ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
General Editor: Karl H. Potter 


VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED 


Bibliography Sections I and Hi, 3rd ed. (1995)—Ed. Karl H. Potter. 


Il. Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology : The Tradition of Nyaya 
Vaisesika up to Gangega (1977)—Ed. Karl H. Potter 
III. Advaita Vedinta up to Sasnkara and His Pupils (1981)—Ed. Karl H. 
Potter. 
IV. Sahkhya: a Dualist Tradition in Indian Philosophy (1987)—Eds. 
Gerald James Larson (@ Ram Shankar Bhatiacharya. 
V. The Philosophy of the Grammarians (1990)—Ed. H.G. Coward. 
VI. Indian Philosophical Analysis: Nyaya-Vaisesika from Gangeia to 
Raghundatha Siromani (1993)—Eds. Karl H. Potter & Sibjiban 
Bhattacharyya. 
Vil. Abhidharmz Buddhism to 150 AD. (1996)—Eds. Karl H. Potter with 
Robert E. Buswell fr., Padmanabh S. Jaini & Noble Ross Reat. 
VII. Buddhist Philosophy from 100 to $50 A.D. (1999)—Ed. Karl H. 
Potter. 
IX. Buddhist Philosophy from 350 to 600 A.D. (2008)—Ed. Karl H. 
Potter. 
VOLUMES UNDER PREPARATION 
X = Jain Philosophy [Part I]—Eds. Daisukh Malvania & Jayendra Soni. 
XI. Buddhist Philosophy from 600 to 750 A.D.—Ed. Karl H. Potter. 
XII. Buddhist Philosophy from 750 to 1300 A.D.—Ed. Karl H. Potter. 
XIII. Yoga Philosophy—Eds. Gerald J. Larson & Rama Shankar 
Bhattacharya. 
XIV. Nyaya-Vaisesika from after Raghunatha to Gadadbara’s Tume—Eds. 
Sibjiban Bhattacharyya & Karl H. Potter. 
XV. Advaita Vedanta from 800 to 1300 A.D.—Ed. Paul Kuepferie. 
XVI. Advaita Vedanta from 1300 to the present—Ed. Karl H. Potter. 
XVII. Jain Philosophy [Part I1]—-Eds. Kart H. Potter 
XVII.  Kaémir Saiva Philosophy—Ed. Navjivan Rastogi. 
XIX. Visistiidvaita Vedanta Philosophy—Eds. Stephen H. Phillips & M. 
Narasimhachary. 
XX. Dwaitidvaita Philosophy—Eds. Ram Shankar Bhattacharya & Karl 
H. Potter. 
XXI. Parvamiméarisd Philosophy—Eds. KT. Pandurangi & Karl H. Potter. 
XXII. Acintyabhedibheda Ed. Srivatsa Goswami. 
XXIH. Dwvaita Vedanta Philosophy—Ed. K T. Pandurangi. 
XXIV. Carvaka Philosophy—Ed. Ed Franco. 
XXV.  Suddhddvaita Vedanta Philosophy—Eds. Sharad Aniruddha Gaswami 
& Shyam Manoharaji Goswami. 
XXVI. _ Viragaiva Philosophy—Eds. Unch Sen. 
XXVIII. Collective Glossary-Index—Ed. Karl H. Potter. 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF 
INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


VOLUME X 


Jain Philosophy (Part I) 


EDITED BY 
DALSUKH MALVANIA & JAYENDRA SONI 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED * DELHI 


First Edition: Delhi, 2007 
© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED 


All Rights Reserved 


ISBN: 81-208-3169-1 (Vol. X) 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110007 

ae 22 Bhulabhai Desai Road, Mumbai 400 026 
utah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 

336, aig Main Hl Block Ja . Bangalore 560011 

Sanas Plaza, 1802 Baji Rao Road, Pune 41) 002 

8 Camac Street, Kolkata 700 017 

Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 

Chowk, Varanasi 221 00) 


PRINTED IN INDIA 


BYJAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, 
4-45 NARAINA, PHASE-I, NEW DELHI 110 028 

AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED, 
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007 


CONTRIBUTORS 


R. S. Betai 

P. N. Dave 

J. W. de Jong 

K. K. Dixit 
Dulaharaj 

Erich Frauwallner 
Satischandra Ghoshal 
Bhagchandra Jain 
H. L. Jain 

K. C. Jain 

L. C. Jain 

P. S. Jaini 
Jambuvijaya 
Mahendra Kumar 
Ratna Lahiri 
Dalsukh Malvania 
Karl H. Potter 

N. J. Shah 

Y. S. Shastri 
Jayendra Soni 
Nathmal Tatia 

A. N. Upadhye 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE xiii 
ABBREVIATIONS xv 
PART ONE 
INTRODUCTION (Jayendra Soni) 3 
THE JAINA CANON (Karl H. Potter) 35 
PART TWO 
SUMMARIES OF WORKS (Arranged Chronologically) 
1 Umasvati (400?), Tattvdrthasiitra (K.K.Dixit) 45 
2 Umasvati, Pragamatiratiprakarana (Y.S.Shastri)) 66 
3 Umasvati, Tattvarthasiitrabhdsya (K.K.Dixit) 70 
4 Kundakunda (400?), Paricastikayasa@ra (A.N.Upadhye) 95 
5 Kundakunda, Pravacanasdra (Upadhye; Potter) 97 
6 Kundakunda, Samayasara (Upadhye; Potter) 110 
7 Kundakunda, Niyamasara (Potter) 120 
8 Kundakunda, Astaprabhrta (Ratna Lahiri) 126 
9 Kundakunda, Dvadasdnupreksa (Upadhye) 138 
10 Samantabhadra (600?), Aptamimamsa (Potter) 140 
11 Samantabhadra, Yuktyanusdsana (Lahiri) 154 
12 Putyapada (480), 

Tattvarthasttra-Sarvarthasiddhi (Potter) 159 
13 Pujyapada, Istopadesa/Commmentary 174 
14 Pujyapada, Samadhitantra (Potter) 174 
15 Siddhasena Divakara (550), Dvdtrimsika 

(P. N. Dave) 177 
16 Siddhasena Divakara, Sanmatitarka (Potter) 191 
17 Mallavadin Ksamasramana (550), Nayacakra 201 


(Frauwallner, Jambuvijaya, de Jong) 
18. Jinabhadra Gani (600), Dhyanasataka (Dulaharaj) 210 
19 Jinabhadra Gani, Avasyakanirukti-Visesavasyaka- 


bhdasya (Dalsukh Malvania) 224 
20 Simhasiragani (600), Nayacakra- 
Nyayagamanusarini 233 


21 Kotyacarya (725), Visesavasyakabhasya 233 


viii ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


22 Siddhasena Mahamati (700?), Nyayavatdra (Potter) 234 


23 Yogindudeva (725), Paramatmaprakdsa (Upadhye) 

24 Yogindudeva, Adhyatmasandoha 

25 Yogindudeva, Yogasara (R. S. Betai) 

26 Vadibha Simha, Navapadarthaniscaya 

27 Vadibha Simha, Syddvadasiddhi 
(Bhagchandra Jain) 

28 Dharmadasa Gani (750), Upadesamala 
/Balavabodha 

29 Bhatta Akalanka (770), Aptamimdmsd-Astasati 
(Satischandra Ghoshal) 

30 Bhatta Akalanka, Laghiyastraya 
(Nagin J. Shah; Lahiri) 

31 Bhatta Akala nka, Nya@yaviniscaya 
(Shah; Mahendra Kumar) 

32 Bhatta Akalanka, Pramdanasamgraha 

33 Bhatta Akalanka, Siddhiviniscaya (Kumar; Lahiri) 

34 Bhatta Akalanka, Tattvarthasutra-Rajavarttika 
(Kumar; Lahiri) 

35 Haribhadra Suri (770), Anekantajayapataka- 
Uddyotadipika 

36 Haribhadra Suri, Anekantapraghatta 

37 Haribhadra Suri, Anekantavadapravesa 

38 Haribhadra Suri, Anckantasiddhi 

39 Haribhadra Suri, Anuyogadvarasitra-Laghuvrtti 

40 Haribhadra Siri, Ava@syakasiitra-Sisyahita 

41 Haribhadra Siri, Avasyakasitra-Brhadvrtti 

42 Haribhadra Suri, Dharmabindu 

43 Haribhadra Suni, Jivabhigamasiitra-Laghuvrtti 

44 Haribhadra Suri, Lokatattvanirnaya 

45 Haribhadra Siri, Nandisitra-Vivarana 

46 Haribhadra Suri, Paficasittraka-Vyakhya 
(Jambuvijaya) 

47 Haribhadra Stiri, Saddarsanasamuccaya (Potter) 

48 Haribhadra Suri, Sarvajfasiddhi 

49 Haribhadra Siri, Sastravarttasamuccaya 


238 
260 
260 
264 


264 
264 
266 
270 
284 
299 
306 


422 
424 


425 
425 
425 
425 
425 
426 
426 
427 


427 
435 
436 
436 


CONTENTS 


50 Haribhadra Siri, Sodasakaprakarana 

51 Haribhadra Siri, Tattvarthasuitra-Laghuvrtti 

52 Haribhadra Suri, Upadesapada 

53 Haribhadra Siri, Yogabindu (Potter) 

54 Haribhadra Stri, Yogadrstisamuccaya (Dixit) 

55 Haribhadra Suri, Yogavimsika (Dixit) 

56 Haribhadra Suri, Yogasataka (Dixit) 

57 Haribhadra Suri, Brahmasiddhantasamuccaya 

58 Haribhadra Suri, Samyaktvasaptati 

59 Haribhadra Suri, Darsanasaptatika 

60 Haribhadra Suri, Dharmasamgrahani 

61 Haribhadra Suri, Vimsavimsika 

62 Haribhadra Siri, Tattvaprakasika 

63 Haribhadra Suri, Astakaprakarana 

64 Gandhahasti Siddhasena, Tattvarthasitrabhdasya 
(N.Tatia) 

65 Kumaranandi Bhattaraka (750), Vadanyaya 

66 Virasena and Jinasena (837), Kasayaprabhrta- 
Jayadhavala 

67 Jinasena and Gunabhadra (870), Atmanusdsana 
(Upadhye) 

68 RajaSekhara (900), Saddarsanasamuccaya 
(B. C. Jain) 

69 Jinacandra (900?), Siddhantasara 

70 Siddharsigani (900?), Nyayavatara-Vivrti 

71 Amrtacandra Suri (925), Tattvarthasara 

72 Amrtacandra Suri, Purusarthasiddhyupdya (Potter) 

73 Amrtacandra Suri, Pafncastikayasara-Tattvadipika 

74 Amrtacandra Stiri, Pravacanasara-Tattvadipika 
(Potter) 

75 Amrtacandra Suri, Samayasara-Atmakhyati 

76 Amrtacandra Siri, Laghutattvasphota (P.S.Jaini) 

77 Devasena (934), Nayacakra-Alapapaddhati 

78 Devasena, Tattvasara (Soni) 

79 Devasena, Darsanasara (B. C. Jain) 


iX 


437 
438 
438 
438 
448 
454 
455 
458 
458 
458 
458 
459 
461 
462 


462 
468 


468 


468 


472 
472 
472 
483 
484 
487 


502 
507 
507 
521 
527 
532 


x ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


80 Manikyanandin (940), Pariksamukha (Potter) 

81 Vidyananda (940), Astaprabhrta-Aptapariksda 
/Alamkrti (Soni) 

82 Vidyananda, Astasahasri 

83 Vidyananda, Patrapariksa 

84 Vidyananda, Pramdnapariksa 

85 Vidyananda, Satyasasanapariksa (Tatia) 

86 Vidyananda, Tattvarthasitra-Slokavarttika 

87 Vidyananda, YuktyanuSdsana-Tika 

88 Anantakirti (950), Jivasiddhinibandhana 

89 Anantakirti, Laghiyastraya-Tatparyavrtti 

90 Anantakirti, Sarvajfiasiddhi 

91 Anantakirti, Svatahpramanyabhanga 

92 Amitagati I (950), Yogasaraprabhrta 
(H.L.Jain; Upadhye) 

93 Kanakanandin (975), Karmaprakrti 

94 Kanakanandin, Dravyasamgraha 

95 Anantavirya (980), Pramadnasamgraha-Bhdsya 

96 Anantavirya, Siddhiviniscaya-Tika 

97 Anantavirya, Laghiyastraya-Vivrti 

98 Anantavirya, Nydyaviniscaya-Vrtti 

99 Nemicandra Saiddhantika (980), Gomatasdra 
(Potter) 

100 Nemicandra, Labdhisdra (L.C.Jain) 

101 Nemicandra, Ksapanasdra 

102 Nemicandra, Trilokasara 

104 Nemicandra, Fribhangisara 

105 Nemicandra, Dravyasamgraha (Potter) 

106 Nemicandra, Upadesasiddhantaratnamdla 

107 Nemicandra, Tattvarthasiitra-Vrtti 

108 Jayasena (998), Dharmaratndkara (Upadhye) 

109 Amitagati Il (1010), Paficasamgraha 

110 Amitagati Il, Dvatrimsika or Sdmdyikapatha 
Gaini) 


533 


CONTENTS xi 
ENDNOTES 663 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 673 


PREFACE 


I wish to begin by offering my profound thanks to Dalsukh 
Malvania, who over thirty years ago agreed to take on the 
onerous task of editing this first Volume of the Encyclopedia 
to be concerned with Jain philosophy. Unfortunately he was 
unable to complete the task, and Jay Soni has agreed to assist 
by -writing the Introduction and providing expert advice. 
Shortcomings of this Volume should not, however, be ascribed 
to either Malvania or Soni; they are entirely my own. 

Since it has recently been questioned, perhaps a word 
of explanation about the intended scope of coverage in 
Volumes of the Encyclopedia, which may go some way 
towards answering questions that may arise about the works 
chosen for summation in the present Volume. According to a 
policy that was announced in the very first edition of Volume 
One, the Bibliography is "intended to provide an account of 
works of Indian philosophical literature which are (1) of 
philosophical interest throughout; (2) theoretical rather than 
purely practical in their intended function, and (3) polemical 
or at least expository in a context where defence of one view 
among alternatives is appropriate." Readers of previous 
Volumes will appreciate that out of respect for those whose 
personal preference is for a given philosophical system I have 
refrained from using these strictures to preclude the 
appearance of favorite works which may not hew precisely to 
these three requirements. Some beloved works, for example, 
consist essentially of advice to the aspirant for liberation. To 
use the the three requirements listed above to exclude such 
favored texts would have unduly offended those readers and 
made the Volume somewhat less useful to them. It seems thus 
wisest to exercise the policy stated above in a relaxed manner, 
enabling inclusion of borderline cases favored by the system's 
followers. 

One or two words recapitulating my policies on a 
couple of matters. Standardization of translations of technical 
terms, which we have followed in this and previous Volumes, 
may cause the style of exposition to appear cramped and 


xiv PREFACE 


otherwise difficult to read; even possibly misleading renditions 
may occur in a few cases. The problem comes about as a 
result of the tension between two aims | have tried to follow, 
one to provide an accurate (although not always standard) 
rendition of the term where it occurs, and the other to use the 
same translation of the Sanskrit term throughout if this is at 
all possible. I apologize for any problems that may have been 
caused by my intentions in this matter. 

In order to make the summaries less prolix I have 
followed a fairly strict policy in the present Volume (I have 
been working toward it in previous Volumes). The chosen 
English rendition of a technical Sanskrit term is given (in 
Sanskrit, not in Prakrit) at the first occurrence of that term. 
The Sanskrit term, and its chosen translation (or, in a limited 
number of cases, alternative translations) appear in the 
Glossary-Index, which should be used to remind the reader of 
the Sanskrit term, or range of terms, that is being rendered 
through the English word provided. 

My thanks, once again, to Christine Keyt for her 
generous help in all sorts of matters having to do with this 
computer age, and for her assistance in making it possible to 
keep the Bibliography up to date and available through the 
Internet (at http://faculty.washington.edu/kpotter). Readers 
wishing to keep up with the literature on their favorite 
philosopher, school or topic are invited to avail themselves of 
this information. 


Karl H. Potter 
February 18, 2004 


ABBREVIATIONS 


BCE = before common era 

CE = common era 

E: = pages of the edition chosen for the present work 

GOS = Gaekwad's Oriental Series 

h = hetu (the term) 

Kapadia 1947 = H. R. Kapadia, Introduction to GOS 105 
(Baroda 1947) 

no. = number 

op. cit. = previously cited 


p = paksa 
s = sadhya 
sp = sapaksa 


T = pages of the translation chosen for the present work 
vp = vipaksa 


PART ONE 


INTRODUCTION 


INTRODUCTION 


By Jayendra Soni 


What is Jainism? Jainism is a word derived from "Jaina" 
or "Jain", which in turn is derived from the Sanskrit word jina, 
literally meaning "conqueror". In the Jaina tradition a jina is 
a unique human being who, through severe ascetic discipline, 
has conquered, overcome or broken the bonds of the passions 
which bind one to worldly life and values, and who teaches 
the basic doctrine of nonviolence. A jaina or Jain is one who 
follows this and other teachings of a jina, and for the ascetics, 
being a Jain means one who strives to lead a lifestyle on the 
model of a jina. Since the life and teachings of a jina serve as 
a bridge or ford (tirtha) to cross over beyond the stream of 
worldly existences, a jina is also called a maker of such a ford, 
a tirthankara. The Prakrit term niggantha (nirgrantha in 
Sanskrit), literally "free from bonds," was originally used to 
designate such a person and the ascetics of the tradition. 

Jainism as it has survived to this day is traced back to 
the life and teachings of the jina Mahavira (literally, the "Great 
Hero"), whose given name was Vardhamana. However, in the 
Jain tradition Mahavira is not the only jina and his position 
and significance has to be seen in the light of the Jain 
conception of time. Time is seen as a wheel which 
beginninglessly and endlessly rotates of its own accord. The 
wheel of time has twelve spokes which represent the different 
eras of time on a cosmological scale, each era being made up 
of thousands of years. The twelve eras are divided into two 
equal half-periods of the downward motion (apasarpini) and 
the upward motion (utsarpini) of the wheel of time, with six 
eras in each. According to the tradition twenty-four jinas are 
born as human beings in each half period of cosmological 
time, in the third and fourth eras of each. In the present 
downward motion of the time-wheel Vrsabha was the first and 
Mahavira, who was a contemporary of Gautama Buddha, the 
last jina. Scholars ascribe undoubted historicity to Mahavira 
and his predecessor Parsva, the twenty-third jina, who lived 


4 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


about 250 years earlier. It is in this sense that Mahavira is not 
the founder of Jainism, but rather a reformer who based his 
life and teachings on those of his predecessor (e.g., adding one 
more "great vow" to Parsva's four for the ascetics). Unlike the 
Buddhist view that the Buddha set in motion the law of beings 
and things with his first sermon as recorded in the famous 
Dharmacakrapravartanasitra, the Jains believe that the law of 
beings and things is eternal and has always been so, with 
Mahavira resuscitating the basic doctrines of the tradition. 

A moot question is: In what sense can persons like 
Mahavira (or the Buddha or the Upanisadic thinkers) be 
regarded as philosophers? Nothing of what Mahavira taught 
(as with the Buddha too) is available in his original words, his 
life and teachings being redacted finally by others into a canon 
several centuries after his death. Even Mahavira's dates are a 
matter of debate, although there is clear evidence that 
Mahavira was the Buddha's contemporary, some time between 
the sixth and fourth centuries B.C.E. Mahavira can be regarded 
as a philosopher in the sense that his life, teachings, ideas and 
concepts moulded the philosophical activity of the thinkers in 
the tradition since then. Mahavira serves as a model not only 
for achieving the goal of enlightenment which he himself 
realized, the goal of nirvana or moksa which is common to 
Buddhism and Hinduism as well, but also as a model for 
insightful thinking about human nature, life and the world. 

Everything that comes under the rubric of Jainism 
encompasses a vast area, because through the influence of 
Mahavira and his teachings the Jains have made major 
contributions in all fields of learning ranging from philosophy 
to literature, from rules governing religious thought and 
practice to temple architecture. Jainism is an indigenous, 
inalienable and well-represented part of Indian thought, of 
Indian art and literature, in short of Indian culture. This point 
is significant to note because, especially as far as the 
contribution of Jain philosophy is concerned, independent 
studies of specific themes are relatively few compared to what 


INTRODUCTION 5 


has been done in Hinduism and Buddhism. Whereas it is 
impossible to deal with Jain philosophy in a vacuum and to 
fully comprehend its significance without recourse to 
corresponding developments in Buddhism and Hinduism, the 
reverse is no less true, Several intricate philosophical problems 
remain obscure without an adequate understanding of Jain 
philosophy, e.g., the innumerable references to anekantavada, 
the famous doctrine of manifoldness, which is a small, albeit 
basic, part of Jain thought. One is led to ignore the fact that 
Jain philosophy has made other contributions apart from the 
sydd- and naya-vada aspects of anekdantavada, e.g., insightful 
deliberations concerning dravya, guna and paryaya (substance, 
quality and mode). This volume on Jainism will make it 
evident that throughout its history Jain thinkers have kept 
pace with equal developments in Buddhism and Hinduism. 


Ontology and Metaphysics 


Implicitly or explicitly, Jain thinkers trace back the 
inspiration for the source of their philosophical ideas 
ultimately to the essence of Mahavira's teachings, and the 
earliest source for Mahavira's ideas are the canonical works of 
the tradition, from which the thinkers drew. This is not the 
place to discuss the complex issue of the Jain canon. Suffice it 
to say that both the major groups of Jains, the Digambaras 
and the Svetambaras, have groups of texts which they 
regarded as sacred because they contain Mahavira's basic 
teachings. These canonical works make laborious reading 
especially because of their repetitive nature (obviously based 
on an oral tradition); whatever is philosophically relevant in 
them has to be extracted out of a huge volume of material on 
a wide range of topics, such as the conduct of the monks and 
nuns and general rules for ascetics. In other words, Mahavira's 
teachings are scattered oll over the canon in an unsystematic 
manner. 

Whereas a systematic study of the philosophical 


6 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


elements in the works of the Jain canon is undoubtedly a 
fruitful undertaking, such a study will be a restricted endeavor 
insofar as one will be hard-pressed to link it to later 
philosophical activity. A case in point is anekantavada. This 
famous doctrine of manifoldness, often erroneously taken as 
a synonym for Jain philosophy as a whole, is based on 
Mahavira's method of seeing the truths concerning all objects 
of inquiry from particular standpoints or perspectives. Later 
thinkers developed this basic idea into an elaborated 
systematic theory in such a way that the link to the canonical 
works either becomes lost or is blurred. The case is similar to 
taking the works of Badarayana for Vedanta or Jaimini for 
Mimamsa as a source, instead of directly dealing with the 
Vedic texts for the development of the philosophy in the 
respective traditions. The question then is: are there compar- 
able works in the Jaina tradition? 

The first attempt to present Jain philosophy in the form 
of the classical Sanskrit sutras of the other schools of Indian 
philosophy was done by Umasvati (also called Umasvami) in 
his so-called pro-canonical work Tattvarthasitra (also called 
Tattvarthadhigamasutra). Indeed, there have been early 
successful attempts to deal with Jain philosophy in a similar 
manner in the Prakrit language as well, for example, by 
Kundakunda and Siddhasena Divakara. There is no conclusive 
dating of these pioneer thinkers in the Jain tradition, the last 
of whom belonged to the fifth or sixth century CE. Summaries 
of their works are dealt with below in this volume; hence it is 
not necessary here to deal with Jain ontology and metaphysics 
in detail in this Introduction. Rather, an attempt is being made 
here, with reference to Umasvati and Kundakunda, to deal 
with a basic problem related to these aspects of philosophy, 
namely, with the terms tattva and padartha which are used for 
both the basic ontological and the metaphysical categories. 
The first question is whether there are seven (Umasvati) or 
nine (Kundakunda) such categories.’ 


INTRODUCTION 7 


Seven or Nine Basic Categories? 


In the enumeration of the seven (sapta-) tattva and the 
nine (nava-) padadrtha in Jainism it is clear that tattva and 
padartha are both used to refer to the fundamental categories 
which constitute Jain ontology and metaphysics. These terms 
feature prominently in Indian philosophical texts from very 
early times. The word tattva is derived from the neuter 
pronominal tat with the suffix -tva, which may be added to 
any noun base. The neuter abstract substantive tattva thus 
formed bears the dictionary meanings of "true or real state, 
truth, reality, a true principle", including "that-ness and such- 
ness".* The term padartha literally means “the meaning (artha) 
of a word (pada)," or "that which corresponds to the meaning 
of a word", and, therefore, "a thing or material object”. It is 
from these meanings that the term is also used to denote a 
category and hence one can speak of a contextual relation 
between tattva and padartha. 

Reality is stated to be constituted of seven categories by 
Umasvati in Tattvarthasutra 1.4 (this is the version that is 
mostly quoted in works on Jainism): jivajivasrava-bandha- 
samvara-nirjarad-moksds tattvam. In his Paficastikdya 108 
Kundakunda enumerates the following nine padarthas (the 
passage is in Prakrit; we give here Amrtacandra's Sanskrit 
translation): jivajivau bhavau punyam pdpam casravas tayoh 
samvara-nirjara-bandha moksas ca bhavabhavanti te arthah. 
The word arthah is to be understood as padarthah, as is clear 
from Amrtacandra's commentary when he says, after repeating 
each term in his commentary, that these are the names of the 
nine padarthas (...iti navapadarthanadm namani). This 
sequence of the terms is repeated in Kundakunda's Samayasara 
13, and the subsequent chapters there dealing with each 
category corresponds exactly to this sequence.* 

Apart from the two additional categories supplied by 
Kundakunda, his sequence is different from that of Umasvati's, 
with the category bandha appearing before the last and punya 


8 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and papa inserted after the two ontological categories of jiva 
and ajiva. In his commentary to the Tattvarthasitras, the 
Sarvarthasiddhi, Piijyapada is aware of the difference between 
the seven and nine categories. It is useful to see what he says 
in the relevant section of his commentary on Tattvarthasutra 
1.4.4 

"All fruits are experienced by the soul. So the soul 
(Gjiva) is mentioned first in the sutra. The non-soul (ajiva) is 
mentioned next as it is of use to the soul. Influx (dasrava) is 
included next as it concerns both the soul and the non-soul. 
Bondage (bandha) is added next, as it follows influx. As there 
is no bondage for one who practises stoppage, stoppage 
(samvara) is mentioned after bondage in order to indicate that 
it is the opposite. Dissociation proceeds after stoppage, and 
hence it (nirjara) is mentioned after stoppage. As liberation is 
attained at the end, it (moksa) is mentioned last." 

"Here merit (punya) and demerit (papa) must be 
included, as others have spoken of nine categories. No, it is 
not necessary to include these, as these are implied in influx 
and bondage. If it were so, the mention of influx, etc. is 
unnecessary, as these are included in soul and non-soul. No, 
it is not unnecessary. Here liberation is the main theme of the 
work. So it must be mentioned. And that (liberation) is 
preceded by the cycle of births and deaths. Influx and bondage 
are the main causes of transmigration. Stoppage and gradual 
dissociation are the chief causes of liberation. Hence these are 
mentioned severally in order to indicate the chief causes and 
effects. It is well-known that the particulars implied in the 
general are mentioned separately according to needs. For 
instance, 'Ksatriyas have come, Suvarna (a ksatriya) also (has 
come)'.” 

If Umiasvati's and Kundakunda's dates could be 
determined precisely it would shed a great deal of light as far 
as the development of the ideas here are concerned. Under the 
circumstances one can only note the two different traditions. 
However, one more point may be discussed in the context 


INTRODUCTION 9 


here. Piijyapada, who was quoted above, belonged to the 
Digambara tradition of Jainism, as did Kundakunda as well 
(Umasvati is regarded by both Svetambaras and Digambaras 
as being one of their own). It is obvious that Pijyapada knew 
Kundakunda's works and, as is clear from the quotation above, 
he was aware of the tradition of the nine categories of reality. 
True, he was commenting on the Tattvarthasutra and he had 
to use the text as handed down by the tradition. What is 
puzzling, however, is that he did not defend his tradition 
when he had the opportunity to justify Kundakunda's 
enumeration in his commentary. Why does he not go into 
further details regarding the sequence of the categories? 
Rather, he sees the inclusion of punya and papa in the list as 
"unnecessary". Indeed, such speculation does not change the 
matter, but any detailed occupation with the texts 
automatically raises these issues. 

To conclude this section, it may be said that Umasvati's 
enumeration seems more “logical” if one takes into account the 
role of karma as soon as the jiva, the soul, becomes associated 
with ajiva. The association is responsible for an inflow of 
matter which then, in the form of karma, binds the soul. The 
inflow of karma can be stopped and, further, all karmas can 
be completely obliterated gradually, which means that the soul 
attains liberation. However, without explicitly mentioning 
punya and papa in the sutra itself Umasvati leaves little room 
for the ethical role of these categories in the context of the 
ascetic discipline. To explicitly mention them, as Kundakunda 
does, would highlight their role for the aim of liberation, a 
role that is in any case accepted a priori. 

_ Perhaps the reason why Umasvati does not mention 
punya and papa in the sitra itself is because karma is not 
explicitly mentioned, it being implicit in dsrava, the inflow of 
karma. But then these would be implicit in Kundakunda's work 
as well, which also does not mention karma explicitly, but 
includes punya and papa in the list of the basic categories. So 
the question, which we can hardly answer but nonetheless 


10 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


pose, would be why he does so. As for Kundakunda’s sequence 
in which bandha appears at the end before moksa, it may be 
said that this is deliberate in order to highlight the soul's 
liberation from the bondage of karma. In other words, moksa, 
the goal, comes after the bandha that exists before it. 


Epistemology 


The Jain contribution to philosophy in general, and to 
epistemology in particular, is often underestimated, if not 
completely ignored. Jain thinkers also drew from a common 
pool of ideas (like the assumption of suffering as a 
characteristic feature of human existence, knowledge of reality 
as crucial for liberation and the possibility of liberation), and 
they couched these ideas in accordance with their own 
ontology, metaphysics, epistemology and ethics. In each of 
these branches of philosophy the Jains have made significant 
contributions to the history and development of Indian 
philosophy as a whole. Here an attempt is made to show that 
Jain epistemology not only has its own history and differences 
that go with it in certain respects depending on the thinker 
concerned, but also to demonstrate that the Jains did not lag 
behind in keeping up with the mainstream concerns in Indian 
philosophy.° 

The presentation of basic Jain epistemology here is 
based on selected aspects of the problem in the original words 
of a selected number of thinkers: Kundakunda, quoting from 
his Pravacanasara, Umasvati's Tattvarthasutra, and Manikya- 
nandin's Pariksamukha. They are chosen for their systematic 
clarity and because they are early thinkers who are generally 
regarded as authoritative by the Jain tradition. Other thinkers 
like Siddhasena Divakara (fifth century), Akalanka (eighth 
century) and Vidyanandin (ninth century) have also made 
significant contributions but their views will be referred to 
only in passing--to enter into a critique of the interesting 
details of difference and to make comparisons would go far 


INTRODUCTION 11 


beyond the scope of what can be done here. 

A few words regarding the beginnings of Indian 
epistemology on the whole may not be out of place in order 
to show that the Jain tradition was not isolated in the Indian 
tradition and that its views did not evolve in a vacuum. 


On the beginnings of Indian epistemology 


The desire for knowledge which basically reflects a 
philosophical inclination is traceable in the Rgveda in a 
general way in what sounds like inquisitive questions, for 
example, about the origin of existence and about what can be 
known. Indeed, they reflect the beginnings of constant 
questioning and the desire to know the answers, an attitude 
which makes the ground fertile and prepares the field for 
further philosophical thought and activity. Suffice it for the 
point made here to refer to the famous hymn of Rgveda X, 
129. Even though doubts have been raised about the 
authenticity of certain philosophical ideas in this work, the 
interpolations are certainly “very early" and depict an 
intrinsically philosophical attitude even in the earliest records 
of Indian thought. 

By the time of the composition of the Upanisads the 
questions became more direct and systematic in the sense that, 
for instance, they show a specific desire for an understanding 
of the nature of the self (atman). Moreover, especially in the 
Upanisads after the sixth century BCE and in the siitra 
literature from the period shortly before the beginning of our 
common era, the direct or indirect mention of different views 
becomes usual. Particularly in the commentaries on the stitra- 
works the explicit mention of Buddhist and Jaina views 
becomes standard, signifying an interesting and lively debate 
among the different schools of thought. The history of Indian 
philosophy goes hand in-hand with the emergence and history 
of such a debate among all the representatives of different 
schools of thought and, with it, the necessity of dealing with 


12 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


epistemological categories. The contribution of Jainism here is 
perhaps also uniquely based on the Jains' attitude of collecting 
and copying all kinds of literature for the sake of knowing the 
other views.° 

The emergence of philosophical debate in India, not 
only in the commentarial literature to the basic works of each 
school, but also in the form of organized public contests, 
contributed greatly to a sharpening of the philosophical tools 
and to setting down rules of debate which had to be strictly 
adhered to in the courts, where the debates mostly took place. 
That epistemology has been a favorite topic from very early 
times is evident from a work on Indian medicine (perhaps in 
the first century of our era, but the ideas were surely in vogue 
even earlier) compiled by Caraka in his Carakasamhitd. The 
author (in Carakasamhita 3, 8) advises medical practitioners 
to debate with others because discussion increases the zeal for 
knowledge, clarifies knowledge, increases the power of speech, 
makes one famous, removes doubt and establishes the truths 
already learned. Moreover, one can learn new things in a 
discussion, especially when, carried away with the zeal of the 
discussion, the other person discloses information which would 
otherwise be kept secret. In this very early period in the 
history of Indian debate it was also recognized that a 
discussion, which forms the basis of a debate, can be of 
different kinds, and Caraka distinguishes two kinds, one that 
is "friendly" and one that is “hostile”.’” In view of their extreme 
emphasis on nonviolence the Jains were probably exemplary 
debaters well-acquainted with their subject matter. 

Caraka's list contains forty-four items which the 
physician should have a command over before accepting an 
invitation to enter into a debate. A cursory glance at a few 
terms out of this list would suffice for the point made here 
about the imporance of epistemological terms:* (1) dispute 
(vada), (2) substance (dravya), (3) quality (guna), (4) 
movement ({(karman), (5) generality (sdmanya), (6) 
particularity (visesa), (7) inherence (samavaya), (8) thesis 


INTRODUCTION 13 


(pratijfia), (9) statement of the proof for the thesis put 
forward (sthdpand), (10) the opposite statement of the 
opponent (pratisthapand), (11) reason (hetu), (12) application 
(upanaya), (13) conclusion (nigamana), (14) rejoinder 
(uttara), (15) example (drstanta), (16) tenet (siddhdnta), (17) 
communication (Sabda), (18) perception (pratyaksa), (19) 
inference (anumana), (20) tradition (aitihya), (21) comparison 
(aupamya), (22) doubt (samsaya), (23) the purpose one 
follows (prayojana), (24) going astray (savyabhicara), (25) 
(vyavasdya), (28) the origin as a means to infer the beginning 
(sambhava), (29) the questionable (anuyojya), (30) the 
unquestionable (ananuyojya), (31) the question (anuyoga), 
(32) the counter-question (pratyanuyoga), (33) defect of 
speech (vdkyadosa), (34) excellence of speech 
(vakyaprasamsa@), (35) quibble (chala), (36) fallacy (ahetu), 
(37) lapse of the right time (atitakala), (38) objection 
(upalambha), (39) rejection of the objection (parihara), (40) 
abandonment of the thesis (pratijfiahdni), (41) admission of 
the opposite thesis (abhyanujfid),’? (42) incorrect reason 
(hetvantara), (43) missing the point (arthantara), and (44) 
reasons for defeat (nigrahasthana). 

The list becomes more compact later and especially 
when the Nyaya school, whose favorite topic was 
epistemology, includes them as a starting point for all the 
themes it deals with in its basic work. Sixteen terms are listed 
at the beginning of the Nydyasutra which are interesting to 
note here in order to show their relation with the emergence 
of philosopical debate in India, and for their special emphasis 
on epistemological issues: (1) the instruments of true 
cognition (pramana), (2) the objects of true cognition 
(prameya), (3) doubt (samsaya), (4) purpose (prayojana), (5) 
example (drstanta), (6) tenet (siddhanta), (7) members of the 
argument (avayava), (8) deliberation (tarka), (9) conclusion 
(nirnaya), (10) disputation (vada), (11) debate (jalpa), (12) 
wrangling (vitanda), (13) fallacious reasons (hetvabhasa), 


14 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(15) false objections (jati) and (16) reasons for defeat 
(nigrahasthana). 

Each school accepted a fixed number of instruments or 
means of true cognition, each of which yields a particular kind 
of correct awareness, and for the major schools of Indian 
philosophy the number ranges from one to six. So, for 
example, the materialist accepts only perception as the most 
important and reliable instrument of knowledge, the Buddhists 
and the Vaisesika school accept inference as well, the Samkhya 
school accepts verbal testimony or scriptural authority in 
addition to perception and inference, etc. There are certain 
implicit conditions on the basis of which the number of means 
of cognition were accepted by each school. At least four 
conditions need to be fulfilled: (a) the awareness which one 
cognitive instrument furnishes must be new and not attainable 
by any other means; (b) one means of cognition may aid 
another in making a particular awareness possible but the 
means of cognition in question should not be reducible to 
another--so, e.g., when perception aids inference, as in 
inferring fire by seeing the smoke in the distance, the 
understading gained cannot be reduced to that obtained by 
perception alone; (c) the cognition obtained through one 
particular instrument of true cognition should not be 
contradicted by another instrument; (d) the accepted cognitive 
instrument should appeal to reason and, in the case of verbal 
testimony or scriptural authority, for example, one's 
understanding of the revealed truth must appear probable and 
be made intelligible in terms of human experience; otherwise 
such a means of cognition will fail in its purpose.’° 

Jain thinkers did not lag behind in their concern with 
epistemological issues, and the relevant literature from the 
beginning of our era evinces this. What their basic 
epistemology is, will be seen with special reference to 
Kundakunda, Umasvati and Manikyanandin. 


INTRODUCTION 15 


Jaina epistemology 


The Jain tradition rests on one fundamental fact that is 
epistemologically significant, namely, that human beings are 
in a position to be omniscient and that this view is based on 
the teaching of omniscient beings who have taught their basic 
ideas after having become enlightened through a strict ascetic 
discipline. Their teachings are regarded as reliable and 
authoritative and every basic idea concerning ontology, 
epistemology and ethics is traced back to a tradition started by 
such authoritative beings.’ 

It must be noted that epistemological issues are in fact 
inalienably connected with the metaphysics and ontology of a 
particular school. What is the intrinsic nature of the things of 
the world which are open to human knowledge? How can one 
define the subject, the knower? What is the nature of cognitive 
instruments like sight and hearing? All these questions are 
basic to the concern with epistemology. It is also a well-known 
fact that, apart from the materialists, the Carvakas, the 
teaching of each school is aimed at liberation (moksa or 
nirvana) and each has its own view of the world, an account 
of which forms part of the discipline which leads to the goal. 
Jainism made its own unique contribution to this mainstream 
development by also occupying itself with the basic issues 
concerning the nature of knowledge, how knowledge is 
derived and in what way knowledge can be said to be reliable. 
For the Jains as well the concern with epistemological issues 
also served two main functions: it provided the basis for an 
intelligible discourse on matters of common, everyday 
experience and, secondly, even if indirectly, it demarcated this 
area from what constitutes knowledge of ultimate reality. 

Explaining how errors occur in human cognition was 
included in the epistemological theories and it is not often 
noticed that epistemology dealt with theories of error as well 
as of truth. Indeed, the success of a theory of valid cognition 
is commensurate with the success with which error in our 


16 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cognition is also explained. In other words, granted that we 
can err in our cognition, a theory of cognition should also be 
able to explain the source of this occurrence, or at least be in 
a position to account for it. This point is implicit when at the 
very beginning of his Partks@mukha, Manikyanandin says "the 
proper ascertainment of an object arises out of a valid 
cognitive instrument (pramana), the contrary of this happens 
when it is erroneous” (Pariksdmukha 1).’ In his Pramana- 
mimamsa I. 1. 7 Hemacandra says that error "is a cognition 
which definitely takes a thing to be what it is not." 

One superficial relation between Jain ontology and Jain 
epistemology is that just as there are only two fundamental 
ontological categories, the principles of sentience and 
nonsentience (jiva and ajiva), there are only two basic 
instruments through which we can know thngs, in a direct 
way (pratyaksa) and in an indirect way (paroksa). For the 
Jains the principle of sentience intrinsically possesses unlimited 
qualities of bliss and energy and, without the detrimental 
influence of matter, is omniscient. The association of the soul 
with the insentient principles hinders its capabilities and 
therefore human beings possess limited knowledge. Unique to 
Jainism is that direct knowledge in fact takes place through 
the soul.’? 

On the basis of the twofold classification of a direct and 
an indirect means of knowledge, an intricate theory 
concerning the fundamental principles or categories (tattva, 
supplied below) is built up. The first systematic presentation 
of it in the classical sutra-style was given by Umasvati in his 
Tattvarthasittra 1, 6-31 and his presentation is regarded as 
authoritative by all Jains. Kundakunda's views expressed in the 
Prakrit language are also looked upon with great respect for 
his pioneering attempts. 

The sentient principle is responsible for the fact that 
cognition takes place at all and hence for the Jains knowledge 
takes place in the soul; when the soul is freed or isolated from 
the influence of matter it has kevalajfidna (omniscient 


INTRODUCTION 17 


knowledge, which beings like the Jinas have attained). In the 
case of the concern with epistemology in the context of human 
cognition it is necessary in Jainism to clearly understand the 
context in which the following terms are used: jidana, pramana 
and naya. Further, the theory of manifoldness (with its two 
fold aspects of nayavdda and syddvdda) also has to be seen in 
an epistemological context because it is concerned with 
cognizing things. The theory of manifoldness, however, applies 
in a different context: it is concerned with particular 
standpoints (naya), like the common, the general, or the 
practical standpoint from which an object may be perceived, 
and the seven kinds of statements or predications that may be 
made about an object, where it is said that depending on the 
perspective (sydt) an object can be said to exist, not to exist, 
etc. What the theory of manifoldness does not do is discuss 
the instruments of true cognition in the Jain tradition. 

The word jfidna, which is regularly translated as 
"knowledge", is used in Jainism in the context of absolute 
knowledge which can be had only by beings liberated from the 
detrimental effects of matter in the form of karma clinging to 
the soul. In other contexts the word jriana is used to mean any 
cognition. We shall reserve the word "knowledge" for absolute 
knowledge in order to avoid confusion. Knowledge, as we shall 
use the term, is by definition true. A cognition (jfidna) that is 
true is termed a prama; a cognition that is not true is an 
apramd.’ An epistemological theory (pramanyavada) deals 
with all these three aspects--absolute knowledge, true and 
false cognitions. The Jains say that there are two general kinds 
of instruments of true cognition, three direct (one of these 


\(Editor's note:) It is in keeping with these points that we have 
chosen, in the summaries that follow, to render the term pramana, 
standardly translated as "instrument of knowledge", as “instrument 
of true cognition" when speaking of Jain beliefs. Where the context 
is the views of those professing a different philosophical school we 
have retained the usual translation. 


18 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


being absolute knowledge) and two indirect ones. The objects 
cognized (prameya) are the seven basic categories of Jaina 
metaphysics. Both cognition and knowledge take place in the 
soul. 

It seems that Kundakunda is the first independent 
thinker of the post-canonical period who dealt with 
epistemological issues. In this context his Pravacanasara: 
(‘Essence of the Scripture’) is an insightful work, regarded as 
one of his philosophical masterpieces. The three sections of the 
work clearly show the issues he deals with: cognition, the 
objects of cognition, and conduct. It is interesting to see how 
he deals with some aspects of epistemology which have 
become part of the tradition, so that it can also be evident 
how the problem was thematised differently in the later 
period.'* Here are selected passages from that work that 
appear to deal with knowledge: 

. "He who has manifested pure consciousness and is free 
from...karmic dust, has become self-sufficient; and fully 
comprehends the objects of cognition." (1, 15) 

"The soul is co-extensive with knowledge; knowledge is 
said to be co-extensive with the object of knowledge; the 
object of knowledge comprises the physical and non-physical 
world; therefore knowledge is omnipresent." (1, 23). 

"The knower who is beyond  sense-perception, 
necessarily knows and sees the world neither entering into nor 
entered into by the object of knowledge, just as the eye sees 
the objects of sight." (1, 29). 

"He who knows is knowledge; the self does not become 
a knower with knowledge (as an extraneous instrument). The 
very self develops knowledge, and all the objects stand 
(reflected) in the knowledge." (1, 35). 

"Perception of things through a foreign agency is called 
paroksa, indirect or mediate; whatever is perceived by the soul 
alone is pratyaksa, direct or immediate" (1, 58). 

"The object of knowledge is made up of substances, 
which are said to be characterised by qualities, and with 


INTRODUCTION : 19 


which, moreover, are (associated) the modifications; those 
who are deluded by modifications, are false believers” (2, 1).’° 

"That is called a substance which is endowed with 
qualities and accompanied by modifications and which is 
coupled with origination, destruction and permanence without 
leaving its nature” (2, 3). 

"According to some modification or the other it is stated 
that a substance exists, does not exist, is indescribable, is both 
or otherwise" (2, 23). 

This random selection of the basic aspects of the 
problem in Kundakunda's own words has been supplied so as 
to demonstrate how the treatment of the theme is different for 
Umasvati. One of the basic differences is that Umasvati 
explicitly enumerates the different instruments of true 
cognition that are grouped under the rubrics of the direct and 
the indirect. 

In Tattvarthasitra 1, 6 Umiéasvati says that true 
cognition can be obtained through pramdna and naya, and 
goes on to say (in 1, 9-12) that it is obtained through the five 
kinds of pramana and that of these the first two, the sensory 
and scriptural, are indirect cognitive instruments, and the rest, 
clairvoyance, telepathy and omniscience are direct cognitive 
instruments. This list is not only much more differentiated and 
explicit than Kundakunda's, but it also presents the 
characteristically Jain view since then. Sensory awareness is 
defined as being indirect, whereas all other schools regard it 
as the only direct means of cognition; what the Jains regard 
as direct cognitive instruments do not at all feature as such in 
the other schools.'® 

In elaborating the Jain view Umasvati continues to say 
that synonyms for sensory awareness are remembrance, 
recognition, ‘induction' and ‘deduction’, all of which are caused 
by the senses and the mind (Tattvarthasitra 1, 13-14). 
Scriptural knowledge, which is based on sensory cognition, is 
of two, several or twelve kinds (20), depending on which 
scripturdl texts are regarded as authoritative. The range of 


20 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sensory and scriptural cognition extends to all the six 
substances (souls and the five insentient substances), but not 
in all their modes (20). Divine and infernal beings possess 
clairvoyance; if the karma which hinders this kind of cognition 
is obliterated, or if its influence is neutralised, then animals 
and human beings too can have it (21-22), and through it all 
entities that have form can be known (27). Telepathy is of two 
kinds, distinguished on the basis of purity and infallibility (23- 
24), and its range is infinitely greater than that of clairvoyance 
(28). The scope of omniscience, on the other hand, extends to 
all substances in all their modes simultaneously (29). Sensory 
cognition, scriptural cognition and clairvoyance are explicitly 
referred to as means of cognition which can also be erroneous 
(31). 

Manikyanandin begins his treatment of epistemology in 
his Pariksamukha by saying that "pramana is valid knowledge 
of itself and of things not proved before" (1, 1),’” going on to 
say that the validity of pramana "rises from itself or through 
another (pramana)" (1, 13). After referring to the basic kinds 
of cognition as direct and indirect in keeping with the tradition 
(2, 2) he says that direct cognition is awareness "which is 
clear" (2, 3), with clearness meaning an "illumination without 
any other intermediate knowledge or illumination in details" 
(2, 4). Direct cognition is then divided into two kinds: one 
that is current in everyday life and which is partially clear (2, 
5), and the other which is "supreme", not dependent on any 
sense organ, and is devoid of any kind of obstruction (2, 11). 
The indirect means of cognition consists of memory, 
recognition, logic, inference and scriptural testimony (3, 2). 
These are then defined and the final three chapters of the 
work deal respectively with universals and particulars, the 
results of inference and, finally, the fallacies of inference. 

One of the notable differences regarding the specific 
instruments of true cognition that are direct is given by 
Akalamka when dealing with sensory perception. It was seen 
above that for Umasvati direct perception, which takes place 


INTRODUCTION 21 


in the soul, occurs through clairvoyance, telepathy and 
omniscience and that sensory knowledge and scriptural 
knowledge are indirect. According to Akalanka's classification 
direct knowledge is basically of the two kinds which 
Manikyanandin takes over from him, namely, direct knowledge 
which takes place through the senses and cognition which 
takes place through memory, which is regarded as synonyous 
with remembrance, recognition, ‘induction’ and ‘deduction’. In 
another classification Akalanka identifies memory together 
with sensory perception as one kind of direct knowledge, and 
distinguishes it from other kinds of direct knowledge not 
derived through the senses, namely clairvoyance, telepathy 
and omniscience. The differences are not merely a matter of 
classification. In view of the high regard and impact his views 
have in the Jain tradition (inspiring masters such as 
Vidyanandin and Manikyanandin) a detailed study and further 
research of Akalanka's works is still needed to assess their 
epistemological implications in the context of the Jaina view 
as a whole.'® 

The relation between epistemology and logic needs 
special mention here. These two areas are closely linked in the 
Indian tradition because logic in India primarily involved an 
investigation into the validity of inference which, in turn, is 
regarded as an instrument of true cognition. The occupation 
with abstract, logical ideas related to inference was a favorite 
topic of the Nyaya school and Jain thinkers adopted its 
language and method, using natural language, not symbols, to 
present their abstract ideas.’° 

It was said above that the Jain theory of manifoldness 
also serves an epistemological function insofar as it concerns 
cognition of things. The theory has come down to us in the 
two related aspects of nayavada and syadvdda. Here an 
attempt is being made to deal with an issue related especially 
to the latter, again by comparing references to it in 
Kundakunda and Umasvati (who refers to it indirectly, as will 
be seen below).”° 


22 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Kundakunda on syddvada 


Three works by Kundakunda are especially praised as 
philosophical masterpieces: Paficastikayasara, Pravacanasara, 
and Samayasara. These works are all in Prakrit and they 
contain not only one of the earliest interpretations of syadvada 
but also give one a good impression of how the Prakrit 
language was used to express philosophical ideas. For his ideas 
related to anekantavada reference will be made only to 
Kundakunda's Pravacanasara and Paricastikayasara. 

In his Pravacanasara 2. 22-23 Kundakunda says:*! 


davatthiena savvam tam pajjayattiena puno 

havadi ya annam anannam takkale tammayattddo (22). 

(dravyarthikena sarvam dravyam tat paryayarthikena 
punah 

bhavati canyad anyat tatkdle tanmayatvat (p. 144). 


"All substances are nondifferent from the substantial 
viewpoint, but again they are different from the modificational 
viewpoint, because of the individual modification pervading a 
substance for the time being" (p. 394). 


\ 
atthi tti ya natthi ya havadi avattavvam idi puno 
davvam 
pajjayena du kena vi tak ubhayam Gdittham annam va 


(astiti ca nastiti ca bhavaty avaktavyam iti punar 
dravyam 

paryayena tu kenapi tad ubhayam adistam anyad va (p. 
146). 


"According to some modification or the other it is stated 
that a substance exists, does not exist, is indescribable, is both 
or otherwise" (p. 394). 


INTRODUCTION 23 


The last point is repeated in Kundakunda's Paficastikdyasara 
14: | 


siya atthi natti uhayam avattavvam puno ya tattidayam 

davvam khu sattabhangagam ddesavasena sambhavadi 
(14). 

(syad asti ndsty ubhayam avaktavyam punas ca 
tattritayam 

drayam khalu saptabhangam adeSavasena sambhavati) 
(p. 9). 


"According as dravya is viewed from different aspects of 
reasoning it may be described in the following propositions: 
(1) perhaps it is; (2) perhaps it is not; (3) perhaps it is both 
(is and is not); (4) perhaps it is indefinable; (5) perhaps it is 
and is indefinable; (6) porhaps it is not and is indefinable; and 
(7) perhaps it is and is not and is indefinable" (p. 9). 

Although Kundakunda does not use the word 
anekantavada two points are noteworthy here: the word naya 
is used with reference to an object depending on the 
standpoint which emphasizes it as a substance (dravya) or a 
mode (paryaya). Secondly, Kundakunda explicitly mentions 
sevenfold predication (syddvdda or saptabhangi) in 
Pancastikayasara 14, and again in 72 of the same text where 
it is stated that the soul (jiva) "is capable of admitting the 
sevenfold predication" (p. 61), namely, that the soul is capable 
of grasping the nature of an object in all its aspects at once. 
On the basis of what Kundakunda says above, it cannot be 
decided whether naya or syat has priority. Hence, it seems 
they would have to be taken together, as the one being 
implicit in the other. 


Umasvati on syadvada 


It is noteworthy that although the word syat appears in 
the canonical literature, and Kundakunda uses it too, it does 


24 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
not feature in the first Sanskrit work presenting Jain 
philosophy in the traditional sutra style, namely, Umasvati's 
Tattvarthastitra. Commentators on the Tattvarthasiitra regard 
syadvdda as being "implied"™ in that text's 5. 32 (31 in the 
Svetambara version) arpitanarpitasiddheh ("The contradictory 
characteristics are established from different points of view", 
see below under Pijyapada). In Tattvarthasitra 1. 33 (34 in 
the Svetambara version) Umasvati mentions only the 
standpoints (naya), not statements, assertions or predications 
that may be made about an object of investigation, each of 
which is qualified by the word syat. They are the standpoints 
which reflect the common or non-distinguished (naigama), 
general or collective (samgraha), practical (vyavahara), etc., 
positions from which an object may be ascertained. The word 
naya in the canonical literature also refers to two other 
contexts, with reference to vyavahdranaya and/or 
niscayanaya,” or to the two standpoints with reference to 
dravya and paryaya mentioned above. In other words, when 
dealing with the word naya one has to distinguish three 
contexts in which it is used: 1. with reference to dravya and 
paryaya; 2. with reference to vyavahdranaya and/or 
niscayanaya (the latter being synonyms of the guddha- or 
paramarthika-naya), and 3. with reference to naya in the 
context of naigama, samgraha, etc. 

In order to better understand the difference between 
Kundakunda and Umasvati on syddvdda we have also to take 
recourse to the commentaries on the Tattvarthasutra, because 
the siitra alone is too brief for any comparison. 


Anekantavada in two commentaries on the Tattvarthasitra 


Pujyapada is generally believed to have belonged to the 
fifth or sixth century and to have been a renowned 
grammarian.* His philosophically celebrated work is the 
Sarvarthasiddhi which, for the Digambaras, is the first 
commentary on Umasvati's Tattvarthasiitra. The following are 


INTRODUCTION 25 


references to the problem under discussion, taken from S. A. 
Jain's translation of the work.” He translates (on pp. 157-158) 
Pijjyapada's commentary on Tattvarthasiitra 5.32/31 
arpitanarpita-siddheh ("The contradictory characteristics are 
established) from different points of view" in the following 
way; here the key word to be noticed is anekdnta--it has 
already been stated that syddvada is regarded as being implicit 
in this sitra, since Umasvati does not mention it anywhere in 
his Tattvarthasitra: "Substances are characterized by an 
infinite number of attributes (anekdntatmakasya vastunah). 
For the sake of use or need, prominence is given to certain 
characteristics of a substance from one point of view, and 
prominence is not given to other characteristics, as these are 
of no use or need at the time. Thus even the existing attributes 
are not expressed, as these are of secondary importance 
(anarpita). There is no contradiction in what is established by 
these two points of view. For instance, there is no 
contradiction in the same person Devadatta being a father, a 
son, a nephew and so on. For the points of view are different. 
From the point of view of his son he is a father, and from the 
point of view of his father he is a son. Similarly with regard to 
his other designations. In the same manner, substance is 
permanent from the point of view of general properties. From 
the point of view of its specific modes it is not permanent. 
Hence there is no contradiction. These two, the general and 
the particular, somehow, are different as well as identical 
{kathamcid bhedabhedabhyam). Thus these form the cause of 
worldly intercourse..." 

Although Pijyapada uses the word anekanta here in the 
commentary, the sevenfold statements with the word syat are 
not given as we find them in Kundakunda. Even though it is 
important that the word is explicitly used, it is puzzling that 
he does not make any reference to the use of syat. Pijyapada 
belongs to the Digambara tradition and certainly lived after 
Kundakunda whom all Digambaras revere profoundly. If 
indeed this siitra of the Tattvarthasitra really “implies” 


26 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


syadvdda one would have expected Piijyapada to have clinched 
the opportunity to mention the saptabhangi, easily taking it 
over from Kundakunda (as he does in the case of 
dravyarthikanaya and paryayarthikunaya, see fn. 27). 

With regard to the word naya Pijyapada explains it in 
his commentary to the Tattvarthasutra in two places: in 1.6 
and in 1. 33/34. 1. 6 (p. 9) says: pramana-nayair adhigamah 
"Knowledge (of the seven categories) is attained by means of 
pramana and naya." A part of his commentary on this siitra is, 
in Jains translation (p. 10): "...it has been said that 'pramana 
is a comprehensive view, whereas naya is a partial view’. Naya 
is of two kinds, dravyarthika and parydyarthika. The former 
refers to the general attributes of a substance, and the latter 
to the constantly changing conditions or modes of a substance. 
Bhava niksepa must be ascertained by the standpoint of 
modes, and the other. three by the standpojnt of substance.2” 
For the latter refers to general characteristics. That which has 
the substance as its object is the standpoint of substance. That 
which has the mode as its object is the standpoint of modes. 
Both the substance and the mode are ascertained by pramana 
(comprehensive knowledge)." 

The other place where Piijyapada has to comment on 
naya is at Tattvarthasiitra 1. 33. In the Digambara version this 
closes the first chapter of the Tattvarthasutra and represents 
1. 34 of the Svetambara version, with the difference that the 
Svetambara version has only the first five nayas, omitting 
samabhiriidha and evambhita nayas. The Svetambara version 
closes the chapter with sitra 35, which, for the full 
understanding of nayas acording to the Svetambaras, has to be 
read together with 1.34 which merely enumerates the five 
nayas.”® In the Digambara version Umasvati enumerates the 
seven nayas in 1. 33: naigama, samgraha, vyavahara, rjusutra, 
sabda, samabhiriidha, evambhita, namely, the standpoints 
which are generally discussed in Jainism. 

On 1.33, where the seven nayas are enumerated, 
Pujyapada says (Jain's translation pp. 41ff.): "The general and 


INTRODUCTION 27 


specific definitions (samdnya-visesa-laksanam) of these (seven 
nayas) must be given. First the general definition. Objects 
possess many characteristics. Naya is the device which is 
capable of determining truly one of the several characteristics 
of an object (without contradiction) from a particular point of 
view It is of two kinds, namely statements which refer to 
general attributes of a substance and those which refer to the 
constantly changing conditions or modes of a substance. 
Dravya means general or common, a general rule or 
conformity. That which has these for its object is the general 
standpoint (dravydarthika naya). Parydya means particular, an 
exception or exclusion. That which has these for its object is 
the standpoint of modifications (paryayarthika naya). Their 
specific definitions are given now. The figurative standpoint 
(naigama naya) takes into account the purpose or intention of 
something which is not accomplished..." The commentary then 
continues explaining each of the nayas, and thereby ends the 
chapter. From this it seems that Pujyapada is the only one who 
uses the word anekanta with a clear hint of the sense in which 
the term came to be applied as a synonym for the Jain 
approach with its epistemological significance. The word naya 
is used both with reference to dravya and paryaya and with 
reference to the seven beginning with naigama, samgraha, etc. 

As is known, the Svetambaras believe that Umasvati 
himself wrote a commentary on his Tattvarthasitra and it is 
now necessary to see what, if any, reference to anekanta there 
is in Umasvati's commentary on the sutras which Pujyapada 
comments on above.”? 

Tattvarthasuttra 5. 32 (arpitdnarpita-siddheh) corre- 
sponds to 5. 31 of the Svetambara version for which Sukhlalji 
gives two interpretive translations: "Each thing is possessed of 
a number of properties; for as viewed from the standpoint 
adopted and as viewed from another standpoint it proves to be 
something self-contradictory" and “Each thing is liable to be a 
subject matter of usage in various ways; for usage is accounted 
for on the basis of arpand and anarpana--that is, on the basis 


28 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of a consideration of chief or subordinate status depending on 
the desire of the speaker concerned." The context here is 
existence (sat) which has already been defined as being 
characterized by origination, destruction (or disappearance) 
and permanence (5. 30/29: utpada-vyaya-dhrauvya-yuktam 
sat). In his commentary Umasvati begins by saying that there 
are three kinds of existence as characterized in the siitra, all 
of which are eternal insofar as they occur continually. Each of 
these may be established through arpita or anarpita, which he 
equates with the practical (vyavaharika) and the non-practical 
(avyavahdarika). 

The commentary continues with an explanation of what 
existence means on the basis of this classification, in which he 
mentions, for example, dravyastika, utpannGstika and 
paryayastika, existence as a substance, as origination (namely, 
as a particular object) and as a modification. Although 
Umasvati uses neither the word naya nor anekdnta here, it is 
clear that that is intended, namely, that the nature of an 
object or existence as such can be ascertained depending on 
the standpoint from which one approaches the subject, i.e., on 
the basis of what is given a primary or secondary significance. 

Umasvati's commentary on Tattvdrthasiitra 1.6 is 
relatively short, in which pramana is said to be of two kinds, 
indirect and direct, and that the nayas (7 or 5 for the 
Digambaras and Svetambaras respectively), naigama, etc., will 
be discussed later, i-e., in 1. 33 (34 in the Svetambara version, 
see above).*? There is nothing else significant for the context 
under discussion here. In Umasvati's commentary on the sutra 
mentioned above the word anekdnta does not appear, 
although it seems easy to read this into it. Hence, although 
neither Kundakunda nor Umasvati uses the word anekanta 
explicitly, it is evident that the theory is implicit in their ideas. 


INTRODUCTION 29 


Differences between Kundakunda and Umasvati on 
anekantavdada . 


The significant difference between these two thinkers 
lies in detail. Kundakunda explicitly uses the word sydt in the 
context of the five statements given in Pravacanasdra 2. 23 
and seven in Paficastikayasadra 14 that can be made about an 
entity. Umasvati, on the other hand, does not use the word 
syat. The word naya is used in different contexts by them: 
Kundakunda uses naya with reference only to dravya and 
paryaya in the stanzas considered above (and these are also 
used by Pijyapada in his Sarvarthasiddhi on Tattvarthasiitra 
1. 6), whereas Umasvati uses it in the context of the well- 
known nayas (naigama, etc., 7 or 5). In the context of 
pramana in 1. 6 there is no reference to dravya nor to parydya 
in Umasvati's commentary, although it is found in Pijyapada's 
Sarvarthasiddhi. 

As for the word anekanta itself, in the sense in which 
it can be associated with the theory of manifoldness unique to 
the Jains, it seems that Pujyapada was the first person to 
explicitly use it so. By the eighth century, however, the theory 
was undoubtedly already established in this sense, as is 
evident in Akalanka's works. 


Ethics 


Jain ethics or the moral code of conduct is identical 
with the religious duties prescribed for the "fourfold 
community" of Jains encompassing the monks, nuns, laymen 
and laywomen. Preeminence for the Jain code of conduct is 
given to the rules for the ascetics, the monks and nuns, with 
the entire ethics evolving out of it as a pattern of behavior for 
the laity as well.*? Throughout the history of Jainism the 
ascetic way of life has been expected to be emulated by all 
Jains, on the model depicted in the biographies of the Jinas 
themselves, especially Mahavira. The emphasis on asceticism 


30 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ng that even the so-called "lesser vows" (anuvrata) 
oe fs hfe as a Jain layperson have their roots in the 
prescriptions given by Mahavira for the “great vows 
(mahavrata) of an ascetic. a 

The five great vows ascribed to Mahavira can be seen 
as a summary of Indian asceticism as a whole which has been 
practised in India since ancient times. The first and foremost 
of these is nonviolence (ahimsda) which entails total abstinence 
in thought, word and deed from injury of any kind to all life 
forms. The rule also includes not causing anyone to commit 
violence, nor to approve of it in any way. Since the whole of 
nature is seen as impregnated with life, ie., inhabited by 
souls, extreme care has to be exercised not only in the contact 
with plant and animal life forms but also with those in earth, 
water, fire and air. The other "great vows" are: to abstain from 
lying, correlated with which is eschewing violent or harmful 
speech; not to take what is not given; to lead a life of celibacy; 
and to renounce attachment to the objects of the world, i.e., 
to renounce possession of property. How these rules for the 
ascetic are adapted with necessary changes for the laity will be 
seen below. A few points regarding the first ethical rule of 
nonviolence may be appropriate here, since the rule can be 
seen as the basis for the others as well, and as being 
ultimately based on Jain metaphysics. 

For the rationale behind the first rule of nonviolence it 
is noteworthy that in one important canonical text the 
teaching is clearly based on self-reflection and self-experience, 
and then is projected onto all other living beings: "-@Xactly as 
it is not nice to me if I am wounded, struck, threatened, 
beaten, hurt, hit hard or killed with a stick, a bone, fist, a clod 
of earth or a potsherd--(yes) even if just a hair of mine is 
pulled out I feel vividly the injury which causes me suffering 
and fear of it--so too, know this, all higher beings, all plants, 
all lower animals, all other living beings if wounded...or killed 
with a stick..., indeed even if just a hair of theirs is pulled out, 
feel vividly the injury which causes them suffering and fear of. 


INTRODUCTION 31 


it. If one has recognized this, then (it is certain that) no higher 
being, no plant, no lower animal, no other living being may be 
beaten, commanded, subdued, strained (or) killed. Truly I say: 
the venerable saints who were, who are and who will be, they 
all say, they speak, proclaim, explain the following: no lower 
animal, no plant, no other living being may be beaten, 
commanded, subdued, strained or killed. This is the pure, 
constant, eternal teaching proclaimed by those who know, 
because they understand the world. In this way a monk 
renounces violence against living beings (untruth, unallowed 
acquisition, sexual intercourse and) ownership." 

The same text also makes it evident that the emphasis 
on nonviolence is based on or arises out of the actual 
occurrence of violence in everyday life, even in its subtle 
forms. In other words, it seems that the very occurrence of 
violence justifies the attempt to renounce it. It is quite 
revealing that many of the thirteen kinds of violence 
enumerated in the text entail aspects of human behavior that 
can be relevant even today when reflecting on a code of moral 
action: Violent deeds arise out of: (1) purposeful violent deed, 
(2) purposeless violent deed, (3) militant violent deed, (4) 
accidental violent deed, (5) a violent deed through an optical 
illusion, (6) an act that occurs in untrue speech, (7) in 
unallowed acquisition, (8) in (a bad) mood, (9) in pride, (10) 
in doing wrong to friends, (11) in deception, (12) in greed, 
(13) in prescribed action.** Each of these types of violence is 
then discussed in detail to make evident the seriousness with 
which the practice of nonviolence is advocated. Even though 
it may not be explicitly stated in the text itself, the reflections 
on eschewing violence because one oneself feels pain seem to 
imply the corollary: you yourself are indeed the creature 
which you think may be beaten, taken in command, strained, 
controlled or killed. In other words, violence begets violence 
and one thereby endangers one's own being. 

The moral code of conduct for the laity, as already 
Stated, is based on that for the ascetic. Ascetic life obviously 


32 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


has priority in terms of what Jainism sees as the ideal of 
human behavior based on the lives of the Jinas themselves. It 
is for this reason that the ascetic vows aré mirrored in the 
rules for what the laity should do to exemplify an ethical life. 
The first rule of nonviolence, together with not making 
another commit violence nor of approving of it in any way, 
applies to the laity as well. The layperson is expected to obey 
this rule as far as possible, in any case to keep in mind the 
ascetic ideal. Hence a livelihood which involves unnecessary 
destruction of life, like hunting or an occupation which 
involves excessive use of fire, should be avoided. The rules of 
not lying (including avoiding violent or harmful speech) and 
not stealing apply just as well to the laity as to the ascetics. 
The vow of celibacy is of course relaxed for lay people, with 
sexual contact restricted to the married partner. However 
restraint here is enjoined as a special virtue for the 
householder. There are several other "lesser vows” for the 
layperson as a guide to ethical behavior and reference may be 
made here to only a few more: nonattachment to property and 
possessions and the aim of leading a simple life; religious 
giving or donation; eschewing excessive and unnecessary 
travel; fasting on auspicious days of the Jain calendar.*® 

The history of Jainism evinces a very close symbiosis 
between the ascetics and the laity. The ascetics do not cook, 
and rely on the householder for their daily subsistence, and 
the laity require the ascetics for their religious teaching and 
advice. The confession of ethical transgressions is a code of 
conduct which applies to both groups. Special acts of 
atonement through penance are then prescribed for religious 
purification.*° The aim is to reduce or even completely 
annihilate the karmic effect of an infringement. 

It was stated above that the Jain emphasis on 
nonviolence is based on its metaphysics. The basics of Jain 
metaphysics have been dealt with above, in which the concept 
of karma plays a central role for the understanding of the 
basic categories or fundamental principles. Ethical life is aimed: 


INTRODUCTION 33 


at attaining freedom from the influence of karma, which 
obstructs the proper and adequate manifestation of the powers 
of the soul. Since violence is responsible for the maximum 
amount of karma that can be accumulated by a soul, and since 
liberation is possible only when all the karmas are completely 
destroyed or annihilated, the task is reduced through 
avoidance of violent deeds. The answer to the question 
associated with ethics, then, about what should be achieved 
through a moral code of conduct with nonviolence as its 
supreme rule, is liberation (moksa). This goal is echoed right 
at the beginning of his work by Uméasvati in his 
Tattvarthasutra 1:1: "right faith, right knowledge and right 
conduct (together) constitute the path to liberation." Since the 
"right conduct" presupposes the supreme rule of nonviolence 
the often used axiom "nonviolence is the highest religion" 
serves as a summary of Jaina ethics. 

The liberation that can be achieved is not a sudden 
break from the fetters caused by karma but a gradual process 
of purifying karma's detrimental influence on the soul. In this 
“path to liberation" the soul goes through a series of fourteen _ 
“quality stages" (gunasthana), with the possibility of relapse to 
a lower stage depending on the inner attitude.*’ It is in this 
context that the reference to proper conduct in thought, word 
and deed becomes particularly significant. 

The extremeness with which nonviolence is expected to 
be followed by all Jains is balanced and contrasted by the 
extremeness with which self-control and self-mortification is 
expected to be carried out for liberation, just as all the Jinas 
themselves did. In other words, the softness towards others is 
to be as extreme as the hardness of the discipline on oneself, 
both being undertaken with a calmness exemplified by the 
Jinas. Two extremes are implicit here: great care towards 
other beings and extreme self-abnegation, self-sacrifice and 
self-denial as an ascetic discipline. The ascetic way of life, even 
if implemented by householders, is not regarded as an act of 
violence, despite its extremeness. 


34 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The issue of "voluntary or religious death" which is 
unique to Jainism also comes under the rubric of ethics. Its 
occurrence has been recorded in inscriptions throughout the 
history of Jainism and has been practised even in 
contemporary times. This kind of death, which can be chosen 
by both ascetics and laity, is a death that literally makes "the 
physical body and the internal passions emaciated" 
(sallekhana; Pujyapada on Tattvdrthasitra V.22), and often 
serves to accelerate the death process already in progress. 
Jainism contrasts this death with suicide, which it eschews 
because passions such as "attachment, aversion, or infatuation" 
are involved in suicidal death. By virtue of its excellence this 
passionless death, this "inviting or pursuing death" performed 
under strict conditions and observation, is regarded as the 
most effective ascetic practice to rid the soul of the binding 
passions and to terminate an ethical life. 

Jainism (and Buddhism) shows how a religious, 
virtuous and ethical life is possible without the idea of a 
creator God to whom one can turn as one ultimately 
responsible for the human condition. Models for ethical life in 
Jainism are provided by the biographies of the twenty-four 
Jinas, the conquerors of the passions, of whom Mahavira was 
the last. Even though the Jinas are worshipped as divine 
beings, just as Hindus worship their gods, the tradition 
represents the Jinas as illustrious human beings who, through 
their extreme asceticism, gained an insight into the nature of 
reality, on account of which they are regarded as omniscient 
beings. Their lives serve as a guiding principle and, according 
to tradition, an emulation of their virtues leads one to the 
same goal of liberation which they themselves achieved. 


THE JAIN CANON 
Karl H. Potter 


Despite the vast collection of literature concerned with 
Jainism, understanding of much of its history and literature 
appears still uncertain and debatable. Under the 
circumstances, we can only report some of the most recent 
accounts of the early history of Jainism and its thought, and 
of the texts which are now taken by all or at least many Jains 
to constitute its basic texts. What follows in this section is not 
intended in the least as even a summary introduction to 
Jainism, but merely represents an understanding of what 
constitutes the background to the philosophical texts contained 
in the body of our volume. It depends to a large extent on a 
recent (at the time of writing) introduction to Jainism, the 
Second Edition of Paul Dundas' readable The Jains (London 
and New York, 2002) (referred to in the footnotes here as 
Dundas 2002). 

It is standard to take Mahavira, the Jina (6th-Sth BCE) 
as the founder of Jainism, but the Jains own understanding is 
that Mahavira is only the last of eighteen tirthankaras (lit. 
"fordmakers"), the first of which was Rsabha and the most 
recent was Parsva. It seems likely that the historical Mahavira 
must have lived contemporaneously with Gautama the 
Buddha, although along with the Buddha's Mahavira's dates 
are not entirely certain. Also uncertain is where Mahavira was 
born. He is supposed to have had as his given name 
Vardhamana, though he is not referred to under that name in 
the earliest texts.*® 

We eschew trying to reconstruct Mahavira's life from 
the traditions-and references in the literature. Indeed, given 
the orientation of the present Volume toward philosophy all 
that is really relevant is that, like the Buddha, after a period 
of thirteen years living the life of an ascetic--during which he 
is supposed to have met Makkhali Gosala the Ajivika, who was 
also one of the Buddha's early teachers--Mahavira achieved 
enlightenment, termed "complete knowledge" or “omniscience" 


36 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(kevalajfana), in a field--location unknown--tilled by a farmer 
called SAamaga. He then ‘proceeded to preach and began to 
gather followers (ganadharas), who are said to have numbered 
eleven in all, although there is no reference to them in the 
earliest literature. The most important of these followers was 
Indrabhiti Gautama, about whom stories developed that are 
dear to the heart of Jains through the ages.°? 

Mahavira's teachings were not written down, and can 
perhaps best be gleaned from passages in the oldest of the 
Jaina scriptures, the Acadranga and the Siitrakrtanga (for which 
see below). Essentially, they are that the world results from 
ignorance, frustration and pain caused by karma. Actions 
(karman) bring about rebirth. Freedom from karma, and thus 
from rebirth, can only arise for one who adopts the life of a 
wandering mendicant and, acquiring the right approach to the 
world, learns to abstain from worldly actions through 
overcoming his passions. But these early passages do not try 
to give a precise account of the relationship between action 
and rebirth, nor do they provide even an inkling of what we 
find in later scriptures, a vast cosmography and the 
development of metaphysical categories and philosophical 
analysis of them. Rather, they center around the insistence on 
the practice of compassion toward and noninjury to all living 
beings. *° 

We have not as yet located the founding figures of 
Jainism within the subcontinent. There are, of course, 
voluminous accounts of the lives of the Tirthankaras and of 
Mahavira in particular. He is traditionally held to have been 
born in Vaisali in what is modern Uttar Pradesh, and Parsva is 
held to have made the Nirgrantha religion popular there. 
Mahavira himself is held after his enlightenment to have 

visited various places in eastern India, especially in Bihar but 
probably in western. Bengal and into Orissa. In any case 
Jainism clearly spread into Bengal soon after Mahavira's 
lifetime. By 250 B.C.E. Jains are found in the Panjab and 
Gujarat. Jain inscriptions are found in Mathura dating from 


THE JAIN CANON 37 


200 B.C." 

Little to no historical evidence is available for the 
lengthy period between 200 B.C. and 400 A.D., when the 
earliest of the texts surveyed in our Volume are assumed to 
date from. Some time during that period, however, there must 
have occurred the split, that has bulked so large in Jaina 
history, between the Digambara and Svetambara sects, since 
the evidence about our earliest texts so clearly poses the 
problems that distinction raises for us. It is not known when 
this split occurred, although there are plenty of legends and 
assumptions bruted about concerning it. Asim Kumar 
Chatterjee reports that “although the Digambaras claim a 
hoary antiquity for their religion, no Digambara record earlier 
than AD 300 has so far been discovered. The earliest 
Svetambara work that refers to the formal separation of the 
Digambaras from the original samgha is the Avasyakaniryukti 
(c. AD 200)."*? 

As their names suggest, the most evident contrast 
between members of the two sects was that while the 
Svetambaras preferred to wear white (sveta) clothing the 
Digambara's espoused nudity, i.e., were "space" (dig)-elad. 
Further distinctions are sparse but important. Dundas 
succinctly writes: "Svetambara monks and nuns wear robes (an 
upper and a lower garment) and they use a bowl into which 
alms are deposited and from which they eat. They believe that 
women can attain spiritual deliverance without being reborn 
in a male body and that the kevalin, the fully omniscient 
being, experiences hunger and needs to take physical 
nourishment. Fully initiated Digambara monks, on the other 
hand, wear no clothes at all (this does not apply to 
Digamabara nuns) and do not use an alms bowl, eating their 
food from the cupped hands. They reject the authority of the 
Svetambara scriptures, as well as the possibility of deliverance 
for women and the omniscient being's need for food."* 

A third sect, whose incipience is likewise uncertain but 
appears to have been current in India until as late as the 


38 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


twelfth century, were the Yapaniyas, though their importance 
for the philosophical literature is confined to earlier part of the 
first millennium. "The Yapaniyas, inscriptional references to 
whom start to appear from the early medieval period, 
occupied an interstitial position between the Svetambaras and 
Digambaras, with the latter viewing them as heretics. 
Digambara in outward appearance, the Yapaniyas seem to 
have compromised over the wearing of clothes when in 
contact with their lay supporters. Moreover, they also accepted 
the authority of the Svetambara scriptures and the only full- 
length writings on doctrinal matters by a Yapaniya writer 
which have survived defend the Svetambara views about 
deliverance forwomen and the eating of food by the 
omniscient kevalin."“ 

Another important contrast between the Digambaras 
and Svetambaras concerns their attitudes toward early Jain 
literature. As Dundas suggests, the usual- use of the word 
"scripture" to refer to that literature needs to be interpreted 
carefully, and especially in the light of the fact that the 
Digambaras disavow the present existence of any such 
literature, claiming it has been lost. And indeed both sects 
agree, at least, that a large body of early Jain literature has 
been lost, namely the Purvas, the works ascribed to the first 
fourteen tirthankaras. These texts are associated by the 
Svetambaras with the twelfth, now lost, section of what they 
take to be the limbs (anga) of the Jain canonical literature. We 
shall now tum to what constitutes that canonical literature. 

In contrast to other accounts Dundas cites as “what has 
come to be regarded as the standard version of the scriptural 
canon" forty-five texts which are classified into five groups.‘ 

Group I: Limbs (anga) 

1 Acarangastitra: statements about the nature of 
reality, concerning particularly the self and karma; a biography 
of Mahavira, and advice about the monks' discipline. 

2 Sutrakrtangasutra: the views of opposing 
schools; karma, Mahavira, asceticism, women, hells. 


THE JAIN CANON 39 


3 Sthanangasittra: categories drawn from doc- 
trine, practice, mythology and cosmology, etc., in clusters of 
one to ten. 

4 Samavayangasitra: like (3). 

5 Vyakhy4aprajriaptyangasitra: the biggest text of 
the canon, on subjects drawn from the entire range of Jain 
doctrine and practices. 

6 Jfiatadharmakathdngasttra: stories providing 
appropriate advice concerning the religious path. 

7 Updsakadasangasttra: stories about pious 
laymens' resistance to attack by demons. 

8 Antahkrddasdngasutra: stories about previously 
liberated beings. 

9 Anuttaraupapattikadasangasttra: stories about 
those reborn as gods. 

10 Prasnavyakarandadnyangasitra: questions and 
answers on doctrinal matters. 

11 Vipakasutangasutra: stories about the experi- 
ences arising from one's karma. 

12 Drstivadangasttra: now lost; see above. 


Group 2: Subsidiary Limbs (updnga) 

1 Aupapatikasutra: spontaneously-born gods and 
denizens of hell; Mahavira's teachings; how to gain liberation. 

2 Rajaprasniyasutra: a discussion between King 
Prasenajit and the monk KesSin, follower of Pargva, about the 
relation of the self to its body. 

3 Jivajtvabhigamasutra: ontology. 

4 Prajnapanasutra: continuation of anga #5, 
above. 

5 Suryaprajnaptisutra: the sun. 

6 Jambudvipaprajnaptisutra: on the island 
Jambiidvipa; biography of Rsabha. 

7 Candraprajnaptisutra: the moon. 

8-12 Five stories about karmic results. 


40 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Group 3: Behavior of Monks (chedasiitra) 

1 Dagagrutaskandhasitra (Prakrit: Aydradasdo), 
which includes a Kalpasiitra as a chapter. 

2 Kalpastitra, not the same as the above; deals 
with monastic law. 

3 Vyavahdrasitra: rules for monks and nuns. 
4 Nigithasitra: atonements for breaches of 
ascetic behavior. 

5 Mahanisithasttra: rules and examples of 
asceticism. 

6 Paficakalpasiutra: lust; may never have existed. 

7 Jitakalpastitra: written by Jinabhadra in the 
7th century A.D., it prescribes atonements for violations of 
rules of conduct. 


Group 4: Basic Scriptures (mulasitra) 

1 Uttaradhyayanasitra: 36 chapters of verses 
reporting legends, practical behavior and doctrines. 

2 Dasavaikdlikasttra: ascribed to Sayyambhava, 
it concerns correct asceticism. 

3 Avasyakastitra: concerning the six obligatory 
ritual actions, which has spawned a vast expository literature. 

4 Pindamoryuktisutra and Oghaniryuktisutra, 
which together explain how to beg for alms and care for a 
monk's equipment. 


. Group 5: Eight Mixed (prakirnaka) Texts concerning 
suicide, astrology, etc., along with two texts concerning 
epistemology titled Nandisiitra and Anuyogadvarinisitra. 


: Even this list is not accepted by all branches of the 
Svetambaras, though this appears to have been the list which 
was arrived at in the fifth century in Vaisali when a large 
meeting was held and the traditions concerning such matters 
was recited. It was at that same meeting, apparently, that the 
schism between the two primary sects was thoroughly and 


THE JAIN CANON | 41 


irrevocably finalized. As was said above, the Digambaras 
refused to accept the above list of alleged scriptures as 
authentic. However, there are stylistic and other reasons to 
think that the texts the Digambaras appealed to as 
replacements, the Satkhandagamasittra and _ the 
Kasdyapdhudasutra, were composed much later and that other 
texts cited by the Digambaras were closely related to one or 
another of the Svetambara list given above. 

The rather few paragraphs above take us from the 
middle of the first century B.C. to the fourth or fifth century 
A.D., at which point the philosophical literature of the Jainas 
proper may be said to begin. Although some of this literature 
consists of commentaries on one or another of the forty-five 
scriptural books listed above, we shall for the most part ignore 
these commentaries in what follows. Rather, we shall 
concentrate on independent texts, and commentaries on them, 
that represented Jaina efforts to develop and explain a world- 
view in terms of which the traditions inaugurated by the 
tirthankaras culminating in Mahavira and fleshed out in the 
scriptures listed above can be rationalized and made both 
meaningful and the basis for a way of life that would capture 
the imagination of serious-minded aspirants for liberation. 


PART TWO 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 
(ARRANGED CHRONOLOGICALLY) 


TATTVARTHASUTRA 45 


1. UMASVATI (4007), Tattvartha(adhigama)sitra 

A rather heated controversy rages within Jainism as to 
whether this author, apparently the earliest who wrote 
noncanonical material, belonged to the Svetambara or the 
Digambara sect, as well as over other matters concerning his 
identity and time. In 1985 Johannes Bronkhorst published a 
thorough review of the evidence surrounding this matter*®; 
since his approach is presumably not infected by any biases 
that might affect the opinions of Jains of either sect we report 
here his conclusions. One point of controversy concerns 
whether the same author wrote the -siitras and the -bhasya, 
our #3, which is regularly attributed to him. Bronkhorst 
provides an extended argument to show that the two authors 
were different people; so, to be safe, we shall separate the 
summaries of the two works in the present Volume. 
Bronkhorst also argues that the author of the Bhasya 
incorporated the Sutra into what was disseminated as his 
work. 

A distinct question concerns whether this text stemmed 
from Svetambara or Digambara origins. In fact there are two 
distinct versions of this text, each belonging to one or the 
other of these rwo schools. However, Bronkhorst gives some 
reasons to think that in fact the origins of the work stemmed 
from a third Jaina sect, that of the Yapaniyas, and was 
incorporated by the other two schools into their literature with 
appropriate changes to fit their beliefs. That the original form 
was Yapaniya is argued for by Bronkhorst on the grounds that 
a passage counting hunger and thirst among the eleven 
sufferings of a Jina is found at Tattvarthasutra 9. 11, whereas 
the Digambaras hold that a Jina neither eats nor drinks. As for 
why it cannot be a Svetambara work, he cites an extensive 
argument by R. Williams showing discrepancies between 
unique Svetambara beliefs and passages in the text. Thus 
arises Bronkhorst's idea that the text stems from Yapaniya 
sources. 

That conclusion also bears on the question of the text's 


46 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


proper dating. Since the Yapaniyas faded out around the 
beginning of the fifth century and originated during the 
second century, this suggests a period between 150-400 for 
the composition of the work. Suzuka Ohira, A Study of 
Tattvarthastitra with Bhasya- with Special Reference to 
Authorship and Date (L. D. Series 86: Ahmedabad 1982), 
deserves attention since her work, which stemmed from a 
doctoral thesis at Gujarat University, is presumably operating 
from a position independent of the rival contentions of the two 
great schools of Jainism, viz., Svetambara and Digambara. She 
places Umasvati "some time in the late middle of the 5th 
century A.D. where the migration of the Jainas to the South 
and the West was nearing to the end." However, on her own 
showing and that of many other historians of Jainism that 
"migration" seems to have been completed closer to the end of 
the fourth century, and indeed a reference on the next page 
suggests that she may rather have meant the fourth rather 
than the fifth century in the passage quoted above, especially 
since she cites evidence to show that Kundakunda, Pujyapada 
and Samantabhadra can be dated back to the 5th century and 
that Umasvati preceded them. Thus our surmise of 400 as a 
possible date to assign to Umasvati.*” 

The differences between the two versions of the text 
have been set forth by J. L. Jaini*®, as well as by A. Shantiraja 
Sastri.” In the summary below we adopt the readings of K. K. 
Dixit found in ET (which are not themselves consistent in 
following either of the two texts), noting a few major 
differences that appear crucial to understanding the texts. 

Mahendra Kumar states that “it is beyond any doubt 
that Tattvarthasiitra...of Umasvami or Umasvati...is in the form 
of Stitras in Sanskrit containing, for the first time, the 
teachings of the Agamas."*° , 

A number of other works are often ascribed to 
Umasvati. Of them the only one that appears genuine, though 
not philosophical, is the Jambudvipasamasa "of which the first 
two ahnikas describe the geography of Jambiidvipa, the third 


TATTVARTHASUTRA 47 


explains the world oceans and continents, and the fourth 
discusses about mensuration formulae and recapitulates the 
characteristic features of Jambiidvipa." (Ohira, ibid., p. 139) 

"E" and "T" references. are the edition and translation by 
K. K. Dixit to be found in L.D.Series 44, Ahmedabad 1974. The 
summary is based on a separate contribution for this Volume 
provided by Prof. Dixit. 


Summary by K. K. Dixit 


CHAPTER ONE 

1 (E3; T2-5) Right vision (dargana), right awareness 
(jfia@na) and right conduct (cdritra)--these three constitute the 
pathway to liberation (moksa). 

2 (E3; TS) Right vision is faithfully seeking out which 
are fundamental things (tattvartha). 

3 (E3; TS-6) That arises either naturally (nisarga) or 
from study (adhigama) 

4 (E3; T7) The fundamental things are: self (iva), 
what is not self, inflow (dsrava) of karma’, bondage (bandha), 
cessation of inflow (samvara), cleansing off (nirjara) (of 
traces), and liberation. 

5 (E3; T9) These (things) are located (niksepa) or 
distinguished (vibhaga) according to their name (nama), 
representation (sthdpana), substance-type or (karmic) state 
(bhava). 

6 (E3;T11) They are apprehended (adhigama) 
through (an) instrument of true cognition (pramana) or from 
a perspective (naya), 

7-8 (E3; T12) (known) as being mentioned (nirdesa), 


‘As shall become clear in due course (and particularly in Chapter 
VIII of this text), the Jains conceive karman in the form of a physical 
formation that gets attached to a self as a result of its good or bad 
acts. It is purged off from a self either after yielding the appropriate 
fruit or with the help of some special endeavor like penance, etc. 


48 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ssessor (svami), its instrumentality (sadhana), its 
eatcn (alhiarana) its duration (sthiti) or classification 
(vidhdna), its existence (sat), number (samkhy4), (spatial) 
location, extent (sparsana), time (kala), interval (antara), 
(karmic) state (bhava), or relative numerical strength 

a). 
eae 7) The five kinds of awareness are called 
immediate (nonverbal) awareness (mati), linguistic awareness 
(sruta), extrasensory awareness (avadhi), telepathy (manah- 
paryaya) and knowledge (kevala). 

10 (E3; T19) They involve two instruments of true 
cognition, 

11 (E3; T19) the first two (of the five) being indirect 
(paroksa) instruments of true cognition 

12 (E3;T19) and the last three being direct 
(pratyaksa). 

13 (E3; T21) Synonyms for "mati" are smrti, samjfid, 
cinta, abhinibodha. 

14 (E3; T22) Immediate nonverbal awareness can 
originate either from the sense-organs or not (i.e., or from the 
internal organ). 

15 (E3; T22) There are four (successive) steps involved 
in it, called “indistinct" (avagraha), "directed" (tha), 
"determinative" (avaya) and “concluding” (dhdrand). 

16 (E3; T24) Immediate nonverbal awareness occurs in 
twelve ways: having many distinct contents, having one 
content, having many forms or only one, being grasped quickly 
or slowly, on the basis of a locus or not, accompanied by 
doubt or not, regularly (dhruva) or irregularly. 

17 (E3; T28) All four steps involve grasping an object. 

18 (E3; T30) Sense-object contact is called "vyafijana"; 
when it happens indistinct awareness ensues. 

19 (E3; T30) - But in visual and mental awareness this 
pattern is not applicable. 

20 (£4; T36) Linguistic awareness is always preceded 
by immediate nonverbal awareness. and can be classified into 


TATTVARTHASUTRA 49 


classified into two, twelve, or many types. 

21-23 (E4; T42) Extrasensory awareness is of two sorts: 
that owing to birth (bhavapratyaya), which is found in 
inhabitants of hell and of heaven, and that owing to quality 
(gunapratyaya)’, which arises from destruction and subsidence 
and is found in the six kinds of birth among animals and 
humans. 

24-25 (E4; T46) Telepathy has two varieties, differing 
in respect of purity and the presence or absence of backsliding. 

26 (E4; T47) Knowledge and telepathy differ as to 
purity, range, who (or which of the six kinds of beings) can 
experience them, and their kinds of contents. 

27 (E4; T48) Telepathy and linguistic awareness range 
over all substances and some of their modes. 

28 (E4; T48) Extrasensory awarenesses range over only 
those substances having color and touch. 

29 (E4; T48) Telepathy grasps only a single one of the 
substances together with only a portion of its modes, 

30 (E4; T48) while knowledge ranges over all 
substances and all modes. 

31 (E4; T51) Ina self there may occur at the same time 
one, two, three or four types of awareness, with the 
occurrence of no one kind being necessary. 

32 (E4; T32) Immediate nonverbal, linguistic and 
extrasensory awarenesses can be false as well (as true). 

33 (E4; T32) Such awarenesses, even though true, are 
in a sense false for one who does not know the difference 
between real and unreal, since such an awareness, even if 
true, is only accidentally so. 

34 (E4; T55) There are five types of perspective (naya): 
conventional (naigama), generic (samgraha), commonsensical 
(vyavahara), (temporally) immediate (rjusitra) and linguis- 
tically implied (Sabda). 


‘The text merely characterizes the second type without providing 
the term, which we take from commentaries. 


50 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


35 (E4; T55) The conventional perspective has two 
varieties, the last linguistically implied three. 


CHAPTER TWO 

1 (E5; T73) A selfs nature (at a moment) consists of 
five modifications (bhava) (of applications of awareness 
(upayoga)): (1) that arising from the subsiding (aupasamika) 
(of a karmic trace's operation), (2) that arising from the 
destruction (ksdyika) (of a trace), (3) that arising from the 
combination of those two, (4) that arising from the fruition 
(audayika) (of a trace), and (5) that arising from the 
transformation (parindmika) (of a trace). 

2 (E5; T73) (1) has two sorts; (2) has nine sorts: (3) 
has eighteen, (4) has twenty-one and (5) has three. 

3 (ES; 173) The two properties that result from 
subsiding of a karmic trace are right inclination (samyaktva) 
and right conduct. 

4 (E5; T73) The nine types that arise through 
destruction of a karma are awareness, vision, giving (dana), 
gain (labha), experiencing (bhoga), repeated experience 
(upabhoga), energy (virya), right inclination, and right 
conduct. 

5 (E5; T74) Among the eighteen types arising from a 
combination of cessation and destruction of karmic traces 
there are four kinds of awareness, three kinds of ignorance, 
three of vision, five of giving, etc. (giving, gain, experiencing, 
repeated experience and endeavor), right inclination, right 
conduct and partial restraint (samyamasamyama). 

6 (E5; T74) The twenty-one kinds that arise through 
fruition of karma residues include four kinds of rebirth (gati), 
four of passion (kasdya), three of sexual feeling (linga or 
veda), erroneous awareness (mithyajfidna), ignorance, lack of 
restraint, nonliberation (asiddhatva) and six types of (self- 


TATTVARTHASUTRA 51 


colorings (lesya).’ 

7 (E5; T74) Being a self, being worthy of liberation 
(bhavyatva) and being unworthy of liberation. 

8 (ES; T80) The mark of a self is (its) application (of 
awareness).>} 

9 (E5; T82) It can be viewed as having two, eight or 
four types. 

10 (ES; T85) The two types of self are transmigrating 
(sams@rin) and liberated. 

11 (E5; T86) (Transmigrating selves may be classified 
in various ways: as. possessing an internal organ (manas) or 
not, 

12 (ES; T86) as mobile (trasa) or static (sthadvara)-- 

13 (E5; T86) earth, water and plants being static, 

14 (ES; T86) fire, water, and those having two, three, 
four or five senses being mobile. 

, 15 (ES; T89) There are five (sense-)organs (indriya), 

16 (ES; T89) Each having two kinds. 

17 (E5; T89) The substantial (sense-)organ (dravyen- 
driya) can be (viewed as) outwardly visible (nirvrtti) or as a 
capacity (upakarana). 

18 (E5; T89) The (sense-)organ as a state (bhdven- 
driya) can be either initial (labdhi) or applied (upayoga). 

19 (E6; T89) The applied sort occurs with respect to 
tangible, etc. (objects) 

20 (E6; T89) The five (sense-)organs are tactile, gusta- 
tory, olfactory, visual and auditory. 

21 (E6; T92) The objects (artha) of these are 
respectively touch, taste, smell, color and sound. 

22 (E6; T92) The contents of the internal organ are 
verbal. 


1 The Jainas conceive a coloring (lesya) in the form of a physical 
formation that is variously colored and attaches to a self depending 
on the amount of purity that self exhibits. The six increasingly purer 
colorings are black, blue, grey, yellow, red and white. 


52 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


23 (E6; T95S) Selves up to those consisting of air (vayu) 
have one sense-organ. 

24 (E6; T95) Insects, ants, bees, and men possess 
respectively two, three, four or five sense-organs. 

25 (E6; T96) Possessors of an internal organ are those 
who have recognition (samjrid). 

26 (E6; T99) At the time of rebirth (?) there is only one 
sort of activity (yoga), viz., karmic. 

27 (E6); T99) All motion follows a straight line 


(Sreni)) 
28 (E6; T99) A selfs movement toward liberation is 


undeviating, 

29 (E6; T99) whereas a bound selfs movements may 
involve deviations or not, and if it does, three at most. 

30 (E6; T99) An absence of deviation comprises one 
moment (samaya). 

31 (E6; T99) A self remains unassimilative for only one 
or two moments. 

32 (E6; T106) The three kinds of birth arise from 
agglutination (sammirchana), from a womb (garbha), and 
through sudden manifestation (upapdata). 

33 (E6; T106) There are nine kinds of places of birth-- 
where no living beings are born, where some are born, both 
of the above, where it is partly cold and partly hot, where it 
is only hot, where it is all three, where birth is concealed, both 
concealed and revealed, and where it is revealed. 

34 (E7; T106) Born wrapped in placenta Garayu), born 
from an egg (andaja), and born in a bare state (potaja)--these 
are the three ways of being born from the womb. 

35 (E7; T106) Hell- and heavenly-beings are born from 
sudden manifestation. 

36 (E7; T107). Allthe rest are born from agglutination. 

37 (E7; T111) The five kinds of body are: (1) material 
(audarika), (2) transformative (vaikriya), (3) procuring 
(aharaka), (4) fiery (taijasa) and (5) made of karma 
(karmana). 


TATTVARTHASUTRA 53 


38 (E7; T111) (Those listed) later (in the foregoing list) 
are subtler than (those listed) earlier. 

39 (E7; T111) (1-3 of 37 above) The later ones 
comprise more atoms than the earlier ones listed, 

40 (E7; T111) and the last two even more atoms. 

41 (E7; T111) (4) and (5) are nonresistant 
(apratigha). , 

42 (E7; T111) They are beginninglessly related to a 
self, 

43 (E7; T111) and all selves possess one. 

44 (E7; T111) A self can possess at most four (of 1-5 of 
37) necessarily including (4) and (5). 

45 (E7; T111) Only (5) is without the experience of 
satisfaction and frustration. 

, 46 (E7; T111) (#1) (of 37) Material bodies are born 
only from the womb or through agglutination. 

47 (E7; T112) A (#2) (of 37) arises only by sudden 
manifestation 

48 (E8; T112) and is produced through the attainment 
of superordinary power. 

(48A)? As is (#4) also.) 

49 (E8; T112) (#3) (of 37) is good (Subha), pure 
(visuddha), and without resistance (avydghata), and is the 
body only of a monk versed in the 14 texts of the Pirva class. 

50 (E8; T123) Beings in hell or born by agglutination 
are neuter (napurusa). 

51 (E8; T123) Heavenly beings are never neuter. 

52 (E8; T125) Beings born through sudden manifes- 
tation, those in their final embodiment, a person in his final 
embodiment and one who is destined to live for uncountable 
(asdnkhyata) years ali must live out their karmically required 
period (anupavartaniya). 


1 This sutra is found only in the Digambara version of the text. 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


CHAPTER THREE 

1-2 (E8; T130) Seven hells, one below another, are 
named, located on water, in the air and in space (akasa). 

3 (E9; T130) Beings in hells have bad colorings, 
transformations, bodies, feelings (vedana), and actions 
(vikriya). on 
4 (E9; T130) They cause pain in each other. 

5 (E9; T130) Those in the upper hells (earlier in the 
list in 1-2) also suffer from pain caused by troubled demons 
(samklista asura). 

’ 6 (E9; T130) The maximum period of residence of the 
beings inhabiting each of the seven hells is enumerated. 

7-13 (E9-10; T140-141) The world is so constituted 
that a continent and an ocean go on alternating until we have 
uncountable world-continents and uncountable world-oceans. 
In the middle of them all is situated the world-continent called 
Jambiidvipa which has the mountain Meru located right at its 
center and is divided into seven regions separated from one 
another through six mountains. The second world-continent is 
Dhatakikhanda and the third Puskara, while in each the 
number of regions and mountains is double that of those in 
Jambidvipa 

14-16 (E19; T141) Human beings are found only in 
Jambidvipa, Dhatakikhanda and fourteen in the inner-half of 
Puskara, and they are either noble (drya) or not (mleccha). 
Again, certain regions lying in this world-portion are called 
"karmic places" (karmabhimi). 

17 (E10; T140) The minimum and maximum length of 
life of a human being is specified. 

18 (E10; T140) For animals it is the same. 


54 


_ CHAPTER FOUR 
1-2 (in Svetambara reading; 1 in Digambara) (E10; 
TS1) The gods inhabit four regions; the third has a yellow 
color. 
3 (E10; T151) The number of subtypes of each of the 


TATTVARTHASUTRA 55 


four regions is given. 

4-5 (E10; T152) Subtypes of gods are named. 

6 (E10; T153) The first two regions have two lords 
(indra) each. 

7 (E10; T154) They have all four kinds of colors. 

8-10 (E10; T154) The gods residing in the lowermost 
heavens experience sexual enjoyment through the body, those 
residing above them through touch, those residing above them 
through form, those residing above them through thought, 
while those residing above them are immune from sexual 
enjoyment. 

11 (E10; T156) There are ten subtypes of the god-type 
Bhavanavasin. 

12 (E10; T156) There are eight subtypes of the god- 
type Vyantara. 

13-16 (E10-11; T156-157) The five subtypes of the god- 
type Jyotiska are on the move in the region of human beings 
and are responsible for the time divisions there; outside this 
region they are static. 

17-20 (E11; T157) The god-type Vaimanika is broadly 
divided into two groups--one where division into classes 
obtains, the other where all individual gods stand on an equal 
footing. The former group possesses twelve subtypes, the latter 
group six. Of these, the first two subtypes possess yellow color, 
the next three red, the rest white. 

21 (E11; T164) The length of life, abilities (prabhava), 
experiences, purity of their colorings, sense-objects, and 
contents of extrasensory awareness are better the higher the 
god is seated. 

22 (E11; T164) The higher a god is seated the less 
movement (gati), body (Sarira), appropriation (parigraha) and 
arrogance (abhimdna) he has. 

25-26 (E11; T168-171) The Lokantika gods--subdivided 
into nine groups--are a special fraternity of gods residing in 
the heaven called Brahmaloka. 

27 (E11; T171) The highest-situated god-subtypes 


56 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


residing in the heavens Vijaya etc. attain liberation after being 
twice born as a human being. . 
28 (E11; T171) "Animal" (tiryak) designates any being 
which is not a human and is not born by sudden 
ifestation. 
Se oss (E12-13; T172-176) The higher situated a god 
the greater are its maximum and minimum life-durations; 
similarly, the lower situated a hellish-type being the greater 
are its maximum and minimum life-durations. 


CHAPTER FIVE” 

1 (E13; T177) Bodies that are not selves (called ajiva) 
are of four kinds--(1) initiator of movement (dharma), (2) 
initiator of stasis, (3) space, and (4) karmic product 
(pudgala). 

2-3 (E13; T178-179) These four plus selves are 
substances, eternal, unchangeable (avasthita) and formless 
(artipin).- 

4 (E14; T179) Karmic products have color/form 
(rupa). 

5-6 (E14; T179) (1)-(3) are single and inactive. 

7-11 (E14; T182) The sizes of various things are 
indicated: the sizes of the initiator of movement and the 
initiator of stasis, of a self and of space are uncountable; as for 
a karmic product, its size may be countable or uncountable; an 
atom has no size. 

12-16 (E14; T185) The portion of space in our 
universe that is occupied by each of the four kinds of things is 
indicated: the initiator of movement and initiator of stasis are 
universal; karmic products are of various sizes; a self occupies 
one part or more, and can contract and expand. 

17-18 (E14; T191) The initiator of movement and 
initiator of stasis cause things to begin or stop moving 
respectively. Space's function (upakdra) is to provide room. 

19-20 (E14; T193-194) A karmic product makes 
Possible a body, an internal organ, language, breathing, and 


TATTVARTHASUTRA 57 


experiences of satisfaction and frustration, life and death. 

21 (E14; T195) A self can interact with others. 

22 (E14; T195) Time makes possible persistence 
(vartand), transformation, action and is greater or less. 

23-24 (E14; T198) A karmic product's qualities include 
touch, taste, smell, color, sound, union, subtlety, grossness, 
shape (samsthdna), differentiation (bheda), darkness (tamas), 
shadow (chdya), hot light and cool light. 

25 (E14; T202) There are two kinds of karmic products, 
atomic (anu) and molecular (skandha). 

26-27 (E15; T203) Molecules arise through combination 
and splitting, whereas an atom is caused through split alone. 

28 (E15; T204) Visible molecules arise from split and 
combination together. 

29-31 (E15; T207-208) The desire of a speaker may be 
expressed in various ways. Thus sometimes he may desire to 
describe a thing as substance in general, sometimes as a 
particular subtype of substance, sometimes as something that 
originates, sometimes as something possessed of a mode (that 
originates and perishes). Again, in the last three cases he 
might desire to assert what exists or to deny what does not 
exist or to declare that it is impossible to simultaneously make 
this assertion and this denial, or he might combine the first of 
these attitudes with the second or the first with the third or 
the second with the third or the first with the second as well 
as the third (there thus being seven attitudes in all). 

32-36 (E15; T214-219) Combination of karmic products 
does not take place between components possessed of 
smoothness or roughness of a minimum degree. When the 
degrees concerned are equal combination does not take place 
between similar components. Combination can take place 
between components whose degrees differ by two units or 
more. At the time of combination an equal or a larger degree 
transforms an equal or a smaller degree. 

37 (E15; T220) A substance has qualities and modes). 

38 (E15; T224) (Some say that) time also (is a 


58 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


substance)? 
39 (E15; T224) and is made up of endless moments. 


40 (E15; T225) What resides only in substances and is 
itself without a quality is (defined as) a quality. 

41-44 (E15-16; T225-227) A thing's being (i.e.,’ its 
retaining its specific nature in the midst of origination and 
destruction) is transformation (=mode). In the case of a 
karmic product all transformation is possessed of a beginning; 
in the case of a self, activity (yoga) and cognitive application 
(upayoga) are alone possessed of a beginning; in the case of 
the remaining substances all transformation is without a 


beginning. 


CHAPTER SIX 

1 (E16; T229) Activity (yoga) is bodily, linguistic and 
mental action. 

2 (E16; T229) ‘It is also termed "inflow" (Gsrava). 

3-4 (E16; T230) For a good (subha) self it is good 
(punya), and for a bad (asubha) self it is bad (papa). 

5 (E16; T232) Activity involving passions causes 
persisting (samparayika), and activity not involving passions 
causes fleeting (irydpathika) karma. 

6 (E16; T234) Persisting karma is classified into five 
vow-negaters (avrata), four passions, five organs of attachment 
and aversion, and twenty-five activities. 

7 (E16; T237) Difference (in karmic result) depends on- 
whether feeling (the action) is acute, mild, knowing, 
unknowing, effortful, and to what it is addressed. 

, 8-10 (E16; T239) Locations "to which action can be 
addressed" are of two sorts, self and not-self. Those for selves 
are classified as to whether they are the objects of an intention 
to act (samrambha), of planned preparation to act 
(samarambha) or the actual performance of an act (arambha), 
what specific activity is involved, whether an act is done, 
caused to be done or agreed to, and what passions are 
involved. Actions toward locations that are not selves may be 


TATTVARTHASUTRA 59 


constructing (nirvartand), locating at a place, combining 
(samyoga) or naturally operating (nisarga) one's body, speech 
or mind. 

11-26 (E16-17; T242-244) There are eight chief types 
of actions, each having several subtypes, and in the case of 
each type and subtype there is a set of appropriate behavioral 
acts that constitute this kind of action. The present siitra 
merely lists them; details are provided in Chapter VIII. 

They are: (1) Jfidndvarana--jealousy, concealment, 
ungenerosity, obstruction, denial, false accusation in respect of 
awareness. 

(2) Darsandvarana--the same in respect of vision. 

(3a) Asatave daniya--pain, sorrow, heart-burning, crying, 
killing, bewailing, each produced in oneself, in another or in 
both. 

(3b) Sdtavedaniya--compassion (karund) for beings as 
such, compassion for those leading a disciplined life, donation, 
proper attentiveness towards a disciplined life accompanied by 
attachment, etc., forbearance, purity. 

(4a) Darsanamohaniya--speaking ill of the omniscient, 
the religious order, religion, the deity. 

(4b) Caritramohaniya--the acute mental state resulting 
from manifestations of passion. 

(Sa) Ndrakayus--too much infliction of injury and too 
much accumulation of possessions. 

(5b) Tiryakayus--deceit. 

(5c) Manusydyus--meagre infliction of injury, meagre 
accumulation of possession, softness and simplicity of nature. 

(5d) All types of lives--to be devoid of sila (i.e., the 
subsidiary vows of discipline), to be devoid of vrata (i.e., the 
chief vows of discipline), as also the just mentioned features 
of meagre influence, etc. 

(Se) Devdyus--disciplined life accompanied by attach- 
ment, life of discipline-cum-indiscipline, refraining from evil 
acts out of compulsion, childish penance. 

(6a) ASubhandma--the crookedness of acts and false 


60 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


behaviour (alternatively, creating dissension). 

(6b) Subhanama--the opposite of the just-mentioned 
features--that is, the sincerity of acts and causing genuine 
behavior (alternatively, healing a dissension). — 

(6c) Tirthankaranama--purity of inclination, respectful 
attitude towards things, highly spiritual nonviolation of 
morality and vows, ever-wakefulness as to the acquisition of 
cognition regarding verities, ever present fear of worldly joys, 
renunciation as per one's capacity, providing means of 
easement to the fourfold religious order, particularly the order 
of monks, offering services to competent personages, feeling 
of devotedness towards a tirthankara, a preceptor, a highly 
learned personage, a scriptural text, not missing a performance 
of the daily religious service designated "required” (Gvasyaka), 
to cultivate the path of liberation and to make others traverse 
it, feeling of disinterested love towards the co-religionists. 

(7a) Nicagotra--to condemn others, to praise oneself, to 
turn a blind eye towards even the existing merits of others, to 
make a display of even the nonexisting merits in oneself. 

(7b) Uccagotra--the opposite of the just mentioned 
features--that is, to condemn oneself, to praise others, to make 
a display of one's own shortcomings, to turn a blind eye 
towards one's own merits. 

(8) Antaraya--to cause obstruction to others engaged in 
the task of donation, etc. (i.e., donation, reception, immediate 
consumption, recurrent consumption, endeavor). 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

1 (E18; T258) A vow is ‘refraining from violence, 
untruth, theft, sexual incontinence or attachment to 
possessions. 

2 (E18; T260) It may be partial or complete. 

3-7 (E18; T261-264) Each vow involves five helping 
ways (bhdvand) to acquire steadiness in fulfilling vows. 
Additionally, there are the following four ways that are of a 
general nature: (1) To view the five defilements (violence, 


TATTVARTHASUTRA 61 


etc.) as problems to be faced both in this world and the next; 
(2) to develop in relation to these (violence, etc.) a feeling 
that they are entirely and solely frustrating, (3) to develop a 
feeling of friendliness (maitri) to all beings, a feeling of 
gladness toward those better than oneself, a feeling of 
compassion for those who are suffering, a feeling of neutrality 
in relation to those who are unworthy of instruction, (4) to 
develop a feeling of fear and of dispassion in relation to 
things worldly. 

8 (E18; T267) Deprivation of the life-principle due to 
negligence is violence. 

9 (E18; T273) Speaking what is not the case is lying 
(anrta). 

10 (E18; T275) Taking what has not been given is 
theft. 

11 (E18; T275) Incontinence is copulation. 

12 (E18; T276) Appropriation is attachment (murcchda) 
13 (E18; T278) The (true) taker of vows is to be 
"devoid of thorns" (nissalya). 

14 (E19; T279) Vows may be taken by a householder 
or by a nonhouseholder. 

15-17 (E19; T280) The vow-taker of the householder 
type observes the five subsidiary vows (anuvrata) and seven 
plus one additional duties--which are named but not 
described. : 

18 (E18; T285) Deviations from right vision are: doubt 
(Sanka), longing (akamksa@), perplexity (vicikitsa), holding a 
wrong view (anyadrsti) and consorting with those who do 
(prasamsda). 

19-32 (E19-20; T286-288) Detailing of transgressions. 

33-34 (E20; T296) A properly performed donation 
consists in duly offering to a competent person what might be 
of use to him. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 
1 (E20; T298) There are five causes of bondage: false 


62 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


belief (mithydtva), indiscipline (avirati), negligence 
(pramdda), passion, and activity. 

2-3 (E21; T301) When associated with passion a self 
acquires karmic products, and this is bondage. 

4 (E21; T302) (Bondage) has four aspects (1) according 
to (an action's) nature, (2) in terms of (karma's) duration, (3) 
regarding the intensity of the act, (4) in respect to which 
karmic constituents are affected. 

5 (E21; T303) (1) has eight varieties (as above, cf. VII. 
11-26 above). 

6-14 (E21-22; T305-306) Each of the eight is further 
classified, as follows: 

(1) Jfidndvarana--karma acting to conceal each 
of the five types of awareness called immediate, etc. 

(2) Darganavarana--concealing the four types of 
vision called ocular, nonocular, vaguely sensory and complete, 
as well as the five to be experienced in the form of sleeping 
(nidra), a state between sleep and waking (nidranidra), 
sleeping while erect (pracala), while walking (pracaldpracala) 
and a sleep which generates superior energy for subsequent 
activities when awakened (styanagrddhi), which are merely 
named here). 

(3) Vedaniya--that to be experienced in the form 
of pleasure/satisfaction and that to be experienced in the form 
of pain/frustration. 

(4) Mohaniya--that having for its subtypes (and 
still lower divisions) delusions affecting vision, conduct, 
passions and their helpers, which are respectively of three, 
two, sixteen and nine kinds. Right inclination, false belief and 
a combination of the two--these are the three kinds of delusion 
affecting vision. Passions and their helpers (nokasaya)--these 
are the two kinds of delusion affecting conduct. Of these, the 
passions are further divided into sixteen kinds: anger 
(krodha), pride (mana), deceit (maya) and greed (lobha), 
each of which is divided into four kinds.* Similarly, helpers of 
passion affecting conduct are further divided into nine kinds-- 


TATTVARTHASUTRA 63 


viz., inducing laughter (hdsya), liking (rati), dislike (arati), 
fear (bhaya), sorrow (Soka), disgust (jugupsda), sexual 
excitement in a male (purusaveda), sexual excitement in a 
female (striveda), and in a neuter (napumsakaveda). 

(5) Ayuska--that having for its subtypes hell- 
beings, animals, men and gods. . 

(6) Nama--that karmic outcome having for its 
forty-two subtypes species (animal, etc.), type (of animal, 
etc.), kind of body, bodily parts, acquisition of new karmic 
particles and the form taken in this embodiment, shape, bone- 
structure, its sensory qualities.* 

(7) Gotra--that having for its subtypes higher and 
lower. 

(8) Antaraya (?)--that pertaining to donation, 
etc. 

15-21 (E22; T312) The duration of the karmic residues 
that are the result of (1). 

22-24 (E22; T313) The maturation (vipdka) (of karma) 
is experiencing (anubhava). It conforms to (the karma that) 
produces it. And this experiencing produces the cleansing off 
of karmic traces. 

25 (E22; T315) Each action is bound down by a self in 
the form of karmic products which come to occupy each and 
every constituent unit of that self. 

26 (E22; T317) The good kinds of karma are listed; the 
rest are bad. 


CHAPTER NINE 

1-2 (E23; T320) The cessation of inflow comes about 
through restriction (nigraha) of activity in one or another of 
the forms called restraint (gupti), observance (samiti), 
dharma, reflection (anupreksa), discomforting (parisahdjaya) 
conduct (caritra) and penance (tapas). 

3 (E21; T321) Penance produces inflow as well as 
cessation of inflow. 

4 (E21; T321) Restraint is the restriction of the 


64 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


activities of body, speech and mind through right activity. 

5 (E21; T322) The five right observances are: fleeting 
(i.e, passionless) (irya) acts, right speech (bhdsa), Tight 
acquisition (esand), right acceptance (addana) and location of 
things, and right disposal (utsarga). 

6 (E21; T323) There are ten aspects of the highest 
dharma: forbearance (ksama), modesty (mardava), sincerity 
(arjava), absence of greed (Sauca), truthfulness (satya), 
restraint, penance, renunciation (tydga), nonownership 
(Gkificanya), studentship (brahmacarya). 

7 (E21; T327) Reflection on twelve aspects of things-- 
transience, helplessness, transmigration, aloneness, separated- 
ness, impurity, inflow, cessation of inflow, cleansing off of 
traces, the universe (loka), the difficulty of achieving 
enlightenment and the realization that what is dharma has 
been well explained. 

8-17 (E23-24; T331) Procedures designed to stick to the 
right path and get rid of karmic residues are called 
“discomforts” (parisaha). Twenty-two of them are identified, 
and the kinds of occasions for the use of each is outlined. 

18 (E24; T337) There are five kinds of conduct: 
practicing equanimity (samdyika), proper initiation (chedopa- 
sthdpana), penance (pariharavisuddhi), reducing greed to a 
small amount (siksmasampardya), expunging passions 
altogether (vitaraga). 

19-21 (E24; T339) Penance may be external or internal. 
The former involves giving up food, reducing greed, living in 
a lonely place, self-mortification. The latter (internal) involves 
atonement (prayascitta), veneration (vinaya), giving service 
(vaiyavrttya), study (svadhydya), renouncing selfish feelings 
(vyutsarga), and concentration (dhydna). 

22 (E24; T341) Nine types of atonement are described. 

23 (E24; T342) Four types of veneration. 

24 (E24; T343) Ten ways of giving service. 

25 (E24; T344) Five types of study. 

26 (E24; T1344) Two types of renunciation of 


TATTVARTHASUTRA 65 


selfishness. . 

27-28 (E24; T345) Fixing his/her attention on a single 
object by someone with sufficient physical ability is called 
concentration. It can last up to one muhirta (= 4/5th of one 
hour). 

29-30 (E24; T349) Concentration is of four types called 
frustration-producing (arta), cruel (raudra), dharmic and 
white (sukla). The last two produce liberation. 

31-35 (E24-25; T349) Further classification of frustra- 
tion-producing concentration and who is qualified to practice 
it (i.e., in which stage of progress). 

36 (E25; T350) Cruel concentration described as 
reflection on violence, lying, theft and covetousness, and who 
is qualified for it. 

37-38 (E25; T351) Dharmic meditation and who is 
qualified for it. 

39-46 (E25-26; T352-353) Four white meditative 
practices and who is qualified to do them. 

47 (E26; T357) Ten kinds of persons, arranged in 
increasing levels of cleansing-off of karma). 

48 (E26; T359) Five types of monks (nirgrantha) from 
less to more advanced. 

49 (E26; T360) The different marks of these types of 
monks. 


CHAPTER TEN 

1 (E26; T365) From the destruction of delusion the 
obstruction of awareness, the obstruction of vision, and 
hindrances (antaraya) comes knowledge. 

2-3 (E26; T365-366) Since there is no more cause for 
bondage, and because of traces having been cleansed, there is 
the destruction of all karma which is called liberation. 

4 (E26; T366) Liberation occurs when there is the 
absence of the states of subsiding, etc., as well as of (the state 
of) being worthy of liberation, but not of the absence of the 
destruction of karma, of the awareness of that destruction, of 


66 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the vision of karmic destruction and of liberatedness. 

5 (E26; T367) On this annihilation of karma the self 
rises up to the top of the world 

6 (E26; T368) It rises because of previous impulses, 
since it is now disembodied, there being no more bondage and 
being its natural state of motion. 

7 (E26; T369) Twelve ways in which liberated selves 
differ from one another named. 


2. UMASVATI, Prasamaratiprakarana 
Though there is little firm evidence to support the 
attribution of this work to UmAsvati, it is regularly assumed to 
be his, at least by Svetambaras, as early as the seventh century 
in Jinadasamahattara's Nisithacurni.*° 
The summary is taken from Yajneshwar S. Shastri's 
edition and translation which constitutes L.D.Series 107 
(Ahmedabad 1989), pp. 5-8, with the translations of technical 
terms replaced by those chosen for use in this Volume. "ET" 
references are to the edition and translation provided in the 
same volume. Numbers in parentheses in the body of the 
summary refer to the numbered passages of the text. 


Summary by Yajneshwar S. Shastri 


1-23 (ET1-5) Chapter One. The first chapter is an 
introductory chapter in which the author, after paying homage 
to the five preceptors (Jinas, Siddhas, Acaryas, Upadhyayas 
and Sadhus), states the purpose of his undertaking to write 
this book. The main object of this work is to make one's mind 
firm on the path of nonattachment so as to reach an 
absolutely unperturbed state of the Self. This work is 
composed out of devotion towards Jain passages that are 
meant for the benefit of laymen. Then the writer, with 
characteristic modesty, requests scholars not to mind his 
intellectual weakness and any type of slips in this work (8-11). 


PRASAMARATIPRAKARANA 67 


The author says that he is not preaching any new principle but 
repeating the ideas which are already told and retold by 
ancient teachers and scholars (12). He defends this repetition 
by saying that just as certain mantras and medicines, which 
are used repeatedly, cure diseases, similarly repetitions have 
a decided value in annihilation of diseases of attachment (13- 
15). Here the author explains the term prasama occurring in 
the title of the present work as a synonym of vairdgya, 
nonattachment (17). Then the author introduces the central 
theme of this work stating that attachment and aversion 
(ragadvesa) are the causes of the karmic bondage in samsdra 
and describes the nature of the mundane and passionate self. 

24-30 (ET6-7) Chapter Two deals with four kinds of 
passion, viz., anger, pride, deceit and greed (as the root cause 
of mundane life. 

31-33 (ET8) Chapter Three deals with their relations to 
attachment and aversion on the one hand and to mineness 
(mamakdra) and ego or "I" (ahamkara) on the other. 
Attachment consists of deceit and greed, and aversion consists 
of anger and pride. “Attachment” and “aversion” are the 
synonyms of "mineness" and "egoity” respectively. The pair of 
mineness and egoity are the roots of these four passions. 
These four fundamental passions accompanied by wrong 
belief, indiscipline, negligence and psycho-physical activities of 
mind, speech and body are the causes of eight kinds of 
karmic bondage of a self. 

34-38 (ET9) In the fourth Chapter the author discusses 
the eight kinds of karma, their subdivisions, and six kinds of 
colorings of selves. 

39-80 (ET10-17) Chapters Five and Six explain the 
cause of repéated births and deaths and also show the 
pathway to stop this cycle. Passions, wrong belief, indiscipline, 
negligence and activity are the cause of accumulation of karma 
and are the root cause of the chain of repeated births and 
deaths. The one who has no control over his senses, engrossed 
in sense-objects, meets with death like those of the deer, the 


68 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


moth, the black bee, the fish and the elephant, who meet with 
death bound by the rope of their native tendencies. 

The great net created by attachment and aversion can 
be completely destroyed by following the right path, right 
conduct, austerity, meditation, observing five vows which lead 
one to the complete withdrawal of self from the 
psychophysical activities, which withdrawal in turn leads to 
the breaking of the chain of births and rebirths. This breaking 
leads to the ultimate freedom, i.e., liberation. 

81-111 (ET18-24) The seventh Chapter deals with 
eight kinds of pride, viz., pride of caste, family, beauty, 
strength, gain, intellect, popularity and cognition, which are 
not only the root cause of mental agitation but the cause of 
long chains of births and deaths. 

112-148 (ET25-33) In Chapter Eight five kinds of code 
of conduct, viz., right vision, right awareness, right conduct, 
penance and rigor are prescribed for monks as a means of 
destroying attachment, aversion, passions, etc. 

129-166 (ET34-37) Chapter Nine: The author discusses 
the important conception of twelve helping practices for 
fulfilling vows (sampreksa) on which a monk has to reflect 
constantly. Reflection on these twelve aids leads to 
renunciation of attachment to worldly pleasures. 

167-181 (ET38-40) Chapter Ten deals with ten kinds of 
monastic duties--a virtuous path such as supreme forgiveness 
(ksanti), modesty, sincerity, absence of greed, self-restraint, 
renunciation, truthfulness, penance, and studentship. 

182-188 (41-42) Chapter Eleven teaches us to avoid 
four kinds of unworthy topics such as stories about women, 
food, theft and different countries, which generate interest in 
worldly enjoyment, and to engage oneself in four kinds of 
religious stories which inspire us to perform religious duties. 

189-193 (ET43) In the twelth Chapter the author 
mentions the nine fundamental principles, viz., self, not-self, 
demerit, merit, inflow, cessation of inflow, cleansing off of 
traces, bondage, liberation and the kinds of selves. 


PRASAMARATIPRAKARANA 69 


194-195 (ET44) Chapter Thirteen tells us that con- 
sciousness is the common defining characteristic of all souls. 
This consciousness is also divided into two kinds, viz., 
determinate (sdkdra) and indeterminate (nirakdra). The 
former is of eight kinds and the latter is of four types. 

196-207 (ET45-47) In the ‘fourteenth Chapter the 
author explains the six kinds of states, (i.e., characteristic 
conditions of the soul due to fruition of karma): 
transformation (pdrinadmika), natural state, subsidence of 
karma, destruction of karma, destruction and subsidence 
together and a mixed state of the last five kinds of states 
(samnipatika). They are subdivided into many kinds. The self 
conditioned by these different states of karma obtains rebirths 
in different regions having different senses. The self exists 
from the point of view of its own substance, space and time, 
and it does not exist from the point of view of others’ 
substance, space and time. A real thing or substance is that 
which possesses the three characteristics of arising (utpada), 
destruction (vigama) and permanence (dhrauvya) 

207-227 (ET48-52) Chapter Fifteen gives detailed 
explanation of six substances, the nature of the universe, and 
nine fundamental topics. Firm faith in these topics is called 
right vision. There are two kinds of cognition: direct 
(pratyaksa) and indirect (paroksa). The former is of two kinds 
and the latter is of three kinds. 

228-242 (ET53-55) The sixteenth Chapter teaches us 
about five kinds of right conduct, viz., equanimity, observation 
of penalties, refraining from sins, subtle persistence and 
annihilation of passions, which are the chief means of 
liberation. Right vision, right awareness and right conduct 
together constitute the path of liberation. If one of them is 
absent the path is imperfect. 

243-254 (ET56-58) Inthe seventeenth and eighteenth 
Chapters concentration on dharma and its types is discussed. 
Meditation on this concentration leads one to the eighth step 
(called apirvakaranagunasthana). 


70 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


255-272 (ET59-62) In the nineteenth Chapter the 
author shows how the aspirant gradually ascends to a state 
where all delusions are annihilated by destroying deluding 
karma and, after remaining for a period of less than forty-eight 
minutes (antarmuhurta) in the twelfth stage, he ascends to 
thirteenth stage which is the stage of knowledge. 

273-276 (ET63) Chapter Twenty deals with the process 
of the knower's spreading his self throughout the world. 

277-282 (ET64-65) In the twenty-first Chapter the 
author explains the process of cessation of activity by the 
knower. After retiring from the spread-out-in-the-world state 
the knower ceases activity, eliminating his activities of mind, 
speech and body. 

283-313 (ET66-71) The twenty-second Chapter deals 
with the process of ascending to the motionless stage by the 
the knower and the state of liberation (siddha). The knower, 
being free. from all types of activities and colorings, 
immediately after the time taken to pronounce five syllables 
obtains a motionless state. In this state he destroys the germs 
of karmic matter and simultaneously annihilates length of life, 
feeling, name and lineage karmas and giving up his body 
immediately ascends to the top of the universe and obtains 
liberation, which is ever free from the impurities of matter and 
karma, beyond pain, suffering and transmigration. The self 
obtaining this infinite, incomparable, undisturbed state of 
happiness becomes the very essence of right awareness. 

In this Chapter the code of conduct for householders is 
also discussed. This is a preparatory state for becoming a 
monk. Following these principles, householders will obtain 
heaven after death and withm eight births, being perfectly 
pure, obtain liberation. 


3. (Probably) UMASVATI, Bhdsya on his Tattvarthasitra 
K. K. Dixit (in the Introduction to E) and Dalsukh 
Malvania suggest that that this work is not a Yapaniya one, 


PRASAMARATIPRAKARANA 71 


it does not recommend nakedness and speaks of carrying 
utensils. Dixit, who takes the Tattvarthastitras to have been 
composed by a Svetambara, feels that the present work is 
Umasvati's autocommentary, and gives a number of reasons 
(cf. p. 33-34 of E). He also offers a number of reasons to 
conclude that Umasvati was not a Digambara (E, pp. 36ff.). 
Ms, Suzuko Ohira, cited previously, devotes an entire chapter 
to the question whether this Bhasya is an autocommentary, 
coming to the conclusion that at least part of it is. However, 
the identification of the author of this Bhdsya with the author 
of the Tattvdrthastitras remains controversial. 

"E" references are to the edition by Manilal Jhaveri 
published in 1932. 


Summary by K. K. Dixit 


CHAPTER ONE 
Right Vision 

1-3 (E15-21) The relation between right vision, right 
awareness and right conduct is such that the one mentioned 
earlier among those three can be present even in the absence 
of one mentioned later but not vice versa. The distinguishing 
features of right vision are spiritual cleanness (prasama), 
spiritual agitation (samvega), spiritual detachment (nirveda), 
compassion (anukampa@), and religiosity (dastikya). Right vision 
originates automatically in those beings to whom the 
appropriate karmic conditions are available. 


Methods of Investigation 

5-8 (E22-31) To take an example, to consider self or 
substance in terms of name is to consider a thing that is given 
the name of "self" or "substance". To consider it with respect 
to representation of it is to consider the thing as a physical 
copy of a self or a substance. To consider it in respect of 
something containing potency for it is to consider a thing that 
is capable of becoming in future a self or a substance. To 


72 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


consider it in respect to reality is to consider something that 
is actually a self or a substance. And all things whatsoever can 
be considered in this fourfold manner. As for instruments of 
true cognition and perspectives, they are going to be described 
later. Lastly, taking the case of right vision, it can be shown 
how knowledge of it can be had on the basis of the fourtcen 
aspects of it. Thus we have to understand what right vision is, 
who are entitled to possess it, what are the means that 
produce it, where those who possess it are located, how long 
it lasts, how many types it has, and so forth. These questions 
can be raised and answered with regard to all things 


whatsoever. 


General Classification of Contentfilled (savikalpaka) 
Awareness 

9-12 (E33-35), Immediate awareness is a variety of 
instrument of true cognition because it ocurs through the 
instrumentality of a sense-organ or an internal organ, while 
verbal awareness is an instrument of true cognition because it 
is invariably preceded by immediate awareness and is 
conveyed to one person by another. On the other hand, the 
remaining three types of awareness are direct varieties of 
instruments of true cognition because they are had by a self 
without requiring a sense-organ or the like. 


Immediate Awareness 

13-19 (E36-41) The awareness of a thing as such is 
indistinct. The thought-process that is undertaken with a view 
to ascertaining specifically the general object that has been 
grasped by indistinct awareness is direct awareness. When 
through further attentiveness final ascertainment takes place 
as to the features grasped at the Stage of directed awareness, 
that is determination. A continuous such ascertainment, its 


retention in memory and its recollection at a later time--all 
these three are called dharana., 


TATTVARTHASUTRABHASYA 73 


Verbal Awareness 

20 (E42) The verbal type of awareness is of two types, 
that included in those texts called "anga" and those not 
included. The latter are texts like Sdmdyika, CaturvimSati, 
Stava etc., the former in a set of twelve texts such as Acdra, 
Sutrakrta, etc. Again, the former include texts uttered by a 
tirthankara and given the form of a book by his chief disciples 
called "ganadhara"; the latter are composed by masters who 
arose in later times and kept in view the requirements and 
capacities of the relatively less competent audience. And the 
verbal type of awareness differs from the immediate type 
inasmuch as the latter has for its object something present, 
the former something past, present or future; moreover, the 
latter is natural to all selves while the former, presupposing 
the latter, is had as a result of it being imparted by one person 
to another. 


Extrasensory Awareness 

21-23 (E45-46) The extrasensory type of awareness on 
the part of animals and men is of six possible forms--(1) that 
which accompanies the cognizer from one place to another 
(Gnugamika), (2) that which does not accompany the cognizer 
(ananugamika), (3) that which increases with the passage of 
time (vardhamana), (4) that which decreases with the passage 
of time (hiyamana), (5) that which does not remain constant 
(but increases and decreases from time to time) (anavasthita), 
(6) that which always remains unchangeable. 


Mutual Relations of the Four Types of Awareness 

26-29 (E51-54) Whatever objects are noticed by the 
extrasensory type of awareness are noticed in a relatively 
purer fashion by the telepathic type. Extrasensory awareness 
notices all the tangible substances situated within the confines 
of the entire universe, whereas telepathy only grasps certain 
tangible objects situated within the region of the universe that 
is inhabited by human beings. Similarly, extrasensory 


74 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


awareness is available to a person whether he is disciplined or 
not, whereas telepathy can only be experienced by a 
disciplined person. Lastly, extrasensory awareness can notice 
any aspect of tangible objects, whereas telepathy cognizes only 
one part (i.e., the part available to human beings). 


Knowledge 
30 (E54) There is no type of awareness higher than 
knowledge, inasmuch as there is nothing whatsoever that does 
not become an object of this type of awareness. 


Simultaneous Occurrence of Differing Types of Awareness 

31 (E55-56) At one time a self can possess either 
immediate awareness alone, or both immediate and verbal 
awareness, or three awareness types, or four. But as for 
knowledge, certain authorities maintain that it can coexist 
with the other four types of awareness though it overshadows 
them as the sun overshadows the stars: on the other hand, 
certain other authorities maintain that knowledge, being an 
all-comprehensive type of awareness, cannot coexist with the 
remaining four types which are all more or less limited in 
scope. 


True and False Awarenesses 
32-33 (E57-59) Right awareness of things can be had 
only by one possessed of right vision. Hence it is that initial 
awareness, verbal awareaess and extrasensory awareness on 
the part of one of wrong faith are false awarenesses even if 
they might sometimes be (accidentally) correct, just as a 
madman's utterances are sometimes correct. 


Perspectives 
34-35 (E60-73) Here are the respective definitions of 
the different perspectives. (1) The view which results from 
following popular convention is conventional. And when on 


TATTVARTHASUTRABHASYA 75 


the basis of a word that is indicative of something generic just 
a few of the corresponding specimens are called to mind the 
resultant view is a conventional perspective encompassing a 
part (desapariksepin); on the other hand, when on the basis 
of the same word the entire corresponding class is called to 
mind the resulting view is a conventional perspective 
encompassing the whole (sarvapari-ksepin). (2) The view on 
the basis of which some single generic feature of things of 
various types are subsumed is called generic (samgrahanaya). 
(3) The view from which with a practical purpose one 
distinguishes between things that share common features is 
called commonsensical (vyavahdranaya). (4) The view which, 
disregarding the past and future, grasps only the present is a 
view confined to present situations (rjusiitranaya). (5) The 
view which chiefly depending on words posits a corresponding 
meaning is samprdptasabdanaya; the view which posits a 
difference of meaning on the basis of etymology is 
samabhirtidhanaya; the view which applies a word to a thing 
only when the thing satisfies the meaning of that word is 
evambhitasabdanaya. 


CHAPTER TWO 

Awareness, the Defining Characteristic of a Self 

8-9 (E82) Cognitive application is of two basic types-- 
(1) formfilled (sakara) and (2) formfree (nirakara). (1) is of 
eight kinds: right immediate awareness, right verbal 
awareness, right extrasensory awareness, right telepathic 
awareness, knowledge, wrong immediate awareness, wrong 
verbal awareness, wrong extrasensory awareness. (2) has four 
kinds: that born of the visual sense-organ, that born of a 
sense-organ other than the visual, that of the form of 
extrasensory awareness, that of the form of knowledge. 


Sense-organs and the Internal Organ 
15-25 (E88-98) (1) The outwardly visible sense-organs 


76 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


made out of physical aggregates are called nirvrttindriya. That 
external and internal capacity of such a sense-organ without 
which capacity it is not in a position to produce cognition is 
called (2) upakdranendriya. The subsidence-cum-destruction 
Sense-born awareness is called (4) upayogendriya. (1) 
presupposes (3), (2) and (4) presuppose (1), (4) presupposes 
(2). 


Transmigration 
26-31 (E99-104) The transmigratory motion, undeviat- 
ing, requires one moment, that with one deviation two 
moments, with two, three, with three, four. 


Different Kinds of Body 
37-49 (E110-121) Certain authorities are of the view 
that the body-type (5) (karmana-) is the only one of the five 
that is possessed by every self. (1) gradually grows and 
ultimately perishes, (2) is capable of assuming one form and 
now another, (3) is temporarily assumed by certain highly 
competent monks in case they have to visit--with a view to 
getting a doubt removed--a person of knowledge staying in a 
far-off region, (4) is made use of for inflicting curses or 
bestowing favors on others, and (5) is of the form of 
accumulated karmas possessed by the self. 


Who Must Live Out Their Life-Periods 

30 (52 in E) (E132-134) The hellish beings born by way 
of sudden manifestation, the heavenly beings, humans in their 
last embodiment, highly noble persons like tirthankaras, 
universal monarchs, etc., and humans or animals destined to 
live uncountable years--all must live out their karmically 
required period of life. However, even in these cases 
accumulated karma gets worked off, for what happens is that 
the time taken for experiencing this karma is less than usual. 


TATTVARTHASUTRABHASYA 77 


CHAPTER THREE 
Hells and Hellish Beings 

1-6 (£137-159) The seven hells are in fact the seven 
types of hells situated in the seven levels that lie beneath our 
earth one below another. Between our earth and the first level 
and so also between any two successive levels, there first lies 
a layer of dense water, then a layer of dense air, then a layer 
of rarefied air, then a layer of empty space. The lower the 
level the more extensive it is. Similarly, the lower a level the 
more inauspicious is its construction--also the more 
inauspicious are the colorings, the physical transformations, 
the bodies, the tactile feelings, the self-wrought bodily 
transformations exhibited by a hellish being residing on such 
a level. The hellish beings also cause pain to each other, while 
in the first three levels additional pain is caused to them by 
certain classes of highly irreligious gods. The lower situated a 
hell is the greater is the life-duration of those residing in it. In 
the case of each hell there are certain species of beings that 
are born in it but not in a lower situated one; similarly, in the 
case of each hell there are certain virtuous qualities that can 
be developed by one residing in it but not by one residing in 
a lower situated one. 


World-Continents and World Oceans 

7-13 (E160-174) The world-continent Jambidvipa is 
plate-shaped, the remaining world-continents and world- 
oceans are bracelet-shaped. Jambidvipa is 10,000 yojanas*”’ in 
diameter while each other world-continent or world-ocean has 
a diameter double that of the immediately preceding world- 
ocean or world-continent. The world-continent Puskara is 
divided into an inner half and an outer half by means of a 
mountain called Manusottara while the world-continent 
Dhatakikhanda and the inner half of the world-continent 
Puskara are each divided into a right-half and a left-half by 
means of an intermediate mountain. Both the right-half and 


78 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the left-half of Dhatakikhanda and those of the inner-half of 
Puskara have a center-located mountain Meru and six region- 
forming mountains bearing the same names as they do in 
Jambiidvipa. The mountain Manusottara is so called because 
no human beings are found beyond it. 


Human Beings in the World 

14-16 (E176-181) There are seven regions in 
Jambidvipa, fourteen in Dhatakikhanda and fourteen in the 
inner-half of Puskara. Human beings are found only in these 
thirty-five regions, as also in the fifty-six intermediate 
continents situated in the first world-ocean called Lavana. 
However, as a result of the exercise of a superordinary skill 
a human being might be found also in the two innermost 
world-oceans and even on the top of the mountain Meru. The 
regions Bharata, Airavata and Videha (minus the sub-regions 
Uttarakuru and Daksinakuru)--each five in number--are called 
karmabhimi inasmuch as here alone is the practice of the 
highest type of right conduct possible. Again, in these very 
fifteen regions there are certain localities that are alone 
inhabited by noble ones--the entire remaining world of human 
beings being inhabited by others. In all, the noble ones are of 
six types--viz., those who are noble owing to location, owing 
to race, owing to family, owing to activity, Owing to skill, 
owing to language. 

17-18 (182-184) There is also a rule as to how many 
times continuously one can be born in the same species of 
beings. For example, not more than seven or eight times in a 
row can one be born a human. 


.CHAPTER FOUR 
Types, Classes and Colors of Gods 


__ 4-7 (€186-192) The four types of gods are Bhavana- 
vasins, Vyantaras, Jyotiskas and Vaimanikas. And the ten 


TATTVARTHASUTRABHASYA 79 


classes into which a god sub-type is divided are (1) Indra or 
someone who acts as a chief, (2) Samanika or someone who 
is as good as Indra, (3) Trayastrim$a or someone who acts as 
a minister or a chaplain, (4) Parisadya or someone who acts 
as a companion, (5) Amaraksaka or someone who acts as a 
bodyguard, (6) Lokapala or someone who acts as a border- 
guard, (7) Anika or someone who acts as an army-chief, (8) 
Prakirnaka or someone who acts as an ordinary townsman or 
villager, (9) Abhiyogya or someone who acts as a slave, (10) 
Kilvisika or someone who acts as an outcaste. The god-types 
Vyantara and Jyotiska lack the classes Trayastrimsa and 
Lokapala, the god-types Bhavanavasin and Vyantara have two 
Indras each. 


Types of Gods 

11-24 (E198-230) The five subtypes of Jyotiskas are 
the sun (siya), moon (candra), planet (graha), constellation 
(naksatra), and stray star (prakirnatdrd). And it is in terms of 
their motion around the mountain Meru that in the region 
inhabited by human beings time is divided into units like 
seconds, days and nights, months, years, etc. The properties 
which increase in the case of a higher-situated god are life- 
duration, efficiency, pleasure, glow, purity of soul-coloring, 
extension of the field of sensory cognition, and extension of 
the field of vague sensory awareness; and the properties which 
decrease in the case of a higher-situated god are movement, 
bodily size, appropriation and arrogance. 


The Highest Gods 
27 (E233) The text does not apply to the highest 
heaven, Sarvarthasiddhi, inasmuch as the gods residing there 
attain liberation in their very next birth, which of course is a 
human birth. 


80 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Extent of the Lives of Gods and of Hell-Beings 

29-53 (E235-244) The rule expressed in the text 
applies in the case of Bhavanavasins and Vaimanikas, but 
Vyantaras who are situated above Bhavanavasins have the 
same maximum life-duration as the Bhavanavasins and a 
shorter life-duration than they do. Similarly, among Jyotiskas 
the sun and the moon are situated lower than the planets and 
constellations and irregularly in relation to stray stars, but the 
maximum and minimum life-durations are greater in the case 
of the sun, the moon and stars than in the other three. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


Relations Among the Collections 
1-6 (E245-251) The collections (called) initiators of 
motion, initiators of stasis, space and karmic products are 
called "bodies" (kdya) because they are made up of constituent 
units. Time, not being a body, is excluded from the list. To be 
material (murta) is to be possessed of color and/or touch, etc. 
By “active” is to be understood translocatory motion. 


The Number of Components of the Collections 

7-11 (E253-256) The measure of size is to be 
understood as based on a unit the size of a single physical 
(karmic-product) atom. Space is divided into two parts, that 
part confined to a universe and that confined to what is not a 
universe. There are endless units comprising space taken in its 
totality, while its worldly aspect possesses as many units as an 
initiator of motion, an initiator of stasis, or a self. 


Portions of Space Occupied By the Various Collections 
12-16 (E256-260) Whatever exists exists in the portion 
of space confined to a universe. As for a karmically-produced 
aggregate made up of atoms, a specific number can occupy 
different totalities of spatial units, just as the light of the same 
lamp can occupy rooms with different sizes. 


TATTVARTHASUTRABHASYA 81 


The Functions of the Collections 

17-22 (E161-169) Satisfaction and frustration (or 
pleasure and pain) are due to karmic aggregates inasmuch as 
certain karmically-produced bodies are possessed of pleasant 
sensory qualities, certain others of painful ones. Life is due to 
karmic products inasmuch as life is sustained by food which is 
karmically produced, and also because it is prolonged as a 
result of the non-reduction of the Jength of life which is 
something karmically determined. Death is due co karmic 
products because death is caused by a weapon, etc., which are 
karmic products, and also because life is shortened as a result 
of the reduction of the length of life which is again karmically 
conditioned. Selves act as occasioning causes for one another 
through preaching by one to another of things beneficial or 
harmful. By "occurring" is meant continuing to exist, by 
"transformation" is meant change, by action is meant 
translocatory motion, and by "greater or less" is meant 
seniority or juniority in age. 


Karmic Products 

23-28 (E270-277) The four sensory qualities of touch, 
etc. belong to a karmically-conditioned atom as also to a 
karmically-conditioned aggregate, while the ten beginning with 
sound belong only to a karmically-conditioned aggregate. 
Touch is of eight types--hard, soft, heavy, light, cold, hot, 
smooth, rough. Tastes are of five types: pungent, bitter, 
astringent, sour, sweet. Smell is of two sorts: good and bad. 
Color is of five kinds: black, blue, red, yellow and white. 
There are six kinds of sound: drum-produced, string-produced, 
bell- or cymbal-produced, produced by a blown instrument, 
produced by rubbing things together, and produced by living 
beings. Combination is of three kinds: voluntary, natural (or 
involuntary) and mixed. Subtleness and grossness are each of 
two kinds, absolute and relative. Shape is of two kinds, 
definite and indefinite. Splitting is of five kinds: that resulting 
from sawing off, that resulting from being pounded down, that 


82 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


resulting from being broken into pieces, that resulting from a 
gradual chopping off of layers, that resulting from removing 
the bark. Darkness, shadow, hot and cold light have no 
varieties. 


Aggregate-Formation of Karmically-Conditioned Bodies 

32-36 (E288-292) A karmically-produced aggregate 
comes to be formed not simply because the constituent atoms 
happen to touch each other but because they combine with 
each other--in the sense of getting glued to each other--on 
account of possessing either some degree of smoothness or 
some degree of roughness. However, in this connection there 
are certain rules in according with which combination takes 
place. Thus two atoms will not combine in case both of them 
happen to be possessed of either the minimum degree of 
smoothness or the minimum degree of roughness--not even if 
one of them is smooth and the other rough. But even in case 
two atoms happen to possess a nonminimal degree of 
smoothness or roughness they will not combine if both of 
them are either smooth or rough while the two degrees are 
the same; in this case combination will take place only if the 
two degrees differ by two units or more. 


Substances, Qualities, Modes 
37-44 (E292-297) A quality is that which resides in a 
substance and is itself devoid of qualities. A mode is that on 
account of which a thing assumes another form and another 
name. Present time is just one moment while past and future 
comprise countless moments. 


CHAPTER SIX 


Causes of Karmic Inflow 
1-7 (E298-303) Activities of body, speech and mind are 
in fact physical activities, inasmuch as body and speech as well 
as mind (internal organ) are something physical. But these 


TATTVARTHASUTRABHASYA 83 


activities are accompanied by a corresponding transformation 
of the self--that is, of mental attitude-which may be good 
(i.e., auspicious) or bad (i.e., inauspicious). It is on account of 
such good or bad mental attitudes that karmic inflow takes 
place. Bad bodily activities are e.g. killing, etc., bad linguistic 
activities are speaking ill of others, etc., bad mental activities 
are thinking ill of others, etc. The opposite sorts of activities 
are good. And karma flows into a self on account of such bad 
or good activities as water does into a pond through a water- 
channel. The five vow-negators are violence, untruthfulness, 
theft, incontinence and acquisitiveness. The four passions are 
anger, pride, deceit and greed. Twenty-five acts (kriyd) are 
listed; they comprise (with one or two exceptions) five types 
of ill-intentioned or improper behavior. 


The Kinds of Karma-Producing Acts 

8-10 (E304-308) There are 108 types of karma- 
producing acts of living beings--three kinds of bad acts: 
impulsion to evil, preparation for such an act, performing it; 
three kinds: performed by either body, speech or mind; three 
kinds: performed either by oneself, caused to be performed by 
someone else, or approved of when performed by someone 
else; and four kinds: accompanied by one of the four passions 
(3x3x3x4= 108). 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


Vows 

3-7 (E320-328) Here is a catalogue of helping ways 
(bhavana) of fulfilling one’s vows. (1) Nonviolence-- 
attentiveness as regards movement, keeping one's mind under 
guard, attentiveness as regards procuring things, proper 
inspection of things eaten and drunk; (2) Truthfulness-- 
speaking after proper consideration, renunciation of anger, 
renunciation of greed, renunciation of fear, renunciation of 
laughter; (3) Nontheft--begging for shelter after proper 


84 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


consideration, frequently begging for shelter, fixing a limit to 
shelter, begging shelter from a co-religionist, eating and 
drinking as per permission; (4) Continence--to refrain from the 
use of bedding, etc. used by a woman, an animal, an impotent 
person; to refrain from passionate talk about women, to 
refrain from looking at the beautiful organs of a woman, to 
refrain from recalling the sensuous enjoyments earlier 
experienced, to refrain from eating delicious food; (5) 
Nonacquisitiveness--to accord similar treatment to an 
agreeable and disagreeable touch, an agreeable and a 
disagreeable taste, an agreeable and disagreeable smell, an 
agreeable and disagreeable form, an agreeable and a 
disagreeable sound. 


Five Violations of Vows 
8-12 (E330-333) Lying means to deny the existence of 
an existing thing or to describe it as something which it is not 
or to speak words that cause distress to others. 


Vow-takers 
13-14 (333-334) "Salya" is the generic name for three 
defects of character, viz., deceit, desire for worldly enjoyment 
in return for one's pious performances, and wrong faith. 


The Householder Vow-taker 

15-32 (E334-350) The seven-plus-one duties of a pious 
householder are as follows: (1) To refrain from movement 
beyond a limit in the directions east, west, etc. with a view to 
avoiding bad acts in the regions lying beyond that limit 
(digvirati). (2) To further delimit from time to time the region 
of movement fixed in connection with (1). (3) To refrain from 
bad acts not necessary for conducting the affairs of the day 
(anarthadandavirati). (4) To refrain from all bad acts for a 
certain fixed period of time (s@mayika). (5) On certain fixed 
dates of the month to keep fast, to refrain from bodily 
decoration, to keep awake during night time engaged in 


TATTVARTHASUTRABHASYA 85 


religious acts (pausadhopavasa). (6) To fix a limit for the use 
of food and drink, ornaments, clothing, utensils, etc., with a 
view to avoiding much unvirtuousness (upabhogaparibhoga- 
parimdna). (7) To offer with a feeling of devotedness 
appropriate donations to persons observing self-restraint 
(atithisamvibhdga). (8) To undertake a fast unto death when 
conditions of life are no more suited for a fulfilment of 
religious obligations (samlekhana). 

The following is a catalogue of types of transgressions 
likely to occur in the case of not practising right view, the five 
subsidiary vows and the just enumerated seven-plus-one 
duties: (1) Right faith--doubt, longing, inconstancy of 
understanding, praising those holding an alien view, 
developing intimacy with those holding an alien view; (2) 
Nonviolence--binding, injuring, piercing the body, loading 
another excessively, denying food and drink; (3) Truthfulness-- 
false instruction, false accusation in private, forgery, 
misappropriating a pledged property, divulging someone's 
secret; (4) Nontheft--to encourage someone to commit theft, 
to receive what has been brought by a thief, to violate the 
taxation regulations of an opposing kingdom, to measure out 
more or less than the proper quantity, to deal in counterfeit 
commodities. (5) Continence--to arrange someone else's 
marriage, to enjoy a woman kept by someone else, to enjoy a 
woman looked after by none, an unnatural sexual act, 
intensive desire for sexual acts. (6) Nonacquisitiveness--to 
exceed an amount that has been fixed for the possession of 
fields and residential quarters, similarly to exceed the amount 
fixed for the possession of manufactured gold and silver, for 
that of cattle, wealth and corn, for that of servants and maid- 
servants, for that of clothes and utensils. (7) To violate the 
limits placed, to add limits not placed. (8) To get a thing 
brought by someone from outside the prescribed region, to 
send a servant to bring something from outside the prescribed 
region, to make a sound with a view to calling someone from 
outside the region, to make a bodily gesture for the same 


86 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


purpose, to throw outwards some physical stuff for the same 
purpose. (9) Uncultured talk, jokes, etc., unbecoming bodily 
gestures, talkativeness, lending things to others without a 
proper thought, possessing in excess the things of daily 
requirement. (10) Improper bodily movement, improper 
speech, improper mental act, feeling of disregard, lack of 
requisite memory. (11) To evacuate, urinate, etc. at a place 
not properly inspected and not properly cleansed of dust, to 
receive and place things at such a place, to arrange bedding at 
such a place, feeling disregard, lack of requisite memory. (1) 
To eat something alive, to eat something possessing something 
alive, to eat a thing mixed with a living thing, to eat what 
causes intoxication, to eat what is not properly cooked. (13) 
To place the thing to be donated inside what possesses life, to 
cover it by what possesses life, to say about one's own 
possession that it belongs to someone else, malice, violating 
the fixed time. (14) To wish for life, to wish for death, 
affection for friends, refreshing the memory of past pleasures, 
to wish for some sort of enjoyment as a result of penance and 
renunciation. 


Donation 
33-34 (E351) An act of donation is especially merit- 
orious in four ways--viz., insofar as the procedure adopted is 
proper, insofar as the thing donated is of a proper description, 
insofar as the attitude adopted towards the donee is proper, 
insofar as the donee himself is properly possessed of virtues. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


Causes of Karmic Bondage 
1 (E353) Of the five causes of karmic bondage 
mentioned above, an earlier one presupposes a later one but 
not vice-versa. 


TATTVARTHASUTRABHASYA 87 


Karmic Bondage in Respect of Intensity 

22-24 (E376-377) Each type or subtype of karma is 
possessed of the capacity to yield a definite sort of result. 
However, sometimes it can happen that a subtype yields an 
effect that is appropriate to another subtype of the same type. 
But this cannot happen in the following two cases: view- 
deluding and conduct-deluding karma cannot yield each 
other's results. As we shall see, karma takes leave of the self 
concerned also as a result of penance. 


Karmic Bondage in Respect of Constituents 
25 (E378) The karmic physical particles which get 
attached to a self are subtle and not gross, are situated at the 
same place as this self and not at another place, are in a static 
state and not in a mobile state, are attached to each and every 
constituent unit of this self, are themselves anantdnanta 
(endless times endless!) in number. 


Good and Bad Types of Karma 
26 (E379) The following actions are good (the others 
bad): pleasure-yielding feelings, inclinations, laughter, male 
sexual acts, the good (i.e. godly and human) subtypes of 
length-of-life-determining karma, the good subtypes of name, 
the good subtype of lineage. 


CHAPTER NINE 
Cessation of Inflow Defined and Its Means Enumerated 
1-3 (E381-382) Auspicious restriction of activities, etc., 
are the good qualities by developing which one brings about 
the cessation of karmic inflow; by performing penance one 
also brings about a purging-off of the earlier accumulated 
karma. 


Restriction of Action 
4 (E382) On the basis of a proper understanding of 
things, to undertake on a restricted scale, and if necessary and 


88 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


possible, to altogether abstain from, the activities of body, 
speech and mind is called gupti. 


Reflection 

7 (E392-405) The twelve aspects are explained: (1) the 
transience of everything whatsoever, (2) the helplessness of a 
being in the face of the troubles of the world, (3) the 
transmigrations undergone by a self after facing all sorts of life 
situations, (4) the unrelatedness of a being to everybody else, 
(5) the separateness of one's self from one's body, (6) the 
impurities of various sorts characterising one's body, (7) the 
fundamental verity designated "karmic inflow", (8) the 
fundamental verity designated "protection against karmic 
inflow", (9) the fundamental verity designated "purging-off of 
karma", (10) the constitution of the world, (11) the fact that 
right awareness with right conduct is difficult to attain, (12) 
the fact that the religious message has been well delivered by 
the great sage (tirthankara). A reflection on these features 
enables one to face successfully the difficult contingencies 
befalling one in one's life. 


Discomforts 

8-18 (E405-410) The twenty-two discomforts in 
question are (1) hunger, (2) thirst, (3) cold, (4) heat, (5) the 
presence of gadflies and mosquitoes, (6) nakedness, (7) 
distaste for the monastic life, (8) the presence of women, (9) 
moving about in an uncomfortable fashion, (10) sitting in an 
uncomfortable posture, (11) lying on a bed uncomfortably, 
(12) harsh words spoken by others, (13) beatings 
administered by and threats directed at one by others, (14) 
begging, (15) non-receipt of alms, (16) disease, (17) 
uncomfortable touch of grass, straw, etc., (18) dirt 
accumulated on the body, (19) feeling puffed up while 
receiving honor and reward, (20) feeling puffed up on account 
of possessing, (21) feeling puffed up on account of one's 
learning, (22) feeling dejected because supersensuous entities 


TATTVARTHASUTRABHASYA 89 


are not visible to one. Of these, eleven discomforts--(1-5), (9), 
(11), (13), (16-18)--result from a manifestation of feeling- 
obstructing karma; seven--(6-8), (10), (12), (14)--from that 
of conduct-deluding karma; two--(20-21)--from that of 
awareness-obstructing karma; one--(22)--from that of conduct- 
and-vision-deluding karma, one--{15)--from that of hindrance- 
producing karma. Hence it is that in the thirteenth and 
fourteenth stages, where feeling-obstructing karma is alone 
manifested, there are present only those eleven discomforts 
that are due to the manifestation of this karma, while in the 
tenth, eleventh and twelfth stages, where view-deluding and 
conduct-deluding karma are not manifested, there are absent 
only those eight discomforts which are due to the 
manifestation of these kinds of karma; (strictly speaking, a 
negligible degree of conduct-deluding karma is present in the 
tenth stage). As for the stages up to the ninth, all the twenty- 
two discomforts can be present there. However, since the 
discomforts (3) and (4) cannot occur simultaneously, nor any 
two of those number (9-11), there can simultaneously occur 
at the most nineteen discomforts only. 


External Penance 

19 (E411-414) The six types of external penance are 
a complete giving up of food, a partial giving up of food, a 
prior fixation of the quantity, quality, etc. of the alms to be 
begged for, a giving up of delicacies, a lonely residence, 
mortification of the body. All these penance-types result in a 
renunciation of attachment, a lightness of body, a control over 
one's sense-organs, a preservation of the disciplined life, and 
a purging-off of karma. 


Internal Penance Further Classified 
21-26 (E415-421) The nine subtypes of atonement are 
as follows: (1) to confess a transgression committed by 
oneself, (2) to repent for a transgression, (3) both to confess 
and to repent for a transgression, (4) to Jeave out forbidden 


90 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


things from alms begged for, (5) to altogether discard the 
alms begged for in case the forbidden things cannot be 
extracted from them, (6) to perform external penance like 
giving up food, etc., (7) to reduce the reckoned period of 
monkhood in correspondence with the gravity of the 
transgression committed, (8) to exclude from the monastic 
order for a definite period one who has committed a 
transgression, (9) to make the offending monk undergo once 
more the initiation ceremony. 

The four subtypes of veneration are (1-3) that 
pertaining to right awareness, right vision, and right conduct 
(in the sense of properly acquiring each), (4) that pertaining 
to formality, in the sense of formally greeting those who are 
superior to oneself as regards virtuous qualities like right 
vision, right awareness, etc. 

The ten subtypes of a service rendered are those 
directed towards the following persons or groups of persons: 
(1) a teacher (acarya), i.e. a monastic group chief, (2) an 
upadhyaya, i.e., one whose chief task in a monastic group is 
to teach scriptural texts, (3) one who performs a great and 
severe penance, (4) one who has newly entered the monastic 
‘order, (5) one who has grown weak owing to disease, (6) a 
group of monks who are disciples of different teachers but 
form one fraternity, (7) a group of monks that are disciples of 
the same teacher, (8) the totality of those who follow one 
religion and include monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, (9) a 
monk, (10) a monk who belongs to the same monastic 
subgroup as oneself. 

The five subtypes of self-study are: (1) to take first 
lessons in a text, (2) to make an inquiry about it, (3) to 
mentally ponder over it, (4) to correctly repeat the wording of 
it, (5) to interpret it to others. 

The two subtypes of renunciation are those relating to 
external belongings like utensils, clothing, etc., and those 
relating to internal belongings like one's own body or one's 
blameworthy mental states. 


TATTVARTHASUTRABHASYA 91 


Concentration 

27-46 (E422-429) The frustration-producing type of 
concentration has for its object four things--the getting of what 
is not desired, the losing of what is desired, a disagreeable 
sensation, a hankering after enjoyments to be yielded by one's 
pious performance--and concentration of this type is practiced 
by one in one of the first six stages. Similarly, the cruel 
(raudra) type has for its object four things--violence, 
untruthfulness, theft, protection of an acquisition--and it is 
practised by one in one of the first five stages. Again, the 
dharma type has for its object four things--a religious 
commandment, a worldly disaster, a fruit yielded by an action, 
the constitution of the world--and it is practised by one 
occupying any of the stages of progress from the seventh up 
to the twelfth. Lastly, the white (¢ukla) type has four subtypes; 
of these, the first two are practised by one occupying the 
eleventh or twelfth stage and versed in the Purva text,’ the 
last two by one's occupying the thirteenth or the fourteenth 
stage. Here, the first subtype is technically called 
prthaktvasavitarka, the second ekatvdvitarka, the third 
sukriyapratipatin, the fourth vyuparatakriyanivrtti. In the case 
of the first subtype the object is a diversity of things taught in 
a scriptural text, in the case of the second a single thing 
taught by a scriptural text--the word "vitarka" meaning (here) 
a scriptural text. The third subtype takes place when the 
process of putting an end to all activity is just on the eve of 
completion, the fourth when this process is complete (this 
process invariably taking place in the fourteenth stage of 
progress). 


Levels of Cleansing Off of Karmic Traces 
47 (E430) The following are the levels in question (a 


1 The lost Drstivada is supposed to be a part of the Pirva texts-- 
fourteen in number--which were lost to memory quite early and are 
available no more. 


92 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


member of the list brings about uncountable times greater 
cleansing than the one mentioned immediately preceding it): 
(1) one possessed of right view, (2) one possessed of partial 
discipline, (3) one possessed of complete discipline, (4) one 
engaged in getting rid of the endlessly binding passions 
(anantanubandhikasaya), (4) one engaged in destroying view- 
deluding karma, (6) one engaged in suppressing deluding 
karma, (7) one who has suppressed deluding karma; (8) one 
engaged in destroying deluding karma, (9) one who has 
destroyed deluding karma, (10) an omniscient one. 


Types of Monks 

48-49 (E431-436) The five types of monks are: (1) A 
pulaka, who has not yet developed full proficiency in the basic 
and derivative virtues of a monk but who never wavers in his 
faith in the scriptures. (2) A bakusa, who indulges in 
decorating his body and his implements, who desires 
miraculous powers and fame, who loves ease, who not leading 
a lonely life keeps the company of an entourage, who suffers 
from the moral defects designated cheda (i.e., degradation of 
conduct) and sabala (failure of conduct). (3) A kusila, of 
which there are two subtypes--a pratisevandkusila who being 
a slave of his senses acts in violation of some of the derivative 
virtues of a monk, and a kasayakusila who while never 
succumbing to an intense degree of a passion is sometimes 
attacked by a mild degree of it. (4) A nirgrantha in whom. 
omniscience has not yet made its appearance but who is 
utterly devoid of attachment and aversion (and who will 
acquire omniscience within a period of muhirtas). (5) A 
snataka in whom omniscience has made its appearance. These 
different types of monk differ among themselves as to the 
discipline-type, scriptural cognition, violation of -rules, 
spiritual overlordship, signifying mark, soul-coloring, next 
birth, and disciplinary stage. 


TATTVARTHASUTRABHASYA 93 
CHAPTER TEN 


Causes of Omniscience 
1-2 (E437-438) Wrong faith, etc. have already been 
identified as the cause of karmic bondage, and they are absent 
when the karma causing them is destroyed. ‘On the other 
hand, the past stock of the four karma-types in question 
disappears as a result of an appropriate purging-off. 


Liberation 
3-4 (E439-440) The idea is that liberation comes about 
when the remaining four karma-types too disappear. 


Where the Liberated Self Goes 

5-6 (E440-444) In this connection there simultaneously 
take place three things (all requiring but one moment): the 
separation of the self from the body, its motion signifying the 
process of being liberated, its ascending to the top of the 
universe. 

Liberated Selves 

7 (E445-463) The different liberated selves differ from 
one another (either in the liberated state or in the immediately 
preceding embodied state or in the still earlier embodied 
states) as to region, time, species, signifying mark, spiritual 
overlordship, right conduct, "whether enlightened through 
one's own effort or through that of another enlightened 
person", cognition, bodily size, interval, number, and relative 
numerical strength. 


KUNDAKUNDA (400?) 

The date of this author is most perplexing. It has been 
extensively discussed in many places. Without reviewing all 
the reasoning’? we will merely note W. J. Johnson's®? 
suggestion that the works attributed to Kundakunda are 
largely compilations, and that while external evidence (of the 
type cited by Upadhye, cf. footnote 11) is inconclusive, there 


94 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is some internal evidence (mentioned in E. H. Johnston, Early 
Samkhya (London 1937, reprinted 1974, p. 41, fn. 1) to 
suggest a date no earlier than the third or fourth century A.D., 
despite the Jains’ own estimate of his date as several centuries 
earlier. Ms. Ohira, cited previously, remarks that 
"Kundakundadvaya is recorded in 466 A.D. (Saka 388) in 
Markara copper-plate of which script however is said to belong 
to the 9th century A.D.", with a footnote citing "E.C.I, no. 1" 
(Ohira, op. cit., pp. 142-143). If that is so we have firm 
evidence of a terminus ad quem within which to place 
Kundakunda. The date we suggest here is based on this 
evidence. It also intentionally begs the question of the priority 
between Umasvati and Kundakunda, another point on which 
the sects disagree without much evidence on either side. 

A. N. Upadhye, in the Introduction to his edition and 
summary of the Pravacanasdra,© provides at pp. 1-23 an 
exhaustive review of much data relevant to the identity of 
Kundakunda. While the conclusions he arrives at are open to 
challenge (he dates Kundakunda at the beginning of the 
Christian era) he argues interestingly for South India as the 
place where Kundakunda flourished. He also notes that it is 
likely that Kundakunda wrote some eighty-four works titled 
(in Prakrit) Pahuda (Skt. Prabhrta) of which the eight 
comprising #8 below are among those that remain. Upadhye 
undertakes to give brief accounts of twenty-two works in all, 
including where appropriate summaries, of a number of 
Prabhrtas, of which we provide summaries of the six that seem 
to contain the most philosophical material. 

It seems unlikely that either the Astaprabhrta or the 
Dvadasanupreksa are from the hand(s) of the one (or those) 
who were responsible for (at least some of) the first four 
works summarized below. Nevertheless, since tradition 
ascribes these texts to Kundakunda, and we do not know 
anything otherwise to date or otherwise locate their authors, 
summaries of these two texts are located here rather than 
elsewhere. 


KUNDAKUNDA 95 


4.KUNDAKUNDA (400?), Paricdstikayasara 

The work has been edited and translated by A. 
Chakravarti, first in the Sacred Books of the Jains and then in 
a reprint edited by A. N. Upadhye.® This is our "ET". It must 
be noted that Prof. Upadhye provides both the Prakrit text 
and a restoration into Sanskrit, which is helpful in 
standardizing the translations of technical terms. The summary 
by Prof. Upadhye reprinted here appears in volume containing 
his edition and translation of Kundakunda's Pravacanasdra (op. 
cit.), pp. 40-42. 


Summary by A. N. Upadhye 


It is devotion towards the doctrine that has goaded the 
author to produce this book for the further propagation and 
glorification of the creed. 

2 (ET1) He proposes to deliver a discourse on samaya; 
the contents are originally given out by Sramana (Mahavira), 
and they lead the follower to liberation. 

3-5 (ET2-3) Samaya is defined as the collocation 
(samaya) of five collections (astikdya), i.e., of those entities 
that manifest, through numerous qualities and modes, their 
existence with extensive spatial points, viz., self, karmic 
products, initiators of movement and of rest, and space, of 
which the three worlds are an outcome. 

6-9 (ET4-6) The same collections plus time are 
designated as substances which mutually interpenetrate and 
accommodate each other ever retaining their individuality, and 
which are so called because of their passing through various 
modes ever maintaining their existential character. 

10 (ET60) A substance has substantiality or existence, 
is endowed with the triad of origination, destruction and 
permanence, and forms the substratum of qualities and modes. 

11-22 (ET7-16) Then follows a discussion on the 
mutual relation, etc., between substance, quality and mode, 
and the same is illustrated in the case of a self, in view of the 


96 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


doctrine of seven-fold predication (saptabhangi). 

23-26 (ET16-19) This introductory section (Pithika) is 
concluded with a discussion on time, which is a substance but 
not a collection, from the real and ordinary points of view. 

Then the author enumerates the special characteristics 
of a self and discusses them in detail both in the 
transmigratory and liberated conditions. 

‘30-32 (ET22-23) The soul lives, 

33-34 (ET24-25) is of the same size as the body it 
comes to occupy, 

38-39 (ET27) has consciousness 

40-52 (ET28-48) which manifests into awareness and 
vision; 

53-56 (ET48-51) it is the performer of actions 

57-67 (ET52-58) and is liable for the results thereof: 
and lastly the self is potent. When discussing the cognitive 
applications, namely awareness and vision, the author deals 
with the relation between substance and quality stated from 
the Jaina point of view. 

71-72 (ET61) This discussion about the self is 
concluded with two cryptic passages on the nature of self in its 
one- to ten-fold aspects. 

73-82 (ET62-70) In the discussion about not-self the 
author gives various types of matter down to the primary 
atom, the nature of which is defined in detail. 

83-89 (ET72-76) Then the two collections, of 
movement- and stasis-initiators, the principles of motion and 
rest, are taken and their characteristic functions given with 
illustrations. 

90-96 (ET79-82) Now we get some passages on the 
corporeal and noncorporeal aspects of these substances. 

101-102 (ET87) Then time is discussed. 

103-104 (ET88-89) and the section is concluded with 
two benedictory passages. 

105-107 (ET90-95) Having discussed substances and 
collections the author proposes to discuss the same as 


PANCASTIKAYASARA 97 


categories (paddGrtha), thus shedding light on the path to 
liberation which consists of right vision, right awareness and 
right conduct, which are defined briefly. 

108 (ET96) The author enumerates the nine categories 

109-123(ET97-106) and discusses them serially: self, 
its nature and types are biologically reviewed. ° 

124-139 (ET106-109) Not-self is defined, contrasted 
and its relation with self discussed. 

131-134 (ET109-111) Merit and demerit are defined 
as good and bad transformations which must be suppressed; 

135-140 (ET112-115) Auspicious attachment, etc. lead 
to meritorious influx, and careless conduct, etc. lead to 
demeritorious influx of karman. 

141-143 (ET116-117) For the stoppage of karmic influx 
one has to rise above attachment and aversion. 

144-146 (ET118-120) He who has stopped the karmic 
influx, if he practises penances, etc., effects the destruction of 
karma; 

146-150 (ET120-124) It is the passionate and tainted 
modifications (of cognitive application) that lead to bondage. 

151-153 (ET124-125) When the karmic influx is 
stopped and the deposit is consumed the immediate result is 
liberation, wherein the soul has its innate and potential 
qualities completely developed. 

161-173 (ET131-137) In conclusion the author gives a 
beautiful appendix in which a short discourse on liberation 
and the path of liberation is given from commonsensical and 
higher perspectives. 


5. KUNDAKUNDA, Pravacanasara 
The work has been edited numerous times and 
translated at least twice: by Barend Faddegon (Cambridge: 
University .Press 1935) and by A. N. Upadhye (cf. note 11 
above). Upadhye also provides a summary on pp. 52-58 of 
the introduction to his edition-and-translation. "E" in what 
follows refers to Upadhye's edition (he provides both the 


98 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Prakrit and a Sanskrit translation) and "U" to his English 
translation; "F" refers to Faddegon’s translation. Our summary 
is based on Upadhye's summary mentioned previously, 
somewhat expanded by the Editor. 


CHAPTER ONE 

1-6 (E2-6; U384-385; F1-4) The author offers salutation 
to VardhamAna, to the remaining Tirthankaras, to the liberated 
selves and the great saints collectively as well as individually, 
and lastly to the contemporary Tirthankaras in the Manusa 
region; then he declares his intention to adopt equanimity 
after entering the order of ascetics whereby is attained 
liberation the path to which consists in right conduct based 
on right vision and awareness. 

7 (E7; U385; F5) Right conduct is equanimity, which 
is a transformation of the self free from delusion and 
disturbance (ksobha). 

8 (E8; U385; F5) A substance is constituted of that by 
which it is transformed or modified; therefore, the self, when 
it develops dharma, is called "dharma". 

9 (E9; U385; F5)° The self becomes good or bad when 
it transforms into good or bad forms, and it is pure when free 
from both. 

10 (E10; U385; F6) An object (artha) is always made 
up of substance, quality and mode. 

11 (E11; U385; F7) Pure cognitive application leads to 
liberation, good application to heaven. 

12 (E13; U385; F7) Bad application leads to the state 
of being a bad man (kunara), an animal or to hell, and 
involves continuous frustrations. 

13 (E13-14; U385; F8) The happy experiences of pure 
beings is extolled. _ 

14 (E15; U385; F8) An ascetic (Sramana) is called pure 
when he knows the categories and the siitras explaining them, 
when he is restrained and has practiced penances, is 
nonattached and considers satisfaction and frustration the 


PRAVACANASARA 99 


same. 

15-16 (E16-18; U385; F9-10) By this pure cognitive 
application the self, free from the four ghatiya types of karma, 
becomes omniscient and is named "svayambhu". 

17 (E20; U386; F11) For him there is no state of being 
without deprivation (vihina) and no destruction without 
origination, 

18 (E21; U386; F11) whereas all objects have both 
origination and destruction; every object exists in some mode 
or other. 

19 (E23; U386; F12) He whose karma has ceased, 
abundant in energy, beyond the senses, develops knowledge 
and happiness. 

20 (E25; U386; F13) The one who is completely aware 
is without happiness or frustration, being beyond all sensory 
experience. 

21-22 (E27-28; U386; F13-14) He enjoys direct vision 
of all objects without sensory stages in his perception. 

23-25 (E29-30; U386; F14-15) The presence of know- 
ledge is thus established: the self, ie, the knower and 
knowledge are coextensive; any infringement of extension 
leads to the conclusion that either knowledge is a nonsentient 
function or the self can know without knowledge. 

26-29 (E31-35; U386-387; F15-17) Knowledge is coex- 
tensive with objects known, and the objects known comprise 
the whole universe. Knowledge is the function of the self 
alone, and the omniscient self can know all objects as it were 
reflected in itself, though there is no mutual contact. 

30-32 (E36-38; U387; F18-19) As a sapphire lights up 
the milk in which it is put, knowledge enlightens all objects, 
all of which, because of the omnipresence of knowledge (in 
the knower), are reflected in it. In this process of direct 
knowing the omniscient one neither loses nor gains anything. 

33 (E39; U387; F20) One who understands the self as 
knower through scriptural authority is called a srutajfidnin. 

34 (E40; U387; F20) "Sitra" is what is taught by 


100 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(a/the) Jina through words which are by nature substantial; 
understanding it is called jfiapti. 

35-37 (E41-44; U387-388; F21-23) The knower and 
knowledge are one, and knowledge is not at all an extraneous 
instrument; when the self, as a knower, has its knowledge 
perfectly developed, all things--of past, present, or future, 
subject, object and their modifications--are reflected presently 
therein. . 

38-41 (E46-48; U388; F24-25) Both future and past 
modes are perceptible by knowledge. However, perception 
which grasps things as "here", i.e., present to the senses, is 
only mediate awareness, whereas the knowledge of things 
with and without location, both material and immaterial, 
whether in future or past modes, is called supersensible 
(atindriya) knowledge. 

42 (E49; U388; F26) If the knower evolves into (i.e., 
becomes attached to) the object he ceases to have the kind of 
knowledge that arises when karma is destroyed. 

43 (E50; U388; F26-27) Elements of karma necessarily 
arise; one who is deluded, has attachment and/or aversion, 
will be bound by them. 

44 (E51; U388; F27) Perfected beings (arhat) naturally 
stand, sit, wander and teach, just as women are naturally 
deceitful. 

45 (E52; U389; F27) These perfected beings enjoy the 
results of their good actions; those actions, born of the fruits 
of karma, are free from delusion, etc., and are thus considered 
to arise from the destruction of karma. 

46 (E53; U189; F28) There would be no rebirth for any 
embodied self if the self by itself, through its own nature, did 

not become auspicious or inauspicious.® 

47 (E54; U389; F28-29) Awareness born of the 
destruction of karma knows all things at once in all their 
variety. 

48-52 (E55-60; U389; F30-33) Omniscient knowledge 
visualises completely and simultaneously the whole range of 


PRAVACANASARA 101 


variegated and unequal objectivity of the present, past and 
future. A single substance has infinite modes, and infinite are 
the classes of substances. To know them serially is an 
impossibility. So in order to know even a single substance with 
its modifications it is necessary that one should know 
simultaneously the object of three senses and three worlds, 
being still immune from consequent attachment or aversion. 

53-58 (E62-68; U389-390; F34-37) Thisomniscience, 
which does not require the use of the senses in its functions, 
can visualize nonconcrete entities, and as such it is the 
highest. The self, when it functions through organs of sense 
with which it is endowed in its embodied state, perceives only 
the perceptible, and sometimes does not; the sense organs 
cannot perceive simultaneously. The organs constitute a 
foreign stuff not essentially and naturally belonging to the self, 
and as such what is perceived by them cannot be natural for 
the self; so it is only in omniscience, when the self directly 
visualizes objects without the meditation of the senses, that 
there is direct knowledge (pratyaksa). 

59-68 (E69-78; U190-391; F38-44) Thatself-born, per- 
fect and pure knowledge, which enlightens infinite things and 
which is free from the stages of perception, is called real 
happiness (sukha). Omniscience is a state of happiness where 
there is no trace of misery because of the absence of hindering 
karmas; everything desirable is achieved therein, and it is 
appreciated by all the aspiring selves. Transmigrating beings 
are harassed by the senses, and they try to satisfy them by 
yielding to them; but this pleasure of the senses is misery 
itself. The self is the substratum of happiness, and bodily 
happiness is no happiness at all. Since the self is happiness, it 
is no use pursuing the pleasures of the senses, since it is the 
liberated self that has both knowledge and happiness (which 
are not contingent on external accessories), just as the sun has 
both light and warmth. 

69-78 (E80-88; U391-392; F45-49) As a result of good 
cognitive application, which consists in devotion to gods, 


102 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


teachers, etc. and the cultivation of philanthropy and fasts, the 
self is destined to subhuman, human or divine births wherein 
are available various pleasures of the senses. The happiness 
even of the gods is not self-established; simply to satisfy their 
physical itch they enjoy various pleasures, but the enjoyment 
of these pleasures leads to further prolongation of the 
embodied condition; their desire for sensory pleasures goes on 
increasing and they are ever unsatisfied. The happiness 
derived through the senses is dependent, open to disturbances, 
terminable and a cause of bondage and dangerous; so it 
should be completely eschewed. This should be thoroughly 
realized. Attachment and aversion to various objects should be 
given up. Good application must be cultivated so that the 
miseries of the body shall disappear. 

79-82 (E89-93; U392; F49-51) Delusion is a great 
hindrance to self-realization. He who knows the perfected 
being in substance, quality and mode knows himself, and his 
delusion evaporates. All perfected beings have destroyed 
karma and attained liberation by being free from delusion, 
attachment and aversion, and by realizing the pure self, and 
they have preached also to that effect. 

83-92 (E94-106; U393; F51-58) Delusion consists in 
being infatuated with various objects. One is baffled, therein 
developing attachment and aversion which give rise to various 
kinds of bondage which should be destroyed. The charac- 
teristics of delusion are perverted apprehension, cruelty to 
beings, indulging the senses with objects. This delusion can be 
exhausted by understanding from scripture the constitution of 
things from substances, qualities and modes, upon which 
liberation is attained. The self is constituted of knowledge, and 
other things are related to it only as substances. Thus the self 
and the nonself should be understood, if the self is to realize 
a delusionless state of itself. He is a .true saint who 
understands thus, and he is called dharma, as he is free from 
delusion, expert in scriptures and established in conduct free 
from attachment. 


PRAVACANASARA 103 


CHAPTER TWO 

1-2 (E108-111; U394; F60-63) An object is made of 
substance, substances by their nature have qualities, and these 
again have modes. Those deluded ones who are satisfied with 
modes are called parasamayikas; those who rely on the nature 
of the self are called svakasdmayikas. 

3-4 (E112-115; U394; F64-67) A substance is that 
which remains the same while undergoing birth, maintenance 
and destruction and has qualities and modes. 

5-7 (E118-121; U394; F70-73) There is one mark 
belonging to all things and their properties; that is existence. 
That which exists is substance realized through its own nature. 

8 (E123; U394; F75) There is no coming to be without 
destruction, no destruction of anything unborn, and neither 
birth nor destruction can occur without maintenance. 

9 (E125-126; U395; F77) Birth, maintenance and de- 
struction are modes; since modes are modes of substances, 
everything is substance. 

10 (E127; U395; F78) A substance at a single moment 
has birth, maintenance and destruction inhering in it; thus 
substance is those three. 

11 (E129; U395; F80) One mode arises, another ceases, 
but the substance remains. 

12 (E130; U395; F80) Since the substance transforms 
itself from one quality to another without itself changing, 
these modes of qualities are also to be considered substance. 

13 (E131; U395; F81) If substance were not existence 
it would be nonexistence or something else, and wouldn't be 
substance! 

14 (E133; U395; F82) Separateness is occupying differ- 
ent places, says (Maha)Vira. Otherness is nonidentity. 
Substance, quality, mode are all existents, (not separates). 

16-18 (E136-139; U395; F84-86) A substance is not a 
quality nor vice-versa. So nonidentity is not just nonexistence 
(of the one in the other). The quality is just the substance's 
transformation; it is not a different thing. "Substance" just 


104 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


means a thing's existence. 

19-22 (E139-1444); U396; F86-90) A substance which 
forever retains its position can be affirmed and denied, with 
respect to its existence, according as it is viewed from the 
perspective of substance or of mode. So far as the substance 
is concerned there is always nondifference, but there is 
difference in the mode which pervades the substance for the 
time being. 

23 (E146; U395-396; F91) According to some mode or 
other a substance exists, does not exist, is indescribable, is 
both or otherwise. 

24-28 (E147-152; U396-397; F93--96) Various 
activities lead to karmic results which give their fruits: the 
karma determining one's type (ndmakarman), which 
overpowers the self, shapes the figuration of the body, etc. in 
a particular existence like that of man, god, etc., and the self- 
substance is the same individual behind these modes that are 
developed by karma. There is nothing like absolute production 
or destruction in this world wherein, at every moment, some 
modification originates and some other passes away; so this 
mundane existence is a flux of active change through which 
the self-substance is moving. 

29-34 (E154-160; U397; F96-100) Thedevelopment of 
modes in the self, which is soiled by karma from time 
immemorial, is of the nature of the self, i.e., thinking (cetand); 
it is of three kinds: awareness, i.e., conceptual construction of 
objects; the action done; and the fruit which is either 
happiness or misery. The self then is not the direct agent of 
these results, yet ordinarily they are attributed to the self. The 
self, which is itself the agent, means, action and fruit, realizes 
itself as pure when passions, etc. are not developed. 

35-42 (E162-171; U397-398; F102-107) Substance 
comprises self and not-self. Self is constituted of the 
application of thought. Not-self or the ‘insentient class 
comprises five substances: matter, (pudgala), i.e. karmic 
products, from the fine molecule to gross earth, possesses 


PRAVACANASARA 105 


sense-qualities; dharma, the intitiator of movement, serves as 
the fulcrum of motion; adharma, the initiator of stasis, serves 
as the fulcrum of rest. Space gives accommodation; time 
marks continuity. Of these matter alone is concrete and the 
rest are nonconcrete, i.e., devoid of sense-qualities and hence 
not amenable to sense-perception. All these substances exist 
in the universe, in which take place transformations consisting 
of origination, subsistence and destruction collectively or 
individually, while in the space not in the universe there is 
space alone. 
43-52 (E172-185; U398-400; F109-118) Time is devoid 
of space-points, while other substances have innumerable 
space-points (pradesa), and hence they are called collections 
(astikaya). A primary atom has no space-points, but it is itself 
the unit of measuring space-points. The time required for a 
primary atom to traverse one space-point of space is called a 
"moment" (samaya). A space-point of space is capable of 
giving room to the atoms of all substances. All these ultimate 
units are not exempt from the trio of origination, maintenance 
and destruction. 
53-62 (E185-195; U400-401; F120-124) The universe 
is stable, eternal and filled with entities endowed with space- 
points; this is the object of awareness and the knower is the 
self endowed with the life-essentials, viz., senses, channels of 
activities, duration of life and respiration, which are fashioned 
by material substances. The self in its embodied condition, 
being bound by infatuating and other karma and experiencing 
the fruits of karma, incurs fresh karma. Being tainted with 
karma it develops attachment and aversion, and incurs fresh 
bondage. It takes birth in different grades of existence with 
-different configurations of the body due to nadmakarman. 
Knowledge of things will rescue one from attachment and 
aversion. . 

63-70 (E197-203; U401; F125-129)™ The self's self is 
cognitive application (upayoga). This application is awareness 
and vision and is good or bad. Good application is 


106 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


characterized by devotion to religious duties and compassion 
to living beings and it leads to merit; bad application is 
characterised by sensual pleasures and passions and cruelty to 
beings and leads to demerit. In the absence of both there is 
the pure one which has neither (merit nor demerit). Being free 
from both good and bad application one should meditate on 
the self as an embodiment of knowledge and as absolutely 
different from everything else. 

71-74 (E204-207; U402; F129-131) An atom, having no 
spatial parts and being soundless, “experiences” as either 
smooth or rough extension over two spatial units or more. The 
smoothness or roughness increases over more units until it 
"experiences" an infinite number (of units). Smooth or rough 
transformations are either even or odd. When one is two 
degrees higher than another then they are linked, except at 
the beginning. Thus, e.g., the second-degree smooth is 
combined with the fourth-degree smooth. — 

75 (E208; U402; F132) Molecules (skandha) of earth, 
water, wind or fire, comprising two or more parts, have shape 
and evolve in their appropriate ways. 

76-78 (E209-211; U402; F132-133)© The physical 
world is fully packed with molecules, subtle and gross and 
capable of becoming karma which, coming into contact with 
the passional condition of a self, flow into that self, but not by 
the self's agency alone. This is the material constituting the 
various embodiments of the self. 

79-80 (E211-212; U402; F133-134) All the various 
kinds of bodies consist of substances which are karmic 
products. The self itself, however, is without sense-qualities, 
unmanifest, with consciousness (caitanya) as its quality, 
without a mark or shape. 

81-82 (E214-215; U402-403; F136-137) Objection: How 
can this incorporeal self be bound by material karma? 

Answer: Just as, though colorless itself, it can see 
colors, and such experience constitutes its bondage, so likewise 
it can know substances though itself incorporeal. 


PRAVACANASARA 107 


83-85 (E217-219; U403; F137-138) The self, composed 
of cognitive application, undergoes attachment, aversion or 
infatuation over sense-objects. It is thus that the self is tinged, 
and thereby karma binds through the modifications of 
cognitive applications. The bondage of a karmic product is 
through touch, of a self through attachment, etc., and the two 
comprise mutual bondage. 

86-87 (E219-220; U403; F138-139) The self has space- 
points wherein penetrate the karmic particles of karmic 
products; they remain there and pass away according to the 
period of bondage. When the self develops attachment there 
is bondage, otherwise not. 

88-89 (E221-222: U403; F140) Delusion and aversion 
are bad, attachment is good or bad depending on whether it 
is purifying or defiling. A good transformation brings merit, a 
bad one demerit--so it is said. A transformation which is 
neither destroys frustrations. 

90-94 (E223-227; U403-404; F141-142) The self is the 
direct agent of the developments of consciousness, but not of 
material karma. One who does not understand this deludedly 
thinks "] am this (not-self thing, e.g. this body)". The agent of 
his own substantial bodily transformations is for a time bound 
and then released from karma. 

95-97 (E228-230; U404; F143) When the self develops 
attachment and aversion of good and bad forms obstructing 
awareness, etc., karma becomes involved with it, and this is 
bondage. 

The foregoing (the higher view) is the summary of 
bondage as set forth by perfected beings; the view of ascetics 
(yati) is different. 

98-108 (E231-243; U404-405; F144-150) Successful 
meditation on the self is possible only when all notions of 
‘attachment and mineness are completely severed. Objects 
whether living or nonliving are not permanent associates of 
the self which is essentially constituted of cognitive 
applications. The great saint who is completely immune from 


108 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the hindrances of the passions, being rich in knowledge and 
happiness of all the senses together and having no functioning 
senses, meditates on the highest happiness.© 


CHAPTER THREE 

1-4 (E246-251; U405; F152-155) The process of 
becoming a monk (sramana) described. 

4-7 (E252-255; U406; F155-157) The Jain monk's 
emblem is of two kinds: internal and external. The internal 
one, which aims at liberation, consists in being free from 
infatuation and preliminary sins, in being endowed with pure 
manifestation of consciousness and activities, and in having no 
desires at all. The external one consists in possessing a form 
in which one is born, in pulling out hair and moustache, in 
pure cognitive application, in being free from harm to beings, 
and in not attending to the body. A monk is of this sort.°” 

8-9 (E257; U406; F158-159) A monk's vows are listed. 

10-12 (E258260; U406-407; F159-160) The one who 
gives the ordination is the teacher (guru); other monks who 
give advice about correcting faults (cheda) are niryapakas. 

13-15 (E261-263; U407; F161-162) The monk has no 
desires, avoids attachment. 

16-21 (E264-271; U407-408; F162-165) Faults, e.g. 
violence, involve heedless (aprayatna) action, internal or 
external. It is the heedlessness that is the problem: the careful 
monk is unharmed. E.g., when a living being is killed someone 
may Or may not become bound as a result, but from 
attachment bondage certainly results. Only by absolute 
nonattachment can the monk avoid inflows. 

22-25 (E272-276; U408-409; F166-167) He is allowed 
to keep only a little quantity of paraphernalia which does not 
involve sin and which is essential for the practice of his 
primary virtues. The only acceptable paraphernalia for a monk 
is said to consist of the bodily form with which he is born, the 
words of the teacher, (disciplinary) modesty and the study of 
sacred texts. Other articles of use, on account of his 


PRAVACANASARA 109 


nonattachment, are sure to disturb him and his course of 
conduct. 

26-31 (E280-290; U409-410; F168-173) The diet and 
activities of a monk described. 

32-36 (E291-297; U410-411; F174-178) A monk should 
constantly apply himself to the study of scripture whereby he 
acquires certainty of knowledge and _ meditational 
concentration. The scripture is his eye, and enlightens him on 
the nature of objectivity constituted of both self and notself. 
This scriptural study prepares him for self-discipline and self- 
control, and the value of the same will be heightened when he 
is completely nonattached. 

37 (E298; U411; F179) Neither understanding of 
scripture without practice of self-restraint nor the reverse will 
suffice. 

38-40 (E300-303; U411; F180-181) A (karma- 
producing) action which would ordinarily take a thousand 
crores of rebirths to expunge can be lived out in a single 
breath by someone who knows and practices the threefold 
auspicious restraint. But one who, though knowing the 
scripture completely, suffers from delusions about the body, 
etc., does not attain perfection. He is called self-restrained who 
fulfils the five observances (samiti) and three restraints, 
controls his five sense-organs, has conquered the passions and 
has complete vision and knowledge. 

41-44 (E304-308; U411-412; F182-185) The differences 
between the successful monk and the unsuccessful one 
involves the presence in the former of restraint, right vision, 
and right conduct, lack of attraction, of aversion and of 
infatuation. 

45-49 (E3309-313; U412; F185-187) Those free from 
inflows are the monks who have pure cognitive application. 
Those wha are devoted to perfected beings and all who have 
studied the scriptures are called of good application: they 
show their respect to monks through praise, homage and 
attendance. It is they too who are teachers of others who 


110 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


practice cognitive application. 

50-60 (E314-321; U412-413; F188-192) Differences in 
two applications are classified in terms of the action's object, 
time, type of addressee, occasion and result. 

61-70 (E322-329; U413-414; F193-196) Description of 
the difference between pure and impure application and the 
appropriateness of displaying good application towards only- 
apparent monks. The latter are explained to be those who may 
follow correct practices but nevertheless do not accept Jain 
categories. The value of proper respect towards those equal or 
superior to one in merit is extolled, and the monk is warned 
to keep the company only of those who practice penances. 

71-75 (E331-335; 0414-415; F196-199) Without correct 
understanding of things one transmigrates endlessly. But one 
who behaves properly, has correct understanding of the (Jain) 
categories, has given up appropriating things and is not 
attached to sense-objects is soon liberated, even in this present 
existence. 


6. KUNDAKUNDA, Samayasara 

"ET" references are to the Sanskrit restoration of these 
verses found in Jnanapitha Murtidevi Granthamala English 
Series 1, (Delhi 1971), together with an English translation 
(which we assume is a reprint of that of J. L. Jaini, but the 
translator is not identified in this volume!). A summary (from 
which we have borrowed extensively below) is provided by A. 
N. Upadhye in the Introduction to his edition and translation 
of Kundakunda’'s Pravacanasara, op. cit., pp. 42-44. The gathas 
of the edited work and the summary below are consecutively 
numbered; T divides it into ten chapters, a division we omit 
here. The work is in Prakrit. 


3 (ET3) The author opens his discourse with the 
definition of svasamaya and parasamaya, which respectively 
stand for the realisation of the self as identical with right 
vision, etc., and with material karma. 


SAMAYASARA 111 


4 (ET6) ,When the oneness (ekatva) of the self is 
realized there is no bondage at all. 

5 (ET9) The aim of the author is to point out this 
oneness, the same as bhedavijriana, to the best of his ability 
(svavibhavena). 

7-8 (ET14-17) The ultimate aim of every aspirant is to 
realize the pure self as a knower from the higher perspective. 
Just as we cannot make a nonnoble person understand unless 
we talk to him in his language, so the commonsense 
perspective is quite necessary for the understanding of the 
pure perspective. 

11-12 (ET21-22) The commonsense perspective helps 
the weak speech of ours, which is incapable of fully expressing 
reality as is expressed through the pure speech of the higher 
ones. 

13 (ET23) Right (categories) are: self, nonself, merit, 
demerit, inflow, stoppage of karma, cleansing of karmic traces, 
bondage, and liberation. 

14-22 (ET25-29) The pure perspective consists in 
realizing the self as unbound and untouched by karma, as one, 
steadfast and inseparable from its qualities and not united 
with anything else. The three jewels (of vision, awareness and 
conduct) stand for that self. Just as we know, believe in and 
follow a king, so also it should be with the self. Believing the 
self to be the karmic and nonkarmic (nokarman) body is to 
fail to understand the truth. 

24-30 (ET31-35) The self as seen by the omniscient has 
cognitive application as its permanent mark. A self cannot be 
material. 

Objection: But then hymns praising (the bodily) 
Tirthamkara or Acarya must be false! 

Answer: That is the commonsense perspective; from the 
higher perspective the self and the body are not the same. One 
should not worship the Lord as an embodied person, any more 
than one should suppose that a city is the same thing as its 
ruler. 


112 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


31-38 (ET35-41) Rather one should view the self as 
knowledge itself, understand it as the conqueror and destroyer 
of delusion. One should recognize oneself as cognitive 
application. One must not be subject to the delusion that even 
an atom of anything else is related to me. 

39-48 (ET42-48) Various mistaken views about the self 
are rehearsed--that it is just a series of desires, etc., others that 
it is material, others that the self is just the karmic outcome of 
one's deeds, etc. But the Jina showed that these modifications 
are themselves the results of karma, and that the eight kinds 
of karma are material in nature, as well as the effect of karma, 
that is, frustration. And it is only from the commonsense point 
of view that Jinas say that the modifications belong to the self, 
just as one might see the echelon marching and say "the King 
has started!". 

49-56 (ET49-55) A self has no material qualities, no 
shape; it is just thought (cetana). In the self there is neither 
desire nor aversion nor delusion, no karmic matter, neither 
atoms nor molecules, no experiencing of satisfaction or 
frustration, no yogic stage, no karmic bondage, no stages of 
progress neither purification nor control. Differences among 
types of selves are solely due to their karmic attributes. 
Although these are properties of selves from the commonsense 
standpoint, none of them actually belong to the self. 

57-68 (ET56-62) The self is only characterized by 
application. Jinas may say that a self has color, etc., but it is 
only a manner of speaking, since a self is not material. The 
classifications of selves are the product of namakarman. Even 
the stages along the way of spiritual growth attributed to a 
self are said to be due to deluding karma. 

69-75 (ET63-67) One must realize the difference 
between the self and karmic inflow, and thus avoid anger, etc., 
which will only increase that influx. When the danger of 
impurity is known, the self refrains from the causes of inflow. 
Concentrating on the nature of the self one should consider 
everything as extraneous. The psychic states of the spirit and 


SAMAYASARA 113 


the karmic transformations are naturally related; really 
speaking the self is the agent of its spiritual states wherein the 
material stuff is transformed into karman; it is only from the 
ordinary pont of view that the agency of karma is attributed 
to the self. The self does not produce any transformation of 
matter. When the self realizes itself as an embodiment of 
knowledge, there is no more bondage occasioned by 
falsehoods, etc. 

76-79 (ET67-69) The self knows various kinds of karmic 
matter having various results but does not transform them, 
identify with them, or cause them to appear as modes of 
something else. Nor does matter transform, identify with or 
cause to appear any modes of the self. 

80-86 (E70-74) Still, caused by transformations of the 
self the karmic products transform, and likewise, caused by 
karmic conditions the self transforms. The self does not 
produce changes in karma nor does karma produce changes in 
the self. Rather, they are occasional causes (nimittakdrana) of 
each other. So, from the higher standpoint the self doesn't 
produce anything except itself. But from the commonsense 
perspective the self produces the karmic products and 
experiences their results. If that were true from the higher 
perspective as well, two different effects would arise from the 
same cause, which is. denied by the Jains. 

87-101 (ET74-85) So there are two sorts each of 
(modes such as) error, ignorance, want of control, activity, 
delusion, anger, etc., one sort related to the self and the other 
to the not-self. One sort, application, relates to the self, the 
other, karmic products, relates to notself. The selfs conceptual 
application is involved in three delusions as appropriating 
(upGddna)--error, ignorance and wrong conduct--though 
remaining itself pure. As a result of ignorance he seems to 
become an agent of karma. But this is only the empirical point 
of view. If the self really were the appropriater or producer of 
notself then he would have to be notself. A self cannot make 
a pot, a cloth, etc.; these arise from bodily activity and mental 


114 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


application of which he is (empirically) the cause. The self 
does not make the substantial karmic products which become 
knowledge-obstructing 

102-108 (ET86-90) The self indeed causes his own 
good or bad modifications, which become his karma and 
produce his experiences. But he does not produce substances 
or qualities of a karmic sort. When it is seen that with the self 
as cause a transformation of bondage occurs, it is (only) 
figuratively spoken of by saying that karma is produced by the 
self. Likewise, in a figurative way it might be said that the self 
produces, binds, transforms and acquires karma, as a king is 
figuratively said to perform the actions, etc. of his kingdom 
and its people. 

109-112 (ET91-92) There are four generic conditions 
(pratyaya) or agents of bondage: falsity, indiscipline, passions 
and yoga. There are thirteen types of these four, viz., the 
thirtéen stages of progress from false view to complete 
awareness involving qualities (sagunakevala). These 
progressive stages are nonconscious (acetana) since they result 
from the arising of karmic products. But it is the stages of 
progress that produce karma, not the self. 

113-120 (ET92-95) If anger, like the self's cognitive 
applications, were nondifferent from the self then the self 
would be identical with what is nonself. On the other hand, if 
anger is entirely different from the selfs applications then 
conditions, karma and nonkarma must also be different from 
the self. If the substantial body of karmic products does not 
transform itself and thus become bound to that self, then it 
must be nontransforming; but if so there can be no 
transmigration, as is the case for the Samkhya. 

Objection: The self itself causes the substantial body of 
karmic products to transform into karmic modes. 

Answer: How can a thinking self cause something that 
is by nature nontransforming to transform?! So it has to be the 
substantial body made of karmic products itself that 
transforms into the various modes; the self does not cause 


SAMAYASARA 115 


that. And this goes for all kinds of karma, e.g., for awareness- 
obstructing karma as well. : 

121-124 (ET97-98) If the self is not bound by karma 
and does not have modifications like anger, etc., then it must 
be nontransforming, and then transmigration cannot occur, 
and the Sarmkhya view results. 

Samkhya: It is substantial karma (=prakrti) that causes 
the transformations in the self such as anger. 

Answer: How can it do so, since the self is (according 
to you) incapable of transformation? 

Samkhya: The self by itself, without help from prakrti, 
undergoes the transformations like anger. 

Answer: Then what you said above is wrong. 

125-136 (ET98-102) The self when cognitively applying 
anger is angry, when cognitively applying pride is proud, etc. 
The self is the agent of the modifications (of its applications). 
If the modification is constituted of correct awarenesses, the 
karmic mode is good and breeds no karma, if of false--that is, 
ignorant, impure (involving passions) and activity-involving-- 
awarenesses, the karmic mode is bad and produces karma. 

137-142 (ET102-105) If both the self and karmas 
together cause attachment, etc., then both would be attached. 
But if the self by himself could cause attachment, etc. it 
wouldn't require karma to do so. If karmic modifications are 
really produced by the substances comprising karmic products 
together with the self, then both matter and self become 
material. But if karmically produced substance by itself is 
capable of producing karmic modifications then matter as such 
must be able to do so (without requiring a self at all). It is 
from the commonsense perspective that it is said that karmas 
bind in contact (sprsta) with the self; really karma neither 
binds nor contacts the self. So the self is bound from one point 
of view, free from another. 

144 (ET106) But that the self is just right vision and 
right awareness transcends points of view and so is termed 
“sarnayasara". 


116 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


145-150 (ET107-109) Bad karma, involving attachment, 
opposes morality (Sila), and good karma, involving 
detachment, accords with morality. Both bind, so one should 
not be attached to either. 

151-154 (ET109-112) "Supreme" (paramatman), 
"samaya", "pure" ({uddha), "knower" (kevalin), "sage" (muni) 
and "knower" (jfdnin)--fixed in this (i.e., what is denoted by 
all these terms) the wise attain liberation (nirvana). Penance 
and vows undertaken without such fixedness on the highest 
(self) is childish; it does not itself produce knowledge and only 
leads to rebirth. 

155-163 (ET112-115) Right vision (that there is a) self, 
etc., right awareness of a thing's nature, and right conduct in 
rooting out attachment, etc., comprise the path to liberation. 
The wise (yati), appreciating that the destruction of karmas is 
only for those hewing to the highest (path), will not adhere to 
the commonsense perspective ignoring the higher perspective. 
Jina said that falsity undermines right vision, ignorance 
undermines right awareness, and passions undermine right 
conduct. 

164-180 (ET116-123) Falsity, etc., which are the 
psychic states of selves in transmigration, are the causes of 
karmic influx. When the psychic state is free from passions 
there is no cause for ondage. A ripe fruit fallen to the ground 
cannot stick back to the stalk, so karma, when once completely 
destroyed, cannot involve the self in transmigration. A man of 
right vision, because of his discriminative ability, is above 
bondage. 

181-192 (ET124-129) Neither anger nor the other types 
of karma have any relation with conceptual application. There 
is no karma nor any nokarma (karmic helper) in application. 
Errorfree awareness arises when there is pure conceptual 
application causing no modifications. Just as gold, though 
heated, does not lose its yellow color, so, though operated on 
by karma, the knower does not lose his knowerness; his aim 
is to discriminate the pure self from passional states. Being 


SAMAYASARA 117 


free from all atttachments, when one concentrates oneself on 
his self, there is no more contact with karma and its products. 

193-236 (ET130-152) The pleasures, etc. of a man of 
right vision, because of the complete absence of attachment, 
etc. in his case, only exhaust his karmic deposit. He has fully 
realized that his self is only a knower and not to be identified 
with anything else. Attachment, etc., even to the extent of a 
primary atom, cause a great danger to self-realization, even 
though one has mastered all the sacred texts. One should 
absorb oneself in his self, which is an embodiment of 
knowledge, and thus be satisfied; that is excellent happiness. 
A knower, being free from attachment, etc., like a piece of 
gold thrown in mud, is not rusted by karma; while the 
ignorant person is to be compared with a piece of iron, which 
rusts. A man of vision is endowed with desirelessness and 
other virtues, and is free from fear. 

237-287 (ET153-176) If a man, with his body smeared 
with oil, stands in a dusty place and takes exercise, he is 
coated with dust; similarly a man of false faith, passing 
through various states of attachment, etc. and acting in 
various ways, is bound by karmic dust. On the other hand, 
when the oil is removed the dust will not stick to his body in 
spite of his various exercises; so a man of vision, who is not at 
all attached to anything, though he acts in various ways, is not 
bound by karma. One should be always indifferent to the 
effects of karma. Really speaking, bondage results from impure 
thought-activity, whether a sinful act is committed or not. 
Though the thought-activity proceeds from some object or the 
other it is not the object but the thought-activity that is 
responsible for bondage. 

288-307 (E178-187) A man, bound in shackles, cannot 
get himself released if he simply thinks of shackles without 
thinking of breaking them; so a man in transmigration must 
break the bonds of karma so that he might be completely free. 
The chisel of self-discrimination will help him to cut off these 


118 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


karmic shackles, and then the pure self is realized. 

308-318 (E189-195) The self is neither cause nor effect. 
The seat of consciousness (cetayitr) is born and dies for the 
purpose (artha) of prakrti, and prakrti is born and dies for the 
purpose of consciousness. Through the relation of the two 
through mutual conditioning (anyonyapratyaya) transmig- 
ration is produced. As long as the relation between self and 
prakrti is not broken it remains unenlightened. When the 
relation is broken the wise knower (muni) becomes free from 
actions and remains a spectator of them, not experiencing 
them. Only the nonknowing self is an enjoyer of them; the 
knower knows them but is no enjoyer (avedaka). However, he 
knows the nature of karmas and their results, whether good or 
bad. 

319-323 (E195-197) Likewise, knowledge is neither 
doer nor enjoyer; it only knows bondage and release, karma 
and its destruction. Ordinary folk and monks who believe in 
the perpetual creation of worlds, who believe that Visnu or the 
self actually creates everyone and everything, are precluded 
from belief in liberation. 

332-335 (ET200-201) It is through karma that the self 
is ignorant or knower, asleep or awake, satisfied or frustrated. 
It is karma that leads him to wrong beliefs and practices, that 
he finds himself in various heavens or hells. Karma is what 
gives and destroys; a self is a nondoer. 

338-344 (ET202-203) So no self is guilty of killing; 
killing refers to one karma destroying another karma. 

Objection: Yes! You thus accept the Samkhya position! 

Answer: According to the Samkhya position prakrti thus 
becomes the agent and all selves are inactive. 

Objector (a Vedantin?): A self transforms itself. 

Answer: That cannot be, for scripture tells us the self is 
eternal and occupies uncountable places and so cannot 
change, being co-extensive with the universe. 

345-355 (ET206-209) The self dies in the sense that its 
modes terminate, from another viewpoint it does not die. Both 


SAMAYASARA 119 


are one-sided views. The person who believes that the agent- 
self is identical with the experiencing-self has a wrong view 
and is not a perfected being. The carpenter uses his tools but 
is not the same as them, the self uses its organs but is not the 
same as them. That is the commonsensical way of 
understanding it; here is the higher way. As the artist 
conceives his work and then makes a physical form that is one 
with it, so the self makes karma and then becomes it. 

356-365 (ET211-213) Analogy between chalk, which 
while making the board white remains distinct from the board, 
and the self, who while knowing an object remains distinct 
from it. But this is only the commonsense perspective; the 
higher analogy is as follows. Chalk whitens a thing because it 
is essentially white; a knower knows a thing because it is 
intrinsically a knower. 

366-389 (ET215-225) The properties of the conscious 
self and nonconscious matter are entirely different from each 
other. Thus destroying the former leaves both the purified self 
and matter unsullied. And the properties of one thing (the 
self) are not produced by a different thing (matter). So by 
getting rid of attachment, aversion and delusion the self stops 
thinking of itself as an agent and enjoyer and remains oniy 
pure consciousness. This is certainly (niscaya) productive 
confession (pratikramana), productive reflecting, productive 
conduct. But if one identifies his self with his experiences of 
the results of karma he breeds more karma. 

390-407 (ET226-232) Awareness, which is intentional, 
is a different kind of thing from any nonintentional object or 
organ. It is different, too, from reflective discerning 
(adhyavasaya), for reflection isn't aware of anything. And since 
the self is always aware it cannot be other than awareness 
itself. So the self, which is pure consciousness only, does not 
grasp or relinquish any object. 

408-415 (ET233-236) Those who flourish insignia on 
their bodies to indicate their exalted status are false monks 
who misunderstand the path to liberation. That path consists 


120 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of vision, awareness and conduct. One who follows it will 
achieve liberation. 


7. KUNDAKUNDA, Niyamasara 
"ET" refers to the edition and translation by Uggar Sain, 
Sacred Books of the Jainas 9, Lucknow 1931. 


Summary by Karl H. Potter 


CHAPTER ONE 

1 (ET1) Dedication to Vira Jina, the possessor of 
supreme knowledge. 

3 (ET2) Restraint (niyama) is what is worth doing, 
viz., right vision, awareness and conduct. The addition of -sdra 
is to avoid anything contradictory to it. 

4 (ET3) Restraint is the aid to liberation; its fruit is the 
highest liberation. 

5-6 (ET3-4) Right inclination (samyaktva) is belief in 
qualified persons (Gpta), in scripture and in the fundamental 
topics. A qualified person is a self possessing all the good 
attributes and free from defects, which are listed. 

7 (ET4) The one free from those defects, possessing 
knowledge, is called the highest self (paramatman). 

8 (ET4) His words are scripture, and in them are 
enunciated the fundamental topics. 

9 (ET4) These topics are: self, karmic product, initiator 
of movement, initiator of rest, time and space, along with their 
qualities and modes. 

10 (ETS) A self essentially has cognitive application 
(upayoga), which is directed towards vision or awareness. An 
application of awareness may be either natural (svabhava) or 
nonnatural (vibhdva). 

11-12 (ET6-7) Natural awareness is complete (kevala), 
involving no use of the sense-organs, and independent 

(asahaya). Nonnatural awareness is of four kinds: immediate, 
verbal, extrasensory and telepathic. Lack of awareness 


NIYAMASARA 121 


(ajfidna) is also of three kinds, starting with the immediate. 

13-14a (ET7-8) Visual cognitive application is of two 
kinds, natural and nonnatural. The natural kind is complete 
(kevala), nonsensory and independent. Nonnatural cognitive 
application is of three kinds: sensory vision (caksurdarsana), 
nonsensory vision, and extrasensory vision. 

14b-15 (ET8-9) Modes are of two kinds, natural and 
nonnatural. The nonnatural modes are human, hellish, animal 
and heavenly. Natural modes are those that do not stem from 
(past) actions. 

16-17 (ET9) Human selves are of two kinds: those born 
to work and those who merely enjoy. There are seven sorts of 
hell-beings. Animals are of fourteen sorts, and heavenly beings 
are of four kinds. Consult Lokavibhaga (?) for details. 

18-19 (ET11-12) From the commonsensical viewpoint 
a self performs karmic acts and experiences karmic products, 
but from the higher viewpoint the self is an agent and enjoyer 
through the modifications of karma. From the substantial 
viewpoint a self is free from the afore-mentioned modes, but 
from the modal viewpoint selves have both (natural and 
nonnatural) modes. 


CHAPTER TWO 

20 (ET12) Not-self or karmic matter is of two sorts: 
atomic and molecular. There are six kinds of molecules and 
two kinds of atoms. 

21-24 (ET12-13) (The six kinds of molecules are:) 
gross-gross (earth, stones); gross (ghee, water); gross-subtle 
(shadow, sunshine), subtle-gross (objects of touch, taste, smell 
and hearing), subtle (karmic molecules attached to a self), and 
subtle-subtle (all the rest). 

25 (ET13) A causal atom (kdranaparam@nu) is a cause 
of the four dhatus (viz., earth, water, fire, air). An effect atom 
(kadryaparamanu) is the smallest molecule. 

26 (ET13-14) An atom is indivisible and noncognizable. 

27 (ET14-15) Something that has one taste, one color, 


122 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


one smell and two touches is of natural qualities. Those 
available to all the senses are held to be nonnatural in 
Jainism. 

28 (ET15) A natural mode is not dependent on other 
things; a nonnatural mode is molecular. 

29 (ET15) From the higher viewpoint an atom is called 
a space-point, but from the commonsense viewpoint that 
appellation is applied to a molecule. 

31 (ET16) Time can be divided into two kinds, a 
moment and a trail (lit., “wink") (Gvali), or into three kinds, 
past, present and future. Past time is measured by (the 
number of) destroyed shapes multiplied by uncountable trails. 

32 (ET16-17) (The number of) moments is infinite 
times the number of karmic products times the number of 
selves. “Real time" (paramartha kala) occurs in worldly space. 

34 (ET17) The five nonself categories are called 
"collections" (astikaya). They occupy many spatial units 
according to Jainism. 

35-36 (ET17-18) The space-points of material things 
are either countable, uncountable or infinite. In initiators of 
movement, initiators of stasis and in each self as well as in the 
universe they are uncountable; in what is other than the 
universe they are infinite. Time, having no extension, has only 
one space-point. 


CHAPTER THREE 

38-49 (ET20-23) A long list of things a self is not and 
has not are provided. All of them are predicated of a self 
commonsensically, but from the highest point of view every 
self is a liberated self. 

50 (ET28) All these things just listed should be 
renounced. 

51-53 (ET29-30) What right awareness involves. 


CHAPTER FOUR 
56-60 (ET31-33} The five vows of noninjury, truth, 


NIYAMASARA 123 


nonstealing, chastity and renunciation are described. 

61-65 (ET33-34) How to carry on the daily activities of 
walking, speaking, eating, handling things, and excretion. 

66-70 (ET34-35) How to restrict in a proper way daily 
activities of thought, speech, and body, initially by avoiding 
improper behavior, eventually by complete abstention. 

71 (ET36) A perfected being is free from bad karma, 
has such perfect attributes as knowledge, etc., and has thirty- 
four superior qualities. 

72 (ET37) Those are called "liberated" (siddha) who 
have destroyed eight kinds of karmic bondage, have eight 
properties, exist eternally at the top of the universe, 

73 (ET37) Those are called "teacher" who observe five 
kinds of conduct, contro] all the five senses, are firmly 
determined and of deep qualities. 

74 (ET37-38) Preceptors (upadhydya) are those brave 
ones who have the three jewels, teach the Jina's categories, 
and are desireless. 

75 (ET38) Monks (sa@dhu) are those who, free from 
worldly occupations, remain in four kinds of contemplation, 
without possessions and undeluded. 

76 (ET40) All the above activities are examples of right 
conduct from the commonsense viewpoint. What right conduct 
is from the higher standpoint will be indicated later. 


CHAPTER FIVE 
77-81 (ET40-41) What the seeker should say to himself: 
"I am not a self", "I am not a doer", etc. 
82-94 (ET42-45) What confession (pratikramana) 
consists of is explained as complete renunciation by the saint 
of wrong vision, wrong belief and wrong conduct. 


CHAPTER SIX 
95-106 (ET46-49) Repentance (pratyakhyana) involves 
abandoning sophistry (jalpa), prevention of good and bad 
thoughts and actions, and meditation on oneself as a perfect 


124 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


knower, as free from karmic bondage, as nonattached, as only 
cognition, as eternal, equanimous and free from passions. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

107-112 (ETS50-52) Reflection (dlocana) involves 
concentration by an ascetic on his self as free from matter 
whether karmic or not, as without qualities or modes. There 
are four kinds of reflection: reflection proper, eradication 
(dluficana) of the roots of karma, obtaining unchangingness 
(avikrti) in equanimity, and purity of states (bhavasuddhi), 
i.e., freedom from thoughts involving desire, pride, etc. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 
113-121 (ET53-55) Atonement (prayascitta) involves 
observing vows, care, sense-control, self-concentration. It 
results in the destruction of karmic molecules accreted by the 
self. 


CHAPTER NINE 
122-133 (ET56-59) The highest concentration (parama 
samadhi) described. It leads to pure equanimity. 


CHAPTER TEN 
134-140 9ET60-61) Supreme devotion (bhakti) 
described. It leads to liberation. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 

141-158 (ET62-67) One of real independence (niscaya 
avasyaka) can perform independent actions capable of 
destroying karma; thus it is the path of liberation. The one of 
real independence--who is different from the man of good or 
bad thoughts, or who meditates on qualities and modes--thinks 
of his self as stainless, and thus gains equanimity. He is known 
as one of "internal self" (antardtrnan); engaged only in pure 
nonlinguistic meditation and passionless conduct, studying 
scripture, observing vows, he is engaged only in self- 


NIYAMASARA 125 


concentration. Since there are various kinds of selves, karmic 
bondages and attainments one should avoid discussions with 
both those of one's own faith and of others. That (path) leads 
to perfect knowledge. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 

159 (ET68) Vision and awareness coexist in the man of 
perfect knowledge. 

160 (ET69) Objection: Actually, awareness illuminates 
other things, vision illuminates the self only, and it is the self 
which illuminates itself and other things. 

161-167 (ET69-71) Answer: If awareness only 
illuminates others then vision is different from awareness. If 
the self illuminates other things then vision is different from 
the self. From the commonsense viewpoint, just as awareness 
and the self illuminate other things so does vision. But from 
the higher viewpoint both awareness and vision illuminate the 
self alone. Really, the completely knowing Lord (bhagavan) 
sees only the self, but neither universe or nonuniverse. 
Awareness of both material and nonmaterial things, of 
conscious and unconscious things, of self and others, that 
awareness is called "direct" (pratyaksa) and supersensible. One 
who does not perceive all the items just listed together with 
their qualities and modes has only indirect vision. 

168-171 (ET71-72) Commonsensically understood, a 
perfectly knowing Lord knows the universe and the 
nonuniverse but not the self. But really, knowledge is the 
essential nature of a self, so a self always knows (its) self. If 
it were not so it would mean that awareness is a separate 
thing from the self. But awareness cannot occur without a self, 
nor vice-versa. So just as awareness illuminates the self (the 
knower), so does vision. But a perfect knower does not have 
to exert himself to know; that is why he is a "perfect" knower 
and is called free from bondage. 

172-182 (ET72-75) Bondage arises in an ordinary 
person from intentionally (irha) expressed thoughts; in a 


126 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(perfect) knower language, not issuing from thoughts, causes 
no bondage. Furthermore, a perfect knower does not 
intentionally perform actions; thus he incurs no karmic 
bondage. As soon the length-of-life karma ends, all remaining 
karma is destroyed and the self rises to the top of the 
universe. There the perfect knower is free from birth or death; 
it is pure, supreme and free from the eight kinds of karma. In 
liberation there is neither frustration nor satisfaction, no 
karma of any kind, no thought, nothing good or bad, no 
concentration; there is only nirvana (he is siddha). 

183-186 (ET75-76) The movements (gamana) of selves 
and of karmic products occur only within the collection of 
initiators of movement and no further, since there is nothing 
beyond. 


8. KUNDAKUNDA (?), Astaprabhrta 
Summary by Ratna Lahiri 


Prakrit Pahuda (Sanskrit Prabhrta) means a special gift, 
for example an offering to a king, say a text having verses 
(pada) of essential value. In Jaina literature it came to mean 
chapters in sacred texts like this one. It is believed that 
Kundakunda wrote 84 Pahuda works. A. N. Upadhye® has 
enumerated 43 pahudas, though not all are available. In 
keeping with our practice in this volume we use the Sanskrit 
prabhrta throughout. 

Ascription of this work to Kundakunda is rather 
doubtful. 

"E" references are to the publication found in the 
Kundakunda Kahana Digambar Jain Teerth Suraksha Trust's 
version, published from Jaipur (7th edition, 1994). 

A summary of this work can also found in the 
Upadhye's Introduction cited in note 69, pp. 27-34. 


ASTAPRABHRTA 127 


CHAPTER I: Darsana Prabhrta 

This Chapter has 36 verses in which, after the 
benediction, the importance of right vision is emphasized. 

2-10 (E3-19) Right vision is essential. Those who do not 
have right vision are not fit for reverence. Even though they 
may perform austerities for thousands of years they will not 
achieve salvation or know the self. Those who have realized 
right inclination do not gather further karma particles and the 
existing ones are washed away. The selves that are bereft of 
right vision, right awareness and right conduct are the worst. 
They perish themselves and cause their followers to perish as 
well. Such people make allegations against the righteous in 
order to hide their own faults. 

If the root perishes, then the branches, leaves, flowers 
and fruits also do not prosper. Similarly, if the basic right 
awareness is missing, control, etc. and all other spiritual 
qualities also fail to prosper. 

12-13 (E20-21) One who is bereft of right awareness 
and, considering himself well controlled, desires others to 
revere and bow to him, will become lame and dumb as 
vegetables and will never achieve knowledge. Those who bow 
to such teachers of wrong faith will also never achieve 
knowledge. 

23-27 (E28-31) Just as the one with wrong vision is not 
fit for reverence, so also the man without control is unfit. Even 
though such ones may have given up dress, etc. and other 
outer habits, if they are not internally well controlled they are 
not fit for reverence. Neither body nor family nor caste is fit 
for reverence; the only quality fit for reverence is (the 
combination of) right vision, awareness and conduct. In the 
path of Jina anyone bereft of the (above) three gems should 
not be worshipped. 

28-36 (E32-37) Just as the lack of qualities is not fit for 
reverence, similarly the one with positive qualities must not be 
ignored. Those who do not worship the sages with these right 
qualities due to jealousy, etc. are not righteous folk with 


128 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


proper vision. Have proper vision at least: that is right 
awareness. This right awareness is the first step to the castle 
of liberation. This causes awareness and conduct to become 
right. Vision, belief, austerities and conduct when proper lead 
to a controlled balance known as liberation. This correct vision 
is to be lauded in every way, and leads to infinite pleasurable 
knowledge that liberates. 


Stra Prabhrta 

1 (E39) The path shown by arhats, those with untied 
knots (ganadhara) and gods (deva) and is celebrated by Jina 
saints, is by tradition passed on through siitras and aphorisms, 
also called "threads". 

3 (E46) Just as having the thread, the needle does not 
get lost, similarly by following these aphorisms the seeker will 
stay on the right path. 

5 (E47) Substances, self and not-self and their essences, 
are described in the aphorisms, which show what is desirable 
and what is not. Having faith in those teachings is right 
awareness. 

8 (E53) Those aspirants who follow these aphorisms are 
able to destroy their karma. Those who do not follow these 
practices may be important chiefs of monasteries or even be 
like Siva or Visnu, but they will continue to roam the worlds. 
Therefore aspirants should follow the aphorisms. 

18 (E60) As the child is born, so is the garb of the 
ascetic. This insures no acquisition of karma whatsoever. If an 
ascetic acquires even a little, he is bound to become a 
vegetable. 

21-22 (E63) Three kinds of dress codes have been 
described in the Jina aphorisms. The best is that of the naked 
Digambara saints, second best is that of pupils (laymen) and 
the third is that of Jaina women ascetics. There is no other 
garb that is to be revered. 

23 (E64) Even if an ascetic reaching the highest stage 
of semi-realized ones (Tirthankaras) puts on clothes, he will 


ASTAPRABHRTA 129 


not be liberated, so what can be said of others? Nudity is the 
only path, all other paths are wrong paths. 

24 (E64) For women, nudity is not possible, therefore 
they cannot be liberated. Very small mobile bacteria keep 
growing in their vaginas, between their breasts, and under 
their.armpits and in their navel. They are forever worried 
about: their monthly periods and are by nature lazy, so 
exemplary asceticism is not possible for them. However, they 
are not evil or demeritorious, as they may have right vision, 
right awareness and one-aspected right conduct. 

25-26 (E65-66) If a woman has right inclination and 
practices austerities, then she is laudable and may reach the 
heavens, ‘but cafinot be liberated in the woman mode. A 
woman cannot practice proper meditation either due to her 
lethargic nature, lack of purity of mind and worry of monthly 
period, etc. 


Caritra Prabhrta 

S (E71) There are two kinds of right action: right 
inclination based on right action, and controlled perfection in 
outer conduct. Both have been taught in the Jina way. And 
that pure right inclination conduct is also right controlled 
conduct. 

18 (E81) The self knows the true nature of essentials by 
having right vision of them, having correct awareness about 
substances and their modes, having right inclination toward 
their nature and thus performing right conduct. This right 
conduct is nothing other than pure right vision based on true 
belief. Mere appropriation of outer right conduct, without 
correct views and awareness, will not help one to attain 
liberation. 

23 (E85) Various rules of conduct for ascetics are 
described. Five kinds of smaller vows, three quality vows and 
four educational vows are the twelve ways of those of right 
controlled conduct. 

24 (E86) Abstaining from killing mobile beings, from 


130 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


untruth, from taking what is not given or belongs to another, 
from taking a woman belonging to another, and from limiting 
acquisitions are the five lesser vows. The other vows and 
conduct rules are described. 


Bodha Prabhrta 

1 (E100) Eleven concepts are explained to underline the 
asceticism required of teachers of the path. 

3-4 (E102-103) These, as told by Vitaragadeva, have to 
be known in sequence from i-viii (following). Then the last 
three (ix-xi) as told by arhats have to be known. 

5-7 (E103) i. The exemplary ascetic's abode (dyatana). 

8-9 (E105-106) ii. The house of worship (caityagrha). 

10 (E106) iii. The Jina image (pratima). 

14 (E109) iv. One who shows right views and has 
himself internally right vision.. 

16 (E111) v. The picture of the perfect ascetic is pure, 
extremely detached and causes karma to cease (jinabimba). 

19 (E112) vi. Qualities of the same enumerated 
Ginamudra) 

20-23 (E115) vii. The kind of knowledge, external and 
internal, that graces the ascetic. 

24 (E116) viii. The true definition of gods that are 
givers of the four aims of man {purusartha). 

26 (E117) ix. True pilgrimage is to visit the ascetic and 
bathing the self in purity, etc. 

28 (E119-131) x. Qualities of the realized highest state 
of destruction of the ghati karma, etc. in great detail. 

45-49 (E133-142) xi. The highest type of renunciation 
after giving away (pravrajya) everything possessed. In great 
detail the true ascetic is described as one who is internally and 
externally renounced. 

60-62 (E142-147) These eleven concepts emphasize 
internal purity as opposed to mere outward show and physical 
renunciation. It is helpful to humans, as has been told in great 
detail above, if practiced with emphasis on the internal 


ASTAPRABHRTA 131 


matching the external austerities. 

These Prakrit aphorisms have come to be heard in 
tradition, as told by the Jina god (Mahavira) and known to the 
fifth Srutakevali Bhadrabahu who told it to his disciple 
Visadkhdcarya. Bhadrabahu had special knowledge of the 
twelve limbs and fourteen pre-limbs (purvdrga) in full detail; 
hence he was a Srutajfidni. He was the high teacher of the 
gamaka type of preceptors who knew the true meaning of an 


aphorism and parse it accordingly. Praise be to him. 


Bhava Prabhrta 

Explains the importance of pure mental attitude without 
which nothing can be fruitful. 

3-4 (E152-153) Outer acquisitions are renounced for 
the sake of mental or attitudinal purity. However, without 
giving up internal acquisitions like attachments, etc. outer 
renunciations, even if practiced for a million years, will be 
useless. Therefore travelers on the path of liberation should 
recognize mental attitude as the first requisite. 

7-10 (E155-156) O Self, you have accepted outer 
austerities so often, but without the inner garb you have 
continued to suffer the sorrows associated with the four types 
of births. In the infernal worlds you had extreme cold, heat 
and shelter problems; in the animal births you had digging, 
burning, pain, piercing, stoppage, etc.; in the human births 
you had fear of future, mental, physical, etc.; and in the godly 
incarnations you had separation, inferiority, etc. types of 
sorrows. 

17-20 (E161-162) What more can be said when without 
a sense of self you are shriveling in the most impure place in 
your mother's womb. If all the milk you have drunk from so 
many mothers were to be collected it would fill the oceans. 
The tears mothers have shed for your birth and death will 
again fill the oceans. You have taken so many births already 
that if the bones, marrow and meat of all those bodies were 
to be collected it would make a pile larger than the Sumeru 


132 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


mountain. 
23-24 (E164-165) O Self, without the mental state of 


recognizing the self you have resided in the three worlds in 
water, earth, air, fire, mountains, rivers, trees, forests, etc. and 
everywhere you have suffered. You have continued to eat 
karmic products (pudgala) and yet are not satisfied. You have 
been thirsty and drunk from waters of the three worlds but 
have not yet quenched your thirst. Considering all this, look 
towards ending this by meditating on the three gems 
(ratnatraya). 

30-32 (E168-169) Without acquiring the three gems 
you have suffered in this world since infinite time, so now 
concentrate on the three gems. This means having right vision 
of the self, with right awareness and conduct, so that your 
death this time becomes a good death (sumarana) and not a 
bad death (kumarana) and you acquire eternal bliss. 

34-35 (E173-174) Describing the futility of having only 
the outer garb (dravyalinga) he addresses the self again. There 
is no place left on earth where you did not take birth and die 
with only an outer garb, nor are there any matter-particles left 
that you have not acquired in the process. Still you have not 
been liberated, because without the internal garb (bhavalinga) 
you continue to suffer the sorrows of birth, old age, etc. 

37 (E175) In each finger-length of this body there are 
ninety-six kinds of illnesses. Imagine how many in the whole 
body which you have suffered in the past and will suffer 
during your future births. 

39-41 (E176-177) O ascetic, you have lived in the 
impure place of your mother's womb. There you have eaten 
the liquids created from the already mouthed food of the 
mother. Then as an infant you have unknowingly lain in filth 
and eaten filthy things. This body is full of impure meat, 
bones, marrow, and blood, feces and pus, in which you 
continue to have attachment and therefore are suffering 
forever. 

43 (E178) One who has merely left the family is not 


ASTAPRABHRTA 133 


renounced; the truly renounced is one who has rid himself of 
the inner states of attachments. So, knowing this, give up 
internal passions. There have been many that have given up 
acquisition of bodily needs and become renounced outwardly, 
but having egoism, they have not succeeded. Only when they 
gave up egoism did they get liberated. An outwardly 
renounced person acquires many special powers but anger can 
cause it all to fall. 

52 (E187) Thus it is evident that outer nudity without 
inner purity is futile. The outer garb when added to right 
inner attitude leads to the dropping off of the karmic nature. 
Knowing thus, you should meditate on the self. 

56-57 (E190) The ascetic who, having rid himself of 
bodily attachments and passions arising out of egoism, 
meditates on the self, is known as the bhavalingi. He is 
completely detached. "My nature is without attachment, so I 
renounce all other crutches and take hold of the self"--this is 
how the ascetic should think. Also, 

58 (E191) "I am the knowledge-faith-natured self, and 
everything else adhering or associating to it is separate from 
me." 

62, 64 (E193-195) The self is of the nature of 
consciousness. Dwelling constantly in the conscious, the 
knowledge-natured self leads to liberation. (Refutes Carvaka.) 
The self is without taste, form, smell, manifestation, sound, 
garb, or shape. 

66 (E196) The stages of aspirant and ascetic are caused 
by the right mental attitude. 

67 (E197) The outer garb with the inner attitude leads 
to destruction of karma. Otherwise, if nakedness were all that 
was required, infernal beings and animals would be the first 
to be liberated. They actually suffer even more, so it is clear 
that nudity alone can only lead to sorrows and further rounds 
of the worlds. 

69 (E198) The aspirant with outward nudity, when 
active in backbiting, ridiculing others, bad language, etc., 


134 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


begets a bad name and becomes the butt of derision. 
Therefore one should totally renounce al] mental faults and 
possessions before taking the outer garb (of nakedness). 

74 (E201) The inner attitude is the key to a higher state 
(heaven) and liberation. The striver who is bereft of inner 
purity is going to animal births because his mind is clouded 
with impure activities. 

89° (E211) Without purity of inner being the external 
renouncing of acquisitions, living in caves, understanding, 
studies, etc.--all activities are useless. 

94-98 (E214-216) Accepting the twenty-two discomforts 
(parisaha); meditating on the twelve reflections (anupreksa); 
contemplating the nine substances, seven essentials, ten types 
of non-celibacy, and revealing the nine types of celibacy are 
advised in order to purify inner atttitude. Only with this inner 
attitude can the outer-garbed ascetic acquire right vision, 
awareness and conduct; without these he gets the four births 
with eternal sorrows. 

121-122 (E236-237) Meditation results in liberation. 
Eliminating the frustration-producing and cruel (raudra) types, 
practice the dharma and the white (Sukla) types of 
meditations. The ascetic who is merely outer-garbed is not 
able to practice the latter two types of meditation. 

125-126 (E239-240) Concentration of awareness is - 
meditation. Drink the pure cooling waters of meditation with 
right inclined attitude, to cool the fever of worldliness. By 
meditation the seeds of karma are burnt, from which the 
sapling of worldliness then cannot arise. 

131 (E243) One who has reached the inner-attitude 
state does not wish to acquire special prodigious gifts, or the 
pleasures of men and gods. He only wants to benefit his self 
as soon as possible. 

138 (E248) Just as the snake that drinks jaggery-mixed 
milk is still not rid of its poison, those not eligible for 
liberation do not forego their misconceptions even after 
hearing the Jain way. 


ASTAPRABHRTA 135 


141 (E250) They continue to hold false beliefs in only 
one false perspective and continue to suffer worldly travails. 
Think about it. You should forego the 363 false faiths and 
adhere to the Jain faith only. 

143 (E253) The body without right vision is like a 
moving ‘corpse. A corpse is not worthy of worship. The Jain 
muni and aspirant have right vision and are worthy. 

A detailed description of the qualities of the good monk 
follows. 

164 (E267) Thus knowing the value of right inclination 
and the faults of false faiths, accept the right inner attitude as 
the first step to liberation and to the four aims of man: 
dharma, artha, kama, moksa. 


Moksa Prabhrta 

The eternal blissful state of the self that has achieved 
liberation is described in 106 verses. 

4-7 (E273-275) The self has three aspects, outer, inner 
and higher. The first relates to the outer senses, the second to 
the mind and intuition, and the third to what is known only 
to the self, the inner soul. Give up the outer for the inner. The 
self is pure, without sense-organs, without body, desirable and 
praiseworthy in all ways, eternal and realized. 

10 (E277) Causes of bondage and liberation are 
discussed. Substances other than the self cause it bondage: 
therefore dwell in the self and renounce the nonself. 

14-19 (E279-283) Anything other than the intrinsic 
nature of the self, e.g., wife, children, wealth, possessions, etc., 
are nonself. The embodiment of knowledge, eternal self-god 
is the self-substance (svadravya). Those who meditate on self- 
substance get liberation. 

29 (E289) The seeker of the self realizes that all talk is 
useless because all else is false, unconscious and embodied. | 
am not so. Therefore he-remains silent and meditates on the 
self. 

31 (E290) The seeker who is asleep to outer behavioral 


136 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


practices is awake to inner needs. Knowing thus, a yogi 
relinquishes all outer interaction and meditates on the self. 

37 (E294) One who knows essentials has knowledge. 
One who is inclined to knowing essentials has vision, and one 
who does meritorious deeds as opposed to evil ones is of right 
conduct. 

59 (E309-310) Understanding without austerities 
(Samkhya) and austerities without understanding are both 
futile. Liberation comes from knowledge based on austerities. 
Meditation is the best austerity. However some fallen ones say 
it is not possible in this age. This is not true. Knowledge with 
austerities is the path. 

64 (E313) One who becomes absorbed in the self in 
meditation, that pure conduct ascetic definitely achieves 
liberation, knowing the self to be of pure conduct, view and 
awareness. 

65-86 Further detailed description of the path for 
ascetics. Then the path for lay aspirants is described. 

87-88 (E327-328) Right vision is the first essential. 
Whosoever in the past has been liberated, or shall be in the 
future, all are due to the greatness of right vision. 

103-105 (E337-339) The best substance is the self, 
which resides in one's own body. The five highest realized 
states also remain immersed in their selves. Right vision, 
awareness and conduct are the stages of this self, so | 
surrender to the self alone. 


Linga Prabhrta 

2 (E348) The truly religious self (Digambara monk) has 
the garb (nakedness), but merely accepting the garb is not 
enough. So recognize the inner condition (bhava) which is 
essential. 

3-4 (E349-350) The sinful people who laugh at the 
naked bodies of Jain monks are denounced in strong terms. 
Those who taking the garb (nakedness) then dance and play 
instruments, etc. to cause ridicule, are animals, not monks. 


ASTAPRABHRTA 137 


5 (E350) Those who having renounced everything take 
the garb and afterwards acquire things, they are not true 
monks but ignorant and like animals. 

6-13 (E351) Those who still have appetites for tasty 
food, run to eat, fight among themselves, sleep whenever they 
like, run as they walk, gamble, and jump, even after taking the 
garb, are neither ascetics or human; they are animals. 

18 (E358) Monks who take special interest in 
householders, whether they be initiated or not, do not keep to 
the acceptable activities of ascetics and do not revere their 
preceptors, are not ascetics, they are animals. 

20 (E359) Those garb-takers (nude monks) who believe 
in women, or deal with them taking them into their 
confidence, are worse than the animals, they are fallen. Even 
if very erudite, such garb-taking ascetics are not true monks. 


Sila Prabhrta 

2 (E364) There is no knowledge without right conduct, 
nor right conduct without right awareness. 

5 (E367) Knowledge without proper conduct is 
meaningless. Without proper vision, the taking of the naked 
garb is meaningless. Without self-control, austerities are 
useless. 

6 (E368) Right awareness must be purified by conduct. 
Undertaking the garb (naked) should be purified with right 
vision and austerities with self-control. Definitely great results 
will be achieved. 

20 (E376) Good conduct is the purest of austerities, 
good conduct is the purity of right vision, good conduct is the 
purity of knowledge and good conduct is also the enemy of 
sense pleasures and is a step to liberation. 

29 (E382) One does not see the liberation of dogs, 
donkeys, cows and women. Only those who seek the four aims 
of human life are liberated. 

38 (E388) Those who have understood the essence of 


138 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Jain teachings and have thus renounced all sense pleasures, 
who practice their wealth of austerities (austerities are their 
only wealth), and are patient, and have become pure due to 
right conduct, those ascetics beget the bliss of realized beings. 


9. KUNDAKUNDA, Dvddasanupreksa 
Edited by Balabhadra Jaina, Barasanupekkha 
(Dvadasanupreksa) (New Delhi 1996), is our "E". The 
summary of contents provided here is taken from the 
Introduction to A. N. Upadhye's Sri Kundakunddacarya's 
Pravacanasara (op. cit.), pp. 37-38. 


Summary by A. N. Upadhye 


It contains ninety-one gdthds. This work deals with 
twelve reflections which should necessarily be cultivated for 
the stoppage of karmic influx. The following are the topics on 
which the monk is to reflect constantly. 

1-7 (E1-4) Various paraphernalia, relatives, physical 
strength and beauty, etc. are all transitory; the soul alone is 
eternal and above all these. 

8-13 (E5-7) No external things like gems, medicines, 
armies and weapons can rescue the soul from death; the only 
shelter is the self itself which is the seat of five dignitaries and 
an abode of right vision, awareness, conduct and austerities. 

14-20 (E8-10) The soul is alone, alone responsible for 
the fruits of the acts done. 

21-23 (E11-12) Relatives, friends and this body: all 
these constitute the object external, and are absolutely 
separate from the soul which is an embodiment of faith and 
knowledge. 

24-38 (E13-22) The soul is wandering in samsara, 
suffering many miseries with false motives and pretended 


attachments; the soul, when it is free from karmas, gets out of 
samsara. 


DVADASANUPREKSA 139 


39-42 (E23-25) This universe is threefold with hells 
below and heavens above that are the consequences of 
inauspicious and auspicious manifestations of consciousness; 
when there is pure manifestation, liberation is attained. 

43-46 (E26-27) Everything in this world is impure, and 
the soul alone, when free from karma, is pure and an abode 
of eternal happiness. 

47-60 (E28-35) Falsity, vowlessness, passions and 
various activities are the causes of karmic influx which is the 
cause of samsara. 

61-65 (E36-38) Such religious activities, which 
counteract the karmic influx, should be reflected upon. 

66-67 (E39) Further the twofold way of shedding 

‘karmic matter should be considered. 

68-82 (E40-47) Then eleven pratimds of a householder 
and ten dharmas of a monk should be considered; the internal 
and external attachment should be given up, and one should 
meditate on the pure nature of the self. 

83-86 (E48-49) Enlightenment is rare, so one should 
reflect on the means of attaining it. 

87-91 (ES0-52) Reflection on these twelve topics is 
spiritually fruitful, and leads on to liberation. 


SAMANTABHADRA (430?) 

The most complete discussion about what little we 
know or can surmise about this author is by Saratchandra 
Ghoshal, writing in 1944 (more recently published as Apta- 
Mimamsa of Acharya Samantabhadra (New Delhi 2002), pp. 
1-20). If we assume, as Ghoshal does, that Pujyapada (or 
Devanandin) lived in the fifth century--he claims that "It has 
been ascertained that Pijyapada lived before 482 A.D."--he 
reasons as follows: ""This Pujyapada has mentioned 
Samantabhadra in his work Jainendra Vydkarana (Vol. 4, p. 
140)--'catustayam samantabhadrasya'.” (p. 12). If this is 


140 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


correct it fixes Samantabhadra's date prior to 482, and if we 
make our usual 50-year interval assumption we arrive at the 
date we have opted for here. Ghoshal cites various sources in 
favor of a much earlier date than this. It seems clear, however, 
that Samantabhadra must follow Umasvati and Kundakunda. 
Inscription No. 64 of "Inscriptions in Sravanabelagola" by 
Lewis Rice confirms this order. 

Besides the two works summarized below a number 
more are ascribed to Samantabhadra, including several stotras: 
Svayambhustotra (on which Prabhacandra has commented), 
Stutividyd (it goes by other names), Ratnakarandasravakacara, 
and a number of other works. Ghoshal remarks (p. 19): 
“Though references to these (other) works are found in works 
of Jaina writers of a very late date, nothing definite can be 
said unless manuscripts of these are discovered." 


10. SAMANTABHADRA (600?), Aptamimamsa 

Nagin J. Shah has provided us with an edition and 
translation, with extensive discussion, of this work 
(Ahmedabad 1999). The numbered headings with page 
references (S) refer to the 116 verses as edited and translated 
there. He also give us a brief synopsis together with a more 
extended analysis of each of the sections he analyzes the work 
into. Besides S there is an edition and translation (G) by 
Saratchandra Ghoshal in his work cited above. Neither 
translation makes easy reading by itself. 

The summary that we now provide is by the Editor of 
this Volume on the basis of (S) and (G). 


CHAPTER ONE 
1 (G25; $1) Magicians have such special abilities 
(vibhuti) as making gods appear to come down to earth, sky- 
walking, and displaying symbols of glory. You are not our Lord 
because of those things. 


APTAMIMAMSA 141 


2 (G28; S2) Bodily and mental merits, wonderful as 
they are, are found even in the denizens of heaven who are 
full of attachments 

3 (G32; S2) Even those who advise concerning 
liberation (tirthakrt) contradict each other. Everyone's word 
cannot be trusted. Only one (person) should be accepted as 
teacher. 

4 (G35; $3) The destruction of defects and obstructions 
occurs in at least one self due to its excellence. 

5 (G42; $4) Subtle, concealed and distant things are 
perceptible by an omniscient person, since they are knowable 
by inference, like fire. 

6 (G46; S5) You, this omniscient person, speak words 
uncontradicted by reasoning or scripture, for what you desire 
is not opposed to what should be accepted. 

7 (G47-48; S6) The views of those who disagree with 
your position, sweet as nectar, and who always espouse a 
single aspect (ekanta), are refuted by what is evident (drsta). 

8 (G52; S7) Those who accept only a single aspect, O 
Lord, who are opposed to both their own views and those of 
others, cannot distinguish good from bad actions, and for 
them the other world (i.e., liberation) is not possible. 

9 (G53; S9) Those who attribute only being to things 
and deny nonbeing must conclude that every thing is 
beginningless and endless, has each other's nature, and thus 
is without a nature of its own. 

10 (G60; S9) If prior absence is denied, effects and 
substances will be beginningless. If destruction (i.e., posterior 
absence) is denied, they will be endless. 

11 (G61; S11) If mutual absence, i.e., difference is 
denied there will be only one thing (in the world). If none of 
them (the foregoing three absences apply, anything can inhere 
in anything?! 


1 The second line of this verse has different renditions among the 
commentators. 


142 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


12 (G63; $14) The denial (that any) being (exists) has 
no instrument of true cognition to support it or to convince 
others. How could there be support for their view or 
repudiation of that of others? 

13 (G66; S15-16) The view of those opposing the logic 
of syadvdda, who claim that contradictory things can be 
inherent in (one) substance, as well as the view that things are 
utterly indescribable (avdcya)}, are not correct. 

14 (G68; $17-18) From different perspectives being, 
nonbeing, both and indescribability are acceptable to you, but 
not in all respects. 

15 (G72; $19) Who will not accept that everything 
exists in its essential nature? Likewise, who will deny that 
each thing is absent from something else? If it were not so 
nothing could exist at all. 

16 (G74; $19-20) Taking them successively everything 
both has being and is an absence. (Moreover, nothing is) both 
(being and absence) simultaneously, that being an 
impossibility. Finally, three more (perspectives) apply 
respectively to each (of the first) three as being themselves 
indescribable. 

17 (G78; S22) Just as, when we desire to speak of 
difference (between A and B) we ascribe similarity (to them) 
through that qualification, we speak of the existence in A of 
another property (B) when there is invariable concomitance 
(of B) with As counterpositive. 

18 (G79; S23) And just as, when we desire to speak of 
nondifference (between A and B) we ascribe difference 
through that qualification, we speak of the nonexistence in A 
of another property (B) when there is invariable concomitance 
(of B) with A's counterpositive. _ 

19 (G81; S24) Whatever is a qualificand capable of 
being spoken about has the characters of being positively 
described as well as of being negatively described, just as a 
property of the sadhya may or may not be a reason (hetu) in 
a given case. 


APTAMIMAMSA . 143 


20 (G82; S25) The rest of the (seven) perspectives are 
to be understood according to their specificities. O Lord of 
sages, in your teachings there is no contradiction whatsoever. 

21 (G83; S26) Thus the causation of an object cannot 
be understood either through ascribing existence to it (vidhi) 
or by denying (nisedha) its existence. If you deny that, it will 
not be possible to explain an effect by reference to external 
and internal conditions. 

22 (G84-85; S27) Specification of each feature among 
the indefinite number of features of an entity serves a purpose, 
since when one (feature) is given prominence the others 
become subsidiary. 

23 (G86; S28) One who understands (the doctrine of) 
perspectives should apply it in different specific cases, for 
example, in the conceptual constructions of one and many, etc. 


CHAPTER TWO 

24 (G87; S29) On the single-aspect view of nondualism 
(advaita) differences, which are perceived, between’ causes 
(ka@raka) and actions (kriyda), etc., are denied. But one cannot 
be produced from oneself. 

25 (G88; S29) Actions could not be of different kinds, 
thus their results and the worlds inhabited by their agents 
could not exist. Understanding and ignorance would not occur, 
and there could be no bondage or liberation. 

26 (G88-89; S30) If nondualism is (sought to be) 
established (by inference) on the basis of an h there would 
have to be duality between the h and the s. If no h is needed 
why shouldn't dualism (dvaitavada) be established by mere 
words? 

27 (G90; S30) Without what is ahetu there cannot be 
a hetu; without dualism there cannot be nondualism. There 
can be no denying if there is nothing to be denied. 

28 (G91; S31-32) On the single-aspected view which 
insists on separateness there can be no separateness, since a 
thing would not be separate from its separateness. A quality 


144 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(such as separateness) is located in many things. 

29 (G91-92; $32) If singleness is denied there can be 
no stream(s) (santana) (of awarenesses) or collection(s) 
(samudaya), no similarity, no birth. 

30 (G92-93; $32-33) And if awareness is different from 
its content they will have distinct actual natures, and so 
cannot be twofold. To those who disagree--how can there be 
a content of awareness, internal or external, without there 
being an awareness? 

31 (G93-94; S33) For those who say that words 
designate only universal properties and deny particulars all 
(sentences) become false in the absence of general 
(meanings). 

32 (G95; S36) The position of those who deny 
syadvada, saying that a thing cannot have more than one 
aspect, is wrong because contradictory. Those who say that 
only the view that things are inexpressible is wrong, their view 
itself being inexpressible according to them! 

33 (G95-96; $36) Singularity and separateness are 
unreal since both are without cause. Actually the very same 
thing is both one and separate, just as the very same prover 
(sadhana) is both itself and separate. 

34 (G96-97; $37) The unity of everything is due to 
everything having the universal of being, and the separateness 
is in respect to (each) being a substance or something else. It 
is like the too-specific reason (asddharanahetu) which proves 
both the difference and the nondifference of things. 

35 (G97; S37) Those who affirm or deny (universals or 
particulars) are trying to speak about a particular qualifier in 
infinite qualificands, not of something that doesn't exist. 

36 (G98; S38) Both difference and nondifference are 
existents, being the referents of cognitive instruments. They 
are not merely conventional (samvrti). There is no 
contradiction in their both occurring in a single thing, any 
more than there is when you yourself speak about both 
secondary and primary qualities of things. 


APTAMIMAMSA 145 


CHAPTER THREE 

37 (G100; S40) For those who hold that everything is 
eternal there can be no change. Since from the start there is 
no agency, how could there be a cognitive instrument or its 
result? . 

38 (G100-101; $40-41) If any things could be revealed 
as cognitive instrument-agents, like the objects of the senses 
they also would have to be eternal; so how could they be 
subject to change? That assumption of universal eternality, O 
sddhu, being external (to the implications of your claim), is 
censurable. 

39 (G101; S41) If the effect always exists it cannot 
come into being; it will be like (your) purusa. Any idea of 
transformation (parindma) will refute your position of (the) 
eternality (of everything). 

40 (G102; S41) There could be no meritorious or 
demeritorious actions--so how could there be rebirths when 
those are nonexistent? O Lord, those whom you do not guide 
cannot (establish) bondage or liberation. 

41 (G102-103; S42) For those who believe in 
momentariness (ksanikatva) existence after death is 
impossible. Moreover, there can be no_ recognition 
(pratyabhijfia), etc., and thus there will be no arising of an 
effect from which (karmic) results could arise. 

42 (G103; S44) If there can be no effects anywhere 
nothing can ever happen, like a sky-flower (which never 
occurs). There will be no regularity of material (effects) and 
there will be no expectation of any effect arising. 

43 (G104; S44-45) No cause-effect relationship can 
exist, since there can be no concomitance between one thing 
and another. One stream (santana) of experiences is not like 

- another, for a stream of experience and a (persistent) thing 
which possesses experiences are quite different (things). 

44 (G105; S105) Objection: This word "stream" is 
merely conventional, being used to attribute nonotherness to 


146 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


something actually other. 

Answer: Then why isn't it just false? A primary (i.e., 
actual) entity cannot be merely conventional, and without (a) 
primary (object) there can be no conventional usage. 

45 (G106; $105) Objection: Since one cannot apply the 
conceptual construction (vikalpa) of fourfold negation 
(catuskoti) to everything, nothing can be said about the nature 
of differences of streams or of something which possesses 
experience. 

46 (G107; $105-106) Answer: You shouldn't say that 
fourfold negation is a conceptual construction. The result will 
be the nonactuality of everything, qualifiers and qualified 
alike. 

47 (G107; S46) One can only deny the properties of 
other substances, etc. to an object that exists. Differences 
between nonexistent entities cannot be a matter of ascribing 
either existence of nonexistence to them. 

48 (G108; S47) Without any limitations whatever 
everything is nonexistent, indescribable. The reverse of that 
reasoning is that unreality can only be affirmed of existent 
objects. 

49 (G108-109; $47) If all things are indescribable how 
can we even speak of them? 

Objection: We (rather) say: everything is conventional 
(samvrti). 

Answer: Then everything must be false (mrsa), being 
other than reality (paramartha). 

50 (G109; S47-48) Is the indescribability because of 
(our) inability (to describe things), because of the 
nonexistence (of everything), or because of (our) 
nonawareness (of anything)? The other two (i.e., the first and 
third) cannot occur. Stop evading--state your position! 

51 (G110; S48) (On your position, which must be the 
second,) one who does not intend to kill will kill, and one who 
decides to kill will not kill. There can be no bondage in either 
case, and without bondage no one can be liberated. 


APTAMIMAMSA 147 


52 (G111; $48) If destruction is without any cause a 
person intending injury cannot cause any injury. Then there 
can be no stream of consciousness nor any liberation through 
the eight causes. 

53 (G112; S49) Objection: A cause is needed to bring 
about something different (from before). 

Answer: Then the same cause that causes what was 
before causes what comes about now. Thus entities that are 
not already different do not have causes that produce 
difference. 

54 (G113; S50) (Your) streams of aggregates must be 
unconditioned (asamskrta), being conventional. They cannot 
exist, be born or die, any more than the horns of a donkey 
can! 

55 (G113-114; $52) The view, opposed to syadvada, 
that both (permanence and momentariness) are true (of the 
same thing is to be rejected) because it involves contradiction_ 
It is mot correct either to say that the perspective of 
indescribability is itself indescribable. 

56 (G114; S53) What exists is persistent (nitya), since 
it is recognized. It is uninterrupted. Things are momentary 
(ksanika) due to temporal differences. Your position (to the 
contrary) would have the fault of the disconnectedness of 
awarenesses. 

57 (G115; S54) A thing does not come into or go out 
of existence through its general nature; that is evident in 
general. Its coming into and going out of existence is rather 
due to its particular (nature). On your position (too) one 
existence has in common birth, (persistence, death), etc. 

58 (G117; S54-55) The arising of an effect involves the 
destruction of its cause. But because of the regulatoriness 
these two things are not separate. Since universals, etc., exist 
in both (cause and effect) they cannot be held to be 
(nonexistent) like the sky-flower, since they are not 
independent (of each other). 

59 (G118; S55) A person wanting a pitcher, an 


148 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
ornament or gold gets grief, joy or indifference along with 
destruction, arising or persistence and their causes. 

60 (G118-119; S55) One who has vowed to drink only 
milk does not eat curd. One who has vowed to eat curds does 
not drink milk. One who has vowed not to imbibe anything 
from a cow doesn’t imbibe either. So things have three 


natures. 


CHAPTER FOUR 

61 (G120; S57) Some hold the one-sided view that 
effect and cause are different, that quality-possessors and their 
qualities are different, and that universal properties are 
different from any of those. 

62 (G120-121; $58) The faults in these non-Jaina views 
are: The occurrence of many in one could not occur, since 

(these) things either have no parts, or have many. And it is a 
fallacy (abhdsa) to say that a thing cannot be single because 
it has parts. 

63 (G121; $58) Since separable (yutasiddha) things can 
occur in distinct places and times, a cause and its effect cannot 
occupy the same place. 

64 (G123; S58-59) Naiyayika: A thing and its locus are 
not independent; they are co-inherors (samavayin). 

Answer: Since there is no relation between them it is 
not right to speak of "(co)-inherors'". 

65 (G124; S59) A universal and inherence, in their 
completeness inhering in one substance, cannot (each) exist 
without a locus. What, then, is the rule concerning causation, 
destruction, etc.? 

66 (G125; SS9) Being completely unconnected the 
universal and inherence, are likewise unconnected with any 
object. So all three are nonexistent like the sky-flower! 

67 (G125; S61) In the one-sided view that (an effect) 
is always nondifferent from the atoms (that cause it), there 
will be disjunction (of the atoms) even when connected 
(samghata). The four (elements), being unconnected, would 


APTAMIMAMSA 149 


be illusory. 

68 (G126; $61) If their effects are illusory the atoms 
will be so also, since a cause is known by its effect. If both 
(atoms and the substances that are their effects) are 
nonexistent, then qualities, universals, (and motions) cease to 
exist as well. j 

69 (G127; S62) If both (cause and effect) are 
nondifferent each will be nonexistent, for one cannot exist 
without the other. That the number two applies to them will 
be contradicted. 

Objection: They are merely conceptual constructions. 

Answer: That is an illusion. 

70 (G128; S63) So what verse 13 said is correct. 

71 (G129; S63-64) Substance and mode are one since 
there is no negative concomitance (vyatireka) between them, 
because of their specific transformations, and because of the 
powers of things which possess powers. 

72 (G131; $63-64) The difference (between substance 
and mode) is not complete, but comes about through the 
particularities of name, number, etc., according to their 
specific marks (svalaksana), and because of differences in 
purpose, etc. 


CHAPTER FIVE . 

73 (G132; S66) If universals and particulars depend on 
each other, the two cannot exist. But if they don't depend on 
each other there can be no universals and particulars. 

74 (G133; S67) Repeats verse 13. 

75 (G133; S68) The invariable concomitance of a 
property and its possessor is established through their 
interdependence. They do not have essential natures of their 
own. They are established by each other, as are being an 
instigator (karaka) and being an indicator (jfidpaka). 


CHAPTER SIX 
76 (G135; S69) If everything is established through 


150 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


inference there is no role for perception. If everything is 
established by scripture, even contradictory views will be 
established. 

77 (G136; S69-70) Repeats verse 147. 

78 (G137; S70) When a speaker is not authoritative 
what he proves through a reason is called "proved by reason". 
When the speaker is reliable, what is proved through his 
speech is called "proved by verbal authority". 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

79 (G138; S72) On the one-sided view that the only 
reality is internal (to thought, all) awarenesses and sentences 
must be illusory, only apparently instruments of true 
cognition--but how can that be (known) if there are no 
instruments of true cognition? 

80 (G139; S72-73) If what is to be proved and its 
prover are consciousness-only (vijfiaptimatrata), there can be 
no s nor h since the thesis and the reason involve fallacies. 

81 (G140; S74) On the one-sided view that the only 
reality is external there can be no fallacies; thus every 
contradictory expression would establish what ought to be 
done. 

82 (G141; S74-75) Repeats verse 13. 

83 (G141; S75) If all positive objects are dependent on 
awareness there can be no fallacies. Your instruments of true 
cognition prove external objects only. 

84 (G142; S75-76) The word "self" ("jiva") designates 
an external object since it involves conceptual identification 
(samjfia), like the word "hetu'. Words expressing illusory 
conceptual identifications, such as "maya", deal with illusory 
objects; similarly words expressing veridical awareness 
(prama) (designate actual objects). 

85 (G143; S76) The words "buddhi, "fabda" and “artha" 
designate awareness, language, and an object respectively; so 
they are three. Likewise the awarenesses of the three (viz., 
awareness, language and object) designate the three things 


APTAMIMAMSA 151 


that those words reflect (pratibimbika). 

86 (G144; S77) Knowledge arising from words is 
different in the case of the speaker, the hearer, and the person 
who is engaged in proving. In the case of error an external 
object is connected with either knowledge or error in the same 
(three) cases. 

87 (G145; D77) Validity of an awareness or a verbal 
expression occurs when there is an external object, otherwise 
not. Truth or falsity depend on whether the object is verified 
or not. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

88 (G146; S79) If the realization of purpose is attained 
through destiny, how is it that destiny can arise from the 
activities of a person? If destiny stems from another destiny, 
a person cannot attain liberation, and personal activity 
becomes useless. 

89 (G146-147; S79) If things are only attained by 
personal activity how can personal activity result from destiny? 
If results arise only from personal activity everyone would 
always succeed in their efforts. 

90 (G147; S80) Repeats verse 13. 

91 (G147-148; S80) When desired or undesired things 
are attained without any awareness, that is destiny. When 
desired or undesired things are attained knowingly, it is from 
personal activity. 


CHAPTER NINE 

92 (G149; S81) If demerit (papa) arises from (causing 
others’) pain (duhkha), and merit (punya) arises from 
(others') happiness (sukha), unconscious (things) and (things) 
free from passions will get bondage from instrumental causes. 

93 (G150; S81) If merit arises from pain caused to 
oneself, and demerit arises from one’s own happiness, a 
learned sage without attachments or hatreds would become 
attached due to these (same) causes. 


152 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


94 (G151; $82) Repeats verse 13. 

95 (G152; S82) The inflow of merits and demerits 
arises from the happiness or pain caused by others or by 
oneself depending on whether it is done with evil or pure 
intent respectively. Otherwise the view of the Arhats will be 
untenable. 

96 (G156; S84) If bondage comes from ignorance there 
can be no omniscient ones (kevalin), since there are infinitely 
many knowable things. If there can be liberation with little 
knowledge one with great ignorance can be liberated.\ 

97 (G157; S84-85) Repeats verse 13. 

98 (G158; S85) Bondage arises from ignorance if there 
is delusion, but not if delusion has disappeared. When there 
is no delusion liberation occurs through even a little 
knowledge, but not when delusion persists. 

99 (G160; S85) According to one's karmic bondage the 
results of desires (kama), etc., are varied. The karma arises 
from its appropriate cause according to the purity or impurity 
of the (agent's) self. 

100 (G162; S86) The capacity for purity and impurity 
are like the capacity to be cooked or not to be cooked. 
Occurrences of each can have a beginning or be beginningless, 
according to one's intrinsic nature based on reasoning. 

101 (G163; S87-88) Knowledge of things and 
instruments of true cognition illuminate everything at once. 
Gradually that knowledge is purified by perspectives and 
syadvada. 

, 102 (G164-165; S89) The result of the first (viz., 
perspectives) is neutrality (upeksa) toward, of the second 
(syadvada) the desire to get or avoid, the results (of actions). 
Alternatively the result of the first is neutrality or the 
destruction of ignorance concerning the realm of everything. 

103 (G165-166; S90) The word "syat" has the sense of 
a particle (nipata) indicating that what is spoken of has 
various aspects and indicates that your sentence's meaning 
having those as its domain is approved by those with 


APTAMIMAMSA 153 


knowledge. 

104 (G166; S90-91) The word "syat" excludes the 
absolutely one-sided viewpoint, and involves words derived 
from "kim" ("who") and "cit" ('-ever"), etc. It is dependent on 
sevenfold predication (saptabhanginaya) and _ features 
distinguishing things to be acquired and avoided. 

105 (G167; S91) Syadvada and complete knowledge 
illuminate all the categories (tattva) (of things). Their 
difference is that between direct and indirect (awareness). 
What is unknown to these two kinds of knowledge is not an 
actual entity. 

106 (G167-168; S91) A perspective (naya) indicates an 
individual aspect.of an object that has been understood 
through syddvdda by indicating the features it shares with the 
thing to be proved (sddhya) and those the lack of which it 
shares with what contradicts it. 

107 (G168; 92) A substance is the meeting-ground of 
one-sided viewpoints, both perspectives (naya) and 
subsidiaries to them (upanaya), though not necessarily 
separately related to them. It is both one and many (from 
different perspectives). 

108 (G169; $92-93) Objection: A collection of false 
features must be false! 

Answer: On our view there is no one-sided falsity. The 
perspectives are false when unconnected with each other, but 
in connection they indicate actual entities. 

109 (G170; S93) In a statement an object is affirmed or 
denied, regulated one way or another, regulated by what it is 
or what it is not. Otherwise it could not be a qualified entity. 

110 (G170; $93-94) In a statement that a thing is "only 
thus" it is meant that the actual entity is both what it is and 
what it is not. If this were not the case, how could one teach 
about actual entities through false statements? 

111 (G171; S94) The nature of a spoken sentence is 
that it can without obstruction deny what another sentence 
means. 


154 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objection: (No,) what it expresses is the universal 
f the object meant. 
De ae This would make it like the flower in the sky. 

112 (G172; S$94-95) A word intending a universal 
property, if not indicating a specific thing, must be false. It is 
the word "“syat" that indicates the truth involved in (the 
word's) indicating a specific entity. 

113 (G173; S95) The aspect of an object that is desired 
is opposed to what one wishes to avoid. Likewise with 
accepting and rejecting. Syadvdda works that way. 

114 (G173-174; $96) This Aptamimamsa is composed 
for those who seek liberation, who desire to obtain (and avoid, 
respectively,) the particular things available through correct 
and wrong teachings. 

115 (S97 only) Concluding invocation. 


11. SAMANTABHADRA, Yuktyanusdasana 
Summarized by Ratna Lahiri 


Internal evidence shows this has been written after the 
Aptamimamsa. The entire work of logic is disguised cleverly in 
the adulatory style of addressing Mahavira and referring to his 
teaching as the best logically proven method of attaining 
knowledge and liberation. Another name for this ‘prayer’ is 
therefore Virajinastotra. In the summary I have removed the 
adulatory mode of addressing each philosophical idea as a 
qualification eulogizing Lord Mahavira. 

"E" references are to pages of Bharatvashiya Anekanta 
Parishad's publication No. 48 (Jaipur 1989-90) with a Hindi 
translation by Jugal Kishore Mukhtar. 


5 (E5) gives causes why the true teachings may not be 
rightly understood: 


YUKTYANUSASANA 155 


(i) Kaliyuga, the modern times, which is an 
external cause; 

(ii) The false orators (who are not able to speak 
on the higher (niscaya) plane) adddress only the practical 
perspective (vyavahdranaya), which is an extraordinary 
external cause, and 

(iii) The inability of the listener or layman who 
due to misapprehension of the faith is not successful in getting 
the real meaning--which is an internal cause. All this is in 
contrast to the many-aspected Jain teachings, which lead to 
riches and power in all fields. 

7 (E6-8) The Jain way teaches that both essential 
difference and essential nondifference of qualities of self, etc. 
are true. Due to different perspectives they are sometimes 
substance, sometimes modes, sometimes both. If both are 
considered independent of each other each becomes 
nonexistent and no meaning can remain. In addition, 
substances and their qualities, causes and effects, are 
perceived as collocations (this is refuting the Vaisesika view of 
qualities). If not, nothing can be accepted. 

8-9 (E11-14) If the states are considered to be 
permanent, then there is a problem--what of the modifications 
that occur? There can neither be bondage nor release. If it is 
said that the permanent substances (the self, etc.) are by 
nature multimodal, then the question may arise whether they 
are forever perceived as such without any cause from 
childhood or not. (Then it would create the problem of 
misconceptions, whereas the Jain way would accept both 
forms through perspectives and many-sidedness and have all 
the answers.) 

11 (E16) If it is surmised in the Buddhist theory of 
momentariness that the self at a moment is nonexistent in the 
next moment, then it is just a proofless statement of madness, 
because there is no visible or imaginary cause possible for it. 
If it is argued that a trace (samskara) at the first moment 
remains in the next moment (for continuity) that too is not 


156 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


possible, as the same substance does not exist in the second 
moment, being like a son of the first moment. A trace along 
with its effects (va@sand) cannot remain in the second moment, 
which is quite different in existence from the first. 

12 (E18) Nor can a cause-effect relationship be 
established between moments, as at each moment the past 
existence dies and the new one is born. So how can they be 
similar if not arising from the first? If it is said that the first 
cause (is father to) the second and is thus related, then it is 
questionable if the second is first born and exists relative to 
the cause or not (since the first moment dies before the 
second is born). Both contentions are impossible like the 
flower in the sky, and thus are not proved. 

Similar logical refutations of all points of Buddhist 
logic, samvedanddvaita, etc. are proved to be false views (15, 
E22),-viparitabhinivesa (24, E34). 

26 (E37) The fixed-ended doctrines of others are either 
bereft of general states or of specific ones, but do not take 
into account the one relative to the other. This is one-sided 
and lacks all possibilities and thus is of the nature of 
nonsubstance, so, nonexistent like a flower in the sky. 

27 (E39) If someone were to negate the nonexistence 
and affirm the natural state of being and then say that direct 
and indirect perception both become instruments of bondage 
or release, then too both states have to be recognized as 
interdependent; else there is a dichotomy of statement. They 
are not opposites but relative to each other. Thus in absolutist 
(one-sided) theories there can be no recognition of being or 
truth. 

29 (E41) To say a thing is indescribable goes against 
that very contention because the word ‘description’ is still a 
part of it, i.e., we are describing it as indescribable. If referring 
either to its own nature or to the nature of others we say it is 
indescribable, it becomes a fallacy. 

30-33 (E46-47) Similar types of fallacies are discussed 
and proved to be untenable unless the syadvada of Mahavira's 


YUKTYANUSASANA 157 


way is accepted. 

34 (E49) (Carvakas say:) Just as the intoxicating quality 
of wine is created by the coming together of its ingredients 
like paste, sugar, vessel, etc., similarly the coming together of 
elements (mahdabhitas--earth, water, fire, air) causes 
consciousness to manifest. This is not the doing of any god. 
But those shameless and fearless men (the Carvakas), busy in 
filling their bellies and sexual appetites, have thus been 
making fools of poor simple people. When consciousness 
remains as a byproduct of the elements then how can the 
Carvakas think highly of life, consciousness, or its visible forms 
like intelligence, etc.? Thus they fall into an abyss of 
ignorance. They think of the world as freedom to do whatever 
they wish and consider that, irrespective of ethical standards, 
at the time of initiation itself there can be liberation 
immediately. All these are outside the Jina path of conditioned 
predication (syadvdda), bondage, release and knowing the 
causes of both and stages of liberation. 

39 (E59) Those who torture themselves (and others) by 
offering the head of a goat, falling from a height, wearing 
certain berries, worshipping false gods and _ consider 
themselves realized (siddha) are false, those who do not look 
towards destroying their faults (dosa) and are greedy for 
pleasures, are not our followers. 

40 (E61) All general and specific qualities are 
interdependent in relation to a substance, whether they are 
consecutive or coexistent. They are also collocated and 
perceived according to perspective. 

43 (E67) Those who assert the stinya or sattdadvaita 
views say that existence of a substance implies nonexistence at 
the same time. That is contradictory, lacking the conditioned 
predication of syadvadda. Specifics then do not exist. 

47 (E75-76) Just the substance by itself without the 
modes does not exist as it does not become an object of 
knowledge, neither does the mode by itself become a known 
object. Thus, the sentence with the 'maybe' predication (i.e., 


158 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the sydadvada formulation) implies neither just the substance 
nor just the qualities nor just both, as they cannot become 
known objects. 

51 (E82) One-sided understanding leads to 
misapprehension and in turn to passions, egoism, etc., in 
people. When one-sidedness is destroyed (as in the Jain 
anekanta view) the true nature is revealed and right 
awareness occurs naturally. 

55 (E89-91) If various existing generalities of substance, 
qualities and modes are considered existent outside the self 
and without options, then they become immeasurable and do 
not remain existent or objects of knowledge. 

60 (E98-99) The Jain teachings alone accept all facets, 
general and specific, substance and modes, one and many, etc. 
natural states, including the perception of primary and 
subsidiary natures. There is no (absolute) one-sidedness in 
such perception and it is of a relative nature. This is why it is 
beneficial for all humanity. 

62 (E100-101) Even those who have considerable 
malice towards the Jain teachings, if without prejudice and 
with a balanced mind they analyze and examine our 
(Mahavira's) way, then their false pride will definitely be 
destroyed. Although they have false beliefs, they will see the 
truth (samyagdrsti). 


PUJYAPADA or DEVANANDIN (430?) 

“He was born in Karnataka region of India in the 5th 
century A.D. According to Sravana Belgola Inscription No. 40 
he occupied a very important position amongst Jain saints and 
acaryas. Several kings and chiefs of his time were among his 
great devotees and he was considered...one of the greatest 
saints of his time. He was the preceptor of Durvinita, the then 
ruling king of the great Ganga dynasty of the Deccan. His 


PUJYAPADA 159 


original name was Devanandin but being held in high esteem 
by all, he was renowned as Piijyapada, i.e. one whose feet are 
worth worshipping. He was also called Jinendra-buddhi as he 
excelled in intelligence."”° He is held to be the author of the 
well-known grammatical work Jainendravaiydkarana. 

As to his date, Ohira remarks: "Samantabhadra quotes 
mangaldcarana of Pijyapada in his Aptamimamsd, and 
Pujyapada refers to Samantabhadra in the Jainendravyakarana. 
Therefore both authors are speculated to have been 
contemporaries" (Ohira, op. cit., p. 143). As noted previously, 
however, the specification of 430 is based on evidence about 
Samantabhadra; there is no such independent evidence to 
confirm Pijyapada's date given, although we have cited the 
evidence as best we can. 


12.PUJYAPADA, Sarvarthasiddhi on Umasvati's 
Tattvarthasttra 

Our "E" is the edition by Phoolchandra Siddhanta 
Shastry in Jnanapitha Murtidevi Granthamala, Sanskrit 
Grantha No. 13 (New Delhi 1971). "T" is the translation of the 
work by S. A. Jain titled Reality (Calcutta 1960). For the 
Digambaras this is the earliest commentary on Umasvati's 
sutras, and there is some discrepancy between the sutras 
accepted by each of the commentators as constituting 
Umasvati's work. 


Summary by Karl H. Potter 


CHAPTER ONE 
2 (E5;T5) "Right vision" would better be rendered as 
"right faith" (sraddha), and in fact the word "faithfully" occurs 
in this sutra. 
3 (E9-10; T6) Objection: Does one become aware of the 
fundamental things through right faith or not? If one does, 
right faith and right awareness arise together and shouldn't be 


160 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


distinguished. If one does not, how can one have faith in those 
things without being aware of them? 

Answer: The distinction is between the faith that is 
gained without a teacher versus that gained through a teacher. 

7 (E16-20; T11-15) Which kinds of beings can have 
right faith? Right faith can be attained by those in hell, by 
male (but not female) animals, by humans and gods whose 
relevant karma has subsided or been destroyed (different 
degrees distinguished, with attention to the difference between 
the sexes on all levels). It is also explained just how beings on 
these various levels attain right faith, how long right faith 
lasts, and other classifications of right faith. 

Question: It is said that apprehension arises from the 
instruments of true cognition and from perspectives. But 
various things have been identified as instruments of true 
cognition--awareness, others say relationships, still others say 
the senses are those instruments. 

10 (E67-70; T1719) Answer: There are only two 
instruments. If awareness were the instrument it couldn't also 
be the result. If connection with the senses is required one 
couldn't know very small, hidden or remote things. 

Objection: If a cognitive instrument is needed to know 
a thing, there must be another instrument to know the 
instrument. 

Answer: No. A cognitive instrument is like a lamp, it 
lights up itself as well as other things. 

12 (E72-73; T20-21) Objection: Surely perception must 
be direct and the last three, not involving the senses, indirect 
(contrary to what you claim). 

Answer: If it were so the person qualified (for advanced 
states) could not have direct awareness, since he does not use 
the senses there. 

Objector: He only uses his internal organ. 

Answer: Then he cannot be omniscient (since the 
internal organ's range is limited to one content at a time), or 
else we have to give up the assumption that traces are 


SARVARTHASIDDHI 161 


momentary. 

18 (E81; T26-27) "Vyafijana" means, e.g. , unmanifest 
sounds, etc. I.e., it takes several exposures to a sense-content 
before one grasps distinctly what it is; when that happens one 
has indistinct awareness of an object (arthavagraha). 

19 (82; T27-28) Vision occurs without the visual organ 
making contact with the object that is its content; we know 
this from scripture as well as from inference (one does not, 
2.g., perceive medicine applied to the eye). The mind also 
does not contact its object. Thus the other three senses (ear, 
nose, tongue) alone can occasion indistinct awareness. 

20 (E84-85; T28-30) Objection: Scripture is without 
beginning or end, so it can't be preceded by immediate 
awareness. And it must be unauthoritative (apramana) since 
it is manmade. 

Answer: Scripture was not created at a particular time 
and place by someone, but a particular text has a beginning 
and an end, just as in general a sprout beginninglessly and 
endlessly requires a seed but a particular sprout doesn't 
require any particular seed. And authority is not confined to 
authorlessness. 

Actually, sometimes scriptural knowledge is preceded by 
other scriptural knowledge, (contradicting (20)). 

21-22 (21 in E and T) (E888-89; T32-34) Objection: 
“Birth” (in “extrasensory awareness owing to birth") is the 
mode which causes the arising of a particular length and kind 
of life. The gods and hell-beings have lives that are so caused, 
and so their extrasensory awareness cannot bring about 
destruction or subsidence of their karma. 

Answer: For them destruction and subsidence of karma 
occur naturally when they leave the present birth(-mode), just 
as birds fly naturally and don't need to be taught to do so. 
However, we are here speaking only of those whose 
extrasensory awareness is accompanied by right faith; 
extrasensory awarenéss in others is called "vibhanga", not 
"avadhi". 


162 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


23 (22 in E and T, with partial variation) (E88-89; T32- 
34) "Destruction" here refers to a state that results from the 
arising of partially but not completely obscuring karma. 
"Subsidence" refers to the existence of such karma in one that 
has not yet arisen. Extrasensory awareness is caused in both 
animals and humans of six kinds of birth. 

24-25 (23-24 in E and T) (E90-92; T34-36) The two 
kinds of telepathy, knowledge of others' minds, are called (1) 
"straight" (jjumati" and (2) "crooked" (vipulamatt). (2) lasts 
longer, extends farther than, and grasps subtler contents than 
(1), and one who has (2) cannot backslide, though one who 
has (1) can. 

26 (25 in E and T) (E92; T36) Telepathy is purer than 
extrasensory awareness since only those in the seventh-twelfth 
stages who are advancing and have the seven supernatural 
powers (rddhi) can obtain it, whereas extrasensory awareness 
is available to hell-beings, animals, humans and gods. 

34 (33 in E and T) (E98-102; T41-46) The conventional 
viewpoint is characterized as thinking of an action, e.g., in 
terms of its intention or purpose rather than its result. 
Piijyapada also reads this sitra as counting the words 
samabhirudha and evambhita as indicating two additional 
kinds of viewpoint (rather than subvarieties of the siitra’s fifth 
kind, sabda, as is implied in what the Vyakhya counts as a 
35th sutra that divides the fifth kind into three sorts); 
Pujyapada's reading doesn't recognize 35 as a sutra. 


CHAPTER TWO 

1 (E105-106; T47-48) Pujyapada interprets this and 
subsequent passages as naming fundamental topics of right 
vision. The first three of the five modifications of awareness 
mentioned in the sutra--subsiding, destruction and the 
combination of the two--are described specifically as varieties 
of right vision. Of these three, the numbers of the second are 
far greater than that of the first, and likewise the number of 
those in the third class is far greater than the second. 


SARVARTHASIDDHI 163 


Question: Why is the third of these an additional class? 

Answer: Because while all those in the first two states-- 
subsiding and destruction--have the capacity.to be liberated, 
some of those in the third do not. 

2 (E106-107; T48-49) The enumeration of "sorts" here 
is of varieties of states in general, not just of subsidence. 

3 (E107-108; T49-50) Question: How can karma 
subside for one who is beginninglessly subject to false 
awarenesses? 

Answer: Through the occurrence of appropriately 
favorable times, through the fact that some karma binds for 
only a limited period, and because of a favorable birth. 

4 (E108-111; T50-51) Thus, e.g., through destroying all 
knowledge-obscuring karma one gets knowledge; through 
destroying the hindrances to giving one is able to provide 
fearlessness to endless numbers of living beings; through 
destroying gain the omniscient escapes the limitations of 
hunger, etc. And when "repeated" (i.e., renewed) experiences 
of these kinds of destruction ensue one gains various splendid 
experiences. 

Question: Does the above describe the state of the 
liberated self (siddha)? 

Answer: No, for the liberated self has no properties of 
these sorts, but only infinite bliss and pure energy. It is the 
perfected being and the tirthankara who have the above- 
mentioned perfections, since the former is still embodied and 
the latter still has na@makarman (i.e., is still identifiable 
through specific qualities). 

7 (E113-114; T54-55) The three features listed belong 
to a self alone and do not depend on the subsiding and/or 
destruction of karma. The word "and" (ca) at the end of the 
sutra indicates that others, e.g., existence and eternality, are 
added members of this list. 

Objection: But you said "three"? 

Answer: No, since existence and eternality are common 
to both selves and not-selves, whereas the three mentioned are | 


164 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


found only in selves. 

Question: Since the self is nonmaterial how can it be 
"worthy of liberation"? 

Answer: The self is not just nonmaterial; in the sense 
that it has the modes of karmic bondage it is material as well. 

8 (E115; T55) Though the self is both material and 
nonmaterial, still its distinguishing mark is (the capacity for) 
cognitive application (upayoga). 

9 (E115-116; T55-56) The two kinds of cognitive 
application are those of awareness and vision. The former has 
eight kinds, the latter four (cf. the summary of the Vyakhyd on 
8-9 for the list). 

Question: How do awareness and vision differ? 

’ Answer: The former is formfilled, the latter formless. 
They occur successively in those formfilled but simultaneously 
in the formless. 

10 (E116-120; T56-60) There are five aspects of 
transmigration: in terms of (1) matter, (2) space, (3) time, (4) 
condition and (5) state (of the self). (1) has two varieties, 
(1a) nonkarmic and (1b) karmic. (1a) is found in three kinds 
of body and five kinds of development, which are each 
instantiated in a karmic product (pudgala) at an initial 
moment. The kinds of development are: as first acquired, as 
momentarily acquired, as momentarily lost, as mixed (both 
acquired and lost), and as returning to their original state. 
Thus each self has been involved with each and every karmic 
molecule at some time in history. 

As for (2), a nigoda occupying a minute point in space 
is born with the central eight points of the universe as the 
middle of its body. It exists briefly and dies, is reborn again in 
the same place and dies, etc., each time extending its spatial 
location. Thus each self has occupied all the places in the 
universe. 


(3) Thus a self is born and dies at each moment 
without interval. 


(4) Expected lifetimes in various states from hell to 


SARVARTHASIDDHI 165 


heaven are specified. 

(5) A complicated account is given of the stages 
undergone by a self as the amount of passion, intensity, and 
vibration (yoga) involved and the extent, both spatial and 
temporal, involved. 

11 (E121; T61) The term "internal organ" can be 
understood as a substantial thing or as a functional activity. In 
the former sense it refers to that action-organ (karmendriya) 
which undergoes maturations of karmic products. In the latter 
sense it refers to the purity of the self arising from the 
destruction and subsidence of energy-obstructing and 
nonkarmic actions. 

12 (E121-122; Tol-62) The words "“trasa" and 
"sthavara" cannot mean "mobile" and "static" respectively, since 
all beings with more than two sense-organs are said to be 
mobile in scripture. So the terms must refer to which kind of 
karma one is bound by. 

13 (E122-123; T62-63) The text as read by Piijyapada 
is different from the Digambara version of the Tatrvdrthasutra, 
and states that there are five static categories, earth, water, 
fire, air and plants. A being of one of these five sorts has four 
life-principles: (prana): touch, bodily strength,. breath and 
duration. 

14 (E123; T63) This text is also differs from the 
Digambara version of the Tattvarthasutra, since fiery and 
watery beings have just been said to be static. 

19 (E126-127; T65-66) Again the text differs from 
Umasvati's text. What's sutra 20 for Umasvati is 19 for 
Pujyapada, so that each sutra up to 48 is numbered one less 
than in the Tattvarthasutra summary given above. 

' 22 (E228-229; T67) Pijyapada's text differs from that 
of Umasvati. What it says is that bodies up to plants 
(vanaspatyanta) have just one sense--that sense being touch, 
Pujyapada explains. 

25 (E130-131; T68-69) Karmic activity is the action of 
the karmic body after death and prior to the next life. 


166 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


29 (E133; T71) Something following a straight line 
without bend takes only one moment to go however far it 
goes. ; - 
30 (E133; T71) The text according to Pijyapada reads 
“for only one, two or three moments". "Procuring" (@hdrika) 
means acquisition of karmic molecules contributing toward 
three kinds of bodies (physical, heavenly or hellish, and 
saintly) and six kinds of development (assimilation of 
molecules, formation of the body, the senses, breathing, 
speaking and thinking).”! 

31 (E134; T72) "Sudden manifestation" refers to how 
or where heavenly and hellish beings are born. 

32 (E134-135; T72-73) There are three pairs of 
opposites--living vs. dead, cold vs. hot, concealed vs. revealed. 
These in their combinations provide the loci for the nine ways 
of being born. 

34 (E136; T75) A footnote in T tells us "The celestial 
beings are born in box-beds, and the infernal beings in 
bladders hung from the ceilings of the holes in hell.” 

35 (E136-137; T75) T translates "sammurchana" (which 
we have rendered as "sudden manifestation") as "spontaneous 
generation". 

52 (E144-145; T82-83) The Digambara text has here an 
additional siitra which says that the remaining selves (other 
than those born in hell, by agglutination, or in heaven) are of 
one of three sexes--male, female and neuter. Pijyapada rather 
pedantically explains carefully the difference between men, 
women and eunuchs. 


CHAPTER THREE 
The number of siitras is increased substantially in 
Pujyapada's reading, so that this Chapter has 39 of them. 
Verses 12-32 are interpolated, so that 12 of the -sdtra = 33 of 
the present text. The new material adds new mythical materia] 
to the account of the Jain universe. 


SARVARTHASIDDHI 167 


CHAPTER FOUR 
Again there is a rather wide discrepancy between the 
Digambara and Svetambara accounts of the contents of this 
Chapter. Since the material is not particularly enlightening 
philosophically we omit consideration of the differences here. 


CHAPTER FIVE 

1 (E196-197; T128-129) What does "body" (kaya) mean 
here? A bunch of space-points. And the word is used to 
distinguish things properly called "bodies" from other things 
such as time, which doesn't have space-points, or an atom, 
which occupies minimal space and so only one space-point 
(i.e., no space-points). 

2-3 (2 of E and T) (E197-199; T129-132) A substance 
is what has its own modes. 

Objection: A substance is that which has the universal 
property substanceness. 

Answer: No, for a universal property serves to qualify 
two or more distinct things which exist separately, but a 
quality and its substantial locus don't exist separately. 
Otherwise there should be a universal property common to a 
nonexistent lotus and the sky! 

Substance and quality are not entirely different; yet 
they can be brought under the same name, mark, etc. 

Objection: Aren't earth, water, etc., substances? 

Answer: No. Earth, water, etc., are either atomic or they 
are karmically produced molecules. But atoms do not have 
modes; indeed, they are not cognizable at all. There are no 
atoms of earth, water, etc.--all activity involves the blending of 
classes. And molecules are combinations of atoms of different 
sorts, so no molecule is earth (alone), etc. 

(Digambara's 5. 3'is Svetambhara's 5. 2.) 

4 (5 of E and T (E200-201; T132-133)” With no 
apology for the apparent contradiction, our commentator 
interprets this passage as saying that karmic products 
(pudgala), or at least those that are products, do have form, 


168 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ie., color/shape. It is added that if karmic products were 
formless, like pradhana (a jab at Samkhya) one couldn't see 
them. 

5 (6 of E and T) (E201; T133) "Single" means that they 
count each as one, not that they may not occupy more than 
one space-point or moment. 

6 (7 of E and T) (E202-203; T133-135) Objection: If 
these three are inactive there can be no birth and thus no 
death! 

Answer: No. Birth, sustenance and death are proved 
rather by scripture, which affirms that everything (including 
these nonself things) goes through six stages of increase and 
decrease; furthermore, we know what the causes of birth, etc., 
are. 

Objection: But if the initiator of movement and the 
initiator of stasis are themselves inactive (as the passage 
states) then they cannot be initiators. 

Answer: Just as the eye helps one in providing vision, 
so these initiators help people in moving and stopping. 

7 (8 of E and T) (E202-203; T135) There are three 
Kinds of uncountability: the minimum, the maximum and a 
point in between. A space-point is the space occupied by an 
atom.! The initiator of movement, the initiator of stasis, and 
each self contain uncountable (in the third sense) space-points, 
yet a self (unlike the other two) can expand and contract to 
fill a smaller or bigger body as determined by its operative 
karma. 

What is counted as 5. 9 in the Svetambara version 
doesn't appear in Pijyapada's Digambara text. 

10 (E204; T136) Objection: You said the universe 
contains uncountable Space-points, and now you say that a 
molecule may itself have uncountable Space-points. This is a 
contradiction. : 


1 This kind of "atom", a Paramanu, is in this context a synonym of 
what we have been calling an atom (anu) up till now. 


SARVARTHASIDDHI 169 


Answer: No, since an atom (paramdGnu) can take a 
subtle form, so that infinite numbers of atoms can occupy the 
same space-point. 

11 (E205; T137) Something comprising one space-point 
(i.e., a paramanu) is said to be of "no size" since it cannot be 
further divided. 

12-13 (E205-206; T137-139) Space is divided into two 
parts, the space in the universe and that outside it. Initiators 
of movement and stasis reside in the former space, not in the 
latter. 

19 (E211-214; T144-146) Objection (by a Vaisesika): 
The internal organ is an additional (separate) substance, 
without color/form and of atomic size. So it can't bea karmic 
product. 

Answer: Either your internal organ is connected to a 
self or it isn't. If it isn't then it can't help the self or the sense- 
organs. If it is connected then, being atomic in size, it can only 
help that minute part of the self that it occupies 

Vaisesika: It circulates (among points) like a circle of 
fire (alatacakra) through the power of adrsta. 

Answer: In your view adrsta is a property of the self, 
which is (for you) inactive; so adrsta too must be inactive, and 
so can't cause activity elsewhere. 

(The Digambara version has 5. 29, which merely tells 
us that it is substances which are said to exist or have being 
(sat). As a result, 5. 30-38 of our present text corresponds to 
5. 31-39 of the Svetambara version). 

38 (39 in E and T) (E232-235; T163-165) Why isn't 
time listed in 5. 1 as an additional kind of not-self? Because 
the four mentioned in that sutra each comprise a plenum of 
space-points from one of two points of view, whereas time 
comprises no space-points from either point of view. 
Furthermore, we were told that the not-self substances (1)-(3) 
were each single, but time is manifold, existing throughout the 
space in the universe, every particle of time existing in each 
space-point. 


170 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


CHAPTER SIX 

1 (E238; T167) Activity (yoga) is the vibration 
(parispanda) of the space-points of the self. 

3 (E239; T168-169) Good activity is an action done 
with good intention, bad with bad intention, not on the basis 
of whether the act produces good or bad karma; otherwise 
there would be no good activities at all, since good activities 
like bad ones produce bondage. 

(Pujyapada's Digambara version counts 3 and 4 as 
constituting a single passage (=6. 3), so sutras 4-17 are 
numbered one less in his text than in the Svetambara 
reading.) 

4 (E169; T240) "Persisting” (samparayika), i.e., leading 
to rebirth of those with passions; "fleeting" (iryapatha), i.e., 
caused by vibrations for those free from passions. 

18 (E251; T181-182) An additional sittra reads “And 
also natural modesty". Piijyapada explains "natural" as without 
instruction, and says that it leads to inflow leading to rebirth 
as a human being or a god. 

21 (E252; T183) This passage is inserted between the 
20th and 21st stitras in the Svetambara text. It adds rightness 
(i.e., right vision) to the list in 6. 20. Thus its 6. 21 = 6. 22 of 
Pilijyapada’s, and so on to the end of this Chapter. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

(Pujyapada has a few additional siitras which provide 
specific examples of fulfilling the five kinds of vows listed in 
7. 1. Thus for him Svetambara 7. 4 is Digambara 7. 9, etc.,) 

14 (=9 of Svetambara) (E265; T197) "Lying" (anrta) is 
glossed as speaking what is not praiseworthy (aprasasta), i.e., 
Causing pain (pida) in living beings whether it is real or 
imagined. 

13 (=18 of Svetambara) (E238-239; T200) To be 
"devoid of thorns” is metaphorically used to mean being 
without deceit, desire for things and experiences (nidana) or 
wrong vision. The true vow-taker is such. 


SARVARTHASIDDHI 171 


14 (19 of Umasvati) (E269; T200-201) "“Anagdra”, lit. 
"homeless", refers to the person whose thoughts are turned 
away from home. A monk cr a householder may observe vows 
and thus be "homeiess". 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

2 (E258-259; T217-218) The intent of this passage is 
that it is karma, meaning karmic products (pudgala), that 
makes the self associated with passions. Through wrong vision, 
etc., the self, always active, attracts subtle matter of infinite 
space-points pervading the space-points occupied by that seif, 
that are capable of turning into karmic matter, which then is 
combined by interpenetration with the space-points of the self. 
This is called bondage. 

(E and T read Umasvati's 8. 2-3 as a single 8. 2, so that 
the succeeding siitras are each numbered one less in Umasvati 
than in Pijyapada's text.) 

4 (3 of Svetambara) (E286-287; T219-220) The term 
translated here as "nature" is prakrti, explained here as that 
which brings about effects. "Duration" is maintaining that 
nature. 

22 (21 in Eand T) (E302-303; T232-233) Experiencing 
happens in two ways, based on its own nature and by 
another's nature. Experiencing of the main (eight) types of 
karma (milaprakrti) is based on the action's own nature.’ In 
the case of subtypes of the same species--except in the case of 
(length-of-)-life-karma, faith-deluding and conduct-deluding 
karma--fruition is possible by other's nature also. For instance, 
the fruition of life-karma of an animal or a human being is not 
possible through life in hell. And the fruition of faith-deluding 
karmas is not possible through conduct-delusion or vice versa. 


1 "That is, knowledge-covering karma will cover knowledge only 
and will not produce feeling or will not determine life or status." (S. 
A. Jain in T, p. 233) 


172 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


24 (=23 in E and T) (E304; T234) The "cleansing off", 
i.e., the dissociation of karma from a self, is of two kinds: 
through maturation or natural ripening, and through processes 
not involving natural ripening, e.g., through penance, and 
other ways. 


CHAPTER NINE 
1 (E309-311; T238-241) Just which kinds of karma 
cease at which of the fourteen stages of progress is explained 
as follows: 

Stage 1, of False View or Delusion”*: That karma 
which is accreted through false view ceases. 

Stage 2, of Downfall: Sixteen kinds of karma 
cease, including the kind causing false view, being. sexually 
neuter, living in hell, going to hell, being born as a one- 
sensed, two-sensed, three-sensed or four-sensed being, 
misshapen embodiment, weak bone structure, etc. 

Stage 3, of Mixed Right and Wrong Belief: Here, 
upon the termination of three kinds of nonrestraint, viz., that 
kind of passion that leads to endless rebirths, the kind that 
hinders partial restraint, and the kind that hinders self. 
discipline, cease. A long list of kinds of causes of karmic influx 
is hindered, including, e.g., anger, pride, deceitfulness and 
greed, rebirth as a female or an animal, an unpleasant voice, 
birth in an inferior family. But length-of-life karma still 
operates. 

Stage 4, of Vowless Right Belief, 

Stage 5, of Partial Vows: anger, pride, deceitful- 
ness and greed cease at the end of this stage. 

Stage 6, of Imperfect Vows: Up to this stage one 
is still visited by karmas caused to arise from negligence and 
which produce frustration, a weak or ugly body, and 
disrepute. 


Stage 7, of Perfect Vows, during which one 
comes to be reborn in a heaven. 


SARVARTHASIDDHI 173 


Stage 8, of New Thought-Activity, where neg- 
ligence ceases and one's rebirths, whether as god or human, 
have many lovely qualities. 

Stage 9, of Advanced Thought-Activity, where 
some gross passions still remain, such as forms of anger, pride, 
male sexuality, deceitfulness, greed. 

Stage 10, Slight Delusion or Subtle Passion. Here 
five kinds of knowledge-obscuring karma, four kinds of 
perception-obscuring karma, honor, glory, high-caste status, 
and five kinds of obstructing karma caused by very small 
degrees of passion cease. 

Stage 11, Subsided Delusion, 

Stage 12, Destroyed Delusion, and 

Stage 13, Omniscience with Vibration. Through 
these three one continues to feel the emotions of satisfaction 
(or pleasure) stemming from mere vibrations or activity. 

Stage 14, Omniscience, where activity ceases and 
with it feelings altogether. 

2 (E311-312; T241-242) Restraint (gupti) (defined in 
9.4) is that by which the self is protected from transmigration. 

Pujyapada's Digambara version combines 9. 27-28 of 
the Svetambara version, so that 9. 28-36 of Piijyapada is 9. 29- 
37 of Svetambara. Also the order of 9. 31 and 32 of Piijyapada 
(9. 32 and 33 of the Svetambara version) is reversed in the 
two versions. 9. 38 of Svetambara is not found in Ptjyapada. 
Thus 9. 37-47 of Piijyapada is 9. 39-49 of Svetambara. 


CHAPTER TEN 
1 (E356-357; T280-281) How one ascends through each 
stage of progress is again explained. 
2 (E357-358; T282-284) Exactly which passions are 
destroyed at which stage is detailed. 
Svetambara's 10. 3 is part of Pijyapada's 10. 2. 


174 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


13. PUJYAPADA, Istopadesa 

There is an edition and translation by Champat Rai Jain 
to be found in Dhanya Kumar Jain's edition of this work, 
Srimadrajacandrajainasastramala 14, Agasa 1973. The transla- 
tion was first published as The Discourse Divine from Hardoi 
in 1925, and most recently in Spiritual Insights: Ishtopadesh 
and Samadhi Shatak by Acharya Pujyapada Svami (Ed. with 
Introduction by Jagdish Prasad Jain "Sadhak") (New Delhi 
2000). The translation is very free. 

This is a brief text conveying good advice to its hearer. 
The text is especially noteworthy fer the many pertinent 
similes it provides. 


14. PUJYAPADA, Samdadhitantra 

"ET" is the text and translation found in Samadhi 
Shatak (A Century of Verses on Concentration of Self- 
Absorption) by Acharya Shri Pujyapada Swami Alias 
Devanandi, with English Rendering and Commentary by 
Vangmaya-Pradip Late Raoji Nemchand Shah (Jaina Academy 
Publications 2). Second edition, Aliganj (Etah), U.P. 1962. 
The most recent publication is in Spiritual Insights, cited under 
4. 2 above. 


Summary by Karl H. Potter 


1-3 (ET1-3) Invocation. 

4 (ET3) The self is threefold: external, internal and 
highest. One should renounce the first and approach the last 
through the second. 

5 (ET4) The delusion that the body and organs are the 
self gives us the idea of the "external" self. The internal self 
lacks body and organs. And the highest is completely stainless. 

9 (ET6-9) The self has infinite knowledge and power 
and can be realized only by itself, becoming fixed and 
immovable. 


11-12 (ET7) But the confused person takes his body to 


SAMADHITANTRA 175 


be himself and views other bodies as likewise their selves. He 
supposes he is involved with them and is grieved when 
separated from them. This is the result of ignorance, and 
rebirth follows involving the same confusions. 

16-26 (ET9-15) The internal self rejects these beliefs of 
the external self and identifies itself with the highest self. 

27 (ET16) Meditating thus one gets into the habit of 
thinking one is the highest self. 

32-55 (ET20-36) One who does not see that his eternal 
self is quite distinct from the body cannot attain liberation 
even after performing severe austerities. But one who sees is 
full of joy in realizing his true nature. He is free from conceit, 
ignorance, likes and dislikes, and feels no pride. He shuns 
feelings of attachment and hatred, has no affection for any 
body or thing, for such feelings are based on the wrong belief 
that body and self are the same. The self has no sex--male, 
female or neuter. 

57 (ET36) One who believes in the highest should 
always regard his body as not his own, and the bodies of 
others the same way. 

60-62 (ET40-43) He is satisfied with inner things, while 
the unenlightened is satisfied with external objects. Bodies do 
not experience pleasure or pain, but the deluded ascribes pain 
to the same body that experiences happiness. As long as this 
continues one will wander in the worlds. 

67 (ET46) Only one who remains tranquil and views 
the changing world as inert attains peace. 

71-72 (ET51-52) One with wavering mind cannot attain 
liberation; thus the yogi should avoid contact with people and 
reside in the self itself. 

75 (ETSS) Only the self leads the self to either birth or 
liberation; no other teacher is necessary for getting the highest 
state. 

83-84 (ET61-62) Renouncing vowlessness, observing 
holy vows, the seeker for salvation should renounce even those 
vows, having attained the highest state. 


176 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


87-89 (ET65-67) Caste, sex, race and other such 
differentiations apply only to the body; they do not affect the 
= 90 (ET68) Those who are conceited about their sex or 
race do not gain release. Too, those who give up such things 
in the hope of gaining happiness still love the body and not 
the inner self. 

94-95 (ET71) The one who experiences and meditates 
discriminatingly on the true self attains liberation even though 
asleep or intoxicated. Wherever there is faith, equanimity is 
sure to follow. 

101 (ET77) Just as the self is not destroyed when one 
dies in a dream, so when one is awake he sees the destruction 
of the embodied state but the self is not destroyed. 


SIDDHASENA DIVAKARA (550) 

The dating of this author, like the dating of many 
another Indian philosopher, has been the subject of much 
speculation and controversy. A thorough review of the 
discussion can be found in A. N. Upadhye's introduction to his 
translations of Siddhasena’s Nydydvatara with editions of the 
Dvatrimsika and Yasovijaya's Nayakarnika (Bombay 1971). 
With apologies to the many scholars whose views Prof. 
Upadhye treats and dismisses, and being unable to draw a 
better conclusion than his ourselves, we provide here a few 
paragraphs from pp. 278-279 of Upadhye's introduction. 

"This famous logician, who was a pupil of Vrddhavadi 
Stiri, received the name of Kumudacandra at the time of his 
ordination. He is said to have split, by the efficacy of his 
prayers, the liga (Brahmanical symbol) of Rudra in the 
temple of Mahakala at Ujjain, and to have called forth an 
image of Parsvanatha by reciting his Kalydnamanirastava. He 
is believed to have converted Vikramaditya to Jainism 470 
years after the nirvana of Mahavira. The Jains believe that he 
was the spiritual tutor of that famous king, as is evident from 
the Kumdrapdlacaritra and other works. 


SIDDHASENA DIVAKARA 177 


"It may be noted here that Vikramaditya of Ujjain has 
been considered by scholars to be identical with YaSodharma 
Deva, king’ of Malwa, who, according to Alberuni, defeated the 
Huns at Korur in 533 A. D. The Chinese pilgrim Hsuan-tsang, 
who came to India in 629 A. D., says that a very powerful king 
(presumably Vikramaditya) reigned 60 years before his arrival 
there. From this it appears that Siddha Sena Divakara, who 
was a contemporary of VikramA@ditya, must have lived at Ujjain 
about 550 A. D. 

"Legends and historical accouts show that Siddha Sena 
was the well-known Ksapanaka (the Jaina sage), who adorned 
the court of Vikramaditya and was one of the Nine Gems 
(navaratna). Varahamihira, the famous astronomer, who was 
another of the Nine Gems of the court of Vikramaditya, lived 
between A. D. 503 and A. D. 587. We are told that Ksapanaka, 
alias Siddha Sena, was a contemporary of Varahamihira, so he 
must have flourished about the middle of the 6th century." 

For an earlier but very thorough review of the evidence 
about Siddhasena’s milieu and age cf. Charlotte Krause, 
"Siddhasena Divakara and Vikaramaditya", Vikrama Volume 
(Ujjain 1948), pp. 213-280. 


15.SIDDHASENA DIVAKARA, Dvatrimsika 
The title of this work means "thirty-two", and refers to 
a number of short metrical works in Sanskrit, each comprising 
thirty-two stanzas. As we have the work today, it comprises 
twenty-one compositions dealing with a variety of topics, such 
as eulogies to Mahavira.and refutations of Buddhist and Hindu 
views, together with an exposition of Jaina adepts. 
“E" refers to the edition by Vijayalavanya Suri, Botad 
1977. 


Summary by P. N. Dave 


178 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


5.151 

By way of paying homage to Lord Mahavira, the 
philosophy of many aspects (anekantavdda) is explained here 
in the list of the perspectives and topics (bhanga). 

20 (E29) The logical controversies which generate 
mutual animosity are attributed to the absolutist attitude of 
logicians towards the doctrine of causality. For instance, some 
logicians (SAmkhya-Yoga) assert the eternal existence of the 
effect, while others (Nyaya-Vaisesika)-demonstrate its absolute 
absence in the cause. 

23 (E31) The validity of .many aspects as moral 
discipline is shown through rejecting the efficacy of cultivation 
exclusively of physical austerity or scriptural learning as the 
path to liberation. A combined path of knowledge and action 
is the correct one. 

28 (E34-35) Moral attributes such as anger, attachment, 
etc. are neither different from a self nor identical with it. 

30 (E36) Whatever valid propositions are found in 
other philosophical systems are emanations from the scriptural 
lore of the Jainas, the upholders of (the) many aspects (view). 


Sede 

This is also a eulogy offered to Mahavira. In it the 
confluence of opposing attributes is shown to be true of 
Mahavira's personality. He is neither moved by mercy for 
people subject to frustrations, nor does he rejoice at the 
fulfilment of their worldly desires. Yet he does not fail to lead 
them to the highest good. 

2 (E42) Plainly speaking, Mahavira remains unmoved 
by worldly passions, and yet ceaselessly works for the spiritual 
welfare of all living beings. 

25 (E65-66) There is no inconsistency in the selfs 
remaining unfettered by karma on the oné hand and karmic 
retribution on the other. (This seems addressed to Buddhists, 
who reject the existence of a self.) 


DVATRIMSIKA 179 


5.1.3 

The eulogizing is continued. 

8 (E84) A co-ordinated view is taken of the principles 
of determinism (niyati) and absence of free will, essentialism 
(svabhdvavdda), time as the determinant of creation, the 
doctrine that one enjoys exclusively the karmic results of one's 
own actions, and the opposing doctrine that a person enjoys 
the results of actions done by others. 

16 (E93) A critical estimate of the supreme principle of 
nonviolence is proposed. A person may kill and yet be free 
from the sin of killing; on the other hand, one may not 
actually kill any living being but yet be bound by the sin of 
killing. 


5.1.4 

In the three previous sections the author lauds 
Mahavira by asserting that all other views are incorporated 
into the boundless ocean of his philosophy of many aspects, 
though it is unrecognizable in them individually. 

23 (E128) The activity of the mind is not outside the 
body, nor is the activity of the body outside the mind; the 
body and the mind are thus mutually neither different nor 
identical. 

26 (E130) The self is both in motion and motionless, it 
indulges in action and yet is free from the result of action; it 
enjoys the fruit and yet is incapable of earning the fruit. This 
is how the spirit of many aspects is brought home to the 
person who is in doubt. 


- 5.1.5. Stuti 
A short biography of Mahavira. 
6 (E140) Lord Mahavira, the lover of Yasodha whom he 
married, is described as the conqueror of death (mara). 
16-18 (E149-150) He is also eulogized as the conqueror 
of great hardships created by gods and men 


180 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


23 (E156) and as omniscient. 

26 (E158) His teaching is described as free from 
obscurity or deception, full of mercy for all living beings, 
inducing mental peace and vanquishing all kinds of evil. 


5.1.6 

1 (E165) Uncritical learning is despicable. 

5 (E168) What is new is old after it dies. The merit of 
a statement is not proved by its antiquity if it does not stand 
the test of logic. It is suicidal to underestimate one's own 
power of thought by blindly accepting the infallibility of one's 
teacher. 

8 (E170) It is nothing but delusion to place uncon- 
ditional faith in the imaginary statements of the old and to 
reject the same views arising in modern times. 

10 (E171-172) A person with a critical outlook should 
be assigned a place of distinction, and uncritical faith in the 
validity of a spiritual discipline is nothing but delusion. 

23 (E180) One has to exercise one's logical faculty by 
searching out a reliable spiritual teacher who is omniscient 
and capable of leading his disciple to the highest goal of life. 

28 (E184) A person with blind reverence for the old is 
incapable of distinguishing right from wrong; reverence should 
be born of merit. 


5. 1. 7. Vadopanisaddvatrimsika 

This section deals with the essential basis of debate. 

2 (E190) Victory cannot be achieved in a debate in the 
assembly unless there is a definite sddhya to be proved. 

3 (E191) One should read beforehand the mind of the 
king and look at the eyes of the assembly with respect to 
himself and the opposition. 

5 (E192) For achieving victory, one should speak in a 
language that is lucid and clearly understood, neither too 
loudly nor too slowly, overpowering the intellect of the 
opposition. 


DVATRIMSIKA 181 


8 (E195) The opposition, if inadequately equipped or 
gagged under the pretext of ignorance, should be asked to 
define his position and to explain the texts he quotes from 
treatises that he accepts. 

27 (E209-210) The most important condition of success 
in a debate is unperturbed tranquility of mind. It is, therefore, 
said that one should exert oneself a hundred times more for 
the preservation of mental tranquility than for acquisition of 
learning. 


5.1.8.Vada 

1 (E215) Two dogs contesting for the same piece of 
meat may arrive at a compromise, but two disputants, though 
uterine brothers, can never agree to be friends. 

7 (E218) The path to liberation and the path to victory 
in a debate are poles apart. , 

9 (E218) A single person, versed in the sGstras and self- 
possessed, is capable of proving his thesis which an assembly 
of people indulging in casuistry and sophism is unable to 
vindicate. 

10 (E219) A person with an unbalanced mind is not 
capable of achieving victory in a debate. 

11 (E219) Neither logic without learning nor learning 
without logic is capable of achieving victory. A person adept 
in both is bound to achieve victory. 

12 (E220) A person depending on mere sophisms is a 
hopeless disputant. 

18 (E222) It is an accepted principle that egoism is a 
source of suffering and misery. How then can a person 
immersed in egoism aspire to victory in a debate? 

19 (E222) A deep insight into the philosophy of the 
opponent is essential for appreciating the strength of one's 
own position in philosophy. 

20 (E223) One should make effort for one's own 
enlightenment and not just to vanquish his opponent. Even the 
omniscients have failed to convince their opponents in the 


182 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


past. How then can one aspire to bring the world to unanimity 
in philosophy? 

23 (E224) Even’ a weak philosophy is capable of 
attracting people if it is couched in humble and sweet 
expresssions and is free from egoism, whereas even a valid 
philosophy expressed in words full of vanity falls on deaf ears. 

26 (E226) A sane person cannot be subject to egoism 
if he is conscious of the fact that even a single object is 
incapable of being comprehended in all its aspects by him. 


5. 1. 9. Vedavada 
(E227-250) An exposition of Samkhya and Vedanta that 
presents Jaina principles in Upanisadic terminology, quoting 
verses from the Rgveda. 


5. 1. 10. 

This section gives a brief account of moral and mental 
disciplines from the standpoint of Jainism. 

6 (E254) Desire (pipasa) is the basic cause of coming 
to exist (bhava) and appropriating (up@ddana) things. 

8 (E256) Bhava is explained as the doer of worldly 
activity inspired by passions which constitutes appropriating 
(upadana). 

16 (E261) The author distinguishes two types of 
activity--one leading to worldly life and the other leading to 
liberation. The first type is represented by the process 
beginning with birth and ending in death, whereas the second 
is the path based on freedom from passions through the right 
view of things and a life of self-restraint. 

21-22 (E262-263) The practices of detachment and 
endurance of hardships are prescribed. 

23-24 (E263-264) Meditative postures (Gsana) and 
breath-control (pranayama) are recommended. 

27 (E265) The above practices calm down all passions 
and effect cessation of all kinds of karmas. They lead to what 
is called concentration on dharma. This is followed by the 


DVATRIMSIKA 183 


"white meditation" which destroys ignorance in toto. 

32 (E274) The author gives a very comprehensive view 
of liberation which is nothing but the consciousness of power, 
an existence that is. not susceptible to any kind of 
characterisation. 


5. 1. 11. Gunavacana 

(E276-300) The work is edited and translated by 
Charlotte Krause in Vikrama Volume (Ujjain 1948), pp. 236- 
252. Ms. Krause offers the following characterization: "In this 
Dvatrimsika a royal patron is addressed, who is revealed as 
such a unique personality, standing out in bold relief against 
a background of warfare, empire-building and ingenious rule, 
that, with the help of contemporaneous literature, even a 
modern reader can guess who he was and thus infer when 
Siddhasena lived....The understanding of this poem is made 
somewhat difficult by the fact that behind the inspired eulogy 
with its graceful poetic figures hides itself a smart attack on 
the system of Vaisesika philosophy achieved with the help of 
occasional paranomasia. Thus the word "guna", the leitmotiv, 
as it were, of the whole poem, is sometimes used in its 
conventional meaning of "virtue", "merit"..., sometimes as a 
logical termimus  technicus meaning "quality" in 
contradistinction to dravya "substance", while in some cases it 
is to be understood as conveying both the meanings 
simultaneously. Other words too are used with a similar 
double entendre."” 


5. 1. 12. Nydya 

1 (E301) The author deplores the fact that there is no 
dearth of audience for fools, and that any shameless person 
can pass as a learned scholar. 

5 (E303) Philosophy, in a sense, is an unnecessary 
discipline; if ill-conceived it dies a natural death, and if well 
thought out it needs no further deliberation. 

7 (E304) Philosophers quarrel with words. 


184 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


8 (E304) Doubt explained. 

9 (E305) Topic (prayojana) and example are defined. 

10 (E306) Conclusion (siddhdnta) is mentioned, along 
with the members of the argument and tarka, which are 
expressed by the words "“anga" and “dharmavikalpa" 
respectively. 

11 (E306) Ignorance, standing for absence of 
knowledge as well as perverse awareness, is given as a 
dominant factor in all fallacies (hetvabhasa). 

12 (E307) Quibble (chala). 

14 (E308) Futile rejoinder (jari) and ways of losing an 
argument (nigrahasthana). 

16 (E309) Sophistry (jalpa). 

17 (E309) Cavil (vitanda). 

19 (E311) Ascertainment (nirnaya) is the cessation of 
all doubts. There must be an end to doubt, as there is no 
further doubt when one has seen an object with his own eyes. 

28-32 (E316-318) (These verses may be characterized 
as being a glorification of the speaker (vaktrprasasti). A 
philosophy derives its strength from the power of exposition 
of its proponent. 


5. 1. 13.Samkhyaprabodha 

This section gives a critical estimate of Samkhya 
philosophy as explained to Asura by Kapila and by Asura to his 
followers. , 

3 (E321) Prakrti is defined as the state of equilibrium 
of sattva, rajas and tamas. The principles of mahat, ahamkara, 
etc. arise on the disturbance of this equilibrium. 

4 (E322) The characteristics of sattva are lightness, 
illumination and happines; suffering and restlessness constitute 
rajas; the opposite of all these is tamas. 

5 (E322) Only two instruments of cognition, namely 
perception and inference, are recognized. Unlike the 
traditional Samkhya the statement of a qualified person is not 
recognized as a third instrument. 


DVATRIMSIKA 185 


8 (E325) The purusa is a nondoer (akartr) because it is 
the controller and a free agent as well as the knower. 

9-10 (E326-327) It is said that the principles of mahat, 
etc., originate on account of the imbalance in prakrti, which is 
also responsible for the arising of the other evolutes such as 
sound, etc., and their counterparts, viz., space and the like on 
the one hand, and the five sense-organs like the ear, etc., on 
the other. 

11 (E327) The five action-organs (karmendriya) are 
enumerated, and the internal organ is characterized. 

15 (E330) The four kinds of intellectual creation 
(pratyayasarga) are briefly defined as follows: (1) siddhi 
stands for the fulfilment of the desired end, (2) tusti signifies 
satisfaction with a partial success; (3) asakti means 
imperfection of the instruments of success, (4) viparyaya 
stands for achievement of the reverse of (1) - (3). 

19 (E332) The bhautika path is classified as divine, 
human and brute. 

22 (E333) Nonattachment is given as the cause of the 
dissolution of the qualities, which had arisen for the service of 
the purusa. 

23 (E334) Siddhasena refutes the Samkhya-Yoga view 
that detachment is the culmination of the cultivation of 
knowledge. 

32 (E338) Purusa enjoys prakrti, remaining aloof from 
it, much like the eyes, which see their objects, keep away from 
them. Purusa is free from bondage and liberation: it is devoid 
of qualities, though living beside them even after they have 
fulfilled their mission. 


5.1.14 
The fundamental categories of the Jaina system are 
explained. 
3-4 (E342-343) Substance, quality, karma. 
5 (E348) Perception and inference. 
6 (E349) Atoms (paramdnu) are the ultimate material 


186 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


causes. Deca te 
7 (E350) The definition of earth, etc. up to akasa in 


terms of the Vaisesika qualities is provided. 

17 (E362) The conventional nature of the act of naming 
things is‘ mentioned. 

21 (E365) The origin of doubt, dream and memory is 
explained. 

25 (E367) The importance of adrsta is recognized. 

27 (E369) The role of knowledge (vidya) and 
nonattachment (vairdgya) as leading to enlightenment is 
explained. The importance of the breaths (prana), etc. is 
mentioned. 

30 (E371) Inherence is explained. 

‘(The category of absence (abhdava) does not appear to 
have been discussed in this section.) 


5. hs, 35, 

A very brief summary of early Buddhist philosophy is 
given in this section. 

1 (E375) It opens with the enigmatic statement that 
nirvana cannot be achieved by an egoistic person, nor is it 
reached by a person who is free from egoism; knowledge 
(vidya) does not lead to discrimination (viveka) nor does 
ignorance lead to karmic states. 2 (E376) Emptiness of the 
person (pudgalasiinyata) and emptiness of aggregates 
(skandhasiinyata) of Mahayana philosophy are mentioned. 

3-4 (E376-377) A person is nothing but aggregates. 

5 (E377) Reference to the BhdrahGrasitra in order to 
explain the nature of sattva. 

6 (E378) A person is compared to the stream of a river 
or the flame of a lamp. 

7 (E379) The principles of matter/form (rupa) and 
consciousness (vijfidna) explained. 

8 (E379) Delusion, desire, mind and karma. 

10 (E380) Matter/form is said to undergo change every 


DVATRIMSIKA 187 


moment, just like awareness (citta). 

13 (E382) The principle of a self refuted. 

16 (E384) All the factors cease to exist at every 
moment, but their cessation is recognized only when a 
heterodox set of causes and conditions takes place. 

17 (E384) Liberation is possible only if there is 
transmigration. But as transmigration means motion, and 
motion is logically inconceivable, how can there be liberation? 

27 (E391) The Vijianavada view of bondage-breeders 
(kleSa) as extraneous elements, and purification as removal of 
those bondage-breeders, is refuted. 

In brief, this section is mainly a critical estimate of the 
two branches of Mahayana philosophy, namely Sinyavada and 
Vijhanavada. 


5. 1. 16. Niyata 

3 (E399) When a person is not capable of producing 
even his own body and sense-organs, how can he be the 
master of his future life? 

4 (E400) Merit and demerit are also dependent upon 
place, time, etc., and as such are not controlled by the person. 

10 (E404) Everything is controlled by its own nature, 
and there is no efficient cause outside it. 

11 (E405) Even the gunas of the Samkhya philosophy 
are activated by themselves, and as such it is sheer madness 
to believe in the efficacy of knowledge and nonattachment. 

14 (E407) The efforts of Buddhist philosophers to 
achieve liberation by controlling the passions of attachment, 
etc., are futile, because everything is momentary and devoid 
of substance according to them. 

18 (£410) The function of abhijati, a very peculiar 
doctrine of determinism of Makhaliputta Gosala, is mentioned, 
a concept which is explained at some length in the verses that 
follow. 

25 (E414) There is no necessity of spiritual sermons. 
Enlightenment is achieved spontaneously by fit persons, even 


188 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


as a lotus opens up by a touch of the sun. 


S17 

1:2 (E418-419) Merit and demerit are not opposed to 
worldly suffering or enjoyment, because an effect depends for 
its origination upon a set of conditions and not on merit or 
demerit alone. 

3 (E420) The purpose of vows and self-restraint is to 
induce steadfastness in the discipline. 

4 (E421) A vow is either the negation of demerit or the 
acquisition of merit. 

5 (E421) "Vow" stands for abstinence from sin (virati). 
For the practice of vows the eradication of false awareness is 
of vital importance. 

10 (E424) The passions are but the manifestations of 
false view. False view, nonabstinence and passions are 
responsible for bondage which is a kind of imbalance of the 
personality. . 

11 (£424) Violence, falsity, etc., are the signs of the 
passions, and therefore the spiritual aspirant is required to 
desist from violence, etc. 

15 (E426) Destruction of these faults cannot be effected 
without spiritual calm (prasama), and as such restraint is a 
definite step towards self-purification. The eradication of the 
vices, however, needs the services of vices themselves, even as 
wind requires another flow of wind in the opposite direction 
to stop it. 

16 (E427) The noble ones recoil from the views which 
ordinary people have in their homes, but the saints who are 
set on doing favors to others chalk out their spritual path 
according to the needs of the people. 

18 (E428) It is the mind which is the root cause of 
bondage as well as of release. 

19 (E429) Egoism gives rise to attachment or mineness, 
but attachment may not give rise to egoism; it is egoity which 


DVATRIMSIKA 189 


has a necessary relation with wishful thought (samkalpa) and 
as such is the cause of bondage. 

20 (E429) The proposition "I do not exist" is analyzed 
.as negation or affirmation; in the former case it stands for the 
cessation of all phenomenal existence, while in the latter it 
means thé cessation of all imperfections. 

26-27 (E433) Austerity without knowledge and 
knowledge without austerity are denounced as futile; mere 
knowledge of medicine does not help cure the patient. 


5.1.18 

1 (E436) The teacher should take note of the place, 
time, heredity, customs and the age of the student along with 
his attitude toward worldly life. 

2 (E437) The teacher should be pure in mind and body, 
of pleasing nature, brilliant, compassionate, conversant with 
the needs of the disciple, a good speaker and self-possessed. 

4-5 (E438) The aptitudes of various kinds of disciples 
are described in respect of their power of knowledge and 
practice of spiritual discipline. A disciple is like the patient 
who needs medicine according to his disease.. The teacher 
should be a specialist in the treatment of a person. The 
imperfections and blemishes of diseases of the body and the 
mind, which are controlled by physical discipline alone, may 
arise again and again, but if they are removed by means of 
enlightenment their cessation is radical. A person who eats just 
enough to maintain life and is engaged in self-purification all 
the time, living in a secluded place, does not expose himself 
to distractions which destroy his mental vigilance. 

' In the verses that follow it is prescribed that teaching 
should be according to the ability and inclination of the 
’ disciple. 

28 (E458) It is not only futile but also harmful to 
explain the merits of a work to a person who has not 
controlled his mind, just like a suppressive medicine given to 


190 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


a person who has just been attacked by high fever. Austerities 
are also to be prescribed according to the nature of the 


discipline. 


5. 1. 19. Niscaya 

1 (E462) Awareness, vision and conduct constitute the 
path leading to liberation. 

2 (E468) Immediate awareness is classified into 
doubting, determinative (apdya or avdya) and dharana. 

12 (E477) The traditional difference between 
immediate awareness and verbal awareness is rejected. 

15 (E481) The possibility of an omniscient person is 
proved on the ground of the fact that the complete eradication 
of awareness-concealment is possible. 

17 (£485) The cogency of awareness of mental 
modalities of even the thoughts of the two-sensed living beings 
is accepted. 

31 (E494) A student of philosophy is asked to explain 
philosophical positions through the method of complete and 
partial affirmation and negation. 


5. 1. 20. Drstiprabodha 

1 (E495) The whole of Mahavira's philosophy is 
summarized in the fix of origination, cessation and continuity 
on the one hand, and the duality of substance and mode on 
the other. 

4 (E500) All philosophers have at their disposal the 
same instrument of knowledge for discovering the truth, yet 
they quarrel among themselves on account of the different 
definitions they propose from their individual standpoints. 

6 (E502) It is laid down that the nature of knowledge 
and conduct for the purpose of attaining liberation is bound to 
vary from person to person, and one is free to follow the path 
of one's own choice. 

7 (E503) The entanglement in worldly life has different 
causes and conditions for different persons, and consequently 


DVATRIMSIKA 191 


the ways of disentanglement are also different. 

Different schools of philosophy which flourished at the 
time are mentioned in the verses that follow. 

24 (E515) The reasons for the origin of these 
philospphies are given as the inclination of the disciple, the 
strength of the opposition, and the ability of the teacher. 

28 (E518) Awareness and activity (yoga) are given as 
the path to’ spiritual emancipation. 


5.1.21.) 
12 (E540) The trio of origination, destruction and 
permanence has its counterpart in the Brahmanical trio of 
Brahma (vidhi), Siva (hara) and Visnu (hari). 


16. SIDDHASENA DIVAKARA, Sanmatitarka 
This work was originally written in Prakrit. "ET" is the 
Prakrit text and translation by Sukhlalji Sanghvi and 
Becaradasji Dosi, originally published in Gujarati, rendered 
into English and published from Benares in 1939. 


Summary by Karl H. Potter 


CHAPTER ONE 

3 (ET3) There are two fundamental perspectives: as 
substantial (dravyastika) and as modal (paryaydastika). All 
other perspectives can be subsumed under these. 

4 (ETS) The basic forms of the substantial perspective 
are the generic viewpoint and the commonsense viewpoint. 

5 (ET6) The basic form of the modal perspective is a 
view which is confined to the present (rjusutra). The 
perspective of what is linguistically implied (sabdanydaya) and 
other perspectives are varieties of view confined to the 


1 A. N. Upadhye (Siddhasena's Nyayavatara and Other Works 
(Bombay 1971), p. xxi. says: "It is held by all that the 21st Dva is 
composed by a different Siddhasena” . 


192 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


resent. 
: 6 (ET9) The locating perspective (niksepanaya) has four 
sorts--linguistic (ndma), representational (sthapana), substan- 
tial, and modal. 

7 (ET11) The pure form of the substantial perspective 
is just the straightforward thesis that something exists. All 
other statements, dealing in some way with an attribute, 
involve both substantial and modal perspectives. 

8-10 (ET13-16) Any generalization involves substantial 
as well as modal perspectives. The purely particular is only 
that which involves no further possibility of particularization. 
Thus nothing is purely substantial, and nothing purely modal: 
to classify a perspective as one or the other is a matter of what 
one wishes to draw attention to. Still, each point of view 
claims it is the right one. 

11 (ET16) E.g., from the modal staridpoint everything 
is born and dies; from the substantial standpoint everything 
exists forever. 

12 (ET17) Nothing lacks the modifications of birth and 
death. On the other hand, there is nothing that doesn't have 
some permanence in it. 

13 (ET18) Each perspective, if taken independently of 
the other, fails to adequately characterize a thing. So each 
point of view abstracted from the other is a wrong standpoint. 

14 (ET19) There is no third point of view. The truth 
cannot be correctly expressed from either point of view by 
itself; this is the thesis of many aspects. 

15-16 (ET21-22) All the other perspectives are likewise 
wrong when taken alone. 

17-21 (ET22-24) The shortcomings of taking a single 
point of view are shown. 

22-25 (ET26-27) A simile to show the point: a bunch of 
Jewels lying on the table does not constitute’a necklace; soa 
bunch of perspectives improperly related does not constitute 
the truth. 


26 (ET28) The value of such an illustration is lauded. 


SANMATITARKA 193 


27 (ET29) Thus, of the views that the effect is 
contained in the cause, that it is not, or both--all are 
incomplete. 

28 (ET31) All perspectives are right in their own sphere 
but only there--they are wrong if extended to the sphere of 
another perspective. 

29 (ET32) The substantial perspective deals with 
objects unrelated to other things; as soon as one is 
distinguished from another we have a substantial perspective. 

30-31 (ET33-36) There are two kinds of difference, that 
depending on words (vyafijang) and that dependent on things 
(artha). The former admits of further subdivisions; the latter 
doesn't. 

32-35 (ET36-39) A man stays a man all his life; boy, 
youth, etc. are modifications of the man. To say that either 
point of view is mistaken is wrong. 

36-40 (ET39-41) The seven modes of predication 
(saptabhangi) are reviewed. 

41 (ET45) All seven modes apply differences dependent 
on a thing; but for a difference dependent on words only two 
modes are possible--construction-filled (savikalpaka) and 
construction-free (nirvikalpaka). 

42-46 (ET47-51) From the modal perspective it is a 
thing's modes that are real--but this fails to consider their 
substance and thus cannot be the whole truth for the Jains. 
The same man is ashamed of his childish excesses and longs 
for future features that are good for him. The man is not 
merely a child, nor merely an older man. It is like that with 
respect to the self. 

47-48 (ET52-53) The modes cannot be parceiled out to 
separate substances, but are inextricably mixed. 

49 (ET56) So it is not contradictory to speak of a self 
as single and many. _ 

50 (ET57) Really, there is no difference between 
external and internal; internality depends on the mind. 

51-52 (ET58-59) So, from the substantial perspective 


194 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


one’s self exists, is subject to karma, and experiences the fruits 
of his own actions. From the modal perspective no self exists, 
karma applies to one thing and the fruit is the experience of 
another. 

53 (ET60) The correct Jain view combines these two 
perspectives. 

52 (ET61-62) Still, a wise teacher may well speak from 
one or the other standpoint in order to lead his pupil toward 
the truth. 


CHAPTER TWO 

1 (ET63) Vision is awareness of the general, of the 
substantial perspective; awareness is knowledge of the 
particular, of the modal perspective. 

2 (ET64) Still, it is the same thing that is viewed from 
either standpont. 

3 (ET66) The substantial and the modal perspectives do 
hot occur at the same time for the (three states) up to 
awareness of mental modalities. But in complete awareness 
the two synchronize; there vision and awareness are the same. 

4 (ET68) Some teachers think, to avoid violating the 
view of the Tirthankara, that the omniscient one comprehends 
only the particular, not the general form of a thing. 

5-9 (ET70-74) But (we say that) when the obstructions 
to knowledge are removed both vision and knowledge arise 
naturally. Passages from the siitras are appealed to that are 
said to show that someone with knowledge does not have 
. Sensory: cognition but has knowledge--that is, his perception 
(immediate awareness) is not different from knowledge. Both 
vision and knowledge are said to be endless for the completely 
aware, but on the view of the one who claims (4) above, one 
or both will have to end; thus that view is wrong. Both vision 
and knowledge arise simultaneously for the knower--indeed, 
they are not different from each other (for him). 

10 (ET75-76) If the "omniscient" knower is claimed to 
have deeper awareness of all things at the same time he must 


SANMATITARKA 195 


have it at all times. 

11 (ET76) The person who knows finds no difference 
between vision and knowledge. 

12 (ET76) If vision and knowledge are different there 
can be ho omniscient knower. 

13 (ET76) If the knower perceives what is unknown 
and knows what is unperceivable, how can he be omniscient? 

14 (ET76) Scripture says both vision and knowledge are 
endless, but if they are different at least one must be limited. 

15 (ET80) Objection: We say a person has different 
kinds of amounts of knowledge, though he has not knowledge. 

Answer: Likewise, the knower does not have all five 
kinds of awareness, though he does have the fifth, knowledge. 

16-17 (ET81) Indeed, at the levels of linguistic 
awareness, extrasensory awareness and telepathy, objects are 
known as distinct and have aspects such as perception, etc., 
different from each other. But knowledge is different--there is 
no division possible. 

18 (ET83) Though it may seem that some sitras take 
the objector's point of view, the wise must interpret those 
passages in the proper way. 

19 (ET84-85) Since there is no vision of substance at 
the level of telepathy, it is called awareness, not vision. 

20 (ET85-86) Vision has four kinds: sensory (lit. "visual" 
(caksus), verbal, extrasensory, and complete. Thus knowledge 
and complete vision are different. 

21-22 (ET86-87) Objection:' Just as nondistinct 
awareness is vision but also knowledge at a higher stage, so it 
is with complete (awareness or) knowledge. In knowledge, 
however, vision and knowledge are identical. 

23-24 (ET88-89) Answer: If nondistinct awareness is 
vision, but apprehending individuals is awareness, then 
sensory awareness must:be vision. 

25 (ET90) Vision is awareness through the eye and the 


1 Following the interpretation of Abhayadeva. 


196 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


internal organ; it excludes inferential awareness of future 
things, etc. 

26 (ET92-93) Objection: Telepathy is vision. 

Answer: No, for the proper organ of that kind of 
awareness is the internal organ, which cannot grasp jars, etc. 

27 (ET94) Sensory and linguistic awareness are 
required to cognize things. 

28 (ET95) Objection: But linguistic awareness is vision. 

Answer: No, for things known by linguistic awareness 
are not known directly. 

29 (ET96) There can also be extrasensory vision as well 
as extrasensory awareness, since by the latter things 
untouched are cognized. 

30 (ET96-97) A knower perceives and knows an object 
simultaneously. 

31 (ET97) In canonical literature it is said that 
(complete) knowledge and (complete) vision have a beginning 
but no end. So they must be simultaneous. 

32 -33 (ET98-99) Vision actually applies to the 
awarenesses of those who have firm faith. So right awareness 
is always accompanied by right vision, but not necessarily the 
reverse. 

34-36 (ET100-101) The above-cited canonical passage 
about "a beginning but no end" has to be properly interpreted. 
What it means is that complete understanding (kevalabodhi), 
occurring only once, has a beginning, but since the self that 
undergoes changes is endless, that same complete 
understanding is also without an end. 

37-42 (ET103-105) Objection: The self is beginningless 
and knowledge has a beginning and no end (, you say). So 
they must be entirely different from one another. 

Answer: We have answered this already (cf. verse 12). 
But here is an example: just as we say of the same man, now 
sixty, who was king at thirty "this man became king", so we 
say of the same self who has perfect knowledge "this self 
became omniscient". The substantial self without any 


SANMATITARKA - 197 


individuating marks is beginningless, but the mode of 
completeness, like being king, is a particular feature and 
nothing more. 

43 (ET107-108) Knowledge is sometimes measurable 
(samkhyata), sometimes immeasurable and endless, just as the 
self is sometimes passionate, sometimes hateful, sometimes 
deluded. 


CHAPTER THREE 

1-2 (ET109) There is no such thing as a universal 
unmixed with particularity, or a particular unmixed with 
generality. 

3-4 (ET111-112) (Thus) the description of a substance 
in terms of the connections of the thing with its previous and 
its subsequent states is the correct one. 

5-6 (ET113-114) (So) every thing is absent from the 
standpoint of things entirely unlike that thing. Even among 
things that are alike one exists from the perspective depending 
on words and does not exist from the perspective depending 
on things. And a substance is both the same and different from 
itself, since there are infinite qualities that it has or doesn't 
have at various times. 

7 (ET116-117) A person now is clearly different from 
that person in his next life, for they are the effects of different 
causes. But he is the same person! 

8 (ET118) Objection: The qualities of a substance are 
different from that substance, for their qualities are grasped by 
different organs. 

9-15 (ET119-122) Answer: You apparently think that 
what you mean by "quality" (guna) is the same as what we 
mean by “mode" (paryaya). Though they are synonyms they 
are not interchangeable: Mahavira used the word 
"paryayastika", not "gundastika". 

Objection: But in scripture he refers to gunas such as 
ten kinds of colors, etc. 

Answer: But he didn't mean by "guna" color. Lots of 


198 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


types of things are tenfold. 

16-22 (ET125-126) Objection: Just as one man can be 
a father of x, a son of y, a brother of z, etc., so the same 
substance appears from different aspects to have different 
colors, etc. , 

Counterobjection: That a thing has different qualities 
doesn't merely depend on its relation to other things. 

Objector: But if you admit that in a particular case the 
appearance of difference is compatible with actual identity, 
why shouldn't you admit it as a general rule? 

Answer: But color, smell, etc., arise from things' relation 
to the senses. That is, the causes of things undergoing change 
are external to the thing changing. A thing takes on different 
modes at particular times; at some times it does not change its 
modes. 

23-24 (ET133) Objection: A substance is permanent; a 
quality perishes. So they are completely different. 

Answer: If a substance must be different from its 
qualities they must be either material or immaterial. If they 
are material then an atom must also be material, since it has 
material qualities. If, however, an atom is immaterial and its 
qualities are too, then they can never be cognized. 

25-26 (ET136) The above discussions are really 
irrelevant for us, since we do not accept either dualism or 
monism. Those who espouse such theories are ignorant. 

27-28 (ET137-138) "Anekdnta" means brooking no one 
fixed view.” Thus to be anekdnta is compatible with 
onesidedness (ekanta), providing it doesn't conflict with the 
right awareness of things. E.g., the view that there are six 
kinds of sentient beings (though a Jain tenet) should not be 
taken as gospel, since sentient beings can be viewed as a 
single kind. 

29-31 (ET140-141) E.g.,a thing moving upward is not 
moving (i.e., not moving downward). Fire which burns is also 
a nonburner, since there are things that can’t be burnt. As 
substance the jar exists, as living thing it doesn't exist. 


SANMATITARKA 199 


32-34 (ET142-143) There are two kinds of creation:. 
natural (samudayakrta, aikatdattvika) and _ artificial 
(samudaydkrta, aparifuddha). Natural creation is found in 
space, initiators of movement and of stasis; it is due to 
external causes and is variable. Destruction too has two kinds: 
natural and artificial. It is found in nature in the form of the 
separation of aggregates or in the exchanging of a form for a 
new one. 

35-37 (ET148-149) Origination, maintenance and 
destruction are both different from and the same as a 
substance. Though the time of expansion is not the same as 
that of extraction, there is no interval between the one and the 
other. To describe a substance as what was produced, is 
produced, or will be produced, is to speak of the same thing 
from three temporal viewpoints. 

38-42 (ET152-154) (Vaisesika): A substance arises 
through contact of one substance with another, and not by 
disjunction. You admit that the term "atomic" applies to a 
double atom (dvyanuka), and that "tryanuka" applies to a 
composite with three double atoms. Furthermore, an atom is 
only figuratively said to be "produced" when it separates from 
the double atom. 

Answer: Creation can occur through disjunction; e.g., 
one substance produces many arisings, maintenances and 
destructions. Furthermore, even the same arising has many 
modes: as body, internal organ, language, action, form, 
motion, contact, disjunction or awareness. 

43-45 (ET159-160) Scripture may be either hetuvada or 
ahetuvdda. Categories such as worthiness and unworthiness 
for liberation are the subject of hetuvdda. E.g., (according to 
hetuvdda only) worthiness leads to liberation through right 
vision, right awareness and right conduct. But actually the 
Gradhaka (one who worships correctly) alludes to reasons 
(hetu) only when hetuvada is under discussion; he relies on 
scripture when it is appropriate. One who doesn't do this is a 
heretic. 


200 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


46-49 (ET163-165) The proper topic of perspective 
theory is the (Jain) canon. There are as many perspectives as 
there are ways of speaking or heresies. E.g., the system of 
Kapila is merely the substantial viewpoint and that of the 
Buddha is the modal viewpoint alone. Kanada (also known as 
Ulitka) makes reference to both perspectives, but his system is 
fallacious because it uses the perspectives independently. 

50-52 (ET168-169) The views just alluded to, that 
things exist and that they don't exist, are unable in themselves 
to provide liberation, but when adjusted according to the 
many aspects view the result is right vision. 

53 (ET171-172) Time, nature, fate, adrsta and aims of 
life (purusa@rtha)--if taken singly these are false, but when 
connected properly they are all true. 

54-55 (ET173-174) It is wrong to hold that there is no 
eternal self that acts and experiences,,and thus no path to 
liberation is possible. It is right to hold the reverse views. 

56-59 (ET175-177) When the believer in a single truth 
(ekantavadin) proves a conclusion by similarity or dissimilarity 
the result is nihilism (asadvdda). E.g., to view things in terms 
of either generalities or particularities alone each constitutes 
a claim for a single truth. The difficulties of producing reasons 
for onesided views is set forth. 

60 (ET178) To explain categories properly one needs to 
speak of substance, field, time, karmically produced state, 
mode, place, connection and difference. 

61-62 (ET178-179) Those who cite siitras which involve 
only one perspective are confined to the verbal only; they 
impede appreciating alternative viewpoints, thus impeding 
spiritual progress. 

63 (ET179-180) No mere scholar can possess real 


knowledge of the truth, and should not presume to interpret 
the canon. 

64-65 (ET180-181) Though the siitra is meaningful, it 
cannot by itself give (true) meaning, which is hard to come by 
given (the truth of) Perspectivism. 


SANMATITARKA 201 


66-67 (ET182) The shortcomings of studying with an 
unqualified teacher, or with one who is too insistent on rules 
and regulations. 

68 (ET183-184}) Knowledge and practice need to be 
combined. 


17. MALLAVADIN KSAMASRAMANA (550), Nayacakra 

The summary that follows is taken from the following 
sources: the summary of Chapters 1-4 of Jambuvijaya's text is 
by Erich Frauwallner and is found in his introduction to the 
edition of the Dvddasaram Nayacakram with Simhasiri Gani 
Ksamasramana's commentary, Part I, edited by Muni 
Jambuvijayaji (Sri Atmanand Jain Granthamala Serial No. 92) 
(Bhavnagar 1966). This is our F. In the second volume of the 
same series (No. 94, 1976) there is a very brief summary of 
Chapters 5-8 by Jambuvijayaji. This is our J. And in the third 
volume of the series (No. 95, 1988) Jan Willem de Jong has 
provided a summary of the remaining four Chapters, our D. 
These references are to the pages of the relevant volume in 
which the English summary is found, We indicate respectively 
the pages of each of the three volumes where one finds the 
Sanskrit text by "El, E2, E3". There is also in print a summary 
of the entire work by K. K. Dixit (K. K. Dixit, Jaina Ontology. 
Lalbhai Dalpatbhai Series 31, Ahmedabad 1971.) We indicate 
the pagination of excerpts from this summary by D. 

"Mallavadi has...referred to Siddhasena; this fact also 
supports the limit of his age",”*> writes Mahendra Kumar Jain, 
dating this author as after the 5th century. He continues, "The 
fact that Nayacakra reférs to Dignaga and is totally silent 
about Dharmakirti and his disciples leads us to the irresistible 
conclusion that Mallavadi flourished after Dignaga (Sth c. 
A.D.) and before the 7th c. A.D.", the latter because Akalanka 
quotes Mallavadin in his commentary on the Tattvavatara 1. 
33.7° 


202 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The work is not available in its entirety, but has had to 
be reconstructed from the commentary by Simhastrigani 
Ksamasramana. This presents a problem, since as Dixit 
remarks, "the difference between Mallavadi's own text and this 
text as. restored from Simhasiri's commentary is obvious" 
(D114, though Dixit does not tell us how he knows this-- 
presumably from comparison of the parts otherwise available). 
As a result the summaries of T and that of D differ in 
emphasis. We have tried to give samples of both readings. As 
usual in this Volume we substitute preferred translations of 
technical terms where required. 


(D114) "Nayacakra is written in the form of a marathon 
debate taking place between some.seventeen disputants where 
the incoming one criticizes the outgoing one before presenting 
his own case. Among themselves these disputants exhaust 
almost all of the most representative systems that dominated 
the contemporary philosophical scene.” 

(E1.1-3) "The old doctrine of the naya teaches a 
number of standpoints which form a basis for the 
consideration of things. It holds that each of these modes of 
consideration by itself is onesided and therefore wrong, so that 
true knowledge of things only becomes possible by the 
combination and concentration of all modes (Jainism). 
According to their object the latter have been divided into two 
groups by Siddhasena Divakara: modes aiming at the thing per 
se, ie., substance, or at qualities and states. His ideas are 
based on the Jain view of the essence of things, as we find it 
clearly defined with patriarchs such as Kundakunda. According 
to them things consist of their substance, or their state, and 
their various qualities and modes (paryaya), but they have no 
essential existence of their own as they have in the Vaisesika, 
but are welded into an inseparable unity. The '‘being” of things 
(bhava) Is a "becoming" (bhavana), i.e., it exists in an 
incessant continuity of changing phenomena, a process in the 
course of which they continually shape into a new state." 


NAYACAKRA 203 


“Here Mallavadi's trends of thought take their start; the 
substance of things in contrast to the continually changing 
states may be accepted as the general feature (sdmdnya) 
within them, while in the conditions the. restricted, the 
particular feature (vigesa) manifests itself. Accordingly also the 
mode of consideration aiming at the substance of things or 
their states can be differentiated. If, viz., things are being 
considered according to their substance, i.e. to their general 
feature, the result is a general statement, an affirmation or an 
assent (vidhi, utsarga)...(C)onsidered according to their states, 
i.e. to their particular feature, the result is a limited statement, 
a restriction or a negation (niyama, apavada)..." 

"Thus, Mallavadi teaches three fundamental modes of 
considering things: general affirmation (vidhi), affirmation and 
restriction (vidhiniyama), pure restriction (niyama). In 
addition hereto each of these modes of consideration can be 
(the) subject of the same three viewpoints, so that finally a 
total of twelve modes of consideration is brought about..." 

"Arranged in a circle these twelve modes form the 
‘wheel of modes of consideration’ (nayacakra)...the title of 
Mallavadi's work. By taking into account these twelve modes 
of consideration Mallavadi believes (himself) to have 
exhausted all possibilities in the consideration of things..." 

"Thus, the main contents of Mallavadi's work is the 
framing and refutation of various philosophical doctrines..." 


CHAPTER ONE 

(E1.1-89; F3) "The first and simplest viewpoint, the 
simple, general affirmation (vidhi), is the viewpoint taken by 
ordinary men (laukika) towards things. It accepts things as 
they appear, refuting at the same time the attempt to define 
them further by a philosophical system, which may either see 
a common factor in all things (samanya), as does Samkhya, 
something specific (visesa), as the Buddhists do, or both, as it 
is the case with Vaisesika. This viewpoint is vindicated in the 
fact that it considers the essence of things, i.e. their process of 


204 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


becoming (bhavana). According to an old rule of grammar, the 
intrinsic which concerns the inmost essentials of things 
(antaranga) claims priority to all external definitions 
(bahiranga) of commonness, specificity, or both. This 
viewpoint is essenially agnostic (ajfanikavada) as it renounces 
a priori any attempt to define the essence of things in concrete 
terms, stating its futility. Here it coincides with the 
Purvamimamsa, which declares only the ritualistic precepts of 
the Veda as essential for man's happiness repudiating any 
philosophical consideration of things..." as 

(D116) "Finally, there is a long refutation of Dinnaga's 
theory of perception with a view to proving that ordinary 
perception has nothing to do with the same as conceived by 
Dinnaga. In this conection there occurs a criticism of the 
position that many physical things can well be the object of 
one single perception--in the course of which it is said: 'this 
will mean seeking refuge with the Lord of doctrinal views, and 
we have no quarrel with him. For he is certainly the Lord of 
the whole world. He comes to the rescue of a world-element 
when it is on the verge of disappearance.’ As for how it means 
seeking refuge with him, it is because the rupayatana (physical 
aggregate) has been admitted to be of a multiple nature. This 
criticism over, there is a brief submission to the effect that 
similar difficulties arise in connection with the Samkhya and 
Vaisesika theories of perception, the reason being that 
ordinary perception reveals reality to be unlike what these 
theories maintain, just as it reveals it to be unlike what 
Dinnaga’s theory maintains." 


CHAPTER TWO 
(E1.117-245; F3-4) "As a second viewpoint Mallavadi 
mentions the express affirmation of the most general kind 
(vidher vidhi). The first viewpoint had ‘eft undetermined the 
€xact nature of being or becoming...'(B)ecoming' means that 
something becomes something else’ (and) therefore is in need 
of a subject (karta) or vehicle. What, then, is the vehicle of all 


NAYACAKRA 205 


becoming? In reply to this question Mallavadi quotes several 
doctrines of which the following (i.e. succeeding) always 
contradicts the preceding. The first of these doctrines make a 
world-soul (purusa) the vehicle of becoming, the second 
necessity (niyati), the third time, the fourth ‘the own being' or 
the nature of things (svabhava), and the fifth finally being per 
se (bhava), which Mallavadi follows with Bhartrhari's doctrine 
of the word as the First Cause of all things 
(Sabdabrahmavdda)." 

(D116-117) "...(A) really important discussion ensues 
when asatkaryavada is refuted and _ satkdryavdada 
maintained...Satkaryavada argues that if the effect is absent 
there before its production why should it not behave like a 
sky-flower, that is, why should it ever be produced at all? On 
the other hand, the asatkdryavddin argues that if the effect is 
present there before its production why should it not behave 
like the cause, that is, why should it not be present there for 
all to see? Then begins a representation of (the first doctrine) 
of purusddvaitavada proper where the central proposition is 
that all phenomena must be one of the four possible states of 
the sole world-cause purusa, i.e., deep sleep, dream, 
wakefulness, the fourth state (absolute wakefulness). 
Niyatyadvaitavada criticizes purusadvaitavada on the ground 
that a person only too often undergoes suffering--which means 
that he is not a free agent but an agent predetermined in a 
particular fashion. Kaladvaitavdda criticizes niyatyadvaitavada 
on the ground that even a predetermined event cannot occur 
except at a particular time. Svabhdavadvaitavdda criticizes 
kaladvaitavada on the ground that even for an event to occur 
at a particular time the things involved in it must have a 
particular nature of their own. Lastly, bhavdadvaitavada 
criticizes svabhadvavada’on the ground that there are no 
‘different things to have a particular nature of their own but 
just one thing behaving in the way it does." 


206 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


CHAPTER THREE 

(E1.246-334; F4) “Against this viewpoint stands a third 
(vidher vidhiniyama) which refutes the vehicle of becoming as 
the sole principle. It is manifest in two doctrines: the Samkhya 
system and the doctrine of a Godhead as the creator of all 
things (isvaravadda). And again Mallavadi allows the first of the 
two doctrines to be contradicted by the second. The viewpoint 
of the Samkhya system reasons in the following way: it 
differentiates two forms of being or becoming, being present 
(sannidhibhavana) and coming about (apattibhavana). Only an 
existent duplicity, however, makes them possible. As concerns 
being present someone who knows (jridtd) presupposes 
something that is known (jfieya), someone who enjoys 
(bhokta) presupposes something that is enjoyed (bhogya) and 
vice versa. (The) coming about requires .a manifold unity 
(aneka eka) which by changing again and again (parindma) 
adopts a new fom. At the same time it requires a second 
principle on acount of which the change is being brought 
about. Thus, the two principles of Samkhya, the soul (purusa) 
and original matter (pradhana), are given. The doctrine of a 
Godhead does away with the differentiation of being present 
and coming about. It also teaches a duplicity, however: a 
vehicle and cause of all becoming (bhavayita or pravartayita) 
besides material principles whose becoming it causes and 
steers (bhavya or pravartya). Both doctrines hold up express 
affirmation (vidher vidhi) by presupposing a general vehicle of 
becoming, (but) restrict it, however, by presupposing a second 
principle that is only passively steered and does not act as the 
active subject of becoming (vidher niyama)." 


CHAPTER FOUR 
(E1.335-375; F4-5) "By a fourth, viewpoint the 
supposition of a subject and separate vehicle of becoming is 
done away with completely. At first using as examples action 
(karma) and soul (purusa) Mallavadi shows by a number of 
rather daring conclusions that neither action nor soul can 


NAYACAKRA 207 


alone be general cause as they converge in one and the same 
essential existence. (The same holds good in general for the 
steering and the steered, the inciter and the incited 
(pravartaka and pravartya). Thus, one essential existence 
remains as the sole vehicle of becoming the ‘substance that 
becomes’. A subject or causer of becoming (kartd) is 
eliminated. Thus the second viewpoint, the additional 
affirmation (vidher vidhi), which demanded such a subject, is 
refuted, It is true, though, that simple affirmation (vidhi) 
remains valid and is to be found in the supposition of the 
general vehicle of becoming. Yet it is restricted to substance, 
i.e. the pure process of becoming (niyama)." 

(D117) "This chapter contains a representation of the 
doctrine that purusa and its karmas are two .all-sufficient 
factors to account for the multiplicity of world phenomena. 
Hence it begins with a criticism of the theistic position on the 
ground that God has no necessary role to play in the 
happenings of the world. Later on the chapter also contains 
a criticism of the doctrine that the purusa's endeavors and not 
karmas account for the multiplicity of world-phenomena.as 
also of the doctrine that karmas and no purusa's endeavors 
account for the same." 


CHAPTER FIVE 

(E2.377-415; J9) (D118) "This chapter contains a 
representation of the position that dravya and kriya are two 
absolutely distinct factors in world-phenomena. Hence it 
begins with a general criticism of the earlier theories which 
had spoken.as if the posited world-cause and its states are 
somehow one with each other. According to this position 
dravya is that world-factor which ever remains absolutely the 
same while kriyd is that which becomes different every next 
moment." 


CHAPTER SIX 
(E2.416-454; J9) (D118) "This Chapter contains a 


208 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


representation of the Vaisesika view and it begins with a 
criticism of the earlier view on the ground that a dravya 
absolutely untouched by kriyd is a nonentity, for such a dravya 
cannot exhibit the three essential characteristics of a real 
entity, viz. origination, destruction and permanence. At the 
end of this criticism satkaryavada is refuted and asatkaryavada 
maintained, it being understood that the earlier view somehow 
involves satkdryavdda. In this conection an interesting 
distinction is made between absolute nonexistence (atyanta 
asattva) and conditional nonexistence (savisesana asattva) and 
it is argued that it is only an absolutely nonexistent thing that 
never comes into existence while a conditionally nonexistent 
thing comes into existence when appropriate conditions are 
available.” 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

(E2.455-551; J9) "In this (Chapter) old Vaisesika works 
which are not extant nowadays, such as Vakya, Bhasyatika by 
Pragastamati and Katanditika have been criticized at length. 
Also in this (Chapter), the meaning of the Word is described 
according to the famous Buddhist Logician, Dinnaga, who is 
aptly called the Father of the Buddhist Logic." 

(D118) "...The chapter begins with the elaborate 
criticism of asatka@ryavada and ends with an elaborate criticism 
of satpcdarthavada. In between the two there occurs a positive 
defence of syGdvada." 

(D178) "...(I)t is only towards its end that the speaker 
adopts a tone more appropriate to a Sautrantika Buddhist-- 
perhaps thus preparing the way for the chapter being declared 
to be a vindication of rusutranaya...(T)he Vaisesika here 
argues that an effect exists in its cause even prior to its 
production but that it is then called absent there because it 
has not yet been associated with satta--an example of things 
which exist without being associated with satta being 
samanya, visesa, samavaya." 


NAYACAKRA 209 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

(E2.553-737; J9-10) "In the Eighth (Chapter), which is 
the longest of all..., the doctrines of Bhartrhari, his teacher 
Vasurata, and Dignaga and his commentators, have been fully 
repudiated." 

(D118-119) "This chapter contains a representation of 
what the Jaina theoreticians call sabdanaya. It begins with a 
brief criticism of the view that abhdva is as much a constituent 
of the real as is bhava, a view maintained by syaddvdda. (On 
the present disputant's view bhava alone constitutes the real.) 
But its criticism is directed against several other doctrines viz. 
(i) the doctrine of primacy of name (the ndmaniksepavdda); 
(ii) the doctrine of primacy of word (Bhartrhari); (iii) the 
doctrine of impartite word-meaning (of Vasurata, the 
preceptor of Bhartrhari); (iv) the doctrine of primacy of 
configuration (of the sthapandniksepavdada); (v) the doctrine 
of demarcation (of Dignaga)." 

"On his own part the fabdanayavadi maintains that the 
meaning of a word consists of both the general and the 
particular, with emphasis on the particular." 


CHAPTER NINE (of E andDJ)/ CHAPTER TEN (of D) 

(E2.765-793; D119) "This chapter contains a 
representation of what might be called rupdadisamudayavada, 
that is, of the view that the real is but a conglomeration of 
qualities-devoid-of-an-abiding-substance. It begins with a 
criticism of avaktavyavada on the ground that a real 
avaktavyavada must be absolutely speechless, a self-defeating 
position. Towards the end of the chapter it is maintained that 
a real undergoes no origination or destruction of any sort." 


CHAPTER TEN (of E and DJ)/CHAPTER ELEVEN (of D) 
(E2.794-805; D119) This chapter contains a 
representation of what might be called ksanikavada. It begins 
with a criticism of ripddisamudayavdda on the ground that an 
entity that undergoes no origination or destruction is a 


210 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nonentity. In the course of argument the thesis is maintained 
that all destruction of a thing is causeless and that this is why 
this thing must necessarily be momentary." 

(DJ1) "The tenth chapter refutes the theory of 
inexpressibility and the existence of visesa and samanya...The 
concept of samudaya, which plays such an important role in 
the Sarvastivada school of Buddhism, is refuted in terms 
similar to those used by the Sautrantikas, who considered that 
an object is not an assemblage (samudaya) of really existing 
atoms but only something nominally existent (samvrtisat). 
Mallavadin next refutes the theory of the existence of the 
effect (sat karya), considering two alternatives, i.e. the 
existence of both cause and effect and the existence of the 
effect alone. In the same way he refutes the existence of an 
atman which is separate and different fromthe five skandhas. 
Atman is only a designation given to the group of the five 
skandhas just as the word ‘heap’ (rasi) is used for an 
accumulation..." 


CHAPTER ELEVEN (of E and DJ)/CHAPTER TWELVE (of D) 

(E2.806-873; D119) This chapter contains a 
representation of stinyavada, that is, of the position that things 
of the world are essenceless (nihsvabhava). It begins with a 
criticism of ksanikavada on the ground that an alleged 
momentary entity must first come into existence before it is 
associated with a moment but that in that case it ceases to be 
a momentary entity. Towards the end of the chapter it is 
suggested that it will also do if things of the world are called 
not essenceless but something of the nature of consciousness 
on the ground that they are necessarily objects of 
consciousness. So the doctrine of the chapter can also be 
called Vijhanavada." 


18.JINABHADRA GANI (600), Dhydnagataka 


‘Jinabhadra...belongs to the last quarter of the 6th and 
first quarter of the seventh century A.D,"7” 


DHYANASATAKA 211 


The translation that follows, together with the text of 
the work and of the Hindi commentary which is translated 
into English here, was published from Delhi in 1972. This is 
our "ET". Technical terms are translated in accordance with 
the standards for this Volume, as usual. 


Translation by Muni Dulaharaj 


1 (ET1-3) Bowing to Lord Mahavira who has burnt 
away the fuels of karma by the flames of fukla dhyana, who 
is Yogesvara (highest yogi) and the refuge, I shall expound 
the treatise on concentration (dhydna). 

2 Mental effort which is steady is concentration. The 
one which is unsteady is called "mind" (citta). Mind is of three 
kinds: (1) bhavand, effort to practise meditation; (2) 
anupreksa, reflection, the effort to re-fix the mind on the same 
concentration from which it has fallen off; (3) cinta, © 
anticipative thinking. 

3 Meditation (holding of the mind) on one particular 
object (mode) by one who has not become an omniscient can 
never (last for) more than one antarmuhirta).(a period of 
time extending no more than 48 minutes). After this duration 
the mind fixes itself on some other object, and as such the 
flow of meditation changes its course. But (for) those who 
have become jinas by exterminating four ghatiya karmas, the 
meditation would be the suppression of all the activities of 
word, mind and body. 

. 4 After antarmuhurta some other thought or a different 
meditation (bhavand or anupreksa) starts. The mind then fixes 
itself on different objects and thus the flow of meditation may 
be for a longer duration: , 

5 (ET3-7) Concentration is fourfold: 

1. frustration-producing (arta) 
2. cruel (raudra) 
3. dharmya 


212 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


4. white (Sukla). 
The last two are the instruments of emancipation and the first 
two lead to transmigration. 

6 Polluted with dislike, one who excessively thinks of 
separation from undesirable objects of the senses like sound 
etc. and constantly strives for avoiding their acquisition is the 
first type of arta concentration 

7 One who, because of his attachment to the body, 
eagerly desires to get rid of the unbearable pain caused by 
colic, headache etc., and constantly strives for avoiding their 
repetition is the second type of arta concentration. 

8 One who is overpowered by attachment has a strong 
mental urge for retaining the desirable objects of senses and 
pleasant sensations caused thereby and also strives again and 
again for their acquisition. This is the third type of arta 
concentration... 

9 The longing to obtain sensual objects, splendor and 
supernatural accomplishments of Indra and emperors and of 
such others is called niddna. This indeed is a mean 
consideration for material gain which is generated by deep 
ignorance. This is the fourth type of arta concentration. 

10 All these four types of arta concentration are found 
in a person infatuated by attachment, aversion and delusion. 
This concentration increases transmigration of the self and is 
the instrumental cause which leads the self to be bound in 
animal existence. 

11-12 One who contemplates the reality of substances, 
remains neutral and knows that combination, separation, 
diseases, etc., are the consequences of one's own karma, one 
who remains equanimous in all the divergent circumstances, 
one who adheres to the virtuous recourses to get rid of trials 
and tribulations, one who considers penance and self-control 
to be the resistant forces Overcoming all the ailments caused 
by karma, and who engages himself in their use without any 


idea of acquiring any material gain, is a competent aspirant for 
the dharmya concentration. 


DHYANASATAKA 213 


13 (ET7-11) These three factors--attachment, aversion 
and delusion--are the root causes of samsdra. They are found 
in arta concentration and hence drta concentration is the seed 
for the tree of sarnsdra. 

14 Kapota (kavoya?), blue (nila) and black (krsna)-- 
these three colorings of a person engaged in arta concentration 
are not excessively afflicted. These colorings are the conse- 
quences of karma. 

15 Four characteristics of arta concentration (are): 

1. screaming, 

2. weeping pitiously, 

3. lamenting, 

4. beating one's own chest, head, etc. in sorrow. 
These occur due to the pains of separation from the desirable 
and union with the undesirable. 

16 In arta concentration one decries one's own activities 
and deeds and praises with dismay the affluence of others. He 
intensely hankers after them and when they are acquired he 
becomes absorbed in them and constantly strives to acquire 
them more and more. 

17 One who is absorbed in sensual objects like sound, 
etc., who is away from spirituality, who is negligent and 
disinterested in the religion of expunging passions altogether 
(vitaraga) dwells in arta concentration. 

18 Arta concentration is found in three types of 
persons: 

1. one who is devoid of self-control; 

2. one who practices self-control to the extent of 
a seeker, 

3. an ascetic who is in the sixth category, who is 
not free from unmindfulness. Arta concentration is the root of 
all negligence. It should be avoided by all the aspirants. 

19 (ET11-15) Seized by the merciless and cruel 
intention to strike, cut, bind, burn or brand and kill living 
beings and possessed by excessive anger of mean fruition is 
the first type of raudra concentration.. 


214 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


20 The firm intention of a person to delude, to cheat, 
to engage in backbiting, to conceal his sins, to lie, to utter 
vulgar words, to use words likely to cause killing leads to the 
second type of raudra concentration. 

21 Engaging oneself, overpowered by intense anger and 
greed, in killing living beings, indulging in ignoble activities, 
misappropriating the possessions of others and remaining 
indifferent to the calamities of the next world is the third type 
‘of raudra concentration.. 

22 To be absorbed in protecting wealth which is the 
means of procuring objects of sensual enjoyment, to be 
engrossed in filthy thoughts, to remain suspicious of others, to 
be very much agitated by the filthy thoughts of killing is the 
fourth type of raudra concentration. 

23 Hence raudra concentration is of four kinds: 

1. dominated by violence, 

2. dominated by falsehood, 

3. dominated by stealing, 

4. dominated by protection of sensual objects. 
One who engages oneself in these drags others towards them 
and gives consent to others already engaged therein and 
remains deeply engrossed in the respective subject is in raudra 
concentration. It is ignoble. This concentration is found in two 
types of persons: 

1. those who are completely devoid of self- 
control, 

2. those who are partially restrained. 

24 These four types of raudra concentration are found 
in a person who is overwhelmed by attachment, aversion and 
delusion. They lead to the increase of transmigration and are 
root Causes leading the soul to hell. 

25 For one engaged in raudra concentration three 
thought-currents (kapota, etc. as above) become excessively 
afflicted. They are the consequences of one's own karma. 

26 The characteristics of one who is engaged in these 
four type of raudra concentration through word and body are 


DHYANASATAKA 215 


as follows: 

1. to remain constantly engaged in one of these 
four types with intensity of mind; 

2. to remain engaged in all the four types; 

3. to indulge in violent activities, such as 
lynching, pecking the eyes out of sockets, etc.; 

4. not to repent for one's sinful activities till 
death. 

27 One who is engaged in raudra concentration feels 
elated at the misfortune of others, remains indifferent (that is, 
becomes unmindful of the fear of sin), becomes cruel and 
unrepenting, feels happy at evil deeds. These are the indi- 
cations of a person engaged in raudra concentration. 

28-29 (ET16-24) A monk should engage himself in 
dharmya concentration after knowing well the meditative 
practice, place, time, posture, supporting object, order of 
succession, aim, meditator, contemplation, thought-currents, 
signs and the fruits. After practising this, he should proceed to 
sukla concentration. 

30 One who practises meditation through the medium 
of repeated meditative practice becomes competent to engage 
in concentration. Practices are of four kinds: 

1. practice of awareness (jAdna bhavana) 

2. practice of vision (darfana bhavanda) 

3. practice of conduct (cdritra bhavana) 

4. practice of nonattachment (vairagya bhavana). 

31 One who is constantly engaged in acquiring 
knowledge, one who is steadfast in knowledge, one who 
always retains purity of text and its meaning, one who knows 
the utmost through the practice of knowledge, can engage in 
meditation with a steadfast awareness. 

32 One who is free from the defects like suspicion, etc., 
and who is calm and composed, becomes noninfatuated in 
meditation through the purity of vision. 

33 By stopping the inflow of karma, annihilating the old 
ones and acquiring auspicious karma, one through this 


216 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


practice of conduct becomes engrossed in meditation even 
without any effort. . 

34 The mind of one who is conscious of the nature of 
the werld, one who is detached, fearless and desireless, 
becomes inundated by nonattachment. He can easily become 
steadfast in meditation. 

35 Monks should always dwell in a secluded place 
which is free from young women, beasts, eunuchs and 
unchaste people; particularly when he is engaged in 
concentration, he must remain in solitude. 

36 Those monks who have thoroughly practised yoga 
and have become steadfast in it, those whose minds are 
unflinching in meditation, make no discrimination between an 
overpopulated village and a desolate forest in their selection 
of a place for meditation. 

37 Hence a place where the activities of mind, word 
and body remain composed and which is free from the 
disturbances of living beings is a fit place for one to meditate. 

38 When mind, vocal organ and body remain composed 
it is the proper time for meditation. There is no restriction 
regarding day and night or other period for one who 
meditates. 

39 In meditation, one should remain in that bodily 
posture which has been mastered and which does not become 
a deterrent to meditation. He can do meditation standing. 
sitting or lying down. 

40 Several sinless monks have attained omniscience 
through meditation in all places, periods and bodily postures. 

41 Scriptures have not placed any restriction with 
regard to place, time and posture of Meditation. One should 
Strive so as to bring about the pacification of one's activities of 
word, mind and body. 

42 Supports for dharmya concentration are: 

1. study of the scriptures, 
2. questioning, 
3. repetition of Studies, 


DHYANASATAKA 217 


4..reflection on meanings. 
These are the four props dominating verbal (awareness) 
concentration (Srutadharma). 

Practising equanimity and other such necessary works 
are the props dominated by conduct dharma. 

43 Just as a person climbs a steep place with the 
support of a firm substance (like a rope), even so, one 
progresses steadily in dharmya concentration by taking 
support of a scriptural text. 

44 When an omniscient reaches the motionless state 
(Sailesi), white concentration functions in the following order-- 
first of all the activities of mind, then the activities of vocal 
organ and lastly the actions of body are stopped. But one who 
is in the sphere of dharmya concentration does not follow this 
order. He accomplishes the cessation of activities in 
accordance with his spiritual well-being without sticking to 
any particular order. 

45-46 (ET25-29) One engaged in dharmya concentra- 
tion should first of all meditate on the commandments of the 
Lord who is like a beaconlight for the whole world. The 
meditator should be desireless. The commandment of the Lord 
is stilled and perfect, eternal, beneficial to beings, cherished by 
truth, invaluable, boundless, invincible (and which) has a 
great objective, has great valor, has various subjects to deal in, 
unknowable by the unskilled persons and which is deep with 
differential standpoints (naya), permutations and topics 
(bhanga), instruments of true cognition (pramdna) and 
different approaches (gama). 

47-48 This commandment of the Lord is not easily 
comprehensible due to some fundamental causes: 

1. Feeble intellect, 

2. Absence of proper teacher, 

3. Depth of subject-matter, 

4. Intense obscurity of the knowledge, 
5. Dirth of logical wisdom, 

6. Lack of proper illustration. 


218 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


These causes act as hindrances to the proper understanding of 
the commandments of the Lord but a man of wisdom should 
strive in this direction. 

49 Arhats are the most excellent in the world. They 
have conquered attachment, hatred and delusion. They do 
good even to those who do ill to them. They always speak 
what is true. 

50 A monk who avoids what is avoidable and meditates 
on the perils of this world and the next world of the people 
engaged in attachment, hatred, passions and causes of inflow 
of karma, engages himself in the second type of dharmya 
concentration. 

51 One who reflects upon the fruitions of action 
regarding their nature, duration, intensity and location which 
are grouped into auspicious and inauspicious and which are 
generated by the activities of mind, word and body and also 
by negligence...is (practising) the third type of dharmya 
concentration. 

52 One should also reflect on the characteristics, forms, 
bases, classifications, measures, origin, endurance, destruction 
and modes of substances delineated by the Lord. 

53 (ET29-34) This universe consists of five elements: 
(1) self, (2) not-self, (3) initiator of motion, (4) initiator of 
stasis and (5) space. It is without a beginning or end, is 
infinite, is differentiated by name, etc. It is threefold: (1) 
upper region, (2) lower region and (3) nether region. 

54 This universe is structured into the earths, spheres, 
islands, oceans, hells, heavens and bhavana (abodes of gods). 
It is settled on air and space. One should meditate on the 
structural appearance of the universe. This is the fourth type 
of dharmya concentration. 

S55 The characteristic of the self is active consciousness. 
Self is without beginning or end. It is different from the body, 
it is formless and is the doer and enjoyer of its own karma. 

56-57 This ocean of samsdra is the product of one's own 
actions. This ocean is filled with (the) water(s) of birth and 


DHYANASATAKA 219 


death, is deep with passions like anger, pride, etc. and is 
inhabited by innumerable wild animals in the form of 
catastrophes. It is full with the cesspools of delusion; it is 
dreadful. It is attacked by the successive waves of connection 
and separation caused by the strong wind of ignorance. It has 
neither a beginning nor an end. It is inauspicious. One should 
reflect on this nature of samsdra. 

58-59 That great boat of conduct is capable of crossing 
this ocean of samsdra which has right intention as the 
fastening cord and pious and right awareness as the navigator. 
This boat is without any holes due to discipline. Its movement 
is accelerated by the wind of penance. It moves on the way of 
nonattachment without being shaken by the raging billows of 
counter-currents of wrong thoughts. 

60 Travelling in this boat which is filled with precious 
jewels of conduct, the mendicant merchants reach safely and 
quickly the city of emancipation. 

61 There the self in exchange for the three jewels (right 
vision, right awareness and right conduct) obtains happiness 
which is absolute, spontaneous, unobstructive, uncomparable 
and imperishable. 

62 What more? The scriptures of the Lord are replete 
with the description of self, etc. They represent the different 
standpoints. One must reflect on this. 

63 Those monks of wisdom who are free from all types 
of negligence, whose delusion is dissolved or subsided, are the 
incompetent authorities of dharmya concentration. 

64 (ET34-40) Those whose practice in dharmya con- 
centration has reached the acme of perfection, who are 
purvadhadra (versed in ancient texts) and whose bodily 
constitution is of excellent kind, can alone be the meditators 
of white concentration's first two phases. The third phase 
comes to the omniscient and the fourth to the one who is on 
the verge of emancipation and who as such has stopped all 
physical actions and has become completely inactive. 

65 One whose inner soul is well tainted with dharmya 


220 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


concentration always remains engrossed in the contemplation 
of different meditative practices in which he constantly thinks 
on the transitoriness of the world, etc. 

66 During dharmya concentration yellow, lotus and 
white--these three auspicious colorings gradually become pure. 
These colorings mitigate in accordance with the conscious- 
awakening of an individual. 

67 The signs of dharmya concentration are to have firm 
belief in the teachings of the Lord, through scriptures, 
exhortations, commandments and natural inheritance. 

68 The meditator of dharmya concentration is one who 
eulogizes and adores the qualities of (an) arhat and the 
monks, who is endowed with the virtues of modesty and 
generosity and who is engaged in-the study of scriptures and 
the practice of the code of conduct and self-restraint. 

69 In the Jain religion the predominant factors are: 
forgiveness, meekness, rectitude and nonattachment. Taking 
these bases, one climbs in white concentration... 

70 The object of mind comprises all the three worlds. 
A cadmastha (?) monk practising white concentration 
contracts his mind gradually and establishes it in an atom and 
meditates steadfastly. Omniscience is devoid of mind and as 
such there is no mental meditation for him. 

71-72 Just as poison which has spread all over the body 
is collected and localised at the point of the serpent's bite 
through mental incantations (mantra) and then with more 
powerful mantras it is thrown out of the body, even so the 
arhat physician who is endowed with the strength of mantras 
and meditation contracts in an atom the mind-poison which 
wanders in all the three worlds and expels it (mind) out 
therefrom. 

73-74 Just as a fire, fuel of which has been removed, 
gradually diminishes and ultimately: remains with a few 
rampants of fuel and when that remaining fuel is removed, it 
extinguishes, even so the mind-fire devoid of the objects of 
sense-fuel becomes less and less and ultimately dies out when 


DHYANASATAKA 221 


the fue] is completely extinguished. 

75 Just as water in a tube or inside a hot iron vessel 
gradually lessens, even so you should understand that a yogi's 
mind (mind is compared to water) gradually disappears and 
ultimately becomes amana (without any mind). 

76 Likewise an omniscient suppresses the activities of 
the vocal organ and body in their due succession, becomes 
steady like Mount Meru and reaches the motionless state. 

77-78 (ET40-53) The unattached monk versed in 
ancient texts considers the modes like origin, decay and 
persistence of a single substance from different standpoints. 
This is the first type of white -concentration called 
prthaktvavitarkasavicara. Here the word savicara means to flee 
from an object of meditation to the verbal symbol (artha to 
vyanjana) and from one activity to another. 

79-80 To fix the mind in any one of the modes, like 
origin, decay and persistence of a substance, and to meditate 
steadfastly like the flame of a lamp kept in an airtight place, 
is the second type of white concentration § called 
ekatvavitarkavicdra. It is also accomplished by taking the 
support of ancient scriptures (through which the meditator 
meditates on very subtle modes of a substance).-In this mode 
of meditation there is no fleeing from an object of meditation 
to the verbal symbol and from one activity to another. 

81 When the time of emancipation draws near, the 
activities of mind and vocal organ of an omniscient stop but 
the subtle activity of inspiration and expiration remains. This 
is the third type of white concentration called 
suksmakriyanuvrtti, where the subtle activities remain. 

_ 82 The omniscient reaches the stage of motionlessness 
like a mountain. This is the last type of white concentration 
called vyavachinnakriyapratipatti where all the activities come 

‘to naught and the meditator never falls down from~his 
meditation. 

83 In the first type of white concentration there may 
exist all the three kinds of activities (mental, vocal and 


222 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


physical) or any one of them. 

84 In the second type, there exists only one kind of 
activity amongst the three. In the third type, there exists only 
the activity of the body, and in the fourth type there is 
complete cessation of all activities. This is the state of inaction. 

Just as the steady mind of a cadmastha is called 
meditation, even so the steady body of an omniscient is called 
meditation. 

85-86 In an omniscient who is in the sphere of action 
or has reached the state of inaction, even though he is devoid 
of mind, the active consciousness of the self is present there. 
Hence the last two types of white concentration exist there. 
The main reasons for this consideration are: 

1.Due to the previous actions of the self, 
2.Due to annihilation of karma, 

3.Due to manifold meanings of a word, 
4.Due to scriptural authenticity. 

87-88 An aspirant whose mind is well tainted with 
white concentration and who is equipped with the supreme 
code of conduct, even after retirement from meditation 
ponders on the four reflections: 

1. To think of the calamities which follow the 
inflow of karma, 

2. To think of the evil nature of the world, 

3. To think of the infinity of worldly existence, 

4. To think of the decay and deterioration of all 
the worldly substances. 

89 In the first two types of white concentration the 
coloring is also white, and in the third type it is paramasukla 
(ultimately white). The fourth type is beyond the sphere of 
colorings. There the stability is acquired to such a great extent 
that it conquers the stability of Meru mountain and hence it is 
a paramasukla state naturally. 


90 One engaged in white concentration is known by 
these four signs: 


1. pacification of the whole being, 


DHYANASATAKA 223 


2. non-infatuation, 
3. high discrimination, 
4. utmost renunciation. 

91 An aspirant of wisdom and valor never swerves nor 
is frightened by afflictions and obstacles. He never gets 
confused even in subtle matters or in supernormal phenomena. 

92 He sees the self as distinct from the body and 
likewise perceives all fetters. Being unattached, he completely 
renounces body and all the substances. 

93 The fruits of dharma concentration are the inflow of 
pious karma, stoppage of influx of new karma and annihilation 
of accumulated karma, and abundance of heavenly pleasures. 
All these fruits are connected with auspicious lineage. 

94 The fruits of the first two types of white 
concentration are the extra-ordinary gain of the inflow of 
suspicious karma, the stoppage of inflow of karma and the 
cessation of old karma. Along with this, the meditator attains 
the highest (anuttara) heavens. The last two types of white 
concentrations result in the final emancipation of the soul. 

95 Inflow of karma is the root cause of this worldly 
existence. Hence in dharmya and white concentrations there 
is no inflow of karma. It is for this reason that the dharmya 
and white concentrations never become the cause for worldly 
existence. 

96 Stoppage of the inflow of karma and _ the 
annihilation of accumulated traces are the path of eman- 
cipation. Penance is the path of samvara and nirjara. The 
predominant factor in penance is meditation and hence, 
finally, it is the cause of emancipation. 

97-98 Just as water cleanses the stains on a cloth, fire 
removes the rust of iron. and the sun dries up the slough of 
water on earth, likewise the stain, rust and slough of karma in 
the cloth, iron and earth of the soul is cleansed, removed and 
dried up by the water, fire and sun of meditation. 

99 Just as during the time of meditation the body heats 
up, is weakened and aches severely, even so, the karmas of a 


224 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


out by yogic procedures like meditation, fasting, etc. 

101 Just as fire fanned by wind burns up quickly the 
heaped fuel, even so the fire of meditation burns up in a 
moment (an) immense mass of karma-fuel. 

102 Just as clusters of clouds struck by the wind 
disappear in a moment, even so the clouds of karma are 
destroyed by the gale of meditation. 

103 One who has reached the inner state of meditation 
is never tormented by the mental ailments like envy, grief, 
dejection, etc. which are the products of passions. 

104 One whose mind has become steady in meditation, 
who always acts for the annihilation of karma, is never 
disturbed by manifold bodily afflictions like cold, heat, etc. 

105 Thus meditation is the storehouse of all spiritual 
virtues. It is the means of happiness, both seen and unseen. 
It is exceedingly noble, an object of faith and a thing to be 
always known. 

106 Thus Jinabhadra Ksamasramana has compiled this 
treatise on meditation containing 105 slokas meant for the 
purification of karma. 


19.JINABHADRA GANI (600), Visesavasyakabhasya on the 
Avasyakanirukti 

Dalsukh Malvania, in the English Introduction contained 
in Volume Three of his three-volume edition of the 
Avasyakasiitra with this commentary, estimates the year of the 
death of Jinabhadra Gani as 609 A.D. (p. 5). He also says "it 
is certain that he toured in the region of Valabhi and other 
neighbouring parts of West India where the Jain Religion-- 
especially the Svetambara sect--was gaining importance there." 
(p. 5) Evidence of his having toured Mathura is also found in 
the the text (p. 6). 


VISESAVASYAKABHASYA 225 


The text, with commentary and an autocommentary, 
was first edited by Dalsukh Malvania in Lalbhai Dalpatbhai 
Series Volumes 10, 14 and 21, our "E". The text is also edited 
by Nathmal Tatia as Prakrit Jaina Institute Research 
Publication Series Volume 6 (Volume I: Vaishali, Bihar 1972). 
As Dr. Tatia tells us, the work actually comments on only the 
first chapter of the Avasyakanirukti. 

The summary provided here is by Dalsukh Malvania, 
found in the Third Volume of his edition cited above. Page 
references under "S" are to that Volume. Numbers in 
parentheses are to the numbers of the verses in the text. 


Summary by Dalsukh Malvania 


(S8-9; E1-158) "The Anuyogadvara(siitra), at the outset, 
(stitra 1), enumerates the five awarenesses (jfidna), establishes 
the connection of the Avasyakasiitra with verbal (sruta) 
awareness (stitras 2-6), one of those five awarenesses, clarifies 
the meaning of the title Avagyakasrutaskandha applying the 
method of locating (niksepa) (sutras 7-58) and then discusses 
the subject-matter, etc. of the Avagyaka." 

"The Visesavasyakabhdsya too comments on the 
Avasyakasitra. Hence it follows the Avagyakanirukti which in 
turn follows the Anuyogadvarasutra in respect of the order in 
which the exposition is to proceed. Thus it naturally follows 
that the Visesavasyakabhdsya follows the order of exposition 
found in the Anuyogadvarasutra. Hence the Visesavasya- 
kabhdsya too contains not only the method of exposition found 
in the Anuyogadvarasttra but also the explanation of the 
method itself..." 

"The Anuyogadvarasiutra starts with the mention of five 
awarenesses, viz. mati, Sruta, avadhi, manahparydya and 
kevala. That is why the Avasyakanirukti first explains these 
five jfidnas only. Complete explanation of the five awarenesses 
is found in the Nandisitra too. The Nandisutra is a mangala 


226 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(an auspicious introductory prayer). Hence Acarya Jinabhadra 
discusses first the mangala (12-78) and then at length the five 
awarenesses (78-832) under the pretext of mangala after 
having identified mangala with the Nandisutra and the 
Nandisitra with the five awarenesses..." 

"After the exposition of the five awarenesses there 
occurs the explanation of the name of the sastra. The title of 
the sdstra itself suggests its subject-matter or its contents 
(samudayartha). Hence this portion of the text...is given the 
name of Samudayartha." 

"Following the method of exposition demonstrated in 
the Anuyogadvarasitras it is declared that, out of the five 
awarenesses, to the verbal awareness only could be applied 
the method of exposition (anuyoga). For this Jinabhadra offers 
clarification as follows. Verbal awareness is other-dependent 
in the sense that it requires the medium of language, so that 
it is acquired from others. Again, it is other-illuminating in 
the sense that it could be imparted to others through 
preachings and teachings. This being the case with verbal 
awareness it becomes possible for us to apply to it the method 
of exposition (834)." 

(S9-10; E158-169) "On the other hand, the remaining 
four awarenesses being neither other-dependent nor other- 
illuminating, it is quite impossible for us to apply to them the 
method of exposition. The Avagyaka being verbal its exposition 
means the exposition of the language itself. Again, it is 
established that the Avasyaka is a srutaskandha, that is, it 
consists of several chapters (adhydya) (833-838). At this 
occasion, it is stated that it is not compulsory for a 
commentator to comment upon the Nandi, though here at the 
outset the Nandi is commented upon for the benefit of the 
pupils. While writing a commentary on any: work one should 
perform a mangala (auspicious introductory prayer) at the 
outset; and what is compulsory for performing a mangala is 
merely the mention of the five awarenesses and not the 
exposition of the Nandisiitra (839-841)." 


VISESAVASYAKABHASYA 227 


"Then follows the explanation of the constituent terms 
of the title Avasyakasrutaskandha through the method of 
locating which settles the meaning of a term after having 
discussed the various senses in which it is employed in 
different situations, viz., ndma, sthdpana, etc. (gathd 842 ff.). 
And this explanation of the title itself constitutes the substance 
of the text (pindartha or samudayartha). It is so because the 
Avasyakasttra is divided into six chapters and the subject- 
matter of all these chapters is suggested by the explanation of 
the title of the text. Hence this portion wherein the meaning 
of the title is discussed is given the name of samudayartha at 
the beginning of this topic (2) and that of pinddrtha at the 
end of the topic (899)." 

($10; E169-181) "Pindartha (general content, substance 
of the text) is followed by the avayavartha (exposition of the 
chapters one by one). Equanimity (samayika) being the first 
chapter its exposition is now due in order. Hence at this 
juncture first the entrances to exposition are explained. They 
are upakrama, etc. Having stated that mental equanimity is 
the basis of al] spiritual qualities (900) Jinabhadra explains in 
a general way the four entrances to exposition, their divisions, 
the etymology of their names, etc. (900-911). Then follows the 
detailed explanation of each and every entrance to exposition 
(912ff.)..." 

(S10-11; E182-298) "In the Anuyogadvara occurs the 
upodghata (preface, introduction) to the entire work...In the 
first dvdra of upodghata, viz. uddesa, we are required to 
understand that the general name of the text commented upon 
is adhyayane (chapter). In the second dvdra, nirdesa, we are 
required to understand that the particular name or title of the 
text commented upon is Samayika...(970, 1501) Then follows 
the detailed explanation of the meanings of the terms uddesa 
and nirdesa applying the method of niksepa. (1484) After this 
occurs the discussion on the nirgamadvara, the third 
constituent of the upodghata..." 

(S11; E193-254) "While describing the spiritual 


228 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


evolution by which any soul can attain Tirthankarahood 
Jinabhadra has described the nature of a Tirthankara, given 
the life-sketch of Lord Mahavira, the last twenty-fourth 
Tirthankara and the propounder of the present Jaina Religion, 
and explained the Jaina theory of spiritual evolution. (1023- 
1343)..At this juncture he has explained the way of action 
(kriyamarga) and the way of knowledge (jndnamarga). 
According to the former, it is action only that leads to 
liberation. According to the latter it is knowledge only that 
leads to liberation. Jinabhadra has pointed out that the two 
ways are two extremes fraught with many faults and defects. 
He has synthesized both these ways and has declared that 
both action and knowledge, when synthesized, lead to 
liberation. (1123-1179)." 

($13; E272-286) "..Jinabhadra discusses the kaladvara 
because kala (time) is an internal cause. Jinabhadra gives an 
etymology of the term kala and declares that time is nothing 
but a mode of a substance. Its different names are due to its 
minor insignificant special features. Time is treated of in nine 
different ways. In the Avasyakanirukti at one place occurs the 
statement "pagadam tu bhavena" (2502=Niryukti 503) and at 
another place occurs the statement "ettha puna adhikaro 
pamana-kalena". Jinabhadra points out that these statements 
are not contradictory. Jt is so because the first statement 
means that Lord Mahavira preached equanimity when he was 
in the state of destroying karmic traces. Thus bhavakdla means 
the time of the destruction of karmic traces. (2556=Avasyaka- 
nirukti'519). The second statement means that Lord Mahavira 
preached equanimity in the Mahasena woods in the morning 
of the eleventh day of the bright half of Vaisakha 
(2555=Avasyakanirukti 518). Thus the Niryukti removes the 
contradiction. Jinabhadra too follows the Niryukti. Moreover 
he declares that there is no difference whatsoever between 
bhavakala and pramdnakdla from the point of view of time as 
a substance; they are identical. The different names that time 
has are due to some trifling different features." 


VISESAVASYAKABHASYA 229 


(S13-14;.E2570-2583) "In the karanadvara Jinabhadra 
conducts a discussion on various senses in which the term 
"kdrana" ("cause") is employed under different situations, viz. 
nama, sthapana, etc. Here one finds an exposition of the 
problem of cause in various ways. This exposition is very 
important as it contains different views about the nature of a 
cause, expressed in different systems of Indian philosophy." 

(S14; E2612-2616) "In the pratyayadvara...we are told 
that there are three conditions (pratyaya) of the knowledge of 
equanimity--the self, the teacher and the Scriptures. For a 
Tirthankara the knowledge of equanimity is self-conditioned 
(a@tmapratyaya). It is so because he has the direct realization 
of the nature of the self, that is, of the fact that he is an 
omniscient person. That is why he has not to rely on any other 
person for the knowledge. But for others all the three severally 
serve as the cause of the knowledge of equanimity. They being 
not possessed of omniscience have to depend on either the 
teacher or the scriptures. Thus for the ganadharas (the chief 
disciples of a Tirthankara) the knowledge of equanimity is not 
self-conditioned (atmapratyaya). They entered into discussion 
with Lord Mahavira and got their doubts removed and thus 
they acquired the knowledge of equanimity, having relied on 
the teacher." 

(S14-15; E2617-2650) "In the Laksanadvara twelve 
different ways of defining a thing are pointed out. And the 
Bhasya explains them. Form or structure possessed by all the 
murta dravyas (i.e. substances having physical qualities) in 
common is considered to be their defining characteristic. That 
common characteristic out of so many like existence, being a 
substance, etc. possessed by amurta siddhas (i.e. by liberated 
souls devoid of physical qualities), to which we direct our 
attention, will be looked upon by us as their defining 
characteristic. If we apply the term siddha to all of them then 
we shall be regarded as formulating the definition of a siddha 
without directing our attention to any common quality 
(existence, etc.) possessed by siddhas (2623-2624). Again, it 


230 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is established that origination and destruction are also the 
characterizing features of a thing (2635-2642). It is suggested 
that five internal states (bhava) of a soul, viz., 
aupasamikabhdva (existence due to subsidence of karmas), 
etc., constitute the defining characteristics of one who has 
equanimity. And it is also pointed out that other definitions of 
equanimity are also to be formulated keeping in view the 
nama, etc." 

(S15; E2651-2759) “In the Nayadvara all the seven 
nayas (perspectives) beginning with the conventional (nigama) 
are dealt with at length. Nowhere (else) do we come across 
such an extensive exposition of the perspectives. Here it is 
stated that there are as many perspectives as modes of 
expression...We are told that all the perspectives, taken singly, 
represent the parasamayas (other creeds, partial truths), but 
that when synthesized they represent Truth (2736). It is 
declared that each of the seven fundamental perspectives has 
a hundred divisions and hence in all there are 700 
perspectives. And we are told at this juncture that if the 
number of the fundamental perspectives is five only then there 
would be 500 perspectives in all...Moreover, it is pointed out 
that one is liable to mistake the right for wrong and vice versa 
if one were to think without applying the methods of 
perspective, locating, and instruments of true cognition. Hence 
all these three methods should be applied while determining 
the nature of a thing or finding out a solution of any problem 
(2744).” 

(S15; E2746-2749) "In the Anumatadvara (kasya kim 
anumatam) it is discussed as to which equanimity leads to 
liberation from a particular perspective. It was already pointed 
out that in the Nirdesadvara much space is devoted to the 
treatment of equanimity applying the method of perspectives 
(1503-1528). One is likely to consider this to be the reason 
why equanimity is not treated of here (by) applying the 
method of perspectives. But this is not the case because the 
acaryas declare that while expounding theories according to 


VISESAVASYAKABHASYA 231 


the various views (drstivada) the application of the method of 
perspectives is necessary and inevitable but here it is not 
necessary. Again, it is stated that mostly the exposition is 
conducted applying the three fundamental perspectives and 
that in the exposition the expositor should take recourse to 
one or more perspectives according to the calibre of the 
hearers or readers; he may even remain satisfied with treating 
of the subject from one viewpoint only..." 

($16; E3108-3115) "The question as to which (kind of) 
equanimity is regarded as the way to liberation by a particular 
perspective is dealt with in the Anumatadvdra. According to 
the immediate view (rjusttranaya), etc. conduct alone is the 
cause of liberation because liberation takes place as soon as 
conduct becomes perfect while it does not take place even 
though awareness and vision are perfect (3108-3114). But the 
synthesis of all the perspectives is sya@dvada. And hence 
awareness, vision and conduct all three together should be 
regarded as the cause of liberation (3115)." 

(S16-17; E3117-3155) “Then follows the Kimitidvara 
wherein the question as to what equanimity is is discussed. 
Here first the nature of equanimity is discussed from the point 
of view of category. That is to say, the question is raised as to 
whether it is self Giva) or not-self or both or a non-entity. 
Again, the question is raised as to whether it is a substance or 
a quality. In answer it is said that the soul in the state of a 
resolve that 'I refrain from all sinful activities’ itself has 
equanimity. And in the first great vow this refraining is with 
regard to selves only while in other great vows it is with 
regard to all the substances (3117-3124). From the point of 
view of substance it is to be regarded as a substance. But 
from the point of view of modes it is to be regarded as a 
quality. Here the question of identity or difference of 
substance and modes is dealt with at length..." 

(S17; E3160-3174) "In the Kassadvara the question as 
to who could be regarded as possessed of equanimity is 
discussed. The person who is always engaged in the practice 


232 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of restraint (samyama), observances of lesser vows (niyama), 
penance (tapas) is regarded as possessed of equanimity. Again, 
one who considers all the souls--whether mobile (trasa) or 
static (sthavara)--to be equal is to be regarded as possessed of 
equanimity. The equanimity of a monk (who has abandoned 
all the sinful activity) is far better than that of a layman. This 
is so because a layman cannot shun all sinful and harmful 
activities. He is allowed to give consent to such activities..." 

"In (S17; 3274-76) we come across the discussion about 
the point as to how long equanimity continues after its 
acquisition." 

(S18; 3277-3287) “In the Katidvara the question as to 
how many persons can acquire equanimity is discussed." 

(S18; 3281-3289) "In the Antaradvara the question as 
to how much time (is) required for re-attaining equanimity 
once having fallen from it is discussed.” 

($18; 3290-3291) "In the Avirahadvara there occurs a 
discussion regarding the time which the mundane souls have 
without equanimity." 

($18; 3292) "In the Bhavadvara is discussed for how 
many lives one can continuously retain equanimity." 

(S18; 3293-3294) "In the Akarsadvara there has been 
raised a question as to how many times one should perform 
equanimity again and again in.one life or in many lives in 
order to relish it. At this occasion an illustration given is that 
of a man taking a particular number of morsels for relishing 
the good." 

(S18; 3295-3296) "In the Sparsanadvara the question 
as to how many space-points of the universe are touched bya 
self possessed of equanimity (3295-3296) is discussed." 

(S18; 3305-3306) "In the Niruktidvadra the term 
"samayika" is etymologically explained...Jinabhadra says that 
‘sama means freedom from attachment and aversion and 

"aya", which is equivalent to "ayana'"( =gamana), means 
attainment. Thus the term "samaya" means the attainment of 
the state characterised by freedom from attachment and 


VISESAVASYAKABHASYA 233 


aversion. And "samaya" and "samdyika" are identical. The term 
"samaya" means samyak (right) samaya (attaiment. or 
acquisition). The self having the attitude of universal love 
(=samaya=samyak gamana=daya) towards all creatures is 
itself samdyika." 


20.SIMHASURAGANI (600), Nyayagamanasarini on 
Mallavadin's Nayacakra 

As noted in the Introduction to the section on (17) 
Mallavadin's Nayacakra, the text of that work is only extant by 
reconstructing it from Simhasuragani's commentary. That 
commentary is available in the several editions of the parts of 
Mallavadin's work detailed under the Introduction to that 
section. Erich Frauwallner, in his Introduction to the first of 
the three volumes mentioned there,- remarks “Simhasuri's 
commentary which naturally takes Mallavadis original for 
granted...is not understandable without it. Therefore it is 
imperial to reconstruct the original" (of Mallavadin's text) 
"from Simhastri. This is difficult and sometimes almost 
impossible, because as a rule Simhasuri quotes only the first 
and the last words of the sentence to be explained, allows 
space only to more difficult passages, and passes quickly over 
others with the remark "easily understood" (sugamanam)." 78 


21.KOTYACARYA (725) , Commentary on Jinabhadra Gani's 
Avasyakanirukti-Vigesavasgyakabhdsya 

This commentary has been edited several times. About 
its author, Nathmal Tatia, on p. 6 of his Introduction to his 
edition of the work constituting our #19, speculates that 
Kotyacarya "must have flourished before the eighth century 
A.D, and might have been a contemporary of Acarya 
Haribhadrasiri." 


234 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


22.SIDDHASENA MAHAMATI (700?), Nydydvatara 

The identity and date of this Siddhasena, who seems 
not to be the same as ‘Siddhasena Divakara, has been 
frequently discussed. The most recent examination of the 
issues is found in Piotr Balcerowicz, Jaina Epistemology in 
Historical and Comparative Perspective. Alt- und Neu-indische 
Studien herausgegeben von der Abteilung fiir Kultur und 
Geschichte Indiens und Tibets des Asien-Afrika-Institutes an 
der Universitat Hamburg 53. 1-2, Stuttgart 2001. Balcerowicz 
reviews the extensive literature about Siddhasena's date, 
coming to the conclusion that this author must have lived after 
Dharmakirti, to whose Buddhist innovations he refers, and 
before Haribhadra Siri, who quotes one of the verses from the 
Nyaydvatara. This places Siddhasena in a period from about 
620-750, and we are left to estimate where within that range 
to place him 

Apparently neither the Nyayavatara nor its earliest 
commentary, the Vivrti of Siddharsigani, give the name of its 
author. Balcerowicz suggests calling the author "Siddhasena 
Mahamati", since "Mahamati" is the name by which Haribhadra 
Siri appears to have have known him. 

Balcerowicz provides an edition (interlarded within his 
edition of the Vivrti) in the second volume of his work cited 
above. This is our "E". His translation appears in the first 
volume, and our "T" below is based on that, but with some 
emendations to fit the translations of technical terms to fit our 
current practices. 


0 (E323; T1) This (work) is begun in order to explain 
(what) an instrument of true cognition (is). 

1 (E333; T9) An instrument of true cognition is an 
awareness (jfidna) which reveals both itself and something 
else, and is without sublation (badha). It is of two kinds, 
direct (pratyaksa) (i.e., perception) and indirect (paroksa) 
(i.e.; inference), depending on the kind of object each 
ascertains. 


NYAYAVATARA 235 


2 (E353; T26) Objection: Instruments of true cognition 
‘are well-known, and common practices (vyavahdra) are 
carried out through them. So there is no point in giving a 
definition of "instrument of true cognition”. 

3 (E356; T29) Answer: The purpose of giving a 
definition of "instrument of true cognition" is well-known; it is 
remove the delusions of those whose minds are deluded. 

4 (E358; T31) An awareness which grasps an object 
directly is perception; the other is to be known as indirect in 
its manner of grasping. 

5 (E367; T38) Traditionally, inference is (taken to be) 
the determination (niscaya) of the saddhya through the hetu's 
(here, linga's) inseparability from it. Inference is nonerroneous 
(abhranta) because it is an instrument of true cognition like 
perception. 

6 (E373; T43) Perception is not erroneous, since it is 
clearly an instrument of true cognition. To say "error is an 
instrument of true cognition" would be to utter a 
contradiction. 

7 (E379; T47) Since it is wrong to suppose that all 
appearances are illusory, what is clear (sphuta) and ascertains 
both itself and something else is an instrument of true 
cognition with regard to both. 

8 (E380; T48) When from a sentence that is not 
opposed to experience and which speaks of ultimate truth 
(paramartha) an instrument of true cognition arises that 
grasps things as they are (tattva), that (instrument) is called 
"verbal testimony" (Sabda). 

9 (E58; T6) Scripture is the awareness of a qualified 
person that is nontransgressing (anullanghya), not inconsistent 
with competent perception, that concerns things as they are 
and prevents mistaken ways of behaving. 

10 (E384; T52) A sentence which produces certainty for 
others as it brings about certainty for oneself is called by wise 
persons an instrument for others (parartha) through 
metaphorical transfer. 


236 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


11 (E386; T53) Since both perception and inference 
reveal well-known objects, and since they are means (for the 
knowledge) of others, both are known as instruments for 
others. 

12 (E388; T55) An expression (vacas) indicating an 
object cognized through perception is (also) called perception, 
since it is the instrument (nimitta) of the appearance (in the 
mind of that object). 

13 (E389; T55) Inference for others is an expression 
indicating that a paksa (has) a hetu that is regularly connected 
with a sadhya. 

14 (E393; T59) The paksa is (something that is) 
associated (abhyupagama) with the sddhya and is not 
excluded therefrom by perception, etc. (Or: the thesis is the 
acceptance of the sadhya (in the paksa) that is not set aside by 
perception, etc.) The paksa must be provided, being (or 
showing) the place of residence (gocara) of the hetu. 

15 (E394; T59) Otherwise, if the addressee 
misunderstands the (paksa, i.e., the place of residence) of the 
hetu intended by the speaker, the reason may be suspected of 
being contradictory, just as 

16 (E395; T60) for a spectator watching archery, the 
bowman who fails to say what he is aiming at may be equally 
rightly be taken either to have hit.or to have missed the target. 

17 (E396; T61) The specification of the hetu can be 
(exemplified) either through its positive relation (to the paksa) 
or otherwise; there are these two ways, since the s@dhya is 
established by either one of these ways. 

18 (E398; T62) An example (drstanta) by similarity is 
a statement of the pervasion (vydpti) of the sddhya by the 
hetu (here, sadhana) when that relation is recollected. 

19 (E400; T63) But an example in which, where there 
is absence of the hetu, the absence of the sddhya as well is 
found, is traditionally held to be based on dissimilarity. 

20 (£401; T64) Since the sddhya is proved only 
through internal pervasion (antarvydpti) there is no use for an 


NYAYAVATARA 237 


example from outside. Thus those wise in reasoning (nydya) 
conclude that even in the absence of external examples the 
relation in question stands. 

21 (E403; T65) A fallacious thesis is one that is already 
accepted by the addressee, (or) is sublated by direct 
perception of an inferential sign or by what is said by people 
in the world or by one's own say so--there are these many 
kinds (of fallacious thesis). 

22 (E404; T66) The definition of the reason (hetu) is 
that without which something would be inexplicable. A 
fallacious reason is due to its not being perceived, its being 
doubtful, or there being an error concerning it. 

23 (E405; T66) The unproved (asiddha) reason is one 
which is not found present. Where a thing is explicable only 
otherwise it is contradictory (viruddha). And that (reason) 
which is plausible both in the present case and otherwise is 
inconclusive (anaikantika). 

24. (E409; T70) Faults in the example--here based on 
similarity--aré said by logicians to arise from inapplicable 
definitions of the hetu or from lacking the sddhya, etc. 

25. (E413; T73) Faults in the example based on 
dissimilarity are said by logicians to include nonexclusion of 
one or more of the terms or their combination and 
doubtfulness (concerning their presence). 

26, (E418; T78) Refutation is pointing out faults in 
what someone has said. A fallacious refutation is to point out 
faults in an argument that is faultless. 

27 (E420; T79) That which free from all veils, that is 
pure (kevala), is perception which constantly reveals the very 
nature of al] objects. 

28. (E424; T82). The result of instruments of true 
cognition is the removal of ignorance; (the result of) purity is 
happiness and indifference; the result of the rest (of the five 
kinds of perception) is the ability to acquire and avoid. 

29. (E425; T83) That reality (vastu) whose nature is 
multiple (anekantatmaka) is the domain of all acts of 


238 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


awareness. An object qualified by (only) one place is the 
content of (one or another of the) standpoints (naya). 

30 (E475; T125) Since standpoints are used in context 
of (verbal) testimony relating to one (aspect), testimony 
concerning the complete object is called "testimony based on 
(sevenfold) predication". 

31 (E477; T126) The cogniser (pramatr) is aware of 
himself and of what is not himself; (he is) an agent, an 
experiencer, (he) changes, knows himself, is alive and not 
(made of) earth, etc. 

32 (E489; T136) Instruments of knowledge are 
established as beginningless and endless, even though they are 
well-known to all people in everyday life. They have been 
discussed here. 


23. YOGINDUDEVA (750), Paramatmaprakasa 

This writer is also known by other names which include 
the element "Yoga" or "Yogi". A Digambara, little to nothing is 
known of the details of his life. 

This summary is taken from the Introduction to our "E", 
A. N. Upadhye's edition of this work together with 
Yogindudeva's Yogasara, constituting Rajachandra Jaina 
Sastramala 3, Agas 1973, pp. 10-24.”? We have amended the 
summary in some places to bring it into conformity with the 
translations of technical terms and stylistic policies of the 
present Volume. 

Prof. Upadhye in his Introduction to E compares several 
manuscripts of the work, and after a careful analysis concludes 
that the text we have now is undoubtedly somewhat different 
from the text apparently composed by Yogindndeva in around 
750 A.D. 

The work was presumably written in, and at any rate 
comes down to us as in, Apabhrarga. Prof. Upadhye has also 
provided in E a Sanskrit restoration of the text. 


PARAMATMAPRAKASA 239 
Summary by A. N. Upadhye 


CHAPTER ONE 

1-7 (E5-12) Salutation to selves supreme (paramatman) 
that Have become eternally stainless and constituted of 
knowledge after burning the spots of karman with the fire of 
meditation. | 

Salutations are offered to hosts of liberated selves 
(siddha) who are the embodiments of bliss and unparalleled 
knowledge, who have consumed the fuel of karma with the 
fire of great meditation, who dwell in nirvana never falling 
back into the ocean of transmigration though supremely 
weighty with knowledge, and who being self-established 
clearly visualize everything here, both physical and 
superphysical existence. Then devotional obeisance to the 
great jinas who are the embodiments of omniscience, 
omnivision and omnibliss and by whom all the objects of 
knowledge are enlightened. Lastly, salutations to the three 
classes of saints, viz., teachers (dcdrya), preceptors 
(upddhyaya) and monks (s@dhu) who, being absorbed in great 
meditation, realize the vision of paramatman. 

8-10 (E15-17) After saluting the five divinities Bhatta 
Prabhakara, with a pure mind, addresses Yogindu: Sir, for 
infinite time we have been in this round of rebirths. Not a bit 
of happiness has been attained, but a lot of misery has fallen 
to our lot. We are tortured by the miseries of the four grades 
of existence, viz., divine, human, sub-human and hellish states 
of existence; so please instruct us about paramatman (i.e., the 
soul supreme) orf paramapada (i.e., the lofty status of 
liberation), to put an end to our miseries. 

11-15 (E18-22) Then Yogindu asks Bhatta Prabhakara 
to attend closely to his discourse that follows, and says: The 
self (atman), the principle of life, is of three kinds, viz., 
external self, internal self and the supreme self. One should 
give up attachment to the external and then by knowing 
oneself realize the self supreme which is an embodiment of 


240 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


knowledge. He is an ignoramus who takes the body for the 
self. But he is a wise man who considers himself as an 
embodiment of knowledge distinct from the body and being 
engrossed in great meditation realizes the paramdtman. 
Realization of the self as an embodiment of knowledge and as 
free from karma after quitting everything external: that is 
paramatman. Thus it is the internal that by leaving everything 
external becomes the supreme. 

16-25 (E23-29) One should concentrate one’s mind on 
the supreme self that is respected in all the three worlds, that 
has reached the abode of liberation, and on which meditate 
Hari and Hara. The supreme self is eternal, untainted by 
passions and consequent karma. He is peace, happiness and 
absolute bliss. He does not leave his nature and get changed 
into something else. He is untainted (nirajijana), having no 
color, no smell, no taste, no sound, no touch, no birth and no 
death. He is not subject to anger, delusion, deceit and pride; 
nor is there anything like a specific place and object of 
meditation for him who is all by himself. He is not amenable 
to merit and demerit, nor to joy and grief. He has not a single 
taint or flaw, so he is untainted. He is an eternal divinity in 
whose case there is no devotional control of breath, no object 
of meditation, no mystical diagram, no miraculous spell and 
no charmed circle. That eternal self, who is the subject of pure 
meditation or contemplation, is beyond the comprehension of 
Vedas, sastras and senses. His is the highest state, dwelling as 
he does at the summit of three worlds, representing unique or 
absolute vision, knowledge, happiness and power. 

26-33 (E30-35) The divinity that dwells in liberation, 
being free from karma and constituted of knowledge, is 
essentially the same as the spirit or the self in the body; really 
speaking there is no difference between the two. It must be 
known that paramatman is already there in oneself, and by 
realizing this the karmas accumulated over a long time are 
shattered away. The self should be realized as immune from 
pleasures and pains of the senses and of mental activities, and 


PARAMATMAPRAKASA. 241 


everything else must be avoided. Though the self dwells in the 
body the former should not be identified with the latter, 
because their characteristics are essentially different. The self 
is mere sentiency, noncorporeal and an embodiment of 
knowledge; it has no senses, no mind, nor is it within sense- 

perception. The lengthy creeper of the round of rebirths is 
crippled by -him who meditates on his self with his mind 
indifferent to worldly pleasures. One that dwells in the temple 
of the body is doubtlessly the same as paramdtman, the 
eternal and infinite divinity with his constitution brilliant with 
omniscience. Though he dwells in the body, there is no mutual 
identity nor connection between himself and the body. It is 
paramatman that is revealed, giving supreme bliss, to saints 
who are established in equanimity. 

34-42 (E36-42) It is the ignorant that understand the 
highest self as a composite body, but indeed he is one whole, 
separate from karma, though he is bound by karma and 
though he resides in the body. Like a star in the infinite sky 
the whole universe is reflected in the omniscience of the 
highest self on whom, as an object of meditation, the saints 
always concentrate their attention in order to obtain 
liberation. It is this very paramatman, when he is in the grips 
of karma, that assumes various forms of existence and comes 
to be endowed with the three sexes. The universe is there in 
the highest self reflected in his omniscience, and he is in the 
universe, but he is not (convertible into the form of) the 
universe. The paramatman dwells in the body, but even to this 
day he is not realized by Hari and Hara, because they are 
devoid of the highest meditation and austerities. 

42-49 (E43-48) So far as modifications are considered 
the highest self is said to be coupled with origination and 
destruction, but in fact from the realistic point of view he is 
above them. With his ‘presence the sense-organs function, 
otherwise the body becomes desolate. Through the sense- 
organs he knows the objects of sense, but he is not known by 
them. Really speaking there is no bondage or transmigration 


242 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


for paramatman, so the commonsensical viewpoint should be 
given up. The supreme characteristic of paramatman is that his 
knowledge, like a creeper, stretches as far as the objects of 
knowledge are. With reference to him actions fulfil their own 
functions, but the highest self neither loses nor gains anything. 
Though bound by karma he is never transformed into karma. 

50-56 (E49-54) Some say that the self is omnipresent; 
some hold it to be devoid of knowledge; some say that it has 
bodily size; and some others say that it is empty (Sunya). The 
self is all-pervading in the sense that, when free from karmas, 
it comprehends by its omniscience physical and superphysical 
worlds. Sensory knowledge functions no more in the case of 
selves who have realized spiritual light; and in this sense the 
self is devoid of knowledge. The pure self, there being no 
cause, neither expands nor contracts, but it.is of the same size 
as that of the final body; and in this sense the self is of the 
bodily size. He is empty in the sense that, in his pure 
condition, he is not amenable to any of the eight kinds of 
action and eighteen faults. 

57-58 (E56-57) The self is not created by anybody, nor 
is anybody created by the self. As a substance the self is 
eternal, but only its modes appear and disappear. Substance 
is that which is endowed with qualities and modes. Qualities 
are co-born with the substance, while modes present 
themselves in succession on the substance. The self is a 
substance; vision and knowledge are the qualities; the 
appearances in the four grades of existence are the modes 
caused by karma. 

59-66 (E59-56) The association between self and karma 
has no beginning in time, and furthermore one is not created 
by the other; so both of them have no beginning in time. The 
embodied self, because of its previous karma, develops various 
conditions, and thus becomes virtuous or otherwise. The self, 
thus obscured by eight kinds of karma, will not realize its own 
nature. Karma represents (subtle) atoms (of matter) that stick 
into the space-points of selves that are infatuated and tainted 


PARAMATMAPRAKASA 243 


with sense-pleasures and passions. Really speaking the five 
sense-organs, the mind, the tortures in the four grades of 
existence and all other conditions are, in fact, separate from 
(the nature of) the self: they are fashioned by karma for the 
self. Various kinds of pleasures and pains and all the 
conditions such as bondage and liberation are brought about 
by karma; the self does nothing beyond mere seeing and 
knowing: that is the realistic view. There is not a single region 
in the 840,000 births which has not been visited by the self 
wandering without obtaining the instructions of Jina. The self 
can be compared to a lame person; by himself he neither 
comes nor goes; it is the force of karma (vidhi) that drags 
about the self in the three worlds. 

67-70 (E67-70) The self is itself, and it can never be 
anything else; that is a rule. So far as its real nature is 
concerned, it is not born, it does not die, nor does it bring 
about anything like bondage or liberation. Various terms like 
birth, old age, death, disease, gender and color do not, in fact, 
refer to the self but only to the body. 

71-75 (E71-74) The self is Brahman without old age 
and death, which refer only to the body, so one should not be 
afraid of them. To reach the other end of transmigration one 
should meditate on the pure spirit without minding whether 
the body is cut, pierced or destroyed. The self is essentially 
different from attachment, etc., which are occasioned by 
karma and from other insentient substances. The self is an 
embodiment of knowledge, and everything else is foreign. The 
self must be meditated on as independent of eight kinds of 
action, as free from all the faults and as an embodiment of 
vision, knowledge and conduct. 

76-84 (E78-80) When the self realizes himself by 
himself he becomes right vision, i.e., possessed of right vision 
or spiritualistic attitude, and gets rid of karma; but if he 
pursues the modes his view is perverted, and he incurs the 
bondage of many karmas and wanders long in transmigration. 
Sticky and hard karmas lead the self astray in spite of the 


244 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


acquisition of knowledge. When the self develops perverted 
attitudes he grasps reality in a perverted manner and identifies 
the conditions created by karma with himself. Then he begins 
to say "I am fair", "I am black", "I am a Digambara, a Buddhist, 
or a Svetambara". It is an ignorant fellow who speaks thus. 
Mother, father, wife, home, sons, friends and wealth: all this 
is a magical network of unreality, and only a fool claims all 
this as his. A being of perverted attitudes does nothing else 
than enjoy the objects of pleasure which are the cause of 
misery. 

85-91 (E81-85) Right vision: is attained by the self 
when, finding an opportune time, delusion is destroyed: thus 
necessarily the self is realized. The wise man should realize 
that the self is neither fair, nor red, nor black; he is neither 
subtle nor gross...neither a Buddhist, a Digambara nor a 
Svetambara, and the self possesses none of the ascetic 
characteristics. The self is neither a teacher nor a pupil, 
neither a master nor a servant, neither a hero nor a coward, 
etc., etc. 

92-103 (E86-97) The Self, besides its essential nature 
of consciousness, is not to be identified with merit, demerit, 
time, space, initiators of movement and of stasis. The self is 
restraint, chastity and austerity; it is faith and knowledge; and 
the self is the seat of eternal liberation when it is realized. 
Ignoring the pure self one should not search after some 
heavenly place, serve some other teacher, and think of some 
other divinity. The self represents absolute vision, and all other 
descriptions are formal, being true from the commonsense 
Point of view only; when the pure self is realized, the highest 
state of liberation is reached within a moment. Religious 
treatises, sacred works and austerities do not bring liberation 
for him whose mind is not occupied with (reflection on) the 
pure self. When the self is known, the whole world is known; 
because it becomes reflected in the knowledge of the self. That 
both physical and superphysical worlds are seen (reflected) in 
oneself is a privilege of those who are merged in self- 


PARAMATMAPRAKASA 245 


realization. Undoubtedly it is a natural phenomenon that the 
self enlightens himself and others like the light of the sun in 
the sky. The vision of the world reflected in the self is like that 
of stars reflected in clear water. The saint by the strength of 
his knowledge should realize his self whereby he knows 
himself and others. 

103-108 (E96-101) When Prabhakara requests that he 
should be instructed in the great knowledge, he is thus 
addressed: The self is knowledge, and he who knows his self 
pervades all of space with his knowledge, even though 
ordinarily he is limited to the body. Whatever is different from 
the self is not knowledge, so leaving aside everything one 
should realize the self which is a fit subject for knowledge. As 
long as a knower does not know the self, which represents 
knowledge, by means of knowledge, he will not, being a 
nonknower, realize the highest Brahman who is an 
embodiment of knowledge. By knowing one's self 
parabrahman is visualized and realized whereby the highest 
realm of liberation is reached. 

109-123 (E101-112) When Brahman is seen and 
realized, the world other than samsdra (paraloka) is reached. 
The lofty divinity, the embodiment of knowledge, residing 
therein is meditated on by saints, Hari and Hara. One reaches 
that condition on which one's mind is set; one should not, 
therefore, direct one's attention towards other foreign stuff 
than the status of parabrahman. That which is nonsentient and 
separate from the self is the foreign stuff consisting of matter, 
the principles of motion, rest, space and time. One who is 
devoted toward paramatman even for half a moment burns 
the whole lot of sin, as a spark of fire reduces a heap of logs 
to ashes. Setting aside all thoughts, one should peacefully 
concentrate on the highest status of liberation and thus realize 
the divinity: The highest bliss, which is attained by visualizing 
Paramatman (Siva) in the course of meditation is nowhere 
attained in the world of transmigration. Even Indra, who 
Sports in the company of thousands of nymphs, does not get 


246 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that happiness which the saints attain when meditating on 
their self. The self which is free from attachment, when 
realizing the self termed "Siva" and "bliss" (<Gnta), attains that 
infinite happiness realized by great Jinas by visualizing the 
self. The highest self is visualized in the pure mind like the 
brilliant sun in the cloudless sky. As no figure is reflected in a 
mirror with a solid surface, so indeed the God, the highest 
self, is never visualized in the mind (Ardaya) unclean with 
attitudes of attachment, etc. There can be no place for 
Brahman when the mind is occupied by a fawn-eyed one: how 
can two swords occupy the same scabbard? It appears to me 
that the eternal divinity dwells in the clear mind of a knower 
like a swan on the surface of a lake. God is not there in the 
temple, in the statue, in the plaster, nor in the painting, but he 
dwells in the equanimous mind as an eternal and stainless 
embodiment of knowledge. When the mind and parameSvara 
have become identical, nay one, where is the question of any 
worship? To concentrate the mind that is running towards 
pleasures and passions on the paramatman free from the stains 
of karma, that is the means of liberation, but not any mystic 
syllable or practice. 


CHAPTER TWO 

1-10 (£115-124) Then Prabhakara asks: What is 
liberation (moksa), what are the means and what are the 
fruits of attaining liberation? The author expounds only the 
views of Jina. Liberation is superior to dharma, artha and 
kama, which do not give absolute happiness. That the Jinas 
attain liberation alone by avoiding the other three shows that 
liberation is the best of the four. The world or transmigration 
means bondage. Even beasts in bondage want to get 
liberation, then why not others? That the realm of liberation 
is at the top of the world is a sign of its superiority. Liberation 
represents the best happiness, that is why liberated selves stay 
in liberation ali the time. Hari, Hara, Brahman and Jinavara 
and great saints--all these meditate on liberation concentrating 


PARAMATMAPRAKASA 247 


their minds on the pure highest self. It must be realized that 
in the three worlds there is nothing else than liberation which 
brings happiness to selves. The wise sages have said that 
liberation consists in the realization of the highest seif by 
being free from all karma. 

11 (E125) The highest and eternal fruit of liberation is 
that there is (infinite) vision, knowledge, happiness (and 
strength) without being lost even for a moment. 

12-14 (E125-128) The selves attain liberation without 
right vision, awareness and conduct which really speaking 
consist respectively in seeing, knowing and conducting oneself 
by oneself. From the commonsense point of view right faith, 
awareness and conduct constitute the means of liberation, but 
really speaking the self itself is all three. The self sees, knows, 
and realizes himself by himself; therefore the self himself is 
the cause of liberation. Proper knowledge of the self 
constituted of right vision, awareness and conduct lead to 
spiritual purity. 

15-28 (E129-145) Right vision consists in the steady 
belief in the true nature of the self resulting from the 
knowledge of various substances exactly as they are in the 
universe. Those are the six substances which fill these three 
worlds and which have no beginning and end. Of these six, 
the self is a sentient substance, and the remaining five, 
namely, karmic products, initiators of movement, initiators of 
stasis, space and time are insentient and separate from the 
self. Really speaking (so far as its essential nature is 
concerned) the self is noncorporeal, an embodiment of 
knowledge, characterized by supreme bliss and (one that can 
achieve) an eternal condition of purity. Karmic products, in 
their six types, are corporeal or concrete (murta, having sense- 
qualities and thus amenable to sense-perception), while the 
others are noncorporeal. Space is that in which the rest of the 
substances exist, i.e., it is that which gives room to all the rest. 
Time is a substance characterized by persistence (vartand), 
being an accessory cause of change when things themselves 


248 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


are undergoing a change; the moments of time are 
individually separate like jewels in a heap of jewels. Excepting 
the self, karmic products and time, the remaining substances 
are indivisible and homogeneous wholes. Beside the self and 
karmic products the remaining four substances have no 
movement. Initiators of movement and of stasis and a self 
occupy innumerable space-points. Though the six substances 
exist together in physical space, they exist in fact in their own 
‘qualities or modes. These various substances fulfil their own 
functions for the embodied beings which wander in 
transmigration suffering the miseries of four grades of 
existence. The very nature of these substances has been the 
cause of misery; so one should follow the path of liberation 
that he might reach that realm other than this of 
transmigration. 

- 29 (E148) The condition or state of the self which 
understands the substances exactly as they are is known as 
knowledge. 

30 (E149) Cultivation of that genuine and pure state of 
the self after fully realizing and discriminating the self and the 
others and after giving up (attachment to) the others is known 
as right conduct. 

31-33 (E150-152) The devotee of the three jewels will 
not meditate on any other thing than the self which is an 
abode of great merit. To identify the three jewels with the self 
is to meditate on oneself with the condition of liberation in 
view; and gradually meditating on the self day by day they 
attain liberation. 

34-52 (E154-172) Selves have first vision, which 
consists in the general comprehension of all things devoid of 
particular details. Thus clearly vision comes first, and then, in 
the case of selves, authentic knowledge follows when the 
particulars of particular details are known. The self without 
any attachment, putting up with pleasures and pains and sunk 
in the austerity of meditations, becomes the instrument of the 
shedding of the stock of karma. Treating merit and demerit 


PARAMATMAPRAKASA 249 


alike (from the point of view of liberation), when the self is 
equanimous fresh influx of karma is stopped. As long as the 
saint, with no distractions, remains submerged in meditation 
on the nature of the self, fresh karma is stopped and the stock 
is exhausted. The old karma he destroys, and fresh karma he 
does not incur: giving up all attachment he cultivates peace. 
And right vision, right awareness and right conduct belong to 
him who has equanimous peace and to none else; so the great 
Jina has said. Self-control is possible where there is peace of 
mind; self-control is lost when the self becomes a victim of 
passions. Infatuation, which gives rise to passions, must be 
given up. Knowledge devoid of attachment and aversion is 
possible when one is free from delusion and passions. Those 
who understand what is real and what is otherwise and who 
are equanimous, taking pleasure in their spiritual nature, are 
happy in this world. An equanimous person has two faults: he 
destroys his bandhu (meaning "brother’, also "bondage"), and 
makes the world gahilu (meaning "foolish", also "possessed"). 
He has a third fault as well: he leaves his enemy (sattu) and 
becomes engrossed in para ("enemy”, also "the highest self"). 
There is another fault: being vikala ("without stains", also 
"without body") he rises up to the top of the world. And the 
last fault is that when all beings are asleep he is awake, and 
when the world is awake, he sleeps. He neither speaks nor 
opens a discussion; he neither praises nor blames anybody, but 
he realizes an equanimous attitude which leads one to 
liberation. The saint, realizing that paraphemalia--pleasures, 
body, etc.--are foreign to his self, has neither attachment to 
nor aversion from (internal and external) paraphernalia like 
pleasures and the body, etc. The great saint feels no 
attachment and aversion for activity (vrtti) and withdrawal 
(nivrtti), because he. knows them to be the cause of bondage. 

53-65 (E174-186) Not knowing the causes of bondage 
and liberation and not realizing the self as right vision, 
awareness and conduct, one incurs through delusion both 
merit and demerit as though they lead one to liberation. The 


250 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


self that does not treat merit and demerit alike suffers misery 
all along and wanders in transmigration being deluded. The 
wise say that even demerit or sins (papa) are beneficial, since 
they immediately give pain and leave the self free to attain 
liberation; and even the merits (punya) are not beneficial 
when they bestow kingdoms and consequently bring lots of 
misery. Better to court death that leads to self-realization than 
merits that lead astray. Those that march toward self- 
‘realization attain infinite happiness, but others that have 
mistreated the same suffer infinite miseries in spite of 
meritorious deeds. Merits lead to prosperity, prosperity to 
vanity, and vanity to intellectual perversity, which further 
leads to sin; therefore merits are not desirable. Devotion to 
gods, scriptures and saints leads one to merit, but never to the 
destruction of karma: so says the venerable saint. Contempt of 
the same, however, necessarily leads to sin whereby one 
wanders in transmigration. Sin leads the self to hell and the 
subhuman world, good conduct leads to heaven, and mixture 
of both to the human world; but when both are destroyed 
there results liberation. Worship, self-reprobation and 
repentance with correction--all these bring merit; so a man of 
knowledge will not devote himself to these by leaving 
meditation on the pure and holy self, the embodiment of 
knowledge. 

66-71 (E187-192) A man of impure manifestation of 
consciousness has no self-control, and his mind is not pure. 
Pure manifestation of consciousness is the best, because it is 
attended by self-control, character, rightéousness, vision, 
knowledge and the destruction of karma. Pure manifestation 
of consciousness is the dharma which supports beings falling 
in the miseries of four grades of existence. Pure manifestation 
of consciousness is the unique path leading to liberation: one 
who goes astray can never be liberated. One may go anywhere 
and do whatever one likes, but liberation can never be 
attained unless the mind is pure. Good manifestation of 
consciousness. leads to piety, bad to impiety, and pure 


PARAMATMAPRAKASA 251 


manifestation, which is free from both, is immune from karma. 

72-78 (E193-199) Giving brings pleasures, austerities 
bring the status of Indra, but knowledge brings that state of 
existence which is free from birth and death. To know one's 
self is to get released; otherwise without this knowledge one 
has to wander in transmigration. Without this knowledge 
nobody has attained liberation: by churning water the hands 
would not be greasy. That knowledge which is not self- 
knowledge is to no avail, and even austerities which are not 
conducive to self-knowledge are simply painful. In the 
presence of self-knowledge there is no scope for attachment: 
darkness cannot spread before the rays of the sun. For men of 
knowledge there is no other object of attachment than the self: 
so when they realize this reality, their mind finds no pleasure 
in objects of the senses. Their minds cannot be concentrated 
on any other object than the self: he who knows an emerald 
attaches no value to a piece of glass. 

79-85 (E189-205) When experiencing the fruits of his 
actions, he who entertains, through delusion, good or bad 
attitudes incurs karma again; and if he has no attachment or 
delusion fresh karma is not incurred and the old stock is 
exhausted. Though the highest reality is being studied, even a 
particle of attachment proves to be a hindrance. If the self is 
not realized, study of scriptures and the practice of penances 
will not rescue anyone. A man studying the scriptures may still 
remain dull, if his doubts are not cleared, as long as he has 
not realized the pure highest self residing in his body. 
Scriptures are studied for self-enlightenment, and if one has 
not attained that highest knowledge thereby, is he not a fool? 
A tour to holy places will not rescue anyone from 
transmigration if he is devoid of self-knowledge. 

86-107 (E205-224) There is a vast difference between 
foolish and wise saints: the wise forsake the body realizing the 
self to be independent thereof, while the foolish wish to 
possess the whole world with the pretext of practising various 
virtues. The foolish take pleasure in their pupils--male and 


252 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


female--and in books; but the wise are ashamed of them, 
knowing them to be the cause of bondage. Mat, board (or 
garment, bowl) and male and female disciples attract a monk 
and carry him astray. It is a self-deception .if a saint wearing 
the emblem of great Jinas pulls out his hair with ashes but 
does not give up attachment for paraphernalia. To receive 
desired paraphernalia even after being a monk is to swallow 
back one's vomit. Those monks, who give up the pursuit of 
liberation for the sake of worldly profit and fame, are burning 
a temple in fact for a nail. The monk who considers himself 
great because of his possessions never realizes reality. To those 
who have realized reality no one is great or small: all selves 
are the great Brahman. The devotee of three jewels makes no 
distinction between selves and selves, whatever bodies they 
might be occupying. The selves in the three worlds are 
distinguished from one another by the ignorant, but in 
omniscience they are of one type. All selves have knowledge 
as their essence; they are free from birth and death; they are 
alike with regard to their spatial extent, and they are similar 
with regard to their characteristics. Vision and knowledge are 
their essential attributes: if the mind is enlightened, no 
distinction should be made between various selves. Those that 
make no distinction between the (potential) Brahmins in this 
world realize the pure light of the highest self. By leaving 
attachment and aversion and (consequently) being established 
in equanimity (samabhdva) those that treat all selves alike 
easily attain liberation. The distinction between various bodies 
should not be attributed to the selves, which are essentially 
characterised by vision, knowledge and conduct. Bodies, small 
or big, are fashioned by karma (vidhi), but the selves are all 
alike everywhere and always. He who considers friends, foes, 
himself, others and the rest all alike knows himself. He who 
does not realize the one nature of all the selves cannot 
develop the attitude of equality which is like a boat in the 
transmigratory ocean. The distinction between selves and 
selves is occasioned by karma which is not to be identified 


PARAMATMAPRAKASA 253 


with the self and which will be separated from the self when 
there is an opportunity. All the selves should be treated alike 
without dividing and without distinguishing them according to 
class (varna); as is the highest self-so are these three worlds. 

108-111 (E226-229) The great saints: know what is 
other than the self and give up their association therewith, 
because that association distracts their concentration on the 
highest self. Association with a person who is not equanimous 
should be avoided, because that makes one anxious and 
uneasy. Even the good lose their virtues in the company of the 
wicked: fire, for instance, is hammered because of its 
company with iron. Infatuation does no good, and uniformly 
it brings misery; so one should get rid of it. 

It is a matter of disgrace that a nude monk with 
hideous physical appearance should desire sweet dishes. The 
monk, if he wishes for abundant fruits of his twelve-fold 
penance, should give up greed for food in thoughts, words and 
acts. To love savoury and detest tasteless food is gluttony that 
comes in the way of realizing reality. 

112 (E232) Moths, deer, elephants, bees and fish dre 
ruined respectively by light, sound, touch, scent and taste: so 
one should not be attached to those. 

113-124 (E233-240) Greed and attachment bring no 
good, but uniformly they bring misery: so one should get rid 
of them. Fire in the company of loha (=greed, and also iron) 
is picked up by a pair of tongs, placed on the anvil and struck 
by a hammer. Sesame seeds, because of sneha (=oil, and also 
attachment) are sprinkled with water, pressed underfoot and 
crushed repeatedly. Successful and virtuous are those persons 
who easily swim across, when they have fallen in the pond of 
youth. The great Jinas abdicated their thrones and reached 
liberation: then how is it that persons who are maintaining 
themselves by begging should not achieve their spiritual good? 
The selves wandering in transmigration have suffered great 
miseries, and hence by destroying the eight karmas they 
should achieve liberation. Beings cannot put up with even a 


254 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


bit of misery: then how is it that they can afford to incur 
karma which brings manifold miseries in the four grades of 
existence? The whole world, being entangled in turmoil, 
foolishly incurs karma, and not a moment is devoted to the 
rescue of the self. Till the great knowledge, viz., omniscience, 
is attained the self, suffering misery and infatuated with sons 
and wives, wanders in millions of births. The selves should 
never claim ownership over the house, relations and body: 
they are the creations of karma as understood from the 
scriptures by the saint. Thoughts about residence and relations 
bring no release: the mind should be applied to austerities 
(which bring about the destruction of karma) that liberation 
might be reached. 

125-127 (E241-243) One has to suffer for the sins that 
one has incurred by killing manifold beings for the benefit of 
his sons and wives. One has to suffer infinitely more pain than 
the pain one has inflicted on beings by crushing and killing 
them. Harm unto living beings leads one to hell and shelter 
unto them to heaven; these are the two paths that are 
available: one should select whichsoever one likes. . 

128-143 (E244-258) Everything here is ephemeral: it is 
of no use to pound the husk; even the body does not 
accompany the self; the mind, therefore, should be directed to 
the pure path of liberation without any attachment to relatives 
and residence. Temples, (images of) gods, scriptures, teacher, 
holy places, religious texts (veda) and poems and the tree 
that has put forth flowers: all this shall be the fuel (in the fire 
of time). Except in one, Brahman (i.e., paramatman), the 
whole world is earthly and ephemeral, and this should 
specially be remembered. Those whom one meets in the 
morning are no more in the evening: so dharma should be 
practised without any greed for youth and wealth. No religious 
merits are amassed and no austerities practised by this tree 
covered with skin (i.e., the embodied being); hell then is the 
destiny after being eaten by the ants of old age. The self 
should be devoted to the feet of Jina; and relations, even one's 


PARAMATMAPRAKASA 255 


father, must be abandoned, because they simply drag the self 
into transmigration. It is a self-deception if austerities are not 
practised with a pure mind in spite of one's having obtained 
human birth. The camels in the form of five senses should not 
be let idose; after grazing the whole pasture of pleasures they 
will again hunt the self into transmigration. Unsafe is the 
course of meditation; the mind cannot be settled at rest as it 
repeatedly reverts back to the sensory pleasures. The yogin 
cultivates (right) vision, awareness and conduct, and being 
exempt from the influence of the five senses meditates on the 
highest reality. The pleasures of the senses last for a couple of 
days only, and then again follows the stream of misery; one 
should not be deluded, and one should not flourish the axe on 
one's neck. That man commands respect who gives up 
pleasures though they are at his disposal; the bald-headed 
fellow has his head shaved by destiny (for which he deserves 
no credit). By capturing the leader, viz., the mind, all others 
(i.e., the senses) are captured; the roots being pulled out the 
leaves necessarily wither. A lot of time is spent in enjoying the 
pleasures of the senses; therefore steady concentration on Siva 
(i.e., the highest self) is necessary whereby liberation is 
reached. Those who are engrossed in the concentration on the 
highest self are never seen to suffer miseries. Time has no 
beginning, the self is eternal, and the round of rebirths has no 
end; the self has not secured two: the teacher, Jina, and the 
religious virtue, right vision. 

144-153 (E260-267) Family life is full of sin; it is 
indeed a steady net decorated with death. When the body 
does not belong to oneself there is no propriety in claiming 
other things by neglecting the concentration on the highest self 
(called Siva). Concentration on anything other than Siva will 
not lead one to the bliss of liberation. Apparently the body 
looks nice: but (as to its real nature) it gets rotten when 
buried, and it is reduced to ashes when burnt. Anointing, 
decorating and sumptuously feeding the body serve no 
purposes, like obligations bestowed on the wicked. This body 


256 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is like a dilapidated filth-house (narakagrha), and as such it 
deserves no attachment. As if with vengeance fate has 
fashioned this body out of all that is miserable, sinful and 
filthy. It is shameful to enjoy the loathsome body; the wise 
should take delight in dharma, purifying their selves. The 
saints should not be attached to this body which brings no 
good to them: they should realize the self, which is an 
embodiment of knowledge separate from the body. 
Attachment can never bring eternal happiness. 

154-160 (E267-272) One should be satisfied with that 
happiness which entirely depends on one's self; pleasures from 
external accessories will never remove (further) desires. The 
self should be realized as essentially constituted of knowledge, 
and there should be no attachment to anything else. If the 
mental waters are not disturbed by pleasures and passions, the 
self immediately becomes pure. Of no avail is yoga which does 
not separate the self from others after suppressing or curbing 
the mind at once. Omniscience cannot be attained by 
meditating on anything other than the self, the embodiment of. 
knowledge. The saints who meditate on siinyapada (a point of 
meditation devoid of disturbances), who do not identify 
themselves with anything foreign, who have neither merit nor 
demerit, and who populate the (so far) deserted (attitude) and 
desert the (so far) inhabited (attitude) deserve all respect. 

161-164 (E273-276) In response to Prabhakara's 
question the author says: There, in that meditation, delusion 
is smashed to pieces and the mind sets into steadiness, when 
the breath issuing from the nostrils melts back into ambara. 
When one dwells in the ambara delusion melts, mental 
activities are no more, inhalation and exhalation are stopped 
and omniscience develops. He who concentrates his mind, 
which is as extensive as the physical and superphysical space, 
on dkasa, has his delusion destroyed, and he is an authority to 
others. 

165-172 (E178-183) (Then possibly the pupil speaks in 
a mood of repentance:) The self, the infinite divinity, which is 


PARAMATMAPRAKASA 257 
in the body, has not been realized; and it has all been a waste 
to have held the mind in the equanimous Ambara. All the 
attachments are not given up; the attitude of detachment has 
not been cultivated; the path of liberation liked by saints has 
not been understood; severe austerities, which are the essence 
of self-realization, are not practised; both merit and sin are not 
consumed; then how can the round of rebirths be terminated? 
Gifts have not been given to saints, the great Jina is not 
worshipped and the five great teachers are not saluted: then 
how can liberation be maintained? 

(Answer:) Successful meditation does not consist so 
much in closing the eyes, half or complete, as in remaining 
steady, with the mind undisturbed whereby alone liberation, 
the best state of existence, is attained. If .undisturbed 
concentration is attained, the round of rebirths comes to an 
end; even the great Jina will not achieve hamsdcara if he is 
liable to disturbances and anxieties. It is indeed foolish to run 
after the world and its activities. Brahman who is above all 
this should be realized, and the mind must be set at rest. The 
mind must be curbed from all attachments, from the six tastes 
and five colors, and then be concentrated on the self. 

173-201 (E284-304) The infinite self assumes that form 
in which he is meditated upon like a crystal or a mantra. The 
self himself is the highest self; but he remains as self because 
of special karma; as soon as the self is realized by himself then 
he is the highest self. One should meditate thus: I am the 
same as the highest self, the embodiment of knowledge and 
the infinite divinity, and the highest self is myself. Like the 
colors reflected in a ‘transparent crystal all the karmic 
associations are different from the nature of the self. By 
nature, like crystal, the self is pure; the dirty appearance of 
the body is mistaken for that of the self. The body should not 
be considered as red, old and worn out when the clothes are 
red, old and worn out. Similarly, red color, old age and 
destruction of the body have nothing to do with the self. As 
clothes are separate from the body, so the body is separate 


258 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


from the self. The body is the enemy of the self, because it 
produces miseries; then he is a friend who destroys this body. 
It is indeed a great gain if actions, which are to be made ripe 
for operation to give fruit, become automatically ripe and 
exhausted. If the mind cannot bear harsh. words, meditate on 
the highest Brahman whereby the mind might be set at rest. 
Beings that are averse to their spiritual welfare wander in 
transmigration pursued by karmas; what wonder, then, if they 
escape from transmigration when they establish themselves in 
themselves. If others take pleasure in finding fault with you, 
then consider yourself as an object of pleasure for others, and 
give up anger. Monks, if they are afraid of misery, should not 
entertain any anxiety, for even a bit of it, like a subtle nail, 
necessarily causes pain. There should be no anxiety even for 
liberation, for anxiety will not bring liberation: that which has 
bound the self will rescue it. Those that sink in the great lake 
of meditation have their selves rendered pure, and the dirt of 
transmigration is washed off. Elimination of all mental 
distractions is called the great meditation (paramasamddhi); 
the saints, therefore, give up all attitudes of good or bad. 
Though severe penances are practised and though all the 
scriptures are understood the Sdntam Sivam is not realized if 
the great meditation is not practised. Realization of the highest 
self cannot be accomplished if meditation is not practised after 
destroying pleasures and passions. If the highest Brahman is 
not realized through great meditation one has to wander 
infinitely suffering the miseries of transmigration. The 
omniscient have said that the great meditation is not achieved 
unless all good and bad attitudes are annihilated. The self 
becomes a perfected being when all the mental distractions are 
stopped, and when, being on the path of liberation, the four 
ghatiya kinds of karma are destroyed. The self becomes the 
perfected being, necessarily full of supreme bliss, who 
continuously knows the physical and superphysical worlds 
through omniscience. That Jina who is omniscient and whose 
nature is supreme bliss is the highest self, the very nature of 


PARAMATMAPRAKASA 259 


the self. The Jina who is separate from all karmas and 
blemishes should be understood as the very light of 
paramatman. The great saint Jina, who possesses infinite 
revelation, knowledge, bliss and strength is the great light. It 
is the great and pure Jina, the highest self, that is variously 
designated as paramapada, hari, brahman, buddha and the 
great light. The Jina, when he is absolutely free from karmas 
through meditation, is called the great siddha. 

202-203 (E305-306) Siddha represents self-realization: 
he is the brother of three worlds; and his nature is eternal 
happiness. He is not accessible to births and deaths; he is free 
from the miseries of the four grades of existence; and he is 
free and blissful being an embodiment of absolute revelation 
and knowledge. 

204-209 (E307-310) The saints that sincerely study the 
Paramatmaprakdga overcome all delusion and realize the 
highest reality. The devotees of this work attain that spiritual 
light which enlightens the physical and superphysical world. 
Those that daily meditate on this book have their delusion 
immediately smashed and become the lords of three worlds. 
The competent students of Paramatmaprakasa are those who 
are afraid of the miseries of transmigration, who abstain from 
the pleasure of senses, whose minds are pure, who are 
devoted to the highest self, who are intelligent in self- 
realization and who wish to obtain liberation. 

210-212 (E311-312) This text, which is composed not 
(much) minding the rules of grammar and metrics, if sincerely 
studied destroys the misery of the four grades of existence. 
The learned should not mind here the merit or otherwise of ' 
repetition; ideas are repeated for the sake of Bhatta 
Prabhakara. The learned, who have realized the highest 
reality, should forgive the author for whatever is said here, 
reasonable or otherwise. 

213-214 (E313-314) He attains liberation when flashes 
forth in his mind that highest principle which, as an 
embodiment of knowledge, is meditated upon by great saints, 


260 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


which having no body dwells in the bodies of embodied 
beings, which is an embodiment of celestial knowledge, which 
deserves worship in three worlds, and which represents 
liberation. 

Glory to that blissful omniscience which is a celestial 
embodiment of effulgence to those that have attained the 
highest status, which is a celestial and liberating light in the 
minds of great saints, and which cannot be obtained here by 
people who are given to pleasures of the senses. 


24.YOGINDUDEVA, Adhyatmasandoha 
NCat I, 53 advises consulting Jaina Siddhanta Bh 
0185skara (=Jain Journal) volume 4, p. 222. A. N. Upadhye 
says that the work is in Sanskrit (rather than Apabhram§a), 
but that we do not know anything about it.®° 


25.YOGINDUDEVA, Yogasara 
Summary by R. S. Betai 


Syadvada is a major contribution of the Jainas in the 
realm of philosophy. As far as philosophical experience for the 
ultimate end and aim in view, liberation, is concerned, the 
most important points for a seeker are (1) an absolute 
observance, both in theory and practice, of nonviolence, (2) a 
total annihilation of all karma; (3) a strict and absolute 
following of and adherence to the three jewels--right vision, 
right awareness and right conduct, (4) probing deep into the 
inner consciousness after withdrawal from the external as a 
real seeker, and (5) a complete cessation of I-ness and lifting 
one's self to self-realization, so that one's self sublimates and 
is on the path of becoming the highest self. 

"E" references are to the edition contained in A. N. 
Upadhye's edition and translation of the same author's 23. 


YOGASARA 261 
Paramatmaprakasa. 


1-3 (E359) At the very outset it is stated that since the 
mortal world is full of sorrow the work is composed for those 
who are frightened by mortal existence and aspire after 
liberation. 

7 (E360) For the present purpose, the self is stated to 
be the external self (bahirdtman) that is deluded by false 
visions and, as a consequence, its lot has so far been in 
constant rotation in the cycle of mortal existence. 

8 (E360-361) The other aspect of the self is the inner 
self (antaratman, also known as panddtman), that has 
visualized the external self and has decided to disregard 
outright the external world and existence therein. 

9 (E361) The body, etc., are not the highest self that is 
here known as stainless (nirmala), timeless (niskdla), pure, 
Jina, Siva, Visnu and peaceful (santa). 

12 (E361) The one who knows the self as the self 
attains liberation (nirvana). 

13 (E362) If one becomes absolutely free from desires 
and takes recourse to austerity, comes to self-realization, 
followed very soon by visualization of the highest course 
(paramagati), such a one is free from the cycle of births and 
deaths. 

14 (E362) The self seeker should make a clear distinc- 
tion between bondage and liberation. 

15 (E362) But when the seeker is on this path, 
knowledge of self comes first because even all merit might 
lead one only to mundane existence. 

16-17 (E362-363) Actually, thus only self-realization is 
supreme and only that is the cause of liberation. 

18 (E363) It is specifically stated that this highest state, 
liberation, is possible even for men of the world if they have 
clearly and specifically made a distinction between what is 
worth abandoning and what is worth adopting. 

19 (E363) Remembering the Jina, pondering, medita- 


262 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ting on him with a pure mind leads to the highest state. 

20 (E363) This is because the pure self and Jina are the 
same. 

25 (E364) No sublimation is possible without attaining 
right inclination. 

26 (E365) The purport is that Jina is himself the 
highest self. , 

27 (E365) Here, as the philosopher talks of liberation, 
He uses other words for moksa, "Sivagamana’, etc. ("Sivalabha" 
in 38, "Sivavasa" in 32, "Sivapurigamana" in 34). All these 
show what a uniquely blessed state liberation is. 

29 (E365) The vows, austerities, self-control, etc. lead 
to liberation only when the self comes to a state of visualizing 
and experiencing pure, sacred feelings thereby. 

- 32 (E366) Man can attain self-realization only when he 
renounces the reward of both merit and demerit. 

33 (E366) Otherwise they constitute only practical 
activities (vyavahara), the commonsensical path. 

34 (E366-367) All this becomes possible only when the 
self is known by the self and all externals are totally 
renounced. 

35-37 (E367) That is the reason why all practical acti- 
vity is to be renounced, that practical activity that is 
constituted of substances, categories, nonthinking substances, 
etc. Rather one should resort to the highest self. 

38 (E367) What all this means is that when the 
distinction between self and not-self shall be known, only then 
is liberation possible. 

39 (E368) Liberation is of the nature of absolute 
knowledge. 

43-45 (E369) Jinadeva is present in all temples of the 
body, and man would be a fool to seek him in temples. 

54 (E371) We are also to understand that if the self 
remains unknown all study and memorizing of scriptures is 
futile. 

' 57-60 (E372-373) The author describes the yoga that 


YOGASARA - 263 


can be resorted to for the gradual uprise of the self and 
ultimate experience of liberation. It is yoga or perfect 
concentration on the self to visualize it as bodiless, so that one 
does not again take birth, this birth that is shame-inspiring. 
Actually, when man lifts himself far above the body he comes 
to genuine realization. Bodilessness constitutes a good body. 
That is why delusion is to be given up. 

61 (E37373) Let the self experience that it does not 
accept even its own body. 


VADIBHA SIMHA (750) 

In a manuscript at Tanjore (P. 257, Srirangam, 1916) 
of this author's literary work Gadyacintamani his nickname is 
given as Odeyadeva. He was from Southern India, belonging 
to the Odeya clan, and his teacher's namie was Puspasena. He 
is also known as Vadisimha. As well as the two works 
identified below he is also the author of two texts dealing with 
the story of Jivandhara, titled Ksatracuddmani and 
Gadyacintamani. 


26.VADIBHA SIMHA, Navapadarthaniscaya 
NCat 9, 397 informs us that a manuscript of such a 
work is listed in A Supplementary Hand-List of 230 
Manuscripts in Ailak Pannalal Digambar Jain Sarasvati Bhavan, 
Sukhadananda Dharmasala, Bombay IV, pp. 5, 8. 


27.VADIBHA SIMHA, Syddvadasiddhi 
Summary by Bhagchandra Jain 


The work is divided into fourteen chapters as follows: 


264 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(1) Jivasiddhi, (2) Phalanbhoktrtvabhavasiddhi, (3) Yugapad- 
dnekdntasiddhi, (4) Karmanekantasiddhi, (5) Bhoktrtvabhava- 
siddhi, (6) Sarvajfiasiddhi, (7) Jagatkartrtvabhavasiddhi, (8) 
Arhatsarvajfiasiddhi, (9) Arthapattipramdnyasiddhi, (10) 
Vedapauruseyatvasiddhi, (11) Paratahpramanyasiddhi, (12) 
Abhavapramanadisanasiddhi, (13) Tarkapramanyasiddhi and 
(14) Gunaguni Abhedasiddhi. 

The entire text is composed in anustubh meter. Its 
subject matter can be understood from the names of its 
chapters. It appears that the text is incomplete. It has been 
published more than once. 


28.DHARMADASAGANI (750), Upadesamala with 
Balavabodha thereon 

Some idea of the contents of this work, which is 
untranslated, can be gleaned with much effort from the thesis 
of Trimbaklal N. Dave, University of London 1931, published 
as A Study of the Gujarati Language in the 16th Century (V.S.) 
with special reference to the MS. Balavabodha to Upadesamala 
(London 1935). Dave studies the grammatical aspects of the 
commentary, and by trying to piece together the contents of 
the work from the snippets of commentary he chooses for 
attention one may perhaps acquire an idea of its contents. The 
book contains a transliteration from Gujarati of the 
commentary (pp. 72-112) but not the text itself. However, the 
text (though perhaps not the commentary) has been edited in 
Sanskrit several times; cf. Volume I of this Encyclopedia, 
Bibliography, Third edition, #307 on p. 331. 


BHATTA AKALANKA (770) 

Sarat Chandra Ghoshal, in the Introduction to his 
edition of Manikyanandin's Pariksamukha (Sacred Books of the 
Jains 11, Lucknow 1940), reviews the information pertaining 
to the date of this important writer on Jain logic and 


UPADESAMALA 265 


epistemology. He notes (p. xxxv) that "In the work 
Akalankacdritra it is mentioned that in 700 Vikrama Samvat 
(643 A.D.) there was a great discussion between Akalanka and 
the Buddhists".** And Nagin Shah writes: "(it) is almost certain 
that he flourished between 720 A.D. and 780 A.D., that he 
belonged to Manyakheta; that he was a son of Purusottama, 
a minister of Subhatunga of Manyakheta; that he stayed in the 
Buddhist Matha to study Buddhist philosophy and that he had 
debates with a Buddhist teacher at the court of king 
Himaégitala of Kalinga."®? 

Shah remarks about Akalanka's style "In his writing 
Akalanka is very satirical and sarcastic about Buddhists, 
particularly about Dharmakirti keeping in view the 
euphemistic criticism of Syadvada resorted (to) by 
Dharmakirti. He replies in forceful words...There is hardly any 
doubt about the fact that Akalanka imbibes the method, style 
and spirit of Dharmakirti..." 

"Akalanka sometimes bodily takes the sentences of 
Dharmakirti (sometimes introducing minor changes therein) 
and makes use of them in connection with constructing his 
own...This..suggests that the main purpose that remained 
constantly before Akalanka in composing his original works 
should have been to save the Jaina philosophy from the 
Buddhist's and particularly Dharmakirti's attacks." 

"Even in his style Akalanka imitates Dharmakirti."® 
Shah's book, then, attempts to study the content of Akalanka's 
criticism of Dharmakirti, and we shall make use of many of his 
references in the summaries below. 

The dating of Akalanka is the subject of an exhaustive 
inquiry by Mahendra Kumar Jain.** Without going through the 
intricacies of the argument, it will suffice to report that he also 
concludes by assigning a period of 720-780 for Akalanka's 
flourishing. 


266 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


29.BHATTA AKALANKA, Astasati on Samantabhadra's 
Aptamimamsa 

The summary ‘below is taken from the comments by 
Saratchandra Ghoshal, Apta-Mimamsa of Acharya Samanta- 
bhadra, edited and translated by Saratchandra Ghoshal (Delhi 
2002), referred to below as (G). The entire text of this work 
is provided by Nagin Shah in his edition and translation of 
Samantabhadra's Aptamimamsa denominated as (S) for the 
summary of work #10 above. 


Summary by Saratchandra Ghoshal 


1 (G27) Akalanka says that both mangaldcarana and 
the setting out of the purpose have been mentioned in the first 
verse. The praise of the omniscient in an attempt to examine 
his characteristics is the mangalacarana. The necessity of the 
work is also indicated by laying down that it is characterised 
by faith (sraddhd) and knowledge of the qualities. 

2 (G29-30) It might be urged that as magicians fail to 
show these the same are neither false nor mundane. So we 
should accept these as identifying essentials of the omniscient. 

Akalanka, therefore, says: "The internal and external 
excellence of bodies, etc., though not found in shows or 
magicians, cannot be accepted as proving the omniscient, for 
these are seen in celestial beings whose passions have not 
disappeared. So, you are not praised as our Lord even for 
this.” 

3 (G32-33) There are many who are accepted as 
Tirthakrts. Buddha, Kapila and others are known as Tirthakrts 
from Sdstras. 

(Objection: So the Buddha, Kapila, etc. are omniscient 
as well!) The reply to this is that all these lay down different 
doctrines contradictory to one another. 

11 (G62) Akalanka says that the view of the Buddhists, 
which also, like the Samkhya view already described, denies 
the existence of abhdva, is refuted in this verse. We see that 


APTAMIMAMSA-ASTASATI 267 


some quality exists in something at a certain time. By denial 
‘of absolute nonexistence, the position will be that every 
quality will exist in everything at all times. 

13 (G66) The logic of syddvdda or anekdntavdda 
accepts existence or non-existence or indescribability with 
limitation. Leaving out the limitation, it is. impossible to 
maintain the embodiment of existence and non-existence in 
the same substance, because this will be quite inconsistent. It 
is explained that the Samkhya view of simultaneous existence 
and non-existence is thereby refuted. 

30 (G93) If knowledge be non-existent, the object of 
knowledge will also become nonexistent as the object of 
knowledge depends on knowledge. 

So the view of the Buddhists, like that of the followers 
of the Vaigesika system of philosophy who hold the one-sided 
view of separate existence, is refuted __ 

32 (G95) Akalanka explains this verse as follows: It is 
not possible that an object possessing qualities should have 
two natures opposed to each other existing at the same time. 
For example, existence and non-existence, oneness and many- 
sidedness, cannot be jointly predicated of the same thing, as 
one will oppose the other and existence of both will be self- 
contradictory; a barren woman and a child cannot be 
connected together. 

35 (G97-98) This verse attempts to refute the view of 
the Buddhists who say that unity and divergence cannot be 
established by one's desire to speak or not about a certain 
quality of a substance, as both of these are unreal. For 
example, when we speak about unity we deny the existence of 
diversity, and vice versa. The reply is that when we want to 
speak about anything, we accept its existence. We never want 
to speak about anything which is non-existent. Otherwise we 
cannot have any action performed. By merely saying "a man, 
and fire" we cannot get cooking. There must be action to get 
cooking. The connection between qualities which we hold to 
be non-existing, when we want to speak about it, is merely an 


268 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


analogy. 

55 (G114) It cannot be urged by the Buddhists to 
escape the absurdity of their position that permanence and 
nonpermanence should jointly be accepted. For this would be 
as impossible as simultaneous existence of life and death. 

56 (G115) Avoiding this fault, the anekanta view is 
that according to modifications, the seven tattvas may in one 
sense be recognised as transitory, for there is a difference in 
time in seeing and recognition. 

63 (G122) A pitcher and a cloth, for example, are 
accepted as separate by the Naiyayikas not only from 
themselves but also from their parts (avayava). The result 
would be that the parts and the objects having parts might be 
said to exist in a different place and time which is absurd. If 
they try to escape by saying that we accept existence in the 
same place we urge that even this is not possible for wholes 
(avayavin) which cannot exist with their parts in the same 
place. These will occupy different space, like an ass and an 
elephant. 

73 (G132) Divergence and identity are only relative. 
They are connected with samanya and visesa. 

76 (G136) There are many persons who urge that 
without the logical process of reasoning or inference, we 
would not accept the proof, even if it be seen by our eyes. 

91 (G148) The Jaina view is that when one engages in 
discriminating good or bad actions and begins to act 
accordingly, the results flowing from it are caused by paurusa 
and when things (for or against us) happen without there 
being even any thought of the same (not to speak of efforts) 
the result is from Daiva. 

93 (G151) A person practising penances and devoid of 
attachment) or aversion often causes pain to his body. To hold 
that from this pain there arises merit, will mean that he will 
have bondage from this merit and will not be able to gain 
liberation. Further, a learned muni gains pleasure from 
equanimity resulting from knowledge of realities. To hold that 


APTAMIMAMSA-ASTASATI 269 


demerit results from one's own happiness would mean that 
such a person would have bondage from this cause. The view 
that merit and demerit are derived from causing pain or 
pleasure to oneself is untenable. The result would be that no 
one would attain liberation, which happens only when there 
is no possibility of any bondage resulting from merit or 
demerit. 

94 (G152) The Jain view, regarding the influx of karma 
consisting of merit and demerit, is that the cause of such 
influx depends on visuddhi and sanklesa relating to happiness 
and misery of one's own or of others. 

Sanklesa is the result of drta and raudra dhyana and its 
absence is viguddhi, i.e., the existence of the soul in its innate 
nature. 

109 (G170) A substance is established by affirmation or 
negation. From a merely one-sided view, there will be no 
difference between existence and non-existence of a substance. 
As the knowledge is varied according to pramdna and naya, its 
object is also of many kinds. 

We mention that a substance is "this and not this" and 
do not hold only that "it is this", for the latter is false and 
cannot lead to correct knowledge. 

111 (G172) We do not find anywhere a universal 
without a particular or a particular without a universal. The 
Carvaka view of universals without particulars is an 
impossibility. 

113 (G173) When we want to have a pitcher, we say 
"bring a pitcher". This necessarily goes to mean that we do not 
want to have a picture (of a pitcher). The acceptance of 
pitcher and (the) discarding (of) other things necessarily 
comes from our intention. In this manner, the seven modes of 
predication (saptabhangi) are accepted by refuting opposites 
and accepting particulars. 


30.BHATTA AKALANKA, Laghiyastraya with Vivrti thereon 
The summary of certain sections of this text found 


270 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


below is compiled from Nagin J. Shah, Akalanka's Criticism of 
Dharmakirti's Philosophy, op. cit., indicated by "S". "E" 
references are to Mahendra Kumar's edition of three works of 
Akalanka's of which this is one, the book containing his edition 
entitled Akalankagranthatrayam, edited as Saraswati Oriental 
Series No. 8, Ahmedabad 1939, reprinted 1996. Unquoted 
passages of this summary are by Ratna Lahiri. "V" indicates the 
Vivrti commentary. 

"..It is a compendium of three small treatises. The 
colophon of the vrtti on Laghiyastraya goes to prove that the 
Pramdana Pravesa and Naya Pravesa together formed one book 
and was named as Pramdnanayapravesa. Since the Pravacana 
Pravesa has a separate mangaldcarana and repeats mostly the 
topics of Nayapravesa, it can be proved that it is a separate 
treatise." 

"...(T)he total number of Slokas (is) 78...It is apparent 
that Akalanka followed...the chapter on Svarthanumdna of 
P(ramana)V(arttika) and its vrtti of Dharmakirti."* 


Summarized by Nagin J. Shah and Ratna Lahiri 
Pramanapravesa 


Chapter One: Perception (pratyaksa) 

1-3 (E1; $229) "Akalanka, following his predecessors, 
divides perception into two _ categories--empirical 
(samvyavaharika) and transcendental (mukhya)." 

(E1; $192) “Even Akalanka agrees with Dharmakirti 
insofar as he holds that it is a cognition that should be 
regarded as pramdna (instrument). The reasons why he 
upholds this view are the same as those advanced by 
Dharmakirti." 

V downplays the importance of sense-organ-derived 
perceptions and highlights the importance of the internal 
knowledge rising from austerities in discriminating reality 
(tattva). 


LAGHTYASTRAYA 271 


4 (E2; $228-229) "Akalanka defines perception as the 
construction-filled awareness which is lucid and vivid. In turn, 
he defines vividness in such a manner as would apply the 
definition to both sensory and extrasensory perceptions. 
Vividness, far him, consists in generating a type of objective 
awareness in which are reflected the particular characteristics 
of an object-more in number than those reflected in inferential 
cognition and the like. This vividness is natural to it and 
neither borrowed nor adventitious as Dharmakirti holds. 
Moreover, Akalanka repudiates the idea that perception grasps 
its object through the mental copy of that object...On his 
showing it grasps the object directly." 

V gives two further subtypes of empirical perception, 
viz., perception through the sense-organs and perception not 
through those organs. The latter is the main type. The 
superiority and possibility of extrasensory omniscience is thus 
established. 

5 (E2-3; §229-230) "According to Akalanka and other 
Jaina logicians, sense perception can be analysed into four 
Stages: indistinct (avagraha), directed (tha), determinative 
(avdya) and focussed concentration (dhdrana)}. These four 
stages are usually described as types of sense perception. But 
it would be more appropriate to treat them as four stages of 
sense perception because this is what they turn out to be when 
psychologically analysed. The correctness of this interpretation 
can be seen from the fact that Akalanka himself states that an 
earlier form (i.e. stage) develops into the next subsequent 
forms and that all of them are of the same essential nature.” 

"Akalanka defines avagraha as that construction-filled 
cognition of the distinctive nature of an object which follows 
in the wake of the construction-free cognition of the pure 
‘existence of this object, a construction-free cognition which in 
turn is consequent upon the contact of the sense-organ with 
the object. On th(at) contact...there arises the construction-free 
cognition of pure existence (sanmdatradarsana). This 
construction-free cognition then develops into the 


272 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


constructionfilled cognition of the object. This is called 
avagraha or indistinct awareness. Tha (directed) awareness is 
defined by Akalanka as the striving for (the knowledge of) a 
specific characteristic of the object cognised by avagraha. This 
ihd is different from doubt for the reason that. it positively 
possesses the element of ascertainment. The definition of 
"determinative" (avdya) given by him is as _ follows. 
Determinative awareness means the ascertainment of the 
specific features of an object. In other words, avaya is the 
constructionfilled cognition of a specific characteristic of an 
object. It arises from the exclusion of the wrong and the 
ascertainment of the right. Akalanka defines dharana 
(focussed concentration) as the condition of recollection, a 
condition called samskara (trace). But this...trace is not 
physiological in nature. It is a species of cognition. " 

V: These types of awarenesses may have different 
names in different contexts. 

6 V: The nature of focussed concentration is detailed. 
It is a type of immediate awareness (matijfndna). Focussed 
attention creates traces and that, added to directed awareness, 
should be considered to be the nature of knowledge 
(jfidnasvartiipa). The four stages of sense perception have 
further subdivisions, which total 48 types of thought. 

(E3; $223-224) "Dharmakirti argues that...inference is 
(an) instrument of valid cognition because it removes 
superimpositions consequent upon the cognition of similarity. 
Akalanka in return observes that it is precisely because a 
constructionfree cognition stands in need of the removal of 
superimposition that we (Jains) refuse to treat it as an 
instrument of valid cognition.” 


Chapter Two: Objects of Valid Cognition (prameya). 
(E3; $192) 7a. “It is interesting to note that Akalanka 
for the first time takes clear note of and endorses the 


LAGHIYASTRAYA 273 


relativistic Nyaya-Vaisesika position according to which the 
intermediary links in the...causal chain of a cognitive process 
are, each of them, an instrument of valid cognition as well as 
the effect of an instrument of valid cognition." 

(E3; $70) 7b. "Reality is neither substance alone nor 
modes alone but is characterised by both.” 

The pure particular (svalaksana) or the universal 
(samdnyalaksana? or of Advaitins?) cannot be objects of 
knowledge. 

8 (E4) Efficiency (arthakriyd) is not possible for those 
who view the nature of things as either eternal or momentary. 

V ridicules the Buddhist view which labels the origin of 
a substance itself as its efficiency (arthakriyd). 


Chapter Three: Indirect (paroksa) Awareness 

10 (E4) An initial awareness may be an immediate 
awareness (mati), a recognition (samjfid) or an anticipation 
(cinta). Subsequently follows verbal (Sruta) awareness. 

V explains how the subsequent perception arises from 
the previous one and thus memory and i are also 
valid instruments of knowledge. 

(E5; $197) "For the Jainas inference and sectiniony are 
two species of...indirect source(s of valid cognition). Again, 
according to them comparison (upamdna) is a form of 
recognition (pratyabhijfhd) which is a species of...indirect 
source of valid cognition. Similarly, they consider cogitation 
(i.e., reductio ad absurdum, tarka) to be one of the. indirect 
source(s) of valid awareness. As for noncognition and 
implication they are both reduced to inference by them (the 
Jainas)." 

11 (E5; $260) "Some hold that the awareness of 
necessary connection (or pervasion) (vydpti) is acquired by a 
single act of sense-perception. For example, the necessary 
connection between smoke and fire is grasped at the time of 
the very first observation of the two together. On the very face 
of it this view is untenable. The object of sense-perception is 


274 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


something existing at the present time and place while the 
necessary connection between smoke and fire expresses their 
relation in all times and places. So, we cannot grasp the 
necessary relation between two things at the time of the first 
observation of the two together.” 

12 (E5; $261) "Nor could it be held that it is inference 
that grasps necessary connections. For, it might be asked as to 
which inference grasps a necessary connection--the inference 
requiring the awareness of necessary connection or another 
one. The first alternative involves the fallacy of mutual 
dependence; the second involves an infinite regress." 

14 (E5; $258) “Coming to the cases of pervasion based 
on the relation of necessary succession between hetu and 
sddhya, Akalanka points out that even if some of these are 
cases of causal relationship...cthers are not. Thus he 
finds...instances where though two things are invariably 
successive yet they are not causally related. Such for example 
is the inference of the previous appearance of the bharani 
constellation and the forthcoming appearance of the rohini 
constellation from the rise of the krttika constellation. The 
krttika appears invariably aftter the appearance of the bharani 
and the rohini appears after the appearance of the krttikd. Yet 
they are not causally related with one another...Certainly, the 
stars forming the constellation bharani do not generate the 
stars forming the constellation krttika. Thus Akalanka proves 
the possibility of there being necessary sequence even without 
causality." 

15 (E6) (Buddhist:) The nonexistence of a substance 
may become the content of an awareness due to the 
nonperception of what is not available (adrsyanupalabdhi). 

16-17 (E6) As a reply to the Buddhist, it is averred that 
in constructionfilled perception there is no experience of 
momentariness; on the contrary a stationary, solid substance 
is experienced. So after negating the nonapprehension 
(anupalabdhi) cause (hetu) of the Buddhists the effect-cause 
(karyahetu) is also criticized. 


LAGHIYASTRAYA 275 


18 (E6-7; $227-228) V: "...(T)he self-cognition of a 
construction-filled awareness...could never be construction- 
free. Dharmakirti holds that the self-cognitions of all 
awarenesses--including even construction-filled awareness--is 
construction-filled. This would mean that even a construction- 
filled knowledge is not self-determined but requires another 
knowledge to determine itself; this would involve an infinite 
regress detrimental to all purposive action." 

19 (E7) criticizes the Naiyayikas perception of 
comparison as an instrument of valid cognition by asking: if 
perception of similarity (i.e. comparison) is an instrument of 
knowledge then what kind of an instrument will perception of 
difference be? 

V demolishes the number of instruments accepted by 
Naiyayikas. 

20 (E7) If the relation between a word and what is 
meant by (vdcyavacaka) it is not acceptable as an instrument 
of valid cognition then the perception of similarity isn't one 
either! : 

V gives an example: A knowledgeable person has 
described a certain village and its qualities to a traveler, who 
on going there recognizes it as the one that person had 
described. This should also qualify as an instrument of valid 
cognition just like comparison. 

21 (E7-8) Many subdivisions of memory and direct 
perception have been enumerated, and have been established 
as separate and parallel instruments of valid cognition. 


Chapter Four: Verbal Testimony (Ggarna) 

22 (E8; $189) "Akalanka...considers harmony or non- 
discrepancy (avisamvdda) to be the true mark of valid 
cognition...By non-discrepancy he...means the correspondence 
of cognition with the nature of its object. Sometimes he also 
means by non-discrepancy the coherence between the 
cognitive and conative activities." 

The visual awareness of a patient of dim vision 


276 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(taimirika) is a fallacy of direct perception. 

V: A person with such dim vision sees two moons: he 
sees something, so this kind of perception is faulty only in the 
matter of number, not regarding its object (the moon). 
Therefore this awareness may not be considered entirely false. 

(Dharmakirti:) Only constructionfilled (savikalpaka) 
awareness occurs; constructionfree awareness is a fallacy. 

23 (E8; $222) V: "Akalanka has also criticised 
Dharmakirti's view that the object of perception is only a 
unique particular. He observes that constructionfree cognition, 
which is the only type of perception according to Dharmakirti, 
has not a unique particular for its object because a man whose 
senses are operating never cognises such an object. One does 
not experience such a unique particular either externally or 
internally. Externally we perceive (for example) a pot 
undergoing modifications and having parts; internally we 
experience our own consciousness having many forms. Even 
the person who has withdrawn his thoughts or concepts from 
all objects perceives only a gross form having many parts and 
not an absolutely unique impartite particular. This is proved 
by the fact that a person awakened from such a state does not 
remember having experienced such an absolutely unique 
particular." 

24 (E9; $218) with V: “Dharmakirti contends that 
perception does not involve constructions (kalpana) as they 
are not noticed by us in (a) perceptual cognition. If they were 
present there in...perceptual cognition they would have been 
noticed by us because they never come into existence or pass 
away unnoticed. But Akalanka points out that though 
constructions are present in perception they are not noticed by 
us at the time of perception just as the difference among 
point-instants coming into existence in close succession at one 
spatial point is not noticed by us in perceptual cognition. 
Dharmakirti might urge that there is no reason why we should 
not notice constructions if they are present in perceptual 
cognition, while there is a reason why we do not notice the 


LAGHIYASTRAYA 277 


difference obtaining among point-instants--the reason being 
that they are similar. Akalanka observes that on the 
momentarist hypothesis there is no possibility of any two 
things being similar. The intelligent person should ponder over 
the question whether absolutely construction-free, thoughtless 
cognition is possible or not. Moreover, how could the 
absolutely construction-free, thoughtless cognition generate 
construction-filled cognition? 

25 (E9) Perception and fallacious perception are further 
differentiated. Perception, memory, recognition, etc. are valid 
because they can be verified practically. If experience 
contradicts expected outcome then they are fallacious. 

26 (E9) Verbal awareness is an instrument of true 
cognition. The Buddhist view that correct understanding of the 
word (for it) leads to perception of an external object is 
rejected. 

27 (E9) If having found verbal awareness contradictory 
one always considers it false then direct perception and 
inference will also have to be considered false, because 
sometimes even these are contradicted. 

(E9; $292-293) V: "Akalanka refutes the Buddhist view 
that words do not directly lead to the knowledge of things. He 
observes that words are connected with things. Of course, 
though words and things are not related by natural physical 
relation...yet they do have some invisible invariable relation 
between them just as (two constellations) Sakata and krttika 
have--as a result of which it becomes possible to infer the 
posterior rise of Sakata from the prior rise of krttika..." 

(S295-296) "...Akalanka says that words enable us to 
know not only the intention of the speaker but...external 
things also. The mere fact that...cognition acquired through 
words at times does not correspond to facts is not sufficient to 
establish that all cognition acquired through words is of such 
nature that words could not enable us to cognize things at all. 
Akalanka observes that if this be the reason for the Buddhist 
logicians's acceptance of the position that words do not enable 


278 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


us to cognize things and that they enable us to cognize only 
the intention of the speaker, they are laboring under a blunder 
because sometimes, as for example in the case of 
gotraskhalana (the mistake of pronouncing a different name 
from the intended one), etc., the words are not used by the 
speaker according to his intention to convey some particular 
information and hence the cognition derived through words 
would not then have for its object the speaker's intention to 
convey some particular information. But Dharmakirti deems it 
possible to understand the speaker's intention through his 
words in spite of the fact that all words are not used in 
accordance with the intention of the speaker. Similarly, he 
should recognise the possibility of cognizing things through 
words even though all words do not describe the things as 
they are.” 

28 (E9-10) If the apparent meaning of the words of a 
knowledgeable person or those arrived at by reason are not 
considered sufficient for validity, then how will you distinguish 
between an instrument of true cognition and a fallacy? 

29 (E10) On recognizing the deviation of the meaning 
of the words of a person from those in his heart, if the word 
itself is considered deviant (vyabhicarin) from its meaning, 
then it is a wrong inference, a false reason being ascribed as 
a causative factor which cannot then be labeled as a specific 
cause leading to a specific effect. 

V further criticizes the Buddhist view of essential nature 
(svabhdva) and of inference based on an effect (karyahetu) as 
being a possible anomaly. If on the basis of wrongly derived 
causation we accept the possibility of constructionfree 
awareness by deducing it on the basis of essential nature and 
inference based on effect, then merely knowing the word 
should also be considered a means for awareness of its 
meaning. This is fallacious reasoning. Thus verbal testimony 
is a proper instrument of true cognition. 


LAGHIYASTRAYA 279 


Nayapravesa 

30 (E10) Perspectives and fallacious perspectives are 
defined. 

V: Two perspectives are the substantial or generic 
(dravydstika) and the modal (parydydstika). The former 
focusses on nondifference, that is, on generalities 
(satsamanya), 

31 (E11) which are inclusive of all being, nonbeing, etc. 
and all their subdivisions. 

32 (E11) The generic (samgraha) perspective is of pure 
substance, i.e., of generality. Nothing is totally nonexistent. No 
knowledge can be derived without first knowing the basic 
general existence (sat). 

33 (E11) Vs. Buddhism: In direct perception there is no 
awareness of partless moments (niramSa ksana). 

34 (E11) Just as, in the Buddhist view, one awareness 
appears in its many (momentary) forms, similarly, substances 
constantly appear with all their qualities and modes. 

35-36 (E12) The identifying qualities of a substance are 
the basis of its efficiency (arthakriya), but this is not true on 
the Buddhist view of momentariness. If the effect occurs in 
the same moment as the cause then the cause-effect 
relationship cannot occur. Thus no effect is possible on the 
Buddhist view of momentariness. 

37 (E12) A substance may perform more than one 
function and pervade many natures. 

38 (E13) V: The subject of the generic perspective is 
that existence (sat) is itself reality (tattva). This does not 
totally exclude analytic viewpoints (bhedadrsti). If it did so, 
there would have been no difference between the subject of 
the generic perspective and the unity theories of Advaita 
(brahmavdda). 

39 (E13) The nature of the conventional perspective 
and its fallacies are discussed. 

V: Between a quality and the qualified the first is 
focussed upon,.the other becomes secondary. This is the 


280 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


meaning of the conventional perspective. However, where 
quality and qualified, whole and part, etc. are each viewed 
separately, it is a case of a fallacious conventional perspective. 

40 (E13) Yoga is refuted by querying if a substance is 
real or unreal. If before association with the real (sat) the 
substance had existence, then where is the need for the 
association. If it is unreal like the hare’s horn it could not be 
associated with reality. 

V: The Samkhya doctrine is subjected to the same 
criticism. . 

41 (E14) The use of instruments of true cognition is 
conventional, but if the convention is fallacious there is not an 
instrument of true cognition. 

42 (E14) While discussing the commonsensical 
(vyavahara) perspective and its fallacies, the existence of an 
external (bahya) meaning is considered practical while the 
Yogacara doctrine that only consciousness is real and the 
Buddhist doctrine of emptiness are considered fallacious. 

43 (E14-15) The temporally immediate (nusutra) 
perspective makes only the present mode its subject. However, 
the Buddhist's "variegated awareness" (citrajfidna) is not its 
subject since that is merely an aggregate of atoms. 

44 (E15) discusses the linguistically-implied, the 
etymoiogical (samabhiridha), and the strict constructionist 
(evambhita) perspectives. The _linguistically-implied 
perspective differentiates meaning on the basis of tense, case 
and gender. - The etymological bases meaning on modes, and 
the strict constructionist bases it on the primary verb. 

45 (E16) Buddhist: Why is memory not recognition? 

Answer: Both have a past object, but sensory awareness 
is clear while memory may be ambiguous. 

46 (E16) Both scriptural and sensory awarenesses can 
be accurate (nonwandering, avisamvddin), the difference again 
being that the latter is clear while the former may be 
ambiguous. But that does not impugn scripture's validity, since 
inference, which also may be unclear, is accepted even by the 


LAGHIYASTRAYA 281 


Buddhists as valid. 

47 (E16) One should determine tense, case and gender 
whenever possible. 

V: When they are not ascertainable a many-aspects view 
should be accepted. 


Pravacanapravesa 

51-52 (E18) Mahavira is remembered again, along with 
a promise to state the instruments of true cognition, 
perspectives, and locatings in use. 

54 (18-19) If objects (artha) cause awarenesses what 
causes illusions or hallucinations? If one answers that it is 
defective sense-organs or mental states, then what is the use 
of recognizing meaning as the cause of knowing? Only a 
faultless mind and sense-organs can be instrumental in true 
awareness; thus it is better to recognize mind and organs (and 
not objects) as the causes of awareness. 

56 (E19) Awareness cognizes meaning but does not 
know that it knows. If it did there would be no controversies. 

V: E.g., though perception cognizes through a sense- 
organ it does not cognize the sense-organ; likewise, though 
verbal awareness arises from meanings it does not know those 
meanings. 

Darkness is seen, but substances obscured by darkness 
are not. Thus the reasons for nonawareness are awareness- 
veiling actions (jfiandvaraniyakarman) and not darkness. 

57 (E19-20) Just as a polished gem, though covered 
with filth, may be recognized by other means, similarly the 
increasing awareness of the self is more or less evident 
through other means. 

V: Due to the gradual destruction and quiescence 
(ksayopasama) of accrued karma the mind and the senses 
themselves cause awareness to occur, not light or meanings. 

58 (E20) refutes the Buddhist theories that the same 
form (tddriipya), same effect (tadupapatti) or same 
ascertainment (tadadhyavasdya) collectively or individually 


282 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSUPNIBD 


become the causes of valid cognition. 

59 (E20) Just as meaning is the subject of awareness 
though it may be caused by something else (than awareness), 
likewise though arising by itself awareness also knows 
meaning (without necessarily causing it). 

V: Though meaning and perception do not have a 
causal relationship, they are related (respectively) as grasped 
and grasping. 

60 (E20; S189) "In addition to non-discrepancy, 
definiteness (vyavasdyatmaka) is regarded by him as one of 
the essential characteristics of valid cognition. He observes 
that even non-discrepancy of cognition is impossible without 
its possessing a definite nature." Thus the Buddhists' 
constructionfree awareness, not being definite, cannot produce 
constructionfilled awareness, 

61 (E21) There are two kinds of knowledge, direct and 
indirect. Direct awareness is of three kind: sensory (indriya), 
nonsensory (anindriya) and supersensible (atindriya). Sensory 
awareness is of four kinds, indistinct, directed, determinative 
and concentrated. Nonsensory is also of four kinds: memory, 
recognition, anticipative and abhinibodha. 

Linguistic awareness (Srutajfidna) is indirect, and 
includes presumption, inference and comparison, etc. . 

62 (E21) Linguistic awareness has two aspects, that of 
syadvada and of perspective (naya). The former term refers to 
enmeration of all possibilities, the latter term to one possibility 
among them. 

63 (E22) Every sentence should be prefixed with 
"maybe" and "only/also". If it is not, even then it is implied. 

64-65 (E22) Sometimes the letters, words and sentences 
imply a meaning not intended, sometimes they do not even 
say what is intended. Even then the Buddhists say that words 
are merely indicative of what the speaker wants to say. The 
Buddhists are ridiculed for disregarding public belief, 

V adds that though people may not always want to 
utter ‘bad words, sometimes they come out inadvertently. 


LAGHTYASTRAYA 283 


Besides, a fool may wish to explain the scriptures, but cannot 
(due to lack of understanding). Therefore, words may not 
(always) be indicative of -he intended meaning of the speaker. 

66-67 (E22-23) Discussion of perspectives. 

68 (E23) The conventional view and is apparent 
fallacies are discussed. 

V explains that in the conventional view both qualities 
and qualified are discussed in detail while in the generic only 
one of them is. 

69 (E24) The generic view. 

70 (E24) The commonsense view explained. The 
Sunyddvaita view is fallacious since it is destructive o 
practicality. : 

71 (E24) The temporally immediate view discussed. 
Again, Buddhists are criticized in V for postulating apparent 
(pratibhdsa) and natural (svabhava) varieties. 

72 (E24-25) The conventional, etc. four views are 
categorized as perspectives of meaning (arthanaya) and words, 
etc. of three types are labelled word-perspectives (‘abdanaya). 

73-76 (E25-26) Having known the substances through 
instruments of true cognition, perspectives, locatings or 
ascription and explanations, and especially having known the 
qualities of the life-substance (jivadravya) through its 
conditions, stages of progress and stages of search, the self 
purifies its right belief and attains salvation by total 
annihilation (nirjara) of karmic particles by practicing 
austerities. 

A name-location (na@maniksepa) is that which is 
ascribed without relation to kind, substance, quality or 
function. Having mentioned one by name, when the other is 
represented, it is known as_ representational-location 
(sthdpananiksepa). The substance which is on its way to 
acquiring another mode of the same is known as fluid-location 
(dravyaniksepa). It is again of two kinds, dgama and nodgama. 
That location which is limited to the present time only is 
conditional-location (bhavaniksepa). 


284 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


By location we negate the non-present and affirm the 
present (factual); therefore locating is very useful. 

In view of the liberated conditions as defined by 
Vaigesika, Saugata and Samkhya theories it has been stated 
that in the liberated self neither are the specific qualities of a 
self lost nor is the qualified-quality chain (gunagunisantana) 
broken. Nor does the self become totally bereft of enjoyment 
(bhoga). 

77-78 (E26) The result of deep study of scripture is the 
attainment of the exalted ‘Jina’ state. May that be achieved by 
those seeking salvation. 


31.BHATTA AKALANKA, Nydyaviniscaya and Vrtti or 
Curni thereon 

Nagin Shah comments: “Nydyaviniscaya, written in 
verses and prose, is designed after Pramanaviniscaya of 
Dharmakirti. The original version of Nydyaviniscaya is not 
available. Dr. Mahendrakumara restored the verse part of it 
from the commentary of Vadiraja, but the restoration of (the) 
Vrtti is impossible in the absence of a commentary on it."*° 

The work numbers 480 1/2 verses. Mahendra Kumar 
provides the following brief outline: 

"The first chapter includes the topics: the nature of 
perception, the refutation of the view that knowledge is non- 
perceptible, the nature of substance, refutation of views held 
by other schools regarding...perception, etc." 

"The second chapter deals with the study of inference, 
the empirical elements in inference, the nature of discusssion 
(vada), ways of losing an argument (nigrahasthdna), fallacies 
of discussion (vaddbhdsa), etc. related with the topic of 
inference." 

"The third chapter deals with the nature of pravacana 
(the scripture), the refutation of the Buddhist theory of a 
qualified person, the Vedic dogma of authorlessness 
(apauruseyatva); the proof of omniscience, the refutation of 
the no-self view of the Buddhists, the conception of liberation 


NYAYAVINISCAYA 285 


(moksa), the theory of Saptabhangi and Syddvdda, etc."*’ 

The following summary is compiled from the same "S" 
of Shah's and from the same "E" as in work #30 above. Topics 
of sections not treated by Shah are also indicated on the basis 
of Mahendra Kumar's brief summary on pp. 38-39 of E and the 
Table of Contents on pp. 109-111. 


Summarized by Nagin J. Shah and Mahendra Kumar 


CHAPTER ONE: PERCEPTION 

6b-7a (E30; $220-221) "The Buddhists including... 
Dharmakirti generally define kalpana (conceptual 
construction) as (a) cognition expressed in words. But...if 
there can be no kalpand without the relation of words, then 
kalpand in the form of the memory of words would require 
other. words...and so on ad infinitum. Thus kalpand itself 
remains unproved and unestablished. As a result, it would not 
be possible for us to determine the nature of perception. In 
such a situation how can we make use of perception so as to 
acquire...knowledge of reality? If, in order to avoid this 
difficulty, kalpand in the form of the memory of words were 
regarded as arising without requiring the use of other words, 
then the definition of kalpand as a cognition expressed in 
words would become (too) narrow, because in that case it 
would not apply to the kalpand in question. And if the 
memory of words were not regarded as kalpana on the ground 
that it arises without being related to other words denoting 
the words remembered, then on the same ground other 
determinate cognitions too should not be regarded as kalpana 
so long as they are not put in words. Thus the sensory 
cognition determining a thing without the use of words would 
be proved to be free from kalpand and hence to be a case of 
perception." 

7-18 (E30-31) Contents of sensory awarenesses are 
well-defined (vyavasdyatmaka), direct. Awareness is self-aware 
(svasamvedana) of pleasures, etc. 


286 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


19-26 (E32; $193) "The Naiyayikas are of the opinion 
that though every cognition is perceptible it is perceived by a 
cognition other than itself which is called (an) ‘after-cognition' 
(anuvyavasdya). Dharmakirti and Akalanka both criticise this 
peculiar Nyaya view. They observe that if cognition is not self- 
revelatory but requires another cognition to reveal itself it 
would involve us in an infinite regress. Akalanka has refuted 
the Bhatta view also." 

28-99 (E33-43) Refutation of sakaravada and proof of 
nirdka@ravada. Establishment of external objects, and refutation 
of idealism. 

50-51a (E36; $179) "Akalanka observes that there is no 
nondual pure consciousness. Consciousness never reveals itself 
as nondual. We experience the duality of subject and object in 
it. From where does this duality come? It-could not be held 
that its nondual nature is revealed by something other than 
itself, because that would deprive it of its nonduality. That 
consciousness is nondual means that it is beyond the subject- 
object duality. As soon as it is held to be the object of 
something other than itself it would no longer be called 
nondual. It becomes one of the two terms. The object term 
implies the subject term and consequently duality. Moreover, 
even in the nonreflective state of consciousness it is 
experienced as dual only." 

69a (E39; $176-177)"Akalanka points out that it is only 
the external things that are efficient. Ideas are not 
éfficient...We do not die simply on account of our having the 
idea of venom." 

86ff. (E42; $178-179) "Dharmakirti rejects the external 
world pointing out absurdities that are involved in the concept 
of it. One atom is contiguous with other atoms. If it is 
identical with the atoms close to it, the aggregate of all the 
atoms would assume an atomic size; if it is different from 
them an atom would have six parts. Again, let us take the case 
of a whole and its parts. Are they identical? If they are 
identical, the redness of a part would pervade the whole. If 


NYAYAVINISCAYA 287 


they are different, the question would arise as to whether the 
whole resides in each of its parts partially or wholly. The 
difficulties of both the alternatives are patent and require no 
elaboration." 

“Akalanka retorts that like external atoms, the internal 
atomic reflections too could not avoid the defects that are 
contingent upon their being contiguous with each other. A 
man perceives a multicolored gem. Reflections of the blue, the 
yellow, etc. arise in contiguity with one another and are 
considered to be atomic in size. If the atomic reflections on 
the six sides of an atomic reflection of the blue were identical 
with the latter, the complex of all these atomic reflections 
would also be of an atomic size and if they are different from 
it, an atomic reflection would possess six parts...Again, if all 
these atomic reflections were to form one variegated 
cognition, there would arise the question as to whether this 
one cognition resides in its constituent parts partially or 
wholly and so on. Moreover, Akalanka is of the opinion that 
the atoms are somehow perceptible also." 

94-95 (E42; $176) "Akalanka rightly observes that the 
reality of the external world cannot be ruled out because like 
consciousness it also is repeatedly experienced by us. The 
external world is not unreal as no counterevidence competent 
to upset its reality is known to us. There is no doubt in our 
mind regarding its reality. The cognition of the external world 
is not a delusion created by imagination because it is not 
contradicted or sublated by other valid cognitions and also 
because it bears vivid and distinct reflection of the external 
world. If...ideas are accepted as real and the external world is 
denied reality we go against, says Akalanka, the supreme 
authority of experience. We do not assume the external world, 
we perceive it." 

96-97 (E43; $178) "Akalanka observes that Dharmakirti 
should not declare that the cognition of (an) external object 
arises merely on account of ignorance...Akalanka wants to 
point out that even illusory cognitions have (an) objective 


288 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


basis. All...cognitions are always generated by external things, 
though some of them are so generated directly and some only 
indirectly. Akalanka asks Dharmakirti...why he does not accept 
traces (vasand)...as the cause(s) of bodily actions and speech. 
Dharmakirti might contend that...traces could not explain the 
cognition of the bodily actions and speech in a particular locus 
if there were not external bodily actions and speech. Akalanka 
asks Dharmakirti to adopt the same attitude towards external 
objects as he has done in connection with the bodily actions 
and speech. Moreover, the idealist Dharmakirti is of the 
opinion that even...dream reflections of...bodily actions and 
speech are remotely related to...actual (bodily actions and 
speech of) other minds. Akalanka wants him to apply the same 
logic in the case of...dream-cognitions of external things. The 
dream-cogniiton of a particular thing is remotely related to 
that thing. Has anybody dreamt of a thing whose component 
parts he has never experienced externally? As a matter of 
fact, dream implies the experience of a real external world." 
98-99 (E43; $177) "Dharmakirti noted some cases of 
the reflection of external objects without there being any 
actual external objects there outside, and on the basis of this 
he generalised that all the reflections of external objects are 
devoid of corresponding external objects. All the reflections of 
external objects are caused by vasana (the internal force of 
illusion). Akalanka refutes this view of Dharmakirti. In the 
state of fear, etc. the reflection of an external object is no 
doubt sometimes caused by vdsana but in the case of...other 
states, that is, in the case of the placid state of mind, the 
reflection of an external object should not be regarded as 
caused by vdsana; in this latter case the reflection is caused by 
an actual external object. The reasoning of Dharmakirti is as 
fallacious as the one employed by the Naiyayikas to prove the 
existence of an intelligent creator of the world. Having seen 
that some things possessed of a structure have got an 
intelligent creator, the Naiyayikas generalise that all things 
possessed of a structure should have an intelligent creator." 


NYAYAVINISCAYA 289 


101-110 (E43-44) Refutation of Nyadya-Vaigesikas on 
atoms and the difference of the whole from its parts. 

111-141 (E44-48) On substances, qualities and modes. 

114a (E45; S70) “Akalanka says that a substance is 
permanent in the sense that it never loses its essence and not 
in the sense that it is absolutely static. It undergoes change no 
doubt but it retains its essential nature; it is in this sense that 
it can be said to be permanent--not in the sense of being 
absolutely changeless. From this it follows that reality is 
dynamic, it is always in motion, it always transforms itself 
without giving up its essence." 

115b (E45; S70) "The process of transformation 
involves origination, decay and persistence. Hence reality is 
said to be of this triple nature." 

140b-141a (E48; S70) "A substance and its modes are 
not absolutely different...as the Vaisesika philosopher's 
substance and its qualities are; nor are they absolutely 
identical, one engulfing the other and thus giving rise to the 
Vedanta eternalism or Buddhist momentariness. There obtains 
a relation of identity-cum-difference between them. They are 
identical in so far as one is not found without the other; they 
are different in the sense that they can be mentally 
differentiated. Thus the Jaina philosopher's substance is not 
absolutely changeless, nor are its modes absolutely discrete. 
The previous mode is related with the posterior mode; 
between them there obtains a relation of relative identity as 
between the cause-continuum and effect-continuum." 

142-154 (E48-50) On universals and particulars. 

143b (E48; S146) "All things experience change. It is 
possible for a similar character to be common to many things 
and for one thing to have many modes or characters." 

143b-144 (E49; $140) "Only...thoughtless persons hold 
that the universal is nothing but exclusion from the opposite 
(apoha)...How can this exclusion of the opposite be possible 
if the individuals are devoid of any similarity or similar 
characters? So, in the form of the basis of exclusion, even 


290 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Dharmakirti should acknowledge the presence of...positive 
similar characters like existence, etc., there in things. Let us 
elaborate this point. How can we exclude some select 
individuals from all others if the former do not possess some 
common (i.e., similar) characters or modifications. If the cow 
sGbaleya has the same degree of difference from the cow 
bdhuleya as it has from a horse then why only are sabaleya 
and bahuleya held to be having the exclusion of the opposite 
(of cow) and not the horse too? That is to say, what is the 
basis on account of which some individuals are selected to 
have the exclusion from the opposite in common? In fine, 
what is the principle of exclusion? If it is held that the 
difference that obtains between a horse and a cow is 
immensely greater than that which obtains between any two 
cows and hence the exclusion of the opposite that the cows 
possess is not possessed by the horses, then this is merely a 
round-about way of saying positively that the common (i.e., 
similar) traits or characteristics or modes that are there in any 
two cows are more numerous than those that are there in a 
horse and a cow. Thus it is only the common {i.e., similar) 
characters that urge us to classify things, to give them one 
name and generate the notion of similarity." 

145b-146 (E49; S146) "It is to be noted that in no way 
can the universal of the Samkara Vedantins (or the Vaisesikas) 
go to characterize the particulars or (can) the pure particulars 
of the Buddhists be characterized by the universal; but it is the 
nature of things undergoing a similar transformation to have 
both the universal and the particular, that is, to have both the 
similar characters and the unique ones. As the universal and 
the particular are never found without one another, it is to be 
concluded that a thing is of the nature of both the universal 
and the particular." 

148-149 (E49; $223) "Akalanka criticises Dharmakirti's 
position that perception positively cognises a thing in its 
entirety while the instruments other than perception are 
required only to remove false superimpositions. The criticism 


NYAYAVINISCAYA 291 


is as follows. Perception does not grasp a thing in its entirety 
inasmuch as some part or aspect of it remains unperceived. 
This can be corroborated by what are called perceptual 
illusions (pratyaksabhranti) by Dharmakirti. In perceptual 
illusions the cogniser perceives a thing partly as it is and partly 
as it is not. If it were the nature of perception to grasp a thing 
in its entirety, then in perceptual illusion also the cogniser 
would have perceived the thing in its entirety with the result 
that perceptual illusions should not arise at all. Thus 
perceptual illusions would become an utter impossibility if it 
were held that perception grasps a thing in its entirety.” 

151b-153a (E50; $144) "Akalanka, like Dharmakirti, 
refutes the concept of an eternal all-pervading impartite 
entitative universal. He rightly observes that, if such a 
universal were held to be revealed by an individual, then once 
it is revealed it would remain revealed forever and would be 
revealed everywhere in all individuals, present, past and 
future. Just as existence (satta), inherence (samavaya) and an 
individuator (visesa) can exist even without any independent 
universal inhering in them.even so all those entities that are 
called arthas, that is, substances, qualities and actions 
(karman) can exist without any independent universal called 
"existence" inhering in them. The concept of one entative 
universal residing in many is thus not proper. Otherwise, even 
time, space, etc., would become universals." 

153b-154 (E50; $145-146) "Just as a body is not an 
independent entity over and above its limbs even so existence 
is not an independent entity called a universal over and above 
its species and sub-species. Though all things are equally 
existent only some, and not others, have a particular set of 
similar characters, just as though legs, hands, etc., belong to 
the same body or are parts of the same body a leg is similar 
to another leg and it is not that even a hand is similar to a leg. 
A thing has both similar and peculiar characters as is proved 
by perception, etc.; otherwise change would become 
impossible.” 


292 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


156-162 (E50-51) There is no constructionfree 
(nirvikalpaka) perception. Nor is there any mental perception 
(manasapratyaksa). 

160-164 (E51-52; S226-227) "Akalanka gives the 
following arguments in refutation of mental perception 
recognised by Dharmakirti and other Buddhists. (i) One finds 
no difference between sense-perception and mental perception 
as conceived by Dharmakirti. (ii) Santabhadra (?) is of the 
opinion that constructionfree awareness (nirvikalpaka jfiana), 
being quite different from constructionfilled awareness 
(savikalpaka jfiana), could not generate the latter directly 
without mental perception to link them. But it might be asked 
as to how mental perception that is equally quite different 
from constructionfilled perception could generate the latter 
directly. (iii) If as many mental perceptions are accepted as 
are sense-perceptions, there would not arise the co-ordinating 
cognition (pratisandhi), viz. '! who have smelt the sweet have 
eaten it". (iv) If one mental perception were regarded as 
grasping all types of objects--viz. color, flavor, odor, etc.--there 
would remain no need of our positing five types of sense- 
perception. (v) If it were held that mental perceptions arise 
successively one after another, then Dharmakirti's thesis that 
the sense-perceptions of different types arise simultaneously 
would. be contradicted; for on this view a mental perception 
would intervene between two sense-perceptions. (vi) 
‘Even...experience and inference contradict the view of 
Dharmakirti that mere mental perception directly arises from 
the preceding sense-perception, for we actually experience 
conceptual cognitions like 'I experience through eye, nose, etc. 
color, odor, etc. simultaneously’ arising directly from sense- 
perception. There is an invariable relation between sense- 
perception and judgment. The judgment ‘this is blue' does not 
establish the existence of mental perception because the 
judgment is generated directly by sense-perception only; for its 
generation there is no need of an intermediary mental 
perception. (vii) If mental perception were regarded as akin to 


NYAYAVINISCAYA 293 


self-cognition (svasamvedana) there would arise an over- 
absurdity (namely, that mental perception will then be a. 
redundant concept). (viii) If it is urged that the definition of 
mental perception is given in accordance with the canonical 
texts, then it is to be pointed out that in scientific treatises 
such unnecessary things (i.e., definitions based on dogmas) 
should find no place." 

"According to Dharmakirti every consciousness and 
every mental phenomenon are self-cognised. Akalanka would 
not contradict this. For him also a cognition is necessarily self- 
cognitive; but he would not endorse Dharmakirti's view that 
all self-cognitions are instruments of knowledge (pramana), 
i.e. valid. Akalanka is emphatic on the point that only 
determinate self-cognitions deserve to be called instruments of 
true cognition. This is so because according to him an 
instrument of true cognition has to be a constructionfilled 
piece of cognition. On Dharmakirti's view, says Akalanka, the 
cognition of a man even in states of sleep, swoon, etc. would 
become instruments of knowledge, but this is surely absurd. 
To avoid this absurdity Dharmakirti could not maintain that in 
those states there is no cognition at all, for this would mean 
a complete nonexistence of repeated meditation on the four 
noble truths in those states--a position not acceptable to 
Dharmakirti." 

165-167; E51) Discussion of yogic perception, vs. 
Samkhya on audition and Nyaya on sense-object connection 
(sannikarsa). 

168 (E52; S228) "Akalanka would not object to yogic 
perception provided it is constructionfilled. To regard it as 
constructionfree contradicts the following statement of 
Dharmakirti himself: 'the people seek that person who knows 
the means (updaya) of attaining nirvana so that they desiring 
nirvana follow the advice of this person without any doubt in 
their minds.’ If the yogic perception of the four noble truths 
were constructionfree the yogi could not relate them to the 
vineyas, the seekers of the truth." 


294 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


CHAPTER TWO: INFERENCE 

170-184; E52-54) Definition of inference, of the sddhya 
and its fallacies. 

185b-206a (E54-56; $145) "For Akalanka,...similar 
characters or similar modifications are what constitute the 
universal. It might be asked as to how a characteristic that is 
similar but not the same can reside in many individuals and if 
it does not reside in many individuals how can it be called a 
universal? Akalanka replies that...things are necessarily similar 
to some and dissimilar to others. Again, he points out that it 
cannot be said that one character resides in many; it is so 
because it is identical with or embedded in the individuals.. 
Nor can it be held that it is confined exclusively to one 
individual; it is so because like this individual another 
individual too possesses the character exactly similar to it. 
The Jaina conception of universal is not vitiated by defects 
that are pointed out in the corresponding Nyaya-Vaisesika 
conception by forming the dilemma, namely, whether it is 
ubiquitous or...is confined to the concerned individuals, for 
according to the Jainas the similar character is numerically 
different in each individual of a class. The universal and the 
particular, that is, the similar characters and the specific 
characters, are both identical and different. The universal 
cannot exist without the particular and vice versa and in this 
sense they are identical, but they are different also as we 
recognise them as distinct. Things are not merely identical as 
they are different also; their difference is established by the 
cognition of difference in relation to them. Nor are they 
merely different or discrete as they are identical also; their 
identity is established on the strength of the cognition of 
identity in relation to them. In the Jaina system the identity of 
things means their having similar characters. There is nothing 
contradictory about a thing having both similar and specific 
characters because otherwise two things would never become 
similar nor would they ever be grasped as similar." 


NYAYAVINISCAYA 295 


187b (E55; $144-1S) "Nyaya-Vaisesikas certainly cannot 
escape the horns of the dilemma viz. whether their universal 
is ubiquitous or it is confined to the concerned individuals." 

193b-194a (E55; $141) "Dharmakirti's view that there 
arises the cognition of identity in relation to discrete 
individuals because the conceptual cognition conceals the 
discrete nature of the individuals is not proper. He himself 
says that this conceptual cognition reflects the difference 
inasmuch as it grasps the things as similar and not as 
identical. Thus since it does not conceal the difference that 
pertains to the individuals it should be recognised as valid, 
and the similarity that it finds in the different individuals 
should be recognized as real." 

199b (E56; $144) “Existence in many cannot be put 
down as a distinguishing mark of the universal because it 
would lead to over-absurdity; that is, in that case 
even...entities like contact and number (two, etc.) would have 
to be treated as universals." 

201-203 (E57; S141-142) "Akalanka asks Dharma- 
kirti...why...people do not have construction-filled knowledge 
of the uniqueness of particulars even though they perceive 
them as unique, i.e. as excluded from all other things similar 
as well as dissimilar. If he were to reply that on account of 
their similarity we are unable to determine their uniqueness, 
then he has unconsciously spoken the truth. Now, we ask him 
if this similarity itself is of the nature of exclusion. He cannot 
say that similarity is nothing but exclusion as that would prove 
him incoherent and inconsistent in his talk. The exclusion of 
a thing from all other things, similar as well as dissimilar, that 
' is, its uniqueness is not determined, because it is similar to 
other things and this similarity is nothing but the exclusion of 
the things from others. No sane man would talk like this. 
Moreover, the view that though there obtains no real similarity 
between things they are cognised as similar due to their 
exclusion from others involves the contingency of all the things 
of the world becoming equally similar inasmuch as each and 


296 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


every thing possesses...exclusion from all others." 

"The similarity obtaining between things should be 
regarded as real. Otherwise the possibility of illusions would 
be altogether ruled out. As a matter of fact, on perceiving the 
_ similar nature that characterizes two things we are misled into 
attributing the specific nature of one to the other. For 
example, in the case of an illusion of silver in shell, we first 
cognise the concerned similar nature, viz., glitter. This similar 
nature being connected with the specific natures of shell and 
silver both, it is quite possible that it revives the memory 
traces of silver and as a result the cogniser superimposes 
silverness on shell and mistakes shell for silver. If Dharmakirti 
were to say that illusions arise without any external conditions 
at all then why should he not consider the movement of a ship 
and -the speedy revolution of a firebrand, which are 
respectively given by him as the external conditions of the 
illusory cognition of a moving tree and that of a fiery circle, to 
be of no use in causing those illusory cognitions? If he were 
to regard ignorance, which is internal, as the cause of illusion 
then his view that all things are unique may well be set aside, 
for (someone e.g.) the Sankara Vedantins' would say that the 
cognition of difference is due to ignorance, the cognition of 
identity being alone true. Thus there would arise the 
contingency of the acceptance of quite a different view, viz. 
(e.g.) the Vedanta view, if the internal ignorance is regarded 
as the sole cause of illusion. Akalanka concludes that a real 
similarity obtaining between things is necessary to account for 
illusions." 

269-272 (E66-67; S272) Definition of the reason 
(sadhana) and its fallacies. "While discussing the fallacies of 
(the) reason Akalanka has tried to be consistent with his 
doctrine of ‘one-condition-of-a-valid-reason'. Though he accepts 
all the fallacies of (the) reason recognised traditionally he 


1 There is no explicit reference in the Sanskrit text to Advaita 
Vedanta in this passage, however. 


NYAYAVINISCAYA 297 


observes that there is in fact only one fallacy of (the) reason 
and that is called asiddha or akificitkara by him; all the other 
fallacies are mere species of this one fallacy." 

273-386 (E67-81) The many aspects of ordinary objects, 
i.e. molecules, and reasons. Molecules differ in colors but are 
not differentiated by their colors. Absences are also knowables. 

370b-371a (E79; S272-273) "...(T)wo types of fallacies 
of the reason (akificitkara)... (viz.) a reason adduced to prove 
a thesis that is either already proved or is contradicted by 
other valid cognitions, cannot really be treated as fallacies of 
(the) reason. They are in fact fallacies of (the) 
thesis....Akalanka observes that all those reasons that are 
devoid of a necessary connection with the sddhya concerned 
are to be called akificitkara in spite of their fulfilling those 
three conditions of a valid hetu (formulated by the Buddhist)." 

472b-473a (E93; S297) "If only on the strength of such 
trivial differences among the various cases of knowledge we 
were to regard them as results of several independent sources 
of valid knowledge then there would be innumerable such 
sources." 


CHAPTER THREE: AUTHORITATIVE LANGUAGE 


32..BHATTA AKALANKA, Pramdnasamgraha and -Vrtti 

",..(Dt has a very compact style. From the maturity of 
judgments and acute analysis, it can be said that it is the last 
work of Akalanka; besides, he includes some of the kdrikds 
from Nydyaviniscaya...There are nine chapters and 87 1/2 
' karikas...dealing with the topics: Pratyaksa (perception), 
Paroksa (mediate knowledge), Anumdana (inference), Hetu 
(reason), its classifications, Hetvabhasa (fallacies of reason), 
non-existent (asiddha), contradictory and inconclusive, Vada 
(legitimate discourse), Pravacana (the nature of scripture), 
proof of omniscience, refutation of apauruseyatva, Saptabhangi 
(the seven fold predication), naya and its classification, lastly 


298 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


conclusion on pramdna (valid knowledge), naya (partial 
standpoint) and niksepa."® 

"E" is Mahendra Kumar's edition of the two previous 
works and this one in the volume titled 
Akalankagranthatrayam., op. cit. 


CHAPTER ONE: PERCEPTION 
- 1-10 (E97-99) The identifying qualities of direct 
perception. The priority of the validity of scripture (sruta), i.e., 
of perceptual, inferential or (ordinary) verbal knowledge. 


CHAPTER TWO: INFERENCE 
11-18 (E99-101) Memory of an object validly perceived 


CHAPTER THREE: REASON 
1-10 (E101-103) The ingredients of inference, viz., 
sddhya and sadhana, are discussed. Fallacies. 


33.BHATTA AKALANKA, Siddhivinigcaya 

A few passages from this work are summarized (S") by 
Mahendra Kumar in his edition, with Anantavirya's Tika, 
constituting Jnana-Pitha Murtidevi Jaina Granthamala 22-23, 
1959. "E" references are to this edition as well. The summary 
provided is translated by Ratna Lahiri from Mahendra Kumar's 
Introduction to the first volume of the same edition, pp. 94-95. 
Translations of section headings are the editor's. 


Summarized by Mahendra Kumar and Ratna Lahiri 


"1.Pratyaksasiddhi (perception): The topics brought 
under discussion are: the nature of pramdna; the result of 
pramana; the proof of external objects; the validity and 
perspicuousness of consti uctionfilled cognition; rejection of the 


PRAMANASAMGRAHA 299 


validity of constructionfree perception; refutation of the 
constructionfree nature of self-cognition; the establishment of 
knowledge on the strength of wide, not whole, application of 
nondeviance; the possibility of mati and sruti knowledge, etc., 
without the application of words; and so on. 

2.Savikalpasiddhi (constructionfilled awareness). The 
des-cription of indistinct awareness, etc. Examination of 
mental perception. Constructionfilled awareness is not the 
result of constructionfree awareness. Each cognitive member 
of indistinct awareness, etc. (in order) is the cognitive organ 
and each succeeding member as the resultant. Impossibility of 
knowing (an)other person if the Buddhist view is accepted. 

3.Pramanantarasiddhi (other instruments of 
knowledge): Establishment of recollection and recognition as 
separate instruments. Inclusion of comparison (upamana) in 
recognition (pratyabhijfa). Justification of tarka as instrument 
of true cognition. 

3.2 (S105) "Tarka or inductive reasoning is an 
independent valid (source of) valid awareness, because to 
know the concomitance there is no other valid means than 
tarka. If concomitance is not known there is no possibility of 
inference." 

--The impossibility of action in the (Buddhist) 
philosophy of momentariness. Justification of creation 
(utpada), destruction (vyaya) and subsistence (sthiti). 
Destruction as the creation of other modes. The establishment 
of eternity and identity-cum-difference of substances and 
modes. 

4 Jivasiddhi (self). False awareness, the result of the 
operation of knowledge-obscuring (favaraniya) karmas. 
Causal efficacy. Continuity, etc., untenable in momentariness. 
With respect to bondage self (jiva) and not-self are one though 
differing essentially in their nature. The causes of influx of 
karmas. Disbelief in prajfidsat and prajriaptisat. Criticism of 
materialist (as in Tattvopaplava) philosophy. Refutation of 
materialism (bhutacaitanyavada). Nyaya conception of self. 


300 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Criticism of the Samkhya theory of tattvas-- 

4.15-20 (E293-300; $113) "Akalanka has criticised the 
Samkhya's oneness of prakrti." 

4.23 (E308; $113) "Akalanka has criticised the 
independent sa@mGnya and visesa which are (the) eternal 
entities according to Naiyayikas." 

--the bondage of karmas with the formless 
consciousness (cetana). The _ identity-cum-difference 
(bhedabheda) of awareness (jfidna), etc. and self (@tman). 

5 Jalpasiddhi (sophistry). The nature of sophistry 
(jalpa). The four limbs of it. The connotation of gabda. Sabda 
is not necessarily an indication of intention. Criticism of the 
ways of losing an argument (nigrahasthana) due to the 
statement of (what is) other than an essential condition of 
proof, etc. Definition of victory (jaya) and defeat (pardjaya). 

5.1-2 (E310-311; $1109) "Akalanka clearly says that if 
one is able to establish his own paksa, it is jaya for him and 
defeat for the other. It is needless to state that according to. 
Akalanka, the establishment of one's own theory is possible 
only by means of right reasoning. This constitutes the essential 
device in debates." 

5.2. (E311; $109) "When there was no place for unfair 
means in debates, the difference between vada and jalpa was 
reduced to nothing; and as regards vitanda, Akalanka has 
clearly stated that it is the fallacy of vada; so for Akalanka, 
there remains one type of debate, viz. vada, which is also 
termed (as) jalpa." 

6 Hetulaksanasiddhi (definition of a _ reason). 
Impossibility otherwise (anyathanupapatti) is the characteristic 
of an invariable reason.-- 

6.2ff. (E372ff.; S106, 110) "Keeping in view the three 
characteristics--paksadharmatva, etc.--of hetu accepted by the 
Buddhists, Akalanka establishes that only the anyathanupapatti 
or the vipaksavyavrtti is the essential characteristic of hetu. He 
has explained that anyathanupapatti or vipaksavyavrtti is 
nothing else than avinabhava or vyapti. 


SIDDHIVINISCAYA 301 


"Before discussing the validity of agama, it is necessary 
to know the views about the nature of sabda according to the 
Jains. In Jaina dgamas (the) sabda has been established as 
having material nature (pudgala). Acarya Akalanka has given 
arguments in favour of this theory and on the analogy of 
shadow and sunshine has firmly established the material 
nature of word and rejected the theory of the Naiyayikas that 
(the) Sabda is a quality of the sky. Further he has vehemently 
criticised the eternity of the word accepted by the 
Mimamsakas, and has also criticised the sphota theory of the 
Vaiyakaranas.” 

--Concomitance is not conditioned by identity 
(taddtmya) and causation (tadutpatti) only (as_ in 
Dharmakirti). Justification of divisions of the reason.-- 

6.9 (E383; $107) "Special attention is given to establish 
Karanahetu, because this was not accepted by the Buddhists; 
Akalanka has given many instances where the effect can be 
inferred with the help of (the) cause (kdrana)." 

--Justification of prior (purvacara), posterior 
(uttaracara) and simultaneous (sahacara). The possibility of 
sattva hetu etc. only in the anekanta philosophy. 

6.16 (E394; $106) "There are certain cases where hetu 
is devoid of its characteristics of paksadharmatva just as the 
rising of rohini in (the) future is inferred on seeing the rise of 
krttika (now). Further Akalanka argues that their (the 
Buddhists) most favourite hetu, sattva establishing momentari- 
ness, is such that it has no sapaksasattva; and still they believe 
that sattva is a valid hetu. So ‘it is quite clear that 
sapaksasattva cannot be an essential characteristic of hetu.” 

6.35-36 (E434-436; $107) "Akalanka maintains that the 
meaning drsya (in Dharmakirti's term drgyanupalabdhi) should 
not be taken as 'perceived' only but it should be taken as 
‘cognised' by any of the (means of) valid cognition, be it 
pratyaksa or other than pratyaksa. So according to Akalanka 
the object which is non-sensuous can be negativated as the 
non-existence of consciousness is inferred in a dead body by 


302 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


certain signs; otherwise even this cannot be decided whether 
a person is a ghost or not." 

7 Sastrasiddhi (scripture). The value of scripture in the 
spiritual path. The signification of sabda. The consciousness of 
a self while asleep. Error of selves due to the rise of karmas. 
Refutation of theism. Criticism of Nyaya conception of 
liberation (moksa). The possibility of par excellence knowledge 
in man.-- 

7.9-10 (E463; $113) "Akalanka has criticised the 
Vedanta's absolutistic theory of one Brahma." 

--Non-discrepancy of syddvdda. Repudiation of 
apauruseyatva of Veda, etc. 

7.28-30 (E483-487; S110) For the Jains, unlike the 
Mimamsakas, the scriptures are the collection of the 
preachings of the Tirthankaras. So it was necessary for 
Akalanka to refute the Vedic tradition of apauruseyatva and to 
establish the origin of the agamas. Akalanka has rejected the 
validity of the dgamas established on the strength of 
apauruseyatva, affirmed the validity of the agama on the 
strength of the virtues of the speaker." 

8 Sarvajnasiddhi (omniscience). Knowledge of imper- 
ceptible things also is possible. Speaking a language is not 
contradictory to omniscience. Proof of omniscience on the 
basis of noncontradictory reasons.-- 

8.3 (E527; $103) "If a person has no capacity to know 
all, by means of the Veda also he will not be able to know all." 

8.8 (E539; $103) "Akalanka, following his predecessors, 
says that the soul has the inherent capacity to 
comprehend...substance; if it does not, it is due to the 
obscuration of that capacity by the veil of Karmic bondage; the 
destruction of Karmas will result in the perception of all 
things." 

"If supra-sensorial knowledge is inadmissible, how can 
we have the non-discrepant astrological divinations? Hence it 
must be accepted that there is a faculty of knowledge which 
is super-sensuous and this type of knowledge is nothing but 


SIDDHIVINISCAYA 303 


kevalajfiana or omniscience." 

"The very progressive gradation of knowledge 
necessarily implies the highest magnitude of knowledge 
attainable by man." 

--The impossibility of omniscience in the Samkhya 
theory. Omniscience is the result of the total destruction of 
knowledge-obscuring (jfidndvdGraniya) karmas, etc. 

8.10-18 (E540-552; S103) "(The) impossibility of 
omniscience cannot be established without the knowledge of 
persons of all times. That is to say, one who rejects 
omniscience for all time must be omniscient. In this way, after 
giving the positive arguments, he relies on the negative 
argument that it is certain, there is no contradictory 
instrument of knowledge to reject the established omniscience; 
he substantiates this argument by examining the various so- 
called contradictory instruments", 

9 Sabdasiddhi (language). The material nature of 
language. Its nature of aggregation as shadow and light. The 
relation of word and meaning. A word connotes a particular 
object. Word can even establish the illusory nature of all 
things. If a particular is not signified by a word it will become 
imperceptible. If the word denotes only an intention, there will 
be no discrimimination between right and wrong. Discussion 
on the expression "eva". 

9.13 (E619; $103) "Akalanka has criticised (the) apoha 
of the Bauddhas, etc." 

10 Arthanayasiddhi (perspectives on  objects).-- 
Perspective .is the standpoint of the knower. It is also an 
instrument of knowledge. Two fundamental perspectives, 
absolute (nirapeksa) and conventional. 

10.1 (E662; S114) "Briefly we can say that pramana 
comprehends one and all; naya one, durnaya rejects other 
than one. The aforesaid two nayas are further subdivided into 
seven: nigama, samgraha etc. These seven are classified again 
into perspectives on objects (arthanaya) and linguistically 
implied perspectives (sSabdanaya); the first four--naigama, 


304 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


samgraha, vyavahara and rjusitra--are called arthanayas; and 
the rest viz., sabda, samabhiridha and evambhita are 
$abdanayas." 

"Akalanka has attempted to include the various schools 
of Indian philosophy into durnayas related to the seven nayas.” 

10.3 (E666; $113) "The relation between naya and 
pramana is discussed by Akalanka. He is of the opinion that 
when one comprehends a substance on the ground of a 
particular attribute, that is to say, when he cognises the whole 
reality (sakalddega) through a particular attribute, it is called 
pramadna; and when a person cognises the attributes of reality 
(vikaladesa), it is called naya; the reality as the aggregate of 
all the attributes is the object of pramana while a particular 
attribute of (the) reality is naya. So it is quite clear that naya 
is the outcome of the comprehension of oer and that 
pram4na is none other than srutajfianas 

10.4 (E667; $113-114) "It is sbyious that (the) various 
schools of philosophy are the outcome of the absolutist view 
of a substance giving emphasis on certain aspects with the 
result that they reject downright the other aspects of reality. 
Keeping such views in mind Akalanka has classified the nayas 
into right (sunaya) and wrong (durnaya). That is to say that 
sunaya, though (it) gives no preference to one of the 
attributes, does not reject others; on the other hand, durnaya 
not only prefers but endorses that and rejects the rest." 

--Samkhya theory--a naigamdbhasa (nonanalytical 
fallacy). Collective (samgraha) perspective and its fallacy. 
Commonsensical (vyavahara) perspective (and its fallacy), 
immediate (i.e., a view confined to present situations, 
njusiitra) perspective and its fallacy. 

11 Sabdanayasiddhi (linguistic perspectives). Discussion 
of the nature of language (Sabda). Refutation of the doctrine 
of phonetic explosion (sphota). Rejection of the eternalistic 
view of the word--Sabdanaya.--' 

11.5 (E702; $113) "Akalanka has criticised the 
Sabdabrahman of the Vaiyakaranas. 


SIDDHIVINISCAYA ° 305 


--Description of the etymological perspective (samabhi- 
rudhanaya) and strict constructionist perspective (evambhita- 
naya), etc. 

12 Niksepasiddhi (locating the meaning).-- 

12.1-2 (E738-739; $115) "One of the means to know 
(the) reality is niksepa or explaining the meaning of the 
connotation of the word...(W)ords sometimes connote (the) 
cognition, sometimes (an) external object and also (the) 
words. So in order to remove the confusion the procedure of 
niksepa is essential to arive at the right meaning. Just like 
nayas, niksepas are also of various types. But briefly they are 
classified into four: nama, sthdpand, dravya and bhava....the 
nama-niksepa deals with (the) words without their 
connotation. The sthapana deals with the meaning related to 
knowledge and dravya and bhava deal with (the) external 
objects..." 

33 "In common parlance of life, there are certain 
occasions when we attach importance to the ndma only and 
on other occasions we are concerned (ourselves) with 
sthapana..." 

"The relation between naya and niksepa is also 
explained. The nama, sthapana and dravya are the objects of 
dravyarthika-naya, while the bhdva is the object of 
paryayarthika-naya." 


34.BHATTA AKALANKA, (Rdja)Varttika(alamkara) on 
Umasvati's Tattvarthasutra 
with a Bhasya or Alamkara thereon 

"The Tattvarthasutras) have undergone two recensions; 
one as accepted in the (Tattvarthadhigama)Bhdasya and the 
other accepted in the Sarvartha Siddhi. Akalanka accepted the 
latter recension and has criticised, at certain place, some 
Sutras of the Bhasya recension and the Bh@sya itself. It is also 
found that he has composed Varttika out of sentences from the 
Bhdasya."™ 


306 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The work is viewed by Digambaras as the second in the 
chronological line of commentaries on Umasvati's work after 
Pujyapada's. 


Summary by Mahendra Kumar Jain with Ratna Lahiri 


Mr. Jain's summary is found in Hindi in his edition 
contained in Jnanapitha Murtidevi Granthamala, Sanskrit 
Grantha No. 10 (in two parts). This is our "E” for Chapters 
One through Five. For Chapters Six through Ten "EM" refers 
to the edition by Manoharalala printed as Saraswati Oriental 
Research Sanskrit Series No. 16 (Ahmadabad 2002). The 
summary is summarized for this Volume by Ratna Lahiri. 
Certain Chapters have been translated by N. L. Jain; "T" 
references are to these, identified in endnotes after the titles 
of the relevant Chapters. 


CHAPTER ONE 

1-4 (E265) Just as medical aid is sought at the advent 
of a disease, so also to know the self the path to liberation 
should be sought. Out of the four goals of life (dharma, artha, 
kama, moksa) the last is the one that must be sought and 
taught. 

Question: Should the path be taught, or only the fact 
that liberation is the highest goal? 

Answer: Since the path is sought, the path should be 

taught. 
5-8 (E265) Most contenders have no doubt regarding 
their goal but they have differences regarding the path. Some 
contenders aver that knowledge alone is liberating, others 
think cessation of sense pleasures, and still others think some 
routine activities are instrumental in this achievement. 

Even as to the nature of liberation there are many 
views. All agree that liberation means the cessation of all 
sorrow. However, the path according to each contender is 
different. Some believe it is achieved through knowledge, 


FO AEE REE 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTIKA 307 


others through action and others through renunciation. The 
Buddhists believe that the stoppage of five aggregates (ripa, 
vedana, samjiid, samskara, vijridna) will lead to liberation. The 
Samkhya system believes that on knowing the difference 
between prakrti and purusa the subsequent dwelling in pure 
consciousness will then liberate. The Naiyayikas insist that 
uprooting some specific qualities of the self (awarenesses, 
pleasures, pains, desires, repulsions, efforts, dharma, adharma 
and traces) leads to liberation. Even so, all contenders are in 
agreement on the fact that the self has to be realized by 
destroying the bondage to karma. Everyone agrees that on 
liberation all bondage to karma is totally uprooted. 

9-13 (E265-266) Question: If liberation is not seen by 
a direct perception then why look for its path? 

Answer: Although not available to direct instruments of 
true cognition like the sense organs, even so it can be inferred. 
An example of the rural water system is given wherein a 
container tied to a wheel is circulated over a source of water 
by a bull, whose activity energizes the circular motion of the 
fulcrum of the wheel to keep it turning. The cessation of the 
activity of the bull stops the fulcrum, which in turn stops the 
wheel and the filling of water-containers. Similarly the 
stoppage of the wheel of karma stops the rounds of worldly 
life. This is called liberation. If anyone denies the existence of 
liberation, then all of them will be denying their basic 
premises. 

14-16 (E266) Question: Why then are the causes of 
bondage not discussed first? 

Answer: It will scare the seeker to listen to all that first, 
so it is better to keep up his hope by relating the ways to 
liberation, just as the prisoner, if told how he can escape, 
retains his enthusiasm through the difficulties of 
imprisonment. 

17 (D266) Rather than one path all three combined 
(right vision, right awareness and right conduct) have been 
given as the way to liberation. 


308 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


1.1.1 (E266) Right vision is the rising of faith in the 
meaning of essentials (tattvarthasraddha@) due to the internal 
cause of destruction and/or subsidence of certain adhering 
karmic matter. This internal activation occurs either through 
natural causes (nisarga) or through study of another's 
preaching. Thus it can have two types of origin. 

1.1.2 (E266) Accurate knowledge about the self and the 
other substances without any doubt and without any 
contrdiction or inattention, through the instruments of true 
cognition along with their relative perspectives, is known as 
right awareness. 

1.1.3 (E267) Right conduct is the acquiring of his innate 
natural state (svartipasthiti) by a man of discrimination, after 
he has renounced the external and internal mental, physical 
and verbal activities, knowing them to be the cause of worldly 
ties of attachment and repulsion. This state of perfection in 
right conduct cannot be acquired before the eleventh and 
twelfth stages of spiritual development or by the realized 
(kevalin). Below those stages, the various stages of progress 
are hierarchical in accordance with the effort involved, for 
laymen and for mendicants (s@dhu) who may have reached 
the tenth stage. 

1.1.4 (E267) Vision and knowledge are instruments of 
the self by which the substances are known. Right faith in 
essentials (tattva sraddhana) is what is gained in the process. 
"Conduct" relates to activity by which these actions are 
regulated. 

1.1.5-6 (E267) Question: If knowledge is the instrument 
(by which the self is known), then shouldn't the subject (self) 
and the instrument (knowledge) be two different things like 
the woodcutter and the axe? 

Answer: No. Just as fire burns by heat, but fire and its 
heat are not separate, so also there is no separation between 
knowledge and the self. The self becomes knowledge action 
Gftana kriya) and the self itself becomes vision action (darsana 

kriya). Fire cannot be imagined without heat. Thus the self is 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 309 


also of the innate nature of right vision and right awareness 
from the undifferentiated essential perspective (dravya drsti). 

1.1.7-8 (E267) The question is raised: Is knowledge a 
quality of the self, or heat a quality of fire, like a man with,a 
stick in his hand, both of which are associated but separate 
entities?. 

Answer: No, since the stick is a proven separate entity 
before its association with the man, and blueness in a blanket 
is separate from the things it colors, but fire cannot be 
established as existing without heat nor the self as existing 
without knowledge. Thus without heat or knowledge fire or 
self cannot be separately established as existing entities, nor 
can the heat or knowledge qualities be established as self- 
existent. Therefore they should not be imagined to be 
separate. 

1.1.9 (E267) The logic of imagining heat as a separate 
quality of fire is rejected. So is the possibility of the existence 
of knowledge as apart from the self. 

1.1.10-11 (E268) Vaisesika: Merely through associating 
with a staff a man does not become a staff. Fire becomes 
heated through association with heat according to our 
(VaiSesika) view. Thus a substance and its qualities are 
separate. Through co-occurrence a quality and what it qualifies 
appear to be the same; thus heat co-occurring with fire appars 
to be the same. 

Answer: It is not so. Co-occurrence cannot occur in 
independent substances. If heat and fire are different then why 
does heat not occur in water? Thus heat must be considered 
a corollary of the fire substance itself, not a different quality 
or substance. . 

I.1.12-13 (E268) Inherence (samavaya) is a relation, 
not a separate category. 

1.1.14 (E268) Objection: A lamp is different from its 
light. 

Answer: Even though the lamp lights itself, the co- 
occurrence of the intrinsic quality of being a substance, along 


310 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


with its quality, activity, general and specific states, are all 
modifications of the substance, hence its modes. The substance 
itself, due to outer and inner reasons, becomes the various 
modes. 

Inherence has no separate existence of its own. If the 
qualities of a thing were separated, then the substance will 
become nonexistent. Then where will the quality reside 
without the substance? So even the quality will then have to 
be nullified. Therefore, it is logical to consider the qualities 
inherent in the substance as modal existences of the same 
substance. 

I.1.15-16 (E268-270) Since knowledge is temporal and 
grasps one meaning at a time, it cannot lead to the 
discrimination (of substance from quality). Only separately 
established entities can be in contact (samyoga), while 
- inseparably-related (ayutasiddha) entities (five types in Nyaya- 
Vaisesika) are coexistent with the substances. Traces 
(samskdra) are also according to experience, so the 
understandings acquired through one-sided systems will also 
be one-sided. Thus discrimination may not occur through 
dispositional trace impressions. 

Knowledge, though intrinsic to the self, when perceived 
as slightly separate from its nature, can become both the 
subject and the instrument (karana). 

I.1.17-21 (E269) The unity and separateness of modes 
and substances should be viewed from the relative-pluralism 
point of view. Due to external and internal reasons, the self 
itself modifies into cognitive modes. (Example: mud and mud 
pots are somewhat similar from the essential point of view but 
different in practice as pot, plate, etc.) There is no existence 
of the self without the cognitive modes and no existence of 
knowledge without the self. 

Substances may occur both having form or not having 
form. Similarly, instrumentation is also of two kinds, with a 
separate subject and instrument (vibhaktakartrka) or without 
a separate subject. The same Indra has separate names 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 311 


according to the action he is performing, but they are various 
states of Indra, not different Indras. Similarly the same self is 
somewhat different from the knowledge, faith, etc., and 
somewhat similar to them. It cannot be said that its cognitive 
modes are altogether separate from a self. 

1.1.22-24 (E269-270) Thus, vision, awareness, and 
conduct are to be considered as instrumentative aspects of the 
self. So the difference between subject and instrument should 
not apply to a self and cognition, etc. Even from the 
grammatical point of view this is acceptable, as the same 
suffixes may be used for both (in Sanskrit). Thus objectively 
speaking visual and cognitive actions are themselves the path. 

1.1.25 (E270) Question: If knowledge is the same as a 
self then the word jfiana (meaning knowledge) should be of 
the same masculine gender as the word dtman (meaing self). 

Answer: No. Within the same meaning, different 
genders may apply according to the synonym selected. 
Examples are given. 

I.1.26-29 (E270) Question: Should jfiana be taken as 
the first symptom followed by darsana or vice versa, due to 
the fact that jfiana has fewer letters? 

Answer: They are all coexistent like the light and heat 
of the sun; they do not occur in sequence. As soon as right 
vision occurs, immediately all the other perceptions become 
right perceptions. Having fewer letters should not be given 
precedence to knowledge, in fact right vision has to occur first. 

1.1.30 (T270) Awareness has been mentioned 
specifically in this sutra as right vision and right conduct may 
arise only after right awareness. 

1.1.31-34 (E270) In the word samyagdarsana- 
jfianacaritrani conjunction is used to join the three words for 
vision, awareness and conduct, thus each of them have equal 
weight. All three are equally important, not one, because the 
plural number has been used. When an adjective precedes 
such a word, it applies to all the words in the phrase, so 
"right" (samyak) at the beginning applies to all three. Other 


312 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


grammatical queries resolved. 

1.1.35-37 (E270) The word "path" implies seeking, thus 
right vision, etc. constitute the easy wide road, the "seeking" 
of the city of liberation. 

1.1.38 (E270) Just as to remove the diseases of 
imbalances in the body the taking of medicines becomes the 
path tq recovery, so also to remove the disease of worldliness 
of wrong vision right vision becomes the path to recovery. 

1.1.39-46 (E271) Question: Since all contenders have 
accepted false awareness as the cause of bondage, why are 
three paths given (instead of just right awareness)? 

Answer: According to the Samkhya the right path 
(dharma) leads to higher births and adharma to lower animal 
ones. Discriminative knowledge regarding prakrti and purusa 
results in liberation and the opposite (nondiscriminating 
awareness) results in bondage. As long as there is false 
identification with the body (as in "I hear", "I see") the self is 
in bondage. As soon as realization dawns that all this belongs 
to prakrti and the three gunas interacting, discrimination is 
aroused that they are not my true self, and liberation occurs. 
Thus right awareness, discrimination, immediately results in 
liberation. 

The Vaisesika claims that desires and aversions create 
the world of pleasures and pains. The one who knows 
correctly does not have any longings or jealousies, attachments 
or aversions. Thus by not having new desires, a new body 
does not accrue and liberation occurs once the balance of 
karma is exhausted. Therefore the six categories should be 
thoroughly known. Again, knowledge leads to liberation. 

The Naiyayikas claim that due to essential knowledge 
(tattvajriana) all false awareness disappears resulting in 
subsequent disappearance of faults and inclinations (pravrtti) 
resulting in birth and sorrow. Again, knowing is liberating. 

Buddhism teaches that bondage results from ignorance. 
To consider all transient, nonself and impure substances that 
result in sorrow to be the pure, eternal, nature of the self is 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 313 


false awareness. A detailed analysis of the Buddhist philosophy 
of dependent origination is given. Destruction of false 
awareness results in destruction of traces, etc., which in turn 
results in freedom. 

Objection: In the Jain way, too, false belief is a result 
of ignorance. In common everyday opinion, also, erroneous 
belief (that one's son is dead) results in sorrow and removal 
of it (the son arriving, alive) results in happiness or liberation. 
Thus knowledge alone should be sufficient. 

1.1.47 (E272) Answer: This argument is not right, 
because liberation is coexistent with right vision, right 
awareness and right conduct. Mere belief in the medicine, 
mere awareness of it or the mere action of taking it will not 
result in eradication of the disease. For full effect of the drug, 
a belief, and the action of taking the medicine are all required. 
Even so, the disease of worldly attachments can be eradicated 
only by all three, vision, awareness, and conduct. Thus all 
three together are to be considered the path to freedom. 
Awareness without action is useless, as is the action of those 
who do not know. Many examples are given: a chariot does 
not move on one wheel, a blind man and a lame one can 
together escape the forest fire. 

1.1.48-52 (E273) Liberation cannot happen immediately 
after knowledge. Some inherent traces (samskdra) may remain 
which have to be brought to fruition, otherwise it may not 
even be possible to go on pilgrimage, give speeches for the 
benefit of others, etc. If knowledge were to imediately liberate, 
then what would be the use of wearing saffron, shaving the 
head, practicing austerities, repeating the Lord's name, 
initiation, etc.? Similarly, renunciation alone is not sufficient. 
Liberation will happen immediately after knowledge, but 
renunciation cannot liberate immediately. 

1.1.53-57 (E273-274) If the self is eternal and all- 
encompassing it could have no modifications like the arising 
of awareness, nor any movement. Thus no activity or 
modifications could take place, such as knowledge, 


314 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


renunciation, etc. Similarly, if the self is considered to be 
momentary (as the Buddhists believe), then too, since the 
substratum is destroyed every moment, no liberation can 
occur. If the resulting moments are different from the 
producing one, then too there can be no gaining of liberation. 
The person who already knows the difference between a post 
and a man can have a misconception regarding them in 
darkness or due to faulty sight. However, if he has never 
known the difference, how can the misconception occur? Thus 
if prakrti and purusa were not known to be different earlier, 
how could the misconception of not discriminating between 
them have occurred? If Samkhya then says that, yes, at one 
time they had been perceived as different, then why did the 
misconception occur? Liberation should have taken place 
instanteously. Similarly if the Buddhists had a preconception 
of what is not eternal then they too should have been instantly 
liberated. 

1.1.58-60 (E274) Question: Since awareness and vision 
take place together, shouldn't they be considered the same? 

Answer: Just as heat and light, even if one, are different 
in their effects and qualities, similarly knowledge of essentials 
and vision of essentials are also separate in their qualities and 
effects. There is no rule that those born at the same time are 
the same entities (e.g. two horns of a cow). In the Jain 
doctrine the subsantial and the modal perspectives are both 
taken into account in analyzing a substance. Where the 
essential view predominates awareness and vision may be the 
same. The same self-substance is then awareness and the same 
self-substance is vision. When separated as modes, they are 
different. 

1.1.61-64 (E274) Question: Since there is no temporal 
gap between awareness and conduct they should be 
considered the same. 

This doubt is countered with examples. Time is shown 
to be a very subtle thing. Besides, there is a difference in the 
implications of the two words "awareness" and "conduct". In 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 315 


the substantial perspective (dravyarthika) they are the same, 
but in the modal view they are different. 

1.1.65-66 (E275) Question: If the three (vision, 
awareness and conduct) are qualitatively different then they 
should be considered three different roads, not one. 

Answer: Even if they have separate qualities, together 
they create such enlightenment of the self that the 
elightenment becomes a single unified road to liberation, just 
as the mud-lamp, the oil, the wick, etc., separate entities, 
together create light. Examples from the different theories of 
Samkhya, Vaisesika, Buddhism, and Nyaya are given wherein 
different entities are accepted as creating one unity. Similarly, 
right vision, right awareness and right conduct come together 
to become one path. 

1.1.67-68 (E275) In the trio of right vision, awareness 
and conduct the later states may or may not occur after the 
former. They ocur in sequence, but arriving at the first does 
not necessarily mean that the second will be achieved. 

1.1.69-71 (E275) Question: The above statement that 
right vision does not necessarily mean right awareness cannot 
be correct. It would imply vision without awareness. But how 
can vision occur if awareness has not arisen? If awareness is 
the nature of a self, it is available in large or small measure. 
It cannot be said that it is still to be acquired. Otherwise lack 
of awareness will imply the lack of self. As per earlier 
statements, right vision will happen causing the eradication of 
false awareness. Then, if right awareness does not 
(automatically) occur, there will be a total vacuum of 
awareness (of any kind). Thus it will result in the lack of self 
altogether (since awareness is coeval with the self). 

1.1.72 (E275) Answer: Knowledge or omniscience has 
been stated as the goal to be sought, not partial right 
awareness.. Only the stages of srutakevalin and kevalin, 
realized states, can involve this omniscience. After right 
awareness, it is not guaranteed that all twelve or fourteen 
stages of knowledge will be reached. Similarly, the ideal of 


316 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


conduct (listed as various higher stages of conduct) will 
always be a goal to be sought and not easily or immediately 
attainable. 

1.2.1-2 (E276) Analysis of the word "right" (samyak). 
It implies praise. It means essential and desirable. The author 
goes into intricate grammatical logic to affirm these meanings 
as relating to fundamental matters. 

1:2.3-8 (E276) Question: How can "dargana" mean 
"vision", since it would normally mean perception? 

Answer: Roots may have many meanings, so this 
meaning is acceptable. Here, in the context of liberation, the 
meaning of vision of essentials is relevant. 

1.2.17-21 (E277) It is necessary to qualify the word 
darsana with the word tattva to indicate that what is meant is 
vision of essentials as seen by the Jain faith. If that is not 
emphasized then other wrong ways will become acceptable; 
this is not desirable. 

1.2.22-25 (E277-278) If just one word (dargana or 
tattva) were sufficient then the siitra might reflect meanings 
proposed by Vaisesikas or Advaitins who would then query 
whose vision or vision of whom? That is why it is emphasized 
that it is vision of the meaning of what is known as the 
essentials that is called "right vision." 

1.2.26-28 (T288) Some may construe "right vision" as 
synonymous with "wilfui opinion". That is wrong, as scholars 
of other misguided faiths sometimes study the Jain religion to 
show their erudition or in order to be able to defeat it in 
debate. Thus the following definition is acceptable: "That by 
the occurrence of which the self is able to appreciate the 
substantial meaning as it is, is known as right vision. 

1.2.29-31 (T288) Right vision is of two types: (1) with 
attachment (sardga), (2) without any attachments whatsoever 
(vitaraga). (1) expresses itself in four ways: attachments 
quieted down gradually cease (ragatisanti); fear of worldliness 
(samvega); friendliness towards all life forms (anukampd); 
and intelligent awareness in the existential nature of 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 317 


categories. 

1.3.1-6 (T288-289) Question: Since without 
understanding the fundamentals vision cannot arise, how can 
it arise "naturally’? Various doubts are raised: (1) if the 
medicine is not known how can faith in it arise? (2) if 
knowing fundamentals is necessary for right vision it cannot 
arise naturally; (3) a Sudra might have faith in the Vedas by 
hearing about them or knowing from the Purdnas (which he 
is allowed to read), but even that devotion cannot be called 
“arising naturally"; (4) if general knowledge occurs, even then 
it cannot be called "natural" as even that comes from teaching 
by others; (5) when right awareness occurs, simultaneously 
the self becomes aware of the true nature of the instruments 
of true cognition, just as the heat and the light of the sun 
appear together. So independent arising of a “natural” manner 
of right awareness cannot happen. Both happen 
simultaneously. 

Answer: In both types of the rising of right awareness 
the internal cause is the same: destruction and subsidence of 
the residual veiling of false awarenesses. When this internal 
cause arises without outside teaching then it is called 
"natural". Although it does not happen suddenly, even so, if no 
outside cause is visible it is deemed "natural". 

I.3.7-10 (E289) Question: The self is fated to realize 
itself sooner or later. So why postulate right awareness 
through teaching by others if there is no hope that the self will 
do this before its time has come? So there should be only one 
kind--natural arousal of right awareness. 

Answer: If only these two had been cited as causing 
liberation then there would be some substance in your query. 
However, it is only after right awareness and right conduct 
combine with right vision that liberation is possible. Liberation 
is not the issue here. Right vision will lead to liberation at 
some point of time--later, at some distant point in time--or 
never, depending upon the state of spiritual evolution. 
However, time is not of the essence in this case since both 


318 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


internal and external causes are being discussed. 

1.4.1 (E280) A substance may be subdivided into from 
one to infinite categories. One substance has infinite modes. 

Self and not-self are two categories. 

Meaning, word and knowledge are three categones. 
Similarly, relative to usage there may be thousands of known 
relations and relative to the unknown there may be infinite 
categories. If described briefly, only scholars may understand; 
if in full detail it may go on forever; so only seven major 
categories are taken for the understanding of students. 

1.4.2-5 (E280) Question: Why are influx and bondage 
separate, as they are just modes of the self and not-self? Can 
they not be assimilated as subdivisions of two basic categories 
of self and not-self? 

Answer: Intermingling of the self and not-self creates 
the world. Therefore, the main causes of the world, bondage 
to the world and release from it, are categorized as these 
seven need to be known. 

Liberation is the purpose, so the path to liberation will 
be explained. The self should understand who is liberated. 
Since the world consists of self and not-self, therefore not-self 
has to be known as well. The main causes of the world are 
inflow and bondage and the main causes of release are 
cessation of inflow and the cleansing off (of existing particles). 
This is why seven categories must be known. Obviously the 
influx, etc., has separate existence--else why would the 
question arise? If they were unreal the question would not 
arise. 

All these categories have to be considered from a 
variety of aspects. When the essential viewpoint prevails, 
substance or state, and self and not-self, are the only two 
divisions, but when the modal view prevails, the influx, etc., 
of other substances have to be dealt with separately. 

1.4.6-13 (E280) A living being or self (Gjiva) is one which 
by the prevalence of its unique combination of modes uses one 
or more of the ten life forces (five senses, the powers of the 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 319 


mind, of speech, of embodiment, aging and breathing) to exist 
in the past, present or future. Liberated ones (siddha) also 
exist though they don't use all of these ten. 

1.4.14 (E281) Life is consciousnéss. Consciousness is of 
the nature of awareness and knowledge. This is what 
differentiates living beings from other substances. 

1.4.15 (E281) Objection: Trees, e.g., do not have the 
conscious power of thinking, so they should not be considered 
living beings. It is intelligent activity that is a sign of the 
living. 

Answer: There is consciousness in vegetation. The 
realized beings know this by direct perception and the laymen 
know it from scriptural sources. Also, we can infer the 
consciousnes of vegetables from the fact that in the absence of 
water and nutrients a plant wilts. Intelligent cognitive activity 
is not found in life in the womb, in those who have fainted or 
are in the egg, so lack of cognitive activity alone does not 
make them nonliving. 

1.4.28 (E282) Influx and bondage may be either 
meritorious or sinful. 

1.5.1 (E282) A noun ascribed without regard to form, 
quality, effect, etc. is called a name. E.g., someone may be 
called "Indra" even though he is not the first of the gods or 
powerful. 

1.5.2 (E282) Representation (sthapana) gives a name to 
a similar or dissimilar object as such. E.g., one chess piece (the 
rook) is called the elephant, another (the knight) the horse. 

1.5.3-7 (E282) A substance is a thing which has a future 
possibility of turning into a particular-mode and is in that pre- 
modal state at present. 

I.5.8-12 (E282-283) The specific modal revelation at 
present in a given substance is known as that particular state 
(bhavajiva). The self using that particular modal revelation is 
known as agamabhavajiva. 

1.5.13-18 (E283) Thus, even though essentially there is 
no difference between substance and state, there are 


320 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


differences with respect to their nomenclature and other 
qualities of them. . 

Substance is treated first because the name is posited 
first for a substance. Representation--the specific meaning of 
the name invoked--is considered next. State (bhava) comes 
after them. Name comes before state, which is a detail 
considered after the name. But the state is nearest to the mode 
of the substance, though it comes after name and 
representation. 

1.5.19-30 (E283-284) The fourfold analysis just 
proposed is defended. 

1.5.31-33 (E284) Objection: If name, representation, 
etc., are subjects of the essential view and state is that of the 
modal view, then apparently perspectives must be discussed 
later. 

Answer: For clever students it can be understood by just 
these two kinds of ultimate (dravydarthika) and modal 
(paryayarthika) perspectives. However, for others it is 
necessary to explain what is a perspective and how meanings 
are ascribed (niksepa). Thus according to the subject and the 
cognizer several types are described. 

1.6.1-3 (E284) Resolution of grammatical doubts why 
the instruments of true cognition and not perspectives need to 
be considered first. 

1.6.4 (E285) The theory of relative pluralism is 
introduced. 

1.6.5 (E285-286) When not contradicting the 
instruments of true cognition a substance is understood also 
from various perspectives. Sevenfold predication is detailed: 
(1) maybe it is, (2) maybe it is not, (3) maybe it is both, (4) 
maybe it is indescribable, (5) maybe it is (1) and (4), (6) 
maybe it is (2) and (4), (7) maybe it is (3) and (4). Thus a 
pot can be seen from all the above points of view. Apart from 
that, whatever is the pet or not the pot (what separates it 
from others) can also be looked at from all these perspectives: 

(1) Whatever has the pot-identification is the self (of 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 321 
the pot) and all else is “other”. It is this differentiation that 


identifies an object. Otherwise names would not be necessary 
in practice. 2°: : 

(2) The locus on which the four facets described above 
(name, representation, substance, state) are imposed is 
identical to the pot's self. The rest is the not-self vis-a-vis the 
pot. 

(3) A particular pot will be different in structure and 
shape from other pots. Thus other pots are the "other" from 
this viewpoint. 

(4) A particular pot is existent for a number of 
moments. While being made, its various stages can be called 
a "pot" in relation to other things. However, those preparatory 
stages are other than the pot itself because only after them is 
a pot, its full qualities, manifested. If all the the pot's qualities 
were existent before, people would not need to make a pot! 

(5) Even while the pot is fully existent as a pot it is 
constantly undergoing wear and tear. Thus from the 
temporally immediate standpoint (rjusiitranaya) the immediate 
moment is the self for the pot and all other future or past 
moments are "other". 

(6) Within those limits many qualities in the pot, such 
as its form, scent, and hollowness, are imperative for its 
identity as pot. If they were not there, there would be no pot. 

(7) The shape contains the form, moisture, etc., 
qualities which are visible to the eye. 

(8) The word distinguishes its meaning, so it is a pot 
when the word "pot” applies to it, not when other words 
apply. If other things were to be called by the same name it 
would not be practical. 

(9) After the word "pot" is used, the thing can function 
as a pot. Its functioning as a pot is essential to its self. If it is 
not there, it cannot be called a pot, else other things not 
functioning as a pot would be called "pot". 

(10) Consciousness has two aspects: (1) as the form of 


322 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


awareness, (2) as the content of awareness. An object of 
awareness is known in two ways, by its essential qualities and 
by what it is not. Both substantial and modal views are 
elaborated again, but in conclusion it is said that the true 
nature of a substance can only be determined by using 
conditioned (i.e., sevenfold) predication. That is the truth, as 
also the best way to determine what is desirable. 

1.6.6-7 (E287) Objection: Then the theory of many 
aspects can itself be seen from many perpectives! 

Answer: Multi-aspectual views are of two sorts: truly 
relative (samyaganekanta) and truly absolute (samyagekanta). 

1.6.8 (E287) Why relative pluralism is not a hoax. There 
is no intention to cheat. 

1.6.9-14) Question: How can one substance have 
opposing qualities? 

Answer: Specific qualities of a thing are not rejected 
even though the essence is also cognized. A man may be a 
father, brother, son and friend. These are not contradictory to 
each other and should not cause doubt. Besides, the 
arguments given from one side always enhance the quality 
that illustrates their own view, while those of the opposition 
support the contradictory ones. Thus no one objects to one 
substance having many qualities. 

I.7.1-2 (E288) First, name and nature (nirdesa) are 
discussed, as that is what first creates curiosity to know the 
rest of the qualities of things. The others--ownership, etc.--are 
discussed in answer to questions. 

1.7.3-5 (E288) From the modal perspective the self has 
various stages. From the substantial perspective it is a name, 
form, etc. From the epistemic perspective both aspects are 
apprehended. 

L7.6-7 (E288) From the higher standpont (niscayanaya) 
the self is the owner of its modes (as fire is the owner of 
heat). Since a mode and its possessor are different there is this 
slight difference between owner and owned. From the 
practical viewpoint the self can be the owner of all substances. 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 323 


1.7.8-9 (E288) From the essential standpoint the self 
manifests its infinite transformational modes until finally 
realizing its true self. From the practical standpoint, it acquires 
its form through the conjoining of its parents and food as well 
as due to the gradual subsidence of karmic states. 

1:7.10-11 (E289) From the essential standpoint the self 
occupies innumerable space-points, while from the practical 
standpoint it-resides within the body that it acquires through 
past actions. 

1.7.12 (E289) From the substantial standpoint the status 
of the self is infinite. From the modal standpoint it can be a 
limited space-time event. 

1.7.13 (E289) From the modal perspectives of infernal, 
human, etc., the self can be of numerable, innumerable and 
infinite types. 

1.7.14 (E289) Similarly, nonselves also should be looked 
into from all these angles of name, possessor, etc. Name and 
form also may be nonliving. Time, etc. are external causes or 
instruments. Initiator of movement, initator of stasis, time and 
space require their own natural qualities of motion, stasis, 
usability and permeability. Usually their natural form is also 
their location. From the substantial viewpoint their existence 
is infinite, from the practical it is limited to a time. From the 
essential the three (motion, etc.) substances are one. From the 
modal view, the infinite selves and matter cause the motion, 
etc., and are therefore numerate, innumerable and infinite. 
Time is numerable as well as innumerable. Material substances 
are in general one, but specifically they can be numerable, 
innumerable and infinite. 

(E290) Here the commentator describes in great detail 
how the remaining essentials of inflow, bondage, cessation of 
inflow, cleansing of traces and liberation also have their 
natural ascriptions, ownership, bases, instruments and options. 
All have been indicated. They are also typed by various 
criteria. 

1.8.1-2 (E291) The word "sat" here refers to existence. 


324 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Since existence is the first requirement of all substances it is 
treated first. 

1.8.3 (E292) What exists has some measure. Hence the 
numerable, innumerable and infinite space-points denoting 
measure are next treated. 

1.8.4 (E292) After knowing its measure the area above 
and below may be demarcated. 

1.8.5-6 (E292) Substances may transform in various 
ways during the three times. Thus to determine the relative 
occupancy by touch (how many fingers, etc.) is then essential. 
This is followed by the limiting of the substance in time. 

1.8.7-8 (E292) Seven different meanings of the word 
"interval" (antara) are given. Here it may mean a different 
substance. Usually the meaning of hole or separation is 
adopted. The difference in time of one modality disappearing 
due to some cause and appearing after some time is labeled as 
kalantara. 

1.8.9 (E292) (Karmic) state (bhava) is indicative of the 
transformational states of the quiescence of karmas. 

1.8.10 (E292) Even though a thing's number is 
determined, the relative quantity is differentiated by more or 
less (alpabahutva) or comparability. 

1.8.11-14 (E292) Question: Indication of a name already 
assumes the existence of the substance. So the mentioning of 
"existence" here is redundant. 

_ Answer: By mentioning existence here one indicates the 
life-course, senses, body, etc., that may have been reached in 
whichever stage of the fourteen phases in evolution. The 
existence of right awareness, etc., can be thus indicated in a 
self. However, in the not-self types of unoccupied (anadhikrta) 
states like anger, and modalities of color, nonliving things 
need to be identified first as existent. 

1.8.15 (E292) Classification (vidhdna) and number are 
necessarily separately specified. The classification aspect 
enumerates the types of right vision, etc., while all subtypes 
of the quiescent type of right vision, etc., are counted 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 325 


numerically. 

1.8.16 (E293) Although location and extent are not 
really different, even so occupied or unoccupied areas of 
substances need to be demarcated: therefore extent is 
specifically mentioned. 

1.8.17-19 (E293) Question: The presence of extent 
alone permits touch, so is touch not redundant? 

Answer: The word "extent" may indicate the subject, as 
in "the extent of a king's domain". It does not indicate that he 
actually touches the whole area. However "extent" (sparsana) 
indicates awareness in totality in all three times. 

1.8.20 (E293). To indicate the primary time factor the 
existence of a substance is separated from its time. Practical 
time separates the time of the mode and of the substance. In 
order to comprehend fully every substance, this aspect of 
"interval" is specified. 

1.8.21 (E293) For the proper apprehension of the 
essentials and their many types all these details are needed. 
This is for the understanding and peace of the student given 
his eligibility. Some may understand in brief, others need 
detailed explanations, while still others are somewhere in 
between. Otherwise, just saying the word “pramdna" would be 
sufficient, all else being redundant. 

1.9.1 (E293) After the removal of sense-veiling karma 
the focus of awareness on meanings with the help of the 
sense-organs and the mind is known as immediate nonverbal 
awareness. 

1.9.2 (E293) After the eradication of scripture-veiling 
karma what may be heard from the body of traditional 
knowledge is linguistic awareness. 

1.9.3 (E293) The etymological meaning of avadhi is 
discussed; it refers to downward going and limited capacity. 
Although all awareness other than omniscience is limited, by 
convention this is referred to as "extrasensory". 

1.9.4 (E293) After the dissipation of the telepathic- 
knowledge-related veils of karma, the awareness of meaningful 


326 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


thought arising in other minds is known as telepathic 


awareness. 
1.9.5 (E294) Question: Shouldn't it be referred to as 


“mental telepathy"? as 

Answer: The mind here is not an instrument as it Is in 
sense-awareness, since telepathic awareness rises out of purity 
of the self and the presence of the mind is incidental, just as 
in the perception of the moon the sky is incidentally seen. 

1.9.6-7 (E294) The purpose for which all austerities are 
undertaken is called "complete awareness” (kevalajfidna). The 
word "complete" refers to the lack of any other type of 
unveiling related awareness. For example, "rice only" means 
rice without any other accompanying vegetable. 

1.9.10 (E294-295) Buddhists do not accept the existence 
of a self. This means they cannot use the instrumental case to 
mean "by which a thing is known”. Similarly, they cannot refer 
to awareness as a state (bhava), since the person who is aware 
is nonexistent. 

The Buddhist idea of momentary awarenesses each 
unrelated to the next is also not tenable. If the subsequent 
moment is the product of the previous, then the existence of 
a self is proved. The mind cannot be called an instrument 
according to them, as its existence according to them is merely 
the moment prior to awareness, and not a separate organ of 
perception. Since the existence of the doer is momentary 
according to them, there cannot be any cause-effect 
relationship, no knower who exists through the subsequent 
moment of awareness. The Buddhist view of momentariness 
is refuted totally by various grammatical and logical howlers. 
For example, a person who does not cognize either black or 
white cannot differentiate between them or decide this is black 
and that is not. Since (for Buddhists) the cognizer of the white 
color does not exist in the subsequent moment of cognizing 
the black color, how can he differentiate them then? 

1.9.11 (E295-296) Even after cognizing the existence of 
the self, if it is perceived as eternal and immutable, then too 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 327 


its instrumentality cannot be proved. A nontransforming self 
cannot be a cognizer. Since the self is an independent entity, 
and awareness too is an independent thing rising coevally with 
a self, awareness cannot be an instrument for cognizing the 
self. This also means that if the self is different from 
awareness then, as an independent entity, the self will be 
bereft of consciousness like a pot. Cognition without a self (a 
knower) and a knower without knowledge cannot be proved. 

Objection: That which knows is knowledge. 

Answer: Then the mind and the sense-organs (which 
know) become knowledge too. 

Since the self is omnipresent, it is without action; 
knowledge too is a quality, so it is without action, since 
change is possible only in a substance. So the self can neither . 
be a doer nor an instrument. 

Samkhya says the the purusa is different from prakrti, 
eternal, pure and imutable. Even so, instrumentality is not 
possible. Sense-organs, mind, ego and the mahat tattva and all 
their interactions are other than the pure immutable self. How 
can intelligence become an instrument of such a self? 

1.9.17-20 (E296) Of all the three types of direct 
perception (i.e., the last three kinds of awareness) 
extrasensory perception is the least pure. Telepathic awareness 
is purer and occurs only in self-controlled living beings. 

1.9.21-25 (E296-297) Question: Since immediate 
awareness and linguistic awareness are alike why aren't they 
two varieties of the same category? 

Answer: Since they both happen to the same person it 
is obvious they are separate and should be treated as such. 
Linguistic awareness can happen only to those with immediate 
(perceptual) awareness, so they have a_ cause-effect 
relationship. Although their subjects are amallet, the manner 
of their being acquired is different. 

1.9.26-29 (E297) Objection: But both sensory awareness 
and linguistic awareness occur through the mind and the 
sense-organs. Like sense-perception linguistic awareness also 


328 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


emanates from the mouth of the speaker, is received by the 
ear and mind of the hearer. So, having arisen from the same 
source they are the same. 

Answer: No, since they do not have the same cause. 
The tongue of the speaker is merely helpful in articulating the 
words, not in the awareness of them. Simlarly, the ear of the 
listener is instrumental in hearing the word, but not in 
appreheifision. Thus in linguistic awareness the sense and mind 
are not the real conditions. The meaning arrived at through 
the mind is the real cause. Scriptural awareness is thus not 
sense-related but mind-oriented. Directed awareness (iha) also 
arises from the mind. Linguistic awareness relates to things 
other than what is merely heard. With the help of perspective 
and other means it also cognizes what is not spoken through 
analogy, innuendo, etc. 

1.10.1 (E297) The word "pramana" is properly used in 
ali three forms of subject, instrument and state. When state is 
implied a correct awareness (prama) is called a pramana. In 
the subjective sense it is primarily the power to apprehend 
that is implied, while in the instrumentality (karana) sense the 
separation of the apprehender from the apprehended and the 
instrument of apprehension are implied. 

J.10.2 (E297) Replying to a query related to the 
independent illumination of awareness it is said that 
awareness is like a lamp which does not need another light to 
show itself. It is the light, the source of light and that by 
which all around is illuminated. There is no contradiction in 
this. 

1.10.3 (E298) Awareness is self-experiencing. If it is not 
then it will be a further object, awareness of which has to be 
ascertained. If it were not self-experiencing, the self would not 
be experienced as "I was the knower" at a later time in 
memory. Also the apprehended meaning would not be recalled 
if it were not so. We do not remember the perceptions of 
other persons since we did not have their initial awarenesses. 

1.10.6-7 (E298) Is the resulting state of awareness the 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 329 


result (phala) of the experience? No, the result is the pleasure 
of knowing the meaning. The main result is the removal of 
ignorance. 

1.10.8-9 (E298) Question: In the subjective sense, the 
instruments of awareness become the knower (pramdtr), but 
the self is the knower and the awareness is the quality of the 
knowing self. Thus knowledge and the knower have to be 
different. Also, it has been said that awareness is a separate 
result of the coming together of the self, objects, mind and 
sense-organs. 

Answer: If awareness is considered to be a separate 
thing from the self, then the self will become an inanimate 
and ignorant object, like a pot. However, it is not so. If the 
illuminating property were not the selfs intrinsic nature it 
would not be able to comprehend even in the proximity of 
knowledge, just as a sightless person may not see even in the 
presence of light. 

1.10.10-13 (E298-299) Objection: Just as the lamp and 
the pot are separate, the instrument of true cognition has to 
be separate from the object of awareness. Therefore their 
defining marks (laksana) are different. 

Answer: The object of awareness or awareness itself is 
the instrument of true cognition, though outwardly they may 
seem different. Intrinsically, if the instrument of true cognition 
does not have the quality of awareness it will not be able to 
prove itself, since it will require another as evidence and then 
a third to be able to prove its existence. Relatively, due to 
nomenclature, objectivity and qualitative difference, there is 
separation between the cognizer, the cognized and the 
instrument of true cognition, but while the object of cognition 
(prameya) is spoken of as different, the instrument of true 
cognition (pramdna) is actually both the instrument and the 
resulting thing cognized (prameya). 

1.10.14-15 (E299) Points of grammar are explained. 
Immediate awareness and linguistic awareness have been 
treated as indirect while extrasensory and _ telepathic 


330 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


awarenesses have been treated as direct knowledge, hence two 
basic awareness-types are referred to in the grammatical dual 
number form. By the use of the word "tat" it is indicated that 
these types of awareness are themselves the instruments of 
true cognition and not the proximity of the self with the 
organs, e.g. 

1.10.16-22 (E299-300) If proximity (sannikarsa) is - 
considered an instrument of true cognition and the subsequent 
awareness of meaning the result, then there can be no 
omniscience, since all things cannot be in proximity. In the 
case of the omniscient, then, the proximity of four, viz., the 
self, mind, sense-organs and meaning, or the proximity of just 
three, viz., the self, mind and meaning, cannot become the 
cause of the omniscience. This is because the mind and the 
senses do not always come to the same place and their qbjects 
are limited. 

There are infinite possible objects of awareness, and 
since they cannot all come together, their knowledge will not 
be possible. 

Even the argument--that the self can go everywhere and 
thus there will be proximity to all objects--cannot hold, since 
that quality of the self cannot be proved experimentally. 
Similarly, the impossibility of the sense-organs coming 
together with all meanings is ruled out, thereby denying the 
Status of proximity as an instrument of true cognition, 
According to the school of thought promoting proximity as a 
cause for knowledge, even the self is without the knowledge 
before the awareness of meaning comes to it, and then 
subsequently the meaning should become a quality of the 
senses as well as the mind. This is denied, as it is not logical 
to then say that only the self acquires the meaning thereafter, 
and not the senses. If without Proximity no meaningful 
perception can take place, then it can be said that proximity 
itself could bring meaning to other substances as well, Thus 
proximity cannot be an instrument of true cognition. 

1.11.6-7 (T300) Light, senses, preaching, etc., are 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 331 


primarily indirect instruments of true cognition. Just as a stick 
is used to enable walking, these instruments are used to gain 
knowledge after the self has been released from the 
knowledge-veiling karmas. It is indirect because it is 
dependent on others. . 

I.12.4-5 (T301) Question: How can any knowledge 
occur without the external and internal instruments of the 
mind and the sense-organs? 

Answer: For the incompetent, instruments are required 
to make an object like a chariot, but the adept can create one 
without using them just by determined desire (samkalpa). 
After the self has reached a certain level of evolution and its 
knowledge-veils are completely destroyed, it can become 
aware without these external or internal instruments. 
1.12.6-8 (T301) Objection: Awareness not involving the 
senses is accepted as indirect and that related to senses as 
direct by almost all schools. Buddhists view undifferentiated 
awareness as direct, and awareness involving wofds, 
properties, etc. is called "construction" (kalpana). The type of 
awareness is then named in accordance with the relevant 
organ. The Naiyayikas believe that the awareness arising due 
to proximity of the sense-organs with objects is called "direct" 
awareness. Samkhya views the fluctuations (vrtti) of the sense- 
organs as direct awareness. Mimamsakas believe that the 
intelligence arising from the proper use of the organs is direct 
awareness. So direct awareness should be that acquired by the 
senses, not vice-versa. 

Answer: If sense-awareness is called direct then the 
truth will never be perceived directly. Omniscience will not 
occur, since the omniscient knowers of truth do not perceive 
by sense-organs. One cannot assume that all extrasensory 
awareness stems from linguistic awareness, since the scriptures 
are the product of renounced individuals having direct 
awareness. Since the directness of extrasensory awarenes is 
not proved, how can scriptural learning become a proof of it? 
The nonpersonal origin of the scriptures is also not proved. 


332 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The Vedas cannot be considered a valid instrument as they 
prescribe violence, etc. 

1.12.9-10 (E301-302) The view of the Buddhists that 
yogis perceive everything without the help of the senses or 
scriptures is not tenable. One cannot imagine an 
undifferentiated substance. The existence of yogis is also not 
proved, since in the Buddhist stage of nirvana there is the 
concept of nothingness. The Naiyayika’s statement that the self 
can become omniscient without the senses with the help of his 
yogic nature is not acceptable, as in that state the yogi is 
neither the doer nor the knower. There can be no activity in 
him, since then he is the supreme inner self, eternal and 
nontransforming. 

1.12.11 (E302-303) The Buddhist concept of perception, 
involving construction, cannot be an account of direct 
perception--even if accepted partially there is a definite 
contradiction there. 

Buddhist Logician: We agree--direct perception is 
constructionfree. 

Answer: The first experience of something is called 
vitarka; the subsequent consideration of it is vicara. 
Remembering those experiences of that object is called 
anusmarana. They all have an identical content, which cannot 
happpen if the content is momentary. Further, by the 
Buddhists’ own logic, if those awarenesses are momentary and 
simultaneous they cannot be cause and effect. If awarenesses 
are sequential then in the duration of the awareness there is 
no substance, and in the duration of the substance there 
cannot be awareness: so there can be no subject-object 
relationship, and thus no awareness at all! 

1.12.12 (£303) The Buddhists view knowledge as 
awareness of an object for the very first time. But this is 
wrong since all knowledge is valid. The light of a lamp initially 
illumines an object in the dark and keeps it illumined in 
subsequent moments; similarly knowledge in general remains 
valid all the time whether understood or not. If continuous 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 333 


change implies a new and unique knowledge at each moment, 
then awareness cannot ever be valid at any time, since 
remembering, past desire, jealousy, etc. cannot be present at 
present. | 

_1.12.13-14 (E303) The Buddhists advocating the 
nondualist account of knowledge believe that knowledge 
appears in both the shape of the subject as well as of the self 
that apprehends it. They consider self-apprehension as the 
result or the fruit of knowledge. However, a product is 
different from a cause: they are naming both the 
understanding and its validity as the same thing, so this 
contention too is not valid. 

1.12.15 (E303-304) It is not proper for the Buddhists to 
subsume all three aspects of the object, the subject and the act 
of perception into one principle of validity: this too-closely 
resembles the Jain principle of many aspects. That one 
substance has many aspects is the principle of the Jaina 
system. If knowledge can have many aspects then why cannot 
all other substances in the world? If fearing the many-faceted 
principle they accept many aspects of knowledge then.the 
question should arise--the shape of what? A shape cannot 
exist without a substratum. So the substance ‘will cease to 
exist. If shape and substratum occur simultaneously they will 
not stand in a cause-effect relationship. Momentary shapes 
cannot occur in succession. If this kind of logic is accepted, 
then their contention that "each distinct thing in succession 
merely exists as the momentary form/shape of knowing and 
not as such" cannot hold good, as the perception thereof will 
also then be in sucession each time at a new moment. If the 
external existence of substance is denied and only its epistemic 
existence accepted there will be no system needed to 
distinguish between truth and merely apparent truth, since 
there is no difference in the internal shape of each awareness. 
When the nonexistent is apprehended as existent it is a true 
aspect (pramdbhdsa) and when it is apprehended as 
nonexistent then it is valid. If such reasoning is followed then 


334 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


it will be difficult to say why it does not follow that perception 
and inference are both false. The two types of knowing are 
based on the existence of their objects. "Direct perception 
targets the pure particulars, it is without construction, and is 
definitive, while inference is based on the general." This way 
of thinking cannot be acceptable to those who believe in the 
nonexistence of everything (sarvabhavavadins). 

The contention of those who believe in the nonduality 
of perceived experience {samvedanadvaita) is that “all 
knowledge is without a substratum and therefore only 
undifferentiated self-experience is valid: all this detail about 
valid and invalid awareness is an extension of ignorance-- 
knowledge is beyond argument and reveals itself’. This has 
been refuted as follows: What can be said of a person who 
believes in the experience of a totally unproven unity of 
subjective experience that cannot be perceived directly or 
through inference? Thus samvedanddvaita is to be shunned. 

1.13.2 (E304-305) Though the words "smrti" and 
‘samyna" (in the sutra) are different they have the same 
meaning in routine usage. From the Jain perspective these 
words are similar as well as dissimilar. From the substantial 
viewpoint they are the same; from the modal viewpoint they 
are different. They are all part of the cognitive process but 
differ as modes. 

1.13.6-7 (E305) Modes are not qualities. These modes, 
the words for which are synonyms, can be the same in quality. 
A quality cannot be differentiated from the substance. Only the 
intrinsic, internal mode can become the defining quality, not 
the outer mode--e.g., heat is intrinsic to fire, not smoke. 

_1.14.2-3 (E306) "Not (from the sense-organs)", i-e., from 
the mind. It does not mean that the mind is not a sense-organ, 
but that it is a little like the senses, but its subject is not 
determined as is the case for the sense-organs; thus it is 
different from them. 
ae [.15.1-5 (E306) The first meaningful perceiving is the 

Ty stage known as "indistinct". After that first perception- 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 335 


-e.g., that this is a man--there is a curiosity about his age, 
shape, language, etc., and this stage is known as "directed" 
(tha). Understanding the specification of language, e.g., that 
this is a South Indian, young and fair, etc., is the next stage, 
of "determinative" (avdya) awareness. And when these 
specifications are remembered later it is "concluding" 
(dharana). 

1.15.6-10 (E306) Question: Since there is still some 
doubt and no complete cognition in the first two stages they 
shouldn't be called valid perceptions. 

Answer: Indistinct awareness (avagraha) concentrates 
on just one perceived item; it is not doubt and is therefore a 
definitive step towards perception. It may be likened to a 
doubt due to its inconclusiveness regarding specific features; 
however, it only cognizes a specific thing. 

1.15.11-13 (E306-307) Although not quite decisive, even 
the "directed" stage cannot be called doubt, since there is 
already a propensity toward decisive perception of specifics. It 
merely leans towards one decision, thus cannot be called a 
doubt. Doubt itself has not been listed in this siitra since in 
doubt no meaningful conclusion is reached. 

Question: Is the name “determinative” (avaya) proper 
or would apaya, "rejecting the wrong conclusion", be more 
correct? 

Answer: Both are correct, since in determining the right 
answer the wrong one is forfeited automatically. 

Question: What is the difference between vision 
(darsana) and determining (avaya)? 

Answer: Vision occurs at the unveiling of the karma 
veils due to the dissipation and quiescence of the wrong types 
of karma (darsanavaraniya) at the first moment of the subject 
and perceiver coming together. It is a fleeting moment of 
‘awareness that there is something here. Afterwards it becomes 
known that this is a form, man, etc., in the "indistinct" stage. 
This requires the dissipation of the knowledge-veiling particles 
and the obstacles of the subtype of karma particles known as 


336 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


viryantariya. The causes of indistinct awareness and vision are 
Aiea since the dissipation of knowledge-veiling karmic 
particles is poles apart from the dissipation of sight-veiling 
ones. The sighting of a thing by the eye occurs just before the 
first stage of perception of it as a form. Then the speculation 
about its color, etc. finally results in the complete perception 
and retention. Knowledge-veiling karma has innumerable 
secondary configurations (uttaraprakrti) that veil all such 
sense-oriented perceptive stages like indistinct awareness, etc. 
As and when the veils are dissipated these perceptions are 
revealed. 

Question: Sensory perception occurs via the sense and 
the mind, but these "directed", etc. categories come about 
through the first stage of indistinct awareness; therefore they 
should not be labeled "thoughts" (matijfidna). 

Answer: But they emanate from the mind; therefore, 
they are in fact thoughts. 

Although verbal awareness also emanates without 
sensory mediation, the first stage of perception is traditionally 
accepted as emanating from the senses. Certainly in directed 
awareness the senses are used. 

1.17.1 (£310) That substance which is caused to 
become the basis of modes is called an "object" (artha). 

1.17.2 (E310) Naiyayika: Qualities, (and not only 
substances) are perceived by the sense-organs (and are thus 
objects), 

Answer: An abstract thing like a quality cannot be 
connected with a sense-organ. Even collectively qualities are 
still subtle, so how can they be grasped (by sense-organs)? 

1.19.2-7 (E311-313) Smell, taste and touch need to 
come in contact with their respective sense-organs where those 
organs are located, unlike the case of visual and mental 
awareness. The eyes reach out to the spot where the object is: 
they cannot see themselves. E.g., the kohl applied to the eye 
cannot be seen by that eye itself. 

Question: Is the eye like a magnet--able to attract 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 337 


objects at.a distance, but not if they are covered up--or is it 
like the skin, which needs some contact with its object to be 
felt/perceived; or is it like fire, since it is physical. 

Answer: It is not exactly like any of those: it is not 
physical like the magnet; the feeling subject within is the 
perceiver, not the skin; it is not like fire just because it is 
physical, since a magnet, too, is physical. 

Objection: The eye is a fiery substance; it has rays and 
the rays touch the object and cause visual perception. 

Answer: No, for the eyes are not effulgent or hot. An 
eye is not by itself warm or bright. If it were it would not 
require external light for it to see. The eyes are unique in that 
they can see both what is near and what is far at the same 
time. Furthermore, an eye, unlike the ear, does not see an 
object within itself, since it sees the distance between itself 
and the perceived object. 

. The eye does not go out to grasp its object. A sick eye 
is treated within for any medical problem. If it were to go out 
to see, then even after closing one’s eyes one should be able 
to still see the object, since the rays have already gone out. 
The senses perceive with the help of the internal organ or 
mind, but the mind is an internal organ (antahkarana) and 
cannot go out to help the senses to perceive. And if the 
internal organ is atomic in size how can it help the visual 
organ which has already spread outside? 

The Buddhists say that the ears similarly go out to 
grasp far-away sounds. This is also untenable. An ear's range 
for hearing sounds is limited. Like the nose, the ear perceives 
the sound aggregates of matter that come within its range of 
perception, and can be heard only after they enter the 
auditory cavity. 

Objection: Sound is a quality of Gkasa. 

Answer: No, since akdsa is an abstract thing like bliss, 
and not perceptible at all.Even when we recognize that 
hearing takes place at a particular point in space, the distance 
and direction of the sound is known due to the loudness and 


338 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


distance of the sound's origin. Sound particles of matter are 
extremely suble and spread out in every direction; they can be 


affected ‘by reverse air currents, wails, etc. 
Question: Since the mind does not depend on anything 


other than the senses in cognizing, why is it not a sense- 

? 
ae The mind is not visible to others like the eye 
and the other organs. It is subtle and internal, unlike those 
organs. Its existence is proved by the fact that without its 
functioning the external stimulation of the organ is not 
sufficient to produce cognition. But whichever organ the mind 
applies itself to will cognize, react. Furthermore, that organ by 
which sense-perception is remembered is the mind, whereas 
unmanifest things are known only by inference. 

1.19.8-9 (E3130 Although the self has cognitive and 
conative powers it needs the sense-organs-for different kinds 
of perception, just as a painter needs brushes and paints to 
paint. Due to type-determining (néma-) karma body parts and 
their ancillary organs are produced--the ear like the spiral 
barley straw, the nose like a pearl, the tongue like a spade, the 
eye like the seed of the lentil called masoor but black and star- 
like, and the skn spreading all over the body; each sense-organ 
is shaped differently, and can only cognize their specific kinds 
of things, not others. 

A mathematical analysis of the ranges of the several 
sense-organs is offered. 

1.20.3-5 (E314) Question: A mud pot is made out of 
mud. Similarly, linguistic awareness, since it occurs with the 
help of the sense organs, should also be called sensory 
perception. 

Answer: Sensory perception is merely instrumental in 
linguistic awareness, not a material cause. The material in this 
case is the self that transforms into the mode of linguistic 
awareness, The presence of the potter's wheel or stick cannot 
make a mud pot out of sand--clay is the necessary material. 
Linguistic awareness cannot occur in a self that has not yet 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 339 


unveiled the barriers of karmic adhesions, i.e., without 
releasing (ksdyopasamika) linguistically-related karma. 

1.20.6 (E314) Objection: If linguistic awareness is 
"heard" then only auditory awareness should be called 
"linguistic", not knowledge acquired through the eyes, etc. 

Answer: No, that is merely a tradition. All other 
linguistic awarenesses acquired through the eyes, etc., are also 
termed Sruta, ‘i.e., "heard", i.e., linguistic. 

1.20.7 (E314) Question: Whatever has a beginning has 
an end. So linguistic awareness should not be termed 
beginningless (anadi), and since humans are its authors, it 
may not be valid. 

Answer: Compared to ordinary substances language is 
without beginning, since no one has seen a time when it was 
absent. However, each piece of linguistic awareness has a 
beginning and an end, and may not be true. Even lack of 
human authorship is not sufficient to prove language's validity- 
-otherwise stealing and adultery would be valid since they 
have no first-known advocate. Immediate awareness may be 
transitory but that does not raise a doubt about its validity. , 

1.20.9 (E315) The individual capacity to hear language 
is unique for each self. Depending on the degree of the 
unveiling of the barriers of karmic adhesions, each individual 
perceives according to his/her own capacity. 

1.20.10 (E315) Question: On hearing the word "pot" the 
first awareness of the pot occurs, followed immediately by a 
second awareness (say) of its ability to hold water. That 
second awareness is not sense-related. Similarly, if smoke is 
seen and fire is inferred, the inference is not sense-related. 

_ Answer: In heard linguistic awareness, at first the sense- 
organ is involved, and even later the related sense-organ is 
understood to be operative because of the word (in the text) 
"matipurvaka" (i.e.," preceded by thought"), Thus whether it 
is direct or through tradition, in any case linguistic awareness 
is termed “heard" (sruta). 

1.20.12 (E315-318) Linguistic awareness from tradition 


340 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


has two subtypes, (1) with inner limbs and (2) with outer 
limbs. (1) comprises the twelve texts which have been collated 
into books by those erudite and realized beings (ganadharas) 
who have had the privilege of having purified their selves 
through the direct sayings of Lord Mahavira. These are the 
twelve angasitras. Their contents are explained. 

1.20.13-14 (E318-319) The disciples of the 
ganadharadevas have written other scriptures for the 
enlightenment of lesser intellectuals or people with less time 
and energy. They are called (2) the outer limbs. They are of 
many categories. Those that have certain rules by which they 
have to be studied are called kdlika and those that have no 
prescribed time limits are uttarakdlika. There are another 
twelve such outer limbs. 

1.20.15 (T319) There are three types of inference: (1) 
purvavat, e.g., the inference of fire from (this) smoke by one 
who already perceived the causal relation between fire and 
smoke; (2) sesavat, e.g., the inference that other animals of 
this type have horns by one who knows the relation between 
animals of this type and hornedness; (3) samanyatodrsta, e.g., 
the inference that the sun has moved by one who has learned 
that it is motion that causes something to appear in a different 
place. 

Comparison (upamana) occurs, e.g., when one who 
knows that milk comes from cows like Bossie concludes that 
the cow Dotty gives milk. Verbal testimony (Sabda) is also 
accepted as an instrument of true cognition, as are 
presumption (arthapatti), concurrence (sambhava), and 
absence (abhava). However, all these five are kinds of 
inference, not separate instruments of true cognition. 

Perception is of two types: spatially limited (desa) and 
unlimited (sarva). The first kind includes extrasensory 
perception or clairvoyance and telepathy, and the second kind 
is omniscience. Clairvoyance occurs when the relevant veiling 
karma particles have subsided or been sublimated through 
austerities. Clairvoyance subtypes include: cognition of the 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 341 


world (bhavapratyaya), of qualities, of limited space-time and 
of general space-time. 

1.21.1-6 (T319-320) On being born in hell or heaven 
the karmic veils of extrasensory awareness subside; hence this 
type of cognition can take place easily. Just as birds fly in the 
sky, so the sky is the instrumental cause (nimittakdrana) here. 

In humans and animals -this: type of extrasensory 
awareness can take place if there is sufficient merit due to 
nonviolence;‘#usterities, etc. However, they do not require any 
fasts, etc., as their subsidence occurs along with their modes. 

1.21.7 (T320) Question: In scriptures the hells are 
mentioned first, so shouldn't they be mentioned before heaven 
here? 

Answer: The word "deva" (for "heaven") is shorter and 
respectful, so it is correct to have it first. 

Here the commentary details the exact points in space 
occupied by each type of extrasensory field. The measurements 
are given according to Jain mathematics and describe in which 
direction the area of clairvoyance extends in each of the 
higher, middle or lower worlds. The time frame of each mode 
also changes accordingly. 

I.22.1-3 (T321) One should not infer that all other 
beings have extrasensory peception. Those that are 
incompetent do not have it. Even amongst those who are 
competent, if they do not adhere to right awareness they 
cannot have this kind of cognition. All extrasensory 
awarenesses can be caused by the subsidence and sublimation 
of the relevant karmic veils, but it is clear that humans and 
animals do not have it merely in virtue of their kind of 
existence. 

1.22.4 (T1321) There are six kinds of extrasensory 
perception: (1) that which accompanies, (2) that which does 
not accompany, (3) that which increases over time, (4) that 
which decreases over time, (5) unchangeable and (6) 
changeable. Examples are given. Also they can be divided into 
three kinds: relating to place or area, to time, and all- 


342 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


encompassing. Further subtypes of these are detailed along 
with their space-points and areas, in what proportion they may 
increase or decrease, and what are the time limits of each type 
and subtype. These details are outlined for each type of life 
form, human, animal, celestial and infernal. 

1.23.1-6 (=1.22.1-6° of Umiasvati) (T1323) "Two 
varieties", viz., simple and intricate. Due to subsidence and 
destruction of the veils covering telepathic awareness, and the 
occurrence of subsequent limbs and signs, the self that knows 
the thoughts of others in relation to itself has telepathic 
awareness. It is relative to oneself because it is within the 
areas of the self that the veils to this awareness have to be 
removed. Telepathy is not dependent on sense-organs or the 
mind: therefore it is not sense-related. Just as in the sighting 
of the moon in the sky the sky is just an additional condition, 
not the primary one, so also the mind of the other is incidental 
to the awareness of its thoughts, and not instrumental in the 
rise of telepathic awareness. Similarly, it is not inference like 
reasoning from smoke to fire, since it knows the thoughts of 
others, not its own awareness, and it neither arises from sense- 
organs nor from the teaching of another. Inference is indirect 
awareness, but telepathy is direct. 

1.23.7 (E324) The simple kind of telepathy can be 
classified into three subtypes: mental, verbal and bodily. 

The first, mental, telepathy occurs, e.g., when a person 
A of clear simple awareness says, thinks or does something 
and himself forgets it, and the telepathist-later is asked tu 
relate it, he will know exactly what was said, thought or done 
by A. But he can know only the thoughts of simple people, not 
of complicated awarenesses. 

The complicated kind of telepathy knows the thoughts, 
words and bodily motions of another person even of 
complicated mind. 

1.24.1 (1.25 of Umasvati) (E324) The meaning is that 
the two types--simple and complicated--differ in that the 
simple kind is impure and subject to backsliding, whereas the 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 343 


complicated type is not. The telepathic awareness of 
complicated minds is purer and finer than the simpler 
awareness from every point of view--relating to sei 

time, area and state. 

1.26.4 (1.27 of Umiasvati) (E326) jatiiatos of 
movement, space, initiators of stasis, space and extrasensory 
objects may also be the subject of mental awareness. Therefore 
both sensory and riptural awareness can have any substance 
as object. 

1.27.1-3 (1.28 of Umasvati) (E326) Extrasensory 
awarenesses range over not only color and touch, but shape, 
taste, and smell as well. 

"Not including all modes" (asarvaparyaya) is implied in 
this stitra. There can be extrasensory perception of some 
modes but not all. Through it one can be aware of a substance 
and some of its modes, as well as the rising, subsiding or 
dissipating karmic state, since some visible form of karma is 
associated with these. However, one cannot thus know the 
formless karma-annihilated states, or the initiators of 
movement or of stasis. 

1.29.1-3 (1.30 of Umasvati) (E326) The independent 
entity that transforms into modes is a substance. The same 
substance is both subject as well as object, since it is 
somewhat different from its modes. If it were totally similar, 
it would not be possible for a substance to be both subject and 
object for a unified undifferentiated thing. 

1.29.4 (E326) A particular transformational state of 
natural or incidental contradictory or similar stage of a 
substance is known as its mode. Those that are due to motion, 
substance, time, state, area or occupation are obtained-causes 
(upattahetuka), and those that adhere to their natural 
existence at all times are nonobtained causes (anupattakahetu) 
like the rising states of the self. Some initiators of movement 
are contradictory, others are not. For example, upward moving 
consciousness and operative karmic states (audayikabhava) 
may not be contradictory, but anger and peace, or animal and 


344 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


human or infernal existences cannot occur simultaneously, and 
are therefore contradictory. 

1.29.9 (E327) In this world and beyond, at all times, 
whatever infinite substances and their infinite modes may have 
been or will be, all are known to the omniscient kevalin. Even 
if there were infinite similar worlds like this one, the 
omniscient would know them. 

1330.4 (1.30 of Umasvati) (E327) Objection: If 
“one...type" here means sense-awareness then this type 
excludes linguistic awareness. 

Answer: No. They are not contradictory and go 
together, so linguistic awareness may also be understood. 

1.30.8-10 (E328) Objection: On gaining omniscience the 
other types of awarenesses do not disappear but may appear 
nonexistent just as the stars are not seen in sunlight. 

Answer: Since omniscience means a state of total 
karmic annihilation and is totally pure, how can any impure 
type of awareness exist in its presence? There may be any 
combination of sensory, linguistic, extrasensory and telepathic 
awareness, but not with the fifth--omniscience. 

1.31.1-3 (1.32 of Umasvati) (T328) Due to false beliefs 
the self may have sensory, linguistic or extrasensory awareness 
which are fallacious, just as milk kept in a bittter gourd 
becomes bitter. The falsity is removed by gaining right beliefs. 

1.31.3 (1.33 of Umasvati) (T329) The reason why 
"awarenesses, even though true, are in a sense false" is that 
different schools hold and preach different types of view on 
the nature of fundamental substances. Some (the Advaitins) 
say there is only substance, that forms do not exist at all. 
Others (Buddhists) say there is only form, no substance. Still 
others (VaiSesikas) say qualities are separate from substances. 
All three are fallacious. Form and substance cannot be proved 
independently of each other. Without substance the 
indeterminate form cannot come into contact with the sense- 
organs and their cognition will be impossible. 

1.31.4 (E329) The contending schools differ not only 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 345 


about the nature of substances but regarding the basic cause 
of the world as well. The Samkhya believes that from formless 
nature arises the mahat, from that comes ego, from ego the 
five organs, etc., and that these compose the visible world. 
This view is not tenable as from the formless, inactive qualities 
all the opposite qualities are said to arise. The unconscious 
prakrti cannot create this intelligently conceived universe. If 
the purusa is itself inactive it cannot inspire prakrti to create. 
Moreover, there seems to be no purpose for the pradhdna to 
wish to create. If the reason given is for pure pleasure then 
again the logic does not hold water as a perennial and all- 
encompassing self needs nothing and cannot transform as the 
enjoyer. An unconscious prakrti cannot create intelligently 
even if somehow inspired. 

The Vaisesikas believe that the material substances are 
made up of different types of atoms. Unseen activities take 
place among the atoms and bifurcation occurs. This logic is 
also false since the atom is perennial and cannot transform 
into activity producing an effect. However, no independent 
product or effect is achieved apart from the atoms. It is not 
proved that the atoms of substances are of many types as 
stipulated by this theory. It is known that distinct substances 
produce entirely different things, e.g., water produces the 
pearl, and fire can be produced by wood. If the self is inactive 
and untransformable, then it cannot be the doer (of actions, 
kartr). Thus it cannot produce activity in different substances. 

Buddhists believe that a collection of the form of colors, 
etc. together produces the effect that is "seen" by the sense- 
organ. This is also not possible, because if every atom is 
beyond the senses then even their collections would be the 
same. Since the atom is momentary and inactive, it will not be 
able to produce any effect. Those atoms of different abilities 
cannot come together in any relationship nor can there be 
another doer instead. 

Right conduct is the primary force behind liberation and 
will be discussed in the section on liberation. Even after 


346 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


omniscience is achieved, there is no possibility of liberation 
until a certain category of total meditational good conduct is 
achieved. 

1.32.1 (1.33 in Umdasvati) (E330) Perspective is the 
awareness that illuminates with validity the special nature of 
substances with reference to their many modes. There are two 
main perspectives, substantial (dravyastika) and modal 
(parydyastika). The substantial looks only at the meaning of 
the substance, while the modal looks at the meaning of the 
mode. It can also be said that the awareness of the meaning 
of the substance with its qualities and activities is substantial 
meaning, and that of only the modes is modal meaning. The 
modalist believes that since the past is dead and the future not 
yet there, the present conditional mode is the only true 
existence. The substantialist believes that since the basic 
nature of the substance cannot be taken away it must be the 
only primary meaning. 

1.32.2-3 (E330) The viewpoint that accepts intended 
meaning as valid is known as the conventional type of 
perspective. For example, if a seated person says "I am going" 
his intention is to go and is understood as such. However, it 
is not just a future possibility that is indicated; it is the 
intention that is being referred to. 

1.32.5 (E331) That which identifies with a similar 
general perspective of aggregates is the generic perspective. 

1.32.6 (E331) Defining and delineating specific entities 
from among those specified in the generic perspective is 
known as the commonsensical perspective, e.g., what is 
viewed as “a substance" from the generic perspective is 
differentiated as living" or "nonliving", e.g, from the 
commonsensical perspective. 

1.32.7 (E332) The immediate perspective targets the 
simple and presently available mode. It is simple, 
straightforward and its subject is limited to the single 
temporarily available present, since the past or future modes 
cannot be dealt with in practice. For example, the rice is 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 347 


cooking but is not quite cooked. According to this perspective 
no practical considerations are made. Every moment the 
modes are changing, and one cannot be the other. So the 
present one should be specified. 

1.32.8-9 (E333) The linguistically implied perspective 
emphasizes the need for proper usage of gender, number and 
tense. It does not worry about grammatical correctness, but 
insists upon the purity of word usage. Various examples are 
given of misfit gender, number, person, tense, etc., which are 
not acceptable to this perspective in spite of grammatical or 
accepted usage. 

1.32.10 (E334) Abandoning all other possible 
connotations and synonyms, when one single conventional 
meaning is established that is the conventional perspective 
(samabhirudhanaya). For example, the word "gau" has eleven 
other possible meanings, but when it is commonly used for the 
four-legged animal cow, it should not be interpreted as the 
earth or any of the other eleven. Words are for communication 
and there should be one clear meaning. 

1.32.11-12 (E334) The strict constructionist's perspective 
(evambhiitanaya) accepts only the presently applicable literal 
usage of the word indicating the current mode. The cow is 
literally a cow ("go", the word for cow comes from the root 
meaning "to go") only when it is moving, not when sitting. In 
the previous or later stages if the mode is different then the 
same word should not be used to indicate it. 

These perspectives are progressively finer and 
sequentially described. Initially they are contradictory and 
comprise large topics; subsequently of complementary and 
finer ones. Relative to the infinite variety of substances and 
their qualities, they are of infinite veriety. They become 
helpful in acquiring right awareness and proper aims of life. 
Together they are successful in leading to right awareness, not 
individually, just as the warp and woof threads of a cloth 
cannot cover or warm the body individually by themselves. 


348 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


CHAPTER TWO 

("T" references for this Chapter are to the translation 
contained in N. L. Jain, Biology in Jaina Treatise on Reals 
(Chennai 1999). The summary, based on the translation, is by 
Potter.) 

II.1.1 (E336; T37) Just as by administering the 
cleansing nut to the water the impurities settle down by 
themselves, similarly by the purity of modifications, when the 
karmic traces cease to arise it is known as "subsiding" 
(upasama). What gives rise to this state is calle "aupasamika". 

11.1.2 (E336; T37-38) Just as if the water in which the 
impurities have settled is distilled into another jar it becomes 
even clearer, similarly with the total absence of karmic 
impurities an ultimate clearness of the self is achieved. This 
state is called "ksaya", and states leading to it are called 
"ksayika". 

11.1.3 (E336; 1T38) Due to weakening of 
transformational results (parindma), some karmic matter may 
be annihilated while some remains. This mixed state is called 
"ks@yopasamika". 

II.1.4 (E336; T38) When karmic fruition occurs 
according to substance, area of occupancy, time, and stage, it 
is called the rising (udaya) of the same and any related states 
are known as operative karmic states. 

11.1.5-6 (E336; T38) Those states that occur by 
themselves without regard to subsidence of karmic matter are 
known as transformational or parinamika. 

II.1.7-15 (E336; T38-39) In order to give priority to the 
potentially accomplishable (bhavya) selves the subsiding states 
are discussed first although the other states rise both in 
potentially accomplishable and nonaccomplishable life forms. 
At first right vision is a subsiding state, that is, subsidence 
occurs first; then it comes into the combination 
(ksayopasamika) state; and in the last stage, total annihilation 
of karmic matter occurs. 

From the point of view of number as well, the subsiding 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 349 


state is treated first because it takes a shorter time than the 
other stages. 

11.1.23-25 (E337; T40-41) Question: If the self 
ultimately abandons the intrinsic qualities of itself, then it 
creates a vacuum as when heat abandons fire; otherwise, if it 
continues to have the rising and other phases how is it 
emancipated? 

Answer: In the theory of relative pluralism 
(anekantavdda) it is possible to have both. From the eternal 
substantial consciousness (anddi parindmika) point of view the 
self does not abandon its qualities, and in the temporary rising 
mode it is released from the quality. Even if fire abandons its 
heat quality, the aggregates of matter remain existing on the 
basis of other matter aggregates relative to form, touch, etc. 
For example, in sleep, even if the eyes do not see, the person 
is not considered blind. Similarly the rising karma phases, 
though destroyed, do not cause nonexistence of the self. 

11.2.3 (E338; T48-50) Subsidence of seven types of 
effective karma (karmaprakrti) leads to the right awareness of 
subsidence. The seven are the three types of false belief-- 
deluded visions (darsanamoha) known as falsity of belief, right 
falsity of belief (samyakmithydtva) and right inclination 
(samyaktva), and the four character deficiencies (cadritramoha) 
of lifelong anger, ego, deceit and greed. This right awareness 
of subsidence happens on the ripening of time even to the 
potential (bhavya) self with lifelong false belief. This ripening 
of time is of many types. 

Subsidence leading to vision can occur in all four types 
of life forms..In all seven hells the infernal habitants can begin 
to have the first degree of right inclination (samyaktva) after 
a certain time (antarmuhurta). Up to the third hellish region, 
remembering of class, feeling pain, and listening to the right 
path can lead to serenity=right inclination. Details are given 
of age, stage and habitat of various life forms that can acquire 
the basic rightness on listening, holy viewing of the images of 
Jinas, etc. 


350 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Character-related subsidence occurs only after twenty- 
eight types of effective karmas have subsided. Lifelong 
nonrejection, rejection, sudden passion, anger, ego, deceit, 
greed, sixteen passions (kasdya), laughter, attachment, 
nonattachment, sorrow, fear, hatred female, male and bisexual 
types of passions--the nine passions’ helpers, and the three 
deluded views (darsanamoha) are the twenty-eight types of 
subsidence necessary for right action or character 
(samyakcaritra). 

11.4.1-6 (E340; T52) Total annihilation of knowledge- 
veiling karma leads to omniscience. Total annihilation of 
vision-veiling matter leads to omniscient vision. Total 
annihilation of charity-obstructing matter leads to divine 
auspiciousness and pure matter-aggregates associating with the 
omniscient one who lives on lotus flowers. This is ultimate 
gain. When all experiencing-obstructing matter is destroyed, 
the extreme form of luxury comes in the form of raining 
flowers or perfumed water from heaven, lotuses appearing at 
the feet, and perfumed cool air, mild sun, etc. When all 
repeatedly-experienced subsidiary indulgences are destroyed, 
other miraculous indulgences occur, like the gods playing 
music, halo, throne and other royal appendages, appearing 
and divine sounds. At the annihilation of all energy-obstructing 
matter, the eternal energy-annihilating karma is revealed. 

Question: Does this happen to those liberated (siddha)? 

Answer: Yes, they automatically attain it. 

II.5.3 (E341; T55) Details how certain unripened totally 
destructive karmic super-variforms (anudaya prdpta sarvaghati 
spardhaka) become the contenders after the destruction of 
similar risen ones, and how further, partically destructive 
variforms (deSaghati spardhaka) also rise, and how they can 
both be completely suppressed before the total annihilated- 
subsided (ksdyopasamika bhava) can be achieved. 

11.5.4 (E341; T55-56) Details concerning how infinite 
space-points of risen karma are measured in liberated ones 
and in unattained (abhavya) selves. The text defines the 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 351 


measures of gradually increasing or decreasing groups of 
variforms, how similar sections of these are put together to 
form groups. (In the structure of the super-variforms the lower 
ones are associated with low energy and upper ones with high 
energy. After annihilating many upper super-variforms 
associated with high energy, the ultimate particles therein are 
mixed into the lower ones in sequence. Then there is reduction 
in the energy of ungracious configurations owing to 
attainment.) The sequences of how these energy-splits form 
groups gradually are described. The unattained selves have 
these balanced quality-variforms (samguna vargana) in a 
certain proportion while adepts have them in infinite measure. 

11.5.5 (E341; T56) It is explained how the risen, then 
subsided, and now annihilated particles lead to proper sensory 
and scriptural knowledge when the related obscuring or 
veiling ceases after the primary and secondary stages of rise, 
subsidence and annihilation, leading to grouping of the super- 
variforms. Mathematical details given of various stages 
wherein finite aggregates of super-variforms undergo an 
energy (anubhdga)-split, and the subsidence and annihilation 
of karmic particles occur in proportion to them. It happens in 
a similar manner in extrasensory as well as telepathic forms of 
perception. 

11.5:6 (E341; T56) Due to increase in erroneous 
awareness karma, three types of illusive perception occur, 
namely fallacious sensory perception, fallacious scriptural 
perception and fallacious contradictory perception. 

11.5.7 (E341; T56) Visual perception, extravisual 
(acaksus) and extrasensory perceptions happen due to the 
removal (by subsidence or annihilation) of their veiling 
particles. 

11.5.8 (E341-342; T56-57) Five types of attainments 
occur due to the removal of giving-obstructing particles. They 
are attainments related to giving, to gain, to experiencing, to 
secondary experiencing and to energy. Details of how these 
types and their subtypes of right vision occur on subsidence of 


352 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


twelve diffferent types of passions and nine passions’ helpers. 

IL.5.9 (E342; T57-58) Minute details regarding which 
subsidence merges with which type of annihilation state, such 
as right fallacy merging in proper religious belief (samyaktva) 
or yoga in the attainment of energy. 

11.6.1 (E342; TS9) "Four kinds of rebirth": hellish, 
animal, human and celestial. 

11.6.2 (E342; T59) “Four of passion": anger, pride, 
attachment and greed. 

II.6.3 (E342; T59) Sexual feelings are of two types, 
substantial and state-related. The female passions (striveda) 
lead to yearning for the male and the male passions for the 
female, while bisexual appetites arise for both. 

11.6.4 (E342; T59) The rise of awareness-deluding 
particles leads to disinterest in knowing or believing in the 
fundamentals. This is called "erroneous awareness’. 

11.6.5 (E342; T59-60) The all-destructive (sarvaghatin) 
super-variforms of sense-perception-veiling particles arise in 
single-organed beings leading to ignorance of taste, etc. Apart 
from “speaking birds" (parrots) the syllabic-linguistic- 
knowledge-veiling super-variform particles are risen in all 
animals and some humans. The rising of the passions-helpers' 
veils related to lack of perception is included in this. Similarly, 
all veils of extrasensory perception, etc. are the causes of 
ignorant operative karmic states. 

11.6.6 (E342; T60) The inclination toward violence and 
sensory indulgence is due to the rise of character-veling 
particles and is called “lack of restraint" (asamyama). 

1.6.7 (E342; T60) The eternally bound self has all its 
karmic particles rising (causing impurities and obstructions), 
so it is in the nonrealized mode. In the tenth stage of progress 
all eight have arisen; in the eleventh and twelfth all seven 
except deluding have arisen; and in the volitionful omniscient 
(samyogin) and volitionless omniscient (ayogin) stages four 
aghatin (destructive afunctional) karmas rise to generate the 
nonadept phase. 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 353 


11.6.8 (E343; T60-61) The tendencies toward particular 
associations (yogapravrtti) colored by passions result in karmic 
colorings. Differences are detailed. Relative to their 
effectiveness on the purity of the self a coloring can be one of 
six: black, blue, dove-gray, yellow, lotus-pink and white. They 
do not accur in the omniscient stages, but there may be some 
residual white coloration in the last two stages of progress. 

11.6.9-11 (E343; T61) False perception includes 
nonpercep-tion due to the rise of veiling of right awareness. 
Such nonpassions as laughter and attachment are classed 
under "sexual feeling". Motion toward progress or regress is a 
result of the rise of aghdatin particles. 

II.7.1-2 (E343; T63) Those resultant phases that are not 
relative to the rise, subsidence, annihilation or annihilation- 
subsidence of karmic particles occur due to the intrinsic nature 
of the self and are known as the transformational 
(parinamika) phase. 

II.7.7-9 (T343-344; T64) Those beings in whom right 
vision, right awareness and right conduct has become apparent 
are those capable of liberation (bhavya). Those in whom this 
is not manifest are not capable of liberation. This is.a 
difference in the inherent power of the substance. Thus the 
incapable cannot ever be capable. 

II.7.12-13 (1344-345; T64-67) The word "ca" ("and") 
indicates that various qualities of a self occur in substances 
other than selves as well. Such qualities include existence, 
separation. agency, imbibability, synonymy, universal mobility, 
natural affinity, spatial limitation, unformability and essential 
perpetuity. 

1I.7.14-20 (E345; T67-68) Question: Doesn't the "and" 
also. include rising states like movement? 

Answer: Movement is not a transformational state but 
one that leads to the rise of karmic fruition. There are only the 
three transformational states mentioned in the stra. 

I1.7.24-27 (E347; T72-73) Question: Since the self is 
not embodied, should it not be separate from the karmic 


354 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


material? 

Answer: Due to eternal binding with karmic matter it 
accrues a special power. Thus the forever-transforming 
conscious self remains conscious in its modes even in the 
hellish and sensory-awareness forms as well. It is somewhat 
embodied due to its karmic affiliations, while being somewhat 
formless due to not relinquishing its knowledgeable self. Just 
as due to excessive intake of alcohol a man may become 
unconscious and lose his memory, similarly the rise of karmic 
matter veils the natural knowledge- qualities of the self. It is 
not right to say that the sense-organs become unconscious or 
faint due to alcohol, because if they are already unconscious 
how can they become so after drinking?! 

Carvaka: Just as a flower or raw sugar become 
inebriating wine when they are putrified, similarly mixtures of 
earth and water produce the happy or sad feelings of 
consciousnes, there being no separate entity called 
"consciousness". 

Answer: There is a vast difference between happiness 
and form. Form and taste are qualities of the earth and 
become less if the earth is divided. But when body-parts are 
divided up there is no division in the experience of happiness 
or sadness. If happiness is a quality of earth then it should be 
available even to a dead body. It is not logical to say that 
some subtle elements have escaped from the body, and that 
therefore the dead person cannot have awareness. If that were 
so then those sublte elements should be qualified by 
knowledge, not the entire body. Thus the example of wine is 
not tenable since the quality of inebriation is present in every 
drop of it. Furthermore, only something conscious can be 
affected by alcohol. 

11.8.1 (E348; T76-77 ) Two types of outer and two 
types of inner causal conditions come together to result in the 
conscious transformation of a self. The outér causes may be 
inside (e.g., the eye) or outside (e.g., a lamp) the body. Inner 
vibrations arising out of mental, verbal or bodily variforms of 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 355 


karmic particles are inner causes--causes foreign to the self 
though internal to the body--whereas purificatory feelings are 
internal causes natural to the self. 

These causes come together as required. A human may 
need light to see at night, but not a cat. 

11.8.2-4 (E348; T77) The distinguishing feature of a 
substance, by which it may be separated from a group of 
otherwise similar things, is called its mark (laksana). The body 
and the self, though both bound, are separated by the mark of 
awareness in the latter. A mark may be intrinsic or not 
intrinsic. Heat is the intrinsic quality of fire, while the staff is 
an: external mark of a man holding a staff. Actually, an 
intrinsic quality is not totally different from the substance 
itself. There is no consciousness without a self, nor vice versa. 

II.8.5-6 (E349; T77-78) Objection: The qualified thing 
and its qualities are distinct. Thus a self and its consciousness 
must be separate. 

‘Answer: If they are considered totally separate then 
there will be a problem of either's very existence, since 
otherwise another sign for it will have to be found, and then 
another sign to point to that. 

11.8.7-12 (E349-350; T78-79) Objection: Just as milk 
does not transform into milk, but does transform into curds, 
similarly the transformation of the conscious self cannot be 
into knowledge. 

Answer: Since there is no separation between 
consciousness and self, the self is cognized as consciousness. 
The Jain view is different from others in which the self 
transforms as awareness only. On the Jain view it transforms 
sometimes into awareness, sometimes as vision, and other 
times as happiness, etc. 

II.8.13-15 (E350; T79-80) Objection: Since the self is 
said by you to be without a cause it must be nonexistent, like 
a frog's horns. 

I1.8.16-18 (E350; T80-83) Answer: Since a self cannot 
be found except in a mode such as human or hellish, and 


356 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


these modes are due to fallacious beliefs, it is not altogether 
noncausal. So in some sense a self is both existent and 
nonexistent. In a certain sense even the horns of a frog can be 
proved to exist. 

Objection: But a self is not perceptible. 

Answer: Not normally, perhaps, but a pure self can be 
perceived by the omniscient, and impure selves can be 
cognized by extrasensory and telepathic awareness. 

All substances definable by words have positive and 
negative facets. Nothing can be totally negated. Relative so 
some other substance a thing may be nonexistent, but 
otherwise it exists. 

II.8.19-20 (E351; T83) Awareness through different 
sense-organs results in unified perception of a thing. The one 
who is seeing is the same one who is tasting, therefore the 
unifying factor proves the existence of the perceiving self. Even 
if the awareness of a self is called contradictory it is still 
proved, since what is nonexistent is not contradictory! 

11.8.21 (E351; T83) The contention of the Buddhists, 
that numerous moments of awareness in succession result in 
a stream (santana) due to which memory or recognition takes 
place, is wrong, since according to them the continuity itself 
is imaginary, not real. If they consider it real there will be only 
a marginal difference between it and the self, not a substantial 
one, since the substratum of multimodal knowledge is just the 
self. 

11.8.22-23 (E351-352; 184) Objection: But 
consciousness ceases from time to time, and thus there is no 
persisting self. 

Answer: Again, that is the case from one viewpoint but 
not from another. If consciousness is considered to have 
completely ceased, it will be difficult to remember or recognize 
it at a later time, since memory can be only of objects 
experienced by oneself, not by another. And in the absence of 
memory, all customary interaction will disappear. 

1I.9.1-2 (E352; T88) "It" in the siitra refers to cognitive 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 357 


application (upayoga). It has “two..types", formless (nirakdra) 
and formfilled (sakdra). Awareness (jridna) is formfilled while 
vision (dar§ana) is formless. Awareness may be one or another. 
of eight types: sensory, linguistic, extrasensory, telepathic, 
omniscient, and fallacious sensory, fallacious linguistic or 
fallacious extrasensory. Vision may be of four types: visual, 
nonvisual, extrasensory and omniscient. These can occur in the 
omniscient simultaneously and in others consecutively. 

I1.10.1-2 (E352; T91) Those who undergo modal 
transfor-mation due to their own actions are bound to the 
world. The self is itself the doer and enjoyer of its activities. 
The contention of Samkhya that prakrti is the doer and the 
purusa the enjoyer is totally untenable, since there can be no 
doership in prakrti, which is devoid of consciousness. 

II.11.1 (E353; T94-95) There are two kinds of internal 
organs. One is substantial and the other a modification. The 
substantial internal organ rises due to a type-determining 
karmic product. The purification of the self, through removal 
of impediments to effort and the subsidence and annihilation 
of mind-veiling karma, results in pure mental modification. 

11.11.2 (E353; T95) Question: Do you mean that the 
bound have internal organs and the free lack them? 

Answer: No, since if it were so animals and immobile 
beings would have to be included among the "free", causing 
confusion. 

II.13.1 (E354; T99-100) There are five static types of 
selves: earth, water, fire, air and vegetation. 

I1.14.2-4 (E355; T104-105) Two-sensed beings have six 
vital breaths--those of taste, touch, production of sounds, 
physical capacity, age-limit and breathing. Three-sensed beings 
have seven breaths--the six plus a nose and the resulting 
sense of smell. Four-sensed ones have eight, adding the eyes. 
Five-sensed ones, when without the internal organ or mind 
(manas), are animals who have ears along with nine vital 
breaths, and when with mind, they are animals, humans, 
celestial beings and hellish ones who have mental energy 


358 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


along with ten vital breaths. 

11.15.3-4 (E355-356; T106) Although the manas is also 
the result of past karma and is helpful in the selfs cognitive 
processes, still it is not located in one place like the eyes and 
other senses. Therefore it is.not included among the sense- 
organs. Even before the eyes perceive the manas has acted. 
When the self wishes to see, it turns toward the object of 
vision, and only after that does the action of the eyes take 
place. So the manas is not a sense-organ. 

I1.17.1-3 (E356; 109) That which results in the genetic 
code determining the finished form or personality acting is 
known as the "outwardly visible”. It 1s of two types, external 
and internal. A space in the self that is as it were a blueprint 
of the eye is the internal type. When the material body 
aggregates take the shape of the eye, etc., it is the external 
type. 

I1.18.1 (E356; 109-113) The "initial sense-organs as 
states" refers to the activity of the self when it creates the 
instrument of perception in accordance with the removal 
{annihilation or subsidence) of knowledge-veiling karmic 
matter. 

I].18.2-4 (E356; T109-113) The intellectual activity in 
accordance with that activity of perception results in cognitive 
application (upayoga). Although resulting from the senses, 
since the cause is often referred to as the resulting effect, so 
it is acceptable to call the cognitive application itself the sense- 
organ. 

11.19.3-10 (E357; T113-114) The sense of touch is 
spread all over the body and exists in all worldly beings. Thus 
it is treated first. 

The eye occupies the least area, the ears a numerate 
multiple, smell a litle more, and taste innumerable points of 
space. 

11.20.4 (T358; T117-118) The Vaisesikas hold that earth 
has the properties of color/shape, taste, smell and touch. 
Water has color, taste and touch, fire has color and touch, and 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 359 


air has only touch. But this classification is false, since all the 
senses have ail the qualities. The air has form, since it has 
touch, as in the empty pot. Fire has taste and smell, since it 
has color, as in jaggery. Water has smell since it has taste, as 
in a ripe mango. It is imagined (by other schools) that water 
has no smell, and that the smell comes due to additional 
material particles being introduced. We aver that water has 
smell as a quality. Otherwise, why not call the taste also a 
result of such particles? Then there would be no basic 
difference of genus between, e.g., earth and fire. The earth 
itself, when causes are present, becomes fluid, water also can 
freeze to become ice. Fire becomes kohl, etc. True, some 
qualities are sometimes obvious, sometimes not. 

1.21.5 (E358-359; T118) In themselves the sense- 
organs are somewhat similar and somewhat different. If they 
were totally similar then with the experience of touch taste 
would also be experienced. 

(E359) (A sutra, not found in Umasvati, is read by 
Akalanka here as "The subject of verbal awareness is (also) the 
subject of the mind".) Knowledge derived from simple hearing 
by the ear cannot be termed "verbal awareness", as what is 
heard by the ear is simply the sense-organ-related sound. After 
hearing, the analysis and understanding that comes from the 
mind is what is termed "verbal awareness" (Sruta). 

11.23.4 (E359; T122) (=11.22 of Umasvati) The sense of 
touch is implied by "one". This arises at a stage when energy 
obstacles are removed and suitable subsidence and 
annihilation of touch-veiling matter particles have been 
attained. The form of a body is achieved by the personality- 
regulating (nama) particles, and then the one-sense genus 
gives rise to the one sense of touch. 

11.24.4 (E359; T124) (=11.23 of Umasvati) Touch and 
taste arise in the worm, smell is added for the ant, eyes for the 
bee and hearing for the human. 

If.25.1-7 (E360; T127) (=I1.24 of Umasvati) Question: 
Since "samjfia" means the awareness of what is beneficial or 


360 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


harmful, awareness being an activity of the internal organ, 
why is the specification "possessors of an internal organ" 
necessary? 

Answer: The word "samjfia" has many meanings, which 
are applicable to things other than living beings. Everything 
has a name, so if we mean awareness through name all beings 
have this awareness. Therefore, those without an internal 
organ have to be known as "amanaska". Thus, in the womb, as 
in the egg, in sleep or fainting, one cannot know what is 
beneficial or harmful--but even then the internal organ is 
present. " 

11.26.1-4 (E360; T131) (=I1.25 of Umasvati) Due to the 
rise-of normal material particles, the association. with or 
acceptance of appropriate aggregates is known as "rebirth" 
(vigraha), which applies also to the nonacceptance of quasi- 
karmic matter. All these produce the individual identification 
and (new) body with the relevant vibrations caused by the 
space points in the self to which these aggregates have 
adhered and risen. 

11.27.1-5 (=I1.26 of Umasvati) (E360; T132-133) From 
the center to the upper and lower regions, and diagonally, the 
space areas are systematized into arrays or series. The 
direction of migration of aggregated beings is in accordance 
with these arrays. All beings that are in the migratory cycle are 
intended by this, and their births are referred to rather than 
their movement. 

1.27.6 (E360; T133) The instants and areas of the 
subseries (anuSreni) are predetermined. Apart from this it is 
also possible to have cyclic movements (visreni) that are not 
in linear arrays in these worlds. Their karmic destiny is 
intended here by the word ‘gati" rather than any motion or 
stasis. At the time of death of living beings, while they are 
acquiring new modes, and at the time of the upward 
movement of emancipated beings, the movement is in these 
sub-arrays. All movement that rises from the highest regions, 
lowest regions and diagonal regions are similarly in sub-arrays. 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 361 


Matter aggregates that end at the time of the end of the 
worlds also are in accordance with these sub-arrays. For other 
movements there are no rules. 

1.28.1 (E360; T134) (=I127 of Umasvati) The 
-following siitra concerns the bound self: therefore this one is 
obviously about the emancipated ones. It becomes necessary 
to say this separately as the others in ee also 
have straight paths (without deviations). 

11.29.2 (E36; T135) (=11.28 of Umasvati) Realized 
selves move on a straight path and worldly ones on a 
deviating path. 

‘T1.29.3-4 (E361; T135-136) A bound selfs movements 
can be of four types: like the arrow, like water released from 
the palm, like the plough, and like the cow's urine. The first is 
without deviation, the other three with deviations. The first, 
moving straight like an arrow (isugati), happens only to free 
selves and some worldly adepts. Movement like water relased 
from the palm is of two time frames and one deviation. The 
third type has two deviations like the plough and takes three 
time frames to be completed. The path taken by a cow's urine, 
having three deviations, is the fourth type of progression that 
is completed in four time frames. 

11.30.1 (E361; T137) (=II.29 of Umasvati) The straight 
path is without bend and within one moment. From the end 
sections (agrabhaga) of the worldly regions the matter 
aggregates of the selves (in this path) reach within one instant 
of time. 

11.30.2-6 (E361; T137-138) The self should not be 
considered without activity and motion, since it is omnipresent 
by nature. Just as, due to internal and external causes, even 
stones can move, so the self when associated with karmic 
aggregates becomes embodied, becomes active. Without the 
body it remains like a flame in its natural active state. If the 
self were considered inactive since it is omnipresent anyway, 
then there would be no bondage. Liberation can happen only 
with action. 


362 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


11.31.4 (E362;:T138 ) (=I1.30 of Umasvati) Receiving 
matter-aggregates in accordance with the three bodies 
(physical, transformable and assimilative) and the six 
developments (assimilation, body, sense, respiration, language 
and mental) is known as assimilation (@hdara). The aggregates 
of the (subtler) phosphorescent (taijasa) and functional 
(kdrmGna) keep on adhering to the self until final liberation. 

11.31.5-6 (£362; T138-139) Only adepts have 
assimilating bodies. Therefore in one migratory, bent life 
course one cannot gain such a body. In the deviating life 
course there is no development of the remaining types of 
assimilation as these take time and there would be a temporal 
discrepancy if they did. Even a heated arrow will have to 
assimilate the pouring rain while on its way to its destination. 
Similarly, at the time of death, due to the sorrow arising from 
leaving this body, the subtle functional body composed of 
eight type of matter aggregates assimilates quasi-matter 
particles and thus becomes assimilating while leaving the 
body. In the paths with deviations it remains nonassimilative 
for three moments. In the straight-arrow path it goes in one 
instant while accruing karmic helping aggregates, and thus 
becomes assimilating. In the two-instants path with one 
deviation (panimukta) it remains nonassimlative in the first 
moment. In the pough-like path taking three moments with 
two deviations (langalika) it remains nonassimilating in two 
moments. In the path with three deviations and four momens, 
it remains nonassimilating in the first three and becomes 
assimilative in the fourth moment. 

I].32.1 (E362; T141) (=11.31 of Umasvati) When atoms 
of matter aggregates come together from all directions to 
become a body, it is known as agglutination. 

II.32.2-3 (E362; T141) The mixture of semen and blood 
in the womb of a woman is uterine. When nourished by juices 
resulting from the intake of food by the mother, there is birth 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 363 


from the womb. 

-11.32.4 (E362; T141) The place (in space-points) of the 
birth of celestial and infernal beings is called upapdda. 

11.32.5-10 (E362; T141-142) The agglutinative body is 
concrete, lives for a short time and its causes of flesh and the 
resulting body are visible. Therefore it is considered first. Next 
comes the uterine birth as it takes a longer time to complete. 
The upapada life, being extremely long, is therefore treated 
last. Due to combination of varied sets of karmic matter 
undergoing transformation beings are born in these forms. 
Birth occurs in accordance with past actions. 

11.33.18-26 (E363; T147) (=I1.32 of Umasvati) The 
gods and the hell-beings have consciousnessless places of birth, 
since their rising places (upapada) have matter aggregates that 
are bereft of consciousness. Those born in the womb, due to 
a mixture of the consciousnessless semen and fluids with the 
conscious self, are of mixed birthplaces. Among those of 
spontaneous generation most are conscious by birth. But 
others are not conscious and still others of mixed origin. Gods 
and hell-beings have cold and hot origins, fluorescent beings 
have hot origins, and others are of mixed origin. Gods, hellish 
and one-sensed beings are of covered (samvrta) origin, while 
those of impaired senses are of convoluted origin and the 
uterine ones are of mixed origin. 

11.33.27 (E363-364; T147-148) Altogether eighty-four 
million birthplaces are implied by the word "and" (in the 
sutra). The omniscient knows all of them, and for the less 
knowledgeable, they may be known from the scriptures. The 
eternally vegatating, the lowest form of life, have seven million 
birthplaces, the not-eternally vegetating have another seven 
million, earth, water, fire and air each have 700,000, trees 
have a million, those with impaired senses have 600,000, hell- 
beings, gods and the five-sensed animals have 400,000 each 
and humans have 1,400,000 birthplaces. 

11.34.1-5 (E364; T150-151) Within the uterus is a 
sheath of flesh and blood covering the placenta. The egg is as 


364 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


hard as the foremost part of a nail, encircled with blood and 
sperm, and white in color. Those that can immediately start 
moving around after being born, and have no covering sheath 
in the womb, are called "bare" (pota), since such a being is not 
born of any other thing, but is merely the transformation of 
the self. 

11.34.6-10 (E364; T151) (11.33 of Umasvati) Since those 
born from the womb in a sheath have unusual powers such as 
language, more accomplished beings like Cakravartins and 
Vasudevas are usually born in that way. They are the ones that 
attain liberation and are thus treated first. Among those born 
of an egg, the parrot and the mynah bird are capable of 
uttering syllabic sound: therefore the egg-born have been 
treated before the pota type. 

1.35 (E364; T153) (11.34 of Umasvati) Sudden 
manifestation perhaps shouldn't be called "birth", since it may 
not involve the acquisition of aggregates. 

11.36.1-3 (E365; T155) (11.35 of Umasvati) A "body" 
(Sarira) is constantly decaying and capable of personality 
development (namakarmodaya). 

11.37.4-9 (E365; T155-156) (11.36 of Umasvati) The 
material body is "generous" (udara), i.e., of concerete 
dimensions and purpose. The transformative body can become 
big, small, levitate, etc. For acquiring the subtle realities and 
negation of noncontrol of the self, the imperfectly regulated 
(pramattasamyata) type of aspirant creates a procuring body. 
The fiery body causes effulgence. And the karmic body is the 
group of karmas. 

I11.37.10-13 (E365; T156) Just as different vessels made 
of mud such as a pot or a plate are different by their names, 
looks, usage and purpose, similarly though all these five kinds 
of bodies are formed by karma, even then they are different in 
name, qualities, appearance, and size. 

II.37.14-17 (E365-366; T156-157) Just as the oil lamp 
illuminates others as well as itself, similarly the karmic body, 
is the cause of the physical body. In the karmic causal body 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 365 


there is a constant flux of accruing and dissipating particles, so 
that it is constantly decaying, and thus a “body”. 

11.38.1-5 (E366; T159) Space is atomic. Spatial divisions 
are atomically based. Though increasing by geometric 
progression they have less density.. From the material to the 
procuring, a body has innumerable space points. Just as the 
area occupied by cotton and iron, though equal, is of different 
density due to intimate or loose closeness of the atoms within, 
similarly the transformative, etc., bodies are consecutively 
denser and thereby occupy less space and are subtler. 

11.39.1-2 (E366; T159-160) Something infinite again 
has infinite options and so must be considered infinitely 
infinite. Thus the fiery should be taken to occupy infinite times 
more space-points than the procuring, and so on. 

11.39.6 (E367; T162) Although in the fiery and causal 
bodies the atoms are so many, even so, due to their excessive 
density and subtle transformations they are not perceptible to 
the senses. \ 

11.40.1-3 (E367; T164) (11.41 of Umasvati) Just as fire 
enters the ball of iron, the fiery and causal bodies cannot be 
stopped by the hardest of materials and thus enter 
everywhere. Although the transformative and procuring bodies 
are also permeable within limits, these two (the fiery and 
causal bodies), being able to go everywhere, are known as 
nonresistant. 

II.42.1-2 (E367; T165) (11.43 of Umasvati) All mundane 
selves have a fiery and karmic body. Without them they 
cannot be of this world. 

11.44.1-3 (E368; T169-170) (=I1.45 of Umiasvati) 
Experiencing: of tastes, sounds, etc. by the sense-organs is 
called upabhoga. Although it is posible for the causal body to 
give away its karma (karmadana), dissipate karmic particles 
(nirjara), and experience sadness and happiness, even then in 
the transformative path new substantial senses (dravyendriya) 
are not created. Therefore extended enjoyment is not available 
in the karmic body. The fiery body also is for the purpose of 


366 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


yoga, and does not cause any vibrations in the space-points of 
the self. 

11.47.4 (E368; 1T171-172;) (=I1.48 of Uméasvati) 
Transformation (vikriyad) does not mean destruction, since the 
body which is disintegrating all the time is also producing new 
forms constantly. Transforming is of two types: single and 
separate. Transforming into another life-form like that of a 
lion or deer is the single type, and into a house is the separate 
type. Bhavanavasi astrologers and gods of the sixteen heavens 
can all transform both ways. Others such as the higher 
graiveyaka gods of the sarvarthasiddhi paryanta worlds are 
well-versed in the first, single, type. The seventh hell-beings 
can change into huge insects, blood, etc., which is also a single 
type of transformation. Changing into weapons is also 
singular. In animals the transformation into a peacock, etc. is 
also of a singular type. Even humans can perform the singular 
type of transformation through special knowledge and 
austerities. 

I1.48.1 (E369; T172) (missing from Umasvati) The fiery 
body type can cause all the attainments, though for brevity it 
was mentioned with the procuring type earlier. 

11.49.1-3 (E369; T174) Just as grains, being the cause 
of breathing, are (figuratively) called breaths (prana), so also 
the body required for attaining the auspicious assimilating 
stage is called "procuring". This body occurs due to the rise of 
the purest karmas. It does not obstruct anyone nor is it 
obstructed by anyone (avydghatin). 

11.49.4 (E369; T174) The word "ca" (in the sutra) 
implies that a partly realized being like an imperfectly-realized 
(pramattasamyatta) aspirant cannot go with his physical body 
to ask subtle questions of realized ones like the omniscient 
beings, because he does not live in the proper region. He lives 
in the gross body (mah@videha) region and it would not only 
be impossible but impertinent to go there with his physical 
body, so the imperfectly-regulated aspirant creates a procuring 
body to understand the subtler conclusions or the proper 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 367 


nature of the special attainments (rddhi). 

ILS2.1 (E371; T183-184) (Lacking in Umasvati) "The 
rest (of the beings) are of all three (sexes).” 

H.53.1-5 (E372; T185) "Excellent body" refers to 
Cakravartins and Vasudevas. “One who is destined to live for 
uncountable years" is one who lives very long, as in the upper 
kuru region, and does not die due to poison or weapons. 

11.53.6-9 (E372; 186) Question: One hears of the 
untimely death of highly evolved bodies like Vasudeva and 
Krsna, so what you say cannot be universally applicable. 

Answer: It applies to the ultimate, not just the best. 
Untimely death does not happen to those having reached their 
ultimate embodiment. 

11.53.10-13 (E372; T186-187) Just as paper and straw 
can be used to ripen a mango before its time, so also, before 
the natural (karmic) time of death, due to the excessive fast 
rise (udirand) of age-related matter untimely death does 
happen. In the Ayurveda texts medicines are described taking 
of which avoids this untimely death. Just as with emetic 
medicines the poison can be expelled forcibly, so also due to 
poison and weapons bodies can die prematurely. Even when 
this fast rise happens, the karmic matter runs its full course of 
divine fruits according to action. They do not dissipate by 
themselves. Neither does one have to suffer the fruits of 
actions not done, nor can one avoid the fruits of actions done. 
Otherwise there could be no liberation, nor would one have 
any enthusiasm for good works. But just as if a wet cloth is 
kept bunched up it takes longer to dry, but if spread out it 
dries faster, so also due to fast rise of karmic fruits age may 
dissipate faster before its time. That is untimely death 
(akalamrtyu). 


CHAPTER THREE 
I¥I.1.1-4 (E373) The seven hells (earths?) glow with 
progressively darker colors. Darkness has its own color, and a 
certain luminescent charm (prabha). 


368 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


III.1.7-8 (E373) The heavens are above each other 
without needing a base, but the hells are not so and have an 
earth for a base. These earths in turn rest on the ring-cushion 
(vatavalaya) of the dense air envelope. named ghanodadhi, 
which is in turn encircled by the ring ghanvatavalaya, and the 
latter by the ring named tanuvatavalaya. All three rings of air 
are twenty yojanas (a yojana = 4,000 miles) thick. 

The Ratnaprabha world is 180,000 yojanas thick, and 
has three sections called karabhaga ("rough"), pankabahula 
("muddy") and abbabahula ("watery"). The rough one is 
16,000 yojanas thick and dazzles due to the luminosity of 
sixteen types of precious gems. The muddy one is 84,000 
yojanas thick, and the watery one is 80,000 yojanas thick. 
Above and below the rough section of this world, beyond 
1,000 yojanas on either side in the central section of 14,000 
yojanas, live the seven gods called vyantara, viz., transvestite 
and dancing gods (kinnara), eunuchs (kimpurusa), demons 
with big bellies (mahordga), singing celestials (gandharva), 
water gods (yaksa), departed souls awaiting rebirth (bhita), 
and fiendish beings (pisaca). The nine types of bhavanavasin 
(lit. "residing in palaces") gods are the snakes (naga), lightning 
(vidyut), goldenwinged (suparna), fiery (agni), airy (vata), 
Mammary (stanita) oceanic (udadhi), of islands (dvipa) and 
of the directions (dikkumdra). 

In the muddy regions live asuras and raksasds. 

The watery regions have the deep burrow of hell 
(naraka). 

IlI.3.1 (E375) Compared to animals and to the upper 
regions, the lower hells have even worse color, being 
progressively inauspicious. 

Il.3.4 (E375) In the first two hells, the hue is grayish 
like a dove, in the third it is dovish on top but bluish at the 
bottom, in the fourth it is blue, in the fifth it is blue above but 
dark at the bottom, and in the seven it is a very dark color. 
There are in all six colorings and they keep changing 
constantly. Everything in the hells is the cause of great pain 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 369 


and suffering. The bodies there are disgusting due to the rise 

of inauspicious personality-making matter, and they are also 

transforming and migrating but are full of feces, urine and 
us. 

The height of the dwellers of each of these hells is 

detailed: 

Four hells are hot, a fifth has heat and cold, and the 
other two are cold. Hell-beings, even when they decide to do 
well, cannot, as whatever they do results in double suffering 
due to the rise of bad karmic matter. 

III.4 (E376) Beings in the hells are like dogs 

II.5.1-5 (E376) Asuras belong to the community of 
gods due to the rise of their godly-modification-causing karma. 
They can go up to the third earthly domain only. 

I1I.5.8 (E376-377) Asuras indulge in the following 
activities: making each other drink molten iron, tying to a red- 
hot iron pillar, beating with an iron mace, slashing with 
swords, knives and similar weapons, boiling in hot oil, dry- 
roasting, cooking in iron pots, crushing in an oil-crusher. But 
they do not die. ; 

(The Digambara and Svetambara sutras of this Chapter 
deviate widely, and the analysis of the sections and 
constituents of the universe vary likewise. There are a total of 
39 sutras in this Chapter as interpreted in the present 
Svetambara commentary, with most of the extra ones falling 
between II.13 and 11.14 of the basic text of Digambara 
Umiasvati. While the details are fascinating, we skip over them 
as they are not "philosophical"!) 


CHAPTER FOUR 
IV.1.1-2 (E401) "Gods" are those who at the time of the 
personality-making (ndma) karma of celestial birth become 
beings with outer radiance who ¢an play at will and are 
divine. 
IV.1.3 (E401) There are four groups of them: 
Bhavanavasins, Kinnaras, Jyotiskas and Vaimanikas. 


370 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


IV.10.1 (E403) (=IV.11 of Umasvati) (Here (in contrast 
to II].1.7-8) ten types of Bhavanavasin gods are listed, with the 
asuras now comprising the tenth type.) These gods are called 
"Bhavanavasin” because they live in palaces. 

IV.10.4-6 (E404) The Asuras, though they fought the 
gods (sura), are not bad as envisaged in Hindu mythology. 
They always worship the Jina and do not indulge in abducting 
women, etc. 

IV.10.76-8 (E404) All these gods are called "kumaras as, 
like young folk, they are perpetually playful and dress well. 

IV.11.1 (E404) (=IV.12 of Umasvati) This time there 
are eight kinds of Vyantara gods, the additional type being 
raksasa. Vyantara gods are so-called since they live in many 
regions. 

IV.11.4 (E404-405) Question: Aren't they so-called 
because of their bad reputation among peaple? 

Answer: No, they possess pure transformational bodies. 
All that is heard about them is just their play. They do not eat 
meat or drink alcohol. They eat with their minds. Their 
locations in various areas in the innumerable islands, 
mountains, seas and cities are detailed, along with the number 
of their queens. 

IV.12.1 (E405) (=IV.13 of Umasvati) The Jyotiska 
deities are the sun, moon, planets, constellations, and 
miscellaneous stars. They are called "luminous" because light 
is their natural quality. 

IV.12.4-10 (E405-406) Details showing, e.g., the 
distance to the stars and planets from the earth. 

IV.13.1-4 (E406) (=IV.14 of Umasvati) These gods 
move around Mount Meru at a distance of 100 yojanas. The 
number of their suns, moons, planets and stars are given. 

IV.15 (E408) (=IV.16 of Umasvati) "Outside this region 
they are static", i.e., they are outside the human world. 

IV.16-17 (E408) (=IV.17-18 of Umasvati) The basic 
division of Vaimanikas is into three types--indraka, §reni, 
prakirnaka, each of which in turn has two types: classed and 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 371 


nonclassed, referred to as higher and lower respectively. 

IV.18-21 (E408-411) (=IV.19-22 of Uméasvami) 
Contrasting attributes of the various types of gods. These are 
discussed (in IV.22.10-IV.23) under the following headings: 
description, result, transformation; activities, signs, motions, 
lordship, instruments, numbers, area, adjacence, difference, 
state and comparative count. 

IV.27.1-7 (E417) (IV.28 of Umasvati) "Tiryak" means 
being underneath, e.g., as beasts of burden. It also means 
those who have regressed due to karmic rise. They are divided 
into moving, stationary, etc., as shown earlier. They dwell 
everywhere and do not have specified areas like the gods. 

There are two subtypes: minute and gross. The minutes ones 
dwell all over in air, water, etc., but the gross are limited to 
the earth, water, fire, air and regions of those with 
handicapped senses (vikalendriya) and five-sensed ones. Since 
all three worlds have this species of dwellers they have been 
discussed here and not in the second Chapter, since the 
remaining sitras (below) can only be understood after 
understanding the division into humans, gods and hell- -beings. 

IV.28-41 (E417-419) (=IV.29-52 of Umasvati) 

IV.42. (E419-429) The commentary here. reviews the 
modes and qualities of a substance in general, on which is 
based the difference between the sequential (vikaladesa) and 
the unified (sakaladesa) ways of viewing a thing. The unified 
relates to the instruments of true cognition, the sequential 
relates to perspectives. Every quality has a_ sevenfold 
perspective--the seven perspectives are reviewed, their 
relevance is explained. The word "maybe" (syat) that appears 
in many of fhe seven perspectives is to be understood as the 
opposite of "only" (eva). These seven are paired off with the 
seven points of view described earlier. 


CHAPTER FIVE 
("T" references for this Chapter are to N. L. Jain, The 
Jaina World of Non-Living (The Non-Living in Tattvarthasitra) 


372 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(Varanasi: Plano, Texas 2000). The summary on its basis is 
made here by Potter.) 

V.1.6 (E644; T45-46) "Nonliving” does not merely imply 
the absence of life, but it indicates a kind of positive substance 
instead. 

V.1.7-8 (E644; T46) Just as the physical body is formed 
when the personality-making matter matures, and is formed of 
many aggregated atoms, similarly the substances that are the 
topic of this sutra (initiators of movement, initiators of stasis, 
space and karmic products) also occupy timelessly modifying 
Space-points or many parts and are therefore said to have 
bodies (kaya). 

V.1.9-14 (E654; T47-48) Question: Why is it necesary 
to mention their many space-points since having a body would 
suffice to indicate the same fact? 

V.1.15-16 (E654; T48) Answer: The two initiators are 
specified as occupying many space-points, ‘but time does not. 
Just as an atom, not having more than one space-point, is 
considered not to be occupying space, similarly time is also 
said to be not occupying space, even though it occupies one 
Space-point. 

V.1.24-26 (E654; T49-50) The kind of substance that 
divides and decays by combination, and the results of such 
division and decay, are matter aggregates called "karmic 
products" (pudgala). Since the number of atoms increases, 
decreases and changes in quality, there is no harm in 
considering karmic products to be modifiable. 

V.1.27 (E655; T50) Motion and stasis occur by 
themselves, and space and karmic products are substances 
independent of living beings or matter aggregates. They are 
instrumental in the movement of living substances and matter- 
aggregates and are not instigated by them. 

V.1.28-30 (E655; T50-51) Initiators of stasis cause the 
formation of the humanoid shape of the worlds. If such a 
substance were not postulated, then living substances and 
aggregates would be all-pervading and there would be no 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 373 


shapes of things possible. | 

V.1.34-35 (E655; T51-53) Question: Shouldn't space be 
treated first, since it is the substratum (ddhdra) on which all . 
else subsists? 

Answer: The worlds have existed from time 
immemorial; there is no precedence or antecedence among the 
worlds. So, even though scriptures say that space is self- 
existing, in space ‘there are the rings of air (vayu) known as 
tanuvatalaya, in the latter there is the ghanavatalava, in that 
the ghanodadhivatalaya, and so on. As the contained in the 
container there is no dichotomy in this. However, whether 
matter is viewed as container or contained depends on the 
perspective; e.g., from the strict constructionist perspective 
there is no container-contained relationship. However, it is 
also true that from the practical perspective it would not be 
wrong to say that the tanuvatalaya, for example, subsists in 
space, and that space has no container since it is all-pervading 
and infinite. Only a finite, nonpervading tangible and 
embodied substance can have a container or have another as 
substratum. 

V.1.36 (E655; T53) Although time is also a nonliving 
substance it is not enumerated here since it will be discussed 
below. 

V.2.1 (E655-656; T63-64) That which undergoes birth, 
decay, etc., and that which is the result of such modifications 
is a substance. Substance, area, time and state are external 

factors and intrinsic power is the internal factor. Even if 
external causes exist,- if intrinsic power is not conducive to 
such modification it will not occur. Thus, though the modes of 
birth, decay, etc., are not really different from the substance 
itself, still due to the difference in nominative and accusative 
roles that which keeps flowing through these modes is a 
substance. 

V.2.3 (E656; T65-67) Question: Shouldn't earth be 
interpreted as substance due to its association with a 
substance rather than its having modifications? 


374 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer: No. If a thing does not have an intrinsic ability 
to modify it cannot be held to be substance. However, 
substance should not be considered existent by itself (svatah 
sat); it is by its collocation with existence (satta) that it 
becomes existent. If not, even the horns of a rabbit will be 
real. 

Substantiality is eternally transforming. It is not right to 
suppose that a substance is the substratum of qualities and 
motions, since a substance is not self-existent and cannot be 
the substratum for another. Only a previously existing pot can 
be a container of water. 

V.2.6-8 (E657-658; T69-70) If substanceness is eternal 
and unembodied, how can it reside in earth, etc.? If it resides 
there substanceness will become concrete and many. 
Substance is not like space even though it may be huge. Space 
occupies infinite space-points so it can pervade many 
substances and many substances can be in it. Substance is not 
SO. 

V.2.9 (E658; T70-72) The assumption that substance is 
that which is realized by its qualities is also a one-sided view, 
therefore not correct. If quality and substance are one then 
they should not be indicated separately. If totally identical, 
then either the quality or the substance will remain. If only 
quality remains then without a locus it too will disappear. If 
only substance remains, then without qualitiy or nature it will 
have no existence. 

The Vaisesikasutras say: “Spatial direction, time and 
akasa are inactive (niskriya), as are motions and qualities." 
Then inactive substances cannot flow towards qualities, so the 
mark (laksana) "flowing" (samdravati) cannot be accepted 
either. So qualities have no separate existence from 
substances, 

Vaisesika objection: When material atoms are inflamed, 
then their dark color, etc., are destroyed and they assume the 
red form; so qualities are assumed by substances. 

Answer: If one assumes that the substance remains as 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 375 


such while its shape changes and decays, then qualities (such 
as shape) will become separate from the substance. If the 
qualities are assumed to be a collocation and self-existent, 
then like substances qualities will also become eternal. If they 
are stipulated to exist when their substance exists then either 
both substance and/or qualities will become ephemeral or 
both will be permanent. If they are considered totally different 
from each other then again they will not always be associated. 

The Vaisesika also says “a lamp can light itself and 
needs no second lamp." Do they not know that this is 
contradicting themselves as well as scripture? Do they really 
know their own views? They also say: "Self is known by 
appropriate contact of self and internal organ." But they do not 
accept omniscience, so how can one who does not (already) 
know oneself know other things? So one should not accept the 
self-substance (dravyatmaka) mode. 

Thus all extreme (ekantika) views are negated by 
argument as untenable. 

V.3.1-2 (E659-660; T78) The same line of argument 
holds against the relation of selfness (jivatva) to self (jiva). 

V.3.3 (E660; T79-80) Motion, stasis, space, matter, self 
and time are the six substances, and there is no seventh. This 
negates all other views. VaiSesikas stipulate nine substances, 
which can be assimilated to our six. Earth, water, fire, air and 
mind having form, taste, touch, smell and touch are all part of 
the matter aggregate. Air (vayu) is formed since it has touch. 

Mind is of two types, substantial (dravyamanas) and 
mental states (bhavamanas). The latter are of the nature of 
awarenesses, and therefore are parts of the self. The 
substantial mind is made of the matter-aggregate (karmic 
product, paudgalika), and has a shape. That mind has shape 
is proved by the inference that mind is an instrument of true 
cognition and therefore has shape like the eyes, etc. Sound is 
also a karmic product and has shape. The material atoms in 
air and mind also have the capacity for formations into groups 
or matter-aggregates. There is no basic difference between 


376 _ ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


solid and liquid matter, since the moonstone 
(candrakantamani) can create water and water can create 
pearls. Spatial directions (dik) are included in space. 

‘ V.4.3-5 (E661; T86-87) The substances never cease to 
be six. The space-points they ocoupy do not change. They have 
many transformations. Still, they do not change their nature, 
for example stasis does not ever have consciousness or shape 
nor are the selves ever unconscious. There is no dichotomy 
due to the fact that these substances have many 
transformations due to the substantial and modal perspectives. 

V.5.1-2 (E661; T88-89) The word "ripa" (form) has 
many meanings. Shape (miirti) is the transformation into 
sight, taste, smell and touch and triangular, square, long, 
wide, etc. , 

V.5.3-6 (E661; T89-90) Or else "form" should be 
understood as that which can be visually perceived. Taste, 
smell, etc., are corollaries of sight, so they should also be 
understood. Although matter is not different, in its modal 
forms it is somewhat different. Matter remains while the 
forms appear and decay. 

V.7.1-2 (E662; T94-95) Activity (kriya) is that mode of 
a substance which due to internal or external reasons moves 
it from one area of occupancy to another. Activity is not the 
perpetual nature of a substance. The activity is not apart from 
the substance, but the resulting transformation is another 
mode. If it were not so then substances would be inactive. 

V.7.3 (E662; T95) Instigators of stasis; etc., do not have 
origination or decay in one sense, but they should not be 
considered as having no origination at all. Origination is of 
two types, for the self and for others. Infinite differences in 
qualities like size, etc., create originations within all 
substances. 

V.7.4-6 (E662; T95-96) Question: Since activity has 
been seen to cause activity, like the moving water causing 
movement of fishes, then how can inactive substances like 
initiators of movement and of stasis cause motion or stasis in 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 377 


other substances? 

Answer: The self wishing to see creates the power in 
the eyes to see. A dead person without the presence of the self 
does not have this power to see. So it is obvious that the self 
is the seer and the senses.are merely reservoirs of its power. 
Similarly, the substances that have the power of movement 
move or stay, but space and the initiators of movement and of 
stasis are merely instrumental though themselves inactive. 
Thus, though space is called all-pervading since it is in contact 
with everything, it does not go anywhere but is merely 
instrumental. 

V.7.7-13 (E663; T96-97) Question: Since the self is all- 
pervading and therefore inactive, it is only instrumental in the 
activity of other substances due to its collocation with 
qualities, etc. Thus it is not logical to call it active. 

Answer: No. An inactive self cannot be instrumental in 
another's activity. The Vaisesikastitra also says that spatial 
direction, time, space, motions and qualities are inactive in 
contrast to substances, which are active. 

V.7.14-16 (E663; TO7-98) If the self is considered 
inactive, then like space-points it will not be able to cause 
activity in the physical body either. Jainism considers the 
association of the self with the karmic body as an activity- 
causing factor, and therefore once all eight types of karma are 
destroyed the self becomes free from embodiment or activity. 
However, the natural quality of the self to move upward is 
accepted even in the emancipated self, as well as the activities 
of eternal power, knowledge, faith and bliss. 

V.7.18-19 (E664; T98) Activity is the same as the acting 
substance since it is a particular transformation of it, like the 
heat of fire. If fire is considered different from heat then fire 
becomes inactive but also nonexistent, being an activity-less 
substance. 

V.8.1-2 (E664; T105) Instigators of motion and of 
stasis, along with a single self, have innumerable space-points, 
since they cannot be counted. They have exceeded the possible 


378 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


numbers that can be enumerated. 

V.8.3-4 (E664-665; T105-106) The area occupied by an 
undivided atom is known as one space-point. The instigators 
of motion and of stasis pervade countless space points. They 
are inactive. Although a self.also occupies countless space- 
points, it is possible for it to take small or large life-forms due 
to its flexibility in assuming size. When it is time for its 
completion (lokapurna avastha) and it rises to the samudghata 
kala, its central eight space-points occupy the citra and vajra 
strata under the central Sumeru mountain. The remaining 
space-points spread over, above and below and on all sides. 

V.8.5-6 (E665; T106) Although a = substance is 
indivisible, it is not conjoined, and the space-points in it are 
actual, not figurative. The space-points occupied by a pot are 
distinct from the space-points occupied by a cloth; else space 
would not be called all-pervading. Thus substance is 
indivisible, but not without space-points. However, it.does not 
consist of parts like a pot, so there is no problem in calling it 
indivisible, limbless, and whole. 

V.8.7-9 (E665; T106) There are infinite numbers of 
living beings, so one self has been mentioned to indicate that 
each being has countless space-points. There is a difference 
between a substance and the space-points it occupies. 

V.8.10-13 (E665; T106-107) The space-points in the 
instigators of motion and of stasis are also real, not figurative. 

V.8.14-15 (E665; T107) Objection: If motions, etc., are 
primarily occupying space then they should be treated as such. 
The area occupied is in accordance with the material atoms 
that occupy the space. So they should be considered to have 
primary space-points too. 

Answer: No, these are abstract and therefore cannot be 
seen even if they do primarily occupy space-points. Hence they 
are presented through the space-points they occupy. 

V.8.15-16 (E666; T107-108) The scriptures taught by 
the arhats, remembered by the ganadharas, and passed on by 
the tradition of teachers describe the space-occupany of these 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 379 


substances as follows: In each space-point of a self there are 
infinite karmic space-points of knowledge and other veiling 
karmas. In each of these karmic space-points there are infinite 
material bodily space-points. In each bodily space-point there 
are infinite decaying atoms like dust adhering to wet jaggery 
(i.e., inseparable). Thus one should know dharma, etc., to 
have primary space-points. 

The central eight particles or points of a self remain 
stable whatever the condition. In the realized states of an 
omniscient (kevalin) being, with or without activity of body 
and mind, all the points are stable. In the remaining points, 
except for the central eight, the particles are unstable during 
exercise or agitation due to sorrow, etc. 

V.8.19 (E666; T108-109) According to VaiSesika 
philosophy the area of space in the ear is the hearing medium. 
This, conditioned by adrsta, gains the ability to hear. If space- 
points are not stipulated the entire space will have to be an 
ear. In that case every being should be able to hear every 
sound. If, however, a specific area is called the hearing organ, 
then labeling the space as without separate points is refuted. 
Or else, does one atom get connected with all space? Then one 
atom will have to be as large as space. And if not then it is 
clear that space has primary space-points. 

V.9.1-2 (E666; T112-113) “Infinite" should not be 
confused with "countless". 

V.9.3-5 (E667; T113-114) Being infinite should not be 
feared to be unknowable, since it is known by the immensely 
knowledgeable omniscient beings. 

Question: If the omniscient knows the infinite to end 
then the infinite does not remain unending, so becomes finite. 
Again, if the omniscient does not know the infinite to end then 
he is not omniscient. 

Answer: Since the annihilating knowledge of the 
omniscient is infinite squared (anantdnanta) it is able to 
fathom the infinite by itself. The omniscient knows the infinite 
as infinite, so its knowledge by an omniscient does not limit it 


380 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in any way. All contenders accept both omniscience and 
infinity. A list of Buddhist, Samkhya and Vaisesika ideas of 
infinity are enumerated to prove the point. Knowing them 
does not make the idea of infinity finite. If substances are not 
everpresent then both the world and liberation from it will 
disappear. If selves are limited then when all selves become 
emancipated the world will cease to be. 

In each self there are an infinite number of karmic and 
karma-helping aggregates. If they are considered temporal (not 
eternal) then again both the world and liberation will 
disappear. Similarly, the past and present are also infinite. If 
they are considered finite then too there will be no practical 
use of time left. However, this is not logical, since the 
origination of nonexistence and the total termination of 
existence both are illogical. 

Similarly, if space is postulated as limited, then 
something tangible will have to be postulated beyond that. If 
not, then accepting space and space only there will not be a 
finite space. 

V.10.1-2 (E667; T117) The infinite is included in the 
"and" (ca) of the sutra. "Infinite" also includes all three types: 
the peripheral infinite (paritananta), yoked infinite 
(yuktananta), and infinite infinite (anantdnanta). 

V.10.3-6 (E667; T117-118) Objection: If the worlds are 
of countless: space-points, then how can they include the 
infinite space-points of aggregates? This is a:contradiction in 
terms. 

Answer: Due to the transformational powers of very 
subtle matter and the infinite penetrability of space, it is 
possible for infinite matter aggregates to penetrate 
everywhere. Besides, it is no exception that a larger size of a 
substance may be contained in a smaller vessel. It is possible 
for a small bud of a campaka flower to spread its fragrance far 
in all directions. 

V.12.2-4 (E668; T124) The world space (lokdkaga) is 
the substratum for all others but space itself has no other locus 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 381 


as there is nothing larger than it. 

V.12.5-6 (E668; T124) From the strict constructionist 
perspective all substances reside in themselves; there is no 
supporter-supported relationship. It is only from the practical 
perspective that the supporter-supported concepts are 
imagined. Thus, in practice, air is supported by space, water 
by air, earth by water, all living beings by earth, selves and 
nonselves by each other, karma by beings and beings by 
karma, and finally, space is the support of movement, stasis 
and time. 

V.13.1-3 (E669; T128) Intiators of motion and of stasis 
are inherent in the entire worldly universe like oil in oilseeds. 
The pervasion is total. When concrete things like ashes, water 
and sand can pervade one place then there can be no 
contradiction (in space-points) for abstract things. There may 
be some space-point separations in gross aggregates that come 
into first contact at one point in time, but those which are 
forever existent together, such as initators of motion and 
stasis, are nonsequential and abstract. Thus they have no 
contradiction with regard to space-points. 

V.14.1-2 (E669; T130) One atom occupies one space- 
point. Two, if bound together, also occupy one point; 
otherwise, they occupy two separate points. Three atoms may 
be similarly bound or unbound, occupying one, two or three 
space-points. Thus, depending on the specific binding, the 
aggregates of numerate, innumerate and infinite (atoms) may 
pervade one, numerate or innumerate space-points. 

V.14.3-6 (E669-670; T130-131) Question: Since initia- 
tors of motion and of statis are abstract, they can occupy one 
space-point, but how can gross large aggregates pervade just 
one space-point? If that is possible, then either the space- 
points will have to be further divided or a unity in the 
aggregates will have to be stipulated. 

Answer: It has been said before that due to certain 
accumulations, transformations and the pervasive quality of 
space, many may be situated together. Just as within the same 


382 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


room, the light of many oil lamps may pervade the same space 
without losing their separate identities, similarly, even infinite 
aggregates may be able to retain their individual natures 
without affecting one another, due to extremely fine 
transformations (parinamana). Just as the fire will burn and 
the straw will get burnt due to their innate natures and no 
other logic prevails, similarly it is in the nature of certain gross 
aggregates to be able to pervade the same space-point. 

V.15.1-3 (E670; T133-134) The worldly universe has 
countless space-points, each of which has countless parts. A 
being may live in one or more countless areas and the entire 
world is pervaded by beings. 

V.15.4 (E670; T134) Objection: If one countless part 
also has countless space-points, and two, three or more parts 
also have countless points, then there should be no special 
quality of pervasion in beings. 

Answer: The nonminimal maximals are countless and 
of countless options. Since the minimal-maximal countless 
things have countless options in turn, there is a difference 
between the pervasion of beings as well. 

V.15.5 (E670; T134) Objection: If a being dwells in one 
countless area of the world, but in substance-measure it is of 
infinitely infinite quantity, then how can it be contained in the 
worldly universe? 

Answer: Beings are of two types, gross and subtle. The 
gross beings have bodies of a particular obstructive type 
(sapratighatasarira), but the subtle-bodied beings have very 
subtle transformations and therefore do not collide with either 
gross bodied or other subtle-bodied ones. That is why where 
one subtle vegetable body exists there exist an infinite number 
of subtle-bodied general (sddharana) beings. In the gross 
bodies of humans there live many such living beings like 
those born of perspiration, etc. If all beings were gross, there 
may have been a problem in pervasion. However, it is well- 
known from experience that the embodied self is also 
nonobtrusive. At the time of death the self departs with the 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 383 


subtle body even through iron-walled homes with doors of 
adamantine. This subtle body is a lump of the personification 
of knowledge-veiling karmas (due to past actions). The 
luminous body also always remains with this (subtle) body. At 
the time of death this body leaves the room without causing 
any hole in it. Similarly the subtle vegetable life should also be 
considered noncolliding or frictionless (apratighatin). 

V.16.1-3 (E670; T136-137) Although the self is abstract, 
due to its timeless association with karmic matter it is also 
somewhat formfilled. Its space points are equal to that of the 
worldly universe, but even then it stays within the boundaries 
of its karmic subtle body. The shrinking of the space-points, 
like the shriveling of dry skin, is known as samkoca and the 
expansion of the space-points, like oil spreading on water, is 
known as visarpa. Due to these causes a being can fit into 
countless parts. Just as the light of a lamp, when left under 
the open sky, spreads into many space points, if covered by a 
mud plate it remains limited therein. What appears to be a 
fault in this comparison--that the lamp is not immortal--is not 
a fault for the Jains, because from the modal bodily (karmdna) 
viewpoint the self in this formfilled state is mortal, but from 
the substantial viewpoint, in spite of its contraction and 
expansion, it is immortal. Thus this is not a fallacious 
comparison. 

V.16.4-7 (E671; T137-138) Objection: If the worldly 
self were to have contraction and expanison like the oil lamp, 
then it should also undergo breakage like the earthen pot and 
have space-point descriptions accordingly. 

Answer: Even though the self is one with the karmic 
body due to-its bonds being still unbroken, in essence it does 
not-abandon its true abstract nature. Due to difference in 

features they are definitely different. In this case too, 
manifoldness prevails. From the eternal transforming 
consciousness or substantial viewpoints neither is there any 
destruction or shriveling of space-points, nor does it have any 
limbs (that do so). Yes, maybe there is contraction and 


384 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


expansion of space-points necessary for the explanation of the 
rise of the modal construction that results in the forming of 
the gross body. In this way of timeless binding with karmic 
matter, it also has limbs. In fact, the things that. have parts, 
rising due to a certain cause, also suffer destruction or 
decaying of those parts, just like a cloth that decays due to the 
decay in the threads that are a part of it. However, the points 
of the self have not formed due to the coming together of 
other substances; they are causeless. E.g., the location-point of 
the atom is without cause, therefore, it does not become 
transient due to decay in its parts, but when it comes into 
contact with other atoms, it becomes modifiable (or loses its 
eternality). Similarly, the location-points of the self do not 
have compression (samghata with other substances. Therefore, 
although it may have points and therefore limbs, the self does 
not lose its eternality due to decay in its parts. It can be called 
transitory only in the modal sense, such as when in motion, 
etc. Thus the special expression of happiness or sadness, 
cannot be seen in the space-points of the self. The qualities of 
things that are made out of association or conjunction with 
other things like the pot can be embedded in each space-point. 
Had the points of the self come together due to causes other 
than itself, then it too would have happinessor sadness in its 
space-points and then there would be a question of many 
selves within one body. Just as in the atom there can be only 
one type of quality like white color, similarly in the self there 
can be only one type of happiness quality at one time. Thus 
the argument that heat and cold may afftect the skin but do 
not affect space is negated, since if the self were to become 
like the skin then it would be ephemeral. And the argument 
that "if it were like space then there would be no karma (merit 
and demerit) attaching to it" does not hold, since it has been 
said that from the substantial point of view the self is eternal, 
but from the modal it is ephemeral (anitya). 

V.16.8-9 (E671-672; T138-139) Since the worldly self 
acquires a small or large gross body, and since the smallest 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 385 


gross body is the countless division of one finger length, 
therefore the self cannot pervade one space-point as a karmic 
product can. Although liberated beings do fiot retain a body, 
their self-points are shaped a little smaller than the last 
physical form they had assumed, and neither decreases nor 
increases subsequently, because in that realized state there are 
no more activities that cause decay or surface-expansion 
(visarpa). Therefore, realized selves cannot be treated as 
having one or more space-points like matter. , 

V.16.10 (E672; T139) Objection: If the area in which 
the instigators of motion and stasis as well as space are the 
same, and if their shape is the same, and even their time is the 
same, the touch-types (sparsana) are equal for all of them, and 
even the knowledge of the omniscient (kevala) is all the same. 
Then why not consider the instigators of motion, etc., to be 
the same substance? 

Answer: The very reasons that you have appealed to to 
show the similarities of these substances are obviously the 
causes of their differences. Since they are otherwise different, 
that is why the above possible similarities have been pointed 
out. Had they been one and the same, these issues would not 
have been raised. Just as shape, taste, etc., though having 
comparable spatial and temporal applications, have separate 
specific characteristics and are therefore separate, similarly 
motion, etc. are also characteristically different. 

Question: The pervasion of matter in space-points is 
understandable. However, the pervasion of the instigators of 
motion and stasis in the entire world space, even while having 
countless space-points like a self, is difficult to understand. 

Answet: Just as water facilitates fish to swim, and 
without water a fish cannot swim, similarly the natural and 
experimental motion and stasis of beings and matter is 
facilitated by the two instigators (viz., motion and stasis). 
Since matter and beings move all over the world, it is obvious 
that the medium thereof also pervades everywhere. 

V.17.20-23 (E673; T145-147) Question: Space is both 


386 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


all-pervading and flows easily, so the instigators of motion and 
stasis could be considered aspects of space. 

Answer: Space is the substratum of all instigators of 
motion, stasis, etc. It is the base for the five substances. As 
space definitely has the characteristic quality of providing for 
pervasion, these other qualities cannot be ascribed to it. 
Otherwise, the heat quality of fire, and the fluidity of water, 
will have to be ascribed to earth as well. If space were to be 
the helper in motion, then even the nonworldly space would 
also be available to the self and matter. There would be no 
distinction between the world and the nonworld. There has to 
be a nonworld. Just as a fish can swim only in water and 
without it not on earth, similarly, even in the presence of 
space, being and matter can be in motion or stasis only 
because of the presence of one of these instigators. They are 
the general causes of motion and stasis even though other 
external causes like water may be present. 

V.17.24 (E673; T147-148) If the quality of one 
substance is ascribed to another, thus reducing the number of 
substances, then all systems of thought will suffer from various 
fallacies, since all schools of thought have postulated many 
substances. 

E.g., the Vaisesikas postulate four universal substances: 
space, time, spatial direction, and self. They too can reduce 
spatial and temporal direction to space. Similarly there would 
be no need to have many selves. just one with different 
attributes would be enough. Thus many things stipulated by 
the scriptures will be nullified. 

Samkhya postulates three basic gunas: sattva, rajas and 
tamas. All three are coextensive. If space can fill in for the 
motion and stasis instigators, then sattva guna can fill in for 
the drying and heating effects of rajas as well as the covering 
and veiling effects of tamas. There will thus be no need for 
three gunas. Again, all selves have one common quality of 
consciousness, so there should be just one self, not infinitely 
many. 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 387 


The Buddhists postulate five aggregates. But if one is 
accepted as having the characteristics of the others, only 
consciousness (vijfia@na) need be postulated. That alone will be 
able to function as aggregates, feelings, identifications and 
traces. But after replacing the other four, even consciousness 
cannot éxist without any basis--so there is only emptiness. 
Therefore, even though extended all over, space should not be 
considered to. have the ability to cause the functions of the 
instigators of motion and stasis. 

V.17.25-27 (E674; T148) Just as light cannot be the 
primary cause of vision, or the walking-stick the primary cause 
of motion, so also the instigator of motion or of stasis of being 
and matter aggregates are assisted by these media, but they do 
not cause them. Thus they neither cause the two opposites 
together, nor do they forbid them. If they had been the causes 
then both motion and stasis would cause obstruction to each 
other. Sometimes, even when an. external cause like water is 
not present, there is motion, as with birds flying in the air due 
to their dharma. Space (akdsa) is not the instigator of motion, 
as its primary function is to provide extension. 

Then again, it is not necessary always to have light for 
the eyes to see. Cats can see without any external source of 
light. For humans light is necessary, as they do not have this 
abililry. People do not always need a staff to walk. Similarly, 
it is not necessary for beings and matter to always have an 
external cause for movement or stasis, they happen helped by 
these media automatically. For some, just these are enough; 
for others, these plus outer causes are needed. 

V.17.28-31 (E674; T148-149) Just because the 
instigators of motion and stasis are perceptible they should not 
be considered nonexistent. Otherwise, even the omniscient, 
merit and demerit, and the other worlds will also have to be 
considered nonexistent. Furthermore, the omniscient lord has 
spoken of them in the dgamas. 

V.17.34-35 (E675; T150-151) If it is contended that all 
things not available to the senses are nonexistent the 


388 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


contenders’ own theses will be contradicted. For example, the 
Buddhists believe that every atom of color/shape (riipa) is 
beyond the senses; it is only when many of them come 
together that perception occurs. They consider consciousness 
and mental associates to be invisible to the senses. Samkhya 
believes that the modalities of prakrti function like earth, etc., 
to cause perception, while the causal attributes like the three 
gunas and the highest self are imperceptible. VaiSesikas say 
that certain factors combine to make the perception of shape 
possible. Thus the combination of many atoms giving rise to 
gross forms of earth, etc., plus the collocation of qualities like 
shape, number, quantity and division, cause perception, while 
an atom and akasa are imperceptible. So, if imperceptibility 
were considered to be a condition of existence, then each of 
these schools would be involved in self-contradiction. 

If atoms are inferred from their function, then where is 
the problem in inferring initiators of movement and initiators 
of stasis also? Just as your own birth and death are unknown 
to you but are known to the omniscient, similarly, they know 
the instigators of motion and stasis, and therefore those must 
exist. 

V.17.36 (E675; T151) Question: Just as awarenesses, 
being transformations of the self, and curds, being 
transformations of matter, do not require anything 
imperceptible to help, similarly shouldn't the motion and stasis 
of matter and beings also not need the help of these 
imperceptible instigators? 

Answer: Even an awareness requires general causes like 
time; likewise, for motion and stasis, a general external 
instigator is required. 

V.17.37-40 (E675-676; T151-152) Adrsta is a property 
of the self. In order to cause it pleasures and pains, the fruits 
of action and their ancillaries, accrue to the self. The 
Vaisesikasutra says: "The upward motion of fire, the diagonal 
flow of wind, the first functions of atoms and.the mind, all 
happen due to adrsta. Going up or down, the combination of 


TATTVARTHASOTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 389 


the humors, and which body one goes to are all due to this 
adrsta." Can't motion and stasis also not be caused by this 
same adrsta? 

Answer: Material aggregates are unconscious, they can 
have no adrsta. Therefore if adrsta is considered to be 
instrumental in motion and stasis, then material particles will 
not be able to move or remain fixed. 

Suggestion: The matter that assists the self will assume 
movement or stasis in accordance with the adrsta of that self. 

Answer: No, since a property of one substance cannot 
cause activity in another substance. We have already said that 
that which cannot cause activity within itself cannot also cause 
activity in another substance. If adrsta is considered to be 
instrumental in motion and stasis, then realized beings, who 
have already destroyed their merits and demerits, will have no 
movement or stasis--but they certainly do have them. 

Being abstract does not necessarily imply not being the 
concomitant instrumental cause of motion and stasis as in the 
case of the instigators of motion and of stasis, since there is no 
example of being noncausal to activity due to being abstract. 
In fact, space, which is abstract, is instrumental in giving 
extendedness to other substances. Abstract consciousness is 
instrumental in causing name and form (a Buddhist 
contention). Thus adrsta, though abstract, is instrumental in 
generating utilities for the self to enjoy. Similarly, the abstract 
instigators of motion and stasis are general instrumental 
causes of motion and stasis. 

V.18.1-2 (E676; T155) All three--instigators of motion, 
of stasis, and space--are ubiquitous. 

V.18.3-4 (E676; T155) Question: Only separately 
existing substances can have the container-contained 
relationship. In this case, instigators of motion, of stasis, and 
space are not yet separately proven to exist. 

Answer: Even inseparable (ayutasiddha) things can 
have the container-contained relationship, like the lines on 
one's palm. 


390 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


V.18.5 (E676; T155-156) The beginningless relationship 
(anaddisambandha) and inseparability are just manifold 
(anekanta) aspects. Maybe they are nonseparately proved and 
eternally related, as in the case of the substantial viewpoint 
being primary, since there is no rise or decay from that 
perspective. Maybe they have a beginning in time and are 
separately proved in the case of the modal perspective being 
the primary view, since modalities rise and decay. 

V.18.6 (E676; T156) Being and matter have primary co- 
pervasion, like the swan in water, since they are both active. 

V.18.7-9 (E677; 156) Even though space is pervasive, 
gross things collide among themselves and this does not affect 
the pervasiveness of space. Subtle substances may pervade 
each other. If the earth becomes the support for the horse, it 
does not affect space. 

V.18.10 (E677; 156-157) Question: Since space was 
never born, isn't it nonexistent like the horns of a rabbit? 

Answer: Space is not necessarily unborn, since, in the 
subsidiary role of the substantial view and the primary role of 
the modal view, space continues to experience 
transformational activities of matter and beings including their 
birth, decay, etc. Just as when someone suddenly becomes 
omniscient, that part of space unavailable to and therefore 
nonexistent for him becomes suddenly available and therefore 
"born" or existent at that point of time for him, so also space 
may be said to be unborn to his awareness or born to his 
awareness. 

V.18.12 (E677; T157-158) Sound is material, not a 
characteristic of space. Therefore it is incorrect to infer space 
from the quality sound. 

V.18.13 (E677' T158) The Samkhya assumption that 
space is a modification of prakrti is also not correct. Eternal, 
inactive and infinite prakrti cannot have modifications, since 
it is neither born nor decays. 

' Samkhya: Prakrti is a balanced state of the three gunas, 
and in this balanced state has the capacity to bring forth 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 391 


modifications, and those modifications are the mahat 
(=buddhi), etc. along with space. 

Answer: No, for just as a pot when it becomes modified 
is. destructible, tangible and. nonpervading, so also, when 
modified, space too would become so: but it {s known to be 
the opposite. -- 

V.19.1-2, 9-11 (E677; 160-161) (The sutra, as 
understood here, reads "body, speech, mind and breathing are 
functions of matter"). The order (body, speech, mind, breath") 
is justified with reasons. 

V.19.3-8 (E677-678; T160-161) Objection: Sense- 
organs, e.g., the eyes, are also functions of matter, so they 
should be taken up here too. 

Answer: In a future sutra the word "and" will indicate 
this. A different objector: No. Since the eyes are not within 
the space-points of the self they are not implied here. 

Answer: Since bodily parts are formed due to the rise 
of personality-making karmic matter, the substantial sense- 
organs are material aggregates. 

V.19.12 (E678; T161-162) Question: Why should the 
functions of visible matter be discussed? This is stating the 
obvious. 

Answer: Some groups of matter are invisible. Out of the 
five functional varieties of the body (material, transformative, 
procuring, fiery and karmic) only gross physical bodies are 
visible, whereas other kinds of matter are subtle and invisible. 
Speech and breathing are also in some cases visible, in others 
not. Mind is also not perceptible to the senses. 

V.19.13-14 (E678; T162) Body types have been already 
described. The causal body (karmanasarira), though without 
shape, is material since it gives rise to the results of material 
action and is thus connected with them. Just as rice is material 
since it ripens due to its association with the sunlight and 
water (concrete material objects), similarly, due to association 
with sweets and thorns (which are concrete material 
substances), the actions of the self give rise to karmic matter, 


392 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


hence they too are material. No abstract thing ripens due to its 
association with a concrete thing. 

V.19.15-17 (E678; T162-163) Language can be seen in 
two ways, as substance (dravyavacana) and as occurrent state 
(bhadvavacana). Both are material in nature. The occurrent 
state of language rises due to a certain amount of subsidence 
and destruction of sound and intellect-veiling karmic matter. 
Thus, being caused by matter it has to be material. 
Substantial, i.e., physical speech, that occurs once the 
propensity to speech is there, also occurs due to efforts of the 
palate within the mouth, and is available to the ear. Just as 
lightning disappears after being seen once, the sound of a 
word too disappears once proneunced and cannot be heard 
again. Sound is not available to the eyes. 

V.19.18-19 (E678; T163-164) Objection: Language is 
abstract because it is a quality of space, which is also abstract. 

Answer: No, because being accepted, obstructed or 
intiated by material concrete things it also must be material 
and concrete. 

Objection: Sound is like space, abstract. Thus the 
abstract may receive the abstract. 

Answer: No, since sound can be thrown about by wind, 
stopped by obstruction, or redirected in the opposite direction; 
thus it is not abstract. 

V.19.20 (E678; T164-165) Mind also can be seen in two 
ways, substantial and occurrent. The occurrent mind is of the 
nature of attainment stages and cognitive application. It also 
belongs to material groups, since it is both caused by and 
depends on matter aggregates. The substantial mind consists 
of the specially-empowered matter that, becoming the mind, 
helps or supports the self, while engaged in discriminatory 
cognition or recognition to attain the subsidence-annihilation 
of the knowledge-veils and hindrances to attainments. So it is 
also of the nature of matter. 

V.19.21-23 (E678; T165) Just as, relative to the 
knowledge-veiling subsidence-annihilation and hindrances of 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 393 


power attainments (virydntaradya) the areas of the self 
transform into the eyes, etc., therefore the individual self is no 
different from the sense-organs, but on the destruction of the 
senses the self is not destroyed. Similarly the mind is also the © 
transformatory aspect (parinamana) of the self and the 
annihilation of mind does not cause any modification to the 
self. The mind is no permanent structure since the matter 
groups that had transformed as mind disappear after having 
engaged in their mental functions of discrimination between 
qualities, faults or recognition functions; they do not remain 
as mind after that. 

V.19.24-26 (E678-679; T165-167) Vaisesika: The 
internal organ is a separate substance. It is atomic, and each 
internal organ is attached to a distinct self. One self does not 
engage in many activities at the same time and neither do all 
the sense-organs function together. Thus the internal organ is 
the controller of this sequence. 

Answer: This is not correct, since being just atoms (or 
groups of them) such an internal organ has no ability of its 
own. It needs to be considered whether it connects one part 
of itself while dealing with the self and its categorical 
instruments like the sense-organs or connects itself as a whole. 
If it connects partially that is wrong, since it is atomic (and 
atoms have no parts). So either the internal organ will have to 
be construed as extended or the self will have to be limited to 
atomic size. Again, if it connects partially the self must have 
divisions, which will mean that some parts of the self will have 
knowledge and others not, in which case one may wonder 
whether the parts that do not are self at all. On the other 
hand, if the internal organ is totally connected with the sense- 
organs, then again the senses will have to become atomic-sized 
or the internal organ will have to be larger. VaiSesikas believe 
that the quality and the qualified are separate entities: if the 
internal organ is eternal, then since it cannot transform itself 
into connection or by dividing, neither will it be able to 
connect with the self or with the senses. But if we accept 


394 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


modifications the internal organ cannot be eternal. If the 
internal organ is without consciousness, then the 
discrimination "this self or this sense-organ should be 
connected with that and this other should not" will not be 
possible, so the internal organ cannot connect with a self. 

V.19.27-29 (E680; T167) It is not correct to assume a 
beginningless relationship between the internal organ and its 
self, since the relationship between them is that of contact 
(samyoga), and you hold that contact occurs at a point in time 
to things that are not associated. So there cannot be any 
beginningless contact on your own assumptions. On the Jaina 
view, however, the mind is of the nature of subsidence and 
annihilation and so it cannot be ‘beginningless, else it would 
have to remain forever attached and could not be ever 
relinquished. Even karmic matter, which is bound to the self 
from the beginning, can finally be dislodged, because it gets 
attached at some point of time due to false belief, etc., and so, 
when right vision, awareness and action combine to result in 
serenity, the contact involving those karmic adhesions are 
relinquished. However, it is not so for your internal organ. 

V.19.30-31 (E680-681; T167-168) Question: Can't it be 
said that the mind is an associate cause of the senses, since 
when the senses grasp favorable or unfavorable objects, the 
internal organ's association with the sense allows one to 
experience pleasure or pain? Indeed, that is the only function 
of the internal organ. 

Answer: Actually, the senses, being transformational 
aspects of a self and thus being of the nature of consciousness, 
experience feelings by themselves. If they could not do so then 
one-sensed, handicapped-sense and the nonintellectual five- 
sensed beings would not experience pleasure or pain. 
Discriminatory analysis, etc., are independent functions of the 
mind. The self that has qualified for attainment of mind- 
particles has the mind to assist it in discrimination and 
remembering in spite of various external obfuscating reasons. 
Therefore, mind has an independent existence. 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 395 


V.19.32 (E681; T168-169) Buddhists do not accept the 
separate existence of the mind but consider it a psychical 
aggregate of consciousness. According to them mind is the 
moment of recognition of prior knowledge. Since mind is a 
momentary phenomenon for them, it cannot even continue to 
cognize the present--then what of the past? If present 
cognition cannot connect with past and future moments of 
consciousness then how can it analyze good or bad, or think 
and remember? Only the same person can remember what has 
already been experienced in the past, not what has not been 
experienced or has been experienced by some other entity. But 
given momentariness the sequence of such remembering 
cannot take place. If the storehouse consciousness 
(dlayavijfidna) is considered persisting, then their contention 
of momentariness is compromised. If even it is momentary, 
then it too cannot be the source of memory. 

V.19.33-34 (E681; T169) Samkhya considers mind to 
be a modification of prakrti. However, if prakrti is 
unconscious, then its modifications too will be unconscious, 
and then it cannot have cognitive processes such as judging 
and analyzing. Then who will be the doer of such activities, 
prakrti or purusa? The purusa is qualityless, so it cannot 
experience the modifications, analyze or remember. Prakrti is 
unconscious; it cannot have cognitive processes either. 

V.19.35-37 (E681; T169-170) Relative to removal of 
obstacles in evolution, subsidence, annihilation and consequent 
removal of knowledge-obstructing veils, and the rise of 
personality-making matter, the air that is released out of the 
body by the self is known as breath (prana) and the air that 
is taken in is known as apana. These are the cause of the life 
of an embodied self. However, it is seen that fear or lightning 
can cause the mind to be obstructed, and alcohol can cause it 
to be overpowered. Breathing can be obstructed by covering 
the mouth and nose, or overcome by phlegm in the throat. All 
these are concrete substances and therefore, being obstructed 
or overcome by material causes, these breaths too are matter 


396 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


aggregates. 

V.19.38 (E681; T170) The presence of a self is proved 
by the activity of inhaling and exhaling. These activities cannot 
occur without cause and ze known to occur regularly. They 
cannot be caused by consciousness, since consciousness is 
abstract and cannot inspire activity. Since the material 
aggregate is not conscious, it too cannot be the cause of this 
activity. If all substances are deemed to Jack activity then they 
will lack movement in space from one place to another. Other 
fallacious theories regarding the causes of movement or 
activity in substances are rebutted. It is not correct to negate 
activity by invoking momentariness, since momentariness has 
been proved to be contradictory. 

V.20.1-4 (E682; T175) When the karmic matter 
adhering to a self that relates to pleasant feelings adheres to 
a self and results in fruition due to external causes, then the 
pleasure experienced by that self is known as happiness. 
Similarly, that matter relating .o unpleasant feelings causes the 
experience of pain or unhappiness. The rise of age-determining 
karmic matter causes the breath of a living being to continue 
until its cessation causes death. 

V.22.4 (E683; T181-182) Persistence (vartana) is the 
continuity of awareness of its identity that every substance 
feels in each of its modes. Though the flow of the substances 
are continuously creation-subsistence-decay, a substance 
knows its existence through each of these modes. Each 
substance has its separate awareness. 

V.22.5 (E683-684; T182) This awareness continues to 
occur at every moment in each substance. This is proved by 
inference from the fact that if rice is cooked in a vessel in 
thirty minutes, it cannot be said that nothing happened until 
twenty-nine and a half minutes and suddenly it was cooked in 
the last moment. Subtly it was being cooked from the very 
first moment on. 

V.22.6 (E684; 182) Persistence is a property of time. 
Time is inferred from this continuity of awareness. 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 397 


V.22.10 (E684; T183) The natural matter-decaying 
(pudgalavikara) changes that take place in a substance without 
it losing its intrinsic character are called transformation 
(parindma). The subsequent stage of modality of a substance, 
without leaving its basic charaeteristic of substantiality 
(dravyatva), is thus the resultant transformation. Again this 
can be seen from two viewpoints, substantial or modal. 

Transformations are of two types, with beginning and 
beginningless. The construction of the universes, the shape of 
Mt. Sumeru, etc., are beginningless. Things with beginnings 
are again of two types, due to application (prayoga) or due to 
collapse (visramsa). The subsidence-related stages that occur 
in conscious substances due to subsidence of karmic matter, 
not requiring any human effort, are due to collapse; Those 
occurring due to knowledge, practice and instructions from the 
preceptor are those due to application. 

V.22.11 (E684; T183-184) Objection: Is the seed 
present in the sprout or not? If it is, then it cannot be called 
a sprout. If it is not, then it cannot be said that the seed 
became the sprout since the sprout no longer has the quality 
of seed. In this way both existence and nonexistence can “be 
refuted, and then there can be no transformation. 

Answer: From the relative point of view the conclusion 
is acceptable, From the substantial point of view, since the 
seed of rice is a seed, if it has been totally transformed into 
the rice sprout why is it still called "rice"? From the modal 
point of view it has no seed, since if the transformation from 
the seed stage had not taken place where would the sprout 
come from? In the theory of relative pluralism there can be no 
such objections. 

V.22.12-13 (E684-685; T184-185) Intense, argumenta- 
tive, hair-splitting questions are raised regarding the very 
existing of transformations. If the result of the transformation 
is negated, then what-is the transformation into? If it is 
already there, then even the negation of the result is there, so 
the negation itself will be negated too. Then the 


398 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


transformation will be proved to actually exist. You cannot 
negate both the arguments. If you think the negated 
transformation is not negated, then the transformation will 
actually remain without negation. If there is no 
transformation, even then, like the nonexistent horns of a 
rabbit, it cannot be negated altogether. Besides, who then 
speaks of the negation, what is the status of such words, and 
what is their meaning? If no speaker or meaning exist, then 
what transformation is negated? 

The question is: is the seed different from the sprout or 
not? If it is different, then it cannot be called the sprout; if it 
is not then it must still remain like the seed, and therefore 
cannot be called a sprout. However, we know it is different. 
Then we cannot call it a transformation or a sprout, or these 
problems will occur. 

Answer: This has been answered before. We do not 
subscribe to the one-sided views. We believe in relative 

pluralism. Before the birth of the sprout, the modality of 
sprout did not exist in the seed; it occurred afterwards. 
Therefore from the modal perspective it is a sprout and 
different from the seed. Since the sprout is of the same kind 
as the seed, therefore, from the subsantial persepctive, the 
sprout is not different from the seed. 

V.22.14 (E685; T185-186) Objection: If the result is the 
sprout, then there can be no stable seed left; otherwise, if the 
seed remains stable transformation into sprout is blocked. 

Answer: Again, multifold perspectives are acceptable. 
Due to the rise of age-related and personality-making karmic 
matter a self acquires limbs, body, etc., and is known as the 
finger-like individual self (angulyatman). That self expands or 
contracts in accordance with (or relative to) the removal of 
obstacles and subsidence-annihilation of karmic matter. At that 
time, as the eternal tranformational conscioysness substance 
it is existent, and even as the materially transformed limb of 
the finger-self, it is existent, nondifferent and unchangeable. 
From the changing (modal) view it is nonexistent, different 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 399 


and changeable. Similarly, the one-sense-organed vegetation 
type of personality-making rise of self is labelled as the seed. 
From the eternal transformational substance perspective it. is 
existent, and from the one-sensed-matter aggregate of the seed 
with form, taste, smell modalities also, it is existent, and 
therefore also stable and different. Thus, in relative pluralism 
there is no problem. 

V.22.15 (E685; T186-188) Transformation does not 
mean increase. If the sprout were merely the transformation 
of the seed, it would be equal in size (as in milk to curd), not 
larger. It is not correct to believe that the earthly nutrition and 
water have joined to it to increase its size, just as the 
accumulation of lac on wood increases the portion of the lac, 
and not the size of the wood. If that is so then what does the 
seed do? 

Answer: Just as the human child, being born, grows due 
to sunlight, mother's milk, external causes and its internal 
digestive power, similarly the personality-making karmic 
matter that is born to the life of a seed makes the earthly and 
watery juices grow into a sprout with the help of its internal 
digestive power and fertilizer. Thus growth is not dependent 
upon the seed but on other factors. 

This problem can arise only for those who have one- 
sided extreme views. For those who consider substances to be 
eternal there cannot be any transformations or modifications. 
In the Buddhist momentariness view of dependent origination 
as well there cannot be an effect larger than the cause, so 
there will be no increase. In this case, will the earthly juice be 
destroyed before or simultaneously with the seed or spout? If 
together, thén what will increase? If by increase they are being 
destroyed, then how will they cause other decaying 
substances? If consecutively, then what will the earthly and 
watery nourishments do with the seed that has already been 
destroyed? On the relative pluralist theory, the seed and the 
juices are all substantially permanent but modally destructible. 
Thus increases may occur. 


400 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


V.22.16 (E686; T188-189) Other doubts are raised 
regarding the possibility of increase in the case of the possible 
states in Buddhist thought. The reply given shows the fallacy. 
Whether the simultaneously existing will be entertained, or the 
simultaneously nonexisting ones, or one existent and the other 
nonexistent, is not clear. In the momentary view, since the 
earlier stage will disappear before the subsequent one, there 
can be no such considerations of continuity. Only existent 
substances can be arranged. If we accept their existence, then 
the contention of momentary existence is proved fallacioius. It 
is not correct to say that like the rwo sides of a balance 
origination and decay take place simultaneously, as they 
cannot happen together like one horn being the cause or effect 
of the other. 

V.22.17-18 (E686-687; T189-190) Objection: "The 
cessation of one quality in a stable substance and the 
subsequent rise of another is known as transformation". In 
substances having relative stability the cessation of the milk- 

‘like quality happening before the curdling into yogurt is 
known as transformation. 

Answer: This definition is not very good either, as it 
leads to many faults. If apart from the collection of qualities 
there is any separate entity that remains stable, then merely 
the group of characteristics must not be considered the 
substance. The one that is born, that remains or that dies, is 
a collection of qualities in all three cases. If they are the same 
as the substance, then the intrinsic qualities that were there 
before remain after the transformation: then the question 
remains, which will be the transformation of what? If one 
quality dies and the other is born, the one-sided view of 
eternal existence is proved wrong. Thus multifaceted relativism 
has to be accepted. From the modal view, then, there may be 
transformation and from the substantial view, stability. 
Substantially the stable substance itself will then have modal 


destruction of one quality and creation of others as it 
transforms. 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 401 


V.22.23 (E687; T191-192) Abiding, transforming, etc., 
are signs by which one infers the time substance. It has been 
well,said that the substance by which concrete things increase. 
or decay is known as time. 

V.22.24 (E687; T192-193) Objection: One feature, such 
as abiding, is enough to entail the existence of time, since 
transformation, etc., are varieties of progressing or staying. 

Answer: The text (23) indicates the difference between 
primary time and the practical use of time. Just as the 
instigators of motion and stasis indicate movement or stability, 
similarly primary time is the prime helper of 
subsistence/abiding (vartana). In the space-points of each 
worldly region one primary time-particle substance 
(ka@lanudravya) is situated. They are not interrelated. They do 
not have a heap of primary space-points like those of motion, 
etc., or secondary space-points like matter aggregates. They 
are single-space-pointed. Not having both type of point- 
groupings these are not collections. Not having any cause for 
decay, they are eternal. However, other substances are born, 
abide and decay in them,-so they are temporary. Although 
permeable, they are abstract, since they do not have form, 
taste, or smell. Since they do not move to another point in 
space, they are inactive. Practical time (vyavaharakala) is 
identified due to transformations, activities and sequence 
(paratva/aparatva). Being the basis of these activities is called 
time. It is instrumental in the division (limitation) of others 
but is not limited by them. 

V.22.25 (E688; T193-194) Past, present and future are 
relative to each other. Just as a traveling Devadatta sees the 
trees passing by, coming and passing him again, similarly, 
atoms of time in sequential modes cause past, present and 
future in substances. In primary time the past, etc., are 
subsidiary, and in practical time they are of prime relevance. 
The past, etc., is relative to another. The transformational 
activity of a substance (kriyaparinatadravya), having a particle 
of time, is called "present" due to its present-time- related 


402 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIE 


quickening activity (vartana). When the same substance cease 
to feel the abiding of that time-particle it is past, and th 
time-particle is also known as the past. Similarly, relative t 
the sun's motion in every moment the time divisions of tra 
(@vali), breath (ucchvdsa), moment (lava), twenty-fou 
minutes (ndlika), forty-eight minutes (muhirta), day and nigt 
(ahoratra), fortnight (paksa), month (mdsa), season (rtu) an 
solstice (ayana) are adhered to in the world of humans sinc 
the sun moves there. It is from these that beings of all th 
three worlds have their durations of activity, existence, an 
aging. From this stems the numbers up to innumerate an 
infinite 

V.22.26 (E688; 194) Objection: Activity itself is time 
no other. The activity itself is instrumental in causing divisio 
in the substance by dividing itself, therefore it is time. Th 
duration of change of the atom within the-substance is itse 
time; there is no other measure of subtler time as such. Th 
cluster of time-measure taken in activity is the measure ¢ 
trail, the cause of trail-measure a breath, and so on. Withi 
the trail, the duration of the particles of activit 
(paramanukriya) is the time. In folk usage also this i 
indicated in duration measures like time of milking, cooking 
time, etc. One activity divided by another becomes known a 
time. 

Answer: Right. However, the activity itself is not time 
Time taken implies the instruments of time within i 
Otherwise the usage of time would disappear. For example, 
man with a staff is called "dandi" in relation to the staff h 
holds; if there is no staff he will not be called so. Similar] 
when associated with the substance of time (duration) a 
activity becomes time. Therefore one has to postulate time 
substance. 

V.22.27 (E688-689; T194-196) If activity were to b 
considered to be the only substance of time, then there woul: 
be no present. While weaving a cloth the thread that has bee 
woven becomes the past, and that which still has to be wove: 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 403 


the future. Between them there is no past or future activity 
that can be called the present. Since past and future are 
relative to the present, if there is no present there will be no 
past or future. 

Objection: The group of activities from the beginning to 
the end’ of an action is the present. 

Answer: That contradicts your own statement. Earlier 
it was stated that action itself is time; now you say a group of 
activities is time. Then it cannot also be a group of momentary 
activities. Those who consider staying (the sign of abiding, 
vartandlaksana) to be different from time believe that from the 
beginning of the first trail onwards to the second instant the 
actions in time are considered to be subsisting from the 
substantial perspective and thus can be considered a group of 
activities. The group of activities of creating a pot, for 
example, is until completion labelled as a present continuous 
(as the pot is being made, it is happening) action. If, due to 
not being separated from an activity, time is denied existence, 
then the action and group of actions will also cease to be. 
Certain inclinations (pravrtti) of the various declensions of 
nouns (karaka) are known as their actions. The inclinations 
are not separate from the declensions and so likewise the parts 
of actions are also not different from the activity itself, just as 
crookedness is not separate from the serpent. Then both the 
action and the group will cease to exist. Action cannot divide 
anything other than action. We do not consider the lamp or its 
flickering to be purely momentary activities, since the light 
emanating from it is spread over many moments. In a group 
of activities there cannot be the divider-divided relationship 
since there cannot be a group of momentary actions. 

Objection: Why not? Just as a group of momentary 
syllables become words and sentences, similarly actions can 
also form groups. 

Answer: The momentarines of syllabic sounds is not 
proved, since spatially separated hearers can hear them. It is 
also not correct to assume that further new sounds are the 


404 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cause of this hearing. If the moment of the sound is produced 
it cannot produce another similar one, and it ceases to exist in 
the next moment. A substance is known as originating when 
it is about to come into existence. However, if it is not going 
to exist in the next moment, it cannot be said to have 
originated. If intelligence is also momentary, then the earlier 
awareness and the traces derived from past awarenesses 
cannot cause this intelligence. Groups do not have delimiting 
or piercing functions because momentary things do not have 
groups. 

V.23.1-5 (E689-690; T201-202) The order in which 
sense-data are listed in the sutra is defended. 

V.23.7-10 (E690; T202) Soft, hard, heavy, light, cold, 
hot, rough and smooth; these are the eight basic varieties of 
touch. Taste is of five types: pungent, bitter, sour, sweet and 
astringent. Smells are of two varieties, fragrant and 
malodorous. Colors are of five types: blue, yellow, white, dark, 
and red. All these have transformations of one, two, three, 
four, numerate, innumerate, and infinite types. 

(V.24. Pijyapada's text of this sutra differs from 
Umasvati's, and lists a number of examples of modes of matter 
differing from Umasvati's.) 

V.24.2-5 (E690-692; T209-213) (1) Words are of two 
types, linguistic and nonlinguistic. Linguistic words are of two 
types, syllabic and nonsyllabic. The scriptures are expressed 
through syllabic words, and they are in Sanskrit or other 
languages due to differences in usage by noble (Grya) and 
nonnoble speakers. Nonsyllabic words belong to the two- 
sensed, (etc.,) beings. Transcendental knowledge and 
omniscience causing apprehension of the self is in nonsyllabic 
words. Nonsyllabic sounds are of two types, experimental 
(prayogika) and natural (vaisrasika). The sounds of clouds are 
experimental, and of four types: percussive, stringed, stuck 
and wind-blown. The sound of the instruments where skin is 
stretched over a drum is the percussive type. The sound from 
plucking instruments is the second. Striking on solid metal 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 405 


instruments like a gong and cymbals is the third, and the flute 
and the conch-shell have the fourth kind of sound. 

Mimamsaka: Sounds are momentary, caused in 
succession and destroyed at the next moment. They get 
weakened in expressing their own nature, so they are 
themselves not capable of meaning. If sounds were capable of 
conveying meaning, then like a substance, each letter or 
syllable would be meaningful. If one syllable could convey 
meaning, then another would not be necessary as a material 
cause to form the word. Syllables in succession being 
collocated and thus becoming meaningful are also not 
possible. Therefore, in the expression of these sounds one has 
to recognize the eternal essence (sphota) of a word expressed 
through sounds, an essence capable of expressing meaning, 
intangible and abstract, eternal, transcending the senses, 
without parts and inactive. 

Answer: This view is not correct, since sound and 
meaning cannot be related as expresser-expressed. Is this 
sphota established in itself or not? If yes, then what is the 
reason why the sphota is not available before and after the 
sound? Is it too subtle, or is there some contradicting factor? 
If too subtle, then like space the sphota should remain 
unavailable even during the time of the sound being produced. 
If the grossness of sounds appears with the removal of subtlety 
then sounds will not remain eternal, being modified. There is 
no obfuscating cause in this case like that of darkness in 
perceiving a pot. Darkness is not merely the absence of 
something, but has, like dark blue color, possibilities of 
increasing and decreasing, Therefore it is substantial. If the 
essence of words is not present ard stable intrinsically, then 
meaning cannot be implied, nor are sounds capable of 
implying meaning; on the contrary, due to being available due 
to the sound-configuration it will be considered a function of 
those sounds. Besides, if the first sound reveals the sphota of 
the word then what is the purpose of the subsequent sounds? 
If they reveal the area filled by the word then it will become 


406 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


a whole having parts and not remain division-free. Again, if 
sounds were capable of revealing the sphota, then do they 
help the sphota or the ear or both? The sounds cannot help 
the sphota (as the scent of the earth is revealed on watering 
the earth) because a sound is eternal and nothing can modify 
or increase it in that case. The ‘abstract, eternal and suddenly 
revealed sphota cannot have any modifications. A sphota also 
cannot be compared to the kohi that aids the eye, since in deaf 
ears the sphota cannot cause sound or meaning. A healthy ear 
may be helped so that it will hear the word. And if this 
function is possible also by sound the postulation of sphota 
becomes unnecessary. Thus neither of the two is aided. Then 
again, if a sound can reveal a momentary sphota where is the 
problem in their directly revealing meaning? Since they get 
destroyed immediately, how can they reveal a sphota? Even 
the lamp is not momentary, as locations/substances distant 
from it are also lit. We do not accept difference in substance 
and function, and from the substantial point of view we accept 
it as abiding, not momentary. Also a sound sphota cannot exist 
separately. A concrete and functional lamp is able to light up 
concrete and active pots, etc., but neither sounds nor their 
essence are concrete or functional. Also, if the sphota is not 
separate from the sounds, then too, being the same, it will not 
have the capacity to reveal meaning. If different, then it 
should not be available to the organ of hearing. No example 
is available which can be both abstract, eternal and yet 
concrete, noneternal and with parts. Therefore it should be 
accepted that a word is of the nature of sounds, both eternal 
and noneternal (as per relative pluralism). It is eternal from 
the material substance point of view, and noneternal in its 
modal forms as being temporarily available to the organ of 
hearing in its changing modes. 

V.24.6-8 (E692; T213-214) (2) Bonds are of two types, 
experimental and natural, and the latter is again of two types, 
having a beginning and beginningless. Forms of matter having 
harsh, smooth, etc. qualities include lightning, comets, 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 407 


waterfalls, rainbows. What is beginninglessly bound includes 
time atoms, the space-point areas of a self, the media of 
motion, stasis and space, and various living beings. 

V.24.9 (E692-693; T214-216) Effort (purusartha) 
demands method (vidhi). "Natural" (visrasd) is the opposite of 
vidhi. Experiment (prayoga) means the coming together of a 
man's body, mind and speech. Effort fully done is called 
experimental (prayogika). It is of two types, one relating to 
living beings and the other to nonliving. The bondage of lac, 
wood, etc. is that of nonliving things. Karmic matter and 
karmic helpers are related to both living and nonliving bonds. 
Bondage of karmic matter is of eight types beginning with 
veils of ignorance. Quasi-karmic bonds are related to the 
physical body. Bondage is again of five types. Securing 
chariots, with iron chains illustrates the (1) dlapana type of 
bondage. Joining bricks and mortar to build a wall or a house 
exemplifies the (2) dlayana sort. The lac in the wood is the (3) 
samsesa bondage. The bodily bindings of the material are 
fivefold, or fifteen types if the joint (4) (samyojaka) bonds are 
also taken into’ account. Bodily bondages are of two types: 
having beginning and beginningless. The eight middle regions 
of space-points occupied by a being do not separate from each 
other, so they have a beginningless bond. Others, as per their 
karmic state, expand and contract, so those bonds have a 
beginning. Fifteen (5) sarira or bodily bonds accrue to the 
body. Karma is that which is done by the collocation of the 
self in the body; therefore it is the primary cause of the slavery 
of the self. The time-periods of the stability of each type of 
bodily variety (material, transformative, karmic, fiery, and so 
on) is given in detail. 

V.24.10-11 (T693; T216) (3) Subtle and (4) gross 
things are of two types, final and relative. The final subtlety is 
in the atomic particles; the relative one is in berries, rice 
grains, etc. Similarly with the other grossness, the final is in 
the mahdaskandhas or large matter group, and the relative in 
the berries or fruits. 


408 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


V.24.12-13 (T693; T217) (5) Forms can be of six types: 
sliced (as in cut planks of wood), powdered (as in granules of 
cereals), pieces (like the broken pieces of a pot), pulverized 
(like lentils), pratara (like slivers of mica), and ?-anuchatana 
(like sparks of fire when a hot iron is beaten). 

V.24.16-17 (E693; T217-218) A body blocking the light 
causes (6) shadow. It is of two types. Those in clear 
substances, as in a mirror, are just shadows. The view of the 
Mimamsakas, that the rays of light from the eyes collide with 
the mirror and return to see themselves, is not correct. There 
is no reflection as such. If there were then the eyes should be 
able to see their face when sight collides with bare walls. 
Similarly, when the rays return, then the face that faces east 
should be facing east and not west (as in a mirror). These rays 
from the eyes cannot perceive without the assistance of the 
mind. 

V.25.1 (E695; T232) Those which transform by merely 
touching a space-point and are thus the subject of sound are 

atoms. They are very fine (subtle) and their beginning, middle 
and end are the same. 

V.25.2 (E695; T232) More gross things, that can be 
received and kept, are aggregates or particles. Systematic 
explanation of why even a two-atom aggregate, though not 
visible, is included in this description. 

V.25.3-4 (E695; T232) Both atoms and aggregates are 
plural to indicate their many varieties. Touches, tastes, smells 
and colors are atoms; sounds are groups (skandha) of atoms. 

V.25.5-12 (E695; T232-234) The immediate atom is the 
cause, it is subtlest, eternal, has one taste, one smell and one 
color, has two noncontradicting touches. It is not correct to 
say that atoms are always causes, since as aggregated they 
become effects as well. Smoothness and other qualities 
continue to originate and decay in an atom, hence it is 
somewhat noneternal and cannot therefore be called 
exclusively eternal. If the effect has not taken place it cannot 
be called a cause. A father can be called a father only after the 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 409 


son is born. An atom cannot have a shadow. The effect of an 
atom is invisible. 

V.25.15 (E696; T234) Those atoms that have bonded 
together are called groups (skandha). They are of three types: 
skandha, skandhadesa, skandhapradesa. Infinite-infinite type 
of a particular bond is a group. Half of that is.a dega and a 
quarter of that is a pradesa. Earth, water, fire and air are 
subtypes of these. Touch and sound variations are its modes. 
A pot and a cloth are the earth types of tangibles, Water too 
is a modification of matter, and it can have s:nell. It is 
incorrect to say that other scents create the scent in water and 
that it is by itself without any smell, since nowhere is there 
any water without smell. Smell is a corollary of touch, 
therefore of matter. Water has smell because it has taste, as in 
a mango. Fire too has touch and sound. Due to being the 
effects of matter, food when partaken creates the imbalances 
of the humors. Similarly air also has modes of touch and 
sound. Vata means wind. Thus wind also has touch. So the 
contention of the Naiyayikas--that earth has four qualities, 
water has only three, fire only two and air has only the quality 
of touch--is wrong. 

V.26.1-4 (E697; T240-241) The separation of united 
aggregates due to external or internal reasons is called 
disjunction. Different things coming together and unifying is 
the opposite, conjunction (samghata). The plural indicates that 
both might occur as causal conditions for the origination of 
matter groups. 

V.26.5 (E697; T241) Grammatical detail: The contact 
of two atoms causes two-atomed groups. The contact of that 
with another atom causes a three-atomed group and so on. 
Similarly, numerate, innumerate and infinite space-pointed 
contacts cause that-many-atomed groups. 

V.28 (E697; T245) Some groups become visible, others 
do not. If a group remains subtle, it will not be visible when 
other contacts occur; it must be gross to be visible. 

Question: Why are motion and stasis called 


410 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


"substances"? Earlier they were indicated as qualities. 

V.29 (E698; T247) That which exists is substance. To 
answer the question as to what is the characteristic of 
substance, it may be said that any category that is within or 
outside the purview of the sense-organs and that due to 
external or internal causes has-origin, existence and decay is 
a substance. Since the initiators of movement and of stasis 
were referred to as substances because they exist, the next 
sutra defines “existence”. 

V.30.1-3 (E698; T247-248) When any conscious or 
unconscious substance, while not abandoning its intrinsic type 
(svajati), undergoes modifications, that is origination, like a 
pot arising out of mud. The cessation of the earlier mode is 
decay (vyaya). In their eternal transforming nature substances 
do not decay or originate: as in a lump of clay and the pot, 
the clay remains. 

V.30.4-7 (E698; T248-249) Question: Quibbling, one 
may speak of a man with a staff (dandin) but they remain two 
separate substances. 

Answer: Here the contact is a unity of existence. That 
origination, abiding and decay is existence is right; they are 
not something different from substance. 

V.30.9 (E698; T249-250) Question: If they are not 
different from substance and substance is eternal, then 
origination, abiding and decay will be eternal. So we therefore 
say that origination, etc. are both different from and 
nondifferent from the substance. 

V.30.10 (E699; T250) (Answer:) This involves a 
contradiction. Whatever arguments you use to deny our 
stipulations will also in turn negate your own. So your own 
opinion is fallacious! 

V.30.11 (E699; T250-251) The substance that arises, 
subsists and decays and its modal variations are somewhat 
similar and somewhat dissimilar. So none of the extreme 
fallacies can occur. Just as due to relation the same man is 
father, son and husband, so there are many modes of 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 411 


substance that are different from the substance as such, while 
in their substantial existence they are somewhat nondifferent. 

V.31.1-2 (E699; T2S3-254) So apparently contradictory 
statements are not contradictory; rather, they represent 
recognition of different aspects of a thing from different 
perspectives. 

V.32.1-4 (E699; T255-256) Every entity has many 
aspects. Some are prominent at one time, others at another. 
Some are cognized from a modal aspect, others from a 
substantive one. . 

V.33.1-5 (E700; T259-260) "Smooth" and "rough” are 
defined. They admit of degrees. 

V.34.1-2 (E700; T60-261) "Quality" has many 
meanings. Here it refers to the having of parts. So one smooth 
atom canot combine with another smooth atom or with several 
smooth atoms, since in order to combine both entities must 
have parts. 

V.35.1-5 (E701; T261-262) Thus atoms with similar 
numbers of parts or of the same size do not bind. 

V.36.1 (E701; T262) Bondage can occur between things 
with more than two qualities, whether of the same or of 
different type. Examples are given. 

V.37.1 (E701; T268) "Larger degree" here means having 
more qualities. 

V.37.2 (E701; T268-269) "Transforms" means changing 
into another state. Together the binding creates a third unique 
aggregate. For example, yellow and blue will create green. 

V.37.3-4 (E701; T269) The Svetambara reading of the 
text here implies that two smooth entities can transform as 
two rough ones. But since this contradicts earlier statements 
it is not tenable. 

V.37.5 (E701; T269) Similar and dissimilar of minimal 
number cannot combine. All this detail of binding is necessary 
to explain that within the space-points of the self these smooth 
or rough transformed infinite space-pointed karmic items are 
able to bind due to the joining capacity of the self 


412 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(yogavyapara). 

V.38.1 (E702; T272-273) Even though qualities and 

modes are different from substance, still, just as, though there 
is no ring without the gold still a ring is different from gold, 
so it is here. 
: V.38.2 (E702; T273) Objection: "Quality" is a category 
of other schools, not of the Jain system. If there are qualities 
there should be a qualitative perspective in addition to the 
substantial and modal perspectives. 

Answer: Scriptures mention qualities. A substance has 
two forms, specific and general. The general form is with 
respect to quality, the specific with respect to mode. Thus 
since quality is inherent in the substance the substantial 
perspective covers it--there is no need of a separate qualitative 
form. 

V.38.3-4 (E703; T274) Or else, quality itself is modal, 
not origination, decay, etc., because there are no qualities 
other than modes. 

V.39.1-2 (E703; T276) Since origin and decay is 
existence and modality (quality) is substance, time also must 
be a substance. Persistence (dhrauvya) is the primary 
characteristic of time, as time always persists. Time has the 
general qualities of being abstract, unconscious, subtle, and 
has special qualities such as causing things to happen. Decay 
and origination take place in time. Thus time is a substance. 

V.41.1-4E703; T280-281) Qualities need a receptacle, 
a base. That which forever abides in a substance is its quality. 
Modes, though inherent in a substance, are revealed 
temporarily; thus substance is not their abode. 

V.42.1-3 (E704; T282-283) The Jaina way does not 
agree with the Vaisesikas who consider a quality to be 
separate from a substance. So we define transformation 
(parinama): The metamorphoses of instigators of motion, etc., 
into their selfhood is transformation. Earlier the intrinsic 
natures of all substances have been told. Transformations are. 
of two types: with and without beginning. The transformations 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 413 


of the instigators of motion and stasis are without beginning. 
Ever since they were substances they have had these 
transformations. The other external devices have a beginning 
in time. 

V.42.4 (E704; T283) Some.say that media of motion 
and stasis, space and time have transformations without 
beginning, and matter aggregates are those with beginning. 
This is not correct. Since all substances have to be considered 
with perspectives, substantial and modal. Thus all will have ab 
aeterno transformations as well as those in time. The 
difference is that the four supersensible substances have both 
types of transformation as known through the scriptures, and 
those of living beings and matter are somewhat visible. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

The summary is made by Ratna Lahiri on the basis of 
the edition and Hindi translation ("E" and "T" respectively) by 
Mahendra Kumar Jain (Bharatiya Jnanapith, Sixth edition 
2001). 

VII.1.1-3 (E533; T825) The definition of vows (vrata) 
is given as an intelligent renouncing of violence, falsehood, 
jealousy, non-self and accumulation (parigraha). 

Intrinsic qualities of violence, etc., will be taken up 
later. Their cessation (virati) is defined as the condition arising 
naturally on removal, or automatic cessation (ksaya, 
ksayopasama or upasama) of character-veiling matter that 
occurs on the rising of right character leading to automatic 
renunciation. 

VII.1.4-5 This refusal to indulge in violence arises out 
of an intelligent understanding of its consequences. 

VII.1.6 Nonviolence is the first factor mentioned as it is 
the key factor. Like an encircling fire used to protect the rice- 
fields, all other vows merely protect nonviolence as the central 
value. 

VII.1.7-9 A cessation should be applied to each of the 
renounceables separately. Each of the cessations could be of a 


414 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


number of varieties according to the difference in the kind of 
violence, etc. that is given up, but here they are meant in 
general, therefore the singular ending is used. 

VII.1.10-14 Question: Shouldn't austerities be discussed 
in the section dealing with stoppage of influx (samvara), since 
the eight type of purificatory controls (humility, walking, rules 
for eating, sleeping, sitting, truthfulness, etc.) would include 
these? 

Answer: Vows should not be discussed with influx since 
these vows are a prelude to the stoppage of influx, which then 
automatically occurs, since the inflow of matter particles is 
stopped. Vows are not identical with inflows because they 
(vows) have a vibratory phase/state (parispanda bhava). 

VII.1.15-20 (E534; T725) Early evening meal is listed 
as the sixth subsidiary vow. However, since it is included in 
the rules for daylight meals, it is not mentioned separately. 

Question: Since light is necessary, why can the light of 
a lamp or of the moon, not be permissible? Reasons are given 
why this is not acceptable. 

VII.2 Great and Subsidiary Vows. 

(E536-538; T726-728) The conceptualization of the vow 
of nonviolence and of the vow of truth. Conceptualization of 
the vows of nonstealing, abstinence and nonaccumulation. 
Analyzing the facets of nonviolent behavior. Analyzing the 
potential suffering in violence. Contemplation on friendliness, 
compassion, etc. 

(E539-541; T729-730) The need to ponder upon the 
nature of the world and that of the body in order to arrive at 
the desire for emancipation and renunciation. Contemplations 
are possible in the permanent-nonpermanent self. Qualities 
(signs) of violence. Endorsement of violence is usually by 
ascetics having some negligence (pramatta yogin). 

(E541-545; T730-733) Violence is not possible given the 
doctrine of momentariness. Qualities of falsehood. Qualities of 
non-stealing. Accepting things is not stealing. The non- 
negligent ascetic may accept objects through sense organs 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 415 


without incurring the fault of stealth. Qualities of nonself, of 
nonaccumulation {acquiring knowledge, vision and good 
conduct is not accumulation), and qualities of undertaking 
vows. Nature of mayd, untruth, etc. 

(E546-548; T733-735) Two types of vows--ascetic and 
househdider, and the subsidiary subtypes. Delineation of vows 
related to directions, qualities and education, time-bound vows 
(samayika), nature of fasting related to auspicious festivals, 
nature of enjoyment, qualities of a guest, and the higher vows 
outside the limitation of directions. 

(E549; T735) Five penalties, nature of false meditation, 
nature of exposition of sins, nature of wrongful trade, nature 
of indirect trade, nature of direction to kill, nature of 
performing a task, nature of indolent character, nature of 
accruing violence, of inauspicious hearing and avoiding 
bathing on fasting days. 

(E550; T736) Causes of indolence, violence to insects, 
etc., four types of hospitality/guests, according to provision of 
food, medicine, space, and facilities. 

(E550-551; T737) Description of voluntary death and 
its subtypes. Query answered regarding why it is not sinful like 
suicide. Method of voluntary death. 

(E551-553; T738-739) Excesses of right faith. Difference 
between praising and adulation. Why only five excesses when 
there are eight limbs (anga)? Five possible excesses of seven 
vows and good conduct. Difference between the two. Excesses 
of subsidiary vows (for householders) of nonviolence, truth, 
non-stealing and abstinence. 

(E555; T739) Definition and qualities of marriage. 
Excesses in vows related to accumulations during marriage. 
Excesses of directional vows and their subtypes according to 
intention. 
(E556-557; T40-41) Excesses of place-related vows and 
other quantifying vows regarding indulgence, voluntary death, 
administering to guests, and festival fasting 

(E559; 1741) Qualities of auspicious donation 


416 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(generosity). Special qualities due to difference in method, 
substance, giver, and receiver. These do not apply to 
momentary or eternal aspects. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

(This Chapter has been translated by N. L. Jain in Jaina 
Karmology, Parsvanatha Vidyapith Series No. 109, Varanasi 
1998. This is the "T" for the corresponding following section 
of the following summary, made on the basis of T by Potter. 
Section numberings correspond to T.) 

VIII.1.1-5 (T40-48). False belief, indiscipline and 
negligence were discussed under Chapter Six, section 5, and 
activities were discussed at 6.1. 

VIII.1.6-1 False belief has two kinds: natural perversity, 
and that gotten from bad instruction. The latter is of four 
kinds: (1) advising action (e.g., Kaukila), (2) advising inaction 
(e.g., Ulika, Kapila), (3) agnostics (e.g., Sakalya, Jaimini), (4) 
advising faith (Vasisiha). There are 363 wrong faiths in the 
world. 

Objection: Jaimini and others teach about rituals 
described in the Vedas, so how are they "agnostics"? 

Answer: Because they allow the killing of animals. 

VIII.1.13-15. Objection: Sacrifical killing of animals is 
taught in the Vedas. 

Answer: The Vedas are not scripture, since they advise 
violence. They are also inconsistent when they advise violence 
and also speak against it. Anyway, the Jain scriptures prohibit 
killing. 

VIII.1.16-27 Doubts about the authority of the Jain 
Scriptures are answered. More expressing abhorrence of 
violence whether in the course of a sacrifice or elsewhere. 
Taking life earns demeritorious karma whatever the motive. 
Vedic injunctions indicating any exceptions to this should be 
rejected as inauthentic. _ VIII.1.28 False beliefs are of five 
sorts: (1) exceptionless, denying the multiplicity of viewpoints; 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 417 


mistaken, when one adopts a viewpoint opposite to the correct 
one, (3) doubtful, not being sure about the true tenets, (4) 
reverential, accepting all gods and texts uncritically, and (5) 
agnosticism, refusing to take sides on a question. 

VIII.1.29-31 Indiscipline has twelve varieties, passions 
have twenty-five, and activities are of thirteen (or fifteen) 
kinds. Negligence has many varieties: examples are provided. 
All five cause bondage collectively as well as individually. 
Examples are given. 

VIII.1.32 Objection: There is no difference between 
indiscipline and negligence. 

Answer: There are fifteen types of indiscipline: four 
kinds of idle tales, five kinds of sense-objects, four passions 
and affections, and these are sometimes found in non- 
negligent beings. 

VIII.1.33 Objection: There is no difference between 
passions and indiscipline: both are types of violence. 

Answer: No. The passions cause one to indulge in 
violence, so they are different, as cause is different from effect. 

VIII.6.4' (T84) Objection: Are the five (sense- 
perception, etc.) kinds of awarenesss when concealed existent 
or nonexistent? If existent how can they be concealed? If 
nonexistent, like a hare's horn they cannot be concealed! 

Answer: There is no problem here. A thing can be 
existent in some respects and not in others. As substances 
visions may be concealed, though they are nonexistent-- 
concealed--with respect to one or another of their modes. Only 
existents can be obscured. So it is not that awarenesss- 
concealing karma appears in the self; rather, we can be aware 
that there is such karma there, though it does not appear. 

VIH.10.3-4 (T112) Objection: It is the proper or 


1 Since Akalanka counts what UmAsvati treats as two verses 2-3 as 
only one verse (2), all the subsequent verses are numbered one less 
in N. L. Jain's translation than the number of the passage in our 
summary of the Tattvdrthasutra. 


418 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


improper intake of food which causes life or death of a living 
being (and not one's life-span (ayus). 

Answer: Food is only the helper. Just as it is dirt that 
is the fundamental cause of the jar, and not the potter, 
likewise the fundamental cause of one's length of life is his 
life-span. This is shown as well by the fact that though hellish 
and celestial beings do not ingest food their birth and death 
cannot be due to food. 

VIlI.11 (1114-123) Each of the forty-two kinds of 
karmic outcome are defined. 

VIII.13 (T130-131) :...donation, etc.": the five kinds of 
obstructing karma are: (1) donation-obstructing , (2) gain- 
obstructing, (3) experience-obstructing, (4) repeated 
experience-obstructing, and (5) energy-obstructing. The 
difference between "experience" and "repeated experience" is 
explained as the difference between an experience had only 
once, such as a particular food or drink, and a type of 
_ experience enjoyed several times, such as sleeping. 

VIHI.15-20 (T136-140) The minimum and maximum 
duration of the karmas of each of the eight sorts distinguished 
in VIII.6-14 are calculated. 


CHAPTER NINE 

("E" and "T" references for this and the tenth Chapter 
that follows are to page numbers from the Bharatiya Jnanpith 
(Sixth Edition, 2001) as previously. The summary, based on 
the translation from M. K. Jain's Hindi, is by Ratna Lahiri.) 
(E586; T760) 1-3 Stoppage of influx of karma is known 
as samvara. All such activities of mind, body and action that 
may produce influx cease. 

6-9 Nature and types of influx. When false visions, etc. 
cease due to adequate controls, both substantial and modified 
types of influx stop. 

10-11 It is necessary to understand the fourteen stages 
eee in order to know the nature of cessation of 
influx. 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 419 


(E587-590; 1760-762) The fourteen stages are 
explained in detail. 

(E591; T763) The natural causes of each stage are 
gradually eradicated, thus resulting in the cessation of inflow. 

(E592; T764) Other causes of cessation of inflow are 
restraint, caution (samiti), virtue (dharma), reflection, 
endurance of afflictions (parifahajaya), and moral character 
(caritra). Austerities also cause destruction of karmas. Even 
though austerity results in spiritual evolution, its’ primary 
effect is dissolution of karmic particles. 

(E493; T764) Signs of liberation. 

(E593; T765) Precautonary disciplines while walking, 
in speech. Fourteen conditions of the living self Givasthdana). 
Precautions in speech, desire, eating habits. It is preferable not 
to have a place, as it would cause accumulation. 

(E595-596; T766-767) Forgivenness, etc.: ten types of 
virtuous living. The need for virtue. Higher forms of 
forgivenness: lack of ego, simplicity, total lack of greed, and 
four types of lack of desire for life, health, indulgence or 
pleasures. Truth and its related controls. Types of controls to 
be practised while walking, going for alms, especially 
nonviolence, cleanliness. Type of house from which alms 
should be sought. Lack of interest towards dress, etc., of the 
giver or the type of vessel in which alms are brought. 

(E596-598; T767-768) Eight type of purificatory rites 
should controls lapse at any time. Austerities, renunciation, 
poverty, celibacy, seven types of repentance. 

(E600-602; 1770-771) Types of contemplation of the 
ephemeral, unity, multiplicity, etc. Their subtypes and details. 
Purity and impurity. Contemplation of pros and cons of influx, 
control, dissolution, etc. 

(E604-606; 1777-784) The fourteen paths. The 
corresponding order of the stages of progress and the 
condition or state of mind. 

(E608-612; 1777-784) Importance of enduring 
afflictions. Twenty-two types of afflictions. 


420 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(E613; T782) Other views on afflictions, their subtypes 
and detailed analysis. 

(E616; T784) Four types of right character; five types 
of vows pertaining to attainment, and abandoning all sinful 
acts. 

(E618; T784) Fasting, etc.: six types of outer austerities. 

(E620-621; T785-788) Six types of internal austerities 
like expiatory practices. Nine types of atonement; need for 
atonement and detailed analysis of its subtypes. Prescribed 
atonements for various types of transgressions. The four types 
of humilities. Service to the traditional teachers. 

(E623; T788) Nature of the ideal preceptor (Gcdrya). 
Nature of teachers, s@dhu, kula, family of the tradition of 
renunciates to be included. 

(E624; T789) Types of self-study--lecturing, asking 
relevant questions, contemplation, traditional treatises, and 
sermonizing. Need for self-study. 

(E624; T789) Renunciations and subtypes thereof. Need 
for renouncing all these. 

(E627-633; 1791-795) Four types of meditation; 
detailed analysis of each, subtypes of each, and indications of 
omniscience related to type of meditation, the last being the 
highest. 

(E634-635; T795-796) Secondary verbal awareness 
transitions (vicadra) and scriptural knowledge (vitarka). 

(E636; T797) Phases in rise of right vision. 

(E636-638; T797-799) Five types of passionless ascetics 
(nirgrantha). Details of each stage of their evolution. 


CHAPTER TEN 
(E639; T800) Causes for the rise of omniscience in 
stages. Phases in the dissipation of attachments; their three 
instruments. : 
(E640; T801) Causes of liberation. The universe has an 
end even if no beginning. Two methods of actionlessness and 
phases thereof. 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-RAJAVARTTIKA 421 


(E643; T802) Liberated beings (siddha) do not 
backslide. Their interaction. Their utterly blissful existence. 

No transition of space-points due to absence of 
personality-producing karma. 

The state of emancipation is not negative. With 
destruction of karma-related bonds, the self rises upwards to 
higher regions. Causes of rising upwards. 

(E645; T803-804) Examples of rising upwards. Reason 
for not exceeding the outer limits of the universe. 

(E646-648; T804-805) Subtypes of liberated beings with 
a view of their areas of occupation. 

(E649-650; T806-808) Phases of states from arousal of 
right vision to ultimate liberation. Stages of contemplation of 
the ultimate essentials. Infinite bliss of the free. 


HARIBHADRA SURI (770) 

H. R. Kapadia in his Introduction to Vol. 105 of the 
Gaekwad's Oriental Series (Baroda 1947) (hereafter referred 
to as Kapadia 1947) discusses the dating of this author, 
especially as regards his relation to Samkaracarya, who is 
frequently regarded as having lived at the same time. 

S. R. Bhide and V. B. Inamdar, in their edition and 
translation of Haribhadrasuri's Samardichchakatha (Sixth 
Embodiment), Poona 1953, pp.3-4, provide the following 
information about the author's life and times. "He was the 
pupil of Jinadatta) who was an ornament of the 
Vidyadharagaccha. He obeyed the command of the 
Svetambara Acarya Jinabhata or Jinabhadra according to 
Munichandra, a commentator of one of our author's works. 
He was born (in) Chitrakiita, the modern Chitor. He was a 
Brahmin by birth since it is mentioned in the Prabhavakacarita 
of Prabhacandra that he was the purohita of king Jitari or 
Jitashatru...(I)t was chiefly Haribhadra who was responsible 
for the use of Sanskrit by many Svetambaras in their writings 


422 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and discussions. He was converted to the Jaina faith only after 
he had received the customary orthodox training of a Brahmin 
pundit." 

"After his initiation into the Jaina order he left Chitor 
and started his peripatetic career like all other monks. The 
principal scene of his activity was North Gujarat and 
Rajasthan...He must have wandered for a considerable length 
of time and studied the Buddhist philosophy also, side by side 
with the propagation of his own." 

He is known to students of Buddhist thought for his 
commentary on Dignaga's Nydyamukha. 


35. HARIBHADRA SURI, Anekantajayapataka and Tika 
or Vrtti thereon 

This work and its commentary are edited with 
Municandra Suri's commentary by H. R. Kapadia in two 
volumes (#s 88, 1939 and 105, 1947) of the Gaekwad's 
Oriental Series, Baroda. In the second, 1947 volume, pp. xvii- 
xxi (Kapadia 1947), some information about this work is given 
(p. xix): "Subject--Exposition of avagraha etc. occurs in Vol. I, 
p. 175 and ff.” (i.e., in Vol. 88 of the Gaekwad's Series 
containing the first part of Kapadia's translation of the work), 
"and examination of the definition of pratyaksa and _ its 
nirvikalpatva is dealt with in this section. Refutation of 
samavaya is-‘met with on pp. 93-94 and that of sphota on p. 
391 & ff. Apoha is treated on p. 318 and ff. In the last section 
the Jaina view about austerity is stated. It emphasizes the fact 
that mortification of flesh is not the goal of the Jainas. On the 
contrary, it is to be discouraged, in case it interferes with the 
natural working of sense-organs and the mind. Holy reflections 
are also a part and parcel of austerity which has been clearly 
and correctly defined in Vol. II" (i.e., the Volume from which 
this passage is quoted) "on pp. 218-219." 

"Style--Though Haribhadra is not a grammarian (at least 
no work on grammar is attributed to him), he is concise in 


HARIBHADRA SURI 423 


expressions, chaste in language and precise in thoughts as if 
he is writing a work on grammar. He gives examples and 
mentions nydayas to illustrate the discussions in question..." 

As for the commentary, which Kapadia knows as 
Uddyotadipika or Vyakhya, the following information comes 
from the same source: "It is in prose intercepted by verses 
most of which are quotations. Dissolution of compounds, 
elucidation of difficult words and that of relative pronouns, 
incidental mention of the source of quotations, and the things 
indicated by addi are the most prominent features of this 
commentary." 

Kapadia also attributes to Haribhadra still another 
commentary in Sanskrit, basing himself on two references, one 
in the previously-mentioned commentary itself. He says that 
there is a manuscript of this commentary at the Bhandrakar 
Oriental Research Institute and that he has described it 
elsewhere.” 

Kapadia also notes that this work and its commentary 
mention at least five others of Haribhadra's works, viz., 
Anekantasiddhi, Atmasiddhi, Sarvajfiasiddhi and its Tika, 
Syadvadakucodyaparihadra and Sdastravarttasamuccaya are 
referred to. Of these, the fourth is not known to the Editor of 
this Volume. 

It should be noted that several works not listed here are 
attributed to Haribhadra Suri. Our list should be viewed as a 
sample based on our judgment that the works listed below are 
among the more philosophically-oriented than others. 


36. HARIBHADRA SURI, Anekdantapraghatta 
NCat I, 220 directs us to p. xxviii of (the first volume 
of) Kapadia's edition of Haribhadra‘s #35 above, constituting 
Gaekwad's Oriental Series 88, for information on this text. 


424 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


37. HARIBHADRA SURI, Aneka@nta(vada)pravesa 

Kapadia 1947, p. xxii, notes: "This is a very small work 
in Samskrta. It is composed probably with a view to helping 
the beginner to master the bigger and more difficult work 
Anekantajayapataka. This looks like its epitome with 
reproductions word for word in several places with this 
difference that here the Yogacara section of AJP is not at all 
treated." 

"The total extent of Anekdnta(vada)pravesa is 720 
§lokas, and it mainly deals with five topics viz. (1) 
sadasattvavada, (2) nitydnityatvavdda, (3) samdnyavisesatva- 
vada, (4) abhilapyanabhi-lapyatvavdda, (5) moksatvavada The 
views of the non-Jaina schools regarding these topics are 
represented in the beginning. The major portion of the work 
is occupied by the refutation of these views; for, it covers pp. 
9 to 65 out of 1 to 65." 

"This work together with Tippanaka was published at 
Pattan in the Hemacandracarya Granthavali in 1919 A.D. It 
was translated into Gujarati by the late Manilall Nabhubhai 
Dvivedi in 1899 A.D. and this translation was published by 
Baroda, Educational Department." 


38. HARIBHADRA SURI, Anekantasiddhi 
V. P. Johrapurkar, in his Introduction (in Hindi) to his 
edition of Bhavasena's Visvatattvaprakdsa (Sholapur 1964), p. 
62, identifies this work as by the author of work #35. Kapadia 
is not so sure; see p. xxiii of Kapadia 1947, ibid. 


ANEKANTASIDDHI 425 


39. HARIBHADRA SURI, Laghuvrtti on Anuyogddvdrasitra 
Kapadia 1947, p. liii, finds a number of titles used to 
designate this commentary--e.g., Vivrti, Sisyahitd, Vivarana. He 
indicates (p. liii) that the work has been published by R. K. 
Samstha, Ratlam 1928. 


40-41. HARIBHADRA SURI, Two Vrttis on the 
_ Avasyakasttras 

Kapadia 1947 says (p. liv) "The extent of (the 
Brhadvrtti) is mentioned as 84,000 Slokas_ in 
Aricalagacchapattavali"; the length of the shorter (Laghu) he 
gives as merely 22,500 Slokas! He also reports that the shorter 
commentary "contains elucidation of Jfdnasaya (Skt. 
Dhyanasataka) of Jinabhadra Gani." 

The smaller commentary has been edited a number of 
times; cf. Bibliography, Third edition, for details. 


42. HARIBHADRA SURI, Dharmabindu 

On this work we have a brief description by H. R. 
Kapadia 1947, pp. xxvi-xxvii: "This is a Samskrta work. It is 
divided into eight adhyayas (sections). It is mostly in prose. It 
opens with a verse. The treatment is in a sutra style. Section 
I deals with the duties of an ordinary house-holder whereas 
the next with those of a special one. In the latter is pointed 
out the way in which a religious sermon should be delivered. 
Section III] explains the vows of the Jaina laity, their 
transgressions, etc. Sections IV and V furnish us with a picture 
of the Jaina monastic life. Activities of the two types of the 
Jaina saints form the subject-matter of section VI. Section VII 
deals with the fruits of religion, and the next with the 
description of a Tirthankara and the nature of the liberated." 
Numerous editions are noted in our Bibliography, Third 
edition, p. 332. 


426 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


43. HARIBHADRA SURI, Laghuvrtti on the 
Jivajivabhigamasitra 
Kapadia 1947, p. lix: "There is . palm-leaf Ms. of it in 
A Descriptive Catalogue of Mss. in the Jain Bhandaras at 
Pattan (by L. B. Gandhi on the basis of the notes of the late C. 
D. Dalal), Gaekwad's Oriental Series 76, Baroda 1937. 


44. HARIBHADRA SURI; Lokatattvanirnaya 

Kapadia 1947, pp. xxxiv-xxxv: "This is a small work in 
Samskrta. From the opening verse it appears that the title of 
this work is Nrtattanigraha; but its popular title is somehow 
Lokatattvanirnaya, and it occurs in the colophon. This work 
comprises 147 (75 + 35 + 37) verses in different metres. 
Thus this work gets divided into three sections. In I, 23-31 
undesirable activities of Visnu, Sambhu, Sakar, Haladhara, 
Skanda, Arya (Ambika), Vinayaka, Brahman, Surya, Anala, 
Soma and Indra are referred to. The author condemns these 
acts; but he is sufficiently broad-mineded to bow to one who 
is really dispassiontate, though he may be named as Brahman, 
Visnu, Sankara or Hara. This work describes the nature of the 
universe (I, 42-75) and states various views about its creation. 
The next topic is the nature of the soul (II, 3-11). This is 
followed by the exposition of the doctrine of karman, etc., as 
propounded in the non-Jaina schools of philosophy (H, 12-35). 
Here the universe is explained according to the views of those 
who lay undue emphasis on svabhava, niyati or parinama. It 
then states the Jaina view (III, 1-37) and thereby refutes the 


LOKATATTVANIRNAYA 427 


non-Jaina ones previously noted...It may be observed that 
some of the verses of this work practically tally with those of 
Bhagavadgita". These are listed (p. xxxv), as well as parallels 
with certain Upanisads. 

In addition to the editions listed in Bibliography, Third 
Edition, p. 333 Kapadia mentions an edition with Gujarati 
translation published in 1921 as Hamsavijayaji Jaina Free 
Library Series 10. 


45. HARIBHADRA SURI, Vivarana on the Nandisitras 

This work is referred to by Kapadia 1947, p. lx, as 
Nandyadhyayanatika. "It has certain Paiya passages in common 
with Nandicuffi. There are quotations in Samskrta and Patya. 
Of them, one on p. 81 is the first verse of Aptamimamsa, and 
one on p. 53 is from Pramdnavarttika (1, 36)...(T)here is 
mention of the names of Jinabhadra Gani, Siddhasena and 
Vrddhacarya. Of these, the first is referred to as the 
spokesman of those who believe that kevala-jfiana and kevala- 
darsana do not co-exist, the second that of such persons who 
hold the opposite view, and the third, of those who look upon 
these two upayogas as non-distinct....Siddhasena, here referred 
to, is not to be confounded with Siddhasena Divakara..., for 
his view tallies with that of Vrddhacarya." 

The work is published by R.K.Samstha from Ratlam in 
1928. 


46. HARIBHADRA SURI, Vyakhyda on a Paficasittraka 

The Paricasitraka is one of many Jain works of 
unknown vintage which are revered for providing sound 
advice for the Jain aspirant. The name of its author is 
unknown; some suspect that Haribhadra himself may have 
composed it.” In any case Haribhadra has written a 
commentary on it. We provide Jambuvijaya's summary of the 
work itself, which no doubt leans heavily on the commentary. 


428 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


"E" references are to the edition contained in Jambuvijaya’s 
publication and the summary itself appears on pp. 33-37. 


Summarized by Jambuvijaya 


1. (E1-23) Paficasittraka’ opens with an homage to the 
Arhats (Tirthankaras) who thus expound their doctrine: Here 
(in this world) the soul is eternal; and because of its 
association with karman since beginningless time, it wanders 
in this external samsara, which is full of misery, suffering, and 
grief. One can put an end to this samsdra by adopting the 
right dharma (which consists of right faith, knowledge and 
conduct). One can obtain this dharma by annihilating sinful 
karmans; and these are destroyed by ripening (or fully 
developing) tathabhavyatva which is inherent in each 
individual. To ripen or fully develop this capability there are 
three means: (i) CatuhSarana-gamana (taking the four-fold 
refuge, namely, that of the arhats, the siddhas, the sadhus and 
the (Jina-) dharma. (ii) Duskrtagarha (Censuring one's evil 
deeds) and (iii) Sukrtasevana (Praising or approving of good 
deeds of others). 

One should cherish ideas and feelings like the 
following: "I am ignorant and sinful and subjected to delusion 
since eternity; I am ignorant of what is advantageous or 
disadvantageous to me. May I know it (through the grace of 
the Arhats, etc.) and may I refrain from doing what is 
disadvantageous and practise only what is advantageous. With 
the conviction that it is to my advantage may I always and 
ever be of service to all beings." 

The inauspicious karmans of one who reads or hears 
and reflects on the import of this stitra are destroyed and the 
auspicious karmans produce good results like a sovereign 
drug, when taken as per physician's prescription. 

2 (E24-33) When a strong desire to adopt the anuvratas 
(partial renunciation of violence, etc.), meant for a sravaka 
(householder) rules one's heart, one should first reflect on 


PANCASUTRAKAVYAKHYA 429 


their nature, their inherent goodness, their fruit accompanying 
one in one's next birth, their beneficence, their being the 
indirect cause of liberation, their being difficult to practise and 
also the dreadful consequences of violating them such as being 
subject to delusion, and other difficulties in the way of 
adopting them. One should, thereafter, adopt them in 
accordance with the prescribed rules and to the best of his 
abilities. These vows are: Partial renunciation or abstention 
from (i) any injury to living beings (ii) telling lies (iii) theft 
(iv) sexuality and (v) possessing property. He should also 
adopt the three gunavratas: (i) dig-virati--limiting one's 
movements to a particular direction, east, west, etc.; (ii) 
bhogopabhoga-(or upabhoga-paribhoga)parimana--setting a 
limit as to articles of use, such as food, drink, clothing, etc.; 
and (iii) arthadandaviramana--refraining from all unvirtuous 
or unprofitable acts; and the four siksdvratas: (1) samayika-- 
equanimity or inward peace obtained by desisting from all 
evil; (ii) desavakasika--limiting every day the distance to be 
traversed in that particular direction (to which one has limited 
one's movements under the vow of digvirati); (iii) 
pausadhopavasa--observing fast on the eighth and the 
fourteenth day of each fortnight and on the fuil-moon day and 
the new-moon day (thus a Jain layman is asked to observe six 
fasts in a month); and (iv) atithi-samvibhdga--offering charities 
to guests (atithi) or to pious men of the Jain sect, such as 
monks, nuns, laymen and laywomen. 

After adopting these vows the Sravaka should strive 
hard to practise them. He should always study and reflect on 
the doctrine of the Jinas. For the doctrine is the greatest 
antidote against the poison of delusion, water that 
extinguishes the fire of hatred (and other passions), medicine 
for the disease of karman and the wish-yielding tree which 
produces the fruit of liberation. He should avoid all evil things, 
contact with irreligious people, and all immoral habits 
acquired from beginningless time. Compassionate to all beings, 
he should avoid whatever is disliked by men in general and is 


430 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


against the ways of the world. He should take to religious 
people who are his friends. He should observe the code of 
conduct prescribed for a householder always and ever 
guarding the activities of his mind, body and speech. He 
should avoid all sinful activities. He should not even think of 
causing harm to others. He should make gifts, enjoy himself, 
keep retinue and make savings in proportion to his earnings. 
He should not torment his attendants but should be 
compassionate to them. He should develop, however, no sense 
of attachment to them. All the souls are separate from one 
another and the sense of ownership or mineness is the root- 
cause of bondage. He should be circumspect in carryng out his 
duties as householder keeping all the while in mind his station 
in life, the family to which he belongs, the preceptor whose 
pupil he is, and the vows he has made. He should think of his 
age and the duties that are proper for that age. He should 
reflect on the harsh realities of life: "The pleasures of the 
senses are worthless, transient and bitter or unpleasant in the 
end. Death is dreadful, all-destructive and strikes one at any 
time, and that it is irresistible, and that it leads to the cycle of 
birth and death again and again. The only remedy against 
death is dharma, which is ali pure, practised by great 
personages, beneficial to one and all and the source of the 
highest happiness of liberation." 

3 (E34-44 The Sravaka, who has deeply reflected on the 
stage of a monk, who is disgusted with samsdra and who is 
intent on attaining liberation, should strive to enter the ascetic 
order without offending others, say one's parents. Offending 
others (one's parents) is an obstacle in the way of entering the 
ascetic order. No good results from a wrong beginning. If the 
parents are not already enlightened, he should first try to 
enlighten them with the following arguments: "The life, which 
is successful both here and hereafter, is really praiseworthy. 
Karmans done in company yield the fruit in company. If we 
take to asceticism in company, we would not be separated 
from one another for many births to come. Otherwise, we 


PANCASUTRAKA-VYAKHYA 431 


would be separeated from one another like the birds who 
frequent a tree and the fly away. Death is irresistible and 
imminent. Human birth is as difficult to obtain as a gem fallen 
in an ocean. There are many other states of existence, no 
doubt, but they are full of sorrow clouded by delusion, end in 
misery and are not suited to the practice of dharma. It is in 
human existence also that one can attain liberation. The state 
of liberation is fit to be attained as it is free from birth, old 
age, and death and as there is no separation from: desired 
things nor union with undesired things; there is neither 
hunger nor this nor any other trouble or suffering. In that 
state the soul is totally independent and free from the feelings 
of love, hatred, etc., and is full of peace and happiness and 
free from all kinds of trouble. 

Contrary to this state of liberation is the nature of 
samsa@ra. It is unsteady. Even the so-called happy are really 
unhappy; the existent is non-existent; and every thing is 
transient or unreal like a dream. Therefore one should not be 
attached to this samsara." 

If the parents refuse to be enlightened he should 
arrange for their maintenance. It is gratefulness indeed. 
Compassion is the very mother (source) of the elevation 
(exaltation) of dharma. He may, if need be, employ deceitful 
means to obtain the consent of his parents to enter the ascetic 
order. For, after all, following the dharma contributes to the 
welfare of all. If they refuse permission, he should desert them 
with a view to bringing the medicine of true _ belief 
(samyaktva) to them. They might, perchance, be saved. He 
should, however, give no offence to his parents--keeping in 
mind the glorious example of Lord Mahavira who did not 
enter the ascetic order during the life-time of his parents, who 
were very fond of him. He should however, remember that 
any separation from the parents for a beneficial purpose or a 
good cause need not be understood as desertion, though it 
really is so. The cause however is more important when he 
sees the long-term benefit of his ascetic life. 


432 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Thus without causing pain to others he should first 
worship the Jinas, pay homage to the monks, give gifts to the 
needy, put on auspicious garments and at an auspicious hour 
enter the ascetic order in the presence of a good (spiritual) 
preceptor. He should scrupulously practise the rules of conduct 
prescribed for a monk and never violate them. 

4 (E45-65) To a monk who seeks liberation, a clod of 
earth and gold are alike, a friend and a foe are the same. Such 
a monk becomes free from the sorrows resulting from 
attachment and enjoys happiness and peace of mind (resulting 
from non-attachment). He stays with his spiritual teacher. He 
is devoted to him, he is modest, knows the true nature of 
things and rightly believes that nothing else is more beneficial 
than a stay with his preceptor. He attentively studies the 
sacred texts and carefully observes various injunctions. He 
knows that if the religious injunctions studied by him are not 
observed, they are as good as not studied at all. The non- 
_ observance leads neither to liberation nor heaven; trangression 
leads, no doubt, to calamities but this transgression may be 
regarded as the remote means of liberation--as it forms the 
first step on its path. The monk observes the five samitis 
(carefulness in walking, speech, etc.) and the three guptis 
(restraint of body, mind and speech), together regarded as the 
eight mothers of the Doctrine. He knows that just as a child 
deserting its mother perishes, even so a monk who repudiates 
these eight mothers perishes. 

He knows very well that right conduct is like a safe 
island in this ocean of samsdra, a lamp in the darkness of 
delusion. Without any delusion and any eagerness for attaining 
the fruit of liberation, he observes the rules of right conduct. 

Becoming purer and purer day by day he is released 
from sinful karmans. Thereafter with his mind all pure, he 
practises self-control and austerities and undistracted by 
troubles and suffering caused by hunger, thirst, etc., he gets 
rid of karmans and experiences the joys of peace of the soul 
like a leper who has been restored to health through 


PANCASUTRAKA-VYAKHYA 433 


treatment. 

Knowing the mind of his preceptor he acts up to it and 
thus honors him. "One who accepts me from the bottom -of 
one's heart also respects his preceptor"--this is the teaching of 
the Lord. Any religious acts performed without respect to his 
preceptor are really as good as not performed. Such acts, like 
the fasts, etc., observed by an unchaste woman, do not bring 
him the fruit of liberation but make him wander in this 
samsara and therefore are condemned by the wise. 

Respect for one's preceptor is the surest means to attain 
liberation. The monk, who has the highest respect for his 
preceptor, never swerves from the right path to liberation. He 
comes to possess spiritual qualities and he excels even gods in 
respect of happiness. He swims against the current of this 
worldly life and as he observes thoroughly the duties of a 
monk he is called a yogin 

5 (E66-81) The mumuksu, strictly observing the rules 
of conduct for an ascetic, attains perfection, realises his true 
self. He is neither sound, nor color, nor odor, nor taste, nor 
touch (because of his siddha state he is absolutely free from 
these qualities of pudgala-matter). He exists eternally without 
a form--in a formless state. He is all bliss. This bliss of a 
siddha (a liberated soul) is absolute and independent of 
anything and everything else. He has absolutely no touch or 
contact even with space. It is the very nature of soul to rise 
upwards when completely freed from karmans and enjoy its 
innate and infinite (faith, knowledge, power and) bliss. This 
bliss cannot be compared with anything else. An idea of it, 
however, could be given by an illustration. The bliss or perfect 
happiness of a siddha, attained after conquering the internal 
enemies like attachment, hatred, etc., is infinitely greater than 
the happiness one gets when all of one's enemies are 
destroyed, diseases cured, the riches attained and the desires 
fulfilled. The perfect happiness of a siddha cannot be known 
to others, just as the happiness of an ascetic cannot be known 
to a non-ascetic or as that of good health to a sick man. The 


434 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


soul, even if bound by karmans from beginningless time, can 
be separated from them as gold from ore (in accordance with 
the illustration of kdficana and upala). The concepts of 
bondage and liberation are best--satisfactorily and logically-- 
explained if they are related to the different states of the soul 
without bringing in the (Samkhya) concept of didrksda (desire 
to see). Again, karman is neither identical with the soul, nor 
is it imaginary; and liberation is not just the absence of 
worldly existence. It is not of the nature of the destruction of 
santana--like the blown-out/extinguished flame of a lamp (as 
held by same followers of Buddha). 

In brief, the perfect happiness enjoyed by a liberated 
soul is infinite. The liberated souls--siddhas--dwell at the top 
of the universe (lokdkasa). Infinite liberated souls dwell in as 
much place as occupied by one siddha (liberated soul). The 
liberated soul, as soon as freed from the eight-fold karmans, 
rises upwards to the top of the universe just as a gourd-fruit, 
with its eight layers of clay completely loosened, rises to the 
surface from the river-bed. 

This doctrine of the Jinas is free of all defects and is 
appreciated by persons who do not attract karmans afresh and 
who follow the path of right conduct. Never should it be 
imparted to undeserving or unqualified persons. This 
instruction is issued with a view to favoring the undeserving 
or the unqualified in accordance with the illustration of 
amakumbhodakanyasa (pouring water in an unbaked earthen 
jar). Just as water when poured in an unbaked jar destroys 
that jar even so the imparting of secret doctrine ruins the 
undeserving or unqualified. Not imparting it to them is, 
indeed, compassion shown to them. 


47. HARIBHADRA SURI, Saddarganasamuccaya 

A brief survey of some philosophical systems. "ET” 
here is the edition with translation by M. Sivakumara Swamy, 
Bangalore 1977. There are many other editions, see 
Bibliography, Third Edition. 


SADDARSANASAMUCCAYA 435 


1-3 (ET3-5) After a salutation to Jina, the propounder 
of the doctrine of viewpoints, it is said that there are only six 
darganas: Buddhism, Nyaya, Samkhya, Jain, VaiSesika and 
"Jaiminiya", i.e., Purvamimamsa. 

4-11 (ET11- 20) Buddhism. The four noble truths; five 
aggregates; twelve sense-bases, two instruments of true 
cognition. Perception is defined as free from conceptual 
construction and nonerroneous. 

12-32 (ET24-51) Nyaya. God (deva) is described as 
creator and destroyer, all-pervasive, eternal, omniscient and 
eternally knowing. Sixteen categories (tattva) (as in 
Nyayasiitra 1.1); four instruments of true cognition; three 
kinds of inference (purvavat, etc.); fallacies; ways to lose an 
argument. 

33-43 (ET55-65) Samkhyas are divided into theistic 
(sesvara) and atheistic (nirisvara). Twenty-five principles 
(tattva); three gunas; three instruments of true cognition. 

44-58 (ET70-81) Jainism. Jina described as passionless, 
omniscient, having destroyed all karma. Nine categories 
(tattva); right awareness, action and yoga; two instruments of 
true cognition, immediate and mediate. Their objects have 
endless properties. 

59-67(ET84-89) Vaisesika. They are said to agree with 
Nyaya about god(s) (devata). Six categories (tattva); nine 
substances; twenty-four qualities; five kinds of motion; two 
kinds of universals, higher (satta) and lower (substanceness, 
etc.); individuators and inherence standardly explained. (No 
mention of absence as a category.) 

68-77 (ET92-98) Jaimintyas deny an omniscient, 
authoritative god; so the meaning of the eternal Vedas needs 
to bé ascertained through studying the Vedas and inquiring 
into dharma, i.e., Vedic injunctions. Six instruments of true 
cognition. 

78-end (ET99-end) Carvaka. This is the sixth system if 
you count Nyaya and Vaisesika as one system; it denies God, 
liberation, merit and demerit and their results. There is 


436 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nothing beyond what is grasped by the senses. The body is 
only an aggregate; consciousness comes when earth, water, air 
and fire (or light) combine. It is foolish to seek the unseen 
(adrsta). | 


48. HARIBHADRA SURI, Sarvajfiasiddhi and Svopajfia 
thereon 

Kapadia 1947, pp. 1-li, tells us: "The text is a Samskrta 
prakarana. It opens with..(a)...verse whereby the author 
salutes a Tirthankara..The purpose of composing 
Sarvajriasiddhi is dilated upon in v. 2-9. Verses 10-21 state the 
arguments usually advanced by those who do not admit an 
omniscient being. These are refuted in prose passages followed 
by 25 verses. Then we have a prose passage and then again 22 
verses...The text “has been published in 14 pages...by R. K. 
Samstha, Rutlam, in 1924 A.D." The com(mentary) is so far 
unpublished.” 


49. HARIBHADRA SURI, Sdstravartasamuccaya and 
Dikprada thereon 

Kapadia 1947, pp. xxxviii-xli: "The text is in Samskrta 
in verses. It examines, refutes and reconciles some of the 
views of the non-Jaina schools and sects in a spirit which is 
highly laudable as the author respectfully refers to the 
opponents and does not stoop low as some critics do...The text 
consists of 700 verses whereas the extent of this commentary 
(Dikprada) comes to 2,250 slokas (one sloka being equal to 32 
letters). The main topics dealt with in this work are:" 

"G) The establishment of the existence of ‘soul’ and 
refutation of the Lokayata system of thought, (ii) the Jaina 
viewe about violence (himsda), and the denouncement of the 
himsa sanctioned by the Vedas, (iii) the theory of causation- 


SASTRAVARTTASAMUCCAYA 437 


five factors examined, (iv) refutation of the Samkhya system, 
(v) criticism of the views of Dharmakirti and other Bauddhas, 
(vi) the Jaina view about reality, (vii) refutation of 
Brahmadvaita, (viii) establishment of omniscience and 
refutation of the Mimamsaka view in this connection and (ix) 
the nature of liberation." 

Kapadia identifies a number of passages quoted by 
Haribhadra in this work from Dharmakirti, Santaraksita, 
Bhartrhari, Kum@rila and the Bhagavadgita. 

The work has been edited many times; cf. Bibliography, 
Third Edition, p. 334. 


50. HARIBHADRA SURI, Sodasakaprakarana 

Kapadia 1947, pp. xliv-xlvi, discusses this work, and we 
quote him: "This is a small treatise written in Samskrta, in 
verse, in Arya. It is divided into 16 adhikdras each of which is 
styled as sodasaka in the printed edition..." 

"The subject of each of the adhikdras is as follows:--" 

"(1) Examination of dharma (dharmapariksa), (ii) 
preaching (desana), (iii) characteristics of dharma 
(dharmalaksana), (iv) characteristics of one desiring dharma 
(dharmaicchukalinga), (v) attainment of transcendental 
principles (lokottaratattvaprapti), (vi) a Jaina temple (Jaina 
mandira), (vii) a Jaina idol (Jaina bimba), (viii) ceremony of 
consecration ({pratisthavidhi), (ix) nature of worship 
(pujasvariipa), (x) fruition of worship (pujaphala), (xi) 
characteristics of srutajfiana), (xii) renunciation (diksd), (xiii) 
modesty to a preceptor (guruvinaya), (xiv) types of yoga 
(yogabheda), (xv) nature of one to be contemplated 
(dhyeyasvariipa) and (xvi) balance of mind (samarasa)." 

In addition to the several editions listed in Bibliography, 
Third Edition, p. 334 one should add "edited by R. K. Samstha, 
Rutlam, samvat 1992." 


438 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


51. HARIBHADRA SURI, Laghuvrtti or Dupadupika 
on Umasvati's Tattvarthasttra 

Kapadia 1947, p. lxiii-lxiv: "For some reason or other 
the entire commentary, if composed by Haribhadra, is not 
available. What we have is a composition of at least three 
persons. The commentary at least up to a portion of VI, 23 
(i.e. pp. 1-275) is by Haribhadra. It is named as 
Dupadupikda..." Kapadia assigns the remainder of the text as he 
finds it to Yagsobhadra Stiri and Gandhahastin Siddhasena (the 
author of our #63). The publication referred to above (of 
'what we have’) is from Ratlam in 1936. 


52. HARIBHADRA SURI, Upadesapada 

Kapadia 1947, p. xxiii: "This is a work in Paiya in 1039 
verses in Arya." (Kapadia refers to it by its name in Paiya, viz., 
Uvaésapaya.) "It is mainly related with dharmakathanuyoga. 
It points out, by means of the ten well-known illustrations, the 
immense difficulty one experiences in securing a birth as a 
human being. This is followed by the topic, viz., the study of 
the Jaina scriptures. Then we have a detailed exposition of the 
four types of intelligence and subsequently the treatment 
about the method of receiving and imparting religious 
instruction..." 


53. HARIBHADRA SURI, Yogabindu 
"ET" refers to the edition and translation by K. K. Dixit 
in L.D.Series 19, Ahmedabad 1968. The summary is by Potter. 


Section One: Introductory 
1-7 (ET3-4) Omniscience to Siva, beginningless and 
endless. The work does not contradict Yoga texts; indeed, it 
shows their consistency. The consistency stems from their 
common aim, which is to lead one to liberation. 


YOGADRSTISAMUCCAYA 439 


8-11 (ETS-6) If the self (@tman) were the only entity 
there is, it would always have selfness (Gtmatva) without 
differentiation, and both bondage and liberation would be only 
conceptual constructions. And bondage and liberation also 
require that a self be capable of connection with karma. Since 
this capacity is beginningless the connection .must also be 
beginningless. 

12-16 (ET6-7) An "agent" is so-called because of his 
capacity, without which he would not be called so. An atom 
cannot be a self even by a god's agency. Otherwise all usage 
becomes merely figurative, which is absurd, since a "figurative" 
use depends on their being a literal one. The yogic path is 
possible only if one knows how things really are. 

17-18 (ET7) The self goes under different terms in 
different systems--e.g., purusa, ksetra, jiiana--and what is other 
than the self is called, e.g., avidya, prakrti, karman. The 
connection between these two is called, e.g., bhranti, pravrtti, 
bandha, while the agent who favors the self is called sastr, 
vandya or avikarin. 

19-23 (ET8-9) Right yoga is established when the above 
factors have properly functioned. But if the self either existed 
or did not exist from all points of view all effort (toward 
liberation) would be futile. (Right) yoga is that which violates 
neither common experience nor scripture--it should not be 
accepted on sheer faith. 

24-29 (ET9-10) One should base oneself on scripture 
that does not contradict perception or inference. Then one can 
_ gain both sensory and supersensory insights. Otherwise one 
will remain confused by verbal differences--e.g., avoidance of 
killing is called yama by some, vrata by others. 

30-35 (ET10-12) Four different kinds of yoga, each 
superior to its predecessor, are called "self-concerning" 
(adhyatman), “helping through fulfilling vows" (bhdvana), 
“concentration” (dhyana) and “destruction of (all mental) 
operations" (vrttisamksaya). 

Other ways of classifying are into fundamental 


440 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(tattvika)--i.e., not merely to please common folk--vs. 
nonbasic, continuous (anubandha) (i.e., uninterrupted)/not 
continuous, and involving defilement (sdsrava)/not involving 
defilement. 

36-41 (ET12-13) The greatness (mahatmya) of yoga is 
celebrated in similes. 

42-67 (ET13-19) The dreams of yogis come true. It is 
not unreasonable to believe in the existence of things such as 
the self that are supersensible but vouched for by those 
capable of yogic perception. The merits and good results of 
yoga are developed. 

68-85 (ET19-23) The self-concerning way (updya) is 
the highest (parama). But it can only be practiced by one in 
the last half of his last life as subject to karmic products 
(pudgalavarta) and who practises (proper) conduct. The 
karma adhering to oneself differs from that adhering to 
another, and this is due to the self concerned. 

Objection: That is essentialism (svabhavavdda), and 
amounts to a denial of causality altogether. 

Answer: No, since it is not one's nature (svabhdva) 
alone that is the cause, but that nature as occurring at a time, 
(a place), etc., since the effect does not arise at any time, 
(place,) etc., but only when the appropriate conditions occur. 

86-108 (ET24-30) Prior to the last half of his. last life a 
person is subject to samjnas and is frustrated. Such persons 
may observe dharma but just to please the populace 
(lokapakti). Thus they are not prepared for the self-concerning 
way, any more than a plant is prepared to be a god. Such a 
person is not prepared to practice yoga. So what others have 
called preparatory performance (pirvaseva) is as I see it 
something that happens prior to the last half of the last life, 
since it still involves attachment. But this rule does not apply 
to those who will not be bound again (apunarbandhaka), who 
have become disgusted with worldly existence. (Gopendra is 
quoted, using. Samkhya terms (prakrti) to make the point.) 

109-149 (ET30-40) Preparatory performance consists of 


YOGABINDU 441 


four things: worship (puja) of teachers (guru) and gods, good 
conduct, penance, and nonhatred of Uperanon: These are 
explained. 
150-163 (ET40-43) Prior to the last half of his last life 
one is attached to life and unwilling to try to escape it. During 
that last half of the last life he is free from these and only 
acquires minimal karma. Five types of yogic performance are 
described: (1) "poison that kills immediately", desire for 
immediate benefits (visa); (2) “poison that kills slowly", desire 
for benefits to come (gara) (3); failure to act at all 
(anusthdna); (4) the cause of failure to breed further karma 
by acting (taddhetu), (5) the nectar of proper performance 
enjoined by the jinas (amrta). The performance of those in the 
last half of the last life tends to be of type (4). 

164-177 (ET43-46) The selfs penchant for acquiring 
karma is natural and beginningless, and is to be known as 
defilement (mala). As it diminishes in the last half of the last 
life that penchant is reduced to the point where one becomes 
free from restrictions even though still acquiring karma. That 
is why that self is no longer as much disturbed by the atoms 
(of karmic matter); he experiences great joy. 


Section II: One Who Will Not Be Bound Again 

178-193 (ET47-50) Such a one is described as one 
whose qualities oppose the faults of an ordinary world-enjoyer, 
whose merit is increasing. A technical and a broader use of the 
term are distinguished. The meaning of the term is that such 
a one has the minimal qualities that ready him for preparatory 
performance. 

194-199 (ET51-52) How such a one should consider his 
state. 

200-202 (ET52-53) All activities from this state onward 
constitute yoga. 

203-209 (ET53-55} One who has "untied the knot" 
(bhinnagranthi) is oriented toward liberation; all his activities 
constitute yoga, for he has perceived the highest state. 


442 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


210-251 (ET55-65) The three attributes (of yoga) are 
(1) thoroughly pure performance, whose object, nature and 
eventual results are pure; (2) reliance on correct scriptures, 
(3) display of the conditions of right conduct derived from 
attention to one's own thoughts, to his teacher's, and for good 
omens. These last contribute to successful completion of a task 
(siddhisadhana). The one who will not be bound again is 
worthy of great praise. 


Section Three: Right Vision 

252-262 (ET66-69) When the knot has been untied one 
achieves right vision, fondness for studying scriptural texts, 
devotion to dharma, to sages, gods, etc. 

263-269 (ET69-71) Such a man is said to have passed 
through three sorts of transformation called yathdpravrtta, 
aptirva and anivrtti. The first of these lasts as long as 
ignorance does; the second occurs when the knot begins to be 
untied. The man of right vision, one who has passed this 
point, can only acquire a fraction as much deluding karma as 
one who has not progressed this far. 

270-274 (ET71-72) This man of right vision is called by 
others a Bodhisattva. Such a one will become a Tirthankara. 

275-279 (ET72-73) Normally acquisition of right vision 
involves passing through successive different states.. 

280-286 (ET4-75) The untying of the knot indicates 
that self will not be reborn. 

287-290 (ET75-76) Whereas a Tirthankara has 
compassion for all others, a Ganadhara is one whose knot is 
untied but who confines his compassion to his relatives, and 
a Mundakevalin one whose knot is untied but acts for his own 
liberation. 

291-317 (ET76-83) There are various views about the 
factors that determine one's progress through these various 
stages. One view is that it depends on the distinctive causal 
conditions which happen to operate from time to time; 
another view is that it is because of the particular moral 


YOGABINDU 443 


‘behavior displayed at a specific time by the aspirant; still 
another attributes the specific occasion for progress to God or 
to prakrti. However, if these last-mentioned views are 
interpreted as meaning that God or prakrti brings progress 
about without regard for the aspiring selfs accomplishment, 
this involves a mistake: neither God, prakrti or karma operate 
independently of the selfs intentional action. Kalatita has 
remarked: "What we refer to as 'God' above is called by 
different names in other systems--‘liberated' (mukta), 
‘enlightened’ (buddha), 'perfected' (drhata). The differences of 
opinion among the various schools as regards the nature of the 
supreme self or God are to my way of thinking meaningless, 
being the functions of poor and misplaced arguments about 
matters beyond our comprehension whose claimers are really 
arguing about which terminology to use to speak of a 
commonly agreed upon topic." While this is well said, it must 
be remembered that talk about a distinction, e.g., between 
God, prakrti and selves only makes sense if each individual of 
these sorts has a specific nature, since whether the behavior of 
each is predestined (sa@msiddhika) or not is known if at all 
only to yogins; the rest of us can only appeal to scripture. 

318-339 (ET83-88) Discussion of the problem of free 
will, i.e., whether how things happen is due to fate (daiva), 
i.e., karma, or to a person's intention (purusakdra). Both are 
required for an action to take place. Sometimes one is 
prominent, sometimes the other. Now some have said that 
karma alone determines events at a specific time. But this 
must be clarified: the karma that is "fate" is previously 
performed action, while one's intentional action is an act 
performed now, and since the former cannot operate except 
through the latter it follows that both are required. 
Furthermore, each of the two can render the other 
undetermining, though neither can completely erase the 
other's operation, since "erasing" is itself an action and requires 
both, as previously indicated. 


444 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


340-351 (ET88-91) Final words in praise of the one 
who has right vision. 


Section Four: On the One of Right Conduct 

352-371 (ET92-97) One of right conduct has belief, 
respects wisdom, admires merit, is persevering, and performs 
noble actions that are within his capacities. The man of right 
conduct is examined from five viewpoints, comprising the four 
viewpoints distinguished in 30-35 above plus one more, viz., 
evenness (samata), which is made the fourth of five. Then the 
question may arise: how are these virtues related as found in 
(1) one who will not be bound again, in (2) one of right 
vision, and in the present case of (3) one of right conduct? To 
answer this the distinction previously drawn between 
fundamental (tattvika) and non-fundamental is applied to yoga 
as practiced by these three kinds of seekers. Thus (1) (and 
presumably (2)) are commonsensically held to be self- 
concerning and vow-fulfilling while (1)s have those traits from 
the higher point of view. A once-returner's (sakrdavartana) 
yoga is not fundamental, but one of right conduct has 
fundamental concentration, evenness and destruction of all 
operations. 


Section Five: Miscellaneous 

380-404 (ET100-106) There are different sorts of self- 
concerning €adhyatmika) seekers. (1) There are those who 
repeatedly recite (japa) mantras to some deity. (2) There are 
those who practice a properly considered ritual followed by 
self-assessment. (3) There are those who worship a deity 
accompanied by repentance and who develop friendliness, etc. 
toward all living beings. 

405-418 (ET106-110) Destruction of all operations 
(vrttisamksaya) is the state where one no longer is able to be 
beset by karma. The qualities of a self who has attained that 
state are described, as well as the means to gain it, viz., study 
of scripture, inference and repeated meditation by one who 


YOGADRSTISAMUCCAYA 445 


has achieved the required preparatory steps. 

419-437 (ET110-115) The distinction between 
samprajiidta and asamprajiidta samadhi is explained as the 
distinction between complete awarenesss and knowledge. 
Some yoga specialists have, however, questioned the 
possibility of attaining knowledge, while others say that it 
cannot be equated with liberation. But since consciousness is 
the essential. nature of a self, and since consciousness is the 
same as knowledge, the self must naturally have knowledge. 
Only if this is so can there be any awarenesss of anything. So 
failure to know must be due to obstructing (pratibandhaka) 
factors, and when they are absent awarenesss is unobstructed 
and so, complete. 

The analogy between consciousness and fire is only 
partial, since (e.g.) that there are things that are incapable of 
being burnt is not intended to imply that there are things 
incapable of being known. Indeed, since we can know the 
general properties of any object whatsoever it should follow 
that any self can know the specific features of any thing 
whatsoever, and in that sense the self is a knower. 

438-457 (ET115-120) Objection:' No one knows 
everything; who cares how many insects there are in the 
universe? Rather, the wise man knows the worthwhile things; 
otherwise we should worship vultures! 

Answer: To know the difference between the 
worthwhile things and those that are not is impossible for one 
who is not a knower. 

Objection (by a Samkhya): The self cognizes what is 
determined by buddhi. 

Answer: But since Samkhya attributes essential 
consciousness to the self (purusa) we fail to see why it 
shouldn't be capable of cognition whenever there is nothing 
blocking. 


1 Identified by K. K. Dixit as Dharmakirti: indeed, 439-443 are 
verses I. 31-34 of Pramanavarttika. 


446 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Samkhya: The liberated self cannot have awareness at 
liberation, since the internal organ is absent then. And 
anyway, what we call cognition is a property of the buddhi 
(here, mahat) which is itself produced from prakrti. 

Answer: How does it get this property? 

Samkhya: It is analogous to the way a crystal takes on 
the color of an object reflected through it. 

Answer: But the crystal will not shine unless there is 
something shiny nearby to be reflected in it. (Likewise, a self 
will not experience things unless it can reflect things presented 
to it--thus, it must have the capacity for "reflection", i.e., 
consciousness. ) 

Samkhya: However, a liberated self cannot cognize 
anything since the required instrument(s) (analogous to the 
shiny thing) are absent then. 

Answer: Certainly not--the whole world is present then! 

Samkhya: But there is no internal organ (analogous to 
.the crystal) then! 

Answer: However, consciousness at the time of 
liberation does not need an internal organ, being rid of 
defilements. And if it isn't conscious of the world when rid of 
the defilements it is not yet free from those defilements. 

Samkhya: At the time of liberation the self has no 
desire to know, and thus does not know anything! 

Answer: If so, your own thesis that a self is just 
consciousness is refuted. Your texts which speak of the 
cessation of awareness in a liberated self must be speaking of 
ordinary, worldly awareness. After all, those same texts of- 
yours teach that a self attains liberation through self- 
knowledge. 

458-477 (ET120-125) Buddhist: By realizing that there 
is actually no self at all, no ego, one stifles attachment and 
obtains liberation. 

Answer: Do you mean that there is no self at all, or just 
that the self is a momentary entity (like everything else, 
according to you). If there is no self at all then all thinking 


YOGABINDU 447 


(about philosophical matters) is purposeless, since there is no 
one to propose or teach any views whatsoever. 

Buddhist: All of that (thinking, teaching, etc.) is error 
(bhranti), like a virgin's illusion of childbirth. 

Answer: Even an illusion is something! There wouldn't 
even bé such an illusion if there is no virgin--a barren woman's 
son doesn't have experiences! 

As for the second reading (of your claim, viz., that a 
self can at best only exist fora moment), this runs afoul of the 
problem that in order for something to cause an effect it must 
persist long enough to do so, i.e., it must persist to at least a 
second moment, the moment at which it causes the effect in 
question. And since there is the continued existence of a self 
through at least those two moments it can also continue to 
exist through subsequent moments at which the subsequent 
events in its existence take place. 

Furthermore, self-attachment is not merely the result of 
bad karma (and so is not avoided by this (Buddhist) thesis of 
the momentarinesss of the self), since the thought of oneself 
as "I" can perfectly well arise at a moment even given the no- 
self theory. Self-attachment in fact can be terminated only by 
achieving liberation through developing complete 
nonattachment. 

Besides, if there is only consciousness, and if karma is 
merely a conceptual construction, why is liberation not always 
present?!-. 

476-489 (ET125-128) The theory that the self is eternal 
is also mistaken. To say of something that it is eternal is to 
attribute to it essential unchangingness. But if a self is 
unchanging it cannot be both a doer and an enjoyer, since 
given that the self is eternal it must be continually one or 
continually the other but not both, for otherwise it would have 
to be admitted that the self undergoes transformation. 
Furthermore, if a self is eternal] it cannot be first bound, then 
liberated. So the path of yoga would be merely illusory on this 
view. 


448 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


490-506 (ET128-132) So a self must be capable of 
undergoing transformation when involved with karma, and so 
yoga becomes a meaningful operation capable of bringing 
about liberation, for liberation has been described as "freedom 
from ignorance", "wisdom" (buddhi), "destruction of all 
karma". Experiencing the trance state called sailesi one gains 
the state called "destruction of all mental operations" 
(vrttisamksaya) (i.e., the fourteenth stage of progress, the 
absence of a self's fitness to come into contact (with karma) 
(samyogatabhava)). 

Objection: If fitness for contact is a selfs very nature 
how can it be absent? 

Answer: That is just what it is to be "fit". And a natural 
quality of a thing can stop without the thing's stopping. 
Consider a new jar: the jar's newness is its nature, but 
eventually it loses that nature while itself cantinuing to exist-- 
this is a matter of ordinary experience. 

511-527 (ET133-137) Final criticism of some opposing 
views. Someone holding a view designated as purusadvaita, 
that only the self exists, cannot distinguish a bound self from 
a liberated one, since there is allowed nothing other than the 
self which could make the difference, and since a self is 
allowed no parts, etc. 

Concluding remarks. 


54. HARIBHADRA SURI, Yogadrstisamuccaya 
"ET" references are to the edition and translation bv K. 
K. Dixit in Lalbhai Dalpatbhai Series 27, Ahmedabad 1970). 
The summary is based on the table of contents provided in ET 
p. 12 and the paragraphs of the summary which follows. 


Summary by K. K. Dixit 


I. Introductory Remarks 
1 (ET16) The benedictory stanza. 


YOGADRSTISAMUCCAYA 449 


2-11 (ET17-21) The three types of yoga: (1) yoga by 
intention (icchdyoga), (2) yoga by scripture (‘astrayoga), (2) 
yoga by self-exertion (samarthyayoga). The latter, which is 
superior to the others and provides omniscience, is s beyond 
words. 


Il. A. General Account of the Eight Yoga Viewpoints 
12-20 (ET24-29) The eight are divided into two groups 
of four; see below. 


Ill. The First Four Yoga Viewpoints 

21-40 (ET30-38) The first (mitra). Here vision is weak; 
vows are observed (cf. stanzas 214-218 below); one tirelessly 
performs one's religious duties and accepts one's fellow beings. 
One who has arrived at his final embodiment prior to release 
commits only pure acts involving association with saintly 
personages, offering them service and benefitting therefrom. 
All this occurs at the stage, called yathapravrttikarana, the first 
part of the process one passes through while progressing 
through the first four stages; the last such part is followed by 
granthibheda or "untying the knot", and leads thence to the 
fourth stage. 

41-48 (ET38-40) The second (tard) features practice of 
restraint, intense liking for works on yoga and reverential 
service to pure yogis. 

49-56 (ET40-42) The third (bala) involves development 
of meditative postures to combat distraction and maximize 
attentiveness. 

57-64. (ET42-45) The fourth (dipra) features breath- 
control. 


IV. Transitory 
65-75 (ET46-51) The state of mind where the nature of 
things is determined is called vedyasandyapada, a subtle 
understanding that conduces to liberation, destroys karma and 
cognizes an object fully. This state of mind is lacking in those 


450 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in the first four stages of progress but present in the next four. 
Those without it are subject to karmic frustrations leading 
necessarily to unhappy states, even though they may be (in 
the first four stages) listening to scriptures, etc. One in this 
state knows good from bad. 

76-85 (ET51-54) Denunciation of persons who lack the 
subtle understanding described in the preceding section. 

86-152 (ET55-72) Attainment of this subtle 
understanding releases a person from dependence on bad 
reasoning (kutarka), which is responsible for lack of faith and 
produces vanity. This bad reasoning is found mainly in the 
form of futile rejoinders (jati). They are futile because the 
actual nature of things is beyond our comprehension, so that . 
between two alternative claims there is no definitive way of 
settling the issue. E.g., one might claim that fire when near 
water makes things wet and water when near fire burns 
things, since that is their nature, and the issue cannot be 
settled merely on the basis of examples; on that basis any 
proposition can be justified. And logic is of no help for 
providing knowledge of supersensible things, while scripture 
can help there. Indeed, a combination of reliance on scripture, 
right belief and conduct, and practice of yoga does provide 
knowledge of such things. (Vyasa's Yogabhasya quoted). 

Since there cannot be several omniscient beings who 
cognize things in different ways, one should place his faith in 
the omniscient person even though one may not fully 
understand him. Similarly, the commonplace distinction 
between devotion to variegated and nonvariegated gods does 
not refute the thesis of an omniscient person: variegated gods 
are worshipped by those who want to be reborn in that way, 
while those who wish to transcend worldly existence worship 
a nonvariegated deity. Thus there are various religions, but 
they all reach the same end by different paths, leading to 
different grades of understanding: buddhi based on sense- 
objects, jfidna based on scripture, and asammoha based on 
proper action. Action based on the first results in rebirth, 


YOGADRSTISAMUCCAYA 451 


action based on the second leads serially to liberation for 
kulayogins (cf. vv. 210-211 below), while proper actions, 
being pure, lead immediately to liberation. This liberation has 
various names--saddsiva, parabrahman, siddhatman, tathata-- 
but they all denote the same thing; there is no real difference 
about the highest truth as is supposed to exist among different 
beings (counted as) omniscient (by the various schools). 

The differences among the teachings of the schools only 
appear different because of the force of the karma of their 
speakers and/or listeners, and are useful each for their 
appropriate level of hearer. Ordinary folk like us cannot 
fathom it. But saints speak only what is true and beneficial to 
others. The truth is not available through inference (quoting 
Bhartrhari), so those desiring liberation should not depend on 
reasoning (tarka); indeed, for such a one it is wrong to be 
attached to anything at all. Rather one should emulate and 
honor great persons, avoiding inflicting pain even on those full 
of evil. 


V. The Last Four Yogic Viewpoints 

153-161 (ET74-76) The fifth (sthira) viewpoint unties 
the knot of ignorance and comes to see the world as child's 
play, a juggler's trick, a mirage, a dream. 

162-169 (ET76-78) The sixth (krantd) viewpoint 
involves focussed concentration undertaken for the joy of 
others. Devoted to pure conduct through the power of dharma 
one is beloved by others and devotes himself to that dharma 
derived from scripture alone, realizing all sensory things as 
illusions. Because of the presence of cogitation (mimamsa) 
delusion does not arise, and only good things result. 

170-176 (ET78-81) The seventh (prabhd) viewpoint is 
that of concentration where one enjoys the pleasure arising 
from the mastery derived from discrimination, peace. From 
this standpoint frustration, including pleasure, is just what is 
dependent on another, while satisfaction comes from one's 
mastery born of meditation. This is the great path of no 


452 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


return called by yogis by various names such as 
prasantavahita, visabhagapariksaya, sivavartman, and 
dhruvadhvan. : 

177-186 (ET81-84) The eighth (para) comprises that 
supreme altered state of consciousness (samadhi) that is free 
from attachment even to itself, completely natural, beyond 
likes and dislikes. This state begins with the second 
apurvakarana (= the eighth stage of progress), and after it 
one gains knowledge, omniscience, and soon realizes 
liberation. 


VI. Liberation 

187-206 (ET85-91) This liberation is a taking on of new 
properties in place of older ones (the self retains its nature). 

Objection: A thing does not exist before or after it 
occurs. 

Answer: Then it may be either eternal or nonexistent. 

Objector: Why can't we say "this object does not exist 
now": after all, you say “the object has become otherwise 
now". 

Answer: But on your view, unlike ours, this will involve 
contradiction. Furthermore, if an entity that existed becomes 
absent, that absence must have a beginning, so it should also 
have an end; thus the entity will reappear once more! 

Objection: Destruction is just the factor's state of 
destruction. 

Answer: Then it cannot last beyond that moment, or if 
it does, the same problem will remain. 

On the other hand, if an entity is eternally existent 
there can be no liberation from it or of it. So the self must 
have certain features, e.g. the desire to see, that literally cease 
so that (for Samkhya) liberation from the transformations of 
prakrti can cease. Otherwise transformation will be eternal and 
apply to everything and everyone eternally, and no liberation 
will be possible. 

Objection: The appearance of difference is illusory. 


YOGADRSTISAMUCCAYA 453 


Answer: Then why is it experienced? There is no 
evidence for difference being illusory. 

Objector: Yogic awareness provides the evidence. 

Answer: But if yogic awareness is really different from 
other awareness your position if contradicted. 

One who is still bound cannot be free, nor vice-versa. 


7. Concluding Remarks 

207-228 (ET93-98) There are four kinds of yogis. 
Among them only two--viz., kulayogins and 
pravrttacakrayogins--are eligible (for the study of this treatise); 
the other two are either underqualified or overqualified. 
Kulayogins are those who are either born in a family of yogis 
or practice yoga, not others, e.g., gotrayogins (who are merely 
born into the right gotra). These kulayogins are enemies of 
none, are devoted to teachers, gods and twice-born ones, 
kindhearted and humble and of controlled senses. The 
pravrttacakrayogins are those who have mastered two kinds of 
external restraint (yama) and aspire to master the other two, 
thus desiring to listen to scripture, etc. Each of these two 
types, then, are entitled to practice yoga 

Like the five noble traits (of noninjury, truthtelling, 
nonstealing, sexual control and lack of greed), the four kinds 
of external restraint called intentional are also well known. 
The first, intentional restraint, consists in the desire to practice 
restraints, to hear words concerning them, etc. (The second), 
active restraint, is the neverending practice of restraints with 
a calm mind. (The third), firm restraint, is practice of restraint 
without fear of counteragents, and (the fourth), accomplished 
restraint, is restraint by a pure self for the assistance of others. 

‘Three unfailing circumstances are: modelling oneself 
after good persons, performing vows, etc., and receiving from 
the noble ones a series of favors leading to liberation. 

"Concluding claims and disclaimers for this text. 


454 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


55.HARIBHADRA SURI, Yogavimsika 
"ET" references are to the edition and translation by K. 
K. Dixit in Lalbhai Dalpatbhai Series 27, ibid. The summary is 
found in Lalbhai Dalpatbhai Series 4, ibid. 


Summary by K. K. Dixit 


1-2 (ET113-114) "This work gives a very brief sketch of 
Yoga. It does not refer to the initial stages, but discusses only 
the advanced stages of spiritual development. All spiritual and 
religious activities are considered by Haribhadra as Yoga. But 
special importance should be attached, he says, to these five 
kinds of activities: (1) practice of proper posture (sthana), (2) 
correct utterance of sound (irnd), (3) proper understanding 
of the meaning (artha), (4) concentration on the image of a 
Tirthankara in his full glory (alambana), and (5) concentration 
on his abstract attributes (analambana). Of these five, the first 
two constitute external spiritual activity (karmayoga) and the 
last three internal spiritual activity Gndnayoga)." 

3-4 (ET114) "These activities can be properly practised 
only by those individuals who have attained to the fifth or a 
still higher stage of spiritual development progress. One 
reaches the consummation of these activities in the following 
order. At the outset one develops an interest in these activities, 
and comes to have the intention to practise them. Then he 
takes an active part in them, and begins actual practice 
(pravrtti). Gradually he becomes steadfast in them and 
achieves stability (sthavirya). Finally he gains mastery (siddhi) 
over the activities.” 

5-17 (ET114-119) “Each of the five activities is 
mastered in this order. First of all one is to master the posture, 
then correct utterance, then the meaning. After that one 
should practise concentration upon an image, and finally one 
should attempt at mastery over the concentration upon the 
abstract attributes of an emancipated soul.” 

18 (ET119) "This is a full course of Yoga practice. One 


YOGAVIMSIKA 455 


may practise these spiritual activities either out of love or 
reverence or as an obligatory duty prescribed by scriptures or 
without any consideration. When a spiritual activity is done 
out of love or reverence it leads to worldly and other-worldly 
prosperity. And when it is done as a duty without any 
consideration whatsoever, it leads to final emancipation." 

19-20 (ET119-120) "Of the five-fold activities 
mentioned above, the last two, viz., concentration of the mind 
upon the image of a Tirthankara or upon the abstract 
attributes of him are the most importance. The word 
andlambana does not mean ‘devoid of any dlambana (object)' 
but only ‘devoid of a concrete alambana’...The distinction, 
therefore, between the alambana and the andlambana Yoga is 
that in the former one concentrates upon an object with form 
while in the latter on a formless object..." 


56. HARIBHADRA SURI, Yogasataka 

"E" and "T" references are to the edition by Muni Sri 
Punyavijayaji and translation by K. K. Dixit found in Lalbhai 
Dalpatbhai Series 4 (Ahmedabad 1965). The summary is 
found at pp. 23-24 of the same volume. 

The subject matter of this work closely resembles that 
of the Yogabindu, and most of the topics found in that work 
are summarized in the Yogasataka. 


Summary by K. K. Dixit 


1-8 (E1-5; T77-78) "This work opens with an exposition 
of the nature of higher-view (niscaya) and commonsense 
(vyavahara) yoga. The coming together in one soul of the 
three attributes, viz., right vision!, right awarenesss and right 


1 Prof. Dixit renders samyagdargana as "right faith" and 
samyagjfidna as "right understanding”. We .replace this, following 
our established practice in this Volume, translating the former as 


456 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


conduct is nifscayayoga, because it brings about connection or 
union with moksa, while those things which lead to and are 
thus the causes of these three, viz., the. right vision, etc. 
constitute vyavahdrayoga. It includes such things as attendance 
on and worship of the preceptor, a desire to listen to the 
scriptural topics and the obeying of the scriptural injunctions 
and prohibitions as per one's capacities." 

9-16 (E6-9; T78-79) "Next, the question as to who are 
the persons qualified for yoga is discussed in the manner of 
the Yogabindu using Samkhya and the Jaina terminology. The 
classification of the seekers into apunarbandhaka and 
samyagdrsti, etc., as also their characteristics, are described 
precisely in the same manner as in the Yogabindu." 

21-22 (E11-12; T80) "The spiritual discipline of each 
seeker is not described in detail, but it is broadly pointed out 
that the spiritual discipline of each seeker suitable to his own 
stage is nothing but Yoga because it is generally devoid of bad 
or evil thoughts and further because it satisfies the definitions 
of Yoga as recognized in all the systems.” 

25-26 (E13; T81) "The preliminary preparation finds 
mention here in a different manner and not under the name 
of purvaseva or yogabija. It is called laukikadharma, which 
comprises non-oppression of others, charity to the poor and 
helpless, worshipful treatment of the preceptor, the deities and 
the guests." 

38-50 (E19-24; T82-84) "Then Haribhadra describes 
certain rules, principles and means, both external and internal, 
by means of which the seeker can bring about his spiritual 
development from the existing stage to the next higher stages." 

51-52 (E25; T84-85) "One should decide the propriety 
or otherwise of one’s own activity on the basis of 
introspection, on the basis of what other people say about him 
and on the basis of the purity of body, mind and speech 
(suddhayoga). Further, he should keep company with those 


"right vision” and the latter as "right awarenesss". 


YOGASATAKA . 457 


who are superior to him in. spiritual development, should 
reflect on the nature of worldly existence and the passions that 
bind the soul. He should resort to external means such as 
penances, self-surrender to the preceptor, etc., for the removal 
of inauspicious karmas like fear, etc. These are the means to 
be employed by developed seekers. A novice, however, should 
first benefit from such means as the study of scripture, going 
on a pilgrimage, etc." 

59-80 (E28-35; T86-89) “After knowing the meaning of 
the scriptures he should take recourse to introspective self- 
inspection, to find out if there are, in his own self, the inner 
flaws like attachment, aversion, delusion or false belief, etc. 
Further, Haribhadra gives an elaborate description of the 
method of reflection on the objects of attachment and 
aversion, etc., and their results for securing a better 
concentration of the mind." 

81-82 (E35-37; T89) "Lastly, Haribhadra gives us a 
glimpSe into the mode of eating and drinking proper for a 
seeker. This part of the work mainly describes the 
characteristics of the proper mode of begging alms from the 
householders." 

83-85 (E36-37; T89) "All the aforesaid means gradually 
bring about the annihilation of inauspicious or sinful karma 
and eventually liberation through the acquisition of auspicious 
karma."” 

88 (E37) "A Bodhisattva can commit a bad bodily act 
but never a mental wrong, since his mind is pure." 

92-100 (E39-44) "If one completes his yoga in this life 
he is released from bodily, vocal and mental acts and achieves 
liberation of an absolutely pure type. If he has not completed 
yoga in this life he is born again as a human being and 
continues his yogic practices, just as some people pick up their 
activities from their dreams when they wake up." 

"The time of one's death is indicated by various signs (a 
deity, a star or constellation). One should be careful to purify 
one's mind through fasting, etc., at the time of death, for the 


458 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


colorings in the next life are detetermined by one' s final 
actions here, even if one has good colorings in this and 
previous lives." 


57. HARIBHADRA SURI, Brahmasiddhantasamuccaya 
The manuscript of this work was discovered by 
Punyavijaya Muni when sorting through old leaves of Jain 
Bhandaras. Dalsukh Malvania reports that "Rev. Punyavijayaji 
is of the opinion that this treatise too may be the work of Ac. 
Haribhadra"® The text is published with Punyavijyaya's edition 
of #56. Yogasataka, pp. 47-76.™ 


58. HARIBHADRA SURI, Samyaktvasaptati 

Kapadia 1947, p. xxiv: "This is a small work in Paiya in 
70 verses, and it deals with right faith and its purity...In Patya 
it can be...named as Sammattasattari, Damsanasattari and 
Darisanasattari as well..." 

The work has been published along with a commentary 
by Sanghatilaka Suri called Tattvakaumudi in the D.L.J.P.Fund 
Series as No. 35 in 1916. 


59. HARIBHADRA SURI, Darsanasaptatika 
Kapadia 1947, pp. xxiv-xxv: "As suggested in the 
opening verse, this Paiya work...explains in verse the religion 
to be practised by the Jaina laity." 
It is not published as far as we know. 


60. HARIBHADRA SURI, Dharmasamgrahani 
Kapadia 1947, pp. xxv-xxvi: "It is composed in Paiya in 
1396 verses. It deals with various topics such as the definition 
of dharma and its niksepas (connotations or aspects), 


DHARMASAMGRAHANI 459 


‘refutation of the Carvakas, establishment of the existence of 
the soul and its characteristics, exposition of the eight kinds of 
karman, attainment of right faith, its varieties, distinguishing 
features, five kinds of knowledge, vows of the clergy, 
establishment of omniscience and bliss in liberation." 

On p. xv Kapadia remarks, in connection with a 
discussion concerning the temporal relations between the lives 
of Haribhadra and Samkaracarya, "Neither Haribhadra has 
mentioned, the name of Sankaracarya in any works of his nor 
has the latter that of the former in any of his works. But this 
proves or disproves nothing about the priority or posteriority 
of one or the other. On the contrary the exposition of the 
topics such as bhutavaicitryasiddhi, bhitacaitanyotpatti, 
ksanikatvanirasa, bahyarthasiddhi and samavayanirasa treated 
in Dhammasangahani (v. 65-67, 76, 77, 168, 310 and 228- 
330) and in Paficdsaga, is an imitation of Sariraka-bhdsya of 
Samkaracarya. So I am inclined to infer that this bhdsya was 
seen by Haribhadra... 

Kapadia reports the work together with the commentary 
of Malayagiri Siri in two parts in the D. L. J. P. Fund Series 
1916 and 1918, and the text is published in Rsabhadevaji 
Kesarimalaji Samstha, Ratlam 1928, and an alphabetical index 
of this and other works is published from Ratlam in 1929. 


61. HARIBHADRA SURI, Vimsavimsika 

Kapadia 1947, pp. xxxv-xxxviii: "This work in Palya 
consists of twenty sections. Each one of them except the 
fourteenth comprises twenty verses (gathds) and is hence 
known as visiyd (Skt. vimsika)." 

In section (adhikara) 1, "verses 11-15 enumerate the 
names of the twenty visiyds, and they give us an idea of the 
contents of this work." 

Section 2 (anadi) "proves that the world is made up of 
five astikdyas, is beginningless and is not created by any 
superhuman agency." 


460 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


"Some social practices and observances based upon the 
family traditions and customs of the country form the main 
theme of" Section 3 (kulaniti). 

"The last existence preceding final emancipation is 
called caramaparivarta, known also as apunarbandhaka and 
nivrttadhika@rapravrtti. Herein-every activity of the human 
being is directed towards the attainment of salvation. This is 
the theme of" Section 4 (caramaparivarta). 

"In v. 14-15 five views regarding the causality of the 
universe are noted and evaluated." 

Section 5 (bijadi) “compares the religious life with a 
tree." 

“Attainment of right faith is the main subject of" Section 
6 (saddharma). 

Section 7 (dana) “deals with three kinds of 
endowments, viz., right knowledge, safety and religious 
utility." 

"Worship of the Deity and its varieties and sub-varieties 
are treated in" Section 8 (pijavidhi). 

In Section 9 (Sravakadharma) "the life of the Jaina laity 
is expounded." 

Section 10 (sravakapratima) "deals with the postures of 
a Jaina householder." 

In Section 11 (yatidharma) "there is exposition of the 
life of the Jaina monastic order." 

In Section 12 (Siksd) "religion is compared with a 
kingdom and a perfectly religious monk with a monarch. 
Religious instruction is its central theme." 

Section 13 (bhiksa) "explains the forty-two faults to be 
avoided by the Jaina clergy while accepting alms." 

Section 14 (tadanarayasuddhilinga) discusses the 
factors which act as obstacles in partaking the alms obtained 
in a faultless manner.” 

"Confessions of faults and atonements are the respective 
topics of’ Sections 15 (aloyand, Skt. alocand) and 16 
(prayascitta). 


VIMSAVIMSIKA 461 


In Section 17 (yogavidhdna) "v. 1: yoga is defined as an 
activity leading directly to salvation. Verse 2 mentions the five 
divisions of yoga. Of them the first two comprise karmayoga 
and the last three jfidnayoga). Each of these divisions has four 
varieties, and each of them four sub-varieties. Thus yoga is of 
eighty types. In v. 8 there is mention of anukampd, nivvesa, 
samvega and pasama respectively. Verses 17-20 mention. the 
four varieties of good practice. This visiya does not deal with 
the initial stage of spiritual development but rather the mature 
one...” . 

"Omniscience is the central theme of" Section 18 
(kevalajfiana). 

"Various type of the liberated souls form the subject of" 
Section 19 (siddhavibhakti). "These have for their basis the 
condition of life in their last birth as a human being. That 
emancipation is not the sole right of males but is equally 
shared even by females is ably discussed in v. 6-12." 

Section 20 is titled Siddhasukha. 

The text of this work, together with a number of other 
Jain treatises, is published by R. K. Samstha, Ratlam in 1927. 


62. HARIBHADRA SURI, Tattvaprakasika 

Kapadia 1927, p. 50: "This is practically a Palya work 
in verse. It is divided into twelve sections (adhikaras). They 
consist of 335, 352, 102, 41, 115, 155, 9, 30, 109, 51, and 
140 verses respectively. Their respective topics are: nature of 
God, characteristics of pseudo-preceptors, nature of a real 
preceptor, right faith, the Jaina householders, postures 
(pratima) of the Jaina laity, their vows, instincts, lesyds, 
meditation, wrong belief and alocana." 

The title of this work in Paiya is Sambohapayarana or 
Tattapayasaga. Some gathyds are published by Jaina Grantha 
PrakasSaka Sabha from Ahmedabad in 1916. 


462 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


63. HARIBHADRA SURI, Astakaprakarana 

Kapadia 1927, p. xxiii: "This work...deals with thirty- 
two astakas. Each of them except the last consists of eight 
verses, and the last has ten verses. Only the first sixteen 
astakas have each a_ significant title. Of them 
Atmanityavaddstaka, Ksanikavaddstaka and Nitydnitydstaka 
may be here noted." 

"The work has been commented upon by Jinesvara Suri 
in samvat 1080 (i.e., 1028 A.D.). The Patya portion occurring 
in this commentary has been rendered into Sanskrit by his 
disciple Abhayadeva Siri. The text together with the 
commentary and the Sanskrit rendering was published by the 
late Mansukhbhai Bhagubhal, Ahmedabad." No date of 
publication is provided. 


64. GANDHAHASTI SIDDHASENA (760), Tika or Bhasya on 
Umasvati's Tattvarthasutra 

M. A. Dhaky comments: "The third Siddhasena is 
Gandhahasti (c. A.D.690-770)...He was both an agamika as 
well as a darsanika pandit".» This author has frequently, 
though probably erroneously, been identified with the author 
of the Nyaydavatara (see #22 above).. 

The following summary is culled from Nathmal Tatia's 
edition and translation of Umasvati's Tattvarthasitras with the 
combined comentaries of Uméasvati, Pijjyapada and 
Siddhasenagani (San Francisco 1994), our "T". Verses are 
numbered as in the summary above of the Tattvdrthasttras. As 
usual, we have substituted our translations of technical terms 
for Tatia's. 


Summary by Nathmal Tatia 


CHAPTER ONE 
8 (T11) "The number one does not lend itself to being 


TATTVARTHASUTRATIKA 463 


counted (and so remains in its own classification of ‘one’). 
Two, three, four and so on, are numbers proper which are 
classified as numerable, innumerable and infinite. Numerable 
numbers are those which can be named. Innumerable are 
beyond, naming and fall into three categories: minimum, 
intermediate and maximum. Beyond the innumerable are the 
infinite numbers which fall into the same three categories." 


: CHAPTER TWO 

1 (T34) "...draws attention to a sixth, ‘combined’, 
modification, a mixture of two or more of the above states, 
which it says is also mentioned in the scriptures." 

11 (T41) "(The internal organ as functional activity) is 
attributed to the partial elimination and partial suppression of 
the karma which obscures articulate awareness." 

"(The substantial mind) pervades the whole body of a 
being." 

14 (T42) "...(T)he fire-bodied and air-bodied (selves) do 
not move of their own accord and as such, truly speaking, do 
not belong to the class of mobile creatures." 

19 (T44) "The applied sort of (sense-)organ functions 
in both the perception of external objects and the experience 
of one's own pleasures and pains." 

22 (T45) “(Knowledge of verbal contents) is 
empirical...(cognition) beginning with the stage of directed 
inquiry (cf. I. 15). This empirical knowledge is by the mind 
and not by any sense organ such as the ear or eye. It is a 
mental perception that understands the scripture." 

37 (55) "The material body is described...as the visible 
bulky body made from the suitable class of material clusters..." 

44 (TS7) “According to those who accept that only (5) 
the karmic body is associated with the soul from beginningless 
time, the possible combinations are eight (according to earlier 
commentators). Siddhasena_ rejected one of these 
combinations, viz., that of karmic and fiery." 

48 (T59) "..(B)oth karmic and fiery bodies are 


464 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


permanent but the power of the latter is activated by 
superordinary power." 

51 (T62) "Each of the four classes of gods are either 
female or male...(T)he mansion, sylvan and luminous gods and 
the empyrean gods dwelling in Saudharma and Aisana, the 
first and second heavens (see 4. 1, 4. 20), are of either female 
or male disposition. Higher gods than these are always of male 
disposition. As the levels of celestial life become higher 
because of greater spiritual attainment in previous lives, there 
is a gradual sublimation of sexual disposition." 


CHAPTER THREE 
5 (T72) "...(T)hree agonies (viz.,) of...ghastly environs, 
the vengeance which they inflict upon one another, and the 
gods of evil thoughts and deeds who revel in inciting the 
infernal beings (to torture one another), prevail up to the third 
hell. The lower hells have only the first two agonies as the 
gods have no access to these hells." 


CHAPTER FOUR 

2 (T97) "...()t is only the physical colour that is defined 
with respect to different classes of gods; their psychic colour 
may be any one of the six colours--black, blue, grey, red, 
yellow or white." 

27 (T110) "This (commentary) notes and rejects the 
view that the last re-birth in the celestial realm must be in 
Sarvarthasiddha, the highest and most sublime of the five 
highest heavens. Nevertheless, those who are born in 
Sarvarthasiddha are assured of only one further life as a 
human being in which they will attain liberation." 


1 Superordinary power "is the capacity for action, from the 
mundane doings of daily life to supernatural acts such as hurling 
fire, emanating rays and creating protean bodies." (T, p. 59) 


TATTVARTHASUTRATIKA 465 


CHAPTER FIVE 

6 (T124) "Some commentators interpreted ‘inactive’ as 
immutability, but" this commentary "rejects this interpretation 
on the grounds that, according to the Jaina scripture, all 
substances are subject. to the three cardinal phases of 
origination, cessation and continuity. There is nothing that i is 
absolutely permanent or absolutely impermanent." 

19 (T130) "...(S)peech is possible only for souls who 
have attracted clusters of matter suitable for the body to make 
the speech organ, transform the clusters into sounds and pour 
them out as language through the properly developed vocal 
chords, etc. The physical mind is a cluster of matter that 
sustains the psychic mind which is of the nature of sentience 
and knowledge, capable of thought and memory." 

28 (T134) "How can two atoms, both of which are 
partless, combine together to make a single cluster? How can 
many imperceptible units create a perceptible one?" This 
commentary “discusses this problem at length (5. 1, 5. 11, 5. 
25, 5. 26) and attempts to solve the issue by distinguishing 
two aspects of atoms: an atom as partless matter (matter 
without parts) and an atom as the integrated qualities of 
touch, taste, smell and colour. These two aspects are 
respectively called 'matter-atom' and ‘quality-atom'. The 
integration of the qualities of touch, taste and so on, to a point 
of saturation, may result in perceptibility." 

30 (T135) This commentary "brings out the positive 
aspects of the four kinds of traditional absence:" 

1. prior absence "is existence in another form, 
e.g. before a golden pot exists, the gold exists." 
"2. posterior absence "is also existence in another 
form, e.g. after the golden pot is destroyed, the gold exists." 
3. "the mutual absence of rwo things is because 
of their existence, e.g. this gold pot is not that gold pot and 
that gold pot is not this gold pot." 
4."absolute absence refers to that which can 


466 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


never exist by definition of what does exist, e.g., the ‘square 
circle' is understood as impossible because both square and 
circle exist independently." 

"These four kinds of traditional absence are used to 
show the continuity between origination, cessation and 
persistence, between modes and substances. In the cessation 
of one mode there is the origination of another and through 
this, substance persists." 

30 (T136) "...Origination and cessation co-exist with 
persistence. Origination and cessation would have no 
foundation without persistence and persistence would be void 
without origination and cessation." 

31 (T138) "(A)n entity is a single whole and it has the 
dual aspect of change and permanence; the categorization of 
it as substance and mode is only a device for the 
enlightenment of the novice." 

This commentary "then discusses the Law of 
‘Contradiction and shows the absence of any opposition 
between permanence and impermanence, existence and 
nonexistence as attributes of the same entity. It is our 
experience, not abstract logic, that is the proof of the 
compatibility or incompatibility between attributes." 

33 (T140) ©The implications of this siitra are that 
atoms of two or more degrees can integrate with each other 
whether they are both of the same quality, or one is viscous 
and one dry...(A) one-degree atom can integrate with a two- 
degree atom of a diffefent quality." 

34 (T141) says that combination can take place 
between components whose degrees differ by two units or 
more. "This commentary illustrates this law with the example 
of two wrestlers. As two wrestlers of equal strength cannot 
win in wrestling, so two equally viscous atoms or equally dry 
atoms cannot integrate with each other..\"| This commentary 
"also rejects the view that a one-degree atom can integrate 
with a two-degree atom of the same quality." 


TATTVARTHASUTRATIKA 467 


CHAPTER SIX 
5 (T152) "...(A)n ascetic with very thin passions also 
experiences this fleeting (karmic) inflow, provided he 
meticulously observes the monastic code. Activities 
accompanied by passion cause karmic bondage that, in turn, 
causes the soul's long-term worldly wanderings." 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

1 (T190) (T)he commentary "names as upholders of 
deluded doctrines about thirty great non-Jaina philosophers of 
ancient times, such as Badarayana and Jaimini, the famous 
Vedanta and Mimamsa advocates. The doctrines were deluded 
because they were absolutist, allowing for no other 
viewpoints." 

24 (T203) The commentary "...identifies two varieties 
of karma: 'ripening' and ‘falling off. The first is due to the 
usual process of maturity in which the karma bound in the 
past produces its result at the destined time and then ceases 
to exist. Sometimes, however, by special effort, the soul enjoys 
the result of the karma before the destined time. This second 
variety of maturity is like the artificial ripening of mangoes 
and jackfruits." 

26 (T204) The commentary "finds difficulty in 
accepting the (near-perfect) enlightened world-view as 
beneficial karma because it is one of the four destructive 
karmas; it is due to the rise of purified view-deluding karma 
(see 8. 10)." The author "is also discomforted by laughter, 
relish and male disposition--identified in 8. 10 as quasi- 
passions (conduct-deluding karma)--being designated 
beneficial. Neither the scripture nor the ancient literature on 
karma mentions these four types of beneficial karma. Nor does 
8.-25. acknowledge these four karmas as beneficial. Only the 
forty-two varieties of bondage listed below are confirmed by 
all traditions as beneficial." 


468 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


CHAPTER NINE 
22. (T234) The ninth type of atonement is specified as 
‘reordination’. "The commentator clarifies that reordination is 
preceded by two further states of penance: unfitness for 
reordination and then fitness for reordination due to the 
practice of requisite austerities." 


65. KUMARANANDI BHATTARAKA (776), Vadanyaya 

Mahendra Kumar writes: "Vidyananda refers to him in 
Pramanapariksa (p. 72) and in the Tattvarthaslokavarttika (p. 
280) which suggests that Kumaranandi was the author of 
Vadanydya...; further, Patrapariksa (p. 3) also refers to him. In 
one of the records of a gift by Prthvikongani (Saka 698-716 
A.D.) to Candranandin, there is a genealogical list of teachers 

of Kumaranandi. It seems he lived near about 776 A.D." 

) "Kumaranandi's Vadanydya explicitly bears the influence 
of the Slokavarttika of Akalanka. Though Vadanyaya is not 
available, the quotations from it bear the testimony that it is 
influenced by Akalanka-nyaya."* 


66. VIRASENA and JINASENA (837), Jayadhavala on 
Gunadhara's Kdsayaprabhrta 
This vast work--some 60,000 granthas, it is said--is 
available--in an edition by Phulcandra Jain, Mahendra Kumar 
Jain and Kailash Chandra Jain (Mathura 1944). 


67. JINASENA and GUNABHADRA (870?), Atrnanusasana 

On the author cf. A. N. Upadhye, H. L. Jain and 
Balchandra Siddhanta Shastri's Introduction to the edition 
("E") published as Jivaraja Jaina Granthamala No. 11, 
Sholapur 1961. We are informed that Jinasena was the 


ATMANUSASANA 469 


student of Virasena and himself the teacher of Gunabhadra. 
These three "lived in an age of political prosperity and stability 
as well as literary fertility...The contemporary Rashtrakita 
rulers were Jagattunga, Nrpatunga and Amoghavarsa (815-877 
A.D.) and Akdalavarsa (and his feudatory Lokaditya). 
Amoghavarsa was a great devotee of Jinasena. whose ascetic 
virtues and literary gifts must have captivated his mind. He 
soon became a devout Jaina and renounced the kingdom in 
preference to religious life as mentioned by him in his Sanskrit 
work Prasnottararatnamala and as graphically described by his 
contemporary Mahaviracarya in his Ganitasdrasamgraha"..." 
(Introduction to E, p. 10) 

There is a translation (T) by J. L. Jaini published in The 
Sacred Books of the Jainas Volume 7, Lucknow 1928. 

The summary here is taken from E, pp. 2-5, with 
technical terms rendered into our chosen terminology as usual. 
The quoted passages are taken as numbered from T. 


Summary by A. N. Upadhye 


Everyone shuns frustration and yearns for satisfaction; 
but the way to satisfaction is shown to the deserving by a 
worthy teacher who expounds the principles of dharma. "Every 
one desires to attain true happiness at the earliest; that arises 
from the destruction of all karma which results from right 
conduct which is dependent on right awareness. This right 
awareness is acquired from scriptures which are based on the 
discourses of the apta who is free from all blemishes such as 
attachment, etc. Therefore, after duly reasoned out scrutiny of 
him, the source of all happiness, let the worthy resort to him 
for their benefit." (9) 

Dharma should be the highest pursuit to which all 
others are subservient. Such thought-activities must be 
cultivated as accrue merit in the absence of which one suffers 
under the stress of one's karma in the past from which even 
the so-called gods are not exempt. There are many even today 


470 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


who are above attachment. 

The pursuit of sense-pleasures is a mirage: the pleasures 
are just a result of past merit, so one should be sensible 
enough to fix one's eye on future prospects. 

The life of a householder has its limitations from the 
ultimate point of view--one has to reflect on the past and 
future and give up all attachment and aversion. Desires are a 
bottomless depth and only lead to further travails in this 
worldly whirlpool. "Fire burns when fed with fuel and is 
extinguished for want of it. But it is surprising that the terrible 
fire of infatuation blazes strongly in either way (on getting or 
not getting the objects of desire)." (56). 

The human body is a veritable prison for the self; it is 
a folly to be attached to it. "Birth is the mother; death, father; 
mental and physical sufferings, brothers; and decrepitude is 
the friend of this living being in the last stage. And yet there 
is love for the body!" (201) 

The kith and kin are not in any way permanent 
associates; so one should pursue the path of dharma. Wealth 
and other external accessories are temporary. "The poor are 
discontented for not obtaining wealth, and the rich too are 
(so) for want of contentment. Alas! all are in distress; but only 
a monk or an ascetic is happy” (65), for his happiness alone is 
self-dependent. The happiness that is dependent on anything 
else necessarily leads to privation and pain. 

The life of a monk has something unique about it. 
Neither the body nor the period of life is long-enduring; the 
monk makes the best use of them, for death is certain. "Living 
beings are like fruits, falling down from the palm-tree of birth. 
How long can they be in the intervening space before they 
reach the ground of death!" (74) Every opportunity, therefore, 
must be snatched to practise religion, since there are many 
handicaps, temptations and pitfalls on the way. It is by the 
practice of penances, for which the human birth alone is 
suited, that karma is consumed and real happiness is reached. 
"An ascetic, in the first stage, chiefly radiates light (of 


ATMANUSASANA 471 


knowledge), like a lamp. Later on he glows with light and 
glory (of omniscience) like the sun. The wise (ascetic) who 
resembles a lamp becomes resplendent with right awareness’ 
and right conduct, and removing the soot of karma makes the 
self and nonself manifest." (120-121) 

A woman is a temptress; she has taken many a victim 
in her trap; any attachment for her body means irretrievable 
fall; so one who is in pursuit of spiritual progress must avoid 
her from a distance. A householder is superior to a monk who 
becomes a victim to womanly temptations. 

A worthy teacher has to be sought and followed, 
because merited monks are rare in these days. Many are 
tempted by worldly pleasures and have become mean 
supplicants: “What can karma do to saints who see with 
discrimination, whose wealth is possessionlessness and to 
whom death itself is life" (162) Self-restraint is the highest 
treasure; penances, the great pursuit; the many-aspects 
doctrine, the lovely resort; and self-realization the ultimate 
good. "An ascetic, endowed with spiritual knowledge, 
perceiving the natures of things as they are, extending his 
right knowledge again and again, and exterminating love and 
hate, should contemplate (upon the supreme self)." (177) 

The passions like anger, pride, deceit and greed deserve 
to be subjugated, because even great men have succumbed to 
them. "One should be apprehensive of the deep pit of deceit 
enveloped in the pitchy darkness of falsehood. The horrible 
cobras of anger, etc. (the passions) living in its depth are not 
visible." (221) "Love and hate constitute worldly addiction 
(pravrtti), and doing away with them is renunciation. They 
both are associated with external objects, and so they should 
also be discarded." (237) One should rise above attachment 
and aversion; then alone penances are fruitful; then alone the 
self is distinguished from the body; thereafter proper 
application to meditation destroys all karma, and then the self 
is realized in full effulgence. 


472 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
68. RAJASEKHARA (900), Saddarsanasamuccaya 
Summary by Bhagchandra Jain 


This Rajasekhara is a different personality from 
RajaSekhara the author of Kavyamimamsa. He was the fifty- 
second Pattadhara of Tapagaccha Pattdvali (p. 43) and the 
Diksastitra published from the Vinayacandra Grantha 
Bhandara, Jaipur, p. 15. Laksmisagarasiri was his immediate 
successor. This is also supported by the epilogue of 
Prabandhakosa, another work of RajaSekhara. 

RajaSekhara composed his Saddarsanasamuccaya in 
imitation of Haribhadra's work of the same title. He tried to 
introduce the philosophical views of the Jaina, Samkhya, 
Purvamimamsa, Vaisesika and the Buddhists (Saugata). These 
philosophies believe in the existence of a self and are therefore 
called astika, as opposed to the Carvaka philosophy, which is 
called ndstika as it does not believe so. This is the subject- 
matter of the work. It is published by the Yasovijaya Jain 
Granthamala, Varanasi. 


69. JINACANDRA (900?), Siddhdantasara 
Ed. in Manikacandra Digambara Jaina Grantha 21, 
1923. It is merely a list of categories. 


70. SIDDHARSIGANI (900), Vivrti on Siddhasena 
_Mahamati's Nya@yavatara 
This is the earliest known commentary on the 
Nyayavatara. It has been edited and translated by Piotr 
Balcerowicz; see the reference cited under the summary of the 


NYAYAVATARA-VIVRTI 473 


Nyayavatara above. This is our "ET". Numbering of sections 
below corresponds to the numbering in that summary. 

The Sanskrit text of the commentary was published. 
earlier, by A. N. Upadhye in Siddhasena's Nydydvatdra and 
Other Works (Jaina Sahitya Vikasa Mandala, Bombay 1971), 
but without translation. 

The work is voluminous, and it is not possible to 
provide a full-scale summary here. We choose only a few 
sections for treatment. 


Summary by Karl H. Potter 


0 (E323-327; T1-4) Dharmottara: Since a word cannot 
be related to an object by either identity or causality, this 
opening passage is to incite students to study, not to claim 
validity. 

Answer: If so, ordinary people would not study, since 
they are not motivated by a statement deemed by them to be 
false. 

Arcata: This opening statement is intended to show the 
unsoundness of the opponent's arguments. 

Answer: If the opening statement has no validity itself 
it cannot show the unsoundness of opponents’ arguments. 

On the Buddhist assumption that everything is 
momentary no relation of causality is possible, since a 
momentary thing cannot produce an effect before, during or 
after its momentary occurrence. Nor can there be a relation of 
identity or even similarity between an awareness and its 
content. An awareness cannot have the same form as its 
content, since it would have lost that form by that time, and 
anyway one couldn't see an object larger than one's own body, 
and one's head would split apart with all those forms. And as 
for similarity, you yourself cannot accept similarity, since you 
do not accept the similarity of distinct ultimately real things. 

Grasping of an object can either mean the object's 
conceptualisation or its direct perception. But you do not 


474 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


accept that particular things can be conceptualized (citing 
Dharmakirti's Pramdnavarttika 2. 133-134). 

(E327-332; TS5-9) Buddhist: Conceptualization that 
arises from traces brings about grasping of an unreal universal, 
whereas direct perception grasps an external object directly, 
free from any connection with universals. 

Answer: Then perception cannot be causally 
conditioned or a causal conditioner, and language cannot be 
valid on your view, as it involves universals. But we do not 
have any such problem: we can distinguish perception whose 
grasping of an object is produced by a specific sufficient 
condition, whereas linguistic awareness grasps both specific 
and general features since it is not confined to a specific 
condition. (This distinction is then reformulated in accord with 
Jain terminology.) So we have no problems about 0's 
designating real objects, an ultimately real purpose and the 
actual relevance of the one to the other, which are the topics 
of 0. 

The opinions of other theories (viz., Mimamsa, Nyaya, 
Vaisesika, Samkhya, Carvaka) about the definition of 
"instrument of true cognition” are reviewed, as well as their 
respective opinions about the contents of instruments of true 
cognition, especially whether they grasp universals as well as 
particulars or not. 

1 (E333-337; T10-13) The definition provided in the 
first sentence of 1 is analyzed to show which elements in it 
refute which alternative theories. Thus “reveals both itself and 
something else" refutes the views of the Vijmanavadins, who 
view awareness as only self-illuminating, and the Mimamsakas 
and Naiyayikas, who view awareness as capable of 
illuminating something different from awareness. 

The Yogacaras (or Vijianavadins) deny external objects 
and hold that all awarenesses are of awarenesses, like dreams. 
But even dreams are caused by traces of past waking 
experiences. 

Yogacara: Yes, and those past experiences are likewise. 


NYAYAVATARA-VIVRTI 475 


caused by others in a beginningless series, and all the items in 
the series are unreal. 

Answer: Is the trace that causes an experience itself an 
experience or not? If it is, how do you know it? and if it is 
not, this refutes your position. 

Yogacara: That trace is only different from an 
experience which is defiled by the knower-known dichotomy; 
it is nevertheless itself an experience. 

Answer: There is no evidence for such a trace. 

As for the second kind of position (of Mimamsakas and 
Naiyayikas), which denies self-illumination, that is incoherent, 
since a thing cannot be known as illuminated by another 
unless that other is self-illumined. A lamp cannot illuminate a 
pot unless it illuminates itself. 

Objection: The cognition grasps another without 
grasping itself. 

Answer: Then Devadatta's cognition would be grasped 
by Yajnadatta! 

The definition (in 1) also says that an instrument of 
true cognition is itself an awareness. This serves to preclude 
the Nyaya specification of sense-object contact as an 
instrument of true cognition. Sense-object contact is itself 
insentient: if it could be an instrument of true cognition any 
causal element, e.g., the body, would be an instrument too. 

"Without sublation" excludes, e.g., the double-moon 
illusion from the definition of an instrument of true cognition. 

(E337-340; T13-15) The whole definition (of 1) refutes 
the definitions of others. E.g., the Mimamsa definition, which 
requires that a content of perception must not have been 
previous cognized, is open to the following objection: 
Previously cognized by whom? Not by another, since that 
would exclude all ordinary experiences from the range of the 
term “instrument of true cognition". But if it is construed to 
mean that one must not have cognized the object previously 
himself, that fails as well however we construe the thing 
cognized--as a substance, a mode, a quality or a universal-- 


476 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


eight alternatives in all, each shown to be unacceptable. 

A Buddhist definition has it that an instrument of true 
cognition is a cognition that does not wander (avisamvadaka). 
The term "nonwandering" is ambiguous. If it means 
"unattained", then awareness of an object about to disappear, 
like a bubble, would not be covered. If it merely means 
"capable of being attained" then distant stars would qualify. 
But if it means being unsublated (ab@dhita) you accept our 
definition! 

The Nyaya definition of an instrument of knowledge as 
a cause of experience (upalabdhi) would allow in anything at 
all--bodies, sense-organs--to the purview of perception. 

(E341-343; T17-18) Objection (by a Carvaka): There is 
only. one instrument of knowledge: perception. 

Answer: No, since one would be unable to show that 
some awarenesses are valid and others not, which 
demonstration is not a matter of perception and needs to be 
done by inference. Furthermore, you are in no position to 
prove that there are no such things as heaven, adrsta (i.e., 
karma), gods, etc. 

(E343-348); T18-23) There are other instruments of 
true cognition but they are all subsumable under either 
perception or inference. And in the case of absence (abhava), 
which the Mimamsaka claims is an instrument of knowledge, 
it serves no purpose and can either be excluded altogether or 
included among these two (viz., perception and inference). 
However, comparison (upamana), presumption (arthapatti) 
and verbal testimony (sabda) fall under inference. 

Mimamsaka: How could absence not be an instrument 
of knowledge? 

Answer: Because it has no content (gocara). 

Mimamsaka: But perception can only grasp a positive 
part (amsa). Awareness of an absence-is not brought about by 
a sense-organ, since a sense-organ is only capable of 
connection to existent things. So after the presence of a thing 
has been grasped, it is later recalled by the mind alone as 


NYAYAVATARA-VIVRTI 477 


being the counterpositive of an absence. 

Answer: Is this positive part the same as or different 
from the negative part? If it is the same, how can it not be 
grasped when the negative part is grasped? If it is different, 
"then (to say) that the surface of the ground is grasped by the 
first perception as detached (free) from the absence of pot, 
etc., implies that the pot, etc., is (indeed) grasped (on the 
surface of the ground) because non-grasping of the absence of 
this (pot) is invariably coequal with grasping its existence." 
Moreover, if you invoke absence (as an instrument of 
knowledge) to grasp an absence because there is no other 
instrument of knowledge to grasp it, what instrument of 
knowledge grasps that absence of an instrument of 
knowledge? You are involved in infinite regress or vicious 
circle. 

(E348-351; T23-25) Objection: The doctrine that there 
are just two instruments of true cognition, perception and 
inference, is that of the Buddhist. 

Answer: But the Buddhist is not in a position to show 
that there are only two, whereas we are. The Buddhist can 
only appeal to identity and causality to show a conclusion, but 
neither one is capable of showing the absence of any 
additional instruments, nor are perception or inference 
themselves ‘capable of showing that. Perception cannot grasp 
an absence (as was admitted above). Inference through 
identity and causality proves only actual entities. And the 
absence in question cannot be shown by inference from 
nonperception (anupalabdhi), which is capable of proving only 
limited absences and not absolute absence. 

What shows the validity of perception and inference 
(for the Buddhist)? Not perception, since it is constructionfree. 
The wareness that immediately follows perception cannot 
confirm perception's validity, since that awarenesss deals with 
general (i.e., constructionfilled) things, not pure particulars. 


1 This is Balcerowicz' translation of the pertinent passage. 


478 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Buddhist: That validity is shown by inference. 

Answer: But inference deals with constructionfilled 
things. And is the inference that is supposed to show the 
validity of perception and inference itself an instrument of true 
cognition or not? 

4 (E358-364; T31-36) Samkhya: Perception is the 
operation of (sense-organs such as) the ear, etc. 

Answer: No, since it is something sentient that grasps 
an object through awareness: the ear, etc., are insentient. 

Buddhist Logician: Perception is free from conceptual 
construction (kalpandpodha) and is nonerroneous (abhranta). 
It grasps an object that is proximate and capable of efficient 
action. Awareness of it is nonlinguistic: if it were otherwise, 
since there is mo way of connecting a word with an object 
except through memory, one could never perceive an object. 

Answer: The argument is that perception is 
nonlinguistic because an object is nonlinguistic; but the same 
kind of reasoning would show that perception is insentient 
because its object is insentient. And how can individual atoms 
bring about awareness of a whole that is not momentary? But 
actually we know that in everyday practice when an object 
becomes perceived language becomes relevant to it fully. And 
this everyday practice requires admission of universal 
properties, and is impossible on the assumption of 
momentariness. 

As for your definition of perception as nonerroneous: if 
"nonerroneous” means grasping an object as it actually is 
nonerroneousness never occurs, since it cannot represent 
reality which (according to you) consists of infinitesimal 
atoms. But if you take "nonerroneous" to mean awareness 
which does not make one err with regard to a particular thing 
like a pot, then since such things do involve conceptual 
construction the other part of your definition (viz., "free from 
conceptual construction") must be eliminated. 

(E365-366; T37-38) "...in its manner of grasping", i-e., 


NYAYAVATARA-VIVRTI 479 


inference is an immediate awarenesss on the part of the 
cognizer, but "indirect" in that it grasps an external object 
through inferential signs and linguistic items. Thus "the other" 
has two varieties: inference and verbal testimony (i.e., 
language). 

5 (E368-372; T39-43) The definition given in 5 shows 
the childishness of definitions of inference such as (Dignaga's) 
that there are three kinds of inference: through nonperception 
(anupalabdhi), through identity (svalaksana) and through 
effect (kdrya), and that (of Kanada), and that which analyzes 
inference into three types: purvavat, Sesavat and 
samanyatodrsta. For in all these cases it is just the 
inseparability (of the h from the s) that is crucial, since 
without that relationship none of those definitions would 
apply. And this will apply in any other definitions as well. 

Buddhist: Inference is erroneous (bhranta) since it uses 
the erroneous concept of a universal property, which is 
unnecessary given the relations of identity and difference. 
Nevertheless, since without an object there can be no mark 
(linga) related as identical or as cause, without a mark the 
object cannot be cognized, and without cognition of the object 
it cannot be remembered, and without its being remembered 
there can be no inference. Thus inference is an instrument of 
knowledge even though erroneous, since it is nondeviating 
from its object. 

Answer: No. Among (you) Buddhists, the realists, since 
they accept perception as valid, cannot demonstrate the 
erroneousness of objects. As for those (Buddhists) who believe 
that everything is momentary, since they deny everything they 
are not able to prove this thesis. Is the sentence “everything is 
nonexistent" existent or nonexistent? If the former, the 
Buddhist gives up his position; if the latter, then the existence 
of everything follows, since there is nothing that can refute it. 

6 (E374-377; T44-47) Yogacarin: It is not a 
contradiction to say "error is an instrument of knowledge". 
Perception and inference make us reach an object in a 


480 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


practical way, but since they misrepresent their contents as 
wholes or parts, and as things grasped or graspers, which 
relations do not stand to reason, they are erroneous. The only 
real entity is consciousness. 

Answer: There is no instrument of true cognition to 
prove what you just said. We do not experience our 
consciousness as becoming bifurcated into knower and known, 
not even in our dreams. And it is evident that there are wholes 
and parts. 

27 (E421-423; T80-82) Objection: What is the proof 
that there is any such thing as this “pure” perception? 

Yogacarin: Here are two proofs. (1) A pure perception 
(vigadadarsana) whose content consists of all actual entities is 
possible, because there can be inference proving that content, 
for example, fire can be both perceived and inferred; there is 
such an inference, and so there is pure perception. 

Question: What is the inference proving that actual 
entities are experienced? 

Yogacarin: In this world what exists is experienced as 
undergoing continuity, birth and death, because it is an actual 
entity, just as bending and straightening one's fingers; thus 
things that exist have those experiences. But when those actual 
entities are rid of their karmic obstructions ("veils", @varana) 
there is nothing to block awareness and one becomes 
omniscient. 

(2) The self is such that complete purity is possible, 
because the means to its purification exists, like a jewel which 
is purifiable in a furnace (putapdka), etc. And the completely 
purified self is called "pure", in that there is no difference 
between subject and object of cognition. The means to its 
purification is repeated meditation. 

Objection: How can repeated meditation cause 
purification? 

Yogacarin: Because it counteracts the karmic 
obstructions, as you yourselves admit. 

29 (E425-474; T83-125) That a thing can have a 


[YAYAVATARA-VIVRTI 481 


iultiple nature (anekantatmaka) is proved as follows: In this 
vorld an instrument of true cognition grasps a real entity 
aving many properties, because only such, a thing (having a 
iultiple nature) is experienced, like a red flower which looks 
osy. 

Nyaya-Vaisesika: A property-possessor is completely 
ifferent from its properties, so there cannot be a thing having 

multiple nature. 

Answer: How can a thing have many properties, then? 

Naiyayika: Each property inheres in the thing. 

Answer: Then the thing has a multiple nature! And 
arallel arguments show the preferability of our theory of 
ultiple nature to the theories of Samkhya, Sautrantikas, 
ogacarins and Madhyamakas. 

The seven perspectives (naya) are now expounded at 
ome length, and each of the seven associated with the view 
f one or more other schools. It is argued that each 
erspective fails if it is taken to be right and the other 
iewpoints wrong. The concluding portion of this section sums 
p the position: "Whatever the propounder of the doctrine of 
seven-fold) modal description, who is conversant with (both) 
iewpoints and instruments of true cognition, predicates with 
1e intention of demonstrating the intrinsic nature of the real 
iing--while taking into consideration (both) the complete ana 
re incomplete accounts--that is true, because the domain (of 
is predications) are possibly existent objects. However, 
yhatever propounders (of simplistic theories interpreting 
sality) in the absolute sense, who cling to opinions of a 
efective viewpoint, argue is false, because the province (of 
1eir predications) are possibly nonexistent objects." 

31 (E478-482; T127-131) Buddhist: A thing like, e.g. a 
ot is seen to become extinct, to get destroyed by being 
mashed with a club, for example. But the essential nature of 

thing, being eternal, can't be destroyed by a club. So a 
1ing's essential nature must be such that it will be destroyed 
t the same time the thing is destroyed. Then is that 


482 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is it produced by that same essential nature? If by chance the 
causal nexus that destroys it is not needed. If the thing is 
destroyed by its essential nature, then since an essential nature 
is eternal it will persist after the destruction, so the thing is 
not destroyed after all. So momentarinesss must be the correct 
conclusion. 

Answer: On your view extinction takes place at every 
moment without cause. But why don't you say instead that 
duration and origination occur at every moment without 
cause? The same reasoning that you use to show that 
extinction can have no cause can be used to show that 
duration and origination can have no cause. 

Objection (by a third party?): It is evident from 
perception, etc., that the sufficient conditions for origination, 
maintenance and destruction occur all the time. 

Answer: We don't deny causation altogether, but we 
point out that causality pertains to things, (not to the 
Buddhists’ pure particulars).? 

(E482-488; T131-135) "...(A)ware of himself and of 
what is not himself" refutes the Mimamsaka who denies the 
possibility of self-cognition, and also refutes the Yogacarin, 
who denies the existence of anything external to (one's) 
consciousness. 

",..(T)he agent, the experiencer" refutes Samkhya. 

Samkhya: The appearance that the purusa is an agent 
is due to the proximity (upadhdana) to prakrti. 

Answer: No, since the purusa must be subject to one 
form and then another, and this is a mark of agency. 

",..(He) changes" refutes the opinions of Naiyayikas and 
Vaisesikas, who construe the self as not subject to change of 
any sort. 

Nyaya-Vaisesika: The self changes in the sense that it 
has different awarenessses inherent in it. 


1 The intent of this section is not entirely clear to us: one should 
take what may seem to be implied with a grain of salt! 


NYAYAVATARA-VIVRTI 483 


Answer: We have already refuted inherence, and no 
other relation will serve to help explain the matter. 

"...(Is) not made of earth..." refutes the Carvaka, who is 
subjected to an extensive treatment. 


AMRTACANDRA SURI (925) 

A. N. Upadhye discusses this author in the Introduction 
to his edition and translation of the author's Pravacanasdra- 
Tattvadipika, op. cit., pp. 94-96. He says: "...(S)o far as we 
know, he is the first commentator on the authoritative works 
of Kundakunda. He does not aim at verbal explanation, but he 
wants simply to propound the philosophical contents of the 
gathas...His zeal for anekdnta logic is very great...he shows 
close acquaintance with Digambara as well as Svetambara 
works...(He) is more a poet than a prose writer...(A)s a 
spiritual poet (adhyatmakavi) his position is simply unique and 
unequalled by any Jaina author before or after him." 

Upadhye addresses the question of Amrtacandra's date.. 
Noting that "There is very scanty material for sealing the date 
of Amrtacandra", he reviews what little evidence he can locate 
and concludes that "The traditional Pattavalis put Amrtacandra 
at the beginning of the 10th century A.D.", which is where we 
therefore put him. 


71. AMRTACANDRA SURI, Tattvarthasdra 

According to P. S. Jaini this work, which he estimates 
as the earliest of Amrtacandra's works, is "merely a summary 
of the aphorisms of the Tattvarthasiitra."” A. N. Upadhye 
describes it as "a running metrical exposition of 
Tattvarthasutra. Excepting the concluding verse, it is in 
Anustubh metre. The name of the author is not mentioned; 
but at the end...the author happily expresses his modesty that 
the letters have formed the words, the words the sentences, 
which in turn have made the book; so he is no more the 
author."!% 


484 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


72. AMRTACANDRA SURI, Purusarthasiddhyupdya 
"ET" refers to the edition and translation by Ajit Prasad, 
with the editor's English commentary, published by L. 
Chhunna Mal Jain from Delhi in 1956. A. N. Upadhye (ibid.) 
says this work is also known as Jinapravacanarahasyakosa and 
that it "exhaustively deals with the duties of a house-holder in 
a highly philosophical tone.”” The summary is by Potter. 


5-9 (ET6-8) A niscaya naya is one whose object exists 
(bhatartha); a vyavahara naya is one whose object does not 
exist. Kevala teachers point to the latter as guide to the 
ignorant. But vyavahara alone is of no help to one who only 
knows it. One who knows both gains neutrality. 

9-10 (ET8-11) A person (purusa) is a conscious self 
(cidatman), unconnected with sensory qualities, undergoing 
origination, disappearance and _ continuity. Eternally 
undergoing transformations it performs acts and enjoys its 
own acts and own experiences. 

12-14 (ET14-15) These transformations, occasioning 
activities of the self, themselves constitute karmic products 
(pudgala). It is the self itself that modifies itself; the karmic 
products are only instruments. Thus a self is not the same as 
the modifications caused by karma, though the ignorant 
suppose it is. This is the seed of samsdra. 

23-30 (ET26-30) One who has right vision must not 
doubt whether any of the various things people say are true or 
not, or whether they proceed from the omniscients. One 
should not desire greatness in this life as a Cakravartin or 
Narayana, or accept one-sided views. He should not be 
disgusted at (a) source of unhappiness, or believe in false 
scriptures... 

31-34 (ET30-32) Those of right vision, having mastered 
the Jain system and its logic, should with effort acquire right 
awareness, which can only be gained after right vision. 

37-41 (ET34-36) One who has mastered right vision 


PURUSARTHASIDDHYUPAYA 485 


and right awarenesss must necessarily practice right conduct. 
He may be either a saint (yati) in complete cessation, or a 
seeker (updsaka) of only partial restraint. 

44-48 (ET36-39) Attachment (raga), etc., is the arising 
of violence (himsa) and its nonappearance is nonviolence 
(ahimsa). Violence only occurs when there is violence to the 
instruments of life (lit. breathing, prana)--it does not require 
injury to another person, but occurs when a person acts out of 
passion, or even while abstaining from violence, if one is 
careless. 

50-57 (ET40-44) One who though not understanding 
the truth tries to practice the path is childish, causing any 
worthwhile conduct to come to an end. One may not commit 
an injury but may still bring violence about, just as one guilty 
of violence may not suffer its results. But trivial violence 
eventually breeds heavy results, just as serious violence may 
cause only mild results. It all depends on the agent's intention; 
a person with bad intentions will suffer whether or not his 
actions bear the intended results. One who sympathizes with 
a wrongdoer will suffer the consequences of that one's act, and 
those who coerce others into acting wrongly will wreak the 
majority of the sufferings consequent thereon. Whether an act 
is violent or not is a matter of the agent's intentions. 

61-75 (ET45-48) To avoid doing violence one should 
give up drinking spirits, eating flesh-or honey, and eschew the 
five kinds of fig. Alcoholic spirits make one liable to commit 
violence; one cannot eat flesh without being responsible for 
loss of life; eating honey represents the death of bees; and figs 
are the birthplaces of mobile beings. 

76-90 (ET49-57) Perfect renunciation (autsargiki 
nivrtti) involves nine aspects (not explained here). Imperfect 
renunciation (apavddiki nivrtti) is of various kinds. For 
example, a householder has to ingest a certain number of 
nigodas {minute living beings, like bacteria), but should 
nevertheless try to avoid killing any more than he must (to get 
on with the ordinary functions of life, such as eating). 


486 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


And one should not be hard on such a one, nor be 
misled by advice, e.g., that one may commit injury for the 
sake of one's religion. True religion does not involve sacrifice 
to the gods, nor should one attempt to please one's guest by 
offering him a meal of meat under the mistaken notion that it 
is all right to kill, e.g., goats. Nor should one kill others who 
are themselves guilty of killing, even under the notion that one 
is saving (or prolonging) the lives of others by doing so. For 
the same reasons, one should not participate in mercy-kllings, 
or kill someone in the act of meditation or under the mistaken 
impression of the Kharapatikas that one achieves liberation 
immediately on being released from his body. Likewise, 
feeding another one's own flesh as sacrifice is still violence, as 
is any suicide. 

91-101 (ET59-62) Carelessly false statements are 
classified. Again it is the speaker's intention that determines 
how bad the act is, as in general it is the agent's intention 
(pramatta yoga) that determines sin. What is bad for the 
perfect renunciate may be allowable for the householder. And 
a moral speech that causes mental suffering to the listener is 
not bad, since it is motivated by good intentions. 

102-110 (ET62-65) Intentionally taking what has not 
been given to one is an act of violence. A saint's breathing in 
bits of karma unintentionally is not violent. Unnatural ways of 
answering sexual passions are violent. Even the householder 
who is not ready to renounce sex altogether should confine 
himself to his wife. 

111-119 (ET65-68) Appropriating (parigraha) is 
attachment. It is of two sorts, internal and external. Internal 
includes falsity, sexual desires, laughing, etc., and four 
passions. External appropriating is of two kinds, for living and 
for nonliving things. Appropriating of both sorts is violence; 
renunciation of both constitutes nonviolence. 

120-226 (ET69-104) The remainder of the work 
proceeds in like fashion to discuss a number of specific do's 
and don'ts, commitments to which are implied by commitment. 


PURUSARTHASIDDHYUPAYA 487 


to Jaina vows. 


73. AMRTACANDRA SURI, Tattvadipika on Kundakunda's 
Paficastikdyasara 


Summary by K. C. Jain 


"E" references are to the edition found in the Srimad 
Rajchandra Jain Shastramala Series, Third edition. The 
summary has been translated from Hindi by Ratna Lahiri. 


3 (E9-11) In this section the author has introduced 
three collocations (samaya), word (sabda), meaning (artha) 
and knowledge (jfidna), and (in the second half) he has 
touched upon the distinction between the world (loka) and 
what is beyond (aloka). 

Of the five collections (astikaya, existents in relation to 
many spatial points), that which is balanced, i.e., without any 
favor or aversion, and consists of syllable, phrase or sentence, 
is known as the collocation of words (Sabdasamaya or 
Sabddgama). When the advent of false vision is destroyed, 
knowledge of them is called the collocation of knowledge 
(jfanasamaya or jranagama). What is known by that is called 
the collocation of meanings (arthasamaya), which means the 
group of all substances. The collocation of meanings is 
twofold, worldly and beyond-worldly, that is, the infinite 
beyond. 

4 (E11-13) Self or soul, karmic products, initiators of 
stasis and initiators of movement and space are the five 
collections. Their general and specific characteristics--arising 
(utpdda), maintenance (vyaya) and dissolution (dhaumya)--are 
already known to exist. They are all undifferentiated yet 
specific. 

There are two perspectives, substantial (dravyarthika) 
and modal (paryayarthika). Entities, though they may be 


488 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


separate entities from the latter perspective, are nondifferent 
from the former. 

“Atorm" here means one space-point or indivisible unit. 
All substances are accumulations of space-points and therefore, 
occupying space, are known as bodies (kdya). Although an 
atom of matter is one-space-pointed, yet it becomes many- 
space-pointed on mingling with other atoms. Atoms of time, 
though existent, are not embodied to the absence of space- 
pointedness. So time as substance has not been dealt with in 
the section on the collections. 

5 (E13-16) Collections are not different from their 
various qualities and modes. Existence occurs due to the 
demolition of one mode or the arising of another and 
association of a substance with its stages of creation and 
dissolution. In case a substance is totally without any qualities 
or modes, it means another substance is being created, 
destroyed or perpetuated. Then it will be nonexistent. 

Now embodiment is described. Selves, karmic products, 
initiators of stasis and movement, and space are embodied. 
They occupy points in space, and these space-points are 
distinctive parts and therefore known as modes. The 
identification of those parts with those substances indicates 
embodiment (kayatva). Although an atom is without parts, it 
has the capacity to have parts, so is shown to have a body. 

Excepting karmic products, the other substances are 
unformed and are therefore indivisible. Yet it is not impossible 
to envisage them as divisible because it has been seen that 
though space is indivisible we may imagine it as space in a pot 
or total space, etc., If we could not imagine divisions in space, 
then pot-space, etc. all would become one. Therefore, except 
in the atom of time, every other substance has the quality of 
being embodied and thus has limbs or parts. 

6 (E16-17) The collections plus time are labelled 
substances. A substance is the base for the coexisting qualities 
and serially occurring modes. Therefore, the modifications 
(bhava) which have occurred, are occurring, or will occur, and 


PANCASTIKAYASARA-TATTVADIPIKA 489 


those that will become modes (like all the five collections plus 
changes, reasons, and time), are substances. Time being the 
cause of the modifications in karmic products, etc., it is here 
just another mode of it and therefore it is called the changing 
reason (parivartanalinga). 

8 (E19-23) "Existential character". Existence is being, or 
the state of being. Existing things are neither eternal nor 
temporary. In eternal things, there cannot be a state of 
sequentiality and therefore there cannot be any modifications 
there. Momentary things cannot be recognized as "this is the 
same one" and thus cannot have continuity. Therefore a 
substance has three contemporaneous stages of existence, 
having an eternal mode due to being recognizable as itself at 
the next instant, and being continuously modified as evolving 
and devolving simultaneously through different states of its 
being. So, existence also has a continuous form of arising, 
existing and dissipating, since state of being and being are the 
same. Existence occurs in all substances, which is why it is 
called "omnipresent". It is infinite in its modes. 

There are two types of existence (satta). In the above 
section the "higher being” (mah@satta) that dwells in all 
substances has been described. The second is the "lower" 
(avantara) type of being. From the relative point of view of 
subsidiary being higher being is nonexistence and from that 
higher point of view the "lower" is nonexistence. 

9 (E23-24) Although there is a little difference between 
existence and being a substance (dravya, that which flows) 
due to signified qualities and states, etc., substance and being 
are really the same. 

10 (E24-26) However, the nature of substance, being 
many, is not only being. A substance is also the receptacle of 
the creation-maintenance-destruction process of modal 
qualifications. So being is of the nature of 
permanence/impermanence (nitydnitya). Therefore, by "being" 
(sat) is implied oneness with both the permanent qualities 
along with the changing modes. Similarly, in the other 


490 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


qualifications the occurrence of one implies the occurrence of 
the other two (i.e., of creation-maintenance-destruction). 

11 (E27) Substance is eternal and without birth or 
destruction. It does not have a beginning or end. But its 
qualities of birth-maintenance-destruction, consecutive modes, 
do arise and get destroyed. So from the substantial perspective 
a substance is neither born nor does it die. However, from the 
modal perspective it is born and dies. 

12 (E28-29) Since substance and mode are essentially 
unified there cannot be one without the other. 

13 (E29-30) A substance and its qualities are also the 
same. 

14 (E30-32) Here the word "syat", connoting relative 
pluralism, has been used to imply "sometimes" or "perhaps" 
(kathamcit). 

A substance exists in relation to its own state of points 
in space and time, but from the relative view of other 
substance (paradravya) is does not exist. (Perhaps it is.) 

Thus, sequentially it does and does not exist from the 
one to the other state. (Perhaps it is not.) Together, both 
cannot be expressed. (Perhaps it is indefinable.) 

In relation to its own time (svadravyaksetrakala) and of 
both of them together its existence cannot be expressed. 
(Perhaps it both is and is not.) 

In relation to the time of others and of both of them 
together it is inexpressible. (Perhaps it is, and is indefinable). 

In relation to both its own time and that of others and 
both of them together it is and is not inexpressible. (Perhaps 
it both is and is not, and is indefinable.) 

But this sevenfold set of alternatives is not unproved 
(anupapanna). Every substance is, in relation to its form, etc., 
non-zero, in relation to the other, zero, in relation to both 
itself and the other it is zero and nonzero, and together, it is 
indefinable. In relation to the topic (bhanga), they are non- 
zero-indefinable, zero-indefinable and non-zero-zero-indefin- 
able. 


PANCASTIKAYASARA-TATTVADIPIKA 491 


This is’ the seven-aspected logical ar 
(saptabhangt) of Jaina logic. 

15 (E33-34) An existing substance does not get 
destroyed as substance, nor does a nonexistent other substance 
get created as a substance. Coming into existence or 
destruction, substances generate destruction arid creation of 
qualities and modes without actually creating nonbeing or 
destroying being, just as with the clarified butter arising out of 
the essence of milk the substance of milk does not cease to be. 
Nor is something other than the substance of milk created. 
However, without the destruction of existence or creation of 
nonexistence the fluidity, etc., qualities of the erstwhile milk 
are modified from their earlier state. The secondary stage or 
butter mode, etc., is also destroyed to produce the mode of 
clarified butter. It is the same with the modifications in all 
substances. 

16 (E34-36) The qualities of a self are consciousness 
and cognition, perception and knowledge. Consciousness is of 
two kinds, pure and impure. Knowledge-filled consciousness 
Grananubhiti) is pure consciousness. Action-oriented 
consciousness (kdrydnubhiti) is impure. Cognitive application 
(upayoga) is also of two types, construction-filled and 
construction-free. Modes are also pure and impure. Extension 
or diminution in either light or heavy qualities lead to pure 
modes. 

20 (E42-44) On liberation there is no creation of 
ultimate nonbeing. The generation of, say, a godly mode of 
a self temporarily existing in one mode and devolving to 
produce another mode of existence does not produce 
nonexistence. Similarly, even if for a long time a self has 
dwelled in samsdra and in the absence of its causes ceases to 
be so, thus creating a state unknown to him before 
(abhiitapiirvasiddha), that too does not create nonbeing. 

21 (E45-46) Substances are forever indestructible and 
unborn. Therefore, the self is eternal as a substance. The 
same, when born as a god, etc., is called the doer of that state. 


492 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The same, when destroyed as a human, is the doer of 
nonexistence. The same, when destroying the existence modes 
of the gods, etc., is known as the doer of nonexistence of 
existence. The same, when generating human, etc., modes, is 
the doer of existence of nonexistence. This is the result of the 
theory of manifoldness, that even in this apparent 
contradiction there is no real contradiction. 

27 (E56-61) From the ultimate perspective 
(ni§cayanaya) the self assumes the bhava breaths and from the 
practical perspective (vyavahdranaya) he accrues the dravya 
breaths to become a self. From the ultimate perspective he is 
of the nature of consciousness, and from the practical 
perspective he is one with consciousness and possessor of its 
power (citSakti). Ultimately consciousness is undifferentiating, 
practically it is differentiating consciousness resulting in 
awareness and therefore cognizable. Ultimately it can control 
the bhava actions, practically it controls the dravya actions and 
their outflow, bondage, stopping inflow, cleansing and 
emancipation by itself and is therefore the Lord. 

Ultimately the self is the doer of the karmically-related 
results and practically he is the doer of matter-accruing 
actions for self-related results; therefore, the self is the 
ultimate doer (kartr). Ultimately he is the experiencer of the 
good-bad results of pure-impure actions and practically he is 
the experiencer of good results from good acts and bad results 
from bad acts. Thus he is the enjoyer (bhoktr). Ultimately it 
may be by worldly measurement (lokapramana) but practically 
it is due to name karma; he is either in a small or a big body 
and so is embodied. 

Practically he may be associated with form but 
ultimately he is formless by nature, and therefore incorporeal. 
Ultimately he is associated with conscious actions associated 
with karmic matter, while practically he is associated with 
results accruing from conscious actions: thus he is karmically 
conditioned (karmasamyukta). 

28 (E62-63) The moment the self is completely released 


PANCASTIKAYASARA-TATTVADIPIKA 493 


from karmic bondage due to its rising nature he goes up to the 
top of creation (loka) and stays there because there is .no 
reason to go on further. He is not liberated from knowledge 
(kevalajridna) or complete vision (kevaladargana) as they are 
his very nature. They both reside in him and he revels in the 
eternal pleasures beyond the senses. This liberated soul has 
certain kinds of material selfhood (ripajivatva), consciousness, 
cognition, lordship, agency, enjoyment, size in keeping with 
the size of the physical body in which he had attained 
liberation, and an incorporeal quality without attributes. 
However, the liberated self does not have any association with 
karma. 

31-32 (E68-69) Every self, being an indivisible entity, 
occupies points of world-space. Every self has 
lightness/heaviness qualities that cause the form he is in. At 
any moment in time, the possible modifications in size of this 
are infinite. The points in space are also innumerable. The 
amount of space occupied by an indivisible atom of karmic 
matter is known as a space-point (pradesa). Some selves, 
through their complete manifestation of spiritual qualities, 
may extend to the whole world. Most others (not so fully 
manifested) do not fill the world. These are filled with false 
faith-binding emotions and erroneous awarenesses. Those who 
have beer liberated from these are the liberated beings 
(siddha). 

34 (E72-73) Just as in this world the self resides in a 
body as part of the never-ending consecutive procession of 
bodies, so also does it then sequentially go to its other bodies. 
In this, his existence is thus in each of these bodies in 
sequence. Yet, within a body, he does not become the same as 
the body, just like milk in water, remaining separate due to his 
not being of the same nature as the body. 

36 (E75) Liberated beings are not born like the worldly 
self who is filled with effects of actions of mind, body and 
speech generating karma, nor do they cause substantial results 
which in turn usually cause rebirth in the forms of gods, 


494 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


humans or animals. Liberated beings do not get born like that. 
Due to the eradication of substantial actions (dravyakarman) 
one is born by oneself and due to some other cause. The 
other-worldly being becomes a cause due to the fruits of his 
actions of bhavakarman and resulting karmic products, which 
in turn cause the forms of gods, humans, animals or hell- 
beings. It does not cause liberated beings: those generate 
themselves on having expended both types of actions. 

38 (E78-79) Some selves experience only pleasure and 
pain due to being soiled with deep delusion; and those who 
have strong awareness-obstructing traces experience the 
pleasure-pain fruits of karma because their capacity to act has 
been destroyed by strong hindrances (viryantardya). Others, 
who also have their conscious nature veiled with attachments 
as well as awareness-obstructing karma but have some residue 
of capacity for action due to elimination of hindrances, 
experience the pleasure-pain of karma arising out of the 
results of action. 

Some selves, who are clear of soiling due to 
attachments born of deluding karma, have also destroyed all 
their awareness-obstructing karma and have thus unveiled 
their total powers: they are of infinite power due to the 
eradication of all hindrances. They experience the natural 
pleasure of knowledge as part of their self because the fruits 
of their actions have been erased, and they experience bliss. 

41 (E81-82) Knowledge obtained by congenital mental 
capacity (abhinibodha) when occurring with false vision is 
called kusrutijfiana, and extrasensory awareness when arising 
with false vision is vibhanga. 

43 (E84-85) The knower is’ not different from 
knowledge, as both having the same existence they are one 
substance, and both occupying the same space-points they 
have one-space-ness. Both having the same time-frame have 
cotemporality. However, even if this be said, there is no 
contradiction in saying that one self may have many types of 
knowledge because substance is of the form of the universe 


PANCASTIKAYASARA-TATTVADIPIKA 495 


(visvariipa). 

44 (E88-89) Qualities must belong to something. They 
belong to and reside in substances. If they are separated from 
one substance then they will belong to something else and that 
too will be another substance. In this way the eternal nature 
of substances is revealed. A substance is a conglomeration of 
qualities. If the collection of qualities exists separately, then 
where does it exist? So if substances are considered separate 
from the qualities substances will become nonexistent. 

45 (E89-91) The space-points occupied by a substance 
and its qualities are the same, so they are said to have the 
similarity of undivided space-pointedness (avibhaktapradesa- 
rupatva). To explain: Just as one atom, occupying one space- 
point indivisibly, is nondifferent from that space-point, so also 
the one atom is not differentiated from its sight, smell, touch, 
taste qualities coexistent in those space-points. However, just 
as far-off places like the Vindhya mountains are divided in 
space and therefore are separate from other mountains, that 
kind of separateness does not reside in substances and 
qualities since their space-points are not different. 

46 (E91-93) Examples are given to show that different 
designations or representations do not prove difference in 
substances and their qualities. 

56 (E105-107) The rising of the fruits of actions is 
called udaya. Nonarising is known as upasama (calming of 
result-giving actions). Nonarising and arising is known as 
ksayopasama. Complete separation from karmas is known as 
ksaya. An evolute (parindmya) is that which is caused by the 
very nature of a substance, not by action. The state consisting 
of the rising action is known as (1) operative karmic state. The 
one which has calming mode is known as (2) subsiding. One 
with depletion and nonarising of karma is known as (3) 
ksayopasgamika. That with depletion is (4) ksayika, and with 
results it is (5) parindmika). These five are the qualities of the 
self. Four of these are differentiated and one is inherent by 
nature. . 


496 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


57 (E107-108) From the practical viewpoint the self as 
the experiencer of dravyakarmans and those actions that come 
to him as experience are called the instrumental cause 
(nimitta). By its instrumentality the doer-self does the action- 
object. Thus in whichever state of being or emotion the action 
is performed the self becomes the subject of that state. 

58 (E108-110) Without performing actions the modes 
(1-4 of 56 above) do not arise. So they should be considered 
as caused by karma. The fifth mode is the natural 
undifferentiated, eternal, infinite mode of the self. A mode of 
type (4), though infinite due to the self being associated with 
a personality, nevertheless is born of the dissolution of karma: 
therefore it is not eternal and is thus said to be caused by 
karma like the other three. A type (2) mode is also born of the 
gradual quietening of karma and is destroyed if quiescence 
does not take place: therefore, again, it is karma-caused. So 
types (1-4) are all various stages of dravyakarman itself, but 
not type (5) the ultimate resulting higher self. 

59 (E110-111) If states (1-4) are caused by karma the 
self does not become the doer of those actions. But the self 
cannot be accepted as the nondoer either. Therefore, the 
conclusion must be that the self is the doer of the 
dravyakarmans also. But how is that possible, since from the 
ultimate standpoint the self does not indulge in anything 
except its natural state? 

60 (E111-112) This verse resolves the problem posed in 
the last one. From the practical standpoint, being the 
instrumental cause, karma is the doer of jivabhdvas and vice 
versa. From the ultimate higher viewpoint neither karma nor 
the jivabhava is the doer. It is not that they happen by 
themselves without a doer because ultimately (from the higher 
standpoint) the self is the doer of its resultant ultimate state 
and karma is the doer of the resulting deeds. 

65 (E116-117) Even without releasing its true conscious 
parinamika nature in this world, the self is entangled in 
eternal bondage of eternal delusion, passion and aversion. 


PANCASTIKAYASARA-TATTVADIPIKA 497 


Contaminated by them it roams the worlds in this sullied state. 
Whenever he indulges in these states of attachment, jealousy, 
etc., at that time, using that very cause as instrument, he 
generates the products of karmic matter and interfaces with its 
space-pbdints and thus acquires the nature of that karma. 

67 (E118-120) Thus from the ultimate viewpoint karma 
is the doer of itself and from the practical viewpoint it is doer 
of the bhava-states of the self. The self, too, from the ultimate 
viewpoint is the doer of its own states while from the practical 
point of view it is the doer of its actions. However, from both 
points of view karma is the doer and from neither is it the 
experiencer, because by being nonconscious it cannot have 
experience. Therefore, due to having consciousness, only the 
self can be the experiencer of the self engulfed in the fruits of 
actions such as pleasure and pain or sometimes desirable or 
undesirable things. 

71-72 (E123-125) That great self (the self in the 
liberated state) is eternal consciousness itself and therefore it 
is one. From the difference between relative awareness and 
vision it has two divisions. From the point of view of the 
awareness of awareness, of karma and of karmic results it has 
three divisions. Due to having four movements it is one with 
fourfold motions. Due to having five major conditions (bhava, 
see 56 above) it has five primary qualities. On dying it may go 
to the four directions, above or nether worlds, thus it has six 
series of orbits. It has sevenfold predications, thus it has seven 
existential states. It is the receptacle of eight type of karmas 
and eight qualities; it deals with nine substances in nine ways, 
so has nine ‘meanings. It resides at ten levels, viz., in earth, 
water, fire, air, vegetation in general, in each plant specifically, 
in two-, three, four- and five-sense-organed life forms, and in 
the ten places of the five organs. 

76 (E129-130) Due to six types of decrease and 
increase, the atom may have the nature of completion- 
dissolution. Otherwise, due to the appearance and 
disappearance of aggregates, the atom may have the 


498 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


completion-dissolution stages: thus it can be determined to 
consist of karmic products. 

Aggregates are many karmic products having the same 
mode and are nondifferent from those products, which is why 
they are called "pudgala’. 

78 (E132-133) Due to the embodiment of an atom 
touch , taste, smell and color are separate from it in name 
only. Actually, its space-points, etc., are the same in the 
middle or at the end. Thus, the substance and its quality 
being nondifferent in space, the space-point of an atom is the 
same as the space-point of the touch, the taste, the smell and 
the color. Therefore, if in an atom there is a decrease of smell- 
quality, in another of smell and taste-qualities, and in another 
of shape-quality, then the atoms are destroyed as a result of 
having shared the same space-point of those qualities. 

Therefore it is not logical for an atom to decrease. So 
the cause of the earth, etc., are all four fundamentally one and 
the same atom. The transformational quality of an atom is 
unique. In some instances one quality may manifest and others 
not manifest, and thus have unique transformations. For the 
same reason, in some the smell, etc., qualities may be 
unmanifested. The resultant transformation is not the word, 
because the atom is single space-pointed while the word is 
many-space-pointed. 

80 (E136-137) Being located in one space-point the 
atom is indestructible and therefore eternal. It is with space as 
it lends space to the qualities that are nondifferent from it. It 
is without space because it does not have two or more space- 
points. It is the divider of aggregates as by having only one 
space-point it is instrumental in their division. It is for the 
same reason of the formation of aggregates their generator 
(kartr). The time it takes for one space-point to travel over 
one space-point of space is called a "moment" (samaya); 
therefore an atom is the divider of moment. By the reason of 
having one space-point, it indicates the number of space-points 
in the aggregates, and thus is the divider of numbers. 


PANCASTIKAYASARA-TATTVADIPIKA 499 


86 (E143-144) Just as the nature of the initiator of 
movement has been described, know the nature of the initiator 
of stasis to be similar. The difference is just this: the substance 
that initiates movement is instrumental like water in the 
mobility’ of the karmic matter of the mobile selves 
(kivapudgala). However, the substance that initiates stasis, like 
the earth, is instrumental in causing the stability of static life 
matter. Just as the earth, being still by itself, does not inspire 
others to be still, but continues to be benign to the (by itself) 
still horse as a noninterfering enabler, so also does adharma- 
substance remain static by itself without inspiring others to be 
still, but benignly becomes an instrument to help those who 
are still of their own accord. 

87 (E145-146) Both initiators are substances, because 
without them the world and nonworld cannot be divided 
(exist). The totality of all substances like selves, etc., is the 
world. The one pure space alone is nonworld (aloka). In the 
world, the selves and karmic matter by their own natures 
continue to reach their various states or results. If the initiator 
of motion and of stasis, in arriving at their deserved or 
resultant states of being, were unregulated, who is to stop 
them from escaping into the nonworld? 

100 (E159-160) The time-mode that occurs in sequence 
is known as practical time (vyavaharakdla). The essential basic 
substance of it is ultimate time (niscayakala). Although 
practical time is a mode of ultimate time, even so, due to 
ultimate time's being measured by the transformational states 
(parinadma) of jivapudgala_ transformations, these 
transformations occur due to external instrumental past time- 
substances (dravyakdla). Therefore it is said that they are born 
of dravyakdla. In summary, practical time is determined by the 
selves, karmic matter transformations, and since such a 
transformation cannot be otherwise, the time substance is 
determined. Practical time is momentary because the subtle 
modes are limited. Ultimate time is eternal, and due to its 
being the base of its own qualities and modes, it is 


500 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


indestructible. 

121 (E184-185) The one-organed, etc., and earth- 
bodied creatures that are called selves are so-called in practice 
because in the intermingling of eternal karmic matter and the 
self there is a predominance of the self. From the ultimate 
perspective the earthly body or sensation of touch lacks the 
nature of consciousness, so they are not selves. Within them, 
those who know themselves as different from others, are 
known as selves due to the quality (cognition) being 
somewhat coexistent with the holder of that quality. 

128-130 (E191-193) Due to the attribute of eternal 
bondage of the worldly self there are some smooth (snigdha) 
transformations. By transformations karmic matter is attached. 
Due to karma, the hell states, etc., happen. Therefrom the 
body, organs, objects and attachment-jealousies, etc., arise. 
The attachment-jealousies in turn cause more smooth 
transformations. From a smooth transformation arises the 
‘karmic matter transformations, from karma, again the state of 
hell, from hell again another body, from body, again sense- 
organs and sense-objects, and from them again attachments 
and jealousies are born. Thus mutually being cause and effect, 
the self and karmic matter transformations continue in the net 
of karma and wheel of rebirth eternally, infinitely and without 
beginning or end, again and again. 

131 (E194) Where there is laudable attachment and the 
mind is calm, there is good transformation. Where there is 
false apprehension, jealousy and unlaudable attachment, there 
is a bad transformation. 

132 (E195-196) The doer of laudable transformations 
(subhaparinama) is the niscayakarman of the self. It is itself a 
good transformation, and causal due to being instrumental in 
good transformations. That is, the inflow of the substance of 
merit (punya) begins having found the instrumental cause of 
good transformations. After its inflow, it is known as the 
“merit-satate” (bhavapunya). Similarly, after the inflow of 
demerit, karma is known as demerit-state (bhavapdapa). The 


PANCASTIKAYASARA-TATTVADIPIKA 501 


niscayakarma agent of the karmic product is the doer of the 
transformation of effective karma (visistakarmaprakrtiriipa). : 
That substance is merit and is instrumental in good 
transformations of the self, or demerit and instrumental in 
producing bad transformations of the self. 

136 (E200-201) Good attachment happens to an 
ignorant devotee who has only gross qualities of devotion. 
Even some of those knowledgeable aspirants who cannot rise 
to higher planes sometimes need this kind of attachment, in 
order to stop it from occurring towards the wrong object or to 
dislodge it from the excessive fever of worldly attachments. 

137 (E201-202) To be upset in the mind due to pity on 
seeing an excessively hungry or thirsty being, and to desire to 
do something about it, is the pity of an ignorant person. Those 
knowledgeable persons living in the lower planes have this 
slight sadness in the mind seeing the world inundated in this 
wheel of rebirth. 

142 (E206) Stopping of all false attachments and 
negative transformation is known as bhdsamvara. And due to 
that, the cessation of all karmic matter entering due to activity 
and causing good/bad karmic transformations is known as 
dravyasamvara. 

145 (E209-210) Meditation is the main cause of the 
cleansing off of traces. One who has succeeded in complete 
cessation of good/bad transformations, one who knows well 
the nature of substances, one who has been able to refrain 
from other objectives and is actively focussed on his self- 
objective alone, achieves the self by his own experience. 
Seeing no separateness in the qualities and the qualified, he 
meditates unwaveringly on the self-knowledge and, becoming 
completely devoid of softness (nissneha), dissipates his earlier 
acquired karmic particles. Thus, meditation is the mainstay of 
cessation. 

147 (E213) The good-bad transformations of the self 
soiled with misapprehensions, attachments and jealousies, is 
known as the bhdvabandha. The good-bad transformational 


502 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


matter (pudgala) caused by them and adhering to and 
intermingling with the self are known as the dravyabandha. 

148 (E213-214) The external cause of the accrual of 
karmic matter is activity (yoga), and the internal cause of this 
karmic matter having special power and existence is the state 
of the self. 

154 (E222-224) The basic nature of the self is 
perennially emancipated. Its nature is right awareness and 
right vision which are not separate from the self. They are not 
different from the self as both are specific and general aspects 
of its basic consciousness nature. Within that innate 
knowledge and vision the rise and fall and_ status 
(utpadavyayadhrauvya) that exists is laudable because it is not 
of the nature of attachment, etc. That is right conduct and that 
verily is the path to liberation. 

159 (E229-230) That lord of yogis (yogindra) who is 
able to shed all misapprehension of the other substance nature 
and follow his own natural substance and who realizes his self 
by knowing it to be one with his innate knowledge and vision, 
he is the real follower of the self-path. 

This is the exposition of the path to liberation on the 
basis of the nigcayanaya that relies on the pure substance and 
nondifferentiated ends and means. And that which was 
discussed in verse 107 was the practical perspective to the 
path of liberation based on modes of self and nonself and 
relying on separate means and goals. There is no essential 
difference in the two because there is a means and end 
relationship between the vyavahdra and niscaya viewpoints. 
This is why the Lord Jina has given the exposition from both 
points of view. 


74. AMRTACANDRA SURI, Tattvadipika on Kundakunda's 
Pravacanasdara 
Our "E" is the edition contained in A. N. Upadhye, Sri 
Kundakundacarya's Pravacanasara edited with commentaries 
of Amrtacandra and Jayasena and Hemaraja's Hindi 


PRAVACANASARA-TATTVADIPIKA 503 


commentary, Station Agas, Post Boria, Via Anand, W. Rly. 

1964. "T” is the translation by Barend Faddegon published as 

Jain Literature Society Series 1 (Cambridge University Press 
1935). 


10 (E10-11; T6) No actual entity (vastu) becomes a 
supporting object (alambana) of existence (satta) without 
evolving (parindma), and evolution occurs only in actual 
entities. An actual entity involves substance, which marks its 
continuity; qualities which are its individual accompaniments, 
and modes; the particular stages it passes through, and it 
arises, continues and perishes. 

14 (E15; T9) "...considers satisfaction and frustration 
the same”, i.e., he no longer undergoes the evolutions which 
arise from feeling-producing karma. 

15 (E17; T9) "...omniscient", i.e., since the self is just 
knowledge and knowledge is just knowable things, the self 
that knows reaches the summit of all things knowable. 

16 (E18-20; T10-11) "Svayambhu" is interpreted in two 
ways: as having the capacities indicated by each of the six 
karakas (cases--nominative, accusative, instrumental, dative, 
ablative and locative); or as throwing off the ghatiyakarmans 
in their respective order. 

But there are actually no case-relations between the self 
and anything else, the self not being dependent on the means 
to its realization. 

19 (E24; T12) Since awarenesss and bliss constitute 
intrinsic characteristics of a self they arise in the liberated self 
even without sense-organs. 

21-22 (E27-28; T13-14) "...without sensational stages", 
i.e., the knower's cognition is not analyzable into stages (such 
as indistinct, directed, determinative), but at the moment the 
obstructions are at an end he enjoys direct vision of everything 
perceptible. 

32 (E38; T19) "...neither loses nor gains", i.e., there is 
no grasping or releasing but an immediate (saksatkarana), 


504 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nonwavering awareness, and so the omniscient one is involved 
while remaining isolated. 

45 (E52-53; T28) The actions of a perfected being do 
not cause changes (delusion, atachment, aversion), and at the 
same time they annihilate karmas and thus cause liberation. 


CHAPTER TWO 

1 (E108; T60-61) "An object”, i.e., a verbally denoted 
thing "is made of substance", a substance being an 
aggregation (samudaya) of particulars (visesatmika) 
classifiable in terms of persistent features (vistd@rasamdnya) 
and specific features (@yatasdmdnya). Substances “by their 
natures have qualities", those persistent features, and both 
(substance and quality) “again have modes", viz., the specific 
features. 

A substantial mode (dravyaparydya) comprises the 
thought of a unity of several substances which in turn may be 
homogeneous (e.g., several material atoms) or heterogeneous 
(e.g., self/karmic product, or god/man). 

A qualitative mode (gunaparya@ya) comprises the 
thought of a diversity of specific features, which in turn may 
be natural (svabhava) or nonnatural (vibhava). A natural 
qualitative mode of all substances is being subject to increase 
and decrease. A nonnatural qualitative mode is, e.g., color, etc. 

These examples are dilated upon. 

3 (E112-114; T65-67) The unity of a substance 
comprising the qualitative differences of the modes relating to 
birth, maintenance and destruction are illustrated by the 
example of a dirty shirt's becoming clean. 

4 (E115-117; 167-70) The essential nature of a 
substance is existence (sadbhava, astitva), since it does not 
depend on anything else, exists beginninglessly and endlessly 
as well as occurring in time, is different from its nonnatural 
modes, and is not spatially analyzable. To illustrate the 
relations of a substance to its qualities and modes the example 
of gold is adduced. 


PRAVACANASARA-TATTVADIPIKA 505 


5 (E118-119; T70-71) "...one mark", viz., existence 
(sat), the common property of all things. It is elaborately | 
shown that unity and sharing a common property are 
compatible characteristics of a thing. 

6 (E120-121; T71-73) Substances do not arise from 
other substances, since a substance is "realized through its own 
nature", as indicated by their beginninglessness and 
endiessness. 

Existence (satta) is not a distinct entity from (an) 
existent (sat) (as in VaiSesika)--they can neither be said really 
to be separated (yutasiddha) nor unseparated (ayutasiddha), 
since to cognize two things as separated they must first be 
cognized as unseparated. 

7 (E122-123; T73-75) Just as a substance, by nature 
single, has many space-points as its parts determining its 
spatial extension, so the occurrence of a substance, by nature 
single, involves changes (parindma) in its parts and controlling 
its orderly positive activity. And just as these space-points 
come and go while the whole stays of the same volume, so the 
changes constitute collectively the birth, maintenance and 
destruction of a thing despite each itself being single. 

8 (E125; T76) So it is necessary to accept a substance 
as having the three features (of birth, maintenance and 
destruction) going on unopposed and inseparably connected 
with the creation of posterior absences, the destruction of 
prior absences, and persistence throughout. 

10 (E127-128; T78-79) Objection: A moment of birth 
is neither a moment of persistence nor a moment of 
destruction, etc. So a substance originates, persists and decays 
of its own nature. _ 

Answer: No. Why do you assume that origination, 
persistence, and destruction each must have different moments 
of occurrence? The moment of birth of a pot is the same 
moment as that of the death of the lump of clay, etc. And thus 
the substance is all these moments (which we call modes). 

16 (E136-137; T84-85) If nonidentity were just 


506 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nonexistence of one thing in the other the result will be that 
one substance will be many, or emptiness (Stinyatva), or 
apoha. All involve contradiction. 

52 (E185-187; T118-120) (Faddegon at T, p. 118-119, 
gives the following analysis, which we quote, of the argument 
of this section of the commentary:) "A. Thesis. Existence or 
occurrence without space-points cannot belong to time, and 
still less can time be occurrence itself. B. First part of the 
argumentation: Time canot be the occurrence itself, for the 
occurrence must rest on something which possesses the 
occurrence. And if we supposed that time were identical with 
the occurrence, then oneness of origination, annihilation and 
persistence would be impossible. C. Argument for the 
conclusion, drawn at the end of B: If the unity of origination 
and annihilation, with reference to a substance, were to 
consist in an uninterrupted series of origination and 
annihilation, without something in its modifications subject to 
these aspects, then the Buddhistic theory of momentariness, 
ksanabhanga--horribile_ dictu!--would hold true. Time, 
therefore, consists of (one or more) space-points. D. Second 
part of the argumentation: Should time consist of many space- 
points, then (as we must read between the lines) the only 
supposition allowed would be that it consists of an 
innumerable number of space-points, equal to the space of the 
universe. But this is excluded, because the moment could not 
come into existence. E. Final conclusion (or return to thesis). 
Time consists of one space-point and, as such, according to the 
gatha it possesses existence. Had it not possessed even one 
Space-point it would not have existed." 


CHAPTER THREE 
(E246; T152) The commentator considers the body of 
the Pravacanasdra to terminate at the end of Chapter Two: 
what follows is an Appendix (cilaka). 
2 (E146-151; T153-155) How one desiring to be a 


PRAVACANASARA-TATTVADIPIKA 507 


monk should bid farewell to his family is set forth at some 
length, detailing the five aspects of studentship--knowledge, 
vision, right conduct, penance and energy--in each case 
insisting that none of the activities referred to belong to the 
purified self. 

The commentator indicates that at 31.the section on 
conduct (dcarana) ends and new section on the path to 
liberation (moksam4arga) begins, terminating at 44. Section 45- 
70 is characterized as the section on good cognitive 
application (¢‘ubhopayoga). 71-73 are termed, respectively, the 
truth of rebirth, liberation truth, and the truth of the means to 
the liberation truth. 


75. AMRTACANDRA SURI, Atmakhyati on Kundakunda's 
Samayasara 

As far as can be ascertained, this work has not yet been 
translated. A. N. Upadhye describes a portion (-kalasa) of it as 
"a veritable mine of finely phrased and carefully polished 
melodious verses containing the essence of Atmavidya"'” and 
P.S.Jaini comments "Amrtacandra's poetical eloquence finds 
real expression in the commentary on the Samayasara."™' It 
has been edited several times. 


76.AMRTACANDRA SURI, Laghutattvasphota 
Edited and translated (our ET) by Padmanabh S. Jaini 
as L.D.Series 62, Ahmedabad 1978. Prof. Jaini provides an 
analysis of the contents (pp. 4-24) from which we draw in 
what follows. Some technical terms are rendered through the 
translation adopted in the present Volume rather than in Prof. 
Jaini's analysis. 


Summary by Padmanabh S. Jaini 


"The first chapter is...the most formidable part of the 


508 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


entire work, as the poet turns quite a few of its verses into 
veritable riddles. The doctrine of syddvdda affords him 
unlimited opportunity to exploit the figure of speech called 
virodhabhdsa, whereby he can describe the Jina in apparently 
contradictory terms such as “empty-nonempty’”, "eternal- 
noneternal”, “being-nonbeing", (etc.). All Jaina poets employ 
these dual attributes for the soul in the spirit of manifoldness, 
i.e., from the ‘conventional’ (vyavahara) and ‘higher’ (niscaya) 
points of view. What distinguishes Amrtacandra from the rest 
is his eloquent espousal of the niscayanaya without departing 
from the manifoldness doctrine." 

"The second chapter continues with the problem of the 
dichotomy created by the vaisvariipa and ekariipata which 
characterizes the cognition of the Jina. As if anticipating the 
Samkhya objection that cognition of objects might destroy the 
unitary nature of consciousness, the poet asserts that the 
purusa...remains distinct from the world of objects even when 
he cognises them, undisturbed from the innate (sahaja) unity 
of his consciousness (caitanya). This is of course possible only 
for the Jaina, who adheres to the doctrines of manifoldness 
and syadvdda: the absolutist Samkhya must deny any 
cognition by the self, for this would imply contamination. The 
poet therefore calls the ekantavadin a pasu or ignorant person, 
literally an "animal". This term, although rather strong and of 
Tare occurrence in other Jaina works, occurs ten times in the 
Laghutattvasphota. It is invariably applied to an ekantavadin : 
this could be an adherent of any of the classical darganas, or 
even a Jaina who has strayed from the true path either by 
clinging to the commonsensical (vyavahdra) discipline at the 
cost of cultivating the higher (nisaya), or by abandoning the 
external in the misguided belief that he has already attained 
the higher. The Poet characterizes the pasu as "destroyer of 
the self", “devoid of insight", “one of closed heart", etc," 

"The second chapter closes with a further affirmation of 
the variegated nature of the self." 

"The third chapter Provides one of the finest accounts 


LAGHUTATTVASPHOTA 509 


of the spiritual career of a Jina found in the entire Jaina 
literature. This career consists of the gradual progress of the 
self from its lowest state, that of falsity, to the highest state of 
spiritual growith, marked by omniscience. This path of 
purification has fourteen stages called gunasthadnas, beyond 
which lies the total isolation (kaivalya) of the self, the Jaina 
ideal of a perfect being (siddha). The turning point is the 
fourth stage, samyaktva, which marks the entrance of the 
aspirant onto the path. Amrtacandra hails the moment of 
entering that path (mdrgavatdra) as one of great bliss. (51). 
The (fourth stage of) samyaktva consists of insight into the 
true nature of the self, which is defined as nothing but "pure 
intuition and knowledge" (drgbodhamdtra). The author 
equates this samyaktva with saméayika, a Jain technical term 
for the tranquility of the self which is gained only by such 
insight. Samyaktva leads to the relinquishing of all evil 
activities, activities which give rise to attachment and aversion 
and thus injure the self. It has two stages, being first partially 
achieved while living as a layman (Srdvaka), and then totally 
while an ascetic (muni). These changes are indicated by the 
fifth and sixth stages, called desavirata and pramattavirata 
respectively. Through these stages the aspirant cultivates sight 
conduct, which to the nascent Jina comes so spontaneously 
that he is called the very embodiment of sa@mayika." 

"It might be argued by certain overzealous advocates of 
the higher viewpoint that the noble aspirant, endowed with 
such insight and equanimity, could dispense with the ‘mere 
formalities’ of becoming an ascetic (i.e., the commonsense 
path). As if to correct such a notion, the poet makes the 
pointed observation that external (dravya) and internal 
(bhava) controls (samyama) are interdependent, and that the 
nascent Jina demonstrated this by first establishing himself in 
the discipline of the ascetic (53). The sixth stage, called 
pramattavirata is marked by numerous ascetic activities, 
particularly the practice of such austerities as fasting and long 
hours of meditation. But these are all actions, albeit worldly 


510 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


wholesome ones, and must yield results according to the law 
of karma. Further, the word pramatta itself indicates more 
than simple carelessness in ascetic activities; it implies lack of 
mindfulness regarding the true nature of the self. Hence the 
true aspirant must turn "completely inward", “creating vast 
distance between the purusa and prakrti" (61), i.e., between 
the self and karma, and attain the firm stage of pure 
consciousness (Ssuddhopayoga), in which no new karma is 


generated." 
“The chapter ends with the author's devout wish that he 


too may become an omniscient being (75)." 

"The fourth and the fifth chapters continue with the 
theme of the omniscient Jina, seated in the holy assembly. He 
is described as a mass of knowledge, of which his cognition is 
a mere sport (83). Although he has not-transcended the 
mundane condition, the Jina has not abandoned that essential 
duality of permanence and change which characterizes all 
existents (89). His omniscience is larger than the totality of 
the objects which it knows. These objects do not produce 
knowledge, which exists by its own nature; they merely 
instigate’ (uttejana) it (98). Even so it is held that there could 
be no ‘inner knowables' in the absence of ‘outer objects’; hence 
the Vijfanavadin doctrine of bahirarthanihnava stands 
condemned. (109). Finally, the Jina’s cognition, even when it 
illuminates an infinity of objects, is free from agitation; from 
the higher viewpoint the Jina cognizes the mere existence 
(sanmatra) which is one, partless, eternal and innate (113)." 

"The sixth chapter returns once more to the ascetic path 
of the nascent Jina, discussed in the third chapter. The 
aspirant turns all activities into morality (sila), perfect 
conduct. His heart is filled with profound disenchantment, and 
he offers his worldly life into the fire of austerities (127). 
Moving all alone on the holy path, he mounts the ladder of 
the destruction of karma ( 131) and arrives at the twelfth stage 
of progress; here arises the 'the omniscient knowledge which 
becomes a beautiful flame, kindled at the center of the 


LAGHUTATTVASPHOTA 511 


universe’ (136). Finally, the Jina becomes a siddha (138), 
shining forth in his peaceful light and experiencing boundless 
bliss.” 

"The seventh chapter opens with the declaration that 
the poet takes refuge only in the Jina, ie, in pure 
consciousness. It is pure in that all notions of action are absent 
when one sees this consciousness from the transcendental 
point of view: ‘All existents are naturally and eternally 
contained within the limits of their own being; they cannot be 
obstructed by others’ (167). The state of omniscience is one of 
knowing and not of doing, for even when objects are cognized 
the self is merely manifesting its own nature by itself, for 
itself, and in itself. Thus it is devoid of instrumentalities 
(kdraka); there is no agent, object, instrument, recipient, point 
of departure, and location (170)." 

“The eighth chapter shows the Jina as supreme teacher, 
the dpta. The poet praises him for demonstrating to others 
(i.e., the theists, whose teachers are superhuman) the splendor 
of human endeavor; by his valor he has destroyed the passions 
and married Laksmi in the form of omniscient knowledge 
(181). Although he had achieved his goal, he used the 
remainder of his life for the benefit of the universe, showing 
the holy path by establishing a Tirtha (182); thus the Jina is 
known as Tirthankara....Amrtacandra admits the mutual 
dependence of the aspirant and the Tirtha for the instruction 
of the former and the reestablishment of the latter. This 
mutual causality is like that of seed and sprout; the nascent 
Jina follows the “ford” and the "ford" proceeds from the Jina 
(183)...” 

"The omniscient Jina perceives the whole of reality; yet 
there are no words adequate to express the universe in its 
totality. Therefore only an infinitesimal portion of the Jina's 
cognition is conveyed to gods and men, and only a few of 
these will have the purity of heart necessary to grasp it (186). 
Only through the Jina can one learn the true doctrine, that 
which asserts the dual nature of reality (185). The preaching 


512 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
ina is marked by the seal of sya@dvada (187), the only 
ak one ae comprehend and fully express reality 
with its mutually opposed characteristics. Thus he is called the 
r of all (99)." 
Ot ae takes us once more to the spiritual 
carrier of the nascent Jina...The Jina's self is filled with 
tranquility when he enters the holy path (201). He fearlessly 
vows to remain isolated, totally renouncing both internal and 
external attachments (202). He fills his heart with compassion 
for all suffering beings (203). Resolved to stay in meditation, 
he suffers the scorching rays of the sun by day and sits all 
night in the charnel ground, letting jackals crush his emaciated 
body (205). He fasts for two weeks, or even a month (206) ; 
thus he gradually attains to perfect conduct and omniscience. 
The Jina then preaches that path which he himself has 
practised, the path which is the very essence of the scriptures. 
Internally it consists in the destruction of passions, externally 
in the resolute pursuit of right conduct (209). Both are 
necessary, for although insight is the most important factor in 
bringing about salvation, it loses efficacy in the case of one 
who lacks proper conduct (210)." 

"The tenth chapter opens with a solemn declaration that 
the poet will praise the Jina from one standpoint, that of the 
pure view (226). In this view, substance is identified with only 
one of its qualities and with only the purest of its modes. The 
Jina's self is endowed with innumerable qualities or powers, 
all manifest in their pure modes. Nevertheless, the pure view 
prefers to identify that self with only one of these qualities, 
knowledge, and only its perfect modes, knowledge. Other 
modes are not unreal, but they are of no relevance to the path 
of salvation. The aspirant therefore fixes his attention only on 
this goal, using the pure view as a meditational device. In 
omniscient cognition even knowledge of the infinity of objects 
is of no consequence; the pure view ignores this rather 
incidental aspect of knowledge and concentrates only on the 
aspect of self-experience (svanubhava). This must be so, for 


LAGHUTATTVASPHOTA 513 


from the higher standpoint the self knows only itself; it sees 
and experiences itself alone. The poet therefore describes the 

Jina as being a mass of pure consciousness which seeks no end 

other than manifesting its own blissful nature. It is blissful 

(andkula) because there is no room in this cognition for the 

net of conceptual constructions (vikalpajala) which produces 

such distinctions as existence and nonexistence. These qualities 

have validity only in discussing the nature of reality; for the 

Jina, all conceptual constructions are at rest. (232). Despite 

his cognition of the innumerable objects in their infinite 

modes, the Jina does not deviate from his innate and unified 

nature; he is compared to a piece of ice which appears wet on 

all sides but still retains its firmness (239). The unity of his 

character is like that of a piece of salt, having the same flavor 

throughout (238). He has turned away from the cycle of 
instrumentalities and is free from distinctions of seer and seen; 

he shines forth as pure intuition (234); he is nothing but 

knowledge (237)." 

"Chapters eleven and twelve, both in anustubh meter, 
continue the theme of the pure viewpoint initiated in the tenth 
chapter. According to this viewpoint, the omniscient 
consciousness of the Jina remains unified even when plurality 
of objects is cognized. This claim of unity needs further 
examination since the Jaina believes in the doctrine of twe 
distinct applications (upayoga) of consciousness, calledd vision 
and knowledge (jfiana)." 

"The poet hails the Jina as anekantasalin and speaks of 
the infinite powers of his consciousness. This is followed by 
the declaration that he will "ignore the manifold nature” and 
"regard him as undifferentiated knowledge" (277). In this 
passage the word "jfidna" stands in the place of "cit" and 
subsumes both vision and knowledge. A little later, in verse 
286, Amrtacandra makes a similar statement, saying that Jina's 
"inner and outer light shine forth as nothing but intuition". 
This is very significant, for it appears that the poet here wishes 
to reduce even awarenesss of external objects (jfidna) to 


514 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


vision, the intuition of the self...." 

"The thirteenth chapter continues with the topic of the 
supremacy of vision according to the pure viewpoint. The 
concepts of contraction (samhdra) and expansion (asamhdra) 
of consciousness appear here. The poet characterizes vision as 
the quality which, lacking all other objects, has been 
contracted on all sides (310) and shines forth with only one 
object, namely the self." 

"Having thus stressed the pure viewpoint and having 
impressed the aspirant with the true glory of the Jina, the poet 
returns to the task of achieving a balance between the higher 
and the commonsensical viewpoints. For it must be 
remembered that even the pure view, however exalted, is but 
a single viewpoint and can apprehend only one of the many 
aspects of the existent. Moreover, the Jina too is subject to the 
law which regulates the role of external causes in producing 
effects (322), and he cannot prevent the objects outside his 
knowledge from being illuminated by his omniscience....It is 
the very nature of (omniscient) cognition, like that of the sun, 
to illuminate the totality of objects, and the Jina has neither 
any desire to know these objects, nor any consciousness of 
agency pertaining to the act of their cognition (314). He 
should see both the unity and multiplicity of consciousness as 
forming the essential nature of the self. The chapter ends with 
the poet's call for self-realization, the state in which these 
manifold aspects are effortlessly subsumed (325)." 

"In the fourteenth chapter the poet views the Jina both 
sequentially, i.e., considering each quality separately, and 
simultaneously, i.e., considering his substance in its unity. 
Looked at from the point of view of particulars, omniscience 
consists, for example, of both intuition and knowledge, but 
from the unified standpoint it is seen as pure consciousness 
alone (326). The chapter fashions such contrasting viewpoints 
into a string of riddles...But the doctrines of anekanta and 
syadvada have goals beyond merely describing the nature of 
reality. The Jina taught them in order to produce 


LAGHUTATTVASPHOTA $15 


discrimination between self and other. The method is one of 
asserting what belongs to the self and negating that which 
belongs to others; hence it is known as vidhipratisedhavidhi 
(338). ‘The objects of knowledge do not belong to the self and 
yet the knower is drawn by them; therefore an aspirant's soul 
should take itself as its object' (345). A person whose mind is 
endowed with such discrimination does not take delight in 
externally oriented actions (346); he attains to the immovable 
fruition of consciousness; for such a one there is no rebirth, 
for he has forcefully uprooted the seed of transmigration 
(347).." 

"The vidhipratisedha method mentioned earlier receives 
further attention in the fifteenth chapter. The poet 
characterizes it as a weapon which has been sharpened 
innumerable times by the Jina during his mundane state 
(353). Vidhi and nisedha, i.e., the positive and negative 
aspects, are mutually antithetical. But when properly balanced 
through the doctrine of syadvada, they work together for the 
accomplishment of the desired goal, namely discrimination 
between the self and the not-self (357). By vidhi is understood 
the own-nature (svabhava) of an existent, defined by its own 
substance, own space, own time and own modes. All existents 
are at all times endowed (vidhi) with their own fourfold 
nature. They are at the same time devoid of (pratisedha) the 
fourfold nature of other existents. Thus both the positive and 
the negative aspects abide equally and simultaneously in the 
Same existent (358)." 

“Although existents are well secured in their own nature 
and never partake of ‘other nature’, they do not thereby 
become entirely independent of each other; there also exists 
thelaw of causation which demands mutual assistance. 'Cause' 
is the designation for a complex situation; it involves self and 
other, i.e., of both material and efficient causes, which operate 
in mutual dependence (365). The Jina's being the embodiment 
of knowledge is not dependent upon any other substance; 
Similarly, the innumerable distinctions (i.e., the reflections of 


516 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the objects cognized) within omniscience are not inherent to 
jt; dual causality is thus clearly evident in the omniscient 
knowledge of the Jina (366)." 

"The law of causation and the law of own-nature should 
both be seen in proper perspective: the two laws are properly 
balanced when one applies to them the conventional and 
higher points of view (370)." 

"In the sixteenth chapter the poet applies the twin laws 
of causation and being to the cognition of the Jina. Just as the 
movement of schools of fish leaves a wake in the sea, this 
entire universe produces an infinitely great net of conceptual . 
constructions in the omniscient cognition (386), constructions 
of the form 'this (object) is thus’. And yet, because the Jina 
possesses both positive and negative aspects, the distinction 
between his self and others is never lost (387). This is because 
both objects and the knowledge of these. objects have their 
own space-points as well as their own substance, time and 
modes; hence there is no possibility of any defiling mixture or 
confusion between them." 

"As if to forestall the false conclusion that the 
constructions in the omniscient cognition are not part of its 
own nature, the poet hastens to add that the Jina undergoes 
these infinite transformations at every moment by his innate 
power (391). This process is always subject to the law of 
dependence upon both material and efficient causes; the 
objects play their proper role as external and instrumental 
causes in the transformation of the cognition." 

"In the seventeenth chapter the poet discusses the 
relationship between words, the qualification ‘maybe; (syat), 
and the reality expressed by them. The positive aspect (vidhi) 
by itself proclaims the object as established in its own 
substance, space, time and modes. But this assertion is 
meaningless unless it simultaneously implies exclusion 
(nisedha) of that object from the substance, space, time and 
modes of others. There is no single word which can ever 
succeed by itself in expressing both these aspects 


LAGHUTATTVASPHOTA 517 


simultaneously. Qualifying one-dimensional assertions with 
'syat", however, renders them expressive of actual, multi- 
dimensional reality. The spoken word...itself expresses the 
primary (mukhya) aspect, whether positive or negative, which 
is desired by the speaker. The qualification “syat" implies the 
other aspects, which are subordinate (gauna) insofar as they 
were not expressly mentioned (421). Thus the two positions 
abide in mutual compatibility and express the referent fully." 

"It could be asked whether this syat produces a power 
that was not present in the words or merely brings out one 
that was already there (417). The Jaina answer to this 
question conforms to syddvdda. The dual power of words is 
innate in them; no external thing can produce a power in 
something else which does not already exist there. But the 
manifestation of that dual power never occurs without the 
accompaniment of the expression 'maybe' (418)." 

"Chapters eighteen and nineteen continue further with 
the dual nature of the existent and the manner in which that 
nature is harmonized by the device of syadvada. The Jina is 
seen, from different viewpoints, as both substance and modes, 
universal and particular, eternal and momentary, existing and 
nonexisting, expressible and nonexpressible. The poet returns 
once again to his favorite theme of the material and efficient 
causes. He accepts objects as the efficient cause of omniscient 
knowledge, but asserts that the subject-object relationship is 
similar to that which obtains between an indicator (vacaka) 
and the thing indicated (artha). There is no real 
interpenetration, dependence, or actual mixing of one 
substance with another (452). Existents are always complete 
in their own-beings (456) and are secured within the 
impregnable limits of their own space-points (452). All 
existents are endowed with mutually opposed aspects. They 
are proportionately divided into substance, modes, etc. 
through the doctrine of 'maybe' (450). Although divisions, i.e. 
the modes, are real, to dwell in them is to dwell in 
speculations of instrumentalities, speculations which cast 


518 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


blemish on the splendor of the own-being (465). Therefore the 
aspirant takes note of them but abides only in that aspect 
which is enduring, which affirms only beingness 
(bhavamatrta), which is the unbroken stream, the 
undifferentiated subtance itself; he becomes aware of the 
unified light of the Jina's consciousness, free from divisions of 
time and space (472)." 

"The twentieth chapter is of special interest as it is a 
critique of Buddhist doctrine, a singular honor not accorded to 
any other darsana by our author...The Jaina characterizes the 
other classical darsanas as partial expositions of reality which 
claim to be speaking the whole truth. This he brands as 
onesidedness (ekdnta), a term which also carries the stigma of 
blind dogmatism. The Vedantic doctrine of monistic absolutism 
or the Buddhist doctrine of momentary dharmas are examples 
of such onesided views; the former apprehends only substance, 
declaring the modes to be unreal, while the latter concerns 
itself only with the present moment and totally excludes the 
substance (or self) which is the underlying unity of past and 
future states. Both doctrines are mutually exclusive and must 
give a false description of reality." 

"The Jaina admits that there is an element of truth in 
both these points of view if they are qualified by an expression 
like 'maybe' (syat), hence asserting one view while suggesting 
the existence of the remaining aspects of reality. Qualified in 
this manner, the Vedantic doctrine can be accepted as 4 
synthetic (samgraha) (477) and the Buddhist momentariness 
as a straightforward (rjusutra) (478) viewpoint; both are valid 
insofar as they represent reality as it is successively perceived. 
By the use of syddvdda the Jaina can not only transform the 
false, i.e., the absolutist doctrines, into instruments of 
knowledge (naya) but he can even play devil's advocate with 
no apparent inconsistehcy (476)." 

"The twentieth chapter provides a fine examples’ ‘ofa 
Jaina attempt to accord validity to the Buddhist tenet of . 
momentariness by transforming it into the rjusiitranaya. The 


LAGHUTATTVASPHOTA 519 


tenet can thus be accommodated with the rest of the Jaina 
doctrine and can even be presented as a teaching of the 
omniscient Jina, who thus deserves to be called 'Sugata' or 
even ‘Tathagata’, two time-honored epithets of Sakyamuni 
Buddha (495)." 

“Although momentarinesss (ksanabhangavada) is the 
main tenet for assimilation, the poet makes a broad sweep, 
bringing almost all shades of Buddhist doctrine under his 
purview in the brief span of twenty verses. The chapter 
abounds in Buddhist technical terms..." 

"The twenty-first chapter is probably a criticism of the 
Nyaya-Vaisesika system, which regards the universal and the 
particular as two separate entities related to the other 
categories by means of inherence. For the Jaina the universal 
and the particular constitute reality itself and hence cannot be 
separated (512). What is called ‘universal’ is the substance, 
which ‘becomes by way of similarity’, i.e., which is the 
continuity among the particulars, namely the modes (513). 
The same rule applies regarding absence. In the Jaina system 
an existent is characterized by both presence and absence. It 
is presence from the point of view of its own being (namely, 
substance, space, time and modes) and its absence from the 
point of view of the other (524)." 

"Although of miscellaneous character, chapters 22, 23 
and 24 can be considered together as they touch repeatedly 
upon one of the author's favorite themes, omniscient cognition 
and its incorruptibility by the impact of the objects cognized. 
In the Jina all feelings have been eradicated, because he has 
turned his face away from attachment to external objects 
(526). A wondrous stream of bliss flows within him, carrying 
his concentrated insight (magnam drsam) even more deeply 
into his soul (526). It is even possible to suggest that the 
objects are not perceived at all, that only the knowledge is; for 
is it not true that the internalized objects are nothing but 
transformations within and of the knowledge? And yet the 
Jina's teaching does not consist in negating the reality of the 


520 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


objective universe (536). He need not negate objects, for there 
is no fear either of their entering into or making actual contact 
with the self. This is because all existents have mutual 
boundaries which are innate and fixed; they never fall away 
from their nature (537). The Jina can in no way be 
contaminated by his cognitions (537). He abides forever deep 
in the boundless mass of innate knowledge. Because’ of the 
absence of delusion he will never again have the notion of 
agency. Even if it is alleged that knowing involves agency, 
what can the Jina do other than know? (539) Cognitions are 
not able to move the Jina away from the unified consciousness 
of his self (542). The aspirant should cast out all vitiated 
transformations of the soul until there shines the light of 
omniscience, the only thing which cannot be removed (549). 
Only then is the firm knot of passions totally dissolved (558), 
and upon this dissolution the cognition exists only as Knower." 
"The twenty-fifth and final chapter deals with the 
integration of action and knowledge (karmajfidnasamuccaya) 
(615), which would appear to be the heart of Jaina teaching. 
The poet, as usual, begins with the importance of knowledge. 
There is, he says, some subtle thing (i.e. the bond of 
attachment) that obscures the true nature of the Jina from the 
seeker (602). Ignorant persons indulge in ever more severe 
activities but fail to perceive the truth. As to those who 
dissolve the knot of subtle attachment and devote themselves 
to restraints, they obtain the inner light and secure their own 
natural state (602). Great effort should therefore be made to 
control the totality of desires, for there is no release for the 
yogin who undertakes merely the restraint of vibrations (yoga) 
but remains bound by inner attachments (612). Activity 
pertaining to perfect conduct must, however, remain the sole 
refuge (613) until one has attained release from internal 
bonds; thereafter, as in the case of an arhat, these activities 
are involuntary and have no further goal (613). As to those 
who, deluded by the mere touch of an occasional glimpse of 
self-realization, think they can dispense with the actions 


LAGHUTATTVASPHOTA 521 


pertaining to pure conduct and cease to be vigilant, they will 
surely fall away from their asceticism and injure themselves 
again (615). But those who are at all times firmly secure in 
sharp awareness of the self and behave with equanimity 
towards all will reside in their own selves, which are filled 
with both vision and knowledge (617). The aspirant, knowing 
the importance of both knowledge and action, applies himself 
to the entire field of scriptural knowledge with great 
resolution, grasps fully the nature of the self, and remains 
secured in the restraints which lead to perfectly pure conduct. 
Dispelling darkness, he destroys the bondage of karma. Such 
a soul, touching his own reality, i.e., the self, attains to the 
domain of omniscient knowledge which illuminates the whole 
universe; only then does he come to rest (618). 


77. DEVASENA (933), Nayacakra/Alapapaddhati 

H. L. Jain and A. N. Upadhye write: "The Nayacakra of 
Devasena in 87 gathds...Devasena has composed the 
Alapapaddhati in Sanskrit on his own Nayacakra to 
supplement the latter with the discussion about dravya, guna 
and paryaya." 


Summary by Ratna Lahiri 


"E” references are to the Bharatiya Jnanapith Moortidevi 
Jain Granthamala Prakrit Series 12, in which a Hindi 
translation of this work by Kailasacandra Shastri is found. The 
summary is made on the basis of that translation. 


1 (E209) There are six substances: selves, not-self (i.e., 
matter), initiator of movement, initiator of stasis, space and 
time. Substance, which consists of origination, destruction and 
permanence, is what exists. 

(E210-212) General qualities are: existence (astitva), 
actuality (vastutva), relative size (agurulaghutva), space- 


522 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


pointedness (pradesatva), thought (cetanatva), lack of thought 
(acetanatva), materiality or embodiment (mirtatva) and 
immateriality or disembodiment (amurtatva). Each substance 
has six of these eight qualities, 

There are sixteen special qualities of substances: (1) 
awareness, (2) vision, (3) pleasure, (4) energy, (5) touch, (6) 
taste, (7) smell, (8) color (varna), (9) cause of movement 
(gatihetutva), (1) cause of stasis (sthitihetutva), (11) cause of 
accommodating space (avagdhahetutva), (12) cause of 
persistence (vartanahetutva), (13) thought, (14) lack of 
thought, (15) embodiment and (16) disembodiment. A self has 
(1)-(4), (13) and (14). Matter has the rest. The other four 
substances have three special qualities each. (13)-(16) are 
general in case of their own kind but special in relation to the 
opposite kind. 

Modifications in the qualities are known as modes. They 
are of two types, (A) natural modes (svabhava) and (B)modes 
of aspects (vibhava). Natural modes, related to the relative 
size of the mode, are of twelve kinds (six stages of increase 
and six of decreasing space-pointedness are enumerated). 
Modes of aspects are four (human, hellish, celestial, animal) 
of 840,000 births--these are the conditioned 
(vibhavavyayijana) modes. Immediate awareness, clairvoyance, 
telepathy, etc., are known as the conditioned modes. That the 
body in which liberation is acquired becomes slightly shrunken 
in size but rémains of the same shape is known as its natural 
(svabhdvavyafijana) mode. The four endlessnesses, viz., 
endless knowledge, endless pleasure, etc., are the natural 
modes of a substance. The conditions of two atoms of matter 
making up aggregates, etc., are known as expression 
(vyafijana) substance modes. When a condition of one taste or 
smell shifts to another taste or smell, then it is the conditioned 
expression mode. One atom of the pure state of matter is a 
natural conditioned mode. In this atom if one of color, one of 
taste and two of touch (one rough or smooth and one hot or 
cold) qualities occur, then it is termed a natural conditioned 


NAYACAKRA/ALAPAPADDHATI 523 


mode of material quality. At all times these modes rise and fall 
in the substances eternally--just like waves in water. | 

2 (E213) An intrinsic nature (svabhdva) is and is not, 
is permanent and impermanent, many and one, differentiated 
and undifferentiated, capable of liberation and not so capable, 
and it is realized; these are the eleven general (samdnya) 
intrinsic natures of substances. There are ten specific (visesa) 
intrinsic natures. 

Self and matter have all twenty-one natures. Initiators 
of movement and of stasis along with space have sixteen; time 
has fifteen. 

These substances can be known by instruments of true 
cognition and from perspectives. Knowledge is of two types, 
direct and indirect. 

Nigama means optional. What has not yet materialized 
but is conceptually available in its nondiscriminated totality is 
the conventional perspective. 

The commonsensical (vyavahdra) perspective is the 
empirical point of view. Samgrahanaya accepts the view 
arising out of the collection of all the substances as 
nondifferentiated. The commonsensical perspective accepts the 
meanings thus arrived at and differentiates between them. The 
rjusitra perspective accepts only the reality of the moment. 

Acceptance of the grammatical form and etymology, 
etc., is the linguistic viewpoint (Sabdanaya). Clairvoyance and 
telepathic knowledge are limited direct knowledge while 
complete knowledge (kevalajfidna) is omniscience. Immediate 

‘and verbal awarenesses are indirect. Perspectives are just limbs 
of the instruments of true cognition. 

3 (E214) Of all the perspectives the basic two are 
substantial (dravydrthika) and modal (parydyarthika). They 
are the causes for successful ultimate realization (niscaya). 

There are nine perspectives: substantial (dravyarthika), 
modal (paryayarthika), conventional, collective (samgraha, 
with emphasis on the universal amidst particulars), practical 
(vyavahdra), rjusiitra (at a particular point of time), sabda 


524 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(with reference to the meaning, functional), samabhiridha 
(application of sabda), and evambhdta or strict constructionist. 
Further subdivisions of these perspectives are called 
subperspectives (upanaya). E.g., the substantial perspective 
has ten subcategories, each of which is enumerated with its 
relative emphasis of viewpoint. Then six categories of the 
particular perspectives are enumerated. The conventional 
perspective has three sub-perspectives, past, present and 
future. The collective, practical and temporal each have two 
subperspectives, and the rest have none. Thus there are 
twenty-eight subperspectives. 

Qualities co-exist forever with a substance; modes come 
and go. Qualities separate one substance from another. 

4-5 (E219) The ten qualities are each explained. 

Modes are transformations into natural and conditioned 
states. A substance never abandons its natural state, thus, it is 
existent by nature. It never acquires the nature of another, 
thus, it is nonexistent by nature. In each of its modes, it is 
recognized as the same in nature; therefore it is eternal. 
However, it continuously changes its modifications; therefore 
it is transient by nature. Its substratum is the same amidst 
different modes, therefore it is one. However, it has 
differences regarding qualifier and qualified, name, number, 
purpose and signs; therefore it is many. The qualities have a 
different purpose, hence a substance and its qualities are 
differentiated. However, the qualities and the substance 
owning those qualities are actually the same; hence, it is also 
undifferentiated. In future it may acquire another form; thus 
it is capable of salvation (bhavya). But it never changes its 
form, thus it is not capable of such transformation in another 
sense. 

6 (E220) It has been said in the Paficastikayasitra (v. 
7) that all substances are intermingled in space and give space 
to one another, thus though intermingled they are still 
different. 

Due to its transformative nature, a substance has the 


NAYACAKRA/ALAPAPADDHATI 525 


potential for highest transformation. This is the general nature 
of substance. 

The nature of a substance is not its quality, but in 
relation to a thing's substance, area, time and state its qualities 
become its nature. 

Transference of nature from one to another is known as 
transferred (upacarita) nature, which can be of two types. The 
first arises from karma, the other is innate. For example, 
embodiment of self or unconsciousness belong to the nature 
arising from karma, i.e., from acquired karmic matter. 
Knowledge and omniscience in the realized being is an innate 
transferred nature. 

7 (E221) Due to false perspective, often a substance is 
considered real in itself, because false perspective (durnaya) 
knows only its own (one-sided) meaning. One does not look 
at other perspectives and considers only one's own. Being one- 
sided and opposing all possible viewpoints, they are in error. 

If a substance is seen to be true only from a single point 
of view, then due to many mixed falsehoods the true meaning 
will not be revealed. If always every substance is considered 
absolutely existent, then everything will become the same: self, 
etc., will become identical. Similarly, if substance is considered 
exclusively nonexistent, then all will be empty (Stnya). If 
substance is considered eternal then, being nondifferentiated, 
it will have no capacity to produce action and therefore 
becomes nonexistent. If considered exclusively temporal 
(anitya) it will be destroyed constantly and be unable to 
produce action, thus again becoming nonexistent. 

8 (E221) If it is considered nondifferentiated without 
either general or specific modes, then too with the lack of 
either the other will be meaningless (generalities will occur 
only in relation to specifics). So both general and specific will 
then become nonexistent like the horns of a donkey. 

If considered to’be merely many (instead of one), then 
too the substance will cease to be, as absolute differentiation 
will not have a unitary substratum. Without substratum and 


526 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


what is supported, there will again be a lack of substance. 
Between general and specific, if absolute differences are 
accepted, then due to the inability of either to create activity, 
again there will be no substantiality. 

If any absolute or exclusive viewpoint is accepted, then 
there will be no difference between the known and the 
knower, the seeker and the sought, everyone will be pure and 
perfect, there will be no difference between teacher and 
student. 

The word "always" (sarvatha) can mean either in all 
time, or in all types or as a rule, or relative predication 
(anekanta sapeksa). If the last is accepted, then it proves our 
way. This means a substance is seen not in one way alone but 
from all perspectives, as it has many natures. If that is taken 
as the rule, then how can there be scope for both eternal, 
transient, one-many, differentiated/undifferentiated, etc., 
possibilities of all meanings? Then you will be accepting just 
one perspective exclusively. 

If an absolutist unconsciousness principle is accepted 
there will arise the destruction of all conscious substance. If 
the self is considered corporeal, then it will not have 
liberation. If considered totally unformed, the world itself will 
disappear. If considered as occupying just one space-point or 
many space-points exclusively, then the undivided total self 
will not be able to execute its many activities. If considered 
totally pure, karmic matter will not be able to accrue to it. If 
considered impure by nature, how will it ever become pure? 

9 (E225) Instruments of true cognition are of two 
kinds, constructionfilled (savikalpaka) and constructionfree 
(nirvikalpaka). Knowledge accruing with the help of the mind 
is known as constructionfilled, and has four categories: 
awareness of a present object (i.e., immediate awareness, 
matijfiana), scriptural or traditional awareness (srutajfdna), 
extrasensory awareness (avadhijfidna), and _ telepathic 
knowledge (manahparydyajfiana). Knowledge acquired without 
the help of the mind, by the self alone, is known as 


NAYACAKRA/ALAPAPADDHATI 527 


construction-free, i.e. complete (kevala) awarenesss or igness 
omniscience. 

Ascription or imposition of the instruments of true 
cognition and perspectives is known as the study of 
implications (niksepa). It is fourfold: that which refers to 
proper’'names (ndma), that which refers to the ascribed 
meaning (sthdpana, representations), that referring to meaning 
in future time (dravya, potency) and that referring to the 
meaning of the nature of the object at present (bhava). 

(E226-227) There are two perspectives, substantial and 
practical. Of these the substantial focusses on the 
undifferentiated, the practical on differences. 

The substantial has two subtypes, pure and impure. 
That which finds as its subject the undifferentiated unity of the 
quality and the qualified is the pure substantial view, e.g., the 
self as omniscience. What focusses on the qualified content as 
the impure substantial perspective, ¢.g., present awarenesss, 
is the self. 

The practical perspective has two divisions: (1) 
differentiating between varieties of the same substance 
(sadbhita), (2) differentiating between varieties of different 
substances (asadbhtita). Each have two further categories of 
transferred (upacarita) and not transferred (anupacarita), 
depending upon which finer similar or different characteristics 
they compare or impose on the perspectives. Separating the 
qualified from the qualifier, with its attributes, is the practical 
sadbhitta perspective, for example, the view that present 
awarenesss, etc., are qualities of the self. An example of 
practical asadbhitta perspective is ascribing undifferentiated 
omniscience to the self: 


78. DEVASENA (934), Tattvasara 


Summary by Jay Soni 


528 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


"E" references are to the edition with commentaries by 
Hiralal Siddhanta Sastri, Ahmedabad 1981. 


4 (E25) Devasena regards a direct meditation on 
nonindependent categories as a cause for merit and, through 
the tradition, as a cause for liberation. 

5 (E27) The independent categories are of two kinds: 
constructionfilled and constructionfree. The constructionfilled 
cate-gories are those which are combined with the influx of 
karma and the constructionfree are those without karma. 

6-7 (E28-29) Description of how the gradual transition 
from the fourth stage of progress to the eleventh is achieved. 

8 (E30) Description of the pure nature of the soul, 
having right vision, right awarenesss and right conduct, being 
called pure consciousness. 

9 (E32) One should become a monk (lit. "bondless" 
(nirgrantha) and meditate on this purity. 

10 (E33) Description of the person called "bondless", 
namely, one who has given up the ten exterior and the sixteen 
interior kinds of bonds. 

11 (E34) Description of the condition under which 
meditation on the self is possible, namely, the necessity of 
seeing e.g., pleasure and pain, life and death as the same. 

16 (E42) If one desires the joy of liberation then 
attachment, aversion and delusion should be renounced and 
meditation should be practiced. 

17-21 (E43-62) Description of the essential nature of 
the self from the higher standpoint (niscayanaya). 

22 (E64) Description of the self from the 
commonsensical standpoint. 

23-24 (E65-66) The possibility of separating the self 
from karma is pointed out. 

7 25 (E67) One should strive to grasp the nature of the 
self. 

26-28 (E69-72) Further qualities of the self described. 

29 (E73) The nature of the self can be realized through 


TATTVASARA 529 


meditation. , 

30-31 (E74-75) Just as the sun shines fully without the — 
veil of the clouds, so too does the true nature of the self shine 
forth without karma. For this a stoppage of the activities of 
mind, speech and body is necessary. 

32 (E76) With the stoppage of these there is a stoppage 
of the influx of new karma, and the karma that is already 
bound to the soul is also destroyed. 

33 (E79) Liberation is possible only through the 
nonattachment of karma. 

34 (E80) Conversely, with attachment of karma there 
is bondage. 

35 (E81) Difference between the knowing and the 
ignorant persons. 

36 (E83) Superiority of taking the middle way. 

37-38 (E84-85) A yogi is neither pleased nor displeased 
with anything. 

39 (E86) The mind of one who knows the nature of 
things is not disturbed by attachment, aversion or delusion. 

40 (E88) Such a person has a vision of the self, not 
those whose minds are disturbed. 

41 (E49) The stillness of the mind for a glimpse of the 
self is compared to the stillness of a lake which enables one to 
see through it. 

42 (E91) No sooner is the yogi free from the objects of 
the senses then there is a glimpse of the self and a knowledge 
of everything. 

43 (E92) Therefore one should leave the objects of the 
senses and meditate on the pure nature of the self endowed 
with knowledge. 

44 (E94) The person who meditates on the self with 
thorough understanding (samvedana) is freed from passions, 
is pure and is the bearer of the three jewels. 

45 (E95) A person who has experienced the pure nature 
of the self is a person who has right vision, awarenesss and 
conduct. 


530 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


46 (E98) Even though a yogi has attained unflinching 
concentration, if he not experienced the essential nature of 
the self, then this purity cannot be attained by him. 

47-48 (E99-100) Through constant meditation a yogi 
cannot experience the pure nature of the self if attached to 
physical pleasure. 

49 (E102) But the yogi who becomes unattached to the 
sicknesses of the body, meditates on the self, he becomes 
perfected after being freed from the five kinds of bodies. 

50 (E103) When a yogi who constantly meditates on 
the self experiences karma there is no doubt that it is 
beneficial. 

51 (E104) In experiencing the fruit of this karma 
without attachment or aversion, there is no bondage to new 
karma, and there is a destruction of the karma already 
accumulated. ; 

52 (E105) But if the karma is experienced with good or 
bad feelings, then there is bondage to the new karma. 

53 (E106) Even if there is a minute attachment to 
things of the world there is no freedom from karmic bondage. 

54 (E108) Only the ascetic practice of one who is fixed 
in meditation without attachment or aversion leads to a 
destruction of karma. 

55 (E113) This happens because a knower does not 
deviate from his essential nature; such a person not only stops 
the influx of new karma, but also destroys existing karma. 

56 (E115) The person who is freed from dependence 
experiences his or her essential nature with a fixed mind. Such 
a person has definitive vision, awareness and conduct. 

57 (E116) This is so because from the higher standpoint 
the self itself has vision, awareness and conduct, and is pure 
consciousness. 

58 (E117) After having obtained one's own pure nature 
by destroying attachment and aversion, yogis obtain supreme 
bliss. 

59 (E118) If one does not obtain supreme bliss during 


TATTVASARA 531 


concentration, then what should one do with concentration or 
yogic practice? Nothing at all. 

60 (E119) Even if there is the slightest movement when 
one is fixed in concentration, the pleasing supreme bliss 
cannot be obtained. 

61 (E120) But when the mind's activity has stopped and 
all thoughts are stilled, then the eternal nature of the self 
which it experiences is the cause of liberation. 

62 (E122) For the yogi fixed in his own nature there is 
no awareness of sense objects nor the arising of karma, but 
only a knowledge and view of the pure self. 

63 9E123) The mind of a yogi who has obtained the 
essential nature of the self does not roam around sense-objects 
but, desireless, becomes identical with the nature of the self, 
for they (the sense-objects) are destroyed through the weapon 
of concentration. 

64 (E125) The mind perishes only when the entire 
delusion karma is destroyed. No sooner is it destroyed than 
the mind is also destroyed, and at the same time the 
ghatiyakarman also perishes. 

65 (E126) The reason for this is because the delusion 
karma is involved with all karma. Just as in a battle when the 
king is killed the army disperses, so too as soon as the 
delusion karma is destroyed the remaining ghatiya karma also 
perishes. 

66 (E127) As soon as all the four (kinds of) 
ghatiyakarman are destroyed the world and nonworld shine 
forth, there arises pure, knowledge in the knower of the 
qualities and modes of substance in the present, past and 
future, and this yogi becomes a supreme self. 

67 (E129) As long as there exists karma responsible for 
life the yogi remains in the state of a Tirthankara or samdya 
kevalin, roaming around teaching the path to liberation to 
those selves destined for liberation, becoming an ayogikevalin 
when the length of life karma has a maximum of forty-eight 
minutes (antarmuhiurta). 


532 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


68 (E130) A liberated (siddha) self is free of both 
movement and nonmovement, without activity, in bliss 
without disease, endowed with the supreme qualities. 

‘69 (E131) Becoming graduaily devoid of senses at this 
time the liberated self knows and sees all at once both the 
world and the nonworld and all the material and immaterial 
substances endowed with their eternal qualities and modes. 

70 (E133) Since there is no initiator of movement 
beyond the world the liberated self does not move and 
therefore remains eternally above the world. 

71 (E134) When the self becomes free from karma why 
does it not go downwards or diagonally when the principle of 
motion is still present? Here Devasena says that it is because 
it is the nature of the self to go upwards. 

72 (E135) The liberated self is devoid of the five kinds 
of bodies, has a lesser form of the last body, with no future 
births or deaths. I bow down to such liberated selves. 

73 (E136) The self that crosses this poisonous ocean of 
existences immersed in the mutually dependent categories 
should always be good to the categories which give refuge to 
all the selves. 

74 (E138) If a person who has right vision practices 
concentration on the category of self through this essence of 
categories (Tattvasara) composed by Devasena, such a person 
will obtain supreme happiness. 


79. DEVASENA, Darganasara 
Summary by Bhagchandra Jain 


This work was composed by Devasena, the disciple of 
Vimalasena, in 933 in Dharanagari. It consists of 51 gathas in 
Prakrit. Devasena is of the view that the ‘first tirthankara 
Rsabhadeva's son Marici is the main originator of ekdntavadin 
philosophies like ekanta, saméaya, viparita, vinaya, and ajfidna. 


DARSANASARA 533 


In his opinion, Pihitasrava's disciple Buddharti was the great 
scholar in the Parsvanatha tradition. But he started eating 
meat and refused to accept the existence of a self, established 
the theory of momentarinesss and became the founder of 
Buddhism (cf. gatha no. 6). Thereafter Devasena criticises the 
view of Svetambara Jainas, Viparitavadins, Vacanikas, 
Ajhanavadins, Dravidas, Yapaniyas, Kasthasanghiyas, 
Mathurasanghiyas and Bhillakasanghiyas along with their 
origination. When speaking of Kasthasangha he refers to 
Kundakunda, Virasena's disciple Jinasena, Gunabhadra, 
Vinayasena and Kumarasena. He mentions Kumarasena as the 
preacher of Kasthasangha and expressed his opinion that it 
was originated v.s. 753. Likewise, the origin of Mathurasangha 
was made by Ramasena in Mathura in v.s. 953, according to 
gathas 39-40. 


80. MANIKYANANDIN (940), Pariksamukha 

This author clearly follows Akalanka in his 
interpretations of logical points. M. A. Dhaky ("The date of 
Vidyananda: literary and epigraphical evidence", Nirgrantha 2, 
1996, pp. 25-28) identifies him as "a confrére, possibly senior, 
of Vidyananda". Since Dhaky shows that inscriptional evidence 
fixes Vidyananda’'s date as in the first half of the tenth century, 
Manikyanandin's date must fall at about the same time. 

"ET" references are to the edition and translation by Sarat 

Chandra Ghoshal in Sacred Books of the Jains 11, Lucknow 
1940. The summary is by Potter. 


INTRODUCTION 
1 (ET1) Correct understanding of things comes from 
instruments of true cognition, and error from what is only 
apparently true (but is not). This work gives a brief account of 
these. 


534 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


CHAPTER ONE 

1 (ET12) An instrument of true cognition is an 
awareness which ascertains itself and objects not previously 
ascertained. 

2 (ET30) It is an awareness which enables the obtaining 
of worthwhile (hita) things and avoidance of things that are 
not worthwhile (ahita). 

3 (ET32) An instrument of true cognition such as 
inference ascertains definitively (niscaya) what contradicts 
mistakes (samaropa) 

4-5 (ET36-37) "Not previously ascertained" (in 1.1 
above) explained. Even something that has been ascertained 
correctly can become unascertained through mistakes. 

7-12 (ET38-41) “Ascertainment of itself’ (in 1.1) is 
illumination (pratibhasa) of itself along with other objects. 
E.g., we say "I know the pot by myself" (grammatical analysis 
given). But cognition is also self-aware where no language is 
involved, analogously to the lamp lighting itself up as well as 
objects around it. 

13 (ET44) Validity (of an instrument of cognition) may 
come through that instrument itself or through another 
instrument of true cognition. 


CHAPTER TWO 

1-2 (ET48-49) There are two kinds of instruments of 
true cognition, direct (=perception) and indirect (=inference). 

4-5 (ETS0-57) Perception is clear, i.e., illumination 
without any intervening awareness and/or through what 
possesses a specific property (visesavattaya). 

5 (ET60) Sensory or nonsensory awareness whose 
clarity is partial is called commonsensical (samvydavahdrika). 

6-8 (ET65-) Neither the object (known) nor the light 
that illuminates it isan instrument of true cognition, since 
they can be discerned in the dark. This is shown through 
positive and negative concomitance in the case of mosquitoes, 
hair, etc. and by animals’ ability to see at night. 


PARIKSAMUKHA 535 


9-10 (ET68-71) Though not caused by an object, like a 
lamp awareness illumines objects through its ability to quiesce 
(upagama) through destruction (ksaya) (things) that can 
obstruct it. If it (the object itself) were the cause (of 
perception it) could be deviating (vyabhicdra) because the 
senses, etc. (are the cause}. 

11-12 (ET72-75) Absolutely clear perception does not 
depend on any sense-organ and arises when all obstructions 
are destroyed through perfection of its sufficient condition. A 
hindrance (pratibandhaka) can arise through (awareness) that 
is caused by the senses and involves obstructions. 


CHAPTER THREE 

1-2 (ET78-80) The other instrument, indirect, has (five) 
varieties: memory (smrti), recognition (pratyabhijria), 
reduction to absurdity (tarka), inference and scripture. It is 
caused by perception, etc. 

3-4 (ET81-83) Memory is an awareness of the form "it 
is that" resulting from the arising of a trace, as when we say 
"this is Devadatta’". 

5-10 (ET84) Recognition is a combination of vision and 
memory, when we say (or think) "this is that" or "this is like 
that", etc. Examples are provided. 

11-13 (ET87) Reduction to absurdity (here, tha) is 
awareness of pervasion arising from experiencing things 
together or not together, e.g., smoke occurs with fire and 
without fire there is no smoke. 

14-30 (ET90-100) Inference is the awareness of a 
sddhya on the basis of a hetu (here, saddhana). A hetu is 
something regularly found (niscita) with a sadhya. Pervasion 
(here, avindbhava) is the regularity of one thing following 
another. Concomitance (sahabhava) is (the relation between) 
coexistents, between pervaded and pervader. The regularity of 
one thing following another may be causal or not, and is 
ascertained by reduction to absurdity (of its opposite). 

Definitions of other words used in the context of 


536 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


inference: A saddhya.is something desired (to be proved) which 
is unsublated and not already proved--thus excluding what is 
doubtful, false and/or not understood. A s@dhya may be the 
property (dharma) (to be proved) or an entity having that 
property. The latter is also called the paksa. When it is 
cognzed through conceptual construction (vikalpa) the sadhya 
will consist of existence or absence, as in, e.g., "(an) 
omniscient being exists" and "donkeys horns do not exist". 

31-34 (ET100-102) When established by an instrument 
of true cognition or by both (such an instrument as well as 
conceptual construction) a property-possessor (dharmin) is 
qualified by the sadhya-property. But in the context of 
pervasion it is only the property (not the possessor) that is 
known as the sadhya. 

35-36 (ET102-103) The paksa, though it is known 
(through perception) already, is specified in order to 
differentiate just which sadhya we are speaking of (i.e., where 
it is located, etc.). 

37-47 (ET104-111) There are only two limbs of an 
inference; the "example" (uddharana) is not (a third limb): no 
sapaksa is needed to cause our awareness of the sadhya, since 
the hetu is that (cause), and no vipaksa is required to prove 
the necessity of pervasion, since that is proved through (the 
absence of) a sublator. Furthermore, an example deals only 
with particulars, while pervasion relates general features; if it 
were otherwise we would need an example to prove the 
example, resulting in infinite regress. Nor does the example 
remind us of the pervasion, since providing the hetu has 
already done that. The example actually only raises a doubt as 
to whether the sddhya is in the paksa; otherwise there should 
be no need for an application and conclusion (as in the Nyaya 
five-membered version of the inference). And indeed, these 
two are not needed, but only because they are unnecessary 
once one knows what the hetu and the sddhya are. Perhaps 
(the three members, viz., example, application and conclusion) 
are only provided to help those of limited understanding. 


PARIKSAMUKHA 537 


There are two kinds of example, viz., a positively and a 
negatively concomitant. 

52-56 (ET116-119) Inference for oneself and inference 
for others. 

57-59 (ET121-122) There are two kinds of reason, a 
positive and a negative kind. Each of the two can further be 
subdivided into two, affirmative (vidhi) and denying 
(pratisedha). Anoncontradictory affirmation has six varieties: 
(for which see 65-70 below). 

60 (ET122) A cause can be a hetu when there is no 
other cause to prevent it. E.g., one infers fruit from juice and 
then infers its form from that. 

61-64 (ET124-126) There are no antecedent or 
consequent (hetus) since the identity or reappearance of a 
thing is not known after a passage of time. Neither future nor 
past, nor death and awareness of waking, cause such things as 
omens of death, waking up in the morning, etc., for there is 
no causal connection between these things. Also there is no 
such kind of hetu as collocative (sahacdra), for the same 
reason. 

65-70 (ET127-129) The six kinds of noncontradictory 
affirmation, with examples provided: 

(1) (Vyapya) The case where the hetu is pervaded 
by the sadhya. 

(2) (Karya) Where the sadhya is a result of the hetu. 

(3) (Karana) Where the hetu is a result of the 


sadhya. 
(4) (Purvdcara) Where the sadhya precedes the hetu. 
(5) (Uttaracara) Where the hetu precedes the sadhya. 
(6) (Saha@cadra) Where the sddhya and the hetu 
coexist. 


71-77 (ET129-131) A parallel list of six kinds of 
contradictory affirmation, with examples provided. 

78-85 (ET131-133) Seven kinds of noncontradictory 
denial: 


538 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(1) (Svabhava) The bare absence of a thing ("there 
is no pot here"). 
(2) (Vyapaka) Absence because of absence of its 
pervader ("there is no elm here because there's no tree here"). 
(3) (Karya) Absence of effect because of absence of 
cause. 
(4) (Karana) Absence of cause because of absence of 
effect. 
(S) (Purvacara) Absence of the sadhya because of 
absence of the hetu. 
(6) (Uttardcara) Absence of the hetu because of 
absence of the sddhya. 
(7) (Sahacara) Absencé of one of a coexisting pair 
because of the absence of the other. 
86-89 (ET133-134) Kinds of contradictory denial: 
(a) (Karya) Absence of effect because of absence of 
cause. 
(b) (Karana) Absence of cause because of absence of 
effect. 
(c) (Svabhava) E.g., "each thing has many aspects, 
because they are not found to have only one aspect". 
90-93 (ET135-136) A series of causes should be treated 
as one. Examples. 
99-100 (ET137-140) Scripture is knowledge based on 
the words of a qualified person. Words cause us to know 
things through their inherent power. 


CHAPTER FOUR 
1-9 (ET146-151) The contents (visaya) (of an 
instrument of true cognition) are universal and particular 
corresponding to similarities and differences. There are two 
kinds of universal, animalic and upright, and there are two 
kinds of particularities, viz., modal and differential. 


PARIKSAMUKHA 539 


CHAPTER FIVE . 
1-3 (ET152-154) The result (of an instrument of true 
cognition) is the avoidance of ignorance, wrong dispensings or 
acquirings, and endurance. 


CHAPTER SIX 

1-7 (ET156-159) Fallacies of the instruments of true 
cognition (pramandabhdasa) include failure to recognize oneself, 
cognizing what is aleady known, doubt, etc., for those fail to 
accomplish their results. Among examples mentio:1ed are the 
(Nyaya) notion of inherence in what is conjoined 
(samyuktasamavaya), the (Buddhist) idea of perception of fire 
upon a sudden vision of smoke, and the Mimamsa idea of the 
clarity of sense-perception. 

8 (ET160) A fallacy of memory occurs when one 
misidentifies Jinadatta as Devadatta. 

9 (ET161) Fallacious recognition is misidentifying one 
twin as the other. 

10 (ET161) A fallacy of tarka is to suppose pervasion 
between unrelated things. 

11-45 (ET162-179) The fallacies of inference: 

1. Fallacies of the paksa have varieties such as 
describing the paksa in a way denied by the hearer, etc. on the 
basis of contradictory experience, inference, testimony, 
common parlance or belief on one's own part. Examples given, 
including as example of the last (i.e., on one's own part) "my 
mother is barren”. 

2. Fallacies of the reason (or of the hetu): 

a. Unproved (asiddha): a hetu that either definitely 
doesn't pervade the paksa or where that pervasion is doubtful. 

1. Definite (svaripasiddha): Example: sound is 
perishable because it is visible. 

2. Doubtful (samdighasiddha): Examples: "Here 
there is fire because here there is smoke" said by someone 
who is not very smart (who can't tell smoke from steam), or 
when a Samkhya philosopher says “sound is perishable 


540 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


because it is caused" (since Samkhya doesn't believe in 
creation). 

b. Contradictory (viruddha): a hetu is pervaded by 
what is certainly the opposite of the sadhya. Example: "Sound 
is not perishable because it is caused”. 

c. Deviant (anaikdntika): where the hetu resides in 
the vipaksa. 

1. Definite (niscita): Example: "Sound is 
perishable because it is knowable, like a pitcher", since 
imperishable things are knowable too. 

2. Doubtful (sankita): Example: "An omniscient 
being does not exist, because he can speak", since being 
omniscient doesn't necessarily exclude being able to speak. 

d. Futile (?) (akimcitkara): where the paksa's being 
a sddhya is either already accepted or is excluded by 
perception, etc. é 

1. Already accepted (siddha): Example: "Sound 
can be heard, because it is sound. 

2. Sublated (badhita) by perception: Example: 
"Fire is cold, because it is a substance”. 

(d) is not really a fourth fallacy of the reason, being 
covered under "fallacies of the paksa" (above). 

3. Fallacies of the example: the example is not 
appropriate, 

a. relating to the sapaksa (sadharmya, anvaya): 

1. Where the sp is unlike the s: Example: 
"Sound is not found in man (apauruseya), because it is 
immaterial, like satisfaction". Here satisfaction is found in 
man. 

2. Where the sapaksa is unlike the sa@dhya: 
Example: "Sound is not found in man, because it is immaterial, 
like an atom”. Here an atom is not immaterial. 

3. Where both 1 and 2 apply. Example: "Sound 
is not found in man, because it is immaterial, like a jar’, since 
a jar is neither found in man nor immaterial. 

b. relating to the vipaksa (vaidharmya, vyatireka): 


PARIKSAMUKHA S41 


1. Where the vipaksa is like the sddhya: e.g., 
"Sound is not found in man, because it is immaterial, unlike 
an atom". Here an atom is like the sddhya (it is found in 
man). 
2. Where the vipaksa is like the hetu; e.g., 
"Sound. is not found in man, because it is immaterial, unlike 
satisfaction". Here satisfaction is like the hetu (it is 
immaterial). 

3. Where both 1 and 2 apply. Example: "Sound 
is not found in man, because it is immaterial, unlike space". 
Here space is found in man and is immaterial. 

46-50 (ET188-189) A fallacy called bdlaprayoga 
("childish mistake"?) occurs when one of the members fails to 
get mentioned. 

51-54 (ET190) Fallacious verbal authority occurs when 
the speaker's words are subject to passions, delusion, or error. 

55-60 (ET191-192) Fallacious enumeration of 
instruments of true cognition is found in the Lokayata, 
Buddhist (saugata), Samkhya, Nyaya, Vaisesika, Prabhakara 
and Jaiminiya (Mimamsa). schools, which accept instruments 
other than percep<ion in increasing numbers of instrumertts. 
Given their reasoning there should be stil] other instruments 
of true cognition such as tarka. 

61-65 (ET194) A fallacious conception of the content 
(of awarenesss) occurs when that content is confined to either 
the general or the specific. Without the general aspect nothing 
will get done, and without the specific distinct things will 
seem as one. 

66-72 (ET195-196) A fallacious effect (of an instrument 
of true cognition) is when the effect is exclusively assimilated 
to -the instrument, or when the effect is exclusively 
distinguished from the instrument. The former mistake is 
found in the (Buddhist) who says that an instrument of true 
cognition and its effect are the same. 

Buddhist: An "effect" is just the absence of being 
noneffect, (and a "cause" is just the absence of not being a 


542 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cause). 

Answer: No, for then there can be no difference 
between things at all. 

Naiyayika: That's why there must be inherence 
(samavadya) between an instrument of knowledge and its 
result. 

Answer: That will result in overextension (atiprasanga). 

73 (ET197) Showing one's opponent to be involved in 
fallacy results in a win in debate. 


VIDYANANDA (940) 

As indicated in the introduction to the previous entry, 
Vidyananda's date has been shown by Dhaky to coincide with 
that of Manikyanandin. We know nothing about him, other 
‘han that he is also known as Patrakesgavin, that he was a 
Jigambara, and is said to have lived in Pataliputra. 

This author is frequently referred to as Vidyanandin. To 
ivoid confusion, we have changed occurrences of that name 
n the following summaries to "Vidyananda". 


81. VIDYANANDA, Astaprabhrta-Aptapariksé/Alamkrti 
Summary by Jayendra Soni and Karl H. Potter 


First published, together with #83 in 1913 in Sanatana 
laina Granthamala 1; then printed again in 1930 as a single 
vork by Biharilala Kathnera Jaina, Jaina Sahitya Prasaraka 
(aryalaya, Gargaon, Bombay. It was also printed in 1919 by 
Nyayacara Pt. Darbarilala Jaina Kothiye, Saharanapura, Vira 
eva Mandira with Hindi translation and excellent scholarly 
reface. This last is our E. The work has 124 stanzas, with 
fidyananda's autocommentary called Alamkrtitikd. 

The summary is largely based on the description of 
ections found in "E". The numbers identify siitras. 


APTAPARIKSA/ALAMKRTI 543 


1-4 (E1-19) Salutation to the Jina who knows the 
essence of reality perfectly and who has pierced the veil of 
delusion. That is why he is praised at the beginning of the 
text, as well as for teaching the path to liberation so that I 
may obtain those qualities. 

5 (E19-21) In what has been said the aim is to dismiss 
the claim to be a qualified person made by others and to 
establish the Jina as a qualified person. 

(E21-39) Against the Vaisesika categories. 

6-9 (E39-43) Does the perfection (siddha) of the 
qualified person (Gpta) involve abandoning the desire to 
continue acting? 

(E43-66) Objection: God is the maker of the world. This 
refuted. 

10-11 (E67-70) Refutation of one who says that it is 
impossible that beginningless omniscience constitutes the path 
to liberation. 

12 (E70-83) Demonstration of the nonexistence of an 
inactive God capable of desire and effort. 

13 (E83-85) Provision of an example of an inference 
showing the arising of an effect from God as merely involving 
the power of the knowledge of a perfected being. 

14-17 (E85-87) Story giving Jinendra as an example of 
one who has understood Jainism. 

18-21 (E87-92) Avatars of God refuted by the Acaryas. 

22-26 (E92-94) The position of Samkara's school 
explained. 

27-31 (E94-101) The Vaisesika's refutation of God's 
awareness as being neither eternal or noneternal. The first 
alternative (God's awareness is eternal) refuted. Is God's 
awareness itself an instrument of valid awareness or is his 
awareness a result of such an instrument? Neither alternative 
is acceptable. Refutation of the second alternative (that God's 
awareness is noneternal). 

32-36 (E101-130) Can God's awareness be either 
pervasive or nonpervasive? Neither is possible. 


544 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


37-39 (E130-132) God's awareness can be neither valid 
(visamvddin) nor invalid (avisamvadin). 

40-42 (E132-133) God can be neither the same as nor 
different from His awareness. 

(E134-143) Objection: The relation between God and 
his awareness is inherence (samavaya). 

43-56 (E143-161) Answer: Explanation of the qualifier 
"inseparable" (ayutasiddha) in the (Nyaya-Vaisesika) theory of 
inherence. The fallacy involved in establishing separability 
through a different topic. Why it is not right to suppose that 
there is inseparability merely because separability is absent. 

57-59 (E161-165) The Vaisesika charge of infinite 
regress against the Jains answered. 

60-77 (E165-187) Objection: Inherence is independent 
(svatantrya) and single. This rejected. The opponent gives a 
different example for his claim. This too is refuted. More vs. 
the Vaisesikas. 

(E187-193) Demonstration that inherence, like 
existence, is both single and many and both eternal and 
noneternal. But these are contradictions, so must be denied. 

(E193-203) So the essential existence or nonexistence 
of God's inhering in an actual entity must be rejected. 

78-79 (E204-210) Having refuted the Vaisesikas we 
move on to consider the Samkhya view that the path to 
liberation cannot be taught. 

80-83 (E211-219) Since pradhana must be either 
liberated or unliberated there is no fault in saying the same of 
purusa. 

84 (E219-226) The Buddhist view of liberation 
explained and refuted. 

(E226-234) Sautrantika objection, and the Jain response 
to it. 

(E234-239) The Yogacara position refuted. The fallacy 
of the Buddhist view that the path to liberation involves 
knowledge of all categories, all of which are (merely) 
conventional (samvrti). 


APTAPARIKSA/ALAMKRTI 545 


85-86 (E238-257) The (Advaitin's) nonduality of 
perception (samvedana) refuted. 

(E257-258) The unity of everything (citradvaita) view 
refuted. 

(E258-272) The fallacy in the view that the path to 
liberation involves knowledge of the category of a supreme 
(parama) purusa. 

87-88 (E272-276) The omniscience of the perfected 
being (arhat). 

89-90 (E276-277) The charge of deviating reason 
(anaikdntika hetu) repudiated. 

91 (E277-278) The need for the example to be different 
from the h and the s is denied. 

(E278-280) Objection: But the paksa's qualifiers must 
be unknown (to reside in examples of the sadhya). No, since 
the s may not exist. 

92-96 (E280-285) The fallacy of the reason called 
svarupasiddha is eliminated (from the list of fallacies). 

(E285-295) Refutation of the Bhatta argument against 
omniscience. k 

97-110 (E295-317) That arhats alone are omniscient is 
established by the absence of any instrument to refute it. That 
either perception, inference, comparison, presumption, verbal 
testimony or negation do so is rejected. 

111-115 (E317-333) The contention that the arhat still 
needs to abandon the desire to continue acting is refuted. 

116 (E333-336) Nature of liberation. 

(E336-337) The difference between cessation of inflow 
(samvara) and cleansing off of traces (nirjara). 

117 (E337) Why proponents of other views (ndstika) 
are not capable of liberation by themselves, since they deny 
the very existence of liberation. 

118-119 (E338-346) The nature of the path to 
liberation. 

120 (E346-347) The three qualifiers and the rest of the 


cateonriac ara ilhierrarad 


546 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


121 (E348-350) The unproductiveness of the arhat. 
122-124 (E351-353) Concluding summary. 


82. VIDYANANDA, Astasahasri on Akalanka’s Astasati 

Nagin Shah comments on this work "Vidyananda, in his 
Astasahasri, adopts a unique technique; for he there so 
formulates his arguments that all the sentences of the Astasati 
(in their original order) become a natural part of the 
Astasahasri (which, as is indicated by its name, is ten times as 
large as the Astasati)." © 

"G" references are to S. C. Ghoshal, Apta-Mimamsd of 
Acarya Samantabhadra (New Delhi 2002). "E" references are 
to the edition of the work by Darbarilala Kothiya, published at 
Jaipur in 1997. "E” references are to the entire section 
corresponding to the numbered passage. 


Summary by Saratchandra Ghoshal 


2 (E2-3; G29) Those who practice yoga say that the test 
of finding whether the sights of gods and goddesses are real 
is to look for such chiracteristics (as sweet scent, etc.), 
because a magician will not be able to reproduce these in a 
false show of celestial beings. It may be urged that as 
magicians fail to show these favorable marks they are neither 
false nor mundane. So we should accept these marks as 
identifying essentials of the omniscient. To this a reply is given 
that it cannot be so, for the omniscient is free from ghatiya 
karmas, but the celestial beings who possess similar specialties 
are not free from these, as they are possessed of the four kinds 
of passions, viz., anger, pride, deceit and greed. Akalanka's 
remark (quoted in our summary of his text) answers this. 

3 (E3-45; G33) If we accept this view (that the Buddha, 
etc. are Tirthamkrts) the Buddha, Kapila and others will be the 
Lords of the Jainas and so will deserve praise. 

Kumarila says: “If Buddha be omniscient, why cannot 


ASTASATI-ASTASAHASRI 547 


there be correct knowledge that Kapila also is omniscient? If 
both of them be accepted as omniscient, why are there 
differences of opinion between them?" 

So, we might hold that being a Tirthamkara doesn't 
establish the greatness of anyone. Accordingly, we might hold 
that no’one is omniscient. 

Kuméarila says that it is well-known that people desirous 
of welfare gain it from the Vedas. There is no necessity of 
praising any being as omniscient. 

6 (E55-67; G46-47) It is mentioned that Samantabhadra 
in the sixth verse of his Brhatsvayambhistotra, while praising 
Sambhava Jina, has said "You, O Sambhava, in this world you 
have suddenly appeared like a physician ministering to the 
cure of diseases, as a healer of people suffering from the thirst 
of worldly desires". This verse is accordingly explained by 
Vidyananda with analogy to the above verse of praise. 

It is mentioned by Vidyananda that as a physician in 
mitigating a disease becomes faultless when he applies 
reasoning as well as medical science, so one who follows 
reasoning and scriptures in laying down liberation and its 
causes is free from blemishes. The faults such as ignoranée, 
attachment, aversion, etc., are never present in a perfect soul. 

It is urged that the omniscient Lord is free from faults 
and that his words, following reasoning and the scriptures, are 
not opposed to the celebrated anekdanta view (or, in another 
sense, are not opposed to any pramana or proof). In other 
words, as a physician can prove that he is faultless by using 
reasoning and quoting works on medical science, so the words 
of a perfect soul are free from faults as these follow reasoning 
(which is not opposed to any pramdna) and are in perfect 
agreement with the scriptures. 

8 (E77-79; G52-53) In this verse by kugala and akusala 
(good and bad) the two varieties of dsrava, viz., good and 
bad, are denoted. "Paraloka" is the attainment of another state 
after death. By implication that which causes a particular state 
after death, viz., meritorious and demeritorious karmas, are 


548 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


also indicated by this word. By the word "and" liberation, etc., 
are implied. All these are not possible if we accept the view of 
those who view everything as transient (like the 
momentariness belief of the Buddhists). For how can a future 
state of happiness or misery arising from meritorious or 
demeritorious karmas exist, if everything is transient? 

9 (E80-84; G58-60) If we accept the padarthas, e.g., 
twenty-five tattvas of the Samkhya philosophy, the result will 
be a denial of all the four kinds of abha@va as already 
described. 

Since (prior absence, i.e.) pragabhdva is not accepted, 
the view of the Samkhya philosophy, viz., that mahat arises 
from prakrti, then ahamkara, and from it the sixteen varieties 
(mind, the five organs of sense, the five organs of action and 
the five tanmatras) and from the five tanmdatras the five 
elements appear, cannot stand. All these become without any 
beginning (because we deny their pragabhava or previous 
nonexistence). 

Since pradhvamsabhava is not accepted all these 
tattvas, which the Samkhya says arise from prakrti, will 
become eternal. But the Samkhya has laid down that the five 
elements, earth, etc., merge in the five tanmdtras which again 
with the five organs of sense and five organs of action as well 
as mind merge in ahamkara. Ahamkdara merges in mahat 
which merges in prakrti. This merging will become impossible 
on the denial of pradhvamsabhava described before. 

Since anyonydbhava is rejected, the twenty-three 
principles (of Samkhya) leaving aside purusa and prakrti will 
not exclude one another, but each will involve the others and 
thus will become all-pervading. But definitions have been 
given in Samkhya philosophy distinguishing these twenty-three 
principles, which are called “evolved" (vyakta), from prakrti, 
which is called "unevolved" (avyakta). 

Since atyantabhava is denied, the qualities of all the 
twenty-five tattvas cannot be distinguished each from the 
other; so these will lose their identity. If there is no distinction 


ASTASAHASRI 549 


(if evolved and unevolved be of the same kind without there 
being any distinction of inherent qualities) no’ one will be able 
to find out the real nature of a tattva because the real nature 
is only understood when. we take into account the 
distinguishing characteristics which have nothing but the 
absence of particular qualities as the basis of differentiation. 

11 (E93-98; G62) (The second line of the verse (of the 
Aptamimdms4a) is read differently by Vidyananda from 
Samantabhadra's reading. Here is his idea:) If the qualities of 
one are accepted in another (by denial of absolute 
nonexistence of some qualities of a substance in another 
substance) there is anyatra samavaya, i.e., connection of 
qualities in another substance. For example, if we predicate 
sense of an insentient substance, the ideas "this has 
consciousness” and "this does not have consciousness" cannot 
be expressed showing their distinction. 

18 (E124-125; G80) If someone says that as you accept 
existence inseparably connected with nonexistence, so when its 
opposite will come, viz., nonexistence will be predicated, you 
will have to accept its contrary, viz., existence. Thus when a 
substance does not absolutely exist, such as a sky-flower or a 
hare's horns, you should also accept its existence. 

The reply given by Akalanka is that by inference we 
establish the reality of substances capable of our 
understanding, and our example of homogeneousness or 
heterogeneousness applies to the establishment of such 
substances only. 

19 (E125-127; G81-82) Now the word "vidheya’, i.e., 
“positively described") in the verse may be taken to mean 
astitva (existence). Its pratisedhin (opposite) will be ndstitva 
(non-existence). A substance which has these qualities, viz., 
Jiva, ete., might be considered as a paksa (minor term) in a 
syllogism. The qualities of the sddhya would be its 
manifestation, etc. These qualities are considered hetu (middle 
term) when we desire to establish their noneternal aspect and 
ahetu (not the middle term) when we consider their eternal 


550 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


aspect. The example will be "Where the substance exists, the 
qualities exist" or "where the substance does not exist, the 
qualities do not exist". In this manner, existence and non- 
existence can be predicated of the same thing as can be 
established by process of inference as shown above....By a 
similar process of inference -it can be established that 
substances, jiva, etc., can be known by words. 

30 (E216-217; G93) If you say that everything has a 
separate real existence, you must accept the separate existence 
of knowledge from the object known. The result would be that 
both would become nonexistent, for how can there be 
knowledge if there be no thing known? There might be 
internal or external objects of knowledge. But every such 
object would become nonexistent if there be no knowledge. 

33 (E219-220; G96) Someone might argue like this: 
Diversity is not existent because it is not connected with or 
related to unity. Again, unity alone cannot be in existence 
because it is void of diversity. Through showing the absurdity 
of such reasoning the opinion of those who hold the one-sided 
view can be refuted by our having previously displayed (in 
verse 24) the twofold reasoning as based (i) on unity and 
diversity as well as (ii) on neutrality. As fire is established 
from the existence of smoke, where its nonexistence in water 
(is the vipaksa), so substances like jiva become one when 
regarded through the existence of a paksa, and they are 
regarded as different when they are established through 
difference. 

A thing has different varieties and different qualities. 
Without a noun there cannot be adjectives such as “hare's 
horned". Again without qualifying adjectives differentiating a 
substance, we cannot have an idea of the latter. To meet both 
these points, acceptance of the theory of manifoldness is 
necessary, that is to say, unity and diversity are not absolute 
realities. 

34 (E220-221; G97) By the word "hetu" employed here, 
the hetu term as employed in inference is to be understood. 


ASTASATI-ASTASAHASRI 551 


Such a hetu is of two kinds: jfdpaka (that which makes a 
thing known, viz., smoke leading to the knowledge of fire) or 
karaka (that from which a thing is made, viz., clay from which 
a pitcher is manufactured). We have different intentions when 
we speak of these different kinds of hetu. So when we intend 
merely to speak of existence, all substances (jiva, etc.) are the 
same, but when we wish to express the difference according 
to dravya, ksetra, kala and bhava they are different. 

50 (E248; G110) It is mentioned that want of a 
"tongue, etc.", i.e., lack of vocal organs, may lead to absence 
of power. Again, a man who has taken the vow of silence or 
one who does not utter any word through modesty or fear 
might be said to be wanting in power. But all persons at all 
times are not affected by such disabilities. So this cannot 
establish indescribability. 

53 (E249-251; G112) When we see a SimSapd tree, we 
form an idea that it is a tree as well as that it is simsapa. 
Again when we see a picture, we have an awarenesss of it 
simultaneously with the awarenesss of its color blue, etc. In 
these cases, the separate contents of awarenesss become 
welded together and the causes are not different. 

55-56 (E25252-255; G114-115) Absurdity will arise in 
accepting indescribability as in the case of a man who says "I 
am under the vow of silence and never speak". 

A wrong recognition is known as recognition without 
any basis (akasmdat). 

65 (E280-281; G124) The Vaisesikas hold that "formerly 
a thing (a pitcher, e.g.) did not exist in the place of its 
existence; it does not leave its former recipients after its 
existence and it itself occupies its place after existence. Being 
indestructible it is not destroyed even after the destruction of 
its locus, and inherence and its universal property are 
complete in the thing.” This view is untenable, being unable to 
explain the destruction or creation of a substance. 

69 (E283-284; G128) If you urge that the effect is 
embodied in the cause without having any separate existence, 


552 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and that the cause is eternal, the answer is: the use of the 
number "two" will become faulty in such a case. The difficulty 
cannot be avoided by saying that the mention of "two" is 
fictitious, for in that case everything will become illusory. 
Without number, things counted cannot exist and an object 
void of all qualities such as being counted, must be 
nonexistent. 

70 (E284; G129) In syadvada, however, there is no 
flaw, as by the adoption of different viewpoints we can say of 
every substance that it is describable in one sense, viz., 
vyanjanaparyaya, and indescribable in another sense, viz., 
arthaparyaya. 

73 (E296-297; G132) "If they don't depend on each 
other..." If we take (this) Nyaya-Vaisesika view of the 
independence, the existence of universals and particulars 
accepted by them will disappear. The existence of one of these 
is related to the other. 

75 (E297-298; G133-134) Before we speak of quality or 
a substance possessed of a quality, their own nature has 
already been established. These are established through 
dependence on one another. This is established by themselves, 
as we have knowledge of universals and particulars. We 
express universal concomitance in two ways, affirmatively, 
called anvaya, e.g. "wherever there is smoke there is fire", or 
negatively, called vyatireka, e.g., "where there is no fire there 
is no smoke." A universal is self-established and is known from 
anvaya dependent on vyatireka. A particular also is self- 
established and is known from vyatireka dependent on anvaya. 

The example is of a relation expressed by a grammatical 
case. The function of grammatical nominative (kartrtva) is not 
independent of the relation of the accusative towards the verb 
(karmatva) because the nominative ends in settlement of an 
accusative and the relationship of an accusative also is derived 
from the knowledge of the nominative. But the real nature of 
nominative or the accusative is not dependent one on the 
other. 


ASTASATI-ASTASAHASRI 553 


76 (E301-302; G135) Vidyananda says that in this 
world the thing to be obtained is first mentioned and then the | 
means to obtain that thing is discussed. Without necessity even 
a fool does not work. So the necessity is first established. To 
get crops we must do work like ploughing etc. To have 
liberation we must. also pursue the proper path which, 
according to Jainism, consists of right vision, right awarenesss 
and right conduct. It is only the Carvaka school of philosophy 
that does not recognise the next world or liberation. 

80 (E310-312; G140) The Vijianavadins are at fault 
when they try to establish the quality of nonmanifest 
qualificand and qualifier. For example, the word "blue" and the 
awarenesss arising from this word must be identical or 
different. Their identity cannot be accepted by them, as the 
Vijnanavadins maintain the difference between property and 
property-possessor as well as the difference between reason 
and example. Again, acceptance of reality of consciousness- 
only will be barred by the maintenance of its divisions. 

86 (E316-317; G144) One utters words and another 
hears them. A person finds out the sense of a word by 
perception or inference. If the speaker has no knowledge of 
the words he speaks, how could he utter them? Without 
words, the hearer cannot have any knowledge. The man 
requiring proof of the word behaves in a different way from 
the speaker and the hearer. So we must accept the threefold 
nature of knowledge in such cases. 

100 (E342-343; G162-163) Its power (Sakti) is with 
reference to its appearance, being considered only in respect 
of its modification (parydaya). It may be said to have a 
beginning. According to its substantial nature it is eternal. 

110 (E355; G170-171) The one-sided view of the 
meaning of a proposition cannot be accepted, for this will be 
false and how can there be realisation of truth through false 
propositions? So the anekanta view that a proposition has 
connection with itself as well as with its opposite must be 
accepted. By denying the opposite, a substance is established. 


554 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


That is to say, we mention that a substance is "this, and not 
this" and do not hold only that “it is this", for the latter is false 
and cannot lead to correct knowledge. 

114 (E357-358; G174) The object of this work is correct 
teaching (samyagupadesa) which lays down that the path to 
liberation consists of right vision, right awareness and right 
conduct. Liberation cannot happen in the absence of (any) one 
of them. Other views regarding liberation, e.g., that liberation 
is attained through knowledge alone, are false teachings. 
These other views are refuted. 

The omniscient is established, refuting the view of 
those, e.g., Mimamsakas, who deny omniscience. 


83. VIDYANANDA, Patrapariksa 
Summary by Bhagchandra Jain 


This is Vidyananda's smallest text. It is published by the 
Sanatana Granthamala with our work #81 as noted. Patra 
means the vakya, with the famous members or parts of an 
inference (avayava), that accomplishes the desired meaning 
and keeps quietly the concealed words: 

usiddhavayavam vakyam svestasyarthasya sadhakam. 

sadhugtdhapadaprayam patramahuranakulam. (pp. 
1-2) 

Then he establishes that only the thesis (pratijria) and 
reason (hetu) should be accepted as members of an inference. 
He is also of the view that, if necessary, ten members of an 
inference can also be accepted. But it should be remembered 
that these ten types are quite different from the ten accepted 
in Nyaya philosophy. In this context, he also reviews the 
concept and refutes other philosophers’ views. 


PRAMANAPARIKSA 555 


84 VIDYANANDA, PramdGnapariksd 

This relatively (for this author) brief work has been 
edited by Darbarilal Kothiya as Yugavir-Samantabhadra- 
Granthamala 14 (Varanasi 1977). As its name implies, it 
examines the views of various individual philosophers’ schools 
on the notion of pramana. Among the individuals referred to 
are Uddyotakara (p. 2), Dharmottara (p. 6), Dharmakirti (p. 
8), Sabara (p. 21), and Prabhakara (p. 23), as well as less 
well-known names such as Jinapati (p. 13) and Kumaranandi 
Bhattaraka. Extended attention is given to the Buddhists, and 
briefer arguments against Carvakas, the author of the 
Tattvopaplavasimha, Mimamsakas, and Samkhyas. 


85. VIDYANANDA, Satyasasanapariksa 
A compendium of the work is provided by Nathmal 
Tatia in the edition by Gokul Chandra Jain in Jnanapitha 
Murtidevi Jain Granthamala Sanskrit Grantha No. 30 (Varanasi 
1964), pp. 11-48. "E" references are to that edition. "S" refers 
to pages of Tatia's summary. 


Summary by Nathmal Tatia 


(E1; S13) "It is impossible to arrive at a true doctrine. 
Between two contradictorily opposed doctrines, one must be 
true. The Law of Excluded Middle means that the negation of 
any proposition is an absolute alternative to it, that is, not 
only the proposition and its negative cannot both be true, but 
one or (the) other must be true. What is not contradicted by 
doctrines taken up (below) for refutation are judged by this 
criterion of truth and found not to satisfy it." 

(E1-2; $13) "The Monistic Vedanta is taken up first. 
This school makes ignorance (avidyd, Tatia translates it as 
"nescience") the prius of the subjective and the objective order 
of existence. Ignorance, in association with the eternal 


556 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Brahman,' is the material cause of the world. It is of course 
not real like...,Brahman, because it is subject to annihilation. 
Only that is real which possesses existence as an intrinsic and 
inalienable character. Change is not predicable of the ultimate 
reality. It appears in and upon Brahman owing to the latter's 
association with ignorance. As regards the nature of Brahman, 
it is limitless existence, consciousness, and bliss with no 
difference, intrinsic or extrinsic, in its being and is a unity-- 
perfect, solid and simple. Plurality is false. It appears so long 
as there is ignorance and it must disappear on the destruction 
of the latter. And this destruction of ignorance is spiritual 
liberation (moksa)." 

(E3-4; $13-14) "In reply, the Jaina philosopher asserts 
that plurality is not capable of being repudiated as false 
appearance. Absolute unity and absolute plurality are both 
contradicted by experience. Difference is as clearly given to 
experience as identity. Monism is contradicted by the 
experience of plurality." 

"The Vedantist appeals to dream experience in support 
of his position that the unitary self-identical Brahman appears 
as the plurality of phenomena. It is argued that in dream a 
plurality of facts is experienced though it is one consciousness 
only that exists and is felt. The Jaina does not agree with this 
interpretation of dream experience. Even in dream, as in 
wakeful experience, the consciousness of action is different 
from that of the agent, because it is admitted even by the 
Vedantist that dream contents are produced by different 
memory-impressions." 

"The Vedantist's appeal to illusory experience in which 
one single entity appears as many is also rejected by the Jaina 
philosopher. An illusion is not a normal experience, because it 
is contradicted by a subsequent valid cognition. But the 
cognition of plurality is‘a case of normal experience. There is 


: Tatia renders brahman as “the Absolute"; we substitute merely 
Brahman" 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-SLOKAVARTTIKA 557 


no contradiction in the fact that the potter fashions a jar with 
his staff and eats his meal with his hand. There is no reason 
why the normal experience of plurality should be asserted (to 
be) erroneous." 

"The Vedantist may here assert that the normal 
experience also is liable to contradiction on the attainment of 
final enlightenment. But that is also not possible. We do not 
know of any proof for the existence of Brahman as different 
from (the) plurality which is given to our normal experience. 
Such proof itself, by the very fact that it proves Brahman as 
different from the object of normal experience, would prove 
the object along with...Brahman, much in the same way as the 
knowledge of shell as shell, while contradicting the erroneous 
cognition of shell as silver, proves the existence of the shell 
and the silver as two different entities.” 

"The Vedantist in despair refers to constructionfree 
(nirvikalpaka)' cognition, which cognizes bare existence, as 
the proof of the existence of Brahman which is unity, pure and 
simple. But the Jaina philosopher refuses to believe in the 
possibility of such undifferentiated experience. What we 
immediately perceive on opening our eyes is specific existehce 
determined by space, time, otherness and the like. We never 
perceive what is not determined by space and what is not 
other than the knowing self." 

“Our perceptual experience thus is found incapable of 
proving Brahman. On the contrary, it proves difference to be 
as integral to reality as identity." 

(E4-5; $15-16) "The Vedantist now seeks the aid of 
inference to prove Brahman as pure consciousness. The 
unreality of-an independent objective world is deduced from 
an analysis of even an ordinary empirical judgment. Take for 
instance the trite experience 'I see the pen’. What is the status 
of the pen? The pen is felt as an object no doubt. But what 


1 We replace Tatia's "indeterminate" (nirivkalpaka) by our 
“constructionfree" throughout. 


558 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is felt as the content of, that is, coincident with, its cognition 
is inside, i.e., identical with the cognition. For instance the 
character of cognitionhood, being coincident with the 
cognition, is identical with the latter. All things can similarly 
be shown as coincident with cognition, and as such identical 
with it. There is thus nothing outside consciousness which 
alone exists." 

"But the Jaina considers the argument suicidal. The 
Vedantist infers ‘identity’ from ‘coincidence’. But how can the 
inference be valid unless both ‘identity’, the probandum, and 
‘coincidence’, the probans, are admitted as two distinct facts 
existing in their own right?” 

"Nor can the Vedantist postulate absolute identity 
between the probans and the probandum. He seeks to deduce 
the identity of the content and cognition from the felt 
coincidence of the two. The fact that they are felt as two 
should have made the Vedantist pause before he drew the 
conclusion of their absolute identity. If experience be the 
determinant of the nature of things, it cannot be gainsaid that 
not only the probans and the probandum are felt as identical- 
cum-different, but also that the conclusion, viz., the 
integration of the content, should be regarded as a case of 
identity-in-difference. Even in the Buddhist philosopher's 
inference of the 'momentariness’ of a word (Sabda) and the 
like from their ‘existence’, the probans (viz. existence) and the 
probandum (viz. momentariness) are not felt as absoutely 
identical..." 

"The Jaina, however, agrees with the Vedantist when he 
asserts that the object cannot remain absolutely distinct and 
different from consciousness when it is cognized. The verbal 
proposition expressing the knowledge situation is of the form 
‘the pen is known’. The predicate 'knownness' proves that the 
pen is not absolutely different from and so unconnected with 
knowledge. But the negation of absolute difference does not 
imply that the pen is absolutely made identical with 
knowledge. The proposition is entirely on a par with such 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 559 


factual propositions as 'the cloth is white’. In both propositions 
the relation of subject and predicate is one of substance and 
attribute. The relation cannot be absolute identity as in that 
case it would be reducible to one of the terms, either the 
subject or the predicate. The relation is sui generis which may 
be called identity-in-difference for want of a better and more 
expressive name.” 

"But the Vedantist may ask: What about the judgment 
‘the cognition per se shines’ (pratibha svarupam pratibhasate) 
that is, ‘the cognition per se is known by cognition’? Here the 
content of the cognition is its own self, and so the position 
that the relation of cognition and content is one of identity- 
cum-difference cannot hold in the present case." 

"But the Jaina philosopher avers that the content is not 
the act of cognition as such but its specific character. 
Cognition has both specific and generic attributes as 
constitutive of its nature. For instance, cognition is existent 
and this shows that it has the attribute of existence in common 
with all other entities. The attribute of cognition-hood is an 
uncommon characteristic. In the said judgment the content is 
the specific character of cognition, and the specific character 
is not absolutely identical with the cognition. There can be no 
judgment or proposition possible if the terms are absolutely 
identical or absolutely different, e.g., ‘gold is gold’ and 
‘Himalaya is the Vindhya’ are not logical propositions. As 
regards the basic argument of the Vedantist employed to prove 
the identity of cognition and content, it can be upset by the 
following argument: "Whatever is coincident with cognition is 
somehow different from the cognition concerned, i.e., the 
nature of cognition itself. All the contents, internal and 
external, such as pleasure and the chair are coincident with 
cognitions. Therefore, they must be somehow different from 
the cognitions concerned." 

(E5-6; $17-18) "With the collapse of inference as the 
proof of monism, the Vedantist in the last resort falls back 
upon revelation (@gama) in support of his position. But the 


560 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


question arises whether revelation is ontologically different 
from Brahman or not. If it be absolutely different from the 
Absolute, this will prove the dualism of revelation and 
Brahman at any rate. If on the contrary it is absolutely 
identical with the Brahman which it seeks to establish, then 
the revelation will be as much an unproved fact as the 
monistic Brahman which is yet to be established. Certainly the 
means of proof and the object of proof cannot be absolutely 
identical as in that case the two will be on the same level so 
far as they are not established facts." 

"Moreover, the meaning of the proposition ‘All that 
exists is Brahman’ (sarvam vai khalvidam brahma) is not 
unqualified monism. In it the subject is ‘all existents' which are 
revealed to us in knowledge and thus a known factor. The 
predicate is unknown. In all judgments the subject is a known 
fact and the predicate must be unknown. If the predicate were 
equally known with the subject it would not be a judgment or 
a proposition. So the very form of a proposition implies that 
the subject and the predicate cannot be identical. The 
Vedantist therefore cannot establish monism even by appeal to 
authoritative revelation. It may be contended that the meaning 
of the predicate is self-identity which is realized by a subject 
in his own self and this self-identity is asserted of all that 
appears including self and not-self. The logical implication of 
the proposition therefore is the negation of the appearance of 
plurality as real. Thus interpreted the proposition is neither 
tautologous nor liable to signify dualism. The Jaina would 
observe that even if the interpretation be accepted as true, the 
implication of dualism is inescapable inasmuch as the duality 
of revelation and the world appearance respectively as the 
negator and the negated remains uncontradicted. If on the 
other hand revelation were to be regarded as the essence of 
Brahman, that also would not prove their identity as essence 
and possessor of essence must be numerically different." 

"The Vedantist cannot also regard self-intuition as proof 
of Brahman, because the proof must be different from the 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 561 


object of proof. Nor can Brahman be taken as self-proved, for 
why (should) not then plurality or voidity or the doctrine of | 
universal illusion be accepted as the ultimate truth?" 

"It has been argued by the Vedantist that our perceptual 
experiences are false because they are cognizant of difference, 
just as dream experience is. But this inference is vitiated by 
self-contradiction because the factors of inference such as the 
probans and the example must in any event be regarded as 
true. If they are true, their difference also is true. And if all 
these conditions of inference are false and thus cognition of 
difference be declared to be false, the inference will not prove 
the thesis, because no true conclusion will follow from false 
premises." 

"The Vedantist may contend that the conditions of 
inference are accepted as true by the opponent and hence they 
are valid so far as the opponent's refutation is concerned. But 
that would mean the recognition of the duality of acceptance, 
viz., one's own acceptance and the acceptance of the 
opponent...And again if this duality also is assigned to another 
belief of the opponent, a second duality of acceptance would 
be required, and so on ad infinitum. And the result would be 
the establishment of duality." 

(E6-11; $18-31) "Nor can the Vedantist assert the self- 
evident pure consciousness as the contradictory of our normal 
cognition of plurality, because that would be a case of self- 
contradiction, being tantamount to the acceptance of the 
duality of the contradicted and the contradictor. Moreover the 
Vedantist, being a monist, can accept the contradicted- 
contradictory relation only on the authority of his opponent. 
For him the relation is as unreal as anything other than 
Brahman...” 

"Furthermore, monism can be established only by the 
negation of dualism. In fact, Samkara, the founder of the 
school of monistic Vedanta, has called his philosophy the 
doctrine of non-dualism. The expression ‘non-dualism' can 
convey an intelligible meaning only if dualism be understood. 


562 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Now ‘dualism’ is a whole (akhanda) expression and stands for 
a whole concept. It can be asserted as a universal proposition 
that the negation of a whole concept presupposes the reality 
of the concept in some other context...Now monism qua 
negation of dualism is possible only if dualism be a false 
appearance. But dualism being a whole concept, its negation 
will necessarily presuppose the reality of the negatum (sc. 
dualism) in some context or other." 

"The Vedantist is not convinced by such linguistic 
arguments...The negation of dualism does not in reality belong 
to Brahman. The whole logical apparatus which is the creation 
of the professional logician is possessed of a provisional value. 
It is valid until the ultimate truth is realized. But what is the 
necessity of negation of dualism and what again is the reason 
for the adoption of the logical apparatus for the establishment 
of the monistic position by the Vedantist? The whole order of 
plurality (he says) is an unreal show which has deceived the 
dualist and the pluralist into the belief of its ultimate reality. 
When the Vedantist tries to convince the dualist of his error, 
he has to adopt the logical apparatus invented by the logicians 
of the realist persuasion. The distinction of self and not-self is 
necessitated by avidyd and is not to be mistaken as possessed 
of ultimate validity. So the charge of self-contradiction urged 
against the Vedantist is the outcome of misunderstanding.” 

"But what is the nature of avidya...? Let us consider the 
nature and relation of ignorance as expounded by Suresvara 
in the Brhadaranyakopanisadbhasyavarttika.™ It is possible 
to conceive that ignorance, if it exists at all, can exist as the 
content of Brahman or of the individual or as an independent 
entity. Now the first alternative is not conceivable. The 
conception of ignorance in Brahman, which is of the nature of 
cognition and ex hypothesi omniscient, involves self- 
contradiction. Nor can it be supposed to subsist in the 
individual, because the individual is not different from 
Brahman and as such is free from all taint of ignorance. How 
can ignorance exist in the individual self which also is of the 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 563 


nature of pure cognition? Nor is the third alternaiive a tenable 
hypothesis, because ignorance admitted as an independent 
entity, like Brahman, cannot be supposed to be annihilated by 
knowledge, and so knowledge of the identity of the self and 
Brahman, which is prescribed to be the condition of liberation, 
being the eliminator of ignorance, will have no purpose to 
serve. Knowledge of identity is believed to lead to the perfect 
emancipation of the self, because it is assumed to be 
destructive of ignorance which induced bondage. But if 
ignorance be an independent entity like Brahman and to be 
coeval with Brahman from beginningless time, it will be as 
eternal as Brahman. And bondage also will be an eternal fact." 

“Suresvara answers that the nature of ignorance cannot 
be determined by an instrument of knowledge. Ignorance is 
not capable of being determined by logic, yet it cannot be 
denied that it exists. The individual feels that he is ignorant of 
many things. He is as certain of his ignorance as he is of his 
own existence. The individual is directly aware that he is a 
conscious being. So consciousness and existence are 
inalienable characteristics of the individual self. From the 
authority of revelation as well as the evidence of logic, the self 
is known to be identical with Brahman. And we have seen 
that ignorance is not possible in Brahman and the individual 
alike." 

“Suresvara maintains that this is not the correct 
approach for determining the relation of ignorance. To deny 
the existence of ignorance would be contradiction of a felt 
fact. So, however irrational and illogical the concept of 
ignorance may appear to be, its actual existence has got to be 
admitted by all. It is true that the conception of ignorance as 
an independent entity is an absurd hypothesis. We find from 
our study of the Upanisads that ignorance is totally destroyed 
by knowledge of reality. This is also the finding of 
incontestable experience. Our ordinary errors such as the 
perception of shell for silver are found to be annihilated when 
followed by correct knowledge of reality. This would be 


564 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


impossible and also unaccountable if ignorance were eternal 
verity. It must be admitted that there is no raison d'etre for 
error. It is possible only when the conditions of knowledge are 
given a false twist by something added to them. It is 
absolutely unintelligible why there should be deviation from 
the normal standard. Certainly this deviation cannot be the 
normal law as this would make the emergence of correct 
knowledge and cancellation of the false awareness preceding 
it an impossibility. What holds good of ignorance operating in 
the individual must be true of it in its cosmic aspects also. So 
ignorance cannot be eternal verity like Brahman. Nor can it be 
an independent entity as shown above. It is felt by us all that 
we are beset by limitations on all sides and we are not 
satisfied with our present condition. We always try to 
transcend it as an undesirable obsession. The Vedantist 
believes that consciousness, absolute and undifferentiated, is 
the only reality and is the very stuff and essence of all that 
exists and appears. The appearance of plurality according to 
the Vedantist is erroneous, and such must have a reason of its 
own. This reason is found in ignorance. And so ignorance is 
not subjective but also objective because it is co-pervasive with 
consciousness in its entire range." 

"Now the individual is not the seat of ignorance 
according to Suresvara for two reasons. In the first place, the 
individual is nothing different from pure consciousness in 
point of reality. And if the individual be regarded as 
ontologically different from Brahman (which is not the 
position of any section of the monistic school), then also the 
individual cannot be regarded as the locus of ignorance. The 
individualization of the self is itself the result of ignorance and 
such cannot be the determinant of the incidence of ignorance 
which is its very presupposition. Ignorance must have a local 
habitation of its own as the possibility of ignorance as a 
floating entity would be absurd. It must then have pure 
consciousness as its locus and abode and from the evidence of 
our own experience we find that ignorance is a felt fact. This 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 565 


shows that pure eternal consciousness cannot be opposed to 
ignorance. On the contrary, it constitutes the only evidence of 
its being. (The) opposition is both a priori and empirical. The 
opposition of being and nonbeing is felt a priori. But other 
types of opposition are empirical and as such can be known 
only from experience. We have found that there is no 
opposition between pure consciousness and ignorance. Pure 
consciousness means consciousness which is not determined by 
any objective reference. It is bereft of subject-object 
polarization. Pure consciousness thus means unpolarized 
consciousness...." 

"...But how to account for the opposition of ignorance 
as error with knowledge? It is felt beyond the shadow of a 
doubt that our erroneous perception of shell as silver is 
cancelled and corrected by knowledge of the shell in its true 
character. Our knowledge of shell is attended with the 
negative judgment ‘it is not silver’. This shows that there is 
opposition between knowledge and error which is nothing but 
a species of ignorance. This has puzzled many a respectable 
philosopher and it has been seriously asserted that the 
Vedantist is guilty of  self-contradiction. True pure 
consciousness is an eternal and transcendental entity. As 
regards ignorance, it is also asserted by the Vedantist to be 
associated with the absolute consciousness which is pure and 
transcendental and undetermined by objective reference. There 
can be no difference in transcendental consciousness. But the 
difference of one consciousness from another is possible when 
it is made specific and particularized by objective reference, in 
other words, when it is possessed of a specific content and is 
called knowledge. Knowledge is consciousness in its essence, 
but it is different as a specific determination is from the genus. 
The opposite. of error is knowledge and not pure 
transcendental consciousness which is rather the proof of it. 
Error is also a cognition with a distinct content and it is 
cancelled only by a cognition with an opposite content with 
reference to the same situation. It is true cognition which 


566 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cancels false cognition....the opposition only holds between 
them." 

"It has been argued by the opponent of the monist that 
there can be no ignorance in Brahman because of the a priori 
opposition between consciousness and ignorance. But the 
opposition is not a priori, and so the argument has no validity. 
The very fact that we are conscious of ignorance shows that 
there is no opposition between them. But though a felt fact 
and uncaused entity existing concurrently with Brahman, 
ignorance is not regarded as an eternal verity like Brahman, 
because it is liable to be cancelled and corrected by the 
unerring realization of the nature of the self as identical with 
Brahman. It has been shown that ignorance is destroyed by 
knowledge...The Vedantist deduces from that fact the 
conclusion that ignorance is not a reality in the true sense of 
the term. A reality is not capable of death or destruction. 
Ignorance, being liable to extinction, cannot be regarded as a 
co-ordinate reality. But though not a reality, its actual 
existence is a felt fact and so cannot be denied without self- 
contradiction. The denial of ignorance as well as its assertion 
is possible only within the limitation of ignorance, because 
they are all judgments and as such have a dualistic reference. 
Of course, there can be no real relation between Brahman and 
ignorance. Brahman is unattached and unrelated to anything 
within or without. But whatever be the ontological or logical 
character of the relation of ignorance, its actuality cannot be 
disputed. Even an unreal relation is possible just as an unreal 
ignorance is...." 

".. Ignorance cannot be intuited as existent if the true 
nature of Brahman as pure consciousness is realized...Who will 
be the knower of it--the person who suffers from ignorance or 
(one) who has emancipated himself from it? The 
determination of the nature of ignorance is not possible for the 
person who is subject to its sway, because this will mean that 
he is not fettered by ignorance. As regards the emancipated 
self, the logical distinctions of the subject, the object, and the: 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 567 


act of knowledge have totally vanished for him forever, and so 
such determination is not possible. An instrument of 
knowledge is not competent to gauge unreality. It is only the 
real that can be determined by it. But ignorance is ex 
hypothesi not a real (thing) because it does not stand the 
scrutiny of accredited cognitive organs. Ignorance is so-called 
because it is incapable of standing critical examination with 
success. In fact, the criterion of ignorance is nothing but this 
incapacity for standing trial by accepted instruments of 
knowledge.” 

"Now the question may be asked ‘Why are we 
enamoured of such an irrational concept?’ You have yourself 
admitted that it is not capable of being determined by the 
accredited organs of logic. Why don't you admit that the world 
is both different and nondifferent from Brahman? Both you 
and I admit Brahman and the world, and the relation between 
them is asserted by us to be identity-cum-difference. The merit 
of this theory lies in the consideration that it does not entail 
repudiation of ny one of the felt facts--the world and its 
cause, Brahman. Why should you postulate an irrational and 
unreal principle as the cause of the world process?" 

"The Vedantist answers that after all his theory is the 
simplest of all. Moreover, it makes the postulation of a large 
number of irrational entities uncalled for. Thus the opponent 
who believes in the reality of the world process has to admit 
that it is both different and nondifferent from Brahman. In the 
second place, he has to posit that bondage, though it is real 
and so uncaused, is liable to cessation. In the third place, he 
has to posit that emancipation is the product of religious and 
moral activity and is yet eternal. The monist only affirms 
ignorance as the sole and sufficient condition of all these 
results. And though it exists from eternity alongside of and 
together with Brahman, yet there is no logical difficulty in the 
fact that it is liable to annihilation, because it is felt to be 
unreal and so its disappearance does not entail logical 
contradiction, which would be inevitable if it were real." 


568 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


"But it might be argued that simplicity is not by itself a 
recommendation for a theory. If a multiplicity of things is 
necessitated by logical thought we cannot reject it for the sake 
of economy alone. But the Vedantist agrees that simplicity or 
multiplicity without the sanction of valid cognition is not a 
compelling consideration in the determination of reality. But 
if the multiplicity of categories asserted by the opponent is 
found to be contradicted by accredited instruments of 
knowledge, the postulation of it will be logically indefensible. 
Now the believer in the reality of the world has to assert that 
the relation between the world and its cause is identity and 
difference both--a conception which is repugnant to all sources 
of knowledge. Secondly, he admits that the worldly career is 
a reality bereft of beginning in time, and to say that it is 
annihilated by knowledge is opposed to the universally 
accepted proposition that a real uncaused and undated is 
eternal. Thirdly, it asserts emancipation to be the product of 
moral activity and yet to be eternal. This is opposed by thc 
universal proposition that whatever is caused to happen at a 
particular time cannot but be liable to extinction. These are 
the major contradictions in the theory of the opponent, and 
there may be many more, if minor details are to be taken into 
account. As regards the Vedantist's theory, it only postulates 
ignorance and this is not also an unwarranted assumption 
since it is endorsed by experience and scriptural authority 
alike.""™ 

"The Jaina frankly confesses his inability to appreciate 
the argument of the Vedantist. In the first place, the 
postulation of ignorance which the Vedantist himself admits to 
be incapable of any proof strikes him as an unphilosophical 
position. It is extremely puzzling that a philosopher should 
subscribe to a position which is not amenable to test by any 
accredited instrument of knowledge.‘ Whatever may be the 
subject of dispute, call it truth or untruth, science or 
ignorance, the matter can be finally decided by means of the 
accredited instruments of knowledge available to us. The Jaina 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 569 


does not dispute the existence of ignorance, but he insists that 
this is also a matter of proof. When the Vedantist asserts that 
ignorance is an actual existent he is certainly aware of its 
existence. And this awareness must be true. Otherwise he will 
not be in a position to make the assertion. The Vedantist had 
to admit that ignorance is a felt fact. But he chooses to call the 
awareness of ignorance an alogical knowledge. The reason 
seems to be the opposition of ignorance with knowledge which 
is also a felt fact. That we commit error is not open to dispute. 
That this error is corrected and cancelled by knowledge of the 
true character of reality such as of the shell as opposed to 
silver is not also liable to be disputed. But the cancellation of 
error, which consists in the proof that the predicate does not 
belong to the subject in the context in spite of its reality in 
another context, need not be construed as evidence of the 
unreality of error or of its content. That we make errors is also 
capable of being established by veridical knowledge. This is 
apparent from the consideration that the Vedantist also cannot 
deny that we misperceive shell as silver. This misperception is 
a fact which can be known by an unchallengable cognition. 
And this cognition is possible if an organ of cognition operates 
upon the fact. But the Vedantist may urge ‘Well, if error be an 
object of veridical cognition, it will be a real like true 
cognition. Not only this, it will also have to be admitted that 
the knowledge of error will be true knowledge, and this will 
amount to the assertion that there is no difference between 
error and truth’.” 

"The Jaina does not regard these objections as real 
difficulties. In the first place, he admits that error is as much 
a fact and verity as truth. In the second place, he admits that 
the cognition of error is true cognition. In other words, the 
Jaina believes that error as a psychical event is a true 
occurrence, and its cognition is the cognition of a true fact. It 
has been observed by Akalanka ‘A cognition is true in 
reference to a fact which is not contradicted by another 
cognition’. The Vedantist also endorses the factuality of error 


570 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


as a psychical fact, and he also admits that there is awareness 
of such error. But he refuses to give this awareness the status 
of a true cognition, and he thinks the content of error, at least 
the predicative part of it, is neither real nor unreal, but 
something logically indeterminable. The reason he advances in 
support of his position is that it is set aside by a true cognition 
following upon it. Nobody denies that error is corrected by a 
subsequent valid experience. But that should not be 
interpreted as evidence of the unreality of the cognition or of 
the content. It may be false cognition but nonetheless it is a 
cognition, and true so far as its occurrence is taken into 
consideration. It is regarded as error because the external 
object is not possessed of the predicate judged to belong to it 
in error, The contradiction only proves that the predicate does 
not belong to the subject and nothing more. It has already 
been explained that the contradiction cannot mean that error 
did not happen. Error is bound to be admitted as historical 
event, and to be true so far as it is a real happening. The 
Vedantist has affirmed that the awareness of error is effected 
by pure consciousness, and as such cannot be assigned any 
logical value. But this seems to be a distinction without 
difference. Granted that error is felt by pure consciousness. 
But should this awareness be not valid? If the awareness of 
error be invalid, there will be no possible means of asserting 
that it is a psychical occurrence. The question of validity or 
invalidity of a cognition is not capable of being decided by the 
intrinsic character of the cognition in question. The validity of 
a cognition can be decided by external evidence, at least in the 
initial stage. A cognition is regarded as invalid only when it is 
found to be contradicted by a subsequent cognition showing 
that the predicate does not belong to the subject. The 
awareness of error, no matter whether pure or empirical, is 
not contradicted by any subsequent cognition. The subsequent 
cognition does not annul the historicity of error as a cognition; 
it only shows, as we have observed, that the predicate does 
not belong to the subject. Thus there does not seem to be any 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 571 


logical warrant for questioning the validity of awareness of 
error as a fact whether it be classed as empirical or 
metempirical." 

"As regards the contention of Suresvara that ignorance 
or error is not determinable by a valid cognition or an 
instrument of it, the Jaina does not think that it is based upon 
truth. It has been observed that a cognition is proved to be 
false when it is contradicted by a subsequent cognition having 
the same reference. The contradicting cognition is held to be 
true by all even including the Vedantist. This shows that error 
is proved by truth which is based upon a true objective datum. 
The Jaina accordingly thinks that the Vedantist's interpretation 
of error as an alogical fact is due to a hasty appraisal of the 
logical issues. Error as wel] as truth is always capable of being 
determined only with reference to reality. When the cognition 
is found to correspond to the objective situation in all respects 
it is called truth. When, on the other hand, it fails to conform 
to reality in any respect it is called false. So ignorance as error 
is always determinable with reference to reality, and that 
again by means of an accredited instrument of knowledge." 

"As for the further contention of Suresvara that 
ignorance is not possible for a person possessed of knowledge, 
it is observed that ignorance is not possible in a person who 
is possessed of perfect knowledge and as such is omniscient. 
But there is no evidence to show that it is not possible for a 
man whose knowledge is limited. The assertion of Suresvara 
that knowledge is futile in respect of a person free from 
ignorance is also not based upon truth. Freedom from 
ignorance makes perfect knowledge possible, and this 
knowledge is not futile because everybody will admit that it is 
covetable for its own sake. So how can knowledge be futile for 
a person free from ignorance? The assertion of Suresvara 
again that the determination of ignorance in a person is 
possible only so long as he is under the hypnotic spell of 
ignorance is entirely wide of the mark. The differentiation of 
ignorance from truth is possible only when a person discovers 


572 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the truth. Were a person completely under the spell of 
ignorance such differentiation would not be possible. The truth 
of the proposition asserted here is borne out by the evidence 
of dream. The dreaming man cannot distinguish between truth 
and error, because he is completely enmeshed in ignorance in 
dream. So _ Suregvara's categorical affirmation that 
determination of ignorance is possible only under the sway of 
ignorance is entirely opposed to fact." 

"It might be contended that if ignorance as error be a 
true awareness, then there will be no reason for its being 
contradicted by a subsequent awareness; but the fact that it is 
so contradicted shows that it is entirely false. But the Jain 
asserts that there is no incompatibility in the situation. Error 
is regarded as a true cognition only in a sectional reference. It 
is true so far as its reference to the subject is concerned, and 
also so far as it is felt by the person, that is, with reference to 
its own being. When the deluded person thinks that he is 
ignorant or in error, he does not make a false assertion. This 
shows how a cognition, though true so far as it goes and so far 
as its particular reference is concerned, can be contradicted 
by a subsequent experience and thus be false in some 
particular reference." 

"The dilemma raised by Suresvara, that ignorance is not 
intelligible whether the self is known or not known. proceeds 
upon partial appraisal of truth. There is no incompatibility in 
the fact that a partially illumined person is subject to error and 
illumination alternatively or simultaneously. Ignorance is 
impossible of realization only in the case of perfect knowledge 
and total ignorance. But the latter alternative is impossible 
because there is no self which is totally devoid of knowledge, 
which is the possible outcome of total ignorance. As regards 
the former alternative, the contention is only partially true. A 
man with perfect knowledge is not subject to ignorance. But 
he realizes and transcends his ignorance only with the dawr 
of such knowledge." 

"Again, Suresvara has asserted that ignorance is ar 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 573 


irrational principle and the fact that it eludes all the 
epistemological resources is rather symptomatic of its true 
character. But the Jaina would pose a simple question: 'How 
do you know that ignorance is not amenable to logical proof? 
Are you sure that it is so? If so, what is the source of your 
conviction?’ If the Vedantist confesses that he has no resource 
which enables him to make such an assertion, then he will be 
guilty of unabashed dogmatism. If, on the other hand, the 
Vedantist is sure of the truth of his assertion, this will mean 
that ignorance is not altogether incapable of logical 
determination. At any rate the determination of ignorance as 
a logical principle must be based upon truth and consequently 
secured by an accredited organ of knowledge." 

"Suresvara has claimed that the postulation of ignorance 
as the prius of the world process makes Vedanta philosophy 
the simplest of all systems. It may be so. But this simplicity is 
more apparent than real. The plurality of entities with their 
infinite varieties is a felt fact. Ignorance was posited over and 
above the absolutely undifferentiated transcendent 
consciousness called Brahman because it was felt that 
plurality, even as appearance, cannot be deduced from a 
simple unity. But if ignorance be only another unitary 
principle, it also will not be competent to produce the 
appearance of plurality. For this it has been assumed that 
ignorance possesses an infinite plurality of powers. Thus the 
claim of simplicity is based upon a quibble. It has however 
been claimed that ignorance with its infinite resources and 
powers is an unreality and so the only reality is pure 
consciousness. But the assertion of unreality of ignorance is a 
puzzle which runs counter to the verdict of experience and 
logical thought." 

“The Vedantist says that it is not real because it exhibits 
self-contradiction in every stage. The things of the world are 
subject to constant change and this means the extinction of the 
old order and emergence of a new one. But if a thing is to be 
real in its independent capacity and right, it cannot be 


574 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


supposed that it should diminish or increase or cease to be or 
come into being. Origin and destruction are unpredicable of a 
real. A real is real always and so must remain constant. The 
erroneous silver is unreal because it ceases to be when it is 
contradicted by knowledge of the shell. If a real were capable 
of origination and cessation like false silver, there would be no 
criterion possible for the distinction of real from unreal. It 
must therefore be admitted that constancy and continuity and 
consequently the absence of lapse from uniformity are true 
characteristics of a real. But these tests are incapable of being 
applied to the objects of experience. The conclusion is 
inevitable that they cannot be real." 

“The Jaina philosopher asks: What is the source of the 
knowledge of this peculiar nature of reality? The ultimate 
nature of things can be known by experience alone. Well, what 
is the ground for our belief that consciousness is existent and 
also is the proof of the existence of other things? The answer 
must be that it is felt to be so. Consciousness is its own 
guarantor and proof of its own reality. As regards unconscious 
matter, its existence is established by means of consciousness. 
It cannot be asked why consciousness should be self-evidenced 
and matter be dependent upon consciousness for the proof of 
its existence. The question is a question of fact, and not of 
reason. The nature of things is inalienable and must be 
accepted to be what it is. Can anybody answer why fire should 
be hot and water cold, and not vice versa? No, because it is 
a question of fact. Similarly, the nature of reality is to be 
deduced from the testimony of experience. The existence of 
things which are experienced is obvious and self-evident. If 
you call in question their credentials, the fact of existence and 
consciousness which are posited by the Vedantist to be the 
ultimate reality will also not be immune from such doubting 
interrogation. The result will be unrelieved scepticism or 
universal negation. The Vedantist had the good sense and 
sanity not to acquiesce in this suicidal estimation. The Jaina 
would respectfully and earnestly ask the Vedantist to carry his 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 575 


determination of reality consistently to its natural conclusion. 
He accepts existence to be the ultimate truth solely on the 
testimony of experience. But as experience records change as 
the integra} character of existence or rather of things felt to be 
existent, it beats one's understanding why change should be 
declared as unreal appearance. The Vedantist has contended 
that change involves lapse of being into nonbeing and that this 
is a case of self-contradiction. Reality must not be self- 
contradictory. But as change is fraught with contradiction, it 
is to be unceremoniously thrown overboard as an unreal and 
unjustifiable appearance. But the Jaina is a frank realist, and 
is candid in his confession of faith in the verdict of 
experience." 

"The Vedantist thinks that there is pure being which is 
incompatible with pure nonbeing. But pure being is an 
abstraction, and we have no experience of it. So also is the 
case with pure nonbeing. What we find in experience, 
including the principle of consciousness itself, is concrete being 
which is a unity of different entities. Thus we never come 
across a pure substance denuded of qualities and actions. A 
substance is always a unity with the multiplicity of attributes. 
Why should the Vedantist scent contradiction in it? He should 
take reality as a whole, and the attempt to clip away a part of 
its character only bespeaks unwarranted zeal for abstract 
thinking. It is no doubt true that the diversity of reals 
encountered by experience exhibits existence as their universal 
trait. But the universality and continuity of this trait and the 
discontinuity of other traits are facts alike. The former should 
not be vested with truth and the latter dismissed as 
appearance...” 

"The Vedantist...appeals to dreamless experience. He 
asserts that pure existence is felt in this state. He also appeals 
to samadhi (ecstasy) in which the spiritual aspirant realizes 
reality as a homogeneous simple unity bereft of intrinsic and 
extrinsic difference. But the state of samddhi is not attainable 
by all. If a gifted soul experiences it, that does not afford any 


576 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


help to men of limited knowledge who are enquirers after 
truth. So it has no philosophical value. As regards dreamless 
experience, it is also not beyond dispute. So the Vedantist has 
to rely upon the revealed texts of the Upanisads and upon 
pure logic. So far as the Upanisadic texts are concerned, the 
interpretation of the monist is not accepted as the last word. 
There are other interpretations also....As regards pure logic, 
the Jaina attitude towards it has been elucidated with as much 
clarity and precision as has been possible for us." 

"The consequential objections of Suresvara regarding 
bondage and emancipation do not cause much difficulty to the 
Jaina. The Jaina believes that bondage is a real condition of 
the self, and though existing from beginningless time as coeval 
with the individual yet it is liable to be transcended. 
Emancipation is nothing but the disentanglement of the self 
from karmic matter. Karmic matter is not destroyed but pulled 
out. The pure nature of self which is realized in emancipation 
is not a new creation in the absolute sense. It was always 
there. But the karmic matter served to obscure it. The Jaina 
believes in change because it is found to be the universal 
characters of all reals and if it means transition from being to 
nonbeing in a sectional reference, the Jaina is not frightened 
by it. So the objection of Suresvara that emancipation, being 
a product of a process, will be liable to destruction does not 
cause any difficulty. The Vedantic solution that bondage and 
emancipation are both illusory cannot be regarded as the only 
satisfactory explanation, as it has been made abundantly clear 
that the denial of plurality, in defiance of experience, cannot 
escape from fall into the abyss of universal nihilism or 
scepticism which Nagarjuna and his followers have shown to 
be the inevitable conclusion of pure logic.” 

(E11-14; S31-35) "The subjective idealism of the 
Yogacara Buddhist is to be distinguished from the Vedantic 
Monism. The Brahman of the Vedantists is eternal (cognizable 
by all kinds of cognition), and one. But the consciousness 
(vifidna) of the Yogacara Buddhist is momentary, subjective 


TYASASANAPARIKSA 577 


self-intuited (cognizable by self alone), and numerically 
ferent in each consciousness-stream. Vidyananda here 
‘cords the theory of knowledge propounded by the 
utrantika Buddhists, Yangas (Naiyayikas and Vaisesikas), 
mkhyas and the Jainas. These theories are refuted by the 
yjectivist who thus proves that all definitions of cognition 
‘'dya) and cognizer (vedaka) are untenable. He proves the 
sity of all instruments of knowledge by the following 
rument: ‘Whatever is of the form of cognitum and cognizer 
alse, e.g., dreams and illusions; our perceptions and the like 
: on a par with these latter, and hence false’. Our 
‘ceptions and all other instruments of knowledge being 
se, there is no proof of the reality of external objects. The 
yjectivist however does not deny the individual units of 
isciousness which he admits as the source of appearance of 
r cognitions polarized as cognitum and cognizer. Pure 
isciousness alone is real. Even as paintings drawn on plane 
face appear solid with depressions and elevations, so does 
‘ pure consciousness appear as subject and object to the 
uded person under the influence of ignorance. The idealist 
»ves his thesis by the argument: 'The objects--chair and the 
2--are not different from their cognitions, because they are 
znized by them, e.g., the cognition which is cognized by 
lf.’ And he refutes the realist's position thus: 'The chair and 
: like are not external material objects, because they are 
mized, e.g., pleasure and the like which are internal and 
material’." 

"The Jaina philosopher observes that the subjectivist 
ablishes his position by means of inference, and refutes the 
idity of all instruments of knowledge in the same breath. 
is is nothing but blatant self-contradiction. Without the 
»port of an instrument of knowledge, the Buddhist cannot 
ve the falsity of the theories of rival philosophers who 
ieve in extramental reality. Not only this, the subjectivist 
inot prove the falsity of the differentiation of cognition into 


ante met an nn menue Lin hAatldn ehne nese nn weet ne 2a 


578 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


momentary and self-intuited and that there are other epistemic 
subjects. Certainly all these facts cannot be proved by our 
intuitions. The service of inference as a valid instrument of 
knowledge must be requisitioned. A cognition may be felt by 
itself, but it is not felt as momentary, or as not cognized by 
another. Moreover, if the cognition has no veridical reference 
to a real extra-subjective fact, how can the subjectivist believe 
in the existence of other subjects? The denial of genuine 
extrasubjective reference must end in solipsism. If the entire 
logical apparatus including the difference of probans and 
probandum and the necessary relation between them be a 
false creation of ignorance, then the subjectivist cannot prove 
anything including his own position." 

"The subjectivist seeks to establish the identity of 
content with cognition on the ground of the two being felt 
together. But this very assertion proves that he believes in the 
duality of cognition and content. Is this not a case of self- 
contradiction like the vocal statement of a person: ‘I am an 
observer of the vow of silence'?""” 

"It has however been argued in defence by the 
subjectivist that this line of attack on the part of the opponent 
is neither fair nor consistent. How can the charge of a fallacy 
or a self-contradiction be advanced against the subjectivist 
when the opponent knows that the former does not believe in 
the reality of anything other than consciousness? The use of 
logic will become superfluous after the ultimate truth viz., the 
reality of consciousness alone is realized. Dignaga and his 
followers in spite of their ultimate conviction of the truth of 
pure consciousness alone have elaborated logical weapons and 
this is not inconsistent with their philosophical convictions. 
They have frankly avowed that logic has its place and utility 
only on this side of realization of the ultimate truth and is 
necessary to combat the prevailing misconceptions of 
philosophers. So the charge of self-contradiction or 
inconsistency is nothing better than argumentum ad 
hominem “ 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 579 


"The Jaina philosopher observes that his charges could 
be ineffective if the Buddhist idealist succeeded in proving that 
his conclusion was established by an unimpeachable 
logical ground." 

"Dharmakirti asserts that the identity of cognition and 
content follows from the necessity of their being known 
together (sahopalambhaniyama), but what is the meaning of 
the expression ‘the necessity of being known together’ and of 
the term ‘identity’? The former may possibly be interpreted as 
the absence of separate cognition and ‘identity’ may be 
understood to mean (the) absence of numerical difference. In 
other words, the negation of separate cognition may be made 
the ground for the inference of negation of numerical 
difference. But this is not possible because there can be no 
necessary relation between two negations. As regards such 
negative inferences as of the absence of smoke from the 
absence of fire, or the absence of triangle from the absence of 
figure, they are legitimate only because they derive their 
cogency from the necessary concomitance between effect and 
cause, and so the negation of cause leads to the inference of 
the negation of effect. Likewise, there is necessary 
concomitance between figure which is the genus and triangle 
which is the species. And so the negation of the former entails 
the negation of the latter. There is no independent relation 
possible between two negations. The Buddhist argument could 
be effective if the positive concomitance between separate 
cognition and numerical difference were possible. To be 
explicit, the Buddhist is the last person to assert that a 
separate cognition of the content from that of the cognition 
concerned is possible by means of which the numerical 
difference of the cognition and content can be established; for 
the admission of the possibility of the content, separate and 
numerically different from that of the cognition, will knock out 
the Buddhist position of identity of cognition and content. 
The Buddhist therefore is precluded from asserting a logically 
necessary relation between their corresponding negations as 


580 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


negations have no independent logical relation apart from that 
of their opposite positives..." 

(E16-19; $35-37) "The Carvaka philosopher denounces 
self and the possibility of omniscience. ‘The scriptures that 
exist contradict each other and thereby prove their own 
falsity’." 

"The so-called self (Giva; atman) is nothing but a 
temporary product of material elements. It was not before 
birth, nor will it continue to exist after death. There is no life 
hereafter." 

"The Jaina philosopher observes that the materialist's 
denial of self as an independent principle of consciousness 
goes against the law of causality. The nature of consciousness 
is radically different from matter and so it cannot be the 
product of material elements. The effect must be essentially 
homogeneous with the cause and reducible to the latter in 
turn. The law of causality demands that the cause and its 
effect must be mutually reducible. Consciousness is not 
reducible to matter and hence cannot be a material product." 

"Moreover, the existence of self is proved by self- 
intuition (svasamvedana). We feel pleasure and pain, joy and 
sorrow, which presuppose a conscious substance as their 
substratum. The materialist cannot deny self-intuition. He 
must accept cognition as self-cognized in order to cognize the 
object. It cannot be admitted that a cognition is cognized by 
another cognition, because the second cognition would require 
a third, the third a fourth, and so on ad infinitum, leaving the 
object uncognized for ever. Nor can the materialist regard the 
cognition as cognized by inference, because he does not accept 
the validity of inference. He is therefore compelled to admit 
self-intuition, and consequently the existence of the self...as 
the substratum of that intuition." 

“Being radically different in nature from the material 
products, the self must be eternal unlike the latter." 

"The negation (pratisedha) of self entails the reality of 
it, because in all genuine negations the negatum must be a 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 581 


positive fact. Even the negation of square-circle presupposes 
separate reality of square and circle elsewhere. Figurative 
usages like ‘his pictures lack soul’ also argue the existence of 
self. All simple words signify positive reals. The word 'self is 
a simple word and so must stand for a positive fact. There is 
also consensus of opinion among eminent men and the 
testimony of omniscient selves (jina) in favor of the existence 
of self, which has been established by unimpeachable 
arguments of logic too." 

"The obvious disparity and variation in the mental and 
moral faculties of different individuals must have a cause, and 
this cause is asserted to be merits and demerits earned in 
previous lives. And this is the Moral Law which is the proof of 
life herebefore and hereafter." 

"As regards the possibility of an omniscient self, the 
Jaina asserts that the materialist cannot adduce any proof 
against such possibility. The materialist accepts perception 
alone as the valid instrument of knowledge. And perception, 
being capable of cognizing positive objects alone, cannot 
cognize the absence of omniscience. Even if perception is 
admitted as capable of cognizing the absence, the materialist 
should clarify whether it is capable of cognizing the absence 
of omniscience in a particular self at a particular moment, or 
in all selves at all times. The first alternative will not refute 
our position, while the second would prove the omniscience of 
the materialist himself, and land him in self-contradiction.” 

(E20-29; $37-42) "The Sautrantika Buddhist is a realist 
in the sense that he believes in the reality of the material 
atoms and the psychical factors like feelings, cognitions 
(construction-filled and construction-free), names and concepts 
(samjfia) and predispositions (samskdra). These reals are 
discrete and momentary. They form conglomerates, but do not 
give up their discreteness in any way. They last only a 
moment giving rise to their facsimile in the next moment. The 
first moment is regarded as the material cause (upddana) and 
the second the effect (upddeya). The combined stream of these 


582 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


reals gives rise to the false notion of a permanent self, which 
is due to the absence of gap (avyavaddna) between the effect 
and the cause, extreme rapidity of production (laghitpatti) of 
the former from the latter, and their close similarity (sadrgya). 
The recognition of identity between the effect and the cause 
also does not prove permanence. It is an illusion which is on 
a par with the illusion of the identity of ever-growing nails, 
hairs and the like.” 

"Liberation (moksa) for these Buddhists consists in the 
disruption of the consciousness-stream by making it 
unproductive. 'The practice of detachment and contemplation 
helps one to get rid of ignorance and clinging (trsna) and 
finally suck dry the productivity of the consciousness-stream. 
The aspirant to liberation should cultivate the four noble 
truths’." 

"The Jaina philosopher considers this Buddhist view of 
things to be opposed to experience and logic. The objects that 
we perceive are massive, permanent, and composite. We never 
perceive the atomic, momentary and simple objects. The 
Buddhist philosopher cannot dismiss this perception as illusory 
unless he succeeds in pointing out a perception which cognizes 
the momentary simple atom. Dharmakirti has defined 
perception as ‘cognition which is free from conceptual 
constructions and nonerroneous’. If all our perceptions are 
dismissed as illusory, the definition would have no scope. We 
never perceive atoms and so these also cannot be regarded as 
the objects of such perceptions. Constructionfree perception 
also is not capable of cognizing atoms. Moreover, it is devoid 
of the certitude which is an essential condition of the 
cognition's being valid and nondiscrepant (avisamvddaka). 
Even a person ignorant of the nature of poison fails to 
determine the poison as poison by perception, so a 
constructionfree perception is ipso’ facto not capable of 
determining the nature of the object. Nor can the 
constructionfree perception determine its object by means of 
a constructionfilled cognition produced in the next moment, 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-SLOKAVARTTIKA 583 


because the constructionfilled cognition would require the 
production of another constructionfilled cognition for its own 
determination, and so on ad infinitum. Moreover, it is 
impossible that a constructionfree perception should produce 
a constructionfilled cognition in the next moment. An ass 
cannot produce a horse. If a perception free from conceptual 
constructions could produce a constructionfilled cognition 
which is conceptual, why should not the atomic real 
(svalaksana) itself be admitted as capable of generating the 
constructionfilled cognition directly without the intervention 
of constructionfree perception? The Buddhist cannot set down 
the conceptual constructions to the activity of predispositions 
and perversities influencing the constructionfree perception in 
the production of the constructionfilled cognition in the next 
moment. These predispositions and perversities will ever 
remain active and make the constructionfree perception itself 
vitiated and contaminated and incapable of cognizing the true 
nature of the object." 

"Constructionfree perception thus is found incapable of 
establishing the reality of atoms. And constructionfilled 
cognition, being conceptual in character, is unfit to perform 
the function. Inference, being based on perception, is also 
incompetent to do the duty." 

“The Buddhist might contend that composite wholes are 
not real. The parts constitute the whole. But what is the 
relation between the whole and the part? The whole cannot 
reside in the parts individually or jointly. The postulation of a 
peculiar relation called samavaya (inherence) is also not 
helpful, because samavaya in the ultimate analysis is nothing 
but another name of what we call ‘residence’. The concept of 
a composite whole is thus an absurd notion." 

"The Jain philosopher postulates the relation of identity- 
in-difference between the whole and its parts, which is exactly 
similar to the relation obtaining between a cognition and its 
two constituents, viz., the cognizing agent and the cognized 
content. The cognition, the cognizer and the content are three 


584 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


distinct facts inseparably rolled into one. They are identical as 
well as different. The relation is sui generis and for want of a 
better name may be called identity-in-difference. The whole is 
as much a real unity as each of its parts. There is nothing 
repugnant in admitting the atoms as combining together to 
make one unit which is amenable to perception. And such 
unity must be admitted as real. Otherwise, there being no 
unity available at any state, the unity of (an) atom would also 
remain unestablished." 

"The question of the reality of universals is also raised 
by Vidyananda in this context. The Jaina philosopher identifies 
the universal with similarity or resemblance. Similarity must 
be admitted as real. Otherwise there could be no occasion for 
the erroneous cognition of shell as silver. There is similarity 
between shell and silver, which is responsible for the 
occurrence of erroneous cognition in the presence of the other 
relevant conditions of error. The Jaina philosopher does not 
admit the category of eternal and ubiquitous universals of the 
Nyaya-Vaisesika philosopher, for he does not believe in any 
valid experience of such (a) category. This similarity is called 
(a) horizontal universal (urdhvati-samdnya) which relates to 
the identity of a substance through time. A substance changes 
but does not cease to be. It is permanent and also one. This 
permanence and unity is called "vertical universal". The Jaina 
philosopher does not find any difficulty in admitting the same 
self running through different modes and preserving its 
identity. He likens this vertical identity to the unity of a 
cognition which has a variety of colors and forms, spread in 
space, as its content. Even as a single cognition can cognize a 
number of forms and color in one sweep and be one unitary 
fact, so does a substance remain one while passing through 
different modes in succession." 

"Moreover, if causal efficiency is the criterion of reality, 
the real should be admitted as permanent and transitory both. 
The momentary is not capable of exercising causal efficiency 
either in succession or in non-succession and as such cannot: 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 585 


be real. The same is the case with an absolutely permanent 
entity. The Jain accepts causal efficiency as the criterion of 
reality, which, according to him, presupposes that the real 
should be both permanent and transitory." 

"The Buddhist has denied a permanent self underlying 
the course of psychical events which happen at different times. 
What exists and is possible is only the present momentary 
unit. The past is defunct, and the present is lost after its turn. 
This makes the continuity of personal life impossible, and 
consequently the continuity of present life into the future, and 
the necessity of the law of karma that the performer of (a) 
good or bad act will have to bear the consequence of, become 
impossible of explanation. The Buddhist has abolished the 
permanent self and replaced it by a series supposed to be 
governed by the law of causality. The past produces the 
present and the present produces the future, and in the 
production the cause communicates its ethico-religious bias 
into the effect. This seems to be a solution to the difficulties 
involved in the breach of continuity." 

"But is causation possible in the absence of a real link 
between the past and the present? The previous consciousness- 
unit is dead and defunct when (the) succeeding unit happens. 
But how can a defunct and nonexistent fact be the cause of 
anything? Nobody can think that the present occurrence is due 
to an event which has occurred in the remote past. The reason 
for this is that the past is not in existence to influence the 
present event. It might be contended that the immediately 
precedent event can be the cause of the immediately 
succeeding one. But how can the effect come into existence in 
the absence of the cause and yet be due to it? In the Buddhist 
theory the cause ceases to be when the effect comes into 
being. How can there be any relation between what is existent 
and what is not existent? There can be no distinction between 
the immediate precedent and the remote precedent when both 
are equally nonexistent at the time of the production of the 
effect. The determinant of actuality is the concomitance in. 


586 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


presence and absence of the effect with the cause. But in the 
Buddhist theory the effect does not happen when the cause is 
in existence, and it happens only when the supposed cause is 
nonexistent. How can there be concomitance? How again can 
the Buddhist explain that the effect should happen in (the) 
immediately succeeding moment and not in (the) remote 
future or past when the cause has no existence at the time of 
the effect's occurrence?...Thus causality is as inexplicable in 
the theory of flux as it is in the theory of eternally unchanging 
cause.” 

"There is another serious difficulty in the doctrine of 
flux. It is a matter of universal experience that the continuous 
identity of the self as well as of objects is felt by all. This felt 
identity is asserted to be illusion by the fluxist. But what is the 
basis of this illusion? Illusion presupposes a previous cognition 
of the object. A man who has never experienced silver cannot 
mistake the shell for silver. Identity is inseparable from 
continuity. But as there is not real continuity anywhere 
according to the Buddhist, how can there be such illusion of 
identity possible? The supposed continuity is said to be formed 
by discrete moments which come into being and pass out of 
existence. So there is no real continuity anywhere. It is 
affirmed by the Buddhist himself that the discrete moments 
when not felt as distinct create the illusion of identity. We 
have shown that this illusion is impossible. But even admitting 
for the sake of argument that such an illusion may be possible, 
the question arises 'How can one continuum be distinguished 
from another continuum?" 

"Now it is a felt fact that the chair is different from the 
table. It is not the discrete momentary chair that is different 
from the table. But we feel that the table which appears to 
continue is different from the chair-continuum. There is no 
difference between the chair and the table so far as the 
appearance of continuum due to the noncognition of the 
difference of the units is concerned. A question arises: 'How 
can one continuum be felt as distinct from another’ 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 587 


continuum?’ Each member of a chair-series is distinct from its 
other members in the same way as the members of the table- 
series are from those of the chair-series. Yet the chair-series is 
felt as distinct from the table-series. What is the reason for 
this? If the unbroken continuity of the emergence of the table- 
‘moments be the reason for its distinction from the chair, the 
same unbroken continuity is found in all the series. It is 
difficult to understand, firstly, how absolutely distinct entities 
give rise to the appearance of identity; secondly, how one 
series can be distinguished from another series when the same 
absolute difference is found to obtain between them as is 
found between the members of a particular series. If similarity 
be held to be an additional reason for this appearance of 
identity and continuity, then why should not the two table- 
series, closely similar, be not felt as identical? There is 
similarity and also unbroken succession between the different 
units. You may say that one table is felt as distinct from 
another table and so there is no confusion between them. But 
the appeal to perception is useless because what is perceived 
is always the moment and not the series which is an unreal 
intellectual construction. So again the appeal to recognition 
cannot be of help, because in the Buddhist theory of flux 
nothing continues, and there is no identity between the past 
and the present, which is to be known by recognition. What is 
felt is always the moment, absolutely distinct and discrete 
from another moment. So no question of identity of one 
moment with another moment arises. In fact a plurality of 
units without a binding nexus can never account for the unity 
felt in an entity. If an abiding unity is posited to connect and 
combine the different units, then recognition and also causality 
can be explained. This is the position of the Jaina philosopher 
who asserts that a reality is a permanent unity which runs 
through the changing moments that appear in it. The criterion 
of reality is thus continuity and change, that is to say, the flux 
and influx of states." 

(E30-33; $42-44) "The Samkhya philosophy admits 


588 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


dualism of prakrti and purusa. Prakrti is the material cause of 
the universe, and purusa is the unchanging principle of 
consciousness. Prakrti is one but purusas are infinite in 
number. Both are ubiquitous. Prakrti evolves in a definite 
order and the evolutes are twenty-three in number. The 
evolution starts with the unbalancing of the equilibrium of the 
three constituents of prakrti, viz., sattva (principle of buoyancy 
and illumination), rajas (energy) and tamas (inertia). The first 
evolute is mahat or buddhi (intellection) which is followed by 
ahamkara (ego or selfhood) as the second. From the ahamkadra 
are evolved the following sixteen--the five tanmatras (fine 
elements), the five organs of cognition, the five organs of 
action and the mind. From the five fine elements again the 
five gross elements arise. These twenty-three evolutes together 
with prakrti and purusa make up the twenty-five principles. If 
the class of emancipated purusas is added, the number comes 
to twenty-six. And Mahesvara is the twenty-seventh according 
to the Samkhya school which accepts God." 

"Liberation, according to this school, consists in the 
reinstatement of the purusa in its own nature, which is 
attained by means of the discriminative knowledge of purusa 
and prakrti. It is likened to the state of dreamless sleep." 

"The Jaina philosopher has raised objections against the 
Samkhya concept of prakrti and its evolution. Prakrti is 
eternal, ubiquitous and partless. Being partless, it should exist 
in its entirety everywhere and that would mean the existence 
of everything everywhere. But this is opposed to experience. 
We perceive different objects in different places and times, and 
not everything everywhere at all times. But the opponent 
might contend that though it is admitted that everything exists 
everywhere, it is the presence or absence of manifestation 
which determines the perceptibility or otherwise of the object. 
But then what is this manifestation? If it stands for the 
cognition of the previously uncognized object, you have to 
state whether the manifestation is eternal or occasional. If 
manifestation is occasional, it must be admitted to be freshly 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 589 


produced. And consequently what is the harm if objects are 

also admitted as freshly produced? If, on the other hand, the 

manifestation is eternal, the original contingency of the. 
perception of everything everywhere would revive." 
"Moreover, what is the relation between prakrti and its 

evolutes? Are the evolutes the products of prakrti or only the 

transformations of it? If the evolutes are the products, they 

must be either pre-existent or pre-nonexistent. But the 

production of pre-existent products is futile, and the 

production of pre-nonexistent products is impossible according 

to the Samkhya philosopher. An absolutely nonexistent object 

cannot be produced. If, on the other hand, the evolutes are 

considered to be the transformations of prakrti, they are either 

absolutely different from the latter or absolutely identical with 

it. In the latter case, the successive production of the evolutes 

would be impossible, because there is no corresponding 

succession in prakrti. And in the former case, it would be 

illogical to regard them as evolved from prakrti, there being 

absolute cleavage between the two." 

“Now if the Samkhya philosopher admits transformation 
to be neither different nor identical, and asserts that prakrti 
transforms itself as mahat and the like, much like the straight 
or circular shapes assumed by a reptile, he would be 
abandoning his doctrine of absolutely eternal prakrti. This 
would be tantamount to the admission of the doctrine of 
nonabsolutism sponsored by the Jaina philosopher." 

"The Samkhya doctrine of unchanging purusa also does 
not commend itself to the Jaina. The purusa should be 
conceived as permanent-cum-changing. We have already 
discussed the point in connection with our exposition of the 
doctrine of fluxism." 

(E34-41; S44-47) "The VaiSesika school postulates six 
categories (etc., brief statement of Vaisesika categories). The 
self has nine specific qualities of buddhi (knowledge), sukha 
(pleasure), duhkha (pain), iccha (intention), dvesa (aversion), 
prayatna (effort), dharma (merit), adharma (demerit) and 


590 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


samskara (predispositions). On the absolute dissociation from 
these qualities, the self attains liberation and regains its 
natural state of freedom from contamination with these 
specific qualities. The school believes in the plurality of selves 
which are ubiquitous." 

"The Jaina philosopher observes that the Vaisesika 
postulation of absolute difference between the parts and the 
whole (avayavin), qualities and their substratum, action and 
the active, universal and the individual, is opposed to 
experience. We do not perceive the two terms as absolutely 
different from one another, though of course distinction is not 
denied. They must be admitted as somehow identical and 
different both. The postulation of the relation of samavdya 
(inherence) between the two would not solve the problem. It 
would rather add another category equally unamenable to 
perception. Moreover, the relation of inherence is accepted as 
eternal, ubiquitous and unitary, whereas the terms related by 
it are transitory and limited in extension, and different in 
different contexts. Again, inherence itself would require 
another inherence to relate itself to the terms, and this would 
lead to infinite regress leaving the terms unrelated. Nor would 
the quality of contact (samyoga) serve the purpose. Contact, 
being admitted as a quality by the Vaisesika, can reside 
exclusively in a substance, and not in inherence which is not 
a substance. The substantive-adjective relation also is not 
helpful. Such relation is possible only when the terms are 
already related by another relation. For instance, the stick can 
function as an adjective if the relation of contact between the 
person and the stick held by him is known beforehand." 

"The VaiSesika might contend that inherence relates 
itself to the term by itself independently of any other relation. 
Inherence is itself a relation and therefore does not need 
another relation for its relation with the term. But the 
contention is not tenable. Even as contact and such other 
qualities require a relation for their residence in a substance, 
so inherence must also be admitted to be in need of another 


SATYASASANAPARIKSA 591 


relation for its residence in the terms. It cannot be accepted as 
self-related. The Vaisesika might argue: 'Self-relatedness is the 
intrinsic nature of inherence, even as hotness is of fire. There 
is no justification for comparing the nature of contact with 
that of inherence. Fire is hot and water is cold. It is a question 
of fact: One should not ask: Why is fire not cold and water not 
hot?' But the Jaina philosopher does not find any substance in 
the argument. Had the self-relatedness of inherence been 
established by perception, the Vaisesika could appeal to the 
nature of things. But it is a question of logic which can be 
decided only by appeal to reason. The case of contact was 
cited only for the sake of argument against the postulation of 
inherence as an independent category and not as a proof 
against such postulation. In fact, Prasgastapada proves 
inherence by inference." 

"Vidyananda has adduced a number of cogent 
arguments against inherence and the reader will find many 
interesting points in it. With the refutation of inherence the 
quality of contact is also refuted. The postulation of absolute 
difference is the besetting sin. Some sort of identity between 
the terms must be admitted in order to make their relation 
understandable. Otherwise atoms would never combine and 
our perception of unity by the side of difference would remain 
unaccounted for." 

"Another important point of difference between the 
Vaisesika and the Jaina is the question of a personal God. In 
the Nyaya-Vaisesika school, particularly in its later 
development, the existence of a personal God is advocated. He 
is not the material cause of the world. He is only the efficient 
cause. The body, the sense-organs, the world, etc. are known 
to have a definite origin in time. Who has created them? It can 
be inferred that they were brought into being by an intelligent 
person with the help of the material atoms just as articles of 
daily use are manufactured by persons vested with knowledge 
and skill. Such an intelligent person is God." 

"But the Jaina advances a counter-argument: 'God is not 


592 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the creator of body, etc., because he is devoid of bodily 
organism. Whoever is devoid of bodily organism is not the 
creator, for instance, the emancipated self. God is devoid of 
bodily organism. And therefore He is not the creator.’ The 
Vaisesika denies bodily organism to God. Granted that God has 
a bodily organism, an eternal God must have an eternal body. 
Now as the bodily organism is a composite entity, it must ex 
hypothesi be a product created by an intelligent being, and 
this would prove it to be noneternal. If in order to avoid that 
contingency the body is admitted to be created without any 
intelligent creator, this would contradict the doctrine that all 
products must have an intelligent creator. Now if the 
Vaisesika admits God as devoid of bodily organism, the activity 
of creation would be impossible of explanation. And if he 
accepted the possibility of creative activity by a person devoid 
of bodily organism, it would be a simpler hypothesis to admit 
karma, though unconscious, as capable of doing the function. 
Possession of both intelligence and bodily organism are 
necessary for the creation of an object, as illustrated by the 
instance of the potter. Now God, though possessed of 
intelligence, is devoid of bodily organism and so does not 
satisfy the full conditions of creation. Karma, though 
unconscious, makes up a composite material body according 
to the Jaina, and so it is on a par with God in this respect. 
Karma therefore is as much a satisfactory condition of creation 
as the God of the Vaisesika philosopher. The Vaisesika might 
contend that the essential condition of creation is the presence 
of intelligence, desire and effort. The karma of the Jaina does 
not satisfy these conditions and therefore creation cannot be 
set down to it. But the Jaina submits that God also, being 
devoid of bodily organism, is incapable of knowing, willing 
and effort, and hence of performing the function of creation. 
The Vaisesika's postulation of intelligence, desire and effort in 
a bodiless God goes against his doctrine of the disembodied 
emancipated soul as free from the specific qualities of 
knowledge, pleasure, pain and the like." 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-SLOKAVARTTIKA 593 


"The Vaisesika believes in God as the dispenser of 
justice in accordance with the merits and demerits acquired by 
a person. In other words, God grants the fruits of our own 
karma. The Jaina thinks karma is the sole and sufficient 
condition capable of producing the results of good and bad 
moral acts." 

(E42-43; S47) "The Naiyayikas are in essential 
agreement with the Vaisesikas on all important philosophical 
issues, and so Vidyananda refrains from giving any elaborate 
exposition of their philosophy. He however refers to their 
conception of liberation which is of four types, viz. sdlokya, 
sarupya, samipya and sdyujya. The first is attained by 
bhaktiyoga which consists in lifelong devotedness and 
dedication to Mahesvara the Supreme Deity as His servant. 
The second and third are attained by means of kriyayoga in 
the form of spiritual penance and scriptural study and the 
fourth by jridnayoga, that is, meditation on God by means of 
the eight factors of yogic discipline, viz. yama, niyama, etc." 

(E44-47; $47-48) "The Bhatta Mimamsa admits eleven 
categories of reals,’ viz., earth, water, fire, air, space (dik), 
time, @kdsa, self, mind, sound (Sabda) and darkness (tamas). 
Guna (quality), karman (activity), etc., which reside in the 
reals are identical with the latter. The Prabhakara Mimarhsaka 
adopts a different scheme and posits the following nine-- 
dravya (substance), guna (quality), kriya (action), jati 
(universal), samkhya (number), sddrsya (similarity), Sakti 
(potency), samavaya (inherence) and krama (order)--instead 
of the following five of the Bhatta school--substance, quality, 
action, universal and nonexistence." 

"Two ends of human life are recognized, viz. heaven 
and salvation. The duties are fourfold--nitya (compulsory), 


1 This is how the passage reads. However, it is evident that what is 
intended is rather that these are eleven categories of substances. The 
categories of reals consists of the five at the end of this paragraph. 


594 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


naimittika (to be performed on particular occasions), kamya 
(prescribed to serve specific ends) and nisiddha (forbidden). 
The Mimamsakas do not admit renunciation as the essential 
condition of salvation. One can attain salvation even by 
following the life of a righteous householder earning his 
livelihood by honest means, devoted to self-enlightenment, 
hospitable to guests, performing oblation and truthful. The 
candidate for salvation should not perform the kdmya and 
nisiddha duties. He should however do the other two types of 
duties in order to get rid of the obstacles that might obstruct 
his spiritual progress. The Prabhakara Mimamsakas include 
these two also under the kdmya duties and do not prescribe 
them for the aspirant to salvation." 

"Vidyananda selects the Mimamsaka concept of 

universal for refutation at great length." 


86. VIDYANANDA, Slokavarttika on Umasvati's 
Tattvarthasitra 

Jayendra Soni, in Aspects of Jaina Philosophy (Madras 
1996), pp. 45-53, provides the text and a translation of 
Vidyananda's commentary on I. 6. He introduces this with the 
following comments: "The manner in which Vidyananda 
proceeds...is to compose Slokas in the context of (a) siitra by 
Umasvami and then to write his prose varttika in varying 
lengths in which problems are then discussed in more detail. 
His commentary to T(attvdrtha) S(utra) 1, 6 contains a total] 
of 56 Slokas. The discussion of the problem of universals and 
particulars begins with his vartika to his fifth sloka." (p. 47) 
He then goes on to provide the text of certain of the slokas of 
I. 1 and to translate them. We offer the translations here as a 
sample of Vidyananda's style throughout the work. 


CHAPTER ONE 
I. 6. 1 "In the (previous) sitra it is established that the 
knowledge of reality, which may be partial or complete, is put 
forward (niksipta) by name, etc.; here it is (said to be 


TATTVARTHASUTRA-SLOKAVARTTIKA 595 


obtained) through pramanas and nayas. 

I. 6. 2 "In the dvandva (compound) ‘pramdnas and 
nayas' the word pramdna is placed first since it is more 
important, even though it has more syllables." 

I. 6. 3 "Pramana is comprehensive, (so it) is regarded 
as being more important than naya since it (naya) is limited, 
so is what it (naya) expresses (viz., the knowledge it furnishes 
is also partial), so it is said." 

I. 6. 4"To say that pramana is naya since it determines 
its own object is untrue. Naya has the characteristic of 
determining its own object only partially." 

Now, turning to the problem of parts and wholes, he 
comments: 

I, 6. 8 "If the object as a whole were (produced by) a 
superimposed conceptual construction then it would not exist 
in another conceptual construction; it cannot have any causal 
efficiency (artha-kriya-sakti) (i.e., it cannot produce the 
expected purpose), nor can it be known clearly through 
perception." 

Soni in explanation comments: "In this loka 
Vidyananda brings in the criticism that the universal, which for 
him is equivalent to the object as a wholé, is not a 
superimposed conceptual or mental construction (kalpana), 
meaning thereby that the object as a whole exists really. In 
other words, the notion of a really existent object as a whole 
is not a figment of the imagination, as the Buddhist would 
regard it to be. Further, he questions the status of a mental 
construction when in the following moment it is overshadowed 
by another mental construction, taking the Buddhist doctrine 
of momentariness at its word. In effect, Vidyananda is asking 
what use or function a mental construction can then have, 
namely when it in fact no longer exists, not only because of its 
momentary nature but also because it would be pushed aside 
by the next conceptual construction; further, its non-existence 
would imply its imperceivability.” 

“After raising further issues about mental concepts and 


596 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the role of ideas in practical life Vidyananda interprets the 
opponent as believing that the notion of an object as a whole 
is an unjustified notion of the common person involved in 
mundane activities. (That) it is not the pot as a whole that 
bears water, but rather the individual atoms which make it up, 
is what the Buddhist contends. The notion of wholeness is not 
only something hidden but it does not in fact exist. Turning 
the argument around Vidyananda argues that a single atom 
cannot itself perform the function of bearing water, apart from 
the fact that an atom, as an entity in itself, cannot be 
cognized, a point granted by the Buddhists themselves; 
therefore it must be admitted that the atoms together, in the 
form of a pot, are capable of performing the function of 
bearing water. Then why, Vidyananda asks implicitly, does not 
the opponent regard the atoms together in the form of the pot, 
as being identical with the pot itself? This point is clearer 
when Vidyananda probes into the question whether the atoms 
have something special about them which allows them to 
feature in community as an object such as a pot, as a whole." 

Soni then quotes a passage from Vidyananda's extensive 
commentary on the same section: "Atoms either have to 
require something special (about them) when in use, or not. 
It cannot be the latter position (viz., that they do not require 
anything special about them), otherwise all of them would be 
in motion perpetually. If it is said that they do indeed require 
something special (about them) for the actions for which they 
are responsible, then what is this speciality? If it is said that 
(an action for which the atoms are responsible) arises through 
‘their being in the same place’ then, on account of it being 
agreed that the atoms occupy different places, what does 'their 
being in the same place’ mean? 'Their being in the same place’ 
is a position (of the atoms) suitable for the functions of 
carrying water, etc., and nothing else; a single atom in any 
place is capable (of performing the function) and any other 
atoms being there are also being employed (for the same 
function); their 'same places’ cannot be explained in this way, 


TATTVARTHA-SLOKAVARTTIKA 597 


because (all the atoms being) in a single spot would be a 
contradiction--it would lead to the view that all (the atoms in 
one spot) would be merely a single atom, because each would 
merge into the other entirely, otherwise it would have to be 
said that 'being in one spot’ would be meaningless. What else 
would be a single action of bearing water, etc., because even 
though the (other) atoms which are in a different place are 
also being used, they would have to have (occupy) ‘the same 
place'? Accepting the distinctness of each atom you must also 
accept that it (the action performed by each atom) would then 
become several, otherwise there would be no difference in 
saying that what is to be done by the various atoms of a pot, 
etc., is a single action." 

"(Opponent): "True, this (activity of the atoms in the 
form of carrying water, etc., would become many, because 
ordinary life takes place with their (the atoms’) function, 
without which action is hindered. (But) the effect is 
metaphorically regarded as one, because the (various actions 
of the different atoms) cause only a single effect.” 

(Answer:) "Not so, because (1) even though they (the 
atoms) produce effects, the singleness (of their effects) is not 
proved; (2) it has been accepted that in fact there are many 
(effects of the atoms which are together); (3) each (atom) 
produces its own unique effect; (4) it would in fact lead to 
infinite regress if their effects were accepted to be a single 
one; (5) even after thinking about it deeply a single effect 
cannot be accepted (on the basis of your view). If you also 
accept this, then why can the effect of the various atoms 
(together) not be a single object as a whole?" 

And Vidyananda concludes his argument on this point 
by saying in his following two verses: 

I. 6. 9 "If this is an error produced by the senses, 
showing the form of a gross (object), then prove how 
perception, knowledge through the senses, is not erroneous." 

1. 6. 10 “If it is said that the atoms are not joined 
together (but) close together, then these (atoms) can never be 


598 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
within the range of anyone's perception, like the supreme self.” 


N. L. Jain, in the course of his comments on various 
passages from Akalanka's commentary on the Tattvarthasutra, 
gives us some insights on Vidyananda's views on certain 
matters. In what follows we provide excerpts from N. L. Jain's 
explanations. The quotations are from Prof. Jain's three books 
translating Chapters 2, 5 and 8 cited previously: they are 
referred to here as NLJ2, -5, and -8 respectively (with his 
translations of technical terms replaced by ours where 
appropriate). "E" refers to the edition by Manoharalal 
constituting Saraswati Oriental Research Sanskrit Series No. 16 
(Ahmedabad 2002). LJ2, -5, -8" indicate the comments of N. 
L. Jain in his translations of those three chapters. 


CHAPTER TWO 

Il. 8 (E318-322; NLJ2, p. 86) “According to Vidyananda, 
the cognitive application, in general, is the differentium only 
for twelve types of living beings (two types with destructive 
volition of absolute awareness and conation out of nine and 
ten types with mixed (destruction-cum-substantial) volitions of 
four right awarenesses, three wrong awarenesses and three 
conations) where this property is all-pervasive and eternal. 
The other volitional types have specific consciousness.” 

II. 9 (E322; NLJ2, p.90) "Vidyananda points out that 
the living being has been characterised by eight types of 
awareness and four types of conations--i.e., twelve types of 
volitions in all. The question is what type of living being is 
being defined here. In rejoinder, it is pointed out that living 
beings have a total of fifty-three volitions as mentioned in 
2. 2. Out of them twelve have been mentioned as primary 
differentia for living beings, the remaining forty-one volitions 
being secondary ones. Thus the forty-one-volitional living 
being has been defined as with cognitive application in 
general. The différentia of consciousness differentiates the 
living from the nonliving. " 


TATTVARTHA-SLOKAVARTTIKA 599 


If. 10 (E322-323; NLJ2, p. 93) According to him (i.e.,: 
Vidyananda) the word "and" (ca) is put in to include two moré 
categories of living beings besides the two mentioned. They 
are (i) quasi-worldly beings also like those at the thirteenth 
spiritual state (they are going to be liberated in the same 
birth) and (ii) omniscients without activity (i.e: living beings 
at the fourteenth stage, to be liberated in an antarmuhirta's 
time). They are different from the worldly and liberated beings 
in many respects.” 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

VII. 3 (E476; NLJ8, p. 61 "Vidyananda explains the 
varieties of bondage in a different order (from that of 
Akalanka), placing constituents first, followed by nature, 
duration and intensity.” 

Vill. 6 (E477; NLJ8, p. 87) "Vidyananda points out a 
fact in support of knowledge-obscuring karma. There is 
difference in the degrees of the five types of knowledges 
among the different categories and classes of living beings 
despite the fact that the material cause like souls, and efficient 
causes like a good body, sermons and practices, etc., are 
commonly available. This difference could only be explained 
on the basis of some unseen cause which could only be the 
obscuring karma of knowledge." 

VIII. 13 (E470; NLJ8, p. 133) "Vidyananda mentions 
that besides the primary and secondary species of karmas, 
there are many types of tertiary karmic species, depending on 
the variety of karmic (1) duration, (2) intensity and (3) other 
observable causes." 

VII. 25 (E481; NLJ8, p. 156) "Vidyananda has raised a 
good question as to how an infinite-times-infinite number of 
atoms could be converted to karmic aggregates, in the absence 
of which there could be no formation of karmic species.” 

"He points out that if there are no aggregates (which 
are normally perceptible), one cannot perceive objects, one 
cannot make inferences and have self-experience (in the 


600 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


absence of mind-body aggregates). In fact, the atoms 
themselves form aggregates because of their immediate 
vicinity and discreteness (along with positive and negative 
qualities).” ™ 


87. VIDYANANDA, Tika on Samantabhadra's 
Yuktyanusasana 
The work has been edited by Indralal and Srilal in 
Manikcandra Digambara Jain Granthamala 25, 1919, 
unavailable to us. 


88. ANANTAKIRTI (950), Jivasiddhinibandhana 

See the Introduction (in Hindi) by V. P. Johrapurkar to 
his edition of Bhavasena's Visvatattvaprakasa, Jivaraja Jaina 
Granthamala No. 15 (Sholapur 1964), pp. 37-38 and 75. 


89. ANANTAKIRTI, Tatparyavrtti on Akalanka's 
Laghiyastraya 
This work was edited by Kalapa Bharamappa Nitve with 
Akalanka's work and severat other commentaries in 
Manikacandra Digambara Jain Granthamala 1, 1915. We have 
been unable to locate a copy. 


90. ANANTAKIRTI, Sarvajfiasiddhi 
This work was apparently also edited by K. B. Neve in 
the volume cited in the previous entry. 


91. ANANTAKIRTI, Svatahpramdnyabhanga 
Mentioned in Johrapurkar's Hindi Introduction to the 
work cited as #88 above, p. 75. 


YOGASARAPRABHRTA 601 


92. AMITAGATI I (950), Yogasdraprabhrta 

H. L. Jain and A. N. Upadhye, in an essay ("General 
Editorial") introducing Jugal Kishore Mukhtar's edition (our - 
"E") of this work (Jnanapitha Murtidevi Jaina Granthamala, 
Sanskrit Grantha No. 33, 1968), have discussed the problems 
raised by the fact that there are two Jain authors of the name 
"Amitagati", of which the author of the present work seems to 
have been chronologically earlier. After a careful discussion 
they conclude that this Amitagati should be assigned to the 
middle of the tenth century A.D. On this basis we put this 
author and his work here. He is reported to have been a 
Digambara. They also provide a brief summary, which follows. 


Summary by H. L. Jain and A. N. Upadhye 


The Yogasdraprabhrta is divided into nine sections 
(adhikara) which deal respectively with (1) self, (2) not self, 
(3) inflow, (4) bondage, (5) cessation of inflow, (6) cleansing 
of traces, (7) liberation, (8) (right) conduct, and (9) an 
appendix (ciilika). There are 540 stanzas in all. 

The titles of the sections clearly indicate that this work 
covers the fundamentals of Jainism which are presented from 
the higher plane of self-realization. 

Chapter I (59 stanzas) (E3-36), while exposing the 
nature of a self fully, propounds the concepts of vision and 
cognition as well as the types of cognition and its relation with 
what is cognized. It is for the yogi to realize the discriminated 
self. 

Chapter II (50 stanzas) (E37-64) is a discourse on five 
substances other than selves, their existence and their 
attendant origination, destruction and permanence, and their 
accompaniments of qualities and modes. Every one of them is 
fully explained, and the Chapter is concluded with a detailed 
discussion of the karmic product (pudgala), its nature and its 
relation with the self. 


602 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Chapter III (40 stanzas) (E65-79) explains the causes of 
inflow and the various transformations in that context in a 
very critical manner. 

Chapter IV (41 stanzas) (E80-95) deals with karmic 
bondage and its types, indicating how one can try to be 
immune from the bondage of actions, both meritorious and 
demeritorious. 

Chapter V (62 stanzas) (E96-115) propounds the 
principle of cessation of inflow in its two aspects, as state and 
as substantial. The details are highly instructive, showing how 
equanimity, etc., are of great benefit for the seeker of self- 
realization. 

Chapter VI (50 stanzas) (E116-134) sheds light on 
cleansing of traces of two types. How cleansing, i-e., the 
shedding away of karma, becomes possible for a yogi is 
expounded in a dignified manner with requisite illustrations 
and practical guide-lines. 

Chapter VII (54 stanzas) (E135-155) gives the nature 
of liberation in the context of spiritual meditation on which a 
man of learning has to embark to reach this experience. 

Chapter VIII (100 stanzas) (E156-196) deals with 
conduct, namely, the internal and external life of a Jaina 
monk. The whole subject is dealt with in all its details, 
indicating what is to be appropriated (upddeya) and what is 
to be avoided (heya). 

Chapter IX (84 stanzas) (E197-226) presents an 
exhilarating exposition of self-realization in its different facets. 


93. KANAKANANDIN (975), Karmaprakrti 
NCat III, 142 says that manuscript(s) (Prakrit) is/are 
listed in A Hand-List of 838 Sanskrit, Prakrt and Kannada 
Manuscripts in the Danasala Matha Sdstra Bhandara, 
Moodbidri. ss 


DRAVYASAMGRAHA 603 


94. KANAKANANDIN, Dravyasamgraha 
NCat II, 142 says there are both a Brhat- and a Laghu- 
Dravyasamgraha by this author. See N. Premi in Jaina Sahitya 
aur Itihas (Bombay 1942), pp. 296, 298. 


ANANTAVIRYA (980) 

There were a number of Jain authors named 
Anantavirya. Mahendra Kumar in his introduction to the 
edition of Akalanka's Siddhiviniscaya with Anantavirya's Tika, 
op. cit., spends many pages exploring the question of the 
identity--and in particular the dating--of this Anantavirya. After 
a long discussion he concludes that there were in fact two 
other Anantavirya's who commented on Akalanka's text; the 
earlier's work has been lost, and the second of the rwo is later 
than the period covered in this Volume. The date he arrives at 
for the present Anantavirya "can be fixed as extending from 
950-990 A.D." (p. 89). He is said to have been the pupil of 
Ravibhadra (c. 959-990) and the grandteacher of Vadiraja 
(Parsvanathacaritra) (1025), who is referred to by 
Prabhacandra. 


95. ANANTAVIRYA (980), Bhasya on Akalanka's 
Pramanasamgraha 
NCat 1, 180 refers us to the edition by Mahendra 
Kumar published with the editor's commentary as Singhi Jain 
Granthamala 12, 1939, pp 8, 10, 13, ete. 


96. ANANTAVIRYA, Tika on Akalanka’s Siddhiviniscaya 
As previously mentioned, this Anantavirya's commentary 
is the one edited by Mahendra Kumar in the work previously 
cited. Mahendra Kumar (ibid., p. 96) comments: "Anantavirya 
composes poetic prose bordering on Campi to explain the 


604 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


meaning of some sentences...he was a great terminologist." 


97. ANANTAVIRYA, Prameyaratnavali on Akalanka's 
Laghiyastraya 
Edited by Mahendra Kumar in two volumes: Jnana- 
Pitha Murtidevi Jaina Granthamala 22, 1956-58. 


98. ANANTAVIRYA, Vrtti on Akalanka's Nydyaviniscaya 
NCat I, 181 directs us to Jainagranthavali (Bombay 
1902), p. 91; Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Mysore and 
Coorg by Lewis Rice (Bangalore 1884); and A Hand-List of 
407 Manuscripts in the Srimaccarukirti Pandacarya Jaina 
Bhandar at Sravanabelgola, Mysore State (no compiler or date 
given). 


NEMICANDRA SAIDDHANTIKA or 
SIDDHANTACAKRAVARTIN (980) 

Travellers in India lucky enough to visit the town of 
Sravana Belgola in what is now Mysore State have wondered 
at the immense statue of Gomatesvara which crowns a hilltop 
and can be seen from many miles away. This statue was 
erected under the direction of Chamunda Raya, a minister of 
King Rajamalla H. The King's reign ended in 984, but the 
statue could not have been erected before 978, in which year 
Chamunda Raya wrote a purana which does not mention the 
statue. Sarat Chandra Ghoshal, in the Introduction to his 
translation of Nemicandra's Dravyasarhgraha (our "T" for the 
summary of that work provided below), argues that in fact the 
statue must have been in put up in precisely 980, basing this 
estimate on references in literary tracts reinforced by 
astronomical facts. 

Nemicandra mentions the statue in his Gommatasara.. 


NYAYAVINISCAYAVRTT! 605 


Ghoshal spends several pages showing from inscriptional 
evidence that the statue was in actual fact erected by 
Chamunda Raya and not someone else. Although Ghoshal also 
attempts in the same Introduction to gather more information 
about Nemicandra himself, as all too usual there is not much 
to go on. 

A thorough account of the identity of this writer is 
found in "Facts about Gommatasara" by Jyoti Prasad Jain 
(Vaishali Research Bulletin No. 3, 1982, pp. 53-62)."” We pick 
out a few points: Dr. Jain identifies this Nemichandra as a 
student of Indranandin, the author of Jwalamalin-Kalpa 
written in 939 A.D., whose pupil Kanakanandin (see #s93-94 
above) was as well. Other teachers were named Abhayanandin 
and Ajitasena. “It was this Ajitasena who inspired 
Chamundaraya to erect the world famous Bahubali colossus at 
the Vidhyagiri of Shravana-belagola (district Hasan in the 
State of Karnataka or Mysore), and presided at its consecration 
ceremony, most probably assisted by Nemichandra himself. 
Thereafter, the latter was appointed as the chief priest, pontiff 
and caretaker of this holy place..." The date of this remarkable 
happening is argued by Dr. Jain to be Sunday, 13 March, 981 
A.D.! Since the Gomatasara was written after the erection of 
the image it must have been composed a few years later. 


99. NEMICANDRA SAIDDHANTIKA or DEVENDRA GANI 
(980), Gomatasara 

The work has two parts, called respectively Jivakanda 
and Karmakanda. There are many editions, and both parts 
have been edited and translated by J. L.Jain, the first part-- 
Jivakanda--as Sacred Books of the Jains 5 (Lucknow 1927), 
our "ET1", the second part itself in two parts, the first part as 
Volume 6 of the Sacred Books of the Jains (Lucknow 1927) 
(our "ET2"), the second part as Volume 10 of the same series 
(Lucknow 1937 (our "ET3"). Prof. Jain’s Introductions to the 
two volumes have been reprinted by K. B. Jindal in An 


606 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Epitome of Jainism (New Delhi 1987), pp. 114-186 (first 
published Calcutta 1957). 

There is a published summary of the work by Jindal in 
the work just mentioned. It is very long and rather rambling, 
so we have provided a fresh summary here. "ET" refers to the 
edition and translation by J. L. Jaini, Sacred Books of the 
Jainas 5, Lucknow 1927. The text provided is in Prakrit; 
Sanskrit terms are given here to match the policy elsewhere in 
the present Volume. 

This work features many passages where very large 
numbers of types of things are distinguished and often laid out 
at length. To try to reproduce even the lists that these 
passages describe would make the summary impossibly 
lengthy. What has been attempted is to give the reader a 
general idea of what is being discussed in each section (a few 
pages) of the work. K. B. Jindal's summary can be consulted 
in some instances for a kind of halfway house between what 
we provide here and a detailed account of all the hundreds of 
distinctions made in the text itself. 

S. C. Ghoshal, on p. xli of the Introduction mentioned 
above, makes the interesting comment that Camunda Raya 
himself is supposed to have written in Kanarese a commentary 
on this work that he titles Viramartandi. It is apparently now 
lost but its existence has been noted in KeSavavarni's Vrtti on 
Gommatasa@ra. 


Summary by Karl H. Potter 
I]. ON THE SELF (Jivakanda) 


INTRODUCTION 
1-7 (ET1. 1-5) The topics of the 20 chapters discussed 
in what follows are: stages of progress (guriasthana), selves 
(jiva), states of attainment (prapti), breaths (prdna), 
recognitions (samjna), paths (of selves) (marganda), and 
cognitive applications (upayoga). The basic division is between 


GOMATASARA 607 


the paths, to which fourteen chapters are addressed, and the 
rest, to which one chapter each is devoted. 


CHAPTER ONE 

9-10 (ET1. 9) The fourteen stages of progress are set 
forth with their standard names. 

15-16 (ET1. 12-13) False view (the first stage of 
progress) has five varieties: one-sided (as, e.g., Buddhists), 
wayward (viparita, as, e.g., Brahma), wrong (e.g., wrong 
belief in the Vinaya), doubtful and ignorant. 

19-20 (ET1. 15) The second stage is called "downfall" 
because some fall back into it from right belief of Stage Four 
due to their right beliefs being destroyed by one of the four 
kinds of endlessly-binding passions. 

23-24 (ET1. 18-19) Someone in Stage Three, of mixed 
right and wrong belief, is one who has not taken vows. Also, 
one dying in Stages Two or Three is bound by the length-of- 
life karma laid down in Stages One (or Four, if he is a 
backslider). 

25-26 (ET1. 20) From the temporary or mixed kinds of 
karma of Stages Two and Three may arise (Stage Four) 
vowless right awarenesss, i.e., right inclinations resulting from 
destruction and subsidence. The process of right inclinations 
goes from (1) lack of right inclination (Stage One) to (2) right 
awarenesss that is a cause of destruction and subsidence of 
karma (Stage Four) to (3) that right awarenesss that is 
destructive of karma only (Stages Twelve-Fourteen). 

27-29 (ET1. 22-23) The man of Stage Four, of right 
vision, belieyes in what has been taught by the Jina but may 
have not been properly taught; thus his conduct is not yet 
right, and he allows himself to hurt living beings. 

30-31 (ET1.24-25) Stage 5, of partial vows, is a state 
where there is some control of the passions; he vows against 
killing immobile selves, is entirely devoted to Jina. 

33-44 (ET1.25-34) Stage 6, of imperfect vows, is also 
called "negligent" (pramGda) because though having the 


608 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


twenty-eight root-qualities, moral and of full vows, his conduct 
is variegated (citra, i.e., imperfect). Negligence is analyzed at 
some length, the basic division being into negligence of 
speech, passion, senses, sleep and attachment (pranaya), 
which are permuted. 

45-49 (ET1.36-38) There is an ordinary and an 
extraordinary kind of perfect vows (Stage 7). The ordinary 
kind is one with the qualities of Stage 6 who has overcome 
negligence; he falls eventually back into Stage 6. The 
extraordinary kind is, in addition, one who has rid himself of 
the four kinds of endlessly-binding passions by one of three 
kinds of causes of activity, the first and lower of which is 
termed “perfect vow". It lasts for one antarmuhirta. 

50-55 (ET1.39-41) Thence one arrives at the 8th Stage 
where one is capable of different thoughts from what one had 
before; thus this Stage is called one of "new thought-activity”. 
Different selves have different degrees of purity in this stage, 
and it lasts again a shorter antarmuhurta than the previous 
Stage, though the number of thoughts in this Stage is greater 
than in the previous. It is by these ever-increasingly quick 
thoughts that one in this stage is removing deluding karmas. 
These are called "quiescents" (upasamaka). If they proceed 
forward they are called "annihilators" (ksapaka). 

56-58 (ET1.41-42) The latter attain Stage 9 of 
advanced thought-activity. Such selves now experience one 
thought per moment, needing much less fruition of though- 
actions than previously. 

59-61 (ET1.45) When the deluding karmas have 
subsided and only a touch of greed is still present it is Stage 
10 (slight delusion); when even that is gone it is Stage 11 
(subsided delusion). (This is the highest state a quiescent can 
achieve, but an annihilator goes on.) 

62-65 (ET1.46-48) When all deluding passions are 
destroyed completely one is said to be in Stage 12, of 
destroyed delusion. As such, he reaches the 13th Stage of 
omniscience; he is the highest self (paramdatman) having 


GOMMATASARA 609 


attained knowledge of a sort that does not require use of the 
sense-organs. When his inflows stop completely, and so his 
vibrations have ceased, he finally reaches Stage 14 of 
nonvibrating knowledge. 

68-69 (ET1.50-51) These are the perfected (siddha) 
selves, free from all eight kinds of karma, completely blissful, 
undefiled by karmic inflow, everlasting, abiding at the summit 
ofthe universe. These qualities distinguish the Jain view of 
liberation from the views of other schools, viz., of Sadasiva, 
Samkhya, Maskari, Bauddha, Nyaya-Vaisesika, theists, and 
Mandal. 


CHAPTER TWO 

72 (ET1.51) Selves are now classified into fourteen 
sorts, as follows: (1) subtle (stiksma) selves with one sense- 
organ; (2) coarse (badara) selves with one sense-organ; (3) 
two-sensed selves; (4) three-sensed selves; (5) four-sensed 
selves; (6) five-sensed selves without capacity for recognition; 
(7) five-sensed selves with capacity for recognition. Each of 
these seven kinds of selves can be either capable of 
development (paryapti) or not so developable. Thus we arrive 
at fourteen kinds of selves. 

73 (ET1.54) This enumeration of kinds of selves is 
reviewed under additional aspects, yielding classifications 
involving larger numbers of kinds. For example: single-sensed 
beings may be either earth, water, fire, air or subtle (nigoda). 
Each of the five may be either "subtle", i.e., too smail to see, 
or gross. Subtle selves may be either always subtle or 
sometimes gross. Again, some subtle selves are parts of bodies, 
others are not. Then there are, as before, the two-, three-, 
four- and five-sensed selves, the latter being divided now into 
those capable of recognition or not. And since there are some 
selves that are potentially developable but so far not 
developed--in addition to the developable in principal and the 
not developable in principal--the resulting enumeration of 
kinds of selves comprises fifty-seven kinds. 


610 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


74-117 (ET1.56-82) Other features by which selves can 
be classified involve their birthplaces, their size, and the kinds 
of material of which they are comprised. These are discussed 
in detail. For example, some selves are found on earth, some 
in heaven and some in hell. Among those here on earth some 
are "noble" (arya) and some not (mleccha). The type, look and 
source of their nature differs. They are born in different ways. 
(Interesting details are offered about beings residing in hells 
and the birth of the subtle selves.) Two-, three-, and four- 
sensed selves are enumerated, and their possible sizes are 
explained, the topic of size receiving an extensive and 
complicated treatment. 


CHAPTER THREE 

118-128 (ET1.83-89) This Chapter deals with the 
developability (paryapti) of selves. Single-sensed selves can be 
embodied in a way that involves only the capacities to ingest 
nourishment, to have bodies and senses, and to breathe. Two- 
to four-sensed beings, together with the five-sensed beings 
incapable of recognition, have those four capacities plus the 
ability to make noise (though irrationally) while the rational 
five-sensed selves have all five qualities plus the ability to 
recognize things. More information on developability is given: 
there are a vast number of nondevelopable-in-principal selves 
that die almost immediately. “Potentially developable" applies 
to bodies who are acquiring these capacities but have net 
completed the project. Incomprehensible numbers of these 
various kinds of selves are given. 


CHAPTER FOUR 
129-133 (ET1.90-92) The topic of this Chapter is 
prana, meaning not just "breath" but the capacity to function. 
There are said to be ten of them: the five senses, three powers 
(balaprdna) of thought, speech and the body (i.e., breath), 
and the capacity of one's life-span. Rational five-sensed selves 
have all ten of these capacities, irrational five-sensed selves 


GOMATASARA 611 


have nine (they are without thought), four-sensed down to 
one-sensed lack respectively one more sensory capacity each. 
That is for developable selves; the numbers for nondevelopable 
selves are different: only seven (lacking breath, speech and 
thought) belong to five-sensed beings, whether rational or 
irrational, and six for the four-sensed ones down to three for 
the one-sensed. 


CHAPTER FIVE 
134-139 (ET1.93-95) There are four kinds of 
recognition (samjfia): hunger, fear, sexual intercourse and 
appropriation. When one has arrived at the sixth stage of 
progress (see above) one no longer desires food, but the other 
three kinds of recognition still apply. 


CHAPTER SIX 

140-163 (ET1.95-106) What are termed "paths" here 
are the features of the paths being followed by all or some of 
those selves hitherto classified. There are fourteen such 
features dealt with in this and the following thirteen Chapters. 
The present Chapter deals with species of births (gati), of 
which there are four: in hell, animal, human and as a god. 
Animals fall into five subtypes: general, with five sense-organs, 
developable, female, and nondevelopable. Humans, all having 
five sense-organs, can be divided among the other four 
subtypes. Gods (deva) are divided into eight varieties 
depending on their special capacities. The number of selves in 
each of these states is calculated. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 
164-180 (ET1.107-113) This Chapter deals with the 
sense-organs. They are of two main types, as a modification 
(bhava) (of cognition) and as substance. The former is purified 
cognition arising from the subsiding of awarenesss-obstructing 
(karman). The latter is a bodily feature formed by bodily 
karma. One-sensed selves have the tactile sense only; two- 


612 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sensed have that plus the gustatory organ; three-sensed have 
those plus the olfactory organ; four-sensed have those plus the 
visual organ; and five-sensed have those plus the auditory 
organ. The range of these organs is calculated. Liberated 
beings have no sensory awareness, but they have infinite 
awareness and bliss not involving the senses. The number of 
selves of each of the one-sensed, two-sensed, etc. sorts is 
calculated. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

181-212 (ET1.113-127) On bodies. There are six kinds 
of bodies: earthy, watery, fiery, airy, vegetable and mobile. 
Bodies of the first four kinds can be gross (i.e., obstructive) or 
fine (i.e., nonobstructive). Such bodies range from very small 
to very large. The composition of vegetable bodies is 
described: they may be single and inhabited by a single self, 
or multiple and inhabited by a single self, and the latters' 
bodies may involve many atoms of the same kind or of 
different kinds. There is a botanical analysis of them. 

Nigoda bodies can also be small or may combine to 
form a (larger) body in which the constituent nigodas are 
constantly dying and being born. Indeed, each such body is a 
whole universe in itself! Innumerable nigoda selves have never 
attained mobility, remaining nigodas through all (past) time. 

Two- to five-sense selves are classed as mobile. 

The number of the various sorts of bodies is calculated. 


CHAPTER NINE 

216-229 (ET1.131-137) Vibration (yoga) is the cause 
of the acquisition (agama) of karmas through mental, vocal 
and physical activities of the maturational body of karmic 
products. Mental vibrations may be true, false, mixed or 
neutral (the last occurring in irrational beings and the 
nonassertive speech of rational beings). Truth is of ten kinds: 
conventional, idiomatic, representational, nominal, figurative, 
relative, practical, possible, scriptural and illustrative. Neutral 


GOMMATASARA 613 


speech includes sentences of moods other than declarative | 
(e.g., imperative, exhortative, etc.):as well as'doubt. Each of 
the three kinds of activity is caused by a relevant kind of 
karma. The speech of a person in the Thirteenth Stage is not 
an expression of his thought; his mental activity is only a 
presumption on our part. 

230-243 (ET1.137-143) It is only animals and men that 
have material bodies. The material body vibrates. (The other 
two kinds of beings) have fluid bodies (vaikriyaka kaya). 

Beings in the Sixth Stage develop a procuring body 
through which one can proceed to places, perhaps far afield, 
where he can consult scriptures or find an omniscient knower, 
ask questions, etc., and revitalize his faith. 

244-270 (ET1.143-157) Body-making karmas (or karmic 
helpers, nokarma) are of four kinds: that pertinent to making 
of the physical body (aurdlika), the fluid body (vaigtrvika), 
the procuring body, and the body of light (taijasa, lit., “fiery”, 
body). A human being has these plus his karmic body proper 
(at every moment). Molecules (vargand) of these five kinds of 
bodily atoms (together with those of vocal and mental 
molecules) comprise a selfs body at any moment Each of these 
bodies comprises a mass of atomic components. The sizes of 
bodies, and the numbers of atoms in the various kinds of 
molecules is addressed. At each moment atoms of karma and 
karmic helpers flow into a selfs body, and at the same time a 
few such are released. So at the moment of a being's death his 
atoms have the highest vibrations, especially atoms relating to 
the following features: its state of being (i.e., animal, human, 
etc.), age (i.e., length of life at that moment), vibration, 
bondage-breeders (samklesa), decrease and increase of 
duration of life. This is spelled out in detail for each kind of 
body and each state of being, yielding an account of the life- 
expectancy of every being. 


CHAPTER TEN 
271-281 (ET1.157-161) The topic of this Chapter is 


614 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


gender, of which there are three: male, female and neuter 
(sanda, napumsaka). Among other interesting bits of 
information we are told that every male god has at least 
thirty-two celestial wives. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 
282-298 (ET161-173) On the passions. They are four in 
number: anger, pride, deceit and greed. They are classified 
according to intensity (Sakti), "coloring" and duration (ayu). 


CHAPTER TWELVE 

299-440 (ET* 1.175-230) Awarenesses, the topic of this 
Chapter, of the correct sort have five varieties: immediate and 
verbal awarenesses, extrasensory, telepathic and perfect 
awarenesses. Incorrect awarenesses are of three sorts 
corresponding to the first three correct ones; however, wrong 
perception is found only in rational five-sensed beings. As one 
progresses through the Stages one moves from error to mixed 
error and truth of a perceptual sort to truths of the verbal and 
extrasensory sorts. Telepathy is found only in Stages Six and 
above, and perfect knowledge only in the last two Stages. 

Immediate awareness is explained, being understood as 
either indistinct, directed, determinative or concentrated. 
Perception includes both immediate sensory awareness 
(vyafijana) and awareness of objects not present to the senses 
(artha). We are told that perception is possible of whole 
objects when only a part is present to the senses. 

Verbal awareness may involve language or not. The 
latter kind is the awareness of one thing on the basis of 
another (thus, inference, although the term does not appear 
here). 

Extrasensory awareness is free from knowledge- 
obscuring karma, and is found in nigodas when first born. 
How it increases in more complex beings is explained at 
length, an explanation involving reference to some very large 
numbers, and the analysis is extended to include features of 


GOMMATASARA 615 


the previous two types of awareness as well. 

Coming back to the initial type of awareness, viz., 
immediate, further classifications are provided in terms of such 
awarenesses' being restricted in topic, spatial extent and 
temporal duration, and in their conditions. Visual awarenesses 
may be produced by one's state (bhava), i.e., whether one is 
a god, hell-being, etc., or by one's good or bad qualities, i.e., 
from the arising and subsiding of karmic traces. The former 
kind of visual awareness is necessarily partial and may be born 
of qualities; full visual awareness is always born of merit. 
Visual awarenesses cognize collections of material molecules 
acquired by the vibration of the self. 

The smallest possible visible thing is what is seen by a 
nigoda in the third instant of its birth. We cannot estimate the 
largest possible thing. There follows a long and complex 
mathematical analysis of the sizes of visible things. 

441-464 (ET1.230-238) Through simple telepathic 
awareness one can cognize past, present and future objects 
thought of by any one present. A more complex sort provides 
awareness of that has been thought of by anyone at all in the 
past or in the future. Telepathic awareness is possible when 
there is destruction of knowledge-obscuring karma in the 
material internal organ (dravyamanas), which is produced in 
the heart by an aggregation (skhandana) of mental molecules 
(manovargana). This is called the senses’ helper (no indriya) 
since it is not manifested as the other (external sense-) organs 
are. "Simple" telepathic awareness arises depending on the 
senses, these senses’ helpers, and/or the vibratory (mental, 
vocal or bodily) activity (of the self). "Complex" telepathy does 
not depend on these, and is clearer; when extended, it leads 
to omniscience. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
465-481 (ET1.238-245) Restraint (samyama) includes 
observing vows, carefulness, subduing passions, renouncing all 
activities of body, speech and mind, and conquering the five 


616 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


senses: It is what is worked on in the sixth-twelfth Stages of 
progress. The specific Stage at which each is mastered is 
outlined. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
482-488 (ET1.245-247) The topic of this Chapter is 
vision, described as the cognition of something not knowing 
what kind of thing it is. It can be visual or experienced 
through the other four senses or the internal organ. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

489-556 (ET1.1247-280) On the "colorings" of material 
things. A "coloring" is the vibration (of a self) "colored" by the 
arising of (a) passion. There are six kinds of colorings--black, 
blue, grey, yellow, pink and white. The colorings of bodies 
are a function of the colorings of their constituent molecules. 
Thus, hell-beings are black, watery-bodied selves are white, 
fiery-bodied yellow, air-bodied are variously colored depending 
on their respective spheres. All subtle things are grey. 
Transmigrating beings are white. Bodies of mixed colors are 
grey. 

Bad places (places breeding bad passions) are black, 
blue and grey; good places are yellow, pink and white. There 
are more bad than good places. Change of color is of two 
sorts--increase or decrease, and replacement of one color by 
another. Colorings influence actions: six lost and hungry men 
will find six different ways of getting sustenance from a tree 
found in the forest. Each coloring indicates certain personality- 
types. E.g., a black coloring indicates an angry, wicked, stupid, 
etc., person, whereas a blue coloring indicates someone who 
is slow, deceitful and mercenary. A pink coloring indicates a 
person who is open, kind, patient and devoted. 

The balance of one's colorings influences one's age- 
karma--i.e., one's length of life in the birth to come--at 
specified points during the last part of a lifetime. Colorings 
also help determine where one will be reborn in the next life, 


GOMATASARA 617 


whether as a god in sarvarthasiddhi (mostly white), lower 
heavens, (somewhat white), other heavens (predominantly 
pink or yellow), whereas those with maximum black go to the 
lowest hell, etc. Thus one cari make certain generalizations 
about subsequent births, e.g., that one- to four-sensed beings, 
_who are predominantly black, blue or gray, do-not get reborn 
into hell or heaven, etc. The balance of colorings of various 
gods are described. 

Other topics pertaining to the colorings are addressed, 
including the kinds of karma that cause cplorings in each of 
the stages, the number of selves having predominantly each of 
the colorings, the spatial and temporal locations of the selves 
of each coloring. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 
557-560 (ET1.280-281) Selves can be divided into those 
that are capable of liberation (bhavya), those which are not 
(abhavya), and those that are already liberated. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

561-620 (ET1.283-305) There are six substances, five 
collections, nine categories. One should learn which they are. 

The six substartees are discussed under seven topical 
headings, as follows: ; 

(1) By name. Substances are either selves or nonliving 
matter. A self is either material (riipin)--transmigrating selves-- 
or immaterial--liberated selves. Karmic products (pudgala) are 
material nonliving matter; initiators of movement, initiators of 
stasis, space and time are immaterial and nonliving. 

(2) By defining marks: The features of things of each of 
these categories is detailed. 

(3) By duration: all six types of substances are of 
unlimited duration. 

(4) By location: All except space exist in the universe 
(loka). Initiators of movement and of rest are all-pervading. A 
self can contract to atomic size or expand to the size of the 


618 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


universe. Substances may be of any size from atomic up to 
universal. The universe is entirely filled with the six 
substances. 

(5) By numbers: There are infinitely many selves, and 
the number of karmic products is infinite times that number. 
There is only one initiator of movement, one initiator of stasis 
and one space. There are as many times as there are places 
(pradesa). A "place" is the space occupied by an atom. 

(6) By kinds or states (sthana). Immaterial substances 
are stable (acala) as well as their parts. Material selves 
fluctuate (cala) and some of their parts do too. Material 
substances fluctuate, but some of the atoms fluctuate and 
some do not. Twenty-three kinds of molecules (vargana): 
atomic, countable, uncountable,  infinitely-numbered, 
assimilative, ungrasped, fiery, (another) ungrasped (?), 
mental, (still another) ungrasped (?), karmic, stable, within 
and not within, empty, having a single body, stably empty, 
gross nigoda, (another) empty (?), subtle nigoda, spherical, 
large. These are listed in order of increasing size. 

(7) By result. How substances combine. Some are 
smooth, some rough, and rough atoms combine with smooth 
ones but not with their own kind. 

621-659 (ET1.306-321) The nine categories are: selves, 
nonselves, merit, demerit, inflow, cessation of inflow, 
cleansing (of traces), bondage and liberation. Meritorious 
selves are those of right vision and vows. Demeritorious are 
those with wrong beliefs, and are infinite in number. The 
numbers of those with good and bad vows are each calculated, 
along with calculations of other classes of selves. 

Destructive right inclination destroys the causes of 
annihilation of all karmic traces. Its accomplisher is someone 
who begins his studies with someone of knowledge. The five 
attainments involved are from, first, the state of destruction 
and subsidence, then purity, instruction, competence and 
efficiency in arriving at the truth, the last being attained only 
at liberation. Right awareness may arise in one in any of the 


GOMMATASARA 619 


four stages provided one is capable of recognition and 
development, pure, attentive and has gained efficiency. Right 
awareness is possible to attain even after one's age-karma in 
the next life has been bound; however, only those destined to 
become gods acquire the subsidiary and great vows. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 
660-663 (ET1.322-323) To be capable of recognition is 
to achieve destruction and subsidence of the mental-covering 
karma (no indriya-avarana). One who learns to discriminate 
what should be done from what shouldn't be done and to be 
able to discriminate reality from illusion, is called "capable of 
learning" (samjfiin). 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

664-671 (ET1.323-325) The path of assimilation is the 
acquisition of mental-covering molecules of body, speech and 
mind. Nonassimilating selves are those in the course of 
transmigration and knowledge. All the rest of the selves are 
assimilative. 

When a Self leaves his basic body and goes out with his 
karmic and fiery bodies it is called "overflow" (samudghata). 
Overflows are of seven. kinds: feelings, passions, 
transformations, dying, fiery are among the overflows. 


CHAPTER TWENTY 
672-676 (ET1.326-327) Cognitive application is of two 
kinds, involving form (sakara) and not involving form 
(nirakara). The five kinds of true awareness and the three 
kinds of false awareness is cognition involving form. 
Cognitions without form are visions of the first four kinds (of 
awareness. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE 
677-705 (ET1.327-337) The class, attainment, breath, 
recognition, path and recognition attained by each of the 


620 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
stages of progress are specified. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO 
706-734 (ET1.338-347) A few random topics are 
attended to. 


PART TWO: KARMAKANDA 


CHAPTER ONE 

1-35 (ET2.1-20) Through application one or more units 
of bondage are expunged at each moment. Karma can be 
viewed as material or as modifications (of cognitive 
application). Material karma can be classed as of eight kinds: 
(1) perfect-awareness-obscuring €kevalavarana), (2) vision- 
obscuring (darsanavarana), (3) feeling-producing (vedaniva), 
(4) deluding (mohaniya), (5) length of life determining 
(Gyuska), (6) type- (lit., "name"-) determining (ndma), (7) 
lineage-determining (gotra) and (8) hindering karma. (1), (2), 
(4) and (8) are destructive (ghdtiya); the rest are 
nondestructive. Hindering karma is numbered as (8) because, 
though it is destructive, it cannot destroy one fully and 
operates through (3), (5) and (6). 

36-51 (ET2.21-28) The karmic products or molecules 
associated with a self at any point in time can be divided into 
those in operation (udaya) and those in attendance (sattd). 
There are a total of 148 different varieties of attendant karmic 
molecules. The broad divisions are between completely 
destructive (perfect-awareness-obscuring, vision-obscuring 
passions), partially destructive (awareness-obscuring, vision- 
obscuring, conduct-obscuring, passions' helpers, obstructing), 
and meritorious (classified into different birth-species). The 
numbers of kinds of such karmas are calculated in various 
ways, e.g., in terms of their persistence; whether they pertain 
to the body, length of life, type of feeling, 

52-86 (ET2.28-40) Karma can be located in four ways: 
by name, by representation, privatively and positively. "By. 


GOMATASARA 621 


name", i.e., various synonyms for "karma" such as prakrti, 
papa, mala, etc. "By representation", i.e., in whom it occurs. 
"Privatively", i.e., of two major kinds: of substance, Ggama- 
and no-dgama. The first kind comprises those who know the 
scriptures but do not apply their knowledge. The second kind 
is of three sorts: past, future and neither. Three kinds of past 
bodies are: a body that has lived its allotted life-span, a body 
cut off by premature death through sickness, accident, etc., 
and the body of one who has renounced through starvation or 
through failure to help oneself or be helped by others. Karma 
located "positively" is of two varieties: karma proper and 
karmic helpers. 

Karmic helpers are of eight varieties corresponding to 
the eight basic kinds of karma. E.g., the karmic helper of (1) 
knowledge-obscuring karma is termed a "curtain" (pata) as if 
thrown across cognition. The karmic helper in such cases 
distracts the cognizer from the pertinent kind of attention. 
There is no karmic helper for perfect knowledge. Karmic 
helpers also contribute to the different stages of sleep, good or 
bad food, the contents of true and false beliefs, right and 
wrong passions, the sex of one's body, and they play a part in 
practically all karmic results. 


CHAPTER TWO 

87-126 (ET2.40-70) There are four aspects of bondage: 
its material (prakrti), duration (sthiti), intensity of fruition 
(anubhaga) and number of atomic constituents (pradesa). 
That is, in each Stage one may have karmas representing these 
four kinds of bonds and in differing amounts. Examples are 
given of which Stages characteristically feature which kinds of 
karma, and a Stage-by-Stage analysis is provided of which 
sorts of bonds cease in which Stage. E.g., in the Second Stage 
one's tendency to sleepwalk, speak harshly, move awkwardly, 
be female, etc. cease. By the time one gets to the Sixth Stage 
various kinds of unwanted feelings such as pain, sorrow, 
laziness cease. The analysis covers all fourteen Stages. This is 


622 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


followed by an account of what features are found in the 
various hells, in animals of various levels of advancement as 
well as in the gods. 

127-162 (E2.71-90) Next, we are told what the 
Mmaxitnum and minimum duration is of each of the kinds of 
karma, both in terms of which kind of karma it is and the kind 
of being--animal, human, god--that has it. 

163-184 (ET2.91-103) It is explained what intensity-- 
maximum and minimum--the fruition of different varieties of 
karma will involve for beings in hells to those in heavens. 

185-217 (ET2.104-125) Molecules can be classed as (a) 
those which are of the smallest-sized body versus those which 
are larger, (b) those which are fit to become karma versus 
those which aren't, (c) those which are not bound to any self 
and those that are or both. Each molecule has the qualities of 
color, taste, smell and certain tangible qualities. The largest 
proportion of constituent karmic elements are those that 
determine feelings. Other aspects determined by karmas 
include delusion, obscuration of knowledge and of effort, 
obstruction to activity, determination of one's station and/or 
family, of one's kind of embodiment, and of one's natural age- 
length. The karmas responsible for these can be arranged in 
terms of their numbers. 

Knowledge-obscuring karma can be distinguished 
according to which of the five kinds of knowledge (viz., 
immediate, scriptural, etc.) is obscured. Some karmas obscure 
totally, others only partially: 

218-256 (ET2.127-148) The kinds and amounts of the 
vibrations (yogasthana) are classified. There are three kinds: 
relating to birth, to growth and to change. Each of the three 
has fourteen kinds corresponding to the fourteen Stages of 
progress. And in amounts they range from minimum through 
medium to maximum. E.g., a birth-vibration lasts only one 
moment. By "change" is meant the change in bodily 
characteristics one has from the point his body is developed 
until death, during which there is maximum change. The 


GOMATASARA 623 


period between birth and that point is what is referred to here 
as "growth". Such changes of vibrations are classified using a 
special technical vocabulary. 

257-357 (ET2.148-227) Matter (prakrti) and the 
number of space-points (pradesa) that are bound to a self are 
determined by vibrations (yoga); the duration and intensity 
are determined by passions. Beyond the Tenth Stage and 
short of the Fourteenth, the passions having subsided, there is 
no duration-bondage, and in the Fourteenth there is no 
bondage at all. How vibrations work and cease in the various 
Stages is discussed at iength. 

358-397 (ET2.227-255) Just which kinds of beings 
belong to which classes of beings generated by the foregoing 
classifications is now summarily set forth. 


CHAPTER FOUR 
398-407 (ET3.1-8) This Chapter answers nine questions 
concerning karma. 

1-3. Some karmic traces continue to bind (i.e., to lay 
down karmic products) even after one is no longer bound by 
them, others cease before, and_ still others cease 
simultaneously with the bondage. Which are which is 
explained in 400-403. 

4-6. Eleven kinds of karmic traces are nonbinding. 
E.g., the traces of one in a heaven or a hell do not bind a god 
to rebirth in a heaven or a being in a hell to another birth in 
hell. Twenty-seven kinds of karmic traces are binding only at 
certain stages; e.g., fourteen destructive traces, though 
operative up to the twelfth Stage, are binding only up to the 
Tenth stage. 

7-9. Forty-seven kinds of karmic traces go on 
binding continuously until achievement of the Stage of 
advancement where they are no longer binding at all. On the 
other hand, others are binding sometimes but not at all times. 

408-435 (ET3.11-27) Some kinds of karmic traces can 
transfer (the process is called samkramana) from one self to 


624 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


another, though traces of one main class (such as knowledge- 
obscuring, etc.) cannot transfer to another such class. There 
are other limitations and exceptions to this rule. Transference 
is classified according to the features of those involved in the 
transfer. 416-450 (ET3.28-35) A trace belonging to each of 
ten kinds of karmic traces undergoes the following processes: 
(1) binding, i.e., connection with another trace, (2) increase 
of duration or results, (3) transference, just mentioned, (4) 
decrease of duration/result of traces already laid down, (5) 
enhancement, operation out of the karma's scheduled time to 
do so, (6) remaining but for the time being inoperative, (7) 
operating, i.e., bringing about their results, (8) dela¥—in the 
time at which a trace operates, (9) capable of increasing or 
decreasing their duration and/or results, and (10) incapable 
of duration or result. Illustrations are provided. 


CHAPTER FIVE 
451-784 (ET3.36-289) Calculation of the number of 
classes and subclasses of the points at which the varying types 
of binding occur. 


CHAPTER SIX 

785-810 (ET3.289-321) The causes of inflow of karma 
include false thinking, vowlessness, passions and vibrations, 
classified in varjous ways. Five kinds of erroneous thinking: 
one-sided, contrary to fact, doubting, prejudiced and guessing. 
Twelve kinds of vowlessness: failure to control the five senses 
and the internal organ, noncompassionateness of each of the 
five kinds of immobile as well as of mobile things. Twenty-five 
sorts of passions: four kinds each of the four major passions, 
viz., anger, pride, deceit and greed, plus nine minor passions: 
laughter, sorrow, indulgence, ennui, fear, disgust, female, male 
and neuter sex inclinations. Fifteen kinds of vibrations: four 
relating to the mind, four to speech, and seven to the body.’” 


GOMMATASARA 625 


CHAPTER SEVEN. 

811-895 (ET3.322-384) On the modifications of 
cognitive application. There are five kinds of these: subsiding 
(aupasgamika), destructive (ksayika), mixed (migra), operative 
(lit., arising, audayika) and natural (parindmika). "Subsiding", 
i.e., when a trace's activity subsides, "destructive", when it is 
destroyed, "operative" when it is bearing its fruit, and "natural" 
otherwise, i.e., when none of the other four apply. The 
production of right awareness and conduct are the two kinds 
of subsidence; the production of one of nine kinds of 
destruction of karmic residues including, e.g., knowledge, 
conduct charity, acquisition, experiencing, re-experiencing and 
power, constitute the kinds of destructive applications. 
Operative applications are of twenty-one kinds: the courses, 
sex, passions, errors, colorings, not being liberated, lack of 
restraint, and ignorance. Natural applications include being a 
self, being worthy of liberation or not. Thoughts occurring at 
an instant may be single thoughts, thoughts of one sort 
combined with those of another, or (the reverse) of consistent 
sorts. These fifty-three kinds are then distributed among the 
fourteen spiritual Stages. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 
896-912 (ET3.385-394) Three ways of thinking of that 
which destroys deluding karma: as initial (adhas), new 
(aptirva) or advanced (anivrta). The classification is in terms 
of how long it takes to achieve each way of thinking. 


CHAPTER NINE 
913-972 (ET3.395-426) "In Chapter IX is discussed the 
quantity of karmic particles, in their molecular groups, at each 
instant. These quantities are constantly varying, but in a fixed 
ratio, amenable to calculation, although the calculation is very 
minute and subtle, brain-racking to the beginner, but 
graspingly fascinating to the scholar, the thinker, the saint lost 


626 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
in raptures of meditation.” (E, p. 395) 


100. NEMICANDRA SAIDDHANTIKA, Labdhisdra 

In the publication by Prof. L. C. Jain, The Labdhisara of 
Nemicandra Siddhanta Cakravarti, Volume I (Jabalpur 1994), 
the author promises a full edition and translation in 
forthcoming publications (not yet seen), and provides an 
account of the subject-matter of the work at pp. 99-107, from 
which we draw in what follows. Prof. Jain's technical terms 
are replaced by those used in this Volume, and some necessary 
grammatical changes are occasioned thereby. 


Summary based on that of L. C. Jain 


"...(B)ond (bandha), state (sattva), operation (udaya), 
oremature operation (udirana), rising (utkarsana), falling 
(apakarsana), transference (samkramana), quiescence 
(upasama), reservation (nidhatti), preservation (nikacana), are 
‘he ten operational conditions (karana)." 

"There happens to be relation between the self and the 
1ew substances transformed into forms of karma. This is of 
‘our kinds called bonds (bandha): material (prakrti), space- 
doint (pradesa), duration (sthiti) and intensity of fruition." 

"The transformation of matter (pudgala) in (the) form 
of functional molecules (karmGna vargana) fit to become 
‘orm(s) of karma, into original or suboriginal forms of matter 
s the material bond, i.e., knowledge-obstructing, etc. The 
neasured number of the transformed material, ultimate 
darticles or atoms (paramdnu) into material forms is the 
‘onstituent-bond...Such is the measure of the instant-effective 
xond (samayaprabaddha). This lies between the minimal and 
he maximal depending on the decrease or increase in the 
neasure of vibration. The instant-effective. bond, taken as 
nflow at an instant (samaya), gets transformed into material 
varticles in accordance with certain rules of distribution." 


LABDHISARA 627 


"Whatever atoms are bound in forms of matter the 
measure of their duration for which they remain in bond with 
the self for that period is called duration bond. After a certain 
well-defined time-lag period (abddhakala) there is rise of 
bound atoms in cells (nifeka) corresponding to every passing 
instant, there being no cell-structure in the case of the time-lag 
period. This process goes on from the first instant up to the 
last instant of the duration bond excluding the time-lag 
period...A cell at the lowest end of the inflow column has a 
duration of one instant after which it rises and decays. 
Similarly, the upper cells have durations of two, three, four 
and so on instants. Hence, they rise one by one after having 
descended the various columns, rise and decay after fruition 
of energy. The life-time of the last cell is the measure of the 
whole duration of the corresponding inflow...Such is the rule 
for all the seven originating karmas, age karma being excluded 
out of the eight. Duration is not counted in application to the 
age karma, because its duration lapses during the previous 
birth." 

"The mathematical structure of the matrix of the cells 
is defined through the measure of the number of particles 
bound at an instant, their various life-time ‘qualitative 
regressions (gunahani), mutual product-set (anyonydabhyasta 
rasi), and cell-dividers." 

"The karmic particles carry energy which is powerful 
enough to screen the knowledge and so on of the selves, less 
or more, specifically during the period of the rise of the 
particles. Such binding of energy is called the energy-bond. 
There happen to be various types of energy among the atoms 
bound at an instant, corresponding to the material thing. The 
structure of energy of karma is detailed as below." 

"The indivisible part of energy is called an indivisible- 
corresponding-section (avibhdgi praticcheda). The ultimate 
particle of matter (pudgala) associated with an assemblage of 
indivisible-corresponding-sections is called a variant (varga). 
The class of variants having the same number of indivisible- 


628 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


corresponding-sections is called a molecule (vargana). 
Assembly of molecules each of which has one more indivisible- 
corresponding-section than that of the minimal molecule is 
called second-molecule (dvitiya vargana). In this sequence, 
molecules in assembly form molecules-on and on increasing in 
an arithmetical progression...This goes to form a minimal- 
supermolecule (jaghanya spardhaka). The assembly of 
molecules associated with twice the number of indivisible- 
corresponding-sections than that of the minimal molecule is 
the first-variant of the second supermolecule. Similarly, the 
variants of the first molecule of the third, fourth, etc., 
supermolecules have associated with them three, four, times, 
etc., indivisible-corresponding-sections than those of the 
assembly of the variants of the first-molecule of a minimal- 
supermolecule." 

“Here the measure of all ultimate particles is substance, 
lit., something that flows (dravya). In the karma matrix the 
first, second, etc. supermolecules are called the lower ones, 
while the later ones are called the upper ones. Corresponding 
to these the measure of the ultimate particles goes on 
decreasing, whereas the measure of the energy goes on 
increasing from (the) lower to the upper ones. So far the 
description of the karmic bondage.” 

"Further, the karmic particles, bound at several instants, 
at an arbitrary instant have an existence associated with the 
self, and this is called (their) state (sattva). This is of four 
kinds: substantial state, durational state, energy state, and 
particle state...Similarly, when the karmic particles tend to 
impart their fruits at the proper period they are said to rise. 
This is also of four types: substantial rising, particle rising, 
durational rising and energy-rising...Similar details are given 
about karma which rise prematurely. A cell lying in a trail 
(avalli) and fit to rise from its first instant to its last one is 
said to be on the rising trail. Those which lie out(side) of this 
are on the external rising trail mixed in the cells of the rising 
trail below it. These are the prematurely rising." 


LABDHISARA 629 


"Increase of duration or energy is called rising 
(utkarsana). In the karma matrix this .is effected by 
transporting the lower ultimate particles upwards. Similarly, 
when it is required to go down (apakarsana) the opposite 
process is adopted." 

"When secondary substance gets changed into another, 
the phenomenon is called transference (samkramana). 
Corresponding to the transition there are five types of 
transferrers called: perturbation (udvelana), statutory 
(vidhayata), low-tended (adhah pravrtta), geometric-transfer 
(guna samkramana) and complete transfer (sarva 
samkramana)." 

"The atoms out of the rising trail and unfit for being in 
the rising trail are called quiescent substances (upasdanta 
dravya). The operation of quiescence is found in all matter. 
This is to be differentiated from the subsidence modification 
(upasanta bhava)." 

"The atoms of an arbitrary piece of substance may be 
such that they can neither transfer nor are they fit for being 
brought in to the rising trail. They are called reservation- 
operation-substances (nidhatti karana dravya). In addition to 
the above condition when they could neither rise nor fall they 
are called preservation-substance (nikacana dravya). in this 
way the ten operations are described in the Gommatasara." 

"In the Labdhisara (Essence of Attainment) this theory 
is applied for attaining the path of optimization, which is said 
to be achieved through impeding and annihilating karmas as 
a consequence of reduction in bond and state. Here this 
phenomenon is related with the attainment of vision and 
disposition. Thus the annihilation of four types of bond is 
described in the following sequence:-" 

"The life-time-bond is a function of passions. Hence the 
life-time-bond decreases as illusions, passions decrease. 
Sequential reduction of the life-time-bond is called life-time- 
bond-regression. Through such manner of reduction in 
sequence, at the instant of its termination, there occurs 


630 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


misimal-life-time-bond. Afterwards there is annihilation of life- 
time-bond. This sequence occurs with regard to all types of 
materiality (prakrti) except age. Hence the life-time-bond of 
three types of age (exclusive of that of hell), is large owing to 
elevation (visuddhi). Similarly, the life-time-bond of all other 
gracious and non-gracious configurations is greater owing to 
depression, but smaller owing to elevation phases (bhdava)." 

"Now the energy-bond of bad material things is greater 
owing to depression and it is smaller owing to elevation. Thus, 
the energy-bond increases or decreases in sequence with 
infinite common ratio. However, in spite of a greater amount 
of energy-bond of good material things, the self is not affected 
badly, as to live in the world is according to one's life-time- 
bond. The soul is affected badly owing to destructive karmas, 
hence they are bad. Hence, owing to attainment of vision- 
character, there is excess of energy-bond of good material 
things. When there is annihilation or absence of passions, 
there is complete absence of energy-bond. From the above, the 
law of cessation of inflow follows." 

"The atoms of cells of a state disintegrate one by one, 
instant by instant after rising. Further, owing to the same field, 
the atoms of upper cells transform to become lower cells. Thus 
instant by instant there is disintegration of instant-effective- 
bonds in excess, that is, there is disintegration of many 
instant-effective-bonds. As there is bonding of instant-effective- 
bonds, one by one, hence there is ample disintegration and 
thus a smal] amount of bonding. Sometimes there is no 
bonding and there is only disintegration. In this way after 
destruction of all karmic atoms there comes about complete 
annihilation of atomic constituents (pradesa sattva)." 

"Ordinarily, duration reduces instant by instant. But 
owing to the field of the vision-character attainment this 
reduction of duration happens to be according to the law of 
the split duration (sthitikandaka and as per the law of the 
fallen (apakrsta). First we relate the law of split duration." 

"There is a great amount of duration. There is a state of 


LABDHISARA 631 


many cells fit to rise instant after instant. In it several of the 
upper cells are destroyed, reducing the duration of life. After 
such a destruction a series of cells above is excluded, and 
there is injection of cells into all other cells. The injection is 
made up to the inter-muhurta period, and atoms are 
introduced into.the lower cells. For all the remaining atoms 
remaining at the last instant, as they enter into the lower cells 
of that duration there is annihilation of the cells fit for being 
annihilated. Then, whatever the amount of cells that endure, 
there is annihilation of the cells fit for being annihilated. 
Then, whatever is the amount of cells destroyed, that much of 
their duration gets reduced there. The law of the fallen is as 
follows:" 

"When the state of all atoms corresponding to all the 
cells of an arbitrarily chosen piece of material is destroyed 
(bhagahara) by falling, then one part thereof, (the) set of 
atoms, is called fallen substance. Out of that fallen substance 
some atoms are mixed into a rising row (udaydvali), some 
undergo destruction of their qualities (gunahdni), and the 
remaining are mixed into a future (uparitana) duration. To 
these, from present instant to the instants of such a row, 
correspond the cells called the rising row. Into those cells the 
substance fit for being given into the rising row is mixed, cell 
after cell, in a sequence of being reduced by common 
difference, one by one. The cells corresponding to the instants 
lying within the muhtrta lying above the rising row of cells, 
are named after the length of their destroyed qualities. Into 
those cells the substance fit to be given into the rising row is 
mixed, cell after cell, in innumerable sequence. The cells 
destined to persist during the remaining time lying above 
those are called the future duration. The substance fit for 
being given into future duration is mixed in other cells in the 
sequence of reducing common difference per cell through the 
structure of various geometric regressions." 

"Some of the fallen substance is mixed in geometrical 
sequence in innumerable common ratio into the cells 


632 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


corresponding to the initial instant up to the length of their 
future duration. The remaining are mixed into the future life, 
hence the rising row is included in their future duration. 
Hence the denomination. Many cells at the end of this time of 
duration are called top quality; it may contain in some cases 
only one cells at the end. Here by the law of the disintegration 
the geometric progression is to be known." 

"According to the law of law of "split" (kandaka) the 
reduction of the duration of life is from the beginning on 
annihilation of some future-controlling cells. According to the 
law of subsequence (anukrsti) the life-time of only some atoms 
of the future-controlling cells is reduced and there is no 
annihilation of future-controlling cells from the beginning. 
When there remains a trail in a life-time its name is fragment- 
trail (ucchista dvali), in which there is no premature rise, etc. 
There is also the function of decay of the subsequent cells. At 
the lapse of such a fragment-trail there is complete 
annihilation of the duration of life." 

"In the structure of the supermolecules the lower ones 
are associated with small energy and the future ones with 
great energy. There happens to be reduction of energy of bad 
material owing to attainment of vision. Here also the same law 
of split is stated as follows:" 

"After annihilating many supermolecules associated with 
high energy, the atoms therein are mixed into the lower 
supermolecules in a sequence. That is how there is reduction 
of intensity of fruition. The period in which there is completed 
the destruction of intensity of fruition is less than forty-eight 
minutes. During this period, having taken the atoms of 
supermolecules fit for annihilation, mixing is to be effected 
into all such supermolecules which have exhausted their 
frution in the past..." 


101. NEMICANDRA SAIDDHANTIKA, Ksapanasara 
S. C. Ghoshal, op. cit., comments "(It) treats of bandha, 


KSAPANASARA 633 


kasaya, lesya, etc., and lays down the means by which kasdyas 
may be removed. Ksapana literally means ‘destruction’...This 
work may be considered to be a continuation of Labdhisdra..." 
Ghoshal reports it to consist of 270 verses. Ghoshal is basing 
his comments on a manuscript contained in the Central Jaina 
Oriental Library in Arrah. It has apparently not been 
published. 


102. NEMICANDRA SAIDDHANTIKA, Trilokasdra 

Another work by this author that is apparently not 
available in print but contained in the Library at Arrah. 
Ghoshal (ibid., pp. xlii-xliii) says "(It) contains a description of 
the three lokas (regions of the universe), with oceans, 
mountains, etc., together with a description of the abodes of 
heavenly beings and the inmates of hell. The stars and planets, 
with their orbits, are described, and there is mention of how 
night and day are caused by the motion of the earth. Besides 
these, there are other subjects, such as the various kinds of 
measurements, methods of reckoning, etc." 


103. NEMICANDRA SAIDDHANTIKA, Traivdrikdcara 

NCat VIII, 281 indicates that manuscripts. of this work 
are available in Moodbidri II (cited above), p. 78; that five 
manuscripts, one with 19 paricchedas, are listed in the 
Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Government Oriental 
Library (Mysore 1922), p. 55; and in A Hand-List of 407 
Manuscripts in the Srimaccdrukirti Panditacdrya Jaina 
Bhand§ara at Sravanabelgola, Mysore State 164 (a). Cf. L. C. 
Jain's article at D.J.Institute of Cosmographic Research, 
Hastinapur, Meerut, India, pp. 250-404 for material. 


634 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


104. NEMICANDRA SAIDDHANTIKA, Tribhangisdara 
NCat VIII, 256, which cites a number of Libraries as 
holding mss. of this work. Cf. L. C. Jain, cited above. 


105. NEMICANDRA SAIDDHANTIKA, Dravyasamgraha 
"ET" is the Prakrit edition and English translation found 
in S. C. Ghoshal's publication, Volume One of the Sacred 
Books of the Jainas, Arrah 1917. 


’ 1. (ET1) Salutation. 

2: (ET2) A self is defined as capable of cognitive 
application, immaterial, an agent and enjoyer, having the size 
of its body, subject to rebirth and naturally moving upward. 

3. (ET7) From the commensensical viewpoint a self 
possesses senses, force (bala), length of life and respiration in 
the past, present and future. From the higher viewpoint a self 
is that which possesses consciousness. 

4. (ET8-9) Cognitive application (upayoga) is of two 
kinds: vision (darsana) and awareness (jfidna). Vision is 
(fourfold, viz.,) visual, nonvisual, extrasensory or complete. 

5. (ET10-11) Awareness is (eightfold, viz.,) immediate 
(true and false), verbal (true and false), extrasensory (true 
and false), telepathy and complete. Or (it can be divided) into 
direct (pratyaksa) and indirect (paroksa). 

6 (ET20) From the commonsensical viewpoint a self 
may have all eight (kinds of awareness), but from the higher 
standpoint a self is by nature just pure vision and awareness. 

7. (ET22) From the higher standpoint a self is formless, 
not having sensory qualities. According to commonsense it is 
material when bound. 

8 (ET24) Commonsensically a self has karmic products; 
from the higher standpoint it is the subject of thoughts; from 
the pure (Suddha) standpoint it (undergoes) pure 
modifications. 

9 (ET27) Commonsensially a self experiences frustration 


DRAVYASAMGRAHA 635 


and satisfaction, the results of karmic products. From the 
higher standpoint it has thought-modifications only. 

10 (ET28) Commonsensically the self is without 
overflow (samudghdta) and occupies spaces the size of its 
body through contraction and expansion. From the higher 
standpoint it occupies countless space-points 

11 (ET31) Static (sthavara) selves in earth, water, light 
(or fire), air (or wind) and plants possess one sense-organ 
only. Mobile (trasa) selves have more than one sense-organ. 

12 (ET33) Selves with five sense-organs either have 
minds or lack them. None with a less number of organs have 
minds. Single-sensed selves are either coarse (bddara) or 
subtle (suksma), and each kind has two varieties, developed 
(paryapta) and otherwise 

13 (ET36) On the commonsense view selves subject to 
rebirth are of fourteen kinds depending on their path 
(margana) and stage of progress. From the higher standpoint 
all selves are to thought of as pure. 

14 (ET42) Liberated (siddha) selves are free of karma. 
They have eight qualities, (a body) slightly less in size than its 
final embodiment, they are eternal subject to the rising and 
falling (of modifications), and they reside at the summit. 

15 (ET44) What is not self is (one of five categories:) 
karmic product, initiator of movement, initiator of stasis, space 
and time. Karmic products possess qualities such as form 
(riipa), etc.; the others are formless. 

16 (ET47) Modes of karmic products include: sounds, 
bonds, subtlety, grossness, shape, difference, darkness and 
shadow, luster, heat 

17 (ET52) As water helps fish to move, the initiator of 
movement helps karmic products and selves to move. But it 
doesn't move the immobile. 

18 (ET54) As a shadow helps a traveller (to rest), the 
initiator of stasis helps karmic products and selves to come to 
a stop. But it doesn't (itself) stop something moving. 

19. (ET56) That which makes room for selves (etc.) is 


636 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


space. It is worldly or nonworldly. 

20. (ET58) Worldly space is where initiators of 
movement, initiators of stasis, time, karmic products and 
selves exist. What is other than that is not worldly space. 

21 (ET59-60) Ordinary time (vyavahara kala) helps 
produce change in substances and is known from 
transformations. Ultimately real time (padramarthika kala) is 
characterized by persistence. 

22 (ET62) Countless substances each occupy a 
particular space-point of worldly space, like a row of jewels. 

23-24. (ET63) So these substances are of six kinds-- 
selves and five kinds of not-self. Five of them, excluding time, 
are called astikaya because they exist (asti) and have many 
space-points, like bodies (kaya), 

25 (ET66) The space-points in each self and in initiators 
of movement and initiators of stasis are uncountable, in space 
they are countless, and in karmic products they may be 
countable, uncountable or countless. Time has one space- 
point, which is why it is not termed a "body". 

26 (ET68-69) One atom of a karmic product combines 
with others to form molecules, which the omniscient consider 
“body”. 

27 (ET70) A “space-point" is the dimension of one 
atom, but it is capable of being occupied by all. 

28 (ET70-71) We now specify the selves and not-selves 
comprising inflow, bond, cessation of inflow, cleansing of 
traces (nirjara), and liberation (moksa), along with merit 
(punya) and demerit (papa). 

29 (ET71) The transformation of the self bringing on 
karmic inflow is called bhdvdsrava by the Jina, whereas the 
inflow itself is called karmd@srava or dravydsrava. 

30 (ET74) Varieties of the first (i.e., bhavdsrava) 
include that arising from falsity (of belief), from indiscipline, 
from negligence, from activity and from anger, and each in 
turn has several varieties. 

31 (ET79) The Jina said that dravydsrava causes 


DRAVYASAMGRAHA 637 


obstructions of awareness, etc. and has many varieties. 

32 (ET80) That by which karma is bound to the self is 
called bhavabandha, whereas the mutual penetration of space- 
points of karma and the self is dravyabandha. 

33 (ET81-82) (Karmic) bonds may be classed under 
four rubrics: as to their nature (as awareness-obstructing, 
etc.), as to their duration (i.e., the time before the karma is 
worked out), as to intensity, and as to size (the number of 
space-points involved). The nature and size derive from the 
kind of act performed, while the time and intensity are due to 
the passion involved. 

34 (ET84) That transformation of consciousness 
creating cessation of the first kind of inflow is called 
bhavasamvara, that blocking the second kind of inflow is 
dravyasamvara 

35 (ET85-86) Varieties of the first kind include vows, 
observances, restraints, merits, reflection, overcoming 
discomfort, and various kinds of conduct.. 

36. (ET93) Bhavanirjara refers to the disappearing of 
karmic traces when the fruits are experienced, as well as to 
the destruction of traces through penances. The disappearance 
itself (is called dravyanirjara). 

37 (ET96) That transformation of the self involving the 
destruction of all karmas is called bhavamoksa; actual 
separation from karmas is dravyamoksa. 

38 (ET98-99) A self having good (subha) modifications 
has merit, a self having bad modifications is demeritorious. 
"Merit" means an auspicious life, name and class while 
"demerit" means the reverse. 

39 (ET100-101) From the commonsense point of view 
right vision, awareness and conduct are the causes of 
liberation, while from the higher standpoint oneself, which 
(naturally) consists of these three, is the cause. 

40 (ET101-102) These three jewels exist nowhere else 
but in the self, so the self must be the cause of liberation. 

41 (ET102-103) Right inclination (toward the seven 


638 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tattvas) is the vision of the self; it is a quality of the self's, and 
when it is errorfree it becomes perfect (right) awareness. 

42 (ET103-104) Right awareness is awareness of both 
self and not-self free from doubt, confusion (vimoha), and 
illusion (vibhrama); there are many sorts. 

43 (ET105-106) Vision is the grasping of things in 
general, without particularities. 

44 (ET107) In ordinary beings subject to rebirth 
awareness is preceded by vision, which is why cognitive 
applications of each do not arise simultaneously. In perfect 
knowers they do occur simultaneously. 

45 (ET107-108) Conduct is refraining from what is 
harmful and engaging in what is beneficial. In the 
commonsense view it has been spoken of by the Jina as 
consisting of vows, observances and restraints. 

46 (ET108-109) But right conduct is, from the higher 
standpoint, halting action in order to destroy the causes of 
rebirth, so say the Jinas. 

47 (ET109-110) A sage has both (commonsense and 
higher) points of view through meditating; thus you should 
practice meditation carefully 

48 (ET110-111) by fixing your‘mind free from delusion 
or attachment or aversion. 

49 (ET111) Repeat and meditate on the mantras taught 
by the teacher. 

50 (ET113) The pure self who exists in a good 
embodiment, who has the vision, satisfaction, knowledge and 
power that has destroyed the four ghatiya karmas, should be 
viewed as a perfected being (arhat). 

51 (ET115) Meditate on the liberated (siddha), a self 
free from the bodies produced by the eight kinds of karma, the 
seer and knower of this world and the world beyond, who has 
a shape like a human being and who stays at the pinnacle of 
the universe. 

52 (ET116) A sage who addresses himself and others to 
practising power, conduct and penance in which vision and 


DRAVYASAMGRAHA 639 


knowledge are eminent, should be meditated on as one's 
teacher. 

53 (ET117-118) That teacher who is the greatest of the 
sages, being possessed of the three jewels and always 
preaching the truth, is termed an upddhydya 

54 (ET118) and a sadhu. We bow to him. 

55 (ET120) Concentration is attained by a s@dhu whose 
thought is effortlessly trained on anything whatsoever. 

56 (ET121) The highest meditation involves not acting, 
not talking and not thinking, so that the self can be fixed in 
itself. 


106. NEMICANDRA SAIDDHANTIKA, 
UpadeSasiddhantaratnamala 
NCat Il, 358 reports that the work is “printed with 
Hindi transl. and C. by Pannalal of Sujangarh and Marathi 
Transl. and C. by Jayacandra Sitarama Sraman. Nagpur 1898." 
We have not been able to find this publication. 


107. NEMICANDRA SAIDDHANTIKA, Vrtti on Umasvati's 
Tattvarthasitra 
NCat VIII, 79 locates a manuscript of this commentary 
at Moodbidri II (op. cit.).) 436, but says it is incomplete. 


108. JAYASENA (998), Dharmaratnakara 

This summary is taken from A .N. Upadhye's edition 
(our "E") of the work, Jivaraja Jaina Granthamala No. 24, 
Sholapur 1974, pp. 6-17. A manuscript of this work held in 
Byavar specifies the date of composition. We indicate here the 
sections of the work following Upadhye's translations, and a 
few of the passages: the general purport of the work is to 
indicate Jain moral virtues. 


640 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Summary by A. N. Upadhye 


I (verses 1-57) (E3-21) Consequences of merit and 
demerit. Dharma brings merit, pleasure, and all sorts of good 
things, while adharma brings demerit, misery, torture, etc. 

2 (verses 58-115) (E22-37) The fruits of fearless giving 
are extolled. 

3 (verses 116-181) (E38-56) The giving of food is 
always meritorious. 

4 (verses 182-287)(E57-83) Respect for monks, even 
when they are guilty of minor defects, is praised. 

5 (verses 288-420) (E84-112) Giving further praised, 
and its beneficial results described. 

6-7 (verses 421-564) (E113-146) The practice of 
conveying knowledge through teaching is lauded. 

8 (verses 565-604) (E141-156) Providing medical help 
is praised. 

9 (verses 605-722) (E157-188) The cultivation of right 
vision is praised. 

10 (verses 723-827) (E189-214) Right vision is either 
natural or acquired. Its aspects are described. 

11 (verses 828-923) (E215-236) The first stage 
(pratima) of a seeker's religious life. It involves both right 
vision and right awareness; the former comes first. These two 
are followed by right conduct. The five great vows of a monk, 
and the proper practices of a householder are outlined. One 
should not sacrifice using flesh, and other such precluded 
types of behavior are described. 

12 (verses 924-1036) (E237-264) The second stage 
involves the observance of the five secondary vows and 
cultivation of four virtues: friendliness, joy, compassion and 
fairness, as well as of noninjury. Various kinds of insulting, 
sinful, harmful and other bad sorts of speech are warned 
against. 

13 (verses 1037-1112) (E265-283) Vices such as theft, 
sexual enjoyment, feelings of ownership and appropriating 


DHARMARATNAKARA 641 


things are described and monks are warned to take vows to 
avoid them. 

14 (verses 1113-1166) (E284-297) More advice 
pertaining to the second stage. 

15 (verses 1167-1294) (E298-325) The third stage is 
that of the qualified or perfected person who practices 
equanimity. 

16-20 (verses 1295-1661) (E326-420) The remaining 
stages, culminating in fasting to death, are reviewed. A final 
chapter takes up several miscellaneous topics. . 


109. AMITAGATI II (1010), Paficasamgraha 
Apparently this work has been published by Darbarilal 
Nyayatirtha as Manikchandra Digambara Jaina Granthamala 
25, 1927. We have been unable to locate a copy. 


110. AMITAGATI II, Dvatrimsika or Samdyikapatha 
The work has been edited a number of times (cf. 
Bibliography, Third Edition, pp. 383-384). "E" references in 
the following summary are to the edition (#581.4.3 of 
Bibliography) by Sitalprasad Brahmachari in the version 
published by Shri Ksullakabahubaliji Maharaj from Delhi in 
1973. 


Summary by Padmanabha S. Jaini 


1-3 (E2-11) The work opens with a prayer to the 
Realized Being (Jinendra). 

4 (E11-16) In the style of auspicious verses 
(mangalavdcana) some essential concepts of Jainism are 
reiterated. Seven essentials are emphasized: may my time be 
employed in knowing the two types of life and nonliving 
substances, in stopping the influx of karmic matter and the 


642 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


bondage caused by them, always practicing controls (samvara) 
resulting in gradual cleansing of traces of the not-self, and 
yearning for liberation (moksa). Knowing the body, etc., as 
different from the pure self and truly realizing and 
experiencing it as such, may my time be well used in the 
dharma type of meditation and equanimity. 

5 (E17-20) One who is nearing the state of release 
shows the following signs: complete victory over anger and 
other passions, renouncing all acquisitions, sincere effort for 
good conduct, fear of worldly sorrow, service to the sages, 
interest in knowing the words of realized ones, and control 
over the sense-organs. 

6-7 (E21-26) A prayer: At all times let my feelings 
remain the same towards those who wish me ill or those who 
favor me or are at peace with me.... 

8-10 (E26-34) Those fallen ones who indulge in low 
despicable actions reach despicable states; those other 
intelligent ones act in a praiseworthy manner to achieve 
higher states. Those under the spell of the senses, who indulge 
in physical pleasures, actually lose the welfare of both the 
body and the mind, the present and the hereafter. This is my 
wife, this other is my son, that is my mother, this, my sister; 
this is my foe, this the city, that the garden: these are all 
illusive attachments (moha). As long as one remains mindful 
of such inconsequential things, how can the Self then cut away 
the huge tree of the sorrows of this world towards liberation? 

11 (E26-39) The one who has no bondage and is with 
tealized selfhood constantly revels in the thought that, apart 
from the self that is illumined by its intrinsic nature of pure 
knowledge and is ever removed from substance-related 
fallacious actions (nokarman) and functional phases 
(bhavakarman), there is no other state in me nor do I belong 
to anyone else. Otherwise all other living heings in all three 
worlds are commonly bound with the shackles of samsara. 

12 (E39-42) In the world, where even the body that has 
been grown with such diligence from childhood to youth does 


SAMAYIKAPATHA 643 


not remain mine, how can others like son, wife, daughter, etc. 
be of consequence since they are the result of my own | 
bondage by past actions? Knowing thus, an intelligent human 
being remains ever centered in the self. 

13 (E43-45) May the path (dharma) as told by the 
omniscient Lord ever save us from the difficult-to-tunnel 
mountain of karma and equally difficult-to-navigate sea of 
worldliness... 

14-15 (E45-51) The words of the omniscient are 
repeated by the faithful thus: These sense pleasures ultimately 
cause fear, as they are empty and dry like straw and in the 
end cause anxieties and sorrows. They are always perishable 
and therefore denounced by scholars. They cause birth in 
lower states and thus great pain and sorrow. Even though I 
know this, it is so tragic that my mind does not dislodge from 
pleasure. I am so foolish. To whom should I then turn for 
support and what should I do? 

16 (E50-55) The Jinendras have said that pleasures 
from the senses never totally satisfy. They are like a forest fire 
and only fuel further desires. They can cause only future 
sorrow as they are the seed thereof. Under the influence of 
such unholy pleasures, the living being indulges in stealing, ill- 
conduct, violence, etc. and thus reaps countless sorrows. 
Pleasure is subject to constant fear (as it can fail with the 
failure of the sense organs) and although it causes many sins, 
the desired pleasure is not always very easy to attain. 

17 (E54-57) It is advised that with a steadfast mind 
determine within your heart the great sorrows that accrue due 
to repeatedly entering this forest of life that is full of death, 
old age, etc. Resolve to make an effort in the opposite 
direction so that you may never have to face such evils again. 

18 (E57-60) If this body, filled with foul-smelling filth 
and pallor, can be used to achieve great higher states of 
happiness, why not use it so? If soiled useless garlands can be 
used to achieve priceless gems, who among the intelligent will 
not use it? Use the human body as an instrument for spiritual 


644 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


gain. 

19 (E60-62) Just as the sun immediately destroys the 
darkness causing night-blindness, following the Jaina teachings 
and way can similarly remove all fear of death, rebirth, 
nonfulfilment of desires, misfortune, fear, maladies, mental 
anxiety, and great sorrow with immediate effect. 

20 (E62-65) Only that high level aspirant (muni), who 
does not entertain any kind of violence whatsoever nor any 
worldly desires that stop spiritual progress, can steadfastly 
meditate on the self and, shedding all the karmic matter, reach 
the highest states of realization. 

21 (E65-67) The god of passions (kamadeva) coexists 
with the world and is as inexorable as death. It is very difficult 
for embodied beings to elude him. Neither the old nor the 
clever, nor the learned, nor the ignorant, nor the brave, nor 
cowards, neither animals nor celestial beings or birds, no one 
can escape the inexorable power of passion. 

22 (E67-71) These passions always lead to great 
sorrow. This can be controlled only through meditating on the 
self. It cannot be controlled merely by associating with 
knowledgeable persons or calm-minded people. It is to be 
achieved by the knowledge that discriminates between the 
body (not-self) and the self, and gives rise to pure, natural and 
steadfast nonattachment. 

23 (E72-75) What is 'my age (appropriate for 
renouncing or not), which is my birth (human as opposed to 
animal), how should I behave according to present 
circumstances (in this birth that is my appropriate path) that 
would aid spiritual progress, and what is beneficial to my 
future spiritual progress (births)? Instead of debating all these 
important questions, most worldly people continue to indulge 
in acts that will further immerse them in the sea of worldliness 
away from the self. 

24 (E75-77) Those for whom the forest is home, for 
them the moon is the lamp to dispel darkness, whatever is 
given in alms within their palms is great scrumptious food for 


SAMAYIKAPATHA 645 


them, the hard earth is the most comfortable bed, and the 
directions are their clothes. They crave no possessions even for 
their basic needs. They have drunk ‘the ambrosia of 
contentedness. They achieve what others cannot achieve, that 
is, the higher fearless states of emancipation. 

25 (E78-81) The attached being continuously dwells in 
useless thoughts related to the body...Immersed in these dark 
attachments that cloud discrimination between what is really 
beneficial to the self and what is not, the living being runs 
away from right action. 

26 (E81-82) It is very difficult to separate the body 
from the self as they are like part and whole and have been 
together since time immemorial. They stay together from birth 
to death and are difficult to part. Even so, part they must. So 
the discriminating person should think thus: that if even the 
body will have to be parted with, what of the outer 
relationships like wife and son? One should not lament for 
either. Knowing this, every day dislodge yourself from the pain 
of separation from these. 

27 (E83-86) It is a tragedy that the creator Brahma 
made the animals content to eat grass and leaves and sleep on 
the earth, as well as those indulging in luxuries like the 
celestial beings, full of riches. For the world of action he 
created such a hunger for daily needs in human beings that 
they remain immersed in actions contrary to their ultimate 
good. 

28 (E86-88) Sometimes the mind runs after celestial 
women, sometimes after wealth, at other times after glory and 
fame. Never does it run after the peaceful sea of bliss arising , 
from discrimination and following the path of renunciation. 

29 (E88-90) The mind sometimes goes to the 
netherworld agitating upon the possibility of indulging in the 
infernal women, sometime’ it worries about attaining the 
powerful kingship of emperors that no one else has, at other 
times it covets the beautiful women of the higher worlds. It 
remains in illusion, not knowing that in the ambrosia of the 


646 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Jina words and Jina way lies the real and ultimate happiness. 
It is a pity that the mind does not know. 

30 (E91-93) The mind is exhorted not to roam in these 
false worldly attractions, as it is capable of turning its sights 
towards the higher goals of self-realization. Only this will give 
it permanent happiness. 

31 (E93-95) The realized being (Jinendra) is 
supplicated to help the worldly soul who is aspiring to sail 
across the sea of the world, to help him in the path of 
austerities by dislodging him from the seven bad habits like 
gambling and sexual indulgence, aiding him to associate with 
the pure-minded ones, helping in overcoming the power of the 
senses, and in releasing him from anger and passions. 

’ 32 (E96-97) Living beings are helpless, like deer in the 

- forest, in this world full of dangerous animals like death and 

old age. Immersed in sense pleasures beings are soon hunted 

down by death. How can such a world give peace and 

happiness? So the intelligent being will try to get out of this 

cle. 

' 33 (E98-99) Any doctor, son, Brahmin, Indra, wife, 

mother, servant, or king cannot save being embraced by death. 

Reflecting upon this the betterment of the self should be 
attained while alive. 

34 (E99-101) "Even the body that has been preserved 
and nourished with such care will not go with me; what then 
of all this wealth and accumulations?"--thinking thus, the mind 
should remain unattached to any substance. : 

35 (E101-103) A dynamic (tejasvin) aspirant is one who 
has an equanimous attitude towards good or evil persons, in 
the forest or in assemblies, in stones and in gold, in happiness 
and in sadness, in gain or in loss of the desired result, and is 
always calm and collected, bereft of likes or dislikes. To such 
an illustrious being freedom (mukti) comes automatically. 

36 (E104-107) One who practices winning over the 
enemies such as the senses and passions, one who has ceased 
to begin any worldly work, one who has renounced and does 


SAMAYIKAPATHA 647 


not accumulate even a part of inner or otter belongings, and 
one who has controlled the mind to reject all worldly 
pleasures thereby attaining the highest nonattachment, those 
knowledgeable renunciates are the only ones who, bereft of all 
karmic attachments, attain blissful immersion in the self and 
reach the highest state (here termed "Sivalaya"). 

37 (E107-110) The way to that purity of self and self- 
meditation is not that of the sangha or methods practiced by 
them, nor just by revering the guru, nor by getting worshipped 
by one and all. Neither does it lie just in having a bed of 
straw, wood, stone or earth (these are outer things). The 
meditator of the reality of the self is the pure, steadfast self 
itself. Know that like milk and water, the self always knows 
the difference between body (not-self) and self. 

38 (E110-111) Only the self-knowing can achieve 
salvation. Controlling the outpouring senses, one who 
considers the self like a traveller in transit within this body, 
and knows his self to be the eternal one, he alone can easily 
overcome worldliness to attain the ultimate wealth of 
salvation. 

39 (E111-113) One who turns away from worldly 
pleasures that ultimately cause sorrow, attains the pure, 
eternal, beyond-compare pleasures of dwelling in the self. He 
closes his ears to words by others and listens to the eternal 
sound within. 

40 (E114-116) The body is capable of producing many 
sorrows. Actions (karmic adhesions) coupled with this body 
then produce the relationships of wife, son, friend, etc., which 
one mistakenly considers as belonging to oneself. The person 
with false awareness thus considers benefits, which actually 
are debts and cause many misfortunes, as one's achievements 
and experiences false happiness. 

41 (E116-119) One must reflect on the following: When 
I see my friend or foe's body indulging in starting various 
activities and talk, that body is bereft of consciousness and 
cannot do anything for me (ultimately). The self within them 


648 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cannot be seen by me. I am pure and not touched by things 
and actions. Then by whom shall I be pleased? On whom shall 
I show my displeasure? 

42 (E119-121) I am not related in any way to this 
unconscious body which is destroyed by my angry enemies. 
The one self to whom I am eternally related cannot be 
destroyed. Knowing this, the intelligent man never expresses 
any arousal of attachment or jealousy towards anyone. This 
contemplation helps in overcoming animosity. 

43 (E121-123) When the self, mistakenly believing the 
body to be permanent, indulges in many sinful activities and 
thereby becomes the generator of an immensely sorrowful 
state, then it can also reverse this by steadfastly establishing 
itself in nonattachment and thereby gain the ultimate wealth 
of salvation that even the gods like Indra and Narayana cannot 
get. Definitely the self can gain freedom. 

44 (E123-126) The wilfully extended feelings of 
friendship and love towards wife, son, friend, kingdom, riches, 
etc. that are of benefit to this body but ultimately immerse us 
in worldliness, are detrimental to selfhood. On the other 
hand, feelings of detachment, austerities, fasts, self-control, 
etc., that are beneficial to the self may be detrimental to the 
body (i.e., makes it shrink and controlled). Knowing thus, the 
person with a pure intelligent mind should abandon all 
menta!, physical and verbal actions that are beneficial for the 
body but detrimental to the self. 

45 (E126-129) Those who wish to achieve total 
knowledge and total bliss must serve the self alone. The self 
is of the nature of knowledge. If served, it reveals the best, 
purest knowledge whereas the body is ignorant and if served 
can give only ignorance. It is well-known in this world that 
people can give only what they already have. Even the most 
generous giver cannot give the flower of the sky 
(akasakusuma), since flowers don't grow in the sky. 

46 (E129-131) Constantly wishing for pleasures, bereft 
of discrimination, passionate men continue increasing their 


SAMAYIKAPATHA 649 


sorrows by indulging in violence-ridden actions. Like lepers 
increasing their pain by scratching their wounds with various 
irritants, they further aggravate their sorry condition. 

47 (E131-132) One who relinquishes all other activities 
and practices only the three jewels is a friend of the self. One 
who does not do so is an enemy of the self. He continues to 
further denigrate his self and throws it into a prison (a 
situation difficult to extricate himself from). Knowing this 
intelligent people should streadfastly remain centered in the 
self. 

48 (E133-135) The foolish man remains immersed in 
wealth and does not see the inevitable destroyers of wealth 
and men; (it is) like the person or bird sitting on top of a tree 
in the forest who does not do anything even if he sees the 
forest fire (inevitable death) coming. 

49 (E136-137) The self, knowing itself as different from 
all outer things, experiences itself by itself, and in the ultimate 
perspective achieves the difficult-to-reach state of the highest 
(paramatman) realized state, as the thick cluster of bamboo 
ignites itself by rubbing against itself to cause a huge fire. 

50 (E138-139) One who constantly remains busy in 
doing what is needed for the body is like the foolish and 
cowardly servant of the king who, scared of the king's 
displeasure, works for the king all the time without finding 
any time to do his own work. 

51 (E139-142) It is obvious that wealth, fame, the arts, 
women, good fortune, and luck are all ultimately abandoned 
by the self (in death). In acquiring this entire world one 
acquires bondage that immerses the self further in worldliness. 
Therefore good men who covet only liberation do not aspire 
for these. Intelligent people do not respect anything that they 
will have ultimately to leave. 

52 (E142-145) Aspirants on the path of the self never 
indulge in self-detrimental actions, just as those who wish to 
avoid cold never let the flames in the hearth die. Self- 
detrimental actions are those that do not result in the 


650 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


knowledge of what is good and what is bad for the self, 
actions that do not encourage one to renounce worldly 
pleasures, activities that do not crush the karmic adhesions to 
smithereens to dissipate them, and actions that do not result 
in meditating upon the self. 

53 (E145-147) Just as excessive heat melts the hardnes 
of gold, similarly passions, anger, lament, jealousy, pride, 
hatred and indolence are impure feelings that destroy the 
steadiness of the mind that is required for pure meditation. 
Therefore those who meditate should avoid these feelings by 
a great distance. 

54 (E147-149) The great soul who has renounced the 
desire for pleasure, controls this mind that is difficult to 
subdue like a restless monkey and which has eternally been 
playing truant in the forest of the five sense-pleasures, 
removes it from these pleasures and steadfastly centers it in 
the self, meditating in order to get release from the expanse 
of worldliness. Without making this ultimate effort, other 
methods will not give success. 

55 (E149-151) The self should be meditated upon 
within, as the essential reality without which even the moon, 
the sun, the planets and stars that are famous for giving light 
become like darkness. It is the self that keeps the effulgence of 
knowledge ever pure, and it is that self which is meditated 
upon by yogis. One should meditate upon such a pure 
steadfast self as situated within one's very own body. 

56 (E152-154) The elephant of death can come anytime 
to destroy this house of thé body. Even knowing this you keep 
wondering whether it will come and do not accept that one 
day you will have to die. You behave as if you are eternal and 
deathless, and continue to indulge in negative (dhamika) 
activities. 

57 (E154-156) “I will do this, I have done this, now I 
am doing this work": agitated thus, you continue to immerse 
yourself in worldly likes and dislikes and remain aloof from 
your real benefit of the self. Thus you waste the time of your 


SAMAYIKAPATHA 651 


entire life uselessly, and yet do not dwell in the Jina teachings 
that tell you of the pure reality that emancipates you. _ 

58 (E156-158) Some people continue to indulge: in 
negative actions detrimental to the right path; even then, 
those established in the path (dharma) never retaliate or 
punish them. Such (misguided) people fight each other 
oblivious of the fact that there is another path on earth that 
can save the embodied self. 

59 (E158-161) People who accumulate many things 
(and actions) by undertaking great effort to begin works that 
lead to more things, have to ultimately let go of them at the 
time of death. All those accumulations are a cause for sorrow, 
so let go of them. Since they have to be abandoned at the time 
of death anyway, why go on accumulating? 

60 (E161-163) The departed relatives like brothers and 
sons have gone their separate ways (after death) on 
(completing their karmic bondage and) accruing further 
bondage in this life in accordance with their stages of 
evolution. It is futile to continue to make efforts to meet them 
after death or to lament for them. The atoms have been 
dissipated in all directions after they ceased to be, so trying to 
bring them together again is impossible for any man. 

61 (E163-165) O mind, it is a pity that you keep 
returning to the pleasures that have been enjoyed and thrown 
away by you earlier. They merely fire your desires instead. 
They can never be assuaged by enjoyment, so do not crave for 
them. 

62 (E165-168) The self is exhorted to think thus: "I am 
brave, with auspicious intellect; I deserve reverence, as I am 
full of good qualities; I am powerful, and I am the first among 
men.” Thus negating all thoughts that may bind one further to 
the world, always meditate on that eternal pure self that leads 
to the wealth of liberation. 

63 (E168-170) It is impossible for mendicants to 
achieve liberation by holding on to various impurities like 
anger, pride, acquisitions and dress. Thus both external and 


652 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


internal acquisitions have to be abandoned. 

64 (E170-172) It is a pity that conflicted and misguided 
men of wrong faith and intellect continue to expect happiness 
from women. It is like the deer in the desert, expecting the 
shining sand to be water. Therefore it becomes necessary to 
pont out that men should abandon such attachments (women) 
that increase the problems in liberation and are difficult to 
negate. 

65 (E172-175) Violence, etc., are inevitably demerit- 
giving sins, the trees of the forest of this world. Sorrow and 
pain are the unavoidable problems one has to face to negotiate 
this forest. Passions and sense pleasures are the two robbers 
in the forest. Ignorance is like the traps set to ensnare you, 
into which you will inevitably fall. Thus, O intelligent men, 
having found the pure knowledge, destroy all the passions and 
sense-pleasures. It is obvious that learned men do not let go 
of their enemies on finding the right opportunity to kill them. 

66 (E175-177) By pursuing the six types of professions, 
viz., scriptural activities, writing, agriculture, artwork 
(decorative activities), trade and crafts, you endeavor to work 
hard for the sake of your body, wealth and sons (family). If 
you were to work like that even once for the sake of 
controlling your desires, you would be able to enjoy eternal 
flawless pleasures (of freedom). 

67 (E177-179) One who practices control (samyama) 
reaches the high stages of perfection quite soon and become 
a generator of happiness and self-bliss, dwelling in and 
enjoying the fathomless knowledge, vision, and power of the 
self, just as the man dwelling on the highest central mountain 
(Sumeru) finds everything else beneath him. 

68 (E180-181) The impossible may become possible 
(various classic examples given), but it is impossible for the 
man stuck in the wheel of worldliness, which is a mine of 
sorrows, to achieve the bliss of the self. 

69 (E181-183) Born of the fruition of different karmas, 
in different forms of fat, thin, tall, short, etc., this body can 


SAMAYIKAPATHA 653 


never abandon its habit of running after sense pleasures. Just 
as red, yellow, blue, white, black, etc., colors of the clothes we 
wear do not color the body, similarly these outer qualities do 
not become the quality of the pure self which remains covered 
under them. 

70 (E183-184) Even after knowing the eternal, 
indestructible nature of the pure self, which is of the quality 
of knowledge and bereft of the worldly sorrows, you foolishly 
believe in the false imaginations that I am fair, I am beautiful, 
I am strong, I am respectable, I am fat or thin.... 

71 (E185-187) One who does not begin any new 
activities and is untouched by anger, greed, passions, and 
acquisitions, who is filled with the right vision and knowledge- 
oriented cognitive application (upayoga), is bereft of all 
polluting aggregates arising out of karma, and has no need or 
expectation of any outer substance, is of the nature of the pure 
self. This nature should be meditated upon constantly for the 
achievement of freedom. Those who wish success never 
indulge in actions that might be opposites of and detrimental 
to achieving their set goals. 

72 (E188-190) Those who are alive to activities of the 
body lack the discrimination between activities that should be 
abandoned and attitudes that must be cultivated. They do not 
keep their minds in the nature of the self. Thus those who 
wish to succeed in the goal of realizing the self must negate 
involvement in the body, since intelligent beings do not dwell 
in activities that oppose their goals. 

73 (E190-192) Death does not excuse the frightened 
one, so it is useless to fear death. Desired pleasures are never 
achievable (in totality) so do not desire, and do not needlessly 
be sorrowful for what is dead and gone or cannot return. Why 
should a logical person do some useless thing (like lamenting 
for the past)? 

74 (E192-194) The bliss that is within the self does not 
arise with the timely fruition of karmic aggregates, but it is 
revealed with the destruction of existing karmic particles. It is 


654 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


indestructible, without impurities, and always desired by 
scholars. This pleasure is constantly available within you, is 
eternal, and is easily achieved: then why undertake sorrowful 
efforts for outer, sense-related pleasures that are ephemeral? 
O fool, why roam for alms when sanctified food (prasada) is 
available at the Siva-temple? 

75 (E195-197) The fool who expects pure, eternal 
happiness from well-established sources of wealth, friends and 
acquisitions (that are ephemeral) is trying to overcome the 
waves of deluge at the time of dissolution. 

76 (E197-199) When these worldly pleasures inevitably 
increase sources of sorrow both in this world and in the next, 
then how can those who desire freedom ever label them as 
things that actually increase happiness or even sense 
pleasures? Intelligent people never indulge in activities that 
increase the force of sorrow. 

77 (E199-201) Since this being achieves the heavens as 
well as the wealth of liberation by actively encouraging purer 
states of mind and, by indulging in negative states, encourages 
sorrow-producing infernal states (according to the karmic law 
of rebirth), therefore the saintly people choose to indulge in 
the former and not the inauspicious latter actions. Why would 
intelligent beings do otherwise? Thus right mental attitudes 
alone can help the evolution of a being. 

78 (E201-203) Impure mind-states lead to infernal 
regions, pure mind-states lead to higher heavenly regions and 
the purest consciousness-revealing mind-states help to 
eradicate all karmic adhesions to attain flawless freedom. Thus 
those who desire liberation must indulge only in the purest 
mind-states. 

79 (E203-208) Beings in the infernal regions have to 
suffer unbearable and indescribable horrific sorrows inflicted 
on each other. Beings in animal states have-to bear with fire, 
piercing, hunger, thirst, etc., and humans too have to put up 
with disease, separation and death. Beings in celestial domains 
have problems of the mind (due to fear of having to leave 


SAMAYIKAPATHA 655 


those pleasures one day). Therefore all worldly states should 
be considered riddled with pain and sorrows, and the mind 
should be made to hanker only after freedom. 

80 (E208-210) Worldly activities are achieved with 
great effort (like making a mud doll in water), and they are 
totally -destroyed soon. If this is so then why, O fool, do you 
only indulge in worldly activities. It is indeed a matter of great 
shame. Intelligent beings never indulge in useless effort. 

81 (E210-212) No one understands the pure eternal 
bliss of freedom from worldliness, which is full of many 
difficulties, without mental or spiritual peace and full of 
longings. As opposed to that, freedom is bereft of any 
problems. But no human being filled with passions can 
discriminate or understand this essential reality. Why have 
fondness for the world, abandoning such pure freedom beyond 
which there is no greater substance in this creation? 

82 (E212-214) It is regretted that the people of this 
world engage in the six activities necessitating violence (by the 
sword, by the pen, trade, crafts, education, etc.) that further 
increase their great load of karmic adhesions and bondage. It 
is as if though desiring to stay healthy a sick man continues to 
have contra-indicated food. Then naturally it generates great 
pain in all the limbs. 

83 (E214-216) In this deep forest of worldliness, there 
are ferocious karmic enemies due to whom you have been 
suffering greatly from time immemorial. There is no horrific 
sorrow that you have not suffered. By the sword of self- 
meditation, which occurs at the unification of right vision, 
right awareness and right conduct, uproot and destroy these 
karmic enemies, and enter the great city of freedom to attain 
the kingdom of faultless bliss without any further problems. 

84 (E216-218) One who performs austerities to gain 

-outer wealth like kingdom, heavenly states, etc., will achieve 
only these external substances. However, one who wishes to 
realize the self will soon find the pure self. As you sow, so 
shall you reap. Knowing this, the skilful intelligent one works 


656 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


for his self-realization alone. 

85 (E219-221) All these modes of wife, son, etc., are 
other than the self and deserve to be kept away as they are 
ephemeral and unsteady like the wind. They happen due to 
the rise of karmic law. Only the foolish in this world consider 
them to be their pleasure-giving possessions. By just imagining 
them to be so they pretend to have achieved the wealth of the 
heavens. 

86 (E221-224) In this world the substance that is cause 
for the bondage of attached people is also the instrument for 
disenchanted men to erase the filth of karmic adhesions (i.e., 
the bondage lies in the attachment to it, not in the substance 
itself). The curd-butter-jaggery (a combination prescribed for 
the delirious patient) substances are also a tonic for healthy 
men. 

87 (E224-225) Even if a person follows the right vision, 
right awareness and right conduct, should he be fired by greed 
in his mind, then he cannot get rid of his tensions, just as the 
sea, though containing various gems, still agitates due to the 
fire within. 

88 (E226-228) Blinded by attachments, the mind 
perceives the ‘other substances’ like wife, son, body, etc., as its 
own self. In the mind of a man without ignorant attachments 
only the indestructible self without the adhesions of polluting 
karma appears to be always reflected as the self. If you have 
understood the difference of these two, then why do you not 
destroy this false attachment to wife and son immediately! 

89 (E228-229) Those who are full of good conduct 
(sila) and self-control, who have renounced the not-self, those 
who ignore even this body that is an instrument of successful 
meditation, such aspirants (sddhu) perform the greatest 
austerities, but even amidst those difficult states do not desire 
anything. They go to the desirable state of the liberated, 
escaping this horrific forest of worldly existence. 

90 (E230-232) Karmic bondage of sins acquired earlier 
produces sorrows and meritorious acts result in pleasures; 


SAMAYIKAPATHA 657 


knowing this, those yogis who decide to negate the sins with 
great austerities by adhering to the wealth of peace and self- 
contro] are difficult to find. Even rarer are those who desire to 
destroy both types of karma, meritorious and sinful. 

91 (E230-232) Aspirants on the path must of course 
destroy the ripened karma automatically rising, but they must 
make an effort to quickly bring to fruition the karmic 
adhesions not due yet and destroy. them too, just as a brave 
warrior may go out far to destroy his enemies, but certainly 
does not leave unharmed the enemy who has already entered 
his household. 

92 (E234-237) Acquisitions must be abandoned in all 
three ways, mentally, physically and verbally, since they are 
the karmic baggage leading to sins and bondage. Just as the 
side of a physical balance goes down when substance-laden 
and goes up when the substances are removed from it, the 
aspiring soul will similarly rise higher and higher the more he 
rids himself of the burden of acquisitions. 

93 (E237-239) Pure austerities performed without any 
desire for merits or fruits is the kind that will destroy the 
accumulations of past karma. Those who with impure minds 
desire results while performing austerities cannot become pure 
by it, just as dirty water cannot clean the filthy person bathing 
in it. 

94 (£239-242) First of all one needs to acquire 
discrimination. The self and the body are intermingled like 
milk and water. The sage who can quickly discriminate 
between the difficult-to-separate body and self and then, with 
the fire of pure unattached meditation burn the wood of 
karma, becomes the seer of the _ highest _ state 
(kevalajianadharin). Such realized beings are worshipped in 
both the worlds, by the emperors of this world and the gods 
of the higher world. They become the realized souls who show 
the way. May they be there for our salvation. 

95 (E242-244) Such realized beings are indeed a cause 
for wonder. Their knowledge is the fire which is spreading 


658 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


light as it is fanned by the breeze of right vision, and after 
burning off the wood of karma it destroys the darkness of 
attachments that overcome the mind. The light of this fire 
reveals at once all categories of reality and continues to blaze 
permanently as omniscience. Indeed, such strange conduct of 
the realized beings is a cause for wonderment (for the 
laymen). 

96 (E244-247) As long as there remains even a slight 
fondness for outer things the sorrow-producing net of karma 
cannot be destroyed, just as in spite of being heated by the 
strong sun deep-rooted trees with shady branches do not dry 
up because they are sustained by subsoil water. 

97 (E247-249) Good men do not wonder at the fact 
that even emperors abandon their powers and lands to become 
aspirants in this path of austerities leading to unparalleled, 
indestructible wealth of freedom. In fact it is a cause to 
wonder if ever a renunciate should abandon his austere life for 
the sake of sorrow-producing sense pleasures that further push 
him into the sea of worldliness. 

98 (E249-252) O fool, know that woman is the mine of 
sins and the cause of other problems like sons and family. This 
body is the abode of disease and other sorrows. All wealth is 
transitory and elusive like the wind. O self, while roaming 
these deadly forests of worldliness, what cause for happiness 
have you seen that you do not abandon all outer attractions 
and delve into the self? There is no true lasting happiness in 
the world, so meditate on the self. 

99 (E2520254) Emancipation cannot be achieved by 
knowledge alone. The fool who tries to jump the fortress of 
this world and achieve the success that gives the unique bliss, 
without the three gems of right vision, right awareness and 
right conduct, with the help of knowledge alone, is trying for 
the impossible. Such want to reach their goal of swimming 
across the large oceans riddled with perilous water-animals 
and swirling with winds arising from the last deluge just with 
the help of their two arms! 


SAMAYIKAPATHA 659 


100 (E254-256) The life and birth of only those 
aspirants are truly blessed who, with pure minds knowing the 
causes of the world as well as of emancipation, renounce the ° 
world with mind, words and body, and sharpening their mind 
with right conduct, vision and awareness are able to destroy 
the forest of worldliness. 

101 (E256-258) One who abandons the three gems 
(right vision, conduct and awareness) and secretly enjoys the 
sorrow-producing pleasures, actually abandons the ambrosia 
that release from the cycle of birth-old age-death and accepts 
instead the instant-killer poison. 

102 (E258-260) Past action-bondage gives rise to 
pleasure or pain in this life. Why should I then lament or feel 
pleased by it? Thinking thus, the aspirant should hold an equal 
view of both happiness and sadness. Such an intelligent one 
expiates the past ones while not creating any new bindings. 

103 (E260-262) Though desiring to destroy ill-effect- 
producing actions, the lowly continue to increase their 
negative karma by remaining immersed in passions like greed 
and anger, just as the patient that takes the medication but 
does not adhere to the prescribed food or contra-indicated 
things, merely succeeds in increasing his disease. 

104 (E262-264) Those who are on the right path never 
accept acquisitions. Those determined to achieve liberation 
adhere to the three gems and are even shy of receiving a plate 
on which food can be taken. Such should be their aversion to 
acquisitions. 

105 (E265-267) This world is polluted by strong 
passions. The few good men who desiring to achieve the 
wealth of freedom read, listen or take interest in the 
incomparable Jina way that leads one to the true faith and is 
like a guide that shows the path to escape worldly sorrows, 
are very rare. What can be said of those who actually aspire 
to realize freedom based on this great knowledge--they are 
rarer still. 

106 (E267-269) The entire corpus of Jaina literature 


660 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


has been addressed as Mother Jinavani, who is capable of 
giving the wealth of permanent emancipation and help in 
overcoming the ocean of worldliness. The knower of this 
literature is truly knowledgeable and already on the way to 
emancipation. 

107 (E269-271) This body is surely perishable; all 
wealth will sooner or later go; women are not always pleasing 
or well-behaved; and sons and relatives show respect only 
when it suits them. In this huge and deep ocean of sorrowful 
worldliness there is no other (permanently) pleasing refuge 
than freedom (moksa). 

108 (E271-273) Time snatches away all kinds of wealth 
and possessions, whether it be from humans, infernal beings 
or celestials. 

109 (E273-274) Youthful attractions and life and 
acquisitions are ephemeral, like the drop of water on the leaf 
of a lotus. Nothing is stable. 

110 (E275) For the Lord of Death who ultimately 
destroys even the lords of the celestials, it is no effort to 
destroy the pride of men. 

111 (E276-277) Nothing really gives happiness. 
Separation comes with love of friends, old age with youth, and 
problems with money. 

112 (E278-279) When the time of death arrives no one 
can save anyone. Emperors having so many ministers, soldiers 
and priests, and even those who have realized the highest 
states and who are revered by the celestials, are not spared at 
the time of death. What of ordinary humans! No one can 
escape death. 

113 (E279-280) No one can save one from death as the 
very food that nourishes becomes like poison and takes life. 
There are some animal types in which the mother herself eats 
her young. Who can then save one? 

114 (E281-283) These worldly men get so enamored 
with their son, wife and their own bodies that they get blindly 
attached and commit various sinful acts that lead to many 


SAMAYIKAPATHA 661 


kinds of hellish states. They go to these helis alone and suffer. 

115 (E283-284) When this body that has been carefully 
fed, clad, and housed, does not go with one at the time of 
death, what else can go? 

116 (E284-285) The sense pleasures overcome the 
resistance of powerful celestial beings (Vidyadharas and 
Nagakumaras): what can humans do against them? A lion 
which overcomes the pride of powerful elephants will not 
spare the lowly deer. 

117 (E285-286) Death is coming nearer, life is ebbing, 
youth is going further away, old age is increasing; still the 
human, entrapped by the ghosts of attachments, does not 
endeavor to love or benefit his (own true) self. 

118 (E287-288) Everybody can see this world burning 
in the sorrows of birth, death and old age; even then those 
attached to sense pleasures do not put their minds to the right 
path! 

119 (E288-289) Even the householder who knows has 
right awareness, indulges sometimes in right, sometimes in 
wrong and sometimes in both: then how can staying as a 
family man cleanse his sins? So he must stay with pure- 
hearted mendicants on the path and with mind, body and 
word leave his householder status. 

120 (E291-292) In order to achieve permanent 
happiness, those clever men who keep their sense organs 
under control are afraid of repeated birth and death and do 
not covet worldly wanderings: they must meditate upon the 
eternal self that is eternally all-knowing, all-seeing, bereft of 
the fault of birth, death, age or sorrow, and has realized its 
true nature. 

121 (E294) In this way, by these one hundred and 
twenty verses, the one who contemplates on the true nature 
of the essential self soon finds the freedom dear to Amitagati 
Acarya, well within reach. 


ENDNOTES 


1 The following is based on J. Soni, "A note on the Jaina — 
tattva/padartha" in Vasantagauravam. Essays in Jainism 
Felicitating Professor M. D. Vasantha Raj of Mysore on the 
Occasion of his Seventy-fifth Birthday (Mumbai: Vakils, Feffer 
and Simons, 2001), pp. 135-140. 

2 For the use of tattva in a compound (like tattvajfidna, 
tattvabhdava) with particular reference to the Nyadya school see 
Walter Slaje, "Uber Wahrheit (skt. tat-tva)" in Berliner 
Indologische Studien 11-12 (1998), pp. 239-258. The very 
helpful footnotes supply most of the relevant literature on the 
subject. The various translations of the term tattva in a 
compound would also apply to Umasvati's Tattvarthasitra I. 2: 
tattvartha-sraddhanam samyag-darsanam, in contrast to its use 
two siitras further in the enumeration of the categories. An 
analysis for Jainism similar to Slaje's for Nyaya has to be a 
separate study. 

3 It is significant to note that the categories enumerated in the 
Samayasara are referred to as bhitartha and in his commentary 
called Atmakhyati Amrtacandra uses the term nava-tattva to 
refer to them. 

4 S.A. Jain, Reality. English Translation of Shri Piijyapada's 
Sarvarthasiddhi (Madras: Jwalamalini Trust, 1992), p. 7. 

5. The points made in this section are based on J. Soni, "Basic 
Jaina epistemology", Philosophy East and West 50, 2000, pp. 
367-377. 

6 Jaina monasteries were and are the centers of learning and 
from early times copying of manuscripts of all disciplines is seen 
as an act which brings religious merit. Hence, the Jaina libraries 
still contain a wealth of material that only gradually is coming 
to light, with obvious implications for the whole of Indian 
philosophy. 

7 Fora detailed description, also concerning the different kind 
of assemblies which decide the outcome of the debate, see S. 
Dasgupta, A History of Indian Philosophy, Volume II (Cambridge 


664 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


University Press, 1952), pp. 378-388, and E. Frauwaliner in 
Erich Frauwallner: Nachgelassene Werke I: Aufsdtze, Beitrdge, 
Skizzen (Wien: Osterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 
1994), p. 66. Useful in this context is also G. Oberhammer, "Ein 
Beitrag zu den Vada-Traditionen Indiens", Wiener Zeitschrift fiir 
die Kunde Siid- und Ostasiens 7, 1963, pp. 63-103. 

8 See also Frauwallner, ibid., pp. 69-70. 

9. In his footnote to this Frauwallner, ibid., p. 70 notes: "A 
recognition of what the opponent says is also the important 
pooint included here, when one says: 'You commit the same 
mistake’, since one acknowledges the justification of the 
rebuke." 

10 According to Erich Frauwallner it was Vrsagana (or 
Varsaganya, perhaps 300 CE) the renowned Samkhya teacher, 
who was the first to investigate epistemological questions at the 
beginning of his work, the Sastitantra (available only in 
fragments), and thereby began a tradition followed by others. 
See "Die Erkenntnislehre des klassischen Samkhya-Systems” in 
Frauwallner, ibid., pp. 223-278. See also D. Seyfort Ruegg, 
"Note on Varsaganya and his Yogadcdrabhumi", Indo-Iranian 
Journal 6, 1962-63, pp. 137-140, and G. Oberhammer, "The 
authorship of the Sastitantra", Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde 
Stid- und Ostasiens 4, 1960, pp. 71-91. 

11 The issue concerns the notion of dpta, one who can be 
regarded as an "authoritative person". Cf. J. Soni, "The notion 
of apta in Jaina philosophy", The 1995 Roop Lal Jain Annuai 
Lecture, Toronto, 25 November 1995 (Toronto: The 
Universityof Toronto Centre for South Asia Studies 1996). 

12 I am using the 1940 edition: Pariksémukham by 
Manikyanandi (with Prameya-ratnamala by Anantavirya), 
edited with translation, introduction, notes and an original 
commentary in English by Sarat Chandra Ghoshal (Lucknow: 
The Central Jaina Publishing House). The text is also embodied 
in the two main commentaries on the work: (1) the Prameya- 
kamala-martanda by Prabhacandra (Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar 
Press), ed. with introduction, indexes, etc., by Pt. Mahendra 


ENDNOTES 665 


Kumar Shastri, (Second Edition 1941), and (2) the 
Pariksamukha-laghuvrtti (also called Pariksimukha-pafijika and 
Prameya-ratna-mdld) by Anantavirya (eleventh century), ed. 
Satis Chandra Vidyabhusana (Calcutta: Asiatic Society of 
Bengal, 1909). To this second commentary there is a 
commentary called Prameya-ratndlankdra ‘by Abhinava 
Carukirti Pandacarya, ed. Panditaratnam A. Shantiraja Sastri 
(Mysore: Oriental Research Institute, 1948). 

13 The point of direct knowledge taking place through the soul 
can be compared, e.g., with the function of cic-chaxti in Saiva 
Siddhanta. For the similarities and differences see the dpta 
article in fn. 11 above, pp. 9-13. 

14 The translations are taken from Pravacanasdra 
(Pavanasara), ed. with commentaries and English translation of 
the text alone by A. N. Upadhye (Anand (Gujarat): Shrimad 
Rajachandra Ashrama), Fourth Edition, 1984. 

15 The reference here is to a fundamental issue in Jaina 
philosophy concerning substance, quality and mode. For the 
philosophical context of this far-reaching problem see J. Soni, 
"Dravya, guna and parydaya in Jaina thought", Journal of Indian 
Philosophy 19, 1991, pp. 75-88. 

16 Umasvati says that knowledge can also be obtained through 
other means: by description, ownership, cause, resting place (or 
substratum) and division (Tattvarthasiitra 1. 7); by existence, 
number, place of abode, etc. (I. 8). These lists only broaden the 
scope of epistemology. I have chosen to deal only with those 
aspects that are clearly comparable with epistemology in other 
schools. 

17 The translations are from the 1940 edition cited in fn. 12 
above. 

18 The first classification is contained in his Pravacanapravesa 
(a work that forms part of a trilogy called Laghiyastraya; the 
other two contained in it are Pramdnapravesa and 
Nayapravesa). The second classification is contained in his 
Nyayaviniscaya. All these works have been published in a single 
volume called Akalamka-grantha-trayam, ed. Mahendra Kumar 


666 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Sastri (Ahmadabad-Kalkata: Singhi Jaina Granthamala 12, 
1931). The reference to these classifications is taken from K. K. 
Dixit, Jaina Ontology (Ahmedabad: L. D. Institute of Indology, 
1971), p. 146. See J. Soni, "Epistemological categories in the 
Akalankagranthatrayam”, in Dimitrov et al., eds., 
Sikhisamuccayah. Indian and Tibetan Studies (Wien: Arbeitkreis 
fiir Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien, Universitat Wien 
2002), pp. 185-192. 

19 For this point and a survey of the issues in Jaina philosophy 
as a whole, see J. Soni, “Jaina philosophy", Routledge 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (ed. Edward Craig) (New 
York/London 1998). 

20 For this section see also J. Soni, ""Kundakunda and Umasviti 
on anekantavada", a paper presented at the international 
seminar "Aspects of Jainism", Warsaw, 8-9 September 2000 and 
published in Essays in Jaina Philosophy and Religion (Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass 2003). 

21 For both texts I am supplying the Prakrit texts, with the 
Sanskrit translation (in brackets) from the commentary by 
Amrtacandra (tenth century), with Upadhye's English 
translation. 

22 A. N. Upadhye's Introduction to Kundakunda's 
Pravacanasara, 1984 edition, Op. cit., p. 83. 

23 Tatia's translation: "The ungrasped (unnoticed) aspect of an 
object is attested by the grasped (noticed) one", Tattvartha 
Sutra. That Which Is, with the combined commentaries of 
Umasvati/Umasvamin, Pijyapada and Siddhasenagani, 
translated with an introduction by Nathmal Tatia (United 
Kingdom, etc.: Harber Collins 1994), p. 136. 

24 See. B. Bhatta, "Vyavahdra-naya and niscaya-naya in 
Kundakunda's works", Zeitschrift fir die Deutsche 
Morgenlandes Gesellschaft Supplement II (1974), pp. 279-291. 
25 He wrote the Jainendra Vydkarana, ed. Sambhunatha 
Tripathi and Mahadeva Caturvedi and published by Bharatiya 
Jnanapitha Kasi (1956). (On p. 32 Nathuramji Premi comes to 
the conclusion that "Samantabhadra and Devanandi belong to 


ENDNOTES 667 


the sixth century and were contemporaries.”) 

26 For the Sanskrit text see: Sarvarthasiddhi (Delhi: Bharatiya 
Jnanapitha Prakasana, Fifth edition, 1991). In some cases I am. 
supplying the Sanskrit words in brackets from the Sanskrit 
original. All references to Piijyapada are from S. A. Jain's 
translation of UmAasvati's siitras, which he supplies. 

27 This refers to the previous siitra, TS I. 5: nama-sthapana- 
dravya-bhavatas tan nyasah "These (categories) jiva, etc., (given 
in TS 1. 4) are installed (in four ways) by name, representation, 
substance (potentiality, and actual state." Nydsa is a synonym 
for niksepa, which is a typical Jaina way of presenting a topic of 
discussion. Bhdva is a synonym for parydya which refers to the 
object as it is at a particular moment, i.e., the mode or 
modification (parydya) taken on by a particular substance 
(dravya). 

28 For the different traditions on the types of nayas see Pt. 
Sukhlalji's Commentary on Tattvartha Sutra of Vacaka Um4svati, 
translated by K. K. Dixit (L. D. Series 44: Ahmedabad 1974), p. 
56. 

29 I am consulting the following two editions from the same 
publisher: Sabhdsya-tattvarthadhigama-sitram, Rayacandra 
Jaina Sastramala, published in Sriviranirvansamvat 2432, and 
the one published in sriviranirvansamvat 2858 (A.D. 1932). 
30 Pt. Sukhlalji's Commentary..., op. cit., pp. 211-212. 

31 It is interesting to note that Pijyapada says the following 
about pramana at TS 1. 6 (tr. Jain, p. 10): "Pramana is of two 
kinds, namely for oneself (svartha) and for others (parartha). 
All kinds of knowledge except scriptural constitute pramadna for 
oneself. But scriptural knowledge is of two kinds, namely for 
oneself and for others." Moreover, Umasvati does not mention 
dravyarthika-naya and paryaydarthika-naya, as Pujyapada does. 
32 Several ideas expressed here are based on section 3, 
"Ethics", in J. Soni, "Jaina philosophy", Routledge Encyclopedia, 
op. cit., with thanks for the permission to use them here. 

33 Styogada Il. 1. 48-49. See also Mahavira's Words by Walther 
Schubring, translated from the German with much added 


668 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


material by W. Bollée and J. Soni (Ahmedabad: L. D. Institute, 
submitted for printing 2003), pp. 47-48. The German title is 
Worte Mahdaviras. Kritische Ubersetzung aus dem Kanon der 
Jaina (Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1926). 

34 Styagoda Il. 2. 4. Ibid., pp. 51-52. 

35 For the lay rules see Paul Dundas, The Jains (London: 
Routledge 2002, Second Edition) Chapter Seven, especially pp. 
189-192. 

36 For an excellent treatment of this see Colette Caillat, 
Atonement in the Ancient Ritual of the Jaina Monks 
(Ahmedabad: L. D. Institute, 1975). 

37 For the gunasthanas see, e.g., the list in Padmanabh S. 
Jaini, The Jaina Path of Purification (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass 
1979), pp. 272-273. 

38. Dundas, op. cit., pp. 19, 24-25. 

39. Dundas, op. cit., pp. 28-38. 

40 Dundas, op. cit., pp. 41-44. 

41 For a thorough account concerning the evidence of 
Jainism's spread throughout northern India and eventually 
throughout the subcontinent see Asim Kumar Chatterjee, A 
Comprehensive History of Jainism. Volume I: From the Earliest 
Beginnings to AD 1000 (Second revised edition, New Delhi 
2000). 

42 Asok Kumar Chatterjee, ibid., p. 87. 

43 Dundas, op. cit., pp. 45-46. 

44 Dundas, op. cit., pp. 48-49. 

45 The list is based on, and partly quoted from, Dundas, op. 
Cit., pp. 73-76. 

46 Johannes Bronkhorst, "On the chronology of the Tattvartha 
Siitra and some early commentaries", Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die 
Stid- und Ostasiens 29, 1985, pp. 155-184. 

47 A quite full discussion of all the points just raised, but 
coming to different conclusions from ours on several of them, 
can be found in N. L. Jain’s Introduction to Biology in Jaina 
Treatise on Reals (Chennai 1999), which contains a translation 
of Chapter Two of Akalanka's Tattvarthasiitra-Rajavarttika. 


ENDNOTES 669 


48 Cf. J. L. Jaini's translation, with the text, Sacred Books of 
the Jains 2, 1989 (first published 1920), pp. 204-210. 

49  Umasvati's Tattvarthasitra with Bhaskaranandin's 
Sukhabodha, edited by A. Shantiraja Sastri, University of 
Mysore Oriental Library Publications, Sanskrit Series 84, 
Mysore 1944, pp. 235-246. 

50 Bhatta Akalanka, Siddhiviniscaya, edited with Anantavirya's 
Tika by Mahendra Kumar Jain.. Two volumes. Jnanapitha 
Murtidevi Granthamala 22-23, 1959, p. 32. 

51 For an analysis of the development of the concept of 
upayoga cf. W. J. Johnson, Harmless Souls. Karmic Bondage and 
Religious Change in Early Jainism with Special Reference to 
Umasvati and Kundakunda (Delhi 1995), pp. 97-123. 

52 This Chapter has been edited and translated, with extensive 
comments, by G. R. Jain, Cosmology Old and New, Jnanapitha 
Murtidevi Granthamala, English Series 5 (New Delhi 1975). 
53 The Digambaras read this line to justify the inclusion of 
time among the substances. 

54 Cf. W. J. Johnson, Harmless Souls, op. cit., pp. 149-151 for 
discussion. 

55 For the entire list cf. K. K. Dixit's translation, op. cit., pp. 
308-312. 

56 See Yajneshwar S. Shastri's Introduction to E, pp. 4-5. 

57 Equals a certain number of miles--accounts vary as to 
precisely how many miles. 

58 For such a review cf. A. N. Upadhye's Introduction to his 
edition and translation of Kundakunda's Pravacanasara, op. cit., 
pp. 1-23, and more recently W. J. Johnson, Harmless Souls, op. 
cit., pp. 91-97. 

59 Johnson, ibid. 

60 Agas 1964. | 

61 Jnanapitha Murtidevi Granthamala, English Series 4 (New 
Delhi 1975). 

62 9-16 are analyzed in W. J. Johnson, op. cit., pp. 117-120. 
63 Translation by W. J. Johnson, op. cit., p. 120, with analysis. 
64 Cf. W. J. Johnson, op. cit., pp. 114-116 for analysis of 63- 


670 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


64. 

65 77-102 are analyzed, and some passages translated, in W. 
J. Johnson, op. cit., pp. 124-149. 

66 On this section cf. W. J. Johnson, op. cit., pp. 205-210. 
67 Cf. W. J. Johnson, op. cit., pp. 217-222 for discussion of 3- 


5. 

68 Cf. W. J. Johnson, op. cit., pp. 156-168 on himsa in the 
present work, and pp. 168-184 for further discussion of himsd, 
moha and upadhi. 

69 In the Introduction to his edition of the Pravacanasara, op. 
cit., p. 24, note 1. 

70 Jagdish Prasad Jain "Sadhak" in his Introduction to Spiritual 
Insights: Ishtopadesh and Samadhi Shatak by Acharya Pujyapada 
Svami (New Delhi 2000), p. 1. 

71 The parenthetical explanation is drawn from T, p. 71, notes 
1-2. 

72 EandT do not exactly correspond; the first few sentences 
of T have not Sanskrit equivalent in E. 

73 The translations of the names of the fourteen stages of 
progress is that provided by S. A. Jain in T. 

74 Selected from C. Krause, Vikrama Volume (Ujjain 1948), pp. 
234-236. 

75 Mahendra Kumar Jain in the Introduction to his edition of 
Akalanka's Siddhiviniscaya, op. cit., p. 35. 

76 Ibid., p. 35. 

77 Ibid., p. 36. 

78 Dvddagaram Nayacakram of Acadrya Sri Mallavadi 
Ksamasramana with the commentary Nyayagamdnusédrini of Sri 
Simhasuri Gani Vadi Ksamasramana. Part I (1-4 Aras). Edited 
with critical notes by Muni Jambuvijayaji. Sri Atmananda Jain 
Granthamala Series No. 92 (Bhavnagar 1966), pp. 5-6. 

79 Mr. R. S. Betai provided us with a summary of this work, 

for which we are very grateful. It being a good deal briefer than 
Upadhye's, the editor has decided to include the longer, printed 
summary for this Volume. It may also be noted that in a recent 
publication (New Delhi 2000), Upadhye's summary has been 


ENDNOTES 671 


republished along with the text and a translation by Rikhab 
Dass Jain. 

80 Cf. A. N. Upadhye's Introduction to his edition of 
Yogindudeva's Paramatmaprakdasa and Yogasara, Rajachandra 
Jaina Sastramala 3, Agas 1973, pp. 64 and 70. 

81 He adds: "Pandit Sastri points out that B. Kamta Prasad has 
taken the date as Saka 700 but it is clear from the Sanskrit verse 
that vikram samvat is referred to herein." 

82 Nagin J. Shah, Akalanka's Criticism of Dharmakirti's 
Philosophy" A Study. Lalbhai Dalpatbhai Series No. 11 
(Ahmedabad 1967), p. 38. 

83 Ibid., p. 39. 

84 M. K. Jain's edition of Siddhiviniscaya, op. cit., pp. 55-62. 

85 M. K. Jain's edition of Siddhiviniscaya, op. cit., pp. 64-65. 

86 Nagin Shah, op. cit., p. 38. 

87 Mahendra Kumar, Siddhivniscaya, op. cit., p. 66. 

88 Ibid., p.66 

89 Ibid., p. 32. 

90 Descriptive Catalogue of the Government Collection of 
Manuscripts deposited in the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute, Poona 4, Vol. XVII, part 1, ed. H. R. Bhandarkar 1935, 
pp. 9-10. 

91 See Pafcasutrakam of Cirantanacarya, critically edited by 
Muni Sri Jambuvijaya (Delhi 1986), p. 33. 

92 Prof. Dixit's summary ends here. We provide a summary 
based on the translation of the remainder. 

93  Malvania's Introduction to Punyavijaya's edition of 
Haribhadra's Yogasataka with autocommentary and of the 
Brahmasiddhantasamuccaya, Lalbhai Dalpatbhai Series 4, 
Ahmedabad 1965, p. 6. 

94 Ibid. 

95 M.A. Dhaky, "The date and authorship of Nyayavatara’, 
Nirgrantha Volume I (Ahmedabad 1995), p. 45. 

96 Quoted M. K. Jain, Siddhiviniscaya, p. 49. 

97 Amrtacandrasuri's Laghutattvasphota, ed. tr. by Pamanabh 
S. Jaini. L. D. Series 62, Ahmedabad 1978, p. 28. 


672 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


98 A. N. Upadhye's edition of Pravacanasara, op. cit., pp. 93- 
94. 

99 Ibid., p. 93. 

100 Ibid., p. 95. 

101 Amrtacandrasiri's Laghutattvasphota, op. cit., p. 29. 

102 It should be mentioned that the term pasu comes to be 
used even more frequently in another of Amrtacandra's works, 
the Samayasarakaldasa. Its occurrences there are all in the 
chapter dealing with syadvdda, where the ‘false’ doctrines of the 
pagu are contrasted with the Jaina position, which is 
characterized by the tenets of syddvdda. A comparison of these 
passages confirms the identity of authorship of these two works. 
(Jaini) 

103 Nagin J. Shah, Samantabhadra's Aptamimamsé, op. cit., p. 
32. 

104 On sutra 175-181, quoted on p. 8. 

105 Sambandhavarttika 182, quoted in E, p. 8. 

106 Sambandhavarttika 182, quoted on p. 9. 

107 Quoting Astasahasrt. 

108 For analysis of one or two other passages from this 
voluminous work cf. e.g. Nathmal Tatia, Studies in Jaina 
Philosophy (Banaras 1951), passages cited in the footnote under 
"Vidyanandi". 

109 The article is essentially identical with Mr. Jain's General 
Editorial preface to A. N. Upadhye's edition of the Jivakanda of 
the Gomatasara (New Delhi 1978), pp. 5-12. 

110 Taken largely verbatim from the comments in E, p. 290. 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


The following Index attempts to provide a guide to references 
to names, titles and topics. It also indicates which Sanskrit 
words are likely to be translated by which English expressions, 
and vice versa. Page references in bold face indicate the 
primary citation of the work. 


abadhana, see time-lag 

abandonment (hani) - 64, 70, 89-90, 124, 131, 232, 248-250, 
256, 262, 316, 322, 348, 350, 384, 411, 421, 426, 497, 
509, 511, 524, 544, 546, 590, 649-650, 652-654, 656, 
658-661 
of the thesis - 13 

abhasa, see fallacy 

abhava, see absence; noncognition as an instrument of 
knowledge 

Abhayadeva Siri (1060) - 462 

Abhayanandin (940) - 606 

abheda, see (difference-)/nondifference 

Abhidharma Buddhism - 479 

abhimana, see arrogance 

Abhinava Carukirti Pandacarya (1845) - 16, 665 

abhranta, see nonerroneous 

abhyupagama, see association 

abiding, see persistence 

ability or capacity (prabhava, upakarana)/inability - 51, 60, 
65, 76, 87, 111, 117, 147, 152, 155, 163-164, 190-191, 
238, 240, 302-303, 326, 339-340, 358, 375-376, 380, 388, 
391, 394, 406, 412, 526, 535, 569, 611, 619 

ablative case, s.v. 

abode, see home; locus 

abrahma, see incontinence 

absence (abhdava, asattva, nastitva) - 69, 71, 142, 187, 198, 
206, 209, 270, 298, 341, 406, 436, 453, 477-478, 520, 
536, 538, 580, 582 
, absolute (atyanta-) - 178, 466, 478 


674 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


as instrument of knowledge - 477 
, Mutual (anyonya-), see difference 
, posterior (dhvamsa-) - 142, 466, 506 
, prior (prag-) - 142, 466, 506, 549 

absolute or absolutist view, see view, one-sided 

absorption, see assimilation 

abstinence, see also restraint 
from injury, see nonviolence 
from sin (virati) - 189, 413, 415-416 

abstract/concrete - 7, 21, 101, 105, 248, 337-338, 353, 364, 
374-375, 379, 381-382, 384, 390, 392-393, 396-397, 401- 
402, 406-407, 413, 455, 575-576 

absurd(ity) - 269, 287, 294, 296, 439, 551-552, 564-565, 584 
reduction to, S.v. 

acala, see stability 

Gcarana, see conduct 

Acarangasiitra - 38 

' G@carya, see teacher 

accessory cause, S.v. 

accident, see calamity 

accumulation (of karma), see karmic product 

accusation, false - 59, 85 

accusative case, S.v. 

acquisition (4gama, ahdraka, esand) - 31, 36, 52, 60, 62-64, 
83, 90-92, 109, 114, 129-135, 137, 153, 165-166, 189, 
212-214, 216, 223, 227, 230, 233, 238, 245, 265, 274, 
278, 284, 286, 309, 316, 324, 328, 331-332, 340, 348, 
351, 361, 367, 386, 392, 399, 430, 441-443, 458, 470, 
485, 497, 502, 523, 525, 539, 593, 611, 613, 616, 620, 
626, 641, 643, 650, 652, 654-655, 658, 660-661 

acquisitiveness, see desire 

act, action (karma, kriya) - 12, 31-32, 36, 54, 57-60, 62-63, 
79, 81, 83, 86-87, 91-92, 96, 104-105, 109-110, 114, 117, 
121, 125-126, 137, 139, 143-144, 163, 165, 172, 179-180, 
186, 188, 194, 200-201, 207, 219, 223, 225, 229, 243- 
244, 252, 254, 259, 268, 276, 292, 300, 308-310, 312, 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 675 


314, 324, 328, 358-359, 363-364, 368, 384, 392-393, 395, 

404, 417, 427, 429, 433, 436, 441, 443-444, 451, 458, 

461, 464, 478, 485, 487, 493, 495-496, 504, 511, 515, 

521, 526, 544, 546, 557, 576, 578, 590, 594, 597-598, 

603, 617, 638-640, 643, 645, 648, 650-652, 654, 660, 663 

and knowledge, path of, s.v. 

awareness-ascribing - 282, 495 

, bad or wrong - 47, 59, 83-84, 86, 92, 113 118, 123-124, 
141, 145, 170, 269, 421, 430, 493, 510, 586, 593, 
643, 646, 649-650, 655, 661 

, bodily, see activity, bodily or physical 

cognitive, see awareness 

-free - 118 

good or right - 47, 100, 124, 129, 141, 145, 170, 269, 
351, 450-451, 493, 586, 593, 643, 646, 657 

, heedless - 108 

, linguistic , see activity, linguistic 

, mental, see activity, mental 

-organ (-indriya) - 165, 185, 549, 589 

, passionless - 64 

, path of, s.v. 

, preparation for or to - 58 

, prescribed or ritual (prasiddha-) - 31, 40 

, regular - 84, 594 

, religious - 84, 433 

, results of, see maturation, karmic 

, sexual, s.v. 

, sinful, see act(ion), bad; sin 

substance-related fallacious, see helper, karmic 

., the word - 

activity, personal or practical (vrtti, yoga) - 4, 6, 11, 52, 58, 

62-63, 67, 70, 78, 82, 87, 91, 104-105, 108-109, 114-115, 

123, 134, 139, 151-152, 165, 168, 170-171, 174, 180, 

183, 191, 207, 212, 214-215, 222, 250, 257-258, 263, 

276, 307-309, 311, 315, 320, 333, 346-347, 358-359, 370, 

372, 377-378, 386, 390-391, 394, 396-397, 402-404, 407, 


676 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


417-418, 423, 426-427, 442, 454-455, 457, 460-461, 463- 
464, 467, 485, 502, 506-507, 511, 521, 526-527, 532, 
584, 593, 596, 599, 609, 623, 626, 637, 648, 650-651, 
653-656 
, bodily or physical - 63, 67-68, 70, 82-83, 88, 114, 123, 
217, 330, 259, 309, 378, 380, 419, 430, 458, 494, 
529, 613, 616, 649 
, cessation of or freedom from - 70, 218, 308, 378 
, linguistic - 63, 67-68, 70 82-83, 88, 123, 217-220, 222, 
289, 309, 419, 430, 458, 494, 529, 613, 616, 619 
, Mental - 58, 63, 67-68, 70, 82-83, 86, 88, 114, 123, 166, 
179, 216-220, 222, 227, 238, 241, 274, 309, 312, 
320, 361-362, 419, 430, 458, 493-494, 515, 529, 531, 
560, 567, 613-614, 616, 649 
, karmic, see karma 
of a substance, transformational, see transformation 
, religious or spiritual, s.v. 
, sinful, see sin 
(vartana), see persistence 
, visual or perceptual, see perception 
actual, see real\ 
entity, s.v. 
actuality (astitva), see existence 
adamantine, see hard 
adana, see acceptance 
addiction, see habit 
adept, see self, liberated 
adhdara, see substratum 
adharma, see demerit; stasis, initiator of 
adhesion, see trace 
adhigama, see apprehension; study 
adhikarana, see location 
adhydsa, see superimposition 
Adhyatmasandoha (Yogindudeva) - 260 
adhyavasdya, see discerning, reflective 
adhyaya, see chapter 


GLOSSARY-INDEX . 677 


adi, see beginning 
adjective - 312, 550 
adrsta, see unseen 
adulation, see praise 
advaita, see nondual(ity) 
Advaita Vedanta, s.v. 
advantageous(/non-), see good/(bad) 
advocate, devil's - 518 
affection, see love 
affirmation (apavada; niyama; utsarga; vidhi) - 189-190, 203- 
205, 207, 269, 537, 572 
affliction, see disease 
affluence, see rich(es) 
aftercognition (anuvyavasaya) - 286 
agama, see revelation; scripture; testimony, verbal 
age (see also era) - 81, 136, 189, 235, 350, 358, 367-368, 
396, 399, 430, 469, 613, 630, 644 
-determining karma, see karma, age-determining 
, old Gara) - 132, 243-244, 255, 258, 431, 470, 643, 646, 
659-661 
agent (kartr) - 23, 104, 106-107, 113-115, 118-119, 121, 143, 
145, 182, 185, 206, 208, 219, 326-327, 332, 345-346, 
352, 354, 395, 439, 447, 459, 482, 485-486, 491-493, 
496-497, 500, 511, 514, 520, 556, 583, 634 
, non- - 118, 185, 496 
agglutination, see combination 
aggregate (samudaya, skandha) - 75, 80-81, 187, 199, 304, 
307, 338, 347, 351, 360-362, 364, 381-382, 387, 395, 
412, 435, 497-498, 600 
, Karmic, see karmic product 
of atoms, s.v. 
phosphorescent, see fiery 
, material (ritpa) - 205, 280, 287, 349-350, 358, 361-363, 
372-373, 376, 381-382, 387, 389, 391, 393, 396, 399, 
401, 408-409, 413, 436, 522 
-s, stream of, see stream 


678 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


aging, see age, old 
agitation - 379, 510 
, mental - 68 
, Spiritual (samvega) - 71 
agnostic (ajfidnika) - 204, 416 
agony, see suffering 
agrabhaga, see regions, worldly, sections of 
agriculture - 652 
ahamkara, see ego(-maker) 
(in Samkhya) - 185, 548, 588 
ahara, see assimilation 
ahetu, see fallacy 
ahimsd, see nonviolence 
ahoratra, see day and night 
‘aid, medical - 306 
aim of life or of man (purusartha) - 32, 130, 135, 138, 180, 
200, 306, 348 
air (vata, vayu) (see also wind) - 30, 51, 53, 77, 122, 132, 
157, 165, 219, 221, 338, 350, 358-359, 364, 368, 371, 
373, 375-376, 381, 387, 396, 409, 436, 463, 497, 593, 
609, 612, 616, 635 
-y body, s.v. 
Airavata - 78 
Aisana - 464 
ailtihya, see tradition 
Ajitasena (940) - 605 
ajtva, see not-self 
Ajivika - 35 
ajnana, see ignorance 
ajriadnika, see agnostic 
akalamarana/mrtyu, see death, premature 
Akalamkacaritra - 265 
Akalanka (770) - 21, 30, 266-422, 533, 549 
Akalavarsa - 469 
akamksd, see longing 
akara, see aspect 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 679 


akdsa, see space; sky 

akhanda, see partless 

akificanya, see nonownership 

akuSala, see bad 

alambana, see glory; image; object, supporting 

alatacakra, see circle of fire 

alaya, see home; locus 

Alberuni - 177 

alcohol - 354-355, 370, 396, 485 

all-encompassing, see ubiquity 

alms - 37, 40, 88-89, 419, 457, 460, 645, 654 
, going for, see begging 

alocana, see reflection 

aloneness - 64 

alpabahutva, see strength, relative numerical 

aluficana, see eradication 

always (sarvathd), the word - 526 

amanas(ka), see mindless 

Ambara - 257 

ambrosia (amrta) - 141, 645-646, 659 

Amitagati I (950) - 601-602 

Amitagati IT (1010) - 641-661 

Amoghavarsa (850) - 469 

amrta, see ambrosia 

Amrtacandra Stiri (925) - 7, 483-521, 662 

amurta, see (material-)immaterial 

anadi(tva), see beginningless(ness) 

anagara, see homeless 

anaikantika fallacy, see inconclusive reason 

analogy (see also similarity) - 119, 268, 301, 328, 445-446, 
534, 547 

Anala - 426 

ananda, see bliss 

ananta, see endless; infinite 

Anantakirti I (950) - 600-601 

Anantavirya (980) - 604 


680 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


-andtman, see not-self 

anavasthd, see regress, infinite 

Aficalagacchapattavali- 425 

anda, see egg 

anekanta, see multiple 
, the word - 25, 27-29, 199 
-vdda, seee aspects, many-sided view of 

Anekdntajayapataka (Haribhadra Suri) - 422-423 
Uddyotadipika - 422-423 

Anekantapraghatta (Haribhadra Siri) - 423 

Anekadnta(vada)pravesa (Haribhadra Suri) - 424 
Tippanaka - 424 

Anekantasiddhi (Haribhadra Suri) - 423, 424 

anga, see essential; limb 

anger (krodha) - 62, 67, 83, 113-116, 133, 173, 178, 214, 
219, 240, 258, 325, 344, 350, 352, 471, 546, 614, 616, 
625, 637, 642, 646, 648, 650, 652-653, 659 

angula, see finger 

animal (tiryak) - 20, 30-31, 49, 54-55, 62-63, 73, 76, 83, 98, 
121, 131, 134, 137, 160, 162, 172-173, 213, 219, 312, 
340-342, 344, 347, 352, 358, 364, 366, 369, 416, 493- 
494, 508, 522, 534, 538, 611, 613, 622, 644-646, 655, 
659, 661 

animosity, see hatred 

anirvacaniya, see indeterminable 

annihilation, see destruction 
-cum-subsidence, see subsidence-cum-annihilation 

annihilator, see destroyer 

anointing, see consecration 

anrta, see lying 

ant - 51, 255 

antahkarana, see internal organ 

Antahkrddasangasiitra - 39 

antar, see (external/)internal 
-atman, see self, internal 
-muhurta, s.v. 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 681 


-vydpti, see pervasion, internal 
antardya, see hindrance 
anticipation (cinta) - 273 
antidote (pratipaksa) - 429 
anu, see atom 
anubhdga, see maturation, intensity of © 
anubhava, see experience 
anubhiiti, see experience 
anukampa, see compassion; friend 
anumana, see inference 
anupalabdhi, see nonperception 
Anupapatikasitra - 39 
anupapatti, see impossibility 
anupreksa, see reflection 
anusthana, see failure to act 
anustubh meter - 264, 483, 513 
An(uttara)upapattikadasangasitra - 38 
anuvartaniya, see life-span karmically required 
anuvrata, see vow, lesser 
anuyoga, see exposition; question 
Anuyogadvarasitra - 40, 225-226, 228 
Laghuvrtti or Sisyahita (Haribhadra Siri) - 425 
anvaya, see positive 
-vydpti, see pervasion, positive 
anxiety (cintd) - 258, 644 
anya(tva}, see other(ness) 
anyonydabhava, see absence, mutual 
Apabhramfa - 239, 260 
apakarsana, see falling 
apakrsta, see fallen 
apdana, see breath, inhalation of 
aparatva, see sequence 
adpas, see water 
apatti, see becoming (=coming about) 
apauruseya(tva), see authorlessness; man, not found 
apavdda, see (affirmation/)restriction; negation 


682 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


apdya, see awareness, determinative 

" , the word - 336 

aphorism, see siitra 

apoha, see exclusion from the opposite 

appearance - 38, 198, 219, 236, 243, 258, 274, 365, 452, 482, 
497, 553, 560, 564, 573,577, 586-587 
, false, see mirage 

appendix (ciilaka) - 97, 506, 601 

appetite, see desire 

application (in an inference) (upanaya(na) - 13, 536 

application, cognitive (prayoga, upayoga) - 50-51, 58, 75, 96- 
99, 102, 105-117, 121, 164, 357, 359, 393, 397, 491, 507, 
513, 598, 607, 619-620, 625, 634, 638, 653 

apprehension (adhigama) - 160, 325, 328 
, mis-, see misconception 

appropriation (parigraha; upadana) - 55, 61, 79, 130, 611 

apramana, see authoritative, un- 

aprayatna, see heedless 

a prion - 9, 204, 565-566 

apta, see person, qualified 

Aptamimamsda (Samantabhadra) - 140-154, 159, 545 
Astasati (Akalanka) - 266-270 

Astasahasri (Vidyananda) - 546-554 

apurva, see new 

arati, see dislike 

archery - 237 

architecture - 4 

area - 4, 15, 21, 253, 324-325, 342-344, 348, 359-361, 365, 
370-371, 374, 376, 378-379, 382, 385, 393, 406-407, 421, 
430, 525, 566, 569, 615 

argument (vada) - 12, 40, 45, 176, 210, 238, 266, 292, 28, 
301, 303, 313, 322, 330, 334, 375, 385, 398, 411, 430, 
436, 443, 473, 478, 481, 506, 546, 555, 558,-559, 562, 
566, 568, 577, 579, 581, 586, 591, 596-597 
, members of the, see inference, member of an 
, way of losing an (nigrahasthana) - 13-14, 184, 285, 300, 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 683 


435 
argumentum ad hominem - 578 
Grhat, see perfected being 
arjava, see sincerity 
arm - 659 
-pit - 129 
army - 139, 531 
-chief - 79 
arpand, see status, chief 
arrays of space areas, see space-points, series of 
arrogance (abhimana) - 55, 79, 175-176, 250 
arrow - 361-362 
art - 4, 650 
arta, see frustrating 
, dhyana-, see concentration, frustration-producing 
artha, see aim of man; object; purpose; thing 
-antara, see missing the point 
-dpatti, see presumption 
-kriyd, see efficiency 
= the first aim of man - 135, 247 
artist - 119 
arya, see noble 
Arya meter - 437-438 
asadharanahetu, see reason, too-specific 
asadvada, see nihilism 
asahaya, see independence 
aSakti, see imperfection of the instrument 
asamhara, see expansion 
asammoha - 451 
asamkhyata, see (countable)/uncountable 
dsana, see posture, meditative 
asatavedaniya (act) - 59 
asatkaryavada - 205-206, 208-209 
asattva, see absence 
ascertainment (nirnaya; vyavasaya) - 13, 16, 24, 26, 28, 72- 
73, 185, 235-236, 272-273, 281, 329, 436, 534, 536 


684 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ascetic(ism) (muni; framana) - 3-5, 29-32, 33-35, 38, 40, 64, 
89, 99, 108, 124, 129-131, 133-138, 214, 245, 415, 421, 
423, 431-432, 434, 467, 469, 471-472, 509-511, 521, 530 
discipline, s.v. 

-s, order of, see order, monastic 

's residence, see home, an ascetic's 

, Tules for - 29-31, 40, 130, 432-433 
VOWS, S.V. 

ascription (niksepa) - 284, 324, 527 

ash(es) - 246, 252, 256, 382 

asiddha, see nonexistent; unliberated; unproved 
-tva, see nonliberation 

aspect (akdra) - 64, 72, 74, 80, 88, 97, 139, 136, 165, 196, 
198, 238, 262, 283, 291, 305, 311, 322, 334, 386, 411, 
465-466, 486, 506-507, 515-518, 542, 550, 554, 602, 610, 
622-623, 641, 666 
, negative (pratisedha) - 515-516 
, positive (vidhi) - 466, 517 
-s, many-sided view of (anekdntavdda) - 141-144, 153- 

156, 178-180, 182, 193, 200, 281, 268, 297, 302, 
319, 322-323, 334, 349, 390, 411, 471, 483, 502, 
514-515, 519, 526, 539, 548, 554, 666 

aspirant, see seeker 

dsrava, see inflow (of karma) 

ass, see donkey 

assemblage, assembly - 12, 182, 647, 662 
of atoms (samuddya) - 210, 628-629 
of monks - 181, 510 

assimilation (@hdra) - 166, 175, 362-363, 519, 620 

association (abhyupagama; yogapravrtti) - 7, 16, 243, 253, 
258, 280, 353, 374, 392, 449, 488, 556 

Astaprakarana (Haribhadra Siri) - 462 
Commentary (Jinesvara) - 462 

Astaprabhrta (Kundakunda) - 126-138 
Aptapariksd (Vidyananda) - 542-546 

Alamkrti (Vidyananda) - 542-546 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 685 


astikaya, see collection (categorical) 

dstikya, see religiosity 

astitva, see existence 

astrology - 40, 303, 366 

agubha, see bad 

asura, see demon 

Asuri - 185 

atindriya, see supersensible 

atiprasanga, see overextension 

atitakala, see time, past 

atman, see self 

AtmdnusSdsana (Jinasena and Gunabhadra) - 468-472 

Atmasiddhi (Haribhadra Siri) - 423 

atom (anu; paramanu) - 53, 56-57, 80-82, 97, 106, 112, 122, 
149, 167-169, 186, 199-200, 210, 221, 243, 280, 287, 
289, 338, 345-346, 363, 372-373, 375-376, 378-379, 381, 
384-385, 388-389, 393, 402, 407-411, 439, 441, 465-466, 
478, 488, 493, 495, 497-498, 504, 520, 540-541, 581-484, 
591, 596-597, 599-600, 612-613, 618, 620, 626-627, 629- 
632, 636, 651 
, causal (kdrana-) - 122 
, double (dvyanuka) - 200, 410 
, effect- (kdrya-) - 422 
-ic contact, s.v. 
-icity of space - 341 
of time, s.v. 
, primary - 105, 117 
-S, aggregate or assemblage of, see assemblage of atoms 
-S, contact of, see contact, atomic 

atonement (prayascitta) - 32, 40, 64, 90, 124, 320, 460, 468, 
668 

attachment (mircchd; raga) - 30, 58-61, 67-68, 89, 93, 97, 
102-103, 106-109, 116-118, 120, 131, 133, 139-141, 152, 
175, 178, 188-189, 212-213, 215, 218, 233, 240, 244, 
246, 249-258, 269, 308, 313, 317, 350, 352-353, 421, 
430, 432-433, 440, 446, 457, 469-471, 485-486, 494, 496, 


686 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


500-502, 509, 512, 519-520, 528-530, 547, 608, 638, 642, 


645, 647-648, 652, 656, 658, 661 
, illusive, see delusion 
, neglect of, s.v. 
, hon-, s.v. 
, renunciation of, s.v. 

attainment (prdapti) - 65, 125, 151, 178, 185, 233, 242-243, 
253, 260, 284, 312, 316, 351-352, 366, 393, 395, 420, 


437, 450, 452, 464, 523, 554, 562, 566, 573, 576, 607, 


619-620, 629-630, 632, 642, 644, 660 
, initial (labdhi) - 629 
of a desired end (siddhi) - 185 
, power- (-virya) -, see energy 
, Special (rddhi), see power, supernatural 
attention, attentiveness - 59, 65, 72, 84, 108, 110, 240 
attitude - 57, 60, 189, 253 
, good/bad - 86, 131, 250, 252, 259, 646, 653 
, inner or mental - 33, 83, 131-135 
, perverted, see perversion 
, right - 133-135, 654 
attraction, see attachment 
attribute (see mark; property; quality; universal property) 
atyanta, see infinite 
-abhava, see absence, absolute 
audarika, see body, physical 
audayika, see maturation, karmic 
audition, see hearing 
auditory organ, see ear 
austerity, see restraint 
authenticity, scriptural - 11, 222 
authoritative(ness) 
language, see testimony, verbal 
, scriptural, see testimony verbal 
, un- (apramana) - 161 
authorlessness (apauruseyatva) - 162, 285 
avacya, see indescribable 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 687 


avadhi, see awareness, extrasensory 

avagraha, see awareness, indistinct 

avaktavya, see inexpressible 

avali, see trail 

avarana, see obstruction 

avasthita, see unchangeable 

avasyaka, see independence; rite, required 

Avagyakaniruktisiitra - 37, 40, 225-227, 229 
Visesavasyakabhasya (Jinabhadra Gani) - 225-233 

Commentary (Kotyacarya) - 233 

40. Sisyahitai (Haribhadra Siri) - 425 
41. Brhadvrtti (Haribhadra Suri) - 425 

Avasyakasrutaskandha - 226-227 

avatar (avatara) - 543 

avaya, see awareness, determinative 

avayava, see chapter; inference, member of an; part 

avayavin, see whole 

aversion (dvesa) - 34, 58, 67-68, 93, 97, 101-103, 106-108, 
110, 112, 120, 213, 215, 233, 249-250, 253, 269, 313, 
457, 470-471, 487, 496, 504, 509, 528-530, 547, 589, 
638, 659 

avidya, see ignorance 

avinabhava, see pervasion 

avirati, see indiscipline 

avisamvada, see harmony 

avoidance, see abandonment 

avoided, what is to be (heya) - 564 

avrata, see vow, negator 

avyavadana, see gap 

avyavaharikanaya, see perspective, noncommonsensical 

awareness or cognition (see also knowledge) (buddhi; jfidna) 
- 15-19, 21, 30, 48-50, 59, 62, 68, 72-75, 93, 96, 100-101, 
105-106, 108, 112, 120-121, 124-126, 144, 148, 150-151, 
160-161, 163-164, 190-191, 194-197, 200, 216, 225-226, 
231, 235, 238, 272, 276, 278-279, 282-283, 286, 288, 
300, 305, 307, 311-317, 319, 322, 326-327, 329-335, 338- 


688 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


340, 342-346, 355-357, 360, 376, 388-389, 391, 395-397, 
404, 418, 445-446, 463, 473-476, 478, 480, 482, 491-492, 
497, 500, 503, 508, 510, 513-514, 520-523, 537, 541, 

548, 551, 558, -559, 562, 566, 569-572, 577-580, 584, 

586, 589, 598, 601, 612, 614-616, 620-621, 634, 637-638, 

659 

, absolute - 598 

, anticipation of, see anticipation 

, application of, see application, cognitive 

(citta), see consciousness 

, complete, see knowledge 

, concluding (dhdrana-) - 48, 251, 282, 335, 519, 614 

, construction-filled/-free (sa/nirvikalpaka) - 72, 271-273, 
275-279, 282, 286, 292-293, 299, 526, 557, 581, 583 

co-ordinating (pratisandhi-) - 592 

, deluding or concealing karma, see karma, awareness- 

obstructing 

, determinative (avdya-) - 272, 635 

, direct, see perception 

, directed (tha) - 72, 272, 328, 336 

, extrasensory (avadhi-, vibhanga) - 19-21, 48-49, 55, 63- 
76, 121, 162, 195-196, 226-227, 332, 341-344, 494, 
522-523, 526, 614-615 

, false, see error 

, God's, s.v. 

, immediate (mati-,; saksatkara} - 19-20, 48, 72, 74-75, 
79, 121, 161, 190, 194-195, 226-227, 272-273, 
277.328, 330-31, 339, 478, 522, 526, 614-615 

, indirect (paroksa-) - 163, 273-276, 342 

indistinct (avagraha-) - 48, 72, 161, 272, 299, 335-336 

, initial, see awareness, immediate 

, lack of, see ignorance 

, Mediate - 100 

, mental (mano-) - 48, 337, 343 

-ness (or -hood) (-tva) - 

-obstructing karma, s.v. 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 689 


, perfect or pure, see knowledge 
, right (samyag-) - 47, 68-71, 74-75, 88, 90, 97-98, 116- 
117, 120, 123, 127-129, 132, 134, 136-139, 158, 160, 
197, 199-200, 219-220, 247, 249-250, 255, 2261, 
308-309, 312-313, 315-318, 325, 342, 348-350, 353, 
394, 435, 455-456, 469, 471, 484, 502, 528-530, 553- 
554, 598, 607, 619, 625, 638, 640, 655-656, 658-659. 
661 
, scriptural or linguistic or verbal (sruti-) - 20, 48-49, 72- 
75, 92, 121, 190, 195-196, 217, 225-227, 273, 277, 
281-283, 285, 304-305, 326, 328, 330-332, 336, 339- 
340, 343-344, 357, 359-360, 420, 474, 478, 526, 583, 
614 
self- (svasamvedana) - 556 
, supersensible (atindriya-) - 100, 126, 282 
, telepathic, see telepathy 
, true or correct or valid, see truth 
, Variegated (citra) - 280 
, Visual, see perception 
, yogic, see perception, yogic 
ayana, see solstice 
Ayaradasaosutra, see Dasasrutaskandhasitra 
ayatanarupa (in Buddhism), see aggregate, physical 
ayu(s), see life(-span, or length of) 
-ka karma, see karma, age-determining 
Ayurveda - 344 
ayutasiddha, see inseparability 
backbiting - 126, 201 
backsliding ~ 31, 33, 46, 152, 218, 321, 393, 568 
bacteria - 121, 454 
bad (akusala, afubha) - 59, 79, 83, 102, 122, 126, 129, 136, 
152, 169, 180, 203, 206, 210, 215, 222, 338, 370, 394, 
401, 421-422, 424, 428-429, 451, 456, 464, 509, 512, 
602, 604, 643, 646 
act, S.v. 
attitude, s.v. 


690 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


body, see body, good(/bad) 
feeling, s.v. 
habit, s.v. 
influx, see demerit 
karma, s.v. 
thoughts, s.v. 
bddara, see coarse 
Badarayana - 6, 437 
badha, see sublation 
(a)bddhita, see (un)sublated 
bahir, see external 
Bahubali statue - 605 
bala, see force; power 
bala, see child 
-prayoga, see mistake, childish 
balance - 120, 374, 481-482, 577, 615 
-d state - 149, 365, 456 
of mind - 409 . 
Balcerowicz, Piotr - 220-221, 442, 446 
bald(-headed) - 240 
ball, red-hot iron - 342 
bamboo - 608 
bandha, see bond(age) 
, the word - 411, 593 
bandhu - 234 
bare state, born in a (potaja) - 50 
bath(ing) - 388, 615 
battle - 531 
beating - 84, 89, 98, 213, 369, 511, 646, 653 
beauty - 68, 139 
bed(ding) - 84, 86 
bee - 359 
begging - 84, 89, 254, 454, 457 
bowl - 37, 252 
beginning (ddi) - 58, 153, 162, 196-197, 339, 390, 397, 407- 
408, 413, 430, 452, 554, 568, 632 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 691 


-less(ness) (anddi(tva)) - 3, 53, 58, 142, 153, 161-163, 
197, 219, 238, 243, 248, 256, 339, 390, 394, 397, 
407-408, 413, 421, 428, 430, 434, 438-439, 441, 460, 
464, 475, 490, 500, 505, 543, 549, 563, 576 

being (bhava; sat) 

, divine, see god 

-ness only (bhavamatrata) - 518 

, hon-, see absence 

, perfect, see omniscient 

-s, living - 30-31, 36, 52, 81, 83, 106, 109, 163, 171, 179- 
180, 190, 214, 216, 254, 319, 328, 360-361, 373, 
379, 381, 383, 397, 407, 413, 418, 429, 444, 470, 
486, 598-599, 608, 643-646 

-$, worldly - 359 

belief - 45, 109, 121, 128, 220, 236, 248, 283, 313, 352, 444, 

539, 561-562, 574 

, right, see rightness (of belief) 

, wrong, see false 

beneficial, see good 
Bengal - 36 
Betai, Rameshchandar Sundarji - 239, 261-263, 671 
Bhadrabahu - 131 
Bhagavadgita - 427 
bhagavadn, see God 
bhakti, see devotion 
-yoga - 593 
Bhandaras, Jain - 426, 458, 472 
Bhandarkar, H. R. - 671 
Bharahdrasitra - 186 
Bhaitrhari (510) - 205, 209, 437, 451 
Bhatta, B. - 666 
Bhatta Mimamsa - 286, 545, 593-594 
categories, s.v. 
bhautikamarga - 185 
bhava, see being; condition; modification; presence (karmic) 
state 


692 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


, aupasamika-, see existence due to subsidence of karma 
-manas, see mental state 

bhavana, see becoming; palace 

bhavand, see conduct; meditation; practice 

Bhavanavasin (a type of god) - 55, 79-80, 370 

bhavanga, see topic 

Bhavasena (1250) - 424, 600 

bheda, see difference 
-abheda, see identity-cum-difference 

Bhide, S. R. - 422 

Bhillakasanghiya - 533 

bhoga, see enjoyment; experience 

bhoktr, see enjoyer 

bhranti, see error; illusion 

bhiimi, see place 

bhita, see element; self awaiting rebirth 
-artha, see category 
, maha-, see element, great 

Bihar - 36, 225 

bimba, see idol 

bind(ing), see bond(age) 

bird - 152, 341, 352, 364, 387, 431, 644, 649 

birth (gati) - 49, 52, 163, 105, 126, 132, 168, 172, 176, 182, 
192, 219, 240, 251-252, 263, 313, 363, 370, 388, 398, 
418, 422, 430-431, 438, 461, 470, 480, 490, 404, 581, 
610, 617, 623, 643-645, 659, 661 
, concealed - 52 
-free, see liberation 

birthplace - 363-364, 485, 619 
of the gods, see gods’ places of birth 

bisexual - 350, 352 

bitter - 81, 344, 404, 430 

black - 51, 68, 81, 213, 241, 327, 338, 353, 464, 616-617, 
653 

blame(worthy) - 91, 249 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 693 


blanket - 309 
blemishes - 189, 259, 469, 517, 547 
blind(ness) - 60, 180, 313, 329, 349, 656 
, night - 644 
bliss ((@nanda) (see also peace) - 16, 132, 135, 138, 239, 246, 
256, 260, 338, 378, 421, 433, 459, 494, 503, 513, 519, 
532, 556, 609, 612, 645, 647, 652-655, 658 
, highest or absolute or infinite (atyanta-) - 163, 240-241, 
246, 248, 259, 421, 509, 511, 530-531, 648, 655 
blood - 133, 363-364, 366 
blue (nila) - 51, 81, 213, 287, 293, 309, 353, 369, 404, 406, 
412, 464, 551, 553, 616-617, 653 
board - 119, 252 
bodhi. see enlightenment; understanding 
Bodhisattva - 442, 457 
bodily 
act(ion), s.v. 
activity, s.v. 
decoration, s.Vv. 
body (kaya; Sarira) 
, agglutinative - 361 
, animal - 
, dead, see corpse 
, decoration of one's, see decoration, bodily 
, fiery (taijasa-) - 52, 165, 365-366, 392, 613 
gross physical or material (auddrika-) - 34, 39, 52-53, 55- 
56, 59, 63-64, 70, 76, 85, 88-90, 92-93, 96, 102, 104- 
105, 107-109, 112, 114-115, 117, 127, 132, 135-136, 
138, 164, 166, 168, 173-176, 179, 187, 189, 199, 
212, 215-216, 219-220, 222-224, 240-243, 245, 250, 
252, 254, 256-258, 261, 263, 269, 292, 312, 323, 
325, 338, 348, 354-355, 358-360, 362-365, 367, 372, 
377, 384-385, 389, 391-392, 396, 399, 407-408, 415, 
436, 463, 465, 470-471, 475, 488, 492-493, 500, 512, 
522, 532, 581-592, 599, 613-614, 618-619, 621-623, 
625, 635, 642-660, 652-653, 656-661 


694 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


, heavenly, s.v. 
, hellish, s.v. 
, karmic or causal (karmana-) - 111, 166, 365-366, 377, 
384, 392, 463, 612-613 
-less - 135, 249, 362, 385 
, luminous - 383 
, male, s.v. 
, procuring - 365, 367, 392, 613 
, size of the, see size, bodily 
, subtle, s.v. 
, transformative or fluid (vaigiirika-, vaikriya-) - 364, 366, 
391, 613 
, vegetable - 383 
, watery, S.Vv. 
Bollée, W. - 668 
bond(age), karmic (bandha, samsara) - 3, 8, 10, 47, 62, 65- 
68, 86-87, 93, 97, 102, 105, 107-108, 111-114, 116-118, 
123-126, 135, 143, 145, 147, 152, 155-157, 164, 170-171, 
188-189, 242-244, 247, 250, 252, 262, 269, 300, 303, 
307-308, 312-313, 318-319, 324, 362, 384, 407-409, 411, 
417, 421, 430, 434, 439, 467, 492, 496, 500, 520-521, 
528-530, 563, 567, 576, 599, 601-602, 618, 620-621, 623, 
626-630, 635-637, 642-643, 649, 651, 655-657, 669 
-breeder (klega) - 187, 613 
, freedom from, see liberation 
, instant-effective (samayaprabaddha) - 626-627, 630 
, intensity of fruition of, see maturation (of karma) 
, material, see prakrti 
bone-structure - 30, 63, 132, 153, 172 
border-guard - 79 
bottom(less) - 369, 433, 470 
bowl, begging-, s.v. 
bowman - 236 
Brahma - 191, 607, 645 
brahmacarya, see chastity; studentship 
Brahmachari, Sitalprasad - 641 


GLOSSARY-INDEX : 695 


Brahmadvaita, see Vedanta, Advaita 

Brahmaloka - 55 

brahman - 177, 191, 243, 245-247, 253, 255, 257-259, 
426,451, 556-557, 560-564, 566-568, 573, 577 

brahmana, see Brahmin 

Brahmasiddhantasamuccaya (Haribhadra Siri) - 458, 671 

Brahmasitra (Badarayana) 
Bhasya (Samkaracrya) - 459 

brahmavada, see Vedanta, Advaita 

Brahmin (brahmana) - 252, 422, 646 

branch - 127, 658 

brand(ing) - 214, 296 

breakage - 384 

breast - 129 

breath(ing) (prana) - 56, 105, 109, 165-166, 186, 257, 319, 
358, 362, 366, 391-392, 396, 402, 485-486, 492, 577, 
607, 610-611, 620, 634 
-control (pranayama) - 183, 240, 449 

Brhaddranyakopanisad 
Bhasya (Samkaracarya) 

Varttika (Suresvara) - 562-564, 571-573, 576 

brick - 407 

bridge (tirtha) - 3 

Bronkhorst, Johannes - 45, 660 

brother - 181, 198, 249, 259, 322, 470, 651 

brush, painter's - 330 

bubble - 476 

buddha, see enlightened 

Buddha, Gautama the - 3, 9, 35, 200, 267, 434, 519, 546-547 

buddhi, see awareness; intelligence; wisdom 
(in Simkhya), see mahat 

Buddhism - 4-5, 11, 14, 34, 155-156, 178-179, 186-187, 204, 
210, 234, 244, 265, 267-268, 273, 275, 277-281, 283, 
285, 289, 299, 307, 313-315, 326-327, 331, 333, 337, 
345-346, 356, 380, 387-389, 395, 400, 422, 435, 446-447, 
472-475, 477, 479, 481, 506, 518-519, 533, 541, 544-545, 


696 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


548, 555, 558, 577, 579, 585-587, 595-596, 607 

Buddhist logic(ians) - 156, 208, 278, 282, 285, 291-292, 297, 
299, 301, 332-333, 477-479, 482, 539, 541, 580, 582-583 

bull - 307 

buoyancy, principle of, see sattva 

burn(ing) - 59, 131, 134, 199, 211, 214, 224, 239, 252, 256, 
309, 382, 445, 450, 470, 653, 658, 661 

butter - 491, 656 
, Clarified, see ghee 

Byavar - 639 

cadmastha, see monk 

Caillat, Colette - 668 

caitanya, see consciousness 

cakra, see circle 
-vartin, see monarch, universal 

caksus, see eye 

cala, see fluctuation 

calm(ness) (see also peace; rest) - 61, 33, 183, 188, 216, 350, 
394, 426, 453, 495, 500, 644, 646 
, Spiritual (prasama) - 188 

camel - 255 

Campt - 

candra, see moon 

Candranandin (716) - 468 

Candraprajfiaptistitra - 39 

canon(ical literature), Jain -4-6, 23-24, 30, 35-41, 196, 200- 
201, 293 

capacity, see ability 

Caraka - 

Carakasamhita (Caraka) - 12-13 

care, see caution -30, 33, 38, 108, 124, 166, 239, 432, 457, 
507, 601, 616, 638, 646, 661 
-less(ness) - 97, 485-486, 510 

career - 422, 508, 568 

caritra, see character; conduct 

carpenter - 119 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 697 


pavake 14-15, 133, 157, 269, 300, 354, 435, 459, 472, 476, 
+, 482, 553, 555, 580-581 

case, grammatical (kdraka) - 281, 503 
, ablative - 503 
, accusative - 503 
, dative - 503 
, instrumental - 326, 503 
, locative - 503 
, nominative (kartrtva) - 503 

caste (jati; varna) - 68, 127, 173, 176 

casusistry, see sophistry 

catastrophe, 219 

category (bhitartha; pad4drtha; tattva) - 6-9, 12, 16, 18, 26, 
32, 36, 39, 97, 99, 110-112, 123, 153, 165, 186, 199-200, 
231, 262, 271, 310, 313, 317-319, 328, 336, 340, 346, 
352, 410, 412, 435, 453, 472, 519, 524, 526-528, 532, 
545-546, 584, 590-591, 593, 599, 601, 617-618, 635, 658, 
663, 666-667 
, Bhatta - 593 
, Nyaya-Vaisesika - 435, 543, 590 
-(ie)s, knowledge of all - 545 
-(ie)s, multiplicity of - 568 

Caturvimsati - 73 

catuskoti, see negation, fourfold 

causal 
atom, S.Vv. 
body, see body, karmic or causal 
chain - 273 
condition, s.v. 
-ity, see causation 
law - 514-516, 580, 585 
regulatory, s.v. 

causation theory in Buddhist Logic (tadutpatti) - 301 

cause, causation, causality (hetu; karana) - 8, 19, 25, 30, 33, 
36, 54, 56-58, 60-61, 67-68, 77, 81, 83-84, 86, 93, 102, 
113-118, 121, 127-128, 130, 133, 135, 137, 139, 143, 


698 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


145, 147-149, 152, 155-157, 161-162, 168, 170-173, 178, 
182, 185, 187, 189, 191, 193, 197-198, 205-207, 209-210, 
212-214, 217-218, 223-224, 228, 231, 243-244, 269, 274- 
275, 278-282, 288-290, 296-297, 300-301, 308, 312, 315, 
318, 323-324, 326, 328, 330-333, 336, 340, 342, 345, 
350, 352, 356, 369-361, 365-366, 373, 377, 383,-389, 
392-394, 396, 400, 410, 412, 415, 417-419, 421, 430-432, 
436, 440-442, 447, 456, 460, 467, 473-477, 479-482, 484- 
486, 489, 491, 493-496, 498, 500-501, 504, 511, 15-516, 
522-523, 528, 531, 534-538, 540, 542, 547-548, 551-552, 
567-568, 576, 579-582, 585-587, 597, 599, 602, 607-608, 
612-613, 617-618, 624, 633, 637-638, 642-644, 647, 649, 
651, 656, 658-659, 665 
, accessory - 248 
, efficient (sahakdri-) - 187, 478, 515-517, 591, 599 
external/internal - 155, 199, 228, 317-318, 323, 355, 362, 
374, 386-388, 396, 399, 410, 502, 514 
, instrumental or occasioning (nimitta) - 113, 152, 155- 
156, 212, 339, 341, 389-390, 402, 496-497, 499-500 
-ity, dual - 515 
-less - 144, 147, 155, 210, 242, 356, 384, 482 
, material (upadana) - 186, 339, 396, 405, 515-517, 556, 
582, 588, 591, 599 
, natural (nisarga-) - 308, 419 
, honapprehension (anupalabdhi) - 275 
, obtained (upatta)/nonobtained - 344 
of all becoming, see becoming, cause of all 
of life, s.v. 
par excellence (karana) - 310, 328 
, root - 67-68, 189, 213, 215, 223 
caution (samitt) - 419 
cave - 134 
cavil, see wrangling 
celibacy, see chastity 
cell (niseka) - 627-628, 631 
censure, see condemnation 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 699 


cereal - 408 
certainty, see belief 
cessation - 187, 189-190, 261, 307, 400, 410, 446, 463, 466, 
485, 567, 574 
, automatic, see subsidence 
of activity, s.v. 
of inflow - 47, 50, 63-64, 68, 87, 183, 189, 223, 310, 324, 
414, 419, 501, 545, 601-602, 618, 630, 636-637 
(virati), see abstinence from sin 
cesspool - 219 
cetand, see thinking 
chain (santana) - 67-68, 284 
, causal - 273 
chair - 559, 577, 586-587 
Chakravarti, A. - 95 
chala, see quibble 
Chamunda Raya - 604-606 
change (vikdra, parindma) (see also transformation) - 30. 91. 
104, 113, 145, 187, 196, 198, 206, 211, 230, 240, 248, 
289-290, 292, 327, 333, 341-342, 373, 375, 402, 466, 
482, 488, 504-505, 509-510, 624, 574-576, 584, 588, 622- 
623, 629, 636, 669 
in an atom, duration of, s.v. 
-less, see unchangeable 
of color, s.v. 
character 
deficiency (-moha; salya) 
, indolent, see lazy(ness) 
, intrinsic, see nature, essential 
, moral (cdritra) - 251, 350, 419, 513 
, right (samyak-) - 414, 420 
, similarity of, see universal property 
-veiling karma, see karma, character-veiling 
characteristic, see attribute; mark; property; quality 
, defining, see definition; mark, distinguishing 
chariot - 313, 331, 407 


700 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


charity, see giving 
-obstructing karma, see karma, giving-obstructing 
charm, luminescent (prabhi) - 367 
chastity (brahmacarya) - 30, 32, 123, 134, 244, 420 
Chatterjee, Asim Kumar - 37, 668 
chayd, see shadow 
cheat(ing) - 214, 322 
cheda, see cutting; fault; initiation 
chess-piece, see rook, king, etc. 
child (bala) - 128, 135, 155, 267, 399, 432, 643 
-birth, illusory - 447 
-ish mistake - 541 
-ishness - 58, 116, 193, 479, 485, 
's playfulness - 451 
chisel - 118 
Chitor of Citrakuta - 422 
cinta, see anticipation; anxiety 
circle (cakra) - 203, 364, 368 
, charmed - 240 
of fire, see fire, circle of 
, Square - 466, 581, 
, Vicious - 477 
cit 
-Sakti, see consciousness, power of 
citra, see variegated 
-advaita - 545 
citta, see mind 
city - 31, 112, 219, 312, 339, 376, 383, 642, 655 
clairvoyance, see awareness, extrasensory 
clarity, see clear 
class (varna) - 253, 637 
clay - 339, 410, 434, 505, 551 
clean(liness) - 71, 246, 504, 657 
cleansing - 86, 223-224, 429, 661 
of traces or karmic particles (nirjard) - 8, 47, 63-65, 68, 
92, 111, 172, 318, 324, 326, 336, 348, 421, 492, 501, 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 701 


545, 590, 601-602, 618, 636, 642 
clear(ness) (sphuta(tva)) - 20, 181, 235, 271, 348 
clinging, see desire 
closeness, intimate/loose - 365 
cloth - 114, 223-224, 268, 348, 368, 378, 384, 403, 409, 559 
clothes, clothing - 37-38, 85, 90, 129, 252, 258, 429, 432, 
645, 653 
cloud - 134, 224, 246, 405, 431, 529, 645 
coarse (bddara) - 609 


cobra - 471 
code 
, dress-, s.v. 


, genetic - 358 
, monastic - 467 
of conduct, see ethics 
cogitation (mimamsa) - 451 
cognition (see awareness) 
, after-, s.v. 
, co-ordinating - 292 
, instrument of valid, s.v. 
, false or erroneous, see error 
, sensory, see awareness, immediate 
. true of valid, see truth 
, Variegated - 287 
cognizer (pramatr; vedaka) - 73, 320, 327, 330, 478, 577, 
584, 621 
coherence/incoherence - 276, 296, 475 
coincidence - 550, 558-559 
cold - 81-82, 88, 131, 166, 224, 363, 369, 385, 404, 522, 540, 
574, 591, 658 
colic - 212 
collapse (visramsa) - 397 
collection (of categories) (astikaya; samudaya) - 80-81, 95-97, 
105, 126, 144, 401, 487-488, 617 
collective perspective, see perspective, general 
colliding (pratighata) - 383 


702 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


collocation (samaya) - 95, 155, 374-375, 377, 388, 408, 487 
color (riipa; varna) - 49, 51, 54-57, 70, 80-81, 107, 112, 117, 
122, 168-169, 198, 243, 257-258, 287, 292-293, 297, 309, 
325, 336, 343, 359, 369, 388, 404, 409, 433, 446, 448, 
504, 522, 584, 622-623 
-less - 107, 248 
, psychic, see coloring 
, Variegated, s.v. 
coloring (lefya) - 51, 54-55, 67, 70, 77, 79, 92, 213, 220, 222- 
223, 353, 369, 458, 614, 616-617, 625 
column - 627 
combination (sammurchana) - 50, 52-53, 62, 81-82, 163, 
166-167, 202, 212, 237, 319, 349, 352, 363, 372, 388- 
389, 450, 463, 466, 535, 597, 656 
comet - 406 
commandment 
, God's - 217-218, 220 
, religious - 91 
common 
-ness - 204 
opinion, s.v. 
practice - 235 
standpoint, see perspective, conventional 
communication (Sabda) - 13, 347 
comparison (upamana) - 13, 273, 292, 299, 340, 383, 476. 
545 
compassion (anukampa; karund) - 36, 58, 61, 71, 196, 189, 
415, 429-431, 434, 442, 512, 624, 640 
compatibility, see attribute, compatibility of 
competence, see ability 
completion (see also attainment) - 378, 403, 497 
of a task (siddhisadhana) - 442 
composed, see calm 
composite - 107, 199, 241, 345, 362, 582-583, 592, 612 
composition, see text 
compound term (dvandva) - 595 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 703 


compression (samghata) - 384 

compulsion, compulsory - 59, 226-227 
action, see act(ion), compulsory 

conation, see intention 

conceai(ment) - 59, 62, 141, 166, 190, 214, 295, 418, 554 
-ing karma, see karma, awareness-obstructing 
-ed birth, s.v. 

conceit, see arrogance 

concentration (dhydna; samadhi) - 64-65, 91, 113, 117, 124, 
126, 132, 134, 174, 202, 211-212, 216, 240-241, 246, 
251, 253, 255, 257, 335, 439, 444, 451-452, 454-455, 
457, 512, 519, 530-531, 614, 639 
, cruel (raudra-) - 65, 91, 212, 214 
, dharmic (dharmya-) - 65, 69, 91, 183, 212-213, 215, 

217-220, 223 

, focussed (dhdrand-) - 271-272, 451 
, frustration-producing (drta-) - 65, 91, 134, 212-213 
, meditational, see meditation 
on an image, see image, Jina 
, self- - 124-125, 255-257, 263, 532 
, white (Sukla-) - 65, 91, 183, 212, 217, 220-223 
, verbal - 217 

conceptual 
construction, s.Vv. 
identification, s.v. 

conch, see shell 

concluding awareness, s.v. 

conclusion (of an inference) (nigamana; nirnaya; siddhanta) - 
13, 45, 94, 99, 141, 176, 184, 200, 202, 207, 234, 237, 
239, 292, 298, 477, 482, 496, 506, 516, 536, 558, 561, 
566, 574-576, 579 

concomitance, see pervasion 

concrete, see abstract/(concrete) 

concurrence (sambhava) - 309-310, 

condemnation - 145, 428 


704 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


condition (bhava, pratyaya) 
-al location, s.v. 
, causal - 187-188, 355, 410, 442, 474 
, essential - 300, 582, 592, 594 
, self - 229 
conditioned(/unconditioned) ((a)samskrta) - 61, 81-82, 147, 
301, 379, 474, 492, 522, 524 
predication, see predication, sevenfold 
conditioning (pratyaya), mutual (anyonya-) - 118 
conduct (Gcarana; bhavand; caritra) - 5, 18, 52, 62-64, 68, 
103, 109, 123, 215-216, 219, 231, 247, 308, 315-316, 
507, 602, 623, 637-639, 658 
, careless - 97 
, code of, see ethics 
-deluding karma, see karma, character-veiling 
, failure of (sabala-) - 92 
, good (sila) - 137, 250, 346, 415-416, 440-441, 485, 642, 
656 
-obscuring karma, see karma, character-veiling 
, passionless - 103, 125 
, perfect or pure - 136, 451, 510, 512, 520-521 
, right (samyak-) - 33, 47, 50, 68-69, 71, 78, 88, 90, 93, 
97-98, 109, 111, 116, 119-120, 123, 127-130, 132, 
134, 136-138, 190-191, 200, 217, 231, 244, 247-250, 
253, 255, 261, 308, 311-313, 315, 318, 346, 353, 
428, 432, 434, 442, 444, 450, 456, 469, 471, 484, 
502, 509, 512, 528-530, 533, 554, 601, 607, 625, 
637-638, 640, 655-656, 658-659 
, Tules of - 40, 129-130 
, variegated (citra-) - 608 
, wrong, see act, bad 
confession (pratikramana) - 52, 119, 123, 460, 575 
configuration (sthapana) - 105, 209, 336, 357, 630 
conglomeration (samuddya) - 209, 495 
conjunction, see contact 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 705 


connection, necessary, see pervasion . 

consciousness (caitanya) - 69, 96, 106-108, 118, 133, 139, 
157, 187, 219, 222, 244, 250-251, 261, 276, 286, 300, 
319, 322, 344, 349, 354-357, 363, 376, 384, 394, 396, 
399, 436, 445-446, 480, 491-493, 502, 508, 514-515, 520, 
549, 553, 556, 563-564, 566, 573-575, 577, 580, 585, 
588, 598-599, 634, 637 
, action-oriented (kdarydnubhiti) - 491 
, altered state of, see concentration 
, (the) Jina's - 513, 518 
-only (vijfiaptimatrata) - 150, 447, 558, 578 
, pure (Suddha-) - 18, 119, 286, 307, 491, 510-511, 513, 

528, 530, 557, 561, 564-565, 570, 573, 577-578, 654 

, stream of, 8.v. 

consecration (pratisthavidhi) - 256, 437, 605 

consensus - 581 

consideration, see perspective 

consistent/inconsistent, see regular/irregular 

constant, -cy, see abiding 

constellation (naksatra) - 79-80, 274, 370, 457 
-bharani - 274 
-krttika- 274, 278 
-rohini- 274 
-Sakata- 278 

constructing (nirvartana) - 59 

construction 
, conceptual (kalpand, vikalpa) - 104, 143, 146, 149, 285, 

435, 439, 447, 478, 513, 516, 536, 582-583, 595-596 

-filled/-free, see awareness, construction-filled/-free 
, Modal - 84 

contact (samghata, samyoga, sprsta) - 30, 38, 116, 175, 199, 
295, 316, 375, 477, 381, 384, 394, 410, 429, 448, 590- 
591) 
, atomic - 394, 410 
, beginningless - 394 
, sexual, s.v. 


706 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


, sense-object (indriyartha-, vyafijana-) - 48, 161, 272, 
337, 345, 475 
container/contained - 193, 307, 373-374, 381-382, 390 
contamination/noncontamination - 496, 508, 520, 583, 590 
contemplated, to be (dhyeya) - 437 - 
contemplation, see concentration; meditation 
contempt, see arrogance 
content 
of awareness (gocara, visaya) - 18, 26, 48-49, 51, 55, 72- 
74, 91, 99, 104-105, 119, 144, 150, 153, 161-162, 
193, 195, 204, 211-212, 220, 235-236, 238-239, 269, 
272, 275, 278, 281, 286, 292, 322, 329-330, 332, 
334, 343, 357-358, 394, 473-476, 478-480, 484, 527, 
538, 541, 551, 556, 558-559, 562, 565-566, 569, 578- 
580, 583, 585, 621 
, verbal, see meaning 
contentedness, contentment/dis- - 47, 645 
continence, see restraint 
continents, world- - 47, 54, 78 
continuity/discontinuity - 105, 156, 190, 203, 300, 356, 400, 
465-466, 480, 484, 489, 503, 519, 574-575, 585-588 
continuum - 587 
contraction (samhara) - 383-384, 514, 635 
contradiction, contradictory (virodha, viruddha) - 14, 25, 120, 
141-142, 144-145, 147, 149-150, 153, 157, 168-169, 194, 
205-206, 226, 228-229, 235-237, 267, 277, 288, 292-295, 
297-298, 302-303, 308, 321-322, 329, 332, 344, 348, 356, 
375, 381, 396, 405, 409, 411-412, 452-453, 479, 492, 
494, 506, 508, 537-540, 544, 556-557, 560-561, 63, 568, 
570-572, 578, 580, 592, 597 
, law of - 466 
of mistakes (samaropa) - 534 
perception - 352, 439, 555-556 
, Self- - 27, 388, 403, 561-563, 565-566, 574-575, 577- 
579, 581 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 707 


control, see also restraint 
, breath-, s.v. 
controversy, see argument 
convention, see assembly 
convention, fallacy of, s.v. 
conventional meaning or usage (samvrti) - 74, 145-147, 183, 
186, 280, 326, 347, 545, 613 
perspective, 8.v. 
convoluted origin - 363 
co-occurrence, see concurrence 
cook(ing) - 32, 268, 347, 369 ~ 
, time of - 402 
cooked/uncooked - 86, 152, 347, 397, 
co-pervasion - 390, 564 
copper-plate, Markara - 94 
copulation, see sexual act 
copy(ing) - 12, 663 
, mental - 271 
, physical - 71 
cord, see rope 
corpse - 135, 302, 354, 621 
correctness, grammatical, s.v. 
cosmography - 36 
cosmology - 39, 669 
cotemporality - 494 
cotton - 365 
counteracting, counteragent - 139, 453, 480 
counterfact - 287, 315, 
counterfeit - 85 
counterpositive (pratiyogin) - 142, 476 
counter-question (pratyanuyoga) - 13 
‘counting, countable, (sankhydta) - 56, 82, 122, 325, 371, 378, 
381-382, 385-386, 417, 463, 552, 618, 635-636, 643 
course (gati) - 125, 361 
, highest (parama-) - 261 
of life, see life-span 


708 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


covering, mental, see karma, mental-covering 

covetousness, see desire 

cow (go) - 138, 148, 290, 314, 340, 347, 361 

coward - 244, 644, 649 

craft(s) - 652, 655 

Craig, Edward - 666 

creation (sarga, utpdda) (see also universe; world) - 104, 179, 
205, 209, 259, 299, 358, 397, 401, 426, 488-489, 491, 
540, 552, 576, 578, 582-583, 585-596, 589, 592, 625 
, artificial/natural (aikatattvika; samudaydkrta) - 199 
, intellectual (pratyaya) - 185 
of the world, s.v. 

creator, see god, God 

creed - 95, 230 

creeper - 241 

crookedness - 59, 162, 403 

crops -553 

crore(s) - 109 

cruel(ty) (raudra) - 65, 91, 102, 106, 134, 212, 214-215 

crystal - 257-258, 446 
, reflection in a, see reflection 

culaka, see appendix 

curd - 148, 355, 388, 399-400, 656 

cure - 189 
of disease, s.v. 

curiosity - 322, 335 

curse - 76 

curtain (pata) - 621 

cushion, ring (vatavalaya) - 368 

custom - 189, 460 

cyclic motion, s.v. 

cymbals - 405 

daiva, see god 

Damsanasattari, see Samyaktvasaptati 

dance - 137, 368 

danda, see stick 


GLOSSARY-INDEX | 709 


Darisanasattari, see Samyaktvasaptati 

dark(ness) (tamas) - 57, 82, 251, 281-282, 314, 333, 368-369, 
375, 404, 406, 432, 471, 521, 534, 593, 635, 644-645, 
650, 658 

darsana, see perception, sense-; philosophical vision; school) 

Darsanasaptatika (Haribhadra Siri) - 458 

Darsanasadra (Devasena) - 532 

Dasagrutaskandhasutra - 40 

DaSsavaikalikasiitra - 40 

Dasgupta, Surendra Nath - 663 . 

dative case, S.v. 

daughter - 643 

Dave, P. N. - 177-191 

Dave, Trimbaklal N. - 264 

day - 32, 79, 216, 414-415, 512, 633, 645 
and night (ahordatra) - 402 

death (marana, mrtyu) - 57, 67-68, 70, 81, 85-86, 126, 132, 
138, 147, 168, 176, 182, 184, 192, 215, 219, 240, 243, 
250-252, 256, 258-259, 261, 268, 361-362, 367, 383, 388, 
396, 418, 430-431, 457, 470-471, 480, 485, 505, 528, 
537, 566, 613, 623, 643-646, 649-651, 653, 655, 659-661 
conqueror or Lord of, see Mara 
, existence after - 145, 166, 540, 548, 580 
, fear of - 644 
-free, see liberation 
, premature or untimely (akdla-) - 367-368, 621 
, voluntary or religious, see suicide 

debate (jalpa) - 4, 11-13, 180-181, 202, 265, 300, 522, 644, 
663 
, defeat in, s.v. 

debt - 647 

decay (vyaya) - 221-222, 289, 364-365, 372, 374-377, 379, 
384-385, 390-391, 397, 400-401, 409-412, 505, 627, 632 

deceit, deception (maya, tiryakayus) - 31, 59, 62, 67, 83-84, 
100, 171-173, 180, 240, 252, 255, 349-350, 431, 471, 
546, 562, 614, 616, 624 


710 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


declarative mood - 613 

declension - 403 

decoration - 256, 652 
, bodily - 84, 92 

decrease, see increase/decrease 

decrepitude, see age, old 

deduction - 19, 21, 279, 558, 566, 573-574 

deer - 67, 253, 366, 646, 652, 661 

defeat 
-ing, self- - 209 
, reason for, see argument, way of losing an 
(in debate) (parajaya) - 300, 317 

defect (dosa) - 13, 84, 92, 120, M1, 216, 281, 287, 294, 434, 
481, 640 

defilement, defiling (mala, sdsrava) - 60, 107, 440-441, 446, 
475, 516, 609 

definiteness (vyavasadyatmakata) - 282 

defining, definition, see mark, distinguishing 

degree - 57, 82, 106, 350, 410, 466 

deity, see god 

dejection, see sad(ness) 

De Jong, Jan Willem - 201 

deliberation (tarka) - 5, 13 

deluge - 654, 659 

deluding, delusion (moha) - 19, 62, 65, 70, 98, 100, 102-163, 
107, 109, 112-113, 119, 123, 152, 173-175, 180, 197, 
212-214, 218-219, 235, 240, 244, 249-251, 255-257, 259, 
261, 263, 288, 349-350, 353, 428-419, 431-432, 451, 457, 
467, 494, 496, 504, 520, 528-529, 541, 572, 577, 609, 
622, 638 
awareness, see awareness, deluding or concealing 
karma - 70,-87, 89, 92, 112, 172, 353, 442, 467, 494, 

531, 608, 620, 625 

demarcation, doctrine’ of - 209 

demerit (adharma, papa) - 8, 68, 97, 106-107, 109, 111, 129, 
145, 151-152, 179, 187-188, 232-233, 240, 244, 249-250, 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 711 


256-257, 262, 269, 385, 288-389, 417, 435, 500-501, 548, 
581, 590, 593, 602, 610, 618, 636-637, 640, 652 
demon (asura) - 34, 54, 358 
denial - 33, 57, 59, 142, 267, 440, 538, 548-549, 566, 576, 
578, 580 
of existence, s.v. 
density - 365 
dependence/independence - 3, 46, 102, 121-122, 124, 148, 
150, 153, 155, 187, 193, 200, 226, 244, 252, 291-292, 
300, 310, 317, 327-328, 331, 343, 345, 373, 395, 399, 
431, 433, 443, 450-451, 466, 469-470, 503, 515-517, 528, 
530, 544, 552-553, 558, 562-564, 574, 579-580, 590-591 
dependence, mutual, fallacy of - 274, 511, 515, 532, 552 
, self- - 470 
dependent origination (pratityasamutpdada) - 313, 400 
depression - 577, 630 
deprivation - 61, 99 
decision, see laughter 
desa, see space-point 
deSanda, see preaching 
describable/indescribable - 19, 22, 104, 142, 146, 156-157, 
321, 552, 654 
described, positively (vidheya) - 549 
desertion, see abandonment 
desirable/undesirable - 101, 128, 135, 21-213 
desire (kama, pipdsd, trsna) - 65, 83-85, 91-92, 112, 124, 141, 
151-152, 154, 171, 182, 185, 187, 212, 253, 307, 312, 
333, 419, 428, 431, 433, 453, 456, 470, 484, 501, 515, 
520, 535, 543, 545, 592-593, 611, 643-644, 654, 657 
, determined (samkalpa) - 331 
for future benefits (gara) - 441 
for liberation, s.v. 
for respect - 127 
for worldly enjoyment or immediate benefits, see 
enjoyment, desire for 
, God's - 543 


712 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


, lack of, see nonacquisitiveness 
-less(ness) - 108, 117, 123, 216-217, 261, 531, 656-657 
, sexual (linga) - 50, 85, 352-353, 486 
, speaker's - 28, 57, 142, 268, 517 
to know, see inquiry 
to see (didrksa) - 434, 452 

desolate - 216, 242 

destiny - 151, 200, 255-256, 317, 443 
, Karmic, see course 

destroyer (ksapaka) - 112, 508, 608-609, 649 
, god as - 435 

destructible/indestrructible - 391, 400, 491, 498-499, 551, 
653-654, 656, 658 | 

destruction (ksapana, ksaya, vigama, vyaya) - 19, 28, 32, 49- 
50, 58, 65, 69, 76, 95, 99, 103, 105, 141, 147-148, 162- 
163, 188, 191, 199-200, 209-210, 218, 230, 242, 282, 
299, 308, 313, 351, 366, 384, 392-393, 401, 452, 481- 
482, 489-491, 504-505, 512, 521, 526, 535, 551-552, 556, 
566, 574, 576, 590, 602, 607, 631-633 
of all mental operations (vrttisamksaya) - 439, 444, 448 
of a karmic trace, see subsidence, karmic 
of ignorance, s.v. 
of the body, see death 

detachment - 116, 182, 185, 257, 582, 648 
, Spiritual (nirveda) - 71 

determination (niscaya) - 72, 235, 565, 573 

determinative awareness, s.v. 

determinism (niyati) - 179, 188 

deva, see god 

Devadatta (an imaginary man) - 25, 402, 475, 535, 539 

Devanandin, see Pujyapada 

Devendra Gani, see Nemicandra Saiddhantika 

devi, see goddess 

deviant (reason), see inconclusive 

devil's advocate - 518 

devotee - 159, 248, 252, 259, 469, 501 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 713 


devotion (bhakti) - 66, 95, 102, 106, 124, 239-240, 250, 317, 
442, 450, 501, 548 | 

Dhaky, M. A. - 462, 533, 542, 672 

dharand, see awareness, concluding; concentration, focussed 

Dharanagari - 532 

dharma (see also factor (in Buddhism); initiator; merit; path; 
property; right; virtue, highest) - 63-64, 91, 98, 103, 134- 
135, 139, 184, 217, 247, 251, 255-256, 306-307, 312, 
379, 387, 428, 430-431, 435, 437, 440, 442, 451, 456, 
458, 469-470, 643, 651 
, concentration on - 69, 183 
-kathanuyoga - 438 

Dharmabindu (Haribhadra Siri) - 425-426 

Dharmacakrapravartanasiutra - 4 

Dharmadasagani (750) - 264-265 

Dharmakirti (610) - 202, 234, 265-266, 270-271, 273, 275- 
278, 284-296, 301-302, 326-437, 473, 555, 579, 682, 671 

Dharmaratndkara (Jayasena) - 639-641 

Dharmasamgrahani (Haribhadra Siri) - 458-459 
-Commentary (Malayagiri Suri) - 458 

dharmic 
concentration, s.v. 
meditation, s.v. 

dharmin, see property-possessor 

Dharmottara (770) - 473, 555 

dharmya, see dharmic 

Dhatakikhanda - 54, 77-78 

dhrauvya, see persistence 

dhruva, see persistence 
-adhvan, see path of no return 

dhvamsabhava, see absence, posterior 

dhyana, see concentration 

Dhyanasataka (Jinabhadra Gani) - 210-224, 425 

dhyeya, see contemplated, one to be 

diagram, mystical - 240 

dichotomy - 156, 273, 376, 475, 508 


714 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


didrksa, see desire to see 

diet - 109 

difference/nondifference (see also identity (bheda/abheda) - 
19-20, 29, 46, 53, 104, 110, 112, 133, 141-147, 149, 153, 
455, 160, 166, 193-195, 198, 200, 229, 232, 252, 269, 
275, 277, 279-280, 289, 292, 295, 297, 300, 307, 311, 
314, 320, 330, 334, 336, 353-354, 356, 359, 371, 377- 
378, 382, 384-385, 401, 405-406, 413-414, 416-418, 439, 
443, 445, 448, 451-453, 479-480, 489, 495, 497, 499, 
502, 504, 524, 526-527, 529, 538, 542, 545, 547, 550- 
551, 553, 556-557, 559, 561, 565, 568-570, 576, 578-579, 
584, 587, 590-591, 597, 631, 647, 656, 665 

Digambara - 5, 9, 24-26, 28, 37-38, 41, 45-46, 53-54, 71, 128, 
136, 159, 165-170, 173, 238, 244, 306, 369-370, 483, 
542, 601, 669 

digestive power - 399 

Dignaga (510) - 202, 422, 479, 578 

digvirativrata, see vow, directional 

dik, see direction, spatial; space 

diksa, see renunciation 

directed awareness, s.v. 

direction, spatial (dik) - 84, 188, 218, 338, 341, 361, 363, 
368, 375-377, 381, 386-387, 392, 415, 429, 497, 645, 651 
, temporal - 387 

directional view, s.v. 

dirt - 18, 86, 88, 117, 258, 379, 418, 504, 657 

disaster - 91 

discerning, reflective (adhyavasaya) - 119 

disciple, see student 

discipline - 33, 38, 59, 74, 92, 172, 178, 182, 184, 188-190, 
219, 419, 508-509, 663 
, ascetic - 3,-8, 15, 33 
, yogic, see yoga 
, self- - 109 
, Spiritual - 180, 189, 456 

discomfort (parisaha) - 63-64, 88-89, 134, 467, 637 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 715 


discourse, legitimate, see argument 

discrepancy/nondiscrepancy, see harmony 

discrete - 289, 295, 581-582, 586-587, 600 

discrimination (viveka/(nondiscrimination) - 116, 176, 186, 
216, 223, 248, 269, 271, 303, 308, 310, 312, 393-395, 
451, 471, 514-515, 645, 649, 653, 657 
, self- - 118 

disease (see also sickness) - 88, 90, 189, 212, 224, 243, 306, 
313, 429, 532, 655, 658-659 
, cure of - 67, 224, 312-313, 433, 547 

disenchantment - 510 

disgrace - 173, 253 

disgust (jugupsda) - 63, 369, 430, 440, 484, 625 

disintegration, law of - 630 

disjunction - 149, 199, 409 

dislike (arati) - 63, 175, 212, 429, 452, 646, 651 

dismay - 213 

dispassion, see calm 

dispensings, wrong - 539 

displeasure - 648 

disposal (utsarga) - 64, 190, 255 

disposition - 464, 467, 629 

dispute, see argument 

disrepute, see disgrace 

dissension, creating - 60 

dissipating karmic state - 343, 365, 489 

dissociation or dissipation (nirjarad), see cleansing off (of 
traces) 

dissolution - 185, 419-420, 423, 487-488, 496-497, 520, 654 

distinction (vibhaga) - 37 

distraction - 189, 249, 258-259, 449 

distress - 89, 470 

distribution, rules of - 627 

disturbance (ksobha) - 98, 102, 184, 216, 256-257 

divination - 303 

divisible/indivisible - 122, 248, 378, 488, 493, 627-628 


716 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Dixit, K. K. - 46-66, 70-93, 201-202, 438, 445, 448-458, 666- 
667, 669, 671 
doctor, see physician 
doer, see agent 
dog - 138, 181, 369 
dogma 
, definition based on - 293° 
, Vedic - 285 
dogmatism - 518, 573 
doll - 655 
donation, see gift 
donkey - 138 
's horn, s.v. 
dosa, see defect; fault 
_Dosi, Becaradas - 191 
double 
atom, s.v. 
meaning - 183 
doubt (samSaya, ganka) - 11-13, 48, 61, 76, 85, 179, 184, 
186, 190, 229, 237, 251, 272, 315, 317, 320, 335, 339, 
400, 417, 484, 536, 539-540, 579, 607, 613, 624, 638 
down, see fallen 
-ward going (apakarsana), see falling 
-ward motion (apasarpini), s.v. 
Dravida - 533 
dravya, see fluid; potency; substance 
-karman, see act, substantive 
Dravyasamgraha (Kanakanandin) - 603 
Dravyasamgraha (Nemicandra Saiddhantika) - 604, 634-639 
dream(less) - 176, 186, 205, 288, 431, 440, 451, 457, 474, 
480, 556, 561, 572, 575-577, 588 
dress - 370 
code - 128 
drink - 45, 84-85, 134-135, 148, 354, 369, 418, 429, 457 
, alcoholic, see alcohol 
drk, see intuition 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 717 


drsta, see evident 
drstanta, see example 
drsti, see faith; view 
drug - 224, 313, 428 
drum - 81, 405 
dual(ity) - 143, 190, 206, 286, 330, 446, 510-511, 517, 561, 
578, 588 
-ism - 143-144, 198, 560, 562, 566 
duhkha, see frustration; pain; suffering 
Dulaharaj - 211-224 
dumb (i.e., without speech) - 127 
Dundas, Paul - 35, 37-38, 668 
duplicity, see dual(ity) 
duration (sthiti) - 98, 171, 218, 233, 402-403, 482, 615, 617- 
618, 621, 623-624, 626-632 
of karma, s.v. 
of life, see life(-span) 
, law of split - 631 
durnaya - 304, 525 
Durvinita - 159 
dust, see dirt 
duty - 61, 84-85, 425, 430, 455, 484, 583, 594 
, monastic - 68, 433 
, occasional (naimittika) - 594 
, religious - 29, 68, 106, 449 
Dvadasanupreksa (Kundakunda?) - 94, 138-139 
dvandva, see compound term 
Dvatrimsika (Siddhasena Divakara) - 176, 177-191 
Dvatrimsika (Amitagati II) - 641-661 
dvesa, see aversion; hatred; repulsion 
dvija, see twice-born 
Dvivedi, Manilala Nanaubhai - 424 
eagerness - 212, 432 
ear - 328, 338, 359, 379, 406, 463, 612 
earnings - 430 


718 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


earth (prthivi) - 30, 51,77, 105-106, 121-122, 132, 141, 157, 
165, 167, 186, 218, 224, 238, 255, 347, 354, 358-359, 
364, 368, 386, 388, 390, 399-400, 406, 409, 432, 434, 
436, 482, 497-500, 548, 593, 609-610, 612, 633, 635, 
645, 647 

economy, see simplicity 

ecstasy (samadhi) - 

education - 415, 655 
-al vows - 130 

effect (kdrya) - 8, 17, 32, 76, 112-113, 117, 141, 143, 145, 
147-149, 155-156, 171, 178, 188, 197, 278-279, 290, 301, 
313-314, 319, 326, 328, 332-333, 345-346, 359, 387, 400, 
409, 417, 419, 440, 447, 473, 479, 493, 500, 514, 541- 
543, 552, 579-580, 582, 585-586, 597, 659 
-atom, S.V. 

-cause, S.V. 

contained in the cause/not contained in the cause, see 
satkarya/asatkaryavada 

, inference based on (-hetu) - 178, 193, 209-210 

, same (tadupapatti) - 282 

effective karma (karmaprakrti) - 350, 500 

efficiency, causal (arthakriya) - 79, 273, 279, 287, 585, 596, 
619 

efficient cause, s.v. 

effort (prayatna, yatna) - 58, 182, 211, 216, 269, 307, 309, 
357, 392, 397, 407, 439, 467, 520, 590, 592-593, 622, 
642-643, 650-651, 654-655, 660 
, God's - 543 
, mental - 211 

effulgence - 260, 337, 365, 471, 650 

egg (anda) 

-born (-ja) - 52, 364 
in the womb - 319, 360 

ego(-maker) (aham(kara) - 67, 327, 345, 349-350, 419, 446 

egoism - 133, 1587, 181-182, 186, 189 

egoity - 67, 189 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 719 


eka, see single 
-antavdda, see view, one-sided 
-rupatd, see aspect, single 
-tva, see oneness; unity 
element 
, fine (in Samkhya), see tanmatra 
, great (mahda-) - 157 
elephant - 68, 253, 268, 650 
, the chesspiece - 320 
elevation (viguddhi) -431, 577, 630 
eloquence, poetic - 507-508 
emancipation, see liberation 
embodied (miurta)/disembodied (amirta) - 66, 93, 100-102, 
105, 112, 136, 138, 163, 176, 243, 248, 255, 260, 354, 
362, 373-374, 383, 396, 488, 521-522, 552, 593 
embodiment (kayatva) - 63, 106, 113, 172, 239, 267, 319, 
378, 488, 492, 498, 509, 610, 622, 638, 644, 651 
, final - 53, 76, 367, 499, 635 
of knowledge, s.v. 
emerald - 251 
emotion, see feeling 
emperor - 212, 646, 657-658, 660 
empirical - 271, 285, 463, 558, 565, 570, 599 
viewpoint, see perspective, commonsensical 
empire-building - 183 
empty(ness) (Sunya(ta) - 186, 242, 280, 387, 506, 525, 618, 
643 


end (anta) - 161, 184-185, 195-196, 240, 257, 260, 339, 361, 
380, 408, 421, 450, 452 

endless (ananta) - 3, 58, 80, 92, 110, 141, 161, 172, 195-197, 
218-219, 238, 247, 255, 380, 435, 438, 490, 500, 504- 
505, 608 
-ness - 522 
(nitya), see eternal 
times endless (anantananta) - 87 


720 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


endowment - 19, 220, 241-242, 471, 509, 512, 515, 517, 529, 
532 

endurance - 183, 218, 419-420, 518, 539, 631 

enemy (para, sattu) - 137, 249, 253, 258, 432, 642, 648-649, 
657 ; 

energy (virya) - 16, 50, 62, 99, 153, 163, 193, 340, 351-352, 
358, 360, 507, 522, 627-630, 632 
-obstructing action or karma, see karma, energy- 

obstructing 
(rajas), s.v. 

enhancement - 624 

enjoyer (bhoktr, vedaka) - 110, 118-119, 121, 219, 345, 357, 
441, 447, 492, 634 

enjoyment (bhoga) - 86, 91, 102, 188, 214, 284, 366, 415, 
493, 651 
, desire for - 84, 102, 168, 178, 441, 469, 547, 644, 

650-651, 653 

, sensuous or sexual - 55, 84, 641 

enlightened (buddha) - 15, 93, 175, 239, 252, 430-431, 467 

enlightenment (bodhi) (see also knowledge; liberation) - 4, 
35-36, 64, 118, 139, 175, 182, 186, 188-189, 315, 340, 
466, 557 
, self- - 245, 252, 594 

ennui - 625 

entanglement/disentanglement - 191, 576 

enthusiasm - 308, 368 

entity, actual (vastu) - 69, 146, 150-151, 153, 238, 473, 480- 

481, 503, 516, 544, 595 

envy - 224 

epistemology - 10-21, 40, 255, 373, 334, 570, 663 

equal(ity) - 253 

equanimity (sama(tva), samayika) - 64, 69, 98, 124-125, 176, 
217, 227-233, 241, 252, 269, 429, 509, 521, 602, 641-642 

equilibrium - 184, 588 

eradication (aluficana) of the roots - 124 

erasing - 443 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 721 


error, erroneous or false awareness (bhranti) - 6, 15, 20, 50, 
74, 102, 113, 116, 135, 151, 155, 158, 163, 184, 188, 
235, 237, 296, 300, 302, 312-314, 317, 334, 351-352, 
435, 447, 478-479, 493, 500-502, 525, 533, 541, 557, 
562; 564-566, 569-572, 574, 579, 582, 584, 598, 614, 
614, 616-617,-619, 624-625, 638, 647 

erudition, see wisdom 

esana, see acquisition 

eSsence (see nature, essential) 

-less (nihsvabhava), theory that everything is, see 
Madhyamaka 

essential (anga) 

condition, s.v. 

-ism (svabhavavdda) - 179, 440 

-s, inmost (antaranga) - 204 

-s, Meaning (tattvdrtha), see thing, fundamental 
nature, s.v. 

standpoint or point of view, see perspective, substantial 

eternal (nitya)/noneternal, eternity - 4, 28, 31, 56, 105, 119, 
123-124, 132, 134-135, 138-139, 145, 164, 175, 178, 200, 
217, 239-242, 244, 246-248, 255-256, 259, 273, 289, 291, 
299-301, 313, 327, 344, 350, 353-354, 369, 374-375, 378, 
380, 389-391, 394, 399, 401, 405-407, 409-410, 413, 416, 
428, 433, 435, 447, 452, 481-482, 484, 489-491, 493, 
495-500, 508, 510-511, 517, 522, 524-526, 531-532, 543- 
544, 550, 552-553, 556, 563-568, 577, 581, 584, 586, 
588-590, 592, 598, 635, 647-648, 651-652, 654-655, 661 
happiness, s.v. 

-ism - 305 
-ity of a self, s.v. 
pleasure, s.v. 

ethics, ethical - 9-10, 15, 29-34, 40, 60, 68, 70, 116, 129-130, 
157, 178, 182, 220, 222, 419, 429-430, 432-433, 443, 
486, 510, 567-568, 585, 593, 608, 640, 667 

etymology - 75, 227-228, 233, 280-281 

eulogy - 178, 183 


722 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


eunuch (kimpurusa) - 166, 216, 368 

evambhitanaya, see viewpoint, strict constructionist 

evenness (samatd) - 444 

evident, self- - 561, 574 

evil, see bad 

evolute (parindmya, vyakta) - 185, 495, 588-589 

evolution (parindma) (see also transformation) - 228, 318, 
325, 331, 391, 395-396, 419, 421, 503, 588-589, 651, 65 

exaltation - 122, 284, 431, 514 = 

example (drstanta, udadharana) - 13, 170, 184, 237, 536, 545 
, fallacy of the - 237, 540 

excess - 32, 85-86, 193, 212-215, 354, 365, 367, 416, 501, 
630, 650 

excitement, sexual (purusaveda) - 63 

excluded middle, s.v. 

exclusion from the opposite (apoha) - 290, 303, 423, 506 

excretion - 123 

exercise - 117, 379 

exhaling, see breath 

exhortative - 220 
mood - 613 

exist, coming to (bhava) -182 

existence (astitva, sadbhava, sat, sattd) (frequent occurrence, 
not expanded here) 
, ascription of (vidhi), see affirmation 
in many, see inherence 
, hominal (samvrtisat) - 
, peranent, see permanence 
, pure, see vision, purity of 

expansion (asamhara)/contraction (samhara) - 199, 383-385, 
514, 635 

experience (anubhava, anubhiti, bhoga, samvedana, 
upabhoga) - 8, 14-15, 37, 49, 55, 62, 98-99, 106, 113- 
114, 119, 146, 163, 194, 276-277, 286-288, 293, 310, 
329, 332, 334, 383, 395, 439, 447-448, 453, 466, 475- 
476, 482, 484, 496-497, 501, 503, 530, 539, 556-558, 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 723 


564-565, 568, 572-575, 582, 584, 586, 649 
-obstructing karma, see karma, feeling-obstructing 
, stream of, s.v. 
, repeated - 59 
experiment(al) (prayoga, prdyogika) - 405, 407 
expiation, see penance 
expression (vacas, vyafijana) - 151, 182, 230, 236, 522, 562 
extension - 79, 99, 491 
extent 
, Spatial, see area 
, temporal, see duration 
external (bahir)/internal (antar) 
cause, S.v. 
mark, s.v. 
object, s.v. 
self, s.v. 
extinction - 482, 566, 568, 574 
extrasensory awareness or vision, see awareness, extrasensory 
extreme view, see perspective, one-sided 
eye (caksus) - 18, 161, 168, 185, 196, 215, 257, 293, 321, 
336-338, 358-360, 376-377, 387, 393, 408 
-ointment, see kohl 
's rays - 337, 408 
facility, see ability 
fact 
, alogical - 569, 571 
, felt - 563, 565-567, 569, 573, 58 
faculty . 
, mental, see mind 
, moral, see moral(ity) 
Faddegon, Barend - 97-98, 503, 516 
failure 
, cause of - 441 
of conduct, s.v. 
to act (anusthana) - 441 
to recognize, see recognition, failure of 


724 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


faint - 319, 354, 360 
fairness - 640 
faith (drsti, sraddha) (see also school) - 47, 69, 92, 128, 133, 
138, 160, 162, 176, 180, 196, 224, 244, 266, 308, 311, 
317, 378, 433, 439, 450, 575, 613, 643, 659 
, Tight (samyak-) - 33, 85, 160, 247, 308, 415, 428, 455, 
458-461 
-deluding karma, s.v. 
wrong or false - 74, 84, 93, 117, 127, 135, 416, 493, 652 
fallacy (abhdsa, ahetu) - 13, 148, 157, 274, 278, 300, 304, 
400, 541-542, 544-545, 578 
inferential, see reason, fallacious 
of convention - 280 
of memory - - 539 
of perception - 276-277, 352-353, 565, 569, 614 
of recognition - 539 
of the example, s.v. 
of the paksa, s.v. 
of the reason (hetvabhasa) - 13, 150, 237, 278-279, 289, 
297, 298, 539-540, 545 
of tarka, s.v. 
of the thesis - 237 
of verbal authority - 541 
, Tight - 352 
fallen (apakrsta) - 136-137, 232, 631-632, 642 
false(hood, -ity) (mithya(tva), mrsda) - 17, 19, 49, 59, 61-62, 
74, 85, 111, 113-117, 120, 123, 135-136, 139, 144, 146, 
151, 153-158, 163, 171-172, 188, 200, 214, 261, 266, 
269, 276-278, 291, 300, 312-313, 316-317, 334, 344-345, 
349-350, 353, 369, 394, 413, 415-417, 419, 457, 471, 
473, 481, 484, 486-487, 493-494, 500-501, 509, 516, 518, 
523, 536, 546, 554, 556, 561-562, 564, 566, 570-572, 
574, 577-577, 580, 582, 607, 613, 619, 621, 624, 634, 
636, 646-647, 653, 656, 672 
fame - 92, 252, 645, 649 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 725 


family - 68, 78, 127, 133, 172, 256, 420, 430, 433, 450, 506, 
622, 652, 658, 661 

fast(ing) (see also restraint) - 32, 84, 102, 224, 341, 415-416, 
420, 429, 433, 457, 509, 512, 648 
to death, see suicide 

fat - 653 

fate, see destiny 

father (pitr) - 25, 156, 198, 208, 244, 251, 322, 409, 411, 
470 

fault (cheda, dosa) - 108, 127, 134-135, 147, 157, 188, 228, 
238, 242, 249, 268, 276, 313, 393, 400, 415, 441, 460, 
547, 552, 661 
in the example, s.v. 
-finding - 258 
-less - 238, 244, 281, 460, 547, 655 

favor - 76, 189, 434, 453, 487, 642 

favorable/unfavorable, see good/bad 

fawn-eyed - 246 

fear (bhaya) - 30, 60-61, 63, 83, 131, 215, 223, 261, 289, 
317, 333, 350, 396, 453, 457, 551, 576, 611, 625, 642- 
644, 653 
-less(ness) - 238, 244, 281, 460, 547, 655 

feces - 133, 369 

feeling (vedana) - 54, 58, 64, 70, 171, 173, 262, 387, 395, 
428, 519, 581, 619, 621-622, 642 
, bad - 530, 650 
, good - 530 
, happy, see happiness 
-obstructing/producing karma, s.v. 
, pleasant/unpleasant, see pleasure 
, sad, see sadness 
, sexual, see desire, sexual 
, tactile, see tough 

felt fact, s.v. 

female (stri) (see also woman) - 63, 160, 166, 172, 175, 252, 
350, 352, 461, 464, 611, 614, 622, 625 


726 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


festival - 415-416 

fetter - 33, 179, 223, 567 

fever - 134, 190, 501 

fictitious - 552 

fiery (taijasa) 
body, s.v. 

figurative (naigama) - 378-379, 613 
speech, s.v. 
standpoint, see perspective, conventional 

filth (naraka)y - 132, 214, 282, 643, 656-657 
-house (-grha) - 256 

finger (angula) - 132, 324, 385, 480 
-like, see self, fingerlike — 

fire (tejas) - 14, 30, 32, 51, 106, 122, 132, 141, 157, 165, 
199, 221, 223-224, 246, 253, 268, 337, 358-359, 364-365, 
371, 375, 389, 408-409, 414, 429, 436, 445, 450, 463- 
464, 480, 497, 510, 540, 574, 593, 609, 635, 654, 656 
, circle of (alatacakra) - 169, 296 
, flame of a, see flame 
, forest-, s.v. 
-fuel - 221, 345, 382, 420 
-heat - 309-310, 323, 335, 349, 355, 378, 386, 591 
-smoke - 274, 340, 342, 535, 539, 550-552 

fish - 68, 253, 386, 516, 635 

fitness (yogyata) - 448, 465 

flame - 187, 211, 221, 362, 375, 434, 510, 650 

flavor - 292, 513 

fleeting (iryapatha) karma, s.v. 

flesh - 363-364, 423, 485-486, 640 

fluctuation (cala, vrtti) -- 331, 618 

fluid(ity) (drava(tva)) - 284, 359, 363, 386, 491 
body, see body, transformative 

fluorescent - 363 

flute - 405 

flux, see momentariness 

foe, see enemy 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 727 


followers, ancient Jain (ganadhara) - 36, 73, 128, 229, 340, 
379, 442 

food - 37-38, 64, 68, 81, 84-85, 89-90, 132, 137, 253, 319, 
323, 363, 399, 408-409, 415, 418, 429, 610-611, 621, 
640, 645, 655, 659-660 

, sanctified (prasada) - 654 

fool - 140, 157, 184, 240, 244, 249, 252, 254, 257, 263, 283, 
436, 553, 643, 649, 653-654, 658 

foot (pada) - 159, 254-255 

forbearance (ksamd) - 59, 64 

forbidden act, see karman, nisiddha 

force, see power 

ford (tirtha - 3, 511 
-maker (-nkara), see Tirthankara 

forest - 132, 216, 616, 643, 645-646, 649-650, 652, 655, 657- 
659 
-fire - 313, 643, 649 

forgery - 85 

forgiveness (ksdnti) - 68, 220, 419 

form (ripa) - 55, 229, 276, 282, 311, 323, 345, 354, 360, 
385, 389, 473, 492-493, 532, 560, 598, 635 
-filled/-free (sakara/nirakara) - 56, 455, 619 

formality - 90 

fortnight (paksa) - 402 

fortune, good - 649 

fourfold negation (catuskoti) - 146 

fragrant - 381, 404 

Frauwallner, Erich (von) - 201, 233, 664 

freedom (see also liberation) - 157 
from activity, see activity, cessation of 
from contamination, s.v. 

friction(less), see colliding/noncolliding 

friend(liness) (anukampd, maitri) - 12, 31, 61, 86, 138, 181, 
244, 253, 258, 317, 322, 415, 320, 432, 444, 470, 640, 
647-649, 654, 660 

fright, see fear 


728 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


frog - 356 
fruit(ion) (see (karmic) maturation) 
-juice - 127, 408, 434, 470 
, jack-, s.v. 
frustration (duhkha) - 36, 53, 57, 61-62, 81, 98-99, 107, 112, 
118, 126, 173, 178, 440, 450-451, 469, 503, 635 
-producing concentration, ‘s.v. 
fuel - 211 
-fire, s.v. 
fulfilment, see attainment 
fundamentals, see category 
furnace (putapaka) - 480 
future 
birth, s.v. 
time, S.v. 
Gadyacintamani (Vadibha Simha) - 263 
gahilu - 249 
gain (labha) - 50, 68, 160, 163, 212-213, 242, 258, 350, 352, 
503, 547, 644, 646 
-obstructing karma, s.v. 
gambling - 646 
ganadhara, see follower, ancient Jain 
gandha, see smell 
Gandhahasti Siddhasena (760) - 438, 462-468 
gandharva, see god, singing 
Gandhi, L. B. - 426 
Ganga dynasty - 159 
Ganitasarasamgraha (Mahaviracarya) - 469 
gap (avyavadana) - 582 
gara, see desire for future benefits 
garb (linga) - 128-129, 131-134, 136-137 
garbha, see womb 
garden - 642 
garland - 644 
garment, see clothes 
gatha - 110, 138, 227, 459, 483, 506, 521, 532 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 729 


gati, see birth; course; movement 

gau, see cow 

Gautama, see Buddha 

gem, see jewel 

gender - 243, 281, 311, 347, 614 
, female, s.v. 
, masculine, see male 
, heuter, S.v. 

general 
standpoint, see perspective, general 

generality (samanya) (see also universal property) - 12, 197, 
279 

generation, spontaneous (sammurchana) - 166, 263 

generator (kartr) - 498 

generous/ungenerous - 369, 648 

genetic code - 358 

genus/species - 63, 77-78, 93, 171, 292, 297, 359-360, 371, 
579, 599-600, 611, 620 

ghanodadhi, see air envelope, dense 

ghata, see pot 

ghatiyakarma, see karma, destructive 

ghee - 121, 491 

Ghoshal, Sarat Chandra - 139-140, 265-270, 535, 546-554, 
604-606, 633-634, 664 

ghost - 302, 661 

gift (see also alms) - 32, 59-61, 63, 85, 96, 126, 134, 257, 
416, 418, 430, 468-469, 576 
-obstructing karma, s.v. 

giver - 130, 416, 420, 648 

giving (ddna) - 32, 50, 163, 251, 352, 456, 625, 640 
-obstructing karma, see karma, gift-obstructing 
up, see abandoning 

gladness - 61 

glitter, see glow 

glory (adlambana) - 141, 173, 260, 454, 471, 514, 645 

glow - 79, 296, 368, 471 


730 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


glue - 82 

go, see cow 

goat - 157, 486 

gocara, see content; home; residence 

God (bhagavan, ifvara) - 34, 112, 125, 141, 204, 206-207, 
246, 267, 314, 435, 443, 461, 492, 543-544, 588, 591-593 
"s awareness, S.v. 
's commandment, s.v. 
's body - 592 

god (deva, sura) - 34, 39, 52-54, 56, 59, 63, 76-80, 87, 102, 
104, 121, 128, 130, 134, 141, 157, 160-162, 166, 170, 
173, 180, 254, 319, 350, 363-364, 366, 369-371, 417-418, 
433, 435, 440, 442, 444, 450, 453, 457, 460, 464, 470, 
476, 491-492, 504, 511, 546, 593, 611, 617, 619, 622, 
633, 648, 657 
, bhavanavasin - 370 
of passions (kama-) - 644 
, rebirth as a - 39, 131, 173, 491, 493-494, 623 
-s, abodes of the (bhavanda) - 218 
's awareness - 543-544 
-s, sacrifice to the, see sacrifice 
(vyantara-), s.v. 

goddess (devi) - 546 

gold - 85, 117, 148, 412, 432, 434, 465, 504, 559, 646, 650 

Gommatasara (Nemicandra Saiddhantika) - 605-626 
?Viramartandi (Camunda Raya) - 606 
-Vrtti (KeSavavarman) - 606 

GommateSvara statue - 604 

gong - 405 

good (kuSala, fubha) - 58, 79, 83, 97-98, 114-115, 120, 124, 
126, 132, 135, 218, 232, 251, 253-254, 256, 368, 394- 
395, 428-430, 433, 440, 442, 450-451, 453, 461, 486, 
492, 500-501, 530, 532, 546-547, 599, 615-616, 618, 630, 
637-638, 640, 646, 649-651, 658-659 
act, S.v. 
attitude, s.v. 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 731 


conduct, s.v. 
, highest - 178, 471, 645 
inflow, see merit 
karma, s.v. 
thought, s.v. 
Gopendra - 440 
gotra, see lineage 
-skhalana, see misspeaking 
gourd - 344, 434 
grace - 183, 428 
grades of existence - 105, 240, 243, 248, 251, 254, 259-260 
graha, see planet 
graha, see grasping 
grain - 366, 408, 482 
grammar, grammatical (vydkarana) - 24, 159, 264, 311-312, 
320, 330, 347, 410, 423, 523, 534, 626 
correctness - 347 
howlers, s.v. 
logic - 316 
rules - 204, 260 
Grammarian (vaiyakarana) - 301, 305 
grasp(ing) (grdha), see perception 
grass - 88, 645 
gratefulness - 431 
gray coloring - 353, 369, 617 
greed (lobha, samparaya) - 31, 62, 64, 67, 83, 157, 172-173, 
214, 253, 349-350, 352, 471, 546, 600, 614, 624, 653, 
656, 659 
, absence or lack of (Sauca) - 64, 68, 255, 419, 453 
green - 412 
grha, see house 
grief, see sad(ness) 
gross(ness) - 57, 81, 105-106, 121, 173, 244, 276, 367, 371, 
381-385, 388, 390, 392, 405, 408, 410, 501, 588, 598, 
609, 612, 618, 635 
group (skandha), see aggregate 


732 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


growth - 112, 399 

guess(ing) - 624 

guest (atithi) - 415-416, 429, 456, 486, 594 

Gujarat - 36, 422, 665 
University - 46 

Gujarati language - 181, 264, 424, 427 

guna, see quality 
-s in Samkhya - 187, 312, 387-388, 396, 435 
-sthana, see stage of progress 
, the word - 185, 198 
-vrata - 429 

Gunabhadra (870?) - 468-471, 533 

Gunadhara - 468 

gupti, see restraint 

guru, see teacher 

gustatory organ - 612 

habit - 47, 127, 175, 419, 429, 646, 653 

habitat(ion) - 350, 565 

hair - 30, 108, 252, 534, 582 

Haladhara - 426 

hallucination - 281 

halo - 350 

hammer - 253-254 

hana, see avoidance; restraint 

handicap - 371, 395, 470 

hani, see abandonment; regression 

happiness (sukha) - 70, 98-99, 101-102, 104, 108, 117, 139, 
151-152, 175-176, 204, 215, 219, 224, 238-241, 246-247, 
249-250, 259, 269, 313, 354, 356, 366, 384-386, 396, 
430-434, 450, 469-470, 484, 532, 548, 644, 646-647, 652, 
654, 658-661 

hara, see Siva 

hard(ness) - 81, 364-365, 404, 645, 650 

hardship - 180, 183 

hare's horn, s.v. 

hari, see Visnu 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 733 


Haribhadra Siri (770) - 234, 421-462, 472, 671 
harm(ful) - 30, 32, 81, 108, 190, 232, 254, 360, 373, 0 
589, 638, 640, 669 
harmony/discrepancy - 159, 167, 276, 282, 302, 362, 517 
harsh(ness) - 88, 258, 407, 430, 622 
hasya, see laughter 
hate, hatred (dvesa) - 152, 175, 178, 197, 218, 350, 429, 431, 
433, 441, 471, 648, 650 
head - 157, 255, 479 
health - 406, 419, 432-433, 655-656 
hearer (§ravaka) - 151, 174, 231, 328, 404, 451, 539, 553 
hearing (Sravana) - 15, 121, 135, 294, 312, 317, 326, 328, 
338-339, 359-360, 374, 392, 404, 406-407, 415, 428, 453, 
540, 553 
heart (hrdaya) - 246, 428, 433, 508, 510-512, 615, 643 
heat - 45, 57, 82, 86, 118, 131, 221, 224, 309-311, 314, 317, 
323, 335, 349, 355, 361-362, 369, 378, 385-387, 408, 
522, 574, 591, 635, 650, 658 
heaven - 49, 55-56, 70, 79, 98, 110, 129, 134, 139, 141, 165- 
166, 218, 223, 244, 250, 254, 341, 350, 366, 368, 432, 
464, 476, 594, 610, 617, 622-623, 654-656 
heaviness, see weight 
heedless (aprayatna) - 108 
height -157, 369 
hell - 38, 54, 77, 98, 118, 139, 165-166, 172, 218, 250, 254- 
255, 341, 350, 368-369, 464, 500, 617, 622-623, 661 
-being (ndraka) - 39, 49, 52-54, 56, 63, 76-77, 80, 121, 
160-162, 166, 240, 350, 352, 354, 356, 358, 363-364, 
366, 369, 371, 418, 494, 522, 610-611, 615-616, 633, 
661 
help(ful) - 47, 60, 68, 83, 111, 131, 168, 328, 348, 358, 621, 
635-636, 640, 646, 663 
-less(ness) - 64, 88, 456, 646 
helper - 386, 401, 418 
, karmic (nokarman) - 116, 362, 407, 613, 621 
-8, passions’ (nokasaya) - 62, 350, 352, 628 


734 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


, senses' (noindriya) - 615 

Hemacandra (1150) - 16 

heretic - 38, 200 

hero - 3, 244 

heterogeneous(ness) - 504, 549 

hetu, see cause; reason (in an inference) 
-abhasa, see fallacy of the reason: 
, collocative (sahacdra) - 537 
, karana - 301 
, sattva- - 301 
, the term - 144, 235-237, 274, 301, 535-541, 550-551 
-vada - 199-200 

heya, see avoided, what is to be 

Himalaya - 559 

Himasitala, King of Kalinga - 265 

himsa, see violence 

Hindi - 155, 211, 306, 413, 419, 475, 502, 521, 542, 600-601, 
639 

hindrance, obstacle (antaraya, pratibandhaka) - 65, 89, 102, 
108, 163, 218, 223, 251, 336, 360, 393, 396, 399, 430, 
460, 494, 535, 594 
-producing karma, see karma, energy-obstructing 

Hinduism - 4-5 

hita, see worthy 

hoax - 322 

hole - 166, 219, 324, 383 

hollowness - 321 

homage - 66, 110, 178, 428, 432 

home or abode (Glaya, ayatana, gocara) - 19, 54, 89, 130, 
139, 188, 219, 240, 244, 249, 254, 383, 413, 564, 583, 
591,633, 645, 658, 665 
-less (andagdra) - 171 

homogeneous - 504, 549, 576, 580 

honey - 485 

honor - 88, 173, 433, 451, 518-519 

horn - 235, 340, 400 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 735 


, cow's - 314 
, donkey's - 147, 525, 536 
, frog's - 356 © 
, hare's - 280, 374, 390, 418, 549-550 
horse - 290, 390, 499, 583 
(in chess), see knight 
hot, see heat 
house (grha) - 254, 366, 407, 419, 606, 657, 661 
, filth-, s.v. 
of worship (caitya-) - 130 
householder (grhastha) - 32-33, 61, 70, 137, 171, 425, 430, 
457, 460-461, 470-471, 485-486, 594, 640, 661 
, duties of a - 70, 139, 484 
(Sravaka), see seeker 
, vows of a - 61, 84-86, 415-416 
howler, grammatical - 327 
hrdaya, see heart 
Hsuan-tsang - 177 
humble, humility - 182, 414, 453 
humors, the - 389, 409 
hunger - 37, 45, 88, 163, 431-432, 611, 645, 655 
Huns - 177 
hunting - 32 
hymn - 11, 111 
iccha, see intent(ion) 
ice - 513 
idealism - 286 
, Buddhist, s.v. 
, subjective - 576 
identification 
, conceptual (samjnda) - 150, 321, 387 
, false - 312 
, individual - 360 
identity (abheda, tadatmya) - 45, 103-104, 198, 232, 241, 
268, 290, 295, 297, 299-301, 473, 477, 479, 505, 537, 
549, 553, 556-559, 561, 563, 578-580, 582, 584, 586-587, 


736 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


591 
-cum-difference (bheddbheda) - 289, 299-300, 559, 567- 
568, 583-584 
, self- , s.v. 
idol (bimba) - 437 
ignoble, see noble/nonnoble 
ignoramus, see fool 
ignorance (ajfiana, avidya) - 36, 50, 113, 116, 121, 143, 152- 
153, 157, 175, 181, 183-184, 186, 212, 219, 238, 288, 
296-297, 313, 329, 334, 352, 407, 442, 448, 451, 539, 
547, 556, 561, 563-569, 571-573, 577-578, 582, 625, 648, 
652 
ihdjfidna, see awareness, directed 
illness, see sickness 
illumination (pratibhdsa) (see also fire) - 20, 185, 328, 534, 
572, 588 
, principle of, see sattva 
, self. - 286, 475 
illusion (bhranti) (see also error) - 31, 149, 281, 289, 291, 
296-297, 447, 451, 475, 557, 561, 577, 582, 586, 619, 
629, 638, 646 
, double-moon, see moon, double 
image 
, Jain (pratima) - 130, 177, 350, 454-455, 605 
of a god - 254 
imagination - 288, 595, 653 
imbalance, personal - 185 
imbibability, see drink 
immeasurable - 158, 197 
immediate (pratyaksa)/mediate (paroksa) 
awareness, S.v. 
perception, s.v. 
perspective, s.v. 
immobile, see mobile/immobile 
immutable, see unchangeable 
imperative mood - 613 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 737 


implication (niksepa) - 274, 315, 527, 548, 560 

impossibility (anupapatti) - 101, 142, 269, 291, 299, 303, 330, 
564 
otherwise (anyatha) - 301 

impression, see (dispositional) trace 

impulse - 66 

impurity - 64, 113, 152, 420 

inability, see ability(/inability) 

inaction, inactive - 56, 118, 168-169, 220, 222, 345-346, 362, 
375, 377-378, 391, 401, 405, 416, 465, 593 

Inamdar, V. B. - 422 

incantation, mental (mantra) - 67, 220, 257, 444, 638 

incite (pravart-) - 207, 464, 473 

inclination (pravrtti) - 60, 87, 190-191, 313, 353, 403, 628 
, Tight (sammaktva) - 50, 62, 120, 127, 129, 135, 262, 

349-350, 607, 638 

incoherence, -t, see coherence 

inconclusive (anaikantika) reason - 278, 540, 545 

incontinence (abrahma) - 60-61, 83 

independence (asahaya, avasyaka, svatantrya) - 4, 46, 121- 
122, 124, 155, 200, 244, 272, 291-292, 300, 310, 317, 
327-328, 343, 345, 373, 395, 431, 433, 443, 466, 515, 
528, 544, 552, 558, 562-564, 574, 579, 580, 590-591 

indescribable, see inexpressible 

indeterminable (anirvacaniya) - 287, 570, 586 

India 
, South - 46, 94, 335 
, West - 46, 225 

indicator (jfiapaka, vacaka) - 150, 517 

indifference --117, 148, 214-215, 238, 241 

indirect awareness, s.v. 

indiscipline (avirati) - 59, 62, 67, 114, 416-417, 636 

indistinct awareness, S.v. 

individuator (vigesa) (see also particular) -12, 203, 209-210, 
268, 291, 300, 424, 435, 523, 534 

indolence - 415, 650 


738 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Indra - 79, 212, 246, 251, 311, 319, 426, 646, 649 

Indrabhiti Gautama - 36 

Indralal - 600 

Indranandin (939) - 605 

indriya, see sense-organ 
-jdna, see awareness, immediate 

induction - 19, 21 

indulgence - 350, 353, 416, 419, 625, 646 

inebriation - 354, 366 

inert - 175 

inertia, see tamas 

inexplicable, see indeterminable 

inexpressible (avaktavya) - 111, 146, 150-151, 160, 471, 527 

infallibility - 20, 180 

infatuation - 34, 102, 105, 107-109, 212, 216, 223, 243, 249, 
253-254, 470 

inference (anumdna) - 13-14, 20-21, 141, 148, 150, 161, 186- 
186, 196, 235-237, 268, 271, 273-274, 277-279, 281-282, 
285, 293-299, 334, 339-342, 376, 397, 435, 439, 444, 
451, 476-480, 534-537, 539, 545, 549-551, 553-554, 557- 
558, 560-561, 577-580, 583, 591, 600, 614 
, fallacy of, see fallacy, inferential 
, member of an (avayava) - 13 

inferiority - 131, 172 

infinite (ananta, atyanta) - 25, 70, 101, 106, 122, 132, 144, 
152, 169, 171, 197, 218, 241, 246, 250, 318, 323-324, 
330, 344, 351, 365, 374, 377-383, 387, 391, 402, 404, 
410, 412, 434, 463, 487, 489, 493, 500, 516, 573, 588, 
618, 630 
bliss, s.v. 
-ly infinite (anantdnanta) - 409, 599, 618 
mode, s.v. 
regress, S.V. 

inflow or influx, karmic (dsrava) - 8-9, 47, 58, 63-64, 68, 82- 
83, 88, 97, 108, 110-113, 116, 138-139, 152, 170, 172, 
216, 218, 222-223, 269, 300, 318-319, 324, 414, 419-420, 


GLOSSARY-INDEX - 739 


467, 500, 528-530, 588, 601-602, 609, 618, 624, 627, 
636-637, 642 
, bad, see demerit 
, cessation of, s.v. 
, good, see merit 
inhalation - 257, 396 
inherence (samavaya) - 12, 103, 142, 148, 186, 291, 310, 
313, 413, 420, 435, 481-482, 493, 519, 542, 544, 549, 
551, 583, 590-591, 593 
, co- - 142, 148 
in another substance (anyatra samavaya) - 549 
in what is conjoined (samyuktasamavaya) - 539 
inheritance - 220 
initiation (cheda) - 157, 314, 422 
ceremony - 90 
, proper (-upasthdna) - 64 
initiator 
of movement (dharma) - 56, 80, 95-96, 105, 120, 122, 
126, 160, 168-169, 199, 218, 244, 247-248, 323, 343- 
344, 377-379, 381, 385-390, 401, 410, 413, 487-488, 
498-499, 521, 523, 525, 532, 612, 618, 635-636 © 
of stasis (adharma) - 56, 80, 95-96, 105, 120, 122, 160, 
168-169, 199, 218, 244, 247-248, 323, 343-344, 373, 
377-379, 381, 385-390, 401, 410, 413, 487-488, 498- 
499, 521, 523, 617-618, 635-636 
injunction - 432, 456 
' , Vedic - 417, 435 
injury/noninjury - 30, 36, 59, 85, 123, 147, 429, 453, 485- 
486, 509, 520, 640 
innuendo - 328 
innumerable, innumerate - 5, 105, 219, 248, 297, 323-324, 
336, 359, 365, 370, 378, 382, 402, 404, 410, 463, 506, 
512-513, 515, 612, 631-632 
inquiry (jijfidsd) - 11, 13, 90, 446, 462, 514, 613 
inscription - 34, 36, 38, 533 
, Sravana Belgola - 140, 158, 605 


740 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


insect - 52, 366, 415, 445 

inseparability (ayutasiddhi) - 111, 203, 235, 379, 390, 479, 
544, 584, 586 
-relation (ayutasiddha) - 310, 390, 505, 544, 549 

insight - 310, 390, 505, 544, 549 

insignia, bodily - 120 

instant, temporal (samaya) - 314, 361-362, 403, 489, 615, 
625-628, 630-632, 639 

instigation (uttejana) - 510 

instigator (kadraka) - 150, 389 
of stasis/movement, see initiator 

instinct - 461 

instruction, see teaching 

instrument (al cause) (nimittakarana) - 156, 212, 311, 323- 
324, 371, 393, 403, 421, 484-485, 511, 644, 656 
(karana), see cause par excellence 
, Musical - 81, 137, 405 

instrument of true cognition (pramdna) - 13-21, 47-48, 72, 
142, 145, 150, 152, 160, 185, 190, 217, 230, 235-236, 
238, 271, 273-281, 283, 291, 293, 299, 303-304, 307-309, 
317, 320-321, 326-332, 341, 372, 376, 435, 446, 474-481, 
523, 526-527, 533-534, 536, 538-539, 541-543, 563, 567- 
569, 571, 577-578, 581 

instrumental - 307, 328, 339, 373, 377, 377, 389, 402 
case, S.v. 
cause, S.V. 

instrumentality (karaka) - 511, 516-517 

instrumentality (sadhana) - 48, 72, 327 

instrumentation - 311 

insult(ing) - 640 

integration - 465, 520, 538, 630, 632 

intellect - 68, 181, 218, 651-652 
-ion, see mahat 
-veiling karmic matter, see karma, intellect-veiling 

intelligence (buddhi (see also awareness) - 157, 159, 327, 
331, 404, 438, 592-593 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 741 


intensity (Sakti) - 62, 85, 87, 92, 165, 214-215, 218, 398, 449, 
599, 614, 623, 637 
of fruition, see maturation, karmic 

intent(ion) (iccha) - 27, 83, 94, 98, 126, 162, 170-171, 214, 
219, 270, 300, 346, 416, 443, 449, 453-454, 481-482, 
485-486, 551, 590, 598 
, speaker's - 278, 486 
to act (samrambha) - 58 

intercourse, sexual - 31, 611 

interdependence - 149, 156-157, 509 

internal organ (antahkarana, manas) - 48, 51-52, 56, 72, 75- 
76, 82, 161, 165, 169, 185, 196, 199, 337, 357- 358, 360, 
375, 393-395, 446, 463, 615-616, 624 

interpenetration - 95, 151, 517 

intoxication - 86, 157, 176 

introspection - 456 

intuition (drk) - 135, 509, 513-514, 578 
, self- - 561, 580 

iron (loha) - 117, 224, 253, 365, 383, 407 
, hot - 221, 364, 408 

irrational - 563 

iryapatha, see act, fleeting 

isolation, see knowledge, perfect 

Istopadesa (Pujyapada) - 174 

isu, see straight 

isvara, see God 

jackal - 512 

jackfruit - 467 

Jagatrunga (850) - 469 

jaggery - 135, 359, 379, 656 

Jaimini - 6, 416, 467 

Jaiminiya, see (Pirva) Mimamsa 

Jain, Balabhadra - 130 

Jain, Bhagchandra - 264, 472, 532, 554-555 

Jain, Biharilala Kothera - 542 

Jain, Champat Rai - 174 


742 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Jain, Dhanya Kumar - 174 
Jain, Gokul Chandra - 555 
Jain, G. R. - 669 
Jain, Hiralal - 528, 601-602 
Jain, Jagdish Prasad - 174, 670 
Jain, Jyoti Prasad - 605 4 
Jain, Kailash Chandra - 468, 487-502 
Jain, L. Chhunna Mal - 484, 627-631, 633 
Jain, Mahendra Kumar - 46, 201, 266, 270, 284-413, 419, 
468, 603-604, 665-666, 669-672 
Jain, Nani Lal - 307, 349, 372, 416, 598-599, 669 
Jain, Phulcandra - 468 
Jain, Rikhab Das - 671 
Jain, S. A. - 25, 159, 663, 667, 670 
Jainendravydkarana (Samantabhadra) - 140, 159, 666 
Jaini, J. L. - 46, 110, 469, 606, 669 
Jaini, Padmanabh S. - 483, 507-521, 641-661, 668 
jalpa, see debate; recitation; sophistry 
Jambidvipa - 54, 77-78 
, geography of - 46-47, 78 
Jambudvipaprajnaptisitra - 38 
Jambudvipasamasa - 39, 46 
Jambuvijaya - 201, 427-434, 670-671 
japa, see recitation 
jar, see pot 
jara, see age, old 
jaradyu, see placeta 
jati, see caste; rejoinder, futile; universal property 
Jaya, see victory 
Jayarasi (650) - 555 
Jayasena (998) -502, 639-641 
jealousy - 59, 128, 312, 333, 413, 496, 500-501, 648, 650 
jewel - 193, 219, 248, 480, 636 
-s, three - 111, 123, 219, 252, 261, 529, 637, 639, 649 
Jhaveri, Mani Lal - 71 
jijfidsa, see inquiry 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 743 


jina, the, see Mahavira 
Jinabhadra Gani (600) - 40, 211-233, 425, 427 
Jinacandra (900?) - 472 
Jinadasamahattara (7th century)- 66 
Jinadatta (an imaginary man) - 539 
Jinadatta (740) - 422 
Jinadeva - 263 
Jinapati - 555 
Jinapravacanarahasyakosa, see 72. Purusarthasiddhyupaya 
Jinasena (837) - 468-471, 533 
Jinavani, Mother - 660 
Jinavara - 247 
Jindal, K. B. - 606 
Jinendra, see Mahavira 
Jinendrabuddhi, see Pujyapada 
Jinesvara Siri (1028) - 462 
Jitakalpasutra - 40 
Jitari or JitaSatru, King - 422 
jiva (see life; living being; self) 
Jivajivabhigamasittra - 39 

aghuvrtti (Haribhadra Suri) - 426 
Jivandhara - 263 
Jivasiddhinibandhana (Anantakirti) - 600 
jriana, see awareness; cognition; knowledge 

-indriya, see cognition, organ of 
jfidpaka. see indicator 
jnapti, see sutra, understanding 
jnata, see known 
Jnatadharmakathangasutra - 39 
jnatr, see knower 
jrieya, see knowable 
Johnson, William J. - 93, 669-670 
Johnston, Edward Hamilton - 94 
Johrapurkar, Vidyadhara Pasusa - 424, 600-601 
joy - 148, 175, 240, 451, 528, 580 
judging - 395 


744 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


judgment (see also awareness, construction-filled; proposition) 
- 290, 293, 558-560, 565-566, 570 

jJugupsa, see disgust 

juice, fruit-, s.v. 

juniority - 81 

justice, dispenser of - 593 

Jvalamalinakalpa (Indranandin) - 605 

Jyotiska (a type of god) - 55, 79-80, 370 

kala, see time 

Kalatita - 443 

Kalinga - 265 

kaliyuga - 155 

kalpanda, see construction, conceptual 

Kalpasttra(s) - 40 

Kalydnamanirastava (Parsvanatha) - 176 

kama, see desire 
an aim of man - 135, 247, 306 

Kanada (100?) - 200, 479 

Kanakanandin (975) - 603, 605 

kandaka, see split 

Kannada language - 603 

Kapadia, Hiralal Rasikdas - 421-427, 436-438, 458-459, 461- 
462 

Kapila - 184, 200, 267, 416, 547 
's system, see Samkhya 

kapota (kavoya?) coloring - 213, 215 

karaka, see case, grammatical; instigator; instrumentality; 
noun 

karana, see cause par excellence 

karana, see cause 
-dvara - 229 . 

karma (karman) (see also act(ion); cleansing of karma; inflow, 
karmic; matter, karmic; maturation, karmic) - (the word 
"karma" occurs on almost every page) 
, age-determining (adyuska-), see life-span 
, awareness-obstructing or -veiling (j@ndvaraniya) - 59, 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 745 


62, 89, 114-115, 171, 173, 282, 352, 396, 626 
, bad - 87, 116, 123, 170, 447 

’ character-veiling or conduct-deluding (cdritravaraniya: -)- 
87, 89, 172, 353, 414, 467, 620 

, deluding (mohaniya-), s.v. 

, destruction or purging off accumulated (ksaya), see 
subsidence 

, destructive (ghatiya-) - 99, 130, 211, 259, 467, 503, 531, 
546, 620, 630, 638 

, duration of - 62-63, 418, 599, 622, 637 

, energy-obstructing (virydvaraniya-) - 165, 350, 360, 418, 
627-628, 630 

, faith-deluding - 172 

, feeling-obstructing (vedanavaraniya-) - 70, 89, 418, 503, 
620 

, fleeting (iryapathika) - 58, 64, 170, 467 

, force of (vidhi) - 243 

, gain-obstructing (labhavaraniya-) - 418 

, giving-obstructing (ddndavaraniya-) - 352 

, good - 63, 87, 116, 170, 216, 223 

, hindering- or hindrance-producing - 89, 101 

, inflow of, s.v. 

, intellect-veiling - 392 

, knowledge-obscuring, see karma, awareness-obstructing 

, law of - 509, 585, 654, 656 

, length of life determining, see life-span 

, lineage-determining (gotra-) - 63, 70, 87, 620 

, maturation of, s.v. 

, mind-veiling - 357 

, nondestructive (aghdtiya-) - 620 

, ripened (prarabdha) - 172, 258, 351, 428, 467, 657 

, scripture-veiling (srutavaraniya-) - 326 

, subsidence-cum-destruction of, see subsidence-cum- 
destruction 

, touch-veiling - 360 

, transfer of (-dana) - 624, 626, 629 


746 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


, type-determining (nama-) - 63, 70, 104-105, 112, 163, 
338, 357, 492 
, view-deluding (darsandavaraniya-) - 87, 87, 92, 172, 350, 
467, 620 

karmabhumi - 78 

karman, see act(ion); karma; karmic notion 

Karmaprakrti (Kanakanandin) - 603 

karmendriya, see organ, action- 

karmic 
body, s.v. 
bondage, s.v. 
dust - 18, 117 
place (karmabhumi) - 54 
state (-bhdva) - 47-48 

karmic product or particle or accumulation (pudgala) -56-58, 
62-64, 67, 76, 80-81, 104-107, 112-115, 117-122, 124, 
126-128, 130, 132, 164-169, 171, 223, 247-249, 284, 301, 
303, 336, 351, 353, 355, 357, 362, 366, 372-373, 376, 
380, 385, 419, 440, 484, 487-489, 494, 497-498, 500-501, 
504, 599, 602, 612, 617-618, 620, 625, 627-628, 634-636, 
653-654, 657 

Karnataka - 158 

kartr, see agent; generator 
-tva, see case, nominative 

karund, see compassion 

karya, see effect 

kasaya, see passion 

Kasayapahudasitra - 41 

Kasthasanghiya - 533 

kathamcit - 

Kaukila - 416 

kavi, see poet 

Kavyamimamsa (RajaSekhara) - 472 

kaya, see body 
-tad, see embodiment 

KeSavavarni - 606 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 747 


Kesin - 39 

kevala, see pure 
-dargana, see vision, direct/indirect 
-jfidna, see omniscience 

kevalin, see omniscient 

Kharapatika - 486 

killing - 30-31, 59, 83, 108, 118, 130, 147, 179, 214, 254, 
415-417, 439, 441, 485-486, 531, 608, 652, 659-660 

Kilvisika - 79 

kim 
-itidvdra - 231 
-purusa, see eunuch 

kind-hearted - 453 

king - 39, 111-112, 114, 126, 159, 177, 181, 197, 265, 325, 
422, 531, 604, 646, 649 
-dom - 85, 114, 250, 460, 469, 646, 648, 655 

kinnara,. see god, transvestite or dancing 

klega, see bondage-breeder 

knight (the chesspiece) - 320 

knot (granthi) - 128, 441-442, 449, 451, 520 

knowable (jfieya)/unknowable - 141, 152, 297, 380, 503, 510, 
540 

knower (jfidnin; jfidtr, kevalin, pramatr) - 15, 18, 70, 99-100, 
105, 111, 116-119, 124-126, 185, 195-196, 245-246, 304, 
327, 329, 332, 445, 475, 480, 494, 503, 515, 520, 526, 
530-531, 566, 613, 638, 660 
, wise, see sage 

knowledge (bodhi, jfiana, vidya) (see also awareness) (entries 
so numerous it is not worth trying to cite them here) 
and action, path of, s.v. 
, desire for, see inquiry 
, absolute or omniscient or perfect (kevala-), see 

ommniscience 

(buddhi), see intelligence 
, direct or empirical, see perception 
, embodiment of, see knower; self 


748 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


, instrument of, s.v. 
-obstructing karma, see karma, awareness-obstructing 
of what is already known, see proving what is already 
accepted 
, self-, s.v. 
, theory of, see epistemology 
, verbal, see awareness, scriptural 
knownness (jfidtata) - 550 
kohl - 337, 339, 406 
Korur - 177 
Kothiya, Darbarilal Jain - 546, 555 
Kotyacarya (725) - 234 
krama, see order 
Krause, Charlotte - 177, 183, 670 
kriyd, see act(ion); condition 
-yoga - 593 
krodha, see anger 
krttikd, see constellation, krttika 
ksam4, see forbearance 
ksana, see moment 
-bhanga, see momentariness 
ksanika(tva), see momentary(ness) 
ksanti, see forgiveness 
ksapaka, see destroyer 
ksapana, see destruction 
Ksapanaka, see Siddhasena Divakara 
Ksapanasara (Nemicandra Saiddhantika) - 633 
Ksatractidamani (Vadibha Simha) - 263 
ksatriya - 8 
ksaya, ksdyika, see destruction; subsidence 
ksetra, see (spatial) location 
ksobha, see disturbance 
kula - 420 
Kumar, Mahendra, see Jain, Mahendra Kumar 
kumdra gods - 370 
Kumaranandi Bhattaraka (776) - 468, 565 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 749 


kumdrapdlacaritra - 176 
Kumarasena - 533 
Kumarila (660) - 437, 547 
Kumudacandra, see Siddhasena Divakara 
Kundakunda (400?) - 6-10, 12, 14, 16, 18-19, 21-26, 28-29, 
46, 93-139, 140, 202, 483, 487, 502, 507, 533, 666, 669 
Kuru region, life in the upper (uttara-) - 78 
kusala, see good 
labdhi, see attaiment, initial 
-indriyakarman, see karma, subsidence-cum-destruction 
Labdhisdra (Nemicandra Saiddhantika) - 626-632 
labha, see gain 
lac - 399, 407 
Laghtyastraya (Akalanka) - 269-284 
Vivrti (Akalanka) - 270-284 
Tatparyavrtti (Anantakirti) - 600 
Prameyaratnavali (Anantavirya) - 604 
Laghutattvasphota (Amrtacandra Siri) - 507-521 
Lahiri, Ratna - 126-138, 154-158, 270-421, 487, 521-527 
laity, see lay 
lake - 246, 258, 529 
laksana, see mark, distinguishing 
, sva-, see particular, pure 
Laksmi - 511 
Laksmisagarasuri - 472 
lame - 127, 243, 313 
lament - 213, 645, 650-651, 653, 659 
lamp - 80, 160, 187, 221, 310, 328-329, 333, 356, 365, 375, 
382-384, 404, 406, 414, 432, 434, 471, 475, 535, 645 
-light, s.v. 
language (see also speech) - 21, 56, 78, 111, 126, 134, 151, 
181, 199, 226, 264, 297, 302-303, 305, 335, 339, 362, 
364, 392, 405, 423, 465, 474, 478-479, 534, 614 
laudable, see praiseworthy 
laughter (hdsya) - 63, 83, 87, 350, 353, 467, 625 


750 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


laukika, see ordinary 
-dharma, see preparation 
lava, see moment 
Lavana - 78 
law - 4, 466, 516, 564, 631-632 
, causal, s.v. 
, karmic, see karma, law of 
, monastic - 40 
, moral - 581 
of contradiction, s.v. 
of split, see duration, law of split 
of the fallen, 631 
lay, laity - 29-32, 34, 425, 458, 460-461 
-man - 29, 39, 66, 90, 128, 155, 232, 308, 319, 429, 509, 
658 
-woman - 29, 90, 429 
laziness - 129, 415, 622 
leaf - 127, 255, 458, 645, 660 
learned - 60, 152, 184, 260, 269, 644, 652 
learning - 178, 180-181, 332, 602, 663 
, capable of (samjnin) - 619 
, pride in one's - 89 
lecturing - 420 
leg - 292 
legend - 37, 40, 177 
leitmotiv - 183 
lentil - 408 
seed (masur) - 338 
leper - 432, 649 
lesya, see coloring 
letter (see also syllable) - 283, 311, 405, 436, 483 
levitation - 364 
liberation (moksa, mukti, nirvana) (see. also freedom) 
(mentioned on most pages, often many times) 
life, living (iva) - 3-4, 20, 30-36, 67, 85-86, 88, 92, 105, 157, 
171, 182, 189, 191, 193, 238, 240, 256, 268, 307, 317, 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 751 


319, 372, 396, 399, 430-431, 433, 457, 460, 464, 470- 
471, 485, 499, 510, 528, 594, 597, 617, 637, 642-643, 
658-661 . 
, aim(s) of, see aim of man 
, cause of - 81, 418 
, continuity of - 585 
, desire for - 86, 419, 441 
, disciplined - 59, 89 
, duration of, see life-span 
-force - 319 
-form or way or style - 3, 41, 161, 325, 342, 349-350, 
362, 366, 378, 383, 430, 497 
, future, see rebirth 
, last - 440-441, 461 
, length of or -duration or -span - 36, 54-57, 70, 76-77, 
79-81, 87, 105, 126, 165, 172, 232, 362, 367, 396, 
418, 470, 531, 585, 607, 611, 613-614, 617, 620-621, 
627, 629-632, 634 
, loss of, see death 
, monastic - 88, 426, 602 
, next - 458, 580-581, 617, 619 
, one more to live, see rebirth, one more 
, previous, see birth(s), previous 
, religious, s.v. 
-principle, see breath 
, religious - 460, 469, 640 
-substance - 283 
light, illumination (see also fire) - 57, 82, 102, 252, 282, 337, 
355, 371, 387, 408, 414, 510, 513, 518, 520, 534, 613, 
635 
, lamp- - 80, 328, 333, 375, 382-383, 404, 406, 414 
, SUN-, S.V. 
-weight, see weight, lightness of 
lightning (vidyut) - 368, 392, 396, 407 
liking (rati) - 63, 449 


752 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


limb (anga) - 300, 342, 384, 399, 416, 488, 523 
, inner (antar-) - 340 
-less - 378, 384 
of an inference - 536 
, outer (bahir-) - 340 
-s of the Jain canon - 38-40, 131 
-s of the body - 242, 655 
-S, pre-, see Purvas 
limiting movement, s.v. 
line, straight (Sreni) - 52, 166 
lineage (gotra) - 223 
-determining karma, s.v. 
linga, see feeling, sexual; garb; mark; reason (in an inference); 
symbol, Brahmanical 
linguistic 
act, S.v. 
activity, s.v. 
argument - 562 
awareness, see awareness, scriptural 
viewpoint, see perspective, linguistic 
words - 404 
lion - 356, 661 
listening, see hearing 
living being, see life, living 
lobha, see greed 
location (adhikarana, ksetra, niksepa) - 48, 58, 64, 78, 100, 
165, 218, 284, 323, 325, 370, 384, 406, 511, 617-618 
locative case, s.v. 
locus (adhdra, alaya, Gsraya) - 48, 96, 101, 148, 167, 288, 
314, 321, 333-334, 357, 373-374, 381, 386, 524-525, 551, 
580, 590, 665 
of ignorance - 564, 566 
logic (nydya) - 20-21, 154, 156, 178, 180-181, 183, 236, 265, 
345, 354, 377, 450, 466, 490, 555, 559-560, 562-563, 
566-568, 571, 573, 576, 578, 581-682, 591 
, Buddhist, s.v. 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 753 


, grammatical - 316 
loha, see iron 
loka, see universe; world 
Lokdditya - 469 
Lokantika gods - 55 
Lokatattvaniraya (Haribhadra Suri) - 426-427 
Lokavibhdaga - 121 
longing (@kamksda, nidana) - 61, 85, 212, 312, 655 
lord (indra) - 55, 92-93, 259, 380, 502, 660 
-ship - 371, 493 
Lord, see God 
lotus 350, 353, 660 
coloring - 220 
love - 220, 350, 353, 360 
of self - 661 
lucid(ity), see clear(ness) 
luminous, lustrous - 371, 464, 
body, s.v. 
luxury - 350, 645 
lying (i.e., telling a lie (anrta) - 31, 60, 65, 83, 91, 130, 170, 
306, 415, 569 
, abstention from - 30, 32 
lynching - 215 
Madhyamaka Buddhism - 401 
madman's utterances - 74 
madness - 156, 187 
mhagic(ian) - 141, 244, 266, 546 
magnet - 337 
mahabhita, see element, great 
Mahakala temple in Ujjain - 177 
Mahanisithasitra - 40 
Maharaj, Ksullakabahubalaji - 641 
Mahasena woods - 228 
mahat (in Samkhya) - 184-185, 327, 345, 391, 446, 548, 588- 
589 


754 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Mahavira - 3-6, 17, 29-30, 32-36, 38-39, 41, 95, 100, 112, 
116, 120, 123, 127, 131, 154, 157, 177-180, 190, 198, 
228-229, 243, 247, 249, 255, 257, 259, 261-262, 281, 
340, 350, 370, 431, 435, 502, 508, 519, 607, 637-638, 
668 

Mahaviracarya (850) - 469 

Mahayana Buddhism - 186-187 

Mahe$gvara, see God 

maintenance, see subsistence 

maitri, see friend(liness) 

Makkhali(putta) Gosala - 35 

mala, see defilement; stain 

Malayagiri Stiri (1280) - 459 

male - 37, 63, 87, 160, 173, 252, 311, 350, 352, 461, 464, 
467, 614, 625 

malice - 86, 158 

Mallavadin Ksamasramana (550) - 201-211 

malodours, see smell, bad 

Malvania, Dalsukh - 70, 224-233, 458, 671 

Malwa - 177 

mama(tva), see mine(ness) 

mana, see pride 

manahparyaya, see telepathy 

manas, see mind; organ, internal 

Mandali - 609 

mandira, see temple 

mango - 359, 367, 409, 467 

manifestation - 33, 59, 89, 108, 133, 1°39, 188, 250-251, 493, 
517, 550, 580, 589 
, Sudden - 52-53, 56, 76, 166, 364 

Manikyanandin (940) - 10, 14, 16, 20-21, 533-542 

Manoharalala - 306 

manojhana, see awareness, mental 

Mansukhbhai Bhagubhai - 462 

mantra, see incantation, mental 

Manusa region - 98 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 755 


M4anusottara, Mt. - 77 
many (see also multiple) 
- aspects or many-sidedness, see aspects, many-sided view 
of 
/one - 48, 143-144, 148, 153; 158, 194, 267, 290-291, 
' 294-295, 322, 374, 465, 480-481, 523-526, 544, 557, 
597 
Manyakheta - 265 
mara, see death 
mdrdava, see modesty 
marga, see path 
-avatard, $.v. 
Marici, son of Rsabhadeva - 532 
mark, distinguishing (laksana, linga) - 27, 51, 65, 69, 74-75, 
92-93, 103, 111, 130, 164, 167, 186, 190, 197, 204, 229- 
230, 235, 237, 271-272, 276, 285, 293-295, 297, 300-301, 
317, 329, 335, 347, 355, 375, 400, 413, 416, 423, 456, 
458, 466, 474-476, 478-479, 482, 504, 535, 546, 548, 
577, 582, 617 
, general (samanya-), 8.v. 
, specific (svalaksana), see particular, pure 
Markara - 94 
marriage - 32, 85, 180, 416, 511 
mdsa, see month 
Maskari - 609 
massive, see size, large 
mastery (siddhi) - 451, 454 
material (mirta)/immaterial (amirta) - 7, 80, 100, 106, 111- 
113, 115, 123, 125, 145, 164, 198, 206, 301, 303, 339, 
359, 365, 389, 392-393, 399, 407, 521-522, 540-541, 577, 
580-581, 610, 616-617, 627, 634 
aggregate, s.v. 
body, s.v. 
cause, s.v. 
(=prakrti), s.v. 
substance, see substance 


756 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


materialist, see Carvaka 
mathematic 
-al analysis - 338, 615, 627 
-s, Jain - 341, 351 
Mathura - 36, 225, 533 
matijfidna, see awareness, immediate 
matter, see karmic product 
aggregate or cluster, see aggregate, material 
, charity-obstructing, s.v. 
, intellect-veiling, see karma, intellect-veiling 
, karmic, see karmic product 
(prakrti), s.v. 
, quasi-karmic - 360, 407 
, subtle, see subtle particle 
- , transformational (pudgala), see karmic product 
maturation, karmic (audayika, phala, udaya, vipaka) - 8, 47, 
50, 63, 69, 87, 91, 100, 104-105, 120, 138, 153, 165, 
172, 179, 194, 214-215, 218-219, 223, 251, 246-247, 253, 
258, 313, 333, 344, 348, 353-354, 367-369, 389, 396, 
426, 429-430, 432-433, 437, 471, 494-497, 498, 530, 593, 
599, 612, 621-622, 625-628, 632, 637, 640, 653-654, 657, 
663 
maya (see also deceit) - 150, 415 
meaning (artha) - 7,51, 75, 281-283, 329, 331, 390, 405-406, 
441, 454, 463 
of a word (pada-) (see also category) - 7, 200, 209, 227, 
278, 281, 305, 554 
, ascribed, see configuration 
, sentence- (vakya-) - 153, 283, 604 
means of cognition, see instrument of true cognition 
measurement, mensuration (pramdna) - 47, 80, 218, 315, 324, 
341, 351, 492, 633 
meat - 132, 181 
-eating - 370, 486, 533 
medical 
aid - 306, 640 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 757 


literature - 212 
science - 547 

medicine - 67, 138, 161, 189-190, 312-313, 317, 367, 415, 
429, 547, 659 

meditation (bhavand, samadhi) (see also concentration) - 65, 
68-69, 101, 108, 124-125, 129, 132, 134, 211-212, 215- 
218, 220-224, 239-242, 243-247, 249, 256-260, 415, 420, 
444, 449, 451, 461, 471, 480, 486, 501, 509, 512, 528, 
530, 593, 602, 626, 638-639, 642, 644, 650, 656-657 
, self- - 106, 108, 124, 133, 135-136, 139, 175-176, 241, 

243-244, 246, 248-250, 256, 528-530, 647, 651, 653, 
655, 658, 661 

meek - 220 

member of an inference, s.v. 

memory (smarana, smrti) - 19-21, 72, 86, 91, 186, 255, 262, 
272-273, 275-277, 281-282, 285-286, 296, 298-299, 329, 
332-333, 335, 338, 350, 354, 356-357, 379, 395, 431, 
443, 465, 478-479, 535, 539 
-trace, S.v. 

mendicant (sddhu) - 36, 219, 308, 652, 661 

mental (manasa) 
act, $.v. 
activity, s.v. 
attitude, s.v. 
awareness, S.V. 
effort, s.v. 
energy, S.Vv. 
faculty, see mind 
peace, S.v. 
perception, S.v. 
power, S.v. 

mercenary, merchant - 219, 616 

mercy - 178, 180, 214 
-killing - 486 

merging, see combination; devolution 


758 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


merit (punya) - 8, 60, 68, 86, 97, 106-107, 110-111, 136, 
141, 145, 151-152, 180, 187-188, 240, 244, 248-250, 256- 
257, 260, 262, 269, 319, 341, 389, 435, 440-441, 444, 
469-471, 500-501, 528, 548, 581, 593, 602, 615, 618, 
620, 636-637, 640, 657 _ 

, religious - 255, 773 

Meru, Mt. - 54, 78-79, 221, 223, 371 

metaphor (upacdra) - 171, 236, 547 

metaphysics (see also ontological) - 5-7, 10, 15, 18, 30, 32 

metrics - 260 

mica - 405 

middle, law of excluded - 558 

milk - 99, 131, 135, 148, 340, 344, 355, 399-400, 491, 493, 
647, 657 
-curd, S.v. 

-ing, time of - 402 
, mother’s, s.v. 

mimamsd, see cogitation 

(Purva) Mimamsa - 6, 467, 474-475. 539, 541 
Bhatta, s.v. 

Prabhakara, s.v. 

mind (citta, manas) (see also internal organ) - 19, 59, 64, 82- 
83, 134-135, 161, 179, 187, 189, 194, 211, 215-216, 220- 
221, 235, 243, 251-252, 254-255, 258, 281-282, 319, 325- 
331, 335-338, 342, 358, 370, 376, 389, 391-396, 407-408, 
420, 423, 455, 457, 463, 465, 515, 526, 529, 531, 548, 
588, 593, 600, 619, 625, 635, 638, 642, 645-646, 654, 
656, 661 
, activity of, see activity, mental 
, balanced (samarasa) - 58, 181, 437 
, calmness of, ‘see peace, mental 
, composed, control of - 220, 432, 647, 650 
(hrdaya), see heart 
-less (amana) - 220, 222, 241, 393, 581, 635 
, pure/impure - 129, 189, 239, 246, 250-251, 255, 259, 

262, 281, 432, 456-457, 646, 648, 654, 657, 659 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 759 


-s, other - 162, 288, 326, 433 
-reading - 180 
, Steady/unsteady - 175, 190, 211, 222, 224, 246, 257, 
501, 530, 643, 650 
, substantial, see perspective, substantial 
-veiling karma, s.v. 
mindful(ness)/unmindful(ness) (pramatta) - 214-215, 510, 
642 
mine(ness) (mama(tva)) - 67, 108, 189, 430 
minister (=chaplain) - 79 
to a king - 265, 604, 660 
minute 
-8, 24 (nalika) - 402 
-s, 48 (muhirta) - 65, 70, 92, 211, 402, 631 
miracle, miraculous - 92, 350 
mirage - 451, 470, 556, 562, 575 
mirror - 246, 408 
misapprehension, see error 
misappropriation, see appropriation 
misconception, see error 
miserable, misery - 101-102, 104, 139, 181, 239, 244, 248, 
250-251, 253-256, 258-260, 269, 428, 431, 548, 640 
misfortune - 215, 644, 647 
missing the point (arthantara) - 13 
mistake, childish (balaprayoga) - 541 
mithya, see false 
mix(ed) (prakirnaka) - 40, 69, 81, 164, 172, 348, 598, 607, 
613-614, 616, 625, 629, 632 
mleccha, see (non)noble 
mobile (trasa)/immobile - 51, 87, 129-130, 165, 232, 357, 
463, 485, 499, 608, 612, 624, 635 
mobility - 499, 612 
, universal - 354 
modal - 155 
construction - 284 
-ity, mental - 190 


760 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


-ity of prakrti, s.v. 
perspective, s.v. 
revelation - 320 

mode (parydya, vyafijana) - 5, 20, 23, 25-27, 49, 57, 82, 99, 
102-105, 149, 154, 158, 161, 190, 197, 203, 221, 228, 
280, 284, 290, 320, 323, 325, 335, 339, 341, 346-347, 
356, 376, 466, 488-491, 495-496, 498-499, 667 
, cessation of - 410, 466 
, conditioned - 522 
, construction-filled/-free, see awareness, _construction- 

filled/-free 

, infinite - 496 
, Karmic - 115 
natural/nonnatural - 122 
; qualitative, see perspective, qualitative 
-s, standpoint of, see perspective, modal 
, substantial, see perspective, substantial 
, temporary rising - 2349 

modesty (mdrdava) - 64, 66, 68, 109, 170, 220, 432, 437, 
483, 551, 

modification (bhava) - 19, 22, 28, 50, 97, 100-101, 104, 107, 
112, 144-115, 117, 121, 155, 162, 192-193, 242, 268, 
276, 290, 294, 310, 314, 348, 357, 369, 374, 394, 400, 
406, 409-410, 463, 484, 488-489, 491, 493, 506, 522, 
524, 553, 612, 610, 615, 619, 634-635, 637, 667 
of prakrti, see evolution 
, self- - 393 

moha, see confusion; delusion 
-niya karman, see karma, deluding 

moisture - 321 

moksa, see liberation 

molecule (skandha) - 57, 105-106, 112, 121-122, 167, 169, 
297, 613, 615-616, 622, 636 
, assimilation of - 166 
, functional (vargana) - 613, 618, 628, 636 
, karmic, see karmic product 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 761 


, mental(-covering) (noindriya) - 613, 615, 619 
, SUpET-, 5.V. 

moment (ksana, lava, samaya) - 50, 52, 58, 76, 82, 93, 103, 
105, 122, 156, 164-166, 168, 187, 208, 210, 246, 248, 
279, 314, 321, 326-327, 333-334, 336, 356, 362-363, 395, 
397, 402, 404, 447, 452, 493, 498, 503, 505-506, 518, 
523, 581-582, 585-588, 595, 608, 613, 620, 623, 667 

momentary(ness) (ksanika(tva)) - 104, 145, 147, 156, 161, 
187, 210, 224, 245, 273, 275, 277, 279, 289, 299-301, 
314, 326-327, 332, 333-334, 346, 365, 395-396, 400, 403- 
406, 415-426, 446-447, 473, 478-479, 482, 486-587, 489, 
499, 506, 517-519, 533, 548, 558, 577, 581-582, 585, 
589, 595-596 

monarch, universal - 76, 460 

monastery - 663 
, chief of - 90, 129 

monastic 
code - 90, 467 
duty - 68 
law - 40 
life - 88, 426 
order - 90, 460 

money - 660 

monism, see nonduality 

monk (nirgrantha, sddhu) - 5, 29, 31, 37-40, 53, 60, 65, 68, 
70, 76, 90, 92, 108-110, 118, 120, 123, 135-139, 171, 
215-216, 218-221, 232, 239, 252-253, 258, 422, 429-430, 
432-433, 460, 470-471, 506, 528, 602, 640-641, 668 
, cadmdastha (?) - 220 

monkey - 650 

month (mdsa) - 79, 84, 129, 402, 429, 512 

mood (linguistic), declarative, exhortative, imperative, etc. - 
613 

moon (candra) - 39, 79-80, 276, 326, 342, 370-371, 645, 650 
, double - 276, 475 
, full - 429 


762 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


-light - 414 
, hew - 429 
-stone (candrikdntamani) - 376 
moral law - 581 
morality, morals (Sila), see ethics 
mortality, see death 
mortar - 407 
mortification, see ascetic(ism) 
mosquito - 88, 534 
moth - 253 
mother - 131-132, 244, 363, 432, 470, 642, 646, 660 
, a barren - 539 
's milk - 399 
-s of the doctrine - 432 
motion or movement (gamana, gati, karman) - 4, 12, 52, 55, 
66, 79-81, 83-84, 86, 93, 126, 149, 179, 187, 199, 219, 
248, 296, 307, 314, 323, 340, 343-344, 353-354, 361-362, 
371, 373-375, 377, 381, 384, 386-387, 396, 401-402, 429, 
435, 497, 516, 522, 531-532 
, cyclic (visreni-) - 361 
, downward (apasarpini-) - 3 
, fulcrum or principle of, see initiator of motion 
, initiator or instigator of, see initiator of motion 
, perpetual - 289, 596 
-less(ness) (Sailesi) - 70, 179, 217, 221 
, the earth's - 633 
, upward (utsarpini-) - 3 
motive - 139, 417 
mountain - 54, 77-79, 132, 222-223, 370, 378, 495, 633, 643, 
652 
moustache - 108 
movement, see motion 
mrsd, see false 
mud, see clay 
muhirta, see minutes, 48 
inter- (antar-) - 70, 211, 350, 531, 608, 631 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 763 


Mukhtar, Jugal Kishore - 155, 601 
mumuksu, see seeker 
Mundakevalin - 442 
mundane, see worldly 
muni, see ascetic; sage 
Municandra Siri (1100) - 422 
murccha, see attachment 
murta, see concrete; embodied; material 
music - 350 
mutual 
absence, s.v. 
dependence, s.v. 
mynah (bird) - 364 
myth(ology) - 39, 167, 370 
ndga, see snake 
Nagakumara - 661 
Nagarjuna (160) - 576 
naigama, see fallacy, nonanalytical 
-naya, see perspective, conventional 
nail - 252, 268, 364, 582 
Naiyayika, see Nyaya 
naked(ness) - 71, 88, 128, 133-134, 136-137 
naksatra, see constellation 
ndlika, see minutes, 24 
naman, see name; personality 
name (naman; samjiia) - 47, 71, 134, 209, 278, 290, 319-320, 
322, 324, 360, 498, 637 
and form (nadmarupa) - 323, 360, 389 
karma, see karma, type-determining 
Nandisitra - 40, 226-227 
Vivarana (Haribhadra Siri) - 427 
Curni - 427 
napumsaka, napurusa, see neuter 
na@raka, see filth; hell-being 
Narayana - 484, 648 
nastika, see view, other 


764 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ndstitva, see absence 


nature 
, essential or intrinsic or innate or own (svabhava, 


svaripa) - 15, 19, 23, 28, 58, 100, 103, 125, 129, 
133, 135, 141-1422, 149, 152, 157-158, 171, 175, 
187, 205-206, 238, 240, 243-244, 248, 256, 269, 272- 
273, 279, 282, 289, 291, 196, 300, 309-310, 329, 
346, 353, 376, 382, 405, 413, 440, 443, 445, 448, 
450, 481, 502, 504-505, 509-511, 514-516, 523-525, 
528, 530-531, 552, 588, 591, 642, 653 
, material, see karmic product 
Navapadarthanifcaya (Vadibha Simha) - 264 
navel - 129 
naya; see consideration; perspective 
Nayacakra (Mallavadin Ksamasramana) - 201-211, 233 
Nyayagamananusarini (Simhastragani) - 233 
Nayacakra (Devasena) - 521-527 
Alapapaddhati (Devasena) - 600 
necessity (niyama, niyati) - 205, 536, 553 
of being known together (sahopalambha-) - 579 
necklace - 193 
nectar, see ambrosia 
needle - 128 
negated, negatum - 560, 562, 581 
negation (apavdda, pratisedha) (see also absence) - 156, 188- 
190, 203, 269, 398, 555, 579-581 
as instrument of knowledge - 545 
, universal or total - 356, 575 
, fourfold (catuskoti) - 146 
negator - 58, 83, 560 
negative concomitance, see pervasion, negative 
neglect, negligence (pramdda, pramatta, pranaya) - 61-62, 67, 
173, 213-214, 218-219, 256, 415-417, 608, 636 
Nemicandra Saiddhantika or Siddhantacakravartin (980) - 
604-639 
nephew - 25 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 765 


net - 68, 256, 513, 516 
, karmic - 500, 658 
network, magical - 244 
neuter (napurusa, sanda) - 7, 53, 63, 166, 172, 175, 614, 625 
neutrality (upeksd) - 20, 61, 152, 212, 404, 550, 613 
nicagotra act - 60 
niddna, see longing 
nidhatti, see reservation 
nidra, see sleep 
nigama, see optimal 
perspective, see perspective, conventional 
nigamana, see conclusion (of an inference) 
night - 79, 84, 216, 402, 512, 633 
-blindness - 644 
vision - 355, 534 
nigoda - 164, 609-610, 612, 615, 618, 635 
nigraha, see restriction 
-sthadna, see argument, way of losing an 
nihilism (asadvdda) - 200, 576 
nihsvabhava theory, see Madhyamaka 
nikdcana, see preservation 
niksepa (see also ascription; implication; location; primacy) - 
26, 47, 209, 228, 298, 305, 458, 667 
nila, see blue 
nimitta, see instrument 
-kdrana, see cause, instrumental 
nipata, see particle, grammatical 
nirdkd@ra, see formless 
nirafijana, see untainted 
nirdesa (see mention; nature) 
-dvdra - 
nirgamadvara - 228 
nirgrantha, see monk, passionless 
nirjard, see cleansing (of traces) 
nirmala, see stainless 
nirnaya, see ascertainment 


766 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nirukti 
, Avasyaka-, s.v. 
-dvdra - 233 
nirvana, see liberation 
nirvartand, see constructing 
nirveda, see detachment, spiritual 
nirvikalpakajfidna, see awareness, construction(-filled)/-free 
nirvrtti, see visible 
niryapaka - 108 
nisarga, see natural 
nigcaya, see attainment; determination; plane, higher 
-naya, see perspective, practical 
-kdla, see time, ultimate 
-karma - 500 
nisedha, see existence, denial of 
niseka, see cell 
nisiddhakarma, see act, prohibited 
Nisithasitra - 40 
-Curni (Jinadasamahattara) - 66 
nissneha, see softness 
nitya, see eternal; permanent 
-karman, see act, regular 
nivrtti, see renunciation; withdrawal 
ntyama, see necessity; restraint 
Niyamasdra (Kundakunda) - 120-126 
niyati, see determinism; necessity 
noble/nonnoble/ignoble (drya/andarya/mleccha) - 54, 76, 78, 
188, 214, 224, 405, 453, 509, 610 
act - 444 
truths, s.v. 
noindriya, see mental-covering 
nokarman, see helper, karmic 
nokasaya, see helper, passion's 
nomenclature, see name 
nominal existence, s.v. 
nominative case, s.v. 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 767 


nonabsolutism, see aspects, many 

nonacquisitiveness - 84-85 

nonapprehension, see nonperception 

nonattachment (vairdgya) - 66-67, 108-109, 185-187, 215- 
216, 219-220, 350, 529, 644, 647-648 
to possessions, s.v. 

nonbeing, see absence 

noncognition as instrument of knowledge, see absence as 
instrument of knowledge 

nondiscrepancy, see harmony 

nondoer, see agent, non- 

nonduality (advaita) - 286 
of perceived experience (samvedana-) - 334, 545 
Vedanta, see Vedanta, Advaita 

nonerroneous (abhranta) - 235, 435, 478, 582 

nonexistence, see absence 

nonidentity, see difference 

noninjury, see injury/noninjury 

nonmaterial, see material/immaterial 

nonownership (@kificanya) - 64 

nonperception (anupalabdhi) - 275, 353, 477, 479 

nonsensory awareness, see awareness, verbal 

nonsentience, see not-self 

nonviolence (ahimsa) - 3, 12, 28, 30-33, 83, 85, 179, 261, 
341, 414, 419, 485-486 
, vow of - 416 

nose - 51, 161, 293, 338, 358, 396, 612 

nothing(ness) - 332 

not-self (ajiva, andtman) - 58, 68, 96-97, 105, 107, 113, 121, 
128, 169-170, 218, 231, 263, 300, 318-319, 321, 325, 
515, 521, 560, 562, 636, 638, 642, 644, 647, 656 

noun (kdraka) - 7, 319, 403, 550 

nourishment, see food 

novice, see seeker 

Nrpatunga (850) - 469 

Nrtattvanigraha, see Lokatattvanirnaya 


768 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nudity - 37, 129, 133-134, 253 

number (samkhy4a) - 48, 80, 93, 149, 163, 169, 271, 276, 295, 
324-325, 330, 347, 349, 371, 373, 378, 388, 402, 462- 
463, 498, 506, 524, 552, 593, 606, 610, 613, 615, 618 

numerable, numerate - 323-324, 359, 482 

nun - 29, 37, 40, 90, 429 
-s, rules for - 5 

nut, cleansing- - 348 

nutriment, nutrition, see food 

nyaya, see logic; reasoning 

Nydaya-Vaisesika, Naiyayika (see also VaiSesika) - 13, 21, 148, 
178, 183, 268, 273, 275, 286, 289, 300-302, 307, 310, 
313, 331-332, 336, 409, 435, 474-476, 481-482, 519, 536, 
539, 541-542, 544, 552, 555, 577, 584, 591, 593, 609, 
663 

Nyayamukha (Dignaga, actually probably Samkarasvamin) - 
422 
Commentary (Naribhadra Siri) - 422 

Nyayastitra (Gautama) - 13, 435 

Nyayavatara (Siddhasena Mahamati) - 176, 191, 234-238, 
462, 672 
Vivrti (Siddharsigani) - 472-483 

Nydyaviniscaya (Akalanka) - 284-297, 298, 665 
Curni or Vrtti (Akalanka) - 294-297 
Vrtti (Anantavirya) - 604 
Commentary (Vadiraja) - 284 

nymph - 246 

obeisance - 239 

Oberhammer, Gerhard - 664 

object (artha) - 17, 23-24, 27-28, 30, 48, 58, 65, 98-103, 108, 
110, 117, 119, 121, 143, 149, 151, 161, 182, 184-185, 
196, 210, 242, 244, 268, 271, 281, 286, 298, 303-305, 
329-330, 333, 336, 445, 449, 452, 455, 476, 478, 501, 
526-527, 534-535, 557-558, 580, 596-597 
, actual or existent, see real entity 
, €xternal or material - 7, 138, 146, 150-151, 175, 277, 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 769 


286, 288-289, 299, 305, 337, 392, 474, 550, 570 
of awareness, see content 
of valid cognition (prameya) - 13, 16, 18, 158, 258, 267, 
273, 276, 304, 595 
, sense-, see content 
» supporting (Glambana) - 215, 503 
objection (updlambha) - 13 
, false, see rejoinder, futile 
, rejection of the (parihdra) - 13 
objective, objectivity - 101, 109, 217, 271, 288, 330 
order of existence - 556 
oblation - 594 
obscuring, see obstruction 
observance (samiti) - 63-64, 109, 232, 460, 637 
obstacle, see hindrance 
obstructing karma, see karma, awareness-obstructing 
obstruction (antardya, avarana, pratigha, vyaghata) (see also 
veil) - 59-60, 65, 141, 154, 162, 194, 351, 353, 387, 392, 
480, 503, 535, 599, 622, 637 
obtained (updatta) cause, s.v. 
occasioning cause, see cause, instrumental 
occupancy, area of - 344, 348, 376, 399, 421 
occupation - 32, 123 
ocean - 47, 54, 77-78, 131-132, 218-219, 239, 253, 368, 432, 
532, 633, 659-660 
Odheyadeva, see Vadibha Simha 
odor, see smell 
offence, offending, offensive - 90, 430-431 
Ohira, Suzuka - 46-47, 71, 94, 159 
oil (sneha) - 117, 315, 365, 369, 381-384 
ointment, eye-, $.v. 
old age, s.v. 
olfactory organ, see nose 
omen, good 442 
omnipresence, see ubiquity 


770 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


omniscience, (kevaladarsana, kevalajfidna, sarvajfia) - 15-16, 
18-21, 34-35, 37-38, 59, 92-93, 99-101, 111, 141, 152, 
161, 163, 173, 180, 182, 190, 194-195, 197, 211, 216- 
217, 220-222, 229, 239, 241-242, 252, 254, 256-257, 259- 
260, 266-267, 271, 285, 298, 302-303, 316, 326, 330, 
332, 341, 344, 346, 350, 353, 356-357, 364, 367, 375, 
379-380, 385, 388, 390, 405, 420-421, 435-438, 449-452, 
459, 461, 471, 480, 484, 503, 509-517, 519-521, 523, 
525, 527, 536, 540, 543, 545-547, 554, 562, 571, 580- 
581, 599, 609, 613, 615, 636, 643, 658 

once-returner (sakrdavartana) - 444 

one(ness) (eka(tva)) - 111, 267, 300, 489, 506 
/many, see many/one 
-sided (ekanta) - 156, 158, 525, 624 
-sided view, see perspective, one-sided 

ontology (see also metaphysics) - 5-8, 10, 15-16, 39, 201, 560, 
564, 566 

operation, premature (udirana) - 367, 626 

operational condition, see cause par excellence 

operative karmic state (auddyika), see maturation, karmic 

opinion 
, common - 313 
, wilful - 316 

optimization, path of - 629 

orator, see speaker 

orbit - 497, 633 

order, monastic (samgha, sangha) - 90, 460 

ordinary viewpoint, see perspective, ordinary 

ordination - 108, 177, 468 

organ (indriya) 

, action-, S.v 

, internal, s.v. 

of awareness, s.v. 

, sense-, S.V. 

, type-determining, see karma, type-determining 
, Vision-obstructing, see karma, vision-obstructing 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 971 


, visual, see eye 

origin (utpdda) (see also beginning; rising) - 11, 13, 186, 191, 
273, 302, 332, 363, 412, 574, 591 

origination, dependent, s.v. 

Orissa - 36 

ornament - 85, 148. 422 

other(ness) (anya(tva)) - 103, 146, 226, 557 

(what) ought to be done - 150 

outcaste - 79 

outflow, karmic, see overflow 

overaccumulation of possessions - 59 

overextension (atiprasanga) - 542 

overflow (samudghdta) - 442, 619, 635 

overqualified - 453 

ownership - 31, 64, 254, 322-324, 430, 641, 665 

pacification - 217, 223 

pada, see foot; verse; word 

padartha, see category 

pain (duhkha) (see also frustration; sorrow) - 31, 36, 54, 59, 
62, 70, 77, 81, 131, 151-152, 171, 175, 212-213, 241, 
243, 249-251, 254, 258, 269, 307, 312, 350, 369, 389, 
395-396, 432, 451, 463, 470, 494, 497, 528, 580, 590, 
593, 622, 643, 645, 649, 652, 655, 659 

painter, painting - 246, 338, 577 

Paiya, see Prakrit 

paksa, see fortnight 

paksa (in inference) (see also thesis) - 237-237, 300, 402, 536, 
539-540, 545, 549-550 
-dharmatva - 300 
, fallacy of the, s.v. 

palace (bhavana) - 368, 370 

palate - 392 

pallor - 643 

palm - 361, 390, 645 
-leaf - 426 
tree - 470 


772 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Paficakalpasitra - 40 

Paficasaga - 459 

Paficasamgraha (Amitagati II) - 641 

Paricastikdyasadra (Kundakunda) - 7, 22-23, 29, 95-97, 524 
Tattvadipika (Amrtacandra Suri) - 487-502 

Paficastttraka (Cirantanacarya) - 671 
Vyakhya) - 427-434 

pandit (pandita) - 462 

Pannalal of Sujangarh - 639 

papa, see demerit 

paper - 367 

para, see enemy 

paraloka, see world, other 

paramanu, see atom 

paramarthika, see real 

paramasatya, see truth, ultimate 

paramatman, see self, supreme 

Paramatmaprakasa (Yogindudeva) - 238-260 

paranomasia - 183 

paraphernalia, see possessions 

paratva, see sequence 

parent - 323, 430-431 

parigraha, see appropriation 

parihara, see objection, rejection of the 
-visuddhi, see penance 

Pariksamukha (Manikyanandin) - 10, 16, 20, 265, 533-542, 
664 
-Prameyakamalamartanda) (Prabhacandra) - 664 
-Panjika (Anantavirya) - 665 

-Prameyaratnalamkara Abhinava Carukirti 
Pandacarya) - 665 

parinama, see evolution; transformation 

parinamika, see natural; transformation (of a trace) 

parinamya, see evolute 

parisaha, see discomfort 

parivyaya, see giving everything 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 773 


paroksa 
-jfidna, see awareness, indirect 
-pramdna, see instrument, indirect 
parrot -352, 364 
Parsva(natha) - 3-4, 35-36, 39, 177, 533 
Parsvanathacaritra (Vadiraja) - 603 
part (avayava) 
-less (akhanda) - 378, 447, 465, 469, 510, 588 
/whole, s.v. 
particle 
, grammatical (nipata) - 153 
, karmic, see karmic product 
, material - 87, 359-360, 389, 627 
particular - 8, 25, 27, 194, 203, 303 
(visesa) - 8, 12, 20, 144, 149, 194, 197, 200, 209, 269- 
270, 276, 290-291, 294-295, 473-474, 504, 517, 519, 
523, 536, 538, 552, 594, 638 
-ization - 192 
, pure (svalaksana) - 149, 192, 273, 291, 334, 477, 482 
-s, viewpoint of - 514 
paryapti, see development 
paryaya, see mode 
-astika, see perspective, modal 
passion (kasaya) - 3, 34, 36, 50, 58-59, 62, 67-69, 83, 92, 94, 
108, 114-116, 133, 139, 158, 165, 170-174, 179, 182-183, 
187-188, 197, 218-219, 224, 243, 246, 249, 256, 258, 
266, 350, 352-353, 417, 429, 457, 467, 471, 485-486, 
496, 511, 520, 541, 596, 607-609, 614, 616, 619, 621, 
623-625, 629, 637, 642, 644, 646-647, 649-650, 652-653, 
655, 659 
, expurging altogether (vitaraga) - 64, 213 
, female - 352 
» god of (kamadeva) - 644 
-less or -free - 109, 116-117, 124-125, 152, 170, 182, 240, 
$21, 435, 512, 529, 630 
-s' helper, s.v. 


774 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


, sexual - 106, 486 
past, see time, past 
paste - 157 
pasu, see animal; person, ordinary 
pata, see curtain 
path (marga(na)) 
, bhautika- - 185 
of action - 288 
of action and knowledge - 288 
of knowledge - 178 
, Tight (dharma) - 64, 68, 128, 312, 350, 434, 470, 643, 
651, 659, 661 
, Spiritual - 39, 189, 302, 509-510 
-s, fourteen stages of, see progress, stages of 
to liberation - 33, 47, 60, 67, 69, 97-98, 116, 120, 124, 
131, 136, 178, 181, 189-191, 200, 223, 240, 251, 
254, 257, 259, 261-262, 306-308, 311-313, 315, 318, 
361-363, 366, 432-433, 450, 485, 502, 507-512, 531, 
543-545, 553-554, 607, 611, 659, 668 
with deviations, see deviation 
, wrong - 129 
patient - 138, 189, 278, 616, 656, 659 
PatradeSavin, see Vidyananda 
Patrapariksa (Vidyananda) - 554-555 
patron, royal - 183 
Pattavali - 483 
paurusa, see (human) karma 
peace (Santi) - 175, 180, 240, 246, 249, 261, 325, 344, 429, 
431-432, 451, 510, 642, 645-646, 655, 657 
, inward, see equanimity 
peacock - 366. 
pearl - 338, 345, 376 
pen - 558-559 
penance (parihara, tapas, vifuddhi) - 32, 47, 59, 63-64, 68, 
86-87, 89-90, 97, 99, 110, 116, 172, 213, 219, 223, 251, 
253, 258, 269, 420, 441, 457, 468, 470-471, 507, 693, 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 775 


637, 639, 659 

penetrability - 381 

perception, sense- (darsana, pratyaksa) - 13-14, 18-21, 23, 72, 
75-76, 79, 99-101, 105, 120, 126, 150, 153, 158, 160- 
162, 185-186, 195-197, 204, 235-238, 241, 248, 271-277, 
281-282, 284-295, 298-299, 303, 311, 316, 326, 328-329, 
331-339, 341-344, 352, 354, 356, 358, 388, 394, 418, 
435-436, 439, 463, 471, 473-503, 534-536, 539-540, 545, 
553, 555, 564, 577, 581-584, 587, 589-591, 595, 598, 
612, 614-615, 638, 666 
, construction-filled/-free, see awareness, construction- 

filled/-free 
, contradictory - 352 
, direct or immediate/mediate or indirect - 156, 194, 276, 
279, 298, 307, 319, 327, 332, 334, 474 

, extrasensory, see awareness, extrasensory 
, false or fallacious, see fallacy of perception 
, indistinct, direct, etc., see awareness, indistinct, etc. 
, instrument of, see knowledge, instrument of 
, Mental (mdnasa-) - 299, 463 
, nonwandering, see nondiscrepancy 
-obscuring karma, s.v. 
, pure (visada-) - 480 
, Tight, s.v. 
, yogic (yoga-) - 440, 453 

percussive - 405 

perfect 
awareness, see awareness, pure 
concentration, S.v. 
conduct, s.v. 

perfected being (arhat, drhata) - 100, 102, 107, 110, 119, 
123, 163, 259, 443, 504, 530, 543, 545, 609, 538, 641 
(siddha), see self, liberated 

period, monthly - 129 

perishable - 219, 539-540, 643, 660 

permeability - 323, 365, 401 


776 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


perpetual, perpetuity (see also endless; life, length of) - 118, 
354, 370 ; 
perplexity (vicikitsa) - 61 
persistence (dhruva, samparayika, vartana) - 57, 69, 85, 146- 
147, 210, 221, 248, 289, 396-397, 401-403, 406, 410-412, 
466, 504-506, 522, 574, 587, 609, 621, 636 
person (purusa) . 
, common or ordinary (pasu) - 79, 118, 126, 204, 425, 
441, 451, 473, 596, 638, 660 
, qualified or great (dpta) - 120, 160, 185, 236, 285, 451, 
538, 543, 641 
personality (ndma) - 358, 364 
-making or -regulating karma, see karma, type-determining 
perspective or viewpoint (naya) - 6, 17, 28, 47, 49, 72, 74-75, 
97, 111, 113, 115-116, 119, 142-143, 147, 152-153, 155, 
157, 160, 178, 192-193, 197, 200, 202-203, 230-231, 279- 
284, 304-305, 308, 320-322, 328, 346-347, 348, 372-373, 
381, 399-400, 411, 481, 492, 402, 523, 526-527 
, absolute or exclusive, see perspective, higher 
, commonsensical or practical (vyavahdra-) - 17, 24, 26, 
75, 97, 111-116, 119, 166, 280, 305, 323, 347, 373, 
381, 492, 496, 502, 523, 528, 527, 571, 634-635, 637 
, conventional (naigama-) - 26-27, 50, 74, 280, 283, 304, 
346-347, 523-524 
, epistemic - 323 
, essential, see perspective, substantial 
, etymological (samabhirudha-) - 26, 75, 280, 305, 523 
, false or fallacius (dur-) - 135, 153, 279, 525 
, general or generic (samgraha-) - 26-27, 75, 279-280, 
346-347, 623 
, higher or pure or ultimate or absolute (nigcaya-) - 24, 
97, 111-113, 116, 123, 304, 323, 492, 496, 500, 512, 
528, 530, 634-635, 637-638, 649 
, (temporally) immediate (rjusiitra) - 26, 75, 280, 305, 
347, 523 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 777 


, linguistic (Sabda-) - 26, 97, 192, 280-281, 283, 304-305, 
347, 623 
, locating (niksepa-) - 192, 230, 305, 320 
, modal (paryayastika) - 23, 26-27, 97, 191-194, 200, 279, 
314, 320, 323, 346, 376, 390, 398, 412-413, 487, 
490, 523 
of meaning (artha-) - 283, 304 
, one-sided (ekdntika-) - 119, 148-150, 153, 156, 158, 
267, 269, 310, 374, 398-399, 401, 404, 484, 525, 
550, 553, 607, 624 
, practical, see perspective, commonsensical\ 
, pure, see perspective, higher 
, Qualitative (guna-) - 412, 504 
, representational (sthapana-) - 192 
, Straightforward, see perspective, immediate 
, strict constructionist (evambhutva-) - 75, 280, 305, 347, 
373, 381, 523 
, subsidiary (upanaya-) - 523-524 
, substantial (dravydstika-) - 23, 26, 97, 191-194, 200, 
268, 309, 314, 320, 323, 346, 376, 390, 398-399, 
403, 412-413, 463, 487, 490, 504, 523, 527 
, yYOgIC, S.V. 
perspiration - 383 
perturbation (udvelana) - 629 
pervaded, see hetu 
pervader, see sddhya 
= vydpaka - 538 
pervasion (avindbhdava, vydpti) - 142, 145, 149, 237, 249, 274, 
297, 301, 381-383, 386, 535-536, 539, 552, 579, 586 
, co- - 390 
, internal (antar-) - 237 
, hegative (vyatireka) - 149, 534, 536-537, 562, 579-580, 
600 


, positive (anvaya-)( 534, 536-537, 579-580, 700 
perversity - 184, 250, 416, 583 
phala, see maturation, karmic; result 


778 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


phase, functional (bhavakarman) - 642 
philanthropy - 102 
philosophy, school of, s.v. 
phlegm - 396 
physical . 
activity, see activity, bodily 
aggregate, see aggregate, material 
body, s.v. 
world, s.v. 
physician - 12, 220, 428, 547, 646 
picture - 130, 270, 551, 581 
piercing - 85, 131, 243, 404, 543, 655 
piety, pious - 30, 39, 84, 91, 219; 223, 251, 429 
Pihitasrava - 532 
pilgrimage - 130, 313, 457 
pindartha, see text, substance of the 
pink 
coloring - 617 
lotus - 353, 616 
pipdasa, see desire 
pisaca, see devil 
pitcher - °48, 268, 270, 540, 551 
pitfall - 470 
pitr, see father 
pity - 501 
place (bhimi) 
, karmic (karma-) - 54 
, rising (upapdda-) - 363 
(deSa, pradeSa), see space-point 
of birth, see birthplace 
placenta (jardyu) - 52, 364 
plane 
, higher (niscaya) - 501, 601 
, lower - 501 
planet (graha) - 79-80, 370-371, 633, 650 
plant (vanaspati) - 30-31, 51, 165-166, 319, 440, 497, 635 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 779 


plaster - 246 

plate - 77, 94, 311, 365, 383, 659 

play, child's - 451 

pleasure (sukha) (see also satisfaction) - 62, 68, 79, 81, 86-87, 
117, 128, 134, 157, 175, 189, 212, 243-244246, 249-252, 
255-256, 258, 269, 286, 307, 312, 329, 345, 389, 395- 
396, 419, 439-440, 451, 463, 470-471, 486, 494, 497, 
522, 528-529, 559, 577, 580, 593, 640, 643, 647-651, 
653-657, 659-661 
, eternal or endless - 493, 522, 531, 647, 652 
, heavenly or godly - 223 
, sensory or sensual - 101-102, 106, 130, 138, 241, 255, 

259-260, 307, 430, 470, 530, 643, 646, 652-654, 658 

plough(ing) - 361, 553 

poem - 183, 254 

poet(ics, -ry) (kavi) - 183, 483, 507-509, 511-517, 519-520, 
604 

point, space- (desa, pradesa) - 105, 107, 122, 167-171, 232, 
243, 248, 323-324, 342, 351, 363, 365-366, 372, 374, 
376-379, 381-386, 391, 401, 407-408, 410, 412, 421, 488, 
493-495, 497-498, 404-406, 516-517, 521-522, 526, 623, 
626, 635-637 

point-instant - 277 

poison - 135, 220, 367, 429, 441, 532, 582, 659-660 

polarization - 565 

pond - 83, 254 

poor - 157, 470 
, giving to the - 456 

populace, pleasing the (lokapakti) - 440 

popularity - 68 

positive (anvaya) 
example, s.v. 
pervasion, S.v. 

possession(s) - 85-86, 108-109, 135, 138, 250, 252, 592, 656, 
660 


-lessness, nonattachment to possessions - 30, 32, 60, 123, 


780 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


134, 471, 645 
, others’ - 214 
overaccumulation of - 59 
possessor (svdmi) - 48, 52, 148-149, 323, 360, 492, 561 
~possessor, S.V. 
posture (pratima, sthdna) - 88, 454 
, householder's - 460-461 
, Meditative (dsana) - 183, 215-216, 449, 454 
pot (ghata) - 199, 276, 321-322, 329, 339, 348, 365, 374, 
378, 384, 391, 403, 409-410, 434, 465, 475, 481, 488, 
505, 534, 538, 540, 557, 596-597 
potaja, see bare state, born 
potter - 418, 557 
's wheel - 339 
poverty - 420 
power (bala, Sakti) - 33, 149, 155, 175, 177, 183, 220, 241, 
319, 328, 374, 377, 393, 433, 512, 551, 625, 638-639, 
651, 658, 661 
, infinite - 378, 494, 513, 573 
, mental - 338 
of breathing - 611 
of consciousness - 180, 433, 492, 543, 553, 611 
of speech - 12, 319, 364, 517, 538, 611 
, special or supernatural (rddhi) - 53, 92, 133, 162, 354, 
367, 464 
Prabandhakosa (Rajasekhara) - 472 
prabha, see charm, luminescent 
Prabhacandra (1040) - 140, 422, 472, 603, 664 
Prabhakara (700) - 555 
Prabhakara Mimamsa - 541, 593-594 
prabhava, see ability 
Prabhavakacarita. (Prabhacandra) - 422 
Prabhrta - 94, 126 
pracala, see sleep 
practical (vyavahdrika-) 
perspective, see perspective, commonsensical 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 781 


time, see time, ordinary 
pradesa, see bondage, constituent of 
pradhana, see prakrti 
pragabhava, see absence, prior 
praise (sevana) - 60, 110, 213, 249, 266-267, 316, 415, 442, 
444, 512-512, 543, 547, 640 
-worthy - 129, 135, 170, 436, 480, 500, 502, 547, 642 
prajfia, see wisdom 
-sat - 300 
Prajfi@panasttra - 39 
prajnaptisat - 300 
Prakirnaka - 79 
prakirnaka, see mixed 
prakirnatard, see star, strong 
Prakrit - 3, 6-7, 16, 22, 40, 94-95, 98, 110, 126, 131, 191, 
225, 532, 603, 606, 634, 666 
prakrti - 115, 118, 171, 184-185, 300, 307, 312, 314, 327, 
336, 345, 349, 357, 388, 391, 395, 439-440, 443, 446, 
452, 482, 500, 510, 548, 588-589, 621, 623, 626, 630 
pramd, see truth 
pramada, see negligence 
pramana, see instrument of true cognition 
Pramanamimamsa (Hemacandra) - 16 
Pramanapariksa (Vidyananda) - 555 
Pramdnasamgraha (Akalanka) - 298 
Vrtti (Akalanka) - 298 
Bhasya (Anantavirya) - 603 
Pramdnavarttika (Dharmakirti) - 271, 427, 445, 473 
Pramdnaviniscaya (Dharmakirti) - 284 
pramatr, see cogniser 
pramatta, see negligence; (mindful)/unmindful(ness) 
-samyata, see seeker, imperfectly regulated 
-virata - 509 
prameya, see object of true cognition 
pramiti, see knowledge, result of 


782 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


prana, see breath 

-dyama, see breath-control 
pranaya, see neglect of attachment 
prapti, see attainment 
Prasad, Ajit - 484 
Prasad, B. Kanta - 671 
prasdada, see food, sanctified 
prasama, see calm(ness), spiritual 
Pragamaratiprakarana (Umasvati) - 66-70 
prasantavahita, see path of no return 
Pragastapada (530) - 591 
Prasenajit, King - 39 
prasiddhakarman, see act, prescribed 
Prasnavydkarandnyangasutra - 39 
Pragnottararatnamala (Amoghavarsa) - 469 
pratibandhaka, see hindrance 
pratibhdsa, see illumination 
pratibimba, see reflection 
pratighd, see obstruction; resistance 
pratighita, see colliding 
pratijfid, see thesis 
pratikramana, see confession 
pratima, see image; posture; stage (of life) 
pratipaksa, see antidote 
pratisandhi, see awareness, co-ordinating 
pratisedha, see aspect, negative; negation 
pratisedhin, see opposite 
pratisthGpana, see opponent's statement 
pratisthavidhi, see consecration, ceremony of 
pratityasamutpada, see dependent origination 
pratiyogin, see counterpositive 
pratyabhijnia, see recognition 
pratyakhyana, see repentance 
pratyaksa, see perception, sense- 
pratyanuyoga, see counter-question 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 783 


pratyaya, see condition, generic and in Buddhism; conditioning 
-dvara - 229 

pravacana, see scripture 

Pravacanasdra (Kundakunda) - 10, 18, 22, 29, 94-95, 97-110, 
665-666, 669-670, 672 
Tattvadipika (Amrtacandra sari) - 483, 502-507 
Commentary (Jayasena) - 502 
Commentary (in Hindi) (Hemaraja) - 502 

pravart, see incite 
-anvitd, see becoming, cause of all 

pravrtti, see inclination; practice 

prayascitta, see atonement 

prayatna, see effort 

prayer - 154, 177, 226-227, 641-642 

prayoga, see application; experiment 

prayogika, see experimental 

prayojana, see purpose (in debate) 

precept, Vedic - 204 

preceptor, see teacher 

predestined (sdmsiddhika) - 443 

predication, conditioned or sevenfold (saptabhangt, syadvada) 
- 17, 23-24, 96, 153, 157-158, 193, 238, 270, 290, 321- 
322, 481, 490, 497, 526 

predisposition, see trace 

prejudice - 158, 624 

Premi, Nathuram - 603 

preparation (laukikadharma) - 456 
to act (samdrambha) - 58, 83 

presence (bhava) - 

present time, s.v. 

preservation (nikdcana) - 89, 181, 626 

presumption (arthdapatti) - 292, 341, 476, 545, 613 

‘presupposition - 564 

pride (mana) - 31, 62; 67-68, 83, 115, 124, 158, 172-173, 
175, 219, 240, 352, 471, 546, 614, 624, 650, 652, 660- 
661 


784 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


priest - 605, 660 

principle (tattva), transcendental (lokottara) - 437 
prison(er) - 308, 470, 649 

privation - 470 

probandum, see sadhya 

probans, see hetu 

procuring, see acquisition 


product 
, karmic, s.v. 
, material, s.v. 


-set (rasi) - 627 
production (utpatti), see creation 
profession - 652 
profit, worldly - 252 
progress, stages of (gunasthdna) - 65, 91, 112, 114, 172-173, 
283, 308, 353, 419-420, 448, 450, 452, 510, 528, 607, 
’ 611, 616, 620, 622, 670 
progression 
, arithmetical - 628 
» geometric - 365, 632 
prohibition - 456 
proof of the thesis (sth@pana) - 13 
property (dharma), see attribute; mark; quality; universal) - 
, distinguishing, see mark 
, honattachment to, s.v. 
-possessor (dharmin) - 148, 481, 536, 553 
, specific, see individuator 
prosperity - 127, 250, 455, 469 
prover (sddhana) - 144, 150-151, 181 
proving what is already accepted (siddhasddhana) - 297, 540 
proximity (sannikarsa, upadhana) - 330-331, 482 
prthak(tva), see separate(ness) 
prthivi, see earth 
Prthivikongani (716) - 468 
pudgala, see karmic product 
puja, see worship 


GLOSSARY-INDEX _ 785 


Piijyapada (430) - 8-9, 24-27, 29, 34, 46, 139-140, 158, 159- 
176, 306, 404, 663, 666-667 
pungent - 81, 404 
punya, see merit 
Punyavijaya Muni - 455, 458, 671 
pupil, see student 
Purana - 317 
purification - 32, 53, 107, 112, 134, 187, 224, 457, 509, 668 
, self- - 188-189, 256, 357, 480 
purity (suddhi, visuiddhi) - 20, 49, 51, 55, 59-60, 79, 124, 
129-131, 133-134, 137, 152, 167, 215-216, 238, 247-248, 
326, 347-348, 353, 420, 456, 458, 480, 511, 528, 530, 
608, 619, 647 
(of) awareness, s.v. 
(of) conduct, s.v. 
(of) consciousness, s.v. 
(kevala) - 238 
purohita - 422 
purpose (artha, prayojana) - 13-14, 27, 31, 118, 143, 149, 
151, 162, 188, 256, 265-266, 318, 326, 345, 364-365, 
447, 474, 476, 524, 563 
purusa, see person 
-advaita - 205, 448 
-artha, see aim of man 
(in Samkhya) - 185, 307, 312, 314, 327, 345, 357, 395, 
482, 510, 548, 588-589 
-veda, see excitement, sexual 
Purusdrthasiddhyupdya (Amrtacandra Siri) - 484-486 
Purusottama (740), father of Akalanka - 265 
purva, see prior 
-sevd, see performance, preparatory 
_ -vat inference, s.v. 
Purva (texts) - 38, 53, 91 
-dhdra - 219 
-seva - 456 
Puskara - 54, 77 


786 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Puspasena (720) - 263 

putapdka, see furnace 

putra, see son 

purification - 354 

qualificand (visesya) - 143-144, 553 

qualified (visista) - 46, 153, 201, 280, 283-284, 355, 394, 501, 
524, 527, 536 
person (dpta) - 120, 160, 185, 236, 285, 434, 453, 456, 

538, 543,641 

qualifier (visesana) - 144, 146, 524, 527, 544-546, 553 

quality (guna) - 5, 12, 49, 58, 82, 89, 96, 98, 102-104, 106, 
127, 144, 167, 183, 186, 198, 231-232, 267-268, 280, 
284, 301, 309-310, 319, 327, 329-331, 334-335, 337-338, 
349, 354-355, 359, 371-375, 378, 385-387, 391-392, 394- 
395, 397, 400-401, 409, 411-413, 448, 465-466, 475, 
488-498, 500, 504, 514, 522, 525, 527,-552-553, 590-591, 
593-594, 638, 653, 655 
-possessor, see property-possessor 

quasi-karmic, see helper, karmic 

queen - 370 

quibble (chala) - 13, 184, 573 

quiescence, see subsidence 

race - 176 

raga, see attachment 

rain - 350, 362 
-bow - 407 

(King) Rajamalla I (985) - 604 

Rajaprasniyasutra - 39 

rajas (in Samkhya) - 184-185, 387, 588 

Rajasekhara (900) - 472 

Rajasekhara, author of Kavyamimams4 - 472 

Rajasthan - 422 

raksasd - 369 

Ramasena (900?) - 533 

rasd, see taste 

rasi, see heap; product-set 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 787 


rati, see liking 
Ratnakarandasravakaéca@ra (Samantabhadra) - 140 
Ratnaprabha - 368 
raudra, see cruel 
-dhydna, see concentration, cruel 
Ravibhadra (959-990) - 603 
rays 
, eye's, S.v. 
, sun's - 251 
rddhi, see power, supernatural 
real(ity) (sat, tattva) - 7, 9-10, 15, 26, 31, 34, 38, 58, 72, 111, 
144, 146, 150-151, 154, 159, 198, 204, 212, 251, 253, 
255, 259-260, 269, 271, 280, 287-289, 304, 364, 430, 
437, 450, 454, 474, 477-478, 480-481, 511, 513-514, 517- 
519, 523, 543, 551, 556-557, 562-564, 566-569, 571, 573- 
578, 581, 583-584, 587, 605, 629, 637, 647, 650-651, 
655, 658, 663, 667 
, atomic, see particular, pure 
, criterion of - 585, 588 
, object, see entity, actual 
viewpoint, see perspective, realistic 
realism, realist - 242-243, 562, 575, 577, 581 
, Buddhist, see Abhidharma Buddhism 
realization, see attainment 
self, see liberation 
reason (in an inference) (hetu, sadhana) - 13, 143, 158, 200, 
237, 297-298, 301-302, 535, 537, 554, 570 
, contradictory, s.v. 
, deviating, see inconclusive reason 
, fallacious (-dbhdsa), see fallacy 
, inconclusive, s.v. 
-s for defeat, see argument, way of losing an 
, too-specific (asadharana) - 144 
, unproved, s.v. 
reasoning (nydya) - 23, 141, 152, 206, 237, 268, 300, 547, 
591 


788 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


, fallacious, see fallacy 
, inductive, see tarka 
rebirth (samsdra, vigraha) - 8, 36, 50, 52, 64, 68-70, 76, 88, 
100, 109, 114-116, 118, 145, 164, 166, 170, 172-173, 
175, 187, 197, 212, 214, 239, 241-244, 246-248, 250-252, 
254-255, 257-259, 352, 368, 450, 493, 500-501, 507, 515, 
619, 623, 632, 634-635, 648, 644, 654 
as a god, s.v. 
receptacle - 413, 489, 497 
recognition (pratyabhijnd, samjna) - 19-21, 52, 145, 156, 268, 
273, 277, 281-282, 299, 356, 393, 395, 411, 535, 539, 
551, 561, 582, 587, 607, 609-611, 619-620, 664 
recollection, see memory 
red - 258, 375 
coloring - 51 
flower, S.v. 
reducibility - 4, 359, 580 
reductio ad absurdum (tarka, tha) - 274, 299, 535, 539, 541 
reflection (alocana, anupreksa, pratibimba) - 30-31, 64-65, 68, 
88, 119, 124, 134, 138-139, 211, 217, 222, 245, 419, 423, 
446, 457, 637 
, atomic - 287 
, dream - 288 
(in a medium) - 288-289, 400, 515 
refuge (Sarana) - 204, 211, 428, 511, 520, 532, 660 
refutation - 156, 178, 203-204, 237, 284-286, 289, 292, 298- 
300, 302, 305, 423-424, 436-437, 459, 543, 545, 561, 
591, 594 
, fallacious - 238 
region 
» gross body (mahavideha) - 367 
-s, worldly, sections of (agrabhdga) - 362, 401 
regress (hani, tiryak) - 353, 371, 627, 630; 632 
, infinite (anavastha) - 274-275, 286, 477, 536, 544, 590, 
597 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 789 


regular(ity) (dhruva)/ irregularity - 46, 48, 80, 145, 147, 153, 
236, 297, 365, 367, 438, 518, 535, 578-579 
act, S.v. 
causal - 396, 514, 535 

regulation - 85, 201, 309, 499 

rejoinder (uttara) - 13 
, futile (jati) - 13-14, 299, 305, 350 

relapse, see backsliding 

relative perspective, s.v. 

religion - 33, 59-60, 84, 90, 213, 450, 460, 470, 486 
, fruits of - 26 

religious 
commandment, s.v. 
merit, S.v. 
sermon, S.v. 

remembrance, see memory 

renunciation (nivrtti, tyaga) - 60, 64, 68, 83, 86, 90, 123, 130- 
131, 223, 307, 314, 414-415, 420, 428-429, 471, 485-486, 
594, 645 
(diksa) - 437 
of attachment, s.v. 

reordination - 468 

repentance (pratyakhyana) - 89-90, 124, 215, 250, 257, 420, 
444 


representation (sthapana) - 47, 71, 192, 205, 284, 319-321, 
527, 613, 621, 667 

reprobation - 468 

reptile, see snake 

repulsion (dvesa) - 307-308 

resemblance, see similarity 

reservation (nidhatti) - 626 

residence, see home 

residue, karmic, see trace 

resistance/nonresistance (pratigha, vyaghata) - 39, 53, 213, 
366, 661 

resolve - 231, 512, 643 


790 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


resort - 262-263, 457, 469, 471 

respect - 16, 60, 110, 240, 255-256, 341, 433, 436, 444, 575, 
640, 649, 660 

respiration, see breath 

rest, fulcrum of, see initiator of stasis 

(self-)restraint or control (gupti, hana, niyama, samvara, 
samyama, yama) - 32-33, 50, 63, 68, 84-85, 109, 120, 
137, 172-173, 182, 188, 213-214, 220, 232, 244, 249-251, 
262, 327, 353, 419, 432, 449, 453, 471, 485, 520-521, 
616, 625, 637-638, 648, 656-657 

restriction (nigraha) - 63, 87, 203, 216, 441 

result (phala), see maturation 

revelation (agama) - 259, 560, 563 
, modal (bhavajiva) - 320 

reverence, reverential - 127-128, 180, 417, 449, 455, 651 

reward - 88, 262 

Rgveda - 11, 182 

Rice, Lewis - 140, 604 

rice - 326, 347, 392, 397-398, 408 

rich(es) - 108, 155, 213, 433, 470, 645, 648 

riddle - 507, 514 

ridicule - 134, 137, 273, 283 

right (samyak) 
awareness, S.V. 
character, s.v. 
conduct, s.v. 
inclination, s.v. 
vision, S.V. 

righteous - 127-128, 251, 594 

rigor - 68 

ring (valaya) - 368, 412 

ripe(ning) - 116, 350, 359, 367, 392 
, karmic, see karma, ripened 

ritual - 40, 204416, 444, 668 

river - 187 

rjusutranaya, see perspective, (temporarily) immediate 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 791 


robber - 652 
rohini - 301 
rook - 320 
root - 127, 255, 658 
cause, S.Vv. 
, verbal - 316, 347 
rope - 68, 219 
rough(ness) - 57, 81-82, 106, 368, 404, 412, 522, 618 
row, see trail 
Rsabha(deva) - 35, 39, 532 
rtu, see season 
Rudra - 177 
Ruegg, Savid Seyfort - 664 
rule - 5, 12, 27, 32, 78, 92 
, grammatical, see grammar, rules of 
of conduct, s.v. 
rules of a city - 112 
rupa, see color; form; shape 
rust - 117, 224 
sabala, see conduct, failure of 
Sabara(svamin) (400) - 555 
Sabda, see communication; language; sound; testimony, verbal 
-brahman - 305 
-naya, see perspective, linguistically implied 
sacrifice - 33, 416-417, 486, 640 
sad(ness) - 148, 175, 224, 240, 354, 366, 384, 428, 501, 646, 
659 
sad@siva - 451, 609 
sadbhdva, see existence 
Saddarsganasamuccaya (Haribhadra Suri) - 434-436 
Saddarganasamuccaya (Rajasekhara) - 472 
sadhana, see hetu; instrumentality; prover; reason 
sddhu, see mendicant,; monk 
sddhya - 143, 153, 180, 235-237, 274, 294, 297-298, 535-538, 
540-541, 545, 549 
sddrsya, see similarity 


792 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


safety - 460 

saffron - 314 

sage (muni) - 88, 152, 638, 657 

sahabhava, see concomitance 

sahakarikdrana, see cause, efficient 

sahopalambhaniyama, see necessity of being known together 

sailesi, see motionless state 

Sain, Uggar - 120 

saint (yati) - 31, 98, 103, 108, 123, 128, 158-159, 166, 188, 
239, 241, 245-247, 249-250, 252-254, 256-260, 426, 449, 
451, 471, 485-486, 626, 654 

Saiva Siddhanta - 665 

sakdrariipa, see form-filled/-free 

Sakra - 426 

sakrdavartana, see once-returner 

saks@tkdra(jfidna), see awareness, immediate 

Sakti, see intensity; power 

Sakyamuni Buddha - 519 

sullekhana, see death, voluntary 

salt - 482, 513 

salvation, see liberation 

Salya, see character-deficiency; thorn 

sama, see equanimity 
-rasa, see mind, balanced 
-ta, see evenness 

samabhiridhanaya, see perspective, etymological 

samadhi, see concentration; ecstacy; meditation 

Samadhitantra (Piijyapada) - 174-176 

Samaga - 36 

Samanika - 79 

Samantabhadra (430?) - 46, 139-158, 159, 266, 546-547, 549, 
667, 672 

samanya, see general(ity); universal property 

Samaraicchakatha (Haribhadra Siri) - 422 

samarambha, see preparation to act 

samaropa, see contradiction of mistakes 


GLOSSARY-INDEX : 793 


samavdya, see inherence 

Samavdydngastitra - 39 

samaya, see collection; collocation of the five; instant; moment 
-prabaddha, see bond(age), instant-effective 

Samayasdara (Kundakunda) - 7, 22, 110-120,.507, 663 
Atmakhyati or Kalaga (Amrtacandra Siri) - 

sdmayika, see equanimity 
, para-, sva- - 103 
(a period of time) - 84 
, the word - 233, 509 

Samayika - 73, 328 

Samayikapatha (Amitagati II) - 641-661 

sambandha, see relation 

sambhava, see concurrence 

Sambhu - 426 

same/different, see difference/identity 

Sambohapayarana. see Tattvaprakasika - 

samgha, see order 

samghdta, see compression; contact 

samgrahanaya, see perspective, general 

samhara, see expansion/contraction 

samiti, see caution/observance 

samjnid, see identification, conceptual; name; recognition 
= mati, S.Vv. 

samjnin, see learning, capable of 

samkalpa, see desire, determined; thought, wishful 

Samkara Vedanta, see Advaita Vedanta 

Samkaracarya (700) - 421, 459, 562 

Samkhya - 14, 114-115, 118, 136, 168, 178, 182, 184-185, 
204, 206, 267, 280, 284, 300, 303-304, 312, 314-315, 
327, 331, 345, 357, 380, 387-388, 391, 395, 434-436, 
440, 445-446, 452, 456, 472, 474, 478, 481-482, 508, 
539-541, 544, 548, 555, 577, 588-589, 609, 664 

samkhya, see number 

samkoca, see shrink 

samkramana, see transference 


794 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Sammatasattari, see Samyaktvasaptati 
sammiurchana, see agglutination; combination; generation, 
spontaneous; manifestation, sudden 
samnipataka state, see mixed state 
samparaya, see greed 
samparayika, see persistence 
sampreksa, see vow, helping ways of fulfilling 
samrambha, see intention to act 
samsara, see bondage; rebirth 
samSaya, see doubt 
samsiddhika, see predestined 
samskara, see trace, karmic 
samskrta, see conditioned 
Samstha, R. K. - 425, 427, 436-437, 459, 461 
samsthdna, see shape 
samuccaya, see integration 
samudaya, see aggregate; atoms, assemblage of; collection of 
categories; conglomeration 
-artha, see text, substance of the 
-krtasarga, se creation, natural/artificial 
samudghata, see overflow 
samvara, see cessation of inflow; restraint 
samvedana, see experience; understanding 
samvega, see agitation, spiritual; worldliness, fear of 
samvrta, see origin, covered 
samvrti, see conventional 
-sat, see existence, nominal 
samyag-, samyak-, see right 
-tva, see inclination, right 
Samyaktvasaptati (Haribhadra Siri) - 458 
Tattvakaumudi (Samghatilaka Siri) - 458 
samyoga, see contact 
samyuktasamavaya, see ineherence in what is conjoined 
sand - 381, 652 
sanda, see neuter 
Sanghvi, Sukhlal - 27, 191, 667 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 795 


sanity - 575 

Sanka, see doubt 

Sanmatitarka (Siddhasena Divakara) - 191-201 

sannidhi, see becoming; being present 

sannikarsa, see proximity 

Santabhadra - 292 

santana, see chain; stream 

Santaraksita (750) - 437 

Santi, see peace 

sapaksa - 301-302, 536, 540 

sapphire - 99 

sapratighata, see obstructive 

saptabhangi, see predication, sevenfold 

Sarana, see refuge 

sarga, pratyaya-, see creation, intellectual 

Sarira, see bod 

Sarirakabhasya (Samkaracarya), see Brahmasitrabhasya 

sarupya, see similarity 

sarvabhavavdda, see nonexistence of everything 

Sarvajfasiddhi (Haribhadra Siri) - 423, 436 
(Svopajna)Tika (Haribhadra Siri) - 423, 436 

Sarvajriasiddhi (Anantakirti) - 600 

Sarvastivada - 210 

sarvatha, see always 

sdsrava, see defilement 

Sastr - 439 

Sastra, see scripture 

Sastitantra (Varsaganya)- 664 

Sastravarttasamuccaya (Haribhadra Siri) - 423, 436-437 
Dikprada (Haribhadra Siri) - 436-437 

Sastri, A. Shantiraja - 46, 665, 669 

Sastri, Hiralal Siddhanta - 528 

Sastri, Phulcandra Siddhanta - 468 

Sastri, Yajneshwar S. - 66-70, 669 

sat, see being; existent; real(ity) 


796 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


satisfaction (sukha) - 53, 57, 62, 81, 99, 112, 126, 173, 185, 
451, 469, 503, 540-541, 635, 638 

satkdryavada - 205, 208 

Satkhandagamasitra - 41 

satpadarthavada, see Vaisesika 

Satru, see enemy 

sattad, see existence; universal, higher 
-advaita - 157 

sattva, see state 

satya, see truth 

Satyasdsanapariksa (Vidyananda) - 555-594 

Sauca, see greed, absence or lack of 

Saudharma - 464 

Saugata, see Buddhism 

Sautrantika Buddhism - 208, 210, 481, 544, 577, 581 

savikalpajfiana, see awareness, construction-filled 

savisesanabhava, see absence, conditioned 

savyabhicadra, see wandering 

scent, see smell 

sceptic(ism) - 575-576 

school, philosophical (darsana) - 6, 11-15, 19, 38, 125, 135, 
191, 285, 304, 316, 330-331, 345, 359, 386, 412, 422, 
424, 426, 436, 443, 451, 481, 555 

Schubring, Walther - 668 

science - 293, 569 
, Medical, see medicine 

scratching - 649 

scream - 213 

script - 94 

scriptural 
authority, s.v. 
awareness, S.v. 
literature, see scripture 
study, s.v. 

scripture (agama, pravacana, SGstra, sruti, siitra) - 18, 38, 40- 
41, 92, 102-103, 109-110, 118, 120, 125, 141, 150, 161, 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 797 


165, 168, 195, 198-200, 216-217, 219-221, 229, 236, 250- 
252, 254, 258, 263, 281, 283, 285, 298, 302, 332, 340- 
341, 364, 373, 375, 379,379, 387, 405, 412-413, 417, 
438-439, 442-444, 449-451, 453, 455, 457, 463, 465, 467, 
469, 484, 512, 535, 538, 547; 580, 613, 621 

authority or validity of, see authority, scriptural 

-veiling karma, s.v. 

sea, see ocean 

season (rtu) - 402 

secret - 12, 85, 434, 659 

seed - 254, 338 
/sprout - 134, 161, 213, 397-500, 511 

seeing, see vision 

seeker (mumuksu, Sravaka, updsaka) (see also lay, laity; 
veneration) - 123, 128, 135, 176, 213, 261-262, 294, 308, 
428, 444, 456-457, 485, 520, 526, 602, 640 

seer - 377, 513, 638, 657 

self or soul (atman, jiva) (since the word appears on about 

90% of the pages we do not give a list here) 

awaiting rebirth (bhiita) - 357 

-awareness, S.V. 

, eternality of a - 56, 119, 124, 135, 138, 164, 175, 200, 
217, 239-242, 244, 255, 313-314, 327, 332, 353, 378, 
384-385, 428, 447, 484, 491, 496-497, 531, 581, 647, 
651, 653, 661 

-evident, s.v. 

, highest or supreme (parama-) - 116, 120, 239-242, 246, 
255, 259, 609, 649 

-identity - 560 

, liberated (siddha) - 39, 51, 66, 93, 96, 98, 101, 122-123, 
163, 178, 230, 239, 247, 284, 319, 331, 351, 361- 
362, 385, 421,.426, 433-434, 443, 446, 448, 461, 
493-494, 503, 531-532, 612, 617, 635, 638, 656 

, NO-, S.v. 

semen - 363 


798 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sense 
-data - 404 
-object connection, see contact, sense-object 
-organ (indriya) - 48, 52, 72, 75-76, 89, 109, 121, 135, 
165, 169, 185, 187, 242-243, 271-272, 281, 325, 327- 
332, 335-338, 340, 342, 345-346, 354, 356, 358-359, 
366, 391, 393-394, 399, 410, 423, 476, 478, 497, 
500, 503, 535, 591, 609, 611-612, 635, 642 
-quality, s.v. 
-s, beyond the, see supersensible 
sensory 
awareness, see awareness, immediate 
content, S.v. 
pleasure, s.v. 
quality, s.v. 
sensual, see sexual 
object, s.v. 
sentence (vdkya) - 144, 150, 235-236, 283, 404, 4887, 613 
-meaning, s.v. 
sentience - 199, 241, 247, 465, 475, 478, 549 
, hon-, principle of, see non-self 
, principle of, see self 
separable (yutasiddha) - 148, 544 
serene, serenity, see calm(ness) 
sermon - 4, 188, 420, 425, 599 
servant - 85, 244, 593, 646, 649 
service - 60, 64, 90, 185, 188, 420, 428, 449, 642 
Sesavat inference, s.v. 
sevana, see praise 
sevenfold predication, s.v. 
sex - 176, 621 
, abstention from - 486 
-es (see also female; male; neuter) - 160, 166, 241, 367 
sexual 
act - 61, 84-85, 87 
content - 32 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 799 


desire, s.v. 
enjoyment, s.v. 
feeling - 50 
incontinence, s.v. 
indulgence - 646 
intercourse, S.v. 
-ity - 173, 429 
passion - 486 
shackles - 117-118, 643 
shade - 121 
shadow (chaya) - 57, 74, 82, 121, 301, 303, 408-409, 565, 
595, 635 
Shah, Nagin J. - 140, 265, 270-297, 546, 671-672 
Shah, Raoji Nemchand - 174 
shame - 193, 252, 655 
-ful - 256, 263 
-less - 157, 184 
shape (miirti, riipa, samsthdna) - 57, 63, 77, 81, 104, 106, 
122, 133, 168, 172, 203, 321, 333-335, 338, 343, 358- 
359, 373, 375-376, 385, 388, 397, 498, 522, 589, 635, 
638 
, bodily, see body, shape of the 
-less - 112, 392 
sheath - 364 
shell - 405 
-silver illusion - 296, 557, 564-565, 569, 574, 584, 586 
shelter - 83-84, 131, 138, 234 
ship - 296 
shirt - 504 
shrink(ing), shrivel(ing) (samkoca) - 131, 383-384, 640 
sick(ness) (see also disease) - 132, 337, 433, 530, 621, 655 
siddha, see self, liberated 
'  -s@dhana, see completion of a task; proving what is 
already accepted 
siddhanta, see conclusion of an inference; tenet 
Siddhdantasara (Jinacandra) - 472 


800 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Siddharsigani (900) - 472-483 
Siddhasena Divakara (550) - 6, 10, 176-201, 202 
Siddhasena Mahamati (700?) - 234-238 
siddhatman - 451 
siddhi, see attainment of a desired end; mastery 
Siddhivinigcaya (Akalanka) - 298-305, 603, 669-672 
Tikd (Anantavirya) - 298, 603, 604, 669 
sight, see vision 
-less, see blind 
sign - 247, 319, 355, 403 
, inferential, see hetu, the term 
Sila, see conduct, good; diary; morality; vow, subsidiary 
silence, vow of 
Simhasuragani KsamaSramana (600) - 233 
similarity (sa@drgya, s@ripya) - 142, 144, 200, 237, 273, 290, 
295-297, 333, 455, 471, 473, 495, 519, 582, 584, 587, 
593 
, perception of, see comparison 
simile - 174, 193, 440 
simplicity - 59, 419, 568, 573, 592 
SimSapa, see tree 
simultaneity (sahacara) - 20, 70, 74, 89, 93, 101, 164, 183, 
196, 267-268, 292-293, 301, 317, 332-333, 344, 357, 400, 
489, 514-516, 551, 572, 623, 638 
sin, see demerit 
sincerity (arjava) - 60, 64, 68, 642 
single, singular, see one(ness) 
sister - 642 
sitting, rules for - 88, 216, 347, 414 
Siva - 128, 191, 246, 255-256, 258, 261-252, 438 
temple - 654 
size - 56, 80, 365, 377-378, 381, 399, 521-522, 610, 615, 618, 
637 
, atomic, see atom 
, bodily - 79, 93, 96, 242, 493, 613, 634-635 
of a self, s.v. 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 801 


Skanda - 426 

skandha, see aggregate; molecule 

skill, see ability - 78, 217, 592 

skin - 241, 245-246, 301, 326, 342, 383 

sky (Gk@ga) - 145, 148-149, 154, 156, 167, 205, 549, 648-649 
-flower (kusuma) - 145, 148-149, 154, 156, 167, 188, 

205, 549, 648-649 

-walking - 141 

Slaje, Walter - 663 

slave - 79, 92, 408 

sleep (nidra) - 62, 118, 136-137, 176, 205, 249, 293, 302, 
349, 360, 414, 418, 588, 608, 621-622, 645 

smell (gandha) - 51, 57, 81, 84, 121-122, 133, 198, 240, 242, 
253, 293, 337, 343, 358-360, 376, 401, 404, 406, 409, 
433, 465, 495, 498, 522, 575, 622, 643 

smoke-fire, s.v. 

smooth - 57, 81-82, 106, 404, 407, 409, 411-412, 500, 522, 
618 

smrti, see memory 
= mati, S.v. 

snake (naga) - 135, 368, 589 

sneha, see oil 

Sodasakaprakarana (Haribhadra Siri) - 437 

soft(ness) (nissneha) - 33, 59, 81, 404, 501 

Soka, see sorrow 

soldier - 660 

solid(ity) - 246, 275, 376, 405, 556, 577 

solipsism - 578 

solitude - 216 

solstice (ayana) - 402 

Soma - 426 

son (putra) - 25, 156, 198, 313, 322, 409, 411, 656 

Soni, Jayendra - 3-34, 542-546, 595-596, 668 

sophism - 181 

sophistry (jalpa) - 124, 181, 184, 300 


802 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sorrow (foka) - 69, 63, 131-132, 134, 213, 261, 307, 313, 
350, 362, 379, 431-432, 580, 622, 625, 642-644, 647-649, 
651-655, 657-661 
, cessation of all, see liberation 

soul, see self 

sound (Sabda) - 51, 57, 81, 84-85, 106, 133, 161, 185, 212- 
213, 240, 253, 338, 350, 358-359, 364, 366, 376, 379, 
391-392, 404-409, 427, 433, 454, 465, 539-541, 593, 635, 
647 

soundness (of an argument) - 473 

space (akdsa) - 54, 56, 69, 77, 80, 95, 105, 120, 164, 168- 
170, 185, 199, 218, 244-248, 268, 292, 323, 341, 343, 
358, 360, 365, 372-382, 385-387, 389-392, 396, 401, 405, 
407, 413, 415, 433, 470, 487-488, 490, 493-495, 498-499, 
506, 515-516, 518-519, 521-524, 541, 557, 584, 593, 617- 
618, 635-636 
, atomicity of, s.v. 

-clad, see Digambara 
-point (desa, pradeSa), s.v.- 

spanda, see vibration 

spardhaka, see supermolecule; variform 

sparsa, see touch 

sparsana, see extent 

spatial direction, s.v. 

speaker (vdcaka, vaktr) - 28, 57, 150-151, 155, 184, 189, 208, 
236, 278, 283, 302, 328, 398, 405, 451, 517, 541, 553 

_ ‘gs intention, s.v. 

specific quality, see quality, (general)/specific 

spectator - 118, 236 

speech, language (bhasa, Sabda, vacana) - 59, 64, 67, 70, 82- 
83, 88, 111, 150, 288, 313, 391-392, 407, 419, 432, 456, 
465, 613, 619, 625 
-act, see activity, linguistic 
as pramana, see testimony, verbal 
, bad - 86, 640 
defect - 13 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 803 


, figurative - 114, 199, 366, 439, 508, 581 
, good - 13, 111, 486 
, ill-, see slander 
» negligence in - 608 
, power of, s.v. 
, right (samyak-) - 64 
, violent or harmful - 30, 32 
sphere, spherical - 616, 618 
sphota - 301, 305, 405-406, 423 
sphuta, see clear 
spiritual 
activity, see religious activity 
discipline, s.v. 
evolution, s.v. 
faith, s.v. 
penance, s.v. 
quality, s.v. 
sermon, S.V. 
spirits, see alcohol 
split (kandaka) - 57, 81, 632 
duration, s.v. 
energy (anubhdga) - 351 
sport - 246, 510 
sprsta, see contact 
square - 376 
circle, s.v. 
Sraddha, see faith 
Sraman, Jayacandra Sitarama - 639 
Sramana, see ascetic 
Sravaka, see hearer; layman; seeker 
sravana, see hearing 
Sravanabelgola inscription , s.v. 
Sreni, see line, straight 
Srilal - 600 
Sruta 
-jhdna, see awareness, scriptural 


804 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


-kevalin - 316 
-skandha - 226 
§ruti, see authority, scriptural or verbal; scripture 
stable, stability (acala, sthavirya) - 105, 223, 379, 399-401, 
406, 408, 454, 469, 499, 618, 660 
staff, see stick 
stage (pratimd, sthana) - 321, 323 
-s of progress, fourteen (gunasthdna) - 33, 65, 70, 89, 91- 
92, 112, 114, 129, 133, 162, 165, 168, 172-174, 196, 
283, 308, 316, 325, 439, 353, 360, 367, 393, 419- 
421, 442, 448-450, 452, 454, 456, 461, 470-471, 503, 
509-519, 528, 599, 607-609, 611, 613-614, 616-617, 
620-623, 625, 635, 640-641, 670 
stain (mala, vikala) - 223-224 
-less (nirmala) - 125, 175, 239, 249, 261 
standpoint, see perspective 
star - 74, 79-80, 241, 245, 274, 344, 371, 457, 476, 633, 650 
-s, constellaiton of, s.v. 
starvation - 621 
stasis (sthiti), initiator of, s.v. 
static (sthavara) - 51, 55, 87, 232, 289, 358, 371, 499, 635 
statue - 246, 604 
status (see also persistence), chief (arpand) - 27 
Stava - 73 
steadiness, see abiding; permanence; persistence of mind 
of mind, see mind, steady 
Stealing - 32, 123, 214, 339, 414-416, 453, 643 
steam - 539 
steep - 217 
sthana, see posture; stage; state 
Sthandngasiitra - 39 
sthapana, see representation 
sthavara, see static 
sthavirya, see stability 
sthiti, see duration; subsistence 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 805 


stick (danda) - 30, 309, 335, 387, 403, 410, 557, 590 
-holder - 309 
, potter's - 339 
, walking-, s.v. 

stone - 121, 362, 646-647 
, moon-, S.v. 

stoppage of inflow, see cessation of inflow 

storehouse - 224 
consciousness, S.v. 

story - 36, 39, 68 

straight arrow (isu) path - 362 

straw - 88, 338, 367, 382, 643, 647 

stream 
(of experience or consciousness) (santana) - 144, 146-147, 

356, 577, 582 

of a river - 187 

strength - 68, 138, 165, 247, 259, 295, 466 
, relative numerical (alpabdhutva) - 48, 93 

stri, see female; woman 

student(ship) (brahmacdrin, -ya) - 64, 68, 73, 90, 128, 131, 
176, 180, 189-191, 194, 202, 227, 229, 244, 252, 257, 
320, 325, 340, 422, 430, 462, 473, 506, 526, 532-533, 
603, 605 

study (adhigama) - 47, 64, 201, 259, 265, 285, 308, 316, 429, 
453, 473 
, scriptural - 5-6, 109, 125, 217, 220, 251, 263, 284, 435, 

438, 442, 444, 457, 563, 593 

, self (svddhyaya) - 64, 90, 420 

stupid(ity), se fool 

Stutividya (Samantabhadra) - 140 

Subha, see good 

Subhatunga of Manyakheta - 265 

subhuman - 102, 250 

subjective idealism, s.v. 

subjugation - 471 


806 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sublation, sublated (bddha, bddhita) - 235, 237-238, 475-476, 
536, 540 
subperspective (upanaya) - 524 
subsidence (of karma) (upasama, aupasamika, ksaya) - 32, 49, 
69, 161-163, 165, 230, 282, 308, 323-324, 336, 341-342, 
349-350, 352, 397, 444, 496, 625-626, 629 
-cum-destruction (of karma) (labdhindriyakarman; 
ksayopasamikakarman) - 65-66, 69, 76, 97, 100-101, 
105, 116, 118, 124, 130, 133, 161, 163, 165, 220, 
250-251, 254, 303, 308, 313, 317, 342, 351-353, 
357,-358, 360, 362, 393-394, 396, 399, 419, 421, 
434, 469, 510, 530, 607, 615, 619, 625, 630, 637, 
654 
subsistence (sthiti) - 32, 103, 105, 199, 299, 373, 397, 403, 
411, 431, 482, 487, 489-490, 504-505, 553, 563 
/abiding (/vartana) - 401 
substance (dravya) (occurs too frequently to list) 
substantial perspective, s.v. 
substratum, see locus 
subtle (suksma) - 31, 53, 57, 69, 81, 87, 106, 121, 141, 162, 
169, 171, 173, 221, 223, 243-244, 258, 297, 402, 405, 
408-410, 412, 499, 520, 609, 616, 626, 635 
being, see nigoda 
body - 362, 383 
suddha, see pure 
Suddhi, see purity 
suffering (duhkha) - 10, 30, 45, 70, 133, 139, 181, 185, 188, 
205, 240, 254, 259, 369, 415, 428, 431-432, 470, 485- 
486, 512, 547, 655 
sufficient condition, s.v. 
suffix - 7, 311 
sugar - 157, 354 
Sugata, see Jina 
suicide, suicidal - 34, 40, 85, 415-416, 486, 553, 575, 641 
sukha, see happiness; pleasure; satisfaction 
Sukhlalji, see Sanghvi, Sukhlal 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 807 


Sukla, see white 
-dhydna, see concentration, shite 
stiksma, see subtle 
-krityanivrtti - 
Sumeru, see Meru 
summit - 241, 503, 609, 635 
sun (siirya) - 39, 74, 79-80, 188, 224, 246, 350, 370-371, 471, 
514, 644, 650 
-light - 102, 245, 311, 317, 344, 392, 395, 529, 650 
-shine - 121, 301 
's heat - 102, 311, 317, 658 
's movement - 340, 402 
's rays - 251, 512 
sunya, see empty 
-advaitavada - 157, 283 
-pada - 256 
-ta, see emptyness 
-vada, see Madhyamaka 
superimposition (adhydsa) - 273, 291 
supermolecule (spardhaka) - 351, 628, 672 
supernatural, supernormal - 162, 212, 223, 464 
superphysical, see space, superphysical 
supersensible, see awareness, supersensible 
supervariform, see supermolecule 
supplicant - 471 
supporter-supported relation - 381 
supporting object, s.v. 
sura, see god . 
Suresvara (730) - 562-564, 571-573, 576 
Suri, Vijayalavanya - 178 
surrender, self- - 136, 457 
surya, see sun 
Surya - 426 
Suyaprajnaptisitra - 39 
Suspicion - 216 
Sutrakrtangasitra - 38, 73, 76 


808 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Suvarna - 8 
Suyagoda - 668 
svabhdva, see nature, essential 
-vdda, see essentialism 
-vyanjana, see mode, natural 
svadhyaya, see study 
sujati, see type, intrinsic 
svalaksana, see particular, pure 
svami, see possessor 
svarupa, see nature, essential 
-asidda reason - 
-sambandha, see relation, self-linking 
svasamaya, see self-realization 
svasamvedana, see intuition, self- 
Svatahpramanyasiddhi (Anantakirti) - 601 
svatantrya, see independent 
Sveta, see white 
Svetambara - 5, 9, 24, 26-28, 37-38, 40-41, 45-46, 54, 66, 71, 
167-174, 225, 244, 369-370, 412, 422, 483, 533 
Swamy, M. Sivakumara - 434 
swan - 246, 390 
sweet - 81, 141, 182, 253, 292, 392, 404, 546 
swimming - 254, 386, 433, 658 
swoon - 293 
sword - 246,369, 655 
syad- or syat-, see maybe; predication, sevenfold 
Syadvadakucodyaparihara (Haribhadra Siri) - 423 
Syadvadasiddhi (Vadibha Simha) - 264 
syat, see syad- 
syllable - 70, 246, 352, 364, 404-405, 487, 595 
syllogism - 549 
symbol - 21, 141 
, Brahmanical (linga) - 177 
, verbal (vyafijana) - 221 
synonym - 6, 19, 24, 27, 48, 67, 168, 198, 311, 316, 334, 347, 
354, 621, 667 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 809 


system of philosophy, see school, philosophical 
table - 193, 586-587 
tactile organ - 51, 77, 612 
tadatmya, see identity 
tadriipya, see form, sae (in Buddhism) 
tadutpatti, see causation theory in Buddhist Logic 
taijasa, see fiery 
taimirika, see vision, a person of dim 
taint - 97, 105, 220, 222, 240, 243, 563 
tamas, see darkness 
Gin Samkhya) - 184-185, 387, 588 
tangible - 51, 73-74, 373, 380, 391, 405, 409, 622 
Tanjore - 263 
tanmdatra - 548, 588 
tanuvatalaya - 373 
Tapagaccha Pattavali - 472 
tapas, see penance 
target - 236, 334, 347 
tarka, see deliberation; reductio ad absurdum 
, fallacious - 539 
taste (rasa) (see also flavor) - 
, organ of, see gustatory organ 
tathabhavyatva - 428 
Tathagata, see Jina 
tathatd - 451 
Tatia, Nathmal - 225, 234, 462-468, 555-594, 666 
Tattvapaydsaga, see Tattvaprakasaka 
tattva, see category; principle; reali(ity); state, real; suchness; 
thatness; truth 
-artha, see thing, fundamental 
Tattvaprakasaka (Haribhadra Siri) - 461-462 
Tattvarthasittra (Umasvami) - 6-10, 16, 19, 24-29, 33-34, 45- 
66, 483, 663, 665-669 
Bhasya or Vyakhya (Umasvati) - 45-46, 70-93, 162, 164 
Sarvarthasiddhi (Pijyapada) - 8, 24, 29, 159-174, 306, 
462, 667 


810 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Raja- (or Sloka-)varttika (Akalanka) - 306-421, 468, 669 
Bhdasya or Alamkara (Akalanka) - 306-421 
Laghuvrtti or Dupadika (Haribhadra Siri) - 438 
Tika or Bhdsya (Gandhahasti Siddhasena) - 462-468 
Commentary (Siddhasena Gani) - 462 

Tattvarthasdra (Amrtacandra Suri) - 483 
Slokavarttika (Vidyananda) - 594-600 
Vrtti (Nemicandra Saiddhantika) - 639 
Sukhabodha (Bhaskaranandin) - 669 

Tattvasadra (Devasena) - 527-532 

Tattvopaplavasimha (Jayarasi) - 300, 555 

tautology '- 560 

taxation - 85 

teacher (Gcarya, guru, upddhyaya) - 35, 67, 90, 102, 108-110, 
123, 127, 130-131, 141, 160, 176, 180, 189, 191, 194, 
201, 218, 229, 239, 244, 254-255, 257, 265, 379, 420, 
432, 440, 442, 453, 469, 471, 484, 511-512, 526, 603, 
605, 638-639, 664 

teaching (upadesa) - 3-5, 15, 30-32, 36, 39, 46, 61, 85, 128, 
138, 143, 154-155, 158, 170, 180, 190, 220, 226, 243, 
317, 342, 397, 416, 433-434, 438, 447, 451, 460, 511, 
518-520, 531, 543, 554, 619, 6450, 644, 651 

tejas, see fire 
-vin, see seeker, dynamic 

telepathy (manahparyaya) - 19-21, 48-49, 73-75, 121, 162, 
195-196, 326-327, 330, 341,=-344, 351, 356-357, 522- 
523, 526, 614-615, 634 

temple (mandira) - 4, 177, 241, 246, 252, 254, 263, 437 
, Siva - 654 

temporal, see time 
direction, see time, past; time, future 
perspective, see perspective, (temporally) immediate 

temporary - 349, 401, 470, 489, 580, 607 

temptation - 470-471 

temptress - 471 

tenet (siddhanta) - 13, 99, 417, 518-519, 572 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 811 


tense (grammatical) - 281, 347 
tension - 656 
terminologist - 604 
testimony, verbal or scriptural (dgama, ebaais 14, 20, 236, 
238, 273, 276-279, 340, 476, 479, 539, 545 
text, composition - 11, 41, 46, 66, 71, 73, 154, 177, 239, 259, 
261, 264-265, 306, 424, 427, 436, 438, 458, 472, 521, 
-532, 594, 604-605, 639 
, sacred or scriptural or canonical, see scripture 
theft, see stealing 
theism - 207, 302, 435, 511, 609 
theory, causal, see causation 
thesis (pratijnid, paksa) - 12-13, 150, 181, 192, 210, 236, 297, 
446-447, 450, 479, 506, 554, 561, 577 
, fallacious, see fallacy 
thin - 467 
thing (artha, bhava) 
, fundamental (tattvdrtha) - 47, 129, 160 
, real, see entity, actual 
thinking, see thought 
thirst, see desire 
thorns (Salya) - 61, 171, 392 
thinking, thought - 104, 115, 118-119, 162, 166, 175, 211, 
319, 446-447, 575, 597, 625 
-activity, see activity, mental 
(matijfiadna), see awareness, immediate 
-s of others, knowing the, see telepathy 
, wishful (samkalpa) - 
thread - 128, 348, 384, 403 
threat - 30, 88 
throne - 254, 350 
time (kala) - 3, 48, 55, 57, 69-70, 73, 76, 79-80, 93, 95-96, 
105, 110, 120, 122, 164, 167, 169-170, 179, 187, 189, 
200, 205, 215-216, 228-229, 246-248, 261, 268, 274, 292, 
315, 318, 323-3245, 342-344, 348, 350, 361, 372-375, 
377, 381, 385-386, 389, 397, 401-403, 408, 412-413, 488, 


812 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


490, 494, 499, 504, 506, 515-516, 518-519, 521, 523, 
525, 557, 588, 593, 617, 628, 635-637, 660, 669 
, atoms of - 402, 407, 488 
, future - 122, 324-325, 402, 527, 
-lag (abadhana) - 627 
-particle (-anudravya) - 402 
, past (atita-) - 13, 122, 324-325, 380, 402, 499, 612 
, present (vartamana-) - 82, 122, 274, 284, 324-325, 380, 
402, 527 
-trail, see trail 
tirtha, see bridge; ford 
-krt - 141, 267, 547 
-nkara - 3, 35-36, 38, 41, 73, 76, 98, 111, 129, 141, 163, 
194, 228-229, 426, 436, 442, 454-455, 511, 531-532, 
547 
tiryak, see animal; regression 
tongs - 253 
tongue - 161, 328, 338, 551 
top of the world, s.v. 
topic (bhanga), fundamental, see category 
(prayojana, in Nyaya) - 184 
torment, torture - 157, 224, 239, 243, 430, 464, 640 
touch (sparsa) - 49, 51, 55, 57, 77, 80-82, 84, 88, 107, 111, 
121-122, 165-166, 188, 196, 208, 232, 240, 253, 324-325, 
337, 343, 349, 358-360, 376, 385, 404, 408-409, 423, 
433, 465, 495, 498, 500, 519-522, 608, 648, 653 
townsman - 79 
trace, karmic (samskdra, vdsana) - 50, 63-64, 101, 156, 161, 
223, 228, 272, 288, 307, 310, 313, 339-340, 348, 387, 
394, 404, 474-475, 484, 494, 535, 615, 618, 623-625, 
647, 650, 654-657 
, Cleansing of (nirjara), s.v. 
, Memory- - 296 
trade - 415, 652, 655 
tradition - 3-6, 8-11, 15, 17-18, 20-21, 24, 34-35, 40-41, 94, 
128, 131, 185, 190, 235, 237, 297, 302, 326, 336, 339- 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 813 


340, 379, 420, 460, 467, 483, 528, 664, 667 
(aitihya) - 13 

trail (G@vali) - 122, 402-403, 628-629, 631-632 

Traivikacara (Nemicandra Saiddhantika) - 633 

tranquil(ity) - 175, 181, 509, 512° 

transcendental - 271, 405, 437, 511, 565-566 

transference (samkramana) (see also metaphor) - 525, 624, 
626, 629 
of karma, s.v. 

transformation (parindma; vikriyd) - 50, 54, 57-58, 69, 77, 81, 
97, 104-107, 113-115, 145, 149, 289, 291, 323-324, 344, 
348-349, 353-354, 357, 363, 365-366, 370-371, 376-378, 
381-383, 388, 390, 397-402, 404, 413, 442, 447, 452, 
484, 498-501, 516, 519-520, 524, 589, 602, 619, 626, 
636-637 
of a self, see self-transformation 

transformative (vaikriya) 
body, s.v. 
path, s.v. 

transgression - 32, 61, 85, 89-90, 236, 420, 425,432 

transience, transitoriness - 138, 220, 268, 313, 339, 384, 430- 
431, 449-451, 524, 526, 548, 585, 590, 658 

transition - 421, 528, 576, 629 
, secondary verbal (vicdra) - 421 

transmigration, see rebirth 

transvestite god (kinnara), s.v. 

trap - 471, 652 

trasa, see mobile 

travel(ler) - 32, 131, 219, 275, 402, 498, 604, 635, 647 

TrayastrimSa - 79 

treasure - 471 

treatise, see text 

‘tree (SimSapda) - 213, 254-255, 296, 429, 431, 538, 551, 616, 
642, 649 

trial - 213, 567 

triangle - 579 


814 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Tribhangisara (Nemicandra Saiddhantika) - 634 

tribulation - 213 

trick, juggler's - 451 

Trilokasara (Nemicandra Saiddhantika) - 633 

Tripathi, Sambhunatha - 666 

trouble - 54, 88, 431-432 

trsnd, see clinging; desire 

truancy - 650 

truth (pram4d, satya, tattva) - 6-7, 12-15, 17, 19, 64, 68, 83, 
85, 111, 123, 151, 154, 156, 158, 190, 192-194, 200-201, 
217, 230, 282, 289, 294, 296, 322, 332, 334, 414, 416, 
419, 451, 485, 507, 518, 520, 554, 556, 569, 570-573, 
575-576, 578, 594, 613-614, 619, 639 
-s, four noble - 293-294, 435, 582 
-telling, vow of - 414, 453 
, ultimate or highest (paramartha-) - 235, 451, 561-562, 

575, 578 

tryanuka - 199 

twice-born (dvija) - 453 

twin - 539 

two, see duality 

tydga, see renunciation 

type 
-determining karma, s.v. 

ubiquity - 18, 99, 294-295, 390, 584, 588, 590 

uccagotra (act) - 60 

udaharana, see example 

udarakaya, see body, generous 

udaya, see arising; maturation, karmic; operation; rising 

uddesa - 227 

udvelana, see perturbation 

Uddyotakara (610) - 555 

tha, see reductio ad absurdum 

Ujjain - 177, 183, 670 

Uluka, see Kanada 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 815 


Umasvami or Umasvati (400?) - 6-10, 14, 16, 19-21, 23-29, 
33, 45-93, 94, 140, 159, 165,-166, 171, 342-344, 346, 
359-367, 370-371, 303, 317, 594, 663, 666-667, 669 

unchangeable (avasthita, avakrati) - 119, 145, 289, 327, 376, 
399, 524, 556 

unconscious(ness) - 125, 136, 151, 296, 345, 354, 376, 389, 
395, 410, 412, 525-526, 574, 592, 648 

understanding (bodhi, samveda) - 5, 11, 14, 26, 32, 35, 46, 
85, 87, 100, 102, 109-111, 119, 134, 136, 143, 158, 183, 
196, 218, 277, 283, 310, 317-318, 325, 333, 335, 359, 
371, 414, 449-450, 454-455, 485, 529, 533, 536, 549, 
562, 575 

undesirable - 212-213, 426, 497 

unformability - 354 

uniformity - 574 

unity, see oneness; (difference)/nondifference 

universal property (jati, samanya) - 20, 56, 144, 148-149, 154, 
167, 197, 269, 273, 290-292, 294-296, 435, 474-475, 478- 
479, 517, 519, 523, 538, 551-552, 575-576, 584, 590, 
593-594 . 

universe (loka) - 56, 64, 69, 73, 80, 99, 105, 119, 122, 125, 
139, 164-165, 167, 169-170, 218, 232, 241, 247, 345, 
369, 381-383, 397, 421, 426, 445, 460, 494, 506, 510- 
511, 516, 519, 521, 588, 609, 612, 618, 633 
, top of the (-dkdsa) - 70, 93, 123, 126, 434, 638 

unproved (asiddha) reason - 237, 539 

unseen (adrsta) - 224, 345, 436, 599 

untainted (nirafijana) - 240 

untruth, see lying 

upabhoga, see experiencing, repeated 

upacdra, see transfer, metaphorical 

upaddna, see appropriation 

| -k@rana, see cause, material 

upadesa see teaching — 

Upadesamala (Dharmadasagani) - 264-265 
Balavabodha (Dharmadasagani) - 264-265 


816 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Upadesapada (Haribhadra Siri) - 438 

Upadesasiddhantaratnamala (Nemicandra Saiddhantika) - 639 

upddhana, see proximity 

upadhyaya, see teacher 

Upadhye, A. N. - 94-110, 126-127, 138-139, 176, 191, 238- 
261, 468-471, 473, 483-484, 502, 507, 521, 601-602, 639- 
641, 665-666, 669, 671-672 

upakarana, see ability; capacity; function 

upakrama - 227 

updlambha, see objection 

upamana, see comparison 

upanaya, see application (in inference); perspective, subsidiary 

upanga, see limb, subsidiary 

Upanisad - 4, 11, 182, 427, 563, 576 

upapaddabhimi, see place, rising 

upapata, see manifestation, sudden 

updsaka, see seeker 

Upasakadasangasitra - 39 

upasama, see subsidence 

upatta, see obtained 

upaya, see means 

upayoga, see awareness, Cognitive 

upeksd, see neutrality 

upodghata, see preface 

upward motion, s.v. 

urine - 361, 369 

urna, see utterance, correct 

usage, grammatical or word- - 27, 146, 310, 334, 347, 405, 
439 
, figurative, s.v. 

utensil - 71, 85, 90 

uterus - 364 

utkarsana, see rising 

utpada, see creation; origin(ation); rising 

utpatti, see production 

utsarga, see affirmation; disposal 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 817 


Uttaradhyayanasutra - 40 

Uttarakuru - 78 

Uttar Pradesh - 36 

uttarapaksa, see rejoinder 

uttejana, see instigation 

utterance, correct (urna) - 454 

vacaka, see indicator 

vacana, see language 

vacana, see verse 

Vacanika - 533 

vacas, see expresion 

vacya, see word 

vdda, see argument; theory 

Vadanyaya (Kumaranandi Bhattacarya) - 468 

Vadibha Simha (750) - 263-264 

Vadiraja (1025) - 284, 603 

vagina - 129 

vague awareness, S.v. 

vaidharmya, see example, negative 

vaikriya, see transformative 

Vaimanika (a type of god) - 55, 78, 80, 370 

vairagya, see nonattachment 

Vaisakha - 229 

Vaisali - 36 

Vaisesika (see also Nyaya-Vaisesika) - 14, 155, 169, 183, 186, 
199, 203-204, 208, 267, 284, 289-290, 309, 312, 315-316, 
345, 359, 375, 379-380, 386, 388, 393-394, 413, 435, 
472, 474, 482, 505, 541, 543-544, 551, 577, 589-593 

Vaisesikasutra (Kanada) - 375, 377, 389 
Vakya - 208 
Katandi - 208 
Ttka (Pragastamati) - 208 

vaisrasika, see natural 

vaisvarupa, see aspects, many 

vatyavrttyd, see service, giving 

vakya, see sentence; speech 


818 : ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


-artha, see meaning, sentence- 
Valabhi - 225 
valaya, see ring 
validity, see truth 
valor - 217, 223, 511 
value, provisional - 562 
vanaspati, see plant 
vanity - 182, 250, 450 
Varahamihira - 177 
Vardhamana = ‘Mahavira, s.v. 
varga, see variant 
vargand, see molecule, functional 
variant (varga) - 628 
variegated (citra) 
awareness, S.Vv. 
color, s.v. 
conduct, s.v. 
variety - 101, 348 
(super)variform (spardhaka) - 351-352, 355 
varna, see caste; class; color 
Varsaganya (300?) - 664 
vastu, see entity, actual 
Vasudeva - 364, 367 
Vasurata, teacher of Bhartrhari - 209 
vata, see air; wind 
-deva, see god, airy 
vayu, see air 
Veda, Vedic texts - 6, 204, 240, 302, 317, 332, 416-417, 435- 
436, 547 
vedaka, see cognizer; enjoyer 
vedana, see feeling 
vedaniya (act) - 62 
Vedanta, Advaita - 280, 289, 296-297, 302, 543, 556, 573 
Vedic , 
dogma - 285 
injunction, S.v. 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 819 


precept - 204 
texts, see Veda 
tradition - 302 
vedya, see cognition 
-sandyapala - 449 
vegetable - 127-128, 319, 326, 383, 612 
body, s.v. 
vegetation - 319, 358, 364, 399, 497 
vehicle of becoming - 205 
veil, see obstruction 
veneration (vinaya) - 64, 90 
vengeance - 256, 464 
venom, see poison 
verb - 552 
verbal 
authoritative(ness), see testimony, verbal 
awareness, see awareness, scriptural 
content, see meaning 
verity, see truth 


verse 
(gathd), s.v. 
(pada) - 126 


(vdcana), auspicious, see mangala 

vessel - 157, 221, 365, 381, 397, 420 

vibhdga, see distinction; distinguished 

vibhanga, see awareness, extrasensory 

vibhavavyanjana, see mode, conditioned 

vibhrama, see illusion-free 

vibhiiti, see ability, special 

vibration (parispanda, spanda, yoga) - 165, 170, 173, 355, 
360, 366, 414, 520, 609, 612-613, 615-616, 622-625, 626 

vic@ra, see experience second; transition, secondary verbal 
awareness 

vicikitsd, see perplexity 

victim - 249, 471 

victory Gaya) (in debate) - 180-181, 300 


820 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


videha, see region 
Videha - 78 
vidhdayatta, see statutory 
vidheya, see described, positively 
vidhi, see affirmation; aspect, positive; karma, force of; 
method 
-pratisedha - 515 
vidyd, see knowledge 
Vidyabhusana, Satischandra - 665 
Vidyadhara - 422, 661 
Vidyananda (940) - 10, 21, 468, 533, 542-600 
vidyut, see lightning 
view (drsti) 
, many-sided, see aspects, many 
, philosophical, see school, philosophical 
-point, see perspective 
, Tight - 85, 92, 130, 182 
, wrong - 61, 119 
vigama, see destruction 
vigilance - 189, 520 
vigraha, see rebirth 
Vijaya, a heaven - 56 
vijfidna, see consciousness 
Vijnanavada, see Yogacara 
vijfhaptimatra, see consciousness-only 
vikala, see handicapped; stain 
vikalpa, see construction, conceptual 
vikara, see change 
Vikramaditya - 177 
vikriyd, see transformation 
village - 79, 216, 275 
Vimalasena (913) - 532 
vimoha, see confusion, freedom from 
VimSavimsaka (Haribhadra Siri) - 459-461 
vinaya, see veneration 
section of the Buddhist canon - 607 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 821 


Vinayaka - 426 

Vijayasena - 633 

Vindhya mountains - 435, 559 

violence (himsd) - 30-33, 60-61, 65, 83, 91, 108, 188, 214, 
332, 353, 413-415, 417, 428, 436, 485-486, 643-644, 649, 
652, 655 
, NON-, $.v. 

vipaka, see maturation, karmic 

Vipdkasutangasiitra - 39 

vipaksa - 536, 540-541, 550 
-vyavrtti - 301 

viparita 
-abhinirdesa - 156 
-vada - 532-533, 607 

viparyaya - 185 

Virajinastotra, see 11. Yuktyanusdsana 

virasd, see natural 

Virasena (837) - 469, 533 

virati, see abstinence from sin 

virodha, see contradiction 
-abhdsa - 508 

virtue (dharma) - 32, 34, 68, 77, 85-86, 90, 92, 109, 117, 
183, 213, 220, 224, 243, 253-255, 302, 342, 419, 429, 
444, 469, 640 

viruddha, see reason, contradicted 

virya, see energy 

Visakhacarya - 131 

visarga, see expansion of space-points 

visaya, see content (of awareness) 

visesa, see individuator; particular(ity) 

visesana, see qualifier 

visesya, see qualificand 

visible - 51, 57, 75, 89, 156-157, 317, 321, 338, 343, 345, 
358, 363, 391-392, 408-410, 413, 463, 471, 539, 615 


822 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


vision (dargana) - 15, 18, 50, 59, 62, 65-66, 96, 106, 111, 
117, 120, 125, 128, 136-137, 161, 164, 190, 194-196, 
215-216, 231, 239, 242, 244-245, 249, 251-253, 308-309, 
311-317, 336, 342, 350, 356-358, 376, 387, 408, 415, 
418, 449, 495, 497, 502, 507, 509, 513-514, 521-522, 
529, 535, 539, 546, 601, 616, 619, 629-630, 632, 634, 
638-639, 646, 652, 659 
, dim (taimirika) - 276 
, direct or perfect (kevala-) (see also omniscience) - 99, 
109, 241, 245, 247, 493, 503, 634 

, extrasensory, see awareness, extrasensory 

, false or wrong, see falsity 

, hight(time), s.v. 

, honsensory or verbal, see awareness, scriptural 

, right (samyag-) - 47, 61, 68-69, 71-72, 74, 90, 97-98, 
109, 111, 116-117, 120, 127, 129-130, 132, 134-138, 
159, 162-163, 170, 196, 200, 219, 244, 247, 249-250, 
255, 261, 308-309, 311-313, 315-318, 325, 349, 352- 
353, 394, 421, 442-444, 455-456, 484, 502, 528-530, 
532, 553-553, 607, 618, 637, 640, 653, 655-656, 658- 
659 

, sensory, see awareness, immediate 

, vision-veiling, see karma, view-deluding 

visista, see qualified 

Visnu - 118, 128, 191, 261, 426 

visramsa, see collapse 

visrenigati, see movement, cyclic 

visual (caksusa) 
organ, see eye 
perception, see perception, cirect 

visuddha, see pure 

visuddhi, see elevation; purity 

Visvatattvaprakasa (Bhavasena) - 424, 600 

vital breath, s.v. 

vitanda, see cavil; wrangling 

vitaraga, see passions, expunging them altogether 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 823 


Vitaragadeva - 130 
vitarka, see experience, first; scripture 
viveka, see discrimination 
vivid(ness) - 30, 271, 288 
vocal organ - 216-217, 221, 551 
voice - 172 
void, see empty 
vomit - 252 
vow (vrata) - 32, 60-61, 68, 83-84, 108, 116, 123-125, 130, 
148, 170-173, 176, 188, 262, 413-416, 420, 425, 429-430, 
439, 444, 449, 453, 459, 461, 486, 512, 551, 578, 607- 
608, 616, 618, 637-638, 641 
, great (maha-) - 4, 30, 59, 231, 414, 619, 640 
-less - 139, 172, 176, 624 . 
, lesser or subsidiary (anuvrata-, sila-) - 30, 32, 55, 61, 85, 
130, 232, 414, 619, 640 
-negator (avrata) - 58, 83 
vrata, see vow 
Vrddhacarya - 427 
Vrddhavadi Suri - 176 
Vrsabha - 3 
Vrsagana, see Varsaganya 
vrtti, see activity; fluctuation 
-samksaya, see destruction of all mental operations 
vulture - 445 
vyabhicara, see deviant 
vydghata, see obstruction; resistance 
vydkarana, see grammar; Grammarian 
Vakyaprajnaptyangasititra - 39 
vyakta, see evolved 
vyafijana, see contact, sense-cbject; sound, unmanifest; 
symbol, verbal 
-parydya, see describable 
-vibhava, see mode, conditioned 
vyafijana, see expression 
Vyantara (a type of god) - 55, 78-80, 368, 370 


824 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


vydpaka, see pervader 

vyapti, see concomitance; pervasion 

Vyasa (475) - 450 

vyatireka, see example, negative 
-vyapti, see pervasion, negative 

vyavachinnakriyapratipatti - 222 

vyavahara, see practice, common 
-kdla, see time, ordinary or practical 

Vyavaharasitra - 40 

vyavasdya, see ascertainment 
-atmika, see definiteness 

vyaya, see decay; destruction 

vyutsarga, see renunciation of selfish feeling 

wakefulness, waking - 60, 62, 84, 118, 136, 176, 205, 220, 
249, 276, 474, 537, 556 

walking - 62, 123, 137, 331, 414, 419, 432 
, Sky-, S.v. 
, Sleep- - 622 
-stick - 387 

wandering, see discrepancy 
mendicant, s.v. 

warm(th), see heat 

water (apas) - 30, 51, 54, 77, 83, 106, 121-122, 132, 134, 
157, 165, 167, 219, 221, 223-224, 245, 251, 254, 256, 
307, 310, 319, 340, 345, 348, 350, 354, 358-359, 361, 
364, 368, 471, 374-375, 377, 381, 383, 386-387, 390, 
392, 399-400, 406-407, 409, 429, 434, 436, 450, 493, 
497, 499, 523, 550, 574, 591, 596-597, 609, 612, 616, 
635, 647, 652, 655, 657-660 

way (see also path) 
, highest (parama-) - 440 
, middle - 524 
, self-concerning (updya) - 440 

wealth - 85, 135, 138, 214, 244, 255, 470-471, 645-649, 651- 
652, 654-660 

weapon - 81, 138, 366-367, 369, 515, 531, 578 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 825 


weeping - 213 
weight - 312 
, lightness of - 491 
welfare, well-being - 179, 217, 258, 431, 547, 642 
wheel -- 307, 313 
of consideration, s.v. 
of time - 3 
, potter's - 339 
whirlpool - 470 
white (Sukla, sveta) - 55, 65, 81, 119, 327, 364, 385, 404, 
559, 616-617, 653 
-clother, see Svetambara 
coloring - 51, 222, 353, 364, 616 
concentration, s.v. 
whole/part (avayavin/avayava) - 30, 75, 223, 241, 248, 268, 
280, 287, 289, 325, 378, 393, 406, 463, 466, 478-480, 
505, 511, 562, 583-584, 590, 595-597, 614, 645 
wick - 315 
wicked - 253, 256, 616 
wife - 135, 244, 254, 486, 614, 642-643, 645-648, 656, 661 
of a god, see god's wives 
will 
, free- - 179, 443 
-ful opinion - 316 
Williams, R. - 45 
wind (vata, vadyu) - 106, 188, 219, 224, 389, 392, 405, 409, 
635, 656, 658-659 
wine - 157, 354-355 
wisdom (buddhi, prajfid) - 218-219, 223, 317, 444, 448 
wise (yati) - 116, 118, 194-195, 236-237, 240, 244, 247, 250, 
252, 256, 445, 471 
withdrawal (nivrtti) - 64, 250, 261, 276 
woman (stri) - 84-85, 129-130, 363, 433, 471, 658 
, celestial, see goddess 
, son of a barren, s.v. 


826 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


womb (garbha) - 52-53, 319, 360, 363-364 
, mother's - 131-132 
wood - 345, 399, 407-408, 647, 657-658 
-cutter - 309 
-s, Mahasena, s.v. 
word (pada, sabda, vacya) - 75, 84, 88, 90, 100, 141, 143- 
144, 150-151, 154, 167, 182, 184, 193, 197, 205, 208- 
209, 211, 214-218,233, 253, 258, 275, 277-278, 283, 285, 
286, 301, 303, 305, 312, 318, 328, 331, 343, 356, 392, 
404-407, 423, 453, 473, 478, 483, 487, 498, 511, 516- 
517, 538, 541, 547, 550, 553, 558, 581, 642-643, 659, 
661 
-free awareness, s.v. 
-meaning, see meaning of a word 
-usage - 214, 347 
world (loka) 
-appearance, s.v. 
, Creation of the - 118, 179, 592, 655 
, higher, see heaven 
, hether-, see hell 
, honphysical or superphysical - 242, 245, 259 
, top of the - 66, 70, 93, 123, 126, 247, 249, 434, 492 
worldly - 67, 104, 232, 262, 266, 366, 464, 510, 515, 546, 
596 
enjoyment, s.v. 
existence, S.v. 
-ness (samvega) - 134, 312, 317, 643-644, 647-650, 652, 
655, 658-660 
work - 647 
, physical or external - 18, 106, 261, 287-288 
-S, three - 95, 101, 132, 220, 240-241, 243, 247, 252-253, 
259-260, 371, 402, 643 
worm - 360 
worship (puja) - 34, 112, 127, 130, 135, 157, 159, 200, 246, 
250, 257, 260, 370, 431, 437, 440, 444-445, 450, 456, 
460, 647, 657 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 827 


worth(while)-ness) - 120, 159, 262 

wounded - 30 

wrangling (vitandd) - 13, 184 

wrestler, wresting - 466 

Yajhadatta - 475 

yaksa - 368 

yama, see restraint 

Yanga, see Nyaya-Vaisesika 

Yapaniya - 38, 45-46, 70, 533 

Yasobhadra Siri - 438 

Yasodha - 180 

Yasovijaya (1679) - 176 

yathapravrttikarana - 449 

yati, see ascetic; saint; wise 

yatna, see effort 

yellow - 51, 54-55, 81, 117, 220, 287, 353, 404, 412, 464, 
616-617, 653 

yoga (see also activity; concentration, perfect; vibration) - 216, 
256, 263, 352, 437, 439-440, 444, 444-445 447-450, 456- 
457, 461, 546, 593 

Yoga (school) - 280, 438, 454-456 

Yogabindu (Haribhadra Suri) - 438-448, 455 

Yogacara - 187, 211, 280, 424, 474-475, 544, 577, 664 

Yogadrstisamuccaya (Haribhadra Suri) - 448-453 

Yogasara (Yogindudeva) - 238, 260-263 

Yogasdraprabhrta (Amitagati) - 601-602 

Yogasataka (Haribhadra Stri) - 455-458, 671 

Yogasutras (Pataifijali) 
Bhasya (Vyasa) - 450 

Yogesvara - 211 

yogi (yogin) - 136, 175, 211, 221, 224, 238, 255, 294, 332, 
433, 439-441, 443, 449, 451-453, 457, 502, 520, 529-531, 
593, 601-602, 650, 657 

Yogindudeva (750) - 238-263 

yogi perception, s.v. 

yogurt, see curd 


828 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


yogyatd, see fitness 

yojana - 13, 77, 368, 371 

11. Yuktyanusdsana (Samantabhadra) - 154-158 
87. Tika (Vidyananda) - 600 

yutasiddha, see separable 

zero - 490 


