ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Voi, iL 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF 
INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Vol, 1: Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology: 
The Tradition of Nyaya-Vaisesika 
up to Gangesa 


EDITED BY 


KARL H. POTTER 


PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Princeton, New Jersey 


Copyright © 1977 by Princeton University Press 
Published by Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey 
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, Guildford, Surrey 


All Rights Reserved 


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data will 
be found on the last printed page of this book 


This book was composed in India by Shantilal Jain at 
Shri Jainendra Press, New Delhi 


Printed in the United States of America 
by Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey 


Contributors: 


Usharbudh Arya, University of Minnesota 

Gopikamohan Bhattacharya, Kurukshetra University 
Janakivallabha Bhattacharya, Jadavpur University 

Sibajiban Bhattacharya, University of Burdwan 

Masaaki Hattori, University of Kyoto 

Bimal Krishna Matilal, University of Toronto 

Jitendranath Mohanty, Universities of Calcutta and Oklahoma 
E. R. Sreekrishna Sarma, Sri Venkatesvara University 

S. Subrahmanya Sastri, University of Madras 

V. Varadachari, Sri Venkatesvara University 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE xi 
PART ONE : 


INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF 
NYAYA-VAISESIKA (Karl H. Potter) 


I. Historical Resumé 1 
2. Theory of Value 18 
3. Nature of a Philosophical System 38 
4. Relations 47 
5. Substance 69 
6. Qualities and Motions 112 
7. Universals, Individuators, and Absences 133 
8. Meaning and Truth 147 
9. Logical Theory 179 
PART TWO : 
SUMMARIES OF WORKS 
1. Kanada 211 
Vaisesikastitras (Masaaki Hattori) 212 
2. Gautama 220 
Nyayastitras (Karl H. Potter) 221 
3. Vakyakara 238 
. Katandikara 238 
5. Vatsyayana 239 
Nyayabhasya (Karl H. Potter) 240 
6. Candramati 274 
Daégapadarthasastra (Masaaki Hattori) 275 
7. Bhavivikta 281 
8. Pragastapada 282 
Padarthadharmasamgraha (Karl H. Potter) 282 
9. Uddyotakara 303 
Nyayavarttika (Karl H. Potter) 304 
10. Atreya 337 
11. Priticandra 338 
12. Aviddhakarna 338 
13. Samkara (Svamin) 340 


14. Visvartipa 34] 


Vill CONTENTS 


15. Dhairyarasi 341 
16. Jayanta Bhatta 341 
Nyayamafijari (Karl H. Poiter, 
J. V. Bhattacharya, U. Arya) 343 
Nyayakalika (7. V. Bhattacharya) 394 
17. The Nyayaratnakara 395 
18. Trilocana 396 
19. Bhasarvajfia 398 
Nydayasara (Karl H. Potter) 400 
Nydyabhisana (B. K. Matilal) 410 
20. Sanatani 424 
21. Vyomasiva 424 
Vyomavati (V. Varadachart) 425 
22. Vacaspati Misra 453 
Nyayavarttikatatparyatika (B. K. Matilal) 455 
23. Adhyayana 484 
24. Vittoka 484 
25. Narasimha 484 
26. Sridhara 485 
Nyayakandali (Karl H. Potter) 485 
27. Srivatsa 520 
28. Aniruddha 521 
29. Udayana 521 
Laksanavali (Karl H. Potter) 523 
Laksanamala (S. Subrahmanya Sastrt) 525 
Atmatattvaviveka (V. Varadachari) 526 
Nyayakusumafijali (Karl H. Potter and 
Stbajiban Bhattacharya ) 557 
Nyayaparisista 588 
Nyayavarttikatatparyatikaparisuddhi 588 
Kiranavali (B. K. Matilal) 589 
30. Apararkadeva 603 
Nyayamuktavali (S. Subrahmanya Sasiri) 604 
31. Srikantha 612 
32. The Vrttikara 612 
33. Vallabha 613 
Nyayalilavati (J. N. Mohanty) 613 
34. Varadaraja 629 
Tarkikaraksa with Sarasamgraha (Karl H. Potter) 629 
Nyayakusumafijalibodhani (G. Bhattacharya) 640 
35. Sivaditya 642 


Saptapadarthi (Karl H. Potter) 643 


CONTENTS 


36. 


37, 
38. 
39. 
40. 


Nyayamala (S. Subrahmanya Sastri) 

Vadindra 

Mahavidyavidambana (EF. R. Sreekrishna Sarma) 
Kiranavalidarpana (G. Bhattacharya) 
Kanadasttranibandha 

Bhatta Raghava 

Divakara 

Vadi Vagisvara 

Narayana Sarvajfia 


41. KeSava Misra 
Trakabhasa (Karl H. Potter) 

42, Anandanubhava 

43. Prabhakaropadhyaya 

44. Abhayatilaka 

45. Sondadopadhyaya 

46, Manikantha Misra 
Nyayaratna (V. Varadachari) 

47, Sagadhara 
Nyayasidhantadipa 

48. Tarani Misra 

49, Jagadguru 

50. Ravisvara 

51. Nyayabhaskarakara 

52, Visnumisra 

53. WVidyadharamiéra 

54. Srikara 

55. Bharadvajavrttikara (?) 

56. Candrananda 

FOOTNOTES 

INDEX 


645 
646 
647 
652 
658 
659 
659 
660 
663 
663 
664 
667 
667 
668 
668 
668 
669 
682 
682 
684 
684 
685 
685 
685 
685 
685 
685 
685 


687 
717 


PREFACE 


The present volume provides a detailed resumé of current knowledge 
about the classical Indian philosophical system of Nyaya-Vaisesika 
in its earlier stages. Specifically, it covers the literatures of Nyaya 
and Vaisesika from their inception in the respective sitras up to 
the time of Gangesa, that is, about A.D. 1350. This dividing point 
is regularly accepted in the tradition, since with Gangesa it is felt 
that a new start is made within the systems, the result coming to be 
known as Navyanyaya, “new”? Nyaya. We hope that a volume will 
follow covering the remainder of the Nyaya-Vaiéesika literature 
from Gangega to the present. 

A volume already published, Bibliography of Indian Philosophies 
(New Delhi : Motilal Banarsidass, 1970), provides a useful guide to 
the literature, both primary and secondary, on the Nyaya-Vaisesika 
school, and citations in the present book make constant references 
to the Bibliography, such references usually appearing in the form of 
**B” followed by the number of entry cited. 

The form of this book features an extended introductory section 
followed by summaries of works belonging to the system’s literature. 
These summaries are arranged in relative chronological order to 
assist the reader in tracing the development of the school’s thought. 
Summaries have been solicited from scholars around the world— 
Indian, Japanese, and American scholars have collaborated in the 
undertaking. This international aspect of the book is one of its 
pleasantest features, serving to put philosophers and Indologists 
around the world in closer touch with one another. 

A few words of explanation and advice as to how to use this 
book may be in order. Perhaps the first and foremost thing that 
needs to be said is that this volume is not intended to be analytically 
definitive: it invites the attention of philosophers and scholars rather 
than making such attention unnecessary. The thinking behind the 
preparation of this volume has been that philosophers without ex- 
tended training in Sanskrit and Indian studies are notin a very good 
position to appreciate the contributions made by classical Indian 
philosophy toward the solution of perennial philosophical problems. 
This is partly due to the fact that the tradition in which the Indian 
schools arise and grow is foreign to Western philosophers, but our 
thinking is that this fact is an avoidable hazard. It is also partly 
due to the type of translations that have been produced by Indian 


xii PREFACE 


and Western Sanskrit scholars; these translations, while usually 
accurate, are not always philosophically perspicuous, which is to 
say that they do not always bring out what a professional philosopher 
will find most interesting and identifiable in the material. The 
production of an acceptable translation is,and ought to be, a serious 
and extensive scholarly problem, and the summaries in Part II of 
this book are in no way intended as surrogates for such translations. 
Nevertheless, we think that philosophers should be provided with a 
tool for introducing Indian thought into their courses on problems 
of philosophy, history of thought, etc., and that the translations 
and other materials currently available to them do not make it 
really possible for them to work up Indian thought without more 
training than most philosophers are willing or able to expose 
themselves to. Our aim here, then, is to provide the philosopher 
with an account of the systematic thought of India which is less 
detailed than an accurate translation, but more detailed than the 
standard introductory textbook on Indian philosophy. 

It is to be stressed that the work is addressed to philosophers 
primarily, and Indologists secondarily. Of course we hope that 
the materials here presented will, within the limits of our intent, 
be adjudged sufficiently accurate in terms of scholarship. The 
editor has endeavored to obtain the work of some of the leading 
scholars of the system to furnish s:mmarics. However, these summa- 
ries omit large portions, may well omit sections which others deem 
of primary importance, and will otherwise deviate from the evaluations 
likely to be made by the Sanskritist. In order that there be no 
misunderstanding it is well to mention these points here. These 
summaries, then, are not substitutes for scholarship, but guides and 
markers for further study on the part of trained scholars. 

In studying the philosophy of the Nydya-Vaisesika school 
one finds that a fair amount of the literature occurs in the séira or 
commentary form so well known in India. The reader should bear 
in mind that, in the summary of one of the sitras, say, what is summa- 
rized is no more than what is actually said there; if the summary 
seems imprecise and laconic, that is because (if we have done our 
work well) the sara has those features. It is characteristic of this 
tradition that the commentators spell out what they believe to be 
the intent of the authors of the sdras; thus the reader should, if he is 
tracing the thought of the school on a given topic, be careful to 
read the summaries of the commentators in conjunction with that 
of the sutra. The index provided is intended to enable the reader 
to identify all the passages summarized here which bear upon a 


PREFACE Xili 


given topic, and he is advised to use it frequently. Sometimes, too, 
an author will comment on a topic in a part of his work unrelated 
to any logical development that the ordinary reader can discern; 
here again the reader may well miss this contribution unless he uses 
the index. 

This volume has been in preparation for a number of years. 
Work on it began in the early 1960s. The editor wishes to thank 
the American Institute of Indian Studies for awarding him a 
Followship in 1963-64 which enabled him to visit prospective contri- 
butors and utilize the resources that India provided for furthering 
his work. Later on, in the summer of 1967, he received a Summer 
Session grant from the University of Minnesota which enabled him 
to use the Widener Library to locate out of the way secondary mate- 
rials in preparing his introductory section. He is extremely grateful 
for both these opportunities. 


1977 KARL H. POTTER 


PART ONE 


INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY 
OF NYAYA-VAISESIKA 


HISTORICAL RESUME 


A full-scale philosophical system is generally expected to speak to 
problems in the following areas: metaphysics, epistemology, ethics 
and theory of value, logic, and philosophical method. The system 
of Indian philosophy known as Nyaya-Vaisesika is such a full-scale 
system. Its contribution in each and every one of these areas is 
extensive, interesting, and usually of fundamental importance, as 
this introduction will attempt to show. 

Metaphysics: Ny&ya-Vaigesika offers one of the most vigorous 
efforts at the construction of a substantialist, realist ontology that the 
world has ever seen. It provides an extended critique of event- 
ontologies and idealist metaphysics. It starts from a unique basis 
for ontology that incorporates several of the most recent Western 
insights into the question of how to defend realism most successfully. 
This ontology is ‘‘Platonistic’” (it admits repeatable properties as 
Plato’s did), realistic (it builds the world from “timeless’’ individuals 
as well as spatio-temporal points or events), but neither exclusively 
physicalistic nor phenomenalistic (it admits as basic individuals enti- 
ties both directly known and inferred from scientific investigations ).1 
Though the system has many quaint and archaic features from a 
modern point of view, as a philosophical base for accommodating 
scientific insights it has advantages: its authors developed an atomic 
theory, came to treat numbers very much in the spirit of modern 
mathematics, argued for a wave theory of sound transmission, and 
adapted an empiricist view of causality to their own uses. 

Epistemology: Whereas in “modern”? philosophy of the West 
the idealist critique of substance initiated by Berkeley has never been 
seriously challenged, the philosophers of the Nyaya-Vaigesika school 
entered the controversy very early in its history against Buddhists 
who used Berkeleyan arguments. The resulting polemical battle 
may well represent the most important confrontation in philosophical 


2 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


literature between so-called naive realism and the threats to it from 
idealist sources. NyAya offers an account of perception which makes 
sense of our belief in an external world, yet promises to explain the 
fact of perceptual error without allowing that opening wedge of 
idealism, the admission that the mind creates certain parts of our 
world (and so why not all of it ?). The intricacy of this discussion 
between Nyaya and Buddhism brings out many fascinating and little 
understood aspects of the two views and what they require from their 
adherents. 

Ethics and Theory of Value: The Nyaya-Vaisesika system provides 
no startling new ideas over and beyond what is generally acceptable 
to Hindus, but it presents many carefully gauged arguments for the 
standard position, involving belief in transmigration, karma, and 
the possibility of liberation from future rebirths. It does not discuss 
questions of ‘“‘ethical theory’ as we understand that term in contem- 
porary philosophy, since that was the business of others (Mimam- 
sakas) in the peculiar division of labor adopted by the ancient 
Indian thinkers. However, it endorses many of the general ethical 
attitudes of Hindu sages, questioning some in passing. On one 
point Nydya is recognized by Hindus to have provided a definitive 
treatment, and this is on arguments for the existence of God. 

Logic: Ny&aya grew in part as a theory of philosophical debate, 
and among Hindus has been accepted as the system which specially 
studies the theory of arguments good and bad, in keeping with the 
division of labor principle alluded to in the previous paragraph. 
This does not mean that all Hindu philosophers accepted every point 
in the Nyaya account, but they certainly tended to look to Nyaya for 
definitive treatment and detailed discussions of intricate points. 
Nyaya had its great rival, however, in the logic developed by the 
Buddhists, and from this controversy developed one of the most com- 
prehensive logical theories the world has known. Indian logic is 
never conceived as ““formal’’ in the Western sense, but as an account 
of sane processes of reasoning it has few equals in the West for atten- 
tion to detail. 

Philosophical Method: Topics in this area are of the greatest 
current interest to philosophers in the Anglo-American tradition. 
Western philosophers sometimes seem to suppose that the “‘linguistic 
turn” in recent philosophy is a unique phenomenon, a turning- 
point in the history of philosophy. Perhaps it is, but if so it took 
place many centuries ago in India, where attention to grammar was 
commonplace by the 4th century B.c. The Nyaya theory of language, 
of meaning and the meaningfulness of words and sentences, shows 


HISTORICAL RESUME 3 


subtlety at the levels of syntax, semantics, and pragmatics. Nyaya 
also gave prolonged attention to defense of the empirical theory of 
validity and truth, opposing uncritical use of intuition and authori- 
tarian appeals to revelation. 


I. Who were these Philosophers ? 


The present volume covers the first part of the history of the 
school of Nyaya-Vaisesika, up until the beginning of so-called Navya- 
nyaya in the Tattvacintamani of Gangega. The reader will be able to 
find below summaries of what we know about these ancient philo- 
sophers. In this section I provide only a brief survey designed to give 
a nodding acquaintance with the most important of them so that 
they can be referred to as we proceed. 

Gangesa flourished around a. p. 1350. This volume, then, deals 
with the system as it is presented and developed by some 55 authors 
who flourished prior to a. D. 1350, and who wrote some works of 
which we know or have heard. Many of these authors are practically 
nothing but names to us at present, and it is quite possible that we 
shall never learn more about them. Of the 82 works whove titles 
are known to us, only 51 are available now; the remaining ones, if 
we know anything about them, are known through fragmentary refer- 
ences taken from the works of philosophers who addressed polemics 
toward their views.? 

Of the 50 works available in manuscript, 33 have been edited, 
some more than once, and 11 have been translated—wholly or 
partially—into English. In our treatment in this volume we have 
been able to provide summaries of the contents of 30 of these works. 
However, many of the works we have been unable to summarize are 
late commentaries of apparently less interest than some of the more 
original works that are better known. 

As with several of the major Hindu philosophical systems, there 
is a tradition that looks back to a basic work in which the princi- 
ples of the system were supposedly first enunciated. Nydya and 
Vaisesika were frequently listed as two systems,® partly perhaps 
because there are two sets of sétras or aphorisms from which the two 
schools issued. It is uncertain whether these works were the work 
of one author or many, and it is probable that the development of 
the doctrines they summarize took place over several centuries. Of 
the two, the Vaisesikasiitras, attributed to a probably fictitious person 
named “Kanada” (perhaps “atom-eater”) or “Ulika’” (‘‘owl’’), 
seem to represent the somewhat earlier stage of development. The 
date of Gautama or Aksapada (“eyes in his feet’’), to whom the 


4 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Nydayasiitras is attributed, is variously estimated from as early as the 
6th century B.c. to the 2nd century a.p., the reason for the discre- 
pancy being apparently that these sdiras, which achieved their present 
form around the time of Nagarjuna and very possibly were fashioned 
by a chief architect of that period, are attributed to a traditional 
personage who must have lived very long ago, since he is known to 
the authors of Vedas and epics which date back many centuries be- 
fore Christ. In any case, it seems likely that traditions which asso- 
ciate Kanada with Banaras and Aksapada with Mithila (North 
Bihar) may be accepted; Banaras was an ancient seat of learning, 
and many of the most influential later scholars of the system came 
from or were instructed in Mithila. 

The style of the VatSesikasdtras is laconic, and several parts of it 
are extremely difficult to interpret. Apparently later Vaisesika 
authors found them difficult to understand also, as commentaries 
on these sitras before Vadindra (fl. 1225) have been lost and appa- 
rently more or less forgotten. The style of the Nygyasiitras, by contrast, 
is somewhat more discursive, particularly in its third and fourth 
books, which has led some to guess that these are of later origin. 
However, it is several centuries before the first extant commentary 
on these sitras was composed by Vatsyayana or Paksilasvamin (450- 
500), who is also known as “‘Dramida,”’ suggesting his home was in 
the Deccan or the south of India. The Mydyabhdsya, as this commen- 
tary is known, became the basis for a great many subcommentaries 
in the next few centuries, and indeed on until the present. Whether 
Vatsyayana accurately understood the meaning of the aphorisms on 
which he comments, it is his account of Nyaya which provides the 
springboard for many of the subsequent developments in the system. 

This is not to suggest, however, that each new sub-commentator 
did not innovate. They certainly did so, for they were under cons- 
tant pressure from a remarkable series of philosophical Buddhists, 
who selected Nydya-Vaisesika as their prime target in controversy. 
Scholars are still not absolutely certain about the relative chronology 
of this period, but it would appear that Buddhist logic of a serious 
sort began with Vasubandhu, who was more or less contempora- 
neous with Vatsyayana; it was developed by Dignaga and Dharma- 
kirti, defended by Santaraksita and Kamalasgila, and refined by 
Ratnakirti and Jfanaérimitra, and that this period found constant 
challenge and response between these philosophers and the contem- 
porary Ny&ya-Vaisesika thinkers. 

Part of the difficulty in piecing together the history of this period 
is due to the fact that the historian must command several languages 


HISTORICAL RESUME 5 


to be in full command of his materials. The original language of 
all these philosophers, Hindu and Buddhist, was classical Sanskrit, 
but for many of the Buddhist works the scholar must rely on Tibetan 
and/or Chinese versions, then reconstruct the original. It is probable 
that many as yet unknown works of these times are hidden away in 
Tibetan lamaseries, for occasional forays have brought to light 
a number of works previously unknown or only heard of, and_ there 
must be many more waiting to be discovered. 

It is understandable that the Sanskrit works which Chinese 
monks translated and carried to China during these times were 
mainly Buddhist. Only two Hindu texts are known to have been 
translated; one of them is a treatise called Dasapadarthasastra by a 
Candramati (or Maticandra) who probably dates from about 
Vatsyayana’s time. His work is a version of the Vaisesika system, 
and Frauwallner has argued that it was to refute his version that 
Prasgastapada wrote the work which is probably, even more than 
the Vaisesikasiitras, the definitive treatise on Vaisesika tenet.* Pragas- 
tapada’s work is called Paddrthadharmasamgraha; while it. alludes 
frequently to the sitras, it can hardly be called a commentary on 
them, being an independent exposition of the fundamental tenets 
of the system with some detailed notes on certain topics. Scholars 
have argued whether Praéastapada got his theory of inference from 
Dignaga the great Buddhist logician, or vice versa. It appears fairly 
certain that Pragastapada and Dignaga were separated by no more 
than acentury. Frauwallner dates Pragastapada 500 to 600. Appro- 
ximately contemporary with him is the Naiyayika’ Uddyotakara, 
whose commentary on WNydyabhdsya is the oldest now available. 
Uddyotakara clearly knows of Dignaga’s views and attacks them. 
His Nydyavarttika is philosophical work of great skill in dialectic; 
he was a consummate philosopher, although some modern scholars 
judge him too fond of sharp practices in argumentation. 

At this point, unhappily, a 300-year gap sets in as far as available 
texts are concerned. From Buddhist sources, however, we know 
that the period was alive with philosophical controversy. Santara- 
ksita (ca. 700) refers to several old Naiyayikas and considers some 
of them to be “pillars” of the system—notably Bhavivikta, Aviddha- 
karna, and Samkarasvamin. Bhavivikta may be prior to Uddyota- 
kara, but the other two must fall within this 300-year gap. Fortu- 
nately, Santaraksita and his commentator Kamalagila provide 
extensive references to the views of several of these philosophers. 

The next available texts of the system come from a new direc- 
tion—Kashmir. One of the most interesting personalities among 


6 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INLIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


our group of philosophers is Jayanta Bhatta (840-900), the author 
of a Nydyamaijari (and apparently a summary of it called Nydyakalika). 
Jayanta came from a Bengali family which had migrated to Kashmir 
several generations previously; he was an orthodox Brahmin who 
zealously defended the authority of the Vedas and saw the refutation 
of Buddhism as a religious cause. Yet he was no fanatic; he held 
that differences among religious sects are unimportant since they all 
seek the same end, namely liberation: all serious (i.e., Hindu ?) 
faiths should be tolerated. Furthermore, Jayanta was capable of 
retaining his sense of humor under adversity: he tells us that as he 
writes Nydyamafijari he is being held prisoner in a cave and ‘‘I have 
beguiled my days here by this diversion of writing a book.” The 
book turns out to be one of the acknowledged masterpieces of Sanskrit 
style, replete with light turns of phrase to offset the dry character 
of his subject matter. An “allrounder,’’ Jayanta also wrote a play 
and was well trained in grammar and aesthetics. 

Another Kashmiri Naiyadyika is Bhasarvajfia (860-920), the 
author of Nydyasdra and a commentary on it called Nydyabhiisana. 
The importance of the latter work for the development of the system 
is difficult to overemphasize. The Nydyasdra, a brief and rather 
straightforward summary of Nyaya doctrines with a few remarkable 
features, is a standard text. The Bhisana, however, is a long work 
that was thought to be lost until quite recently. The work has now 
been published, and its appearance is one of the most exciting events 
in the history of scholarship on Indian philosophy, for the doctrines 
in this work are apparently highly extraordinary and original. Later 
philosophers continually refer to the view of the “Bhisanakara,” 
or sometimes to a group of Naiydyikas they call ‘“‘ekadesins’’— 
meaning “‘a section of the school,” apparently referring to the fol- 
lowers of the Bhisanakara. Since many of the opinions of this section 
involve throwing out whole categories of time-honored importance 
within the system, it is understandable that Bhasarvajfia’s views 
provide the basis for what is perhaps the only serious factional split 
within the system, one that lasts on and is referred to till the end of 
our period. Bhasarvajfia’s theories may well turn out to have inspi- 
red some of the reforms currently attributed® to the Navya-naiy4- 
yika Raghunatha Siromani, for instance. 

This brings us to the 10th and 11th centuries, a period during 
which the Nydya-Buddhism conflict reached its climax. Indeed, 
after this period Buddhism, for whatever reasons, is no longer a force 
in India. Naiyayikas like to think this occurred because of the force 
of their polemics. 


HISTOIRCAL RESUME i 


Three commentaries on Pragastapada’s classic Vaigesika trea- 
tise were written during this period: the Vyomavati of Vyomagiva 
(900-960), the Nydyakandali of Sridhara (950-1000), and the Kirand- 
vali of Udayana (1050-1100). These are lengthy, technical accounts 
defending complex ontology with exceptional subtlety. As for com- 
mentaries on the Nyaya literature, two authors stand out promi- 
nently. One is Vacaspati Migra (900-980), a rather unique pheno- 
menon in Indian philosophy, for he managed to compose treatises 
defending no less than five different and mutually incompatible 
systems of thought, treatises each of which has become a classic within 
its tradition. His contribution to Nyaya is a commentary on Uddyo- 
takara’s work: its title is Nydyavdrttika Tatparyatikd. 

On Vacaspati’s work Udayana (1050-1100) composed still another 
commentary called Parisuddhi. Many modern scholars believe that 
Udayana deserves the title of the greatest philosopher of the Nyaya- 
Vaisesika school; he certainly stands as one of the most impor- 
tant figures. Besides Atrandvali and the Parisuddht he wrote five 
other works on Nyaya-Vaisesika, and fortunately they are all pre- 
served. Two of them are brief presentations of the basic defini- 
tions of Nyaya concepts (Laksandvali and Laksanamala). A third is 
a development of the topic of how to win or lose a debate, a topic 
Gautama treated in the fifth book of his sitras: Udayana gives it a 
full-scale treatment in his Nydyaparisista. 

The other two works are perhaps Udayana’s most important 
contributions. One of them is entitled Atmatattvaviveka, ‘“Discrimi- 
nation of the Reality of the Self”, a broadside against Buddhism 
from which, according to confirmed Naiyayikas, Buddhism never 
recovered. This text badly needs translating; it may well be that 
its brand of analysis would prove more interesting to contemporary 
philosophers than any of the works so far available in all of Indian 
thought. In it Udayana not only gives arguments for the existence 
of the continuants the Naiyayikas call ‘‘Selves’’; he also considers 
and refutes fundamental principles of Buddhist analysis such as the 
principle that whatever is real has only momentary existence, the 
Buddhist denial of an external world independent of the mind, the 
very important Buddhist view that substances are nothing but bundles 
of qualities, and the Buddhist account of causation which is akin to 
that of Hume and Kant. 

Udayana’s magnum opus, according to many critics, is yet another 
work, entitled Nydyakusumaijali. This work contains by general 
acclaim the definitive treatment of the question of how to prove God’s 
existence. It is still regularly studied in Indian curricula. As 


8 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Udayana develops the question of God’s existence it turns out to 
involve most of the central topics of philosophy—e.g., the nature 
of successful argument (since arguments for God go beyond the 
reach of the senses), the nature of causation re the cosmological argu- 
ment and the need for a creator, and so on. 

So monumentally does Udayana loom in the history of Nyaya 
Vaisesika that writers in this tradition over the next few generations 
are overshadowed by comparison. Indeed, some historians of the 
school hold that it is a mistake to break “old” and ‘‘new’”? Nyaya 
at GangeSa; Udayana, himself, pioneered the new techniques that 
Gangega so expertly wielded. There is no doubt that much of the 
discussion during the period between the two— a period of about 
250 years—was devoted to refining Udayana’s definitions and 
analyses, though Udayana was by no means followed slavishly, and 
new ideas continued to be broached and older ones resuscitated. 

Too, part of our difficulty is that this post-Udayana, pre-Gangesga 
period has not been studied nearly as extensively as that prior 
to Udayana. One or two short handbooks have been translated: 
that of Sivaditya called Saptapadarthi presents a succinct account 
of Vaigesika, useful for.students who study in India by rote 
methods, and Kegava Migra’s Tarkabhasa is a similarly useful hand- 
book for students of Nyaya. Of the more original works of this 
period none are available in translation. One is Srivallabha’s (or 
simply Vallabha’s) Nydyalildvati, written during the first part of the 
12th century. Another is the Mahdvidydvidambana of Bhatta Vadindra 
(1175-1225), which contributes importantly to the development of 
logical theory by exhaustively and critically studying the question 
of that sort of argument called kevaldnvayi, where what is being proved 
is the existence of universal properties or things satisfying them. As 
we approach Gangeta’s time a number of works are written, none 
of them well-known to scholarship, which may well contain much 
of what Gangesga systematizes. Notable in this group are the Nydya- 
ratna of Manikantha Misra (1275-1325) and the Nydyasiddhdntadipa 
of Sagadhara (1275-1325). 

For ease of reference the table on the next page summarizes the 
names of Nyaya-Vaisesika authors, their works, dates, and places 
of origin where known. 


HISTORICAL RESUME 9 


T—Translated 
E—WNot translated, but has been published 
M—Not published, but manuscript(s) available 


NYAYA-VAISESIKA BEFORE GANGESA—-CHECK 
LIST OF AUTHORS AND WORKS 


Name Date Place Works 
1. Kanada ? Banaras? Vaisesikasitras (T) 
2. Gautama ? Mithila, then Nydyastitras (T) 
Kathiawar? 
3. Vakyakara ? ? Vaisesikasitravakya 
4. Katandikara ? ? Vaisesikasitravakya- 
katandi 
5. Vatsyayana 450-500 Deccan? Nydyabhasya (T) 
(Oberhammer) 
6. Candramati 450-500 ? DaSapadarthasastra 
(Frauwallner) (T) 
7. Bhavivikta 520-580 ? Nyayabhasyatika 
(Frauwallner) 
8. Prasastapada 550-600 rd Padarthadharmasam- 
(Frauwallner) graha (T) 
8a. (Pragastamati) Tika on Vaisesika- 
siitras, Vakya 
g. Uddyotakara 550-610 Srughna near Ny4dyavarttika (T) 
Thanesvar and Bhasya 
10. Atreya ? ? Ravanabhasya on 
Vaisesikasiitras 
11. Priticandra 600-650 ? ? 
12. Aviddhakarna 620-700 ? Nyayabhasyatika 
13. Samkara (svimin) 675-725 ? Sthirasiddhi 
(before Santaraksita) 
14. Visvaripa 800-850 ? Nydyabhasyatika 
(Steinkellner ) 
15. Dhairyarasi 800-850 ? ? 
(Steinkellner) 
161 Jayanta Bhatta 840-900 Kashmir Nyayamafijari (E: 
(Steinkellner) partially T) 
Nyayakalika(?) (E) 
(Agamadambara) 
17. Ny&ayaratnakara 840-g00 Kashmir? Nyayaratna 
(Kaviraj) 
18. Bhasarvajiia 860-920 Kashmir Nyayasara ({E) 
(Suali) Nyayabhiisana (E) 
(Ganakarikas) 
1g. Trilocana (870-930) Karnata Nyayaprakirnaka 
country? Nyayamaiijari 


Nyayabhasyatika 


10 


20. 


21. 


22. 


23. 


24. 


25. 


26, 


27. 


28, 


29. 


30. 


3te 


32. 


33- 


Name 


Sanatani 


Vyomasiva 


Vacaspati Misra I 


Adhyayana 


Vittoka 


Narasimha 


Sridhara 


Srivatsa 


Aniruddha 


Udayana 


Apararkadeva 


Srikantha 


Vritikara 


(Sri) Vallabha 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Date Place 


go00-g60? 
(D.C. Bhattacharya) 


Bengal 


900-960 “from South’’ 
(V. Varadachari) ‘‘Kashmir” 
(D.R. Sastri) 

900-980 Mithila 
(Thakur) 

950-1000? ? 
(Steinkellner ) 

950-1000? ? 
(Steinkellner) 

950-1000? ? 
(Steinkellner) 
950-1000 Bengal 
1000-1050 Mithila (?) 
(D.C. Bhattacharya) 

1025-1075? ? 

(Jetly) 

1050-1100 Mithila 
(Frauwallner) 

1075-1125 Konkan 


(Subrahmanya Sastri) 


1075-1125 ? 
(D.C. Bhattacharya) 


T100-1150 Bengal 
(Thakur) 
1100-1150 Mithila 


(D.C.Bhattacharya) 


Works 
CG on NyAyasiitras (?) 


Vyomavati on Padar- 


thasamgraha (E) 
Nydyavarttikatat- 
paryatika (E) 


Nyayasiicinibandha (E) 

G on Ny4yaratna 

Rucitika on Ny4ya- 
bhasya 

? 


Nydyakandali on 
Padarthadharma- 
samgraha (T) 


? 


Vivaranapafijika on 
NS, NBh, NV and 
NVT (M) 

Laksanavali (£) 

Laksanamala (E) 

Atmatattvaviveka (E) 

Nydyakusumafijali 
(partially T: E) 

Nyayaparisista (E) 

Nyayavarttikatat- 
paryatikapariguddhi 
(partially E) 

Kiranavali on Padar- 
thadharmasamgraha 

(E) 

Nydyamuktavali on 
Nyayasara (E) 

Paficaprasthanyaya- 
tarka on NS, NBh, 
NV, NVT, and 
NVTP (M) 


Vaisesikasiitravrtti 
(M) 
Nyayalilavati (E) 


HISTORICAL RESUME 


Name 


34. Varadaraja 


35. Sivaditya 


36. Vadindra 


37. Bhatia Raghava 


38. Divakara 


39. Vadi Vagisvara 

40. Narayana Sarvajfia 

41. KeSava Misra 

42, Anandanubhava 

43. Prabhakaropa- 
dhyaya 

44. Abhayatilaka 


45. Sondadopadhyaya 


Date Place 
1100-1150 ? Kashmir or 
(V. Varadachari) | Andhra 
1100-1150 ? 
(D.C.Bhattacharya) 

1175-1225 Daulatabad 
(D.C.Bhattacharya) 

1200-1250 Daulatabad 
(D.C.Bhattacharya) 

1200-1250 Mithila 
(D.@. Bhattacharya) 

“before Anandanu- 
bhava”’ 

(E.P, Radhakrishnan) 
1225-1275 ? 

(D.C. Bhattacharya) 

1225-1275 Mithila 
(D.C. Bhattacharya) 

1230-1280 

1230-1280 Mithila 

(D.Q. Bhattacharya) 

1275-1325 ? 
(Jetly) 
1275; 1325 Mithila 


(D.C. Bhattacharya) 


1] 


Works 


Tarkikaraksa (E) 

Sarasamgraha on 
*Tarkikaraksa (E) 

Nyayakusumaiijali- 
bodhani (BE) 

Con Kiranavali (M) 


? Nydyadipika (M) 
Saptapadarthi (T) 
Laksanamala 
Hetukhandana 
Upadhivarttika 
Arthapattivarttika 
Nyayamala (E) 
Mahavidyavidambana 
() 
Kiranavalidarpana 
(partially E) 
Kandadasitraniban- 
dha (M) 
Vaisesikasitravya- 
khya (E) 
(Summary of previ- 
ous item) 


? C on Laksanavali 
Nyayasaravicara (M) 


Nyayakusumaiijali- 
parimala (M) 
Nibandhoddyota (on 
Pariguddhi? ) 
(partially M) 
Manamanchara (M) 
Nyayalaksmivilasa 
? 
Tarkabhasa (T) 
Nyayakalanidhi on 
Nyayasara (E) 
(Advaita works) 
? 
Nyayalamkara on 


NBh, NV,NVT and 
NVTP (M) 


2 


12 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Name Date Place Works 
46. Manikantha Misra 1275-1325 Mithila Nyayaratna (E) 
(D.C.Bhattacharya) Nyayacintamani 
47. Sagadhara 1275-1325 Mithila Nyayasiddhantadipa (E) 
(D.C.Bhattacharya) Nydyamimamsapra- 
karana (M) 
Nyayanaya (M) 
Sasadharamala (M) 
48. Tarani Misra 1300-1350 ? Ratnakosa (M) 
(D.C.Bhattacharya) 
49. Jagadguru “before Gangesa”’ G on Nyayakusuma- 
(D.C. Bhattacharya) fijali 
50. Nyayabhaskarakara “‘before Gangesa”’ Nyayabhaskara 
(D.C.Bhattacharya) 
51. Ravigvara “before Gangesa”’ ? 


(D.C. Bhattacharya) 

Questionable, or dates unknown 

52. ? Bharadvajavrtti on 
Vaisesikastitras 

53. Visnu Misra 

54. Vidyadharamisra 

55. Srikara 

56. CGandrananda Vaisesikasitravrtti(E) 


II. Nydya and Vaisesika: Two Schools or One ? 


Although there are two sets of sdtras, there is no doubt that each 
of the two schools accepted a great deal of what the other taught. 
The extent to which, for example, Uddyotakara utilized Vaisesika 
doctrines in his Nyaya commentary has been shown to be of no mean 
proportion. At least one author appeals explicitly to the principle 
that if of the two sister schools one does not speak against the other’s 
view it should be accepted that the two agree on the point.’ 

In the light of this it seems unnecessary to speculate about just 
when ‘‘syncretism”’ between the two schools occurred. One scholar 
has suggested that Sivaditya’s Saptapadarthi is the first syncretic work, 
since Sivaditya attempts ‘“‘to combine the two systems...in one 
manual by a symmetrical representation and arrangement’.® In 
this special sense later handbooks such as Tarkikaraksé and Tarkabhasa 
However, apart from this stylistic 


> 


may also be called “‘syncretic.’ 
point, Nyaya and Vaisesika have from the first considered themselves 
as mutually supportive, Nyadya specializing in epistemology and 
methodology, Vaisesika ‘in metaphysics. 

There were occasional points of disagreement between the 
philosophers of the two schools, however. Many of these were quite 
minor, and others are on points where even within each school there 


HISTORICAL RESUME 13 


is by no means unanimity. Umesh Mishra® has provided a useful 
list of these points of disagreement. Despite this, there seems no 
reason whatsoever not to treat Nydya-Vaisgesika philosophers to- 
gether under the same cover; on practically all fundamental questions 
they agree in opposing the various other systems of Indian thought. 


III, Nydya-Vaisesika and the Other Systems of Indian Philosophy 


Besides the Buddhists, the Naiyayikas jousted on occasion with 
philosophers representing several of the Hindu systems, notably the 
Vaiyadkaranas, Mimamsakas, Samkhyas, and Advaita Vedantins. 
There are very few references to the Jains in the works of our period; 
other varieties of Vedanta did not arise until the close of our period 
or even after that, though in the subsequent period of Navya-nyaya 
there was controversy with logicians of the Dvaita school of Madhva, 
for example. 

Vaiyakaranas: These philosophers developed the theory of mean- 
ing in early times. Scholars are now working on the views of 
these Grammarians, and we may be confident that the results of 
their researches will yield many insights into the origins of some of 
the speculations of the systematic schools such as Nyaya-Vaisesika. 
There is reason to believe that many of the typical tendencies in 
Hindu thought had their antecedents in grammatical theories, though 
the influence went more or less unnoticed by the philosophers them- 
selves. An occasionally more insightful philosopher such as Jayanta, 
however, expert in grammar as well as his own philosophical tradi- 
uon, provides us with much material for deeper analyses of the 
sources of Nyaya views on meaning and truth. We shall deal with 
some of these views below. 

Mimémsakas: As mentioned above, Pirvamimamsa had as its 
business in earliest times what may be likened to ethical theory, 
namely the exegesis of the scriptural injunctions which constituted 
the moral precepts accepted by the community and enshrined in 
the Vedas. In the course of this work the Mimamsakas also deve- 
loped characteristic views on meaning, validity, and truth, sometimes 
at odds with those of the Grammarians. Of particular importance 
to Nyadya was their theory about the nature of sound, which the 
Mim4msa views as an eternal substance manifesting itself here and 
there as words and noises. Utilizing this theory, they were able to 
defend the eternity and authority of the Vedas. They were roundly 
attacked by Nyaya-Vaisesika for this view, and the number of argu- 
ments that can be culled from the literature for and against the 


14 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


eternity of sound seems endless. This had its importance for logical 
theory, for in the heat of this battle both sides were forced continually 
to re-examine the nature of their arguments, and one hears that 
many debates were held, no doubt regulated by the rules of debate 
which we find promulgated in one form or another in such books 
as the Nydyasiitras. 

Mimamsa does not really flower into a philosophical system in 
the full sense until the time of Kumarila (620-680) and Prabhakara 
(650-720), that is, until approximately the time of the 300-ycar 
gap we referred to in Nyaya-Vaisesika literature. In studying the 
polemics between Buddhism and its realistic opponents during this 
gap, scholars have been able to replace the lacking Nyaya works with 
Kumirila’s Slokavarttika, for in it the author sets out many of the 
characteristic yaya doctrines and arguments. But there are 
important differences, particularly in epistemology, separating Nyaya 
and Kum§arila. Much the same sort of thing can be said about the 
views of Prabhakara, which in some respects might be held to provide 
a via media between Buddhism and Nyaya. Epistemologically Pra- 
bhakara is if anything even more uncompromisingly realistic 
than Nyaya-Vaisesika; but ontologically he shows tendencies to 
nominalism which did not fit with Nyaya predilections. 

Samkhya: ‘This system is one of the oldest among the Hindu 
schools. In some form or other, SAamkhya appears to date back 
several centuries before Christ, and many scholars have suggested 
affinities between early Samkhya and Buddhism. The Maha- 
bharata, probably the older of the two great Indian epics, presents 
Samkhya philosophy in many places, notably in the mouth of 
Krsna in the Bhagavadgita. It is not always easy to identify the 
source of opponents’ arguments in the early Nyaya-Vaisesika texts, 
but clearly Vatsyayana addresses himself to Samkhya arguments in 
several places and implies that the MNydyasitras also were directed 
toward that quarter. The most important controversy between 
Nyaya-Vaisesika and Samkhya is over the nature of causation, a 
topic which can be viewed as crucial to all other problems of meta- 
physics and epistemology. The Samkhyas were the champions of the 
view that the effect exists in potency already in its cause, which 
merely needs to be nudged in order to make the effect manifest to 
observation. The Samkhya, to be sure, conceived this version of 
change to be a process which takes place in the real world external 
to our minds; yet merely to describe the view serves to suggest why 
the Naiydyikas looked askance at it, for it suggests that an effect is 
so because we the observers, are aware of it when previously we were 


HISTORICAL RESUME 15 


not. Nydya-Vaigesika proposes instead a view of causation accord- 
ing to which the effect does not exist until the moment of its origi- 
nation. This view has more affinity with Buddhism than with most 
of the other Hindu systems, for the Buddhists believed that the effect 
came into being after the cause. However, the crucial difference 
still remains that the Naiydyika believes in real continuants, while the 
Buddhist explains continuants away as mere appearance; in reality 
all there is for Buddhists are momentary events. 

It appears also that the Samkhya thinkers were among the first 
to propose systematic techniques which warrant the title of “‘logic,”’ 
and it was their logical theories which were prevalent in the period 
prior to the compilation of the Nydyasatras.1° Frauwailner thinks that 
some of the puzzling aspects of the classification of types of inference 
are cleared up by referring to this old Samkhya logic, which seems 
to have remained prominent until the 5th century or so. 

Rather little is heard of Samkhya in our texts during the later 
centuries. Samkhya seems to have had few defenders. V4acaspati 
Misra wrote a commentary on the Samkhyakarikds in the 10th 
century, but after that until the so-called Sdmkhyasiitras composed 
apparently in the 13th or 14th century there is practically speaking 
no Samkhya activity at all. It would seem that many of the 
Samkhya ideas were absorbed during this period into the thought of 
the Vedanta schools. 

Advaita Vedanta: Considering the importance of this school in 
recent times, when it has become so prevalent as to be frequently 
mistaken for the only kind of Indian philosophy extant, it is interesting 
to notice how long it takes this school to catch the attention of the 
Ny4ya writers. We find an occasional reference to the Advaitin 
Mandana Miégra in works of the 9th and 10th century, but I have 
found no reference in the Nyaya-Vaigesika literature of that period 
to Samkaracarya, acclaimed nowadays as India’s greatest philoso- 
phical mind. In fact, itis not until the time of Udayana that Advaita 
clearly begins to call for attention on the part of the Naiydyikas. 
There is a tradition that Udayana once defeated in debate one 
Srihira, whose son was Sriharsa, the author of several famous literary 
works. Sriharsa, who may be held to have lived around 1075-1125, 
avenged his father by writing a barbed critique of Nyaya called 
Khandanakhandakhddya. This work espouses Advaita, albeit a rather 
negative version of Advaitic teachings more akin to that of Samkara’s 
pupil Sure’vara than to the more positive teachings of Mandana 
or Padmapada, say. Several Naiyayikas were moved to write answers 
to Sriharsa’s polemic. It is quite unusual in the history of 


16 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Indian thought to find members of one school writing commentaries 
on a text of another school with an eye to refuting its arguments, 
Refutations of other schools are the business of the day in Indian 
thought, but one normally appends one’s arguments to a text which 
sets forth the truth as one sees it, introducing and confuting opponents 
who dare to challenge the master. A Tika by the Divakara listed above 
was the only one of these anti-Sriharsa commentaries that we know 
to have been written on the Khandanakhandakhadya prior to Gangeta, 
but quite a few Navya-naiyayikas also wrote such commentaries. 
And in any case after the time of Sriharsa, Nyaya-Vaisesika could 
not ignore Advaita, though even then one remains surprised at the 
infrequency with which Advaita views are attacked. It is perhaps 
noteworthy that at least one of the writers of the post-Udayana 
period, Anandanubhava, was apparently an Advaitin who dabbled in 
logic; the bulk of his writings were in Vedanta, but he wrote at least 
one occasional commentary on a Nydya text. Does this presage the 
modern reconciling tenor of Vedantins, who tend to see other systems 
as partial approximations to the full monistic insight, or as necessary 
stages in a dialectic leading to Advaitic enlightenment ? 

Jainism: References to Jain views in the classical Nyaya-Vaisesika 
texts are very rare. Jain writers did on occasion write on Nyaya 
topics during the latter part of our period. One of these was Abha- 
yatilaka (1275-1325); there were others later on in the post-Gangeva 
period. 

Carvdka: It is clear that from the time of the Buddha and 
Mahavira onward for many centuries there were skeptics who found 
the pretensions of Brahminical philosophy with its faith in spiritual 
values a belief without substance. Just about all the works of these 
as they are usually called by Indian writers, have 
been lost or destroyed. Yet, the frequency with which our writers 
address themselves to skeptical doubts indicates their need to justify 


“‘materialists,” 


each plank in their philosophy not only to believers, Hindus like 
themselves, but to nonbelievers as well. 


IV Was there any Influence from or to Western Philosophy 


This question was asked frequently by scholars of a number 
of decades back who were struck by what they considered strong 
affinities between Nyaya and Aristotelian logic. Since it has become 
clear that these affinities are the result of inadequate information 
pr reflection, the quest for evidence of mutual influence has died 
away. The truth is that (as far as philosophical ideas are concerned) 


HISTORICAL RESUME 17 


there is very little, if any, evidence of direct borrowing by Indians 
from the West until near-contemporary times. As for the influence 
of Indian thought on the West, there is no doubt that Neoplatonism 
owed a good deal to Oriental mysticism, and other relationships 
can be attested to throughout the centuries. 

Restricting ourselves to the field of logic, Frenkian™ has found 
specific influences of Indian logical speculations on Greek thought 
as early as the second half of the 4th century B.c. “Firstly, the 
image of the coiled rope taken for a snake was used as illustration 
of the doctrine of Carneades in the 2nd century B.c. Secondly, 
the quadrilemma seems to have been employed by Pyrrhon, the 
founder of the Greek skeptical school of philosophy in earlier times, 
in the 2nd half of the 4th century B.c.”?_ He also points out that 
Sextus Empiricus, though he alone, uses as example of inference the 
Indian stock argument about there being fire on the mountain 
because there is smoke. The first two of these characteristically 
Indian allusions—the rope-snake illusion and the quadrilemma—are 
more Buddhist than Hindu, at least in those early days of which 
Frenkian speaks. But the smoke-fire illustration of inference must 
have been well-known in proto-Nyaya before the time of Sextus 
Empiricus (2nd to 3rd century a.D.), though it is of course possible 
that Sextus thought it up on his own. All in all, we must be sober 
in our judgments on this exciting possibility of mutual East-West 
influence; repeated efforts by reputable scholars have found precious 
little to show any conscious borrowing. 


THEORY OF VALUE 


Philosophical system building in India is almost invariably 
connected by its creators with the gaining of perfection, which has 
various names in Indian thought but which we shail here call regu- 
larly “liberation.” One topic reviewed below is the extent to 
which this commitment to liberation is mere windowdressing in 
the case of Nyaya-Vaisesika, which some critics view as studying 
logic and debate for their own sake. We shall have occasion to 
look at the religious affiliations of our philosophers in this connec- 
tion, and to attempt to gauge the relevance of their religious convic- 
tions to their philosophy. Then, after summarily reviewing the 
general Hindu lore that lies behind all Indian thought, we shall 
turn to consider particular Nyaya-Vaigesika theories about the 
nature of liberation and the other characteristic topics in the Hindu 
theory of value such as karma and transmigration, the abilities of 
yogis and sages, the question of human versus divine freedom, and 
the relative worth of the various paths to liberation. 


I. What is the Place of Spiritual Values in Nydya-Vaisesika ? 


The answer to this question has implications not only for our 
understanding of the philosophy of the system but also for assessing 
its historical origins. Generally speaking, Western scholars have 
tended to discount the reference in the texts to liberation, while 
Indian scholars have tended to take them seriously. Thus Faddegon 
writes that the Vaisesika ‘‘owes its origin to a purely theoretical atti- 
tude of mind and not to that craze for liberation which dominates 
nearly all forms of Indian thought’’!; but Gopinath Kaviraj suggests 
that even for the Nyaya-Vaisesikas “the external world...has only a 
moral value....Hence, the same moral end...which occasions the 
rise of subjective phenomena acts also as a motive for the origin of 


the objective order,”? These two quotations represent extreme views; 


THEORY OF VALUE 19 


most scholars adopt positions somewhere between. Not all Western 
scholars are as skeptical as Faddegon about the moral import of the 
system: Ingalls writes, ‘It has often seemed to me that the teachings 
of the early Nyaya might better be called a philosophy of man than 
an exposition of logic.’ And not all Indians have accepted the 
claims of the classical writers connecting moksa with philosophy; 
e.g., Daya Krishna writes: ‘“‘...many schools of philosophy have lite- 
rally nothing to do with moksa. Nyaya, Vaisesika, and Mimamsa 
would predominantly come within this group.’ 

It is important, I believe, to separate the historical question 
here from the methodological one. As for the latter, I think there 
is very little reason to accept either Faddegon’s or Kaviraj’s extreme 
position. There is no question about the sincerity of moral convic- 
tion implicit in the writings of the authors we are concerned with. 
Doubts on this score might only begin to be raised as we approach 
the close of the period, where there is a tendency to write short 
monographs on limited topics in logic and methodology, topics which 
can be handled without any reference to ultimate purposes. As 
we shall see below, it is possible that the earliest philosophers of this 
school were not monotheists, but it is only a Western prejudice which 
draws from this the conclusion that they were amoral or uninterested 
in spiritual values. They have a great deal to say about liberation, 
karma, and life, and they quite frequently make rather explicit the 
connections they assume hold between their epistemological and 
ontological speculations and the quest for perfection. 

On the other hand, I find nothing to warrant Kaviraj’s view 
that in some basic sense Nydya is a kind of idealism. These writers 
are explicitly concerned to controvert idealism in all quarters. It 
is only if we view philosophy as subordinate to religion that we might 
come to a view such as Kaviraj’s. But there is no evidence that 
these philosophers took such a view of philosophy. The question 
of just what the relation is between philosophical investigations and 
the proper way to live is one that we shall raise below, where we 
shall see that while the Naiyayikas did not equate the good life with 
the reflective life, they did feel that one would not find his appro- 
priate path eventually. culminating in liberation without under- 
standing the truths about reality enshrined in Nyaya-Vaisesika 
doctrine, and without mastering the methods of investigation taught 
in the system. 

The historical question is much more difficult to settle. The 
most recent and thorough review of it has been made by Oberham- 
mer.> He traces the origins of Nyaya to an old “vdda tradition,” a 


20 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


theory about how to carry on and win in discussion, which he feels 
probably existed independently of dimavidyd, or theory of the self and 
its perfection, in the days prior to Vatsyayana. It was Vatsydyana, 
he argues, who made special efforts to wed these two disparate strands 
which only sit uneasily side by side in the Nydyasiitras. For example, 
in the old theory of discussion the topic of the proper instruments 
of true knowledge (framdpa) has only a secondary importance, since 
though to win a debate one needs to know which arguments carry 
weight and which do not, the place to look to decide which arguments 
are persuasive is to the judge, not to theories about the nature of the 
world or spiritual values. If one’s intent is merely to evaluate the 
worth of arguments, then one need not worry about whether they 
are productive of true judgments. Thus Nagarjuna, engaged in a 
negative dialectical refutation of all positive philosophies, feels no 
need to limit his reasoning to arguments involving acceptable instru- 
ments of true knowledge. The Naiyayika, on the other hand, inso- 
far as he does plan to use argument to establish positive propositions 
about how things are, must appeal to a theory about which kinds of 
evidence are trustworthy. 

Vatsyayana identifies what he calls “‘the science of argument” 
(nydyavidyd) with an ancient science called dnviksiki, referred to by 
Kautilya in the ArthaSastra, a famous tract of perhaps the 2nd century 
B.C. apparently written by a royal minister for the edification of 
princes. In this work dnviksiki is mentioned as an essential part of 
the curriculum of the young ruler, and scholars have speculated as 
to what the term means and what sort of an intellectual climate its 
mention implies. ‘The term may be translated, perhaps, as “‘investi- 
gation”; it occurs elsewhere in Sanskrit literature, where it sometimes 
means the study of the Vedas. Hacker® thinks it is misleading to 
construe it as referring to philosophy, and suspects that Kautilya 
had in mind that princes should be trained to argue intelligently, 
and that by referring to the logical aspects of what was taught by 
philosophers at that time they would find a guide for what they 
needed. It is possible that the reference is to a form of the Nyaya 
school, or Vaisesika, but more likely it refers primarily to some form 
of that early Samkhya logic which we had occasion to mention above. 
In any case, Vatsyayana tries to identify this dnviksiki with the logical 
side of Nyaya-Vaigesika, and according to Oberhammer’ he is the 
first to make extended efforts to show that Nyaya is also a science of 
the self, that is, a means to that self-knowledge which is propaedeutic 
to liberation. Vatsyayana does seem to make extended efforts to 
apply notions probably drawn from the yoga system of Patafijali to 


THEORY OF VALUE 21 


the topic of the things one must know (frameya). But D. N. Shastri® 
sees no evidence that dnviksiki did not always include the science of 
the self, despite the analyses of Oberhammer and of Jacobi? before 
him. 

These matters bear upon several others: one is the makeup of 
the Nydyasittras. Another is the attitude of early Indians toward 
logic. Vidyabhusana was of the opinion that logicians were looked 
on with disfavor in early times because then “‘Nyaya was pure logic” 
and “‘had no relation with the topics of the Vedic Samhita and Brah- 
mana.” However, there were other branches of learning which 
were unconnected with the Vedas—e.g., grammar—and which so far 
as we can tell flourished in the same period. 


II. Religious Affiliations of Nydya-Vaisesika 


The connection of this question with the previous one is probably 
more apparent to a Westerner than to an Indian. One does not 
have to believe in one God to accept moral and spiritual values in 
India, though not all Indians in later times would assent to this 
statement. 

Tradition has it that Naiyayikas are Saivite and Vaisesikas are 
Pasupatas. The Yuktidipikd, a Samkhya treatise written around a.D. 
550, tells us that the Pagupatas introduced God into the Vaisesika 
system, going on to suggest that God has no business being there.4 
Pagupata is a sect of Saivas (worshippers of Siva) who worship him 
as “Lord of Beasts” (fasupati). They are usually traced back to the 
teacher LakuliSa (A.D. 100), reputedly a native of Gujarat, who 
established a line of teachers who taught around Mathura in the 
Ganges plain. It was an extraordinary sect, whose practices included 
bathing in ashes, honoring the god by dancing, laughing, and lowing 
like a bull, and it advised its more advanced devotees to go about 
behaving like madmen and to perform acts which the populace 
generally looked upon as improper. Ingalls has compared them 
with the Greek Cynics.1? 

However, as is the way with some of the Indian traditions, it is 
difficult to find much evidence that the Vaisesika philosophers were 
Pagupatas, though there is evidence that some of the Naiydyikas 
were, all of which may tell once again in favor of the essential identity 
of the two schools. Uddyotakara is sometimes referred to as Pagu- 
patacarya, and Bhasarvajfia (whose version of Nydya is closer to 
Samkhya than to Vaisesika) wrote a work called Ganakdriké expound- 
ing Pasupata tenets. 


‘ 
22 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


There is plenty of evidence, on the other hand, that Naiyayikas 
are generally worshippers of Siva rather than Visnu. As far as I 
know there is no evidence to suggest that any of our philosophers 
up to near the end of our period were Vaisnavites. And several 
writers are of the opinion that the religious sources of Nyaya and 
Vaisesika were more or less the same. Kaviraj writes that the source 
of bondage between the schools is through “the original Sivagama 
or its philosophical counterpart, the so-called Isvaravada, out of 
which not only the present form of Yoga and Nyaya, but the later 
Saiva philosophies also may have well arisen and gradually crystalli- 
zed themselves into independent systems.’ This isvaravdda or 
doctrine of a supreme God Kaviraj takes as referring to Saivism 
rather than Vaisnavism: Ixvara is originally a name of Siva, while 
the name for Visnu would be Purusottama, he explains, Bhandar- 
kar™ has found an inscription at Kedaresvara temple at Belgami in 
Mysore State which suggests that Nyaya was looked upon as a specific 
Maheévara sect. He also reminds us of a passage in the Vapupurdna, 
probably dating from the 4th century, in which it is said that Lakulisa 
had three pupils : Aksapada, Kanada, and Vatsa. This leads 
Bhandarkar to suggest that the schools were the same from the start. 

This is all very well, but we must consider also the fact that both 
sets of siitras are very chary of reference to God. The author of the 
Yuktidipika can only find one passage in the Vaisesikasitras that might 
conceivably be construed as referring to God, and it seems certain 
that it was not intended to.% And there has been considerable 
speculation about the section in the fourth book of the Nydpasiiras 
which refers to God—it is as possible that it attacks as that it de- 
fends monotheism. By the time of Pragastapada, however, Nyaya- 
Vaisesika was thoroughly monotheistic: the Yuktidipekad thinks it was 
worked over by Pagupatas and molded into the form Pragastapada 
presents.1” 

Whatever the truth be about the view of the authors of the two 
sets of sdiras on God, it is likely that they accepted, along with the 
rest of the Hindus, the belief in the gods which was second nature to 
everyone in those times. There is no reason why a_ philosopher 
should refer to the gods, except perhaps in his invocation, unless 
he has particular roles in mind which the gods, or God, must play 
m his philosophy. In the case of Nyaya-Vaisesika God’s role turns 
out to be that of a general condition of all action, and in particular 
the agent who sets the world in motion at the beginning of each 
cycle by bringing about the first collisions of atoms. The technical 
aspects of God’s functioning presumably did not occur to the earliest 


THEORY OF VALUE 93 


formulators of these theories, engaged in developing the fundamentals 
of the mechanics of atomism and causation, and it is only when they 
discovered that they needed additional agents besides humans that 
they were moved to postulate a super-self, God, who can fulfill the 
requirements. 

So special is the role that God playsin Nyaya-Vaisesika that other 
monotheistically minded philosophers in India find the Nyaya 
conception of Him a thin one indeed. Yet, the origins of other 
systematic philosophies of the same period show more or less the same 
phenomenon. The Samkhyaka@rikds of Isvarakrsna, a 4th-century 
work, shows no monotheistic inclinations, and Pirvamimamsa expli- 
citly denied to God the role of creator of the Vedas. Mahayana 
Buddhism had its Bodhisattvas, but their importance increases in 
much later stages of the Buddhist religion, paralleling similar develop- 
ments in Hinduism and extending into the form it takes in Tibet, 
China, and Japan. The Jains also had their sages, the Tirthamkaras, 
but believed in no supreme deity. Monotheists represented only 
one philosophical theory among many at that time, as far as evidence 
shows. 

It is, then, a later prejudice which connects belief in one supreme 
God with sincerity of spiritual convictions, or in the case of Western 
critics it reflects an imposition of foreign assumptions. 


III. The Connection between Philosophy and Liberation 


There are nevertheless those who doubt that Indian philosophy, 
and notably Nydya-Vaisesika, really has anything to do with the 
search for liberation, despite the many statements of the philosophers 
themselves that there is a connection. Part of the difficulty here 
lies in conceiving accurately what the connection can be between 
theoretical pursuits and practical ones. Daya Krishna!® notes 
rightly that speculation is rarely viewed as constituting the path to 
freedom, and concludes that it therefore has nothing to do with free- 
dom. He also points out that writers in all sorts of fields, not only 
philosophers, attempt to link their writings to the search for libera- 
tion, but concludes that, although it is fashionable to pay lipservice 
to this goal, in fact this is one of those traditions that live by common 
assent but have no substance whatever. I think it is not necessary 
to answer these doubts in detail immediately; we may allow the true 
picture to emerge from the writings themselves and the summary 
of them whichI shall attempt in the remainder of this chapter. 
The first part of Daya’s argument must be met by showing what 


24 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the path to liberation is according to Nyaya-Vaisesika, and how 
theoretical speculation gets involved in the life of the freedom seeker. 
This is the burden of what is immediately to follow. As for the 
charge that belief in moksa is a matter of lip service without sincere 
conviction, I think it will become apparent from the nature of the 
arguments used by Naiydayikas, if not from the proportional attention 
they pay to the topic, that liberation is always on their minds even 
if not always uppermost in the question of the moment. 


IV. The Hindu Theory of Value: Important Concepts 


The Nydya-Vaisesika theory of value must be considered as a ver- 
sion of the more general theory which is accepted in a general way 
by all varieties of ‘“‘Hinduism’—a term which is difficult to 
define but serves to distinguish the vast majority of Indian religious 
sects and cults from—especially—Buddhism, Jainism, and foreign 
religions such as Islam and Christianity. Since any number of 
works set forth the fundamental tenets of Hinduism in considerable 
detail’® it will not be necessary to spend much time here on this, 
but merely to remind the reader that in Nyaya-Vaisesika he is dealing 
with a system squarely within traditional assumptions. 

A. Aspects of the Good Life: Hindu texts set forth several ‘aims 
of life’? (artha) the relationships among which are variously explained 
by different authorities. The aims of life are usually said to be 
four: artha or material prosperity, kama or affective gratification, 
dharma or right conduct, and moksa or liberation. The order in which 
these four are listed varies; however, liberation is universally accepted 
as the highest end by those who accept it at all. In ancient times 
Pirvamimamsa did not accept liberation as an end, preaching that 
the ultimate purpose in life was to attain heaven through performance 
of acts prescribed in Vedic injunctions and avoidance of those acts 
proscribed by the same sacred scriptures. In later times virtually 
all Hindus accepted the supremacy of liberation to dharma. Each 
of the four ‘‘aims’’ has a literature which is traditionally attached 
to it : for artha, the Arthasastra of Kautilya (referred to above); for 
kama, the Kamasiitras of Vatsyayana (probably not our Paksilasvamin ) 
and other handbooks of erotics and aestheticism; for dharma, the 
various DharmaSastras, notably that entitled ‘““The Laws of Manu’’; 
and for moksa, the philosophical literature, particularly that part of 
it which advises methods for seeking and gaining liberation. Many 
handbooks devoted to one of the other “‘aims”’ indicate that atten- 
tion to their teachings will aid one in achieving liberation; this 


THEORY OF VALUE 25 


suggests that the general Hindu view is that liberation transcends the 
others without implying that commitment to them will work against 
eventual self-perfection. 

B. Karma and Samsara; Preexistence and Transmigration: Moksa, 
the supreme end of life, is liberation from the bondage of karma, from 
the circle of birth and rebirth (samsdra). This is the , minimal 
meaning of moksa; we shall see below how Nyaya-Vaigesika and other 
schools further interpret it. Here we are interested in the view of 
life presupposed by all the Indian theories, including Buddhism 
and Jainism. 

Most Indians who reflect on the matter are of the opinion that 
they existed prior to the birth of their present body, and that they 
have existed “‘beginninglessly.”” Just what is referred to by the 
“they”’ is a matter of philosophical controversy. Nevertheless, the 
only important opposition to the doctrine of preexistence comes 
from the Carvakas. As for beginninglessness, this is also generally 
accepted, although there is disagreement about some of the details, 
for example, about whether there is a period of rest (pralaya) between 
cosmic cycles. All these matters are subjects of discussion and argu- 
mentation, contrary to what some scholars suppose; we shall see the 
kinds of arguments used by Nyaya-Vaisgesika scholars. 

As for the manner in which human beings exist, this requires a 
somewhat different mode of speech when we are considering 
Buddhism than when we are considering Hindu theory, since the 
Buddhists do not believe there is any continuing self or soul underlying 
the series of momentary states called the person. Keeping this 
difference in mind, we can nevertheless assert that Hindus, Buddhists, 
and Jains alike held that one’s actions influence subsequent events 
in one’s history; and that this happens in a perfectly mechanical 
manner—what one sows, one will eventually reap. To be sure, 
we need to qualify this somewhat for later stages of Indian thought, 
particularly certain types of later Vedanta, where God is granted 
the ability to save individuals regardless of their karma. However, 
this qualification hardly affects the period under study in this volume. 

In particular, the “weight”? of an individual’s karma was held 
to be passed from embodiment to embodiment and to determine the 
particular form of rebirth the person suffered. It is important to 
realize that both “good”’ and “‘bad”’ deeds create karma; even refrain- 
ing from performing an action may add to the weight of one’s karma. 
Thus one cannot gain liberation by good deeds alone, though the 
performance of good works constitutes an important element in most 
accounts of the path to liberation. Nor can one gain liberation by 


26 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


inaction, though at a certain stage in life it is thought appropriate to 
retire from worldly activities in favor of more spiritually directed 
ones. 

As one lives out each embodied lifetime, he works off the karma 
that has accrued from his past actions, but accretes more of it in the 
course of his present activities. The problem of liberation, then, 
is to bring it about that karma no longer ‘‘clings’? to one. The 
achievement of this stage is frequently termed “enlightenment,” an 
appropriate term in its literal meaning as well as in its more usual 
sense of self-understanding. Since the karmic machinery is a natural 
fact, it is usually understood that an enlightened person will still have 
to work off the karma which clings to him from deeds prior to his 
enlightenment. Thus, for example, the Buddha is held to have 
achieved enlightenment (bodhi) after several weeks of reflection under 
a tree, but he lived on to spread his wisdom throughout the Ganges 
plain before he passed on several decades later. In his post-enlighten- 
ment stage, then, Gautama the Buddha corresponds with the type 
of person Hindus call jivanmukta, “liberated while living.’’ Not all 
Hindus accept the doctrine of liberation while alive, but it is a very 
common notion. 

C. Yoga—the Path to Liberation: How to achieve the good 
life? This practical issue is the topic of a vast literature, including 
the types of tracts mentioned earlier pertaining to the four “‘aims of 
life” but essentially involving all serious pursuits, which are regularly 
connected to ultimate values just as they are in Western thought. 
Thus, for example, the Laws of Manu treats many types of practical 
problems, and one seeking to perfect himself cannot afford to ignore 
its sort of advice. Different types of living are enjoined for different 
sorts of personality, and for individuals of differing occupations and 
roles in society. The Vedas, the ancient sacred scriptures, speak 
especially to the Brahmins, for whom they prescribe many rites and 
duties. In ancient times it was apparently accepted that Brahmins 
were the main authority on spiritual matters and that this suggested 
their superior spiritual attainments. In later times this assumption 
was brought into question; indeed, the introduction of the notion of 
liberation to replace the Vedic view of dharma as the final aim is taken 
by some scholars to be an important early episode in this revolt against 
Brahminical pretensions. 

Thus, the teachings about how to perfect oneself are exceedingly 
various; it is impossible to catalogue them in any succinct fashion. 
Western readers may have been exposed to one classification of paths 
if they have read the Bhagavadgitaé; though the account of paths 


THEORY OF VALUE 27 


expounded there has been influential, it should by no means be mis- 
taken for the only Indian account. Nevertheless, it is a handy place 
to begin. 

The Gitd teaches that there are three kinds of path to libera- 
tion: the way of karma, the way of knowledge, and the way of devotion. 
It is rather vague as to which of these is the preferable way, if any; 
perhaps it means to suggest that there are different ways for different 
sorts of people. It is also not clear whether they are to be viewed 
as mutually exclusive. The Gitd places great importance on the 
attitude of nonattachment (vairdégya) tothe fruits of one’s actions, 
which is developed early in the poem in particular connection with 
the way of karma. Here we are taught to participate in worldly 
activity in performing appropriate actions, but to do them without 
thought of personal advantage. A bit later we are shown the ideal 
of the man of stable insight (sthitaprajiia), who sits meditating apart 
from ordinary men. He is the one who seeks true knowledge and 
liberation through it. Some commentators think the Gita means 
us to understand that the way of karma is preparatory to the way of 
Knowledge; others think these two paths are to be combined. This 
controversy bulks large in the writings of Vedantists. 

The Gita further specifies a way which it at one point characterizes 
as the ‘“‘easy” way to liberation, which is to devote oneself to God 
and think of nothing but him. This has certainly tended to be most 
popular path in the past few hundred years, and numerous methods 
of devotion have been developed, such as the continuous chanting 
of God’s name, community sings, and various odd and antinomian 
practices such as were apparently practiced by the Pagsupatas. 

The general term for a path is mdrga, but the Gitd uses the term 
yoga in this connection. A yoga is a discipline. A classical form of 
yoga is that set forth in the Yogasidtras of Patafijali (4th c.?) ; it consists 
of seven stages of discipline beginning with the performance of righte- 
ous acts, going on to. breath-control and resulting control of the 
mind (and as a sidelight control of the body), and culminating in a 
state called samadhi, divided into a higher and a lower type: the 
lower type is the mystic’s trance, the higher is liberation itself, the 
difference being that once one gains the higher he never loses it. An 
adept of such a method is known as a yogi, and yogis are generally 
credited with exceptional powers of concentration and control, 
abilities which are viewed by most Westerners with a modicum of 
incredulity. Naiyayikas, who as we shall see are as scientifically 
minded as any Indians are, credit yogis with exceptional abilities 
(see below), though one may sometimes discern qualms. 


28 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
V. The Nydya-Vaisesika Conception of Liberation 


Moksa, meaning freedom, is not the only term used by Indian 
philosophers to characterize the ultimate end of life. The Buddhist 
term nirvana is probably better known to most readers. In Nyaya- 
Vaisesika two other terms appear: ni/freyasa, literally “having no 
better,” and apavarga, meaning an end or completion. 

1. The Developed Doctrine: As we shall see during our survey of 
Nyaya-Vaisesika topics, there is a tendency in maturer stages of 
the system to formulate increasingly technical definitions of key items. 
Liberation likewise receives this treatment. As an example, we 
may consider Sivaditya’s definition of liberation as the absence of 
sorrow together with the posterior absence of false knowledge which 
is the cause of sorrow, which posterior absence is produced by true 
knowledge. This definition uses the technical notion of “posterior 
absence” (dhvamsa; the absence of something after it has existed 
and come to an end) and is otherwise built according to a pattern 
which becomes standard in Navya-nyaya. 

Sivaditya’s definition as it stands accords with the account of 
liberation usually credited to Vaisesika, but not to Nyaya. It is 
completely negative; it does not attribute any consciousness or feelings 
whatsoever to the liberated self. This negative conception has 
called forth the gibe that freedom for the Vaisesikas is being like a 
stone.” The Naiyayikas, on the other hand, are supposed to credit 
the freed self with an experience of everlasting bliss. Just how far 
this tradition can be substantiated by the writings of our philosophers 
will be explored in the next section. 

2. Development of the Conception of Liberation : Vhe Vatsestkasdtras 
present liberation as a state where the two necessary conditions 
for the arising of another body are absent. These two conditions 
are said to be the conjunction of the internal organ with the self, 
and a certain ‘“‘unseen force’ (adrsta) which is instrumental in pro- 
ducing transmigration. It is probable that Kanada equates this 
unseen force with the accumulation of karma which he mentions in a 
later siitra. Ifso, a person may be held to be liberated either when 
his karma becomes inoperative or when his internal organ is disjoined 
from his self. The latter condition is achieved in samadhi. 

VAtsyayana contributes a lengthy discussion, centering around the 
question whether liberation is a blissful state or not. He defines 
apavarga as a condition involving attainment of bliss, and says it is 
called “Brahman,” thus, linking his discussion to the conception of 
the Upanishads. However, he immediately turns on those®! who 


THEORY OF VALUE 29 


say that the self experiences pleasure when liberated. Among his 
reasons we may note this: pleasure is a positive feeling toward which 
men characteristically develop passions of attachment or aversion. 
If to practice a path with an eye to obtaining liberation involves 
attaching oneself to the gaining of eternal pleasure, then liberation 
can never be achieved, since any path to liberation involves non- 
attachment. As we saw above, Vatsyayana apparently has no 
objection to renaming absence of pain “‘bliss,” and in this way per- 
haps can resolve the contradiction in his account. 

Whereas the sirakdras’ accounts were compatible with the conc- 
eption of liberation as a state, perhaps of samadhi, achieved through 
yoga while the body lives, Vatsyayana’s discussion clearly suggests 
that he conceives of liberation as setting in when the last embodi- 
ment of the freed self has died. PraSastapada’s view is the same. 
Uddyotakara explicitly distinguishes two kinds of perfection: lower, 
when one is still working off old karma, and the higher, when all the 
old karma has been worked off. 

So far, except for Vatsyayana’s puzzling use of the word “bliss,” 
there has been nothing to suggest a divergence between the Nyaya 
and Vai§esika conceptions. It is with the radical Bhasarvajfia that 
a real change is wrought within the system. He specifically denies 
that the purely negative description of liberation can be correct, and 
asserts that it is a state not only of pleasure but also of conscious- 
ness, as against the Nyaya-Vaigesikas like Uddyotakara and Pragasta- 
pada who say that the self loses all its qualities in the highest stage of 
freedom. No one wants such a state, says Bhasarvajfia. 

The review of various theories about liberation given by Vyo- 
magiva concludes with a theory held by various schools of Saivism, 
including the Pagupatas, that the self acquires the qualities of Siva 
upon being liberated, these being qualities such as eternal knowledge 
and pleasure. It is likely that this is a reference to Bhasarvajfia’s 
view, though Vyomagiva is not given to naming his sources. Vyo- 
masiva’s own view follows that-of Pragastapada; release occurs after 
the old karma wears off and involves annihilation of the specific quali- 
ties of the self. He refers to liberation as a ‘‘prosperous”’ state and 
suggests that the word ‘bliss’? should be construed as ‘“‘absence of 
sorrow.” 

Sridhara’s list of current theories is not as extensive or sugges- 
tive as Vyomagiva’s. His refutation of those who believe that 
liberation is blissful does not discriminate Bhasarvajfia’s view from 
that of the Vedantins, etc. He evidently believes in jivanmukti, 
liberation while living, since he cites the Vedas and (surprisingly) 


30 ENYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the Samkhyakarikas as authorities for the view and bases some of his 
arguments on the actuality of that state. 

Udayana defines liberation as the final cessation of sorrow, 
but his way with other conceptions is original. He teaches that 
we must pass through various stages of realization corresponding to 
the freedoms taught in other systems before finally reaching the 
highest state of indifference (kaivalya) which is the NyAya version. 
Udayana calls this “final Vedanta.” As against orthodox Vedanta 
he evidently feels that they identify liberation too readily with some 
kind of direct experience. On Udayana’s view such an experience 
is not enough; one must also have a Naiyayika’s discursive knowledge 
of reality as well as a truly devotional attitude. 

Apararkadeva, the commentator on Bhasarvajfia, further expli- 
cates that view, arguing that bliss is not just the absence of sorrow as 
Vyomasiva and others think. However, he agrees with the normal 
Naiyayika view that bliss is not an eternal quality of the self, since 
if it were there would be no bondage and nothing to be liberated 
from. ‘Though he does not spell it out, this would seem to imply that 
the bliss of the liberated self is a positive quality acquired by the libera- 
ted self, perhaps from identification with Siva. 

One final note : Udayana, it is said, departed from tradition by 
acknowledging that liberation for all (sarvamukti) is possible and a 
legitimate end to strive for, reminding us of the Buddhist notion of 
the bodhisativa who delays liberation in order to work for the salvation 
ofall. Sridhara, on the other hand, denies this view, and Srivallabha 
later on also rejects it. 

It would appear from our rapid survey that the tradition, report- 
ed for instance in the Samkaravijaya of Madhava, that Naiyayikas 
generally take a positive view of liberation and Vaises:kas a negative 
one, is true only for that section of Nyaya which follows Bhasarvajfia. 
Just whether he was the originator of that interpretation is not clear 
from the evidence. 


VI. Arguments for the Possibility of Liberation 


Granted that the above is what our philosophers mean by the 
terms for “‘liberation,”’ why should we believe there is any such state ? 
Doubts about the possibility of complete freedom are not limited to 
Westerners; early Indians apparently suffered from them too. The 
Nydyasiitras discuss several doubts which were raised, and this dis- 
cussion is reviewed and continued in the subsequent literature. One 
doubt is that we do not live long enough to prepare for liberation, 


THEORY OF VALUE 31 


since the Vedas teach that Brahmins must finish all their other duties 
before retiring to practice a path. Another is that human nature is 
naturally so imperfect that no amount of striving will completely 
rid us of our faults. Furthermore, we cannot help becoming attached 
to things in the course of living, and since attachment automatically 
produces bondage we will never become free. Gautama’s response 
to these doubts is that the scriptural passages which cause the doubts 
can be construed in other ways compatible with liberation, indeed 
that properly understood the Vedas encourage a man to retire to 
meditate and liberate himself. As for the doubts about man’s evil 
proclivities, Gautama’s answer resembles that of his famous predeces- 
sor Gautama the Buddha, who pointed out that happily we know 
the causes of our imperfection and so can treat the disease; and this 
answers the last difficulty also, since true knowledge of the causes of 
attachment will enable a man to practice a method of ridding him- 
self of it. Jayanta adds that just as heat renders a seed ineffective, 
true knowledge makes one’s past deeds ineffective, so that no new 
karma is produced.?? 

Later writers felt the need of more rigorous arguments in favor of 
the possibility of liberation, not perhaps so much because skepticism 
became stronger but rather because as the system developed it be- 
came more enamoured of its method, which involved providing 
definitions and arguments for everything thought worth discussing. 

The classical Nyadya argument for liberation is inferential: 
“whatever comes into being successively is perishable, like the wheel 
of fire,” or in a slightly different form, “the series of sorrows in the 
self finally gets cut off, because it is a series, like the series of flashes 
constituting lamplight.”” Udayana says everyone accepts this argu- 
ment. Sridhara, however, does not accept it, since he thinks there is 
a counterexample to be found in the series of colors belonging to 
atoms of earth, which he takes to be an endless series. Udayana’s 
answer to this is that inference equally well proves that the series of 
colors of earthy atoms also comes to an end. 


VII. The Path to Liberation: Nydya-Vaisesika View 


We come now to consider precisely how the Naiyayikas think 
liberation should be sought, and in particular what relevance philo- 
sophical investigations have to the quest. 

1. Causes of Bondage and Liberation: The Vartsesikasitras present 
the following picture of the path to be followed in seeking freedom: 
one should behave according to Vedic precepts; this produces merit 


32 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(dharma) and eventually exaltation (abhyudaya), whereas impure 
behavior produces demerit (adharma). Bondage (samsdra), how- 
ever, is caused by both merit and demerit (adrsfa=karma). It is 
because of our attitudes of desire and aversion that we act in ways 
which produce more karma, and these attitudes have as a necessary 
condition the contact between the internal organ (manas) and the 
self of the individual person. It becomes clear that the method of 
liberation involves gaining control over one’s internal organ. Yoga 
is the control of that organ so that it does not come into contact with 
the external sense organs (indriya); when such contact ceases, there 
are no more feelings of pleasure and pain for the individual, and this 
in turn stifles any desires or aversions. Eventually the trance-like 
state, which as we have seen Gautama likens to deep sleep, sets in, 
and when this separation of self from internal organ is achieved and 
the old karma lived out, the self is completely liberated from bondage, 
since there is no way for karma to come again to operate on him, 

What is not clear from Kandda’s account is how knowledge, is 
related to this process. Gautama’s Nydyasiitras makes this more 
explicit. In his second sitra he presents a fivefold chain of causal 
conditions leading to bondage. The chain begins with wrong know- 
ledge (mithydjiana), which is a necessary condition for faults (dosa), 
which are in turn productive of activity, which results in (rebirth) 
which is the cause of sorrow. This is reminiscent of the twelvefold 
chain of Buddhism (fratityasamutpdda), which leads from ignorance 
(avidyZ) to rebirth and misery in a somewhat more complicated 
series; according to the Buddha’s chain the last member of the series, 
rebirth, is responsible in turn for the first member, ignorance, so 
that the whole thing is likened to a wheel. We may suppose that 
Gautama’s version is also wheel-like. In any case, it is clear from 
what Gautama goes on to say that one seeking liberation from sorrow 
is to break into this chain by replacing wrong knowledge with right 
knowledge; thus, the necessary condition for faults being lacking, 
they in turn will not arise, and activity as a result will not either, nor 
will birth nor sorrow. And absence of sorrow is liberation. 

This true knowledge, Gautama explains, is to be achieved by the 
classical methods of concentration, meditation, and yoga, but he 
significantly adds that one may get it by discussion with others, It 
is this latter means that the Nyadya system is especially concerned to 
expedite; thus it is necessary to have a complete set of rules for the 
carrying out of proper discussions which will conduce to true know- 
ledge. 

The “‘faults’’ of which Gautama speaks he lists as three: attrac- 


THEORY OF VALUE 33 


tion, aversion, and delusion. The last-mentioned is again a signi- 
ficant addition. Kanada speaks primarily of mistakes in attitude, 
whereas Gautama is concerned about failure of understanding. 
Gautama also uses the term flesa in a later section to denote wrong 
attitudes. He explains that klefas are not natural events but are 
caused by wishful ideas (samkalpa). These wishful ideas are born 
from delusions that normal humans are subject to. Vatsyayana 
gives a striking example when he cites the fact of male attachment 
to the female body; that the body is attractive is a misconception 
which he recommends eliminating by paying attention to the dis- 
pleasing aspects of the body. But to develop an aversion to the body 
would be equally wrong; what is to be practiced is an attitude of 
nonattachment, and it is clearly the opinion of Gautama and Vatsya- 
yana that this attitude can only be cultivated when things are seen 
as they really are and not otherwise. Thus knowledge of truth, 
while not in itself the path to liberation, is an essential part of the 
procedure of gaining it. 

This general picture is accepted and developed by all the sub- 
sequent writers. There are occasional interesting modifications. 
For example, Candramati, perhaps concerned that the above account 
may be construed as enjoining one to abstain from meritorious actions, 
explains ‘“‘merit’? as having two varieties: the kind which produces 
positive activity, and the kind which produces cessation of activity 
(niorttz), The acquisition of merit of the latter kind results in a 
state of delight in perfect cognition free from attachment. Presum- 
ably we are not, however, to identify this state with liberation, but 
rather with an advanced stage of yoga. 

As is to be expected, the later writers, presupposing the account 
summarized above, proceed to the details of precisely how wrong 
knowledge is produced and the methods by which it is to be eradicat- 
ed. Some of our writers occasionally allude to implications of their 
theories for the general Hindu theory of value. For example, after 
the time of Vedantins like Mandana Misra, Bhaskara, and Samkara, 
the question of the relative importance of knowledge and action 
becomes more frequently raised, perhaps because of Samkara’s radical 
endorsement of the path of knowledge to the exclusion of action. 
The more traditional view, that one must tread a combined path of 
knowledge and action (jidénakarmasamuccayavada), defended in Veda- 
nta by Bhaskara, is attributed to the author of the Nydyabhisana,?8 
and is defended in Vyomavati and Nydyakandali. The nub of the 
discussion centers over whether one must still perform the actions 
prescribed in the Vedas even after he has embarked on a discipline 


34, ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


leading to liberation. Samkara’s answer is no, that one must only 
attend to the Vedas up to the stage of adept (adhikarin) but not 
afterwards. By comparison, Naiyayikas tend to be surprisingly 
conservative. Udayana may perhaps constitute an exception to this 
general assessment. He points out that activity prescribed by the 
Vedas is intended to gain advantage for the agent, and that insofar 
as that is the case one cannot, for example, explain the actions 
of ascetics as enjoined, since they do not act purposively. Udayana 
is no antitraditionalist, however; he spends more than one extended 
passage complaining about the deterioration of general dharma 
brought about by decay of faith and self-control. 

The most important modification of the traditional view of the 
path to liberation in Nyaya-Vaisesika is the introduction of the 
notion that God must at least permit, if not be operative in, the pro- 
cess. The first of our writers clearly to include God in the descrip- 
tion of the path is Prasastapada, whose introduction specifies that 
merit together with God’s injunctions produce the knowledge about 
reality which is necessary for liberation, However, in later reviews 
of the same topic this reference is absent; one may safely say that 
God is not much on Praéastapada’s mind. Uddyotakara brings in 
God as the creator of merit and demerit, but nothing he says implies 
any interruption of the machinery by which the self earns good or bad 
karma by his actions. It is probably with Bhasarvajfia that God 
begins to play a more positive role, although from the Npdyasdra all 
we can glean is that knowledge of God is the touchstone to the remo- 
val of wrong attitudes. But none of this is particularly surprising: 
God is taken to be the author of the Vedas, after all, and thus plays 
a role of importance for any interpretation of paths which admits 
that the Vedas are relevant. 

The fact is, as Ingalls remarks, that ‘“‘among the beliefs concerning 
man which are essential in the old Ny4@ya is a belief in the efficacy 
of human effort. ..Any statement which involves karmavatphalya- 
prasanga... or akrtabhyagamaprasanga... is ipso facto wrong. This 
belief...is common in India.”** The lengthy Sanskrit terms in this 
quotation are ways of formulating the notions, which Naiyayikas 
hold to be faulty, that what men do has no regular connection with 
their deserts, either because the deserts vary or because the whole 
process is out of their hands, being controlled by a superior power. 
In short, the Indians generally believed in freedom of the will at 
least to the extent that men were not conceived to be pawns in the 
hard of a superior power, 


THEORY OF VALUE 35 


VUI. Advanced Spiritual Practitioners: Yogis, Sages, etc. 


That certain individuals have remarkable powers because of 
their spiritual advancement is a generally accepted notion in India. 
The Naiydyikas do not question it, and our philosophers make 
occasional comments clarifying precisely what claims of special 
powers they are willing to endorse. The reader will not find case 
histories of yogic experiments here, but we can sift out a few general 
abilities credited to men with special powers and gifts. 

Kanada says that sages (rsis) and “perfected beings’ (siddha) 
have special powers of awareness. It is a stock Nydya-Vaiéesika 
theory that yogic perception is different from ordinary perception 
and deserves special treatment. The reason for its needing special 
treatment is that yogis are held to be able to occupy several bodies 
at once, as well as to have transtemporal experiences. According 
to some of our philosophers this ability gained through yoga enables 
an individual to achieve immediate liberation. Since a yogi has 
the power to move his internal organ into contact with a number of 
bodies simultaneously and to bring it about that the karma accreted 
from past deeds gets worked olf faster than it would take for normal 
individuals, he can do what would otherwise be inexplicable, namely 
work off past karma at more or less the same time as he achieves en- 
lightenment. This account is detailed especially in Vyamavati. 

About the sages, among whom are normally included those re- 
puted to be the original redactors of the Vedas (God, of course, is 
the Vedas’ author), we hear from Pragastapada that, like the gods, 
they have bodies produced by meritorious karma. In this they con- 
trast with ordinary humans, whose bodies are produced by a mixture 
of good and bad karma, and with insects, whose bodies are produced 
by predominantly bad karma. Sages have a regular intuitive ability 
called pratibha which ordinary humans manifest only occasionally. 
This ability gives them knowledge about past and future as well as 
present but removed events. The siddhas or perfected beings referr- 
ed to by Kanada, Pragastapada says, have both perceptual and 
inferential knowledge of the workings of karma. Special drug- 
induced insights are also attributed to these people. Jayanta says 
that both yogis and sages can see dharma. But later writers have 
less to say about the special powers of these exceptional types. 


IX. Arguments for Pre-existence and Immortality 


As indicated above, Naiyayikas were fond of defending stan- 


36 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


dard Hindu doctrines with arguments that could be tested against 
the rigorous requirements which they established in their theory of 
inference. I note here a few such arguments without, again, consi- 
dering at the moment the question of their rigor, since we are not in 
a position yet to compare them with appropriate standards of criti- 
cism. 

In connection with the proof that an individual’s self or soul 
is eternal, Gautama provides some arguments for its preexistence. 
(1) “Because the new-born infant experiences joy, fear, and sorrow 
—which could follow only from the continuity of remembrance 
of what has been repeatedly gone through before (the self existed 
before),” (III.1.18) (2) “(The self must be regarded as eternal) 
because of the desire for milk from the mother’s breast, which is 
evinced (on birth) after death, and which can only be due to repeated 
feeding (in the past). (III.1.21)8 Commentators on this passage 
add further variations. Uddyotakara argues that the same self is 
child and man, because of its smile, and Vacaspati points out that 
the child’s fear of falling can only be explained on the hypothesis 
that it has fallen before and remembers it. 

Now the obvious answer to these arguments is that the pheno- 
mena alluded to—reactions of joy and fear, of attraction to the 
mother’s breast—are natural, that is to say, they are events occur- 
ring in the body and needing no appeal to an agency inside to explain 
them. Gautama considers this answer. For example, he has an 
opponent say that reactions of joy and fear are like the opening and 
closing of a flower, and his answer is to the effect that the opponent 
is eventually unable to say what these motions of the flower are due 
to, and will have to assent to the principle that motions are caused 
by conscious agents. This principle provides the basis also for the 
main Nydya argument for God’s existence, as we shall see. 

Again, an opponent argues that the attraction of the child to its 
mother’s breast is like the attraction of iron toa magnet, and needs 
no conscious agency. Gautama’s answer is too short to be comple- 
tely intelligible, and the commentators labor to interpret it. 
Vatsyavana’s interpretation is this: iron, alone among metals, is 
attracted by magnetism. As there is a special factor among the 
causal conditions of the phenomenon of magnetism which limits the 
kinds of metals which are attracted by magnets, so there is a special 
factor among the causal conditions of the phenomenon of breast- 
feeding which limits the kinds of objects which are attracted to the 
breast. Now what is the special factor in each of these cases ? 
Vatsyayana has no opinion to offer about the explanation uf magnet- 


THEORY OF VALUE 37 


ism, but as for the child’s response to the breast he says that the 
special factor here is the memory on the child’s part of this sort of 
experience in the past, and that this hypothesis is ‘‘entrenched’’?é 
in our actual experience that desire for food proceeds from our 
memory of past experiences.” 


3 


NATURE OF A PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEM 


What is a philosophical system? <A system is a set of concepts 
which are interrelated so as to explain what needs to be explained 
fully, accurately, and with no waste motion. In India a philosophical 
system is one which is pertinent to the ultimate supreme value of 
mankind, the gaining of liberation. Expanding on this a bit, we 
can discern several criteria that an Indian philosophical system will 
try to satisfy. 

The statements in which the interrelated concepts which com- 
prise the system are expressed must all be true. What is sought is 
truth; what truth is is itself a philosophical question. A philoso- 
phical system must commit itself to a theory of truth and then justify 
it by showing its place within the system itself. Since of two contra- 
dictory statements only one can be true, it follows that a satisfactory 
philosophical system must contain no mutually contradictory state- 
ments. 

The system must explain everything which is relevant to the 
problems involved in achieving liberation. That is not to say, as 
we have seen, that the system itself is the mechanism of liberation, 
though Naiyayikas at any rate feel that its construction is a necessary 
ingrelient in the identification of the path to freedom. Thus the 
system does select, from among the indefinitely many things it might 
pay attention to, those things which are pertinent to human aims. 
However, this is not as restrictive a criterion of relevance as one 
might at first think. Since others have different conceptions of what 
is the ultimate value, or other versions of what liberation consists in, 
their mistaken views must be addressed and corrected by reference 
to one’s own philosophical system, either through arguments formu- 
lated in the opposition’s own terms or in some other fashion. 

It is obvious that there are difficulties in the way of formulating 
truths in a system that utilizes concepts which were created by others 


NATURE OF A PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEM 39 


for the purpose of expressing what are, in fact, falsehoods! It is 
for this reason that one must be more circumspect about the relations 
between one’s system and the world it attempts to explain. We’d 
better back up and start again. 

Let us think of the world to be explained as a set of sentences 
expressed in everyday language, with no selectivity imposed upon 
it other than the criterion of relevance mentioned above. That is 
to say, we are to think of an indefinitely large set of sentences, some 
no doubt true, some false, some perhaps confusedly or improperly 
formed so that their truth or falsity is difficult to assess. All that 
is necessarily common to the sentences in this set is that they are in- 
tended to be descriptive, and that in some way or other the question 
of their status (true? false? neither?) is or might become relevant 
to the attainment of liberation. 

Now let us think of a philosophical system as another set of 
statements which contains ‘‘translations” of the sentences in the first 
set. The concepts which are utilized within the translations are not 
necessarily found expressed in the sentences to be explained. The 
system maker is not bound to honor every commonsense or ordinary- 
language hunch or habit about these things. Yet, he must of course 
choose wisely in formulating his system, so that no contradictions 
within the system crop up, so that no falsehoods are contained or 
implied in the system, so that all the true sentences in the original 
set are paralleled by truths within the system, and so that this is all 
achieved by the smallest number of basic concepts. Thus, beside 
the criterion of relevance to human concerns, the other criteria in 
philosophical system making are those of accuracy, adequacy, and 
economy. 

A system is successful if it fully satisfies the above criteria. But 
since the concepts and, indeed, the language the system maker chooses 
may not be known or intelligible directly to others, he will need to 
have ways of informing them of what he is doing. A convenient 
example is that of a map, which is a kind of system in the sense I 
am characterizing. A map may provide accurately, adequately, and 
economically the information sought to be provided by an indefinitely 
large set of signposts, verbal directions, and so forth uttered and 
written in everyday speech. But someone on his way to a new locale 
and needing directions may not find it helpful to have a map thrust 
into his hands when he asks for guidance, unless the map also contains, 
or he is otherwise provided with, directions for using it couched in 
language he can understand. Thus the philosopher cannot merely 
concentrate on constructing an accurate, adequate, and economical 


40 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


system. He must also attempt to convey to the rest of mankind a 
sense of what he is doing and has done. He must demonstrate to 
them that his system really is a map of the required territory. 

A philosopher is thus speaking at several different levels— 
or if you like, in several different languages—at once as he goes 
about his business. Beside the ordinary speech in which everyday 
activitics are carried on, and the technical vocabulary of the system 
which he learns to master as he constructs it, he must utilize a third 
sort of language, one which serves to link his activities with that of 
others. A procedure frequently practiced in this connection by 
philosophers is that of providing “‘explications” of the technical con- 
cepts utilized in the system. These explications are sometimes the 
cause of misunderstanding. It is clear that they are not intended, 
as definitions sometimes are, to state two equally tenable ways of 
describing something in one language. Dictionary definitions may 
be intended to satisfy the requirement of interchangeability salva 
veritate; the definition “‘bachelor=df. unmarried male” suggests that 
wherever one of these expressions turns up the other may be substi- 
tuted for it without changing the meaning of the sentence. But 
an explication of a technical term in our sense is not like this at all, 
since it links terms drawn from two distinct ‘‘languages’’—ordinary 
language and the language of the system. 

Nor is this kind of explication to be confused with yet another 
that may also be promulgated by the philosopher. In building a 
system one characteristically defines a number of his technical con- 
cepts in terms of others, with a small number being considered 
primitives for the system. The structure of defined terms and primi- 
tives properly interrelated constitutes the system itself, indeed, since 
the interrelated terms are the statements of the system. Nyadya, we 
shall see, develops later on toward this conception. 

What has been said will perhaps adequately suggest for the 
moment the nature of the relation between a system and the world 
it explains. Now let us consider the steps involved in constructing 
such a system. We may do this by reviewing several sorts of choices 
one is called upon to make, choices which raise fundamental prob- 
lems of phildsophical conviction and taste. 

Incidentally, in reviewing these choices we are, fortunately, 
able to operate under many of the same assumptions for India as 
Western philosophers make. The reason, as we shall see in a moment, 
is that both Sanskrit and the common Western languages— English, 
German, French, etc.—share the characteristic of being funda- 
mentally subject-predicate languages, that is to say, they all formu- 


NATURE OF A PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEM Al 


late most of their sentences in subject-predicate form. Thus, we 
may refer to this form in identifying the kinds of choices system build- 
ers are called upon to make, and these references are as legitimate 
for Indian philosophy as for Western. 

What methodological choices must a philosopher make, then ? 
First, he must make a decision about the kind of logic he will avail 
himself of. This is not only a question of whether he will respect 
the laws of noncontradiction and excluded middle; it may involve 
that. But it is also a question of whether he chooses to let all his 
terms name, and what sorts of things they will be allowed to name. 
Thus, for example, one philosopher may limit the referential terms 
within his system to those which occur in the subject, not the predi- 
cate, place in the systematic statements, construing predicates as 
indicating arrangements among their subjects, which arrangements 
are not to be considered additional entities. Another philosopher 
may feel that no such distinction is warranted or needed. The 
question, notice, is not whether or not it is the case that predicates 
name— no such question can be raised, since we are not concerned 
with a language already given but with one we propose to construct. 
The guiding considerations are rather, for example, whether we plan 
to link reference within the system with ontological commitment, so 
that if asked what things exist we have a ready answer at hand merely 
by considering which concepts appear in the subject places of state- 
ments within the system. It also may reflect a philosopher’s feelings 
about abstractions; if he is suspicious about admitting universals, 
or classes, or whatever, among the entities his system recognizes, he 
may choose to link classification with predication and have only 
his nouns (terms in the subject place) refer to individuals. These 
considerations may be viewed as a matter of taste, although philo- 
sophers tend to feel strongly on such matters and sometimes can trace 
their feelings to well-grounded hypotheses, e.g., that a system admit- 
ting such-and-such kinds of entities is more likely to contain hidden 
contradictions than other systems, or that it is less powerful or econo- 
mical. 

Second, a philosopher engaged in constructing a system will 
wish to decide whether he wishes to restrict the things spoken of in 
his system in certain ways. For example, he may wish not to allow as 
fundamental elements in his system any entities which are spatiotem- 
porally extended; he wants to rebuild the world from events occurring 
at one point in space-time each. Or he may allow spatial, but not 
temporal, extension, or vice versa. A different sort of choice is that 
between a system built from physical entities and one built from 


42 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF [NDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


phenomenal entities. The physicalist tries to translate sentences in 
ordinary speech about our experiences without exception into 
systematic statements confined to terms referring to (or defined in 
terms of other terms referring to) the kinds of things physics investi- 
gates. A phenomenalist, on the other hand, hopes to manage the 
reverse, to explain all the physicist’s reports in terms of concepts 
reflecting modes of awareness such as the colors, feels, and other 
observational reports which are held to verify the physicist’s conclu- 
sions. Again the reason a philosopher makes one choice on these 
matters rather than another may be as vague as intuition or as precise 
as a formulable hypothesis about the fashion in which the wrong 
choice will certainly violate one of the criteria of system making. 
It might be well to note, also, that choices of this sort are not always 
necessary in the sense that the alternatives necd not be mutually 
exclusive. Nyaya, for example, allows both physical and pheno- 
menal terms into its system. 

Finally, a philosophical system builder must decide which primitive 
notions he is going to start with. Not that he discovers which they 
are by some special sort of intuition; he discovers it by hard work. 
It is the interrelating of the primitives which constitutes the economy 
of the system and which accounts in part for its adequacy and accuracy 
as well. For the more powerful a basis for a system is, the more 
decisions it will make about which among the sentences to be trans- 
lated are the true ones.! 


Nyaya-Vaisesika as a Philosophical System 


The sketch given above of a philosophical system of course 
represents a very advanced stage of self-awareness on the part of 
philosophers about what they are up to. Philosophers develop this 
kind of self-awareness about method over the course of history. 
Nyaya-Vaisesika is no exception. I think it can be seen that a 
sophisticated account of Nyaya-Vaisesika will construe it as a system 
of the kind described, but it is also evident that the early Naiyayikas 
were less aware of the principles of system construction than were 
the practitioners of Navya-nyaya. However, to do justice to Nyaya 
we should view it in the light of what it has become and not only 
how it began. And the distortion of historical perspective involved 
is not as serious as one might suppose. 

We have seen, in the previous chapter, the nature of the human 
concern which provides the Naiyayika with a criterion of relevance. 
As early as the sitras the selection of certain topics as philosophically 


NATURE OF A PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEM 43 


relevant is commonplace; the lists of categories (paddarthas) given 
by Nyaya and Vaiéesika reflects this selectivity. The Vaisesika 
categories are intended to provide an exhaustive catalogue of all the 
things that need to be referred to in a discussion about the nature 
of the world and the place of liberation in it, and the Nyaya list is 
constructed in the same way. The lists are rather different. Vai- 
Sesika countenances 6, later 7 varieties of entity; they are the “reals,” 
the stuff of which everything else is made. Nydaya’s list of categories, 
some 16 of them, ranges wider. It began as a list of topics for a 
manual of debate or discussion, for the reader will recail that 
Gautama viewed discussion as one means toward liberation, and the 
means particularly within his province. The ontological categories 
of Vaisesika come later on to be incorporated within one of the Nyaya 
16, namely under the category of prameya, the objects which are to 
be understood correctly. The Nyaya list of categories also commits 
it to an interest in the ways of knowing—thus to epistemology and 
logic— as well as a good many other things connected with the 
discovery of truth through discussion and debate. 

Recognition of the other criteria of system making that were 
listed above is demonstrated in the writings of our philosophers. 
Concern about accuracy is contained in the extended attention given 
to the questions of validity, the means of knowing, and the nature 
of illusion. Consistency is clearly appealed to constantly in the 
Nyaya theory of inference,.and there is no reason to think that con- 
tradiction is viewed any differently from the way in which Western 
philosophers from the Greeks on have viewed it. Inadequacy, that 
is to say, the inability of the opponent to explain something which 
clearly needs explaining, is a common ground for refutation, and 
likewise the ability of a hypothesis to explain more than its alterna- 
tives is made the basis of acceptance. There is a Sanskrit word for 
lack of economy, gaurava, meaning “‘heaviness,”’ which is considered 
a fault by the later writers of our period and by Navya-naiyayikas. 
Simplicity as a criterion may be construed in numerous ways, how- 
ever, and it is so in India as elsewhere. 

Nyaya-Vaigesika is frequently referred to as the philosophy 
which is closest to common sense. The suggestion is that they were 
the arch-empiricists among the Indians. Murti writes ‘We are all 
Naiyayikas first and continue to be so unless by a special effort we 
free ourselves from the empirical habits of our mind.’? No doubt 
the Naiydyikas were as empirical as most Indian theorists, if only 
because they made. all truth-claims about things within reach of the 
senses turn ultimately on direct observation. But they were at the 


44 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


same time among the most imaginative of systematic philosophers 
in their constructions. We shall see below the extent to which they 
developed such matters as the theory of relations, of universals, and 
of absences far beyond anything one could hope to find presaged in 
common sense. However, Nyaya may be admitted to be closer to 
common sense than other theories in that they considered the range 
of relevant common-sense sentences which needed systematic trans- 
lation to be much wider than did most other systems. This is mainly 
because of their belief that intellectual discussion can pave the way 
for spiritual realization, a belief which certain other philosophers 
do not share. Given that intellectual doubts about liberation are 
obstacles to progress toward human perfection, it becomes clear 
why the Naiyayika believes that nothing short of a full-scale account 
of the nature of the external as well as the psychical world will do. 
Both these parts of the world must be shown to be such as to allow 
the possibility of liberation. 

With these beliefs and attitudes in mind we can turn to the 
decisions system makers must make which were mentioned above. 
First, as to questions of logic. The old Naiyayikas groped for a 
system, perfected by the Navya-naiyayikas, in which each technical 
term, whether subject or predicate, has a referent. Thus, they do 
not limit the referential terms in a syntactical manner, and they do 
not construe ontology as determined by the list of things named by 
nouns only. In this they resemble the bulk of Western philosophers. 
However, they were perhaps more consistent in this choice than 
many Western philosophers in that they were led to construe even 
what we now call “logical connectives’? as naming entities. Western 
philosophers tend to distinguish terms like ‘‘and,” “or,” and “‘‘not’’ 
as differing in kind from referential terms like “‘man’’ or “walks.” 
They came to a sort of reckoning over the little term “‘is’’ as used in 
a sentence such as “the sky is blue.” Does ‘“‘is’’ refer here? If so, 
to what? And if not, why do other verbs refer? The Naiydyikas 
fail to distinguish logical terms from others: to them “‘is’? denotes 
positive being, “‘not’? denotes negative being, i.e., absences, “‘and” 
and “‘or’’? denote certain complex relations. 

Furthermore the Naiyayikas were not suspicious of repeatable 
entities such as universals. Their logic countenances them among 
individuals as referents of either nouns or verbs. The reasons why 
they do so are reviewed by them in their arguments, and are summari- 
zed below. 

Although Nyaya admits universals among its elementary entities, 
one should not leap to the conclusion that its logic is intensional 


NATURE OF A PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEM 45 


in the more rigorous senses of the word. If we use the term “‘inten- 
sional’’ to speak of a system in which two distinct terms may have 
the same content, that is, range over exactly the same entities, and 
“extensional”? to speak of systems which do not allow difference of 
entity without difference of content, then we must conclude that 
Nyaya-Vaisesika is an extensional system. In fact, the principle 
of extensionality is explicitly formulated by Udayana among the 
so-called impediments to universalhood (jatibddhaia).2 By the same 
token, the temptation to construe Nydya as speaking of classes— 
a temptation that becomes strong when we consider its definition of 
number (which resembles that of Principia Mathematica) must be 
resisted for precisely the same reason: that classes do not satisfy the 
principle of extensionality. 

The second kind of choice we noticed system makers must face 
is that concerning the elements of the system. Here the Vaisesika 
ontology seems clearly guided by a straightforward rule of thumb, 
which is that the basic elements must be conceived of as without 
parts; they have no constituents. This leads them to view the 
ultimate components out of which material things are produced as 
atomic. However, they also view space, time, selves, and internal 
organs as elements, as well as various properties and relations. The 
Vaigesika ontology is, by comparison with some that have been 
proposed, a very rich one: it begins from over 40 kinds of basic ele- 
ments. But then, it promises to explain rather more than many 
systems do, and furthermore, as we just saw, it allows predicates to 
denote as well as subjects, thus necessitating the admission of rela- 
tions as well as relata into the system’s basis. 

As for the choice between realism and particularism, that is, 
between a basis which allows spatiotemporal repeatable elements 
as opposed to that which restricts itself to events, Nyaya-Vaisesika 
is flatly on the side of realism. Belief in substance, i.e., in conti- 
nuants through space and time, is a basic plank in their philosophical 
platform. 

It was mentioned previously that Nyaya’s basis is both physicalistic 
and phenomenalistic. Not only are physical atoms elements of the 
system, but so too are colors, tastes, sounds, and smells. One 
implication of this is that the Nyaya accepts no so-called principle 
of acquaintance in arriving at its position. Items which are known 
to us only by inference are perfectly admissible as elements of the 
system side by side with those which are directly perceived. The 
existence of several of the basic Nyaya-Vaisesika categories are held 
to be demonstrable only by inference: e.g., space, time, and the internal 


46 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


organ, as well as inherence, one of the basic Nyaya relations. To 
be sure, there are those among our philosophers who later on argue 
that some or all of these too can be directly perceived at least by 
yogis. Nevertheless, no Naiyayika ever argues that admissibility as an 
element is contingent upon being the object of direct awareness. 

As for the final choice, that of the primitives of the system, we shall 
be studying these as we work on through the details of the system. 

One final matter, on which Nydya-Vaisesika once again parallels 
other philosophical systems. We saw that a philosopher engaged in 
systematic philosophy must not only construct the system but also 
communicate with others what he has done, and that this is frequently 
done by means of explications which connect terms within the system 
with ordinary language. There is even a small-scale theory of 
explications developed, mainly by the later writers, giving principles 
by which such explications can be criticized. An explication, or 
“definition,” must be such that it neither overextends so as to apply 
to uninten‘led things, nor underextends so as to fail to apply to things 
intended. And, obviously, a definition which applies to things 
directly contrary to what is intended is unsatisfactory. 

As is to be expected, these definitions are not intended to com- 
pletely characterize the definienda; they merely serve to pick out 
from among things that might be confused with the thing which is 
being defined. In this way they are said to indicate differentia 
(asddha@ranadharma) of the definiendum. It is important to keep well 
in mind, though, that the differentia are properties alluded to in ordi- 
nary, not systematic, parlance. In a definition of this kind, the 
technical term from the system is the definiendum, and terms whose 
meaning is known to the public constitute the definientia. This is 
why it would be wrong to suppose that definitions in Nyaya serve 
to identify the “‘essence’’ of the things being defined, as Biardeau 
rightly notes, and it also explains what she finds rather puzzling, 
namely the nonchalance earlier Naiydyikas exhibit toward problems 
of definition. It is typical of philosophers constructing systems 
that they should tend to feel that the worth of their constructions 
will ultimately stand or fall on its overall ability to explain, and not 
on the individual correlations between its terms and those of common 
sense. In this way Naiydyikas are committed to a kind of “holism” 
in Quine’s sense.5 


4 


RELATIONS 


We shall not delay any longer getting into the system itself. First 
of all, we shall survey the ontological categories of the Vaisesika, 
which are accepted also by Nyaya. Later on we shall turn to prob- 
lems of epistemology. Inevitably, whichever way we choose to 
expound this system, it will turn out that we must refer to material 
as yet unexplained in order to fully illuminate what is under dis- 
cussion at the moment. That is the way with a philosophical system; 
were it not so, the more unsystematic one’s philosophy must be. 
Thus, as we have chosen to treat metaphysics before epistemology, 
certain things will need to be referred to in earlier chapters which 
will only receive full treatment in later ones. For example, given 
this decision about the order of exposition we shall not discuss the 
theory of inference until later, and so J shall sometimes need to refer 
the reader to material developed in the section on inference in order 
to fully clarify an argument which is put forth in defense of a certain 
ontological category. Likewise, questions about the experiential 
basis for ontology, though they will come up in the section on onto- 
logy, will have to await full resolution until the theory of perception 
can be developed more fully. 

A sizable group of the sentences Nydya-Vaigesika wishes to trans- 
late into its system concern the makeup of the external world, those 
objects with which we deal in our everyday affairs. Since it is attach- 
ment to the agrceable characteristics of these objects which breeds 
karma and samsara, a prime purpose of philosophy is the successful 
analysis of the makeup of these things, so that the aspirant for libera- 
tion may truly understand the sources of the attraction and be able 
to adopt a suitably disinterested attitude to them. 

In order to provide technical terminology with which to trans- 
late suitably sentences about objects and their constitution, the 
Vaisesikas propose a number of types of basic elerrents of their system, 


48 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


together with relations to connect them in such a way as to build 
larger objects. The relations, as we have seen, are included among 
the basic elements, so that in choosing just these elements the Vaise- 
sikas are at the same time working out their choice of primitive terms. 

The sentences of the system, as well as those of ordinary language 
which the systematic ones will translate, are taken to be in subject- 
predicate form. Thus, some of the elements may occupy the sub- 
ject place only, others may occupy the predicate place only, and 
many can play either role depending on context. Do not think, 
however, that the Vaigesika thinks of his basic elements as terms; 
they are real entities, existing independently of our thinking, as we 
shall see later on. The system, though we may speak of it as a 
language into which another language is being translated, is in a 
fact a map of the nature of things itself. We may think of the matter 
this way. In the real world there are substrata (dharmin), proper- 
ties (dharma), and relations (sambandha\, each having appropriate 
subdivisions. The entities combine in the world so as to produce 
further entities; they also are related so as to constitute what we may 
call facts. The minimal form of a fact, call it an “‘atomic fact” if you 
will, consists of a substratum connected by a relation to a property. 
More complex relationships are also found. The “sentences’’ of the 
system are linguistic entities which reflect the form of such facts. 
The terms of these sentences must denote elements of the system, or 
else be expandable into sentences whose terms each denote an element. 

Naiyayikas are fond of a saying which is sometimes found at the 
head of their works: ‘“‘whatever is, is knowable and nameable” 
(astitva jieyatva abhidheyatva). A bit of thought about this maxim 
suggests how clearly they conceive their task in the manner I have 
been suggesting. The knowability and nameability, as well as the 
existence, spoken of in this saying must be understood as existence, 
knowability, and nameability within the systematic langudge. Other- 
wise contradictory views could both be true, since it is possible to 
name both x and its nonexistence. But the things which really 
exist, namely the basic elements and their products, are named by 
terms in the systematic language, whereas the things which other 
people think exist but which actually do not are not named at all 
within the system. In addition, other philosophers have’ hypotheses 
granting existence to certain kinds of things (e.g., darkness, as we 
shall see) which they misconstrue. Darkness exists, but its name 
within the system is not “darkness”? but something else—‘“‘absence 
of light,” according to some of the Naiy@yikas.+ 


It cannot be emphasized too strongly how important to the 


RELATIONS 49 


Nyaya-Vaisesika’s program is the postulate that substrata and pro- 
perty are different entities entirely (dharmadharmibheda).2 We shall 
return to illustrate the importance of this for a realistic epistemology 
in Chapter Eight. The Naiydyika is always careful to distinguish 
combinations of elements which produce further elements from 
mere aggregations of elements, which do not “‘produce”’ at all in the 
technical sense adopted by NyAya-Vaisesika. This being the case, 
it may be well for,us to have some terminology of our own to distin- 
guish those things recognized by Vaisesika as belonging to one of 
the categories from those aggregates which are not. So far I have 
used the term “‘element,’’ but this is somewhat unfortunate, for we 
shall need this term to distinguish certain types of substances from 
others. Therefore, 1 wish to introduce here the term “individual,” 
which will refer to any entity belonging to one of the Vaisesika 
categories, and is to be contrasted with “‘object,’’ which I shall use to 
speak of aggregates as well as what were called “‘facts.”” An individual 
has no parts in the strictest sense: it is not a sum of any other 
individuals. 

The Vaifesikasiitras distinguish 6 kinds of individuals. They may 
be referred to in English expositions as: (1) substance; (2) qua- 
lity; (3) motion; (4) universal; (5) individuator; (6) inherence. 
Later on a seventh category of individuals was added, that of (7) 
absence. The Sanskrit term translated by “‘category’’ is padartha, 
literally a thing to which words refer. As pointed out previously, 
the individuals may be thought of as the denotata of the terms in the 
systematic language, which is just what is implied by the use of this 
word. 

Of these 7 categories that of inherence is comprised by a relation or 
relations exhaustively: category (2), that of qualities, contains in its 
list of types of quality several of which are relational, namely contact, 
number, separateness, and disjunction. Later on Nydya theory 
developed the notion that anything could function as a relation by 
linking itself to another thing. Since the Naiydyikas’ choice of 
individuals is in large measure guided by their conception of how such 
individuals are to combine to form facts, we had better start our 
review of ontology by examining their theory of relations. 

First a few technical terms. A notion we may concede to be 
primitive for Nyaya is that of a “locus” (afraya or adhikarana). The 
best a Naiyayika can do to explain what a locus is to say that it 
is that which we say things reside “in” or “fon” or “at? Tt is not 
spatiotemporally conceived, although spatiotemporal difference im- 
plies different loci. According to Prasastapada the first 5 categories 


50 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


are loci, and Sivaditya echoes this when he defines x’s being a locus 
(adhikaranatva) as x’s property of having a universal resident in it. 
Any two things related in such a way that one is resident in (on 
or at) the other can be called a resider-residence-relation (dfrayd- 
Sritasambandha). 

A related pair of terms which has an epistemological connotation 
is that of “qualifier”? (vifesana) and “‘qualificand” (visesya). A thing 
qualifies another when we conceive it to. Praéastapada limits 
qualifiers to the first 5 categories, but Uddyotakara and later writers 
appeal to a relation called “qualifier-qualificand-relation’’ (visesana- 
vtsesyasambandha) which, e.g., connects inherence to its relata or 
absences to their loci. This is perhaps the first self-linking connector 
(svar ipasambandha).2 According to the Nydyalilavati “qualifier”? and 
““qualificand” have no fixed meaning; sometimes the distinction 
indicates relative importance, sometimes that one is contained within 
the other, sometimes that one is the locus of the other. Sometimes, 
Vallabha says, the relation is not even real. This admission lets in a 
host of epistemological problems which we shall have to postpone for 
now. 

In Navya-nyaya further useful technical terminology was deve- 
loped to handle relations, as their awareness of the importance of 
relations for their system increased. Some of these terms begin to 
be used in the latter part of our period. For example, the term 


“‘limitor’’ (avacchedaka), though found in early texts, begins to assume 
its technical sense in Nydpalilavatt and Saptapadarthi. Vallabha says 


that the universals inhering in earth atoms are the limitors of the 
inherence causes of smell, and Sivaditya defines a moment as time 
limited by a motion. The terms anuyogi and pratiyogi, used to diffe- 
rentiate the relata related by relations which point only one way, so 
to speak, are found used in this way by Bhasarvajiia, for example, 
but are not frequent until the later literature. But the directionality 
of inherence and contact is implicit in the theories of the older writers. 


I. Inherence 


Kanada explains inherence as the cause of the notion that something 
is “here’’ in a locus, and connects its function to causality. He also 
conceives that there is only one inherence, since there is no indication 
that different inherences connect different pairs of things related by 
inherence. The theory of a single inherence carries on until Navya- 
nydya times.* As for the definition of inherence, however, our 
philosophers begin immediately to improve on Kanada’s definition. 

VAatsyayana says that inherence relates two things when one can- 


RELATIONS 51 


not occur without the other. The definitive form of this account 
is provided by Prasastapada, who defines inherence as the relation 
between two inscparable (uyutasiddha) things related as located to 
locus. He further explains that ‘‘inseparability’ means different 
things for noneternal entities than it does for eternal ones. Two 
entities, at least one of which is noneternal, are inseparable if all loci 
of one are loci of the other, while two eternal entities are inseparable 
if all motions that occur within one occur within the other. 

Inherence relates qualities, motions, universals, and individuators 
to substances. It also relates universals to qualities and universals 
to motions. Finally, it relates composite individuals to the “parts” 
which are the composite individuals’ cause. 

Prasastapada has a number of further interesting things to say 
about inherence. For one thing, he follows Kanada in saying it is 
“marked through our knowledge,” i.e., that its presence is in some 
manner dependent on our attending to it. Does this mean that 
the Nydya-Vaisesika realistic epistemology is jeopardized? We 
shall return to this question. For another, inherence has no universal 
inhering in it, nor any individuator individuating it. This is not 
surprising, since there is only one inherence. But Pragastapada is 
also aware of the possibility of infinite regress, were inherence to be 
related to a universal inherenceness by inherence. Which leads 
us to a basic question: what relates inherence to its relata? Pragasta- 
pada’s answer is that it is related to them by the relation of identity 
(t@datmya). Furthermore, what happens to inherence when its 
relata are destroyed or disappear? According to Prasastapada in- 
herence is unaffected. It may be likened to a glue which glues to- 
gether whatever inseparable things happen to fall into it. If there 
are no such things, the glue exists in potency, ready to glue but not, 
at the moment, gluing! Uddyotakara argues that if it were not 
independent of its relata in this way it could not do its job. 

PraSastapada thinks that inherence is not directly perceived, but 
is known through inference. This is consistent with his idea that it 
is somehow dependent on our knowing about it. But Uddyotakara 
and the Naiyayikas generally hold that inherence is directly percep- 
tible. Jayanta and Bhasarvajfia are equally explicit about it, 
although the latter characteristically differs in details, holding that 
inherence is only sometimes perceptible. The commentators on 
Prasastapada mention the view that inherence is perceptible as the 
view of “others,’’ and scholars say that this is one of the few differen- 
ces between the Vaiscsika and Nydya systems. Vallabha is appa- 
rently trying to adjudicate this discrepancy when he argues that, 


52 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


though inherence is not perceived, it is inferred as closely involved 
in judgments of perception and so seems to be perceived because of 
this involvement. Faddegon compares the Vaisesika theory of 
relations with that of certain 19th century philosophers such as 
Sigwart and Windelband, who divide relations into 3 sorts: (1) 
reflective relations, produced by mental classifications, (2) consti- 
tutive relations, which are in the things themselves, and (3) modal 
relations, relating our ideas and feelings and their contents. He 
says that Vaisesikas thought inherence was a reflective relation, 
while Mimamsakas, for example, took it as constitutive.5 However, 
despite what Prasgastapada says about inherence being dependent 
on our knowing, I think Faddegon is mistaken in attributing to 
Vaisesikas the view that inherence is mind-dependent in the sense 
that European logicians had in mind. There are various ways in 
which an entity may be mind-dependent, and not all of them are 
inconsistent with direct epistemological realism. 

Certainly our philosophers did hold that inherence not only related 
objects known by us, but also entered into the relations between our 
knowing apparatus and its objects. Uddyotakara lists 6 different 
kinds of relations between the sense organs and their objects, one of 
which is inherence, another being the qualifier-qualificand-relation 
mentioned earlier. The rest of his 6 are direct contact and 3 indirect 
relations involving inherence and contact in combination. 


IT, Other Relations: Contact, Self-Linking Connectors 


Besides inherence, relations between individuals within the Nyaya 
scheme boil down to contact, self-linking connectors, or some indirect 
relation combining those three. If difference is to be counted a 
relation, it should be added too. 

Contact (samyoga) is one of the qualities, and we shall discuss it in 
greater detail. Here we need only note that it is capable of relating 
two substances at least one of which is material (mirta). Given 
two such substances, contact is a quality of an ordered pair of them, 
inhering in it (the pair) as any quality does in the substance it is a 
quality of. 

Disjunction (vibhdga) is also a quality, inhering in pairs of individuals 
which (individuals) have just parted from contact with each other. 
Separateness (prthaktva) is yet another quality which may reside 
in pairs of separate substances. Still another is number (samkhy@), 
at least those numbers higher than one. 

Otherness, i.e., difference in nature, 1s construed as a variety of 


RELATIONS 53 


absence, the seventh category. We shall have a closer look at it 
subsequently. 

All other relations are either complexes of the simple ones, or are 
instances of self-linking connectors (svaripasambandha). The theory 
of these relations is worked out in great detail in Navya-nyaya. 
There is little attempt by the classical philosophers of the school 
to work out such a theory in any systematic way. But several such 
relations have an important place in the system’s defense of certain 
fundamental theses. 

We noted in passing above that the relation between knowledge 
and known (called qualifier-qualificand-relation) may have been 
the earliest self-linking connector. Another case which gets regular 
recognition is the relation between an absence and its “counter- 
positive,” i.e., the thing that is absent. For example, absence of pot 
is an individual, the nonexistence of a certain pot—or of pots in 
general. There is no such thing as pure absence —absence of 
everything or absence of nothing in particular. Every absence has 
a counterpositive, something which is absent. Here the counter- 
positive is the particular pot—or the universal “‘potness’”’ if the 
absence is of pots in general. But what is the relation between 
an absence and its counterpositive ? Is it inherence, or contact, 
or what? These scholastic sounding questions might not be raised 
by the Naiyayikas themselves, but are caused to be raised by critics 
of the system, especially of that part of it which pertains to absences, 
which play an important role in Nyaya-Vaisesika. And since they 
are caused to be raised, e.g., by Buddhists, the Naiyayikas feel they 
must answer them. The answer is that an absence needs no further 
relation to relate itself to its counterpositive, that is to say, it just is 
that absence, of that particular thing and no other. It did not get 
that way in dependence on something else, though our having 
noticed it at all no doubt had a cause, and the pot may have been 
removed or destroyed by causal factors. But its nature is not depen- 
dent on something else, and that is why it is its own connector. 

Similarly, when the question of the relation between inherence 
and its relata is raised, as it was by Samkara and others (not to speak 
of Bradley), this same answer is given. There is no infinite regress, 
for while two inseparable things need inherence to be related to each 
other, inherence just is the sort of thing which relates inseparable 
pairs of entities of appropriate kinds. 

Still another use for self-linking connectors was apparently empha- 
sized by Trilocana, who found himself being asked, in connection 
with the theory of inference, what the relation was between two 


54 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


universals one of which “pervaded”? the other. Pervasion between 
universals is the key to the answer to the problem of induction, 
according to Nyaya; clearly it is important to allay any suspicions 
of a regress here. Trilocana appeals to a connection he calls sva@bhda- 
vikasambandha, a natural relation between the universals. 

PraSastapada, we noted, referred to this kind of relation as “‘iden- 
tity” (tddatmya). Swrictly speaking, identity cannot be a relation 
within the system, since the system may contain no two identical 
things, in consonance with the principle of extensionality. And 
indeed formal relations, like identity and difference, do not occur as 
individuals in the system. A relation must relate two distinct things, 
and it must be distinct from them. But must it be distinct from 
each of them? Apparently not, for a self-linking connector is precisely 
one thing x relating itself to another, y. If we are to say there are 
three things here, x, y and the connector, we shall have to say that, 
though the connector is not different from x, it is different from y, 
thus, it is a distinct thing from its relata. Later on the Navya-naiya- 
yikas puzzled over some of the implications of this.6 


HT. Causal Relations 


Among the sentences needing accurate systematic translation, 
sentences about the causes of things are perhaps the most important 
of all. Since the psint of philosophizing is to prepare the way for 
liberation, it is a crucial part of the philosopher’s understanding that 
he understands the causes of bondage, and, therefore, the causes of 
liberation. 

The Naiyayika views causation as a relation between individuals, 
not solely between events. However, some individuals are momen- 
tary; but not all are. On this last point Nyaya jousts at length with 
the Buddhists, culminating in Udayana’s attack in his Atmatattvaviveha. 
Some scholars trace this polemic all the way back to the sétras. 
It seems unlikely, however, that Kanada and Gautama were concerned 
so much with Buddhism as they were with Samkhya, which was 
the most influential tradition of their period. Nyaya-Vaisesika has 
in common with Samkhya the conception that there are individuals 
which are not momentary but continuants; they differ, however, 
on the relation between continuants which are causes and those which 
are their effects. 

To understand the development of the NyAya theory of causation 
we may first inspect its fully developed form, as we get it in Udayana, 
whose treatment is accepted as definitive by practically all subsequent 
Naiyayikas, including those of the new school. 


RELATIONS 55 


The causal factors involved in the production of an effect are usually 
quite numerous, and it is only the full collection of factors (sdmagri) 
which is a sufficient condition for the production of the effect. When 
that full collection is operative, the effect arises. The effect is not 
one of those causal factors: the effect is not included within the cause, 
since new features arise which are not found anywhere within the 
causal factors or at any rate not in the particular combination in 
which they are productive. Among the several factors which make 
up the full collection some will appear more prominent to the observer 
than others. These others may be referred to as ‘‘accessory’’ causes, 
but their presence is just as necessary as the more prominent ones. 

Indeed, the members of the collection are cach necessary condi- 
tions. Plurality of causes--more than one sufficient condition 
for a single effect—is unreal. Therefore, the arguments of others, 
e.g., Mimamsakas, that a proper explanation of causality involves 
the postulation of a special category of power or causal efficacy 
(Sakti?) may be dismissed. Furthermore, certain Buddhist terms 
meaning “efficiency” can be construed just to mean the presence 
of all the accessories; thus the efficiency of an event (Buddhists hold 
that only events have efficiency) consists in its being accompanied 
by the other factors necessary and sufficient to produce an effect. 

Naturally, only noneternal things can be produced and so become 
effects of causes. Both eternal and noneternal individuals may be 
causal factors. However, Udayana holds that causality is a relation 
between universals, not particulars. He is even willing to admit 
causality as a special additional category, although he does not 
insist upon it. He defines causality as “being a universal which is 
regularly connected with an earlier time (pdrvakdlaniyatajatiyatva),”’ 
which amounts to saying that the relation between cause and effect 
is a relation of temporal precedence together with constant con- 
junction. The Naiydyika interprets “constant conjunction” as a 
relation between properties. Whereas in English we should say 
that a causal relation is present when it is true that “whenever a 
thing of type A occurs, a thing of type B occurs’’. Udayana interprets 
this as a relation between the properties A-ness and B-ness, in accordance 
with his ontological predilections. 

A generally accepted Ny4aya classification divides causal factors 
into 3 varieties. (1) First, there is what is called the “‘inherence 
cause’? (samavdyikdrana). When Kanada talks about a cause he 
usually has this kind of causal condition in mind. Thus, a substance 
is the inherence cause in the production of its qualities and motions, 
since the effects inhere in the substance. Furthermore, when a pot 


56 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is produced from pot-halves or a cloth from threads (two favourite 
Nyaya-Vaisesika examples) the pot-halves and the threads are res- 
pectively the inherence causes of the pot and the cloth because the 
latter, which are the effects, inhere in the halves and the threads. 
It is important to recognize that the Naiyayika does not hold that 
the halves or the threads are the material out of which the pot and 
the cloth are respectively composed. Such an account involving 
a “material cause” (updddnakdrana) is Samkhya’s, not Nydya’s.’ 
Eternal substances may be inherence causes, as well as noneternal 
ones; e.g., selves are the inherence causes of their cognitions and 
feelings. 

(2) A second variety of cause is called merely the “noninherence 
cause” (asamavdyikdrana). An individual which is not inhered in 
by the effect, but which is “closely related” (pratydsanna) to the 
inherence cause, may function as a noninherence cause. For 
example, in the production of a pot from pot-halves the contact 
between the pot-halves, which inheres in the pot-halves, is the non- 
inherence cause of the pot. Or when a cloth is being woven, the 
colour of the threads, which inheres in the threads, is the noninher- 
ence cause of the colour of the cloth. The examples make it clear that 
the ‘‘close relation” is a matter of degree. Vyomasiva divides non- 
inherence causes into two kinds: (a) ‘‘small’”? (laghvi), where the non- 
inherence cause inheres in the same substance that the effect inheres 
in—e.g., the contact of the pot-halves, or one sound (wave) which 
precedes the next sound (wave), since they both inhere in the one 
akasa : (b) “big” (byhati), where the noninherence cause inheres 
in the same substance that the effect inheres in, e.g., the colour 
of the threads. But the “close relation” may be still looser. The 
Dasapadarthasastra counts the internal organ as the noninherence 
cause of the psychic qualities of that self with which it is in contact. 
Many individuals belonging to the second category — the qualities 
—may be noninherence causes, although according to Pragastapada 
and his commentators some of them are not causal factors at all. 

(3) The first two varieties of causal factors are toyether necessary 
but not sufficient to produce an effect. Furthermore, in some cases 
of causation the first two sorts of factors are entirely absent. For 
example, in the production of absences — the destruction of a 
middle-sized substance like a pot, for instance — since the effect 
does not inhere in anything there is neither inherence nor non- 
inherence cause. So the third variety of causal factor is in many 
ways the crucial one, on the authority of the Naiyayikas. It is called 
the “instrumental cause” (nimitiakdrana). 


RELATIONS 57 


Clearly all other causal factors not included in the first two varieties 
must be included here if the classification is to be exhaustive. So, 
for example, in producing a pot from pot-halves the presence of a 
potter at the appropriate time and place, the absence of any obstruc- 
tions to his completing his task, as well as the specific movements which 
he makes his hands and stick go through, are all to be included within 
this third variety. So the Naiyayikas further subdivide this cate- 
gory into two: (a) general instrumental factors (sdédhdranakarana), 
like the presence of time, place, and absence of obstructions, and 
(b) specific instrumental factors (asddh@ranakdrana), including the 
particular movements of the potter’s hands and stick as well as any 
qualities which are specific to just this kind of effect, such as number 
in counting, size in measuring, etc. 

We should also note a rather honorific word used for “ (causal) 
condition par excellence.” The general word for “cause” in Sanskrit 
is kdrana; this special word is karana. What is the karana or “‘condition 
par excellence” of an effect? Several interpretations are found offered 
by our writers. One, suggested perhaps by Uddyotakara, has it 
that the supreme cause is the most effective cause, the event which 
immediately precedes and brings about the production of the effect. 
Sometimes this event is called the ‘‘operation’” (vydpara). Thus, 
in chopping down a tree the last contact of the axe with the tree 
before the tree begins to fall might be considered to be the causal 
condition par excellence. In this interpretation this condition is an 
event. A second view is proposed by Jayanta Bhatta: he holds that 
the honour of being called the supreme cause can only properly be 
awarded to the whole collection of causal conditions —the suffi- 
cient condition itself. His view is pretty well ignored by subsequent 
Naiyayikas, however. A third view, popular in Navya-nyaya, is 
that the cause par excellence is not the event which immediately pre- 
cedes the production of the effect, but rather the individual whose 
operation constitutes that event. Thus, in our example it is the axe 
which is the cause par excellence, the karana.® 

To this picture of the developed Nyaya-Vaisesika theory of causal 
relations we may next append a few historical comments. As was 
mentioned, the major opponents of our philosophers on causation 
were the Buddhists on the one hand, Samkhya on the other. Samkhya 
views causality as a relation among continuants, as Nyaya does, but 
conceives the relation differently. The Buddhists reject continuants 
in toto and view causation as a relation among events. 

Samkhya conceives that causality is a connection between a cause 
which contains the effect in a potential state, and the effect which is 


58 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the same thing now “manifested”? (vyakta), i.e., apparent to our 
inspection. Favourite examples are the oil of the sesame seed, first 
contained within the seed and then spilled out when the seed is 
broken open, or, with a somewhat different thrust, the production 
of curds from milk. In both cases the effect is contained in the cause. 
Samkhya generalizes this conception of causation to the relation 
between the unmanifest matter (prakrti) which is the ultimate causc 
of all worldly effects, and its transformations into the manifest mental 
and physical modes with which we are acquainted in life. 

Gautama is aware of the view that change is modification of already 
existing stuff, rather than replacement of something old by a new 
thing. Oddly, be discusses this in connection with a grammatical 
point about the change in suffixes due to variation of a stem in syntac- 
tical function. The related point about whether the sounds consti- 
tuting the words are manifested or produced is a topic which goes 
far back into the earliest history of Indian thought. The Naiyayikas 
hold that sounds are produced in the substance called dkasa. | Sounds 
are qualities for Nyadya, and are produced in a series, one being 
destroyed as the next arises. Others, notably Mimamsakas but also 
including Samkhyas, held that sound itself is a substance, and that 
different sounds are modifications of this eternal sound-stuff. Many 
of the arguments about the theory of sound turn on this difference 
among the systems over causality. 

S4amkhya writers such as Iévarakrsna offered several arguments 
in favour of their view that the effect is contained in the cause. 
Among the most important of these are the following. (1) The 
effect must exist in the cause, since a nonexistent thing cannot be 
produced. This corresponds to the ancient maxim of classical 
Western philosophers, ex nithilo nihil fit. (2) What prevents a cause 
from producing anywhere and all the time, or in any random fashion 
you please? There must be some factor which limits the effective- 
ness of the cause to producing its effect at the proper time and place, 
and this factor can only be the presence of the effect itself in potency. 
(3) A given type of effect can only be produced by a certain type 
of cause, e.g., milk produces curds, but other liquids cannot. This 
shows that the peculiarity of that liquid which is competent to pro- 
duce curds is due to the presence within it, but not in the other liquids, 
of the effect in its potential state. 

The Ny4aya attitude to these arguments, as exemplified in Sridhara’s 
Nydyakandali, is as follows. The first argument is in the nature of 
an undefended pronouncement. Who says a nonexistent thing 
cannot be produced, and why? Experience shows us that nothing 


RELATIONS 59 


is commoner than production of previously nonexistent things from 
causal factors none of which can be shown to “‘contain’’ the effect 
within them. If the effect already exists, why can it not be produced 
for inspection? Sridhara professes not to understand the notion 
of the existence of the effect ‘in potentiality.” How is this different 
from “‘notexistent yet,” i.e., from the effect’s nonexistence at a time 
prior to its production ? 

To take the second and third arguments together, Sridhara admits 
that an effect regularly shares some attributes with its cause; but it 
does not share all its attributes with the cause. The Samkhyas 
apparently cannot conceive how else the peculiar ability of milk to 
produce curds can be explained, but the Naiyayika finds the expla- 
nation readily enough in the notion of conditions which are indivi- 
dually insufficient but jointly sufficient to cause the origination of the 
effect. And the two theories are not as far apart here as one might 
suppose. For Samkhya readily admits that something changes when 
milk produces curds : certain qualities at least arise-—sourness, 
solidity—-which were absent in the milk. And the Naiyayika admits 
that the inherence cause—the milk —shares a number of qualities 
(e.g., a certain chemical composition) with the curds. Both assert 
that in order that milk produce curds there must be some extrane- 
ous causal conditions present which determine that the causal change 
takes place now and here. Samkhya does not choose to call these 
extraneous factors by the name “‘cause,”” and Nyaya does. 

Samkarasvamin presents a counterargument of some interest. It 
is a matter of experience that one thing can produce several diffe- 
rent effects, but it cannot do so unless some of the other circumstances 
difler. These differing circumstances are the Naiyayikas’ ‘‘accesso- 
ries,” and this shows that the Samkhya account is inadequate in that 
it fails to explain certain observed facts. Trilocana, thinking along 
the same lines, distinguishes two kinds of causal efficiency (sdmarthya) : 
an internal kind, stemming from the entity we call the ‘“‘cause”’ and 
which within the system is merely one of the causal factors, and an 
external kind, stemming from the accessories. What is being pro- 
posed, then, is that the ordinary, common-sense use of the term 
“‘cause,”’ which is notoriously unclear, be abandoned within the 
system and replaced by the clear-cut notion of a totality of causal 
conditions which are jointly sufficient for production of the effect. 
Then to connect the resulting theory with ordinary speech we may 
resort to the language of ‘‘accessories” and the distinction Trilocana 
proposes. 

Viewed in this light, the refusal of the Naivayika to limit the term 


60 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


“cause” to the inherence cause, as Samkhya does, becomes not 
merely a verbal matter but one of deep philosophical importance. 
Nyaya claims that its way of speaking about causes within the system 
satisfies the criteria of systembuilding better than its alternatives; 
this is by no means a verbal claim, but one crucial to the success 
of the system. 

The conception of the s@magri, or totality of causal conditions, is 
also the main element in Nydya’s answer to Buddhist arguments. 
However, the matter is complicated by introduction into the dis- 
cussion of causality of the closely related, indeed inseparable, question 
of the viability of an event ontology. 

Kanada seems not to address any arguments to Buddhists, and it is 
not at all clear that Gautama is concerned to refute them in any detail. 
He does make reference to one of the major Buddhist arguments for 
their thesis that only events exist. This is the argument from the 
unintelligibility of the past and the future, and therefore of the notion 
of a continuant, of something which did exist and will go on existing. 
Gautama’s reference suggests that he does not fully grasp the impli- 
cations of that arguinent, since his answer is merely that we can infer 
the reality of past and future on the ground of the admitted reality 
of the present. The nub of the Buddhist’s argument is that the 
notion of “‘present” is itself dependent on the notions of past and 
future; thus, temporal distinctions are “constructions” and temporal 
succession is not real. Vatsyayana’s comment on Gautama’s passage 
helps some: it is our direct experience of process which enables us to 
infer the reality of time. He clearly recognizes that the Buddhist’s 
argument is weighty if they are allowed to treat motion as the succes- 
sive occupation of points in space in a series of discrete moments. 
This discussion nicely reflects its parallels in Zeno and Russell. 

The first explicit reference to the Buddhist’s thesis of “‘momentari- 
ness” (ksanikavéda) among our writers occurs in Vatsyayana, who 
introduces this position in passing during a discussion of Samkhya 
theories. But it is Uddyotakara who first develops extensive polemics 
on this point. 

Uddyotakara’s arguments are as follows: (1) Buddhists accept 
karma, transmigration, and liberation; they have a theory of value 
much the same as Naiyayikas do, except that they tend to internalize 
the sources of bondage to a greater extent. Thus Buddhists make 
much of the notion of “seeds” (bia) or “‘traces’”? (vdsand) which 
carry out the force of karma previously earned on subsequent thoughts 
and actions. But the notion of a trace is incompatible with the 
Buddhist theory of momentariness, since on that theory each momen- 


RELATIONS 61 


tary event is self-contained and cannot pass anything on to a_subse- 
quent event. Furthermore the explanation of the facts of memory 
and recognition depends on the postulation of traces; thus the 
Buddhist ontology is inadequate as a basis for system making. (2) 
Buddhists talk in subject-predicate language, and ihus implicitly 
accept the view that there are substances and qualities, or at the least 
that there are loci in which other things reside. E.g., the locus of 
the cause must be continuous with the locus of the effect, as we find 
it so in experience. Thus an event ontology is inconsistent with the 
Buddhist’s choice of language. (3) What does ‘“momentary” mean, 
anyway? And in particular, how can the Buddhist assert both that 
momentary events are real and also that time is unreal? For a 
“momentary”? event is presumably one that lasts for a moment and 
no more, but this makes appeal to the notion of a ‘““moment”’ and so 
to temporal distinctions. 

Though these arguments are repeated by later writers it must be 
admitted that at best they produce a standoff with the Buddhists, 
and at worst they represent Uddyotakara in an uncharitable light. 
The first argument is developed at length by Vyomasiva and Udayana, 
but it is not clear that Nyaya-Vaisesika is any more a believer in real 
process than the Buddhist. Both, after all, hold that a variety of 
causal conditions combine to produce the effect; it is a more complex 
matter than Uddyotakara suggests to show that causality is inexpli- 
cable in an event ontology. The last two arguments are, in the 
context of system building, quite unfair, since they assume that the 
Naiyayika, but not the Buddhist, is to be allowed to ignore common 
usage in favour of technical terminology. The question of how we 
ordinarily talk is precisely one of the matters which is not to be allowed 
to determine the structure of a philosophical system. If Uddyotakara 
applied his arguments to himself he would be unable to appeal to a 
large number of his pet categories. Granted, it is proper to ask the 
Buddhists for explications of their technical terms, to ask them for 
example how in terms of their choice of basis they propose to explain 
the facts of memory, causation, and so forth. And Uddyotakara’s 
critique did force the Buddhists to expatiate on these topics. 

As the theories of Dignaga and his followers became more compli- 
cated the character of Nyaya arguments against momentariness 
changed. Certain arguments are directed to peculiar theories of 
individual Buddhists; witness Jayanta’s argument that Digndga’s 
thesis that the instrument and result of knowledge are identical is 
inconsistent with momentariness, and Sridhara’s argument against 
Dharmottara. Others are of more general force. 


62 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


One main line of argument for the Buddhists is this : the mark ofa 
real thing is that it exerts causal force, has efficiency (arthakriya- 
karitua). The Buddhist claims that only events are effective causes. 
The point of this claim is that eternal entities, such as universals, 
are nof things which are seen to produce effects. Vhe Buddhist 
postulates two kinds of elements—momentary particulars (svala- 
ksana\, which are the only “‘reals,’’ and universals (sémdnyalaksana), 
which are not real but rather generated by our conceptualizing 
apparatus for the purpose of classifying and talking about the parti- 
culars. The Nyaya answer is that, though universals and other 
eternal entities may not produce effects by themselves, they enter 
into totalities of causal conditions in essential ways. Thus, pro- 
perly understood, causal efficiency belongs to any causal factor, 
not only to events. Furthermore, the Naiyayikas argue, the pheno- 
menon of gradual change could not be explained if continuants are 
not admitted among the causal factors. 

Another argument that appears frequently in Buddhist writings 
is this. Noneternal things are, by the admission of the Nalyayikas, 
subject to eventual destruction. Now since this is a necessary 
characteristic of every noneternal thing it is not contingent upon 
causes, argues the Buddhist. Not depending upon the concurrence 
of causal factors at any particular time, there is no reason why 
destruction should not occur immediately upon the coming-to-be 
of the thing. Thus, momentariness is proved, everything being 
destroyed as soon as it arises. Udayana treats this argument at some 
length. He explores 5 distinct ways of interpreting the Buddhist 
claim that destruction is necessary and so uncaused, and finds each 
interpretation to violate criteria of successful system making. 

Another aspect of the problem arises from the question how the 
Buddhist proposes to account for the regular relation between a 
given kind of cause and the appropriate sort of effect. Why shouldn’t 
any event be the cause of any other subsequent one? The Buddhists 
postulated a special component of the causing events called kurvad- 
riiba which is supposed to accompany an event which then produces 
the effect immediately without delay. The point of this theory is to 
account for the qualitative relation between cause and effect without 
having to admit a continuant “within”? which the momentary events 
occur and whose nature explains the qualitative relation. Udayana 
points to the ad hoc character of this theory, and to its failure to 
accomplish explanation, by asking how the Buddhist can be sure 
that the proper sort of effect is around to be produced by the kurvad- 
vipa. The fact that a seed has the capacity to produce a sprout of 


RELATIONS 63 


a certain kind does not guarantee that a sprout of that kind will be 
forthcoming when the capacity is present in the seed. To explain 
that, some additional hypothesis is needed. Udayana avers that 
the only one which will do is that the seed grows into the sprout by 
gradual replacement of some qualities by new ones. 

The Buddhist finds the notion of a continuant which has the capa- 
city to produce an effect now and lacks it at a later time to be an 
inconsistent one. Udayana explains that ‘“‘capacity’’ in the Nyaya 
sense is not an individual like the Buddhist’s kurvadriipa; rather, it 
is the presence of all the accessories which, together with the conti- 
nuant, constitute the sufficient condition for the effect in question. 
This question of a distinct individual constituting the power or capa- 
city of a cause is, however, not peculiar to Buddhism. It is found 
in Pirvamimamsa4 and even in at least one early VaiSesika treatise, 
Candramati’s Dasapadarthasastra. 

Candramati’s view is that there are two additional! kinds of indivi- 
duals, one called causal efficacy (Sakti), the other causal inefficacy 
(asokti). Causal efficacies inhere in substances, qualities, and 
motions, and are required for these individuals to operate as causes; 
causal inefficacies also inhere in the same three kinds of individuals 
and function to obstruct causation. He also thinks that these indi- 
viduals can be directly perceived, but that the perception of them 
does not require our sense organs to make contact with the objects 
in which they inhere; the perception of them, then, is a kind of mental 
perception. 

Candramati, however, is alone among our philosophers in accep- 
ting these kinds of individuals. Indeed, none of the others know of 
his espousal of causal efficacies, or if they do, they are careful not to 
let on. The theory of causal efficacies is always attributed to Mima- 
msakas, especially tou the Prabhakara branch. Samkarasvamin is 
the first known among our philosophers to propose the standard 
reaction to the causal-efficacy theory, which is that causal efficacics 
are unnecessary since the sdmagri just is the causal efficacy—that 
is, a thing “has causal efficacy’? when all the accessories are present, 
and lacks it when some of them are absent. But this explanation 
apparently did not satisfy the Mimamsakas. 

As Jayanta presents the Mim4amsa complaint, it is this. Some- 
times, even though all the factors comprising the sdmagri are present, 
the effect does not occur because, e.g., someone has pronounced an 
incantation. Jayanta’s answer is simple: if so, all the factors are not 
present after all. Thc Mimamsaka, however, wishes to explain 
magical spel]s by postulating a causal efficacy in the continuant which 


64 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is blocked by the charm. Fine, says Jayanta, only you do not need 
a new individual to be the causal efficacy which is blocked, and it 
need not be supposed to be “in” the continuant either. A much 
simpler explanation is just that one of the causal factors which make 
up the sufficient condition for the effect in question is absence of charm. 
When a charm is spoker, this causal factor is precluded from occur- 
ring, and so no effect is produced. 

Sridhara has the Mimamsaka go on to a further objection: suppose 
someone chants a countercharm—then even in the presence of 
the charm the effect will be produced ! So absence of charm cannot 
be one of the causal factors, and the causal-efficacy hypothesis proves 
superior. Sridhara’s answer is that if the case is indeed as described, 
then the causal factor is not absence of charm but rather absence of charm 
or presence of countercharm. Udayana, however, derides this answer 
of Sridhara’s. It is impossible that both charm and countercharm 
are among the causal factors in the instance the Mimamsaka describes, 
since the countercharm is supposed to destroy the charm | Perhaps 
we should say that the factor is absence of (effective) charm, and construe 
the countercharm as one cause of the production of such an absence. 

Incidentally, this discussion suggests one reason why the Nyaya- 
Vaisesikas became more receptive to absences as their theory deve- 
loped. Since their theory requires absences to be admitted among 
the causal factors—and the theory will not work without this admis- 
sion—they had no choice but to add absences to their list of kinds 
of individuals. This category turned out to have all sorts of uses, 
as we shall see. 

The second major argument® for adding a category of causal effi- 
cacy is that there is plurality of causes—fire can be produced in 
several ways, by rubbing sticks together, by focusing the sun’s rays 
on some dry grass, etc. Now since, as Udayana emphasizes, causa- 
lity is a relation among universals rather than individuals, causal 
efficacy is needed to explain how it is that these different causes all 
produce the same effect. Udayana answers that there can be no 
real plurality of causes, since inference from effects to their causes 
depends on their being only one kind of cause for an effect. The 
Buddhist depends on such inferences as much as the Naiydyika, so 
he will not wish to adopt a theory which undermines them. As 
for the proper explanation of the apparent plurality of causes of fire, 
Udayana says that if one takes the matter at the level of the different 
causes, then we must suppose that each type of cause produces its 
particular kind of fire. Alternatively, if we consider these various 
individuals—the sticks, the jewel used to focus the rays, etc.—as 


RELATIONS 65 


sharing one universal, namely being the cause of fire, then it is also all 
right, since the regularity of the relation between causes of fire and 
fires is unaffected by there being different kinds of causes and diffe- 
rent types of effects. Udayana becomes very permissive at this point, 
in fact; he goes so far as to say that if one wants to he can admit an 
additional category of causality (kdranatva), and that this new cate- 
gory may be considered to be the old causal efficacy under another 
name. One may well wonder what the need was for all the argu- 
mentation if Udayana is going to adopt the opponent’s view after all. 
However, Udayana’s position is more subtle than one might guess. 
Part of the point of his attitude is that causality cannot be considered 
a proper universal since it violates one of the requirements of univer- 
salhood, crossconnection (jdtisamkara). If one takes this require- 
ment seriously one cannot hold that one universal being the cause of 
fire is shared by the sticks, the jewel, etc., and it is overly complex 
to hold that each is a distinct kind of cause. These considerations 
may lead one to postulate the new category. 

We may conclude this discussion of causality in Nyaya-Vaisesika 
with the problem which will seem paramount to Western-trained 
philosophers, namely, what is the character of the causal relation ? 
Is it a necessary or a contingent relation? Under what conditions 
can we be assured that a genuine causal relation holds, and are these 
conditions at least partially due to our habits of thinking, our concep- 
tual classifications ? 

The importance of the distinction between necessary (a priori) 
and contingent (a posteriori) relations comes into modern philosophy 
through certain steps which form a part of the idealist critique of 
naive realism as urged by Berkeley, Hume, and Kant. For example, 
in Hume we find a distinction between “relations of ideas’? and 
‘“‘matters of fact’? which paves the way for Kant’s “analytic a priori”’ 
and “‘synthetic a posteriori.” And Kant locates causality among 
the categories of the understanding which make human knowledge 
possible, a set of classificatory principles which order the raw material 
of experience. 

Some of these distinctions have analogues in the Buddhist philosophy 
which our Naiyayikas were concerned to refute throughout most 
of the period we are treating. It is tempting to assume that, since 
the Buddhist way with certain matters parallels that of Hume and 
Kant, it is possible to attribute to Buddhists other related “‘empiricist’’ 
doctrines of a Humean or Kantian sort, doctrines which in fact the 
Buddhists did not admit. A full treatment of this matter will have to 
await the volumes of this series which deal with Buddhism, but a 


66 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


few points are pertinent in order to gauge the position of Nyaya- 
Vaisesika on the questions introduced above. 

One major difference between Indian and Western empiricism 
is that the Indians did not know, or at any rate paid very little atten- 
tion to, the distinction between ‘formal’? and “material” truths 
which forms so influential a part of the Western philosopher’s Aristo- 
telian heritage. Inference was not pictured as a way of deducing 
statements from other statements on the grounds of their formal 
character or logical structure; rather, it was held to be the method of 
scientific inquiry. This point will be developed when we turn to the 
Nyaya theory of inference. In anticipation of fuller treatment, 
however, we may begin an answer to the question “Is causality neces- 
sary or contingent in Nyaya-Vaisesika?” by remarking that if by 
“necessary” is meant the kind of relation which is taken to relate two 
statements or ideas by virtue of deductive or formal character, then 
at any rate causality is not a necessary relation in that sense. Causa- 
lity is a relation which links empirically real entities in whatever world 
there is, and this is true both for Naiyayikas and Buddhists, at least 
insofar as the latter admit any empirical world at all. In all cases 
of causality it is thinkable that the cause should occur without the 
effect occurring: thus the relation is not a logical one in the episte- 
mologically loaded Western sense. 

Yet, of course, causality 7s a necessary, and not a contingent, rela- 
tion, in the sense that there can be no counterinstances. It must 
be the case that whenever the sdémagri occurs the effect occurs; other- 
wise it is not the sufficient condition of that effect. Thus, invariable 
antecedence is a necessary condition of causality. But both Buddhists 
and Naiydyikas hold that it is not sufficient. 

If we follow Stcherbatsky’s treatment of Buddhist logicians, we 
can find a very Kantian view in the writings of Dharmakirti. ‘‘Causa- 
lity is a relation superimposed upon reality by our understanding.’’!° 
According to Dharmakirti all necessary relations are of one of three 
kinds: relations of contradiction, of identity, and of causality. 
In Dharmakirti’s world view everything is related to everything else 
either by being opposed to it or being causally related to it. Stcher- 
batsky likens this to the Kantian notion of the synthetic a priori. 
The relation between two things one of which is cause, the other 
effect, is not “‘analytic,”’ since the things are two; yet it is a priori true 
that the first thing has an effect and that the second has a cause. Thus, 
the Buddhist of Dharmakirti’s sort adopts a kind of uniformity-of-nature 
principle, known not by experience but in whatever fashion the pratitya- 
samutpada or chain of twelvefold causation is known. Just how closely 


RELATIONS 67 


we can liken this view to Western analogues depends somewhat on 
just what the Buddhist’s source of insight is taken to be. If it is 
“reason”’ then he can be assimilated to “rationalism” in contrast to 
the Naiyayika’s “‘empiricism,” but it seems difficult to picture the 
Buddhist’s method of transcendental knowledge as rational. 

In any case, the Naiyayika has a different reason for thinking that 
invariable antecedence is not sufficient for the establishment of a 
causal relation. His reason lies in the patent fact that we can never 
know that all the evidence is in for any empirical claim, and in parti- 
cular for the claim that two things are related as cause to effect. 
We can never be sure that a hitherto undetected variable is respon- 
sible for our judgment that x causes y. Not all cases of invariable 
antecedence are causal; some are merely accidental. 

In Navya-nyaya we find detailed treatment of a notion which 
appears toward the end of our period but not in its later sophisticated 
form. That is the identification of an additional requirement of a 
cause, over and beyond its invariable antecedence to the effect: it 
must be ananyathasiddha, ‘‘essential’’ or ‘‘relevant.” “An invariable 
antecedent is irrelevant if knowledge of it is not required for any 
anticipative knowledge of the origination of the effect’’.12 In Keéava 
Misra’s Tarkabhisa 3 examples of irrelevant antecedents are offered: 
(1) the colour of the threads which combine to form the cloth are 
irrelevant, i.e., not to be included among the factors comprised in 
the sdmagri; (2) the potter’s father is irrelevant to the production of 
that potter’s pot; (3) a donkey which happens to stray by when a 
particular pot or cloth is produced is not a relevant causal factor. 
Later the kinds of irrelevancy increase to 5.14 

But even when we exclude the irrelevant factors we can never be 
sure we have got a cause and not an accidental antecedent, as can be 
seen by thinking about the definition of relevance offered above. 
For what we need to anticipate the origination of the effect depends 
upon experience; we may think we are able to anticipate the produc- 
tion of x whenever y and z are found, but one day y and z may occur 
without x, and we shall begin again to search for the additional condi- 
tion which we have been hitherto unaware of. V4acaspati Miéra 
enunciates the fallibilistic thesis of Nyaya straightforwardly. 

This, however, forces us to take another look at the question of the 
plurality of causes. We saw that Udayana says there is no plurality 
of causes. Fallibilism says that we can never be entirely sure that 
we have identified the cause of a given entity. These are not ulti- 
mately incompatible assertions, but thev raise this question: How 
can Udayana be so certain there is no plurality of causes? Does 


68 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


he have insight of the sort the Buddhist counts on to assure him that 
all positive relations are causal? I think Udayana does not suppose 
he has; rather, examination of his passages in Nydyakusumafjali per- 
taining to plurality of causes convinces me that he is proposing that 
we adopt as a principle an attitude which leads us to continue to seek 
for a single cause for each effect. ‘“There is no plurality of causes” 
is for him a heuristic maxim amounting to “keep looking for causes 
as long as you have apparent plurality.” 

Along these lines we can also hope to make sense of the Nyaya belief 
in the presence of causes for the things, e.g., in Gautama’s chain. 
Both Buddhists and Naiyayikas need to believe that there are causes 
of the sources of bondage, as we have seen. Buddhists claim to know 
this by a kind of insight. How do Naiyayikas know it? Well, 
they do not if by “know”? one means know for certain. Yet, they do 
not have to subside into skepticism for all that, any more than the 
Western scientist does. The Naiyayika’s knowledge that the things 
that matter have causes is based on past success in finding concomi- 
tances. To be sure, it remains possible that any given concomitance, 
hitherto supposed to be an invariable concomitance, will turn out 
not to be so. But the probability remains that conditions found 
so far to be relevant, invariable antecedents do, in fact, constitute the 
(one) cause of the effect in question, and this probability does not 
require any certainty to ground it. 


5 


SUBSTANCE 


I. Cateszories 

In the foregoing chapter we took occasion at one point to glance 
briefly at the Vaisesika list of 7 categories: substance, quality, motion, 
universal, individuator, inherence, and absence. What is the reason 
for admitting only 7 categories, and why just these 7? The answer 
lies in the necessities of the constructive enterprise to which I have 
alluded. Likewise, when we come to look at the list of 9 kinds of 
substance, 24 kinds of qualities, etc., similar questions are raised and 
the answer lies again in the manner in which the system can be built 
up. In order to illustrate this I shall in the next few pages suggest 
how one might start rigorously to generate the system from definitions 
utilizing the basic relations studied in the preceding chapter. I do 
not intend to take this very far, since the purpose of clear elucidation, 
if the reader is not acquainted with modern symbolic logic, is not 
served by such a technical presentation. Nevertheless, I think it is 
instructive to see how one might proceed to study the system in a 
rigorous fashion.} 

Our sole primitive will be the self-linking connection between a 
locus and what is located there. Which individuals are loci of 
which kinds of individuals, and located in which other kinds of indi- 
viduals, will become clear as the system is developed. One may 
view each definition of a kind of individual — i.e., of a ‘‘category” 
—~as constituting an assignation of the role of locus or located with 
respect to other kinds of individuals. It would, also, be possible to 
analyze further the locus-located relation by utilizing the notions of 
“qualifier” and ‘‘qualificand’’ and tying the question to the way the 
language works, but I shall not attempt to develop this here. Short- 
cutting that approach, let us merely symbolize the locus-located 
relation, a special case of self-linking connection, as ‘“‘La, b,’’ where 
the first member (a) is what is located and the second member (6) is 
the locus. 


70 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Utilizing Z, we can now attempt to define inherence. I shall 

state a definition and then discuss it. 

D1: Ins=d. (x) [La x? (y) (Lay. 9 Ly, x)] 

“Y” is the two-place predicate “inheres in.” The definition is inten- 
ded to capture the notion of inseparability as it applies in the normal 
case, where one or both of @ and 6 are not eternal individuals.? As 
we saw, not all Naiyayikas admit that inherence relates eternal 
individuals. For those who do, like Prasastapada, we might develop 
two alternative definitions, but T shall not make the attempt here. 
What D1 says in effect is that two individuals a and 6 are such that 
a inheres in 6 if and only if all loci of 6 are loci of a, which was the 
required idca to be captured. 

Now we turn and define the 7 categories. 

A peculiarity of substance is that it is the only kind of individual 
which can be inhered in without also inhering in something else. 
The difficulty about using this feature as an element in the definition 
is that although not being located is a sufficient condition for being a 
substance, it is not also a necessary condition, since some substances 
do inhere in something else, albeit only in other substances. 

We cannot arrive at a definition in any very straightforward way. 
For example, one might suppose that one could say that a substance 
was any individual which either does not inhere in something else 
or, if it does, the thing it inheres in does not inhere in anything else 
or, if it does, etc....But that will not do, since it would apply to a 
quality as well. A quality inheres in something which inheres in 
something which does not inhere in anything. So that line will not 
work. 

In order to arrive at a satisfactory definition of substance we shall 
have to yo at the matter in a more devious way, one which, however, 
was implicit in the development suggested in the previous chapter. 
We note that contact is a relation which connects substances only. 
If we first define contact, we can easily define substance, for every 
substance is in contact with something, namely dkdsa. 

Defining contact is not terribly straightforward, either. But here 
is a way of getting at it. Contact is, according to Nyaya-Vaisesika, 
a quality which inheres in two substances under conditions such that 
the product of the two individuals is greater than zero but smaller 
than either of the two (where “‘product’’ is here being used in its 
mathematical or set-theoretical sense4). That is, the product of 
two individuals is the individual (if any) which exhausts their com- 
mon content. ‘Two individuals are not in contact at all if they have 
no common content (i.e..if their product is zero), and they are not 


SUBSTANCE 71 


(for this system) fwo substances unless their product is less than each 
of the two.’ Therefore, we can suggest defining contact as follows: 
D2a: Cy= df. (qa) (qb) (Ip [a, 6]. ab40. ab<a. ab<b)® 

D2a is not quite satisfactory, however, since it overextends to include, 
e.g., a universal property which inheres in both a and 6. L.e., suppose 
a and b are two atoms of earth; then earthness is an individual which, 
when taken as a value of x in D2a, satisfies the definition even though 
a and b may not be in contact at all. We can add a qualification 
so as to take care of this, however. We specify that any value of 
x in the definition of contact must be such that something inheres 
in it. Since a universal is something in which nothing inheres, 
this effectively excludes universals as values for x. Thus, the full 
definition of contact is : 

D2: C= df. (572) (gq) (ay) ix * Ln[a,b] * ab O° ab<a* ab<b). 

Having thus defined contact, it is easy to define substance. 

D3: Sq = df. (dx) (ax) (Ce Lela,y]) 
since every substance is in contact with something (dkafa). 

Moving on to quality, we note that qualities inhere in substances 
only. The difficulty about using this as a distinguishing feature of 
substances is that the same can be said of motions—they inhere 
only in substances as well. This indeed led Bhasarvajiia to propose 
that motions be treated as a kind of quality.?’ From the point of 
view of constructionism of the kind here being carried on, his pro- 
posal seems inviting. The alternative would be to define motion 
first and then get at the definition of quality by excluding motions. 
Formally, qualities and motions are very much alike; indeed, the 
main difference is that motions can inhere in certain sorts of substances 
only—that, at least, is what the main wing would say. Bhasarva- 
jfiia’s point, however, is that the notion of motion depends on other 
notions such as occupying successively different points in space, 
notions which are usually traced to their causes which are qualities 
(namely, priority and posteriority). 

Following Bhasarvajfia’s suggestion, then, let us define a quality thus: 
D4: Qa=af. (fx) (Sx Lax)’ (9) (Sy A ~La)? (@)(~ (Caz) 

(qw) Lw>a) 
That is, a quality is an individual which (1) inheres in a substance; 
(2) inheres in no thing that is not a substance; (3) is not in contact 
with any thing; (+) has something inhering in it. The third clause 
excludes substances which satisfy (1} and (2); the fourth clause 
excludes universals which satisfy (1), (2), and (3). 


A proper definition of motion, in Bhiasarvajfia’s system, will come 
when the various qualities are distinguished from each other. It is 


C 
72 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


at least a necessary condition of an individual’s being a motion that 
it inhere in material substances only, i.e., in those substances which 
are not ubiquitous, which have limited dimension. Material substance 
can be defined thus: 
D3: MS, = df. (q*) (Q@) Com~ ay &@ FY). 

That is, an individual a is a material substance if there are two subs- 
tances one of which is in contact with a and the other of which, though 
not identical with a, is not in contact with a. A material substance 
is one which is capable of motion. However, if we wish to define 
motion in extensional terms we shall have to go at it in a more round- 
about fashion, by first defining such qualities as priority and posterio- 
rity, along with such substances as space and time. 

The fourth category comprises universal properties. Universals, 
as we have had occasion to note, do not have universals inhering in 
them, but this by itself is not enough for a definition, for the same can 
be said of individuators and inherence. Thus, we can define a 
universal as follows: 

D6: Uy = Of. ~(7) Lea) (49) Lay): 
Universals are properties which inhere in something but do not have 
anything inhering in them. Individuators and inherence, on the 
other hand, do not inhere. 

An individuator is an individual which is located in a substance 
which does not inhere in anything: It must also be such that nothing 
inheres in it. 

DI: Va = df. ~(g*) (lea) (97) (Sy. Low) 

The sixth category is that of inherence itself. We have not yet 

defined it; what we defined in DI was the two-place predicate inheres in. 
Dil aah GY Ose Gaal lh 

That is, a is (an) inherence if it links two individuals which are rela- 

ted by the relation of inhering in. The old Nyadya view, as we saw, 

is that there is only one inherence, while later theorists like Raghu- 

natha Siromani held that there are many.® Either view is compatible 

with the above definition, however. 

The final category is that of absences. In Ny&ya an absence is 
always an absence of something or other, and this something is called 
the ‘‘counterpositive”’ of the absence. Thus, we shall define a two- 
place predicate is-an-absence-of, a relation which connects an absence 
to its counterpositive. 

D9: Age = df. (qx) (Lax? ~ Loss ~ Tix YY Ctx): 
Here the value of « constitutes the locus of the absence. E.g., in 
the stock example “‘there is no pot on the ground,” a@ = absence-of- 
pot, 6 = pot, and the ground is the value of x. 


SUBSTANCE 73 


It is an instructive exercise to fashion definitions such as the above, 
and as a way of understanding what philosophical problems the 
Naiyayika faces the exercise has value. Rather than continue to 
pile up definitions, however, I shall now revert to expository prose 
unclarified by symbols, hoping to have suggested by analogy in the 
last few pages the kind of rigor at which Nyaya definitions aim and 
the nature of the system which they are attempting to construct. 


IT. Substance. 


The list of 9 kinds of substance, though it appears a hodgepodge 
without any particular order, is justified by the fact that all individuals 
satisfying D3 can be most economically brought under these 9 kinds. 
Some of our philosophers in Jater times even thought the list could 
be reduced further, as we shall see. 

In the previous chapter we reviewed some of the arguments used 
by Naiyayikas to justify the adoption of continuants rather than 
events as the elements of the system. These were to the effect that 
chopping the universe into momentary flashes violated certain of the 
criteria of successful system making. E.g., Uddyotakara argued 
that since the relevance of the system requires the possibility that a 
person now bound may become liberated later, the Buddhist denial 
of continuants and especially of the substantial self robbed the enter- 
prise of its interest. I pointed out a possible criticism of this, that 
the Ny&ya treatment of change no more admits real process than the 
Buddhist’s. As we spell out the ramifications of Vaisesika substan- 
tialist ontology the reader will be able to come to his own conclusion 
on this fundamental question. 

We have already had occasion, at an early stage of construction, to 
distinguish “‘material’’ substances from immaterial ones (D5 above). 
The material substances are those capable of motion: according to 
Vaisesika theory, there are 5 kinds of material substance : (1) earth, 
(2) air, (3) fire, (4) water, and (5) internal organs. The 4 imma- 
terial substances are (6) time, (7) spatial direction, (8) akdsa, and 
(9) selves. 

The distinction between material and immaterial substances is 
only one of several distinctions among substances of which the Naiya- 
yika makes use. We can reconstruct the other distinctions in turn 
from this one. For example, the mobility of a substance is closely 
related to the question of its size in a broad sense. Naiydyikas divide 
substances into 3 broad classifications of size. Some substances are 
“atomic,” of minimal size; others are middle-sized; still others are 
ubiquitous. 


74 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


An atomic substance—an atom—is a material substance which 
inheres in nothing. Thus, there are atoms of earth, water, fire and 
air, and internal organs are atomic in size. 

The immaterial substances are all 4 of them ubiquitous (vibhu) 
so that “is a ubiquitous substance” is easily defined by ‘‘is an immate- 
rial substance.” The third class of substances, the middle-sized 
ones, are then definable as those which are neither atomic nor ubi- 
quitous. 

Again, substances may be either eternal or noneternal. The 
Vaigesika theory is that atomic and ubiquitous substances are eternal, 
while the middle-sized ones are not. 

A good deal of Vaisesika ontological discussion is taken up with 
questions about which sorts of substances are related by causal and 
other relations to which other sorts of individuals. In formal recons- 
truction we would be able to formulate the principles governing these 
connections only after we have satisfactorily identified by definition 
the members of each of the 9 kinds of substances. However, the 
identification of some of these kinds of substance—e.g., the discrimi- 
nation of earth atoms from watery ones—requires prior definition 
of certain notions drawn from the other categories, for earth atoms, 
to take our example again, are responsible for olfactory qualities 
while watery atoms are responsible for taste and cold touch. 
Orderliness of exposition here parts company with the logical order 
of such definitions. , 

A. Parts and Wholes: Before turning to the 9 kinds of substances 
in detail, we must attend to an extremely important aspect of Vaisesika 
ontology which ramifies implications over the whole system. ‘This 
is the theory about how the atomic, eternal substances combine to 
form middle-sized, noneternal substances of the sort we are acquainted 
with in everyday life. Closely related to the topic of causality dis- 
cussed in the previous chapter, the special character of the produc- 
tion of substances requires additonal detailed treatment, for it is 
over the Nydya-Vaisesika conception of unitary wholes, as opposed 
to aggregates or sums of qualities, that some of the sharpest polemics 
between Buddhists and Naiyayikas were waged. 

In Nyaya-Vaisesika a whole is produced from its parts, but is not 
constituted by them. Favourite examples in the literature are the 
pot which is produced from its halves, and the cloth which is produced 
from the threads which compose it. The pot and the cloth are not 
aggregates of sherds or threads; the pot is one unified substance, of 
medium dimension, with its own qualities and relations, a different 
entity from the sum or collection of its components. We may recall 


SUBSTANCE 75 


the importance of the Nyaya theory of the notion that new entities 
come into being through causal relations, as opposed to the Samkhya 
view that the effect is contained in the cause. 

The view finds its earliest recognition in the Mpdyasiitras, where 
Gautama infers the existence of unitary wholes from the fact that we 
can hold and pull things. If pots and cloths were merely aggregates 
of atomic entities they would sift through our fingers, for our bodies 
would also be aggregates of atoms. Furthermore, since atoms are 
too small to see, we should not be able to see substances at all. 

By Vatsyayana’s time the argument with the Buddhists on this 
issue is in full flower. VAtsyayana explains Gautama’s views at 
length; he also adds new arguments of his own. For instance, he 
attributes to an opponent the thesis that everything is an aggregate, 
and points out that ‘‘aggregate’” means a collection whose ultimate 
elements are not aggregates; thus, the thesis is self-contradictory, 
and some things are not aggregates. The implication is that if the 
opponent once admits that there are unities, he can be forced to admit 
that they may be middle-sized as well as atomic. 

Vatsyayana also is the first to clearly enunciate the doctrine that 
the whole resides in its parts by the relation of inherence. Inherence 
relates entities which are distinct from each other but nevertheless 
occur together; the whole cannot occur without its parts, but neverthe- 
less the parts and the whole are different things, so the relation is 
properly that of inherence. 

Uddyotakara characteristically lets out all stops on the issue by 
presenting some 14 different arguments against the theory and refut- 
ing each in turn. A good deal of his discussion, as that of Gautama 
and Vatsyayana before him, is given over to clarification of the 
theory: it is terribly easy to misrepresent the doctrine in question. 
That is because it is essentially contrary to our usual ways of speaking. 
We normally do assume that a whole is the sim of its parts rather than 
being a completely different, new thing. All three authors are able 
to detect in a number of the opposing arguments assumptions which 
are natural enough in themselves but which beg the point at issue. 
For example, Uddyotakara has an opponent say “‘the whole is identical 
with its parts, since they are ifs parts!’’, the point being that we do, 
in fact, normally take a thing’s parts as being components of the thing 
in such a fashion that part is an essential element in the very nature 
of the thing, a logically defining characteristic of it. Uddyotakara 
clarifies the doctrine here by distinguishing two senses of “‘part,”’ only 
one of which is related to the thing in the way common sense assumes. 
It is true that a spatially extended thing contains points in space as 


76 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


its parts, and if it did not it would not be what it is; but it is Nyaya 
doctrine that the threads are not related to the cloth in the way that 
the points in space occupied by the cloth are related to it. 

A serious objection to the theory is presented, however, hy Uddyo- 
takara’s last opponent, who argues that since the whole weighs the 
same as the sum of the parts they must be identical. Uddyotakara, 
in order to answer this objection, has to ofler the rather lame expla- 
nation that the difference in weight, though present, is so small as 
to be undetectable. Others, later—notably Vacaspati Misra and 
Sridhara—wrestled with this problem without notable success.® 

So far we have a picture of a theory of middle-sized continuants 
being defended by philosophical arguments against the more natural 
position which implicitly interprets pots and cloths as aggregates of 
smaller constituent parts and which paves the way for a view of the 
middle-sized perceptible objects of our everyday acquaintance as 
being constructions of our minds. Perhaps bothered by being put 
in the position of trying to refute the implications of common-sense 
intuition by intricate inferences, Samkarasvamin suggests that actually 
the theory under discussion is establishable just by paying attention 
to what we perceive. V4Atsyayana had already argued that we 
sometimes, at least, see wholes without seeing their parts; this happens 
when we inspect something of minimally perceptible size, whose 
parts are imperceptible atoms. But the rejoinder to Vatsyayana’s 
point might well be ‘‘how do you establish that there are imperceptible 
atoms beyond the minimal perceptibilium,” to which the answer 
must be that the theory holds it to be so. However, since the theory 
is what seems to need added bolstering, this answer is no help. 
Samkarasvamin offers a more pertinent claim to bolster the theory. 
He holds that we actually perceive the inherence in addition to the 
whole and parts. We do not know how he argued for this position, 
but it is clear enough that were it viable it would go quite a way to- 
ward easing the kinds of doubts, based on our ordinary habits of 
thinking, to which I referred above. For if we can see inherence we 
need not treat its existence as inferred on the basis of the theory alone; 
we know directly that it relates perceptible pots to perceptible pot- 
halves, and then we can infer that minimal ferceptibilia also have 
parts in which they inhere. (We shall see below why the Naiyayika 
is so anxious to maintain the existence of imperceptible atomic 
individuals. ) 

Dharmakirti, the great Buddhist logician, initiated a new phase 
in the discussion of the theory of the whole by introducing in his 
Pramdanavarttika 3 difficulties which, along with one or two more added 


SUBSTANCE 77 


later, provided a basis for argumentation between Buddhists and 
Naiyayikas reaching a climax in Udayana’s treatment in the Atmatatt- 
vaviveka° Most of the Buddhists and Naiyadyikas between Dharma- 
kirti’s time and that of Udayana discuss the issue, practically always 
using these difficulties as the springboard for their dicussions. 

Dharmakirti’s 3 difficulties are the following: (1) According to 
Nyaya-Vaigesika a person’s body is a whole of whichhis hand is a 
part. Now it is possible for the hand to move without the whole 
body moving, as we can easily see; yet, on the Nyaya theory, since 
the whole is a unity, it must move ifa part of it does, Therefore, we 
are led to a contradiction: the body both moves and does not move, 
(2) An extended object may be partly covered up by another one; 
yet, since the whole is unitary, it follows that it is both covered up 
and not covered up. (3) One whole, say a cloth, may be partly 
red and partly some other color. Yet, since the cloth is one thing, 
without parts, it is both red and not red at the same time. 

Udayana treats these 3 arguments plus 2 more. (4) A unitary 
thing can occupy only one place, for otherwise it will have several 
parts corresponding to the several places it occupies. Yet patently 
the wholes, such as pots and cloths, which the Naiyayika calls unitary 
do occupy several places. Therefore, one thing both does and does 
not occupy several places, which is contradictory. (5) When we 
look at a pot, we see only a part of it, namely its front side. Yet, if 
the pot is unitary, we must either see all or none of it, so to speak. 
So we must conclude that we both do and do not see all of the whole, 
which is contradictory. 

Answers to some or all of these are to be found essayed by Vacaspati 
Misra, Sridhara, and Udayana. As for (1), Vacaspati and Sridhara 
sharpen the point as follows. The Buddhist seems to think that 
when the hand moves the body must move, but this conclusion does 
not follow even though the body is unitary. The Buddhist’s point 
ought rather to be this: according to the Nyaya theory the whole 
inheres in the parts. Now inherence is defined as requiring insepara- 
bility (ayutasiddhi) between its relata. But if the hand (the part) 
moves while the body (the whole) does not, then surely this means 
that the hand is separable from the body, and thus inherence cannot 
relate them. But the Naiydyika answer is merely this: inseparability 
does not require that the two things so related have all the same quali- 
ties and motions, but rather only that they cannot exist separately. 
Even though the hand moves and the body does not, still wherever 
that hand is the body is too; thus, they are inseparable. 

There is some difficulty felt by our authors about what is being 


78 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


claimed in argument (2). Vacaspati thinks the suggestion is that 
since a part of the whole is covered up we cannot see the whole, because 
we cannot see that part. His answer to this is that, on the contrary, 
since we can see the other part, we can see the whole! Udayana 
picks up some words of Vacaspati’s in explaining that the term 
“cover up”’ refers necessarily to the dimension of what is a quality 
of a thing distinct from the thing itself. 

We shall see in more detail that the Naiyayikas propose to answer 
argument (3) by developing a theory according to which certain 
qualities do not pervade their loci, for example contact. Wacaspati 
answers (3) by saying that a thing becomes partially red and partially 
not by coming into contact with another substance—e. g., paint—but 
the contact is not locus-pervading and so does not color the whole 
surface of the thing. This leaves untouched the question whether 
one thing (e.g., a zebra) may be naturally striped. Udayana and 
others take a different tack, adopting the notion that there is a type 
of color called ‘‘variegated’’ (citra). Udayana’s answer to (3) is 
that no single thing can be and not be a given color at one and _ the 
same time, and if it is not red or green, etc...all over it is then varie- 
gated-color all over. 

The fourth argument has ramifications beyond the context of a 
discussion of wholes, since it relates to the attitudes of Buddhists and 
Naiyayikas on the problem of universals as well. The Buddhist 
finds it contradictory that one thing can occupy more than one place: 
universals, as well as wholes, are entities which in the Nyaya view do 
just that. The answer of the Naiyayika is just that things do come 
into contact with more than one thingatonce. If‘‘the place”’ occupied 
by x and “‘the place” occupied by » are different, and x and y» come 
into contact with z, z is to that extent occupying two different places. 
According to Nyaya-Vaisesika atomic theory atoms can do just that, 
namely, come into contact with several other atoms at once. 

Finally, argument (5) is answered in the fashion we have seen 
Vacaspati answering what he takes to be argument (2). 

A different question entirely is the following: under just which cir- 
cumstances do two entities combine to form a whole, as opposed to 
what the Naiyayikas calla ‘“‘loose aggregate’”’ (pracaya)? Surpri- 
singly little is said on this topic, which one would have supposed to 
be crucial and unavoidable for those constructing the theory. Pragas- 
tapada speaks to it when he discusses what happens when two pieces 
of cotton are rolled up into a ball. Here he thinks a new whole is 
produced. But he adds that outside of special instances such as this 
one the coming together of two middle-sized objects does not produce 


SUBSTANCE 79 


alarger one. Yet, this is hard to reconcile with the stock examples 
of pot-halves forming a pot, or threads a cloth. Vyomasgiva says that 
the human body is a final whole (antydvayavin)—it does not produce 
further wholes by contact with other bodies. 

A contemporary Nyaya scholar, Jitendranath Mohanty, has noticed 
this defect in Nyaya-Vaisesika theory and suggests an intriguing answer 
to it. He points out that since wholes are produced from contact 
among their parts, it might be thought that the Naiydyika believes 
there is a special kind of contact which produces wholes rather than 
mere aggregates. But, Mohanty argues, since even the parts of a 
whole, e.g., the threads in a cloth, can be separated, this distinction 1s 
not viable. Yet, the question must be answered: why, for example, 
is the potter’s handiwork a whole, but God’s handiwork, namely the 
universe, not a whole? Mohanty suggests that the answer might 
be located in a tacit Nyaya premise that he likens to a phenomeno- 
logical thesis, namely, that in Nydya everything is “intentional” 
with respect to other things, and so the pot-halves “‘call for’ a pot 
while the whole pot does not call for any larger entity. 

As it stands this analysis might seem to have little to recommend 
it; it appears as rather ad hoc appeal to anotion not to be found in the 
literature. Yet perhaps it should not be dismissed too easily, for 
we should remember the nature of the primitive relation with which 
we started, the self-linking connector. To just which things does an 
entity link itself? And why those things and not something else ? 
In a sense the whole Vaisesika system may be taken as a compendious 
answer to that very question, for it details the “‘rules’’ of combinations 
among the individuals allowed into the system and of those entities 
which the elementary individuals combine to produce or otherwise 
form. If the self-linking connector is an “‘intentional’’ notion, and 
it seems hard to see how else it can be interpreted, then one may well 
admit that the point of view carried through within this system is 
permeated with the sort of ‘“‘phenomenological”’ orientation Mohanty 
is concerned to identify. Even so, the fact remains that the Naiyayikas 
pay scant attention to the problem of how one is to tell a “final” 
whole from one that is not. 

B. Atomic Theory and Theory of ‘Cooking’: Atoms are conceived 
in Vaigesika as small, eternal, uncaused material substances. Accord- 
ing to the authors of the Saras atoms are too small to be perceived; 
they must be inferred from their effects. Kanada says they may be 
without qualities —temporarily “‘bare particulars.’’ Some modern 
writers have suggested that they are to be likened to extensionless, 
mathematical points. Harisatya Bhattacharya warns us not to equate 


80 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


these atoms with their Greek counterparts. “They are neither gross 
matter as we ordinarily suppose, nor infinitesimally small bits of ex- 
tended gross matter, as the early Greeks supposed.’!2 And Faddegon 
writes “Vaisesikas...have never tried to explain the qualitative 
changes of compound things as results of quantitative changes.. .in 
the atoms. .; their atoms are not absolutely hard corpuscula, but are 
mathematical points.’’ 18 

Gautama maintains that an atom is indivisible, and considers the 
objection that since it can be penetrated by akafa, which is all-pervasive, 
it must be divisible. Gautama’s answer is to redefine the all-pervasi- 
veness of the dkdafa: its all-pervasiveness consists not in its occupying 
every point in space, but rather in its being in contact with everything. 

Buddhists of approximately the same period, it is interesting to note, 
were engaged in very similar discussions, for there were certain Bud- 
dhists who believed, as did the Vaigesikas, in the existence of atoms. 
The most frequently heard objection to atoms is to be found in the 
Nydyasiitras: since atoms are admitted to have contact with things, 
and since they are material, it is permissible to infer that like other 
material entities in contact with each other the contact occurs at only 
one point on their surface; but if so, atoms are not indivisible after 
all, since that point of contact is discriminable as a proper part of 
the whole atom. The answer is predictable: if so, an infinite regress 
will result. Somewhere in the series of entities of smaller and smaller 
dimension there must be a limit, and it is entities of the smallest size, 
that are to be called ‘“‘atoms.’’ Candramati has a special term for that 
size, meaning literally ‘‘spherical” (pdrimandalya), to distinguish the 
dimension of atoms from “‘atomic dimension” (anutva), which is found 
in other very small things. 

This whole discussion is as usual developed at length by Uddyota- 
kara, with special attention to the problem of conceiving contact among 
atoms which is not contact at a point on the atom’s surface. He 
begins by pointing out that contact is a quality inhering in two subs- 
tances—say, two atoms—but that in general qualities do not increase 
the size of the substances in which they inhere. E.g., the red color 
of a rose does not make the rose any bigger. Neither, says Uddyota- 
kara, does the contact between the two atoms. Now you may ask— 
why is it that two material substances, when they come into contact, 
produce a larger whole? The answer is not that the contact adds 
dimension to the substances, but rather that two material substances 
cannot occupy the same place. Contact is a quality inhering in 
pairs, not a link between the elements of the pairs; thus the question as 
to where the contact links them need not arise. In fact, Uddyotakara 


SUBSTANCE 81 


implies that atoms have no sides, so that the situation corresponding 
to the usual thought-picture of a circular object with 6 circles imping- 
ing on it on various sides cannot arise either. Atoms may be “‘spheri- 
cal,” but it is not a kind of sphericity which allows something to come 
into contact with one side of it and not with the other at the same time. 

By Udayana’s time the discussion appears a good deal more techni- 
cal. There has now developed the distincticn between two kinds 
of contact called ‘‘locus-pervading’’ and “‘non-locus-pervading”’. 
Udayana has a Buddhist argue that there are no atoms, since the con- 
tact between atoms is neither locus-pervading nor non-locus-pervading 
and the dichotomy is exhaustive. According to the Buddhist, if the 
contact were non-locus-pervading then the atoms would have parts 
and be divisible. Ifit were locus-pervading then when an atom x is in 
contact with another atom y, x can have no further contact with any 
other atom z, whereas it is clear that if this were the case nothing would 
ever get produced from atoms. The idea is this: if contact is locus- 
pervading, then two atoms in contact will occupy precisely the same 
extent in space or none at all; thus, no spreading out in space can 
result from combination of atoms, and as we shall see it is from the 
combination of atoms that middle-sized objects eventually arise. 

Udayana’s reply is a clever ad hominem against the Buddhists: 
if this argument were allowed to refute the existence ofatoms, a parallel 
argument would equally refute the existence of ideas (which the 
Buddhists believe to be existents rather than atoms). Udayana’s 
positive attitude to the matter seems to come to this: contactisa quality 
of certain pairs of things. We know this to be true from experience. 
Butitis not a kind of physical something which sits between the bottom 
of the cup and the top of the kitchen table; rather, it is just a quality 
which qualifies the pair. Since it is not necessary to bring in discrimina- 
tion of parts of two ordinary sized objects to be able to talk about their 
contact, there is no difficulty in speaking in the same fashion about 
atoms. As for the question of how two atoms in contact can occupy 
more space than one of them alone, the answer is just that they do: 
again, we see that they do in the world of macro-objects, and there 
is no reason to deny that it happens in the realm of atoms. 

Is contact between atoms, then, locus-pervading or not? It is 
not. “When, therefore, one atom is simultaneously conjoined with 
others, the conjunctions are distinguished from one another and thus 
believed to be partial, not because of their location in the different 
parts of the central atom, for the atom is ex hypothesit impartite, but 
because they are found to be spatially limited through association with 
different directions or points of space (digbheda).’44 The atom does 


82 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


not “‘occupy”’ space it seems, but becomes related to spatial directions. 
We shall return to a more detailed discussion of space in a short while. 

Turning to another point, let us ask the Naiyayika why it is that the 
atom must be imperceptible? Why not just say that the smallest 
perceptible individual is the atom, that it is with it that the regress 
stops, and that we do not need to go on to postulate imperceptible 
entities? Kanada seems to have thought that the eternal character 
of atoms depended upon their imperceptibility, since every percep- 
tible entity is destructible. We have seen that it is important for the 
value theory of Hinduism that the world should be beginningless and 
continue through the cosmic pauses between cycles; atoms must there- 
fore be counted eternal, Uddyotakara was aware of a theory, perhaps 
actually held by someone, identifying the minimal perceptibilium 
with the atom, but he rejects the theory on the ground that a minimal 
perceptibilium can be broken into parts, since it is perceptible. It is 
not until Raghunatha Siromani in Navya-Nyaya that this apparently 
reasonable identification is espoused by a known Naiyayika.l® 

A fundamental problem for the Vaigesikas was to explain how imper- 
ceptible atoms could combine to produce perceptible individuals. 
One might suppose that this would not have been a great problem: 
surely if one takes enough things below the threshold of perception 
and sets them beside each other he will produce something perceptible. 
There is textual evidence to suggest that some of the early Vaisesikas 
held this straightforward view.1* Bhasarvajfia presumably does also, 
judging from the remarks of his follower Apararkadeva. But the 
preponderance of extant Nyaya and Vaisesika texts come down in 
favor of a more complicated theory. 

According to this theory, detailed most notably in the commeniaries 
of Vyomagiva, Sridhara, and Udayana on Pragastapada’s Padartha- 
dharmasamgraha, two atoms combine to form an imperceptible dyad, 
but it takes three dyads to form the minimal perceptibilium (trasarenu 
or truft). Several motives seem to incline these writers toward this 
cumbersome theory. 

Praéastapada says that the dimension of a whole is produced by 
one or another of three things: (a) the dimension of its parts, (b) the 
looseness of the contact between its parts, or (c) the sheer numerical 
diversity of its parts. Now an atom has the dimension called ‘‘small 
size’ (anutva). Suppose a minimal perceptibilium were produced 
by three atoms combining, and its dimension produced according to 
(a), that is, from the dimension of its parts. Then, since a quality 
can only produce another quality of the same type as the first, the 
‘small,’ but 


¢ 


dimension of the minimal perceptibilium will also be 


SUBSTANCE 83 


2 


the minimal perceptibilium is by hypothesis of “‘large,”’ i.e., percep- 
tible, size. Loose contact, (b), isnot possibleamong atoms. Thus by 
elimination the cause of the large size of the minimal perceptibilium 
is (c), the number of its parts. 

This argumentation is surely defeasible, but even ifit is accepted 
the conclusion needed does not follow at all obviously. Why should 
not the number 3, qualifying 3 atoms, be the cause of large size in 
the minimal perceptibilium, which would then be analyzed as com- 
posed of 3 atoms ? The answer is that experience tells us, not only that 
any gross object has smaller parts, but also that every such object 
has as parts things which are themselves products. If the minimal 
perceptibilium is a collection of 3 atoms, then it violates this rule. 
Thus, it must have as its component parts things which are themselves 
composed. 

The resulting theory satisfies these various rules about causation 
and size: dyads are postulated, which have atoms as parts but which 
are not perceptible; thus, these dyads are of the ‘‘small’ dimension, 
The minimal perceptibilium is then defined as the individual produced 
by 3 of these dyads in combination. Why 3, rather than 2? The 
answer is apparently that the number 3 is the smallest number which 
can be associated with the “large”? dimension. Then the causes of 
this triple dyad are its parts, which are themselves composed accord- 
ing to the rule enunciated in the previous paragraph, but since these 
dyads are not of the “larger” size their parts need not be composite; 
thus, they may be the atoms,17 

It becomes clear, then, that the motivation for this complex theory 
lies in the intention to honor certain supposedly empirically ascertain- 
able rules—that size is produced by the size, form of contact, or number 
of the parts of a thing; that a quality can only produce another of 
itsownkind; and that the parts ofa perceptible thing must be products. 
What Bhasarvajfia, or at any rate Apararka, contends is that at least 
one of these rules is not given in experience but postulated as theory, 
and as such does not have to be honored. The rule Apararka rejects 
is the one about a quality only producing another of its own kind; 
he sees no reason why something of a small size cannot produce a 
thing of large, perceptible size. Thus, for him the argument reviewed 
above does not get started. 

What both Pragastapada and Apararkadeva agree on, at any rate, 
is that there are atoms and they combine to form compound subs- 
tances, eventually the everyday macro-objects of our experience. 
These atoms are eternal and in themselves changeless. Yet, the 
objects of which they are the ultimate constituents are constantly 


84 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


changing. It is this fact of constant change which leads the Buddhist 
to his theory of the momentariness of all real things. How is the 
Naiyayika going to explain change consistently with his hypothesis 
that the changing substance remains constant? What is the Nyaya- 
Vaigesika solution to the hoary problem of the one and the many, 
stability and change? 

The identity of a substance through time is presumably to be based, 
in Nyaya-Vaisesika, on the identity of the atoms which are ultimate 
constituents of the substance. If this kind of identity through time 
is not maintained, the Buddhist point is fully made, for every moment 
a new substance replaces the previous one. Thus, the substance’s 
essence must be located ultimately in unchanging material, and in 
Vaisesika this material consists of atoms. But if the atoms are un- 
changing what is the source of the change undergone by the substance 
those atoms constitute ? 

The answer is that the qualities of a substance may change while 
the substance persists. But it takes some doing to make this theory 
viable. As we are about to see, the details of this part of the theory 
are among the few matters over which Nyaya and Vaisesika tradi- 
tionally part company. 

The stock example of the kind of change to which these divergent 
accounts are addressed is the baking of a pot. Indeed, the whole 
process of qualitative change involving the atoms is referred to in 
Sanskrit as paka, literally “cooking.” An unbaked pot is (depending 
on the kind of clay used) black, say, but after it comes out of the oven 
it is red all over, both outside and in. Yet, ex hypothesi it is the same 
atoms making the same pot. ‘“‘Cooking’’ does not only affect change 
in color, mind you;it applies equally to all sorts of changes of quality, 
including the gestation and maturation of plants and animal organisms. 
Any change which comes about through application of heat is classi- 
fied under pdaka. 

The Vaigesika theory, found in the Vaisesikasitras themselves, is 
that when a pot is baked the heat of the fire destroys the contact of 
the atoms constituting the pot and immediately thereafter destroys 
the black color. For a moment, then, the atoms exist without any 
color at all. But immediately the heat produces a new, red color in 
each atom, and they then combine so as eventually to reform the pot 
with its new red color. This theory of Vaisesika is called pilupaka- 
vdda (‘‘the doctrine of cooking atoms’’) for the change takes place in 
each isolated atom. 

Again this counterintuitive theory is called forth by what Vaigesikas 
take to be a highly confirmed empirical generalization. This genera- 


SUBSTANCE 85 


lization is that qualities of wholes are produced by the qualities of 
their parts. The Vaisesika thinks this law must be reflected in the 
system, while the Naiyayika thinks it is not, as it stands, a law at all. 
If it is a law, the Vaigesika’s conclusion is understandable — the 
pot can only be red if its ultimate parts — the atoms — are first 
red. But why does the Vaisesika think that the pot must disintegrate 
in order that the qualities of its atoms must change? The answer 
is that the Vaisesika is aware of what he takes to be another empirical 
law, which is that when fire pervades all the atoms of a substance the 
substance gets completely burned up so that it cannot reconstitute 
itself. Since wood burns, why not a pot under the same conditions ? 
The Vaigesika concludes that the conditions cannot be the same, that 
the heat does not completely penetrate the pot while baking as it does 
the piece of firewood. 

Why do the heated atoms come out of the oven red rather than, say, 
yellow ? It is a result, say our theorists, of the dispositions of indivi- 
dual atoms to develop a certain color upon being subjected to heat of 
a specific intensity. Indeed, it would seem that according to Udayana 
all atoms have these dispositional characteristics such that although 
normally not exhibited they will appear whenever the atom is sub- 
jected to a certain amount of heat. 

Does this Vaigesika theory meet the Buddhist charge that all change 
is destruction of identity? Not really, one might contend. The 
Nyaya-Vaigesikas admit that a whole is a completely different thing 
from its parts. But according to the above theory, when qualitative 
change occurs the whole disappears temporarily, not to speak of the 
pot-halves, their constituents, etc. Under these circumstances what 
sense can be made of the Vaisesika thesis that the pot persists through 
out? In fact, all that persists are the atoms; but the atoms are by 
the Vaisesika’s own admission not the pot. Thus, whenever a quality 
changes through cooking the substance is, pace Vaisesika, destroyed 
and a number of moments later another pot is created. Indeed the 
Vaisesikas spend some of their time calculating the number of moments 
it takes for such destruction and creation to be completed — some 
say it takes 9 moments, others 10, etc. 

Which brings us to what the Naiyayika, as opposed to the Vaige- 
sika, holds to happen in cooking. He calls his theory pitharapaka. 
According to it the whole remains intact while the change occurs. 
The Nyaya defenders have no difficulty in finding trouble with the 
Vaisesika theory, and I have tried to show above why the Nyaya 
theory, if otherwise tenable, is an important element in the school’s 
riposte against Buddhist flux-theory. Their only problem is to 


86 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


show how the supposed facts that motivated the pilupakavddin in his 
unprofitable theory are to be properly construed. 

These ‘‘facts’? were two: one, that fire burns up wood but not 
pots, and two, that the production of qualities in a whole arises from 
the qualities of its parts. Nyaya admits that both of these claims 
are true, but argues that they do not entail the Vaisgesika theory. 
The Vaigesika thinks that since fire does not burn up a pot and yet 
manages to change the pot’s qualities, both inside and outside, the 
solution to the puzzle must lie in the pot’s temporary disintegration, 
so as to allow the fire to get at the atoms. Nydaya points out, however, 
that a wet pot is porous, so that the heat gets in among the components 
of the pot and thus affects its inside as well asits surfaces. As for the 
second claim, Nyaya admits that the quality of the whole is a function 
of the quality of its parts, but sees no reason to admit that this rule 
holds in the specific case of the production of new qualities in atoms, 
which have no parts. And if the Vaisesika will admit that the law 
fails in the case of atoms, as it must according to its own theory, then 
it should be willing also to admit that new qualities may arise in atoms 
even when they are conjoined with others in a continuant.18 

C. Earth, Water, Fire and Air: We can now turn to consider the 
special characteristics of each of the 9 kinds of substance. A great 
amount of space in the early manuals of Vaigesika, notably the 
Vaisesikasiitras and the Paddarthadharmasamgraha, is largely taken up 
with specifying the kinds of qualities each sort of substance may dis- 
play. 

In treating each of these 4 substances, our philosophers characteris- 
tically list the kinds of qualities a substance may have and classify 
the modes in which the substance is displayed in the world. We 
may summarize the standard account of the qualities of these 4 in the 
following table: 


earth water Sire air 
(has) color x x x 
taste x x 
smell x 
touch x x x x 
number x x x x 
contact x x x x 
disjunction x x x x 
farness and nearness x x x x 
size x x x x 


SUBSTANCE 87 


separateness x x x x 
weight x x 

fluidity x x x 

viscosity x 

impetus (vega) x x x 
elasticity x 


In addition, each of these 4 substances is taken to have its peculiar, 
differentiating quality. Earth is the unique locus of smell, as will be 
seen from the table. Water is the peculiar locus of cold touch, that 
is, it causes all experiences of cold touch in, e.g., ice and snow as well 
as running water. Likewise, fire causes all experience of heat as 
grasped through the skin. Air’s peculiar quality is tangibility which 
is neither hot nor cold and is not produced by cooking (apakaja). 

Air presents particular problems. The need for postulating its 
existence over and beyond that of space apparently stems from the 
experience of wind, and some translators have rendered the term 
vdyu as ““wind.”? Kanada holds that we know of the existence of air 
only by inference, while we directly perceive the other 3 kinds of 
middle-sized substance. This reflects an ancient predilection of our 
philosophers to define perception in terms of visibility primarily, so 
that possession of color is taken to be a necessary condition for percep- 
tibility in general. Jayanta appears to think that it is a Vaisesika, not 
a Naiyayika, tenet that air is imperceptible. Vyomasiva argues, as 
against tradition, that air is perceptible, and though a Vaisesika author 
he sets aside the authority of Kanada which makes possession of color 
a necessary condition of perceptibility. However, Vyomasiva’s 
view is ignored by the other commentators on Pragastapada, who 
develop Kanada’s suggestions about the basis for inferring the exis- 
tence of air. 

Air is to be inferred on several grounds. (1) As we have seen, 
water produces cold touch, fire produces hot touch, earth produces 
touch but only when “‘cooking’’ has taken place, so that its touch is 
Indirectly produced by fire. Now since the touch of the wind is 
neither hot nor cold and is not produced by cooking, there must bea 
substance in which that kind of touch inheres, and that substance is 
air. (2) The mechanics of the production of the sound of the wind 
necessitates the postulation of a substance against which clouds, etc., 
can strike, so as to produce sound waves which eventually carry the 
wind sounds to our ears. (3) There must be a substance to hold 
up clouds and the things blown about in the wind, and that substance 
must have touch and velocity (or impetus, vega); thus space itself 


88 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cannot be the substance in question, and air needs to be postulated. 
(4) An argument from the quivering motion of trees in the windis 
also found. 

Objects composed of these 4 elements are first divided into two sorts, 
eternal and noneternal. The eternal objects are the atoms, discussed 
above. Prasastapada goes on systematically to classify the kinds of 
noneternal objects for each of the 4 substances. Thus, nonatomic 
earth is of 3 kinds: bodics, the organ of smell, and middle-sized 
objects produced from the earth atoms. Similar divisions, and appro- 
priate subdivisions, are offered for the other 3 substances. 

1. Bodies: Pragastapada distinguishes bodies into two main 
sorts, wombborn and non-wombborn. Among the latter kind are to 
be classed both the bodies of very low forms of life — insects, plants 
—and also the bodies of the gods and semidivinities recognized in 
Hindu lore. Such bodies may be made of any of the 4 substances. 
The lower forms of life have earthy bodies, but the gods may have 
watery, fiery, or airy bodies depending on the part of the universe in 
which they reside. 

As for the wombborn bodies , they are of two types: viviparous and 
oviparous. Udayana thinks that plants should be included as a 
third sort, while Pragastapada relegates plants to a place among the 
lower forms. 

According to Kanada and Gautama the animal body is composed 
exclusively ofearth. But, of course, this theory flies in the face of the 
evidence, for the body breathes, is hot and cold, contains blood, etc. 
Our philosophers thus had to defend their view against the more 
intuitive theory that the body is composed of several elements in 
combination.’® The authors of the sitras merely state the thesis; 
it is left for later writers to defend it. Pragastapada does not raise the 
question. Vyomagiva is perhaps the first to expand on the topic. 
He argues that the body is composed of earth only, not of all 5 elements, 
because if it were composed of all 5 elements, it would display the 
specific qualities of each of the 5. The body is not luminous, like 
fire, nor is it always cold and hot to the touch; but ifit were composed 
of atoms of all 5kinds it would display all these features constantly. 
Vyomasiva admits, however, that the specific qualities of the other 
elements are occasionally found in bodies, and explains this by saying 
that whereas earthy compounds constitute the inherence cause of a 
body, contacts with other elements enter in as noninherence and 
instrumental causes, and in this qualified sense the combined element 
theory has some truth to it. 

The Nyaya-Vaisesika conception ofa body excludes the sense organs 


SUBSTANCE 89 


of vision, audition, smell, touch, and taste. According to Gautama 
the body is the locus of the sense organs. Realizing that this relation- 
ship is a puzzling one, Vatsyayana explains it. ‘The body is the locus 
of motions caused by desires and aversions in the self inhabiting that 
body. Whatever helps or hinders the sense organs does so by its effect 
on the bodily members through which the organs operate, and the 
pains and pleasures experienced through the senses are experienced in 
the body. For al] these reasons the body is the locus of the senses. 

2. Sense Organs: From what has just been said it becomes appa- 
rent that a sense organ is not to be identified with the part of the body 
through which it operates. Each sense organ is held to be composed 
of one of the 5 elements. The organ of smell is compused entirely 
of earth, the organ of taste of water, the crgan of touch of air, the organ 
of sight of fire, and the organ of hearing of dkdéfa or ‘‘ether.”’ In 
the Nydyasiitras we hear of an opposing point of view according to 
which all the senses are made of one element,?° but this is rejected 
with the argument that were itso, one would not be able to see without 
hearing, etc. 

This theory about the peculiar constitution of each sense organ has 
implications for the theory of perception which we shall reserve for 
the section on perception below. For example, each sense organ, 
constituted by its unique element, can grasp objects composed exclu- 
sively or primarily of that kind of substance, which is why we do not 
see without light (fire) being present, cannot taste air, etc. Another 
topic of discussion in this literature concerns whether there are one 
or two eyes. This would seem a silly controversy if it pertained to 
the eyeballs, for anyone can see that each normal human body has 
two of them. But the Naiyayikas hold that the sense organs them- 
selves are imperceptible, unlike their bodily loci. 

Though Kanada counts the sense organs as 5, it would seem that 
the number ought properly to be 6, since the internal organ is a 
sense organ, grasping kinaesthetic sensations. Dignaga argues this, 
and pokes fun at Vatsyayana’s uneasy attempt to remain true to the 
Siitra while admitting that the internal organ is indeed an organ.?! 
Later writers refer to the “‘external sense organs,’ meaning those 5 
which grasp objects external to the body. 

3. Gold: Prasastapada says there are 4 kinds of fiery objects: 
first the fire and light we find here on earth, secondly heavenly fire, 
i.e., the sun, thirdly the fire in organic bodies, inferred from their 
heat, and fourthly mineral fire, namely gold. He quotes the Vedas 
in support of this last theory that gold is a fiery object. Wyomagiva 
supplies one argument: whereas properly earthy objects becomegaseous 


90 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


when heated sufficiently, gold melts and becomes fluid. This, however, 
does not explain why gold should be brought under fire rather than 
one of the other elements. Sridhara supplies further information. 
He contrasts butter, which is earthy, with gold, which is fiery. When 
butter is heated it eventually disappears—becomes a gas—while this 
does not happen to gold. What remains when gold is heated is pure 
fire. It is fire for it is self-illuminating; put molten gold into the dark 
and it will light the place up. Sridhara admits that this pure fire 
which is gold is mixed with particles in the solid state: that is 
why it has weight and why it does not in that state illuminate itself. 

D. Akasa or Ether: Just how to translate the term dkdfa isa difficult 
question. Since dkdsa is taken in Nyaya-Vais esika to transmit sound- 
waves the term “‘ether’’ comes tomind, Faddegon, however, suggests 
“physical space.’ Yet, dkafa is not exactly ubiquitous, since it 
does not penetrate atoms of the first 4 substances, whereas, of course, 
space as normally conceived does. Furthermore, the Nyaya-Vaisesi- 
kas, as opposed to Bhatta Mimamsakas and Vaiyakaranas, believe 
that dka@fa cannot be perceived, whereas space, one might suppose, 
canbe. The main difficulty with translating akdfa as space, however, 
is that there is another substance answering to “‘space,”? namely dik. 
We shall come to it in due course. For clarity’s sake, let us leave 
akafa untranslated. 

The proof of dkdfa’s existence is exclusively from the facts about 
sounds. For reasons we shall review below, the Nyaya-Vaisesika view, 
and his alone, is that sound isa quality, amember of the second cate- 
gory. Once that is established it is easy to infer the existence of dkdsa, 
for every quality must have a substance as its locus and all the other 
8 kinds of substance can be eliminated; or at least so most Naiyayikas 
believe. Sound cannot be a quality of earth, water, fire, or air, since 
it is found where those substances are absent. It cannot bea quality 
of the internal organ, for it is apprehended by an external sense organ. 
The reasons why sound cannot be a quality of time or space are some- 
what more complex and rather less convincing. The Naiyayika argues 
first that sound is a specific quality (v¢fesaguna) like touch, taste, color, 
and smell, since it is grasped by one sense organ only. Granting that, 
he next points out that time and space have no specific qualities. 
Just what isa ‘“‘specific’? quality ?#% It is one which is locatable in, 
or originates in, a particular place and time. Since time and space 
are inclusive of all particular times and places, they. have no specific 
qualities: thus, they are ruled out as the locus of sound. Finally, 
selves are not the loci of sounds, since none of the qualities of selves 
are apprehendable by external sense organs. Therefore, an addi- 


SUBSTANCE 91 


tional substance must be inferred to be the locus of sound, and that 
substance is akdsa, 

There are defects in the above reasoning. For example, the term 
visesaguna, “specific quality,”’ is applied not only to the sensible qualities 
but also viscidity and fluidity, which are likewise locatable in a parti- 
cular place and time. Vyomagiva notes this.24 More serious is this 
point: according to Nyaya dkdsa is single and is in contact with every- 
thing at once. So are time and space. Why, then, is it that dkasa 
can have specific qualities while time and space cannot ? 

Again, the reasoning that excludes selves as the substrata of sounds 
is not entirely convincing, particularly if we notice that according to 
all but the earliest Naiyayikas God is one of the selves. Why can’t 
we say that all the qualities of our selves are psychical, but that some 
of God’s qualities are unlike the familiar ones of pleasure, pain, etc. ? 
Some of the more imaginative among our authors modified the tradi- 
tional ontology and eliminated dkdfa asa distinct substance. Just 
who was to pioneer these unorthodox notions is not clear. Aparar- 
kadeva identifies space and time with God, but does not seem to 
question akdsa’s separate existence.”> The first writer who clearly identi- 
fies akafa with time and space is, surprisingly, Sivaditya in the Sapta- 
padaérthi — a rather unoriginal work in other respects. One may 
suspect that its author transmitted this theory from an earlier source. 
But Sivaditya does not follow Apararka in identifying space-time- 
Gkasa with God. It is Raghunatha Siromani who does this.? 

Akasa has 6 qualities. It has number — the number one, since 
itissingle. Ithasasize. It is separate from other things, comes into 
contact and becomes disjoined from things. And, of course, it has 
sound. The auditory organ is composed of dkafa. We shall discuss 
the mechanics of the transmission of sounds through dkasa below. 
Briefly, a sound produces waves which in turn produce others until 
the series arrives at that portion of the ubiquitous daka@fa_ which is en- 
closed in the auditory cavity; then the sound is heard. 

E. Space and Time: Philosophical scholars sometimes divide 
theories of space and time into two main divisions: absolute and rela- 
tional.?”7,. The Nyaya-Vaisesika theory is relational, though it might 
at first glance seem otherwise. Space and time are not viewed either 
as receptacles in which objects move or as continua of fixed points 
constituting extension. Rather, they are inferred, or for some Naiya- 
yikas perceived, as the necessary relating principles among physical 
things which enables those things to be related by relations such as 
being above or below, before or after, farther or nearer, etc. 

The philosophically challenging question about space and time is 


92 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


how do we come to know about them, and are they independent of 
our knowing them? ‘The Nyaya-Vaiéesika has no doubt about the 
last question: they certainly are independent existents. About their 
cognition there is, however, lack of unanimity. Kanada, Praégasta- 
pada, and Uddyotakara hold that space and time must be inferred 
while Jayanta, siding with the Mimamsakas on this point, finds them 
to be perceptible. Jayanta’s argument on this score is simply that since 
we perceive things in space we perceive space in addition to things, and 
likewise since we perceive things at times we perceive time in addition 
to the things. ‘The answer of the other faction is, first, that space 
and time cannot he perceptible since they lack a necessary condition 
of perceptibility, and that secondly, what is perceived is not space or 
time but rather the things in relations (spatial and temporal )to cne 
another. 

The condition of perceptibility which is said to be lacking in the case 
of space and time is possession of color. In discussing perception 
below we shall return to this requirement; Jayanta merely dismisses 
it as a mistake. More interesting is the way in which Prasastapada 
and company propose to explain the inference to the existence of 
space and time. Bhaduri has summarized this insightfully.*® The 
account is roughly as follows. We perceive pairs of objects with quali- 
ties of remoteness and nearness — spatial or temporal — inhering 
in them. Furthermore, we are able to make comparative judgments 
of this sort — we can say that A is farther from B than from (C;, etc. 
What enables us to make this judgment? It is the greater number 
of contacts between individuals spread out between A and B than 
between 4 and C. For example, the ink bottle is nearer to the pen 
than to the radiator, that is,the number of contacts present in a line 
from the ink bottle to the radiatur is greater than the number from 
the ink bottle to the pen. Only thus can the notion of “greater dis- 
tance” be explained. But when we look for the individuals whose 
contacts must be counted up, we do not find any belonging to the 
other categories — or at least we do not find the right number. 
Between the ink bottle and the pen a book (say) is situated, while 
between the ink bottle and the radiator there is just space ! Thus, 
in order to provide the material to explain these comparative judg- 
ments we must postulate an intervening series of entities, and these 
are spatial. As Bhaduri puts it, contact is not a transitive relation, 
and space is introduced to‘‘make it transitive’’®® and more generally 
to relate two otherwise unconnected things by a series of contacts 
postulated to lie between. 

The example just given relates to spatial discrimination. A some- 


SUBSTANCE 93 


what similar argument holds for the existence of time, except that in 
order to explain temporal discriminations we need to bring in reference 
to a standard temporal unit, which Vacaspati proposes may be found 
in the standard experience of a single day —i.e., of a sunset and 
sunrise. Then the notion of “older than” may be explicated as “thas 
been connected with a larger number of days than.”’ The inference 
proceeds through the question: what connects an object to a day? 
The answer given by the Vaisesika is : time. That is, to say that A 
is older than B is to say that there is an entity, time, which connects 
the sun and A, as well as the sun and B, every day that A and B have 
existed, and that the number of such connections in the case of A has 
been greater than in the case of B. 

Space and time, like dkaéa and a self, are held to be ubiquitous sub- 
stances, uniformly present everywhere and so eternal. This may 
sound like the receptacle theory, but it is actually very different. 
As we have seen, the work that time and space do is done, not by the 
single, ubiquitous substances, but rather by the particular spatial 
or temporal relations which connect pairs of objects. Why not say, 
then, that there are as many spaces and times as there are relations 
of this sort ? The answer is that when Vaisesika says that there is only 
one space and one time, he is denying that any two objects in the 
universe cannot be related temporally and spatially. If there were 
more than one space, then A in one space could not be connected to 
B, in the other.*° Thus, space and time are continua of relations 
potentially available to relate any objects ‘anywhere’? and ‘‘any- 
when.” 

As we have already seen, later theorists found it economical to 
identify space and time with each other and with akdsa and God. 
Since all of these are ubiquitous substances with different functions, it 
is tempting to reduce them to one substance with manifold functions. 

F, The Internal Organ: The last two substances in the list are 
involved in explanation of psychical rather than physical events. 
This difference does not make them members of a different category, 
however; it merely means that some of their qualities are of a quite 
different sort from those of the physical substances. 

The word manas is cognate to English “mind,” but is normally used 
in Indian philosophy to denote, not an actively cognitive faculty, but 
a passive internal organ, incapable of any such activity as thought, 
intrinsically unconscious. 

The internal organ, as remarked before, acts as a sixth, internal 
sense organ, receiving kinaesthetic sensations and passing them on to 
the self. It also has a second function : it acts as a sort of secretary 


94 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


for the knowing self, passing on one sensation at a time so that the self 
will not be swamped with too many data at once. In short, it is 
appealed to in order to explain the fact of attending, as well as the fact 
that knowing takes time and does not occur all in an instant. The 
theory which explains both of these facts is that the internal organ 
must contact an external sense organ in order that the data grasped by 
that organ can be passed along to the seat of consciousness, and that 
the time the self takes to synthesize its awareness of an object from the 
data gathered by the senses is due to the time it takes for the internal 
organ to get into and out of contact with each of the several organs, 

There are indefinitely many selves in Nyaya-Vaigesika, and each 
one, when embodied, has one internal organ connected to it. Internal 
organs are mobile, minute entities; their motion is caused by the voli- 
tion of the self to which they belong. The facts of yogic experience 
are for the most part explained with the help of this theory about the 
internal organ. A yogi is one whocan move his internal organ around 
in remarkable fashion. Yoga, indeed, is explained by Kanada as the 
withdrawal of the internal organ from contacts with the external 
sense organs; this is evidently a description of samadhi or meditation. 
Liberation itself, beinga never-ending state of samadhi, necessarily 
involves absence of these contacts. In addition, yogis are able to move 
their internal organs in and out of their bodies at will, which enables 
the yogi to have supernormal knowledge of things beyond, the ken 
of ordinary people, as well as an occasion to inhabit more than one 
body intermittently, etc. 

As an aid in explaining certain facts of the psychic experience of 
ordinary people the internal organ is also invaluable. It is peculiarly 
involved in memory, intuition, dream, as well as perceptions of plea- 
sure and pain, apprehension of desires, etc. We shall discuss memory 
and intuition, as well as dream, in their epistemological aspects. We 
may only pause to note that the Naiydyikas, as other philosophers in 
India, have thought quite a bit about dream and sleep. Sivaditya 
says that sleep occurs when an internal organ of an ordinary person is 
brought to rest out of contact with a sense organ. There area variety 
of causes mentioned which produce the dream-awarenesses through 
an internal organ at rest, and as we shall see there is a question raised 
whether dream is a kind of memory. 

When the body dies the internal organ joins the “‘subtle body”’ and 
transmigrates toa new body. An internal organ is eternal; like atoms, 
it is never destroyed. But it cannot function except within a body, 
in conjunction with a self; thus, a disconnected internal organ has no 
function and is undetectable, Also like atoms, one internal organ is 


SUBSTANCE 95 


just like the next as far as its intrinsic characteristics are concerned, 
and so individuators are needed to distinguish one from another. 

There is a rather interesting controversy between Nyaya and other 
schools about the size of the internal organ. The Bhatta-Mimamsakas 
argue that the internal organ is ubiquitous, while Vedantins argue that 
it is middle-sized. ‘The Nydya view that it is minute is defended on 
the ground that it alone suffices to explain all the relevant facts; the 
attempts of the opponents to qualify their respective positions to 
account for the various functions of the internal organ are dismissed 
as unnecessarily forced or downright inconsistent.3+ 

G. Selves: Nyaya-Vaigesika believes that there are an indefinite 
number of substances which are capable of cognitive, volitional, and 
affective activity. These are the selves. They are ubiquitous and 
everlastingly existent. As the sacred scriptures assert, a self is never 
born and never destroyed. 

Kanada holds that though one’s self cannot be perceived by normal 
folk (it can be perceived only by yogis), it can be inferred following 
several sound lines of argument. One, we infer the existence of a 
knower from the fact of knowing, a fact which is as certain as anything 
can be for us. This is a proof of the existence of our own self. A 
second proof for myself is my use of the word “‘I’’, a word which cannot 
be properly interpreted as referring to my body for the simple reason 
that I talk about “‘my”’ body and thus presuppose something else as the 
“owner” of that body. 

There are other proofs which prove not only the existence of myself 
but also of other selves. According to Kanada we infer the presence 
of a volitional agent in other bodies by noticing the pattern of activity 
within these bodies, as well as by noticing facts such as breathing, the 
exhibition of certain sorts of behavior expressing pain or pleasure, 
desire and aversion. 

As the system develops these arguments are worked out in greater 
detail, and new ones added. A large part of the third book of the 
Nydyas iitras is concerned with the proof of the self. Gautama takes 
pains to refute the notion that the seat of cognitive activity is in the 
sense organs. In a Platonic vein he argues that we must postulate a 
self to explain the behavior of a new-born child, for its activity can 
only be understood on the supposition that it remembers things from 
former births, and memory involves previous direct experiences on the 
part ofa knowing self. Vatsyayana specifies the argument from memory 
as the primary one for the self’s existence. Pragastapada lists a num- 
ber ofarguments. Of particular interest are two. One is an argument 
by analogy : just as an action requires an agent, so a knowledge 


96 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


requires a knower, that is, a conscious entity, and since by elimina- 
tion no other substance will do, all of them being unconscious, a self 
must be postulated as the knower. The other is an argument from 
the ordinary use of words like “‘pleasure,”’ “pain,” etc., which are 
attributed to me in such a way that the attribution is not withdrawn 
when the body or senses are inoperative. The force of this last argu- 
ment reflects a familiar Western argument which constitutes an 
important issue in what is called the ‘mind-body problem”: if] felt 
pain when your bedy was pinched, wouldn’t it still be “my pain’’ ? 
And if so, this shows that pains are private to the self in a certain 
fundamental sense, and any attempt to reduce mental and affective 
states to physical or physiological ones is doomed. It is interesting 
to note that Pragastapada feels himself entitled to yse this argument 
despite the fact that he readily admits the yogis’ ability to do what 
Westerners generally deem impossible — namely to inhabit several 
bodies at once, including bodies which ordinarily belong to someone 
else. Many Indians believed that a body may simultaneously belong 
to two selves, and one would expect that a pain caused in both selves 
by pinching their common body would “belong”? to both. Thus 
although such a pain experienced by me would still be “‘my’’ pain, no 
doubt, it would not follow therefrom that no one else could share it, so 
that the Western doctrine of so-called “privileged access” is undercu! 
for such a philosopher as Pragastapada. 

The first of the two arguments summarized in the preceding para- 
graph implies that knowing is like an action. As a matter of fact the 
Mimamsakas hold that knowing is an act, which makes the inference 
to a knowing self even more straightforward. Jayanta Bhatta spends 
an extended section in an attempt to refute the Mimamsa view that 
knowing is an act, and one might expect him to be less than enthusiastic 
about Pragastapada’s argument, inasmuch as it falls as soon as a 
disanalogy between knowing and action is admitted. 

However, the notion that selves are only inferrable, not perceptible, 
while characteristic of early Nyaya-Vaisesika, is largely abandoned 
later on. As early as Bhavivikta we find the view expressed that the 
self can be perceived, and it is echoed by Uddyotakara, Vyomasiva, 
and Udayana,who hold that the self is perceived by the internal organs 
of ordinary human beings and not just those of yogis. Udayana, 
particularly in Atmatattvaviveka, develops the main line of inference as 
well, not only the argument from memory simpliciter but also a new 
version which stems from the experience we all have that there is a 
continuity in the flow of our ideas and impressions which can only 


SUBSTANCE 97 


occur, according to Udayana, on the assumption that there is a 
knower underlying this succession and “‘correlating”’ its components. 

It is very important to the Naiyadyikas that each aspect of their 
theory of selves be accepted. They deal at length with a variety of 
arguments addressed against the theory, and there can be no question 
of the sincerity and seriousness with which they treat the issues thus 
raised. It seems perfectly clear that their attitude here stems from 
the connection between the nature of the self and the professed purpose 
of philosophizing, namely as a preparation for the achievement of 
release. For example, Gautama makes the point in the fourth book of 
the Nydyasittras that it is by transferring our debts, troubles, and the 
karma resulting from our activities to a state where the self can handle 
them that we get into a position to master these sources of bondage. 
If the self were such that this transference were precluded, or if there 
were no self at all, liberation would be impossible to achieve. 

With this in mind we may review the aspects of the Nyaya theory 
that are most subject to criticism, other than the thesis that the self 
exists. One evidently important theory is that of the plurality of 
selves, which Kanada asserts is a truth inferrable from common ex- 
perience as well as promulgated by scripture. However, doubts about 
the plurality ofselves may well be raised merely by considering some 
of the qualities attributed to a self by the Nyaya-Vaisesika theory. 
A self, according to this theory, is incorporeal, intangible, invisible, 
eternal, ubiquitous, partless, motionless. What sense can be made, 
under these circumstances, of there being an indefinite number of 
things answering to these descriptions ? 

Pragastapada argues that there must be many selves since it is evident 
that the qualities of one do not produce qualities of others. E.g., 
only I can be a locus of my pain, only I can know in direct fashion 
my internal states of body and mind. This, however convincing it 
may seem to be, must suffer in its impact when we reflect that each 
and every selfis omnipresent according to the Naiyayikas, for what is 
it that prevents self A from directly experiencing the internal states 
of body B, after all, if self A is by hypothesis present inside body B? 
We have seen that yogis are granted this capacity anyway—what 
reason do we really have to deny it in principle to any self ? Indeed 
none, for we know that every self hasit in him to become a yogi; 
given the will there is a way according to the Naiyayika. 

The doctrine that there is only one self, on the other hand, is espous- 
ed by an important rival school of Indian philosophy, namely Advaita 
Vedanta, Advaitins believe, specifically, that there is only one self 
and that the apparent plurality of empirical selves is a kind of illusion 


98 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


reflected from, or constituting, their bondage. Vyomagiva is 
perhaps the first of our philosophers to address himself specifically, 
to Advaita on this topic, and he offers the standard argument. It 
turns on the challenge: whose is release ? If there is only one self, 
then ifanything is liberated it must be one self; but since the Advaitin 
wishes to hold that the supreme self is unsullied by bondage he must 
reject this view. But then the Advaitin cannot very well be a 
monist; he must admit plurality of selves at the present time, whatever 
may be his hopes and expectations about the eventual liberation of all 
selves. 

As for the all-pervasive character of each self, Vyomagiva argues 
that only on such a hypothesis can we explain the yogi’s ability to in- 
habit many bodies simultaneously. 

Sridhara enlarges upon the Naiyayika refutation of Advaita. Where 
Vyomatsiva left off, the Advaitin will say that the appearance of plura- 
lity among empirical selves is due te a sort of cosmic ignorance 
(avidyé) or maya. Sridhara, however, wants to know to whom this 
ignorance belongs? The question once again forces the Advaitin 
into a dilemma: if ignorance be visited upon the Supreme Self then 
this controverts Advaita in one way, while if it is the property of the 
empirical selves then he has admitted their independent existence, 
Sridhara also asks the damaging question: if there were only one self 
then when one of us is liberated wouldn’t everyone become so? But 
that, he thinks, is absurd. 

Why, though, do the Naiyayikas hold that each self is intangible, 
motionless, partless, etc. ? Primarily because they view the self as the 
knower, and they conceive psychological qualities to be sua generis 
different from physical ones. Atoms of earth, air, fire, and water are 
mobile, and constitute middle-sized objects which are also mobile 
and tangible. The internal organ is mobile, though not tangible : 
thus it is of less than all-pervasive dimensions. The other substances 
— dkdsa, space, time, and selves — are not atoms or composed of 
them, nor can they move around or be touched. Thus they are 
intangible, motionless, and all-pervasive. This does not mean that 
things may not move around ‘‘in’”’ them, or that limited portions of 
them may not have specific locations. For example, that portion of 
akasa limited within the ear constitutes the hearing organ of an indivi- 
dual’s body, and it is located where that body is and moves around with 
it. Likewise, reasons the Naiyayika, that portion of a self limited 
within an individual’s heart constitutes the knowing organ of that 
individual, and moves around with that individual body. 

However, that account makes it all the more easy for the Naiyayika 


SUBSTANCE 99 


to hold that there is only one self, limited by hearts so as to pluralize 
knowers, just as there is one dkdfa, limited by ears so as to pluralize 
hearing organs. Why should not the Naiyayika adopt that view, 
then? Well, for cne thing we do not share each other’s pleasures and 
pains; each of our karmas is different. Ifwe hold that there is only 
one self, then when one selfis freed all are freed: this difficulty, which 
we originally thought of as a defect in the Advaitin’s view, turns out to 
be a defect in any view — Advaita or not— which does not admit 
plurality of selves. 

Nevertheless, Umesh Mishra tells us that at least one modern 
exponent of Nyaya-Vaisesika thought that when all the selves 
become liberated there will be only one self. Mishra argues that 
even then the selves will be differentiated, for the connection between 
each self and its internal organ is supposed to be eternal and indis- 
soluble. 3? 

The motivation which produces the Nyadya-Vaigesika theory of 
selves is complicated by the fact that the self is the seat not only of 
cognitions and affective states but also of volitions and desires. Where- 
as a knower may well be conceived, if not as all-pervasive, at least 
as without any spatial location in particular and thus in a sense every- 
where and nowhere at once, the seat of will and desires is not so 
easily conceived. For willing and the like are among the causal 
conditions of overt action involving motions of the body and limbs 
which belong to the agent. Ifa self is conceived as an agent as well 
as a knower, the theory of the incorporeal self becomes even less easy 
to assimilate. Knowers may not move, but agents seem to. 

There is practical unanimity among our philosophers that the self 
is the agent of our actions. There is no question that selves do not 
move. The theory is rather that agency does not require mobility. 
Kanada, for a start, in inferring the existence of other selves from 
their bodies’ activity, suggests that selves are agents of their bodies’ 
actions. Vatsydyana is quite explicit: he argues that moral responsi- 
bility requires a locus which persists, and that the self is that locus. 
Thus selves are responsible agents of the activities which breed karma 
and bondage. Vatsyayana by no means limits the function of the 
self to a witnessing consciousness. Pragastapada also speaks of selves 
as agents. 

The dissenter among Naiyayikas on this point is Sridhara. He sides 
with the Samkhya-Yoga position. that the self is neither the agent 
nor the enjoyer of the results of its actions; it is merely a witnessing 
consciousness. The notion that the self is the agent is a result of a 
wrong notion, produced by karma, which must be dispelled in order 


100 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


for us to achieve liberation. The agent is the body, and it is the body 
which enjoys pleasure and pain—or at any rate, it is the embodied 
self, not the pure self. 

H. God: A great deal has been written about the question as to 
whether the authors of the satras were theists, or even mention God. 
It seems pretty clear that Kanada does not mention Him. God zs 
mentioned in the Nydyasitras, but here the question is whether the 
reference occurs in the words of the author or in a speech representing 
an opposition view. There is much to be said for the latter interpre- 
tation.38 

At any rate by Vatsyayana’s time Nyaya has become theistic, and 
Pragastapada makes room for Him. We have seen earlier that the 
Nydya-Vaisesika conception of God is very different from most theo- 
logies, however. VaAtsyayana understands God to be a self with the 
various qualities selves generally plus a number of special, unique 
qualities. For one thing, God, like other selves, has karma, but all 
of His karma is of the meritorious kind. His knowledge is entirely 
accurate. He has no wrong notions. If He is not omniscient, He 
is capable of understanding everything that needs to be understood 
in order that He may perform His functions. These functions include 
the control of the operation of the karma which binds other selves, 
as well as serving as one of the causal factors involved in the produc- 
tion of the universe at the begining of each cycle, and bringing it 
about that appropriate fruits are forthcoming from human actions. 
God has all the yogic powers. He is by no means a liberated self, 
for He still has desires. His desires are always satisfied, since He is 
so powerful, and since His ideas are always benevolent He acts toward 
other selves as a father toward his children. Vatsyayana does say, 
however, that God depends on human efforts in regulating the cosmos; 
He cannot do it all Himself. 

Uddyotakara, commenting on these remarks, adds that though 
God depends on human effort in order to create the world, He does 
not depend on others per se, It is, indeed, the adrsia or karmic poten- 
tialities of the selves which determine the kinds of bodies inhabiting 
the world which God creates. The initial action of His creativity 
occurs when he causes the atoms to make contact at the outset of 
a cycle; what contacts occur is determined by human dispositions. 
As with other selves, as we have just seen, agency does not imply 
mobility; God is omnipresent and eternal, or more precisely, ever- 
lasting. But whereas ordinary selves require embodiment in order 
to exert agency, God manages this without a body; in this he transcends 
human limitations. Another respect in which God differs from the 


SUBSTANCE 10) 


other selves is this: whereas consciousness is adventitious for an 
ordinary self, present only some of the time, God is always conscious 
and thus, in another sense, omniscient. 

Not everyone agreed with Uddyotakara about God’s ability to 
act without a body. Samkarasvamin appears to have thought that 
God has not only one but several bodies—perhaps the sorts of bodies 
in which the varicus gods known to Hindu tradition appear to mortals. 
Vyomagiva speculates that perhaps the atoms themselves are God’s 
body. Udayana in the Kirandvali suggests that God assumes a body 
for certain activities, such as producing contact between atoms and 
for exhibiting His glory for the improvement of mankind, but that 
for other activities he does not need a body. An activity for which 
he needs no body Udayana says, is the composition of the Vedas, a 
function which is attributed to God by Naiyayikas in opposition to 
the Mimaméa view.*4 

Our philosophers developed some doubts about the description 
Vatsyayana gives, which makes God rather like other selves as far as 
His qualities go, except that He has a few more. Where Vatsyayana 
says God has meritorious karma, Uddyotakara holds, along with 
Vacaspati, that God has no dharma at all, that is, that the question 
of his moral character does not arise. Thus, for these and for most 
of the Naiyayikas subsequently*one cannot say that God is benevolent, 
and to this extent the problem of evil in its Western theological guise 
cannot arise. Likewise, Sridhara raises the problem whether God 
is a liberated or a bound self; his answer is ‘‘neither, since what has 
never been bound cannot be free.” This suggests that although 
in some formal way God’s qualities may parallel those of the rest of 
the selves, His qualities are actually very different in that they are 
not subject to being involved in the karmic mechanism as human 
knowledge, desire, and volitional activity are. 

We come now to survey the Naiyadyikas’ arguments for the existence 
of God. As noted before, Udayana’s Nydyakusumdfjali is the classic 
work, admired by all Indian philosophers whatever their persuasion 
for its thoroughness and subtlety in developing and defending theism. 
But the topic of arguing for God’s existence comes up in many of 
our philosophers’ works, and Udayana owes much to his predeces- 
sors in this matter.*5 

Broadly speaking, there are three major varieties of theistic argu- 
ment we shall need to pay attention to. First, there is a cosmoteleo- 
logical argument, reasoning from the world as effect to God as the 
purposive agent which is its cause. Secondly, there is an argument 
from the existence of language and thought to a Being who authored 


102 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the first words, the Vedas, and whose thoughts preceded those of 
the rest of us. Finally, there is a kind of negative ontological argu- 
ment, introduced by Udayana himself, to refute all arguments for the 
nonexistence of God. 

lL. Cosmoteleological Argument : The basic form of this, the main 
argument offered by all Naiyayikas, is as follows: 

(A) This world is produced and destroyed by a conscious agent, 
since it is a thing which is subject to production and des- 
truction, like a pot. 

A word may be in order about the format of Indian arguments, since 
the topic of inference still lies ahead of us. An argument has three 
members: a thesis, a reason, and an example (or sometimes more 
thanone). In the present example the thesis is: the world is produced 
and destroyed by a conscious agent (= God). The reason is: be- 
cause the world is a thing which is subject to production and des- 
truction. The example is: like a pot. The strategy of argument in 
philosophy in matters such as this one is to present an argument in the 
proper form and then consider one by one the criticisms that have 
been or might be brought against the argument’s validity. If it 
passes the tests of a valid argument, and is not vitiated by any faults 
brought against it by opponents, then it is to that extent vindicated 
and acceptable as doctrine. 

This argument I call ‘‘cosmoteleological”’ since it appears to combine 
into one argument the two Western proofs of God’s existence usually 
dubbed ‘‘cosmological’’ and ‘‘teleological.’’ The cosmological argu- 
ment reasons to a first cause; the teleological argument reasons from 
signs of a plan in nature to a conscious agent who carries out his plan. 
The Nyaya argument collapses these separable claims into one, liken- 
ing the world to a pot which is both an effect and an object which was 
created according to plan. The argument is by analogy : just as the 
pot could not have come to exist without an intelligent maker, so it is 
with the world. Now it is up to the critic to knock the argument 
down. 

There are various ways of going about knocking an argument down. 
One way is to find a counterexample tothe general rule which is 
operating as the unexpressed “major premise’’ ofthe argyment. Here 
that unexpressed premise is ‘‘whatever is created and destroyed is 
created and destroyed by a conscious agent.’’ A second way is to 
present an argument which demonstrates a thesis contradictory to the 
one presented in the argument in question. Both these methods of 
refuting the theistic position are set forth and dealt with in our texts. 

The basic complaint is that of the materialist Carvaka, He is given 


SUBSTANCE 103 


an extended hearing in the first chapter of the Nydyakusumanyjalz. 
His view is that things come into existence by their own nature without 
any cause, and Udayana shows him step by step that causal regularity 
requires that the cause be distinct from the effect and have a character 
of iis own; otherwise the concomitance we see occur would be quite 
as likely to occur anywhere else, and at any time. In short, Udayana 
summarizes the theory of causal relations which was set forth earlier. 

But one does not have to go so far as the Carvaka. One can merely 
offer a counterexample, an instance of something which, though 
produced, is not produced by a conscious agent. Jayanta considers 
such an opponent, who cites as his counterexample ‘“‘big trees.” 
Surely, he submits, big trees are not created by any conscious agent, 
and so the unexpressed major premise is not a case of regular con- 
comitance. Jayanta’s response to this is that at best it is unclear 
whether big trees are or are not the products of a conscious agent’s 
work. The opponent, thinking he sees his way to a conclusive refuta- 
tion, proceeds to suggest that since it is uncertain whether or not all 
products are products of intelligent creators the supposed law is 
unverified and so not a proper basis for an inference. But Jayanta 
disagrees, That all effects are the products of conscious agency is, 
he thinks, provable by another inference, as follows: 

(B) Whatever is created and destroyed is created and destroyed 
by a conscious agent, because it has parts, like a pot and 
unlike atoms. 

That is, he claims that though the original ‘“‘major premise”’ is unveri- 
fied it is at least confirmed by the inference (B) just cited. Thus 
he rules out “‘big trees”? as a counterexample on the ground that since 
trees have parts, and since pots, which have parts, have intelligent 
makers, there is evidence to think that big trees have intelligent makers 
as well. 

It will be apparent that if (A) depends on (B) in this way it will 
be clearer if we reformulate the cosmoteleological argument as follows: 

(C) The world is created by an intelligent agent, because it 
has parts, like a pot and unlike atoms. 

Just this form of the argument is found in the quotations from Avid- 
dhakarna, and we shall consider the argument in its form as either 
(A) or (C) from now on, 

If Jayanta’s way with counter examples is allowed to stand, the oppo- 
nent is forced to some other strategy. An apparently telling refutation 
of the cosmoteleological argument can be displayed, itmay be thought, 
by producing not just counterexamples but whole counterarguments 
against the major premise of either (A) or (C). Jayanta—whose 


104 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


discussion of theistic proofs is second only to Udayana’s in its thorough- 
ness—is ready with illustrations of such counterarguments. For 
instance, consider the following counterargument: 

(D) Amountain is not a product, because it is not man’s handi- 

work, unlike a pot. 
Jayanta’s own argument against this is ad hominem—he shows that 
each of the opponents who might offer this argument believe some- 
thing which is inconsistent with it. But more basically we can easily 
see that the thesis of (D), which affirms that there are uncaused 
entities which yet have beginnings and ends, falls under those argu- 
ments against the Carvaka which we just noted. 

The reader will perhaps have noticed that neither argument (A) 
nor (G) mentions God, and that indeed the cosmoteleological argu- 
ment as I have formulated it properly speaking has two steps, one step 
arguing that the world is created by a conscious agent, the second 
identifying this conscious agent as God. A good many of the argu- 
ments cited in the literature against the cosmoteleological argu- 
ment are directed toward the second step rather than the first. 

These counterarguments are generally intended to prove that 
God is unsuited to the role the Naiyayika assigns him, namely, He 
is unsuited to create. For example, Uddyotakara cites the following 
argument by way of objection: 

(E) God is not the cause of the world, because He is immobile, 

unlike a potter. 

Uddyotakara’s answer to this it that the potter is immobile also, 
that the objector has mistakenly identified the potter with his body 
(a revealing identification associated with materialist and skeptical 
views by orthodox Indian philosophers). The potter is actually, 
as we have seen, an all-pervading self which has become temporarily 
associated with a body, and being all-pervading, the self, strictly 
speaking, cannot move. But this argument leads to an associated 
one, which is perhaps the most common objection to the cosmoteleo- 
logical argument found in the literature. 

The counterargument to which I refer is the one about God’s 
body. It is found in Jayanta, Udayana, and many others. It may 
be stated simply: 

(F) God is not a cause, because He lacks a body, unlike men. 

This appears to have been a fairly compelling argument, serious 
enough to have produced some dissension in the ranks. Uddyotakara 
asserts that God has no body; Jayanta defends this view. But as 
we have seen Samkarasvamin says God has not one but several bodies, 
and Vyomasiva speculates about what God’s body may be. An 


SUBSTANCE 105 


especially instructive writer is Udayana, who seems to aflirm both 
sides of the question. In the Atmatativaviveka he asserts that God is 
capable of creating despite his lack of a body, and in the Nydyakusumai- 
Jjali he pictures God as out of time altogether. However, in Kirandvali 
he admits that God assumes a body on certain occasions; among 
those occasions are times when he is creating physical things, exhibiting 
his glory to mankind, etc. Even in the Npdyakusumaijali there is 
some inconsistency, for Udayana at one point says that atoms serve 
the same purpose for God as the human body does for an individual 
self. Udayana seeks to save the inconsistency by pointing out that 
it is nevertheless the case that God does not have a human body, and 
that it depends on how one chcoses to define ‘‘body’’ whether God 
has one or not. 

Uddyotakara and Jayanta are able to deny any kind of body to 
God by virtue of their denial that God ever wills anything. Having 
abandoned any very close analogy between the way God creates and 
the way a potter creates, they do not need to heed the force of (F). 
Jayanta has additional arguments as to why God should not be viewed 
as capable of embodiment. For one thing, if God had a body there 
would have to be another God to create that body, and so on ad infini- 
tum. Furthermore, even if God had a body it would not help Him 
in controlling the first motions of the atoms—Jayanta claims it would 
take Him too long! 

Jayanta, indeed, does not offer any form of the cosmoteleological 
argument that we have reviewed so far, and that is only consistent 
with his views as we have summarized them. His major argument 
for God is from the necessity of the Vedas’ having an author—the 
second major type of theistic argument to which we shall turn shortly. 
But Jayanta does incidenially offer a modified form of the cosmoteleo- 
logical argument, one which does not imply that God has motives 
and desires, however. This argument goes somewhat as follows: 

(G) The world is caused by a conscious agent, because the world 

is an effect of the sort whose occurrence presupposes the 

existence of someone who knows the process and motive 

of its production, like a jar. 
(G) differs from (A) and (C) in that it does not suggest any motive 
or desire on God’s part but merely implies that God is aware of the 
course of creation and that this awareness is one of the causal factors 
involved in the world’s production. Thus we are not required to 
view God’s creative acts analogously to human creativity, and as 
a result there is no reason to credit God with any sort of body. 

Udayana’s problems stem from the fact that he credits God with 


106 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


motives. Jayanta criticizes this view of God with gusto. If Godacts 
from motive, this suggests that he is lacking something, that he has 
needs; but this is contrary to the conception of Him as spiritually 
exalted. To this a critic might reply that if God does not act from 
motives, then He must act senselessly, like an insane person. Jayanta’s 
answer is that the dilemma does not exhaust the alternatives. God, 
Jayanta thinks, creates out of compassion. The obvious retort to 
this is that if God is compassionate why does He allow calamity and 
misfortune to strike mankind ? But we have already seen that what- 
ever the force of this argument may be for a Westerner who believes 
we have only one life to live, for the Indian it is one’s own previous 
karma which produces misfortunes; God is not responsible for them. 
Indeed, God’s compassionate role is limited to providing ways for 
men to work off their karma in more appropriate circumstances, 
at least as far as we learn from Jayanta. 

A different group of counterarguments raises the question why 
God, and not merely ordinary selves are needed to explain the crea- 
tion of the world. One reason, in answer to this, is that God is omni- 
scient where ordinary selves are not, and that an omniscient agent is 
needed to create the universe. Counterarguments to this are found 
in Vacaspati Migra and Udayana’s writings. For example Vacaspati 
gives: 

(H) The world is not made by an omniscient agent, because it 

exists, like a pot. 


The answer Vacaspati gives to this is that the world must have been 
made by some agent—ex hypothest this is not in question—and since 
ordinary humans have only limited knowledge and power they could 
not have done it; thus it must have been God’s work. 

Udayana has a different objection in the fourth book of the Wyava- 
kusumanjali: 

(I) God is not an omniscient agent, because his knowledge is 

invalid. 
This argument belongs to the Bhatta Mimamsaka, who thinks that 
knowledge is not valid unless it tells us something we do not already 
know. Since God already knows everything, he has no valid know- 
ledge ! Udayana answers with a critique of the Mimamsa view of 
validity. 

It is possible that Vatsyayana had in mind the necessity of showing 
that God, rather than ordinary selves, created the world when he 
seems to interpret the puzzling sétra passage as arguing as follows: 

(J) God is a causal condition for the connection between human 


SUBSTANCE 107 


actions and their fruits, because this connection is not mechani- 
cal, like the relation between nutrition and life. 
That is, whereas the products of man’s handiwork—e.g., pots—are 
mechanical in their workings, a special kind of cause needs to be postu- 
lated to explain the production of organic, nonmechanical relations, 
and God is that special kind of cause. 

2. Arguments from Language and Thought: As we have seen, Jayanta 
bases his claim that God exists on His authorship of the Vedas. The 
Mimamsaka thinks the Vedas do not have an author. In order to 
safeguard the validity of the Vedas, he argues that they must be con- 
ceived as authorless. Jayanta’s reply to this is that some passages 
in the Vedas are clearly false, and so the scriptures cannot be consi- 
dered to be valid in toto. If the Mimamsaka tries to explain the 
falsity of portions of the Vedas by appeal to the fact that those passages, 
unlike the others, have human and fallible authors, then he gives the 
show away: if those passages have authors then why shouldn’t the 
rest of them? 

Udayana offers several arguments for God as the author of the 
Vedas. Among them are these: 

(K) The knowledge embodied in the Vedas is due to faultless 
causes, because it is valid, like perceptual knowledge. And 
the faultless cause of the Vedas is God. 

This argument will work for most opponents, but not for the Mimam- 
saka, who needs to be convinced that validity depends on a faultless 
cause and not merely on the absence of faults. The Mimamsakas 
are willing to admit that the Vedas are faultless, but they think that 
that is their nature. Another argument is: 

(L) The Vedas have an author, because they constitute a book, 
like any other book (e.g., the Mahabharata). 

Alternatively this argument might appeal to the fact that other 
*‘Vedas”, notably the authoritative books of medicine, Ayurveda, are 
admitted to have authors; so also with the earliest Vedas themselves. 
Ofcourse this reasoning can be met by merely holding that the Vedas 
are not like other books, and that the Ayurveda is not really a Veda. 
Udayana is aware of these possible retorts. He offers arguments 
such as (K) and (L) as arguments likely to convince, say, the Samkh- 
yas, but not the Mimamsakas. For the Mimamsa opponents he has 
a different set of arguments. 

To convince the Mimamsaka Udayana offers such arguments as 
these: 

(M) The Vedic injunctions must have an enjoiner, because they 

are injunctions, like ordinary commands. 


108 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


And, of course, this enjoiner must be God. Udayana spends some time 
making the connection between injunctions and their enjoiners. 
He argues that injunctions cannot be understood at ali unless there 
is someone whose intentions they are designed to express. The 
Mimamsakas are provided with a number of replies, none of which 
are admitted to be satisfactory. This discussion takes the reader 
into intricate details of grammatical theory, to which we shall return 
below. 

Another argument directed toward Mimamsa is this: 

(N) The word ‘“‘God” in the Vedic injunctions denotes an existent 
entity, because the sentences in which it occurs are injunc- 
tions, like ordinary injunctions. 

If 1 say “bring the cow”? and am not deceiving you, you may assume 
that there is a cow for you to bring. As the Mimamsakas do not 
believe Vedic injunctions can be deceptive, injunctions to worship 
God in the Vedas show that God exists. 

3. Negative Ontological Argument: We may in conclusion, pause 
to notice that Udayana is, as far as can be discerned, the inventor 
of a technique by which all counterarguments intended to prove 
the non-existence of God can be disposed of. The technique is simple. 
According to principles governing the validity of an inference is the 
principle that the terms of the inference must denote. That being 
the case, any inference which begins “‘God does not exist because...” 
must ipso facto be fallacious, since if the statement ‘“‘God does not 
exist’’ is true the inference is necessarily invalid, and if it is false then 
the inference is invalid since God does exist.%¢ 

Udayana suggests that this way of handling counterarguments 
works against the kind of argumentation called tarka as well as against 
standard inferences. Such a larka argument might be, for example, 

(O) If God were the creator, then he would have possessed a 
body, suffered pain, etc.; but He does not have a body, 
suffer pain, etc.; therefore, God is not the creator. 

According to Udayana this commits the fallacy known as @frayasiddhi, 
the fallacy of ‘‘unproved locus.” Tarka arguments are formally 
similar to (O), in that the first member is a counterfactual conditional 
proposition, the second denies the consequent of the conditional, 
and the conclusion is the denial of its antecedent. However, the 
first sentence in (O) is not a counterfactual conditional at all, argues 
Udayana, since a counterfactual conditional is always of the form 
“if X were to have property P then it would have property Q’’ where 
it is assumed that X exists. How, after all,could one demonstrate that 
the second member of (O) is true? In order to show that God does 


SUBSTANCE 109 


not have a body, etc., one must produce an inference or some other 
tarka argument to show it: this will again either require that the term 
““God”’ denote or else force the question back to yet another argument, 
this regress either being infinite (which constitutes a fault) or terminat- 
ing in an inference which requires God to exist. 


It would seem that this line of argument, if it proves anything, 
proves too much, for by recourse to it we can refute any inference or 
tarka argument which purports to prove the non-existence of something. 
Similar problems are known in recent Western philosophy. Bertrand 
Russell, for example, considered the problems raised by the sentence 
“the golden mountain exists.’’ Meinong had postulated a whole 
realm of subsistent entities to stand as the referents of the subject 
terms of such propositions. Russell thought this too high a price 
to pay, and suggested expanding the troublesome sentence as follows: 
“there is at least one thing which is both gold and a mountain, and 
there isno more than one.”” This statement, he claims, is false because 
the first conjunct is false, and no additional ontological realm is needed 
for the referents of terms in false sentences.?” But it is not clear that 
a similar line of thought will resolve the problems raised by such a 
statement as “‘God does not exist.” And indeed Russell would find 
this statement not false but meaningless, because its subject term fails 
te denote. Both ‘God exists”? and ‘God does not exist” are, in 
his view, meaningless since their subject-term fails to denote. Quine 
has suggested a modification cf the Russellian position which might 
seem promising here. He suggests reconstruing names and descrip- 
tions in terms of appropriately chosen predicates, thus adopting the 
Russell analysis of the sentence about the golden mountain (which 
Russell analyzed into statements in which the troublesome description 
was replaced by the predicates.‘‘. .is golden” and“. .is a mountain’’ ) 
but extending it further to cover proper names as well as descriptions. 
Quine’s example is “‘Pegasus exists.”’ Quine will render this as ‘“‘there 
is exactly one thing which pegasizes.”8® But Quine’s solution depends 
on his theory that predicates do not refer, and this thesis is not accepted 
by Naiy4yikas. 


A likely line of response to Udayana’s quick way with denials of 
existence, given the restrictions within which Nyaya assumptions 
force us to work, is to suggest that ‘‘X does not exist’? should be under- 
stood not as denying the occurrence of something satisfying the descrip- 
tion or name “‘X,”’ but rather as affirming the occurrence of something 
which is properly described as ‘‘absence of X.”? Thus ‘‘God does not 
exist”? should be read as ‘‘there is an entity properly described as 


110 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


‘absence-of-God,’ which does not name God and so does not commit 
the fallacy which Udayana has in mind. 

Udayana, however, anticipates this response. An absence must 
be the absence of something, and that something is called the ‘‘counter- 
positive’* of the absence. Now Udayana asserts that the counter- 
positive of an absence must exist, that is to say, that the expression 
“absence of X” refers only if“‘X”’ refers. There may be difficulties with 
this view E.g., if in order to deny the existence of, say, a squared 
circle we must affirm the existence of the absence-of-squared circle, 
and this affirmation to be meaningful requires that squared circles 
exist, then we shall never be able to deny the existence of anything 
in an absolute way. However, there is an answer that can be given 
to this. How satisfactory an answer it is requires further analysis. 
The answer that can be given is that when Udayana requires that 
the counterpositive of an absence exist he is not requiring that an 
entity answering to the description of the counterpositive exist, but 
rather that at least entities corresponding to the component parts 
of the description exist. In the example offered, although there are 
no squared circles, there are squared things and there are circles. 
Likewise, although there are no sky-flowers, there is a sky and there 
are flowers. 

I. Darkness. There are just 9 kinds of substance, according to 
Nyaya-Vaigesika ontology. Why only 9? Because of economy; 
there is no point in admitting more kinds of entities than one needs to 
explain what needs to be explained. And all other things which 
might be supposed—and are on occasion by other philosophers sup- 
posed—to be substances can be shown to belong to other, already 
admitted categories. 

The main example of this that our philosophers regularly allude to 
is the case of darkness (tamas). Kanada raises the question whether 
darkness is a substance, and answers in the negative. What does he 
think darkness is, then? It is absence of light, he says, and thus does 
not need to be added as a separate entity. Uddyotakara varies 
this slightly. According to him ‘“‘darkness”’ denotes things which are 
not apprehended due to the absence of light. Since such things 
might be of various sorts, the question “‘to which category does dark- 
ness belong??? has no ‘single answer. 

The major defector from this view that darkness is an absence is 
Sridhara, who thinks it is a quality—namely black color. His is 
perhaps the most thorough treatment of the question; he is aware he 
is departing from tradition. Darkness is not a substance, Sridhara 
argues; if it were it would have to be a material substance (not being 


SUBSTANCE 111 


ubiquitous or eternal), and since a material substance must be made 
up of tangible atoms and darkness is not tangible, darkness is not a 
material substance and thus no kind of substance whatever. But 
it is not absence of light either, for it is black, and black is a positive 
color. Then why does Kanada identify it with the absence of light ? 
Well, says Sridhara, what he is trying to do is identify the conditions 
under which we (sometimes) see black, namely in the absence of 
light. 

Varadaraja decries this view: darkness cannot be black color, 
since it has black color! But what his positive view is, is difficult to 
say: absences, after all, do not have colors any more than qualities do, 


6 


QUALITIES AND MOTIONS 


The second of the 7 Vaigesika categories is referred to under the 
Sanskrit term guna, and this term is usually translated by the English 
word “‘quality.”’ The implications of ‘“‘quality,’ as that term is 
normally used in Western philosophy, do not altogether match those 
of guza in Nyaya-Vaigesika, however, since Western philosophers 
generally think of qualities as repeatable properties, while the Vaise- 
sika guna is not repeatable. Thus, in Nyaya a white substance has 
a particular white guna of its own, different from the white gunas of 
other white substances and whiteness, the universal property, resides 
in the several white colors (not in the substances). Although this 
view of qualities as particular characteristics of particular things is 
found in Western thought, it is not common there.1 

Kanida lists 17 qualities, and adds at the end of his list “‘etc., 
thus inviting later commentators to add a few more. The canonical 
number, arrived at by the time of Candramati and Pragastapada, 
is24. In the list given below, the first seventeen are Kanada’s original 
entries, the rest additions of later writers, although of course they 
claim that in specifying these particular items they are merely spelling 
out Kandda’s “‘etcetera”’ ! 


> 


1. color 13. pleasure 
2. taste 14. frustration 
3. smell 15. desire 
4. touch 16. hatred 
5. number 17. effort 
6. contact 18. weight 
7. disjunction 19. fluidity 
8. farness 20. viscosity 
9. nearness 21. dispositional tendency 
10. dimension 22. merit 
11. separateness 23. demerit 


12, knowledge 24. sound 


QUALITIES AND MOTIONS 113 


Most Naiyayikas accept the canonical list of qualities, although 
theories developed about some of them which might just as easily have 
led later philosophers to add more qualities and thus increase the 
total number. As with many things in India, the number of items 
in a list acquires a kind of authority from traditional acceptance, and 
innovators frequently accommodate their ideas to the traditional 
number rather than change it. 

One innovator who was not so accommodating, however, would 
seem to have been Bhasarvajfia author of Nydyabhisana. He disallows 
6 of the list—number, dimension, separateness, disjunction, farness 
and nearness—and more radical yet, argues that motions should be 
accounted qualities. We shall review his reasons below. 

There are not very many general things that can be said about 
qualities as such. The list is a heterogeneous one, so much so that 
in Navya-nyaya times Raghunatha Siromani claims that there is 
no common characteristic that these 24 things have in common, 
and so presumably no category. We shall be forced to deal with 
each of these 24 items independently in order to understand their 
nature. Of the few general distinctions among qualities, however, 
two appear to be amenable to immediate treatment: first, the distinc- 
tion between specific and generic qualities, and second, that between 
locus-pervading qualities and those which are not locus-pervading. 

The distinction between specific and generic qualities is not altogether 
easy to describe and it is dubious of what use the distinction is anyhow. 
One use to which it is put by Vatsyayana is in defining an “individual” 
(yyakti). An individual is a material thing (mdérti) which is a locus 
of specific qualities. Praéastapada lists the specific qualities as follows: 
color, taste, smell, touch, knowledge, pleasure, frustration, desire, 
aversion, effort, natural fluidity, viscosity, mental traces (a kind of 
dispositional tendency), merit, demerit, and sound. The rest 
are generic qualities: number, size, separateness, contact, disjunction, 
farness, nearness, weight, accidental fluidity, and the variety of dis- 
positional tendency called vega, i.e., impetus or velocity. 

It should not be supposed? that the distinction is between 
nonrepeatable qualities. All qualities are nonrepeatable in the 
sense that they cannot be shared indiscriminately by any 
number of distinct substances, separated randomly in space 
and time. Udayana’s Laksandvali gives the following definition 
of a specific quality of earth: it must (1) occur in earth, (2) not occur 
in anything which is not earthy, and (3) be a quality. According 
to Vaigesika theory smell is the only specific quality of earth; the fact 
that other things smell is explained by the supposition that such 


114 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


things have earthy particles mingled with their other constituents. In 
this way color is a specific quality of fire, touch of air, and sound of 
akdSa; taste, natural fluidity, and viscosity are specific qualities of 
water; the rest of the specific qualities in Pragastapada’s list are all 
qualities of selves. In contrast, various substances may come into 
contact and become disjoined, are numerous and have a size, weight, 
and velocity. Both earth and fire are supposed to have accidental 
fluidity. 

A rather more important distinction is that between qualities which 
pervade their loci and those which do not. This distinction is first alluded 
to in the Dasapadartha$astra, which lists the following as locus-pervading: 
color, taste, smell, touch, number, dimension, separateness, farness, 
nearness, contact, disjunction, fluidity, viscosity, weight, and velocity. 
All the others are non-locus-pervading. Pragastapada qualifies 
this: contact and disjunction are sometimes locus-pervading, but 
sometimes not, as for example when atoms contact dkdsa. By Siva- 
ditya’s time the doctrine has become further modified: he excludes 
contact, disjunction, and velocity from the list of locus-pervading 
qualities, and makes an overall threefold distinction: those which 
are always locus-pervading (Pragastapada’s list minus the 3 just 
mentioned); those which are always non-locus-pervading, namely 
contact, disjunction, pleasure, frustration, aversion, dispositional 
tendency, merit, demerit, and sound; and a group of qualities which 
are sometimes locus-pervading and sometimes not, namely knowledge, 
desire, and effort. 

It will be seen that contact and disjunction, accounted as locus-per- 
vading in Candramati’s list, have completely changed their status 
in later times and become non-locus-pervading. To see why this 
happened we may consider Sridhara’s discussion of the matter. Sri- 
dhara starts with the question: when a monkey, say, is in a tree, why 
not say, rather than that there is contact between the whole monkey 
and the whole tree, that there is contact between part of the monkey 
and the branch of the tree? Should not the principle be that contact 
connects the smallest portions of the whole which (according to ordi- 
nary speech) aresaid totouch? Sridhara answers that this principle 
is unacceptable, because when the monkey and the tree are said (in 
ordinary speech ) to be in contact all that will really be in contact will 
be certain atoms ‘‘contained’’ in the monkey and the tree. Now 
since these atoms are invisible, the contact will be also, and asa result 
our common-sense judgment becomes inexplicable. Furthermore, 
as we have seen, the Nyaya-Vais esika view of a whole is that it is a 
unit, produced from, but not composed of, its parts. It is consistent 


QUALITIES AND MOTIONS 115 


with this that a whole A, when it is in contact with something B, is 
itself as a unit in contact with B. Therefore, concludes Sridhara, 
we must resist the temptation to follow ordinary usage by construing 
contact as relating parts of things rather than wholes. 

So far, then, we understand contact as holding between two wholes 
whose parts may, speaking in common-sense terms, be seen as impinging 
on each other—e.g., as the monkey’s paw touches the branch of the 
tree, according to our perception—and yet the contact is a relation 
between the whole monkey and the whole tree. But this understand- 
ing is not sufficient for full appreciation of the nature of contact, 
for there are other kinds of contact. There are several different kinds 
ofsubstancesin Vaisesika: there are gross objects—wholes generated 
from smaller objects—but there are also atomic entities which have 
no parts, and there are all-pervading substances which likewise 
have no parts. How should contact be construed when applied to 
relations among such entities? In particular, we may have the follow- 
ing cases: (1) contact between two atoms; (2) contact between atom 
and gross object; (3) contact between atom and all-pervading object; 
(4) contact between two gross objects; (5) contact between gross 
object and all-pervading object; (6) contact between two all-pervading 
objects. We have been discussing case (4), and Sridhara has concluded 
that contact of this type is contact between the whole gross objects and 
not their parts. But now one may well ask the following question: 
given that two wholes, A and B, are in contact, does it follow that all 
their parts arein contact? The answer given in later Nyaya-Vaisesika 
is ““no’’; we can see that only the monkey’s hand and the branch are 
in contact, not the other parts. Thus, contact is non-locus-pervading, 
and the meaning of that phrase is that when contact inheres in a pair 
of substances it does not inhere in all of its parts. Or so it would 
seem. 

The reason that this will not quite do is that cases (1), (2), (3), 
(5), and (6) all involve objects which have no parts, and yet contact 
occurs among such substances. Is contact locus-pervading or not 
in these other cases? One might suppose that it would not matter 
much one way or the other, but one would be wrong. It makes a 
good deal of difference, for the Naiyayika’s defence against a certain 
Buddhist argument turns on contact being non-locus-pervading in 
case (1). The Buddhists argue that atoms cannot combine to form 
larger objects, since the supposed contact between two atoms can be 
neither locus-pervading nor non-locus-pervading. If it were locus-per- 
vading, argues the Buddhist,then if atom A isin contact with atom B, 
and atom B with atom C, the resulting group cannot make up anything 


116 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


bigger than the original size of A, since all parts of A, B, and C must 
touch. Gross objects can never be built in this way, he says. On the 
other hand, if contact is non-locus-pervading, then atoms have parts, 
which produces an infinite regress and defeats Vaiéesika theory. 

The form of the Buddhist’s argument is as follows. Dilemma: 
either contact is locus-pervading or it is not. If contact were locus- 
pervading, gross objects could not be produced, but according to 
Vaisesika they are. Therefore, contact is not locus-pervading, 
that is to say, it isnon-locus-pervading. But to be non-locus-pervad- 
ing is to be a relation such that it holds between two objects but not 
between all of their parts. Therefore, if the contact between two 
atoms is non-locus-pervading the atoms must have parts, and this 
contradicts Vaisesika theory. 

One method for dealing with this dilemma may come quickly to 
the reader’s mind: it is to deny the inference from not being locus- 
pervading to being non-locus-pervading. That is, one might 
say, if “contact is locus-pervading’’ means (W) “‘contact holds between 
all parts of those things in contact, and things in contact have parts,”’ 
then “‘contact is not locus-pervading”’ denies (W); but it is consistent 
with the denial of (W) that some things in contact have no parts, 
and it does not follow that contact is non-locus-pervading in the sense 
defined above. The Naiyayika does not particularly welcome this 
way out ofthe dilemma, however. For it leaves him open to the follow- 
ing argument. Suppose it were his view that contact among atoms 
is neither locus-pervading nor non-locus-pervading (since atoms 
have no parts). Then arguments of the following sort would not 
be allowed: “‘contacts between atoms produce dyads, because they 


39 


are contacts, like contacts between gross objects.”? This argument 
would fail because by hypothesis contacts among atoms are not like 
contacts between gross objects, the latter being non-locus-pervading 
whereas the former are neither locus-pervading nor non-locus-per- 
vading. And if this argument fails, the Naiyayika has no good 
way of refuting any opponent who wishes to dispense with atoms 
altogether. 

So the Naiyayika takes a different course. He submits that all 
contacts, including those between partless substances, are non-locus- 
pervading. Clearly ‘‘non-locus-pervading’’ cannot mean what we 
thought it meant before. Rather it now means something like this: 
contact has a property phi such that if two things are in contact and 
both of them have parts, some of the parts are not in contact. The 
point is that the property p/z is present whether or not the conjuncts 
have parts. 


QUALITIES AND MOTIONS 117 

It must be admitted that, though this explanation may be sufficient 
to justify calling contact non-locus-pervading, it is by no means clear 
even yet why, for example, pleasure is deemed non-locus-pervading. 
The psychic qualities—pleasure, frustration, knowledge, desire, 
effort, merit, and demerit—are qualities of selves, and by hypothesis 
selves are without parts. Why call them ‘‘non-locus-pervading,” 
then? The answer would seem to be that, although selves, dkasa, 
space, and time are strictly speaking without parts, yet they have what 
might be called ‘‘quasi-parts,’’ since portions of these all-pervasive 
substances can become distinguishable by virtue of their being limited 
inside a body, or an ear, or objects located at particular points in place 
and time. Thus the qualities of these substances are to be called 
“‘locus-pervading”’ only ifit is true that, ifsuch a substance has quality 
Q, all its quasi-parts have Q also. Sivaditya’s classification becomes 
somewhat more intelligible now. His ambivalent conclusion abcut 
the 3 qualities of knowledge, desire, and effort is probably intended 
to allow these qualities toGod. In the case of God, ifhe has quasi- 
parts (e.g., when he shows himself in an avatdra as Krishna, etc,) those, 
quasi-parts share His knowledge, desires, and volitions. Ordinary 
selves, on the other hand, are only adventitiously intelligent, desirous, 
and striving; at least upon liberation, these qualities will disappear. 
Pleasure, frustration, hatred, merit, and demerit are not, in Sivaditya’s 
view, qualities of God but only of ordinary selves: their adventitious- 
ness, therefore, requires that they be classified as non-locus-pervading. 

1. Color, Taste, Smell, Touch: Since many of the things that a 
Vaigesika needs to say about color are also appropriate, with suitable 
replacements, in describing taste, smell, and touch I shall treat them 
together here. 

We have just seen that color is a locus-pervading quality, and this 
raises an immediate question. ‘To say that color is locus-pervading 
is to say that all the parts of the substance in whichitinheresare colored; 
but among those parts are the ultimate atoms, which are invisible—so 
how can they be said to be colored? Well, says the Naiyayika, they 
are, SO we must postulate an unmanifested color (anudbhiitarapa) in 
those parts of colored substances which are below the threshold of 
perception. This convenient hypothesis also allows an explanation 
of why we do not see the ray of light which is supposed to emanate 
from the eye when vision is in progress; its color is unmanifested. 
Likewise taste, smell, and touch may be unmanifested also. 

Earthy, watery, and fiery substances may possess color. A further 
classification arises from the theory of “‘cooking’’: it involves distinguish- 
ing between colors which are produced by chemical change (pakaja- 


118 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ipa) and those which are produced in a substance from the colors 
of its parts (abdkayaripa). The former kind of color serves as a causal 
factor in the production of colors of shades different from its own—thus 
in cooking a gray atom may become red. The latter kind of color, 
however, may only produce a further color of the same shade. 

Vhis raised another problem. Consider a substance with a mottled 
surface of more than one shade, Nydya-Vaisesika insists on treating 
this substance as a single entity with one color of its own, but surely 
it is evident that it has several colors. Does this mean that one thing 
can be both, say, red and green all over at once? Uddyotakara 
seems to have originated one sort of answer to this, which is that in 
the list of shades one has to count as one kind of color that called ‘‘varie- 
gated color”? (citraraijpa). (Likewise there is variegated taste, according 
to Sivaditya,). We are told? that the author of the Nydyabhisana 
rejected this notion of variegated coler. It is interesting in this 
connection to note that Apararkadeva, who so frequently follows the 
Bhiisanakara, deviates in this instance (at least if the doctrine of the 
Bhisapa has been accurately reported). Apararka allows citraripa; 
he remarks that this type of color is unusual in that it has a number 
of contradictory universals inhering in it at once—redness, greenness, 
etc.—but avers that this is no defect. Speaking generally, once 
again, it will be evident that the doctrine of variegated color follows 
from the theory that color is a locus-pervading quality together with 
the assumption that each visible substance must have one and only 
one color. But it also should be noted that the admission of variegated 
color vitiates an earlier assumption we had occasion to note, namely 
that a color not produced by cooking only produces further colors 
of the same shade. Clearly, variegated color in a whole is produced 
from reds, greens, etc.,in its parts. This is presumably the principle 
Apararka is willing to abandon. 

Most of our philosophers count the presence of manifested color 
as a necessary condition for the perceptibility of any substance what- 
soever, regardless of the sense involved in grasping it. Thus, for 
example, water is not allowed to be colorless. Its color is referred 
to as “non-shining white”’ as opposed to the “shining white” attributed 
to fire. If water were colorless we could not see it or perceive it in 
any way. Vallabha takes exception to this view, however, Since 
he is concerned to argue that God and yogis can perceive atoms, he 
relaxes the requirement of manifested color for perceptibility, atoms 
being without such qualities. 

Sridhara is of the opinion that qualities do not arise in a substance 
until a moment after the substance has come into existence (at the 


QUALITIES AND MOTIONS 119 


earliest), and that likewise, since the cause of the destruction of a color 
is the destruction of the substance in which it inheres (except in cook- 
ing), the quality persists for a moment after the substance is destroyed. 
He seems to be motivated in this doctrine by the extreme importance 
the Naiyayikas place upon keeping quite separate substances and their 
properties. Sridhara seems driven by this to allow qualities a fleeting 
existence without any loci, which flies against ordinary Nyaya-Vaise- 
sika doctrine. Yet his position is found adopted in later works, 
e.g., the Tarkabhasa. 

Earth and water have taste, while earth alone smells. All 4 kinds of 
atoms have touch qualities, but the temperature or characteristic 
feel of the touch of each is distinctive. Fire has hot touch exclusively, 
and water cold touch. Earth has indifferent touch, neither hot nor 
cold. Air, finally, has a characteristic touch which identifies it 
uniquely; “‘air,” indeed, seems to have been normally construed 
as wind. When earthy objects feel warm, this is due to there being 
fiery particles mixed in the substance. Tangibility is counted as a 
second necessary condition of a substance’s perceptibility, in addition 
to possession of manifested color. VWyomasiva remarks that the ray 
of the eye which is fiery must have unmanifested touch, otherwise 
we would burn up everything we look at ! 


2. Number: One should not look to Nyaya-Vaisesika discussions 
of number for any mathematical insights; indeed, there is no reference 
to mathematical theory in this literature. Number is viewed by 
our philosophers as a kind of quality which substances (and only 
substances) have. Thus one cannot speak of the number of qualities 
a thing has, for example, for qualities have no number, number being 
itself a quality. This is a defect in the old theory which is resolved 
later on in Navya-nyaya.é 

The peculiar characteristic of numbers is that they constitute the 
special causal condition for the phenomenon of counting. In this 
connection a difference of opinion of some interest arises over whether 
the number one is a number at all. The number one is in certain 
respects different from two and above: this fact is noted by Kanada 
himself. Thus the number one is eternal in eternal substances but 
noneternal in noneternal substances, whereas two etc., are always 
noneternal. Again, numbers from two on are products, but one is 
not a product. Nor does the number one ever occur in a cause, 
says Kanada; presumably the suggestion is that the causal conditions 
of any effect are always numerous. Pragastapada adds further 
differences: two, etc., occur in several things at a time, while one 


120 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


occurs in only one thing at a time. One lasts as long as its 
locus, while two etc., may come and go even though their locus re- 
mains, (That is, substances x and y are two, so that the number 
two inheres in each; if x is destroyed, two is also, but_» remains.) 
But the most important difference by far is that, according to Prag asta- 
pada and many others of our group, two and above have as a causal 
factor in their production a certain kind of judgment, while one is 
not produced at all. 

Prasastapada gives a terrifically complex account of how the num- 
bers two, etc., are produced. This account features a certain sort 
of judgment called “‘enumerative cognition,” as a result of which 
“‘each (of two substances) comes to be invested with the new character 
of being second to another without forfeiting its own intrinsic numerical 
unity.’ This clearly puts two, etc., in a very different position from 
one, which is produced from a_ like quality—viz., unity—in 
the material cause (s) ofitslocus. ‘Two turns out to be a quality depen- 
dent upon our thinking it present, while one is there whether we think 
so or not. To admit what such qualities as two, etc., represent in 
Pras astapada’s view would seem to be a very dangerous admission for 
a Naiyadyika to make if he wishes to maintain a sure-footed realism 
about the external world. 

Later writers show the tensions created by this theory in several 
ways. Aviddhakarna seems to have held that unity (one) isa separate 
quality altogether. His reason appears to have been that, in order 
for causation to take place, the causal factors must become unified, 
and the quality they come to have as a result is unity. Although 
that is about all we know of what Aviddhakarna said, we may specu- 
late that the unity of these causal factors was conceived by Aviddha- 
karna as neither a product of the unities of the various factors nor as 
dependent upon our making a judgment—this would be a reason- 
able interpretation, one must concede. 

More radical still is the view of the Bhisanakara, Bhasarvajiia. 
He dismisses the whole category of number. Unity and diversity 
are not qualities at all, but rather they are equivalent, on the one 
hand to identity of nature, and on the other to natural difference. 
This view appears to resemble the doctrine of the identity of indis- 
cernibles : if “two” things have no difference in their essential nature 

(svariipa), they are not two but one, whereas if they have differences 
in their essential nature they are two. This, of course, still does not 
account for the difference between two, three and above. As to 
this, if we can accept Vallabha’s authority, Bhasarvajiia admitted 
that we make distinctions in virtue of our enumerative cognitions, 


QUALITIES AND MOTIONS 121 


but his notion is that this fact precludes our counting numbers as 
qualities. 

The task of answering Bhasarvajfia falls to Udayana. His idea is 
that without a quality of two we shall be unable to explain the size 
of a dyad and other larger compounds. The argument here reflects 
that of Pragastapida reviewed above.® Apararkadeva replies that 
Udayana, in accepting Prasastapada’s line of reasoning, accepts a 
principle that is untenable. That principle is this : the size of a part 
can only bring about size of the same type in the whole; e.g., a minute 
size in a part can only bring about a larger but still minute size in the 
whole. But, says Apararka, this rule is obviously incorrect. 

Apararka also speaks to the status of the number one. One is not 
a quality, he says, but rather a universal. Indeed, Apararka is willing 
also to construe all numbers as universals. Vallabha rejects the view 
that numbers are universals, however, on the grounds of ordinary 
speech : if two were a universal we would recognize something and 
say “‘this isa two and that is a two” just as we say “‘this is a pot and 
that is a pot.”? Vallabha indeed rejects most of Bhasarvajfia’s thoughts 
on the topic of number. He says that one is not merely a thing’s 
identity, for we do not normally see things as “one” but need a special 
judgment to recognize a thing’s unity. Furthermore, he construes 
the thought of the Bhasana as saying that the enumerative cognitions 
produce two, three, ecc., where they were not before. Vallabha 
derides this view, and says that an enumerative cognition of two, for 
example, requires the quality two to be present already in the world. 
Vallabha appears to think that the cause of enumerative cognitions 
includes the number of the things about which the judgment is made. 
And this is indeed the way in which the Naiyayika who, like Pragasta- 
pada, thinks that numbers are dependent on cur knowledge, refutes 
the idealist charge that the Nyaya position allows the mind the ability 
to create. The answer is rehearsed by Sridhara: it is that although 
numbers require cognitions to come into being, they also require, 
as an additional causal factor, the existence of the proper number of 
substances independently of our knowing. E.g., the judgment that 
there are 3 things in front of one is required in order that 3 qualify 
the 3 substances, but it is also required that there be 3 unities out there, 
each with its quality of one. 

3. Contact and Disjunction: We have seen already the essentials 
of the discussion as to whether contact is locus-pervading or not. 
Another topic which receives attention concerns the conditions which 
bring contact about. Kanada says these are 3 : (a) contact may 
be produced by the motion of one but not the other of the two sub- 


122 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


stances; (b) or both may be in motion; (c) or contact may be pro- 
duced by contact. The third kind of contact is explained by Prasasta- 
pada to refer to a situation of the following kind. Considera dyad of 
earth which is in contact with two water atoms which are themselves 
in contact and form a water dyad. Then the earth dyad’s contact 
with the water dyad is produced by the earth dyad’s contacts with 
the water atoms. It is important to note that, according to Pragasta~ 
pada, while one ubiquitous substance, e.g., dasa, may contact non- 
ubiquitous substances, two ubiquitous substances cannot be in contact, 
since neither are capable of motion. He is followed in this by most 
of our philosophers. Characteristicaliy, however, Apararkadeva 
disagrees, allowing contact between two ubiquitous substances such 
as akafa and time. 

Disjunction is considered by the older Vaigesikas to be a quality 
which inheres in a pair of substances when one has just parted con- 
tact with the other. Like contact, it has 3 kinds, says Pragastapada : 
the first two produced by the motion of one or both of the disjuncts, 
the third produced by another disjunction. This third sort, however, 
has 2 varieties: (1) disjunction produced from disjunction of its 
causes, e.g., when some atoms move away from a place and thus 
produce a disjunction between themselves and the atoms which remain 
in that place; (2) disjunction produced by the disjunction of the cause 
from something else, e.g. when one removes one’s hand from the trunk 
of a tree the disjunction of hand from tree produces disjunction of the 
body whose hand it is from the tree. Vacaspati Misra remarks that 
some philosophers of his acquaintance do not accept this third kind 
of disjunction, and it would appear that the dissenter is once again 
Bhasarvajfia. At least Apararkadeva reports that the Bhisanakara 
denied that there is any such disjunction. Actually it would appear 
that the Bhisanakara went a great deal further, and denied disjunc- 
tion as a quality altogether. He appears to have construed disjunc- 
tion as an absence, namely absence of contact where contact would be 
appropriate. But even so, the question of the cause of such an absence 
can be raised, so the issues are distinct. The Bhisanakara seems to 
have argued thus : there is no disjunction produced from disjunction 
of the type (2) mentioned above; action in the hand cannot produce 
disjunction in the body; rather since there is action in the hand there 
is also action in the body, and it is this latter action which produces 
the “disjunction.” 

Vallabha defends the classical view against that of the radicals 
Bhasarvajfia and Apararka. He argues that disjunction cannot be 
‘construed as an absence, since it has a structure different from an 


QUALITIES AND MOTIONS 123 


absence. A disjunction is the parting of some x from some y, where 
both « and » are positive entities and remain so before and after the 
rising of the quality called disjunction. An absence, on the other hand, 
has a counterpositive: an absence is that x which occurs when its 
counterpositive y does not occur. The contrast, thinks Vallabha, is 
evident. 

4. Size and Shape: Under this heading I propose to deal with the 
qualities of farness, nearness, size (or dimension), and separateness. 

Farness and nearness are, like contact and disjunction, qualities of 
pairs of things. They qualify substances which are remote or proxi- 
mate to each other in either space or time. Thus “‘farness’”? may mean 
separation of x from _» by either many contacts with points of space or 
by many contacts with the sun and time. That these qualities are, 
like number, partially dependent for their origination upon our know- 
ledge is a point made by Pragastapada. 

The Bhiisanakara once again takes exception to this category. He 
rejects these two items as qualities, saying that all that is needed are the 
categories of contacts, or in the case of time, moments (i.e.} contacts 
between time and the sun and a given item). Bhasarvajfia seems 
also to have seen that these qualities are relative to the context in 
which they are postulated. He points out that if one were to admit 
farness and nearness one ought in justice to admit another quality 
of intermediateness. Vallabha retorts that any attempt to reduce 
farness and nearness to something else, such as number of contacts, 
will, when unpacked, turn out to utilize the notions of ‘‘far’’ and “‘near’ 
and thus not succeed in eliminating these qualities. This becomes 
understandable when we recall that time and space are inferred from 
our notions that one thing is prior to another, or that one thing is 
nearer to a second than isa third. Given the Naiyayika’s decision to 
find an entity to correspond to each legitimate notion, the logic of 
Pragastapada and Vallabha on this matter is intelligible, but one also 
must sympathize with the Bhisanakara’s wish to keep the beard 
from getting too bushy ! 

The literature contains quite a good deal of discussion about the 
size of things. We have already had occasion to review some of it. 
Kanada finds 5 basic sizes : large, minute (anu), long, short, and a 
fifth size called pdrimandalya. Largeness and longness are perceptible 
and apply to substances which are perceptible. Minuteness and 
shortness are found both in dyads, which are noneternal, and in the 
internal organ, which is eternal; but they are below the threshold of 
perception. The fifth size, pdrimandalya, sometimes translated ‘‘spheri- 
city”, belongs exclusively to atoms. It is inferred that, since other 


124 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


substances have size, atoms must too, and so this size is postulated by 
Kanada for them. 

Candramati offers a somewhat different explanation of parimandalya. 
According to him, it is the size of eternal substances, and has two varie- 
ties, the ultimately small size of atoms being one variety, the all- 
pervading size of akdfa, space, time, and selves being the other. He 
also holds the internal organ to have paérimandalya, in contrast to Kanada. 
Prasastapada mediates between these differences : according to him 
parimandalya is a variety of minute size; minuteness applies both to 
atoms (and internal organs) and to dyads, while large size applies 
both to dkasa, etc., and to middle-sized perceptible products. 

Once again the Bhiisanakara rejects this quality completely. He 
will reduce size to a matter of the number of contacts among the parts 
ofa thing. Again, too, he uses as an argument against this quality 
the fact that statements like ‘‘this is large’’ or ‘“‘this is small” are rela- 
tive, and thus there are no finite number of “kinds” of size such as 
Kanada and the others speak of. 

Very little is said by our philosophers about shape. In discussion of 
theories of meaning there is broached the thought that the meaning 
of a word is the characteristic configuration by which we identify an 
entity—presumably this might be shape in the case of a perceptible 
substance. Vyomasiva dismisses questions of shape by saying that 
particular shapes are the result of the arrangements of the parts of 
the thing and thus additional entities do not have to be recognized 
to corres pond to the words “‘triangular,”’ ‘“‘circular,”’ etc. 

Another quality recognized by Kanada and Pragastapada but 
rejected by Bhasarvajfia is that of separateness. Pragastapada dis- 
tinguishes separateness into two kinds, one the separateness of one thing, 
the other the separateness of two or more things. The first sort of 
quality is viewed by Praéastapada asa kind of differentiating feature 
which any single substance has as long as it remains what it is. A 
quality of this sort is produced each moment by the like quality which 
resides in the thing at the previous moment, and it can function asa 
noninherence cause in the production of wholes which have the original 
substance as a part. The other kind of separateness, separateness of 
two or more things, is, unlike the first, dependent upon our cognition 
in the way that Pragastapada holds number, farness, and nearness to 
be as well. It has no causative functions. The Bhisanakara’s 
reaction to this is to assert that the first kind is irrelevant and the second 
otherwise explainable. The separateness of one kind is not properly 
named. We don’t use the word “‘separate”’ to identify a single thing’s 
identity through change, and indeed no quality is needed to accomp- 


QUALITIES AND MOTIONS 125 


lish this self-identity. As for separateness of two or more substances, 
Bhasarvajfia’s view is that this is merely a kind of absence, the variety 
we shall learn to recognize under the rubric ‘“‘mutual absence”’, i.e., 
difference. Therefore, we can dispense with this quality as well. 
Vallabha as usual springs to the defense. Separateness, he says, is a 
positive entity, notanabsence. Hisresponse, thatis, is exactly parallel 
to his defense of disjunction. 

5. Psychological Qualities: Judgment, Pleasure, Frustration, Desire, 
Aversion, and Effort: The next 6 qualities in the canonical list are 
all qualities of selves, and of selves alone. The first thing to notice 
is that all these qualities are adventitious : it is not the nature ofa self 
to be conscious, etc. On this point the Naiyayika is in violent opposi- 
tion to the Vedanta systems, Jainism, Buddhism, Samkhya— indeed, 
to just about every other school of Indian thought. The advantage 
of the Naiyayika’s view is obvious : since these qualities, some of which 
are directly responsible for bondage, are not natural to a self, a self 
can become freed from them without changing its essential characteris- 
tics. Other schools have to engage in tortured explanations of how 
bondage is possible for the conscious self; they tend to dissociate 
consciousness, and judgments, from the other 5 qualities in this group, 
which are held not to be essential characteristics of the self. Or alter- 
natively, as in Buddhism, the whole notion of the self has to be aban- 
doned. 

On the other hand, as has been noted, the other schools deride the 
resulting Nyaya-Vaisesika account of the self, since it leads to a con- 
ception of liberation which is unattractive. Ifthe freed self is not 
conscious, who needs freedom? We saw that this led Bhasarvajiia 
to modify Nyaya doctrine. 

The view of the sitrakéras and their immediate commentators is 
that judgments are evanescent. Vatsyayana even says that judgments 
are momentary. Gautama gives arguments in a rather mysterious 
passage which Vatsyayana explains as follows. Consider our judg- 
ments of an arrow in flight. Since (as we shall see) motions are 
momentary, and these motions are the proper contents ofthe judgments 
whose series constitutes knowledge of the arrow’s motion, itfollows 
that these judgments each are momentary too. 

Bhasarvajfia dissents from this view. He explicitly asserts in the 
Nydyaséra that consciousness is eternal and attempts tomeet the criti- 
cisms which are directed against him by the older wing of Nyaya. 
Many later Naiyayikas find it possible to adopt an intermediate 
position between the new and old. They view consciousness as eterna] 
in God, but noneternal in ordinary selves, 


126 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Judging from the frequency and extent of their references to it, 
our philosophers seem to have viewed the Samkhya theory about 
consciousness as the main source of mistaken opposition views. The 
relevant features of the Samkhya theory are these. According to 
Samkhya, the fundamental material cause of all empirical events, 
known in Samkhya as prakrti, evolves in a peculiar fashion so that the 
psychical features are manifest first and these in turn evolve their 
“contents” and objects. Thus, prakrti first evolves itself into a psychic 
entity called buddhi. Whenthe witness-selves, or purusas, become 
“reflected” in this buddhi, the result is upalabdhi and jitana, i.e., appre- 
hension and cognition, not to speak of the other psychic qualities 
such as pleasure and frustration, etc. And from thence comes our 
consciousness of a world of objects, bodies, etc. 

Gautama seems to have this theory very much in mind when he 
pronounces, atthe outset of his discussion of consciousness. that the 
four words buddhi, jitdna, upalabdhi, and pratyaya are synonymous — 
which might otherwise seem a peculiar way to begin an exposition. 
Pragastapada repeats the same equation, and the commentators are 
quick to muster extended arguments to show that these words do not 
name distinct faculties. Wyomaégiva notes that on the Samkhya view 
there is just one buddhi for all the purusas — but since by hypothesis 
the purusas are not able to interact with prakriti, there is no property 
which the buddhi can have in relation to one purusa and not another; 
as a result everyone should have the same cognitions. Vacaspati 
takes issue with the reflection analogy; since consciousness is unmodi- 
fiable, it cannot be reflected as the sunlight is supposed to be reflected 
by the moon. Udayana expatiates further on these and other argu- 
ments. He is particularly concerned to show in the Nydyakusuman- 
jali, as against Samkhya, that the seat of consciousness isthe same as 
the agent —if it were notso, he argues, a person’s awareness of the 
results of karma will be divorced from his agency asthe originator 
of that karma, and either bondage or liberation will be rendered impo- 
ssible. The conclusion reached by Naiyadyikas is that the term 
buddhi is to be understood to refer to a quality ofselves, the same selves 
as are the loci of other psychical qualities constituting enjoyment and 
agency. 

How do we become aware of consciousness ? According to Nyaya- 
VaiSesika, in opposition to the other schools, we perceive cognitions 
through our internal organs. The Naiydyika’s reasons are connected 
mainly with his epistemological concerns; in particular, he wishes 
to deny vehemently that consciousness is self-revealing. 

We may note in passing that while Pragastapada views conscious- 


QUALITIES AND MOTIONS 127 


ness as non-locus-pervading, Udayana sees it as locus-pervading 
since its locus is without parts. For reasons in explanation of these 
and other discrepant views about the locus-pervadingness of various 
qualities see above, pages 114-117. 

Moving on now to the other psychic qualities, we may consider 
next the quality of pleasure and its opposite number, called dukkha 
inSanskrit. Itiscommon to translate this term as ‘‘pain,’’ conforming 
to English-language expectations, but it is clear from the context, 
and even specifically argued by Vacaspati Misra, that it should not 
be considered as merely pain, but rather a broader notion of unhappi- 
ness. One scholar has suggested that “‘disharmony’’ would be as 
accurate a translation as he can think of,’ and I have decided on “‘frus- 
tration” for this book. It may suggest itself that we might well, 
in conformity with this decision, translate the word for “‘pleasure”’ 
as instead meaning ‘“‘satisfaction,’’ coordinately with ‘‘frustration,”’ 
and Idonotdoubt that this would be accurate and more logical. If 
I do not take this course here itis merely because there is an almost 
universal practice on the part of translators to translate the terms as 
“pleasure” and “‘pain,” and by rejecting both these terms the reader 
may fail to remember the connection between our discussion here and 
the writings of others on Nyaya Vaisesika. 

Vatsyayana is rather unlike the other Naiyayikas in stressing our 
hedonistic concerns—he espouses a_ straightforward psychological 
hedonism, and in his introduction classifies all objectsinto ascheme 
which takes pleasure and frustration as basic. Others are more 
cautious about granting so much importance to our immediate motiva- 
tions, preferring to speak as if we generally desire release, 

This raises the question as to whether in release a self enjoys pleasure 
(he is surely satisfied !). The answer given by the older philosophers, 
and followed by most later ones, is “‘no’’; Bhasarvajfia, however, 
says ‘‘yes.”’ Indeed, Bhasarvajfia thinks that pleasure and frustration 
are eternal, as are knowledge and ignorance; our bondage consists 
in our failure, due to bad karma, to see that correct knowledge and 
pleasure are concomitant. The only early Naiyayika whose remarks 
indicate a possible sympathy with this view of Bhasarvajfia is Candra- 
mati, who speaks of two kinds of pleasure, the one caused by bodily 
activity, the other by inactivity when there is perfect knowledge. 

Desire and aversion are, as we have already seen, the immediate 
source of the distractions which lead to activity and bondage. They 
too, like the other psychic qualities are perceptible by the internal 
organ. Prag astapada lists some major varieties of each. Kinds of 
desires are erotic, hunger, passionate, compassionate; kinds of aversion 


128 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


are anger, resentment, jealousy. Thus, Pragastapada views desire as 
sometimes mild, while aversion tends to be kind of ‘“‘burning,’’ he 
while 


33 


says. Sivaditya also speaks of aversion as a “blazing up, 
desire is described as “‘purposeful.”’ It would seem from this that our 
philosophers thought of aversion as in the main an emotional reaction 
against sources of frustration, while desire might well be calculating 
as well as abandoned. This might be kept in view when reviewing 
the question as to whether God has desires or not. 

As a result of desire or aversion, selves exert effort (yaina or prayaina), 
sometimes also rendered as “‘volition.”’ Effort is likewise perceptible 
to the internal organ. Pragastapada has it that there is also a_ kind 
of effort which arises in the natural course of one’s life, resulting in 
such activities as breathing and attending. Sivaditya may be merely 
reporting Pragastapada’s notion when he classifies effort into 3 kinds, 
one of which is indifferent as to getting or avoiding an object. 

The natural question whether liberation is after all possible, since 
in desiring and exerting effort (in yoga) to attain it we are producing 
more bondage, is raised by Apararkadeva, but only to say simply 
that these desires and efforts, unlike the others, do not bind. 

6. Dispositional Qualities : Weight, Fluidity, Viscidity, Inertia, Elasticity, 
Mental Traces : We turn now to a number of qualities which are 
postulated to explain the dispositions of substances to behave in certain 
characteristic ways. Pragastapada lists 4 of these: weight, fluidity, 
viscidity and a fourth called ‘dispositional tendency’’ (samskara). 
This last he then subdivides into 3: inertia, elasticity, and mental 
traces. 

Earth and water have weight; air and dkdfa have none, according 
to Prasastapada. It is imperceptible, an inferred entity. The only 
problem of any consequence about weight is the one, referred to 
above (p. 76), concerning the relationship between the weight of an 
object and the weights of its parts. 

On the other hand, water, earth, and fire all have fluidity. How- 
ever, water’s fluidity is held to be natural (sdmsiddhika) , while that of the 
other 2 kinds of substance is accidental (nazmitiika). Since we see 
a river flowing, etc., it is directly perceptible both by the visual and 
tactual organs. It is locus-pervading. An example of an earthy 
substance which displays accidental fluidity is butter. Fluidity is 
given the power of producing motions by Pragastapada. 

Viscidity is postulated to explain the disposition of certain substan- 
ces to stick together. According to Sivaditya viscidity also has 2 
varieties: natural, which is found in water, and limited (aupddhika), 
as in (presumably) butter, etc. It is perceptible by vision and touch, 


QUALITIES AND MOTIONS 129 


Inertia (vega), sometimes rendered as “‘impetus,”’ “‘velocity,”’ 
or even “speed,” is the quality of a moving substance which is res- 
ponsible for its continuing in the same direction. There is a dis- 
crepancy between Vaisesika and Nyadya on how many such inertia- 
qualities occur in a body moving ina line ofdirect flight. Sealreports 
that the Vaigesikas hold that there is one inertia throughout, but that 
Uddyotakara and the other Naiyayikas hold that inertia, like the other 
qualities, ismomentary and produces another one at the next moment. 
The Ny4ya view has the advantage that acceleration and deceleration 
can be easily explained. The Vaigesika posits that inertia loses its 
force as it expends energy and thus the body eventually slows down 
and stops. Change of direction in a moving body also calls forth 
some additional hypotheses. Some philosophers of our schools think 
that when the body changes direction the original inertia is destroyed 
and a new one produced, either by impact or compression, Others 
hold that the original inertia’ is not destroyed but remains to help 
produce a new motion, a resulting change in its own direction.® 

Inertia is a locus-pervading, specific quality of the material sub- 
stances. Pragastapada holds it to be perceptible. He explains 
flight by hypothesizing that inertia can oppose weight. 

The Bhiisanakara rejected inertia as a quality. Apararkadeva 
also does so, arguing that inertia can be analyzed into spatiotemporal 
notions and is not needed as an additional category. Furthermore, 
he argues, motions are not produced by inertia. As we shall see 
shortly, these philosophers take motions themselves to be qualities, 
not a different category altogether. 

Sridhara is aware of opponents (perhaps Bhdsarvajfia) who wish to 
reduce inertia to motion. He argues that from the phenomenon of 
motion alone we could never get the idea of inertia. We do not get 
it from slow motion, he says, and from fast motion we get the idea ofa 
solid object, as in the Buddhist’s favorite example of the whirling 
fire-wheel or Glatacakra. 

Elasticity (sthitisthdpaka) is a quality in earth which explains/ the 
tendency of certain things, e.g., the branch of a tree, to return to its 
original position after it has been pushed aside. 

The third kind of dispositional tendency is the mental trace. These 
are dispositions in the selves, and are produced by vivid knowledge, 
habit, or a special effort of attention. Merit and demerit are said by 
Vatsyayana to produce traces and Pragastapada mentions that dreams 
and other kinds of erroneous cognition can also produce traces, Pra- 
§astapada also explains how traces can be counteracted : by know- 
ledge, by intoxication, and by great pain. According to Sivaditya 


130 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


traces are the causal factors most efficacious in the production of 
memory. Udayana also defends the independence of traces by argu- 
ing that memory would be inexplicable without positing a trace 
corresponding to each distinct object perceived in the past; this is 
necessary, he suggests, since on the Nyaya-Vaisesika theory knowledge 
is formless and cannot take on the form of its object. 

Traces are appealed to in a variety of contexts to smooth out the 
theories our philosophers espouse. We shall notice these instances 
as we proceed. 


7. Merit and Demerit, and Adrsta: Ethical naturalists that they are, 
the Nydya-Vaisesika philosophers hold that the moral qualities of 
selves are causal factors in the production of certain nonmoral, as 
well as moral, results. Vatsyayana says that when Gautama speaks 
of “activity”? (pravrtti), one of the members in his fivefold chain, he 
has merit and demerit in mind. We have seen above how merit 
and demerit play their part in the systems of Kanada and Gautama 
in producing bondage and transmigration. There remain a few 
technicalities to consider. 

Properly speaking, it seems one ought to say that merit and demerit 
earned by the behavior of self A’s body inheres in A and produces 
therein traces which in turn produce the eventual birth of A’s next 
body. But our writers are generally careless about the distinctions 
here and speak of merit and demerit as the immediate cause of trans- 
migration. 

Yogis have accumulated great merit, which enables them to do 
unusual things. In particular one might mention that it enables 
them to be directly intuitive about things (such asmerit and demerit) 
which normal people can only infer, and that it also enables a yogi 
to throw his internal organ to great distances and thus into other 
bodies. 

The term adrsta seems to have been early associated with Vaisesika 
and rejected by Nyaya. Kanada makes extensive use of the notion 
to explain a variety of things: magnetic attraction, the initia] motion 
of atoms, falling downwards, as well as transmigration. Gautama 
explicitly rejects the theory that adrs{a is responsible for the connection 
between a self and its body, i.e., for transmigration, because he reads 
adrs{a as involving the various aspects of Kanada’s use, notably that 
aspect in which itis a quality of atoms. Pragastapada preserves 
Kanada’s sense of adrsia as the cause of the initial motion of atoms, 
but seems to equate thiscause with the agency of the merit and demerit 
of the selves. Udayana flatly rejects adrsia as a quality of atoms, 


QUALITIES AND MOTIONS 131 


and by his time it is accepted on all sides that adrsta is the force of the 
merit and demerit of selves.® 

8. Motions : In the standard Vaiéesika list of categories, motions 
constitute the third of the 7 great categories, and most Naiyayikas 
follow this classification. In familiar fashion, Bhasarvajfia and those 
who follow him deviate. In this case the novelty in their view is that 
they classify motion as an additional member of the second category, 
as a quality. In the Nydyasdéra, when Bhasarvajfia is listing the cate- 
gories, motions are notably missing. I have been unable to find any 
explicit refutation of the Bhiisanakara’s view that motion is a quality. 
Indeed, motion is in all germane respects like a quality. A motion 
inheres in a substance, is momentary, and acts as the noninherence 
cause of the appearance of certain qualities such as contact and dis- 
junction. None of these properties are inconsistent witha motion’s 
being a quality. The only doubt that might occur would be over the 
extent of time during which a motion may last. Kanada says that 
the flight of an arrow is a series of motions, and Vatsyayana says that 
motions are momentary. However, one may speculate that some 
doubts were felt on thatscore. And indeed Vyomagiva asserts that the 
Vaiéesika view is that a motion lasts 5 moments. If so, this would 
constitute a sufficient reason to distinguish motions from other quali- 
ties, which are held to be strictly momentary. But there isa disturb- 
ing lack of attention to these problems, which have an obvious kinship 
to Zeno’s paradoxes. 

A topic that does receive extended attention, however, is the ex- 
planation of how a motion is produced and what a motion can _pro- 
duce, that is, the explanation of movement. Kanada views a motion 
as a cause of contact and disjunction but not of other motions, and 
says that motions are caused by various qualities: contact, volition, 
adrsta. Pragastapada adds to the list of motion producing qualities 
weight, fluidity, and inertia. Some writers dispute the ability of a 
motion to produce contact or disjunction. Uddyotakara says that a 
motion cannot produce these qualities by itself, and Bhasarvajfia 
denies that motions have any such causal role, asserting that when we 
say that a thing’s motion brought it into contact with something it is 
the cause of the thing’s motion which is the cause of the contact. He 
also denies that inertia can produce motion. 

One reason why motions cannot be granted the capacity to produce 
other motions is given by Sridhara. _If motion mis by its nature able 
to produce a second motion n without assistance, then there could be 
no cessation of motion since there would be no reason for m not to 
produce n even if m were supposed to be the last motion, Thus, if 


132 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


after m there does turn out to be another motion n , the cause of n 
should be sought in the special causative factors pertinent to its occur- 
rence, and not in m alone.10 

Can motions be seen, or must they be inferred? Kanada says 
we can see motions in substances which are visible, i.e., in colored 
substances, 

Kanada subdivides motions, in rather quaint fashion, into 5 varie- 
ties. These are: (1) going up; (2) going down; (3) contraction; 
(4) expansion; (5) going. The last includes all sorts of indiscrimi- 
nate movement, and is supposed to be produced by composite forces 
working in different directions, for example, vortical motion produced 
by the inertias of two bodies moving in opposite directions.11_ None 
of the later writers feel inclined to improve upon this classification. 


7 


UNIVERSALS, INDIVIDUATORS, ABSENCES 


We now turn to those problems of ontology which have a close 
kinship with various issues of great interest to philosophers in the West 
as well as in India, issues which divide realists from nominalists and 
conceptualists, which probe such ultimate questions as “how does 
one tell one thing from two ?” and ‘‘what is the status of negation ?” 
With respect to all of these issues there is one generalization which 
can be made in characterizing the position of Nyaya-Vaigesika, and 
that is that in resolving issues such as these a Naiyayika is prone to 
proceed through verification rather than through recourse to episte- 
mological subtleties. Thus he peoples the world with universals rather 
than attributing classifications merely to our selective attention; he 
postulates individuating entitiesrather than allowing that numerical 
identity is dependent upon our concerns to reidentify certain items; 
and he eventually adds a category of negative entities, absences, 
rather than construing reference to the negate of a thing as dependent 
upon our judgemental activity of denial. In all these moves heis 
motivated by a realistic bias — realistic now in the epistemological 
sense of not wishing to allow that entities can be produced merely 
by an activity of thought. This underlying motivation must be con- 
stantly kept in mind if one is to understand the rationale of these 
aspects of Nyaya-Vaisesika philosophy. 

1. Universal and Particular: The fully developed Nyaya-Vaiéesika 
view of universals is that they are real, independent, timeless, ubiqui- 
tous entities which inhere in individual substances, qualities, and 
motions and are repeatable, i.e., may inhere in several distinct indi- 
viduals at once and or at different times and places. The general 
term used in Vaigesika for such an entity is sémdnya. 

However, the initial doctrine of the school as found in the VarSesika- 
siitras and the early commentators is substantially different from the 


134 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


notion just characterized. Kanada’s 6 categories contain 2 — 
sdmanya and visesa — whose names are retained by the school, but 
which he probably construed rather differently from later thinkers. 
It has been suggested (and Hattori in his summary below of the 
Vaisesikas iitras follows this suggestion ) that translating these two terms 
“genus” and “species”? would render Kanada’s intent most accura- 
tely. This translation illuminates the otherwise puzzling statement 
which Kanada makes : that a sémdnya (other than Being, to which 
we shall return) may also be viewed as a vifesa. This makes perfect 
sense as applied to an entity such as, e.g., potness, which is a genus 
relative to particular pots but a species relative to the more inclusive 
genus clay-objectness. Indeed it is evident that Candramati not 
only construed Vaisesika theory in just this way, but also carried 
out its logical implication to the extent of adding a category. His 
reasoning was this : potness, etc., are both sdémdnya and visesa, both 
genus and species at once. They are thus one kind of entity. A 
different, and second, kind of entity is pure Being, which is the highest 
genus and does not differentiate anything, being shared by all entities. 
And a third kind of entity is the ultimate individuator (antyavisesa), 
an entity which differentiates without assimilating, which is not 
common to and shared by several entities but is unique and self- 
individuating. 

We may divine from this that one source ofthe postulation of univer- 
sals, especially strong in the Vaigesika thinkers, is the necessity of 
explaining the existence of natural kinds, the fact that certain indivi- 
duals are similar and not merely because we think them so. A second 
source of the notion of universals, particularly prominent in the 
Nydyasitras and its commentarial literature, comes from the necessity 
of deciding what it is that a common noun names. 

In Gautama’s discussion of the meaning of words three types of 
designata are considered. The question raised is: does the word 
“cow”? (e.g.) mean Bossie, the individual cow, or the characteristic 
shape and other qualities associated with cows, or the property of 
cowness which is common to the several individuals to which the word 
“cow”? is customarily applied ? Gautama’s conclusion is that all 
3 are involved in the meaning of the word, and we shall consider 
the Nydya theory of meaning more closely below. At the moment 
our concern is with Gautama’s notion of a property, such as cowness. 

The Sanskrit word that Gautama uses is jdtz, etymologically asso- 
ciated with the notion of natural kinds (the same word is used to 
identify members of a caste, a natural kind in the realm of human 
beings). Randle points out that Gautama knew of the Vaigesika 


UNIVERSALS, INDIVIDUATORS, ABSENCES 135 


view, speaking of sdémdnya in the sdira in question, and says that jati 
“seems to be what we should calla natural class.” Watsydyana, it is 
interesting to note, brings the two terms into relation: according to 
him a sdémdnya is a “‘pure’’ universal, like Being, which assimilates 
without differentiating, while a jati is an ordinary property like potness 
or cowness, one which both assimilates and differentiates. Thus 
Vatsyayana uses the term jati for the purpose that Candramati sought 
to serve by giving the term sdmdnyavisesa a technical meaning. Pra- 
gastapada adopts Vatsyayana’s, rather than Candramati’s termino- 
logy, and after him both Naiydyikas and Vaisesikas speak alike on 
this point. Nevertheless, the category of universals is usually referred 
to by the word sémdnya although jatis as well as “‘pure’’ universals 
belong in the category. 

Although Randle claims that ajatiseems to beaclass, B. K. Matilal 
has pointed out that neither in the medieval nor in the modern logi- 
cian’s sense of ‘‘class’’ can this be made out.2 Rather the jatz is the 
property which demarcates the members of a class. One might be 
tempted to say that Naiydyikas are intensionalists,but this is mislead- 
ing. Rather the Naiyayika should be conceived to be a realist in 
the scholastic sense; he believes that universals exist ante rem, indepen- 
dently of both thought and instantiation. 

A further distinction within the category of sémdnya is developed 
gradually during our period, and becomes of immense importance 
in Navya-nyaya. This is the distinction between jati and upddhi. 
Ingalls has suggested the translation ‘imposed property”’ for upadhi.* 
By Sivaditya’s time it was accepted that the category of universals 
included both jatis and imposed properties. 

As Sivaditya notes, the difference between an imposed property 
and a proper universal or jati is that the former ‘“‘has a sublator,” 
i.e., fails to satisfy one or more of the tests of jdti-hood. These tests 
were formulated succinctly by Udayana in the Atrapdvali. ‘There are 
6 tests. First, a proper universal must have more than one individual 
as instances; thus Devadatta-ness, a property unique to Devadatta, 
is not a proper universal but an imposed property. Second, there 
can be only one proper universal for each distinct set of individuals. 
E.g., kalasatva and ghatatva, both properties instantiated in each and 
every pot, and only in pots, are not two different properties; rather, 
the two Sanskrit terms must be construed as denoting one and the 
same property. Ifsomeone insists that in addition to potness there 
is a second property, kalafatva, inhering in the same entities as potness, 
he is speaking of an imposed property. Thirdly, if two properties 
have x as an instance, and one of the two does not fall completely 


136 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


within the other, then neither is a proper universal—both must be 
imposed properties. Thus elementhood and materiality are imposed 
properties, for earth is both an element and material, but ether is 
an element and not material, while the internal organ is material 
but not an element. This fault is called crossconnection. The 
fourth test excludes from the scope of proper universals any property 
whose incorporation would result in the production of an infinite 
regress. Thus universalhood, the property common to fotness, cowness, 
etc., is an imposed property, not a proper universal. Fifthly, a pro- 
perty which is supposed to have as loci entities which by hypothesis 
are unique is an imposed property, not a proper universal. Such 
a property is individuatorness, since the ultimate individuators 
are by nature things which differentiate without assimilating. Sixthly 
and finally, if a property is such that it cannot, consistently with 
Ny4ya-Vais esika theory, be construed as inhering in its loci then itis 
an imposed property, not a proper universal. Thus inherenceness is 
animposed property, for if it were to be supposed that it inheres in 
severalinherences® the supposed relation could not be inherence 
but rather a self-linking connector, since the relation (inherence) is 
identical with one of its relata (inherences) . 

Though the Kirandvaliis the most noted exposition of these require- 
ments, they are by no means unknown in the earlier literature, The 
fault of crossconnection is appealed to by Pragastapada in meeting 
an objection to the fifth type of motion mentioned above, which the 
objector feels covers all motions whatsoever. Pragastapada’s answer 
is that to classify a whirling motion as both going up and going down, 
for example, involves the fault of crossconnection. Sridhara notes 
that universalhood is not proper universal, and likewise for inherenceness, 
and explicitly identifies the former as an imposed property. This is 
the earliest use of upddhi in the sense of imposed property that I have 
been able to locate. 

Of the 6 faults only one is seriously challenged by our philosophers. 
The doubtful one is crossconnection, and the challenge comes, pre- 
dictably, from the Bhisanakara’s school. Apararkadeva, for example, 
submits that crossconnection is not a fault, alluding specifically to 
Udayana’s listing of it. Apararka raises the question in the course 
of rejecting variegated color as a separate kind of color. Udayana 
and others find themselves forced to postulate variegated color since 
for one thing to be both red and green would result in crossconnection 
of the universals redness and greenness. Apararka rejects crossconnection 
as a fault. The Navya-naiyadyika Raghunatha Siromani agrees, 


UNIVERSALS, INDIVIDUATORS, ABSENCES 137 


noting that there would be mighty few proper universals if this require- 
ment were adhered to. 


Itis worth pausing to note that the second requirement is tantamount 
to what Western logicians term the principle of extensionality; this 
is why it is, as remarked above, misleading to call the Naiyayikas 
intensionalists. It is true that they recognize universals as real, 
independent entities; nevertheless, they do adhere to certain parsimo- 
nious practices. 


2. How Do We Come to Know Universals? : Are universals directly 
perceived, or only inferred? The authors of the satras did not address 
this question, but as soon as the issue was faced the answer was evident 
and consistently adhered to: universals are perceptible. After all, 
universals are the features by which we recognize, reidentify, and thus 
are able to classify individuals, sothatsurely we must be able to perceive 
them. That led in turn to the question: how do we perceive them— 
with what organs ? Candramati held that we perceive them with 
ourinternalorgan. Hecarefully distinguishes perception of universals, 
which only requires contact between self and internal organ, from 
perception of substances, qualities etc., which requires the activity of 
external sense organs. Pragastapada, however, explicitly states that 
a universal residing in a perceptible locus is perceived by whichever 
sense organ it is that apprehends the locus. Samkarasvamin is 
said to have held that universals actually have a form, are colored, 
etc.,—a view which plays hob with some of the assumptions we have 
had occasion to note heretofore. Later commentators appear to 
have felt difficulties about the perceptibility of universals, however. 
Vyomagiva asserts that universals are perceived only by that type of 
perception termed ‘“‘nonpropositional’’ {nirvikalpa). We shall have 
more to say about this when we discuss perception, 


Despite the fact that we are supposed to be able to perceive universals 
directly, it was still felt necessary to defend the existence of universals 
against objections, and thus inference also came into play as a way of 
cognizing universals. 


3. Do Universals Exist ? Defense against Nominalism: Our philoso- 
phers postulated universals in order to explain several kinds of pheno- 
mena: the use of common nouns to speak indifferently of one or more 
of a group of things, the notion that one thing is similar to another 
in a certain respect, the facts of recognition, causation, and inference. 
However the Buddhists, the Indian defenders of nominalism, profess 
to be able to explain each of these phenomena in accordance with 
nominalistic assumptions. In addition, they find fault with certain 


138 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


implications of the realist’s view. Let us take up those among these 
points that we have not already had occasion to mention. 

First, as to what common nouns designate, the Buddhist theory 
is that the function of such a noun in a sentence is to exclude from 
consideration things which do not answer the description. Thus 
the term ‘“‘cow” in the sentence “‘bring the cow’? has the function of 
excluding from consideration all the other things the speaker does 
not want brought. Thus, a noun designates the negation of its comp- 
lement—that is to say, “‘bring a cow” has the force of “‘bring something 
whichis notanon-cow.” The negate of the complement ofsomething 
is technically termed apoha, and the Buddhist theory is thus referred 
to as apohavdda. ‘The point of the view for the current topic is that 
the function of common nouns can be explained without assuming 
that reference is being made to any external element other than the 
individual being brought—the particular cow. Where the Naiyayika 
argues that the force of ‘‘a cow” (as opposed to “‘the cow”) can only 
be explained by postulating a property common to cows, the Buddhist 
claims to be able to explain the difference by reference to what is 
being excluded; thus the entities alluded to in the expression “‘bring 
a cow” are all things which are not present in the situation at all— 
namely, all the other things which are not cows capable of being 
brought. 

In answer to this theory of the Buddhists many arguments are 
adduced by Uddyotakara and later writers. While reserving a fuller 
review of these arguments for a later section, we may note here Uddyo- 
takara’s point that if the Buddhist hopes to avoid commitment to uni- 
versals by this theory he is doomed to be disappointed, for in order to 
understand the directive ‘‘bring a cow’’—even granting that the only 
external reference is to an individual—still we cannot tell which indi- 
vidual the reference is to except by apprehending the property cows 
have in common, a property which is the “‘complement”’ of the pro- 
perty all non-cows have in common. 

As for similarity, it is notable that Buddhists tend to take similarity 
asa primitive relation generated by our conceptualizing activity, which 
projects these classifications into the external world. Thus they 
espouse a nominalism which leads straightaway to epistemological 
idealism. We shall consider the epistemological issues shortly. 

Jayanta argues that however one strives to explain the facts of 
recognition of an object seen before, he will have to posit that that 
thing is of a kind, and the notions of kind presuppose those of common 
properties. 

4. Where Are Universals Located? : It is well-known to students of 


UNIVERSALS, INDIVIDUATORS, ABSENCES 139 


ancient Greek philosophy that an importance different between the 
theories of Plato and Aristotle concerning universals was over whether 
universals only occurred in their instances or had some kind of in- 
dependent existence ‘“‘elsewhere.’? This sort of question was also 
raised in classical Nyaya-Vaigesika. Pragastapada is perhaps the 
first to speak to it directly. He states that while a universal inheres 
in all its loci simultaneously, the universal does not exist in the space 
between the loci. Uddyotakara seems to agree. However, there is 
a tradition that universals, like ether, selves, inherence, etc., are all- 
pervasive entities. The view espoused by Pragastapada appears to 
violate this tradition. Vyomasiva notices the discrepancy. He 
points out that to defend the tradition one would have to hold that 
though a universal—say cowness—is present everywhere and so present 
in horses, its manifestation in cows and not in horses is due to some 
additional causal factor. This is absurd, thinks Vyomagiva. Rather 
he suggests how to read the traditional account of universals as all- 
pervasive: the idea is that universals are unlimited in the scope of 
their occurrence, though of course they do not occur everywhere but 
only in their proper instances. 

Vacaspati takes a different tack. He thinks that universals are 
everywhere at once but sees no fault in this, After all, he remarks, 
akdéa and selves are all-pervasive and so concurrent, but it is not neces- 
sary to conclude that one qualifies the other. Only if inherence 
links a pair of things one of which is a universal do we have qualifica- 
tion. The idea is that only cows are capable of being related to cow- 
ness by inherence. The puzzle about Vacaspati’s interpretation is 
that we cannot very well suppose under the circumstances that cows 
get their membership in the class cow by virtue of their sharing the 
property cowness, since Vacaspati can only distinguish cowness from 
other coextensive universals by appealing to the fact of the inherence 
in cows ! For Uddyotakara, on the other hand, a thing is neither cow 
nor non-cow except insofar as cowness inheres or fails to inhere in it. 

Udayana characteristically proceeds to the ultimate question: 
does a universal exist even when it has no instances? The connection 
with the foregoing is clear: if a universal occurs only in its instances, 
then it is nonoccurrent when there are no instances. Udayana says 
flatly that universals do occur even in the absence ofinstances. Apara- 
rkadeva specifies that this happens during the period between one 
dissolution of the universe (fralaya) and its subsequent creation, 
though he seems to feel a bit unsure about Udayana’s theory—he re- 
marks that perhaps when universals lack any instances in our universe 
they have instances in another world-egg (brahmanda)! Is this a 


140 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


vague presentiment of the notion of “possible worlds,” a stock concept 
in modern Western philosophy ? 

5 Are Universals Dependent on Our Thought? : None of the foregoing 
quite meets this question. Wehavehad occasion before this tomention 
the disturbing phrase which occurs sometimes in Kanada and Pra- 
§astapada, “marked by knowledge.’? Prasastapada applied this to 
universals, which might suggest he holds some version of what is 
called ‘“‘conceptualism’’ in Western medieval thought. Sridhara 
however, denies this interpretation. Whatis meant is justthat in the 
case of things other than universals we can know them by their effects, 
etc., but since universals have no effects or other distinguishing marks 
we must be supposed to know them directly by reflection. It doesnot 
follow, though, that Sridhara adopts all the usual features of scholastic 
realism. For example, he specifically denies that universals only 
characterize ‘‘natural” kinds: as long as people conventionally treat 
two otherwise different items under the same rubric, that in itself 
is sufficient to warrant our recognizing a universal to be present. Never- 
theless, one gathers that for Sridhara and the rest the universals are 
“already there’’ to be recognized, not put there by us when we adopt 
a classificatory rubric. Thus Naiyayikas are believers in universals 
ante rem although which universals are recognized depends on con- 
vention. 

6. The Supreme Universal Being or Existence: Nyaya-Vaisesika has 
come in for a good deal of criticism over its account of existence, so 
it will be well to devote a special section to a discussion of it. As we 
saw, Kanada and the other early Vaigesika writers viewed existence 
as the highest genus, indeed that genus which is not a species lying 
under any superior genus. The term Kanada uses for this supreme 
universal is bhava, derived from the root bhi meaning “‘to come to 
be,” and he specifically noted that bhava includes first 3 categories of 
substance, quality, and motion. This has led many critics to ask 
what in the world Kanada thought the status of the remaining 3 
of his categories was: do they exist? 

By the time of Candramati and Pragastapada different terminology 
is in use, and partly because of the change in terminology confusion 
subsequently has arisen. The term for the universal which inheres 
in the first 3 categories is now sattd, derived from a different Sanskrit 
root, as, cognate to Latin esse, ‘‘to be.’? It is the highest genus. It 
is probable that the reason why in these writers this highest genus 
was not attributed to the categories of universal, individuator, and 
inherence is that—as we have seen—the members of these categories 
had no higher genus at all in hering in them and thus a fortior: were 


UNIVERSALS, INDIVIDUATORS, ABSENCES 141 


provided no highest genus, whereassubstances, qualities, and motions 
came in hierarchical varieties. 

In any case, Candramati (who we will remember believed there 
were 10 categories, not just 6) found some other properties which 
characterized all 10 of his kinds of things: everything in the categories 
is knowable (jneyatva) and nameable (abhidheyatva). Among his cate- 
gories is the one comprising absences (abhdva), which are thus knowable 
and nameable. Pragastapada, on the other hand, who did not recog- 
nize absences in his list of categories, not only adopted the universals 
of knowability and nameability as characterizing all 6 categories but 
also added a third such universal, “‘isness” (astitva). This word is 
also derived from the root as, and grammatically ought to come 
to the same thing as satté. Pragastapida in characterizing all 6 
categories as having aséitva but only the first 3 as having sattd, clearly 
promulgates a technical terminology with no particular rationale 
in the language. 

Furthermore, by explicitly identifying his satéé@ with Kanada’s 
bhava he compounds the confusion, as it turns out, although he cannot 
be altogether blamed for it. Since the term for ‘‘absence”’—negative 
entities—is abhdva, the result is that neither bhdva nor satid nor astiiva 
quite answers to ‘‘existence.’’ For there would appear to be two impors 
tant and distinct senses of ‘existent’ to be distinguished, and Praégasta- 
pada’s stipulations render no 2 of the 3 terms sufficient to make the 
distinction. In the first of these senses, one might want to have a 
term characterizing all positive entities in distinction from negative 
ones—absences. Etymologically bhava ought to do that, but Pragasta- 
pada follows Kanada in using this term to refer to only the first 3 
categories. Instead Pragastapada adopts the term astitva for all 6 
categories. But then he has no way of handling the second sense, 
which is the sense of “‘existent”’? according to which we want to charac- 
terize every actual entity regardless of its positive or negative mode of 
existing. Having used astitva he might appeal to sattd, say, for this 
wider purpose—but he has already deprived himself of that term by 
equating it to bhava! 

The solution to this predicament, as we find it in Sridhara and 
Udayana, is to widen satté@ to cover the 6 positive categories and 
astitva to cover all 7 including absences. In order to accomplish 
this, however, without completely defying the stipulations which come 
with the authority of Pragastapada, they indulge in the explanation 
that whereas all 6 positive categories have satté connected to them, 
only the first 3 have it actually inhering in the individuals comprising 
the categories, In the other 3 categories the relation between satig 


142 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and the members is not inherence but a more indirect relation. For 
example, although satid, being itself a universal, cannot reside in the 
universal jarness,* both the two universals are related by a relation 
called “‘inherence in the same object”’ (ekarthasamavdya), since both 
satla@ and jarness inhere in jars. 

The other widening, that of the scope of astitva to apply to all 7 
kinds of things recognized by Vaigesikas, took longer and perhaps 
has never been universally adopted. Sridhara proposes a reading 
of astitva which departs from what has so far been suggested. He 
thinks that astitva is not a universal but rather that astitva characterizes 
the distinctive character which each real thing has, what is elsewhere 
called its svaripa or ‘‘own-nature.’? Bhaduri writes: ‘‘The real, 
therefore, is conceived in the Nyaya-Vaisesika system, asa definitely 
determined fact. It must possess a self-identity, without which it 
would neither be whatitis, nor be different from what it is not.’’? 
That the term astitva, as well as “‘knowable” and ‘‘nameable,” are 
used by Udayana and many Navya-naiydyikas to denominate criteria 
of reality is clear enough, and it is also clear that they use it in such 
a way as to cover absences as well as positive existents. Absences, 
like positive things, havea “distinctive self-identity” if they are real; 
it is only fictions which lack a svaripa. 

Nonetheless not all subsequent Naiyayikas followed Sridhara and 
Udayana in applying astitva to all7 categories. Vallabha and Kesava 
Misra, to take two, continue to restrict it to the 6 positive categories 
only. 

7. Individuation : As was noted earlier, the ideas of universal and 
particular originated in Kanada as relative notions akin to our notions 
of genus and species. But just as there is a summum genus, so there is 
an infima species, which in Sanskrit is termed antya vifesa, ‘‘final indivi- 
duator.”? Kanada mentions such individuators, and Candramati 
is perhaps the first to include them as a distinct category. The term 
visesa yields the adjectival form vaisesika after which Kanada’s system 
became known, since the inclusion of individuators constituted 
aunique feature of the school. 

According to Candramati all 9 substances have (final) individuators, 
The atoms of earth, water, fire and air each has its distinct individuator, 
as does each self and internal organ, dkaSa, time, and space. He ex- 
plicitly attributes to the individuator the capacity to produce in us the 
identification of a thing as being of a kind. 

Prasgastapada raises the question as to how we come to recognize 
individuators; he avers that yogis of the “‘ecstatic’’ type see them. 
Atreya apparently added that individuators could only be seen close 


UNIVERSALS, INDIVIDUATORS, ABSENCES 143 


up, unlike universals, which could be recognized from a distance. It 
is clear that the individuators of atoms are considered to be too small 
for the normal observer to perceive. Prasgastapada viewed all the 
other substances, including selves, as imperceptible for normal percip- 
ients, though the yogis could see the difference between selves. As 
later writers admitted the perceptibility of selves they also began 
admitting the perceptibility of the individuators of those selves. 
Vyomasiva, for example, admits the perceptibility of individuators 
but only through indeterminate perception. Sridhara uses Atreya’s 
point about the difficulty of seeing individuators from afar as a way 
of explaining the indistinct perception of distant objects. 

Prag astapada also raises the f'undamantal objection: why must indivi- 
duators be postulated, since substances can be supposed to individuate 
themselves ? His answer is twofold: first, that since atoms and selves are 
alike as far as their generic character is concerned, there must be 
postulated something else to differentiate them ; second that just 
as things become unclean by coming into contact with flesh which 
is ipso facto unclean, so a substance becomes individuated by coming 
into contact with an individuator which is ipso facto individuated. 
Furthermore, adds Sridhara, there would be an infinite regress if 
individuators were not self-individuating. 

Though these arguments may appear unconvincing they seem to have 
been generally accepted throughout most of our period. Varadaraja 
omits individuators from his list of entities which we need to study, 
but it is not clear that he has any basic criticism of the tradition. His 
version of that tradition is a bit different: according to him the indivi- 
duator is the ‘“‘own-nature”’ (svariipa) of simple substances, but the 
individuators have no svariipas. 

8. Absences: We come, then, to the seventh and final category. 
As has been mentioned, its categorial status was only grudgingly 
accepted by some of the Naiydyikas. But this is due to differing 
conceptions about what constitute the conditions for categorial status. 
Starting with Kanada, Naiydyikas discuss absences as an ontological 
rather than epistemological matter. Kanada speaks of non-being 
(asat), and classifies it into 4 kinds corresponding to the major divisions 
accepted and developed at length later. Gautama attributes asat 
to a thing which has not yet been produced. Candramati is the first 
to recognize absences as a distinct kind of being with categoria] status, 
and subsequent philosophers of the school either explicitly list it as 
seventh category or rather apologetically explain why it is not listed 
by Kanada, implying that its ontological importance must not be 
overlooked. 


144 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


For the Naiyayika an absence is an entity distinct from anything 
else. If one is counting up the things in the universe one will have 
to count an indefinite number of absences. Absences have no svariipa 
of their own (and thus do not have “‘existence”’ in the technical sense 
set forth on pp. 140-142) but each and every absence is the absence 
of some positive entity which does have a svariipa. This positive 
thing is the absence’s “‘counterpositive’”’ (pratiyogi). Furthermore, 
every absence has a locus, a positive entity which it “‘qualifies.’’ Thus 
for example when the judgement “‘there is no jar on the mat”’ is true, 
there is located on the mat an absence whose counterpositive is jar. 
This absence is said to be the ‘‘qualifier’’ of the mat, its locus. 

Early Vaigesikas and Naiyayikas differed over the perceptibility 
of absences. Vatsyayana holds that absences are known through 
the same means as their counterpositives would be knownif they were 
present; thus the absence ofjar on the mat is known by the same means, 
namely perception, that the jar would be known by if it were on the 
mat. Though Candramati denied that absences could be perceived, 
later Vaigesika commentators accepted the perceptibility of absences 
and argued alongside their Nyaya colleagues against opponents who 
wished to convince them that when a negative judgment is grounded 
in perception what is perceived is the locus(e.g., the mat in our example 
above) and nothing more. For example, Vyomasiva points out that 
since when the mat is presented alone we do not always judge the 
absence of jar there, an additional entity mustbe present to perception 
in those cases where we do form such a judgment. This is intended 
to refute the Prabhakaras and Vedantins who hold that all entities 
are positive and that the cause of negative judgments is our failure to 
observe a positive entity, jar, on the mat. Vyomagiva’s point, and 
that of a great many Naiyayikas who argue to this purpose, is that 
there is presented in experience not just a mat, but a mat qualified 
by the absence ofjar, and that just as when we apprehend by perception 
that the grass is green we perceive not only grass but green color, so 
when we perceive that the mat is qualified by absence of jar we perceive 
both the locus and the qualifier. 

Udayana, in Nydyakusumaiajali, adds anumber of important notes 
to the question of the perceptibility of absences. He remarks, interes- 
tingly, that some Naiyayikas deny thatabsences are perceptible, 
although it is not known to whom he is referring . But, he says, 
absences are perceptible when their counterpositives are, andit is 
not even necessary that their loci be perceptible. For example, 
he cites the judgment “‘the sound I heard before does not exist now,” 
which he says is a perceptual judgment even though the locus, now, 


UNIVERSALS, INDIVIDUATORS, ABSENCES 145 


is not perceptible. He reviews all the arguments of his forebears 
for the perceptibility of absences, adding what are presumably some 
new ones as well, For instance, he argues against the Vedanta view 
that absences are known through nonapprehension (anupalabdhi). 
His argument is that while it is possible to make mistaken judgments 
about absences, nonapprehension cannot be mistaken, for when one 
knows something through nonapprehension his failure to apprehend 
is sufficient to guarantee the truth of his claim. As Udayana puts 
it, in nonapprehension there is nothing involved which might be 
defective and produce error,whereas in perception the senses are in- 
volved, and they may well be defective and produce erroneous 
perceptions. 

In Udayana’s Atmatattvaviveka some additional points of interest 
are discussed. One relates to the possible referent of the phrase 
“absence of hare’s horn.”” Uddyotakara had in fact mentioned the 
phrase and had asserted that it was a perfectly meaningful phrase and 
referred to an absence. Udayana, however, insists that since a hare’s 
horn cannot be known through any of the means of knowledge the 
phrase “absence of hare’s horn,” like ‘“‘hare’s horn”? itself, denotes 
something unreal rather than nonexistent. This discrepancy is, 
I think, easily resoluble. The two philosophers had different pro- 
positions in mind. Uddyotakara is considering the proposition ‘“‘there 
is absence of horn on (a) hare’s head”’; here both horns and hare’s 
heads are perceptible and thus the absence of the oneon the other is 
a straightforward case of perception. On the other hand, Udayana 
considers a different proposition ‘‘there is absence of hare’s horn here,”’ 
and apparently assumes that we are never going to see a hare witha 
horn on his head. Since there is no counterpositive denoted by the 
phrase ‘‘hare’s horn,” the absence identified through that apparent 
counterpositive is unreal, 

A related point, of interest for the study of certain issues in Navya- 
nyaya, concerns the question whether an absence can itself be the 
counterpositive of another absence, and if so whether the absence of 
the second absence is a third one, etc. Vacaspati Misra and Udayana 
state categorically that there is no absence of an absence, since such an 
entity is a positive one, a presence (bhava). 

Kanada distinguished 4 varieties of nonexistence, and the distinc- 
tion remains unchanged in most subsequent treatments. The 4 
varieties are: (1) prior nonexistence, as for example the absence of 
a jar before it is made; (2) posterior nonexistence, as for example 
the absence of the jar after it has been destroyed: (3) mutual absence, 
which is merely the absence of any thing in whatever is different 


146 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


from it, e.g., the absence of pot in cloth; and (4) absolute absence, 
which is the nonexistence of a thing in another thing at all times, 
past, present and future. 

To this list Candramati adds a fifth variety: (5) relational absence 
(samsargabhava), because of which certain sorts of things do not be- 
come related to certain other sorts, e.g., satid is absent from inherence 
in this way. However, Vacaspati Misra returns the list to the 4 
Kanada recognized by treating ‘“‘relational absence’’ as a general 
rubric for any absence involving a positive relation. Thus he subdivides 
absences initially into 2 groups: (1) mutual absence, or absence of 
identity, and (2) relational absence, which has 3 subvarieties: prior, 
posterior, and absolute absence. 

Jayanta Bhatta has a unique theory, according to which prior and 
posterior absence are the only two kinds. He attempts to bring the 
others mentioned above under one of the two, prior and posterior 
absence. Mutual absence is prior absence of one thing in a second 
thing which is different from the first. Jayanta then classifies abso- 
lute absence as a further variety of mutual absence, the kind where 
there are no temporal limits; he gives the name ‘“‘limited absence”’ 
( apeksabhdva) to mutual absences which are considered within limits. 
He also refers to still another kind of absence ‘“‘absence of capacity”’ 
(sémarthyabhava), apparently proposed by others known to Jayanta; 
he dismisses this kind as either prior or posterior absence depending 
on the case, 


8 


MEANING AND TRUTH 


We turn now from the ontological speculations of the Naiyayikas 
to their methodology and epistemology. The various topics raised in 
discussions of these matters interpenetrate in complicated ways, and 
there is no clear-cut expository tradition to follow. Since meaning 
and truth have been analyzed in detail by recent Western philoso- 
phers, I have approached Nydya material in ways reminiscent of 
certain parallel Western analyses. In this Iam reflecting a growing 
tendency on the part of recent Nyaya scholars. 


I. Meaning 


The theory of meaning is logically prior to theory of knowledge 
in the following respect. Ifwe suppose, asis natural, that truth is a 
property or relation which accrues to a judgment or its expression, no 
matter what it is in virtue of which this property or relation accrues, 
at least we can say that whether or not a judgment or expression is 
true or false cannot very well be decided until we know what the 
judgment means, or what the expression expresses. Whether truth 
is a function of correspondence between our judgments and the way 
the world is, or of coherence with a maximum number of other judg- 
ments, or merely successful prediction of future events, in any case 
we cannot know how to apply the test, or what it would mean to do so, 
until we know the nature of that to which we propose to apply it. 
For this reason we may best start our discussion of theory of knowledge 
by considering the Nyaya theory of meaning. 

We have seen above that knowledge (jidna) appears in the Vaigesika 
ontological scheme as a quality of the self. Though in translating 
jiiéna as “knowledge”? we have followed traditional practice, it is 
time to become more careful. The term “knowledge” in Western 
usage is used in several ways, and ina sense the way in which the term 
indna behaves in Nyaya fails to answer to any of the common Western 


148 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


habits of use of ‘‘knowledge.’? The reason for this is that, since 
qualities are transitory, as we saw, jadnas come and go as qualities of 
the knowing self who entertains them. Thus we shal] have to speak 
of “‘a knowledge’’! if we wish to use “‘knowledge”’ as translation for 
jiana and recognize the fact that each self entertains indefinite numbers 
of these entities. 

Then what is a knowledge? It is best thought of as a judgment, 
except that we must realize that in referring to a judgment that, say, 
the cat is on the mat, we are referring to someone’s notion, held ata 
certain time, that the cat is on the mat.2 Let us translate jidna, 
then, as ‘‘judgment’’ from now on, realizing however that it is not the 
judgment as (timeless) proposition which is referred to but the actual 
judging performed by the knower at some time. By rendering 
jitdna as ‘‘judgment’’ we also have the added advantage that we shall 
not be tempted to suppose that all jidnas are necessarily correct (since 
to know something is to have a true belief), And indeed there is 
another word, as Mohanty points out, which more closely approxi- 
mates this sense of “‘(true) knowledge,” namely pramd.® 

Judgments may be true or false, then. But is a judgment any bit 
of awareness, or must a judgment have a structure of a certain sort 
to be capable of being true or false? This is a fundamental question 
which receives extended attention by all serious writers on Indian 
thought. And it appears that there was an almost irresistible 
tendency to discuss this fundamental question largely in terms of the 
possible structure, or lack of structure, that is possessed by the linguistic 
expression through which we communicate our judgments. Thus 
Indian thought anticipated the “linguistic turn”? of modern analytic 
philosophy. 

A crucial distinction which is formulated in detail by Vacaspati 
Misca and perhaps anticipated by others previously is the distinction 
between nirvikalpaka and savikalpaka judgments. Nirvikalpaka is fre- 
quently translated as ‘‘indeterminate,”’ savikalpaka as ‘‘determinate.” 
Mohanty proposes to understand by savikalpaka judgment a judgment 
which is “‘propositional,’’ in the sense that the sentence which ex- 
presses the judgment entertains a proposition in one of several ways 

(it may assert or deny, doubt, exhort, command, etc.). But this is 
helpful only if we understand the conditions under which we have a 
proposition. 

The full development of the analysis of the notion of a propositional 
or ‘‘determinate’’ judgment is not concluded until Navya-nydya times, 
but it will be helpful to anticipate that development here. Accord- 
ing to the later theorists a proposition has a minimal triadic consti- 


MEANING AND TRUTH 149 


tution : it must consist, at the minimum, of an entity, called the 
quatified, related to a second entity, called the qualifier, by a relation, 
called the qualified-qualifier-relation. The three entities (includ- 
ing the relation) must be things included under one or another of 
the categories in the ontological scheme already reviewed. Thus a 
proposition is a kind of minimal ‘‘possible state-of-affairs,”’ on the 
understanding that only actual entities can enter into such states-of- 
affairs. 

A propositional judgment, then, is one such that the sentence ex- 
pressing it entertains a proposition. But this too is insufficient, for 
we have yet to understand under what conditions a sentence expresses 
a judgment. Still, it is now clear that the judgment, the sentence, 
and the proposition are three distinct things and that the grammatical 
considerations relating to the nature ofa sentence are distinct from 
the ontological considerations relating to the minimal constitution 
of propositions. Nevertheless, though distinct, the grammatical 
considerations turn out to be parallel to the ontological ones. 

According to Nyaya theory a sentence must satisfy 3 (or later, 4) 
conditions in order to express a judgment. Each of these conditions 
applies to the words which make up the sentence. The conditions 
are: (1) the words must be such that the expectancies set up by each 
are satisfied by the others. This requirement is called akamksa@ or 
mutual expectancy. By appeal to this requirement strings of words 
which do not constitute syntactically well-formed expressions are 
excluded from the class of sentences. (2) A second requirement is 
yogyata or semantical fitness. A string of words may be syntactically 
well-formed and yet not constitute a (meaningful) sentence. E.g., 
““FLe wets it with fire’’ is cited as a nonexpressive string of words, failing 
the requirement of semantical fitness. (3) The third requirement 
is contiguity (samnidhi), and merely requires that there be no great 
gap between the utterance (or writing together )of the words making 
up the sentence. Otherwise one could consider the subject of the 
first sentence in one book and the predicate of the last sentence of 
another to constitute a sentence expressing a judgment. (4) Some 
later Naiydyikas added a fourth requirement, that a string of words 
must be uttered with intent to communicate a proposition, and that 
itis the nature of this intention (éatparya) which unambiguously identi- 
fies the meanings of the constituent words. 

A judgment is propositional, we have said, when the sentence ex- 
pressing it entertains a proposition. But not all judgments are propo- 
sitional (savikalpaka); some are nonpropositional or “indeterminate” 
(nirvikalpaka). ‘There is divergence of opinion within Nyaya as to 


150 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the nature of the distinction between savikalpaka and nirvikalpaka 
judgments. Jayanta Bhatta holds that the distinction is that bet- 
ween a judgment expressed and one not expressed; he thinks of 
nirvikalpaka asa stage in awareness where we have become aware 
of something but have not yet founda word for it. But this view 
isnot accepted by most Naiyayikas. Rather the more usual way 
of marking the distinction is to say that in nirvikalpaka judgment 
we entertain the elements of a proposition but have not as yet synthe- 
sized them into a proposition, whereas in savikalpaka judgment we 
have made this synthesis. Only under the latter condition can a 
sentence be formed entertaining the proposition, and if we recall that 
according to NyAaya whatever is knowable is nameable we can con- 
clude that for every proposition it is possible to construct a sentence 
which entertains it. 

One might suppose from this that we might express a nonproposi- 
tional (nirvikalpaka) judgment by, say, the use of a single word rather 
than a sentence, since such a word would not entertain a proposition. 
This would be a mistaken way of understanding Nyaya. For even 
to identify something as of a kind is already to formulate a sentence 
which entertains a proposition. If I identify the object before me as 
“‘jar,”’ my knowledge of it is propositional, since the utterance of the 
word “jar” is tantamount to saying “‘this is a jar’’, a sentence which 
entertains (in the asserting mood) the proposition whose qualificand 
is the substance before me, whose qualifier is jarness, and the quali- 
ficand-qualifier relation between them is inherence. About the best 
one can do in identifying the content of a nonpropositional judgmen 
is to think of it asa something or other, for to identify or classify it 
further signifies that one has proceeded to propositional judgment 
Put another way, propositional judgments involve the comparison 
or contrast of the “‘subject”’ of the judgment with other things, and 
since every use of words no matter how minimal suggests such a com~- 
parison or contrast, nonpropositional judgments are inexpressible. 

The foregoing account implies a thesis which is highly controversial 
in Indian grammatical theory, the defense of which occupies the time 
of a number of Naiy4yikas. The controversial implication is that 
individual words have meaning independently of their role in a sen- 
tence. As we have put it above, this is because each occurrence of a 
word is a kind of little sentence of its own, correlated with a minimal 
proposition. We may think of the matter thus. Let us consider the 
sentence (A) “‘the cat is on the mat.”’ According to Nyaya the pro- 
position this sentence entertains is a good deal more complicated than 
one might think. For “‘the cat’ itself entertains the proposition this- 


MEANING AND TRUTH 15] 


inherence-catness and ‘the mat?’ entertains the proposition that-inke- 
rence-matness, and this and that are qualified by the quality of contact, 
in which inheres contactness; it is this pair-inherence-contactness which is 
entertained by the word “‘on.” It is the whole complex proposition 
which (A) entertains, and we understand the sentence (A) because 
we understand the component “sentences” implied in the words 
which make up (A). Thus “mutual expectancy” refers to the 
syntactical functions of the words ‘‘the cat,” ‘‘on,’? and ‘‘the mat,” 
while “‘semantical fitness” applies to the fact that the propositions 
entertained by those three words can be connected without violating 
fundamental rules of Vaigesika ontology. 

The view that words have meanings of their own independently 
of the sentences in which they are embedded is called abhihitanvaya- 
vada. It is a view espoused by the Naiyayikas and the Bhatta Mima- 
msakas against the Prabhakara Mimamsakas and Vedantins, who 
believe that words do not convey meaning except in the context of a 
sentence, This latter view is known as anvitabhidhinavada. The 
distinction has frequently been misrepresented. For example, 
Kunjunni Raja in his generally accurate book on Indian Theories of 
Meaning writes “‘The commonplace statement in modern linguistics 
that the sentence is the unit of speech is comparable to the anvitd- 
bhidhana theory,’ implying that modern linguists favor that theory 
as opposed to the Naiyayikas.5 But as we have seen Nydya also 
believes that the sentence is the unit of speech; it, however, holds 
that what we call words are in effect minimal sentences. It is not 
that the Naiyayika is guilty of the kind of procrustean theory which 
Wittgenstein finds and derides in the writings of Augustine.* The 
Nyaya theory, whether ultimately correct or illuminating, is at least 
pretty sophisticated. 

The idea that a word functions asa minimal sentence can be traced 
back even to the Mydyasiitras. Gautama raises the question as to 
what a word denotes — is it an individual, aproperty, or the charac- 
teristic form of the individual which shows its nature? Gautama’s 
answer is that it is all three of these. Vyomasiva specifically says that 
the meaning of a word is the individual possessing its differentiating 
property. 

Despite this tendency to treat words as sentences it must be stressed 
that Naiydyikas use different concepts in analyzing words from the 
ones used in analyzing sentences. Words have primary meanings 
(abhidha; Sakti) and secondary meaning (laksand). These terms are 
not applicable in describing the meaning of sentences, where “‘sen- 
tence”’ is to be understood as an expression arising from a combina- 


152 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tion of words. It is the Nyaya view that the meaning of a sentence 
results from our remembering the earlier words’ meanings, until 
after the last word through ‘‘collective memory”? (sdémithdlambana- 
smrti) a simultaneous judgment concerning the meaning of the collec- 
tion arises. This judgment is called fabdabodha, ‘‘verbal understand- 
ing.”’ Jayanta argued that it is made possible by the intentionality 
{tatparya) of the component words, which combine to relate them 
together to form the sentence and produce the verbal understanding. 

The Ny4ya-Vaisesika theory about how sentences come to be mean- 
ingful should be contrasted with the view of certain Grammarians 
who hold that a peculiar entity called sphofa must be postulated to 
account for the facts. The most notable defender of this notion was 
perhaps Bhartrhari, author of Vakyapadiya. Bhartrhari finds three 
characteristic aspects in any segment of discourse: (1) the particular 
noise (vaikrtadhvani) produced by the speaker and heard by the liste- 
ner; (2) the phonological pattern (prakrtadhvani) of which (1) is an 
instance; (3) the sphofa, which is an entity expressed by (1) and 
signifying an object. Kunjunni Raja calls it an “‘integral symbol.’”? 
According to Bhartrhari one must postulate in addition to the noises 
this integral symbol, since otherwise one would be unable to explain 
how it is that words have significance, as well as how the meanings 
of the component words produce a verbal understanding of the 
sentence. He thinks of a word as a group of noises each of which is 
not in itself significant. How is it then, he asks, that the group has 
meaning while none of its components do? It must be, he contends, 
that the word is timelessly and naturally connected to its sphota, which 
is intentional toward the object meant; then in producing the noises 
which compose the word we express first vaguely and finally concre- 
tely that sphota. Bhartrhari feels that we directly exverience this 
Sphota, a fact which is shown by our acknowledgment that the word 
or sentence has a single unitary meaning even though we have not 
fully grasped it yet. Furthermore, he argues, the only other alter- 
native explanation is that our understanding of the word is produced 
by the impact of each noise on our ear and mind, the sum constituting 
the cause of the understanding; but in this case ‘‘lesson”’ and ‘‘unless”’ 
should be synonymous, since their phonetic components are the same. 

Sridhara gives a rather extensive refutation of the sphota doctrine, 
although he is not the first nor certainly the last among our _philoso- 
phers to treat the matter. His main complaint is ontological: it is 
unnecessary to postulate an additional entity which is the meaning 
of the word. It is true that we experience words as collective unities 
rather than as distributive pluralities, but this experience need not 


MEANING AND TRUTH 153 


be explained in the fashion Bhartrhari suggests. There is no reason 
not to suppose that each sound sets down a mental trace in the listener, 
that the meaning of the word is grasped when the last sound is heard 
and construed together with the memories of the previous ones. This 
will also explain the order of the component noises: true, they must 
befixed, butthe order issomething which wecan remember and so 
we will not confuse “‘lesson’’ with “‘unless.’? After all, the sphofa- 
vddin will be forced to postulate a separate sphota for each phoneme, 
but Sridhara saves him the necessity of postulating still another such 
capacity for the word. 

Discussion over these sophisticated grammatical theories cameinto 
Nydya after the first few centuries of its existence. The old Naiya- 
yikas tended to see their major opponents as the Mimamsakas, who 
suppose that sound is eternal and that the meanings of words are 
natural and fixed rather than conventional and revisable. These 
issues are independent of those just mentioned; onemay reject sphota 
whether one believes that a given noise necessarily signifies a certain 
object for all time or whether one believes that it signifies that object 
by tacit agreement of the speakers of the language and for as long as 
it is convenient to construe it that way. Thus the later Mimamsakas 
and Naiydyikas were able to ally against the Grammarians’ espousal 
of sphota despite their continuing differences over the origin and 
eternality of meanings. 

Kanada claims that the naming relation is conventional, and 
Gautama provides several arguments to show that sounds are non- 
eternal, The Mimamsa motivation for holding sound to be eternal 
was to safeguard the authority of the Vedas, among other things. 
The Naiyadyika’s attitude to the question of the meaning of Vedic 
utterances is that God instituted the conventions which govern the 
proper meaning of these injunctions, but that we learned these con- 
ventions from those who first committed them to memory, thus 
accounting for possible failure to understand and gradual decay of 
the tradition. The variety of arguments for and against the eter- 
nality of sound in this discussion is tremendous; the reader is referred 
to the summaries below if he wishes to collect some of them. 


Il. Kinds of Judgments 


We have seen above one division of judgments into propositional 
and nonpropositional. Another division, of equal or greater impor- 
tance to our discussion, is summarized in a useful chart provided by 
Satischandra Chatterjee.® 


154 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 





Judgment 
Bi te el 
anubhava memory 
leet, 
| | | 
pramé aprama yathartha ayathartha 
(true) (untrue ) (valid) (invalid) 
| | | 
doubt _ error tarka 
ices «ell iG ; 
perception inference comparison verbal testimony 


‘“‘Anubhava includes all ‘presentative’ apprehension,” explains 
Ganganatha Jha, as opposed to memory (smti), which is represen- 
tative of whathas been previously presented.* Memory judgments can 
represent those previous presentations as they really were (yathartha) 
or falsely (ayathartha). On the other hand, presentative judgments 
require a more complex analysis. First, the above chart divides, 
such judgments into true (rama) and untrue (aframa). But 
“untrue” does not here mean ‘“‘false’’; false presentative judgment 
(viparyaya, or mithya) is only one of three kinds of untrue judgments, 
the other two being judgments of doubt and judgments expressing 
akind of reasoning called tarka, We shall see presently why these 
last are classified in this way. True presentative judgments, are, 
finally, subdivided into 4 types according to whether their validity stems 
from perception, inference, comparison, or verbal testimony. We 
shall review all of these types of judgments shortly. 


Chatterji’s list is not canonical—there are deviations among our 
philosophers. It is provided only as astarting-point for our discussion, 


Ill. Truth—lIts Criterion and Nature 


Nyaya couches its discussion of truth and error in a vocabulary 
which is peculiar and important enough to warrant a rather careful 
exposition. This vocabulary makes an early appearance. Ober- 
hammer thinks it comes to Vatsyayana from some previous commen- 
tary on the Nydyasiitras, since he finds it in Kaundinya’s commen- 
tary on the Pasupatasiitras, a work in which Kaundinya appears to 
derive his Nyaya from an older source than Vatsyayana,’° The 
school discriminates a number of technical terms all derived from the 


MEANING AND TRUTH 155 


common. root —ma-+pra, meaning “to measure out.” Pramda is a 
term designating a true judgment; pramdtva is the universal property 
shared by all true judgments. Frequently this property is referred 
to by another word, pradmanya, which is, however, ambiguous, as 
Mohanty demonstrates.11 The truth of a judgment is grounded in 
what is called a pramina, an instrument of (true) knowledge. As 
we see from consulting the preceding chart, Nyaya recognizes four 
such instruments. The property which all such instruments have in 
common is also called pramanya — thus providing a source of con- 
fusion. A pramana or instrument of knowledge is another true judg- 
ment which validates the judgment whose truth is in question; the 
latter judgment may be termed the pramiti. An object ‘“‘grasped” 
by a true judgment, that is, which constitutes or is included in the 
content of a true judgment, is called a prameya. The person who 
asserts a true judgment is called a pramdir. 

It may be helpful todistinguish at the outset between two questions: 
(1) What is the criterion of truth? and (2) What is the nature of 
truth? I say it may be helpful, because it is difficult to make out 
that any such distinction is consistently adhered to by our philoso- 
phers, although it is sometimes alluded to. When such allusions are 
offered, they are usually to the following purpose: the criterion of 
truth is simply successful activity. More particularly, a true judg- 
ment produces inthe knower an understanding of the object of know- 
ledge which is reflected in the fact that his subsequent cognition (s) 
enable him to carry out his purposive activities involving the object. 
One might say that as a general tendency Naiyayikas are verificatio- 
nists, even pragmatists in their theory of the criterion of truth. How- 
ever, as is familiar to students of recent Western epistemology, there 
may be differing points of view among verificationists about the nature 
of truth. One may hold that truth consists in the judgment’s ‘‘copy- 
ing’’ its object or corresponding to “‘the facts,” while another may 
hold that the judgment’s truth consists in its coherence with other 
judgments — the latter belief not requiring the existence of a world 
of external objects to be ‘“‘copied” at all. Yet both of the above may 
agree that we discover truth by verificatory, or at least confirma- 
tory, procedures. 

The serious concerns about truth in Nyaya-Vai‘esika arise over 
its nature rather than its criterion, then, although in attacking an 
opponent’s view of the nature of truth our philosophers do not hesitate 
to invoke the argument that the opponent’s theory does not provide 
an adequate criterion, an argument that seems to undermine the 
distinction. 


156 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


What, then, do our philosophers have to say about the naiure of 
truth ? In what does truth consist ? The handbook of Varadaraja 
may be taken as a convenient source of the developed view, which 
turns out to be quite simple: truth is anubhava — a presentational 
judgment — that is yathartha, as the object actually is. As indica- 
ted in the Chart valid memory is also termed yathartha; it will be con- 
venient to render yatharthya as ‘“‘validity’? and pramdtva as “truth,” 
in which case we could say that on Varadaraja’s account a true 
judgment is a valid presentational judgment. 

The reader may well complain immediately that this does not 
tell him what he wants to know, since what he wants to know is 
precisely how to tell how objects are from how they are not, i.e., what 
is validity ? Before proceeding to deal with that, however, let us 
pause to review alternative theories with which Varadaraja takes 
it he has to contend — for his definition of truth, though disar- 
mingly simple, is carefully gauged to avoid the errors of other views. 

The Buddhists define. truth as avisamvdditva—nondeviance— 
or arthakriyakdritua—effectiveness in producing successful activity. 
The latter may be acceptable as criterion but not as an ac- 
count of the nature of truth. The former fails asa definition, since 
it includes memory (which is valid but not true) and excludes either 
propositional or nonpropositional judgments — since the Buddhists 
hold all propositional judgments to be untrue, and even if they 
agree to admit them everything will be deviant from everything else. 
This is similar to recent Western critiques of the coherence theory of 
truth, which attempts to show that coherence alone does notsuffice 
to uniquely identify an accurate conceptual scheme; indefinitely many 
internally consistent combinations of judgments and their negations 
can be constructed (in any interestingly rich systematic context) 
such that each is inconsistent with every other. The effect of this 
critique (and the intended effect of Varadaraja’s argument) is to 
suggest that there must be correspondence of some sort between the 
contents of some of our judgments and the nature of objects to which 
these judgments refer, a nature which is independent of our knowing. 

Other definitions of truth fail likewise to satisfy the Naiyayika such 
as Varadaraja because they either rule out judgments which are ex 
hypothesi true or because they allow judgments which are ex hypothesi 
not true. The Mimamsakas, for example, offered such alternative 
definitions. Prabhakara’s school has it that truth consists just in the 
judgment’s being presentational (rather than representational as 
memory is). The Prabhakaras think that all judgments are true 
in themselves; error arises when we fail to discriminate several judg- 


MEANING AND TRUTH 157 


ments from one another. From Varadaraja’s standpoint, however, 
this rules propositional judgments out as untrue generically, and that 
violates the conditions he has in mind as requirements for any success- 
ful definition of truth. For the Prabhakara holds that 
propositional judgments involve the combination of more than one 
simple (true) judgment; thus, suggests Varadaraja, they must be 
untrue — orifnot, the Prabhakara still owes us a definition of truth. 
Varadaraja remains unsatisfied with attempts by the Prabhakarite 
to modify his theory to meet the Naiyayika’s requirement. 

Kumirila’s branch of Mimamsa, on the other hand, takes the defini- 
tion of truth to involve the judger’s not having previously known the 
object of the judgment. This is a way of excluding memory from the 
scope of the definition. Unfortunately it allows into the scope of the 
definition all untrue judgments which are not derived from memory. 

It appears, then, that Varadaraja has a fairly precise conception of 
what a definition of “‘truth’? should accomplish — what it should 
exclude and what it should include — and his claim is that his 
disarmingly simple definition accomplishes this where other plausible 
proposals fail. But we have not yet answered the very real difficulty 
of the reader who feels cheated because he fails to understand the 
nature of validity (ydthdrihya) in terms of which “‘truth’’? has been 
defined by Varadaraja. 

Andindeed no definition of “validity” is, to my knowledge, given? 
For to be valid is just to describe things as they are, and to know how 
things are is to have a set of successful definitions interlocked so as to 
constitute a system.18 The emphasis on definitions grows in the later 
stages of our period. In the earlier portions it was sufficient to be 
able to provide powerful reasons for supposing that one’s account of 
how things are corresponds to the way they really are, and that in 
turn was thought tantamount to grounding one’s assertions on a 
pramana — aninstrument of knowledge — and backing this with a 
general justification of the instrument appealed to. In this way 
one finds that the question ‘“‘which are the pramanas?’”’ occupies an 
extensive and important section in each of the major works of the 
literature, especially in the earlier period. We shall soon turn to 
this question. 

But the recalcitrant reader may not be inclined to accept that this 
isa way to proceed. He may havea rather specific objection on his 
mind, one which seems to undercut any attempt to answer the ques- 
tion about the nature of validity by any appeal to pramdnas. His 
objection is this. The Naiyayika says that the way to justify the 
validity of judgment p is by showing that it is grounded in a pramana, 


158 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Buta pramipa is,onNyaya grounds, another judgment, g. Therefore 
in order that g be shown to be valid, appeal will have to be made to 
reasons justifying the inclusion of that pramdna as a proper ground. 
Such a reason will be another judgment, r. It in turn will have to 
be grounded, etc., etc., ad infinitum. Thus it would seem that 
somewhere even the Naiyayika must admit that there are judgments 
which are self-validating. And once he has admitted this, he has 
admitted his inability to answer my question. For he could as well 
have said, to my problem about how # is known to be valid, that it 
is self-validating — since what he intends to do instead will lead 
him eventually to assert the self-validating character of some other 
judgment which grounds p. 

The question as to whether judgments validate themselves or not is 
one of the hotly disputed issues on which all the schools of Indian 
philosophy have something unique to contribute. Its importance 
should be clear from what has just been said, but if further emphasis 
is needed, we may remark that the question of whether empirical 
judgments are sometimes indubitable, or necessary, is a recurrent 
theme in Western philosophy of the modern period as well, and a 
more important question is hard to name. 

On this question the Naiyayikas are ‘‘fallibilists’—that is, they 
hold that no empirical judgments are necessarily or indubitably true. 
The validity of such judgments is extrinsic — it has to be justified 
by inference from grounds, that is to say, from other judgments. 
But then what grounds these other judgments? Here the Nyaya 
answer gets quite interesting and subtle, and it is by no means agreed 
upon by all our philosophers. Vacaspati appears ready to admit 
that certain inferences are intrinsically valid, but it turns out that 
those inferences are the ones about which doubt does not normally 
arise. The picture which emerges from his discussion, and it is 
traceable in other writers, both prior to and after him, is that inferen- 
tial judgments are valid until someone doubts them. The search for 
more and more ultimate grounds eventually comes to rest in an infe- 
rence which rests on a generalization which noone questions. Vacas- 
pati evidently does not take seriously the possibility that one might, 
like Descartes, set out systematically to doubt every assertion on 
principle. He takes the question of whether validity may be intrinsic 
to be a psychological question, namely ‘“‘do we have inferential know- 
ledge which we donot doubt.” The answer he gives to this is “yes.” 
But of course one might counter that this psychological question is 
not the same as the logical question about the grounds for believing a 
judgment to be true. This latter question is perhaps not clearly 


MEANING AND TRUTH 159 


distinguished until Navya-nyaya times, but notall of our philosophers 
assent to Vacaspati’s views on the matter. 

Asimilar problem arises for any empirical account of the criterion 
of truth which locates that criterion in the effectiveness of a judgment 
in leading us to expectations that are satisfied subsequently, that is, 
confirmed. The confirming judgments, it may be pointed out, are 
empirical and thus need to be grounded in turn, and this leads to a 
regress similar to the one which was just urged, ifnot indeed the same. 
On this point, too, Vacaspati’s attitude is that there are certain judg- 
ments which we do not question, not so much because they are not in 
principle questionable, but rather because they are familiar cases. 
But just what itis precisely that constitutes a ‘familiar case’’ isnot 
easy to say. Udayana in the Parisuddhi valiantly tried to clarify the 
notion.'4 

Although not all Naiyadyikas accept Vacaspati’s theory as a sketched 
above, it is at least generally accepted that validity is extrinsic in the 
sense that its grounds lie outside itself. This thesis, however, is also 
accepted by the Buddhists. Indeed, as early as the 8th century one 
finds sarveys of Indian philosophy (e.g., as found in Santaraksita’s 
Tattvasamgraha) \aying out four possible positions on the subject of 
validity, each associated with an important school of thought. Thus 
the Naiyayika believes that both the validity of true judgments and 
the invalidity of false ones depend upon grounds lying outside of the 
judgments themselves. The Buddhists agree that validity is extrinsic, 
but argue that invalidity is intrinsic, since according to them any 
verbalized judgment is ipso facto false, being infected with concepts 
(vtkalpa). The Mimamsakas and older Vedantins take a third posi- 
tion; according to them, judgments are true in themselves i.e., intrinsi- 
cally valid. When falsity infects a judgment what happens is that we 
entertain a complex proposition as if it were a simple one, only to 
discover our error subsequently, so that invalidity is extrinsic even 
though validity is intrinsic. Finally, the Samkhya position is said 
to be that both the validity and invalidity of judgments are intrinsic 
and need no reference to external grounds for their justification. 

Jayanta sets out to deal with the positions alternative to the Naiya- 
yikas’ own. The Samkhya position is absurd, since if a given judg- 
ment’s validity is intrinsic as well as its invalidity, we can never dis- 
cover that a judgment we once believed to be true in fact is false. 
As for the Buddhist view, Jayanta believes that it can be controverted 
by pointing to the fact that we do not initiate action predicated ona 
judgment unless we believe it to be true. But if as the Buddhist 
asserts all judgments are intrinsically invalid, we should never initiate 


160 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


action on the basis of a judgment until it has been grounded subse- 
qutntlyinanotherjudgment. And this is just not the way we behave. 
It might be thought that in adopting this line of argument Jayanta 
is refuting his own theory, since the Naiyayika also believes that judg- 
ments are not intrinsically invalid — and not intrinsically valid, 
either! Thus one might argue that either the Nydya view is refuted 
by the argument Jayanta uses against Buddhism, or else he should 
abandon that line of argument. However, Jayanta can make out 
an answer : itis that we do not need to be convinced that a judgment 
is necessarily true (— valid) in order to act uponit, but if we are 
convinced that it is necessarily untrue (— invalid) we shall not act 
upon it. The Nyaya position is that no (empirical) judgments are 
necessarily true or necessarily false, while the Buddhist appears to 
assert that judgments are necessarily false until proved otherwise. 
Jayanta believes that all that is necessary to initiate action on the basis 
of a judgment is our belief that the judgment has a sufficient degree 
of probability. His belief is consistent with the doctrine that truth 
is extrinsic. 

It is worth noting that this whole question of the intrinsic or extrinsic 
nature of validity and invalidity is to be carefully distinguished from 
a different topic with which it is frequently confused. Philosophers 
in India are also fond of discussing whether judgement illumines itself 
(svapraka@sa) or not. That is, another problem is : what knows know- 
ledge? Is it the judgment which is “‘self-evident’’, or is another 
judgment required to know the first one ? Again the various schools 
of Indian thought divide : the Advaitins, Prabhakara Mimamsakas, 
and Buddhists hold that a judgment constitutes self-awareness, while 
the Bhatta Mimamsakas and Naiyayikas hold that a subsequent and 
distinct judgment is required. 

The type of judgment which enables us to subsequently grasp an 
initial judgment— something in the form of “I judge that the cat 
is on the mat”? — is called anuvyavasdya in Nyaya-Vaigesika. Vacas- 
pati Misra holds that, like inference, anuvyavasdya is self-validating 
unless it is doubted. Udayana underlines the strength of the Nyaya 
attitude that no empirical judgment is necessarily true, no empirical 
judgment is necessarily untrue, no descriptions free from possible 
fallacy. 


IV. Perception : Its Definition 


Next let us turn to the first of the four sources of true judgments, 
namely perception. We have seen in previous chapters the various 


MEANING AND TRUTH 161 


views held by our philosophers concerning whether substances, qua- 
lities, universals, absences, and other things are perceptible. Here 
we will raise a different sort of question. Our question now is: what 
necessary conditions must a judgment satisfy in order that it be accoun- 
ted a veridical perceptual judgment ? 

It will be evident that this question can hardly be settled without 
clarifying the nature of erroneous judgments of perception as well. 

The classical definition of perception is given by Gautama in the 
fourth sara of the first chapter of the first book of the Nydyasitras; 
its prominent position typifies the importance all Naiyayikas attach 
to it. Gautama’s definition sets forth 4 conditions each of which is 
necessary for a judgment to be a true perceptual judgment. As Gau- 
tama has it, ajudgment is perceptual and true onlyif (1) itis produced 
from contact between sense organ and an object; (2) itis avyapadesya, 
*‘not verbal’; (3) it does not wander (avpabhicéra); and (4) it is 
definite (vyavasdyatmaka). These last three terms receive a lot of 
attention from the commentators, and all 4 conditions are defended 
at length. I take them in order. 


1, Sense-Object Contact (indriyarthasannikarsa) : This is a, or perhaps 
the, requirement which distinguishes perceptual judgments from other 
kinds, such as inferential, Gautama already is aware of an objection, 
to the effect that in seeing things ina mirror there is no sense-object 
contact; Gautama denies that that isso, holding that the ray from the 
visual organ bounces off the mirror and grasps the object. But 
actually this much of the definition is relatively noncontroversial. 
The only controversial question is why this particular contact is 
singled out for sole recognition in the definition. Watsyayana has 
an opponent point out that there will be no perception if there is not 
contact between the self and the internal organ, so that that contact 
should also be mentioned. Indeed, the Vaisesika writers beginning 
with Candramati speak not just of sense-object contact but of more 
complex relationships of fourfold, threefold and twofold contact. 
Normal perception of external objects through the visual organ 
requires fourfold contact — the senses must contact the object, 
the internal organ must contact the sense-organ(s), and the self 
must contact the internal organ; thus 4 distinct types of entities must 
be in contact directly or indirectly. Auditory perception requires 
threefold contact, since the object grasped by the auditory sense- 
organ is identical with the substance constituting the organ itself, 
namely dkafa. And kinaesthetic perception of pleasure, pain, and 
other psychological qualities are said by Candramati and Prasasta- 


162 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


pada to require only contact between the self and the internal organ. 
Yogic perception also requires less complex sorts of contact. 

Gautama’s requirement, then, must be understood to be limited 
in its application to normal perception of external objects. But if we 
take ‘‘contact’’ literally in the requirement, it will not even cover all 
such cases, since we can perceive qualities as well as substances, not to 
speak of universal properties inhering in substances and qualities, 
absences, and whatever. Uddyotakara attends to this problem by 
asixfold classification of types of “‘sense-object connection,’’ only one 
of which is contact in the literal, ontological sense described earlier. 
Uddyotakara’s 6 types of sense-object connection are (1) contact, 
when an organ grasps a substance; (2) inherence in what is conjoined, 
as when the organ grasps a quality or universal property which inheres 
in a substance which is in contact with the organ; (3) inherence in 
what inheres in what is conjoined with the organ, as for example when 
the visual organ grasps the redness (a property) inhering in the red 
color which in turn inheres in a jar which is in contact with the visual 
organ; (4) inherence simplictter, which is the relation between the 
auditory organ (== akdfa) and the sound (a quality ) which inheres 
in the dkdfa; (5) inherence in what inheres in the sense-organ, as when 
we grasp with our auditory organ the loudness (a property) inhering 
in a sound which inheres in the dkafa (= the auditory organ); (6) 
qualifier-qualificand relation (see above, p. 50), when we perceive 
absences or inherence. 


2. Non-Verbal (avyapadesya ) : The meaning which Gautama 
attached to this word is far from clear, and commentators vary widely 
in interpreting it. The general idea, presumably, was an attempt 
to exclude from the scope of the definition of true perceptual judg- 
ments those which stem from the fourth pramdna, verbal authority. 
The matter was aggravated, however, by the proximity of Buddhists, 
and Prabhakara Mimamsakas who, as we saw, hold that only non- 
propositional judgments can be perceptual in any case. The Naiya- 
yikas do not subscribe to this view. They do not wish to exclude from 
the class of true perceptual judgments those which are expressed 
in words, for reasons reviewed above. Thus they wish to find a way 
of excluding from. perceptual judgments those judgments which arise 
from verbal origins, but without excluding propositional judgments 


from the class of veridical perceptual judgments. This turns out to 
be a difficult task. 


Tu get a feel for the problem, consider the judgment (A) ‘“‘this isa 
cow’’, uttered in the presence of a cow and reporting one’s veridical 


MEANING AND TRUTH 163 


perception of the animal. The Buddhist argues — and he is 
followed by Grammarians and some Mimamsakas — that this judg- 
ment is produced in part by our understanding of the meanings of the 
words “‘this’’, “‘cow’’, etc., and that indeed such is the case with regard 
to any propositional judgment. Vatsyayana attempts to answer by 
pointing out that sometimes we perccive a thing without knowing a 
word for it, but he does not make it clear whether such a perception 
should be counted as propositional or not. (Presumably the dis- 
tinction had not yet been introduced.) The Buddhists, notably 
Dignaga, developed their theory further. As soon as verbal under- 
standing is involved, say they, the judgment is no longer perceptual 
since it involves inferential elements, namely, the inference that this 
individual here confronted has the property of cowness by virtue of 
which it is appropriate to apply the word ‘‘cow” to it. Asa result, 
only nonpropositicnal judgments can be considered perceptual. 

Uddyotakara’s reply to this is rather weak. Insofar as the Buddhist 
is willing to attempt a definition, in words, of what it is to be a per- 
ceptual judgment, he is assuming that perceptual judgments have 
some connection with words; thus he cannot without contradicting 
himself say that psrceptual judgments have no connection with words. 
This is hardly convincing, however, constituting a rather glaring 
case of confusing use and mention: the Buddhist claims that any 
judgment expressed in words is nonperceptual, but can freely admit 
that such a judgment can be mentioned in words. 

Jayanta’s procedure is more cogent. As for (A), he readily 
admits that it is not a perceptual judgment but a verbal one, and so 
excluded by the term avyapadetya. A verbal knowledge, he opines, 
is one which is born jointly from seeing an object and hearing a word, 
and (A) is ex hAypothesi such a judgment. The Buddhist, however, 
erroneously infers from this admission that there are no propositional 
perceptual judgments. Non sequitur. Verbal knowledge presupposes 
propositional perceptual judgments — otherwise how could we 
ever learn what words denote? Jayanta’s picture is this; nonproposi- 
tional perceptual judgments grasp an object independently of any 
relation to a word. The Buddhist views this as involving a direct 
confrontation of a sort of “‘bare particular”, an entity of no kind per 
se. Very well, says Jayanta, but the Buddhist also admits that subse- 
quently this bare particular gets classified as a cow, and he provides 
us no help when we ask how it is that ifwe say itisacow we are right, 
but ifwesay it is a horse we are wrong. Inother words, it will not 
do to suppose that a bare particular becomes a cow merely in virtue 
of our linking the particular to a word, since then the same particular 


164 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


can be a cow for me and a horse for you, or a cow at one time and 
ahorseamoment later, merely by virtue ofmysayingso. This is the 
weakness of the Buddhist’s extreme nominalism. Rather, we must 
postulate an intervening phase of perception, in which we link the 
particular with a property given to us by memory; it is after this stage 
that we associate — through memory or stipulation — a word with 
the property and produce the verbal knowledge (A). This interven- 
ing stage is what the Naiyayika means to speak of by the term ‘‘proposi- 
tional perceptual judgment.”’ 

Jayanta’s analysis is deep and, I think, sensible. He expressly 
repudiates the treatment of this question by “earlier logicians.”’ By 
no means all subsequent logicians follow him, however. Vacaspati 
Misra, for example, reads Gautama’s definition quite differently from 
his predecessors. His interpretation he attributes to his mentor Tri- 
locana. What it involves is parsing the definition so that the term 
avyapadesfya is not a requirement of perceptual judgments but rather a 
description of nonpropositional judgments, to be paired with “‘well- 
defined”’ which is to be construed as descriptive of propositional judg- 
ments. Thus Gautama’s definition turns out to say that a true percep- 
tual judgment must be produced from sense-object connection and 
not wander, and it may be either propositional or not ! 

The distinction between propositional and nonpropositional judg- 
ments undergoes a subtle but distinct change in later times also. 
Whereas in the early writers up to Jayanta a judgment’s being proposi- 
tional was connected to its expressibility, in later times a propositional 
judgment was thought of as any judgment which had as content a 
qualified entity. Ifthe reader will recall the use of “minimal propo- 
sition”? which I indulged in on p. 149, we might say that in this later 
usage a judgment whose appropriate expression would be through a 
minimal proposition constitutes the simplest sort of propositional 
judgment. The difference from the older view is that a cow can be 
known through nonpropositional perception as a cow, not merely as a 
bare particular as in Buddhism. This conveniently bypasses the nub 
of the Buddhist’s main point, of course, but it reflects a natural pro- 
gression, For, returning to Jayanta’s analysis for a moment, suppose 
one were to ask how it is that we are able to identify through memory 
the appropriate property with which to clothe the bare particular we 
grasp through nonpropositional perception? Why is the Naiyayika 
any better off with that problem than the Buddhist is with the one 
Jayanta saddles him with? The only answer that seems possible 
for the Naiyayika is to repudiate bare particulars altogether. We 
recognize cowness through memory as the appropriate property be- 


MEANING AND TRUTH 165 


cause we cognize the cow as a cow, even though we have not as yet 
related her to the property. Thus the Naiyayika is forced eventually 
to take a stand against uninterpreted Givens; with Kant he affirms 
that percepts without concepts are blind. 

3. Does Not Wander (avyabhicdra) : Gautama’s definition is 
intended to distinguish veridical perception from erroneous judgments, 
The condition that a perceptual judgment must not “‘wander’’ is 
Gautama’s way of insisting on that condition. However, it hardly 
clarifies the notion of truth to say that a true judgment is one which 
does not wander, i.e., which is not erroneous. In fact, the word in 
the definition receives fairly little attention by our philosophers by 
comparison: the usual comment is merely that this requirement 
serves to exclude erroneous judgments. But the later writers had 
much to say about error, although they chose to discuss it under 
different rubrics. 

Examples of erroneous perceptual judgments include, among the 
most typical, mirages, perception of two moons when one pushes on 
one’s eyeball, finding what appears to be a piece of silver on, the beach 
only to subsequently discover itis a shell, a crystal appearing red 
because there is a red flower behind it, an object appearing yellow 
when we have jaundice. Dreams, though illusory, are not examples 
of illusory perception : they are excluded by the first condition, since 
dreams are not produced by sense-object contact. Notallnonveridical 
perceptual judgments are erroneous : doubtful judgments (“‘is this a 
dagger that I see before me?’’) are nonveridical — perceptual 
but not veridical because they fail the fourth requirement by not being 
“well-defined”. At least this is so for many Naiyayikas. But 
Trilocana and Vacaspati, followed by Udayana and Varadaraja, 
construe ‘‘non-wandering”’ as excluding all nonveridical judgments 
including doubt, and find, as we have seen, a different use for “‘well- 
defined”’, namely to identify propositional judgments. 

We must note, first, that it is only propositional perceptual judgments 
which are subject to error. Nonpropositional judgments grasp the 
“own-nature’’ (svaripa) of their contents, and although as we have 
just seen the Naiyayika is driven to disavow that these contents are 
bare particulars (svalaksana) as the Buddhist asserts, he is not willing 
to abandon the claim of indubitability for nonpropositional perceptual 
judgments. We may be acquainted with a cow in a nonpropositional 
way, and gua cow, although as soon as this is related to the fact that 
the object before us shares cowness with other such objects, we have a 
propositional judgment and an occasion for error, since the proposed 
relation may be the wrong one. 


166 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Indeed it is precisely this misrelating which constitutes perceptual 
error, says the Naiyayika. His view is usually referred to as anyatha- 
khyati and contrasted with the views of opposing schools, cach view 
having its proper khydti title. Vacaspati reviews 5 such theories 
known to him, his own plus 4 mistaken alternatives. The Yogacara 
Buddhist holds a view called dimakhyati, according to which error 
results from externalizing the reports of consciousness which are, 
properly understood, internal. All judgments of an external world 
are erroneous in this view; Vacaspati understands the Yogacara to 
be an idealist. A second mistaken view isthat of the Madhyamika 
Buddhist, who holds a view dubbed asatkhyati, according to which 
error consists in judging something nonexistent to exist. Vacaspati 
understands the Madhyamika to be a skeptic. Third, the 
view of the Advaita Vedantin is called anirvacaniyakhyati. According 
to it, when we mistake a shell for a piece of silver we are actually 
aware, for as long as our error persists, of a piece of silver which in 
some sense exists, since it is presented, but which is not real, since the 
judgment is false. Again the result is that all empirical judgments 
of perception are erroneous, since Advaita views all empirical objects 
as transient and thus all empirical judgments as false. Vacaspati’s 
reply is that the notion of error being analyzed requires that an erro- 
neous judgment be one which misleads us because itresembles a true 
judgment. If all perceptual judgments are false none of them could 
be mistaken for a true one, or at any rate no reason has been given why 
one perceptual judgment should mislead us while the next does not. 
Since nojudgments of this kind are allowed as true, there quired sort 
of error cannot arise. The fourth and last of Vacaspati’s list of mis- 
taken views about error is the akhyati theory of Prabhakara’s branch 
of Mimamsa. According toit all percepiual judgments are true per 
se; error arises when two such judgments are illicitly confounded, when 
we fail to apprehend the difference between them. Of the 4 in 
Vacaspati’s list he is most favorably inclined toward this one. How- 
ever, it fails, but only because Prabhakara insists on making the con-~ 
fusion a matter of failing to apprehend difference, rather than a 
matter of apprehending (mistakenly) an identity. For example, I 
think a shell is a piece of silver: Prabhakara says I fail to grasp the 
difference between this (shell) and a piece of silver. Vacaspati wants 
toknow: isitthat Iseesomething atmy feet and fail to judge thatitisa 
shell and not a piece of silver? Ifso, we shall not be able to explain 
why I eagerly bend down, gather up the object and examine it more 
closely hoping it is legal tender, for ex hypothesi we have not made any 
judgment that this thing is a piece of silver. On the other hand, if 


MEANING AND TRUIH 167 


Prabhakara means that we do make a positive judgment that this 
(shell) is (identical with) a piece of silver, Vacaspati is happy: on 
this reading Prabhakara’s akhydti view is tantamount to the Naiya- 
yikas’ anyathakhydtt. 

Anyathakhyati, the Nyaya theory, differs from each of the 4 described 
in the previous paragraph. Positively described, it is the view that what 
is grasped in erroneous perception exists (pace Madhyamika) and is 
external (pace Yogacara); furthermore (pace Advaita) its ontological 
status is no different from the objects grasped in veridical perception. 
What happens in erroneous perception is that an object whose proper 
location lies elsewhere is erroneously perceived here and now. Or 
again, objects whose actual properties are thus-and-so are erroneously 
clothed with properties which actually exist, but elsewhere. E.g., 
the thing at my feet, which is actually a shell, is erroneously clothed 
with silverness, a property which occurs in the real, external world 
but is, as it happens, not here at my feet. The Naiyayika usually traces 
the erroneous mislocation of things and ‘properties to the activity of 
our memory: we have experienced silverness veridically in the past and, 
because of some defect in our sensory or mental apparatus, we now 
attribute this remembered property to the object before us. But 
(pace Prabhakara ) although the cause of error isa defect, the judgment 
is a full-scale, positive one in which we identify the thing as having 
the property in question—as opposed to the akhyati theory which 
holds that we merely fail to discriminate them. 

4, Definite ( wyavasdydtmaka ) : The final requirement that 
Gautama specifies is intended to exclude judgments of doubt. In the 
dusk I see an object before me and, not sure whether it is amanora 
post, I form a doubting perceptual judgment. Gautama’s condi- 
tion is intended to exclude from the scope of veridical perceptual 
judgments all judgments which do not assert a proposition. Where 
nothing is asserted, the question of truth or falsity cannot arise; in 
doubting judgments nothing is asserted. Trilocana and Vacaspati 
point out that this requirement is implicit in the previous condition 
that the judgment “‘not wander,”’ since they interpret that condition 
to exclude all judgments which are not true. Thus they reinterpret 
Gautama’s fourth condition as a way of identifying one of the two 
kinds of perceptual judgments, namely the propositional variety. 

So much for Gautama’s definition of veridical perception. Not all 
subsequent Naiyayikas accepted this definition, however; there are 
recurrent attempts tostartallover. Bhasarvajfia, for example, defines 
valid perception as “‘correctimmediate experience’’ (samyagaparoksa- 
anubhava). This is reflected in Varadaraja’s “‘what is pervaded by 


168 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


immediacy and validity.’ The notion of ‘immediacy’? (aparoksa) 
gains currency Jater in the tradition. Udayana defines an immediate 
knowledge as one which is not born from another knowledge. The 
attractiveness of Bhasarvajfia’s line of definition is that it reflects 
the primacy of experience, without insisting that the experience be 
sensory. This is important for the later theistic Nyaya: whereas 
Gautama’s definition makes a frank appeal to the sensesas the only 
source of perception, theistic Naiyayikas realized this would either 
result in God’s not having perceptions or else in the necessity of sadd- 
ling Him with sense organs. 


V. Unusual Forms of Perception 


We have noted already that yogis were believed to have unusual 
powers, among them the ability to perceive things not ordinarily 
perceptible by human beings. Kanada mentions certain classes of 
sages and perfected beings who have these powers. There is specula- 
tion among our writers as to how they manage this unusual yogic 
perception. Prasastapada divides yogis into two varieties, one kind 
able to perceive validly without using external sense organs, the other 
needing the use of those organs. The former kind of yogic perception 
is carried out by the internal organ alone. 

Unusual kinds of perception are not limited to yogis, however. 
Vatsyayana mentions a kind of immediate awareness called pratibha, 
which we may translate as “‘intuition.”” Gopinath Kavira} suggests 
that it is equivalent to what Buddhists and others refer toas prajid, 
‘insight.”45 Intuition is a source of knowledge for ordinary folk on 
occasion, for sages regularly, so Pragastapada tells us. Examples of 
intuitive knowledge occur when, for example, we know immediately 
that a certain event will happen in the near future (say, our long-lost 
brother will turn up) or that someone near and dear has died ina far 
away place. Jayanta explicitly classifies intuition as a kind of per- 
ception and accepts it as valid. He carefully distinguishes it from 
yogic perception. 

In Navya-nyaya times we find a well-defined tradition according to 
which there are 3 types of “‘extraordinary’’ (alaukika) perception. 
One of these is (1) yogic perception. The others are (2) perception 
of a universal characterizing all members of a class one of whose 
members is presented (sémdnyalaksanapratyaksa) , and(3) perception of 
the features of a thing which was known previously or elsewhere as 
here and now presented (jidnalaksanapratyaksa). Gopinath Kaviraj 
states that ‘‘before the days of Tativacintdmani the difference between 


MEANING AND TRUTH 169 


laukika and alaukika sannikarsa was not positively declared in a Nyaya 
treatise.’16 However, there are passing references to these 3 types of 
unusual perception in our period, notably in the Nydyamafjari of 
Jayanta. 


Jayanta clearly describes the sdémdanyalaksana kind of unusual per- 
ception, explaining that it is accomplished through the internal organ. 
He even alludes to the doctrine as common Nydya. ‘It is important 
for the Naiyayika in order to explain how we arrive at universal judg- 
ments such as “‘all smoky things are fiery.”” It will be recalled that 
concomitance is generally held to be a matter of a relation among 
universal properties. ‘The problem remains : granted that, say, the 
property of being smoky is pervaded by that of being fiery, how do we 
know that all smoky things are fiery? That is, though we have not 
been presented with all smoky things, we are able to assert a true 
judgment about that class, as well as to have desires and expectations 
about the various unobserved members of the class. Since whatever 
inference gives us is based on relations which hold between the univer- 
sals smokiness and fieriness, the source of the universal judgment in 
question is not inference. The Naiyayika claims that the source is 
perception; we see the newly observed instance of a smoky thing as 
possessing fire, though the basis of our perception lies in the previously 
ascertained inference about the universals. 


The second kind of unusual perception (jadnalaksanapratyaksa) 
is also mentioned by Jayanta. Here the problem is in many ways 
quite parallel to the previous kind of unusual perception. We see 
thisas silver, though it really isnot; granted, we can explain why it is 
that we are prone to infer the presence of silverness from the perception 
of silveriness together with presumed defects in our sensory or mental 
apparatus, but this still does not explain how we come to see this as 
silver, any more than the pervasion between smokiness and _fieriness 
could explain how we conieto seea newly foundsmoky thing as fiery. 
The answer, again, is that “‘this is silver’? (when itisnot) is a genuine 

(though false) perceptual judgment, mediated in this case by our pre- 
vious judgment about a validly observed piece of silver. 


It becomes reasonably clear, upon surveillance of the literature, that 
extraordinary perception, though perhaps not systematically distingui- 
shed until Gangesa, was well. known and regularly appealed to by our 
philosophers. Thakur, for example, reports that Sriharsa, the Advai- 
tin, attributes the doctrine of sdémdnyalaksana perception to Vacaspati 
Misra, although Vacaspati had a different term for it (sarvopasam- 
hadrakaxyapti).7 Vallabha discusses the same doctrine explicitly. 


170 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
VI. Doubt and Indefinite Judgment 


Besides erroneous perception, doubt and ¢arka are classified in the 
chart on p. 154 as presentative judgments which are not true. We 
shall have occasion to discuss tarka in connection with inference in 
the next chapter; here I briefly summarize what our philosophers have 
to say about judgments expressing doubt or uncertainty about things. 

Doubting judgments are contrasted with judgments which give 
“ascertainment”? (nirnaya). We must also note a kind of judgment 
called ‘indefinite’? or “‘uncertain”’ (anadhyavasdya), which may or 
may not be the same as doubting judgments. 

Kanada gives an analysis of doubting judgments as arising from the 
concurrence of 3 conditions : (1) perception of something as being 
ofageneral kind; (2) failure to perceive its differentiating characteris- 
tics; (3) recollection of those differentiating characteristics. Pragasta- 
pada interprets this to mean that we are in doubt when (1) we per- 
ceive that x and _y have a common set of general characteristics, (2) 
we remember that x has different specific properties than y does, but 
(3) we cannot see clearly enough (or infer cogently enough) to tell 
whether the object of our awareness is x or y, this obscurity stemming 
from adharma, He distinguishes doubting judgments from indefinite 
ones—the latter, he says, occur when we do not know the word for 
a thing and thus describe it in vague terms. Vyomagiva expands on 
this last point—doubt is always about objects ofa kind we are al- 
ready acquainted with, while indefinite judgments may also be about 
objects of a kind we never before confronted. Later writers relax the 
distinction between doubting and indefinite judgments, however. 
Vallabha has it that the only difference is that indefinite judgments 
have the form ofa question —“‘is this a dagger I see beforeme ?” 
—while doubting judgments have the form of a disjunction— 
“this is either a dagger or a mirage.’’ And Sivaditya merely includes 
indefinite judgments as a subclass within doubting ones. 

Gautama treats doubt in several places, but it is not clear from the 
text whathisconceptionis. Apparentlyitwasnotclear to his commen- 
tators either, for his ambiguous words get different interpretations 
at their hands. Vatsyayana finds that Gautama classifies doubt 
into 5 varieties : (1) where we wonder whether the thing in the dusk 
is a post or a man, since posts and men share a certain general shape 
(which we perceive) but differ in other characteristics (which, be- 
cause of the gloom, we do not perceive); (2) where we wonder, e.g., 
about sound whether it is a substance or a quality, since although we 
kuow some of the differentia of each what we know of sound is not 


MEANING AND TRUTH 171 


sufficient to determine which of the additional differentia it satisfies; 
(3) where two parties make contradicting claims, each one unsuppor- 
ted; (4) where we are not sure, with respect to a thing perceived, 
what its proper classification is (“is it a dagger or a mirage ?’’); 
(5) where we have the same doubts about a thing’s classification, 
but the thing is not perceived. 

Udyotakara understands the very same passage of Gautama’s as 
saying something entirely different. Where Vatsyayana thinks 
Gautama is giving a list of varieties of doubt, Uddyotakara thinks he 
is explaining the conditions under which doubt occurs. Of such 
conditions he claims that Gautama finds 3. Doubt occurs when (1) 
we fail to know the differentia ofx; (2) we perceive or infer a character 
held in common by « andy; and (3) we do not havea clear percep- 
tual knowledge that what we see (or fail to sec) isx, and noty. Uddyo- 
takara not only dismisses Vatsyayana’s interpretation of Gautama’s 
Siitra : he finds fault with 2 of the 5 varieties of doubt which Vatsya- 
yana distinguishes. The culprits are Vatsyayana’s numbers 4 and 
5. According to Uddyotakara, in every judgment, true or not true, 
some properties are more clearly presented than others. ‘Vatsyayana 
seems to think that this indicates the presence of doubt ipso facto 
but, says Uddyotakara, if it were so we could never become clear 
about something we had initially doubted, since even the clarifying 
judgment answers to the descriptions given under numbers 4 and 5 
of Vatsyayana’s list. Uddyotakara appears to think that Vatsya- 
yana finds any judgment about a thing to be doubtful if it fails to 
discriminate that thing from everything else, which is surely too 
much to ask, 

Bhasarvajiia, however, accepts Vatsyayana’s interpretation and his 
5 kinds. He also mentions indefinite knowledge, making it a kind 
of doubt. Pragastapada attacks Vatsyayana’s third kind, the kind 
of doubt stemming from two parties holding contradictory and equally 
evidenced beliefs. His reason for disallowing this kind of doubt is 
that no judgment could be formulated under the conditions descri- 
bed, since doubt always arises about a thing and involves perception 
and memory of characteristics which that thing has, and since further- 
more ofany two contradictory propositions there is scriptural authority 
favorable to one and not to the other! Udayana, on the other hand, 
unmoved by Pragastapada’s reasoning, allows doubt to arise from 
contradictory beliefs, and asserts that it is precisely for such doubts 
that the procedures of tarka are useful. 

Udayana is also suggestive concerning the importance of the topic 
of doubt and the necessity of being precise about its nature, It is 


172 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


because of the Giarvaka materialist that doubt must be carefully in- 
vestigated. The Carvaka wants to say in effect that every judgment 
is one of doubt, and this the Naiyayika cannot allow. Indeed, the 
whole demonstration that there are pramanas (ways of gaining know- 
ledge) is directed to silencing the skeptical Carvaka. As is the way 
with skeptics, these Carvakas resort to the device of setting such high 
standards for knowledge that no empirical judgments can in the nature 
of the case satisfy those standards, from which it follows that there is 
no empirical knowledge. Part of the answer to this skeptical critique 
is to make out that, as we have seen, one does not have to know every- 
thing about a thing before one can formulate a judgment which qua- 
lifies as knowledge, and this implies that mere inability to answer 
any question whatsoever about a thing is not sufficient to prove that 
all one’s judgments about that thing are judgments of doubt. The 
standards for knowledge thus lowered, all that remains is to show that 
there are sources of valid knowledge. 


VII. Memory and Recognition 


It will be recalled that in defining perception special efforts are 
put forth to distinguish perception, which is taken to be an instrument 
of veridical knowing, from memory, which is not. Just why memory 
is not to be counted as an instrument of veridical knowledge is not 
altogether agreed upon by our philosophers, however. In fact, 
memory is regularly veridical, just as perception is, although neither 
is counted as incorrigible. Pragastapada says memory is a form of 
true knowledge (vidy@), but nevertheless does not classify memory as a 
pramana. Jayanta explains that memory is not to be counted as 
true knowledge (pframé@) because its content is not among its causal 
factors: when we remember x it is the trace produced by x, and not 
xitself, which is the crucial causal factor. He notes that the Mimam- 
sakas offer a different theory to exclude memory, namely that since 
all true judgments have as content objects not previously known, and 
since memory has as 7és content an object previously known, memory 
is not true. 

Jayanta, in fact, distinguishes two properties: validity and truth. 
Memory, he says, sometimes may be true, but it is not valid, since it 
does not always represent the object ‘“‘as it is.” Udayana agrees, 
Memory, according to Udayana, never represents its object correctly, 
since it always leaves out some of the properties previously noted or 
adds others not initially present. An objector may say that the object 
should be taken to be the thing divested of its qualities—since, 


MEANING AND TRUTH 173 


for example, if I perceive x at ¢ and then remember at ¢--1 year the 
x I saw a year ago, my memory attributes the property of being past 
tox as I knew it then. Udayana’s answer is that if this were so we 
could “remember” objects which we could not have perceived. 

In short, the attitude of the Nyaya tradition proper—that is, 
of the commentators on the Nydyasiitras and their commentators in 
turn—is that judgments of memory are not veridical, and thus that 
memory is not an instrument of true knowledge. The Vaisesika 
tradition is different. Prasgastapada classifies memory as one of 
several varieties of valid knowledge (vidya). Sridhara explains that, 
despite this, memory is not an instrument of valid knowledge because 
it is parasitic upon perception and inference, which initially make us 
acquainted with the objects we can subsequently remember. Jayanta, 
he says, was just wrong when he claimed that memory judgments 
were untrue because their objects were not among their causal fac- 
tors; if that were a good reason for calling judgments untrue, says 
Sridhara, then inferences could never yield truth, since they are not 
caused by their objects. Both inference and memory judgments are 
true, but memory, unlike inference, represents rather than presents 
its content; thus inference, but not memory, deserves the title of an 
instrument of knowledge. 

Vallabha understandably finds difficulty in reconciling these diver- 
gent traditions. He tends to accept the Vaisesika tradition of Pra- 
§astapada and Sridhara in the main, but when it comes to explaining 
why memory is not a pramdna the best he can do is to refer us to the 
authority of the authors of the siétras who, he says, established the 
conventions covering the proper application of the term pramana. 

Just what can be the content of a memory judgment? Clearly, 
the objects of previous perceptual cognitions may be remembered. 
Indeed, since memory is produced merely from the contact between 
theselfand internal organ when activated by a trace, we can remember 
any object which is capable of producing a trace. How are traces 
produced? By judgments. The trace is not of the judgment, but of 
the content of the judgment, its object. This object may happen to 
be itself a judgment, but if it is remembered it must be because a 
trace was produced by a judgment about that judgment which is 
remembered—or else the Naiyayika must adopt the doctrine of the 
self-illumination of judgments, which as we have seen they reject. 

Recognition (pfratyabhijid) is different from memory, since in it 
we judge with respect to a presented object that it is the object we 
were previously acquainted with. According to Jayanta it is just a 
particular variety of perception. This view seems to be generally 


174 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


accepted in the system. The major competition in this matter is the 
view of the Buddhist, who thinks that recognition is a complex judg- 
ment composed of two kinds of simpler judgment, one perceptual, 
the other a memory judgment, From the Buddhist’s standpoint such 
a composite judgment is always in error, since reality ismomentary 
and thus cannot be validly recognized. In the light of this fact the 
Naiyayikas’ concern to establish the validity of recognition is under- 
standable. He wishes to establish the continuity of objects. 


Udayana is notable in his use of the argument that, since recognition 
is a fact, objects are continuous. It is surprising that Uddyotakara 
seems to miss the point by admitting that recognition does not necessi- 
tate the assumption that its object is a continuant. 


VIII. Comparison (Upamana) 


We have moved by now to a discussion of the instruments of know- 
ledge, which they are and what are their natures. According to 
classical Vaigesika doctrine there are only 2 instruments—percep- 
tion and inference. According to Nyaya doctrine there are4. The 
difference is not as serious as might be thought, however, since the 
Vaigesika includes the two missing instruments under inference. 

The Naiyayika’s 4 instruments are perception, inference, compa- 
rison, and verbal authority. We shall take up the topic of inference, 
which is the specialty of the system, in the following chapter. In the 
remainder of this chapter I review Nyaya thought on the last 2 instru- 
ments and briefly summarize the reasons why our philosophers refused 
to admit any additional instruments. 


The stock case ofa judgment of comparison occurs when a man who 
has seen a cow is told thatin another part of the country there isan 
animal called a gavaya which is similar to the cow he is acquainted with. 
Sure enough, when travelling in that other part of the country he 
runs across a beast which is similar to a cow and judges, as a result, 


“this must be a gavaya.” 


There are quite a few different theories about precisely what kind 
of a judgment this resulting judgment is. Gautama argued that it is 
sui generis, being neither a perception nor an inference. The reason 
it is not perceptual is that its content includes a reference to linguistic 
usage (of the word gavaya), and usage cannot be perceived. And it is 
not inference, he says, since inference gives us knowledge about things 
which can be verified through perception. These considerations by 
themselves failed to convince many subsequent writers, however, 


MEANING AND TRUTH 175 


Vatsyayana analyzes this kind of judgment as having for its cause 
(1) the memory of the conventional usage conveyed to him earlier 
together with (2) perception of the animal. Uddyotakara disagrees: 
for him the cause of a judgment of comparison involves (1) the know- 
ledge of the similarity between cow and garaya conveyed in the ear- 
lier discussion through the words of another, plus (2) the perception 
of the similarity of this animal now presented to cows previously 
seen. Jayanta defends Vatsyayana and attacks Uddyotakara: we 
cannot perceive similarity since ex hypothesi the things whose similarity 
is supposed to be perceived are not both present. Jn fact, the simi- 
larity is learned directly from the verbal authority of the speaker in 
the original discussion, and as Vatsyayana holds, it is the memory 
of this similarity which is the first of the two conditions. Presumably 
Pragastapada has a similar account in mind : he classifies comparison 
as a species of verbal authority, which in turn he classifies as a kind of 
inference. 

Bhasarvajfia’s discussion of this instrument is very peculiar. His 
considered conclusion is that comparison is not an instrument of know- 
ledge in addition to the others, contrary to what Gautama maintained. 
Yet he struggles to make it seem that he is not saying anything in 
conflict with the view of the siitrakdra. His apologies seem to have 
taken no one in. More unusual still, he has no firm alternative to 
offer. He details at least two accounts of judyments of comparison. 
According to one, such judgments fall under the rubric of verbal 
authority, as Pragastapada had proposed. According to the other, 
a comparative judgment is a sort of memory of a previous nonproposi- 
tional judgment which makes the subsequent confrontation of the 
animal (which had been known only indistinctly before from the 
description) a vivid propositional one. Bhasarvajnia and his followers 
do not, as Vatsyayana and others do, think that a comparative judg- 
ment reports facts about conventions ofusage. Such reports are made 
through judgments deriving from the instrument called verbal autho- 
rity. Varadaraja spells this latter view out more fully: we get an 
indistinct knowledge of a gavaya from the words of our earlier acquain- 
tance, indistinct since we are not yet acquainted with any denotata 
of the new word in his speech. Then when we confront the animal 
later we recognize this animal as that animal we knew indistinctly 
before. Thus the judgment is a kind of recognition, and so presu- 
mably to be classified under perception. 

Udayana also argues against Uddyotakara’s view that comparison 
grasps as its object the similarity between cow and gavaya, His 
argument is that if that instrument can grasp similarity it can grasp 


176 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


dissimilarity too—presumably on analogy with the well-accepted 
doctrine that perception can grasp the absence as well as the presence 
of objects. Varadaraja seems to have accepted the implications of 
this argument of Udayana’s and incorporated it into a view of the 
type Udayana intended combating with it. Varadaraja classifies 
judgments of comparison into 3 kinds :(1) judgments through simi- 
larity (gavaya from cow); (2) judgments through dissimilarity (from 
cow to horse); (3) judgments deriving from recognition of the same 
property in two different things i.e., the process of identifying a thing 
as of a kind, 


IX. Verbal Authority (Sabda) 


The fourth instrument in Gautama’s list is explained by him as 
being constituted by the teaching of a worthy person (dpta)—in 
short, an authority. Who are authorities, and why? Watsyayana 
says that an authority is one who has direct knowledge of something 
and is both desirous and capable of speaking about it. He adds that 
authorities need not be sages, and may even be foreigners! Vacas- 
pati goes even further, noting that an authority need not even be 
morally worthy: a robber, after he has taken everything one has, 
may provide accurate information about the way to the next town. 
It is evident that the NaiyAyikas, unlike Vedintists, did not restrict 
authority to the scriptural sort. Nevertheless, Udayana adds, an 
omniscient person will naturally qualify as an authority on everything. 

It should be further added that judgments derived from verbal 
authority are classified by Gautama into 2 kinds, (1) those where the 
object is seen, and (2) where the object is unseen. Clearly an author- 
ity on the second variety needs to have special powers. Further- 
more, whereas the first kind of judgment can be verified by percep- 
tion, the second kind cannot; thus we are fully dependent on the 
authority for the validity of his claim. This is viewed by our philoso- 
phers, if not exactly as an unfortunate consequence of the way the 
world is, at least as a consequence of it. 

Kanada asserts that judgments derived from verbal authority re- 
present a variety of inference, and he is followed in this interpretation 
by Pragasapada and Sridhara, though interestingly enough not by 
Vyomasiva. Prasgastapada argues that judgments gotten from autho- 
rity are inferential since they satisfy the requirements of inference— 
they involve perception (auditory) of sounds as well as knowledge of 
regular concomitance or pervasion. Gautama anticipates this criticism 
and answers that whereas in inference the concomitance is natural 


MEANING AND TRUTH 177 


and lawful, in verbal authority judgments the concomitance is based 
on man-made conventions. This reasoning apparently convinced 
Vyomasiva to depart from his tradition; he accepts the difference. 
Sridhara takes the position that the concomitance in question is 
between the intention of the speaker and the sounds he emits when he 
speaks; we discern this regularity, which is as natural as anything 
is, and infer the truth of what he asserts. Perhaps, retorts Vacaspati, 
we infer the validity of what he says, but what he says is known to us 
through another instrument than inference. Vatsyayana argues 
that in inference the concomitance in question must pertain between 
things both of which can be observed, while verbal authority depends 
on a denotation relation which may well relate a word with a type of 
object never perceived or even imperceptible. Jayanta has a succinct 
reason why verbal authority is not inference: authority operates 
through single words alone, while inference requires whole sentences 
for its operation. Inference cannot prove either that a word has the 
capacity to convey a meaning or that the word does in fact convey 
that meaning, he adds. Vallabha, on the other hand, accepts the 
classification of verbal authority as inference, since the use of words 
seems to him to presuppose previous knowledge of the relations among 
their meanings; the words merely cause us to recall those relation- 
ships. 

A good deal of the previous paragraph will be lost on the reader 
until he has a chance to absorb the next chapter, on inference. Never- 
theless, he will discern that among our philosophers there is a variety 
of views about questions pertaining to linguistic usage and its nature, 
a variety that must make us think of our own day and its philosophers’ 
obsession with questions about language, questions which are reminis- 
cent of those we have just touched upon. 


X. Pseudo-Instruments of True Knowledge 


Various other schools propose other instruments besides the 4 
recognized by at least some of our philosophers. It is not that the 
jadgments classified as deriving from such instruments by others are 
rejected as false by Naiyayikas; rather, the Naiyayika’s claim is that 
he can accommodate each of the other “‘instruments’’ under one of 
the Nyaya 4 (or Vaigesika 2) accepted instruments. 

Thus Mimamsakas, for example, find a place for an instrument 
they call ‘presumption’ (arthdpatti). A stock example is our judg- 
ment that Caitra must be out, since he’s alive and not at home. 
Another has to do with Devadatta, who is fat, and about whom we 


178 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


conclude that he must eat at night, since he is not seen to eat in the 
daytime. Gautama includes presumption under inference, and this 
is defended by commentators on the ground that since we require 
knowledge of lawlike concomitances, as in recognized inferences, we 
have no need to distinguish this particular class of judgments. 

Another supposed instrument, admitted by Mimamsakas, is needed 
to explain the source of negative judgments. We have seen above 
that Naiyadyikas generally maintain that absences are perceptible; 
thus judgments about absences can be incorporated under the instru- 
ments of perception, inference, and the others. 

Other instruments are occasionally. proposed. The Pauranikas 
are said to have proposed that we need an additional instrument to 
validate such a judgment as “‘since there are 1,000 people in this 
crowd there are 100." The Nyadya view is that this is derivable by 
inference. 

We shall shortly have occasion to examine a mode of reasoning 
called tarka, which operates somewhat as the kind of reasoning called 
“reductio ad absurdum”’ does. It is occasionally suggested that tarka 
is an additional instrument. VAtsyayana controverts this suggestion 
on the ground that tarka is by itself not able to produce truejudgments; 
it is an ancillary technique and does not by itself give us knowledge. 
Apararka even says it isa kind of doubt; Sivaditya echoes this. It is 
said, however, that the Bhiisanakara makes tarka an independent 
category; it is difficult to know what that, if true, would indicate. 


9 
LOGICAL THEORY 


All systems of Indian philosophy except the Carvakas accept infe- 
rence as an instrument of valid knowledge. The science of reasoning 
(nydya) is alluded to in very early Indian texts, and the name of the 
Nyaya school indicates that Indian intellectuals looked to thisschool 
as the authority in matters of detail connected with logic. Not that 
Naiyayikas had a corner on the subject. Most of the other systems 
proposed theories in the area of logic and reasoning, and some 
(notably Samkhya) may well have antedated the Naiydyikas on 
certain important points. In particular the logical theories of 
Buddhists of Dignaga’s school were viewed by the Naiyayikas as 
rivaling their own in subtlety and importance. 

An extended history of Indian logic has yet to be written. Little 
is known of the beginnings of these reflections. Argument is indulged 
in in the earliest texts, the Vedas and Upanishads, and there are 
references in the Upanishads to a science of “‘dialogue,”’ though it is 
unclear what this consisted of. During the Buddha’s and Mahavira’s 
period, argumentation was enriched. The Buddha’s method of 
answering questions is noteworthy: asked whether a metaphysical 
proposition was true or not, he sometimes answered by denying that 
it was true, false, both, or neither; this method became the touchstone 
of Nagarjuna’s Madhyamika system. Mahavira developed a “‘logic 
of perhaps,” the so-called syddvdda or sevenfold predication, which 
made much of the different points of view from which propositions, 
might be taken to be true, false or possible. Some of the suttas of the 
Buddhist canon mention tarkikas or logicians, and a chapter of the 
Majjhimanikaya is called anumdnasutta, the chapter on inference. 
Manu and the epics refer to logic and logicians, sometimes taking 
a dim view of their ways and warning the devout against them. 

The specific topic of the proper form of argument (somewhat mis- 
leadingly referred to as the theory of the ‘‘syllogism”’ by certain writers ) 


180 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


can be traced back at least to the Jain writer Bhadrabahu, who had a 
10-membered argument.! His 10 members are different from another 
set which Vatsyayana addresses himself to later on. By the time of 
Caraka (ca. A.D. 78), the writer on medicine, we have a 5 membered 
argument form. Caraka’s time closely approximates Kanada’s and 
is not far before Gautama. There is also reason to believe that at 
this same period the Samkhya philosophers knew and used a 5 mem- 


bered argument form.? 


I. The Terminology of Inference 


Before summarizing the logical theories of our writers it will be well 
to arm ourselves with appropriate terminology for describing those 
theories. 

As we have seen, Nydya is used to suggest logical theory. A more 
specific term meaning ‘‘inference,”’ however, is anumdna, which is the 
name for the second of the 2 Vaigesika, and 4 Nyaya, instruments of 
knowledge. Through inference we are able to gain knowledge about 
things not available at the moment to perception. For example, 
we can come to know the cause of an occurrence by inferring on the 
basis of observed lawful relationships even though we failed to observe 
the causing event; or we can know that a certain universal qualifies 
a given particular because it is pervaded by another which is seen to 
pervade that particular. These are two samples of what comes to 
be called “‘inference for oneself’? (svdrthanumana). A different, but 
equally important, use of inference is to convince others of the truth 
ofajudgment. This is called “inference for others” (pardrthanumana). 
The adumbration of theories about inference among the Nydaya- 
Vaigesikas largely concerned this latter role of inference. 

According to our philosophers, all valid inferences-for-others can 
be analyzed in such a way that they can be perspicuously represented. 
in an argument form which has 5 members and 5 terms. Each of 
these members has a Sanskrit name, as does each of the terms: I shall 
propose English equivalents for the names of the members, and abbre- 
viations for the terms. It is easiest to grasp the roles of these members 
and terms by considering a stock Nyaya argument. 

(1) This mountain is fire-possessing. 

(2) Because it is smoke-possessing. 

(3) Whatever is smoke-possessing is fire-possessing like kitchen, 

unlike lake. 

(4) This mountain, since it possesses smoke, possesses fire. 

(5) This mountain is fire-possessing. 


LOGICAL THEORY 181 


In the Sanskrit terminology : (1) is called the pratijfa; it is what is 
put forward to be proved, and we may call it the “chypothesis”’; 
(2) is called the hetu or ‘‘reason”’; (3) is the udéharana or ‘‘example”’ 
(actually it states the general principle which underlies thein ference 
as well as providing evidence in the form of examples which are in- 
tended to show not only that there are things which are both smoky 
and fiery but also that absence of smoke and of fire are concurrent) ; 
(4) the upanaya or “‘application,”’ as its name implies, applies the 
property whose presence is to be proved to the subject of the inference 
(this mountain); finally, (5) the nigumana or “conclusion”? asserts the 
hypothesis as proved. 

The 5 termsare these. First, the subject ofthe inference, that whose 
property is proved, in the above argument this mountain, is called in 
Sanskrit the paksa, which we shall abbreviate as p. The property 
which is proved to qualify pis the sadhya, ors. In the above argument 
sis fire-possessing. The argument is that this mountain possesses fire 
because it is smoke-possessing, that is, because it is known to have 
another property which is related in an appropriate way to the s. 
This property is called 2, the hetu. In the third member of the argu- 
ment two kinds of examples are offered : one is positive, one negative. 
The positive example is called sapaksa, sp, while the negative one is 
vipaksa, vp. In the argument above, kitchen is the sp while lake is the 
vp. 

Note that though I have called these last 5 things the “‘terms”’ of 
an inference it should not be inferred that f, s, h, sp and up are linguistic 
entities, words or phrases. They are, as the Naiyayikas see it, things 
and properties. I have italicized them,r ather than writing them 
in quotes, in order to suggest this important point. One implication 
we should note immediately is that an argument is not well-formed 
unless all 5 terms are present (with certain exceptions mentioned 
below), and that it is not enough to merely mouth a word or phrase 
to make them present—they must in fact exist ! 

Now a successful inference is one where there is the relation called 
““pervasion’’ (zyaptt) between s-ness and h-ness. In the illustration 
above, the validity of the argument asa whole depends fundamentally 
on the fact that fire-possessingness pervades smoke-possessingness. That 
pervasion is a relation among universals was emphasized quite early 
in the development of the system, although it is apparent that some of 
the early writers were unclear on the point. 

The topic of inference received early attention because by proper 
understanding of the nature of an argument one may hope to identify 
the conditions under which the truth can be ascertained. Histori- 


182 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cally, it would appear that the systematic theory of inference owed 
a great deal to attempts by early practitioners of debate to develop 
fool-proof methods for winning arguments, as well as providing judges 
with applicable procedures for telling a winner from a loser. A 
remarkable feature of the Nydyasiitras is the extended attention that 
these debating categories receive in the last book of the work. 

In particular, the theory of debate has close connections with a 
topic at the heart of Nydya discussions of inference, the topic of falla- 
cies. Even by the close of our period, Naiyayikas were just beginning 
to think carefully about positive formulations of the conditions sufficient 
and necessary to guarantee that pervasion is present, and the problem, 
which may be insoluble, is fundamental in much Navya-nyaya lite- 
rature. Without the identification of positive conditions for perva- 
sion, one is forced to fall back on negative procedures, that is, one is 
forced to rely on the identification of fallacies in distinguishing apparent 
pervasion from the real thing. Thus it is that in the actual assess- 
ment of arguments for validity Naiyayikas proceed by examining 
the arguments for fallacies, and as a result a clear and sweeping list 
of types of fallacy is a prime desideratum. 


II. Nature and Function of Inference 


Kanada and Gautama viewed inference primarily as a means by 
which we ascertain causal conditions, or sometimes the effects of 
known causes. Kanada includes inference from contradictory qua- 
lities too. As we have seen, Naiyayikas view inference as consisting 
of judgments whose referents are existing things, not, as we in the 
West are prone to do, as relating to words or concepts. Thus where 
we conceive of the validity of an inference as compatible with the 
failure of its members to refer or be true of anything, the Naiyayika 
views nonreferential words as ill-formed and excludes them from any 
inference. 

This fact seems to me to show that Nydya is not concerned with 
‘formal’? logic in the way that Western logicians have characteristi- 
cally been. However, this does not contradict Bochenski’s view that 
“in India too a formal logic developed. That it really was a formal 
logic is shown by the fact that the formulae constructed by the Indian 
thinkers concern the fundamental questions of logic, the question of 
‘what follows from what.’ 3 Ofcourse Indian Jogicians were interes- 
ted in what follows from what. But their logic was not “formal”? ina 
different sense : it did not have to do with abstract relations among 
terms, where the abstraction was from all questions of reference. A 


LOGIGAL THEORY 183 


Western logician views the inference “‘all animals are pigs; all pigs 
have wings; therefore all animals have wings’? as formally valid, 
though unsound. The unsoundness does not in his view, detract from 
the logical interest of the example as instantiating a valid form 
of inference. The Naiyayika’s view of this example is that it isa 
nyayabhdsa, something which is only apparently an argument but 
really is not. It is, in short, ill-formed because its members arc 
known to be false. 

As a result, a great deal of time has been wasted, it seems to me, 
by writers who attempt to compare the Nyaya 5-membered inference 
with the Aristotelian syllogism. A more fruitful comparison can 
perhaps be found with John Stuart Mill’s canons of inductive reason- 
ing. When the Nyaya method of assessing inferences in practice is 
carefully studied it becomes quite apparent that the assessment of 
“validity” is a matter, not of comparing the inference with 
abstract models to see if it instantiates one of the ‘‘valid forms of in- 
ference,’’ but rather of trying to detect subtle errors in the adducing 
of evidence for the constituent judgments. 

It is a consequence of this view of inference as mainly inductive that 
the instrument of knowledge called ‘‘inference for oneself”’ is said by 
Gautama to ‘‘follow on perception.’’ Inference is a distinct means of 
knowledge because it gives us knowledge about things we are not 
immediately acquainted with—but the things in question must 
be such that we could immediately be acquainted with them if the 
world, including ourselves, were different from what it is now. In 
particular, in inference for oneself we must actually perceive and 
fp, and we must have a memory ofan observed concomitance between 
s and h—thus we must either be observing or have observed all 
3terms inthe argument. Ifthis condition is not satisfied we have the 
fallacy called “‘unproved terms’? (asiddha). Uddyotakara, pre- 
sumably following some earlicr teacher (s)® introduces the notion of 
lingaparamarsa as a condition which must be satisfied in addition to 
the ones above: his idea is that the fourth member of the argument, 
the ‘‘application,’’ reports the actual perception of the s-pervaded h 
as residing in p. Uddyotakara, in opposition to Buddhists, Mimam- 
sakas, Samkhyas, and Vedantists, argues vigorously that this synthetic 
condition is the proximate cause of a successful inference for oneself. 

But what of inference for others? Is not this, after all, formal ? 
I use inference to convince you of something you do not know already; 
if you had perceived it, you would not need an argument. Thus 
inference for another cannot require that the hearers have perceived 
the terms and the pervasion and residence relations among them. 


184 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Even here, however, the Naiyayika characteristically requires per- 
ception on the part of the person one is trying to convince, an extra- 
ordinary (alaukika) kind of perception, to be sure. The argument’s 
purpose is to get the hearer to see that p possesses s-pervaded h, from 
which he will be able to conclude the truth of “‘p is s.” 

To return to the remark with which I began this section : Kanada 
and Gautama viewed inference as primarily about causal relations. 
In the Nydyasiitras, as well as in the writings of Hindu logicians of 
the same period representing other systems such as Samkhya and 
Mim4amsa, one finds reference to a classification of inferences into 
3 varieties : pirvavat, Sesavat, and sdmanyatodysta. It is not clear what 
Gautama means by these 3 terms, and Vatsyayana apparently did not 
understand them very well either, since he offers two distinct explica- 
tions of the satras in question. This has given rise to several historical 
reconstructions among modern scholars.’ 

One of Vatsyayana’s interpretations makes Gautama to be distin- 
guishing (a) inference from cause to effect (pirvavat), as when we 
infer rain from clouds gathering; (b) inference from effect to cause 
(Sesavat), as when we infer rain upstream from the swollen river down- 
stream; (c) inference from general correlation (sdmdnyatodrsta), 
which would cover correlations not involving the temporality of 
before and after. Thakur thinks Vatsyayana’s other interpretation 
indicates his acquaintance with Vaiéesika thought, since it runs along 
lines developed in e.g., Candramati.8 Candramati divides inferences 
into drsta and adrsta. The former is inference based on perception of 
a property held in common between two things; the latter is inference 
based on our failure to perceive the properties of one thing in another. 
Prasgastapada actually uses the term sdmdnyatodrsta, but gives ita 
complex meaning: it is inference which occurs when two things have 
different universals but because of general correlation we infer the 
property of one from the other. 

It is apparent from later writings that no one is very sure what 
Gautama’s sitras meant, and that one interpretation is as good as 
another, depending on one’s theory. Uddyotakara has still another 
explanation. As he sees it, the threefold distinction being drawn may 
be construed as that between only-positive, only-negative, and positive- 
negative inferences. This distinction is an important one in the 
subsequent literature, as the others mentioned above are not, so let 
us turn to the last mentioned division and leave historical ques- 
tions aside. 

The distinction between only-positive, only-negative, and 
positive-negative inferences is this. In the stock case about smoke 


LOGICAL THEORY 185 


and fire on the hill, set out above, it is possible to provide both posi- 
tive examples (e.g., kitchen) and negative ones (e.g., lake). But 
Uddyotakara, criticizing Dignaga, holds that not all inferences are 
such that both sorts of examples can be given, and this not because 
of any defect in principle but because of the nature of what is the 
subject of the inference. ‘Thus in the inference “‘this pot is nameable, 
because it is knowable,”? we cannot give a negative example, not 
because we are lazy, but because according to Nyaya assumptions 
everything whatever is both knowable and nameabie. That is, 
knowable and nameable both have as their extension the universal class, 
if you will, and since a negative example has to be something which 
lacks both s and & it is evident that under these circumstances no such 
example can be provided. In such a case Uddyotakara says we have 
a case of only-positive (kevaldnvayin). Likewise, in the inference 
‘Sound is eternal, because it can be perceived by an external sense 
organ,” if one (e.g., a Buddhist) believes that nothing is eternal one 
cannot in the nature of the case provide a positive example. This 
is, then, an ‘‘only-negative’’ (kevalavyatirekin) inference. The stock 
example of smoke and fire, where both examples are available, is 
“‘positive-negative’’ (anvayavyatirekin). 

Uddyotakara held that all three kinds of inference were such that 
valid instances of them can be cited, and this view has been charac- 
teristic of Naiyayikas since, although there have been some devia- 
tions—-e.g., Jayanta seems to have rejected only-positive inferences 
as not valid, and Udayana appears to have had misgivings about only- 
negative ones. Most Naiyayikas in our period, however, allow both 
as valid in principle. Indeed, the Nyaya rejection of presumption 
Carthipatti) as an independent instrument depends on their being 
able to classify presumptive arguments under only-negative type 
inference. 


Ill. The Members of an Argument 


We have seen which the 5 members of a’full-scale inference for 
others are as illustrated in the stock case of the claim that the hill is 
fiery because it issmoky. But (1) why are these just the members ? 
Could not an argument be successfully couched in less? Or on the 
other hand, are not there additional members which have been 
overlooked? (2) What are the peculiar functions of each of the 
5 members? And in particular, why do we need 2 members — 
the hypothesis and the conclusion—which apparently are identical 
in form and content ? 


186 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


First, why 5 members and not fewer ? Inarguments which actually 
appear in the course of philosophical polemics the characteristic form 
ofan argument is briefer. It tends to be stated something as follows : 
“that hill has fire, because it has smoke, like a kitchen and unlike 
lake.’ This short-form argument sets out all 5 terms in their appro- 
priate places. Why is it not sufficient, and why should we not reject 
the additional material in the 5 membered Nyaya argument as re- 
dundant or dispensable ? Mimamsakas, Advaitins, and Buddhists 
all consider the Nyaya argument form unnecessarily prolix. 

Our philosophers labor to make a case for each of the 5 members. 
For example Vatsyayana seems to have thought that ina full-scale 
argument all 4 of the valid instruments of knowledge come into play, 
and that each of the first 4 members of the argument form represent 
an instrument, the conclusion stating the judgment as proved by all 
4 instruments in tandem. So he identifies the hypothesis as given 
to us through verbal testimony, the reason as being inference proper 
(the second of the 4 instruments), the example indicating the per- 
ceptual material, and the application representing the use of compa- 
tison.® I think it is safe to say that this account is pretty well ignored 
by later writers. 

What is more plausible is that the difference between the first and 
last members, and also between the second and fourth members, is the 
difference between what Ingalls calls ‘‘ascripts”’ and “‘assertions.”!° 
The hypothesis ascribes s to p, whereas the conclusion asserts that p 
hass. The reason ascribes h to p, whereas the application asserts that 
p has s-pervaded h. This distinction Ingalls traces back to Vatsyayana. 
Tt appears to be appealed to by Pragastapada in distinguishing the 
hypothesis from the conclusion. 

This is not quite the same as saying that the difference between the 
first two and the last two members is that the former merely mention 
their terms whereas the latter assert something about them. Sridhara 
seems to have something of this sort in mind when he says that in the 
reason the A is merely mentioned but it is not stated there that it isa 
property of p. Randle takes Sridhara to task here; clearly the reason 
does more than merely mention A—‘‘that mountain has fire, be- 
cause smokepossessing’’ makes no sense unless it is implicit that itis 
that mountain which possesses the smoke.1! 

A different sort of reason why the hypothesis must be differentiated 
from the conclusion stems from the fact that among the faults which 
may vitiate an inference many Naiyayikas include cases where only s 
and p are involved. It is sometimes taken to be a fault in one’s argu- 
ment'if the proposition one is trying to prove is contradicted by per- 


LOGICAL THEORY 187 


ception. Ifone can see all the mountain and can see that there is no 
fire on it, it is a mistake to argue that it possesses fire. Or again, 
if one is trying to prove the truth of ‘“‘my mother is barren’’ one is 
wasting one’s time; but the reason one is wasting one’s time has 
nothing to do with anything other than the contradiction between 
being a mother and being barren. Now since these faults cannot be 
classified as fallacies of the h, the sp or the vp, and since the conclusion 
asserts a proposition on the basis of its nonfallaciousness, in order to 
test the argument for these sorts of fallacies we have to formulate 
the proposition which it is intended to prove for the purposes of testing 
it for contradictoriness. Such, one might suppose, may have been 
part of Pragastapada’s rationale in justifying the hypothesis as a sepa- 
rate member. Others, notably Uddyotakara, deny that these are 
faults, or else classify them under fallacies of the reason or examples, 
They, therefore, must appeal to different reasons for distinguishing 
the hypothesis as a member. 

Uddyotakara reminds us that the hypothesis is not, as we Wester- 
ners are prone to think, a judgment-or statement but rather the 
complex object p accompanied by s. What we have been calling falla- 
cies or faults are in fact, literally, in Sanskrit called dbhasa—‘‘appea- 
rances (of something as what it is not).”? Thus the hypothesis, since 
itis an object, cannot be fallacious, although one may take something 
which appears to be an object (but is not) to be one. It follows that 
a “‘self-contradictory hypothesis” is a kind of category-mistake; if 
something isa hypothesis it cannot be self-contradictory (since objects 
can not be self-contradictory), and if something is self-contradictory 
it cannot be a hypothesis, not being that kind of thing. We have, 
then, a fundamental cleavage here between the Vaigesikas Pragasta- 
pada, Vyomagiva, and Sridhara on the one hand, and Naiyayikas 
such as Uddyotakara on the other, about the nature and function of 
the members of an inference. The Vaisesikas take these members to 
be judgments or propositions, the Naiyayikas take them to be objects 
which the corresponding judgments are about. 

Very well, then, we need at least 5 members, say the Naiyayikas 
and Vaigsesikas. But why, let us ask next, only 5? VaAatsyayana 
mentions 5 additional members that some older philosophers had 
included—the desire to know, doubt about the truth of the hypo- 
thesis, the possibility of getting a solution to the question, the purpose 
of the inquiry, and the resolution of the doubt. Recent scholarship 
suggests that a 10 membered argument form was espoused by Sam- 
khya; just these 10, in fact, are apparently foundin the Yuktidipika."* 
Vatsyayana’s attitude toward these added entries is that they are 


188 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


properly cited as psychological conditions and for stages in inference 
for oneself but that they are out of place in a list of the steps required 
for inference for others. Udayana expatiates: the reason why the 
additional 5 members are out of place is that although their presence 
assists inference to take place they do not need to be known and 
understood by the person to whom the argument is addressed, while 
the approved .5 members must be appreciated in order that the argu- 
ment succeed. 

A good deal of discussion is occasioned over the function of the fourth 
member, the application. A question which troubled many of our 
philosophers was this: since everything has a cause, and since an 
inference issues (when successful) in the establishment ofa conclusion, 
a key to understanding inference is to know, not merely what the steps 
are but what is the essential cause of the successful demonstration. 
What, then, asked our philosophers, is the essential cause ofa successful 
demonstration ? 

Now, the conclusion of our stock inference is ‘‘this mountain possesses 
fire.” ‘The Buddhists thought that the essential cause for the 
knowledge of this fact on the part of the person to whom the demons- 
tration is addressed is just the realization that this mountain has smoke, 
the information set forth in the second step. (Of course in Buddhism’s 
view there are no more steps !) Most Naiyayikas would agree that 
the second member sets forth this fact (technically referred to as 
paksadharmata), but many would not agree that the knowledge of this 
fact on the part of the person being convinced is the essential, or at 
least the last crucial, step in the process. Uddyotakara in particular 
champions the fourth step as that which sets forth a relationship 
which is the most essential and proximate cause of success, a relation- 
ship which he calls ligaparamarsa. This relationship is that which 
holds between p and s-pervaded A, a relationship of qualification. As 
emphasized before, Uddyotakara is careful to insist that the relation- 
ship itself is not judgmental; it is a fact of nature, and itis this fact 
which is the cause of the addressee’s correct judgment that p has s. 

Sridhara, on the other hand, says that the Vaisesika view is diffe- 
rent from Uddyotakara’s, that the fourth member has the function of 
conveying the paksadharmata. He can say this because, we will re- 
call, he holds the second member merely to mention the A, not to 
ascribe it to. Randle argues that in fact Sridhara identifies paksa- 
dharmata with liitgaparamarsa, as they are both now associated with the 
fourth member.18 

These subtleties go beyond what is said by the authors of the sdtras 
and their initial commentators (Vatsyayana and Pragastapada). 


LOGICAL THEORY 189 


These oldest writers apparently thought of the fourth member as 
merely arguing by analogy from the fact that in a kitchen one finds 
both sand h to the fact that on this mountain one finds both s and 4, 
coupled with the tact, established in the third member, that this 
mountain is an instance of a general concomitance between h and s 
as instanced by the negative example, lake. In other words, the oldest 
writers treated the fourth member merely as the particular instantia- 
tion of the general relation; they do not raise the question as to which 
member states the most essential or proximate cause of successful 
inference. It is probable that they did not distinguish clearly the 
notion ofa member asa linguistic or epistemic item — a judgment 
or statencat —from that ofamemberas a complex fact about which 
we form judgments or make statements. 

It is Uddyotakara’s care in distinguishing these that leads him to 
emphasize the role of lingapardmarsa. Ashe sees it, it is not our judg- 
ments which make inferences successful but the facts themselves; 
thus in particular it is not the judgments that A resides in p and that s 
pervades A that cause a successful inference, but only the complex 
fact of p’s possessing s-pervaded h which causes it. It is particularly 
the Buddhists that Uddyotakara opposes. Buddhist logicians such 
as Dignaga, since they do not admit objects independent of knowledge, 
must perforce view inferences as constituted of judgments, and more 
particularly they must trace the causes of success in inference not to 
facts buttojudgments. Uddyotakara is cleverly forcing the Buddhists 
to see what he believes to be the shortcomings of an idealist theory of 
knowledge and inference. 


IV. Paksa and Saddhya 


{n the case of the terms, there is no real disagreement among the 
schools about their number, but there is some discussion over just 
what exactly the terms are, i.e., what constitutes ap, anh, orans, 
or one of the examples. 

One problem about reading the earlier writings in the school on 
these topics is that the terms paksa and sddhya were used interchange- 
ably. The reason for this, apparently, is that the term paksa is found 
frequently as an alternative way of designating the first member or 
hypothesis, and apparently the term sddhya was used indiscriminately, 
sometimes to mean the subject of the hypothesis, sometimes to mean 
its predicate. Tuccil# points to a passage in the Buddhist work 
Nydyapravesa in which the author explains that according tothe older 
masters of logic the argument form has two sections: (1) the sédhya, 


190 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


including both its dharmin (a thing which has a property) and its 
dharma (the property the thing has) ; (2) the sadhana, which comprised 
the first 3 members of the argument form discussed above. The idea 
apparently was that the first section gives us what is to be proved, 
and the second produces the proof. According to Tucci this tradition 
is followed by Asanga and Vasubandhu, but was rejected by Dignaga 
and Dharmakirti in favor of a distinction between the hypothesis, 
called by them the paksa or sddhya, and the reason plus the examples, 
called the sédhana or proof. It took a bit of duing for the Naiyayikas 
to evolve a consistent terminology, since they were addressing 
themselves to Buddhists whose terminology was not at all clear and 
who tended to analyze the first member differently than the Naiya- 
yikas did. 

Just what is it that one is attempting to prove in the stock argu- 
ment? When one says ‘‘this mountain has fire’? how should we 
analyze what this statement is about? This question created con- 
troversy between Nyaya and Buddhism, and for that matter among 
Naiyayikas themselves.15 VAtsyayana starts us off: he says that 
what is being inferred is fire. But both Dignaga and Uddyotakara 
point out that one does not infer fire from smoke, or even fieriness 
from sm okiness, but rather one infers from the fact that a place has 
smoke that it has fire. It is the relation between smoke and fire that 
makes the inference possible, but the inference is to a particular 
possessing a property, not merely to the property alone. 

But the Buddhists are not very happy with the notion that in “‘this 
mountain has fire” we are referring to a universal in a particular. 
Dignaga therefore espouses the view that what is being proved in the 
inference is that the place from which the smoke is issuing is a fire- 
possessing place; the subject of the argument is a particular place on 
the mountain, and the property of fire-possession is being attributed 
to that place. Uddyotakara controverts this, it is clear; just what 
his argument is is not so clear. Vacaspati Misra appears to think 
that Uddyotakara’s point isthat the inference cannot be about that 
place, since we do not see that place, it being hidden behind the hill. 
After all, if we could see the place we could see the fire and would 
not need inference. Randle discusses the passage at length and con- 
cludes that Vacaspati’s understanding is probably mistaken, and that 
what Uddyotakara is complaining about is that Dignaga wants to 
infer from the general presence of smoke to the occurrence of fire at 
some specific spot, which he could only do ifhe adduced as his reason 
that the smoke qualified that particular spot — and that is not the 
evidence that is given ! 


LOGICAL THEORY 191 


Udidyotakara’s own analysis of the hypothesis is that we are infer- 
ring, about this particular smoke that we see over the hill, that it is 
fiery, i.e., (hat it is accompanied by fire somewhere nearby on the hill. 
On his view, then, the p is this smoke and the s is fire-possessing; the 
mountain disappears as a term in the argument because, as Randle 
puts it, it is an ‘accidental dharmin.’? As we shall sec, this analysis 
leads Uddyotakara to have grave suspicions about the crucial relation 
of pervasion, which will be discussed shortly. 

Generally, the p is identified, e.g., by Vatsyayana, as the thing about 
which we are doubtful as to whether it does or does not possess the s. 
For one thing, it must not be an empty class. Udayana explicitly 
points this out, and it is generally assumed. Jayanta adds that it must 
not overlap the sp, and that it must not be identical with thes. In 
general, we may say at this point, all the terms ofa well-formed argu- 
ment must be different. Sridhara adds still another requirement: 
the f must not be such that it can have mutually contradictory pro- 
perties—of the two entities s and absence of s one or the other but 
not both must be attributable to. Mimamsakas and others suggest 
a further requirement intended to rule out ‘“‘straw man” argunients:s 
must be hitherto unproved to reside in . But Uddyotakara rejects 
this as too stringent ; all that is needed to make an inference have point 
is that someone claims that s resides in p. 


V. The Hetu Term: Its Nature and Requirements 


In many ways the heart of early discussions of successful inference 
lies in their treatment of the A and when one hasa “‘real’’ Aas opposed 
to only an apparent one. ‘There is more than one way of approach- 
ing the requirements for a successful h. On the one hand one may 
attempt to provide conditions necessary and sufficient for a putative 
h’s being a real one. On the other one may set out to specify (ex- 
haustively if he thinks himself able) the kinds of faults discovery of 
which convicts a putative A of being only an apparent one—a 
hetvabhasa. Ne shall deal with each of these approaches in turn, 

A. Necessary and Sufficient Conditions for hh: One of the most famous 
theories in Indian philosophy, and probably the best known to histo- 
rians of Indian logic, is that of the ‘‘three fold mark’’ (trairapya) of the 
hetu. The theory is especially associated with the name of Dignaga, 
but in some form it antedates him considerably. The reason for the 
association with Dignaga is that he seems to have radically reinter- 
preted the formula which constitutes the ‘threefold mark,” This 
formula runs as follows : 


192 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(1) the » must fall completely within the A; 
(2) the sp must occur partially or completely within the h; 
(3) the vp must occur outside of the fh. 


Unfortunately, this formula as given is ambiguous, and the history 
of the development of the theory of pervasion is a history of the succe- 
ssive reconstruing of the second and third requirements in the formula. 


Stage One: As Vidyabhiisana asserts, ‘“‘an example before the time 
of Dignaiga served as a mere familiar case which was cited to help the 
understanding of the listener.’"'® In the first stage of development 
requirement (2) of the threefold mark was taken to mcan that the 
sp constituted some class or other whose members all share the pro- 
perty of possessing fire, and that at least one of those members also 
has the property of possessing smoke. To use a Boolean proccdure 
for symbolizing this, (2) required that ashAO (where a=sp). 
Requirement (3) , likewise, was construed to mean that the vp consists 
of some class or other whose members all share the property of not 
possessing fire, and that none of those members have the property of 
possessing smoke. Thus (3) may be formulated for this stage as 
vsh=0 (where v=up)}. Requirement (1) is relatively unambiguous; 
it states that ph=O. 

[t is important to note carefully the definition of 56 and »p set forth 
in this stage, as well as two features of an inference as conceived here. 
The first feature is this : that satisfaction of the three requirements 
conjointly does not suffice to entail the conclusion. The situation 
hereis rather that one giving an argument is citing examples to suggest 
the plausibility of his hypothesis to a listener; we are considering a 
moment in discussion where one side claims something to be the case 
and in order to illustrate what he means, as well as to show that his 
claim is not altogether unreasonable, he provides examples. The 
second feature to note is this : requirements (2) and (3) are indepen- 
dent of each other. It is possible to satisfy one without satisfying the 
other. 

Stage Two: In this stage the understanding of requirement (3) 
undergoes a distinct change, while the other two requirements are 
interpreted as before. In Stage One the vp was taken to be some 
particular class (e.g., the class of lakes). On the understanding of the 
second stage the vp is to be construed as the class of all fireless things. 
Requirement (3) now is taken to state that hs=0, that is, that the 
his completely within the s. 

This is a radical change, for it is now the case, where it was not 


before, that if all three requirements are satisfied the conclusion is 


LOGICAL THEORY 193 


entailed, and we have in (1)—(3) the necessary and sufficient condi- 
tions for a successful inference. To sce this we may construct a 
diagram. 


TO PROVE: ps = 0 

ASSUME: p #0 

s #0 

h #0 

pa = 0 

as = 0 
REQUIREMENTS:(1) ph = 0 
C2) ash # 0 
(3) hs = 0 





Tt will be seen from the diagram that the falls completely within 
s, which is the conclusion to be proved. However, the stock example 
of lake as »p willno longer do. For lakes is not the class of everything 
which lacks the s-property fiertness. In Stage Two, then, interest 
has swung from the giving of evidence suggestive of lawfulness to the 
actual assertion of lawful connection between smokiness and fieriness, 
a connection which comes to be known as “‘pervasion.”? In Stage 
Two, while sf still serves as positive evidence of concomitance between 
hand s, vpis no longer viewed as an example but rather as the comple- 
mentofs. Requirements (2) and (3) onthis reading have completely 
different roles: whereas requirement (2) involves giving evidence for 
concomitance by citing a particular case instantiating both A and s, 
requirement (3) asks us to assent to a universal proposition, “all A 
things are s things’’ (‘‘all smoky things are fiery things’) but does not 
involve the production of specific evidence. 

Nevertheless the 2 requirements are still independent. One can 
find an instance satisfying requirement (2) without feeling able to 
assert pervasion of bys, and likewise one might feel inclined to assert 
pervasion without being able to come up with an actual instance of a 
thing which shares the two properties. It is evident, though, that 
Stage Two is a halfway house, since if one sincerely believes that 


194 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


requirement (3) is satisfied, that pervasion does indced hold, then he 
will have no doubt that an instance of concomitance can be found, 
even though he might not be imaginative enough tocome up with one 
immediately upon request. So we are led to a third stage. 

Stage Three : Here requirements (1) and (3) are understood as 
in Stage Two : the change is in requirement (2). In fact, in this 
Stage requirements (2) and (3) come to the same thing; for the sp 
is now construed as consisting of the class of all things which have the 
s-property except the p itself. Requirement (2) now says that the 
members of h, smoky things, must only occur in the sp, which means 
now the class of fiery things. Thus requirement (2) must be stated 
thus : hs= 0, which was precisely the way we found requirement 
(3) to read as well in Stage Two. 

In this Stage not only are requirements (2) and (3) equivalent, 
but it follows that one of them is unnecessary. Requirement (1) 
together with either one or the other of the other two is sufficient to 
entail the conclusion. 

The three Stages I have just identified can be associated with Bud- 
dhist logicians. Stage One presumably antedates Dignaga. Just 
who was responsible for Stage Two is not entirely clear. Vidya- 
bhisana!’ seems to have thought it came in with Asanga, but Tucci!® 
finds no trace of the trairapya in Asanga. In any case it is likely that 
it was Dignaga’s position, although this is extremely hard to ascertain, 
mainly because of the difficulty of maintaining the position of Stage 
Two without perforce being led on to Stage Three. Stage Three is 
explicitly and unmistakably formulated by Dharmakirti in the Nyaya- 
bindu.® Stcherbatsky’s®® puzzlement over the frairépya stemmed from 
his difficulty in explaining adequately why Dharmakirti should pro- 
mulgate asa threefold mark a formula in which one of the require- 
ments is redundant and unnecessary. He was not the firstt o have 
this difficulty; Dharmakirti’s commentators, such as Dharmottara, 
shared it.71 

Tt is especially instructive to note how in the transition from Stage 
One to Stage Two attention shifts from what is the case to what is 
asserted. I remarked earlier that Uddyotakara, especially, is 
sensitive to Buddhism’s tendency to confuse things with judgments 
about them. In turning the pattern of inference into a formal rela- 
tion among judgments, the Buddhists discovered something approxi- 
mating the kind of thing which Western logicians have studied for 
centuries. 1t was their idealist proclivities which enabled them to 
interpret the argument pattern thus without shuddering. Naiyayikas 
resisted the transition from Stage One to Stage Two, They continued 


LOGICAL THEORY 195 


to interpret the sp as a_ class whose members share the s-property and 
some of whose members (though not necessarily all) bave the h- 
property, and they refused to take the vp as the complement of s, 
As empiricists and realists they viewed the examples as providing 
evidence for pervasion, but they generally admit that the statement of 
pervasion isalways fallible—that subsequent examination may show 
that what scemed to be concomitance between A and s is not really 
such, Their attention remained directed toward the evidence, where 
the Buddhists tended to be drawn off to study formal relationships 
among judgments abstracted from their relationship with the facts, 
At least I think it fair to say a Naiyayika would claim this to be so. 

We find the threefold mark cited by most of our authors as necessary 
conditions fora validk. Jayanta adds 2 more requirements to the 
3 of Stage One above. They are (4) that h’s residence in p not be 
refutable by one of the valid instruments, and (5) that A not be such 
that though it satisfies requirements (2) and (3) with respect to s it 
also satisfies them with respect to s’s complement. According to 
Matilal?? the Vaisesika authors count (4) as a requirement on p 
rather than onf, although Vyomaésiva at any rate reports with approval 
the fivefold mark of “Nyaya theorists.” 

B. Fallacies of the Hetu : If one despairs of finding any set of 
conditions on the h necessary and sufficient to insure validity of the 
inference in question, the alternative is to list and classify as many 
as one can of apparent fetus which are not real hetus, i.e., which do not 
produce a valid inference. 

It is not hard to show why despair may be an appropriate attitude 
to adopt toward the prospect of finding positive conditions for validity. 
There are indefinite ways in which an inference which has the look 
of validity about it fails, and only a small number of these ways consti- 
tute violations of the 5 conditions Jayanta accepts. For one thing, 
participants in an argument are extremely likely to disagree on matters 
which are presupposed in the very formulation of the hypothesis, or 
reason, or examples. In such cases the argument may pass all 5 
conditions from one party’s point of view but not from the others, 
so that although it convinces the speaker it fails to convince the hearer. 
Worse yet, one or both parties may be confused or uncertain about 
key aspects of the terms, in which case although conviction may be 
produced theargument is invalid (though possibly temporarily success- 
ful!). Then there is the matter of being well-formed semantically 
and pragmatically (supposing for the moment that it passes muster 
syntactically). I.e., if one or more of the terms fails to denote any- 
thing whatsoever, or if there is a category-mistake involved in relating 


196 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


one thing to another, the argument is not well-formed semantically; 
andifthe terms are equivocalin context, or ifthemembers areasserted 
at widely separate times, the argument is not well-formed pragmati- 
cally or contextually. In Western logic textbooks one sometimes 
finds discussions of ‘informal fallacies,’? arguments which appear 
formally satisfactory but which misuse the language in some fashion 
or other. It would be a very unsophisticated logician who thought 
he could give an exhaustive classification of all the possible faults of 


this sort that can infect an argument. 


When one turns to consider what Indian logicians have to say about 
fallacies of the hetu, one is struck by the lack of agreement on such 
topics not only between philosophers of different schools but also 
between Naiyayikas themselves. In part this reflects the difficulty 
felt by everyone about getting any rigorous classification of fallacies, 
but it is even more apparent that our philosophers were victimized 
by a horrible confusion over terminology. In what follows I shall 
try to give hints about this sort of difficulty, although to track down the 
uses of different terms synonymously and of thesame terms in different 
senses would require that I presuppose more understanding of Sanskrit 
than I am in fact presuming on the part of my reader. 


Let us start with Kanada. He finds that there are 3 kinds of fallacies 
which pertain to the hetu term. (1) It may be contradictory (viruddha). 
(2) It may be unproved (asiddha). Or (3) it may be doubtfui 
(samdigdha) . Itisleft to his commentators to explain just what 
kinds of mistake Kanada had in mind. 


Meanwhile, however, along contes Gautama. He finds 5 varieties, 
only one of which verbally matches with Kanada’s list. The one that 
matches is (1) contradictory. His other 4 are (4) an A which is 
indecisive (savyabhicadra or anaikantika) ;(5) where the A, though it is 
intended to establish something, merely produces doubt in the hearer 
about the topic (prakarahasama) ; (6)where the 4 needs proof 2s much 
as the s (s@dhyasama); and (7) where the fA is mistimed (kaldtita). 
But his explanations of some of these notions are not at all precise. 

Vatsyayana helps us a bit in understanding (1) and (7). The 
contradictoriness of (1), he says, occurs when one puts forth as ha 
terrn which contradicts something he himself holds—either the 
hypothesis itself or something else which the speaker holds to be true 
along with the hypothesis. As for (7), Vatsyayana rejects the notion 
that it merely rneans the case where one member is spoken today 
and the others a year from now; actually, he says, what is meant 
under (7) is fallacies of equivocation generally. 


LOGICAL THEORY 197 


Now we come to Pragastapada. True to Vaisesika tradition, he 
accepts (1)—(3) of Kanada, but then adds one of his own, (8) 
uncertain (anadhyavasita). His explanations take us farther; (2) 
the “‘unproved”’ hetu, may be subdivided into 4 sorts, accordingas the 
his not recognized as existing by either party, not recognized by one 
of the two parties, is mischaracterized, or is notrecognized by one or 
both parties. (This last, which looks like a confusion, is viewed by 
Svidhara as actually referring to the status of the term p.) As for 
(3), the ‘‘doubtful’’ 4, this occurs when what is offered as A turns out 
to reside in both sp and vp. And (8), his added “‘uncertain”’ variety, 
is glossed as that putative hetu which is too specific (asdédhdrana) so that 
the p and fh terms are identical, as in ‘‘this hill is possessed of fire, 
because it is this hill.” 

Uddyotakara tells us that (6) is the same kind of fault as (2), since 
iff needs proof as muchas s then it is safe to say that his unproved. 
And he provides some subvarieties of (2): (a) where the very nature 
(svariipa) of the proposed 4 is unproved; (b) where the locus of the 
proposed f/ is unknown; (c) where the proposed reason (the second 
member of the argument) can be analyzed differently so that the h 
turns out not to prove s. Uddyotakara has also achieved some noto- 
riety for his apparent belief that it might, after all, be possible to 
specify an exhaustive list of fallacies and thus get a decision procedure 
for validity, albeit a very complicated one.?8 

This brings us to Bhasarvajfia, whose treatment of fallacies, by 
comparison with the time spent in Nydyasdru on other topics, is re- 
markably comprehensive. He lists 6 main varieties of helvdbhdsa, 
namely (1) contradictory, (2) unproved, (4) indecisive, (8) uncertain, 
(5) the hk which produces doubt, and (7) the “mistimed.” His 
explanation of (1) is that it is the fallacy which occurs when h turns 
out to reside in both sp and up: we just saw that this mistake was classi- 
fied by Pragastapada under (3) doubtful. As for (2) the unproved A, 
Bhasarvajfia says that this covers all cases where it is doubtful that 
hoccurs in pf, and he subdivides it into 12 varieties, a couple of which 
had been classified by Uddyotakara under (6). The other 5 main 
varieties are elaborately subdivided as well, and in many cases it is 
apparent that these subvarieties are related with subvarieties of other 
main classes in such a way that if an argument commits one kind of 
mistake it must commit another. Bhasarvajfia recognizes this aspect 
of his classification and is unperturbed by it. For example, (4) 
indecisive turns out to occur whenever the supposed & occurs in fp, 
sfand vp; it would appear that whenever this happens the f wil! also 
be (1) contradictory. And (8), the uncertain 4, is explained as in 


198 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Pragastapada. But when he coines to (5) his explanation diverges 
in an interesting way. In (5) the “‘mistimed” occurs, says Bhasar- 
vajfia, whenever /’s occurrence in fis sublated by a valid instrument; 
thus Bhasarvajfia incorporates into his list of fallacies one of the added 
positive requirements of validity that Jayanta had insisted on, indecd 
both, since others among his fallacies, notably (8), rule out the possi- 
bility that one A can prove both s and its complement. 

Vyomatgiva’s treatment is also elaborate. It is apparent that he 
has read others on the topic, and his list of fallaciesis not limited to the 
4 given by Pragastapada, on whose text heis commenting. Inaddition 
to Pragastapada’s (1), (2), (3) and (8) he specifically admits a 
fallacy he calls ‘‘mistimed,”’ and he also discusses the (4) indecisive 
sort. He mentions in passing that Kanada presumably inciuded 
these last 2 under (1), contradictory, but is not very impressed with 
this notion, for he suggests that we should accept these additional 
types of fallacy on the authority of Nyaya authors (not Vaisesika 
ones !) regardless of Kanada’s intentions. 

Vacaspati Migra equates (7), the confusing “‘mistimed”’ 4, with a 
fallacy called (9) “‘sublated’’ (bédha), which occurs when we have 
adequate reason to accept (or reject) the hypothesis without appealing 
to any A. Thus it is ‘‘mistimed’’ in the sense that, since there is no 
doubt about the hypothesis, there is no occasion for an inference. 

This fallacy (9) sublated, as well as a couple of others, are speci- 
fically attacked, however, by later writers such as Vallabha on the 
ground that a hetvabhdsa should directly vitiate inference. Thus 
Vacaspati’s (9) belongs in a class with such a fault asa ‘‘straw-man’”’ 
argument (siddhasadhana), where one sets out to prove what has already 
been admitted. Despite this reasoning, we find Manikantha Misra 
including (9), subiated, among his five varieties of fallacy, the other 
four being (1), contradictory, (2), unproved, (4), indecisive and (5), 
the doubt-preducing sort. 

It should not be thought that one can get a summary view of our 
schools’ views on fallacies based on merely listing the 9 major varieties 
we have found above. For one thing, although for various reasons 
no one philosopher is able to do so, it is possible to discern identities 
among some of the 9. For example, the fallacy Kanada calls (3), 
doubtful, is probably the same as the one Gautama knows as (4), 
indecisive. Varadaraja and later writers subdivide this fallacy into 
two kinds, (a) the overly general, and (b) the overly specific. The 
later subvariety probably corresponds to Pragastapada’s (8) uncer- 
tain, where 4 and # are identical. The former, overly general sort 
occurs when one proposes as h something which occurs in both s and 


LOGICAL THEORY 199 


the complement for absence) of s. Udayana knows a fallacy called 
anupasamhdarin, which occurs when fp, h and s are all identical with the 
universal class (e.g., “whatever is nameable is knowable’’), He 
thinks it is a variety of (2), unproved, but other writers make it a 
third kind of (4), indecisive. GangeSa, later on, will argue that it is 
not a fallacy at all. 


VI. The Examples 


As we have seen, Nydya-Vaigesikas differed from Buddhists in 
preserving the function of the examples and thus maintaining infe- 
rence as in a sense ‘‘hypothetico-deductive”’ rather than purely deduc- 
tive or ‘formal.”? The third member of the Nyaya argument form 
includes 3 sections : (1) the formulation of the general connection 
between fh and 5s (there is an irresistible tendency on the part of 
Westerners to call this the ‘“‘major premise”), (2) the positive example, 
and (3) the negative example. We know that in the cases of certain 
inferences, the only-positive and only-negative types, one or the other 
of the examples may be precluded. Where it is appropriate to offer 
examples, however, one must be careful to offer proper ones — if 
one does not do so, the inference is vitiated. 


Many Naiyayikas take the position that fallacies of the example are 
unnecessary to list separately, since they are all covered by one or 
another of the hetvdbhasas. Pragastapada is a significant exception, 
however; he lists 6 fallacies for each of the 2 examples to be given. 
They are, for the sp or positive example : (1) that one or both of the 
parties in the discussion does not accept the proposition that h over- 
laps the proposed sp; (2) that one or both of the parties does not 
accept that s overlaps sp; (3) where both (1) and (2) occur; (4) 
where sp is empty; (5) where the connection of sp with A or s is not 
evident; (6) where sp is contrary tof ors. For the up or negative 
example they are : (1) one or both parties does not accept that h 
excludes vp; (2) one or both does not accept that s excludes wp; (3) 
both (1) and (2) hold; (4) where vp is empty; (5) where the exclu- 
sion of hand/or sis not evident; and (6) where the vp is concomitant 
with A or s. 


Discussions of fallacies of the example are also found in Bhasarvajfia 
and Trilocana, who add to the basic list above, and in Varadaraja, 
who subdivides several in Pragastapada’s list but avers that all of them 
can be incorporated under one or another of the fallacies of A. 


200 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


VII. Pervasion 


It has been a commonplace remark among writers on the history 
of Indian logic to say that either Dignaga or Prasastapada was the first 
to clarify the notion of pervasion, a notion crucial to the theory of 
inference and one which increasingly dominates the writings of later 
logicians. However, it is clear that philosophers before the time of 
Dignaga knew of the concept of regular concomitance, although they 
did not use the term wpapti for it but rather such words as avindbhava 
and avyabhicéra. Therefore interest in the scholarly controversy of 
the early twentieth century, as to whether Dignaga or Prasastapida 
‘discovered pervasion,’’ has waned more recently. 

Certainly Pragastapada had the concept of regular concomitance 
(avinaébhava), for he explicitly appeals to it in describing the nature of 
h.** Yurthermore, as Randle indicates, his way of expressing the 
‘‘major premise”’ that appears in the third member suggests, by con- 
trast with Vatsyayana’s, that he viewed this premise as a general 
maxim rather than merely a particular relationship. Pragastapada’s 
way of stating the third member translates approximately as ‘“‘what- 
ever is hiss’, while Vatsyayana’s formulation is not as clearly universal 
in form. 

Thereader may be puzzled as to why so much value is being placed 
ona “‘discovery’’ of something which is, from his standpoint, so obvi- 
ously needed as a major premise connectinghands. He will pro- 
bably be surprised to learn, then, that Uddyotakara explicitly rejects 
the possibility of regular concomitance between h and s. The passage 
represents a continuation of his thoughts on the nature of the hypothe- 
sis and its terms (see p. 187). Uddyotakara asks us to explain 
what can be meant by “inseparable connection’? between smoke and 
fire. What is the connection? It is not causal, he argues; the only 
kind of causal connection which could be viewed as inseparable is 
inherence causality, but smoke does not inhere in fire, nor fire in smoke. 
Then perhaps it is that both fire and smoke inhere in the same thing? 
No, since the fire is presumptively on the hill out of sight, while the 
smoke, or part of it, is visible rising over the hill. Well, then, perhaps 
the connection is that smoke and fire are the common locus of some 
common effect — but they are not. All right, the connection is 
none of these — nevertheless, there is a connection, so we will just 
affirm that without specifying further what kind : No, says Uddyo- 
takara; you have no right to do that, since we frequently see smoke 
without fire, as well as fire without smoke. 

Uddyotakara’s point is not that inference is impossible. Rather, 


LOGICAL THEORY 201 


as we saw, itis his view that what is inferred is a particular thing 
as qualified by a certain property. We might put his point this way. 
Dignaga and Pragastapada would analyze ‘‘p is s, because it is h’’ etc. 
as in Principia Mathematica, so that if p stands for “‘is this mountain,” 
sis “is fire-possessing,”’ and His ‘‘is smoke-possessing’’ the argument 
goes as follows concerning a certain individual a: “‘if Pa then Sa, 
because Ha; for all x, if Hx then Sx; (like sp and unlike zp).”? Uddyo- 
cakara, on the other hand, will analyze the same inference as follows : 
where a stands for this particular smoke on this hill, S stands for is-smoke- 
as-having-fire-close-by and H stands for ts ~ smoke - as - instantiating- 
smokiness, then the argument is best represented as : “Sa; because Ha; 
like kitchen, unlike lake; Ha - Sa; thus Sa.’? (Recall that the first 
2 members are ascripts and donot yet assert.) For Uddyotakara 
member (4) is the crucial one, and the ‘‘major premise’’ is either 
impossible or, ifit appears, is a crude way of saying that it isa property 
of smoke that it has-fire-close-by. I pointed out above, and it is 
once again obvious, how clearly Uddyotakara insists that the members 
are not words but things; his way of parsing the inference pattern 
contrasts with that of Dignaga and Pragastapada in precisely the 
respect that the members of inference for Dignaga and Pragastapada 
can be viewed better as words than as things — an interpretation 
which leads Dignaga’s followers in the direction of Stages Two and 
Three of the history of the ‘‘threefold mark’? sketched above. 

One might also put Uddyotakara’s insight by saying that he realizes 
that for a realist system the “‘is”’ in, e.g., “piss” is not the ‘“‘is” of 
predication but the “‘is’’ of identity, a kind of ‘“‘essential identity” 
which relates two states of the same substance. The importance ef 
a notion of identity crystallizes in Navya-nyaya times in their treat- 
ment of such matters as self-linking connectors. 

Just what happens in the development of the theory of pervasion 
during the next 300 years is difficult to say. It would appear that 
controversy between Buddhist logicians and Naiyayikas became hea- 
ted, and that in their concern to meet Buddhist objections Naiya- 
yikas after Uddyotakara temporarily lost sight ofhis objections con- 
cerning the establishment of concomitance. Of views on pervasion 
after this 300-year gap, the carliest of which we have knowledge is that 
of Trilocana. He has a new and differcnt account. 

Tosee the merits of Trilocana’s view we need to speak briefly of the 
Buddhist theory of pervasion. According to Dignaga’s school there 
are only two kinds of invariable concomitance: relations of identity, 
and causal relations. The former allows the Buddhist to deduce 
“this is a tree’? from ‘‘this is an afoka tree,” The latter allows one to 


202 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


infer particular effects from their causes, causal conditions which are 
distinct from the effects in question. The division anticipates Hume’s 
distinction between relations of ideas and matters of fact, i.e., what 
comes to be called the “analytic”? and “‘synthetic’” by Kant, etc. 
Now limitation of inference to just these 2 kinds neatly precludes a 
great many of the Naiydyika’s inferences, for he views an inference, 
e.g., from ‘this substance smells” to “‘this substance isearth”’ as neither 
amatter ofidentity nor of causality in the Buddhist sense. The theory 
developed by Trilocana and Vacaspati Misra is intended to justify 
these unwarrantedly excluded inferences. 

What Trilocana says is that pervasion, or universal concomitance, 
is an intrinsic relation (svadbhdvikasambandha) between two distinct 
things. An “‘intrinsic’’ relation is to be contrasted with relations which 
are vitiated by upadhis, obstructions. Vacaspati’s example of such 
avitiated relation is this : ‘‘thismountain is smoky, because it is fiery” ; 
here the supposed concomitance between fire-possessing and smoke- 
possessing is vitiated by an upddhi, namely wet fuel. What Vacaspati 
means is that it is only fire-with-wet-fuel-possessing which is intrinsi- 
cally connected with smoke-possessing, and not fire-possessing alone. 

Now, how is an intrinsic relation discovered? Trilocana holds 
that it is directly perceived, by a sense organ or the internal organ, 
but that repeated observation (bhayodarfana) is required to bring about 
this perception. V4Acaspati appears to have thought that the percep- 
tion was always through the internal organ, not through external 
sense organs, but he agrees about the necessity of repeated observa- 
tion.25 This is the new way of insisting upon the importance of the sp 
and vp, forit is in considering them that one has the repeated observa- 
tion which leads to perception of pervasion, Incidentally, Vacaspati 
points out that on this definition of pervasion causal relations are not 
always cases of invariable concomitance. 

However, Vacaspati’s way of talking about the occasions on which 
pervasion is known suggests that he still shares with Jayanta and earlier 
Naiyayikas the notion that concomitance is a relation among parti- 
culars. He says that we come to know of concomitance “‘in a general 
way” (sarvopasamharena); we do not have to examine every specific 
case. But it seems that the pervasion primarily relates to particular 
cases, and the problem is how to understand our knowledge of universal 
relations among particulars, The reader will recall that Jayanta 
already knew of a kind of extraordinary perception which was held 
to explain how we could have such a compendious knowledge of 
many instances of concomitance. 

Vyomasiva, however, holds that pervasion is a relation between 


LOGIGAL THEORY 203 


universals, and that it is the application of the perceived relationship 
to particular cases that requires the repeated observation. This is the 
generally accepted view hereafter, emphasized especially by Udayana. 
Vyomasiva relates this new development to the polemical context: 
Buddhists cannot make sense of repeated observation of the concomi- 
tance between universals as located in particular instances, since 
according to Buddhism everything is momentary and we are unable 
to repeat an observation of anything. According to Vyomasiva it is 
in the fourth member of the argument form, the application, that the 
pervasion among universals is finally applied to the particular f in 
question. 

Udayana, as noted, emphasizes especially that pervasion is a relation 
amonguniversals. Hismain argument for this theory is that if it were 
otherwise, a given individual might belong to any class. That is, 
universals generate natural kinds, and it is their relationships which 
delimit the kinds of concomitances there are in the world. It is 
perhaps in anticipation of the same point of view that Bhasarvajfia 
claims that pervasion parallels any relation whatsoever, since any 
true relationship is reflected in the relations among the universals 
involved. 


VIII. Demonstration of Pervasion ; Upadhis and Tarka 


There is another aspect to this discussion which has not yet been 
properly brought out. It relates to how pervasion is discovered, given 
Trilocana’s view (accepted by most of the subsequent writers in our 
period) that pervasion is a relation among universals which is free 
from vitiation by upddhis. The question is : how does one come to 
know that a proposed relation is free from upddhis? According to 
Kajiyama’** it was the Jains who first proposed that one uses the method 
known as tarka to show absence of upddhis. Tarkais sometimes ren- 
dered reductio ad absurdum, which is not altogether inaccurate, 
since iarka involves proposing a false hypothesis and then by showing 
it false proving the truth of its negation, or at any rate helping to 
prove the truth of its negation. However, Buddhists such as Ratna- 
kirti and Ratnakaraganti — and no doubt Buddhists before them 
— made use of this reductio method in a fashion objectionable to 
Nyaya. 

The objectionable aspect of tarka for the Naiyayika is that as used in 
certain Buddhist arguments at any rate it involves the use of a hetu 
term which is unreal (asiddha) or indecisive (anatkdntika). For ex- 
ample, Ratnakirti argued for momentariness thus: “‘continuants have 


204 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


no causal efficacy, because (being continuous in time) they do not 
bear tempora Irejations of before and after to one another; whatever 
fails to bear such temporal relations lacks causal efficacy, like a hare’s 
horn,” concluding that continuants, having no causal efficacy, are 
unreal. The Naiyayika’s complaint about this argument is at least 
twofold. First, Ratnakirti allows himself to frame an argument 
about ‘“‘things’? which in his own view do not exist — net only 
continuants, but also things which lack causal efficacy — and thus 
commits the asiddha fallacy. Second, the example of hare’s horn is 
unacceptable as an affirmative example, since by general agreement 
it does not exist. Once again, the Naiyayika insists that language 
properly used in inference must have existential import, while the 
Buddhist does not require this. In the parlance of Udayana’s and 
Ratnakirti’s time, the Buddhist (at least of Ratnakirti’s sort ) holds the 
doctrine that pervasion is an inner relation between two concepts 
(antarvyaptivada) while the Naiyayika insists thatit isan external rela- 
tion between two independent and existent entities (bahirvpyaptivida). 

Despite these reservations about tarka, Naiyayikas eventually come 
around to accommodating its uses, and most of our later writers admit 
that it is an appropriate instrument in ferreting out upddhis. Oné 
can see from the foregoing that care must be exercised in using it. 
But it seems to have become a generally accepted view by Udayana’s 
time that itisa proper ancillary technique — not an instrument of 
true knowledge (pramdana) in itself, but a help in proving something 
knowable by one of the proper instruments. Thus in distinguishing 
the erroneous generalization ‘‘whatever is fiery is smoky’? from the 
valid one “‘whatever is smoky is fiery,’ one uses tarka as ancillary to 
one’s survey of examples such as kitchen etc.; about each affirmative 
instance one thinks of one asks if it has the A-property, and if it does, 
one then asks whether it has the s-property. Where h is fire-possessing 
and s is smoke-possessing we shall in due course come to the red-hot 
iron ball, which is on fire but does not smoke. With respect to it, 
the inference ‘‘this ball is smoky, becausc it is fiery”’ fails, for the ball 
isnot smoky. In this fashion, the finally developed view of how we 
come to know pervasion is that we know it by perceiving through our 
internal organ the relation hetween two universals, having subjected 
a variety of putative affirmative examples to test by imagining similar 
inferences about them. 

Pervasion, then, is still an empirical matter for the Naiyayikas. 
One may have thought of lots of putative affirmative examples and 
found none of them to produce vitiating inferences, but it still remains 
possible that the next one will. The question that naturally arises 


LOGICAL THEORY 205 


is this : may there not be some way in which we can catalogue all 
the possible kinds of upddai which can vitiate concomitance ? After 
Udayana there is a development of theory toward a more perspicuous 
classification of types of upadhi. 

After Udayana the general conception of an upadhi is that it is “that 
which is not a pervader of A, while it isa pervader of s.”’ Clearly 
then, an upddhi is in this conception a property. Inthe inference from 

fire-possessing to smoke-possessing, the upddhi is the universal property 
fire-with-wet-fuel-possessingness. This property pervades smoke-possess- 
ingness, i.e., wherever there is smoke there is fire-with-wet-fuel. But 
it does not pervade fire-possessingness, for not all fires have wet fuel as 
their material. 

Vallabha finds that there are 3 kinds of upadhi, and 4 ways of dis- 
covering them. ‘The 3 kinds are (1) when we are certain that there 
is such a property, (2) when we are doubtful whether a property, 
which we know pervades s, does or does not pervade A, and (3) when 
we know that a property does not pervade f but have suspicions that 
it may pervade s. If we have doubts of both kinds mentioned in 
(2) and (3), Vallabha says we do not even know of an upddhi at all. 

The 4 ways of discovering such a property are (1) through subla- 
tion (badha), (2) through wandering (vyabhicdra), (3) because there 
is no tarka favorable, or (4) because there is a tarka against. (1) 
If someone argues “‘Fire is not hot for it is created’? one can show the 
inference invalid by pointing out the property of not-being-fire, which 
pervades the s not-being-hof but does not pervade the h being-created, 
(2) If someone argues “‘sound is eternal, for it is an object of valid 
knowledge,” one may point to the upddhi property of being-created. 
This property vitiates the inference, since being-created does not pervade 
being an object of valid knowledge, while whether sound is created or not 
is doubtful, being a point of controversy among the schools. (3) 
If someone argues ‘“That man is dark-complexioned, because he is the 
son of Mitra,’’ he may be refuted by pointing to the upadhi property 
being-caused-by-eating-spinach, since there is no reason not to suppose 
that this property pervades both the & and the s properties, (4) 
If someone argues “‘air is colored, because it is the locus of manifested 
touch,’’ one may point to the upadhi perceivable-by-the-visual+-organ. 
The point here is that the general relationship purported to hold 
between having manifest touch and being colored can be challenged through 
tarka, since one may submit that whatever is colored is perceivable by 
the visual organ, but that not all loci of manifested touch are visually 
perceptible, e.g., the fire in the boiling water. It is not necessary 
that this challenge be conclusive — it may be one of the ‘‘doubtful’’ 


206 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


kinds of upddhi listed in the previous paragraph. (Varadaraja, inci- 
dentally, reduces Vallabha’s 3 kinds to 2: certain and doubtful.) 

Vallabha also feels it necessary to defend the importance of observ- 
ing a number of instances in justifying a purported pervasion. He 
argues that a single perception of the h with the s cannot be sufficient 
to yield knowledge of pervasion; indeed, what the first perception 
produces is doubt, which needs subsequent experience, as well as 
tarka to clear up. But Manikantha Migra controverts the doctrine 
of bhityodarsana or repeated observation as necessary in apprehending 
pervasion: he thinks one good look can suffice. However, he also 
thinks that it is the external sense organs which grasp it, not the in- 
ternal organ. He is skeptical of any notion that one can show wydpti 
to hold with certainty—he seems to suggest that the Bhisanakara 
supposed that it was possible to set conditions on the h such that per- 
vasion would be guaranteed if the conditions are met. 

At about this point the discussion turns to the definition of perva- 
sion — a more careful formulation of the conditions which may at 
least be supposed to be necessary for pervasion to hold, even if they 
are not sufficient. It seems that some, apparently not including 
Manikantha, hoped that a set of necessary and sufficient conditions 
could be found. The development of such definitions carries us into 
the Navya-nyaya and beyond the scope of the present study. 


IX. Nature and Variety of Tarka 


From what has been said above one can see that the earlier Naiya- 
yikas viewed ¢arka with a certain amount of distrust. True, Gautama 
lists it as one of the 16 categories, but Vatsyayana insists that it is not 
an instrument of knowledge in itself, though it can be used to bolster 
the actual instruments. Uddyotakara adds that tarka cannot by 
itself produce the state called ‘‘ascertainment,”’ though it can show 
us what ought to be ascertained. 

Sridhara explains that tarka comes into play when two contrary 
opinions on a topic are equally evidenced. He speculates upon where 
tarka should appear among the varieties of judgments — is it, for 
example, knowledge (vidya) or ignorance (avidyd) ? His answer is 
not-clear; he seems to conclude that tarka may be a kind of doubt, 
since no definite cognition is produced from its use. Apararkadeva 
definitely classifies it as doubt, and so does Sivaditya. 

But what is tarka? Vallabha defines it as the invariable conse- 
quence of one property upon the assumption of another. Udayana 
considers an obvious challenge to this : how can farka be used to help 


LOGICAL THEORY 207 


prove invariable concomitance if it presupposes that concept inits 
own definition? Udayana’s answer is that there is no regress or 
circularity, that doubt has a practical limit beyond which it is point- 
less. Udayana rejects any method of methodological doubt of the 
sort Descartes is famous for. Waradaraja merely characterizes tarka 
as an undesirable outcome, although he adds that the content of a 
tarka judgment is a real object, though one about which we are in 
doubt. Manikantha apparently is aware ofa number of attempts at 
defining farka; he criticizes them, and sets forth his own. 

Varadaraja and Manikantha are much more generous in their 
treatment of tarka than their predecessors. It is in the Tarkikaraksa 
that we get the development of the theory of 5 varieties of tarka.?? 
The 5 are (1) self-residence, (2) mutual dependence, (3) vicious 
circle, (4) infinite regress, and (5) undesired outcome. Since the 
last constituted Varadaraja’s definition of the whole notion, we should 
construe the fifth variety as covering all other undesired outcomes 
besides the 4 specified. Manikantha makes this quite clear. It 
seems that someone had added a sixth kind (6) contradiction (vpa- 
ghata), and others a different sixth (7) equally evidenced opposing 
reason (pratibandhin), but Manikantha rejects these by bringing them 
under appropriate hetvdbhasas. 

Varadaraja also sets forth a theory of what he calls the “‘members’’ 
of tarka, which are essentially the conditions constituting a proper 
instance of a tarka argument. Thus what happens in tarka is this: 
first one takes the opponent’s pervasion, which seems to be a perva- 
sion because of the presence of an upadhi; this apparent pervasion is not 
opposed by any other tarka; and so a conclusion is drawn on the basis 
of the supposed pervasion. But then we realize that this conclusion 
is “undesired,” i.e., false, and thus conclude that the opponent’s 
position cannot be proved. 


X. Theory of Debate 


A peculiar feature of the Mydyasiatras is that the last book, the fifth, 
is given over entirely to topics which appear to relate entirely to the 
techniques of debating. The connection of these topics is clearly 
spelled out in the foregoing material, and no one doubts that it is 
part of the business of Nyaya. It does mean, however, that those 
who commented on the saras and on its literature were forced to 
spend time on the complexities of questions which related more to 
rhetoric than to truth. One might or might not be fascinated by 
such topics. Udayana, for one, wrote a whole separate treatise 


208 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


about these matters, the Nyiyaparisista or Bodhasiddhi; this seems to 
have been a separate retreatment of Vacaspati’s Tdatparyatikd on the 
fifth chapter of the satras, which according to N. C. Vedantatirtha he 
had already covered in his Parifuddhi.2® But not all of our philoso- 
phers were by any means so engrossed in the theory of debate. 


In the Nydyas iitras we find a number ofitems among the 16 categories 
which Gautama proposes that have not as yet been treated. They 
relate to the context of argumentation and its kinds. The categories 
in question are argument (nydya), discussion (vdda), tenet (siddhanta), 
cavil (vitandd), sophistry (jalpa), quibble (chala), futile rejoinder 
(jati), and ways of losing an argument (nigrahasthana). 


We have seen, in our discussion of the theory of inference, that 
Nyaya features a 5 membered form of argumentation unlike that 
found in other logical systems. This constitutes what Gautama 
calls argument. Now arguments are frequently found occurring in 
argumentation, or controversy (kathd). Controversies, in turn, may 
be divided into kinds. According to Gautama there are 3 kinds of 
controversy, namely discussion, cavil, and sophistry. Discussion 
occurs when two people with differing opinions carry on argumenta- 
tion using proper means of reasoning (i.e., the 5 membered form, the 
proper instruments of knowledge plus tarka) with intent to discover 
which of the two views is correct. However, if the controversy is 
carried on with intent only to defeat the opponent by fair means or 
foul, it will be termed sophistry — and if, furthermore,,the parti- 
cipants care only for refuting the opponents’ arguments and nothing 
for the worth of their own, this is called cavil. Among the foul means 
which characterize sophistry and cavil, quibble and futile rejoinders 
are prominent, and ifall that is at a stake is the question of who wins 
and who loses the debate the several ways of losing an argument must 
be studied. 


Such is Gautama’s picture of argumentation. It is developed at 
length by some of his successors. The importance of this material 
for philosophy must not be underestimated, but its worth lies in the 
wealth of detail it provides to illustrate theories which are developed 
elsewhere, e.g., in theory ofinference. Therefore, it is not worthwhile 
to attempt a lengthy summary of these topics in this introduction. 
The interested reader should consult the pertinent parts of the sum- 
maries that follow, particularly those pertaining to the fifth book 
of the Nydyasitras, 


PART TWO 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 


(arranged chronologically) 


1. KANADA (Ulaka, Kanabhaksa, Kanabhuj, Kasyapa) 


The author of the earlier of the two sets of aphorisms central to 
this system, the Vaifesikasiitras, is referred to by several names; the 
one usually used now is Kanada. As is common with important 
authors ofancient times, numerous legends have grown up around this 
personage, some of them rather amusing. In the case of Kanada 
there are stories based on his name. One is that he is known as 
Kanada because of his atomic theory —the etymology is supposed 
to give us “‘atom-eater’ for the name. Another is reported in the 
Life of Harivarman (A.D. 450) : our author was a man of nocturnal 
habits, and “‘as young women were frightened by the sight of him... 
he afterwards went in secret into mills, picked up pieces of corn from 
rice-bran, and ate them.” He is accordingly known as “‘rice-grain- 
eater” (Kanabhuj or bhaksa) and as ‘‘owl’’? (Ulika). The Chinese, 
says Ui, do not know of the translation of Kanada” as ‘‘atom-eater.’”’! 
On the other hand, the Mydyakosa tells us that our author was known 
as Ulika, “‘owl,”” because the god Mahadeva appeared to him in the 
form of an owl and revealed the Vaisesika system.? 

Itis pretty clear that we are dealing here witha mythical personage. 
The Vaisesika system had its beginnings at some indeterminate time 
B.C. One writer dates Kanada 800 years before the Buddha.® 
He is said to have taught in Banaras: one of his pupils is reputed to 
have been Paficagikha, sonofManavaka. Ui says this is confused with 
Samkhya tradition.* 

By the time of Caraka, the medical writer, and of the Buddhist 
works Vibhaésé and Mahdvibhasd, all of which date from Kaniskan 
times (i.e., around the turn of the era, plus or minus 100 years.), 
the Vaisesika system is known to others in a fashion closely resembling 
that set forth in the Vaisesikasiitras: Ui points out, however, that 
Nagarjuna and Aryadeva, but not Agvaghosa, know VaiSesika in 
a manner which precisely reflects some of the sdtras, and on this basis 
suggests A.D. 50 to 150 as.a likely date for the sdtras’ achieving their 
present form.® 

The only work attributed to Kanada is the Vaisesikasiitras. It is 
difficult to say in what order the component séras were originally 


2 


212 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


arranged, or indeed whether some of the siitras are even authentic. 
This is largely because the extant literature is very scanty. Until 
recently scholars were forced to depend upon the commentary of 
Samkara Miéra I, although they were aware that this commentator’s 
readings were suspect and that the original form of the work was 
different both in content and arrangement. Recently fragments of 
earlier commentaries have come to light. A commentary by one 
Candranandahas been edited by Sri Jambuvijaya Muni, and Anantlal 
Thakur thas edited a commentary which he thinks is an abridged 
version of a work of Bhatja Vadindra. 


VAISESIKASUTRAS 
(Summary by Masaaki Hattori ) 


This textbook of aphorisms expounds the basic tenets of the 
Vaisesika system. The order of the sitras in all these works 
deviates from that given by Samkara Misra. In this summary 
of Professor Hattori, the Candrananda sitrapatha has been 
followed. References in parentheses are to Jambuvijaya’s 
edition (B58) (E) and N. Sinha’s translation(B 43) (T). 
It consists of 10 chapters (adhydya) of which the first 7 are res- 
pectively divided into 2 sections (dhnika).6 Itdeals with various 
topics concerning the 6 categories, but the arrangement of 
the topics is not systematic. 

1, Entities are arranged under 6 categories,? namely, substance 
(dravya), quality (guna), motion (karman), genus (sdémdnya), species 
(visesa), and inherence (samavdya). (T8) 

2. The characteristic feature of substance consists in its possessing 
motion, possessing qualities, and being an inherence cause of motion 
and quality. (1.1.14) (E5; T25) 

3. The characteristic feature of quality consists in its residing in 
substance, not possessing qualities, and being, when independent, 
not a cause of contact or disjunction. (I.1.15) (E5; T26) 

4, The characteristic feature of motion consists in its possessing 
one substance, possessing no qualities, and being an independent 
cause of contact and disjunction. (1.1.16) (E5; T27) 

5. Excepting Being (bhdva),® genera such as substanceness, quality- 
hood, and motionhood may be regarded as species from another 
point of view. The ultimate species (antya visesa) is never regarded 
as a genus. (I.2.4-6) (E8; T41-43) 

6. Being is the cause of the notion “‘exist”’ in respect to substances, 
qualities, and motions. (1.2.7) (E9; T43) 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 213 


7. Inherence is the cause of the notion that (A is) “here” (in B) 
with respect to effect (kdrya) and cause (kdrana).® (VII.2.29) (E61 ; 
T243) 

8. There are 9 substances, viz., earth (prthivi), water (dpas), fire 
(tejas). air (vdyu), akafa, time (kala), place (dis), self (dtman), and 
internal organ (manas). (1.1.4) (E2;T17) 

9. There are 17 qualities, viz., color (riépa), taste (rasa), smell 
(gandha), touch (sparfa), number (samkhyd), size (parimdna), separa- 
teness (prthaktva), contact (samyoga), disjunction (vibhdga), remote- 
ness (paraiva), nearness (aparatua), judgment (buddhi), pleasure 
(sukha), pain (duhkha), desire (icchad), aversion (dvesa), and effort 
(prayatna).° (1.1.5) (E2; T18) 

10. Thereare 5 kinds of motion, viz., throwing upwards (utksepana), 
throwing downwards (avaksepana), contracting (dkuficana), expanding 
(prasarana), and going (gamana), (1.1.6) (E2; T19) 

11. Being is one, because of the uniformity ofits mark ‘‘is,’’ and 
because of the absence of any mark of differentiation, (1.2.18) 
(E10; T47) 

12. Inherence is one, for the same reasons. (VII.2.3.) (E61; 
T246) 

13. Substance, quality, and motion are not distinct from each 
other in their being existent (sat), noneternal (anitya), substance- 
possessing, effect, cause, and genus-and-species possessing. (1.1.7) 
(E3; T21) 

14. Substances originate another substance. Qualities originate 
another quality. No motion is originated by (another) motion 
(1.1.8-10) (E3-4; T22-23) 

15. A substance is not incompatible with its effect, nor 
is it incompatible with its cause. A quality is both incompatible 
and compatible with its effect and with its cause. A motion is in- 
compatible with its effect. (I.1.11-13) (E4-5; T24) 

16. Substance and quality are causes of substance, quality, and 
motion. Motion is a cause of contact and disjunction, but not of 
substance nor of motion. (I.1.17-21) (E6; T27-30) 

17. Substance is a common effect of substances, and of contacts, 
but not of motions. Among qualities, numbers beginning with two, 
separateness, contact, and disjunction are common effects of substances; 
color isa common effect ofcolors; contact and disjunction are common 
effects of motions. No motion isa common effect of substances or of 
motions. Throwing upwards is a common effect of weight (gurutva) 
volition, and contact. (1.1.22-29) (E6-7; T30-33) 

18. Being is not a substance, because it possesses one substance?! 


214 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


It is neither a motion nor a quality, because it exists in qualities and 
motions. Also because of the absence of genus and species in it, 
Being is known to be different from substance, quality, and motion. 
For the same reasons, substanceness, qualityhood, and motionhood 
are known to be different from substance, quality, and motion. 
(1.2.8-17) (E9-10; T43-46) 

19. Earth possesses color, taste, smell, and touch. Water possesses 
color, taste, and touch, and is fluid (drava) and viscous (snigdha). 
Fire possesses color and touch; air possesses touch. Akasa possesses 
no color, taste, smell, or touch. (II.1-5) (E11; T48-54) 

20. The fluidity of earthly substances such as ghee, etc., and that 
of fiery substances such as tin, etc., which arise from their conjunction 
with fire, constitutes their similarity to water. (II.1.6-7) (E11-12; 
T55) 

21. Airasan invisible substance is inferred from the touch which 
is different from that of the visible substances. Air is eternal. The 
plurality of air is known from the concurrence of air with air. (II.1.8- 
14) (E12-13; T56-62) 

22. Akasais inferred from sound (sabda), which is not an attribute 
of the substances possessing touch, nor of the internal organ, nor of 
the self.12 Akasa is eternal and uniform. (II.1.24-28) (E15; T63- 
70) 

23. Smell, hot touch, and cold touch reside respectively in earth, 
fire, and water exclusively. (II.2. 1-5) (E16-17; T73-75) 

24. Time is inferred from the fact that there arises the notion 
“remote” in respect to that which is spatially nearby. Such notions 
as “simultaneous,” ‘‘nonsimultaneous,”’ ‘‘quick,’’ and ‘‘slow”’ are also 
inferential marks (liiga) of time. Time is eternal and uniform. 
However, plurality is ascribed to time because of the difference among 
its effects. The view that time is nothing other than motion is unten- 
able. (I9.2.6-11) (E17-18; T75-78) 

25. Place is that to which is due notions such as “‘(Ais) to the 
east (of B),”’ etc. It is eternal and uniform. However, plurality is 
ascribed to it because of the difference among its effects. (11.2.12-18) 
(E18-19; T78-82) 

26. Doubt (samfaya) arises from perception of the generic charac- 
ter of an object, nonperception of its specific character, and memory 
(smrti) of the specific character. (I1.2.19-23) (E19-20 : T82-85) 

27, There is no reason to doubt whether sound is a substance, 
quality, or motion, since sound is proved to be a quality. The view 
that sound is eternal (nitya) is untenable.t® Sound is proved to be 
noneternal. (I1.2.24-43) (E20-24; T86-93) 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 215 


28. Selfis known to exist-by meansofinference. That which is in 
contact with x, that which is inherent inx, that which is inherent in 
the same thing in which x is inherent, and that which is in contra- 
diction tox, are the inferential marks ofx, When an inferential mark 
ofx is universally known, it is recognized as the cause proving the exis- 
tence of x. Thus, universal awareness of the senses and their objects 
is the mark proving the existence of the self as the ‘‘cognizer.” (III. 
1.1-9) (E25-26; T96-102) 

29. Contradictory (aprasiddha), unreal (asat), and doubtful 
(sandigdha) marks are not recognized as valid marks. (III.1.10-12) 
(E26-27; T107-08) 

30. That which is produced from the contact of self, sense organ, 
internal organ, and object (viz.,a judgment ) is a different mark 
proving the existence of the self.14 (III.1.13) (E27; T111) 

31. The selves of other persons are inferred from the activity 
(pravrtti) and the cessation of activity (nivriti) seen in their bodies. 
(1II.1.14) (E27; T113) 

32. The mark of the internal organ is the presence (bhdva) and 
absence (abhdva) of judgment (jfdéna) when thereis contact between 
self, sense organ, and object. Internal organ is one in each organism, 
and is eternal. (III.2.1-3) (E28; T114-16) 

33. Selfis inferred from such marks as breathing upward, breath- 
ing downward, shutting the eye, opening the eye, life, movement 
of the internal organ, modification of another sense organ, pleasure, 
pain, desire, aversion, and effort. Selfis eternal. (III.2.4-5) (E28- 
29; T117-19) 

34. Self is indicated by the word “I’”’, The view that the word 
“I”? indicates the body proves incorrect. (III.2.6-14) (E29-30; 
T120-27) 

35. The plurality of selves is established from the difference bet- 
ween the states of different persons, and also on the authority of 
scripture (Sdstra).  (III.2.15-17) (E31; T127-31) 

36. That which is existent and has no cause (i.e., an atom) is 
eternal. Itisnot perceived, but isinferred from itseffect. (IV.1.1-5) 
(E32; T133-36) 

37. Perception of a substance which has large (mahat) size occurs 
because of its possession of many substances and also because of color 
residing in it. An atom which does not possess any substances, 
and air which is devoid of color, are not perceived. (IV.1.6-8) 
(E33; T136-38) 

38. Perception takes place in regard to color, taste, smell, and 
touch, because of their inherence in a substance consisting of many 


216 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


substances and because of the specific properties of color, taste, smell, 
and touch? respectively residing in them. Since the specific property 
of one object is absent in another, there isno confusion among per- 
ceptions of these four objects. (IV.1.9-11) (E33; T138-40) 


39. Number, size, separateness, contact, disjunction, nearness, 
remoteness, and motions become the object of visual perception 
through their inherence in a substance possessing color. When they 
reside in a substance devoid of color, they do not come within the 
range of visual perception (IV.1.12-13) (E33-34; T141-42) 


40. Qualityhood and Being are cognized by all the senses. (IV. 
1.14) (E34; T142) 


41. The body (Sarira) is made of only one element; the other 
elements are merely in contact with the body. (IV.2.1-3) (E35; 
T144) 


42. There are bodies not born from the womb. (IV.2.4-9) 
(E35-36; T145-49) 

43, Motions related to the self directly or indirectly are produced 
by various causes such as contact, effort, impact, andimpulsion. In 
some cases, the combination of different causes produces a motion, 
as for example, the motion in the hand is caused by volition and the 
conjunction of the hand with the self. In some cases, a single cause 
produces a motion, as for example, the motion of a pestle is produced 
by the impact of the pestle on a mortar. When there is no cause 
which produces motion, there results the falling down of a thing be- 
cause of its weight. (V.1.1-14) (E39; T151-57) 

44, The motion of the jewel towards a thief, and the motion of the 
needle toward a lode-stone, are caused by adrsta. (V.1.15) (E39; 
T157-58) 

45. The flight of an arrow consists ofa series of motions, of which 
the subsequent ones arise from the dispositional tendency (samskéra) 
produced by the preceding ones. (V.1.16-17) (E39; T158-59) 

46. Motions of earth, fire, and air are caused by impulse, impact, 
contact with what is in contact, or by adrsta. (V.2.1-2; 13-14) 
(E40, 41-42; T161-66) 

47. Various motions of water result from different causes: falling 
down results from gravity or adrsta; flowing from fluidity; ascent from 
contact of air with the sun’s rays, and so forth. (V.2.3-12) (E40-41; 
T162-64) 

48. Motion of the internal organ is caused by effort and the con~ 
tact of the internal organ with the self. (V.2.15) (E42; T166) 

49. When the internal organ abides in the self but not in the senses, 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 217 


there results the absence of pleasure and pain, which is called yoga. 
(V.2.16-17) (E42; 1167-68) 

50. In the absence of adrsta, which causes transmigration, there is 
the absence of contact of the internal organ with the self (which results 
in life), and also nonappearance of another body: this state is libera- 
tion (moksa). (V.2.19-20) (E43; T169-70) 

51. Darkness (tamas) is not an independent substance, but is 
merely the absence of light. (V.2.21-22) (E43; T171) 

52. Place, time, and dkdfa have no motion. (V.2.23) (E44; 


T172) 
53. Qualities and motions have no motion. (V.2.24-25) (E44; 
1172-73) 


54. In spite of their motionlessness, qualities as well as place and 
time are recognized as causes.t® (V.2.26-28) (E44; T173-74) 

55. Exaltation (abhyudaya) results from merit (dharma), which 
is produced by following the Vedic precepts, entertaining a pure 
Brahmin (braéhmana), and giving together with him the benediction, 
etc. Conversation with an impure Brahmin produces demerit 
(adharma). (VI.1.1-12) (E45-46; T175-80) 

56. When a person invites a Brahmin, preference is to be given to 
one who is superior to him, but not to one who is equal or inferior to 
him. (VI.1.13-14) (E47;T180) 

57. Taking of another’s property (pardédéna) is to be done by a 
Brahmin from a pious person who is, in the order of preference, in- 
ferior, equal, or superior to him. When the Brahmin is prevented 
from taking another’s property, he should take recourse to, according 
as the interferer is inferior, equal, or superior to him, killing, (either 
of) self-killing and killing, or self-killing. (VI.1.15-18) (E47; T181- 
83) 

58. Bathing, fasting, chastity, residence in the preceptor’s family, 
dwelling in a forest, sacrifice, gift, oblation, observance of the rules 
regarding direction constellation, sacred formula, and time, which 
are mentioned in religious texts without any visible purpose, are 
meant for exaltation. (VI.2.1-2) (E48; T184-85) 

59. Nondeception in the four stages of life (aframa), and offering 
pure food to a Brahmin produce merit. The deeds contrary to these 
produce demerit. (VI.2.3-11) (E48-50; T186-88) 

60. Activity toward merit and demerit is preceded by desire and 
aversion, which arise from various causes. (VI.2.12-17) (E50; 
T189-91) 

61. From the accumulation of merit and demerit there result the 
contact and disjunction of merit and demerit with and from the body. 


218 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The absence of these contacts and disjunctions isemancipation. (VI. 
2.18-19) (E50-51; T191-92) 

62. Color, taste, smell, and touch residing in noneternal earth as 
well as those residing in the atoms of earth, are noneternal. (VII.1. 
4-7) (E52; T193-94) 

63. Color, taste, and touch residing in the atoms of water, fire, 
and air are eternal; those residing in noneternal water, etc., are non- 
eternal, (VII.1.8-9) (E52-53; T194-95) 

64. In earth qualities such as color, etc., are preceded by the 
qualities of the cause, or they are newly produced by cooking (pakaja). 
In water, fire, and air the qualities are preceded by the qualities of 
the cause, and there is no quality produced by cooking. (VII.1. 
10-11) (E53; T196) 

65. A quality comes to reside only in that substance which has no 
quality as yet. The atom of earth, when being cooked, loses its 
qualities and remains without any quality. Therefore, a new quality 
produced by cooking comes to reside in it. Qualities and mot‘ons 
have no qualities. (VII.1.12-14) (E53; T202) 

66. Size is fivefold : largeness (mahativa), smallness (anutva), 
longness (dirghatva ) , shortness (hrasvatva ), and sphericity (parimandalya). 
Largeness results from the multiplicity of the causes, the largeness 
of the causes, and a particular accumulation; it is perceived. Small- 
ness is contrary to largeness. Largeness and smallness do not possess 
largeness and smallness. The explanation of largeness and smallness 
apply also to longness and shortness. These four varieties of size are 
noneternal or eternal according to whether they reside in a non- 
eternal or eternal substance. Sphericity is the shape of an atom; 
itiseternal; itis inferred from the fact that there is no substance which 
has no shape (VII.1.15-27) (E53-55; T203-10) 

67. Akasa, self, place, and time are large. Internal organ is 
small. (WII:1.28-32) (E55-56; T211-13) 

68. Unity (ekatva) and separateness ; their eternality and noneter- 
nality, and their arisal, parallel those of color and fiery touch (cf. 
63,64); they do not possess unity and separateness; they do not exist 
as causes or effects. (VII.2.1-9) (E57-58; T214-19) 

69. Contact and disjunction are respectively threefold: that which 
is produced by the motion of either one of the two conjuncts or dis- 
juncts, that which is produced by the motion of both, and that which 
is produced by contact or disjunction. They do not possess contact 
and disjunction. There is neither contact nor disjunction between 
cause and effect. (VII.2.10-14) (E58-59;T225-33) 

70. Aword (orasound) does not contact its object. The notion 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 219 


of an object is derived from the word for it merely on the basis of 
convention (samdyika). (VIJ.2.15-24) (E59-60; T234-36) 


71. Nearness and remoteness result from two things standing near 
and remote in the same direction or at the same time, and also from 
nearness and remoteness of the cause. They do not possess nearness 


and remoteness. (VII.2.25-28) (E60-61; T238-42) 


72. A judgment arises from the contact of sense organ, object, 
self, and internal organ. Judgments concerning qualities, Motions, 
genus, and species arise through judgments concerning the substance 
in which they reside. Judgments about substance, quality, and 
motion depend on genus and species. Judgments about substances 
depend on substances, qualities, and motions. Judgments about 
qualities and motions do not depend on judgments about qualities 
and motions. (VIIL.1-9) (E62-63; 1247-54) 


73. Judgments of “whiteness”? and of ‘“‘white” stand in the rela- 
tionship of cause and effect. Judgments arising successively in res- 
pect to different substances, or in respect to substance, quality, and 
motion, do not form the relationship of cause and effect. (VIII. 
9-14) (E63-64; T254-59) 


74. Each sense organ is composed of one element: olfactory, 
gustatory, visual, and tactual senses are respectively composed of 
earth, water, fire, and air. (VIII. 15-17) (E64-65; T259-60) 


75. A thing is nonexistent (asat) prior toits production. A thing 
becomes nonexistent after its destruction. A thing is nonexistent 
as something other than itself. That which is absolutely different 
from the existent is also nonexistent. (IX.1-12) (E66-68; T262-70) 

76. Yogic perception arises in respect to the self and its qualities, 
as well as to the other substances together with the qualities and 
motions residing in them. It derives from a particular contact of the 
self and the internal organ, or from the contact of the sense organ, 
object, self, and internal organ. (IX. 13-17) (E68-69; T272-76) 

77. ‘This is the effect of x,” “‘..the cause of x,” “..the conjunct 
of x,” “ 


oe 


..something co-inhering with x in the same thing,” or 
contradictory to x’? —these are types of judgments based on an 
inferential mark. Judgment derived from words is not a different 
type from judgment based on inferential mark. (IX. 18-21) (E69- 
70; 1277-87) 

78. Memory, dream, and consciousness in dream result from a 
particular contact between self and internal organ, and from dis- 
positional tendencies. (IX.22-23) (E70; T290-92) 

79. Imperfect knowledge (avidya) results from defects of the sense 


220 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


organs, and also from the dispositional tendency of past imperfect 
knowledge. (IX.25) (E70; T293) 

80. Intuitive cognition (darfana) of the sage (rsi), and vision of 
the perfected ones (siddha), result from merit. (IX.28) (E71; 
T294) 

81. Pleasure and pain are different from the five elements and 
their qualities; they are qualities of the self. (X.1-2) (E72; T296) 

82. The arising of doubt and ascertainment (nirnaya) is similar in 
fashion to that of perceptual and inferential judgments respectively. 
(X.3-4) (E72; T297-98) 

83. ‘There has arisen an effect,” “‘there will be an effect,” ‘‘there 
is an effect,”’ “there was an effect’? — these judgments arise from 
perceiving something related to that effect in one way or another. 
(X.5-10) (E73-74; T299) 

84. The notion of “‘cause”’ arises in respect to substance, motion, 
and some of the qualities. (X. 12-18) (E74-75; T302-04) 


2. GAUTAMA (Aksapada, Dirghatamas, Gotama, Medhatithi 
Gautama) 


It is common practice to refer to the author of the Nydyasitras as 
“Gautama”’ or “‘Gotama.’’ Unfortunately it isa very common name 
in India, and various personages by this name probably flourished in 
very ancient times. Indian scholars have attempted to identify the 
author of these sdtras with one or another such person, some of them 
apparently dating back even to earliest Vedic times.? 

Other scholars, with perhaps more caution, suggest that the work 
we now have grew in several stages, some of which may have been in 
existence before the beginning of our era, and that while Gautama, 
referred to as the founder of the Nyadya system, perhaps played some 
part in the composition of the work, it was not until around the 2nd 
century A.D. that the work took the form in which it now appears. 
The crucial question about the dating of this final form has come to 
turn on the question of the relation between the séiras and Nagar- 
juna’s writings. Nagarjuna, the great Madhyamika Buddhist philo- 
sopher, probably flourished in the second century. Jacobi, in his 
famous article on the dating of the various sitras of the schools, argues 
that siira IV.2.25 of our present text is specifically addressed against 
the Madhyamika system, and he thus gives NagAarjuna’s time as the 
terminus aquo for the date of the Nydyasaitras.2 However, more recently 
there have been suggestions that, as Satkari Mookerjee puts it, the 
usual “‘chronological assessment seems naive and hasty,”’ since more 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 221 


careful reading of texts, e.g., of Nagarjuna’s Vaidalyaprakarana, may 
well show that Nagarjuna knew or even quoted the Nydyasiitras.® 

As a matter of fact, commentators know the author of the sitras 
not as “Gautama” but as Aksapada, a name which means literally 
“eyes in his feet.”” A person named Aksapada is mentioned in the 
Ramayana; he came from Mithila, and was known as “‘eyes in his 
feet” either (in one version) because God gave him eyes in his feet 
after he fell into a well, or (in another) because he needed an addi- 
tional pair of eyes to keep a vow.4 Satischandra Vidyabhusana 
suggests that Aksapada wrote the final version of the siiras; the 
Aksapada he has in mind, however, is one mentioned in the Brahm- 
andapuréna who is said to have come from Kathiawar.® 

One may sum up the situation pretty safely by saying that we have 
not the vaguest idea who wrote the Nydyasaitras or when he lived. A 
possibly more fruitful inquiry has been proposed, oriented toward 
discovering which parts of the work — or which sitras — were 
earlier, and which later in the corpus. G. Oberhammer® has offered 
remarks on this topic, suggesting that the first and last (fifth) chapters 
of the work are the earliest in origin, and indeed that Chapters 3 and 
4 may represent another work which was combined with the other 
chapters at a date after the 4th century. His evidence for this sugges- 
tion is provided by Guiseppe Tucci’s discovery that in certain Bud- 
dhist works, e.g., the Satasdstra of Aryadeva, certain of the sitras 
are quoted but are evidently not considered part of the work but 
rather, according to Tucci, are viewed as stemming from a Vaisesika 
work,’ 

The Nydyasiitras have been more fortunate than the Vatsesikasiiiras 
in having been commented on several times within a few hundred 
years of their initial redaction, in works which have been saved for 
posterity. The earliest known commentary, that of Vatsyayana, 
is nevertheless removed by at least 200 years from Nagarjuna’s time, 
and it is evident that even in that space the meaning of some of the 
siitras has become confused or forgotten. Stylistically, the Nydya- 
sittras, particularly in the third and fourth books, are more discursive 
than the Vaisesikasitras.® 


NYAYASUTRAS 


(Summary by Karl H. Potter) 
This is the primary text of the prdacina or older Nydya school. 
It is divided into five adhydyas or ‘‘lessons,”’ usually called 
““books’’; each lesson is divided into dhnikas or daily portions, 


222 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and these in turn contain a number of satras, “threads,” or 
aphorisms. These sitras are also divided into prakaranas or 
“topics” by commentators such as Vatsyayana and Vacaspati 
Migra. The topics into which the following summary is 
organized sometimes deviate from the classification of the 
classical commentators, however, and certain numbered sections 
are not covered in these summaries. 

The satrapa tha followed here is the one accepted in the Chow- 
khamba edition of Ganganatha Jha and Dundhiraja Sastri 
(B 253), pages of which are referred to following the letter 
**E”? below; references preceded by “‘T”’ are to Jha’s translation 


[B264(2).] 
BOOK ONE : PORTION ONE 


Topicl : Subject Matter and Purpose of the Work. (E14-42; T3-16) 


(Satra) 1. Correct judgment (jidna) of the nature of the follow- 
ing (categories ) leads to perfection (nihSreyasa) : 
1. instrument of knowledge (pramdna) 
2. object of knowledge (prameya) 
3. doubt (samfaya) 
4, purpose (prayojana) 
5. example (drstanta) 
6. tenets (siddhdnta) 
7. members of an inference (avayava) 
8. tarka 
9. ascertainment (nirnaya) 
10. discussion (vada) 
11. sophistry (jalpa) 
12. cavil (wvitanda) 
13. fallacies of the reason (hetvabhdsa) 
14. quibble (chala) 
15. futile rejoinder (datz) 
16. ways of losing an argument (nigrahasthéna) 
2. By annihilating wrong judgments (mithydjidna) one brings 
about the annihilation in turn of defects (dosa), activity (pravrtii), 
birth (janma), and pain (dukkha), and this leads to release (apavarga). 


Topic II : The Instruments of Knowledge. (E53-86; T16-32) 
3. The four instruments of knowledge are : 


1. perception (pratyaksa) 
2. inference (anumdna) 
3. comparison (upamdna) 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 223 


4. verbal testimony (Sabda) 

4. Perception is a judgment which is (1) produced from connec- 
tion (sannikarsa) between sense organ (indriya) and object; (2) is 
avyapadefya (inexpressible ? unnameable?)®; (3) does not wander 
(avyabhicdra); and (4) is well-defined (vyavasdyatmaka). 

5. Inference (1) follows on perception and (2) is of 3 kinds: 
(a) pirvavat; (b) sesavat; and (c) sdmdnyatodrsta.l° 

6. Comparison is a way of proving what is to be proved through a 
thing’s sharing qualities with what is already known. 

7. Verbal testimony is the teaching of a reliable person (dpia), 
and has two varieties : (1) where its object is seen, and (2) where 
its object is not seen. 


Topic III: The Objects of Knowledge : (E88-110; T32-53) 
9. The objects of knowledge are : 


self 

body (Sarira) 
sense organs 
object (artha) 
judgment 
internal organ 
activity 

defect 

rebirth (pretyabhava) 
fruit (phala) 
Il. pain 


—_ 


CON AAA WN 


S 


12. release 

10. The marks (liiga) of a self are : (1) desire; (2) aversion 
(3) effort; (4) pleasure; (5) pain; (6) judgment. 

ll. The body is the locus (afraya) of gestures (cesta), sense organs, 
and objects. 

12-14. From the elements (bhita) come the olfactory, gustatory, 
visual, tactual, and auditory sense organs. These elements are 
(respectively) earth, water, fire, air, and adkdfa. Their objects are 
(respectively) smell, taste, color, touch, and sound. 

15. Buddhi, jana, and upalabdhi are all words denoting judg- 
ments. 

16. The internal organ’s mark is that more than one judgment 
does not arise at a time. 

17. Activity is the operation of speech (v#k), of judgment, and of 
the body. 

18, Defects are things which cause activity. 


224 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


19. Rebirth is re-arising. 

20. The fruit is a thing produced by activity and defect. 
21. Pain is uneasiness (bddhanda). 

22. Release is absolute freedom (vimoksa) from pain. 


Topic IV: The Preliminaries of Argument (nydya). (E119-28; T53-58) 


23. Here Gautama gives a definition of doubt which is obscure. 

24, Purpose is that object toward which one acts. 

25, The example is an object on which the ordinary man and the 
expert agree. 


Topic V: The Nature of Tenets. (E130-35; 157-61) 


26-31 : A tenet is accepted as correct for various reasons, e.g., 
because it is the topic of some course of teaching or because it is admit- 
ted without proof. Gautama finds four varieties of tenets. 


Topic VI: The Nature of an Argument. (E136-49; T61-73) 


32-39 : Themembers of an argument are5: (1) the hypothesis 
(pratijnd); (2) the reason (hetu); (3) the example(s) (uddharana) ; 
(4) the application (upanaya); and (5) the conclusion (nigamana). 
Each of these is defined. The hypothesis identifies the thing to be 
proved (sadhya). The reason proves it by showing its similarity to the 
examples, which may be positive — sharing with the reason the 
property to be proved; or negative — sharing with the reason the 
absence of the property to be proved. The application applies the 
example(s) to the instance under discussion, and the conclusion 
restates the hypothesis as now demonstrated. 


Topic VII : Nature of the Subsidiary Processes in Proving an Argument. 
(E155-60; T73-80) 


40. TYarka is to be brought into play when the truth is (otherwise ) 


unknown. 
41. Ascertainment is determining the nature of something by 


considering both of two opposing views. 
BOOK ONE : PORTION TWO 
Topic VIII : Controversy (katha). (E166-74; T80-86) 


1. Discussion is presenting of two opposing views, setting forth 
one’s own in 5 membered arguments, proving it by appeal to the 
instruments of knowledge and to tarka, when correct conclusions are 


not thereby contradicted. 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 225 


2. Sophistry is like a discussion but involves supporting and con- 
demning arguments through quibbling, futile rejoinders, and (use of) 
ways of losing an argument. 

3. Cavilis sophistry, but without even trying to establish anything. 


Topic IX : Fallacies of the Reason. (E176-86; T85-97). 


4-9: There are 5 kinds of fallacies of the reason : (1) savpabhicara, 
a reason which is indecisive (anaikantika); (2) viruddha, a reason 
which contradicts accepted tenets ; (3) prakaranasama, a reason in- 
tended to establish something but which only produces doubt ; 
(4) saédhyasama, a reason which is as much in need of proof as the thing 
to be proved; (5) Adldtita, a reason which is mistimed. 


Topic X : Quibble. (E190-200 ; T92-104) 


10-17 : Quibbling is defined as controverting a proposition by 
giving it a different meaning. Three sorts are distinguished : (1) 
verbal quibbling, when the proposition is not worded carefully; (2) 
quibbling about classification, by classifying the subject of discussion 
in some overly wide class; and (3) a third sort called upacarachala, 
which an objector tries to reduce to the first sort. 


Topic XI: Mistakes in Argumentation Due to the Incapacity of the Arguer. 
(E200-05 ; T104-06 ) 


18. Futile rejoinders are objections to a proposition based on 
irrelevant similarities and differences between the reason and the 
thing to be proved. 

19, Ways of losing an argument occur when the arguer misunder- 
stands or fails to understand what the argument is about. 

20. There are varieties of both of the above mistakes. 


BOOK TWO: PORTION ONE 


Topic XII: Discussion of Doubt. (E207-21; T107-18) 


1-7 : An opponent argues that doubt is not a product: it does 
not start at any specific time, but is actually endless since its cause is 
everpresent. Gautama answers that his definition (1.1.23) is framed 
so as to allow doubt to have a beginning and an end. 


Topic XIII: General Discussion of Instruments of Knowledge. (E222-48; 
T118-37) 


8-16 : The validity of instruments of knowledge is questioned on 
the ground that perception, for example, cannot arise before, after, 


226 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


or at the same time as its object without defeating one of Gautama’s 
tenets. Gautama’s answer is that the opponent’s demonstration itself 
presupposes the validity of instruments of knowledge. 

17-20: The objector complains that an instrument of knowledge 
requires an infinite regress of other instruments of knowledge to 
justify it. Gautama’s reply is to liken the operation of an instrument 
of knowledge to the illumination of things by a lamp. 


Topic XIV : Discussion of Perception. (E252-69; T139-48) 


21-30 : Gautama’s definition (I.1.4) of perception is found in- 
sufficient by the opponent, for it fails to mention the necessity that 
there be contact between the self and its internal organ, as well as 
certain other general conditions. Gautama answers that the internal 
organ is not mentioned because we have perceptions even when asleep 
or inattentive. 

31-32 : Objection : Perception is really inference, since we only 
perceive a part of the object. Answer : Well, we do perceive that 
part, so perception is not merely inference. 


Topic XV : Discussion of the Whole (avayavin). (E270-80; T147-51) 


33-37 : There must be wholes, since we can hold and pull things. 
And one cannot draw an analogy between wholes and their atomic 
parts, on the one hand, and an army and its soldiers on the other, 
for atoms, unlike soldiers, are too small to be perceived. 


Topic XVI : General Discussion of Inference. (E294-95; T163-65) 


38-39 : Certain reasons give rise to erroneous inferences, an oppo- 
nent objects. E.g., from seeing a swollen river, we infer it has rained 
upstream, but it may only be due to the river having been dammed 
up below. Gautama’s answer is that the reasons in such cases are 
incompletely specific — e.g., a river swollen from rain upstream 
looks different from one that is dammed up. 


Topic XVII : Discussion of Present Time. (E299-308; T167-71) 


40-44 : An opponent questions the possibility of inference on 
the ground that there is no present — only past and future. The 
answer is that past and future depend on present ; inference about 
past and future depends on present perceptions. 


Topic XVII : Discussion of Comparison. (E311-16; T172-76) 


45-46: Opponent: Comparison is notaninstrument of knowledge, 
whether the similarity which is supposed to license it is perfect or 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 227 


merely partial. Answer: The similarity in question is of whatever 
degree given in experience. 

47-49: Opponent: Comparison is a kind of inference, not a sepa- 
rate instrument of knowledge, for it gives us knowledge of what is not 
perceived on the basis of what is. Answer: In comparison we draw 
a conclusion about one perceived thing on the basis of another per- 
ceived thing. 


Topic XIX: General Examination of Verbal Testimony. (E316-26 ; 
1175-83) 


50-57 : Opponent : Verbal testimony is a kind of inference, be- 
cause its object is unperceived, and because there is the same kind of 
connection between the instrument and its object as in inference. 
Answer: No; although in both inference and verbal testimony the 
object is unperceived, in the latter we depend for knowledge not on 
words in general but in particular upon the teaching of a reliable 
person. As to the second part of the objection, the connection in 
inference between sign and signified is a natural relation, while that 
of word to object in verbal testimony is conventional and not every~- 
where the same. 


Topic XX : Reliability of Scripture. (E327-41; T184-91) 


58-69 : Opponent: Scripture is not an instrument of knowledge, for 
itis untrue, self-contradictory, and counsels the uttering of tautologies. 
Answer: No. Theappearance ofuntruth comes rather froma defect 
in the agent or in his action; the appearance of self-contradiction 
arises because the Vedas sometimes offer of a choice of appropriate 
actions; and the tautologies are in fact useful repetitions. If we divide 
scriptural statements into injunctions (vidhi), descriptions (artha- 
vada), and reinculcations (anuvdda), we willnot beconfused. Further, 
the trustworthiness of the scripture derives from the trustworthiness 
of its expositor, as in medical texts. 


BOOK TWO : PORTION TWO 


Topic XXI : Defence of the Fourfoldness of the Instruments of Knowledge 
(£348-59; T195-201 ) 


1-2: Opponent: The following should be added to your list of 
instruments of knowledge : tradition (aitihya), presumption (arthd- 
patti), concurrence (sambhava), and negation (abhdva). Answer : 
No. Tradition is included in verbal testimony, and the other 3 
are included in inference. 


228 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


3-12: Discussion of the validity of presumption and negation. 
Gautama attempts to show confusion in the opponent’s reasoning. 


Topic XXII : Sound Is Noneternal. (E362-92; T202-23) 


13-2] : Gautama’s positive arguments for the thesis that sounds are 
noneternal are (1) because they havea beginning; (2) because sound 
is grasped by asense organ; (3) because sound is spoken of as a pro- 
duct; (4) because sounds are not experienced prior to their being 
produced; and (5) because we do not experience anything to explain 
our not perceiving a sound before it is produced. 

22-29 : Opponent’s rebuttal : Sound is eternal, (1) because it is 
intangible; (2) because of traditional teaching; (3) because of repeti- 
tion; (4) because we experience no cause of the destruction of sound; 
and (5) because the substratum of sound is intangible. These argu- 
ments Gautama rejects. 


Topic XXUI : Changes in Suffix in Sanskrit Word Combination (samdhi) 
Are Substitutions, Not Modifications. (E395-416; 'T225-40) 


40-60 : The opponent argues that when, for example, in Sanskrit 
dadhi atra becomes dadhyatra, the final “‘i’’ is transformed into ‘‘y.” 
Gautama argues that it isnot so, fora number ofreasons. The dis- 
cussion brings out some interesting facets of Gautama’s thinking about 
the transformation model for causal relations. 


Topic XXIV : The Meaning of Words, (E418-29; 'T241-50) 


61-71: Three theories are advanced : that the meaning ofa word 
is (1) the individual (vyakti) — a piece of material (mariz) with its 
differentiating qualities; (2) the akrti — the characteristics by which 
we recognize the presence of a property; (3) the universal property 
(jati) — which begets the same idea from use to next use of a word. 
The first theory is rejected because it involves an infinite regress and 
because words have meaning even when there is no individual directly 
denoted. The second theory is not treated here. The third theory 
is criticized on the ground that the presence of the universal depends 
on the presence of the individual and the dkrit. The conclusion 
Gautama reaches is that the meaning of a word consists inits relation 
to all three — individual, dkrti, and universal. 


BOOK THREE : PORTION ONE 
Topic XXV : The Self is Not the Sense Organs (E433-60; T252-84) 


1-3: The self is not identical with the sense organs, because we 
can grasp one object by more than one sense, 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 229 


4-6 : A second reason is stated ambiguously, but has something 
to do with sin (pdtaka) and death. 

7-11: A third reason is that since what was seen by one eye is 
recognized by the other, there must be a self beyond the sense organs. 
An opponent contends that in fact there are not two eyes at all, but 
rather one field of vision divided by the nose. This is refuted by 
reminding us that we can lose an eye without losing our sight.“ 

12-14: A fourth reason is that one sense can excite another; thus 
there must be a self to provide the basis of the memory which accounts 
for this. The opponent tries to locate memory in the object remembe- 
red, but this is rejected. 


Topic XXVI: The Self Is Not the Internal Organ. (E460-77; T268-84) 


15-17: An opponent argues that the internal organ can do every- 
thing selves are adduced todo. Gautama replies that this isa verbal 
matter : whatever it be called, there must be a locus for judgments. 

18-26 : Gautama argues that there must be a self to explain the 
reactions of a new-born child, for the only conceivable explanation 
of those reactions is that the child remembers former experiences. 
An opponent claims that the child’s reactions are mechanical, but 
this is rejected on the ground that the mechanical modifications of the 
physical elements require conditioning factors which are absent in 
the case of the child. 


Topic XXVII : The Body, (E481-85 ; T287-90) 


27-31: Several views about the nature of the body are listed. The 
commentators take it that the first view, to the effect that the body is 
made of earth, is Gautama’s own, and that he rejects the others, which 
make out-that the body is made of several elements in combination. 
The last line (III.1.31) appears to justify the Nyaya view by appeal 
to scriptural authority. 


Topic XXVIII : The Sense Organs Are Elemental (bhautika). (E487-507; 
T291-306) 


32-34 : The issue is raised as to whether the sense organs are not 
nonelemental after all, since how can a sense organ produce percep- 
tion even when the eye is at a great distance from the object ? Further- 
more, since the eye can grasp both large and small objects, it cannot 
be elemental. Gautama’s answer is that, nevertheless, the eye is 
elemental; it is rather the ray (rafmi) issuing from the eyeball that 
grasps objects close and far away, large and small. 

3-539 : An objector complains that the contact between ray and 


230 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


object cannot be the cause of perception , for we do not see any such 
ray. Nevertheless, replies Gautama, the ray may exist and be know- 
able through inference ; the reason we do not perceive the ray is that 
it lacks sensible qualities. 

40-44 : Other ways to explain why we do _ not perceive the ray are 
explored and rejected. It is not that the ray has color but we do not 
see it (like the color of the stars) during daylight hours, because we 
do not see it at night either. But we do observe that night-prowlers 
can see in the dark, and this shows that they have rays too. 

45-51 : An opponent seeks to show that perception does not re- 
quire contact of sense with object, and thus that the hypothesis of a 
ray is gratuitous. He cites our seeing things in mirrors or screened by 
transparent objects, where contact can only occur between the glass 
and the hypothetical ray. The reply is that there is contact between 
ray and object in the cases cited, unlike other cases where opaque 
objects preclude perception. The ray goes through certain substances, 
e.g., when we see a fire through a piece of glass. It is just a fact 
that some things are transparent and others opaque. 


Topic XXIX : There Is More Than One Sense Organ. (E508-18; 
T308-61 ) 


52-60 : Opponents argue that there is only one sense organ be- 
cause none of the others are different from the skin, and because the 
objects of all the senses have the same character, namely objectness, 
and so there is need of only one sense organ to grasp things with this 
character. The first argument is answered by pointing out that if it 
were correct, we should have simultaneous touch, sight, hearing, etc. 
of every object ; the blind could see. But this is not the case. The 
second argument is answered by specifying the varying characters of 
the several objects of the several senses. There are just five senses 
because there are just five kinds of objects for them. 


Topic XXX : Specific Constitution of Sense Organs and Their Objects. 
(E522-37 ; T318-30) 


61: Each sense organ is composed primarily of the kind of stuff 
it grasps ; thus the eye is made primarily of light, the ear of akasa, 
etc. 

62-63 : The special sense-qualities of the 5 elements are as follows: 


Elements Sense-Qualities 
earth touch, color, taste, smell 
water touch, color, taste 


fire (or light) touch, color 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 231 


air touch 
akasa sound 

64-68 : Objector: The above account is wrong, for each element 
is only found to have one quality as its special characteristic, and the 
explanation for water’s having touch, for example, is that water is 
intermingled with earth. Gautama’s reply is : Noindeed ! for if your 
view were correct, how could we see earth or water ? 

69-73: Gautama adds several bits of information about the senses. 
Though some elements have several qualities, the sense organs, which 
are primarily characterized by one quality, each perceive their 
corresponding elements because of their peculiar proportion. A sense 
organ, properly so-called, is a substance together with its appropriate 
characteristic (which is why, say the commentators, a sense organ 
cannot perceive its own characteristics). In any case, a thing is 
never grasped by itself. An objector points out that Gautama holds 
that the ear perceives its own quality, namely sound. Gautama’s 
answer is that the case of sound is different. 


BOOK THREE : PORTION TWO 
Topic XXXI: Fudgment Is Noneternal. (E540-51: 7332-40) 


1-3: The question of the eternality of judgment arises from the 
fact that judgment shares qualities both with karma, which is transitory, 
and with akafa, which is eternal. An opponent claims that judgment 
is eternal because we recognize objects, but this is rejected as begging 
the question; the Nyaya view is that the self does the recognizing. 

4-8: The next section appears to deal with an opponent who 
holds that judgment is an intrinsic mode of the eternal self, and thus is 
itself eternal. This view is controverted because if it were true various 
senses would operate simultaneously, and when recognition ceases all 
judgment(s) would cease. The Nydya explanation for the facts 
here is rather that the nonsimultaneity ofsensory perceptions is due to 
the activity of the internal organ which moves into contact with each 
sense in turn, as an eternal self could not do. 


Topic XXXII : Relation of Destruction and Production. (E554-56; 
T432-50)1? 


9-12: Twoviewsappeartobe methere. Oneis the view that the 
difference among our ideas is a result of the differences among their 
objects, though the stuff of consciousness remains the same. The 
other is the view that at every moment each thing is destroyed anda 
new thing arises in its place. The true view, says Gautama, is that 


232 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


some things really do decay and grow gradually and that the destruc- 
tion of one such thing is regularly linked with the production of the 
next. E.g., when milk is destroyed, curd arises. 

13-17: Alternative views about milk and curd are considered and 
rejected. One view is that since we do not see the final decay of the 
milk we cannot justify the supposition that there is any link between 
milk-decay and curd-production. The answer is that we do perceive 
the final decay of milk — it occurs when the sweet flavor disappears. 
Asecond view is that the milk is not destroyed at all but merely ex- 
changes its sweet quality for sour. The Nyaya answer is that we can 
infer the destruction of milk from similar instances. 


Topic XXXII : The Locus of Judgments Is the Self. (E569-629; 
T352-89) 


18: Judgments do not reside in the senses, because we can enter~ 
tain a judgment without the senses operating. 

19-21 : And judgments do not reside in the internal organ, be- 
cause the internal organ is the cause of judgments not being simulta- 
neous. 

22-24: An opponent complains that judgments cannot be pro- 
duced or destroyed on Gautama’s view since, inhering in an eternal 
substance, they must be eternal themselves. But, replies Gautama, 
judgments are seen to be noneternal, and the problem of how an 
eternal substance can have noneternal qualities is mitigated by recall- 
ing that the case is likewise with sound and akasa. 

25-33 : Memories, argues an objector, are not simultaneously 
produced in one knower; this cannot be explained in the Nyadya view 
but only by supposing that the internal organ comes into contact 
with a part of the self — but then the self must have parts and so 
be noneternal. No, says Gautama: that is not the reason memories 
are not simultaneous. Memory requires an effort of attention, diffe- 
rent judgments of characteristic properties, etc., and since these do 
not all occur simultaneously memories do not either. 

34-37: As to these efforts (of attention), an objector contends 
that their causes, namely desire and aversion, belong to the body, and 
therefore the locus of judgments should also be taken to be the body. 
The answer is that although axes are sometimes impelled to cut down 
trees and sometimes not, we do not attribute desires and aversions, 
or for that matter judgments, to them. 

38-39 : Additional reasons why the internal organ is not the self: 
because the internal organ is dependent (paratanira), and because one 
person cannot inherit another’s karma. 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 233 


40-41 : Memory belongs to the self, because the self is the thing 
which has the capacity to ‘‘cognize.’? Twenty-odd kinds of causes for 
the awakening of memories are suggested. 

42-46 : A judgment is transitory because actions are transitory. 
An opponent argues that if this were true we could never know an 
object as manifest (vyakta). Gautama answers that just as we get a 
complete picture ofan object ina momentary flash oflight, soalthough 
a judgment dies it gives an adequate account of its object. 

47-55 : Judgment is not a natural quality of the body as color, 
etc., are. An opponent disagrees, because sometimes a sub- 
stance’s natural qualities are destroyed, e.g., when the pot is baked 
its original blue color becomes red. The answer is that nevertheless 
coloredness is a natural property of the pot, even though blue color 
is not, and furthermore baking produces a contradictory color, while 
death does not produce another contradictory kind of judgment. 

But, the opponent continues, judgment is a natural quality of the 
body because it pervades the body. No, says Gautama, for it is not 
found in certain parts of the body. 


Topic XXXIV: There Is Only One Internal Organ for Each Self. (E631- 
35; T390-92) 


56-59 : Each self has exactly one internal organ, and we infer 
this because of the nonsimultaneity of judgments. This is challenged 
by an opponent, but he is answered by appeal to the example of the 
wheel of fire (dlatacakra). This also shows that the internal organ is 
minute (anw) in size. 


Topic XXXV : The Body Is Produced by One’s Karma. (E636-56; 
1394-404 ) 


60-65 : An objector argues that the body is produced from the 
elements like a statue from stone. The analogy is not apt, claims 
Gautama, for a body needs a father and mother, food, etc., and not 
all unions between the sexes issue in childbirth, which shows that the 
child’s karma is operative as well. 

66-72 : Karma also causes the union of self with body. Ifone tries 
to hold that it is produced by adrsta, he will be unable to explain why 
the self is not reattached to a body after release. Nor can the karma 
be located in the internal organ, for then the body could never sepa- 
rate from the internal organ; both would have to be held to be eternal. 
A last try by the opponent: in release the body disappears into eternal 
blackness, which is why it does not reappear. No, says Gautama, 
there is no proof for that. 


234 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


BOOK FOUR : PORTION ONE 
Topic XXXVI : Defects. (E661-69; T409-13) 


1-9: There are three kinds of defects: (1) affection (raga), 
(2) aversion (dvesa), and (3) confusion (moha). An opponent tries to 
reduce them to one, but is refuted. Confusion is identified as the 
worst of the three, because its presence is a necessary condition for the 
presence of the other two. An opponent tries to draw from this the 
inference that confusion is not a defect, but this is rejected. 


Topic XXXVII: Causation. (E670-88; T414-25) 


10-13: Production of a manifested thing is from another mani- 
fested thing, just as a jar is produced from its halves. 

14-18: An objector argues that a thing is produced only after its 
cause is destroyed, since without destroying something nothing can 
come to be. This is inconsistent, retorts Gautama, because the thing 
which destroys the cause (namely the effect ) must exist in order to do 
the destroying, and by the opponent’s hypothesis it does not exist 
yet. However, it is allowable to say that the qualities of the cause 
are destroyed in the production of an effect. 

19-21: An objector argues that God (Zsvara) is the cause of the 
production of things, because man’s acts do not always issue in appro- 
priate fruits. The reply is that in any case man’s acts are a necessary, 
though possibly not a sufficient, condition for fruits. 

22-24: An objector suggests that things are produced without any 
instrumental (nimitta) cause whatsoever ; things just are productive 
by nature. Gautama’s answer suggests that the opponent is trying 
to make causelessness itself a cause, which will not do. 


Topic XXXVIII: Some Things Are Eternal and Others Non-eternal. 
(E689-719; T426-42) 


25-27: An objector holds that everything is noneternal. Gau- 
tama replies that at least one thing is eternal in that case, namely 
noneternality. 

28-33 : Another objector holds that everything is eternal, since 
the five elements are eternal and they make up everything. The 
answer is that we see that things are produced and are destroyed. 

34-36: Another objector says that everything is separate (frthak), 
because they have diverse characteristics. Gautama’s answer is that 
a variety of characteristics can belong to one entity. 

37-40: Still another argues that everything is an absence, be- 
cause each entity is absent in mutual relation to something different 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 235 


from itself. Gautama’s answer is that every positive entity (bhava) 
is present in relation to itself (svabhdva). The objector, however, 
denies that things are present in relation to themselves, since they 
depend on each other for their existence. This is dismissed as self- 
defeating (vydhata). 

41-43 : There is not even any fixed number of things, for it is 
possible to disprove any cause for there being such a fixed number. 
No, says an objector : there is a fixed number of parts which is the 
cause of a fixed number of things. Gautama’s answer is that the 


number of parts is not fixed either. 


Topic XXXIX: Fruits. (E720-29; T444-49) 


44-45 : How can an action have a result after an interval, asks 
someone, since the cause has long since been destroyed ? Gautama 
answers that this happens in the same way as when a tree ripens and 
bears fruit: the cause is the nourishment of the tree, which occurs 
long before the fruit appears. An objector says that the fruit before 
it appears has neither being (sat) nor nonbeing (asat). Gautama 
replies that it has nonbeing, as everyone cansee. The objector turns 
to attack the analogy of the tree. He points out that the analogy is 
faulty, since the nourishment is of the same object which bears fruit, 
while in the case of karma one thing is nourished and another bears 
the fruit. Gautama replies that it is not the body which enjoys the 
fruit, but the self. Goodnessno! says the objector; the self can- 
not be the locus of such results as sons, wife, cattle, etc. These are 
not the results, says Gautama ; the result is pleasure (priti), and these 
other items are called results only because the result proper is produced 


through their presence, 


Topic XL: Pain. (E732-35 ; T451-52) 

55-58 : Birth is painful, for it is attended by various distresses. 
This account of birth is not contradicted by the fact that we experience 
pleasures too, for though we experience pleasure we are constantly 
seeking other pleasures and thus experiencing pain. Furthermore 
“‘pleasure”’ is merely one form of pain itself. 


Topic XLT: Release. (E737-58; T454-65) 


59-68 : An objector says that we can never attain release because 
scripture tells us we are always bound by debts, troubles (klefa), and 
activities. Gautama suggests how we ought to read the scriptural 
passages according to a secondary meaning. Furthermore, we can 
transfer (sama@ropana) these sources of bondage to the self and se 
master them. Release is like deep sleep; there are no troubles, just 


236 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


as the sleeper is without dreams. And one who is untroubled can 
act without being bound again. Some say that these troubles are 
natural; others that though they are natural and therefore beginning- 
less, they nonetheless come to an end like the blue color of an atom 
when it is baked. Gautama answers that since troubles are not 
natural, but rather caused by one’s wishful idea (samkalpa), oneneedn’t 
decide among these alternatives. 


BOOK FOUR : PORTION TWO 


Topic XLII: How Correct Knowledge Destroys Defects. (E765-68; 
T469-71) 


1-3: It is when we see objects as colored, etc., that we come 
under amisapprehension, and we come to do this by seeing things as 
wholes rather than parts. 


Topic XLUI : Whole and Part. (E770-85; T472-80) 


4-12: An objector argues as follows : There are only parts, not 
wholes, for a whole cannot reside anywhere nor be the locus of any- 
thing. Its parts cannot reside in it as a whole, nor in any part of it. 
Gautama answers that this criticism rests ona confusion about wholes: 
we cannot talk about a “‘part”’ of a whole because a whole is without 
parts. The critic misunderstands the relation of residence involved 
here. 

13-14: We perceive wholes made up of imperceptible parts just 
as a person with poor sight can see a head of hair though he cannot 
make out the individual hairs. 

15-16: Do the whole and its parts both continue together, but 
only up to the end of a cosmic cycle (pralaya) ? No, there is no final 
end to things at that time, for atoms, the ultimate parts, are eternal. 


Topic XLIV : Atomic Theory. (E786-95; T481-85) 


17-22: An atom is beyond the minimal perceptibilium (éruiz), 
states Gautama. It is indivisible. But an objector claims that it is 
divisible since it is penetrated by akafa. No, says Gautama: dkasa, 
though it is omnipresent (sarvagata), cannot penetrate inside an 
atom; its omnipresence consists in its being in contact with everything. 
The attributes of akdsa are that it is not collected (avyiiha), it is non- 
obstructive (avistambha), and it is all-pervasive (vibhu). 

23-25 : An objector argues that atoms must have parts, because 
anything material must have parts, and atoms can have contact 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 237 


with things. Gautama’s answer is that the objector is committed to 
an infinite regress. 


Topic XLV : The Existence of the External World. (797-801; T486- 
88) 


26-30: Objection : Just as there is no experience of the existence 
ofa cloth when the threads have been separated, so there is no experi- 
encing of the actual nature (yathdimya) of the world, because it is 
undiscriminated in our judgments. Answer : The argument is self- 
defeating. There is no separate grasping of the locus of a thing, and 
anyway objects are to be established by instruments of knowledge, 
and there are no good arguments for the nonexistence of things.14 


Topic XLVI: The Falsity of Everything Refuted. (E802-11 ; T489-93) 


31-37 : An objector contends that both instruments of knowledge 
and their objects are false like dream objects or like magic (?, mapa) or 
a mirage, or the city of the Gandharvas. The answer is that there is no 
reason to suppose that these phenomena are not aspects of the natural 
world; dream objects are on the same plane as memories and imagi- 
nation; the illusory objects disappear when we know the truth, and 
are therefore shown to have causes like natural objects. The cause of 
illusion is that we fasten on an ideaas primary whichis not the true 
nature of the thing. 


Topic XLVII: The Production and Maintenance of Correct Knowledge. 
(E814-26; 1494-501), 


39-51 : Gautama apparently counsels repetition of certain kinds 
of concentration (samadhi) in IV. 2. 38. An objector questions the 
possibility of concentrating, since we are harried by obstacles. The 
answer is that by our good karma we are impelled to overcome these 
obstacles by concentrating in a quiet place, etc. By practicing yoga, 
including purification through restraints, etc., we can train ourselves 
toward release. An objector claims that even in release we can be 
distracted by desires, but Gautama denies this, for in release there is 
nothing which can be distracted. 

Gautama also advises repeated grasping of knowledge through 
conversation with those who are versed in truth, as well as with anyone 
seeking to better himself, e.g., gurus, their pupils, one’s fellow-initiates, 
etc. In fact, one can pursue knowledge without the usual necessities 
like an opponent to argue with, and one can even employ dubious 
procedures like sophistry and cavil to make oneself more zealous for 
truth and to protect it. 


238 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
BOOK FIVE : PORTION ONE 
Topic XLVI: Kinds of Futile Rejoinders. (E828-88 ; T503-37) 


1-43: Twenty-four kinds of futile rejoinder are detailed in the 
first sitra. The subsequent text further divides these and apparently 
gives advice as to how to meet these irrelevant rejoinders. What the 
section amounts to is a review of various ways in which the example 
may fail to prove the pervasion required for an inference to be success- 
ful. This supplements the discussion of fallacies of the reason, the 
combined account covering in a somewhat unsystematic way the 
various manners in which inferences can fail the requirements of 
validity. 


BOOK FIVE : PORTION TWO 


Topic XLVIX : Ways of Losing an Argument. (E891-918; T540-54) 


1-24: Some 22 kinds of losing an argument are detailed in the 
first séitra. The subsequent texts review various sorts of incoherence, 
evasions, etc. The last item in the list is ‘fallacies of the reason,” 
so that one can claim that in this fifth book all ways in which an 
inference can fail have been listed. 


3. VAKYAKARA 4. KATANDIKARA 


It is probable that several commentaries were written on the Vaise- 
stkasiitras in the period prior to Pragastapada’s at the end of the 6th 
century. No such commentaries have been preserved, but in Malla- 
vadin’s Nayacakra, a work of the 5th century, we find references to a 
commentary on the Vaisestkasiitras called Vakya, on which we are told 
there was a Bhasya in turn. A work called Vaisesikakatandi is twice 
referred to by Mallavadin, who describes it as “‘an elaborate work 
based on the satras of Kandda.’’ This Katandi is also mentioned in 
Murarimigra’s Anaghardghava, where Ravana is said to be well-versed 
in Vaisesikakatandi.1 Anantlal Thakur, to whom we owe these investi- 
gations into now forgotten Vaisesika authors and works, suggests 
that the Katandi may have been a commentary on the Vakya, perhaps 
even identical with the Bhdsya mentioned by Mallavadin.?, Kuppu- 
swami Sastri, however, suggests identifying the Katandi with the so- 
called Ravanabhasya, still another lost commentary which is referred 
to in several later texts.2 Thakur, on the other hand, attributes 
the Ravanabhasya to Atreya and since he dates Atreya after 
Pragastapada, who is said to have written a commentary on Kafandi, 
he cannot identify them.‘ It is unlikely we will have a very clear 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 239 


idea about all this unless we should happen upon a manuscript of 
one or more of these lost works. And we have no idea what new 
doctrines the writers of these works might have introduced into the 
system. 


5, VATSYAYANA (PAKSILASVAMIN, DRAMILA) 


According to Vacaspati Misra, the given name of the author of 
the Nydyabhdsya was Paksilasvamin; Vatsyayana is a patronymic. 
Vidyabhiisana tells us that he is sometimes called Dramila or Dravida, 
suggesting that he came from the south.?__ Estimates of his date range 
from as early as 600 B. CG. to as late as 539. A.D.* The latter date 
seems to have some merit, although Ingalls gives the date as the 3rd 
century on the grounds of Vatsyayana’s apparent lack of acquain- 
tance with Yogacara philosophy as well as his archaic sytle.» Ober- 
hammer’s reasons for dating Vatsyayana in the second half of the 
5th century are based on his opinion that Vatsyayana knew Vydasa’s 
Yogabhadsya and the Samkhya writer Vindhyavasin.® We hazard A.D. 
425 to 500, then, as an approximation. 

The Nydyabhasya is not only the first commentary on the Nydya- 
sdtras that is still extant, it is also the first to which we find any refe- 
rence. However, some scholars have questioned whether all of the 
text is in fact the work of Vatsyayana. Ernst Windisch argues that 
there is an old Varttika mixed up with the Bhdésya, and dates this 
Varttika around 200 B.C. because of its similarity with the Mahabhdsya 
of Patafijali.? That Vatsyayana was a close student of the Maha- 
bhasya has been demonstrated by Paranjpe.§ Windisch’s date is 
hard to accept, since it would involve pushing back the date of Gau- 
tama to a very early time indeed. Some Indian scholars who are 
independently convinced of the antiquity of the Nydyasiatras, such as 
Ganganatha Jha,® accept Windisch’s conclusions. But H.N. Randle 
has argued against the “hidden Varttika’’ theory at length, pointing 
out that what Windisch interprets as a commentary can more plausibly 
be construed as sdéra-like material of origins unknown to Vatsyayana. 
Randle thinks that Vatsyayana was faced with ‘“‘a mass of material.. 
which existed largely in sitra form’ and had no sitrapétha to go by, 
so he identified some of what he had as siitra and treated the rest 
with respect.'° 


240 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
NYAYABHASYA 


(Summary by Karl H. Potter) 


The topics into which this summary is arranged correspond to 
those used in summarizing the Nydyasdtras above ; comments 
should be read in conjunction with the summary of the rele- 
vant sutras. The translation used is the same as in the case of 
the Nydyas iitras above (B264 (2) ); the edition is that of Ganga- 
natha Jha, Poona Oriental Series 58, 1939 (B264(1)). 


BOOK ONE : PORTION ONE 
Topic I: Subject Matter and Purpose. 


Introductory Section (El-2; T1-3). Fruitful activity only occurs 
when an object is known through an instrument of knowledge. Now 
objects are of 4 kinds : pleasure, a cause of pleasure, pain, and a cause 
of pain. There are innumerable objects since there are innumerable 
living things. When an instrument of knowledge possesses its object, 
the knower, the object knowr, and the resulting judgment are all 
successful, ‘The nature of things (tativa) is a function of all 4 of the 
above. That nature consists in the being (sat) of existents (sadbhdva) 
and the nonbeing (asat) of nonexistents (asadbhdva). 

But how can things which do not exist be known through an instru- 
ment of knowledge? Through the nonapprehension (anupalabdhi) 
of nonexistents when existents are apprehended. ‘Things which are 
not (present) are known by the same instrument of knowledge as 
would identify them if they were (present). The first sara lists the 
types of existents. 

1. (H2-8; T4-12) Objection: Since doubt, etc. (i.e., the cate- 
gories following doubt in Gautama’s list) are either instruments or 
objects of knowledge we do not need to list them separately. Answer: 
Since Ny4aya is the specific science of argument it must treat of its 
subject matter here. Otherwise it would appear that Nydya deals 
only with the self, like the Upanishads. But if the objector questions 
that the third to sixteenth categories belong in the proper purview 
of Nyadya, Vatsyayana satisfies this doubt also. Each additional 
category has a special place in the science of Nyaya. Doubt is that 
which precedes inquiry. There is no purposeless inquiry (though 
Vatsyayana has misgivings about this, especially in the case of sophis- 
try). Inference and verbal testimony require the presence of an 
example. Discussion, etc., only occur when some tenets are held. 
Successful reasoning involves the members of an inference. Tarka helps 


NYAYABHASYA 241 


the instruments of knowledge. Inquiry aims at ascertainment. Dis- 
cussion leads to ascertainment when properly carried out. The 
rest of the categories show how to avoid improper discussion. 

2. (E8-9; T12-15) Vatsyayana spells out how each member of 
the chain of five given in the satra_is a condition for the one following. 
Defects are actions which lead to demerit. Activity includes merit- 
orious and demerit-earning action, however, and produces accordingly 
honorable or despicable birth. 


Topic II : The Instruments of Knowledge 


Introductory Section (E10; T15-16). The activity of the science 
of argument consists in statement (uddesa), definition (laksana), and 
examination (pariksa). Statement is naming the category; definition 
is giving that property which demarcates that which has been stated; 
and examination is inquiring whether or not the definition is correct. 

3. (E10-12;T6-18) Vatsyayana gives his own preliminary account 
of the instruments of knowledge. Question : Does each instrument 
grasp mutually exclusive objects, or can several instruments grasp 
the same object? Answer: Sometimes their objects are exclusive, 
sometimes they arenot. Perception is the most important of the four, 
because it alone is self-sufficient to allay doubts. 

4, (E12-16; T18-25) The satra divides the definition of percep- 
tion into four parts. Objections to each part of the definition are 
considered. (1) Objector: Though the sara mentions only sense- 
object connection, the internal organ must also be in connection with 
the sense organ for perception to occur. Why is such connection 
not mentioned ? Answer: A definition does not supply all necessary 
conditions but only the distinguishing cause. (2) Objector: There 
is no avyapadesfa perception, since every cognition produced by sense- 
object connection is expressed in words and is therefore inseparable 
from words. Answer :(a) Sometimes we do not know a word for an 
object perceived. (b) Even when we do know a thing’s name, we 
do not identify the thing with its name or suppose that it could not 
exist without a name, and our idea of it is no different from the idea 
we had of it when we did not know itsname. Naming is useful for 
communication and manipulation, and only comes in when these 
purposes are in point. (3) In order to exclude the “‘perception’’ of 
water in a mirage the sdira says that perception ‘‘does not wander.” 
(4) In order to exclude doubting sense reports (e.g., “this is either 
dust or smoke’’) the siira requires that a perception be “‘well-defined.”” 

Objection : Perception as here defined does not include perception 
of the self or of pleasure ; hence it is defective. Answer : The internal 


242 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


organ, which grasps those objects, is a sense organ, although differing 
from the other sense organs by being nonelemental, effective with 
respect to all kinds of objects (instead of specific sorts for each of the 
other sense organs), and not needing to grasp particular qualities in 
its object (whereas the other senses grasp their objects through those 
particular qualities). That the internal organ is a sense organ is 
taught in other systems, and when another system’s teaching is not 
denied it is meant to be accepted. 

5. (E16-19; T25-28) Inference ‘“‘follows on perception’’—i.e., 
perception of the relation between sddhya and hetu, together with 
perception of the hetu and memory of the previously perceived rela- 
tion, join to produce inference. 

Vatsyayana offers two separate explanations of the rest of this sara. 
(1) Pirvavat is inference of effect from cause, from clouds to subse- 
quent rain. Sesavat is inference of cause from effect, from swollen 
river to earlier rain.. Sdmdnyatodrsta is inference from general cor- 
relation, as the inference that a thing has moved since it is located 
in a different place than before. (2) Parvavat is inference of one of 
two things perceived together before from the present perception of 
the other one, e.g., of fire from smoke. Sesavat is inference through 
elimination, as in inferring that sound is a quality by eliminating the 
other possible categories. Sdmanyatodrsta is inference from the simi- 
larity of the sa@dhya to something else which is known to be correlated 
with the hefu, asin inferring that desire inheres in the self by remarking 
that desire is a quality and all qualities reside in substances. 

Perception only grasps present objects, while inference grasps ob- 
jects in the past, present, and future. 

6. (B19-20; T28-29) An example of comparison is “‘the word 
gavayais the name of this object”? when oneis confronted with an animal 
which resembles a cow and recalls being told that the gavaya is likea 
cow. 

7-8. (E21-22; T29-31) <A person is ‘reliable’? if he has direct 
knowledge and is desirous and capable of speaking about the object 
as he knows it. This applies not only to sages (sz) but also to ordi- 
nary people both here (drya) and in foreign parts (mleccha). 


Topic IIT: The Objects of Knowledge 


9. (E22-23 ; T31-33) Vatsyayana reviews the account of the 
twelve objects of knowledge. He adds that there are other objects, 
e.g., those listed in the Vaigesika set of categories, but that the s#tra 
has only listed those objects whose knowledge leads to release and the 
wrong judging of which leads to bondage. 


NYAYABHASYA 243 


10. (E23-24; T33-36) Selves cannot be known by perception, but 
they can be known by inference from the marks which the sdtra lists. 
The main argument for the existence of a self is of the following sort : 
desire, etc., would not be possible if there were not a persisting sub- 
ject to remember previous pleasures and pains and to utilize this 
remembered difference in choosing objects now. 

11. (E25; T36-37) This sara identifies three marks of the body. 
The body is the locus of the gestures exerted by the self urged by 
desires ; it is that whose benefit helps the sense organs and whose 
injury injures those organs ; it is the abode of the pleasures and pains 
produced by the contact of objects with the sense organs, and is there- 
fore the locus of those objects. 

12-14, (E25-27; T37-40) Because the organs proceed from dis- 
tinct elements they are restricted to particular kinds of objects; the 
fact that they are restricted in this way cannot be explained if they 
are supposed to stem from a single source. 

15. (E28 ; T40-41) Some say that judgment is the operation 
(vrttt) of the buddhi, which is unconscious (acetana), and that experienc- 
ing is the operation of something conscious but nonactive. But 
judgment cannot belong to an unconscious buddhi, for then the buddhi 
would be a conscious entity—and there is only one seat of conscious- 
ness. 

16. (E29; 141-42) The sara gives one reason why we must 
postulate an internal organ. In addition, it must be accepted as the 
sense organ peculiarly involved in memory, inference, knowledge 
gotten from verbal testimony, doubt, intuition (pratzbha), dream, and 
imagination (éha), as wellas in the perceptions of pleasure, desire, etc. 

17. (29-30; T42) ‘“Judgment’’ in this sara actually refers to 
the internal organ. 

22. (832-37; T46-52) Release is a state of being free from fear, 
undecaying and immortal; it is also called ‘“‘Brahman”’ and consists 
in attaining bliss. Some argue thus: In liberation (moksa) there 
is manifested eternal pleasure of the self, like its bigness (mahattva). 
But there is no proof for this view. Furthermore, one who argues 
thus must say whether the experience of eternal pleasure is itself 
eternal or not. Ifitis eternal, then there is no difference between a 
liberated self and one not liberated. If it is not eternal then the 
proponent of this view must identify the cause of the manifestation 
of eternal pleasure. Ifhe says that the cause is the contact between 
internal organ and the self, he must mention auxiliary conditions. 
Suppose one should say that the merit produced by yogic contempla- 
tion is the auxiliary condition ? But since whatever is produced has 


244 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


an end, this merit, being a product, must come toanend. Therefore 
it cannot be the auxiliary condition in question. And if merit be 
held to be eternal, then again there is no difference between a liberat- 
ed and an unliberated self. 


Topic IV : The Preliminaries of Argument 


23. (E37-39; T53-56) Vatsyayana interprets Gautama’s obscure 
siltra to say that there are 5 kinds of doubt. (1) When we are not 
sure which of several objects we are cognizing because we do not 
cognize the differentia of any of them, but we do cognize characteris- 
tics common to all; e.g., when we are not sure whether what we see 
is a postora man. (2) When we are not sure because we cognize 
characteristics of a thing which do not differentiate this object suffi- 
ciently; e.g., when we find sound to have the property of being pro- 
duced by disjunction, but this property does not suffice to tell us whether 
sound is a substance, a quality, or amotion. (3) When there are 
contradictory opinions about a thing, each of them unsupported by 
proof. (4) When we perceive a thing and are not necessarily sure 
of all its characteristics; e.g., when we perceive water and do not 
know whether it is existentas ina tank or nonexistent asin a mirage. 
(5) When we do not perceive a thing and are therefore in doubt 
about its characteristics; e.g., when we fail to perceive water we do 
not know whether it is existent or nonexistent water we fail to perceive. 


Topic V: The Nature of Tenets 


26-31. (E41-43; T57-61) Vatsyayana explains Gautama’s 4 
varieties of tenets thus : (1) doctrines common to all philosophical 
systems; (2) doctrines peculiar to one system (examples credited to 
‘‘Samkhyas”’ and “‘Yogas” are given); (3) doctrines whose truth 
rests on acceptance of their implications ; (4) doctrines taken for 
granted as a basis for investigation. Vatsyayana thinks the last 
kind of tenet is an indulgence. 


Topic VI : The Nature of an Argument 


32-38. (E44-50 ; T61-69) Objection: In addition to the five 
members of an inference given in the stra there are five more, namely : 
desire for knowledge, doubt, possibility of proof, purpose, and re- 
moval ofdoubt. These should be included as well. Answer : These 
five are propedeutic to knowledge but not members of an argument 
as such since they do not in themselves tend to bring about true 
knowledge. 


NYAYABHASYA 245 


To illustrate the five members of an argument, VAatsyayana offers 

the following : 

Hypothesis : Sound (is) noneternal 

Reason : because sound (is) a product, and it is seen 
that products are noneternal and that that 
which is not produced is eternal 

Examples: (1) (positive) like a dish, a cup, or the like ; 

(2) (negative) unlike self, etc. 

Application : sound is so (i.e, a product, on the basis of 
the positive example) ; sound is not so (i.e., 
not nonproduced, on the basis of the nega- 
tive example) 

Conclusion : (therefore) sound (is) noneternal 


In the commentary on siitra 36 the question is raised as to how the 
paksa, sound, can be similar to the hetu, being-a-product, since the 
former is an individual and the latter a property. Vatsyayana seems 
to say that the example (e.g., a dish) is a thing in which two proper- 
ties — the sddhya noneternality and the hetu being-a-product — 
both reside, and that it is this fact which constitutes the similarity. 

39. (E51-52; T70-73) Vatsyayana analyzes the instruments of 
knowledge involved in an argument, which he claims cooperate in 
producing theconclusion. (1) The hypothesis is given to us by a sage. 
(2) The reason is given to us by inference from the concomitance 
of the sddhya and hetu in the positive example. (3) The positive 
example is given to us by perception. (4) The application is given 
by comparison. (5) The conclusion is produced through the com- 
bination of all the four instruments of knowledge. 


Topic VII : Nature of the Subsidiary Processes in Proving an Argument 


40. (E52-54; T73-76) As an example of tarka Vatsyayana 
offers this argument, intended to prove that the knower (jfdir) is 
beginningless: ‘if the knower had a beginning, then the body, etc. 
which it has at the beginning is not the result of past karma; further- 
more, since whatever is produced is destroyed, the knower would 
cease; and both of these conclusions run counter to the possibility 
of release; therefore the knower must be beginningless.”’ 

This sdira says that tarka is brought into play in order to know the 
true nature of an object, but an objector asks why éarka is not the very 
true knowledge desired ? Answer : Because tarka in itself is indeci- 
sive ; it does not in itself prove a conclusion but bolsters the instruments 
of knowledge which themselves must do the proving. 


246 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


41, (E54-56; T76-79) Objection: Ascertainment is not, as Gau- 
tama asserts, the result of considering two opposing views, but rather 
the result of considering one view, the correct one. In a discussion 
both sides offer their arguments, and this goes on until one side gives 
up; when this happens, itis the arguments of the winner which produce 
the result. Answer: No, for the conclusion of the discussion comes 
only when not only is the winner’s tenet proved but the loser’s tenet 
disproved. 

Vatsyayana also notes that what appear to be two contradictory 
positions may not be so upon closer inspection. There is no real 


conflict unless two contradictory properties are predicated of the 
same thing. 


BOOK ONE : PORTION TWO 


Topic VIII : Controversy 


2. (£59-60; T83-85) Objection: Quibbling, futile rejoinder, and 
the ways of losing an argument are never used to support a position 
but only to condemn another’s. Answer: Though condemning, 
quibbling, etc. may serve a direct means, in supporting also they may 
serve, if only as an indirect means. Quibbling, etc., have as their 


proper use the guarding of one’s own views by attacking those of the 
opposition. 


Topic IX: Fallacies of the Reason 


4-9, (E60-66; T86-96) The 5 kinds of fallacies are explained by 
Vatsyayana as follows: 

(1) Savyabhicara. Example: ‘Sound is eternal, because it is 
intangible, like a pot.’? But atoms are tangible and eternal; and 
judgments are intangible and noneternal. Thisnonconcomitance 
between the hetu and sddhya vitiates the inference. 

(2) Viruddha. This occurs when a hypothesis propounded by 
someone contradicts a doctrine already accepted by him. Thus 
someone who argues that the world is a modification (vikdra) and no 
modifications are eternal, and also that the world continues to exist 
since it cannot be utterly destroyed, is contradicting himself. 

(3) Prakaranasama. Example : ‘Sound is noneternal, because 
of the nonexperiencing of eternality in noneternal things, like a dish, 
etc.”? But since there is nonexperiencing of noneternality also, this 
puts both claims (that sound is eternal and that it isnot) on the same 
footing, and leaves us in doubt. 


(4) Sdadhyasama. Example: ‘Shadow is a substance, because 


NYAYABHASYA 247 


it possesses motion.”? But it is not shown that shadows move; it is 
equally possible that they do not. 


(5) Kéaldtita. Example: ‘Sound is eternal, because it is mani- 
fested by contact, like color.”” Here the contact (between light and 
jar) which produces color is of a different sort from the contact which 
produces sound; the former sort continues as long as the color lasts, 
while the latter sort is destroyed before its effect appears. This is not 
the same explanation as others give of this fallacy. Others suppose 
that kalatita means a hetu offered before the sddhya, but Vatsyayana 
avers that this would not vitiate its power to prove the sddhya, because 
of the rule that when two things are (really) connected their remote- 
ness does not destroy the connection, 


Topic X: Quibble 


12. (E67-68; T97-99) The example of verbal quibbling is un- 
translatable but turns on the ambiguity of the Sanskrit word nava 
which means both “‘new”’ and “‘nine,’’ so that one who says “‘the boy 
has a new blanket’’ is construed as saying that he has nine blankets ! 
Vatsyayana urges that in such cases one must take the context into 
account, and applies that principle to more difficult cases, such as 
the ambiguity between the distributive and collective senses of a 
word (particularly troublesome in Sanskrit, which has no articles, so 
that one who says ‘‘take goat to the village’? may be construedas 
ordering either that one or that all the goats are to be taken). 


13. (E68-69;T99-101) Example (of the second type of quibble) : 
‘“‘Learning is natural to a Brahmin,”’ says someone, which is met by 
showing that there are unlearned Brahmins. The way to meet the 
quibble of the reply here is to show that the quoted statement was not 
an assertion but a eulogy of Brahmins. 

14, (E69-71; T101-04) Example (of the third sort of quibble) : 
“The platforms are shouting.’? Here the primary sense gives non- 
sense, so it must be interpreted in a secondary sense to mean that the 
men on the platforms are shouting, providing that that was the 
intention of the speaker. 


15-17. (E71-73; T104-07) An objector points out that the third 
type is a special case of verbal quibbling (type 1), being a play on 
words. Vatsyayana answers that types | and 3 are, of course, similar 
but they are also different; if similarity were all that were of interest 
than all three, being similar, could be identified. 


248 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
BOOK TWO : PORTION ONE 


Topic XI : Discussion of Doubt 


1-5. (E73-75; T107-10) Vatsyayana finds several opponents’ 
views set forth in these sitras. 

Hereare 4 ways ofinterpreting the objection in satral. (1) Doubt 
does not arise from the presence of common properties, but from the 
cognition of these properties. (2) Doubt does not arise from cogniz- 
ing two things as sharing a property. (3) Doubt does not arise when 
we ascribe the common properties to one thing only, e.g., if we ascribe 
‘‘coiledness”’ to a snake, no doubt arises about the rope. (4) If we 
are convinced that the common properties apply to one thing, no 
doubt arises about its possibly applying to another. 

Here are 2 ways of interpreting the objection in séira 2: (5) 
Doubt does not arise from either contradictory opinions or from un- 
certainty about a thing’s characteristics, but rather from one’s cogni- 
tion of contradictory opinions or of uncertainty. (6) Nor does it 
arise from the cognition that some people think one thing and others 
the opposite, nor from the realization that there is no certainty that a 
thing has a given property together with the realization that there is 
no certainty that a thing does not have that property. 

Glossing sitra3.: Since each of the two proponents of contra- 
dictory theses is certain about his own thesis,.if doubt were to arise 
from this there would be the absurdity that doubt arises from 
certainty. 

Glossing si#ira4 : Ifthe uncertainty a person has about the nature 
ofa thing is itself certain, then doubt cannot arise; and if it is uncer- 
tain, then it is not real uncertainty and again doubt cannot arise. 

Glossing satra5: If doubt arises from common properties, then 
as long as those properties persist doubt should persist. 

6-7. (E75-78; T111-16) Vatsyayana’s answers to these objec- 
tions are mostly concerned to show that Gautama’s definition specifies 
the aspects the objectors find missing, e.g., with respect to (1), the 
fact that it is from the cognition of common properties, and not merely 
their existence, that doubt arises. 


Topic XII: Instruments of Knowledge 


11. (E80-81; T119-23) In addition to Gautama’s reply to the 
objection treated here, Vatsyayana offers this: if one claims that a 
word can be applied to an object only after its object has appeared, 
much ordinary usage would be impossible. 

16. (E84-85; T129-30) Gautama is here showing that the same 


NYAYABHASYA 249 


object can be an instrument of knowledge with respect to one thing 
and an object of knowledge with respect to some other instrument. 
Vatsyayana generalizes this point and illustrates it by pointing out 
that each of the case relations (kdraka), i.e., nominative, genitive, 
dative, etc., indicates a different relation of a thing to other things. 
E.g., the same tree is the subject of the verb ‘‘stands’’ (nominative), 
from which a leaf falls (ablative), on which birds sit (locative), etc. 
Thus a case relation is not aname of the substance tree, nor the action 
specified by the verb, but rather a name of the thing in its capacity 
to bring about the action.” 

19. (E86-88 ; T133-36) To explain Gautama’s example of the 
lamp, Vatsyayana says : Lamplight helps one toseea table, andisthus 
an aid to perception, but it is also perceived itself, and so is at the 
same time an instrument of knowledge and known by the same kind of 
instrument. Just so one perception can be both an instrument of 
knowing its object and also known by another perception. In this 
way there is no infinite regress of instruments of knowledge ; even 
though it is true that one perception cannot know itself, it does not 
follow that a perception must be known by something nonperceptual, 
etc., ad infinitum. 

20. (E88-89; T136-38) The example of the lamp is used by other 
schools to prove that the instruments of knowledge areself-illumined. 
But this argument is inconclusive, since ifit were a valid argument to 
say that one instrument of knowledge, say perception,does not need 
any other instrument of knowledge to know it, one could as well argue 
that the objects of knowledge do not need anything to know them, 
since the example of the lamp could as well be used to prove that. 
Then the instruments of knowledge would be useless or redundant. 
But the Nyaya view is that a particular instance of perception, though 
it needs a different token of the type instrument-of-knowledge to 
know it, does not need a different kind of instrument; one perception 
can be known by another perception. And there is no infinite regress 
here, since the perception known is an object of knowledge, and the 
perception which grasps it is an instrument of knowledge, and we 
need not ask what knows the instrumental perception unless a judg- 
ment arises expressing knowledge of that instrument. 


Topic XIV: Perception 


26, (E92; T141) The reason why sense-object-contact is identi- 
fied as the cause of perception and not mind-self-contact is that the 
latter kind of contact is involved in all 4 of the instruments of know- 
ledge, while the former is distinctive to perception. 


250 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


27. (E93 ; T142-43) The point of the examples of sleep and in- 
attention is this: sometimes we go to sleep having decided to wake up 
at a certain time, and we do so—here our determinatien brings 
about contact between internal organ and the self. In other cases 
we are awakened by a loud noise or by shaking ; here it is contact of 
our senses with objects that causes the contact between internal organ 
and self, and not the self’s desire which, by hypothesis, is inoperative. 
Likewise, a self without any desire to attend to a certain object may 
have his attention forcibly drawn to a thing. Thus the principal 
causal factor is sense-object-contact and not internal organ-self-con- 
tact. 

30. (E94-95; T144-45) Objection: When a man is asleep or 
not attending and wakes up or becomes attentive, the causal factors 
include (according to the Naiyayika) sense-object-contact as a prin- 
cipal cause and internal organ-self-contact as a subsidiary cause. 
Now since there is no effort on the self’s part, by hypothesis, in these 
cases, what is it that impels the internal organ to come into contact 
with the self? Not sense-object-contact, since this is by hypothesis 
not present here. 

Answer: In all judgments it is the effort of the self which brings 
about contact between self and internal organ, and this effort is always 
the result in turn of defects in its activity. In the case in question 
these defects are still operative and cause the effect mentioned. It is 
essnetial that effort of the self be allowed to be operative with regard 
to all manner of effects, for if it is not, we shall be unable to explain 
the initial motion of the elementary atoms which eventually produce 
the sense organs and their objects. 


Topic XV: The Whole 


31. (E96-97; T145-46)!3 Two views are mentioned about the 
nature of an object: (1) an object is an aggregate of component 
parts; (2) an object is a whole produced from its component parts 
(but different from them). Now Vatsyayana argues that on neither 
view is it correct to say we infer the tree from perception of one of its 
parts. For on the first view, to know the tree we can, to be sure, 
infer the presence of other parts from the presence of the one we see, 
but our knowledge of the tree isa product ofmemory ofallthese parts. 
And on the second view, in order to have an inference of the whole 
from its part we must have perceived the relation of the whole and 
part previously, which shows that we can perceive the whole— 
and that is the view Vatsyayana wishes to defend. 

33. (E97-99; T148-50) Thus Vatsyayana’s view is that the whole 


NYAYABHASYA 251 


is a distinct substance from its parts and is as perceptible as the parts. 
Objection: No, wholes are known by inference from their parts, 
because we never see the whole (i.e., all the parts) of an object. 
Answer: But we do not mean by “‘whole”’ all the parts. The whole 
is grasped along with the parts that are grasped through the senses; 
when the parts are not grasped, neither is the whole. 

If the whole were only the aggregate of parts, it would have to be 
considered as either (1) the collection without remainder of the trunk, 
the leaves, etc. ; or (2) these parts considered in connection with each 
other. But in either case we could never grasp the whole tree, since 
the entirety would never be present, one part hiding another, and since 
by the same token we never see all the parts in connection with each 
other. 

34-37. (E99-106; T150-63) Objector: The previous arguments 
will not do, as the existence of a whole is unproved and the arguments 
assume it. Answer: We must assume the existence of wholes, since 
otherwise we could not explain how we see a substance, for instance, 
which is made up out of unperceivable atoms; for according to the 
objector, there is no composite whole which could be the locus of the 
qualities grasped in the perception of a substance. Furthermore we 
could not hold and pull things if there were no wholes. The pertinent 
factor which allows for holding and pulling is adhesion (samgraha) 
between parts, this adhesion being a quality produced by viscidity 
and fluidity arising in turn from contact with water (in making a pot) 
or with fire (in baking a pot). If holding and pulling were due to 
qualities of the parts, then we should be able to hold or pull a dust- 
heap, and we should not be able to hold or pulla bundle of straw and 
wood.,14 

There follows an exposition of the siéitrakdra’s remarks about the 
difference between atoms and soldiers. Vatsyayana adds that the 
opponent is inaccurate in offering his argument since the point at 
issue is whether or not our concept of unity refers to a mass of parts, 
and by assuming that the forest or the army is a mass of parts he begs 
the question. Nor can he urge that everyone sees that the idea of an 
army comes from ignoring the differences among its parts, for that is 
again precisely what is at issue. As a matter of fact, the question of 
whether the mass of atoms is a single entity could not arise unless we 
had in mind a prototype of unity with which to compare the mass of 
atoms — but this prototype must be a perceptible object, which shows 
the existence of wholes! Objector: No, the prototype of unity is 
such a thing as sound. Answer: But in your view sound really is 


252 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


one, whereas what we need is a prototype which will explain how 
many things can be conceived as one. 

Similarly, the notion of size, since it cannot arise from our idea of 
atoms, must have another prototype. And like arguments may be 
drawn from our ideas of contact, motion, genus, and species. To be 
consistent, the objector should deny the existence ofall of these, for they 
cannot be explained except by admitting wholes distinct from their 
parts, 


Topic XVI: Inference 


38-39. (E103-05; T163-66) In addition to the example of the 
swollen river, Vatsyayana explains the 2. other kinds of examples 
Gautama hasin mind. (1) We see ants running around with their 
eggs and conclude thatitis going torain ; but, says the objector, itmay 
just be that the ants’ nests have been destroyed. V4atsyayana ex- 
plains that ants running around in fright look different from those 
running around peacefully, and besides when rain is coming whole 
hostsofantsrunaround. (2) Weheara peacock’s scream and infer 
there is a peacock in the cave ; but it might be a man mimicking it, 
says the objector. But, says Vatsyayana, snakes can tell peacocks’ 
screams from men’s imitations of them ! 


Topic XVII: Present Time 


40-44. (E£108-11; T167-72) The grounds on which the objector 
questions the existence of present time are these. As a piece of fruit 
falls to the ground, the space through which it has fallen corresponds 
to the time through which it has fallen, and the space still remaining 
between it and the ground corresponds to the future time of falling. 
And these two time spans exhaust the history of the fall. Answer : 
Time is not to be thought of as so closely tied to space. Rather, itis 
to be understood with respect to motion. Time past corresponds to 
motions which have ceased, and time future to motions which have 
not yet started, but neither would be intelligible without our under- 
standing what it is for a motion to be going on, and the time at which 
they are going on now is the present. 


Topic XVIII : Comparison 
48. (E113; T176) Vatsyayana offers another difference between 


inference and comparison. In comparison one man who knows both 
gavayas and cows, let us say, conveys information to another who does 
not know cows, whereas the information in the statement ‘‘gavayas 
are like cows’? conveys to oneself something of a different nature. 


NYAYABHASYA 253 


Topic XIX: Verbal Testimony 


593. (E115; T179-80) The opponent argues that knowledge gained 
from verbal testimony is inferential. But in inference the relation 
between heiu and sadhya must be knowable, whereas the relation 
between a word and its denotation is not knowable by any of the 
instruments of knowledge. If contact is taken to be the relation 
between word and denotatum, it must be a contact which is not 
knowable, since many denotata are beyond the reach of the senses. 

54, (E116; T181-82) Furthermore, if contact were the relation 
then either the denotatum would have to move toward the word or 
the word out tothe denotatum. Ifthe denotatum moves tothe word, 
then when one says ‘“‘food’’ one’s mouth should be filled by food. 
On the other hand, since words are uttered in the throat and the 
denotatum is usually elsewhere, if the word moves out to the denota- 
tum no words could be uttered. 

56. (E116-17; T182-83) What is ‘“‘convention’” ? It is an 
injunction restricting the name to its denotatum, and verbal know- 
ledge does not arise unless this injunction is understood. Even 
people who hold that the word-denotatum connection is divinely 
ordained must admit that they learn particular injunctions by ob- 
serving common usage, and furthermore the science of grammar is 
developed to identify these injunctions, 


Topic XX: Reliability of Scripture 


69. (E123-25; T192-94) The trustworthiness of medical pro- 
fessors and of those who practice spells consists in their effectiveness 
in curing disease and averting evil; but the cause of their trustworthi- 
ness is the fact that they have direct knowledge of nature, they want 
to cure and help people, and they want to describe things accurately. 
The same characteristics identify the trustworthy Vedic sage; indeed 
they are the same individuals as those who composed the medical 
scriptures ! 

A brief discussion follows against the view that words are eternal 
and therefore trustworthy. Vatsyayana points out that even if words 
are eternal, this would not explain which words are trustworthy, since 
according to the objector all words are eternal, whereas some words 
are not trustworthy. In fact, all that could correctly be meant by 
“the Vedas are eternal’’ is that there is an unbroken continuity of 
tradition. 


254 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


BOOK TWO : PORTION TWO 


Topic XXI: Defense of the Fourfoldness of the Instruments of Knowledge 


1. (E126; T195-96) Examples of some of the 4 additional instru- 
ments of knowledge claimed by the opponent: Of presumption: 
“there is rain when there are clouds’? comes to be known from the 
fact that there is no rain when there are no clouds. Of concurrence : 
knowledge of a certain kind of measure leads to the grasping of equi- 
valent measures and ofamounts contained within them. Of negation: 
from the fact that it not raining we know that there is some obstruc- 
tion such as the clouds being blown by high winds. 

3-4. (127-28; T197-98) Objection: Presumption is invalid, 
since sometimes when clouds are present there is no rain. Answer : 
The opponent misunderstands presumption. The argument in 
question runs from the observation of the concomitance of lack of 
rain with lack of clouds to the conclusion that clouds are a necessary 
condition for rain. Of course clouds are not a sufficient condition 
for rain ; that is the way with causal factors, 

8-12. (E129-30; T200-01). Negation is an operative instrument 
of knowledge in a case where, e.g., we identify certain pieces of cloth 
by the fact that (unlike others) they are unmarked. Objection : 
This is all very well for something which was marked and ceases to be 
so, but where there is nothing to cognize, you cannot claim that an 
instrument cognizes its absence. Answer: Well, the marks exist 
elsewhere; we cognize the absence of those marks which identify the 
other pieces of cloth. Objection: No, the absence is not of those 
marks, since they are located elsewhere. Answer: Nevertheless 
that is precisely how we identify the pieces of cloth in question. 


Topic XXII: Sound Is Noneternal 


Introductory Section. (E130-31; T201-02) Several views are 
listed about the nature of sound. (1) Sound is a quality of dkasa ; 
this quality is all-pervasive, eternal, and capable only of manifesting 
itself (but not of being produced or destroyed). (2) Sound is located 
in the substances in the same way as smell, etc., and is capable only 
of manifesting itself. (3) Sound is a quality of dkafa and is capable 
of being produced and destroyed. (4) Sound is not located in any- 
thing; it is produced by a disturbance in the elementary things 
(mahabhita) and is liable to production and destruction. 

13. (B131-32; T202-05) Question: Is sound manifested like 
color, etc., in the same place as its locus, or is a sound produced by 
contact and in turn gives rise to a series of sounds which eventually 


NYAYABHASYA 255 


reaches the ear? Answer: The latter, as is shown by the fact that 
the sound of an axe-blow is heard even after the blow has ceased, 
for in manifestation the quality cannot persist after its locus is destro- 
yed. And furthermore we speak of the difference between sharp 
and dull sounds, like sharp and dull pains, which are products. Ob- 
jection: ‘The sharpness or dullness belongs to the manifestation of the 
locus of sound, and it is this quality of the locus that we apprehend 
—the sound remains unchanged. Answer: No, since some sounds 
can drown out others—a drum can drown out a lute; this shows 
there are different sounds. And furthermore, since the drumris the 
locus of the sound which drowns out, and the lute the locus of the 
sound which is drowned out, and the two are separated, how can the 
two kinds of sound come into contact? Ifcontact is deemed unnece- 
ssary, then a drum should drown out all lute-sounds everywhere ! 
However, in our view the suppression of the drum-sound is limited 
to those lute-sounds which happen to reach the ear at the same time 
as the drum-sound. 

14-17. (E133-34; T205-09) Odjection: Sound is eternal be- 
cause (1) some things which have causes are eternal, e.g., the absence 
of the pot after it has been destroyed; (2) some things apprehended 
by the senses are eternal, for example universal properties; (3) some 
things which are eternal are spoken of as if they were not, e.g., we 
talk of parts of space, whereas space, being eternal, has no parts. 
Answer: In (1) and (3) words are being used in a loose sense. The 
post-destruction absence of a pot is not eternal in the strict sense 
of “‘eternal,”” and space has no parts in the strict sense of ‘‘part.”’ 
As for (2), the fact that sounds are grasped by sense organs does not 
prove sound’s noneternality directly, but it does show that there is a 
series of sounds leading from the place of production to the ear, and 
this fact in turn shows that each member of the series is noneternal. 

35. (E140-41 ; 1219-20) Vatsyayana takes it that we do know 
the cause of a sound’s destruction, even though we do not perceive 
any cause. We know the cause through inference. What is the 
inference? In the series ofsounds, each sound destroys its predecessor, 
and the last sound in the series is destroyed by contact with a non- 
resonating substance. Question: How can one explain the continui- 
ing sound of a bell ? The opponent would have to postulate a conti- 
nuing manifestor in the bell. The Naiyayika postulates instead a kind 
of dispositional tendency which appears at each stage of the series 
in the bell and which can be stronger or weaker corresponding to the 
intensity of the sound heard. 

38-39. (E142-43; T223-24) Vatsyayana interprets the opponent’s 


256 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


fifth argument in this section as intended to show that sounds do not 
reside in dkd§a but rather in air or perhaps in each of the five substances. 
He explains the argument as follows: The resonance of the bell must 
be located where the vibrations producing the sound are located; 
otherwise we could not stop the sound by putting our hand on the 
bell. Since the resonance is located somewhere else, according to 
Nyaya, this consequence will necessarily arise, and thus the Nyaya 
view must be incorrect. In answer the Naiyayika says that the objec- 
tion does not arise, for Gkdfa is intangible. Since we find that sound 
continues even in the absence of any material substance, we conclude 
that sound’s locus is an intangible substance, namely aka@Sa. Further- 
more, sound cannot be held to reside in a material substance and be 
manifested along with that substance’s other qualities, because it 
would then be impossible to explain the diversity among the notes 
in a tune, etc. 


Topic XXIV: The Meaning of Words 


63. (E154; 1246-47) The dGkrii is the collection of parts and of 
parts of parts of a thing, ordered by rule. But it isnot this akyti 
which is the meaning of a word, since we apply a word to a thing 
when we know that thing to be characterized by a universal property, 
and the 4krti of a thing is not characterized by a universal property. 
What is characterized by the universal property then? It is the 
substance composed of the parts, not merely the arranged parts. 

66. (E155; 1248-49) The final Nyaya view is that all three 
(individual, dkrti, and universal property) together constitute the 
meaning of a word, and Vatsyayana adds that it depends on the 
concerns of the user of the word which factor is predominant. When 
he wants to differentiate things, the individual is predominant; when 
he wants to classify them, the universal property is predominant. 

67. (B155-56; T249) The individual is a material thing which 
is a locus of specific qualities (vifesaguna). These specific qualities are 
color, smell, taste, touch, etc., and a material thing is a composite 
whole. 

68. (E156; T250) Sometimes there is no @kyti at all, as in “clay” 
or “gold”; here dkrti does not figure in the meaning. 

69. (E156;T250) A pure universal (sdmdnya) is one which does not 
differentiate but merely brings several things under one judgment. 
An ordinary universal property (jai) is one which both excludes some 
things and includes others. 


NYAYABHASYA 257 


BOOK THREE : PORTION ONE 


Topic XXV : The Self Is Not the Sense Organs 


Introductory Section. (E157-58; T251-52) The question that 
leads to the present section arises from the problem of interpreting a 
statement like “‘he sees with the eye,” ‘“‘he knows with his mind,” 
etc. What does “the” refer to here: (1) a collection of parts, so 
that these statements are like “‘the tree stands by its roots,’’ or (2) 
an independent thing, so that the statement is like “‘he lights with the 
lamp”’ or “he cuts with the axe.’ The correct view is that the self 
is something different from the sense organs, following the second 
interpretation. 

2-3. (£158-59; T253-55) Vatsyayana’s interpretation of these 
Siitras is this. An objector argues that the self is a collection of parts 
including the sense organs, as is shown by the fact that each sense- 
organ has its appropriate kind of object. The knowing self is just 
the collection of all of these, for to make itan additionalentity would 
be unnecessarily complex. Vatsyayana answers that this reasoning 
is not conclusive, since the fact of the senses having their own objects 
is compatible with either of the interpretations of the self under dis- 
cussion. He then interprets sara 3 as arguing that the fact that each 
sense has a restricted scope shows the truth of the second interpretation 
of self, since if there were no such restriction we could not infer a self 
distinct from the sense organs. But in fact we can and do make such 
inferences, as we have seen. 

4-6. (E160-62; T257-62) If the self werea collection of sense 
organs, etc., then it would be destroyed each instant and replaced by a 
new collection. Suppose that A is one such collection and B is a 
later collection which has replaced it, and Akillsaman. Then we 
cannot hold A responsible, since he has already left the scene, but we 
do attribute the responsibility to B, who had nothing to do with 
the originaldeed. Objection: The question of responsibility does not 
arise. For the thing that is killed is either a body without an eternal 
self or a body with an eternal self. Killing the former body,is not 
sinful, and it is impossible to kill the latter self, since it is eternal. 
Answer: Though the self cannot be destroyed, destroying its body 
and senses is sinful. 

ll. (B164;'T265-67) There are two eyes and not just one organ of 
vision with two sections, because (1) if the organ of vision were a 
collection of parts, as the opponent urges in satra 10, then if one eye 
were destroyed vision would be destroyed, just as a tree whose branch 


258 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is cut off is no longer a tree but a part ofa tree ; but this is not what 
happens. (2) If there were only one visual organ, we should not 
find two holes in a dead man’s skull. (3) If there were only one eye, 
then obstruction or destruction of vision through one eyeball should 
bring about obstruction or destruction of vision through the other, 
but it does not. (4) When we press an eyeball we see two objects, 
since the rays from the two eyes donot coincide as long as we are 
pressing on the eyeball; this shows that there are two eyes. 

14, (E165-67;T269-72) Memory isa quality of the selfand not of 
a collection of sense organs. If it belonged to the senses we could not 
explain memory at all, since the collection of senses is continually 
being destroyed and memory requires a continuing knower. Fur- 
thermore, the opponent does not properly understand what it is that 
is remembered. Memory is in the form ‘I knew that thing,”’ and its 
object is not just the thing but rather the thing as known by me 
earlier. 


Topic XXVIII: The Body 


28-30. (E174-75; T289-90) Three views holding that the body 
is a combination of material substances are rejected on the ground 
that the arguments offered are inconclusive (samdigdha). ‘Theargu- 
ment in each case goes from the presence of the qualities of material 
substances in the body to its composition, and Vatsyayana says this 
is inconclusive since the presence of such qualities can also be explained 
by the fact that the earth particles, which are properly constitutive of 
the body, are in contact with particles of the other substances. 

31. (E175; T290) The view that the eye is made of fire and the 
body of earth is traced back to Rgveda X.16.3 and Satapatha Brah- 
mana XI.8.4.6. 


Topic XXVIII: The Sense Organs Are Elemental 


37. (E177; T295) Sometimes we can perceiveathing’s qualities 
though we cannot perceive the thing. For example, it is because there 
are watery molecules in the air during the winter that we feel cold, 
but we do not perceive the watery molecules, though we do feel the 
cold, 

38. (E178; T296) Vatsyayana introduces here the notion of 
unmanifested (anudbhita) qualities. He explains that the rays of the 
sun have manifested color and manifested touch; that rays of the lamp 
have manifested but unmanifested touch; that light in contact with 
water has manifested touch but unmanifested color; and that the ray 
of the eye has both color and touch unmanifested, 


NYAYABHASYA 259 


39. (E178-79; T297-98) Only elemental substances can be obs- 
tructed. Therefore, since the visual organ is sometimes obstructed 
itmust be elemental. Odjection: Only nonelemental substances can 
be unobstructed. Since the visual organ is sometimes unobstructed 
it must be nonelemental. Answer: No. Elemental things are fre- 
quently unobstructed, e.g., the heat of a kitchen fire is unobstructed 
by the metal of the pot, but it is nonetheless elemental. 


Topic XXIX : Plurality of Sense Organs 


53. (E184-85;T310-11) If the only sense were the sense of touch, 
then the blind man could see color since he can feel. Odjector: The 
organ of touch includes the other senses as parts; the blind man is 
lacking one of the parts. Answer: If the organ has several parts, 
some of which can be lacking, then it mustitselfbe multiple in nature, 
which contradicts your thesis. 

55. (E186; T313) If color is grasped by the skin, then sense- 
object contact is not necessary for perception (since the skin does not 
go out to the object). But if contact is unnecessary, we should per- 
ceive all colors, etc., at once. 


Topic XXX : Constitution of Senses and Their Objects 


73. (E194; 1330-31) The difference between the case of hearing 
and that of the other senses is this. Whereas vision, say, grasps things 
only in virtue of its possessing a particular color on its own behalf, 
and the nose grasps odors and has its own smell too, the auditory 
organ, which is just dk@fa, does not have its own particular sound, 
since dkdasa is all-pervasive. And furthermore dkdafa, unlike the other 
four elements, can be shown by inference to be the only substance 
which can grasp its ownquality, whereas this inference is not forth- 
coming for the other sense organs, 


BOOK THREE : PORTION TWO 


\ 


Topic XXXI : Fudgment Is Noneternal 


1, (E195; T332-33) The characteristic which karma and Gkdsa 
share is intangibility. 

9-3. (E196-98; T334-38) The opponent of this section isidenti- 
fied by Vatsyayana as the Samkhya, who holds that the buddhi is 
(not a quality but) the inner cause (antahkarana) and is eternal be- 
cause we recognize objects. Vatsyayana’s answer distinguishes the 
Samkhya view that buddhz is the knower from the Ny4ya view that the 
self is the knower and judgment its instrument, ‘“Because we recog- 


260 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nize objects’? certainly establishes that the knower is eternal, but it 
does not establish that the instrument of knowledge, whatever it be 
called, is. 

9. (E200; T342-44) Vatsyayana takes fitra 9 to be a part of 
Topic XXXI rather than the next topic. He views it as an oppo- 
nent’s argument. This opponent holds that the inner cause and its 
operations are identical, and since the inner cause is one, its operation 
must be unitary also; the appearance of difference among the opera- 
tions is like the appearance of difference in color in a piece of glass 
when it is put over a variety of differently colored substances. Vatsy4- 
yana controverts the analogy by pointing out that in the case of 
judgment, unlike that of the piece of glass, the operations appear 
one after another in concomitance with the sense-objects, and thus 
the diversity of these operations is real and not apparent as the oppo- 
nent thinks. 


Topic XXXII: Destruction and Production4® 


10-11. (E200-01; T344-46) Vatsyayana introduces his opponent 
here as a ksanikavadin, a proponent of momentariness, and this oppo- 
nent is made out to object to the Samkhya view of sitra9, asserting 
that in the case of the piece of glass as much as in the case of judgment 
new things are produced and old ones destroyed every moment. He 
supports this by appealing to the common experience of growth and 
decay. The Nyadya answer is that our common experience only 
supports the opponent’s view in some cases, not in all. 


Topic XXXII: The Locus of Fudgments Is the Self 


19, (E205; 1353-55) Vatsyayana explains that judgments cannot 
reside in the internal organ, since we infer the existence of an internal 
organ from the nonsimultaneity of judgments. The nonsimultaneous 
judgments must be located elsewhere, namely in the self. He adds 
that the yogi’s simultaneous knowledge of disparate things would be 
impossible if judgments belonged to the internal organ. He credits 
yogis with the ability to create a number of bodies with distinct sets 
of sense organs. 

23-24, (E207; 1356-57) There are two ways in which qualities 
can be destroyed : (1) by destruction of the substance in which they 
reside, and (2) by a contrary quality replacing them. The destruc- 
tion of a judgment is, of course, the second sort, the residence of judg- 
ment being eternal; it is like the destruction of one sound by another, 
though their residence, dkdfa, is eternal. 

26. (E208; T358) A “‘living”’ person is defined as one where an 


NYAYABHASYA 261 


internal organ is in contact, as an outcome of past karma, with that 
quasi-part ofa self that is limited within a body. Therefore the internal 
organ cannot come into contact with (quasi-) parts of the self which 
are outside the body. 

33. (E210-13; T362-65) Objection: Some memories do not 
require any effort of attention etc.; they are like intuition. Now in 
their case they should be grasped simultaneously, since the differen- 
tiating conditions, which Gautama claims account for nonsimulta- 
neity, here are absent. Answer: There are no such memories. 
Sometimes men overlook the causes ofmemory and think that memory 
resembles intuition, but they are wrong. Objection: Well, how 
about intuitions themselves ? Why don’t they appear simultaneously ? 
Answer: It is due to karma. But in any case an instrument can 
only do one thing at a time; that is its nature. 

37. (E225-27; T368-72) Vatsyayana here refutes the materialist 
who holds that the body is the knower. In addition to Gautama’s 
argument, he offers others. (1) Since the body is composed of many 
particles, and since according to the opponent material particles are 
capable of desire and aversion and therefore judgment, the result 
would be that there are many knowers in each man. (2) The 
opponent argues that matter is capable of desire andaversion on the 
ground that it is capable of activity and inactivity. But the kind of 
activity and inactivity characteristic of human beingsis quite different 
from that characteristic of material particles. (3) Since the activity 
of material things is frequently found tobe due to the qualities of 
other things, the activity of the particles composing the body is due 
to the qualities of something else, namely the qualities of effort, etc., 
which belong to the self, which is other than the body. 

42-45. (E222-24; 1379-83) Vatsyayana argues here that judg- 
ments, unlike pots, are completely evanescent, lasting buta moment. 
An arrow’s flight consists of a series of movements. Since each one 
is the object of a corresponding judgment, it follows that these judg- 
ments are of equally short duration. Furthermore, if judgments 
were not transitory our perception of ajarshould persist after the jar 
disappears. The fact that we know some things as manifested and 
others as not is not due to any difference in the judgments but rather 
to the causes of those judgments. When we judge things through 
their general features, we judge them as manifest with respect to those 
features and unmanifest with respect to the differentiating features. 
When we know them through both general and differentiating fea- 
tures we know them as manifest with respect to both kinds of features. 
Indeed, there can be no judgment of an object as unmanifested so far 


262 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


as its own object is what is known, so the opponent’s objection cannot 
arise, 

46. (E224-25; T383-84) Vatsyayana takes this sdtra together 
with what follows. According tohim it raises doubt whether judg- 
ments belong to the body on the ground that substances have other 
qualities beside their own, e.g., in water there is fluidity, which is a 
quality of fire. 

47, (E225-26; T383-85) Judgment is not a natural quality of the 
body like color, says Gautama ; but an objector asks why it could not 
be like dispositional tendencies? Answer: No; when a dispositional 
tendency disappears from an object, the object is no longer the same 
as it was before, lacking the properties which conduced to the exhi- 
bition of the tendency, whereas when consciousness ceases to appear 
in the body the body remains otherwise exactly the same. 


Topic XXXIV: Each Self Has One Internal Organ 


58. (E229-30; 1391-92) In particular our knowledge of words is 
an example of nonsimultaneous judgments being thought simultaneous 
because they are presented rapidly; like the wheel of fire. The sylla- 
bles are presented separately but coalesce in our consciousness. 


Topic XXXV : The Body Is Produced by One’s Karma 


60. (E232; 1394) The exact story of the production of a body is 
this. A person does certain acts ina previous body and the effects 
of these acts consist in the merit and demerit produced. When that 
body dies, another is born through the dispositional tendencies caus- 
ing the merit and demerit to operate on the material stuff which 
makes up bodies. Persisting through the series of bodies isa self, 
which is the locus of the desires which result in the acts. 

66-67. (E234-36;1397-400) Objection: Since all the selves are 
all-pervasive they are therefore all in contact with a given body. 
Therefore that body should belong to all the selves, not just to one. 
Answer: However, each body is found to be connected with one self 
only, and to explain this connection we appeal to karma. It also 
explains how one self can be freed without all selves being freed at the 
same time. 

68. (E236-38; T401-02) What is this adrsta that Gautama, men- 
tions? Vatsyayana offers two different readings, so that the objection 
takes two forms. On one reading adrsta means the non perception 
(adarsana) of things resulting from the lack of connection between self 
and body. Ifthe opponent takes this nonperception as the cause of 
the subsequent union of self with body, he will be unable to explain 


NYAYABHASYA 263 


why after release -— since there is then nonperception — there 
should not be further bondage. 


On the other reading adrsta is a quality of atoms (an ‘ 


‘unseen”’ 
quality) which produces motion in the atoms, which in turn results 
in the aggregation we call the body, which is thus the special cause 
of the production of the body. But this quality is indestructible 
(since atoms are indestructible), and therefore once again there 
could be no release. 

71-72. (E239-40; T404-07) An objection : Though the dark color 
ofan atom is eternal, it can be obstructed in baking and never appear 
again. Just so, the unseen quality of atoms, though eternal, can be 
obstructed, and final release is thus possible. Answer: The view is 
unproved. Furthermore, if karma were not operative men would get 
results they did not earn and not get the results they have earned, 
which is contrary to perception, inference and scripture. 


BOOK FOUR : PORTION ONE 


Topic XXXVI: Defects 


19-21, (B250-53; T420-24) According to Vatsyayana, stra 19 
sets forth Gautama’s view that God is the cause of the production of 
things; 20 constitutes an objection to the effect that since man’s acts 
are a necessary condition for any fruits God is unnecessary; and 21 
answers this by saying that men’s acts would not produce fruits without 
God’s help. Vatsyayana then goes on to define ‘‘God.” God is a 
self with peculiar qualities, viz., (1) absence of demerit, wrong judg- 
ment, and negligence, (2) presence of merit, knowledge, and concen- 
tration; (3) has eight kinds of divine power resulting from (2); (4) 
His ideas are meritorious; (5) controls the operation of each self’s 
karma as wellas the elements; (6) enjoys the results of what He Him- 
self has produced according to His own desires; (7) though He has 
attained the fruits of His own karma, nevertheless He acts for the sake 
of others just asa father for his children. God must beaself, since 
the only features by which we can know Him are his knowledge, etc., 
characteristics of selves. If this were not so, how could He be known 
at all? 


Topic XXXVIII : Some Things Eternal, Others Not 


25-28, (E255-56; T426-28) WVatsyayana takes sdtra 26 to be 
answered in turn by séira 27, with the final view uttered in 28. In 
this reading Gautama does not argue that noneternality is eternal; 


264 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


he rejects this, but maintains that there are eternal things because we 
perceive things to be nonliable to production and destruction. 

32. (E257-58; T429-31) Vatsydyana lists several reasons why 
we must admit that things are produced and destroyed, things like 
jars, etc. Objection: |The perception of production and destruction 
is as in a dream and so is wrong apprehension. Answer : Then our 
perception of the things you think to be eternal are also dreamlike and 
therefore misapprehended. Opponent : However, if there were no 
eternal things our practical behavior would come to an end. 

33. (E258-59; T431-33) Objection: There is no production and 
destruction, but what we call production and destruction involves the 
appearance and disappearance of properties. When a_ thing is 
‘“‘produced”’ it has already been in existence but now takes on a new 
property ; when a thing is “‘destroyed’’ it still exists but has lost a 
property. Answer: No, for under this view we could never know that 
something has been born or destroyed. For “‘taking on a new pro- 
perty”’ is a kind of production, and therefore according to the analysis 
offered that property would have to be extant before ‘‘production”’ 
and after “‘destruction.’’ Furthermore, we could not distinguish 
temporal differences, since everything would be present always. 

36. (B260-61 ; T434-35) The opponent is urging here that 
everything is an aggregate. But this is self-contradictory, since aggre- 
gates are aggregates of single entities; therefore if everything is an 
aggregate something is not an aggregate. 

37-38. (E262-65; T436-39) The objector’s thesis is that every- 
thing has as its nature merely its difference from other things; e.g., a 
cowisnotahorse. Thuseverythingisatbottoman absence. Vatsya- 
yana gives several answers of his own, as wellas offering different 
interpretations of Gautama’s reply. (1) The word “‘all’’ refers to 
a collection of positive things. Therefore there is a contradiction 
between hypothesis and reason in your argument. (3) The oppo- 
nent claims that by their very nature things are nonexistent in them- 
selves. But the very nature ofa thing is to exist. (4) Since you urge 
that the cow is non-horse, why can’t you equally well say that the 
cowisnon-cow? The fact that you cannot intelligibly say this shows 
clearly that cow is a positive entity with its own nature, and not a 
negative entity depending on the nature of another. 

39-40. (265-66; T439-41) The opponent argues that there is no 
positive nature (svabhava) of a thing, since everything’s nature is 
relative to something else. The Nydya answer is that if ‘“‘long”’ is 
relative to “‘short,’’ then ‘‘short’’ cannot be relative to “‘long,”’ since 
if both depend on each other the absence of one would necessitate the 


NYAYABHASYA 265 


absence of the other, and the notions would never arise (since one or 
the other must be absent). Furthermore, if everything were relative, 
we should have the idea about a given thing that it is both short and 
long at the same time; but we do not. 

41-43. (E267-70; T441-43) One can never prove that there are 
only a certain number of things, for either the means of proof (sdédhana) 
is the same as or different from the thing to be proved (sddhya\, Ifit 
is the same as the thing to be proved, then there is no proof; if it is 
different from the thing to be proved, then there are more things than 
the limited number to be proved. And if you say that the means of 
proving is a part of what is to be proved, you are contradicting your- 
self, since in your view there can be no parts. For if there were the 
possibility of things having parts, then there would be more things 
than the limited number you claim there is. 


Topic XLI: Release 


59-60. (E277-81; T454-61) The ‘“‘debts’? Gautama refers to 
are our debts to the sages, to the gods, and to the fathers. The Vedas 
tell us to perform sacrifices to pay these debts. But they go on to 
say that these debts persist until death, and since there is no time after 
that to perform sacrifices, there can be no release. Vatsyayana 
explains the secondary meanings here at length. In the first place, 
the Vedas cannot mean to speak literally of debts here, but rather 
mean to speak of something like a debt but from which we can be 
released. Karma is like debt in that a person who fails to perform 
sacrifices is condemned like one who does not pay his debts. Fur- 
thermore, Vatsyayana argues, the “death”? which the Vedas talk of 
here is not literally death but in fact release. 


BOOK FOUR: PORTION TWO 


Topic XLIZT: How Correct Knowledge Desiroys Defects 


Introductory Section. (E287-89 ; T467-70) The question is 
raised: Do judgments about reality (tativajfiana) arise with respect 
to each and every thing, or with respect to only some things? Not 
the former, since the number of things is in (de)finite. Not the latter, 
since wrong judgments would still be present, and release therefore 
impossible. To this Vatsyayana answers that delusion consists in 
wrong judgments, not merely in the absence of judgments about 
(some of the) real things. More particularly, it is knowledge of the 
real nature of the self which is the releasing knowledge. Wrong 
judgment about the self is viewing what is not-self as self—in parti- 


266 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cular, thinking that the body, the senses, the internal organ, feelings, 
or judgments are the self. How do wrong judgments of this sort lead 
to bondage ? When a man looks on his body, etc., as his self he comes 
to have a longing for their continuance, and this longing results in 
their continuing. The antidote to this is knowledge concerning 4 
kinds of things : (1) things to be known, like rebirth, fruit, and pain; 
(2) things to be abandoned, like activity and defects; (3) things to 
be attained, i.e., release; and (4) the means of attaining it, that is, 
knowledge of the real nature of (these) things. 

2-3. (H289-91; T470-72) It is because our ideas of color, etc., 
are tinged with our desire and attachment that those ideas bind us. 
The way to meet this is to become unattached to those objects through 
understanding their true nature. Likewise, our idea of the pleasant 
characteristics of a whole, e.g., of the female body, become the cause 
of defects; and these can be met by thinking only on the disagreeable 
characteristics of the parts of that body. 


Topic XLUI: Whole and Part 


7-12. (E292-94; T474-77) The objector’s point is expandedas 
follows: The whole cannot reside in the parts, since they are of 
different sizes, and part of it cannot reside in each of the parts, since 
by hypothesis the whole has no parts. Nor can the whole reside 
apart from the parts, because we always see the two together and 
because the whole would be eternal, which it is not. Nor can the 
whole be a quality of the parts taken together because the parts already 
have qualities and qualities cannot have qualities. 

The answer is that all these problems arise only on the under- 
standing that the whole is many and not one. On the Nyaya view 
of the whole, questions predicated on its diversity do not arise, since 
itis unitary. But then, the opponent understandably inquires, what 
is the relation between whole and parts? WVatsyayana explains that 
the relation isinherence. This relation is present when between two 
things one cannot occur without the other ; here the whole cannot 
occur without the parts, but nevertheless they are distinct entities. 
Objection : Howcan there be such a relation when some of the relata 
are eternal things? Answer: We know there is such a relation by 
inference from the case of noneternal things. 

It is not that, in seeking release, we are to suppose that there are 
no wholes. Rather, we are to suppress our desire for wholes. Wholes 
exist as much as colors, etc; both are sources of attachment. 

13-14. (E294-95;T478-79) The opponent wants to use the exam- 
ple of a head of hair to show that our perception of middle-sized- 


NYAYABHASYA 267 


objects is of a mass of parts which become fused due to our senses 
not being acute enough to distinguish one partfromanother. Vatsya- 
yana’s answer is that this cannot be right, since the senses have their 
intrinsic limitations. Atoms, for example, cannot be sensed; they are 
too small. The opponent wants to make out that if enough of them 
are combined we can sense them. But Vatsyayana argues that no 
manner of conglomeration of imperceptible things can become per- 
ceptible ; it is only if the atoms combine to produce a new whole 
different from the conglomeration of atoms that something is pro- 
duced which is of the right size to be grasped by a sense organ. 


Topic XLIV : Atomic Theory 


22. (E297-98; T483-84) Akasa is not collected, asis shown by 
the fact that there is no change in dkdfa when things move in it or 
against it; this shows that dkdsa has no parts to displace each other. 
Likewise, dkdfa is nonobstructive, as is seen from the fact that it does 
not obstruct things moving in it or against it. This shows that dkasa 
is intangible. 

25. (E300; T485-86) If atoms are made up of parts because they 
are capable of contact, then everything has parts and this involves 
infinite regress; since infinite regress is impossible, atoms are not 
made up of parts. Ifinfinite regress were possible and everything did 
have an infinite number of parts, then we should not be able to ex- 
plain how we come to have the ideas of diverse sizes, or of weight, 
and the whole and the part would have to be of the same size ! 


Topic XLV : Existence of the Eternal World 


26-28. (E301-02; T486-88) Vatsyayana has the objection thus: 
all judgments which have an object are wrong judgments. For 
consider a judgment about a cloth; when we inspect the object closely 
we find only yarns and nothing else in addition which could be rightly 
called a ‘“‘cloth”’; therefore the judgment concerning a cloth is false. 
This argument holds analogously for all judgments about objects. 
Answer: This is self-contradictory, because the argument assumes 
that one can “‘closely inspect’? an object—rightly judge its nature 
—but at the same time denies that one can rightly judge anything. 
Furthermore, we do sometimes, though not usually, find both the 
whole and the part when we inspect an object closely, e.g., when the 
parts are imperceptible (atoms) and the whole is perceptible, we 
know the former by inference and the latter by perception. 


268 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Topic XLVI: The Falsity of Everything Refuted 


34-35. (E304-05; T491-92) A wrong idea can only occurif itis 
based on a prototype—e.g., the idea “‘thisisa pillar, not a man”? is 
only explicable on the supposition that the person making thejudgment 
has seen aman. Now when a mistaken judgment is corrected, what 
is destroyed is not any object—there are still both pillars and men 
—but rather a certain wrong judgment. It is precisely the same 
in the case of dreams, magic, and the city of the Gandharvas (ex- 
plained here as a sort of mirage). There is always some real object 
which, though misapprehended, nevertheless is the object of a wrong 
judgment. That there is, is shown by the fact that in every such case 
the judgment would not be possible were it not for the existence of an 
object. Thus in the mirage, where we see a lake in the desert, the 
object is the sun’s rays flickering due to contact with the earth’s sur- 
face heat; we think we see water because of the similar quality 
(flickering) between water and the said behavior of the rays. But 
there would be no such illusion at night, when the sun does not shine. 

36-37. (E305-06; 1493-94) Ifthe objector is not even willing to 
admit that cognition itself is something real, it is pointed out that 
wrong judgment differs from right in that it, so to speak, has two ob- 
jects : the object which the judgment is really about, and the proto- 
type which is mistakenly thought to be present. Now when a judg- 
ment, as for example the apprehension of a certainsmell, does not 
have two objects, there is no problem of its being wrong. This then 
is right knowledge and its object is real. ‘And wrong judgment, too, 
is real, since we know its causes and since we experience it. 


BOOK FIVE : PORTION ONE 


Topic XLVI: Futile Rejoinders 


1-38. (E312-28; T502-35) In these sections Vatsyayana offers 
examples of the twenty-four kinds of futile rejoinder and explains how 
to deal with each one. In each case we may identify (1) an argu- 
ment in the form of an inference, (2) a (futile) rejoinder, and (3) 
an explanation or ‘‘solution’’ which solves the problem of how to deal 
with such arejoinder. We may, then, summarize the matter schema- 
tically : 

1. Argument: ‘“The self is active, because it is a substance endo- 
wed with qualities conducive.to activity, like a piece of earth.” 

Rejoinder: ‘The self is inactive because every all-pervasive sub- 
stance is inactive.” 


NYAYABHASYA 269 


Solution: Always offer as your hetu a property invariably con- 
comitant with the sddhya. 

2. Argument: As in (1). 

Rejoinder: ‘The self is inactive, because it is not limited in extent, 
unlike a piece of earth.” 

Solution: As in (1). 

3. Argument: As in (1). 

Rejoinder: ‘‘The self is not active, because if it were active like a 
piece of earth, it ought to be tangible like earth also, but it isn’t.” 

Solution: It is sufficient that the sapaksa be similar to the paksa 
in some respects. It cannot be similar in all respects or it would be 
identical with the paksa. Therefore arguments cannot be set aside 
merely on the ground of dissimilarity in some respect between sapaksa 
and paksa. 

4, Argument: As in (1). 

Rejoinder: ‘“The self is not active, because if it were active like the 
piece of earth it should be nonpervasive like the piece of earth, but 
it isn’t.” 

Solution: As in (3). 

5. Argument: As in (1). 

Rejoinder: ‘‘It is uncertain whether pieces of earth are active, 
and thus your example is different from the paksa — the self — 
which is certainly active.” 

Solution: As in (3). 

6. Argument: As in (1). 

Rejoinder : ‘‘It is quite clear that the self is as active as a piece of 
earth is; thus your inference fails since the paksa certainly has the 
sadhya property.” 

Solution: As in (3). 

7. Argument: As in (1), 

Rejoinder : ‘“Theselfmay be inactive, since earth, possessing weight, 
is active, while air, lacking weight, is also active — and likewise 
the piece of earth, which has the qualities conducive to activity, may 
be active whereas the self, which also has those qualities, is inactive.” 

Solution: Asin (3). 

8. Argument: As in (1). 

Rejoinder : ‘‘Since the piece of earth is like the self in being active 
(according to the argument) and the presence of activity in the self 
is still to be proved, the presence of activity in the piece of earth also 
is still to be proved, and the argument fails — or if the presence of 
activity in the piece of earth is not still to be proved, it is unlike the 
self and cannot function as example.”’ 


270 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Solution: As in (3). 

9. Argument: As in (1). 

Rejoinder: ‘‘Are your sadhya and hetu united (prapya)? If so, 
there is nothing to be proved or else no proof.” 

Solution : Point out cases where causes are united with effects — 
€.g., jars and their causes — to show that the hetu can cause the 
sddhya even though united with it. 

10. Argument: Asin (1). 

Rejoinder: ‘‘Are your sddhya and hetu united? If not, the hetu 
cannot establish the sédhya, since a lamp cannot light up an object 
unless its light unites with the object.” 

Solution: Point out cases of causation without contact — e.g., 
magic spells — to show that the hetu can cause the sddhya without 
uniting with it. 

ll. Argument: As in (1). 

Rejoinder : ‘‘Why do you say that the piece of earth is active ?” 

Solution : Show that it isa properly qualified example by demons- 
trating that it is accepted as common opinion ; or if the question is 
what is the purpose of offering an example, the answer is ‘‘to prove the 
hypothesis.”’ 

12. Argument: As in (1). 

Rejoinder: ‘‘The self is inactive, because though its contact with 
air aided by dispositional tendencies to move trees endows it with 
qualities conducive to action, it does not act, just like akasa,”’ 

Solution : Show that your reason is effective (s@dhaka) while your 
opponent’s is not. 

13. Argument: ‘‘Sound is noneternal, because it comes after 
effort, like a jar.” 

Rzjoinder : ‘‘Sound is eternal, because before it is produced there 
is no coming-after-effort ; and since therefore sound is eternal, it follows 
that it is never produced.” 

Solution: Point out that there is no sound before it is produced 
and therefore sucha nonentity cannot have absence-of-coming-after- 
effort in it. 

14. Argument: As in (13). 

Rejoinder: “‘Your argument is doubtful, since sound, like both 
universals and jars, is perceptible — and since universals are eterral 
and jars are not, by similarity to both sound’s status is problematic.” 

Solution : Similarity is not a cause of doubt when the distin- 
guishing characteristic has been mentioned. Here, coming-after- 
effort is the distinguishing feature. 

15, Argument; As in (13). 


NYAYABHASYA 271 


Rgoinder : ‘Sound is eternal, because it is perceptible by the ear, 
like soundness.” Since this argument is as acceptable as the argu- 
ment in (13) no conclusion can be drawn.” 

Solution : Itis impossible that the opponent’s argument should 
be established and at the same time that no conclusion can be drawn. 


16. Argument: As in (13). 

Rejoinder: “The hetu must exist either before, during, or after the 
sddhya’s existence. But it can exist at none of those times, for if it 
existed before, of what could it be the prover? If both are simulta- 
neous, which one is the prover? And if it comes after, where is the 
thing to be proved ? Therefore the hetu can never prove anything.” 

Solution: There must bea prover, since experience tells us that 
proofs occur. And the hetu exists “‘before’’ the sddhya in the sense 
that any instrument exists “‘before’’ that which it is the means ofaccom- 


plishing. 
17. Argument: As in (13). 
Rejoinder : ‘If the argument is justified on the ground of the simi- 


larity of sound to noneternal things, then by presumption it is also 
undermined by the similarity to sound to eternal things, e.g., similarity 
with respect to intangibility.”’ 

Solution: If “‘presumption’’ merely means what is not stated but 
implied, then among such things that are implied by the truth of 
the argument in (13) is the falsity of the opponent’s thesis. 


18. Argument: As in (13). 

Rejoinder: “If any similarity makes two things identical, then 
everything is identical, since everything resembles everything else in 
such a respect as existence, for instance.” 

Solution : Some similarities are compatible with others, and some 
similarities are not. Coming-after-effort is of the former sort; exis- 
tence is of the latter. If the opponent urges that any two things 
which exist are noneternal, so that existence always accompanies 
noneternality, then the opponent will be unable to provide any 
examples for his argument, and it will fail. 


19. Argument: As in (13). 

Rejoinder : ‘‘ ‘Soundis noneternal’ is as well off as ‘sound is eternal’, 
since there are grounds for both.” 

Solution: There cannot be grounds for one thesis without those 
grounds being equally grounds for denying any contradictory thesis. 
Therefore there cannot be grounds for both. 

20. Argument: As in (13) 

Rejoinder: ‘“The argument is fallacious, since the noneternality 


272 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of sound is found also in branches broken by the wind (where no 
effort is involved).”’ 

Solution : So what? Sound may be produced by other causes 
besides the one mentioned as hetu. 

21. Argument: ‘‘When sound is not heard, it is nonexistent (and 
therefore noneternal ), because if it were existent we would apprehend 
that which obstructs it from being heard.” 

Rejoinder: ‘‘Since the nonapprehension of the obstruction is not 
apprehended, that nonapprehension is nonexistent; therefore the 
obstruction does exist.” 

Solution: It does not make sense to talk of the apprehension of a 
nonapprehension; therefore it does not make sense to talk of the non- 
apprehension ofa nonapprehension either. Nonapprehension is mere 
failure to apprehend, i.e., an absence, and not another kind of appre- 
hension. 

22, Argument : ‘“‘Sound is noneternal, because it is similar to the 
jar, which is noneternal.’’ 

Rejoinder: ‘Then all things are noneternal, because they are all 
similar to the jar, which is existent.” 

Solution : Existence, not being concomitant with noneternality, 
is not a proper similarity on which to ground inference. 

23. Argument: As in (13). 

Rejoinder: ‘‘Since noneternality is eternal, it follows that sound 
is eternal because it is noneternal.” 

Solution: No, since if sound is unmanifested it must be due to an 
obstruction, and we fail to apprehend any such obstruction. 

39-43. (5328-32; T535-39) Vatsyayana here discusses the 6 steps 
of a futile discussion. There are (1) setting forth of an argument; 
(2) the opponent urges that the hetu is inconclusive; (3) the first 
speaker argues that if his Aetu is inconclusive the same applies to the 
opponent’s denial of it; (4) the opponent argues the same about the 
denial of his denial; (5) but admits that his own view (in step 2) 
is faulty ; (6) but the first party’s view (in step 1) is also faulty since 
he has admitted the same fault in the opponent’s view. Thus both 
parties are guilty, and the whole discussion is worthless. 


BOOK FIVE : PORTION TWO 


Topic XLVIX : Ways of Losing an Argument 
1-24, (E333-40; T540-54) These are the 22 ways of losing an 


argument; 


NYAYABHASYA 273 


1. (pratijnahani) When a property of the opponent’s example is 
admitted to be present in one’s own example. 

2.  (pratijfidntara) When one changes his hypothesis under fire (e.g., 
starting by putting forward a thesis about sound using properties of 
jars as example, and ending by defending a thesis about jars). 

3.  ( pratijiavirodha) When the hypothesis and the reason contradict 
each other, e.g., “substance is different from quality, because nothing 
is perceived except color, etc.” 

4.  (pratijidsannydsa) When one renounces his own hypothesis. 

5.  (hetvantara) When one modifies his hetu under fire and, thus 
produces a different reason from the one originally offered. 

6. (arthiéntara) When one defends his argument by irrelevant 
statements. 

7. (nirarthaka) When one defends his argument by meaningless 
jargon. 

8. (avijnatarthaka) When one’s argument is unintelligible to his 
hearers even after having been stated three times. 

9. (aparthaka) When there is no connected meaning in one’s 
argument. 

10. (apraptakala) When the members of the argument are stated in 
the wrong order. 

ll.  (npéina) When one fails to give all members of the argument. 

12. (ddhika) When more than enough examples are proffered 
(though this is only a mistake if there has been agreement that the 
speaker should restrict himself to a minimal number of examples). 

13.  (punarukta) When the speaker repeats himself needlessly. 

14. (ananubhdsana) Feigned failure to understand the opponent 
even when the opponent has said his say three times and it has been 
understood by the audience. 

15. (ajfana) Actual failure to understand the opponent under the 
conditions mentioned in (14). 

16. (apratibha) When one is embarrassed and does not know how 
to answer the opponent. 

17. (vikseba) Evading the discussion on pretext. 

18. (maténujia) When one admits that his argument is mistaken by 
arguing that the opponent’s argument commits the same mistake. 

19. (paryanuyojyopeksana) When one fails to catch his opponent in 
making a mistake. (However, says Vatsyayana, the audience can- 
not very well expect the discussant, when the audience is deciding who 
won the debate, to claim victory on the ground that his opponent 
failed to catch his mistake !) 


274 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


20. (ntranuyojydnuyoga) When one charges his opponent with a 
mistake the opponent has not committed. 

21. (apasiddhanta) When one contradicts himself in the course 
of offering an argument. 

22. (hetudbhdsa) When one commits one of the fallacies of the 


reason. 
6. CANDRAMATI (MATICANDRA) 


We treat next an odd work entitled Dasapaddarthasastra, preserved 
in Ghinese. It is an odd work because the system it presents differs 
in fundamental respects from classical Vaisesika, although it is clear 
that a type of Vaigesika system is being expounded. It has a certain 
importance for Chinese thought, in that it was the only non-Buddhist 
work other than the Samkhyakdrikas to have been translated into 
Chinese.t It was, in fact, translated by the famous Chinese pilgrim 
Hsuan-tsang; Ui gives the date of the translation as A.D.648.? 

The work is available in translation from the Chinese in the volume 
by Hakuju Ui entitled The Vatsesika Philosophy. In that work Ui 
presented arguments for dating the work’s author, Candramati, in 
the first half of the sixth century. The argument mainly turns on the 
fact that Dharmapala, a well-known Buddhist commentator of the 
mid-6th century, knows Vaisesika in the 6-category fashion expounded 
in Kanada and Pragastapada, but not in the 10-category system as 
found in Candramati. Therefore, argues Ui, Dharmapala cannot 
have lived after Candramati, and he dates them as contemporaries.® 

More recently this argument has been questioned by Erich Frau- 
wallner,* who proposes that Candramati may well antedate Pragasta- 
pada as well as Dharmapala. Dharmapala may have ignored the 
10-category system merely because it was unorthodox; furthermore, 
Dharmapala’s discussion of Vaisesika occurs in the course of discussing 
a work of Aryadeva’s, and since Aryadeva probably preceded Candra- 
mati it would have been anachronistic for Dharmapala to relate his 
text to Candramati’s version. Ui also seems to think that Candra- 
mati’s work presupposes the prior existence of Pragastapada’s, but 
Frauwallner points out that the correspondences are not great, and 
that the arrangement of the sections and other aspects of Candramati’s 
text suggests more dependence on a work such as the Abhidharma- 
koSa than on the commentary of Pragastapada. Furthermore, on 
internal grounds we should date Candramati earlier: his treatment 
of many matters is primitive by comparison with PraSgastapada’s 
expansiveness, and where Candramati does provide expanded treat- 


DASAPADARTHASASTRA 275 


ment his explanations tend to hew closer to the Vatsesikasatras than 
do Pragastapada’s. 

Frauwallner also makes some interesting comments about the logical 
theory found in the DasapadarthaSastra and its origins. He suggests 
that Candramati gets his theory of inference from Varsagana’s Sam- 
khya, which featured a bipartite division (drsfa and sdményatodrsta) 
rather than the tripartite one found in the Nydyasiitras and more 
common later on. Of interest also is the contrast between two kinds 
of inference called vita and avita, the formerreferring to the fivefold 
Ny4ya inferential pattern, the latter referring to a method of proving 
hypotheses contrary to the right one to be impossible. Frauwallner’s 
arguments here are provocative, but they force him to draw some 
artificial conclusions about certain of the Vaisesikasatras which also 
feature the bipartite divisions; Frauwallner dismisses these sitras 
(I1.1.15-17 and III.2.6-8) as “‘later additions’’ ! 

On the basis of these arguments and others, Frauwallner contends 
that Candramati may be taken to be a contemporary of Vindhya- 
vasin and of Vasubandhu the younger (the author of Abhidharmakosa 
in Frauwallner’s reconstruction)—thus he dates Candramati in 
the first half of the fifth century.® 


DASAPADARTHASASTRA 
(Summarized by Masaaki Hattori) 


Inthis treatise, the author adds 4 new categories to the 6 recog- 
nized in the Vaisesikasiitras. He discusses in a systematic 
manner the categories from beginning to end, without touching 
upon such topics as emancipation, yoga, and the like treated 

in the sdtras. 

Numbered references in parentheses refer to page and line of 

the edition of the work published in Taisho Shinshu Daizokyo, 

volume 54, pp. 1262c-1266a (Tokyo, 1928), and to the pages 

of the translation provided in H. Ui, The Vaisesika Philosophy 

(London, 1917)8. 

1. In addition to the 6 categories mentioned in the sdiras, the 
author enumerates 4 other categories, namely (1) causal efficacy 
(Sakti), (2) lack of causal efficacy (afakti), (3) limited universal 
(sémanyavisesa), and (4) absence (abhdva).? (1262c.14-16; 93) 

2. Nine substances are listed and the characteristic feature of 
each substance is explained. A peculiarity of the explanation is this : 
Self and internal organ are held to be respectively the inherence 
cause (samavdyikadrana) and the noninherence cause (asamavayikdrana) 


276 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of judgment, pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, effort, dispositional ten- 
dency, merit, and demerit. (1262c. 17-27: 93-94) 

3. In the list of qualities, the following 7 are added to Kandda’s 
list : (1) weight (gurutva), (2) fluidity (dravatva), (3) viscidity (sneha), 
(4) dispositional tendency (samskara), (5) merit (dharma), (6) de- 
merit (adharma), and (7) sound (fabda). (1263a.1-6; 94) 

4, The characteristic feature of each quality isexplained. Devia- 
tions from the sdras occur in the explanation of size: Minuteness 
(anutva) and shortness (hrasvatva) are characterized as having a 
dyad (duyanuka) for their inherence cause. Sphericity (pdarimandalya) 
is divided into two, viz., absolute minuteness which resides in an atom, 
and absolute largeness which resides in dkdfa, time, place, and self. 
(1263a. 7-c.2; 94-98) 

5. Judgment is explained in detail. Judgments are of two kinds : 
perceptual and inferential. Two kinds of inference are mentioned 
here : inference based on perception of a common property (drsfasd= 
manyam anumanam), and inference based on nonperception-of-a- 
common-property (adrstasdmdnyam anumdénam). The former is the 
instrument in cognizing an unperceived object through contact 
between self and internal organ, which contact is preceded by the 
perception of an inferential mark and conditioned by the memory 
of the connection of this mark with the object. The latter is the instru- 
ment in cognizing an absolutely imperceptible object through the 
contact between self and internal organ, which contact is preceded by 
the perception of either a cause of, an effect of, a thing in contact with, 
something co-inherent in the same thing as, or something contradic- 
tory to x, and is conditioned by the memory of x’s connection with 
the object. (1263b. 5-13; 97) 

6. The qualities which are not enumerated in the sdira are ex- 
plained as follows : Weight inheres in earth and water, and causes 
the falling down of a substance. Fluidity inheres in earth, water, 
and fire and causes the flowing of a substance. Viscidity inheres in 
water and causes coherence with a substance such as earth. Dis- 
positional tendencies are of two kinds, viz. (a) tendencies caused by 
mental activity, and (b) tendencies caused by motion. The former 
kind inheres in selves, and is produced by perceptual or inferential 
judgments. The latter kind resides in material substances and is 
produced by impulsion (nodana) or any other motion. Merit is of 
two kinds, viz., activity (pravrtti) and inactivity (nivrtti). Activity 
is the cause of pleasure in a desirable body, etc., inheres in selves, and 
destroys one substance by its effect. Inactivity is the cause of delight 
in perfect cognition free of attachment, inheres in selves, and destroys 


DASAPADARTHASASTRA 277 


one substance by itseffect. Demerit is the cause of pain and imper- 
fect cognitions in an undesirable body, inheres in selves and destroys 
one substance by its effect. Sound resides in one substance and is 
perceived only by the auditory organ. (1263b.18-c.2; 97-98) 

7. Five kinds of motion are listed and explained. (1263c.2-11; 
98-99 ) 

8. (The categories of) universal (sdémdnya) and individuator 
(vifesa) comprise respectively the ultimate genus, i.e., Being (sattd), 
and the ultimate individuator (antyavifesa), (1263c.12-18; 99-100) 

9. Causal efficacy inheres in substances, qualities, and motions 
and is indispensable for them to produce effects cooperatively or 
individually. (1263c.19-20; 100) 

10. Lack of causal efficacy inheres in substances, qualities, and 
motions and is indispensable for them in order not to produce any 
effect other than their own, either cooperatively or individually. 
(1263c.21-22; 100) 

11. Substanceness, etc., which are recognized as genera from one 
point of view and as species from another, are classified under the 
category of limited universal (séményavisesa). (1263c. 23-1264a.1; 
100-01 ) 

12. Absences are of five kinds, viz., prior absence (pirvadbhava), 
posterior absence (pradhvamsabhava), mutual absence (anyonyabhdva 
or itaretarébhava), relational absence (samsargadbhdva), and absolute 
absence (atyantébhdva). Mention of relational absence as a separate 
type of absence is peculiar to this treatise. Itis that because of which 
Being, substances, andsoondo not conjoin with or reside ina certain 
locus. (1264a.2-10; 101) 

13. The five kinds of substances — earth, water, fire, air, and 
internal organ—are mobile, are material (marta), have impetus 
(vega), and possess farness and nearness. The other four substances 
are contrary to these! (1264a.11-14; 102) 

14, All the 9 (kinds of) substances possess qualities, are inherence 
causes, possess substanceness, possess individuators, are not incompa- 
tible with their effects, and are causes dependent on other things. 
(1264a, 14-17; 102) 

15. The4 (kinds of) substances earth, water, fire, and air possess 
touch, produce substances, and are causal conditions for substances, 
qualities, and motions. The other 5 are contrary to them. (1264a. 
17-19; 102) 

16. The 3 (kinds of) substances earth, water, and fire possess 
color, are visible, and become objects of sight. The other 6 are 
contrary to them. (1264a.19-22 ; 103) 


278 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


17, The 5 (kinds of) substances dkdafa, time, place, self, and internal 
organ are eternal, do not reside in another substance, do not consist 
of parts, are not incompatible with their causes, have ultimate indivi- 
duators, and are spherical. As for the other 4 substances, the non- 
products are the same as the above mentioned, while the products 
are contrary to them. (1264a.22-24; 103) 

18. The 5 (kinds of) substances earth, water, fire, air, and akdfa 
are material substrates of sense organs. The other 4 are contrary 
to them. (1264a.24-28; 103) 

19. The qualities of each substance, are enumerated, as shown in 
Table 1. 


TABLE | 


earth water fire air akasa time place self internal 
organ 


color 
taste 


x 

x 
smell x 
touch x 
number x 
size x 
separate- 


Mo 
” 
* 
4 
” 
* 
bo 


ness 
contact x x x x x 5 x x 
disjunc- 


* 
* 
*“ 
4 
ad 
a 
4 
* 


tion 


” 
4 
* 
? 
* 


nearness 
remote- 
ness x x x x x 
judgment 
pleasure 
pain 
desire 
aversion 
effort 
weight x 
fluidity x x x 


me ow MM MOK 


Eo 


” 


viscidity 

disposi- 
tional 

tendency x x x x x x 


DASAPADARTHASASTRA 279 


merit 
demerit 
sound 


ba 


Total 14 14 11 9 


rn 
on 
wo 
—_ 
ox 
oe 


(1264a.20-b.18; 103-105) 


20. Color..remoteness (in Table 1), fluidity, viscidity and impe- 
tus are perceptible when residing in large substances composed of 
many substances, but imperceptible when residing in an atom or 
dyad. Sound is altogether perceptible. Judgment..effort, (in 
Table 1) are perceptible to (their) self. Merit, demerit, and dis- 
positional tendency are imperceptible. (1264b. 19-25; 105-06) 

21. Judgment. .effort (in Table 1), dispositional tendency, merit, 
demerit, farness, nearness, and sound are products; the other qualities 
are either products or nonproducts. Products are transitory while 
nonproducts are eternal. (1264b. 25-c.8; 106) 

22. Color..touch (in Table 1) and sound are respectively per- 
ceived by one sense organ; number..farness (in Table 1), fluidity, 
viscidity, and impetus are perceived by the visual and tactual sense- 
organs. (1264c. 8-10; 107) 

23. The causes of each quality, especially of judgment, are dis- 
cussed in detail. Perception is caused in 3 ways : (1) Ordinarily, 
perception is caused by the contact of four factors, viz., sense organ, 
object, self, and mind. (3) In respect to pleasure. .effort (in Table 
1), and the causal efficacy, lack of causal efficacy, limited universal, 
and Being resident in them, perception is caused by the contact of 
two factors, viz., self and internal organ. 

Inference is caused by the contact of self and internal organ, which 
is preceded by the cognition of something in contact with, or co- 
inherent in the same thing with, or contradictory to the thing being 
inferred, and which (contact) is conditioned by the memory of the 
connection between the thing in contact with or co-inherent with, 
etc., and the thing being inferred. 

Doubt, ascertainment, imperfect knowledge (avidyd), and perfect 
knowledge (vidy@) are treated as subdivisions of perceptual andin- 
ferential judgments. (1264c.10-1265a.21; 107-10) 

24. Color..touch (in Table 1) size, nearness, farness, judgment.. 
sound reside in one substance. Contact and disjunction reside in 
two substances. Number and separateness reside either in one sub- 
stance or in more than one substance. (1265a.22-27; 110-11) 


280 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


25. Color..farness (in Table 1), fluidity, viscidity, weight, and 
impetus pervade their loci. The other qualities are contrary to 
them. (1265a.27-29; 111) 

26. Incompatibility between qualities and their effects or causes 
are explained in detail. (1265a.29-b.17 ; 111-13) 

27. Every quality inheres in substances, possesses neither quality 
nor motion, isa noninherence cause, isa mark of the substance possess- 
ing it, is nonmaterial, and does not consist of parts. (1265.17-19; 
113) 

28. All the 5 (kinds of) motions inhere in one substance, are 
immaterial, possess no quality, do not consist of parts, are the causes of 
contact and disjunction, are productive and products, are nonaggre- 
gates, are the signs of the substances they reside in, are causes of dis- 
positional tendencies produced by impulsion, etc., and have causes 
other than motions. (1265b.19-23; 113-14) 

29. Throwing upwards, throwing downwards, and going reside 
in earth, water, fire, air, and internal organ. Contracting and ex- 
panding reside in large and long substances which are effects of a 
particular arrangement of very loosely connected parts. (1265b. 
23-26; 114) 

30. Allthe 5 (kinds of) motions pervade their substrata. (1265b. 
26-29; 114) 

31. The causes of motions are explained in detail according to the 
differences in the loci and the difference between the first motion and 
subsequent motions. (1265b.29; 114-16) 

32. Being is not a product, is eternal, possesses neither quality 
nor motion, and does not consist of parts. It resides in substances, 
qualities, and motions, but not in causal efficacies, lack of causal 
efficacies, limited universals, and individuators. Being is one, and is 
the cause of the judgment that A is. (1265c.25-29; 116) 

33. Individuators reside in dkasa, place, and time, are the cause of 
the judgment that (this is) dkdsa, etc., are eternal, are not produced, 
possess neither quality nor motion, do not consist of parts, and are 
many. (1265c.29-1266a.2; 117) 

34. Inherence is one, is eternal, is not produced, does not consist 
of parts, is immaterial, and is the cause of one thing inhering in an- 
other. The mark of its existence is the judgment that there is A 
here in B. (1266a. 3-4; 117) 

35. Causal efficacy and lack of causal efficacy are not products, 
are eternal, possess neither quality nor motion, do not consist of parts, 
and areimmaterial. There are many of them, and they differ accord- 
ing as they reside in substances, qualities, or motions. The judgments 


DASAPADARTHASASTRA 281 


that A is efficacious, B is not efficacious, and the like are their marks. 
(1266a. 5-8; 117) 

36. Substanceness pervades the category of substance, inheresin 
substances, is one, is immaterial, does not consist of parts, possesses 
neither motion nor quality, is eternal, and is not a product. This 
applies correspondingly to qualityness and so forth, (1266a. 8-11; 
118) 

37. Prior absence is transitory. Posterior absence, reciprocal 
absence, and absolute absence are eternal. Relational absence is 
either eternal or transitory. (1266a. 12-19; 118) 

38. All the 5 (kinds of) absences are not objects of perception. 
(1266a.19-21; 119) 

39. Allthe 10 categories are cognizable (jieya) and nameable 
(abhidheya). (1266a. 21-22; 119) 


7. BHAVIVIKTA 


This writer is mentioned in a Buddhist work of the 8th century by 
Santaraksita. Bhavivikta is said to have written a commentary 
on a Nydyabhdsya, presumably Vatsyayana’s.!_ Scholar’s estimates of 
his date vary. 

Steinkellner? places him after Uddyotakara, but Oberhammer? 
dates him 520 to 580, since he identifies him as one among certain 
teachers who flourished prior to Uddyotakara and to whom Jayanta 
refers, 

The views which are attributed to him by Santaraksita are the 
following :* 

1, Since the ego-making faculty (ahamkdra) is self-cognizable, 
the self is perceptible and can be proved thereby. 

2. We can sometimes perceive substances without their qualities, 
e.g., in a shady place. 

3. There is a distinct category of universals. Universals are 
the causes of names and concepts, and they are spoken about and 
known in a different way from individuals. 

4, Aview on perception. 

5. The “reaffirmation”? (upanaya) is an indispensable member 
of the inference pattern. 

6. A view on the prakaranasama fallacy. Santaraksita mentions 
Uddyotakara, Priticandra, and Bhavivikta as the major rivals of 
Dharmakirti.® 


282 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


8. PRASASTAPADA (PRASASTAMATI, PRASASTA- 
DEVA, PRASASTAKARADEVA) 

Although the Vazsestkasatras are no doubt the most authoritative 
Vaisesika source, it is the Vaisesika system as seen through the eyes 
of Kanada’s most important commentator which is known as_ the 
standard old Vaigesika. This writer is Pragastapada, author of the 
Padarthadharmasamgraha. Frauwallner gives his date as the last half 
of the sixth century,! although other writers have attempted to place 
him earlier. E.g., Stcherbatsky argued? that Pragastapada must 
have been contemporary with Vasubandhu, since Vasubandhu 
quotes Vaisesika views which to our knowledge are only found in 
Pragastapada. This line of argument has also been used by  others* 
to push Pragastapada’s date back to an even earlier time than Vasu- 
bandhu’s, for Vaigesika views of a sort not precisely found in the 
sitras are found in Harivarman, Aryadeva, and Vatsyayana. Stcher- 
batsky’s arguments, it has been pointed out by Randle,* depend on 
our assuming that there was no development in Vaigesika theory 
between Kanada and Pragastapada, and there is no reason to suppose 
this to be the case. 

Frauwallner® thinks that Pra‘astapada is in his work trying to 
re-establish the satrakdra’s views against, e.g., Candramati’s system of 
10 categories. He also shares with Guiseppe Tucci® the opinion that 
Pragastapada went far beyond most members of his school in accept- 
ing a good deal of the Buddhist logical theory which was developed 
by Vasubandhu and Dignaga. Notably among such theoretical 
elements is the theory of the threefold mark (érairiipya or trilaksana- 
hetu, which was initially adopted by Ny&ya and Veaisesika, as well 
as Kumiarila, but later given up by members of all the three schools 
(see. e.g., Jayanta and Parthasarathi Misra). Thus he concludes 
that Pragastapada must have lived after Dignaga. 

Thakur’ has discovered that Mallavadin, the Jain philosopher, 
attributes to one Pragasta a commentary called 7ikd on the Vatsesi- 
kasiitras, the Vakya, and Bhasya. Santaraksita refers frequently toa 
Pragastamati.2 B. Bhattacharya® remarked that this Pragastamati 
“seems to be different from the Vaisesika philosopher PraSastapada,”’ 
but Thakur is inclined to identify them.'° In Thakur’s view, 
Pragastapada wrote at least two works. 


PADARTHA DHARMASAMGRAHA (?PADARTHA- 
PRAVESAKA)!2 (Summary by Karl H. Potter) 
Numerical references preceded by “‘E” are to the edition by 
Durgadhara Jha which appeared as Ganganatha-Jha Grantha- 


PADARTHADHARMASAMGRAHA 283 


mala no. 1, Varanasi 1963. Those preceded by ‘*T”’ are to the 

translation by Ganganatha Jha reprinted from the Pandit, 

Allahabad 1916. The topic numberings, according to which 

the material is organized below, are taken from the Ganganatha 

Jha translation. 

Introductory Section. After paying his respects to God and to 
Kanada (El ; T1), Prasastapada lists the 6 categories specified in the 
Vaisesikasiitras and says that to understand them, their similari- 
ties, and dissimilarities is to produce release (nihfreyasa) (E15;T13). 
He adds that this understanding results from merit assisted by the 
injunctions of God, (E19; T16). 

1-5. The Categories. The 9 substances, 17 qualities, and 5 
motions are listed as in the satras; the word ca, which appears in the 
siitras at the end of the list of qualities, was intended, says Pragasta- 
pada, to indicate that 7 additional qualities are to be admitted. 
Thus Pragastapada’s list of qualities is the same as Candramati’s. 

6. In discussing motion, the fifth sort, “‘going”’ ( gamana) is said to 
encompass all kinds of movement other than upwards, downwards, 
contracting and expanding motions. (E20-28; T17-24) 

7. A universal is defined as the cause of our idea of similarity. 
There are two kinds of universals. The higher kind is Kanada’s 
“Being” of Vatsesikasiitra, sections 5-6, 11, etc. above. It is the one 
proper universal, since its object isthe most comprehensive and since 
it functions only to assimilate, not to distinguish. The lower univer- 
sals, such as substanceness, both assimilate and distinguish things. 
(E29-30; T25) 

9. Inherence is defined as the relation which holds between a 
substratum (adhdra) and a superstratum (ddheya) which are insepa- 
rable (ayutasiddha). It produces the judgment “‘Here there is an 
object (of a certain kind). (E 36-37; T30). 


Similarities and Differences among the Categories 


11. All 6 categories have the properties of existing (astitva), 
nameability, and knowability. (E41; T37). 

12. All things except the eternal ones are resident in something 
(other than themselves). (E42; T38). 

13. The first 5 categories are the kinds of things other things can 
inhere in. (E42; T39) 

14. The last 5 categories have no qualities and no motions. 
(E43; T39) 

15. The first 3 categories are related to Being, have both univer- 


284 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sals and individuators, are called “things” (artha) in the (technical 
language of the) system, and are the agents (kartr) of merit and 
demerit. (E43-44; T40) 

16. A thing is noneternal only if it is caused. The first 3 cate- 
gories are effects, and thus noneternal. (E46; 42) 

17, All things belonging to the first 3 categories can be causes 
except sphericity, etc. (E47; T43) 

18. Members of the first 3 categories, except for the eternal 
substances, reside in substances. (E48; T44) 

19. The last 3 categories share the following characteristics: 
they are self-sustaining, are marked through judgments, are neither 
effects nor causes of anything, are without universals or individuators, 
are eternal, and are not called ‘thing’? (in the technical sense). 
(E49; T45) 

20. Each of the 9 (kinds of) substances have the capacity for 
being the cause ofsomething else’s arising and being resident upon 
it, have qualities, are not destroyed by their causes or their effects, 
and are individuated by the ultimate individuators. (E54; 'T49) 

21. All substances, except wholes, are not resident in anything 
else and are eternal. 

24, Akasa, time, and place are omnipresent (sarvagata), of the 
largest dimension, and constitute a common locus for all things. 
(E58-59; T54) 

25. Earth, water, fire, air, and dkdsa are elemental, are the mate- 
rial substratus of sense organs, and have respectively the qualities 
perceptible by the appropriate sense organs. (E59;T54) 

29. All the elemental substances, together with the selves, have 
specific qualities (v7sesaguna). (E64; T59) 

31. The specific qualities of 4kaga and the selves are momentary 
and are non-locus-pervading (ekadefavriti). (E65; T59) 

32. Place and time are the instrumental causes of all originations. 
(E65; T60) 

33. Earth and fire have instrumental (naimittika) fluidity. 
(E67; T61). 


The Substances 


36. Earth has the qualities in Table 1. It has 6 kinds of taste, 
2 kinds of smell (good and bad !). Its temperature is neither warm 
nor cold; warm temperature is produced in it by cooking (paka). 
(E70-73; T65) 

There are 3 sorts of noneternal earth: bodies, sense organs, and 


PADARTHADHARMASAMGRAHA 285 


objects. Earthy bodies are of two kinds : born of the womb, and not 
so born. Gods and sages have bodies of the latter kind, born from 
atoms acted upon by meritorious karma, while little insects have 
bodies born from atoms acted upon directly by bad karma. The 
two kinds of bodies which are born from the womb are the viviparous 
and the oviparous. The sense organ of smell is made up of earth 
particles undominated by particles of other substances. There are 
3 kinds of earthy physical objects : clay, stone, and vegetable. (E78- 
87; T66-67) 

37. Water has the qualities in Table 1. Its noneternal variety 
also has 3 subdivisions : bodies, organs, and objects. Watery bodies 
are not born from the womb and exist only in Varuna’s part of the 
universe. The watery sense organ is the sense of taste. (90-96; 
T81-82) 

38. Fire has the qualities in Table 1 and its divisions as discussed 
under the previous substances. Fiery bodies exist in the region of 
the sun. The fiery sense organ is the visual organ. And there are 
3 kinds of fiery objects : earthly, heavenly (the sun, organic, which 
brings about digestion), and mineral (gold). The fact that gold 
has taste is explained by the fact that it is mixed with earth. (E97- 
101; T88) 

39. Air’s qualities are as before, and its subdivisions parallel to 
those above. Airy bodies exist in the region of the Maruts. Touch 
is the airy sense organ. The air we perceive as such is in fact the 
substratum of all touch. Though it is invisible, yet we can infer 
that it is many from the behavior of wind. Breath is the air in the 
body. (E101-120; T100-101) 

40. Creation and destruction of the above 3 substances. At 
the appropriate time for dissolution of the universe (i.e., every 100 
Brahma-years) God gets a desire to dissolve the universe. Simul- 
taneously all the unseen (adysfa) potentialities of the selves cease to 
operate. As a result the atoms in bodies and sense organs are dis- 
rupted and their combinations are broken, and so everything breaks 
down to the ultimate atoms, which finally remain in separation from 
each other along with the selves. But the selves are still accompanied 
by their merit and demerit and their dispositional tendencies. 

Then, in order that Beings may enjoy, God conceives a desire to 
create, and there are produced in the air atoms certain motions 
resulting from the dispositional tendencies in the selves, which ten- 
dencies begin to operate again. Asa result the atoms combine into 
dyads, triads, etc. until the atmosphere we know is created. Then 
in the same fashion water, earth, and fire come to be in the fashion 


286 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


we know them. (E121-31; T108-11) 

41. Akdsa has the qualities in Table 1. Its postulation as the 
locus of sound is inferred through elimination. Sound cannot be a 
quality of tactile substances since it is perceived elsewhere than in 
such substances. It cannot be a quality of the self, since itis per- 
ceptible by an external sense organ and is perceived by other selves. 
Nor is it a quality of place, time, or the internal organ, since it is 
perceptible by the ear and is a quality specific to its location. Thus 
an additional substance, akasa, must be inferred as the locus of sound. 

There is only one dkdSa, since sound occurs everywhere in it. Thus 
it must be separate, all-pervading, and eternal. But because it is 
the cause of individual sounds it must have contact and disjunction. 
An auditory organ is that portion of akdfa enclosed in the part of the 
physiognomy called the ear. Its auditory powers are aided by the 
merit and demerit of the self inhabiting that body. Deafness is 
brought on by these additional causes, since the auditory organ is 
by nature endowed with the power to hear. (E143-52; T128-30) 

42. Time is inferred from the characteristics of being before and 
after, simultaneity, succession, etc. It is the instrumental cause of 
the production, maintenance, and destruction of all produced things. 
Its qualities are in Table 1. There is only one “‘big”’ time (mahakala), 
though it gets diversified by the conditions which help bring about 
the changes of production, maintenance, and destruction, just as 
the crystal and the cook get diversified in color or function by the 
relationships they enter into. (E155-60; T140-41) 

43. We infer the existence of place from the fact of there being 
directions like ‘‘east,’’ “‘south,’? etc.—these referring to relation- 
ships between one material object and another lying in some direction 
from it. Its qualities are in Table 1. Like time, it is single but 
diversified by the relata of those relations of which it is the locus. 
(E165-67; T147-48) 

44, We infer the existence of a self (since it is imperceptible) : 

(1) By analogy from the necessity of postulating an agent for 
an action; just so in cognizing a sound we must postulate a cognizer. 
By elimination this cognizer cannot be any of the other substances 
because they are all unconscious. This lack of consciousness in the 
other substances is shown as follows. Dead bodies are not conscious, 
so the body is not intrinsically conscious. We have consciousness 
even when each of the sense organs is not in contact with its object. 
Indeed, we may remember even after our sense organs are destroyed. 
As for the internal organ, if it could function independently of the 
other organs, perception and memory would occur simultaneously. 


PADARTHADHARMASAMGRAHA 287 


Moreover, just asa chariot needs an intelligent charioteer to steer it 
inthe right direction, so the body needs an intelligent guiding agent 


to steer it correctly. 
(2) Additional arguments for the existence of the self derive 


from the actions of breathing, winking, healing up of wounds, attend- 
ing—respectively, there must be a blower, a puller, a doctor, 
a something which directs attention. 

(3) The qualities of pleasure, pain, desire, hate and effort 
cannot belong to the body or the sense organs, for unlike the body 
and the sense organs the ideas of pleasure, etc., are always attributed 
to ‘‘me’’ and do not vary or disappear with the variation or disappear- 
ance of the body or sense organs. 

(4) The very fact that we use the word ‘I’’ shows that a self 
must exist. 

The qualities of selves are in Table 1. The fact that the qualities 
of one self do not produce the appearance of qualities in other selves 
shows that there are many selves and that they each have their own 
karma. (167-215; T152-54) 

45. We infer the existence of an internal organ from the facts 
(1) that we do not always attend to objects which are near our self 
or our sense organs; (2) that we experience pleasure, etc., which are 
not objects of external sense organs. The qualities of the internal 
organ are in Table 1. There is one internal organ for each body, 
since effort does not occur simultaneously with judgment, and it has 
minute size. It moves quickly and is intrinsically unconscious. 
(E216-26; T198-99) 


The Qualities 


50-51. All the qualitics except contact, disjunction, the number 
duality (dvitva), and the separateness between two things (dviprthakiva) 
are qualities which occur in one thing ata time. (E230; T211) 

52-53. Qualities are divided into specific and generic. Number, 
size, separateness, contact, disjunction, farness and nearness, weight, 
instrumental fluidity, and impetus are the generic qualities; the rest 
are specific. (E230-31; T212) 

54-57. Qualities are further classified as (1) perceptible by one 
ofthe external sense organs only (sound, touch, color, taste, smell); 
(2) perceptible by two sense organs (number, size, separateness, 
contact, disjunction); (3) perceptible by the internal organ only 
(judgment, pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, effort) ; (4) not percep- 
tible at all (weight, merit and demerit, dispositional tendency). 
(E231-36; T212-16) 


288 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


58-74, This section discusses the causative relations of qualities. 
Certain qualities may be produced by like qualities in the inherence 
causes of their substrata : color which is not produced by cooking, 
taste, smell, touch, size, the number one (—unity, ekatva), separate- 
ness of one thing (ekaprthaktva), weight, fluidity, viscidity, and im- 
petus. Certain qualities are produced by contact: judgment, plea- 
sure, pain, desire, aversion, effort, merit and demerit, dispositional 
tendency, sound, measured size, secondary contact, instrumental 
fluidity, farness and nearness. Contact, disjunction, and impetus 
are caused by motions. Sound and secondary disjunction are pro- 
duced by disjunction. Farness and nearness, duality and separate- 
ness of two or more things are dependent upon our judgments. 

Again, some qualities produce their likes: color, taste, smell, 
touch which is not hot, sound, dimension, unity, separateness of one 
thing, viscidity. Others produce qualities both like and unlike 
themselves: contact, disjunction, number, weight, fluidity, 
hot touch, judgment, merit and demerit, dispositional tendency. 
Some qualities produce qualities only in things other than their own 
locus; other qualities produce qualities both in their own locus 
and elsewhere. Certain qualities produce motions: weight, fluidity, 
impetus, effort, merit and demerit, contact. The following qualities 
are noninherent causes: color, taste, smell, non-hot touch, number, 
size, separateness of one thing, viscidity, sound. The following can 
be instrumental causes: judgment, pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, 
effort, merit and demerit, dispositional tendency. Contact, dis- 
junction, hot touch, weight, fluidity, and impetus can be either non- 
inherence or instrumental causes, whereas farness and nearness, 
duality and separateness of two or more things cannot be causes at 
all. (E236-47; T216-28) 


75-78. Certain qualities may occur in only part of their locus: 
contact, disjunction, sound, and the specific qualities of the self. 
On the other hand, certain qualities exist as long as their loci do: 
color not produced by cooking, taste, smell, touch, size, unity, sepa- 
rateness of one thing, natural fluidity, weight, and viscidity. (E247- 
49; 1224-26) 

79. There is a lower universal for each of the kinds of quality 
by virtue of which each instance of that kind gets its name—e.g., 
a given color gets called a “‘color’”? because it is related to a universal 
(colorness). (E250; T227) 


Now each of the qualities is reviewed in detail. 
80. Color is perceptible by the visual organ, resides in earth, 


PADARTHADHARMASAMGRAHA 289 


water, and fire, and is divided into various shades. It is eternal in 
water and fire atoms, but in earth atoms it can be destroyed by cook- 
ing. It is destroyed when its locus is. (E251-52; T228) 

81-83, Taste, smell, and touch are discussed. (E254-56 ; T230-32 ) 

84. Pragastapada explains the process called “‘cooking’’ which 
results in the production of (a new) color in earth atoms, An un- 
baked jar is put in the fire. The fire produces motion in the atoms 
composing the jar. This produces disjunctions which destroy the 
contact between the components of the jar, and when the jar has 
been broken down to its elemental particles, the heat of the fire causes 
the atoms to lose their previous color and to take on the color produced 
by cooking. Now these atoms, with their new colors, come into 
contact with selves through the operation of the adrsta of those selves 
(who are destined to experience the jar), and this contact produces 
motion in the atoms, which results in contact, which results in 
the formation of larger wholes until the jar is “reconstituted.” At 
each stage of this building up the color of the parts produces a similar 
color in the whole produced. The reason for this complicated 
account is that it is impossible for fire to pervade all the atoms of the 
jar at once, both outside and inside, without completely burning up 
and destroying the jar and its component macro-parts. (E257-62; 
T233) 

85. Next there is a lengthy discussion of the quality number. 
Numbers reside in both single things and collections of things. The 
number of single things—one—is to be thought of parallel 
to the color of an atom. The numbers of collections range from the 
number two toa number called pardrdha (a very large number !). 
Problem : How to account for the appearance and disappearance of 
the notions of ‘“‘two,”’ etc.? Answer: It comes with the cognition 
of the number one in each of several things in contact with the visual 
organ at once, and is destroyed by the destruction of the cognition 
of the distinction between the various things. In more detail: (1) 
There is contact of two objects with the eye of a knower. This pro- 
duces (2) a judgment of the universal oneness, which is gained through 
the fact that the universal oneness inheres in the quality one which 
inheres in each of the two substances which are in contact with the 
visual organ. From the universal oneness in its relation to the quality 
one and from our judgment about it there arises (3) the single judg- 
ment of two one-qualities. (This single judgment is technically 
called an apeksaébuddhi,which Kuppuswami Sastri translates as ““enume- 
rative cognition.’’!3) In a similar fashion, from presentation of the 
two single things in this enumerative cognition there arises (4) the 


290 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


quality two residing in the pair of substances. And from this 
there arises (5) the judgment concerning the universal twoness, 
along with the decline of the enumerative cognition and the beginning 
of a judgment concerning the quality two—all of these occurring 
at one moment. Next (6) the enumerative cognition is destroyed, 
the quality two declines, judgment of that quality destroys the judg- 
ment concerning the universal twoness, and a judgment of the sub- 
stances in their duality begins—all this again occurring at one 
moment. Then (7) the judgment ‘‘(these are) two substances” 
arises to full awareness, two (the quality) is destroyed, the judgment 
of it declines, and a dispositional tendency (or trace) is laid down 
—all in one moment. Finally (8) the judgment of two is des- 
troyed and the trace destroys judgment of the substances. 

Similarly one explains the genesis of three and the rest. 

Sometimes the ideas of two, etc., are destroyed by the destruction 
of the substances themselves. 

Part of the point of this theory is to keep it consistent with the 
general theory that in order for one stage in a process to destroy the 
previous one that previous one must be capable of destruction. On 
other theories the judgment ‘‘(these are) two substances,’ which 
comes to fruition in stage (7) above, could not arise, since two will 
have been destroyed before the judgment concerning two substances 
has arisen. Thus the complications about the beginning and decline 
of certain segments in the process. 

Objection : Why can’t the judgment “(these are) two substances” 
arise from the judgment of two even in the absence of two, just as in 
inference one can prove the conclusion merely from knowledge of 
the hetu even though the hetu does not at that time exist. Answer: 
The analogy is not apt, for in the present case the substances are 
related to the quality by a relation of nondifference (abheda), while 
in inference the hetu and the judgment about the hetu are not related 
by such an entity. Odjection: Your view also will not allow the 
judgment “‘(these are) two substances’ to begin to arise in stage 
(6), for it is accepted Vaisesika doctrine that an idea terminates as a 
trace in the third moment ofits “life’’; thus, the enumerative cognition 
being in its third moment, only its trace exists and it cannot parti- 
cipate in production of a judgment about two substances. Answer : 
No, for traces are only produced by composite (samiha) judgments 
(and thus the enumerative cognition leaves no trace). Opponent: 
But this undermines the whole theory by allowing simultaneous cogni- 
tions. Answer : Not so, for the rule barring simultaneous cognitions 
must be modified so as to bar only the simultaneity of two fully existent 


PADARTHADHARMASAMGRAHA 291 


cognitions; cognitions which are in the process of decline cannot 
destroy. (E267-95; T241-45) 

86. Size is the cause of judgments of measurement. It is of 
4 kinds : minute, large, long, and short. The large size is of two kinds: 
eternal and noneternal. Akdfa, place, time, and selves have the 
eternal large size, while the triad (tryanuka) and other middle-szed 
wholes have the noneternal sort. There are also eternal and non- 
eternal forms of minute size. Atoms and internal organs have the 
eternal kind, known as “‘sphericity’’; the dyad has the noneternal 
sort. Middle-sized objects come to have these terms “‘iarge” and 
“small? applied to them in a relative fashion. 

All 4 kinds of noneternal size depend on number, size, and aggre- 
gation (pracaya) as their source. The plurality in number of the 
atoms and dyads composing macro-objects creates length and size 
along with color, etc. When two middle-sized objects combine to 
produce a larger one, the size of the latter is determined by the sizes 
of its components. But when one rolls two balls of cotton up into a 
single ball, the contacts between the component particles produce 
a single large object, not two conjoined ones : this is “aggregation.” 

Yogis are endowed with the ability to tell the minuteness of an 
atom from its shortness. (E314-31; 1284-87) 

87. Separateness inheres in single as well as in groups of sub- 
stances. It is like number with respect to its eternality and non- 
eternality, except that unlike number the specific separateness qualities 
are always qualified by a number, e.g., “‘this one is separate,” “these 
two are separate,” etc. (E332-33; T299-300) 

88. There are 3 kinds of contact: (1) contact produced by the 
motion of one of two things; (2) contact produced by the motion 
of two things together; (3) contact produced by contact. The idea 
of (3) is that if something is in contact with x, and x is inhered in by 
substance y, then that thing is in contact with y. In this way effects 
come to be in contact with things which are not their cause but are 
conjoined with their cause—e.g., an earthy dyad in contact with 
two conjoined water atoms is also in contact with the dyad they 
produce. All contacts are caused, and so none are eternal. 

When atoms conjoin with akaga the contact is of the first type above 
and is spoken of as part-occurring (pradefavrtti). ‘Two all-pervading 
things do not contact each other since they do not exist separately 
from each other. 

Destruction of contact is produced by disjunction inhering in one 
of the things conjoined, or sometimes also by the destruction of those 
things. (E335-62; T301-04) 


299 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


89. Disjunction has 3 kinds : (1) that produced by the motion 
of one of two conjoined things, (2) that produced by the motion of 
both of two conjoined things; (3) that produced by another dis- 
junction. The third sort has 2 subvarieties : (a) that produced from 
disjunction of causes, and (b) that produced by disjunction of cause 
and non-cause. The former happens when, say, the atoms making 
up a substance move away from a place, thus breaking the contact 
among them and destroying the substance. The latter occurs when 
one waves his hand. 

Objection: This would result in a whole being separate (yutasiddha) 
from its parts, which is absurd. Answer: No, for ‘‘separate” means 
something different with respect to eternal substances from what it 
means with respect to noneternal ones. ‘‘Separate’’ means “resident 
in distinct loci” when applied to noneternal things, but not with 
respect to eternal things: there “separate” means “‘possessing separate 
activity.” Therefore an atom and dkdfa, for instance, though not 
resident in any loci, are nevertheless separate (and so not related by 
inherence) since the former is capable of motion without dependence 
on the latter. 

Disjunction, unlike contact, is of momentary duration. Some- 
times disjunction is destroyed by the destruction of its locus. E.g., 
in two yarns that cross in a cloth, there may be movement of one part 
of one yarn which not only disjoins that part from the rest of the one 
yarn but also disjoins the whole first yarn from the second. This 
taking one moment, at the next the conjunction of the yarns ceases 
and then the whole yarn is destroyed. Therefore, by the same token, 
the disjunction of the second yarn is destroyed. (E363-92; T326-31) 

90. Farness and nearness are of 2 kinds: (1) relating to direc- 
tions in space, (2) relating to temporal relations. We get our ideas 
of distance from calculating the number of contacts between us and 
an object ; by contrast with the number of contacts between us and 
another object this leads to relative notions of “farther” and ‘‘nearer.”’ 
Likewise various symptoms of aging lead us to judge that one man is 
older than another. 

The destruction of these qualities leads Pragastapada into the same 
kind of complexities we found in considering number. The reason 
for this is that, as in the case of numbers greater than one, an enume- 
rative cognition may have to be destroyed and this raises difficulties 
about the stages in the process. Since sometimes destruction of 
farness and nearness may also involve destruction of contact or des- 
truction of the substances involved, there are several distinct kinds 
of cases to consider. (E393-410;T352-57) 


PADARTHADHARMASAMGRAHA 293 


91-93, The next quality to be considered is judgment (buddht- 
upalabdhi-jtana-pratyaya). At has indefinitely many kinds since 
its contents are indefinitely many and different. However, the main 
distinction is between perfect knowledge (vidya) and imperfect 
knowledge (avidya). There are 4 kinds of imperfect knowledge: 
(1) doubt, (2) error (viparyaya), (3) indefinite knowledge (anadhya- 
vasdya), and (4) dream (svapna). (E410-11; 1363-65) 

94. Doubt occurs when we perceive the similarities between 
two objects which we recall to have different properties, and due to 
this plus some kind of demerit we ponder the alternatives. It has 
an internal and an external variety. An example of the internal 
kind is an astrologer who is doubtful whether to predict an event on 
the basis of certain conditions when predictions on the basis of those 
conditions have been verified in only some of the past instances. 
External doubt can be of perceptible or imperceptible objects. The 
latter occurs when we wonder whether a pair of horns in the forest 
belonged to a cow or a gavaya, the former occurs when we are not 
sure whether what we see is a post oraman. (E411-14; T369-70) 

95. Error occurs when, due to a defect in the sense organs, the 
trace of a previously perceived thing produces contact between internal 
organ and self, which in combination with demerit produces an 
erroneous idea, e.g., of “horse’’ with regard to a cow. Such errors 
arise both with respect to perception and otherwise. For example, 
we often mistake steam for smoke and thus infer fire. Likewise 
people are deluded by heterodox théses, such as those of the Buddhists, 
and think they are beneficial; or they think the body is the self, etc. 
(E423-26 ; 1374-75) 

96. Indefinite cognition occurs when we wonder about something 
“what can it be??? An example is puzzlement with respect to a 
jackfruit tree on the part ofsomeone from another part of the country 
where jackfruit does not grow. In such a case the observer perceives 
that the object isa substance, earthy, a tree with a certain color, etc. 
Indeed it even includes perception of the universal jackfruittreeness; 
all that is lacking is the knowledge that the term “‘jackfruit’” is appro- 
priate in designating this tree. (E434-35; T384) 

97. Dreams occur when the sense organs have stopped function- 
ing and have retired. Then through contact between the inner cause 
(antahkadrana) and the self produced by adrsta the internal organ 
stands still in the heart disconnected trom the sense organs and moves, 
and the result of this motion together with breathing and traces is to 
produce dreams of things which are unreal. Dreams are of 3 kinds: 
(1) due to the strength of the waces; (2) due to defects in the body; 


294 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(3) due to adrsta. (1) We sometimes dream of the things we have 
thought hard about when we were awake. (2) When wind is pre- 
dominant in the body a man may dream of flying. (3) Sometimes 
our dreams presage good things: these proceed from dharma— 
e.g., when wedream ofriding on an elephant or obtaining an umbrella. 
Sometimes we dream of bad symbols, such as rubbing of oil and riding 
camels—these are produced by adharma together with the traces 
of these kinds of things. Sometimes we dream of things completely 
unknown in waking life; these dreams proceed completely from adrsfa. 
The cognition called “‘dream-end cognitions,’ although it does not 
proceed from sense organ contact and so may seem to fall into the 
definition of dream, is in actuality only a form of memory. (E436- 
41; T386-88) 

98. Perfect cognition is also of 4 kinds : perception, inference, 
memory, and that derived from authority (arya). (E441; T390) 

99. Judgments proceeding from one or more of the 6 sense- 
organs are termed perceptual. Perception of substances comes in 
2 ways: (1) Just perceiving the thing in its own nature. Here a 
middle-sized object is perceived when there is a causal nexus (sdémagri) 
of merit, etc., when there is a fourfold contact which results in the 
presentation of manifested-color (udbhitaripa) possessed by many 
substances. (2) Perception which arises from contact between 
the internal organ and the self in dependence on qualifiers (vifesana) 
—universals, individuators, substances, qualities, and motions 
—and results in judgments such as “‘this white earthy substance 
which is a cow is moving.” 

Perception of the qualities of color, taste, smell, and touch result 
from the appropriate sense organs and is caused by these qualities 
inhering in several component substances, the peculiar differentia 
of the qualities themselves, and contact with the loci of the qualities. 
Perception of sound comes from a threefold contact; since sound in- 
heres in the ear it is known only by that organ. Number, size, sepa- 
rateness, contact, disjunction, farness and nearness, viscidity, fluidity, 
impetus, and motion are grasped by the visual and tactual organs 
because of their inherence in perceptible substances. Judgments, 
pleasure and pain, desire, aversion, and effort are perceived through 
the contact between internal organ and the self. 

Universals, when they inhere in perceptible loci, are perceived 
by the same sense organs that perceive those loci. 

However, in yogis in a state of ecstacy there arises direct insight 
into the natures of the yogis’ own and other selves, into dkafa, place 
and time, atoms, air, and internal organ, as well as the qualities, 


PADARTHADHARMASA MGRAHA 295 


motions, universals, and individuators resident in these, and also into 
inherence. This insight is brought about by the internal organ aided 
by merit produced from yoga. As for nonecstatic yogis, they have 
perception of subtle, hidden, and distant objects through the fourfold 
contact of their internal organ as aided by the merit born of yoga. 

Now the instrument of valid knowledge is perception of the first 
kind, i.e., perceiving a thing in its own nature with respect to its 
universals and individuators. An object of valid knowledge is a 
member of one of the categories—substance, etc. The self is 
the knower. And the resulting valid cognition is a judgment whose 
content is substance, etc. Cognition of the universals and indivi- 
duator of a thing is not due to any instrument of knowledge other than 
the direct perception of the thing’s own nature, since it is not a result 
(= fruit). 

Alternatively, the instrument of valid knowledge may be consi- 
dered to be the nondeviant (avitatham), avyapadesya knowledge of a 
thing—anything—produced from fourfold contact. Then the 
object is substance, etc.; the self is the knower; and the resulting 
cognition is the insight into the good, bad, or indifferent qualities of 
the thing. (442-75; T391-93) 

100-01. Inferential knowledge proceeds from perception of the 
linga (=hetu). Kasyapa (i.e., Kanada) is quoted both as to the 
definition of a valid hetu and the 3 types of fallacious hetus. (E476- 
80; T420-22) 

102. A valid hetu (hk) must (1) be concomitant in time or 
place with the object to be inferred, (2) reside in either the whole or 
part of something in which the sddhya (s) resides, (3) be validly 
known to be absent from the whole of that which is different from the s. 
(E480-81; T423-24) 

104. When one who knows the rule “wherever there is smoke 
there is fire; where there is no fire there is no smoke” has a nondoubt- 
ful (asamdigdha) perception of smoke, through the memory of the rule 
he comes to conclude “this is nothing other than fire.”” Thus when- 
ever the condition of invariable concomitance (avindbhava) is satisfied 
one thing becomes the # of another. This account does not conflict 
with Vazsesikasitra IX.18-21. 

Inference is of 2 kinds: drsta and sdmdnyatodrsta. The drsta 
kind occurs when s and fA have absolutely the same  universals— 
e.g., when one has seen dewlaps only on cows and infers from a subse- 
quent dewlap to the presence of a cow. The sdmdanyatodrsta- kind 
occurs when s and 4 have absolutely different universals, but we infer 
the s from the general concomitance of a property with s and A: 


296 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


e.g., when we infer that since men of various sorts—farmers, traders, 
servants—act for a purpose we infer that even men who act for novisible 
purpose must nevertheless have a purpose. (E491-510; T432-33) 

105. Verbal testimony and the other instruments of knowledge 
belong under inference, for these others also involve invariable con- 
comitance together with a nondoubtful perception. (E512-521 ;T448) 

106. Knowledge from gestures is a form of inference since only 
one who knows the meaning of the gesture understands it. (E529; 
T466) 

107. Comparison is a special case of verbal authority, since it 
depends on the testimony of a trustworthy person. (E530; T466) 

108. Presumption is inference to what is contrary, whether based 
on perception or on verbal authority. (E534; T472) 

109. Concurrence (sambhava) is also a kind of inference. (E542; 
1477) 

110. Nonapprehension is also inference, for just as the occurrence 
of the effect indicates the existence of a cause, so the nonoccurrence 
of the effect indicates the nonexistence of the cause. (1542-43; 
T478) 

111. Tradition (aitihya), when correct, is trustworthy assertion. 
(E558; T490) 

112-14. Inference for others is explained. The hypothesis or 
first member of the 5 menibered argument identifies the paksa (p) 
qualified by the s and indicates that p is the locus of kh. It must not 
be contrary to perception, inference, or scripture and it must not 
contradict itself. (E558-76; T491-506) 

115. Fallacies of the h are subdivided (here) into 4 types: 

(1) Asiddha. This has 4 subdivisions: 

(a) Where the & is characterized in a way not recognized by 
either party in the debate. 

(b) Where 4#’s characterization is recognized by only one party 
in the debate. 

(c) Where & is mischaracterized—e.g., when intending to 
prove fire through smoke a person actually offers steam as his h. 

(d) Where the f is not recognized by one or both of the dis- 
putants, 

(2) Viruddha. The contradictory h does not reside in the p 
but does reside in what has contradictory properties tof, and thus 
it proves the opposite of what is intended. 

(3) Samdigdha. An hwhich resides in things both like and unlike 
s is doubtful. Some say that when reasons both favorable and 
unfavorable to the conclusion are put forward this is also a case of this 


PADARTHADHARMASAMGRAHA 297 


fallacy. Pragastapada provides a separate classification (4 below) 
for this case. Doubt never arises from two contradictory hetus of 
equal authority, for in such a case no definite proposition could be 
formulated. 

(4) Anadhyavasita. This is Pragastapada’s added type of fallacy; 


2. 


we may translate it ‘‘uncertain.”’ An uncertain Ais one which is 
found only in the s and so produces uncertainty—e.g., “‘the effect 
is an entity, because it is produced.” (E576-98; T507-10) 

116-17. The examples are discussed, and 6 fallacies for each of 
the two examples (sapaksa and vipaksa) are identified. Thus in the 
argument ‘‘sound is eternal, because it is immaterial’? we can have: 

(a) ‘“‘like an atom’’-—here one or both parties do not agree 
that the A applies to atoms; 

(b) “like a motion”—here one or both parties do not agree 
that the s applies to motions; 

(c) “like a dish’’—here the applicability of both hk and smay 
not be accepted by one or both of the parties; 

(d) “like darkness”—here one or both of the parties may 
reject the description “darkness”’ as having a locus at all; 

(e) ‘“‘like akasa’’—where the connection between the example 
and the A or the s is not evident; 

(f) “‘like a mobile substance’’—-where the sapaksa is contrary 
to the A or the s. 

A parallel classification is given for fallacies ofthe vipaksa. (E598- 
99; T525-26) 

118-19. The last two members are discussed. The reiteration 
of the first member constitutes the conclusion or last member. It 
is necessary to reiterate the hypothesis in order that the positive and 
negative concomitance between s and h as applied to p be fully ex- 
pressed, as it was not in the first member. (E606-20; T530-37) 

120. Ascertainment is the contradiction of doubt. It is the 
affirmative judgment produced by the perception of the individuating 
characteristics of things. It can be perceptual or inferential. The 
perceptual sort occurs when we distinguish a man from a_ post by 
eventually perceiving his differentia. The inferential sort occurs 
when we distinguish a cow from a gavaya. (E622-24; T545-46) 

121. Memory arises when, aided by perception ofa mark (=), 
desire, and associated ideas, as wellas by traces left by past cognitions, 
there is contact between self and internal organ. The traces in 
question may have been aided by repetition and by selective interest 
in the objects of the past cognitions. And the resulting memory 
may in turn become the cause of recollection of a part of the previ ous 


298 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cognition, of desire or aversion, and of further association of ideas. 
(E625-26; T547) 

122. To sages who act in accordance with Vedic injunctions, 
due to the merit they earn thereby, there comes an intuition (pratibhd) 
about things past, present, and future, sensory and nonsensory, both 
the sort that the scriptures speak of and other sorts. This kind of 
intuition is called “sagelike” (drsa). Occasionally we find it even 
in ordinary human beings, as when a little girl knows in her heart 
that her brother is coming. (E627-28; T554) 

123. The knowledge of people known as __ siddhas—occult 
knowledge-——is not a distinct sort of judgment, but is ‘either per- 
ceptual or inferential. For example, people who get to know things 
by taking drugs, etc., have special knowledge of a perceptual sort, 
while the knowledge of the precise ways in which karma is worked out 
in the lives of living things is occult knowledge ofan inferential variety. 
(E629-30; T555-56) 

This concludes the section on the quality judgment. Pragastapada 
now turns to discussion of the other qualities. 

124, Pleasure is a quality of agreeableness. It is produced by 
contact between self and internal organ, which contact is conditioned 
by the contact between the agreeable thing and the sense organ. 
These contacts, together with the merit of the self, bring about acer- 
tain feeling which has characteristic effects such as affection, bright- 
ening of the eyes, and so forth. With regard to past things pleasure 
can be produced by memory; with regard to future things by imagina- 
tion (samkalpa). Wise men gain pleasure from their wisdom, peace- 
fulness, and contentment and their special meritoriousness. (E630- 
32; 1557) 

125, Pain is what is harmful. Its varieties and causes are para- 
Ilel to the ones explained in the case of pleasure, except that the 
feeling is disagreeable and the cause is demerit. (E633; T559) 

126. Desire is wishing for something not yet obtained, either for 
one’s own sake or another’s. It causes effort, memory, merit, and 
demerit. It has several varieties : sexual (kama), hunger, passion 
(réga), compassion, disinclination, etc. (E634-36; T560) 

127. Aversion is a burning; some of its varieties are anger, 
resentment, jealousy. (E637; 1561-62) 

128. Efforts are of two main varieties: (1) the kind arising from 
just living, and (2) the kinds issuing from desire and aversion. Brea- 
thing and selective attention upon awakening are given as examples 
of the former. (E638; T562-63) 

129. Weight causes falling; it is imperceptible and known by 


PADARTHADHARMASAMGRAHA 299 


inference. It can be opposed by contact, effort, and dispositional 
tendency. (E640;T564) 

130. Fluidity is of 2 varieties: (1) natural (samsiddhika) and (2) 
instrumental (naimittika). Fluidity is a natural quality of water, 
an instrumental quality of earth and fire. 

An objector argues that fluidity cannot be a natural quality of 
water, for we find water in solid state as ice. Answer: No, here the 
natural fluidity of the water atoms is counteracted by the fire 
(= light) of the sky, so that the atoms combine to form solids. 

The instrumental fluidity of earth and fire (teas) is produced by 
contact with fire(agni). The fire produces action in the atoms of 
earth so that the cohesion of the solid substance is destroyed, and the 
atoms take on fluidity as a result. (E641; T566-68° 

131. Viscidity is the differentium of water, and causes cohesion and 
smoothness. (E645; 1570) 

132. Dispositional tendencies are of 3 kinds : (1) impetus (vega) ; 
(2) traces (bhdvand); (3) elasticity (sthitisthépaka). 

Traces are qualities of selves. They cause memories, and are 
counteracted by judgments, intoxication, and extreme pain, etc. 
Traces are produced by the vividness of judgments, their repetition, 
or a special effort. An example of the first is when a man from south 
India first sees a camel; of the third, when one makes a special effort 
to see the silver and golden lotusesin the celestial lake. (E646-59; 
T570-72) 

133. Merit is a quality of men (= selves, purusa). It produces 
happiness and liberation. It is supersensible. It is destroyed by 
the experience of the final happiness. It is produced by contact 
between the self and the inner cause (antapkdrana) when conditioned 
by pure thoughts and decisions. 

Different classes of men have different methods of acquiring merit, 
although there are also methods which are common to all. Both 
kinds are laid down in sacred and secular works. General causes 
of merit are : faith (Sraddha), nonviolence (ahimsd), love of mankind, 
speaking the truth, not stealing, chastity, purity of intent, lack of 
anger, bathing, use of purifications, devotion to particular gods, 
fasting, and nonneglect. The particular duties of the four classes of 
men (Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaigyas, and Sidras) are detailed, and 
the particular duties of each of the four stages of life.  (E659-72; 
T583-85) 

134. Demerit produces undesirable results and is destructible 
by experiencing the last item of pain which it produces. It is produced 


300 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


by doing prohibited actions, failing to perform prescribed actions, 
neglect, and impurity of motives. (E677; T598) 

135-36. By performing acts which earn merit and demerit, a 
man earns his way from the human body to other bodies—divine, 
human, and animal, or even devilish—and this constitutes his 
bondage. When a man does meritorious acts without concern for 
the fruits he comes to be born in a pure family. Being desirous to 
know how to bring an absolute end to his pain, if he goes to a pro- 
perly qualified teacher and learns the truth about the 6 categories he 
will become free from feelings, and as a result he will acquire no fur- 
ther merit or demerit. When his previous merit and demerit are exhau- 
sted, his further actions can only be from pure merit and productive 
of happiness. And when the body is cut off, there are no longer any 
seeds of further merit and demerit, and there ensues the cessation 
called liberation. (678-82; T599-601) 

137. Sound is the quality of dkdfa, perceptible by the auditory 
organ. It is momentary. It can be produced by contact, by dis- 
junction, or by another sound. There are 2 kinds of sounds :(1) 
syllables (varna, perhaps ‘““morpheme”?) and (2) noise (dhvani). 
The production of syllables results from a contact of the internal organ 
and the self when influenced by memory : first one desires to produce 
the sound of the syllable, then makes an effort. As a result there 
is contact between the self and air, which brings about motion in the 
air; the air moves up and hits the throat and the resulting contact 
brings about contact with dkafa and the resulting sound. Sounds 
are always produced in a series, like a series of ripples in water, and 
when these waves reach the ear we hear them. (E692-96; T611-13) 

138-42. The first 4 kinds of motions are discussed. (E697- 
700; T616-20) 

143, The fifth kind of motion (gamana) is defined as that which 
brings about contact with points of space in various directions. An 
objector finds fault with this classification of motions, claiming thay 
all motions satisfy the description. This is rejected on the basis of 
common experience : we know the difference between going up and 
going down, etc. The objector retorts that if so, there should be an 
indefinite number of kinds of motion since there are indefinitely many 
different motions distinguished in common experience. This is 
rejected on the basis of crossconnection of universals (jatisamkara), 
the fault being explained as involving one and the same event falling 
under several universals at once—e.g., if something could both be 
coming out of one room and going into another at the same time. 
Classification of motions on the basis of their direction produces no 


PADARTHADHARMASAMGRAHA 301 


such fault. The reason men find such diverse descriptions of the same 
motion is that they attend to particular patterns of contact and 
disjunction between the object and its parts and the points of space 
they successively occupy. (E700-08;T620) 

145-48. Conscious movements of the limbs are discussed. It is 
the contact between the self and the hand (when one is raising his 
hand) that produces the motion, aided by the self’s effort and the 
weight of the hand. A description of how one brings a stick down on 
something, striking (abhighdta) it—a conscious movement— 
followed by the bouncing up of the stick (an unconscious movement) 
follows. When this rebound action happens to the stick its impetus or 
momentum produces rebound motion in the hand. Descriptions 
of throwing and of shooting an arrow are presented in detail. (E713- 
25; T629-39) 

149-53. Motion can be produced by striking, by impulsion, by 
weight, through fluidity, from dispositional tendencies, through 
contact between self and air aided by effort (in the case of the motion 
of breathing), through contact between self and internal organ aided 
by desires and aversions in the case of the motion of the sense organs. 

Death occurs when effort, merit and demerit no longer function, 
or when they defeat each other. Then breathing stops, but due to 
further merit and demerit there is contact of self with internal organ 
which produces a disjunction of the internal organ from the dead 
body : this is called “going out” (apasarpana). Outside it joins the 
subtle body which has been produced by the same merit and demerit, 
and this body proceeds to heaven or hell where it joins a new gross 
body which is a fit receptacle. The entrance of the internal organ 
into this new body is called “incoming” (upasarpana). 

Yogis’ internal organs can leave and enter their bodies at will. 

Motions of the elements for which we can find no other cause but 
which are favorable or harmful to us must be held to be caused by 
adrsta (=merit and demerit). E.g., the initial motions of atoms 
after creation, the attraction of iron to a magnet are such motions. 
(E726-40; T640-48) 

154. Universals are of 2 kinds : higher and lower. A universal 
pervades its instances and occurs in the very same form in many 
things, and is the source of our ideas of class-inclusion, since it 
inheres in all its loci simultaneously. 

The highest universal is Being, since it encompasses everything 
and excludes nothing. Lower universals exclude as well as include. 
Thus they are individuators as well as universals in that they 
differentiate as well as assimilate. (E741-47; T651-53) 


302 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


155. Universals form a separate category since they are quite 
different in character from substance, quality, and motion. Uni- 
versals are eternal. But they differ from each other since they reside 
in different sets of loci and people have a distinct notion of them. 
They exist throughout all the places their instances do, but they do 
not exist in the intervals in between. (E748-54; T656-57) 

156. Individuators (proper) are the final differentiae of their 
loci. They occur in substances which are beginningless, indestruc- 
tible, and eternal, such as atoms, aka, time, place, selves, and internal 
organs. Just as we ordinary mortals have relatively differentiating 
notions by which we tell a cow from a horse, so yogis have the ability 
to distinguish one atom, or self, from another. An objector asks 
why yogis could not have this ability without their being anything 
in the things to differentiate them. The answer is that even yogis 
cannot correctly cognize something that is not there. Then, says the 
objector, since the individuator of atom a must be different from the 
individuator of atom 6, why not just hold that a and 6 are self-diffe- 
rentiating ? Answer: The atoms have the same nature as each other, 
and need something else to differentiate them. Furthermore, a thing 
never brings about judgments about itself but always about other 
things—e.g., a lamp brings about cognitions of a jar, but not of 
itself nor of another lamp. Individuators are self-differentiating, 
and itis due to the relation of the atoms with them that individuation 
occurs. (E765-71; T671-72) 

157. Inherence connects things that are inseparably connected 
(ayutasiddha) and stand to each other in the relation of located and 
locus. Itis the cause of our idea that “‘this is here.” It appears in 
relation to substances, qualities, motions, universals, and individua- 
tors, both in causal and noncausal relations. It also holds between 
two things of medium dimension which are interdependent. (E773- 
75; T675-76) 

158. Inherence is different from contact because (1) inherence 
requires inseparable connection, (2) inherence isnot produced by 
motion of the relata, (3) inherence is not destroyed upon the destruc- 
tion of the relata, (4) inherence requires that the relata be related as 
located and locus. (E775-76; T677) 

159. Inherence must be a separate category since it does not 
satisfy the definition of any other others. There is only one inherence, 
for the same sorts of reasons that there is only one Being. (E776-77; 
T678) 

160. Objection: If there is only one inherence there will be 
confusion of categories, since the same relation will relate members 


PADARTHADHARMASAMGRAHA 303 


of different categories. Answer: No, for the differences among the 
relata make it clear that the universal substance e.g., inheres in 
substances only and not in qualities or motions, etc. Objector: 
How do you know? Answer: From perception—we never find 
substanceness in a quality. (E778-81; T679-80) 

161. Inherence is not transient like its relata, since it is not pro- 
duced causally. Objection: How is inherence related to its relata ? 
Not by contact, since only substances can be in contact. Not by 
inherence, as inherence is single. And there is no third relation. 
Answer: It is related to its relata by identity (tédétmya). Just as 
Being is one and thus unrelated to any other Being, so inherence, 
since it is inseparable from its relata, can have no other relation to 
them and is therefore self-occurrent (svdtmavytti). For this reason 
it is held to be imperceptible and known only through inference. 

The work concludes with an invocation to Kanada. 


9, UDDYOTAKARA (BHARADVAJA, PASUPATACARYA) 


Probably the most persistent champion of the Nyaya-Vaisesika 
cause during the height of the period when the system was challeng- 
ing and being challenged by Buddhist logicians such as Dignaga 
and Dharmakirti is Uddyotakara, the author of the Nydyavarttika. 
This work is an extended commentary on Vatsyayana’s Nydyabhdsya, 
in which its author develops many new arguments and sometimes 
presents new or alternative explanations for some of the sééras. 

Uddyotakara himself mentions his place of residence as Srughna, 
which has been identified as a town in the Punjab on the west bank 
of the Jamuna about 40 miles north of Thaneévar.! He identifies 
himself as ““Pagupatacarya,” a teacher of the Pagupata faith. Ganga- 
natha Jha says the name ‘“Bharadvaja” is specified by Vacaspati 
Misra as Uddyotakara’s family name.’ 

His date seems relatively certain. He must have lived after 
Dignaga and Pragastapada, and probably he slightly preceded Dharma- 
kirti. In any case the terminus ad quem isdefined by hisbeing mentioned 
in Subandhu’s Vasavadatta, a Sanskrit work written before 705. Thus 
Uddyotakara cannot be earlier than the last half of the 6th century, 
and not Jater than the 7th;* Frauwallner* gives A.D. 650 for him; 
others incline to a slightly earlier date.’ In any case he must have 
flourished during the first half of the 7th century. 

The question of his relation to Dharmakirti was discussed at length 
in a series of scholarly articles by various writers.6 The discussion 
turned on Uddyotakara’s references to some Buddhist logical texts 


304 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


called Vadavidhi and Vadavidhina, which Satischandra Vidyabhusana 
tried to identify with a work of Dharmakirti’s and a commentary 
thereon by Vinitadeva. Other scholars have concluded, however, 
that the works in question are those of Vasubandhu. 

Uddyotakara has for some reason been the target of somewhat 
abusive criticism on the part of modern scholars. For example, 
Oberhammer writes : “Uddyotakara...was an author with decidedly 
polemic interest, who. .was relatively uninterested in the true logical] 
problems.”’? D.N. Sastri avers that ‘the...lacked the philosophical 
grasp and depth of Vacaspati Misra. The latter is marked for his 
meticulous fairness to his opponents, but for Uddyotakara no stick 
was too big to beat his opponent with. Very often he argues by verbal 
twists which even Vacaspati Misra, otherwise so reverent to him, feels 
constrained to criticize.”? Even Henry Randle, though he estimates 
that “‘Nydyavarttika is one of the world’s great treatises on logic,” 
goes on to add “‘though its greatness tends to be obscured by the at- 
mosphere of incessant and often hypercritical polemic.”® These, 
however, are remarks of Sanskritists and, in Sastri’s case, one who 
believes the Buddhists excelled the Naiyayikas in argument. This 
writer believes that a philosophical estimate of Uddyotakara’s im- 
portance must give him a place second to none among exponents 
of Nyaya-Vaisesika, if only because of the consistency with which 
he presents and defends the principles of realism against all manner 
of subtle idealistic arguments.!° 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 
(Summary by Karl H. Potter) 


References preceded by “E” are to the edition by V. P. 
Dvived and L. S. Dravida, Banaras 1916 (B1104); those 
preceded by “‘T” are to Ganganatha Jha’s translation which 
appeared in Indian Thought from Volume 4 (1912) on to 
1919; the volumes are identified below by year. 


BOOK ONE : PORTION ONE 


Topic I: Subject Matter and Purpose 

(El-10; T (1912) 52-84), A science (Sastra) is ultimately con- 
cerned with the betterment (sreyas) of men, and functions to explain 
the true nature of things not known through perception or inference. 
The betterment of man is twofold : pleasure and the cessation of pain. 
The latter may be complete or only partial. Complete cessation of 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 305 


pain involves the destruction of its 21 loci, namely (1) the body, 
(2-7) the sense organs; (8-13) their objects; (14-19) the correspond- 
ing kinds of judgments; (20) pleasure, and (21) pain itself. 

An instrument of knowledge may either possess its object or fail 
todoso. A ‘false’ instrument of knowledge is called an “instrument 
of knowledge”’ in a figurative sense, because it, like a proper instru- 
ment of knowledge, also grasps universals. However, the difference 
is that when one grasps an object by a proper instrument of knowledge, 
his resulting activity is successful (sémarthya), while when he grasps 
it by a false instrument of knowledge his activity is not successful. 

Objection: Since we can only know that an activity is successful 
by a proper instrument of knowledge, to claim that an instrument is 
proper only if the resulting activity is successful is a circular definition. 
Answer: No, there is an interdependence between the two judgments, 
but this is a beginningless interdependence and not vicious. 

There follows a very detailed analysis of Vatsyayana’s opening 
sentence. 

Objection: Perception grasps differentiating features, and inference 
grasps universal properties. There are just these two instruments 
of knowledge, and they never apprehend the same object. Answer: 
No. For one thing, besides differentiating features and universal 
properties we are also acquainted with the individuals which have 
these features and properties. For another thing, several instruments 
of knowledge may know one thing, as in the case of seeing and smelling 
the same piece of earth, although of course in seeing we grasp the 
earth through its color and in smelling through its odor. 

Next, “instrument of knowledge”’ is defined as the cause of (valid) 
knowledge. Objection: But the knower and the object are also causes 
of knowledge. Answer: But the instrument, unlike the other two, 
has as its peculiar function the causing of knowledge. It is in turn 
produced by sense-object contact, which presupposes the existence 
of a cognizer and an object, and this series is beginningless. Further- 
more, the instrument of knowledge is the effective (sédhaka) cause. 
An “effective” cause is one whose presence is both necessary and 
sufficient for the result, or alternatively it may be defined as the causal 
factor which, other general factors being present, comes as the last 
and most proximate cause in the series culminating in the effect. 

Vatsyayana’s introduction might seem to imply that there are an 
infinite number of things in the universe. Uddyotakara, however, 
rejects this interpretation. What Vatsyayana means, he says, is 
that there are innumerable purposes served by an instrument of 
knowledge. 


306 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objection: If reality includes nonexistents as well as existents, as 
Vatsyayana asserts, why does not Gautama list nonexistents among his 
categories ? Answer: Some nonexistents are mentioned—e.g., release, 
which is defined as absence of pain—but only those are mentioned 
which are helpful in fulfilling man’s purposes. 

1. (E10-23; T (1912) 168-73, 180-96, 201-13, 214-16, 361) 
What is “perfection”? ? Answer: There are two varieties of perfec- 
tion, seen and unseen. Seen perfection accrues from every true 
judgment; but if this were the only sense of “perfection,” knowledge 
of all objects, and not just those listed by Gautama, would lead to 
perfection. Thus in the sara “perfection” means the unseen kind. 
Objection: There is no proof for this unseen perfection. Answer: 
See siira 2. But if perfection were limited to the seen variety, to 
which any true judgment contributes, everyone would gain release 
without trying, for everyone knows something or other correctly, 
Therefore, since release does not come so easily, we must conclude 
that it is the knowledge of the objects listed by Gautama which leads 
to release, and that release is not merely what we have called “‘seen”’ 
perfection but rather the “unseen” variety. 

Uddyotakara submits that the purposes which incite men to action 
are not the well-known 4 “‘aims of life’? but rather the attainment of 
pleasure and the avoidance of pain. It is these which lead men to 
investigate through reasoning. 

With regard to Vatsyayana’s doubts as to whether sophistry is 
purposeful, Uddyotakara argues that it is purposeful in the sense 
that the sophist is adopting a position, even though he does not 
defend it. 

In connection with the discussion of tarka an interesting example is 
provided : Uddyotakara says we can use tarka to help establish 
the proposition “birth is due to karma,’? by showing that there are 
grades of goodness and badness in the world and that this would be 
inexplicable without the assumption of a differentiating factor, 
namely karma. 

Uddyotakara points out that there are 4 sciences—Vedic, 
agriculture, politics, and the science of the self—and that each has 
its particular scope and aim. Vedic science aims at heaven through 
knowledge of the proper methods of sacrifice. Agriculture aims at a 
successful harvest through knowledge of the soil, etc. Politics aims 
at maintenance of the kingdom through knowledge of certain arts of 
conciliation, gift-giving etc. And the science of the self aims at 
release through knowledge of the things listed in Gautama’s list of 
things to be understood. It is not knowledge of every one of the 16 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 307 


categories which leads to release, but only of certain particular cate- 
gories detailed in the second sééra. 

2. (E22-23; T (1912) 362—64, 367-75, Objection : Release 
does not result from knowledge of reality, because if it followed 
directly, aman should die as soon as he achieves such knowledge, 
but we know that such men live. If we hold that they do not live, 
there could be no handing down of the truth through traditional 
sources, and if this were so, everyone’s knowledge of reality would 
be his own fancy, uncorroborated by authority. Answer : There are 
2 kinds of release. The lower kind, which occurs immediately follow- 
ing knowledge of reality, is experienced while one is still working off 
his past karma; it is characterized by freedom from pleasure and pain. 
But in this sara Gautama is speaking of the higher kind of release, 
which is attained by degrees. 


Topic II : The Instruments of Knowledge 


3. (E27-30; T (1912) 381-88) Objection: Inference cannot be 
an instrument of knowledge, for it is held to produce the correct 
cognition of an object, but this cognition is identical with the conclu- 
sion of the inference. Answer: In fact, this is characteristic of all 
the words for instruments of knowledge; they are all ambiguous. 
“Perception”? sometimes denotes the result of perceiving, sometimes 
the activity of perceiving. Likewise ‘‘inference’’ sometimes denotes 
the result of inference (the judgment demonstrated) and sometimes 
the process of inferring. Objector: But even so, this does not answer 
my question, which is how inference can ever be considered an instru- 
ment for producing something else,since its result is contained within 
it. Answer: The result of inference, as well as the result of the other 
instruments of knowledge, is not the judgment demonstrated but 
rather the subsequent evaluation of the object as something to be 
gotten or avoided or ignored. 

4, (E30-43; T (1913) 24-58) Sense-object-connection is of 
6 kinds: 

1. Contact (samyoga), e.g., when wesee a jar there is contact 
between the visual organ and the jar. 

2. Inherence is that which is in contact (samyuktasamavdya), 
e.g., when we see the color of a jar the color inheres in the jar which 
is in contact with the visual organ. 

3. Inherence in what inheres in what is in contact (samyukta- 
Samavetasamavaya ), e.g., when we see the redness of a red jar, the redness 


308 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


inheres in the red color which inheres in the jar which is in contact 
with the visual organ. 

4, Inherence (samavdya), e.g., when we hear a sound, the 
sound inheres in the auditory organ (which is just dk@fa). 

5. Inherence in what inheres (samavetasamavaya), e.g. when 
we apprehend the loudness of a sound, the loudness inheres in the 
sound which inheres in the auditory organ. 

6. Qualifier-qualified-relation (visesyavisesanabhdva), e.g., when 
we perceive the inherence between a jar and its color, inherence is the 
qualifier of the color; or when we perceive the absence of something, 
the absence is the qualifier of its locus. 

In connection with 4, a discussion is raised about the origin of 
the first sound in a series which results in a sound being heard. 
Uddyotakara says that this first sound is produced either by contact 
or by disjunction— by contact, e.g., when a drum is beaten, and 
by disjunction when a bamboo stick is broken. However, the cause 
of sound is not the contact of stick and drum, but rather the contact 
of drum with dkdsa, for if it were not so sound would be produced 
anywhere or everywhere. 

Objection: There can be no connection between the visual organ 
and an object, because the organ operates without getting out to the 
object in certain cases. The visual organ grasps things far from it, 
and much larger than it. Furthermore, we say “the thing I see is 
east of me” while if ‘‘I,”’ i.e., my visual organ, were where the object 
is we would not say this. Finally, the visual organ sees nearby 
things at the same time that it sees distant ones. Answer: How 
do you know the visual organ does not get out there? If you say 
“because we perceive the distance between the eyeball and the 
object,” what is this “‘distance” ? It cannot be akafa, since akdsa 
cannot be seen, being colorless; and it cannot be any colored substance, 
since then the object would be blocked from view. Nor can it be 
mere absence, since no one sees mere absence. 

Objector: Well, then, why do we say there is distance between me 
and the object I see? Answer: It is because the object is far from 
our body, not because it is far from the visual organ. As for your 
other reasons: You say that the visual organ cannot grasp objects 
larger than it, but this is false; everyone admits that the visual organ 
does not have to grasp all of its object in order to see it. Finally, we 
do not in fact see nearby things at the same time we see far-off ones; 
rather, the impression of simultaneity is due to our failure to dis- 
criminate the moments of time in question, In addition, the visual 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 309 


organ must get at its object in order to grasp it, for otherwise walls 
and screens would not obstruct our vision. 

With regard to mirages, some Naiydyikas say that the erroneous- 
ness of the mirage is located in the object. But this is not right: 
it is not that the sun’s rays are not rays, or that the flickering of the 
image is not a flickering; rather the error lies in the knowledge we 
have of something as what it is not, as water rather than as flickering 
rays of sunlight. 

Uddyotakara differs with Vatsyayana over the nonelementality 
of the internal organ. V4atsyayana says it is nonelemental, but 
Uddyotakara says the question of its elementality cannot arise, since 
the question properly arises only with regard to products and the 
internal organ is not a product. He says that the auditory organ 
likewise is neither elemental nor nonelemental, since it is nothing but 
Gkdsa and dkdsa is not a product. 

Some people (e.g., the author of the Vadavidhi )™ define perception 
as a judgment derived from its (proper) object. But this definition 
would not exclude inference. The objector claims that the Vadavidhi 
definition excludes cognition of conventional objects (samurtijtana)'® 
since the judgment “‘this is a jar” is a judgment about the color, 
hardness, etc. but is reported as a judgment about the jar; therefore, 
since it is not derived from its proper object, it is not perception. 
Uddyotakara retorts that this definition does not exclude cognition 
of conventional objects after all, since ‘‘this is the jar’s color’ is one 
judgment and “‘this is a jar’’ is quite another. In addition, he argues, 
even if one accepted this definition at its face value, the opponent’s 
theory of perception is defective, since according to it the cause of 
perception precedes the perception and is destroyed before the per- 
ception takes place, so that the perception cannot be a perception 
of that which causes it. (Ifthe opponent tries to argue that the same 
criticism applies against Uddyotakara’s own theory, he is referred to 
the commentary on ITI.2.9.) 

Other people’? define perception as devoid of any conceptual 
construction (kalpand), i.e., without any connection with a word or 
classification or relation to other things. Uddyotakara’s criticisms: 
(1) Your definition is concerned with the word “perception.” Now 
what does this term denote? Ifit denotes a judgment, then what is 
so denoted cannot be defined as ‘“‘without any connection with a 
word.” And if it does not denote a judgment, then either it denotes 
something else, in which case it is not a definition of perception, or 
else it denotes nothing, in which case it is meaningless. (2) Buddhist 


310 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


scriptures speak of perception as “noneternal,”’ etc.; so perception 
cannot be “without a connection with a word.” 

The Buddhist explains “devoid of conceptual construction” 
further. It is intended to refer to something whose essential nature 
(svariipa) cannot be specified. But, says Uddyotakara, in that case 
everything would be known through perception, since according to 
the Buddhist there is nothing whose essential nature can be specified. 

Jaimini’s definition of perception, ‘‘a knowledge produced from 
sense-object-contact,”’ is not correct, since it would not exclude doubt, 
as had indeed been remarked by commentators on the Mimdmsd- 
sitras. ‘Two or three other definitions are also rejected. 

5. (E43-57; T (1913) 128-68) Uddyotakara’s account of this 
stra construes itto mean, not that the inference must follow directly 
upon perception, but that it follows upon any of the instruments of 
knowledge, including another inference. 

Now, is it the memory of the relation between sddhya and hetu, 
or the perception of the hetu together with the memory of the relation, 
which is the actual instrument we call inference ? Or is it the recog- 
nition in the paksa of invariable concomitance between hetu and paksa, 
the recognition called li.gapardmarsa? Uddyotakara thinks that all 
three are involved, but that the last is the most important, since it is 
the most proximate cause of the completed inference. 

Uddyotakara now turns to the part of the sara which says that 
inference is of 3 kinds. His first account of this is that the 3 kinds are 
(1) only-positive (kevalénvayi), where the hetu occurs everywhere, 
(2) only-negative (kevalavyatireki), where the hetu occurs in the paksa 
alone, (3) positive-negative (anvayavyatireki), where the hetu is present 
in some things other than the paksa and is not universally present. 

In glossing Vatsyayana’s explanations Uddyotakara reconstrues 
sdmdnyatodrsta to include any inference which is noncausal. 


32 


Direction (dik), such as “‘east,” is not perceptible; however, we 
appear to point in a certain direction with our finger, so one might 
think direction is perceptible after all. No, says Uddyotakara: 
what we point at are the locations of objects we have seen before. 
E.g., we have seen the sun occupying a place on the horizon and come 
to call the vicinity of that place the “‘east.” 

Question: What is the sddhya in the inference of fire from smoke? 
Isitfire, or the locus offire, or the existence of fire, or the locus of fire 
together with fire? None of the first three, says Uddyotakara, since 
the sadhya must be something whose nature is to be inferred, and the 
nature of fire, or the locus of fire, or existence of fire is already known. 
Not the fourth view either, since smoke does not reside in the place 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 311 


where the fire does (but above it), and since we do not perceive the 
locus of fire but rather the fire. What is the sddhya then? Uddyota- 
kara says it is the smoke accompanied by fire. 

Inherence is independent (svatantra) since it does not reside in 
another thing. If it did, there would be an infinite regress. Further- 
more, if it were dependent on its referent it could not come into 
existence before its referent did, and thus it could not relate its relatum 
to its referent. And if it were, by what relation could it be related 
to its referent ? Not by contact, which in turn requires inherence; 
and surely not by inherence itself, since there is only one inherence. 
Objection: If there is only one inherence we have the absurdity of 
relata without any relation. Answer: No, inherence does not 
cease to exist; what ceases is the specific cause of our apprehension. 

Uddyotakara refutes alternative definitions of inference. 
(1) Definition : Inference is the awareness of what is invariably 
concomitant.'4 This is formulated in two slightly different ways, 
and is rejected on grounds of redundancy and unclearness in gramma- 
tical construction. (2) Definition: When inference occurs, the 
hetu is present in paksa and sapaksa, absent in vipaksa. This is critici- 
zed as too inclusive, applying to properties which occur in only a part 
of the paksa (as, e.g., ‘‘atoms are noneternal, because they smell, 
like pots,’’ where “‘smelly’’ applies to some atoms but not to all.) 
(3) Definition: Inference is knowledge of a thing arising from the 
perception of its relationship with another thing.’® This is said to 
be subject to the same criticisms as (1) and (2); in addition, it is 
held to contradict its proponents’ own theories. 

6. (E57-58; T (1913) 169-71) Uddyotakara, unlike Vatsyayana, 
holds that in comparison we perceive the similarity between gavaya 
and cow at the time of the judgment, this perception being aided by 
what we have been told beforehand about the similarity between 
these two kinds of animal. Odjection: Comparison is, then, nothing 
but a combination of perception and verbal testimony. 

Answer: No, the judgment which comparison leads to connects 
an object with a name, and neither perception nor verbal testimony 
lead to such a judgment. 

78. (E58-61; T (1913) 172-82) Odjection:1® Since heaven, 
gods, etc., cannot be perceived, it would be well to define verbal 
authority in a way which does not involve any person’s assertion, 
but Gautama’s definition alludes to a_ reliable person. Answer: 
Heaven and gods are perceptible, because they are located in certain 
places, exist for the sake of others, are capable of being spoken of, 
and are not eternal, and things with these characteristics are percep- 


312 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tible. Objection: But how about karma (here: apirva)? It is not 
known to he noneternal. Asnwer: If karma were eternal, there would 
be no death andno liberation; furthermore, we should have to ask 
how many eternal karmas there are, and thisisan awkward question. 
For if there is only one karma shared byeveryone, then everyone’s 
good would depend on everyone else’s actions. Or if each person 
has his own eternal karma, he could never get more or less of it. Here 
the opponent holds that one eternal karma can appear as diverse 
through the diversity of that which manifests it, like a face becoming 
many in aset of mirrors. Uddyotakara’s retort is that the face does 
not become many but only appears to, and so likewise with karma. 
Finally, ifeach person has many eternal karmas, then all actions should 
be producing their results at every moment. 

Objection: The “teaching ofa reliable person” either means that 
the person is truthful or that what he says is. To find out that he is 
truthful one uses inference, and to find out what is the case one uses 
perception. Therefore there is no such independent instrument of 
knowledge as verbal testimony. Answer: No, the objector misunder- 
stands the result of verbal testimony. Verbal testimony leads to a 
judgment that something is known through testimony; and neither 
inference nor perception lead to that kind of a judgment. 


Topic III: The Objects of Knowledge 


10. (E64-68; T (1913) 191-205) Objection: How can the exis- 
tence of self be known through inference from desire, etc., since desire, 
etc. are not perceptible ? Answer: The inference is from the fact 
that memory has the same content as desire, etc., to the existence of a 
common locus for memory, desire, etc. Objector: No, the idea 
that memory has the same content as desire is due to there being a 
series of judgments one following the next and fused together in our 
consciousness; the “‘self’’ is thus a series of judgments and not the 
common locus of memory, desire, etc. In fact memory is merely a 
causal sequence of judgments thus fused; when such a causal sequence 
is absent, there is no memory. Answer: But we were talking, not 
about memory in general, but about a particular memory which has 
as its content an object which is later desired. Such a memory is not 
possible on your account. Objector: Not at all; such a memory is 
possible, but it involves no agent as distinct from the series of judg- 
ments called “‘the memory.” Answer: Memory is hardly possible 
on your theory, which holds that no judgments last more than a 
moment. Objector: Each judgment in a memory-series contains the 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 313 


seed of the next, so that the next judgment is conditioned by that 
seed. Answer: This is inconsistent with your own theory that each 
member of the series arises and disappears without changing its 
character. 

11. (E69-71;'T (1913) 211-14) How can an atom change color? 
E.g., in baking a pot one atom undergoes several changes of color, 
apparently from the same cause, namely heat. The answer is that 
heat is not the only cause. In addition, there is the specific shade 
that the atom had just prior to the change. Generally, no effect 
has only one cause, but always a collection of causal conditions, 
Objection: Well, what about a motion, which produces both contact 
and disjunction at once, according to Gautama’s account ? Answer: 
But motion does not produce contact and disjunction all by itself; 
there are other causal factors, and the differences among them explain 
the differences in the effects. 

14, (E71-78; T (1913) 216-36) Uddyotakara proposes to read 
this satra quite differently from Vatsyayana. According to Uddyo- 
takara, Vatsyayana’s reading would imply that earth and the other 
substances are not perceptible, since the saira identifies smell, etc., 
as the objects of the sense organs (and not substances). Uddyotakara 
therefore reconstrues the passage so that the objects of the external 
sense organs are earth, fire, and water and their properties, i.e., 
everything which inheres in these three as well as inherence itself, 
which is also perceptible. His purpose seems mainly to be to avoid 
the (Buddhist) view that only qualities are perceptible and not 
substances. He argues that substances are perceptible because we 
are able to grasp one thing by two-or more senses. The opponent 
sets to work to construe substances as merely aggregates of qualities; 
he says that we say we see a jar when in fact we see certain properties 
appearing in a certain shape or configuration (akdra). Uddyotakara 
replies that the notion of “‘configuration”’ arises from the substance 
which constitutes the thing which has a shape, in this case, a jar-— 
therefore the opponent has admitted the existence of a jar! Or 
perhaps the term ‘“‘configuration’”’ is just the opponent’s peculiar word 
for that which the Naiyayika calls ‘“‘substance!”” The opponent, 
however, points out that on his view a judgment concerning a jar is a 
false judgment, whereas a judgment about a configuration of qualities 
is a true judgment; thus a jar is different from a configuration of 
qualities. Uddyotakara submits that a false judgment about some- 
thing can be admitted only if there is possibility of true judgments 
about it; but according to the opponent, there can be no true judg- 


314 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ments about jars. Therefore there cannot be any false judgments 
about jars either, on the opponent’s assumptions. 

The opponent tries again to prove that substances are reducible 
to qualities, by arguing that when we cannot have a judgment of one 
thing without also having it about another, these two things are 
identical. E.g., soup is nothing but meat and water, and a row is 
nothing but things lined up. Uddyotakara replies with several 
arguments. The opponent’s view contradicts his presuppositions; 
it cannot be consistently formulated; it involves identifying a plurality 
with a unity; the soup and the row are different from their constituents. 

OF special interest is the handling of the example of the row of 
things, which calls forth an analysis of number. Such collective 
words as “‘row,”’ says Uddyotakara, refer to the number of a set of 
things, and number has a distinct categorical status from the numbered 
things. The opponent tries to deny the independent status of 
numbers, but it is pointed out that the basis of the notions of one and 
many, both which notions apply to substances like jars, must lie out- 
side the realm of substance. 

Finally, the opponent’s argument (two paragraphs back), that 
the impossibility of knowing x without knowing » is sufficient to show 
that there is only one thing known, is not valid, since there are other 
reasons (besides the nonexistence of x) why we see them always to- 
gether. There are 2 sources of nonperception : (1) when the thing 
does not exist, like a hare’s horn; (2) when it is not available for per- 
ception, like the roots of a tree underground. 

22. (H84-87; T (1913) 350-58) Objection: The scriptures say 
that there is eternal pleasure for the liberated self, but Naiyayikas 
deny it. Answer: What the scripture really means is that there is 
final cessation of pain. We frequently talk that way. I say “I 
am well and happy” when I have recovered from a major illness but 
still have minor aches and pains. And furthermore, if one aims for 
release under the impression that he is going to gain pleasure he will 
never obtain release at all, since such an attitude involves attach- 
ment. Objection: But so is aversion to pain an attitude of attach- 
ment. Answer: True. The seeker’s proper attitude in seeking release 
is one of indifference. 

Some say that it is the internal organ that is released, but their 
view is that everything lasts for only one moment, so that either 
liberation will come too easily or else not at all. 


Topic IV : The Preliminaries of Argument 
23. (E87-101; T (1914) 56-96) Uddyotakara interprets Gau- 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 315 


tama’s obscure sutra to say that there are 3 conditions of doubt. Doubt 
arises when (1) we fail to know the differentia of a thing, but (2) 
we do apprehend a character shared by that thing and other things, 
and (3) we have no certain perceptual knowledge of the nature of 
the thing, either through perception or through failure to perceive. 
All these conditions must be satisfied together for doubt to arise. 
Uddyotakara discusses at length the interpretation of the key words 
in the sara. He explicitly rejects Vatsyayana’s thesis that there 
are 5 kinds of doubt. He takes issue with Vatsyayana’s last two kinds 
of doubt in particular. Vatsyayana has it that whenever we perceive 
or fail to perceive a thing, some of its characteristics are clear and 
others unclear. Uddyotakara says that if this were true doubt could 
never be removed. Since this partial lack of clarity applies 
to any judgment, it would also apply to whatever judgment is 
supposed to clear up doubt, so that judgment would in turn be 
doubtful, etc. 

24, (E101-02; T (1914) 153-55) Why is purpose mentioned 
here? Because purposeless doubt never leads to inquiry. 

25. (E102-03; T (1914) 156-57) Gautama’s “‘definiton”’ of the 
example is meant only as an illustration. It cannot be a proper 
definition, since ordinary men have no ideas whatsoever about things 
like @ka§a, etc., and so cannot share ideas on these topics with experts. 
The proper definition of example is merely that it isan object concern- 
ing which beliefs are shared. 


Topic V : Tenets 


26-31. (B103-07; T (1914) 159-69) There is some discussion 
about the authenticity ofone or the other of sairas 26and 27. Uddyo- 
takara reads the fourth kind of tenet as “‘doctrines taken for granted 
without being mentioned in the sdiras’’—e.g., ‘‘the internal organ 
is a sense organ,”’ which is nowhere explicitly stated in the sdtras, 
though it is commonly accepted Nyaya doctrine. With this inter- 
pretation Uddyotakara goes on apparently to reject Vatsyayana’s 
view that the fourth kind of tenet is an indulgence.}? 

The skeptic who holds that there is no doctrine common to all 
philosophies is refuted by being asked to prove his opinion by reason- 
ing. He discovers he must assume that “reasoning constitutes proof” 
is accepted by all philosophies——-the alternative being silence. The 
notion that tenets are no different from someone’s opinions is refuted. 
One’s own thesis is something to be investigated, while a tenet is 
something accepted without investigation. 


316 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Topic VI : The Nature of an Argument 


33. (E108-18; T (1914)174-97) As we have seen, Uddyotakara 
holds the sédhya to be an object accompanied by the characteristic 
which is to be inferred (cf. his commentary on 1.1.5). Objectors 
are made to criticize this. Under the criticism Uddyotakara specifies 
his contention more precisely. The sddhya is the mutual relation of 
necessary connection (ntyamaka) which holds between the qualified 
object sound and the qualifier noneternality (in the inference ‘“‘sound 
is noneternal,”’ etc.) Noneternality is already known as a characteristic 
of jars, etc., but it has to be proved to qualify seund. 

A lengthy discussion is devoted to the following argument. Gau- 
tama’s definition of the hypothesis is that it identifies the sddhya, 
i.e., the “thing which remains to be proved.”? Now this definition 
overextends, since it would include as a proper hypothesis the identi- 
fication of any unknown property, since such an unknown property 
wouldremain to be proved. Answer: by sddhya we mean something 
which not only remains to be proved but is claimed by someone as 
part ofhis tenets. Odjector: Why, then, don’t you say “‘tenet” instead 
of sédhya in the definition ? Answer: Because all tenets are not in 
question. The first type of tenet, the tenet common to all philoso- 
phies, cannot be included as sdédhya. Furthermore, the overextension 
you charge us with is precluded by the understood additional require- 
ment that the sédhya must be something one desires to know. 

Uddyotakara offers some 7 answers to this objection, going on to 
indicate why he spends so much time on the matter. He cites alter- 
native definitions of the hypothesis, such as, e.g., “‘the hypothesis is 
that which is desired to be proved,’’ and shows in a number of instances 
that what the opponent thinks to be putative hypotheses excluded 
by this definition are in fact excluded by more fundamental consi- 
derations anyhow. In addition, he remarks, the Buddhist is evi- 
dently not defining the hypothesis but rather the statement expressing 
the hypothesis. The hypothesis, according to Uddyotakara, is the 
paksa accompanied by the sddhya; there is no possibility of any question 
of self-contradiction or like fault being found with it, since it is not 
an expression. Objector: You argue that faults such as self-contra- 
diction do not apply to objects, since the character of objects remains 
the same no matter how one speaks about them. But the same can 
be said of assertions ; the character of an assertion remains the same 
no matter how one speaks about it. Therefore, assertions are not 
self-contradictory, etc., either: Answer: Quite so ! In fact these faults 
are primarily ascribable to people. Being self-contradictory is 


NVYAYAVARTTIKA 317 


primarily a characteristic of the speaker of an utterance, and only 
secondarily a characteristic of the utterance. 

35. (E122-34; T (1914) 209-38) This sdira speaks ofthe dissi- 
milarity between the hetu and the vipaksa, which Vatsyayana construes 
as the negative example. Uddyotakara objects to this interpretation, 
however, and finds that this passage indicates that there are 2 kinds 
of hetu—affirmative (vita) and negative (avita). The function of 
the latter kind of hetu is limited to refuting others—e.g., “‘this 
body has a self, since if it did not it would not breathe.” 

An alternative definition of hetu is proposed: “‘the hetu is that which 
is always absent from the vipaksa, but not always absent from the 
sapaksa.”’ ‘This is criticized, first as allowing as valid inference some- 
thing like ‘“‘atoms are eternal because they smell’? (where the hetu 
satisfies the definition but is present in only part of the paksa). When 
the opponent adds a qualification (‘‘the hetu must be present in all of the 
paksa’’) to meet this, the resulting definition is criticized as redundant. 

Another alternative definition : ‘“‘hetu is that which is present in 
either part or all of the sapaksa and is absent from all of the vipaksa.”’ 
Again this fails to exclude an inference where the hetu is present in 
only part of the paksa. And again, if this additional qualification is 
made, the result is unnecessarily complicated. 

Again: ‘“‘Hetu is that which possesses a property which is never 
absent from the sapaksa.”’ Criticism: This does not assert that there 
is any property present in the sapaksa. But even if we grant that 
the definition implies or presupposes the presence of a property in the 
sapaksa, still once again there is no guarantee that the hetu is present 
in all of the paksa. In an example, offered by proponents of the 
definition, ‘“‘sound is noneternal, because it is produced by effort,” 
the hetu is not present in the paksa; sounds are not produced by effort 
but rather by contacts and disjunctions. In fact, “by effort’? here is 
superfluous—the mere fact that sound is a product is sufficient 
to show its noneternality. 

Someone (a Buddhist) has said that there are 3 kinds of things 
not produced by effort : eternal things, like akafa ; noneternal things, 
like lightning; and nonexistent things, like the sky-flower. Criticism: 
Nonexistent things like the sky-flower cannot be assigned properties 
at all. Furthermore, aka@fa cannot be described as “not produced by 
effort,’ since it is not produced at all! 


Topic VII : Nature of the Subsidiary Processes in Proving an Argument 


40. (B139-42; T (1914) 338-48) How does tarka differ from 
inference or ascertainment ? Answer: In both the result isa detailed 


318 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


understanding of something, while the result of ¢arka is merely to 
indicate, so to speak, that such and such “‘ought to be”’_ the conclusion, 
but does not of itself prove that conclusion in the way inference or 
ascertainment does. 

41. (E143-45; T (1914) 351-59) Why isn’t ascertainment a 
kind of inference? Because inference requires the identification of 
and relating together of a hetu and a sddhya, but ascertainment does not. 
Because inference is an instrument of knowledge while ascertainment 
is the result of the use of instruments of knowledge. 


BOOK ONE : PORTION TWO 


Topic VIII. Controversy 

1. (E146-60; T (1915) 41-44) After defending Gautama’s 
definition of discussion, Uddyotakara considers alternatives. One!® 
is to the effect that discussion is conversing with an eye to establish 
one’s own view and demolish another’s. Various interpretations 
of “one’s own” and “‘another’s” are considered and rejected. Uddyo- 
takara has it that theses cannot be properly described as “belonging 
to”? people the way land, for example, can. To say that one’s own 
view is the view one intends to prove renders the definition trivial. 
And since ‘‘another’s” view is no less a view after it has been criticized, 
it is wrong to speak of demolishing it. Furthermore, what is it to 
“establish” a view? Uddyotakara provides 2 possible meanings 
—establishing is (1) producing or (2) manifesting a thesis— 
and finds fault with both. To establish a view is to convince the 
umpire of the truth of the view — but this implies that the view 
has already been produced or manifested.’® 

2. (B160-62; T (1915) 45-51) Where VaAtsyayana says that 
quibbling, etc., can be used directly to condemnand indirectly to 
support, Uddyotakara flatly denies that these tricks can be used either 
to condemn or support. Their function isto help win victory in 
debate through foul means. Any debate where these means are used 


is not a discussion but sophistry or cavil. 


Topic IX : Fallacies of the Hetu 

4, (E163-69; T 7 (1915) 114-29) Uddyotakara calculates the 
number of kinds of hetu—right and wrong. On one reckoning 
their number cannot be counted; on another, more restricted, the 
number is 176. There are 16 cases where the sddhya { =s) pervades 
the hetu (=h): (1) A occurs in both sapaksa (=sp) and in vipaksa 
(=p); (2) hk occurs in all sp and part of vp; (3) h occurs in sp, 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 319 


absent from wp; (4) A occurs in vp, absent from sp; (5) h absent from 
sp, occurs in part of vp; (6) A absent from both sp and ap; (7) h occurs 
in all of vp, part of sp; (8) h occurs in part of sp, part of wp; (9) A 
occurs in part of sp and all of xp; (10) h occurs in sp but there is no 
vp; (11) A occurs in part of sp but there is no vp; (12) A absent from 
sp, there isnovp; (13) hoccurs in vp but there is no sp; (14) / occurs 
in part of vp but there is no sp; (15) h absent from vp and there is no 
sp; (16) there is no sp or vp. A similar list of 16 arises where h per- 
vades only a part of s, and another 16 where h is absent from s. By 
adding qualifications to the h according as h is unknown, inapt, or 
doubtful he arrives at a number of kinds much greater than 176.?° 

6. (172-73; T (1915) 137-41) Uddyotakara offers an alternative 
account of the fallacy called viruddha. It occurs, he says, when the 
reason contradicts the hypothesis. As example, ‘sound is eternal, 
because it is a product.’? This account admittedly overlaps the 
third way of losing an argument. 

8. (E174-75; T (1915) 147-49) There are 3 kinds of sdédhyasama 
or asiddha fallacy : (1) where the / is as much in need of proof as the 
531 (2) where the locus of h is not known (asraydsiddha) ; (3) where h 
can be explained in a way other than that which would make it a 
proof (anyathasiddha). 


BOOK TWO : PORTION ONE 


Topic XII : Doubt 


1. (£182; T (1915) 302-06) In addition to the 4 interpre- 
tations of sdira 1 given by Vatsyayana, Uddyotakara gives 4 more: 
(1) Doubt cannot arise concerning things that are perceived, since they 
are clearly known, and it cannot arise about things that are not per- 
ceived since they are not known at all. (2) Frequently when we 
cognize a common property we are not in doubt—e.g., when we 
realize that sound has the property of being a product, in common 
with lots of other things, no doubt arises. (3) Doubt occurs sometimes 
when there is no knowledge of common properties, e.g., when we find 
contradictory properties apparently resident in one thing. (4) A 
property which resides in only one thing cannot be called a “common” 
property, but the tallness of a post resides in the post only, so it cannot 
be common to a man and a post, thereby causing doubt. 

6. (183-85; T (1915) 315-20) Answers to the above objec- 
tions. (1) When things are perceived, but unclearly, there is doubt. 
(2) A “common”? property is one which resides in the thing presented 
and in things other than those which are homogeneous with that thing. 


320 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Now being-a-product is present in sound and also in things which are 
homogeneous with sound. Therefore no doubt arises. (3) We do 
not claim that doubt arises only when common properties are known. 
E.g., we admit that doubt arises from knowing several properties of 
several objects. On the other hand we do not admit that two contra- 
dictory properties canreside in thesame thing. (4) This ismet above, 
in the answer to (2). 


Topic XIII : Instruments of Knowledge 

11. (E186-89 ;T (1915 )329-35) Does the opponent mean to deny 
the existence of instruments of knowledge, orrather todeny that what 
is called ‘‘perception,”’ for example, is a valid instrument of know- 
ledge? The former thesis is impossible to substantiate for the reason 
that Gautama states—that to prove nonexistence requires an instru- 
ment of proof as muchas any other thesis. As to the latter: Suppose you 
say that, though perception and the others are not valid instruments, 
there are other instruments whichare valid. Then you will be faced 
with exactly the same difficulties about time as you urge against our 
account. Or if you say that perception, etc., exist but lack the 
character of being instruments of knowledge, then we can still ask 
you about the character of the things you assert lack this character 
—and the same difficulties will again arise for you! 

12. (E189-91; T (1915) 336-40) You say “‘perception does not 
exist,’’ and want to construe this as denying the existence of percep- 
tion. Butsucha sentence cannot assert the absolute absence (atyanta- 
bhava) but rather denies the connection of its subject with something 
else —just as “‘the jar does not exist”? must mean that it does not 
exist here, or now, or perhaps that it is not efficient—so likewise 
this sentence of yours can only deny the existence of the instruments 
of knowledge at a time or at a place or their efficiency; it cannot deny 
the existence of the instruments themselves. Furthermore, to whom 
are you addressing your sentence? And who is uttering it? The utterer 
is one who knows it, and the man addressed is one who does not, you 
may say. But how can the utterer know itif there are no instruments 
of knowledge—and if he does not know it he is in the same boat as 
the person addressed; and in that case how can you tell them apart? 

16. (E193-98; T (1915) 351-61) In order to broach another 
debate with a Buddhist, Uddyotakara takes advantage of this dis- 
cussion of the character of what is denoted by “‘tree’’ in the nominative 
case. The tree, when referred to in this manner, is assumed to be 
independent, not to need another agent for its behaving in the manner 
indicated by the verb. Orit may mean continuity of existence— 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 321 


“the tree stands” means it continues to exist in a place at more than 
one point of time, and this is known through its being recognized 
from one moment to another. Objection: There is no recognition of 
the sort you mean. Such “recognition” is adequately explained by 
the analogy of the wheel of fire or of the lamp. In such cases there 
is only apparent continuity and recognition, but in fact everything 
is momentary. Answer: But you have no proof that everything is 
momentary. Objector: Neither have you any proof that anything 
is continuous. Answer: Oh yes we do. We infer it from the fact 
that in causation the locus of the effect must be continuous with the 
locus of the cause. Objector: And how do you know that? There is 
no example of this which both of us will accept! Answer: Then you 
also admit that there is no valid example for your own thesis, that is, 
no example that we will both accept. And your view is contradic- 
tory, since you talk in a manner which implies that things have loci 
—e.g., you say that a substance is nothing but a collection of ele- 
mentsand their qualities, but we ask ‘qualities of what ?,”’ and what 
does ‘‘of”’ signify here except residence in a locus? 


Topic XIV : Perception 


22. (E203-04 ; T (1916) 30-32) The question is raised: Why are 
not place, time and dkdfa causes of perception, since they are always 
present when perception is? Answer: Because we fail to find that 
these conditions are successful in producing perceptions. The case 
is similar to that of the hot touch of fire, which is not credited with 
being the cause of the visual perception of the fire, whereas the color 
of the fire is credited with being the cause, even though the hot touch 
and the color are both equally present whenever the effect occurs. 


Topic XV : The Whole 


34. (33 in Eand T) (E216-31; T (1916) 148-96) Uddyotakara 
presents some 14 arguments on behalf of the opponent, all intended to 
show that the whole is nothing but the aggregate of its parts. (1) 
Opponent: One thing cannot be a part ofa different thing; therefore 
we conclude that whole and parts are the same. Answer: This is 
self-defeating. If there are no parts, different from the whole, then 
we should not talk about “‘parts’— but we do. Opponent: No. 
What I mean is that what we call ‘“‘parts’ and “‘whole”’ are the same 
elements arranged inadifferent manner. Answer: Thatis, youmean 
that where before certain things were not in contact, now they are; 
but that means a newand distinct element, contact, has been produc- 
ed, so that the whole is distinct from the parts. Opponent : Contact is 


322 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


not a distinct entity. Answer: Then how do you explain the fact 
that water one place and a seed in another do not produce a_ plant? 
There must be contact between them for them to produce. Opponent: 
Production does not require contact. Consider the production of a 
sound by another sound, of magnetic attraction, of contact by a 
motion. Answer: True, production does not require contact, 
but my point is that production always involves some additional entity 
coming into being that was not there before. In each of your examples 
there must be proximity between the elements involved: the parts 
of space characterized by the sounds must be contiguous, the magnet 
must be close to the filings, the things that move in producing con- 
tact must be close together. And proximity, like contact, is a distinct 
entity. 

(2-3) Opponent: The whole is identical with the parts, since they 
are parts of it! Answer : For clarity, we should distinguish ‘‘part’’ 
in the sense we are discussing from another sense of “‘part’’ in which 
one refers to the places occupied by an object. ‘“‘Part” (avayava) 
in our sense refers to a causal factor which is distinct from the whole 
it helps produce, The sum of the parts in the other sense (pradefa), 
the totality of the places occupied by an object, may be admitted to 
be identical with the place where the object resides. 

(4-11) Anumber of arguments are rejected on the ground that the 
opponent identifies whole and part and yet argues on the assumption 
that they are different, thus contradicting himself. 

(12) Opponent: If the whole were different from the parts, it 
would not be perceptible, since it inheres in imperceptible atoms. 
Answer: If it is being argued that for anything to be perceptible 
all its parts must be perceived, no object is ever perceived— for 
we never see the insides and backs of objects. That atoms are not 
perceptible is defended. They are in contact with the sense organs 
but are not perceived because they are too small. An opponent tries 
to identify the atom with the minimal perceptibilium or triad, but 
this is rejected on the ground that the minimal perceptibilium can 
be broken into parts. 

(13) Opponent: That things are different from each other is 
shown sometimes by their being contact between them, sometimes 
by their being separated from each other. Now the parts and the 
whole show neither relation. Therefore they are not different from 
each other. Answer: But according to you, the three gunas are 
different from each other and yet there is no contact or separateness 
relating them; likewise prakyti and purusa. 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 323 


(14) Opponent: The whole is identical with the parts, because 
they weigh the same, or more generally, because the presence of the 
whole in addition to the parts adds nothing to the qualities of the 
resulting object. Answer: The presence of the whole does add some- 
thing but it is so tiny as to be undetected by, e.g., the balance in the 
case of weight. There is a discussion about what makes an object 
exhibit weight. According to Uddyotakara it is the contact between 
the parts which causes the weight of the whole. The opponent thinks 
it is the weight of the parts together with the inherence of the 
whole in the parts. But it is argued that if this were true, then 
everything which inheres in the parts should have weight, and thus 
weight, which inheres in the parts, would have weight, which is 
absurd. 


Topic XIX : Verbal Testimony 


50-51. (49-50 in Eand T) (E259-60; T (1916) 265-71) Uddyo- 
takara adds more arguments on the opponent’s behalf to show that 
verbal testimony is merely inference, and refutes each one. (1) 
Opponent: Testimony is inference, because it depends on memory. 
Answer: But doubt, tarka and comparison also involve memory, so this 
is an insufficient reason. (2) Opponent: Testimony is inference bee 
cause it involves past, present, and future. Answer: So do the other 
instruments of knowledge just mentioned. (3) Opponent: Testimony 
is inference because it involves negative and positive concomitance. 
Answer: So does perception. 


Topic XX : Reliability of Scripture 

69. (68in T) (E271-73; T (1916) 355-63) Uddyotakara is more 
positive about the noneternality of scripture (1) because the scrip- 
tural utterances are classified according to the purposes they serve, 
(2) because they consist of letters, (3) because they are received by 
the ear, (4) because they consist of words. For all these reasons the 
sentences in scripture are just like ordinary sentences and so noneternal. 
Opponent: If scriptural sentences were not eternal no judgment could 
arise from hearing a sentence, since it would always be like hearing 
a word for the first time, and no judgment arises from that. Answer: 
We get a judgment from words heard for the first time, just 
as we get a judgment by means of a lamp used for the first time. 
Opponent: But the lamp is connected with its object through its 
lighting it up. Answer: So is the word connected with its object by 
denoting it, 


324 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
BOOK TWO : PORTION TWO 


Topic XXII : Sound Is Noneternal 


13. (E280-84; T (1917) 31-58) What does ‘‘noneternal” actually 
mean ? Uddyotakara mentions 4 wrong definitions. (1) The non- 
eternal is that of which there is prior absence (pragabhdva) and posterior 
absence (dhvamsabhdva). (2) The noneternal is that which has a 
cause of its own destruction. (3) The noneternal is that which is not 
perceived when the conditions of its being perceived are present. 
(4) The noneternal is what is expressed by the abstract term “‘non- 
eternality.”’ All of these are rejected, some on rather technical 
grounds. The correct definition is given as : A thing is noneternal if its 
existence (sattd) is circumscribed by beginning and end. Eternality, 
then, is defined as a thing’s existence not circumscribed by beginning 
or end. In a similar manner, inherence is called ‘“‘cause’’? when it is 
qualified by an effect, and called “‘effect’? as qualified by a cause. 

In refuting the Mimamsa opponent who holds that there is only 
one sound manifested in the one dkafa, Uddyotakara also gets invol- 
ved in a discussion about the nature of words. What is manifested 
when a word is uttered ? Is it the sound of one syllable of the word? 
But one syllable cannot carry the meaning of the whole word. Or is 
it the sound of a number of letter-sounds together? But on the 
Mimamsa view that there is only one sound and one locus for it, 
when a word is uttered there should be a terrible uproar—all the 
syllables being heard at once, along with all other sounds that are 
being manifested at the same time! For this reason we must also 
reject the view that there are numerous all-pervading sounds. 

17. (18 in E (E293-97; T (1917) 63-71) Uddyotakara’s view is 
that sound is a non-locus-pervading (avpdpyavrtti) quality of akdsa. 
A characteristic is ‘‘locus-pervading’’ if it is perceived whenever and 
wherever its locus is perceived. E.g., existence is locus-pervading, 
while contact is not. 

Are the contacts between akasa and objects eternal or noneternal? 
Uddyotakara’s view is that contacts between dkdfa and atoms are 
brought about by the motion of the atoms, while contacts between 
Gkésa and gross objects are produced by the contact between dkasa 
and the constituent atoms of the gross objects, 

31. (32 in E) (E301-03; T (1917) 87-91) In connection with 
the opponent’s third argument (“‘because of repetition”) the opponent 
argues that because we recognize sounds they must be eternal, for to 
recognize something is to perceiveitagain. Answer: No, recognition 
arises also when something is perceived to be similar to something 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 325 


else of that kind. Opponent: Yes, there are such cases, but they can 
be distinguished from recognition proper by the fact that, when we 
“recognize” something which is only similar to and not the same as 
the original, we abandon the report of recognition as soon as we 
perceive the points of difference between them. Answer: But there 
are also cases where we abandon our report of recognition even when 
points of difference are not perceived. Therefore this abandonment 
cannot be used as a mark. 


Topic XXIV : The Meaning of Words 


64. (65 in E; 61 in T) (E314-19; T (1917) 144-53) The siira 
presents the opponent’s position in favor of the universal property 
being the meaning of a word. Uddyotakara develops the opponent’s 
argument at length, starting with the point that individuality and 
presence of the Gkriti may occur without the universal—as in a 
clay cow, which lacks cowhood—and that in such cases we do not 
want the words meaning to extend to such objects, since the result 
would be absurdity : we say “‘milk the cow,”’ but a clay cow cannot 
be milked, etc. 

He then moves on to defend the very notion of universals itself. 
Opponent: There are no universals, since a universal is supposed to 
link several individuals, but when we look in the space between the 
individuals we do not find any universal. Answer: Of course we do 
not find cowhood, for example, in dkdfa ; we find dkdSaness in Gkdsa. 
But more important, without the category of universals we could not 
have the notion of kinds of things. Opponent: We can get these 
notions by perceiving the similarities in the dkrtis of things. Answer: 
No, for each dkrti is a particular characteristic of the object it charac- 
terizes—or if you think it is a common characteristic you have 
admitted universals under another name. 

Opponent: Now look. We have a notion of “universal property”’ 
—and you and I are discussing something we recognize by that 
description. What is the basis of this notion? Is it some second- 
order property ‘“universalness”’ ? But the Varsestkasitras deny that 
there is any such property.22_ Thus there are notions of kinds which 
do not require universals as their basis—and generalizing we can 
conclude therefore that no such notion requires a universal as its 
basis. Answer: But though there is no second-order property univer- 
salness, it does not follow that the notion of universal property has 
no basis. Its basis is the coming together of several things. Just 
so the notion of “universal property’’ has as its basis the coming to- 
gether of several universal properties. I do not say thatall classifica- 


326 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tion into kinds involves universals, only that such classification involves 
something other than individuals and dkrtis by themselves. 

Opponent: Does the universal reside altogether, or only partially, 
in the individual? If it is entirely within the individual, then it is 
peculiar to that individual and cannot link with other individuals. 
And if it is only partially within the individual, i.e., if it has parts, 
then either a part is unique to its individual, in which case again it 
cannot link that individual with others, or if it is not unique to the 
individual, it must have parts in turn. So the universal cannot do 
the job it is intended to. Answer: Your question cannot arise, since 
a universal is neither a whole nor a sum of parts. It is a mistake to 
talk about ‘‘all” or “part” of a universal. 

Opponent: How does a universal relate to its individual loci, then? 
Answer: By inherence. Opponent : But what does (e.g.) cowness 
inhere in? It must be either in cows or non-cows. But if it inheres 
in cows, then a cow is a cow before the universal comes to inhere in 
it; and of course it does not inhere in non-cows. Answer: Nonsense! 
The individual is not a cow until the universal inheres in it. Before 
that it is neither cow nor non-cow, so the dilemma does not arise. 

66. (67 in E; 63 in T) (E319-31 ;T (1917) 155-80) A Buddhist 
defender of the apoha theory says : Take the word “existent”? (sat). 
Tt does not denote a universal, as ‘“‘cowness”’ does, for ‘“‘cowness”’ 
applies to cows, while ‘‘existent’’ also applies to cows. And it does 
not denote individuals, for one word cannot denote innumerable 
different things. And it cannot denote an individual as invested 
with a quality, for “existent”? primarily denotes existence and only 
secondarily things which are existent. Therefore the denotation of 
a word is to be explained as the negation of other words’ proper appli- 
cation. Answer: You confuse sat, “‘existent,”’ with sattd, “existence.” 
“Existent,’’ on our view, denotes various individuals as qualified by 
existence. Therefore it does not denote innumerable different things, 
but rather several things which share a property. 

As for the (Buddhist) view that the meaning of a word is the nega- 
tion of what is denoted by other words, this will not do. For one thing, 
how can we understand what this means unless we grant that some 
words have a positive denotation? Secondly, what is the status, 
e.g., of what is not non-cow, which according to the Buddhist is the 
denotatum of “‘cow”? Is it positive or negative? If the former, 
there is no objection; it is just another name for cow. The latter is 
impossible, for when we talk of a cowwearenot speakingof an 
absence. Thirdly, what about a word like “‘all’*—what does it denote? 
You cannot say “not non-all,’’ for that makes no sense. Nor can 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 327 


you say that “‘non-all” means one or some, since then you would have 
the word “‘all”’ excluding some or a given one thing, and thus you would 
not be using “‘all”’ in its usual sense. Fourthly, what is excluded by 
asserting “‘cow”’—is the thing excluded cow or non-cow ? It cannot be 
cow, obviously. If it is non-cow, who ever thought that a cow was a non- 
cow ? And how could we think of “non-cow”’ without first thinking 
of “cow”? Fifthly, is this exclusion of non-cow, which you claim 
to be the meaning of ‘“‘cow’’, the same as or different from cow? 
If it is the same, then nothing is gained. If it is different, then does 
non-non-cow reside in cow or not? If it resides in cow, then “‘cow”’ 
denotes a quality of a cow and not acow. If it does not reside in it, 
what has it got to do with cow? Sixth, is there one apoha for each 
cow, or one for all? If there is one for all, then your apoha is just 
another name for the universal cowness, which we happily admit. 
If there is one for each, then there are as many apohas as cows, and 
nothing has been gained. Seventh, is apoha itself denotable or not? 
If it is denoted by apoha, then your doctrine is undermined. But if 
it is not, then your doctrine is unformulable! 

67. (68 in E, 64 in T) (E332; T (1917) 181-83) There is a 
difference of opinion over the interpretation of this sitra between 
Vatsyayana and Uddyotakara. V4atsyayana’s interpretation of the 
individual is that it must be a material substance. Uddyotakara 
thinks that an individual is any instance of a category which is neither 
an Gkrti nor a universal, Thus qualities are individuals, as are indivi- 
duators, motions, etc. 


BOOK THREE : PORTION ONE 


Topic XXV : The Self Is Not the Sense Organs 


Introductory Section. (E335-47; T (1917) 306-30) Though it is 
impossible that anyone should put forward proofs for the nonexistence 
of selves, some nevertheless try! E.g., an objector says: There is no 
self, because no such thing is produced, like the hare’s horn. Answer: 
(1) When one says ‘“‘x is not’? he must mean “x is not here.” One 
cannot wholly deny the existence of something which is nameable, 
Therefore it is impossible to deny the existence of the self absolutely, 
since it has been referred to. Objector: Then where does the self 
exist ? Answer: Nowhere in particular, just as it occurs at no time in 
particular but is eternal. (2) Objector: But there are words, hike 
‘void’? (Sénya) and ‘‘darkness,’’ which have no denotation, and our 
claim is that “self” is such a word. Answer: No, there are no such 
words. Sénya means “fit for dogs,”? and denotes any substance which 


328 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is fit for dogs. As for ‘‘darkness,” it refers to things which are not 
apprehended due to absence of light. (3) The Buddhist’s denial of 
the self is self-contradictory. (Some Buddhist passages are analyzed. ) 
(4) The nonproduction of self is no reason for the nonexistence of it. 
There are lots of things which exist but are not products. (5) As for 
the example of the hare’s horn, it is not impossible that some time a 
hare will have a horn. Someone might graft a horn onto a hare, say. 

Objector: No self exists, since no such thing is experienced. Answer: 
Many of the above objections hold against this too. But anyway, 
the self is experienced; it is perceived, in fact. We make judgments 
such as “I am fair,’ and the “I” here is a perceived object. Opponent: 
Yes, but the perceived object isthe body. Answer : Whose body ? My 
body! And this ‘‘my” shows that the body has an owner, a self. 

1, (E347-49; T (1917) 331-35) Objection: You say that because 
we have both touch and vision of the same object there must be a 
self distinct from the senses. But I say that we never perceive objects, 
only qualities, so your argument fails. Answer: No. We sometimes 
see objects without their qualities, e.g., when one puts a piece of 
glass over a blue surface he does not see the color of the piece of glass, 
since we see the blue color passed through it, but we do see the piece 
of glass. Or again, when cranes fly over at night we perceive the 
birds even though we cannot sce their color. 

4, (E350-54; T (1917) 345-54). Objector : Your argument 
presupposes that what arises at each moment in the series is comple- 
tely different from its predecessors. However, it is rather like the 
seed and the sprout—though they are different, still a sprout can 
only come from a seed and vice-versa, so that the seed is “‘responsible”’ 
for the sprout. Likewise, if A the predecessor of B kills a man, B 
is responsible since he is the specific effect of A. Answer: No, you 
misanalyze the seed and sprout example. There are common consti- 
tuents between the seed and the sprout, so that it cannot be used as 
an example for the series of items entirely different from each other. 
Opponent: All right, but those constituents are atoms, and atoms 
have no differentiating characteristics— the atomic constituents 
of a seed are qua atoms indistinguishable from those of the sprout. 
Therefore the causative character of seed with respect to sprout must 
be otherwise explained than by their common constituents. Answer: 
No, the common constituents are not the atoms only, but certain 
middle-sized constituents such as swelling-seed, growing-leaves, etc. 
Objection: Then how did the atoms ever start producing things? 
Answer: This is due to adrsta— through it God combines the atoms. 

Uddyotakara also argues that on the Buddhist view release comes 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 329 


without effort at every moment and thus the instructions for spiritual 
improvement given by the Buddha are pointless. 

7-11. (E359-61; T (1918) 56, 59-63) Uddyotakara takes sitra 7 
(the “third reason” in the summary of the Nydyasitras, cf. p. 229) 
as an unsound argument, and moves on to defend the view that there 
is only one visual organ. If there were two visual organs, he points 
out, there would be 6 external sense organs and not 5 as Nyaya- 
Vaigesika holds. Objection : Then how do you explain the fact that 
we have two eyes? Answer : The visual organ is not the eye but the 
substance that operates through the two eyes. 


Topic XXVIII : The Sense Organs Are Elemental 


33. (3linEandT) (E373-76;T (1918) 111-16) The lamp, which 
grasps both large and small objects, is elemental; so likewise is the 
visual organ. If an objector denies that the lamp isa relevant example, 
he is asked what is a relevant example. If he can offer none, his case 
is defective. The opponent tries some alternative examples. It is 
like a judgment, he says, which is not elemental but grasps large and 
small things. Answer: Judgments do not grasp things, they just are 
the grasping of things. Opponent: All right then, the internal organ, 
or the self, are nonelemental graspers of large and small things. 
Answer: The question of elementality with respect to these things does 
not arise. They do not have parts and so it is silly to ask whether 
they are made up of elemental or nonelemental substances. Opponent: 
You misunderstand. When we say that the eye is nonelemental, 
we mean that it is such that the question of its make-up does not arise. 
Indeed, sense organs are all-pervasive. Answer: If so, why don’t 
we see everything everywhere ? Walls, etc., should not stop an all- 
pervading organ! Opponent: What the wall stops is the operation 
of the organ. Answer: What you call the ‘“‘operation’’ is what I 
call the “‘sense organ,’ and I challenge you to prove that there is 
anything “behind” the “operation”? as you call it. 


BOOK THREE : PORTION TWO 


Topic XXXII : Relation of Destruction and Production 


14, (411-19; T (1918) 324-44) According to Vatsyayana the 
case of the piece of glass is different from that of milk and curds. In 
the latter there are new things produced and old things destroyed every 
moment, while in a piece of glass this is not so. Objection: It is so 
in the case of a piece of glass too, since sometimes it feels cool, other 
times warm, etc. Answer: This is due to other causes, namely, 


330 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that when it is cool particles of water have entered into it, and when 
it is hot particles of fire have entered. If you do not admit this, you 
will have to admit that the same thing is both hot and cold, etc., 
without any change in the thing—and that is absurd. 

Opponent: 'The destruction of a thing is not due to anything else. 
A thing is born and destroyed of itself without any assistance. Answer: 
This will not do. For according to you, there are 2 kinds of things 
without causes: eternal things and nonexistent things. But destruc- 
tion can be neither an eternal thing nora nonexistent one. If it 
were eternal, then nothing could be produced; and if it were non- 
existent, then nothing could be destroyed. Opponent: Destruction 
is causeless, since it is itself indestructible. We know this from the 
fact that when something is destroyed it cannot be produced again. 
Answer: The production of a thingis not the same as the 
destruction of its destruction. Furthermore destruction, though 
it can be produced, cannot be destroyed, since it is a negative 
thing and negative things are not properly described as 
“destroyed.” 

There is a discussion about exactly what the thesis of ‘‘momentari- 
ness”’ (ksantkavada) is. If it means that things last for only a moment 
—that is, for the smallest conceivable measure of time—Uddyo- 
takara contends that this controverts the Buddha’s statement that 
time is merely a fiction. 


Topic XXXUI : The Locus of Judgments Is the Self 


26. (E424-25; T (1918) 363-64) Gautama says “‘the internal 
organ occurs within the body.”” What does this mean? It cannot 
mean that the internal organ inheres in the body, nor that it functions 
only inside the body (for it goes out along with the visual organ to 
grasp objects). Answer: Right. What is meant is that the internal 
organ never functions except when there is a body for it to function 
through. 


Topic XXXV : The Body Is Produced by One’s Karma 


66. (E441; T (1919) 30-31) Vatsyayana explains why all the 
selves do not have a given body in common. He explains it by 
appealing to the karma which brings about that body. But, asks an 
objector, what causes that karma to be connected to that particular 
body and not another? Answer: The cause is the connection between 
the internal organ of that particular body and the self. Odjectzon: But 
what is the cause of the internal organ’s connection to that particular 
self? Answer: The karma of that particular self. Objection: But 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 331 


at the beginning of creation the selves have no karma. Answer: 
There is no beginning of creation. 

68. (E442-45; T (1919) 37-42) Supposing an opponent identifies 
adrsta with ignorance (ajfiana), and attributes the connection between 
self and body to that. Then the reply should be: What do you mean 
by ‘‘ignorance’ ? Do you mean absence of knowledge, or wrong 
knowledge? If absence of knowledge is meant, then freedom is 
impossible, for both before and after the manifestation of the universe 
there will be absence of knowledge and therefore ignorance in your 
view. If wrong knowledge is what is meant, then the bondage of 
the self to the body could never begin, since ‘“‘wrong knowledge”’ 
requires its objects already to be in existence. And if you say that 
objects are forever in existence, then again you admit the impossibi- 
lity of release. 


BOOK FOUR : PORTION ONE 


Topic XXXVI : Defects 


3. (B448-50; T (1919) 54-57) Several varieties of each of the 
3 kinds of defects are explained: e.g., affection includes love, selfish- 
ness, longing, thirst (for rebirth), and greed. Aversion includes 
anger, jealousy, envy, malice, and resentment. Confusion includes 
error, suspicion, pride, and negligence. Uddyotakara claims that 
his definitions are reports of common usage. 


Topic XXXVII : Causation 


ll. (8452-53; T (1919) 66-67) Uddyotakara explains that a 
“manifested” thing is one which has the conditions of perceptibility 
or has qualities similar to perceptible ones. Thus atoms, though 
their qualities are not perceptible, do have color, etc., and so are also 
included under “manifested” things. 

Objection: A jar, which is a manifested thing, is produced from the 
contact between its parts. But contact is not a manifested thing. 
Therefore the sitra isin error. Answer: No. We do not mean that 
the only causal factors in the production of a manifested thing are 
manifested; only that some factors are. 

21. (E456-67; T (1919) 79-100) God is an instrumental cause 
(nimittakarana) of the world, since He helps men to reap the fruits 
of their actions. If God were not dependent on men release would 
be impossible. 

God is an instrumental cause of the world and therefore must 
exist, because prakyti, atoms, and karma cannot operate without a 


332 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


conscious agent, just as an axe cannot cut without someone wielding 
it. Objection: But in the case of prakrti the conscious agent is not 
God but rather the purposes of men themselves. Answer: Men 
can have no purposes until objects come into existence for them to 
take purposive attitudes toward. And if you say that objects were 
always in existence, then the action of prakrti would be unnecessary. 
Furthermore, you (Samkhyas) say that the equilibrium among the 
three gunas changes when prakrti begins to evolve—what causes 
this ? Not prakrti itself, clearly, since it cannot evolve until the gunas 
go out of equilibrium. 

Others think that the specific cause of the world is atoms controlled 
by men’s karma, but our arguments hold good here too. These 
unconscious things need a conscious agent. Objection: But uncons- 
cious things can be active—e.g., milk flows out of the mother for 
the nourishment of the calf, and just so atoms move for the purposes 
ofmen. Answer: The milk would not flow if the mother were dead. 
Generally, unconscious things do not move except under the influence 
of a conscious thing. Furthermore, it is only when a conscious thing 
controls the world that pleasure and pain, dharma and adharma occur. 
Objection: The conscious agent in these cases is of course the self. 
Answer: This cannot be, since dharma and adharma cannot come to 
be until the body and the senses have been produced for the self, 
and who produces them? In addition, if the self were solely res- 
ponsible it would not produce suffering for itself! 

Objection: The conscious agents which in the world cause un- 
conscious things to move are always themselves mobile, e.g., the potter. 
Now God is immobile, hence He cannot be the cause of the movements 
of unconscious things. Answer: Causes are sometimes mobile, some- 
times not. E.g., two atoms in contact, whose movements have ceased, 
produce a dyad, or yarns (at rest) produce a cloth—so God can 
be a cause even though he does not move. 

Objection: Does God create the world out of something or out of 
nothing? If out of something, then He cannot be the creator of that 
something. If out of nothing, men’s efforts are useless and release 
impossible. Answer: A man makes an axe out of wood and iron 
and then with the help of the axe he makes lumber. Just so God makes 
dharma and adharma and with their help makes the bodies of men. 
Objection: But at the time He is making one thing, He is not the 
creator of the material with which He is working. Answer: Who 
ever said He had to make everything at once! Objection: But what 
about the first thing Hemakes—isit madeout of nothing? Answer: 
There was no first thing. 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 333 


Question: | Why does God create the world at all ? Some say 
foramusement (krida), others sayin order toshowhis power. Answer: 
Neither of these views is correct, for God gains nothing in either case, 
being without unhappiness and omnipotent already. Rather he 
creates because that is his nature: it is his nature to be creatively 
active. Objection: Ifso, he should be creating all the time and not 
in fits and starts. Answer: God’s creative actions, however, 
are dependent on other conditions, viz., the proper time for karma 
to issue in fruition, other auxiliary causes, the collocation of the things 
to be used in the (particular) creation, etc. 

Objection: Is God’s omnipotence transitory or eternal? If 
transitory, then it would be better to say that there are several gods, 
but if there are several gods they would conflict and neutralize 
each other. If God’s omnipotence is eternal then His dharma is useless, 
as it cannot be the cause of His powers. Answer: God’s omnipotence 
is eternal. And He has no dharma. 

Is God a substance, a quality, or what? He is a substance, like 
other selves; yet He is unlike other selves, since He has a_ peculiar 
quality. What is this quality? Eternal consciousness, asis shown 
by the fact of the activity ofatoms, which proves that the consciousness 
of the agent of this activity must be unrestricted by a body—i.e., 
since the motions of atoms take place simultaneously in various locales, 
the agent of these activities must have an unrestricted consciousness. 


Topic XXXVIII : Some Things Eternal, Others Not 


40. (480-81; T (1919) 141-43) Uddyotakara’s own arguments 
against the svabhdvavadin who says ‘everything is an absence”’ are these. 
(1) Aman who tries to prove this thesis either appealsto an instru- 
ment ofknowledge, thus contradicting his own thesis, or does not and 
so has no proof. (2) The sentence the opponent proposes, if he under- 
stands it, must be an entity, which contradicts his thesis. (3) Ifhe 
addresses his thesis to someone, he admits there is someone and so 
contradicts his thesis. (4) If he thinks his thesis contradicts another, 
then he admits that the two propositions have different meanings, but 
this contradicts his own thesis. 

49-50. (H485-90; T (1919) (155-56) Here the satkaryavadin— 
who believes the effect preexists in the cause—is dealt with. His 
view is mistaken because: (1) Since activity presupposes a purpose 
on the part of the agent, in the form “I shall obtain this, and avoid 
that,” and since on the hypothesis in question this and that are already 
in existence, thereis nothing to obtain or avoid; thus all activities 
are pointless. (2) Inference too is pointless under such conditions, 


334 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


since the knowledge it is capable of producing is held already to 
exist. Objection: Inference is for the purpose of removing ignorance. 
Answer: But if nothing new is produced, ignorance cannot cease. 
Objection: Well, in a sense something is produced, but since the effect 
already exists, it would be better to describe it as being manifested. 
Answer: What does ‘manifested’? mean? If it means being produ- 
ced, then you admit our thesis. If it means being perceived, then, 
since the perception is a new thing, you also admit our thesis. And 
the same difficulty attends any interpretation of “manifestation.” 

Opponent: All right, what is your proof of the nonexistence of the 
effect prior to production? Answer: Of course there cannot be 
any inference about a nonexistent thing. Opponent: Then what are 
we arguing about ? Answer: We are arguing about the nature of the 
effect—whether or not it is the same thing as the cause, or different, 
e.g., whether the cloth is the same thing as the yarns which produce 
it. 


BOOK FOUR : PORTION TWO 


Topic XLIII : Whole and Part 


12. (E505-08; T (1919) 216-20) Odjection: You say that the 
whole is different from the parts. But then it should have a different 
color from the parts, just as yarns of different colors make up a cloth 
of variegated color (citraripa). Something which has variegated 
color is obviously multiple and not one whole. Answer: No. 
Variegated-color is one color ; the list of colors includes red, green, 
blue...and variegated. If variegated-color were not one color, 
then you could not explain how a many-colored cloth is produced, 
since either it must be produced from a lot of variegated-colored yarns 
—in which case you admit that variegated-color is one color— 
or else it is produced from several yarns of various colors, in which 


case you admit our thesis. 


Topic XLIV: Atomic Theory 


25. (£514-20; T (1919) 238-48) Ifan atom were made of parts, 
it would not be an atom. Nor would it be an atom if it were a pro- 
duct. These truths follow from consideration of the meaning of the 
term “atom.” Objection: Atoms must have parts, since they are 
capable of contact. For instance, you hold that two atoms combine 
to make a dyad, and three dyads to make a triad. Now in this triad 
—which consists of six atoms—one atom connects the other by 
being in contact with them, and therefore since the contact is in diffe- 


NYAYAVARTTIKA 335 


rent parts of that atom, the atom must have parts. Or if you hold 
that all six atoms occupy the same point in space, then atoms could 
never produce larger objects. Answer: Our view is this. Qualities, 
which are immaterial, can inhere in the same locus and not increase 
the size of the things in which they inhere. Contact is a quality. 
Therefore a single atom can be involved in contact with several others 
and not be any different in size from before. But this contact does 
not reside in parts of the atom. Each contact resides in the pair of 
atoms which it qualifies. Therefore when you say “contact is in 
different parts of that atom’ you misunderstand the nature of contact. 
And when two material substances are related by contact, there is 
increase in size, not because of the nature of contact but because two 
material substances cannot occupy the same place. Opponent: But 
if there are no “sides” to the atom—i.e., if it is not spread out 
spatially—then things could never screen other things, since things 
are made out of atoms. Answer: Screening is not due to spatial 
occupancy but rather to the fact that certain kinds of objects prevent 
others from being related to them. 


Topic XLVI : The Falsity of Everything Refuted 


34. (E521-24; T (1919) 259-63)23 How can the idealist explain 
demonstration and refutation? Are they consciousness only? If 
so, nothing can ever be proved for the benefit of others, since every- 
thing is someone’s dream and nobody ever dreams anyone else’s 
dream! Furthermore, what is the difference between waking and 
dreaming? ‘There are no real objects in either case, so there is no 
difference in the idealist view. But if there is no difference, there is 
no difference between dharma and adharma—for it is admitted that 
dream-incest is guiltless, so therefore waking incest must be also! 
Opponent: The difference between waking and dreaming is that in 
the latter case the person is asleep. Answer: How does one know 
when he is asleep? Opponent: Well, when we are asleep, our ideas 
are indistinct, while when we are awake they are distinct. Answer: 
But what do these terms mean when there are no objects? A dis- 
tinct idea is a clear notion of something; as there is, in your view, 
nothing for ideas to be notions of, there are no distinct ideas, nor 
therefore any indistinct ones. Opponent: But even when there are 
admitted by everyone to be no objects we can still perceive a diffe- 
rence between distinct and indistinct ideas. For example, some 
souls after death have distinct ideas of certain unpleasant sights, 
such as a river of pus or ariver of blood, but the objects of these ideas, 


336 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


do not exist. Answer: Then these dead souls cannot very well have 
ideas of such objects, the objects being nonexistent! 

Opponent: The result of an act should appear where the act is 
performed, and in our view it is so, since both an act and its results 
are the consciousness only of the agent. But in your view some acts 
are performed in one place and _ the results appear quite else where. 
Answer: We do not admit it; the results of an action appear in the 


self and nowhere else. 


BOOK FIVE : PORTION TWO 


Topic XLVIX : Ways of Losing an Argument 


1. (E549-51; T (1919) 357-60) Question: Who or what is it that 
is convicted when one of the ways of losing an argument is committed 
and discovered? Answer: Not the proposition under discussion. 
It is as well or as poorly off as before. Not the argument for it. It 
proves whatever it proves, regardless of whether it is properly under- 
stood ornot. Therefore it is the person who propounds the argument 
who is convicted. 

Objection: Watsyayana says that the propounder of a true pro- 
position as well as of false ones can be convicted by these ways of 
losing an argument ; but this must be wrong, as one who propounds 
a true doctrine cannot be defeated. Answer: Obhyes he can, since 
he may fail to identify his opponents’ tricks of argument and therefore 
succumb to arguments which in fact involve fallacies. 

11. (2555-56; T (1919) 375-77) Item No. 10 in the list of 
ways of losing an argument (the apraptakala type) suggests that the 
argument is defective if its members are stated in the wrong order. 
Objection: This is not a defect, since (1) despite the “‘error” the 
hypothesis is proved, (2) there isno fixed convention governing the 
proper order of statement, and (3) in any case the members of an 
inference are found to be reversed in all sorts of well accepted treatises. 
Answer: As to (1), this might be considered in analogy with treating 
an argument in which words are misused. Now although a poor 
word for something may well bring to mind the proper word for it, 
just as a misordered argument may bring to mind the proper argument, 
still it is important that words be so used as to suggest their proper 
meaning and not something else. So it is with arguments. As to 
(2), no, there is no convention, rather it is a natural order among the 
members that is being stressed. As to (3), the treatises in question 
are summary accounts of things and so have in view different purposes 


ATREYA 337 


of exposition than one has in mind when setting forth an argument 
in a debate. 


10. ATREYA 


Though, as mentioned earlier, the Vaisestkasiitras suffered from 
lack of commentators, at least commentaries have been preserved 
for us since there are references to at least one such commentary in 
early times. The Jain writers Vadideva Suri (fl. 1130) and Guna- 
ratna (fl. 1400) mention a Bhdsya called Atreyabhasya or Atreyatantra, 
as does Vadindra (1175-1225), a Nyaya writer treated below.) Vadi- 
deva calls its author “‘a ripe old leading Brahmin”’ (to adopt Thakur’s 
translation of varsiydn viprapuhgavah). He details the views of its 
author on three points: (1) On the presence of the term guna in the 
definition of substance given in Vaisesikasatra 1.1.14, Atreya says that 
it is necessary to specify that a substance is something which has 
qualities, since if that were left out the definition would overextend to 
include motionness (kriydtva). (2) With respect to the definition 
of a motion (Vaisesikasiitra 1.1.16), Atreya glosses the term “‘indepen- 
dent” (in ‘being an independent cause of contact and disjunction’’ ) 
in order to show that Kanada did not mean to say that motions can 
cause contacts and disjunctions without any other causal conditions 
operating. Motion is “independent” only in the sense that another 
noninherence cause is not required—or perhaps that no extra- 
ordinary sort of causal factor need be appealed to. Furthermore, 
Atreya is said to have thought that this phrase about causing contacts 
and disjunctions constitutes the definition; the other properties speci- 
fied in this sara merely describe motions, but are not differentiating 
marks. (3) The third matter on which Atreya is quoted pertains 
to the question whether doubts and illusions can arise from the visual 
organ, and if so how. Atreya seems to suggest that when the visual 
organ goes out to grasp a distant object all it can get are the generic, 
universal features and not the details. Asaresult, doubts and 
illusions are the natural outcome.’ 

The question of Atreya’s date is almost impossible to answer at 
present. There has, however, been a good deal of discussion about 
another old Vaisesika commentary referred to by a number of writers, 
called Ravanabhésya. This commentary is referred to by the Naiya- 
yika Padmanabha Misra, and by the author of the Vedanta work 
Prakatarthavivarana.* This latter writer attributes to the Ravanabhasya 
the theory that the large (mahat) size, found in the triad and wholes, 
composed of four or more atoms, is produced by the loose aggregation 


338 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(pracaya) of two dyads. D.N. Shastri* suggests that the odd account 
of Vaisesika theory expounded in Samkara’s Brahmasiitrabhasya, 
according to which two dyads produce a caturanuka or ‘“‘quadruple- 
atom’’ instead of the usual account which has four triads producing 
a quadruple-atom, may be due to the fact that Samkara gets his 
Vaisesika from the Ravanabhasya. Anantlal Thakur® suggests that 
when Mallavadin alluded to a commentary by Pragasta on the Vaisesi- 
kasiitras, a Vakya and a Bhdasya, the latter Bhésya may be the Ravana- 
bhadsya, and its author may have been Atreya. All of this is extremely 
speculative, and there is no hard evidence for much of it. That the 
Ravanabhdsya was an early text is clear from the fact that Jinendra- 
buddhi and Udayana know of it, but whether it was Atreya’s work 
is unclear. Kuppuswami Sastri thought that the Rdvanabhasya was 
identical with the Vaisesikakatandi.? 

Equally mysterious are references to a Bharadvdjavriti, which 
Udayana refers to in the Kirandvali and remarks that it depends on 
the Ravanabhésya (if we can trust Thakur’s memory !)* An old Vrtti 
is also quoted by Samkara Mifra and by Candrananda, authorof a 
commentary of indeterminate age which was published recently.® 
Ui! thinks this Vriti may indeed be the Bharadvajavriti, put there is 
no particular evidence for this and Faddegon denies that it is.11 The 
recent work by Gangadhara Kaviratna Kaviraja called Bharadvdja- 
orttibhdsya is not on the old Bharadvdjavrtti, Ui asserts.12 There is also 
the fact that Uddyotakara was of the Bharadvaja clan. 


11, PRITICANDRA 


As we have seen, Santaraksita mentions this author along with 
Uddyotakara and Bhavivikta as the major rivals of Dharmakirti.! 
Apart from locating his date at or prior to the time of Dharmakirti, 
however, nothing more can be learned from this information. 


12. AVIDDHAKARNA 


We are now well into the dark period in the history of Nyaya- 
Vaisesika literature, a period between the time of Uddyotakara and 
Jayanta Bhatta, spanning three centuries. All our information about 
the development of thought in the school during this time is necessarily 
inferential, at least until manuscripts at present unknown are dis- 
covered, (This is by no means impossible even today, however.) 

Aviddhakarna is one of the most widely discussed authors of this 
period. References to him are found in various Buddhist works by 


AVIDDHAKARNA 339 


such writers as Santaraksita, Kamalagila, and Karnagomin. He is 
also known from Jain sources written by Abhayadeva and others.! 
It seems clear that he wrote a commentary called Tiké on a Nydya- 
bhasya, presumably that of Vatsyayana.® Kamalasgila says that Aviddha- 
karna wrote a work called Tattvatika.2 Thakur‘ thinks this may be 
the same work, but Mahendra Kumar Jain® has argued that in fact 
there were two Aviddhakarnas, one the Naiyadyika who flourished 
between 620 and 700, the other a Carvaka who lived in the 8th 
century. SAntaraksita and Kamalasila do attribute to Aviddhakarna 
views about inference which would seem to be extremely skeptical, 
‘and Mahendra Kumar cites Jain authority for Aviddhakarna’s view 
that it is impossible to define the linga(=hetu) and that, since a 
valid instrument must give us information we do not already have, 
inference, which depends on memory, is not a valid instrument. It is 
for these reasons that Mahendra Kumar concludes that the Tattva- 
liké is a different work, and by a different author, from the commen- 
tary on the Nydyabhasya. On the other hand, Umesh Migra® explicitly 
identifies the works. Oberhammer’ also assumes they are the same, 
giving the name Rucifikd to the commentary in question.® 

Thakur, Mahendra Kumar, and Umesh Misra report other 
views attributed to Aviddhakarna. (1) Abhayadeva reports him as 
agreeing with Uddyotakara’s arguments refuting momentariness on 
the basis of pervasion. (2) He is widely quoted as arguing for the 
existence of God by two arguments. (a) An object, perceptible by 
two sense organs, or not perceptible at all, is produced by a conscious 
cause, because it possesses an arrangement among its parts, like pot, 
etc., or atoms, etc., respectively. (b) The material causes (upadéana) 
of an organism are dependent upon an intelligent Being, because 
they possess color, etc., like threads, etc.? (3) The destruction of 
an object occurs a moment after the thing exists, not simultaneously 
with its existence. Therefore it must have a distinct cause. (4) 
He agrees with Bhavivikta and Uddyotakara that a substance can 
be perceived without any qualities. (5) He refutes someone’s thesis 
that aggregation and continuity are anirvacaniya. (6) He distinguishes 
comparison from verbal testimony on the ground that the former 
gives us knowledge of objects, the latter of the relation ofa name with 
an object. (7) Since the Buddhists deny the existence of selves, 
there is no possibility of their knowing invariable concomitance 
(avinébhava}. (8) Atoms must be eternal, because it is impossible 
to suppose that they have a creator. This last is impossible because 
no valid instrument can give us knowledge of such a creator, and thus 
the creator is unreal, like a hare’s horn, 


340 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Aviddhakarna must precede Dharmakirti, but otherwise we have 
no certain knowledge of his date. 


13. SAMKARA (SVAMIN) 


Samkara is another old Naiyayika of whom we hear much from 
Buddhist and Jain writers. He is also referred to by Jayanta at least 
once,! and by Vacaspati Migra.2. Oberhammer? concludes he must 
have lived between Dharmakirti and Santaraksita, and Steinkellner’s 
study concurs.4 

The title of the work he is known for is Sthirasiddht. Thakur® has 
collected references to views he is supposed to have held, and Umesh 
Migra® has also discussed some of these. 

1. God has a body; in fact, He has several bodies. 

2. The conditions for the perception of something are sufficient 
to bring about the perception of its absence. Thus, for example, 
one who is able to see light can also see darkness under the same 
conditions, for darkness is just the absence of light. 

3. He is credited with two distinct definitions of the notion of 
“separate existence” (yutasiddha). (The importance of this notion 
comes in that inherence is defined as a relation between two things 
which are ayutasiddha ‘“‘not separately existing.’’)(a) To exist sepa- 
rately is to be the locus x ofa locus y which has the quality of separate- 
ness (prthaktva) from x (prthagasraydsrayitvam). (b) To exist separately, 
when it occurs in eternal things, is to have the ability to move separa- 
tely (from other things) (nityéndm prthaggatimattvam). 

4. Every absence has a counterpositive. 

5. Since contact is non-locus-pervading, and since what is called 
the color of the cloth is actually the color of the dye used to color the 
cloth, a cloth does not become colored “‘clear through.” 

6. Inherence of a whole in its parts is perceptible. 

7. Universals have color and form, and are perceptible. In this 
way is explained the fact that we can have knowledge of objects which 
have been destroyed. 

8. The causal efficacy (Sakti) which some postulate to explain 
causation, is nothing more than the collection of causal factors (sdémagri) 
sufficient to produce the effect. Likewise lack of causal efficacy 
(aSakti) is merely the absence of one of the necessary conditions for 
production. However, once an effect is produced, it can remain in 
existence even though its sdémagri-fakti disappears. 

9. One thing can cause several different effects, since it can play 
role in several distinct collections of causal conditions. 


SAMKARA 341 


Samkara must have been a very important member of the Nyaya 
school, for some of the views detailed above are not found clearly 
stated in writers prior to him, and are particularly appealed to by 
later writers such as Udayana. Furthermore, the Buddhist logician 
Ratnakirti found it appropriate to write a whole work, Sthirasiddhi- 
disana, directed against Samkara’s treatise.? 

As for the question of his date, he must have preceded Santarak- 
sita, who mentions him. Thus he must have flourished no later 
than the 7th century. A.D. Bhattacharya® says that Vacaspati 
Miéra refers to him, and that in Udayana’s Npdyaparisista Samkara 
is said to be “the head ofa band of scholars differing from the Bhasya- 
Varttika school.” He places Samkara prior to Trilocana.® But, he 
also says that this Samkara, the author of Sthirasiddhi, should not be 
identified with Samkarasvamin, another old Naiyayika. No argu- 
ments or clarification are given on this point, however, and most 
scholars have in fact made the identification. 


14. VISVARUPA; 15. DHAIRYARASI 


Jayanta Bhatta mentions several old Naiyayikas in his play 
Agamadambari. Two are Visvaripa and Dhairyaragi.! It seems 
that Visvariipa wrote a commentary called Tika on the Nydyabhdsya. 
Steinkellner? places both these authors in the first half of the 9th 
century. 

Varadaraja Misra in his Tarkikaraksé refers to several views held 
by Visvaripa concerning the ways of losing an argument. He seems 
to have limited the fault of repetition or redundancy to certain 
contexts only, namely those where necessity (niyama) has been shown. 
In such a context, however, even the mere repetition of words consti- 
tutes a fault. Finally, concerning the 19th way of losing an argu- 
ment (called paryanuyojyopeksana), which is committed when one fails 
to catch one’s opponent making a mistake, Visvaripa is said to have 
held that this constituted a victory for a debater only if he pointed 
out the failure. If neither party catches his opponent, the debating 
assembly itself wins!° 


16. JAYANTA BHATTA 


Our next author is an especially interesting one. It seems that 
at the end of the 7th century a Gauda Brahmin of the Bharadvaja 
gotra named Sakti migrated from Bengal to Kashmir. His son, or 


342 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


perhaps his grandson, Saktisvamin, became minister to king Mukta- 
pida (invested 733). Saktisvamin’s grandson was named Candra: 
he may or may not be the Candra who commented on Prabhakara 
Mimamsa works. Candra’s son was named Jayanta Bhatta.} On 
the basis of the above genealogy one must place him toward the close 
of the 9th century. This is confirmed by the fact that one of Jayanta’s 
works, a drama entitled Agamadambara, was written during the reign 
of Sugandha Devi (904-906) .2 

The Nydyamanjari, Jayanta’s major contribution to Nyaya thought, 
was probably written before the play. According to Jayanta’s own 
account, it was written in jail. He says he is writing as a prisoner 
“in this cavern where no human voice can enter and I have beguiled 
my days here by this diversion of writing a book.’? We cannot really 
tell what occasioned Jayanta’s imprisonment. 

Jayanta seems to have had the benefit of an extremely versatile 
education. According to his son Abhinanda his family was deeply 
devout, thoroughly versed in Vedic lore. This is shownin Jayanta’s 
obviously thorough knowledge of, and interest in, the topics and views 
of Purvamimamsa. Yet he was no narrow-minded zealot; rather 
the reverse. A keen student of Buddhism, he acknowledges his respect 
for Dharmakirti, and when he agrees with that Buddhist author he 
tells us so. Mookerjee likens Jayanta to Santaraksita in that they 
both have tolerant and encyclopaedic command of the literature of 
their times. As for tolerance, though Jayanta is clearly a sincere 
believer in the authority of the Vedas, of Saiva authorities as well 
as various smrtis, and attacks the Buddha for being anti-Vedic, he 
nevertheless holds that differences among religious sects are unimpor- 
tant, since they all seek the same end. God teaches according to the 
taste and capacity of the pupil. It is for this reason that different 
philosophies are promulgated, and all serious faiths should be 
tolerated.® 

Jayanta was uot only a scholar of philosophy. We have mentioned 
that he wrote a play, the Agamadambara, which is being edited at 
Darbhanga.*’ Hewas, furthermore, a keen student of grammatical 
theory. According to his own testimony he wrote a treatise on gram- 
mar in his youth. Kane credits him with the authorship of several 
lost works on dharma.® 

Despite his erudition Jayanta remains modest about his accom- 
plishments, disavowing any originality. His prose style is engaging 
and good-natured. He sometimes pokes fun at himself and his fellow 
—e.g., he cites with glee a bit of doggerel suggesting that Naiyayikas 
pay scant attention to the niceties of grammatical theory, preferring 


NYAYAMANJARI 343 


to be taken in by the sterilities of logic. Jayanta’s response points out 
the insipidity of grammatical studies. 

Jayanta’s great triumph is the Nydyamanjari. He is also credited 
with a small summary of it called Nydyakalikd, although at least one 
scholar® has suggested that the work is a later compilation of 
sentences out of the Nydyamaiijari. 

Scholars had thought that references to Jayanta’s work in Buddhist 
writings, as well as in Vacaspati Misra’s, were easy to find.” This 
became more difficult to say, however, when it was realized that 
Vacaspati’s teacher wrote a work also called Nydyamaijari, and that 
some of the references were most probably to Trilocana’s work. 
Since Vacaspati’s date has been for some time now an important 
scholarly issue, the identification of the Manjari Vacaspati referred tois 
an important one. Some scholars believe that Jayanta cites and so 
must be placed after Vacaspati.® Ifthe above reasoning about his 
date is acceptable, this would bring Vacaspati’s date back into the 
9th century. For various reasons this date for Vacaspati is unaccep- 
table (see below). 


NYAYAMANJARI on Gautama’s Nydyasatras 


(Prepared by Janakivallabha Bhattacharya, Usharbudh Arya, 
and ‘Karl H. Potter). 
Though the work is in a sense a commentary on the Nydyasiitras, 
by far the largest portion of it treats Nyaya topics under the rubric 
of pramana, and the remainder takes up the topics listed as prameyas 
or objects of valid knowledge in Satra I.1.1. In the following 
summary, therefore, we do not follow the topics utilized in the 
summaries of the Sittras and other commentaries thereon, but 
develop a new scheme. Numbers in parenthesis to the left of a 
paragraph will be used merely for reference purposes. 
References are as follows : “E” precedes page citations from 
the edition of Surya Narayana Sukla, Kashi Sanskrit Series No. 
106, Benares 1936. ‘TI’ precedes page citations from the trans- 
lation of Janakivallabha Bhattacharya in the Calcutta Review, 
seriatim from October 1952 through March 1955. Each citation 
covers pages up to the next citation. - 


I. INTRODUCTORY SECTION, (EI-5;T 1-7 [Oct. 1952]) 


1. After 16 verses of salutation to Siva, etc., Jayanta proceeds 
to explain the utility of scripture. The purpose of scripture is to help 


344 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


people attain the unseen (adrsta) ends of man (purusdrtha). Now 
scripture has 14 branches, of which Nyaya (also called tarka) is one, 
the other being the 4 Vedas, Mimamsa, the so-called 7 ancillary 
sciences (viz., grammar, astronomy, phonetics, ritual, prosody, etymo- 
logy, and Vedic exegesis), the Puranas, and the Dharmaéastras. 
But of these nydya is the most important, since upon its success rests 
any hope of defending the validity of the Vedas. Samkhya, Jain, 
and Buddhist logic are not sufficient to establish the Vedas’ validity. 
In this treatise Jayanta proposes to refute their arguments. As for 
the Carvakas, they can be ignored since their logic is so poor. And 
the Vaisesikas follow the Naiyadyikas very closely. 

2. Objection: If the purpose of Nyaya is to defend the validity 
of the Vedas, then it is unnecessary, since Mimamsa does that. 
Answer: True, Mim4msa tries to do it, but its main emphasis is on 
interpreting the Vedas, not on defending their validity. And it will 
be shown below that the Mimamsakas are not very good at defending 
validity when they do try. 

3. Objection: If the Vedas cannot validate themselves, no one 
else can— for how are we to know that Gautama, the author of 
the stras, is trustworthy? Answer: And howare we to know enough 
to trust Panini on etymology? These sciences, like the Vedas, are 
always present. The authors of treatises concerning them merely 
report their content and discuss it. Odjector: Then the Vedas are 
intrinsically valid! Answer: True, but the point of discussing and 
defending them is to enlighten unlearned people. None of the bran- 
ches of science are meant for those who already understand them. 

4, (E5-11; T 7-81 [Nov. 1952]). The question is raised as to 
why anyone should read a book if he is not convinced that it will 
be useful to him. The paradox is posed that in order to find out that a 
book is useful it must be read. The answer given by Jayanta is that 
the opening sentence of a book—here, the first siétra—gives the aim 
of the book, and thisis enough to keep the reader interested even 
though he may initially doubt some of the tenets of its author. 


II. THE CATEGORIES 


5. Jayanta now briefly describes each of the 16 categories. Each 
is defended. An objector asks why tenets should be specified as a 
distinct category. The answer is that it shows that the object to be 
inferred has the property it is supposed to have. But, the objector 
continues, if we do not doubt that the object has this property, no 
inference will result—-so why list this as a distinct category? True, 


NYAYAMANJARI 345 


says Jayanta, but not all inferences are intended to prove doubtful 
objects. There is no rule that inference must not ever be applied to 
cases where nothing is in doubt. 


II. DEFINITION OF INSTRUMENT OF KNOWLEDGE 


7. An instrument of knowledge is to be defined as the collection 
of all the conditions of true judgment, i.e., judgments which are other 
than illusory or doubtful. Odjection: Then, since the knower, the 
object, and the act of judging are all conditions of true judgment, 
but no one of them the collection of all conditions, none of them are 
instruments of knowledge. But this runs counter to ordinary ways 
of speaking. Answer: Nevertheless, the collection of causal conditions 
is the only thing which is regularly followed by the effect; therefore 
only it can be called the “‘instrument.”? Objector: But the collection 
of causal conditions cannot be said to ‘‘change,” while the instrument 
of knowledge must be allowed to change as it produces its result. 
Answer: Though the collection does not change, some of its consti- 
tuents do, and itis their change which is spoken of as the change of the 
instrument. The collection, it should be remembered, is not itself 
a whole individual, but merely an aggregate. That is why we say 
we see with our eyes, but not with the collection of causal conditions 
of visual perception. 

8. (A Buddhist objection) Some say that the instrument of 
knowledge is (some kind of) consciousness (bodha). Consciousness 
can result from the action of an instrument of knowledge, but cannot 
by itself be the instrument, since not all consciousness issues into further 
results. ‘Therefore consciousness may be part of the instrument of 
knowledge but cannot exhaust it. 

9. Others hold the following view: Consciousness is an instru- 
ment of knowledge when it is followed by both an object and knowledge 
of that object. There are parallel series of phenomena: one series 
is known as ‘‘objects’’, the other as “‘judgments’’, and one does not 
occur without the other. Answer: This willnotdo. For one thing, 
it is generally accepted that an instrument of knowledge is so called 
because it produces true judgments, but in this view it also produces an 
object. Again, a momentary instrument cannot change and thereby 
produce a result. Other points will be elaborated when idealism is 
refuted. 

10. (Vs. Mimams&) According to Sabara, consciousness is the 
instrument of knowledge, but unlike the Buddhist he holds that the 
result produced by this instrument is different from the instrument. 


346 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


This result is the knownness (jadtaid) of the object. According to 
Sabara judgment is a motion, for nothing can be achieved without 
some action being performed. Thus when we find that an object 
has been known—and so has knownness—-we infer back to the 
presence of an instrument of knowledge. Kumiérila holds that 
presumption (arthdpatti), and not inference, is the means by 
which we conclude the presence of the instrument. But both 
Sabara and Kumiarila agree that we do not know the instrument 
directly. 

ll. Jayanta responds that judgment is not a motion. Although 
some of the conditions, which make up the collection which is the 
instrument, may move, the collection itself does not move. Jayanta’s 
procedure is to try to get the Mimamsaka to admit that the “motion” 
of judging is supersensuous, and then to argue that this supersensuous 
motion is superfluous and can be dispensed with. Furthermore, 
Jayanta claims that Sabara cannot infer a supersensuous motion, 
since no sapaksa is available. The Mimamsaka remarks that if that 
isso, Jayanta cannot infer the existence of his self, since no sapaksa 
is available. Jayanta’s answer is no, that the inference to the self 
is not on the ground of similarity to an sp but on the ground of falling 
under a universal property. In addition, knownness, which the 
Mimamsaka says is the mark from which the motion of judging is 
inferred, is itself not perceived in the object and so cannot function 
as amark, 

12. As for Kuméarila’s theory that the act of judging is known 
through presumption, Jayanta claims that there is no room for pre- 
sumption, since whenever we make a judgment we immediately 
thereafter entertain a judgment about that judgment. 

The Mimamsaka, however, does not accept the view that the 
second judgment is distinct from the first. He holds that a judgment 
reveals its object and itself all at once. Jayanta proceeds to refute 
this, His arguments: (1) We cannot know that a judgment is 
about x ifwe do not first knowx. (2) If objects can reveal themselves 
then we all become omniscient in the twinkling of an eye. (3) 
Suppose, then, the Mimamsaka says that the object reveals itself 
under the conditioning of its relation to a. knower. Jayanta replies 
that nothing like this is found elsewhere. A lamp reveals itself in- 
dependently of any conditioning. (4) Suppose it be said that 
objects reveal themselves like the number 2, which reveals itself when 
the knower is in a proper frame of mind. Wrong, says Jayanta; 
it is not the number which does the revealing, but the knower who 


« 


counts ‘‘one, two 


334 


NYAYAMANJARI 347 


13. Now Jayanta gives his own view. The self, the knowing 
subject, has a quality of judgment (here, samvedana) which illuminates 
an object. This illumination, however, is not the result of knowing 
but a factor in knowing. Furthermore, it needs another judgment 
to illuminate it. But this will be discussed later. 

14. (Another view) Some say that an instrument of knowledge 
cannot know an object which has already been apprehended. Its 
object must be new, or the judgment does not count as (valid) know- 
ledge. Jayanta replies that this requirement is unnecessarily rigid. 
Recognition, which is generally accepted as a kind of knowledge, 
could not be so on this account. The opponent, however, points 
out that Nydya rejects memory as a kind of true judgment: if 
Jayanta does not accept the requirement that the object of 
knowledge must not have been previously presented, he will have 
to contradict the tenets of his system and admit memory. No, says 
Jayanta, the reason memory is not a kind of true judgment has 
nothing to do with the fact that the object has been known before. The 
reason memory is nota kind of true judgment is just that its object 
is not among the causal conditions which produce the judgment 
which grasps it. 

15. (Buddhist Logicians) Others say that an instrument of 
knowledge is that which “does not baffle movement”’ (avisamvadi), 
which does not block our attaining the object. The theory of the 
Dignaga school is elaborated. There are two instruments, percep- 
tion and inference. Perception gives us determinate apprehension 
of a series of objects similar to the series of svalaksanas which per se are 
unattainable. Inference, though it grasps ideas which are per se 
imaginary, causes us to attain our objects and is therefore an instru- 
ment of knowledge. 

Jayanta criticizes this view. Since the Buddhists admit that the 
actual object of perception, viz. the svalaksana or ‘“‘bare particular,” 
is never attained, nojudgments are ever true in the Buddhist logicians’ 
account, 

16. The Buddhist now defends himself by distinguishing the level 
of conventional experience from the level of higher truth. The 
external world has noreal existence from the higher standpoint, and 
from that standpoint there are no true judgments. But from the 
conventional standpoint what we have said above holds good, they 
aver. Jayanta here questions the status of the ignorance (avidya) 
which is held to produce conventional experience. Is this ignorance 
real or unreal? Furthermore, he adds, the Buddhist account fails 
to make room for objects toward which we are indifferent. Surely 


348 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


we can have true judgments about objects which we neither want to 
attain or avoid. 

17. Jayanta also refutes a Buddhist analysis of illusions, e.g., 
amirage. Why do we not say that the judgment of water in the desert 
is a true judgment, since it reveals its object? The Buddhist says 
that the judgment does three things: (1) it reveals the ray of the sun 
which causes the illusion, (2) it fails to reveal the sand, and (3) 
instead it reveals water which is not causally connected with the sun’s 
ray. This composite judgment is true in its first function but false 
in the other two. Jayanta’s answer is that even the first function is 
false, for the sun’s ray is revealed as permanent whereas the Buddhist 
holds it to be in reality evanescent. 

18. (Samkhya) (E£24;T182 [Dec. 1952]). Next the Samkhya 
account is introduced. In this view different modes of the buddhi 
are the instruments of knowledge. Now the buddhi is unconscious, 
being an evolute of prakrti, but it attributes its modifications to the 
conscious purusa. Jayanta reserves criticisms of Samkhya till later, 
but points out that the Samkhya wants to say both that buddhi is and 
is not a property of purusa. 


IV. THE NUMBER OF INSTRUMENTS OF KNOWLEDGE 


19. (E24-27; T 184 to end [Dec. 1952]). Jayanta wants to 
interpret the fourth Nydyasdtra so as to apply to all 4 instruments 
of knowledge (not just to perception). Thus the terms ‘‘produced 


> 


by an object,” “‘does not wander,” and ‘‘is well-defined”’ serve to 
identify the common features of instruments of knowledge and to 
rule out memory, illusion, and doubt. 

20. (Vs. Buddhists) (E27-33; Tl=11 [Jan. 1953]) As there are 
only two kinds of objects, so there can be only two kinds of instru- 
ments of knowledge to grasp each of them, say the Buddhists. To 
prove that there is no third kind of object in addition to perceptible 
and imperceptible ones (pure particulars and universals )the Buddhist 
is made to appeal to the principle of excluded middle. There can be 
nothing which is neither perceptible nor imperceptible. The Buddhist 
goes on to justify the principle of excluded middle, suggesting 
that if it were not accepted practical activity would be brought to 
nought, since we would not know that , e.g., to avoid an object we 
ought to refrain from attaining it. 

21. Now perception is able to grasp perceptible objects, and 
inference can grasp imperceptible ones. Where is the need for any 
additional kind of instrument? E.g., why admit, in addition, verbal 


NYAYAMANJARI 349 


testimony if it is supposed to grasp a universal? Nor can instru- 
ments cooperate in grasping objects; since pure particulars and 
universals are mutually exclusive, perception and inference are also. 
If, per impossibile, inference is allowed to grasp the pure particular, 
then there will be no function left for perception. 

22. Jayanta complains that the Buddhist assumes that percep- 
tion can report the perceptibility of its object, whereas perception 
only grasps the object, not its perceptibility. Nor does a percep- 
tion report that the object has been perceived; that is a separate 
judgment. This will be treated at length later. Therefore the 
Buddhist cannot know, on the basis of perception alone, that there 
are only two kinds of objects, since perception cannot grasp an object 
as perceived or perceptible. 

23. But suppose we admit that there are only two kinds of objects. 
Still, the Buddhist’s conclusion does not follow. For the distinction 
among instruments of knowledge is to be made according to diffe- 
rences in the conditions determining them, not according to the 
number of kinds of objects. 

24, As for the Buddhist contention that one object cannot be 
known by cooperating instruments, this would make inference impos- 
sible. Inference requires knowledge both of the sddhya and the 
pervasion of the heiu by the sddhya. Here perception grasps one of 
them, and the other is known by inference. If both were known by 
separate inferences, there would be an infinite regress. The Buddhist 
tries to escape by pointing out that pervasion is imaginary and so 
not an object of either perception or inference, but Jayanta will not 
have that; a real object cannot participate in an imaginary pervasion. 

25. Nevertheless, there is a sense in which different instruments 
must have different objects; but what the Naiyayika insists on is that 
the underlying substratum is the same, though the properties judged 
to belong to it may be different when approached by perception, 
inference, or verbal testimony. 

26. Bhattas on presumption (arthdpatti) (E33-40; T11-95 [Jan. 
1953] and [Feb. 1953]. Kumarila’s followers add arthapatti and 
anupalabdhi to the list of instruments of knowledge. Presumption 
works as follows: When we learn something and find it difficult to 
understand, we postulate or assume something else in order to under- 
stand it. There are 6 kinds of presumption, depending on which 
of the 6 instruments gave us the bit of learning we found difficult to 
understand. Examples of each of the kinds are given. The stock 
example is this: Caitra is not at home, but he lives; therefore he 
must be out. Presumption is not inference, since the hetu being not 


350 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


at home is not pervaded by the sddhya being out (i.e., somewhere else). 
It is not anupalabdhi, for anupalabdhi grasps absences in a definite 
locus, and Caitra’s absence is not always ina definite locus. Consider 
““Caitra is at home, since he lives and he is not anywhere else.”” Here 
we cannot search everywhere else for the absence of Caitra—he may 
be moving around too! 

27. Jayanta’s reply is that nevertheless presumption is a kind of 
inference after all, for the simple reason that from a knowledge of one 
object nothing follows about any other object unless there is some 
pervasion relation between them. But just because we do not know 
in a given case what the relation is between two objects does not mean 
there is not any, or that we should therefore invent a new instrument 
to explain our knowledge. And the Mimamsakas do admit that 
there is at least a regular relation between the problematic piece 
of knowledge and the assumption which solves it. 

28. A diversion occurs now, as Jayanta deals with the Mimamsa 
view that a new category of causal efficacy (Sakti) must be introduced 
to explain actual production of an effect. (The Mimarpsaka uses 
presumption to substantiate his contention.) This causal efficacy 
belongs to the causal conditions; we must assume that it does, because 
otherwise we could not explain how the effect can fail to take place 
when the causal conditions are present and collected. For example, 
if a man takes poison he dies, but if certain incantations are spoken, 
he does not. What is obstructed by the incantations? Not the poison 
—he swallowed that. Therefore we must postulate a causal effi- 
cacy which the incantation obstructs. 

29. Jayanta answers that the effect does not occur in such cases 
because the incantation disturbs the collection of causal conditions; 
the absence of such disturbing factors is one of the causal conditions 
itself. Indeed, after the incantation is spoken we have a new collec- 
tion of conditions. Anyway, how is it that the causal efficacy is 
affected by the incantation ? Is this causal efficacy itself a sufficient 
condition, or does it need help to produce its effect? Ifthe former, 
it will always produce its effect and no incantations can stop it. If 
the latter, it is merely a superfluous causal condition. 

30. (Prabhakaras on presumption) (E41-45; T95-214 [Feb. 
1953] and [March 1953]). The other branch of Mimamsa has a 
different account of presumption. According to the Prabhakaras, 
while in inference the hetu cannot exist in the paksa unless the sadhya 
does, in presumption the relation is reversed: the sddhya cannot 
exist in the paksa unless the hetu does, We reason from the sddhya to 
the hetu, 


NYAYAMANJARI 351 


31. Jayanta says the issue betwcen Nyaya and Prabhakara is 
verbal. The reasoning “Living Caitra is not in his house, there- 
fore he is out”’ surely involves implicit appeal to a pervasion between 
living Caitra’s not being in his house and living Caitra’s being out of his house. 
Whichever of these two things one starts with, that is the hetuand the 
thing one reasons to is the sadhya. So presumption ismerely inference. 

32. There is a lengthy discussion here about the type of pre- 
sumption originating with judgments heard from scripture. The 
BhAattas wish to use presumption to complete overly short Vedic utter- 
ances. The Prabhakaras, on the other hand, do not believe there is 
any presumption of the scriptural sort. Jayanta’s idea is that Vedic 
sentences can be completed using inference alone. The Prabhakara- 
view necessitates their holding that a sentence contains more words 
than are actually heard, and this opens them to charges of irresponsi- 
bility from the standpoint of the Bhattas. 

33, (Vs. Bhatta Mimamsa on nonapprehension (anupalabdhi). 
(E46-51; T214-16 [March 1953] and [April 1953]). The Bhattas 
think that knowledge about a negative object is gotten through an 
instrument which consists in the nonapprehension of any of the stan- 
dard proofs for the occurrence of the counterpositive of that object. 
More specifically, we perceive the locus of the absence, and remember 
the counterpositive; then the internal organs together with this instru- 
ment of nonapprehension produce the judgment “‘there is no pot here.”’ 
Or on occasion we shall not actually be at the moment perceiving the 
locus, but remembering it too. This process of nonapprehension, 
say the Bhattas, isnot inference. If it were inference, it would involve 
a fallacy, for what is to be taken as the hetu? Not the locus, surely, 
for it is the paksa. Nor can we take the hetu to be the nonperception 
of the counterpositive, since this nonperception is not a property of 
this locus (viz., the ground). ISfwe say it is, we are guilty of the fault 
of reciprocal dependence, for that—- this property belongs to this 
locus—is what constitutes the conclusion. ‘Therefore thisjudgment is 
not arrived at by inference. 

34. Jayanta’s reply is that negative judgments can be explained 
without recourse to this additional instrument. Sometimes we see 
absences with our eyes. Ifthe Mimi3msaka complains that an absence 
has no color and visible objects must have color according to accept- 
ed Ny4ya tenets, Jayanta answers that that account only applies to 
positive objects, not to negative ones. In the case of negative objects, 
the relation linking the eyes with the object is that of contact-with- 
qualifier-relation (samyuktavisesanabhdva), the same relation by which 
we perceive inherence. 


352 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


35. Now as to the case, mentioned in section 33, where we are 
not perceiving the locus but remembering it along with the counter- 
positive, the Naiyayika says that what happens, e.g., when we report 
that there is no one named Garga living in a certain village, we are 
remembering our perception of Garga-absence which we had when we 
were previously in the village. The Mimimsaka objects that we 
formed no such judgment at the time. Jayanta replies that we always 
form the general judgment “I see these things and nothing else.” 
Objection: But how can we be said to remember the object of a judg- 
ment we did not actually make explicit ? Answer: You also must 
admit that in inference, on your own account, theinferrer remembers 
objects he may not explicitly have noticed previously. 

36. (Vs. the Buddhists on nonapprehension) (E51-57; T6-98 
{April 1953] and[May 1953]). The ‘‘red-clothed ones’”’ say that there 
are no independent negative things, only negative judgments. There 
is no relation to connect a negative object with positive ones— 
neither inherence, nor contact, nor the relation of qualifier to quali- 
fied, which last (says the Buddhist)— is not a distinct relation at 
all. But, says Jayanta, the Buddhist cannot explain away an absence 
as merely another kind of positive entity. For example, the absence 
of a jar after it has been smashed is a different thing from a bunch 
of potsherds. If th» absence were merely the potsherds, it would 
follow that if the potsherds were destroyed the pot should come into 
being again! 

37. The Buddhist replies: What is it that distinguishes one 
absence from another? Nothing negative. Itis the difference bet- 
ween their counterpositives. Now the Naiyayika thinks that an 
important reason for admitting independent absences is to distinguish 
positive things from each other. But the result is reciprocal depen- 
dence, for we see now that the negative things need to be distinguished 
themselves. 

38. At this point Jayanta reviews 11 kinds of nonapprehension, 
and asks what their function is supposed to be in the Buddhist view. 
The 11 kinds are : (1) nonapprehension of a thing’s own nature; (2) 
nonapprehension of the thing’s cause; (3) nonapprehension of its 
pervader; (4) nonapprehension of its effects; (5) nonapprehension of 
a nature in it contrary to that of the thing; (6) perception of the effect 
of something contrary; (7) perception of pervasion by what is con- 
trary to the thing; (8) perception of the contrary of the thing’s effect; 
(9) perception of the contrary of its pervader; (10) perception of the 
contrary of its cause; and (11) perception of the effect of the contrary 


to the cause, 


NYAYAMANJARI 353 


39. According to the Buddhist, nonapprehension does not 
produce a negative judgment, but rather the potentiality for such a 
judgment. This explains how he can hold that, in nonapprehension, 
the Aeéu is not different from the sddhya, e.g., that the nonapprehen- 
sion of something is identical with the absence of that thing. Jayanta 
asks how potentiality, which is a positive thing, can be said to be non- 
different from nonapprehension, which is a negative thing. The 
Buddhist answer is that nonapprehension is not a negative thing; 
rather it is the positive awareness of something other than what is 
expected. As a result, the Buddhist holds that we can only frame 
negative judgments about particular perceptible things. We cannot 
prove ‘“There are no sky-flowers,” for example, by nonapprehension. 

40. Jayanta’s refutation of the Buddhist view is as follows. 
Consider “‘there is no pot here.’’ The Buddhist takes this to be a 
positive judgment about the place called “‘here’—and so do the 
Naiyayikas. But the rest of the judgment cannot be explained satis- 
factorily in the Buddhist fashion—for what positive thing is “no pot’ 
supposed to refer to? The Buddhist seems to say that the whole 
judgment is positive, being about the place called ‘“‘here.’”’ But if so, 
then “‘there is a pot here,” being equally about the place called “‘here,’’ 
has as much right to be called a negative judgment as its contrary. 
The difference between positive and negative judgments then becomes 
merely verbal. But Jayanta contends that it is of the utmost impor- 
tance to distinguish them. 

41. As for the first difficulty, cited by the Buddhist in section 
37, that there is no relation to connect negative things with their posi- 
tive loci, Jayanta’s answer is merely that no relation is required in 
the case of absences. Or if one wishes one may introduce a qualifier- 
qualified-relation to explain it. After all, in philosophy we move 
from experience to theory, not vice versa. 

42. Actually, the Buddhists must in consistency hold that a 
jar does not exist (since they hold that reality is evanescent). There- 
fore they must in any case accept the thesis that there are independent 
negative things. They try to avoid this by playing tricks with 
grammar, but such attempts must fail. 

43. (Vs. Prabhakaras on nonapprehension) (E57-59; T98-99 
[May 1953]). The Prabhakaras also deny negative entities, holding 
instead that the perception of or failure to perceive a positive object 
constitutes the criterion of the reality or unreality of that object. 
However, says Jayanta, this will not do. For example, we cannot 
perceive water far underground, but we do not use this as a criterion 
to establish that water far underground does not exist. Here the 


354 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Prabhakaras try to distinguish between universal nonapprehension 
and conditional nonapprehension : only the former leads to negative 
judgments, while the conditional sort—e.g., the nonapprehension 
of water far underground—does not. But then what about the 
failure to perceive a sky-flower, or a demon? Are these conditional 
or universal? Surely there is a difference between them—a_ sky- 
flower cannot exist, but a demon might. 

44, Furthermore, the Prabhakaras, unlike the Buddhists, hold 
that the referents of words are real things. Since there is a word 
“not,” there should then be negative entities in their view. 

45. (The kinds of absences) (E59; T100 [May 1953[). 
Jayanta, deviating from the usual Nyaya view, holds that there are 
only two kinds of absence: prior absence and posterior absence. 
Mutual absence, usually counted a distinct variety, is just prior absence 
limiting other objects as their upadhi. Absolute absence is prior ab- 
sence without any limits, while limited absence (apeksdbhava) is prior 
absence considered within a limited range. Finally, what some call 
absence of capacity (sdmarthydbhava) is either prior or posterior 
absence depending on cases. 

46. (Concurrence and tradition rejected as instruments) 
(E59-60; T100-02 [May 1953]). Concurrence (sambhava) is 
knowledge of a part derived from knowledge of the whole; but this is 
merely a kind of inference (e.g., “since there are a thousand people 
in the room, there are a hundred people there”). ‘Tradition is 
verbal testimony if it is true, and not an instrument at all if it is 
not. 

47. Ina passing reference to Carvaka views, Jayanta remarks 
that the Carvaka must have other sources of knowledge to be so 
confident in denying the ones the orthodox schools accept. 


V. PERCEPTION 


48. (What does the stra define?) (E61-68; T103-94 [May 
1953] and [June 1953]). Jayanta sets about interpreting and defend- 
ing Gautama’s definition of perception in sdtra 1.1.4. The first ques- 
tion raised is whether the qualifying adjectives in that sara are meant 
to describe the instrument itself, or the collection of causal conditions 
of perception, or the resulting knowledge. The criticfinds fault with 
each interpretation. Jayanta suggests that the third interpretation 
could be substantiated by inserting the word “‘whence”’ into the sitra. 
Then the definition will describe the knowledge resulting from what- 
ever satisfies the adjectives. And two sorts of thing may satisfy these 


NYAYAMANJARI 355 


adjectives : (1) the collection of causal conditions whose result is 
perceptual knuwledge; (2) the perceptual knowledge whose result is 
the judgment that the object is to be obtained, avoided or viewed 
indifferently. 

49. This last line of thought is questioned. What is the rela- 
tion between the perceptual knowledge and this later judgment of 
evaluation? ‘There are several steps : (1) perception of a wood- 
apple (say); (2) memory that a former wood-apple has given pleasure, 
(3) memory of the generalization that wood-apples give pleasure; 
(4) application to this wood-apple; (5) memory that things which 
give pleasure are worth obtaining; (6) application to this wood-apple. 
Now with so many steps intervening, how can we hold that perceptual 
knowledge results in the evaluative judgment? 

50. Herethe view of an dcdrya is related. This teacher 
agrees that the perceptual knowledge is not the instrument of the 
evaluative judgment, that this object belongs to the class of pleasure- 
giving wood-apples, and from this we infer (4), which in turn, together 
with sense-object-contact, produces the final perceptual judgment 
(6). On the authority of Vatsyayana, Jayanta concludes that this 
allows us to say that the evaluative judgment is the mediate result of 
the perceptua] judgment. 

51. Others interpret the matter differently. They think that 
judgments (4) and (6) are identical, and that therefore the interven- 
ing inferential step is unnecessary. Jayanta appears to sympathize 
with this view. 

52. A new objection: (4) is a judgment to the effect that a 
wood-apple has the power to give pleasure. But such a judgment 
cannot be perceptual, since power is not the sort of thing that can be 
perceived. And since inference depends on perception, it cannot be 
inferred either. Jayanta’s answer is simply that power can be _per- 
ceived. The power to give pleasure is, in his view, merely the collec- 
tion of causal conditions. What perceives this collection? The 
internal organ, says Jayanta. 

53. Dignaga’s view that the instrument and its result are 
identical is now discussed. If it were so, says Jayanta, they should 
have the same locus —indeed, Dignaga says they do. But in fact 
a cause and its effect do not always have the same locus. In the 
Buddhist theory of evanescence, in fact, they could not; the notion of 
“locus”? is a peculiar one in a Buddhist’s mouth. 

54. If this view is untenable, even more so is the view, also 
found among Buddhists, that the instrument, the object, and the 
resulting judgment are all three identical, that the distinction among 


356 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


them results from an abstraction within one and the same conscious- 
ness, 

55. (Sense-object contact) (E68-72; T194—to end [ June 
1953]). Which kinds of things can be grasped by the sense organs ? 
The 5 sense-qualities and their respecitve universals, some of their 
loci, some other qualities such as number, motions, and the universals 
inhering in all of these, and absences. The 6 kinds of relation bet- 
ween sense and objects are reviewed and illustrated (cf. pp.307-08). 

56. Why does the sétra say that perception is a judgment ? 
One possible explanation is that it is intended to exclude such a thing 
as pleasure from the scope of the definition. The Buddhists however, 
think that pleasure and pain are kinds of judgments. But they are 
wrong, for judgments reveal their objects, while pleasure and pain 
do not. This lack of intentionality in feelings differentiates them from 
judgments. Of course, the Buddhist does not believe in this inten- 
tionality since he denies the external existence of objects and therefore 
there is nothing to be intended. He says pleasures and judgments are 
both like the lamp, lighting up themselves as well as everything around 
them. As has been argued, though, judgments are not self-luminous, 
says Jayanta, and if pleasure were held to be self-luminous, then every- 
thing around a happy man should be happy too. 

57. Why is the adjective “nonwandering”’ (in the sara) nece- 
ssary, since it could only apply to judgments and it is already specified 
in the definition that part of the definition is that perception be a 
judgment? Jayantasays that pleasurealsocan be erroneous. E.g., 
the pleasure derived from another man’s wife is a false pleasure, be- 
cause it is condemned by scripture, just as the cognition of shell as 
silver is a false perception, since it is sublated by perception. 

58. Again, the adjective ‘‘well-defined”’ (in the sétra) is not 
applicable to pleasure, but only to judgments, claims an objector. 
But this adjective, says Jayanta, has a different function. It pre- 
cludes the definition’s overlapping so as to include doubt. Then why 
is the word ‘‘judgment”’ necessary ? In order to give the adjectives 
something to qualify. 

59. (The word avyapadesya) (E73-82;T7—108 [July 1953] 
and [Aug. 1953]). Jayanta first gives us the interpretation of the ‘“‘old 
logicians.”’ According to them it means that perception is not ex- 
pressible in words. But this interpretation cannot be correct. A 
second interpretation is that the adjective serves to exclude knowledge 
gained from verbal authority, e.g., when someone tells me that the 
tree I am looking at is a jack-fruit tree. However, says Jayanta, as 
long as such verbal knowledge is caused by sense-object-contact and 


NYAYAMANJARI 357 


satisfies the other adjectives in the definition, it should be counted as 
perception. But he eventually rejects this interpretation of the word 
avyapadesya on the ground that it makes some judgments derive from 
two sources—sense-object-contact and verbal authority—and it is 
difficult to see how such judgments can be falsified. 

60. Jayanta’s own viewis this. The word avyapadesya is intend- 
ed_ to exclude the (impossible) judgment about a cow, say, which is 
derived at the same time from the eyes and the ears—the eyes 
seeing the cow, the ears hearing the word “‘cow.”’ Such a judgment 
is impossible, since the cow cannot be heard and the word cannot be 
seen. Rather, the judgment “‘this is a cow” results from perceiving 
a cow and remembering the word ‘‘cow.”? The word is not a source 
of knowledge here; indeed, we never apprehend the word all at once, 
but only know the letters one at a time and our hearing of the last 
letter together with memory of the preceding ones gives us verbal 
knowledge. However, the definition of perception is intended 
to include within perception the nonpropositional awareness 
(nirvikalpakapratyaksa) of the object prior to its association with 
words, 

61. Some teachers disagree, however, and think that the judg- 
ment “‘this is a cow”’ is not verbal knowledge but rather a species of 
perceptual knowledge, Jayanta considers this and rejects it. If this 
judgment were perceptual, then it would have to be given to us through 
our hearing the word ‘‘cow.”’ But this is absurd. We do not have 
to hear the word “‘cow”’ in order to frame the judgment “‘this isa cow.” 
The objector tries to save his view by arguing that the word ‘“‘cow” 
is both the object and the instrument of the knowledge, just as the 
sun’s light is both the object and the means by which we see it. 
Jayanta argues in return that there are two acts of seeing involved 
which have been conflated by the opponent. 

62. But, continues the objector, why is not “‘this is a cow” a 
visual judgment ? Why don’t you say that we see with our eyes 
the object called ‘‘cow’’ ? After all, in cases of illusion you say that 
you see an object called ‘‘water,’’ although there is no water in con- 
tact with our visual organ. Likewise here. But, answers Jayanta, 
our account of illusion is just that water is first grasped by the internal 
organ and then perceived (mistakenly) by our eyes. Likewise here, 
the word ‘‘cow’?’ is first remembered and then the cow is perceived by 
our eyes. 

63. In the objector’s view, all propositional perception is verbal 
knowledge. Asa result he cannot explain‘how we come to know that, 
e.g., the word “‘cow”’ refers to cows. In order to explain this he must 


358 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


appeal to some other source of knowledge—but which one? 
Verbal authority ? But this would mean that the cow already is quali- 
fied by the word “‘cow,”’ and as a result the word ‘“‘cow’? would de- 
note itself! And the definition of perception must accommodate 
propositional perception, or the Buddhists will have a field day. 

64. In the last analysis, however, Jayanta confesses inability 
to make up his mind among the various interpretations of this word, 
and leaves the reader to choose. 

65. (Nonwandering again) (E82-84;T108-111 [Aug. 1953]). 
This adjective in the definition of perception serves to exclude illu- 
sion from perception. Three theories of Naiyayikas about the con- 
tent of an illusion are presented here: (1) What is presented in the 
mirage are the rays of the sun, which conceal their specific character 
and assume the form of water. (2) The characteristics (alambana) 
of water elsewhere are presented here. (3) Water is presented, but 
the condition of its presentation is the rays of the sun. 

66. What about hallucinations, which have no content— 
or soitseems? These are caused either by memory or by merit and 
demerit. In any case, they are not produced by sense-object contact, 
as illusions are, and so are ruled out of the scope of the definition of 
perception by the first clause of the definition. 

67. (Well-definedness again) (E84-86; T111=211 [Aug. 
1953] and [Sept. 1953]). This adjective serves to exclude doubt. 
Objection: The only cause of doubt is the internal organ, so this 
adjective is unnecessary, doubt already being ruled out by the first 
clause. Answer: No, some doubts are produced by the sense organs. 
Objection: A doubt is an error; therefore doubt is ruled out by the 
term ‘‘nonwandering.”? Answer: No, doubt and error are different. 

68. <A group of philosophers called here ‘‘Pravaras” hold that 
both doubt and error are propositional judgments, and that only 
a non-propositional judgment qualifies as perception. Therefore, they 
say, only one adjective, namely avyapadesya, need be given in order to 
preclude doubt and error. But this has been refuted when Jayanta 
showed that propositional perceptions are not verbal knowledge. 

69. (The Buddhist definition of perception) (E86-93; T211- 
13 [Sept. 1953] and [Oct. 1953]). The Buddhist definition consider- 
ed here is that perception is conceptual construction (kalpand) which 
is free from determination by the imagination (apodha) andis non- 
illusory (abhranta).!° First, the Buddhist claims that all judgments 
expressible in words are false, since they do not grasp a momentary 
pure particular as itis but instead through its relation with some- 
thing else, and in reality it hasnosuch relation. Secondly, among 


NYAYAMANJARI 359 


these false judgments some are vivid, since they follow closely on a 
nonpropositional awareness; others are not vivid, since they are purely 
imaginary, as we might put it. It is the first of these last two types of 
judgment that the definition under discussion singles out as “‘percep- 
tion.” 

70. Jayanta criticizes this by pointing out some 7 different 
kinds of reasons which seem to be given by Buddhists in distinguishing 
false judgments from true perceptions. The Buddhist seems to say 
that a judgment is false because (1) it is expressible in words (2) 
it arises from memory and not sense-object contact (3) it arises from 
overly complicated conditions (4) it is dissimilar to the nonproposi- 
tional awareness which precedes it (5) it grasps an object already 
known by nonpropositional awareness (6) it mistakes one thing for 
another, or superimposes identity on two different objects (7) it refers 
to a universal or a relation. 

71. As for (1), Jayanta holds, as we have seen, that the same 
object which is grasped by nonpropositional perception is also grasped 
by propositional perception. Furthermore, universals are grasped 
by nonpropositional perceptions also. Thus both propositional 
judgments, expressible in words, and nonpropositional ones, not 
expressible, are capable of being true or false. (2) The presence of 
memory among the conditions does not falsify the judgment. The sense 
organ continues to function despite the intervention of memory. 
(3) This reason is unworthy of a philosopher! (4) The difference 
alleged by the Buddhist between the nonpropositional awareness 
and the propositional perception which follows is that the latter 
judges where the former does not. But, says Jayanta, only people 
judge, not judgments; and anyway, why should it matter? (5) 
Novelty does not constitute a criterion of truth. (6) And we do 
not identify different objects—-we are quite aware that a universal 
and a particular are different. When we say “‘this is Devadatta”? we 
do not suppose that ‘‘this’’ is ““Devadatta,”’ but rather that the object 
spoken of is identical with the referent of ““Devadatta.” 

72, Jayanta reviews several understandings of nonpropositional 
perception, including the Buddhist’s. He argues that since there are so 
many conflicting accounts of it, one is free to decide for himself how to 
interpret it. Andfrom this standpoint there is little to recommend the 
Buddhist idea that nonpropositional perception is one which grasps 
a pure particular. Such a perception leaves unexplained why it is 
followed by a propositional judgment classifying the particular under 
one universal rather than another. The same difficulty haunts an- 
other theory about nonpropositional perception, namely that it 


360 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


grasps the highest genus, Being. Or the Grammarian thesis that 
nonpropositional perception grasps words : this is refuted by pointing 
to the absurdity of grasping a word without knowing its meaning. 

73. In fact it is the same object which is cognized by both non- 
propositional and propositional perception, the difference being that 
the latter cognizes the object as denoted by a word, this relation being 
supplied by memory. 

74. As for the term “nonillusory” in the Buddhist’s definition, 
it is unnecessary since “free from determination by imagination” 
excludes all such illusions. Thus the definition fails. 

75. (Mimamsa definition of perception) (E93-100; T3-19 
[Oct. 1953]). The views of Varsagana, Jaimini, and the Vrttikara 
are mentioned and rejected as being too wide or too narrow. The 
Mimémsasiitra which appears to define perception is taken by Kuma- 
rila and others not to do so; rather, they say, it explains why 
perception cannot grasp dharma. This is because there is no 
yogic perception. But, says Jayanta, if Kumarila denies the existence 
of yogic perception he cannot very well use it as a term in an infere- 
nce toshow that perception cannot grasp dharma. Furthermore, if no 
one can have yogic knowledge how did you, Kumarila, come by your 
knowledge through study of the Vedas? More positively, since cats 
can see in the dark, why can’t sages see dharma? And since their 
experience of dharma is at least as vivid as illusions, such experience 
should be accepted as a species of supernormal perception. 

76. Asacorollary to the Nyaya thesis of omniscience in sages, 
which the Mimamsakas reject, Jayanta also attends to the kind of 
knowledge called pradtibha—intuition, or foresight. He says this 
is a kind of direct, valid knowledge, i.e., perception. Objection: 
But this judgment is not born of sense-object contact, since its object 
is not present at the time of judgment but only comes to be present 
later on. Answer: However, the object with the properties it will 
have in the future is presented now as a possibility. E.g., the brother 
who will come home for dinner is known directly now as a possible 
returnee. Objector: Which sense is involved in the contact? 
Answer: The internal organ. Objector: Then the blind can see! 
Answer: No, the internal organ only grasps what has been presented 
before by external sense organs; in this case, the brother is grasped. 

77. But what exactly is omniscience ? Is it one or many acts 
of yogic perception? Jayanta thinks it is one act. Objection: But 
how can one judgment grasp many incompatible objects? Answer: 
Well, a picture, containing blue and its complement, may be grasped 
in one perception, so why not the whole universe? 


NYAYAMANJARI 361 


78. (The Samkhya definition of perception) (E100; T19-20) 
[Oct. 1953]). Isvarakrsna defines perception as a clear and distinct 
image of its object. But this overextends to inference. Raja’s 
emendation that the definition means that the object is in front of the 
percipient does not exclude inference either.1! 


Vi. INFERENCE 


79. (Vs. Buddhists on validity of inference) (E100-08); 
T107-221 [Nov. 1953]) and [Dec. 1953]). Jayanta begins by giving 
a general discussion of inference. In his account, there are 5 charac- 
teristic features of the hetu ina valid inference. (1) The & must 
overlap the p. (2) The A must overlap the sp. (3) The absence of 
h must overlap the vp. (4) The & must have an unsublated content. 
(5) The kh must not be counterbalanced by an opposing h. All 
fallacies of the hetu can be classified as violating one or more of the 
above requirements. 

80. Some Buddhists argue instead that the first 3 requirements 
are sufficient, since satisfaction of requirements (4) and (5) is necessi- 
tated by satisfaction of the first three. The fourth requirement con- 
cerning unsublated content means that the hetu must not be contra- 
dicted by perception or verbal testimony. E.g., “fire is not hot, 
because it isa product’””—here we know from perception that some 
products are hot, and this violates (4), according to Nyaya. But, 
says the Buddhist, such an inference already violates (1). The reason 
is this : a proper f must be such that it can overlap the f and the s, 
but this p, namely a fire which is not hot, isnot sucha f; therefore, the 
h cannot overlap it, which violates (1). Furthermore, it violates 
(2) as well, since not all sp overlaps ; fire is an sp, and it does not 
overlap h. 

81. Jayanta’s answer: As to the second point, surely it is 
absurd to require complete inclusion of all sp including the # to estab- 
lish pervasion. If that were required, inference would have no point. 
As for the first argument, the Buddhist takes p as being already 
endowed with s—a fire which is not hot—whereas to properly 
understand p we must take it as in itself neutral between the s and its 
negation. 

82. The Buddhists claim that pervasion is analyzable into a 
necessary relation of either identity or causality. Jayanta finds this 
obscure and eventually faulty. For one thing, if # is identical with 
s then we cannot apprehend the one without also apprehending the 
other. Then inference has no point. Ifto give inference point we 


362 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tamper with the kind of identity involved here, the judgment becomes 
nonsymmetrical, and identity is a symmetrical relation. And in 
any case, once 4 nonsymmetrical relation of pervasion is admitted— 
even if it be perversely dubbed ‘“‘identity’?—the Naiyayika can rest 
satisfied. As for inference based on causal relations, Jayanta avers 
that the Buddhist cannot admit causal relations, since on the assump- 
tion of momentariness nothing lasts long enough to be a cause. He 
should rather talk about concomitance, which is precisely the way the 
Naiyayika wishes to speak too. 

83. ‘The Buddhist replies to this last by reminding us that 
Kanada speaks of fesavat inferences as from effect to cause, but Jayanta 
explains that Kanada was merely offering this as an example of infe- 
rence and not as definitive. The sesavat inference is intended to 
illustrate concomitance, not causality. 

84. (Vs. Carvakas in defense of validity of inference) (E108- 
12; T221-27 [Dec. 1953]). A collection of complaints against in- 
ference’s validity are listed. For example: (1) Smoke belongs to 
fire but not to the mountain; therefore must be understood in a 
secondary meaning, and likewise “‘inference”’ itself must as a result be 
understood in a secondary meaning. (2) Pervasion cannot relate 
a particular fire withsmoke. Pervasion can only relate general things, 
like fire, to other general things—but fire in general does not exist 
on any particular mountain. 

85. Jayanta answers that these arguments, though they might 
bring into question someone’s account of inference, cannot prove 
inference’s invalidity, since everyone accepts inference in order to get 
along in the world. As for the particular objections cited, the Car- 
vaka fails to understand that the pervasion relation relates universals 
and not particulars—smokiness and fieriness, not smokes and fires. 

86. (Knowledge of pervasion) (E112-13; T227-31 [Dec. 
1953]). It is common Nyaya doctrine that a type of extraordinary 
perception called sa@mdnyalaksana must be introduced to explain our 
knowledge of the positive concomitance between all the particular 
smokes and fires. In addition, some Naiyayikas say that another 
kind of extraordinary perception must be postulated to account for 
knowledge of negative concomitance, which is equally important. 
In this they are opposed by the Mimamsakas, who think that negative 
concomitance need not come into the picture; positive concomitance 
is sufficient. But their view has been refuted above (cf. section 27) 
since presumption has been shown to be a kind of inference and in- 
volves negative concomitance. However, Jayanta agrees that the 
additional kind of extraordinary perception is unnecessary; the grasp- 


NYAYAMANJARI 363 


ing of the negative concomitance, as well as of the positive concomit- 
ance, is done by the internal organ. 

87. (Explanation of s#tra 1.1.5) (E113-25; T234 [Dec. 1953] 
T128 [Feb. 1954]). Jayanta cleverly interprets the defining portion 
of the sétva, namely “‘follows on perception,”’ to mean “follows on two 
perceptions of an appropriate sort”——namely, on (1) the perception 
of universal concomitance between A and s, and (2) the perception of 
paksadharmata, the presence of the h in the p. 

88. The discussion moves on to the 3 kinds of inference distin- 
guished in the satras. (1) Parvavat. There is a lengthy discussion 
as to whether this means inference from cause to effect or from effect 
to cause. Jayanta and Kumarila agree that the former is correct. 
(2) Sesavat. The discussion here follows familiar lines. (3) Sdmdnya- 
todrsta. Watsyayana’s example of this type of inference, from diffe- 
rence in location to the fact of a thing’s having moved, is rejected on 
the ground that the relation is the reverse: we infer difference in 
location from motion, so that this is an example of fesavat. In place of 
Vatsyayana’s example Jayanta gives as an example of sémdnyatodrsta 
the inference to a wood-apple’s taste from its color and other qualities. 
He apparently agrees with Uddyotakara that any noncausal infe- 
rence belongs here. 

89. Jayanta reviews the second type of explanation offered 
by Vatsyayana (cf. p. 242). In connection with sdmdnyatodrsta 
there is a discussion with the Mimamsakas as to whether its object is 
necessarily beyond the senses or not. The Mimamsakas say not. 
They give as an example the inference to Devadatta’s motion when 
it has not been seen. Another example is an inference about causal 
efficacy. Jayanta rejects these examples. 

90. (Time and space) (E123-28); T128-137 [Feb. 1954]). 
All the 3 times (past, present, and future) contain inferrable objects. 
But some say that time cannot itself be proved, and therefore the above 
statement is senseless. We cannot infer time from ideas such as 
“slow,” “‘quick’”’, etc.; these only establish the existence ofevents, 
not of time. If time is held to be partless, furthermore, how can we 
speak of past, present, and future? An answer to this is that time is 
perceived as a qualifying adjunct of objects, e.g., in judgments express- 
ed with adverbs such as “‘simultaneously,”’ ‘‘quickly,” etc. Objection: 
But time is not colored, and so is not perceptible. Answer: Color is 
not colored, but it is perceptible. Authorities such as Pragastadeva!? 
are mistaken in limiting perceptibility to colored substances and 
their qualities. Place also is perceptible. 

91. However, others think that time is inferred, not perceived. 


364 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The inference is from our ideas of slowness, etc., to their origin. 
Objection: But as said above, these properties only prove that there 
are objects or events, not time. For example, they show that the objects 
are qualified by vibrating activity. 

Answer: And what are the vibrating activities qualified by? 
We say that activities are fast and slow too. 

92. Time is one, and does not have three parts. But by think- 
ing of time as associated with certain motions, we arrive at the con- 
ventional divisions of time into past, present, and future. 


VII. COMPARISON 


93. (E128-36; T137-251 [Feb. 1954] and [March1954]). 
The interpretation of Vatsyayana is reviewed and defended. Then 
an opinion of ‘‘contemporaries”’ (adyatanas) is given, that comparison 
is the perception of the resemblance between gavaya and cow on the 
basis of verbal knowledge, and that its result (upamiti) is the knowledge 
of the denotative relation between the word gavaya and the animal in 
question. Jayanta refutes this by reminding us that perception cannot 
very well give us knowledge of this relation when the object is not in 
view. 

94. The Mimamsakas think that comparison is the instrument 
which produces the knowledge that the cow is similar to the gavaya. 
They also argue that memory of the similarity between gavaya and cow 
is impossible since the gavaya has not yet been seen at the time the 
Naiyayika wants to have us experience the similarity we later remem- 
ber. The Naiyayika says that the similarity is a result of verbal 
knowledge, and this is what is remembered. But he admits that the 
gavaya which figures in these judgments is anindistinctly known one; 
only later, when we see one, do we have a distinct knowledge of gavaya. 
There is a discussion of the nature ofsimilarity here. Jayanta contends 
that similarity can be known even when the relata are not distinctly 
known; the Mimamsaka denies it. 


VIII. VERBAL TESTIMONY 


95. (Defended as praména) (E137-46; T251-to end [March 
1954]). Again Jayanta reminds us of his idea that the qualifying 
adjectives in the definition of perception are to be understood to apply 
to all four instruments. He discusses the words “‘teaching”’ and ‘‘re- 
liable person”’ in sara 1.1.7, incidentally refuting sphotavada and affir- 
ming that only sounds which denote are words. On ‘“‘reliable person”’ 
he cites Vatsyayana with approval. 


NYAYAMANJARI 365 


96. Now an objector argues that verbal authority is merely 
inference. Several points of similarity between them are cited, and 
the differences are held to be minor. In reply, Jayanta stresses some 
of the differences. E.g., we must have specific sorts of previous 
knowledge to have an inference, but in verbal authority all we have to 
do is tolisten. Again, inference issues in whole propositions while 
verbal authority applies at the level of individual words. Objection: 
But individual words are understood to be laconic expressions of 
sentences. Answer: No, a sentence is understood to express a complete 
thought, while a word expresses an incomplete one. Another 
objector tries to argue that our knowledge of the denotation of a cow 
by the word ‘‘cow”’ is an inference from the animal’s possession of 
cowness. Jayanta’s answer is that the conclusion of this supposed 
inference is unclear : is it that a word has the capacity of conveying 
a meaning or that the word does in fact convey that meaning? 
Neither can be inferred from a property of the object cow. 

97. Now a skeptic is introduced who doubts the validity of 
scripture. He says its authorship is uncertain or nonexistent, it 
contains contradictions, it is repetitious, it does not speak of the real 
world. Take the last first. A sentence like ‘“‘a hundred elephants 
stand on the end of one finger’’ does not speak of the real world, but 
only of an imaginary state of affairs. Even if this is uttered by a 
reliable person it, produces illusion. Therefore words, even when 
uttered by reliable persons, produce illusion. The answer to this, 
says Jayanta, is that no reliable person would utter such asentence 
except in fun or with some secondary meaning. Unreliable people, 
on the other hand, do produce illusory judgments by their words. 
So it is the speaker, not the words, that is the source of error. 

98. (Self-validity (svatahpramanya) vs. validation by another 
judgment (paratahprimdanya)) (E146-60; T16-21 [April 1954] and 
[June 1954]). This discussion arises from the Mimamsa theory that 
scripture is valid intrinsically, regardless of its source. To approach 
this, Jayanta decides to review the whole question of intrinsic validity 
vs. extrinsic, a question relating to all knowledge and therefore to 
verbal authority in particular. 

99. Four views are outlined. (1) Judgments are known to be 
valid or invalid by inspection, i.e., intrinsically. (2) Both validity 
and invalidity depend on testing a judgment against some external 
standard orsource. (3) Invalidity is intrinsically justified, but validity 
is extrinsic. (4) Validity intrinsic, invalidity extrinsic. 

100. The defects of the first theory are obvious. In mistaking 
a shell for silver, does the judgment carry its validity or invalidity in 


366 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


it intrinsically ? Ifso, which? This also defeats view (3), for if the 
invalidity of a judgment such as “‘this is silver’? when confronted with 
a shell is intrinsic, then why do we reach for the object? Who reaches 
for illusory silver when they know it to be such? 

101. The Mimamsa theory, namely (4), is now presented at 
some length. What is the extrinsic condition on which the validity 
of a judgment is supposed to depend? Not the conditions which 
produce it—they are responsible for the occurrence of the judgment 
but they cannot be also the answer to the question ‘‘what is responsible 
for the validity of the judgment,” since this question would not arise 
at all unless those conditions operated. It isnot some extrinsic ‘“‘good 
quality.”’ Truth is merely due to the normal functioning of the senses, 
not to some superior or abnormal functioning. Knowledge illumi- 
nates its object naturally; it is only when the senses are defective that 
error arises. Or perhaps it will be said that the extrinsic condition 
is the absence of a contradictory judgment. But then the judgment 
“this is shell’? is not true as long as we are under the erroneous im- 
pression that the object is a piece of silver. Or perhaps it will be said 
that the judgment must agree with another judgment to be valid. 
But then how do we know the other judgment is itself valid? 

102. Furthermore, in order to explain why we act to grasp 
the object of a judgment we must accept the thesis that validity is 
intrinsic, so the Mimamsaka argues. For we do pot act to grasp an 
object unless we are convinced it is there and we are disappointed 
when we grasp for it and fail to find it. Therefore it is necessary to 
assume that a judgment is intrinsically valid but extrinsically invalid— 
that a definite judgment, as opposed to doubt, produces activity in us 
to obtain the object, and that the thwarting of this activity due to the 
erroneousness of the judgment is not due to the judgment itself but to 
extrinsic conditions. 

103. Finally, says Kumarila, the Vedas are intrinsically valid. 
They are incapable of invalidity since they have no author. The 
invalidity of scriptural statements could only be maintained if some- 
one produced them who had some defect in himself which infected 
his statements. But since the Vedas have no author, they are 
infallible. 

104, Jayanta answers these arguments. He first asks which 
instrument of knowledge grasps the validity of a judgment—per- 
ception or inference? Not perception; we do not perceive truth, 
since there is no sense-object contact, and anyway no such judgment 
as ‘I see (hear, etc.) the truth of the judgment ‘this is blue’ ” is ever 
entertained. Nor can inference prove validity, since we know on 


NYAYAMANJARI 367 


infallible mark to reason from to truth, except that truth is always a 
property of a judgment. But not all judgments are true! There- 
fore neither perception nor inference proves the intrinsic validity of 
judgments, and thus it must be extrinsic. 

105. The Mimamsaka’s argument above (section 101), that 
the validity of a judgment is due to the absence of a contradictory 
judgment, is not convincing, says Jayanta. It is not the case that we 
must be convinced of the truth of a judgment in order to act to obtain 
its object. We must believe it to be more probable than not, to be 
sure, but we need not be absolutely certain. The Mimamsaka may 
press us on this point, and we admit that it is possible to think one is 
certain where one is actually in doubt. After all, doubtis a kind of 
awareness, produced by conditions and capable of going wrong. 

106. Jayanta challenges the Mimamsaka to produce a mark 
by which wecan distinguish valid from invalid judgments generally. 
What Jayanta suggests is that every judgment, when it first arises, 
arises as a doubt (whether we think so or not), and only subsequently, 
when it becomes confirmed by appeal to extrinsic conditions, do we 
know it to be true. 

107. Here Jayanta qualifies his conclusion (section 105) that 
judgments of probability suffice to inspire action towards the object. 
He now says that this applies only to ordinary objects. With respect 
to supersensible objects we must have certainty before we are willing 
to act. 

108. Now the opponent will say that the theory of extrinsic 
validity involves an infinite regress. The knowledge of an object is to 
be tested by reaching for it. But when one reaches for it, and either 
judges that he has obtained it or failed to, the resulting judgment 
(whichever it is) needs a further judgment to verify it, etc. Jayanta’s 
answer is that no oneneeds a further judgment to verify the judgment 
that an object has been obtained. E.g., one may be in doubt as to 
whether the thing in front of him is a lake as long as he is out of it, 
but once in it there can be no doubt. The reason there can be no 
doubt is that the experience of obtaining water when in a lake is an 
instance of a universal regularity which has never failed us in the past. 
Whenever we have gotten in something watery we have obtained 
water. 

109. A “proud philosopher” holds that the term ‘‘self-evident”’ 
applies to judgments about objects of a kind we have tried to obtain 
before, while the word “‘extrinsic”’ applies to objects we have not tried 
to obtain before. Jayanta points out that this philosopher has not 
reflected that in everyday life we are continually seeking objects and 


368 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


it is these everyday verifications which validate a judgment; such 
judgments cannot be called “self-evident.” 

101. (Vs. the Prabhakara theory of illusion) (E161-72; T222 
[June 1954], T155 [Sept. 1954]). The Prabhakaras attempt to 
salvage Mim4msa theory by denying outright that a judgment is ever 
contradicted. What exactly is contradiction? The destruction of 
one judgment by a succeeding one? That is too wide. The non- 
coexistence of two properties in the same locus? ‘That, too, is too 
wide. Or perhaps it is the wiping out of the trace left by the contra- 
dicted judgment? Too wide. 

111. Then are there no illusions at all? No, say the Prabha- 
karas, there are not. Then is the judgment that this shell is a piece of 
silver true? The answer to this is that there is no such judgment as 
“this is a piece of silver.” There are two judgments here, one of 
perception and the other of memory, and both are true. What pro- 
duces an “‘error’’ is that the memory is not appreciated to be what it 
is, and is not distinguished from the perception. This Prabhakara 
theory is called akhydtivdda because of this nondetection of difference 
(akhyati). 

112. The Prabhakarite goes on to criticize other theories of 
error. The Naiyayika, e.g., thinks that silver which occupies another 
place and time stimulates the senses to produce awareness of silver here 
and now. But we see a piece of silver here and now, and it is not that 
piece of silver which is elsewhere and “‘elsewhen’’; therefore, this 
account is inadequate. Furthermore, what place and time are pre- 
sented with the (erroneous) piece of silver? Not the place-time 
where the silver really resides, for then the judgment would not be 
erroneous; and not any other nonexistent place-time, since a non- 
existent place-time cannot stimulate the sense. Well, then, if neither 
the silver or the place-time are present, what stimulates the senses? 

113. Or perhaps the Naiyayika will have it that it is the shell 
which stimulates the senses. Then the problem will be to connect 
this perception with the memory of silver, which has nothing to do 
with it. The only way to resolve this problem is to suppose that the 
shell conceals its own form and presents a form not its own, But 
Naiydyikas deny that this happens. 

114, As for the theory of asatkhydti, that an unreal object is 
presented in error, this is refuted by pointing out that no one experien- 
ces an absolutely unreal object like a sky-lotus. If the Buddhist 
replies that what produces the experience is the trace of a real object, 
he must be asked how does such a trace produce an experience of an 
unreal object ? And why does the trace produce a silver-experience, 


NYAYAMANJARI 369 


say, rather than a sky-lotus experience ? The trace theory will not 
hold water. 

115. Finally, the theory of dtmakhyati, where the knower and the 
known are both consciousness, should lead to our judging ‘‘I am silver” 
rather than “‘this is silver.” Anyway, ifan internal object is presented 
as external, this means the view under consideration is merely another 
version of the Naiyayika’s anyathakhydti theory, and fails for the reasons 
outlined above. 

116. The Prabhakara insists that error is entirely negative. 
It is failure to discriminate, but no positive identification takes place, 
since that would lead to the Naiyayika’s view. What, then, asks the 
critic, is the character of the judgment with which we detect error ? 
Answer : It is the discrimination of what had been before undiscri- 
minated. (b) What about dreams? Answer: Here, as before, the 
objects of memory are not discriminated as such. But not all errors 
are alike, and the Prabhakara is not committed to precisely the same 
analysis of every false judgment. 

117. Jayanta now sets out to refute the Prabhakara theory. 
For one thing, the Prabhakara insists that “this is silver’? is not one 
judgment but two. However, it clearly is one. Again, just how does 
silver present itself to us—as given by memory, or as given by 
perception? If by memory, then we should have the experience of 
remembering that we had seen the object before—but we do not. 
And ifit is given by perception, then the Prabhakara has given up 
his position. 

118. Again, what is denoted by “‘this’’ in ‘‘this is silver’? The 
Prabhakara must in consistency answer thatit is an indeterminate 
locus, where shell is not perceived andsilver is remembered. But 
surely we would not identify silver with an indeterminate “this’’ 
unless we were under the impression that they shared some property. 
And now the Prabhakara thesis fails to differ from Jayanta’s own. 

119. However, the Prabhakara may reply that there is still 
a difference, and that is that while in Jayanta’s viewsilver appears to 
us to be perceived, on the Prabhakara view it does not. Jayanta 
points out that the Prabhakara view is borrowedfrom Dharmakirti. 
It is defective, since we do not reach for objects unless we think we 
perceive them. 

120. The Prabhakara analysis of the judgment which dis- 
covers error is inadequate also. ‘This is not silver’? by no means 
makes an undiscriminated judgment into a discriminated one— 
nobody would say that. 

121. As for dreams, the Naiyayika is better able to explain 


370 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


them than is the Prabhakara. The Prabhakara is unable to explain 
why one remembers silver when he sees shell; he is even worse off in 
the case of dreams, where there is nothing real presented. The Naiya- 
yika, on the other hand, explains dreams as the reflections of real 
objects seen before and elsewhere. The example of the double-moon 
illusion does not help the Prabhakara. The Prabhakara idea is that 
true judgments of memory are sometimes not recognized to be such, 
and that such ‘mutilated’? memories constitute the subjects of our 
dreams. To show that such mutilated memories occur, he cites the 
example of seeing two moons. His explanation of this illusion is as 
follows. The number two rightly belongs to the eye-rays and is 
mistakenly transferred to their object, the moon. Thus the illusion 
is due to failure to discriminate a judgment of memory (that there are 
two eye-rays) from a judgment of perception (of the single moon) 
—both judgments being correct in themselves. Jayanta’s answer 
is that this judgment of memory, thatthere are two eye-rays, is impos- 
sible, since we cannot perceive eye-rays and so cannot remember and 
transfer the memory of their number. 

122. The Prabhakaras challenged us to explain contradiction 
(section 110). We can do that. Given a judgment 9, which attri- 
buted an object to a locus in space and time, the contradictory of it, 
not-p, is the judgment which denies that object’s occupying that locus. 

123. (Vs. the view of some other Mimamsakas) (E172-73; 
1155-58 (Sept. 1954]). Another school of Mimamsa holds that 
in error we confront an extraordinary (alaukika) piece of silver. It is 
extraordinary because it is not a useful object to confront. Thus 
instead of saying “‘this is not silver after all,’ we ought to say “‘this is 


$2? 


not ordinary silver; it is extraordinary silver!’’ But, replies Jayanta, 
this is absurd. When we discover the error we do not perceive any 
silver at all, and so can hardly perceive extraordinary silver. Further- 
more, if the criterion of extraordinariness is being framed in a negative 
judgment then the view is wrong, for we sometimes make negative 
judgments about ordinary, i.e., veridical objects. 

124, (Validity of verbal authority extrinsic) (E173-75; T158- 
61 [Sept. 1954]). Since words denote objects only because of con- 
vention and not intrinsically, the truth of judgments gained by verbal 
authority depends entirely on the trustworthiness ofthe speaker. It is 
possible to identify the characteristics which indicate trustworthiness: 
they include compassion and other such virtues. Now the Mimam- 
sakas think that these “good qualities’? are merely the absence of 
defects, but that absence of defects does not establish the extrinsic 
nature of the validity of judgments deriving from verbal authority. 


NYAYAMAN JARI 371 


Thus, they say, the Vedas are authoritative and valid intrinsically, 
because of their lack of authorship. 

If so, Jayanta claims, some Vedic passages which are clearly 
false must be held to be true. The Mimamsaka is made to answer 
that in such cases the texts have authors and those authors have defects. 
Jayanta points out that the argument is circular : the falsity of the 
statement is being used as a criterion for its having an author, but 
likewise the fact of its having an author is used as a criterion for its 
being false . 

125. (Existence of God) (E175-88; T161-83 [Sept. 1954] 
and [Dec. 1954]). Ifthe Vedas do have anauthor, the author must 
be God. Jayanta now presents opponents’ arguments designed to 
refute the existence of God. 

126. (1) God isnot perceived. (2) And therefore He cannot be 
inferred. (3) God’s “works,” e.g., hills, are not products, since they 
are unlike pots, etc., which are the products of man’s handiwork, 
(4) In any case, not all products are products of man’s handiwork, 
and therefore not all products are products of God’s handiwork. 
(5) If God were inferred by analogy, then He would be like a potter. 
But a potter has a body, moves his limbs, is not omniscient, etc., while 
God is held to have the opposite qualities. (6) If Godhasa body, who 
creates it? Not Himself, obviously, and to postulate another God to 
create the first God’s body is to generate infinite regress. (7) Does 
He create by bodily movement or by mere willing? Not by bodily 
movements, since it would take too long. Not by mere willing, as 
how could willing affect the courses of atoms? (8) Does God act 
from motive or not? If so, God is not perfectly blissful. If not, 
then He behaves like an insane person. Or perhaps He creates out of 
compassion? But then why did He create so much sorrow? (9) 
Since merit and demerit is sufficient to guide destiny, God is not needed 
to command them. (10) And if He is brought in to guide merit and 
demerit, He becomes dependent on them. (11) Ifitisheld that God 
creates for sport (lila), then it must be pointed out that in between 
cycles there is no sport and thus no reason for creation; nor shoulda 
good God be edified by this tawdry spectacle ofa world. (12) If God 
is made absolutely responsible for the state of the world (i.e., if the 
‘law of karma” is abandoned) then (a) God’s goodness must be re- 
jected, (b) the Vedic injunctions become pointless, (c) the hypothesis 
of liberation must be abandoned. 

127. Jayanta now answers these arguments. He holds that 
God can be inferred, and that the mark by which this inference pro- 
ceeds is the fact that the world is an effect. The inference, then, is 


372 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


this : God exists, because He produces an effect of a type whose exis- 
tence presupposes the existence of someone who knows the process 
and motive of its production, like a jar. 

128. The arguments against the world’s being an effect might 
stem from a Carvaka, a Buddhist, or a Mimamsaka, but in each case 
their espousal of such arguments leads them into inconsistency. The 
Carvaka believes that the Vedas are produced by men. The Mimam- 
sakas believe that mountains are effects since they hold that they are 
destructible. The Buddhists, holding that everything is transitory, 
must admit that everything is an effect. 

129. But what is being proposed as the mark of ‘“‘being an 
effect”? ? Jayanta answers : having parts. This is challenged by the 
Buddhist on the ground that it involves assumption of universal con- 
nections. Jayanta answers that though the Buddhist may deny 
universals he replaces them by absences of absences (apoha) and this 
will serve as well at this point. In answer to argument (4) in section 
126 Jayanta argues that the examples given by the opponent of things 
which are not products of man’s handiwork are themselves uncertain, 
being subjects of other inferences, and therefore not proper counter- 
examples. There is an interesting discussion of this claim, the oppo- 
nent asking how we can ever give counterexamples if they are to be 
ruled out in this fashion. Jayanta firmly reiterates that the disputing 
parties must agree about the absence of the sddhya from a counter- 
example. Ifthe parties dispute over the presence or absence of the 
sadhya from a putative counterexample, then it cannot function as a 
counterexample, but must itself be argued over. Whether the earth, 
or big trees, for example, are or are not created is doubtful. But they 
are effects, and we infer from analogy with other effects that therefore 
they must have acreator. Therefore the opponent cannot use them 
as counterexamples. 

130. There is a brief discussion ofother proposed proofs for 
God’s existence. They are criticized in some cases, accepted as autho- 
rity in others. 

131. Then the eternality of God’s attributes is proved. How 
can God’s will be eternal? Ifit is, its results should be eternal also, 
says an objector. Jayanta answers that though God’s will is eternal it 
produces temporary effects by its connection with noneternal objects. 

132. As for objections (5)—(7) in section 126, the ones 
about God’s body, Jayanta holds that God is incorporeal. God can 
will physical results just as we will our bodies to move. As for (8), 
about God’s motives, the objection that God should not produce sorrow 
if he is compassionate is answered by holding that God must provide 


NYAYAMANJARI 373 


a place (Hell) for people whose karma is bad to correct their ways and 
seek salvation anew. As for the time between cycles, that is produced 
by God to give the selves periodic rest from their labors. 

133. Kumiérila’s view, that the merit and demerit of theselves 
produces all effects and that God is unnecessary, is met thus : such 
a view cannot explain the production of many natural objects. A 
mountain isa pleasure to X and a problem to Y—surely their karmas 
cannot cooperate in producing it! In fact, individuals never have 
common aims. When big buildings are built, it is one individual 
who commands and others obey; to try to build a big building by 
democratic institutions would be crazy. Likewise the world needs a 
masterbuilder. For the same reason, there is only one God. 

134, (Sounds are noneternal) (E188-200; T183-220 [Dec. 
1954] and [March 1955]). The Mimamsakas argue that sound is 
eternal. But objections to this are as follows. (1) A sound is an 
effect because it is regularly preceded by effort. (2) A sound is 
destructible because it is not heard always. (3) We use expressions 
like ‘‘producing sounds,” etc., which show it isan effect. (4) Sounds 
evolve from other sounds. (5) Variations in the cause of a sound 
produce variations in the sound, which shows it is an effect. 

135. The Mimamsa answer to these points. (1) Sounds are 
not produced, they are manifested. Effort precedes this manifesta- 
tion, but is not a cause. (2) The manifestation of words requires 
formation in the mouth, and as the mouth changes the word is no 
longer heard; but this does not show that sound is produced. (3) 
**Produce”’ is ambiguous in ordinary usage; it may mean production 
properly socalled, or it may mean manifestation. (4) What you call 
the ‘‘evolution”’ of a sound from another is in fact the substitution of 
one sound for another. (5) And it is the volume ofa sound, not the 
sound itself, which increases or decreases due to varying conditions. 

136. Now the Mimamsaka offers an argument based on pre- 
sumption (arthdpaitt). Ifa sound perishes, thenitcannot communi- 
cate its meaning, for it takes some time for men to make out the mean- 
ings of words. The Naiyayika may reply that it is not the sound but 
its universal property which persists. This is not tenable, for such a 
universal belongs both to sounds which convey meanings and to sounds 
which do not. And anyway, there is no universal ‘‘g’’-ness residing in 
“9? s, for there is only one “‘g’’; the appearance ofmany “‘g’’sisdue to 
its association with other letters in different combinations. 

137. Now since there is only one sound of a given kind, when 


ee 33 


we recognize a sound as “‘g’’ it follows that we are literally re-cogniz- 


374 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ing the same “‘g,”’ not discovering a particular “‘g’”’ which falls under 
a universal we have seen instances of before. 

138. Jayanta refutes this. Letters are produced, not manifes- 
ted. First, if letter-sounds are eternal and omnipresent, why don’t 
we hear them everywhere and all the time ? The Mimamsaka may 
answer that there are different dhvanis—bits of air in the body— 
which come into contact with a part of the mouth and thus manifes- 
tation of one sound rather than another takes place there. But, says 
Jayanta, this does not help explain our auditory experiences— 
either we should hear nothing or everything, particularly since the 
Mimamsaka thinks that the organ of hearing is the all-pervading, 
partless dkafa. Thus we must hold that words and letters are produced, 
not manifested. 

139. The Mimamsaka retorts. The ear, like the mouth, is 
capable of discriminating sounds which reach one part rather than 
another, And we do not hold that the sky per se is the auditory 
organ; rather it is a circumscribed portion of adkafa, as the Naiyayika 
holds. Letters come to be thought of as particulars by taking on 
properties of the dhvani in which they are manifested. 

140. Furthermore, the manifestation theory is simpler than 
that of production. The Mimamsaka spoofs the Vaisesika account of 
sounds creating other sounds in rippling waves throughout the atmos- 
phere. Samkhyas hold that the auditory organ goes out to grasp 
sounds and takes on their forms just as the visua] organ does. But then 
it should also take on the forms of the nearby sounds that it has to 
pass through to get to the far-off ones. The Jainas hold that a sound 
is a whole made up of particles, and that this body moves from the 
place of origin to the ear. Butsuch constituents of sounds are not seen 
and are not combined by anything; such loose conglomerations, not 
being very heavy, ought to be blown around considerably en route, 
or demolished completely by trees, etc. In comparison with these 
the Mimamsa theory has obvious merits. 

141. Now Jayanta sets out to refute this argument. Hesees 
two lines of argument used by the Mimamsaka: one from recognition, 
the other from presumption. But both arguments fail if the hypothesis 
that ‘‘p’’-ness exists can be established—for then both recognition 
and the possibility of communication can be adequately explained 
without recourse to the Mimamsa account. Therefore Jayanta 
proposes to prove the existence of such a universal property. 

142. Consider the word gagana. According to the Mimamsaka 
theory of manifestation, are there one or two “‘g’’s here? If only one, 


6699 


then on what basis do we distinguish between ‘“‘g” and ‘‘v’’, say ? 


NYAYAMANJARI 375 


All letters become one in this account. But if the Mimamsaka says 
there are two “‘g’’s in “‘gagana,” then again on what basis? The same 
part of the mouth, and the same dhvani, manifest the same kind of 
sound. Thus there is only one sound, not two. The Mimamsaka, 
thinks Jayanta, is incapable of explaining the difference between the 


CO 


two “‘g’’s. And once it is admitted that there are two different indivi- 
duals sharing a common character, ‘‘g’’-ness has been admitted. 

143. This leads to a discussion of identity and difference. The 
Mimaémsaka says thata and 6 are different if we see a differentiating 
feature, but not otherwise. Jayanta denies thisprinciple. E.g., in 
movements there are subtle changes from one moment to the next, 
and the watcher senses there is difference without seeing the differen- 
tiating characteristics of each moment and contrasting them with one 
another. In any case, the Mimamsaka seems willing to admit that 
if these two “‘g’’s are different they must have differentiating features, 
and vice versa. Very well, let us say they have differentiating fea- 
tures: the minute differences in the way they are pronounced, say. 
But this makes Jayanta’s point : There are different ‘‘g’’s but they 
share the universal property ‘‘g’’-ness. 

144. The only way left for the Mimamsaka, according to 
Jayanta, is to deny that there are classes of things which differ amongst 
themselves. But this is absurd. It issues either in a Buddhistic sort 
of theory or in monism. 

145. There follows a discussion of recognition, intended to 
show that only on the hypothesis of universals can the phenomenon 
be adequately explained. The exact account of recognition does not 
matter, thinks Jayanta; whatever it may be, either universals or simi- 
larity must be brought in to complete the account, and the Buddhistic 
theory of similarity—the apoha theory—reduces to the theory of 
universals, as suggested in section 129 in aslightly different connection. 

146. Jayanta now reverts to the Mimamsaka’s manifestation 
theory and refutes it along similar lines to what was given before. 
The theory that the organ of hearing changes like the mouth’s dhvanis 
from sound to sound, a theory attributed to Bhartrmitra, is scoffed 
at. Kumérila also rejected it. Kumérila’s own solution is to make 
the auditory organ out to be dik rather than akdSa. But dik— 
direction—performs different functions, and if the functions are 
transferred the point becomes a verbal one. 

147, Jayanta asks : What accounts for the differences in inten- 
sity ofsounds. Is it the letter’s changing properties ? If the Mimam- 
saka agrees, he capitulates to Nyaya. Or is it the properties of the 
air which are (incorrectly) attributed to theletters? But this will 


376 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


not do either, since the air is sensed not by hearing but by touch. 
Or else, as Vaisesikas hold, it is not sensed at all but inferred. Or 
perhaps the Mimamsaka will say that the intensity belongs to our 
consciousness and not to its objects. But then, since the Mimamsaka 
holds that consciousness is not sensed, we cannot sense the changes in 
intensity! 

148. There are some remarks about the physics of audition, 
to show the superiority of the Nyaya view over that of Mimamsa. 
This is to answer the argument that the Mimamsa view is simpler than 
that of the Vaisesika. Jayanta tries to show that Kanada had a 
better understanding of the way the world is than Kumarila. He 
explains carefully and at some length the theory that one sound pro- 
duces another, forming waves of sounds. 

149. Is sound a quality? Yes, says Jayanta. No, says the 
Mimamsaka. The argument given by Jayanta is that sound must be 
either a substance, a quality, or a motion. By eliminating the other 
two we conclude it isa quality. It is not a substance, since substances 
are caused by many, not one, substance and a sound can be caused by 
one substance. It is not a motion, since one sound may produce 
another, and one motion cannot produce another motion. Jayanta 
is careful throughout this passage to discriminate good reasons from 
the bad ones that he considers some Naiyayikas to have given. 

150. (E213-18) Mimamsa holds that the Vedas are not man- 
made. Jayanta produces reasons for doubting this theory. There 
must be an instrument of knowledge supporting claims, e.g., of God’s 
authorship of the Vedas, and Jayanta points out that no one has seen 
the Vedas being composed; thus perception is not a proper instrument. 
If one seeks to prove by inference that the Vedas have no author, say, 
by inferring from the tradition of God’s authorship to the absence of 
human authorship, Jayanta constructs a rival inference which is 
equally valid but contrary to this one and suggests that neither is 
correct since they are equivalent in force. 

The opponent may claim that the Vedas are of natural origin 
while other products are artificial. Jayanta questions the basis on 
which the opponent might propose to make this distinction. Why 
aren’t cloths sometimes of natural origin if words sometimes are ? 
Why are the Vedas of natural origin and other texts not? If the 
opponent seeks to show that the Vedas possess excellences which dis- 
tinguish them from other literary works, Jayanta replies that this is 
no reason for denying their authorship, and furthermore, he adds, 
compositions by such as Kalidasa and Bana have excellences of 
their own. 


NYAYAMANJARI 377 


The opponent might argue that the Vedas are natural in origin 
since they appear at the beginning of each cycle. Jayanta answers 
that the opponent cannot prove the beginninglessness and authorless- 
ness of the Vedas through that, for he has no way of showing that a 
different work does not come into existence at the beginning of each 
cycle. 

In the Vedas it actually says that Prajapati created the Vedas. 
Now the Mimamsaka is presumably willing to accept that, e.g., Vyasa 
wrote the Mahabharata since the epic says so; the parallel inference 
in the case of the Vedas is sufficient to show that they were created 
by God. 

The Mimamsaka finally turns and challenges Jayanta to provide 
a proof of an author of the Vedas, which Jayanta happily does by 
presenting the stock Nyaya inference by analogy from the fact that a 
cloth, a pot, etc. have a maker, being composite things, to the Vedas 
having a maker, being a composite thing. 

151. (E218-19) Is He who creates the Vedas the same as He 
who creates the world? Yes, since they are created for human beings 
who inhabit the world, so that those beings may improve themselves 
by the study of the texts. Only a Creator who is all-knowing and 
understands the working of this mechanism because He created the 
world and the bodies in it would have the requisite knowledge and 
capacity to create the texts whose study has these results. 

152. (E220-22) The Mimamsaka’s view about the meaning 
of words is that there is a natural relationship between a word and its 
meaning such that it needs no self to establish it. However, they do 
admit that the sages who set out the Vedas in words are necessary for 
the conveying of these naturally established meanings. Jayanta 
answers that, so far as the evidence goes, wherever there isa meaning- 
ful expression there is a man responsible for it; it is gratuitous to postu- 
late a natural meaning in addition. We do not perceive any relation 
(contact, inherence, etc.) between word and object; thus it must be 
conventional. The Mimamsaka retorts that there is an element of 
convention in our understanding and communicating meanings, 
even though the meanings themselves are naturally established. He 
gives many reasons why one cannot construe the original meaning- 
relation as conventional. 


This hypothesis of an additional relationship of fakti, a natural 
relation, cannot, says Jayanta, be perceived or inferred. If everything 


can be explained by appealing to convention, the additional hypothesis 
of fakti is gratuitous. The fact that words appear to have their 
meanings fixed is because God lays down the conventions at the begin- 


378 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ning of each cycle; the assumption of beginningless fakti gains nothing. 

Objection: To establish a convention one must say something 
like “TI establish this convention’’; but if God did that at the beginning 
of creation the words he used must have gotten their meaning some- 
where previously. Answer: Just as God can create mountains merely 
by his desire, so He creates speech by his desire, and gives it a conven- 
tional meaning. It is true that to convey this meaning to people he 
must create the Vedas, but the opponent has already admitted that the 
Vedas are created (by the sages) to convey already established mean- 
ings, so he should not have any difficulty accepting Jayanta’s theory 
that God creates the Vedas to convey meanings already established 
by God. 

153. (E222-23) Jayanta refutes the position that there is an 
eternal relation between a word and its meaning by showing that no 
such relation is known through perception or inference, and that in 
any case it is redundant, convention providing a simpler explanation. 

Objection: Since convention is dependent on men’s desires which 
are irregular, there would be confusion between the referents of words 
and the content of a man’s idea at a moment. Answer: No, that 
there are fixed kinds of objects is guaranteed through the relation 
of objects to universals. The kinds of things in the world are not 
dictated by the natural power of words, as the Mimamsaka seems to 
think. Ifit were so, a new word could not convey an old meaning, 
but it can, 

154. (E226-29) Jayanta says that the validity of the Vedas 
is due to their being spoken by trustworthy people, not to their eter- 
nality. Objection: What is the proof that sages are trustworthy? Not 
perception, clearly. Not inference, because there is no relevant per- 
ception to base it on. Answer: Thishas already been answered. God is 
trustworthy, and He must be invoked to explain the authorship of 
the Vedas. Furthermore, the opponent is mistakenly trying to justify 
by inference a thing which can only be known through authority; 
the case is similar with, e.g., the Ayur-Veda (medical) texts, whose 
authority is not to be thought of as inferred from experimental results. 

155. (E231-71) There follows a lengthy section in which 
Jayanta treats the claims of various texts to validity through authority: 
he defends the authority of the Atharvaveda, as well as of such texts 
as the Tantras and the scriptures of Saivism and of Vaisnavism, since 
they are in accord with the Vedas, but he rejects the teachings of 
Buddhism since they are not. He seems, however, to accept the 
actual words of Gautama the Buddha, arguing that the Buddha, 
being an incarnation of the one God, spoke authoritatively. 


NYAYAMANJARI 379 


Jayanta is really quite tolerant of a wide variety of claims to scriptural 
status, only rejecting texts which are clearly born of lower impulses. 
He defends the Vedas’ authority against a number of standard ob- 
jections, 

156. (E271-82) The question of universals is generated by 
the question of what a word means—the individual, the universal 
property, and/or the characteristic shape (dkriz). 

Now an objector begins a lengthy argument against the very 
existence of universals. (1) Universals cannot be shown to exist, 
since they cannot be perceived. The operation of the senses is con- 
fined to what is presented at the present moment, and thus perception 
cannot bring about classification, which involves relation with what 
went before and what is to follow. (2) Universals cannot be proved 
to exist through inference or verbal testimony, since these instruments 
involve conceptual constructions (vikalpa) and thus do not get at sub- 
stantial reality. (3) There is no difference between the individual 
and his properties, as there is a difference between, say, a pot anda 
cloth. Difference is shown by the fact that one can have a thought of 
one thing without having the thought of the other, but in the case of 
an individual and his property the thought of the one necessarily 
involves the thought of the other. (4) If the Naiyayika complains 
about the previous argument, contending that individual and property 
are different since (on his theory) they are each located in distinct 
loci, the objector refuses to allow that any relationship between dis- 
tinct things is perceived in the case of individual and universal. 
(5) Does the universal occur completely in the individual, or does 
only a part of it do so? Familiar difficulties are adduced in either 
case, (6) If the Naiyayika appeals to inherence, a relation between 
inseparables (ayutasiddha), how can there be a “‘relation’’ between two 
things which are not separate? The objector canvasses the Vaiée- 
sika and Nyaya views on which things are inseparable from which. 
(7) The Naiyayika may wish to characterize the relation of universal 
to individual as a relation between a qualifier (rapa) and the thing it 
qualifies (riépin), but what does the term ‘‘qualifier’’ denote here 
~color, or shape, ora thing’s nature? Not color, since air and 
the internal organ have no color. Not shape, since qualities and 
motions have no shape, though they are supposed to have universal 
properties inhering in them. And surely not nature, since then in- 
dividual and universal will be identical, in opposition to the Nyaya 
contention. (8) Kumarila holds that an individual must be held to 
have a dual nature, inasmuch as it resembles some things and is 
different from some others. But this must be wrong, as one single 


380 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


thing cannot be known by a single act of perception to have two 
mutually contradictory characteristics—both oneand many, eternal 
and noneternal, etc. These judgments which we admittedly make 
cannot be accurate but must involve conceptual construction. Thus 
the apparent class character of cows is due to conceptual construction 
resulting from the efficiency in treating together things which produce 
the same practical results. 

The Buddhist objector continues, by raising the question how 
inference can occur if there are no universal properties, no kinds of 
things. The answer is in terms of the afoha theory, which is set forth 
along with Mimamsaka attempts at its refutation and a defense of the 
theory. 

157. (E282-84) Jayanta now begins his rebuttal. First he 
asks : Do you, the Buddhist, affirm the apoha theory because of a view 
about reality or because of a view about language ? I do not wish 
to quarrel about the latter, but you have not made the case out con- 
cerning the actual nonexistence of universals. After all, we do have 
valid knowledge of universals—i.e., we entertain judgments which 
are produced from contact between object and senses and which is 
free from sublation (bddha). Your doctrine that at the first moment 
of sensation we only grasp difference and not similarity is sheer dogma. 
How could we possibly adjudicate an argument on this basis— 
you saying that the first moment of perception is one way, and I saying 
that it is another ? It is not a matter of oath taking! It must be 
resolved by fair consideration of theoretical concerns. I claim that 
the Nyaya interpretation of nonpropositional (nirvikalpaka) judgment 
is better than the Buddhist’s because it explains how a subsequent 
propositional judgment can arise of the sort that actually does arise 
—namely, one which classifies objects into kinds. To explain 
common experience, then, one shouldadmit that in the first stage of 
perception itself we grasp both similarities and differences between 
things. 

158. (E284) With respect to objection (8) of section (156) , 
the rule appealed to, that two opposite characteristics cannot reside 
in one individual, is faulty. It is only when cognition of one charac- 
teristic sublates the previous cognition of the other that one could 
invoke such a rule. Experience displays many instances ofcontrary 
characteristics coexisting— e.g., in a variegated-colored cloth. 
And the same experiences refute the other objections of section (156) 
stemming from considerations about relations and conceptual cons- 
truction. 

159. (E284-86) As for (5) of section 156, our answer is that 


NYAYAMANJARI 381 


a universal property resides in its entirety in each individual instance. 
The difficulties urged must be removed, since experience shows that 
this occurs, and the relation of inherence is appealed to remove 
them. But inherence is a familiar relation, found in other relata than 
these: itrelates qualities to the substances they qualify, it relates 
wholes to their parts, etc. 

160. (E286-88) Now if you reject universals you will be unable 
to explain how we come to have classificatory judgments. Your 
alternative explanation in terms of your apoha theory, appealing to the 
practical efficiency of conceptual constructions, will not do, since you 
have not shown that those conceptual constructions could perform the 
necessary practical function. How can several completely unique 
conceptual constructions combine to produce a classificatory judgment 
that several individuals belong to one kind? Onyour assumptions, 
they cannot. And if you insist that they can, that your “‘conceptual 
constructions’’ are grasped by proper instruments of knowledge, then 
your position differs from ours only verbally. 

161. (E290) The Mimamsaka does not distinguish the dkrti 
from the universal property. Jayanta explains that dkrti is commonly 
understood as “‘consisting of parts being joined together,” but that 
the point is that the dkrti is the aggregation of the parts. The Mima- 
msa view is that the meaning of a word denoting a perceived individual 
cow has to be identified as the dkrti. But since the above is what 
Gkrti means the Mim4msa view will not do, since the aggregates of 
parts of cows differ among each other, despite their all being cows. 
Different kinds of cows have different configurations. Thus the dkrti 
cannot be that which is designated by a word, any more than the 
universal property can. The designatum of a word must be the indi- 
vidual, since it is the individual which is the thing injunctions are 
given about; individuals can be manipulated, etc. So says one sort 
of theorist. 

162. (E292-94) The Mimamsaka disagrees with that sort of 
theorist, however. He asks : Does the word mean one individual or 
all individuals? Clearly not all individuals there are! If it is said 
that the word ‘‘céw’’ denotes just those individuals which are quali- 
fied by cowness, then cowness is the meaning, not the individuals, since 
it is the universal cowness which determines the applicability of the 
word. 

Someone here suggests that the word ‘‘cow’’ may mean both the 
individual and the universal. The Mimam saka rejects this as placing 
too much ofa burden on a word, though he does not deny that hearing 
a word causes us to identify or reidentify a particular individual. 


382 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


But this occurs through the mediation of the universal, which is why 
the universal must be taken as the meaning. 

As for the argument that the individual is the meaning because 
it is the individual which anyone hearing a command has to deal with 
in practical terms, the Mimamsaka says no, since there are commands 
which require actions of a general nature not involving any particular 
individuals. 

163. (E294-97) Jayanta now answersthe Mimamsaka, The 
universal cannot be the meaning of a word in use, since such a word is 
declined. A declined noun points to individuals (one or more, of a 
certain gender and in a certain relation to the verb) in virtue of that 
individual’s being characterized by the universal. Thus the meaning 
of a word cannot be the universal simpliciter. However, we Naiya- 
yikas hold that the meaning is the individual qualified by the universal. 
Like perception, the word relates directly to both. 

164, (E297-300) Since the Mimamsaka accepts that the func- 
tion of a sentence is regularly injunctive, he should admit that words 
relate through their meaning at least in part to individuals. Jayanta 
goes on to elaborate on grammatical points in concluding this 
argument, 

165. (E300) Jayanta now turns to the question of sentence 
meaning. He alludes to 3 theories : (1) the meaning of a sentence is 
the judgment conveyed by the mutual relationships among its consti- 
tuent words; an external (bahya) meaning is impossible; (2) external 
meaning just is the mutual relationship among the words, so sentence 
meaning is external to word meaning; (3) the sentence meaning is the 
(meaning of the) main verb qualified by the mutual relationships 
among the other words. 

166. (E300-02) The first view is explained. The judgment 
conveyed by the sentence must be unitary, and thus intrinsic to the 
whole sentence and not to any of its parts. The proponent of this 
view turns out to be a Buddhist, for one of his reasons for holding this 
view is that since ideas are momentary, there can be no meaning rela- 
tionships (such as expectancy, etc.) among them. 

Jayanta refutes this view by pointing out that since the meaning 
of a sentence is different from the meaning of each word in it, sentence 
meaning must be “‘external’’ to the meanings of each of its words, 

167. (E302-06) The third view of section 165 is now enter- 
tained. Its proponents wish to say that the main verb carries the 
meaning of the sentence, and thus that the action enjoined is the 
primary meaning of every sentence. Jayanta deals with this by a 
stepwise procedure of adducing arguments to show that other things 


NYAYAMANJARI 383 


aremore important. First, he argues that the result of the action must 
be the sentence meaning, since it is the result for which the action is to 
be performed. But then, next, it turns out that the person who will 
enjoy the result is even more important. But this allows Jayanta to 
refute the entire line of thinking. The person being enjoined to act 
cannot be the meaning of the sentence, nor can the result, since noth- 
ing is said about its being fulfilled. 

168. (E306-22) Jayanta’s own view is that it is productive 
activity (bhdvand) which is the meaning of the sentence, or rather, 
itis the activity enriched with a suitable result and tied down in res- 
pect to result, means, and procedure. But this activity is not the 
agent’s action, which was shown not to be the meaning in the previous 
section; it is rather the doing common to all action verbs. There 
follows a lengthy discussion of Mimamsa like theories about the 
function of verbs, injunctions, the optative mood, etc. 

This bhavand of which Jayanta speaks actually has two parallel 
varieties. The previous paragraph spoke of the activity done : this is 
the arthabhavané. But one must also recognize the sabdabhdvana, the 
function of words to induce that activity. This latter function also 
is determined in three ways, corresponding to agent, result, and means, 
which together determine the arthabhdvand. Corresponding to the 
result (what is done) is the word’s inducing a person to activity; 
corresponding to the means (by what it is done) is the word order; 
and corresponding to the procedure (how it is done) are the arthavada 
statements giving precise details of the enjoined ceremonies.** 

169. (E323-24) In the course of these grammatical subtle- 
ties, the question is raised: what is the content of a negative injunction 
(nisedha)? Jayanta discusses several possible answers. His prefe- 
rence is to treat the negative particle as in effect constituting the verb 
in a negative injunction, with the grammatical verb conditioning the 
negative particle as an adjunct indicating what is proscribed. 

170. (E332-34) Returning finally to the question: “‘What is 
the meaning ofa sentence,”’ Jayanta remarks that the s&trakéra and 
his commentators did not define sentence meaning since it was not 
within the purview of their investigation. An objector taunts Jayanta 
to distinguish sentence meaning from the meanings of the constituent 
words, Jayanta does, explaining that the meaning of the sentence is 
the collection of word meanings joined together. 

171. (E334-35) If the opponent insists upon Jayanta’s identi- 
fying some category (padartha) as the principal meaning of the sen- 
tence, Jayanta prefers that the category be that of the result for which 
the activity enjoined is undertaken. 


384 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


172. (E335-36) A couple of additional suggestions are taken 
up and refuted. One party suggests that the meaning of a sentence 
is the effort (udyoga) marked by a flickering (spanda) in the _ self. 
Jayanta argues that there is no such flickering. Another suggestion is 
that the sentence meaning is intuition (pratibha) which shines forth 
when the words are understood. Thisis rejected: there is no single 
intuition—the same words produce different reactions in different 
hearers. 

173. (E336-37) Jayanta now turns to consider the sphota theory. 
It is unacceptable to the Naiyayikas because it makes out the cause of 
understanding words to be something eternal and established by sages 
(apta) whereas Nyaya holds that words are noneternal and conven- 
tional. Thus the sphota theory has to be refuted. But first, it must 
be sympathetically expounded. 

174, (E337-44) The sphotavddin first refutes the notion that 
letters convey meaning in themselves either separately or collectively. 
Then he proves by inference that, since we understand the meanings 
of words, there must be a cause of this understanding, and since it is 
not the letters themselves, it must be the word sphofa which produces 
our understanding of the word. This sphota becomes manifest as soon 
as the first letter of the word is heard, and is made clearer by the succee- 
ding letters. Or, if one prefers, one can view sound as that which 
manifests the sphota —one sound, appearing differentiated through 
conditioning (upddhi). In this way it can be held that the sphota 
is known not only through inference but also by perception. 

But this view is only conditionally correct. For the ultimate 
sphota is the sphota of the sentence. There are in reality no word 
sphotas, only sentence sphotas which are partless. The appearance 
of parts—words—is a delusion (bhrama). This leads finally to the 
identification of the sphota with Brahman itself, manifesting itself 
(vivarta) asmany through association with beginningless avidya. There 
is not even in reality anything meant by a sentence which is distinct 
from the speaker. Even this apparent distinction is illusory. 

175. (E345-48) Jayanta proceeds to refute the sphofavddin. 
The inference that the sphota theorist used fails, because the letters do 
convey the meaning of a word collectively. The sphotavddin thought 
to set this possibility aside because he denied the possibility that the 
letters produced the resultant word meaning progressively through 
their sequential production. But this is precisely what happens. 
Moreover, it is quite usual for things in sequence to produce effects 
collectively. Mouthfuls of food in sequence produce a single satis- 
faction which is not forthcoming from just one mouthful. Just 


NYAY AMA NJARI 385 


so, as the letters are spoken, at each stage a result is produced (avdnta- 
rapirva); when the final letter has been spoken the collective result 
is the whole word meaning (paramdpirva). 

176. (E348-52) The alternative possibility which the sphota- 
vadin mentioned, according to which sound manifests the sphota, is 
now taken up. The one sound cannot manifest the word meanings 
in itself, since when one speaks very fast, although the words are 
spoken, the hearer does not understand them. This shows that each 
letter must be articulated and that the meaning is built up progressi- 
vely. Thus the suggestion that sphota can be known through percep- 
tion will not do. 

177, (E352-56) As for the contention that the meaning of a 
sentence, which the sphofavddin takes to be the ultimate single sound 
(=Brahman), is without parts, Jayanta points out that although it 
may be single it does not follow that itis partless. Acloth is single 
but it has parts. 

178. (E356-64) Having shown that letters successively under- 
stood convey the meaning of a word, Jayanta now shows that the 
letters also convey the meaning ofa sentence by producing judgments 
concerning words which are then recollected all together at the hearing 
of the final letter, the result being the understanding of the meaning 
of the sentence. 

179. (E365-72) Jayanta now takes up the two competing 
theories about sentence meaning, namely abhihitanvayavdda and 
anvitabhidhanavada. According to the latter view, the words of a 
sentence do not denote their meanings separately but only function to 
help convey the meaning of the sentence. This view holds, that 
words have no meanings in isolation. Abhihitdnvayavada attributes 
separate meanings to words and construes the meaning of the sentence 
as a function of the meanings of its component words. Jayanta points 
out that the arguments given above against sphota also apply against 
anvitabhidhanavada.14 

180. (E375-92) Jayanta concludes the first Book of his treatise 
with an extended discussion of the uses of grammar as expounded 
by Patafijali in his Mahdbhdsya, for instance. After considering all 
sides of the question he concludes in favor of grammar. 


PART TWO : THE OBJECTS OF KNOWLEDGE 
181. (El-7) Jayanta describes the views about the self held 


by Carvaka, Mimamsa, and Advaita, setting aside the account of 
the Advaitin according to which the self is consciousness and suppor- 


386 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ting the view, which Nyaya shares with Mimamsa, that the self is 
perceptible. 

182. (E7-14) He goes on to show that the self is inferrable as 
well. In the course of this he takes up an objection that the marks 
which the Naiyayika takes to prove the self actually are merely marks 
of the body. After expounding the two views about “‘cooking”’ (see 
pp. 84-86) he repudiates this objection by showing that neither the 
body, nor the senses, nor even the internal organ are conscious, and 
thus the marks, since they must prove the existence of a seat of cons- 
ciousness, prove the existence of the self. 

183. (E14-39) Jayanta reviews arguments against the Vijfia- 
navadin’s thesis of momentariness, showing that the fact of recollec- 
tion refutes that thesis. 

184. (E39-45) Now he refutes the Carvaka by proving the 
existence of adrsta. 

185. (45-47) Next he discusses Gautama’s definition of body, 
noting that some had complained that the definition, Since as it 
specifies that bodies must move; both overextends toapply to chariots 
and underextends by not including immobilized frogs. Jayanta 
answers that the intention is to indicate by the word cesté in the defi- 
nition the ability to display movements initiated by a self. Thus 
chariots, not having that ability, are not bodies while the frog in the 
stone, having the ability but being temporarily restrained, does have 
a body. 

186. (E48-55) Jayanta shows that the sense organs are not to 
be confused with the parts of the body in which they abide. Samkhya 
holds that the senses are not elemental, as Nyaya thinks they are, but 
evolved from the ahamkdra, since they are capable of behavior that is 
not characteristic of material substances. Jayanta shows that the 
senses, even though they are elemental, are capable of grasping the 
various objects and behaving in the fashion in question. 

187. (E55-58) Jayanta reviews the objects (artha). 

188. (E58-67) Next he takes up the notion of dbuddhi, first 
expounding the Samkhya theory. He professes not to understand 
the view that the purusa is conscious but that the buddhi, though un- 
conscious, brings about a propositional judgment, since if the buddhi 
is a judger it must surely be conscious. Samkhya says that the purusa 
“sees”? while the buddhi ‘“‘determines’’ : what is this ‘‘seeing’? One 
sort of answer given is that seeing isakindof reflection. Jayanta asks: 
What is reflected—the purusa in the buddhi, or the buddhi in the 
purusa? Purusa cannot pass on its power of consciousness to the buddhi 
because its consciousness has been defined as untransferable. If the 


NYAYAMANJARI 387 


buddhi sends up reflections to the witnessing purusa, the purusa must 
make a response in order to “‘see,”’ but this runs counter to the defini- 
tion of purusa as unchanging and by nature a ‘“‘seer.”’ 


Samkhya replies that what happens is that the buddhi sends up a 
specific content which triggers the specific activity with respect to 
that content, even though purusa’s witnessing nature is eternal and 
natural. Jayanta replies that it is impossible to distinguishin all this 
the activity of the buddhi from that of the witnessing consciousness. 
Thus the assumption that buddhi is different from purusa’s consciousness 
is faulty, and the Nyaya view is thereby demonstrated to be true. 
No doubt, Jayanta adds, an eternal internal organ is necessary, but 
that is already present as the manas. Thus the buddhi conceived as 
an additional “organ” is superfluous. The Samkhya argues that 
unless prakrti—including buddhi—is allowed to bind the purusa— 
the whole doctrine of bondage and liberation becomes unintelligible. 
Jayanta’s answer is to point out that the Samkhya account of bondage 
is itself incoherent, since according to it the prakrti binds the purusa 
even though purusa is by nature pure witnessing consciousness, yet 
after realization prakrti ceases to bind—but no explanation can be 
found for this, since prakrti admittedly can bind purusa despite the 
latter’s natural purity. 

Jayanta now sets forth the satkdryavdda view of causation, of which 
the Samkhya is a notable exponent, and criticizes it. How can the 
cause and effect both exist simultaneously in the same thing? They 
are not both seen there. He criticizes various ways of construing the 
relation which the Samkhya claims to connect cause to effect. Sam- 
khya speaks of a relation of ‘‘manifesting”’ (abhivyakti), as well as of 
a “potency” (Sakti) which causes the effect to be manifested at a 
certain time and place. We do not see any “‘potency,” and it cannot 
be the effect (say, the pot) existing before its production, since it does 
not have the form of a pot. More sophisticated ways of identifying 
the “potency”’ are considered and rejected, since they involve notions 
(such as ‘‘material cause’’ (updddéna) whose implications are shown not 
to be compatible with satkdryavada. 

189. (E67-71) After discussing the topics of the internal organ 
and activity, he explains the different kinds of defects(dosa) in 
Gautama’s list as well as the ways of extinguishing them, adding that 
they will be discussed in greater detail in the section on liberation. 

190. (E71-74) In discussing rebirth, Jayanta takes occasion to 
describe the process of construction of a human body, which is the 
same—from atoms with the assistance of God—as with any 
material body. 


388 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


191. (E74-75) In considering the topic of fruits (phala), our 
author points out that while some kinds of actions produce their results 
immediately, performing prohibited actions characteristically produces 
results in a later life. 

192. (E77-81) Here begins a lengthy discussion of liberation. 
First, Jayanta reviews the Vedanta gibe that the Vaisesika self in 
liberation is like a stone. He explains the Advaita view of the eternal 
bliss of the self, but points out that there is no evidence or proof for 
this. 

193, (E82-117) Jayanta appeals to the standard distinction 
between the two kinds of sentences in the Vedas, the karmakanda, and 
jidnakanda, to answer the objection that liberation is impossible since 
the Vedas are exhausted in injunctions to act. Performing acts is not 
sufficient in itself to achieve liberation, but by practice of activities 
conditioned by correct knowledge one can ward off the wrong judg- 
ments which produce faults. That liberation is achievable is shown 
by our experience of the faultless selfin deep sleep and sometimes even 
in the waking state. 

The position of jfdnakarmasamuccayavada is set forth, Such a 
theory holds that gaining liberation involves a simultaneous, two- 
fold process of on the one hand burning off the fruits of one’s actions 
by performing prescribed duties over many incarnations, on the other 
of gaining true knowledge. Jayanta answers that the samuccaya- 
vadin has not explained why new karma is not born simultaneously 
with each performance of a duty, so that one never finished burning 
off the fruits. Furthermore, liberation cannot be an effect of karma, 
since if it were it would be noneternal. Liberation must be the natu- 
ral state of the self, not a product of action. Karma is an aid to 
liberation by making one a better person, but the main method of 
gaining liberation is through knowledge. 

194. (E91-99) Jayanta runs through a number of views about 
the nature of the self and our knowledge of it. Vedanta, Gramma- 
rian, Buddhist, Samkhya, and Yoga views are considered. Jayanta 
repeats his critique of identity and difference with respect to Advaita 
and Buddhist views. He criticizes the Advaitin notion of avidyd as 
being self-contradictory: the Advaitin says that avidyd is part of an 
eternal miyd-Sakti, but has to be removed, and furthermore it is also 
called ‘“‘nonexistent” ! He shows that the Advaitin confuses non- 
existence with noneternity; noneternal things are removable, but not 
nonexistent ones. Ifthe Advaitin says that avidya = ajitana or lack of 
understanding, and is therefore nonexistent, Jayanta retorts that doubt 
and error (viparyaya) are lacks of true knowledge but are nevertheless 


NVAYAMAN JARI 389 


existent. Furthermore, if avidyd is not positive, how can it produce 
that limitation (avaccheda) of Brahman which is called the individual 
self (jiva), a limitation analogous to the (positive) limitation which 
distinguishes the ak&fa in the pot from the dkdfa in the monastery? 

Jayanta attacks the Advaitin’s claim that avidyd can lead to true 
knowledge (vidya). How can something nonexistent, like a sky- 
flower, be a means to anything? The Advaitin replies that it is 
as when a configuration of lines conveys a true meaning, or as when one 
is frightened by a snake. Jayanta answers that in both cases there is 
something which has a nature (svaripa) which produces the result 
in question—in the one case that cause is the configuration of 
lines, which is what it is really regardless of what it produces; in the 
second instance what produces fright is not an unreal snake but a 
judgment that a snake is present—a judgment which, though false, 
has a nature as an entity in its own right. 

A final jibe against the Advaitin: if there is only one self, why 
is it that when one is freed all are not freed? The Advaitin is made 
to respond that it is just as when in the same body a foot may be aching 
while the head is healthy. Jayanta retorts that in the case of the body 
there is a delimiting factor distinguishing foot from head, etc. Is 
there such a delimiting factor in Brahman ? 

195. (B99-102) Next Jayanta turns to the Grammarians, who 
hold the view of fabdadvaita, according to which everything in the world 
is a vivarta or manifestation of word (Sabda). Against this Jayanta 
poses several arguments : (1) We see that people can distinguish and 
assimilate things without knowing the words for those things. (2) 
In learning the language from our elders we must both hear the word 
and see objects, or at least entertain an image of the object the word 
is intended to denote. (3) Pronouns would be nonsense unless there 
were objects for them to refer to. (4) Kumirila is quoted as arguing 
that our conception of an object remains the same after we have lear- 
ned the word for it as it was before; what is added is the conception 
of the thing’s being a name-bearer. 

The Grammarian holds that the relation between word and ob- 
jectis one ofsuperimposition. Butthisiswrong. A wordis the means 
whereby we identify one of the properties of a thing which bears a 
number of properties. Words are one kind of thing, objects another, 
and judgments still another. And why does the Grammarian need the 
doctrine of superimposition, since according to him object judgment, 
and word are nondifferent? Words light up objects in a manner 
similar to that in which sense organs light up objects. 

In any case, superimposition is impossible in the case of words, 


390 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


For superimposition occurs either in the manner of shell-silver, be- 
cause of similarity, or in the manner of a colored object reflected by a 
crystal and appearing somewhere else. In either case both items 
must have distinct natures of their own. But in the Grammarian 
interpretation the object (Brahman) is formless and words have form. 
Thus they certainly cannot be thought similar. Nor can it be like the 
reflection through a crystal, since while the reflection and the original 
object are grasped by the same sense, a word and its object are not 
grasped by the same sense. 

Jayanta next takes up the Grammarian’s claim that the relation 
between words and the world is one of vivarta. Jayanta evidently 
feels that the relation of vivarta is capable of more than one interpre- 
tation. Interpreting it first as transformation (parindma—as e.g. 
milk into curds) he points out that adoption of this relation defeats 
monism. On the other hand, if vivarta refers to a magical relation 
of unreal appearances to their ground then this has been previously 
disproved, at the point when the reality of external objects was demon- 
strated. Further arguments recapitulate the attack on Advaita, 

196. (E103-10) In this section Jayanta expounds the Vijiiana- 
vada view of ‘‘self”’ (or ‘‘no-self”’) and then proceeds to refute it. We 
summarize here some of Jayanta’s points in rebuttal. 

Vijfianavada holds that the cognizer and what is cognized are 
not distinct. The appearance (avabhdsa) of the content of awareness 
is the same as the appearance of the consciousness itself. If there were 
independent external unconscious (jada) objects which cognition 
grasped, they could not in any case be known, since only what is of 
the nature of illumination (prakdfa) can appear (avabhdsitum). And 
this illumination must be without form (nirakdra); if it had form it 
would be unconscious and unable to appear. 

Jayanta agrees that illumination is without form, but reasons 
that it is precisely the form of the external object which distinguishes 
the content of one consciousness from another. To be sure, we some- 
times grasp illumination itself as content of consciousness, but only 
grasped illumination becomes content. Thuswhat is called ‘‘form” 
is the grasped content, what is called “‘illuminating’’ is the conscious- 
ness or judgment which grasps the content. The object needs no 
further illumination to become content of an illuminating. 

The Vijfianavadin tries in several ways to establish that a judg- 
ment must itself be grasped in order that its content be cognized. 
Jayanta criticizes some of his arguments as confusions deriving from 
language. The Vijfianavadin says that the eye requires a judgment 
to see an object, just as itrequires a candle to illuminate the objects 


NYAYAMANJARI 391 


in a dark room. But the analogy breaks down. A judgment does 
not illuminate in the same sense that a candle illuminates. Ex hypo- 
thesi the eye does not light up the object like a candle (for that is the 
Nyaya view); nor does the candle perform an act of grasping like 
the eye. Jayanta doubts that anything is ever known as_ illuminating 
both itself and other things. The Vijfianavadin asserts, on the con- 
trary, that judgments, words, and candles all share this interesting 
property. Jayanta shows that each of the three require different 
kinds of causal conditions for self-illuminating and object illumination, 
so that the property supposedly shared turns out to be the result of 
conflating different properties. 

Another argument adduced by Vijfidnavada is that we must 
grasp our cognition (in addition to its content) at the moment of its 
arising, since there is nothing to prevent our doing so, and since we 
later recall having cognized. As to the first, says Jayanta, itis not a 
matter of an obstruction preventing; rather, grasping of our cogniz- 
ing requires a certain collection of causal conditions (sdémagri) which, 
in the case in question, presumably is not present. As for memory, 
we do not usually recall that we grasped our cognizing, but rather that 
we cognized an object without having been aware of doing so. 

197. (EI110-16) Jayanta moves onto deal with asatkhyati, 
the view of the Madhyamika Buddhists, and  dtmakhydti, 
the view of the Vijfianavadins, concerning erroneous cognition. He 
says he has already refuted the Mimamsa akhyativéda view, and he 
himself espouses the view of viparitakhydtivada, that in erroneous 
judgment we cognize something which actually exists but not at the 
time and place it is seen to. 

In treating atmakhyati Jayanta clarifies the differences between 
the Vijfianavadin’s vdsandé and the “trace” (samskdra) of the Nyaya., 
He also vigorously criticizes the hypothesis of the Glayavijfidna as a 
locus for vaésandas, arguing that if the dlayavijfidna is not momentary this 
contradicts Buddhism, and if it is, what guarantees that subsequent 
vdsands spring up perpetuating their kind ? 

The treatment of asatkhyati presents the Madhyamika as essen- 
tially recapitulating arguments already refuted in the foregoing. 

198. (E117-25) This section takes up the subject of doubt. 
Two lines of interpretation of the sitra on doubt are reviewed, one 
credited to some dcdryas. The explanation of the dcéryas involves 
using the dortti method, reading the one sara several ways to get the 
several kinds of doubt out of them which V4Atsyayana finds there. 
The other method construes doubt as essentially a matter of appre- 
hending contradictory attributes; this line of thought dismisses 


392 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


as unprofitable the efforts of the dcdryas to find a definitive list of causal 
factors productive of doubt. Jayanta refuses to prefer one of these 
interpretations to the other. 

An example of a doubtful judgment is offered. It goes as 
follows: ‘“‘sound is either a substance or a quality.”” The doubt arises 
because a special condition of sound is that it is produced from dis- 
junction, and the puzzle there is whether being produced by dis- 
junction is always resident in a quality or not. Some say there is a 
kind of disjunction which is itself produced from disjunction; if, so 
how can being-produced-by-disjunction be a peculiar quality of sound, 
since it also qualifies disjunction ? Two sorts of replies to this source 
of doubt are offered. (1) It is not being-produced-by-disjunc- 
tion simpliciter which is the specific quality of sound, but rather the 
particular kind of that property which arises when the inherence cause 
(of sound) is disjoined. (2) The other sort of reply denies the 
existence of anything described by ‘‘disjunction-produced-from-dis- 
junction.”’ A disjunction, according to the proponent of this view, 
can only be followed by a motion which produces a contact, not 
another disjunction. Some even go so far along these lines as to deny 
that disjunction can be produced from motions at all, in opposition 
to the views of the dcdryas. Again, Jayanta remains noncommittal 
on the issues here. 

199. (E125-26) Following Vatsyayana Jayanta treats prayo- 
jana in a hedonistic vein : Purposes are oftwosorts; Primary (mukhya) 
and secondary (gauna). ‘The primary purposes are obtaining plea- 
sure and preventing frustration Secondary purposes are those things 
which provide the means for accomplishing the primary purposes. 

Objection. A purpose cannot initiate human action, since it is 
neither existent nor nonexistent. If it is existent one needs initiate 
no action to obtain it; if it is not existent it cannot be obtained. 
Answer : Purpose is an initiator of action when it is entertained as the 
content of a judgment. In that role it is what comes to a judger as 
that which is to be obtained, 

200. (E126-27) This section treats of the examples. 

201. (£127-30) Taking up the puzzle about the fourth kind 
of tenet, Jayanta quotes from a previous commentator with whom he 
disagrees and then offers his own explanation, which is that this kind 
of tenet occurs when one argues in the following way : “let sound be a 
substance; nevertheless, I shall proceed to prove the impermanence of 
sound as follows,” or “there may be reasons to think that sound is 
a substance; despite that.” I.e., itis the concession one makes to one’s 


NYAYAMANJARI 393 


opponent which in English we sometimes refer to as “‘for the sake of 
the argument.” 

202. (130-44) This section concerns the members of the argu- 
ment form. The general purpose of the five members is shown to be 
inference for another. An objector thinks there is no such thing as 
inference for another, since the listener infers fire not from the smoke 
spoken of by the speaker but from the speaker’s words. The justice 
of this complaint is admitted by Jayanta, but he points out that the 
speaker intends the hearer to draw the appropriate inferences from his 
words, so that from the speaker’s point of view his judgments are 
“inference for another.” 

Treatment of the five members follows well-established channels. 
Jayanta refutes the five additional members (jijidsa, samsaya, Sakya- 
prapti, prayojana, and samsaya-paryudasa). He spends a lengthy passage 
discussing whether a definition of a member (e.g., “the hypothesis 
is the setting-forth of what is to be proved’) should be construed 
regularly in an “‘exclusive” (avadhdrana) sense (so that the definition 
would be “‘the hypothesis is the setting-forth of what is to be proved 
alone, and nothing else’), Since ordinary assertions are not nece- 
ssarily to be construed in this fashion, Jayanta sees no reason to 
construe these definitions in this way either. 

jayanta mentions a number of “‘fallacies of the hypothesis” 
(paksabhésa), and indicates that these and the so-called “‘fallacies of 
the example” are all in fact properly classed as fallacies of the hetu. 

A discussion follows of sdtra 1.1.34 explaining the hetu term. 
Two alternative readings are distinguished and elaborately reviewed. 
The first creates difficulties because of the Naiyayikas’ desire to 
exclude “‘only-positive” (kevaldnvayin) inference while admitting 
“only-negative” (kevalavyatirekin) inference, although perhaps this 
reading can be construed so as to overcome the difficulties. The 
second reading, which takes this sara to answer a doubt as to whether 
the hetu is dependent on the sddhya rather than the reverse, is the one 
preferred by Jayanta. 

Several passages are devoted to attacks on, and defense of, the 
viability of only-negative inferences. The general line of attack is to 
the effect that by allowing only-negative inferences one allows just 
about anything to be proved— since for most any sddhya and hetu 
one can find some class which falls outside both. Jayanta’s defense 
is that only-negative inferences are only acceptable when some pecu- 
liarity in the classes constituting the sddhya and hetu makes it impossible 
—say, for example, that the members of one of the classes are be- 
yond perceptibility, so that no individual can be perceived common 


394 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to both sddhya and hetu. It is only when some such special condition 
is responsible for the absence of a sapaksa that only-negative inference 
is allowable. 

The difference between a drstdnia or example and the third 
member (uda@harana, but sometimes rendered likewise as ‘‘example’’) 
of an argument is that whereas the drsfdnta is defined (in sdtra 
1.1.25) as something accepted by both parties in a discussion as exhi- 
biting the features of sédhya and hetu, the uddharana is defined as the 
adducing of something which actually does (whatever anyone thinks) 
exhibit the features of sédhya and hetu, as well as something which 
actually does lack the features of both, adducings which are for the 
purpose of demonstrating a conclusion. 

203. (E144-208) In the concluding sections covering the rest 
of the “debate” categories Jayanta for the most part elucidates the 
siitras without special novelty. He prefers to identify the 5 fallacies 
of the hetu under the rubrics (1) anatkantika, (2) viruddha, (3) satprati- 
paksa, (4) asiddha, (5) badhita. 


NYAYAKALIKA 


There has been a great deal of confusion over this work. Ganga- 
natha Jha held that it is Jayanta’s abstract summary of Nyaya views 
on the 16 categories.15 Umesh Mifra also accepts Jayanta’s author- 
ship, but says it is a “‘very brief explanatory commentary on the first 
sittra of the Nydyasiitras.”!® It is described frequently as a summary 
of the Nydyamaiijari, perhaps by Jayanta or one of his pupils. On the 
other hand, Gopinath Kaviraj points out that the Jain writer Guna- 
ratna cites a “‘Nyayakalika’? as a commentary on Bhasarvajfia’s 
Nydyasara.3? 

Rather than give a summary, under the circumstances we give 
here a short essay written for this volume by Janakivallabha 
Bhattacharya of the University of Calcutta, in which he considers 
the evidence for and against Jayanta’s authorship of the work: 

Jayanta is the author of Nyayakalikéd. We cannot advance proof 
positive to establish the identity of its author Jayanta and Jayanta 
Bhatta. The book is not a synopsis of Jayanta’s Nydyamaiyjari. 

The salutation to Siva at the beginning of the work speaks in 
favor of the identity of Jayanta with Jayanta Bhatta, who displays 
great reverence for Siva. If Nydyakalika is the work of Jayanta Bhatta 
it must be his earliest work. It contains reference neither to his 
personal life nor to his family nor to contemporary events. 

A point may be raised against the said identity of Jayanta with 


NYAYAKALIKA 395 


Jayanta Bhatta. Jayanta Bhatta is a great critic of the Buddhists. 
This Jayanta, the author of Nyayakalikd, departs from the traditional 
explanation of abhyupagama siddhanta (one of the kinds of tenets) and 
follows the Buddhist interpretation of the term. The explanation of 
the term is as follows: ‘‘Apariksito api kascid artho buddhyatigaya- 
cikhyaparyisaya praudhavadibhistathetyabhyupagamyamanoabhyu- 
pagamasiddhantah”  (Nydyakalika, p. 9). Translation: “‘The 
uncritical popular tenet is accepted in order to demonstrate the 
superiority of one’s own intellect.” 

Nydyakaliké refers to another interesting hypothesis. The self 
is not directly known. Our self-consciousness refers to our body. 
The self is known by inference (Mydyakalika, p. 5). 

Another point may be put forward against the identity of the two 
Jayantas. Jayanta Bhatta’s favorite hypothesis is that the collection 
of all conditions is the cause par excellence. This Jayanta, the author 
of Nydyakalika, makes no mention of it. 

There are two or three points in favor of the identity of the two 
Jayantas. (1) The explanation of tarka in Nydyakaliké and Nydya- 
marjari is almost the same. (2) The catholicity of spirit of Jayanta is 
noticed in the remarks “Rsyaryamlecchasadharanam caitad apta- 
laksanam”’—‘“‘the definition of trustworthy person is equally appli- 
cable to sages, the cultured, and the uncultured” (Nydyakalikd, p.3). 
(3) The invariable concomitance which holds between the hetu and the 
sddhya is discovered by an act of inner perception with the aid of 
sensuous perception. 

The stamp of Jayanta Bhatta is faintly noticed in the Nydya- 
kalika. It really is a ‘“‘bud of logic.” It is a primer of Gautama’s 
logic meant for the young learners. Thus the title of the book seems 
to be very apt. 

It deals with the sixteen topics of logic mentioned in Gautama’s 
Nydyasitras. Evidence of Jayanta Bhatta’s mature thought is cons- 
picuous by its absence in this work. Had it not been Jayanta Bhatta’s 
work it would not have been preserved. 

The importance of this book lies in the fact that it helps us in 
understanding the frame of Jayanta’s mind and also the gradual 
unfolding of his intellectual powers. 


17. THE NYAYARATNAKARA 
Gopinath Kaviraj! remarks that there was an old work called 


““Nyayaratna”’ on which Vacaspati Mifra is reputed to have written 
a commentary. The work is lost, and we know nothing of it. 


396 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


18. TRILOCANA 


This philosopher, whose works have been lost, was clearly one 
of the leading Naiyayikas among the brilliant group who taught and 
wrote during the 9th century. Vacaspati Misra identifies him as his 
teacher,! and Jfanasrimitra, the llth century Buddhist logician, 
identifies him as one of the four “‘pillars of Nyaya’”’ along with Samkara, 
Bhasarvajfia, and VaAcaspati.? 

D. C. Bhattacharya’ suggests, on the basis of a quotation found 
in the Dharmottarapradipa, which appears to refer to Trilocana as a 
“Karnata in rags,” that he came from the Mysore area. As to his 
date, we must conclude that he flourished around the beginning of the 
10th century, since the best evidence we now possess about the date 
of his pupil Vacaspati does not allow us to suppose that the polymath 
was born much before 900. Other estimates of his date, giving a much 
earlier time, are based on an earlier time for Vacaspati. Thus we 
may speculate that Trilocana lived from about A. D. 860 to 920. 

Trilocana wrote at least one work, and possibly as many as 
three. The title of one of his works, Mydyamanjari* has naturally given 
rise to a lot of difficulty, since it is identical with the title of Jayanta 
Bhatta’s masterpiece. For some time it was thought that Vacaspati 
might have studied with Jayanta. However, it is apparent that the 
Buddhist logicians Jfianasri and Ratnakirti, who quote Trilocana 
frequently and by name, were for some reason unacquainted with 
Jayanta’s writing. (Jayanta and Trilocana are not the same philo- 
sopher, for their views differ on various topics, see below.) 

Works by two other titles are ascribed to him by various later 
writers. One title, Nydyabhdsyatika,°’ indicates that he wrote a com- 
mentary on a Nydyabhasya, presumably Vatsyayana’s. It is quite 
possible that this work is the same as the Nydyamajijari—there is at 
any rate no evidence against the identification. The other title 
given is Nyayaprakirnaka.® ‘‘Prakirnaka’”? means a miscellany, and 
Anantlal Thakur suggests that this may be a portion of a larger work, 
perhaps the Nydyamaryjari.” 

On a number of points the views ascribed to Trilocana by Bud- 
dhist and Jain writers are not such as to require special mention here, 
since they merely repeat what is by now common Nyaya doctrine. 

Thakur® has collected a good many of the references to views of 
Trilocana, and Oberhammer has discussed one of Trilocana’s contri- 
butions in considerable detail.° Some of the passages suggest that in 
the opinion of the writers—llth to 12th century for the most part 
~—it was Trilocana who had rescued Nydya-Vaisesika from its sorry 


TRILOCGANA 397 


state following Uddyotakara. V4Acaspati himself remarks that the 
views of Uddyotakara had been lost in a mire of bad treatises, and 
Thakur identifies the “bad treatises’? most notably to be Dharma- 
kirti’s, a proper answer to which had not been forthcoming during the 
8th century and is now first being essayed by Trilocana and Vacaspati 
himself.1° 

Vacaspati credits Trilocana with clarifying the Nydyasiitra defini- 
tion of perception (NS I.1.4) by introducing the distinction between 
propositional and nonpropositional judgments in place of a fuzzy 
explanation of Vatsyayana’s.11 Where Vatsyayana interprets the 
requirement that perception be ‘‘well-defined”’ as intended to exclude 
doubt from the scope of the definition of perception, Trilocana and 
Vacaspati point out that doubt is excluded already by other parts of 
the definition, notably in the requirement that the judgment ‘‘not 
wander,” i.e., be uncontradicted. What Trilocana suggests is that 
siitra 1.1.4. is only partially a definition: the specification of sense- 
object contact and of nonwandering are defining conditions, but the 
other two words —avyapadesya and vyavasdydtmaka — are not part 
of the definition but rather indicate the two kinds of perceptual 
judgments to which the definition applies, namely nonpropositional 
(nirvikalpaka) judgments (indicated by avyapadesya) and propositional 
(savikalpaka) (indicated by the expression ‘‘well-defined’’) (uyavasdyat- 
maka). 


Another aspect of Nyaya philosophy in which Trilocana’s repu- 
tation is high concerns the way in which he carried on the attack 
against the Buddhist theory of momentariness. Although Udayana 
is generally recognized as a champion of the view that we should talk 
of the collection of causal conditions rather than of “‘the cause,”’ the 
Buddhist logicians of the 11th century seem to have credited Trilocana 
with special responsibility in urging the argument.!? It is hardly 
new in Ny4ya, however; we have seen Jayanta and even others before 
him making the point as against the theory that a proper explanation 
of causation requires the postulation of a special “causal-efficacy.” 

Other minor divergences and original ideas are credited to 
Trilocana by Varadaraja and by Raghava Bhatta, the commentator 
on WNydyaséra, who comments that when Bhasarvajfia mentioned 
“others” who speak of eight fallacies of the example he had in mind 
Trilocana.* 

Perhaps the most interesting of Trilocana’s known contributions 
is the notion of essential relation (svabhdvikasambandha).14 This is 
presumably an alternative term for the later svaripasambandha, ‘‘self- 
linking connector.” The particular relation that Trilocana proposes 


398 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


analyzing as self-linking is the relationship of pervasion (vydpti). The 
puzzle is generated by the fact that we seem to be able, in inference, 
to get knowledge of things not directly experienced. We get this 
knowledge on the basis of things which are directly experienced. But 
what sort of a relation is it that connects the two sorts of things? And 
what organ is it that can grasp such aconnection? If what is needed 
is knowledge of a generic relationship between all the things of the 
perceived kind and all the things of the unperceived kind, no organ 
seems fit. For it would seem necessary to perceive all the particulars 
of the two kinds to be assured of the regular concomitance among the 
two groups. 

Dharmakirti had proposed a solution to this problem according 
to which two classes are to be held coextensive just if the essential 
natures of their members were either identical or related as cause 
and effect. But his solution featured an “external”? connection 
(bahirvyapti) between the two classes, discovered by examination of 
some of the members of each of the two, and the resulting conceptual 
linking of the notions corresponding to each. Trilocana’s objection 
to this procedure is that it contents itself with concepts and fails to 
get at connections in the actual world. He proposes instead an “‘inter- 
nal connection” (antarvyapti) which connects the universal proper- 
ties of the two classes; he also suggests that this relationship among 
universals can be grasped by mental perception (mdnasapratyaksa). 
The point to emphasize is that the internal organ is being given the 
power to see directly into the structure of nature, whereas inthe Bud- 
dhist view our thinking is confined to consideration of concepts and 
words. 

How does the internal organ proceed in identifying this internal 
connection among universals? It does so, says Trilocana, by perceiv- 
ing that the relation in question is free from vitiating obstructions 
(upadhis)}. Trilocana seems to feel that the internal organ just sees 
that there is no upddhi when it “‘views’’ the two universals in relation- 
ship to each other. Such an obstruction-free relationship between 
universals is, then, the “‘essential relationship” (svdbhavikasambandha). 
It is clear that Trilocana leans heavily on Dharmakirti in developing 
this theory, even though it diverges from the Buddhist view in certain 
important respects. 


19. BHASARVAJNA OR BHAVASARVAJNA 


We come now to the philosopher who may well represent the 
source of the most important schism in the Nyaya-Vaisesika school. 


BHASARVAJNA 399 


If not the source, he is the first known proponent of a number of doc- 
trines which diverge boldly from the accepted traditional views of all 
the authors we have so far considered. We review below (under the 
Nydyabhisana entry) some of these unorthodox theories. They are 
referred to often as the views of the ‘‘( Nyaya) ekadefins,”’ i.e., a section 
of the Naiyayikas. Samasastry! notes that since, e.g., Sureévara re- 
fers to these ekadefins in his Mdanasollésa, accurately identifying one of 
their characteristic doctrines, this branch of Nyaya must antedate 
Bhasarvajfia. In any case, later Nyaya authors tend to see two main 
branches of their system, with Uddyotakara as the source of one, 
Bhasarvajiia of the other. 


A Kashmiri? like Jayanta Bhatta, Bhasarvajfia must have 
flourished contemporaneously with him. Bhatta Raghava remarks 
that Bhasarvajfia consulted one of Trilocana’s works,’ which is quite 
reasonable if we place Bhasarvajfia ca.A.D. 860 to 920. 

In Bhasarvajfia’s case his religious convictions are of great 
importance in assessing his contribution. It seems clear that this 
philosopher was a member of the sect of the Pagupatas, a Saiva sect 
which Ingalls* has likened to the Greek Cynics, for they practised 
similarly wild and odd behavior as a means of religious training. 
The prefix Bha is, according to D. R. Sarma,® standard among the 
names of members of this sect. Bhasarvajfia holds several views 
characteristic of the Pagupatas despite their evident divergence from 
Nyaya—e.g., the view that there are only 3 instruments of know- 
ledge, probably the most obvious discrepancy in Bhasarvajfia’s theory 
from standard Ny4ya, is a view of the Pasupatas. He is also credited 
with the authorship of a Pagupata handbook, the Ganakdrikas.® 

Bhasarvajfia has been known for a long time as the author of the 
Nydayasara, a rather simple exposition of Nydya tenets with a few special 
twists. The Nydyasdra is more or less standard fare for Nyaya stu- 
dents, and has occasioned no especial excitement. Bhasarvajfia 
wrote a commentary on his own work called Nydyabhisana. It is the 
views of the ‘““Bhiisanakara” that are identified as the primary locus 
of the unorthodox notions mentioned above. Bhatta Raghava and 
Vallabha both attribute this commentary to Bhasarvajfia himself.’ 

The Nydyabhisana was thought to be lost. However, Anantlal 
Thakur writes® that an acquaintance, C. D. Dalal, has seen 
a manuscript of the work at Patan. ‘“‘A friend is editing possibly the 
same manuscript, he continues. According to him (the friend), 
the work is called Samgrahavaritika in its colophon, and consists of 
18,000 granthas. The author’s name is Bhavasarvajfia, and its initial 
verse reads: “Umapatim sarvajagatpatim sada pranamya nirvana- 


400 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


damisvaram param/ Guriiméca sarvananu moksasiddhaye pravaksyate 
nyayasadarthasamgrahah//’ 

The Nydyabhisana has now apparently been recovered, and was 
published in 1968. Professor Matilal’s remarks prefacing his summary 
below will serve to indicate the present state of our knowledge of this 
work. 


NYAYASARA 
(Summary by Karl H. Potter) 


The work has been edited several times, but is untranslated. 
References below are to pages in the edition by Abhyankar 
and Devadhar, Poona 1922 (B2505). 


FIRST CHAPTER 


1. (El) Bowing to Sambhu (i.e., Siva), the lord of the world, 
the author announces his intention to give a definitive account of the 
instruments of knowledge and what is different from them, for the 
instruction of students. 

2. (E2) An instrument of knowledge is an instrument of 
direct experience (samyaganubhava). The word “direct” here excludes 
doubt and error. 

3. (E2-4) Doubt is uncertain (anavadharana) judgment. It has 
5 varieties: (1) same property, (2) many properties, (3) contrary 
views, (4) perceived, and (5) not perceived. In (1) we confuse 
a man with a post because they share properties. For (2) the 
example is “‘sound is eternal or it is noneternal,”’ since it has a variety 
of specific qualities. For (3)—the sense organs are elemental, some 
say, but others deny it. (4) Water or a mirage. (5) Whether or 
not we see a ghost (pifdca). 

4. (E4) Imagination and indefinite judgment are not classi- 
fiable as error, so they are included here under doubt. E.g., a man 
at a distance taken to be a post is imagination, while uncertainty may 
be felt about which species of tree one is confronting. 

5. (E5) Misconception is false(mithyé) definite (adhyava- 
saya) judgment. E.g., the double-moon illusion, or dreaming of 
elephants. 

6. (E5-7) An instrument of knowledge is what directly grasps 
an object in a way different from remembering it. Understanding it, 
one can differentiate it from the knower, the object of knowledge, and 


NYAYASARA 401 


from its result. The direct experience is valid knowledge (pramda). 
The knower is the locus of that experience, and its content is the object 
of knowledge. 

There are 3 kinds of instruments of knowledge : (1) perception, 
(2) inference, (3) verbal testimony (agama). 

7, (E6-11) Perception is the means of direct immediate 
(aparoksa) experience. It is of two kinds : yogic perception and per- 
ception of those who are not yogis. 

Nonyogic perception grasps  gross(sthiila) objects through 
their relation with the sense organs when aided by favorable conditions 
such as light, time, place, etc. Other kinds of entities are grasped by 
various relations (the exposition follows Uddyotakara, cf. pp. 307-08). 
Inherence and perceptible (drfya)absences are grasped by the relation 
of visesanavisesyabhava or “‘qualifier-qualified relations,’ when such a 
relation takes as its referent relations of one of the other kinds and zts 
relata. H.g., “the ground is void of any pot” or “the pot is not here 
on the ground,” etc. There is grasping of inherence only sometimes 
—e.g., in “here there is inherence of color in the pot.” 

8. (E12-13) Yogic perception grasps objects which are far 
away spatially or temporally. It is of 2 kinds: in a disciplined state 
(yukidvasthé), and not in a disciplined state (ayuktdvasthé). In the 
former kind of yogic perception one grasps all objects collectively with- 
out remainder through one’s merit together with contact between the 
self and the inner cause (antahkarana). In the latter the usual sort 
of sense object and other contacts have to take place, either fourfold, 
threefold, etc, as required (see p. 294), whereas in the disciplined- 
state kind only a twofold contact is needed. So-called drsa know- 
ledge is included under yogic perception, since it is produced by ex- 
ceptional merit of the sages. 

9, (E13-15) Again, perception is of 2 sorts: propositional 
and nonpropositional. Propositional perception is demarcated 
through its having arisen from its description through relation with 
names, etc. E.g., ““This Devadatta has a stick.”” Nonpropositional 
perception involves the appearance of the mere nature (svaripa) 
of a thing, e.g., the judgment produced by the first contact with the 
eye, or yogic perception of the disciplined-state variety. 


SECOND CHAPTER 


10. (E16-17) Inference is the instrument of mediate expe- 
rience which works through direct invariable concomitance (avind- 
bhava). This invariable concomitance is pervasion (oyaptz) of the 


402 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


hetu by the sadhya according to their very natures (svabhdvatas). 

11. (E17) Inference is of 2 kinds: positive (anvaya) and 
negative (vyatireka). Positive pervasion occurs between the universal 
corresponding to the hetu and the universal corresponding to the 
sadhya. Negative pervasion occurs between the absence of the one 
universal and the absence of the other one. 

12. (E18) The hetu or linga is of 2 kinds : drsta and sdamanya- 
todrsta. The former kind is used in proving objects fitto be perceived, 
while the latter is used to prove objects whose natures (svabhava) 
are remote, e.g., the color of one’s own eye. 

13. (E19-22) Again, inference is of 2 kinds : for oneself, and 
for others. The latter kind is discussed at length. Inference for 
others has 5 members, each of which is defined. The second member 
(hetu) is of three varieties: only-positive, only-negative, and positive- 
negative. The criteria of the validity of the positive-negative kind 
of inference are 5 in number, 

(1) The A must occur in p. This requirement is known as 
paksadharmatva. The paksa is something in which the 5 occurs, and 
paksadharmatva is defined as the locus-pervadingness (vydpyavrttitva) 
by the / of the p. 

(2) The A must occur in the sp. The spisa thing which is 
qualified by s, and ‘‘occurrence in sp’? means occurrence of A in all 
or part of sp. 

(3) Exclusion of h from wp. The vf is a thing qualified by a 
property which excludes s, and “exclusion from vp”? means nonoccur- 
rence of f in all of the vp. 

(4) The A’s occurrence in must be unsublated. That is to 
say, it must not be the case that there is an instrument of valid know- 
ledge (pramana) which proves the / not to occur in p. 

(5) There must not be another A such that it proves the con- 
tradictory of s and yet it satisfies (1-3) above. This requirement is 
known as asatpratipaksatva. 

14, (E22) A hetu is of two kinds, depending on whether it 
occurs in all or only a part of the sapaksa. For example, ‘‘sound is 
noneternal, because it is an effect” is of the former kind, while ‘“‘sound 
is noneternal, because it is grasped by an external sense organ belong- 
ing to an ordinary person like me and when it possesses a universal’ 
is of the latter kind. 

15. (E23) Only-positive inference is where A pervades p, 
occurs in sp, but no vp is known. It has 2 kinds : (1) asin the follow- 
ing inference : ‘‘the unseen subject of a lawsuit is perceptible to some- 
one, since it is an object of knowledge, like something in the palm 


NYAYASARA 403 


of one’s hand’’; (2) as in the inference: “the unseen subject of a law- 
suit is perceptible to someone, because it is not perceptible according 
to the Mimamsakas, like the self, pleasure, etc.” 

16. (E23-24) Only-negative inference is where A pervades 
p, sp is unknown, and op is completely excluded from h.  E.g., ““Every 
effect has an omniscient creator, because it is transitory; whatever 
is not produced by an omniscient creator is not transitory, such as 
akasa.”” Only-negative inference can also be phrased using the word 
prasangat (and having the effect of tarka): ‘“This thing is not without 
a self, since the result (prasaiga) would be that a living body would 
be without breath, like a lump of clay.” 

17, (E24-26) The next topic is that of fallacies of the hetu. 
Bhasarvajfia says there are 6 varieties: 

(1) Asiddha. This occurs when it is doubtful whether the 
hetu overlaps the paksa. 

(2) Viruddha. Were the hetu occurs in both the paksa and the 
vipaksa. 

(3) Anaikantika. Here the hetu occurs in the paksa, the sapaksa, 
and the vipaksa. 

(4) Anadhyavasita. Here the hetu occurs in the paksa but no- 
where else, and thus cannot prove the sddhya. 

(5) Kaldtyayapadista. This fallacy is committed when the 
hetu’s occurrence in the paksa is sublated by a valid instrument of 
knowledge. 

(6) Prakaranasama, Here the hetu satisfies the “threefold mark”’ 
— i.e., requirements (1)-(3) for a valid inference listed in section 
(13) above —— but it proves both the sddhya and its contradictory. 

The following 6 sections treat the above 6 fallacies in greater 
detail. 

18. (E26-28) The asiddha fallacy has several subdivisions. 

(1) Svariipasiddha. Example: “Sound is noneternal, be- 
cause it is visible.” 

(2) Vyadhikaranasiddha, Example: “Sound is noneternal, be- 
cause it creates words.” 

(3) Visesydsiddha. Example: ‘Sound is noneternal, since it 
is a universal and is visible.” 

(4) Visesandsiddha. Example: “Sound is noneternal, be- 
cause it is visible and has a universal.” 

(5) Bhagasiddha. Example: “Sound is noneternal, because 
it requires effort.” 

(6) Asrayasiddha. Example: “There is matter (fradhdna), 
since everything has size,” 


404 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(7) Asrayaikadesdsiddha. Example : “Matter, selves, and God 
are eternal, since they are not products.” 


(8) Vyarthavisesyasiddha. Example: “Sound is noneternal, 
since being a product it possesses a universal.” 
(9) Vyarthavisesanadsiddha. Example: ‘‘Sound is noneternal, 


since possessing a universal it is a product.” 

(10) Samdigdhasiddha. Example: (When someone who has 
not clearly discriminated smoke from steam says) ‘“This place is fiery 
because it’s smoky.” 

(11) Samdigdhavisesyasiddha. Example : (When under the same 
conditions as in section 10 one says) ““This place is fiery, because 
possessing a universal it is smoky.” 

(12) Samdigdhavisesanisiddha. Example : (Conditions as in 
the previous two cases:) ‘“This place is fiery, because it is smoky and 
has a_ universal.” 

An asiddha fallacy may be conceived to be so by both disputants 
or one only. 

19. (E28-30) The viruddha fallacy has 2 major subdivisions, 
and each of these has 4 further divisions, The major subdivision is 
between cases of viruddha where there is a sapaksa, and cases where 
there is not. 

The further 4 divisions of each subdivision, are as follows: 

(1) Where the hetu pervades both paksa and vipaksa, e.g., 
“Sound is eternal, because it is an effect.” 

(2) Where the hetu pervade the paksa and occurs in a part of 
the vipaksa, e.g., “Sound is eternal, because while having a universal 
it is graspable by an external sense organ belonging to an ordinary 
person like me, etc.” 

(3) Where the hetu occurs in parts of both the paksa and the 
vipaksa, e.g., ‘Sound is eternal, because it requires effort.” 

(4) Where the hetu pervades the vipaksa and occurs in part 
of the paksa, e.g., ‘‘Earth is eternal, because it is a product.” 

Objection : The account of viruddha overlaps that of asiddha, 
since four of the eight varieties of viruddha are cases where the hetu 
occurs in only part of the paksa, and that is the mark of asiddha. 
Answer : There is no fault, for an argument may commit more than 
one fallacy at a time. 

20. (E30-31) The anaikdntika fallacies are dividedin a manner 
similar to that employed in classifying the viruddha fallacies. ‘Thus 
there are (1) 2 pervades f, occurs in parts of sp and vp; (2) A pervades 


p and sp, occurs in part of op; (3) A pervades p and of, occurs in part 
of sp; etc, 


NYAYASARA 405 


21. (H31-32) Varieties of the anadhyavasita fallacy : 

(1) Where 4 pervades f, but neither sp nor op are known, ©.g., 
“Everything is noneternal, since it exists.” 

(2) Where h occurs ina part of p, and sp and vp are unknown, 
e.g., ‘Everything is noneternal, since it exists,”’ 

(3) Where A pervades # but is lacking from both up and sp. 

(4) Where A occurs in part of p but is lacking from both up 
and sp. 

(5) Where A pervades f, no vp is known, and his lacking in sp. 

(6) Where A occurs in part of p, no vp is known,and his lacking 
in sp. 

22. (E32-34) Varieties of kalatyayapadista : 

(1) Where perception is contradicted, e.g., ‘‘Fire is not hot, 
because it is a product.” 

(2) Where inference is contradicted, e.g., “‘Atoms are not 
eternal, since they are material.” 

(3) Where verbal authority is contradicted, e.g., “Wine is to 
be drunk by Brahmins, since it is a fluid substance, like milk.” 

(4) Where perception is partially contradicted, e.g., ‘All fire 
is not hot, because it is colored.” 

(5) Where inference is partially contradicted. 

(6) Where verbal authority is partially contradicted. 

23. (E34-35) An example of prakaranasama is “Sound is non- 
eternal, because it is different from the (class) product of p and sf, 
like sp’. Here the A satisfies the first three of the five requirements of 
validity (see section 13 above), but is fallacious nevertheless since the 
same h willalso prove equally well the hypothesis ‘‘sound is eternal’. 

Another type of case is here called viruddhavyabhicdrin. Tt occurs 
when two fetus are both satisfactory but prove opposite sddhyas. E.g., 
(a) “‘AkaSa is eternal, because it is a nonmaterial substance, like a 
self,” and (b) “‘Akaga is noneternal, because it is grasped by an ex- 
ternal sense organ belonging to an ordinary person like myself.” 
But Bhasarvajfia adds that this last, like a type of fallacy others dub 
anyatardsiddha, is a fallacy only in dependence on the predilections of 
the particular parties involved. 

24, (E35-39) Returning to the discussion of the members of 
an inference, the author turns to the third member, the example, which 
is the naming of instances, either positive or negative or both. He 
lists a number of fallacies of the example. They include cases where 
a proper relation between the example and the other terms is lacking; 
they also include cases where that relation is doubtful. 

25. (E39-40) The fourth member is that which states concern- 


406 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ing the Aetu that it pervades the paksa by comparing (upamdna) it with 
the example, when it is established that there is invariable concomit- 
ance between the feitu and the sddhya as shown by the examples. 
There are two aspects of this member, corresponding to the positive 
and the negative examples respectively. 

26. (E40-41) The fifth member is the repeating of the expre- 
ssion which states the pratijid. It is not useless, for it is intended to 
show that the contrary position to the hypothesis is not tenable; in this 
way it has a distinct function to perform. 

27. (E41-43) There are 2 kinds of controversy : dispassionate 
and passionate. The former kind is known as discussion (véda). 
Gautama’s definition of itis quoted. It normally involves two parties 
with opposing theses, but may not, as in the case of a discussion 
between a teacher and his pupil. The passionate kind is the contro- 
versy involved in a debate, where the aim is victory and not under- 
standing. It may on occasion be practised by a dispassionate truth- 
seeker set on ferreting out confusing debating tricks which block the 
pursuit of understanding. 

28. (E43-66) Sophistry is passionate controversy where tricks 
such as quibble, futile rejoinders, and the various ways of losing an 
argument are practised both in defending one’s own position and in 
attacking the other party’s view. Cavil occurs when these tricks are 
used only in attacking the other party, 

Gautama’s definitions of quibble are quoted, with its 3 kinds 
distinguished. Futile rejoinders and ways of losing an argument are 
reviewed. This discussion essentially follows that of Vatsyayana. 


CHAPTER THREE 


29. (E66-67) Verbal authority is an instrument of direct 
experience gotten through conventional meanings (samaya). It has 
2 kinds: where the object is seen, and where it is not. The validity 
of the first kind is known from the practical results of activities based 
onit. The validity of the second kind is dependent on the reliability 
of the authority, and is thus known from inference. 

30. (E68-71) Itisnot known on the basis of eternal meanings, 
since words are not eternal. This can be shown by many arguments. 
E.g., if words are eternal then they will either be apprehended at all 
times or never. And the opponent may not argue that the fact that 
words are heard only occasionally is due to the absence of their mani- 
festing causes (abhivyatjaka), the problem is to know what this mani- 
festing cause is, and no suitable candidate can be found. E.g., if it 


NYAYASARA 407 


be supposed to be contact with air, then sounds will be heard all the 
time. The cause of the occurrence of sounds must be a producing 
(kdraka) cause, so that a certain sound—rather than all sounds or 
some other sound—is produced. 

31. (E71) Comparison, presumption, concurrence and tradi- 
tion, as well as negation (as an instrument) are all included in these 
3 instruments of knowledge, viz., perception, inference, and verbal 
testimony. 

32. (E71-74) Three accounts of comparison are mentioned, 
(1) “A gavaya is like a cow’—this version of comparison can safely 
be included under verbal testimony. (2) ‘“‘My cow is similar to this 
animal’’—but this is a case of memory, for when we saw the cow 
we apprehended its potential similarity to things like it and remember- 
ing that we form the judgment now. Objection : How can werecog- 
nize the similarity between two objects only one of which is known ? 
Answer: It is nonpropositional (nirvikalpaka) judgment whose specific 
correlate (pratiyogi) is unknown but then becomes known later on. 
And this function of memory in making propositional what was pre- 
viously apprehended nonpropositionally is not unique. E.g., when 
we have visited a house and noted that five or six people were there 
and are later asked ‘‘was Devadatta there,’? we can answer ‘‘no”’ 
even though we did not actually notice Devadatta’s absence at the 
time. (3) The judgment produced by comparison is ““This animal 
isnamed gavaya. ’? But this too is a variety of verbal testimony. 
When someone says ‘“‘the animal called gavaya is like a cow,” this 
produces knowledge about the meaning of a term as muchas the more 
direct ‘‘this animal is called gavaya. It is not necessary that we 
actually perceive the denotatum of a word to understand its meaning. 

33. (E74-77) To explain away the contradiction of this view, 
denying that comparison is a separate instrument, with Gautama’s, 
which holds it to be separate, Bhasarvajfia argues that in other instan- 
ces categories which are mentioned separately are also included 
under other headings, and so it is here: Gautama in explaining 
verbal testimony is intending to show the kind of use to which that 
instrument can be put. Some say that verbal testimony merely 
corroborates what is already known through perception of inference, 
and is therefore not a separate instrument. It does not give us know- 
ledge about the meanings of words by itself, since to understand the 
meaning of a word we are required to comprehend what objects the 
words refer to by appeal to some other instrument. It is to answer 
this view that Gautama mentions comparison in his sfitra—it is not 
that comparison is a fourth instrument, but that it constitutes a parti- 


408 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cularly important function of verbal testimony, namely its function 
in giving us knowledge of the conventional meanings of words whose 
objects are not perceptible or inferrible. It is true that Gautama 
defends the validity of comparison, but so he does also of presumption, 
so this does not show that he thought it was an independent instrument. 
Likewise, though it is true that Gautama explicitly argues that 
comparison is not inference, he does not argue that it is not verbal 
testimony. As for Gautama’s explicitly saying that there are four, 
and not three, instruments of knowledge, Bhasarvajfia says that he did 
not state his view carefully. For example, in dealing with the part and 
whole he does not state his view carefully; he seems to say that the 
whole cannot exist at all, but really means only that it must exist 
separately from the parts. 

34. (E77-78) Presumption is to be included under inference, 
since there is invariable concomitance involved. Objection: But in 
our judgment that Devadatta is fat we are making a judgement about 
an individual case. How can this be a matter of inference, which 
deals with generalities ? Answer: The type of inference in question 
is the only-negative kind, which operates when there are no similar 
instances. And one cannot reject this kind of inference merely on 
the ground that one of the two kinds of example cannot be given, 
since by parity of reasoning one ought then also to reject only-positive 
inference, which is absurd. 

36. (E78-80) Negation (as an instrument) is classified under 
either verbal testimony, inference, or perception according to cases. 
Objection: Negation cannot be perception, since perception requires 
sense-object contact and by hypothesis there is no object to contact. 
Answer : No, there isan object, namely anabsence. Odjector: Still, 
there cannot be contact between a sense organ and an absence. 
Answer: It is not required, either by us or by the opponent, that 
there be simple contact: there are half a dozen kinds of relation which 
may be involved in perception. 

37. (E80) Tradition, along with gesture, is included in verbal 
authority. 

38. (E81) Knowledge of the objects of knowledge (prameya) 
leads to perfection (nihéreyasa). The objects are divided into those 
to be attained, the means to them, those to be avoided, and the means 
to avoiding them. 

39. (E81-82) What is to be avoided is future pain, which has 
21 varieties: the body, the 6 senses, their 6 objects, the respective 6 
kinds of judgment, pleasure, and pain. Each of these is either the 
locus, the concomitant, or the cause of pain. 


NYAYASARA 409 


40. (E82-83) The means of getting pain are: imperfect know- 
ledge (avidyd), desire (trsna), merit, and demerit. Imperfect know- 
ledge is what is opposed to self-knowledge, along with traces, etc. 
Desire is the cause of future lives. Merit and demerit are the 
causes respectively of pleasure and pain. 

41. (E83) What is to be attained is the cutting off of pain, 
i.e., the absolute cessation of any relation with pain. 

42. (E83-95) The means to the cutting of pain is knowledge 
of reality, whose content is the self. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad I1.4.5 
is quoted, along with Chandogya Upanisad VII.1.3. Selves are 
of 2 kinds—higher and lower. The higher type is God, omnipo- 
tent, omniscient, creator of the universe. Heistobe known through 
inference and verbal testimony. The inference toan intelligent agent 
from the fact that the earth is a product is offered. By elimination 
it is then shown that the agent must beGod. The lower selfis he who 
enjoys the fruits of samsdra. The self is also inferred as the locus of 
judgments, etc., and again by elimination other possible loci are 
excluded. The facts of memory, etc., refute the thesis that there is 
no self and the thesis of momentariness of the Buddhists. The self is 
all-pervading because a locus for merit, etc., which produce motions 
in the air is required, and because the yogi can take on many bodies 
in various places at once. A variety of quotations from the Yoga- 
siitras are cited to show that knowledge of God is helpful in attaining 
liberation, through removing klefas, etc. Klefas are defined and 
summarized as passion, hate and delusion. The yamas and niyamas 
(the first two stages of Patafijali’s yoga) are discussed, along with 
other categories of the Yoga system. 

43. (E95-98) Through yoga the seeker eventually gets a vision 
of Siva, and thus attains liberation. Some say that liberation is the 
state of the self when all its specific qualities have been cut off: then 
it is like @kafa during pralaya. Both pleasure and pain must be ended, 
according to this view, since they are invariably concomitant and one 
cannot lose one without the other. But others (including presumably 
Bhasarvajfia) say that no discriminating person will strive for such 
a state. We know from verbal authority that the liberated person 
enjoys pleasures and is conscious (and Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 
TII.7.28 is cited). 


Objection: Are the qualities of pleasure and consciousness 
eternal or noneternal qualities of the self? If eternal, then we are 
already free; if noneternal, then the freed self may lapse back into 
bondage. Answer: They are eternal, and it is because of demerit and 


410 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


frustration that we do not perceive the eternal relationship between 
consciousness and pleasure. 

Objection : The knowledge which one gets at liberation is a 
product, and like all products it is noneternal and the liberated self 
will eventually lapse back into bondage. Answer : Not every product 
has an end. E.g., posterior absence is a product but has no end. 
Objector : But this final knowledge, unlike posterior absence, is a posi- 
tive thing. Answer : No, for the relation between a judgment and its 
content is not a member of any of the 6 categories. Ifsuch a relation 
were allowed to belong to a category, then there could be no relation 
between inherence and our knowledge of it. Objector: The content 
of a judgment is produced by karma in dependence on adrsia, and the 
knowledge of that content is produced in turn by it. Answer : No, 
for then God’s knowledge could have no content, since God has no 
adrsta and cannot be dependent on it. Thus it is established that 
liberation is a state of blissful consciousness. 


NYAYABHUSANA (or SAMGRAHAVARTTIKA ?) on 
NYAYASARA 


Summary by Bimal Krishna Maitilal 


Bhasarvajiia’s Nydyabhisana holds a very unique place in the 
history of Nyaya-Vaisesika philosophy. The actual text was suppos- 
ed to be lost for a long time since no manuscript was discovered. 
But the recent publication of the entire text came asa pleasant surprise 
to the world of scholars. The editor notes in the preface that he hada 
glimpse of the actual manuscript only once, in the possession of Svami 
Satyasvarupa Sasiri. After obtaining a grant from the Government 
of India to publish it, the editor approached Mr. Sastri again, at 
which time the latter did not allow him to see the manuscript but 
gave him only a prepared transcript. The present edition is based 
upon this transcript. 

The odd nature of this story raises some suspicion. Besides, 
the previous information about a Jain Bhandar possessing the manus- 
cript is ignored by the editor. 

The book is written in elegant philosophical Sanskrit. It is 
rather unfortunate that the edition is full of printing errors (some of 
which are quite confusing and misleading). But almost all the known 
references and citations of Bhasarvajfia can be located in this book. 

Originally the book was written as an elaborate commentary 
on Bhasarvajfia’s own manual Nydyaséra. But in fact the commen- 


NYAYABHUSANA 4]1 


tary itself was Bhasarvajfia’s masterpiece. It proves undoubtedly 
that Bhasarvajfia was a great thinker of his time. He preceded Udayana 
by a short time. He was a great innovator in the Nyaya system. 
Many of his interpretations and views are sometimes termed “‘unor- 
thodox”? in the Ny4ya tradition. 

Instead of giving a summary of the whole text (which seems 
to be a very difficult task ), I shall try to point out the important 
philosophic problems discussed in the book and some interesting 
theories which the author independently held. 

Textual citations to the edition by Swami Yogindrananda, 
Varanasi 1968. 


CHAPTER I 


(Pp. 1-11) First, pramdna or instrument of right knowledge is 
defined. Bhasarvajfia holds that there are only 3 instruments of 
knowledge as opposed to the orthodox Nyaya view that there are 4. 
The 3 means are perception, inference, and verbal testimony. Other 
means of knowledge noted by other philosophers, according to Bhasar- 
vajfia, are to be included under these 3. Bhasarvajfia argues later 
(p. 81) with great ingenuity that his system of 3 instruments of know- 
ledge does not in fact go against Gautama’s system of 4. Gautama 
first spoke of 5 sense organs in NS 1.1.12, and then in another place 
accepted the internal organ as the sixth sense organ. This shows, 
according to Bhasarvajfia, that Gautama’s enumeration of items was 
not always meant to be exact or exhaustive or even mutually exclusive 
of other lists. Thus, although he mentioned 4 instruments of know- 
ledge he would not have denied the fact that there are only 3, the third 
in his list being capable of being included in the fourth, verbal testi- 
mony. 

(Pp. 26-32) Bhasarvajfia discusses 8 different theories regard- 
ing the status of the content of erroneous judgment. This is rather 
interesting because Vacaspati Miéra, in a similar context in Tdiparya- 
tika, mentions only 5 different theories or khydtis (see summary of 
Taiparyatika below, sections E85-91). 

The first theory is called akhydti and is ascribed to the Madhya- 
mika school. It maintains that an erroneous judgment is without any 
objective content as its support (nirélambana) This view is rejected 
with the following argument: If there were no objective basis, how 
could one distinguish between one error and another, or between 
error and absence of cognitive states in general? The objective 


412 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


contents of judgments are, in fact, ‘‘distinguishers”’ of the individual 
judgments. 

.. The second theory is called asatkhydti, and says that the object 
appearing in error is, in fact, nonexistent (asat). 

The third theory, called prasiddharthakhyati, states that the 
object which appears in an erroneous judgment (e.g., the snake in 
a snake-rope confusion) is a ‘‘well-established”’ (prasiddha), i.e., real 
object. The said snake is, however, short-lived like a flash of light- 
ning. It exists as long as the error continues. 

The fourth theory (alaukikarthakhyati) states that the object 
causing the erroneous judgment must be an extraordinary thing, since 
it is not only short-lived as electric flashes but also does not perform 
its function properly. E.g., the water in a mirage does not quench 
our thirst. 

The fifth theory (smrtipramosa) is held by the Prabhakaras. 
They maintain that the perceptual error expressed as “‘this is a snake”’ 
is, in fact, partly confused with the memory of the snake, but the per- 
ceiver is not aware at that moment that it is a memory. 

The sixth theory (dimakhyati), held by the Yogacarins, states 
that there are no external objects apart from the cognition itself. 
Thus, in error the internal form of the judgment itself is externalized 
as the ‘‘snake.’’, 

The seventh theory (anirvacaniyakhyati) says that the snake 
appears in error neither as existent nor as nonexistent. If it were 
existent, then the said judgment would have been a true one. If 
nonexistent, then it should not have produced such tangible results 
as the fear of the snake and other reactions in the perceiver. Thus, 
the snake in the erroneous judgment must have an indeterminable 
status. 

The eighth theory is called anyathakhyati and is upheld by the 
Nyaya school. Bhasarvajfia supports this theory and rejects the rest. 

(Pp. 32-38) Skeptics argue that all cognitive states are merely 
causes of doubt, and that neither knowledge nor error can ever be 
possible because we can never be sure about the truth or falsity of a 
cognitive state. 

This view is first analyzed in detail and then proven tobe un- 
tenable. Sometimes the truth ofa cognitive state is established by the 
nonorigination of contradiction; sometimes it is established by the 
successful action that follows with regard to the object. 

(Pp. 38-43) The question whether the validity of knowledge is 
intrinsic or extrinsic is raised and Bhasarvajfia eventually supports 
the theory of extrinsic validity (pfaratah-pramanya). 


NYAYABHUSANA 413 


(Pp. 49-62) An instrument of knowledge is that which is instru- 
mental (karana) in the realization of true cognition. The notion of 
“instrumentality’’ (karanaiva) involved here has been explained differ- 
ently by different philosophers. Bhasarvajfia’s interesting and elabo- 
rate discussion touches the areas of logic, grammar, and epistemology. 
His definition of “instrumental” is given on page 67. 

(Pp. 84-100) The author first justifies his definition of percep- 
tion given in the Nydyasdra (see previous summary, p. 401). He then 
proceeds to examine the definition found in Nyayasitras 1.1.4. This 
sitra is interpreted and justified, and Dignaga’s critique of the Nyaya 
theory of perception is discussed and answered. 

Bhasarvajiia says that the word avyapadesya_ (in Gautama’s siitra) 
indicates that Gautama defined the nonpropositional (nirvikalpaka) 
type of perception. Nonpropositional perception is at the root of all 
other cognitive states such as propositional perception and inference. 
All the yogis try to gain this nonpropositional type of perception. 
But propositional perceptual judgments are also accepted in the 
Nyaya school, and Gautama supports this kind of perception, not in 
NS 1.1.4, but in such sitras as NS 1.1.14 and II.2.65 Bhasarvajfia’s 
interpretation is quite different from the traditional interpretations of 
NS 1.1.4. 

(Pp. 104-53) Since the Nyaya theory of perception assumes the 
reality of the whole as well as of the parts, Bhasarvajfia develops a 
very interesting discussion of this problem. He quotes extensively from 
Dharmakirti’s Pramdnavdrttika as well as from other Buddhist writers 
in expounding the opponent’s view. Bhasarvajfia justifies the ortho- 
dox Nyaya view that the whole is not merely an integration of parts 
but is separately existent, in contradistinction to the Yogacara Buddhist 
doctrine of the unreality of wholes and parts. 

This discussion leads to a consideration of the problem of varie- 
gated color (citraripa). Bhasarvajfia argues that variegated color 
can be regarded as one type of color belonging to the whole which 
arises from material parts which have several different colors. 

A section of the Yogacarins holds the theory of citrédvaitavada, 
according to which one individual (nondual) cognitive state can 
have various “‘forms,’’ This view is briefly explained and then refuted. 
Bhasarvajfia quips: If the Buddhist accepts the citrddvaita, why does 
he take so much trouble to reject the brahmdadvaitavada of the Vedanta 
school? The Nyaya school is fundamentally pluralistic and hence 
rejects any form of advaita. 

The classic argument of Dharmakirti that the judgment and 
its object are in fact identical because they are always realized to- 


414 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


gether (sahopalambhantyama) is analyzed and criticized. Bhasarvajfia’s 
main point is that it is impossible to establish beyond reasonable doubt 
that the judgment and its object are always realized together. 

The Yogacarins argue that a judgment is always revealed by 
itself, not by another judgment. Bhasarvajfia maintains that a judg- 
ment is revealed by another judgment. Some YogacArins introduce a 
distinction between the object that is received or grasped (in judging) 
and the object that is ascertained or ascribed (grahya and adhyavaseya). 
And thus, they maintain, the ‘‘receiver,”’ i.e., the judgment, is actually 
identical with the first type of object, the ‘‘receivable’’. Bhasarvajfia 
rejects the said distinction between two types of object, the receivable 
and the ascribable. Inthis way, the Yogacara thesis of identity of 
judgment andits object is rejected and the reality of external objects 
is established. 

Some Buddhists argue: All cognitive states, are, like dreams, 
without any “objective support’? (a@lambana). Bhasarvajfia follows 
Kumirila in rejecting this theory. Several verses are quoted from the 
Slokavarttika, Bhasarvajfia takes great care to distinguish between our 
judgments in our dreams and our judgments when we are awake. 

Dharmakirti and Prajfiakaragupta argue as follows: Ifthe exter- 
nal object were different from the judgment, how could it be revealed 
by the judgment? If this revealing of the object by the judgment is 
due to some relation between them, then the question arises whether 
that relation is also a different entity apart from the judgment and the 
object. Ifit is different, then we need another relation to relate such a 
relation to the judgment and the object. And in this way, we are led 
to an infinite regress. 

Bhasarvajfia rejects this argument, saying that ascertainment 
reveals the object as certain without revealing itself (the judgment) 
as certain. Since in such cases ofascertainment the Buddhists do not 
admit an infinite regress to make the ascertainment certain, the 
Nydya likewise does not accept the alleged infinite regress, even 
though it maintains that the object is different from the judgment. 

It is argued further that even the judgment in our dream is not 
totally without objective support. Even if the objects of our dream 
judgments do not exist, the objects of our waking judgments do exist 
for one group would be unintelligible without the other. Thus it 
is reasonable to admit the reality of external objects. They arenot 
just the creation of our imaginative construction. 

(Pp. 154-65) Bhasarvajfia offers a number of original suggestions 
to modify the Vaisesika system of categories. The 24 qualities of the 
Vaisesika and the category of motion are, according to Bhasarvajiia, 


NYAYABHUSANA 415 


not different in character. Thus motion can belong to the category 
of quality. 

Number is not a separate quality for Bhasarvajfia. The number 
one (ekatva) is merely nondifference (abheda). Higher numbers imply 
simply difference. 

Size (parimdna) is also not a separate quality. The notions of 
size such as “‘big’’ or “‘small’”? depend upon our comparisons between 
objects. 

Separateness (prthaktva) is also not a quality. It simply equals 
difference, which belongs to the category of absence. 

Disjunction is, according to Bhasarvajiia, merely the absence of 
contact, not a separate quality. 

Similarly, farness and nearness are not, according to Bhasarvajfia, 
separate qualities. 

Impetus (vega) is also not a separate quality. It is indistin- 
guishable from actual motion. “It moves with impetus’? means 
simply that it moves. The traditional Vaisesika system maintains 
that impetus is a quality by which the body continues to move long 
after the original impact or push from another body. Traditional 
Vaisesika also maintains that sneha or viscidity isa quality which 
belongs to water only. But Bhasarvajfia says that viscidity belongs 
not only to water but also to such solid substances as butter and wax. 

(Pp. 162-87) General problems about perception are discussed. 
The Buddhist definition of perception (as given by the Dignaga- 
Dharmakirti school) is analyzed in detail and criticized. The 6 
types of sense-object-contact are discussed and justified. The yogic 
variety of perception is also discussed in detail. Bhasarvajfia emerges 
as a great advocate of this variety of perception. 

Following the Nyaya school, Bhasarvajfia justifies the validity 
of propositional perceptual judgments by answering criticisms of the 
Buddhists. 


CHAPTER II 


(Pp. 159-209) The definition of inference and its threefold 
division as found in Nydyasitra I, 1.5 are discussed. Various inter- 
pretations of the threefold classification of inference given by previous 
writers such as Uddyotakara are mentioned. 

Some people explain that sara 1.1.5 gives the triple character 
of the hetu, viz., presence of the h in the p, presence of the Ain sp, and 
absence of h from vp. Bhasarvajfia rejects such interpretation on the 


416 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ground that it would be irrelevant to talk about the hetu only when the 
context demands a discussion of inference proper. 


The Nydyasdra definition of an inferential judgment-product 
(anumiti) is explained. 


The Buddhist argues that all inference is, in some sense, false 
since it reveals only universals (sémdnya) which are always imaginative 
constructions, Bhasarvajfia discusses and rejects this argument, 
quoting extensively from Dharmakirti, Prajfiakara, and Dharmottara. 
The Buddhist again: When the lustre ofa gem is mistaken for the gem 
our mistaken judgment nevertheless leads to successful activity, viz., 
obtaining of the gem. Similarly, an inferential judgment-product 
may not reveal the real object (e.g., fire) but it nevertheless leads to 
successful activity (viz., finding fire on the other side of the mountain. ) 
Thus it is argued by the Buddhist that inference can be called an ins- 
trument of valid knowledge even though it does not reveal a real 
object. Bhasarvajiia rejects this argument. If successful activity 
were the sole criterion for the validity of a judgment, then validity 
could be ascribed even to doubting judgments (samsaya). 

Both Dharmakirti and Prajfiakara argue that the validity is 
due to conventional or ordinary usage and experience (vyavahdra). 
Our conventions lead us to believe that the same object which we 
perceived before is before us now, and thus the validity of the previous 
judgment is established. Bhasarvajfia says: If convention establishes 
the said validity, then we need to ask the same question about the 
validity of that very convention or “‘ordinary’’ experience. Ifsuchan 
experience is accepted as valid, what establishes its validity? If ano- 
ther convention, then we have an infinite regress. It is to be noted 
that conventions cannot be said to be intrinsically valid, since not all 
our ordinary experiences are uncontradicted. 


(Pp. 210-23) The Lokayata school tries to refute the validity 
of inference in several ways. (1) Inference is invalid because it 
deals with the metaphorical sense of the object. Ifthe object to be 
proved is already proven then there is no need for inference. And if 
not, then we call something an “‘object to be proved’’ (sdédhya) only 
asametaphor. (2) Suppose the object to be proved in the inference 
‘this mountain possesses fire”’ is ftre. Now, fireness is a well-established 
property and hence cannot be established by this particular inference. 
And the particular fire on that mountain cannot be established by 
inference since the relation of pervasion (vydpti) holds between uni- 
versal properties only. (3) The relation of pervasion can be grasped 
neither by perception nor by inference, Hence inference based on 


NYAYABHUSANA 417 


such a relation is impossible. (4) Further, in most inferences it is 
possible to think of a contradictory hypothesis. 

Bhasarvajiia rejects all these arguments. ‘‘Object to be proved” 
(sddhya) and ‘‘inferential mark” (hetu or liiga) do have their primary 
senses in the context of inference, not just their metaphorical senses. 
And ‘“‘subject of the inference’? (paksa) means the locus where the 
inferred property is desired to be proved, or where the presence of the 
inferred property is doubted. 

Pervasion holds between the universal properties smokiness and 
fieriness. With the help of such a relation we infer the presence of a 
particular fire in a particular place. 

Different theories regarding how we know the pervasion relation 
are offered and criticized. 

Some say: Pervasion between smokiness and fieriness is ascertained 
through observation, i.e., perception of a number of instances, This 
view is rejected because no one can be sure how many instances one 
may need in order to know the relation of pervasion. 

Others say: Pervasion between smokiness and fieriness is obtained 
through a kind of mental perception (mdnasapratyaksa). This view is 
also rejected because if a mental perception revealed the pervasion 
relation between all cases of fire and all cases of smoke, the person who 
possessed such a perception would have to be omniscient. 


Another view maintains: By observing a few cases of co-occur- 
rence of smoke and fire we can safely assume the pervasion relation 
between smokiness and fieriness. This is also rejected. Although 
most solid things are cut by iron, yet there are some kinds of things 
belonging to the class of solids which cannot be cut by iron. This 
indicates that mere concurrence of properties is not always a safe 
guide for ascertaining the pervasion relation. 


Bhasarvajfia’s own view is this: We perceive that smoke occurs 
in the same locus with fire and we also perceive that smoke does not 
occur in a place where fire does not occur. This observation of agree- 
ment in presence and agreement in absence (anvayavyatireka) leads 
to the realization of the general relation of pervasion between smoki- 
ness and fieriness. Just as the property cowness is perceived as we start 
perceiving a few individual cows, so also we perceive the pervasion 
relation in a similar manner. 


(Pp. 229-73) While discussing the inferential mark (hetu or 
linga), Bhasarvajtia discusses the problem of universals. The Buddh- 
ist argues: Universals are imaginative constructions (kalpand). 
Bhasarvajfia’s main opponent in this section is Dharmakirti. Most 
of the citations and arguments are from the Praméanavarttika. The 


418 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


important connection between the pervasion relation and the notion 
of universal property is also discussed here in detail. 

Common nouns like ‘‘cow’”’ and ‘‘man’’ express, according to 
the Nyaya view, the individual as qualified by the universal property, 
here respectively cowness and manness. When we learn the meaning 
of the word “‘cow”’ as the individual qualified by cowness, we can apply 
the word to any individual in which cowness is present. Buta proper 
noun like “Yudhisthira” is not applicable to another individual 
except the one with regard to which we have learnt the word. 


The Dignaga school holds that universal is a form of double 
negation, that ‘‘cowness’’ only means ‘‘what is not a non-cow.” 
Bhasarvajfia discusses this argument in detail, quoting frequently from 
Pramanavarttika. He rejects the Buddhist view and argues in favor of 


the existence of a universal property cowness. 


A universal property like cowness may exist everywhere (i.¢., 
be all-pervasive) or it may only exist in the individual cows. If the 
latter alternative is accepted, then when a new cow is born in a place 
cowness will have to move from its previous place to the new place to 
be associated with the new cow. Ifthe former alternative isaccepted 
then everything could be called a cow because cowness will be present 
in it. Such criticisms from the Buddhists are answered. Some 
Naiyayikas say that cowness exists only in the individual cows (not 
everywhere) and such is the special nature of a universal property 
such as cowness that it can be associated with any new cow that is born 
without “‘physically’? moving from its former locations. Others 
hold that cowness is all-pervasive, but it is only manifested when it 
inheres in an individual. ‘Thus, everything cannot be called a cow 
because cowness does not inhere in everything. 

Bhasarvajfia concludes that Dharmakirti’s objection that the 
meaning of a word cannot be the individual object because 
meaning is a “‘social’’? (or ‘“‘conventional,”’ vyavahdra) fact, can be 
met in the following way. There are 2 types of meanings, (1) express 
meaning or denotation (vécya), and (2) implied meaning or connota- 
tion (gamya). The express meaning of “‘cow”’ is an individual cow 
as qualified by cowness. Its implied meaning is the exclusion of what 
is a non-cow. The express meaning of ‘‘not a non-cow”’ is the indi- 
vidual qualified by the exclusion of what is a non-cow, and its implied 
meaning is cowness. Besides, Bhasarvajfia argues, without universal 
properties like cowness it would be impossible to introduce a natural 
classification of empirical objects. 

(Pp. 273-81) The school of Bhartrhari posits an entity called 
sphota, which is the meaning-bearing unit distinct from the audible 


NYAYABHUSANA 419 


sounds or letters. While discussing inference for others (pararthanu- 
mana) Bhasarvajfia discusses the concept of sphota. He rejects this 
concept and maintains that the cluster of letters or audible sounds 
makes up a word and the cluster of words makes up a_ sentence. 
Panini’s rule 1.4.14 is quoted to justify this position. Instead of 
saying that the cluster of letters manifests the sphofa which expresses 
the meaning, one might as well say that the cluster of letters directly 
manifests the meaning. 

Different theories about the nature of the sentence (vdkya) 
are examined and analyzed. The Nyaya view that the cluster of 
words makes up a sentence is established. Bhasarvajfia supports 
also the anvitabhidhdna theory, according to which sentence meaning 
is derived from the words which are first syntactically connected to 
generate the required meaning. 

(Pp. 282-85) While discussing the Nydyasitra definition of the 
hypothesis or proposition to be proved in an inference (pratijid) 
(NS 1.1.33), the Buddhists suggest that all proposition-expressing 
sentences can beconstrued as containing an implicit quantificational 
particle “‘only’’ (eva). Since the meaning of this particle can be of 
3 types, they argue, the meanings of sentences must also be explained 
in 3 different ways. Bhasarvajfia quotes from Pramdnavarttika and 
criticizes the Buddhist view by referring back to Uddyotakara (here 
Tamori). The Nyaya view says that not all proposition-expressing 
sentences have an “‘only’? implied in its meaning. To suppose 
that the simple assertion “‘the lotus is blue’ (nilam utpalam) has an 
“only” implied in its meaning is a gross misinterpretation of the 
sentence. 

(Pp. 287-99) In the Mydyabindu, Dharmakirti talks about, 
3 types of hetu: (1) hetu as effect (kdrya): (2) hetu as essential nature 
(svabhdva), and (3) hetu as nonapprehension (anupalabdh). E.g. 
for (1), “Shere there is fire because there is smoke”’ ;for (2), ‘‘thisisa 
tree because this is a Simfapa’’; and for (3), “there is no pot here 
because it is not apprehended.’’ The second and third type of hetus 
are rejected by Bhasarvajfia. 

A very interesting discussion on the notion of causality and 
induction follows. Passages from Dharmakirti and Prajfiakara are 
frequently cited and criticized. In a long quotation from Prajfiakara 
it is argued that cause and effect are mutually connected and therefore 
one must necessarily imply the other and vice versa. This view is 
rejected. Bhasarvajfia says that cause and causal conditions must 
exist when the effect is being produced, but when the effect has 


already been produced they may or may not exist. 


420 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(Pp. 300-03) The Nyaya accepts only-positive (kevalénvayin) 
properties (i.€., ever-present properties) as hetus and sddhyas in infe- 
rence. Dharmakirti criticized this admission, and Bhasarvajfia 
defends it. Dharmakirti also criticized the notion of an only- 
negative (kevalavyatirekin) hetu. Our author answers the Buddhist 
objections and analyzes Uddyotakara’s example ‘“‘A living body is 
not without a self, otherwise it would not show signs of life, breathing 
etc.”’ in order to defend it. 

(Pp. 308-20) Bhasarvajfia adds one more fallacy of the hetu 
(hetvabhdsa) to the traditional Nyaya list of 5. It is called anadhya- 
vasita. The anatkdntika hetu generates doubt as towhether the sddhya 
is present in the paksa or not. The anadhyavasita hetu generates a sort 
of uncertainty with regard to the presence of s in p. Doubt is oscilla- 
tion between alternatives, while uncertainty is simply lack of cer- 
tainty as to what the specific character of the p is. 

(Pp. 320-77) Bhasarvajfia explains the 5 members (paficdvayava) 
in a full-fledged argument. He generally follows the Mydyasiitras 
on this topic. Then he discusses the 3 types of debate (kathd) as well 
as such items as quibble, futile rejoinder, and ways to lose an argument. 
He adds more futile rejoinders to the Nydaya list of 24 found in the 
Nydyasiitras. He also refers to Dharmakirti’s criticisms of several 
Nyaya categories of debate in the Vadanydya. These criticisms are 
answered and the Nyaya view is defended. 


CHAPTER III 


(Pp. 379-88) This is the chapter on verbal authority as an ins- 
trument of valid knowledge. Dignaga and Dharmakirti talk of 
only 2 instruments because they recognize only 2 types of objects. 
This view is rejected and verbal authority established as an instru- 
ment. 

Dharmakirti argues: There is no invariable connection between 
a word and the object it signifies, and thus words are merely indica- 
tors of what the speaker has in mind. 

Bhasarvajfia answers: Since there is no invariable connection 
between word and object, we do not say that verbal authority is only 
a form of inference (as the Vaigesika does). Verbal authority is 
actually a separate means of knowledge like perception. Just as the 
eye reveals an object with the help of light, etc., so also the word 
reveals its object aided by the memory of our first learning of the 
meaning of the word (sanketa). 


NYAYABHUSANA 421 


(Pp. 389/421) The Vedic scriptures are established as composed 
by the Omniscient and, therefore, it is argued that they are without 
error. The Mimamsa view that the Vedas are eternal and without 
any author is criticized. ‘The Mimarhsa says that there is a “natural” 
relation between the word and its object and that sound is eternal. 
Both of these views are rejected. 

(Pp. 421-27) Here Bhasarvajna tries to prove that Gautama 
mentioned verbal authority as an instrument of knowledge only to 
establish the authority of the Vedas or scriptures, which can be 
regarded as a special kind of verbal authority. And comparison 
(upaména) was mentioned by him as the third instrument simply 
to establish verbal authority, i.e., toestablish sentence meaning in 
general as another means of knowledge besides perception and in- 
ference, 

If the object referred to by the word is already known either 
by perception or by inference, then the word will not be an original 
source of knowledge. And if the object is not known by either per- 
ception or inference, then also the word cannot be the source of 
knowledge because we cannot establish any regular connection bet- 
ween the word and its object. To answer this dilemma, Gautama men- 
tioned comparison just to show that the connection between the word 
and its object can be established in various ways such as through the 
notion of similarity (sddrSya-upamadna). The relation between the 
expression gayal and the gayal can be understood through the gayal’s 
similarity to a cow. In this and many other ways we can under- 
stand the relation between some unfamiliar word and the unfamiliar 
object it denotes. 

(Pp. 427-34) All other instruments of knowledge such as 
comparison and presumption (arthdpatii) are to be included under 
the triad of perception, inference, and verbal authority. 

(Pp. 436-85) Twelve objects of knowledge (prameya) found 
listed in Mydyas aira 1.1.9 are discussed one by one quoting the relevant 
sitras from 1.1.10 to 1.1.22. Under the topic of self (diman), Bha- 
sarvajfia talks about 2 types of self, human self and God. God is 
called Mahefvara. God is established through inference and scrip- 
turalauthority (d@gama). A form of the causal argument is formulated 
to prove God by inference. The atheistic arguments of the Samkhya 
and the Mimamsa are rejected. 

The maker of a pot is the potter who is an embodied being, 
but from the empirical evidence how can one infer God as the maker 
of the earth, etc., since God is presumably a disembodied being ? 
Bhasarvajfia answers : A product usually has an embodied agent or 


422 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


maker. But if the fact of being a product warrants us in inferring 
an embodied maker of the earth, then that inference could be con- 
tradicted by the fact that it is impossible for an embodied agent like 
us human beings to produce a vast effect such as the earth. Hence 
we conclude that a product like the earth does not have an embodied 
agent but simply has an agent, and that agent is no other person 
than God. 

Bhasarvajfia devotes a considerable portion of this section 
to discussing and analyzing various problems connected with theism. 
Such questions as “‘Why should God act to create since He is supposed 
to be totally without any unfulfilled desire’ are answered. Three 
alternative views are mentioned: (1) God acts for the sake of others, 
(2) God acts for his own sake, (3) God acts out of His own good na- 
ture. 

There is only one God, not many. He sees everything and 
His knowledge is eternal. With such unbounded knowledge He 
becomes the creator of the earth, etc. Many Buddhist objections 
culled from Dharmakirti and Prajfiakara are discussed. 

(Pp. 509-41) The Buddhist theory of universal flux or momen- 
tariness is discussed in detail. Verses from Pramdnavarttika are cited 
to prove the thesis of momentariness. Everything that exists is 
momentary because it exists only in doing something. A stable, 
momentary object cannot cause anything to happen either gradually 
or simultaneously, and hence it can only be a fictitious object. 

Bhasarvajfia rejects the thesis of momentariness. It would 
be logically impossible to construct an inference of the sort “‘A stable 
object is nonexistent because of its stability’? since there are no 
stable objects according to the Buddhist. It might be said that a 
stable object is an imaginative construction (samuyt?) and accepting 
such an imaginary entity one might try to construct the said in- 
ference. But this is criticized and rejected. In fact, a stable object 
can produce other things either gradually or simultaneously depending 
on how it becomes associated with the accessories (sahakérin). Logical 
arguments are equally strong on both sides, for momentariness and 
nonmomentariness. But recognition (pratyabhijfid) is an additional 
proof in favor of the thesis of nonmomentariness. 

Dharmakirti argues: Destruction is a natural process and an 
object is self-destructive. Bhasarvajfia analyzes this argument 
and criticizes it. It is argued by the Buddhist that if destruction 
were produced by an external cause then since all products must 
meet destruction eventually one can conclude that destruction itself 
can be destroyed, which would mean that the object would be re- 


NYAYABHUSANA 423 


created, Bhasarvajfia answers no. Only with regard to positive 
objects (bhdva-padaértha) does such an invariable connection between 
production and destruction hold. But ‘“‘destruction’’ itself is a nega- 
tive concept, corresponding to an absence (abhdva), and hence it is 
not included under the above rule. It is just the nature of destruc- 
tion that it cannot be destroyed although it is produced. 

(Pp. 543-52) Human selves are ubiquitous and also eternal, 
They transmigrate from the old body to the new body. Experiences 
in one life leave their latent impressions on the self, these impressions 
(samskara) being qualities of the self. Some of these impressions 
are transferred from one birth to another. These impressions can be 
revived through appropriate means. Those which are called ins- 
tincts—a child drinking milk and crying in pain—are, in fact, revived 
latent impressions, according to Nyaya. 

Dharmakirti argues: Knowledge of self will lead the person 
on to a never-ending cycle of rebirths instead of freeing him from it, 
because knowledge of self leads to love of self which eventually 
changes into selfish desire for perpetuation. 

Bhasarvajfia rejects this argument. The kind of self, the Nyaya 
talks about does not in fact give rise to a selfish desire or love of self. 
It rather prompts one to work for his freedom from suffering. 

(Pp. 552-60) Incidentally, the Jain view is discussed. The 
7 categories (tativa) beginning with self (jiva) and nonself (ajiva) 
are explained with frequent citations from Tattvdrthavaritika (of 
Bhatta Akalanka?). The Jain theory of nononesidedness (anekdn- 
tavada) is also explained. Bhasarvajfia, however, rejects the Jain 
position. 

(Pp. 562-73) The Samkhya school says: Cognitions, pleasure 
and pain are not located in the self but in matter (pradhdna). Five 
different proofs to establish the existence of matter are cited and 
examined. Bhasarvajfia says that none of the reasons used in these 
5 proofs are conclusive. Verses from the Sémkhyakarikas are quoted 
to show the relative positions of the self and matter in the Samkhya 
school. The Samkhya theory of effect preexisting in cause (satkarya) 
is also discussed and refuted. 

(Pp. 574-83) The way leading to final freedom is knowledge 
of the supreme self. The Advaitin argues: Knowledge of the 
identity of the ordinary self with the supreme self leads to final freedom. 
Many verses are cited from scriptures like the Upanisads to prove 
this point. But Nydya supports dualism of the ordinary and supreme 
selves (i.e., between self and God) and rejects any form of Advaitism. 
Bhasarvajfia quotes some verses from the Upanisads to prove dualism. 


424. ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


He says that scriptural verses that talk about nondualism can also be 
interpreted as dualistic. 

The Advaitin’s contention that the nature of reality is indeter- 
minable (?-anirvacaniya) is also refuted. Reality is knowable. 

Bhartrhari’s theory of sabdadvaita, nondualism of the Word,’ 
is also discussed and refuted. 

(Pp. 584-98) Bhasarvajiia talks about the methods of updsand 
(religious practice) in order to achieve the final freedom. He men- 
tions yoga, tapas, etc., as ways toward freedom. The 8 limbs (anga) 
of yoga are recommended. 

Time and space may not be separate categories, i.¢., separate 
substances as the Vaisesika says. God, time, and space are, in a 
sense, identical. 

In the Nyaya concept of freedom there is neither sorrow nor 
happiness. This is the traditional view. But Bhasarvajfia thinks that 
there is happiness or delight in final freedom (moksa). 


20. SANATANI 


Dinesh Chandra Bhattacharya tells us! that in Udayana’s 
Parisuddhi there is a reference to this writer, who, Bhattacharya 
thinks must have antedated Vacaspati Migra. The passage says 
Sanatani was a Bengali. He must have written a commentary on the 
Nyayasiitras, He is also referred to by Vardhamana. In the Part- 
Suddhi passage he is credited with having held that there are 4 rather 
than 3 kinds of controversy (Kathi). V. Vardachari reports? that 
Udayana twice refers to Sanatani. 


21. VYOMASIVA 


Vyomagiva seems to have been the earliest of the three great 
commentators on Pragastapada’s Padarthadharmasamgraha, although 
it is likely that all three were contemporaries. (The other two are 
Sridhara and Udayana). Gopinath Kaviraj writes that he ‘“‘seems to 
have been a Saiva saint of the South... Vyomagiva was the leader... 
at any rate a learned representative of a distinct section of the 
Vaisesika school!.... Estimates of his date vary, but V. 
Varadachari, whose summary follows, estimates 950, and this seems to 


39 


agree well with most other suggestions.2 Vardhamana tells us that 
he preceded Udayana, and D.C. Bhattacharya claims that views 
which according to Samkara Migra belonged to Sridhara and were 
refuted by Udayana were in fact the views of Vyomagiva. He says 


VYOMAVATI 425 


that Vyomagiva, Sridhara, Vacaspati Migra, and Vallabhacarya 
all address themselves against Nydyabhisana.* 


The Vyomavati, Vyomagiva’s only known work, is untranslated 
and has only been edited once, in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit 
Serics (B1054). Page references in Professor Varadachari’s 
summary below are to this edition. Footnotes are Professor 
Varadachari’s. Sections are numbered to correspond to the 
summary of Pragastapada’s work above. 


VYOMAVATI or TIKA on Pragastapada’s Padarthadharma- 
samgraha 
Summary by V. Varadachari 


The Padérthadharmasamgraha is an independent treatise on the 
Vaigesika system. It is also known as Paddrthasamgraha,* Padartha- 
pravesa,5 and Prasastapadabhésya.6 The last mentioned title would 
suggest this work to be a commentary on the aphorisms of Kanada, 
as other commentaries are on other systems of thought, e.g., Nydya- 
bhasya, Sabarabhasya, and others. However, this is no commentary at 
all, but is named so in all the commentaries on it.’ It is a treatise 
planned and executed by its author on the basis of the aphorisms of 
Kanada which are cited® occasionally in support of his treatment 
of the subject. 

The author of the work appears to have been known as Pragasta® 
and became reputed as Pragastadeva!® and Pragastapada." He is also 
referred to as Bhasyakara.1? 

The Padérthadharmasamgraha has 3 commentaries under the 
names Vyomavati, Nydyakandali, and Kirandvali written by Vyomagiva 
Sridhara, and Udayana respectively. Internal evidences show that 
the order in which these are enumerated here is chronologically 
correct. It appears that there was also the Lildvati, another com- 
mentary by Srivatsa, which is not extant.14 The writer’s identity is 
not established. There are other commentaries which belong to the 
later period. 

Internal evidence! is available in the Vyomavati which shows 
that attempts were made before Vyomasiva to interpret the Padar- 
thadharmasamgraha. Some of these interpretations are simply alluded 
to and others are rejected by Vyomasiva. These could have been 
taken from the commentaries written on the work by the predecessors 
of Vyomagiva, whose names have not come down to us. Such 
references may also be taken to represent the views of other schools 


426 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of thought made in connection with the rejection of the doctrines of 
the Vaigesika school. 

Vyomagiva, as the name indicates, must have been a follower 
of Saivism. It is said that he was a native of Kashmir! and that 
this name was assumed by him when he became a recluse, that he 
was known as Sivaditya Sivacarya in the previous order of his life, 
and that he wrote the works Saptapadarthi’ Laksanaméla}® and 
Saktisamdoha. All this is unsupported by evidence. Vyomatgiva’s 
attempt to leave out absence from the list of categories and Sivaditya’s 
classification of the categories as positive and negative prove that 
the two writers must have been different. This is further streng- 
thened by the absence of reference in the Vyomavati to the mahavidya 
syllogism which Sivaditya is stated to have advocated in the 
Laksanamala. 

Vyomagiva’s reference to his preceptor shows that the latter 
must have been an able exponent of the Nyaya-Vaisesika doctrines 
and he must have dealt elaborately with the topics!® of the nature 
of the whole, proofs of God, refutation of momentariness, definition 
of perception, refutation of Samkhya, verbal authority, the number 
of instruments of knowledge, and other topics.2° Neither the name 
of this writer nor that of his work is available to us. 

Vyomasgiva mentions Padarthasamkara® as the name of a work 
which he cites twice in support of his interpretation and which is not 
the same as the Padarthadharmasamgraha of Pragastapada. He quotes 
from Kumiarila’s Slokavarttika,22 Dharmakirti’s Pramdnavarttika,®3 
Vatsyayana’s Mydyabhasya,24 Uddyotakara’s Nydyavarttika,® and 
Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya.2® Certain quotations are not traceable to 
any known source. 

The nature of the treatment of the subject matter in the Padér- 
thadharmasamgraha is based upon the aphorisms of Kanada. It begins 
with an invocatory stanza which is followed by a brief introduction. 
The similar features among the categories are then set forth and 
examined. Then follows an elaborate treatment of the specific 
(dissimilar) features of the categories one by one. 

The name Vyomavati for the work of Vyomasiva is to be explained 
after the name of the writer. Padarthasamgrahatika is the name of 
the work as it is given in the colophons at the end of the sections 
dealing with each category. Samgrahatika appears to be the name 
mentioned by Sridhara in the Wydyakandali.2?7. Udayana refers to the 
author of the work as Tikakrt.28 

The beginning portion of the Vyomavati is missing and what 
little could be taken to have formed roughly a part of it is filled with 


VYOMAVATIi 427 


lacunae. Anything like a connected sense is hardly available from 
this portion. 


Introductory Section (p. 20) 

From the fragmentary portion at the beginning of the text, 
Vyomagiva is found to refer to the fashion in which the aphorisms 
were composed by Kanada. Through the grace of Mahegvara 
(i.e., Siva) the sage Kanada acquired the knowledge of the 6 cate- 
gories and composed the aphorisms. As these were bricf and beyond 
the understanding of the people, Pragastapada gave an exposition of 
their contents. Kanada’s treatment of the categories intended to 
help people in getting final release (moksa), which is a prosperous 
state when the 9 qualities of the self are annihilated. It must therefore 
be understood that this system concerns itself with the means of attain- 
ing final release and does not deal with the 3 other pursuits of life 
which are accomplished with little effort. One who gets correct 
knowledge of the 6 categories is required to meditate on it. Conti- 
nuous meditation willremove the erroneous cognitions along with 
their products such as hatred. Then there results the cessation of 
activities, upon which merit and demerit do not any longer arise. 
Whatever be the results of those still left over will be destroyed by 
experiencing them. Then the stage of final release comes into being. 

According to the Bhagavadgita?® the fire of knowledge reduces 
the (results of) actions to ashes. A well-known statement® declares 
that the results of actions would not get exhausted even after the 
lapse of ten thousands of aeons, until they are experienced. These 
statements contradict each other, An explanation that would justify 
both could be offered by holding that one who gets knowledge through 
meditation will realize how the results of actions can be avoided. 
He may then get the experience of all actions simultaneously by 
creating several bodies for the purpose through yogic power. A 
person who acquires true knowledge will have to perform the actions 
of obligatory (nztya) or conditioned (naimittika) sorts. It is only 
then that he can avoid the sins of omission (pratyavadya). He must 
refrain from committing acts which are prompted by desires (kémya) 
or which are forbidden (nisiddha). He has also to surrender the 
result of all actions to the Supreme Preceptor who is God.#1 

Those who become recluses (sannpasis) are said to enter into 
the sun’s disc and proceed upwards. This does not mean that they 
get final release, but a region better than here is meant by this. So 
it is only the knowledge of reality that is the means of obtaining 
final release, 


428 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The views of several schools about the nature of final release 
are reviewed here. 

The first view is that Brahman’s nature is bliss and the soul 
gets it in the released state. This is baseless, as there is no means 
such as body, or mind, etc., during the stage of final release to enable 
the self to have the enjoyment of bliss. The word ‘bliss’ is to be 
taken in the figurative sense, to mean absence of pain.*? 

According to the second theory, final release consists in dis- 
crimination between matter and spirit. This view is to be rejected, 
as the basic concepts of matter and spirit maintained by the Samkhya 
school, which holds this theory, are untenable. 

The third theory is maintained by the idealistic Buddhists who 
hold that final release consists in the use of knowledge which is free 
from likes, dislikes, etc., due to reflection on the instability of the 
world, This theory cannot be maintained, as the self and the world 
are established to be stable. 

The Jainas hold a fourth theory, according to which an imperi- 
shable body is acquired during the state of release by reflecting upon 
the nonexclusive (anekdnta) nature of things. A theory like thisis to be 
rejected, since a nonexclusive nature cannot lead to a state of a 
decisive nature such as release. 

According to the fifth theory, which is held by the Advaitins, 
the individual self gets itself lost during the released state in the 
Supreme Self by realizing that the self is only one. This theory can- 
not be maintained, as the knowledge that the self is only one and the 
world illusory cannot be helpful in attaining the released state. 

The sixth theory, which declares that the state of release is 
characterized by sabdadvaita (word-monism) and is the theory 
maintained by the school of Grammarians, cannot be accepted since 
it cannot be proved that all except word is illusory. 

The last theory referred to declares that through the grace 
of Siva the impure prosperity in which the self finds itself gets destroyed 
and then the self acquires the qualities of Siva. This theory, which 
was held by schools of Saivism such as Pagupata, Saivasiddhanta, 
and others, does not stand to reason, as the qualities.of one self cannot 
be acquired by another. 

The benedictory stanza is then explained. The act of offering 
prayers to a deity and preceptor is justified by taking the word 
atha in Kanada’s first aphorism?3 to mean “‘then’’, which has the 
sense of “‘after bowing to God.” The word ifvara must mean Siva 
who is the source of knowledge. This interpretation fits in with 
the context of writing a treatise proving the way to release. The 


VYOMAVATI 429 


word hetu means God as the instrumental cause. Treatment of the 
real nature of the categories is intended to offer an exposition of merit 
which would yield the correct knowledge. 

The word Padarthadharmasamgraha is to be split to as padértha- 
nar dharmah tesém samgrahah. The portion padarthadharma is a com- 
pound of the subordinating type and so greater significance is attached 
to dharma. The word samgraha, when compounded with this, gets 
the greatest importance and means the characteristics (dharmas) of 
the categories as dealt with in other works are treated here in brief. 
The word mahodaya refers to the great prosperity mentioned by 
Kanada.*4 

A discussion is then undertaken on the relative merits of in- 
corporating the stanza of benediction into work.35 Some works in 
which the stanza of benediction is included are not found to have 
been completed by their authors, e.g., Kddambar?. Others which do 
not begin with a benediction are found completed, e.g., Nydyabhasya. 
A particular kind of merit must be taken as the cause of the comple- 
tion of the work undertaken, and not the benediction, therefore, 

Obeisance may be verbal] (vdcika) or mental (manasa). Verbal 
obeisance which has the support of the mental one will have to be 
treated as responsible for the successful end of the work. Obstacles 
are destroyed by obeisance to God and preceptor. This act of 
obeisance will also endow the disciples of the author with the 
qualities expected of them. (This exposition of the topic is quite 
peculiar and is different from those given by other commentators on 
the Padarthadharmasamgraha). 

1. (p. 20) Six categories are mentioned by Pragastapada. 
Absence is not mentioned along with these, as its position is subor- 
dinated to those of the positive categories. It is only when a positvie 
object is known that its absence can be apprehended. 

In the word tattvajfdna (‘‘knowledge of reality”’) tattva is to be 
taken as the qualifier (visesana) of the substantive jndna. Tattva 
means “‘accurate’’ and accuracy is the characteristic of certain judg- 
ments. In this way erroneous cognitions can be kept from being 
included under tattvajidna. 

2. (p.33) Accurate judgments are to be attained by merit 
which manifests itself at the will of God, and only eminent sages 
like Kanada can acquire it. Others have to make a study of the 
characteristics of the categories in order to get this knowledge. The 
Vedas incite people to take to the performance of righteous activities 
and they contain passages which create such incitements (codand). 
The Vedas are valid through being the compositions of God. The 


430 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


specific merit mentioned by Kanada may be taken to be manifested 
by the Vedas. 

(Pp. 44-46) Now the discussion turns to the topic of the rela- 
tions between the part and the whole. An objection is posed. | How 
do the parts and the whole become related to each other? If the 
whole is said to exist partially in the parts, then the whole must have 
some parts not covered by it and would cease to be the composite 
whole. Then it must be taken to exist in different regions. In such 
a case the whole cannot be apprehended asa unit. Actually, what is 
cognized is only a conglomeration of parts such as color, taste, and 
so forth. Substance and quality, etc., the parts of things, cannot 
therefore have independent existence. Differences between them 
are not apprehended. So the bare apprehension of objects has to 
be admitted as constituting reality. 

Answer: This theory, which is put forward by the Buddhists, 
cannot stand, since there is correlation (pratisamdhina) between the 
judgments of two qualities apprehended by two separate sense organs. 
This correlation would be without a base if there were no object like 
a substance to which they could belong. 

The Buddhist may say that the apprehension of an object can 
only be of the nonpropositional (nirvikalpaka) type, the apprehension 
of the ‘‘parts,” i.e., the thing’s qualities, contributed by conceptual 
construction (kalpand). But this can be no argument, since the 
conceptual constructedness (vikalpa) in the perceptual judgment 
which arises subsequently can be proved to have been caused by 
the recollection of the traits of the object already perceived. Both 
nonpropositional and propositional judgments of perception must 
therefore be held to arise from the object possessing the characteristic 
features. Otherwise the judgment concerning the whole object 
would depend completely on the nature of the words which denote 
it, which is absurd. So the propositional judgment of perception 
must be admitted to arise as soon as the contact is effected between 
the sense organs and the object. The differences between the 2 kinds 
of judgment—propositional and nonpropositional—are due to the 
differences in the accessory conditions that help in producing these 
judgments. And the fact that the 2 kinds of judgment are different 
is sufficient to prove that objects are not without qualities; they have 
parts and each of them, or at least most of them, are cognized by 
more than one sense organ. These parts are found to exist in one 
and the same composite whole. 

It is needless to discuss how the parts and the composite whole 
exist in mutual relation. A part is that which is one among many. 


VYOMAVATI 431 


The whole is that which does not have anything uncovered by it. 
A whole, which is spoken of as a unit, cannot strictly speaking be said 
to have parts. What is single must have full pervasion of all its 
“parts.”” A whole is apprehended by contact with the sense organ 
which cognizes the parts of that whole. 


Reference to the nonapprehension of the hind parts of a whole 
is meaningless, since this indirectly admits of a whole whose parts 
are said to be cognized. 


It is improper to speak of the whole as located in different re- 
gions on the ground that the parts or the qualities are apprehended 
individually. A cow and a horse are different from each other be- 
cause of the different characteristics possessed by them, not because 
of the difference in the regions where they reside. Though forming 
parts of one whole, the qualities, motions, and other characteristics 
which are its parts are cognized by different sense organs and are 
cognized at the same time as the composite whole is cognized. It is 
not necessary to apprehend all parts of the whole, since even when 
there is very little light the composite whole is apprehended, even 
though all its parts are not exposed to the light. 


3. (p. 47) The number of substances is no more than 9. 
Shadow (cha@ya@) is not an independent substance, for a shadow is 
only the absence of light produced by screening of the light by an 
object whose shade is cast there and whose movement creates the 
impression of movement.*¢ 


9. (Pp.107-08 142-43) The definitions offered by Pragastapada 
for the various categories and their subdivisions are analyzed and ex- 
plained. The case of the definition of inherence may be cited here. 
Pragastapada defines inherence as the cause of a judgment that 
something of a given kind is “‘here,’”’ and it is said to be a relation 
between inseparable things, as well as between things related to 
each other as container and contained. The first part of the defini- 
tion Vyomasgiva explains as having the function of excluding from 
the definition a case such as seeing a village from a distance and seeing 
the trees as located there also. However, we do not say that the 
trees occur ‘‘here’’—1.e., as a property of the village—and so this is 
not a case of inherence. As for the second part of the definition, 
a bird flying in the sky and the sky are related to each other, but 
inherence cannot be the relation since they are not related to each 
other as container and contained. The badara fruit and a basin 
have the relationship of container and contained, but are not inse- 
parable: thus the third part of the definition. 


432 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Qualities and motions inhcre in a substance and when all of 
them are destroyed, inherence continues to exist: it is not produced 
anew. It does not have a substratum other than the individuals 
(uyakti) which it relates. 

11. (Pp. 112-14) When describing an object it is necessary 
to mark out those features which distinguish it from others. Thus 
in Pragastapada’s definitions it is the differentiating features which 
are given. Such features often serve us in making identifying refe- 
rential judgments (vyavahéra). This is best done through utilizing 
inference of the only-negative type. This mode is adopted by 
Vyomasiva throughout the work. An explanation is offered for adopt- 
ing this mode. When a particular sense organ comes into contact 
with a unique characteristic of a certain kind of object, a non- 
propositional perception is produced. In order to deny any other 
kind of object’s possession of that characteristic, inference of the only- 
negative kind is to be adopted. The need for this is felt when others 
have to be instructed about the object by showing that there is no 
Sapaksa. 

15. (Pp. 189-94) While explaining the relation between 
earth and earthness, Vyomasgiva entcrs into an elaborate discussion 
regarding reference. He concludes that a word denotes an individual 
as having a universal. 

36. (Pp. 221-23) The earth is proved to have variegated 
color (citrariépa). The argument follows Uddyotakara’s comment 
on NS IV. 2.12, above. 

(Pp. 223-25) The existence of atoms is proved by inference. 
A composite whole must have parts of a size smaller than that of the 
whole. However, there is a limit to this process; otherwise infinite 
regress would result. ‘The point at which the regress is cut off demar- 
cates the size known as ‘‘atomic’’ (paramdnu). 

(p. 228) The body (Sarira) is defined as the seat of activity 
which takes place in conformity with the volition of a person, 
According to some, body is that through whose perfection or imper- 
fection the sense organs remain perfect or imperfect respectively up 
to death. An earthly body is defined as that composite whole which 
does not need any addition to complete it—a final whole (antpdv- 
ayavin )—while being produced by the flesh and other parts. 

(Pp. 244-45) The earthly body is made up of only one element 
which is the material cause for it. It cannot be a product of all 5 
elements (patcabhautika) because in that case it would be required to 
show the presence in the body of the specific and individual qualities 
of all these elements such as white color which is brilliant, touches of 


VYOMAVATI 433 


the hot, cold, and lukewarm kinds and so on, and also the qualities 
formed through the application of heat and those not so formed. 
The particular features of the triads formed through the atoms of 
more than one element forming the constituent dyads could not be 
explained. Moisture, heat, motion, and space which are the results 
of the operations of the elements are not always apprehended in bodies 
of the earthly type. Their occasional apprehension is to be explained 
by admitting earth as their material cause and the other four elements 
as other kinds of causal factors. In this sense the term pafcabhautika 
might be reinterpreted to accord with our theory. 

(Pp. 232-33) A sense organ is defined as an instrument which 
is invariably located in a substance beyond the reach of the senses, 
which substance produces an immediate cognition. The word 
‘‘instrument’”’ excludes the self; “substance”? excludes contact bet- 
ween object and sense organ: and ‘“‘invariably’’ excludes space and 
time which are the instrumental causes for all effects. 

(Pp. 233-34) Pragastapada describes the nature of a sense 
organ as due to being produced by those parts of that element (to 
which that organ belongs) which are not overpowered by other 
elements. On this Vyomagiva remarks that it is because of this 
that a particular sense organ is able to grasp a particular quality. 
He cites Kanada (VS VII. 2.5) in support of hisinterpretation. The 
word bhiyastvat?” here is interpreted as meaning “‘having a larger 
number of component parts of that element whose quality it will 
apprehend.”’ 

38. (Pp. 256-57) The visual organ possesses color of a special 
type. If this is not admitted, the visual organ, being a product of 
fire, will have hot touch also manifested. The visual organ has a 
size and is possessed of parts. Thus it is the kind of thing which 
should be visible. It is not visible, however, because it does not have, 
as light does, the specific color called ‘‘manifested’’ (udbhava).38 In 
the absence of this color even a substance having a large size and 
many parts is not apprehended. This manifested color acts as an 
accessory in the apprehension of other colors. Because of its absence 
color is not found in, e.g., the fire that lies in the hot water, in spite 
of its having all the other requisites for being perceived. On the 
other hand, it is its presence which makes fire shine in the dark. 

Why should there be unmanifest as well as manifest colors ? 
Things have been created in the world for enjoyment. There must 
be a restriction on enjoyment, for it is merit and demerit that regulate 
enjoyment. If objects are perceived visually even at night there 
will not be any enjoyment. Therefore the Creator made the visual 


434 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


organ possess unmanifested color. Similarly, the hot touch of the 
fiery parts of the visual organ is unmanifested, because otherwise the 
things perceived by that organ would be burnt. It is because of this 
that objects, even though perceived by many, are still enjoy- 
able. 

Vyomasgiva adopts the same principle in dealing with the other 
sense organs. He adopts Kanada’s aphorism VS VIII. 2.3 and 
applies it, with changes suited to the context, in the case of the taste,*® 
visual,“ and tactile sense organs.4! 

(P. 258) Pragastapada, while dealing with fire, quotes a Vedic 
passage: “‘the chief offspring of fire is gold’’ (agner apatyam prathamam 
suvarnam). Wyomagiva remarks that by offspring is not meant 
anything that comes out of fire, for then smoke will have to be treated 
as the offspring of fire also. The word “‘offspring’’ (apatya) is to be 
taken as a reference tothe things belonging to the same species. 
‘Fire’? cannot refer to an inert object, so the deity presiding over 
the fire is meant here. Lac and other earthly products become gases 
due to constant application of heat. Intense heat produces fluidity 
in gold, and so gold cannot be a product ofearth. It must therefore 
be brought under fire. The Vedic authority which declares gold to 
be a product of fire cannot be counteracted by any inference. 

39. (P. 272) There is a lengthy discussion on the nature of 
air. Air is perceived through the tactile sense. This judgment 
takes the form ‘‘the chill wind blows,”’ ‘‘the hot wind blows.’? This 
cannot be a case of inference, since the middle term in an inference 
is to be remembered after the rise of subsumptive reflection (pard- 
marsa) and it does not rise here. Nor can this be a case of verbal 
testimony, since no words are involved here. Vyomagiva quotes 
VS IV. 1.6 as laying down the conditions of perceptual judgments. 
These conditions are that the object perceived must have large (mahat) 
size, have parts, and have manifested color. Wyomagiva remarks 
that these conditions apply fully in certain cases, but only partially 
in others. They apply fully in those cases where both the tactual 
and visual sense organs operate. In other cases, possession of mani- 
fested color cannot beacondition. In the case of the self, for example, 
only one condition, namely large size, is available, due to which it is 
perceived only by the internal sense but not by the visual sense, for 
which large size and possession of parts constitute the conditions. 
On the other hand in the case of earth, etc., all three conditions stand. 
During the night fire is perceived even from a distance because of 
its prominent color. Though possessed of large size and parts, moun- 
tains are not perceived at night since color is wanting in them. But 


VYOMAVATI 435 


when there is external light the mountains are perceived even 
from far away....Little importance is attached here to large 
size.* 

40. (Pp. 301-05) While dealing with the topic of creation and 
dissolution Vyomagiva takes up the proof of God’s existence. Such 
proofs are derived from inference and verbal testimony. The 
inference in question is: ‘“The creation and destruction of earth etc. 
are the result of an agent, because they are the results of intelligent 
action, like the creation and destruction of a jar.’ Human agency 
must be denied here, since He who is held to be the agent is required 
to be skilled in handling the materials which would produce effects 
like earth. These effects require an intelligent, in fact an omniscient, 
agent. The question of the possession of a body on God’s part is 
not pertinent, for the inference is based on general invariable con- 
comitance; it would be equally beside the point to complain that the 
argument fails because makers of jars are not omniscient. The 
features of the examples must not be introduced into the sddhya, 
for then there will be nothing to prove. 

Traces of past actions cannot in themselves explain creation 
and dissolution. Being inert, they require to be controlled by a 
sentient agent. Ignorance of and absence of direct control over the 
atoms, out of which the world is created, show that the individual 
selves cannot be treated as the agents. The analogy of the flow of 
milk#3 which is inert, is beside the point, since milk does not flow 
from the dead body of the cow or when there is no effort on the part 
of the cow and the calf. 

If one should insist that anything must have a body to be called 
an “‘agent,”’ this would raise difficult problems. The body is located 
in a definite place where alone the effect could be proved to take 
place. But then no agent can be shown to bring about effects in all 
the places they are produced. Admission of a body which is all- 
pervasive, intangible, and lies beyond the range of the senses, is 
unjustified, for this is opposed to the (ordinary) notion of a body. 
Since there cannot be an eternal body, even God must have His 
body created. If another body is required to create His body, then 
this will lead to an infinite regress. ‘Then God would not be able 
to do anything else but be creating one body after another. If 
another body is not required, then, as He is said to create His body 
without having a body, in the same manner‘He may be admitted to 
create the world without the possession of the body. Again, if God 
had a body, it must perish along with the rest of the world at the 
time of pralaya. God will thus be bodiless in any case at the time of 


436 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the first creation following pralaya. Thus it is improper to require 
that God have a body. 

(P. 305) No particular motive is required to be the prompting 
force for God in the task of creation. God can be taken to create 
for the sake of others, having nothing to be accomplished for himself, 
since His nature is so, just as the nature of the sun is to illuminate 
others. He can create through His will, as we activate ourselves, 
induced by our desires. Or, the atoms may be taken to serve as 
God’s body.*4 

(P. 305) God’s will takes the help of the merit and demerit 
of the selves and so the problem of whether His will is eternal or not 
does not arise. 

(Pp. 305-06) There are Vedic passages which prove God’s 
agency in the world. The Vedas are authoritative, as they give 
rise to valid judgments. That a means of valid cognition should give 
rise to some activity or stop some activity has relevance only to a 
sentient’s person’s attempt to get delight or avoid misery. The 
passages of the Vedas which speak only of God’s nature do not lose 
their validity, for even these passages yield correct judgments which 
may give ris€ to successful activities or dissuade from purusing the 
wrong course. 

41. (Pp. 326-27) While dealing with dkdfa, Vyomasgiva 
refers to the need for offering more than one kind of evidence to prove 
a certain conclusion. This does not constitute any defect in the 
methods of debate and discussion. A few arguments are sufficient 
to create conviction for some people, while others require more. 

44, (Pp. 391-92) The self is held to be subtle and therefore 
imperceptible. Subtlety is to be taken as the absence of bulkiness 
(sthilatva) inhering in an object along with a color. It is not to be 
taken as meaning “‘having the size of an atom.’’ Vyomasgiva refers 
to a view according to which the self is perceptible since it appears in 
judgments about the ego. He supports this view and explains that, 
when the self is declared to be imperceptible what is meant is that 
it is not perceivable by the external senses. 

(Pp. 396-402) After proving that the self is eternal and is the 
seat of judgments, Vyomagiva sets forth the doctrine of mo- 
mentariness. According to this doctrine nothing lasts beyond a 
moment, so there is neither self nor judgment. Since there does not 
exist any entity beyond the moment when it comes into being, there 
cannot be a relation of cause and effect between a knower and his 
act of knowing. Accessory causes do not help, for they too cannot 
but be momentary. 


VYOMAVATI 437 


Vyomagiva sets this doctrine aside on the strength of the fact 
of recognition, which establishes that certain things endure for some 
time beyond the moment when they are produced, and that some 
last for all time. An object produces an effect when associated with 
accessory conditions, and does not produce it in their absence. The 
accessories combine to produce a single effect; e.g., the visual organ, 
color and light from an external source act together and give rise 
to a particular perceptual judgment. Differences in effects produced 
by the same objects have to be accounted for as due to differences 
in these accessory conditions. 

Besides, there is no invariable concomitance between momen- 
tariness and existence (sat), as this cannot be supported by sapaksa 
or vipaksa. 

Assumption of mere dispositional tendencies as forming the 
link between one moment and another cannot justify the doctrine 
of momentariness and account for recollection, for the agent of an 
act may not be there to recollect its experience. 

(Pp. 402-04) In discussing Pragastapada’s arguments for the 
existence of selves, Vyomasgiva shows that trees have selves and that 
they have, according to Vrksayurveda, desires.45 When their desires 
are fulfilled they put forth flowers. 

(P. 410) The Advaitin’s view, that bondage in the case of the 
self consists in the self getting away from the Supreme Self and 
that the absorption of the self in the Supreme Self marks the state 
of final release, is set forth and criticized. If the selves are not diffe- 
rent from the Supreme Self it must be explained who would get 
final release. If they are different, monism will have to be given 
up. Those passages*® of the Vedas which speak of the self as one 
are to be taken as referring to the Supreme Self only. When they 
say that only one self exists in a body, they must be understood to be 
denying that more than one self can be in one body. 

(Pp. 399-400) There is a detailed discussion about absences. 
While positive existents have certain features marking them, absences 
have no such features. Apprehension of them becomes possible 
only through their dependence on the positive existents. The 
judgment which arises about the absence of a jar on the ground is 
produced by a sense organ. It depends for its arising upon the 
ground that is qualified by the absence of jar. If the apprehension 
of the ground bereft of jar were not due to the absence, then such a 
judgment should arise even when the jar is present there. Hence 
the apprehension of the absence ofa jar isitself the nonapprehension 
of the jar, and is not merely absence of apprehension. 


438 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


52-53. (P. 432) Qualities are classified as specific (wifesa) 
and generic (sémdnya). <A specific quality is defined as that whose 
specific nature qualifies only those substances which are of the same 
species as reside in the kind of substance associated with the 
quality. 

(Pp. 438-39) The Vyomavati features a detailed treatment of 
the noninherence cause. The function of this cause is to bring about 
an effect in that which is near to or related to it by inhering in the 
same substratum. The noninherence cause is of two kinds: (1) 
called laghvi, where it (the inherence cause) inheres in the same 
substratum as its effect does, and (2) called brhati, where it inheres 
in the same substratum as the inherence cause of the effect does. 

An example of the laghvi variety is the case where one sound 
causes another. Both the noninherence cause (the first sound) 
and the effect (the second sound) inhere in the same substratum, 
namely akafa. Here, however, the first sound cannot produce an 
effect anywhere; it must produce its effect nearby——thus the restric- 
tion in the original explication of this kind of cause in the previous 
paragraph. Merit and demerit also function as noninherence causes 
of the laghvi sort. 

For an example of the brhati kind, Vyomasgiva offers the color 
of the threads which help to produce the color of the cloth woven 
from those threads. Here the color of the threads inheres in the 
threads, and the inherence cause of the effect, namely the cloth, also 
inheres in the threads. 

The first kind is called laghvi, “‘light’? and the second brhaizi, 
‘“‘heavy”’ because the first involves asimpler or more direct relation- 
ship than the second does. Color, taste, smell, touch which is neither 
hot nor cold, size and viscidity are always of the second, “‘heavy’”’ 
kind when they function as noninherence causes. So also are the 
numbers above one. The number one, and separateness-of-one- 
thing, are always of the first kind when they function as noninherence 
causes.47 

(P. 466) Since absences are not found to inhere anywhere 
they have no noninherence causes. However, they do have instru- 
mental causes, 

84. (Pp. 445-54) The effects of cooking (paka) take place 
in earth atoms only. Conjunctions with fire are of varied kinds as is 
borne out by their varied effects. The Vaisesika system believes 
that a motion has several parts lasting normally for five moments. The 
process of change is a sequential one marked by the gradual rise of 
contacts and disjunctions and of new qualities after the destruction 


VYOMAVATI 439 


of the previous ones. Calculations are made to fix the time it takes 
for a substance to undergo a change in qualities due to cooking. 
Vyomagiva maintains that it takes nine moments for the new quality 
to be produced.48 

85. (Pp. 456-71) The elements have eternal numbers, while 
earthly products have noneternal numbers. The highest number 
is said to be parérdha, that is, 1014. Vyomagiva offers an elaborate 
explanation to show how the judgments of numbers are produced by 
enumerative cognitions. 

86. (P. 473) While dealing with the 4 kinds of size it is said 
that the sizes of triangular, quadrangular, and circular objects are 
only the results of particular arrangements of the component parts 
and so are not independent kinds of size. But even when there is 
dim light and the particular arrangement of the parts is not noticed, 
pillars and other things appear as long or tall, etc. So the short 
and long, etc., sizes must be admitted as distinct kinds. By sub- 
dividing the large and atomic sizes into eternal and noneternal the 
number of sizes can be taken as 6. 

(Pp. 475-76) The size of an atom is called “‘atomic-size”’ 
(paramanuparimana), the size of a dyad is called ‘‘dyadic-size’’ 
(duyanukaparimana). The size of a triad is large (mahat). Two 
atoms, when they combine together to form a dyad, can only give 
rise to two atomic-sizes and not to a dyadic-size. Similarly, dyadic- 
size in the three dyads can produce only three dyadic-sizes, not large- 
ness. Thus in these cases the size of the causes cannot produce the size 
in the effects. Therefore twoness (dvitva) is considered to give rise to 
the size of the dyad, and threeness (¢ritva) to that of the triad. Two- 
ness and threeness can only be produced by the enumerative cog- 
nitions of a person who can cognize the numbers of the atoms and 
dyads. Such a person can only be God, or, conceivably, a yogi. 

88. (P. 488) Vyomagiva takes up the two illustrations given 
by Pragastapada for the kind of contact (1) produced by the motion 
of one of two things. The first illustration is the contact between a 
pillar and a vulture alighting on it. Here the cause of the contact 
includes both the motion of the feet of the vulture and the contact 
arising between the vulture’s feet and the pillar. This distinguishes 
it from the second kind of contact of type (1),where a substance of 
limited size comes into contact with an all-pervading substance. 
Here the noninherence cause is the motion of the first substance 
alone. 

91-93. (Pp. 521-23) While interpreting the text which de- 
clares the words buddhi, upalabdhi, jidna, and pratyaya to be synonyms, 


440 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Vyomagiva refers to the Samkhya theory of the buddhi. According 
to the Samkhyas, buddhi is the first modification of the primordial 
matter. Upalabdhi is enjoyment which consists of the self’s reflection 
in the buddhi, which transforms itself into pleasure, pain, and other 
feelings. Or it may be assumed that the self, which is unchanging in 
form, makes the inert mind appear sentient through its own illumina- 
tion on account of its proximity. The sentience of the self cannot 
change. 

Vyomafgiva rejects this theory. If the enjoyment were real, 
then there would be no difference between a self that is in bondage 
and one which has attained release. The activities of the Samkhya 
buddhi have no specific features to be related to a particular self and 
so should be experienced alike by all selves. The self alone cannot 
be an agent, and since it must remain indifferent, it cannot have any 
enjoyment. The inert buddhi and its products cannot have any pur- 
pose in becoming active. Since on the Samkhya view the changes 
undergone by the buddhi are identical with it, buddhis also must be 
many, since the changes are many. 

(Pp. 524-26) The idealistic school of Buddhists holds that 
objects do not have existence apart from judgments. They argue 
thus. Cognition is self-luminous and therefore reveals itself. Objects 
are inert and so cannot reveal themselves. If a cognition is held to 
be capable of illuminating objects, the question that would arise is 
this. Does this cognition get apprehended before it illuminates 
another ? If it is to be apprehended by another, this would lead 
to an infinite regress. If it is not apprehended by another, it cannot 
illuminate any object and the objects have to remain unilluminated. 
Thus there must be invariable concomitance between illumination 
and existence (satié). Any quality, such as blue or yellow, that is 
presented in illumination can only be cognition and is not due to the 
existence of the external world. Due to beginningless impressions 
the cognition must be admitted to contain in itself the relationship 
of the cognition and the cognized, but this relationship is not real. 
Just as a man suffering from eye disease gets the cognition of two 
moons which do not exist, the person who is not learned gets a judg- 
ment about a world which does not exist. Cognitions cannot be 
admitted to arise or to be destroyed. A thing seen from a distance 
appears small, and when seen close up appears big. So it has no 
definite features. When the threads are carefully reflected upon, 
there cannot be any cloth, and when the parts of the threads are 
reflected upon, there will not be threads either. The untrained get 
on in the world accepting everything as workable due to avidya. The 


VYOMAVATI 44] 


trained have to get on in life. What has been said does not prove 
that worldly activity should come to a stop for the scholar. 

(Pp. 526-32) Vyomatgiva refutes this position by showing that a 
judgment must rise with reference to a specific object. That is, 
there cannot be a judgment without an object. Traces cannot by 
themselves explain the rise of a judgment, for their presence and ab- 
sence are needed to explain the difference between one kind of judg- 
ment and another. A judgment is real, and the world unreal, 
according to the Buddhists; when they are apprehended together, 
the difference between them must be noted. Moreover, only that 
object is cognized with reference to which the judgment arises, and 
so the judgment becomes the possessor of the object. Judgment 
is therefore the illumination (prakdsa) of an object. When an object 
is cognized, there is no need in our view to find out whether that 
cognition is apprehended, since it rises due to the contact between 
the self and the internal organ. Another cognition is not therefore 
required to prove the first one. Only the self can become a knower, 
for judgments are only produced in selves. The analogy of a lamp 
should not be brought in here, for judgments which are formless 
become distinguishable from each other according to the objects 
from which they arise. The activities of people can be justified only 
if there are external objects. 

The analogy of the cognition of the two moons is also absurd, 
since the man suffering from eye disease apprehends only one moon 
when his vision is corrected. A man with correct vision sees only 
one moon, for there is only one. 

Again, every object must be taken to appear in its own form. 
If external reality is denied, the states of wakefulness and dream could 
not be distinguished from each other. The state of waking occurs 
when we are aware of an object which is in contact with our sense 
organs. Dreams are precisely judgments where this is not the case. 
If the objects that form the contents of our judgments are all unreal, 
then all our judgments are equally unreal. Therefore, there must be 
an external world. 

(P. 532) The arguments ofthe nihilistic Buddhists are also base- 
less. If everything is to be taken as void (Sanya), on the ground that 
there is no relation between what apprehends and what is apprehen- 
ded, this is unproved, since the objects of our cognitions are established 
on the strength of the valid instruments of knowing. 

The Jain theory that buddhi is a particular modification of the 
self, and that in the state of change it is noneternal while in the state 
of no change it is eternal, cannot be maintained, for judgments are 


442 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


many and so the selves should also be many. The theory of 
anekantavada cannot be maintained. 

(P. 533) Imagination (aha) is not enumerated as a distinct 
kind of imperfect knowledge, for it is not experienced as being distinct 
from doubt or indefinite knowledge. 

94. (Pp. 534-35) In discussing doubt, Vyomagiva begins 
by pointing out that the cause of doubt is the perception of the similar 
properties in the object about which the doubt arises; otherwise there 
would be no connection between the perceived similarity and the 
resulting doubt. 

Vyomasgiva cites the aphorism of Kanada II,2.17% to show 
that the word “‘perceive’’ in this aphorism is to be taken to mean 
any valid instrument—e.g., inference—not merely perception. The 
author refers here to an interesting illustration. Devadatta leaves 
his wife in his house and goes abroad. At the sight of women in the 
places he visits he does not have any doubt as to their being his or 
another’s, although all the factors that give rise to doubt are available 
here. The time and place prevent the rise of such doubt. 

(P. 536) While interpreting the twofold classification of doubt 
as external and interna], Vyomasiva cites Nydyasatra I .1.235°, and 
explains that cases of doubt arising from apprehension based on the 
possession of certain features when we can understand the object 
in more than one way are to be classed as external doubt, while cases 
based on irregularities arising from the fact that a feature has both 
been apprehended and failed to be apprehended in an object are 
to be called internal doubt. The basis for internal doubt lies in the 
apprehension and nonapprehension getting in turn apprehended 
by the internal organ. Vyomasiva justifies this by criticizing the 
Nyayabhasya commentary on this aphorism. The division into 5 
kinds of doubt, on the strength of the sara in question, must be given 
up, since the twofold classification is justified on the ground that 
some of the cases cited in the fivefold distinction are instances of 
doubt based on perception while others are based on nonperception. 

95. (Pp. 539-40) While dealing with error Vyomatgiva sets 
forth and criticizes the Prabhakara theory that all judgments are 
valid. 

(P. 541) While discussing errors of perception Vyomagiva 
explains our perceiving the eyeball as black when our eyes are closed: 
the ray from the eye returns and produces this perception, just as in 
the case of reflection of the ray from the mirror by which we _ per- 
ceive our own face. 

(P. 542) Adding some examples of errors of inference, Vyoma- 


VYOMAVATI 443 


giva mentions mistaking mist, or the cloud of mosquitos stirred up by 
a whisk, for smoke. 

(Pp. 542-44) Errors produced from verbal testimony are des- 
cribed by Vyomativa as arising due to a person’s acquaintance with 
the wrong systems of thought, and they thus depend on one’s point 
of view. E.g., the Vaigesikas hold that all effects presuppose Para- 
mega (Siva) and worship Him as the means for final release. This 
is erroneous cognition from the point of view of Mimamsa or Buddh- 
ism. On the other hand, an objection raised against Vaisesika 
theory of, e.g., selves by Buddhists would be erroneous cognition 
from the point of view of the Vaisesika. 

(Pp. 544-46) While discussing the Samkhya principles under 
this head the author discusses elaborately the relative merits of the 
satkaryavada (effect preexists in its cause) and drambhavada (effect 
arises anew) and establishes the correctness of the latter. 

96. (P. 547) Indefinite cognition is different from doubt. 
Doubts rise only with reference to well-known objects, while inde- 
finite judgments arise concerning both well-known and unknown 
objects. This may occur due to intense application, as in the case 
of the archer whose attention is fixed on hitting the target and who 
therefore does not know the name of a person who passed by. It 
may also be produced by earnestness, as in the case of someone 
meditating so absorbedly that he is not able to tell the name of the 
king who passed by him. 

97. (Pp. 549-52) With reference to Pragastapada’s statement 
that in dream the internal organ ‘“‘stands still in the heart,..and 
moves,’ Vyomasiva quotes the authority of the Agamas, according 
to which the heart stands upside down and the internal organ remains 
still, during dream, in the region of the self where there is no contact 
with a sense organ. 

There are two definitions of dream. One is that a dream is a 
mental perception which rises through the sense organs while the 
internal organ is at rest. The other is that dream is a mental 
perception which occurs when the internal organ is at rest. Dreams 
occur when the internal organ ceases to function as a result of 
adrsta. This cessation is required for providing rest for people and 
also for digestion. These two purposes may not apply to all indi- 
viduals. 

Some people hold that walls, etc., appear as elephants in dreams 
and are responsible for the occurrence ofdreams. Neither percep- 
tion nor any other valid instrument of knowledge can prove this; 
thus the theory is rejected. Therefore dreams have no objects. 


444 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


98. (P. 554) Pragastapada does not mention verbal testimony 
among the kinds of perfect cognition. Some hold that it is to be 
brought under inference. According to others, the fact that it is not 
mentioned merely shows that Vaisesikas do not accept it as a valid 
instrument. 

99. (Pp. 555-56) Vyomasgiva explains the alternative defi- 
nition given by Pragastapada (p. 355). The word “‘nondeviant’’ 
excludes doubt and error from the scope of the definition. The 
word avyapadesya is intended to exclude judgments which arise from 
words together with the operation of the sense organs. For example, 
one who perceives a color may not know it to be a color, but when 
the word “‘color’’ is used in his hearing to denote it, he comes to know 
that it is one. This resulting judgment is not perceptual. 

Some hold, according to the opinion of another school (prati- 
tantra), that the word “‘well-defined’’ which occurs in NS I. 1.4 must 
be included in the definition. Vyomasgiva does not disagree. As 
for “‘nonwandering,’? however, which also occurs in Gautama’s 
definition, it functions to distinguish perception from the other ins- 
truments and is not needed in the definition. Thus the final defini- 
tion of perception should read: Perception is knowledge which is not 
erroneous, which is not verbal, which is well-defined, and which rises 
with reference to an object which is in conjunction with the sense 
organs.5! The 6 kinds of connection with the sense organs, as found 
in Uddyotakara, are listed. 

(P. 557) Perception must have an object. Substances, quali- 
ties, motions, and universals are the kinds of things which can be 
perceived. Some scholars add inherence to this list. 

(Pp. 557-58) In the cases of earth, water, and fire, nonpropo- 
sitional perception is produced at first. The condition for this per- 
ception is that the object which comes into contact with the sense 
organ must have a large size. This is Pragastapada’s first kind of 
perception, “‘just perceiving a thing in its own nature.’’>2 Other 
necessary conditions for this sort of perception are possession by the 
object of parts, manifested color, the presence of external light, 
merit and demerit, and the fourfold contact. Vyomagiva construes 
this as referring to nonpropositional perception. 

The second kind of perception is taken to be propositional 
perception. It is this which proves the existence of the previous 
nonpropositional perception. 

(P. 559) Commenting on Pragastapada’s remarks about 
yogis, Vyomagiva says that when a yogi perceives his self he requires 
contact between that self and the internal organ. When he appre- 


VYOMAVATI 445 


hends his own internal organ, he requires the operation of his own 
internal organ. When he is to apprehend another’s self, he effects a 
contact between his internal organ and the internal organ of the 
person whose self he is to apprehend. 

(P. 560) That there are yogis is shown because there must be 
people who perceive atoms and other things not ordinarily perceived, 
since they are knowable like jars. 

Universals and individuators are perceived by nonpropositional 
perception alone. 

100-01 (P. 563) Vyomagiva suggests®? that the words “non- 
deviant,” ‘“‘well-defined,” and avyapadesya should be understood. to 
apply in this definition as well as to that of perception. Then in- 
ference is knowledge, limited by the above terms, which arises from 
knowledge of a hetu as qualified by nonwandering and the absence 
of other fallacies, and refers to a specific subject about which some- 
thing is being inferred. Or, inference is the apprehension of (liiga) 
pardmarsa which is produced by the realization that the middle term 
possesses the absence of fallacies. 

102. (Pp. 563-69) Vyomagiva discusses the definition quoted 
by Pragastapada from Kagyapa which defines the hetu and specifies 
3 types of fallacious hetus. In the course of dealing with the defini- 
tion of h he refutes the Buddhists’ attempt to add the term eva to the 
definitions of p, sp and up. 

(P. 565) As for the requirements for a proper h, Vyomagiva 
shows how Kaégyapa’s 3 kinds cover all 5 of the requirements for a 
proper hetu as set forth in Nyaya works, e.g., by Jayanta, 

This leads to a discussion of the various fallacies of the hetu. 
A fallacy is something which has the form of a (proper) hetu but has 
one or more of the conditions missing. 

Samdigdha occurs when the supposed A is not absent from all 
up, but the other two conditions of the tratripya are satisfied (presence 
in p, overlaps sp). 

Viruddha occurs when the supposed fh does not overlap the sp 
and is not excluded from of, but the other condition is satisfied. 

Asiddha occurs when the supposed hetu lacks all three conditions. 

Vyomagiva proposes that Kandda’s term aprasiddha includes, 
along with ziruddha, the fallacies somecall kalatyaydpadesa and praka- 
ranasama. Or they can be taken to be acceptable on the basis of their 
being admitted to the Nyaya system. 

Some object to recognizing kaldtyaydpadesa as a separate fallacy; 
their argument is that since the defect involved results from defective 
formulation it should be included under the asiddha type. Wyomagiva 


446 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


rejects this, saying that though the defect lies in the formulation, the 
hetu is put forward and so there must be a fallacy corresponding to 
it. For example, in the putative inference “‘fire is not hot, because 
it is produced,”’ the 3 conditions of a proper hetu are present, but the 
pervasion is nevertheless not established because perception tells us 
that fire is hot, and this sublates the inference. Thus this must be 
accepted as a distinct kind of fallacy. 

104. (P. 570) An objector argues that pervasion cannot be a 
relation among universals since then inference cannot apply to 
particular cases; while if it is a relation among individuals we cannot 
infer anything about other individuals from data restricted to those 
we have observed. Vyomagiva rejects this kind of argument and 
shows that relation must hold between universals. We learn to 
formulate relations among universals by repeated observations of 
individuals of different sorts which all fall under the relevant uni- 
versals. At least that is one view. Others hold that knowledge of 
all the individuals falling under a universal is achieved when we 
apprehend pervasion; otherwise, the relation could not be univer- 
salized. 

(Pp. 570-72) Vyomafsiva’s criticism of the Buddhist concept of 
invariable concomitance® is detailed and marked by clarity of argu- 
ment. Repeated observation, which is essential for maintaining 
invariable concomitance, is not admissible in the Buddhist concep- 
tion. Also, invariable concomitance cannot exist between identical 
objects. Vyomagiva offers illustrations to show the shortcomings 
of the theory of external pervasion. Those who climb up Kedara 
hill listen to the confused sound and infer the presence of thunder, 
But there is no causal relation between confused sound and the pre- 
sence of thunder. 

105. (p. 577) Vyomagiva produces a clever reading designed 
to suggest that Pragastapada’s authority is not unequivocally favor- 
able toward the inclusion of verbal testimony under inference. On 
this reading Pragastapada meant to say that all instruments of know- 
ledge except verbal testimony are to be included under inference. 
Vyomasgiva admits that the more obvious readings—that verbal 
testimony should be classified as a kind of inference—is also possible. 

(Pp. 577-78) Vyomagiva’s own predilections are clearly 
favorable to the Naiyadyika view that verbal testimony is an inde- 
pendent instrument, however. Though he admits that verbal 
testimony involves a number of items paralleling inference—invariable 
concomitance, pardmarsa, perception, etc.—still the object of verbal 
testimony is beyond the senses, and the process involves reference to 


VYOMAVATI 447 


the conventions governing the use of words. Neither of these last 
are present in inference. There is a discussion of convention. 

(Pp. 579-84) At this point Vyomagiva introduces a discussion 
of the topic of validity (prémanya) of judgments. The Mimamsaka 
arguments for intrinsic validity are set forth in detail. The Mimamsa 
arguments to prove that the Vedas are eternal are also discussed. 
Vyomasgiva reviews these at length. The Mimamsaka holds that 
validity is intrinsic and invalidity extrinsic. Wyomasiva shows that 
extrinsic invalidity is due to defects, and that since validity thus 
must depend on merit it too must be extrinsic. Since sounds are 
noneternal, words and sentences which are composed out of them 
must also be eternal. The Vedas, which are a group of sentences, 
must also be noneternal. Therefore we must presuppose a beginning 
which must have been their composition by an_ intelligent 
person. Such a person must be free from all defects and he must be 
a different person from ourselves. It has already been proved that 
such a person has immediate perception of supersensible things, and 
indeed that he is none other than God. Being the composition of 
such a Supreme Person, the Vedas are valid extrinsically. Wyomasiva 
cites certain of Kanada’s satras to show that these views constitute 
proper Vaigesika positions. 

(Pp. 584-87) Vyomasiva next turns to the Buddhists. Accord- 
ing to them, there are 2 kinds of knowables, namely (1) the thing in 
itself (svalaksana) and (2) other objects. The former are apprehend- 
ed by perception and the latter by inference. Since there is no 
other kind of knowable, there cannot be a third means of valid cog- 
nition. 

Vyomasiva rejects this on the ground that words convey a sense 
which is nonwandering and correctly related to their objects. Thus 
verbal testimony must be a valid means of knowledge. The number 
or nattre of the kinds of things does not determine the number of 
instruments of valid knowledge. More than one instrument can 
operate on one and the same object. For example, the self is known 
from the Vedas, inferred through inference and visualized through 
yogic perception. 

106. (P. 587) An example of gesture is placing the folded 
palms near the mouth, by which a person creates in another the 
judgment that the gesturing person is thirsty.57 

107. (Pp. 587-90) Comparison, which functions to produce 
knowledge of the gavaya which has not been seen before by means 
of the words of a reliable authority concerning the similarity between 
a gavaya and a cow, is only a type of verbal testimony, since it is only 


448 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the proving, by a credible person, of the gavaya through the cow on 
the strength of similarity. It is admitted that the gavaya is compared 
with the cow, but the way in which it is done is only of the nature 
of verbal testimony. Similarity (sédrfya) cannot be taken as a know- 
able thing. The cognition that this cow is similar to a gavaya can 
only be a case of recollection. The resulting judgment obtained 
through the operation of comparison cannot be brought under pre- 
sumption or negation or perception. It cannot be a case of inference 
either, as there is no operative hetu. 


Some hold that a man hears from a forester that a gavaya is 
like a cow, and then, wandering in the forest, beholds an animal 
which is similar to the cow. He then remembers the relation between 
cow and gavaya and forms the judgment that this animal is similar 
to the cow. After this he understands that the animal is called 
gavaya because of the realization of the relation between the thing 
denoted and the word denoting it. WVyomagiva rejects this by show- 
ing that the man learns the conventions governing the use of gavaya 
during his initial conversation with the forester. This view is squared 
with Kanada’s sara II. 1.19, which seems to require perception 
(pratyaksa) of an object as a condition of its getting a name, by 
arguing that here the word pratyaksa is meant to include any valid 
instrument of knowledge.58 


108. (Pp. 590-91) The Mimamsakas take presumption as 
having 6 kinds, each one based on one of the instruments of know- 
ledge which they accept. Vyomagiva shows that all 6 of them can 
be brought under inference, the common basis for inference and 
presumption being invariable concomitance. 


110. (Pp. 591-93) On nonapprehension Vyomasgiva departs 
entirely from Pragastapada and argues that it belongs under percep- 
tion rather than inference. Perception must be admitted to appre- 
hend absences through the operation of the sense organs. Vyoma- 
giva says that in the judgment, “‘there is no jar here on the ground,”’ 
the absence of the jar is first apprehended, and only subsequently the 
ground. ‘The absence is the qualifier, the ground what is qualified. 
There is no need to adopt a special kind of valid instrument for 
apprehending the qualified entity which is the object of perception. 
Generally, that which apprehends the counterpositive of an absence 
cognizes the absence as well.54 


112-14. (P. 594) Inference for others consists in proving a 


thing, about which a decision has been taken by oneself, to another 
by employing 5 membered argument. Vyomagiva takes the word 


VYOMAVATI 449 


sadhya in this connections to refer to the thing about which a decision 
has been taken by oneself. 


The difference between inference for oneself and for another 
lies in this: that in inference for oneself the hetu is given to the person 
for whom the inference is intended by the sense organs, while in 
inference for another the hetu is conveyed by language. 


(P. 595) Arguing against the Grammarians’ rejection of the 
5 membered argument form, Vyomasiva introduces a discussion of 
the sphota theory. Vyomasgiva rejects that theory. His account of 
the way in which the meaning of a sentence arises is this: when the 
first meaningful noise arises it produces a trace. The second such 
noise is then cognized and the trace created by it becomes associated 
with the trace produced by the first one. In this way one eventually 
comes to the last meaningful unit. With the traces of the previous 
noises operating as accessories, this last noise produces the judgment 
as to what the whole passage means. This is the view of the 
Vaigesika school.6¢ 


(Pp. 595-99) Vyomagiva mentions a number of views about 
meaning in the course of establishing his own. Some, he says, hold 
that the traces which are produced by the experience of the previous 
letters are restricted by adrsta so that one does not cognize indepen- 
dently the meaning of each constituent unit but a single recollection 
is eventually built up which acts as the accessory in the final realiza- 
tion of the meaning of the whole passage. Others hold that the 
several noises each produce their independent cognitions of their 
meaning, and that these cognitions become the accessories. Or 
again, in this last view some say that the meaning of the whole 
passage does not become realized until one has judged the meaning 
of each constituent, including the last one: when all have been ex- 
perienced, the recollection of their totality produces knowledge of 
the meaning of the whole passage. 


Others hold that, when a constituent is first heard a judgment 
about its meaning arises and is immediately destroyed, but when the 
final judgment concerning the meaning of the whole sentence occurs 
each of these judgments about the constituents arises again. This is 
not admitted by Vyomagiva, on the ground that a word, once it has 
produced a judgment linking that word to its proper object, does not 
repeat the production. 

Still others argue that the constituent sounds remain in akaSa 
until all of them are uttered and, after the last is uttered, create a 
sentence of which all the consitutent sounds are parts. Vyomagiva 


450 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


rejects this as being contrary to reason. Words uttered previously 
do not remain until the last word is uttered. 

A different view is that the hearing of a constituent word 
produces the recollection of the conventional meaning of that word, 
which in turn produces a judgment about the meaning of the 
constituent now presented. Such a judgment destroys a previous 
judgment about a previously presented word, but nevertheless the 
several judgments become associated and together produce the judg- 
ment about the meaning of the whole sentence. Vyomasgiva shows 
that there is no such association between later judgments and the 
earlier ones. 

The proper account, he says, is this: The constituent sound 
is heard, producing a trace, and also invoking recollection of the 
conventional meaning of the sound. This produces a judgment 
about the meaning of the word. This judgment, and the recollec- 
tion, are destroyed in the next moment, and a new sound is heard, 
with the same attendant results. This goes on until the last word 
is reached. The impressions produced in each give rise to the re- 
collection of the meaning of all the constituent words. The last word, 
which is qualified by this recollection, is treated as a sentence and 
from this the cognition of the meaning of the sentence rises. 

In some cases, where the meaning of the constituents becomes 
known through some means of valid knowledge other than percep- 
tion, the meaning of a sentence may be understood even without the 
sentence being identified as a whole. Vyomagiva cites a passage 
from Kumiarila’s Slokavérttika®! and shows that by observing white 
color from a distance, inferring the presence thereof horseness from 
hearing a neighing in that direction, and discovering the existence 
of running by hearing the stamping of the hoofs, the sense of a whole 
expression is arrived at, namely to the effect that a white horse is 
running, even though no sentence is actually formulated to express 
this meaning. Similarly, even though one does recognize that a 
sentence has been uttered he may not know its meaning. For 
example, the passages in the works of poets do not convey any sense 
until the meaning of the well-known words used by them is under- 
stood. Thus, it is concluded that the sense of the sentence has to be 
understood as conditioned by the requirements of expectation 
(akaénksaé), appropriateness (yogyata), and proximity (sannidhi) 
as applied to its constituents. 

Vyomagiva also attacks the views of the Prabhakaras, who 
hold the view called anvitabhidhana.® 

(Pp. 599-602) Turning to the members of the 5 membered 


VYOMAVATIi 451 


argument form, Vyomasiva glosses Pragastapada’s definition of the 
first member, remarking that without this member, the sense of the 
argument is not made available, no discussion could take place 
relating to the topic at hand and communication would fail. The 
requirement that the hypothesis must not be contradictory Vyomasgiva 
takes to mean that it should not contradict perception, inference, or 
one’s own school’s view as well as the view being set forth. 

115. (Pp. 606-07) Vyomasiva says that there are subdivi- 
sions of the 4 kinds of asiddha fallacy Pragastapada lists. Many of 
these are in Bhasarvajiia’s list (cf. p. 403), Vyomasgiva says that all 
these subvarieties fall under one or another of the main 4. Some 
say that certain of them, e.g., a fallacy called tadbhdvasiddha and one 
called anumeydsiddha, belong under inference for oneself rather than 
inference for others. Vyomagiva rejects this, holding that the same 
fallacies of the hetu may arise in either of the two kinds of inference. 

Vyomasgiva finds four subvarieties of viruddha, namely 

(a) where the hetu occurs in a part of the up; 

(b) where an sp is known but the hetu pervades up; 

(c) where no sp is known and hetu pervades up; 

(d) where an sp is known and. hetu occurs in a part of vp 

Likewise, he offers four varieties of the anaikdntika or samdigdha 
fallacy: 

(a) whre the /, while pervading sp, occurs in a part of up; 
(b) where the A occurs in a part of sp, but pervades up; 
(c) where A occurs in parts of both sp and up; 

(d) (paksatrayavrtt: ) 

Pragastapada, in discussing the samdigdha fallacy, remarks 
that if one actually had a case where there were two contradictory 
hetus of equal authority one would not have this kind of fallacy; one 
would not even have a case of doubt, for in such a case no definite 
proposition could be formulated. Does Pragastapada mean by 
speaking of ‘‘two contradictory hetus’’ to classify such a case under 
viruddha? No, says Vyomasiva; he means precisely that this isnot a 
case of viruddha. Vyomasiva thinks of it as a kind of kdlatyayapadista 
case, 

118. (Pp. 614-15) The fourth member is necessary, for it 
shows that the Aetu has an unsublated content. It establishes internal 
pervasion (antarvyapti) and pardmarsa, and these are crucial to the 
success of inference. The third member, for example, cannot (as 
some suppose) prove internal pervasion, that is, cannot show that 
there is no way of refuting the alleged pervasion. What the third 
member shows is that there is external pervasion (bahirvyapti) 


452 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


between hf and s, but another member is required to assert unsublated 
content and the absence of contrary reasons. 

121. (Pp. 620-21) In commenting on memory, Pragastapada 
remarks that recollection must have for its object a thing that has passed 
away from the time when it operated (atita). This does not, however, 
mean that the object must have been destroyed. It may still exist, 
but not at the same place as when the original perception which 
produced the memory grasped it. Therefore atita must be taken to 
mean that recollection has as its object something the experience of 
which has passed. But does this mean that memory has an object? 
No, says Vyomasgiva. It does not function with respect to external 
objects by itself, for the sense organs are inoperative; the object 
remembered may no longer exist at all. 

122. (P. 621) Intuition is a special kind of mental trace. 
Knowledge of this sort must be classed as mediate, since the sense 
organs donot operate. (Presumably it is to be counted as inferential), 

123. (Pp. 623-24) The knowledge of the siddhas is sometimes to 
be counted as of the “‘sagelike’’? kind of inference treated in the 
preceding section, sometimes as perceptual. 

124-27. (Pp. 627-28) Pleasure, pain, desire, and aversion 
are to be treated as distinct from judgments, though the causes for 
all are the same. Just as effects produced by cooking differ, though 
the ultimate stuff (atoms) is the same, so, due to differences in the 
causal conditions, the effects inhering in selves differ, but may still 
be distinguished in kind. 

133. (Pp. 638-42) That merit is a quality of selves is proved 
through inference and verbal testimony. Some say that since merit 
is an intrinsic character of them karma is unavoidable; furthermore, 
death would be impossible. If merit is an extrinsic quality of atoms, 
then it cannot be created through our activities. Too, enjoyment 
of the fruits of one person’s meritorious deeds would be shared by 
everyone. Others say that merit has no locus, but this is absurd. 
Vyomasgiva gives a detailed account of the means of obtaining merit, 
describing various sacrificial rites. 

149-53. (P. 653) One motion must inhere in one substance 
only; otherwise, when one substance moves the others involved 
should move as well. Therefore in cases where many objects move 
at once the causes there must be many; several quick impacts, 
undiscriminated by us because of their practical simultaneity, are 
needed to move several objects aggregated together. 

154. (Pp. 678-89) Some hold thatall universals are existent 
in every individual, but are not apprehended everywhere for want 


VYOMAVATI 453 


of that which would manifest them. Vyomagiva rejects this view. 
He says that the relation between a universal and the individual 
manifesting it is of the nature of nondifference. A universal has 
no cause for its production, since its substrata do not all exist at the 
same time. Universals are all-pervasive, but yet are found to be 
manifested where the manifesting individuals are located. 


161. (Pp. 698-99) Inherence is perceptible by indeterminate 
perception, ¢.g., when one judges concerning the contacts among 
the parts of a whole. 


22. VACASPATI MISRA 


This writer is well known to students of Indian philosophy, 
for he contributed to a variety of different systems, and each of his 
contributions seems to have been highly thought of. In this respect 
he is very unusual among Indian philosophers. Traditionally, he is 
held to have been a Maithili Brahmin, and to have lived somewhere 
near the Nepal frontier. There is a village in that region named 
Bhama, which is supposed to have been named after Vacaspati’s 
daughter, to whom he commemorated the Advaita commentary 
entitled Bhdmati1 On the other hand, Dinesh Chandra Bhatta- 
charya mentions a second tradition, according to which he belonged 
to Badagama in Pargana Nisgsakaptirakiidha, which is now in the 
Saharsa district on the eastern boundary of Darbhanga.? 

Umesh Mishra identifies Vacaspati’s village as Tharhi, in the 
Darbhanga district, “‘where even today there is a tank associated 
with his wife’s name, on the side of which, it is believed, he had his 
house.” Mishra offers some interesting further arguments supporting 
Vacaspati’s being a Maithili. 

Mishra reconstructs the order of Vacaspati’s several written 
works as follows: 

(1) Nydyakaniké, a commentary on Mandana Migra’s Vidhi- 
viveka, in the Pirvamimamsa tradition. 

(2) (Brahma) Tattvasamiksa, of which we know nothing, since 
it has been lost. It is conjectured that this also is a commentary on 
Mandana Migra, specifically on his Brahmasiddhi.4 

(3) TYattvabindu, an original work concerning the theory of 
meaning as understood in the Pirvamimamsa system. 

(4) Mydyasiicinibandha, a work in which the author attempts to 
fix the number and order of the Nyéyasiitras. 

(5) Mydyavarttikatatparyatika, the commentary on Uddyotakara’s 


454 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Nydyavarttika. (Mishra guesses Vacaspati must have been 75 years 
old when this was written). 

(6) Tattvakaumudi on Iévarakrsna’s Sémkhyakarikas. 

(7) Tattvavaisaradi on Patafijali’s Yogasiitra and its Bhasya 
written by Vyasa. 

(8) Bhamat? on Samkara’s Brahmas iitrabhasya. 

A good deal of scholarly debate has centered around the question 
of Vacaspati’s date, which is of especial interest since his works figure 
in the history of several schools; thus if his date could be firmly estab- 
lished it would help greatly in determining the chronology of several 
traditions. Vacaspati actually gives the date 898 for one of his works, 
the Nydyasitcinibandha. The scholars have debated as to whether 
this date is to be understood as Saka or Vikrama 898. If the latter, 
then the work was written in samvat 898, i.c., A.D.841. But there 
are several reasons why this date is unlikely. Paul Hacker® argues, 
for example, that since Vacaspati quotes and names the work Nyaya- 
manjari he cannot precede Jayanta Bhatta; thus the date must be 
Saka 898, i.e., A.D. 976. This argument is shaky, since it seems 
clear that the Nyayamaijari Vacaspati quotes is not Jayanta’s but 
his teacher Trilocana’s creation.6 Dineshchandra Bhattacharya? 
gives some additional arguments, the cumulative weight of which 
would seem to settle the question. His arguments are these: the 
first one seems specious, but the others are telling. (1) Since Vacas- 
pati refutes Bhaskara in his Bhémati he must be 10th century at ear- 
liest. (However, current research indicates Bhaskara to have been 
contemporaneous with Samkara, i.e., early 8th century)’ (2) Vacas- 
pati quotes Dharmottara respectfully, so must have lived a century 
or so after him. Since Dharmottara is 9th century, Vacaspati must 
be 10th. (3) Vacaspati refers to the Bhisana, so must be after 
Bhasarvajfia. (4) According to Vardhamana’s commentary on 
Kiranavali, Vacaspati lived after Vyomagiva. (5) Sridhara seems 
not to know Vacaspati. 

On the other hand, Narahari® argues that since Udayana 
comments on Vacaspati’s work, and Udayana lived around the end 
of the 10th century, the Saka date for Vacaspati must be wrong, and 
we should opt for the earlier one. The basis for this is Narahari’s 
opinion that it is extremely unusual for one man to comment on a 
contemporary’s work, 

Vacaspati wrote two works in the Nydya tradition. One, the 
Nydyasiicinibandha, is merely a siitrapathaand table of contents to the 
Nydyasitras. The other is an extensive commentary on Uddyotakara’s 
Nydyavarttika, entitled (Myadyavarttika) Tatparyatika, summarized below 


TATPARYATIKA 455 


by Bimal Krishna Matilal. There are a number of references in 
later literature to a “‘Tatparydcarya.’’ Presumably these are refe- 
rences to Vacaspati, although some scholars believe there was another 
writer who is referred to under this title. 


NYAYAVARTTIKATATPARYATIKA 


Summarized by Bimal Krishna Matilal, 
(E refers to the edition in Kashi Sanskrit Series 24 by Rajesh- 
wara Sastri Dravid, Banaras 1925) (B2569). 


BOOK ONE: PORTION!® ONE 


Topic I: Subject Matter and Purpose 


Introductory Section. (E1l-5) The science (astra) which is 
the cause of perfection of mankind was composed by Aksapada and 
explained by Paksilasvimin. In spite of this Uddyotakara wrote 
the Varttika because people were misled by the bad reasonings of 
logicians like Dignaga, etc. 

This science causes the betterment of mankind not directly, 
but only by informing them about the nature (fattva) of the basic 
categories, viz., instruments of valid knowledge, etc. 

We know objects (prameya) through some accredited source or 
instrument of knowledge. But how can we be certain that something 
is an accredited instrument ? This leads to the following question: 
How is the validity of a cognition established ? Is the validity intrin- 
sic (svatak) to the cognition itself, or extrinsic (paratah) ? Further- 
more, is cognition self-revelatory (svaprakasa) or not self-revelatory 
(paratah-prakasa) ? If validity is said to be intrinsic then a valid 
instrument of cognition (i.e., an instrument of valid cognition) 
would be indistinguishable from an invalid one. If it is said to be 
extrinsic, i.e., established by another cognition, we will eventually 
invite an infinite regress. Vatsyayana answered this problem in 
his introductory remarks. Vacaspati answers them below. 

(Ell) To ordinary persons, cessation of pain may be wel- 
come but not cessation of pleasure. So why should ordinary persons 
try for a state of release which involves final cessation of pleasure as 
well as of pain? 

Answer: Our science is meant for the wise. Wise men will 
strive for such a state. Even ordinary persons can be made wise 
through the teachings of this science. 

(Ell-16) A valid cognition (or its instrument) is invariably 


456 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


associated with its object. This is proved by the empirical fact that 
a valid cognition produces activities that are successful. Thus the 
validity of a cognition (or its instrument) is not intrinsic or self- 
evident, but is established through an inference. This inference is: 
This cognition is valid because it belongs to the class (tajjatiya) of 
those cognitions which produce successful activity. The invariable 
concomitance of such activity with the validity of cognition is estab- 
lished by empirical instances in which after knowing an object our 
activity with regard to that object proceeds successfully. The 
validity of scripture is thus inferrible in a general way by observing 
the invariable association of the validity of the prescriptions of 
medical scriptures, or of charms, with successful activity. (E.g., 
taking some medicine cures a disease). Scriptural knowledge is on 
the same level with the knowledge of medical writings, or charms, 
inasmuch as they are all derived from reliable persons, 

The validity of cognition is established by inference. But 
inference itself is another type of cognition, and its instrument is 
another instrument of cognition. Thus how are we to establish the 
validity of that particular inference which is in operation there ? 
Answer: In certain cases of inference, where all doubts about its being 
wrong are eliminated, validity becomes self-evident or intrinsic. 
The present case is an inference of this type. | Thus, we do not 
necessarily have to end with an infinite regress. 

(Pp. 17ff.) Dignaga’s view: Objects are of two types, pure 
particulars (svalaksana) and universals (sémadnya). To be real means 
to function or to do something (arthakriydkaritva). Pure particulars 
are real because they alone function in some way or other. They 
are momentary point-instants. Only perception can grasp them. 
Inference, on the other hand, depends on the knowledge of invariable 
concomitance between a hetu and a sddhya. Since such relations can 
only obtain between universals, not between pure particulars, infe- 
rence can only grasp universals. Universals are unreal, although 
they are objectified through imagination (kalpand), which is produced 
by our beginningless desire (anddivésana). Since there are only 
two types of objects, of which perception grasps only particular point- 
instants and inference grasps only universals, it never happens that a 
single object is grasped by more than one instrument of cognition. 

Uddyotakara answered this objection. Vacaspati adds: An 
instrument of cognition is itself not wise enough to consider the fact 
that since this object has already been grasped by another instru- 
ment it is “‘none of its business !’’ If it is said that the knower, being 
a sentient being, can be wise enough to withdraw from some useless 


TATPARYATIKA 457 


activity, it may be pointed out that the knower might desire to know 
a favorite object of his again and again, and hence through his desire 
the instrument of cognition might operate upon the same object as 
another has. Even where the knower may not desire to know some- 
thing (say, something painful), the instrument of cognition will 
also be operative if it is capable of doing so. 

(Pp. 21ff.) Memory, even when it is correct, is not considered 
valid knowledge, and its instrument is not considered an instrument 
of valid knowing, according to the Nyaya school, because in ordinary 
language people use the word ‘‘valid cognition’’ (prama@) to denote 
that correct cognition which is other than memory cognition. 

(P. 34) Blue and yellow are contrary to each other in the sense 
that in one the other is absent and vice versa. Thus, denial of blue 
does not necessarily imply affirmation of yellow. But presence 
(bhéva) and absence (abhdva) are contradictory to each other in the 
sense that the one 7s just the absence of the other. Thus, denial of 
absence is nothing else but presence. 

(Pp. 39-40) The word nydya stands for the hetu’s having the 
well-known 5 (or 4 ) characteristics (viz., presence in the sf, etc.). 
Or, it might stand for the statement of a systematic argument with 
5 steps by which the desired proposition is established. 

(Pp. 43-45) Opponent: Wherever the hypothesis to be proved 
is supposed (by Vatsyayana) to be contradicted by perception, the 
hetu in all such cases does not become concomitant with the sddhya. 
Hence they should be regarded as cases of nonconcomitant hetu. (The 
objector is Dignaga). Answer: Where the relation of pervasion is 
derived in a general way (sarvopasamhdrena) without examining 
each specific case, Vatsyayana’s example can very well be a clear 
case of contradiction by perception. Relations like causal relations 
are not to be regarded as pervasion, according to Vacaspati, but the 
unconditional (anaupddhika) natural (svébhavika) relation is what 
is called pervasion. Thus, if such a natural relation is ascertained in 
a general way between createdness and absence of warmth then the 
inference ‘‘fire is not warm, because it is created’’ can be contradicted 
directly by perception without our knowing that the concomitance 
is neither universal nor necessary. 

(Pp. 54ff.) Uddyotakara says that a sentence is a cluster of 
words which gives rise to a specific judgment where the cognition 
of the meaning of the last word heard is aided by the memory of the 
meanings of the previous words heard in sequence. Vacaspati 
explains. The cognition produced by hearing a sentence is a quali- 
ficative cognition, where the memory of the adjectival words supplies 


458 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the qualifiers and the memory of the substantival word supplies 
the qualificand. The meaning of a sentence is grasped when we have 
such a qualificative cognition. The words by themselves cannot 
give rise to such a qualificative cognition, but can do so through the 
intermediate operation of producing the memory cognitions of the 
references of individual words (padarthasmarana), just as a log of 
wood cannot cook by itself but can do so through the intermediate 
operation of burning. Moreover, since a disconnected word-com- 
plex like ‘“‘ten apples, six cakes,’ etc. does not give any connected 
sentence meaning, we also need for the understanding of a connected 
sentence meaning the following elements as accessories: semantical 
competency (yogyatd@), syntactic expectancy (dkd@iks@), and conti- 
guity in space and time (dsatii). 

2. (E81-82) Brevity is the soul of sara. On this ground, an 
opponent’s view that the second sa#tra of Aksapada should be divided 
into 2 different sutras for the sake of explaining that different 
sufferings, birth, etc. are related by way of cause and effect, is rejected. 
To divide it is to make it unnecessarily cumbrous. Besides, Uddyo- 
takara read it as one sitra. 

(E85-91) Opponent (a Yogacara): In error, ‘‘this is silver,”’ 
the (internal) consciousness itself (which alone is real) appears as 
externalized. Answer: No. The cognition which contradicts such 
error (bddhakapratyaya) can only show that the so-called external 
object (i.e. silver) is not present there, but it cannot reveal that it 
is all internal consciousness and that there is no external conscious- 
ness. For more arguments see Book IV. 

The asatkhyéii theory of error: Error reveals nonexistent 
objects. Answer: If ‘‘nonexistent’? means not present on the 
occasion in question, it is all right with the Naiyayikas. If you say 
that the object (i.e. silver) can neither be described as existent nor 
as nonexistent, you are wrong. During the time of error it is 
describable as existent, and when error is removed it is describable 
as nonexistent. 

The anirvacaniyakhyati theory of the Advaitins is also rejected, 
since there is plurality of objects and generic properties are real. 

The akhyaéti theory: No cognition can be erroneous. The so+ 
called ‘‘error’’ in ‘‘this is silver’? is but a mixture of perception 
(“‘this’?) and memory (“‘silver’”’), and due to the nongrasping of this 
difference we call it an error. Answer: Since we do proceed to try 
to obtain the silver, the error cannot be simply due to the nongrasping 
of difference, but it should be due to the wrong gasping of their 
identity. Our activity toward something proceeds from the 


TATPARYATIEA 459 


knowledge of that thing and not from ignorance. Hence the non- 
grasping of difference (bhed@graha) should be explained as the 
(wrong) attribution (dopa) of one to the other. (For details on 
the theory of error, Vacaspati refers to another book of his, the 
Tattvasamiksa, perhaps, which is a lost commentary on Mandana 
Migra’s Brahmasiddhi). 


Topic II: The Instruments of Knowledge 


3. (E102-04) According to Vacaspati, the following causal 
chain typically occurs. First sense perception of water; then the 
Propositional perception of water as water; then the awakening of 
the memory impression that water of the same class quenched thirst 
before; then recollection to that effect; then synthetic consideration 
(pardémarsa) that this water belongs to the same class; and then the 
inference that this water is acceptable because it will quench thirst. 
Thus perception as an instrument of knowledge finally leads to the 
inference of the acceptability of water as a result or fruit (phala). 

What do we infer here? If ‘“‘acceptability’’ is explained as 
the causal efficacy (fakti) for quenching thirst, construed as an 
imperceptible property of water, then this goes against the Nyaya 
doctrine which does not admit causal efficacy as separate entity. 
Vacaspati explains. There is no causal efficacy apart from the tota- 
lity of all the causal conditions. Although the cause, viz, water, 
is perceived and not inferred, we do infer the effective connection 
of the cause with the effect (kdrya-sambandhita). The “effective 
connection” is this: the cause must be present before the effect is 
produced. Such connection is not perceived when the water is 
perceived, and hence there is need for inference. 

Of the three activities of accepting, avoiding, and being neutral, 
some want to identify the third with second. Vacaspati rejects such a 
view and maintains the trichotomy. 

4, (E108-16) In favor of Uddyotakara’s third kind of sense- 
object-connection, inherence-in - what - inheres-in-what-is-contact, 
Vacaspati argues that without this we cannot explain the perception 
of universals: those who accept similarity as a separate category 
different from the category of universals cannot explain the percep- 
tion of such similarity. 

Several arguments are given to prove that there is a relation 
called inherence which relates a whole with its paris,qualities with 
the things qualified, motions with what moves, universals with indi- 
viduals they characterize. In cognitions like ‘‘the cloth is white,” 
“*the cloth is a substance,”’ “‘the cloth is in the threads’’, two different 


460 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


entities are experienced as related. If you say that the subject and 
predicate actually express an identical entity, then the predicate 
would be felt as repetitive (in sense) to the subject. But it is not 
actually felt to be repetitive. Moreover, a word like ‘white’ ex- 
presses white color, and through this the word refers to white things. 
But this is not to say that white color and the things are identical, 
but that they are related. To avoid an infinite regress, inherence 
cannot be said to have another inherence or a relation to connect it 
with its substratum. Thus for the perception of inherence we admit 
the relation of qualifier and qualificand (visesanavisesyabhdva) as the 
sense-object connection. 

Opponent: When there is no pot on the ground we see the mere 
ground and hence the so-called absence of pot is identical with its 
locus, the ground. Answer: ‘The mere ground’? means nothing 
but the ground qualified by some absence of something, like pot ! 
When an entity which is perceptible is not perceived somewhere, 
we can be said to perceive its absence there, because such an absence 
is known only when the senses are operating. 

Objection: Since remembering of the counterpositive, viz., pot, 
intervenes, the sense-object connection by itself does not produce 
the cognition of absence. Hence absence cannot be perceived. 
Answer: Nyaya accepts the propositional (qualificative or construc- 
tive: savikalpaka) perception where remembering of words, names, 
etc. intervenes but acts only as an accessory to produce the resulting 
perception. In the case of perceiving an absence, memory of the 
counterpositive is such an accessory only. 

Vacaspati also rejects the view that nonapprehension (anupa- 
labdhi) is a separate instrument through which we grasp absences. 
It is suggested that when a person is asked later whether Mr. X was 
present in the room or not, and he replies, after recollecting his 
experience in the room, that there was no Mr. X, such absence must 
be known, not through any sense-object connection, but through a 
separate instrument. V4Acaspati replies that this absence of Mr. X 
is known through inference. 

(E117-18) Vacaspati quotes several verses from Dignaga. 
They state that the sense of sight grasps the object without reaching 
it, because otherwise we should not see distant objects. If it is main- 
tained that the sense of sight goes out to reach the object, Dignaga 
remarks that we should have seen it even by closing our eyes when 
the organ has left to reach the object. Uddyotakara has answered 
this critique of Dignaga’s. 


TATPARYATIKA 461 


(E123) Opponent: Pleasure and pain are indistinguishable from 
judgments because they arise from identical causal complexes. Answer: 
No. Cold touch sometimes produces pleasure but not always. 
Cold touch always, however, produces a judgment that this touch 
is cold. Hence there must be additional factors which help the 
cold touch to produce sometimes pleasure, sometimes pain. 

(E125) Vacaspati says there are 2 types of perception: (1) 
nonpropositional (nonconceptualized, nonqualificative,  nirvikal- 
paka) and (2) propositional (conceptualized, qualificative, savikal- 
paka). In the definition of perception, the word avyapadesya refers 
to the first type, and the word zyavasdyatmaka—‘‘well-defined”’— 
refers to the second. 

Some say: The nirvikalpaka or nonpropositional perception 
isa myth. There cannot be any cognition where a word expressing 
an object does not appear at all. Vacaspati quotes from Bhartrhari 
in this connection and thinks that Vatsyayana repudiates such a view 
while explaining the significance of the word avyapadesya. 

Those who hold that the word and its denotatum are identical 
can be countered in this way. In the perception of children and 
deaf and dumb persons words do not appear but objects do. To 
appeal to the memory-impression of words from previous births is not 
a happy solution. Such impressions from previous births might 
be very vague (avifada), while the objects revealed in perception 
are quite clear and prominent (vifada). It is improper to identify 
a vague thing with something which is not at all vague. If the 
memory-impressions are claimed to be as clear as the object and 
hence identical, then a child would use the word as soon as he sees 
the object for the first time. Moreover, words generally refer to 
their objects, but sometimes, when accompanied by such elements 
as quotation marks (if in Sanskrit), they refer to words themselves. 
A blind man would have grasped color, since he can grasp the word 
“color,” and the deaf would have grasped the word, since he can 
see color. 

(E130-33) The correctness of other types of judgment such 
as inference, those gotten from verbal authority, etc., is entirely 
dependent upon the correctness of some perception or other, which 
must be at the root of all the other sources of cognition. Thus the 
word avyabhicarin, “correct,” has been used in the definition of percep- 
tion only. Moreover, doubt as a sense report is also excluded by 
the mention of this requirement. Although VaAatsyayana and 
Uddyotakara did not explain this word in this way, V4acaspati says 
that he has followed his teacher Trilocana in this matter. Thus 


462 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the word vcypavaséyatmaka, “well-defined,” is used not to exclude 
doubt but to refer to propositional perception. 

(E133ff.) Opponent: The propositional cognition (savikalpaka) 
cannot be called perception, since it involves imaginative cons- 
truction by the mind through which names, etc., are added. Words 
refer to universals which are not real, but mere imaginative constructs 
devoid of causal efficiency (arthakriyakaritva). The real objects are 
pure particulars, the causally efficient point-instants. Sense perception 
arises directly from such real objects. Thus propositional perception 
is merely the adding of the imaginative qualifications to the object 
through our primeval faculty of mental construction. 

From a distance we sometimes grasp the bare existence of a 
tree, say, and do not cognize it as a tree or as a substance. This 
also proves that these are imaginative constructions through recollec- 
tion of words. 

Recollection of words also produces a break in the operation 
of the senses and the object. What is revealed through recollection 
is the past object which is different from the present object. If you 
say that recollection is only an accessory and not an obstacle to 
perception, then even the blindfolded person would have seen color 
through memory. 

Answer: Adding of names, etc., is not always imaginative cons- 
truction, because there is no incompatibility between a judgment’s 
being produced by a sensory stimulus and its revealing the connec- 
tion of its object with names, etc. It will also be shown that uni- 
versals are not always fictitious, and that there are stable and durable 
(sthira) objects.1!_ Recollection of the previous state of the object 
grasped at the time of learning its name helps to determine the 
present state of the object, and thus it becomes an accessory in 
producing the propositional judgment. Recollection of the name, 
however, is an accidental factor which happens along with it; the 
name is certainly not an essential factor in the constructive 
perception, nor is it an impediment to such a perception. 

(E150-53) In criticism of Vasubandhu’s definition of per- 
ception, Vacaspati adds: Cognitions which are formless reveal objects 
which are different from the cognitions which grasp them. Since 
cause and effect cannot be simultaneous, the object to be grasped 
cannot cause the perception of itself at the moment of its existence. 
If perception is produced at the next moment when the object is 
destroyed, then such a cognition cannot be called a (true) perception 
because it reveals a nonexistent object, 


TATPARYATIKA 463 


(E153-55) Kalpand or conceptualization is, according to 
Dignaga, either adding a proper name, such as “‘this is Dittha,” or 
adding a general name, such as “‘this is a cow,” or adding a quality- 
name, such as “‘this is white,” or adding a motion-name, such as 
“this is cooking,” or adding a substance-name, i.e., qualifying it with 
a substance, as in ‘‘this has horns.” 

The definition given by Jaimini is either too wide to exclude 
perceptual error where the sense-object-connection might be said to 
be all right, or it is too narrow to include recognition (pratyabhij ig 
as in “this is the same Devadatta (whom I saw before),”’ where there 
cannot be the right kind of connection between the senses and the 
object of the previous experience. 

5. (E156ff.) Inference must be regarded as a valid instrument 
of cognition, because otherwise either we invite a vicious circle by 
trying to prove the validity of inference through another inference, 
or we fail to express a meaningful proposition unless we admit 
speech or verbal testimony as a separate source of cognition apart 
from perception, so that understanding of the meaning of the sentence 
(inference is invalid) may be in order. 

Opponent: The relation of invariable concomitance between 
h and s is based upon 2 fundamental relations: (1) identity, and 
(2) cause-and-effect. We cannot be certain of such invariable 
concomitance just by the observation of supporting instances and 
nonobservation of contrary instances. The cause-and-effect relation 
is known through the method of agreement (anvaya) and difference 
(vyatireka); the identity relation is known when contradiction be- 
comes impossible. 

Answer: It is difficult to be certain about the cause-and-effect 
relation because there can always be a doubt as to whether smoke 
can be caused, even in the absence of fire, by some supernatural 
condition like a goblin (fifaca). The temporality (kddacitkatva) 
of some events only proves that they are dependent upon something 
else, but this cannot remove the doubt that smoke sometimes can be 
caused by some hitherto undiscovered element. 

Moreover, to infer cause from effect means to infer a former 
event from a present event, but such inference might not always 
help those persons who want to make use of fire inferring it from 
smoke. 

Furthermore, we infer the color from the taste of a thing. Color 
and taste are not identical, nor is one the cause of the other, for they 
are simultaneous. Thus the thesis that identity and cause-and-effect 
are the only relations in inference is falsified, 


464 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Opponent: Since all objects are strings of momentary events, 
the present color-moment is caused by the preceding moment of 
simultaneous color, taste, touch, and smell. Thus, the present 
taste-moment makes us infer its cause, the preceding color-moment, 
which also causes the present, simultaneous color-moment. Thus 
color is inferred from the taste indirectly through the causal relation. 
This also explains the inference of fire from smoke. 

Answer: To infer the preceding color-moment from the present 
taste-moment is to infer cause from effect, but to infer the present, 
simultaneous color-moment from the preceding color-moment is to 
infer the effect from the cause. Hence you admit a third type of 
relation besides the two you mentioned. 

Moreover, if two objects are identical, how can one of them 
be the hetu and the other the sadhya? Besides, the concept of a tree 
and the concept of a fig tree are not exactly identical. 

There are also actual inferences like that of today’s sunrise 
from yesterday’s sunrise, etc., where no question of cause-and-effect 
or identity can arise. 

To justify the mention of the fourfold relation of inference in 
the Vaisesikasatras, Vacaspati says that since not all relations are 
helpful for inference it may be desirable to mention some, at leas,t 
which do help inference. The list is not supposed to be exhaustive. 

In the same fashion one can dismiss the theory of sevenfold 
inference of the Samkhya school. 

Thus, the relation that the hetu must have to the sédhya is one 
which is natural and invariable (niyata). Smoke has such a relation 
with fire, but fire does not have such a relation with smoke since 
fire became related to smoke through the condition of wet fuel. 
Thus this relation is conditional (aupidhika) and not natural. 

We do not always doubt the invariableness of the relation of 
smoke with fire, since if we want fire we unquestioningly proceed 
to the place where we see smoke. Although there is the possibility 
of doubt, actual doubt does not always occur. 

(E174ff.) Objection: It is difficult to make valid inference of 
effect from its cause. When all the causal conditions (sdmagri) 
are present, the effect must follow, but in such cases the effect will 
be perceived rather than inferred. 

Answer: The effect, say the cloth, is not perceived at the mo- 
‘ment it is produced. It is perceived only in the third or fourth 
moment thereafter. Therefore, there is scope for inference in the 
first moment. Moreover, a person who is deaf can validly infer 
the sound—the effect—by beating a drum with his hand, 


TATPARYATIKA 465 


(Ex80ff.) Vacaspati quotes several verses from Digniga 
where the latter contends that what we infer is not the fire as a 
property of smoke, nor is it the relation of smoke with fire. What 
we infer, he says, is the place (defa) as qualified by the property fire. 

Vacaspati explains Uddyotakara’s view. What we infer is the 
fire as a special property of a special type of smoke. Fire does not 
characterize all sorts of smoke, but certain types of smoke which 
remain connected with their place of origin while going upwards. 

6. (E1g6ff.) Objection: When a southerner (who has not seen 
a camel), after hearing the description of a camel, ‘‘a camel is such- 
and-such an animal,” later on coming to the North sees and identifies 
an object as a camel, such identification cannot be said tobe through 
comparison, since the element of similarity is absent. If this identi- 
fying procedure is not a separate source of cognition but a sequence 
of verbal testimony (viz., description), perception, and inference 
(viz., the denotative relation between the word and the object 
camel is inferred), then the identification of gayal (i.e., a gavaya) 
through its similarity with a cow can be similarly explained. 

Answer: The word “similarity” (sédharmya) in the siatra com- 
prises (by an extension of meaning or laksan@) properties (dharma) 
in general, and not just similar properties. Thus even the said 
identification of a camel might be said to be through a separate 
instrument, 1.e., comparison, where general properties are given 
in the description. 

Unlike such words as “the sky,” etc. (i.e., singular terms), 
gayal is a common name or general term which refers not toa single 
object but to many, ie., this gayal, that gayal and so on. Thus the 
denotative relation between gayal and gayals is a bit indirect and 
complex inasmuch as it comprises the common character gayalness. 
The cognition of such a denotative relation is not possible until one 
of the relata, gayalness, is comprehended through perception. A 
verbal report expressing the similarity of a gayal to a cow is, however, 
unable to reveal the nature of gayalness. Hence perception aided 
by the memory of the verbal report is necessary for the full compre- 
hension of the denotative function. The ordinary description of a 
camel might, on the other hand, reveal the nature of camedlness, 
whereupon a separate instrument of cognition may not be necessary. 

7-8. (E201-07) Opponent (Dignaga): Verbal testimony is not 
a separate instrument of true cognition since we know it by a correct 
means through an inference such as “‘this speech is correct, because 
it comes from a reliable person,” 


466 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer: The purpose of the satra has been misunderstood. 
The validity of verbal testimony may be known through inference, 
but the object-complex expressed by the speech is not known by 
inference or by perception. 

Opponent: The speech, as the effect, lets us infer the speaker’s 
knowledge, which comprises the object-complex. 

Answer: If we just infer that the speaker has some knowledge 
since he speaks, it is not useful for revealing the object-complex. 
The object-complex is actually revealed by the speech (i.e., the 
utterance) by reminding us of the individual meanings of the different 
words and being helped by such properties as expectancy, appro- 
priateness, and connectedness. The knowledge of the speaker 
characterized by such an object-complex may be inferred later in 
order to prove the validity of speech. Although there is no invariable 
relation (avindbhava) between speech (i.e., words) and objects, they 
are related in some way so that one can make the other known, 
just as although the eye is different from blue color, it reveals blue 
color all the same. 

For details, Vacaspati refers to his own book called Tattvabindu. 


Topic LI: The Objects of Knowledge 

12. (P. 221) The sense organs are themselves not perceptible 
through the senses. They are inferrable as being the causes of 
particular sense perceptions. In this way the definition of each 
sense organ can be formed. Like the word pamkaja lotus, lite- 
rally born in mud ), words like ghrana etc., i.e., “ (organ of) smell,”’etc., 
combine their etymological meanings with their popular meanings. 
Since the general definition of sense organ will not apply to the sense- 
object-connection, the specific definition of each organ will not 
overextend to include such a connection. 

14. (Pp. 244ff.) According to Vacaspati the reference to 
“objects” in this séra is intended as a definition of the fourth prameya, 
ie., the objects of valid cognition. The rest of the sara supplies 
only certain details of information. This is meant for a friendly 
listener and not for a critical opponent, and hence the sdira has been 
stated in this imprecise manner. 

15. (Pp. 233ff.) Objection: To give synonyms is not to define 
a concept. Answer: There are 2 types of words: one refers to a class 
of individuals, such as ‘‘cow’”’; and the other denotes a particular 
object, such as “Caitra.” The former type is capable of supplying 
the differentiating mark and hence giving synonyms might be taken 
as providing the definition of some concept. 


TATPARYATIKA 467 


The Samkhya says: The buddhi itself is unconscious. But due 
to close proximity with the self which is unmodifiable but ever- 
conscious, the buddhi receives the image of consciousness and thereby 
reveals an object, just as the moon, having no light of its own but 
receiving light from the sun, reveals the object. Thus buddhi and 
consciousness are two different entities. 

Answer: Since consciousness is not modifiable there cannot be 
any reflection of it. Thus the buddhi cannot reflect consciousness 
in the way the moon reflects the light of the sun. Hence, conscious- 
ness, being unmodifiable, cannot accomplish anything either by 
itself or in collaboration with anything else, which means that objects 
can never be revealed. 

17. (P. 236) There are two types of activity. The first one 
(viz., operation of speech) causes knowledge and through it gives 
rise to merit or demerit. The second one causes action and can be 
subdivided into two: one being produced by the body and the other 
by the internal organ. 

20. (Pp. 237-38) Although fruition, i.e., pleasure and pain, 
results directly from activity, defects cause not only activity but also 
pleasure and pain through activity. This has been indicated by 
the additional word “‘defect”’ in the sara. The soil of the self being 
irrigated with the water of defect, the seeds of merit and demerit 
bear fruits of pleasure and pain. 

21. (P. 238) Badhand stands for the feeling of frustration. It 
refers primarily to pain and secondarily to the body, etc., which 
are necessary factors for the feeling of pain. Disinterestedness 
(nirveda) means the knowledge that there is no need of all these. 
Detachment (vairégya) means the knowledge (or attitude) of 
neutrality or indifference toward all these objects although they are 
presented to the senses. 

22. (Pp. 238ff.) Pleasure or happiness is really a quality of 
the self, and hence not identical with the self. Similarly, conscious- 
ness is a quality of the self. States of consciousness, i.e., judgments, 
emerge and go out of existence and hence they cannot be identified 
with the self which is supposed to be permanent and nonemergent. 
In the judgment “I know the pot” the three elements—the knower, 
the known object, and knowledge—are registered as distinct entities. 
Such registration cannot be due to error, since apart from possessing 
these emergent states of consciousness the self nowhere appears to be 
naturally conscious. Moreover, in the state of deep sleep (susuptz) 
no state of consciousness emerges, since no object is revealed. Thus 
this is a time when the self is without consciousness. 


468 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Topic IV: The Preliminaries of Argument 


23. (Pp. 243-60) Vacaspati follows Uddyotakara’s interpre- 
tation of the satra (1.1.23) dealing with doubt. 

Apprehension of a head, arms, etc., along with the nonappre- 
hension of crookedness, holes, etc, is the cognitional instrument 
which authenticates that something is a human being. The con- 
tradictory situation, i.e., apprehension of crookedness, holes, etc. 
along with the nonapprehension of head, arms, etc., is the instru- 
ment which contradicts that the object is a human being. Doubt 
can arise when there is the joint absence of both the authenticating 
instrument (sadhakapraména\ and the contradicting instrument 
(badhakapramana). It is this joint absence which is meant by the 
reference to ‘“‘perception or failure to perceive’ under the third of 
Uddyotakara’s headings (cf. p. 315). 

Objection: How can an uncommon or exclusive (asddhdrana) 
property give rise to doubt? The character of being produced by 
disjunction is a property which belongs exclusively to sound. This 
might give rise to a question or a desire to know what sound is. 
But it cannot give rise to doubt. 

Answer; The character of being produced by disjunction is 
absent from substance, quality, and motion, all of which are sub- 
sumed under the generic notion of existence (saita). Now, since 
sound is an existent entity and has this uncommon property, the 
following doubt may very well be in order: “Perhaps it is a quality, 
and not a substance or a motion,” or “perhaps it is a substance, and 
not a quality or a motion,” etc. Thus even an uncommon property, 
just by being absent from other well-known objects, may bring to 
mind various possibilities indirectly. 

On the point that some disjunctions might be produced by 
another disjunction, Vacaspati adds: The example might be pro- 
vided thus. Motion in the parts (say, in pot-halves) produces 
disjunction or separation of the pot-halves whereupon another 
separation of the pot-half from its previous location in dkdsa takes 
place. This second separation differs from the first in that it des- 
troys the original substance, the pot, and hence it is not directly 
produced by the motion but by the first disjunction, This example, 
is, however, vulnerable to objection, because one might insist that 
the movement in the parts itself produces the first as well as the 
second separation, just as movement in the petals of a lotus (when 
it is blooming) produces separation of the petals as well as the 
(second) separation of the petal from its previous location in akasa 


TATPARYATIKA 469 


(although it does not destroy the original substance, the lotus). 
Another plausible example is the following: Movement in the 
fingers produces separation of the fingers from the tree, which in 
its turn separates the hand (or the whole body) from the tree. Here 
the second separation cannot be said to be produced by the 
movement, which characterizes not the hand, or the body, but 
only the fingers. 

The uncommon or exclusive property of sound may now be 
explained as follows: It is the property of being preceded by only 
such disjunctions as are its direct causes. But the above example of 
disjunction is preceded also (in addition) by such other disjunctions 
(e.g., disjunction of the fingers from their location in dkdfa) as are 
not its causes. 


Topic V: Tenets 


31. (Pp. 268ff.) Vacaspati follows Uddyotakara and criticizes 
Vatsyayana’s interpretation of the sitra. The fourth type of tenet 
is that concept or proposition which is not mentioned in the Mydya- 
Siitras, but which is nevertheless examined later on. 


Topic VI: The Nature of an Argument 


33. (Pp. 267ff.) Uddyotakara criticizes Vasubandhu’s definition 
of the hypothesis (the paksa, in the Buddhists’ phraseology), as well 
as Dignaga’s definition. Vacaspati remarks that Dignaga adds 
several qualifications which are lacking in Vasubandhu’s definition. 
That those qualifications are redundant is proved by Vasubandhu’s 
silence about them, as well as by Uddyotakara’s arguments. 

34. (Pp. 274ff.) Vacaspati contends that while the specific 
definition (vifesalaksana) of hetu (the second member) is explicitly 
stated in the sara the general definition (séményalaksana) of it is also 
implied. The expression fetu is the definiendum, and sddhyasddhana 
(‘prover of what is to be proved”) is the definiens constituting the 
general definition. 

In explaining Uddyotakara’s remarks Vacaspati quotes and 
explains several verses which constitute Dignaga’s critique of the 
definition of hetu given in stra 1.1.34. Since the / is the same as 
the property common to the (positive) examples, the use of the 
ablative in the sitra is wrong (i.e., the “because” in the second 
member ‘‘Because that mountain possesses smoke’’). If hetu means the 
statement of the /, then, although the ablative can be justified, the 


470 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


definition becomes overextensive so as to include the fourth member. 
In fact, says Dignaga, it would be proper to say that the second mem- 
ber is the statement of the common property (only). Uddyotakara 
answered this objection, says Vacaspati. He also says that some of 
Dign@ga’s own definitions can be criticized in a similar manner. That 
the use of case-endings (such as ablative or genitive) depends on the 
desire of the speaker is admitted also by the Grammarians. 

35. (Pp. 281ff.) Here is an example of the negative (avita) 
hetu: The living body is not soulless, because otherwise it would have 
been lifeless. 

Objection: Why should one not infer affirmatively the existence 
of the self as the inherence cause of desires, etc., which in turn cause 
life, i.e. breathing, etc.? Answer: The affirmative inference reveals 
only that there is some inherence cause of desire, etc. To infer the 
self as a separate substance we need to use the inference through 
elimination (parifesa), and this type of inference involves the 
roundabout way of negative inference. 

Vacaspati quotes from Dignaga, who mentions and explains 
g types of hetu and pseudo-hetu. 

37. (Pp. 2g6ff.) Vacaspati criticizes the examples cited by 
Vatsyayana under NS I.1.36-37. Both belong to these “affirmative- 
negative” type of inference. But it is wrong to mention only the 
negative or dissimilar example where a corroborative example is 
available. Vatsyayana’s examples might suggest this wrong 
procedure. 

38. (Pp. 298ff.) To exhibit that the / is properly established 
through concomitance it is necessary to use the fourth step, the 
application, just as it is necessary to use the third step in order.to 
show the nature of the concomitance. 

39. (Pp. 300ff.) The fifth step, the conclusion, is not redundant 
because merely repetitive of the first. While the first puts forward 
a proposition tentatively requiring confirmation, the fifth puts it 
forward as fully established, uncontradicted, and unchallenged by 
any rival hypothesis. 


Topic VII: Nature of the Subsidiary Processes in Proving an Argument 


40. (Pp. 304ff.) Although doubt generally precedes the desire 
to know, sometimes it also follows. This second type of doubt, 
which follows the desire to know, plays a part in tarka. By tarka 
one of the two possibilities which the doubt takes notice of is to be 
accepted as established, the other being rejected. 


TATPARYATIKA 47) 


BOOK ONE: PORTION TWO 


Topic VIII: Controversy 


1. (Pp. 313ff.) How can one find fault with the valid instru- 
ment of cognition (pramana) and with reasoning (tarka)? Answer: 
One finds fault with the person misusing them, not with the valid 
instruments themselves, just as we find fault with the person who 
waves a sharp axe in the air and cuts nothing. 

3. (Pp. 320ff.) Objection: A view cannot be technically called 
a thesis (paksa) unless there is some attempt to establish it. Hence 
the view of a person who is cavilling is neither a thesis nor a counter- 
thesis (pratipaksa). Answer: The view in quesion may be said to be 
indirectly established by the refutation of the rival thesis. Or, 
capability of being a thesis is enough, actual attempts to establish 
it are not required. 


Topic IX: Fallacies of the Hetu 


5. (Pp. 336ff.) The two terms savyabhicéra and anatkantika 
are synonymous, and yet either one can be used as a definition of 
the other. To the person who knows the meaning of the one term, 
this will supply the definition of the other. 

6. (Pp. 338ff.) Vatsyayana’s example of the second type, 
i.e., the viruddha fallacy, cannot be taken to be a case of the k4alatya- 
ydpadisia also, because in the latter case the contradictory thesis is 
established through a stronger reason, while in the former both the 
propositions are equally plausible, one contradicting the other, and 
as a result there is indecision. 

8. (Pp. 344ff.) The sadhyasama is divided by Vacaspati into 
4 varieties: (1) svariépasiddha, where h is absent from p completely; 
(2) ekadeSasiddha, where h is partially absent from p; (3) asrayisiddha, 
where / is imaginary, and (4) anyathdsiddha, where the concomitance 
has not been established. 

g. (Pp. 346ff.) The kdldiyaydpadista fallacy is explained as 
follows. ala means time. The proper time for adducing the hetu 
is the time when we have a doubt about the occurrence of the sd@dhya 
in the paksa. But when the possibility of such occurrence is contra- 
dicted by perception or some such stronger evidence, doubt either 
is destroyed or cannot arise and consequently the A in such cases is 
called “‘mistimed.” 


472 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The Buddhist has explained “mistimed” wrongly as the hetu 
which is adduced late or not in the proper order. Example: “Sound 
is noneternal, like a pot.” Why? ‘Because it is created.” Here 
the statement of the example precedes the statement of the heiu. The 
Buddhist then goes on to criticize this wrong interpretation which he 
himself has suggested: If there is expectancy (akdmksa@) then this 
belated statement of the A is not mistimed; if there is not, it will be 
one of the ways of losing an argument (nigrahasthina). But this 
critique is based on a misunderstanding. 


Topic X: Quibble 


12. (Pp. 340ff.) When the denotation of a word like “‘cow,” 
etc. (i.e, a common name) is fixed by convention it does not refer 
to any particular individual directly “by grabbing it by the horn” ! 
The conventionally fixed meanings of such words are universals. 
The word in use refers to a particular individual through such a 
universal and through such circumstances as the context, the 
speaker, etc. Thus it is no fault of the speaker that such a general 
word has an ambiguous meaning which includes objects not intended 
by him. Itis rather the fault of the convention that fixes the meaning. 

16. (P. 353) In “the platforms are shouting,” ‘shouting’ 
supplies the predicate while “the platforms’ supplies the subject. 
Since the predicate constitutes the principal theme of assertion and 
the subject is somewhat secondary in importance, it is the subject 
which is interpreted as having a secondary sense. The quibble in 
this case negates the predicate. But in “the boy wears nava (new, nine) 
blanket (s),”’ the quibble negates not the whole of the predicate but 
simply part of it, viz., the number nine. In this way, the first type 
of quibble is to be differentiated from the third type. 


Topic XI: Mistakes in Argumentation Due to the Incapacity of the Arguer 


18. (Pp. 353ff.) A futile rejoinder is usually given unknowingly. 
But at times, when the atheist attacks the authority of the Vedas 
(for example), the person defending the authority of the Vedas 
might knowingly take recourse to a futile rejoinder just to stave off 
the atheistic tendency of the audience (in case he has forgotten for 
the time being the correct answer). 


TATPARYATIKA 473 
BOOK TWO: PORTION ONE 


Topic XII: Instruments of Knowledge 


16. (Pp. 364ff.) Objection: What is real is constant and uni- 
form in nature. What is not so is unreal. Snakeness is not real by 
comparison with a rope, since the rope sometimes appears as a snake 
and sometimes as a rope. Similarly, if something appears sometimes 
as a valid instrument of cognition, and sometimes as an object of 
such an instrument, then it is not real: thus such pedicates as “valid 
instrument” or “object of a valid instrument” do not describe real 
things. 

Answer: When we weigh gold, the balance is a valid instrument, 
i.e., a means for knowing the weight of gold. But when after doubt- 
ing the accuracy of a balance, we weigh a piece of gold (whose weight 
has been ascertained by a reliable balance) by the balance in question, 
the whole procedure is designed to prove the accuracy of that 
balance. In that case, the balance itself becomes the object of an 
instrument, and not an instrument itself. 

Objection: If we can know the valid instrument without the 
help of any further instrument of cognition, then why should you 
not concede that the objects (prameya) can also be grasped without 
any instrument? Otherwise we run into either an infinite regress 
or a paradox of cutting a knife with itself. Answer: No. One 
particular instrument is grasped with the help of another particular 
instrument as the instrument for that grasping. There is no infinite 
regress, because it is not the case that an instrument of knowing must 
always be known first in order that it may act as instrument. 


Topic XV: The Whole 


32. (Pp. 380-400) Vacaspati gives a long and elaborate argu- 
ment to show that the whole exists as something different from its 
parts. 

Objection: Everything that resides in something else can do so 
either in all parts of that thing or in some parts of it. This cannot be 
said of the whole because we would have to speak of parts of parts. 

Answer: These alternatives are not applicable to a material 
substance occurring in another material substance. When there is 
no gap between the atoms of the one and those of the other, we 
might say that one occurs in the other depending upon the popular 
use. Actually the whole might be said to occur in parts by its own 


474 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nature (svaripatas), just as the thread of a garland might be said 
to occur in the flowers by its own nature. The difference lies in this: 
In the garland case there are parts of the thread also which reside 
in the flowers, while in the former this feature is absent. 

Objection: ‘To assert the reality of wholes leads to the following 
contradictions. (a) If only the hand moves, the whole (body) 
can be said to move and not to move (since the legs are not moving). 
(b) If when a part moves the whole is said not to move, the whole 
and the parts cannot be said to be related by inherence (technically, 
there will be yutasiddhi, “separable connection,” between them). 
(c) When one part is covered, the whole will not be apprehended 
since some part is covered, and will be apprehended since other 
parts are visible. (d) Ifthe whole is said to be apprehended through 
the grasping of all the parts then none but the omniscient will be able 
to grasp it, and if it can be grasped through the grasping of only some 
parts then we shall always be able to apprehend a very large thing 
by seeing just a tiny part of it. (e) When one part is colored red, 
the whole might appear as red and not red at the same time. 

Answer: (a) The whole (body) does not move when the hand 
moves, because the whole is different from the parts. (b) If “sepa- 
rably connected” means simply different, then we agree with you 
on the point. But if the word means “‘to exist as separated,” then 
we disagree. The whole cannot exist apart from the parts (which 
means that there is the relation of inherence connecting them), 
although it is possible that while a part moves the whole might not 
move. (c) Although a part is covered, there is no nonapprehension 
of the whole since other parts are visible. (d) Largeness is a kind 
of size belonging to the body (whole) and hence a quality of the 
whole. Since the quality and what is qualified are different accord- 
ing to the Nyaya, we need not (although sometimes we may) grasp 
largeness as soon as we grasp the body (whole). (e) Diversity in 
the objects is established through the diversity of our experiences. 
Since red color and its absence are perceived side by side and not 
at the same point of space and time, there is no contradiction. 

Objection: That which resides in many must be manifold 
(ndna). Thus the whole, which is said to reside in many parts, 
must be manifold, i.e. must not be one and the same everywhere. 

Answer: To be one and to reside in many are not contradic- 
tory properties. 

(Pp. 400ff.) Odjection: Universals (sdémdnya) like cowness, 
etc., are figments of the imagination. If cowness were real then 
everything would be called a cow since you suppose cowness to exist 


TATPARYATIKA 475 


everywhere. If cowness does not exist everywhere, how can there 
be any connection between cowness and a cow when a new cow is 
born ? 

Answer: Just as there are discrete entities (according to some 
Buddhists) like color, taste, smell, etc., which can exist at the same 
point of time, or just as there are (according to Vaigesika) the enti- 
ties time, space, akdfa, and selves which are ubiquitous but distinct 
and not mutually related, similarly cowness, etc., can exist every- 
where without being related to everything. Thus everything should 
not be called a cow. “A cow is just born” is to be interpreted in 
philosopher’s language as ‘‘an individual is just determined 


(avachinna) by cowness and inherence.”’ 


Topic XVI: Inference 


37. (Pp. 4oe2ff.) Vatsyayana’s two examples, viz., inferring 
rain from the fullness of the river and inferring the peacock from 
its shouting, are both, according to Vacaspati, examples of the 
Sesavat type of inference. To infer future rain from the moving of 
the ants with their eggs is a debatable example. 


Topic XVII: Present Time 


39. (Pp. 403ff.) The body which is connected with time- 
calibration marked by a larger number of sunsets and sunrises is 
called “old” in comparison with the body which is connected with 
time-calibration marked by a smaller number of sunsets and sun- 
rises and which as a result is called “young.” These properties, 
youth and old age, are produced by the connection of those bodies 
with big-time. 

Opponent: Such properties may very well be due to the con- 
nection of those bodies with the motions of the sun without there 
being any intermediate entity like time to connect them. 

Answer: No. There is no other ubiquitous entity except time 
to connect them. The service of the sky, self, etc., cannot be requi- 
sitioned for this purpose, because they are accepted as entities for 
different purposes. Similarly, our notions of simultaneity, slowness, 
etc. are due to big-time. 


Topic XIX: Verbal Testimony 


52-56. (Pp. 412ff.) Unlike a hetu, such as smoke, from which 
we infer, say, fire, words or the meanings of words are not such that 


476 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


we can infer the meaning of the sentence from them. Thus under- 
standing of the meaning of the sentence is not an inferential 
cognition. 

Objection: Sentence meaning is nothing else but the mutual 
connection of the component word meanings. Such connection 
is inferred from the individual word meanings, of which we are 
reminded by the individual words; this process is aided by the 3 
properties of syntactic expectancy, semantic competency, and 
proximity in space and time. 

Answer: No. The words themselves are competent to produce 
the understanding of the sentence through the intermediate operation 
(avantaravyapara) by which they produce the memory of their 
meanings. The 3 properties—syntactic expectancy and the others— 
are mere accessories to this process and their existence is recognized 
only when the sentence meaning is understood. Thus, since words 
cannot characterize the subject of the proposed inferential judgment, 
we cannot say that sentence meaning is inferentially understood. 
Moreover, it is useless to try to construe the proposed inferential 
judgment rigorously so as to avoid defects, since we see that people 
do not consciously apply the process of inference to learn the mean- 
ing of a sentence, but understand the sentence meaning quickly after 
hearing the utterance. The validity of such a scriptural sentence, 
such as “heaven is such-and-such a pleasure’’ is, in fact, inferred 
from the trustworthiness of the speaker. But this does not imply 
that the meaning of the sentence also is inferentially known. 

The relationship between word and meaning is not natural 
(svuabhdvika), but is fixed by convention (and such convention is 
introduced by God at the beginning of the era). Otherwise, the 
same word yava cannot express barley for Aryans and pepper for 
Mlecchas. 


BOOK TWO: PORTION TWO 


Topic XXI: Defense of the Fourfoldness of the Instruments of Knowledge 


6. (Pp. 438-39) Sabara’s example of presumption is criti- 
cized. Miméaémsaka: From ‘‘Caitra who is alive is not in this room” 
we know that Caitra must be outside through presumption, which 
is a separate instrument of cognition. It isnot inference, for here 
we have an apparent contradiction in the premises, viz., ‘‘Caitra is 
in this world which includes this room too” and “Caitra is not in 
this room.” Vdcaspati’s answer: Here one part speaks of an un- 


TATPARYATIKA 477 


qualified presence of Caitra while the other part speaks of a qualified 
(sévacchinna) absence of him. Thus there is no contradiction. It 
is actually a case of inference with a negative premise. 

12. (P. 440) Deviating from Vatsyayana, Vacaspati speaks 
of 4 types of absence. First it is divided into 2: mutual absence and 
relational absence. The second is again subdivided into 3: prior 
absence, posterior absence (or destruction), and constant absence. 


Topic XXII: Sound is Noneternal 


13. (Pp. 447) Opponent: The same sound is recognized as 
different on different occasions. The different properties, such as 
loudness, sharpness, etc., do not belong to sound naturally, but 
are conditioned by some external element. 

Answer: No external element, by virtue of which the above 
properties can be said to be conditioned, is experienced or otherwise 
shown to accompany sound. 

Opponent: Even if the said properties naturally belong to sound 
and are distinct, the qualificand, i.e., sound, cannot be said to be 
distinct or different on different occasions. 

Answer: Neither can we say that the qualificand, sound, is the 
same everywhere. Just as recognition of the same property cowness 
is possible in different loci, i.e., the individual cows, so recognition 
of the same property g-ness (the sound universally present in 
utterances of the syllable “‘ga’’) is possible even when thier loci 
(the utterances) are different. 


Topic XXIV: The Meaning of Words 


57. (Pp. 46off.) Vacaspati thinks that the opponent here is an 
upholder of the sphofa theory. The opponent says: Letters do not 
denote objects, since they cannot have any connection with the ob- 
jects either singly or collectively. Nor can it be said that the last 
letter being aided by the memory impressions of previous letters 
heard in order can denote objects, since a memory impression of 
a letter can bring about the memory of the letter only, not of an 
object. Thus we admit that the word is different from the consti- 
tuent letter sounds that we hear, and that it is called sphota which 
becomes meaningful and denotes objects. 

Answer: Meaningful words consist of letter sounds themselves, 
and not of anything like sphota, since we do not perceive anything 
but the cluster of letter sounds when the meaning is revealed by a 


478 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


word, A cluster of letter sounds when it gives rise to a unified mean- 
ing (i.e., denotes an object) is called a word. 

Although this position involves logical circularity, Vicaspati 
gets around it by saying that the psychological procedure need not 
be circular. 

It is also possible to have two different words (e.g., nadi— 
“river” and dina—‘‘poor’’) from the same letters by changing the 
order, even if we do not accept an intermediate entity like sphota. 
A word is not merely the letter sounds, but the letter sounds as 
conditioned (upahita) by their order of arrangement, by their decrease 
or increase, etc. If this condition (upadhi) differs, we can very well 
have different words. 

65. (Pp. 483ff.)!2 Opponent: Words refer to universals, but 
universals are imaginative constructions. To say universals are 
real leads to the following absurdities. (a) Since cowness is accepted 
as eternal it cannot be contained in noneternal particular cows as 
its substratum. To have a substratum means to be acted upon in 
some way or other. How can an eternal entity be acted upon? (b) 
How can the same particular, i.c., the same pure particular, contain 
different universals like treeness, simSapd-ness, substanceness, etc. ? 
Thus universals are of the nature of the exclusion of what is other 
(tadanyavyavrtti, or apoha\. This is proved by the following fact: 
cowness can be connected with both assertion (“this is a cow’) and 
denial (“that is not a cow’). It is also felt as involving an exclu- 
sion (uvpdaovrtti). 

Answer: That universals like cowness are real has been proved 
in NS Jl.2.58. There is a natural relation between cowness and 
particular cows. Hence, cowness does not need to be acted upon in 
order to have a substrate. Nor is it impossible for different universals 
to occur in one thing, because one may very well be inclusive of the 
other. “This is a cow’ means ‘‘Cowness is connected with the present 
individual,’? and ‘This is not a cow” implies ‘““Cowness is connected 
with a past or a future individual (although it is not connected with 
the present individual).” 

Moreover, to explain the fact that the activity of a person 
becomes successful when directed toward an external real object, 
while the judgment that prompts such activity grasps only an internal 
fiction (i.e., a universal), you have to say that we proceed to obtain 
the external because of our overlooking the difference between the 
internal and the external (bhedagraha). But if the real point-instant 
(or external pure particular) is not at all grasped by the so-called 
constructive cognition (vikalpa), how can such overlooking be possible ? 


TATPARYATIKA 479 


Or else, we might overlook the difference of the particular cow (the 
pure particular) from any other imaginarily constructed thing in 
the world. In addition, the imagined object should also be re- 
garded as momentary and unique on each occasion, since it 
changes with every change in the activity of our constructive imagina- 
tion. Otherwise, it would be a product of imgination. Thus, just 
as each unique moment of pleasure and pain cannot be expressed 
in language, the imagined object cannot be expressed in language. 
And what is not expressible in language cannot be the object of the 
constructive perception (vikalpa). Hence the so-called imagined 
object cannot be grasped by constructive perception. 


BOOK THREE: PORTION ONE 
Topic XXV: The Self Is Not the Sense Organs 


1. (Pp. 497ff.) Opponent: Our constructive cognition of the 
self (dtmavikalpa) does not grasp an external self as its object, because 
there is no such thing as an external self. 

Answer: If there were no such thing as an external self, you 
could not negate its connection with our cognition. If you say 
that we impute externality to the unreal self through error and then 
deny it later, then we answer that we cannot impute something 
without knowing what it is that we are imputing it to. And if the 
unreal self is said to be known somehow, we cannot say that it is 
entirely nonexistent. 


BOOK THREE: PORTION TWO 
Topic XXXII: Destruction and Production 


10. (Pp. 541ff.) Buddhist: Everything that exists is momentary,.- 
just as our body is in a flux of continuous change and decay. The 
growth and decay of our bodies is perceptible, which indicates that 
it changes every moment. Moments should be conceived as the 
smallest indivisible unit of time. 

(Pp. 546ff.) Buddhist: The object, born of its cause, will be 
either decaying or undecaying. Ifdecaying, it should decay without 
waiting for any cause to produce its decay. If undecaying, nothing 
can destroy it, since nothing can destroy a thing’s nature. Moreover, 
is destruction different from the destroyed object or not? If not 
different, then the object (being identical with destruction) must 


480 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


continue to be, i.e., continue to be causally efficacious. If different, 
then let there be destruction and it cannot possibly do any harm to 
the object which is there already. Moreover, if destruction is a 
must for the object, it will happen without depending on anything. 

Answer: Similar dialectical arguments can very well be direct- 
ed against the Buddhist theory of momentariness, according to 
which objects are self-destructible at every moment. E.g., does 
destructibility mean identity with destruction ? Or capability 
for being destroyed? If the first, the object supposed to be des- 
troyed will be indestructible and hence eternal, since destruction 
cannot be further destroyed. If the second, it is all right with us, 
the Naiyayikas. 

Just as it is the nature of fire that it causes burning (and not 
cooling), similarly it is the nature of destruction that when it appears, 
the object (e.g., the pot) disappears. Just as production of the 
sprout means disappearance of its prior absence, so destruction of 
the pot means disappearance of the pot. It is true that destruction 
is a must for the object, but this does not imply that destruction is 
automatic and not caused by some external element. What is 
supposed to be the function of the hammer which is seen to smash 
the pot? If destruction is natural and happens at every moment, 
why, then, do we see, with our physical eyes, the pot continuing for 
an extended period until the hammer falls on it ? 


(Pp. 551ff.) Buddhist: lo be means to do something or other, 
i.e., to be causally efficacious. Everything that is causally efficacious 
produces its effect either simultaneously (yugapat) or nonsimulta- 
neously (krama), there being no third alternative. Now if a stable 
(sthira) object is causally efficacious it must produce its effects simul- 
taneously, i.e., all at a time and not one after another, because a 
truly competent (samartha) object must go to work without waiting 
for anything else. If it has to wait for accessories it is not the really 
competent one but the accessories are. In the same way it can be 
shown that the stable object cannot produce its effect nonsimul- 
taneously either. Thus, the stable entity is a myth. Everything is 
in a flux. Although the seed is not seen to sprout at each moment, 
we conclude that the seed which is efficacious to produce a sprout 
is the seed at that particular moment when in collaboration with 
air, earth, and heat it is going to sprout at the next moment. And 
a new seed comes into existence each moment as long as the seed 
appears to remain without sprouting. 

Answer: We might also say: everything that is efficacious 
becomes so either depending on something (sdépeksa) or without 


TATPARYATIKA 481 


depending on anything, there being no third alternative. If the 
ultimate seed-moment which produces a sprout in the next moment 
does so independently, the penultimate seed-moment which produces 
the ultimate one will be independent, and by the same token all 
the previous seed-moments will be so independent. Thus, let the 
farmers sit idle without cultivating the land. It is better, therefore, 
to admit that the ultimate seed-moment must sprout depending on 
something. Even a truly competent entity may wait until the 
elements on which it depends are there before going to work. If 
you say that the accessories are useless, there cannot be plurality 
of effects from the same seed-moment. You also admit that the 
seed-moment not only produces the sprout-moment but also the 
earth-moment, water-moment, etc. Thus, since waiting for 
accessories is not possible if the entity is momentary, we conclude 
that some entities stay for several moments. 


BOOK FOUR: PORTION ONE 


Topic XXXVII: Causation 


21. (Pp. 595-96) To the question “If God is full of mercy, 
why does He make people suffer?” WVacaspati answers: Although 
God is full of mercy, He is powerless to change the natural law 
(niyati) that bad effects must follow from bad actions. 

Seeing some products, such as a pot, etc., being produced by 
some sentient being or other, we doubt whether other products, 
such as trees, mountains, the universe etc., are also produced by some 
sentient being or not. This doubt eventualiy leads us to infer the 
existence of God as their creator. 

Objection: Sentience is possible only when there is a body, 
sense organs, etc. But since in the case of the supposed creator 
of trees, the universe, etc., bodies and so forth are not obtainable, 
your inference is wrong. 

Answer: Bodies, sense organs, and the like are required only 
for the kind of sentience which is noneternal and is a product. 
Since our creator is supposed to have eternal and noncaused know- 
ledge, bodies, etc., are not needed. Such knowledge is not possible 
in human beings with limited power. Instead of positing many 
supernatural beings for creating different entities like trees, moun- 
tains, etc., we apply the logic of parsimony (/dghava) and infer one 
omniscient being, i.e., God, 


482 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Nonperception of God cannot establish His nonexistence, 
since (unlike the hare’s horn) God is incapable of being perceived. 

Objection: An inference contradicting your inference may be 
established. Trees, earth, etc., are not made by an omniscient 
Being, because they are existent, like a pot, which is existent and 
not made by an omniscient Being. Hence your inference is wrong. 

Answer: Your counter inference implies that these trees, moun- 
tains, etc. are made by nonomniscient Beings. But this is wrong, 
since it is not possible for human beings like us with limited know- 
ledge and power to create this big universe. 


Topic XXXVI: Some Things Eternal, Others Not 


4t. (Pp. 615ff.) Opponent: Everything is identical with the 
One, Brahman. Diversified names and forms are not different 
from the self-illuminating consciousness which grasps them. Cons- 
ciousness and its object are identical in principle; their difference 
is only an illusory appearance created by avidya. The conscious 
subject is not different from consciousness, self-revelation being its 
very nature. Thus, undifferentiated consciousness is the only reality. 

Answer: The plurality and diversity of objects are established 
by our uncontradicted perception. Hence scriptural passages like 
“There is only one and not many,” etc., have to be explained by 
taking recourse to secondary meanings. 


BOOK FOUR: PORTION TWO 
Topic XLVI: The Falsity of Everything Refuted 


33. (Pp. 655ff.) Opponent: There is no external reality apart 
from the inner flow of consciousness (vijfidna). ‘The so-called external 
object grasped by consciousness is not different from consciousness 
itself. The object (artha) can neither become the content (vsaya) 
of consciousness just because of its existence—for even objects which 
are nonexistent, such as a hare’s horn, can be such a content—nor 
can it become the content of consciousness by being the cause of 
a consciousness-moment, since the eyes cause perception but certainly 
do not form its content. Nor can the object become the content 
just because of the fact that it is produced by the same causal com- 
plex as produces the consciousness-moment, since the past as well 
as the future object can very well become the content although 
they are nonexistent (at the present) and hence not produced at 


TATPARYATIKA 483 


that moment. For similar reasons, the object cannot become the 
content of consciousness just by being the container of the result 
(phala\ of consciousness. ‘Thus, in fact, consciousness is formless 
(ntrakara) and cannot reveal any external object, nor can it establish 
such an object. Even if you accept that a state of consciousness 
has a form (dkéra) which is identical with its content and that the 
content being (i) caused by and (ii) similar to the object proves 
that there are exernal objects, we answer no. Even this theory of 
sakdravijidna (consciousness having a form) cannot establish the 
external object. 

If you say that a state of consciousness which grasps blue color, 
being a temporary happening, must be dependent upon something 
else, namely the external object blue, the answer is still no. The 
temporality of such a happening would also be possible if that state 
of consciousness is produced by the previous state in the same series 
of consciousness-states. Since each state in this series is unique, 
there is no knowing which state will produce what. 

Answer: There are external objects. As long as you cannot 
show beyond doubt that the grasped object and the grasping 
consciousness are always related by identity (abheda), your point 
is not proved. Some state consciousness does grasp the blue object 
as also something big and separate. This bigness and separate- 
ness cannot belong to the consciousness itself, for this would be ob- 
viously absurd. Thus you have to admit that something else is also 
revealed in consciousness apart from consciousness itself. If you 
say that since the (external) object and consciousness are two entirely 
unrelated principles it is wrong to say that one belongs to the other, 
we reply that just as a relation can be said to belong to its relatum, 
similarly the object revealed can be said to belong to consciousness 
and no further relation is needed to connect them. 

Vacaspati adds further: The theory that since the object is 
revealed only when the cognition is revealed the two are identical, 
is also wrong. If cognition of the blue means not only the revela- 
tion of blue but also the revelation of the cognition itself, then it 
invites the absurdity of the same thing being the action as well as the 
object of that action. Revelation of the cognition is one thing in- 
asmuch as it is a mental perception, and the revelation of the object 
is another thing since it is, sometimes, a sensory perception. Vacas- 
pati refers to his book WVydyakanika for further arguments, 


484 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


23. ADHYAYANA 


Durveka Miégra, the author of the Buddhist work Dharmottara- 
pradipa, quotes this author as having written a work entitled 
Rucitiké, which was probably a commentary on the Nydyabhasya. 
The passage Durveka quotes deals with Adhyayana’s views on the 
analysis of the first member of the argument form, the hypothesis. 
Adhyayana appears to think that properly this member ought not 
to be construed as speaking of an object with its property, since 
initially all we cognize is a place with a property and only later do 
we remember the pervasion and so identify the object for what it is. 
Thus the usual form in which the hypothesis is given—‘‘that moun- 
tain has fire”—is “only in order to establish confidence in the object 
to be established,’ to follow Umesh Mishra’s translation.? 


24. VITTOKA 


“Ratnakirti mentions the view of one Astika Naiyayika named 
Vittoka, in connection with Igvarasiddhi in his [fvarasdédhanadasana. 
There is a long passage attributed, as it seems, to Vittoka. Though 
it is the first time that we have come across his name, yet from the 
nature of the quotation and the importance given to his view by 
Ratnakirti, it seems that Vittoka wrote some treatise on Ny4ya directly, 
or wrote a commentary on the Sdira or the Nydyabhasya. While 
quoting the opinion of Vittoka, Ratnakirti refers to him later than 
Vacaspati, and so he may be placed after Vacaspati. 

“Vittoka is a peculiar name, like Umveka, or Uvveka for 
Mandana Mishra. Either this is a pseudo-name of some author in 
which case he may be a Maithila, or he might have been a Kashmiri 
where such names were very common and which was a centre of 
Nyayaéastra between the 7th and the gth centuries.’”! 


25. NARASIMHA 


This author is also referred to in the same work of Ratnakirti 
mentioned in the preceding quotation. Mishra’ estimates his date 
as prior to that of Trilocana, on the basis of the order in which 
Ratnakirti lists their names; Steinkellner,? on the other hand, gives 
the roth century. 


NYAYAKANDALI 485 


26. SRIDHARA 


This writer flourished in A.D. 991, according to his own testi- 
mony. He is celebrated by Bengalis as the “‘first Bengali writer on 
philosophy.’! He tells us he came from ‘‘Bhurigrestha in Rarha 
(modern Bhursut) in Howrah district,” and identifies his parents 
as Baladeva and Acchoka, his patron as Pandudasa, a Kayastha. 
Gopinath Kaviraj? finds that Sridhara wrote four books—a Vedanta 
work entitled Advayasiddhi, a Mimamsa work entitled Tattvaprabodha, 
awork called Tattvasamvadini, and the Nydyakandali, on Pragastapada’s 
Padarthadharmasamgraha. Kaviraj thinks that this work is also called 
Samgrahatika, and Sridhara certainly refers to such a work but since 
the reference is in the Nydyakandali it seems unlikely they are the 
same. V. Varadachari® identifies this Samgrahatikd as the Vyomavati, 
summarized above. Kaviraj* also makes the surprising statement 
that the Nydyakandali was popular in Kashmir and used by scholars 
in Mithila, but not used in Bengal.® 


In the summary which follows, “E” refers to the edition by 
Durgadhara Jha Sarma (B 1056), ‘““T’’ to the translation by 
Ganganatha Jha (Bl1053). Numbering corresponds to the 
Prasgastapada summary. 


NYAYAKANDALI on Pragastapada’s PADARTHA- 
DHARMASAMGRAHA 


Summary by Karl H. Poiter 


Introductory Section. (El-3; T 1-2) The commentary begins 
with a salutation to God, the Highest Purusa. This is followed by 
a discussion of the function of such an invocation; an objector points 
out that an invocation cannot alone remove obstacles to the success 
of a philosophical work, since such worthy commentaries as the 
Nydyabhasya and Mimémsasitrabhasya lack an invocation. Sridhara’s 
reply to this is that the authors did offer an invocation. (Presumably 
he thinks they were lost.) 

(E6-8; T6-7) The purpose of Pragastapada’s work is to help 
the reader get his desired end, namely release. The views of other 
schools about the nature of release are listed. (1) Release is the 
cessation of knowledge together with cessation of vdsands or traces. 
This is wrong, for it would involve self-annhiilation. (2) Release 
is the gaining of pure, contentless knowledge upon the destruction 


486 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of the vdsanas. This is rejected, since the gaining of knowledge 
must result from the gathering together of traces (bhdvand) and this 
presupposes a permanent locus for the traces; if the locus were evane- 
scent, then that which is bound is different from that which becomes 
free. (3) Release occurs when, after the purusa and prakrti are 
discriminated and the prakrti ceases functioning, purusa remains in 
its natural state. This is rejected, since prakrti can never cease func- 
tioning, being intrinsically active, and it is not true that prakrti func- 
tions only for the purpose of purusa and stops when puru;a’s purposes 
have been satisfied. (4) Release is eternal and pertect pleasure. 
We are promised a refutation of this later. 

(Eg-15; T8-12) The proper definition of release is: the 
absolute cessation of what is disadvantageous (ahita). The “‘logi- 
cians’ (tarkikas) try to prove this by a syllogism, but it is fallacious; 
the real proof is from the Upanishads (vedanta). This brings forth 
objections about the authority of scripture. Sridhara’s view on this 
is that scripture is authoritative on questions the other instruments 
of knowledge are incapable of answering; that its authority is in- 
dependent of the speaker’s trustworthiness just as perception’s au- 
thority is independent of the trustworthiness of the sense organ, 
though in both cases we check the instrument to make sure it is 
functioning properly; that scriptural statements need not always 
be interpreted as injunctive, and may refer to things even though 
those things are not introduced in connection with anything to be 
done or accomplished. 

2. (E16-18; T13-15) In order to meet an objection of Man- 
dana Miéra that to view liberation as the cessation of a_ specific 
quality is to view it as self-annihilation, Sridhara argues that des- 
truction of pain results in the self’s true nature (svaripa) being 
realized. If someone should object that liberation as defined here 
means complete absence of pleasure and so cannot be desired by 
men, Sridhara answers that because pleasures are fleeting and always 
mixed with pain men will desire their cessation also. 

Absence (abhdva) is omitted from Prafastapada’s list of cate- 
gories, not because there is no such category, but because it is 
dependent (paratanira) on the other 6 categories of being (bhdva). 

(Er8-19; T16-17) Since the Vaisesikasaitras say that merit 
(dharma) leads to release, and Pragastapada says that true knowledge 
does, there is an inconsistency, and this text resolves it. The know- 
ledge produces merit, which in turn produces release. It is the 
renunciation of objects, produced by the aversion to them, which we 
gain from understanding those objects fully, that leads to liberation. 


NYAYAKANDALi 487 


3. (E21-26; T19-22) Objection: There is another substance, 
namely darkness (¢amas). It has the qualities of color, number, 
size, separateness, farness and nearness, contact and disjunction. 
Answer: Darkness is not a substance because its atoms do not have 
touch and therefore cannot combine to form a substance. Objector: 
Then let us define darkness as the absence of light. Answer: This 
will not do either. Black is a positive color, and not the absence of 
color. Furthermore, an absence is only knowable when its counter- 
positive has heen perceived in the locus where we now find the 
absence; but in the case of darkness, its counterpositive, light, has 
not been found to occupy the locus, as we sometimes find darkness 
independently of any previous knowledge of light. Therefore, 
Sridhara concludes that darkness must be a color. He explains 
away the apparent presence of qualities in this color, and explains 
the satra which speaks of darkness as absence of light as being intended 
to identify the conditions for the perception of the color black. 

7. (E30-36; T26-30) The precise sense in which being (sattd) 
“functions only to assimilate” is this: though being does differen- 
tiate itself from other things (like anything else) yet it cannot diffe- 
rentiate its own locus from any (positive) thing. Objection: We 
should define ‘“‘being’”’ as the character a thing has by virtue of being 
known by an instrument of knowledge. Answer: Then there would 
be mutual dependence, since a thing cannot be known by an_instru- 
ment of knowledge unless it exists, but in your view it cannot exist 
unless it is known by an instrument. Objector: No, what I mean 
is that existent things should be defined as knowable by valid ins- 
truments. Answer: This is verbal; as long as you admit some charac- 
ter common to all positive things I am with you. Objector: But I 
get no common idea at all when I inspect a mountain and a mustard- 
seed; they seem quite dissimilar. Answer: Well, you will admit 
that both a mountain and a mustard-seed are different from a non- 
entity, so in that respect they are similar. Objection: The mark of 
being is the capacity of a thing to do something for a purpose 
(arthakriyakaritva). Answer: No, on pain of infinite regress; for the 
action the thing does must have another action to bring it into 
existence, etc. 

Objection: Since when we observe, say, fire and water we are 
not aware of any similarity between them, it follows that there is 
no such universal as substanceness. Answer: Their common charac~ 
teristic is merely their capacity to be independently cognized. The 
mere assignation of a conventional name or description provides 
the basis for the recognition of a universal. True, not every person 


488 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


can see individuals as falling under appropriate universals: for 
example, one who is not aware that a person was born of Brahmin 
parents may not see him as a Brahmin. But that in no way mitigates 
against their being universals. 

In speaking of lower universals as both universal and indivi- 
duating (visesa), Sridhara says, Pragastapada is using the term 
““universal”’ in a primary sense but “individuating” only in a secon- 
dary sense. 

9g. (E37-38; T32-34) The term “inseparable” (yutasiddha) 
is explained: it means that two things have separate loci, that is, 
that the loci of the two things, though they may be distinct, never- 
theless always occur together as “‘container and contained.” This 
restriction is supposed to exclude the pair merit and _ pleasure, 
which always occur in the same locus, a self, but are not related by 
the container-contained relationship. The requirement also ex- 
cludes the pair consisting of a thing and the word denoting it, since 
a word is not “in” the thing but rather expresses the thing. 

15. (E44; T41) Objection: The text here speaks of a “‘relation- 
ship with existence.”’ Now this thing that is related to existence: 
is it already existent or not before it comes into this relation? If so, 
then existence does no work, since we have presupposed it. If the 
thing is not existent, like the hare’s horn, then we certainly cannot 
have existence related to it. Answer: Since eternal things are begin- 
ningless, there can be no time before their arising with respect to 
which the objector’s question could arise. As for noneternal things, 
it is their prior nonexistence which causes them to become related 
to existence. 

17. (E47-48; T44) The “‘etc.”’ at the end of the text includes 
the dimension of the dyad, the all-pervadingness of akafa, time, 
space, and self, the last sound, the dimension of the internal organ, 
before and after, the separateness of two things and the dimension of 
the whole; these things cannot be causal conditions. 

1g. (E49-53; T45-49) As for why universals do not have 
universals inhering in them, Sridhara merely says this would be 
“undesirable.” Individuators have no universals, since if they 
did there would be an infinite regress, for we should need an indi- 
viduator to tell which class a given individuator belongs to, etc. 
And likewise if inherence had a universal we should have to 
postulate another inherence to connect inherence with its universal, 
ad infinitum. 

Objection: If universals do not have universals in them, then 
how can you say that cowness and horseness, e.g., both have existence ? 


NYAYAKANDALI 489 


Answer: We impose (adhydropa) it on them. Objector: But this 
imposition is thus erroneous ! Answer: Certainly it is; who denies 
it? To attribute unity to diverse things is obviously to have a false 
idea about them. Odyector: Well, then, by the same token the 
attribution of existence to substances and the members of the other 
categories is equally an imposition. Answer: No, for we find that 
existence applies directly to these things, and thus it is not a matter 
of imposition. 

“Are marked through knowledge’—1i.e., universals’ existence 
can only be proved by appealing to our judgments, while in the case 
of other things, such as substances, we know them through their 
effect, etc., as well. 

That universals are not effects is known through perception. 
We perceive universals along with the individuals instantiating them. 
Likewise inherence is not an effect, for how could inherence be 
produced either before, at the same time as, or after its relata ? There 
would be the oddity that a relation would lack a relatum, or else the 
relation would not relate its relata (in the case where they are 
produced together). 

When the text says universals are not causes it means to men- 
tion inherence and noninherence causes. Universals can be instru- 
mental causes—e.g., in the production of judgments. 

Objection: How can universals lack universalness, since how 
otherwise can we explain our class-concept of universals ? Answer: 
That concept is due to an upddhi inhering in many individuals. 

23. (E57-58; 152-53) Objection: Since farness and nearness 
are, according to you, the largeness and smallness of the size of a 
series of things in contact, you do not need farness and nearness as addi- 
tional qualities. Answer: It is not only the comparative sizes, but 
also the direction from the original locus, that counts in estimating 
distance. If ais between 6 and c, then we may not be able to tell 
whether 6 or ¢ is nearer. Both 6 and c must be in the same 
direction. 

It might be thought that impetus (vega) is a series of motions, 
but this will not do, since we do not get the idea from slow move- 
ment. Then is it perhaps that the idea is based on quick appearances 
of moments of movement? No, for in that case, as in e.g., the 
fire-wheel (dldtacakra), we have no idea of successive moments of 
motion but we do have the idea of impetus. 

24. (E58; T54) Actually dkdsa is not the locus of all things, 
as the text says: what is intended is that it is the common locus of 
all composite things since it is the locus of all contacts. 


490 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


25. (E58-62; 155-58) The term “elemental”? is merely a 
conventional classification and is not based on a universal. 

32. (E65; T60) The 5 qualities of place and time are: number, 
size, separateness, contact, and disjunction. 

33. (E67-68; T61-62) The fluidity of earth and fire produced 
by instrumental causes occurs in the case of butter (an earthy sub- 
stance) and gold (a fiery one). Objection: In the case of gold can’t 
we say that its flammability is due to that of the particles of earth 
that are present in it? Answer: No, for that is precisely why we 
distinguish butter from gold; when butter is melted nothing even- 
tually remains, while when gold is melted pure fire remains. 
Objector: But gold is after all earth, since it has weight, like a piece 
of stone. Answer: Gold itself has no weight; the weight of a piece 
of gold is due to the weight of the earthy particles present in it. 
Objector: All right then, gold is earthy because it can be lit up by an 
extraneous source of light, while fire is self-illuminating. Answer: 
Then perhaps the gold has unmanifested color (anudbhitaripa). 
This does not prove its earthiness. 

34. (E68-69; T63-64.) As opposed to those who say that a 
science has 3 stages—the statement of the subject matter (uddefa), 
its definition (/aksana), and the consequent examination of it 
(pariksa)—Sridhara points out that this account of science fails to 
take account of the purpose (frayojana) of an inquiry. 

36. (E75-80; T70-81) The question of the color of earthy 
things is raised. The color of a composite whole is produced by 
the colors of its component parts, and if all the components are blue, 
say, the composite is blue. But when the components are of various 
colors the resulting color is variegated-color. So that color must 
be counted among the varieties of color. Odjection: Suppose we 
say that what is seen as of variegated-color is actually not the 
composite things but the collection of the parts (which in Vai esika 
is a different thing). Then we can dispense with variegated-color 
as a distinct variety. Answer: But we could say the same about 
composites whose components had the same color—that the color 
applies to the collection and not to the composite. And then 
composite things would have no color at all. Objection: Apparently 
you think that the composite whole has a single color called 
‘“‘variegated-color.”” But then, in a cloth which is colored on only 
one side you will be committed to holding that it is colored on the 
other side, and it is not. Answer: The components on the plain side 
have no color and therefore that side has no color. 


NYAYAKANDALI 491 


One atom cannot produce effects, since it is eternal and if it 
were to produce at all would be continually producing. Further- 
more, its products would be indestructible, since they would have 
no complex locus which could itself be destroyed to bring about the 
destruction of the product. Now a triad cannot produce either, 
since triads are visible and must be products of things which them- 
selves are also products, just as jars are products of halves of jars 
which are in turn products of smaller components. Therefore we 
conclude that the ultimate causative elements are dyads. But it 
must take more than two dyads to produce something larger than a 
dyad, since two dyads would only produce something further of the 
size of a dyad on the rule that two infinitesimal things together are 
still infinitesimal but three are larger. Therefore the smallest 
visible substance is the étruti, which consists of three dyads. 

There is an extensive discussion of the processes of conception 
and birth. 

37. (Ego-96; T82-87) Objection: Your definitions are intended 
to differentiate a kind of thing from every other. But this purpose 
is impossible to attain on your own assumptions. For the difference 
between two things is the same as the mutual absence of each from 
the other. Now in order to explain how two things are different, 
the explainer must have cognized the difference, and this means 
he must have cognized both of the two items being differentiated— 
say, in distinguishing a cow from a horse he must have cognized 
both cow and horse. Now we ask you: is this mutual absence bet- 
ween cow and horse cognized by means of one judgment embracing 
both, or by two judgments each embracing one of the two ? If 
the former, then the cognizer cannot very well distinguish the two 
objects, since they coalesce in his judgment of them. [If the latter, 
we have the fault of mutual dependence, for knowing the cow as 
distinct from the horse and vice versa would be the ground for know- 
ing that the cow is different from the horse. Answer: No, for differ- 
ence is not the same thing as mutual absence; rather, the distin- 
guishing characteristics of a thing are part of its very nature, and 
judgments of it do not depend on anything else. Opponent: Then 
in that case we may as well dispense with the notion of mutual 
absence; it does no work. Answer: We need it to answer to the 
content of the negative judgment “‘a cow is not a horse.” 

38. (E1o1-09; To1-99) Objection: You say gold is fire. But 
if so, why does it have smell and taste, and a touch that is not hot, 
while fire, according to you, has no smell or taste and is hot ? 
Answer: Due to the adrsia of the perceiver the hot touch of fire is 


492 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


rendered unmanifested, and he smells and tastes the qualities of 
particles of earth that have gotten mixed with the fire. Objector: 
What is fire apart from its distinctive characteristics? In the case 
of gold, we shall not admit any substance which is unseen and un- 
touched. Answer: Substances must be admitted to explain the 
individuation of qualities which are shared among disparate loci. 
Objector: This individuation may be explained by appealing to the 
impressions or traces we bring to our perceptions. Answer: Why 
should not we also then say there is only one color, and the difference 
of white, blue, etc. are due to the impressions or traces we bring to 
our perceptions ? Objector: In order to explain why we see blue 
at a certain time and white at another we have to allow that these 
colors really exist. Answer: Just so with the substances underlying 
colors; we need to postulate their existence in order to explain the 
perception of them. Furthermore, we cannot admit qualities with- 
out substances, since then we could not explain how two senses can 
grasp the same object—how can we see and touch the same thing ? 

That there are gross (i.e., middle-sized) whole substances 
(sthéla) that are not just collections of qualities is proved by several 
arguments. Objection: You hold that a human body is one single 
individual. But this is contradicted by the facts. When one shakes 
his hand, his whole body does not shake, and one thing cannot have 
contradictory qualities of shaking and nonshaking. Or if it can then 
this would mean that there is separability (yutasiddhi) between the 
body and the hand. Answer: You do not understand “separability” ; 
all it means is that two things can exist separately, not that one can 
move or have a certain quality without the other having it. Like- 
wise, when something covers up part of a whole substance and we 
then touch the uncovered part we touch the whole object through 
touching its part. Buddhist opponent: How can a single whole be 
related to a diversity of parts? Only two possibilities are found : 
either it resides in them part by part, or the whole resides in each 
part. But both are impossible. Answer: There is nothing absurd 
in one thing having several relations with other things. And you 
yourself admit that one vijftana is connected with several things— 
its content, the sense organ, the internal organ, etc. Everyone 
agrees that one thread can be in contact with several beads strung 
upon it. Objector: This fact of perception, upon which everyone 
agrees, can nevertheless be given up if there is reason to do so. Answer: 
The only reason for giving it up would be sense perception. Indeed 
there is no possibility of giving up a judgment arising from sense 
perception providing that it is efficacious (arthakriydkari), true 


NYAYAKANDALI 493 


(samvddi), and recognized by everyone, for the acceptability of 
everything else depends on such perceptions. | 

40. (E133-42; T118-28) Proofs of God’s existence are of two 
sorts: from inference, and from scripture. The inferential reason- 
ing is: The mahabhiitas are preceded by someone who knows 
about them, because they are effects, like a pot. Objection: ‘This 
inference depends on pervasion of being an effect by being preceded by 
one who knows (it), and there is no pervasion between these, since 
there are counter examples. E.g., in the case of the seed and the 
sprout, the man who sows the seed does not know what is going to 
sprout until he sees it coming up. Answer: This does not show 
that there is no one who knows what is going to come up. 

Objector: But the creator you have inferred cannot create the 
earth and the mahdbhiitas, etc., for either He is embodied or not, 
and in either case the hypothesis fails. If God has a body, then He 
is limited by the limitations of His sense organs, etc., and could not 
have the requisite knowledge of supersensuous things in order to 
create the world. But if God did not have a body, He could not 
create anything: for we find that an agent proceeds in acting as 
follows. First, he determines what the situation is, and desires to 
perform the action and effects the result of the act. If any of these 
factors are missing, agency is impossible; but clearly several of them 
are going to be lacking in anything which lacks a body. Therefore 
the agency of a disembodied God is an impossibility. Answer: 
The necessary condition of x’s being an agent is only that he be able 
to operate the instruments necessary to produce the results of the 
action. We know that our own self, for example, satisfies this des- 
cription insofar as it operates our body. Opponent: But the self 
got this particular body through its previous actions when embodied 
in other bodies. Answer: True, but it is the self which does the 
operating, not the body. Opponent: But the operating-—-the impell- 
ing of the body by desire and effort—is only found to occur when 
the self has a body, and so we conclude that the self is the body 
and impels itself. Answer: No, for the body cannot be both the 
doer of the action and the object of the doing—-i.e., the impelling. 
What is important is that the agent be conscious—for only a cons- 
cious being can have desires and exert effort. 

Why cannot the atoms create the world by themselves ? 
Because creation requires conscious control and the selves cannot 
have such conscious control until they have sense organs and a 
body. Opponent: The selves may be held to have a natural, all- 
pervasive awareness. Answer: Then why when a self is born does 


494 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


he not know everything ? Why does he have to learn everything 
all over again? Opponent: Because the awareness ceases to function 
temporarily. Sridhara: Why ? Opponent: Because there are no sense 
organs. Sridhara: Just so; that is just my point ! 

There is only one God, since more than one omniscient Being 
would be superfluous and several such might interfere with one 
another. Some say that God has desires and effort; others deny 
these qualities to Him, allowing Him only pure intelligence, which 
constitutes His creative power. God is neither bound nor free— 
neither description applies—since God has never been bound, He 
cannot be free. 

41. (E146-47; T132-33) An objection is considered from 
someone who thinks that the auditory organ is capable of 
going out to grasp its objects (just as the visual organ is held to do 
by Naiyiyikas.) The objection is refuted by noting that sounds 
are louder when their origin is closer, and softer when farther. 
Furthermore, we can be in doubt about the direction from which 
sound comes. 

44. (E165-93; T161-77) A lengthy Buddhist objection to 
the notion of the self is put forward, based on the Buddhist thesis of 
momentariness. The Buddhist holds that the mark of existence is 
efficiency (arthakriyakdritva), i.e., bringing about an effect, and this 
causal activity can only be gradual or immediate. Now the gradual 
succession of things—change, in short—is only possible, he argues, 
on the assumption of momentariness: for of two states one of which 
follows the other, either the first would have to disappear entirely 
when the second arises—in which case there would be no gradual 
change—or else he first must continue to exist alongside the second, 
in which case there is no gradual change either. Discussion follows, 
centering around the possibility that causes are continuous and the 
gradualness of change is a function of associated, auxiliary causal 
factors. ‘This possibility is rejected by the Buddhist, whose position 
is that the collection of causal factors at a given moment produces 
the event which occurs at the next moment—this is all that can be 
discovered to occur in the causal process. 

Sridhara’s answer to this is that one cannot prove momentari- 
ness of things by merely pointing to their existence, for it is impossible 
to provide a vipaksa—a case where the absence of existence occurs 
together with the absence of momentariness. For the Buddhist 
refuses to allow that anything is permanent. Buddhist: Nevertheless, 
we can surely formulate the hypothesis that everything is momentary 
without admitting the existence of nonmomentary things, just as we 


NYAYAKANDALI 495 


can hypothesize that a post is not a ghost without admitting the 
existence of ghosts. Sridhara: No, to know that a post is not a ghost 
involves being able to perceive ghosts—otherwise we should not know 
what the judgment was about. 

Even if one should admit that nonmomentary things do not 
exist this would not prove that momentary things do; for this 
inference one needs to state a positive reason so that pervasion can 
be judged present or wanting. We cannot straightforwardly con- 
clude anything positive from pervasion of negative things. 

Dharmottara is here quoted as arguing in this connection that, 
once having established the pervasion of existence by momentariness 
in one case we can then go on to use this pervasion as the basis of 
positive inference with respect to other cases. This is dismissed as 
begging the question. 

Furthermore, says Sridhara, the definition of existents as 
efficient (arthakriyikari) does not rule out continuants as existents, 
since the existence of something is its capacity to bring about effects 
in conjunction with appropriate additional causal factors. And 
this will explain the gradual appearance of the effect. Indeed, only 
on such an account can gradualness be explained, for if causality 
were not a function of a continuant, the seed of barley could bring 
about a sprout of rice, since the momentary causal factors for the 
production of the latter—seed, soil, moisture—are all present. 
Finally, since we directly perceive continuity in things the momen- 
tariness theory is precluded. Opponent: This perception of con- 
tinuity in things is mistaken; it arises from distinct momentary events 
very similar to each other not being discriminated. Answer: You 
prove the momentariness of things by showing the erroncousness of 
the perception of continuity, but this erroneousness is only based in 
turn on the momentariness of things: your argument is circular. 

Buddhist: We can infer momentariness of everything from the 
fact that whatever is produced is destroyed. For if this is the case, 
since the destructibility of a thing is part of its very nature, not 
dependent on any extraneous features, there is nothing to stop it 
being destroyed immediately—and so it is, lasting but for a moment. 
Answer: What could be meant by “‘ifs being destroyed’’ if it did not 
last for more than a moment? And if all you mean is that every 
‘‘jarish’? moment is immediately followed by a different moment, 
then why could the succeeding moment not be “‘jarish’’ as well ? 

Sridhara here argues for a conception of an absence as percep- 
tible, and as not inhering in anything, as dependent upon its counter- 
positive, and locatable in space by reference to the locus of its 


496 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


counterpositive. It is not clear from what he says whether he views 
absence as a seventh category or not. 

(E193-99; T177-83) All Buddhist arguments in favor of mo- 
mentariness commit the fallacy called kdaldtyaydpadista, since we have 
the experience of recognition (pratyabhijfia). Opponent: Perception 
is one thing and memory is another; they must have different objects, 
since the former apprehends present events and the latter past events. 
Hence there is no single experience of recognition. Answer: Since 
we have such an experience we are bound to find a cause for it, and 
this cause is the combination of a sense perception with a trace, the 
result being what we call “recognition.” And this common 
experience of recognition overrides all the Buddhists’ inferences, 
since inference depends upon and bows to perception. 

Buddhist: As a matter of fact we have direct experience of the 
momentariness of things. For a sense perception itself is momentary, 
and so is its object. Answer: Since you admit that we cannot know 
our knowledge it follows that we cannot know that our perceptual 
knowledge is momentary. Furthermore, the fact that the object 
is revealed by sense perception only at a moment does not show that 
the object is momentary, since it only shows us a momentary slice 
of the object. (Sridhara says he has explained this already in two 
lost works, the Tativaprabodha and Tativasamvddini). 

Sridhara also argues that the birth of a child is inexplicable 
on Buddhist assumptions. 

(E210-13; T1g2-95) Objection to the thesis of the plurality of 
selves: Just as there is only one dkdfa but many sounds because of 
diversity in its limitations by the several auditory organs, so there 
is only one self but a variety of experiences. Answer: The cases 
are not parallel: indeed, the variety of sound experiences depends 
on the variety of embodiments which is in turn dependent upon 
the karma of the self inhabiting the bodies, so that we must postulate 
an ultimate variety of karmas for the various selves in order to explain 
the diversity of sounds. Advaitin: True, there is a variety of jivatmans, 
but only one paramatman or Highest Self. Answer: This cannot be 
good Advaita, since it would mean that there is a plurality of selves, 
and because the jivatmans would be nonidentical with the supreme 
Self. Adavaitin: The difference between the supreme and_ the 
individual selves is due to avidyaé, which has beginningless differen- 
tiations. Answer: Whose is this avidyé? Not Brahman’s, for then 
Brahman would not be pure intelligence. Not the selves’ either, 
for then there would be mutual dependence. Objector: No, it is 
like the seed and the sprout, beginningless  differentiations, 


NYAYAKANDALI 497 


Answer: No, for there are several seeds and several sprouts, but 
only one self throughout its various states: thus the avidyd of a self 
depends on that self, while that self’s individuation depends on its 
avidyd, which is circular. Furthermore, if there were only one self then 
when one is liberated the world process would cease, which is absurd. 

45. (E218-21; T2or-04) With respect to the second argument 
for the internal organ, from the experience of pleasure and pain, 
an objector asserts that pleasure and pain are not objects of sense 
perception and thus are just forms of cognition itself and not appre- 
hended by the internal organ. Answer: If they were just forms of 
cognition what would explain the difference between pleasure and 
pain? This difference arises from a difference in the objects of 
knowledge, and so the cognition of pleasure arises from a previous 
cognition of an object which is found pleasurable. Furthermore, 
cognition is not self-cognizable (svasamvedana). Objector: Yes it 
is; just as the lamp lights itself, so a judgment illuminates itself. 
Answer: No, for the lamp is cognized through a person’s sense 
organs. Generally, judging is an action of one who judges, 
and thus one cannot identify the agent with its action or with the 
result of its action, the knower with knowing or what is known. 
Objector: Just as a jar depends for its appearance on the lamp, so 
colors, etc., depend for their appearance on a judgment. Answer: 
If you mean that a judgment is merely the appearance of the object, 
then to say that colors, etc., depend upon a judgment is asiddha— 
unproved, since the cognition in turn depends on the object, and 
also anaikdntika—inconclusive, since the cognition also depends on 
the sense organs. On the other hand, if you mean that the appea- 
rance of the objects comes about as a result of a judgment, then you 
will be unable to give an example to corroborate this view, for all 
the lamp does is to produce our judgments about the objects it illu- 
minates, so that in this case the appearance of the jar depends, not 
on the lamp, but on our judgment produced by the lamp. When 
we see something what is produced is not an object or the appearance 
of an object, but rather a judgment concerning the object. Objector: 
So in your view the production of one thing—a judgment—cons- 
titutes the cognition of another—the object. That is very odd! 
Answer: Nevertheless, that is how it is! 

Others say a judgment illuminates all three things—the object, 
itself, and its owner, the self or knower, just as a lamp illuminates 
the things around it, itself, and its wick. But this is not right, for 
the judgment comes in the form ‘“‘this is a jar,” and there is no 
mention of a knower or of the judgment itself. Odjector: But we 


498 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sometimes say “I know the jar.’ Answer: Yes, and here the diffe- 
rence is that there is internal-organ perception (mdanasapratyaksa) 
of the object as qualified by its relation to a judgment and a knower; 
surely the judgment and the knower are not grasped by external 
sense perception, else we could see them with our eyes. 

56. (E232-33; 213-14) Discussion of knownness (jfdtatd). 
Some people hold that judgments are inferred rather than being 
directly perceptible to the internal organ, but this is incorrect, 
since there is no hetu to serve in the inference (the inference being 
“this object is known, because like....”’). The hetu cannot be just 
“because it is an object,’”’ as objects are both known and not known. 
Objector: The hetu can be “because it has knownness.”” Knownness 
is a property produced in the object in virtue of its relation to the 
judgment someone makes about it. Answer: No, we find no such 
property. When rice is cooked we perceive a difference in the rice, 
but we find no such difference in an object before and after it has 
been known. Furthermore, in order to know knownness we would 
have to postulate an additional knownness of knownness produced 
in the knownness by virtue of its being known, and so on ad infinitum. 

75. (E247-48; T224-25) Why do not we, instead of saying 
that contact, etc., occur in part of their locus, just say that a thing is 
in contact with a part of the substance in question? E.g., if a man 
is in a tree, he is in contact with the branch, not the tree. 

80. (E252-54; T229-30) According to Sridhara the destruc- 
tion of a substance and its color are not simultaneous; since the cause 
of the destruction of a color is just the destruction of the substance 
in which the color inheres, there must, he avers, be a very small time- 
lag between the destruction of the substance and the color. If 
someone says that the substance and its color are identical—i.e., 
that a substance is a colored thing—then he must explain how 
atoms produce colors in the things they combine to form—dyads, 
say. Sridhara thinks that a color cannot be produced in a dyad 
until the dyad has come into existence, and that this shows that 
substances are not intrinsically colored but only adventitiously so. 
Or if the opponent says that the color of one atom produces colors 
in subsequent atoms but not in dyads and larger objects, then 
Sridhara points out that nothing perceptible would ever be seen to 
be colored—the world would be colorless. 

85. (E268-70; T246-48) Yogacéra: There are no numbers, 
since all we perceive are colors, etc. The ideas of number—one, 
two, etc. objects—are merely the results of the fruition of odsands 
or traces in the abode-consciousness (Glayavijfidna), since there are 


NYAYAKANDALIiI 499 


no external objects to which they correspond. Answer: If our ideas 
of the number of things did not depend on external objects there 
would be no reason for us to make a given numerical judgment 
about a collection of things. And the ideas of number are therefore 
no worse off than the ideas of colors, etc., in the YogacAra’s view, 
despite his claims. 

(E276-313; T265-84) A lengthy section deals with the 
Buddhist who denies that there is any such thing as twoness, since 
there is no proof for it or any other external object. If one appeals 
to our idea of “two” as the proof, then the Buddhist argues that this 
idea is past and so cannot prove what is present, and that generally 
external objects lack the conditions necessary to being perceived. 
His idea is that what is cognized should be the thing which satisfies 
the conditions of cognizability, and not the cognition, which is some- 
thing else. Therefore, since it is judgments, and not objects, which 
satisfy the conditions of cognizability, there are no objects. 

Sridhara questions the general principle assumed by the 
Buddhist, that if something lacks the conditions necessary for cog- 
nizing it, it therefore must be held not to exist. For example, this 
would preclude our saying that objects too far away to perceive 
exist. The Buddhist is made to qualify his principle: he now says 
that if a thing is perceptible but not perceived then it does not exist. 
Sridhara assents to this, but asks the Buddhist how he discovers 
that something is perceptible when by the Buddhist’s hypothesis it 
has never been perceived (always being in the past). Indeed, what 
conditions do ideas satisfy that make them existent? The Buddhist 
answers that ideas can be accepted or rejected after one has become 
aware of them, and that that is the mark of their existence. Sridhara 
retorts that objects too can be accepted or rejected, so they can exist 
also. 

The Buddhist presents another argument for idealism, as 
follows: An external object, lacking consciousness, cannot illu- 
minate itself, but requires a conscious illuminator to know it. Now 
an unilluminated object is no different from a nonobject, since it is 
unillumined; therefore it is expendable. Further, suppose we admit 
external objects as contents of judgments; then we should be forced 
to note that these objects never appear except when a judgment 
does, and thus there is no difference between the object and the 
knowledge of it. Sridhara’s answer to this is that, first, the assump- 
tion that what is nonconscious cannot figure in illumination is 
indefensible; second, that the invariable concomitance between an 
object and its cognition does not necessarily prove that they are not 


500 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


different; and third, that in any case the assumption that knowing 
and what is known are identical is mistaken, since the object 
appears as external while the knowing appears as internal. The 
Buddhist replies that this appearance of externality must be mistaken, 
since what is illuminated is not found to depend on anything else 
for its illumination—e.g., a lamp, which illuminates itself and needs 
nothing else to illuminate it. Sridhara’s reply is that the metaphor 
is getting mixed: true, a lamp does not need another Jight to illumi- 
nate it, but it does need an eye and a knower to be apprehended, 
i.e., “illuminated”’ in that sense. 

Sridhara now wants the Buddhist to tell him what corresponds 
to “this” in the judgment “‘this is blue.” The answer is given that 
the subject of the judgment is the judgment itself, and that by a 
mistake the form of the judgment is cognized as something different 
from the judgment. Asked how he knows this, the Buddhist answers 
that he infers it from the fact that there is only one real thing involved, 
namely the judgment, and Sridhara replies that such an inference 
must depend on prior perceptions of a sort the Buddhist rejects as 
impossible. Anyway, granting for the sake of argument that cons- 
ciousness is mistakenly polarized into subject and object (or pre- 
dicate), the next question is: why does this happen at particular 
places and times and not just all the time everywhere ? The Buddhist’s 
answer is that the peculiarities of the vdsands—traces—account for 
it, and that these peculiarities are due to the beginningless causes. 
Sridhara now wants to know about these causes—are they external 
or are they of the nature of consciousness too? If they are external, 
then the Buddhist has admitted external objects. If they are not, 
if they are just consciousness, then Sridhara submits that since cons- 
ciousness cannot individuate itself the diversity in the vdsands re- 
mains unexplained. 

86. (E315-16; T287-89) An objection is introduced against 
the whole procedure of basing assertions in ontology on the fact 
that we talk in a certain way—e.g., of postulating a quality of ‘‘size”’ 
just because we make judgments about the sizes of things. The 
objection is that just from a fact of speech we cannot infer the 
existence of an object, for words are not born of objects but rather 
from the vocal chords. Sridhara replies by pointing out that the 
desire to speak a word is certainly one of the factors in the produc- 
tion of the word, and that this desire is preceded by perception of 
the object which it is desired to speak of. Otherwise communication 
would break down. There is a discussion of lying—analyzed as 
trying to speak of something one has never: perceived—concluding 


NYAYAKANDALI 501 


that at least the liar must have some recollection of whatever it is 
he is trying to speak about. 

88. (E339-43; T308-12) Sridhara introduces in this section 
a discussion of the arguments put forward in the ninth kdrika of 
Igvarakrsna’s Samkhyakarikas in favor of satkdryavada, the view that 
the effect preexists in its cause. He finds in that stanza 3 arguments. 
(1) A nonexistent thing cannot be produced; thus whatever is 
produced must already exist. (2) There is regularity of relation- 
ship between effect and cause, and unless the effect is already there 
to determine the particular nature of the cause everything and any- 
thing would be always being produced. (3) Since effects are found 
to be of the same nature as their causes, and since the whole is 
nothing but the sum of its parts, it follows that if the cause is an 
entity the effect must be one too. 

(E343-47; T312-16) Next Sridhara turns to consider causal 
efficacy (sakti). Someone may say that there must be supersensible 
causal efficacies in things, for otherwise how can one explain how 
causes fail to function in the presence of counteracting agents. E.g., 
the same causal factors which produce fire on other occasions fail 
to do so when a charm is repeated, but they do operate when the 
charm is not repeated. Sridhara’s reply is that it is the prior non- 
existence of charms, etc., which helps produce fire and whose absence 
precludes it. Odjection: But if a countercharm is spoken, fire will 
result even in the presence of the charm, and thus an absence should 
not be accounted a causal factor, and we are led to postulate a causal 
efficacy. Answer: Then we must complicate the account of the causal 
factors of fire to accommodate the facts mentioned. Nevertheless 
we should always refuse to introduce supersensible entities as ex- 
planations as Jong as we can explain by reference to visible ones. 

Sridhara adds that plurality of causes is the secret of the Nyaya 
theory, but that he has explained the secret of the Mimimsa theory 
in the (lost) Yattvaprabodha. 

89. (E374-77; T339-43) In the course of an objection about 
the kind of disjunction classified as (3b)—disjunction produced by 
disjunction of cause and noncause—an interesting case of conflict 
between perception and inference arises which Sridhara decides in 
favor of inference. The situation under discussion occurs when 
one’s hand moves away from a wall. The question raised is whether 
the hand moves away from the wall because the body to which 
the hand belongs moves, or not. Sridhara holds that since the motion 
of a body depends upon the motion of its parts, the disjunction of 
the body from the wall depends on the disjunction of the hand from 


502 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the wall; but since the body does not move at the time the hand is 
moved away, some other causal explanation must be inferred to 
explain the hand’s movement, and this is why disjunction of type 
(3b) is invoked. An objector, however, retorts that it is plain 
perceptual fact that the hand and the hody of which it is a part are 
disjoined from the wall at the same time. Sridhara says that it 
cannot be so, since at the moment the hand moves there is no 
cause for the body’s disjunction. The opponent argues that per- 
ception should override inference. Sridhara cites a case where 
we ought to reject perception in favor of inference: when we see 
the petals of a lotus pierced at one stroke, we see them all pierced 
simultaneously but infer that there were very small time-lags between 
each piercing. The opponent finds this a doubtful case, but thinks 
the case of the hand and the wall under discussion is a clear case. 
He challenges Sridhara to explain in general when we should favor 
inference over perception. Sridhara points out that actually we do 
not ever really favor inference over perception, but rather we 
favor the perception on which the inference is based over another 
perception which appears to contradict it. What happens then ? 
We set aside the less-favored perception as “‘sublated’’ (bddha), 
just as we set aside the perception of silver in favor of that of shell 
in the stock case of error. Opponent: But it cannot be denied that 
the perception of silver took place, so that cannot be set aside. 
Sridhara: True; what is set aside is the notion that silver exists in 
the object on the beach, so the judgment that the shell was 
silver was false. Opponent: The existence of silver cannot be denied 
either, since it is only on the assumption that the object exists that 
we can explain the knower’s resulting activity. Answer: No; judg- 
ments do not always result in the knower’s overt activity; sometimes 
he does nothing. 

Sridhara says this last point is explained in detail in the 
Samgrahatika. 

93. (E415-18; 1366-69) Objection: There is an additional 
kind of imperfect knowledge, namely tarka. Tarka occurs when 
there are two opposing, equally evidenced opinions; settlement of 
the argument may then be reached by the use of hypothetical argu- 
ments of the sort “if your view were correct, then...  ,’’where the 
result is some absurdity or contradiction of something the opponent 
wishes to hold. Now this is not perfect knowledge; it only clears 
the way for an inference leading to the truth; nevertheless it must 
be found a place, for it is a very important part of any inquiry. Thus 
it must be a fifth kind of imperfect knowledge. Answer: What 


NYAYAKANDALI 503 


kind of a judgment does tarka involve—the denial of the opponent’s 
view, or the assertion of one’s own? If it involves the denial of the 
opponent’s view, then this is surely a correct judgment and tarka 
should be classified as perfect knowledge. On the other hand, if 
it is the assertion of one’s own view, it must depend on an inference 
from the denial of the opponent’s view, and is therefore to be classi- 
fied as inference. Objector: This would be all right, except that 
there is no definite cognition—merely the assertion of the likelihood 
of one’s own view being the correct one—and yet on the other hand 
it is not a case of doubt either; therefore it is halfway between and 
must be independently classified. Sridhara appears willing to 
classify tarka as doubt, but also argues for considering it as exhausted 
by its twin characteristics of perfect knowledge and inference as 
analyzed above. 

95. (E426; 1377-78) Sridhara refers to his view of error as 
viparitakhyati. We admits that misconception can arise even in the 
absence of any actual substratum, and says that even here something 
not existing is cognized as existing. He distinguishes his view from 
asatkhyati; on his view one can make this kind of mistake only with 
regard to something which is capable of existing. In illusions, 
when there is an objective substratum, the similarity of things together 
with defects in the organs causes error; in hallucinations—e.g., 
when an infatuated man sees his beloved everywhere—there is no 
possibility of similarity and the cause is only derangement. 

(E430-34; T380-83) Some say there is no such thing as mis- 
conception since the sense organs by their very nature bring about 
correct knowledge. In erroneous cognition what happens is that 
2 correct cognitions are confused due to the defect in the organ. 
Thus we have (1) the idea of this with regard to a piece of shell, 
and (2) the memory of silver awakened by the similarity between 
shell and silver. Both are in themselves correct, but when silver is 
attributed to this, error results. 

Answer: If it were so we should not be moved to pick up the 
shell since all that would happen is that we would seea thing and 
remember silver. Opponent: Well, we fail to discriminate between the 
memory and the perception of this. Answer: No, for we never expe- 
rience any such failure to discriminate memories from perceptions. 
And if you refuse to locate the object of the judgment of silver in the 
object, you will never be able to explain the sublating judgment 
“this is not silver.” Opponent: This last judgment comes about as 
a result of our discriminating the two component judgments, 
Answer: That is to say, we no longer perceive shell as identical with 


504 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


silver, an identification you were a moment ago denying ever 
takes place. 

In any case, Sridhara wants to know, how does the opponent 
handle a different kind of misconception, when we appear to see 
two moons? Opponent: In this case rays go out from each eye and 
as a result we get two cognitions of the one moon, which we mistake 
for a single cognition of two moons. Answer: Impossible. We 
never see the properties of our judgments with our eyes. Or if 
you will admit that the duality of the judgments is seen in the object, 
then you have capitulated to our own point of view by admitting 
that simple judgments can be erroneous. 

Still others hold that in error an extraoridnary (alaukika) 
piece of silver is produced, and that therefore there is never any 
error in simple judgments since they always have an object, either 
ordinary or extraordinary. But this view is incorrect, for it fails to 
explain how erroneous judgments lead us to activity, for we are never 
moved to act to acquire objects we know to be extraordinary, i.e., 
not physical objects. 

97. (E441-42; T390) Pragastapada’s reference to ‘‘dream- 
end cognition” is explained. This kind of cognition is the judgment 
we make that we have been dreaming of such-and-such; since we 
have not yet opened our eyes and the senses are not yet operative, 
this kind of judgment might seem to fall into the definition of 
“dream,” but it is actually a case of memory, as Pra’astapida 
explains. 

99. (E444-46); T395-96) The “fourfold contact’ men- 
tioned by Pragastapada in his account of the perception of substances 
is explained as follows. There must be contact between (1) self 
and internal organ; (2) internal organ and sense organ; (3) sense 
organ and object. Thus there is contact among the four things 
mentioned. 

Objection: If universals are perceptible, then individuators 
ought to be also, since they can satisfy the conditions mentioned. 
And it would then follow that doubt and misconception would be 
impossible. Answer: No, for they are related differently to per- 
ception. A universal is perceived merely through the contact of its 
own locus and the visual organ, while an individuator, because 
it is so small, depends on the contact between the parts of its locus 
and the parts of the eye. Therefore it is not absolutely necessary 
that the perception of a universal in a thing be also accompanied 
by the perception of the things’ individuator. This also explains 


NYAYAKANDALI 505 


why we only indistinctly see objects far away—we fail to perceive 
their individuators. 

(£446-59; T396-408) Some people say that only propositional 
(savikalpaka) judgments constitute perception since it is only objects 
of propositional judgments which can be used in human activity. 
To this Pragastapada is answering when he says that this first kind 
of perception is of the thing’s own nature. We must admit this 
nonpropositional (nirvikalpaka) perception, says Sridhara, because 
without a nonpropositional perception of a thing we can have no 
propositional judgment about the thing, since we could not remember 
the word which denotes the thing. Furthermore, nonpropositional 
perception grasps both universal and individuating features of things, 
not merely the pure particular (svalaksana), since we can reidentify 
its objects. True, we do not grasp universals or individuators in the 
things as distinct entities, but that is because we have at this stage 
nothing to compare or contrast the object with. Thus in non- 
propositional perception the relation between the universal, the 
individuator, and the individual thing are not cognized, since they 
have not yet been discriminated and only that which is cognized 
as separate can be cognized anew as connected. 

Buddhist: Only nonpropositional perception can be a true 
judgment, since its content accurately reflects the nature of the 
object cognized, while propositional perception, depending in part 
on traces, etc., deviates from its object. Answer: No, propositional 
perception also can be a true judgment, as Pragastapada indicates. 
Buddhist: The appearance perceived is not born of the object, but 
of traces, etc., and thus all vikalpa or conceptual construction is 
false. Answer: No, since our actions verify such perceptions. Bud- 
dhist: The conceptual construction is born of experience (anubhava) 
and imposes (dropa) its appearance on the pure particular, hiding 
the difference between the pure particular and its appearance; it is 
this appearance which makes us act toward the place occupied by 
the pure particular. Because of the connection, through reflection, 
of the character of the appearance with that of the pure particular— 
just as the light reflected from a gem hides but directs us toward 
the gem—so the appearance leads us toward the object. Answer: 
If the construction did not apply to the object how could it impose 
its appearance? In order that it apply in the appropriate cases 
you must admit that the determinacy provides the correct way of 
grasping the object, as is shown by the fact of success in resultant 
action. Buddhist: No, since everything is momentary, and since 
the time when the appearance is perceived is different from that 


506 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


when the propositional perception takes place the latter cannot 
grasp the object of the former; the object and its appearance can 
only be similar to each other, but this similarity must be with 
regard to that which is contrary to both the appearance and the 
object. Then since the second, propositional perception is only 
cognizing what the first, nonpropositional one has already grasped, 
namely this negative similarity of their objects, the second cannot 
be called correct knowledge. (Inference, on the other hand, can 
be correct knowledge since it grasps a pure particular not already 
cognized by some previous perception). 

Answer: No, for we cognize something positive and not negative, 
and anyway a negative thing could not lead us to act toward an 
object. Further, if the earlier moment is now gone, and it was 
the time of the appearance to the senses of the object, how can you 
say that the same object is known through propositional perception, 
even if that object is called by you a ‘“‘negative similarity” ? 
Buddhist: The propositional perception always involves memory 
of the meaning of the word denoting the object, and is therefore 
produced by memory and not by the sense organ and the object; 
it is therefore not valid knowledge. Answer: True, this memory is 
one of the causal factors contributing toward the production of pro- 
positional perception, but this does not invalidate it. Buddhist: Yes 
it does, since right perception must be free from conceptual 
construction (kalpana). 

The nature of conceptual construction is discussed. The 
Buddhist says there are 2 varieties: (1) the kind involving connec- 
tion of an object with a word, (2) the kind involving connection of 
one object with another. Sridhara: As for (1), does a judgment 
vitiated by such conceptual construction connect the word with 
the object? or does it become connected to the object by means 
of the word? Several interpretations of each horn of the dilemma 
are examined: none of them will do. The Buddhist expands on 
his theory: Words denote persisting kinds of things, and the true 
object, the pure particular, is neither persisting nor a kind. Further- 
more the appearance of externality of the object is conceptual 
construction. Sridhara in reply appears to admit that if the Buddhist 
were right and universals did not exist his argument would be worth 
something, but that because universals exist the Buddhist is wrong. 

As for (2), the Buddhist argues that propositional perception 
cannot have real things for its object, since in such perception 
there is deliberation and discrimination of properties, substances 
and relations—in short, it is not a direct response to the given but 


NYAYAKANDALi 507 


involves several steps of interpretation. Sridhara is unconvinced. 
It is not the judgment which involves deliberation, he avers, but 
the knowing self; furthermore, what the knower does is to discover 
the qualifications present all the time in the object—in nonpropo- 
sitional perception these are not recognized since the necessary 
additional factors for appreciating the character of the object 
presented are not present yet. But since propositional judgments as 
well as nonpropositional ones are produced by contact of the object 
with the sense organ, one has as much right as the other to being 
called “perception.” 

(E459-62; T408-10) Objection: Motions are not perceptible, 
since when a thing moves all we perceive is a series of contacts and 
disjunctions, from which we infer that the thing is moving. Answer: 
No, since of two things which become disjoined only one may move, 
but if all we see is disjunction we should infer motion in both things. 
E.g., when a monkey moves up and down a tree, we perceive that 
the monkey is moving in addition to the contacts and disjunctions of 
the monkey with its parts. Otherwise we would infer the motion 
of the tree equally as well as that of the monkey. 

(E464-70; T411-16) Sridhara further distinguishes the two 
kinds of yogis Pragastapada mentions. The “‘ecstatic’? ones are 
those who are nonattached; the “‘nonecstatic”? are those who have 
desire for knowledge. The perception of the former kind of yogi 
does not produce merit, since there is no attachment, and it does 
not refer to external objects, being a transformation (parindma) 
of the self alone. The latter, nonecstatic yogic perception involves 
desire, produces merit, and illuminates external objects. 

Sridhara says that yogis get their knowledge of other selves 
through their internal organ, which shoots out impelled by the force 
of their great merit and contacts the other selves and in turn reports 
back. 

Opponent: Yogis cannot perceive supersensuous things, because 
they are living beings like ourselves. Answer: This inference fails 
because the opponent does not believe in yogis and so cannot properly 
form an inference about them. If he does believe in yogis, then his 
argument undermines the very evidence by which we can prove 
their existence, namely their supersensuous perceptions. Opponent: 
Your argument is a kind of tarka, intended to show an undesirable 
implication of my view. But this kind of argument fails if the unde- 
sirable implication is something of a sort not even admitted by me— 
and the implication in this case, that the evidence for the existence 
of yogis would be undermined, fails against me since I do not believe 


508 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in supersensuous perceptions or yogis! Answer: Nevertheless you 
cannot put forward your original inference, since it is inference for 
another (pardrthinuména) and any inference for others depends on a 
previous cognition by the person offering the inference. If you 
were allowed this inference, it would be equally allowable for some- 
one to argue “the sky-lotus is sweet-smelling, because it 1s a lotus, 
like the lotus in the pond” ! 

(E471-74; T417-19) Sridhara clarifies Pragastapada’s account 
of the relation between an instrument of knowledge and its result. 
The instrument grasps universals and individuators in their own 
form, free from any conceptual construction; once this has taken 
place it is certain that the resulting propositional perception will 
take the form determined by the natures of the universals and indi- 
viduators. So the resulting judgment (pramiti) is a qualified judg- 
ment about a substance, or rather a judgment about a substance as 
qualified by universals and individuators. But since perception can 
grasp individuators and universals by themselves, there must be an 
instrument for that perception also, and the instrument there is what 
Pragastapada calls ‘“‘svariipalocana,’ which Sridhara says merely 
means the sense-object contact itself. When the result is practical 
activity toward or away from an object, the instrument is the propo- 
sitional judgment about the qualified object. 

102. (E482-87; T425-29) An objector points out that accord- 
ing to the third part of Pragastapada’s definition of a valid hetu the 
fallacious hetus known as prakaranasama and kdlatyayépadista would 
have to be counted as valid. For Pragastapida says that a valid 
hetu must be validly known to be absent from the whole of the vzpaksa, 
and a prakaranasama hetu is not validly known not to be absent from 
the whole of the vipaksa, since it is present in both sp and vp and is 
therefore doubtful. Likewise the kaldtyayadpadista hetu, which is known 
to co-occur with the vp. Sridhara begins his reply to this objection 
by citing an answer which he rejects; this answer proceeds by classify- 
ing the two types of fallacious reasons in question as kinds of anatkdnteka 
fallacy, and rejecting such hetus as productive of doubt. Sridhara 
says this does not answer the objection, which after all calls into 
doubt the definition of a valid hetu. Sridhara’s own solution to the 
problem is to reject inferences of the sort in question (e.g., “‘sound is 
eternal, because we do not perceive any noneternality in it’? as 
opposed to “sound is noneternal because we do not perceive any 
eternality in it’) on the ground that the sddhya or paksa is improper. 
Any sddhya (or paksa) which is capable of having two contradictory 
properties is an improper one, he says. 


NYAYAKANDALI 509 


Another objection is proposed. The objector points out that 
only-positive (kevalénvayi) inferences, where no up is possible, violate 
the defintion and thus it is too narrow. Sridhara replies that the 
third part of Pragastapada’s definition does not require that there 
be a vp but rather that there be absence of failure of concomitant rela- 
tion between s and h. 

104. (E492-500; 1434-38) Challenged to explain invariable 

_concomitance (avindbhava) Sridhara glosses it as ‘‘nonwandering”’ 
(avyabhicéra). He first explains the Buddhist analysis of this in order 
to refute that analysis. The Buddhist says that nonwandering or 
invariable concomitance arises from 2 sources: (1) identity (tadatmya) 
and (2) causal origination (utpatti). He explains the latter first: 
it is the relation of cause and effect when properly checked against 
experience according to 5 tests. As for “identity,” it corres- 
ponds to the relation of the defining characteristics of a thing 
with that thing. We come to know this relationship by realizing 
that its sublator is present in the vp. Sridhara’s criticism of this 
account is that the presence of these characteristics of identity and 
origination themselves depend on the invariable concomitance 
——so concomitance must be explained in some different fashion. He 
illustrates this by providing examples of things which are related as 
cause and effect, and as defining characteristic and thing defined 
thereby, but which fail to display invariable concomitance. E.g., 
certain properties of smoke, such as its earthiness, are not concomitant 
with fire, although smoke is the effect of fire; and an individual tree, 
say a simfapa tree, although possessing the defining characteristic of 
treeness, is not invariably concomitant with it, since we may fail to 
remember that the object is a tree and merely know it as a SimSapd. 

The Buddhist objects to this last claim. He says that in fact 
since the object we see, the simSapa, and the tree all have the same 
defining characteristic, namely treeness, we do perceive that charac- 
teristic as well as SimSapdness. The reason we may not mention the 
treeness in our description of the object is because we fail to remember 
the word ‘‘tree’’ but do remember the word “‘Simfapd,”’ and the reason 
for this is that we have the idea of the exclusion (vydurtti) of non- 
$imsapd rather than that of the exclusion of non-tree. Now when 
we realize the invariable concomitance between fimsapdness and 
treeness, what we actually realize is that the two exclusions have the 
same nature. Sridhara answers that there could be no basis for this 
realization except mere assumption, since the bases for such reali- 
zation are made out to depend upon the realization and not vice 
versa, 


510 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(E500-02; 1439-42) Summing up, Sridhara notes that the 
Buddhist attempt to make invariable concomitance depends on causal 
relations or on nominalistically understood defining characteristics 
will not do, since the relation of invariable concomitance is precisely 
that relation which is not vitiated by upadhis—it is a natural as opposed 
to an adventitious relationship. Empirical relations such as the 
Buddhist appeals to will never yield the strong connection required. 
Furthermore, this strong relation must hold between universals 
primarily, although they hold between individuals characterized 
by the universals in virtue of their being characterized by those 
universals. 

105. (E513-T22; 1449-58) Objection: Verbal authority cannot 
be included under inference. In inference what is inferred is an 
object qualified by a property. In the inference of a word’s denotation 
from the hearing of the word, what could correspond to the object ? 
Not the denotation itself, since it is not known at the time, and 
inference depends on invariable concomitance between the property 
and the hetu. Indeed, the only relation between a word and its 
denotation comes after the meaning of the word has been established, 
and therefore prior to establishment of this relationship no inference 
is possible. Secondly, since in different parts of the world the same 
sound means a variety of things, there is no invariable concomitance 
between a word and its meaning. The difference between verbal 
authority and inference is simply this: that in the former there must 
be a trustworthy source, whereas in the latter this is not required. 

Answer: The concomitance is between a certain activity (in 
this case verbal) on the part of the speaker and his intention to 
communicate something. Once this has been performed by a 
trustworthy person, we can ever after infer that the word has that 
meaning by recalling the concomitance. As for the second objection, 
this is answered in the same way, by noting that the intention of the 
speaker is all-important. There is no natural meaning relation 
between words and their objects; meaning is conventional in origin. 
Even the words in the Vedas get their meanings through the inten- 
tion of the person who composed them. Since this person is a supe- 
rior being his authority is trustworthy, and we know that the Vedas 
are his work because they are generally accepted as authoritative 
and give rise to veridical knowledge. Sridhara here gives several 
arguments for the noneternality of the Vedas. 

(E522-26; 1458-65) Sridhara points out that the Vaisesika 
view creates the following difficulty: that with respect to the gaining 
of such ends of man as liberation and heaven, about which we can 


NYAYAKANDALi 511 


only know by verbal authority, we are not likely to apply ourselves 
to such an end on the basis of testimony until we are convinced that 
the author of such testimony is completely trustworthy. It is to 
meet this difficulty that the Mimamsakas argue that the Vedas are 
self-sufficient and that it is not necessary to ascertain the good quali- 
ties of their author, since they have no author. But this will not do, 
since it is impossible to find a suitable meaning for “self-sufficiency” 
in the case of Vedic text. Does its authoritative character (praémdnya) 
consist in its needing nothing else by which it can be known ? Or is 
it that it needs nothing else by which it is produced ? Or is it that 
it operates by itself without any help ? 

If the Vedas needed no other awareness to apprehend their 
validity, then there could be no doubt or mistake about their meaning, 
and no mistaken activities following on the hearing of them. But 
such doubts and mistakes occur. Therefore the validity of the 
Vedas must be known by a judgment external to them. Objection: 
This will lead to infinite regress. Answer: No, since it is not always 
necessary to be convinced of the authoritative character of an ins- 
trument of knowledge. An instrument points to its object by 
itself; we do not need first to ascertain its authoritative character to 
know what perceptual and inferential judgments are about. It is 
only when a doubt arises about the trustworthiness of an instrument 
that such ascertainment is appropriate. Sridhara quotes Mandana 
Miégra’s Brahmasiddhi in support of this. Objection: You seem to be 
saying that the question of trustworthiness only arises when one has 
not verified a judgment. Then is it your view that the authoritative 
character of a judgment is known from the resulting verificatory 
activity ? Answer: Not quite. The truth of a particular judgment 
is shown through verification, and the trustworthiness of the instru- 
ment involved is shown in dependence on that. 

That is why the Vedas’ authoritative character does not consist 
in its needing nothing else by which it is produced: valid knowledge 
of an object is also required. Objector: What we mean to say is that 
the authority of the Vedas does not require any additional cause 
besides the causes which give rise to the utterances being produced. 
Answer: Then there could be no mistaken judgments about the 
Vedas. Objector: That is true; in themselves these causes cannot 
bring about false judgments; it is only because of defects in the 
causal factors that error arises. Sridhara: Where do these defects 
come from? And how are they to be avoided? ‘There is a neces- 
sary reference to external factors responsible for the production and 
removal of defects. For that matter the same may be said of all 


512 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the instruments of knowledge: any kind of judgment may be in error 
due to defects in its causes and the trustworthiness of any of the in- 
struments as applied to a particular case necessitates the absence of 
such defects. 

108. (E534-42; 1472-77) There are 2 kinds of presumption: 
(1) drstdrthdpatti, based on inconsistency between visual appearances, 
and (2) §rutdrthdpatti, based on inconsistency between auditory 
appearances. As example of the former, the reasoning from one’s 
perceptions that Caitra is alive and not in the house to the conclusion 
that he is outside. As example of the latter, ‘“Devadatta, who is fat, 
when heard, leads one to conclude 


> 


does not eat in the daytime,’ 
and utter the sentence “‘he eats at night.” 

Sridhara points out that in either case presumption is a variety 
of inference, since in the one case the reasoning depends on invariable 
concomitance between being alive and not in the house and being outside 
the house, whereas in the other there is concomitance between being 
fat and not eating in the day and eating at night. 

Objection: But in the latter case it is sentences which are incon- 
sistent and not the properties you mention. Presumption of this 
latter sort is a kind of verbal testimony, since the result of its operation 
is the uttering of a sentence, a result brought about by hearing the 
sentence ‘‘Devadatta, who is fat, does not eat in the day” and the 
instrument called presumption. Otherwise, if there were no verbal 
authority acting in the matter, we would not appreciate the con- 
nection between the above sentence and the conclusion ‘‘he eats at 
night.” 

Answer: But it is the relationship among the words in the sen- 
tences which allows the move from the one to the other. No single 
word by itself can express the meaning of a whole sentence. There- 
fore it is a matter of inference, not verbal testimony. 

110. (E542-52; 1478-86) The Vaisesika view is that absences 
are objects of experience and that they participate in pervasion 
relations and thus reasoning about them is inferential. Objection: 
We cannot directly perceive absences, but only positive loci of ab- 
sences. This is shown by the fact that we sometimes have knowledge 
of an absence even when our sense organs are not operating. E.g., 
if a man leaves Devadatta’s house and goes down the street and 
there is asked whether Devadatta is at home, thinking of it for the 
first time he answers, ‘“why no, he is not there.” One might think 
that he had a nonpropositional perception of Devadatta’s absence 
while he was in the house and remembered it later, but that would 
be to forget that in order to have any kind of perception, including 


NYAYAKANDALI 513 


nonpropositional ones, one has to confront some kind of form, and 
in the case of an absence the only relevant thing that has a form 
is the absence’s counterpositive, in this case Devadatta himself, who 
is by hypothesis not perceived. As the Nydyavarttika says, the diffe- 
rence between a positive entity and an absence is that the latter is 
known only as the negation of something else, whereas the former 
is known without dependence on something else. 


Answer: This man down the street reporting that Devadatta 
is not at home—does he judge that Devadatta is not at home now, 
or that he was not at home when he, the speaker, was in the house ? 
Surely not the former: Devadatta may have come home in the 
meantime, and anyway the man is no longer in the house and cannot 
judge. So your idea is that the previous nonapprehension (anupalab- 
dhi) produces the judgment of absence now. But how could it do 
that? Conditions have changed, and the nonapprehension is no 
longer present: again, it cannot be recalled, since according to the 
story this is the first time the speaker thought of the matter and so 
there is nothing to recall. No, when the speaker was in the house 
he perceived the mere form (svaripamdtra) of absence (without 
appreciating what its counterpositive was) and when prodded later 
about Devadatta he infers that the absence he saw in the house 
was Devadatta’s absence. The inference depends on the pervasion 
relating nonexistence of an object which would be remembered when one tries 
to and fails with failure to remember the object. 

Objection: But we sometimes just plain forget things that did 
exist—e.g., of two lines of a stanza, we may recall one and not the 
other. Answer: The cases are unlike. The words of a stanza are grasp- 
ed by different judgments, since they are heard one after another. 

(552-58; 1486-90) Objection: Since an absence has no 
cognizable nature the question of how we apprehend it cannot even 
arise. Answer: Then what is the source (dlambana) of the judgment 
“the thorn is not here (on the ground)” ? If it is held not to have 
any (external) source, the Buddhists prevail. If the ground is taken 
to be the source, then even when the ground has thorns we should 
still find ourselves saying “‘thorns are not on the ground,” since 
there would be no reason for us not to. Odjector: It is the bare ground 
which is the source. Answer: Is bareness a necessary concomitant 
of the ground, or a quality of it? Ifa necessary concomitant, then 
the difficulty will remain that cognition of it may produce the nega- 
tive judgment even when the thorns are there. If bareness is a dis- 
tinct quality of it, then you are admitting absences as a distinct 
entity, as we do, 


314 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
There are four kinds of absence: prior, posterior, mutual, 
and complete. Prior absences, e.g., the absence of the effect in its 
cause prior to its production, are beginningless but have an end, 
since they are destroyed by the appearance of their counterpositives. 
Objection: Then when the counterpositive in turn is destroyed we 
should perceive its prior absence once again! Answer: No, since 
the parts of the counterpositive also help destroy the prior absence, 
and when it is destroyed its parts still exist. Posterior absence is 
the loss of the nature (svariifa) of an object when it is destroyed. 
It has a beginning but is endless. Mutual absence is the absence 
of one thing in something different from it and vice versa, e.g., the 
absence of cow in horse and vice versa. Complete absence is the 
absence of that which never exists at all. 

112. (E560-64; T493-96) Sridhara’s interpretation of Praégas- 
tapada’s intent is this: When A utters a sentence containing the 5 
members of an argument, B hearing it knows that A intends him to 
understand something determined by the meanings of the various 
words in the sentence; B, indeed, knowing the individual meanings 
of each of the members infers therefrom the meaning of the whole 
sentence of which the argument consists. The meaning of the 
sentence is not cognized directly from the meanings of its components. 

Question: Is it that each of the members’ individual meanings 
is a causal factor in itself for the meaning of the whole (abhihitanva- 
yavada), or rather the meanings of the words in relation to each other 
(anvitabhidhanavéda) ? Some say that it must be the latter, since 
words have meaning only in the context of actions (since we learn 
words in hearing such sentences from our parents as “bring the 
cow,” “‘milk the cow,” etc.). But this cannot be right, since in 
learning, say, “bring the cow” we should have to know the meaning 
of “bring”’ first in order to know what to make of “bring the cow” 
(supposing we do not yet understand “‘cow’’), and thus at least one 
word must have a meaning independent of context; thus the theory 
of anvitabhidhdnavéda is untenable, and the abhihitanvayavdda theory 
is correct. 

113. (E566-74; T499-505) The definition of the hypothesis 
given by Pragastapada is intended to meet a Buddhist objection. 
The Buddhist questions the necessity of stating the conclusion of 
the argument at the outset, since it can serve no function in deriving 
the conclusion. PraSastapada’s answer finds another function for 
the first member, namely to identify the locus of the hetu. (The 
source of this idea is traced to the Nydyabhasya, which is quoted). 
Buddhist: Then again, to define the hypothesis as identifying the 


NYAYAKANDALI 515 


paksa qualified by the sddhya will not do, since the sédhya is not yet 
established and will not be until the inference is completed. 
Answer: True, it is not yet established, but it is known to us because 
we recognize its presence in the sapaksa. The hypothesis attributes 
the sidhya found in the sapaksa to the paksa and in addition identifies 
the paksa as the locus for the hetu to be mentioned in the next member. 

Examples of hypotheses which are not compatible with the 
facts are given. (1) “‘Fire is not hot’ is contrary to perception. 
(2) ‘‘4kaga is dense’’ is contrary to inference, in the sense that the 
defining characteristics of dkdfa are incompatible with density (having 
no constituents, they cannot be densely packed). (3) ‘‘A Brahmin 
should drink wine” is contrary to scripture. (4) ‘This word has no 
meaning”’ is self-contradictory. 

115. (E576-96; T512-22) Sridhara identifies the “some say” 
of (3) (pp. 296-297) as Kumarila and Uddyotakara: they are 
the ones who think that the presentation of two hetus to prove 
contradictory theses produces a case of “doubtful” s@dhya. Support- 
ing Prafastapada’s rejection of such a case as an instance of this 
fallacy, Sridhara says that in fact no such case could arise, since 
once one of the two reasons had been found to fulfil the conditions 
of a satisfactory inference, the other could not properly be proposed. 
To this the objector is made to say that it is not cases where the two 
hetus are actually proposed but cases where they could be proposed 
that produce doubt. Sridhara’s answer to this is that if it were so 
we could have no faith in the conditions specified as sufficient for 
validity of an inference! In fact what happens is rather that there 
is no definite proposition entertained in such a case, which is why 
Pragastapada wants to call it a case of the anadhyavasita type. 
Furthermore, there cannot in any case be two hetus of equal weight 
for two contradictory theses. 

119. (E621-23; 1544-45) Sridhara here deals with people 
who say that only perception is an instrument of knowledge, and 
not inference. He shows (1) that such a person must needs be a solip- 
sist of the present moment, since only by inference can we know that 
the perceptions of others are valid, or that past and future perceptions 
of our own are; (2) that no instruments at all are needed except to 
correct the ignorance of others, but that to know that another is 
ignorant we must have some other means than perception; (3) that 
to prove that inference is not a valid means of knowledge one will 
need to draw inferences. 

121. (E627; T549-50) The reason memory is not counted 
as a valid instrument is that it always grasps objects which have been 


516 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


known previously by some other means, and it is that other means 
which determines whether the judgment is valid or not. Kumarila 
is quoted with approval on this point. 

129. (E640-41; T565-66) When an object falls, is it the object 
itself which has weight or is it the component parts? Sridhara 
answers that both do. Well, then, how is it that a composite object 
weighs no more than its parts do, since if you add the two weights 
the result should be greater than either of the component weights ? 
Answer: Because the difference is very minute we do not feel the 
difference when measuring the respective weights, just as when we 
lift a large thing with some little things on it we do not feel the weight 
of the little things. 

132. (£650-57; 1574-81) In connection with the discussion 
of the second method of producing traces—by repetition of judg- 
ments-—Sridhara brings in a discussion of meaning. The occasion 
for the discussion comes when he explains how repetition of a judg- 
ment produces the trace: it is not just the first judgment in the 
repeated series that is sufficient, nor is it just the last one. He con- 
cludes that it must be that the last judgment aided by the next to 
last, which in turn is aided by the one previous to it, and so on back 
to the first one. 

Here the sphotavadin breaks in to urge that the meaning of a 
word or sentence is expressed not by the word or sentence but by 
its sphota. Meanings cannot be expressed by any one of the letters 
that compose the word all by itself, and the aggregation of letters is 
impossible, since by the time we hear the end of the word or sentence 
the earlier sounds have ceased to exist. If to avoid this we adopt 
the view that each letter-sound is eternal, still the collection will not 
occur, for our judgments of the sounds come and go. Well, then, 
suppose each successive letter in the series as heard produces an 
impression which is modified by the impressions left by the previous 
letter-sounds in turn. But this will not do, since by hypothesis the 
sounds are eternal—therefore talk about a series of them is out of 
the question. In fact if letter-sounds are eternal the words “‘sara”’ 
and ‘‘rasa”’ should mean the same thing, unless there is some addi- 
tional factor involved which differentiates our knowledge of the 
sounds in these two words. And there is: it is this additional factor 
we call the sphota. The way this factor works is this: when someone 
speaks a sound an indistinct sphofa of that letter is produced which 
involves reference to the object denoted by the word being spoken; 
when all the letters have been spoken, the sphotas combine to pro- 
duce knowledge of the object denoted. 


NYAYAKANDALI 517 


Refutation of sphoftavada. The sphota theory might have some 
force if we ever experienced anything like a sphofa, but we do not. 
We experience words as letters considered collectively rather than 
distributively, but we do not suppose there is some additional object 
over and beyond the collection of letters. As for the problem sup- 
posedly requiring the postulation of sphofas as its solution, though 
the earlier sounds have ceased to exist by the time the last sounds 
are spoken, still the impressions produced by those earlier sounds 
remain and it is the combination of those impressions which produces 
the knowledge of the object denoted. Mandana Miéra in his 
Sphotasiddhi has argued against this that since impressions can produce 
in us knowledge only of that which laid them down, the cognition 
of the meaning of a word cannot be produced by the impressions 
of the letters. However, there is no reason why we should accept 
this restriction on the function of impressions. The sphotavddin 
will have to grant to the sphotas of the individual letters the power 
to produce in combination knowledge of the denotation of the whole 
word. Our view is similar but simpler, since we attribute that 
same power to the impressions and save postulating any ad hoc 
entity like a sphota. Sridhara quotes Kumiarila as an authority 
for his view. 

133. (E661-64; T586-89) Objection: Merit is not a quality of 
the self but rather it is subclass of motion (karma), since the Vedas 
tell us that one gets merit by performing sacrifices. Answer: No, 
since a motion has but a momentary existence and has disappeared 
long before the happy result—gaining heaven, say—has come to 
pass. Objector: True, and for this reason we postulate a power in 
motion called apirva, a power to produce action at a distance, so 
to speak. Answer: After the motion is finished, in what does this 
apirva reside? Not in anything but the self, since it eventually 
produces its result there; thus it is a quality of the self, though you 
denied it above. Kumarila and Mandana Miéra are considered to 
the contrary and rejected. 

Sridhara expands a bit on the duties of the renunciate. He 
cites approvingly the steps laid down by Patafijali in the Yogasitras 
as well as those mentioned in the Nydyabhasya and the Samkhyakarikas. 
Yoga is necessary as a means to self-knowledge. The self is neither 
the agent (kartr) nor enjoyer (bhoktr); all notions born of the embo- 
diment of the self are false, producing merit and demerit and 
samsara. Even the Buddhists hold this. When self-knowledge has 
been reached, we will realize that the self is as the Samkhyakarikds 


518 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


describe it, “like an onlooker, free from rajas and tamas, beholding 
prakrti now withdrawn from her manifest forms.” 

136. (E686-89; T603-09) Having commented on Pragasta- 
pada’s account of the gaining of liberation, Sridhara raises the question 
whether liberation is gotten through knowledge alone, or through 
a combined path of knowledge and action (jfdnakarmasamuccaya). 
His view is the latter, and it entails that even the seeker after deli- 
verance must still perform the prescribed duties of his station, say of 
a Brahmin if he is a Brahmin. If he fails to perform these duties 
he incurs demerit. Objection: Failure to perform, being an 
absence, cannot produce a positive thing like demerit. Answer: 
True, an absence by itself cannot produce something positive, 
but together with other factors it can, and in this case a 
positive factor is the fact of just being alive. If one neglects his 
duty when it is enjoined and merely lives without acting as pres- 
cribed this is a positive misdeed and gains demerit. Objector: 
Self-knowledge can certainly destroy wrong actions, however. 
Answer: No, self-knowledge destroys wrong knowledge but nothing 
else. If it did destroy actions, it would destroy even those actions 
one is engaged in doing while gaining self-knowledge, and then 
jivanmukti would be impossible, since one’s body would fall off imme- 
diately upon realization. But it is not so; there is jivanmukti. (Au- 
thorities are cited: Vedas, Sdmkhyakarikés). Self-knowledge pre- 
cludes new actions after its acquisition, but does not destroy actions 
already begun. The fruits of such actions must be lived out. What 
happens when one gains self-knowledge is that no new actions are 
begun since one is no longer conscious of agency, the external organs 
of sense having ceased to operate. 

(E690-91; T60g-11) Question: What is the true nature of the 
self? Some say that its nature is bliss (@nanda). But that is wrong. 
For is the bliss experienced by the liberated self or not? If not, it 
is nonexistent. If so, what is its cause? Body and senses have 
disappeared, and any effects of the internal organ are transient. 
Objection: Nonetheless, the self cannot be supposed to be intrinsically 
unconscious (jada), or it would be like a block of stone ! Being 
intrinsically blissful, when body and senses cease to operate the self’s 
self-consciousness is necessarily blissful too. Otherwise liberation 
would be nothing but annihilation. Answer: If consciousness is 
essentially blissful, then it will be experienced always and not just 
after liberation. Objector: No, it is hidden by ignorance (avidya). 
Answer: What could this mean? If consciousness’ essence is to be 
blissful, then nothing can ‘hide’? it. 


NYAYAKANDALI 519 


155. (E748-52; 1657-60) Some people argue as follows about 
universals; the universal is identical with its instances. We do not 
have judgments about two distinct entities, as in seeing a man with a 
stick, and we do not see a cow as qualified by a distinct entity cowness. 
When we say “‘this is a cow” we are identifying this with a cow, Le., 
the universal. Each individual thing individuates itself and like- 
wise classifies itself as of a certain kind. This explains the view 
known as bhedabhedavada or “‘identity-in-difference.” A universal 
is identical with each of its instances, which are different from each 
other. This being what is found to be the case, it is pointless to 
complain that a thing cannot be both the same with and different 
from another thing at the same time: that is just how things are ! 

Answer: This perception which proves the identity-in-difference 
thesis, according to you—is it the perception that the universal and 
the individual have the same form? or is it a perception of the non- 
difference (abheda) between them? or is it a perception that they 
have different forms? In the first case you are perceiving only one 
thing, so there is identity but not difference. In the second case, 
if there are two things they must differ somehow, so it is a contra- 
diction to say they are identical. In fact, the third case is the correct 
one: we see cowness has a different form from an individual cow, and 
the fact that they are related in a peculiarly intimate way has to be 
explained by recourse to inherence. 

(E756-64; T663-69) The Buddhist view on universals is set 
forth: they deny there are any universals, since we never are aware 
of anything inhering in a number of things like a string connecting 
a number of beads. Answer: The fact that the several cows are 
similar to each other and different from horses suggests that they 
have a factor in common. That factor cannot be unity, since unity 
depends on a cause and the cause must be the possession of a common 
character. Furthermore, if there are no universals how can we 
explain the denotation of words? The pure particular cannot be 
the denotation of a word, since it is momentary and could not there- 
fore become associated with a word by convention. Nor can the 
denotation be the conceptual construction, since it too is momentary 
and is not common to several individuals. It might be the form of 
the conceptual construct, but that would be to admit universals as 
we do. 

The Buddhist explains his view on this: Each individual cow 
has its own conceptual construction, but the conceptual constructions 
of the several cows are similar, though they each have their own 
form. A single conceptual construct could not lead us to perceive 


520 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the difference among the forms, however, since one has to compare 
two things to see their difference. Now since conceptual constructs 
are momentary we cannot perceive their difference and through 
this failure to grasp difference along with the pure particular, 
knowledge of it, the form of that knowledge and the form imposed 
(dropita), this collocation of factors being spoken of as “‘the four- 
and-a-half form” (ardhapaticamakadra). This appearance is what 
is denoted by words, and it is through this appearance that we 
cognize the pure particular. 

Sridhara’s reply: It is just as likely that the nondifference among 
the conceptual constructions should fail to be grasped as that their 
difference should be, since it is equally the case that in order to per- 
ceive the similarity of two things they must be compared. There- 
fore, the explanation that perception of universals is really failure 
to grasp the difference between things will not do. Nor will it do, 
however, to explain the facts by recourse to a supposed grasping 
of the similarity between things, since this would require a perceiver 
to be around long enough to perceive two things and since the 
Buddhists deny the self there is no such perceiver. Leaving that 
aside, there cannot be any grasping of similarity since there is on the 
Buddhist hypothesis no ground for such a perception. 

Buddhist: But there is such a ground: it is the absence of non- 
cows. Answer: What are these ‘‘non-cows’ ? How can we identify 
them unless we already know how to identify cows! (Credit for 
this argument is given to Kumarila.) This notion that the apoha 
is the denotation of words is incorrect. For what is this apoha, 
this absence of non-cow? Is it positive or negative? If it is positive, 
then the difference from our view is verbal only. If it is negative, 
it cannot be the denotation of a word since it has no perceptible form, 
and thus cannot identify an object toward which we can exert our 
practical activities. 

(E787-88; T685-86) Sridhara concludes the work by outlin- 
ing the lineage of the Nyayakandali—naming the village in which he 
lived, the names of his parents, and the precise date of the com- 
position of the work, 913 of the Saka period (—A.D.991). 


27. SRIVATSA 


Udayana in his Parisuddhi produces some arguments of this 
writer, and Dinesh Chandra Bhattacharya’ quotes one verse which 
seems to him to imply that Udayana took lessons from Srivatsa. 
The arguments Udayana reviews are directed against Vacaspati’s 


UDAYANA 521 


views, and Udayana undertakes to defend VAcaspati against them.? 
Thus Srivatsa must come after VAcaspati but before Udayana, i.e., 
around the first half of the 11th century. He probably lived in 
Mithila. 


28. ANIRUDDHA 


A manuscript of this writer’s Vivaranapatijikd was discovered 
by K. K. Shastri in Jaisalmer in 1943.1 This is a commentary on 
the Nydyasiitras, Nydyabhisya, Nydyavarttika and its Tatparyatikd. 
The first chapter of the manuscript is missing. Aniruddha’s work 
is the first of its type—a commentary on the several commentaries 
and subcommentaries preceding him on the NS. Later writers who 
essayed the same kind of collective commenting were Srikantha 
and Upadhyaya Abhayatilaka. These works, however, include 
Udayana’s Parisuddhi within their purview, which strongly suggests 
that Aniruddha did not have that work in hand at the time of 
his writing. Furthermore, D.C. Bhattacharya? thinks Udayana 
refers to Aniruddha. On the other hand, Aniruddha apparently 
refers to Trilocana (or possibly Jayanta—a Nydyamafijari, in any 
case). 

J. S. Jetly has indicated a few of Aniruddha’s views. Aniruddha 
does not always follow the doctrines of those on whom he is com- 
menting. 


29. UDAYANA 


Of all the Nyaya-Vaisesika authors with the possible exception 
of the authors of the two sets of saras, Udayana is probably the most 
revered by followers of the school. He it is to whom credit is given 
by Naiyayikas for having demolished in final fashion the claims of 
the Buddhist logicians. All his works, or at least all of which we 
know, have been preserved, which attests to the respect in which 
he was held from the beginning. In particular, his Nydyakusumanjali 
still finds a place in the curriculum of the classically educated Bengali, 
and is celebrated by modern logicians as demonstrating acute 
dialectical prowess. Ganganatha Jha! goes so far as to say that 
“Udayana was the pioneer of that Modern School....” 
Navya-Nyaya, which properly speaking is held to begin with Gan- 
gesa in the mid-14th century. Certainly Navya-naiyayikas pay 
more attention to Udayana’s analyses as a rule than to those of any 


ie., of 


other writer of the old school. 


522 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


It is also a demonstration of Udayana’s fame that legends, 
indeed conflicting legends, have grown up about his personage. 
It seems probable that he was a native of Mithila. Satischandra 
Vidyabhusana?® says ‘the was born in Man-roni, a village 20 miles 
north of Darbhanga in Mithila on the east bank of the river Kamala.” 
D.C. Bhattacharya? says that Vidyabhusana is “‘quite wrong,” and 
that he lived in Kariyona near the modern railway station of 
Kamataula. In any case, he seems to have been a travelling man. 
Several versions of a story are found, all of which involve a trip to 
Puri, some of which involve Banaras; from these versions we get the 
impression that Udayana was an aggressive personality. It seems 
that (to follow one* account) Udayana took a Brahmin and a 
Buddhist up a hill and threw them both down. As they fell, the 
Brahmin said “‘There is a God,’’ while the Buddhist said ‘‘There is 
no God.” The Buddhist died, and thus Udayana proved the exis- 
tence of God. Becoming penitent, however, Udayana took himself 
off to Puri to see the god Jagannatha, but after three days and nights 
he was told in a dream that the god would not allow him audience. 
Therefore, Udayana retired to Banaras and performed tusdnala, 
i.e., burnt himself to death on a slow fire. As he died he uttered a 
verse, one version of which Ganganatha Jha’ translates as follows: 
“Intoxicated with greatness You treat me ignominiously. But you 
forget that when the Buddhists were in power Your very existence 
depended on me |”? According to Jha, who does not have the 
theistic-proof-by-survival bit, Udayana addressed this verse directly 
to the god at the temple in Puri. Anantalal Thakur®, on the other 
hand, reports that according to the Bhavisyapurdnaparisista Udayana 
defeated some Buddhist logician in a controversy in the presence of a 
king of Mithila, the controversy concerning the existence of the self. 
The terms were such that the Buddhist fell from a palm tree and 
died, after which the king accepted Udayana as his guru and all 
Buddhist texts were destroyed. That is why the temple at Puri was 
closed to him, since he had caused death. D.C. Bhattacharya’ 
has the story much like Vidyabhusana, involving the proof by jump- 
ing, except that according to him it was Udayana who matched the 
Buddhist by jumping with him, and by living while the Buddhist 
died he made his point. On the other hand, in Bhattacharya’s 
version Udayana was ‘‘honored by Lord Jagannatha at Puri as His 
own incarnation and died a natural death in old-age at Kagi.”’ 

There is no question that Udayana had a high reputation as 
a debater. In addition to his debates with Buddhists, he is also 
credited with having debated and defeated one Srihira, who was the 


LAKSANAVALi 523 


father of Sriharsa, the redoubtable Advaita dialectician whose 
Khandanakhandakhadya, containing many arguments against Udayana’s 
views, was composed to avenge his father.® 

One of Udayana’s works, the Laksandvali, contains a dating 
reference which appears as 906 Saka, i.e., A.D. 984 to 985. D.C. 
Bhattacharya® suggests that this is a misreading or miswriting, that 
the proper date is 976 Saka, ice., A.D. 1054. Bhattacharya gives 
elaborate arguments!’ to support the dating of Udayana during 
the latter half of the 11th century. For one thing, since Sriharsa 
flourished between 1125 to 1150, his father could not easily have 
debated Udayana much earlier than the latter part of the 11th cen- 
tury. Further, other 11th century writers who would have been 
expected to know Udayana do not, while all 12th century writers 
seem to. As a final point, we find that Udayana quotes Jiianaégri 
and Ratnakirti, the Buddhist logicians, who according to the 
Tibetan evidence were alive in the second quarter of the 11th century, 
and he must follow Sridhara (991), with whose views he quarrels. 

Udayana is credited nowadays with seven works, and Bhatta- 
charya™ has attempted to reconstruct the order of their composition. 
We follow his ordering in the summaries provided below.” 


1. LAKSANAVALI 
Summary by Karl H. Potter 


This work is a brief series of definitions of key Nyaya-Vaisesika 
notions. Its interest lies mainly in the style and character 
of the definitions, not in their content, which does not usually 
depart from accepted tradition. Since it is difficult to give 
the spirit of style in a summary, the treatment below is brief 
but, it is hoped, suggestive. 

(Page references are to Sasinath Jha’s edition (B2682A), 
Mithila Institute Series No. 14, 1963). 

1. (p. 1) After an invocation addressed to the “Lord of the 
mountain,” Udayana defines entities belonging to the categories as 
“nameable’’ (abhedheya). Such entities are of two kinds, positive 
things and absences. 

2. (p. 2) The positive kind is defined as a content (visaya) 
of a judgment which does not have the kind of contentness whose 
object (artha) is negative (nai). It has 6 varieties, substance and 
the rest. Of these the noneternal substances, the qualities, motions, 
universals, and individuators are things which inhere in other things. 


524 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Substances, qualities, and motions have things inhering in them. 
Universals, individuators, inherence, and absences do not have 
things inhering in them. 

3. (pp. 2-3) Several alternative definitions of substance are 
suggested, the first of which is that a substance is a thing which is not 
the locus of an absolute absence of qualities. The g substances are 
identified, and darkness is shown not to be an additional substance. 
The reason darkness is not a substance is that it is graspable by the 
eye without dependence on light, like absence of light. Darkness 
is not identical with absence of light, according to Udayana. 

4. (pp. 4-6) Earth is defined, e.g., as that which is free from 
the absolute absence of smell, and the eternal and noneternal kinds 
are distinguished. Some inferences are suggested for proving the 
existence of eternal earthy things, i.e., atoms. The body is defined 
as the final whole which is the locus (dyatana) of enjoyment (bhoga). 
A sense organ is a supersensible thing which is the instrument of 
immediate judgments about contacts (of things) with the body. 
Immediacy (aparoksatva) is the kind of judgment which is not 
produced through another judgment. A content (or object, oisaya) 
is a thing which, when it is known, produces enjoyment (bhoga). 

5. (pp. 7-9) Water is defined so as to include ice and hail. 
The association of the quality of taste with water is explained: it is 
because tasting involves water even when what is being tasted is, 
say, grain. 

6. (pp. 9-11) Fire (tejas) is defined as the locus of color which 
is also the locus of the absolute absence of taste. Or it may be 
defined as a thing which possesses a universal which does not occur 
in hail but does occur in shiny minerals. This leads to a defense 
of the thesis that gold is fiery by nature. 

7. (pp. 11-12) Air possesses touch in the same locus as the 
absolute absence of color. 

8. (p. 12) Nabhas—i.e., akafa—is what is not the locus of 
absolute absence of sound. 

9. (p. 13) Time is what is free from being the residence of 
unregulated (aniyata) priority, the regulation occurring either through 
the inherence relation or not; it is also free from materiality (miértatva). 

10. (p. 14) Spatial direction (dik) is treated in a parallel 
fashion. 

11. (p. 14) Selves are free from absolute absence of judgments. 
There are two kinds—godly and nongodly. 

12. (p. 15) The internal organ is material but lacks touch. 
Or else it is a material thing which is the locus of the absolute 


LAKSANAMALA 925 


absence of the specific qualities. The specific qualities are those 
which possess a universal which is pervaded by qualityness and does 
not occur in anything which cannot occur in earth. 

13. (p. 16) Now Udayana turns to the qualities, first to the 
definition of a quality. Again more than one definition is offered. 
The general aim is to offer a definition which does not overextend 
to include certain universals. 

14. (pp. 16-18) The 4 sense-qualities (excluding sound) are 
described, and their varieties explained. 

15. (pp. 19-24) The rest of the qualities are defined. 

16. (pp. 24-25) Motion is defined, and the fifth sort defended 
on the authority of the writers of scientific works. 

17. (p. 25) Universals, individuators, and inherence are 
defined. 

18. (p. 26) Absences are defined as things which are the 
objects of the notion of ‘‘not.” The 4 kinds are listed. Absolute 
absence is said to be a relational absence (samsargabhava) which is 
free from limits at both ends. 


2. LAKSANAMALA 
Summary by S. Subrahmanya Sastri 


The authorship of this work has been debated. Anantalal 
Thakur! has found that a work by this title is attributed to Udayana 
by Varadaraja, Mallinatha, and Abhayatilakopadhyaya. It is 
evident that Sivaditya also wrote a work called Laksanamdéla, and 
it is this which leads Pandit Subrahmanya Sastri'* to identify the 
work as that of Sivaditya. However, Sivaditya’s work seems to 
have been based on the mahdvidyé syllogism, and quotations from it 
are not found in our present treatise. Sivaditya’s work was in all 
probability a longer and altogether more important text than Udaya- 
na’s, which is very brief. Udayana’s work is merely a summation 
of the topics of the Nyadya system. It follows the Nydyasiitras’ 16 
categories, in contrast to the Laksandvali, which follows Vaiéesika. 

The work has been edited twice.” Page references here are 
to Subrahmanya Sastri’s edition (B2679) in the Journal of 
Oriental Research.) 

1. (p. 46) The author defines a valid judgment (pramda) 
as the experience of reality. It is twofold: eternal and noneternal. 
The locus of the eternal is the instrument of valid knowing which is 
God. The loci of the noneternal sorts are the other instruments. 


526 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


2. (pp. 46-47) The 4 instruments are defined. 

3. (pp. 47-48) The third category, object of valid knowing, 
is defined as that which is the content of a valid judgment. There 
are two sorts of such objects. One is that which, being known 
wrongly, leads to desire and hatred. The other is that which, being 
known correctly, uproots the causes of bondage. 

4. (p. 48) Of the 12 objects, 6 are defined here. The other 
6 are ignored, since their definition is clear in the Nydyabhdsya. 

5. (p. 48) Though there are other objects, such as substance, 
quality, etc., the 12 in the sitras are discussed since it is their know- 
ledge which leads to final liberation. 

6. (pp. 48-49) The Vaisesika categories are, nevertheless, 
defined. 

7. (pp. 49-52) The other categories, viz., doubt, purpose, 
etc., are given simple definitions. 

8. (p. 52) The author closes the work with a salutation to 
the Supreme Self. 


3. ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 
Summary by V. Varadachari 


Page references are to the Bibliotheca Indica edition (B2676), 
Calcutta 1939). 

In this work the author undertakes an investigation into the 
nature of the self. ‘The arguments, which Udayana gives while 
proving the existence of the self, are mainly directed to refuting 
the theories of the Buddhists, who deny the stability of the 
objects existing in the world and maintain that there is no self. 
Having established the existence of the self, Udayana discusses 
briefly matters such as God’s existence, the validity of the 
Vedas, and the goal of life. 

The text of the Atmatattvaviveka published in the Bibliotheca 
Indica Series is divided into four sections under the names 
Ksanabhangavada, Bahyarthabhangavada, Gunagunibheda- 
bhangavada, and Anupalambhavada. For a clear understand- 
ing of the text it will be proper to have 5 more divisions, 
namely (1) an introduction at the beginning, (2) establish- 
ment of the self, (3) establishment of God and of the authority 
of the Vedas, (4) the concept of final release, and (5) con- 
clusion. 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 527 


J. Introduction 


1. The work opens with a stanza conveying the author’s 
salutations to God. The main aspects of the Nydaya-Vaigesika 
conception of God are touched on here. God is the father and the 
Lord of the worlds, and is the foremost among the ancient preceptors. 
To Him belong the worlds; they owe their creation and maintenance 
to Him. Having created them, He arouses the people to become 
active. He makes provision for the people to do what is beneficial 
to them and to avoid what is harmful. His utterances are true 
and authentic. His guileless compassion shows that His undertak- 
ings are intended for the removal of the miseries of people. 

2. The author then shows the need for undertaking an inquiry 
into the nature of the self. People experience the miseries of life 
as unpleasant and seek to have them removed, but they are helpless, 
as they do not find the proper means for this. The scientific trea- 
tises (fGstra) declare that knowledge of reality (tattvajiana) is the 
only means for obtaining relief from miseries. The self, which is 
taken as reality, must be cognized correctly in its relation to the 
rest of reality, as that is understood in the various systems of thought. 

3. While denying the existence of the self, the Buddhists put 
forward their arguments under four heads. (1) Ksanabhanga: They 
contend that there is nothing like a permanent entity called a self, 
as against its existence which is maintained by the orthodox schools 
of Indian philosophy. The word ‘“ksanabhanga’” shows that 
everything which is taken to exist lasts only for a moment. This 
applies to everything in the world including the self. (2) Bahyar- 
thabhanga: This word conveys the theory that the things which are 
taken to have external existence do not have existence at all, even 
of a momentary nature. Such things taken to have external exis- 
tence are usually contrasted with judgments, which have existence 
internally. The self, which is considered to be different from its 
judgments (according to the Nyaya-Vaisesika school) is an external 
entity and so does not have existence at all. (5) Gunagunibheda- 
bhanga: This connotes the denial of any difference between a quality 
and the thing which “‘has’’ that quality. Now since the self, on the 
Ny4aya-Vaisesika account, is taken to be distinct from its qualities, 
this shows that there is no such thing as a self. (4) Anupalambha- 
bhanga: Since the self is not apprehended, it must be taken to be 
nonexistent. It is these four objections which are refuted in the 
next four sections respectively. 


528 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Il. Ksanabhangavada 


4. (pp. 22-34) According to the doctrine of momentariness, 
whatever exists does so only for a moment. This is proved by the 
invariable concomitance’® between existence and momentariness. 
An object existing at a particular moment is found to give rise to an 
effect and so is declared to have the capacity to produce that effect : 
this capacity is known as arthakriydkéritva. It did not have this 
capacity in the moments prior to this one, and will not have it after- 
wards. Now capacity and incapacity are characteristics that are 
opposed to each other; they cannot belong to one and the same 
object. Hence an object which has a capacity must be different 
from one which lacks it. The object of one moment is therefore 
different from the previous one, as well as from the next one after- 
ward. Thus, says the Buddhist, an object does not remain even 
for two consecutive moments. 

5. (pp. 34-46) This stand of the Buddhists is studied and 
rejected. The word “capacity” may also mean fitness, which 
means the availability of the full complement of accessories (sahakari) 
which the cause requires for producing its effect. In this sense the 
word ‘‘capacity’’ shows that a cause produces an effect only when 
it is associated with accessories. ‘‘Incapacity’’ will then mean that 
the accessories are not associated with the cause, which therefore 
does not produce the effect. The association of these accessories 
with the cause may take place only at certain moments. That does 
not mean that the object, i.c., the cause, during that particular 
moment must be a different object from the cause at the previous 
and at subsequent moments. 

6. (pp. 48-49) The word ‘‘capacity’? may also be taken to 
mean a characteristic pertaining to the cause. In that case, this 
characteristic may be universal which characterizes the object. 
E.g., in the case of a seed which produces a sprout, such a universal 
will be seedness. ‘That it is this characteristic that conditions the 
operative faculty of the cause is proved through agreement and 
difference (anvayavyatireka). Seedness must be present in all those 
objects called ‘‘seeds’” as long as they endure. So all seeds must 
have this capacity at all moments, and cannot lack it. 

7. (pp. 50-85) The Buddhists explain why a seed produces 
the sprout at a particular moment by showing that a particular 
property called kurvadripa, which is included in the main cause, 
comes into existence in the cause when it is about to produce the 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 529 


effect. But this position is untenable, as the presence of this pro- 
perty is not born out by perception or inference. This property 
cannot be said to produce an effect without any delay, as it must 
produce the effect at that particular moment and cannot continue 
to exist until the seed, out of which the sprout is to be produced, 
comes into existence. That is, when it is to come into being that 
particular seed may not be there, since it is said to have only momen- 
tary existence. Besides, “producing an effect without delay’? must 
mean only that the delay in the production of the effect cannot occur 
when the accessories are present in association with the cause. If 
there is any delay in the production of the effect it must be due to 
the absence of the accessories associated with the cause. An object 
lasts from the moment it is produced until it is destroyed, without 
getting associated with any universal properties other than those 
to which it belongs by nature. It gives rise to effects which are 
similar and dissimilar in their nature due to the variety of the acces- 
sories with which it gets associated from time to time. If, however, 
it is held that the kurvadriipa alone is responsible for the production 
of the effect, then if it exists in a fali (a kind of paddy) seed which 
produces a certain sprout, it must also exist in all sali seeds whether 
kept in the granary or sown in the fields. If this is not admitted, 
the ali seed will never have the capacity to produce the sprout. 
Therefore the admission of kurvadripa is not warranted in account- 
ing for the production of the sprout. 

8. (pp. 57-66) The capacity which a cause is said to possess 
as' its characteristic property cannot be identified with the absence 
of the effect, an absence caused by a deficiency in the accessories, 
for this amounts to admitting that if a cause does not produce the 
effect in the absence of x it must produce that effect in the presence 
of x. This « is nothing but the accessory. Therefore it is to be admit- 
ted that a thing or cause endures for several moments. 

g. (pp. 89-106) Seedness determines the capacity of the seed 
to produce a sprout whether the seed is kept in the granary or not. 
Otherwise the sprout can as well be produced without a seed. 

to. (p. 118) As regards the Buddhists’ claim that an enduring 
cause would have a contradictory nature, having both capacity and 
incapacity, the nature of contradiction requires study. Contradic- 
tion cannot be identified with mutual absence as that entity relates 
to eternality and noneternality, for example, since mutual absence 
of this sort cannot be proved to exist between capacity—which 
consists of the ability to produce an effect at one time—and incapa- 
city—which is the inability to produce the same effect at another time. 


530 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tr. (pp. 117-56) Again, contradiction cannot consist in 
characteristics which belong to the same object being opposed to 
each other like hot and cold, for the cause operates to produce the 
effect only when it is associated with the accessories, and nonpro- 
duction of the effect is the absence of the operation of the cause 
when it is not associated with the accessories. There is no contradic- 
tion between production and nonproduction, since the accessories 
are present near the cause at one time and are absent at the other 
time. 

Contradiction cannot be said to occur between two things 
which have mutual absence, as in the cases of one person having a 
stick and the other an earring, for in these two cases the persons are 
different. This difference is not due to the things possessed by 
them. Such a difference does not exist in the present case. 

12. (p. 157) It is not right to say: “objects must have momen- 
tary existence, inasmuch as one object cannot both have association 
with the accessories and not have such association.’’ For an object 
can have contact with accessories at one moment, and not at the 
next; at the next it may, however, have connection with some other 
accessories and produce some different effect. 

13. (p. 164) It is wrong to try to solve the alleged difficulty 
about contradictoriness by postulating that the accessories come 
into non-locus-pervading contact with the cause, and thus that 
they are both in contact with and not in contact with the cause, 
since they are in contact with one part only. The opponent wants 
to use this as an argument for construing objects as aggregates of 
ultimate particles, viz., atoms. But the position is absurd, as there 
can be no non-locus-pervading contact with an atom, which ex 
hypothesi is supposed to be the ultimate cause, especially if objects 
are aggregates of atoms. 

14. (p. 167) Thus invariable concomitance cannot be proved 
to exist between existence and momentariness. If agreement 
cannot prove this, difference cannot either. If one tries to prove 
through the method of difference that nonexistence and nonmomen- 
tariness are invariably concomitant, he must first admit that both 
exist. But this admission undermines the Buddhist’s case. 

15. (pp. 192-93) Expressions purporting to designate unreal 
things are meaningless. There are of course usages like ‘‘hare’s 
horn,” 
stood according to the anyathakhyati model, since the object, namely 
the hare’s head, on which the superimposition is made, is at a par- 
ticular place and the horn which is superimposed on it is not in the 


which are to be brought under erroneous judgments under- 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 531 


same place. This model for error is not available to the Buddhists, 
for they hold everything to be momentary, and so things do not last 
long enough to be superimposed elsewhere. Fallacies of the hetu, 
and linguistic mistakes, also come under error according to the 
anyathakhyati model. They cannot be explained according to the 
Buddhist’s asatkhyati model, since an error must be about something, 
and on the Buddhist model there is nothing for the error to be about. 

16. (pp. 195-98) Convention does not give rise to usages of 
words designating unreal objects, since such objects cannot be known 
in any fashion. Past impressions, or traces, could not explain the 
rise of judgments of this kind, for then such judgments would become 
eternal, since nothing could destroy them once they were produced. 

17. (pp. 210-18) A judgment about a hare’s horn cannot be 
construed in a fashion parallel to a judgment about the absence of a 
jar, since the nonexistence of the jar, which is distinct from the ground 
where a jar would rest, is known through valid instruments of 
cognition, while it is not so with the hare’s horn. The difference 
between a jar and its absence is real while such is not the case for 
hare’s horn. 

18. (p. 223) The Buddhist’ now offers a defense for his theory 
of momentariness by explaining that destruction is bound to happen 
to an object and so is uncaused. That being the case, anything 
that is produced must get destroyed the next moment. 

19. (pp. 223-28) This defense admits of 5 interpretations. 
(1) It may mean that since destruction is uncaused, this destruc- 
tion and the object destroyed are identical. Acceptance of this 
position cuts at the very root of variety in the world; everything 
becomes identical. 

20. (pp. 231-32) (2) It may mean that as there is no trace 
left at tg by an object existing at f,, destruction of the object can be 
described as characterless. This would lead to the admission that 
the object is in the same condition at all subsequent moments also, 
as there is no means of finding out how to identify the moment 
when the object is destroyed. There must be a cause for destruction, 
by reference to which we can verify its occurrence. 

21. (pp. 235-36) (3) That destruction is uncaused may be 
taken to mean that it is brought about by the object itself. This, as 
it stands, is absurd; if the object causes its destruction, destruction is 
not uncaused. On the other hand, if it is admitted that it is not the 
object by itself which produces its destruction, then the other factors 
must be identified; these are ‘‘accessories,”’ 


532 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


22. (p. 258) (4) The Buddhist doctrine may be interpreted 
to mean that destruction pervades the object. However, this 
cannot be maintained, for there is neither identity nor causal rela- 
tionship between the two, and according to the Buddhist these are 
the only varieties of invariable concomitance. And even if we con- 
sider it according to the Nyaya-VaiSesika conception of pervasion, 
destruction does not pervade the object destroyed. 

23. (pp. 260-61) (5) Lastly, the view may be construed as 
an argument of the following form: Destruction is uncaused, because 
it is an absence; absences are without a cause, like prior absence 
and unlike jars. Counter arguments can be provided against this 
one. For example, it may be argued that prior absence is caused, 
since it is an absence, like destruction; or again, prior absence is 
caused, since it is destructible, like a jar. Or suppose we admit 
that prior absence is uncaused, still: Prior absence cannot be des- 
troyed, because it is not caused, like sky or hare’s horn. The 
arguments on both sides fail to establish anything and so nothing is 
proved, certainly not that destruction can be uncaused. 

24. (p. 267-78) On the other hand, it can be proved that 
objects have enduring existence by appeal to the fact of recognition 
(pratyabhijwa). Objects are found to remain the same beyond the 
moment of their production, for they are not found to have con- 
tradictory features. Thus it is found from experience that they 
do not change from moment to moment. It is also found from 
experience that the form with which an object is normally associated 
is its real form. If it were not, activity arising toward that object 
could not be explained. 

25. (pp. 278-82) The Buddhists hold that the object is asso- 
ciated with a certain characteristic form because that form represents 
the absence of some other form. This view is called apohavéda. 
According to it each object has got in it the absence of, or difference 
from, those things that are different from itself. This shows that 
the form which the object seems to possess is not real, and that its 
real form is negative in character. Vhe Nyaya school rejects this 
position and holds that the object has a positive form. Activity 
arises with reference to positive, not negative, things. 

26. (p. 289) Some Buddhist scholars!® hold that when an 
object presents itself with its positive features, there appears also the 
negative form which is subordinated to the positive features. This 
being the case, they say, references to the real form of the object 
cannot be made out as true, since amidst both kinds of features it is 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 533 


impossible to distinguish which are the positive and which the 
negative ones. 

27. (pp. 289-314) This interpretation is unsound, answers 
Udayana, for one and the same object cannot have both positive 
and negative features. It cannot therefore be claimed that the 
negative features are subordinated to the positive ones. The apoha- 
vada theory might stand if the pure particular could appear without 
its positive features, and if unreal (alika) things could present them- 
selves without their negative features. The Buddhists, however, 
hold that the pure particular presents itself with its positive features. 
And in the case of unreal objects, they have no features at all to be 
presented. 

28. (p. 330) The Buddhists maintain that the pure particular 
is the object of perception only, not of inference or of verbal testi- 
mony. [If all the instruments of valid judgment could operate on 
the same object, there should be differences among the judgments 
produced by each of these instruments. Thus a judgment about 
an object arising from perception is distinct and is confined to a place 
and a time, while those produced about the same object by inference 
and verbal testimony are of an indistinct nature and are not deter- 
mined as to place and time. Hence the pure particular, which is 
apprehended by perception, must alone be real, while those objects 
that are apprehended by the other means of proof must be unreal. 

29. (pp. 332-38) This interpretation is met by the declaration 
that judgments of the same object remain the same irrespective of 
the instrument employed. The slight differences among these 
judgments, if noticed at all, must be taken to have been brought into 
existence by defects in the operation of the instruments or in other 
factors ancillary to their operation. An object cognized at one time 
with a particular feature does not become changed later, nor does 
it present itself differently to another person. Distinctness and 
indistinctness in judgment are due to factors other than the instru- 
ments employed. E.g., an object seen from nearby presents itself 
distinctly, while one far away is indistinct. Nothing can be said 
about the nature of a judgment that a thing has certain features, 
when in fact no such judgment arises; spatial and temporal features 
may not always be presented in judgment when an object is seen 
from various distances. The variety among such judgments does 
not prove that their objects must be different. 

30. (p. 344) The difference between propositional and non- 
propositional judgments does not affect the identity of their objects. 
Judgments perform two functions: they identify their objects and 


534 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


show the species to which they belong. Once the objects are identi- 
fied they may be found to be different from the objects of other 
judgments, or perhaps the same. Even if they are different, it is 
not their difference, but the difference in the causes of the judgments, 
that is responsible for the disparity between propositional and 
nonpropositional judgments. And we cannot know which sort of 
judgment we are entertaining until the subsequent stage of apper- 
ception (anuvyavasaya). 

31. (p. 351) Since the last is the case, it cannot be held that 
when an object is apprehended its difference from what is different 
from itself is also apprehended. If those other things are also cog- 
nized, then their pure particulars must be known. The principle 
of apoha will have to be applied in their cases too, and this will lead 
to infinite regress. If the other things are not cognized, then the 
difference of the present object from them can never be known. 

32. (p. 356) Traces (vdsan@) cannot be taken to give rise to 
the apoha type of identification, as the apprehension of yellow—which 
would rise due to the apprehension of blue’—would produce in 
turn activity on our part with reference to blue. If you say no, that 
the judgments are nonpropositional, then it would follow that 
judgments never produce any activities whatsoever. Perhaps, 
then, you will say that activity only arises from propositional judg- 
ments produced from nonpropositional ones: but then inferential 
judgments and those derived from verbal authority would not lead 
to activity, since they are not produced from nonpropositional 
judgments. 

33. (p. 358-64) The Buddhist may say that the operation of 
experience (anubhava) is responsible for the correctness of a non- 
propositional judgment. But if this operation is with reference to 
the object of perception, then we can get along without the non- 
propositional judgment altogether. This operation cannot be 
supposed to prove that there is similarity of form (séripya) between 
the pure particular and the unreal object which is the object of 
propositional judgments. How can there be sameness of form bet- 
ween what is real and that which is completely unreal ? 

34. (pp. 368-74) The efficacy of a cause cannot give rise to 
activity with reference to an object unless the efficacy is admitted to 
belong to a definite species. If this is not allowed, a nonpropositional 
judgment of fire may give rise to activity with reference to water. 
Since the materials out of which a judgment and its object are 
constructed are different, there cannot be sameness of form between 
a judgment and its object. If this were not so, there would be no 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 535 


difference between a conscious and an unconscious thing. Thus we 
conclude that judgments give rise to activity with reference to the 
objects presented through them; that is their causal efficacy. 

35. (pp. 401-14) The Buddhists?® object to the existence of 
universals (jati) on the ground that a universal is not perceived in 
the interval between the passing out of existence of one individual 
and the coming into being of another. This objection is meaning- 
less, since at that time there is no individual, and it is only through 
individuals that universals can be made known. Universals occupy 
Just precisely the same loci as the individuals they inhere in and no 
others. They are perceptible. 

36. (p. 423) The Buddhist proposes the theory of apoha because 
he is convinced that ultimate truth is not expressible through the 
normal means of identifying objects by reference to their characteristic 
features. But if so, the Buddhist might as well give up his doctrine 
of the pure particular. Also, if words do not identify things by 
distinguishing one from another, then all arguments are beside the 
point, especially the Buddhists’.*+ 


Ill. BAHYARTHABHANGA 


37. (p. 429) According to the idealistic theory of Buddhism, 
there is no object that has existence outside judgments. So the self, 
which is distinct from its judgment and so external to that judgment, 
cannot have existence, they say. 

This theory admits of 3 interpretations: (1) there is no diffe- 
rence between the judgment which apprehends and the object which 
is apprehended by it; (2) both judgment and object belong to the 
same species; and (3) the object is unreal while the judgment alone 
is real. 

38. (pp. 431-64) According to the first interpretation, there 
being no difference between the judgment and its object, the two 
are to be treated as identical; thus there is no additional, external 
object over and beyond the judgment which is the only object. Such 
an interpretation does not stand to reason, for the identity between 
the judgment and its object can only be established if we suppose 
that we can cognize the object through the judgment, and the judg- 
ment has features different from those characteristic of the object. 
So they cannot be identical. The object presents itself in a judgment 
as it actually is and not in a form which is not its own. If the diffe- 
rence between a judgment and its object is not real, then the nature 
of a judgment cannot be established. On the other hand, if the two 


536 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


are identified because we fail to note their difference, we cannot be 
said to have cognized them both together. Nor can the Buddhist 
appeal to the apoha theory here to account for the identity among the 
apparently multifarious external objects, as the apoha theory loses 
all validity if there is no difference at all. 

39. (pp. 470-72) The Buddhist proceeds to analyze the rela- 
tion between a judgment and the object which is its content. He 
argues that they must be identified, since there is no operation per- 
formed on the object by the judgment which affects the object in a 
recognizable way, and since among the characteristics of the judg- 
ment y one does not find the universal making-known object x, while 
among the characteristics of the object x one does not find the uni- 
versal made-known-by judgment y. 

This position Udayana answers by showing that the same rea- 
soning can be used to show that the judgment and its object are 
different. The lack of any effect produced in the object when it 
becomes known, which is used by the Buddhist to prove identity, 
may just as well be used to prove nonidentity. Indeed, by appealing 
to this rule we would not even be able to know that a judgment is 
a judgment, since no effect is produced in the judgment itself by itself 
or another judgment’s “knowing” it. As for the second argument, 
here the principle appealed to is that two things are not different 
unless they are the loci respectively of relational universals indicating 
the difference between them. But to appeal to this rule would 
result in the identification of things the Buddhist does not want to 
identify—e.g., one person’s judgment of cow would be identical with 
another’s. 

40. (pp. 477-79) Buddhists® recognize reality as that which 
is distinct from (i) the existent; (ii) the nonexistent; (iii) what is 
both existent and nonexistent; (iv) what is neither existent nor non- 
existent. This is really wonderful! It may be pointed out here 
that instead of taking this position reality could be admitted to have 
all 4 of the characteristics mentioned above, for this would be 
equally wonderful! But seriously, the Buddhist cannot maintain 
reality to be none of the above, for to maintain this he is making 
use of the notion of denial, which is no longer available to him since 
he accepts the existence of nothing which could be denied. 

41. (pp. 481-84) The second interpretation (of section 37), 
that the judgment and its object belong to the same species, cannot 
stand. The Buddhist holds that the basis of his idealistic theory 
lies in the nihilistic doctrine that both what is within and what is 
without are unfit to be apprehended, but that the existence of the 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 537 


blue (pure particular) cannot be denied. This standpoint is 
absurd, since if the blue cannot be denied to exist it must be fit for 
apprehension, or if not it must be denied to appear. In either case 
there is presupposed something to apprehend, or fail to apprehend, 
something distinct from the pure particular itself. 

42. (pp. 490-91) As to the third interpretation (of section 37) 
according to which the judgment is real and the object not, the ques- 
tion is what “unreality” means here. If it means that the nature 
of the object is inexpressible, this may be admitted without necessarily 
admitting also the nonexistence of the object. This is on the sup- 
position that the object’s inexpressibility is due to our difficulty in 
knowing it. Ifits inexpressibility is due to the fact that it is absolutely 
unreal, then such talk is meaningless. If we can speak of x, it can- 
not be absolutely unreal. 

43. (p. 492) It is only with reference to a real object that a 
judgment about it arouses a desire or aversion with respect to it, 
gives rise to successful effort, produces activity and accomplishes 
finally the acquisition or avoidance of it. This process does not 
apply to the unreal. 

44. (pp. 496-99) The Buddhist may say that the universe is 
unfit to be reflected upon regarding its feature because of some defect 
there. But this is wrong. If this absence of fitness is because of some 
defect in the object, then it cannot but become an object of reflection. 
An analogy is cited here in support of the Nyaya view. A young 
monkey listened to the news brought by Hanuman from Lanka, 
felt envious of the latter’s glory, and jumped and fell into the sea to 
find whether Hanuman really could have crossed it. Unable to 
proceed further owing to the depth of the ocean, it came back to 
shore and said that Hanum4n’s crossing could not have taken place 
at all! Likewise, unreality cannot be attributed to a thing merely 
because of the inability of a person in cognizing it. The world 
should not be held to be unknowable or indescribable because a man 
born blind cannot know or describe a blue jacket. 

45. (p. 501) Udayana now turns to examine whether the ul- 
timate truth is void as the nihilists hold. If voidness is not estab- 
lished by itself, then the universe cannot be declared void. If it is 
proved through conventional truth (samurtisatya), then there is no 
difference between the universe and voidness. If conventional 
truth is not what is taken to prove this, then something else will be 
required which also being void would require another to prove 
voidness. Thus infinite regress will result. What is not established 
cannot prove voidness. Or if it is supposed that it can, the position 


538 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


becomes tantamount to that of the Vedantins. 

46. (pp. 503-4) According to the (Advaita) Vedantin, what 
establishes the ‘‘voidness” of the universe is eternal, characterless, 
and real. It has no relationship with the world which is unreal. 
Conventional truth is responsible for all worldly transactions on the 
part of human cognizers. The experiences and verbal conventions 
of the world are due to ignorance (avidyd). Experience of the world 
as objective arises on account of conditions brought into existence 
by ignorance, and thus there comes to be difference in the world. 

47. (p. 508) Thus it must be admitted on the strength of ex- 
perience that what is different from judgment also presents itself. 
The external world being thus established, its nature requires study. 
Ali schools of thought do not have the same view concerning this. 
Some hold that the external world is real, that judgments produced 
thereby are noneternal, and that the relationship between the 
judgments and the external world is dependent upon the judgments.”® 
Some hold that the nature of the external world depends both on 
judgments and objects, the judgments again being held to be non- 
eternal.26 Other schools treat the external world as unreal. The 
Yogacara school considers judgments noneternal, in which case the 
external world is dependent upon judgments alone.?” Some how- 
ever treat judgments as eternal, in which case their nature is entirely 
dependent upon the external world.** It is the position of the Nyaya 
school which is presented here. In its view the particular nature 
of an existent object presents itself in judgment. This nature belongs 
to that object alone and not to any other. It is this nature which 
constitutes the relation between a judgment and the object which 
is its content. Since this is a self-linking relation, it does not 
require the aid of anything else for making its appearance. 

48. (p. 517) The purpose achieved by this relation consists 
in arousing activity toward the object. Internally, it serves to 
identify the judgment that has arisen. 

49. (p. 522) The nature of the external world cannot be said 
to depend upon both judgments and their objects, as in that case 
judgments would be stable and would not undergo any change. 
And that nature cannot be said to depend on the real external world 
alone while judgments are held to be eternal, for this would lead 
to the admission of the satkdryavdda position of Samkhya, which 
cannot stand owing to the breakdown of the relation between cause 
and effect. For the causal relation cannot be discussed without 
reference to the disappearance of what was prior and the appearance 
of what is posterior. This is not possible on the basis of satkdryavdda. 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 539 


Again, the nature of the external world cannot be held to depend on 
momentary judgments, the external world being unreal, for what 
is unreal cannot have any nature to present. The Yogacaras, who 
hold this view, treat judgments as formless (nirdkara). Hence the 
nature of objects cannot be identified. 

50. (pp. 524-27) Objects cannot both be said to be identi- 
fiable and not to exist. If they do not exist, they may have reference 
to a time other than their own, in which case other times and place 
have to be recognized during which they exist. Or they may be 
taken to exist in a place different from that presented, in which case 
they cannot determine the judgment. What may be meant, on the 
other hand, is that judgments are formless, as above. But even if so, 
a judgment that something is blue must be taken to deny of that 
thing that it is blue, which is to say, to assert that it is non-blue. 
Either the blue or the non-blue must be real; if neither are, they 
cannot be said to be identifiable. 

51. (pp. 527-29) Buddhist: Unreality consists in a thing’s not 
being amenable to reflection (vicéra). Answer: No, for since any- 
thing which has a form is amenable to reflection, an unreal object 
cannot have any form at all. Thus the Buddhist who just spoke 
must agree to the position of the Advaitin’s antrvacaniyakhyativada 
or to that of the Naiyayika who maintains the reality of the external 
world.?® There can be no judgments if the differences among objects 
are ignored. If these differences eventually become sublated, the 
Advaita Vedanta school must be considered to be vindicated. If 
not, the world must be taken to be real as we find it. 

52. (pp. 530-31) If one supposes that one can give arguments 
for the unamenability of a thing to reflection, or its indescribability, 
this is like the fools who, having seen an elephant at the entrance 
to the palace, imagined it to be darkness, cloud, a relation, etc., 
adducing their reasonings to support their contention. After counter- 
arguments were presented by others among them to disprove each 
of the above descriptions, they then concluded that it was nothing ! 
But this does not mean that there was no elephant there !8° Con- 
siderations like these do not deserve discussion. 

53. (p- 533) A statement conveys its sense only if it.is confined 
to the limits of worldly experience. E.g., ‘‘this mountain has fire,” 
which possesses expectancy (akdmksaé), appropriateness (yogyata), 
and contiguity (samnidhi). Its meaning does not depend on other 
instruments of cognition and does not allow for any argument that 
sets aside its sense. On the other hand, passages that do not fulfil 
these conditions do not convey any sense, e.g., ‘“‘this mountain, 


540 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


39 


Devadatta is white,” “the mountain is eaten by Devadatta and has 


this mother is barren,” ‘I am 


33 6 33 CE 


the hare has horns, 
dumb,”’ etc. 


smoke, 


54. (p. 541) The Buddhist’s statements do not convey any 
sense. Such statements are: ‘‘Nothing exists,’ ‘‘nothing is real,” 


99 66 


“nothing does anything,” ‘nothing deserves any discussion,” “nothing 


99 66 > 


has any basis,” “nothing is known,” and “nothing is there.” In 
all these cases there is self-contradiction and consequent lack of 
sense. 

55. (p. 544) If a thing is established (through a judgment) 
it cannot be totally denied (to exist). If it is not established, the 
denial of it has no significance. 

56. (p. 561) The Buddhist at this stage takes up a discussion 
concerning the nature of difference. He addresses a _ dialectic 
against the tenability of the notion of difference. Difference 
between two objects cannot be held to be the natures of the things 
themselves, for the words ‘‘jar’? and “difference” do not mean the 
same. Difference cannot be mutual absence of x in y, for to prove 
that x differs from y, i.e., is absent from y, one must establish the 
existence of a counterpositive (e.g., y)—and this begs the question. 
To hold that difference is a property of an object is to initiate an 
infinite regress. Hence difference cannot be held to have any exis- 
tence, says the Buddhist. 

57. (pp. 564-68) These arguments do not stand to reason, 
replies Udayana. We do entertain judgments concerning the 
differences between things. These judgments cannot be said to be 
eternal, since in deep sleep they cease. They are, therefore, non- 
eternal. Thus they are necessarily caused. And if they are caused 
they must be about some object, namely the causes, and thus diffe- 
rence is known. This is true even if the cause is something else than 
the object which is presented in judgment (as in the Advaita account). 

It is true that if difference were construed as a property an infinite 
regress would ensue, but that only shows that that is not the proper 
way to construe difference. Nor is it correct to construe difference 
as mutual absence of a given thing from everything else, for then 
everything would be cognized as self-resident (dtmdsraya). Since 
we have judgments of difference in addition to the judgments by 
which we identify something as of a given kind, that difference must 
have something else as its cause other than mere mutual absence. 
Ignorance (avidy@) cannot be said to be the cause, for then jars and 
other things could be said to exist without depending for their exis- 
tence on causal factors. So the right alternative (among the 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 541 


alternatives offered in section 56, is that difference is of the nature 
of things themselves, but this nature is brought about by (positive) 
causal factors. It is for this reason that the words “‘jar” and “diffe- 
rence’? mean distinct things; although they may both denote the 
same object (in a given use), one word may be appropriate and the 
other not because of the causal situation. 

58. (p. 569) Difference presents itself variously to us in our 
judgments, depending on what sort of object judgment is concerned 
with. When we judge that a specific cloth is different from a parti- 
cular jar, difference presents itself merely as such. In cases, like 
this, of differences among substances, as well as those between qualities 
and motions, we are acquainted with the distinctive nature of the 
objects, their difference and also the features that distinguish them. 
In the case of universals, individuators, and inherence, on the other 
hand, since these have no universals which constitute their distinctive 
natures, we can only be acquainted with their difference and the 
dissimilar features they have. 

59. (p. 586) The Buddhist® shifts his ground and attacks 
the Nyaya conception of the whole, composed of but not aggregated 
from its parts. There are 5 kinds of mutually contradictory features 
such a whole has, says the Buddhist: (1) a whole can be both appre- 
hended and not apprehended at the same time; (2) it can be both co- 
vered and not covered; (3) it can both be shaking and not shaking; 
(4) it can have and lack a color, e.g., red; (5) it can be in contact 
and not in contact. But one object cannot have contradictory features, 
argues the Buddhist. Udayana demurs. 

60. (pp. 587-613) Each of these supposed contradictions are 
generated by supposing that one part of the whole can be apprehended, 
covered, shaking, red, or in contact, while another part of the whole 
lacks respectively such features. But, says Udayana, this involves 
no contradiction. It is precisely the Nyaya view that one can appre- 
hend a whole while at the same time apprehending some but not 
all of its parts. Since the parts are ex hypothesi, not the same entities 
as the whole there is no contradiction. Some familiar theories of 
Nyaya, e.g., the hypothesis of variegated-color, are set forth. 

61. (p. 617) The Buddhist now attacks the atomic theory of 
Nydya-Vaisesika. If, he says, atoms can be shown not to exist, 
then gross objects cannot either, and so the existence of objects is 
repudiated. His argument against atoms is as follows. In the 
process of producing wholes atoms are supposed to come into con- 
tact with each other. Now contact must be either locus-pervading 
or non-locus-pervading. But contact between atoms cannot be 


542 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


locus-pervading, as in that case an atom which has conjoined with 
another atom cannot have any further contact with any other 
atom. And atomic contact cannot be non-locus-pervading, since 
atoms have no parts. Thus there cannot be atoms. 

62. (pp. 618-21) Udayana’s first line of defense is tu quoque. 
He points out that what the Buddhist has said about atoms can also 
be said about judgments. A judgment must either fully pervade 
(i.e., cognize) its object or not. If judgments cognized all the object 
they could not grasp the features of the object, for one cannot know 
something as blue if it is also yellow. On the other hand, a judg- 
ment cannot be only partially pervasive (cognizant) of its object, 
for judgments have no parts. Thus judgments do not exist, accord- 
ing to the logic of the Buddhist’s argument. 

63. (pp. 622-29) Turning to the Buddhist’s argument about 
contact as it applies to atoms, Udayana shows that the Buddhist 
assumes the opposite of the Nyaya theory in attempting to refute it. 
He assumes that atoms have parts, since he supposes that contact 
can only take place among parts of things and he attributes contact 
to atoms. But this is just mistaken: contact has nothing to do 
with the possession of parts by the things in contact. Though 
contact between middle-sized objects produces the effect of a part 
of one thing screening a part of another, this is not an intrinsic 
characteristic of contact, so that contact does not have to occur only 
between middle-sized things, but may also occur between atoms of 
the smallest size. And furthermore, we could not even explain 
what possession of middle size consists in if we did not postulate the 
existence of smaller units, ultimately of atoms. We must postulate 
atoms, and in order to achieve the simplest explanation, these ulti- 
mate atomic constituents must not have middle-sizedness, parts, 
color, touch, etc. 

Another mistaken idea involved in the Buddhist’s assumptions 
is that there is some kind of space between atoms, or between their 
parts. When two atoms are in contact there is no space between 
them. Again, for the same reason, logical simplicity, we must assume 
that atoms are indestructible; destruction of things occurs when 
their parts disintegrate, but the very logic of this analysis requires 
that there be ultimate elements which do not disintegrate because 
they are partless. 

64. (p. 631) If the Buddhist, in order to escape Udayana’s 
tu quoque argument (section 61), nihilistically denies the existence of 
judgments as well as objects, he contradicts himself; for since his 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 543 


case is expressed through judgments, he cannot very well deny their 
existence ! 

65. (pp. 636-37) That wholes are single units, not aggregates 
of their parts, is attested by everyone’s experience. This experience 
is clear, and is not the content of a nonpropositional perception. 
Indeed, nonpropositional perceptions cannot be held to be clear 
per se, as the Buddhist seems to think, for then perception as we know 
it would cease to exist. 

66. (pp. 639-48) Possession of large (mahat) size is a neces- 
sary condition for perception. Atoms cannot be held to have large 
size, for we know that even the smallest perceptible objects have 
parts, which in turn must be imperceptible. Once this is realized, 
it will also be realized that merely aggregating many imperceptible 
atoms does not produce large size, for if it were so, we should per- 
ceive aggregates of atoms spread out indiscriminately over an 
expanse. 

67. (pp. 653-62) A whole is experienced in relation to its 
parts. This is no reason to question its unity. An object is taken 
to be single, just as a judgment is taken to be single, if it does not 
have contradictory features. As this is all based on experience, it 
cannot be set aside by theory. And in any case there is no other 
way to account for our fashion of speaking of objects as “single” 
than to attribute to them the quality unity; one might as well attempt 
to explain our usages of words like “liquid,” “‘hard”’, “cold,” “hot” 
by appeal to causes other than liquidity, hardness, coldness, and 
heat. 

68. (pp. 662-64) The Buddhist may now modify his claim to 
this: The existence of a world of external objects is doubtful, since 
it is difficult to distinguish veridical from nonveridical judgments 
about those objects. But, says Udayana, the reason is not allowable; 
judgments cannot be exhaustively classified into veridical and non- 
veridical in advance of experience. We discover sometimes that a 
judgment about an object is false, that is, that we had judged incor- 
rectly concerning it, and we thus conclude with regard to that judg- 
ment that we had believed true what is in fact false. If judgments 
wear their truth or falsity on their sleeves, as it were, this experience 
would never occur. And the Buddhist should not try to explain 
away the experience of sublation of a judgment as merely verbal— 
as if the judgment we believed true turned out to be merely ill-formed. 
We engage in discussions about what to say about objects only 
because we assume we can refer to the objects, and so they must 
exist. 


544 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


69. (p. 666) Furthermore, we cannot explain why we engage 
in purposive activity with reference to objects on the assumption 
that there are no external objects; without the hypothesis of such 
objects there would be no reason to predict acquisitiveness rather 
than dislike in a given instance, or to expect a person to act purpo- 
sively toward one (apparent) object rather than another. Thus 
activity toward or away from an object cannot be explained as due 
to everything being unreal or to the difficulty of telling truth from 
falsehood. 

70. (pp. 675-76) Judgments, as was said, are determined as 
to their validity by the nature of things, and thus whether a given 
judgment is true or false cannot be decided in general but must be 
decided case by case. 

Defense of this position requires, however, a discussion of 
whether validity is intrinsic or extrinsic. It isnot intrinsic. If it 
is intrinsic, then is this fact made out by the judgment itself or by 
another judgment? It cannot be apprehended by the judgment 
itself, as no judgment can apprehend its own validity. Judgments 
have the generic character of illuminating, but this cannot be the 
basis for declaring one to be valid in contrast to another. Percep- 
tion cannot show us that a judgment is intrinsically valid, on the 
other hand, for there is nothing perceived in a true judgment which 
is lacking in a false one. 

71. (pp. 676-82) The Buddhists, on the other hand, argue 
that if a judgment is not allowed to be perceptible, then it will not 
illuminate its object for us. Again, they say, if it takes a second 
judgment to cognize a first one, there will be an infinite regress and 
no judgments will ever be cognized. 

These arguments require clarification, particularly of the phrase 
“a judgment is....perceptible.” If to perceive a judgment is to 
formulate that judgment about the object, then the first part of the 
above Buddhist argument merely comes to saying that if no judg- 
ments are allowed to occur no objects will be illuminated—and 
this can hardly be denied. But nothing regarding the existence of 
objects follows from this; objects may continue to exist even if no one 
formulates judgments about them. As for the infinite regress point, 
there is no difficulty here, for it is just not the case that every judg- 
ment needs validation, and in particular, where we are dubious 
about the validity of a judgment we do not have knowledge of an 
object. 

72. (pp. 687-92) As noted above, the validity of a judgment 
cannot be established merely on the basis that it illuminates, for all 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 545 


judgments do that by their very nature. More generally, the 
intrinsic validity of a judgment cannot be established by apperception 
(anuvyavasdya), as it is not possible to decide concerning a given 
judgment merely by inspection that it is valid rather than invalid. 
Nor can we hope to identify validity by inspecting the nature of the 
instrument used in arriving at a given judgment, for we can make 
mistakes about this, and think that what is not a valid instrument 
of knowledge is one. Thus, even if validity pervades the judgment 
from its first instant, we cannot hope to know that fact except extrin- 
sically, i.e., from a subsequent inferential judgment. But we must 
discover error, if worldly transactions are to proceed. 

The process of extrinsic establishment of the validity ofz judg- 
ment fF is this: when F first arises, we do not distinguish the features 
which differentiate its object from other things much like it; it is 
only at a subsequent stage, called abhydsa,** that we doubt whether 
f is true or false, and study the relations between 7 and other judg- 
ments whose objects are similar to that of J. The study undertaken 
at this stage forms the basis of another judgment K; K is based on 
memories aroused by the impressions produced by knowledge of 
invariable concomitance, and thus-it is K, which is about the identi- 
fying features of 7’s object, which validates 7. 

73. (pp. 698-701) The above account applies to perceptual 
judgments but not generally to inferential ones. For in the case of 
the judgment that the hetu pervades the paksa, no doubt arises, and 
yet it is required that this pervasion occur. Asan exception, there- 
fore, the determination of the validity of an inference, inasmuch as 
it depends on this relationship holding, is held to be intrinsic.%3 
Udayana says that this is the traditional view of the Nydya system, 
elucidated by Vacaspati Misra. 

Likewise, another exception tothe rule of extrinsic establish- 
ment of validity is allowed in the case of apperception (anuvyavasdya) 
itself, in order to avoid infinite regress. 

74. (p. 706) Since what is real and what is unreal are distinct 
from each other, it must not be imagined that there is no difference 
between the dream and waking states. If there is agreement noticed 
between objects visualized in a dream and those experienced in the 
waking state, this is purely accidental. All experiences had during 
dreams are sublated with regard to their connections with the agent 
and his actions, space and time, etc., upon waking up. On the 
other hand, during the waking state sublation takes place only for 
some objects and their connections form no consistent pattern. 


546 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


75. (p. 708) Hence the external world is real. As the universe 
is of relatively insipid interest, those like the (Advaita) Vedantins, 
who seek release from it, have ignored it.** The Nyaya school 
shows earnestness in safeguarding the real w orld from being impro- 
perly understood, for if the world is treated with indifference there 
will be room for fallacious reasoning, and epistemological confusions 
are likely to result. In such a situation, even one who is prudent 
and seeks the aid of flawless reasoning may not be in a position to 
understand the truth. Hence the eagerness of the Nyaya school in 
maintaining the real nature of the objective world. 


GUNAGUNIBHEDABHANGA 


76. (p. 710) According to Buddhist idealism, judgments are 
not qualities of the self. The self and (its) judgments are not diffe- 
rent from each other. Thus the Buddhist prefers to speak of judg- 
ments only and holds the self not to exist in distinction from them. 

The Nyaya school criticizes this position by showing that there 
is correlation (pratisamdhana) between seeing and touching, which 
proves that the object of these different acts is one and the same. 
Similarly, two distinct judgments may have the same object. Gene- 
rally, the point is that an object is not identical with its qualities 
(gunagunibheda). 

Correlation might be construed as showing one or another of a 
number of things about the object(s) in question. It might show 
(1) that each of the two acts relates to a separate object, or (2) that 
the object which both relate to is a group, or (3) that the object 
which both relate to is something different from the two acts, or (4) 
that the object is a form or conceptual construct which is not in reality 
the object which the acts relate to, or (5) that the object is unreal. 

77. (p. 712) (1) The first alternative is untenable. We see 
and touch the same object. If one tries to hold that we see only 
sights and touch only tactile qualities, this contradicts our clear 
experience that we have commerce with one and the same thing 
through different sensations. If visual and tactile objects were 
really distinct, then the only way this fact of correlation could be 
accounted for would be by supposing that the two objects are some- 
how identical, so that we can see the tactile one and feel the visual 
one. But then a blind man could apprehend colors with his fingers ! 
Again, under these circumstances we could never establish the ‘real’ 
nature of the two objects and discriminate the visual one from the 
tactual one. 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 547 


78. (pp. 714-15) (2) This alternative differs from the pre- 
vious one in that now the two objects of (1) are allowed to form an 
aggregate or group, with the two acts allowed to relate to 
this group. But Udayana points out that this either grants the point 
at issue or is untenable for the same reasons as (1). Either the 
material causes of the two acts are located in the same place, in 
which case what is referred to here as a “‘group”’ is indistinguishable 
from the objects in which the Naiyayika believes, or else the two 
objects are located in different places, in which case the arguments 
of the previous paragraph apply. 

79. (p. 719) (3) The third alternative is the one the Naiya- 
yika defends. 

80. (pp. 719-20) (4) Two forms of this alternative are 
identified. (a) According to the first, the unreality of the object 
is made out by the proponents of idealism using the standard idealistic 
arguments of the Buddhist sort reviewed earlier. But, says Udayana, 
these arguments, if they prove anything, prove far too much, for they 
purport to show that not only are there no real objects but that there 
are no external qualities either. In this case there is no question 
of anything like what is referred to here as “correlation”. (b) In 
its second version, the analogy of seeing two moons in rippling water 
is appealed to; just as we think we see two moons looking in the 
water, whereas there is really one moon and it is not located in the 
place either of the apparent moons occupies, just so the Naiyayika’s 
“object”? is constructed conceptually and differs from the real object 
related to our actions and judgments, which is located elsewhere 
and has a different nature. Udayana rejects this on the ground that 
on such a basis we cannot explain successful purposeful activity 
directed toward the “apparent” object. If the objector retorts 
that purposeful activity succeeds because of the actuality of the 
qualities, despite the illusoriness of the object which seems to have 
them, Udayana answers that the presence of qualities is not 
necessary to purposeful activity, so this cannot be a proper explanation. 

81. (p. 721) (5) The proponent of the fifth position pre- 
sumably believes qualities and actions, as well as the objects they 
are held to be related to, are all unreal. Thus the issue over 
correlation just does not arise at all for him. 

82. (pp. 722-30) Objection: We always cognize objects with 
qualities, and this is sufficient to show that they are nondifferent, 
that is, that there is no distinction between objects and their qualities. 
Answer: We do not always cognize objects with their qualities; 
e.g., In jaundice we cognize a shell without its actual white color. 


548 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Thus the shell and the white color must be different. Secondly, 
the fact that two things are always cognized together is not sufficient 
to show that they are nondifferent. We always cognize the color 
of the jar and the color of the light which illuminates it together, 
but this by no means shows the two colors are the same. Thirdly, 
if an object is to be held identical with its qualities, then the difference 
between distinct and indistinct presentations of it, because one is 
nearer or farther away from it, cannot be explained. The same 
object cannot have two forms to present to one cognizer. And one 
cannot say that the object presented distinctly is different from the 
one presented indistinctly, since both are found to reside in the same 
place and to be affected by the same causal factors, etc. 

83. (p. 736) If in spite of all this the Buddhist is not convinced, 
then he can as well assume that everyone knows everything at all 
times. 


ANUPALAMBHA 


84. (p. 739) The opponent seeks to argue that the self does 
not exist, since no one ever apprehends it. Even if it were the case 
that no one apprehends the self, this would not be a ground for 
denying its existence, but at best a basis for doubt. After all, there 
are other things which people do not apprehend which nevertheless 
exist. Their existence, like that of the self, then have to be estab- 
lished by arguments. 


ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SELF 


85. (pp. 743-46) However, we do perceive the self. Living 
beings entertain perceptual judgments of a nonpropositional sort 
about themselves. The Buddhist must admit that these selves 
exist, since they are committed to admitting that the objects of 
nonpropositional judgments are real. For example, if a Buddhist 
should argue that our idea of our self is produced by beginningless 
impressions and thus its object is unreal, they will be forced by parity 
of reasoning to admit that perceptions of colors are equally without 
real objects, and then no reliance can be placed on nonpropositional 
perception as giving us insight into reality. Therefore, we must 
reject the idea that impressions—traces—alone produce our judg- 
ments about our selves. These judgments must be caused by their 
objects. 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 549 


It cannot be held that the judgments in question are proposi- 
tional and nonperceptual, that judgments about the self are derived 
from inference or verbal authority. Just as the opponent admits 
that a propositional judgment about blue presupposes nonproposi- 
tional judgments about blue, since colors are the objects of perception, 
so he must also admit that propositional judgments about the self 
presuppose nonpropositional ones about the self, since the self is 
known through perception. This is the case even if judgments 
about the self are somehow erroneous perceptions, since even erro- 
neous perceptual judgments must be about something real given 
through perception. And if the Buddhist rules this all out on the 
ground that there are no real selves external to our judgments, the 
same applies to all judgments and we are back in an earlier dis- 
cussion. 

86. (pp. 747-50) Arguments are proffered against holding 
that something other than the self is the real object of the perceptual 
judgments in question; candidates like body, sense, and duddhi are 
discussed and dismissed. The question is also raised as to whether 
the knowing self cannot be identifed as the storehouse consciousness 
(Glayavijidna). Udayana shows that if this suggestion is understood 
in the natural fashion, the arguments for it equally well establish 
the Nyaya view of a perduring self. 

87. (pp. 752-57) Correlation is what supports the eternal 
and stable nature of the self. ‘Correlation’ does not merely mean 
recognition. What is meant is the continuity among the judgments 
which arise one after another, and the identity of their locus. The 
defenders of momentariness cannot avail themselves of this relation- 
ship of correlation, for they must construe one judgment in a series 
as the cause of the next only in the sense that the one precedes the 
other; however, this relation might well exist between, say, the 
judgments of a teacher and his pupil—it does not suffice to explain 
the fact that all the judgments in the series ‘‘belong”’ to one knower. 

The Buddhist is made to search for a way of explaining the 
relationships among the judgments in the stream of consciousness 
corresponding to a person’s experiences. The judgments cannot 
be held to be identical (nondifferent), as they obviously are different 
in that they are about different things. Again, the Buddhist might 
say that indeed the apparent difference between one stream of con- 
sciousness and another is due to failure to grasp their actual identity. 
But, says Udayana, this contradicts our experience, and also runs 
counter to the commonly accepted interpretation of karma according 
to which one person reaps the rewards of his activities due to 


550 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


impressions produced in his self. If what the Buddhist holds were 
true, the son could recollect what has been experienced by his 
father. 

88. (pp. 760-62) Buddhist:°*> We must distinguish between 
two kinds of causal relationship which connect preceding with 
succeeding moments in the stream of consciousness (samténa). One 
kind relates moments of the same kind, the other relates moments 
of different kinds. In the former case we can say that the first 
judgment is the material cause of its successor, since they are of the 
same form. In the latter case, too, the earlier judgment is the cause, 
but here it is the occasion for the change in the stream from a judg- 
ment of the one kind to one of the other. 

Answer: This reasoning is defective. For one thing, relations 
of the kind the Buddhist believes in are not necessarily causal. Take, 
for example, the relation between the cold fuel or coal and the live 
charcoal. The former is not the cause of the latter; rather the char- 
coal is a condition assumed by the cold fuel. 

Besides, the Buddhist, despite what he has just said, does not 
allow that a cause and its effect may belong to the same kind. Nor 
should he: to say that the material cause is of the same kind as its 
effect is to commit the fallacy of self-residence. 

89. (p. 764) The notion of a series of causes and their effects 
whose stages are unchangingly the same is untenable, and if insisted 
upon will lead to the abandonment of the causal principle and the 
admission of uncaused events. Such an admission will have the 
most untoward consequences; there will be no incentive for activity, 
since things will occur accidentally and at random. 

go. (pp. 767-68) If the Buddhist seeks to fortify the causal 
principle by invoking the notion of a kurvadriipa, a kind of special 
causal entity which operates to produce from one moment of a kind 
a succeeding moment of the same, or different, kind, Udayana 
remarks that if this were the case smoke could be produced without 
fire, providing there were an appropriate kurvadriipa around. But 
this will nullify the inference from smoke to fire. Therefore the 
kurvadripa idea should be abandoned and the Nyaya account accepted, 
which is that an effect must belong to a different kind from its cause, 
due to the variety of the accessories which operate in the causal 
nexus. 

gt. (p. 772) The self is also considered to be one of the acces- 
sories. These accessories must be multifarious and they differ 
among themselves; otherwise the variety of the effects could not be 
explained. But these accessories must have some special feature 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 551 


which makes them all accessories. This feature cannot merely be 
the possession of a causal efficacy to help produce something at a 
given moment, for an effect of the same kind may well be produced 
at a different moment. Again, the special feature of an accessory 
cannot belong to a certain kind of thing generically, as then it would 
help to produce effects beyond its actual scope. E.g., as mentioned 
above, if judgments generically were accessories, then the teacher’s 
judgments might be the causes of the pupil’s judgments.3* Like- 
wise, the feature cannot be identified as belonging to everything 
similar to some one thing which is found to have the feature, for then 
Maitra could recollect what was perceived by Caitra.37 Thus the 
accessory for a particular effect must be held to have a special 
feature which relates to its role in producing that effect and no other. 

g2. (p. 774) The establishment of the proper account of 
causality demonstrates in turn that the material cause of judgments 
is the self, not previous judgments in a series, since they are imper- 
manent. 

93. (pp. 779-80) Udayana returns to a further discussion of 
the topic of correlation (cf. sections 76ff). The Buddhist might 
argue that the apparent correlation between the acts of seeing and 
touching the same thing is due to our failure to apprehend the 
differences among the items contained in the storehouse conscious- 
ness (Glayavijidna). If this were true it would imply that conscious- 
ness of the ego is different from the judgments which manifest them- 
selves in the pravrttivijfidna (the third tier in the Yogacara three- 
tiered system); thus the idea would be that there are two different 
kinds of judgments about the ego. But this cannot be admitted, 
for there is no experience of two independent series of judgments of 
that sort. Even if there were two such series of judgments there 
would be no correlation between them, since they are not related 
as cause and effect. And if this requirement is not respected, one 
might as well say that the judgments of Caitra and Maitra about 
something are correlated, which is evidently not the case. 

If the Buddhist says that the storehouse consciousness is the 
cause of the pravrttivijzana, and that we know this because the latter 
does not cause anything, the answer is no. The storehouse cons- 
ciousness cannot be the cause in the necessary sense, for what is 
required is a material cause, something which persists as the locus 
of change. But the Buddhist storehouse consciousness contains 
evanescent judgments. Suppose one such judgment is a cause; when 
it is removed, there will be a breakdown in the whole stream of cons- 
ciousness, and the last moments during which no effect is produced 


552 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


will have to be taken as nonexistent. But the same reasoning can 
be applied to each previous judgment one by one, resulting in the 
nonexistence of those moments also. So the result is that there will 
be no world. Thus we must postulate a persisting cause, not a series 
of judgments. 

94. (pp. 787-90) The Buddhist may reply that we have not 
properly understood his view. His view is that the ego-conscious- 
ness is the form of many judgments all of which have only occasional 
existence when they appear in the pravrttivijiana. ‘Thus, nonappre- 
hension of difference is a natural outcome. Udayana asks: what is 
responsible for the nonapprehension of difference? Is it the mere 
cognition of the form “‘I’?? Then the variations in the judgments 
“T knew,” “I know,” and “I shall know” could not be justified 
unless the difference between them is explained. What is this 
difference due to? If it is said that it is due to the praurttivijidna, 
this will not do, since it is precisely the differences among judgments 
in the pravrttivijidna which are to be explained, and one cannot 
appeal to those differences in explaining them. Well, then, the 
differences must be due to the objects of the judgments. What are 
these objects ? Such an object cannot be the form of the judgment 
itself, as we have just seen. It cannot be some object other than the 
self, as the Buddhist does not admit any such objects. Yet it cannot 
be unreal, for judgments of the form “‘I....”’ have been proved to 
have a real thing for their object. 

95. (p. 791) Thus the self is proved through perception on 
the strength of correlation. Next, Udayana shows that it is the 
same self which both perceives and remembers. We experience 
something at time ¢, and remember it much later, at f4-n. But 
this is not the only feature of memory; in addition, a memory is of 
the object we experienced at ¢, and thus the object is partly respon- 
sible for the production of the memory. 

g6. (p. 794) In addition, the experience at f and the memory 
of it at t-+n are, aside from the impact of the object upon them, 
without a form (nirékéra). Otherwise the perception at ¢ could 
not be identified as the same (kind of) judgment as is the memory. 
There are plenty of instances where causes produce effects which 
differ markedly from the features of their causes. Such are cases, 
due to cooking (paka), such as the birth of pigeons of one color from 
parents of a different color as a result of the parents’ drinkg in the 
juice of rose-apples and milk, the change from sour to sweet taste 
on the part of the myrobalan when it has been soaked in milk, the 
cotton seed’s change from white to red color when it is soaked in 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 553 


lac juice. On the other hand, the crystal, even though it is kept 
near a red rose, retains its colorlessness, though it appears red be- 
cause it transmits the red of the rose. Similarly, judgments have 
no form of their own, and transmit the form of their objects. 

97. (pp. 797-801) Now since judgments are shown to be 
formless, there can be no judgments which show forth indistinct 
objects. All judgments must show forth their objects distinctly; ifa 
judgment is indistinct, it cannot have an object. Ifthere could bea 
judgment which has an indistinctly presented object, then all judg- 
ments could have any object whatever. 

Thus, to explain how the memory, at ¢--n, can have as its object 
the thing perceived at ¢ the hypothesis of an impression or trace must 
be invoked. This impression must be of continuing force from ¢ 
to t-+n, and since it must have a persisting locus, the self is thus 
proved to continue through time. 

98. (pp. 808-09) The body, senses, internal organ, etc., are 
shown not to be the same as the self. The characteristic features 
of selves are reviewed. 

g9. (p. 812) The size of the self cannot be the smallest size, 
for in that case the size of the internal organ cannot be established 
to be of that size. The reason is that sequence in the workings of 
the internal organ cannot be explained except through the hypothesis 
that there is a sequence in the contacts of the self with the internal 
organ. 

100. (pp. 814-15) The Buddhist changes his attack. Even 
if the self does exist, he says, we should deny it, for people who are 
convinced of the existence of their self have a liking for those who 
help it and a disliking for those who do harm to it. Since attach- 
ment and hatred are the root causes of bondage, one can only get 
out of bondage by denying the existence of the self. 

Udayana replies that this argument is unreasonable, for some- 
one who does not admit the existence of his self cannot even have 
a desire to get released from bondage. As long as one acts one must 
be earnestly desirous of pleasure. When this earnestness ceases, 
the intended result is not achieved. The denial of the self would 
also strengthen atheism, in the trail of which would follow the evils 
attendant upon strong attachment for the objects of the world. 

tor. (p. 819) There are two sources of justification for believ- 
ing in the existence of selves from inference and from the authority 
of the Vedas. 

The inferences are of the form of inference by elimination. 
The body, etc., cannot be the self, for the self must be aloof (kaivalya) ; 


554 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


otherwise there would be no cause for worldly existence and no way 
of gaining release from it. Bondage and release as we know them 
are only possible if we postulate that it is the body which is the con- 
dition which gives rise to attachment, and the throwing off of which 
gives release. When release occurs the self is cut off from all such 
conditions, and it is no longer subject to the dictates of scriptural 
ordainment and prohibition, which operate solely on account of 
birth, caste, age, wealth, and dispositional tendencies. It is when 
we take the not-self for the self that we become attached to worldly 
existence, and it is the removal of this erroneous belief which cons- 
titutes the cause of release. The knowledge of reality which removes 
the erroneous belief is produced by hearing, thinking, and meditating 
on the real nature of things; once this knowledge has been arrived at, 
the remaining results accumulated from past good and bad deeds 
get destroyed by enjoying their fruits. 


ESTABLISHMENT OF GOD AND OF THE AUTHORITY 
OF THE VEDAS 


102. (pp. 823-24) The authority of the Vedas (mentioned 
in paragraph 1 of section 1o1 as one of the sources of justification of 
selves) comes from such passages as Chandogya Upanisad 8.12.1, 
which speaks of “‘living without the body.’*® If someone argues 
that the Vedas are invalid since they contain inconsistent pronounce- 
ments, he is wrong; different passages which seem to contradict 
one another actually have different purposes and are to be inter- 
preted so that they do not conflict. For example, passages which 
speak of the unreal nature of the world mean that the self, which 
does not have any relation to the world, is to be known by those 
who seek release from the world. The passages which are monistic 
in tone mean that knowledge of the self alone is the means to salva- 
tion. Those which contain repetitions show that the truth is difficult 
to comprehend and needs repeating. Those which deny the exis- 
tence of the mind lay emphasis upon the need to give up any resolu- 
tions regarding external objects. Bliss is treated in some passages 
which mean that the self alone is to be studied in order to get final 
release. Matter is dealt with in some passages which mean that 
insentient matter takes on the coloring of sentience. This forms 
the basis for the Samkhya school of thought, and of others as well. 
Udayana defends this way of interpreting the Vedas; if it were not 
thus, both Jaimini and Kapila could not be held to be proficient 
interpreters of scripture. 

103. (pp. 825-50) The Vedas are valid, being the utterances 


ATMATATTVAVIVEKA 555 


of a trustworthy person whose existence is to be inferred as the creator 
of the universe. The universe is a product, the agent of which must 
be an omniscient person, who is God. Counterarguments on the 
basis of God’s lack of a body are rejected. Agency is held to involve 
volition, which in turn requires knowledge and desire concerning 
the object to be created. God’s knowledge includes all the knowables 
within its scope; it is eternal, as are His will and desire. Since God 
needs no body to satisfy the requirements of agency, whereas 
ordinary human agents do require a body, the above counterargu- 
ments come to nought. Since God has direct control over every- 
thing, unlike ordinary mortal agents, He needs no body to create the 
world. 

104. (pp. 860-76) The materials that are employed in the 
production of an effect are all inert and do not have the capacity 
to work by themselves in producing an effect. The body of an agent 
is also insentient and therefore cannot by itself make use of these 
materials to produce the effect. Atoms, which are the primary 
causes out of which the universe of inert matter is produced, are also 
inert. To create the world out of them, the agent must have know- 
ledge of them and full control over them. This agency can apply 
only to an omniscient person, who can be none other than God. 

105. (pp. 881-82) Ordinary persons need a body also to utter 
words in order to convey their thoughts. But God, again, has no 
need of a body for this purpose either. Since He has direct control 
over everything, He does not depend on a medium for expressing 
Himself as ordinary mortals do. 

106. (pp. 883-85) The Vedas and Ayurvedas are His compo- 
sitions, and so authentic. That these are utterances of an omnis- 
cient person is supported by their admission as authoritative by the 
elite (mahajana).*® These “elite”? practice what is taught in the 
Vedas, safeguard its text through the system of grammar, and 
accept the authority of the Ayurveda in regard to their activities. 

107. (pp.896-900) Objection: The Vedas do not need God’s 
authorship, since they are eternal; thus there is no need for their 
composition at all. Answer: No, they are noneternal, since the syl- 
lables which constitute the sentences in the Vedas are not eternal. 
Degeneration is found in the abilities and capacities of all men. 
This applies also to their improving in ability for studying the Vedas. 
Consequently, branches of the Vedas get lost, resulting in the 
cessation of the performance of the sacred rites. Thus the Vedas 
are bound to get destroyed with the passage of time.4° In order 
that the selves which have not yet been released and have not reaped 


556 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the rewards of their deeds before disolution be given the chance to 
do so in each new era, the world requires to be created anew and 
people have to be taught at that time what they should do and what 
they should avoid. This is done through the Vedas. God there- 
fore must be taken to create the world and to utter the Vedas at that 
time. 

108. (pp. 903-4) At the time of creation Manu and others 
accept the authority of the Vedas in order that the tradition may 
continue. Or they may be taken to believe in the authenticity of 
the Vedas as one believes in the objects of experience having awakened 
after slept. They infer the creator to be omniscient by observing 
the creation of beings which are of varying standards; they also infer 
God’s nondeception on the basis that He is (like a) father. Or God 
may be taken to create thousands of bodies in order to preach the 
traditions and make the elite of the people admit the Vedas as autho- 
rity. This is just like the dancing master who trains his pupils by 
his dance display. 

109. (p. 909) Some people do not have faith in the authority 
of the Vedas and have embraced Buddhism because of certain attrac- 
tive features it is thought to have.44 Dharmakirti, Prajfiakara 
(gupta), Dipamkara, and others are cited in this connection. 


FINAL RELEASE 


110. (p. 915) Final release consists in the final cessation of 
the self’s miseries. This is brought about by the destruction of all 
the causes that have given rise to worldly existence. 

111. (p. 935) One should realize, through listening, the nature 
of the self, then get propositional knowledge about it through ratioci- 
nation, and then meditate upon it as distinct and separated from 
the other objects of knowledge. During this stage the self should 
be possessed of faith in the Vedas, have control of its internal organ 
and sense organs, and practice detachment. Such a self should 
work for the destruction of worldly bondage through yogic practices 
such as those ordained by Patafijali in the Yogasiitras.” 

112, While meditating upon the self there are stages of reali- 
zation through which one has to pass. Karma Mimamsa, Mate- 
rialism, the Vedanta of Bhaskara, idealistic Buddhism, the Vedanta 
system in general, nihilistic Buddhism, Samkhya, the Sakta cult, the 
Advaita system, and the final stage which Udayana calls ‘‘final 
Vedanta,” equating it with the Nydya school, are shown to be the 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 557 


stages, each succeeding stage being superior to the previous one. 
During these meditations, all the impressions in the self are destroyed. 
The self, which is aloof, is then not determinable. There is no stage 
to reach beyond this. This stage will also become extinct by itself. 
This is the state of final release as recognized by the Nyaya system.*3 


CONCLUSION 


113. (p. 947) In conclusion the author says that he would 
not be delighted by praise which scholars might want to confer on 
him for the writing of this work. 

There is no value to be attached to the blind man’s praising of 
artist. The people should rather attempt to censure his work by 
pointing out its defects, knowledge of which he would willingly 
welcome.*4 


4. NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 
Summary by Karl H. Potter and Sibajiban Bhattacharya 


This work is Udayana’s best known contribution to the lite- 
rature. Of all his works it is the only one which has been 
translated, although the translation is only partial. Ravitirtha 
has translated Books One and Two, both the kérikds and the 
prose passages.45 FE. B. Cowell and Mahesa Candra Nyaya- 
ratna long ago published a translation of all the karikds, but 
did not translate the prose passages, although they did translate 
Haridasa Nyayalamkara’s commentary.‘ In the summary 
which follows, “‘E’’ references in Books One to Four refer to 
the Bibliotheca Indica edition by M. Candrakanta Tarkalam- 
kara (B2687). In Book Five the ‘“‘E”’ references are to N. C. 
Vedantatirtha’s edition (B2699). “IT” references through- 
out Books One and Two and the numbering of the passages 
correspond to Ravitirtha’s translation (B2694); for Books 
Three to Five these references are the Cowell and Nyayaratna’s 
translation of the kdrikas. (B2684). 

The summary of Books One to Four has been prepared by Karl 
H. Potter; that of Book Five is the work of Sibajiban Bhatta- 
charya. 


558 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


BOOK ONE 

1. Introductory Section, including kériké 1 (El; T1). Udayana 
begins his treatise with an invocation cleverly phrased to take ad- 
vantage of the title of the work. An afijali suggests the characteristic 
Hindu gesture of worship, hands cupped together in supplication. 
As is frequently done, flowers (kusuma) are brought to the altar and 
offered to the god with this gesture. Udayana says that here his 
“flowers” are his arguments (ny@ya). 

2. (Kariké 2. E6; T1} The supreme self is to be explained, 
that supreme Self whose worship is taken by wise men to be the path 
to heaven and to liberation (apavarga). 

3. (Including kériké 3. E12-19; T1-3) How can one doubt 
the existence of God, seeing that just about everyone admits His 
existence as an aid to gaining their various aims? The Upanisha- 
dists worship him as one whose nature is pure consciousness, the 
Samkhyas as the first knower (adividvan), the Yoga followers of Patafi- 
jali as untouched by faults, actions and their fruits, a Being who 
shows men the path by promulgating tradition while inhabiting a 
body of transformations (nirmdnakéya); the (Maha) Pa&supatas 
worship him as independent (svatanira), untainted even by what 
contradicts worldly and scriptural laws; the Saivas call him Siva; 
the Vaisnavas call him Purusottama; the Pauradnikas worship him 
as the great Father (pitiémaha); the sacrificial cults as_ sacrificer; 
the Buddhists as omniscient; the Digambara (Jains) as uncovered 
(nir@varana ) ;47 the Mimamsakas as He who is to be worshipped; the 
Carvakas as one who is proved through worldly experience; the 
Naiyayikas as He who is about to be spoken of here. Even the 
artisans worship him as Visvakarman, the Creator. 

There can be no question of His existence, therefore. Never- 
theless, in accordance with the scriptural passage which exhorts us 
to think and meditate on, as well as hear, the truth, this inquiry is 
being undertaken as a kind of worship itself, as a kind of yoga. 

4-5 (Including karikaé 4. E27-32; T3) In this work 5 argu- 
ments against God’s existence will be considered. They are these. 
God does not exist, (1) because there is no supernatural (alaukika) 
instrument with respect to a world beyond this one; (2) because of 
the possibility that there are other instruments for getting to the 
world beyond which do not presuppose a belief in God’s existence; 
(3) because there are valid means of knowing the nonexistence of 
God; (4) because even if God does exist one cannot rely on Him 
as a valid instrument; and (5) because there is no valid means of 
proving His existence. 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 559 


First Argument. Four Rebuttals Stated. There is a superna- 
tural cause, (a) because of the fact of dependence, (b) because of 
beginninglessness, (c) because there is variety among the things 
which occur, and (d) because of the law that the enjoyment of the 
fruits of an action comes to its agent and not to something 
else. 

6. (First Rebuttal, Including karika 5. E33-37; T3) The argu- 
ment of the opponent (to the effect that there is no supernatural 
cause of the sort argued for above) cannot be meant to deny that 
there is some cause of the world beyond, nor can it mean to deny 
that attainment of the next world is produced. Furthermore, the 
attainment of the next world cannot be self-caused or incompre- 
hensible, since production of effects operates within regulated (i.e., 
rule-governed) limits. 

7. (E42-43; T3-4) Suppose the opponent means to deny that 
there is any cause of the coming to be of things. Then, in the absence 
of any specific reason for something to come to be at any particular 
time, everything will always be coming to be. Or suppose the oppo- 
nent means to deny the coming to be of anything prior (to the coming 
to be of the effect); then nothing will ever come to be later, since 
there is no specific occasion for it to do so. Nor can things be self- 
caused, since a thing cannot both originate at a certain time and yet 
exist prior to that time, and the causal relation involves temporal 
succession. Finally, if the cause is incomprehensible or ex nihilo then 
the effect may exist earlier than it does, and again it will become 
eternal (saddtana). 

8-9. (E44-45; T4) Opponent : We do not mean any of these 
things. What we mean is that a thing’s nature is just to exist at a 
place and during some stretch of time, and it is thus not dependent 
on a cause for its occurrence. Answer : Unless there is something to 
limit the thing’s occurrence, and unless this limit (avadhi) operates 
in a regular fashion (nzyata), there is no reason for the thing not to 
exist always. For existing at only a limited time is just to be some- 
where at a given time and not before. The limit which is thus neces- 
sary is what is called the cause. 

10. (E45-46 ; T4-5) Opponent : Then the limit you speak of 
must be the prior absence of the thing. Answer : No, the limit must 
be more complex than that. For if prior absence of x were the only 
cause of x, this would not limit x’s coming to be to occurrence at a 
specific time, since x might exist prior to that absence. Therefore, 
the prior absence of x must itself be dependent on something else, and 
only together with that something else can it produce x. In fact, 


560 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


we can only identify the prior absence by reference to the other 
positive factors. 

Il. (E47-48; T5) Opponent : All right, there is a limit, but 
the limit is not something the product depends on. That is what we 
mean by saying the thing comes to be of its own nature. Answer : 
What do you mean by saying the product does not depend on the 
limit? Is it that the limit is not necessary? Surely it is necessary, 
since in the absence of any regularity of succession a donkey might 
be the limit of smoke as easily as fire. Or is it that though the rela- 
tion between limit and effect is necessary, still it is not effective in 
producing the effect? But what further do you want? Causation 
just means regular connection between something prior to the effect 
and the appearance of that effect. 

12-13. (E48-51; 15) Opponent : Well, in the case of akdsa one 
does not need to ask why it occurs everywhere, since it isnot produced 
by anything else; likewise, we argue, with regard to other things as 
well. Answer: No, for dkafa’s nature (svabhdva) is not everywhere, 
but only in dkdfa itself. The nature of one thing cannot belong to 
another thing. So the nature of things which are eternal cannot be 
likened to the nature of things which occur only sometimes. And 
the differentia of the latter kind of nature is that such an occasional 
existent must depend on limits, as has been said. 

(14-15. Second Rebuttal. E52-53; T6) The opponent now 
decides to agree with Udayana that there are limits which demarcate 
the period of the existence of those positive existents whose limits can 
be observed. But for absences one or both the limits are lacking, 
and, says the opponent, it is likewise with some positive things — 
they also lack limits, since we cannot perceive any limits. So there 
are, after all, things, including positive ones, which need no cause to 
explain their occurrence. 

16. (Including karika 6. E53-54; T6) To the above argument 
Udayana replies: No, because of beginninglessness. That is: the series 
of causes and effect is beginningless, but it is not the determining factor 
in the different products, nor does it have a single causal-efficacy 
(Sakti) in and of itself. Again, one must provide the limiting causal 
factors which determine positive and negative concomitance (anvaya- 
vyatireka) between cause and effect. 

17. (E54-55; T6) Positive things must have a limit, a begin- 
ning point in time; otherwise a jar would be eternal, for its limit would 
be merely its prior absence. 

18. (E55-56;T6-7) Opponent: All right, let’s assume that 
the very nature of a particular jar is to be produced on a particular 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 561 


day. Answer : But that day may occur before it does, unless we assume 
that it has a cause other than mere prior absence. 

19. (E56-58; T7) Now the opponent attacks Udayana’s idea 
of causal regularity in a different way. He says : Very well, let’s 
admit that there is regularity, but I insist that it relates individual 
things only, and does not hold in virtue of the things’ belonging to 
some natural kind in virtue of their sharing a universal (jat?). Answer: 
But the regularity must hold between universals and not merely bet- 
ween individuals (vyakti). For if it is not so, the very identification 
of an individual will be rendered impossible. For if x, though pro- 
duced by_y, can nevertheless belong to the class of things-not-produced- 
by-y, anything can belong to any class, i.e., have any identifying 
characteristics whatsoever. 

20-21. (E58; T7-8) Opponent : But if the regularity is among 
universals, how is it that there can be plurality of causes — e.g., 
how is it that fire can be produced either from grass, by a drill, or 
by (focusing a) lens? Surely this means that these several 
individuals possess the same causal efficacy? Answer: No, there 
can be no genuine plurality of causes, since to admit such would under- 
mine causal inferences generally, as argued in the previous paragraph. 

22-24. (E58-61; T8) Opponent: The regularity, then, should 
be taken to be only between qualities that people can observe. 
Answer : No, for causality is not the sort of thing one can observe. 
Opponent : Then the regularity may be admitted to hold with respect 
to some causal elements (specifically, the inherence cause) but is not 
required for the other kinds of cause (the instrumental and noninhe- 
rence causes). Answer : No, for causality is a relation holding bet- 
ween the whole causal aggregate (sdmagri) and its effect, not any 
partial set of causal factors and the effect. 

25. (E66-67; T8) This constitutes an effective refutation of 
apohavdda, since causality has been shown to be a relation between 
universals and thus cannot be satisfactorily explained on the apoha- 
vddin’s assumptions. 

26-27. (E71-72; T8-9) However, we can explain the appea- 
rance of plurality of causes, even though it is not genuine. Just as 
grass, drill, and lens belong to different classes since characterized 
by different universals, so also do the kinds of fire which result from 
each. Everyone knows that the lamp-fire which lights up a room, 
a camp-fire, and a cow-dung fire, though they are all fires, are never- 
theless different. 

28-29. (E73-81; T9-10) One does not have to accept the acco- 
unt in the previous paragraph. It is sufficient for causal inferences to 


562 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


infer the cause in general from the effect in general, viz., fire. 

Opponent : Not so. There may be some undetected characteris- 
tic in smoke which makes it causally dependent on fire. If so, one 
cannot infer fire in general from smoke in general, nor therefore 
absence of smoke from absence of fire. And as a result, since the 
identification of things depends on the identification of their results, 
we cannot use inference in establishing causal relations. 

Answer : If you are right, this effectively refutes the Buddhist, 
who thinks that causes are particular universals which are not known 
through perception. But it fails to affect us, since all we affirm is 
that the positive and negative concomitance between two universals 
is sufficient to show a causal relation between them. This is still 
true when there are inferior universals (avdntarajati) under the ones 
showing the concomitance. 

30. (E81-82; T10) What is the causal aggregate for fire-in- 
general, then? Wind (air) is the instrumental cause; the contact 
between the particles of fire is the noninherence cause, and those 
particles are the inherence cause. 

31-32. (Third Rebuttal, including karika 7. E83-84; T10-11) 
Opponent : Very well, then, we need to postulate one single cause for 
all effects; we can dismiss the idea of particular kinds of causes. For 
we find that one thing can produce all sorts of different effects — 
e.g., a lamp removes darkness, burns down its wick, and illuminates 
various colors. Answer : No, because the effects are different. If 
there is only one cause for everything, there could be no sequence 
(krama) of effects, and no difference among the effects. Nor can you 
appeal to some causal efficacy, since such a thing is not different from 
the single cause you have postulated. And the very nature (svabhdva) 
of that one cause cannot very well be changed. 

33-34, (E85-86; T11) All the different effects come into exis- 
tence in a sequence. But an unchanging cause cannot produce 
effects in sequence — at least it cannot without accessory causes. 
But the opponent admits no accessory cause. 

38-39. (Including kdrika 8. E88; T12) Opponent : All right, 
we will admit that there is a causal aggregate, for we can observe its 
features. Why do you go on to postulate something unseen (apiirva) ? 
Answer : All activity cannot be fruitless, nor can it have as its only 
fruit pain, nor can it have the acquisition of seen things as its fruit. 
This will be true even if the activity is fraudulent. 

40-42. (E88-90; T12-13) Even a single person who believes 
his actions are without result or that their result is suffering will not 
perform them, so how much more the whole of mankind ! Opponent: 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 563 


People act for profit, for worship, and for fame. Answer : No, for 
something else determines what constitutes profit, fame, and worship. 
Opponent : Yes; it is the attachment of men to other men who give 
them favors, etc., which determines how people act. Answer : No, 
prosperity is not produced by such attachment, since gifts and favors 
are dispensed according to political whim or for the amusement of 
gamesters. 

43-47, (E90-93; T13-15) Opponent : Ascetics are frauds. 
They really want the worldly profit others do. Answer : No, for they 
show no interest in ordinary sources of profit, and because if what 
they do gave pleasure we would find other sorts of people doing it 
too. 

The suggestion that religious activities are done merely because 
they are enjoined by scriptures is rejected as a Prabhakara’s and not 
Nyaya-Vaisesika’s. Opponent : Well, we are all victimized by our 
parents into thinking we ought to act ina religious manner. Answer : 
No, for our parents act that way too, and dupes do not dupe themselves. 

Opponent : Religion was initially perpetrated by some one man 
in ancient times who out of interest in duping others indulged in 
ascetic practices. Answer: The pleasure of duping can hardly be 
compared to the pain involved in ascetic excercises ! 

48-49. (Including kdrikd 9. E64; T15) Opponent : Good! 
You have discovered the causes of that variety in the effects for which 
we were looking earlier. These causes are precisely the religious 
activities we are speaking of now. Thus we need not involve ourselves 
in talk about ‘“‘unseen”’ results. Answer : No, for men seek what will 
happen at a subsequent time, and the “unseen” is needed to link 
religious activities with their results. This “unseen” factor must be 
in the selves of religious agents, and not just properties of the objects 
experienced, for those objects are the same for everybody and, there- 
fore, none of their attributes can account for the unique retributive 
experiences of the individual. 

51-54. (E95-101; T15-17) Objection : Weight is a supersensible 
property of objects. Likewise, there must be supersensible causal 
efficacies in things, for otherwise how can one explain how causes fail 
to function in the presence of counteracting agents (pratibandhaka)? 
E.g., the same causal factors which produce fire on other occasions 
fail to do so when a charm is uttered, but they do operate when the 
charm is not uttered. Now you might say that the absence of charm 
is one of the causal factors, but this will not do : an absence cannot be 
a causal factor, since it is nothing. Furthermore, if there is a neutra- 
lizing agent present the charm will not work even though it is uttered, 


564 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


so that even so the absence of charm is not a causal factor. More- 
over, absences cannot be causes, for if they were the law of regularity 
of causes would break down, since there are prior absences, posterior 
absences, etc., and especially since there are mutual absences which 
do not affect the causal process. 

55. (Including kariké 10, E101; T17) The answer to this is 
that absence can be a causal factor, just as it may also be an effect. 
So counteraction defeats the work of the causal aggregate. 

56-58. (E101-03; T17-18) As for absence being ‘‘nothing,” 
as the opponent claims, this depends on the point of view. If an 
absence is “‘nothing”’ from the standpoint of an affirmative injunction, 
then a positive entity is a “nothing” from the standpoint of a pros- 
cription. 

59-60. (E103-10; T18-19) As for the argument (in sections 
51-54) about the neutralizing agent, by what right does the objector 
assume that if x neutralizes the charm v, y remains among the causal 
factors nonetheless? If x destroys y, then »’s absence arises, and we 
cannot at the same time assume that there is “‘absence of the charm’s 
absence.” 

61-64, (E110-12; T19-20) The fact of there being various 
kinds of absences does not matter to the argument, though of course 
one should not confuse mutual absences with relational absences 
(e.g., prior and posterior absences). We may even admit that there 
is no universal absenceness and that the classification of absence is 
conventional. 

65-73. (E112-16; T20-22) Further discussion of counteraction 
and the counteracting agent establishing the conclusion that there 
is no inherent causal efficacy in things, 

74-82. (E120-26; T23-25) Opponent : Nevertheless, there may 
be acquired causal efficacy, as we do in fact find when by sprinkling 
some grains and uttering a sacred formula we purify the grains; then 
the grains produce effects through this acquired causal efficacy, even 
though the utterance of the formula and the sprinkling took place 
long ago. And further, this explains what would otherwise be hard 
to explain, namely that things whose ultimate constituents — 
atoms — are undifferentiated into classes should in combination 
produce effects in agriculture of specific kinds. 

83. (Including karika 11, E126-27; T25) Answer : Purification 
is of the agent who does the sprinkling, not of the grains sprinkled. 
As for the causality of the ultimate atoms, they take on attributes 
according to their contact, e.g., with heat in the process called “‘cook- 
ing.” 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 565 


84-90. (E128-33; T25-27) Objection : Wf purification is only 
of the agent and not of the grains, how is it that the grains produce 
concomitant effects? And why should not some unpurified grains 
do just as well? Answer : In some cases the connection between 
the sprinkling of grains and the eventual results is controlled by 
scriptural injunctions. Objection : But when performing, say, the rite 
of Srdddha in an attempt to succor the departed spirits of ancestors, 
the sacrifice must affect not us, the sacrificers, but those departed 
spirits. Answer : No, this is not a causal regularity. Nothing is 
produced in the sacrificial fire, etc., something only is produced in 
the sacrificer. 

91-98. (E134-38; T27-29) Objection: If the characteristics 
of wholes are brought about by the “cooking”? of atoms without 
any causal efficacy having to be attributed to those atoms, how can 
we explain the first production at the beginning of a cycle? Answer: 
It is the same explanation, except that at the beginning of a cycle 
the unseen merit and demerit of the self brings together the atoms, 
whereas in present-day agriculture the farmer brings together the 
factors making up a seed, etc. Objection: Then perhaps we can 
get along without agriculture, and farm just by exerting merit and 
demerit directly! Answer: No, farming is a pleasant exercise 
and it would be too bad to live in a world without it. Furthermore, 
the causal relations guiding the farmer provide a settled order in which 
the unseen operates, and in an unsettled, chaotic world enjoyment 
would not accruere from the operation of the unseen. 

99-100. (Including karika 12. E138-39; T29) Objection: If 
cooking produces no individuating characteristics in things, how 
can they take on such individuating characteristics as coming-to-be, 
not-coming-to-be, fluidity, hardness, etc.? Answer: There are 
a variety of instrumental causes which contribute to the charac- 
teristics of middle-sized things. E.g., the characteristics of the com- 
ponent parts are one such kind of instrumental cause, but another 
is the presence of a god (devatd); still another is recognition (pratyabhi- 
jiiana). 

103-07. (Including kdrika 13, E141-43; T30-31) The ancient 
test by which one endeavored to find out whether some one has 
committed a crime or not by use of a balance is raised by way of 
criticism of Udayana’s view. How is the coincidence between the 
right and one side of the balance to be explained, except by assuming 
that a causal efficacy is produced in the balance which then gives us 
the result? Answer: No; the balance test is used to bring out an 
auxiliary condition, which helps bring about the result of the test. 


566 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


This auxiliary condition is the recognition of guilt or innocence by 
the one being tested, or perhaps the presence of appropriate gods 
indicating the result, or it may be that the test produces an unseen 
element in the person under trial. None of this requires the produc- 
tion of a causal efficacy, however. 

108-10. (E143-57; 131-32) Opponent : What instrument of 
knowledge do you use in justifying your denial of causal efficacy ? 
Answer : None whatever. Opponent : Then you do admit the cate- 
gory? Answer: Certainly ! Opponent: Well, what is it then? 
Answer: It is causality (kdranatva), that is, a necessary (relation 
among) universals determined by an earlier time (pérvakdlaniyata- 
jatiyatva), or, again, the nonproduction of the effect when a necessary 
condition is lacking. If one understands the term “causal efficacy” 
in this manner Udayana has no objection to use of the term. 

111-15. (Fourth Rebuttal. 157-60; T32-33) This section deals 
with the Samkhya opponent who holds that since the self (purusa) 
is devoid of attributes, including adrsta or ‘“‘the unseen,” and is in- 
active, purification (cf. section 74ff. above) cannot be of the self 
but only of the elements of prakrti which constitute the body, senses, 
etc., of a person. So the opponent asks Udayana to show that the 
purification must be of a sentient self. Udayana’s answer is that 
if the selves were not connected with bodies they would all be equally 
related to each and every body; as a result there would be no regular 
connection between meritorious actions of a body and the self’s en- 
joyment of them, and causation with respect to the karmic process 
can be reconstrued in an epistemological fashion. No, says Udayana, 
since a self cannot form judgments (buddhi) until it has a body. 

116-20. (Including kdrika 14. E160-66; T34»36) Udayana 
expands on this last point. He describes the Samkhya theory of the 
purity of the selves in great detail, and gives the theory of the order 
of the arising of the various categories of the Samkhya system. On 
this theory the agent and the ultimate knower are different things. 
The agent is the buddhi, which in Samkhya is a tripartite mechanism 
which reflects the self and the object and relates them for action in a 
judgment of the form “this is to be done by me.” The “by me” 
element is illusory (mdyd) since there is nondiscrimination of the self 
from the ego; the reflection of the object—‘‘this’’—is what is real. 
It is like the reflection in a mirror of someone with a dirty face. 

Udayana’s answer to this is that if the experiences of the agent 
are not determined by the karma of the agent, there will result either 
no liberation or no samsdra, and that therefore the self must be held 


to be the agent. 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 567 


121-33. (E166-72; T36-39) The Samkhya thesis that the 
identification of the agent with the subject of knowing is an illusion 
is denied on the grounds of experience—we find them together. 
Udayana challenges the opponent to give an argument to sublate 
the identification. The opponent tries : the subject of knowing is 
subject to transformation (parinéma), he says. But so is the agent, 
replies Udayana. The opponent tries again : the agent is a product. 
No, says Udayana; all that can be shown is that the agent is beginning- 
less. 

If knowledge is eternal, as Samkhya holds, then there can be 
no liberation or else no samsdra, since if the purusa is intrinsically 
knowing he cannot become ignorant and be liberated; or even if 
per impossible he is thought to do so, what is the occasion for his 
changing in this regard? The Samkhyite answers that it is due 
to the presence of previous, beginningless traces (vésané). Udayana 
replies that if so, liberation from these traces cannot be hoped for. 

134-37. (Including kaériké 15. E173-75; T39-40) A new 
opponent enters the picture. He holds that it is the body itself which 
is the agent as well as the knowing subject, and that it is the traces 
of the judgments and actions of bodies which determine their future 
experiences. Udayana’s answer to him is this. One man cannot 
recollect the experiences of another. But then if the body were the 
self, it would be the same with the various bodies lived through in 
one lifetime : are old man would not recall his childhood and youth, 
since his bodies then were entirely different. Opponent : Presumably 
the traces of the youth are transmitted to the old man. Answer : 
Then why does not the mother transmit traces to her embryonic 
child in the womb? Opponent : The idea is that ifx is the inherence 
cause of y, x’s traces pass to y. Answer: Not true. The arms 
and legs of the youth’s body, which are among its inherence 
causes, if cut off are not among the inherence causes of the old man’s 
body, yet according to the hypothesis the old man can recollect sen- 
sations experienced in those arms and legs. 

138-40. (Including karikd 16. E175-77; T40) Now Udayana 
turns to the Buddhist, who holds that nothing persists longer than a 
moment and that therefore there is no need to postulate a self in 
addition to the body. Udayana proposes to refute the momentari- 
ness doctrine by showing that on the Buddhist view inference becomes 
impossible, but inference is nevertheless necessary to prove momenta- 
riness; as a second argument, he will show that perception depends 
on ascertainment (niscaya), which presupposes persistence of entities 
through time. 


568 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


141-44, (E177-179; T40-41) One cannot hold the thesis of 
momentariness if one admits that causation is a relation between two 
stages of something such that if certain causal factors are present an 
attribute F occurs while if those factors do not occur F does not appear. 
The reason is that this account assumes that the two stages are stages 
of the same thing, which persists. Now take a cause C and an effect 
E; in both the Buddhist must admit there may be no unity among 
“their” various stages, and so a doubt may arise about a stage “of C”’ 
as to whether it, or another stage, caused Z, and likewise a doubt 
may arise about a stage “‘of EZ” as to whether it is the effect of C. 
This effectively rules out any causal inferences. 

145-58. (E180-89; T41-45) This shows, says Udayana, that 
persisting things have universal characteristics, and it is in virtue 
of them that the things participate in causal relations. Restrictions 
on what can be construed as a universal help regulate concomitances; 
e.g., the rule proscribing overlapping of universals unless one includes 
the other. 

The opponent tries to counter by charging that the Naiyayika’s 
causal aggregate is itself a contradictory notion, since it involves 
the fault specified; e.g., a Simfapd tree and its shaking are different 
and yet the same causal aggregate produces them both on the Nyaya 
view. This example is discussed at some length, and eventually set 
aside as not yielding the opponent’s conclusion of momentariness. 

159-64. (E190-92; 145-46) The opponent cannot very 
well give up inference as a way of knowing, says Udayana, for momen- 
tariness can only be proved by inference. It cannot be proved 
through perception, because in perception we must be able to recog- 
nize distinctive characteristics of the thing we perceive, while in the 
Buddhist view, since the field of perception is limited to the present 
moment, there can be no distinguishing the chracteristics of the 
things perceived (now) from the characteristics of other things 
(perceived before or after). 

165-72. (Including kariké 17. E192-94; T46-48) A Car- 
vaka now says: You are right, we cannot prove momentariness by 
either inference or perception. Therefore we must remain in doubt 
about it. Answer: Since in the Carvaka’s view everything is doubt- 
ful, the very notion of doubt is undermined, since doubtfulness only 
makes sense in a context where valid knowledge is possible. Further- 
more, the Buddhist is willing to admit that there can be ascertainment 
of a thing’s character at the moment it exists, as least with regard 
to its spatio-temporal occurrence; by the very same method of identi- 
fication persistent objects can be identified. 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 569 


173-78, (Including karikad 18. E194-96; T48-49) Are thing’s 
positive existence is intrinsically bound up with its ability to enter 
into causal relations. If the Buddhist attempts to avoid this line of 
reasoning by saying that the causality of a thing is dependent on 
accessories, then he must admit that these accessories have persistence. 
Otherwise, if specific causal relations are abandoned, the only positive 
existents will be eternal. 

179-89. (Including kérikés 19-20. E196-202; T49-52) Oppo- 
nent : Very well, we will admit then that positive things are eternal. 
Now eternal things do not enter into causal relations at all, since 
causality involves both positive and negative concomitance and there 
is no possibility of negative concomitance between eternal things. 
Therefore there is no persistence (eternal things are ex terna—out of 
time altogether!) and momentariness is established. Answer : 
No, for even eternal, all-pervasive objects can enter into causal rela- 
tions; concomitance is not always needed to establish causality. For 
example, in establishing that substance x is the substratum of attri- 
bute P—i.e., the inherence cause of it—what we need to know is that 
x precedes P. Now x and P may both be eternal objects, but their 
causal relation need not be eternal. And the contributing causal 
factors in the type of causality which does involve concomitance 
may well be an eternal object—e.g., God, as we shall see. 

Udayana closes Book One with a prayer to God, the contribut- 
ing cause, whose power is wrongly described as mdyé, as prakrti or as 
avidya, but who is serene, creator of the universe and the direct witness 
of its events. 


BOOK TWO 


1-4. Second Argument Rebutted. (Including karika 1. E205-10; 
T53-54) Opponent : True, we need a way of learning about transcen- 
dent things. But we need not bring God in for this, since we learn 
about transcendent things either through the Vedas—which are 
eternal and without defect—or through an omniscient self who 
has perfected himself through yoga and meritorious actions. Ans- 
wer: (1) Valid knowledge depends for its validity on something 
other than merely the source of knowledge as such. Therefore 
the validity of the Vedas must be due to another cause, specifically 
to the reliability of its author. (2) Creation and dissolution of the 
universe are possible. (3) The true authority can only be God. 
These are the three rebuttals, expanded in the succeeding paragraphs. 


570 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


5-33. First Rebuttal. (E210-33; T54-60) Opponent : The validity 
of knowledge is intrinsic. Wrong judgment arises from some fault 
in the causal factors which combine in producing the judgment. 
Thus validity may be defined as absence of faults in the factors. 
These faults are typically things like inattentiveness and desire to 
mislead others, faults which may arise among human speakers. But 
since the Vedas are eternal and have no author at all, no faults can 
arise to vitiate the knowledge they impart. Answer: You say that 
faults are additional factors which make the resulting judgment 
invalid. Then you should be willing to admit that absence of a 
fault is an additional factor which makes the resulting judgment 
valid—and this is precisely our view, viz., that validity is due to 
extrinsic causes. Opponent: Very well, but absence of fault is a 
negative entity. I will revise my thesis to say that there are no 
extraneous positive factors productive of validity. Then I can 
admit that absence of desire to mislead, e.g., is an extraneous factor 
consistently with my account. Udayana: You are thinking of inat- 
tentiveness and desire to mislead as faults. But there are other 
sources of invalidity, other faults which are not positive, such as the 
fallacies of the hetu, for example, which are negative things, failures. 
And the absence of a negative thing is a positive entity. Thus you 
must admit positive extraneous factors and accept our view. 

A long section follows in which Udayana labors to show that 
whatever claim the opponent can make to show that validity is intrin- 
sic can be used against that thesis by parity of reasoning. 

34-87. (E233-75; T60-75) Opponent : All right, perhaps 
validity is extrinsic. Nevertheless, since the Vedas are eternal and 
since their validity is established on the ground of their acceptance 
by wise men, they are not dependent on any author for their authority. 
Answer : No, for sounds are not eternal, as we know from experience. 
When a sound ceases, it is not that it goes somewhere else, since it 
is not the sort of thing that “goes”? anywhere. Other explanations 
of why we do not hear the sound even though it still exists are faulty. 

A section of the Naiyayikas holds that one cannot perceive 
the cessation of sound since perception cannot grasp absences. 
Udayana holds that perception can grasp absences, that the relation 
between absence of sound and the hearing organ is a straightforward 
one of qualified and qualifier. The question is raised : What are 
the conditions under which such perception can take place? Must 
the locus of the absence be perceptible, or must both be perceptible ? 
Udayana answers that only the counterpositive must be perceptible— 
otherwise “here on the floor there is no jar’’ would not bea judgment 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI S71 


of perception, which it patently it (he claims). For in this judgment 
what is being claimed to be absent is floor-jar-contact, and this 
contact is absent from the floor as much as from the jar. Therefore 
the floor and the jar stand on the same footing as far as the necessity 
of their perceptibility is concerned in an example such as this. To 
be sure, the floor is perceived in this example, but it is not necessary 
in general that the locus of a perceptible absence be itself perceptible. 
Indeed, it is only in such an account that we can explain how we 
know something like ‘‘the sound I heard before does not exist now.” 

Opponent : This judgment just mentioned may be known 
through inference. Answer: No, because it is impossible to specify 
a paksa for the argument. The obvious candidates, such as sound, 
noneternity, Gkafa, or even time will not do. Opponent : But suppose 
the inference is thus: “I have at this time an ear without 
sound, because I am not aware of any sound, like a deaf person.” 
Answer : That is contradictory. An ear is by definition something 
which has sound (since akdfa is what makes up the auditory organ), 

More generally, Udayana shows that absences must be percep- 
tible to account for any judgment which reports the destruction of a 
quality of x upon the destruction ofx. This cannot be known through 
inference, for it is through its qualities that we know x. 

Opponent : Sound is eternal and remains ever the same. What 
varies is intensity, etc.; but these are not qualities of sound but rather 
of the air. Answer : No, for if it were so we should be able to feel 
the intensity with our fingers, since touch is the peculiar quality of 
air, and the ear should not apprehend differences of intensity, since 
it is made of dkafa. And in any case, if the intensity of sound is made 
a quality of a material substance it will either be noneternal (being 
destroyed along with composite air-wholes) or else below the thre- 
shold of perception (if sounds are conceived as being qualities of the 
atoms of air). 

88-98. (E275-82; T75-78) Why is sound a quality and not a 
substance, asks the opponent. Answer: Because it causes the states 
of the external sense organs, like color. It is no argument against 
this that heard sound is not a quality of the ear, nor generally that 
the qualities grasped by a sense organ are not its own qualities. The 
qualities are of the right variety, but are not grasped because they 
are not fit to be so in the particular context. Sense organs function 
to grasp the qualities of objects, not their own qualities. Sometimes 
the qualities of a substance are grasped by it, e.g., when a self grasps 
its own feelings. 

99-103. (E282-86; T79-81) Sound is produced, because it 


572 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


has greater or less degrees of intensity, like sweetness. This inference 
proves the noneternality of sound, since degrees of intensity require 
extraneous things to produce the changes in degree, and an eternal 
thing must have whatever qualities it has intrinsically and cannot 
change without violating its own nature. Opponent: But this just 
assumes that eternality and being produced are contradictory properties. 
Where is the proof for that ? Answer : Because whatever is produced 
must also have a cause of its destruction. Opponent : Why is that ? 
Answer : Because we experience it to be so. 

104-20. (E287-99; T81-83) Opponent : Well, if sound is non- 
eternal, how can the meaning of words be explained? For words 
designate universals, which are eternal, and not individuals. 
Answer : Even though the meanings of words be universals, still the 
relation of noneternal words to things is explicable in just the way 
we ordinarily relate noneternal objects to words, for sometimes we 
do not relate a word to its proper object. Opponent : Well, never- 
theless we must presuppose that a word has a unique meaning. 
Answer : What is this ‘‘presupposition” (dksepa) ? It is not inference, 
since we cannot find particulars without universals—or if we can, 
then we can just infer the relation between them. And it cannot 
be presumption, since there is nothing unreasonable about there 
being individual denoted by a word. Opponent: But the universal 
depends on its having individual instances. Answer : No, a universal 
exists even when its individuals have been destroyed or are not yet 
produced. 

121-36. Second Rebuttal. (Including fkarikéd 2. E299-306;, 
T84-88). Opponent : The universe is eternal, i.e., it continues always 
in process without break. Thus there is no scope for creation and 
therefore none for a creator self (= God). For if there were cyclical 
dissolution and consequent creation, the karma of all persons would 
have to be worked out simultaneously. Furthermore, we should 
be unable to justify caste differences, since the caste of an individual 
would not be natural to him but would have to be created anew at 
the beginning of each cycle. Finally, we should be unable to under- 
stand the meanings of words which are, in the Nyaya view, conven- 
tional and so would be forgotten over the interim period between 
cycles. 

Answer : (1) A day in the rainy season is regularly preceded by 
other rainy days, but eventually we find that the first rainy day is 
preceded by the last day of sunny weather which contains the causal 
factors contributing to the coming of rain. Likewise the first day 
of a given cycle is preceded by the last ‘“‘day” of the interim period 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 573 


which contains the causal factors contributing to the coming of the 
new cycle. (2) At the end ofa cycle it is not necessary that all indivi- 
duals’ karma comes to an end. Their karma is merely suspended, just 
as we experience suspension of activity in deep sleep. (3) Just as 
the first scorpion is produced, not from another scorpion but from the 
dung-heap so the first Brahmin is produced from what is not a Brahmin. 
But nevertheless the subsequent line of Brahmins (like the subsequent 
line of scorpions) is distinguished from other castes by the causal 
factors determining them. (4) Finally, conventional usages are 
taught to men by God at the beginning of each cycle. 

137-40. (E306-13; T88-89) Opponent : Very well, but why 
should we accept the notion of creation? What positive argument 
can you provide? Answer: This universe, which is a series of effects, 
arose out of the ultimate atoms, just as the flames of a fire arise from 
the ultimate particles. 

141-72. (Including kariké 3. E313-31; T89-99) Now Uda- 
yana argues at length that the universe is deteriorating, the Vedic 
tradition is dwindling and will eventually become extinct. He 
appeals to the gradual deterioration of caste purity and dharma; he 
goes so far as to suggest that scripture no longer has any function since 
its utility depends on inference and convention. He cites the fact 
that certain sacrifices (Rajasitiya, ASvamedha) are no longer per- 
formed. If the Vedas are to be authoritative and clear they would 
have to be perceptible, and they are no longer so. Thus the universe, 
losing the gist of scripture, declines. Opponent : The scripture is 
perceptible, but it has somehow gotten hidden somewhere else. 
Answer: No, for how can you explain why it is not here? Have 
the Brahmins gone elsewhere? Then there are no reliable persons 
in India! Or has the study of the Vedas been somehow interrupted ? 
But how could this happen when there have been Brahmins whose 
business it was? It is reasonable to assume, rather, that our under- 
standing of scripture gradually wanes due to the decay in our powers 
of faith and self-control. For to follow the path of the Vedic  scrip- 
tures is hard, and involves care, attention, clarity of vision, great 
effort, and an attitude of nonattachment, unlike the path of Buddhism 
which appeals to lazy, worldly, unqualified people. 

173-78. (E332-34; T99-101) Opponent : Since pralaya — 
the interim between cycles — involves a cessation during which 
nothing can be produced and nothing destroyed, why should anything 
come into being again ever? Other systems have answers : Samkhya 
explains it as the transformation of prakrti, Bhaskara as the transfor- 
mation of Brahman, and the Buddhists credit the traces. But Nyaya 


574 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cannot explain creation, since it allows no specific upddhis to exist, 
during pralaya which could initiate a change. All the things that 
exist during the cosmic pause are eternal things, which in themselves 
do not change. 

Answer : Creation takes place naturally when an appropriate 
amount of time has passed. The activity of the atoms decreases in 
intensity until a state called pralaya is reached, where the atoms merely 
come together without aggregating and serve only to mark time. As 
for why pralaya ends at a particular point rather than another, that 
may be explained as due to experiences in another universe. 

179-89. Third Rebuttal. (Including karika 4. E334-39; T100-04), 
Opponent : Fine! Then there is no need fora God. Kapila and other 
wise men can be the moving force for creation and for the Vedic 
scriptures, and there isno need for an omniscient being who knows 
the exact number of worms in the world! Answer : No, even if we 
accept that direct experience is the means of knowing things beyond 
the reach of the senses, still this experience does not give us liberation 
— and itis only when we have found the support of liberation that 
we can rest satisfied with our theory. The claims that Kapila, or 
Brahmins in general, can be the final support of liberation rest on 
shaky foundations. We cannot recognize a person as the same 
person through several lives, or if we can, we cannot be sure that he 
is still a Brahmin (much less a sage). Thus we need the hypothesis 
of God to justify the initial acceptance of the Vedas by reasonable 
men. 

The second Book concludes with devotion to Siva, the creative, 
omniscient God who creates and destroys through his mdyd. 


BOOK THREE 


l. Third Argument Rebutted. Vs. Arguments from Nonapprehension. 
(Including karika 1). E341-43; 32-33). Opponent : God’s 
nonexistence can be proved by nonapprehension (anupalabdhi) thus : 
If God exists he would be perceived; but He is not perceived; therefore 
he does not exist. Answer : No, for God is not the kind of thing that 
can be perceived. He is beyond the senses. This form of argument 
from nonapprehension only applies to things which are fit to be per- 
ceived. 

Opponent : This sort of evasion will render any instance of the 
argument from nonapprehension useless. For one might as well 
argue that a hare’s horn, since it is not fit to be perceived, does exist 
even though it is not perceived. Answer : Hares can be perceived, 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 575 


and so can horns. It is just a fact that no horns belong to hares. 
Furthermore, God’s unfitness to be perceived is due to the fact that 
He has no body. Among sentient things only those with bodies are 
fit to be perceived. 

2. (E343-46) Since even though one’s self is perceptible one 
cannot disprove its existence by the argument from nonapprehension, 
how much less in the case of God. For in dreamless sleep, since 
the general cause of all judgments —- namely, contact between inter- 
nal organ and the sense organs — is absent, there is no perception 
during that period of the self’s existence. 

3. (E346-62) Opponent : But the internal organ is all-perva- 
ding, and so always in contact with everything that is substantial and 
exists. Answer : No, for that would preclude the establishment of 
the nature of anything. 

4. Vs. Inferences Proving God’s Nonexistence. (E362-63) Oppo- 
nent : An agent always has a body. Now since God has no body 
God cannot create anything. Also, action always involves a motive 
in the agent. But since God is without desires he cannot create. 
Answer : These inferences, and any inferences which are formulated 
with the term “God” occupying the place of the paksa, must fail due 


to self-residence, unless God’s existence is first admitted. 
5. (Including kérikés 2-3. E364-68; 133-34) Opponent: 


Very well, in order to get the inference started we will accept God’s 
existence, but then we shall use inference to disprove His creativity. 
Answer: No, for any inference which assumes God’s existence, 
supposing God does not exist, would therefore be totally fallacious. 
If you intend to argue that something is not an agent, then the argu- 
ment must be about something existent in order to be an inference at 
all. If God does not exist He cannot be the counterpositive of His 
own negation. 

6. (Including karika 4. 368-70; T34) Opponent: All right, 
but I do admit the existence of selves. So I’ll formulate the inference 
to be about selves, and argue that selves are neither omniscient nor 
capable of creating the universe. Answer : We agree that ordinary 
selves are neither omniscient nor creators. But that will not suit 
your needs. You want to speak about God, who is not an ordinary 
self, and you must identify Him somehow. Opponent : Very well, 
we identify Him as something which has selfhood. Answer: As 1 
said, you are knocking down a straw man. We admit that selves are 
not generally omniscient nor creators. 

7. (Including karika 5. 370; T35) Opponent : Since the 
scriptures speak of God we can formulate inferences about Him. 


576 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer : If you appeal to the scriptures as authority for talking of 
God, then you cannot very well go on to deny His omniscience and 
creativity, since the scriptures affirm them too. And if the scriptures 
are not authoritative then you cannot formulate any proper inferences 
about Him. 

8. (Including karika 6. E370-74; T35-36) Carvaka : We do not 
accept that failure to perceive something proves its nonexistence only 
if the thing is capable of being perceived. Only what is perceived 
can be said to exist at all. Answer: Ifso, there could not be what 
we call “doubt” since all questions could be settled by inspection only. 
Furthermore, under these conditions perception would in fact be 
impossible. For sense perception depends on the sense organs, and 
the sense organs are not themselves perceived. Since they are not 
perceived, on Carvaka assumptions they do not exist. But if they do 
not exist, perception cannot take place. 

9. (Including kariké 7, E374-424; T36-37) Opponent: In- 
ference is not a proper means of gaining true knowledge, for there is 
no effective (prayojaka) hetu which is not subject to doubt, i.e., which 
does not harbor the possibility of error (“wandering” — vyabhi- 
cara). Answer : If one can doubt the effectiveness of inference on 
the ground that pervasion wanders, then one must have a conception 
of a valid inference against which the deficient ones are to be com- 
pared. In that case inference must be admitted to be sometimes valid. 
So if one finds error at all, that proves the utility of inference. On the 
other hand, if one cannot find any instances of error in inference, this 
proves the utility of inference also! 

Opponent : But we ask, in good faith, how can the doubt caused 
by the possibility of two contradictory hetus be resolved? Answer: 
It is resolved by tarka. Opponent: But upon what does the tarka 
itself rest? If it requires invariable concomitance there will be an 
infinite regress. Answer: No, for doubt is limited by its own utility. 
Doubt would have no point if everything were doubted. So in 
practice doubts only arise up to a point of satisfaction. To doubt 
beyond that is stultifying. 

10. Vs. Comparison Proving God’s Nonexistence. (Including 
karikés 8-10. E424-32;'T37-40) Opponent : Some say that compa- 
rison is not a distinct instrument of knowledge and so cannot be used 
to disprove God’s existence. But it is a distinct instrument, since it 
has its own unique content, namely similarity (sddrfya). Answer : 
True, comparison is a distinct instrument of knowledge, but its appre- 
hension of similarity is not the reason, for similarity is not a distinct 
category of objects. For if we bring in an additional instrument to 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 577 


apprehend similarity, then we should by parity of reasoning bring in 
still another instrument, say presumption, to apprehend dissimila- 
rity. But that is clearly nonsense; neither is needed, for similarity 
and dissimilarity are relations among positive and negative things 
categorized according to the sevenfold (Vaiégesika) scheme. Oppo- 
nent : Well then, if similarity is not the content of comparison, what 
is ? Answer : It is the relation between the denoter (samfiin) and 
the denoted (samjiiad). 

11. (Including kérikés 11-12. E432-48; T40-43) Udayana 
defends his interpretation of comparison’s content by showing that 
the knowledge that the word gavaya denotes the animal corresponding 
to it cannot be produced through any of the other instruments of 
knowledge. It cannot be produced through verbal testimony, since 
the man who hears that a gavaya is like a cow is not given any further 
idea of the gavaya’s properties and so does not know that gavaya denotes 
the animal until he sees it. For the same reason it cannot be inference, 
for inference depends on prior perception of the properties of the 
animal. Furthermore, Udayana adds, the statement ‘“‘a gavaya is 
like a cow,” which is a piece of verbal testimony, needs nothing supp- 
lied to it to explain its meaning; it is informative in itself. Thus one 
cannot suppose that it has some hidden meaning which only gets 
fully realized when we perceive the animal later on. 

12. Vs. Verbal Testimony as Proving God’s Nonexistence. (In- 
cluding karikds 13-17. E449-86; T43-49) Udayana begins by refuting 
the Vaigesika, who argues that verbal testimony is a kind of inference. 
Specifically, the inference in question is the sort of inference by which 
we infer that a sentence has a certain meaning : e.g., “This sentence 
has a meaning, because it is brought to our recollection by the aid of 
words which possess expectancy, semantic fitness and contiguity, as 
in the case of the knowledge of the meaning of a sentence like ‘drive 
the cow with the stick’. Udayana complains that this inference 
might be supposed to show that the sentence in question certainly has 
a meaning or only that it may have one. But it does not show that 
it certainly has one, for some sentences pass the tests and still are not 
meaningful, e.g., ‘he sprinkles with water.” And one does not need 
an inference to show that the sentence may possibly be meaningful, 
since it is assumed to be so in that the hetu presupposes that the words 
are meaningful and related so as to render sense. In fact, expectancy 
is a cause of verbal knowledge by itself; it needs no inference to produce 
that result. 

The Prabhakaras, however, think that the authority of verbal 
testimony must be inferred from the worthiness of the speaker (except 


578 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in the case of the Vedas), and only after this can we be sure that the 
sentence expressing the testimony is meaningful. Udayana replies 
that the inference in question will necessarily have the sentence in 
question as an element in its fetu, and the one who is making the 
inference will thus already know the meaning of the sentence before 
he finishes formulating his inference. Otherwise even the Vedas 
can be shown to owe their meaningfulness to an inference from the 
fact of their being free from the defects inherent in human authorship, 
and this is an unsatisfactory outcome of the Mimamsa position. 

Opponent : All right, suppose verbal testimony is a separate 
instrument of knowledge. Nevertheless, it can show that God does 
not exist. Answer : If the testimony is from the mouth of an un- 
worthy person it is no proof; if it is the testimony of someone worthy, 
he must be able to see what is supersensible; and thus the author of 
the authoritative scriptural passages must be the omniscient God. 
As for passages from scripture which appear to deny His existence, 
Udayana says they must be interpreted according to secondary 
meanings, since there are also scriptural passages which affirm God’s 
existence and that these are the authoritative ones will be proved by 
inference (in Book Five). 

13. Vs. Arguments from Presumption for God’s Nonexistence. (In- 
cluding kérikas 18-19. E486-99; T49-52) Presumption is not a 
separate instrument of knowing, since it is a species of inference. For 
the relation between what is to be explained and the presupposition 
which is introduced to explain it must be pervasion. Opponent 
Presumption has to be brought in when two instruments contradict 
each other; then something is assumed in order to avoid the contra- 
diction. Answer : That is, it is inferred that the two instruments 
do not conflict. Or if you still wish to call this “‘presumption,”’ then 
just substitute that word for “inference.” 

14, Vs. Arguments from Nonapprehension for God’s Nonexistence. 
(Including karikds 20-22. E502-34; T52-56) We have already seen 
that nonapprehension does not disprove God’s existence (cf. sections 
1-3 of this Book). It is not an additional instrument either. For the 
content of nonapprehension is absences, and we Naiyayikas hold that 
absences of perceptible things are themselves perceptible. We argue 
this on the following grounds : 

(1) We grasp absences directly, just as directly as we grasp 
positive perceptible things like color. 

(2) We can grasp the substratum of an absence with our 
senses, €.g., we can see the ground when we report “there is no jar 
on the ground.” 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 579 


(3) Whereas other instruments require some other judgment 
upon which they depend, perception does not. Now since experience 
of absences does not depend on any other judgment, it is a case of 
perception. 

(4) The counterpositive of an absence of a perceptible thing 
is perceptible by the senses, so the absence itself is perceptible by the 
same senses. 

(5) One cannot rule out sensory knowledge of absences on the 
ground that a sense cannot grasp something which is not there, for 
something is there, namely the ground or locus where the absence is 
located. 

(6) We can make mistakes in cognizing absences. Now non- 
apprehension cannot be mistaken, since nothing is involved which 
might be defective. Whereas according to our view the senses are 
involved, and they may become defective, thus causing erroneous 
judgments. 

(7) Judgments that something is absent can be stated in two 
ways : (a) where the substratum is the subject and the absence is the 
predicated, e.g., “the ground possesses absence-of-jar,” and (b) 
where the absence is subject and the substratum predicated, e.g., 
“absence-of-jar is on the ground.’ Now it is not possible that one 
instrument of knowledge apprehends the subject and another the 
predicate of these judgments; therefore the opponent cannot say that 
perception grasps the ground, the substratum, while nonperception 
grasps the absence : they must both be grasped by the same instru- 
ment. 

15. (Including kariké 23. T57) The Book ends with an invoca- 
tion to the allpowerful God of gods. 


BOOK FOUR 


1. Fourth Argument Rebutied. (Including karika 1. El-6; T58) 
Opponent: We cannot trust God’s knowledge, for it is not valid 
knowledge. Valid knowledge must be knowledge of something that 
has not been known before, and since God’s knowledge is eternal, it 
is not valid. Answer : Your definition of validity is mistaken. On 
the one hand it underextends: it fails to include cases where we conti- 
nue knowing something for some time; surely this is knowledge as 
much as any. And on the other hand, it overextends, for it makes a 
false judgment about something new into a piece of valid knowledge. 
The correct definition of validity is this : a valid judgment is one 
through which we experience (anubhava) an object as it actually is 


580 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(yathartha), when this judgment is not dependent upon some other 
judgment. (This last clause is intended to rule out memory.) 

2. (Including kariké 2. E7-18; T59-60) Opponent : You speak 
of experiencing the object as it actually is. But what determines what 
the object of a given judgment is ? Your definition is incomplete. 
It should mention that the particular condition (upddhi) of an object 
which is cognized is that it has the property of being-known or known- 
ness (jfidtaté). Answer : Such a condition is not necessary. The 
relation between a judgment and its object is natural (svdbhdvika). 
If a judgment had to have knownness present in its object, then the 
question would arise : why does that judgment produce knownness 
in just that object and not some other ? Then there will be an endless 
regress. To stop this regress we must eventually admit a natural 
relation between a judgment and its object, and so we should admit 
it immediately. 

Furthermore, how could knownness come to qualify objects in 
the past or in the future, which are objects of valid judgments ? 

3. (Including karikds 3-4. E19-42; T60-62) Opponent : But 
what does a judgment do? Knowing is a kind of act (Kriya), and thus 
must produce something in its effect, namely an action (karma). 
Answer : It is not clear what you mean. Do you mean that a judgment 
always produces some effect in what the judgment is about ? But it fre- 
quently does not: e.g., in the judgment “‘akafa is conjoined with an 
arrow,” nothing happens to akafa. Or do you mean that the instru- 
ment of knowledge—say, the sense organ—always affects the object of 
the judgment? But that is not true either; what is produced by the 
contact of the sense organ with its object is not a change in the object 
but a change in the knower. Judgments are formless (nirakdra). 
Differences among judgments are solely due to differences among their 
objects. 

4. (Including karikad 5. E42-46; T62-63) Opponent : Valid 
knowledge must be an effect (of a valid instrument of knowing). Now 
God’s knowledge, since it is eternal, cannot be an effect. There- 
fore God’s knowledge is not valid. Answer : God’s knowledge is 
valid because it lacks inaccuracy. 

5. (Including karika 6 of E. E46-48; T63). Opponent : God’s 
knowledge cannot be valid, since He is omniscient, and omniscience 
involves cognizing everything, both invalid and valid alike. Answer : 
Not so. God knows validly which of our judgments are valid and which 
invalid. 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 581 


BOOK FIVE 


1. (Including kariké 1. E319-25; T64-66) Udayana gives 8 
reasons to prove the existence of God: the Sanskrit words for these 
are (1) kdrya, (2) ayojana, (3) dhyti, etc., (4) pada, (5) pratyaya, (6) 
Sruti, (7) vdkya, and (8) samkhyavisesa. These 8 reasons are inter- 
preted in 2 ways, first to refute the Samkhya and then the Mimamsa 
varieties of atheism. 

A. First Interpretation: Criticism of Sdamkhya Atheism. (1) 
‘Karya’ here means effect or creation. The inference using this fetu is: 

Inf. 1: The universe (is) creator-possessing, 

Because of being an effect, 

Like a pot. 
The sddhya in this inference is the property of creator-possessing, the hetu 
is the property of being an effect. The pervasion is thus 

Perv. : Whatever is an effect must have a creator. 

The supporters of Samkhya find five defects in Inf. 1 by accepting 
the fundamental principle : 

FP: Every creator (agent) must have a body. 

The five objections are as follows : 

Obj. 1: Inf. 1 commits the fallacy called bddha. This can be 
shown as follows. The s in Inf. 1 is a qualified entity—the property 
of creator-possessing. The qualifier is the property of being a creator. 
There is a rule of logic that the negation of the qualifier implies the 
negation of the qualified entity. (For example, if a thing is not red, 
then it cannot be a red rose.) Now as God, according to Nyaya, 
does not have a body, he cannot be a creator (from FP), and this 
contradicts the qualifier in s of Inf. 1, and hence the s itself. We 
have also the certain knowledge derived through perception that the 
universe does not have a creator. So the hetu (being an effect, i.e., 
a creation) is badhita. (A badhita hetu tries to prove an s whose nega- 
tion has been ascertained in the by other instruments of knowledge). 

Obj. 2: Inf. 1 commits the fallacy of satpratipaksata, i.e., 
there is a counter inference which is equally justified and which 
proves the contradictory of the s. The counter inference here is : 
The universe is not creator-possessing, because it is not produced 
by an embodied person, like akdfa. Here the pervasion is : What- 
ever is not produced by an embodied person is not created at all 
(which follows from FP). 

Obj. 3: Perv. is contradicted by FP, hence Inf. 1 based upon 
Perv. is fallacious. 

Obj. 4: The s in Inf. 1 involves a creator without a body, 


582 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


but FP demands that it has a body. Thus the s is impossible, being 
a creator with and without a body. 

Obj. 5: Perv. of Inf. 1 is vitiated by the upddhi being produced 
by a body. (An upddhi pervades the s but does not pervade the h, 
and thus proves that the s does-pervade the A, for pervasion is a tran- 
sitive relation; if s pervades h and the upddhi pervades s, then the 
upadhi must also pervade h which it does not, hence in such cases the s 
also does not pervade h.) Here we have : (a) Whatever has a creator is 
produced by an embodied person, and (b) It is false that whatever is 
produced is produced by an embodied person. This, if the Nyaya theory 
is correct, will be unavoidable. For Nyaya holds that the universe is 
an effect, but not produced is produced by a body. Here (a) shows 
that being produced by a body pervades the s of Inf. 1, while (b) 
shows that it does not pervade the A. Hence Perv. of Inf. 1 is invalid. 

2. (Including karika 2. E321-25; T66-68) Udayana answers 
the five objections : 

Re Obj. 1 : Obj. 1 amounts to saying that God does not have 
a body, hence cannot be a creator. But every knowledge of an 
absence requires a knowledge of the locus of the absence. Hence 
if we know that God is the locus of the absence of body, then we 
already know God. 

If this knowledge of God is thus necessary (even for saying that 
God does not have a body) then Inf. 1 is more powerful and hence 
overrides the bddha, and falsifies the contention that perception gives 
us indubitable knowledge that the world does not have a creator. 

Re Obj. 2: The counterinference is invalid, because its A is 
unjustified. There is no point in offering not produced by an embodied 
person as the 4, when mere not being produced is enough. The addi- 
tional ‘‘....by an embodied person’’ is useless. 

Re Obj. 3: FP is less justified than Perv., hence it cannot con- 
tradict it. 

Re Obj. 4: If it is proved that the world is created by a creator 
without a body, then the s cannot be contradictory (for what is 
proved cannot be self-contradictory). We have therefore to hold 
that some creators have bodies, while some do not have bodies. 
Hence there is no need to hold that there is a creator with and without 
a body. On the other hand, if God’s existence is not proved, then 
there also can be no contradiction, for the so-called self-contradictory 
entity has not been proved to exist. 

Re Obj. 5 : (a) is unjustified, hence Inf. | is justified. 

3. (Including kaniké 3. E335-37; T68-69) Opponent: If we 
have a doubt about the existence of God this doubt cannot be resolved. 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 583 


The doubt can be justified by an argument, viz., If God were the 
creator, then he would have possessed a body (and suffered pain, 
etc.); but he does not have a body; hence, he is not the creator. 

Answer : This argument is ill-formed. The éarka (i.e., the 
major premise) is a counterfactual conditional, the antecedent 
deliberately stating a contrary-to-fact assumption which leads to a 
consequent which is known to be false (and hence is denied in the 
second premises). But in the contrary-to-fact assumption stated 
in the antecedent of the major premise the subject must be known 
to exist. It cannot be unreal. The antecedent is a contrary-to- 
fact assumption only because the predicate is known not to belong 
to the subject. But here the very subject (God) is regarded as un- 
real, hence the argument is not valid, committing as it does the 
fallacy of dfrayasiddhi. 

4. (Including karika 4. E340-42; T69) (2) Ayojana is the 
second reason (of the eight). Here it means motion. The inference 
is as follows : 

The universe consists of material atoms, but there must be a 

prime mover of these material atoms. This prime mover is 

God. So God exists. 

Objection: The atoms themselves may produce motion because of 
adrsta. Answer : Adrsta cannot reside in material atoms. Moreover, 
adrsta can never be the complete cause of anything, for if it were no 
cause would ever be needed. Even for the production of a pot on 
potter would be necessary, since adrsta alone would suffice. 

5, (Including karikd 5. E347-49; T70) The third reason is 
dhrti, etc. Dhrti means the failure of a heavy thing to fall down. 
The inference is as follows : 

The universe is supported by a conscious effort which prevents 

it from falling down, 

Because it does not fall down; Like a stick carried by a bird in 

flight. 
By “etc.,” we should understand the destruction of the universe. 

The fourth reason is pada, which literally means word. If we 
accept this meaning then the inference is as follows : 

There must be a first teacher of the use of words. 

As this conscious being cannot be one of us, the existence of God 

is proved. 

The fifth reason is pratyaya, meaning validity or truth. 

The inference is as follows : 
The knowledge embodied in the Vedas is due to faultless causes, 
Because it is valid, like perceptual knowledge. 


584 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


According to Nyaya a judgment is true if it is produced by proper 
faultless causes. If there is any defect in the causes the judgment 
produced becomes false. Now the judgments expressed in the Vedas 
are true; this can be only if the author has no defect. This author, 
therefore, can only be God. 

The sixth reason is sruti, meaning the Vedas. The inference is 
as follows : 

The Vedas must have an author, 

Because they are the Vedas 

Like Ayurveda. 

The difference between this inference and the previous one is that 
whereas the previous one bases the proof on the Veda’s truth, this 
one bases its proof on the very existence of the Vedas. 

The seventh reason is vdkya, meaning book or sentence. The 
inference is : 

The Vedas are the creations of a conscious being, 

Because they are a book 

Like the Mahabharata. 

The eighth reason is samkhyd-vifesa, meaning a particular type 
of number. According to Nyaya, when two atoms combine to make 
a dyad, the magnitude of the dyad is produced by the numbers but 
not by the magnitudes of the constitutive atoms. Now numbers 
like two, three, etc. are produced in the object by a certain kind of 
judgment (the “‘enumerative cognition” of Pragastapada). In the 
beginning of the creation of the universe the atoms produced dyads, 
the dyads triads, and so on. Thus, there must be a conscious being 
who had the judgments which produced the numbers of these 
products. This conscious Being is God. 

B. Second Interpretation: Criticism of Mimamsa Atheism 

6. (Including karika 6. E358-61; T71-72) Each of the eight 
reasons are now interpreted so as to refute the Mimamsa. First, 
karya here means the intention (tdtparya) of the speaker. A sentence 
conveys the meaning intended by its speaker. The inference is: 
God is the Being whose intention is conveyed in the Vedas. 

Ayojana means an explanation (vyakhyéna). The inference is : 
God is the first interpreter of the Vedas. 

Dhrti means here preservation. God is He who preserves the 
Vedas. ‘“‘Etc.’? here means the performance of Vedic rites. 

Pada again means word. Words like ‘I’? in the Vedic hymn 
“IT am the lord of all” refer to God, who is the speaker, just as in ordi- 
nary speech “YT” refers to the speaker, 

Pratyaya now means suffix, here the verbal suffixes grammati- 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 585 


cally classified as utilized in the precative mood (/ii). This mood 
is used in Vedic injunctions. The inference is : God is He whose 
intentions are the meanings of the lin suffixes of Vedic injunctions. 
We may explain the point as follows. An injunction is an affirma- 
tive sentence containing a verb with a lia suffix such as “‘those 
who desire to go to heaven should perform sacrifices.” Whoever 
understands the meaning of a sentence of the above form 
is moved to perform some physical action. According to Nyaya 
we have to distinguish between the three stages : (i) an overt action 
of the body, produced by (ii) a desire to perform the action, produced 
by (iii) a judgment (a) that the action will do me good, or (b) that 
the action can be performed by me. Udayana asserts that the ver- 
bal suffix produces the judgment on the basis of which one infers that 
the action will do him good. This is the intention of a worthy person 
(i.e., because it is the intention of a worthy person that I perform this 
action, it must be an action which will do me good). Thus the 
meaning of the lin suffix is the intention of a worthy person 
(Gpta). 

7. (Including kérika 7. E369; T72-74) Udayana now proceeds 
to refute the theory that the meaning of the lin suffix is some property 
belonging to the doer. 

Objection : What the lim suffix in a sentence such as the one 
quoted above means is the physical action of the person who acts in 
accordance with the injunction. Answer : There are injunctions 
which do not enjoin any physical action, such as ‘“‘know thyself.” 
Hence the meaning of the Jin suffix cannot be a physical movement 
of the doer. 

Objection: The lin suffix means the mental effort of the agent, 
not his physical action. That is, when one hears an injunction like 
“know thyself” (i.e., “you should know yourself”), the “should” 
means that one has to make a mental effort. Answer : According 
to you Mimamsakas every verbal suffix means mental effort. Hence, 
even a sentence in the indicative mood would become an injunction. 

Objection: The lin suffix means the desire of the person per- 
forming the act. Answer: No. In the first place this leads to cir- 
cularity. The desire will be a cause of the introspective knowledge 
of the desire (since it is an object and an object is a cause of a judg- 
ment), and this knowledge, in turn, will produce the desire (for 
every desire is produced by a judgment). Secondly, the li suffix 
will produce only a judgment about the desire, but not the desire itself. 
Hence a judgment produced by the injunction will not be able to 
produce the action for which the desire is required. The injunction 


586 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cannot produce the desire itself, for desire can be produced only by a 
judgment, never by a verbal suffix. 

8-10. (Including karikds 8-10; 7-9 in T. E371-80; 174-77) 
The verb ky, “to do” or “make” is used to imply a conscious agent. 
For example, we say “a potter makes a pot,’’ but not ‘“‘a seed makes 
a seedling.’ So the mental effort (Arti) is the meaning of the verbal 
root itself, and so cannot also be the special meaning of the lin suffix. 

There are three different theories of the meaning of sentences. 
(1) Grammarians hold that a sentence produces a judgment in 
which the meaning of the verb becomes the subject or chief quali- 
ficand; and a verb means an action or a result. Thus the sentence 
“Devadatta cooks’? produces the judgment that there is an action 
leading to a changed state of the food, which action is performed by 
an agent identical with Devadatta. Here the action is the subject, 
and the meanings of the other words are adjectival (i.e., they are 
qualifiers), (2) The Mimamsakas hold, like the Grammarians, 
that the judgment produced by a sentence has the action as the subject 
and the meanings of the other words as adjectives. The Mimamsakas 
differ in this, that while the Grammarians hold that the action is 
the meaning of the finite verb, according to the Mimamsakas the 
action is the meaning of the verbal suffix, not of the verbal root. 
This action is not a physical action but merely a mental effort. In 
the above sentence, according to Mimamsa, the action is meant by 
the inflection “‘-s’ in “cooks,” but not by the verb “cook” which 
means “the changed state (of the food).” (3) According to Nyaya, 
it is the suffix which means the action and in this Nyaya agrees with 
Mimamsa and differs from the Grammarians. Nyaya differs from 
both in holding that a sentence produces a judgment the subject of 
which is what is meant by a word in the nominative case. Thus the 
above sentence produces the judgment ‘‘Devadatta (is the) locus of 
the action (= mental effort—a physical action cannot belong to a 
self) leading to a changed state (of the food). Devadatta is the sub- 
ject of this judgment because it is referred to as ‘‘Devadatta’’ which 
has the nominative case-ending. 

Whichever theory one accepts, one and the same entity cannot 
be meant both by the verb and also by the verbal suffix. If mental 
effort is the meaning of the verbal suffix, then it cannot be the meaning 
of the verbal root also. 

ll. (Including karika 11, numbered 10 in T. E383-86; T76-77) 
One should not suppose that the verbal root directly signifies the 
agent; we infer the existence of an agent from the occurrence of the 
nominative case-ending. It is the number (i.e., singular or plural) 


NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 587 


of that case-ending which determines, through expectancy, the num- 
ber of the verb; thus the agent can in no way be supposed to be meant 
by the verb alone. 

12. (Including Adrika 12; 11 in T. E393-96; T77-79) It may 
be contended that a sentence containing the lin suffix only means that 
the action has some property. For example, the sentence ‘‘those 
who desire to go to heaven should perform sacrifices’ simply means 
the result of performing sacrifice has a special quality. Now the 
action may be (a) the object attained, i.e., heaven; (b) the aparva 
(merit) which takes a man to heaven after death, or (c) the sacrifi- 
cial rites which produce the aparva. 

Udayana shows that none of the three can be accepted. (a) 
If the action means the result, then the meaning of “should” (the lin 
suffix) should be its property, i.e., the property of being a result of 
an action. Then if the knowledge of this property of heaven (i.e., 
that it is attained through action) be regarded as the reason for per- 
forming the action, this knowledge should be regarded as the motive 
for performing all actions. For a person who knows that heaven can be 
attained performs not merely sacrifices, but also various other actions, 
and if the knowledge of attainability of heaven be regarded as the 
motive of some of his actions, then it should be regarded as the motive 
of all his actions (i.e., the actions of a person who knows that heaven 
is attainable). (b) The meaning of “‘should’’ cannot be a property 
of apirva for the simple reason that apirva can be produced only by 
performance of the Vedic rites. But one cannot perform these rites 
without first understanding the meaning of Vedic injunctions and 
hence of “should.” (c) Even the property of sacrifices, namely 
that they can be performed, cannot be the meaning of “‘should.” 
For there are many sacrifices which can be performed but one does 
not perform them for they produce bad effects. (Syena sacrifice, 
for example, if performed, kills enemies of the performer but sends 
him to hell for being a killler !) 

13. (Including karikaé 13; 12-13 in T. E404-06; T80-82) 
Similarly, Udayana shows that the meaning of ‘“‘should’’ cannot 
be a property of the words constituting the sentence in which it 
occurs. 

14-15. (Including karikas 14-15; 14 in T. E409-15; T82) 
Hence Udayana concludes that the meaning of “should”? (the lin 
suffix) is the intention of a worthy person (dépia). That is, any sen- 
tence containing “should” produces the knowledge that the action 
is intended by a truthful and virtuous person to be performed by 
everyone to whom the sentence is addressed. 


588 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


16. (Including karikd 16; 15 in T. E416-17; T83-84) The 
next reason (of the original eight) is fruti. In the Vedas there are 
many hymns asserting the existence of God and there are many 
injunctions for his worship. Just as in other injunctions words denoting 
heaven, etc., are interpreted to affirm the existence of heaven, etc., 
so also in hymns enjoining the worship of God words denoting God 
should be interpreted to affirm His existence. 

Next, vdkya. In the Vedas there are arthavddas, i.e., hymns 
praising and condemning certain acts. But praise or condemnation 
is always based on knowledge and sentences praising or condemning 
acts are uttered by someone who knows the worth of these acts. So 
also such Vedic hymns must have been uttered by someone who 
knows the worth of these rites, and that is God. 

17. (Including kaérika 17; 16 in T. E419-21; T84-85) Finally, 
samkhyavisesa. In the Vedas there are hymns like the following : 
‘““(I) am one, (I) desire to be many.’’ Now the verb form ‘“‘am’’, 
etc., means that the number one (because “‘am” is singular form) 
belongs to the speaker. So there must be one speaker of all such 
Vedic hymns and that is God. 

18-20. (Including kdrikds 18-20; 17-19 in T. E425-26; T85) 
The work ends with three verses supplicating Siva to convert the 
atheists, to save believers, and to receive this work as an offering. 


5. NYAYAPARISISTA or (PRA)BODHASIDDHI 


This work is a commentary on Vacaspati Misra’s Tatparyatikd, 
but it deals with the topics of Book Five only, i.e., with the futile 
rejoinders and ways of losing an argument. We have been unable 
to find anyone to summarize this work. Ganganatha Jha mentions 
some of its points in footnotes to his translation of Nydyasiitras.*® 


6. PARISUDDHI on VaAcaspati Miéra’s NYAYAVART- 
TIKATATPARYATIKA 


This great commentary continues the tradition of commenting 
on subcommentaries on the Nydyasiitras. It is only partially available 
in published form. It is a very long work and extremely 
difficult. Various writers have dropped comments about its contents 
in cerain of their writings, notably Ganganatha Jha in his translations 
of the Nydyasitras, Bhasya, and Varttika.*® 


KIRANAVALI 589 


7. KIRANAVALI on Pragastapada’s PADARTHADHARMA- 
SAMGRAHA 


Summary by Bimal Krishna Matilal 


Page references refer to the edition in Bibliotheca Indica 
prepared by M. Sivachandra Sarvabhauma and Narendra 
Chandra Vedantatirtha (B2706). The former covers pp. 
1-288, the latter pp. 289-615. Section numbering corres- 
ponds to that in the summary of Prasastapada’s work. 


I. Substance 


Introductory Section (38-39) Categories. Praéastapada talks 
about 6 categories (paddrtha\, omitting absence. Udayana thinks 
absence was a well-established category even in the early Vaisesika 
system, since its existence was implied by the early Vaisesikas’ talk 
about production and destruction of entities as well as the discussions 
concerning the dissimilarities of other categories. 

(41-77) Final release. Udayana rejects the Samkhya, Vijfiana- 
vada and Bhatta conceptions of final release. Final release is the total 
cessation of suffering. Some (the Buddhists) say that even the self 
should cease to exist because otherwise it might cause suffering again. 
Udayana says : if the self exists it cannot be made to cease to exist, 
and if the self does not exist it cannot cease to exist either. 

Right judgments concerning states of affairs destroy false judg- 
ments and thereby lead to the cessation of suffering, which state is 
identical with final release. Some argue : The series of sufferings will 
finally cease because it is a series like the series of burning by the flame 
ofa lamp. Udayana says : This argument will hold, provided we main- 
tain that there will be final release of all beings (sarvamukti). 

Udayana does not subscribe to the view which calls for “‘combi- 
nation” (samuccaya) of the paths of action and knowledge. 

(83-112) Darkness. According to some, darkness is a substance 
because it has a color, dark color, and it has motion. Udayana says : 
Darkness is simply the absence of light and thus belongs to the cate- 
gory of absence. According to Sridhara, darkness, though not a 
substance, is a special kind of color, a positive entity (bhava), because 
we always have a positive awareness of darkness. Udayana says no. 
Nobody can apprehend darkness without a prior apprehension of 
light, and awareness of darkness thus can never be shown to be a kind 
of “positive” apprehension. 


590 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


7-9. (118-23) Universals (jati). Existence (satta) is the highest 
generic property. A generic property is a natural, not ‘“‘accidental’’ 
or “external” (aupddhika) property of things. If in an individual we 
find two class properties coexisting, then these two class properties 
can be generic properties only when one class is totally included in the 
other. 

(129-32) Individuator (vifesa). An individuator is not just a 
quality (guna), because we cannot discover, as we can in the case of 
qualities, a universal property occurring in a number of individua- 
tors. 

(133-35) Inherence. Inherence is permanent combination. One 
relatum is said to occur in the other by inherence, and this occurrence 
is natural, not conditioned by any “‘external” or ‘‘accidental’’ factor. 

That universals exist cannot be proved in the way we can prove, 
for example, that a substance like a mountain exists. Its proof solely 
depends upon our cognition of the same pattern in many 
things. A universal property is eternal, i.e., is never an effect. 
If a universal like cowness could be produced through the production 
of a cow, then cowness would be numerically different in each cow, 
and then it would no longer be called a universal property. 

Individuators are also eternal, since eternal substances are dis- 
tinguished from each other by their individuators. If there were a 
time when individuators did not exist, the eternal substances would 
lose their distinctness. 

20. (155-60). The cause and effect relation is usually deter- 
mined by universal properties. When an entity a causes an entity ), 
the property of being the effect of a is limited by the universal property 
in 6, Using this general principle, Udayana tries to establish that 
Ssubstanceness is a universal property. 

(161-63) The following are the impediments to a property’s 
claim to be a universal property. (1) A proper universal property 
cannot belong to only one individual. (2) If a class property is 
found in all and only those individuals where another class property 
is found, then they must not be construed as two distinct universal 
properties. (3) The same individual or individuals cannot be the 
locus of two universal properties unless one of them is totally included 
within the other. (4) The category universal property cannot be said 
to possess another universal property because of the infinite regress 
to which that would lead. (5) If by our admission of a universal 
property in an entity we run counter to the arguments by which that 
very entity was posited, we should give up that claim. (6) Inherence 
combines a universal property with an individual, but inherence itself 


KIRANAVALi 591 


cannot be combined by a further inherence; hence there is no univer- 
sal property in inherence. 

25. (169-73) The property of being elemental (bhiitatva) is not 
a universal. If something possesses such (sensory) qualities as are 
apprehensible by an external sense organ it becomes elemental. But 
then why should the property of being elemental not be regarded as a 
universal property? Answer: Because of the third impediment 
mentioned in the previous paragraph. The property of being material 
(mirtatva) is similarly not a universal property. Being ‘‘material”’ 
means having possession of a limited, nonubiquitous size. 

36. (189-99) Earth, The purpose of showing a differentiat- 
ing mark of earth is to differentiate earth from other objects. This 
differentiation operates with the help of an inference called “only- 
negative” (kevalavyatirekin), viz. : “An earthly substance is differentia- 
ted from other things, such as water, because it possesses earthness 
(prthivitva). Whatever is not differentiated from other things in this 
manner does not possess earthness, e.g., water.” 

Question : The sddhya here is unique to the paksa. Hence no 
example can be cited outside the domain of the paksa, where the 
sadhya property is known to be present. Then how can the required 
knowledge of the concomitance between the hetu and the sddhya be 
obtained ? 

Answer : When a unique property of the paksa becomes the 
sddhya, we simply want to show that this property is not present any- 
where else (but only in the paksa). Thus the inference involved is 
accepted as a means of proving the presence of an ultimate differen- 
tiating mark. Or, Udayana says, infer the following : ““The substance 
in question is called earth because it possesses earthness; whatever is 
not called earth does not possess earthness, e.g., air.” 

(207-10) Color  universals and color particulars. Apart from 
specific colors like white color, there are proper universal properties 
like whiteness and redness. Udayana rejects the view that white color 
itself is a universal and that we do not therefore have to admit a sepa- 
rate universal property whiteness. If white color itself were a universal 
property then it would violate the third restriction (cf. p. 590) 
called samkara, “‘intermixture.’’ The same individual, viz., a cow, 
would have the universal property (whiteness) as well as white color, 
and neither of the two coexisting properties can be subsumed under 
the other entirely. In other words, some things can be white but not 
cows while some other things which are cows can be nonwhite. Thus, 
whiteness (and not white color) is a universal property residing in indi- 
vidual white color patches, while cowness is a generic property residing 


592 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in individual cows. These two generic properties do not coexist. 

If there are different shades of white color, we can admit diffe- 
rent lower universal properties residing in those shades and to be 
subsumed under the higher universal property whiteness. 

(219-68) Atomic constituents. An earthy substance of ordinary 
size, such as a pebble, can be divided into parts and those parts into 
further smaller parts, but this process of division cannot go on for ever. 
This process comes to a stop when we reach the element having the 
smallest size or magnitude, the elements called atoms. If the process 
did not come to a stop we would have to admit that a mustard seed 
and a mountain are both made out of innumerable parts or consti- 
tuents, and since there would be no difference in the numbers of their 
constituents they should be of the same size ! 

Someone says : The particles called triads (truti)are perceptible 
and they are known to have the smallest size. Hence the division of 
substances into parts should come to a stop when we reach triads. 
Udayana says no. Since the particles called triads are perceptible 
they must be bodies composed of parts too. We cannot perceive 
something, some substance, which does not have a body made of 
parts in this way. 

Another person (Sridhara) says : The decrease of size from small 
to smaller and still smaller must come to a rest because that is how all 
types of size behave. For example, the increase of size from big to 
bigger to still bigger comes to a rest when we reach the biggest, i.e., 
a ubiquitous thing. Udayana thinks that this argument is wrong 
because it rests on a vicious circle. If we can prove that there is such 
a thing as the biggest size we can prove that there is also the smallest 
size, and vice versa. 

Whatever is a product substance is also an embodied substance. 
And if a substance has a body it is divisible into parts. Thus, since 
atoms are nonproducts, they are without bodies, i.e., indivisible. 

Human bodies, etc., are made of earth. Although it is usually 
said that the human body is made of five physical elements (earth, 
water, air, fire, and dkdfa), Nyaya regards only earth as the causal 
substrate of human bodies, other elements being accessory causal 
factors. 

Objection : A dyad is made out of two atoms. Why accept 
dyads ? The particles called triads are perceptible masses and hence 
they are divisible into parts. Let these constituent parts be atoms 
only and then we would not need to accept another class of inter- 
mediate elements called dyads. Answer : A particle is a substance 
with parts and hence its immediate constituents must also have parts. 


KIRANAVALI 593 


Atoms have only size (parimana), but no parts (avayava). So we need 
some intermediate elements which have size as well as parts. Thus 
dyads. If you say that since dyads have parts their parts will have 
parts too, we say no. Your argument will lead to infinite regress, 
to avoid which we have accepted the partless atoms. 

37. (265-80) Water. Viscidity (sneha) is listed as a quality of 
water. Some say : viscidity is not a quality of water because it is only 
found in oil and butter; it is a type of universal property just as milk- 
ness is a universal property. Udayanasaysno. There is gradation of 
viscidity, viz., some things are more viscous and some less. Such 
decrease or increase is possible only in the case of some quality, not in 
the case of a universal property. We cannot say that one body is 
more cow and the other is less cow, for instance. 

Mailkness is a universal property, but it does not exist in atoms of 
milk. But viscidity as a quality must exist in the atoms which produce 
viscous substances such as oil. A universal property like cowness 
also does not exist in the atoms of a cow. Cowness is a universal pro- 
perty which is manifested in gross substances called cows through 
some conditions (upddhi). Only such universal properties as earth- 
ness OY waterness are present in earth atoms or water atoms. 

38. (281-98) Fire. Concerning the visual organ, some say : 
The visual organ does not grasp an object by coming out to reach 
that object. (1) The object grasped by the visual organ lies detached 
from the place where the body it belongs to is located. Moreover 
(2) the visual organ can grasp something bigger than its own size. 
(3) It grasps the nearby branch of the tree and the distant moon at 
the same instant. (4) It can grasp an object lying behind a solid 
but transparent crystal ball. 

Udayana rejects all these arguments. (1) Just as the lamp 
can reveal an object lying apart by reaching it, so the visual organ 
can reveal an object lying at a distance by reaching it. (2) The 
same lamp example answers the second objection. (3) The fast- 
moving character of fire (i.e., light) accounts for the illusary notion 
of simultaneity of the seeing of a nearby branch and the distant moon 
(4) A transparent solid does not by nature obstruct the passage of 
light. 

Some say : As soon as the ray comes away from the eyeball it 
becomes identified with the light rays outside and then this identified 
ray reaches the object to reveal it. Udayana says no If the ray 
of the eye were identified with the external light rays then we would 
have seen objects lying behind our backs. 


594 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


39. (298-312) Air. Air is not amenable to perception, not 
even to tactile perception. Other objects which can be grasped by 
both the sense of sight and the sense of touch are not like the 
substance air. One can grasp other qualities — such as number, 
size, separateness, contact, and disjunction — belonging to these 
perceptible substances. But with regard to air this does not hold. 
The parallel qualities of air can only be inferred through various 
marks. Thus air is also not perceptible, but inferrible from its qua- 
lity — touch, which we directly perceive through our tactile sense. 

40. (313-31) Creation. If the existence of God cannot be 
proved, Pragastapada’s theory of creation and destruction will not 
hold. How to prove the existence of God? We prove Him by 
inference : “‘Things like mountains are products and hence caused, 
but we do not see any corporeal and intelligent agent constructing 
them. These entities must have been constructed by an intelligent 
agent, and such an intelligent agent is none but the omniscient 
God.” 

Some logical difficulties with regard to the above proof are raised 
and answered. (1) A product substance such as a pot has a non- 
omniscient being as its agent. So how can you prove through these 
known examples that an omniscient Being is the causal agent of such 
supposedly product substances as mountains and sprouts? Answer : 
Omniscience and the property of being an intelligent agent are not 
contradictory properties, although we cannot cite an example where 
we actually see them coexist. A person born blind does not realize 
that color and touch can coexist in an earthly substance. But this 
would not make these two properties incompatible in any way, so 
that they could never coexist. Touch may coexist with color as in 
earth, and may not coexist with color as in air. Similarly, an intelli- 
gent may be either nonomniscient or omniscient. 

(2) Omniscience implies eternality of knowledge. But 
eternality and knowledgeness are seen to be incompatible properties. 
Answer: No. Although eternality and materialness (mirtatva) are ordi- 
narily seen to be incompatible, i.e., noncoexistent, as in a pot or a 
cloth, there are atoms which are both eternal and material. Simi- 
larly, even if ordinary, i.e., human, knowledge is noneternal, there is 
God’s knowledge which is eternal. 

Udayana notes that details of the arguments to prove the exis- 
tence of God can be found in his Wydyakusumafjali and Atmatattoa- 
viveka. 

41. (332-48) Akasa. Some say : Sound is a quality of air. 
Udayana says no. Sound cannot be a quality of something which 


KIRANAVALI 595 


is also the substratum of touch. Why ? If sound belonged to air, 
the auditory sense would be made of air. And if so, the auditory 
sense should be able to grasp touch at the same time. 

42. (348-58) Time. Some teacher (Vardhamana says this teacher 
is Vyomaégiva) has said : The notion of oldness in an aged body 
(compared to a young body) is due to the body’s connection with a 
comparatively larger number of movements of the sun. The sun’s 
movements reside in the sun but the old body in question lies far away. 
Thus, an ubiquitous substance, time, is posited to connect the sun’s 
movements with the body in question. Although a self or dkdfa are 
ubiquitous, they cannot account for the connection that is required 
here, since both of them are loci of some sort of specific (vifesa) quality 
(i.e., the self is the locus of judgment, and akafa the locus of sounds). 

Udayana is wary of this argument. Both a self and dkdga can- 
not just by their presence transfer the movements of the sun to the 
distant old body because they cannot transfer anything from any 
object to another object. Thus, the blue color of a thing at Banaras 
cannot be transferred to a crystal ball at Patna although the selves 
and akafa are supposedly connected with both the objects. Time 
is posited as a substance whose particular function is that of transfer- 
ring the larger number of movements of the sun from the sun to the 
old body in question, and that is why the body is called old com- 
pared to young body to which only a smaller number of movements 
of the sun could be transferred. 

43. (358-61) Place. The spatial position of an object has in 
fact to be explained in terms of its different connections with the 
sun rays. And thus, as above, an ubiquitous substance, place, is 
posited to account for the connection of the sun rays with the other 
distant, medium-sized objects. 

44. (361-88) Self The awareness “I am such-and-such” 
is to be explained by positing a substance called self. A self has many 
qualities. 

A Buddhist argues: The notion of a permanent self is a myth. 
Everything is in a flux. Conscious states are in a flux, one happening 
after the other in a series. How? Whatever exists is momentary 
by nature because to exist means to do something or to function in 
some way or other. There is no such thing as potentiality. If some- 
thing is competent to produce anything it should produce it at that 
instant. If not, it would never produce it. There is no waiting for 
one who is competent. 

Udayana answers this objection briefly. Existence is a bad hetu 
for the Buddhist’s argument, because its invariable concomitance 


596 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


with the sddhya momentariness cannot be established beyond doubt as 
far as Nyaya is concerned. Since it is doubtful whether we can suc- 
cessfully rule out the possibility of a counterexample, the said hetu 
is conclusive. There is potentiality as well as actuality. A seed 
can potentially produce a sprout but it does not always do so unless 
attended by other accessories. For details of these arguments, Uda- 
yana refers to his Atmatattvaviveka and Nydyakusumdaijali. 


II. Quality 


(399-407) Qualityness (gunatva). It is admittedly difficult to 
distinguish the group of 24 qualities from motion (karma). Bhasar- 
vajiia denies that there is any distinction. Udayana defends the dis- 
tinction. Motions are something we directly apprehend as move- 
ments, A motion produces two opposite results — contact and 
disjunction of bodies. None of the 24 qualities has this power to 
produce opposite results. A substance might produce such a pair 
of results; for example, contact of finger with tree causes contact of 
hand with tree — here tree is a substance which is the cause where 
contact and disjunction is produced. A substance is distinguished 
from a motion in that the substance can produce the said results only 
when dependent upon some motion, while motions can produce them 
independently. 

A sensory quality is not identical with the object or substance 
that has it. Blue color is different from the blue-colored thing. 
Some say : A quality like color is produced along with its substratum, 
the pot say, and is destroyed when the substance is destroyed. Uda- 
yana rejects this view. According to the Vaisesikas, there is a logical 
(also temporal) sequence between the production of the substratum 
cause, i.¢., the pot, and the production of the color of the whole pot. 
The color of the pot is a caused event, a product, of which the pot is 
the inherence cause (samavayikdrana). ‘Thus, the pot must have pre- 
ceded, at least by a moment, the production of the color of the whole 
pot. 

84. (424-40) Some hold the theory of pitharapika. This 
theory maintains : When an earthen body, a clay pot, is baked, the 
body gets some new qualities such as its new color. The previous 
color is destroyed and the new color is generated while the body 
remains intact. 

Others hold the theory of pilupadka. That theory maintains : 
When the earthen body is baked, the previous body (i-e., the whole) 
is dissolved into atoms because of the body’s contact with fire particles, 


KIRANAVALI 597 


and these atoms coming into contact with fire atoms get new qualities 
such as a new color (red color). Then out of the combination of 
these atoms (whose qualities have changed) we get a new body, a 
red pot. 

The philosophical motivation behind this view is this: We 
can thus safely maintain the distinction between the quality and the 
substance that has the quality. And this distinction will help us to 
understand the nature of the self as distinct from its qualities. 

Fire atoms are extremely light, weightless, and have impetus 
(vega) and hot touch. Thus, the impact of these atoms can very well 
break the body that is being baked. Further contact with fire helps 
to recreate the body out of the combination of the atoms. Splitting 
of a solid body in contact with fire is sometimes perceptible. Shrink- 
ing of a body in fire also indicates that we have got a new body out of 
the constituents of the old body. 

85. (441-61) Number. Bhasarvajfia rejects the notion of 
number as a separate quality. For him, unity or oneness means 
identity of a thing, and diversity, such as twoness, is the distinctness 
of the nature of things. Udayana refutes this view : Identity of a 
thing is unique to itself, but the notion of unity is found in each diff- 
erent thing at the same time. Thus we say “‘one pot”’ and “‘one cloth”. 
The identity of a pot is different from the identity of a cloth, but 
both appear to have the property oneness, i.e., the property of being 
counted as one. And distinctness is not the same thing as diversity, 
such as twoness and threeness. 

Some say: The number two and other numbers are universal 
properties like potness. Even if you accept two as a quality, you will 
have to accept a twoness universal. Thus it is simpler to accept 
twoness as a universal property rather than in addition to a quality. 

Udayana says no. It is not contradictory to accept two as a 
quality and another entity as éwoness, the universal common to 
different qualities of two. Besides, if twoness were a universal property 
present in any two substances it should be subsumable under subs- 
tances or existence. But in fact twoness appears to be coextensive with 
substanceness. Two coextensive properties cannot be construed as 
two different universal properties (see the second restriction, page 
590). 

Or, Udayana says, number is a quality which accounts for our 
counting objects. 

Two or duality is generated by enumerative cognition (apek- 
sdbuddhi), i.e., a type of judgment in which we cognize objects sepa- 
rately but put them together at the same time. “This is one (and) 


598 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that is one” is the verbal expression of an enumerative cognition. 
Two is thus a transitory quality; it is destroyed as soon as the 
enumerative cognition (which being a judgment cannot persist very 
long) is destroyed. Udayana criticizes Sridhara’s view and some other 
views regarding this point. 

The judgment “there are two things” is generated at the very 
moment when two, the quality, is destroyed. But this leads to the 
question whether the qualifier (vifesana) can be destroyed and appear 
at the same time as the adjective in a judgment (viz., the judgment 
“there are two things”). Udayana says it is all right. An adjective 
x of y is that which is the delimitor of y as well as coexistent with y 
in the same locus. It is not necessary that the adjective x be phy- 
sically present when we have the cognition “Y is qualified by x.” 
To cognize perceptually that some person is qualified by the name 
Devadatta we do not have to perceive the name through our sense 
organ. 


> 


Sridhara says: The notion of two arises out of a simple enumera- 
tive cognition; the notion of three arises out of the notion of 
two and one; the notion of four is likewise to be explained. Udayana 
rejects this view because it would be difficult to explain in this manner 
the origin of the notion of many (bahutva) in such judgments as 
“there are many trees here.” 

86. (463-71) Size. The size of an atom cannot cause anything, 
not even another size. The number of atoms causes the size, a des- 
tructible size, in the dyad. The size of some object depends not 
only upon the size of its constituents or upon the loose contacts of its 
constituents but also upon the number of constituents in some cases. 
Out of five meatballs of the same size two produce a meatball which 
is smaller in size than the meatball produced by the other three. 

87. (471-76) Separateness. Bhasarvajfia holds: The quality 
of being separate is identical with difference which is otherwise called 
mutual absence. Udayana disagrees, ‘A pot is nota cloth” is not 
synonymous with “a pot is separate from a cloth.” The use of the 
ablative in the second case indicates the distinction between their 
meanings. Even possession of nonidentical properties ( vaidharmya) is not 
the same as the quality of being separate. 

88. (477-87) Contact. Contact is central to the Nyaya-Vai- 
Sesika theory of creation. Contact between parts causes a body, 
a substance. Contact between fire and earth particles gives rise 
to a new color in the body. Loose contact between parts causes a 
new size, a bigger one. Impact, pushing, and throwing, which are 
just varieties of contact, generate motion. Since the theory of 


KIRANAVALI 599 


momentariness of everything, as well as the theory of momentary 
modification, is not acceptable to the Vaisesikas, the quality contact is 
an essential postulate for them to account for creation and destruction 
of objects. 

89. (487-504) Disjunction. Bhasarvajfia thinks that disjunc- 
tion is just lack of contact, not a separate quality. Udayana says 
no. When out of two bodies in contact one is destroyed, we may 
say that the contact is also destroyed, but nobody would say that 
the bodies have been disjoined. The destruction of a quality may 
be caused either by the appearance of an opposite quality in the 
same locus or by the destruction of the cause of the first quality. 
Now, when due to a motion in the finger the contact between the 
finger and the tree is destroyed, the contact between the hand and 
the tree would not be destroyed because the hand is not in motion. 
The motion of the finger exists in the finger and the contact of the 
hand with the tree exists in the hand, and thus, the motion and the 
contact not being cooccurrent in the same locus, they cannot be 
related by way of being the destroyer and the destroyed. To avoid 
this absurd consequence we have to posit an opposite quality, viz., 
disjunction, which appears in the hand and thereby destroys the 
contact between the hand and the tree. The motion in the finger 
causes disjunction of the finger from the tree, which in its turn causes 
disjunction of the hand from the tree, and this disjunction destroys 
the contact between hand and tree. 

Bhasarvajfia might argue: Motion can destroy the said contact 
even if it is not occurrent in the same locus. Udayana finds no reason 
to narrow the scope of the rule that a quality can destroy another 
opposite quality provided the two qualities are cooccurrent in one 
locus. 

90. (505-09) Farness and nearness. ‘These should not be re- 
garded as two qualities, says Bhasarvajfia. ‘“‘An object lies near” 
means that it has a comparatively small number of contacts (appa- 
rently among the intervening space-calibrations) and “an object 
lies far” means that it has a large number of contacts. 

Udayana says no. The required small or large number of 
contacts can also be ascribed to the person with regard to whom the 
object is near or far. But the notion of “being near’ or “being far” 
arises with regard to the object only. 

91-93. (510-18) Judgment. Tarka is reasoning through coun- 
terfactual conditionals. Tarka is more than a doubt (samfaya) but 
something less than a certitude. Why was it not mentioned by 
Pragastapada ? Answer : Because tarka is a variety of error (viparyaya). 


600 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


95. (520-24) Error. Some say: Error is due to the nonappre- 
hension of difference. Udayana rejects this view in favor of the 
Nyaya view that error is due to the apprehension of a different pro- 
perty in a given locus. 

99. (529-45) Perception, In the case of direct or pure sense 
perception (dlocana) the object may be grasped as such along with 
its universal property. But propositional (savikalpaka) perceptual 
judgments should be preceded by a cognition or conception of the 
qualifier. Nobody apprehends something to be a horned object 
without a prior cognition or conception of the horn. The Buddhists 
say: Construction (vikalpa) is not perception in the proper sense of 
the term. It is at the level of imagination comparable with the 
imagination of nonexistent pairs in the horizon by a person suffering 
from an eye disease. Udayana rejects this view on the ground that 
universal properties, substances, etc., are real entities, not fictions. 

100-04. (545-63) Inference. Invariable concomitance or 
vydpti means a relation without any nonessential condition (upddhz). 
How is this relation ascertained ? 

According to Dharmakirti, determination of identity as well 
as of the cause and effect relation leads to the determination of per- 
vasion or concomitance. Udayana says : This is true only when the 
inferential relation is limited to either identity (i.e., class inclusion) 
or causal relation. But the inferential relation in a good many 
cases may be neither. If we infer tomorrow’s sunrise from today’s 
sunrise, there does not seem to be any causal relation between them. 
The Buddhist has himself admitted that though the taste and the 
color of a piece of fruit are not related as cause-and-effect, one can 
be inferred from the other all the same. 

(564-68) Condition (upadhi). A “‘condition vitiating an inferential 
relation” is one which pervades the sddhya but does not pervade the 
hetu. The pervasion relation is usually grasped by external perception. 
Since the recollection of names is possible through other means, 
we do not need, in many cases, to have a nonpropositional 
perceptual judgment preceding the perception of pervasion. 

105. (570-83) Verbal testimony. With regard to verbal testi- 
mony we have first to decide whether it gives rise to true judgments 
or not. Udayana says it does. Otherwise statements of facts in 
language would be impossible. Although there is no natural relation 
between a word and its object, a word can express an object. 

But our judgments deriving from verbal testimony are a ctually 
a kind of inference. The inference in question here is as follows: 
These word meanings (paddrthah, ‘“‘objects”, (presumably in a sen- 


KIRANAVALI 601 


tence) are mutually related, because memory of them is occasioned 
by hearing words which are syntactically related and semantically 
compatible. 

The Naiyayikas think that verbal testimony is a separate means 
of knowledge, not inference. They argue : The sense of the sddhya 
in the above inference cannot be explained. If it is meant that the 
objects are mutually related in actuality, then it would follow that a 
falsehood uttered by an untrustworthy person would be true. To 
answer this criticism of the Naiyayikas, the Vaisesikas insert a quali- 
fication in the hetu, viz., being uttered by a trustworthy person. They 
hold that verbal testimony is only a kind of inference. 

Question: Is the validity of judgments intrinsic or extrinsic? 
Answer: Validity is not a natural property, and hence not a proper 
universal because it can be subsumed neither under judgmenthood 
(jfidnatoa) nor under existence (satta), Validity is a conditioned 
property. It arises in a judgment not automatically but due to some 
condition external to the group of causal conditions that produces 
the judgment in question. The opponent (a Mimdmsaka) says: As 
soon as a judgment is generated its validity (if it is valid, that is) 
is also generated by the same causal conditions. Thus validity is 
intrinsic. But the lack of validity in a judgment is due to some 
defect (dosa) in the causal situation. Udayana says no. If the lack 
of validity is due to the presence of some defect, validity would then 
be due to the absence of that defect. One cannot neglect this as 
merely a negative argument because the said defect may appear in 
the form of an absence (viz., noncognition of the specific property 
in the case of doubt, which is an invalid judgment), and thus the 
absence of such a defect would be a positive condition. So, Udayana 
concludes, validity is extrinsic because in our first judgment about 
a new object it is possible to entertain a doubt with regard to the 
validity of that judgment. If validity were intrinsic, the arising of 
such a doubt would not be possible. 

106. (584-86) Gesture (cesta). Physical gestures can generate 
particular cognitive states but they are to be included under inference. 
Physical gesture is, thus, not a separate means of knowledge. 
Udayana says there are two types of relevant physical gestures. One 
is conventionally expressive of some meaning while the other does 
not have any regular meaning. The first is more or less like a script, 
which recalls the word which, in its turn, is expressive of a meaning, 
The second is not concomitant with any particular meaning, and 
thus it does not always generate a propositional judgment as a 
regular sentence does. 


602 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


107. (587-95) Comparison. The statement “a gavaya is like 
a cow” helps us to identify the object gavaya and to call it by the 
name “‘gavaya.” The opponent says: Here the similarity known 
from the statement becomes a means of knowledge by which we are 
able to call the gavaya a “‘gavaya.”” Hence it is a separate means of 
knowledge. Udayana says no. Since it is wrong to construe from 
the said statement that the essence of a gavaya it to be similar to a 
cow, we are forced to construe the essence of a gavaya as gavayaness, 
a property which is indicated (through secondary meaning, Jlaksand) 
by the phrase “like a cow.” Thus the statement itself is the means 
of knowledge here, and this, as we have seen, is only a variety of 
inference. 

110. (595-602) Absence. Absences are sometimes perceived 
and sometimes inferred For example, the absence of pot is per- 
ceived on the ground because the senses are in contact with the 
ground while we have the judgment “‘there is no pot on the ground.” 
Sometimes absence, e.g., of Caitra in that room, is inferred from 
the reason (hetu) that Caitra is not perceived while the interior of the 
room is perceived. The Mimdmsakas say: This last 1s not an inference 
because the reason, nonperception of Caitra, is not actually a pro- 
perty of the paksa—the room, The purported inference is thus a 
separate means of knowledge, say the Mimamaskas, called nonapp- 
rehension (anupalabdhi). Udayana rejects this view. Nonapprehen- 
sion is a property of the self which cognizes the room. Thus the 
reason is not entirely disconnected from the paksa. So, the process of 
inference shown above is faultless. The ground, which lacks pot, 
determines the nonapprehension of pot. 

How can an absence be in contact with the sense organ to make 
the perception of an absence possible? | Udayana says that the 
capability of a sense organ is actually determined by what we 
perceive through it. If a particular sense organ is responsible for 
our perception of the counterpositive, a pot, it is also responsible for 
our perception of the corresponding absence. 

The absence of pot is a separate entity, not identical with the 
ground where the absence appears. If the judgment “‘there is a pot 
om the ground”’ is interpreted as reporting that the ground is charac- 
terized by the presence of a pot, then the judgment “‘there is no pot 
on the ground” may be likewise interpreted as reporting that the 
ground is characterized by absence of pot. The presence of a pot 
is just a pot, which is the counterpositive of the absence of pot. 

There are two main types of absence, relational absence and 
absence of identity. Relational absences may be of three types, 


KIRANAVALI 603 


prior absence, posterior absence, and constant (atyanta) absence. 
The absence of pot on the ground is a constant absence because we 
cannot say that the pot and the ground can be constantly in contact. 
A constant absence is without origin and destruction and therefore 
is eternal like a universal property. 

112-14. (603-05) Members of an argument. A_ full-fledged 
argument has five members. Our doubt, whether supposed or 
real, with regard to the truth of the conclusion cannot be totally 
removed without invoking all five members. 

When the word meanings and their interconnections are 
known, verbal knowledge is generated. Words, by themselves, 
have no power to generate this knowledge. Thus, in a modern 
poem, the poet first thinks of the “meanings” (objects) and their 
interconnections and then composes a sentence. 

(605-08) Some say: A word is an impartite sphota. How 
can we talk about its parts or “members”? Sphofa is an impartite 
whole different from each phonetic element. There is sequence 
in the phonetic elements, there is sequence in our judgments of them, 
and there is sequence in our recollections of them. But sphofa is a 
sequenceless unity grasped by perception. Udayana rejects the 
notion of sphofa. The notion of unity is only conditional. We have 
such a notion because the different elements, in fact, generate only 
one indivisible meaning. 

Here the commentary breaks off. 


30. APARARKADEVA or APARADITYADEVA 


According to S. Subrahmanya Sastri! this author was a monarch 
who ruled in the Konkan in the early part of the 12th century. He 
quotes P. V. Kane: “A grant dated Saka 1049 (+ 78 = 1127) of 
Aparadityadeva who donated a village named Vadavali.... He 
was the son of Anantadeva, grandson of Nagarjuna and traces his 
descent to Jimiitavahana son of Jimitaketu famous for his  self- 
sacrifice. In this inscription (in which the grant is mentioned) 
Aparadityadeva is styled Silahdranarendra and Jimatavahananvaya- 
pragasta. It appears that the date of Aparadityadeva I referred 
to in these grants falls between A.D. 1115 and 1130. We know 
from Srikanthacarita of Mankhaka that king Aparaditya of Konkan 
sent Tajakantha on mission to an assembly of learned men in 
Kashmir during the reign of Jayasimha of Kashmir (A.D. 1129 to 
1150), when Apararkatikd was introduced into Kashmir and recog- 
nized as an authority there.” 


604 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


“Tt is probable that Apararka’s Yajfiavalkya Smrti Vyakhya 
was composed about A.D. 1125.’ 

Subrahmanya Sastri thinks Apararka was an Advaitin by 
persuasion on the basis of remarks the author makes in the Yajfavalk- 
yasmrtivyakhya,> but in the Nydyamuktévali he condemns Advaita. 
It is interesting that nowhere does Apararka mention Samkaracarya, 
though he does quote from Vacaspati’s Bhkdmati and from Mandana 
Misra’s Brahmasiddhi. 

As mentioned earlier, this author’s Nydyamuktavali is of especial 
interest for its comprehensive treatment of the contributions of the 
Bhisanakara, Bhasarvajfia, to the Nyaya tradition. These will 
be rehearsed again in the following summary, based on material 
prepared by Pandit Subrahmanya Sastri. 


NYAYAMUKTAVALI on Bhasarvajfia’s NYAYASARA 


Summary by Pandit S. Subrahmanya Sastri 
“E” references are to the edition by S. Subrahmanya Sastri 
and V. Subrahmanya Sastri, Madras 1961 (B2510). The 
work is untranslated. Sections are numbered to correspond 
with the Nydyasdra summary, pp. 478-490. 

1. (E2-5) The first section deals with the preliminaries of a 
work such as the invocation (mangala). The importance of stating 
the purpose of a work is emphasized. An opponent questions whether 
definitions of “‘instrument of knowledge” and the other categories 
should be given, charging that definitions are useless and lead to 
infinite regress since they in turn require further definitions, etc. 
This is answered by noting that definitions are required only for terms 
which produce doubt, and that there is no infinite regress since a 
definition demarcates its definiendum and also itself. 

2. (E5-9) Definitions are given in the fdstras (such as Nyaya) 
for the sake of people who are confused by the mutually contradictory 
definitions given by bad Naiyayikas. Though there cannot be any 
doubt or illusion for those who have made a thorough study of the 
Upanisads, yet there are people who have doubts and illusions and 
for their sake Sastras are written. Hence there is no futility of 
Nyayaéastra. Moreover, even those who have studied the Upanisads 
should study the Sastras, in order to instruct others and to defend 
their convictions. 

3. (E13-23) Objection: The judgment that expresses a doubt must 
be either one or many. Now if it is one judgment it is not doubtful. 
E.g., “This is a post and a person”’ is not a doubtful judgment. But 


NYAYAMUKTAVALI 605 


if it is said that the judgment denies the two alternatives, then the 
judgment should be “this is neither a post nor a person”—and this 
is not a judgment of doubt either. On the other hand, if the doubt 
is expressed in two or more judgments, they must arise in succession. 
Then both the judgments might well be true, each at its respective 
time of expression. 

Answer: The judgment expressing a doubt isa single judgment. 
Its normal form is ‘This is either a post or a person (but I don’t 
know which),”? and here the “‘or’”’ is of the exclusive variety, signify- 
ing incompatibility between the two possibilities. 

4. (E23-26) Indefinite knowledge (anadhyavasdya), imagina- 
tion (aha), and tarka are all to be included within the category of 
doubt. Apararka argues that Gautama really meant to include 
it within doubt, and that the reason he gives it a distinct mention is 
because he is anxious to show how it assists inference. 

Doubtfulness (samfayaiva) is a universal, since it is a property 
possessed by indefinite knowledge, imagination, and tarka. 

5. (E26) Turning to the category of error, Apararka treats 
alternative views at great length. First he takes up the Prabhakara 
view of error, specifically analyzing the illusion of the double moon. 
The Prabhakara (Apararka cites Salikanatha Miéra) thinks that 
the error results from our failure to notice the difference between 
what we remember and what we perceive. Timirari is cited with 
approval in rejecting this account. It would be impossible to ex- 
plain our purposive activities directed toward illusory objects on the 
Prabhakara account. To explain these activities we must assume 
that the percipient does recognize a relationship between the object 
(perceived) and the property (remembered, according to the 
Prabhakara). 

The Prabhakara is made to reply with some arguments of his 
own against the Naiyayika’s anyathakhyati view. First, the Nyaya 
view implies that the apparent content of an erroneous judgment 
is not its real content. But the Prabhakara does not understand the 
distinction; surely the content of any judgment is what it is about, 
and it is just redundant to say it is “real” as well—of course it is. 
Second, the causal aggregate which produces valid judgments are 
taken by the Naiyayika to be capable of producing invalid ones as 
well. But this violates the causal principle. Apardrka answers as 
follows: As for the first point, the Prabhakara just does not admit 
that error ever occurs, but this is absurd. As for the second, it is 
not the Nyaya view that the same aggregate produces invalid as well 
as valid judgments; when invalid judgments are produced, there are 


606 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


defects in the organs of knowledge, and thus the causal factors do 
differ. 

(E37-39) Some say that erroneous judgments have no content 
at all (nirdlambana). But if so it will be impossible to distinguish 
one erroneous judgment from another—or better (says the “new’— 
Bhasarvajfia’s—school), it will be impossible for an erroneous judg- 
ment to be about something which has the same form as something 
known validly. 

(E39-42) Others say that the content of an erroneous judgment 
is nonexistent (asat), since we have erroneous judgments about hare’s 
horns and the like. Answer: Well, of course the silver (in the shell- 
silver illusion) is not existent in the place it is judged to be, but it 
does exist, so the analysis cannot be correct. 

Some other views, including the dtmakhyati view of Buddhists, 
are reviewed and rejected. 

(E46-55) Apararka saves most of his energy for the Advaitin, 
however. The Advaita view is that the content of an erroneous 
judgment is neither real nor unreal. But this is impossible, says 
Apararka; if something is not one, it must be the other. Oh no, 
says the Advaitin; there are several kinds of reality (sat). Some 
Advaitins say that absolute (pdramdarthika) and empirical  (vpdva- 
harika) are the two levels of reality; others say that these two 
together with the phenomenal (pratibhdsika) level constitute three 
levels of reality. The difficulty with both of these views lies in the 
fact that the Advaitin defines “reality” as Brahman, and as there 
are no differences in Brahman there can be no differences among 
levels of reality. 

There are Advaitins, however, who reject the levels of reality 
interpretation, holding that Brahman is the only reality and that 
an empirical object, e.g., a pot, has no reality whatsoever, but 
appears to have because Brahman is superimposed on it. Apa- 
rarka answers this by pointing out that it is easier to accept the 
Nyaya notion that silver is superimposed on the shell than to accept 
the Advaita notion that Brahman is. Furthermore, the Advaitin 
who adopts this line will have difficulty explaining the sublating 
judgment we form when we discover that the shell is not silver. We 
say ‘‘there is no silver here at all, and never was.’’ But on the 
Advaita view an extraordinary (alaukika) silver is present in (on) 
the shell as long as the illusion persists—so what is it that is being 
denied in our sublating judgment ? 

(E55-62) The Advaitin appeals to the hypothesis of avidya to 
provide the mechanics for the production of the extraordinary silver— 


NYAYAMUKTAVALI 607 


but it is simpler to accept the Nyaya anyathakhyati view, which serves 
to explain superimposition equally well and at less cost. The 
Advaitin is made to present several arguments for avidyd (i.e., positive 
ignorance), but these are rejected. E.g., the hypothesis of the wit- 
nessing consciousness (sdksijfidna) is discussed and set aside. The 
Advaita turns to attack the Nyaya theory of absences, which is 
defended. 

(E62-65 ) The Advaitin now asks the Naiyayika how he proposes 
to explain the contents of dreams, and Apararka indicates that Nyaya 
treats dreams precisely as other types of error. Other accounts of 
dreams are examined and refuted. 

6. (E65-86) The discussion turns to the nature of validity. 
Apararka refutes alternative notions of validity, such as the Advaitin 
appeal to sublation and the Buddhist’s to the fruitfulness of subse- 
quent activities, and defends the view that the cause of validity is 
external. He raises the question about the infinite regress difficulty 
for a view which makes validity dependent on external factors, and 
says there is no difficulty since the question of validity does not arise 
unless there is some doubt about the judgment’s practical purport. 
He mentions Mandana Miéra’s alternative way out, according to 
which the regress stops at the point where the validity of a judgment 
is not questioned. 

In discussing the question of intrinsic vs. extrinsic validity 
Apararka mentions the view of Mahavrata, who defends the intrinsic 
validity doctrine. According to Mahavrata a judgment intrinsically 
establishes the true nature of the object it is about. This is refuted. 
We do sometimes form judgments which we subsequently find to be 
false. ‘Therefore a judgment can only establish the nature of its 
object under the condition that there is absence of sublating judg- 
ments. But this leads to the extrinsic validity view. 

(E86-89) Vacaspati Miéra’s view is said to be that in order 
to stop the regress we should admit that two kinds of judgments are 
self-validating, namely inference and internal-organ perception. 
This way out is rejected by Apararka. 

(E89-104) The discussion moves on to definitions of experience 
(anubhiti) and memory, following Bhasarvajfia’s text. Memory 
is valid when its content is correct, but it is nevertheless not classified 
as a kind of true knowledge (frama) because its validity is dependent 
on a previous judgment of perception, etc. 

Alternative views on these topics are refuted. The Bhatta 
hypothesis of knownness (here, prakafya) as a property produced in 
objects when they are known is presented and rejected. The 


608 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Sautrantika and Vaibhasika views, featuring their characteristic 
views of sakdra (consciousness having an intrinsic form) and_ sdriipya 
(similarity of form between idea and object), are presented and 
discussed. A view attributed to Uddyotakara, that that which 
immediately precedes a valid cognition is what is the instrument of 
knowledge, is objected to on the ground that if it were true we might 
identify the contact of the visual organ, etc., as the cause of the per- 
ception of the color of a whole even when we can prove through 
inference that it is not that contact, etc., which is the cause. And 
everyone knows that though the contact of axe with tree is that which 
immediately precedes the felling of the tree, nevertheless the axe 
itself is spoken of as a cause. 

Apararka in conclusion sets forth the view expounded in the 
Nydyabhisana, which is that the cause of an action is that which is 
the direct agent (sdksdtkartr) with respect to it. 

(E120-26) In connection with Bhasarvajfia’s discussion of the 
objects of perception and the relations through which they become 
known, Apararka initiates an extended discussion of objects. He 
defends the Nyaya view of wholes and parts, and becomes involved 
in a discussion about variegated color as a result. Other Naiyayikas 
hold either that variegated color is the collection of the many colors 
constituting it, or else that it is a completely distinct color. Apa- 
rarka holds, instead, that while variegated color is a distinct color, it 
is brought about in a cloth, say, by the colors of the different threads, 
and furthermore the cloth participates in the properties of all the 
various constituent colors. To this view the difficulty of crossconnec- 
tion of universals (jdtisamkara) is raised, but Apararka is unimpressed ; 
he does not accept crossconnection as a fault. 

(E143-59) Explaining that Bhasarvajfia allows universals and 
qualities to be perceived directly, Apararka takes occasion to report 
the view of the Bhisanakadra on qualities and other categories. 
Number, size, separateness, disjunction, farness, and nearness are 
not qualities according to this writer, as opposed to Kanada. These 
items are taken up in order. Number includes both unity and 
plurality (‘“‘one”’ and ‘‘more than one’’); but unity is nondifference 
and plurality is difference, and so number cannot be a quality. 
Udayana’s Kirapdvali is quoted in opposition to this view. Udayana 
holds that numbers, like other qualities (e.g., color) are capable of 
producing results both like and unlike themselves. Thus when two 
single atoms combine to produce a dyad, it is Udayana’s view that 
the two unities produce a duality, for otherwise the larger size of the 
dyad could not be explained. This larger size cannot be due to the 


NYAYAMUKTAVALI 609 


sizes of the constituent atoms, for there is a rule that a size of a given 
type can only bring about another size of the same type. The 
Nyayabhisanakara is reported as rejecting this rule, however, and 
thus being able to explain the increase in size of dyads, etc., as due 
to the size of the parts, not their number. The Bhisanak4ra’s final 
view about number is that it is some kind of property (dharma) akin 
to a universal (sdmdnya). 

The Nydyabhisana is quoted: Some people deny size to be a 
quality on the ground that “‘bigger,” “smaller,” etc., are locutions 
indicating that they are attributed to things only as relative to other 
things. Apararka says that this view is indeed the Bhisanakara’s 
own, and that his notion is that size is a matter of conjunctions with 
points in space (defa). 

Separateness is not a quality, since if two things are separate 
they are in that respect different, and thus they do not have a quality 
in common. 

Disjunction is not a quality. Disjunction is nothing but absence 
of contact under circumstances when contact is appropriate. 
Vyomasgiva is quoted in support of this view. 

Farness and nearness are not qualities for the same reason that 
size is not, namely, that the locutions seemingly requiring their postu- 
lation really merely require appeal to certain relative respects involv- 
ing the number of contacts between things and space and time. 

Impetus (vega) is also not a quality for the same reasons. 

(E160-65) The Bhisanakara proposes to include the Vaisesika 
category of motions completely under the category of quality. 
Apararka also defends the perceptibility of motions against 
Salikanatha. Where Vaisesikas construe motions as sometimes the 
cause of contact, Apararka argues that the contact which is the 
cause of that motion is itself the cause of the subsequent contact. 
Again, the view of Vaisesika that motions are sometimes produced 
by impetus is questioned, since impetus has been questioned 
(above) as a distinct quality. 

(E167) Advaitins hold that pleasure (= bliss) is identical 
with consciousness itself and thus is self-evident. This is wrong; 
we perceive the difference between consciousness and pleasures. 

(E176) Inherence’s perception is due to the combination of 
the sense organ with adrsta. 

(E177) Contact is defined as “‘relationship between things 
which have a separable (yjutasiddha) existence.” Udayana to the 
contrary, therefore, there can be contact between all-pervading 
(vibhu) things such as time and akéfa, for they are separable existents. 


610 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


However, there are no disjunctions between eternal all-pervading 
things. 


CHAPTER TWO 


10. (E186-91) The force of the “according to their very natures 
(svabhdvatas)”’ clause in Bhasarvajfia’s definition of inference is to 
exclude the Buddhist theory that invariable concomitance is restricted 
to relations of identity and causality. 

How is pervasion known? After a lengthy discussion Apararka 
contends that it is cognized by internal-organ perception aided by 
tarka. 

12. (£196-203) In glossing Bhasarvajfia’s division of inference 
into drsta and sdmdnyatodrsta, Apararka gives an extended defense of 
universals. A question is raised as to whether a universal pervades 
only its own loci or the whole universe. Apararka inclines to the 
first view, but argues that the second is all right too. Opponents 
of the second view hold that if universals pervaded everything then 
a pot would be a cloth, but this is answered by pointing out that 
while potness is present in everything (on the view in question) by 
occurring there, it is present in pots, and not in cloths, by inherence. 
Another problem: during dissolution (fralaya), where do universals 
reside? Apararka is willing to say either that they exist without 
loci, or that they exist in things existing in another part of the 
universe (another ‘“‘Brahmdnda’’). 

28. (E275-300) Dharmakirti’s refutations of the ways of losing 
an argument (nigrahasthéna) are answered. 


CHAPTER THREE 


29. (El-7) Sridhara and Udayana are both cited by name 
and their views quoted to the effect that verbal testimony is not a 
distinct instrument of knowledge but is to be included under inference. 
Their view is refuted. Verbal testimony is required in order to ex- 
plain how words indicate their meanings, since invariable concomi- 
tance is not always present. 

(E7-9) Of the two kinds of verbal testimony mentioned by 
Bhasarvajfia the first kind, where the object is visible, is known to be 
valid when the effort which it produces is successful; the second kind, 
where the object is not visible, is validated by the trustworthiness 


of the person uttering it. There are two kinds of reliable persons: 
God and mortals, 


NYAYAMUKTAVALI 6lt 


(E9-11) Other scriptures — e.g., that of the Buddhists — are not 
reliable, since their acceptance is due to some external cause. The 
acceptance of the Vedas inall partsof Bharata (India) is, however, 
not due to any visible cause and hence its validity is unquestionable. 
The acceptance of the Vedas as valid by cultured people at large 
indicates that they are the production of the Almighty. 

(E15-16) The Nyaya inference for the authorship of the Vedas 
— “The Vedic sentences presuppose an independent writer, since 
they are sentences’ — is criticized by Timirari and defended by 
Apararka. 

42. (E96-144) In connection with Bhasarvajfia’s reference 
to selves a lengthy review of alternative views about the nature and 
existence of self(ves) is provided. Apararka says that Udayana has 
refuted the old arguments the Buddhists give for momentariness, but 
he provides defenses against new arguments. The new argument 
in question is : ‘“That which has conflicting attributes must be diffe- 
rent, like clouds” (which have the capacity to rain as well not to rain). 
The Nyaya answer is that these capacities can be explained by the 
presence or absence of accessory causal conditions, and hence momen- 
tariness is not required, 

Various Jain views are rejected. Then Apararka turns to 
Samkhya, specifically directing arguments toward Iévarakrsna’s 
Samkhyakérikas. Finally, Apararka takes up Vedanta views, provid- 
ing theistic interpretations for the great utterances (mahdvakya) of 
scripture on which Vedantins rely. He also points to passages which 
contradict Advaita tenets. He provides a special section dealing 
with Mandana Misra’s view that perception cannot cognize difference. 
He answers the argument by asserting that, since difference and the 
object perceived are identical, it is possible to perceive difference 
without cognizing its counter positive. Other Advaita arguments 
for the unreality of the empirical world are criticized. 

(E144-45) Bhasarvajfia mentions three klefas while Patafijali 
has five. Apararka explains that the two — egotism and attach- 
ment — not listed by Bhasarvajfia can be subsumed under one or 
another of the other three. 

(E149-54) The Vaisesikas hold spatial direction (dik) and time 
(kala) to be distinct types of substance. Apararka says this is unneces- 
sarily cumbrous. Time should not be identified as the general 
(sédhérana) instrumental cause of all productions, since (big) (mahd-) 
time is unitary and cannot be responsible for different events. It 
will not do to say that time as limited by motion is the general cause 
either, The right view is that in ordinary speech when we speak of 


612 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


‘time’? our meaning is to be explicated in terms of a property of 
motions called ‘‘moment” (ksana), i.e., a conventional measuring 
device. Thus, for example, we should not accept farness and near- 
ness (in time — i.e., older and younger) as separate qualities, as 
we have seen, but rather construe them as being functions of greater 
or less numbers of moments through which the people in question have 
existed. Thus time is not a substance. Similar arguments apply 
against space’s being accounted a substance. If one is worried be- 
cause something is needed to create the universe at the beginning of 
each era, we have already admitted God for this function. 


31. SRIKANTHA 


The Paticaprasthinanyayatarka by this writer is another compen- 
dious commentary on the WNydyasiitras and subcommentaries by 
Vatsyayana, Uddyotakara, Vacaspati Misra, and Udayana, in the 
style of Aniruddha (cf. p. 521). A manuscript of the work is avail- 
able, we are told by Jetly,! at Jaisalmer. The comments of D. C. 
Bhattacharya on his date in different places are contradictory : on 
one occasion? he asserts that Srikantha must have lived after Abhaya- 
tilaka, the author of another work in this same style. But Jetly? has 
examined the manuscript of Abhayatilaka’s work and says that 
Abhayatilaka remarks that he has followed Srikantha’s work in writ- 
ing his own. In another place Bhattacharya argues for dating 
Srikantha in the first quarter of the 12th century, on the ground that 
Sriharsa in his Khandanakhandakhaddya refers to a critic of anirvacani- 
yatva, and this critic is identified by Anandaptrna Vidyasagara as 
none other than Srikantha. 


32. THE VRTTIKARA 


Anantalal Thakur reports that in the Library of the Asiatic 
Society in Calcutta there is an incomplete manuscript, written in 
Maithili and Newari scripts, of a work commenting on Chapters 9 
and 10 of the Vaisesikasiitras, which is called in its colophons Srikapdda- 
sitravrtti.1 ‘The date of the author of this commentary must, on in- 
ternal evidence, be located during the reign of King Vallalasena of 
Bengal. Thakur gives conflicting dates for this king’s reign; in one 
place? he gives 1158 to 1178, but in a subsequently published article® 
he says that Vallalasena died in 1118 or 1119. 


NYAYALILAVATI 613 


Thakur also reports? that the manuscript makes several references 
to a Nydyavriti, written perhaps by the guru of our Vrttikara. This 
guru’s name seems to have been Sriman. 


33. (SRI)VALLABHA (ACARYA) 


Not much is known about the author of the Nydyalildvati. He 
seems to have been a native of Mithila who knew Banaras well and 
perhaps studied there.t According to Vardhamana Vallabha also 
wrote a commentary on the Fifth book of the Nydyasitras, and probably 
he also wrote a work entitled {svarasiddhi.2 Bodas reports? that the 
Nydayalilévati is mentioned in a Kannada poem which was written 
between 1210 and 1247, and D. C. Bhattacharya says® that on the 
evidence of a later writer Vallabha is connected with the “Karnata”’ 
dynasty of Mithila under Nanyadeva, who flourished from 1097 
to 1147. On this basis we may estimate Vallabha as living during 
the first half of the 12th century.® 


NYAYALILAVATI 
Summary by Jitendranath Mohanty 


The work is untranslated. “‘E”’ references are to pages in the 
edition of Mangesh Ramkrishna Telang, published at the 
Nirnayasagara Press (2d edition, 1953). (B2927). 

This is an original work in the Vaisesika tradition. Its stand- 
point is generally sober and conservative, but it is by no 
means a mere summary of traditional lore; Vallabha is a keen 
student of the literature and takes occasion to allude to con- 
temporary issues whenever appropriate. His treatment is much 
influenced by Udayana, and anticipates unmistakably much 
Navya-nyaya terminology.’ 

1. (E1-2) Vallabha begins with the sixfold classification of 
categories, and considers whether the classification may not be too 
narrow or too wide. Are not there other categories than the well- 
known six? In this connection he examines successively the claims 
of (a) absence, (b) darkness, (c) the moment, (d) causal efficacy, 
(e) knownness, . (f) the self-linking connector such as the relation 
between substratum and superstratum, (g) similarity, as being addi- 
tional categories. 

2. (E2,3-5) Absence {abhdva), Vallabha has two contentions. 
In the first place, the sixfold classification is exhaustive with regard 


614 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to positive categories. Secondly, absences are admitted as entities 
in the allied Nyaya school and this is not contradicted by the Vaise- 
sika; thus it is acceptable. 

3. (E2) Darkness (tamas). Even if it is not the mere absence 
of light, it is a substance and so does not need a separate categorial 
classification. It is, however, actually nothing but the absence of 
light. 

4. (E2) The moment(ary existent) (ksanika). The supposed 
momentary existent cannot be apprehended by any means. This 
supposed moment cannot be inferred, there being no sure hefu for such 
an inference. The use of the word “moment” is due to peculiarity 
in our understanding of motions, and not because there is something 
called a moment. 

5. (E2, 5-6) Causal efficacy (Sakti) is not a separate category, 
there being no proof for its being so. 

6. (E2-3, 6) Knownness (jftaiaté), which is admitted by the 
Bhattas, is rejected on the ground that it is not necessary for knowing 
one’s judgments, for one very well knows one’s thoughts about past 
and future objects, as well as those about fictional things like the 
hare’s horn, even though no knownness could accrue to them, The 
Bhatta cannot explain how the supposed knownness is known, A 
judgment is actually made known to us through a perception (anuvya- 
vasdya). 

7. (E3, 7) The relation of being-qualified (vaiSistya) is not a 
separate category. It is an epistemic property, though it is deter- 
mined by the nature of reality. The relation of being the substratum 
of (adharatva) is explained either as the property of offering obstruction 
to weight, or in some cases as being the inherence cause, or in some other 
cases as the property of being the manifesting agent. 

8. (E3, 7) Similarity (sddrsya) is included by Vallabha under 
the category of universal (sdmdnya), inasmuch as it resides in many 
things at once. There is, however, a difference: similarity has, though 
other universals do not have, a correlate (pratiyogi). 

9, (E7ff.) The list also cannot be reduced. After establishing 
the soundness of the list, Vallabha proceeds to discuss each of the 
categories and its subdivisions separately. 

10. (E8-10) Earthness (prthivitva) is established by the argument 
that smell must have an inherence cause, this latter being nothing 
other than the earth. Earthness, then, is the property which is the 
limitor (avacchedaka) of the inherence cause of smell. The quality 
of touch in earth is shown to be due to contact with some sort of fire 
(tejas) or other. 


NYAYALILAVATI 615 


11, (E10-12) The whole (avayavin) is something produced by 
its parts; it is not a mere aggregate of atoms. For the atoms are not 
perceptible, and the object of the perceptual judgment “This is gross” 
can only be something other than atoms. Vallabha further argues 
that the unity attributed to a whole is not false but objectively valid. 

12, (E12-15) Waterness (jalatva) is established by the consi- 
deration that all watery things have one common character, namely, 
white color that is not shining (abhdsvara). 

13. (E15-16) Light or fire (tejas) is said to be distinguished by 
white color that is shining (bhdsvara), The redness of fire is explained 
as being due to other conditions. That part of gold which is the 
locus of fluidity is shown to be a fiery substance and not earth. 

14. (E16-18) Air (vdyu) is established by an argument of the 
following sort. The sense of touch is not made of earth, for it is a 
sense organ which does not apprehend smell. For similar reasons it 
is not watery, fiery, etc. Hence it must be made of something other 
than these, namely, what is called air. The argument makes use of 
the rule that an outer sense organ possesses the specific quality which 
it is suited to apprehend, 

15. (E18-21) That the external sense organs themselves are 
elemental (5hita) is proved with the help of the argument that each 
external sense organ possesses the specific quality which it is suited to 
apprehend, and therefore comes under the appropriate class of subs- 
tance (each of which is a class of elemental things). Thus the olfactory 
organ is earthen, the visual is fiery, etc. But in each case, the organ 
itself is not sensible and so is to be distinguished from other sensible 
elements of the appropriate class. 

16. (E21-23) The body (Sarira) is not a new kind of substance, 
nor is bodiness a true universal. 

17, (E23) The content or object (of judgments) (visaya) does not 
constitute an additional class of substances. All known objects come 
under one or another of the recognized categories. 

18. (E29-30) Regarding atoms, Vallabha proves that the 
minimal perceptibilium (érasarenu or truti), and its middle-sizedness 
(mahattva), are noneternal on the ground that this entity is both 
middle-sized and is visible, like a pot (or its size). This is said to lead 
by implication to the existence of atoms. The minimal perceptibi- 
lium, being noneternal, is further divisible, and the process of divisi- 
bility must come toanend. The homogeneity of the atoms with earth, 
air, fire, and water is then proved by arguments of the form “atoms 
must possess the universals which are the limitors of the inherence 
causes of smell, touch, etc.” 


616 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


19, (E30-31) Sound is proved to be a quality on the ground 
that it possesses a universal and is yet the object of outer perception 
though not of visual perception. It is not a substance, for if it were 
it would be either partless or composite. It cannot be partless, for 
then it could not be an object of external perception. It cannot have 
parts, for what these supposed parts are cannot be ascertained. It 
cannot be a quality of air, for it is a specific property which though 
perceived is not known through the sense of touch. It cannot be the 
specific quality of space (dik), time or the internal organ, for in that 
case it could not be perceptible. It cannot be a quality of the self, 
for in that case it could not be perceived by an external senseorgan. 
Hence by elimination it is proved to be a quality of akdsa. 

20. (E31-32) Time. The existence of time is inferred from the 
fact that things are experienced as qualified by differences (in days, 
months, etc.) which are due to the imperceptible movements of the 
sun. Time is what is supposed to make this relation between things 
(like pots, etc.) and the movement of the sun possible. For only 
something which is in contact with both could serve as the connecting 
link, None of the other categories can perform this job. 

21. (E32-35) Space (dik). The distinction between various 
directions cannot be accounted for by the movements of the sun, or 
by time, as the order of movement of the sun or of time in general is 
irreversible and the same for all persons whereas the order of directions 
in space is relative to each observer. Thus an additional substance 
must be recognized. 

22. (E35-37) Self. The self is defined as that which is the 
inherence cause of pleasure. Neither the five specific qualities like 
color, smell, taste, etc., nor knowledge or consciousness can be the 
substratum of pleasure. In the absence of a self other than the senses, 
internal organ and body, memory cannot be accounted for. In this 
connection the Buddhist theory that the self is nothing but a series of 
momentary conscious states is refuted. 

23. (E37-39) Internal organ. The existence of the internal 
organ is proved thus : Apprehension of pleasure is caused by a sense- 
organ, for it is a direct apprehension as much as perception of coler 
is. The internal organ is that sense organ which apprehends one’s 
own pleasures. It is different from the four material (marta) elements, 
for it is a sense organ which apprehends the specific quality of an all- 
pervading substance. The internal organ is proved to be intangible, 
for it is the locus of that contact which is the noninherence cause of 
judgments, as in the case of the self. The supposed all-pervasiveness 
of the internal organ is rejected on the ground that it is incompatible 


NYAYALILAVATI 617 


with the facts of deep sleep and serial perception in the waking state. 
The simultaneous perception of pleasure and pain in different parts 
of the body is held to be illusory and due to quick succession which 
is mistaken for simultaneity. 

24. (E39-41) Turning to the qualities, Vallabha first treats 
number. A number, say two, is not a universal, for like contact it is 
not apprehended in the object, say a pot, to which it would then be- 
long whenever the senses were in contact with that object. We never 
say ‘““This is two” as we say ‘“This isa pot.” The universal is contained 
in each one of its instances, whereas a number like two is not. Unity 
is not the mere identity of a thing’s nature, for we are not aware of 
things as ones. Nor is two the mere aggregate of ones; it has its 
own distinctive feature. Vallabha rejects the view of the Bhisana- 
kara, whom he here explicitly identifies as Bhasarvajfia himself, that 
two, three, etc. are products of enumerative cognition (apeksdbuddhi), 
on the ground that the so called enumerative cognition itself presup- 
poses numbers. 

25. (E41-43) Size is the cause of our judgments of measure- 
ment. Its nature as a quality is proved by the following inference. 
The material cause of a minimal perceptibilium possesses a quality 
which belongs to a class that is pervaded by qualityness (gunatva) 
and which is of the same class as middle-sizedness (mahativa) ; because 
that material cause is a substance, like a pot. Now since middle- 
sizedness does not belong to the paksa, i.e., the material cause, the atom 
and the dyad are proved to possess a quality which possesses the 
universal sizeness (parimdnatva), this last being a property charac- 
terizing those things which are characterized by middle-sizedness or 
small-sizedness. ‘The existence of middle-sizedness is proved by the 
following inference : Nonperception of a dyad is dependent on the 
lack of some specific quality, for it isa nonperception of a thing other- 
wise fit for visual perception and may be in contact with the appro- 
priate senseorgan aided by light; as in the case of nonperception of 
air. According to Vallabha, longness (dirghatva) is not a kind of size, 
but is analyzable as the property of extending over a large space 
limited by the upper and lower parts of the thing concerned. 

26. (E43-44) Separateness. This quality is distinguished from 
mutual absence (anyonydbhava) on the ground that the latter is nega- 
tive while the former is positive. A mutual absence has the form 
“The pot is not a jar’; separateness has the form ‘“The pot is different 
from a jar.” Negation requires a counterpositive; difference needs 
an ablative (avadhi). Incidentally, Vallabha defends the admission 
of a special kind of separateness called separateness-of-two-things of 


618 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


which an instance is “The cloth and the table are separate from the 
33 

27. (E43-47) Contact. This quality cannot be explained as 
mere absence of separation. It is something positive. Contact is 
apprehended as a positive existent as much as inherence is. Regard- 
ing the question” whether contact is a non-locus-pervading relation, 
Vallabha rejects the Buddhist contention that it is not, and answers 
their objections. That it can coexist with its own absence without 
contradiction is explained as being due to the peculiarity of its own 
nature. It is not then fair to say that because this would be impossible 
in the case of other positive entities the same would hold good in the 
case of contact as well. That would amount to denying the peculiar 
nature of things. There is also another sense in which contact is non- 
locus-pervading; a contact may obtain with regard to a whole while 
it is absent in some of the parts of that whole. Vallabha concedes 
that ultimately the issue whether contact is or is not non-locus-pervad- 
ing may be one of terminology. 

28. (E48) Disjunction is not mere destruction of contact. 
Like contact, it too is referred to as existent and so is something posi- 
tive. Unlike destruction, it has an ablative rather than a counter- 
positive. 

29. (E48-50) Farness and nearness cannot be explained either 
as due to more or less contacts, or as due to different numbers, or as 
nothing but the distinction between the earlier and the later, or as 
the distant and the near; for none of these characteristics is indepen- 
dent of the notions of farness and nearness. They are therefore dis- 
tinct qualities, pace Bhasarvajfia. 

30. (E50-51) Judgments (buddhi) manifest objects. They 
are of two kinds: knowledge (vidy@) and what is not knowledge 
(avidyé). Doubt (samsaya), a species of nonknowledge, consists 
neither in the affirmations of both of two alternatives, nor in two 
negations, nor in denial of one alternative and affirmation of the other. 
Rather, it has four alternatives, two affirmations and two negations 
(p, g, not-p and not-g). The cause of doubt_is said to be perception 
of the common character together with nonapprehension of specific 
characteristics. The word “or” in “Is this p or ¢?” stands for the 
incompatibility of p and q (ie., it is the exclusive “or’’). Finally, 
doubt is defined as consisting in mutually contradictory predications. 

31. (E51-56) Error (viparyaya) is defined as the apprehension 
of a thing as what it is not. The Prabhakara theory that error is 
due to nonapprehension of nonrelatedness is rejected on the ground 
that every expressed judgment (vyavahdra) is as a rule caused by 


pot 


NYAYALILAVATI 619 


apprehension of the object the expressed judgment is about, so that a 
purposive action (pravrtti) toward a shell must have the shell for its 
object even if its qualifier is selverness. What causes inference is not 
the nonapprehension of nonrelatedness between the heiu and the paksa 
but apprehension of the hetu’s relatedness to the paksa. The same holds 
good in the case of knowledge gained from verbal testimony. Error 
is said to be caused by faults (dosa) which not only frustrate the origi- 
nation of true knowledge but may also produce error. To the Mimamsa 
objection that ifany judgment were false then there would be universal 
skepticism, Vallabha replies that the same consequence would follow 
if any expressed judgment were frustrated in a practical way. It 
cannot be objected that since the identity of silverness with yonder 
object is unreal it cannot possess the character of being the content of 
a judgment, for contentness (visapata) belongs to a judgment with 
respect to an object insofar as that judgment causes desire and effort 
directed to that object, or with respect to that object which determines 
the judgment. It cannot be said that what is not real cannot appear, 
as in the case of the sky flower, because the sky flower is being spoken 
of and so lacks the property of being unreal. The inference that 
every judgment is valid because it is an apprehension is vitiated by the 
upddhi not being caused by faults. | Only such judgments as are not caused 
by faults are valid. Vallabha rejects the view found in the Kirandvali 
that all superimposition presupposes a certain resemblance between 
the locus and the superimposed, and digresses in this connection to 
prove that darkness is not a positive substance but is mere absence of 
light. 

32. (E57) Indefinite knowledge (anadhyavasdya), another kind 
of nonknowledge, is defined as the judgment which arises when a thing 
is apprehended in its generic character but not in its specific character, 
and which takes the form of an interrogative sentence containing the 
word “kim” (“which”’). This is different from doubt in the strict sense. 

33. (E57-59) Dream is another kind of nonknowledge. The 
skeptic who maintains that there is nothing to distinguish dreams 
from waking experience is answered by pointing out that the distinc- 
tion between the two, as also the fact that dreams are false while waking 
experience is not, is admitted by everyone, and that a denial of it would 
be contradicted by common experience. Even if it is not possible 
to find a satisfactory definition or criterion to serve as the point of 
distinction, yet the distinction is as corroborated by common expe- 
rience as is the distinction between pleasure and pain. 

34, (E59-63) In this connection, Vallabha considers the 
Buddhist objection that even waking experience, like all experience, 


620 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


has no external object. The distinction, if valid, would upset the 
entire distinction between knowledge and nonknowledge. If judg- 
ments were no different from their objects, then knowledge-of-an- 
object cannot be accounted for. The Buddhist’s main argument 
that the two, the judgment and its object, are always apprehended 
together and never apart and so must be identical, is rejected. Co- 
occurrence (sahopalambha) we are told, is compatible with difference. 
In fact, however, there is no cooccurrence, for judgments are self- 
manifesting and so not given along with their objects. 

35. (E63-64) Turning now to judgments, they are found to be 
of two kinds, perceptual and inferential. Perception in turn is of 
two kinds, ordinary perception and omniscient perception. 

The question ‘Is there an omniscient being’’ is made to center 
around the question ‘“‘Is perception of atoms possible.” For, were 
the latter possible, the existence of an omniscient being would be 
proved by implication. Vallabha proves the perceptibility of atoms 
by depending upon a rule that being an object of knowledge (prameyatva) 
and perceptibility are unconditionally found together. He naturally 
rejects the contention that gross extension and manifested color are 
jointly necessary for outer perceptibility. 

36. (E65) As for ordinary perceptual judgments, they are either 
propositional or nonpropositional. Nonpropositional (nirvikalpaka) 
perception is defined as that which is free from relatedness to words, 
etc. The objection that there can be no nonlinguistic knowledge 
since a word and its object are identical is rejected on the ground 
that the supposed identity of word and object runs counter to 
experience (no one experiences that the yonder object is the word 
““pot’’), and is also contradicted by the fact that the same object may 
be designated by different words just as different objects may be 
called by the same name. 

37. (E65-66) Propositional perceptual judgments (savikalpaka) 
are those which apprehend relatedness, Such a judgment is percep- 
tual, for it is apprehended as such. It is caused by the object, 
as the object is invariably present before it, and as the object 
is a necessary factor for its production. Recognition (pratyabhyita) 
is a propositional judgment which apprehends the ‘‘that”? and the 
“this” as related. It does not consist in two judgments, a memory 
and a perception, but is one perceptual judgment of their relatedness. 

38. (E66-67) Vallabha turns next to inference. The Carvaka 
objection that inference is not possible is first considered. The 
Carvakas contend that the supposed universal relation between 
smoke and fire cannot be ascertained, for it is not possible to observe 


NYAYALILAVATI 621 


all the instances of smoke and fire. A previously experienced fire 
is in fact remembered and the so-called inference is really a case of 
nonapprehension of nonrelatedness. Vallabha refutes this on the 
ground that this contention itself is established not on the basis of 
perception but with the aid of inference. Inference is in fact the 
basis of all our judgments about truth, and about the coherence 
of various judgments amongst themselves. Further, a judgment 
about relatedness must be due to an apprehension of relatedness. 
Moreover, pervasion is apprehended, for with the apprehension of a 
universal all particulars coming under it are in a way apprehended. 

Unless such perception of all particulars belonging to a class 
be recognized, it cannot be explained how there could be desire 
and action in respect of something not yet accomplished. Such 
desire and action, and the underlying judgment, could not have 
for their object an accomplished fact with regard to which there 
cannot arise the appropriate desire to do anything; nor can its object 
be the future, to-be-accomplished object, unless we admit the 
possibility of apprehending all the particulars of a class through the 
mediation of the appropriate universal. 

Vallabha adds that pervasion can, under appropriate circums- 
tances, be apprehended by the visual organ. 

39. (E67-68) Pervasion (vyapti) is said to be the accompani- 
ment of all instances of the hetu by the sddhya. Its defining character 
is said to be the property of being free from all upddhis. An upddh 
is then defined as that which, though always accompanying the 
sadhya, does not always accompany the hetu. Cases of upddhi are of 
three sorts. First, there are cases where we are certain both that a 
certain property always accompanies the sddhya and that it does 
not always accompany the hetu. Second, there are cases where we 
are certain of a property’s always accompanying the sddhya but are 
doubtful whether it accompanies the hetu. Last, we may be certain 
that a property does not always accompany the hetu but have doubts 
whether it always accompanies the sddhya. Where, however, we have 
doubts about both there is no upddhi at all. 

The presence of an upadhi may be ascertained by several methods. 
(i) The discovery that the nature of the hefu sublates (badha) that 
of the pfaksa: e.g., “Fire is not hot, for it is created”; here the upadhi 
is the property of not being fire. (ii) Discovery that the helu and 
sadhya are not concomitant (they wander (vyabhicdra)) except under 
the condition of the upadhi. An example: “Sound is eternal, for it 
is an object of knowledge”; here the upadhi is the property of being 
created. (iti) Where there is no tarka to set aside a putative con- 


622 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


dition which vitiates the argument. E.g., in “He is dark-complex- 
ioned, for he is the son of Mitra’ can be vitiated by adducing the 
upddhi being caused by eating spinach, which, if not set aside by tarka, 
refutes the inference. (iv) Where there is a tarka against the per- 
vasion assumed. E.g., ‘‘Air is colored, for it is the locus of perceptible 
touch”; here it is possible to refute the supposed pervasion by noting 
that the concomitance only holds if the upddhi perceptible by the visual 
senseorgan is substituted for the hetu actually provided. 

40. (E68-69) Tarka is the invariable consequence of one 
property upon the assumption of another. Its usefulness is said to 
consist in this : that it helps ascertainment of pervasion by putting 
an end to all doubts to the contrary. 

In this connection Vallabha raises the following question: 
What is the need of repeated observations (bhayodarsana) of concomi- 
tance when a single observation (sakrddarsana) is enough for ascertain- 
ing pervasion and since in both cases the possibility of doubt remains ? 
If it were possible, refutation of propositions expressing relations 
contrary to the pervasion would establish it; but repetition of 
observation seems to have no special function of its own. In reply 
Vallabha points out that if pervasion were ascertained by one single 
observation then there could not subsequently arise any doubt about 
it. On the other hand, perception of the first concomitance gives 
rise to doubt, and hence there is no ascertainment of pervasion imme- 
diately following. After repeated observations, on the other hand, 
ascertainment does follow on. Any subsequent doubt concerning 
pervasion can arise only through doubt about the validity of the 
judgment involved, and such doubt can be removed by tarka. 

41, (E69) The Mimamsa contention that subsumptive reflection 
(pardmaréa) is not necessary for inference, memory of pervasion plus 
perception of the hetu being sufficient for the purpose, is refuted by 
Vallabha as follows. Just as even if in any case error (‘‘wandering”’ 
(oyabhicdra)) is not apprehended there may nevertheless be doubt 
about the pervasion and consequently no inference, so even if the 
pervaded property and the property perceived in the faksa are not 
apprehended as different there may nevertheless be a doubt whether 
they are not different, and hence there may be no inference at all, 
for in that case the hetu would not be ascertained as what is pervaded. 
Therefore a judgment that the pervaded property is the same as the 
property in the paksa is necessary for inference, and this is precisely 
what is called “subsumptive reflection.” 

42. (E69-70) Verbal testimony is not a separate source of know- 
ledge, for words presuppose prior knowledge of relatedness among 


NYAYALILAVATI 623 


meanings which they make us recall. They mean what is so related. 
This relatedness is established by inference. 

43, (E70-71) Comparison, also, is not an independent instru- 
ment of knowledge; its object is also known by inference. Presump- 
tion is explained as a case of only-negative (kevalavyatireki) inference. 
Concurrence (sambhava) is an uncontradicted judgment which 
arises out of innumerable cases of concomitance. For example, on 
seeing a cloud one says there may be rain. This is to be treated as 
a form of inference, for it is based on knowledge of pervasion. 

44, (E72) Tradition (aitihya) is a type of judgment derived 
from traditions concerning reports based on doubtful sayings of yore. 
However, mere report is not an instrument of valid knowledge. At 
best it can be included under inference. 

45. (E72-77) Negation (abhava) is not an additional instrument 
of knowledge. Absences are apprehended, not by nonperception 
of the counterpositive, but by sense perception. To the Bhatta 
contention that if absences could be perceived by the sense organs, 
the absence of silverness in a shell would be perceived and there 
would have been no possibility of mistaking the shell for silver, Vallabha 
replies that the nonapprehension of the absence of silverness in a 
shell is due to the frustrating circumstance that even shellness is not 
apprehended in the shell on that occasion. Hence it is not necessary 
to suppose that absences are apprehended by nonperception. The 
senses are as much capable of apprehending absences as of appre- 
hending positive entities. 

The Prabhakara contention that the so-called absence is really 
of the nature of the mere locus is rejected on the ground that unless 
an absence is distinct from its locus the question of the relation between 
an absence and its locus would become pointless. Relatedness 
presupposes some difference between the relata. An awareness of a 
floor with a jar, and any other awareness of the same floor, are 
different, but this difference itself is an absence which must be 
accounted for. ‘The judgment “There is no jar on the floor,”’ which 
is different from the judgment “This is the floor,” must be due to the 
awareness of its own object as distinct from the object of the latter 
judgment. It may be asked: How then is the absence of the absence 
of the jar the same as the jar in spite of different linguistic expressions ? 
Vallabha replies that the jar does not have two natures, one the 
positive nature of the jar, the other the absence of an absence. The 
floor, however, as having the jar on it is different from the floor without 
the jar. 

Vallabha asks; What is the designatum of the word “not? ? 


624 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


According to Vallabha, it is that which possesses neither existence 
(satté) nor any relation to existence, that which is unrelated to any 
positive thing excepting through the relation of qualifierness 
(viSesanata) . 

The classification of absences is as usual. Prior absence is that 
which has only a subsequent limit, posterior absence is that which 
has only an antecedent limit. Absolute absence is that which has 
neither antecedent limit nor subsequent limit, and whose counter- 
positive is a relation. One interesting difference, said to hold good 
between absolute absence and mutual absence, is that in the latter 
case the two terms that possess mutual absence may occupy the same 
place and time while this is not so in the case of absolute absence. 
Mutual absence is defined as usual as that whose counterpositive 
is the relation of identity. 

46. (E77-82) Liberation is nothing but the absolute absence 
of pain. WVallabha considers and rejects the Advaita and Bhatta 
theories, as well as that of Bhaskara, and proceeds to determine the 
precise nature of the absence or pain. He rejects the possibility of 
everyone’s being liberated (sarvamukti). Even the prior absence of 
pain is shown to be a possible human goal as is evinced by the act of 
penitence which takes the form ‘‘May I not have pain, etc.” 

47, (E82) An argument (nydya) is inference for another; it is 
5-membered and consists of the usual members. These 5 members 
are not useless, inasmuch as they are instrumental in establishing 
the much-sought-for sadhya. The sddhya cannot be established merely 
by the fourth and fifth members (upanaya and nigamana), for these 
may not even be employed if the sadhya is not sought to be established. 
The first member (pratijfia) is needed for this purpose, namely to 
state the purpose of the inquiry. After the sddhya is indicated there 
will be inquiry regarding the nature of the hetu. The fourth member 
is a sentence which tells us that the pervaded property characterizes 
the paksa, and the conclusion is meant to remove the opposite doubt 
and establish the sddhya. 

48. (E82-84) There are 4 kinds of fallacies of the hetu: asiddha, 
viruddha, savyabhicdra, and anadhyavasita, Badha and satpratipaksa are 
not included in the list, for they, like siddhasadhana (proving what 
needs no proof) vitiate an inference only by making respectively the 
paksa and apprehension of pervasion impossible. They do not, 
therefore, directly vitiate an inference. An updadhi is also not a separate 
fallacy, inasmuch as it does not frustrate inference directly but only 
through undermining the presumed pervasion. 

49, (E84-85) Is not memory a separate instrument of valid 


NYAYALILAVATI 625 


knowledge, inasmuch as it also is an apprehension of its own object ? 
It may even be argued that memory is not wholly dependent upon 
past experience, for it apprehends its object as qualified by thatness 
(tatta), whereas this thatness was not given in past experience. Nor 
can it be said that memory is not valid since its object need not be 
now as it was then; for memory apprehends its object not as being 
not but only as it was then and there. 

To all this Vallabha replies as follows. In the first place, to 
claim that memory is valid knowledge is obviously all right, but to 
claim that it is direct knowledge would be a case of bddha. The 
question then is: Is memory a proper designatum of the term “‘ins- 
trument of knowledge’? This’ question can only be decided by 
consulting the usage of those who speak of instruments of knowledge. 
We find that philosophers like Gautama and Kanada do not speak of 
memory as an instrument of valid knowledge. Second, memory 
can be excluded from the scope of the term “valid knowledge,” like 
desire, since it as a rule has the same object as the past experience 
on which it depends. As regards the thatness, Vallabha points out 
that it appears only when what is recollected is the experience itself 
or when the object is remembered as qualified by past experience. 
In other cases the thatness need not appear. Further, according to 
Vallabha, the thatness need not be explicitly mentioned in a memory 


judgment. 


50. (E86) Sagely knowledge (arsavidya) is the supposed knowledge 
of sages which cannot be classified under any of the other forms. 
Vallabha remarks that even if it is accepted as a valid instrument, 
that would not contradict the twofold classification of Kanada, 
which was made only to apply to ordinary knowledge. 

After examining the instruments of valid knowledge, Vallabha 
turns once again to a consideration of the categories. 

61. (E87-97) The list of qualities cannot be improved upon. 
An attempt is made to reduce an unlisted one to one or another of 
the listed qualities. Thus, for example, liking (ruct) is reduced to 
the judgment “‘I desire,” laziness (dlasya) to absence of (effort, lightness 
(laghutva) to a smaller amount of heaviness. Hardness (kathinya) 
is due either to distinctive kind of contact (of parts) or to a distinctive 
touch. Similar reductions are offered in the case of roughness 
(rauksya), rightness (daksinatva), infinity, etc. 

62. (E97-98) The same holds good for the fivefold classifica- 
tion of motions. Such motions as those of walking, entering, etc., 
are not separate kinds but are reducible to one or more of the listed 
five. Further, some of these, like entering, are shown not to be 


626 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


objective generic notions; what is taken to be entering from one 
point of view may be coming out from another. 

63. (E98-100) The Buddhist who rejects the existence of 
universals explains the possibility of a judgment such as “this is a 
cow”’ in one of two ways. The word “‘cow” either fulfils the func- 
tion of excluding what is other than cow (atadvyavrtti), or it refers 
to a common form (dakdrasadharanya). Now, Vallabha asks: What 
accounts for the exclusion? The pure particular cannot do this for 
the pure particular is unique. It also cannot be done by a class 
character, for that would amount to admitting universals. Further, 
what could possibly be meant by the “common form’? Does it 
mean that all cows have a common nature (svabhdva)? Or, are 
they all related to something common? In the former case, any 
knowledge of a cow would be eternal; the latter alternative would 
amount to admitting universals. 


The Buddhist further argues that what has no causal efficacy 
cannot be said to be real, and the so-called universals have no causal 
efficacy. Vallabha argues in reply that the true test of reality is not 
causal efficacy but being the object of a true judgment. In any case, 
the universals do cause something or other, for certainly they cause 
their own apprehension in the appropriate individuals. 

Vallabha holds that according to Vaisesika a universal is not 
omnipresent (sarvagata), but is present only in all its instances. 
However, a universal is eternal, for it continues to exist even if all 
its instances are destroyed. 

Is existence (satta) a true universal at all, not to speak of being 
the highest universal? Vallabha considers the objection that the 
usage of the word “exists” is really due toa thing’s being the object 
of a valid judgment, and replies as follows: the objects of valid 
judgments are either positive or negative. This distinction can be 
accounted for only if we recognize something which is common only 
to the six positive categories, and this is precisely existence. However, 
existence belongs directly to only the substances, qualities, and motions; 
its ascription to universals, individuators, and inherence is only 
indirect. 

64. (E100-01) Individuators are proved to exist by the following 
arguments. (1) Atoms agreeing in universals, qualities, and motions 
are yet related to things that serve to distinguish them from one 
another, for they are objects of distinct judgments, or because they 
possess substanceness; as in the case of cows, etc. (2) Atoms are 
possible objects of doubt for they possess substanceness. This 
doubt is terminated only by ascertainment of specific characters, 


NYAYALILAVATI 627 


for it is a doubt, as in the case of the doubt “Is it a man or a tree ?” 
Atoms therefore are objects of definite knowledge, which knowledge 
depends upon ascertaining the individuators. (3) Existence is 
unrelated to some positive entity other than universals and 
inherence; for it is a universal, as cowness. This other positive 
entity is the individuator. 

65. (E101-07) The existence of inherence is proved as follows: 
The judgment which apprehends that an individual is qualified by 
a universal must refer to a relation (sambandha), for it is an uncontra- 
dicted and propositional judgment whose object can only be something 
positive, as in the case of the judgment “The floor is with the jar.” 
But here the relation cannot be contact, so by implication it must 
be inherence. 

But if the relation is not perceived, how can there be a proposi- 
tional judgment about it? Vallabha says it must be due to our 
specific awareness of qualified and qualifier. The relation of in- 
herence then is inferred from the fact of the propositional judgment 
not as that judgment’s cause, nor as its object, but as its pervader. 
The direct object of a propositional judgment is the qualifier-qualified 
relation, not the inherence relation, for according to Vallabha in- 
herence is imperceptible. Inherence only seems to be perceived 
because of its “nearness” to the qualifier-qualified relation. 

In fact, according to Vallabha, the words “qualified” (vifesya) 
and ‘“‘qualifier’’ (vifesana) have no fixed meaning. Sometimes the 
more important term is called the qualified, the less important the 
qualifier. Sometimes the material cause is called the qualified, the 
effect the qualifier. Sometimes the manifesting medium is called the 
qualified, the manifested the qualifier. Sometimes the substance itself 
is the qualified, the quality is the qualifier. Sometimes, as in the 
case of “these are related by inherence,” the qualifier-qualified 
relation is only apparent and not real. 

66. (E108-111) After considering the various categories 
Vallabha concedes that a generic definition of object of knowledge 
(prameya) is inadmissible, for there being nothing that is not an 
object of knowledge no generic definition would serve any purpose. 
However, the fact that no generic definition is possible does not entail 
that specific definitions of the various categories are impossible. 

67. (E112) Doubt is defined as a judgment which does not 
definitely ascertain the two alternatives. WVallabha rejects both the 
threefold and fivefold classifications of doubt; he himself accepts a 
twofold classification into the outer (bahya) and inner (antara). 
Further, Vallabha does not take perception of common characteristics 


628 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


as causes of doubt. He recognizes only judgments about the alter- 
natives as causes of doubt: such judgments may be either gained from 
verbal testimony or from memory. Perception of common 
characteristics and the others are only contributory factors which 
help cause memory of the alternatives. 


68. (E113) Error is then defined as the false judgment which 
occurs in the waking state (thus excluding dreams) and with only 
one alternative (thus excluding doubt). 

Validity is not a universal residing in judgments; it is not an 
objective property, for then the validity of one person’s judgment 
could be apprehended by another. It is not an upadhi of a judgment 
that is transferred to it from some other thing (in the way that 
knowledge, which is the property of a self, is transferred to its object 
as its knownness); it is not of the nature of the object. It is a 
property of experience (anubhava) and consists in experience’s not 
manifesting its object as what it is not. Validity is not apprehended 
by itself (svatah), for there arises doubt whether a judgment possesses 
the property or not. 

69. (E114) What is the isness (astitva) that is common to the 
six positive categories? It is not what is denoted by the verb “‘exists”’ 
(for we also say an absence exists) ; it is not that which, being positive, 
is denoted by ‘exists’ (for the property of being positive has not been 
established); it is not the property of being other than an absence 
(for this property of being-other-than has not been shown to be a 
generic property, and it is not settled what constitutes negativity). 
Isness is also not existing-in-its-own nature (svaripasattva), for this means 
either that being belongs to the nature of the thing or that the nature 
of the thing is being. If the former, universals, etc., cannot be said 
to be, and in the latter, even absences may be said to be. Vallabha 
suggests that, since an absence is never perceived as being related to 
existence (satta), being apprehended as so related may be taken as a 
sure mark of isness. Such relatedness holds good even in the cases 
of universals, individuators, and inherence. 


Vallabha raises the question : How is the awareness “This is 
existent” itself apprehended as being existent, and answers as follows: 
Just as the awareness of the pervasion “What is knowable is nameable” 
also apprehends- itself—through an_ extraordinary perception 
(sdmanyalaksana)—as knowable and so nameable, so does the 
awareness of the pot as existent apprehend itself as existent. 

70. (E115) What is knowability (jfieyatva) which is said to be a 
common characteristic of all the categories? According to Vallabha, 
this property owes its unity to its relation to the universal judgmentness 


NYAYALILAVATI 629 


(jfdnatva). In fact, there is a common apprehension of the form 
“This is known.” Fudgmeniness consists in that intrinsic reference 
to an object which is absent in desire, etc. 

71. (E128) Knownness (jiétata), recognized by the Bhattas, 
is rejected on the following grounds. There is awareness of the idea of 
a hare’s horn, but no knownness accruing to it. This awareness 
cannot be analyzed into awareness of a hare and awareness of horn 
and awareness of a relation of inherence (each with its separate known- 
ness), for such an analysis would make it impossible to account for 
error. If an object cannot be known without a knownness, then a 
knownness cannot likewise be known without its knownness, etc. 


34. VARADARAJA (MISRA) 


This writer probably lived in the middle of the 12th century. 
Though Vidyabhusana speculated that he came from Andhra! and 
Gopinath Kaviraj claims he is from Mithila,? other scholars are unani- 
mous that he was a Kashmiri. He was the author of a commentary 
on Udayana’s Nydyakusumafijali called Bodhani, and an independent 
treatise, Tarkikaraksd, on which he also wrote an auto-commentary, 
Sérasamgraha. Aufrecht mentions a commentary on Udayana’s 
Kiranavali.2 There is also a Nydyadipika attributed to a Varadaraja, 
who may or may not be our author. According to Gopinath Kaviraj,* 
Varadaraja wrote his Tarkikaraksa before the Bodhani.® 


TARKIKARAKSA with SARASAMGRAHA 
Summary by Karl H. Potter 


‘*E”’ references are to the edition by V. P. Dvivedin, (= B2986) 
reprinted from The Pandit in 1903. The work is untranslated. 


BOOK ONE 


1, (E3-5, including kériké 1) The categories, instruments of 
knowledge and the rest, are to be defined in brief compass, for the 
understanding of reality leads to liberation. The work is intended for 
beginners. 

2. (E6-11, including sdriké 2) An instrument of valid know- 
ledge is the means (sddhand) to valid judgment (pramiti) when the 
means is pervaded by valid knowledge (prama). Or, it is that which 


630 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is the locus of valid knowledge and is pervaded by it. Valid know- 
ledge (pram4) is experience (anubhava) of things as they are (yathdrtha). 

The commentary explains that even when the instrument and 
the locus of valid knowledge are different from each other, the instru- 
ment of valid knowledge is still pervaded by it. The point is that 
there is no failure of the definition to apply to God, since He is a locus 
of valid knowledge. Nor is there overextension so that “valid know- 
ledge” would be applicable to erroneous hetus proffered by selves other 
than God, for there is no regular relation between them and_ valid 
knowledge. 

Objection : Your definition underextends, since it fails to apply 
to sense organs, hetus, and words, for there is no regular relation between 
them and valid knowledge either. Answer : Of course. They are 
not valid as such. We only accept judgments as valid when there 
are appropriate sense object contacts, or when there is subsumptive 
reflection (liigapardmarsa), etc. 

3. (El1-12, including karika 3) Valid knowledge is of two kinds: 
eternal and noneternal. The locus of eternal knowledge (viz., 
God) is one instrument; the other kind is the instrumental cause of 
valid knowledge. 

The commentary adds that according to Nyaya the knower 
(pramatr) experiences validity through its invariable concomitance 
with God’s knowledge. 

4. (E13-17, including karikds 4-5) The Buddhists say that 
validity consists in nondeviant (avisamvddi) judgment. Some say 
that experience other than memory is the instrument of valid know- 
ledge. Others say it is ascertainment concerning the nature of a thing 
when that nature was previously unknown. Still others define it 
as the operation (vydpdra) involved in gaining the object (prameya). 
Yet others say it is the aggregate of causal factors (sémagri) regularly 
connected to valid knowledge. 

Commentary : The Buddhists identify nondeviant with efficient 
(arthakriy@) jadgments, but they are wrong, since the definition fails 
to cover inferences about past and future things. No efficiency can 
properly be said to belong to objects past and future, since they do 
not exist. Furthermore, the definition overextends to include both 
memory and propositional judgments, neither of which are credited 
by the Buddhists as sources of valid knowledge. Now suppose the 
Buddhists decide to admit propositional judgments as valid; then 
nonpropositional ones will become invalid, since they deviate from 
propositional ones. 

On the other hand, if the Buddhist insists that propositional 


TARKIKARAKSA 631 


judgments are always invalid, then it will follow that inference is 
always invalid, since it necessarily involves propositions (vikalpa). 
But this is a stultifying position to take if one proposes to argue ! 

5. (E19-30) The Prabhakaras are identified as the ones who 
define validity as experience other than memory. Varadaraja 
addresses himself to a Mimamsaka (whom the commentators identify 
as Salikanatha Misra), and argues that in the first chapter of this 
work, when he is defending the validity of Vedic utterances against 
the Buddhists, this definition of validity is violated, since 
knowledge gained from such utterances involves memory. The 
Prabhakaras try to save their case by holding that memory 
judgments in themselves are valid, since they are self-illuminating; but 
this is rejected as contradicting their own view. 

Likewise, the definition of validity as belonging to any aware- 
ness which is self-originating (which is an alternative way of expressing 
the Prabhakara view) should be abandoned, for it has the above 
defects. In addition, propositional judgments and inference would 
be invalid, since they depend on other judgments for their origination. 
If it is said: ‘‘The idea we have in mind is that a valid judgment 
must not depend on any other judgment with the same content (though 
it may depend on other judgments with different contents),” then 
the answer is no, since this will still exclude inference, which depends 
on grasping pervasion with regard to the content of the judgment 
inferred, as well as excluding the validity of judgments gained from 
verbal authority. Or ifit is said: ‘‘Very well, we will allow that 
a valid judgment may depend on another with the same content, 
but only when the definite discrimination of the object is the effect 
of that other judgment,” again the answer is no, since such discrimi- 
nation occurs with respect to contents which are invalid. Also, 
this would allow memory as valid. 

6. (E30-39) For the same reasons, it follows that the definition 
of perception as direct (saksat) experience (pratiti) is incorrect. There 
is no specific universal (avdntarajati) called ‘‘directness” (saksdtiva) 
residing in judgments, since judgment is a quality (of the self) and 
there is no reason to postulate a specific universal belonging to a qua- 
lity. The opponent tries, nevertheless, to explicate this notion of 
“directness.” Eight possible definitions are offered, and each refuted. 
(1) Being produced from one sense-judgment separate from any 
other judgment; (2) or separately from any other judgment which 
has the same content; (3) the manifestation of a thing (vastu) observed 
at that same time; (4) having a content whose nature (svariipa) is 
one of the things belonging to a category; (5) having a content 


632 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


which is a real thing (i.e., belonging to a category) distinguished from 
other real things by sharing some universals and differing with respect 
to others; (6) having the power to produce linguistic usage about 
a real thing distinguished from other real things which have been seen, 
where the difference in what has been grasped does not depend on 
another judgment about a real thing; (7) being congenital to the 
triadically analyzed judgment ‘‘I know this’; (8) any other property. 
The refutations of each of these are rather schematic and turn mainly 
on the claim that they either overextend to include memory or under- 
extend to exclude certain kinds of perception, etc. 

7. (E39-50) The (Bhatta) Mimamsa teachers say that valid 
judgments involve the ascertainment of the nature of things when that 
nature is previously unknown. But this will include certain types of 
error, and it will exclude knowledge derived from the Vedas. 

Perhaps, then, it will be proposed that the valid instrument be 
identified merely as as-the-object-is-ness (yatharthya). Answer : No, 
for this would extend to include, e.g., the trace which produces memory, 
and that trace is not counted as a valid instrument by the great sages 
(who wrote the sitras). Nor should it be so counted, as it is not a 
case of perception insofar as its result is not direct, and it is not itself 
a case of inference. 

Here is another definition of valid instrument of knowledge : 
Validity is a judgment’s having as its content an appearance, not 
previously cognized, of a real thing, in which is observed a small part 
of the time occupied by that thing (i.e., the temporal span of the 
object and its perception must overlap, in order to exclude memory). 
This is refuted. Space and time do not in themselves have specific 
qualities to differentiate things thus. If one bases the discrimination 
(of the time) on an apperception (anuvyavasdya) of the form ‘I expe- 
rienced the pot at a certain time,” one would again be granting 
validity to memory. If one then says that if time is imperceptible it 
cannot be proved to exist at all, the answer is that it is inferred. Nor 
is the temporal determination to be credited to movements of the sun, 
for time and space are all-pervading (vibhu) and there is no relation 
of the sun’s motion to them. 

8. (E50-53) These considerations also defeat the theory that 
the upddhi which differentiates a valid appearance from invalid ones 
is the knownness of the object which appears. For we find no validity 
in such cases. Knownness is a property of judgments, not of their 
contents. 

Objection : Knownness can be proved by the following inference : 
“One produces a judgment by one’s own activity, since it is an action, 


TARKIKARAKSA 633 


like going (gamana).” Answer: No, since judgment’s being an 
action is unproved. Judgments reside in all-pervading substances 
as well as limited ones. 

9, (E55-56, including kérikaés 6-9) Perception and inference 
are valid instruments. Aksapada defines comparison and verbal 
testimony as valid also. The Carvakas believe in only one instrument, 
perception. Kanada and the Buddhists add inference to that. The 
Samkhyas also include verbal authority. Some Naiyayikas also believe 
in those three; other Naiyayikas add comparison. Prabhakara accepts 
these along with presumption. The Bhattas and Vedantins believe 
in six : these along with negation (abhava). The Pauranikas hold to 
these six plus concurrence (sambhava) and tradition (aitihya), 

10. (E57-60, including karikds 10-11) Perception is pervaded 
by immediate (aparoksa) validity. It is of two kinds : propositional 
and nonpropositional. Propositional perception has as content as 
object qualified by names, etc. 

Immediacy, says the commentary, is the same as directness 
(saksattva, see above). This definition makes perception also an 
attribute of God’s, so that the remark “Siva is my valid instrument 
of knowledge” makes sense. 

ll. (E60-64, including the first half of kdrikad 12). Non- 
propositional perception has as its content the mere pure particular, 
free from qualifications such as names, etc. 

The Buddhists think that only nonpropositional judgments can 
be perceptual. Thus they (viz., Dharmakirti) define perception as 
““(a judgment) free from names, etc. and without error’ (kalpana- 
podhamabhrantam). But this is wrong. The phrase is useless, for the 
word “‘without error’ is sufficient by itself to exclude all sources of 
error including names, etc. 

The Word-ists (Sabdikas) say that all perception is propositional, 
but that is not the case either. For judgments do arise without being 
shaped in words, when the relations among their constituents are as 
yet ungrasped. 

According to Nyaya there is no other cause for seeing a ball of 
stuff (pinda) than sense-object-contact; thus both propositional and 
nonpropositional judgments can be perceptual. Varadaraja traces 
authority for this to Gautama’s definition of perception as “‘avyapa- 
desya, avyabhicari, vyavasayaimaka.”’ ‘The first and the last of these terms 
designated nonpropositional and propositional judgments respectively. 

12. (E64-65, including the second half of kérika 12) Inference 
is the instrument of valid knowledge which depends on the grasping 
of pervasion. 


634 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The dcdryas say that inference is subsumptive reflection (litga- 
parémarsa), but what they are defining is actually the hetu, which 
Varadaraja will deal with below. 

13. (E65-69, including karika 13) Pervasion is a relation free 
from upadhis. The commentary explains that this definition distin- 
guishes pervasion from sopddhika (with-upddhi) relations like friendship 
and family relationships. I.e., pervasion is a natural (svabhdvika) 
relation (sambandha). 

An upadhi is something which does not occur in all the places 
where the hetu occurs, but does occur in all the places where the sddhya 
occurs. E.g., since there is violence (himsdiva) in prescribed killing 
(for sacrifical purposes, say), prohibitedness is an upddhi with respect 
to the sdédhya unmeritoriousness (adharmatva) and the hetu violence, 
for prohibitedness occurs wherever unmeritoriousness does but it also 
occurs at places where violence does not. Thus there is no pervasion 
between violence and unmeritoriousness. 

14. (E69, including the first half of karika 14) Upddhs are of 
two kinds : certain (niScita) and doubtful (Sankita). Prohibitedness 
in the above example is an instance of the first kind. But when there 
is doubt as to whether a qualifier which has been spoken of exists or 
does not exist, then the upddhi is of the doubtful variety. 

15, (E70-78, including the second half of karika 14 and kérikas 
15 through the first half of 19) Inference is divided into the usual three 
kinds — only positive, only negative, and positive negative — 
and they are explained. Definitions are merely only-negative infe- 
rences, since they always involve specification of a property unique 
to the thing being defined, e.g., dewlappedness for defining “cow.” If 
there are other things which share the property the definition fails, 
and the inference is vitiated by the anaikantika fallacy. 

16, (E79-84, including the second half of karikd 19 through the 
first half of karikad 21) The commentary controverts the Buddhists’ 
division of inference into those involving either identity or causality. 
This is not correct, for there are lots of inferences that occur in the 
world which do not fall into either of these two classes. Furthermore, 
since in the Buddhist view the hetu-possessor is identical with the hetu- 
property, there is nothing left over to infer from knowledge of the hetu, 
and likewise one cannot infer universals from particulars or vice 
versa, since in the Buddhist view there is no difference. 

17. (85-89, including the last half of karika@ 21 through the 
first half of karikaé 23) Comparison is recollection of perception on the 
part of someone who gains understanding of an object from hearing 
a sentence which includes a word he does not as yet know the denota- 


TARKIKARAKSA 635 


tion of. It has three kinds, as the object referred to by the sentence 
in question may be of three kinds, viz. through similarity, through 
dissimilarity, through the mere property itself. 

The commentary gives examples of the three kinds. (1) 
Comparison through similarity: having seen a cow, recognizing a 
gavaya. (2) Comparison through dissimilarity: having seen a cow, 
finding an animal which is not cloven-hoofed and recognizing that 
it is a horse. (3) Comparison through the mere property itself: 
having seen a camel in the north with its long neck and pendulous 
lip, etc., recognizing another one in the south by the same properties. 

18. (89-94, including the last half of kariké 23 and the first half 
of karik@ 24) The object grasped by comparison is just the relation 
between the understanding of the object and the one who understands. 
There is no other instrument qualified to grasp this relation. 

The relation in question is not understood directly from the 
sentence heard (e.g., “a cow is like a gavaya’’), since the cognizer does 
not yet understand the meaning of the word ‘“‘gavaya,” nor is it 
possible that it is brought about by the similarity of the gavaya to the 
cow, because one cannot see a relation between relata one of which 
he is not acquainted with. If one says “Let the judgment which 
grasps similarity with cow be just that judgment which is the result of 
comparison; it is the occasion for the uttering of the word gavaya,” 
the answer is no, because of overcomplexity, since the word “cow” 
ought to denote a cow, in which case we should not recognize the 
animal presented as a gavaya but as another cow. 

The Mimamsakas explain comparison as a kind of inference, 
specifically, an inference from the judgment concerning the similarity 
to a certain kind of object on the part of an object which was earlier 
grasped to a judgment concerning the similarity of that kind of object 
to something remembered to be the referent of the word. E.g., 
someone who once saw a cow in the forest, because he grasped the 
similarity of cow to gavaya, when in the city he remembers this simila- 
rity, comes to know the similarity of the referent of the word gavaya 
to cows. This can be phrased as an inference thus : Cows are similar 
to gavayas, because they are similar to the referents of the word gavaya. 
But this will not do, since ordinary people do not make such infe- 
rences even though thcy grasp the pervasion mentioned, since they 
can experience the judgment as directly as they can see the palms 
of their hands. 

19. (E94-118, including the last half of karika 24 and the first 
half of kariké 25) Verbal authority (dgama) is that teaching (upadesa) 
which has an object which is far away (para), is spoken by a man who 


636 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sees things as they are, and which speaks of the unseen as it actually is. 

All these qualifiers are necessary, Varadaraja avers, since the 
man who sees things as they really are may not speak correctly, and 
one who is in error may say the right thing by accident. 

Now these four instruments of knowledge include all other 
possible candidates. Presumption and occurrence are included in 
inference; tradition is included in verbal authority; negation (as an 
instrument) is included in perception, although absences are not 
always known through perception; sometimes they are inferred. 

The Prabhakaras, denying that absences are objects, do not 
even allow negation to be an instrument. According to them the 
judgment “‘there is no pot on the ground here” has no content (nir- 
visaya). In fact, they say, there is no such judgment of the form 


be 


“there is no... But in denying such judgments they commit the 
fault of denying the direct testimony of experience, and of failing to 
explain the cause of our ordinary experiénce. Furthermore, if there 
are no such judgments of the form “there are no...,” then their own 
claim is undermined. If they try to identify the locus — the ground 
~—- as the content, or as the cause of the experience, Varadaraja 
produces reasons for rejecting these claims. 

The Jains hold that there are two kinds of instruments — 
distinct (spasta) and indistinct. These answer to the distinction 
made in Nyaya between mediate (paroksa) and immediate. 

This ends the section on the valid instruments. We turn now 
to the objects of valid judgments. 

20. (E118, including the last half of karika 25 and all of karika 
26). An object of valid judgment is what needs to be understood for 
the purpose of gaining liberation. There are twelve kinds of objects, 
viz., those listed in the sééras. 

21. (E119-22, including karikd 27) A self is a conscious (cetana) 
thing and possesses the marks of pleasure and pain, etc. A body 
is that final whole (antydvayavin) which is the abode of motions, en- 
joyment, and sense organs. 

The inclusion of consciousness as an attribute of the self, says 
the commentary, is in order to preclude the definition’s failing to 
include the state of deep sleep. 

22. (E123; including kdrika 28) The sense organs produce 
correct direct knowledge when they are united with a body. They 
differentiate the property of directness (see above, section 6). 

In subsequent sections the other objects are reviewed, followed 
by a review of the Vaisesika categories which contains no notable 
departures from the standard account. 


TARKIKARAKSA 637 


23. (E163-65, including karika 54) After having summarized 
the Vaisesika ontology, Varadaraja remarks that the followers of 
Kumiéarila do not allow individuators and inherence as objects. ‘The 
followers of Prabhakara, on the other hand, admit all the 
positive categories of Vaisesika excepting individuators, but add three 
more categories, namely: causal efficacy (Sakti), number, and simi- 
larity. Varadaraja comments that it is wrong to make causal efficacy 
a separate category, since then it would be separate from the cause’s 
nature and the accessories. Number is included among the list of 
qualities, and similarity is included under the category of universals. 

24. (E185-86, including kérikad 70) Varadaraja’s account of 
tarka is unusually extensive. Tarka is an undesirable outcome. There 
are two varieties: the abandonment of validity of one position, and 
the ascertainment of the validity of a position contrary to that one. 
E.g., as example of the first type: “if water could not quench thirst 
thirsty people would not drink it”: this forces the abandonment of 
the position that water cannot quench thirst. As example of the 
second , then, “if water when drunk burned inside then it would burn 
me too,” which shows that water does not burn. Udayana’s 
Parisuddhi is cited approvingly. 

25. (£186-88, including karika 72) Tarka has 5 varieties, 
and is also 5 membered. 

The 5 varieties are: (1) self-residence (dtmdsraya), (2) reci- 
procal dependence (itaretardSraya), (3) circularity (cakraka), (4) 
infinite regress (anavastha), and (5) undesired outcome (anistapra- 
sanga). 

The 5 members are: (1) pervasion, (2) not being struck down 
by a tarka, (3) coming to a halt in an erroneous position, (4) unde- 
sirability, and (5) nonconformity. These are explained. Because 
of the undesirable outcome’s having a mark which produces that out- 
come, there is pervasion. This pervasion’s not being opposed by any 
tarka constitutes the second member. As a result, a conclusion is 
drawn which constitutes the erroneous outcome. This outcome is 
then said to be undesirable, since it is not the case (two varieties are 
distinguished). Finally, the nonconformity is the failure of the 
opponent’s argument to prove his position, since it involves the 
fallacy of contradictoriness (viruddha). 

26. (E190, including the second half of karikd 73 and the first 
half of karika 74) The content (visaya) of tarka is an object which is 
not yet known, but is real and doubtful. The cause of tarka is a 
hetu upon which something is superimposed. Its result is ascertain- 
ment of the nature of the object. 


638 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


27. (E193-204, including the second half of karika 74 and the 
first half of karika 75) Tarka assists instruments such as perception in 
producing ascertainment. Varadaraja refers the reader to Udayana’s 
Atmatattvaviveka for arguments showing the ability of instruments to 
assist each other. Mimamsa teachers speak of the way in which ver- 
bal testimony supports farka, and Manu is quoted. 

The specific assistance which tarka provides to the valid instru- 
ments consists in cutting off the desire to know the vipaksa in the 
paksa. When someone suspects that there is an upddhi vitiating 
(say) an inference, he may ask himself “Even though there’s smoke 
on the hill, may there yet be no fire there?” This is where tarka 
can help, by precluding this question through reminding us of per- 


vasion through the reasoning “if something is without fire it must 
be without smoke.” 


Objection: This yields an infinite regress, since to know the 
tarka is correct one must know the pervasion it is helping to prove. 
Answer: No, the tarka supports the inference by appealing to the 
undesirability of the notion that smoke could arise on the hill without 
an appropriate cause, namely fire (rather than, say, a demon). 
Udayana is quoted as favoring this answer. 

Tarka operates in this fashion with respect to a variety of upd- 
dhis. A series of doubts may arise, each stemming from the previous 
one, and it is illustrated how these are to be resolved each in turn 
by tarka. Objection: How can tarka assist the instruments of knowledge, 
since it is produced by an erroneous hetu? Answer: It is common 
experience that undesirable means can regularly produce desired 
outcomes. E.g., when there is a desire for food that is poisonous, 
if someone says “‘if you eat that you’ll die’”’ the result is the cutting off 
of the desire to eat that food, but the means (i.e., what is referred to 
by the “if” clause, namely the eating of poisonous food ) is undesirable. 

28. (E206-08, including karika 76). Controversy (kathd) isa 
long sentence (or argument) whose content is a subject for examina- 
tion by many speakers, It has six limbs (ariga)—some say four. 
They are : (1) rules for demonstration (niripya) and for the demons- 
trator (nirfipaka); (2) rules of procedure, concerning who speaks 
in what order; (3) the administration of these rules, (4) coming to- 
gether, (5) determination of the ways of losing the argument (nigra- 
hasthana), and (6) agreement as to when the debate shall end. Those 
who say there are only four limbs include (3) and (4) under (2). 
Some say a scribe should be chosen. A council of 3, 5 or 7 members 
is recommended. 

29, (E210-12, including kérikas 77 through the first half of 


TARKIKARAKSA 639 
kérikés 79) Controversy is of three kinds: discussion (vdda), 
sophistry (jalpa), and cavil (vttanda). Discussion is controversy 
which is free from passion, devoted to proof on the basis of valid 
instruments, and results in ascertainment. Sophistry is controversy 
which involves quibble (chala), etc., and the aim of which is victory. 
Cavil is like sophistry but is carried on without even the intent of 


victory. 
30. (E216-20, including the second half of karika 79 through 


kariké 82.) Now fallacies of the hetu are taken up, following Gautama’s 
classification and the subdivisions introduced by the classical commen- 
tators on the sitras. 

31. (E220-23, including the first half of harika 83) There is 
an extended discussion of the fallacy called prakaranasama. Wara- 
daraja says that commission of this fallacy prevents (pratiruddha) 
both discussants’ conclusions because of the equal force of the hetus 
they respectively adopt. 

An objector argues that such a case should be brought under 
kalatita instead. For, he says, it is hard to see how something can 
prove both a thesis and its opposite; yet this must be the correct 
analysis of the case, since it is unfitting to suppose that there is a 
contradictor of a hetu whose force has already been destroyed by 
sublation, and because it is actually impossible for two distinct 
aspects of one thing to have the same value. Answer: That is all 
right, but in this case the actual nature of things is not correctly 
grasped and so people have the opinion that there is contradiction. 
Furthermore, it is not only in inference that we have prevention 
(pratirodha), for we also find it in perception. E.g., “this shell is white 
because it is a shell, like other shells’ is vitiated because we perceive 
some shells to be yellow, not white. 

Varadaraja mentions still other views on the prakaranasama 
fallacy. Some say that it is “nonwandering from contradiction” 
(viruddhavyabhicéra), e.g., where the imperceptibility of air is proved 
through its lack of color and its perceptibility is proved through its 
touch, this is nonwandering from contradiction. Again, some 
ekadesins (presumably Bhasarvajfia’s wing) define and explain prakara- 
nasama as a hetu which, though it possesses the threefold mark (¢rai- 
riipya) proves both opposing views. E.g., “sound is noneternal, because 
it is other than the paksa and the sapaksa, like sapaksa.”’ But, says 
Varadaraja, this definition is impossible. It is not possible for one hetu 
to prove both of two opposing views and yet have the threefold mark. 
Either the sky (say) is the sapaksa or it is the vipaksa, but not both. 
So the hetu given in the example, ‘because it is other than the paksa 


640 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and sapaksa,” is an improper one. However, other hetus of this 
form are not improper, e.g., “because (the p) is other than sound 
or akasa’’ is acceptable. 

32. (E223-28, including from the second half of karika 83 
through the first half of karika 86) The asiddha fallacy is defined and 
subdivided in familiar fashion. 

33. (E228-31, including the second half of kariké 86) The 
kalatita fallacy involves being sublated by a more powerful instrument. 
Examples of four varieties are offered : (1) perceptual: “Fire is not 
hot, because it is a substance”; (2) inferential: “atoms have parts 
because they are elements; (3) scriptural: “sacrifice, etc., does not 
lead to heaven because it is an activity’; (4) from comparison: 
“similarity to cow is not a property of that which is spoken of by 
the word ‘gavaya’, because it is a real thing.” 


BOOKS TWO AND THREE 


These books deal respectively with the futile rejoinders and the 
ways of losing an argument. 


BODHANI on Udayana’s NYAYAKUSUMANJALI 
Summarized by Gopikamohan Bhattacharya, Kurukshetra University 

This is an extensive commentary on the first three books of the 
Nyayakusumaiijali. It was written after the T arkikaraksa, for reference 
to that work occurs in the Bodhani. 

The work has been edited twice. In the present summary 
“E”’ citations refer to the Kashi Sanskrit Series 30 edition (B2701). 

1, (£41) Causality is established by perception. That every 
event has a cause is known by perception. Varadaraja sets forth an 
inference also. Entities about which there is doubt as to whether 
they are caused or not are determined by some cause, because of the 
fact of dependence (sapeksa). This fact of dependence in its turn 
is determined by occasionalness (kdddcitkatva). Eternal entities, 
such as the sky (dkdsa), etc., may be cited as negative examples. 

2. (E54) Occasionalness means the relation of an object, 
which was non-existent before, to a subsequent point of time. 

3. (E92-93) Differences among effects are produced by 
differences in their causes, E.g.,a pot anda cloth have different 
causes. Or, different effects may have the same cause if and 
only if there is a sequence in time; the same cause assisted by different 
accessories at different times may produce different effects, e.g., milk 
and yoghurt. The opponent (one who holds Brahman to be the 


BODHANI 641 


solitary cause of the universe) cannot admit the first alternative, 
since he postulates one single cause. Nor can he turn to the second 
alternative, since he rejects the idea of any accessory conditions. 

Simultaneity is the belonging of many things to one particular 
time. One unitary cause cannot produce different effects simulta- 
neously. If one unchanging cause were capable of producing diff- 
erent effects it would produce those effects at one and the same time, 
and not in a sequence. This has a solution in the Buddhist theory 
of momentariness, because in that theory we have a totally different 
cause, having practical efficiency, from the one which lacks that effi- 
ciency. But if the theory of momentariness is not accepted, the 
other alternative is to admit the theory of accessory conditions. 

4, (E211) Validity is a common attribute. It is never 
produced since it is eternal. The validity of a judgment is extrinsic, 
i.e, it is due to some extrinsic causes other than the causes of judgments 
in general. Varadaraja argues: (a) Whatever is a specific type of 
effect is due to some extrinsic cause other than the cause of the 
common effect of that type, as, for example, barley sprout. Barley 
sprout is a specific type of effect and is produced from barley seed 
and not from any type of seed. Likewise validity is a specific 
type of effect and hence must be due to some specific cause. 
(b) Whichever is a judgment of a specific sort is due to some 
extrinsic cause to that which produces knowledge in general, as, for 
example, a false judgment. 

Judgment has been defined as a particular entity (vyakt:) which 
instantiates the universal judgmentness (jndnatvabhivyafijaka) and intends 
its content (visayapravana). Perception, etc., are its varieties. God’s 
judgment is eternal, hence is not due to any cause. 

5. (E345-348) Doubt is removed by tarka. Opponent: 
Tarka is based on invariable concomitance which will require another 
tarka and there will be an infinite regress. Answer: Who doubts 
in such a manner? Is he a practical man, or is he a clever one who 
wants to do away with the cause-effect relation altogether? To 
the former, our reply is that one can doubt so long as he does not 
come in conflict with practical behavior. Contradiction is the limit 
of doubt. The latter, on the other hand, if he goes on doubting, 
cannot possibly establish his own viewpoint. 

6. (E348) Universal concomitance is not determined simply 
by repeated observation. It is also not a fact that doubt about the 
existence of an upddhi or vitiating condition arises everywhere. 

But doubt sometimes arises as to whether the co-existence is due 
to an invariable relation or due to some other reason. And here 


642 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
the services of tarka are required to remove this doubt. Although 
we see smoke on the mountain, we may doubt if the mountain has 
fire or not. The possibility of such a doubt will be eliminated by the 
application of tarka: had the mountain no fire even though it has 
smoke, the latter would not have been produced at all, because it is 
the fire which produces smoke and as such fire would not have been a 
regular concomitant of smoke. 

6. (E348) Universal concomitance is not determined simply 
by repeated observation. It is also not a fact that doubt about the 
existence of an updadhi or vitiating condition arises everywhere. 

But doubt sometimes arises as whether the co-existence 
is due to an invariable relation or due to some other reason. And 
here the services of farka are required to remove this doubt. Although 
we see smoke on the mountain, we may doubt if the mountain has 
fire or not. The possibility of such a doubt will be eliminated by the 
application of tarka: had the mountain no fire even though it has 
smoke, the latter would not have been produced at all, because it is 


the fire which produces smoke and as such fire would not have been a 
regular concomitant of smoke. 


35. SIVADITYA 


This author is well known to Nyaya-Vaisesika scholars for his 
useful handbook, the Saptapadarthi. A surprising amount of misin- 
formation and misapprehension has been disseminated about him 
in the literature, however. A number of scholars! were for a long 
while under the impression that Sivaditya was identical with 
Vyomasiva, and estimated his date around 950 accordingly. The 
identification does not seem reasonable. For one thing, Sivaditya’s 
work on the seven categories follows the strict Vaisesika scheme of 
two instruments of knowledge, for example, while Vyomasiva admits 
verbal authority as a separate instrument. But this is not the most 
impressive reason against the identification and dating mentioned. 
More important, Sivaditya was evidently a great exponent of what 
was called the “mahdvidya syllogism,’ a technique we shall discuss 
below. This seems to have been a phenomenon which arose after 
Udayana’s and Vyomasiva’s time, for it brought together the efforts 
of Naiyayikas and Advaitins. One tends to associate it with the 
time of Sriharsa, and indeed Sriharsa, who flourished in the 12th 
century, makes reference to Sivaditya, according to one scholar.? 


We conclude, therefore, that Sivaditya lived during the first part of 
the 12th century. 


SAPTAPADARTHI 643 


He may have written as many as six works. The Saptapadarthi 
has been edited many times and translated more than once. A 
short work on the mahdvidyé syllogism, entitled Nyayamala, has been 
eidted. However, our author’s magnum opus, according to D. CG. 
Bhattacharya,? was probably a work entitled Laksanamdala, which 
was also apparently based on the mahdvidya arguments. No manus- 
cript of this work is known. It is not the work summarized above 
and now attributed to Udayana.4 In addition, Sivaditya wrote a 
work called Hetukhandana, of which a “poorly copied, unintelligible’’® 
manuscript exists. He also mentions, as his own creations, an 
Upadhwarttika and an  Arthdpattivarttika.6 Whether these are two 
more works, or chapters of one of the above, is impossible to say.’ 


SAPTAPADARTHI 
Summary by Karl H. Potter 


As its title implies, this work reviews the seven categories of 
Vaisesika. Noteworthy is the fact that they are enumerated 
as seven, with absence included as the seventh category. 
Although in effect this had been recognized as Vaisesika 
theory by previous writers for a couple of centuries, Sivaditya 
is perhaps the first to make it official. 

In the main, the work merely summarizes Vaisesika theory 
and does not add much to its defense. The summary below, 
then, picks out only a few of the more interesting items for 
review. References are to pages of the combined edition 
and translation by D. Gurumurti (Theosophical Publishing 
House, Adyar, Madras, 1932) (B2980). 

1. (pp. 1-3) The work begins with an invocation to Sambhu 
(= Siva), and seven categories are listed, the seventh being absence 
(abhava). 

2. (pp. 7-8) Universals (sémdanya) are of three kinds: highest 
(para), lowest (apara), and intermediate (pardpara). 

3. (p. 18) There are three kinds of time: origination (uépattz), 
maintenance (sthiiz), and destruction (vindfa). 

4, (p. 18) Eleven directions are mentioned as divisions of 
space (dik): east, southeast, south, southwest, west, northwest, north, 
northeast, lower, upper, and middle. 

5. (p. 42) Motions are divided into prescribed, prohibited, 
and indifferent. 

6. (p. 42) Universals (sémanya) are either jatis or upddhis. 


644 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Existence, substanceness, qualityness are offered as examples of 
jatis. Cookingness is an upddhi. 

7. (pp. 46-47) Similarity (sadr§ya) is a universal of the upddhi 
type. 

8. (pp. 50-51) Knowledge of the reality of the categories is 
the cause of liberation. Reality has the form of not being superim- 
posed upon (andropita). Knowledge of reality is direct experience 
(anubhava) and has four kinds of mark: hearing, thinking, meditat- 
ing, and immediate awareness. Liberation is the absence of pain 
together with the posterior absence of false judgments which are the 
cause of pain, this absence produced by right knowledge. 

9. (pp. 52-54) Right knowledge depends on definitions. A 
definition differentiates its object from everything else by specifying 
a mark which has only-negative concomitance. 

10. (pp. 56-62) Definitions of a scholastic sort are offered for 
each category. E.g., substance can be defined (1) as that which is 
characterized by substanceness, (2) as that which has qualities; 
(3) as that which can be an inherence cause. 

ll. (pp. 65-67) Time is the abode of the noninherence cause 
of priority and posteriority produced by the movements of the sun 
and which is not an abode of the priority and posteriority themselves. 
Space is similarly defined, except that in its case the priority and pos- 
teriority are not produced by the sun’s movements, 

12. (p. 76) Judgment is the light (prakasa) residing in the self. 

13. (pp. 80-81) Dispositional tendency (samskdra) is that 
which produces in its locus the condition in which it was at its 
production. 

14, (p. 95) A moment (ksana) is a time limited (avacchinna) 
by a motion related to a prior absence of a disjunction which is not 
producing another disjunction. 

15. (p. 96) Maintenance (sthiti) is the occurrence of a thing. 
It is the possession of a nature free from the absence of its own prior 
absence. Or, it may be said to be that which is related to the prior 
absence of its own effect. 

16. (p. 106) Valid perception has seven varieties: God’s 
perception and perceptions derived from each of the six organs. 

17. (pp. 106-07) Valid inference consists in knowledge of 
the hetu as qualified by pervasion and paksadharmata. 

18. (pp. 107-08) Pervasion is the relation between the per- 
vader and locus of the pervaded qualified by absence of any upadhi. 

19. (pp. 119-22) The six kinds of fallacies are explained 
following Pragastapada. 


SAPTAPADARTHI 645 


20. (p. 124) Tarka is the reduction (prasafijana) of an unde- 
sired pervader. This reduction consists in the assertion of the negation 
of the opponent’s position through showing other negations by parity 
of reasoning. 

21. (p. 125) Sleep occurs when the internal organ, not having 
merit born of yoga, resides in a place without a sense organ. 

22. (p. 128) Ordinary pleasures of life are dependent on 
effort. Heavenly pleasure, however, does not depend only on effort. 

23. (p. 136) Being material (mirtatva) is having dimensions 
limited by this-much-ness (iyatia). 

24. (p. 143) Individuators inhere in eternal substances. 

25. (p. 151) Being a locus (adhikaranatva) is having a univer- 
sal resident. 

26. (p. 151) All-pervadingness (vibhutva) is being in contact 
with all material substances. 

27. (p. 152) Separable connection (yutasiddha) is the relation 
between things which are found to be two (vidyamanayoh). Inse- 
parable connection is the relation of locus and located (ddhdrddheya) 
between things which are not found to be two. 

28. (p. 152) A Sastra is that which teaches the means to the 
better (Sreyas). 


NYAYAMALA 
Summary by S. Subrahmanya Sastri 


The work is edited by Pandit Subrahmanya Sastri in AOR 
8, 1950-51, pp. 1-10. (B2975). 

This work aims at pointing out counterinferences against in- 
ferences adopted by disputants in establishing their views. Where 
counterinferences are already in vogue, the author supports both 
of them by removing fallacies that may be pointed out in them. (P. 
1) Thus in the Naiyayikas’ inference: “the earth, sprout, etc., must 
have a creator, because these things have an origin,” Sivaditya 
removes the upddhi being created by the body by a new method called 
“mahavidya.”’ Likewise, in the counterinference: “the earth, sprout, 
etc., have no creator, because they are not created by a body,” he 
removes the upddhi nonoriginatedness through the same mahdvidyé. 

(Pp. 2-10) The author then gives counterinferences relating 
to the Nyaya inferences establishing God in other ways. E.g., in 
answering the question “if this sort of inference be valid then a pot 
can be inferred as nondifferent from a cloth,” the author says “not 


646 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


so, since the inference establishing such nondifference is sublated by 
perception.” 

Answering another question: “by another mahdvidyd the self 
can be established as nondifferent from the universe,” the author 
says that this can be accepted as there is no contradiction with 
perception on the part of such an inference. (Pandit Subrahmanya 
Sastri has also commented on the mahavidyaé argument in the introduc- 
tion to B2975: I reproduce his remarks here). 

The Nydyamala “‘aims at refuting the established syllogisms 
of the Naiyayikas by suggesting counter syllogisms on the same lines. 
The opening verse runs: 

Svapaksasiddhim kila ye kathaficana 
prakalpya vafichantyanumanalilaya, 
Viracyate tatsadrguktigumbhitair- 
dvitiyapaksairiha tadvidambana. 
Those who want to establish their position by means of some kind of 
syllogism of inference are mocked at by the countersyllogisms made 
on the same lines. By this it is clear that the author does not aim at 
establishing any view of his own in this work, but that he only wants to 
shatter the views of the opponents. In raising these countersyllogisms 
the author employs what is called mahavidya. 

Mahévidya is a positive probans which being present in the 
subject proves the existence of a positive-negative probandum by 
virtue of its being not explicable otherwise. (A definition is quoted 
from the Mahdvidyavidambana: cf. below.) 

It is ‘maha’ because it is free from fallacies of asiddha, vyabhi- 
cara, badha, and updadhi. 

The method seems to have been invented by Kularka.”’ 


36. (BHATTA) (MAHADEVA SARVAJNA) VADINDRA 
(also HARAKIMKARA, SAMKARAKIMKARA, NYAYA- 


CARYA, PARAMAPANDITA) 


This author, who is usually referred to as Vadindra, gives us 
quite a bit of information about himself. He says he is a “‘religious 
councillor’? (dharmadhyaksin) of one Srisimha, and is patronized 
by Srikrsnabhiipala who is Srisimha’s grandson. This would seem 
to indicate that Vadindra flourished at the court of King Singhana 
of the Yadava dynasty of Devagiri (modern Daulatabad) during 
the first quarter of the 13th century.1_ This fits other references to 
him, e.g. by Vedanta Deéika, the Visistadvaita leader, as well as 


MAHAVIDYAVIDAMBANA 647 


Bhatta Raghava, who was Vadindra’s pupil and dates his Nydya- 
Sdravicdra as written in 1252.7 

Vadindra wrote a work on the mahdvidyd syllogism entitled 
Mahawvidydvidambana, which “‘made him famous in both the north 
and south—it is referred to by Citsukha, Pratyagripa, and Amala- 
nanda among Advaitins, Vedanta Degika, and Srinivasa among 
Visistadvaitins.”® Gopinath Kaviraj writes that Bhatta Raghava 
“speaks very often of Vadindra’s large following.”* Anantalal 
Thakur says that this work was his earliest.® 

In addition, he wrote a commentary on the Vaifesikasiitras 
called Kanddasittranibandha or Varttika. Thakur says this was his 
magnum opus, and that it was extensive. The known manuscripts 
of it are all defective. A Vyakhya has been edited by Thakur which 
he suggests is a shortened version of the big commentary, probably 
prepared by Vadindra or one of his pupils.’ 

Another work of Vadindra’s is a commentary on Udayana’s 
Kiranavali, of which the section on qualities (guna) has been edited 
by Gopinath Kaviraj under the title Rasaséra. Thakur says that 
in the Kanddasitranibandha the title of this commentary is given as 
Haraprasida—K iranavalidarpanaka.® 

Kaviraj thinks Vadindra also wrote a commentary on Udayana’s 
Laksandavali, reasoning from a reference to such a work by one “‘Vadifa”’ 
in Sesa Sarngadhara’s Nydyamuktdvali. Kaviraj thinks Vadiga is 
Vadindra.® 


MAHAVIDYAVIDAMBANA 


Summary by E.R. Sreekrishna Sarma 


Before presenting Professor Sreekrishna Sarma’s summary it will be 
well to collect some materials explaining the sense of ‘‘mahdvidya’’. 
The commentator Bhuvanasundarasiri says that the technique which 
goes under this name was initiated by the Nyaya-Vaisesikas to help 
convince the Mimamsakas that sound is noneternal. M.R. Telang 
thinks that Bhuvanasundarastri, when he uses the term “‘yaugdcdrya”’ 
to designate the creator (s) of the technique, means to refer expressly 
to Kularka Pandita, the author of a brief treatise entitled DasaSloki- 
mahavidyasiitra in which rules for framing such arguments are for- 
mulated.1® Other scholars think that the term “yaugacarya’’ here 
merely refers to teachers following the Nyaya-Vaisesika tradition, 
and that kularka is an epithet of one of these and not a proper name. 
In any case, nothing much is known of this Kularka. 


648 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Prof. Sreekrishna Sarma writes:12 The mahdvidyd syllogism is 
always of the only-positive (kevalanvayin) type, which means that the 
hetu is never a counterpositive of an absence. All things other than 
the paksa are thus the sapaksa. So there is no vipaksa and the sddhya 
is such that it can be described in three ways as not existing together 
in two things. (Bhuvanasundarasuri’s commentary on MVV, 
p- 2). Asan example we can take the usual mahdvidyd syllogism: 
“This sound is the substratum of an attribute which exists in a non- 
permanent thing and which does not exist in the given paksa as well 
as in things other than the paksa concurrently, because it is a knowable 
thing like a pot.” Here the paksa is this sound, and everything other 
than this sound forms the sapaksa, Such an attribute (as is mentioned) 
can then be ¢his-soundness, which, although it exists in this sound, does 
not exist in any other thing and therefore can be described as not 
existing concurrently in the paksa and things other than the paksa. 
The sadhya also exists there because this sound is a knowable thing. 
If we take sounds other than this one, which form the sapaksa, the 
attribute in them would be the mutual absence of difference from the 
paksa. For difference exists in both things that are different. 

With regard to the given example, the pot has the attribute 
potness, which does not exist together in this sound and the things other 
than this sound. It is also knowable. Thus the syllogism satisfies 
all conditions of a true inference. When it is thus established that a 
particular sound has an attribute which exists in it, as well as in non- 
eternal things, that attribute cannot be anything but this-soundness. 
If this-soundness is also proved to be an attribute which exists in a non- 
eternal thing, by the method of elimination it is proved that this 
sound is not eternal. When thus one sound is proved to be noneternal, 
making it an example all sounds can be proved to be noneternal. 
This is in general the method and application of the mahdvidyé syllogism. 

The Mahdavidyavidambana is divided into three chapters. 
Chapter One deals with the definition and explanation of the mahd- 
vidya type of inference given by the protagonists of the method. Ans- 
wers to the objections raised against the mahdvidya syllogism are given 
here. Seventy syllogisms to prove the noneternity of sound are 
mentioned and explained. The author himself says that as it is 
necessary to know what mahdvidya syllogism is in order to refute it, 
he is giving a full account of the argument-form in this chapter to be 
followed by chapters aimed at refuting what is established in the 
first. 

M.R. Telang writes: ‘““He (Vadindra) says that his efforts in 
the exposition of these syllogisms have a twofold object, viz., 


MAHAVIDYAVIDAMBANA 649 


firstly it would remove the impression of the mahdvidyavddin that his 
opponents do not understand the mahdvidyé syllogisms, and secondly, 
a disputant whose resources fail him during a discussion for want of 
accurate reasoning may employ the mahdvidyd syllogisms against 
the Buddhists, just as jatis (futile rejoinders) are employed when one 
fails to duly detect faults (in the arguments of his opponent).’’® 

The second chapter probes into the question as to what an only- 
positive hetu does actually mean. As the mahdvidyd syllogism is in- 
variably an only-positive type of reasoning, a refutation of the 
possible definitions of “‘only-positive” is attempted here. The con- 
clusion is that since the vital point in an inference is pervasion, which 
is in the form of absence of the Aetu where there is absence of the 
sadhya, there can be no only-positive reasoning whatsoever as a part 
of inference. Thus the only-positive is totally rejected. 

Mahadeva Vadindra refutes the only-positive type of hetu in 
toto on the grounds that what is meant by “‘only-positive’’ cannot be 
determined. For the two definitions of the “‘only-positive,”” namely 
(1) “‘existing in all things” or (2) “not being a counterpositive of 
absolute absence,” cannot stand the test. (p. 76) 

The first explanation cannot be maintained since there can be 
no means through which the existence of a thing in all things can be 
known. Knowability (prameyatva), etc., are the only-positive hetus 
according to the votaries of the mahdvidya. How could anyone, 
who is not omniscient, know that knowability exists in all things? 
To those who accept an omniscient creator or God this could indeed 
be explained. But what about the Mimamsakas, who accept neither 
a God nor a yogi? No inference, either, can prove something as 
existing in all things. (p. 79) Such an inference could be only in 
one of the four forms of judgment given below: 

(1) Knowability, etc., exist in all things. 

(2) The state of being existing in all things exists in know- 

ability, etc. 

(3) All things are the substratum of knowability, etc. 

(4) All things other than a particular thing (i.e., the paksa) 

are substrata of knowability, etc. 

The first inference has the defect of unproved qualification 
(aprasiddha visesanata), for the sadhya cannot be shown as existing in 
any example that could be cited. The defect in the second inference 
is Gfrayasiddhi, because the state of being existing in all things, which 
is the paksa here, is not existent according to those who do not accept 
only-positive inference. Such a (proposed) paksa is no better than 
the (proposed) paksa in a statement about a flower in the sky. The 


650 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


third inference cannot have any example. The fourth itself is an 
only-positive inference which cannot be a proof, as the validity of only- 
positive inference is what is under discussion. Besides, how can it 
be proved that all things other than a particular thing in question 
are the substratum of knowability ? The argument that the existence 
of knowability, etc., in a known particular thing is proved by per- 
ception, while the same is proved in things other than the particular 
thing by inference, cannot stand either. The two means of perception 
and inference together cannot be proved to have the capacity to 
prove the knowledge of something which exists in all things. (p. 79) 

The second definition, namely ‘“‘not being a counterpositive 
of an absolute absence,” is ineffective. How could one who does 
not accept an omniscient God or yogi be convinced that knowability, 
etc., are not counterpositives. of absolute absences ? (p. 81) Udayana 
and others have made an attempt to establish the existence of pro- 
perties that are never counterpositives of absolute absences by the 
inference: “Being a counterpositive of an absolute absence is absent 
somewhere, because of its knowability.” (p. 83) This is not at all 
effective, because the same argument cannot be applied to the pro- 
perties which are accepted by Udayana and the others as only-positive 
ones, for if applied to them it would mean that such properties are 
also absent somewhere else. 

Vadindra offers his own argument to prove that there is no such 
thing as being a counterpositive of absolute absence. (p. 83) Accord- 
ing to Vadindra, an absolute absence is an absence which does not 
have a provable counterpositive at all. The example of such an 
absence is the absence of hare’s horn. The type of absolute absence 
which the Vaisesikas generally accept in the case of the absence 
of a pot on the floor is, according to Vadindra, either a prior absence 
of a posterior absence or a mutual absence. The judgment “there 
> according to Vadindra, points to the 
absence of relationship between the pot and the floor, and not to the 
absence of the pot. The counterpositive in such a case is the 
relationship. Incidentally, he makes it clear that there can be no 
relational absence in any other form than those of prior or posterior 
absence. In conclusion, Vadindra’s contention is that counterposi- 
tiveness is a property (dharma) which cannot exist in a nonexistent 
thing like a hare’s horn, and therefore an absolute absence does not 
have a counterpositive at all. (p. 87) 

Consequent on the above argument Vadindra makes an inte- 
resting statement in which he accepts only two types of absence, 
namely mutual absence or difference (anyonyébhdva) and absolute 


is no pot now on this floor,’ 


MAHA VIDYA VIDAMBANA 651 


absence (atyantabhava). (p. 90) According to this view, before 
the production of an effect in its cause which are its parts, the non- 
existence of the effect is only an absolute absence of the relationship 
between the effect and its inherent cause. That it is called by a 
different name, viz., “prior absence,” does not prove that there is 
prior absence as such. Similarly the absolute absence of the rela- 
tionship between an effect and its cause afterwards is just named 
“posterior absence.”’ 

Another explanation given by Vadindra is also interesting. 
He says that prior absence and posterior absence do not have any 
locus. The absence which is cognized as abiding in the inherence 
cause is the example of absolute absence. (p. 91) 

Thus, after refuting the possible definitions of an only-positive 
hetu, Vadindra says that even the concept of something which is 
only-positive is itself self-contradictory. For example, knowability 
is accepted as an only-positive property. Let us pose the question 
whether knowability exists in knowability, or not. If the answer is 
“yes,” how can it be that something can exist in itself? If the 
answer is ‘‘no,”’ knowability itself becomes an instance where know- 
ability does not exist. ‘p. 92) 

After refuting the possibility of an only-positive property as 
shown above, Vadindra argues that no fetu can have pervasion with 
an only-positive thing, for the pervasion which is the cause of inference 
is in the form of the absence of the hetu where there is absence of the 
sddhya. (p. 93) Evidently such a pervasion cannot be shown for an 
only-positive property which is said not to be a counterpositive of an 
absence. Incidentally, the definition of pervasion as “a relation 
lacking upadhis’’ is refuted. (p. 94) At the end, Vadindra ridicules 
the only-positive inference: he concludes that the only-positive, 
which keeps company with the mahdvidya4 who wanders about without 
any modesty or check, has to undertake self-immolation as a necessary 
expiation. (p. 98) He also states that neither the author of the 
Vaisesikasiitras nor that of the Bhdsya on them has mentioned only- 
positive inference. The later commentators who accept only-positive 
inference are not to be followed. (p. 98) 

The third chapter strives to show that the defect of upddhi, for 
avoiding which the only-positive type of syllogism is adopted, is 
present in the only-positive type too. (pp. 99-150) Besides, the 
mahavidyaé syllogisms are shown to have the fallacies of viruddha, 
anaikantika, and satpratipaksa. It is also demonstrated that the 
mahavidya syllogisms can be contradicted by other syllogisms of the 
same kind. Thus the validity of mahdvidya reasoning is shown to be 


652 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


doubtful. Moreover, the differences among the various types of 
mahavidya syllogism are pointed out. E.g., some set to nought theories 
accepted by one’s own school, others are self-contradictory, still 
others prove something which is not intended. The conclusion is 
that any number of mahdvidya syllogisms cannot prove the noneternity 
of sound. But this was the purpose for them set forth by Kularka 
Pandita. Thus the mahdvidyaé does not serve any purpose either in 
proving some truth or in leading to success in a controversy. 


TIKA on Udayana’s GUNAKIRANAVAL]T, also known as 
RASASARA 


(Summary by Gopikamohan Bhattacharya) 


This is a commentary on a section of Udayana’s Kirandvali, 
specifically the section from the beginning of the chapter on 
quality (guna) up to the point where Udayana turns to episte- 
mological matters in the course of explicating the notion of 
judgment (buddhi). Page references cited following “E” in 
the summary below refer to pages in the edition by Gopinath 

Kaviraj (B3034). Numbered sections correspond to those 

sections in the summary above of Pragastapada’s Padarthadhar- 

masamgraha upon which Udayana and Vadindra are com- 
menting. ) 

71. (E12-16) The noninherence cause is defined as that whose 
causal capacity is derived from its proximity to the inherence cause. 
This definition is criticized by an objector, who argues that the defi- 
nition is overpervasive. 

Objection: Consider a cloth and a yarn which (with others) 
composes it. The cloth inheres in the yarn and is thus “proximate” 
to the yarn. And the yarn, together with the cloth, is an inherence 
of the number two which inheres in them. ‘Thus the cloth, being 
something which is a cause (of the number two) and which is proximate 
to the inherence cause (namely, the yarn), must be a noninherence 
cause if the definition is correct. But clearly, being a substance, it 
should not be included within the scope of the definition, and so the 
definition must be incorrect. 

Answer: No, for the definition requires that the causal capacity 
be derived from its proximity to the inherence cause. In the case of 
the cloth and the yarn and the number ‘wo, the cloth has the capacity, 
in conjunction with something else, to be the inherence cause of 
the number two, regardless of what kind of thing it is proximate to. 


RASASARA 653 


Objector: Limited size (avacchinnaparimana) is a necessary condi- 
tion for a substance to be capable of motion. Thus it is a causal 
condition in the production of motion, and since it inheres in the 
substance which moves, it is therefore “proximate” to it—and indeed 
its causal capacity is derived from its proximity to that substance, 
the inherence cause of the motion. So this limited size should be 
the noninherence cause of motion. 

Answer: I should not care to say that limited size has any 
causal function in this case, but supposing that it does, then you are 
quite right, it would be properly classified as a noninherence cause. 
By the same token, such things as impetus (vega) will be noninherence 
causes, e.g., in the case of striking (abhighdta). 

Objector: What about weight in the case of  striking—isn’t 
that also a noninherence cause ? 

Answer: No, for in this case the relation between the alleged 
“cause”? and its effect is not that of direct causation. Weight does 
not directly cause striking; rather, weight inheres in the same locus 
as does the motion produced by striking. 

Objector: If you exclude indirect relations from the scope of 
causal relations in this way your definition will underextend. For 
consider desire and aversion, which are said to be the causes of effort, 
merit, and demerit, etc. Here the desire (say) and the effort it 
produces are in fact related by coinherence in the same locus (the self), 
yet you have just ruled out indirect relations of this kind. So desire 
cannot be a noninherence cause in this case, or if it is, it must cause 
effort in a different self, which is absurd. 

Answer: The situation is altogether different when the locus 
of the qualities involved is a self or akafa. ‘The definition, to be sure, 
does not apply to qualities of selves, but not because the relation 
involved is coinherence in the same locus. For in the case of quali- 
ties of the self there is no reason to suppose that the two qualities— 
desire and effort—qualify the same “part”? of the self. The analogy 
is with the case of the production of sounds in dkafa. When one 
sound generates subsequent sounds in a series, the several sounds 
relate to different points of space although the locus, the akdfa, remains 
a single, all-pervading entity. In the same fashion desire and effort 
may relate to different ‘points’ in the all-pervading locus, the 
self, . 

84. (E19-40) The Vaigesika holds that qualitative changes 
occur in atoms under the influence of heat. Due to the impact of 
heat the dyads are decomposed; then another impact of heat causes 
change in the qualities of the atoms; and last of all again under the 


654 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


influence of heat the atoms with their changed qualities combine to 
form new dyads. 

Schematically, the process of quality destruction in the process 
of cooking may be presented thus: 

(where 7,..fn are moments of time) 

Series A: 

t, : (1) impact of heat on the dyad 

t,: (2) destruction of the contact between the atoms compos- 

ing the dyad, together with 
(3) motion of the fiery particles in contact with the atoms 
(thus generating more heat) 
ts: (4) destruction of the dyad, together with 
(5) destruction of the contact between the fiery particles 
and the atoms 

ty: (6) destruction of the dark color of the pot 
The process of producing the new (red) color of the pot is as follows: 

Series B: 

t,: (7) impact of heat on atoms 

t,: (8) motion in the atoms, together with 

(9) creation of new (red) color in atoms 

tz: (10) contact between the atoms 

t,: (11) creation of the dyad 
The question is raised as to which moments in the two series corres- 
pond, specifically, at which moment in the first series the red color 
is created in the atoms. 

Opponent: (7) occurs simultaneously with (4), and (9) with 
(5), so that the very same impact of heat which destroys the dark 
color creates the new red color. 

Answer: No. The function of the heat which arose at f, in 
Series A spends itself then and is destroyed at ¢,; in Series A. So 
the impact of heat which destroys the old color must be different 
from the impact of heat which creates the new color. 

Opponent: All right then; let us say that (5) occurs at the same 
moment as (6), so that the impact of heat involved in (3) will occur 
at the moment immediately preceding the moment when (6) occurs, 
as well as the one at which (9) occurs. 

Answer: No, for even then that impact of heat cannot serve as 
the noninherence cause of the destruction of the dark color, since 
a noninherence cause must not only exist at the moment when the 
effect is produced, but also at the next moment—when it has come 
into existence. Since the impact of heat which occurs at ¢, in Series 
B is not efficient to produce the creation of the new color, because 


RASASARA 655 


that impact does not immediately precede that creation, it follows 
that (6) and (9) are not co-temporaneous and need distinct impacts 
of heat to bring them about. 

85. (E40-57) Number is a quality, and is distinct from the 
substance (s) in which it inheres. Its difference from them can be 
proved from expressions such as ““This is a pot,” where the substance 
and number appear as qualificand (vifesya) and qualifier (vifesana) 
respectively. The notion “one” in “This is a pot” is different from 
““potness,”’ since such a notion occurs likewise in the case of cloth, 
etc.; furthermore, poiness inheres in many individual pots at one and 
the same time, whereas a number one inheres in only one substance. 

Turning to the number two, Vadindra, in defending Udayana’s 
distinction between the number two (a quality) and the property 
twoness (a universal), answers an objection. 

Objector: Since oneness and twoness inhere in the same locus 
(a pair is both one pair and two things), the two universals must be 
identical. But if they are identical, how can you explain the diff 
erence between the numbers one and two? ‘You cannot say that 
one has a property the other lacks, since I have just established that 
they share both properties. 

Answer: The number two arises from enumerative cognition 
(apeksabuddhi). 

Opponent: No, the difference is this : the number one inhering 
in an atom is the noninherence cause of the number two inhering 
in the dyad as well as the noninherence cause of the number two in 
the pair of atoms, but the difference is that while the inherence cause 
of one is the dyad, the inherence cause of two are the two atoms. 

Answer: That does not explain the difference, since the pair of 
atoms is identical with the dyad. 

Opponent: Then the difference is that the prior absence of one 
is different from that of two. 

Answer: No, for this is not found to be the case. Our view, 
that enumerative cognition effects the distinction, can be proved 
by the following argument: 

The number two (in pot and cloth) is destroyed by the destruc- 

tion of (that enumerative cognition which is) its instrumental 

cause, 

Because the number two is the quality of a pair (such as pot 

and cloth). 

Whatever is a quality is destroyed by the destruction of its 

instrumental cause, 

Like many (bahu), 


656 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Unlike dyads (which are not destroyed by the destruction 
of their instrumental causes). 

Opponent: If the cause of the production of numbers such as 
two, three, etc., is simply enumerative cognition plus the prior absence 
of each number in the series, then one and the same enumerative 
cognition should produce the whole series, since the two conditions 
sufficient for the production of the series are present. I.e., when the 
conditions for the production of two-—viz., enumerative cognition 
plus prior absence of two—are present, the conditions for the production 
of three—viz., enumerative cognition plus prior absence of three— 
are also present, and so on for the rest of the number series—so they 
all should be produced at once, which is absurd. 

Answer: No, the cause of the production of three, e.g., is (1) 
enumerative cognition involving a specific number n plus (2) prior 
absence of that particular number n. The prior absence of other 
numbers is irrelevant to the production of a specific number. 

86. (E57-65) VAadindra, following Udayana, defines size 
as that quality which is the ground for using the expression “‘measure”’ 
(mana), where that expression is used in relation to something other 
than number or weight. 

Opponent: Judgments of size do have to do with judgments of 
number, contrary to your definition. E.g., a pot is judged to have 
“large”? (mahat) size because it is found to have many (bahu) ultimate 
constituents. 

Answer: No. The minimum perceptibilium (trufi, a triad of 
pairs of atoms, called ‘‘the triad” for the purpose of the following 
argument) is held to have large size, even though the number many 
(i.e., more-than-two) cannot be perceived in it, since its constituents 
are below the threshold of perception. Furthermore, large size 
is sometimes produced by loose contact (racaya, as in a cotton 
ball). 

The process of destruction of the large size of a triad is as follows: 
first, there occurs the disjunction of the dyads from each other; 
second, the atoms in each dyad become disjoined from each other; 
third, this brings about destruction of the triad; and fourth, as a result 
the large size of the triad is destroyed. 

The large size of a triad is not produced by impetus (vega). 
Impetus is responsible for the contact between the dyads composing 
the triad, but that impetus has been destroyed by the time the triad 
is produced and so cannot be counted as a cause of the large size of 
the triad. 

And finally, the large size of the triad is not produced by the 


RASASARA 657 


size of its constituent dyads, since there is no proof of that. 

So the large size of the triad is produced by the manyness of 
its constituents (even though the judgment that a triad is large is not 
produced by a perceptual judgment that its constituents are many 
in number, since we are unable to perceive its constituents). 

Opponent: No, there is proof that size can be a cause in the 
production of size—proof in the form of an inference: 

The size of the dyad is the noninherence cause in the production 

of the large size of (larger) things; 

Because the size of the dyad is the size of that which is the 

inherence cause of the size of those larger things; 

Like the size of yarn (which is the inherence cause of cloth). 

Answer: Your inference is vitiated by an upadhi, viz., “not being 
small (anu) size.” Yarn is already of large size, while dyads are of 
small size. So your inference fails. 

On the other hand, I can produce an inference to refute the idea 
that the size of the dyad produces the size of the triad. 

The size of the dyad is not the cause of the size of the triad, 

Because it is a size, 

Like the size of a pot. 

Opponent: This inference of yours involves the fallacy of sat- 
pratipaksa, since there is a counterinference which is equally justified 
and which proves the contradictory of the sdédhya of your inference. 

The size of the dyad is the cause of the size of the triad, 

Because it is the size of the dyad. 

Answer: No, this last inference is invalid, since it commits the 
fallacy of asadharanahetu. It is required of a valid inference that the 
hetu should exist in the locus of the sddhya. The locus of the sddhya 
is the triad (which is the locus of size of triad), but stze of dyad does not 
occur in the triad. So your inference is invalid, and mine carries 
the day. 

87. (E65-71) In Vaisesika separateness is a quality, Bha- 
sarvajfia identifies it, however, with mutual absence. Vadindra 
explains Udayana’s rejection of Bhasarvajfia’s position. He then 
brings in another opponent who has a somewhat different explanation, 

Opponent: Separateness is the vaidharmya of cloth from pot. 

Answer: What does vaidharmya mean? Does it mean (a) 
that in the difference of cloth from pot cloth possesses an attribute 
not belonging to pot? If so, putting the word for pot (ghata) in 
the ablative case (ghatat patah prihak) would be inappropriate. Or 
does it mean (b) that the two things, cloth and pot, have distinct 
qualities ? If so, we ought to say that the atom before baking is 


658 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


separate from the same atom after baking, which is absurd. 

91-93, (E87-104). In this section Vadindra discusses pri- 
marily the concept of tarka and its role in determining the concomi- 
tance between s and p. Tarka facilitates (anugrahaka) the operation 
of inference. Vadindra points out the difference between judgments 
gotten from inference (anumiti) and those resulting from tarka. In 
inference we have valid judgments when we judge that the / pervaded 
by s exists in p—i.e., when we judge correctly that there is paksadhar- 
mata. In tarka, however, the paksadharmata is an instance of super- 
imposition. We assume paksadharmata hypothetically in order to go 
on to prove its absence. 

Thus in ¢tarka the relation between A and p is assumed or “‘super- 
imposed” (dropa). The purpose of tarka is to prove that the con- 
tradictory of the opponent’s assertion is true. Failure to lead to the 
fulfilment of this objective leads to the fallacy called viparyayapar- 
yavaséna—failure to culminate in the proof of the opposite proposition. 
Following Udayana, Vadindra rejects the view that tarka serves to 
remove doubt. For him, tarka is required in order to remove a 
person’s desire to take as truth the opposite of the correct position 
(vipaksajijfidsdnivrtti). Such a desire obstructs inference and hence 
its removal is a perquisite for the operation of inference. 

Unlike Vacaspati Misra, Udayana and Vadindra do not think 
that tarka serves in any way to eliminate doubt. Doubt results from 
our failure to apprehend a distinguishing mark of something, coupled 
with our recognizing certain features common to both of two alter- 
natives. E.g., in “it’s either a tree or a man (but I don’t know 
which)? we cognize common features without cognizing distinct 
ones. This doubt can only be eliminated when the distinctive features 
of one of the two things become cognized, and this is accomplished 
by perception, not by tarka. 


KANADASUTRANIBANDHA or VAISESIKASUTRAVARTTIKA 


Portions of this work are available in manuscript according to 
Anantlal Thakur.44 Furthermore, he has edited an anonymous 
commentary which he construes to be a summary of Vadindra’s 
views concerning the interpretation of the Vavseszkasiitras. Thakur’s 
introduction to this edition (B56) (Darbhanga, 1957) points out some 
of the discrepancies between Vadindra’s siitrapdtha and also demons- 
trates his author’s acquaintance with Atreya, 


DIVAKARA 659 


37, BHATTA RAGHAVA 


As was mentioned above, this author tells us he is the pupil 
of Vadindra.!_ His only known work is a commentary, Vicdra, on 
Bhasarvajfia’s Nydyasdra. In that work he gives the date of its com- 
position in an ambiguous way, so that it can be construed as either 
1174 or 1274 Saka. If the former is correct, it equals A.D. 1252, if 
the latter, 1352. Gopinath Kaviraj prefers the former and cites 
some evidence about the manuscript to support this.? 

P. L. Vaidya’s notes on his edition of the Nydyasdra provide 
some information about Bhatta Raghava’s views.® 

(1) Raghava mentions and criticizes one Ramabhatta, who 
tried to construe the word “‘samyak’’ (“direct”) in the opening line of 
Bhasarvajfia’s material on inference to qualify the term “‘invariable 
concomitance.”? His interpretation is criticized by Raghava. 

(2) “Raghava says that avindbhdva (invariable concomitance) 
is the same as vydpti (pervasion).” 

(3) Raghava distinguishes the prdcinah or old school, who 
limit inferrable things to those which people with our kind of organs 
can receive. Bhasarvajfia differs; the test is whether the thing is 
fit to be known by means of the instrument called perception. 
E.g., a prior concomitance established by perception is inferrable. 
Raghava here cites Vadindra (whom Vaidya believes to be ‘“‘a fellow 
student”’!). 

(4) Raghava says that there are really only five fallacies of the 
hetu but that Bhasarvajfia gets six by splitting one of them into two. 


38. DIVAKARA (UPADHYAYA) or VILASAKARA 


The information given here on this author, who wrote several 
works, is due almost entirely to the researches of D. C. Bhattacharya. 
He seems to have commented on four of Udayana’s works, as well 
as on Sriharsa’s Khandanakhandakhadya. Bhattacharya estimates his 
date as the first half of the 13th century on the basis of the fact that 
a manuscript of a fragment of a Nibandhoddyota dates from between 
1272 and 1283. 

This Uddyota, on either Udayana’s Nydyaparisista or his Parisuddhi, 
is one of the five works attributed to Divakara, of which only two are 
known to exist in extant manuscripts. The other is a commentary, 
Parimala on the Nydyakusumdijali, a manuscript of which exists in one 
of the Jain Bhandaras, according to Bhattacharya. 

Evidence of the other three works is provided by references in 


660 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


later literature. Pragalbha’s commentary on Gangega’s Tattvacin- 
tamani refers to Divakara as many as fifty times, says Bhattacharya. 
Pragalbha implies that Divakara wrote a Vildsa on the dravya section 
of Udayana’s Kirandvali. Mallinatha also refers to him as Vilasakara, 
and this Vildsa is cited as well by Paksadhara Misra. 

His commentary on Udayana’s Atmatattvaviveka is called Aloka. 

The only information about his views that Bhattacharya can 
provide is this. According to Sridhara’s Nydyakandali prepositions 
(upasarga) directly denote (vdcaka). Udayana says no, that pre- 
positions only elucidate the meanings of the verbs they are attached 
to (dyotaka). Divakara adopts a middle course. Prepositions are 
said to be dyotaka where they contradict the primary meaning of the 
verb, otherwise vacaka. 

Umesh Mishra writes that “Divakara Upadhyaya flourished 
in Mithila and was a Maithila Brahmana. His father was a court 
pandita of some Maithila king as has been mentioned by himself 
at the end of his commentary (the Uddyota).”? Mishra cites some 
additional references to Divakara from the later literature.? 


39. VADI VAGISVARA 


V. Raghavan tells us that he has inspected a manuscript at 
Bikaner of this author’s Mdénamanohara.1 It is a Vaisesika work 
concerning seven categories in seven sections, defending each category 
mainly against Mimamsa and Advaita arguments, occasionally citing 
“Saugata’’ and “‘Samkhya.” “There seems to be a gap in the 
portion dealing with visesa,” he adds. The categories of fakt, sadrfya, 
pradhéna, tamas are refuted. The last section deals with moksa along 
Vaisesika lines, criticizing Advaita. The work mentions Vyomasgiva 
and Prabhakara. 

The author was a Saiva, Raghavan says.? He is referred to 
by Anandanubhava (see below), who calls him ‘‘vamamatanusarin.”’ 
Raghavan suggests he may have been a Pasupata. He wrote another 
work, according to his own testimony: its title was Nydyalaksmivildsa. 

E. P. Radhakrishnan has provided us with a good deal of in- 
formation concerning the views of Vadi Vagigvara, based upon what 
other writers attribute to him.® 

(1) “In connection with the discussion of the nature of anu- 
bhatt (experience) Citsukha introduces different views held by various 
schools of thought and refutes them one by one, finally establishing 
the superiority of the Advaitic standpoint. For the Advaitins, 


MANAMANOHARA 661 


anubhiti is svatah-siddha, self-established. The Naiyayikas hold that 
if anubhiiti be held as self-established, so far as experience is concerned, 
it will cease to be a vasiu, padartha, entity or object, because it is no 
more a vedya (knowable). For, with them knowability is the test of 
predicability. In answer to this it need be said that vedyatva (know- 
ability) does not prove objectivity for the simple reason that 
objectness and knowability are not invariably connected. Further 
it is not knowability that establishes vastutva, but sphurana or 
prakasamanatva. 

Here the author of the Nayanaprasddini refers to an anumdna 
put forth by the author of the Manamanohara as follows: “‘etena eta- 
dapyapastam, yadaha manamanoharakarah ‘jfianam pratyaksavedyam, 
vastutvat, ghatavat’ iti”. From this we have to suppose that Vagis- 
vara, like the Naiyayikas, also held paratah prémanya of knowledge 
and supposed the validity of a cognition to be known by perception 
even as a jar is experienced. 

(2) “Citsukha raises the objection put forth by Vagisvara 
regarding the self-luminosity of dtman. The objection arises thus: 
Where does jfdna reside? Evidently the answer will be, in dtman. 
If so, dtman and consciousness are related as qualification and the 
qualified, and dtman will no more be sarvajfia (omniscient), or of the 
nature of intelligence. Addnamanohara anticipates a difficulty here 
by way of a counterobjection. Ffidna does not reside in dtman, 
but it has its locus in jfdna alone, just as existence. The possibility 
of this counterobjection is set aside soon. There is a school of thought 
which holds jfdna not as an attribute of dtman but dtman itself. With 
respect to them no relation between jfdna and diman can be said to 
exist, for they are one and the same. Thus the @fraya for jidna is 
asiddha and the doubt which has for its basis @man as the substrata 
of consciousness does not at all arise. 

(3) “The author of the Mdnamanohara is credited with another 
objection. He says that sruti itself gives the relation between drasta 
and dys# and thus how can dsraydsiddhi for jfidna be held ?...Further, 
if the difference between isvara and jiva be accepted, who is to be held 
as related to drsti? It cannot be jiva for want of nityajfiana. The 
author of the Mdanamanohara said that this fruti relates nityajiidna with 
ifvara. (The ‘Sruti’? here is Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 4.3.23: “na 
hi drastuh drsteh viparilopo vidyate’’). 

(4) “The author of the Mdnamanohara also denied tamas as a 
separate entity in accordance with his Vaisesika bias. How to ex- 
plain the experience of nilam tama (black darkness) ? He says that 
the color sense in darkness is a case of bhrama (error) and cites Salika- 


662 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


natha in support. The usage ‘nilam tamah’ can be explained as a 
case of upacdra or secondary significance. 

“Further, if at all amas is to be accepted as a separate padartha 
it should be the object (visaya) of a cognition. That is not the case. 
For an object consists of parts, which are themselves different from 
the whole. This is Manamanoharakara’s definition of visayatva: 
“uktam ca manamanoharakarena—<Sarirendriyavyatiriktah avayavi 
hi visaya—iti.” 

(5) “The author of the Mdanamanohara is referred to as finding 
objection to (Citsukha’s) use of arthdpatti. He contends as follows: 
In places like Suktirdjata, asat may not exist here, but it can safely 
reside elsewhere; for in the particular place as specified there is no 
khyati or bhdna of asat. Bdadha (sublation) is possible, not in the 
particular form derived by the Advaitins, but in a different manner. 
Further, what is said—‘‘asato bhanam anupapannam’’—is unreason- 
able. Because when we use the word asat, some idea is conveyed by 
it. Otherwise the word will have to be deprived of its capacity to 
convey the idea, which naturally leads to the denial of any sense 
to any word or sentence. 

(6) “Further, what is sat? Is it that which has sattd, or is it 
abadhya, or does it mean brahmasvariipa? Obviously the first alter- 
native cannot be held. For in the Advaitin’s line of thought this 
universe is accepted to have satté and the same is said to be badhya 
too. This, according to the realistic Manamanoharakara is a con- 
tradictory statement. For, as he points out, if it be held that what 
is (exists) cannot be sublated, the cosmos or prapaiica, insofar as it 
has been given satiaé, could not be denied existence. This would mean 
that prapaftca could not be sublated at a later moment. Thus the 
invariable concomitance between sat and abddhya falls to the ground. 

Nor does the second alternative hold good. That is, sat cannot 
be said to mean abddhya. If so, the word abadhya will be a synonym 
for sat, in which case, instead of saying “yat sat, tadabadhyam,”’ it 
can very well be said “‘yadabadhyam tadabadhyam.” This makes 
no difference between the establisher and what is sought to be 
established. 

The third alternative, sat is brahmasvariipa, also is faulty, for it 
is siddhasddhana. By this Vagi§vara means to say that the realists 
also do accept satta (reality of existence) to Brahman, and what the 
Advaitin seeks to establish by saying sat is brahmasvariipa is already 
known to them. Thus the Advaitin’s argument loses its value, since 
it does not establish any new fact, peviously unknown to the realists. 
That is to say, the contention ‘sat is brahmasvariipa’ becomes invali- 


MANAMANOHARA 663 


dated insofar as it does not satisfy the conditions of a pramdana. 

(7) “In answer to the Advaitin’s proof of abheda by arguing 
that there can be no difference between bheda and bhedin on pain of 
anavastha, Vagisvara says : The anavasthaé pointed out above does not 
in any way endanger the concept of bheda; for there is no pramana to 
hold a second bheda. Further, everybody is well aware of the com- 
mon experience and usage that bheda and bhedin are different and are 
not one. Nor can a second bheda be inferred on the authority of 
one bheda. Thus if difference between bheda and bhedin is sought to 
be refuted on the ground of anavasthé it is not possible. For the 
anavastha springs up only later. The first bheda is more powerful 
than the second, for it happens to be the upajivya. Thus anavastho- 
padana with regard to bheda is not reasonable. Bheda cannot also 
be said to be anirvacaniya, for lack of sound reasons. This is the posi- 
tion of Manamanoharakara.”’ 

(8) Citsukha mentions a number of Vagisvara’s definitions of 
various technical terms of Vaisesika. 


40. NARAYANA SARVAJNA 


D. C. Bhattacharya notes that this writer is said by Ananda- 
purna Vidyasagara to have improved on Udayana’s definition of 
upadh. Bhattacharya suggests that he may be identical with the 
commentator on Manusamhita who flourished in the 13th century. 
Samkara Misra also seems to refer to him in his Upaskdra in the section 
on disjunction.! 

On the other hand, Umesh Mishra finds that Anandapirna, 
in his commentary on the Khandanakhandakhadya of Sriharsa, refers 
explicitly to the view of Narayanasarvajfia which he says has been 
refuted by Sriharsa. Assuming this means that Narayana Sarvajfia 
lived prior to Sriharsa, Mishra dates him in the 12th century.? 


41. KESAVA MISRA 


This author is known for one work only, the handbook entitled 
Tarkabhasa which has been edited and translated a number of times. 
Ganganatha Jha affirms! that he lived in Mithila, and D. C. Bhat- 
tacharya gives reasons? for thinking that this is so. There has been 
some discussion concerning his date, but the best guess would seem 
to be mid-13th century. Umesh Mishra notes the interesting fact 
that of the some twenty commentators who have commented on the 
Tarkabhasé ‘“‘a large majority...hail from the South,” and “Govar- 
dhana is the only commentator from Mithila so far known.’’# 


664 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


TARKABHASA 
Summary by Karl H. Potter 


“KE” references are to the edition of S. M. Paranjpe, Poona 
1909 (B3067). 

“‘T” refers to the translation by Poul Tuxen, Kopenhagen 
1914 (B3073). I follow Tuxen’s topical division. 

I. Method. (E1-8; T169-70) After a brief remark indicating 
that this book is a handbook for young pupils (there is no invocation), 
Kefgava quotes Nydyasitra 1.1.1 and explains it. The method of 
statement, definition, and investigation is reviewed. 

II. Instruments of Knowledge. (E8-10; T170) The fruit of 
instruments of knowledge is right knowledge (prama@), which is ex- 
plained as experience (anubhava) which is as-the-object-is (yathartha). 

III. Causality. (E10-26; T170-75) The karana is the most 
effective cause. A ‘“‘cause’’ is defined as a necessary condition which 
is (1) existent prior to the effect, (2) not unessential (ananyathasiddha). 
To explain the second requirement: the color of the threads, though 
it must exist prior to the effect (the cloth), is not a cause of the cloth, 
since the color exhausts its powers in producing the color of the cloth 
and to adduce it as a cause of the cloth itself would be too com- 
plicated. 

The three kinds of causes and their distinctions are reviewed. 
An objector is introduced, who points out that the jar cannot be the 
inherence cause of its own color, since the jar and its color come 
into existence simultaneously. KeSava’s answer is to deny the 
alleged simultaneity. The substance first comes into existence, 
then its qualities; this is defended by pointing out that since the 
pot and its qualities are different they must have different causes, 
and the simplest way to assure this is by the hypothesis offered. 

The objector points out that an implication of this is that a jar 
will be invisible when it is first produced, but Keéava is not bothered 
by this: perception of the jar only occurs at the next moment after its 
production. 

IV. Perception. (E27-31; T175-78) The instrument of 
knowledge called perception is sometimes a sense organ, sometimes 
the contact between sense organ and object, and sometimes it is a 
judgment. It is the sense organ when the result is a nonpropositional 
judgment. In such cases the sense-object-contact is the intervening 
operation (avdntararvyapdra). But when the result is a propositional 
judgment, the instrument is the  sense-object-contact. Finally, 


TARKABHASA 665 


when the results are taken to be the reactions of attraction or repul- 
sion to the object, the instrument is the nonpropositional judgment, 
and the propositional judgment is the intervening operation. 

The six kinds of sense-object-contact are described and _illus- 
trated. 

V. ‘Inference. (E31-45; T178-88) Inference is identified 
with lingapardmarsa, which is explained as that which makes us 
apprehend the object as subsumed under the pervasion. This is 
explained at length and defended against alternative suggestions. 
Inference for oneself is distinguished from that for others, and des- 
cribed; and then inference for others is explained. It is divided into 
positive-negative, only-positive, and only-negative. The first must 
satisfy the usual five conditions in order to be valid; the second must 
satisfy four (since the requirements involving the vp does not apply), 
and likewise the third (since the requirement involving the sp does 
not apply). 

Discussing fallacies, KeSava identifies five: asiddha, viruddha, 
anaikantika, prakaranasama, kdlatyayapadista. An alternative name 
for the prakaranasama is satpratipaksa. 

VI. Comparison. (E45; T188) The result of this instrument 
is said to be an understanding of the relation between the word gavaya 
and the object to which it applies. 

VII. Testimony. (E46-51; T188-190) The three require- 
ments of sentential meaningfulness—expectancy, fitness, and con- 
tiguity—are illustrated. Objection: It is not the words which have 
to satisfy the requirements, but the objects; and even this is not right: 
since expectancy, etc., involve someone expecting, etc., it must be 
the attributes of something conscious which satisfies the requirements. 
Answer: True, but the words are said to meet the requirements in a 
figurative usage. And as for the requirement of contiguity, this is 
not a figurative but a literal usage, for it is the words that must be 
contiguous. , 

VIII. Other Instruments. (E51-55; T190-93) Presumption 
is shown not to be a separate instrument but a kind of inference. 
Likewise, negation (as an instrument) is said to be perception of 
absences. 

TX. On Validity. (E55-62; T193-196) The Mimamsa theory 
of instrinsic validity (svatahpramanya) is explained and refuted by 
rejecting the hypothesis of a property of knownness as distinct from 
the very nature of any object of knowledge. 

Judgments are apprehended by  internal-organ-perception 
(mdnasapratyaksa), but their validity is apprehended by inference 


666 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


from the successful activity they engender. 

X. Objects of Knowledge: Self, Body, Sense Organs. (E62- 
69; T196-98) The objects are listed following the Vydyasiitra fashion. 
The discussion is unremarkable. Objects (ic., the Vaisesika cate- 
gories) : Substance. (E69-78; T198-203) The categories are listed 
as six (absence is missing). The discussion of substances follows the 
usual pattern. Qualities (E78-86; T203-07) The usual 24 are listed. 
Motions, Universals, Individuators, Inherence (E86-87; 1207-09). 
No surprises here. Absences. (E88; T209) Here this is said to be 
the seventh category. It is divided into two kinds: relational and 
mutual. Relational absences -include prior, posterior, and absolute 
absences; mutual absence is said to be that whose counterpositive 
is identity (lddatmya). Judgments. (E89-92; T210-12) Returning 
to the Nydyasiitra’s twelve categories, Kefava next takes up judg- 
ments (buddhi-upalabdhi-jiana-pratyaya). Just as the Vaigesika system 
of ontology is packed into the Nyaya category of objects, so here the 
school’s epistemological thought is summarized under this heading. 
Judgments are of two kinds—experience and memory. Experiential 
judgments are either true or false: the true ones are those which are 
spoken of their objects as they are (yathdrtha). The false ones are 
divided into doubtful, erroneous, and tarka judgments. Memory 
is also subdivided into true and false. In sleep, says KeSava, every 
judgment is a false memory (since we mistakenly think the things 
are presented to us here and now). Judgments have no form 
(nirakara). 

The internal organ, activity, defects, future life, fruits, and pain 
are briefly defined. Liberation is explained. 

XI. Doubt. (E92-97; T212) Doubt is divided into three 
varieties: (1) resulting from noticing the general property and over- 
looking the specific one; (2) resulting from difference of opinion, 
when the specific property of the thing is not recognized; (3) result- 
ing from recognizing only properties which are too specific and thus 
do not settle the question about which the doubt arises. 

XII-XVII. Purpose, Example, Tenets, Members of the 
Argument, Tarka and Ascertainment. (E93-97; T212-14) These 
are explained in the usual way. 

XVIII. Discussion. (97-100; T214) Discussion is divided 
into eight “rebukes”? (nigraha): “‘too little” (ayina), “too much” 
(adhika), “‘giving up the tenet”? (apasiddhdnia), and the five fallacies 
of the hetu. 

XIX-XXII. Wrangling, Cavil, Fallacies of the fhetu, and 
Quibble. (E100-111; T214-21) These are reviewed, with a long 


TARKABHASA 667 


section going over the five fallacies once again with generous examples. 
XXIII. Futile Rejoinders. (E111-112; T221-22) Only two 
of the many varieties are mentioned here, the ones called utkarsasama 
and apakarsasama. 
XXIV. Ways of Losing an Argument. (E£112-113; 7222) 
A few of these are briefly mentioned. 


42. ANANDANUBHAVA or VISVANATHASRAMA 


This author is well known to students of Advaita Vedanta, 
and all but one of his known works follow that school’s thought. 
The exception is his commentary entitled Nydyakalanidhi on Bhasar- 
vajiia’s Nydyasara, which has been printed recently in the edition by 
S. Subrahmanya Sastri.1 Pandit Subrahmanya Sastri reports that 
the contents of this commentary are unremarkable, it being a simple 
and straight forward interpretation. The manuscript breaks off 
in the portion on vipratipatti, picks up again at the section on only- 
positive inference. The colophons at the end of the second and third 
chapters give the author’s name as Anandanubhava, but the bene- 
dictory verse says his name is Vigvanathasrama. Pandit Subrahmanya 
Sastri argues that it is quite possible the work is that of the Advaitin 
Anandanubhava, for the first chapter of another of this author’s 
works, the Padérthatativanirnaya, follows the Nydyasdra closely.” 

As for his date, we know that Citsukha quotes from Ananda- 
nubhava, and Anandanubhava quotes Anandabodha. Since Citsukha 
flourished in the late 13th century, and Anandabodha’s dates are 
1200 to 1297 according to P. K. Gode, we may safely date Ananda- 
nubhava in the middle of the 13th century. 


43, PRABHAKAROPADHYAYA 


This Maithili author lived in the 13th century also.1 He is 
said to have been the first commentator on Vallabha’s Nydyalilavati, 
and also probably commented on Udayana’s Parisuddhi, Atmatattva- 
viveka, and WNydyakusumdafjali. According to Pragalbha, Gangesa 
quotes Prabhakara’s definition of “specific” (asdédhérana). According 
to Jayadeva and Mathuranatha, Gangesa is referring to Prabhakara 
too, when he cites ‘‘ata eva kara.”? The commentary on the Nydya- 
lilavati is referred to many times by Vardhamana and Paksadhara. 
The name of the commentary was apparently Prakdfa.5 None of 
these works have been discovered, however. 


668 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIE § 


44, ABHAYATILAKA (UPADHYAYA) 


This writer composed a large commentary on the Nydyasiitras, 
Bhasya, Varttika, Tatparyatika, and Parisuddhi, manuscripts of which 
are available at Jaisalmer and Surat according to J.S. Jetly.4. The 
work follows Srikantha’s Paficaprasthdnyayatarka by the author’s own 
statement. He tells us that he is the pupil of one Laksmitilakagani, 
clearly a Jain, as is Abhayatilaka himself, for he wrote stotras and 
stavas of Jain sentiment as well as a commentary on Hemacandra’s 
Doyasraya Mahékavya. He refers to a distinction among Vaiéesikas 
between the “‘old’’ (jarad) ones who accepted three instruments of 
knowledge, whereas the “new” (niitana) ones accept only two. 
Jetly says the commentary is mainly concerned with the Parisuddhi, 
and runs to 12,000 Slokas. Its name is Nydyalamkdra.* 


45. SONDADOPADHYAYA 


According to D. C. Bhattacharya, this ““Sondada was regarded 
in his time as the supreme leader of the social hierarchy in Mithila.’’! 
He lived slightly prior to Gangesa, who refers to him in many places. 
Thus we may date him in the early 14th century. 

His best known contribution is a novel view about an additional 
kind of absence, one “‘whose counterpositiveness is determined by an 
essence pertaining to a different substratum” (vyadhikaranadharmava- 
cchinnapratiyogitakah). This absence is therefore universally occurrent, 
and thus Sondada in a fashion rejects the doctrine of anyathakhyati.? 


46. MANIKANTHA MISRA 


Professor V. Varadachari contributes this account of this writer: 
‘‘Manikantha Misra was a native of Tirabhukti, a part of Mithila. 
He is the author of the Nydyaratna, a logical text on the argumentative 
aspects of Nydya. He is known to have written another treatise 
named Nayacintamant, which is now lost. This is stated by the author 
himself on two occasions. The first one is on p. 108 of the Nydyara- 
ina, where the author states that he dealt with the topic of upddhi 
in greater detail there. Satpaksi, saptapaksi, and others are 
stated to have been discussed by him (p. 220 of Nydyaraina) in the 
Nayacintimaniprapafica, which seems to be no other than the Nayacin- 
tamani itself. It appears that the work contains a reference to the 
view which was held by Sondadopadhyaya. The author was in 


NYAYARATNA 669 


favor of Advaita Vedanta. He must have lived before Gangeéa, 
that is, about A.D. 1300.” 

D. C. Bhattacharya also makes a few remarks about Mani- 
kantha which are worth summarizing. He guesses that Manikantha 
was a Maithili scholar who was the “judicial chief of a certain 
king” somewhere outside of Mithila. Bhattacharya thinks that the 
title of the lost work should be ‘“Nyayacintamani,” and that it was a 
more elaborate work than the Nydyaratna. He suggests that it may 
yet be turned up by culling over the manuscripts of the Tattvacintamani, 
since it must have covered much the same ground judging from 
GangeSa’s frequent references to it. 


NYAYARATNA 
Summary by V. Varadachari 


“RE” references are to pages in the edition (B3268) by V. 
Subrahmanya Sastri and V. Krishnamacharya, Madras Govern- 
ment Oriental Manuscripts Library, 1953. 

1. (El) The work begins with an introductory stanza which 
mentions that the Nydyaratna will help one to gain knowledge of 
everything. 

2. (E7-11, including karika 2) Tarka is reductio ad absurdum. 
It plays an important part in inference. The third consideration of 
the mark (értiyalingaparémarsa) is the direct cause of the rise of infe- 
rential judgments.? Recognition that the paksa is qualified by the 
hetu-property, recognition that the hetu is conditioned by paksa-ness 
which is qualified by pervasion, and the knowledge of pervasion are 
the stages leading to inferential judgments. Tarka operates on the basis 
of hypothesis. It is evident that hypothesis plays no part in the stages 
mentioned above, and so farka cannot be the direct cause of the rising 
of inferential judgments. Under these conditions, however, it cannot 
be the indirect cause either. 

In the case of knowledge of pervasion, however, it is necessary 
to show it to be adequate or flawless in order that it lead to correct 
inference. ‘The pervader and the pervaded will have to be proved 
to be invariably concomitant. This is done by showing that they 
do not have variable concomitance, through larka. 

The absence of pervasion is not cognized as long as one judges 
concerning the f and s that they do not exist together. Tarka is useful 
because it removes the doubt that the two do not coexist. Sriharsa 
(the author of the Khandanakhandakhadya) is cited as objecting that 


670 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the doubt cannot ever be removed since the judgment that s and h 
do not coexist is said to arise from doubt, and the proposal is to remove 
the doubt in order to nullify the judgment that the s and h do not 
coexist.4 Manikantha is unimpressed by this objection : doubt, 
he says, is removed when a specific feature is noticed which distingui- 
shes the objects or properties which give rise to doubt. 

3. (E20-26) The topic of defining tarka is now taken up. Two 
definitions are noted and rejected. According to the first of these, 
tarka consists in the superimposition of the pervader due to the superim- 
position of the pervaded. However, this definition overextends to 
such a case as this: There may rise a judgment, with reference to 
smoke, of the form “‘this region possesses a column of dust and a 
kimSuka flower,” where just prior to its rise we have apprehended the 
column of dust. Here the superimposition® of fire is apprehended 
only through the superimposition of the column of dust. Thus this 
definition has overextension to such a judgment. On the other hand, 
it has no applicability to a proper instance such as “‘if the guest were 
to arrive he would have to be fed,” where the guest does arrive and is 
duly fed. Superimposition has no role in cases like these, yet they 
are proper cases of tarka. Finally, this definition has the defect of 
total inapplicability, since all kinds of tarka turn out to be correct. 

The second definition is stated to be “‘the introduction of the 
pervader through the superimposition of the pervaded.” This defini- 
tion is not acceptable, since the word “‘introduction” means tarka 
itself and this leads to self-dependence (dtmdsSraya). 

The author defines tarka as ‘“‘a particular universal which is 
included within the universal judgmentness.’ This does not make 
tarka include doubt, since the definition does not involve alternatives 
(kofi). And it does not overextend to include ascertained judgments, 
for these are arrived at through perception. And if someone claims 
that the fault of crossconnection of universals is committed, no, for 
there is no such fault. 

Another definition is offered by the author : ‘“‘Tarka is the super- 
imposition of the pervader which is the substratum of the effect that is 
related to a cause delimited by the superimposition of the pervaded.’’6 

4. (E27-39) According to Manikantha there are five kinds of 
tarka, namely self-dependence, mutual dependence, circularity, infinite 
regress, and one that is different from these four. The first three may 
appear to get mixed up with each other because of their interdepen- 
dence, but in reality they are distinct from each other since the con- 
ditions under which they arise are different from each other. Contradic- 
tion is considered to be the fifth kind of tarka, since it cannot be included 


NYAYARATNA 671 


under the other four. 

Manikantha does not recognize the case of undesired outcome 
(anistaprasa ga), which is held by Udayana to be the fifth kind of 
tarka’ as a type of tarka at all. He also rejects the classification of tarka 
into six kinds — the first four above, plus contradiction (vpaghdta) 
and counterargument (pratibandhin). ‘These last two are brought by 
Manikantha under the fifth variety in his list, and the anaikantika 
fallacy, respectively. 

Other proposed varieties of tarka such as nonchoice (avinigama), 
abandoning (utsarga), cumbrousness of postulation (kalpandgaurava), 
and economy in postulation (kalpandlaghava) are not varieties of 
tarka. Unsuitability (anaucitya), which Sriharsa® held to be a variety 
of tarka, is shown not to be a type of tarka but merely a way of losing 
an argument. 

5. (E39-41) Corresponding to each of the five kinds of tarka 
is a type of argument which resembles that kind but is fallacious. 
Manikantha classifies these as varieties of matdnujita, one of the ways 
of losing an argument.® 

6. Pervasion. (E42-55) Manikantha begins this section with a 
critical examination of the definitions of pervasion (vpapti). He 
mentions the following eleven definitions and refutes each one of them. 

1. Pervasion is a mere (mdtra) relation. 


2. It is a relation which does not wander (ayyabhicarin). 

3. It is invariable concomitance (avindbhdva). 

4, It is a natural (svdbhavika) relation. 

5. It is the instrumentality of the instrumental cause (of 
inferential knowledge). 

6. It is identity (éadatmya) (between fA and s). 

7. It is the being-qualified of what is qualified. 

8. It is the counterpositive of the absence which pervades the 


absence of the pervaded. 

9. It is complete coexistence (sahabhdva) of the h and s. 

10. It is an unconditioned (anaupddhika) relation. 

11. It is the state of being the common locus for what is not 

the counterpositive of the absolute absence which exists in 
the same locus with what is held to be the A. 

Among these, the first definition is shown by Manikantha to be 
inadmissible on the ground that a specific relation is required to link 
the h and s.1° 

The proof for the second definition lies in the absolute absence 
of the s having coexistence with the absence of h. This does not apply 
to only-positive inference and so is rejected. 


672 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The third definition is to be proved through the absolute absence 

of the s. Thus it too does not apply to the only-positive inference. 

The word “natural,” which occurs in the fourth definition, does 

not have a precise sense and so this definition is vitiated by the defect 
of overextension and underextension.!? 

The fifth definition deserves to be rejected as it does not apply 
to cases involving the causal relation and is applicable to cases which 
do not involve the causal relation. 

The sixth one, which is held by the Buddhists, cannot be main- 
tained, as its admission would lead to the breakdown of the causal 
relation. 

The seventh definition is applicable to the relation between fire 
and smoke (as well as smoke and fire) and so is not acceptable. 

The eighth definition is rejected by Manikantha since it does 
not apply to only-positive inference. 

Since the ninth definition does not cover all the cases of h and 5, 
the word ‘‘complete’’ does not serve any purpose; so this definition is 
rejected. 

Manikantha rejects the tenth definition, as the knowledge of the 
upddhi is to be proved through that of invariable concomitance and 
invariable concomitance is to be known through knowing the absence 
of upadhi, thus leading to mutual dependence.¥ 

The last definition does not apply to contact and other things, 
and so is rejected. 

Finally, Manikantha makes separate mention of the first defi- 
nition again, giving it the interpretation of the Bhisanakara.'4 

7. (E55-61) Manikantha now offers his definition of pervasion. 
The h is said to be pervaded by the s when it has the same locus along 
with that which is not the counterpositive of the absolute absence 
which shares the same locus with it, and where this absolute absence 
must be different from the absolute absence which shares the same 
locus with the former’s counterpositive. This last clause is introduced 
in order to make clear that the A must not share the same locus with 
its own absolute absence. 

8. (E62-70) Regarding the way in which pervasion becomes 
ascertained, the notion of repeated observation (bhiyodarfana) was 
used by earlier writers. This word, however, does not have a precise 
sense, as it could be takento mean repeated (i.e., many) observations, 
or observations of many cases, Thus repeated observations will not 
guarantee that doubts about pervasion will get removed. Mani- 
kantha, therefore, shows that pervasion becomes known through per- 
ception and verbal testimony aided by reasoning. In order to admit 


NYAYARATNA 673 


pervasion in all appropriate cases Manikantha shows that inferential 
cognition must be recognized to arise between the A and s which 
possess a feature through the possession of which pervasion can be 
ascertained to exist between them. Strict adherence to this principle 
will help in drawing correct inferences. The author notes and rejects 
the view that all the particular cases of h and s which cannot be indi- 
vidually inspected can be brought together through an extraordinary 
sense-relation which has for its object the universal under which the 
particulars fall.15 
9. Updadhi. (E70-89) Manikantha states eight definitions of 
upadhi and examines them. They are: 
1. An upddhi is that which does not pervade the h while perva- 
ding thes. 
2. It is that which does not pervade h, but equally (with the /) 
pervades the s. 
3. It does not pervade h, while pervading the s which is limited 
by the property of the p. 
4. It pervades the s but does not exist in the p. 


5. It does not pervade h, but pervades s which is obtained 
(paryavasita) (through the characteristic of the p). 


6. It exists in the same locus as s and qualifies the h. 

7. It does not pervade h, but pervades the relation between 
hand s. 

8. It does not pervade h, but pervades s when s is limited by 
(avacchinna) h. 

Manikantha rejects the first definition on the ground that it 
does not apply to the condition which pervades the s that is limited by 
the h. Also, the updédhi might apply to cases unrelated to the p under 
this definition. 

The second definition!§ is rejected on the ground that an upddhi 
can as well apply to cases which have uneven pervasion (visamavydpii), 
and need not be restricted to cases having equipervasion.17 

The third definition does not apply to the well-known case of 
contact between wet fuel and fire. Thus it is rejected.18 

The fourth definition also does not apply to all cases; also it 
admits some undesirable ones. 

The fifth definition?® is rejected since what is undesirable would 
become an upddhi. 

The sixth definition is also rejected, since the / is connected with 
the s and is qualified by a thing which is likely to become an upadhi. 

The seventh definition is also not acceptable, since what is other 
than the relation between the h and s is to be established on the basis 


674 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of the difference from the upadhi, and so such a definition is not relevant. 

The last definition is also rejected on grounds already rehearsed.” 

10. (E89-96) Now the author defines upddhi as a characteris- 
tic which is other than the property invoked in only-positive inference, 
that is, which does not have concomitance of this only-positive sort. 
In other words, the upadhi is that characteristic which does not prove 
the s when it is removed from the p.74 

11. (E96-100) Upadhis are of two sorts: certain and doubtful. 
Contact with wet fuel is an example of the former. Possession of a 
color which is the result of internal cooking is the illustration for the 
latter, in the judgment “‘this is earth as it has smell.” 

12. (E100-08) An upddhi marks a flaw in the inferential judg- 
ment. Its defectiveness is proved by showing that on account of it 
pervasion is not present and thus there is deviation (vyabhicara) 
preventing the grasping of pervasion. 

Like the fallacious reasons, there are fallacies of upddhi. Mani- 
kantha enumerates nine such fallacies and illustrates them. At 
the end, the author mentions the Nayacintamani as his other work, 
where he gives an elaborate treatment of this topic. 

13. (E109-16) Paksa-ness. The characteristic property of a 
paksa (paksata) cannot be defined as: becoming the object of doubt 
possessing the thing to be proved. For the doubt which arises in the 
form ‘“‘The hill may or may not have fire’ would then be referred 
to as a paksa. Inferential judgments originate from a collection of 
causal factors aided by either the knowledge of invariable 
concomitance or knowledge of the thing which one desires to make 
the subject. As a consequence doubt may arise, but so may the desire 
to know, or fitness in the form of the absence of the means of valid 
cognition to achieve that end. Whatever be the materials which 
produce inferential judgments, then, knowledge of paksatd is not 
actually useful. An inference does not rise from the judgment 
“this paksa has smoke,’’ but rather from ‘“‘this hill has smoke.” The 
word paksa is therefore used with reference to the place which is 
known in its characteristic form, but not as something to be proved. 
The characteristic of the paksa is simply a particular relation, the 
relation, of the hetu’s being located there. 

14. (E116-29)Concerning pardmarsa (“‘subsumptive reflection’’ ). 
Pardmarsa is defined as knowledge of the characteristic of the paksa 
which (knowledge) is qualified by knowledge of pervasion. These 
two judgments cannot be treated as independent causes for inferen- 
tial judgments. If they could be so treated, then inference would have 
to be admitted to result from a judgment of doubt, e.g., ‘““The smoke 


NYAYARATNA 675 


is present in the subject, but it may not be pervaded by fire.” Mani- 
kantha makes it clear that the object, the knowledge of whose being 
the attribute gives rise to the knowledge of the qualified, is then the 
object of that knowledge. Hence the inferential judgment of fire 
has smoke for its object, since it is a judgment that is produced by 
knowledge of smoke which becomes the attribute of fire. The mere 
form of smoke could not give rise to this judgment, for it is pre- 
sented only as the attribute of fire. Therefore knowledge of h has a 
twofold operation as the cause of inferential judgments: one is of a 
general nature, in which its role is that of the knowledge of the 
attribute, and the other is of a special kind in which it functions as 
knowledge of the A. 

The hetu is of three kinds: only-positive, only-negative, and 
positive-negative. These are defined respectively: 

(1) Only-positive hetu is one which is not the counterpositive 
of an absolute absence. 

(2) Only-negative hetu is the characteristic which pervades 
the feature which determines paksaté, which does not share the same 
locus with the absolute absence of the features which determines 
paksatd, and which pervades the sddhya. 

(3) Positive-negative hetu is the characteristic which pervades 
the feature which determines paksatd, is absent from the vipaksa 
which (vipaksa) occurs in that place which has the sa@dhya and has 
absolute absence of the property which limits the paksatd. 

(15) (133) Argument (nyaya). An argument is a statement 
which produces a verbal cognition that is helpful for the consideration 
of the hetu which is the immediate cause of the inferential judgment. 

(16) (E135-44) Members (avayava). The author refers to 
divergent views on the number of members. Some schools of thought, 
like Buddhism, maintain that there are only two members, example 
and application, while others, like the Mimamsakas, maintain three 
members: either hypothesis, reason, and example, or example, appli- 
cation, and conclusion. The early school of the Jains recognized 
the Nyaya five and added five more: doubt, desire to know, attaining 
what is attainable, purpose, and rejection of doubt. Manikantha 
remarks that the judgment which leads-directly to inferential know- 
ledge must be included. Since all five members are needed for this, 
but no more, the Nyaya view is justified. 

(17) (E145-47) Controversy (kathé). Three definitions of 
controversy are noted and rejected. 

(1) Controversy is a passage or sentence which puts forward 
arguments for establishing a position or for rejecting it, 


676 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(2) Controversy is a statement containing ways of losing the 
argument. 

(3) Controversy is a statement uttered by one who points 
out mistakes, at the same time being uttered by one who seeks to 
establish a position which is other than reiteration. 

The first position cannot be maintained, since if the controversy 
takes the form of a discussion, then when one of the participants es- 
tablishes his position, the other may not meet this position by remain- 
ing still. 

The second position cannot be held, for a way of losing an 
argument is itself a statement which is mistaken in one way or another, 
and we could not understand it or the mistake it makes without 
knowing in advance what the controversy is about. 

The third position is not viable for the same reason that the 
first is not. Furthermore, it fails to cover cases of debate where one 
and the same person establishes a point and then refutes it in order 
to win the contest. 

Manikantha then defines controversy as the statement which is 
produced by knowledge of the way in which the fallacious reasons, 
etc., uttered by the opponent are to be set aside. 

18. (E147-54) Discussion (vdda). A discussion is intended 
to determine the truth. It is not undertaken to attain victory in a 
debate. Thus only some of the ways of losing an argument are 
relevant in a discussion, and some of the others should not be raised. 
The ones which are relevant are: virodha, apraptakala, nyiina, adhika, 
punarukta, ananubhasana, apasiddhania, niranuyojyanuyoga, and hetvabhdsa. 

19. (E154-57) Sophistry (ja/pa). This is the proper title for 
an argument held for the purpose of gaining victory. The steps in a 
debate are detailed: someone states his position after the issue has 
been identified; then he establishes it by argument. The mediator 
corroborates this position. The opponent then points out the defects 
in the position of the first participant, and gives his arguments. The 
first participant then refutes the stand taken by the opponent. 

While attempting to win such a debate each party will try to 
identify ways of losing an argument in the position of the opponent. 
This is undertaken by both parties with mutual consent, stemming 
from their pride in understanding the system of the other. The 
view of Sriharsa®2 that sophistry cannot be a kind of controversy, 
since it may consist of different types of argument, cannot be main- 
tained, for by parity of reasoning there would be more than one 
kind of controversy merely because a debate includes one party’s 
establishing, and another’s refuting, a position. 


NYAYARATNA 677 


20. (E157-58) Cavil (vitagdZ) is a controversy on the part 
of a person who desires to achieve victory, i.e. to enhance his reputa- 
tion. 

21. (E158-67) The next topic is that of fallacies of the hetu. 
Four definitions are stated at the outset: 

(1) A fallacious hetu is a judgment whose content is the coun- 
terpositive of an absence, which absence is the cause of inferential 
judgment. 

(2) A fallacious hetu is a judgment whose content is not the 
cause of inferential judgment. 

(3) A fallacious hetu is that which lacks paksaté qualified by 
pervasion. 

(4) A fallacious hetu is that which lacks a paksaiaé known to 
be qualified by pervasion. 

Manikantha rejects these definitions one by one. 

(1) he first definition fails to cover a compound inference, 
such as, e.g., when one infers from the fact that a pot and a cloth 
have qualities the conclusion that the pot is a substance and that the 
cloth is noneternal. Here the pot surely is properly proved to be 
a substance, but on the definition given the hetu turns out to be falla- 
cious and the inference fails. 

(2) The second definition also fails to cover the above example. 

(3) Ifthe third definition were right, one could not prove that 
something is noneternal on the ground that it is a product, providing 
that it is also audible (say), since it (the thing which is the hetu) 
thus lacks paksata qualified by pervasion. 

(4) The same case vitiates the fourth definition. 

The author now defines the fallacious hetu in the following way: 
In each inferential judgment the third consideration of the hetu (i.e. 
in the fourth member, pardmarfa) is required to be experienced as 
valid. This paramarfa is produced by the p as qualified by A having 
invariable concomitance with s. The absence of this state of affairs 
is fallacious hetu. 

There are five fallacies of the hetu: vyabhicara, viruddha, praka- 
ranasama, asiddha, and bddha. In each one there is absence of valid 
experience of the third consideration. 

Some say that since invariable concomitance is absent in all 
fallacious hetus, asiddha is the only fallacy. Others say badha should 
be included under vyabhicéra. Vallabha holds that anadhyavasita is 
a separate fallacy.23 Manikantha refutes these views, showing that 
all five of the accepted fallacies are distinct and ineliminable, and 
that they jointly exhaust all fallacies. 


678 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


22. (£175-80) Concerning the satpratipaksa (= prakaranasama) 
fallacy, Manikantha illustrates it with the example of two inferences 
(a) ‘‘sound is noneternal, being produced,” (b) “sound is eternal, 
being audible.” He denies that the two hetus can be related as a 
thing and its contradictory and be equally powerful, which is the 
way some explain this fallacy.*4 

23. (E188-92) Quibble (chala). Quibbling consists in identi- 
fying a supposed defect in the opponent’s argument by construing 
what he says in a way he does not intend. The three kinds of quibble 
(cf. NS I. 2.11) are illustrated following the usual practice. Mani- 
kantha says that each of the three kinds of quibble are of five sub- 
varieties since they may apply to each of the five members of the 
argument.5 

24. (E192-220) Futile rejoinder (jati). Manikantha notes 
four definitions: 

(1) <A futile rejoinder is a reply which is incapable of repu- 
diating the charge of defect in one’s argument, 

(2) Or it is a reply which is detrimental to itself, 

(3) Or, it arouses defects on the basis of the instruments of 
valid knowledge without mentioning the deficiency in the members 
of the argument, 

(4) Or, it is a reply which establishes that one’s argument is 
incapable of proving the conclusion, since it is not pervaded by that 
which does not prove anything. 

The first definition does not apply to the following example: 
A argues ‘“‘sound is noneternal, being a product.” B_ rejoins: “If 
sound is not eternal, being a product, on the strength of similarity to 
a jar, then why is it not eternal, being all-pervading, on the strength 
of similarity to akdfa ?”” Yet this is a futile rejoinder. 

The second definition is not acceptable, as it is applicable also 
to an inference which has no basis but which takes the opponent’s 
position. For instance, A says “the knowledge of silver has a basis, 
being a judgment, like the judgment of a jar.” B says “The know- 
ledge of silver is without basis, being a knowable thing, like jar.” 
Here A’s statement is thus detrimental to itself (since it opens A 
up to B’s reply) yet this is not a case of futile rejoinder butrat her of 
Satpratipaksa (cf. above, section 22). 

The third definition cannot be admitted, since either it makes 
an attempt to point out a defect in a member of an argument itself 
defective, or else it overextends to include such things, as, e.g., the 
first of the ways of losing an argument (the one called adhika). 

The fourth definition cannot be maintained, since if what 


NYAYARATNA 679 


cannot prove is proved through being pervaded by what cannot 
prove, then that very utterance becomes defective and thus a futile 
rejoinder. 

Manikantha rejects all these definitions and offers his own. 
A futile rejoinder is a reply that is employed with the intention of 
proving what cannot prove, basing its argument on invariable con- 
comitance. 

The twenty-four kinds of futile rejoinder are reviewed. Dis- 
cussing the kind called sadharmyasama, Manikantha illustrates this 
as follows: A says “sound is not eternal, being a product, like a 
jar’. B gives a futile rejoinder: “If, being a product, sound is 
noneternal on account of its similarity to jar, then it may as well be 
eternal since it is a knowable, on the basis of its similarity to akdfa.”’ 
Here no significance is attached to pervasion between h and s, but 
the rejoinder is made instead on the basis of similarity between the 
example (sp) and the hetu. Since the rejoinder is made on the ground 
that sound is a knowable, and since all knowables are not eternal, 
it is defective. The root cause in any rejoinder is its specification 
of a balancing argument. But a rejoinder is made without ascer- 
taining whether all the parts (a/ga) are present,”® and a futile rejoinder 
occurs when a rejoinder is vitiated by the lack of a part which is 
expected. It also occurs when a part which is not required is appealed 
to, and that is the case here, for the similarity between sp and fA is 
not a required element in a valid argument. 

Udayana’s views?’ are cited frequently in discussing the various 
kinds of futile rejoinder.2® Manikantha does not discuss every one 
of the varieties of each kind of futile rejoinder that Udayana distin- 
guishes, however.?® 

25. (E221-45) Ways of losing an argument (nigrahasthana). 
Manikantha defines “losing”? as the absence of correct knowledge 
about what is under discussion.3¢ 

The discussion of some of the twenty-two ways are interesting. 

Pratijfiavirodha consists in stating, in the same sentence, what 
cannot exist together. For instance, to say that an atom has parts 
and it has motion because of its possession of the smallest size is to 
commit this fault. Another illustration is ““The jar is the counter- 
positive of (its) absence, as it exists for all time.” 

Arthantara is something which is not useful in the context, that 
is, which does not form part of the passage. Siddhasddhana cannot 
be brought under this heading, for it gets included under fallacies 
of the heiu. Jayanta*! offers a fine illustration of this. ‘Sound is 
eternal, as it is partless. This statement is made by Panini. 


680 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Panini got the science of grammar from Mahegvara. Mahesvara 
taught grammar to Panini and performed the tdandava dance.” 
Then that dance is described....These remarks illustrate arthdntara; 
they do not mean anything directly. 


Avijfidtartha consists in the use of words which are not known 
to one of the disputants. This includes the intention to delude 
others through the use of puns. For instance, “‘the white one runs.” 
This makes no sense. The speaker alone knows that the dog (Jvé@) 
runs from here (ifah). Again, concepts such as  paticaskandha, 
catvdla (a deep hole for placing the sacred fire), etc., are familiar 
respectively only to Buddhists, Mimamsakas, and others.®2 Gautama 
notes that this is a point of defeat only when what is uttered is not 
made out even after it is offered a third time. Manikantha states 
that this restriction does not serve any purpose. The author of the 
Nydyabhisana® justifies the three-times requirement as made in order 
to get the permission of the assembly to point out the point of 
defeat. According to Trilocana, the statement can be made for a 
fourth time also.*4 Some writers hold that it must be the exact 
statement which was originally made, while others allow that the 
statement may be modified and repeated.*® 


Aparthaka consists in making a statement which does not have 
grammatical connection (anvaya), expectancy (dkamksd), or 
proximity (samnidhi) with a sense that is well-known and admitted 
by both parties. This is illustrated by ‘‘He goes with milk by the 
horse having eaten Devadatta” (gacchati payasasvena bhuktvd Deva- 
dattah). According to the author of the Nydyabhiisana®* the meaning 
in such passages can be gotten by taking it in the reverse way, and so 
like ungrammaticality (apafabda) this point of defeat should be 
raised only in discussions. 


Apratibha is exposing one’s own doubt, as illustrated by one’s 
saying ‘“We are in doubt concerning this matter.” Manikantha 
does not admit Gautama’s definition of this point of defeat. Gautama’s 
understanding is that the discussant does not understand the reply 
on the ground that he is adjusting his hair, looking at the sky, and 
other such activities. Such activities imply his tacit assent (ananu- 
bhasana). The author of the Nydyabhisana®’ held that observing 
silence is itself apratibhda. 

Viksepa consists in giving up a dispute due to the opponent’s 
indulgence in various other activities. For instance, the disputant 
may say “‘my daughter’s marriage is to be celebrated. When it is 
over I shall be here on another day and take part in this debate.” 


NYAYARATNA 681 


If the opponent goes out to spit or perform some other such urgent 
act, this point of defeat shall not be appealed to. 

Paryanuyojyopeksana consists in not pointing out a point of defeat 
in the opponent’s statement when it is fit to be exposed. The 
participants shall not point out this failure; that is the mediator’s 
task. Vacaspati Miéra** offers as an option that the assembly or 
judge may doit. Jayanta?® and Visvaripa hold that it may be done 
either by the disputants or by the assembly, or at the instance of the 
judge. Varadaraja*® remarks that there is no difference of opinion 
on this issue between Trilocana and Vacaspati. 

Niranuyojyanuyoga consists in pointing out a point of defeat 
because of delusion. This is of two kinds: one, showing a point of 
defeat where it is not present; two, showing a particular point of 
defeat where some other point of defeat needs to be pointed out. 
Instances are of many kinds, since such a delusion may arise due to 
the fallacies of quibbling and futile rejoinder. 

Apasiddhanta is admission of the contradictions among the 
schools of thought that are admitted as favorable for discussion. 
The Buddhists do not admit that this is a point of defeat, since accord- 
ing to them discussions do not always proceed on the basis of the 
schools of thought. Manikantha rejects their view, saying that 
disputation should proceed only by admitting some subject matter 
which one of the disputants affirms. According to Udayana,*! 
the sdstra will have to form the basis for disputation. 

Manikantha does not treat hetvantara as an independent point 
of defeat. It is treated as identical with pratijfantara. However, 
Udayana and the commentator maintain that they are different 
from each other. Bhasarvajfia ignores avijfdtartha and aparthaka, 
while Jayanta does not deal with paryanuyojyopeksana. 

Gautama included fallacies of the hetu among the ways of losing 
an argument. The word “ca” in “hetvabhasagca” is interpreted 
by Udayana* as meaning that like the A the examples, tarka and the 
utterance may also become fallacious and turn out to be points of 
defeat. Manikantha rejects this and says that when these become 
fallacious the / too will be fallacious. Hence the word “ca” must 
be taken to include errors which arise due to other pramdnas. 
Udayana* discusses the nature of a number of fallacies and brings 
them under the five fallacies admitted in the Nyaya system. 

25. (H245-48) The last section takes up the mahdvidyd argu- 
ment form. Mahdvidyd is the name given to an inferential argument 
which is absolutely free from any kind of fallacy, since the argument 
is an only-positive one and the requirements of validity, including 


682 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


pervasion, are met. Here is an illustration: “‘This hill has a feature 
which is other than the feature which is different from possession of 
fire, being a knowable, like kitchen or lake.” If any objection is 
made to this, the hetu must be shown to be flawless. This may be 
done as follows: ‘‘This hill has a feature which exists there, where 
fire is present, and does not exist in places other than this hill, being 
a knowable.” 

Manikantha does not discuss any ways of refuting this type of 


argument.4# 
47. SASADHARA 


According to D. C. Bhattacharya this writer is another Maithili, 
who flourished around 1300. Four titles are attributed to him: 
Nyayasiddhantadipa, Nyadyamimamsaprakarana, Nydyanaya, and Sasadhara- 
mala. Gopinath Kaviraj? thinks that the second and third of these 
are identical. Kaviraj reports that one tradition attributes the 
“Lion” definition discussed in the Tattvacintamani to Sasadhara. 

Professor V. Varadachari? gives some information concerning 
Sagadhara’s views on the invocation (mangala). Sagadhara agrees 
with Gangesa and Sridhara, as against the older view maintained 
in Vyomavati and Kirandvali, for example, that an invocation is a kind 
of judgment residing in the self; obstacle destruction too resides in 
the self and thus can be an effect, but completion of the work resides 
in dkafa, since it consists in the destruction of the final letter in the 


last expression constituting the work. 
NYAYASIDDHANTADIPA* 


The work has been edited twice. We give here a summary 
of the topics treated in the section of the text provided in the 
Pandit edition (B3269). 

1. (E1-40) Theory of the invocation (mangalavdda). 

2. (E40-78) Darkness is shown not to be an additional cate- 
gory. 
3. (E79-102) Theory of causality (karanatavada). Sasadhara 
gives and refutes several definitions of causality. His own definition 
is that causality is merely the property of occurring prior to and in a 
regular relation to the effect (kéryaniyatapiroavrttyjatiyatoam eva 
kdranatvam). 

4, (E103-18) Theory of word meaning (padasaktivada). 
Defends Gautama’s theory, that the word means three things, viz., 


NYAYASIDDHANTADIPA 683 


universal property, individual, and dkrti, against Kuméarila’s theory 
that words only mean properties. 

5. (E120-50) Shows that meaning (Sakti) is not a separate 
category (sahajasaktivada). 

6. (E151-68) Adheyasaktivdda. Refutation of ddheyasakti as 
an additional category. 

7. (E169-84) Shows that the internal organ has small size 
(mano’nutvavada). 

8. (E185-200) Verbal testimony is a distinct instrument of 
valid knowledge (Sabdapramanyavada). 

9. (E201-14) Fanakarmasamuccayavada. Some hold the view that 
knowledge and action are of equal importance in producing libera- 
tion. Sagadhara’s view is that their combination does lead to libe- 
ration, but that they are not equal in importance, since right actions 
depend on correct knowledge. 

10. (E214-43) Theory of liberation (muktivdda). Concerns 
proper definition of liberation. 

11. (E244-51)  Stddhdrthapramanyavdda. Judgments about 
objects already proved are yet valid. 

12. (E252-58) Anvayasaktinisedhavada. Still another kind of 
Sakti which is not a new category. 

13. (E260-75) Refutation of the perceptibility of air (vdyu- 
pratyaksatanirasavada). 

14, (E276-97) Defence of nonpropositional judgments 
(nirvikalpakavada). 

15. (E299-319) Suvarnataijasavdda. About gold being fire. 

16. (E320-46) Yogaridhivada. Concerning the theory of 
secondary meanings. 

17, (E350-79) Theory of subsumptive reflection (lingapara- 
marSavdda). 

18. (E379-435) Vyaptivida. Saéadhara offers 17 definitions of 
pervasion which he discusses: pervasion is 

(1) being without upddhi (anaupadhikatvam) ; 
(2) a natural relation (svdbhavikatvam) ; 

(3) being nonwandering (avyabhicaritatvam) ; 

(4) being fully related (karisnyena sambandho) ; 

(5) (probably a misprint here) 

(6) vifiste vatsistyam; 

(7) identity (tadaimyam); 

(8) cause-effect-relationship (kdryakdranabhavo) ; 

(9) necessary relationship (avindbhavo) ; 

(10)  nimittanaimittikatvam; 


684 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


1) a certain mutual absence (anyonydbhavavisesa) ; 
2) ydvadsadhyavyapakavyapyatvam; 
3) pervading the s (sadhyavydpyatvam); 

) having the same locus as the s, which is the counterpositive 
of an absolute absence which is pervaded by having the 
same locus as the absolute absence of the h (sadhandatya- 
ntabhavasamanaddhikaranyavyapyatyantabhavapratiyogisadhyasam- 
Gnadhikaranyam) ; 

(15)  sddhandbhavavyapakabhavapratiyogisadhyasdmanaddhikaranyam ; 
(16)  sadhanabhavavydpakabhavapratiyogitvam; 

(17) just being related (sambandhamatram). 

19. (E436-506) Theory of injunctions (vidhivdda). 

20. (E507-21) Theory of apirva (apirvavada). 

21. (E522-59) The Nyaya theory of error (anyathakhydativdda). 
22. (E560-72) Theory of presumption (arthdpattiwada). 

23. (E574-600) Theory of absence (abhdvavada) . 


48. TARANI MISRA 


This is the “Ratnakogacarya”’ referred to frequently in later 
literature. The name of the author of the Ratnakofa is given as 
Tarani Misra by Rucidatta and by Vacaspati Migra I]. Vardha- 
mana gives six views of this author on the ways of losing an argument, 
and in another place four more. Samkara Migra says that the 
Ratnakosacarya admits a fourth kind of controversy. 

D.C. Bhattacharya suggests that Tarani Misra came after 
Manikantha and is more or less contemporary with Gangesa. We 
have seen above, however, that Manikantha mentions the views of 
the Ratnakosacarya; thus we may assume they were near contempo- 
raries. 


A FEW UNDATABLE WRITERS 


Finally, there are a few names and works which seem to belong 
to our period but which are pretty well undatable within several 
centuries. 

D.C. Bhattacharya? mentions three writers who flourished 
“before Gangesa”. One of these is JAGADGURU, who according to 
Pragalbha had views on, and presumably commented on, the -Npdya- 
kusumafyjali. He may have commented on Kiranavali also, as Pak- 


UNDATABLE WRITERS 685 


sadhara’s Dravyaviveka refers to a Prakafa. Another author is RAVI- 
SVARA, about whom we know nothing. The NYAYABHAS- 
KARAKARA is known only as the author of a work by that name. 

VISNUMISRA is mentioned by Anantlal Thakur? as a writer 
about whom we know nothing. Thakur conjectures this may be the 
same person as Varadavisnumisra, who is quoted by Vedanta Dedika. 
Two other authors, mention of whom has been discovered by Thakur’, 
are VIDYADHARAMISRA and SRIKARA. All three of these are 
Vaisesikas. 

There has been a lot of confusion about a Bharadvajavriti, 
supposedly an old commentary on the Vaiéesikasitras. Thakur* 
suggests that it might be an old commentary quoted by Candrananda 
and Samkara Misra under the title “Vrtti.” Hakuju Ui> investigated 
this a bit. He reports that the late work entitled Bharadvdja- 
orttibhasya, written by Gangadhara Kaviratna Kaviraja, is not on this 
Vriti, since the passages quoted by Samkara Miéra do not agree with 
those in this work. Faddegon® also examined the relevant materials 
and concluded that the work by Gangadhara Kaviratna Kaviraja 
is an eclectic mongrel of Samkhya-Yoga ideas which ‘“‘repel the 
European reader,” that it is impossible to distinguish the commentary 
from the Vrtti it is a Bhasya on, that it seems to be more or less a direct 
commentary on the sitras themselves in a recension which “‘is of little 
authenticity and trustworthiness.” D.N. Shastri? concludes that the 
“Bharadvajavrtti is sheer myth.” 

Finally, we come to CANDRANANDA. His Vriti on the 
Vaisesikas iitras is now available, but estimates of his date differ widely. 
Sandesara® suggests the 7th century, but Hattori thinks it is much 
later, possibly after our period altogether. 


FOOTNOTES 


CHAPTER ONE 


References given with “B” followed by a number are to items in Karl H. 
Potter, Bibliography of Indian Philosophies (Delhi : Motilal Banarsidass, 1970) 


1. For an explanation of these classifications see Nelson Goodman, The 
Structure of Appearance (Cambridge : Harvard University Press, 1951), especially 
Chapters 2-4. 

2. For a list of the authors and works surveyed in this volume see pp. 9-12. 

3. With questionable justice. See p. 12. 

4, Erich Frauwallner, B1049. 

5. The term “Naiyayika” is the normal way in which an exponent of the 
Nyaya system is referred to. For convenience, and since in this volume the Nyaya 
and Vaisesika doctrines are treated together as constituting one system of beliefs, 
I shall frequently use the term “‘Naiyayika” to refer to a member of either school. 

6. By Daniel H. H. Ingalls, B3417, and Karl H. Potter, B3719. 

7. See Anantlal Thakur, BI1106. 

8. D. Gurumurti in the Introduction to B2980. 

9. Umesh Mishra, B6026, pp. 38-50, lists the following 19 points of diffe- 
rence : (1) Nyaya’s emphasis on epistemology, Waisesika on ontology; (2) Nyaya 
has 4 pramanas, Vaisesika, 2; (3) Nyaya accepts 5 kinds of perception, Vaisesika 
only 1; (4) according to Nydya inherence is perceptible, but not according to Vai- 
Sesika; (5) Nydya is pitharapakavada, Vaisesika pilupakavdda;(6) Nyaya believes that 
one motion lasts 3 or 4 moments, Vaisesika that it lasts 7 moments; (7) Nyaya adimits 
5 fallacies of the hetu, Vaisesika, 3; (8) Nyaya believes that in process there are 
several vegas produced in turn; Vaisesika says there is only one; (9) Nyaya admits 
sakhandopadhis, Vaisesika includes them under other categories (this applies only 
to the later schools); (10) Vaisesika admits disjunction produced by disjunction, 
Nyaya does not; (11) Vaisesika holds that 2 and higher numbers are produced by 
an apeksabuddhi, Nyaya says that the apeksabuddhi only manifests, does not produce 
those numbers; (12) Ny&ya accepts contact between ll-pervading substances, 
Vaisesika does not; (13) the schools differ about the state of the self in liberation; 
(14) Nydya uses the term artha to cover the 5 sense-qualities, while Vaisesika uses 
it to cover all substances, qualities, and motions; (15) Vaisesika classifies inferences 
in a fivefold manner (by effect, by cause, by contact, by contradiction, and by in- 
herence), Nyaya thinks this classification useless; (16) Ny&ya says tenderness is 
separate from hardness and both inhere in contact inhering only in earth, while 
Vaisesika says they inhere in touch, not contact; (17) Naiyayikas are Saivas, Vai- 
Sesikas, Pasupatas; (18) there is reputed to be a difference of viewpoint about orga- 
nisms, although Misra thinks there is not; (19) Nyaya says dreams may be true or 
false, but Vaigesika says they are always false. 

10. Frauwallner, B1049. 

11. A. M. Frenkian, B8804. 

12. Frenkian, B8804, p. 126. 


688 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


CHAPTER TWO 


1. Barend Faddegon, B2603, p. 12. 

2. Gopinath Kaviraj, B6004, p. 41. 

3. Daniel H. H. Ingalls, B6100, p. 228. 

4. Daya Krishna, “Three Conceptions of Indian Philosophy,” Philosophy 
East and West 15 (1965), 50. 

5. G. R. F. Oberhammer, B801A. 

6. Paul Hacker, B8877. 

7. Oberhammer, B801A. 

8. Dharmendra Nath Sastri, B6152, pp. 87-91. 

9. Hermann Jacobi, “A contribution towards the early history of Indian 
philosophy,” Indian Antiquary (1918) 107-08. 

10. Satischandra Vidyabhusana, Introduction to revised edition of B240. 

11. George Chemparathy, “The testimony of the Yuktidipika concerning the 
ifvara doctrine of the Pasupatas and Vaisesikas,” Wiener Zeitschrift fur die Kunde 
Sud— und Ostasiens, IX, (Vienna, 1965), 130. 

12 Daniel H. H. Ingalls, “Cynics and Pasupatas: The Seeking of Dishonor,” 
Harvard Theological Review 55.4 (1962) 281-98. 

13. Gopinath Kaviraj, B6007, pp. 613-14. 

14. Cf. D. R. Bhandarkar’s Introduction to B3076, pp. iii-x. 

15. Cf. Chemparathy, op. cit., pp. 131-32. 

16. Cf, eg., Ingalls, B6100. 

17. Chemparathy, op. cit, p. 131. 

18. Daya Krishna, op. cit., pp. 48-49. 

19. A useful work of this kind, one among many, is Satischandra Chatterjee’s 
The Fundamentals of Hinduism (Calcutta : University of Calcutta Press, 1950, 1960). 

20. Sriharsa’s Naisadhacarita 17.74. 

21. See summary of Nydyabhésya 1.1.22, p. 241. It is not clear who the 
“some” are who “argue thus” about liberation involving pleasure: are they early 
Vedantins? R. Shamasastry thinks they are “early Saiva ekadedins,” i.e., he implies 
that there were those Jong before Bhasarvajfia among the Naiyayikas who took this 
view. Cf. R. Shamasastry, B7992, pp. 355-56. 

22. This paragraph is based on Umesh Mishra, B6026, pp. 379-83. 

23. By Anandavardhana. Cf. Anantalal Thakur, B2512. 

24. Ingalls, B6100, p. 228. 

25. These are slight modifications of Ganganatha Jha’s translations of the 
passages. 

26. “Entrenched” in the sense explicated by Nelson Goodman in Fact, Fiction 
and Forecast (Indianapolis : Bobbs-Merrill 2nd edn., 1965), pp.94ff. 

27, A.K.R. Chaudhuri, B6074. 


CHAPTER THREE 


1. For the general conception of philosophical method sketched in the preced- 
ing paragraphs I follow for the most part the exposition of Nelson Goodman in The 
Structure of Appearance, op. cit., especially Chapters 1-4. 

2. T.R. V. Murti, B7909, p. 141. 

3. See Karl H. Potter, “Is Nyaya Logic Extensional or Intensional ?,” Journal 
of the American Oriental Society, 88 (1969), 711-17. 


FOOTNOTES 689 


4. Madeleine Biardeau, B8792, pp. 371-84. 

5. Cf. Willard Van Orman Quine, “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,’ 
a Logical Point of View (Cambridge : Harvard University Press, 2nd rev. edn., 1961), 
pp. 20-46. 


2 


in From 


CHAPTER FOUR 


1. For a development of this line of argument concerning the interpretation 
of Nyaya, see Karl H. Potter, “Astitva Jiieyatva Abhidheyatva,” in Festschrift fur 
Erich Frauwallner, Wiener Zeitschrift fur die Kunde Sud— und Ostasiens, XII-XIII 
(Vienna 1968), 275-80. 

2. The importance of this point is rightly stressed by D. N. Shastri, B6152. 
See his index under dharmadharmibheda. 

3. The notion of a “self-linking connector” plays a large part in Navya- 
Nyaya. See Ingalls, B3417, pp. 75-76, passim. 

4, It is rejected explicitly by Raghunatha Siromani. Cf. Karl H. Potter, 
B3719, p. 87. 

5. B. Faddegon, B2603, pp. 141-46. 

6. Ingalls, B3417, pp. 67-71; also B. K. Matilal, The Navya-Nydya Doctrine 
of Negation (Harvard Oriental Series, 46) (1968), 45-51. 

7. Cf. D.N. Sastri, B6152, p. 128; also Sadananda Bhaduri, B6048, p. 293. 

8. Cf. B.K. Matilal, B6127. 

9. There are minor ones, e.g., that given in Nydyakusumafjali sections 74-90 
of Book One, pp. 564-565. 

10. Th. Stcherbatsky, B1174, Vol. I, 247, passim.. 

11. Stcherbatsky, B1174, Vol. I, 256; Vol. II, 74ff. 

12. Kalidas Bhattacharya, B8567, p. 166. 

13. Kalidas Bhattacharya, B8567, pp. 167-71, discusses this relevance at 
length. He draws some devastating conclusions. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


1. The methodology of such a constructive enterprise is set forth in Nelson 
Goodman, The Structure of Appearance, op. cit. 

2. The relation called the “resider-residemce-relation” on p. 50 includes 
this relation, but also includes other relations which will be defined below, such as 
inherence and contact. It is important for the definitions to follow, however, that 
“L” as interpreted for our purposes cover only those locus-located relations which 
are self-linking (svaripasambandha). 

3. Cf. p. 51. 

4. Furthermore, it is not the product of the substances which must satisfy 
the condition, but the product of the places they occupy. Even so, this definition 
probably fails; see the next footnote. 

5. I am quite aware that the account just given is difficult to square with 
the Vaisesika theory that atoms are partless and of minimal size, The definitions 
offered in this section are not claimed to be accurate; they are intended to illust- 
rate problems of formalizing Vaisesika theory. More satisfactory formalizations 
will, I am sure, appear elsewhere soon. 

6. The symbol “[ ]’” indicates that what is in the brackets is an ordered 
pair. Contact, as here defined, is a symmetrical relation. Later, in Navya-Nyaya, 
contact is analyzed into two asymmetrical relations for at least some cases, 


690 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


7. See pp. 414-415. 
8. Cf. Karl H. Potter, B3719, p. 87. 


9. D.N. Sastri, B6152, pp. 129-31, brings out the difficulty well. 

10. Dharmakirti’s dates are estimated to be A.D. 600-660 by Erich Frau- 
wallner. The Pramdnavarttika is expected to be translated into English by Masatoshi 
Nagatomi in the Harvard Oriental Series soon. 

11. Jitendranath Mohanty, B6133A, p. 38. 

12. Harisatya Bhattacharya, B7818, p. 23. 

13. B. Faddegon, B2603, p. 13. 

14, Sadananda Bhaduri, B6048, p. 64. 

15, Cf. Potter, B3719, p. 31-33. 

16, B.N. Seal, B8908, p. 101. 

17. See Bhaduri, B6048, Chapter IV, and Umesh Mishra, B6026, pp. 114-26. 

18. The points involved here are much more complex than the text suggests. 
For good, extended discussions of the subject see Seal, B8908, pp. 104-17 and U. 
Mishra, B6026, pp. 75-95. 

19. This is usually called paficabhautikavada. 

20. According to Ganganatha Jha the view to which Gautama is alluding is 
an old Samkhya view that touch is the only sense-organ. Cf. Jha’s Introduction to 
B264 (2). 

21, See Masaaki Hattori, Digndga, on Perception (Harvard Oriental Series, 
47, 1968), 38-39. 

22. Cf. Faddegon, B2603, p. 108. 

23. See p. 113 for more on the distinction between specific and generic 
qualities. 

24, U. Mishra, B6026, footnote 25 on p. 167. 

25. U. Mishra, B6026, p. 170, notes that it is a view of the “Tantric school” 
that sound is a quality of God. 

26. Potter, B3719, p. 23. 

27, See Bertrand Russell, Hunan Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits (New York, 
1948), pp. 266 ff. 

28. Bhaduri, B6048, pp. 215 ff. 

29, Bhaduri, B6048, p. 217. 

30, Bhaduri, B6048, pp. 225-26. 

31. Cf. Sadananda Bhaduri, B6044, and U. Mishra, B6026, pp. 132-59, for 
further discussions of the internal organ. 

32, Mishra, B6026, pp. 375-76. 

33, See Ingalls, B6100, for arguments. 

34. See Jadunath Sinha, B8547, p. 304. 

35, For an extended discussion of Udayana’s arguments see Gopikamohan 
Bhattacharya, B6132. 


36. See B. K. Matilal, B9041, for a discussion of this argument and the prin- 
ciple it depends upon. 

37. See Bertrand Russell, “On denoting” in An Introduction to Philosophical 
Inquiry, ed. J. Margolis, (Toronto : Knopf, 1968), pp. 631-42. 

38. See Bertrand Russell, “Descriptions,” in Semantics and the Philosophy of 
Language, ed. L.. Linsky (Urbana : University of Hlionois, 1952), p. 98. 


39, W. V. O. Quine, “On What There Is,” in From a Logical Point of View, 
op. cit. p. 8. 


FOOTNOTES 691 


CHAPTER SIX 


1. For an instructive discussion of the view see a symposium involving G. F. 
Stout, G. E. Moore, and G. Dawes Hicks in Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Sup- 
plementary Vol. III (1923), particularly pp. 114ff. Compare Karl H. Potter, 
B6083. 

2. As, e.g., it is by Dhirendra Mohan Datta, B6086. 

3. Anantlal Thakur, B2512, says that Vadiraja, the Jain author, reports 
the view of the Bhisanakara on this point. However, the summary (below) of 
Nyayabhiisana suggests his information is mistaken. 

4, Cf. Ingalls, B3417, pp. 76-77. 

Bhaduri, B6048, pp. 113-14. 
On p. 82. 

Jaideva Singh, B8212, p. 358. 
B. N. Seal, B8908, pp. 137-43. 
Seal, B8908, p. 134. 

10. U. Mishra, B6026, p. 201. 
Il. Seal, B8908, p. 136. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


1. H. N. Randle, B6014, p. 133. 

2. B. K. Matilal, B6155A, pp. 85-95. 

3. Cf. Karl H. Potter, “Is Nyaya Logic Extensional or Intensional ?,” 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 88 (1969), 711-17. 

4. Ingalls, B3417, p. 40. 

5. Most Naiydyikas think there is only one inherence, so this particular 
problem does not arise for them. 

6. Because universals cannot inhere in other universals on pain of infinite 
regress. See the fourth of Udayana’s “impediments to universalhood,” discussed 
on pp. 135-136. 

7. Bhaduri, B6048, p. 8. 

CHAPTER EIGHT 


1, As indeed does Ingalls in B3417, p. 34, passim. 

2. We might say that a judgment is a belief-episode, intending that phrase 
in a fashion parallel to that use of “speech-episode” characteristic of contemporary 
British philosophers, as in Peter Strawson (speaking of J. L. Austin’s view) in “Truth,” 
reprinted in Truth (ed. G. Pitcher) (Englewood Cliffs, N. J. : Prentice-Hall, 1964), 
p. 33 ff. 

3. Jitendranath Mohanty, Gangega’s Theory of Truth (Centre of Advanced 
Study in Philosophy : Visva-Bharati, Santiniketan, West Bengal, 1966), p. 27. 

4. “Entertains” is a fudge for “either asserts or denies or commands or ex~ 
horts or ...,” since language is used to do all these things with what are here being 
called “propositions.” 

5. K. Kunjunni Raja, B6510A, p. 194. 

6. Cf. Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, (tran.G.E. M. Ans- 
combe) (Oxford: Blackwell, 1953), pp. 1ff. 

7. K. Kunjunni Raja, B6510A, p. 124. 

8. Satischandra Chatterjee, B6035, p. 22. 

9. Ganganatha Jha, B5992, p. 284. 

10. G. R. F. Oberhammer, B801A, 


OP OF 


692 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ll. J. N. Mohanty, Gangesa’s Theory of Truth, op. cit., pp. 2ff. 

12. In the pre-Gangefa literature, that is, Mohanty’s book, ibid. and other 
sources clearly show that the Navya-Naiyayikas discussed the problem. 

13. J have indicated the sort of form such a system might take in formal terms 
on pp. 69-73, and a general account of the notion of system here employed was 
sketched in Chapter Three. 

14. Cf Mohanty, Gangesa’s Theory of Truth, op. cit., pp. 52-54. 

15. Gopinath Kaviraj, B7657. 

16. Gopinath Kaviraj, B6007, p. 612. 

17, Anantlal Thakur, B2589, p. 242. 


CHAPTER NINE 


1, Cf, eg., Hakuju Ui, B1048, p. 83. 

2. See Ui, B1048, pp. 82ff.; also E. Frauwallner, B1049. 

3. I. M. Bochenski, Formal Logic, (tran. Ivo Thomas, South Bend, Indiana: 
University of Notre Dame Press 1961), p. 432. 

4. See, e.g., Satischandra Vidyabhusana, B7617. 

5. As recognized by Henry N. Randle, B7692. 

6. Gerald Oberhammer, B1108, p. 130. 

7. See, for example, A. B. Dhruva, B250; Anantlal Thakur, B801; Ober- 
hammer, B1108; Ui, B1048, pp. 86-89. 

8. Thakur, B80], pp. 85-86. 

9. Randle, B6014, pp. 164-65. 

10. Ingalls, B3417, p. 33. 

ll. Randle, B6014, pp. 170-72. 

12. Cf. Sadhu Ram, B799. 

13. See Randle, B6014, pp. 170-72. See also Oberhammer, B1108, pp. 136ff. 

14. Guiseppe Tucci, B1077, pp. 383-84. 

15. For the details of the summary of the following exchange between Naiya- 
yikas and Buddhists see Randle, B6014, Chapter IV (pp. 263-303). 

16. Satischandra Vidyabhusana, B7534, p. 95. 

17, Vidyabhusana, B7534, p. 95. 

18. Guiseppe Tucci, B484, p. 480. 

19. Stcherbatsky, B1174, Vol. II, 56-60. 

20. Stcherbatsky, B1174, Vol. I, 244-45. 

21. Stcherbatsky, B1174, Vol. II, 58. 

22. B.K. Matilal, B800, pp. 69-73. 

23. Stefan Stasiak, B971. 

24, Randle, B6014, p. 156. 

25. Cf. Yuichi Kajiyama’s translation of Moksakaragupta’s Tarkabhasa 
(Memoirs of the Faculty of Letters, Kyoto University, No. 10, Kyoto, 1966), note 
259, p. 97. 

26. Yuichi Kajiyama, “On the Theory of Intrinsic Determination of Universal 
Concomitance in Buddhist Logic,” Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies, 7.1 (1958), 
34-35. This and the following paragaraph of the text follow Kajiyama’s article 
closely. 

27. The classification goes back to Udayana’s Atmatattvaviveka. See S. 
Bagchi, B8562, p. 151. 

28. See Narendrachandra Vedantatirtha’s Introduction to B2699, p. 87. 


FOOTNOTES for SUMMARIES (prepared by 
Karl H. Potter unless otherwise indicated ) 


1, KANADA (Footnotes 6-16 prepared by Masaaki Hattori) 
Ui, B1048, pp. 4-5. 
Bhimacarya Jhalakikar, B5967. 
Cf. V. V. Sharma, B53, p. 225. 
Ui, B1048, pp. 8-9. 
Ui, B1048, pp. 40-64. 

6. This statement is based on Jambuvijaya’s edition of Candrananda (B58). 
The siitra-text commented on by Samkaramigra has ten chapters, each consisting of 
two sections, and the sitrapdtha is quite different from that found in the Candra- 
nanda version. Comparison of the sitrapathas is made on pp. 77-100 of B58. 


yok we 


7. The word padartha (‘‘category”) does not occur in the sutras. 

8. In the sitras, the word bhdva is used in the sense of satta. 

9. Later Vaisesikas hold that the relation of inherence exists between (1) 
whole (avayavin) and parts (avayava), (2) quality (guna) and quality-possessor (gunin), 
(3) motion (karman) and motion-possessor (kriydvat), (4) universal (jdti) and indi- 
vidual (yyakti), and (5) an eternal substance (nityadravya) and ultimate particularity 
(antyavisesa). The expression “effect and cause” does not apply to (4) and (5). 
Candrananda states that “‘effect and cause” is a synecdoche; cf. his comment on 
VS VII.2.29. 

10. Later Vaisesikas recognize 7 other attributes, namely gravity (gurutva), 
fluidity (dravaiva), viscidity (sneha), impression (samskdra), metit (dharma), demerit 
(adharma) and sound (Sabda), all of which are mentioned in the sitras but are not 
listed here. 

11. Substance is twofold : one possessing many substances (anekadravyam 
dravyam) and one possessing no substance (adravyam drayyam). There is no substance 
which possesses one substance. 

12. Inference of this type (employed also in the previous section) is called 
parifesa. 

13. The Mimamsaka view on sound is criticized. 

14. The siéra III.1.13 allows different interpretations. Candrananda’s 
interpretation has been adopted. 

15. The peculiar property of color, etc., is colorness (ripatva), etc. Cf. 
Candrananda’s comment on VS IV.1.9. 

16. Attributes are noninherence causes (asamavdyikdrana), while space and 
time are efficient causes (nimittakdrana). 


2. GAUTAMA 


1, Cf N.C. Vedantatirtha, Introduction to Vol. 11, B2699, 69-82, for a tho- 
rough review of scholarly opinions, as well as an opinion of his own identifying the 
author of the Nydyasiitras with Dirghatamas of the Rg-Veda. 


694 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


2. Hermann Jacobi, B7535. 

3. Satkari Mookerjee, B172, p. 150. 

4. Cf. G. Jha, B5992 : 4, p. 256. 

5. §.C. Vidyabhusana, B7606, pp. 155-66. 

6. G. Oberhammer, in B801A. 

7. Guiseppe Tucci, Pre-Dinnaga Texts on Logic from Chinese Sources, Gaekwad’s 
Oriental Series, 49, (1929), xxvii. 

8. Additional comments of interest concerning the author of the Nydyasiliras 
may be found in the following : G. V. Devasthali, B6060; P. Masson-Oursel, B7674, 
p. 190 N. L. Sinha’s Foreword to B240; Bodas’ Introduction to B3910, p. 26; H.P. 
Sastri, B233, pp. 248-50; Dhruva. B250; N.C. Bhattacharya’s Introduction to B263, 
D.R. Bhandarkar’s Introduction to B3076; S. C. Vidyabhusana, B7617; Vidyabhu- 
sana, B7649; Ganganatha Jha’s Introduction to B264(2); B. Faddegon, B2603, pp. 
46-47; H. N. Randle, B6014, p. 7. 

9. There is little point in trying to translate Gautama’s term avyapadesya 
in the light of the differences of opinion found among the commentators as to what 
it means. See the commentaries on this sitra by Vatsya4yana, Uddyotakara, Vacas- 
pati, etc. 

10. Again, these terms are left untranslated because they are differently 
understood by later writers, 

11. It is unclear who is the opponent (pérvapaksin) and who the proponent 
(siddhdntin) here. 

12. It is doubtful who is the opponent and who is the proponent here; I 
give one reconstruction. 

13. IV.1.21 is ambiguous. 

14, This text’s interpretation is dubious. 

15. For a detailed summary of all 24 kinds, see the summary of Nydyabhasya, 
pp. 272-274. 


3, VAKYAKARA, 4. KATANDIKARA 
1. Anantlal Thakur, Introduction to B58, pp. 11-12. 
2. Thakur, B58, p. 13. 
3. S. Kuppuswami Sastri, “Ravana Bhasya,” Journal of Oriental Research 3, 
(1929), 1-5. 
4. Thakur, B58, p. 13. 
5. VATSYAYANA 
Cf. G. Jha, B5992: 4, p. 261. 
S. C. Vidyabhusana, B7606, pp. 155-66. 
Cf. Sadhu Ram, B799, p. 24. 
D. Gurumurti, Introduction to B2980, p. xxvi. 
Ingalls, B6100. 
G. Oberhammer, B801A. 
E. Windisch, B795. 
Paranjpe, B270. 
G. Jha, Introduction to B264 (2). 
Randle, B6014, pp. 21-22. Other informative secondary literature on 
Vatsyayana and his commentary include : E. Frauwallner, B8590, p. 22, S. C. 
Vidyabhusana, B796, p. 87; Anantlal Thakur, B801, p. 82; H. Ui, B1048, p. 16; 
N. C. Vedantatirtha, Introduction to B2699(2). 


PON AMR WON = 


> 


FOOTNOTES 695 


ll. There is some question about the status of parts of this section. Some 
of it has been argued to be siiira or portions of a lost Varttika. See E. Windisch, 
B795, and Randle, B6014, pp. 21-22 contra Windisch. 

12. But this argument may be an opponent’s contention. 

13. Vatsyayana’s discussion of wholes begins here, though the s#fra is concern- 
ed with distinguishing perception from inference. 

14, I take this argument as Vatsyayana’s. Uddyotakara takes it as an oppo- 
nent’s view. 

15. Whether this is a separate topic is a matter of dispute. Also, it is, 
dubious who the opponent is in this section. 


6. CANDRAMATI (Footnotes 5-12 provided by Masaaki Hattori) 


Erich Frauwallner, B1049. 
Hakuju Ui, B1048, p. 1. 
Ui, B1048, pp. 9-10. 
Frauwallner, B1049. 

5. No Sanskrit commentary has so far become known even by name. Shéng- 
tsung-shih-chil-i-lun-chang by Tau-shih (T’ang dynasty) and the commentary of the 
same title by K’uei-chi are on record, but are not extant. A good number of 
commentaries were written by Japanese Buddhist scholars in the Tokugawa period: 
Hoja (18th century), Shdshijikkugironki; Koktasu (18th century), Kachi Kando 
Shoshijikkugiron, etc. Cf. Ui, B1048, p.11; Hajime Nakamura’s Japanese  trans- 
lation with Introduction and Notes (Kokuyaku Issaiky6, Ronsho-bu 23, Tokyo, 
1958), pp. 528-30. 

6. The name “Candramati” is found nowhere in Sanskrit sources. Hsuan- 
chang’s translation of the name is Hui(mati)-yueh (candra). H. Ui and E. Frau- 
wallner assume respectively Maticandra and Candramati to be the original name. 
Cf. Ui, B1048, p. 9, and Frauwallner, B1049. The original text is lost. The Chinese 
translation was done by Hsuan-chang in A.D. 648. The title was reconstructed from 
Chinese translation: Shéng-tsung-shih-chi-i-lun. Cf. Ui, B1048, p. 1. 

7. Regarding the additional 4 categories, see Ui, B1048, pp. 123-26. 

8. Dispositional tendency, merit, and demerit are not in the list of qualities 
in the stra. The view that the internal organ is the non-inherence cause of the quali- 
ties of the self involves difficulty, and therefore Ui reads the text in a different manner. 
Cf. Ui, B1048, pp.94, 142. 

9. Frauwallner considers that, in setting forth this theory of inference, the 
author is influenced by Varsaganya-Vindhyavasin of the Samkhya school, but not 
by Vasubandhu-Dignaga of the Buddhist school. On this ground he assigns 
the author a date earlier than that of Prasastapada, whose theory of inference is 
influenced by the Vasubandhu-Dignaga theory. Cf. Frauwallner, B1049, pp. 71-80. 

10. According to Nyaya-Vaigesika of a later period, relational absence is to 
be recognized as a type of absence under which prior absence, posterior absence, 
and absolute absence are grouped together. Cf. Athalye’s edition of Annambhatta’s 
Tarkasamgraha (B3910), p. 100. 

ll. The similarity to Pragastap&da’s account is noticeable hereafter on many 
points. Cf. Ui, B1048, pp. 186ff. 

12.. Cf. Section (5) above; also Frauwallner, B1049, p. 74. 


PEN 


696 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


7. BHAVIVIKTA 

1. Cf. Anantlal Thakur, B6072, pp. 385-94. 
E. Steinkeliner, B6135, pp. 149-62. 
Oberhammer, B801A. 
For references see Thakur, B6072. 

5. In his Vadanyayatika, p. 142, says Thakur in B6072. 
8. PRASASTAPADA 

1. Erich Frauwallner, B8590, Vol. I, 16. 

2. Theodore Stcherbatsky, B5281B. Stcherbatsky’s views are summarized in 
Dhruva (B1073). 

3. Cf. Krishna Rao (B970), who cites the authority of Kalipada Tarkacarya 
in his Introduction to B1055, p. 10. 
Randle, B6014, pp. 26-32. 
Frauwallner, B1049. 
G. Tucci, B484 and B975. 
Thakur, Introduction to B58, p. 12. 

8. Recent papers by George Chemparathy have centered on the variety 
of names under which Pragastapada and his works seem to have gone. See G. 
Chemparathy, “Prasastapada and his other names, ” Indo-Iranian Journal, 12, (1970), 
241-54, and “The various names for the famous Vaisesika work of Prasgastapada,” 
Akhila Bharatiya Sanskrit Parishad, 1.1 (1969), 23-28. 

9. B. Bhattacharya, Introduction to B2278, p. 89. 

10. Thakur, B58, p. 13. 

11. Other sources on Pragastapada’s date and work: H. Ui, B1048, p. 18 
B. Faddegon, B2603, pp. 23-37. 

12. This is the title of Prasasta(pada’s?) commentary as given in Kamala- 
Sila’s Pafjika on the Tattvasamgraha of Santaraksita, according to B. J. Sandesara in 
his Introduction to B58, p. vii. But see Chemparathy, of. cit. 

13. S. Kuppuswami Sastri, B3930. 
9. UDDYOTAKARA 

1. In the concluding colophon of the work. Cf. Vidyabhusana, B7606. 
G. Jha, B5992 : 4, p. 262. 
Jha, Introduction to B264(2). 
Frauwallner, B8590, p. 22. 
Cf. P. Tuxen, B3073; Jha, B5992; Vidyabhusana, B7606 and B1103. 

6. Vidyabhusana, B1103; Vostrikov, B1201; Iyengar, B603A and B608; 
Tucci, B605 and B484; A. B. Keith, B604. 

7. Oberhammer, B1108, p. 140. 

8. D.N. Sastri, B6152, pp. 110-11. 

9. Randle, B6014, p. 35. 

10. Other secondary sources treating Uddyotakara’s work : Thakur, B1106; 
P. Masson-Oursel, B7674, p. 206; Frauwallner, B1049. 

11. See footnote 6 for literature discussing the authorship of the Véadavidhi. 

12, According to Buddhists true perception should grasp the components of 
objects and not the objects themselves. Judgments about conventional objects, 
which involve bringing individuals under universals, are erroneous. 

13. This refers to Dignaga, it seems clear; the definition is his. 


PPS 


Teo 


oe oS 


14. Vacaspati Misra says that this is Dignaga’s definition. 
15. Ganganatha Jha says this is Samkhya’s definition. 


FOOTNOTES 697 


16. Presumably by a Mim4msaka. 

17. This passage in Uddyotakara is obscure. 

18. Credited by Vacaspati Misra to Vasubandhu. 

19. Having criticized the siitra of Vasubandhu, presumably in the Vadavi- 
dhana (?), Uddyotakara proceeds to criticize its commentary in a similar fashion. 
Cf. references under note 6 above. 

20. Stasiak, B971, calculates he generates 2032 kinds. 

21. Vacaspati Misra calls this svaripdsiddha. 

22. See Vaisesikastitras V.8.1. 

23, Here Uddyotakara jousts with the Yogacara idealist, specifically Vasu- 
bandhu, as is suggested by references to the Vimsika. 


10. ATREYA 
1. See Thakur, B2335 and Frauwallner, B8590, p. 17. Also Thakur, B2337, 
p. 249. 
Cf. Thakur, B2335. 
D. N. Sastri, B6152, pp. 103-107. 
D. N. Sastri, B6152, pp. 103-107. 
Thakur, Introduction to B58, p. 12. 
6. According to several writers cf. D. N. Sastri, B6152, p. 107, note 102. 
But Sastri thinks these writers are mistaken. 
7. Kuppuswami Sastri, “Ravana-Bhasya”, Journal of Oriental Research 3, 


aoe gy 


1929, pp. 1-5. 
8. Thakur, Introduction to B58. 
9. See B58. 


10. Ui, B1048, pp. 14-15, 90-91. 
ll. Faddegon, B2603, pp. 34-40. 
12, Ui, Bi048. 


11. PRITICANDRA 
1. Cf D. CG. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 33. 


12. AVIDDHAKARNA 
For references, see Thakur, B6072. 
Thakur, B6072. 
Cf. B. Bhattacharya, Introduction to B2279. 
Thakur, B6072. 
Mahendra Kumar Jain, Introduction to B2433, pp. 75-76. 
- Umesh Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, Volume Two (Allahabad, 
1966), pp. 55-62. 
7. Oberhammer, B80}A. 
8. Other references to Aviddhakarna are found in S. Mookerjee, B5283A, 
p- 85; E. Steinkellner, B6135. 
9. Umesh Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. 2, 57. 


Oo pe who 


13. SAMKARA (SVAMIN) 


1. Cf. S. Mookerjee, B2477, who asserts that Jayanta refers to Samkarasvamin 
on p. 393 of Gangadhara Sastri’s edition of Nyayamaitjjart (B228). 

2. Cf. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 34. 

3. G. Oberhammer, B1108, p. 149. 


698 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


4. E. Steinkellner, B6135. 

5. A. Thakur, B6072. 

6. Umesh Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. 2, 73-76. 
7. Edited in B2660. 

8. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 34. 

9. B6105, p. 33. 


14. VISVARUPA and 15. DHAIRYARASI 

1. Cf. B. Gupta, B2488, p. 25. 

2. E, Steinkellner, B6135. 

3. This paragraph is based on Umesh Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, 
Vol. 2, 116-19. Thakur, B6072, also cites references to Visvaripa in the Tarkika- 


raksatika. 


16. JAYANTA BHATTA 

1, This tradition is reported by Ganganatha Jha, B2476, and is reviewed by 
others, including Hacker, B2484; Narahari, B2487; B. Gupta, B2488; and S. Moo- 
kerjee, B2477. 

2. B. Gupta, B2488, p. 16. 

3. Mookerjee, B2477, and Narahari, B2486, have studied Jayanta’s style and 
personality. 

4. According to Narahari, B2488A. 

5. P. V. Kane, History of DharmaSastra, Vol. 1 (Poona, 1930), 698b. 

6. B. Gupta, B2488, p. 16, reports that V. Raghavan thinks the Nydpakalika 
to be “‘a later compilation of Jayanta’s sentences.’? Gupta credits Steinkellner for 
this information. 

7. E. g. Thakur, B2464 and B2463, finds references to a work by this name 
in Jiianaérimitra’s [soaravada and Ksanabhatigadhydya. Thakur thinks these passages 
refer to Trilocana’s work, not Jayanta’s. 

8. Reported by S. N. Suklain a paper read at the 1955 session of the All- 
India Oriental Congress. Sukla remarks that Phanibhiisana Tarkavagisa refutes 
any relation of pupil-teacher or teacher-pupil between Jayanta and VéAcaspati in his 
Nyayaparicaya (B6022). 

9. The editor of E says that it is Vacaspati Misra who is being referred to ! 
According to Oberhammer, B1108, Jayanta had two main sources, the dcarya and 
the uyakhyatr. Oberhammer thinks that these philosophers are among those cited 
by Kamalasila in his Pafijika on Santaraksita’s Tativasamgraha, and that they pre- 
ceded Uddyotakara. 

10. This is Dharmakirti’s famous definition, given in the Nydyabindu. Cf. 
Theodore Stcherbatsky, B1174, Vol. II, 14. 

11. The reference is to the Yuktidipika. 

12. Probably Prasastapada is referred to. But see p. 282 and note 8. 

13. This whole discussion follows closely the Vyadhikarana section of Kuma- 
rila’s Slokavarttika. 

14. See J. Sinha, Indian Psychology (Cognition), (Calcutta, 1958), Chapter 
XXI, for a more extended summary of Jayanta’s arguments concerning meaning. 

13. G. Jha, B2476. 

16. Umesh Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, Vol.2, 125. 

17. G. Kaviraj, B6007, p. 625. 


FOOTNOTES 699 


17. THE NYAYARATNAKARA 
1. G. Kaviraj, B6007, p. 614. 


18. TRILOCANA 

1. A. Thakur, B2724. 

2. Thakur, B2724. Thakur thinks the order of mention, which has Trilocana 
third in line, is chronological. But D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, says the order as 
given elsewhere has Trilocana before Bhasarvajfia. 

3. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105. 

4. Thakur, B2464, has found references in Jianasrimitra’s [fvaravada to this 
work under this title. 

5. Attributed to Durveka Misra, a Buddhist writer. Cf. Thakur, B2724. 

6. Cf. A. Thakur, B2463, p. 40, and B6072. 

7. Thakur, B2463, p. 40. 

8. Thakur, B2463. 

9. Gerhard Oberhammer, “Der Svabhavika-Sambandha, ein geschichtlicher 
Beitrag zur Nyaya-Logik,’’? Wiener Zeitschrift fur die Kunde des Sud und Ostasiens, 8 
(1964), 131-81. 

10. Thakur, B2463, p. 37. 

ll. Thakur, B2463; also S$. C. Vidyabhusana, B7649. 

12, Thakur, B2463, p. 39. 

13, Thakur, B2463, p. 40. 

14, Discussed in Oberhammer’s article referred to in footnote 9 above. 


19. BHASARVAJNA 
1. R. Samasastry, B7992, p. 354. 
2. Cf. Ganganatha Jha, B2476; S. C. Vidyabhusana, B2503, p. 2. 
3. A. Thakur, B2463, p. 40. 
4, Daniel H. H. Ingalls, in the article cited in footnote 12, Chapter Two 


. D. R. Sarma, B2509. 
6. This work has been edited by C. D. Dalal, Gaekwad Oriental Series, Baroda, 


7. Cf. A, Thakur, B2512. 

8. Thakur, B2512. 

9. Additional materials on Bhasarvajfia can be found in the following : V. P. 
Vaidya, B2507; D. C. Bhattacharya, B2587 and B6105; G. Kaviraj, B6007b; C. R. 
Devadhar’s Introduction to B2505; U. Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. 2, 
81-90. 


20. SANATANI 
1. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 33. 
2. V. Varadachari, B2747. 


21. VYOMASIVA (Footnotes 4-62 prepared by V. Varadachari) 
1. G. Kaviraj, B6007, p. 627. 
2. Cf. V. Varadachari, B1367, p. 173. 
3. Cf. D. GC. Bhattacharya, B6105, pp. 10-12. Other references to Vyomavati 


700 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


are to be found in the following : E. Frauwallner, B8590, p. 17; D. R. Sharma, 
B1366A; Brahmananda Gupta, B1368. 

4. Gf. Citsukha, Tattvapradipika (B3225), pp. 176-77. 

5. This is given as the name of the work in the colophon in the Vizianagaram 
Sanskrit Series edition of the Padarthasamgraha (B1052). 

6. There are numerous references in the later works on Nydya-Vaisesika 
where this work is referred to as the Bhdsva of Prasgastapada. E.g., (L) Jagadiga’s 
Sakti (B1054), p. 1; (2) Visvanatha Nyayapaficanana’s Siddhantamuktdvali (B4159), 
p. 188. 

7. The definition of bhasya as contained in : “Siitrartho varnyate yena padaih 
siitranusaribhih svapadani ca varnyante bhasyam bhasyavido viduh” does not 
apply to the Padarthadharmasamgraha. The only justification, though not really 
sound, that could be offered lies in the author’s references to the aphorisms of Kanada 
eg., II.2.11 under kala; 1X.2.6 under Atman; VIII 1.1.9 under samkhya; etc. This 
is only an inadequate defence. The Vyomavat: contains a number of references to 
the text of Prasastapada as bhasya. See pp. 234, 246,6, 257, 272 See also Nydpakan 
dalt (B1052), p. 289. 

8. The aphorism ‘“dharmavisesaprastita dravyagunakarmasamanyavisesa- 
samavayanam padarthanam sadharmyavaidharmyabhyam tattvajfianan nihéreya- 


sam.” (1.1.4) This must have been responsible for dividing the entire treatise 
under two heads, namely sddharmya and vaidharmya. For the aphorisms quoted see 
footnote 6 above. 

9. At Samkara Misra, Vaisesikasatropaskara 9.2.13. 

10. See Nydyakandalt (B1052), pp. 2, 280; Introduction, p. 19. 

ll. See Vyomavati (B1054), p. 19. 

12. See Vyomavatt (B1054), pp. 20 (ca), 462, 536, 607. 

13. This is dealt with in V. Varadachari, B2550B. 

14. See Introduction to the edition of the Nydyakandali (B1052), p. 19. 
Srivatsa, who is said to have written the Lildvati, cannot be identical with Srivatsa, 
a predecessor of Udayana and a Naiyayika. His views are cited in the Tatparyapari- 
suddhi (in manuscript, collection of the Sanskrit Department, Madras University : 
11.89, 91; III, p. 30, p. 106; V, p. 27, p. 40.) The references prove that he wrote 
only on the Nyaya system. The LilAvati referred to here cannot be the same as_ the 
Nyayalilavati written by Sri Vallabha (B2926, B2927, B2928). This work is, like the 
Padarthadharmasamgraha, an independent treatise on the Vaisesika system. 

15. The following references to passages in the Paddarthadharmasamgraha 
(B1052) may have formed parts of commentaries on Pragastapada’s work. Vyoma- 
Siva does not mention any commentators by name: pp. 51, 107, 161, 162, 189, 190, 
223, 228, 229, 246, 301, 330, 399, 446, 450, 466, 477, 478, 483, 487, 489, 502, 509, 
511, 516, 524, 533, 538, 539, 541, 542, 549, 551, 552, 554, 555, 557 (twice), 561, 
563, 594, 612, 619, 620, 621, 625, 634, 660, 661, 666, 679, 694. 

Some of these could have been references to works on other systems of thought. 
It is not possible from the evidence available to make a decisive statement on this. 
There are numerous references to interpretations which are condemned by Vyoma- 
Siva. They are given below with reference to their subject matter : uddeSaprakarana, 
p- 20 (Ka); visesa-uddeSaprakarana, p. 57; sddharmyaprakarana, pp. 121, 125, 142, 156, 
157; prthiei, pp. 222, 234; odyu, pp. 274, 323; akasa, pp. 323, 326, 328; kala, pp. 344, 
346, 347; dtman, p. 394; manas, pp. 424, 426; gunasadharmya, p. 434; gunapakajapra- 
kriya, pp. 446, 450; samkhya, pp. 456, 457, 468, 469; parimana, p. 477; prthaktva, p. 481; 
vibhaga, pp. 498, 501, 503, 507; paratvdparatua, p. 516; buddhi, pp. 524, 533; viparyaya, 


FOOTNOTES 701 


p. 539; pratyaksa, p. 554; laingika, pp. 563, 564, 573, 574; laingikdvayava, p. 602; 
laingikapadesabhasa, pp. 607, 618; apratyayakarma, p. 672. 

16. See the Introduction by Dundhiraja Sastri to B1054, p. 6. 

17, The Saptapadarthi of Sivaditya has much in common with the Kirandvali, 
Laksanavalt, and Laksanamala of Udayana. For instance, both writers divide the cate- 
gories into positive and negative groups. The definitions of fattva, laksana, buddhi, 
vifesana and upalaksana are identical in the works of these two writers. On the con- 
trary, Vyomavati does not classify the categories into clear cut divisions such as positive 
and negative, nor does it contain definitions of the above-mentioned kind to suggest 
any relationship between him and Sivaditya. The two writers must have been 
different. 

18. The work under this title is cited in the Nayanaprasadint on Citsukha’s 
Tattvapradipika (B3225), p. 180. It dealt with the mahdvidya syllogism, and is now 
lost. There is no reference to this kind ofsyllogism in the Vyomavati to suggest identity 
of Vyomasiva and Sivaditya. The work Laksanaméla that is available is now declared 
to be the work of Udayana. Cf A. Thakur, B2680. 

19. See avayavin, p. 46; ifvaravdda, p. 308; ksanabhanga, p. 402; pradhanavada, 
p. 546; pratyaksa, p. 557; Sabdapramanya, p. 584; praménasamkhyad, p. 586. Vyoma- 
Siva refers to his teacher on these pages. 

20. In two other contexts, reference is made to the preceptor. One is while 
explaining the purpose served by the use of the word “ekaikasah” in taking up the 
treatment of each category, p. 189. The other is reagarding the putting of emphasis 
on the treatment of the hetu, p. 565. 

21. Cf. pp. 483, 689. 

22, Pp. 579, 580, 590, 591, 592, 598, 599. 

23. Pp. 221, 306, 307, 524, 525, 526, 567, 602, 627, 681, 686. 

24. Pp. 20(gha), 329, 536. 

25. Pp. 129, 602. 

26. WVakyapadiya II, 419. 

27. Cf. Nyayakandali (B1052), pp. 117, 159. 

28. Cf. Kirandvali (B36), p. 226; Vyomavati (B1054), p. 488. 

29. “‘yathaidhamsi samiddho ’gnir bhasmasat kurute ksanat, jfiandgnih 
sarvakarmani bhasmasat kurute tatha.” Bhagavadgita IV. 37 

30. “nabhuktam ksiyate karma kalpakoti Satair api, avasyam anubhokta- 
vyam krtam karma subhagubham.” 

31. This act shows the influence of theistic tendencies on the author. It is 
easy to trace it to the influence of the Bhagavadgita and Yogasitras which preach 
the act of surrendering everything to God. See Bhagavadgita [X.27 and Yogasitra 
with Vydsabhésya IT.1. 

32. This view was the one held by some religious schools of Vaisnavism and 
Saivism. The deep divine love which the followers of Vaisnavite and Saiva schools 
could not help but treat as the stage of release was marked by bliss, where the devotee 
can have a permanent abode in the vicinity of God. For the concept of moksa in the 
Vaisnava and Saiva schools see Citsukha’s commentary on Nyayamakaranda (B3203), 
p- 271. 

33. “athato dharmam vyadkhyasyamah”. Vaisesikasatras 1.1.1. 

34, “yato *bhyudayanihsreyasasiddhih sa dharmah”. Vaisesikasiitras 1.1.2. 

35. Cf. V. Varadachari, B6140A. 

36. The use of the word chdéya has significance here, as astudy of this becomes 


702 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


possible only in this case and not tamas or pitch-darkness, the word used by most of 
the other commentators on Pragastapida’s work and later writers on the Nyaya- 
Vaisesika system. 

37. See “‘bhiyastvat gandhavatvac ca prthivi gandhajfiane  prakrtih,” 
Vaisesikasiitras VIII.2.5. Samkara Misra remarks that the term bhdyastva is a 
technical one in the Vaisesika system (cf. Upaskara on this sitra). 

38. See Nydyabhasya (B253), p. 493. 

39. Vyomasiva writes : “asya ca siitrasyedam bhasyam : bhiyastvat rasavat- 
tvac codakam rasajfiane prakrtih.” (p. 246) There is no aphorism of Kanada like 
this, but Vyomasiva adopts the sifra-form for it as the pattern of the aphorism VHI.2.5. 
Justification for this is to be found in the aphorism “‘tathapas tejo vayus ca rasa- 
ripasparsavisesat,” Vaisesikasiitras VIII.2.6. 

40. See “asya ca siitrasyedam bhasyam : bhiyastvat ripavattvac ca ripajfiane 
prakrtih karanam tejah,” p. 257. An explanation similar to that given in note 39 
applies here. 

41. See ‘“‘asya ca sitrasyedam bhasyam : bhiyastvat sparsavattvac ca sparsa- 
jiiane prakrtir vayur iti,” p. 272. The explanation given in note 39 applies here. 

42. Sridhara and Udayana brush aside this view without entering into the 
merits of Vyomasiva’s arguments. 

43. See Igvarakrsna’s Samkhyakarikas, verse 57. 

44. See Varadaraja’s Nydyakusumafjalibodhani (B2985), p. 91. 

45. Trees do not have selves, according to Sridhara. Cf. B1052, p. 83. 

46. See “atma va idam eka evagra Asit,”” Aitareya Upanisad I.1. 

47. The other commentators do not make any contribution of this kind on 
the topic. 

48. There is a lot of difference of opinion regarding how this is to be calculated. 
See Vyomavati, B1054, pp. 445-50; Mydyakandali, B1052, pp. 108-11; Kirandvali, B36, 
pp. 182-92. 

49. “S&manyapratyaksad visesapratyaksad visesasmrtes ca samégayah.” 
Vaisesikasiitras I1.2.17. 

50. ‘‘SamAnanekadharmopapatter _ vipratipatter upalabdhyanupalabdhy- 
avasthatas ca visesapekso vimarsah samsayah.” Nydyasiitra 1.1.23. 

51. Vyomasiva does not know the interpretation offered by Vacaspati Misra 
for the last two words in Gautama’s definition. 

52. ‘“Svaripalocanamatram.” It is difficult to find out which writer was 
the earliest to use the expression Glocana. It occurs in Samkhyakérika 28 and in 
Kumirila’s Slokavarttika, pratyaksa section, verse 112. 

53. This is a novel interpretation not suggested by any writer on Nyaya-Vai- 
Sesika. It is true that these safeguards are required tobe made in this definition. 
The cognition produced from the hetu must be free from error (avifatham). It must 
be decisive (uyavasdyatmaka) and “nonverbal” (avyapadesya). Expressions must 
not be used or must not form part of the inferential cognition, as otherwise there will 
not be any difference between inference and verbal testimony. 


54. See: 
“karyakaranabhavad va svabhavad va niyamakah, 


avinabhavaniyamo darganan na na daréganat”. 
Dharmakirti’s Pramdnavarttika, svarthénumaéna 33. 
55. This may suggest the author’s having been a native of Kashmir. It 
cannot be taken as decisive evidence however, since a reference of this kind may be 
given by any writer, Kashmiri or not, who undertakes a pilgrimage to Kedarnath. 


FOOTNOTES 703 


56. Among the commentators of the early period Vyomasiva goes against 
the spirit of Pragastapada’s utterance regarding the place of verbal testimony. 
Udayana, B36, pp. 301-17, also argues in the same strain. Sridhara, B1052, pp. 
215-16, however, sticks to the purport of the passage in the original and argues for 
treating the verbal testimony as coming under inference. 

57. See Kirandvali, B36, pp. 319-21. Udayana’s treatment of this is more 
detailed than that of Vyomasiva. 

58. Sridhara, B1052, pp. 220-22, and Udayana, B36, pp. 321-23, argue to 
bring comparison under inference. 

59. Though Prasastapada wrote that nonapprehension should be brought 
under inference, all the three early commentators (cf. Nyayakandali, B1052, pp. 225-30; 
Kiranavalt, B36, pp. 326-29) have attempted to show that perception itself enables 
the apprehension of absences and thus nonapprehension can be brought under 
perception. 

60. See Uddyotakara, Nydyavaritika, B1104, p. 16; Vacaspati Misra, Tat- 
paryatikd, B223, pp. 37-38; Udayana, Parisuddhi,' B2705A, pp. 303-13; and Kirandavali, 
B36, pp. 333-35. 

61. “Pasyatah caksusi ripam hesasabdam ca Srnvatah 

Khuraniksepasabdam ca sveto ’Svo dhavatiti dhih.” 
Slokavarttika VI, 358 

62. See : 

1, “Vrddha yuvanah sisavah kapotah 
khale yathami yugapat patanti 
Tathaiva sarve yugapat padarthah 
parasparanvayino bhavanti.” 
2. “Yadyad akamksitam yogyam samnidhanam prapadyate 
Tena tenanvitah svarthah padair eva gamyate.” 
where the views of the ancient and modern schools of Nyaya-Vaisesika are expressed. 
The views stated and reflected upon in this passage by Vyomasiva show the analyti- 
cal approach adopted by his predecessors. These theories appear to have been 
held, but for a few of them, by writers in the Nyaya and Vaisesika schools. 

63. WVyomasiva refers to the Nydyabhdsya and cites passages from it (on pp. 
20 (gha) and 329). He twice cites a passage from the Nydyavdritika (cf. pp. 129, 
602). A work probably on the Vaisesika system_called Padarthasamkara :is cited twice 
(pp. 483, 689) in support of his interpretations. An obscure word, mibratava is used 
on p. 531 and it appears that it refers to the name of the followers of some school of 
thought whose view, according to Vyomasiva, had been set aside. 
The identity of this school is hard to ascertain; the reading appears to be corrupt. 

Tn all likelihood Vyomasiva was responsible for classifying the noninherent cause 
into two kinds and giving them a separate treatment in regard to certain qualities. 
Though he does not actually use the word, it is possible to guess that the first kind 
could have been named Jaghvi, since the latter is referred to by him as mahati, which 
he illustrates on pp. 438, 476, 478, 488, 489. 

While interpreting the passage “evam dharmair vind dharmindm uddesgah 
krta iti,” Vyomasiva writes that the dharmins have been enumerated without their 
respective features. Vyomasiva refers to a view of some scholars who hold, in con- 
trast, that the dharmins are described here together with their features. A difficulty 
arises in justifying that view, since the word vind, which means “without,” is found 
used. The author interprets vind skillfully as “by Kanada.” The word vi means “bird” 
and vind thus means “by the bird ‘owl,’ ” which is another name for Kanada (p. 114). 


704 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Vyomasiva, from the beginning of his attempt to comment on the Padértha- 
dharmasamgraha, continues to refer to the tattvajfidna (true knowledge) as related only 
to the 6 categories, though he is not unaware of the role played by absences (p. 644). 

Though primarily he is a writer on the Vaisesika school, Vyomasiva brings in 
materials belonging to the Nyaya school to provide convincing expositions. This 
is clear from his treatment of the definition of perception and the number of fallacies 
of the heiu as well as topics such as the ways of losing an argument, futile rejoinders, 
and cavil (see pp. 326, 501). 

There is, strictly speaking, no place in Nydya-Vaisesika for the lingasarira or 
“subtle body,” since the self, which is all-pervasive, cannot move from place to place. 
Ifany reference is made to the self’s going it must be taken to be a figurative expression. 
Getting reborn happens to the self which is of course there. Wyomasiva recognizes, 
on the contrary, the existence of the subtle body; he calls it stiksmaSarira, antarabhava- 
Sarira and tivahikaSarira. He says that it must be admitted on the strength of the 
Vedic authority (pp. 20, 559, 676). 

Among the three commentators on the Padarthadharmasamgraha it is Vyoma- 
Siva who was the earliest. References made by Vyomasiva to previous commenta- 
tors on Pragastapada’s work are by far more numerous than those found in the Vydya- 
kandali or Kirandvali. Each of the authors of the other two commentaries was follow- 
ing his own tradition. In point of expression Vyomasiva suffers in contrast with 
Udayana, whose language is very polished, forceful, and dialectic. Vyomasiva’s 
language is forcible but lacks vigor. It is very elaborate, but lacks the finish of 
Udayana. Sridhara’s language is nearer Vyomasiva’s, but also greater in its appeal. 
Vyomasiva has the unique distinction of having given a thorough exposition of the 
entire Padarthadharmasamgraha, leaving not a single passage unattended to. The 
same cannot be said of Sridhara and Udayana who, though attempting to comment 
on the original, did leave certain passages unexplained because they were simple. 
Of all three, Sridhara clings to the text and stands by the spirit of the text without 
swerving from the original. The other two very often bring in matters from the Nyaya 
sphere and incorporate them into Vaisesika doctrine whenever they are found fitting. 
Udayana has, however, even more leaning to Nyaya than Vyomasiva. 

In spite of all this Udayana came to be looked upon as an authority on the 
Vaisesika system as well as on Nyaya. Later writers frequently refer to his views and 
make references to Sridhara sparingly. Vyomasiva was forgotten in the later school 
of Nyaya and was referred to for his opinions only by a few writers such as Vallabha, 
Vadidevasiri, and others. The reason for this is not hard to guess. Udayana achiev- 
ed unique distinction by his classic on theism, the Nyayakusumdfjali, and acquired 
the coveted title Nydyacarya. The authority which he wielded because of his 
reputation became applicable also in the field of Vaisesika. There are passages to 
confirm this in Padmandbha Misra’s Setu on Prasastapada (B1054), pp. 57, 62, 
80, 119, 169, etc. See also Jagadiga Bhattacarya’s Sakti (B1054), p. 166. Also 
Visvanatha’s Siddhantamuktavali with Dinakari pp. 76, 150, 501, etc. 

It is evident that Udayana’s works eclipsed the contribution made by Vyoma- 
Siva to Vaisesika. Vyomasiva’s contribution is as important as that of Sridhara and 
Udayana and deserves careful and sympathetic appreciation. 


22. VACASPATI MISRA 
1. Reported by Ganganatha Jha, B5992: 4, pp 263 ff. 
2. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 23. 
3. Umesh Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. Ii, 100. 


FOOTNOTES 705 


Ibid., p. 106, footnote 5. 

Paul Hacker, B2484. 

As pointed out by H. G. Narahari, B2487: 22.1-2, p. 78. 
D. GC. Bhattacharya, B2587. 

See, e.g., D. H. H. Ingalls, B2173. 

. Narahari, B2487. 

10. Professor Matilal writes : “This is a commentary on Uddyotakara’s 
Nyayavarttika. The job of a person writing a summary of a commentary like Tat- 
paryatiké is difficult and I doubt whether it can be done with much success. It seems 
to be doubly difficult when we think that Vacaspati comments not only on Uddyota- 
kara but sometimes also on Vatsyayana and Aksapada. The Tatparyatika is an 
interesting and important document of the Nydya school. There was a big time gap 
between Uddyotakara and Vacaspati and some interesting developments took place 
in the Nyaya school during this time. Part of the importance of Tdatparyatika lies 
in the fact that it records some of these developments. In my synopsis I have tried 
to note them as far as practicable. But my synopsis, I admit, has been selective. 
In many places I have skipped. In some places, VAcaspati’s remarks need much 
explaining, which I have found hardly feasible to be put in a summary. In general, 
I have refrained from making any value-judgment of Vacaspati’s arguments— 
which, to be frank, do not always seem to be convincing. I also suspect Vacaspati’s 
originality in many places as far as the Nyaya school is concerned. Besides, Vacas- 
pati appears to have a somewhat clumsy way of putting even a subtle point which is 
apt to be missed at first sight.” 

ll. For a translation of this portion of Vacaspati readers are referred to 
Theodore Stcherbatsky, Buddhist Logic (B1174), Vol. IT, 255-98. 

12. This passage also is translated in Stcherbatsky, ibid. 


COND ow 


23. ADHYAYANA 


1. Umesh Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. 1, 127. See also A. 
Thakur, B6072, p. 15, who finds references to Adhyayana in Abhayadeva’s Sanmati- 
tarkatika and Karnagomin’s Pramdnavarttikatika. 


24. VITTOKA 


1. Umesh Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. 11, 116. On Vittoka cf. 
also A. Thakur, B2724 and B2663. 


25. NARASIMHA 


1. U. Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. II, 93. 
2. E. Steinkeliner, B6135. 


26. SRIDHARA 


i. Cf. N. C. Bhattacharya, B2981, p. viii. 

2. G. Kaviraj, B6007, p. 631. 

3. V. Varadachari, B1367. 

4. G. Kaviraj, B6007. 

5. For other information on Sridhara cf. D. C. Bhattacharya, B2587, p. 353; 
M. Chakravarti, B5994, p, 262; B. Faddegon, B2603, pp. 77-78, 601, 


706 ENGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


27. SRIVATSA 

1. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, pp. 20-22. 

2. Udayana seems to suggest that he is commenting on the second chapter 
of Vacaspati’s Tatparyatika to convince Srivatsa of its greatness. Cf. D. C. Bhatta- 
charya, B2746, p. 153; V. Varadachari, B2747, p. 288. 


28. ANIRUDDHA 

1. This information and the remainder of the remarks following are based on 
J. S. Jetly, B2595. 

2. D. CG. Bhattacharya, BG6105, p. 7. 


29. UDAYANA (Footnotes 16-44 provided by V. Varadachari) 
Ganganatha Jha, B5992 : 4, p. 266. 

S. C. Vidyabhusana, B7649, p. 142. 

D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105. 

That of Vidyabhusana, B7649, p. 142. 

G. Jha, B5992 : 4, p. 264, 

A. Thakur, B2724, Introduction, pp. 32-33. 

D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 6. 

D. C. Bhattacharya, B2707, p. 143. 

. D. C. Bhattacharya, B2587, pp. 353-54. 

10. In the sources cited in the previous three footnotes. 

11. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105. 

12. Additional sources supplying information or commentary about Udayana 
include : N. C. Vedantatirtha, Introduction to B2699(2) and B2696; A. Thakur, 
Introduction to B58, p. 4; Nandalal Sinha, Introduction to B240, pp. ii-iii; N. K, 
Telang, Introduction to B2678, p. 5; A. Thakur, B2680; N. C. Vedantatirtha, Intro- 
duction to B2705; V. Varadachari, B2708; Gopinath Kaviraj, Introduction to 
B2985, pp. vii-ix; M. Chakravarti, B5994, p. 263; G. Kaviraj, B6007; Umesh Mishra, 
History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. U1, 147-207. 

13. A. Thakur, B2680. 

14. §. Subrahmanya Sastri in B2679, Introduction. 

15. In B2679 and B2681. 

16. The Buddhists use the word pratibandha in the sense of invariable concomi- 
tance. See Ratnakirti’s Jfvarasddhanaditsana, B2660, p. 41. 

17. See Kamalasila’s Pafijika on karika 375 of the Tattvasamgraha of Santara- 
ksita; Dharmakirti’s Pramdpavarttika IV. 224; Hetubinduprakarana, p. 63; Jiianasri- 


SEN ga rwNr > 


mitra’s Ksanabhangadhyaya, p. 146. 

18. Here the reference is to the treatment given to the apoha doctrine by 
Jiianasri in his Apohaprakarana, B2724, pp. 201-32 

19. An object that is apprehended is referred to in a general way as “blue” 
in the Buddhist literature. 

20. This refers to Dharmakirti’s condemnation of universals, cited in the 
Vyomavati, p. 682. 

21. Here there is reference to a sloka which occurs on p. 89 of Jfidnagri’s 
Ksanabhangadhyaya, B2724. It is cited by Udayana with slight alterations to refute 
the Buddhist standpoint. 

22. In this section, called Bahydarthabhanga, the author reflects the idealistic 
and nihilistic theories of the Buddhists. The Madhyamikas hold that voidness 
(Sanya) and empirical reality (samuytisatya) are to be considered with reference to 


FOOTNOTES 7107 


the ultimate truth. Udayana shows that there is no authority for admitting void- 
ness. Empirical reality might be admitted if a permanent, unchangeable, and 
characterless entity is admitted in place of voidness. This comes to recognizing the 
standpoint of the Advaita Vedantins who take this entity to be Brahman. Udayana 
then summarizes the tenets of Advaita. He discusses the nature of the external world. 
Buddhist dectrines about this are condemned on the strength of the nonavailability 
of reasons for them. Application of logical arguments is then discussed, following 
which there is a discussion of the nature of difference (bheda). In this connection, 
it is proved that there is the composite whole as distinct from its parts. The nature 
of objects is to be ascertained:through our judgments. Whether the judgments are 
valid or not is to be ascertained extrinsically. The reality of the universe is then 
proved. 

23. This refers to Madhyamika Buddhism. 

24. Advaita Vedantins hold that the world is empirically real (samurtisatya). 
This view is not acceptable to the Nyaya school. Yet the author does not refute the 
view. It appears that Udayana must have had leanings toward Advaitic doctrines, 
since they are not contradicted here. Hence Madhusidana Sarasvati and Gauda- 
brahmananda cite Udayana as an authority in support of Advaitic doctrine. See 
Madhusiidana’s Advaitasiddhi, B3964, p. 65. 

25. Bhagiratha’s commentary, B2676, pp. 509-10. 

26. Commentaries of Samkara Misra and Bhagiratha, B2676, pp. 508, 510. 

27. Bhagiratha’s commentary, B2676, p. 510. 

28. This is the view held by Samkhya. See Bhagiratha’s commentary, B2676, 
p. 510. Samkara Misra and Raghunatha Siromani take this as the view of the 
Advaita Vedantin, however. See B2676, pp. 508, 513. 

29. The author’s leanings toward Advaita Vedanta are revealed here. 

30. The same arguments are given by the Buddhist writers. 

31. The reference is to arguments given, e.g., in Kamalasila’s Tattvasamgra- 
hapaijika (B2279), pp. 198-200. 

32. Abhydsa is a stage in which the first cognition which arises about an object 
is compared with a cognition of the same kind which is already available about a 
similar object. 

33. This matter is dealt with by Udayana in his Parifuddhi, B2705A, pp. 58, 
112. For further details, see V. Varadachari, B6138, p. 384. 

34. In spite of his leanings toward the Advaita tenets, the author does not 
openly state that the Advaitic concept of the unreality or illusory nature of the world 
is tenable. He simply says that the existence of the real world was ignored by the 
Vedantins. This is an ingenious way of trying to create a rapprochement between 
the Vedanta and Nyaya systems. 

35. The author refers here to the passage in Jfianasri’s Ksanabhangadhyaya, 
B2724, p. 73. 

36. See Samkara Misra’s commentary on this passage, B2676, p. 772. 

37. Samkara Misra’s commentary, ibid., p. 773. 

38. See Chandyogopanisad 8.12.1: “asariram va vasantam.” 

39. See Nyayakusumaifijali, II, (edition unidentified), pp. 64-65, 

40. Ibid., pp. 56-62. 

41. Ibid., pp. 57, 64-65. 

42. See Nydyastitras IV.2.38-49. 

43. Here the author seeks to place Nyaya on a higher rung than Vedanta. 

44, Before Udayana Trilocana, Jayanta, and others had made distinctive 


708 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


contributions to the refutation of ksapabhatigavdda. Udayana’s treatment of this 
topic is original in subjecting the opponent’s arguments to a severe criticism of all the 
possible alternative interpretations of them. Specifically, such detailed treatment is 
found in the following places : (1) An object, having contact and not having contact 
with the accessories, must be changing (pp. 157-64). (2) Destruction of an object 
is uncaused and therefore the doctrine of momentariness is established (pp. 223-61). 
(3) The criticism of the apoha theory (pp. 278-314). (4) Difference in means 
employed to grasp them does not entail difference in the objects grasped. By denounc- 
ing the Buddhist view, the author secures a strong ground for establishing the stabi- 
lity of the world (pp. 330-58). (5) Establishment of universals (pp. 401-14). 

Much originality is revealed by the author in refuting the idealistic view of the 
Buddhists. He refers in this section repeatedly to passages identified as those of 
Jiidnasri by the commentator Samkara Misra. The argument involving the example 
of the monkey which felt envious of Hanum4n’s crossing the sca (p. 499) is a very 
strong one for proving the existence of the objective world. It also shows that one 
cannot interpret the world or its existence without realizing the limitations within 
which he must operate in using his faculties. 

Udayana tries to explain the position of the Advaita system as distinct from the 
idealist and nihilistic schools of Buddhism, but he does not reject Advaita (pp. 501-29). 

The scope and place of logical reasoning are very clearly discussed (pp. 537-41, 
544-45). A detailed examination of the five Buddhist objections against the separate 
existence of wholes is provided (pp. 586-608), and solid arguments provided in favor 
of that Nyaya thesis (pp. 609-22). 

The treatment of validity of an instrument of valid knowledge is subtle and 
thoroughgoing, with the result that Gangesa, the author of the Tattvacintamani, did 
not have much to contribute by himself to this topic. He had to restate Udayana’s 
arguments (pp. 675-701). It is Udayana alone who refers to Vacaspati Misra’s view 
on the validity of an instrument of valid knowledge (p.698). 

How belief in the need to reject the existence of the self would lead to dangerous 
consequences is well expounded (pp. 814-15). The author’s contribution is unique 
in establishing the self as distinct from the body by adducing logical arguments and 
passages from the Vedas in support of them (pp. 819-24). The apparent diversity 
in the contents of Vedic passages is well explained in order to show that there is no 
discrepancy in the import of those passages (pp. 823-24). That God’s existence need 
not be rejected on the ground that God’s having a body is not necessary, is so elabo- 
rately treated that Udayana himself refers to the present treatment when dealing with 
this matter in his Nydyakusumdfijali (pp. 836-61, 878). 

Why the elite owe allegiance to Vedic teachings is explained with abundant 
humor and irony (pp. 885-90). The treatment of this matter is identical with that 
in the Nydyakusumdafjali except that the present account is more extended. Like- 
wise, why people embrace Buddhism is dealt with more sarcastically in the Kusu- 
mafjali than in this work (p. 907). Denial of a place for pleasure in the state of 
liberation is dealt with to great effect, though it gets even more detailed treatment 
in the Parisuddhi. 

Much credit is due to the author’s attempt to give a place to all systems of 
thought, including those of the Carvakas and Bauddhas, in the graded treatment of 
the stages of realization. Noteworthy in this connection is the author’s citation of 
Vedic passages to support each school’s theory and to show that each such theory does 
not deserve final acceptance (pp. 935-36). 

Udayana’s language, particularly in the Atmatattvaviveka, is terse and simple but 


FOOTNOTES 709 


effective. It became less terse but more piercing as an effective weapon to attack 
opponents in Nydyakusumaijali. The following pages can be cited for simple and 
effective expression : 50, 344, 533, 629, 794, 915, 921, 922. 

The Atmatattvaviveka abounds in passages of humor and sarcasm. After refuting 
the positions of the Buddhists, Udayana frequently makes humorous comments on 
the position in which the opponent now finds himself. References : pp. 138, 187, 
327, 410, 425, 433, 451, 459, 472, 481, 496, 542, 543, 563, 619, 627, 645. A few 
additional passages may be briefly described. 

1. When there is no object, there need not be any discussion about its existence. 
The opponent is asked to say who, as between the dumb and the eloquent, is better 
at discussing nonexistent objects (p. 170). 

2. The idealist Buddhist holds that in the objective world there are no diffe- 
rences between objects. The author asks : ‘Do two objects, which possess contradic- 
tory features, enter into the place of refuge called cognition, leaving aside their contra- 
dictory features, just as the snake and the mongoose are found to leave aside their 
natural enmity on entering into the hermitage of a sage of great tranquillity?” (p. 
438). 

3. The reference to a young monkey’s envy at Hanuman’s crossing the sea 
is very amusing (p. 499). 

4, The nihilist cannot seek to deny cognition. The more he attempts to do 
so, the more does cognition present itself in all its reality. The nihilist’s attempt to 
use an argument to deny cognition is akin to trying to extinguish a lamp by another 
lamp and thus bring in darkness (p. 633). 

Udayana mentions the following Buddhist writers by name : Prajfiakara (p. 
907); Dharmakirti (p. 907); Jfianasri (p. 292) as the teacher of Ratnakirti (pp. 421, 
423); and Dipamkara (p. 907). 

While interpreting passages in the Atmatativaviveka Samkara Misra and the 
other commentators whose commentarics are edited in B2676 identify certain passages 
which give the prima facie view as those belonging to the Buddhist writers cited below: 
Jiianasri : pp. 293, 289, 316, 356, 366, 371, 421, 423, 427, 436, 453, 464, 470, 481, 
489, 508, 839, 841; Dharmakirti : pp. 385, 289, 232, 380, 406, 407, 839, 841; Dig- 
naga is mentioned on p. 289, Dharmottara on p. 296 and Prajfiakara on p. 232; 
Ratnakirti : pp. 421, 435, 462, 465. 

Several passages in the Atmatattvaviveka are taken from the works of Jiianaéri 
and Ratnakirti. The passage beginning with the words “yadyapi nivrttimaham 
pratyemi” on p. 279 is taken from Ratnakirti’s Apohasiddhi, B2724, p. 53. 

45. Cf B2694. 

46. B2684. 

47. According to Gopinath Kaviraj this word should be translated as “‘libe- 
rated.” Cf. B2692, translation of this passage. 

48. Cf. B264(2). 

49. Cf. B264(2) and B242. 


30. APARARKADEVA 
1. In his Introduction to B2510, p. 11. 
2. Ibid., pp. 11-12, quoted from P. V. Kane, History of Dharmasastra. 


31. SRIKANTHA 
1. Cf. J. S. Jetly, B3245. 
2. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 43. 


710 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
3. J. S. Jetly, B3245. 
4. D. CG. Bhattacharya, B2707. 


32. THE VRTTIKARA 
1. Anantlal Thakur, B2987A. 

2. Thakur, Introduction to B58, p. 17. 
3. B2987A. 

4. Ibid. 


33. VALLABHA 

1. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, pp. 58-60. Also B2707. 

2. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 61. 

3. M.R. Bodas, Introduction to B2279, pp. 41-42. 

4, Bodas cites R. G. Bhandarkar’s Early History of the Deccan for this information, 
ibid. 

5. Bhattacharya, B2707. 

6. However, Gopinath Kaviraj gives Vallabha as “end of 12th century,” 
since he is referred to by the poem of 1226 and by Vadindra, whom Kaviraj dates as 
flourishing in 1225. Cf. G. Kaviraj, B6007, p. 637. 

7. The foregoing paragraph is by the General Editor. 


34. VARADARAJA 


1, §. CG. Vidyabhusana, B7649, p. 373. 

2. G. Kaviraj, Introduction to B2985. 

3. Th. Aufrecht, Catalogus Catalogorum I, 107, 550. 

4. Kaviraj, Introduction to B2985. 

5. For additional remarks about Varadaraja see also A. Thakur, B2680, note 
9 on p. 181; N. C. Bhattacharya, Introduction to B2981, p. xii; A. Venis, B2986; 
G. Kaviraj, B6007B; N. C. Vedantatirtha, Introduction to B2696; D. N. Shastri, 
B6152, p. 121; Umesh Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. II, 207-17. 


35. SIVADITYA 


1. Cf. for instance, V. S. Ghate, Introduction to B2979; A. Winter, B2978, 
who quotes R. S. Tailanga in support; D. Gurumurti, Introduction to B2980; J. S. 
Jetly, Introduction to B2984, According to Gopinath Kaviraj it was V. P. Dvivedin 
who was responsible for the identification of Sivaditya with Vyomasiva. 

2. Winter, B2978, and others. Part of the confusion over Sivaditya’s date 
stemmed from inaccurate dating of Sriharsa and Udayana. 

3. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 62. 

4. Cf. A. Thakur, B2680 and D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, as against Subrah- 
manya Sastri, B2679, pp. 44-45, who identifies the work he is editing as by Udayana. 


5. Gf M. R. Telang, Introduction to B3035, p. xix, and Subrahmanya 
Sastri, B2975. 


6. Subrahmanya Sastri, B2975. 
7. For additional references to Sivaditya, cf. P. Tuxen, B3073, p. 166; P. 


Masson-Oursel, B7674, p. 190; and B. Faddegon, B2603, pp. 16-17 contra Masson- 
Oursel; N. C. Bhattacharya, Introduction to B2981. 


36. VADINDRA 
1. Cf. M. R. Telang, Introduction to B3035, and A. Thakur, B3037, 


FOOTNOTES 711 


Gopinath Kaviraj, B3034, p. 5. 

Thakur, B3037. 

Kaviraj, B3034. 

Thakur, B3037. 

Thakur, B3037. 

See Thakur’s Introduction to B56; also B3037. 

Thakur, B3037. 

. Kaviraj, B3034. 

10. Telang, Introduction to B3035. 

11. Telang quotes T. M. Tripathi’s Introduction to B3219 to this effect. 
12. Here begins the summary prepared for the present volume. Professor 


COON DUB oN 


Sreekrishna Sarma has also published an article on the mahdvidyd syllogism. See 
B6155C. 

13. Telang, Introduction to B3035, pp. ix-x. 

14, Anantlal Thakur, B3037, says that all the manuscripts are defective. 


37, BHATTA RAGHAVA 

1. G. Kaviraj, B6007, although P. L. Vaidya’s notes in B2504 figure it out 
that Vadindra and Raghava were “fellow students” (p. 14). 

2. G. Kaviraj, Introduction to 3034. 

3. P. L. Vaidya, notes in B2504, 


38. DIVAKARA 
1. See D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, pp. 7Off. 
2. Umesh Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. II, 225-27. 


39. VADI VAGISVARA 
1. V. Raghavan, B2749, pp. 35-39. 
2. Raghavan, B2749, 
3. The following quotations are taken from E. P. Radhakrishnan, B2748, 


40. NARAYANA SARVAJNA 
1. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 91. 
2. Umesh Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. II, 219. 


41, KESAVA MISRA 

1. Ganganatha Jha, prelirninary note to B3072. 

2. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 64. 

3. Concerning his date, see Jha, preliminary note to B3072; Bhattacharya, 
B6105; Paranjpe, Introduction to B3067; Tuxen, B3073, p. 166; Masson-Oursel, 
B7674, p. 242; D. R. Bhandarkar, Introduction to B3076; E. P. Radhakrishnan, 
B2726; Umesh Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. II, 229-31. 

4. Mishra, ibid., p. 231. 


42, ANANDANUBHAVA 
1. Le. B2510, 
2. Subrahmanya Sastri, Introduction to B2510. 
3. Subrahmanya Sastri, ibid. 


43, PRABHAKAROPADHYAYA 
l. Cf D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 69. 


712 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


2. On this see E. Frauwallner, ‘“‘Prabhakara Upadhyaya,” Wiener Zeitschrift 
Jur die Kunde des Sud—und Ostasiens, 9 (1965), 198-226. 
3. Bhattacharya, B6105. 


44, ABHAYATILAKA 

l. J. S. Jetly, B3245. 

2. See also D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 43; Umesh Mishra, History of 
Indian Phulosophy, Vol. II, 217-18. 


45. SONDADOPADHYAYA 

1. D. CG. Bhattacharya, B6105, pp. 80-82. 

2. Cf. Bhattacharya, B6105, pp. 80-82, and Umesh Mishra, History of Indian 
Philosophy, Vol. U1, 228. Also Gopinath Kaviraj, B3642. V. Varadachari notes 
that Manikantha Misra apparently knows of Sondada’s peculiar theory and refers to 
it in the Nydyaraina. 


46. MANIKANTHA MISRA (Footnotes 2-46 provided by V. 
Varadachari) 

1. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, pp. 85-87. Gopinath Kaviraj remarks that 
according to one tradition the “tiger” definition of GangeSa’s section on definitions 
of pervasion in Tattvacintamant was originated by ‘“Manidhara” (= Manikantha ?). 
Cf. G. Kaviraj, B6007, p. 637. See also U. Mishra, History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. 
II, 234-35. 

2. Judgment that A is present in is the first stage in the first consideration, 
judgment of the invariable concomitance between / and 5, the second, and the com- 
plex judgment which cognizes in p the presence of the A as qualified by invariable 
concomitance with s is the third. See Nydyavarttika (B223), p. 45; Laksanamdlé (B2679), 
p- 46. 

Cf. Nydyakusumdfijali 111.7. 
Cf. Khandanakhandakhédya, B3052 (reprint), p. 370. 
By superimposition is only meant an assumption made hypothetically. 


Gur 08 


6. Udayana’s definition appears to be more clear. According to him, reason- 
ing consists in finding scope for the undesirable (result) to become the pervader by 
admitting the pervaded. Most later writers adopt his definition. 

7. Cf. Atmatativaviveka (B2678), p. 863. Some recognize 11 kinds of tarka. 
See Sarvadarsanasamgraha (edition unidentified), p. 91. 

8. Gf. Khandanakhandakhadya (B3052, reprint), p. 721. 

9. WVaradaraja, the author of the Tdarkikaraksaé, enumerates 5 constituents of 
tarka, in the absence of each one of which there arises a fallacious tarka argument. 
His exposition (B2986, pp. 186-93) of how reasoning operates is clear and is not 
referred to by Manikantha. According to Visvanatha, the author of the Nydyasiitra- 
vrtti, self-residence, mutual dependence, and circularity each have 3 varieties. (See 
the Vriti on NS 1.1.40.) 

10. This is also rejected by Gangesa. Cf. Tattvacintémant, B3391, p. 202. 

1l. This is rejected by Gangesa, B3391, p. 201, but was held by Bhasarvaifia, 
B2503, p. 5. 

12. Again, this definition is not admitted by Gangesa, B3391, p. 201 but was 
held by Varadaraja, B2986, p. 65. 

13. This criticism seems to be unfair, since invariable concomitance is required 


FOOTNOTES 713 


to be proved as correct precisely insofar as it is lacking in upddhis. Hence, this defini- 
tion is admitted by Varadaraja, B2986, p. 65, Srivallabha, B2928, p.54, and Gangesa 
B3391, p. 322. 

14. The commentator Nrsimhayajvan identifies these as the author of the 
Nydyabhisana and others. He refers to the interpretation of the word “only” found 
in this definition as intended to set aside the view that the A and 5 must have the same 
substratum. He identifies the author of this interpretation as Gadadharamisra, the 
author of Nydyabhiisanaprakasa, 

15. This view is not referred te by Udayana but is maintained by Gangesa. 
Cf. B3391, p. 433. 

16. This definition is admitted by Varadaraja, B2986, p. 66. 

17. This definition is said to have been implied in Udayana’s definition (see 
Kiranévali, B2706, p. 301 : “sadhanavyapakatve sati sadhyavyapakatva.”) Nysim- 
hayajvan (on p. 72) seeks to attribute this definition to Sri Vallabha (B2928, p. 54), 
Gangesa rejects the definition (B3391, p. 523.) 

18. Gangesa also rejects it. B3391, pp. 534-36. 

19. This definition is attributed to Ratnakoégakara. See B3391, pp. 541-47. 
Gangesa’s rejection/of this argument suggests his indebtedness to Manikantha’s argu- 
ments. 

20. Gangega too rejects this. Cf. B3391, pp. 537-41. 

21. Udayana (B2678, p. 863) states that an upddhi is some other hetu which is 
intended to be employed to prove the sddhya. That is, when there is a proper Ah, 
something else is sometimes treated as the A and for that reason is called upadhi. For 
instance, a certain characteristic (a crystal) may appear resting on another. Invari- 
able concomitance, which is actually instanced by the latter, appears in the former 
which is held to be the 4. It shines like the redness of China rose, which is refracted 
through it, but is not itselfred. Thus it is called an upadhi. Vadindrais said to have 
adopted Udayana’s definition dropping the word sama. Cf. Vedanta Dedéika’s 
Tattvamuktakalapa with Sarvarthasiddhi IV. 43. 

22. See B3052 (reprint), p. 142. 

23. See B2928, p. 66. 

24, There is a discussion in this section concerning the view of the Ratna- 
kosakara on salpratipaksa. On pp. 181-88 there is a review of the other fallacies— 
asiddha and badha—and arguments to show that the 5 mentioned fallacies are all 
there are. 

In the early period of the Nyaya school anupasamhdrin was not recognized as a 
fallacy. Udayana makes mention of it while commenting on the Téiparyatika on 
Book One (Prof. Varadachari cites Chapter V, p. 55 of the manuscript of the Pari- 
Suddhi in the Sanskrit Department of Madras University), though he makes no refe- 
rence to it in commenting on the last sitra (V.2.) In all probability it gained impor- 
tance, which would account for Manikantha’s trying to reject it. Gangesa recognizes 
it. 

Some scholars replace prakaranasama (=satpratipaksa) with viruddhdvyabhicarin 
(Varadaraja, B2986, p. 222; Bhasarvajfia, B2503, pp. 12-13). The Bhisanakara 
defined prakaranasama as an h which has the 3 marks although it does not exist in one’s 
own or the p of the opponent. (B2503, p. 7). 

Ajftanasiddha is a fourth variety added by Varadaraja to the already accepted 
3 kinds of asiddha. (Cf. B2986, p. 225). 

25. Udayana notes that vdkchala (the first of the 3 kinds) has 9 varieties, and 
that upacdrachala also has 9 kinds. (See Parisuddhi (ms) I, pp. 165-70.) 


714 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


26. Udayana describes a futile rejoinder as having 7 parts (aga), namely : 
(1) carelessness or loss of intuition (laksya); (2) definition of the particular kind of 
futile rejoinder (Jaksana); (3) birth of futile rejoinder (uésthiti); (4) its maintenance 
(sthitipadam); (5) its root cause (mila); (6) result (phala); and (7) loss of the cause 
(patanam). The specific defects may involve absence of the limbs which are expect- 
ed to be found in a futile rejoinder, or the possession of a limb which is not desired to 
be there, or the applicability of it to a matter which is not the subject. Cf. Udayana’s 
Nydyaparisista, B2705, p. 127. 

27, On pp. 202, 209, 210, 211, 217, 219. 

28. He is cited on the following : apakarsasama, pralidystanlasama, prakarana- 
sama, ahetusama, anityasama, and karyasama. His views on these topics are rejected. 

29, Udayana refers to several other kinds of futile rejoinders (Parifuddhi (ms ) 
on V. pp. 29-36, such as asddhyasama, aprasaigasama, upamdnusama, siddhasdduanasama, 
and others, and shows that they get included within the 24 kinds enumcrated by 
Gautama. Bhasarvajfia does not deal with prasatgasama, pratidrstantasama, samésaya- 
sama, prakaranasama, arthdpattisama, upapattisama, anityasama, and kaéryasama, and remarks 
(B2503, pp. 22, 23) that Gautama’s list is only illustrative and not exhaustive. 
Asiddhasama, anistasama, and such others, which were not enumerated by Gautama, 
are referred to by Prajfiakara in his Pramdpavdartt:zkalamkara (B1181, footnote on p. 
45). The Tarkasastra (B575, pp. 12-30), attributed to Vasubandhu, deals with 
16 futile rejoinders, omitting some of those enumerated by Gautama. 

30. Udayana defines defeat as the destruction of the opponent’s haughtiness 
(B2705, p. 79). 

31. B2478, Part II, p. 197. 

32. Udayana mentions in addition : dvddasayatana, caturaryasatya, kapala, 
purodasa. Cf. B2705, pp. 97-98. 

33. B2986, p. 337. 

34. B2986, p. 336. 

35. B2986, p. 337. 

36. B2986, p. 341, and Hemacandra, Praménamimamsd, B2949, p. 68 : 

“Sankhah kadalyam kadali ca bheryim 
tasyam ca bheryam sumahadvimanam, 
tacchankha bherikadalivimana- 
munmattagangapratimam babhiiva.” 

37. B2986, p. 351. 

38. Tatparyatikd, (edition unidentified), p. 510. 

39. B2478, Part II, p. 206; B2986, p. 356. 

40. B2986, pp. 355-56. 

41. B2705, p. 123. 

42. B2705, p. 125. 

43. B2705, pp. 124, 126. Also Parifuddhi (ms) V, pp. 53-55. 

44, Manikantha’s Nydyaraina is intended to deal in the main with the types 
of debate. Hence he takes up topics which relate to that matter. Jayaramabhat{a- 
carya (Nydyasiddhintamdla, B4286, p. 165) and VyAsatirtha (Tarkatandava IV (B3712, 
p. 344) refer to the views of Manikantha. Since the type of pervasion which Son- 
dada held is not referred to by Manikantha, he could have been slightly anterior to 
Sondada, who is criticized by Gangega. However, evidence contrary to this is pro- 
vided in the Sanskrit Introduction to the present edition of Nydyaratna (p. 109), while 
discussing the definition of upddhi. 


Both in technique and treatment Manikantha enjoys an enviable reputation. 


FOOTNOTES 715 


Little was known of him because of the popularity of Gangesa’s Tativacintamani. Mani- 
kantha’s originality is remarkable in many instances. However, it must be said he is 
inferior to Udayana and to Varadaraja whose treatment of the topics of debate is 
exhaustive and has a direct appeal. The way in which the prima facie view is stated 
in a variety of cases suggests that he might have been familiar with the Nydyasiddhdnta- 
dipa of Sasadhara, though this cannot be clearly established. In any case, Gangesga’s 
debt to Manikantha is unmistakable. 


47. SASADHARA 
1. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 90. 
2. G. Kaviraj, B6007, p. 637. 
3. V. Varadachari, B6069, pp. 29-30. 
'4, §. CG. Vidyabhusana, B7649, p. 398, lists the chapters of this work and their 


subject matter. 


48, TARANI MISRA 
1. The foregoing information is from D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, p. 79. 


A FEW UNDATABLE WRITERS 
1. D. C. Bhattacharya, B6105, pp. 93-94. 

A. Thakur, B3037, p. 29, 

A. Thakur, B2663, p. 29. 

A. Thakur, Introduction to B58. 

H 

B 

D 

B. 


fe bh 


. Ui, B1048, pp. 14-15. 

. Faddegon, B2603, pp. 34-40. 

. N. Shastri, B6152, p. 107. 

J. Sandesara, Introduction to B58, p. viii. 


Suu 


INDEX 


abadhita (unsublated) 402, 451 
abadhya, as criterion of reality 662 
abhava (as an entity) see absence 
abhéva as a pramdna 178, 227-8, 254, 408, 
448, 623, 636, 665 
Abhayadeva 339, 705 
Abhayatilaka Upadhyaya 11, 16, 521, 
525, 612, 668, 712 
abheda see identity 
Abhidharmakoga 274-5 
abhidheyatva see nameability 
abhihitanvayavada (a theory of meaning) 
151, 385, 449, 514 
Abhinanda, son of Jayanta 342 
abhyisa 707 
abhyudaya (exultation) 32, 217 
absence (abhdva) as a category or entity 
44, 49, 53, 133, 141-146, 275, 306, 
352-4, 426, 429, 486, 496, 523-5, 
564, 589, 607, 613-4, 623-4, 628, 633, 
636, 643, 666, 684, 704 
absolute or constant (atyanta) 146, 
219, 277, 281, 477, 525, 603, 
624, 650-1, 666, 671-2, 675, 684 
of capacity (sémarthyabhdva) 146, 354 
as causal factor 64, 513, 518, 563-4 
contradictory to bhdva 457, 531, 570, 
623 
counterpositive (pratiyogin) of 53, 72, 
110, 123, 144-5, 340, 352, 460, 
487, 495-6, 513-4, 540, 570-1, 
575, 579, 602, 611, 618, 623-4, 
648-50, 671-2, 675, 677, 684 
everything is an 234-5, 264, 333 
has a cause 532 
limited (apeksébhava) 146, 354 
(relation to) locus of 72, 144, 
353, 437-8, 448, 460, 495, 
623, 636 
mutual (anyonydbhava) 52-3, 
145-6, 219, 277, 281, 354, 415, 
477, 491, 514, 529-30, 540, 564, 
598, 602, 617, 624, 648, 650, 657, 
684 
—ness (abhdvatva) 564 
perceptiblity of? how cognized ? 
144-5, 161-2, 178, 254, 281, 340, 
351, 356, 401, 408, 437, 448, 
460, 495, 512-3, 570-1, 578-9, 
602, 623, 636, 665, 703 
posterior (dhvamsa) 28, 56, 62, 145-6, 
219, 255, 277, 281, 324, 352, 
354, 410, 477, 514, 603, 624, 
644, 650-1, 666 
prior (pragabhava) 145-6, 219, 277, 
281, 324, 354, 477, 488, 501, 
514, 532, 559-61, 603, 624, 644, 
650-1, 656, 666 
qualified (sdvacchinna) 477 
relational (samsarga) 146, 277, 281, 
477, 525, 602-3, 650-1, 666, 695 


308, 
513, 


125, 


vpadhikaranadharmavacchinnapratiyogitaka 
668 
accessory or auxiliary conditions (saha- 
karin) 55, 59, 243-4, 422, 430, 436-7, 
449, 460, 481, 528-31, 550-1, 562, 
569, 592, 611, 637, 641 
accuracy 39, 42-3, 156 
(human) action, act (kriyd, karman) (see 
also motion; activity) 25, 27, 34, 99, 
159, 227, 233, 235-6, 241, 249, 262, 
287, 301, 331, 336, 388, 392, 427, 467, 
487, 580, 585-7, 621 
desired (kamya} 427 
naimittika (occasioned or conditioned ) 
427 
nisiddha (prohibited) 300, 388, 427 
nitya (prescribed) 300, 427 
path of, see karmamarga 
activity (pravrtti) 32-3, 95, 127, 130, 215, 
217, 222-4, 235, 240-1, 250, 261, 266, 
268-70, 276, 387, 432, 467, 478, 534, 
538, 544, 547, 562, 605, 619, 666 
adequacy 39, 42-3 
Gdhéra (substratum) 283 
—tva 614 
—ddheyasambandha (resider-residence 
relation) 613, 645, 689 
adhesion (samgraha) 251, 299 
ddheya (superstratum) see ddhdra 
adhika (a way of losing an argument) 
273, 666, 676, 678 
Adhyayana 10, 484, 705 
adrsta 28, 32, 100, 130-1, 216-7, 233, 
262-3, 285, 289, 293-4, 301, 328, 331, 
344, 410, 443, 449, 491, 565-6, 
583, 609 
—dnumana see under inference 
—nihsreyasa 306 
Advaita Vedanta 11, 13, 15-6, 97-9, 160, 
166-7, 169, 186, 385, 388-9, 413, 423-4, 
428, 437, 496, 538-40, 546, 556, 
604, 606-7, 609, 611, 624, 642, 660, 
662, 667, 669, 707-8 
Advaitasiddhi 707 
Advayasiddhi 485 
Agamadambara 9, 341-2 
agency, agent (karty (tva) )23, 99-100, 103, 
106, 126, 227, 284, 286, 332-3, 435, 
437, 493, 497, 517, 566-7, 594 
direct (sdksat) 608 
and motion see motion 
aggregate 74-6, 79, 250-1, 257-8, 263-4, 
267, 313, 321-3, 339, 345, 381, 430, 
530, 543 
loose aggregate (pracaya) 78, 82-3, 218, 
280, 291, 337-8, 598, 656 
agriculture 306, 564-5 
ahamkdara (ego-sense) 281, 386 
air or wind (zayu) 73, 86-88, 90, 98, 114, 
119, 128, 142, 205, 213-6, 218-9, 
223, 231, 256, 269-70, 277-8, 280, 


718 


285, 294, 300-1, 375-6, 379, 409, 434, 
524, 571, 592, 594-5, 615-6, 622, 683, 
700 

Aitareyopanisad 702 

aitihya see tradition 

ajiva 423 

ajfiina (a way of losing an argument) 
27 


(Bhatta) Akalamka 423 
dkamksé (expectancy) 149, 151, 450, 
458, 466, 472, 476, 539, 577, 601, 665, 
680 
akdra, see akrti 
aké§a (a substance) 73, 90-1, 213, 524, 
560, 592, 700 
as locus of sound 56, 58, 90-1, 114, 
161-2, 230-1, 254, 256, 300, 324, 
374-5, 438, 449, 496, 571, 594-5, 
616, 653 
as related to all substances 70-1, 80, 
91, 284, 468-9, 489 
attributes of 217, 236, 259-60, 267, 
284, 286, 291-2, 309, 317, 324, 
374, 475, 515 
grasps its own quality 259 
identified with time, space and/or 
God 91 
has individuator 142, 280, 302 
has no locus 292 
not a causal condition 321, 488 
not commonsensical 315 
not visually perceptible except by 
yogins 294, 308 
proof of existence of 90-1, 286, 616 
qualities of 91, 114, 117, 128, 214, 
218, 228, 232, 256, 267, 278, 284, 
286, 291 
relation to other ubiquitous substan- 
ces 122, 139, 609 
akhyativdda see error, theory of 
akrti or akéra (configuration) 134, 151, 
228, 256, 313, 325-7, 379, 381, 390, 
483, 683 
Aksapada, see 
Nyayasitra 
alambana 358, 411-2, 513 
Glatacakra (‘‘wheel of fire”) 129, 233, 
262, 321, 489 
alaukika (extraordinary or uncommon) 
—hratyaksa, see perception, extra- 
ordinary 
~—pramana, see pramana, extraordinary 
silver (in error) 504, 506 
alaukikarthakhyativada, see error, theory of 
dlayavijfidna 391, 498, 549, 551 
alika (unreal) (see also empty term) 533 


Gautama, author of 


anadhyavasaya (indefinite knowledge) 170-1, 


293, 400, 442-3, 605, 619 

anadhyavasita (uncertain) (a hetvdbhdsa) 
197-8, 297, 403, 405, 420, 515, 624, 
677 

Anargharaghava 238 

anaikantika (a hetvabhasa) 196, 203, 225, 
272, 394, 403-5, 451, 471, 497, 508, 
634, 651, 665, 671 

dnanda, see bliss 

Anandabodha 667 

Anandanubhava [1, 16, 660, 667, 711 

Anandaptrna Vidydsagara 612, 663 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Anandavardhana 688 
ananubhaésana (a way of losing an argu- 
ment) 273, 676 
ananyathasiddha (essential or 
causal condition) 67, 664 
anaucitya (unsuitability) 671 
anavastha, see infinite regress 
Andhra 11, 629 
anekantavada 423, 428, 442 
anger 298, 331 
merit of lack of 299 
Aniruddha 10, 521, 612, 706 
anirvacaniya 339, 424, 612, 663 
—khyativada, see error, theory of 
Annambhatta 695 


relevant 


‘antahkarana 259-60, 293, 299, 401 


antydvayavin, see whole, final 

anubhava or anubhati (experience) 154, 
156, 167, 505, 534, 579-80, 607, 628, 
630, 644 

anumana, see inference 

anumeya, see inference 

anumiti, see inference 

anupalabdhi (nonperception) 145, 178, 
240, 262-3, 272, 296, 314-5, 419, 513, 
527, 548, 574-6, 578-9, 623, 703 
as pramdna 349-54, 448, 460, 578, 602 
universal vs. conditional 354 

anupasamharin (a hetvabhasa) 199, 713 

anuvyavasaya 160, 346, 534, 545,614, 632 

anuyogin 50 

anvaya (grammatical connection) 680 

anvayasaktinisedha 683 

anvayauyatirekin (positive-negative infe- 
rence or concomitance) 184-5, 297, 
310, 323, 402, 417, 463, 528, 530, 
560, 562, 569, 634, 665, 675 

anviksiki 20-1 

anvitabhidhanavada (a theory of meaning) 
151, 385, 419, 449-50, 514 

anyathakhyativada, see error, theory of 

anyathasiddha, see asiddha 

Apararkadeva 10, 30, 82-3, 91, 118, 121-2, 
128-9, 136, 139, 178, 206, 603-12, 709 

aparatva, see nearness; posteriority 

aparoksa (immediate, direct) 166-7, 433, 
524, 633 

aparthaka (a way of losing an argument) 
680-1 

apasabda (ungrammaticality) 680 

apasarpana (going out of the breath) 
301 


apasiddhania (a way of losing an argu- 
ment) 274, 666, 676, 681 

apavarga 28, 222, 558 

apeksabuddhi (enumerative cognition) 
120-1, 289-90, 292, 439, 584, 597-8, 
617, 655-6, 687 

apoha(vada) 138, 326-7, 372, 375, 380-1, 
418, 478, 509, 520, 532-6, 561, 708 

Apohaprakarana or -siddhi 706, 709 

application (upanaya) 181, 183, 186, 
188-9, 201, 203, 224, 245, 281, 297, 
405-6, 451-2, 470, 624, 675 

apraptakala (a way of losing an argument) 
273, 336, 676 

apratibha (a way of losing an argument) 
273, 680 

a@pta (worthy person; authority)176, 


INDEX 


223, 227, 242, 296, 311-2, 365, 370, 
378, 384, 395, 447, 456, 476, 510, 
578, 585, 587, 601, 635-6 

apirva (see also : karman)- 312, 385,517, 
562-3, 587, 684 

arambhavada 443 

ardhapattcamakéra 
form’’?) 520 

argument, theory of, see logic 

Aristotle, Aristotelian 16, 139, 183 
syllogism see under inference 

arsa(vidya) (sagelike intuition) 294, 298, 
401, 625 

artha (material prosperity) 24 

artha (‘“thing’” in a technical Nyaya- 
Vaisesika sense) 284, 386, 687 

arthakriyakaritva (efficiency) 53, 62, 156, 
456, 462, 480, 487, 492, 494-5, 528, 
534-5, 626, 630 

arthintara (a way of losing an argument) 
273, 679-80 

arthdpatti (presumption) 177-8, 185, 
227-8, 254, 271, 296, 346, 349-51, 
362, 373-4, 407-8, 421, 448, 476, 512, 
572, 577-8, 633, 636, 662, 665, 684 
drstartha]$rutartha 512 

Arthapattivarttika 11, 643 

Arthasastra 20, 24 

arthavada 383, 588 

articles in Sanskrit, absence of 247 

Arya, Usharbudh 343 

arya (ordinary locals) 242, 476 

Aryadeva 211, 221, 274, 282 

asalhdranadharma (differentium ) 46, 468-9 
foe specific’) (a hetudbhdsa) 197, 


(‘four and a_ half 


asakti (causal incflicacy) 63, 275, 277, 
279-80, 340 

asamaviyikaraya (noninherence causc) 56, 
88, 124, 131, 275, 280, 288, 337, 
438-9, 489, 561-2, 616, 644, 652-4, 
693, 695, 703 
laghvi/brhatt 56, 438, 703 

Asanga 190, 194 

asat (nonbeing) 108-9, 143, 219, 235, 
237, 240, 320, 330, 606, 662 

asatkéryavada 15, 58-9, 75 

asatkhyativada sec error, theory of 

asatpratipaksa 402 

ascertainment (nimmaya or niscaya) 170, 
206, 220, 222, 224, 241, 246, 248, 
279, 317-8, 503, 567, 599, 630, 632, 
637-9, 666 

ascetics 34, 563 

ascript 186, 201 

asiddha (“unproved’’) (a hetvébhasa) 183, 
196-9, 203-4, 215, 296, 319, 394, 
403-4, 445, 451, 497, 624, 640, 646, 
649, 665, 677, 713 
svariipa 697 
ajiiana 713 
anyathaé 319 
asraya 108, 319, 583, 649, 661 

asraya, see locus 

aSrayasiddha, see asiddha,  asraya 

asrayasritasambandha (locus-located rela- 
tion) 5G 

assertion, 186, 201, 311, 316 

astitua (isness) 48, 141-2, 283, 628 


719 


astrology 293 
astron3my 344 
Asgvaghosa 211 
Asvamedha (sacrifice) 573 
atheism (see also: God, arguments for 
existence of) 472, 553, 581 
ativyapt, (overextension of dcfinition) 
46, 311, 316, 337, 463, 470, 579, 
630, 632, 652, 670, 672 
dtmakhyéti, see error, theory of 
dtman, see self 
dimaSraya, see sclf-residence 
Atmatattvaviveka 7, 10, 54, 77, 96, 
105, 145, 526-557, 594, 596, 638, 
667, 692, 708-9, 712 
Aloka 660 
atmavidyd, see self-knowledge 
atom, atomic theory 1,45, 74, 79-86, 211 
as differentium 328 
as God’s body 101, 105, 436 
change in qualities of, see cooking 
combination of 74, 82-3, 115-6, 
267, 291, 387, 564, 573, 615 
contact between, see contact 
first combination aftcr pralaya 22, 
100, 130, 250, 285, 301, 333, 
371, 565, 574 
indivisibility of 80, 115-6, 236-7, 
267, 334, 593 
individuator of, see individuator 
manifested, s.v. 
motion of 98, 583 
ordinary imperceptibility of 76, 82-3, 
215, 267, 322, 620 
proof of existence of 432, 541-2, 592, 
615 
properties of 82-3, 88, 339, 555, 
593-4 
qualities of 31, 84-6, 118-9, 130, 
218, 263, 289, 292, 299, 331, 
432, 498, 543, 584, 593, 596-8, 
608-9, 617, 653-5 
size of 74, 79-82, 123-4, 218, 291 
yogic perception of 291, 294, 445, 
620 


Atreya 9, 142-3, 238, 337-8, 658, 697 
attachment or attraction (raga) 29, 
31-33, 47, 234, 266, 276, 298, 314, 
331, 409, 507, 553, 563, 611 
aitention or sclective interest 94, 128-9, 
226, 232, 250, 261, 286, 297-8 
auditory organ 91, 98-9, 117, 161-2, 
223, 230-1, 255, 259, 271, 277, 
286, 294, 300, 308-9, 323, 374-5, 
494, 496, 571, 595 
see also perception, auditory 
Aufrecht, Th. 629, 710 
Augustine 151 
Austin, J.-L. 691 
authority, appeal to 3, 113 
avabhasa (appearance) 390 
avaccheda(ka) (limitation, limitor) 
389, 475, 477, 614, 673 
avadhi (limit) 559-60 
in ablative 617-8 
avatara 117 
avayava, sec part; member of an argu- 
ment 
aversion 


50, 


(duesa) 29, 32-3, 89, 95, 


720 


112-4, 117, 127-8, 213, 217, 223, 
232, 234, 261, 278-9, 287-8, 294, 
298 ,301, 331, 409, 452, 486, 526, 
553, 653 

Aviddhakarna 5, 9, 103, 120, 338-40, 
697 

avidya or ajfana (ignorance, imperfect 
knowledge) 32, 98, 206, 219, 279, 
293, 331, 334, 347, 384, 388-9, 
409, 440, 442, 482, 496-7, 502, 
518, 538, 540, 569, 606-7, 618 

avijnatarthaka (a way of losing an argu- 
ment) 273, 680-1 

avinigama (nonchoice) 671 

avisamvadditua (nondeviance) 156, 347, 
630 

avita, see under hetu (h) 

avyabhicéra or avitatha (nondeviance) 
161, 164-7, 223, 241, 295, 348, 
356, 397, 444-5, 461, 509, 633, 
671, 683, 702 

avyapadesya 161-5, 223, 241, 295, 356-8, 
397, 413, 444-5, 461, 633, 694, 702 

avyapti (too narrow definition; under- 
extension) 46, 463, 579, 630, 632, 
653, 670, 672 

Ayurveda 107, 378, 555, 584 
Vrksa 437 

ayutasiddha (inseparable) 51, 70, 77, 
283, 302, 340, 379 


badha, baidhita (sublated) (a hetvabhasa) 
(see also contradiction) 198, 205, 
380, 394, 458, 502, 543, 545, 581-2, 
606-7, 621, 624-5, 640, 646, 662, 
677, 713 

Bagchi, S. 692 

baking, see cooking 

Bana 376 

Banaras 4, 9, 211, 522, 595, 613 

bare (ground) 513 

begging the question 231 

beginninglessness 25, 82, 245, 302, 
305, 331, 378, 496-7, 559-60, 567 

Being, see existence; astitua 

Belgami 22 

Bengal, Bengali 6, 10, 341, 424, 485 

Berkeley, George 1, 65 

Bhadrabahu 180 

Bhaduri, Sadananda 92, 142, 689-91 

Bhagavadgita 14, 26-7, 427, 701 

Bhagiratha 707 

bhakti 27, 30, 299 

Bhama, Bhamati 453-4 
name of a work 604 

Bhandarkar, D.R. 22, 688, 694, 

Bhandarkar, R.G. 710 


711 


Bharadvaja, see Uddyotakara 
clan 
Bharadvajavrtti 12, 338, 685 


—bhasya 338, 685 

Bharata (India) 611 

Bhartrhari 152-3, 418, 424, 426, 461 

Bhartrmitra 375 

Bhasarvajna 6, 9, 21, 29-30, 34, 50-1, 
71, 82-3, 113, 120-5, 127, 129, 131, 
136, 167-8, 171, 175, 178, 197-9, 
203, 206, 394, 396-424, 451, 454, 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


597-9, 604, 606-11, 617-8, 639, 657, 
659, 667, 672, 681, 688, 699, 712 
Bhaskara 33, 454, 556, 573, 624 
bhasya (a kind of commentary) 700 
“Bhasya-Varttika school” 341 
Bhatta (Mimamsa) (see also Kumiarila) 
90, 95, 106, 151, 157, 160, 349, 35], 
589, 607, 614, 623-4, 629, 632-3 
Bhattacharya, B. 696-7 
Bhattacharya, Dinesh Chandra 10-12, 
341, 396, 424, 453-4, 520-3, 612-3, 
643, 659-60, 663, 668-9, 682, 684, 
697-9, 704-6, 709-10, 712, 715 


Bhattacharya, Gopikamohan 640, 652, 
690 

Bhattacharya, Harisatya 79-80, 690 

Bhattacharya, Janakivallabha 343, 
394-5 

Bhattacharya, Kalidas 689 


Bhattacharya, N.C. 
Bhatta Raghava 
659, 711 
bhautika (elemental), see element 
bhava (presence or positive existence) 
140-1, 145, 176, 212-3, 215, 235, 240, 
457, 486, 589, 628, 693 
bhavana (productive activity as meaning 
of sentence) 383 
Bhavisyapuranaparisista 522 
Bhavivikta 5, 9, 96, 281, 338-9, 696 
bhedabhedavada 519 
bhedagraha 458-9, 478 
bhita, see element 
Bhuvanasundarastiri 647-8 
bhityodarsfana___ (repeated _ observation) 
202-3, 206, 446, 622, 641-2, 672 
Biardeau, Madeleine 46, 689 
Bikaner 660 
birth (janma), 222, 233, 235, 241, 306, 
491, 496 
kinds of (viviparous/oviparous) 285 
blind (ness) 230, 259 
bliss (énanda) 28-30, 33, 243, 388, 410, 
428, 554, 609 
in liberation, see liberation 
Bochenski, J.M. 182, 692 
Bodas, M.R. 613, 694, 710 
Bodhasiddhi see Nyayaparigista 208 
bodhi, see enlightenment 
bodhisattva 23, 30 
(gross) body (sarira) 88-89, 386, 432 
action of, see action; activity 
a prameya, 223 
a single whole~-see whole 
composition of 216, 229, 258, 387, 
432-3, 592 
every creator must have a 581-2 
female 33, 266 
God’s-—-see God’s body 
lack of in liberation 217, 305, 428 
-—mind, see mind-body problem 
—ness, 615 
not an additional substance 615 
not the self 215, 266, 293, 549, 567 
of transformations, see nirmdnakdya 
produced by karman 35, 100, 233, 
245, 261-3, 285, 300, 306, 330-2 
properties of 100, 223, 235 
qualities of 130, 232, 243, 258, 


694, 705, 710 
11, 397, 399, 647, 


INDEX 


261-2, 408, 636 
subtle, s.v. 
wombborn 88, 216, 285 
yogic 35, 94, 96, 98, 130, 301 
bondage 31-2, 97-8, 125-8, 242, 263, 
300, 387, 409-10, 437 
causes of 54, 130, 242, 553 
Boolean logic 192-3 
Bradleey, G.H. 53 
Brahma years 285 
brahman 28, 243, 384-5, 389-90, 428, 
482, 496, 574, 606, 640, 662, 707 
brahmana (priest), see Brahmin 
fpannaede (“world-egg”’, universe) 139, 
1 
Brahmandapurana 221 
Brahmasiddhi 453, 459, 511, 604 
Ere cana a (of Samkara) 338, 
54 
Brahmin (s) (brahmana) 6, 26, 31, 217, 
247, 299, 453, 488, 518, 522, 573-4 
breath (ing) 95, 128, 285, 287, 293, 
298, 301, 317 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 409, 661 
Buddha 16, 26, 31, 179, 211, 329-30, 


342, 378 

buddhi, 549 
in Samkhya 126, 243, 259, 348, 

386-7, 439, 467, 566 

in Jainism, 441 

Buddhism (see also: Madhyamika, 
Yogacara, Dignaga, Dharmakirti, 
Buddha, etc.) 1-2, 4-7, 13-5, 17, 


24-5, 28, 30, 32, 53-4, 57, 60-8, 73-8, 
80-1, 84-5, 115-6, 125, 137-8, 156, 
159-60, 162-4, 168, 174, 179, 183, 
186, 188-90, 194-5, 199, 201-4, 211, 
220-1, 274, 293, 304, 309-10, 313, 
316-7, 320, 326, 328, 338-40, 342-5, 
347-9, 352-3, 355-6, 358-62, 368, 
372, 375, 378, 380, 382, 388, 395-6, 
398, 413, 416-20, 422, 428, 430, 
440-1, 443, 445-7, 469, 472, 475, 
479-80, 492, 494-6, 499-500, 505-6, 
509-10, 513-4, 517, 519-22, 526-54, 
556, 558, 562, 567-9, 573-4, 589, 
595-6, 600, 606-7, 610-11, 616, 
618-20, 626, 630-1, 633-4, 641, 649, 
660, 672, 675, 680-1, 696, 706, 708-9 
butter 90, 128, 415, 490 


Calcutta 612 

Candra (Jayanta’s father) 342 

Candrakanta Tarkalamkara 557 

Candramati 5, 9, 33, 63, 80, 
114, 124, 127, 134-5, 137, 
146, 161, 184, 274-283, 695 

Candrananda 12, 212, 338, 685, 693 

Caraka 180, 211 

Carneades, 17 

Carvaka 16, 25, 102-4, 172, 179, 339, 
344, 354, 362, 372, 385-6, 558, 568, 
576, 620-1, 633, 708 

category (padartha) 6, 43, 47, 49, 69-73, 
149, 206, 208, 212, 222, 240-2, 274-5, 
283, 300, 302-3, 306-7, 344-5, 383, 
414-5, 426-7, 429, 431, 455, 589, 613, 
629, 631-2, 636, 642, 661-2, 693 


112, 
140-4, 


721 


~mistake 187, 195 
caturanuka (quadruple atom) 338 
causation 8, 15, 220, 234, 640-1, 664, 
682, 693 
absences as causa] factors, see absence 
accessory Causes, S.v. 
as additional category 55, 65 
Buddhist theory of 7, 15, 55, 60-3, 
66-7, 329-30, 419, 479-81, 528-32, 
550-1, 568-9 
causal conditions, chain of 32, 130 
causal condition par excellence—see 
karana 
causal efficacy, see fakti 
causal factors, full collection of 
see sdmagri 
causal inference—see inference, 
identity and causal 
causal relations (see also: production, 
manifestation, transformation ) 
54-68, 74, 103, 201-2, 322, 
329-32, 334, 340, 419, 436, 
480-2, 528-32, 550-1, 559-66, 
590 
causality (kéranatva) 65, 413, 566 
effective (sddhaka) 305 
established by perception 640 
God’s—see God 
inherence cause, see samavdyikdrana 
instrumental cause, see nimitiakdrana 
noninherence cause, see asamavdyi- 
kérana 
plurality ofcauses 55, 67-8, 501, 561 
(most) proximate, see karana 
relation between universals 55, 561- 
2, 590 
Samkhya theory of 14, 57-60, 332, 
501, 538 
cavil (vitanda) 208, 222, 225, 237, 318, 
406, 471, 639, 666, 677, 704 
certainty, see ascertainment; necessary 
cesta, see gesture 
Chakravarti, M. 705-6 
chala, see quibble 
Chandogya Upanisad 409, 554, 707 


by 


change, process (see also: causality; 
motion) 62, 83-6, 345 
as real 61 


charm or incantation, magic spell, as 
frustrating causation 63-4,456, 501 

chastity (brahmacarya) 217, 299 

Chatterjee, Satischandra 153-4, 688, 
692 

Chaudhuri, A.K.R. 688 

Chemparathy, George 688, 696 

children 36-7, 229, 233 

Chinese, China 5, 23, 211, 274 

Christianity 24 

(vicious) circularity (inargument) 207. 
305, 463, 477, 592, 637, 670, 712 

citrariipa—see color, variegated 

Citsukha 660-3, 667, 700-1 

class 41, 45, 134-5, 169, 192, 195, 203, 
301 

cognition, see jfdna 

coherence theory of truth, see 
coherence theory 

collection, see aggregate 

color (rapa) 86, 112, 213-4, 230, 277, 492 


truth, 


722 


of air 86, 205, 215, 379, 622 
of atoms 263 (see also: atom; 
cooking ) 


black, as darkness 110-1, 487, 589 

change of, in cooking (see also; 
cooking) 84-6, 117-8, 218, 289, 
313, 596-7, 654 

inferred from taste 463-4, 600 

of internal organ—379 

a locus-pervading quality 
280 

manifested/unmanifested 117-9, 258, 
294, 433-4, 444, 490, 620 

a natural quality of the body 233, 
262 

necessary condition of perceptibility 
87, 92, 118-9, 132, 215-6, 321, 
363, 433 

-ness—288, 693 

as noninherence cause 56, 288, 438 

perception of 288, 294 

properties of 218, 279, 288-9 

relations between 457 

shades of, as color universals 591-2 

a specific quality 113-4, 216, 256 

in universals 137, 340 

variegated (citra) 78, 118, 136, 334, 
380, 413, 432, 490, 541, 608 

when produced and destroyed 498, 
596, 654, 664 

which is not produced by cooking 
288 


114, 117, 


common sense 43-4 

common usage 331 

comparison (upaména) 154, 174-6, 186, 
222-3, 226-7, 242, 245, 252, 296, 
311, 323, 339, 364, 406-8, 421, 447, 
465, 576-7, 602, 623, 633-5, 640, 
665, 703 
role of memory in—sce memory 

compassion 106, 298, 370 

concentration see samadhi 

concept see idea 

conception (of a child) 491 

conceptualism 133, 140 

conclusion (nigamana) 181, 185-6, 188, 
192, 224, 245, 290, 297, 307, 318, 
406, 470, 624, 675 

concurrence see samb! ava 

consciousness (see also : jfdna) 28-9, 
125-7, 243, 286, 345, 376, 385-6, 
409-10, 467, 481-3, 500, 535, 609, 636 
pure witnessing see séksin 

constant conjunction 55 

(mental or conceptual) construction 
(vikalpa, kalpand) (see also : samuvrti) 
60, 62, 76, 159, 309-10, 330, 358, 
379-81, 414, 416-7, 430, 456, 462-3, 
474-5, 478-9, 505-7, 519-20, 546-7, 
600, 631 

contact (samyoga) 52, 70-2, 86, 112, 213, 
278, 321-2, 598-9, 609, 618, 
of all-pervading substances 91, 286, 
291, 324, 439, 489-90, 609, 687 
asymmetry of 50, 690 
of atoms 79-82, 84, 100-1, 114-6, 236, 
267, 289, 291, 324, 334-5, 530, 541-2, 
596-7, 654 
between internal 


external and 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN 


PHILOSOPHIES 


organs 32, 94, 241, 575 
between organs and objects see sense- 
object-contact 
causal relations of 121-2, 131, 212-3, 
218, 280, 288, 291-2, 299-301, 308, 
313, 317, 322, 337, 392, 438-9, 
596, 608 
conditions of perception of 216, 279, 
287, 594 
contrasted with inherence 302-3 
fourfold 215, 219, 279, 295, 444-5, 
507 
a generic quality 113, 287 
locus-pervading 78, 81, 114-6, 280, 
288, 291, 324, 340, 498, 507, 
530, 541-2, 618 
loose see aggregate, loose 
nonmomentary 292 
nontransitivity of 92 
resident in pairs 279 
twofold between self and internal 
organ 162, 216-7, 219, 226, 250, 
261, 276, 279, 293-4, 298, 301 
threefold 215, 294 
content see object 
contentment 298 
contingent or a posteriori 65-6 
continuant or stable object (sthira) 7, 15, 
45, 54, 57, 63-4, 73, 76, 174, 203-4, 
339, 462, 480 
contraction (ékuficana) 213, 280 
contradictory (viruddha) (see also badha) 
38-9, 41, 43, 246, 271, 320, 333, 368, 
370, 457, 463, 529-30 
a fallacy of the A 196-8, 215, 225, 246, 
296, 319, 394, 403-4, 445, 451, 
471, 624, 637, 651, 665, 677 
a type of inference, see inference 
involved in doubt 244, 248, 297, 576, 
641 
involved in ways of losing an argu- 
ment 273-4, 676 
not allowed among propoerties of p 
or s 191, 508 
properties of a single thing 118, 380, 
528-30, 541 
scriptural passages 365, 554 
self-contradictory 187, 227, 235, 237, 
264-5, 267, 316-7, 321-2, 328, 
333, 515, 540, 631, 651-2 
a kind of tarka (uyéghdia) 207, 670-1 
controversy (kathad) 208, 224, 246, 318, 
406, 424, 471, 638-9, 652, 675-6, 684 
convention (al) 153, 219, 227, 253, 370, 
377-8, 384, 406, 408, 416, 420-1, 
446, 448, 450, 472, 476, 487, 510, 
519, 531, 600-1 
knowledge of (conventional objects) 
(samurtijfiana) 309, 347, 422, 
537-8, 696, 706-7 
ordainer of, see God 
cooking (paka) 79, 84-7, 117-9, 218, 233, 
236, 251, 263, 284, 289, 313, 386, 
438-9, 452, 552, 564-5, 653-5, 700 
pilupaka 596-7, 653-4, 687 
pitharapaka 596, 687 
correlation, see ratisamdhana 
counterexample 102-3, 372 
counterfactual conditional 108, 583 


INDEX 


counterpositive (pratiyogin) see absence, 
counterpositive 
—ness (pratiyogita) 650 

Cowell, E.B. 557 

creation, creator (ofthe world) (see also 
God) 205, 219, 234, 285, 301, 332-3, 
371, 409, 435-6, 493, 527, 572-5, 
581-3, 594, 598-9, 612 

Cynics 21, 399 


Dalal, C.D. 399, 699 

Darbhanga 342, 453, 522 

darkness (famas) (see also shadow) 48, 
110-1, 217, 297, 327-8, 340, 487, 524, 
589, 613-4, 619, 661-2, 682, 701-2 

Dasapadarthasastra 5, 9, 56, 63, 114, 
274-81 

Dasgaslokimahavidyasitra 647 

Datta Dhirendra Mohan 691 

Daulatabad 11 

Daya Krishna 19, 23, 688 

deafness 286 

death 229, 233, 265, 286, 301, 307, 312, 
335-6 

debate (see also discussion) 2, 14, 18-20, 
43, 182, 207-8, 268-74, 296-7, 318, 
337, 341, 420, 436, 638, 676, 715 

debt 235, 265 

Deccan 9 

deep sleep (susupt!) 32, 235-6, 388, 467, 
540, 573, 575, 617, 636 

definition (laksana) 8, 28, 40, 46, 50, 69- 
74, 157, 241, 302, 317-8, 324, 331, 
466, 469-71, 509, 604, 627, 630, 634, 
644, 664, 689, 701 
as stage of a science 490 

delusion (moha) 33, 234, 265, 409 

demerit (adharma) 32, 112-4, 117, 129- 
31, 170, 217, 241, 262-3, 276-7, 279, 
284-8, 293-4, 298-301, 332, 335, 358, 
371, 373, 409, 427, 433, 436, 444, 
452, 467, 517-8, 634, 653, 693, 695 

denotation (see also theory of meaning; 
words, meaning of) 41, 44, 49, 177, 
253, 320, 323, 370, 519 

dependence (paratantra, 
311, 486, 559, 640 
dependent origination, see pratilya- 

samutpada 

Descartes, Rene 158, 207 

description 109-10 

desire (raga, kama) (see also attachment) 
24, 32, 89, 94-5, 99-101, 105-6, 112-4, 
117, 127-8, 169, 213, 217, 223, 232, 
237, 242-3, 250, 261, 266, 278-9, 
285, 287-8, 294, 297-8, 300-1, 312, 
409, 452, 493, 526, 585-6, 621, 629 
653 
to know (jijfiésa@) 187, 244, 456-7, 

470, 507, 675 

God’s 371-2, 378, 436, 494 

destruction or dissolution 82, 84-5, 119, 
219, 228, 231-2, 234, 245, 254-5, 
258, 260, 264, 285-6, 289-91, 324, 
329-30, 339, 422-3, 435, 479-81, 491, 
495, 498, 531-2, 542, 571, 594, 596, 
599, 654-6, 682 

deva, see god 


sapeksa) 232, 


723 


Devadattaness 135 

Devadhar, C.R. 699 

Devasthali, G.V. 694 

devil or goblin (pisaca) 300, 354, 400, 463 

devotion, see bhakti 

Dhairyarasi 9, 341, 698 

dharma (right conduct, duty) 24, 26, 34, 
518, 573 

dharma (a quality) see merit 

dharma (property) see property (dharma) 

Dharmakirti 4, 66, 76-7, 190, 194, 281, 
303-4, 338, 340, 342, 369, 397-8, 413- 
20, 422-3, 426, 556, 610, 633, 690, 
698, 702, 706, 709 

Dharmapala 274 

Dharmasastra 24, 344 

dharmin (substratum) 48, 190-1, 703 

Dharmottara 61, 194, 416, 454, 484, 495 

Dharmottarapradipa 396 

dhrti (support) 583 

Dhruva, A.B. 692, 694, 696 

dhvamsa, see absence, posterior; destruc- 


tion 

dhvani (noise) 300, 374-5 
vatkrta/prakrta 152 

dialectic, dialogue 5, 20, 179 

difference (bheda) (see also absence, 
mutual) 55, 120, 166, 247, 264, 375, 
388, 458, 540-1, 597, 606, 608, 611, 
620, 640, 663, 666, 707 

differentia (ting characteristic) 170-1, 
213, 228, 244, 261, 270, 297, 299, 302, 
305-6, 315, 328, 375, 432, 491 

Dignaga 4-5, 61, 89, 163, 179, 185, 189- 
92, 194, 200-1, 282, 303, 347, 355, 
413, 415, 418, 420, 455-7, 460, 463, 
465, 469-70, 695-6, 709 

dik, see space 

dimension, see size 

Dinakari 704 

Dipamkara (i.c., Atisa) 556, 709 

directness (sdksdttva) 631-3, 636 

Dirghatamas, see Gautama, author of 
Nyayasitra 

discussion (vada) 32, 43-4, 192, 195, 199, 
208, 222, 224-5, 237, 240-1, 246, 272, 
318, 406, 639, 666, 676 

disjunction (vibhdga) 52, 86, 91, 112-4, 
122-3, 125, 131, 212-3, 216-8, 244, 
278-80, 286-9, 291-2, 294, 300-1, 
308, 313, 317, 337, 392, 438, 468-9, 
487, 490, 501-2, 507, 594, 596, 599, 
608-10, 618, 644, 663, 687, 700 

dispositional tendency (samskdra) (see 
also : elasticity; trace; vega) 112, 114, 
128, 216, 219-20, 255, 262, 270, 
276, 278-80, 285, 287-8, 290, 299, 
301, 437, 644, 695 

distance, see farness and/or nearness 

Divakara 11, 16, 659-60, 711 

dosa (fault or defect) 32, 107, 145, 167, 
169, 219, 222-4, 227, 234, 236, 241, 
250, 263, 266, 293, 316, 331, 370, 
387-8, 467, 476, 511-2, 533, 570, 578, 
584, 601, 606, 619, 666 
in inference see fallacy of the h 

double moon, illusion of 165, 370, 440-1, 
504, 605 


doubt (samSaya) 154, 165, 170-2, 222, 


724 


224, 240-1, 244, 248, 279, 293, 348, 
356, 358, 367, 388-9, 391-2, 420, 
444, 461, 618, 627, 658, 666, 675 
about the truth of the hypothesis 187 
conditions of 171, 214, 220, 248, 315, 
319-20, 337, 358, 391-2, 442-3, 
451, 468, 515, 618, 627-8 
methodological] limits of 158, 207, 576, 
641 
——ness a proper universa] 605 
role of memory in, see memory 
a single judgment 604-5 
and skepticism 172, 412, 576 
and tarka 470, 503, 599, 622, 641-2, 
658, 669-70 
validity of 416 
varieties of 170-1, 244, 293, 315, 400, 
442, 627, 666 
doubtful A (samdigdha) (a hetvabhasa) 
196-8, 215, 258, 270, 296-7, 515 
Dramila (or Dravida) see Vatsyayana 
Dravida, L.S. 304 
dravya, see substance 
Dravyaviveka 685 
dream (svapna) 94, 129, 165, 219, 237, 
243, 264, 268, 293-4, 335, 369-70, 
414, 441, 443, 504, 545, 607, 619, 
628, 687 
dream-end cognition 294, 504 
drsta, see inference 
drstanta, see example 
drugs 35, 298 
duhkha, see pain 
Dundhiraja Sastrin 10, 222, 701 
Durveka Misra 484, 699 
Dvaita 13 
dvesa see aversion 
Dvivedin, V.P. 304, 629, 710 
Dvyasraya Mahakavya 668 
dyad (dvyanuka) 82-3, 116, 121-4, 276, 
279, 285, 291, 332, 334, 338, 433, 
439, 488, 491, 498, 584, 592-3, 608-9, 
617, 654-7 
dyotaka (elucidating expression) 660 


ear, see auditory organ 
earth (prthivi) 73, 213, 524, 591, 700 
atoms of 31, 50, 71, 88, 98, 142, 218, 
438, 489, 524, 592 
change in qualities of, see cooking 
—ness 71, 432, 614 
properties of 136, 277, 284 
qualities of 86-7, 90, 113, 117, 119, 
128-9, 214, 218, 276-80, 490, 614 
varieties of 88, 219, 223, 229-31, 258, 
284-5, 299, 432-3, 524, 592, 615 
economy (ladghava) 39-41, 43, 110, 123, 
137, 481, 542, 625, 671 
effect or product (kdérya) (see also phala; 
causality) 55, 119, 213, 215, 220, 
223-4, 228, 234-5, 240, 242, 244-5, 
262-3, 266, 284, 295, 297, 320, 331, 
388, 419, 483, 581, 666, 687, 693 
effort (yatna, prayatna) 34, 94-5, 99-101, 
105, 112-4, 117, 128, i31, 213, 216, 
223, 250, ‘261, '270- 2, 278- 9, 987-8, 
294, 298-301, 317, 329, 332, 373, 
432, 493, 625, 644, 653 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


God’s 371-2, 494 
egotism (asmita) 611 
ekadesin 6, 399, 639, 688 
ekarthasamavaya, see inherence in the same 
object 
ekatva, see unity 
elasticity (sthitisthapaka) 87, 299 
element (bhita) and elemental (bhau- 
tika) 48-9, 216, 220, 223, 229-31, 
233-4, 243, 258-9, 284, 301, 308, 32], 
329, 386, 432-3, 439, 490, 591, 615 
basic 48 
big (mahabhita) 254, 493 
—-hood 136 
empiricism 1, 43, 65-7, 195 
empty (i.e., nonreferring) 
191, 195, 530-1 
enjoyment 433, 517, 524, 636 
entailment 192-3 
enumerative cognition, see apeksabuddhi 
envy 331 
epistemology 1-2, 12, 14, 19, 43, 47, 49, 
687 
error (viparyaya) or wrong notion or 
false judgment (mithydjfidna) (see 
also super-imposition; validity; vikal- 
pa; etc.) 148, 154, 165, 268, 293, 400, 
512, 600, 618, 628, 677, 700-1 
all propositional judgments erroneous 
in Buddhism 174, 313-4, 358-9 
“every judgment is false” 237, 267-8, 
335-6 
includes tarka 599 
inferential 416, 442-3 
not an absence 265, 388-9 
perceptual 2, 165, 169, 359, 442 
hallucination 358, 503 
illusion 97, 165, 237, 268, 293, 
309, 337, 345, 348, 357-8, 365-6, 
400, 502-4, 605-7 
possibility of with respect to absences 145 
role of memory in see memor 
source of bondage 99-100, 222, 242, 
265-6, 589 
theory of (khydtivéda) 166-7, 368-70, 
391, 411-2, 458, 503, 530-1, 605-7, 
618-9, 668, 684 
in verbal testimony 227, 366, 443, 
511, 570, 601 
eternal (nitya) entity 74, 284, 324 
as causal condition 55-6, 62 
everything is 234, 263-4, 333-4, 482, 
569 
individuation of 590, 693 
inseparability in 51, 266, 292 
is experience of eternal pleasure eter - 
nal? 243-4 
—ness 594 
depends on imperceptibility 82 
of God’s characteristics 333, 372, 
630 
nothing is (see also momentariness) 
234, 263-4, 333-4 
size of 124, 291 
unreality of, see momentariness 
ethical theory 2, 13 
ethical naturalism 130 
ethics 1-2 
etymology 344 


term 182, 


INDEX 


event I, 41, 45, 54-5, 57, 363-4 
—ontology (see also momentariness ) 
1, 60-3 
evidence 20, 436 
evil, problem of 101, 106, 371-3, 481 
exaltation see, abhyudaya 
example (drstanta, udaharana) 102, 181, 
186, 222, 224, 238, 240, 270, 273 315, 
394, 406, 666, 681 
as member of inference (see also 
sapaksa; vipaksa) 181, 186, 189, 
192, 195, 199, 245, 394, 405, 
469-70, 675 
excluded middle 31, 348 
exegesis, Vedic 344 
existence (satid) (see also bhdva) 134-5, 
140-2, 144, 146, 212-4, 216, 235, 240, 
271-2, 277, 279-80, 283, 301-3, 324, 
326, 360, 437, 440, 462, 487-9, 528, 
530, 590, 595, 601, 624, 626-8, 661, 
693 
existential import 204 
expansion (prasarana) 213, 280 
experience (anubhava, anubhiti), direct 
30, 631, 660-1, 664, 666 
explication 40, 46, 61 
extension, see size 
extensionality 45, 72 
principle of 45, 137 
external world (bdhydrtha) 2, 7, 14, 18, 
47, 237, 267, 335-6, 356, 414, 440-1, 
482, 498-500, 527, 535-46, 611, 
619-20, 707 
extraordinary, see alaukika 
eye—see visual organ 


fact, atomic 48-9, 188-9 

Faddegon, Barend 18-9, 52, 80, 90, 
338, 685, 688-90, 694, 696-7, 705, 
710, 715 

faith (Sraddha) 34, 299, 565 

fallacy of the hetu (hetvaébhdsa) (see also 
under specific names of fallacies) 
182-3, 187, 191, 195-9, 207, 215, 
222, 225, 238, 246-7, 271, 274, 
295-7, 318-9, 361, 397, 403-5, 420, 
445-6, 470-2, 508-9, 531, 570, 624, 
639-40, 644, 659, 666, 676-7, 687, 
704, 713 

fallacy of the example 187, 199, 405 

fallacy of the paksa 393 

fallacy of upadhi 674 

fallibilism 67-8, 159, 195 

false (statements, knowledge, etc) see 
error 

farness (paraiva) 86, 91-2, 112-4, 123-4, 
143, 213, 216, 219, 277-80, 286-8, 
292, 294, 308, 415, 487, 489, 599, 
608-9, 612, 618, 700 

fasting 217, 299 

fear 243 

feeling 28-9, 266 

fire or light (¢ejas) 65, 73, 85-7, 89-90, 
98, 110-1, 114, 117, 119, 128, 142, 
213-4, 216-9, 223, 230, 233, 251, 
258, 262, 276-8, 280, 284-5, 289, 
299, 313, 321, 330, 340, 390-1, 433-4, 
437-8, 444, 487, 490-1, 497, 500, 


725 


524, 592-3, 596-8, 614-5 

fluidity (dravatva) 87, 91, 112, 114, 128, 
131, 214, 216, 251, 262, 276, 278-80, 
288, 294, 299, 301, 693 
natural (sdmsiddhika) 113-4, 128, 299 
accidental or instrumental (naimittika ) 

113, 128, 284, 287-8, 299, 490 

foreigner 176, 242, 476 

forest-dweller (vdnaprastha) 217 

formal (vs. material) truth 2, 65-66 
relationships in logic 194-5, 199 

Frauwallner, Erich 5, 9-10, 15, 274-5, 
282, 303, 687, 690, 692, 694-7, 700, 
712 

freedom, see liberation 
of the will 34 

Frenkian, A. M. 17, 687 

frustration—see pain 

futile rejoinder (jati) 208, 222, 225, 238, 


246, 268-72, 406, 420, 472, 640, 649, 
667-9, 704, 714 

Gadadhara Misra 713 

Ganakarikas 9, 21, 399 

Gandharvas, city of 237, 268 

Gangadhara Kaviratna Kaviraja 338, 
685 

Gangega 3, 8, 16, 169, 199, 521, 660, 
667-9, 682, 684, 708, 712-3, 715 


gas 89-90 
Gauda Brahmin 341 
Gaudabrahmananda 707 
gaurava (overcomplexity) (see also eco- 
nomy) 43, 635, 671 
Gautama Buddha—see Buddha 
Gautama, author of Nydyastitras (see 
also Nyayasitras) 3-4, 7, 9, 22, 31-3, 
36, 54, 58, 60, 68, 75, 80, 88-9, 95, 
97, 100, 125-6, 130, 134-5, 137, 143, 
151, 153, 161-2, 164-5, 167-8, 170-1, 
174-6, 178, 180, 182, 184, 196, 198, 
206, 208, 220-39, 246, 248-9, 252, 
261-3, 265, 306-7, 313-6, 318, 320, 
330, 344, 354, 363, 386-7, 395, 
406-8, 411, 421, 444, 455, 458, 605, 
625, 633, 639, 680-2, 693-5, 702, 
705, 714 
gavaya 174-6, 242, 252, 293, 297, 311, 364 
genus (sdmdnya) 134, 212-4, 219, 252 
gesture (cesté) 223, 243, 296, 386, 408, 
447, 601 
Ghate, V.S. 710 
ghost, see devil 
giving 217 
God (ifvara) 21-3, 100, 688, 701 
arguments for or against the existence 
of 2, 7-8, 36, 101-10, 331-2, 339, 
371-3, 409, 421-2, 426, 435, 481-3, 
522, 526, 555, 558-88, 594, 645 
as author of the Vedas 34-5, 107-8, 153, 
371, 377-8, 429, 447, 555-6, 569, 588, 
611 
*s body 100-1, 104-5, 108-9, 340, 371-2, 
421-2, 435-6, 493, 555, 575, 581-3 
*s control of karman 263 
as creator of the world (see also creation) 
22, 34, 100, 102, 105, 108, 234, 263, 
285, 328, 331-3, 387, 409, 422, 436, 


726 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDJAN PHILOSOPHIES 


527, 555-6, 572, 574, 582-3, 612 Hemacandra 668, 714 


creator of merit and demerit 34 
as destroyer of the world 285, 574 
general condition of all action 22 
identified with space, time, dkdsa 91, 
93, 424 
’s injunctions, see under injunction 
*s karman 100-1, 263 
as locus of valid knowledge 525, 579- 
80, 610, 630, 633, 644 
as ordainer of verbal conventions 253, 
476 
‘s play, see lila 
properties of 100-1, 105-6, 118, 125, 
168, 263, 283, 333, 409-10, 422, 
436, 439, 481, 494, 527, 555-6, 
579, 594, 641 
qualities of 91, 101, 117, 128, 263, 
690 
role in causing liberation 25, 34, 331, 
409, 427-9 
as teacher 342 
Gode, P.K. 667 
god (deva) 22, 35, 88, 265, 285, 311, 333, 
565, 579 
going (gamana) 213, 280, 283, 300-1, 525 
ale 285, 434, 490-2, 524, 615, 
Goodman, Nelson 687-9 
Gotama, see Gautama 
Govardhana Misra 663 
grahya 414 
grammar 2, 6, 13, 21, 58, 108, 149-51, 
153, 253, 311, 342-4, 353, 382-3, 
385, 413, 555 
Grammarians (Vaiyakarana) 13, 90, 
hee 163, 360, 388-90, 428, 449, 470, 
5 


greed 331 

Greek thought (see also: Aristotle; 
Plato; etc.) 17, 80, 139 

Gujarat 21] 


guna (in Samkhya) 322, 332 

guna, see quality 

gunagunibheda (difference between a 
quality and its possessor) 546-8 

Gunaratna 337, 394 

Gupta, Brahmananda 698, 700 

guru 217, 237, 300 

Gurumurti, D. 643, 687, 694, 710 


habit 129 

Hacker, Paul 20, 454, 688, 698, 705 

hallucination, see error 

happiness 299-300, 356,424 

hardness (kdfhinya) 625, 687 

hare’s horn 145, 204, 314, 327-8, 339, 
482, 488, 530-2, 574-5, 606, 629, 650 

Haridasa Nyayalamkara 557 

Harivarman 282 
Life of 211 

hatred, see aversion 

Hattori, Masaaki 134, 212, 275, 685, 690 

heart 98-9, 293, 443 

heat (see also cooking) 84-5, 87, 90, 313, 
432-4, 

heaven 301, 311, 427, 510, 587-8, 644 

hedonism 127 

hell 301, 373 


hetu (h) or linga (see also inference) 181, 


191-9, 295, 317, 339, 393, 402, 445, 
469, 475, 634 
in the application, see 
drsta 402 
effective (prayojaka) 576, 622 
fallacies of the, see fallacies of the hetu 
in pervasion, see pervasion 
in the reason, sce hetu (reason) 
samanyatodrsta 402 
threefold mark of—see trairiipya 
vitalavita 275, 317, 470 
hetu (reason) 102, 181, 186, 188, 195, 
197, 224-5, 245, 264, 273, 319, 602, 
614, 622, 639-40, 649, 675 
Hetubinduprakarana 706 
Hetukhandana 11, 643 
hetvabhasa (a way of losing an argument) 
274, 666, 676 
hetvabhdasa, sec fallacy of the hetu 
hetvantara (away oflosing an argument) 
273, 681 
Hicks, G. Dawes 691 
Hinduism, Hindu 2, 6, 16, 18, 23-7 
Hoju 695 
holism 46 
Hsuan-tsang or Hsuan-chang 274, 695 
Hume, David 7, 65, 202 
hypothesis, see pratijid 


pardmarsa 


ice 299, 524 

idea 81, 281, 287, 398 
distinct (see also vivid) 335 

idealism (in epistemology and meta- 
physics) 1-2, 19, 121, 138, 166, 189, 
194, 335-6, 345, 499, 706 

identity or nondifference  (tdddtmya, 
abheda) 51, 54, 120-1, 124-5, 133, 166, 
201-2, 271, 290, 303, 359, 361-2, 
375, 388, 398, 415, 453, 458, 463, 
483, 509, 519-20, 532, 536, 549, 597, 
600, 608, 610, 624, 634, 663, 666, 
671, 683 
of indiscernibles 120 
inference by, see inference 

ignorance, see avidyd 

illusion, see error 

imagination (tha) 237, 243, 
600, 605 

immorality 36, 243 

impact 216, 598 

imperceptible or unseen objects 176-7, 
214, 227, 236, 251, 253 

impetus—see vega 

imposed property, see upddhi 

inpulsion (nodana) 216, 276, 280, 301 

inaction, (see also nivrtti ) 25-6, 243, 268-70 

independence (svdtanirya) 311, 337, 558 

Indian Thought 304 

individual, see vpakti 

individuator (visesa, antyavisesa) 49, 51, 
72, 133-4, 140, 142-3, 212, 214, 
277-280, 284, 294-5 301-2, 327, 
445, 504-5 508, 523-5, 541, 590 
626-8, 637, 645, 666, 693, 
visesa as individuating property 297, 
448, 
—ness 136 


400, 442, 


INDEX 


indriya, see sense-organ 
induction 54, 183 
inertia—see vega 
inexpressibility (see also anirvacaniya) 537 
inference (anumdna) 5, 66, 102, 154, 163, 
174, 179-208, 222, 226, 252, 294-6, 
307, 631, 633, 665, 687, 695 
a with Aristotelian syllosim 
18 
causal factors of 279, 619, 669 
essential cause of, see pardmarsa 
compared with Mill’s canons 183 
and comparison, see comparison 
from contradiction 182, 219, 687 
depends on perception 183-4, 223, 
242, 310, 398, 417, 461 
drstal/adrsta]samanyatodrsia 184, 275-6, 
295-6, 402, 610 
by elimination 470, 693 
error in, see error 
function of in satkaryavada 333-4 
grasps past, future objects 242, 363-4 
mahavidya—s.v. 
members of, see 
inference 
of two kinds, by identity and causal 
182, 219, 255, 362, 463-4, 509-10, 
561-2, 600, 610, 634 
for oneself/for others, see pardrtha- 
numdana 
only-positive (kevaldnvayin)—s.v. 
only-negative (kevalavyatirekin)—s.v. 
positive-negative (anvayavyatirekin ) 
-~S$.V. 
pirvavat] Sesavat simanyatodrsta 184, 223, 
242, 275, 295, 310, 362-3, 475 
role of memory in, see memory 
terms in, see paksa, hetu, sddhya, 
example 
validity of (see also validity) 158, 
160, 183, 295, 361-3, 402, 416-7, 
456, 463, 545, 607, 644 
and verbal testimony 176-7, 219, 227, 
253, 296, 323, 365, 407-8, 444, 
456, 465-6, 475-6, 510, 577-8, 
600-1, 622-3, 636, 702-3 
vitafavita, see hetu (h) 
infinite regress (anavastha) 51, 53, 136, 
143, 207, 226, 228, 237, 249, 267, 
311, 349, 367, 371, 414, 416, 432, 
435, 440, 455-6, 460, 473, 487, 511, 
534, 537, 540, 544-5, 576, 580, 590, 
593, 604, 607, 637-8, 641, 663, 670, 
691 
infinity 625 
Ingalls, Daniel H.H. 19, 21, 34, 135, 
186, 239, 687-92, 694, 699, 705 
inherence (samavaya) 46, 49-52, 70, 72, 
75, 77, 162, 212-3, 266, 280, 283, 
302, 326, 340, 381, 431-2, 459-60, 
523-5, 626-8 
—cause, see samavdyikarana 
how known? 51-2, 76, 294-5, 340, 
351, 401, 444, 453, 460,609, 627 
how related to its relata51, 53, 136, 
303, 410, 489 
in what is conjoined (samyuktasama- 
vaya) 162, 307 
in what inheres in what is conjoined 


members of an 


727 


162 


(samyuktasamavetasamavaya ) 
307-8, 459 
in what inheres in the sense-organ 
(samavetasamavaya) 162, 308 
in the same object (ekdrthasamavaya) 
142, 200 
its properties 50-1, 139, 213, 280, 284, 
302-3, 311, 489 
—ness 51, 136, 541, 590-1 
relating eternal substances, see eter- 
nal entity 
injunction (vidhi, codand) 138, 253, 371, 
382, 388, 486, 684 (see also act) 
negative (nisedha) 383 
of God 34, 108, 283, 585-6 
Vedic 31, 33-4, 107, 217, 227, 298, 
429, 585-6, 588 
insects 35, 88, 285 
insight (prajfia) 168 
intensionality 44-5, 79, 135, 137 
intensity of sound 571-2 
intertionality 79, 356, 510 
interdependence 305 
intermediateness 123 
internal organ (manas) 45, 73, 93-5, 213, 
214, 497, 616, 666, 700 
absence of contact with sense organs 
is yoga 32, 94, 216-7 
contact with self as condition for 
perception 161-2, 219, 226, 241, 
249-50, 279, 294, 301, 441, 504 
life 261, 330 
inference 276, 279 
error 293 
disjunction from self leads to libera- 
tion 28, 32, 217 
functions to control attention 93-4, 
223, 231, 250 
not the self 229, 232, 266, 553 
as organ of knowledge 89, 93, 96, 
126, 128, 137, 168-9, 202, 204, 
206, 242-3, 294-5, 355, 357, 360, 
363, 387, 398, 411, 434, 616 
perception, see mdnasapratyaksa 
properties, other functions of 94-5, 
98-9, 136, 142, 216, 219, 232-3, 
243, 250, 275-7, 287, 293, 297, 300, 
302, 309, 329-30, 358, 386, 443, 
518, 524, 575, 616-7, 645, 695 
qualities of 94-5, 98, 123-4, 218, 232-3, 
260, 278-9, 379, 488, 524-5, 553, 
616, 683 
role in memory, see memory 
transmigration of 94, 301 
yogic powers over 35, 94, 96, 98, 130, 
168, 260, 294-5, 301, 444-5, 507 
intoxication 129, 299 
intuition (pratibha) 3,35, 94, 168, 243, 
261, 298, 384, 452 
yogic 130 
invariable concomitance see pervasion 
invocation, see mazigala 
irrelevant antecedent, see ananyathasiddha 
Islam 24 
igvara see God 
Isvarakrsna 23, 58, 361, 501, 611, 702 
Igvarasidhanadiisana 484, 706 
Isvarasiddhi 613 
Igvaravada 698-9 


728 


Iyengar, H.R. Rangasvami 696 


Jacobi, Hermann 21, 688, 694 

Jagadguru 12, 684-5 

Jagadisa 700 

Jagannatha 522 

Jaimini 310, 360, 463, 554 

Jain, Mahendra Kumar 697 

Jaina, Jain 13, 16, 23-4, 125, 180, 203, 
337, 339-40, 344, 374, 396,423, 428, 
441-2, 611, 636, 668, 675 
—Bhandar 410, 659 
Digambara 558 

Jaisalmer 521, 612, 668 

jalpa, see sophistry 

Jambuvijaya Muni 212, 693 

Jamuna river 303 

Japan, Japanese 23 

jati see universal property; futile rejoinder 
as caste or class 299, 572-3 

jatibadhaka (impediment to universal- 
hood), see universal 

jatisamkara (crossconnection) 65, 
300, 590-2, 608, 670 

jaundice, illusion produced by 165, 547-8 

Jayanta Bhatta 6, 9, 13, 31, 35, 51, 57, 
61, 63-4, 87, 92, 96, 103-7, 138, 146, 
150, 152, 159-60, 163-4, 168-9, 172-3, 
175, 177, 185, 191. 195, 198, 202, 
281,338, 340-97, 445, 454, 521, 679, 
681, 697-8, 707 

Jayarama Bhattacarya 714 

Jayasimha (of Kashmir) 603 

jealousy 298, 331 

Jetly, J.S. 10-1, 521, 612, 668, 706, 709-10, 
712 


Jha, Durgadhara 282 
Jha, Ganganatha 154, 222, 239-40, 283, 
303-4, 394, 521, 588, 663, 688, 690, 
692, 694, 696, 698-9, 704, 706, 711 
Jhalakikar, Bhimacarya 693 
Jinendrabuddhi 338 
jiva 389, 661 
in Jainism 423 
jivanmukti, see liberation 
jitina (judgment, consciousness, aware- 
ness, “knowledge’’) 112, 147-8, 213, 
389, 441, 542-3, 618, 641, 644, 700 
cannot be simultaneous in one locus 
261, 290 
cessation of required for liberation 305 
composite (samiha) 174, 290 
discursive 30 
evaluative 355 
false see error, avidya 
formless see nirakara 
God’s 101, 117, 125, 263, 641 
how known 126, 287, 294, 497-8, 
544-5. See also anuvyavasdya, svapra- 
kasa, jfdtata 
how produced 219-20, 279, .283, 288, 
290, 294 
imperfect see avidya 
located in self 95, 99, 117, 125, 147, 
223, 229, 232-3, 243, 260-2, 278, 
286-7, 330, 409-10, 436, 441, 467, 
595, 616, 661 
locus-pervading ? 


288 


136, 


114, 117, 126-7, 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


a motion? 346 

negative see absence, anupalabdhi 

not an act 96, 580 

as a path 27, 33 

perfect see vidya 

properties of 125-6, 148, 223, 231-3, 
240, 259-61, 279, 288-91, 329, 439, 
452, 467, 497, 527, 538, 542, 551, 
616, 666 

propositional/nonpropositional see 
nirvikalpaka 

relation with its content (see also 
object (visaya)) 441, 450 

self-knowledge s.v. 

a specific quality 113, 287 

supernormal 94 

structure of 148-9 

$ibdabodha s.v. 

tattvgjitana s.v. 

and traces 173, 289-90, 299, 441, 450 

theory of see epistemology 

true or valid see truth; validity; vidya 

varieties of (see also perception, 
memory, pramd, doubt, etc.) 153-4 
276, 293, 618, 641, 666 

vivid or distinct 129, 533, 553 

yogic, see yogin 

jiténakanda of the Veda 388 
jidnakarmasamuccaya 33-4, 388, 518, 589, 
683 


jitanalaksanapratyaksa_ 168-9 

Jhanasrimitra 4, 396, 523, 698-9, 706-9 

jiidtata (knownness ) 346, 498, 580, 613-4, 
628-9, 632-3, 665 

jiteyatva, see knowability 


Kachu Kando Shoshujikkugiron 695 

Kadambari 429 

kaivalya 30 

Kajiyama, Yuichi 203, 692 

kalatita (‘‘mistimed”) (a hetvabhdsa) 
196-8, 225, 247, 403, 405, 445, 451, 
47\-2, 496, 508, 639-40, 665 

Kalidasa 376 

Kalipada Tarkacarya 696 

kama, see desire 

Kamalasila 4-5, 339, 696, 698, 706-7 

Kamasitra 24 

Kanabhuj, see Kanada 

Kanada 3-4, 9, 22, 28, 32-3, 35, 50-1, 
54-5, 60, 79, 82, 87-9, 92, 94-5, 97, 
99-100, 110-2, 119, 121, 123-5, 130-2, 
134, 137, 140-3, 145-6, 153, 168, 170, 
176, 180, 182, 184, 196-8, 211-20, 
238, 274, 276, 282-3, 295, 303, 337, 
362, 376, 425-30, 433-4, 442, 445, 
447-8, 608, 625, 633, 694, 700, 702-3 

Kanadasitranibandha 11, 658 

Kane, P.V. 342, 698, 709 

Kaniska 211 

Kannada language 613 

Kant, Immanuel 7, 65-6, 165, 202 

Kapila 554, 574 

karaka (case-relation) 249 

karana (causal condition par excellence) 
310, 345, 413, 664 

karanatva see causation, causality 

karman (motion) see motion 


INDEX 


karman (action, as source of bondage) 2, 
18-9, 25-6, 28-9, 32, 127, 307, 371, 
373, 549-50 
as advsta, see adrsta 
caused by attachment 47 
as cause of judgment 410 
concentration caused by good 237 
controlled by God, see God 
God’s, see God 
knowledge of workings of on the part 

of siddhas 298 
—méirga (karman as path) (see also 
jitanakarmasamuccaya) 27, 33, 388, 
427 
operative in creation of world 333 
at pralaya 573 
productive of body see body 
properties of 259, 312 
rendered ineffective by knowledge 31 
and traces 60 
transfer of 97, 232, 235, 265, 287, 566 

karmakanda (of Veda) 388 

Karnagomin 339, 705 

Karnata (country) 9, 396, 613 

karya, see effect 

kaéryasambandhita 
459 

Kashmir 5-6, 9-11, 341, 399, 426, 484-5, 
603, 629, 702 

Kasyapa, see Kanada 

Katandi, see Vaisesikasitrakatandi’ 

Kathiawar 9, 221 

Kaundinya 154 

Kautilya 20, 24 

Kaviraja, Gangadhara Kaviratna, see 
Gangadhara Kaviratna Kaviraja 

Kaviraj, Gopinath 9-10, 18-9, 22, 168, 
394-5, 424, 485, 629, 652, 659, 682, 
688, 692, 698-9, 709-12, 715 

Kedaregvara 22 

Kedarnath 702 

Keith, A.B. 696 

KeSava Misra 8, 11, 67, 142, 663-7, 711 

kevaldnvayin (only-positive) inference 8, 
184-5, 199, 310, 393, 402-3, 408, 420, 
509, 634, 648-51, 665, 672, 674-5, 681 

kevalavyatirekin (only-negative) inference 
184-5, 199, 310, 393, 402-3, 408, 420, 
432, 591, 623, 634, 644, 665, 675 

Khandanakhandakhadya 15-6, 523, 612, 
659, 663, 669, 712 

khyativada, see error 

killing 217, 257, 328, 634 

kinaesthetic sensations 89, 93 (see also 
perception, kinaesthetic 

Kiranavali 7, 10, 101, 105, 135-6, 338, 
425, 454, 589-603, 608, 619, 629, 652, 
660, 682, 684, 701-4, 713 

Kiranavalidarpana 11 

Kiranavalivilasa 660 

klesa 33, 235-6, 409, 611 

knowability (jaepyatva) 48, 141-2, 150, 
185, 199, 281, 283, 424, 628-9, 
648-51, 661 

knower see self; pramdtr 

knowledge, see jfadna; prama; vidya 

knownness, see jfdtata 

Koktasu 695 

judgment, see jfdna 


(effective connection ) 


729 


Konkan 10, 603 

krama (sequence) 562 

Krishnamacharya, V. 669 

Krsna 14, 117 

Krishna Rao 696 

kriyé, see. motion 

Ksanabhangadhyaya 698, 706-7 

Ksatriya 299 

K’uei-chi 695 

Kularka (Pandita) 646-7, 652 

Kumarila 14, 157, 282, 346, 360, 363, 
373, 375-6, 379, 389, 414, 426, 450, 
515-7, 520, 637, 683, 698, 702 

Kunjunni Raja, K. 151-2, 691-2 

Kuppuswami Sastri, S. 238, 289, 338, 
694, 696-7 

kurvadriipa 62-3, 528-9, 550 


laghava see economy 

laksana see definition 

laksané (secondary meaning) 602 

Laksanamala (of Sivaditya) 11, 426, 
525, 643 

Laksanamala (of Udayana) 7, 10, 525-6, 
701, 712 

Laksanavali 7, 10, 113, 523-5, 701 

Laksmitilakagani 668 

Lakulisa 21-2 

language 102, 148, 500 
argument for God’s existence from 


107-8 
ordinary 39, 42, 48, 61, 114-5, 121, 
174-5, 177, 248 


philosophy of 2 
laziness (dlasya) 625 
liberation (moksa, mukti) 24-30, 38, 94, 
117, 125, 217-8, 223-4, 233, 235-6, 
243, 304-7, 388, 427-8, 455, 485-6, 
556-7, 589, 624, 644, 660, 666, 683 
arguments for 2, 30-1, 44, 128, 235, 
486 
blissful ? 28-30, 125, 243-4, 314, 388, 
409-10, 424, 428, 455, 485-6, 518, 
687-8, 701 
caused by merit 299-300, 486 
degree of commitment to 18-20, 23-4, 


574 
ease of gaining used as argument 
against opponents 314, 328-9 


for all (sarvamukti)30, 50, 99, 589, 624 

God’s role in causing see God 

higher/lower 307 

impossibility of, used as philosophical 
argument 97, 126, 245, 262-3, 
265, 312, 314, 331-2, 371, 387-8, 
423, 486, 518, 553-4, 566-7 

is God liberated ? 101 

path to (see also karma as path; jitdna 
as path; jfdnakarmasamuccaya 3 yoga; 
devotion) 18-9, 23, 26-7, 29, 31-4, 
38 

philosophy as preparation for 43, 47, 
54, 265-6, 306-7, 427, 485, 526, 
556, 629, 636, 694 

possibility of backsliding from 237, 
262-3, 410 

while living (jivanmukti) 26, 29-30, 
307, 518 


730 


whose? or of what? 98, 262, 314 
living things 240, 260-1 
light see fire 
lila 371 ; 
Lilavati (of Srivatsa) 427, 700 
limit see avadhi 
limitor see avacchedaka 
lin (precative suffix) 585-7 
linga see hetu (h) 
—pardmarsa, see pardmarsa 
linguistics see grammar 
linguistic mistake 531 
Lion definition 682 
locus (asraya, adhikarana) 49-51, 61, 69, 
139, 144, 190, 197, 223, 229, 232, 
235-7, 243, 251, 255, 284, 301-2, 
305, 310-1, 524, 645, 661 
of absence 351-2, 460, 623 
common locusness (sdmdnddhiharanya) 
200, 312 
—pervading 78, 81, 114-8, 126-9, 
288, 291, 324, 326, 334-5, 402, 530, 
541-2, 596-7, 654 
logic (see also inference) 1-2, 8, 14-6, 
18-21, 41, 43-4, 102, 179-208, 224, 
237, 343, 708 
formal 182-3 
form of 185-6 
logical connective 44 
Lokayata, see materialist 
love 331, 701 
of mankind 299 
lying 500 


Madhava 30 

Madhustidana Sarasvati 707 

Madhva 13 

Madhyamika Buddhism 166-7, 179, 220, 
391, 411, 441, 706-7 

magnetism 36, 130, 301, 322 

Mahabharata 14, 107, 377, 584 

Mahabhasya 239, 385 

mahabhita see element 

Mahadeva 211 

mahat, see size 

mahdvakya 611 

Mahavibhasa 211 

mahavidya 426, 525, 642-3, 645-52, 681-2, 
701 

Mahavidyavidambana 8, 11, 646-52 

Mahavira 16, 179 

Mahavrata 607 

Mahayana Buddhism (see also: Yoga- 
cara; Madhyamika) 23 

MaheSvara 680 
sect 22 

Maithili, see Mithila 

Majjhimanikaya 179 

‘major premiss’”’ 102-3, 199-201, 583 

malice 331 

Mallavadin 238, 282, 338 

Mallinatha 525, 660 

Manamanohara 11, 660-3 

manana (ratiocination) 554, 556, 558 

manas, see internal organ 

mdnasapratyaksa (mental perception) 63, 
398, 417, 443, 498, 607, 610, 665 

Manasollasa 399 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Mandana Misra 15, 33, 453, 459, 484, 
486, 511, 517, 604, 607, 611 
mangala (invocation) 428-9, 485, 558, 
604, 682 
manifestation 58, 254-5, 261, 331, 334, 
387, 687 
of sound 373-5, 406-7 
Manikantha Misra 8, 11, 198, 206-7, 
668-82, 684, 712 
Manu, Laws of (Manavadharmasastra 
or Manusamhita) 24, 26, 179, 556, 638, 
663 
map 39-40, 48 
Maruts 285 
Masson-Oursel, P. 694, 696, 710-1 
malanujha (a way of losing an aruginent) 
273, 671 
material 
cause, see upddanakdrana 
individual 113 
substance, see substance, material 
materialism (see also Carvaka) 16, 261, 
416, 556 
materiality (mdrtatva) 136, 228 
mathematics, see number 
Mathura 21 
Mathuranatha 667 
Maticandra, sce Candramati 
Matilal, Bimal Krishna 135, 195, 400, 
410, 455, 589, 689-92, 705 
maya 98, 237, 388, 566, 569, 574, 707 
meaning (see also; denotation; sentence; 
word; etc.) 
primary (abhidha, vacya) 151, 247, 418 
secondary (laksand; gamya) 151, 247, 
362, 418, 465 
theory of 2-3, 13, 109-10, 124, 134, 
138, 145, 147-53, 162-3, 176-7, 
228, 241, 256, 324-7, 358, 360, 
365, 373, 475-6, 510, 516-7, 539-40 
Medhatithi Gautama 220 
medicine 107, 180, 227, 253, 456 
meditation 32, 427, 554, 556-8 
Meinong 109 
members of an argument (avayava) 
(see also under pratijfid; hetu as 
member; etc.) 180-1, 185-9, 222, 
224, 240, 244-5, 273, 393-4, 402, 
405, 420, 450-1, 514, 603, 624, 
666, 675, 678 
memory (smrti) 154, 172-3, 258, 294, 
297-8, 312-3, 666 
argument from to prove existence of 
self 95-6, 229, 233, 243, 258, 286, 
312, 386, 409, 552-3, 567, 616 
causes of 233, 298, 628 
collective 152 
content of 173, 351-2, 452, 513 
dream a kind of ? 94 
in dream-end cognition, see dream- 
end cognition 
of experiences in previous lives 36-7, 
95, 461 
failure of 513 
of judgments 391 
may produce pleasure or pain 298 
nonsimultaneity of 232, 261 
not a pramdna 172-3, 347, 400, 457, 
515-6, 607, 624-5 


INDEX 


produced by traces 61, 130, 173, 219, 
297, 299, 553, 632 
reJation to internal organ 94, 173, 
219, 243, 297 
role in 
doubt 171, 214, 628 
propositional judgment 164-5, 
359-60, 368, 407, 457-8, 462, 506 
recognition 173-4, 496 
comparison 175, 407, 448, 634 
inference183,242, 276, 295,310,513 
verbal judginent 300, 357, 360, 450, 
457-8, 461, 476, 601 
leading to evaluative judgment 355, 


459 

false judgment 167, 359-60, 
412, 458-9, 503, 506, 605 
368-70, 

“truth” of 156-7, 172-3, 607, 625, 
631-2, 666 


mental effort (krti) 585-6 

mention 186 
and use, see use and mention 

merit (dharma) 25, 31, 33-5, 101, 112-4, 
117, 129-31, 217, 220, 241, 243-4, 
262-3, 276, 279, 283-8, 294-5, 
298-301, 332-3, 335, 358, 360, 371, 
373, 401, 409, 427, 429, 433, 436, 
444, 452, 467, 486, 488, 507, 517, 
566, 569, 653, 693, 695 

metaphor (see also meaning, secondary ) 


metaphysics 1, 12, 14, 179 

method, philosophical method 
19 

mibratava 703 

milk and curd 58-9, 232, 329 

Mill, John Stuart 183 
*s canons, see inference 

(Parva) Mimamsa (see also Bhatta; 
Prabhakara; Kumiarila; etc.) 2, 
13-4, 23-4, 52, 55, 58, 63-4, 92, 96, 
101, 107-8, 153, 156, 159, 163, 172, 
177-8, 183-4, 186, 191, 324, 342, 
344-6, 350-2, 360, 362-7, 370-8, 
380-2, 385-6, 391, 403, 421, 443, 
447-8, 453, 476, 501, 511, 556, 558, 
578, 581, 584-6, 601-2, 619, 622, 
635, 638, 647, 660, 665, 675, 680, 
693, 697 

Mimamsasitra 310, 360 

Mimamsasitrabhasya 485 

mind (see also internal organ) 2, 27, 97, 
428 
—body problem 96-7 
—dependence 52 

minimal perceptibilium, see tru{? 

mirage 165, 237, 241, 244, 268, 309, 
348, 358 

mirror 161, 230, 312 

misconception, see error, 

Mishra, Umesh 13, 99, 339-40, 394, 453, 
484, 660, 663, 687-8, 690-1, 697-8 
704-6, 710-2 

Mithila 4, 9-12, 221, 453, 484-5, 521-2, 
613, 629, 660, 663, 667-9, 682 
Maithili script 612 

mleccha, see foreigner 

modification (vikdra) 246 


1-3, 


Mohanty, Jitendranath 79, 148, 613, 
690-2 

moment (ksana) 50, 123-4, 290, 308, 
312, 328, 375, 439, 464, 479, 489. 
612-4, 644, 654, 687 

momentary, transitory 125, 129, 131, 


233, 261, 292, 300, 303, 333, 403 
momentariness (ksapiketddc). Eud- 
dhist theory of 7, 15, 25, 60-3, 
73, 84, 174, 203, 260, 321, 330, 
339, 345, 353, 372, 386, 391, 397, 
409, 422, 426, 436-7, 479-80, 
494-6, 505, 519-20, 527-35, 549, 
567-9, 595-6, 599, 611, 616, 641, 
701, 708 
of motion, see motion 
monism 98, 375, 390, 437, 554 
monctheism 19, 22-3 
Mookerjee, Satkari 220, 342, 694, 697-8 
Moore, G.E. 691 
morals, moral values (see also ethics; 
ethical theory) 18-9, 21, 176 
responsibility 99, 257 
motion (krijya, karman) (see also acticn) 
49, 51, 60, 63, 71-3, 77, 98, 129, 
131-2, 140-1, 212-3, 216-7, 261, 280, 
283, 301, 337, 376, 431, 452, 459, 
474, 489, 501-2, 523-5, 541, 666, 693 
accounted aquality 113, 131, 414-5, 
609 
and agency 99, 104 
of atoms after pralaya, see atom 
as cause 131-2, 212, 218, 220, 280, 
291-2, 300, 313, 324, 337, 439, 
468-9, 599, 609 
causes of 55, 89, 121, 129, 131, 212, 216, 
263, 276-7, 280, 289, 301, 322, 
332, 337, 371, 409, 468, 583, 609, 


653 
how known ? 132, 216, 219, 294-5, 
356, 363, 433, 444, 507, 609 


an individual 327 
of internal organ, see internal organ 
judgment a? see jiana 
locus-pervading 280 
momentary ? 125, 131, 294, 364, 375, 
438, 517, 644, 687 
of shadows 246-7 
of the sun, see time; space 
varieties of 132, 136, 141, 213, 277, 
280, 283, 300-1, 525, 625-6, 643 

and vega 129, 415, 489 

motive, see desire 

Muktapida 342 

Murari Misra 238 

miirta— see substance, materal 

Murti, T.R.V. 43, 688 

mutual dependence (anyonydSraya) 207, 
264-5, 351-2, 487, 496, 637, 670, 
672, 712 

Mysore 22, 396 

mysticism, mystic 17, 27 


Nagarjuna 4, 20, 179, 211, 220-1 
Nagatomi, Masatoshi 690 
Naisadhacarita 688 

Nakamura, Hajime 695 

name, naming 41, 109, 241, 281, 311, 


732 


339, 462-3, 598, 633 

nameability (abhidheyatva) 48, 141-2, 
150, 185, 199, 281, 283, 523, 628 

Nanyadeva 613 

Narahari, H.G. 454, 698, 705 

Narasimha 10, 484, 705 

Narayana Sarvajiia 11, 663, 711 

natural (samsiddhika) quality 233, 236 

Navya-Nyaya 3, 6, 8, 13,16, 28, 42-4, 
50, 54, 57, 67, 82, 142, 145, 159, 168, 
201, 206, 521, 613, 689-90, 692 

Nayacakra 238 

Nayacintamani 12, 668, 674 

Nayanaprasadini 661, 701 

nearness (aparatva) 86, 91-2, 112-4, 
123-4, 213, 216, 219, 277-80, 286-8, 
292, 294, 322, 415, 476, 487, 489, 
599, 608-9, 612, 618, 700 

necessary condition (see also ananyatha- 
siddha) 55-6, 664 

necessary (as opposed to contingent) 

relation (niyama, niyaia) 65-6, 316, 341, 
409, 464, 559-61 

necessary truth or indubitability 158, 
160, 165 

negative judgment 144, 178, 351-3 

Neoplatonism 17 

Nepal 453 

Newari script 612 

Nibandhoddyota 11, 659-60 

nididhyadsana, see meditation 

nigraha (rebuke) 666 

nihilism 706-7, 709 

nihSreyasa (perfection) 28, 222, 283, 306, 
408 


nimittakarana (instrumental cause) 56-7 
234, 284, 286, 288, 331, 429, 438, 
489, 561-2, 565, 630, 656, 671, 693 

- sadhéranalasadharana 57, 611 

nirakara 390, 462, 483, 539, 552-3, 580, 
666 

niralambana 411, 414, 606 

niranuyojyanuyoga (a way of losing an 
argument) 274, 676, 681 

nirarthaka (a way of losing an argument) 
273 

nirmanakdya (body of transformation) 

nirnaya, see ascertainment 

nirvana 28 

nirvikalpakajfiana or—pratyaksa (nonpro- 
positional judgment or perception) 
137, 143, 148-50, 156, 162-5, 175, 
357-60, 380, 397, 401, 407, 413, 430, 
432, 444, 453, 461, 505-7, 512-3, 
533-4, 543, 548-9, 600, 620, 630, 
633, 664-5, 683 

niScaya, see ascertainment, 

nivrtti (cessation of activity) 33, 215, 261, 
276 


niyata,see necessary relation 

nyati (natural law) 481 

nominalism 133, 137-8, 164 

nonattachment (vairégya) 27, 29, 33, 300, 
467 

noncollected (avyiha) 236 

nondifference, see identity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN 


PHILOSOPHIES 


nonelemental 242, 309, 329 
noneternal, see eternal thing 
nonexistence, see asat 
nonlocuspervading (avpapyavitti, ekadesa- 
atti) 284, 288, 324, 340, 530, 618 
nonobstructive (avistambha) 236 
nonviolence (ahimsd) 299 
noun, see word 
Nrsimhayajvan 713 
number (samkhyd) 86, 112-3, 119-21, 
213, 278, 289-90, 314, 415, 487, 490, 
498-9, 597, 608-9, 617, 637, 655, 700 
as cause 82-3, 288-90, 584, 598, 608-9 
causes of 120, 213, 288, 597, 617, 
655-6, 687 
dependent on cognition 120, 124, 584 
eternal/noneternal 439 
generic 113, 287 
how known 216, 279, 287, 289-90, 
294, 356, 594, 597-8 
locus-pervading 114, 280, 288 
mathematical notions of 1, 45, 119 
parardha, s.v. 
resides in tuples 52, 119-20, 279, 287, 
289 
samkhydvigesa 584, 588 
of things in the world 235, 240, 265, 
305 
two 119-21, 287-90, 346, 370, 439, 
499, 596-8, 655, 687 
one— see unity : 
niitana-Vaigesika (new school of Vaise- 
sika) 668 
nydya (the science of reasoning) 179, 
240-1, 344 
as argument 208, 448, 457, 558, 
624, 675 
as “preliminaries of argument”? 224 
Nyaya system 
distinct from Vaisesika 3, 12-13 
nydyabhasa 183 
Nyayabhaskara 12, 685 
Nyayabhasya 4-5, 9, 239-74, 281, 303, 
339, 396, 425-6, 429, 442, 484-5, 514, 
517, 521, 526, 588, 668, 702-3 
Nyayabhasyatika (of Aviddhakarna) 9, 
339 


(of Bhavivikta) 9, 281 

Nyayabhasyatika (of Trilocana) 9, 396 

Nyayabhasyatika (of Visvaripa) 9, 341 

Nyayabhisana 6, 9, 33, 113, 118, 121, 
399-400, 410-25, 454, 604, 608-9, 
680, 713 

Nyayabhiisanaprakasa 713 

Nyayabindu 194, 419, 698 

Nyayacintamani—see Nayacintamani 

Nyayadipika 11, 629 

Nyayakalanidhi 11, 667 

Nyayakalika 6, 9, 343, 394-5, 698 

Nyayakandali 7, 10, 33, 58, 425-6, 
485-520, 660, 700-2, 704 

Nyayakanika 453, 483 

Ny4yakoga 211 

Nyayakusumanjali 7, 10, 68, 101, 103, 
105-6, 126, 144, 521, 557-88, 594, 
596, 629, 640, 667, 684, 689, 704, 
707-9, 712 

Nyayakusumafijalibodhani 629, 
640-2, 702 


Nyayabhasyatika 


11, 


INDEX 


Nyayakusumafijaliparimala 11, 659 
Ny4dyalaksmivilasa 11, 660 
Nydyalamkara 11, 668 
Nyayalilavati 8, 10, 50, 613-629, 667, 
700 
Nyayalilavatiprakasa 667 
Nydyamakaranda 701 
Nyayamala 11, 643, 645-6 
Nydyamanjari (of Jayanta) 6, 9, 169, 
342-95, 454, 521 
Nyayamafijari (of Trilocana) 9, 
454, 521 
Nyayamimamsaprakarana 12, 682 
Nyayamuktavali 10, 603-12 
Nyayanaya 12, 682 
Nyayaparicaya 698 
Nyayaparisista 7, 10, 208, 341, 588, 659, 
714 


396, 


Nyayaprakirnaka 9, 396 
Nyayapravesa 189 
Nyayaraina (9th c.) 9, 395, 699 





Nyayaratna (of Manikantha) 8, 12, 
668-82, 712 

Nyayaratna, Mahega Candra 557 

Nyayasara 6, 9, 34, 125, 197, 394, 


399-410, 413, 416, 604, 659, 667 
Nyayasaravicara 11, 397, 647, 659 
Nyayasiddhantadipa 8, 12, 682-4 715, 
Nyayasiddhantamala 714 
Nyayasicinibandha 10, 453-4 
Nyayasitras 4, 9, 14-5, 20-2, 75, 79-80, 

89, 95, 97, 100, 134, 151, 154, 161, 

173, 182, 207-8, 220-39, 275, 329, 

331, 343, 348, 394-5, 397, 413, 415, 

419-21, 424, 432, 442, 444, 453-4, 

469-70, 478, 521, 525, 588, 612-3, 

664, 666, 668, 678, 693, 702, 707 
Nyayavarttika 5, 303-37, 426, 454, 513, 

521, 588, 668, 703, 705, 712 
Nyayavarttikatatparyatika, see Tatparya- 

tika 
Nyayavarttikatatparyatikaparisuddhi— 

see Parisuddhi 
Nyayavrtti 613, 712 
nytina (a way of losing an argument) 


273, 666, 676 


obeisance (see also mangala) 429 
verbal/mental 429 
Oberhammer, G.R.F. 9, 19-21, 154, 
221, 239, 281, 304, 339-40, 396, 688, 
692, 694, 696-9 

object or content (visaya) 49, 63, 172-3, 
187, 218-9, 230, 233, 240-3, 250, 
260, 262, 267-8, 295, 390, 392, 410, 
482-3, 510, 523-4, 535-7, 615, 619, 
637, 641, 662 
of valid knowledge—see prameya 
rea] (vastu) 268 
—ness (visayata) 619 

obstacle to samadhi 237 

occasionalness (kddacitkatva) 640 

omnipotence—see God, properties of 

omnipresence—see vibhu; God, properties 
of 

omniscience 100-1, 106, 176, 346, 360, 
403, 409, 417, 435, 558, 569, 574-6, 
578, 580, 594, 620, 661 


733 


one—see unity 
ontological argument. negative 108-10 
ontology 1, 7, 14, 19, 44-5, 47, 687 


Padarthadharmasamgraha 5, 9, 82, 86, 
282-303, 424-6, 429, 486,589, 652, 
704 
Padarthadharmasamgrahasukti 700, 704 
Padarthadharmasamgrahasetu 704 
Padarthapravesaka 282-303 
Padarthasamgraha 700 
Padarthasamkara 426, 703 
Padarthatattvanirnaya 667 
Padmanabha Misra 337, 704 
pain (dukkha) 96-7, 112, 127, 213, 220, 
235, 278, 298, 356, 452, 461, 467, 
497, 624, 666 
as cause 129, 288, 299, 409-10 
causes of 32, 161-2, 277, 288, 298-9, 
332, 409, 461, 467 

complete cessation or absence of— 
see liberation 

eternal ? 127 

how grasped 89, 94, 279, 287, 294, 
497, 617 

inexpressible 479 

nonlocuspervading 114, 117, 280 

as proof of selves 95-6, 99, 215, 223, 
243, 287, 636 

a specific quality 113, 287 

varieties of 408 

paksa (p) 181, 183-95, 197-9, 201, 203, 
245, 269, 296, 310-1, 316-7, 350-1, 
361-3, 402-6, 415, 417, 420, 445, 
471, 508, 515, 545, 571, 575, 581, 
591, 602, 617, 619, 621-2, 624, 
638-40, 648-9, 658, 669, 673-5 
-dharmata 188, 363, 402, 644, 658, 669 
-té 674-5, 677 

paksa as hypothesis 469-70 (see also 
pbratijna’ 

Paksadhara Misra or Jayadeva 660, 667, 
684-5 

Paksilasvamin 4, 24, 239-74, 455 

paicabhautika 432-3, 690 

Paficaprasthanyaya (tarka) 10, 612, 668 

Paficasikha, son of Manavaka 211 

Panini 344, 419, 679-80 

paramarsa 183, 188-9, 310, 434, 445-6, 
451, 459, 622, 630, 634, 665, 669, 
674-5, 677, 683 
pervasion in—see pervasion 

paramarthika 347, 606 

Paranjpe, S.M. 664, 694, 711 

Paranjpe, V.G. 239 

parardha 289, 439 

pararthinumana (inference for others, vs. 
suarthanumaéna, inference for oneself) 
180, 183, 188, 296, 393, 402, 419, 
448-9, 451, 508, 624, 665 

paratah-prakagatva —see svaprakasa 

paratah-prémanya—see truth 
paratva—see farness; priority 

pariksa@ (examination, investigation ) 241, 
490, 664 

parimana—see size 

parimandalya— see size 

parinama (transformation ) 228, 390, 507, 
567, 574-5 


734 


Pariguddhi 7, 10, 159, 208, 424, 520-1, 
588, 637, 659, 667-8, 700, 703, 707-8, 
713-4 

part—see whole 

Parthasarathi Misra 282 

particular—see vyakti 
“bare”’—see svalaksana 

particularism 45 
particular properties of particular 

things 112 

paryanuyojyopeksana (a way of losing an 
argument) 273, 341, 681 

Pasupata 21-2, 27, 29, 303, 399, 428, 
558, 660, 687-8 

Pasgupatacarya—see Uddyotakara 

Pasupatastitra 154 

Patan 399 

Patafijali, author of Mahabhasya 239, 
385 

Patafjali, author of Yogasitras 20-1, 
27, 409, 454, 517, 556, 558, 611 

path(s) to liberation—sec liberation 
Patna 595 
Pauranika 178, 558, 633 
peacefulness 298 
Pegasus 109 
perception (pratyaksa) 2, 154, 160-9, 
174, 222-3, 226, 241-2, 249-50, 279, 
281, 294, 305, 307, 309-10, 320-1, 
347-9, 354-61, 397, 401, 411, 413, 
415, 430, 444, 447, 456, 459, 461-2, 
496, 504-5, 508, 533, 600, 620, 
631-3, 636, 644, 664-5, 687, 696, 701 
auditory (see also auditory organ) 
61, 294, 376 

color as condition for—see color 

extraordinary (see also sdményalak- 
sana; jidanalaksana; perception, 
yogic) 168-9, 184, 362, 621, 673 

how known? (see also svaprakasa) 
249, 544-5 

illusory—see error 

as involved in or related to other 
kinds of judgment—see under each 
other kind of judgment 

kinaesthetic (see also internal organ) 
161-2, 294 

nonpropositional—see nirvikalpaka 

perceptibility of x—see under ‘“‘x, 
how known ?” 

propositional, see savikalpaka 

serial 617 

truth of, see truth 

visual (see also under visual organ) 
87, 118, 205, 216, 229-30, 294, 
308-9, 345, 351, 434, 460 

yogic 35, 46, 162, 294-5, 360, 401, 
415, 445, 447, 507-8 

pervasion (vpdpti, avindbhdva, avyabhi- 
cara 54, 180-2, 189, 191, 193-5, 200-6, 
295, 301, 361-2, 398, 401-2, 416-8, 
435, 446, 456-7, 463, 499-500, 
509-10, 512, 532, 576, 600, 610, 
621-2, 630-1, 633-4, 644, 649, 651, 
659, 671-2, 683-4, 712-3 
as member of tarka—-see tarka 
equi— (sama) 673 
formulated in the uddharana 199 
how known ? 183, 202-6, 339, 349, 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


363-4, 395, 398, 416-7, 446, 600, 
620-2, 628, 641, 669-70, 672-3 
in presumption—see arthdpatti 
in the application 186, 189, 203, 310, 
470, 622, 624, 665, 669, 674, 677, 
712 
in verbal authority 176-7, 296, 456, 
466, 510 
internal/external 204, 398, 446, 451 
negative 362-3, 402, 495 
positive and negative—see 
vyalirekin 
uneven (visama) 673 
phala (fruit)—see effect 
Phanibhusana Tarkavagisa 698 
phenomenalism 1, 41-2, 45 
phenomenology 79 
phoneme 153 
phonetics 344 
physicalism 1, 41-2, 45 
place (see also locus; spatial directicn 
(dik) ) 533, 539 
(pra) dea 322, 465, 609 
plants 84, 88 
Plato 139 
Platonism 1, 95 
pleasure (sukha) 89, 91, 112. 127, 213, 
220, 235, 278, 298, 304, 306, 356, 
423, 452, 461, 467, 497 
as cause 288, 409-10 
causes of 32, 161, 276, 298-9, 332, 
355, 409, 461, 645 
eternal ? 127 
how grasped 94, 241-2, 279, 294, 
497, 617 
freedom from—see liberation 
in liberation—-see bliss 
inexpressible 479 
nonlocuspervading 114, 117 
as proof of selves 95-6, 99, 223, 243, 
287, 636 
a specific quality 113 
varieties 408 
plurality, manyness 214, 259, 314, 474, 
608 


anvaya- 


of causes see causation 
as cause of large size 218, 657 

politics 306 

possible worlds, states of affairs 140, 149 

posteriority (aparatva) 71-2, 644 

potentiality (see also fakti) 57, 59, 595-6 

Potter, Karl H. 221, 240, 282, 304, 343, 
687, 689-91 

Prabhakara 14, 166-7, 563, 633, 637, 660 

Prabhakara Mimamsa 63, 144, 151, 
156-7, 160, 162, 166-7, 342, 350-1, 
353-4, 368-70, 412, 450, 577, 605, 
618, 623, 631, 636 

Prabhakaropadhyaya 11, 667, 711-2 

Prabodhasiddhi—see Nyayaparisista 

pracina (“old”) Nyaya 221 

Pragalbha 660, 667, 684 

pragmatism 155 

Prajapati 377 

Prajiakaragupta 414, 416, 419, 422, 
556, 709, 714 

prakarana (topic) 222 

prakaranasama (a hetvabhdsa) 196-8, 225, 
246, 281, 403, 405, 445, 508, 639, 


INDEX 


665, 677-8, 713 
Prakatarthavivarana 337 
prakatya—see jfidtata 
prakrtt or pradhdna 58, 126, 322, 331-2, 

348, 387, 423, 486, 518, 566, 569, 

573, 660, 701 
pralaya 25, 82, 139, 236, 371, 373, 409, 

435-6, 572-4, 610 
pramé (true knowledge) 148, 154-6, 172, 

305, 347-8, 401, 457, 525, 569, 579, 

589, 607, 629-30, 664 

God as locus of—see God 
pramana (instrument of knowledge) (see 

also perception; inference; etc.) 

20, 154-5, 157-8, 172, 186, 222-7, 

240-1, 248-9, 260-1, 295, 305, 307, 

318, 320-1, 333, 345-9, 400-1, 411, 

413, 441, 455-7, 471, 473, 508, 511, 

533, 578, 625, 629-30, 632, 638, 664, 

687, 701 

God as (sec also God) 525, 558 

memory not a—see memory 

pscudo—-see memory, tarka, etc. 

validity of—see truth 
Pramanamimamsa 714 
Pramanavarttika 76-7, 413, 417-9, 422, 

426, 690, 702, 706 
Pramanavarttikalamkara 714 
Pramanavarttikatika 705 
pramdnya—see truth 
pramatr 155, 400-1, 467, 630 
prameya (object of valid knowledge) 

21, 43, 205, 222-4, 242-4, 249, 295, 

312-4, 343, 400-1, 408, 421, 466-7, 

473, 526, 608, 620, 627, 630, 636, 

666 

-ness 661 
pramiti 155, 295, 354-5, 508, 629 
prapafica 662 
prasanga (undesired outcome) 207, 637, 

671 


Pragasta (mati) (deva) 9, 282, 338, 363 

Prasgastapada 5, 7, 9, 22, 29, 34-5, 49-51, 
54, 56, 70, 78, 82, 87-9, 92, 95-7, 
99-100, 112-4, 119-24, 126-31, 135-7, 
139-43, 161-2, 168, 170-3, 175-6, 
184, 186-8, 197-201, 238, 274-5, 
282-303, 424-7, 429, 431, 433-4, 437, 
439, 443-6, 451-2, 485, 488, 504-5, 
507-9, 514-5, 518, 584, 589, 594, 
599, 644, 652, 695-6, 698, 700, 703 

prasiddharthakhyati 412 

pratibandha 706 

pratibandhaka (counteracting or neutra- 
lizing agent) 563-4 

pratibandhin (counterargument) 207, 671 

pratibha or pratibha—see intuition 

pratibhasika (phenomenal level) 606 

pratyiid (thesis,hypothesis; first member 
of inference) 102, 181, 185-7, 190-2, 
195, 198, 200, 203, 224, 245-6, 264, 
270, 273, 275, 297, 316, 319, 406, 
417, 419, 451, 457, 470, 484, 514-5, 
624, 675 

pratijiigham or-virodha (a way of losing an 
argument) 273, 679 

pratijfidntara (a way of losing an argu- 
ment) 273, 681 


735 


pratijfidsannyasa (a way of 
argument) 273 


losing an 


pratipaksa (counterthesis) 471 

pratisamdhéna (correlation) 430, 546-7, 
549, 551-2 

pratityasamutpada 32, 66 

pratiyogin (relatum) 50, 407, 614 
as counterpositive of an absence—see 

absence 

pratyabhijia-—see recognition 

pratyaksa—-see perception 

pratyasatti (close relaticn) 56 

Pravara 358 

pravrttivijfiiana 551-2 

prayojna—see purpose 

predicate 41, 45, 109 
predication 201 
predicability 661 

prediction 147, 293 

pre-existence 25, 36 

primitive terms 40, 42, 46, 48 

Principia Mathematica 44, 201 

priority (paratva) 71-2, 644 

Priticandra 9, 281, 338, 697 

privacy 96 

probable judgments 367 

product—see effect 

production (see also creation; causality; 

etc.) 58, 231-2, 234, 254, 260, 262-4, 
270, 286, 479-80, 491, 687 

property (dharma) (see also quality; 
universal) 48, 172-3, 181, 190, 192-3, 
201, 245, 264, 273, 379, 389, 465, 
510, 609 
relation to property-possessor 49 

proposition (see also savikalpaka) 148-51, 
159, 167, 179, 186-7, 225, 691 

prosody 344 

prthaktva—see separateness 

punarvkta (a way of losing an argument) 
273, 676 

Punjab 303 

Purana 344 

Puri 522 

purity of intent 299 

purification 299, 564-6 

purpose (frayojana) (see also purusdriha) 
222, 224, 270, 296, 306, 315, 333, 392 
666, 675 
of inquiry 187, 240, 244, 490 
of a work 222, 240, 304-7, 323, 604 

purusa—see self, in Samkhya 

purusartha (human aim) 24, 38, 306, 

332, 344, 427 

Purusottama 558 

purvavat—see inference 

Pyrrhon 17 


quadrilemma 17 

qualifier—see visesana 

quality (guna) 9, 51, 71, 112-7, 212-20, 
231, 234, 242, 258, 260, 266, 276-80, 
283-4, 287-8, 294, 313-4, 321, 335, 
337, 339, 356, 414-5, 431-2, 468, 
492, 523-5, 527, 546-8, 571, 596, 
608-9, 625, 664, 666, 687, 693, 695 


736 


change in (see also cooking) 59, 63 
God’s—see God 
generic (sémanya) 113, 287, 438 
locus-pervading, s.v. 
-ness 596, 644 
specific (vifesa) 90-1, 113-4, 129, 
216, 256, 284, 286-7, 409, 438, 
525, 595, 615-7 
unmanifested, s.v. 
quibble (chala) 208, 222, 225, 246-7, 
318, 406, 420, 472, 639, 666, 678 
vak 713 
upacara 713 
Quine, W.V.O, 46, 109, 689-90 


Radhakrishnan, E.P. 11, 660, 711 

raga-—-see attachment 

Raghavan, V. 660, 698, 711 

Raghunatha Siromani 6, 72, 82, 91, 113, 
136-7, 689, 707 

Raja (?-author of Yuktidipika) 361 

rajas 518 

Rajastya 573 

Ramabhatta 659 

Ramayana 221 

Randle, Henry N. 134-5, 186, 188, 
190-1, 200, 239, 282, 304, 691-2, 
694-6 

rasa—see taste 

Rasasara 652-8 

Ratnakara Santi 203 

Ratnakirti 4, 203-4, 341, 396, 484, 523, 
706, 709 

Ratnakoga 12, 684, 713 

rauksya (roughness) 625 

Ravana 238 

Ravanabhasya 9, 238, 337-8 

Ravisvara 12, 685 

Ravitirtha 557 

ray (of light from visual organ) (rasmi) 
117, 119, 229-30, 258, 370, 442, 504, 
593 

ray of sunlight 258, 268, 348, 595 

realism (Scholastic; vs. particularism 
and nominalism) 1, 45, 135, 140, 
201 

realism (in epistemology, vs. idealism) 
49, 51-2, 120, 133, 195, 304 

reality 30, 536, 606 
criterion of 353 

reason, rationalism 67 
a member of an inference (hetu )—see 
hetu (reason) 

rebirth (pretyabhdva) 32, 223-4, 266, 387, 
423, 666 

recognition (pratyabhijfa) 61, 137-8, 
173-6, 229, 231, 259-60, 321, 324-5, 
347, 373-5, 422, 437, 463, 496, 532, 
549, 565-6, 620 
role of memory in—see memory 

reference—see denotation 

reflection (pratibimbatva) 442 
in Samkhya 126, 386-7, 439, 566 

reification 133 

relation (sambandha) 44-5, 47-68, 91, 
169, 302-3, 309-11, 359, 577, 623, 
627, 684 
conditions of 464 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


natural/adventitious 510 
reality of 50 
unconditioned (anaupadhika) 671 
universal 620-1 
release—see liberation 
religion 6, 18-9, 21-3, 563 
remoteness—sce farness 
renunciation 486 
repeatable property—see universal 
repetition 297, 299 
as way of losing an argument 341 
resentment 298, 331 
restraint (yama) 237 
rhetoric 207 
ritual, rite 26 
a science 344 
ruci (liking) 625 
Rucidatta 684 
Rucitika 10, 339, 484 
Russell, Bertrand 60, 109, 690 


Sabara 345-6, 476 

Sabarabhasya 425 

$abda—see sound; verbal testimony; word 

$abdabodha or -jfténa (verbal knowledge ) 

(see also verbal authority; meaning) 
152, 162-5, 444, 603, 675 
role of memory in—see memory 

Sabdadvaita 389, 424, 428 

Sabdika 633 

sacrifice 217, 265, 452, 517, 558, 565, 
573, 587, 634 

sadhana, in inference 90, 265 

sadharmyasama (a futile rejoinder) 679 

Sadhu Ram 692, 694 

sadhya(s) 181, 183-91, 193-5, 198-201, 
204-6, 224, 242, 245-7, 253, 265, 
269-71, 295-7, 310, 316, 318-9, 
349-51, 353, 361, 372, 393-5, 402-3, 
405-6, 416-7, 420, 435, 449, 452, 
456-7, 463-4, 471, 508-9, 515, 581-2, 
591, 595, 600-1, 621, 624, 634, 648-51, 
657, 669-75, 679, 684, 713 

sddhyasadhana (prover of what is to be 
proved) 469 

sadhyasama (a hetvabhasa) 196-7, 225, 246, 
319, 471 

sage (rsi) 18, 35, 168, 176, 220, 242, 245, 
253, 265, 285, 298, 360, 377-8, 395, 
401, 632 

sahabhadva (coexistence) 671 

sahopalambha 413-4, 483, 620 

Saiva 21-2, 29, 342, 378, 424, 426, 428, 

_ 558, 660, 687-8, 701 

Saivasiddhanta 428 

sakéra 608 

sakrt dargana (single observation) 622 

saksin (witness) 387, 558 

Sakta 556 

faktt (power; causal efficacy) 55, 63-5, 
204, 275, 277, 280, 340, 350, 353, 
363, 387, 397, 459, 501, 551, 560-6, 
613-4, 637, 660, 683 
adheya 683 

_ as meaning-relation 377-8 

Sakti 341 

Saktisamdoha 426 

Saktisvamin 342 


INDEX 


Salikanatha Misra 605, 609, 631, 661-2 

samadhi (yogic concentration) 27-9, 32, 
94, 237, 243, 263 

samagri (full collection of causal factors; 
sufficient condition) 55, 57, 59, 62-3, 
66-7, 294, 313, 340, 345-6, 350, 354-5, 
391, 397, 459, 464, 494, 561, 568, 
605-6, 630 

sdmanadhikaranya—see locus 

sdmanya—see universal; genus 

samanyalaksanapratyaksa 168-9, 202, 362, 
628, 673 

samaényalaksana in Buddhism 62 

simdnyatodrsta—see inference 

simanyavifesa (limited universal) 275, 
277, 279-80 

Samasastry, R. 399, 699 

samavayikdrana (inherence cause) 55-6, 
60, 88, 200, 212. 275-7, 288, 392, 
470, 489, 561-2, 567, 569, 596, 614, 
616-7, 627, 644, 651-3, 655, 664 

samavetasamavaya—see inherence 

sambhava (concurrence) 178, 227, 254, 
296, 354, 407, 623, 633, 636 

samdhi (word-combination) 228 

samdigdha (a hetvabhasa) 445, 451 

Samegrahatika 502 

samjiasamjitisambandha (denoter-denoted- 
relation) 577 

samkalpa (wishful idea; imagination ) 33, 
236, 298 

Samkaracarya 15, 33, 53, 338, 454, 604 

Samkara Misra I 212, 338, 424, 663, 
684-5, 693, 700, 702, 707-9 

Samkarasvamin 5, 9, 59, 63, 76, 101, 
104, 137, 340-1, 396, 697-8 

Samkaravijaya 30 

samkhya—see number 

Samkhya 13-5, 20-1, 54, 56-60, 75, 99, 
107, 125-6, 159, 179-80, 183-4, 187, 
211, 239, 244, 259-60, 275, 332, 344, 
348, 361, 374, 386-8, 421, 423, 426, 
428, 439, 443, 464, 467, 538, 554, 
556, 558, 566-7, 573, 581, 589, 611, 
633, 660, 685, 690, 695-6, 707 

Samkhyakarikas 15, 23, 30, 274, 423, 
454, 501, 517-8, 611, 702 

Samkhyasiitras 15 

samnidhi (contiguity) 149, 196, 450, 458, 
466, 476, 539, 577, 665, 680 

samnpasa, samnydsin 427, 517 

samsara (see also transmigration ; rebirth) 
32, 47, 409, 517, 566-7 

samsaya—see doubt 

samskara—see dispositional 
trace 

samtdna (series of judgments) 312-3, 347, 
549-52 

samortijfidna, samvrtisatya—see convention 

samyuktasamavdya—see inherence 

samyuktasamavetasamavaya—see imherence 

samyuktavisesanabhdva 351 

Sanatani 10, 424, 699 

Sandesara, B. J. 685, 696, 715 

Sanmatitarkatika 705 

Sanskrit structure 40-1, 

Santaraksita 4-5, 9, 159, 281, 338-42 

sapaksa (sp) (positive example) 181, 185, 
187, 189, 191-5, 197, 199, 202, 204, 


tendency; 


737 


224, 269, 297, 311, 317-9, 346, 361, 
394, 402-5, 415, 432, 437, 445, 
451, 457, 470, 508, 515, 639-40, 648, 
665, 679 

Saptapadarthi8, 11-2, 50, 91, 426, 642-5, 
70 


Sarasamgraha 11, 629-40 
Sarma, D.R. 399, 699-700 
Sarma, E.R. Sreekrishna 647-8, 711 
Sarvabhauma, M. Sivachandra 589 
Sarvadarsanasamgraha 712 
sarvamukti—see liberation 
Sagadhara 8, 12, 682, 715 
Sasadharamala 12, 682 
Sastra (science) 304, 455, 490, 527, 604, 
645 
Sastri, Dharmendra Nath 21, 304, 338, 
685, 688-90, 696-7, 710, 715 
Sastri, D.R.—see Dundhiraja Sastri 
Sastri, H.P. 694 
Sastri, K.K. 521 
Sastri, Svami Satyasvarupa 410 
Sat, saita—see existence 
Satapatha Brahmana 258 
Satasastra 221 
satkaryavada 75, 333-4, 387, 423, 443, 
501, 538 
satpratipaksa (a hetvabhasa) 394, 581, 624, 
651, 657, 665, 678, 713 
Sautrantika 608 
savikalpakajfiana, -pratyaksa (propositional 
judgment, perception) 148-51, 156-7, 
163-5, 357-60, 386, 397, 401, 407, 
413, 415, 419, 430, 444, 457-62, 
505-8, 533-4, 600-1, 620, 627, 630-1, 
633, 664-5 
role of memory in—see memory 
savyabhicdra (a hetvdbhdsa) 196-9, 225, 246, 
471, 624 
science, scientific (see also fdstra) 1 
scripture (see also verbal testimony; 
Veda) 13, 95, 176, 215, 227, 229, 
235, 253, 263, 314, 323, 343-4, 351, 
365, 443, 456, 486, 493, 515, 554, 
563, 565-6, 578, 640, 661 
Buddhist 309-10, 611 
interpretation of 554 
truth of—see truth 
Seal, Brajendranath 129, 690-1 
seed 313, 322 
and sprout 62-3, 328, 528-9 
self (dtman) 45, 73, 95-100, 213, 223, 257, 
266, 385, 423, 518, 524, 550, 616, 
636, 661, 666, 700 
arguments for the existence of 7, 
95-100, 215, 286-7, 346, 386, 437, 
549, 553-4 
connection with body—see body 
contact with internal organ—see 
internal organ 
highest (paramatman) 423, 428, 437, 
496 


how known 95-6, 143, 215, 241, 243, 
281, 312, 385-6, 388, 409, 434, 
436, 444, 479, 548-9, 552, 575 

individuation of 142-3, 302 

as knower 94-7, 148, 219, 231-3, 
260-2, 286, 295, 330, 347, 436, 
441, 507, 517, 546, 551-3, 566 


738 


-knowledge (dimavidya) 20, 240, 265, 
306-7, 409, 423, 517-8, 556-7 
knowledge of other selves 445, 507 
in liberation 28-30, 98-9, 125, 217, 
244, 314, 388, 409, 427-8, 437, 
557, 687 
no self (andtman) 25, 327-9, 339, 409, 
527, 548, 553, 589, 595, 611, 616, 708 
not the body—see body 
not the  sense-organs—see 
organs 
plurality of 94, 97-9, 215, 496-7 
properties of 93, 98, 106, 124, 215, 
235, 260, 436, 575, 636, 661 
qualities of 30, 56, 89-91, 98, 114, 
117, 125, 147-8, 223, 231-3, 250, 
258, 260, 275-9, 284-7, 291, 298- 
300, 330-1, 409, 423, 427, 434, 452, 
467, 488, 517, 546, 553, 628, 636, 
653, 661, 695 
in Samkhya (purusa) 126, 322, 348, 
386-7, 439, 467, 486, 566-7 
varieties of—see God 
as willer, agent 99-100, 216, 250, 261, 
286-7, 298-301, 493, 517, 566 
self-annihilation 485-6 
self-illuminating—see svaprakdsa 
self-linking connector see  svariipasam- 
bandha 
selfoccurrence (svatmavrtti) 303 
self-residence (dimafraya) 207, 540, 550, 
575, 637, 670, 712 
selfishness 331 
semantic well-formedness 
also dkamksd; _yogyata; 
theory of meaning) 
sense-object connection or contact (in- 
driyarthasannikarsa) 52, 161-2, 164-5, 
215, 219, 223, 229-39, 241, "249- 50, 
259, 294, 298, 305, 307-8, 310, 348, 
356-60, 401, 408, 415, 430-1, 433, 
444, 459-60, 463, 466, 504, 507-8, 
602, 630, 633, 664-5 
sense-organ (indriya) (see also visual; 
auditory; tactual; internal organ) 
433, 524 
composition of 88-9, 219, 223, 229-31, 
242, 258-9, 278, 284-6, 329, 386, 
400, 433-4, 615 
contact with internal organ, see in- 
ternal organ 
contact with object, see sense-object 
connection 
correlation between, see correlation 
defect in, see dosa 
in doubt see, doubt 
in dream, see dream 
and knowledge of absences, see ab- 
sence, how known 
locus of—see body 
motion of 301 
not identical with the self or part of 
the self 228-9, 232, 257-8, 266, 287, 
327-9, 386, 479, 549, 616 
plurality of 230, 243, 259 
as pramdpa 664 
properties of 231, 243, 267, 279, 379 
in yogic perception, see perception, 


yogic 


sense- 


195-6 (see 
samnidhi; 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sentence 149-50, 177, 323, 333, 351, 365, 
419, 447, 457-8, 512, 514, 584, 601, 
634 
meaning (fulness) of 2, 149, 151-2, 
382-5, 421, 449-50, 457-8, 463, 466, 

476, 577-8, 584-8 

separateness (frthaktva ) 52, 87, 91, 112-3, 
124.5, 213, 216, 218, 234, 278-80, 
287, 291, 294, 322, 340, 415, 487, 
490, 594, 598, 608-9, 617-8, 657, 700 
of one thing 124, 288, 438 
-of two things 287-8, 488, 617-8 

Sesavat—see inference 

Sextus Empiricus 17 

shadow (chayd) 246-7, 431, 

Sharma, V.V. 693 

Shamasastry, R. 688 

shape 124, 218 

Shastri, see Sastri 

Sheng-tsung- shih-chu-i-Iun (-chang) 695 

Shoshujikkugironki 695 


701-2 


siddha (perfected being) 35, 168, 220, 
298, 452 

siddhdnta, see tenet 

Siddhantamuktavali 700, 704 

siddhasédhana (‘straw man’, a_ hetva- 


bhdsa) 186-7, 191, 198, 624, 662, 679, 
Sigwart 52 
similarity, (sdripya, sddrgya) 134, 138, 

175-6, 226-7, 247, 269-72, 283-4, 

311, 364, 375, 407, 421, 442, 448, 

459, 465, 534, 576-7, 602, 608, 613-4, 

634, 637, 644, 660, 700 

negative 506 
simplicity, see economy 
sin (pataka) 229, 257 

—s of omission (pratyavdya) 427 
Singh, Jaideva 691 
Singhana 646 
Sinha, Jadunath 690, 698 
Sinha, Nanda Lal 212, 694, 706 
Siva (see also Maheévara ) 21. 2, 29-30, 

343, 394, 400, 409, 427-8, 443, 558, 

574, 588, 633, 643 
Sivaditya 8, 11-2, 28, 50, 91, 114, 117-8, 

128-30, 135, 170, 178, 206, 426, 525, 

642-6, 701, 710 
size or dimension (parimdna) 72-3, 80-3, 

86, 91, 94, 112-4, 123-4, 213, 216, 

218, 252, 266-7, 269, 276, 278-80, 

287-8, 291, 294, 308, 335, 415, 433, 

439, 444, 487-90, 500, 553, 584, 

592-4, 598, 608-9, 617, 620, 653, 657, 

700 

long/short 123, 218, 264-5, 276, 280, 

291, 617 
“atomic”? (pdrimandalya) 80, 123-4, 
218, 276, 278, 284, 291, 432, 436 


592 
‘small’? (anu) 73-5, 80, 82-3, 94, 
121, 123-4, 218, 229, 233, 276, 


287, 291, 657, 683 
middle (mahat) 73-5, 83, 87, 
215, 218, 229, 243, 243, 280, 
302, 337, 434-5, 542-3, 591, 
617, 656-7 
ubiquitous 73-4, 80,91, 95, 98, 
193, 259, 284, 291 
skepticism 16-7, 104, 166, 172, 315, 


123, 
291, 
615, 


INDEX 


412, 619 

sky-flower or lotus 110, 317, 354, 368-9, 
389, 619, 649 

sleep (see also dream; deep sleep) 94, 

_ 226, 250, 645, 666 

Slokavarttika 14, 414, 426, 450, 698, 
702-3 

smell (gandha) 45, 50, 74, 86-8, 112-3, 
117, 119, 213, 215-6, 218, 223, 230, 
254, 256, 259, 268, 278-80, 284-5, 
287-9, 294, 305, 311, 313, 317, 464, 
475, 491-2, 524, 614-6 
organ of 219, 223, 259, 615 

smoothness 299 

smrti, see memory 

smrtipramosa 412 

sneha, see viscidity 

solipsist 515 

Sondadopadhyaya 11, 668, 712, 714 

sophistry or wrangling (jalpa) 208, 222, 
225, 237, 240, 306, 318, 406, 639, 
666, 676 

sound (Sabda) 13, 56, 58, 87, 90-1, 112-3, 


153, 162, 176-7, 214, 218, 231-2, 244, | 


251, 259-60, 273, 276-7, 279, 286-8, 
294, 300, 308, 316-7, 319-20, 322, 324, 
438, 468-9, 477, 488, 494, 496, 524, 
570-1, 594-5, 616, 653, 690, 693 
intensity of 375-6 
non-eternity of 13-4, 205, 214, 228, 
245-7, 254-6, 260-2, 373-6, 572 
manifestation of, see manifestation 
transmission of 1, 376 
soundness in inference 183, 329 
space 1, 45, 71-2, 77, 87, 90, 113, 117, 
139, 142, 252, 322, 335, 476, 542 
spatial direction (dik) 73, 81-2, 90-3, 
98, 123-4, 213-4, 217-9, 276, 278, 
280, 284, 286, 291-2, 294-5, 300-2, 
310, 321, 363, 368, 370, 375, 424, 
433, 475, 488, 524, 595, 611-2, 616, 
632, 643-4 
species (visesa) 132, 212-4, 219, 252 
ultimate (antya) see individuator 
speech (vaék) 223, 467 
sphota 152-3, 364, 384-5, 418-9, 449, 
477-8, 516-7, 603 
Sphotasiddhi 517 
spiritual values 18-21, 26, 329 
§ravana (hearing) 554, 556, 558 
freyas (betterment, welfare) 304, 455 
Sridhara 7, 10, 29-31, 58-9, 61, 64, 76-7, 
82, 90, 98-9, 101, 110-1, 114-5, 118-9, 
121, 129, 131, 136, 140-3, 152-3, 
173, 176-7, 186-8, 191, 197, 206, 
424-6, 454, 485-520, 589, 592, 598, 
_ 610, 660, 682, 702-4 
Sriharsa 15-6, 169, 523, 612, 642, 659, 
_ 663, 669, 671, 676, 688 
Srihira 15, 522-3 
Srikantha 10, 521, 612, 668, 709-10 
Srikara 12, 685 
Srikrsnabhtpala 646 
Sriman 613 
Srisimha 646 
Srivallabha, see Vallabha 
Srivatsa 10, 425, 520-1, 700, 706 
Srughna 9, 303 
stages of life (dsrama) 217, 299 


739 


stages of realization 30 
Stasiak, Stefan 692, 697 
statement (a stage in inquiry) see uddesa 
stava, see Stotra 
Stcherbatsky, Th. 66, 194, 282, 689, 
692, 696, 705 
Steinkeliner, E. 90-1, 340-1, 484, 696-8, 
705 
sthira, see continuant 
Sthirasiddhi 9, 340-1 
Sthirasiddhidisana 341 
sthitaprajfia 27 
sthitisthapaka, see elasticity 
stotra (hymn) 668 
Stout, G.F. 691 
straw man, see siddhasidhana 
Strawson, P.F. 691 
Suali, Luigi 9 
Subandhu 303 
subject-matter of a work 222, 
304-307 
subject-predicate form 40-1, 44, 48, 61, 
460, 472 
sublation see badha 
Subrahmanya Sastri, $8. 10, 525-6, 603-4, 
645-6, 667, 706, 710-1 
Subrahmanya Sastri, V. 604, 669 
substance (dravya)1, 45, 49, 51, 55, 69- 
111, 133, 140, 142, 212, 275, 277, 280, 
283, 295, 302, 337, 431, 462, 468, 
492, 523-4, 596-7, 644, 666, 687, 693 
atomic, see atom 
as bundle of qualities 7, 314, 321, 
430-1, 492 
causality of, see causation; samavayi- 
kdrana 
composition of, see whole 
elemental, see element 
how known, 118, 161-2, 215, 251, 
281, 294, 313, 339, 444, 633 
material (mirta) 52, 72-3, 80, 110-1, 
129, 236, 256, 258, 261-2, 276-8, 
327, 335, 386, 524, 591, 594, 616-7, 
644 
ness 277, 281, 303, 487, 590, 644 
qualities of, see quality 
substratum, see ddhadra; dharmin 
subtle 436 
subtle body 94, 295, 301, 704 
success in action 305, 456, 478, 666 
Sidra 299 
sufficient condition (see also sdmagri) 
55-6, 66 
suffix (pratyaya) 584-5 
Sugandha Devi 342 
Sukla, Surya Narayana 343, 698 
Sanya, see void 
—vada see Madhyamika 
superimposition (dropa) 359, 389-90, 
459, 489, 505, 530-1, 606-7, 619, 637, 
644, 658, 670, 712 
Surat 668 
Suregvara 45, 399 
susupti see deep sleep 
svabhava (see also svariipa) 235, 264, 402, 
419, 560, 562, 610, 626 
—vadin 333 
svdbhavikasambandha (intrinsic or natural 
relation) 54, 202, 397-8, 457, 476, 


240, 


740 


478, 580, 590, 634, 671-2, 683 

svalaksana (momentary or pure parti- 
cular) 62, 163-5, 347-9, 358-9, 447, 
456, 462, 478-9, 505, 519-20, 533-7, 
626, 633 

suaprakasa_ (self-illuminating) 90, 126, 
160, 173, 226, 249, 346, 356, 390-1, 
414, 440, 455, 482, 499, 500, 631, 661 

sudrthanumana, see pardrthanumana 

Ssvariipa (essential nature) (see also 
identity) 142-4, 165, 197, 294-5, 
310, 389, 401, 474, 486, 628, 631 
~~asiddha see asiddha 
—sambandha (self-linking connector ) 

50, 52-4, 69, 79, 136, 201, 397, 
538, 613, 689 

svasamvedana 487 

suatalpramanya—see truth 

svatantra—see independence 

spadvada 179 

Syena 587 

syllable see varna 

syllogism 179, 183 

symmetry of identity 362 

syncretism 12 

synonym (ity) 466, 471 

synthetic 202 

system, criteria of success of 38-43, 60, 62 

system, nature of a philosophical 38- 
47, 61, 157 


tactua] organ 128, 219, 223, 259, 279, 
294 


taddtmya see identity 

Tailanga, R.S. 710 

tamas (a Samkhya guna) 518, 660 

tamas see darkness 

Tamori see Uddyotakara 

Tantra 378, 690 

tapas 424 

Tarani Miéra 12, 684, 715 

tarka 108-9, 154, 170-1, 178, 203-8, 222, 
224, 240, 245, 275, 306, 317-8, 
323, 344, 395, 403, 470-1, 502-3, 
507, 576, 583, 599, 605, 610, 621-2, 
637-8, 641-2, 645, 658, 666, 669-71, 
681, 712 
members of 207, 637 

Tarkabhasa 8, 11-2, 67, 119, 663-7 

Tarkasamgraha 695 

Tarkasastra 714 

Tarkatandava 714 

Tarkikaraksa 11-2, 207, 341, 629-40, 712 

Tarkikaraksatika 698 

taste (rasa) 45, 74, 86, 112-4, 117, 119, 
213-6, 218, 223, 230, 232, 256, 278- 
80, 284-5, 287-9, 294, 430, 463-4, 
475, 491-2, 524, 600, 616 
organ of 219, 223, 434 
variegated 118 

tatparya (communicative intent; inten- 
tion) 149, 152, 177, 510, 584 

Tatparyacarya 455 

Tatparyatika 7, 10, 208, 411, 453-8, 
921, 588, 668, 703, 714 

tattva (nature) 240, 245, 265, 304, 455, 
701 


Tattvabindu 453, 466 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Tattvacintamani 3, 168, 660, 669. 682, 
712, 715 
tattvajfidna (knowledge of reality) 429, 
525, 527, 629, 644 
Tattvakaumudi 454 
Tativamuktakalapa 713 
Tattvaprabodha 485, 496, 501 
Tattvapradipika 700 
Tattvarthavarttika 423 
Tattvasamgraha 159 
Tattvasamgrahapanijika 696, 698, 706-7 
Tattvasamiksa 453, 459 
Tattvasamvadini 485, 496 
Tattvatika 339 
Tattvavaisaradi 454 
Tau-shih 695 
tautology 227 
technical terms 40, 47, 50, 61 
tejas see fire 
Telang, Mangesh Ramkrishna 
647-9, 710-3 
Telang, N.K. 706 
temperature 329-30 
tenet (siddhénia) 208, 222, 224, 240, 244, 
246, 315-6, 344, 392, 469, 666 
abhyupcgama 395 
Thakur, Anantlal 10, 169, 212, 238, 282, 
337-40, 396-7, 399, 522, 525, 612, 
658, 685, 687-8, 691-2, 694, 696-9, 
701, 705-6, 710-1, 715 
Thanesvar 303 
Tharhi 453 
thesis see pratijfid 
thirst 331 
thought 102 
argument for God’s existence from 
107-8 
thread 67 
throwing downwards (avaksepana) 213, 
280 
throwing upwards (utksepana) 213, 280 
Tibet(an) 5, 23 
Tiger definition 712 
time (kala) 1, 45, 50, 72-3, 90-3, 98. 105, 
113, 117-8, 122-4, 142, 204, 213-4, 
217-8, 271, 276, 278, 280, 284, 286, 
291-2, 294-5, 302, 308, 321, 323, 330, 
363-4, 368, 370, 379, 424, 433, 439, 
463, 471, 475-6, 488, 524, 533, 539, 
559, 571, 595, 609, 611-2, 616, 632, 
640, 643-4, 700 
big (maha) 286, 611 
existence of past and future 226, 242, 
252, 298, 630 
knowledge of past and future 35, 226, 
242, 298, 630 
present, knowledge of 226, 242, 252, 
298 
Timirari 605, 611 
Tirabhukti 668 
Tirthamkara 23 
tolerance 342 
touch (sparsa) 86-7, 98, 111-4, 117, 119, 
213-6, 218, 223, 228, 230-1, 246, 256, 
259, 269, 277-80, 285-9, 294, 328, 
434, 464, 524, 546, 571, 594-5, 614-6, 
622, 625, 687 
cold 74, 87, 119, 214, 461, 491 
hot 119, 214, 218, 288, 321, 434, 597 


613, 


INDEX 


the organ of—~see tactual organ 
manifested/unmanifested 205, 258 
trace or impression (samskdra) (see also 
vasanad; bhdvand) 60-1, 113, 129-30, 172, 
293, 297, 299, 368-9, 391, 409, 423, 
435, 441, 449-50, 452, 461, 477, 485-6, 
498, 500, 505, 516, 531, 534, 545-6, 
549-50, 553, 567, 574, 632, 693, 
and judgment see jfdna 
tradition (aztihya) 227, 296, 307, 354, 407, 
623, 633, 636 
trairtipya (threefold mark) 191-5, 201, 
282, 403, 415, 445, 639 
trance 32 
transference (samdropana) 235 
transformation see parmdma 
transitory see momentary 
translation 39, 42, 44, 47-8, 54 
transmigration and rebirth 2, 
28, 60, 94, 130, 217 
transparency 230 
trees 437, 702 
Trilocana 9, 53, 59, 164-5, 167, 199, 
201-3, 341, 343, 396-9, 454, 461, 484, 
521, 680-1, 698-9, 698-9, 707 
Tripathi, T.M. 711 
truth or validity (prdmdanya, yatharthya) 3, 
38, 147, 154-60, 172, 179, 313-4, 
543-4, 579-80, 584, 607, 628, 630-2, 
641, 664, 683, 708 
of all judgments 442 
balance test for 565-6 
coherence theory of 147, 155-6 
conditions of true perceptual judg- 
ment see perception 
correspondence theory of 147, 155-7 
criterion of 106, 155-7, 159, 172, 456, 
506, 579, 607, 625, 632, 665-6 
of inference—see infererce 
knowledge of—-177, 456, 665-6 
and memory—see memory 
merit of speaking the—299 
of Vedic scripture (see also Veda)— 
107, 227, 253, 323, 344, 378, 436, 
456, 486, 511, 611, 631, 683 
self (svatah)jother - (paratah) 158-60, 
365-8, 412, 416, 447, 455-6, 511, 
544-5, 570, 601, 607, 628, 641, 
661, 665 
skepticism about—see skepticism 
truti(minimal perceptibilium)-—76, 82-3, 
236, 285, 291, 322, 334, 337-8, 433, 
491, 584, 592, 615, 656-7 
Tucci, Giuseppe 189-90, 194, 221, 282, 
692, 694, 696 
Tuxen, Poul 664, 696, 710-1 


18, 23, 


Udayana 7-8, 10, 15, 30-1, 34, 45, 54-5, 
61-5, 67-8, 77-8, 81-2, 85, 88, 96-7, 
101, 103-10, 113, 121, 126-7, 130-1, 
135-6, 139, 141-2, 144-5, 159-60, 165, 
168, 171-2, 174-6, 185, 188, 191, 199, 
203-7, 338, 341, 397, 411, 424-6, 
454, 520-603, 608-13, 629, 637-43, 
650, 652, 655-60, 663, 667, 679, 681, 
691-2, 702-4, 706-10, 712-15 

uddefa (statement) 241, 490, 664, 700 

Uddyotakara 5, 9, 12, 21, 29, 34, 36, 


741 


50-2, 57, 60-1, 73, 75-6, 80, 82, 92, 
96, 100-1, 104-5, 110, 118, 129, 131, 
138-9, 145, 162-3, 171, 174-5, 183-5, 
187-91, 194, 197, 200-1, 206, 281, 
303-39, 363, 397, 399, 401, 415, 419- 
20, 426, 432, 444, 453-4, 456-61, 465, 
468-70, 515, 608, 612, 695-7, 703, 705 
tiha see imagination 
Ui, Hakuju 211, 274-5, 338, 685, 692, 
694-7, 715 
Ulika, see Kanada 
Umveka 484 
unconscious (acetena; jada) 
332, 348, 390, 518, 535 
underextension, see avpapti 
uneasiness (badhand) 224 
uniformity of nature 66 
unity (ekatva) 91, 119-21, 218, 251-2, 
266, 288-9, 314, 415,438, 543, 597, 
608, 615, 617 
universal property (sdémdnya; jati) 41, 
44-5, 49-51, 53-5, 71-2, 112, 133-42, 
169, 212, 261, 281, 283-4, 294, 301-2, 
326, 340, 378, 459, 506, 523-5, 528-9, 
600, 643-4, 666, 693 
arguments against 62, 78, 138, 373-5, 
379-80, 416-8, 456, 462, 474-5, 478, 
487-9, 519-20, 535, 626, 706 
arguments for existence of 8, 134-5, 
137, 325, 373-5, 380-1, 418, 462, 
478, 487-9, 520, 535, 568, 591-2, 
626, 708 
causality a relation between, sec cau- 
sation 
connection of, see pervasion; svabha- 
vikasambandha 
crossconnection of, see jatisamkara 
dependent on thought ? 140, 489 
in doubt, see doubt 
as genus 134, 212, 277 
higher/lower 283, 288, 301, 488, 562, 
631, 643 
highest see existence 
how known 137, 143, 161-2, 180, 
294-5, 305, 340, 356, 359, 417, 
444-5, 489, 504-5, 508, 520, 535, 608 
impediments to proper (jatibadhaka) 
45, 135-6, 590-1, 691 
in inference, see inference; pervasion 
jati vs. samanya 134-5, 256, 590 
jati vs. upadhi see upadhi (imposed 
property ) 
as limitor, see avacchedaka 
as meaning of a word 151, 228, 256, 
325-7, 379-82, 462, 478, 572, 683 
in numbers see number; unity 
universal class, the 185, 199 
universalhood 136, 325, 489 
unmanifested (anudbhiia) quality 117, 
258, 272, 491-2 
unsublated (abddhita) 402, 451 
upadanakarana (material cause) 
339, 387 
upadhi (imposed property) 135-6, 590, 
601, 643-4, 672 
sakhanda 687 
upadhi (obstruction or condition) 286, 
384, 398, 478, 489, 510, 574, 580, 
619, 628, 632, 641, 644, 683, 713-4 


243, 287 


56, 126 


742 


doubtful 205-6 
in inference 202-7, 271-2, 582, 593, 
600, 621-2, 624, 634, 638, 645-6, 
651, 657, 668, 673-4 
Upadhivarttika 11, 643 
upalaksana 701 
upanaya(na) see application 
ee 28, 179, 240, 423, 486, 558, 
4, 
updsana 424 
upasarga (preposition) 660 
upasarpana (incoming of breath) 301 
utkarsasama 667 
utsarga (abandoning) 671 


vacaka (direct denoting expression ) 660 

Vacaspati Misra I 7, 10, 15, 67, 76-8, 
93, 101, 106, 122, 126-7, 139, 145-6, 
148, 158-60, 164-7, 169, 176-7, 190, 
198, 202, 208, 222, 239, 303-4, 340-1, 
343, 395-7, 411, 424-5, 453-83, 520-1, 
545, 604, 607, 612, 658, 681, 696-8, 
702-6, 708 

Vacaspati Misra II 684 

Vadanyaya 420 

Vadanyayatika 696 

Vadavidhana 304, 697 

Vadavidhi 304, 309, 696 

Vadideva Siri 337, 704 

Vadindra 4, 8, 11, 212, 337, 646-699, 
710-1, 713 

Vadiraja 691 

Vadi Vagisvara 11, 660-3, 711 

vagueness (avisada) 170-1, 461 

Vaibhasika 608 

Vaidalyaprakarana 221 

Vaidya, P.L. 659, 699, 711 

vairdgya, see nonattachment 

VaiSsesikasitras 3-5, 9, 22, 28, 31, 79, 
86, 133-4, 211-21, 238, 275-6, 282-3, 
295, 325, 337-8, 434, 464, 486, 651, 
658, 685, 701-2 

Vaisesikastitrabhasya 338, 651 

Vaisesikasitrakatandi 9, 238, 338, 694 

Vaisesikasiitratika 282 

Vaisesikastittravakya 9, 238, 338, 694 

Vaisesikasitravartlika 658 

Vaisesikasitravrtti (12th c.) 10 

Vaisesikasitravrtti (of Candrananda) 
12, 685 

Vaisesikastitravyakhya 11 

Vaisesikasitropaskara 663, 700, 702 

vaisistya (being qualified) 614 

Vaisnava 22, 378, 558, 701 

Vaisya 299 

Vaiyakarana, see Grammarian 

Vakyapadiya 152, 426, 701 

validity, see truth 

Vallabha 8, 10, 30, 50-2, 118, 120-3, 
125, 142, 169-70, 173, 177, 198, 205-6, 
399, 425, 613-29, 667, 704, 710, 713 

Vallalasena 612 

value, theory of 1-2, 18-37, 60, 82 

Varadachari, V. 10-1, 424-5, 485, 668-9, 
682, 699-700, 705-7, 712-3, 715 

Varadaraja (Misra) 11,111, 143, 156-7, 
165, 167, 175-6, 198-9, 206-7, 341, 
397, 525, 629-42, 681, 702, 710, 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


712-3, 715 
Varadavisnumisra 685 
Vardhamana 424, 454, 595, 613, 667, 
684 
varna (syllable, letter, phonetic element) 
262, 300, 324, 373-5, 384-5, 419, 
477-8, 516-7, 555, 603 
Varsagana 275, 360 
Varsaganya-Vindhyavasin school 695 
Varuna 285 
vdsand, see trace 
in Vijfianavada 391, 440, 456 
Vasavadatta 303 
vasiu, see object 
Vasubandhu 4, 190, 275, 282, 304, 462, 
469, 695, 697, 714 
Vatsa 22 
Vatsyayana, author of Nyayabhasya 4-5, 
9, 14, 20, 28-9, 33, 36-7, 50, 60, 75-6, 
89, 95, 99-101, 106, 113, 125, 127, 
129-31, 135, 144, 154, 161, 163, 168, 
170-1, 175-8, 180, 184, 186-8, 190-1, 
196, 200, 206, 221-2, 239-74, 281-2, 
305-6, 309-11, 313, 315, 317-9, 327, 
329-30, 336, 339, 355, 364, 391-2, 
397, 406, 426, 455, 457, 461, 470-1, 
475, 477, 612, 694-5, 705 
Vatsyayana, author of Kamasitras 24 
vdyu, see air 
Vayupurana 22 
Veda 6, 13, 20-1, 23-4, 26, 29, 31, 35, 
89, 101-2, 105, 107-8, 179, 220, 227, 
258, 265, 306, 342, 344, 351, 360, 
371-2, 388, 421, 429-30, 434, 436-7, 
447, 510-1, 517-8, 555-6, 569-70, 
574, 578, 584, 588, 611, 631-2, 708 
anuvadda 227, 354 
arthavada 227 
authority of (see also truth, of scrip- 
ture) 6, 153, 342, 366, 378-9, 421, 
472, 526, 553-5, 573 
authorship of 366, 376-7, 421, 429, 
511, 556, 570 (see also God) 
injunctions, s.y. 
karmakdnda, s.v. 
noneternity of 13, 253, 421, 555, 
569-70 
Rg 693 
precepts, see injunctions 
tradition 573 
Vedanta 13, 25, 27, 29-30, 33, 95, 125, 
144-5, 151, 159, 176, 183, 337, 388, 
486, 538, 556, 611, 633, 688 
Vedanta Desika 646, 685, 713 
Vedantatirtha, Narendra Chandra 208, 
557, 589, 692-4, 706 
vega (impetus, inertia, velocity )87, 113-4, 
129, 131, 277, 279-80, 287-8, 294, 
299, 415, 489, 597, 609, 653, 656, 687 
and motion see motion 
velocity see vega 
Venis, Arthur 710 
verb 320-1 
verbal issue 351 
verbal testimony or authority (sabda; 
adgama) 154, 162, 174-7, 186, 223, 
227, 240, 243, 253, 296, 307, 311-2, 
323, 339, 348-9, 354, 356-8, 361, 
364-5, 370, 379, 401, 406-9, 411, 


INDEX 


420-1, 426, 434-5, 444, 446-7, 452, 
461, 463, 465-6, 475-6, 510-2, 533, 
577-8, 600-1, 610, 619, 622-3, 628, 
631, 633-6, 638, 642, 665, 672, 683, 
701-3 
error in—see error 
and inference—see inference 
pervasion in—see pervasion 

verification 155, 158-9, 367, 416, 511 

Vibhasa 211 

vibhu (ubiquitous size) (see also size, 
ubiquitous) 74, 90, 99, 115,117, 133, 
139, 236, 254, 268, 284, 286, 374, 
423, 475, 569, 575, 595, 609-10, 616, 
626, 632-3, 653, 687 
substances, contact of see contact 

vicdra 539 

vidhi see injunction 

Vidhiviveka 453 

vidya (true or perfect knowledge) 172-3, 
206, 236-7, 265-6, 279, 293-4, 389, 
444, 486, 502-3, 618, 644 

Vidyabhusana, Satischandra 21, 192, 
194, 221, 239, 304, 522, 629, 688, 
692, 694, 696, 699, 706, 710, 715 

Vidyadharamisra 12, 685 

vijfiana 492 

Vijfanavada 388, 390, 440-1, 589 

vikalpa, see construction 

viksepa (a way of losing an argument) 
273, 680-1 

Vilasakara 659-60 

Viméatika 697 

Vindhyavasin 239, 275, 695 

Vinitadeva 304 

vipaksa (vp) 181, 185, 187, 189, 192-3, 
195, 197, 199, 202, 224, 297, 311, 
317-9, 361, 402-5, 415, 437, 445, 451 
470, 494, 508-9, 638-9, 648, 665, 675 

viparitakhyati see error 

viparyaya see error 

viparyayaparyavasdéna 658 

viruddha, see contradiction 

viruddhavyabhicarin 713 

visaya see object 

viscidity (sneha) 87, 91, 112-4, 128, 214, 
251, 276, 278-80, 288, 294, 299, 415, 
593, 693 
natural/limited 128 

visesa see individuator; specics 

vigesana (qualifier )50, 69, 144, 149, 294, 
308, 429, 448, 458, 598, 627, 634, 
655 

vigesanata (qualiferness) 624 

visesanavisesyasambandha 50, 52-3, 149-50, 
162, 308, 352-3, 401, 460, 570, 627, 
661 

vigesya (qualificand) 50, 69, 149, 429, 
448, 458, 477, 627, 655, 671 

Visistadvaita 646 

Visnu 22 

Visnu Misra 12, 685 

visual organ 89, 128, 161-2, 205, 219, 
223, 229-30, 257-9, 279, 285, 288-9, 
294, 307-9, 329-30, 337, 357, 374, 
390-1, 433-4, 437, 460, 482, 494, 
593, 608, 615, 621-2 
see also perception, visual 

Visvakarman 558 


743 


VisSvanatha Nyayapaficanana 700, 704, 
712 


Visvanathasrama 667 

Visvaripa 341, 681, 698 

vita see hetu 

vitanda see cavil 

Vittoka 10, 484, 705 

Vivaranapafijika 10, 521 

vivarta (manifestation) 384-5, 389-90 

vivid 299, 359 

void (Sdénya) 327, 537-8 

volition, see effort 

Vostrikov 696 

vrtti (operation) 243, 260 

Vritikara (12th c.) 10, 612-3, 710 

Vrttikara on Brahmasiitras 360 

vyabhicara (wandering) (see also perva- 
sion) 205, 576, 621-2, 646, 674 
as hetvabhdsa 677 

vyakta (manifested) 58, 233-4 

vyakti (individual or particular) 41, 49, 
53-4, 69, 80, 113, 134, 138, 141, 151, 
190, 202-3, 245, 305, 325-7, 432, 
446, 452-3, 459, 489, 510, 56], 
572, 590, 693 
basic 1 
composite 51 
as meaning of word 228, 256, 379, 
418, 432, 472, 683 

wyapara (operation) 57, 630 

Vyasa, author of Mahabharata 377 

Vyasa, author of Yogabhasya 239, 454, 
701 

Vyasatirtha 714 

vyavahaéra (practical affairs) (sce also 
ordinary usage; samovrti) 348, 416, 
418, 432, 440-1, 618, 632 

vydvaharika (empirical level) 606 

vyavasdydimaka (well-defined ) 161, 164-5, 
167-8, 223, 241, 348, 356, 358, 397, 
444-5, 461-2, 633, 702 

Vyomasiva 7, 10, 29-30, 56, 61, 79, 
82, 87-9, 91, 96, 98, 101, 104, 119, 
124, 126, 131, 137, 139, 143-4, 151, 
170, 176-7, 187, 195, 198, 202-3, 
494-54, 595, 609, 642, 660, 699-704, 
710 

Vyomavati 7, 10, 33, 35, 424-54, 485, 
682, 706 (see also Vyomasiva) 


water (dp) 73, 86-7, 90, 98, 114, 117-9, 
128, 142, 213-4, 216, 218-9, 223, 
230-1, 244, 251, 258, 262, 276-3, 
280, 285, 289, 291, 299, 313, 322, 
330, 415, 444, 459, 524, 592-3, 615 
color of 118, 218 

way of losing an argument (nigrahasthana) 
208, 222, 225, 238, 246, 272-4, 319, 
336-7, 341, 406, 420, 472, 610, 638, 
640, 667, 676, 679-81, 704 

weight (gurutva)76, 87, 90, 112-4, 128-9, 
131, 213, 216, 267, 269, 276, 
278, 280, 287-8, 298, 301, 323, 516, 
563, 597, 614, 653, 656, 693 

Western philosophy, influence or bor- 
rowing 16-7 

whole (avayavin) 45, 49, 51, 74-9, 82, 
85, 114-7, 121, 124, 226, 232, 236, 


744 


250-2, 256-7, 259, 265-7, 278, 280-1, 
284, 289, 291-2, 295, 301, 321-3, 
334, 337, 345. 354, 381, 385, 408, 
413, 426, 430-4, 444, 459, 473-5, 
488, 492, 541-3, 592-3, 608, 615-6, 
618, 662, 693, 695, 701, 707-8 
color of 490 
final (antya) 79, 432, 636 
perception of 76-7 
wind (see also air) 87-8, 119, 285 
in the body 294 
Windelband, Wilhelm 52 
Windisch, Ernst 239, 694-5 
Winter, A. 710 
wisdom 298 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 151, 691 
word 13, 218, 227, 241, 253, 309, 323-4, 
351, 360, 365, 373, 389-90, 398, 447, 
450, 457-8, 460, 512, 583, 600-1, 
603, 610, 620, 622-3, 630, 634, 662, 
665, 682 
distributive vs. collective meaning 247 
eternal 406-7 
meaning (fulness )of (see also theory 
of meaning) 2, 150, 152-3, 177, 
219, 228, 253, 256, 325-7, 377-9, 
381-2, 384-5, 406-7, 418, 432, 
450, 461-2, 465-6, 472, 476-9, 506, 
510, 572, 588, 600-1, 603, 610, 
620, 622-3, 630, 634, 662, 665, 682 
worship (see also updsand) 558, 563, 588 
wrangling see sophistry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Yajfiavalkyasmrtivyakhya 604 
yama 409 
jathaérihya see truth 
yaina see effort 
yoga (discipline, control) (see also paths 
to liberation) 27, 29, 32-3, 94, 128, 
216, 237, 275, 295, 409, 424, 517, 
558, 569, 644 
--anga 424 
Yoga (school of Patafijali) 
Samkhya) 244, 558 
Yogabhisya 239, 454, 701 
Yogacara 166-7, 239, 412-4, 458, 498-9, 
538-9, 551, 697 
yogariidha (secondary meaning) 683 
Yogasiitras 27, 407, 454, 517, 556, 701 
yosin 650 
abilities 18, 27, 35, 46, 94-8, 100, 
118, 130, 143, 162, 168, 219, 260, 
291, 301-2, 409, 427, 439, 444-5, 
507-8 
hody, s.v. 
ecstatic/nonecstatic 142, 294-5, 507 
experience 94 
perception, see pe:ception, yogic. 
pogyaté (semantic fitness) 149, 151, 450, 
458, 466, 476, 539, 577, 601, 665 
Yuktidipika 21-2, 187, 688, 698 
jutasiddha 292, 340, 474, 488, 492, 609, 
645 


(see also 


Zeno 60, 131 


