ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF 
INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Advaita Vedanta up to 
Samkara and His Pupils 


EDITED BY 


KARL H. POTTER 


PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Princeton, New Jersey 


Copyright © 1981 by Princeton University Press 
Published by Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey 
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, Guildford, Surrey 


All Rights Reserved 


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data will 
be found on the last printed page of this book 


This book was composed in India by Shantilal Jain 
at Shri Jainendra Press, New Delhi 


Clothbound editions of Princeton University Press books are 
printed on acid-free paper, and binding materials are 
chosen for strength and durability 


Printed in the United States of America 
by Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey 


Contributors: 


Edeltraud Harzer, University of Washington 
S. Subrahmanya Sastri, Varanasi 
Allen W. Thrasher, University of Washington 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE 
PART ONE : 


INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF 
ADVAITA VEDANTA (Karl H. Patter) 


L. 


Historical Résumé 


2. Theory of Value 
3. Philosophy of Language 
4. Identity and Difference : The Theory of Relations 
5. Advaita Metaphysics 
6. Advaita Epistemology 
PART TWO : 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 


1. 


Gaudapada 

Gaudapadakarikas, or Agamasastra (Karl H. Potter) 
Samkara 

Brahmasitrabhasya (Karl H. Potier) 
Brhadaranyakopanisadbhasya (Karl H. Potter) 
Taittiriyopanisadbhasya (Karl H. Potter) 
Upadesasahasri (Karl H. Potter) 
Chandogyopanisadbhasya (Karl H. Potter) 
Aitareyopanisadbhasya (Karl H. Potter) 
Isopanisadbhasya (Karl H. Potter) 
Kathopanisadbhasya (Karl H. Potter) 
Kenopanisatpadabhasya (Karl H. Potter) 
Mundakopanisadbhasya (Karl H. Potter) 
PrasSnopanisadbhasya (Karl H. Potter) 
Bhagavadgitabhasya (Karl H. Potter) 
Mandiukyopanisadbhasya with Gaudapadakarikabhasya 
(Karl H. Potter) 

Daksinamirtistotra (Karl H. Potter) 

Paficikarana (Karl H. Potter) 

Aparoksanubhiati (Karl H. Potter) 


22 
46 
62 
74 
92 


103 
105 
115 
119 
180 
204 
217 
254 
270 
278 
280 
281 
284 
289 
294 
308 


317 
318 
320 


viil 


Atmabodha (Karl H. Potter) 323 


Satasloki (Karl H. Potter) 324 
Balabodhini, or Atmajnanopadesavidhi (Karl H. Potter) 326 
Atmanatmaviveka (Karl H. Potter) 328 
Tattvabodha (Karl H. Potter) 331 
Dasasloki (Karl H. Potter) 333 
Vakyavrtti (Karl H. Potter) 334 
Vivekacidamani (Aarl H. Potter) 335 
Sarvavedantasiddhantasarasamgraha (Aarl H. Potter) 339 
Advaitaparticaratna, or Atmapancaka (K. Raghavan Pillai) 343 
Vakyasudha, or Drgdrsyaviveka 344 
Upadesapanicaka 344 
Mayapajficaka 344 
Laghuvakyavrtti 345 
Commentaries on other Upanisads 345 
3. Mandana Miéra 346 
Brahmasiddhi (Allen W. Thrasher) 347 
4. Suresvara 420 
Brhadaranyakopanisadbhasyavarttika (S. Subrahmanya 420 
Sastrt ) 
Taittiriyopanisadbhasyavarttika (Karl H. Potter) 321 
Naiskarmyasiddhi (Karl H. Potter) 530 
Daksinamirtivarttika, or Manasollasa (Karl H. Potter) 350 
Panicikaranavarttika, or Pranavavarttika (Karl H. Potter) 560 
5. Padmapada 963 
Paficapadika (Karl H. Poster) 564 
6. Totaka, or Trotaka, 598 
Srutisarasamuddharana (Karl H. Potter) 598 
7. Hastamalaka 601 
Hastamalakaslokah (deltraud Harzer) 601 
NOTES 603 


INDEX 613 


PREFACE 


This volume, the third in the Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, is the 
first of those devoted to the philosophy of Advaita Vedanta. It 
covers the writings of Gaudapada, Samkaracarya, Mandana Misra 
and Samkara’s pupils : Suresvara, Padmapada, Totaka, and Hasta- 
malaka (the last according to traditional authorities only). 

The remarks offered in the preface to volume two in this series 
relating to the general intent of the Encyclopedia apply to this volume 
and others to follow. To review briefly: this volume is intended, 
not as a definitive study of the works summarized, but as an invita- 
tion to further philosophical attention to them. The plan has been 
to make available the substance of the thought contained in these 
works, so that philosophers unable to read the original Sanskrit and 
who find difficulty in understanding and finding their way about in the 
translations (where such exist) can get an idea of the positions taken 
and arguments offered. The summaries, then, are intended primari- 
ly for philosophers and only secondarily for Indologists, and certain 
sections of the works have been omitted or treated sketchily because 
they are repetitious or deemcd less interesting for philosophers, though 
they may be of great interest to Sanskritists. I might also add that 
the summaries are not likely to make interesting consecutive rcading; 
they are provided in the spirit of a reference work. It is hoped, on 
the other hand, that the editor’s Introduction will provide a readable 
account of some of the pertinent features of Advaita Vedanta for 
those hitherto unacquainted with that system of thought. 

Preparation of this volume has been assisted materially by the 
gracious assistance provided by several agencies and individuals. 
The Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs of the U.S. Depart- 
ment of State, represented by Ms. Evelyn Barnes, kindly provided 
the project a generous grant in PL-480 rupees to cover preparation 
of this and other volumes. This grant made possible contacts with 
Indian colleagues and provided honoraria for a number of the 
summaries here included. The grant has been administered through 
the American Institute of Indian Studies, which has provided 
generous assistance in easing administrative details connected with the 


xX 


gathering of summaries, in arranging editorial travel and consulta- 
tion, and in providing secretarial assistance and supplies. I wish 
especially to thank Pradip R. Mehendiratta and Edward C. Dimock 
for their good offices. In 1975 I received a fellowship from the 
American Council of Learned Societies through the Joint Committee 
on South Asia of the American Council of Learned Societies and 
Social Science Research Council that enabled me to make use of 
the unparalleled collections at the India Office Library and British 
Museum in London, without which opportunity a number of the 
summaries could not have been completed and much scholarly informa- 
tion could not have been conveyed or alluded to through references. 
I wish to thank James Settle of the American Council of Learned 
Societies as well as the authorities and staff members at the libraries 
mentioned. Finally, there are several individual scholars who are 
probably not aware of the extent of their contribution to this volume 
through their helpful and provocative conversation with me over 
the years in connection with Advaita. I wish especially to record 
my appreciation and debt to Anthony J. Alston, Daniel H. H. Ingalls, 
T. R. V. Murti, and Allen W. Thrasher for sharing their scholarship 
and thought with me. I am, needless to say, responsible for all mis- 
interpretations of the materials that have crept into what follows. 


1980 KARL H. POTTER 


PART ONE 


INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY 
OF ADVAITA VEDANTA 


HISTORICAL RESUME 
Ll. What is Vedanta ? 


The Vedic literature represents the thought of the Aryans, Indo- 
European-speaking folk who perhaps entered India in the middle of 
the second millennium B.c. Consisting of a wide variety of materials, 
notably hymns and directions as to the proper performance of ritual, 
this literature also contains the beginnings of the philosophical and 
theological speculations that flowered eventually in classical Hinduism. 
Many of these speculations, usually reported in the form of discus- 
sions between teachers, pupils, and interlocutors, sometimes encased 
in mythological or didactic stories, are to be found in those portions 
of the Vedic corpus which reflect the later stages of philosophical 
development. These sections are termed ‘Upanisads’ (a term of 
doubtful etymology). The distinction between Upanisads and other 
parts of the Veda such as Aranyakas and Brahmanas likewise seems 
to follow no established rules; presumably it is a matter of tradition. 
One must always remember that the Vedic ‘literature’ represents 
what primarily was, and is even today, an oral tradition.1 Brahmin 
families pass from father to son that portion of the Veda which has 
been entrusted to them to preserve since ancient times. 

The Upanisads are literally “‘the final sections of the Veda,”’ which 
is what the term ‘Vedanta’ also means. Thus Vedanta philosophy, 
properly speaking, is that philosophy which takes its lead from the 
Upanisads. However, since the meanings of Upanisadic utterances 
are ambiguous, there came to be several Vedanta philosophies, cor- 
responding to differing interpretations of the essential genius of the 
texts that inspired them. Despite an evident similarity in termino- 
logy, which is derived from their common allegiance to the same 
basic literature, these Vedanta philosophical systems vary substan- 
tially among themselves, and there is a polite but perfectly clear 


4 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


rivalry among them as to which system ‘really’ represents the teach- 
ing of the Upanisads. It is an issue that, in the nature of the case, 
may well be insoluble. 

Vedanta philosophers are a particular section of those who special- 
ize in mimdmsd, or exegetics of the Vedic scriptures. Mimamsa is 
sometimes divided into Pirvamimamsa, the school of exegetics that 
interprets the ‘older’ scriptural hymns, and Uttaramimamsa, which 
interprets the ‘later,’ Upanisadic materials. The two exegetical 
systems differ in the emphasis they place on the injunctive and ritual 
aspects of the Vedas as opposed to those passages that apparently 
convey information, especially information about things beyond 
immediate sensory awareness. The style of the oldest Vedantic 
philosophical works is overwhelmingly influenced by the exegetical 
tradition. Great portions of these works are concerned with the nice- 
ties of language, and it is mainly in later times that philosophers make 
bold to compose independent treatises (prakarana) in which the ele- 
ments of Vedanta philosophy are set forth according to the logic of 
the views themselves, rather than in an order determined by that of 
scriptural authority. 


Much of the Vedanta literature is composed following the tradition 
of sutra and commentary that reflects the oral tradition in which it 
was born. Sitras are aphoristic phrases designed to remind their 
memorizer of the elements of the literature so summarized. Both 
Parva and Uttaramimamsa have their siitras, one set for each being 
known to us now, though others may have existed at an earlier time. 
The (Pirva)mimamsdsiitras of Jaimini form the basis of the older 
variety of Vedic exegesis, as well as provide a taking-off point for 
commentators such as Sabara, Kuméarila, and Prabhakara, who 
pioneered systematic Mimamsa philosophical systems through their 
commentaries. It is difficult to date the Mimdmsdsiiiras—the tradi- 
tion they represent must go back at least to the time of the writing 
of the Upanisads themselves, that is, to before 600 B.c., but the sfiras 
as we now have them need not be credited with such antiquity : it 
seems unlikely that they are earlier than 200 B.c. The set of siitras 
ascribed to Badarayana, variously called Vedantasiitras, Brahmasitras, 
or Sdrirakamimamsasfitras, provides the corresponding vehicle for the 
‘later’ (Uttara) exegetical tradition. Since the two sets of sitras 
refer to each others’ authors one might suspect they are of roughly 
the same age, although one cannot rule out the very real possibility 
of multiple authorship. 


Various sorts of commentaries are composed on siifras, and then 
subcommentaries and further commentaries on those. Traditionally, 


tc £ 
MISTORICAL RESUME 5 


a bhdsya is an extensive explanation of the meaning of the sitras, a 
vrtti is a briefer explanation, a vdrttika a critical treatment of a bAdsya, 
and so on. Frequently a writer will compose verses of his own for 
ease of memorization on the part of his reader or pupil, then provide 
his own commentary on those stanzas. 

In addition to the Vedic scriptures, notably the Upanisads, and the 
siitras that are intended to capture the essence of scripture, Vedanta 
philosophers will on occasion cite as authoritative, and occasionally 
even write separate commentaries on literary monuments that are 
not commonly accounted as part of Vedic scripture. Sometimes 
this tendency represents particular sectarian religious movements, 
as in later times led members of the Visistadvaita Vedanta system to 
comment on old Tamil works of Paficaratra persuasion. Far and 
away the most important instance of this phenomenon concerns the 
famous Mahabharata poem, the Bhagavadgita. Although the epics 
(the Mahabharata and Ramayana) are not accounted as ruti, that is to 
say, as works having unquestioned scriptural authority, they are pre- 
eminent among those works generally regarded as smrti, ‘tradition.’ 
To both older and later Mimamsakas Sruti, connoting that which is 
‘heard,’ is either authorless or of divine authorship; not being a 
human production, it cannot be mistaken, though we may be mis- 
taken about what it means—thus the necessity of exegetics. By 
contrast smrti, what is ‘remembered,’ comprises works of admitted 
human authorship, and thus there is the possibility of human error 
contaminating what they say, although this possibility is rendered 
academic by the venerability and sagacity of those who composed 
them. Vya4sa, the alleged author of the Mahabharata, is one of the 
hoariest of sages, and the didactic portions of that epic, among which 
the Bhagavadgita stands foremost, have an authority for all practical 
purposes equivalent to the scriptures themselves. Thus it is that 
many Vedantic philosophers have written commentaries on the 
Bhagavadgita, finding in Krsna’s teachings an appropriate foil for 
expressing their particular slant. 

The Upanisads—at least the oldest of them—the Gitd, and the 
Brahmasitras, then, comprise what is considered to be the triple basis 
(prasthanatrayi) for Vedantic philosophy. 


Il, What ts Advaita Vedanta ? 


So far we have been discussing the general background that all 
Vedanta philosophy shares. However, the present volume deals with 
only one Vedanta system, and indeed with only the earliest part of 
its literature. This system is properly known as Advaita Vedanta, 


6 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


though so important has it become in the eyes not only of scholars 
but also of those who have been influential in molding the attitudes 
of enlightened Hindus toward India’s past, that one will frequently 
find the term ‘Vedanta’ used to indicate only Advaita Vedanta. 
This tendency is a confusion to the uninitiated as well as a constant 
source of irritation to those who are affiliated with one of the other 
Vedanta systems. Still, it serves to emphasize the importance that 
is now attributed to Advaita among the Vedantas, and especially 
that attributed to its most famous figure, Samkaracarya, a thinker 
with whom we shall be dealing at length in this volume. 

Just as it is a mistake, though a common one, to identify all Vedanta 
with Advaita, so it is also a mistake, and a common one, to identify 
all Advaita with Samkaracarya’s philosophy. Through the efforts 
of a number of diligent scholars, we can now safely say that Samkara 
did not found Advaita Vedanta and that there are points of inter- 
pretation on which others—also properly called Advaitins—differ from 
Samkara. These points of distinction will become clear as we proceed. 
First, however, it will be well if we attempt to state as clearly as possible 
what is shared by and constitutive of the Advaita Vedanta philoso- 
phical position. I shall do this in rather summary form here; a fuller 
explanation is in the sequel. 

We may divide the Advaita philosophy, rather arbitrarily for the 
moment, into a theoretical and a practical basis. Some propositions 
that characterize the theoretical basis are : 

1. The purpose of philosophy is to point the way to liberation 
(moksa) from the bondage of rebirth (samsdra). 

2. Bondage is a product of our ignorance (avidyd); the true Self 
(dtman) is not bound, does not transmigrate, is eternally liberated. 

3. Bondage is beginningless and operates with regularity as long 
as ignorance is not removed. 

4. Since bondage depends on ignorance, liberation is manifested 
upon the removal of ignorance by acquiring its opposite, namely, 
knowledge (vidya). 

5. The operation of ignorance consists in its creating apparent 
distinctions (bheda) where none actually exist. 

6. Therefore, knowledge involves the awareness that all distinctions 
are false, especially the distinction between the knower and the known. 

7. This awareness, which constitutes liberating knowledge, which 
is free from subject-object distinctions, is pure, immediate conscious- 
ness (cit, anubhava). 

8. The true Self is itself just that pure consciousness, without 
which nothing can be known in any way. 


t ft 
HISTORICAL RESUME 7 


9. And that same true Self, pure consciousness, is not different 
from the ultimate world Principle, Brahman, because if Brahman 
were conceived as the object of Self-awareness it would involve sub- 
Ject-object distinction and, as said above, this is a product of ignorance. 

10. The real is that which is not set aside as false, not sublated 
(badha), in contrast to products of ignorance, which are eventually 
sublated. 

11. Assuming the above criterion of reality, it follows that Brahman 
(=the true Self, pure consciousness) is the only Reality (sat), since 
It is untinged by difference, the mark of ignorance, and since It is 
the one thing that is not sublatable, for sublation itself depends on 
there being consciousness. 

12. Pure consciousness is experienced during deep sleep; since we 
awake refreshed, it is inferred that pure consciousness (reality, 
Brahman, the true Self) is also the ultimate bliss. 

This is by no means an exhaustive list of Advaita tenets, but it will 
serve for the moment to indicate the tenor of the theory. Now for 
some ‘practical’ propositions. 

13. Since all distinctions are the product of ignorance, any positive 
account of a path to liberation, involving distinctions, must be 
ultimately false. 

14. However, some false views are less misleading than others. 
By criticizing worse views one arrives by stages at better ones. 

15. For example, the view that effects are different from their 
causes (asatkdryavdda) is worse than the view that the effect is essen- 
tially identical with its cause (satkdryavdda); within the latter, the view 
that the cause transforms itself into its effect (parindmavada) is worse 
than the view that it manifests its appearance as effect without itself 
changing in so doing (vivartavdda); still, all views that take causation 
seriously are inferior to nonorigination (ajativéda), since causal 
relations, as any relations, involve differences and are thus tinged 
with ignorance. 

16. Or, for example, the view that one needs a distinct judgment 
to verify or justify true knowledge (faratahpramdnyavdda) is worse than 
the view that true knowledge justifies itself (svatahpramanya); however, 
both these views are ultimately inferior to the view that truth is not 
to be found in judgments, that therefore one cannot attain ultimate 
understanding or truth through the framdpas or ‘instruments of 
knowledge.’ 

17. Or, again, atheism and agnosticism are worse views than 
theism; within theism, again, monotheism is preferable to polytheism; 
but ultimately preferable to all theisms is monism. 


8 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


18. Or, again, the skeptical or materialist view (Carvaka or 
Lokayata) is inferior to those views which accept the authority of 
scripture; among the latter, those views (Buddhism, Jainism, etc.) 
which accept as authority scriptures other than the Vedas are inferior 
to those views which accept the Vedas as authoritative; among the 
latter, the view that holds that only the injunctive sections (karma- 
kaénda) of scripture are authoritative (or that scripture is exhausted 
in injunctions) is inferior to that which holds that both the injunctive 
and declarative (jfdnakaénda) sections are authoritative; within this 
last, those who think that both sections speak of liberation—that both 
actions enjoined and knowledge conveyed in scripture are directly 
relevant to gaining liberation—hold an inferior view compared to 
those who believe that the two sections speak to different ends— 
injunctions leading one to heaven, declarations to liberation, Ulti- 
mately, however, scripture can provide no positive key to liberation, 
because the key lies in removing ignorance, a negative step; so the 
highest view of all is that of apavdda, that reality is ‘“‘not this, not this”’ 
(neti neti). 

The ‘dialectical’ aspects of these last four examples of stages along 
the way toward understanding explain why so many apparent contra- 
dictions—paradoxes, if you will—are apparently condoned and 
indeed frequently celebrated in Advaita. No contradictions are ulti- 
mately acceptable to Advaita, to be sure, because contradictions are 
clearly in the scope of ignorance, if only because they involve language 
and so distinctions. But it doesn’t follow that any contradiction is 
as good as any other: some are instructive paradoxes, puzzles, which 
inspire questions from pupils that sympathetic gurus can turn to 
advantage in bringing their pupils to a higher stage of understanding. 
Frequently Advaita texts read as verbatim reports of teacher-pupil 
interviews. 

The feature illustrated in the last four examples likewise suggests 
the kind of richness that makes Advaita so impressive when contrasted 
with philosophies such as Nyaya-Vaisesika, which believe that the 
ultimate truth can and should be literally expressed in language. It 
must also produce feelings of irritation among nonbelieving Advaita 
scholars, for apophasis coupled with dialectic renders it difficult at all 
times to know with what degree of seriousness one should construe 
what is being said at any moment. 

Of particular relevance for our present purposes, the ‘dialectical’ 
features of Advaita also make it especially difficult to distinguish an 
Advaita Vedantin from other Vedantins, especially in cases where we 
only have fragmentary passages or references to go on in determining 


¢ ft 
HISTORICAL RESUME 9 


his views. A good deal of scholarship—to be reviewed below 
and in the historical introductions to the philosophers whose views are 
summarized in the body of this volume—has been expended in 
attempts to establish how Advaita developed prior to the time of 
Samkara. But which were the Advaitins? Who are the philoso- 
phers that this volume should treat ? 


Ill. Who Were These Philosophers ? 


As we have seen, Vedanta in general can be safely stated to have 
arisen in the Upanisads. It was later epitomized in the Veddnta- 
siitras. Commentators on these writings interpreted them in different 
ways and with different emphases: one finds old commentators refer- 
red to frequently in Samkara, Ramanuja, and the other great Vedan- 
tins, as well as in their commentators in turn. Unfortunately, the 
dictates of style and manner entailed that these references do not 
necessarily identify by mame the old teacher-commentator whose 
opinion is being quoted or reported; frequently it was left to a much 
later writer, removed from the time of the old commentator by more 
than a millennium in many instances, to tell us that Samkara meant 
so-and-so by “they say” in a given passage. As a result, one views 
these identifications with a mixture of gratitude and skepticism. 

Our business is with Advaita Vedantins, however. Did an Advaita 
tradition exist in the first half of the first millennium a.p.? Samkara 
certainly thinks so: he refers to his ‘tradition’ (sampradaya) and 
quotes certain old writers with the reverence appropriate to the elders 
of a tradition one accepts. He even goes so far as to say that even a 
man wise in all the sciences is still like a fool if he has no tradition.* 
Despite this, scholars of pre-SSamkara Vedanta have had little success 
in identifying beyond question more than one or two names of writers 
who may have been associated with an Advaita tradition. 

One could, of course, argue that the great teachers whose instruc- 
tion is reported in the Upanisads, men such as Yajfiavalkya and Udda- 
laka Aruni, were Advaita Vedantins, since they propounded views 
and arguments that are interpreted by Advaita as expressing the 
philosophy outlined above. ‘This would be tendentious in the extreme, 
however, since important representatives of other Vedanta systems— 
notably Visistadvaitins and Dvaitins—also claim the authority of 
those very same teachers. Thus the truth of such a claim seems to 
rest on the acceptance of the truth of Advaita in contrast to other 
Vedantas, not on historical arguments of a nondoctrinal sort. 

The same consideration weighs against our uncritically counting 


10 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Badarayana, the author of the Brahmasiitras, as an Advaitin, although 
it doesn’t stop Advaitins from doing so. In any case, we know nothing 
of Badarayana, not even his date or place of origin, and a summary of 
his Advaita leanings, if they existed, will arise naturally from the 
commentaries of his Advaita interpreters, which are summarized 
below. 

Badarayana mentions on occasion views of others by name. In 
one passage? he contrasts the views of three old teachers—Aémarathya, 
Audulomi, and Kasakrtsna, in that order—on the question of the 
relation between the individual self and the true Self. Samkara inter- 
prets Kasakrtsna’s position indicated in the siitra in question as repre- 
senting the monistic Advaita position, and one might therefore wish 
to count Kasgakrtsna—whoever he may have been—as an old Advaitin. 
Unfortunately, once again other Vedantins claim him too: Rama- 
nuja does so by interpreting the sfira in a way consistent with Visista- 
dvaita. Since the sfitra in question consists of precisely one word! 
it is not hard to construct divergent readings. 

The date of the Brahmasiitras is not closely identified—the best scho- 
larly guesses put it a century or two before or after Christ. It seems 
safe to say, for reasons of the sort mentioned, that we have no firm 
evidence at this time of an Advaita tradition prior to the time of the 
Brahmasiitras, though there were doubtless Vedantins of some sort, 
and the sitras do on occasion suggest that older teachers had offered 
differing interpretations of the Upanisads, quite possibly in the 
form of systematic treatises. Once past the time of the sitras, however, 
we hear of a few names that may perhaps be linked with Advaita. 

The dislike Indians had for identifying people by name is a constant 
headache in this connection. Instead of naming previous comment- 
ators, or even their traditional affiliations, it is characteristic of 
Indian philosophers to introduce an opponent’s view by a laconic 
“some say.”” Indeed, we are lucky to get even that; the bane of the 
efforts of the translator of Sanskrit philosophical texts is making sure 
when one is dealing with an opponent’s view, since so frequently no 
signal whatsoever is given. Slightly better chances for identification 
are afforded in passages where an author is making passing reference 
to someone’s position. Unfortunately, even here the given name is 
either not known or not deemed sufficiently respectful; the person in 
question may well be identified by the work he wrote. Even this 
wouldn’t be so problematic if we had the whole name, but as the work 
is likely to be a commentary and the author is addressing a knowl- 
edgeable audience, the identification may well be only to the type of 
commentary the person is reputed to have written. For example, 


f f 
HISTORICAL RESUME 11 


Samkara is frequently referred to by his disciples as the Bhdsyakara, 
since he wrote a Brahmasiitrabhdsya. 

The relevance of all this to our present context is that, in many 
Vedanta works by Samkara and his pupils, in those of some Mimam- 
sakas, of Ramanuja and his followers, and of Bhaskara and others, 
there are constant references to one or more persons called ‘Vrtti- 
kara.’ A Vrttikara is someone who wrote a brief commentary 
(vrtti), but the simple allusion to that fact fails to distinguish those 
who commented thus on one work from those who commented thus 
on another. Presumably there were vrttis on many of the Upanisads, 
on the Bhagavadgitaé, and on the Brahmasiitras, all of which are now 
lost; there were also orttis on other works—for example, on the 
Mimdamsasiitras—which in a given context may be the work 
alluded to. 

Samkara speaks frequently of Vrttikaras. He speaks, more speci- 
fically, of a Sdrirakamimamsavrtti, that is, a commentary on the Brahma- 
Siitras, whose author he names as Upavarsa.* His reference there 
implies that Upavarsa also wrote a commentary on the Mimdamsa- 
Siitras, and this is confirmed by Sabara, author of the major existent 
commentary on the Mimamsasiitras, who summarizes some of Upavarsa’s 
views.” It is also indirectly confirmed by the fact that Bhaskara also 
quotes Upavarsa in the same connection as does Samkara, although 
under different siiras.8 Later commentators such as Padmapada, 
Govindananda, Anandagiri, and even the Naiyayika Jayanta Bhatta, 
have also cited certain views they attribute to Upavarsa.® It seems 
from all this that there must have been an Upavarsa who wrote com- 
mentaries on the Mimamsa and Brahmas iitras (or perhaps, some scholars!” 
have suggested, a single commentary on both), and furthermore that 
Samkara, who refers to Upavarsa as ‘Bhagavan,’ counted Upavarsa 
as a member of the tradition he follows. 

Upavarsa’s date has been hazarded as between 100 8.c. and A.D. 
200, since Sabara’s date is around a.p. 200.1! Visistadvaita writers, 
notably Ramanuja himself, speak of a Vrttikara named Bodha- 
yana,!* and Vedanta Desika, the great Visistadvaita scholiast, identi- 
fies Bodhayana with Upavarsa.? For various reasons that identifi- 
cation seems suspect, and it is more likely that Bodhayana wrote a 
different vrtti, and quite possible that Samkara is criticizing that in 
places.14 Padmapada, for instance, speaks of ‘another urtti? (urttyan- 
tara) with which Advaita differs. There is no reason to identify 
either Upavarsa or Bodhayana with the Vrttikara who is cited in 
Samkara’s commentary on the Bhagavadgitd, although Anandagiri, 
many centuries later, seems assured that not only are the orttis on 


12 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIRBS 


Brahmasiitras and Bhagavadgita by the same hand, but that the same 
author also wrote vritis on several Upanisads.!® 

Samkara, in commenting on some of the oldest Upanisads, makes 
three references to old teachers who apparently addressed themselves 
to the interpretation of the Chdndogya Upanisad. Anandagiri identifies 
these as referring to Dravidacarya, who, according to Sarvajfiatman 
(a pupil of Suresvara’s), wrote a bhasya on some Chandogya “‘sentences” 
(vakya) ascribed: by him to Brahmanandin.’? On these rather flimsy 
bases one may take Brahmanandin and Dravidacarya as two more 
early Advaitins, since Samkara once again seems highly respectful 
toward the author of the views he makes reference to. Not all modern 
scholars have been willing to accept these two as Advaitins. There 
are authorities and arguments, though by no means conclusive ones, 
for identifying Brahmanandin with Tanka, an old teacher mentioned 
by Yamunacarya as an opponent but by Ramanuja as a forerunner 
in his own tradition.18 Again, the dates of these two commentators 
on the Chandogya are almost entirely uncertain. 

A final name to be mentioned here is that of Sundara Pandya, 
who seems to have written a vérttika on Upavarsa’s ortti.1® Scholars 
have identified some passages in Advaita and Mimamsa works that 
are identified by later Advaitins as referring to Sundara Pandya,” 
but little or nothing is known of his identity or date. 

Other old Vedantins, such as Bhartrprapafica, Brahmadatta, and 
Bhartrmitra, appear not to have been Advaitins, although Brahma- 
datta may have had strong leanings in that direction despite his 
espousing theses at odds with those we listed above.*# 

So far we have been dealing with figures who, except for Badarayana, 
wrote works now apparently lost. The first complete Advaita 
philosophical work is all, or at least a large part, of some stanzas 
(karikds) that Advaita tradition construes as constituting a kind of 
commentary on the Manditkya Upanisad. The same tradition identifies 
the author of these stanzas as Gaudapada. Samkara speaks of Gauda- 
pada as his paramaguru and teacher’s teacher.?* The stanzas are called 
by several names : Mandikyakarikds, Gaudapadiyakarikas, or Agamasastra. 

Modern scholarship has blossomed forth in vast controversy over a 
variety of matters relating to Gaudapada. The details must be gathered 
from the literature itself;?> here we merely mention the problem 
areas as they affect our general understanding of Advaita development. 

First, there is the question of the date of the Mandikyakarikaés. If 
Samkara’s identification is to be accepted one would naturally place 
the Kdrikds no more than fifty to one hundred years prior to Samkara’s 
date, which many scholars feel should be fixed at a.D. 788-820. On 


t f 
HISTORICAL RESUME 13 


this understanding the Karikds can date from no earlier than the end 
of the seventh century. On the other hand, a Buddhist philosopher, 
Bhavaviveka, appears to allude to several of the Karikds and quotes 
one verbatim, and Bhavaviveka’s date is clearly fixed as prior to 630, 
since one of his works was translated into Chinese around that year. 
Thus the Karikds must date not later than the early seventh century. 
But if we place the K@rikds in the sixth-seventh century we must either 
reinterpret Samkara’s remark about his teacher’s teacher, or else 
recompute Samkara’s date. 

Second, there is the name ‘Gaudapada.’ ‘Gauda’ is an old term 
referring to the northeast portion of the subcontinent, roughly North 
Bengal. It has been suggested that the Karikds really constitute more 
than one work, but that the collection came to be known as Gauda- 
padiyakarikds because the several authors came from that region, or 
perhaps because the tradition they pioneered flourished in that region. 
Predictably, this view has not found favor among proponents of the 
Advaita tradition, who believe the entire set of stanzas constitutes a 
single Advaita treatise. Nevertheless, given the pronouncedly Bud- 
dhistic flavor of the fourth book of stanzas, which contrasts in termi- 
nology with the rest, the possibility that we are dealing with more 
than one work and/or author cannot be ruled out. 

Third, there is the matter of the alleged Buddhistic leanings of 
the Karikds. Even the most ardent Advaitin can hardly deny that the 
terminology used, especially in the last book, is redolent of Buddhism. 
That fact alone does not bother those who are willing to admit Advaita’s 
affinities with certain Buddhist systems (Vijfianavada, Madhyamika) 
and who thus have no objection to allowing a general ‘influence’ 
on Advaita by Buddhism. Not all Advaitins are so tolerant, how- 
ever, especially when their opponents have raised what Advaitins 
consider to be the malicious charge that Samkara was a ‘crypto- 
Buddhist,’ citing Gaudapada as evidence. There is little reason to 
doubt that Samkara viewed Buddhism as one of the worst of heresies 
and criticized it as roundly as any opposing philosophy of which he 
was aware. This issue, more than any of the others discussed in the 
scholarly literature, has raised as much heat as light. 

Fourth, there is the very interesting question of the relation between 
the stanzas and the Mandikya Upanisad itself. The accepted Advaita 
tradition is that the Mandikya Upanisad consists of a dozen sentences 
explaining the syllable aum/om as having four parts (waking, dream, 
deep sleep and the ‘fourth’) and as being symbolically identical 
with Brahman, the Self. The first twenty-nine kdrikés, constituting 
the first book of Gaudapada’s treatise, provide explicit commentary 


14 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


on these twelve sentences: the relationship between sentences and 
stanzas is indicated in the commentary attributed to Samkara. The 
remainder of the Karikaés—the last three books—are not specifically 
comments on the Upanisad, although it is contended that they are 
relevant to its subject matter in a general way. This is not the only 
relationship that has been suggested, however. The great Dvaita 
Vedantin Madhva and his followers consider the twenty-nine karikds 
of the first book, though not the remaining kdrikds, to be scripture 
(frutt), although they think the Upanisad and the stanzas were sepa- 
rate treatises. Ramanuja also thought those kdrikds were scripture. 
It has even been suggested by one modern scholar that the first book 
of karikdés antedated the Upanisad itself, so that the Upanisad was 
based on the stanzas rather than the reverse. 

There are other issues surrounding Gaudapada and the Karikas. 
However, no one really doubts that there are one or more works 
preserved in what we call the Gaudapddiyakarikds and that at least one 
of these works (say, the second and third books) teach Advaita 
Vedanta in clearcut terms. And since Samkara and Mandana Misra 
both know these stanzas they must have been written prior to the time 
of those philosophers. Thus, despite the many interesting questions 
raised by scholarship it still seems safe to say that the kdrikds of at 
least the second and third books constitute the earliest extended 
Advaita treatise that has been preserved for us. 

Gaudapada is according to tradition supposed to have taught 
Govindabhagavatpada, Samkara’s teacher. Tradition also makes 
Govinda a Kashmiri who, while traveling south toward Cidambaram 
happened on Gaudapada on the banks of the Narmada River and 
became his pupil. It was also on the Narmada that Samkara sub- 
sequently studied with Govinda. These traditions are embellished 
with interesting stories but can in no way be authenticated 
at this time. We know nothing at all about Govinda except 
that he was Samkara’s teacher. He apparently. wrote little or 
nothing. 

This brings us, then, to the time of Samkaracarya. As mentioned 
above, many scholars tend to believe that he flourished around the 
end of the eighth and beginning of the ninth century, but this date 
is not conclusive, and we favor placing him a century earlier. It is 
extremely difficult to differentiate traditional stories from fact in his 
case—no other Indian philosopher has been celebrated in so many 
legends, and these are reported as unquestionable by his followers. 
He is reputed to have lived a very short life of only thirty-two years, 
yet if in that time he was indeed responsible for the vast quantity of 


¢ c 
HISTORICAL RESUME 15 


literature that is attributed to him, he must have been composing every 
hour of the day ! 

The basic problem however, not only for arriving at Samkara’s 
date but also for arriving at reasoned conclusions about much else 
about him and his philosophy, concerns the authenticity of the works 
attributed tohim. If we could be certain which works are by Samkara 
we could then draw up a list of references found in those works, and 
provided we could identify their sources or the authors they presuppose, 
we would then be able to provide at least an upper limit for his date. 

It is difficult if not impossible to be sure which works Samkara 
wrote. We may start by assuming that he wrote the Brahmasiitra- 
bhdsya—the Samkara we are interested in is, by definition, the one 
who wrote this work. No one seems anxious to question the same 
person’s authorship of the Bhdsyas on the Brhaddaranyaka and Chandogya 
Upanisads. Beyond these, the questions begin. We shall not try to deal 
with these questions at this juncture—the issues will be summarized 
later when the data and arguments are reviewed. 

Even in the three works mentioned, there are enough references to 
give us some purchase on Samkara’s date. The author of these works 
clearly knows Kumarila and Prabhakara, the two philosophical 
Mimamsakas. They are usually held to have flourished in the seventh 
century. Advaita traditional accounts of Samkara’s life relate a 
meeting between Samkara and Kumirila. It seems likely that 
Samkara also knew Dharmakirti’s work. These facts are enough 
to insure that Samkara did not flourish before the seventh century 
but do not determine whether he lived in the seventh, eighth, or even 
the ninth century. 

The situation is further complicated by uncertainty about the iden- 
tity of Mandana Misra, whose Brahmasiddhi constitutes an extremely 
important source of Advaita. Mandana wrote several Bhatta 
Mimamsa works and is reputed to have studied with Kumarila. Tales 
are told about Samkara’s meeting with Mandana and his wife, and 
their eventual conversion. According to the Advaita tradition, 
Mandana then changed his name to Suresvara and became a pupil 
of Samkara. Some scholars have thought it evident that both 
Advaitins were aware of each other’s works, which confirms their 
contemporaneity. 

The reader will find a review of the arguments concerning Samkara’s 
date in the body of this volume at the outset of the section assigned to 
that writer. For reasons given there I incline to believe that he 
flourished at the beginning of the eighth century. 

Samkara is said by some of his biographers to have been born in 


16 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Kaladi, a small town in the Malabar region now included in the state 
of Kerala. His father died when Samkara was very young, and he 
developed as a child prodigy, very learned and very religious. At 
an early age he left home, studied with Govinda, and eventually, 
arrived at Banaras where he attracted some followers, notably Padma- 
pada, Hastamalaka, and Totaka. On a journey to Allahabad, he 
is supposed to have met Kumiarila, then very old, who sent his pupil 
Mandana to debate with Samkara. Mandana brought his wife along, 
and after Samkara had defeated Mandana (so goes the story) the 
wife took up the cause. During the course of their further discussion, 
the wife, Bharati by name, pointed out that Samkara was not fully 
experienced in worldly ways, not having mastered kamasdastra or the 
science of passion. Samkara then asked for a month’s delay in the 
proceedings, occupied the body of an amorous king and quickly 
mastered kdmasastra. After the month was over, he returned tothe 
debate, defeating Bharati, who along with her husband became 
Samkara’s devoted disciple. Mandana, according to tradition, was 
renamed Suregvara and proceeded to compose several important 
Advaita treatises. 

The entourage then returned to Kerala by way of Srngeri, where a 
matha was founded. When Samkara’s mother died, he fulfilled his 
childhood promise by performing the last rites despite the fact that he 
was an avowed samnyasin, that is, he had renounced all religious ritual 
acts. 

Samkara then began extensive journeying that took him through- 
out India. At Dwarka in the west he founded another majha; he 
founded a third matha at Badrinath in the Himalayas and a fourth 
at Puri in the east. He founded the sect of the Daganamis, the “‘ten- 
named ones,” and installed his most important followers as the heads 
of the four mathas. Some stories have it that he met the famous 
Kashmir Saiva savant Abhinavagupta, who cursed him with an 
ulcerous disease of which he eventually died, but not before Padma- 
pada had transferred it back to its donor, who also died of it. At 
the age of thirty-two then, having lived a remarkably full life in such 
a few years, Samkara passed away. 

The above account draws a few stories and traditions from the 
indefinite number found in the many traditional biographies. It is 
hardly possible to discriminate fact from fiction among these at this 
late date. Their number attests the particular reverence felt for 
Samkaracarya by Advaitins in particular, but also to a remarkably 
great degree by Indians of all walks of life, whether or not their 
philosophical and/or religious persuasions agree with his. 


ne 
HISTORICAL RESUME 17 


Overshadowed as an object of traditional reverence, Mandana 
Misra must not be underrated as a philosopher. His alleged identity 
with Suregvara has been severely questioned by scholars.24 As men- 
tioned, tradition makes him a pupil of Kumarila and an elder con- 
temporary of Samkara’s. His single Advaita work, the Brahmasiddhi, 
is an independent treatise developing the major tenets of Advaita, 
The sources of the thought expressed in this work have been the sub- 
ject of speculation. Yet it seems to have been quite original. There 
is some reason to think that for several centuries following Samkara’s 
and Mandana’s lifetimes it was Mandana who was viewed by other 
schools as the major figure in Advaita.25 Vacaspati Misra is said 
to have continued Mandana’s brand of Advaita in a commentary, 
now lost, on the Brahmasiddhi and in his Bhémati on Samkara’s 
Brahmas iitrabhdsya. 

Samkara had many pupils, but only four of them are remembered 
by name. Padmapada, a native of Cidambaram (?), is supposed 
to have been one of his first followers. Padmapada’s Paticapadika 
is a commentary on Samkara’s commentary on the first four Brahma- 
siitras; it is not clear whether Padmapada’s work carried beyond that 
point—in any case it is all we have. Although there are one or two 
other works attributed to Padmapada, his authorship of them is 
doubtful. 

Sureévara is now associated especial'y with the history of the Kama- 
koti Pitha at Conjeeveram (old Kafichi), which may or may not have 
been one of the original mathas established by Samkara but which 
has become since then one of the great centers of Advaita activity. 
Tradition, as we have seen, makes him Mandana before conversion; 
we have no hard evidence about any other facts pertaining to his 
life. Samkara is said to have assigned to him the writing of sub- 
commentaries (vdrttikas) on two of his own Upanisadbhasyas, those 
on the Brhaddranyaka and the Taittiriya. The former is a truly vast 
work—Mahadevan says it is about half the length of the Ramdyana ! 
Suregvara also wrote an independent treatise of great beauty and skill, 
the Naiskarmyasiddhi. Other works attributed to him are probably 
spurious. 

A third disciple of Samkara’s was, according to tradition, originally 
named Giri but was given the name of Totaka when he joined 
Samkara’s group. He is supposed to have been very devoted but was 
apparently not a quick learner until one day after Samkara, to the 
irritation of the other pupils, had delayed lessons so that Totaka might 
attend. He eventually arrived and amazed all by producing first 
a poem of eight verses, Tofakastaka, and then a longer work, entitled 


18 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Srutisdrasamuddharana, which is supposed to have been spontaneously 
composed in the presence of his teacher and fellow pupils. 

A final name of interest is that of Hastamalaka, whom tradition 
identifies as a son of Prabhakara (not necessarily the famous Mimam- 
saka) , and of whom his father had despaired, for he had been cataleptic 
from birth. When addressed by Samkara, however, asking ‘Who 
art thou ?”’ the boy blossomed forth with a fourteen-verse poem on 
the Self; now called Hastémalakastotra. 

When Samkara established the four pithas at Srigeri, Dwarka, 
Badrinath, and Puri, he is supposed to have put one of his pupils in 
charge of each. However, the traditional lists of the different temples 
disagree on the details of who was installed where, and in addition 
the Kamakoti temple at Conjeeveram has since become extremely 
important as a center of Advaita sectarianism. So we cannot say 
with certainty at this point which pupils are to be associated with 
which temples. 

The following list names the authors treated in this volume, those 
works which are accepted by practically all scholars as authentically 
theirs, and also the most important of the spurious works. An approxi- 
mation, based on evidence to be summarized below, is given of the 
dates we are at present inclined to assign to these writers. 


A CHECK LIST OF AUTHORS AND WORKS 
Abbreviations : d. date; p. place; w. work(s); T, edited and translated; 
E, published but not translated; M, manuscript(s) available but 
not published; *, probably spurious 


Upavarsa; d. before a.p. 200 (?); p. ?; w. Brahmasiitraortti 
Brahmanandin; d. ?; p. ?; w. Chdndogyopanisadvakya 
Dravidacarya; d. ?; p. “the South’; w. Chdandogyopanisadvakyabhdsya 
Sundara Pandya; d. ?; p. ?; w. Brahmasiitravrttivarttika 
Gaudapadacarya; d. a.p. 600 (?); p. North Bengal; w. Manditkyo- 
panisadkarikas (also called Gaudapddakarikas or Agamasastra), (T) 
Samkaracarya; d. a.v. 725 (?); p. Kerala; w. Brahmasitrabhasya (T), 
Brhadaranyakopantsadbhasya (T), Taittiriyopanisadbhasya (T), Upa- 
deSasahasri (T), Chandogyopanisadbhadsya (T), Aitareyopanisadbhdsya 
(T), Isopanisadbhasya (T), Kathopanisadbhasya (T), Kenopanisad 
(pada) bhasya (T), Kenopanisad (vakya)bhadsya (E), Mundakopanisad- 
bhésya (T), Prasnopanisadbhdsya (T), Bhagavadgitabhadsya (T), 
Mandiikyopanisadbhasya with Gaudapddiyakarikabhasya (T), *Dak- 
sindmiirtistotra (T), *Pafcikarana (T), *Aparoksdnubhati (T), 
*Atmabodha (T), *Satasloki (T), *Atmajianopadesa (T), *Atma- 
natmaviveka (T), *Tativabodha (T), *Dagasloki (T), *Vakyavrtti (T), 


a f 
HISTORICAL RESUME 19 


*Vivekaciidamani (T), *Sarvaveddntasiddhantasamgraha (T), *Advatta- 
paficaratna or Atmapafcaka (T), “*Vakyasudha or Drgdrsyaviveka 
(T), *Upadesapancaka (T), *Maydpaticaka (T), *Laghuvakyaurtti 
(T), *Svetdfvataropanisadbhasya (E), *Nrsimhottaratépaniyopanis- 
adbhasya (E), *Kausitakyupanisadbhasya (E) 

Mandana Misra; d. a.D. 680-750 (?); p. Mithila (?); w. Brahma- 
siddhi (T [French]) 

Padmapada; d. A.D. 750-(?); p. Cidambaram (?); w. Paficapadika (T) 

Suresvara; d. a.D. 750 (?); p. ?; w. Brhadéranyakopanisadbhasya- 
vdrttika (E; partly T), Taittiriyopanisadbhasyavarttika (T), Nais- 
karmyasiddhi (T), *Daksindmirtimdnasolldsa (T), *Paiicikarana- 
varttika (E), *Kasimoksavicara (E), *Svarajyasiddhi (E) 

Totaka; d. a.p. 750 (?); p. ?; w. Tofakdstaka (E), Srutisdrasamud- 
dharana (E) 

Hastamalaka; d. a.p. 750 (?); p. ?;w.  ‘*Hastamalakaslokah 
(T [German ]) 


IV. Relation to Other Systems 


Samkara is very much aware of the variety of philosophical views 
current in his time as well as those relevant to his purpose and which 
flourished at earlier periods. It would be instructive to measure 
the amount of time he gives specific systems. Impressionistically, 
in default of such a measure, we can say that the early Advaitins 
devote the greatest amount of time to dealing with the views of 
Mimamsakas and other types of Vedanta. Butin the Brahmasiitra- 
bhasya Samkara considers at length Samkhya. In that work also, 
there are extended criticisms of Nyaya, Vaisesika, Yoga, Buddhist, 
Jain, and Carvaka theories. By consulting the index to this volume 
the reader can quickly trace the most important passage in which 
each school is criticized. 

One may also raise the question of the influence of the various 
systems on the development of Advaita. Defenders of the tradition 
point out that their philosophical stance goes back a long way—in 
their eyes, it was developed by the sages of whom we hear in the Upa- 
nisads and by their predecessors. On the other hand, as was implied 
in the foregoing, there seems to be a remarkably small number of 
identifiable Advaitins prior to Samkara, and one not disposed to accept 
tradition uncritically may well speculate that the Advaita interpret- 
ation of the Upanisads, although no doubt receiving a good many 
cues from the scriptures themselves, also owes something to other 
influences, blossoming forth for the first time especially in the works 


20 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of Samkara and Mandana. Once the question of influence is opened 
up in this way there does indeed seem to be some reason to suspect 
certain factors that conditioned the Advaita interpretation. 

Some of the influences are relatively uncontroversial. It is clear 
enough, for example, that Mandana Miéra’s brand of Advaita incor- 
porates the doctrine of sphofa, a grammatical theory held by Bhartr- 
hari the grammarian, whereas, Samkara and his followers reject the 
sphofa theory. Again, Mandana’s explanation of false judgments 
tries to assimilate the Advaita view to that of the Bhatta Mimamsaka, 
whereas Samkara is ambivalent and Suresvara definitely critical of 
the Bhatta view on error. Mandana also appears to owe something 
to Mimamsa in his attitude toward the place of meditation in achiev- 
ing release, and in his tendency to accommodate to some extent a 
“combined-path” view  (jfidnakarmasamuccayavada).*® These tend- 
encies are not surprising : Mandana was indeed a major figure in the 
history of both Grammarian philosophy—as the author of the Sphofa- 
siddhi, a masterful exposition of the theory—and of Bhatta Mimamsa— 
as the author of several works about the system and (possibly) as a 
student of Kumarila himself. 

It is also evident that either Advaita takes over some of the Samkhya 
psychology or that the two systems have a common source. Advaita 
and Samkhya both develop their account of the world through a 
model of reflection, according to which the pure consciousness of Self 
(one Self in Advaita, many in Samkhya) is reflected by the buddhi, 
in various forms, including egoity (ahamkara), internal organ (manas), 
and eventually the physical bodies and qualities of the empirical 
world. The parallels between the two theories on such issues clearly 
make it important in Samkara’s eyes that he carefully distinguishes the 
peculiar Advaita version, involving avidyaé as a positive force though 
nevertheless ultimately unreal, fromthe Samkhya account featuring 
a prakrti that undergoes real transformations and in which avidya 
is only a negative fact, the failure to discriminate. 

The greatest notoriety has surrounded alleged Buddhist influence 
on Samkara’s Advaita. On the face of it the charge is absurd. Sam- 
kara not only shows no self-conscious leanings toward Buddhism he 
saves some of his choicest disrespectful language for the Buddhists.?” 
Nevertheless, the issue has attracted considerable scholarly discussion. 
As we have already seen, Gaudapada uses Buddhist terminology to 
draw Advaita conclusions. Furthermore, there are important paral- 
lels—up to a point—particularly with Vijifianavada. Majumdar 
argues that Gaudapada got his philosophy straight out of the Lankd- 
vatarasiitra.® The handling of avidyd/mdyaé in Vijfianavada resembles 


t e 
HISTORICAL RESUME 21 


Advaita’s in certain respects. Comparisons with Madhyamika are 
also possible : both Madhyamika and Advaita profess the doctrine of 
nonorigination (ajativada) and both Advaita and Buddhism appeal 
to dreams as illustrations taken to show the unreality of the world. 
Other points of comparison can also be found.” 

Loyal Advaitins have almost universally rejected the suggestion 
of any influence, and many of them will argue that the parallels just 
noted are accidental or the result of misunderstandings or foreshorten- 
ed views. For example, K.A.K. Aiyar®® points out five aspects in 
which Advaita and Buddhism are entirely distinct, and most of them 
relate to the alleged parallels. (1) Both schools say that the world 
is “unreal’’, but whereas the Buddhists mean that it is only a concep- 
tual construct (vikalpa), Samkara does not think the world is merely 
aconcept. (2) Momentariness is a cardinal principle of Buddhism— 
consciousness is fundamentally momentary for them. But in Advaita 
consciousness is pure, without beginning or end, thoroughly continu- 
ous; the momentariness of empirical states of consciousness overlies 
this underlying continuity. (3) In Buddhism the “self” is the ego, 
a conceptual construction and quite unreal; in Advaita the Self is 
the only really Real, the substratum of all conceptions. (4) In 
Buddhism avidyé causes us to construct continuants, such as the self; 
in Advaita it causes us instead to take what is unreal to be real and 
vice versa. (5) Removal of avidyd leads to a “blowing out’ (nirvana) 
for Buddhists, but for Samkara it leads to perfect knowledge (vidyd).5 


Z 


THEORY OF VALUE 
I. Bondage : Life, Death, and Rebirth 


As do all Indian philosophical systems (except for the Carvakas), 
Advaita orients its entire approach around the quest for liberation 
(moksa), the release from bondage (samsdra). Although there are 
various levels on which this quest can be understood or interpreted, 
it seems quite evident that the Advaita philosophers studied here 
construed bondage quite literally as a more or less mechanical process 
(though under divine control) describable in very specific detail. 
In order fully to understand the Advaita theory about liberation it 
is necessary first to comprehend what constitutes bondage, that is, 
to review the cycle of life, death, and rebirth as it is conceived in 
Advaita. For reasons that will become clear, it seems best to begin 
this account at the time of a man’s death and to trace his_ continu- 
ation around to the time of his subsequent death in his next life. 

A. Death. Death may be due either to “natural causes,” con- 
strued here as one’s having lived through his allotted years as deter- 
mined by his past karma, or to violence, which interrupts the natural 
working out of karma. In either case, however, a man comes to the 
point of death endowed with several relevant bits of equipment. 
These include his gross body, made up of material substances such as 
earth, water, etc.; his sense organs and ‘‘action”’ organs (organs of 
speech, locomotion, grasping, sex, and excretion); his intellectual 
organ (manas); his sense of ego (akamkdra); and his internal organ 
(buddhi or antahkarana), which is the basis of his ability to engage in 
intentional awareness and consequent activity. 

In addition, he has stored up in the form of traces (samskdra), or 
tendencies, the residues (anuSaya) of acts he has performed in the life 
just ending, as well as the residues of acts performed in previous lives, 
which have not as yet come to “fruition” or ‘“‘maturation” (vipdka), 


THEORY OF VALUE 23 


that is, which have not as yet produced their results. Karmic resi- 
dues are of three kinds. (1) There are those residues that were 
determined at birth to work themselves out during the present life 
(the one just ending)—these residues are called prarabdhakarman. 
(2) There are those residues that were produced by acts performed 
either in this life or in a previous one, but which remain latent during 
this present life—called sajicitakarman.1 (3) ‘Then there are the 
results of acts performed during this very lifetime, which will mature 
in some subsequent lifetime in the normal course of events. This 
kind of karma is called saficiyamana or dgamin karman. 

As karmic residues mature they are influenced by what are called 
“impressions”? (vdsands) to determine the way in which the karmic 
potentials will in fact be worked out, the kind of experience (dhoga) 
that will accrue to the agent in consequence, and the future karmic 
residues that will be laid down by the act(s) so determined. These 
vdsands appear to be decisions arrived at by the internal organ to seek 
certain kinds of outcomes. For instance, K. S. Iyer? divides vdsands 
into impure and pure types and subdivides the impure into those, 
for example, that relate to worldly pride, those that relate to over- 
intellectualizing (addiction to study, ritualism), and those that relate 
to one’s body (taking the body to be one’s true Self, use of cosmetics 
to beautify or medicines to remove blemishes from one’s body). At 
any moment in one’s conscious lifetime one is guided in acting by such 
vdsands, which develop into desires (kdma).3 

The Upanisads themselves suggest several accounts of what happens 
to these various things at the time of death. Itis not altogether easy 
to rationalize all these into a single consistent account, although pre- 
sumably that is what a commentator such as Samkara will attempt to 
do. What we provide next follows Samkara (Brahmasiitrabhaya 
IV.2.1-21) where there are disagreements. 

The process goes as follows : 

1. The speech function becomes absorbed into the intellectual 
organ or power of thought (manas). 

2. It is followed by the functions of all the other organs. Samkara 
emphasizes that it is only the functions that merge, not the organs 
themselves. (One must keep in mind that a sense organ, for example, 
is not to be confused with the physical locus—the visual organ is 
different from the eyeball). 

3. Then the manas, having absorbed these various functions, has 
its own functions absorbed into breath (prdna). That this is so is 
evidenced by the fact that a dying person—and for that matter one 


24 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


asleep and not dreaming—is seen to breathe though his senses and his 
mind is not functioning. 

4. Next, breath so endowed merges with the individual self (jiva), 
that is, with the internal organ as limited by the awarenesses, karmic 
residues, and vdsands present at this moment. The man stops 
breathing. 

5. Now the jiva, thus encumbered, joins the subtle elements 
(tanmatras). These are five in number, corresponding to the five 
gross elements—air, fire, earth, water, and dkdfa. The ‘‘subtle” 
elements apparently are conceived of as minute particles that form 
the seeds from which grow their gross counterparts. The cluster of 
the five subtle elements provides a (material) ‘“‘subtle body”? (siiksma- 
farira) that now encloses the jiva along with its appurtenances, just 
as the gross body did during life. 

6. All these factors collect in the heart.4 The jiva arrives replete 
with awarenesses (both true and false), karmic residues, vdsands, 
desires, and internal organ and so is perfectly capable of consciousness. 
However, since the external organs have stopped functioning, its 
consciousness at this point, like consciousness in dreams, is completely 
controlled by past karma. Thus at the “moment of death,” the jiva 
is caused by its karma to develop a vasand that determines the direction 
the subtle body will go as it leaves the heart—by which veins and point 
of exit, by what path, and to what kind of birth. 

7. Thus decided, the jiva-controlled subtle body leaves the heart 
by one or another of the many veins and arteries and eventually gains 
egress from the dead gross body by one or another opening. 

B. The Progress of the Subtle Body. To this point, the Upanisadic 
sources appear relatively consistent in their implications. When 
they turn to the account of what happens immediately after death the 
versions diverge slightly. 

Basically, the texts distinguish two paths for the subtle bodies to 
follow. One of these is referred to as the ‘‘northern path,” the ‘“‘way 
of the gods” (devayéna), which lies through fire or light and leads to 
the sun. The other is the “southern path’’, the “‘way of the fathers”’ 
(pitryana), which leads through smoke to the moon. Samkara tells 
us that it is those who observe ritual obligations but do not have 
knowledge of God (i.e., Brahman with qualities, saguna Brahman) 
who follow the southern path; those who know God follow the northern 
path. 

What happens to those who do not fulfill their ritual obligations 
and do not have knowledge? They follow a third path, which leads 
to Yama’s world or city— called samyamanam here and also in Manu, 


THEORY OF VALUE 25 


the Epic, and elsewhere—or else they are immediately reborn as 
small animals, insects, perhaps plants, etc.5 

How does the passage along these paths proceed ? In the Brhada- 
ranyaka Upanisad, we are told that the self proceeds from this body to 
the next like a leech or caterpillar. Samkara comments that the idea 
is that the self creates a link from the old body to the new one by means 
of its vdsands.6 This serves to remind us that as the self encased in 
its subtle body moves along its path it is not unconscious—it is having 
experiences, determined by its karmic residues as in a dream, and is 
forming plans and following them out as it goes along. It is thus 
exhausting some of its stored-up karmic residues as it proceeds and 
continues doing so in the place (sun, moon, or samyamanam, as the 
case may be) at which it in due course arrives. 

Some details of the stages along the northern path are discussed in 
the third section, fourth chapter of the Brahmasiitras. For one thing, 
Samkara argues that though by having meditated on certain symbols 
one person may experience things appropriate to those symbols and 
another may experience other things appropriate to other symbols, 
still there is only one northern path. The Chdndogya Upanisad tells 
us that these transmigrating selves go to light, day, the waxing half 
of the moon, the six months when the sun is going north, the year, 
Aditya, the moon, lightning.? What sort of travel is this ? Samkara 
explains that these are references to divinities that conduct the 
self along the path, since in its state it is not capable of finding its 
own way. 

The Chandogya also gives us an account of the details of the southern 
path. It leads from smoke through night, the dark fortnight, the 
months when the sun is moving south, to the realm of the fathers, 
thence to dkdfa and thus to the moon. Again, these are identified by 
Samkara as deities who act as guides for the transmigrating self. 

C. Heaven and Hell. The selves of those who follow the third 
path—to Yama’s world, perhaps—are “reborn” almost immediately 
in bits of grain and other such things. They retain consciousness all 
the while, and the “‘hellish”’ experiences they earn—ascribed sometimes 
to instruments of torture controlled by Yama—are more plausibly 
construed as the natural concomitants of existing in such a state, 
considering the violent changes wrought on them as they are prepared 
for use in meals to be consumed by animals and human beings. These 
embodiments—plants, grains, etc.—being determined by the karmic 
residues of the selves that inhabit them, are rather quickly lived 
through, and the subtle-body-enclosed self may move on quickly 
from one “body” to various others, all the while experiencing 


26 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


appropriate pains “as in a dream.”” When they are deserving, they 
in due course find their way into the food of humans and so get 
into the blood and semen and eventually gain a new human birth. 

As for those who arrive at the moon, the Upanisads tell us that they 
become the “‘food of the gods,’”? which Samkara explains does not 
mean that they are actually eaten by the gods, but that they serve 
the gods. Actually, the sojourn in the moon is a period during which 
the meritorious residues are exhausted, and it is thus basically a happy 
interim. Those who have arrived there have come to experience 
their just rewards in heaven for ritual observances practiced in the 
preceding worldly life. They do so until a small amount of karmic 
residue remains. There is an extended discussion in the Brahma- 
stitrabhdsya defending this interpretation. They are also said to take 
on a watery ‘“‘body” that supports the organs and allows them to 
generate pleasant experiences. 

Those traveling the northern path, or “‘way of the gods, ”’ proceed, 
as we have seen, through the sun (Aditya) to lightning. From there 
they are conducted to the realm of that which they have worshiped 
and upon which they meditate. If that thing is God, (saguya) Brah- 
man, they will be led to the Brahmaloka. If they meditated on God 
under some symbolic manifestation, however, they will arrive at an 
appropriately different kind of heavenly place.® 

It seems likely that Badarayana thought that the Brahmaloka 
amounted to the state of liberation. Samkara, though, cannot allow 
that one can literally “arrive at’’ the higher (nirgupa) Brahman, since 
he claims that Brahman is quite unrelated to any second thing, and 
so he is forced here to interpret the Brahmaloka as a highest heaven, 
not liberation. That raises the question whether the selves who go 
there return to be reborn or not. The text, of course, asserts that they 
do not return—presumably once again speaking of liberation—and 
Samkara is caught in a dilemma.® Either he must reject Bada- 
rayana’s and the Upanisads’ teaching on the point, or else he must 
accept the Brahmaloka as liberation and so capitulate to the view that 
one can obtain liberation without knowing the nature of the highest 
Brahman. The solution that Samkara finds is rather complex. On 
the one hand, he argues that the texts saying that the selves do not 
return from Brahmaloka mean they do not return to rebirth in this 
world; they do, however, return to other forms of existence, presum- 
ably on a divine plane. On the other hand, he is willing to admit 
that those attaining the Brahmaloka, provided they have in the 
meantime attained knowledge of the highest Brahman, will be liberat- 
ed at the time of reabsorption (pralaya). Brahmasitrabhdsya IV.3.10 


THEORY OF VALUE 27 


tells us that such selves proceed, along with the god (Hiranyagarbha) 
who rules the Brahmaloka, to “the pure highest place of Visnu,” 
and that this is what is meant by “‘progressive liberation ” (krama- 
mukti), since the highest Brahman cannot be (literally) ‘‘reached.” 

Mandana Misra’ suggests still another way of resolving the dilemma. 
The nonreturning may be only relative : it may mean that those 
who go to the Brahmaloka remain there until the next reabsorption, 
but that after that they return to bondage in the next cyclical universe. 

D. Descent from Heaven to Earth. For those in the moon the time 
eventually comes when they have exhausted their good karmic resi- 
dues. At this point the watery body, which had supported the organs, 
etc., through their stay on the moon dissolves, and the subtle body 
with its remainder of bad karma begins to fall back toward the earth. 
It is said to descend inversely through the stages by which it ascended— 
through dkdsa to air, to smoke, into mist and cloud, and then to the 
earth’s surface in the rain. This process does not take long, and 
the self loses consciousness during this period, just as one loses con- 
sciousness when falling from a tree (according to one account) or 
because the karmic residues that remain do not become operative 
again until they determine the next birth. 

Having arrived in the rain, the subtle body finds its way into plants. 
It is not reborn in the plants, that is, it does not experience the pains 
of plant existence, as do those who follow the third path and who may 
indeed be reborn as plants and suffer the torments involved. Instead, 
the subtle body eventually attaches itself to a plant—as a grain of 
rice, say—which is ground up, cooked, eaten, and digested by an 
animal. Throughout all this the attached subtle bodies remain un- 
conscious (fortunately for them). It is pointed out in the Chdndo- 
gyopanisadbhdsya!! that this part of the cycle is subject to multifarious 
accidents; a subtle body might spend a long time stuck in some inaccess- 
ible place where the rain water had carried it and then evaporated, 
or it may be carried along in the ecological cycle for a long time, 
passing through various bodies, occasionally into the ocean, back up 
into clouds, down again in rain, and so on. 

E. Birth. Eventually, as was said, the subtle body finds its way 
into an animal’s vital juices—blood, semen—and, depending on the 
kind of animal it is, becomes involved in the reproductive process. 
In the case of many animals, including humans, this means that it 
enters the womb in semen. The Attareyopanisadbhasya!? notes that the 
jiva is in a sense born twice—the first time in the semen when it enters 
the womb, the second time when it leaves the mother’s body. In 
each case there is influence of the parent on the new gross body, through 


28 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the food eaten by the parent, which interacts with the clements in 
the subtle body; this is why the child when born resembles his parents, 
both in the fact that it is a human child that is born (and not some 
other species of animal) as well as in its facial and other features. 

What is not well explained in this account is : what is responsible 
for a jiva destined for highborn caste status, say, getting into the bodily 
fluids of the right kind of parents, rather than suffering a lower birth 
among humans, or even among other animals? It is perhaps not 
altogether speculative to suggest that this may have a good deal to 
do with the importance Indians place on the food they eat. The 
purer jivas find their way into purer foodstuffs (although exactly why 
still constitutes a mystery, it seems); then since the higher castes eat 
the purer foods, and so on down the natural order, it will ordinarily 
work out that the right jivas will turn up with the right parents. 

In any case, the food eaten by the mother during gestation becomes 
transformed into the various physical and mental substances that 
make up the new body, as determined by the relevant aspects of the 
subtle body. Taittiriyopanisadbhdsyavarttika I1.181-186 spells out the 
details of this process, and Samkara refers to it in more general terms 
in various places. SureSvara also dwells, as do other authors, on the 
misery of the jivaas it lies in the womb; here once again it has 
regained consciousness, apparently, and it develops its organs as 
the gross portions of its body corresponding to them grow. Although 
we are not explicitly told so, it would appear that this development 
takes place as determined by karmic residues through the mechan- 
ism of vdsands. If so, it would seem that the process of maturation of a 
Jjiva’s karma begins again at least at the time it enters the womb, if 
not before. Although our texts are vague as to details, it is apparent 
that the Hindu’s understanding of these matters must have had 
tremendous influence on his eating, sexual, and other habits. 

An interesting story, corroborating some of the speculations indulg- 
ed in above, is provided in the Attareya Upanisad and its Bhdsya by 
Samkara and concerns Vamadeva, who was liberated while in his 
mother’s womb.14 Vamadeva is said to have realized the identity 
of his self with the Highest Self while in the womb, and he immediately 
obtained release there. The idea is that Vamadeva was so pure and 
so close to enlightenment in his previous life that his liberation was 
accomplished before his next birth. But this suggests several things. 
First, something happened in the womb to Vamadeva that led to his 
liberation; since this could hardly have been a hearing of the scripture 
or the words of a teacher, we must suppose that his purity resulted in 
removal of ignorance without special occasion. Second, since Vamadeva 


THEORY OF VALUE 29 


is said to have subsequently been born and lived through a life 
determined by his prarabdhakarman, we must assume that the deter- 
mination of his length of life and his experiences, as well as of his 
type of birth, were in fact fixed prior to his liberation in the womb. 
This means, I infer, that what the Aitareya Upanisad called the ‘‘first 
birth,” in which the subtle body enters the womb in the semen, is 
that point at which the operation of karmic residues through vdsands 
is resumed, along with the jiva’s consciousness. Third, it suggests 
that the distinction between Vamadeva’s prarabdhakarman and _ his 
other karmic residues was already fixed prior to this “‘first birth”’, 
since presumably at the point of liberation all the other residues 
became inoperative. 

F. Life. All of this brings us to what we ordinarily call the birth 
of the child, the ‘‘second birth” of the Aitareya. It would seem from 
the foregoing that, viewed in karmic perspective, this is a relatively 
unimportant event, though for obvious reasons it is a critical occasion 
viewed from the perspective of human society. All the karmic pro- 
cesses are already under way, and have been for about nine months 
in the case of a normal child. 

This child is, then, endowed with the three kinds of karmic residues 
noted earlier, that is, pradrabdha, saficita, and agamin. The Bhagavad- 
gitabhdsya® likens prarabdhakarman to an arrow already in flight— 
it will continue until its energy is exhausted, unless something ob- 
structs it. Likewise, the child as he lives through the present life will 
experience the ripening of the residues of his prarabdhakarman unless 
something obstructs it, such as premature death due to violence or 
other unnatural causes. So it is the same balance of prdrabdhakarman 
that determines the length of his normal life and the type of experiences 
he will have during that lifetime. 

The method by which karmic residues determine experience needs 
to be discussed, for it lies at the center of the supposed problems 
about the fatalistic, or at least deterministic, implications of the ‘‘law 
of karma.’ It seems to me that there is little cause for such problems 
in the Advaita context. The key to the puzzle, if any, lies in distin- 
guishing karma from vdsand. A vdsand, as we have seen, is explained 
as a man’s determination to aim for certain objectives of a_ general 
sort. Now these determinations are the effects of one’s karmic resi- 
dues—one’s vdsands will be purer the purer one’s karma. Further, 
pursuing a purer determination will get one, on balance, happier 
experiences, whereas pursuing impure determination will get one, 
on balance, less happy or indeed painful experiences. It is in this 
sense that past actions determine future experiences. However, 


30 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


this is a very loose relation. It is not, for instance, the case that a 
certain act x in a past life specifically determines a certain type of 
experience y in this life. At best, x generates a determination on the 
agent’s part to pursue a life plan or style, or a specific element in one, 
that will lead him to do something, if nothing interferes, productive 
of y. Much may interfere. One aware of the dangers of following 
his instincts may perform yoga, etc., to counteract the influence of 
his vdsands. Furthermore, the agent, aware of the relation between 
his life plans and his type of experience, may decide to take a certain 
attitude to his life as a whole. This is not an alternative life plan, 
but a way of looking at life plans. Thus the karmic residues must 
keep working themselves out—that is, a man must live some life and 
follow some style or plan, experiencing the appropriate results—but 
he may remain, as it were, aloof from involvement in the process. 
In this second-order attitude toward bondage lies the key to 
liberation. 

In living one’s life plan or style, however, one necessarily performs 
actions. The primary meaning of the word “‘karma’”’ is action. 
There are a number of relevant kinds of actions. For example, one 
may divide actions into bodily (kayika), vocal (vacika), and mental 
(manasa) acts. Then again, one can divide actions into those which 
are ritual acts and those which are not. The former group can be 
subdivided into those which are positively enjoined (vidhi) and those 
which are proscribed (nisedha). Of the positively enjoined acts there 
may be said to be four kinds— (1) the regular daily rites (nityakarman) , 
such as the baths prescribed for a Brahmin each day; (2)the occasional 
rites (naimittikakarman), ritual observances for particular occasions, 
for example, those performed at a certain point in the life cycle, such 
as investiture, succoring the ancestors, and so forth; (3) desired acts 
(kamyakarman), that is, those acts prescribed for one who wishes to 
obtain a certain result, say, increase in wealth, or heaven; (4) expia- 
tory actions (prdyafcitta), acts performed to purify oneself because one 
has failed to do certain prescribed acts either in this life or in past 
lives.16 

On Samkara’s view all these kinds of acts are equally capable of 
producing karmic residues, which in turn will condition the type of 
birth, length of life, and kind of experience the jiva will inherit in the 
next life. For that matter, some of a man’s acts may produce resi- 
dues that have their results in the same life. As we shall see, however, 
there is a condition the presence of which is necessary for residues to 
be produced by any action, and that is attachment, explained by 
Samkara as deriving from lack of Self-knowledge. 


THEORY OF VALUE 31 


Which karmic residues work themselves out sooner, which ones 
constitute the prarabdhakarman for a given lifetime, and which are 
saficita, stored up for later fruition ? Samkara seems to think that in 
general the more intense and proximate residues, whether sinful or 
meritorious, tend to mature first, but that this general rule is subject 
to many exceptions because there are incompatibilities between 
several residues that have equal claim but only one of which can mature 
at a given time. 

How does maturation actually come about? One performs an 
act in lifetime A at time é, and this act is supposed to have something 
to do with the experience the same agent has in lifetime B at time 
t+n. In Brahmasiitrabhdsya I11.2.38-41 Samkara explains the differ- 
ence between the views of Jaimini and Badarayana on this score. 
The Mimamsa view of Jaimini is that the act produces at time ¢ 
something called an apiirva, which somehow reflects the act and pre- 
sages the eventual outcome; this apfirva constitutes in a literal manner 
the karmic residue and works itself out automatically in lifetime B, 
having been passed along with the other elements of the subtle body. 
Badarayana’s view, as Samkara interprets it, is that (1) it is clear that 
the act itself cannot produce the experience in lifetime B, because 
an act is a short-lived event; (2) whether or not there is something 
like an apfirva, it cannot by itself produce the experience that consti- 
tutes its maturation, because it is an unintelligent thing like a piece 
of wood and cannot pick out the appropriate time and place for the 
pleasure and/or pain that constitute the experience produced. As a 
result, (3) the correct view must be that God arranges things so that 
the resulting experiences match the merit or demerit characterizing 
the agent’s past acts. It will, I trust, be appreciated that this in no 
way conditions what was said above about determinism and free will. 
It is logically possible that A should do x in lifetime A, that the karmic 
residue should breed a vdsand in lifetime B that leads him to doa »y 
that is productive of great sin but immediately accompanied by 
pleasant experiences. Indeed, not only is it logically possible but it 
seems to happen all the time : why else would people do such things ! 
God does not ordinarily match experience to simultaneous act on the 
ground of the merit-value of that act but rather on the ground of the 
merit-value of one or more past acts. 

The child grows into a young, a middle-aged, and an old person. 
He is constantly forming plans under the influence of those actions 
from his past and present lives, carrying them out through present 
actions that are accompanied by types of experience—a mixture of 
pleasure and pain—arising from situations arranged by God but 


32 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


appropriately reflecting the valence of the past actions. As long as 
a person lacks Self-knowledge, the acts he performs will themselves 
breed future lives and experiences. So he arrives in due course at 
the end of this life, carrying with him the residues of acts in this life 
and previous ones, and he dies once more, eventually to be reborn 
again in one of the fashions we have described. 


Il. Liberation in Advaita 


Practically all Indian philosophical systems view liberation as the 
highest aim of mankind, and Advaita is no exception. In terms of 
the account of bondage just recounted one might say that liberation 
consists of release from the process of birth, life, death, and transmigra- 
tion. This way of viewing liberation characterizes what all systems 
would agree to be the final desired result of their efforts, but it does 
not define the specific Advaita doctrine of liberation. 

The Advaita view is simple to state and devastating in its impli- 
cations. Liberation is nothing more nor less than being, knowing, and 
experiencing one’s true Self. In this disarming statement we can 
find the key to many of the Advaita teachings. 

As the Advaitin sees it, the process of rebirth described in the pre- 
ceding section is the product of our ignorance (avidya). We cannot 
help being, knowing, and experiencing our Self; thus we are always 
liberated. It follows, first, that liberation does not require a positive 
change in us. We do not have to become something, or someone, 
else. Liberation is not a product; it has no beginning or end; it has 
no degrees. Liberation is not some other place, like heaven, that one 
seeks to travel to. 

Other systems, viewing bondage as entirely a matter of the indivi- 
dual’s somehow falling from grace through performing evil actions, 
seek to attain liberation by purifying their actions. But the mechanics 
of bondage will operate for them as much as for those whose actions 
are bad; pure acts bind as much as impure ones, the Bhagavadgita 
reminds us.!7 One has to escape the realm of actions altogether. 
One may contemplate desisting from performing any actions what- 
ever, but the Gita also warns us away from that : no ordinary person 
can avoid acting even for a moment; refusing to act is itself a kind of 
action.18 

One must, therefore, identify a necessary condition for the work- 
ings of the mechanism of bondage, something removable and in whose 
absence the mechanism will cease to function. That condition, says 
the Advaitin, is avidyd. It is only as long as avidyé operates that desires 
for things and ends are formed in us. Without desires the vdsands, 


THEORY OF VALUE 33 


or tendencies, will not be carried through into action, and without 
functioning vdsanés the karmic residues cannot determine birth, 
length of life, and experiences. 

However, if avidya were something—like Samkhya’s prakrti—that 
itself functioned through action, that is, if it were an independent 
and real something, different from oneself, under another’s control 
or out of control entirely, it would not be removable by me, and 
release, if it occurred at all, would be accidental or at the whim of 
someone else. Furthermore, under those circumstances, to remove 
it or destroy it would require another action, which in its turn would 
breed residues, vdsands, and desires, and the round would go on as 
before. 

But avidya, fortunately, is not something that requires action to 
destroy it. It is destroyed by its natural opposite, perfect knowledge 
(vidy@). Knowing is not an act and so does not breed further karmic 
residues. And perfect knowledge is something not under someone 
else’s control or under no control—it is something we already have, 
and we will immediately recognize ourselves as having it if we only 
have it called to our attention under appropriate circumstances. 

How it is to be called to our attention is a question leading to the 
main doctrines of Advaita metaphysics and epistemology. Here 
we are merely considering some implications of what liberation is 
and is not. We can now see what it is not : it is not the result of an 
action; it is not like arriving at a place (e.g., heaven) one has not 
already reached; and it is not dying or just losing consciousness (one 
is reborn or wakes up eventually). 

Still, one may well say, “I am now bound and I want to be free, 
so liberation must at least be a state I’m not now in. Granted getting 
into that state is not like going from here to another place; yet, what 
is it like ??? Samkara tells us in one place that it is like what happens 
to the space inside a pot when the pot breaks, that is, nothing.!® 
As Gaudapada says, there is no liberation really.2° Or, using another 
common Advaita analogy, it is like what happens to the light reflected 
in a dirty mirror when the mirror is cleaned. 

Yet these are only analogies. What, specifically, happens to a 
man when he becomes liberated? As we have seen, bondage arises 
because actions automatically—or with God’s help—produce karmic 
residues, which in turn produce vdsands and experiences. The condi- 
tion under which this happens is avidyé. When avidyd is removed, 
two of the three kinds of action (karma) are rendered inoperative. 
The residues that have been stored up but are not stated to reach 
fruition in this life lose their potency; they are *‘burned,” suggests the 


34 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


etymology of the common verb used here, and like burned seed 
they no longer have the power to produce sprouts. As for the actions 
still to be performed in this life, they will no longer bind. Behavior 
after liberation is not action at all, since for a bit of behavior to be an 
action it must be done with desire for something distinguished as 
different from oneself, a something that one desires to obtain or avoid; 
when one realizes through the perfect knowledge that constitutes 
liberation that there are no other things, the necessary condition for 
action is annulled, and so no future actions can take place. 

That leaves the question of the karmic residues that determine the 
birth, length of life, and experiences of this very lifetime during which 
liberation is achieved. The Advaita doctrine here is that this pra- 
rabdhakarman has to work itself out—it cannot be destroyed by Self- 
knowledge as the other two kinds of karma can; it cannot be ‘‘burned”’ 
for it has already begun to bear fruit. Thus the liberated person 
normally continues in bodily existence, working out his prarabdha- 
karman, and this state is known as “‘liberation while living,” 
tivanmukti. 

The jivanmukti state seems paradoxical. The liberated self has 
achieved Self-knowledge and thus no longer recognizes any distinc- 
tions; yet he moves among us, performs the necessary activities of 
eating, drinking, etc., that suffice to keep him alive through his allot- 
ted years. Having no desires he does not act, but he nevertheless 
does act insofar as he is impelled by the vasands produced by those 
karmic residues that are still working themselves out. Not recognizing 
anything as a possible object to be experienced, and not recognizing 
any organs through which he might experience anything, it 
follows that he has no experiences; yet because of the operation of 
prarabdhakarman and the vdsands he is visited with objects experienced 
through the organs of sense. 

Indeed, the jivanmukta or liberated person can be viewed from two 
perspectives : from the “higher standpoint” (pdramdarthika) he is 
liberated and thus incapable of ordinary knowledge, action, and 
experiences, but from the ‘lower standpoint” (vydvahdrika) he is a 
samnydsin or renunciate, capable of all such things. The Advaitin 
tends to switch back and forth between the two standpoints in 
describing one and the same individual. 

Samnydasa is generally held by Hindus to be the last of the four ideal 
“stages of life” (aframa) and is preceded by studentship (brahmacarya), 
householdership (garhasthya), and  forest-dwelling (vdnaprasthya). 
Whereas most Hindus view samnydsa as an advanced spiritual state 
it is a peculiarity of Samkara’s thought that he construes this stage as 


THEORY OF VALUE 35 


identical with liberation while living, that is, with jivanmukti. This 
is because of his relatively uncompromising insistence on the necessity 
of Self-knowledge for release, coupled with his thesis that Self-knowl- 
edge necessarily renders action of any kind impossible. It is for this 
reason that Samkara, when speaking of samnydsa, frequently describes 
it in terms that seem appropriate only to the liberated person. For 
example, whereas other philosophers think that one may obtain libe- 
ration from any of the four “‘stages of life,’? which is sometimes cited 
as a sign of their tolerant moral attitude, Samkara insists that one can 
only “become liberated” from the fourth stage. This is taken by some 
as a sign of relative intransigence in social morality. However, 
because samnydsa is liberation—so that it is tautologous to say one must 
pass through it to be liberated—and because Samkara insists also 
that one can reach samnydsa directly from any of the other three stages, 
the alleged intransigence turns out to be a verbal phantasm. 

For the same reasons the apparent problem about the possibility 
of backsliding from samnyaésa comes to nought. Having received 
liberation through Self-knowledge and thus passing into a state (like 
Yoga’s nirvikalpakasamaddhi, perhaps) in which no distinctions are 
recognized, one subsequently seems to come out of this state to live a 
life in which knowledge and actions presupposing the recognition of 
distinctions recommence; thus the charge of backsliding. But again 
the problem is semantic only. From liberation there is no backslid- 
ing : once one has realized that everything is identical with Brahman, 
there is no possibility of losing that realization. But the stage one 
reaches, that is, samnydsa, is not a kind of samddhi at all, since prarabdha- 
karman is still operating. The samnydsin does not stop behaving and 
experiencing, for karmic forces are still at work on him; thus qua 
behaver and experiencer he does not reach a state from which he 
might backslide; yet he is at the same time identical with the liberated 
man. 

This paradoxical double-level view of the liberated man has not 
always been well understood by writers on Advaita.24_ A number of 
Western authors, as well as a few Indians, have found fault with the 
moral implications of Samkara’s position, charging it with being 
austerely intellectual, antinomian, and failing to reflect adequately 
the social virtues of love and service to mankind. 

It is evident that Samkara does not teach withdrawal from the world 
at any point along the path of spiritual progress, even at the samnydsa 
or jivanmukta stage. The samnydsin is working out his karma, and 
although from the higher standpoint he is not “‘acting,”’ this makes 
no difference at all from the lower standpoint, which is the only 


36 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


standpoint from which questions about social mores matter. As far 
as the rest of us are concerned, the samnyésin is acting—he eats, sleeps, 
and moves around—and, furthermore, he is doing so motivated by 
vdsands determined by his karmic residues. What kind of odsands 
these are must, then, depend on what kind of residues he has stored 
up, which in turn must depend on the kind of acts he has performed 
in previous lives, or earlier in this one. 

Now in order to be a true samnydsin our individual must have Self- 
knowledge. But Samkara is quite specific about what kind of a life 
one must lead before avidyad is removed and Self-knowledge results. 
He specifies four requirements for the ‘‘adept” (adhikdrin) : 
(1) that he be able to tell what is eternal from what isnot; (2)that he 
be nonattached to present and future experiences; (3) that he have 
acquired moral virtues such as tranquillity (sama), restraint (dama), 
etc., and (4) that he desire liberation. When we learn that the 
remaining moral virtues include faith (Sraddhé), concentration 
(samddhana), and forbearance (éztiksa@) it becomes very apparent that 
a person must be imbued with strong positive moral inclinations when 
he enters the samnydsa stage. Because he is no longer desirous of 
objects after entering that stage( [2] above) and is no longer ignorant 
of what is good for him (following [1] and [4] above), it follows 
that there is nothing to obstruct his moral vdésands from working 
themselves out in the natural course for optimally beneficial results. 
He has no evil karmic residues to spawn opposing vdsands. 

These remarks may help explain why the Advaitin docs not admit 
the charges of austere intellectualism or of lack of social virtues in the 
samnyasin. There is another aspect to the criticism, however, that 
requires further explanation. The charge is that the samnydsin is 
antinomian, that is, that he is outside the obligations of social morality 
and thus likely to do anything at all, in particular, some harmful or 
antisocial thing. 

Now it is, to be sure, Samkara’s position that householders, students, 
and forest-dwellers are obligated to perform moral actions, whereas 
samnyasins are not. But this does not mean that samnyasins are permit- 
ted to perform immoral actions. The point is, rather, that samnydsins 
cannot perform actions at all, and therefore questions of both obli- 
gation and permission are irrelevant to his status. Although Sam- 
kara counts the samnydsin the liberated man, outside the scope 
of dharma, the rest of the theory makes it impossible for him to act 
immorally. 

It is sometimes also charged that the Advaita system fails to recog- 
nize such virtues as love of fellow man and service to mankind. It 


THEORY OF VALUE 37 


is evident that these charges are likely to come from the point of view 
of Christianity or sympathizers with it, for it is in the Christian religion 
that these particular virtues are especially celebrated.22. Advaita 
apologists have not been slow to respond.?3 

Some answers they give are not to be found in the texts we are 
considering. For example, to the charge that Advaita fails to give a 
proper place to love for one’s fellow man, modern apologists some- 
times answer that, because Advaita teaches that there is only one 
Self, and because everyone loves his own self, which is identical with 
the one Self, it follows that everyone loves everyone else’s self.24 That 
this argument is not found in early Advaita is, I believe, entirely to 
its credit, for the argument is quite fallacious. Just as one may 
believe that, say, the Evening Star rises in the evening and that the 
Morning Star does not rise in the evening, even though the Evening 
Star is identical with the Morning Star, because one does not believe 
they are identical, so one may love one self (one’s own) and not 
another, even though the two are identical, because one does not 
identify them. Still, it may be retorted, at least the Self-knower 
must love his fellow man, since what he knows is precisely that his is 
the one Self. But that doesn’t follow either. To love one’s fellow 
man one must presumably recognize him as one’s fellow, but that 
means to distinguish him from oneself, and for the liberated man 
there are no distinctions. 

In fact, Samkara’s theory makes it impossible to raise the question 
of the liberated man’s love for his fellow man, unless one fiddles with 
the senses of the words in that phrase. But it by no means follows 
that his is a selfish philosophy. For Advaita, and Hinduism in general, 
clearly endorses the view that men are expected, to the extent of 
their several abilities, to serve mankind with a willing nature. The 
kinds of acts enjoined on those in the first three “‘stages of life’? are 
calculated to support the social, moral, and spiritual order, to uphold 
lokasamgraha, that is, the ‘“‘hanging together of the world.” We have 
seen that on Samkara’s theory no acts are enjoined on the samnydsin, 
but by virtue of his preparatory training (the four requirements, or adhi- 
kdras, mentioned earlier) he will in fact behave in ways that will 
contribute to the same end. In his case, indeed, since he is pure and 
has no selfish ends of his own to pursue, one can to one’s advantage 
consult him for advice and guidance in one’s own quest, and (provided 
he really is a liberated man and not a sham samnydsin) the theory 
guarantees an honest response and a helpful one to the limit ofthe 
teacher’s ability to understand and sympathize with one’s questions 
and progress. This is the Advaita justification for the Hindu theory 


38 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of the guru or spiritual adviser; the ideal guru is the liberated man. 
But he is not obligated to teach, for behavior on his part indicating 
that he expects to reap personal advantage from his teaching is 
evidence that he is at best not liberated and at worst a sham. 


UI, The Role of Action in Becoming Liberated. 


Liberation, then, is not something new that one acquires; it is 
nothing but the very nature of one’s true Self. What we call “‘be- 
coming liberated”’ is the removal of ignorance, of avidyé, which hides 
our nature from us. The question therefore arises : what is it that 
constitutes the immediate cause of the removal of avidyd ? 

On this point the Advaitin, being a kind of Mimamsaka, faces the 
defenders of Vedic orthodoxy as well as all the other Vedantins who 
interpret the Upanisads differently than he does. It is with argu- 
ments of this kind that Samkara spends most of his time. And it is 
over this issue as well that what is perhaps the most serious breach 
between Mandana’s and Samkara’s Advaita is opened. 

Broadly speaking, we may distinguish three kinds of position against 
which Samkara argues. 

A. Against Pirvamimamsaé. First, there is the position of orthodox 
Pirvamimamsa. The Mimamsaka tends to view liberation as a kind 
of heavenly state that one reaches by performance of pure actions. 
This view is evidently compatible with viewing the liberated state 
as a different state from one’s Self-nature. It also contrasts with 
Advaita’s view in that liberation does not feature the perfect knowl- 
edge that is an antidote to avidyaé. The orthodox Mimamsaka is 
thus calling by the name “‘liberation” something other than what 
Samkara has in mind. Liberation of the sort Samkara has in mind 
involves, as we have seen, the cessation of karmic results of actions 
through removal of the ignorance that prevents us from having 
knowledge of our true Self. 

But the Mimamsa view may be recast in a form that accepts 
Samkara’s sense of “liberation” while apparently preserving character- 
istic Mimamsa tenets. The relevant tenets include these: (1) that 
the Vedas enjoin everything of human value, including liberation; 
(2)that it is only actions leading to future results that can be enjoined; 
(3) that knowing is an act; (4) that false knowing—ignorance or 
avidyd—is a result of faults (dosa) in the knower or in his organs; 
(5) that these faults arise from moral impurity; (6) that the scriptural 
injunctions enjoin actions upon us that will purify present faults and 
preclude future ones; (7) therefore, that by performing actions as 
enjoined in scripture, we may remove ignorance and achieve the 


THEORY OF VALUE 39 


Self-knowledge upon which we are enjoined to meditate, which high 
meditative state constitutes liberation. 

There are several philosophical theses implicit in the above against 
which the Advaitin argues on fundamental metaphysical and epis- 
temological grounds. Indeed, a major aspect of Advaita philosophy 
may be understood as providing a philosophical position supporting 
the rejection of most of the seven propositions just listed. Let us 
begin to work up to that position by considering Samkara’s immediate 
arguments against this Mimamsa way of looking at liberation and the 
means thereto. 

The Mimamsa view holds that liberation is a result of actions. 
Samkara has several general arguments against that thesis. 

First, if liberation is identical with the true nature of one’s Self, 
then it has no beginning, because the Self has no beginning. But 
the result of an action is something that has a beginning; it comes 
into existence when the act has been performed. Therefore, being 
without a beginning, liberation cannot be the result of an action. 

Second, liberation requires the removal of avidyad. Therefore, the 
action (s) whose result constitutes liberation must be such as to remove 
avidya. But no action can remove avidya; the only thing that can 
remove avidyd is knowledge, and knowing is not an act. 

This argument clearly needs to be bolstered by arguments showing 
that knowing is not an act, and that actions cannot remove ignorance. 
Samkara argues to the first point over and over again. He contrasts 
acting with knowing in that the result of an action depends on the 
will of the agent, whereas knowledge does not. For example, to milk 
a cow someone must collect appropriate implements and make 
an effort; to know a cow (i.e., to be aware of it) no effort is required; 
all that is needed is the presence of the cow and appropriate organs 
of cognition. Furthermore, if one has false knowledge, that is, mis- 
takes a rope for a snake, what corrects that error is the subsequent 
awareness that the thing is a rope; no amount of activity will correct 
the error unless it also produces the corrective or sublating awareness. 

With regard to the second point, that actions cannot remove ignor- 
ance, Samkara in more than one place points out that results 
of actions are of only four kinds. The result of an action may be 
(1) the origination (utpatt:) ofa thing, as when the potter creates a pot, 
or (2) the attainment (dpi) of a state, as when one arrives at the 
village, or (3) the purification (samskdra) of a thing through addition 
to it of meritorious features or the subtraction from it of polluting 
features, as in certain ritual activities, or (4) the modification (vikdra) 
of a thing involving a change in its features, for example, when one 


40 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


melts ice by heating it. Now liberation, the removal of ignorance, 
can be none of these four things, for reasons spelled out in infinite ways 
within Advaita. The basic reason may be said to be that all of these 
four things involve differentiation between a prior causal state and a 
subsequent effect state and on the Advaita view liberation must be 
free of differentiation, being identical with the true Self, which is 
without beginning or end and without change of any sort. 

Note also that knowing is incapable, even according to common 
sense, of producing an effect of any of the above four kinds. Thus 
knowing is not an act, since it is incapable of having results of the 
type actions have. Whereas acts have results, knowing has_ only 
content, or subject matter. Either that content exists or it does not. 
If it does exist, it did not become existent through any activity of 
the cognition of which it is the content. And if it does not exist (a 
possibility Advaita ultimately rejects, as we shall see), cognition 
cannot bring it into existence. Liberation is analogous to the actual 
entity that is the content of a cognition; indeed, it is ultimately the 
Advaita position that liberation is the only actual entity there is, 
namely, Brahman, that entity being in truth the real content of all 
awareness. These lines of development lead directly into the heart 
of Advaita epistemology and philosophy of language. 

These, then, are the major reasons Samkara adduces against identi- 
fying liberation as the result of an act. That does not silence all 
opponents, however, for there are other ways of thinking of the 
relations among knowing, acting, and liberation. 

B. Against Bheddbhedavada. According to a second account, 
achieving liberation involves both action and knowledge, a combined 
path of the two (jfdnakarmasamuccaya). Versions of the combined- 
path view were held, scholars believe, by certain pre-“Samkara Vedan- 
tins such as Bhartiprapafica, whose works are now for the most part 
lost, by the writer whom Samkara identifies as the ‘“‘Vrttikara” in 
his Bhagavadgitabhdgya, by Bhaskara, a near-contemporary of Sam- 
kara’s and by others who espoused some version of Bhedabhedavada. 

According to the combined-path thesis the way to liberation 
involves the achievement of Self-knawledge followed by the practice 
of nonattached action. The virtue of the theory, it would seem, is 
that it promises to account properly for the central place of Self- 
knowledge in gaining liberation while maintaining throughout the 
authority of scriptural passages enjoining observance of prescribed 
acts and avoidance of proscribed ones. That is, on the combined- 
path view it is not necessary to make the Self-knower out to be beyond 
the scope of morality altogether. The antinomian aspects of the 


THEORY OF VALUE 41 


doctrine that liberation is gained solely by knowledge are one extreme 
to be avoided, and equally to be avoided is the other extreme, that, as 
the Mimamsaka holds, liberation is the result of action. Although 
agreeing that knowing is not an act, the combined-path theorist 
maintains that the liberation-seeker must meditate on the passages 
in scripture identifying the self with Brahman and that such medi- 
tation properly performed, though not an action, will remove the 
conditions of bondage. However, the conditions of proper meditation 
involve faithful observance of religious ritual; the seeker must continue 
to perform prescribed actions while he is securing his understanding 
of the Self, and specifically, even after he has achieved the under- 
standing of his self-identity with Brahman he must continue to observe 
the scriptural prescriptions as he works off the remaining karma 
accreted from previous actions. 

As we have seen, Samkara agrees that prior to the achievement of 
Self-knowledge the seeker must satisfy high moral requirements, so 
that observance of scriptural injunctions is insisted on up to this point 
by both parties. Samkara parts company with the combined-path 
view over the latter’s insistence on observance of scriptural injunctions 
after liberation—on Samkara’s interpretation, when one has arrived 
at the stage of the samnydasin. 

Samkara’s reasoning is clear and simple, given his presuppositions. 
The knowledge that occasions liberation—that is, that removes 
avidya—is the realization that all distinctions are unreal, non- 
existent from the highest standpoint. But any action can only pro- 
ceed on the basis of the assumption of a difference between agent and 
action, action and result. Precisely because the liberated self is one 
who no longer recognizes any such distinctions, it follows that one who 
knows his Self cannot perform any action at all, whether enjoined 
by scripture or otherwise. By the same token, as Samkara sees it, 
the notion that scripture enjoins actions upon the Self-knower must 
necessarily be mistaken. It is only the unenlightened who are sub- 
ject to obligations to perform actions; it is a type of category-mistake 
to suppose that a liberated man—a samnydsin—is obliged to do any- 
thing, for that would be to suppose that the liberated man is aware 
of differences between himself and other things. 

In short, it is Samkara’s view that Self-knowledge and action are 
entirely incompatible—the conditions for the presence of one constitute 
the conditions for the absence of the other. Of course, prior to 
gaining Self-knowledge, the seeker practises action combined with 
meditation; but, once true knowledge is gained, no further action 
4s possible. 


42 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


C. Against Mandana Misra’s Type of Advaita. There is a third 
position to consider, arising within the Advaita system itself. Mandana 
Misra does not accept the thesis of the incompatibility between 
Self-knowledge and action. Mandana’s position seems to be as 
follows. Knowledge in general requires a distinction between a 
knower, an instrument of knowledge (pramdna), and a content or 
object known. If Samkara persists in his view the result will be that 
Self-knowledge is not knowledge, since the required distinction is 
precluded by hypothesis. Further, consider an empirical case of 
achieving valid knowledge when previously there had been error. 
For example, consider the well-known example of seeing two moons 
because of double vision. When one comes to know, through a 
trustworthy authority, that there are not two moons, but only one, 
the illusion of two moons does not automatically cease. Thus, 
a false appearance continues to exist even after valid knowledge 
has been achieved. Likewise, inthe case of Self-knowledge, the false 
appearance of diversity continues to exist even after one has learned 
that there is only the one Self. To rid oneself of the false appearance 
of diversity which remains even after realization of the truth, medi- 
tation of a certain kind is required and indeed enjoined by scripture, 
a meditation that inculcates the vision of unity over and over until 
the traces of past karma either mature and wither away or else are 
somehow rendered inoperative. Now to be sure it is the meditations 
that accomplish the exhausting or anesthetizing of prdrabdhakarman, 
but the meditation should also be accompanied by ritual action 
(nityakarman), as we are told by the Vedas. Through a combination 
of meditation and action, then, traces of two kinds are dealt with— 
mental traces that would otherwise produce error, and moral traces 
that would otherwise lead a person into further sins. Just as one who 
has been confused by his double vision and been told truly that there 
is only one moon may nevertheless slip back into his confusedly seeing 
two moons because his affliction leads him to forget the truth, so the 
Self-knower may backslide into bondage because the operation of 
the traces of past acts leads him to forget what he has learned. 

In this way, although liberation is not an effect of action or of 
knowledge (since true knowledge does not have its content, reality, 
as its effect), still the eradication of the karmic traces remaining after 
realization is an effect and requires causal conditions. These condi- 
tions, according to Mandana, include as a major factor meditation, 
and as accessory factors ritual acts of prescribed sorts. 

Thus Mandana provides a third position contrasting with Sam- 
kara’s, a more subtle challenge perhaps, but still diverging plainly 


THEORY OF VALUE 43 


from Samkara’s teachings. Both Samkara’s pupils Suresvara and 
Padmapada appear to be aware of Mandana’s views and rush to 
their teacher’s defense. 

Suregvara points out that if the cessation of bondage depends on 
causal factors like meditation and action, it cannot be deemed neces- 
sarily everlasting once attained, for whatever is subject to depen- 
dence on causal conditions is noneternal. Even the authority of the 
Vedas is not sufficient to assure the eternality of liberation thus 
conceived. 

Padmapada’s treatment of Mandana is quite extensive. In 
addition to SureSvara’s objection, Padmapada raises some difficult 
questions for Mandana with regard to how meditation accompanied 
by action can produce the direct realization of reality (Brahman) 
that constitutes the final state of liberation. 

Although neither Suregvara nor Padmapada specifically allude to 
it, Mandana at one point challenges himself to explain how any set 
of causal conditions can remove avidyé completely without leaving 
anything else foreign to the Self in its place. After all, the challenge 
goes, causes are always found to have effects that are something differ- 
ent from those causes and that in turn are potential factors in other 
causal nexuses; thus meditation cum actions can never completely 
expunge from reality (the Self) all foreign conditions, and liberation 
will never be achieved. Mandana answers himself by citing the 
analogy of the kafaka-nut, or soap-nut, which was understood to have 
the remarkable ability, when thrown into dirty water, of clearing 
away all the dirt in the water and itself as well. This appears to be 
an attempt at answering the major thrust of the kind of criticism aimed 
at Mandana by Suregvara and Padmapada. 

It will be evident that three positions, the Mimamsaka, the Bheda- 
bhedavadin, and that of Mandana, all of which try to find a 
place for action in the path to liberation, are largely motivated by 
sentiments of Brahmanical orthodoxy. All three views have at least 
this in common : they assume that the Vedic passages that apparently 
enjoin continued performance of ritual actions (the nityakarmans) 
are to be respected and applied in all stages of life, specifically includ- 
ing the stage of samnydsa. Now that stage is interpre ed by Samkara 
as being identical with the stage of Self-realization, that is of libera- 
tion, or jivanmukti, an identification that proponents of the three other 
positions may not accept. ‘Even supposing the samnpdsin is a liberat- 
ed person,” we may imagine the three opponents saying, “‘still the 
Vedas clearly enjoin actions upon him.” 

We have seen Samkara’s response to this : because the Self-knower 
does not recognize any distinctions he is not subject to any 


44 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


injunctions, and so, whatever the appearances, those Vedic injunctions 
cannot be addressed to him. Samkara nevertheless appreciates the 
pious motivations of the other positions. From their point of view 
he is advising them that at a certain stage in life one can stop perform- 
ing religious rites. All their religious training runs counter to the 
implications of that, for orthodoxy counsels them that only by regular 
performance of prescribed acts and avoidance of prohibited ones can 
a person maintain whatever merit he may have earned; without 
such ritual action he will surely quickly gather demerit and subside 
once again into the lower sections of the great chain of Being. 

To allay these moral and religious scruples Samkara offers some 
words of counsel and comfort. The orthodox believer accepts the 
Mimamsa distinetion between nitya-, naimittika- and kamyakarmans®® 
and takes it very seriously. His notion is that, although the last two 
kinds of acts are undertaken for specific purposes, so that they involve 
attachment and so may plausibly be supposed to be improper for 
a samnydsin to perform, still the regular (nitya) rites—the agnihotra, 
or daily fire-sacrifice, and the like—are to be performed as a matter 
of duty and not in order to achieve any specific results. Thus these 
particular regular acts can incur no sinfu' results .nd involve no 
attachment, and the orthodox Hindu assumes they should continue 
to be performed as long as life persists. Samkara points out in 
response that, first, a certain type of act, for example, the agnthotra, 
is not nitya or kamya by nature. Rather, a particular ritual act is 
kamya if it is performed in order to gain a particular result, whereas 
it is nilya if it is performed out of a natural desire to avoid evil. So 
it is not that the Vedas enjoin on everyone the performance of a 
specific set of actions. 

Second, the desire to avoid evil, however natural, is a desire; thus 
in an ultimate sense nitya and kdmya acts are essentially on the same 
footing, and there is no consistent way of maintaining that performance 
of one is essential for the samnydsin whereas performance of the 
other is not. 

As a result, there is no specific act omission of which by the Self- 
knower will incur sin, and the Vedas when properly understood do 
not imply anything to the contrary. Scripture does not enjoin any 
ritual action on the samnydsin. But that raises the general question : 
how does a samnydsin behave ? 


IV. Stages of Life, and the Role of Yoga. 


We have been discussing the place of ritual action in the achieve- 
ment of liberation. Nonattached action is one of a number of kinds 


THEORY OF VALUE 45 


of discipline, or yoga, spoken of regularly in Indian thought, and 
one may at this point raise the question whether any of these kinds of 
discipline other than the gaining of Self-knowledge (jfdnayoga) 
has a place in the proper path. 

The arguments Samkara adduces against a combined-path view 
apply equally against the supposition that any kind of activity what- 
soever is possible in the state of samnydsa, since the samnyasin has realized 
the nondifference of everything else from his Self. The fact remains, 
of course, that many of the texts on which Samkara chooses to comment 
speak in ways that prima facie run against his view. 

In his comments on the Bhagavadgita and the Brahmasiitras, for 
example, as well as on several Upanisadic passages, Samkara carefully 
distinguishes alternative assumptions from his own. 

Whenever he can Samkara interprets references to “yoga” as refer- 
ring to jfidnayoga. He has no special problem, for instance, interpret- 
ing Gaudapada’s asparfayoga as the discipline of Self-knowledge. 
Other passages cause more trouble. For example, in the opening 
stanza of Book Five of the Bhagavadgita. Arjuna asks which is better, 
samnydsa or yoga? Clearly here the terms cannot be synonymous. 
Samkara explains that Arjuna is of course not aware that samnydsa 
is identical with Self-knowledge. Indeed, Lord Krsna here recom- 
mends yoga over samnydsa, which seems to contradict Samkara’s 
doctrine. In this context, however, samnyasa means (according 
to Samkara) Patafijali’s kind of yoga, that is, renunciation without 
Self-knowledge, so Samkara’s doctrine is unaffected. Patafijali’s 
yoga, involving action, cannot be practised by Samkara’s samnydasin; 
Krsna’s teaching is meant for householders such as Arjuna. 

Although standard Indian tradition speaks of four stages of life— 
studentship, householdership, forest-dwelling, and renunciation— 
Samkara, without rejecting this classification, provides at one point?? 
what he would take to be a more accurate division between (1) 
householders who respect scriptural injunctions, (2) ascetics who have 
renounced the world but do not have Self-knowledge, (3) “‘lifelong 
students,’ who study, teach, and practise penance throughout their 
lives without raising a family, and (4) the true sammydsin, the one who 
“rests in Brahman,” that is, the Self-knower. The point of this 
passage is to indicate why samnydsa is the only stage of life from which 
one can gain liberation; it is so, we can see, because Samkara has 
defined it so that it is identical with liberation. 


PHILOSOPHY OF LANGUAGE 
I. Exegetics 


In the previous chapter we saw that there are three main alternative 
views about the role of action in gaining liberation and that Samkara 
distinguishes his own position from all of them. The argumentation 
over these, points consumes a large proportion of classical Advaita 
literature, and it may not be altogether evident to the casual reader 
why this is so. One must remember that Vedanta is first and fore- 
most a kind of Mimamsa or exegesis, and thus it functions, in the 
classical way of looking at these things, primarily to interpret the true 
meaning of the Vedic scriptures. It follows that the fundamental 
application of Advaita comes in connection with an assessment of the 
role scripture plays in achieving liberation. 

The three alternative positions receive extended discussion as 
possible lines of scriptural interpretation. And it is the implications 
of some of the arguments developed in defending Samkara’s practi- 
cally motivated exegetical views that lead him to characteristic theses 
in epistemology, philosophy of language, metaphysics, and philosophy 
of religion. Most English-language expositions of Advaita, having 
a Western audience in mind, reverse this order and make the Advaita 
theory appear more abstract and impractical than it was intended 
to be. In this introductory essay I am trying to develop Advaita 
theory in a fashion more nearly reflecting the order of the Advaitin’s 
practical concerns. 

The Vedic corpus, including ritual formulae (samhita), directions 
for sacrifice (brahmana), and upanisads, may be viewed as having two 
distinguishable sections, one dealing with actions (karmakdnda), 
the other with knowledge (jfdnakaénda). Broadly speaking, this 
distinction separates those passages in scripture that are related to 
ritual actions, as in sacrifice, from other passages that state the 


PHILOSOPHY OF LANGUAGE 47 


nature of Brahman, the Self. These sections do not necessarily 
occur in separate places in the scripture : although the Upanisads 
feature passages of the second kind, the other parts of the Vedas 
feature passages of the first kind. A basic question of scriptural 
exegesis is : what is the relation between these two sections ? 

There are, logically speaking, three possible relationships: (1) 
the karmakanda is primary, the jfdnakanda subsidiary; (2) the two 
sections have equal weight; (3) the jadnakénda is primary, the karma- 
kanda subsidiary. The three alternative views considered in the 
previous chapter concerning the role of action in liberation in fact 
correspond closely to the above-listed three positions on the present 
question. It is Pirvamimamsa that takes position (1), Bhedabheda- 
vada that takes position (2), and meditation-theory of Mandana’s 
sort that takes position (3). 

A. Critique of Niyogavéda. The exegetical tradition of Puarva- 
mimamsa, which is of hoary antiquity, promulgates the view that the 
primary purpose of scripture is to provide advice to men as to how to 
achieve the ultimate human purpose (purusdrtha). It does this by 
issuing injunctions as to how a man should act. By performing 
nityakarmans and avoiding kdmya- and nisiddhakarmans! a man can 
purify himself and become eligible to attain prosperity of various 
sorts culminating in heavenly bliss. Originally, it seems apparent, 
heaven was the highest human goal recognized in this tradition; 
liberation as a further goal came to prominence after the basic tradi- 
tional stance had been established. Later Mimamsakas tailored the 
tradition to suit the new development by taking the view that libera- 
tion constitutes a further goal to be obtained by action, if only the 
action of meditation. Thus the view came to be that scripture’s 
primary function is to ordain actions, including meditation, leading 
to the highest human goals. As a result, the orthodox Mimamsa 
view claims that all of scripture is governed by an overriding injunc- 
tive mood—whatever is said in scripture must be tied to the context 
of some injunction to act. If such a method of understanding scrip- 
ture is not practiced, the Mimamsa argues, the anomaly will follow 
that at least some of scripture will not be valid since it will not lead 
us to the highest human end. Scripture’s validity depends on its 
relevance to matters lying beyond the sphere of ordinary experience; 
the other means of knowledge cannot operate successfully there, and if 
scripture’s function were confined to this world it would have no 
specific role to perform and thus would not be valid. Its proper role, 
then, concerns future lives and goals. 

This argument from scripture’s role as a pramdna is only one line of 


48 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


argumentation put forth by the Mimamsaka. Another important 
line is grammatical. Some sentences in the Vedas are grammatically 
injunctive : their verbs appear in the optative mood (lin, in technical 
Indian grammatical terminology). Other sentences do not have 
verbs in the optative mood, but the Mimamsa proposes to construe 
such sentences as ancillary to injunctions, as what are technically 
called arthavada. Arthavada sentences do, indeed, provide information 
rather than enjoin, but they are nevertheless subsidiary to injunctions, 
since the information they provide relates in every case to future 
events and things that are to be produced or achieved by actions of 
the sort enjoined in the injunctions. This might not seem to us the 
most evident way of analyzing the meaning of declarative sentences, 
but the Mimamsaka has additional arguments with which he bolsters 
his position. Prominent among these is an argument stemming from 
a theory about the acquisition of language. Children learn the 
meanings of words from their roles in injunctions, so it is argued. A 
child hears his grandfather order his father, ‘‘Bring the cow !”’ and 
sees his father leading the cow in. Later, he hears his grandfather 
order his father, ‘Bring the horse !’’ and, observing his father bring- 
ing a different animal in, draws the correct conclusion that “‘cow”’ 
means the first and ‘“‘horse’’ the second kind of animal. Generalizing, 
and treating declarative sentences as a special kind of word or phrase, 
the Mimamsaka concludes that understanding of information-dissemi- 
nating segments of language presupposes a context of injunctions. 

The refutation of these views is carried on at some length by 
Samkara, notably in the commentary on the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad. 
It is, however, Suresvara who provides the most generous treatment. 
The discussion is elaborate and is carried on through technical termi- 
nology that is not easy for an outsider to understand. Among these 
technical terms, we may note one of the most important. 

There are various terms for injunctions,? but Sureévara frequently 
uses the term nzyoga to connote the notion of injunctive force. Thus 
a niyogavadin is someone who believes that enjoining is the primary 
function of scriptural sentences. Niyoga can also be used to desig- 
nate, by extension, the optative mood, or /ii—since it is the regular 
sign of niyoga—as well as the expected result (kdrya) of the action 
enjoined, the thing-to-be-done—since an expected result is a regular 
concomitant and unique sign of injunctive force.? 

The reader is directed to the summaries for a review of the many 
arguments developed by Samkara and Sureévara against the niyoga- 
vadin.4 Here we shall be content to note a few aspects of these argu- 
ments that influence other developments in Samkara’s system, 


PHILOSOPHY OF LANGUAGE 49 


As we have seen, one of Samkara’s major arguments against this 
sort of theory stems from the thesis that liberation, unlike heaven, is 
not a thing to be achieved. Thus it cannot properly be enjoined as 
something to be achieved. The niyogavddin may seek to turn this 
point to his advantage : scripture does not enjoin us to become libe- 
rated, but it does enjoin us to do things that will put us in a position 
from which we can become liberated. Samkara’s argument, how- 
ever, is deeper than that : the point is, for him, that liberation is not in 
any way a future state or goal; rather, it is something that exists in the 
present, always has existed, and always will exist. The Mimamsaka 
seeks to make the declarative statements in the jfdnakdnda subsidiary 
to the injunctive ones on the ground that scripture can only speak of 
entities to be known in the future. Samkara insists that the main 
entity of which the jadnakdénda speaks, that is, Brahman, is now existent 
and so cannot in any way be made out to be subsidiary to action. 

The Mimamsaka feels that this undercuts scriptural claim to autho- 
rity, for to be a pramana scripture must make known something that 
other pramdnas cannot, and the only such things the Mimamsaka 
envisages are events and things in future time. Samkara’s answer to 
this is that the Self is not made known by the other pramdnas and that 
the sentences in the jfdnakaénda have a function in preparing the way 
for Self-knowledge. Thus the karmakanda does, as the Mimamsaka 
suggests, make known future states that result from action, and the 
jianakdnda helps make known the Self : in both cases scripture’s con- 
tent is previously unknown and thus scriptural passages of both sorts 
are authoritative. 

B. The Combined-path View. Other Vedanta philosophers agree 
that both the karmakanda and the jidnakanda are authoritative; in their 
view both kinds of passage in combination conduce to liberation. 
Suregvara at one point implicitly classifies all such combined-path 
views into three varieties, according to whether such a view makes 
actions superior to knowledge or knowledge superior to actionor 
whether it accords them equal status. 

A view that might fall into the first class is that known as kdma- 
vilayavada,® which postulates that the primary path to liberation involves 
destruction of desires. The means to this is through fulfilling all 
one’s desires, after which one gains a divine state from which libera- 
tion will follow automatically, for all that obstructs Self-knowledge is 
one’s desires. Thus knowledge and action are both required, but 
action is primary. Suregvara’s response to this is to point out that 
no one can ever succeed in fulfilling all his desires; the so-called ‘‘law 
of karma” guarantees that every activity that fulfils one’s desire will 


50 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


breed more desires. Only by abandoning actions can one hope to 
destroy the influence of desires. 

A combined-path view that makes knowledge superior to action is 
known as prapaficavilayavada.6 On this view the karmakaénda injunc- 
tions are subsidiary to superior injunctions found in the jadnakdnda. 
These latter injunctions—to know the Self, etc.—are superior to the 
karmakaénda injunctions addressed to those who desire heaven—that 
they should sacrifice, etc.—for what these karmakanda injunctions do 
is tell us how to destroy worldly actions. Such destruction of all 
worldly activity requires the eventual removal of difference; indeed, 
the various karmakdnda injunctions—nitya, kémya, etc.—are intended 
to remove some part of the notion of difference whose ultimate and 
complete removal is enjoined in the jfdnakanda. Suresvara’s answer 
here is to point out that the karmakdénda enjoins action, not dissolution 
of action, on us in order that we may gain heaven, a different state 
from liberation, so that the attempted compromise is inconsistent with 
the texts. Furthermore, he adds, the world involving its myriad 
distinctions cannot be destroyed by actions, which merely breed more 
distinctions; only by destroying the cause of such notions of difference 
can the world be destroyed, and the cause is avidyg. Activity cannot 
destroy avidyad; only knowledge can. 

The third possibility, which is the one most commonly associated 
with the term “combined-path view” (jidnakarmasamuccayavada), is 
that the karmakanda and jitdnakdnda have equal roles in constituting 
the path to liberation. This is the view that was apparently propound- 
ed by Bhartrprapafica, and Samkara invokes considerable argumen- 
tation in dealing with it. This view, like the previous one, finds both 
the karmakanda and the jiianakanda to be comprised of injunctions, 
injunctions in the former to act and in the latter to meditate. 
As Hiriyanna’ understands Bhartrprapafica, the view distinguishes 
two stages on the path, corresponding to heaven and liberation re- 
spectively. The path to the first stage lies in the performance of the 
nityakarmans as enjoined in the karmakanda while meditating on God 
in the form of Sitra or Hiranyagarbha, which Bhartrprapafica views 
as a lower form of Brahman. By this combination of methods, one 
will then achieve apavarga or escape from samsdra, which is a neces- 
sary stage on the way to, but not identical with, liberation. The 
self that has gained this stage is not yet liberated precisely because 
avidya has not yet been eliminated. To eliminate avidyaé, another 
combination of action and knowledge is required—the “‘knowledge”’ 
this time involving meditation upon the higher Brahman itself, with 
which one in due course achieves identity, this identity constituting 
liberation. 


PHILOSOPHY OF LANGUAGE 51 


Samkara is unhappy with this account for several reasons. First, 
the notion that Brahman has a lower nature suggests that Brahman is 
not completely free from difference; Bhartrprapafica’s view is termed 
bhedabhedavada, ‘‘identity-in-difference-ism” for this reason. 
Samkara thinks the notion of Brahman both containing difference 
and being free from it is a fudge—plainly inconsistent. Second, he 
professes not to understand the second part of Bhartrprapafica’s story. 
Either the self who has gained apavarga is ready to hear the great sen- 
tences such as “‘that art thou’? and be immediately liberated as a 
result, which would imply that he has given up all notions of difference, 
or he is not ready because he still recognizes distinctions among 
things. If the former, since he recognizes no distinctions he cannot 
act and need not meditate; liberation will arise from hearing the 
scriptural sentences alone. If the latter, ifhe is not ready, he can act 
and he can try to meditate as much as he pleases, but he will never 
be liberated as long as ignorance—his recognition of difference— 
continues. Thus Samkara’s conclusion is that Bhartrprapafica’s 
solution makes the worst of the various other solutions. 

C. Meditation Theory (Prasamkhyanavada). A final way of reconcil- 
ing the two parts of scripture will be to make the jidnakanda superior 
to the karmakdnda. This is in fact the view that Advaita takes. How- 
ever, there is more than one way of interpreting that common Advaita 
doctrine, and it is over the interpretation of this point that Mandana 
Misra and Samkara seem most notably to part company. The view 
that Mandana espouses was in all likelihood not original with him, 
however, for Samkara considers it in the Brahmasiitrabhasya in a manner 
that suggests he is not merely setting aside the vagaries of a contem- 
porary upstart. 

The attitude of meditation theory toward our present problem is 
that the karmakanda passages are indeed subsidiary to the jfdnakanda 
ones, but that both sections are partly injunctive in function, the 
Upanisadic passages enjoining meditation and informing us what we 
should meditate on, the karmakdnda passages enjoining actions and 
informing us of their results. However, the emphasis is different 
in the two sections : in the karmakdnda the emphasis is on injunctions, 
and the informative material is subsidiary as explanatory (arthavada), 
whereas in the jfdnakanda the statements about Brahman and the Self 
are primary and do not depend on injunctions for their sense, although 
there is implied an injunction on us to meditate on the things these 
statements make known to us. Thus the Vedas as a whole enjoin 
us to do two things—to perform prescribed acts and to meditate on 
Brahman—and they give us the information necessary for us to 


52 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


successfully follow these commands; it remains true, though, that the 
supreme message of the Vedas is found in the Upanisadic passages 
that tell us of the identity of the Self with Brahman. 

This interpretation avoids many of the most glaring deficiencies of 
the Mimamsa and Bhedabheda theories. Notably, it is apparently 
consistent with Advaita’s penchant for monism; Mandana is an even 
more damaging critic of difference than Samkara. Yet Mandana’s 
view is not acceptable to Samkara and his school. The major diffi- 
culty with it is that the meditation that is made out to be the practical 
point of the jfanakanga has no possible function. The argument here 
is much the same as the one just mentioned as used against Bhartr- 
prapajica : if the aspiring self is eligible to hear the great sentences; 
ignorance will be removed immediately thereby; if he isn’t ready, 
meditation won’t help. Meditation, if enjoinable, is an action, and 
actions both presuppose and foster differences. Samkara charges 
that the meditation theorist misconstrues the famous passage in 
scripture that advises us to “‘hear, think, and reflect” (sravana, manana, 
nididhydsana); thinking and reflecting are not acts, and thus _ this 
passage cannot properly be construed as an injunction, at least in the 
same sense as passages advising sacrifice are. Another way of making 
this point is by reminding us that liberation is not a result and so 
cannot be “reached” by any activity, even meditation. Of course, 
this is not to say that meditation doesn’t play a role in Samkara’s 
philosophy, only that it plays the same subordinate role that actions 
in general do. 

D. Samkara’s Positive Account. These, then, are the rival views 
on the subject and Samkara’s reasons for rejecting them. How then 
does Samkara think the two sections are related ? Samkara’s basic 
point is that the two sections are addressed to two entirely distinct 
classes of people. The karmakanda consists of injunctions to act; it 
presupposes in those it enjoins a recognition of themselves as agents 
wielding ritual and other objects in a variety of ways in order to achieve 
various sorts of results. Since liberation is not a result to be achieved, 
since the true Self is not an agent, there is no way in which these 
injunctions can be construed as relating to liberation, except in the 
indirect way of specifying how one should purify himself in order to 
become eligible for Self-knowledge. On the other hand, the jidna- 
kanda consists, not of injunctions, but of declarations of fact, state- 
ments whose subject matter exists already, that is, Brahman, or the 
Self. These statements are addressed to a person who has become 
eligible to hear them by virtue of his moral purity, intelligence, and 
spiritual motivations. Since the statements’ whole point is to imply 


PHILOSOPHY OF LANGUAGE 53 


that there are no differences in reality, they can only be compre- 
hended by one who is just on the verge of appreciating the truth 
that Brahman, the true Self, is without distinctions. 

As a result, the two sections of the Vedas really have no logical 
relation to each other, which is to say that there is no possibility of 
applying some common exegetical method to them collectively. 
In particular, one cannot apply Mimamsaka methods of exegesis to 
the jfdnakdnda. Yet that does not in any way impugn the Mimamsa 
method as applied to the karmakanda, provided no implications are 
drawn that affect the jfdnakénda. Insofar as meditation theory tries 
to do this it too is defective. 

Scripture is authoritative throughout, but again its authority has 
to be understood with respect to distinct subject matters for the two 
sections. What the karmakdénda enjoins about actions is valid; what 
the jfidnakanda states about Brahman is likewise valid. Both kinds 
of passages tell us something we did not know before and could not 
know otherwise, the injunctions telling us what actions to perform for 
what future results, the statements telling us truths about a reality 
that is not available to the other pramdnas. The function of both 
kinds of passages is to make something known (jfidpaka), not to pro- 
duce activity (kdraka). If hearing any passage, injunctive or declara- 
tive, prompts one to act in some way it must be because one desires 
something, so that it is the desire that does the prompting. But, 
though both kinds of passages make something known, the things 
they make known are entirely different. 

Yet there is a sense in which the jidnakanda is primary and the 
karmakanda subsidiary, and that is evident from the above. Assuming 
that the common purpose of scripture is to tell us how to achieve the 
ultimate human purpose or goal, and assuming that it is agreed that 
that ultimate purpose is liberation, which Samkara equates with true 
knowledge of the Self, then itis clear that the jfdnakanda’s subject 
matter pertains to that ultimate purpose in a way that the karma- 
kanda does not. By hearing ‘‘that art thou” and other passages from 
the jftdnakanda, one, if properly prepared, rediscovers his true Self, 
thus gaining liberating Self-knowledge; this result is not possible from 
hearing passages from the karmakanda. This is not to say, of course, 
that passages of either kind cannot be misused or misconstrued; 
the point is that the karmakanda, whether properly or improperly 
construed, cannot make the Self known, whereas the jfdanakdnda, 
when properly construed by an eligible person, can. 


54 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
II. Theory of Meaning. 


All of this brings us to consider how the sentences of the jfdnakanda 
are to be construed. False vicws of the nature of language and 
meaning obscure an adept’s ability to understand the real meaning 
of sentences that could make the Self known to him; part of becoming 
“eligible” for Self-knowledge involves adopting a correct view about 
language. 

Samkara’s overall view of language is ambivalent. He is, on the 
one hand, suspicious of language—it is the instrument of ignorance, 
breeding mental constructions that distort reality by hiding our true 
Self from us and distracting us to consider other things. But on the 
other hand, he finds the mechanism of liberation ultimately in an 
act that requires speech. Although even the great sentences of the 
Upanisads (mahdvakyas) are ultimately false, says Samkara, because 
they are language and so the products of ignorance, still one can be 
liberated by hearing a falsehood, just as one can be killed by being 
frightened by an illusory snake. 

Mandana appears to have resolved this ambivalence by endorsing 
Bhartrhari’s thesis that Brahman is language (Sabdddvaita). His 
thesis appears to be that Brahman is consciousness, that consciousness 
is the power of speech, and so the conclusion follows that Brahman 
is of the nature of speech; the whole universe is a manifestation 
(vivarta) of speech. It is through words that we are able to discri- 
minate and identify the contents of our ideas, which is to say the 
objects of our world. Mandana adduces a striking series of arguments 
for this conclusion. 

With such a basis for a positive attitude toward language it is 
perhaps not surprising that Mandana develops the view we sketched 
earlier, on which it is possible to approach Brahman positively through 
meditation. By contrast, Samkara and Suregvara emphasize the 
impossibility of using language directly-to designate reality. Although 
hearing a mahdvakya is the occasion for the liberating knowledge, 
that knowledge is a direct intuition (anubhava) free from the taint of 
words or any of the other means of ordinary knowing; what one learns 
is no positive description of reality. No reflective consideration is 
possible after Self-knowledge, for there is no discriminate content to 
reflect upon. The last word on this, from the viewpoint of Samkara’s 
school, is that Brahman is “‘not this, not this’? (neti neti). 

Nevertheless, Samkara’s position is that one cannot be liberated 
merely by hearing a ‘‘great sentence” without understanding what 
the sentence means. One may wrongly think that the words that 


PHILOSOPHY OF LANGUAGE 55 


make up a sentence such as “‘that art thou” directly denote Brahman, 
or that they can do so indirectly or figuratively, but the hearer must 
not understand them this way if liberation is to result. Furthermore, 
wrong views about syntax can also obstruct understanding : if the 
hearer does not realize that the ‘‘art’’ in ‘‘that art thou” is the “‘is” 
of identity and not the ‘‘is” of predication (as Western philosophers 
might put it) he will not appreciate the significance of the sentence 
and will remain in ignorance. 

Indian theories of meaning concentrate on a number of problems 
familiar to Western theorists. Enormous subtleties abound in Indian 
treatments of these issues. Some of these subtleties are hinted at in 
the summaries offered in this volume. Here in the Introduction I 
attempt only to place the Advaita views among those with which 
they compete. 

Indian grammatical tradition identifies at least three meaningful 
segments of language. A morpheme or syllable (varra) is the smallest 
meaningful segment. Varpas combine to form words (pada), and 
words compose sentences (vakya). Let us ignore questions about the 
meaning of varnas and limit ourselves to the last two segments. The 
theory of meaning concentrates on questions such as (1) what are 
the meanings of words, and of sentences? (2) how are meanings 
established ? (3) how are meanings learned or made known? and 
(4) how does all this apply to the proper interpretation of the mahd- 
vakyas ? 

A. Word-meaning. The characteristic view of the Nyaya-Vaisesika 
is that the primary meaning (abhidha, Sakti) of a word is a particular 
(vyakti) characterized by a universal (jati) and a “‘form’’ (dkrti). 
The Mimamsaka, by contrast, finds that the universal alone is the 
primary meaning; the particulars characterized by that universal 
are indicated by the word but only through secondary meaning 
(laksanad). Some theorists take the particular alone to be the primary 
meaning;® others take the “form” to be that meaning. In addition, 
there are, at least two more complex views to consider. The Bud- 
dhists, disbelieving in universals and facing tensions arising from their 
theory of momentariness of particulars, developed a unique account 
according to which the function of a word is to exclude everything to 
which the word does not apply. This view, known as apohavdda, 
is difficult to state in a’ way that does not invite its rebuttal, but 
in the process of teasing out its implications Dignaga’s school of 
Buddhist logic seems to have developed an intriguing and subtle 
view that one hardly knows whether to classify as nominalism or 


conceptualism. 


56 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


All the views catalogued so far identify the meaning of a word with 
something nonlinguistic —a universal or a particular, even a function 
of excluding. The other complex view is that of the grammarians, 
who take a different tack by hypostatizing meaning as what is called a 
sphota, literally something that “‘bursts forth”? when revealed by speech. 
Kunjunni Raja refers to it as “‘the partless, integral linguistic symbol’’.1° 

Mandana Misra defends the sphota theory in his Sphotasiddhi, and 
one infers that the author of the Brahmasiddhi defends it also, although 
it is not specifically invoked there. Properly, discussion of that 
theory belongs below, as an answer to the question of the way mean- 
ings are made known. Samkara, on the other hand, specifically 
rejects the sphofa theory and identifies the meaning of a word as the 
akrti, by which, however, he apparently means the universal property— 
that which is more normally termed the jati. This is the view of most 
Advaitins after Samkara. 

B. How are Meanings Established? Here the issue concerns 
the role of convention in the establishment of relation between a 
particular word and its object. Classically, the Naiyayikas and 
Vaisesikas hold that meaning-relations are established by God’s will, 
whereas the Mimamsakas argue that meanings are inherent in 
the very nature of words. Advaita Vedantins agree with the 
Mimamsakas here. 

An allied question relates tothe manner of word-meaning connec- 
tion. Mandana considers as an objector he who believes that the 
connection requires mediation through ideas—that it is because the 
word evokes an idea that in turn is connected to the object. Mandana 
rejects such a theory for a number of reasons and concludes that 
words are connected naturally to their objects. 

C. How are Meanings Made Known? This is by far the richest 
of our first three questions and involves numerous subtleties. One 
of the most interesting of these, anticipating contemporary issues in 
philosophy of language, is the question whether the meaning of a 
collection of meaningful items is made known by those items, or 
whether the collection has a holistic meaning of its own, logically 
antecedent to those of its parts. In the form most pertinent to 
Advaita concerns, this issue comes up in connection with sentences. 

First we may divide relevant theorists into two camps, those who 
take sentence meaning as a complex of word meanings, and those 
who do not. The main proponents of the latter view are the be- 
lievers in sphofa and those who follow in their wake, including, as 
we have seen, Mandana Misra. For Bhartrhari there is a ‘‘sentence- 
sphofa’’ (vakyasphofa), which is expressed or manifested by the words 


PHILOSOPHY OF LANGUAGE 57 


making up the sentence, just asthe word-sphofa is expressed or mani- 
fested by the syllables making it up. Mandana explores several 
ramifications of this position, notably its application to language 
learning. ‘To see fully his position, though, we need to introduce the 
members of the other camp, those who think sentence meanings are 
complexes of word meanings. In Sanskrit parlance, the first camp’s 
view is known as the “‘partlessness” thesis (akhandartha), whereas 
the second camp’s view is known as the thesis in which meaning is 
derived from the parts (khandartha). 

The latter group is in turn divided into two major sections. The 
Bhatta Mimamsakas and Nyaya-Vaigesikas hold that not only is 
the meaning of a sentence composed of the meanings of the words in 
it, but also that one understands the meaning of the sentence by first 
understanding the meanings of the words. This view is known as 
abhihitanvayavada. The contrasting (anvitabhidhdnavada) view, held 
by the Prabhakara Mimamsakas, although agreeing that sentence 
meaning is composed of word meanings, nevertheless believes that 
one understands the meanings of the sentence directly from hearing 
the words : one doesn’t have to have understanding of the word 
meanings first. One may, on this view, subsequently come to under- 
stand the meanings of the words, but sentence meaning is made known 
by hearing the words alone, not by synthesizing their meanings. 

One might infer from the above account that the Prabhakara posi- 
tion is a clever compromise between sphotavada and the abhihitanvaya- 
vada, and so indeed it may be considered. But Mandana, at any 
rate, finds it objectionable. One may conjecture that Mandana, as 
a former pupil or follower of Kumarila as well as a proponent of 
Sphotavada, deems it his mission to be particularly polemical against 
Kumirila’s rival. On the other hand, it may rather be that Prabha- 
kara’s position only accidentally has the feature that might qualify 
it as a halfway house, since the basic inspiration for the theory stems 
from an even more fundamentalist version of Mimamsa than that of 
Kumarila. 

Mandana brings in Prabhakara as one who insists that a sentence is 
meaningless without a verb and that the function of the verb is to 
signify an action to be done. Without such an action providing the 
overriding context, Prabhakara argues, the words are not properly 
connected and no sentence meaning results. This is, of course, part 
of the Mimamsaka attack on the Vedantin’s assertion that the jfdna- 
kanda provides a source of knowledge independent of the injunctive 
context provided in the karmakdnda. Mandana points out that 
Prabhakara is able to say that sentence meaning arises directly from 


58 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


hearing words, without needing other pramdnas to provide the meanings 
of those words, precisely because Prabhakara assumes that there is a 
primary injunction that gives the context for their meaning. Or, 
turning the same point around, Prabhakara is saying that on the 
anvitabhidhana theory no understanding of a sentence can occur without 
something providing the connection among the words, and in the 
case of scripture (since ex hypothesi scripture has no author) it must 
be the injunctive character of the words that provides the connection. 
It is this assumption that Mandana is concerned with refuting in the 
Brahmasiddhi. 

The refutation leads Mandana to make some interesting points 
about language learning. Prabhakara’s thesis can apparently be 
bolstered by considering a plausible reconstruction of how a child 
learns the meanings of words. He hears grandfather tell father 
sees father bringing the cow, then hears “‘bring the 


> 


“bring the cow,’ 


> 


horse,”’ sees a horse brought, and infers what ‘‘cow” and “horse” 
must mean. Note that he is assumed to understand the meanings 
of the two sentences first : this is the nub of the anvitabhidhanavada 
theory. Now, how does he come to understand the meanings of 
those injunctions? Prabhakara insists the understanding comes 
from language itself (Sabdapramana), arguing that one understands 
the injunctive force from the intention of the speaker. Mandana’s 
reply is that we understand meanings from their capacity—that is, 
from the fact that they mean something—and not from the intention 
of the speaker; if it were otherwise, a speaker could mean anything 
by his words just by intending it! This discussion has a very modern 
ring to it, lying at the heart of issues between some of the speech-act 
theorists and other, more traditional linguists. 

Mandana offers to account otherwise for the connection among 
the words in a sentence, the connection that Prabhakara finds 
necessary in order that sentence meaning be grasped. All that is 
required, Mandana points out, is that we have some way of eventually 
coming to know of the connection; the requirement is that there is 
connection, and if the connection is there the condition Prabhakara 
insists on is satisfied whether or not we are aware that itis at that 
stime. Later on, Mandana declares, we can become aware of the 
connection by the instrument of knowledge called arthdpatti. The 
argument continues at length, with Prabhakara’s position being 
developed in mentalistic directions (the word is connected to an idea, 
not to an object). This position is also subject to criticism by 
Mandana. 

In the end, although Mandana is not very explicit about it, one 


PHILOSOPHY OF LANGUAGE 59 


presumes that he follows Bhartrhari and sabdddvaita. In the remark- 
able, rather self-enclosed section in the Brahmasiddhi where he explains 
that view, he makes it clear that, because difference is ultimately 
unreal and modifications ultimately nothing but what they are modi- 
fications of, it follows that, whereas speech (vdk, fabda) is real, collec- 
tions of words, meanings, and so forth are not ultimately real but are 
instead reflections or manifestations (vivarta) of speech. Whereas 
one may conjecture that Mandana prefers abhihitanvayavada to anvitabhi- 
dhdnavada, given the arguments reviewed above plus the evidence 
of the masterful Sphofasiddhi, still it would seem that even Kumirila’s 
theory proves acceptable only up to a point for Mandana. 

Samkara, on the other hand, clearly rejects sphofavdada. Suresvara 
finds nothing in his master’s remarks to mitigate against a rather 
clearcut espousal of the abhihitanvayavada view, and he makes a spirited 
defense of that view himself in more than one place. It is interesting 
to notice, also, that Suresvara makes generous use of Mandana’s 
arguments, choosing language so close to Mandana’s as to make one 
sure that he knew the Brahmasiddhi. Indeed, these passages provide 
some of the most powerful evidence for the traditional identification 
of the two. However, Suregvara’s treatment lacks the characteristic 
fabdédvaita aspects. 

D. Interpretation of the Mahavakyas. For Advaita, the success of 
any theory of meaning arises from its relative success in explaining, 
consonantly with Advaita teachings, the meaning of the great sen- 
tences of the Upanisads. Sometimes there are said to be four of these 
great sentences, one from each Veda : “Brahman is wisdom” (prajiid- 
nam brahma [Aitareya Upanisad I1J1.5.3]); “I am Brahman” (aham 
brahmasmi [Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 1.4.10}); “That art thou” (tat 
tvam asi [Chandogya Upanisad VI1.8.7]); and “‘this Self is Brahman” 
(ayam atma brahma [Mandiikya Upanisad IV.2]).™ 

Let us consider “that art thou.” Uttered by Uddalaka Aruni 
to his son Svetaketu, the context suggests that by “that” the sentence 
refers to Brahman, by “thou” it refers to Svetaketu’s self, and by 
“art”? it is indicated that these two referents are identical. However, 
this straightforward explanation presents several problems for the 
Advaitin. For one thing, Samkara explains in several places that 
Brahman is ineffable in the sense that words (even “Brahman’’) 
cannot denote It directly. It would seem to follow that if 
“that’? means Brahman it must mean it indirectly, consistently with 
Samkara’s thesis. 

Is “that art thou’? metaphorical, then, a figurative identification— 
one’s self is like Brahman, or Brahman is like one’s true Self? No, 


60 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Samkara replies : figurative language presupposes the speaker’s knowl- 
edge that the things identified are really different, whereas “that art 
thou,” insofar as it provides Self-knowledge, presupposes that the 
speaker knows that the things are really identical. If one says 
“Devadatta is a lion” figuratively, he knows Devadatta is not 
a lion. 

It is not Samkara’s contention that Brahman cannot be indicated 
by words—what he is saying is that Brahman cannot be directly 
designated by any word. However, It can be indirectly designated 
for example, by the word “I.”? The word “I” directly denotes my 
ego (ahamkdra), but since the ego is a reflection of the true Self, as the 
mirror image is a reflection of the fact reflected in it, one can use the 
word ‘I’? nonmetaphorically to indicate the Self. But all such 
usage presupposes, as has been said, the operation of ignorance, a 
failure on our part to discriminate the true Self from the jiva , ego, 
or whatever. Now if one truly appreciates the difference between 
self and Self and understands the nature of the Self, one will also 
appreciate why no word can directly designate It. All words indicate 
particulars by means of alluding to them through the universals that 
characterize them. But no universals characterize the true Self— 
It is “not this, not this”. So if one says “that art thou,” knowing 
the truth about the Self, it follows that he is not using the words 
“that” and “‘thou” to directly denote Brahman. 

Which leaves us still seeking understanding of what “‘that art thou” 
means. Suregvara is perhaps the most helpful writer on this point. 
He asks us to consider a sentence like ‘‘the space in the pot is the space 
in the sky’. Read literally, this sentence is false—the space in the 
pot is there where the pot sits, the space in the sky somewhere else and 
unconfined, and so on. Yet the sentence indicates something beyond 
the direct meaning of its terms, namely, that both the pot space and 
the sky space are aspects of space simpliciter. Thus the sentence 
points beyond its literal meaning, and Suregvara emphasizes that 
it does so immediately—that one does not have to reflect on it to 
appreciate this meaning it has provided; one already knows the 
difference between space simpliciter and confined parts of spaces. 
The analogy with “that art thou” is evident. 

Notice that this refutes certain interpretations of “‘that art thou” 
that might seem tempting or obvious. Of these the most common 
is to suppose that “that art thou” means that Svetaketu’s self (jiva) 
is identical with his true Self or Brahman. The sentence does not 
mean that. Indeed, on Advaita tenets, the jiva is a product of ignor- 
ance or mdayd, whereas the true Self or Brahman is not, so they are 


PHILOSOPHY OF LANGUAGE 61 


quite distinct, and it would be as false to identify them as it would be 
to identify the space in the pot with that outside the pot. 

Nor does “‘that art thou’? assert that one Reality goes under two 
names, for examples, “Self and “Brahman.” For one thing, the 
sentence is not about names. And “that” and “thou” do not name 
the one Reality directly. 

Suresvara explains the function of “that art thou” as a negative 
one. That the sentence cannot be interpreted literally should be 
evident when one reflects that the designation of ‘‘that” excludes 
thou and the designation of ‘“‘thou” excludes that and yet they are 
identified in the sentence. So we are immediately led to forget the 
literal meaning as well as the figurative ones inasmuch as this is an 
identity statement, and given proper preparation we should imme- 
diately grasp the sense of the statement even though no literal ‘‘trans- 
lation” is possible. This grasping will necessarily be accompanied 
by a realization that no words, which is to say no properties, properly 
apply to that which is conveyed through the sentence. 


4 


IDENTITY AND DIFFERENCE : 
THE THEORY OF RELATIONS 


It has become clear in the preceding chapters that the major thrust 
of Advaita, as its title implies, is that even though practical affairs of 
men require a belief in the difference among things, that belief is false, 
and, indeed, eradication of it constitutes a critical part of achieving 
release. The liberating knowledge is awareness of nondifference, 
of nonduality. 

But, one may well object, not every awareness constitutes knowledge. 
For an awareness to be an instance of knowledge it must be true— 
and why in the world should we suppose the awareness of nondiffer- 
ence to be true? The way we discover truth is through using our 
eyes and other senses, as well as by using our reason. But the clear 
testimony of our senses as well as of reason is that there are distinctions 
among things. For instance, it is surely evident that at », and t, 
certain things are the case, whereas at some other # and some later 
t they are different. Change does occur. Again, as another example, 
consider the relation between the subject of awareness and its 
object : some such relations support the predication of “‘truth” for 
the resulting judgment, whereas others do not support such a predi- 
cation; therefore, at the least it must follow that judgments of the one 
kind are distinct from judgments of the other kind and that there is 
something about the one kind that makes them true that is lacking 
in the others. 

The Advaitin’s answer to this objection has already been indicated. 
One has to recognize a difference in levels of understanding, between 
reality and appearance. On the highest level, on which awareness 
of reality (or perhaps better, the reality that 7s awareness) occurs, 
there is no possibility of difference. From the lower level, the level 
of appearance, myriad distinctions are of course apparent, but this is 
entirely the work of avidya or “ignorance.” 


THE THEORY OF RELATIONS 63 


The objector will hardly be satisfied, of course. He will reiterate 
his challenge : ‘‘I have asked for proof,” he will say, ‘‘and the Advaitin 
has given me a pronouncement that merely avoids the challenge. 
Where is his proof that there are in reality no distinctions ?” 

A great deal of the literature summarized later in this volume 
suggests answers to this challenge. But we can perhaps capture one 
major point of the discussion by focusing on those aspects of difference 
that the objector himself cited—the experience of change, or a thing 
arising when it was not there before, and the experience that one’s 
own judgments differ from each other in significant respects. There 
are also some general arguments, chiefly pioneered by Mandana 
Misra, which we need to consider. 

A. Change and Causality—\. Gaudapada’s Ajativdda. Gaudapada 
combines the denial of causal change with a general metaphysical 
principle to arrive at an unconditional monism. The principle is 
that any (putative) object that is nonexistent at the beginning, that is, 
that originates, and that is nonexistent at the end, that is, is destroyed, 
is also nonexistent in the middle, that is, is completely nonexistent. 
The argument for this principle stems from dreams. Everyone 
accepts that dream objects are unreal—why? Because, though 
they appear to originate, exist for a time, and then go out of existence, 
it is clear on waking that none of these appearances are veridical : 
as we say, “‘it was all a dream.’’ Accepting the unreality of dreams, 
we can then formulate the following inference : waking objects are 
unreal, because they originate, like dream objects. And Gauda- 
pada assumes that this inference is unobjectionable. 

Assuming that the inference is unobjectionable, all that needs to 
be done is to show that no waking objects actually originate. The 
view that no objects are ever born, that nothing originates, is known 
in Sanskrit as ajdtivada and is especially associated with Gaudapada. 
He presents several arguments for the thesis. 

The major argument is predicated on a familiar assumption in 
Indian thought, that a thing’s nature cannot change. We haveseen, 
on the basis of the preceding argumentation, that if there were a real 
object it could not have origination as its nature, for that which has 
origination as its nature is unreal, as the objects of dreams are unreal. 
Therefore, if there are any real objects they cannot have origination 
as their nature. But if so, they cannot originate, for a thing cannot 
lose its nature. 

One might respond here that Gaudapada has taken us in by verba 
manipulation. He has commandeered the word “real” for himself, 
meaning by it that which does noi originate and has proved that real 


64 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


objects (in that sense) do not originate, which is hardly news. But 
the question, after all, was : does anything at all originate? And 
the argument doesn’t prove anything about that. 

Gaudapada handles this objection by dividing all things into two 
varieties, real (sai) and unreal (asat). A real object is takentobe 
nonoriginating on the basis of the argument already provided. But 
what the objection indicates is the possibility that unreal objects are 
really born, that is, become real, or that some other causal relations 
hold between the real and unreal as, respectively, cause and effect. 
To deal with this, Gaudapada considers what he takes to be an 
exhaustive list of possibilities. 

First, both the effect and the cause cannot be real. If the effect is 
different from the cause, then it cannot be real, since that which 
originates does not exist (yet). And, if the effect is the same as (has 
the same nature as) the real cause, it cannot originate, since that 
nature involves nonorigination. So if there are causal relations 
either the cause, or the effect, or both must be unreal. 

Second, suppose that the cause is unreal but becomes real as effect. 
But that is absurd—an unreal object such as a son of a barren woman 
cannot come to exist. 

Third, if the cause is real and the effect not, and if the cause and 
effect are the same object, either that object exists (is real) or it does 
not (is not). If it (already) exists it cannot originate as effect, and 
if it doesn’t exist (already) it cannot also exist as cause. On _ the 
other hand, if the cause and effect are different objects, the one real, 
the other unreal, and yet the effect originates from this cause, this 
will force us to suppose, says Gaudapada, “‘that what is born has 
already been born.” 

Or else we are led to the fourth alternative, that both cause and 
effect are unreal, in which case nothing ever comes to exist or goes 
out of existence, which is Gaudapada’s conclusion. 

Gaudapada buttresses this line of argument with some others. One 
interesting point he mentions is that if causality is accepted, then, 
since whatever originates must have an end, either samsdra has a begin- 
ing or else liberation must have an end. Neither result is acceptable. 

Gaudapada’s arguments are reminiscent of Buddhism. Conio! 
and Vidhusekhara Bhattacharya? trace the Buddhist originals of some 
of the arguments. Not every scholar accepts the implications of that 
parallel, however. Anantakrishna Sastri3 feels that the Buddhist 
ajativada is different from that of Gaudapada. Gaudapada’s view, 
he says, “‘does not mean natural non-origin but non-origin of the 
effected universe in the form of its cause (sadbhdvena). The effect, 


THE THEORY OF RELATIONS 65 


when viewed from the standpoint of its cause, will be found to have 
no origin; while viewed in its own form as mere effect it certainly 
possesses some kind of origin (i.e., vivarta or illusory appearance ).’’4 
That is to say, Gaudapada is not denying the obvious fact that causal 
relations characterize the world of appearances. That world appears, 
Just as dreams appear, but the appearance is the result of ‘“‘construc- 
tion” (vikalpa), of ignorance, or maya. This is evidently his view; 
whether the Buddhist view is any different we shall not try to judge 
here. Even if it is different, it is not clear that Anantakrishna Sastri 
is right in assimilating Gaudapada’s view to Samkara’s; this may be 
an overreaction to the charge of Advaita parallelism with Buddhism. 

A. Change and Causality—2. Samkara’s Theory. Samkara provides 
numerous arguments relating to causality. Perhaps the richest 
resource is in Brahmasiitrabhadsya IJ.1.15-20, where Deussen® counts 
some eight different arguments, not all of which will be summarized 
in this volume. 

Some of Samkara’s arguments resemble standard reasons provided, 
for example, in the Samkhyakarikds, for the theory of satkaryavada, 
the theory that the effect preexists in its cause. For example, such 
an argument is that the effect must exist there already, for otherwise 
anything might arise anywhere. Another argument suggests that 
when scripture says that “‘in the beginning the universe was non- 
existent (asat)”’ it means that the effect, before it arises, is the causal 
stuff but not yet developed in name-and-form. 

In a somewhat more original vein, Samkara points out that it is 
common experience that when the perceptibility of something, call 
it x, depends on the persistence of another thing y we assume x and y 
to be identical in nature, whereas conversely, when x=4y, the per- 
ceptibility of x does not depend on the persistence of y, for example, 
a horse can be perceived without a cow being present. 

Still another argument, which is both complex and difficult for a 
Western scientific mind to sympathize with, is predicated on the 
thesis that every causal process must have an “agent” (kartr). The 
assumption secms to be developed on the basis of one kind of Sanskrit 
grammatical theory. The verb from which the basic causal terms 
come (kérana, ‘“‘cause’”’; karya, “effect”; karman, “causal object or 
action,” etc.) literally means “to make” or “to produce” something. 
As with Aristotle, the paradigm in this kind of grammatical theory 
seems to be the production of formed stuff out of unformed stuff. 
In such a context, say in producing a pot from a lump of clay, the 
stuff clay is the cause, the pot the effect. But in addition we may 
want to identify whatever it is that is responsible for the form—here 


66 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the shape—that the stuff takes in its effect state. That determining 
force is termed the “agent” or kartr. Characteristically, an agent 
brings about the effect by producing an action (karman) that gives 
the stuff the effect’s nature. Thus it is the agent that is responsible 
for the nature of the effect. 

The argument of which I speak begins in such a context. It is 
noted that without an agent an effect will be without a nature. But 
furthermore, Samkara argues, the only thing that can properly func- 
tion as agent is the effect itself. It must, therefore, preexist its own 
manifestation, for nothing else can serve as agent. The agent is that 
which gives the form to the effect, and only if it already has that form 
can it perform its function. 

A major objection to this reasoning arises from the suggestion that 
the effect gets its form upon its manifestation through some kind of 
relation with the agent. Samkara’s response is evident : if the effect 
doesn’t already have a nature it cannot come into a relation with 
anything, so on this view too one will have to admit the preexistence 
of the effect before its manifestation. 

But suppose, someone suggests, the “‘agent”’ is simply the prior 
nonexistence of the effect; then the effect is the “‘counterpositive’’ 
of that absence, and a relation between an absence and its counter- 
positive is perfectly appropriate. Samkara disagrees : absences or 
nonexistents cannot be causal agents; a son of a barren woman cannot 
produce anything. 

Causality must involve a relation between an agent with a nature 
and an effect with a nature, as Samkara sees it. The function of the 
agent is to act so as to bring the effect to manifest itself in our experi- 
ence. This effect, say the pot, is made of the substance that prior 
to production was known as the lump of clay; the effect is thus identical 
in substance with its cause, preexisting in it in potency. This is the 
view known throughout Indian thought as satkdryavdda, the view that 
the effect exists in its cause. 

However, Samkara, like Gaudapada, does not admit that the effect 
really exists at all. In commenting on a famous passage in the 
Chandogya Upanisad he makes it quite clear that in the production of, 
say, a pot from some clay it is the clay that is real; the pot is “based 
merely on speech” (vdcélambanamdtra). For this reason most Advaita 
scholars prefer to term Samkara’s view satkéranavada, or the view that 
the cause is existent, especially since other systems, notably Samkhya, 
accept satkdryavdda in a fashion objectionable to Samkara. 

The point is perhaps more clearly made by considering the distinc- 
tion between two models of causation called in Sanskrit parindmavada 


THE THEORY OF RELATIONS 67 


and vivartavdda, The Samkhya provides an example of a system that 
adopts the parinama model. On its view the pot is a transformation 
of the clay that constitutes it, both cause and effect existing at their 
appropriate times, neither being in any relevant way “unreal.”’ By 
contrast, the vivarta model views the effect, the pot, as not an actual 
object but an appearance or construction due to our imagination 
conditioned by ignorance (avidyd). It should be evident that the 
vivarta model fits Gaudapada’s theory; the parindma model does not. 

However, one can also look at the issue from a different angle. 
The reality of the cause, it may be pointed out, is a reality only rela- 
tive to the effect. By contrast with the pot the clay is real; but on 
Samkara’s account the clay is not ultimately itself real. This allows 
for different ways of handling causal relations in the world. Consider : 
one might say that all causality, whether the relation between the 
ultimate cause (Brahman) and all appearance or the relation between 
a particular lump of clay and the pot it becomes—all such relations 
must be thought of according to the vivarta model, so that everything 
except Brahman is an appearance, a construction from avidya relative 
to something else, its cause. But one doesn’t have to say that. One 
might say instead that everything is a construction of avidya when 
compared with Brahman, the only real existent, but that within the 
realm of phenomenal experience the relation between cause and 
effect corresponds to the parinéma model, so that cause and effect, 
though both ultimately unreal from the “highest standpoint” (para- 
marthika), are equally real from the empirical standpoint (yydva- 
harika). Or one might complicate things still further and hold that, 
though ultimately all is unreal by contrast with Brahman, within the 
world of appearances some causal relations are parindma, some vivarta. 

Which of these stories Samkara tells is a matter of dispute among 
scholars. When we discuss the workings of avidyd below, we shall 
reconsider that point. Here I shall merely note, by way of tran- 
sition, that the use of the vivarta model at whatever level puts the 
question of relations, including the causal relation, ina new and differ- 
ent light. Vivarta causality is an apparent relation between an effect 
that is (at least comparatively) unreal and a cause that is (at least 
comparatively) real, between a thought construction and that on 
which such a construction is grounded. Attention therefore shifts 
to the epistemic or awareness relationship, and away from scientific 
accounts of the relations of objects occupying a common, “‘external,”’ 
and real world. 

B. The Awareness Relation. We are led, then, to look more 
closely at knowing or awareness, in particular at what constitutes a 
“construction” and at error in general, 


68 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Returning to Gaudapada, we need a closer look at his use of the 
notion of construction (vikalpa). ‘The term vikalpa is one of the most 
difficult Indian philosophical terms to interpret : the precise sense 
of some of its meanings is not always clear, and a great deal is made to 
hang on those senses. My best guess as to what Gaudapada means 
by it is “wrong interpretation.”” His own example of a vikalpa is 
the taking of a rope in the dusk to be a snake, a wrong interpretation 
of what is presented to the senses. This example is offered as an 
analogy to the relation between the Self (dtman) and its “‘states”’ 
(bhava) such as living, etc. Again, the person who is aware of 
difference (bheda) is termed a vikalpaka, one who wrongly interprets. 

Whether Gaudapada takes wrong interpretation as merely a 
negative state, a failure on our part, or whether he views it more 
positively as an activity, “‘constructing,” is less clear. My own view 
is that he distinguishes between kalpand and vikalpand, the former 
bearing the sense of apparently producing something, the latter 
merely connoting our failure to properly understand something.’ 
If that is right, the fact that I wrongly interpret something, say, 
the rope as snake, does not necessarily imply that I apparently pro- 
duce the snake. There seems some reason to think that in fact 
Gaudapada supposes that the mechanism of apparent production 
ultimately stems from God and works through the vdsands, the karmic 
traces. If this account is correct, Gaudapada’s view would cor- 
respond to some degree with the view of the Yogacarin Vasubandhu, 
who distinguishes imaginary (parikalpita) from dependent (paratantra) 
natures of things, both of those distinguished from their absolute 
(parinispanna) nature, a correspondence that may or may not be 
construed as lending credence to the association of Gaudapada with 
Buddhism. 

Gaudapada is also fond of the term mdéydé, which figures else- 
where in Advaita. For the most part, it seems to me, Gaudapada 
uses mdyé synonymously with vikalpa. If so, Gaudapada seems 
to be saying that we regularly wrongly interpret and so find differences 
where none exist, this occurring in both the dreaming and _ waking 
states. But these wrong interpretations are not forged out of whole 
cloth, so to speak; they are, rather, misinterpretations of something 
apparently produced by God through traces (in waking) or by us 
through traces (in dream). 

The apparent-production aspect carries the idea of ajativada, reviewed 
above; thus even that diversity which we wrongly interpret as 
different sorts of states is unreal. Our wrong interpretations are 
doubly unreal. This idea recurs in Samkara and later Advaitins, 


THE THEORY OF RELATIONS 69 


who sometimes use ‘“‘wrong interpretation” to help us understand 
apparent production and thus, by contrast, the ultimate ground of 
both, the nondual Brahman. 

It is remarkable that in the entire Brahmasitrabhdsya Samkara 
nowhere uses the term vikalpa in Gaudapada’s sense. But Samkara 
develops a related theory, with his own terminology for expressing it. 

The fundamental text on this, a passage more studied and memo- 
rized by students of Indian philosophy than probably any other 
passage in the entire literature, is the famous introduction to the 
Brahmasiitrabhasya. Here, Samkara develops the idea of “superimpo- 
sition”? (adhydsa), which he defines as ‘‘the appearance, in the form of 
a memory, of something previously experienced in some other 
place.” This would seem to be an analysis of the mechanism by 
which “wrong interpretation” takes place. Samkara himself claims 
that his definition captures the common core of everyone’s theory 
of error, that whatever differences in detail there may be, all the 
other systems agree that, in erroneous cognition the properties 
belonging to one thing appear to us as belonging to another. 

In particular, says Samkara, we are prone to superimpose the 
properties of the object of awareness on its subject, and vice versa. 
That is, we identify ourself gua scat of consciousness with ourself qua 
body, mind, memory, etc., all of which are objects, not subjects, 
and so have at least one property that the self gua subject cannot have. 
It is this primary superimposition that constitutes ignorance (avidya), 
and it is this confusion in particular that needs to be eradicated through 
knowledge (vidya). 

Samkara’s account implies the important consideration that super- 
imposition is not the free exercise of the imagination. It is the attri- 
bution of something experienced previously to something experienced 
now. Questions naturally arise : where did these things come from, 
and are they distinct from each other? If they are not distinct, 
how can they be superimposed, and if they are distinct, what happens 
to nondualism ? It is questions such as these that later Advaitins 
spend much time answering, attempting to square their accounts 
with Samkara’s to the best of their ability. 

Samkara’s own answers to these questions are not entirely free 
from ambiguity. Broadly, they are as follows. Ultimately, that 
on which everything is superimposed is pure consciousness, otherwise 
known as Brahman. So when one mistakes a rope for a snake, at 
the empirical level the snaky properties are attributed to a rope (of 
course not recognized as such at the time), but more fundamental is 
the basic superimposition involving attributing external-world 


70 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


attributes to pure consciousness (of course not recognized as such at 
the time). In this sense, Samkara says, all practical affairs are 
dependent on avidyé, on superimposition. 

At the heart of our confusion is the notion, due to avidyd, that my 
consciousness is different from yours or from anything else at all. 
This, then, suggests the answer to one of the questions posed above : 
all difference is unreal, and so the ground of superimposition is 
ultimately one, nondual, undifferentiated; distinct grounds are not 
required to have superimposition, although ordinary perceptual 
errors like the rope-snake happen to be built on more fundamental 
errors and so appear to involve one thing superimposed on another. 

This line of explanation, however, inevitably leads us to inquire 
how the first superimposition could take place, which provided the 
distinctions that subsequently provide the grounds for the “‘ordinary 
perceptual errors.”” Sometimes Samkara’s answer to this is to dis- 
allow the question : avidyd is beginningless, and there was no first 
superimposition. Sometimes he confesses inability to explain the 
mysterious ways of avidyd. 

Neither reply seems to do justice to a concern that motivates the 
question asked. If superimposition, avidyd, is the lack of awareness 
(ajfiana) that I, a knowing subject, am responsible for, then it would 
seem that if the grounds for every error are themselves the result of 
superimpositions, which in turn are things I am responsible for, I 
am caught up in a narcissistic game with myself. One can imagine 
a critic going on from this though to conclude that : either I didn’t 
need to begin this game and thus ought to be able to end it at will, or 
else if not I am mysteriously subject to it in a way that awareness 
of it will not end, so that I am unable to escape at all. Samkara 
seems to be exploring this worry in the Upadesasahasri, and his 
answer appears to go something like this. Inasense you are caught 
up in a game with yourself, but you fail to appreciate the different 
levels of “‘yourself.’”” The grounds for superimposing something on 
something else in this life include sense presentations in this life and 
the results of traces produced by yourself in previous lives. In turn, 
these are manipulated by a higher yourself, God. What is provided 
by that higher self is not fully in control of the lower self: thus the 
feeling that one is subjected to conditions for experience not created 
by oneself. 

If these speculations are generally accurate it would seem that 
Samkara follows a line much the same as Gaudapada, the “three- 
tiered’’ account mentioned previously as resembling the Yogacara 
view, but with an important emphasis. Though the ordinary level 


THE THEORY OF RELATIONS 71 


of experience constitutes a double error—the misinterpretation 
superimposed on grounds that are themselves unreal because only 
apparently produced—it seems that for Samkara it is the Self that is 
responsible for the apparent production, and that the mechanism 
by which apparent production occurs is a “higher-level”? wrong 
interpretation. That is, avidya is not only a failure to comprehend, 
a wrong interpretation, it is also the power of projecting as objects 
of awareness things that, ultimately unreal, themselves, are then 
misinterpreted once more as practical life continues. We shall 
return to consider this “‘positive’ aspect of avidya below. 

CG. Mandana’s Critique of Difference. It is Mandana Misra who 
develops the most devastating arguments against the reality of differ. 
ence. These arguments are based on the logical incoherence of 
difference in general and are not tied to the particular cases of 
causation or awareness. 

The Buddhists base their whole philosophy on distinctions. For 
them, difference is the very nature (svabhdva, svariipa) of every thing, 
as is clearly indicated in their theory of meaning as apoha, the theory 
that a word can only designate its object by excluding everything 
else, since the object has no character of its own other than this 
difference. Mandana argues that this is logically untenable. Differ- 
ence is a relation between at least two things that are different from 
each other. If difference is the essence of these things they will both 
be identical with it, and then by the principle that if two things 
are identical with the same thing they are identical, these two 
different things will be identical, which is absurd. 

If difference is real and not intrinsic to things, it must be a relation 
among things. Mandana moves on to consider relations in general, 
arguing éheir unreality. Relations cannot be the natures of things, 
for this would result in mutual dependence, which precludes the 
thing ever coming to be. Therefore, it must be concluded that all 
relations are dependent on human purposes (pauruseydpeksa) and not 
intrinsic to things at all. 

Various responses, stemming not only from Buddhism, but also 
from Kumarila, Nyaya-Vaisesika, Jainas, and other Vedantins will be 
considered at length, and I shall not attempt to summarize them 
here, except to point out that Mandana’s knowledge of the systems 
he treats is very acute : he picks out critical aspects of his opponents’ 
theories. For example, in treating Kumarila and Nyaya he concen- 
trates on the substance-attribute distinction, which is surely central 
to those ontologies, and on the use by Kumiarila and Nyaya of 
negation, by using which they hope to avoid the force of the 
arguments we have cited. 


72 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Mandana’s approach contrasts with Samkara’s perhaps because 
Mandana is writing an independent treatise, whereas, Samkara is 
commenting. It contrasts with Gaudapada’s approach, perhaps 
because Mandana writes in prose and Gaudapada composed stanzas. 
Some scholars profess to find more significant contrasts among these 
writers than merely those brought about by stylistic necessities, how- 
ever. There certainly do seem to be differences between Mandana 
and Samkara on other matters, notably, the issues over the path to 
liberation, but on the criticism of difference it is not clear that any 
substantial disagreement exists among the three. They each have 
their predilections—Gaudapada for the dream analogy, Samkara 
for exegetics, Mandana for philosophical argument. Still one finds 
considerable treatment of all three topics in the works of each writer. 
And the message is consistent : difference is unreal. 

D. Surefvara’s Synthesis. Suresvara develops all the themes and 
arguments reviewed in this chapter so far. He is very clearly aware 
of both Samkara and Mandana (and doubtless Gaudapada as well) 
and follows them both closely, indeed, so closely that some scholars 
have suggested that if the two are different writers Suresvara must 
“plagiarize’” Mandana.® Presumably the same charge might be 
made that Suresvara plagiarizes Samkara, too, but since Suregvara 
spends much of his time commenting explicitly on Samkara rather 
than on Mandana it seems inappropriate to tax him on that score ! 

Thus, Suregvara develops Gaudapida’s ajdtivdda, Samkara’s super- 
imposition, and Mandana’s arguments versus difference in various 
parts of his vast Brhaddranyakavarttika. He docs not scem to develop 
any new ideas of his own on the epistemological points involved. If 
he has a distinct thesis to argue on difference, it will become relevant 
when we discuss the ‘‘positive’’ side of ignorance. 

E. Padmapada’s Contribution. By comparison with Sureégvara, 
Padmapada is temperamentally much more akin to Mandana— 
interested in the logical and epistemological arguments for their own 
sake. Even though his ideas are developed in the apparent context 
of a commentary on Samkara’s opening sections of the Brahmasiitra- 
bhasya, it is evident almost immediately that Padmapada takes 
Samkara as an occasion for developing his ideas rather than as a 
context limiting the relevance of his remarks. What Padmapada 
does is to take Samkara’s idea of superimposition and erect a whole 
theory of knowledge on it. Whereas Samkara and Suregvara, and 
even to a large extent Mandana, bring in epistemology only to the 
extent necessary to make certain points pertaining to “the path’? and 
its teaching, minimizing the difficulty of the notions so developed, 


THE THEORY OF RELATIONS 73 


Padmapada spares his reader nothing. His method is startlingly 
“modern” : by far the largest portion of his work is a painstaking 
expansion of Samkara’s definition of superimposition, each word and 
nuance explained, analyzed, justified, and expanded by relating it to 
the richness of systematic criticism and response from the standpoint 
of other epistemological theories. 

It is Padmapada who pioneers the epistemology we most likely 
associate with Advaita. He provides the bridge between Samkara 
and later Advaita, which is as obsessed with epistemology as Samkara 
was with the contrast between knowledge and action. 

With respect to the specific topic under discussion—the critique of 
difference—Padmapada embarks on a new road, one that some find 
an extremely dangerous one. In all the other Advaitins we have 
so far studied, difference and relations have been argued to be unreal 
using completely negative arguments. Indeed, the very knowledge 
that liberates is held to be incapable of formulation in positive 
terms—in the final analysis the only formulation that is safe is 
this, not this.’ Even “that art thou” has to be unpacked in negative 
fashion : each term, according to Samkara and Suresvara, removes 
a source of ignorance and it is only the ignorant who will construe it 
as a positive assertion having a subject-predicate form. 

Padmapada’s approach is to emphasize the positive identity bet- 
ween jiva and the étman. To illustrate the relation between them he 
appeals at length to the analogy of the relation between one’s face 
and its reflection in a mirror. Thus the function of ‘‘that art thou” 
for Padmapada is not merely to remove error or ignorance, as it 


ce 


not 


seems to have been for Samkara and Suresvara, but it actually pro- 
pounds a declaration of identity between a reflection and its proto- 
type. That, says Padmapada, is why it is a positive rather than a 
negative judgment. Later developments in Advaita, to be dealt 
with in a subsequent volume in this series, feature extensive develop- 
ment of this line of thought among the writers belonging to the 
so-called ‘‘Vivarana school,” who take their point of departure from 
Padmapada. 


ADVAITA METAPHYSICS 


We turn now to a positive account of the ‘‘categories”’ of Advaita 
philosophy. As we have seen, there is only one real thing according 
to this school, and it is alternatively called “Brahman” or “Atman.” 
We begin by inquiring more closely into the nature of this Real and 
follow this by exploring the workings of avidya and maya, by recourse 
to which the appearance of diversity is explained. In this way we 
shall be led on to consider how apparent creation takes place, and 
thence to consider the phenomenal world and the empirical selves 
we take to inhabit it. 


I, Brahman 


We have seen, in passages such as “not this, not this,” that no 
positive language is adequate to describe Brahman. This does not 
prevent our authors from saying a good deal about Brahman. If 
pressed, they will of course admit that the predicates are applied 
only from the empirical standpoint conditioned by ignorance. Still, 
the choice of such predicates seems to matter enough to warrant some 
extended discussion. 

Samkara clearly distinguishes a higher from a lower Brahman in 
the Brahmasiiirabhdsya and elsewhere. The higher Brahman, Brah- 
man viewed from the aspect of knowledge (vidya), is free from all 
adjuncts, all name and form. It is nirguna Brahman, and it is knowl- 
edge of this Brahman that constitutes liberation according to 
Samkara. Saguna Brahman, or God, is the lower Brahman; it is 
Brahman viewed from the aspect of ignorance (avidya). 

It is, of course, the higher Brahman about which one cannot 
properly speak positively. Many of the adjectives used in our texts 
are negative: Brahman is without qualifiers (nirvifesa), without 
form (ariipa), without change, without parts, without end (advitiya 
or advaita). These perhaps require no further comment here. 


ADVAITA METAPHYSICS 75 


Three positive properties are commonly invoked in alluding to 
Brahman. These are truth (sat or satya), consciousness (cit or 
caitanya), and bliss (dnanda). (In later Advaita these are combined 
into a stock triad—saccidaénanda—but this combination is not found 
in Samkara’s works.! The closest passage is the satyam jitanam 
anantam brahma of Taittiriya Upanisad II.1.) These three properties, 
or each of them singly, are said by Padmapada to constitute the 
essential definition (svariipalaksana) of Brahman, in contrast to the 
accidental definition (tatasthalaksana) that according to Padmapada 
is provided in the second Brahmasiitra. The discussion of each of the 
three properties is instructive. 

The term sat, being, occurs in the earliest Vedic texts. A theme 
there is whether the universe sprang from sat or asat, being or non- 
being, and texts are found that argue for each side of the issue. 
Advaitins, who naturally view sat as the origin, explain away texts 
appearing to favor the converse view as saying something else.? 
The explanations are rather forced. 

What is it to have or be sat? Later Advaitins search explicitly for 
a properly formulated criterion of reality. In the texts here covered 
the nature of reality has to be inferred from contrast with what it is 
not, and we have seen that it is not composite, not subject to origina- 
tion and destruction, not subject to relations or change, etc. The 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad declares that the secret name (upanisad) of the 
Self is satyasya satya, “truth of truth,” and Samkara and Sureévara 
in commenting on this and similar passages treat this as a 
pronouncement more or less parallel to “not this, not this.” 

In Vaisesika satéa is understood as a very comprehensive universal 
property (sdmdanya). Mandana Misra, in the course of his extended 
attack on difference, describes Brahman as a universal in which all 
different individuals are absorbed, and in commenting on this verse 
he explicitly identifies Brahman as sattaé. He appears to retract 
this later in the same passage, dismissing the identification as meta- 
phorical, but apparently Suresvara is not willing to leave it at that, 
for he pointedly refers to Mandana’s view (though without identifying 
the author) and rejects it on the grounds that it allows for complexity 
and so internal differentiation within Brahman. 

Far more informative is the second property in the triad. The 
Highest Brahman is pure consciousness (cit) or awareness (jidna), 
the Witness (sdksin), which is not Itself an object of thought. Brahman 
is self-luminous; indeed It is the sole source of consciousness. 
By Its light everything else shines, that is, is known to awareness. 
In Itself It has no specific form; whatever appears to It as cognized 


76 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is not intrinsic to It. Thus the consciousness that is Brahman is 
not a relational consciousness between knower and known. The 
closest approximation in our experience to pure consciousness occurs 
in deep sleep, which according to Advaita is a state of consciousness 
without any objects. When objects appear to this witnessing con- 
sciousness they are the work of avidyad; they are superimposed on pure 
consciousness, which remains unaffected by that relationship. 

Although Brahman is self-lJuminous it should not be inferred that 
It is the object of Its awareness. Brahman can never be the object 
of knowledge, properly speaking. By the same token Brahman 
cannot be literally identified as the knower, the subject that knows 
objects. Both knower and known are products of avidyé and not 
ultimately real; likewise the relation between them is unreal. ‘This 
we have seen above, and we shall return below to distinguish pure 
consciousness from empirical awareness. 

The third member of the triad is bliss. Although the Upanisads 
frequently comment on this aspect of Brahman, Samkara is peculiarly 
hesitant to attribute this property to It. Samkara’s reasons can be 
easily guessed. Bliss is pleasure, and pleasure is a temporary state, 
the experiencing of which requires a body, organs, etc. So if Brah- 
man is bliss it must be so in some sense that cannot be translated into 
empirical analogues. In Brhaddranyakopanisadbhasya YII.9.28.7, for 
example, Samkara remarks that though no doubt Brahman is bliss, 
nevertheless that bliss is not cognized as an object by us. Our happi- 
ness has nothing to do with Brahman’s bliss, he implies; the case is 
unlike that of consciousness, since we do experience pure consciousness 
(Brahman) in deep sleep, etc., whereas Samkara seems to suggest 
that even the liberated Self does not cognize or experience Brahman’s 
bliss. 

Doubts about Brahman’s having a blissful nature are addressed at 
length by Mandana, and his spirited defense provides no room for 
the kinds of misgivings that Samkara’s approach invites. Pleasure 
is not just the absence of pain, argues Mandana, nor does our attrac- 
tion toward Brahman’s bliss constitute any kind of passion. 

Suresvara emphasizes a point made by both Samkara and Mandana, 
that bliss is not a content of consciousness, something we think of 
and have experience of in an empirical way. The Upanisads suggest 
that the basis of the bliss of Brahman lies in Its being “‘full’’ (pina), 
not lacking anything. We share this bliss to the extent that we are 
or become self-complete; our pleasures are fleeting expressions of the 
joy that is our very nature. 


ADVAITA METAPHYSICS 77 
IT. God 


The Higher Brahman, then, is unrclated to anything else, without 
internal differentiation, a very abstract though perhaps not austere 
reality. It is the one without a second. But then whence all _ this 
world of distinctions? What does it have to do with Brahman, 
after all? The answer is that the lower Brahman, God (ifvara), is 
the cause of all the diversity. 

This basic point is set forth in the second Brahmasitra. Brahman 
is that from which the origination, maintenance, and destruction of 
the world proceeds, and of course the Brahman that is meant is 
saguna Brahman. Advaitins are very concerned, in interpreting this 
Siitra, to insist that God is both the efficient and the material cause of 
the world. He is both immanent and transcendent, to use theological 
language; though different from His effects—being omnipotent and 
omniscient where those effects are not—He is yet within the world as 
inner controller (antaryamin). It is His light, that is, His consciousness, 
that is reflected in avidyd as individual selves and the objects they 
cognize. 

What is difficult to comprehend from the standpoint of ordinary 
theism is that the Advaitin can say all this about God and yet view 
Him as conditioned by ignorance. Brahman is the Supreme, the 
texts say, and yet in the same breath they affirm that He is not only 
not the Highest, His properties are unreal, false attributions of our 
ignorant superimpositions. 

These properties, as we have seen, include omnipotence and omni- 
science. These notions are given Advaitic twists, however. God’s 
omnipotence, for example, does not mean that He is responsible for 
the evil and imperfection in the world. God is subject to the karmic 
potentialities of individual selves in creating. He provides the 
opportunities for the jivas to experience and thus work off their karmic 
residues. Again, His omniscience is hardly a matter of knowing 
everything in the discursive way we think we know some things. 
His omniscience is a feature deriving from the mere fact that He is 
consciousness; it is His awareness—Him—on which we superimpose 
the contents we believe ourselves to be experiencing as we go through 
the world. 

Other problems about His creative ability are easily dismissed by 
Samkara. Why should God create? He has no unsatisfied desires, 
no selfish interests providing Him with motivations to act. The 
answer is that God creates out of “play” (ila). The meaning is 
that God responds in an appropriate manner to the karmic potencies 


78 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


without any personal interest of His own in the outcome; He “‘cannot 
help expressing Himself in creative activity.”? This is an important 
reason why Brahman’s fullness is emphasized. 

Whatever the uninitiated may make of this apparently ambivalent 
attitude to the deity, it is undeniable that some, including Samkara, 
are able to work up a fervent devotional attitude toward God despite 
His involvement with ignorance. A source for this side of Samkara 
is found in the commentary on the Bhagavadgita. He is also believed 
(but probably wrongly) to have composed devotional poetry. 


Ill, Avidya and Maya 


We saw the subjective side of avidyd as superimposition in an earlier 
section, but that suggests only a small part of this critical concept 
in Advaita. It is avidydé or maya that provides the adjuncts (upddhi) 
that, by conditioning Brahman, produce the occasion for the appar- 
ent creation of the world. Clearly we have to do here with more 
than a merely negative notion. 

Scholars have carried on lengthy investigations of the origins of 
these notions. R. B. Joshi suggests that at least four theories about 
the origins of the theory have been propounded, each by influential 
scholars.4 The word mdya occurs as early as the Rg Veda (X. 54, 2), 
and it is used there and in a few Upanisads to mean a “mysterious 
power.” Deussen and others think, therefore, that Advaita’s inter- 
pretation is firmly based in early Hindu tradition. A thorough 
study of references to maya in the traditional literature exclusive of 
Buddhism and Jainism can be found in P. D. Devanandan’s The 
Concept of Maya.’ It appears that, although the term avidydé appears 
frequently in the older Upanisads, the word maya does so only once— 
in the Prasna Upanisad. Furthermore, study of the occurrences of 
avidya shows it to be used in the Upanisads as a negative notion— 
the opposite of vidyd, equivalent to afidna, nonknowledge. In the 
Bhagavadgita also, one finds mayd used to speak of God’s power, but 
it is in no way related to avidyd. 

R. D. Ranade, however, argues that, although the Advaita notion 
of the equivalence of mdyd to avidyé is not explicitly stated in the 
Upanisads, it is nevertheless implicit there.?_ As was noted, however, 
the term mdyd occurs only in the Prasna among the older Upanisads, 
along with the Maitri and Svetdsvatara Upanisads among the later 
but still not ‘‘modern” ones. Joshi pertinently asks why, if the 
Svetasvatara (for example) sets forth maya in Samkara’s sense, Samkara 
didn’t even comment on that Upanisad, much less quote it 
extensively.§ 


ADVAITA METAPHYSICS 79 


By contrast with these infrequent instances of méya@ in Hindu 
scriptures, Gaudapada uses it in sixteen places. Furthermore, Joshi 
argues, Gaudapada uses it not only to mean the power of apparently 
creating things but also to speak of the things so created. This 
latter usage is found in Buddhism and represents one of the numerous 
aspects of Gaudapada’s work that point toward Buddhist influence. 
Still, Gaudapada does not identify maya with avidya as Samkara 
appears to do. 

Joshi concludes that Samkara gets the notion of maya from Buddhism 
through Gaudapada but that he develops it in his own special way.?° 
Specifically, where Gaudapada did not equate avidyé and mayad, 
Samkara does. A second contrast is that in the main Samkara uses 
the term avidyé to speak only of that which produces the world of 
maya or name-and-form but does notrefer to the world itself as avidya 
(though Joshi admits that Samkara is not always consistent on this 
score). Still another contrast is that, whereas Gaudapada seems to 
speak only of real and unreal, Samkara’s explication indicates a 
three-level view with the empirical world occupying a_ position 
midway between Brahman and pure nonexistence. 

Mandana Misra divides avidyé into two sorts, covering (dcchddika) 
and projective (viksepika), and explains that the former is nonappre- 
hension (agrahana, ajiiéna) whereas the latter equals false apprehen- 
sion (viparyayagrahana). The covering avidyd is the cause, projective 
avidya the effect. This is the basis for a notorious distinction, intro- 
duced by Vacaspati Misra following Mandana, between a_ root 
ignorance (mildvidyé) and a secondary ignorance  (tuldvidyd). 
Although Samkara does not use this terminology, he may have 
made such a distinction in some places between a causal ignorance 
and an effect ignorance, perhaps sometimes calling the former mdya. 

Modern scholars have argued vociferously and at length about this 
distinction. Sacchidanandendra Sarasvati, perhaps the most vehe- 
ment critic of the distinction of two avidyds, feels that it was Padma- 
pada who was responsible for the introduction of the distinction into 
Samkara’s school of Advaita.) On Sarasvati’s view avidyad in 
Samkara is superimposition, whereas mdyé is equivalent to prakrti or 
namariipa. It is a confused notion to suppose that God has a power 
called maya. Ndmariipa is not a power; rather, it is what illusorily 
appears when occasioned by (not caused by) superimposition. 
Superimposition doesn’t need a cause, since as Samkara says it is begin- 
ningless. And Samkara does not mean by avidyd to designate the 
empirical objects in the world but rather to speak of our false aware- 
ness of those objects. On Sarasvati’s showing Samkara is a realist, 


80 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


True knowledge does not remove the objects of the world but rather 
removes our false awareness of them. 

The two-avidyaés problem also bears on another much discussed 
issue, the question of the locus of ignorance. The issue is supposed 
to arise as follows : on the one hand ignorance is something we jivas 
experience, so presumably it belongs to us. On the other hand, if 
avidya equals maya and maya is God’s power to produce the world 
illusion, presumably avidyé belongs to God. Furthermore, there 
really are no individual selves or jivas, so for that reason also the locus 
of ignorance has to be Brahman-—-presumably nirguna Brahman, 
although this seems to present a logical inconsistency. 

When Samkara raises the question “‘whose is avidyd ?”? he conspicu- 
ously avoids the above issues by simply denying that avidyd belongs 
to anything. It is never really connected to cither the jiva or to 
Brahman or God. And he drops the matter there. Later Advaitins 
propose to force the issue further by developing the idea that ignorance 
is anirvacaniya, “‘not describable (as either real or unreal),’’ but 
Samkara does not use the term that way. Mandana seems to.!2 

Mandana, in fact, finds that avidyd must belong to the jiva. Other- 
wise, he argues, Brahman would be subject to samsdra, and when It 
obtains release everyone will be released at once. Furthermore, 
since Brahman is perfect knowledge (vidya) by nature It cannot be 
visited with error. 

Suregvara’s position on this issue is still different. He has no use 
for the distinction between mila and tula, but he has an answer to the 
question ‘‘whose is avzdyd ?”’—~it is Brahman’s. Does this mean that 
Brahman is ignorant? No, says Suregvara, because avidyd is unreal 
and thus does not affect Brahman. However, since the jiva mistakes 
this avidyé for something real, it is he who is termed “ignorant.” 

Ingalls points out that in the passages where Samkara raises the 
question of the status of avidyé he never speaks of avidya as unreal, 
though he suggests that its relation to other things is unreal.13 We 
may also note that, although Samkara does not have standard 
terminology to regularly reflect the distinction, he does seem to speak 
of avidyG or maya as causing us to experience (superimpose) things 
the way we do, which is to give it a positive function beyond that of 
merely veiling or covering Brahman. This might seem to imply 
that avidyaé is not the same as superimposition after all, but one must 
recall that Advaita’s view of causality makes the effect identical 
with its cause, 


ADVAITA METAPHYSICS 81 


IV. Creation 


It is God, then, who creates the world-appearance, according to 
our authors, and not the individual selves. If the world is an illusion, 
at least it is not completely fabricated by us. We do, to be sure, 
ordinarily misconstrue the world God apparently creates, taking it to 
be a real creation. But Samkara’s Advaita is not idealism in the 
usually accepted epistemological sense of the word : there is a world, 
not projected by our thought, that is independent of our thinking and 
will not go away just by our thinking it away. The world is ‘‘false,”’ 
not in the sense of being a figment of our imagination, but in the 
sense that it is not real—the only real ultimately being nirguna Brahman. 

In explaining creation Advaita combines psychology, epistemology, 
and metaphysics in a fashion bewildering to the untrained _ student. 
The nature of the Advaitin’s problem is evident : he has to explain 
how diversity can even apparently arise from undifferentiated unity. 
But the complexity arises because there are several distinct kinds of 
diversity to account for. First, one must explain how undifferentiat- 
ed, nirguna Brahman can develop into God, saguna Brahman. Second, 
one must try to explain how the one Self, the paramdtman, can 
appear as many individual selves or jivas. Third, one must show by 
what process a world-appearance is apparently created and how that 
world is related to God on the one hand and to the jivas on the other, 
not to speak of accounting for the attributes of the world as we find 
them in our experience. In discussing all this, we will try to be careful 
to speak only of what our authors suggest on the topic : later Advaita 
is largely occupied with working out these details, but that story will 
be taken up in another volume of this series. 

In explaining these various relationships Samkara and his fellows 
have recourse to a number of analogies or models. (Some of them 
play a major part in post-Samkara developments.) These are all 
invoked to make plausible the generation of multiplicity from unity, 
or, alternatively, to illuminate the phenomenon of superimposition 
and erroneous awareness, for it is by such awareness that the multi- 
fariousness of our perceptual contents is grasped. We. shall briefly 
review the most important of these models, starting with those found 
appealed toin Gaudapada’s Karikas. 

A. Rope-snake. Perhaps the best-known example utilized by 
Advaita is that of the perception of a snake at dusk, when what is 
there is actually a rope. Gaudapada uses this analogy to explain 
how the self or jiva constructs various things from itself through its 
own maya. The mechanism is through memory, and the notion 


82 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


clearly fits Samkara’s account of superimposition. Gaudapada 
appears to think not only that the analogy helps explain the way we 
jivas construct our experiences from our own past memory traces, 
but also that it helps explain how the higher Self—perhaps God ?— 
constructs the individual jivas. It also helps to illustrate the process 
called ‘‘sublation” (badha), by which error and ultimately ignorance 
is removed. The commentator on Gaudapada’s kdérikds (perhaps 
Samkara ?) has an objector complain that, because the rope is, on 
Advaita tenets, as unreal as the snake, it cannot serve to explain 
apparent creation of the world from positive reality : the objector 
points out that it is just as likely that such creation is from nonexistence, 
or the void. The commentator’s answer is that, when the snake is 
detected as being illusory, the rope remains as a positive substratum 
on which the illusion was based; likewise, he implies, there must be 
a positive Reality, Brahman or the Self, on which all error projected 
out of ignorance is based. 

The author of the Gaudapddakarikabhdsya also invokes the rope- 
snake analogy in another place to explain how the Self (here, purusa) 
can produce individual streams of consciousness (citta) through the 
life breath (prdna). This use of the rope-snake analogy is more 
sophisticated, as it explicitly recognizes that the snake zs in a sense 
the rope, or an appearance thereof: likewise, this author argues, 
all beings are in breath before they are apparently created or mani- 
fested. The idea here seems to be that creation occurs through a 
series of manifestations (vivarta rather than parindma) in each of 
which something contains within itself effects that flow forth into a 
manifest state. 

Samkara, in the Upadesasdhasri, appeals to the rope-snake analogy 
to answer an objector who questions what it is that transmigrates. 
The puzzle is that the Highest Self cannot transmigrate, since it is 
changeless, but the individual self cannot do so either, since it is not 
real. The answer is that transmigration itself is not real; it is just 
like the snake that though unreal, exists, wriggles, and hisses through 
the rope’s existence until sublation takes place. 

A final instance of the rope-snake example may be noted in Padma- 
pada’s Paficapadikad. An objector complains that, where the problem 
is to explain the appearance of an individual self, neither the reflec- 
tionist analogy nor that of the red crystal (both will be discussed 
below) can apply, since there is no real substratum to act as adjunct 
(upadhi) in generating the jiva appearance. This is a grave diffi- 
culty, since in order for there to be appearances there need to be 
jivas for things to appear to, and the objector’s point is that the models 


ADVAITA METAPHYSICS 83 


regularly appealed to in Advaita, though they may help us under- 
stand error once we have jivas as percipients, cannot help us under- 
stand the appearance of jivas themselves. Padmapada’s reply is to 
point to other models—the rope-snake, for one, and even better the 
pot-space model (see below). In both cases memory traces produce 
the appearances of things (a snake, the space in a pot) though 
nothing like those things is nearby to be reflected through any medium. 
This implies, then, that the rope-snake and pot-space models may be 
better able to help us understand the production of jivas, whereas 
the reflectionist and red-crystal analogies may be preferable when 
the problem is to account for the world appearance. 

B. Pot-space. Gaudapada invokes the pot-space metaphor to 
explain how nonduality can apparently produce duality without 
being affected. Just as space (dkafa), which is single and continuous, 
may be apparently enclosed within a pot without harming the unity 
and continuity of space in general, just so, says Gaudapada, the Self 
is manifested as many individual jivas without being affected thereby. 
Furthermore, when the pot is destroyed the space it enclosed is 
“merged into space’ without anything changing really; likewise, 
when a jiva is liberated, it is “merged into Brahman’? without any 
real change taking place. 

Samkara has in mind the same points when he utilizes the analogy. 
God is like aida in that He is limited by bodies, sense organs, etc. 
thus apparently creating portions of space. But such differentiation 
is merely a result of our failure to discriminate the Self from its adjuncts 
such as body, senses, etc. 

Suresvara puts it a different way. It is the pot that originates, 
remains, and is eventually destroyed, not the space it contains— 
that is always there, unchanged by the change in its surroundings. 

C. Wheel of fire (alatacakra). This notoriously Buddhistic figure 
is appealed to by Gaudapada in the fourth book of the Karikas. 
In illustrating how one and the same thing, a burning firebrand, when 
waved about can appear as a series—say, as a flaming circle—Gauda- 
pada hopes to shed light on how consciousness (vijfidna), though 
itself not discrete, when it “‘flickers’? may appear as a series of perceiv- 
ings and perceptions, but when it does not “flicker” does not appear 
as anything and is thus “unborn.” Furthermore, he argues that 
just as the appearances of the flickering stick are not produced from 
anything different from the stick nor do they become real external, 
or for that matter internal, properties, likewise, consciousness alone 
produces the apparent objects we experience, but those objects cannot 
be said to exist either outside or inside consciousness. This is an 


84 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


interesting use of the wheel-of-fire example in that it was used by 
Buddhists to make the reverse point, that a series of momentary 
flashes of light can generate the illusion of constancy. One is con- 
strained to note : that Gaudapada’s use of it does not work very well 
it is left unexplained who or what is analogous to the one who waves 
the stick. It is also not clear whether Gaudapada invokes the ana- 
logy to help explain the generation of selves or empirical objects 
from God, or of empirical objects by individual selves. His comments 
seem to suggest the latter, but this appears to conflict with more 
realistic passages elsewhere in the work. 

D. Water and foam. An ancient analogy likens the world’s relation 
with its creator to the relation between foam and the water from which 
it bubbles. The point clearly is to emphasize the identity between 
cause and effect, water and foam, as well as to illustrate how, even in 
the empirical world, production sometimes does not require any 
distinction between a creator and the materials from which he creates. 
The contention of Samkara that God is both the efficient and the mate- 
rial cause of the world is well illustrated in this analogy. Its defect 
is that it is as amenable to being construed in terms of parindma 
causality as of vivarta causality. 

In the Upadesasahasri the model is complicated so that it is dirty 
foam arising from clear water, but the point is not developed. 

E. Sun’s rays, spider’s web, sparks from a fire. These and other like 
illustrations are appealed to by Samkara in various of his works, 
notably in the commentary on Gaudapada’s Karikds, where they are 
all offered along with the rope-snake to help explain how the Self 
can produce individual awareness through prdna. 

F. Reflection analogies. ‘These are probably the most complex and 
sophisticated of the models offered by Samkara and his contempora- 
ries. They are invoked by Samkara to explain the relation between 
God and the jivas. Samkara says that the jivas are mere “appearances” 
or ‘reflections’? (abhésa) of the Highest Self, as when the sun is re- 
flected in rippling water. The analogy is used to rebut an argument 
by an opponent who wonders why, if there is only one Self operating 
the various bodies, the actions of the various bodies do not get mixed 
up. Samkara’s answer is that when the sun is reflected in several 
@bhasas the trembling of one such reflection does not require that the 
next one also tremble; no more so in the case of one individual self’s 
actions—they need not affect the next self. 

Samkara also invokes the reflection analogy to explain how quality- 
less Brahman, consciousness only, can appear as many objects in our 
experience. In Brahmasiltrabhdgya I11.2.11 21 an objector points out 


ADVAITA METAPHYSICS 85 


that in the case of the sun there is something different from the sun, 
namely, rippling water, for the sun to be reflected in, whereas there 
is nothing different from Brahman. Samkara admits that this is a 
dissimilarity—no analogy is perfect—but argues that there are a 
number of points of similarity nevertheless. For example, Brahman, 
like the sun, appears to be affected when the nature of the reflecting 
medium changes—when, for example, it becomes dirty and the light 
becomes pallid—but neither Brahman nor the sun are really affected. 

Again, Samkara uses reflection to explain the Upanisadic passage 
that says that the Self enters into the universe.14 Of course the Self, 
being nondifferent from the universe, cannot literally enter it, but it 
enters it just as the sun “‘enters’’ the water by being perceived there in 
its reflection, though of course it doesn’t literally enter the water. 
This use of the analogy implies that the undifferentiated universe, 
like Samkhya’s avyakta prakrti, is the medium that reflects pure con- 
sciousness, Brahman, with the jivas perceiving the Self and themselves 
in that medium in varied ways. 

In the commentary on the Chandogya Upanisad the analogy is deve- 
loped further. Here the reflection is of a man, or of the sun, in a 
mirror : the man reflected is not affected by being reflected, and no 
more is God affected by the multiplicity of abhdasas that result from His 
apparent connection with buddhi, etc. The defects of the resulting 
appearances are the result of imperfections in the reflecting medium, 
not in the thing reflected. 

Just what does constitute the reflecting medium is not clearly answer- 
able on the basis of Samkara’s writings. We have seen so far that 
undifferentiated prakrti or the internal organ (buddhi) can be cast in 
the role. In other places other items are so cast—prajiid, prana, and 
citta among them. But of course , it is Samkara’s view that ultimately 
there is no medium distinct from Brahman Itself. This would seem 
to suggest that the first projection cannot be understood on the reflec- 
tion model, though later ones can, and Samkara’s discussion in one 
or two places seems to endorse that idea. The original projection 
is more like dreaming, or a magic show. 

Another kind of reflection analogy is exemplified in the red crystal. 
A piece of rock crystal sitting on the shelf may appear to be red in 
color because there is a red flower behind it undiscriminated by the 
observer. Although Samkara appeals occasionally to this analogy, 
Mandana Miéra explains it most completely. The advantage of this 
model is that it sheds light on the necessity of removing the medium 
so that the prototype—the crystal, or Brahman-—may be directly 
seen, even though the form of the crystal was mat entixely obliterated 
by the flower it reflected. 


86 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Padmapada develops the reflection analogy at some length. He 
utilizes both the red-crystal and the face-in-the-mirror examples to 
suggest a contrast. Padmapada is the first of our authors to work 
out in detail a “‘map”’ of the process of creation. In a remarkable 
passage he presents it quite explicitly for us.15 Avidyd (the lst of 
synonyms is informative) veils the natural awareness of Brahman, 
and the result is a transformation (parinéma) of that avidyé which 
has God as its locus and which is termed ahamkdra, the sense of ego, 
of awareness, agency, and enjoyership. This ahamkdra is not, how- 
ever, an evolute of prakrti or avidyd, since this would make it completely 
different from the Self; rather, it is falsely attributed to the Self as a 
crystal is falsely held to possess red color because it is near the flower. 
The analogue of the flower., according to Padmapada, is the internal 
organ (antahkarana), that is, the buddhi. 

Padmapada proceeds to contrast the analogy of the red crystal 
with that part of the process which is like reflection in a mirror. The 
difference is that in the case of the red crystal the crystal’s nature (its 
color) is different from that of the flower, so that our error comes in 
identifying them, but in the case of the face in the mirror the proto- 
type is identical with its reflection, the reflected face is not different 
from the face. And the mirror reflection model is ultimately the right 
one, Padmapada concludes. The ego is identical with Brahman, not 
just similar to It. There is a lengthy dialogue to prove this important 
point of identity, to show that the jiva has the same nature as Brah- 
man, even though, like the face and its reflection, they appear in 
different places. 

An implication of Padmapada’s analysis is that when one appreci- 
ates the identity of jiva and Brahman it does not follow that the medium 
—the internal organ—is destroyed, any more than it is the case that 
when one realizes that one’s face is identical with its reflection in the 
mirror the mirror is thereby destroyed. This is handy, for it explains 
why upon liberation the jiva does not immediately disappear. When 
pressed about this with the objection that his model requires a distinct, 
separate medium, Padmapada immediately has recourse to the rope- 
snake analogy, or, alternatively, the pot-space analogy. In both 
the latter cases, the prototype (analogous to Brahman) is not related 
to the rest of the items in the model (analogous to the adjuncts, includ- 
ing the medium). 

Padmapada, however, is constrained to confess that after all none of 
the models is quite sufficient to completely explain the mystery of 
creation. Later Advaitins continue to explore these models with the 
hope that they can ultimately be shown to resolve the mystery. 


ADVAITA METAPHYSICS 87 


By comparison with his predecessors, however, Padmapada’s de- 
scription is lucid. One must engage in substantial reconstructive 
analysis to manufacture an account from Samkara’s writings, volumi- 
nous though they are. Samkara does appeal to the ahamkara as the 
specific adjunct involved in the manifestation of the jiva\@ Else- 
where, he seems willing to settle for saying that the jiva is a ‘‘part”’ 
of God, provided that isn’t taken seriously but interpreted according 
to the reflectionist model. But most of Samkara’s thoughts on the 
topic of the relation between Self and self seem to come in criticizing 
other people’s views. In a well-known passage in the Brahmasiitras 
Badarayana refers to three old sages, ASmarathya, Audulomi, and 
Kaséakrtsna, who differed over the question of the relation between 
self and Self. Samkara understands Kaégakrtsna’s view to be that 
they are nondifferent and argues that this is the correct view, in 
contrast to that of the other two, who admit at least some degree of 
difference. In other places,!? he is largely concerned with contro- 
verting the views of his archrivals, the Bhedabhedavadins such as 
Bhartrprapafica. We learn how not to interpret the relation in ques- 
tion but are left singularly uninformed as to how Samkara wishes us 
to interpret it. 

It is the apparent production of individual selves that most requires 
explanation, for the materials with which to develop the explanation 
are sparse. Once we assume that somehow attributeless Brahman 
has been veiled (by itself ? by avidya, anyhow) and become apparently 
diversified into many jivas, along with an omniscient, omnipotent 
God, the rest of the story becomes much easier to tell. With internal 
organs to function as reflecting media, projection of a variety of 
objects for the jivas to cognize is understandable along lines sketched 
above. Gaudapada lists a large catalogue of kinds of things that 
people become aware of, erroneously supposing them to be real and 
different from the Self. 

In Samkara and Sureévara creation is only discussed when the tex- 
tual occasion demands it. Usually in such passages the Upanisads are 
repeating various creation myths that are found throughout 
scripture. These myths feature Vedic deities such as Prajapati, 
Hiranyagarbha, Sitratman, Brahma, and Viraj as well as things such 
as the “breaths” (prana). Such a myth is found in the first chapter 
of the Brhadé@ranyaka Upanisad. Suresvara explains the order of crea- 
tion based on this myth as follows. In the absence of Brahman- 
awareness things are created through mdyé. From Visnu—God 
supreme—comes Sitratman or Hiranyagarbha—knower and agent— 
and from him comes Viraj, which is apparently equivalent to 


88 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Samkhya’s unmanifest prakrti. Creation takes place cyclically in 
Hinduism, as is well known; Suresvara explains that after each inter- 
mediate cycle ends a.new one is initiated by Viraj through the creation 
of gods such as Indra, Agni, and so forth, whereas after a major pralaya 
or end of a cycle the new creation is initiated by Brahma. The 
myth is developed so as to involve the gods of creation in the very 
same kinds of fear and ignorance that humans are subject to, so that 
the world is the trials and tribulations of our experience projected 
onto a divine level. At this level Prajapati, God as seeker after 
liberation, does appear to be thought of as projecting his own world- 
illusion; Vedanta is idealistic on this symbolic level at any rate, God 
subjecting Himself to ignorance. And this Upanisad applies its 
idealism to humans also in some places, although Advaitins like 
Samkara tend to interpret such references as meaning that the indi- 
vidual self creates the stuff of its experiences from the traces of its 
past works with the assistance of God. 

In the Chandogya Upanisad, creation is explained as occurring through 
the process of triplication, according to which the differentiation 
of things proceeds according to the involvement of three “‘divinities” 
corresponding to the three elements fire, water, and food (or earth). 
Samkara’s comment indicates that he is not very particular about 
this and that the alternative account in terms of quintuplication is 
equally or more appropriate in explaining certain things. Indeed, 
in his Upadesasdhasri he provides a quintuplication explanation. 

Suresvara develops other themes found in the Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad, such as the role of the breaths and of vdsands. But generally 
the treatment by our authors of standard topics in metaphysics or 
science is unsatisfactory or nonexistent. One is reduced to specula- 
tions about what our authors might have said about the origins or 
analysis of certain interesting kinds of entities. For example, time 
and space are said by Samkara to be the effects of avidya, but scripture 
also alleges that Brahman ‘‘precedes the world.”? U. C. Bhattachar- 
jee concludes that “‘Vedanta . . . does not give a quite satisfactory . .. 
account of Time,’’!8 but one might better have said that it, orat least 
its earliest advocates, give no account at all. 


V. States and Sheaths of the Self 


We have seen that our authors use many analogies to try to indicate 
how the one Self becomes many, and that none of them is quite 
without difficulty. All the analogies so far discussed—reflection, 
pot-space, rope-snake, etc.—are defective on at least one count : 


ADVAITA METAPHYSICS 89 


they require that there already be at least two things, namely, a 
percipient and an obstruction or adjunct. That is, all these analogies 
are taken from the kinds of experiences we have of what is common- 
sensically taken as an external world, and since the theory dismisses 
the adjuncts as ultimately unreal the theory goes outside of the 
analogy, which is therefore inadequate for the job. 

There is another type of analogy, however, that might succeed 
where the previous ones failed, because it does not require the prior 
existence of something distinct from the percipient. The most 
obvious example is dreaming. Whatever one’s ultimate explanation 
of dreams is, common sense suggests that the objects seen in dreams 
are not produced, even by reflection, from anything external to the 
mind of the dreamer. The thought suggests itself—a thought not 
unique to India—that perhaps the objects seen in the waking state 
are internal to that state just as those seen in -dream are internal to 
the dream state, and that, just as we wake up from a dream and the 
dream objects are no more, so we can ‘‘wake up”’ from what we call 
waking experience and the ordinary objects of the empirical world 
will be no more. This is the thought that dominates Gaudapada’s 
Karikas, and which he relates there to the categories of the Mandikya 
Upanisad. 

The idea is that there are four states of the Self to be distinguished. 
The waking state, called Vifva in the Upanisad, is mentioned first 
and identified with the syllable “a” in aum the sacred symbol 
of Brahman. Second is the dream state, called taijasa, equivalent to 
u. Third is the state of deep sleep called frajiia, which is associated 
with m and in which no objects are confronted. Finally there is 
the fourth state, éuriya, the state of liberation, which is associated with 
the silence following the utterance of the sacred syllable. Gaudapada 
indicates that the objects of waking, like dream objects, arise 
from erroneous awareness coupled with nonawareness of the truth 
about things, which is that nothing exists out there. Although there 
are no objects presented in deep sleep, all sleep is accompanied by 
traces, seeds of future experiences; thus one cannot be liberated 
directly from deep sleep or unconsciousness. 

Samkara (in Brahmasitrabhdsya I11.2.1-6) points out that despite 
the analogies between waking and dream there are still important 
differences. We jivas construct our dream objects, but God creates 
the objects of waking. He also distinguishes unconsciousness as in a 
faint from deep sleep, though his grounds are not quite clear. Most 
important, in Brahmasiitrabhagya 11.2.29, he rejects the dream analogy 
by pointing out that only some waking objects are sublated, whereas 


90 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


all dream objects are. He seems to think that in deep sleep Brahman 
is experienced, perhaps not so in a faint. Elsewhere he explains in 
some detail the mechanism of dreaming, which represents the results 
of past karma and anticipations of future results.1® To manage this 
the jiva, while asleep, has to create for itself a dream body made out 
of vdsands, since experience shows that no awareness of objects is 
possible without a body. Nevertheless, in dreams, unlike in waking, 
no contact through sense organs with any objects external to that 
body occurs. 

As for deep sleep, Samkara’s explanation is that this occurs when 
from tiredness the organs, including the internal organ, are tempor- 
arily absorbed into breath, so that no objects are presented. Presum- 
ably the difference between deep and dreaming sleep is that in the 
latter the self has created a dream body to serve as “‘subject’’ of aware- 
ness of the dream objects. 

Elsewhere Samkara equates deep sleep with ignorance (ajfana) 
and with maya; it is this ignorance, that evolves into the three states 
over and over, and the process is likened to a magic show, with the 
Self the magician and the magically created apparition. 

Suregvara provides a graphic account of what happens in sleep,?! 
as well as of the process of waking. Another analogy is offered to 
show how the Self can create without any independent stuff from 
which to create : the example is that of a spider who spins the thread 
out of himself. Suresvara also makes the important point that in 
dream it is not that the Self creates dream objects from the vdsands, 
but rather that the vdsands are themselves the objects experienced. 

It is a popular notion in India that one should not wake up a 
person who is in deep sleep. Suregvara explains why : each of the 
states involves the jiva’s residing temporarily in an appropriate set 
of “‘nerves”’ (nddi), one set for waking, another for sleeping, and while 
the jiva resides in the sleep set the sense organs do not operate. If 
one deeply asleep were woken up suddenly the jiva might be unable 
to find its way back to the waking nerves and so the person might be 
struck deaf, dumb, or blind for life. 

Mandana’s example of the clearing nut (kafaka) is used by Sure- 
§vara in explaining how the Self can be devoid of all vdsands in deep 
sleep. Also, one in deep sleep is not attached to the objects of his 
dreaming, since he frequently does not remember them after he 
wakes up. 

Suresvara, furthermore, presents a fresh theory of his own (appar- 
ently) when he specifies that each of the three stages—waking, dream, 
deep sleep—must be divided into three states along the same lines. 


ADVAITA METAPHYSICS 91 


The waking state of the waking stage is true knowledge; the dream 
state of waking is erroneous awareness (e.g., sensory awareness), 
and the deep sleep state of waking occurs when one is so carried away 
by passion or desire that one ‘‘loses one’s senses,”’ that is, one’s dis- 
crimination altogether. As for the dream stage, its waking state 
occurs when one dreams he is behaving as he would while awake, 
its dream state occurs when one dreams he is dreaming, and the 
deep sleep state involves inability to recall dream objects. As for 
deep sleep itself, its waking state form is sattvic, its dream state is 
rajasic, and its deep-sleep state is tamasic. 

Another ancient theory, related to the four stages theory just review- 
ed, is that of the five “sheaths” (kofa). Its major textual locus is in 
the Taittiriya Upanisad. There the Self is described as having five 
forms, frequently symbolized as five concentric circles, each sub- 
sequent one within its predecessor. The outermost sheath is the anna- 
mayakoSa, the sheath made of food; this represents the gross embodi- 
ment of the jiva. Within this lies the pranamayakosa, the sheath made 
of breath, signifying the vital element in living things. Within this 
lies the manomayakoSa, the sheath made of the internal organ or ‘“‘mind” 
this is construed as indicating the form of the self in its function 
as perceiving and conceiving. The fourth sheath, still more subtle, 
is the vijfanamayakosa, the sheath of consciousness, which illuminates 
the internal organ. Finally, the fifth sheath is dnandamayakosa, the 
sheath made of bliss. 

The Upanisad describes each of these sheaths in turn as “different 
from” the previous one and yet the same as it. Furthermore, it does 
not explicitly identify the fifth sheath with the supreme Brahman, 
although in a later passage it does say that the liberated man 
reaches the dnandamayakosa. Gaudapada nevertheless endorses the 
identification. Samkara and Sureévara refuse to identify the fifth 
sheath with Brahman, perhaps another instance of Samkara’s 
reticence on the point about the bliss of Brahman. 


6 


ADVAITA EPISTEMOLOGY 


The most distinctive notion in Advaitais probably that of pure, un- 
differentiated or objectless consciousness. To be sure, a distinction 
between two kinds of awareness—nirvikalpaka or construction-free 
and savikalpaka or construction-filled—is a common one in Indian 
philosophy by Samkara’s time, especially as found in the Yoga systems 
of Buddhism and Hinduism. But Advaita elevates the distinction 
to new heights by identifying construction-free awareness with reality, 
Brahman. 

Much of what needs to be said about the Advaita view of knowledge 
or awareness (jfidna) has been anticipated inthe preceding discussion. 
It may be helpful to bring it together now. The basic contrast is 
between pure consciousness—called variously by names such as 
anubhava, ‘‘Witnessing’’ (saksijfidna), the Self, Brahman, etc.—and 
ordinary awareness involving the functioning (vriti) of the internal 
organ. 

First, pure consciousness is not an act of any sort. Samkara traces 
the mistaken views of numbers of his opponents to the fallacious 
assumption that knowing is an act; as we saw, much of his polemic 
against Mimamsa stems from this point. In acting, an agent uses 
some instrument(s) to bring about a change in some object(s). 
Acting requires differentiation, and pure consciousness is precisely 
that which is undifferentiated. There are no instruments or objects 
to contrast with the Self as knower. That whole model for under- 
standing awareness has to be abandoned. Even to talk of the Self 
as Witness is ultimately incorrect, because it suggests the improper 
model once again. Indeed, any way of speaking, if taken seriously, 
will be misleading in this way. This difficulty is an accurate measure 
of how difficult it is to eradicate avidyd. 

Even ordinary knowing isn’t an act, for that matter, or at any rate 
it differs from standard doings, as we have seen, in that one does 


ADVAITA EPISTEMOLOGY 93 


something to get something else, whereas knowing is not necessarily 
a means to something else. However, it resembles acting in that it 
involves something coming into a relation with something different 
from itself, though once again the important distinction to note is that, 
whereas in acting something changes in the object as a result, in know- 
ing nothing happens to the object. 

Second, consciousness proper is not adventitious; it does not come 
and go but persists eternally. On this point Advaita agrees with 
Samkhya and disagrees with Buddhism and with Nyaya and Mima- 
msa. Ordinary awareness is dependent on the apparent presence 
of instruments (e.g., sense organs) and objects, and being so depen- 
dent it can exist only as long as those organs and objects are there. 
Pure consciousness on the other hand, not being dependent on any- 
thing, continues to shine regardless of what it may be taken to be 
shining upon, or even (as in dreamless sleep) if it appears to be shining 
on nothing at all. 

One of the most acute discussions of the logic of this and of 
the preceding contrast occurs in the second chapter of the prose 
section of the UpadeSasdhasri. After reviewing the reasons for Advaita’s 
view on the nonact and the persisting nature of consciousness, an 
important objection is raised by the pupil in the dialogue. In deep 
sleep consciousness ceases; we say, “‘] knew nothing.’ And thus 
consciousness is adventitious after all. The teacher replies that the 
pupil’s analysis of deep sleep is incorrect. How could we know 
enough to report that we knew nothing in deep sleep unless we were 
conscious during that period? It is that consciousness, which is 
never lost, that is constitutive of the true Self about which the pupil 
asks. 

A corollary of this second point about consciousness is that, whereas 
ordinary awareness not only has an object but also requires it as 
the occasion for that specific piece of awareness or judgment, pure 
consciousness has no more relation to its objects than does the sun that 
shines on everything without being in the least affected by or depen- 
dent on things. This important contrast provides the basis for 
Samkara’s answer to a very important objection to his theory of super- 
imposition. 

The objection is this : superimposition is explained as general error 
analogous to the rope-snake, red crystal, and so on, the analogy being 
that in all cases we are misled by a similarity between what is presented 
to us and something we remember from previous experience, and 
thus misled we erroneously project something false onto the presented 
item and consequently minisnterpret it. The Advaitin wishes to take 


94 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


this model of empirical error and expand it to explain cosmic creation; 
the projective avidyé leads us to misinterpret the presented objects 
of the world along lines dictated by our vdsands, our memories of 
past experiences. But the expansion carries with it an awkward 
implication : there must be something really presented that the pro- 
jective avidyd leads us to misinterpret, and the only real thing is con- 
sciousness itself. Now consciousness is characterized in scripture as 
that which is never an object—Brahman is that by which all else is 
known but which is itself not known. The objector points to the 
inconsistency : if Brahman is not known It cannot be the object that 
is misinterpreted through the cosmic avidyd. 

This objection is the very first that Samkara raises against super- 
imposition in the introduction to the Brahmasitrabhdsya, so one infers 
he feels it to be important. The bright pupil of the Upadesasahasri 
I.1.2 also raises it. Samkara’s answer has several parts. First, 
though the Self is not an object of pure consciousness, it does not 
follow that it can’t be the apparent object of empirical or ignorant 
awareness. Indeed, whenever we speak of ourselves in the first 
person as knower we are (though we do not know it) aware of the 
Self. Thus it is in a sense an object, although not of pure conscious- 
ness. Second, inasmuch as a person has ordinary awareness, which 
as we now know Advaita construes as a reflection of the “light” of 
the pure Self, of pure consciousness, he is constantly aware of that 
“light,” aware of pure consciousness, or Brahman, just as one who 
mistakes a rope for a snake is aware of the rope in a sense even though 
he calls it a snake. And third, there are types of error that do not 
seem to require that something be presented as an object on which 
to superimpose; consider our supposing that the sky is a blue-colored 
dome, whereas in reality there is only space (dkdfa). For Samkara, 
apparently, akdfa is not a presented object. This last response is not, 
I think, to be taken altogether seriously, inasmuch as Samkara insists 
in other places that every awareness must have an dlambana or support- 
ing object; since our blue-domed-sky awareness is an awareness it 
must have a supporting object, namely akafa. Samkara uses this 
realism to rebut the Vijfianavada Buddhist in several places. The 
resolution of this apparent inconsistency on Samkara’s part can be 
found, I suspect, by reminding ourselves that though in one sense the 
object misinterpreted in superimposition must be really there to be 
misinterpreted, it doesn’t follow that it must be ‘‘real’’ in the Advai- 
tin’s rather technical sense. Thus though in the cosmic projection 
there must be an analogous something for the world-illusion to be 
projected on, this something need not be pure consciousness or 


ADVAITA EPISTEMOLOGY 95 


Brahman and indeed cannot be insofar as we are speaking of and 
conceptualizing it. Granted we cannot explain that about which we 
cannot speak; the account seems to hang together with respect to that 
about which we can speak. 

This point, however, continually recurs as a theme in Advaita, 
the theme of the self-luminosity of the Self. In a remarkable passage 
in the Brhaddranyakopanisadbhasya Samkara is found defending 
realism against a Buddhist who uses the self-luminous character of 
consciousness as a reason for concluding that there is nothing other 
than consciousness. The Buddhist likens consciousness to a lamp, 
which lights itself at the same time it lights up the objects around it. 
Samkara counters by pointing out that there is an important differ- 
ence between light and consciousness: the lamp requires conscious- 
ness to reveal it, since for something to be “‘revealed”’ itmust be possi- 
ble for it to be present or absent tothe revealer, and since the lamp 
cannot be absent from itself it cannot be its own revealer. 

The lesson Samkara draws from this is a remarkable one for a 
monist : consciousness must be distinct from its object, and so there 
must be external objects distinct from the awareness that knows them, 
contrary to the Vijfianavadin’s tenets. The apparent dualistic 
implication of this does not trouble Samkara at all, it would seem, 
because, though awareness requires external objects, consciousness 
does not, for one can have objectless consciousness as in deep sleep. 
Further, the objects need not be real, and consciousness has no actual 
relation to any objects they are the result of superimposition. It is 
in this very odd sense that Samkara believes in the self-luminous 
character of consciousness. 

What is not accepted, on Samkara’s view of self-luminosity, is that 
consciousness knows itself. Consciousness is pure subject, never 
object; it never has anything to do with objects. Thus Brahman, 
the Self, is not an object of pure consciousness; whatever Brahman 
we think we know must have an element of avidyd involved in it. 
This is the key to Samkara’s answer to another conundrum posed 
early in the Brahmasiitrabhdsya. “Is Brahman known or not ?”’ asks 
someone; “‘if It is known we need not inquire further, and if it isn’t 
known, given Advaita assumptions, It can never be known and once 
again inquiry is pointless.” This dilemma, perhaps reminding us of 
one in Plato’s dialogues, is shrugged off by Samkara without much 
fuss. We know of Brahman’s existence, he notes, on the grounds 
of tradition and experience, but the Brahman we know of is one on 
which there are various erroneous opinions. To remove these false 
notions is the point of Advaita teaching. As we now know, Samkara 


96 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


interprets these teachings ultimately inanegative fashion, so that in 
fact we never do know Brahman in a positive way; when all characteri- 
zations have been rejected, pure consciousness will remain unqual- 
ified by adjuncts, and that state of understanding will constitute 
liberation. 

This clever solution allows Samkara to argue both sides of the issue 
when it is appropriate for him to do so. Thus in the Bhagavadgita- 
bhdsya and elsewhere he can affirm the possibility of Self-knowledge 
in the sense that it will be known when awareness of objects ceases, 
whereas at other places he denies that the Self can be known, 
following the Upanisadic dictum that “‘you cannot see the seer of 
seeing,”’ etc. 

We are left, nevertheless, with questions about the justification of 
the Advaitin’s method of proceeding. Does he play the philosophical 
game by any of the same rules as anyone else ?. What are those rules ? 
What philosophy is regularly supposed to aim for is truth, that is, true 
awareness. What the Advaitin recommends would seem to be a 
kind of consciousness that it would be presumptuous to call true, 
though equally presumptuous to classify as false-—it seems to be 
beyond that dichotomy. Samkara endorses that thought completely : 
if “truth”? means what is provided by the instruments of valid know- 
ing (pramdna), Self-knowledge is not ultimately true or false—it just is. 

In a memorable passage in the Brahmasiitrabhdgya (11.1.14), 
Samkara faces the methodological issue squarely. An objector complains 
that on Advaita tenets the pramdpas must be invalid, since they give us 
knowledge — allegedly “true knowledge’?— about objects and 
Advaita says those objects are unreal. Thus in crediting our percep- 
tions of pots and tables we are superimposing on something the 
impressions produced by our vdsands, and this is precisely what error 
consists in. That’s right, says Samkara, all the pramanas can. only 
operate as long as avidyd holds sway, as long as differences are recog- 
nized and accepted as such. Thus the pramdnas fail to tell us about 
reality and so are “‘false’’—at any rate, not “‘true.” 

The admission cuts deep, however. The objector points out that, 
if the pramanas do not tell us the truth, the point of instruction is lost; 
the teacher is unable to give veridical proofs to convince the pupil 
what to do or believe in order to gain liberation. And since instruc- 
tion is required in order to realize one’s Self the impossibility of 
receiving that instruction would seem to preclude the possibility of 
liberation, and Advaita is reduced to a kind of skepticism or worse. 

Samkara’s response is astonishing when first heard, although it is 
not new with him : Nagarjuna the Buddhist had offered it centuries 


ADVAITA EPISTEMOLOGY 97 


earlier. It is that even though the framdnas are unreal they may 
nevertheless assist in “producing” liberation that is real, just as one 
may die from a fancied snakebite The objector retaliates that the 
analogy won’t do : the effect—dying—is just as unreal as its cause, 
the snakebite, whereas the supposed analogue is between an unreal 
cause and a real effect. But we know by now that Samkara’s response 
will be todeny that liberation is an effect at all—as effect, it is unreal. 
The point, however, is that one may be jogged to an improved aware- 
ness by something in the realm from which he is escaping, as something 
violent happening in one’s dream may cause one to awaken. There 
is norule that requires that all the causal conditions producing a result 
be as real as that result.1 The teacher’s business, then, is to gauge 
the level of his pupil’s confusion and to use the pupil’s mistaken 
categories to jog him to higher and higher levels of understanding, 
a process that is admirably illustrated in the prose passages of 
Samkara’s Upadesasahasri. 

Although ultimately, therefore, none of the pramdnas are veridical 
in quite the sense one might have expected, it doesn’t follow at all 
that the Advaitin has no interest in the subject of truth in that com- 
monly accepted sense. The teacher must use arguments and other 
procedures in accordance with the pramdnas to convince his pupil, 
at least to convince a pupil with intellectual training and inquisitive- 
ness. Thus Advaitins spend a good deal of time discussing the 
number and nature of the pramdyas, in particular the number and 
nature of those they feel are especially critical in bringing the adept 
to the brink of Self-knowledge. 

Discussions of that sort are not found among our authors, however, 
although references to numerous framénas can be found. Tradi- 
tionally, the pramanas accepted by Advaitins are held to be six : per- 
ception (pratyaksa), inference (anumdéna), comparison (upamdna), 
verbal testimony (fabda or dgama), presumption (arthdpatti), and 
negation (abhava).2 Among these, the priority in terms of importance 
is clearly with verbal testimony, which, for an Advaitin, mainly means 
scripture (fruti). Yet Samkara emphasizes that even scripture is 
ultimately “‘false,”’ presupposing the workings of avidya as do the other 
pramanas 

All of this may appear somewhat surprising. Advaita places a 
lot of emphasis on direct realization, on the immediacy of Self-knowl- 
edge. Perception, among the pramdnas, is regularly identified as 
providing direct knowledge, and one might suppose that it would 
ultimately be perception that delivers the immediate awareness that 
constitutes liberation, Furthermore, if one is put in the position of 


98 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


defending the possibility of Self-knowledge, surely verification through 
direct experience constitutes the most fundamental proof. Yet 
Samkara and his fellows look to scripture, to language, as the critical 
means of proof. 

A Samkara views Self-knowledge it is not given by any pramdna 
at all. It is true that Self-knowledge is immediate intuition (anu- 
bhava), but that is quite different from perception. The difference 
is the one, noted earlier, between those two kinds of awareness; per- 
ception involves instruments and objects and distinctions, whereas 
Self-knowledge does not. And in some Pickwickian sense anubhava 
may constitute a ‘“‘proof,”’ but it is not a proof that will ever be used. 
When one has Self-knowledge one no longer has doubts or needs 
proof, and when one needs proof one is not ina position to have Self- 
knowledge, since one is under the sway of ignorance. 

It also follows that opponents cannot use perceptual evidence to 
disprove Advaita theory. Samkara points out® that perception of 
difference does not disprove unity; just as dka@sa is one though sounds 
perceived in it are many, and a universal property is single though 
its particular instances are many, so Brahman may be one though 
its manifestations are many. Differences are due to adjuncts and 
do not affect the Real. And if perception is unable to disprove 
Advaita for that reason, the other pramdnas are equally without force 
against it. 

The importance of scripture becomes evident under the circum- 
stances. A critic of Advaita, unable to use the usual kinds of reasons 
to oppose the system, can only turn and ask why he should pay any 
attention to, much less believe, a system that has no rational basis. 
To this the Advaita answer is that the basis, rational or not, is provi- 
ded by scripture, which all reasonable parties accept as the pramdna 
that tells us about transempirical facts. We have seen how the 
Advaitin defends the veridicality of scripture (Chapter Three). Exe- 
getical methods, including the use of inference and other pramdanas, 
provide the rational basis for Advaita in an important sense, then, 
but it is scripture itself that, on the Advaitin’s own view, bears the 
weight. 

But this appears to provide the critic with the opening he was look- 
ing for after all. Mandana elaborates a series of objections based on 
the proposition that perception is a more trustworthy pramdna than 
verbal testimony and so should be preferred where the two conflict. 
And clearly they do conflict, says the opponent, for perception shows 
us a multitude of different things, whereas according to Advaita 
scripture denies all difference. 


ADVAITA EPISTEMOLOGY 99 


The opponent argues that perception should be preferred to verbal 
testimony because verbal testimony depends on perception, because 
scripture is inconsistent, because perception precedes testimony in 
life, because one must first perceive a word before one can understand 
its meaning, and because one can explain away language but not the 
evidence of the senses. Mandana answers that neither pramdna 
depends on the other, that they don’t conflict, because perception 
affirms whereas scripture negates, that is, removes or sublates error. 
The notion that temporal precedence among pramdyas implies greater 
trustworthiness is simply mistaken; the pramdpa that comes Jater, 
undermining the results of the earlier use of another pramdna, is the one 
that carries the day. Scripture is not inconsistent; it does not teach 
duality; rather, assumes it in order to later remove it. 

Later in the Brahmasiddhi Mandana returns to the question of 
scripture’s authority as a pramdna. This time an objector argues that 
since another pramdna such as perception can contradict scripture it 
follows that verbal testimony depends on perception and the other 
pramanas. Mandana rejects this argument easily : perception may 
be contradicted by inference, but it doesn’t follow that it depends on 
inference; no more does perception depend on verbal testimony. 
The pramdnas are independent of one another. The discussion leads 
on to consideration of the characteristic Mimamsa view of the injunc- 
tive force of scripture mingled with further points about the authority 
of verbal testimony. Mandana insists that scripture is the only 
pramaéna for knowing Brahman. But, he adds, even if one were to 
admit that Brahman can be known by another pramdna it wouldn’t 
follow that scripture was not authoritative because dependent. When 
one tells us about something hehas seen, our belief about the object 
is dependent on his perception, but our belief that he has seen the 
object is not. In any case, Mandana concludes, the proof of Reality 
is not to be found in our knowing it by a pramdna : rather, a pramaéna— 
scripture—leads us to direct knowledge of the Real, a direct knowl- 
edge that isin fact the Real itself and therefore not an instrument in 
knowing It. 

Another objection is raised somewhat later still, one that the reader 
may well have anticipated. If our understanding of scripture depends 
on inference and other pramdnas, those must be the ultimate source of 
Self-knowledge, for it is they that enable us to make sense of language. 
Mandana lists a series of rebuttals to this argument, of which the first 
is sufficient. It is that the hearer of a sentence conveying infor- 
mation, about a speaker’s perception, for example, does not himself use 
perception to grasp that information; fis knowledge depends on 


100 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


testimony alone. Sentences can be understood whether true or false; 
since a false sentence cannot very well be known by any pramdna this 
is also sufficient to meet the argument. 

As one works his way through these arguments one begins to realize 
that these points have been made or implied before. Advaita is a 
difficult philosophy to summarize, in contrast to, for example, Nyaya- 
Vaisesika (see the previous volume in this series), for its points are 
much more thoroughly intertwined and much less dependent on 
precise empirical detail for their appreciation. Listening to an 
Advaitin is deliciously, or irritatingly, repetitive, depending on one’s 
receptivity to the message. As we terminate this essay at this point 
in what may seem an abrupt fashion, the explanation stands : 
Advaitins can weave these points and patterns in endlessly varied ways 
—the summaries below and others to follow in later volumes bear 
witness to this—but the major lines of the argument, as announced 
early in the essay, are simple enough. An introduction must remain 
just that. For further insights, whether scholarly or spiritual, we 
need to consult the literature itself. 


PART TWO 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 


GAUDAPADA 


The first extant piece of literature that can be safely classified as 
exclusively Advaitic is attributed in Advaita tradition to an author 
referred to as Gaudapadacarya. Almost everything about this 
identification has been questioned; the literature on Gaudapada 
is vast and complicated. Some doubt there was any one author 
responsible for the four books that now comprise the Gaudapdda- 
karikés. Assuming there was at least and (for argument’s sake) at 
most one author, when did he live? 

The major piece of relevant hard data is that the Buddhist philo- 
sopher Bhavaviveka, while quoting a number of Vedantic passages 
including some Upanisadic texts, offers one stanza that is identical 
with the fifth stanza of Book Three of the Aarikas. Now Bhavaviveka 
is known to have been a junior contemporary of Dharmapala, who is 
reported by Chinese travelers in India to have been flourishing in the 
fifth century a.p. One of Bhavaviveka’s works was translated into 
Chinese in a.p. 630, which also confirms this evidencc.! 

The major difficulty with this date stems from the fact that Sam- 
kara refers to Gaudapada as his “‘highest teacher,”’ paramaguru (Gauda- 
padakarikabhasya (I1V.100) or ‘‘teacher’s teacher,” guror gariyase 
(Upadegasahasri 1.18.2), and Samkara’s date is most frequenily esti- 
mated at a.p. 788-820. If two centuries elapsed between Gauda- 
pada and Samkara this relationship cannot be taken literally. Thus 
either the ascription must be explained away, or else cither Gauda- 
pada’s or Samkara’s dates must be revised. Surprisingly, it proves 
easier to revise Samkara’s date than to seriously question the evidence 
cited above relating to Gaudapada’s. 

Max Walleser has suggested that the word ‘“‘Gaudapada”’ is not the 
name of one person but a more general reference to the lines (pada) 
stemming from Bengal (gauda).2 This suggestion has been rejected 
by all scholars who have concerned themselves with Gaudapada. 
S. L. Pandey summarizes the responses and adds an important piece 


104 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of evidence, that is, that Samkara (in the Chdndogyopanisadbhasya) 
clearly thought that the four books of the Karikds were written by one 
person. 

Vidhusekhara Bhattacharya points out that the term ‘‘Gauda”’ 
need not refer to a resident of Bengal, though it suggests some asso- 
ciation with that area through family background. Indeed, a late 
Advaitin, Balakrsnananda Sarasvati, takes the view that Gaudapada 
was a member of a sect of Gaudas who lived in the ‘Kurukshetra 
country.”4 Another late author, Narayana the fikdkdéra on the 
Mandikya Upanisad, places Gaudapada as writing his work in the 
Himalayas at Badarikasrama.> These opinions are not worth much, 
to be sure, but they do suggest we need not take the term “‘Gauda’”’, 
overly seriously, for learned pandits do not. 

A number of works are ascribed in manuscripts to Gaudapada, 
including an Ultaragitabhdsya, a commentary on the Nrsimhatapaniya 
Upanisad, a Durgdsaptagati, a Sri Vidyaratna Siitra, and a Subhagodaya 
on Sri Vidya. None of these identifications can be authenticated. 
It is also possible that the same author who wrote these Karikds also 
wrote the commentary on the Sdmkhyakarikds attributed to Gauda- 
pada. But the somewhat naive character of the Samkhya commen- 
tary seems so alien to the depths of reflection suggested in the Advaita 
stanzas that the identity seems unlikely. 

As noted in the introductory essay, scholarly excitement has been 
raised on several scores concerning Gaudapada’s text. Fundamental 
to these discussions is the authenticity of the commentary on the 
Karikas that is attributed to Samkara. Since authoritative Advaita 
scholarship now favors the ascription of this work to Samkara we shall 
assume, in this discussion, that the work is authentic.® 

An important textual question concerns the status of the Mandiikya 
Upanisad and the first twenty-nine Karikds of Gaudapada’s text. The 
Mandikya Upanisad is composed of prose passages, or mantras, concern- 
ing the mystic syllable om that relate each letter of the syllable to 
one of the four states—waking, dream, deep sleep, and the fourth, 
or liberation—referred to here by technical terms of Upanisadic 
ontology—visva, tayasa, prajiia, and turiya. The first twenty-nine 
karikas, constituting Book One of the Gaudapddakdrikas, are usually 
thought to be a commentary on the prose passages. But a tradition 
reported in some of the other Vedantic schools takes the Karikds as 
well as the prose passages as scripture (fru¢i), and some scholars have 
argued that Samkara implies that he too takes that view. Vidhu- 
sekhara Bhattacharya has advanced even more startling hypothesis 
that the prose passages of the Upanisad were composed subsequently 


GAUDAPADA 105 


to the Karikas and were based upon them.? He suggests that the 
entire Mandikya Upanisad may have been composed after Samkara’s 
time. B. N. Krishnamurti Sarma, basing his views on the tradition 
that the first twenty-nine K@rikdés are scripture, argues that both 
Ramanuja and Madhva held that view and that Madhva, furthermore, 
did not think that the Karikads were part of the Upanisad—indeed, 
he thought the authors were different from each other. Sarma 
agrees with Bhattacharya that the Kdrikdés are older than the prose 
passages. 

These suggestions have invited a torrent of criticism. One of the 
implications of Bhattacharya’s and Sarma’s hypotheses is that 
“Gaudapada’s Karikds” is not one work but several. This is spelled 
out by Bhattacharya, who suggests that we do not have all of the 
Karikas, that they have been rearranged, and that there are four or 
more independent treatises involved®*. The commentator Samkara 
says he is commenting on four prakaranas, which is ambiguous and 
has been cited in argument by both sides of the discussion, for a 
prakarana may be a chapter in a book or a separate treatise altogether. 
Various scholars have found fault with the arguments of Bhattacharya 
and Sarma on grounds of using unauthentic works as evidence, of 
misinterpreting passages, of ignoring relevant evidence (especially 
from the subcommentary of Anandagiri, a much later Advaitin, 
who views the Kdarikaés as commenting on the prose passages).10 
Others have apparently been persuaded, at least partly. One could 
hardly say at this point that any consensus has emerged.¥ 

Another vexed question concerns Buddhist authorship or influence. 
Vidhusekhara Bhattacharya has stressed the Buddhist terminology 
used in Books Two to Four especially in the last book. He thinks 
that two Karikds in Book Four, actually refer to the Buddha under 
that name, and he argues that asparsayoga is Buddhistic in origin.!2 
Again devout Advaitins have inveighed against this thesis. However, 
most recent writers seem willing to admit Buddhist influence to the 
extent implied by the use of Buddhist terminology but do not inter- 
pret such use as showing that Gaudapada is any less a Vedantin,18 


GAUDAPADAKARIKAS on the MANDUOKYA UPANISAD 
also called AGAMASASTRA 


(Summary references “ET” refer to the edition and trans- 
lation by Vidhusekhara Bhattacharya University of 
Calcutta, 1943). 


106 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


BOOK ONE : TRADITIONAL DOCTRINE (AGAMA) 


1. Karikés 1—5 (ET 1-2). The one (Self) resides in three forms 
in the body, it is in the waking state, the dream state, and the state 
of deep sleep. In the first state the Self is called vifva, in the second 
taijasa, and in the third prajfia. Visva is visible to us, conscious of 
external objects, and its activities and enjoyments pertain to the sphere 
of the gross (sthiila). Taijasa is conscious of internal objects (that is, 
dream presentations); it dwells inthe mind (manas) and has to do 
with what is fine (pravivikia). Prajita’s consciousness is not polarized 
(ghana—without distinctions); it resides in the heart, and its fruits 
and enjoyments consist of bliss (@nanda). The person who under- 
stands these three forms of the Self and their respective enjoyments 
is not affected through enjoying. 

2. Karikés 6-9 (ET 2-4). The person (purusa) produces through 
the vital breath (prana) all the different rays of thought (citta). Some 
say that creation occurs through the expansion of the self; some say 
it is like a dream or a magic show. Others hold that it is God’s 
desire; still others hold that beings are created from (or by) time 
(kala). Some say God enjoys the results; others say it is for the sake 
of His play (Arida), but that it must be natural to Him, for how can 
one who has accomplished everything have any desires ? 

3. Kadrika 10 (ET 4). There is a fourth state of the self, called 
turiya (here, turya). This form of the self is without duality (advatta), 
is the remover of all frustrations (dubkha), is shining, without change, 
and all-pervading. 

4. Karikds 11-18 (ET 5-8). Visva and taijasa can be both cause 
and effect, prajfia can be cause only, and Jturiya is neither cause nor 
effect. Prajfia knows nothing, whereas turiya is always seeing, is 
omniscient (sarvadrk). Both prajfia and turiya are not cognizant of 
duality, but prajfia, unlike turiya, is accompanied by sleep that operates 
as a seed (bija). Vifva and taijasa are said to be accompanied by 
“sleep”? and “dream”; these are then explained respectively as any 
erroneous awareness and as nonawareness of the nature of things 
{tattva). ‘Sleep’ visits the jiva because of beginningless maya; when 
the jiva “awakens” (prabudhyate) it experiences turiya, which is not 
produced and is without duality, “sleep,” or “dream.” (When 
this happens) if the world (frapajica) were existent it would have to 
cease to exist. But this duality (of the world) is merely mdyd; really 
there is only nonduality. If conceptual constructions (vikalpa) 
were constructed by someone they would cease. But this way of 
putting it is for didactic purposes only; when (the truth) is known 
there is no duality. 


GAUDAPADA 107 


5. Karikés 19-29 (ET 9-14). The four states are identified with 
the three letters comprising the sacred syllable aum | om plus the 
undifferentiated ground of them—the turiya. Reasons are found for 
identifying visva with a, taijasa with u and prajfia with m. By medi- 
tating on each letter, one reaches the corresponding state; meditating 
on the turiya gets one nowhere, for turiya has no measure. The results 
accruing from meditation on Om are extolled. Om (or pranava) 
is Brahman—both the higher (para) and lower (apara)—as well as 
God  (ifvara) residing in the hearts of everyone; it is both without 
measure and of unlimited measure; the cessation of duality, it is 
bliss. 


BOOK TWO UNREALITY (VAITATHYA) 


6. Karikds 1-3 (ET 15-17). Dream objects are unreal, since they 
are inside (antahsthdna) insofar as they are covered up (samorta). 
The dreamer does not go to the (actual) place about which he dreams 
+-there isn’t enough time—and when he wakes up he isn’t in the same 
place he dreamed of. This reasoning is consonant with scripture 
(cf. Brhadéranyaka Upanisad 1V.3.10). 

7. Kérika 4 (ET 17-18). The same argument shows objects of 
the waking state to be unreal. They are inside insofar as they are 
covered up. 

8. Karikas 5-10 (ET 18-21). The states of waking and dream are 
in fact identical, since their objects are alike unreal. Any object 
that is nonexistent at the beginning and at the end is also nonexistent 
in the middle. Dream objects can serve a purpose as easily as can 
waking ones. (Kdrikd 8 is obscure). Furthermore, when dreaming, 
the dreamer believes those objects he dreams of as external to be 
real, whereas those he dreams of as internal he takes to be unreal; 
in fact we know them both to be unreal. Likewise, in the waking 
state, though we take what we apprehend as external to be real and 
what we apprehend as internal to be unreal, both kinds of objects are 
unreal. 

9, Karikds 11-15 (ET 22-26). Objection: If both internal and 
external things do not exist, who is it that apprehends them ? 

Answer: The Self (déman) apparently creates (kalpayati) the self 
by the self through its own mdyé and cognizes various things. This 
is the view of the Vedanta (i.e., the Upanisads). Some of the things 
are constructed in interna] thought as fleeting (auyavasthita), others 
are constructed in external thought as fixed (niyata) through time; 
both are alike unreal, however. The difference between the interna] 
and external constructions pertains to the kinds of organs used to 
grasp them, not to the respective reality or unreality of their objects. 


108 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


10. Karikés 16-30 (ET 26-37). First the jiva is constructed and 
from it the various things, which in turn condition subsequent memo- 
ries. Just as a rope in the dusk is imagined to be various things— 
a snake, a line of water—so the jivdtman is imagined to be various 
things; and just as when we know the rope to be what it is the imagin- 
ing of its being other things disappears, so it is with the self. 

Stanzas 19-38 describe some of the kinds of things different people 
construct. Various fundamental categories of things are mentioned— 
some know the Self as breath (prana), elements (bhiita), gunas, tattvas, 
padas, visayas, worlds (loka), gods (deva), sacrifices (yajfia), enjoyers 
(bhoktr) and enjoyables (bhojya), subtle (saksma), gross (sthila), 
material (miirta), nonmaterial (amiirta), time (kala), space (dik), 
discussion or views (vdéda), worlds (bhuvana), mind (manas), buddhi, 
citta, dharma and adharma. Different numbers of categories are dis- 
tinguished by different systems. When one thinks of the Self as 
created, it appears so; and so it is when one thinks of It as de- 
stroyed, or as ongoing. All these things are not different from It 
(the Self) but are imagined to be so. 

ll. Ké@rikdés 31-38 (ET 38-47). All these things that people 
construct on the basis of the jiva appearasthe objects of dream and 
illusion do. Nothing originates or disappears; no one is in bondage, 
no one seeks anything, liberation or anything else; there are no libe- 
rated ones—this is the highest truth (paramdrthata). All such things 
are really nonexistent, imagined through the nondual Self—thus 
nonduality is bliss. Wise men know that there is no manifoldness 
or separateness, or for that matter nonseparateness; they see what is 
nonconstructed, the quiescence of the world (prapaticopasama). 
Having understood this, they should fix their memories on nonduality, 
and having thus realized nonduality they should move in the world 
as if inert (jada). Such wise persons should be without praise or 
salutation, beyond participation in ritual, homeless wanderers, 
acting only as the occasion demands. Thus having realized the 
truth both inwardly and outwardly, they remain steadfastly true to 
nature (tativa). 


BOOK THREE : NONDUALITY 


12. Karikés 1-10 (ET 48-54). Duties of worship arise only for 
those who think something is born and who are thus miserable. The 
author speaks, rather, of the nonmiserable state in which there is no 
birth and which is the same throughout to show how that nonduality 
can give rise to apparent duality and yet remain unaffected. An 
apt analogy is the way in which space (dkdfa), which is without 


GAUDAPADA 109 


duality, nevertheless is manifested as portions of space, for example, 
as that part of space enclosed in a pot (ghafakéfa); just so, the Self 
is manifested as jivas. Likewise, just as when the pots are destroyed 
the space they enclosed becomes merged into space simplictter, so like- 
wise are the jivas merged into the Self. 

13. Karikds 11-16 (ET 54-58). What is jiva? In the Upanisads 
it is indicated that, among the five sheaths (kofa) of food, breath, 
mind, understanding, and_ bliss, the bliss shcath is the Highest Self 
and is also the jiva. The same thing is taught in the madhukdanda 
of the Brhadéranyaka Upanisad, namely, that the self within the body 
and the self of things outside the body are identical with the Self 
or Brahman. Although some Upanisadic texts imply a_ difference 
between jiva and dtman, they are speaking of the apparent distinction 
that arises after an apparent creation. In reality nothing is born; 
there is no creation. References to it and its consequent distinctions 
are made only, out of kindness, for the purpose of spiritual instruction 
(upaya). 

14. Karikés 17-18 (ET 59-60). Although dualists may think they 
disagree with us, there is no real conflict; we both admit duality, 
but we, unlike them, hold that duality is confined to the realm of 
appearances and is not found in reality. 

15. Karikas 19-32 (ET 60-67). Duality is not found in reality, 
for what is real is naturally immortal and thus cannot become mortal, 
any more than what is naturally mortal can become immortal. In 
scriptures we find it said in some places that creation arises from what 
exists or ‘‘is real’? (sat), in other places, that it arises from what is 
nonexistent or “‘is unreal’? (asat). But neither position is reasonable 
ultimately; the only reasonable position is that no creation takes 
place at all. This is the proper interpretation of texts such as “not 
this, not this’ (neti neti). It is unreasonable to think that what 
exists is really born, since to think that one has to think that what is 
born has already been born (which is absurd). On the other hand, 
it is unreasonable to think that anything is created from what is asat, 
either in reality or through mad. For a son of a barren woman is 
not born either in reality or through méayd. This leaves the possibi- 
lity only that what is “born” is born through mdayd from reality (saé). 
Just as the mind (manas) flickering (spandate) in dreams has the 
appearance of a duality, even though in reality there is only one 
manas, not several, so it is in the waking state also. When the mind 
becomes nonmind no duality is experienced. And the mind “becomes 
nonmind”’ when it does not construct images (na samkalpayate); then, 
there being nothing to be grasped (grdhya), there is no grasping. 


110 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


16. Karikds 33-36 (ET 68-70). The jiana, or awareness, that is 
without conceptual construction and is unborn is declared to be non- 
different from the object of that awareness, which is Brahman. Thus 
the unborn Brahman becomes manifest through the unborn (aware- 
ness). The awareness in question is not like that in deep sleep; in 
deep sleep the mind becomes oblivious, whereas in the awareness 
of the suppressed mind (about which we are speaking) the light of 
awareness shines forth free from fear, on all sides as Brahman. This 
kind of awareness is unborn, without sleep or dream, without name 
and form, all-knowing once and for all; it is not merely an approxi- 
mation metaphor (upacara). 

17. Kankdés 37-48 (ET 72-82). Rather the awareness (of the 
nonmind) is samddhi (concentration), which is beyond language 
and thought, very calm and unwavering, full of light and without 
fear. Since there are no thoughts about objects, the awareness rests 
in itself and attains equanimity. It is contactless concentration 
(asparsayoga), difficult even for yogis, who shrink from it, seeing fear 
in what is without fear. But it can and must be attained through 
control of the mind (manaso nigrahah). The means for this is constant 
remembrance that all is duhkha; even when one is distracted by desires 
and pleasant experiences, even when one is at ease in laya (sleep ? 
orat least mentally inactive), remembering that all is frustration 
(dukkha) one turns away from desires and enjoyments. If awareness 
slackens (in laya) one should awaken it; if it becomes distracted, 
one should pacify it; if it becomes stiffencd (sakdsdya), one should 
understand it; when it reaches equanimity one should see that it 
stays there. The adept should not allow himself to experience pleasure 
(sukha) leading to attachment to his skill; he must be free from 
attachment through his understanding (prajfia@). He should make 
his awareness fixed in itself. Such awareness, when it is not again 
distracted or affected by Jaya and when it has no movement and 
projects no images, is Brahman. It is then independent, calm, 
quiescent (sanirvdna), beyond language, blissful, unborn, all-knowing, 
and identical with its unborn ‘object’? (viz., Brahman). Thus no 
jiva is born in reality. 

BOOK FOUR : THE PEACE OF THE FIREBRAND 
(ALATASANTI) 

18. Karikas 1-2 (ET 83-94). The book begins with an invocation 
to “the greatest of men,” 
which are like the sky, through an awareness that is nondifferent 
from its object, and to him who has taught the contactless 


to him who has understood the dharmas, 


GAUDAPADA 11} 


concentration that is free from self-contradiction and confutation by 
other systems. 

19. Karikdés 3-5 (ET 101-107). Some argue that birth is from 
something already existing, whereas others argue that it is from 
something as yet nonexistent. Neither is possible. 

20. Karikas 6-10 (ET 108-112). Argument of Book Three, 
karikds 20-22, repcated in the same language, except that there the 
discussion is about bhdvas and here it is about dharmas. 

21. Aa@rkds 11-13 (ET 112-114), (The Samkhya says that) 
the cause itself is what is born as its effect. How can they consistently 
maintain that that very thing which is born and is different be neverthe- 
less unborn and eternal? If they insist that the effect is unborn, 
being nondifferent from the cause, then they cannot explain how 
the cause can be eternal when the effect (which is also the cause) 
is produced. Further, a person who thinks things are produced from 
something already existing cannot give an example if the view is that 
the cause is eternal; if his view is that the cause is some already existing 
but noneternal thing he lands in infinite regress. 

22. Karikas 14-20 (ET 115-125). This last contention is examined 
and defended, and it is claimed that the thesis of nonorigination 
(qjativada) has been explained by buddhas. If one replies “‘it is like 
the seed and the sprout—there is a beginningless series of causes 
and effects, but that’s how it is,” Gaudapada answers that the reply 
commits fallacies, specifically that of offering as example what has 
yet to be proved (sdédhyasama). 

23. Karikds 21-23 (ET 126-129). Objection: If we do not know 
the point of origin or the end of a thing we admit that attests to its 
nonorigination; but as to something that is produced we do know its 
point of origin, so the a@ativadin conclusion doesn’t follow. 

Answer: Since nothing (really) originates we do not know the 
point of origination of any effect. And so the conclusion does follow 
after all. 

24, Karikds 24-28 (ET 131-138) Odjection: Since we have 
ways (through language and thought) of identifying things (prajfiapic), 
there must be an occasion (nimitta) for the identification, and so the 
identification must be dependent (faratantra) on something else, 
that is, an (external) object. Furthermore, since we experience 
impurities (samklesa) there must be (objects that are the) causes of 
those experiences. 

Answer: What the opponent takes as an occasion is not real. 
Our awareness (citta) does not touch any object or an appearance 
of an object, because objects are unreal and appearances of objects 


112 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


are no different. Neither awareness nor its objects are originated; 
those who see origins are like those who see marks made in the sky 
by birds flying there. 

25. Karikds 29-41 (ET 140-147). One who believes in the reality 
of origination cannot maintain consistently that samsdra is beginning- 
less but has an end or that liberation has a beginning but no end. 
For if something has as its nature to be unborn it cannot be born, 
and if its nature is that it has been born it must have an end. Neither 
samsara nor liberation has a beginning or end. 

The argument of Book Two concerning the unreality of dream 
objects and the implications for the unreality of objects of waking 
states is repeated. 

26. Karikas 42-44 (ET 149-153). The buddhas sometimes speak 
of birth in order to help those who fear the doctrine of nonorigination. 
And the evil that might accrue for one who trusts such teaching is 
slight. In any case, the mere fact that someone speaks in practical 
terms of, say, an elephant cannot prove that elephants are real; we 
say that something exists whenever there is some practical reason for 
dealing with it. 

27. Karikaés 45-52 (ET 153-157). Only consciousness (vijfdna) 
is real, though it appears in various guises as objects with beginnings 
and ends, movements, etc. It is analogous to a burning stick that, 
when swung about, appears as a continuant (say, a fiery hoop); 
in the same way, awareness when it flickers appears as perceiver 
and perceived. But when the burning stick does not flicker it fails 
to appear at all and is thus “unborn’’; so it is with awareness. The 
appearances of the flickering burning stick are not produced from 
anything other than the stick; they do not go out to become real 
qualities of anything external. When the stick is at rest those fiery 
appearances don’t reside somewhere else, nor do they reside in the 
stick. All this is analogous to awareness : the objects of our conscious- 
ness are not produced from anything other than our consciousness; 
they do not go out to form real external objects, and when our mind 
is calmed those objects don’t reside somewhere else, nor do they 
reside in our mind. 

28. Karikas 53-56 (ET 158-160). There is no causation, for it is 
an accepted rule that substances may cause other substances to arise 
and that one thing causes a different thing to arise. But there are no 
substances, and there is only one real thing—consciousness—so it 
follows that there is no causation and in particular, that conscious- 
ness does not cause its objects to arise or vice-versa. In fact our 
attachment to the world and its objects depends on our adherence to a 


GAUDAPADA 113 


belief in causal relations; when we lose that belief we will lose the 
attachment and thus there will be no causes, no effects. 

29. Karikdés 57-60 (ET 161-165). On the level ofordinary affairs 
(samvrtt) everything is coming into and going out of existence all 
the time; thus nothing is eternal. On the other hand everything is 
by nature without origination, and thus without destruction either, 
so eternal. But we do not hold either of these views, for the things 
apprehended on the level of ordinary affairs are only maya. Thus, 
for example, the illusory sprout that arises from an illusory seed 
is neither eternal nor is it subject to origination and destruction. 
In such a case the words ‘‘eternal”’ and “noneternal’’ don’t demarcate 
anything from anything else and so are useless. 

30. Karikds 61-72 (ET 165-172). These stanzas repeat points 
already made about dream objects, etc. 

31. Kérikas 73-81 (ET 174-188). Things that exist in the samortt, 
or practical level, do not exist from the highest (paramdrtha) stand- 
point because they are dependent. So we cannot even assert that 
they are from the highest standpoint “unborn,” since from that 
standpoint they do not exist at all. It is rather our attachment 
to unreality that is responsible for our viewing things under the 
subject-object modality; when this manner of viewing ceases there is 
nothing to classify as unborn. When this happens one reaches a 
state free from sorrow, desire, and fear (i.e., the state of samadhi 
mentioned before, here once again described in the same terms). 

32. Kartkds 82-86 (ET 190-195). Through adhering to notions 
about things (such as : it is, is not, both is and is not, or neither is nor 
is not) happiness is obscured and frustration becomes manifest. 
One who realizes that the Lord (bhagavdn) is not touched by these 
four alternatives (koji) is all-seeing (sarvadrk) and desires nothing 
more. 

33. Karikds 87-89 (ET 196-198). Three stages in understanding 
are distinguished : ordinary (laukika), in which both objects and 
a subject are cognized as real; purified ordinary (fuddha laukika), 
in which perceiving, but not the objects, is cognized as real; and 
supramundane (lokettara), in which neither objects nor perceiving 
is cognized. 

34. Karikas 90-100 (ET 199-217). The agraydna explains what 
is to be avoided, what is to be known, what is to be attained, and what 
is to be developed (made more mature). Of these four, what is to 
be known is not perceived, whereas the other three are. All dharmas 
are without beginning and without variety; they are by nature con- 
sciousness only, quiescent from the beginning by nature; they are al] 


114 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the same, not different. The unwise follow difference and are pitiable; 
the wise are certain about the unborn, undifferentiated Reality, 
but the people do not grasp it. This knowledge of the wise is free 
from attachment (asajga) because it does not relate to the dharmas. 
If any difference among dharmas is cognized that cognition is not 
nonattached, and removal of the covering is a fortiert impossible. 
Not that the dharmas are really covered—they are primary aware- 
ness (?) (ddibuddha) and likewise liberated (mukta). This the buddhas 
understand. The Buddha instructs us that consciousness does not 
reach the dharmas—yet the Buddha said nothing about either con- 
sciousness or dharmas ! 


SAMKARA (SAMKARACARYA, 
SAMKARABHAGAVATPADA) 


As noted in the introductory essay, the date of Samkara is not agreed 
on by scholars. A great deal of traditional lore has been built up 
around Samkara’s name; some of it may well be accurate, but much 
of it surely is not. To be able to defend a hypothesis on Samkara’s 
date, one must have weightier evidence than mere tradition. With- 
out any inscriptional evidence to rely on, internal evidence deriving 
from references in Samkara’s writings is critical in arriving at his 
terminus a quo. But which are Samkara’s writings? 

Tradition is at work here also. Samkara is credited with a great 
many works, most of which are highly unlikely to be by him. The 
most careful work on the criteria for deciding which works are Sam- 
kara’s has been done by Paul Hacker, with applications by Sengaku 
Mayeda.1 In the following discussion we follow these authors 
wherever possible. 

Hacker and Mayeda propose the following tests, all of which are 
satisfied by the Brahmasiitrabhdsya (by common consent the work of 
the Samkara we are interested in): (1) Use of the term avidya 
to mean superimposition (adhydésa), and not as synonymous with such 
terms as jada, bhdvariipa, dvarana- or viksepa-Sakti, or antrvacaniya, 
which identifications Hacker and Mayeda find non-Samkaran; 
(2) use of the term ndmariipa to mean the original world stuff, like Sam- 
khya’s prakrti; (3) relatively infrequent use of the term maya in com- 
parison with avidya; (4) frequent occurrence of the term ifvara (it is 
found less frequently in later Advaitins, including Samkara’s pupils) ; 
(5) reluctance or refusal to accept dnanda as a positive property of 
Brahman; and (6) nonoccurrence of the term vivarta in its ‘‘illusionis- 
tic’? sense asthe relation between a cause and its only apparent, 
unreal effect. These are among the main tests; various others are 
also proposed, Using these tests Mayeda has argued for Samkara’s 


116 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


authorship of the Bhagavadgitabhasya, UpadeSasahasri, Gaudapadakarika- 
bhdsya, and Kenopanisadbhasya (as well as the Brahmasiitrabhasya, of 
course). The method is highly scientific and does not give com- 
pletely unambiguous results; in particular, the Gitabhdsya and Gauda- 
padakarikabhasya, whose authenticity has been questioned by some schol- 
ars, show both similarities and differences with the Brahmas iitrabhasya. 

Different but rather clearer evidence is available for those Upanisad- 
bhasyas on which Suregvara comments, that is, the Brhaddranyaka- 
and Taittiriyopanisadbhadsyas. Unless we find the ascription of the 
subcommentaries to Suregvara spurious—and no one has—we have 
no reason to refuse to ascribe these commentaries to Samkara. 

The same tests are appealed to by Hacker and Mayeda to support 
the rejection of other prakarana works frequently ascribed to Samkara, 
notably the Vivekaciidaémani and Atmabodha, both very popular in 
Advaita circles. Ingalls has also contributed additional reasons to 
reject the Vivekaciidamani.2 Fuller evidence on the various ascriptions 
is reviewed in the material provided below. 

The upshot of the most careful scholarship to date on the works of 
Samkara, therefore, is that the following may without question be 
accepted as the work of the author of the Brahmasiitrabhasya : the 
Brhadaranyakopanisadbhasya,? the Taittiriyopanisadbhasya, and the Upa- 
deSasahasri.4| There seems no real reason to question the inclusion of 
the Aitareyopanisadbhasya, the Chandogyopanisadbhasya, the Mundako- 
panisadbhaésya and the Prasnopanisadbhdsya on this list. Beyond this 
point, however, is only speculation. Therefore, we shall limit our- 
selves to these works in arriving at an estimate of Samkara’s date. 

Authors whom Samkara, the author of the above works, presup- 
poses include Kumarila, Bhartrhari and Dharmakirti,5 and, of course, 
Gaudapada, to whom Samkara refers deferentially.6 Now Bhartr- 
hari lived in the middle of the fifth century, Gaudapada (as we saw), 
in the sixth century, and Kumarila and Dharmakirti, most likely in 
the seventh century. As a result Samkara cannot precede the middle 
of the seventh century. No firm evidence forces us to date Samkara 
any later than mid-seventh century, however. The arguments of 
Belvalkar? and, more recently, Kunjunni Raja® are not conclusive 
for a later date. Finally, very recent work by Allen Thrasher based 
on a study of Mandana Miéra confirms the dating of Samkara inthe 
late seventh and early eighth centuries rather than the frequently 
cited 788-820 date of Dasgupta and others.® 

So far we have confined ourselves to scholarly data of a relatively 
firm sort. ‘There is a vast traditional literature on Samkara’s life and 
times that any Samkara scholar must be aware of, whatever he may 


SAMKARA 117 


decide to do with it. Thrasher, for instance, argues that much of 
what we know on scientific grounds agrees nicely with the traditions. 
Given what we know, it is possible that Samkara was the pupil of 
Gaudapada’s pupil, met Kumarila, and debated with Mandana 
Misra. Other traditional theses, for example, that Mandana was 
defeated and became Suregvara, are less clear from the evidence and 
in all likelihood are not true, although the particular thesis of the 
Mandana-Sureégvara identity is still being argued in the journals.10 

Of the traditional accounts of Samkara’s life—Samkaravijayas by 
Anandagiri, Madhava, Cidvilasa, and Sadananda!!—all except 
Anandagiri agree that Samkara was born in Kaladi, a small village 
in modern Kerala. Anandagiri insists that the birthplace was 
Cidambaram in Tamil Nadu. There are various stories, clearly 
apocryphal, about the circumstances surrounding Samkara’s birth. 
His father is identified as Sivaguru, son of Vidyadhiraja, and is said 
to have died shortly after the child Samkara was born. A famous 
story concerns the taking of vows of samnydsa by the child who, then 
eight years or so old, assured his despairing mother that he would 
return to give her the last rites even though this is not required— 
and possibly not even allowed—for a samnydsin. There is also a story, 
regarded by some as infamous, that Samkara tricked his mother into 
consenting to his taking the vows by pretending a crocodile was about 
to swallow him in a_ river and would not release him except to a 
religious _ life.12 

After leaving home the young Samkara is said to have met his guru 
Govinda on the banks of the Narmada river, but he soon continued 
to travel and began his teaching in Banaras. There he attracted 
disciples, initially Padmapada, and with Padmapada he went on 
pilgrimage to Badrinath, the headwaters of the Ganges. He remained 
there for four years and, according to one account, though not 
yet sixteen he wrote his major works. He then returned to Banaras 
for more teaching and converting. After several more years he was 
off to Prayaga (Allahabad), where he met the elderly Kuméarila, 
who sent him on to Mandana. A popular story ensues: debating 
with Mandana with the understanding that the loser would become 
the winner’s pupil, he defeated that Mimamsaka, but Mandana’s 
wife Bharati challenged him to further debate and temporarily em- 
barrassed Samkara by pointing out to him that he was woefully in- 
experienced in worldly ways, specifically in first-hand knowledge of 
sex. Samkara is supposed to have asked for a temporary leave of 
absence from the debate to gain the necessary experience, which he 
did by entering the body of a powerful king for a few months. 


118 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Returning, he defeated Bharati, and both she and her husband are 
supposed to have become his disciples, Mandana taking the name of 
Suregvara. 

After returning to his birthplace to attend to his mother’s funeral 
Samkara set out on a far-flung tour during which he established the 
four great monasteries of Advaita in the four corners of India—at 
Srngeri in the south, Dwarka in the west, Badrinath in the north, and 
Puri in the east. (A powerful tradition claims a fifth pitha at Kafici, 
that is, Conjeeveram.4%3) At each of these dframas he appointed 
one of his favorite disciples as pontiff. 

Another story tells of his meeting with the Saiva philosopher Abhi- 
navagupta, who cursed Samkara with a nasty disease,14 but Padma- 
pada caused the curse to rebound to Abhinavagupta himself, who 
died of it. 

Those who take the vows of Samkaracarya’s order of the Daéa- 
namis, or ‘‘ten-names,’’ receive one of ten names—Giri, Puri, Bharati, 
Sarasvati, Tirtha, Aégrama, Vana, Aranya, Parvata, Sagara. The 
order also designates four grades of realization—brahmacarin, dandin, 
parivrdjaka, and paramahamsa. 

Samkara’s life is agreed by all to have beena very short one in years, 
though remarkable in productivity. He died at the age of thirty- 
two in the Himalayas according to most sources, although Anandagiri 
again disagrees, locating his place of death at Kajfici. 

The foregoing has been based, as has been said, on traditional 
accounts. At least two Western scholars of modern times have 
offered suggestions toward reconstructing some features of the deve- 
lopment of Samkara’s thought. Daniel Ingalls, studying the relations 
between Samkara and Bhaskara, a rival Bhedabhedavadin commen- 
tator on the Brahmasiitras and Bhagavadgité, suggests that Samkara 
began his career as a Bhedabhedavadin, then was influenced by 
Gaudapada’s thought, taking certain elements of Buddhism through 
Gaudapada (the “‘two truths’), others from Bhartrhari (vivaria), 
and still others from Samkhya (superimposition).1® On Ingalls’ 
interpretation, Samkara’s philosophical polemics are mainly directed 
toward Pirvamimamsa. Paul Hacker proposes an even more 
startling intellectual biography for Samkara.1® Basing himself on 
the ascription to Samkara of a commentary on Vydsa’s Yogabhdsya, 
which Hacker finds reason to accept, he suggests that Samkara started 
as a follower of Patafijala Yoga, was brought by an Advaita master 
to study Gaudapada’s ‘‘new doctrine of Om and new Yoga,” and was 
moved to prepare a commentary on the Manditkyakartkas—the Gauda- 
padakérikdbhdsya—from which he moved through composition of the 


SAMKARA 119 


Taittiriyabhasya and part of the UpadeSasahasri (section IJ.19 at least) 
into his mature works such as the Brahmas itrabhdsya. 

Hacker has also studied Samkara’s probable religious affiliation, 
which he finds to have been Vaisnava,!? despite the widespread 
adoption by Saivites of Advaita philosophy. 

The works summarized below are not ordered by any attempt at 
reconstructing the order in which they were written. Rather, they 
are arranged in two groups : first, the works argued above as likely 
to be authentic; then, and more briefly, summaries of a number of 
works that are probably not the work of the author of the Brahma- 
Siitrabhasya, but that are important in Advaita literature because they 
have some intrinsic interest or are widely commented on by later 
Advaitins and are regularly ascribed by tradition to Samkara. We 
have not tried to summarize all such works, whose number runs into 
the hundreds. 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 


This is Samkara’s major and most authoritative work. It is safe 
to say that it is the single most influential philosophical text in India 
today, a status it has enjoyed for at least a century, possibly much 
longer. Countless Indian adepts commit portions of this text to 
heart, especially the introduction to and commentary on the first 
four siltras, known as the Catuhsiitri, in which Samkara sets forth some 
of his most characteristic and striking views and arguments. 

Influential as it is, neither Indian nor Western scholars agree on 
the accuracy of Samkara’s interpretation of Badarayana’s Siiras. 
The Siitras, as one of the fundamental works of all Vedanta systems, 
is interpreted in appropriately disparate ways by each of those systems. 
Several works in English indicate the disparity among the interpre- 
tations of a single siitra by the various Vedanta authors.1® Among 
‘impartial’? scholars, mostly Westerners without suspected doctrinal 
affiliation, there has been continued debate over whether (in parti- 
cular) Ramanuja or Samkara is the more faithful interpreter of 
Badarayana’s thought, debate stemming at least in part from Thibaut’s 
remarks in the introduction to his standard translation of the Brahma- 
siitrabhasya, in which he expresses the opinion that Samkara’s philo- 
sophy is closer to that of the Upanisads than Badarayana’s own, 
but that Ramanuja’s reading of Badarayana is more accurate than 
Samkara’s.19 Numerous writers have expressed reservations about 
Sanikara as commentator, some finding him careless, confused, or 
even downright dishonest. However that may be, there can be 


120 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


little question that the work stands at the pinnacle of Indian philoso- 
phical compositions. 

In the following summary, “E”’ refers to the edition by Narayana 
Ram Acarya, (Bombay: Nirnayasagara Press, 1948). ‘“T’’ refers 
to George Thibaut’s translation in the Sacred Books of the East 
(republished, New York : Dover Press, 1962). 


FIRST CHAPTER (ADHYAYA), FIRST SECTION (PADA) 


Introduction (E1-4; T3-9). It is evident that “I? and “That”? 
are different, as are their properties. So it is erroneous (mithyd) 
to superimpose (adhyasa) upon the subject (visayin), whose nature is 
awareness (cit) and whose sphere is the notion of “I,” the object 
(visaya), whose sphere is “That”; it is also an error to superimpose 
the subject on the object; furthermore, superimposition of the 
properties of each on the other is also erroneous. Nevertheless it is 
a natural propensity of men to do just that, superimposing the nature 
and attributes of each upon the other when they say, for example, 
“J am that” or “that is mine.” 

Now what is superimposition ? It is the appearance (dabhdsa), 
in the form of a memory, of something previously experienced in some 
other place. Other philosophers define superimposition in slightly 
different ways. Some say it involves the nongrasping of the distinc- 
tion of two things leading to one being superimposed on the other. 
Others say it is the attribution to a thing of properties contrary to 
those belonging to that thing. In any case all agree that it involves 
the appearance of the properties of one thing in another. And this 
agrees with ordinary experience as reflected in the reports of illusions 
such as “‘the shell appears as silver’ or “‘the single moon appears 
double.” 

Objection : How can one superimpose an object on the interior 
Self (pratyagatman), which is not an object? One can superimpose 
an object only on another object that is before him, and you have just 
told us that the Self is entirely different from “That.” 

Answer : The Self isn’t nonobject in an absolute sense, for It is the 
object of our notion of “I” and is directly known to everyone. 
Furthermore, your alleged rule that one can superimpose an object 
only on another object that is before him has exceptions: we super- 
impose blue color on dkafa (the sky), which is not an object of 
perception. So our position is not inconsistent. 

Superimposition is avidyé; understanding the true nature of reality 
by discrimination is vidyd. Since it is so, faults present in an x that 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 191 


is superimposed ona y are not transferred to y. Superimposition, 
that is, avidyd, provides the necessary condition on which all distinc- 
tions of practical speaking (yyavahdra) are based, whether such speak- 
ing is ordinary or scriptural. Such distinctions involve means of 
knowledge (pramana), their objects (prameya), injunctions and pro- 
hibitions, and even liberation (moksa). 

How is it thatmeans of knowledge, that is, perception, inference, 
etc., operate only in dependence on avidya? It is because they can 
operate only if there is a knower (framdir), and the existence of a 
knower depends on notions of “I” and “mine” with respect to the 
body, sense organs, and such, which notions in turn depend on the 
operation of the senses, the body, and the superimposition of the Self 
on that body, so that without all this the Self cannot become a knower. 
Men become attracted or repelled by sense objects just as animals 
do in depending on their senses; since it is evident to everyone that 
animals do not discriminate their Self from what is not their Self, 
it follows that the same applies to men. Inthe same way, though 
a man who sacrifices following scriptural injunctions realizes that the 
Self has a relation to other worlds, still his activity does not depend 
on his understanding the difference between his Self and what that 
Self is not; indeed, once he understands that difference he realizes 
the uselessness of such actions. Thus even the Vedic texts have as 
their purport that which is dependent on avidyd. Texts enjoining 
sacrifices presuppose that on the Self is superimposed caste status, 
stage of life, age, etc. Attributes reflecting notions about a man’s 
relations with others, with his body, his senses, or with his internal 
organ, are superimposed on the Self, which is in actuality the witness 
(sdksin) of all, and that witnessing Self is in turn superimposed on 
the internal organ, sense, and so on. This natural, beginningless, 
and endless superimposition, taking the form of erroneous notions, 
is why everyone supposes himself to be agent and enjoyer. 

It is in order to get rid of these false notions and to acquire under- 
standing (vidyd) of the unity of the Self that the study of the Vedanta 
(texts) should be taken up. 

I.1.1 (E4-6; T9-15). The siitra reads: ‘“Then, therefore, the 
desire to know.” ‘““Then” in the sara does not mean that something 
new is being started, nor is it merely an invocation (mangaia). Rather 
it means that this teaching is intended to follow immediately upon 
acquaintance with the Vedas, although it is not necessary that a man 
has inquired into dharma in order to undertake the inquiry about 
Brahman. “Then” does not mean ‘following performance of 
(certain kinds of) acts,” since the inquiry into dharma and that into 


122 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Brahman differ not only in themselves but also in their results. 
Understanding of dharma results in prosperity that is dependent on 
acts; understanding of Brahman results in liberation or perfection 
(nihSreyasa) that depends on no actions. Dharma is something to be 
accomplished in the future by action; Brahman is already existent, 
since eternal, and so not dependent on human activity. Dharmic 
injunctions instruct man in order to make him act in certain ways to 
achieve results; scriptural texts relating to Brahman merely instruct 
man without enjoining him, the results following directly upon under- 
standing the texts. 

Then what is it that constitutes the unique antecedents of the in- 
quiry into Brahman? It is discrimination of what is really eternal 
from what is not; nonattachment to enjoyments of objects both now 
and hereafter; acquisition of tranquillity, restraint, and other instru- 
ments; and the desire for liberation. When these conditions exist 
a man may successfully inquire about Brahman, whether or not he 
has already inquired about dharma. 

The word “‘therefore” in the sitra indicates that one should inquire 
into Brahman for the reason that the Veda indicates that the results 
of that inquiry constitute the highest aim of man. 

The meaning of the word ‘“‘Brahman’”’ will be explained in the next 
Sittra. 

Objection: Is Brahman generally known to us or not? If It is 
known we need not inquire about It; but if It is not, we cannot 
inquire about It. 

Answer : Brahman is known to us, because once we understand 
that the word “Brahman” connotes something that is ‘great’? (an 
understanding we derive from etymology) and realize that Brahman 
is therefore omniscient, omnipotent, eternally pure, intelligent, and 
free, we know Brahman exists; and because Brahman is known to 
each person as his Self : no one ever says (or thinks) “‘I do not exist,” 
but if the Self’s existence were not generally known we would think 
and speak that way. 

Objector: Then, since Brahman is already known, we need not 
inquire about It. 

Answer: No, since there are mistaken opinions about Brahman. 
Ordinary people and Lokayatas believe the body qualified by aware- 
ness is the Self; others, that It is the organs plus awareness; others 
that the internal organ is the Self; others again, that the Self is momen- 
tary cognitions; and still others, that It is the void (Sinya). Some 
say there is an agent and enjoyer different from the body and that it 
transmigrates; some say that that being is enjoyer only, not agent; 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 123 


others think that in addition there is a God; and still others think that 
God is the Self of the enjoyer. So there are all these conflicting 
opinions, based on both reasoning (yuki?) and authority but which 
are only apparently authoritative. That is why one should proceed 
to study Brahman, that is, the Vedanta texts, using the help of argu- 
ments (farka) and aiming for perfection. 

1.1.2 (&7-9; T15-19). The sétra says “ [Brahman is that] from 
which birth, etc. (proceed). “Et cetera’’ in the sétra includes main- 
tenance and destruction. The sense is that Brahman is the om- 
niscient, omnipotent cause from which proceed the beginning, main- 
tenance, and destruction of the world of name-and-form, of agents 
and enjoyers, of fruits of actions that are determined spatially, tempo- 
rally, and causally, of a world that is not thinkable through the internal 
organ. Only from such a God as has just been described can the 
birth, etc., of the world arise; it cannot arise from an unconscious 
prakrti, or from atoms, or from a transmigrating being. And it 
cannot arise, etc., from the world’s own nature, because natural 
causation needs special spatial and temporal occasions. 

This last argument is by itself not sufficient to prove the existence 
of God, however. Though inference, as well as sense perception, 
can help in providing understanding of Brahman insofar as it does 
not contradict scripture, still it is the proper understanding of the 
Vedanta texts (that is, the Upanisads) that alone produces that 
understanding. Not that this excludes arguments (tarka), for scrip- 
ture itself tells us that, for example, the Self is to be considered (man- 
tavya) as well as heard (Srotavya). 

Scripture (frutz) as well as immediate awareness (anubhava), etc., 
are both to be used in appropriate ways in the inquiry into Brahman, 
unlike the inquiry into dharma in which only scripture is pertinent. 
The reason is that Brahman, unlike dharma, already exists. Again, 
the arising of dharma depends on man’s efforts and so involves injunc- 
tions, prohibitions, rules, exceptions, etc., but the existence of some- 
thing that already exists is not dependent on man’s efforts. The 
truth of a judgment concerning a matter of fact depends on the world, 
unlike the truth of a judgment concerning what is to be done. 

Objection : Since Brahman exists already other pramdanas can provide 
knowledge of it as well as scripture; so we need not study the Vedanta 
texts after all. 

Answer: No, since Brahman is not an object of the senses. We 
might know that Brahman is the cause of the world by perception or 
inference if we could see both Brahman and the world with our sense 
organs, but we only grasp the world that way and not Brahman. 


124 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The sitra does not provide an inference to show Brahman’s causality, 
but rather reflects scriptural passages (found at Taittiriya Upanisad 
III.1 and 6). As for the omniscience of Brahman, it follows : 

1.1.3 (£9-10; T19-20). “From (1) (Brahman’s) being the source 
of scripture (or, as an alternative reading) from (2) scripture’s being 
the source (of knowledge of Brahman).” 

On interpretation (1), we must take it that scripture itself is omni- 
scient, and so how much more so its author, Brahman. On inter- 
pretation (2), the passage is to be understood as showing that siitra 
2 does not present an inference to God’s existence independent of 
scripture. 

(E10-12; T20-23) Objection: Scripture is not the means of know- 
ing Brahman, for, according to Mimdmsdasiitra J.2.1, all scriptural 
passages have actions as their purport. Either scriptural texts enjoin 
actions or else they provide supplementary information to some- 
one intending to perform actions. Scripture is not needed to give 
information about existing things, since perception, etc., can do 
that; in any case, even if it could give information, the information 
would ex hypothesi be irrelevant to action and so of no use to us. All 
scriptural passages are directly or indirectly injunctive, and one cannot 
enjoin the existence or nature of an already existing thing. Thus 
if the texts you have in mind do not themselves enjoin they must 
either supply ancillary information in aid of such injunctions or, 
if you insist that their subject matter is different, they must concern 
meditation (updsana) and other actions mentioned in those particular 
texts, 

1.1.4. Answer: “But that (is so, that is, Brahman is known from 
scripture), because (the passages in question) are connected (to 
Brahman) through (their) meaning.” These texts cannot merely 
provide ancillary information, since many of them clearly preclude 
any reference to action (e.g., Brhaddranyaka Upanisad 11.4.13 : ‘Then 
by what should he see whom ?”’). Again, scripture is needed to give 
information about some already existing things, for example, the 
information that the Self is Brahman (‘that art thou”), And some 
information is relevant even though it does not speak of what is to be 
gained or avoided : the Self, Brahman, which is not something to 
be gained or avoided, is such that understanding of It produces an 
end to all frustration. And though some texts do concern meditation 
those concerning Brahman cannot, since once knowledge of Brahman 
occurs there is no longer anything to be gained or avoided, all con- 
ceptions of difference are destroyed. 

(E12-14 ; T23-29) Oljection: Just as the Vedas give information 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 125 


about the implements of the sacrifice, information not known in 
common parlance, to those who are enjoined to perform sacrifices 
if they desire to get to heaven, so information about Brahman, not 
known in common life, is imparted by the . Vedas to those who are 
enjoined to learn to understand Brahman if they wish to attain immor- 
tality, that is, liberation. But information irrelevant to any action, 
merely stating facts about what already exists without any reference 
to any possible action, is senseless and cannot occur in scripture. 

Answer: If someone says “‘this is a rope, not a snake” intending to 
remove the fear of another person who has mistaken the one for the 
other, it is not senseless; likewise it is not senseless for the Vedanta 
passages to make statements about the Self intending to remove 
the error of one who thinks that It transmigrates. 

Objector : The analogy fails, because though fear of snake is dispell- 
ed by hearing that it is a rope, merely hearing that the Self doesn’t 
transmigrate doesn’t stop men from undergoing transmigration. 
And in fact it is for this very reason that the scriptures enjoin us to 
consider and meditate on the Self in addition to hearing of It. 

Samkara : The objector’s whole line of argument fails because it 
depends on the fallacious assumption that liberation, like dharma, 
is something not yet existent that is to be obtained. But in truth 
liberation is eternal and disembodied (afarira). It is eternal, not in 
the sense (parindminitya) that a continuant undergoing change may 
be said to be, but in the sense (kifasthanitya) that it doesn’t undergo 
any changes at all, that it is omnipresent, partless, absolutely self- 
sufficient, self-luminous. Since liberation is eternal in that sense, as 
well as not involving any body, it cannot be an effect of actions en- 
joined in scripture. In fact, liberation follows immediately upon 
knowledge of Brahman, and thus that knowledge cannot be viewed 
as a means conducive to some action designed to gain liberation. 

(E14-16; T29-31) Samkara now shows by citing appropriate 
passages that the identity of Self with Brahman cannot be dismissed 
as a_ mere figure of speech or as a_ kind of imaginative association 
constituting an element in meditation. Knowledge of Brahman is, 
like knowledge of an object by perception, dependent on its object, 
not on human activity. Brahman has no connection whatsoever 
with actions. 

(E16-18; T31-34) Brahman is not even the object of an “act” 
of knowing or other activity of mind or speech. 

Objector: If so, scripture cannot tell us about Brahman. 

Answer : True, scripture does not speak of Brahman as an object 
but rather turns aside all distinctions produced by avidyé, Scripture 


126 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in fact tells us that Brahman is always subject, never object. Realiz- 
ing this one realizes as well that liberation is not transitory but is 
rather the very nature of the eternally liberated Self. Those who 
believe that liberation is a result of actions of mind, speech, or body, 
or who think it to be a modification (of something), properly conclude 
that liberation is noneternal, for in experience we find that modifi- 
cations such as curds, as well as effects such as jars, are noneternal. 
Liberation is not something to be obtained, since it constitutes (a 
person’s) Self and is all-pervading, thus ever present to everyone, 
like akafa. Nor is it a thing to be acted toward by ritual activities 
of purification (samskdra), for purification involves either the adding 
of some quality or the removal of some fault, but neither is relevant 
in the case of liberation, for liberation is just Brahman, to which no 
quality can be added and which is without fault. 

Objection: Liberation may be a quality of the Self that needs 
purifying action to manifest it, just as a dusty mirror needs the action 
of rubbing to clear it. 

Answer: No, the Self is not the locus of any action, since an action 
must modify its locus; if actions could modify the Self It would be 
noneternal, and this contradicts scripture. And it cannot be puri- 
fied by actions relating to something else, since the Self does not bear 
any relation to anything else. 

Objector: Surely the embodied Self is purified by ritual actions 
such as bathing. 

Answer: No, for what is purified there is not the Self but a self 
joined to the body through avidyd, that is, the ego principle (ahamkdra). 
Common sense will tell you that when we say, having recovered from 
a disease, ‘I am well,” we are speaking of the ego and not the Self. 
And since there are no other ways inwhich liberation could be con- 
nected with action than those mentioned here, it follows that liberation 
stands in no relation to action. 

(E18-19; T34-36) Objection: But knowledge (which you claim 
produces liberation) is itself a mental act. 

Answer: No indeed. An action is something not dependent on 
what now exists but on human intelligence, whereas knowledge is 
(just the reverse) dependent on what exists and not dependent on 
human intelligence. Thus even though some actions such as medi- 
tation, as well as knowledge, are, if you like, “‘mental,” they are en- 
tirely unlike each other. Therefore one’s meditative object is some- 
thing that depends on human action and so can be enjoined, but 
Brahman is not dependent on human action and so cannot be enjoin- 
ed, since it cannot be gained or avoided, 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 127 


Objection : Then what about the Upanisadic passage that enjoins 
us that the Self should be seen and heard ? 

Answer: The purpose of this injunction is to divert men’s thoughts 
from the objects of ordinary activities and toward the Self. Many 
passages (which are quoted) tell us that Brahman is not an object to 
be sought or avoided. 

(E19-21 ; T36-40) Objection: ‘There is nothing in the Vedic 
scriptures that speaks only to describe existing things; all scriptural 
texts are either injunctions, prohibitions, or supplements to those 
two. 

Answer: No, because the Upanisads are surely about the Self, 
and the Self cannot be an aspect (fesa) of something else. If some- 
one should claim that the Self, since it is made known by other means 
(that is, perception, inference), is only incidentally referred to by 
scripture, we reply that the Self is again being confused with the 
object of self-consciousness; the Self with which we are here concern- 
ed cannot be the object of self-consciousness but is rather the witness 
of all that. It is inconsistent to deny that Self, for it is that very Self 
that would do the denying ! So those (Mimamsd) authorities who 
first made the claim that all scriptures consist of injunctions must 
have been speaking about that portion dealing with injunctions. 
And when they aver that whatever Vedic passages that do not refer 
to actions are without purpose, it would mean, if strictly construed, 
that all information (given there) is without purpose (whichis absurd) ; 
ifitis not taken strictly but is relaxed to allow that information may 
be conveyed about things that are related to possible actions, then 
why shouldn’t it give information about the Self, since to do so 
wouldn’t require objects, for example, the Self, to be acts. 

Furthermore, some Vedic passages (for example, “don’t kill Brah- 
mins’) enjoin avoidance of certain kinds of acts. Avoidance of 
action is neither action nor instrumental to action, so it would follow 
from your (Mimamsa) principle that those Vedic passages are without 
purpose, which is absurd. And you can’t assume that the “not” 
(in “do not kill Brahmins’’) itself denotes some other (opposed ) 
action, for that’s not the way the word “not” is used in contexts such 
as this: what “‘not” means is passivity—inaction, except in special 
cases, such as vows. 

(E21-24; T40-45) As for the objection (at E12-14 above) that 
although a man who is told that something is not a snake but a rope 
no longer is under an illusion, when he is told that his Self is Brahman, 
he still remains in samsdra : we hold that the latter man is not in 
samsdra in the same way as before. He is no longer subject to 


128 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


frustration and fear. It is like a person who is proud ofhis earrings 
while he has them; after he loses them he may lose his pride and his 
pleasure in his ownership; when a person loses his body he loses his 
concern for pleasure or pain. 

Objector : Only a dead person loses his body. 

Answer: No, because the cause of embodiment is false awareness. 
The Self is eternally disembodied; thus when wrong knowledge is 
corrected by the understanding of the Self, he “loses his body’? and is 
no longer in samsdra in the same way. 

Objector : Embodiedness is caused by merit (dharma) and demerit 
(adharma). 

Answer: But merit and demerit are caused by embodiment, so 
there will be the fallacy of mutual dependence (itaretarafraya) as well 
as of a beginningless chain of blind leading blind. Anyway since 
the Self cannot be an agent this view is invalid. 

Objection: The Self is ‘“‘agent” in the same sense that a king is, 
by (producing action by) Its mere presence. 

Answer: No, because kings get action by offering wages, whereas 
the Self can do nothing analogous. It is false awareness alone that 
can explain the notion of the Self as agent. 

Objection: The notion in question is not false but is, rather, figu- 
rative (gauna). 

Answer: <A figurative use of a word that primarily means x to 
apply to _y can only be appealed to if x and y are known to be different. 
If they are not known to be different we assume instead that there is 
an illusion present. For example, a man who, seeing something 
in the dusk, calls it a ‘‘post” when itis in fact a man, does not use 
figurative language, but, rather, usesl anguage expressive of his 
error. 

Finally, with respect to the argument (at E12-14 above) that 
merely hearing “the Self is Brahman”? doesn’t stop men from trans- 
migrating, since the scriptures enjoin us to consider and meditate 
on the Self in addition to hearing It, Samkara claims that the medi- 
tation and the consideration are parts of the process by which Brah- 
man comes to be known; they are not additional acts. 

(E24-25; T45-47) The Samkhya philosophers use inference to 
prove that there is a material cause of the world called pradhana (or 
prakrti) and interpret scripture as referring to that. They say that 
the cause of the creation of the world is the contact between selves 
(purusa) and the material cause (pradhdna). Pradhana is, according 
to them, a nonconscious (acefana) composite of the three gunas. They 
contend that the Upanisadic passages that the Advaitin interprets 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 129 


as referring to Brahman can be interpreted consistently as applying 
to pradhana. It is omnipotent, since all objects arise as modifications 
of it. Although nonconscious it can be said in a figurative sense to 
be omniscient; since what you think of as “knowledge”’ is really a 
property of the guna sattva and since it is only the pradhdna (and not 
purusa) that can be held to know something or everything, pradhdna 
is said in scripture to be “‘omniscient”’ as a way of praising its supreme 
sattvic nature. Omniscience can only mean the potentiality (Sakt) 
for knowing everything: if Brahman were to know everything always 
he would depend on the act of knowing, but if Brahman’s knowledge 
is not permanent (and knowledge is the essence of Brahman) then 
when knowledge ceases Brahman would also cease. Again, Brah- 
man prior to the creation of the world is without instruments of 
action, and knowledge cannot occur without the presence of the 
appropriate instruments of the act of knowing, that is, the body, 
senses, etc. Finally, pradhana, being composite, can become modified 
and thus be a material cause, whereas Brahman, being noncomposite, 
cannot be so. 

In answer, the Sitra (1.1.5) says: Since (the cause of the world 
is said in the Upanisads) to “‘see” (iksati), (the pradhdna) is not (that 
cause, because) it is not based on scriptural authority. 

(E25-28; T47-52) The Upanisads attribute consciousness to the 
cause of the world. The Samkhya argument that the pradhdna is 
omniscient because knowledge is a property of sativa won’t do because 
pradhdna is a state, not of pure sativa, but of balance among all three 
gunas. So we would have to call it “‘little-knowing” (because of the 
other gunas) as well as ‘“‘all-knowing” ! As for the argument about 
Brahman’s depending on his knowledge unless he is only capable of 
omniscience, there is no difficulty in Brahman’s knowledge being 
essential to Him, any more than the fact that the sun gives off light 
by nature makes the sun depend on its light. As for what Brahman 
knows prior to creation, He knows name-and-form, and He needs 
no body, senses, etc., to know, any more than the sun needs anything 
else in order to shine. On the other hand the transmigrating self 
requires a body before knowledge can arise, since it is governed by 
avidya. 

Objection: Scripture says there is no transmigrating self other 
than God. How then can you say that the one requires a body for 
knowledge but not the other? 

Answer: True, they are not different in reality. But just as 
akaga is limited by adjuncts (upaédhi) such as jars, caves, etc., but the 
resulting spaces are not different from akéfa, so the Lord is limited 


130 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


by the body, senses and so on, but the result (the transmigrating self) 
is not different from the Lord. The ideas that there are separate 
spaces or separate Selves respectively are just false ideas, born of our 
failure to discriminate the Self from its adjuncts. 

To return for a moment to the last of the Samkhya’s original objec- 
tions, to the effect that only a composite like pradhdnacan be material 
cause, we reply that pradhana isnot endorsed by scripture; our positive 
arguments for Brahman’s being the material cause will come later 
(in Book Two). 

(E28-29; T52-54) Sdamkhya : Nonconscious things are sometimes 
figuratively spoken of as conscious (‘‘the riverbank is inclined to fall’’) ; 
in the same manner pradhdna is spoken of figuratively as conscious 
since it performs actions, just as in scripture fire and water are figu- 
ratively spoken of as (if) conscious (‘‘the fire thought; the water thought). 

Answer (1.1.6): If (the consciousness of the world-cause is) 

said to be figurative, no, because of the use of the word “‘Self”’ (in 
scripture to apply to the world-cause), 
Scripture, for example, Chdndogya Upanisad V1.8.7 and elsewhere 
(‘that art thou, Svetaketu’’), identifies the world-cause as the Self 
and affirms the identity of that Self with Svetaketu, who is certainly 
conscious. As for the attribution of consciousness to fire and water, 
that certainly is figurative, since there is no independent reason— 
as there is in the casein question— for retaining the literal sense, and 
good reason, from common sense, to adopt a figurative one. 

(E30-31; T54-57) Sdmkhya: The fact that the word “Self” is 
used to denominate the world-cause isnot sufficient for your purpose, 
since that word itself is frequently used figuratively, as when a king 
says of his servant “that man is my (other) ‘Self’”’; since pradhana 
is the servant of the purusa it may be termed ‘“‘Self’ in that sense. 

Answer (J.1.7) : (Pradhana is not the Self) because it is taught 

that there is release for one who takes his stand on That (that is, 
Brahman or Being.) 
If the pradhana were truly the Self, then scripture, when it teaches 
Svetaketu “that art thou,” would be telling him that he is noncon- 
scious, and he would conclude that liberation is not possible for him. 
We should not suppose that scripture would provide such a misleading 
teaching. Furthermore, we should not assume figurative meaning 
unless there is a clear-cut and well-recognized distinction between the 
primary object and its analogue. 

1.1.8 (E31-32; 157-58). And (the pradhdna cannot be the 
Self) because it is not referred to (in scripture) as something to be 
avoided, 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 131 


If pradhéna is Being (Brahman) but not the Self, and if “that art 
thou”’ refers tothe pradhana, the teacher (speaking through scripture) 
would eventually say that one should distinguish the two; but in fact 
he says the opposite. 

1.1.9 (E32-33; T59-60). Further, (the Self is not the pradhéna) 

because it is said to ‘“‘go to” (the Self in sleep). 
Chandogya Upanisad V1.8.1 tells us that in sleep a man’s self (jiva) 
becomes united with Brahman. (There is an etymological explana- 
tion involved.) But the conscious Self cannot become united with 
the unconscious pradhdna. 

1.1.10-11 (E33-34; T60-61). Further, because (the Vedanta 
texts) agree (that the world-cause is conscious Brahman, that cause 
cannot be pradhdna), and (sitra 11) because scripture (states it, that 
is, that Brahman is the cause of the world). 

Compare Svetdsvatara Upanisad VI.9. 

(E34-43; T61-77. This section is known as the Anandamayi section.), 

Question: Since the main thesis of Vedanta is now established 
why does the work go on further ? 

Answer: Brahman is understood in two ways: as qualified by 
adjuncts—different kinds of name-and-form; and as the opposite of 
that, that is, free from all adjuncts. Many passages show this. The 
first is Brahman viewed from the perspective of avidyd; the. second is 
Brahman viewed from the perspective of vidya. We are taught that 
in worshiping the first we get different results according to the mode 
of worship determined by the adjuncts distinguishing the Lord. 
Now when we turn to the question of liberation, the question arises 
which form of Brahman must be known to gain liberation, and whe- 
ther it is devotion or knowledge that leads us to release, and how that 
can be. Further refutation of opposing views will also be set 
forth. 

1.1.12 (E£36-37; T64-66). (The Self) consisting of bliss (is the 

Highest Self) because of the repetition (of the word “bliss’’). 
In Taittiriya Upanisad 11.1.5 scripture says that the Self consisting of 
knowledge (vijfana) is different from the Self consisting of bliss 
(dnanda). ‘This Self of bliss is said to experience joy and be em- 
bodied, so it maybe thought that it must be merely the transmigrating 
self and not the Highest Self. But, because scripture repeatedly 
uses the word “‘bliss” to describe the Highest Self, we must assume 
that in this passage too the Highest Self is being mentioned, and we 
shall have to explain the references to experiencing and to embodi- 
ment as applying to the self of knowledge, etc., or as being a secondary 
usage, 


132 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objection : A self ‘‘consisting of” bliss cannot be the Highest Self 
since it is composite. 

1.1.13-19 (E37-43; T66-77). Answer: The objection does not 
stand, since the word ‘“‘consisting of”? (maya) need not involve com- 


> 


position but instead may suggest “‘being full of (bliss). Scripture 
says Brahman is the cause of bliss, and the context of the passage 
leaves no doubt which Brahman is meant, namely, the supreme Self 
and not the other (individual self [jiva] ). That the reference is 
not to the jiva is shown by the explicit declaration of scripture. 
Incidentally, the attribution of consciousness, indeed of desire, in the 
passage in question (from the Taztttiriya Upanisad) shows that we 
surely cannot be talking about pradhdna. Finally, since scripture 
teaches that the jiva gains union with That, that is, the Self of bliss, 
that Self cannot be either jiva or pradhdna. 

Samkara’s exposition of these sitras initially clarifies the meaning 
reflected in the exposition given above, but in his comments following 
siitra 19 he provides a different interpretation and debates the first 
one at some length. According to this alternative interpretation 
siitras 12 through 19 areaddressed to Taitiiriya Upanisad 11.5.1, which 
mentions Brahman as the “‘tail’’ and “‘support’”’ of the Self of bliss. 
The problem is : how can Brahman be a mere member of the Self— 
isn’t it the principal, not the appendage? The sitras answer yes, 
because scripture says so. The suffix-‘‘maya” is analyzed as involving 
pracurya, which the previous interpretation took as meaning “‘being 
full of? but on this second interpretation is a technical term meaning 
a stylistic device. The point of the sitra in which itis mentioned is 
to explain why II.5.1 speaks of Brahman as “tail” : the answer is 
that it’s merelya manner of speaking, a device, and not to be taken 
seriously. Since Brahman is spoken of as the cause (the sitras go on) 
it cannot be a mere appendage. And so forth. 

1.1.20 (E43-46; T77-81). (What is spoken of in Chandogya Upa- 
nisad 1.6.6ff. as) the one within (the sun and the eye is the Highest 
Lord), because (His) properties are taught (in that passage). 

Opponent : That Upanisad is speaking of some transmigrating self, 
since it attributes hair, fingernails, and eyes to this person, since he is 
spoken ofas spatially located, and since his power appears to be limited. 

Answer : No, it refers to the Highest Lord. ‘Freedom from all 
sin (papma)’’ can only be attributed to God, as wellas being the cause 
of all. As for the attribution of bodily qualities, a location and limited 
powers, these are appropriate descriptions of that same God when 
He presents Himself as an object of devotion and meditation with 
a body formed out of maya. 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 133 


1.1.21 (E46; T81). And (God is) other (than an individual 
transmigrating self whose body is the sun), because the difference 
is taught (in scripture). 

The scripture in question is Brhadaranyaka Upanisad I11.7.9. 

1.1.22 (E46-48; T81-84). Akafa (is Brahman) since its marks 
(are mentioned in Chdndogya Upanisad 1.9). 

Opponent: In this passage the word ‘“‘akdfa’? means a particular 
elemental substance, since that is what the word commonly means 
and since the properties attributed to it in the passage fit the properties 
ascribed to that elemental substance. 

Answer: No, because the passage doesn’t say that dkdfa is the 
cause of only some things but of all things, and only Brahman can 
be so described, certainly not that elemental substance. 

1.1.23 (E48-50; T84-87). For the same reason the life breath 
(préna) (in Chandogya Upanisad 1.10-11) (is Brahman). 

The passage in question once again speaks of characteristic marks 
of Brahman qualifying what is referred to by another word here 
““‘brana.”” 

1.1.24-27 (E50-56; T87-97). (In Chandogya Upanisad 111.13.7, 
the word) “‘light” (indicates Brahman) because of the mention of 
feet. If it be objected that (Brahman is) not (the subject of this 
passage) because the meter (chanda) is named, no !—because by that 
(naming) consciousness is directed (toward Brahman); it is so also 
elsewhere. So Brahman is the subject, since Brahman is the only 
thing that can have beings, etc., as its feet. There is no reason to 
suppose that both passages (Chdndogya Upanisad 111.12.6 and III.13.7) 
do not refer to Brahman. 

1.1.28-31 (E56-62; T97-106). The life breath is Brahman, because 
that is what is indicated (in Kausitaki Upanisad III.1 and) in many 
different passages. Just because Indra says that he is breath doesn’t 
disprove this: just like Vamadeva, he must have gained insight 
through scripture. 


FIRST CHAPTER, SECOND SECTION 


1.2.1-8 (E62-69; T107-116). (The one who consists of mind, 
spoken of in Chandogya Upanisad I11.14, is Brahman) because what 
(that passage teaches) is well known everywhere; because the passage 
attributes qualities appropriate to Brahman though not to the jiva; 
because agent and act are separated; because the words used for each 
are different; and because of smrti. 

Objection: The passage talks about a self ‘“‘in the heart’—that 
must be the jiva, not Brahman. 


134 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer : No, because Brahman “‘in the heart’ is a form in which 
we are to meditate upon Brahman, and because it is like the case of 
Gkasa. 

Objector : But jiva and Brahman are said to be identical. 

Answer: No, they are different. Although Brahman and jiva 
are in a certain sense identical, it does not follow that Brahman 
enjoys anything. In respect to the possibility of enjoyership they 
are opposite. 

1.2.9-10 (E69-70; T116-118). The eater (in Katha Upanisad 
1.2.25) (is Brahman), because he is said to ‘“‘eat’’ what is both movable 
and immovable, and because of the context. 

J.2.11-12 (E70-74; T118-123). The two in the cave (in Katha 
Upanisad 1.3.1) are the jiva and the Highest Self, because it is seen and 
because of the qualities (mentioned in the passage). 

Objector: In the passage the two in the cave are said to drink the 
results of their actions, and this makes it impossible to suppose the 
passage refers to either the buddhi, which is nonconscious, or to the 
Highest Self, which cannot drink anything. 

Answer : One can explain this by appeal to figurative usage. 

Objector : The two are the buddhi and the jiva, because ‘‘the cave”’ 
must be the body or the heart, and both buddhi and jiva can appro- 
priately be said to enter there, but not Brahman. 

Answer: As is seen (in ordinary life), we sometimes speak this way, 
for example, we say “‘the men with the umbrella are walking” but 
don’t mean they all have an umbrella. Anyway, many passages 
speak of the Highest Self as in the cave. 

1.2.13-17 (E74-79; T123-130). The person within the eye (in 
Chandogya Upanisad IV.15.1) is Brahman, because the properties 
attributed are appropriate, because locations are attributed to Him 
(in scripture), because of the context, and because of inferences from 
other scriptural passages. That person cannot be some other self, 
because of impermanency and impossibility, that is, this person inthe 
eye cannot be someone reflected in the eyeball or the jiva, or some 
deity, since they are impermanent, and because the qualities imputed 
in the passage are not compatible with those other selves. 

1.2.18-20 (79-81; T130-135). The inner ruler (in Brhadaran- 

yaka Upanisad I11.7.1) is Brahman, for His properties are mentioned; 
it is not pradhdna, nor is it the jiva. 
It cannot be pradhdna since pradhdna is, according to Samkhya, 
nonconscious, but the Upanisad (at III.7.23) says this inner ruler 
sees. Why can’t it be the jiva then? Because the Upanisad ex- 
plicitly distinguishes the inner ruler from the individual self. 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 135 


1.2.21-23 (E82-86; T135-142). “That which is not seen” (in 
Mundaka Upanisad 1.1.5-6) is Brahman, not the jiva or pradhana, 
because of the properties and form attributed to him (in the passage), 

Sdmkhya : The passage refers to pradhdna, because the subject is 
said to be the source of all beings (bhitayoni) ; pradhdna spins out 
creation like a spider. Further, the qualities mentioned here are 
compatible with a nonintelligent creatrix; attributes such as knowl- 
edge and perception are attributed to something higher (aksara). 

Samkara : No, because later in the same Upanisad that same all- 
knowing Being is said to be the material cause as well. As for 
“aksara,”’ this term refers to Brahman. We have no great objection 
to using the term ‘‘pradhana’’ to refer to that which is the potentiality 
of names and forms, abides in God, forms His limiting adjunct, etc., 
provided it not be supposed that it is an independent thing. 

1.2.24-32 (E86-93; T143-153). Vaigvanara (in Chandogya Upani- 
sad V.11.18) is Brahman, because the two terms are such as to indi- 
cate that, and because of an inference from smrii. 

Objection : No. ‘‘Vaigvanara”’ means something different, something 
that dwells within, that is, the digestive mechanism (a kind of 
“‘fire’’), 

Answer: No. The Highest Lord (Brahman) is taught as present 
in the digestive mechanism, and also other things are said of Vaisva- 
nara that can’t be said of digestion. For the same reason Vaisva- 
nara is not the fire-god or the fiery element. Jaiminidoesn’t think the 
term ‘‘Vaigvanara” need have anything todo with fire, even as a 
limiting condition. 

Objection : The Upanisad says that this ‘““Vaisvanara” has spatial 
size; how can it refer to Brahman ? 

Different answers are ascribed to Agmarathya (‘because the size 
is a feature of the Lord’s manifestation”), Badari (“‘because the Lord 
is to be meditated upon in a form with size’), and to Jaimini 
(“because He is to be identified imaginatively with spatially located 
parts for the purposes of meditation”). Anyway, the Jabalas (i.e., 
the abala Upanisad) say that the Lord is in the space between the 
forehead and the chin. 


FIRST CHAPTER, THIRD SECTION 


1.3.1-7 (E93-98; T154-162). (In Mundaka Upanisad 11.2.5) the 
“support of heaven, earth, etc.” is Brahman, because of the use of 
the word ‘‘own”’ (self), and because it is specified as what is to be 
gained by the liberated. The phrase cannot refer to pradhana or 


136 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


prana because they are declared to be different and because the 
whole context indicates the proper interpretation; besides, the passage 
(in the Mundaka) about (the two birds) one of whom stands and one 
of whom eats leaves no doubt as to the meaning. 

Opponent: The passage cannot refer to Brahman, since it speaks 
of the ‘‘support of heaven, earth, etc.’ as ‘“‘the bridge of the immor- 
tals,’ and Brahman cannot be a bridge, since there is nothing beyond 
for it to be a span toward. 

Answer: It’s a bridge in the sense that it binds, not in complete 
analogy to a bridge over a stream. 

The two birds must be the Lord (which stands) and the individual 
self (which eats). 

Objector : But then the jiva is different from the Self, despite your 
denials. 

Answer: It is not the purpose of the Upanisad to teach the highest 
truth about the individual self here; rather it concerns the nature of 
Brahman. The individual self is erroneously distinguished from 
Brahman, just as limited parts of space are erroneously distinguished 
from alJ-pervading space. 

1.3,8-9 (E98-102; T162-169). Objector: In Chandogya Upanisad 
VII.23-24 we are told that the “Bhiman” (“earth”) is that where 
one sees nothing else, hears and understands nothing else. The 
reference here must be to prana, since the passage concludes a series 
of questions about what is greater than the preceding item, but when 
we get up to frana no such question is asked; instead we are told that 
one who views prdna as greater speaks most wisely, and, further, 
that prdna is the greatest because itis what remains awake during 
deep sleep. It is also described as “‘bliss,”? ‘‘immortality.” 

Answer; The “Bhiman” is Brahman (not prdna) since it is some- 
thing superior to deep sleep and the bliss of deep sleep belongs to 
pbréna, and because of the characteristics attributed. The one who 
speaks most wisely is one who speaks truly, not one who speaks about 
prana; in the passage, Narada asks for truth and Sanatkumara leads 
him up to the knowledge of Bhiiman, that is, Brahman, which must 
therefore be the truth. Further, that which one sees and hears, 
understanding nothing else, surely must be Brahman, not prdna; 
compare other Upanisadic statements for confirmation. Likewise 
the other attributes—bliss, immortality—belong to Brahman, not 
to prdana. 

I.3.10-12 (E102-104; T169-171). Objector : In Brhadéranyaka Upa- 
nisad III.8.7-8, the word “‘aksara’”’ indicates that the syllable (‘“‘om” 
is the Self of all, following Panini. 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 137 


Answer: No. The aksara is Brahman (not the syllable), since it 
supports all things up to the sky (or space) and does so on command 
of the aksara, that is, the Lord. Further, aksara is described by unambi- 
guous attributes. 

1.3.13 (E104-105; T171-174). Objector : In Pragna Upanisad V.2, 
it is the lower Brahman that is being discussed, for the rewards offered 
to one who knows Him are confined to a certain world, which would 
be inappropriate if we were speaking of the omnipresent Highest Lord. 

Answer: No. (The reference is to the Highest Self,) since He is 
referred to as the object of sight. Seeing is different from meditating: 
a something that is the object of sight must be real, whereas in medi- 
tation one can imagine things in various forms. Here, however, 
the object that is to be meditated upon (the Self) is identified as the 
object of sight as well and so must be the really Real, the Highest 
Brahman. 

1.3.14-18 (E106-111; 1174-182). Objection: In Chandogya Upa- 
nisad VIII.1.1 we hear of a “‘small space” (dahara) in a lotus in a 
palace in the city of Brahman. The reference here must be to the 
element dkdfa, that is, space or “ether,” given what is said about its 
size and position. 

Answer : The dahara is Brahman, because of what the passage goes 
on to say, that is, that the individual selves go into the world of 
Brahman — this going being an inferential mark that dahara refers to 
this Brahman world. Further, this small space is said to support the 
worlds. Again, in other passages words suggesting “‘space” are used 
to designate Brahman. 

Objector: Then, since in VIII.3.4 the dahara is spoken of as having 
risen from his earthly body, it must be the individual self, not Brah- 
man. 

[.3.18. The individual self is not meant, because that is impossible. 
Attributes like freedom from evil cannot be attributed to the jiva. 

Objector: Surely they can, as witness Prajapati’s teachings in 
Chandogya Upanisad VIII.7-11, where the individual self is taught as 
being free from evil. 

1.3.19 (E111-115; T183-191). (In Chandogya Upanisad VIII.7-11) 
the reference is to the jiva insofar as its true nature has become 
manifest (as Brahman). That is, Prajapati is speaking of the realized 
self, which has discovered itself to be the Highest Self, which is to 
say that he is speaking of Brahman, not the lower self. 

Objection : How can we speak of the “true nature” of Brahman, 
which is alleged to be unchanging and eternal; how can It have any 
other form than Its own true one? 


138 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer: True, Brahman cannot lack Its true nature. But just 
as a pure crystal, without lacking its true nature, is seenas red by an 
observer who fails to see the distinction between it and the color of 
some limiting adjunct (e.g., a red flower), likewise Brahman’s true 
nature is “‘discovered”? by an observer—the individual self—who 
learns to discriminate that nature from its adjuncts. Prajapati’s 
instruction has to be understood in this way. The whole process by 
which the individual self discovers its true nature as the Highest Lord 
is analogous to that by which an imagined snake becomes a rope as 
soon as the observer has discovered its true nature. 

Some of us (?) believe the individual self to be real. The whole 
purpose of these siitras is to disprove this view by citing scripture and 
reinforcing those citations with arguments. 

1.3.20-21 (E116-118; T191-195). The reference (of dahara) 
is not (to space or the jiva but to Brahman). We have already ex- 
plained that the Lord may be termed “small”? (in 1.2.7 above). 

Opponent: In Mundaka Upanisad 11.2.10 and Katha Upanisad V.15 
the shining one mentioned must be some luminous substance and 
not Brahman. The passage speaks of something which, though 
luminous, causes other luminous bodies not to shine. For example, 
the moon and stars do not shine when the sun is shining, so that which 
causes the sun not to shine must likewise be another luminous body. 

1.3.22-23 (E116-118; T192-195). Answer: No. Because it is said 
“After Him, when he shines, everything shines’ (it must be the 
Highest Self and not a luminous body referred to), and because of 
the words ‘‘of Him”? (in the passage “by the light of Him all this is 
lighted’’); moreover, smrtt (Bhagavadgitaé XV.6-12) speaks of the 
Highest Self as universal light. 

The sentence “after Him, when he shines, everything shines’ can 
only make sense if the reference is to the Highest Self. For it is not 
evident that any other luminous body makes the sun not to shine. 
But what is evident is that nothing can be known to shine except 
through the functioning of the light of knowledge itself, which lights 
up all. 

1.3.24-25 (E118-120; T195-198). The person the size of a thumb 
(in Katha Upanisad I1.1.12-13) is not the “self ofknowledge”’ (vijiténat- 
man) but is the purusa, the Highest Self. It is appropriate to speak 
of the Self as having a size appropriate to dwelling in the human heart, 
since after all only humans are entitled to study the Vedas. 

1.3.26-33 (E120-135; 1198-223). Not that the gods cannot 
seek release and practice meditation, etc., leading to it, for they have 
bodies and we hear in the Upanisads of a god like Indra living as a 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 139 


disciple with another god (Prajapati), etc. Granted, they cannot 
sacrifice to gods, because they are gods! They can, however, be 
present at sacrifices made to them, since they are capable of assuming 
various forms at once. 

An objector finds an inconsistency between holding that the gods 
have bodies and the proof of the Vedas’ authoritativeness, in Mimamsa- 
siitra 1.1.5, on the basis of the eternal connections between words 
and their meanings. The answer is offered that gods, men, and the 
world originate from fabda, word (specifically, the Vedas). But, 
says the objector, I thought yousaid (in stra 1.1.2 above) that the 
world originates from Brahman ! And anyway, he continues, it 
is evident that words are given to things only after the things have 
come into being—so the notion of eternal connections between words 
and meanings is in any case false. 

In answer Samkara develops his theory of the meaning of words. 
First, words are connected, not with individual things, but with 
their kinds or species (dkrti); since the gods also fall into species, 
they constitute no difficulty. Second, the sense in which the world 
arises from sabda docs not entail that sabda is the world’s material 
cause; that cause is Brahman, as affirmed in 1.1.2. We know by 
perception and inference—that is, from Sruti and smrti—that words 
precede things; it is so affirmed over and over again in the Upani- 
sads and elsewhere. 

Specifically, however, what is the nature of a word that it can 
“precede” and so ‘‘create” the world ? Two hypotheses are reviewed 
and rejected, The first is that of the sphofavddin, who presents argu- 
ments to show that the letters it contains cannot comprise a word if 
that word is to be endowed with the required powers. Knowledge 
of the letters comes serially, and the earlier parts of the sequence 
are lost before the later ones arise. Therefore the word must be a 
unitary meaning, which we grasp in one mental act after having 
heard the several sounds. The second is the view of the Mimamsaka 
(Upavarsa), that the letters are after all the word, since letters are 
not transitory individuals but permanent properties whose presence 
can be recognized in a single act that requires no additional sphoja 
to be postulated. 

Objection: After each kalpa a pralaya or dissolution ensues, after 
which an entirely new production takes place; how then can the 
connection between word and thing be eternal, even on your view ? 

Answer: It is like going to sleep; when we wake up there is anew 
creation, but in the same forms and with the same names as before. 

Objector: But mahdpralaya—complete dissolution of the entire 


140 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


world—isn’t like merely going to sleep; we can’t merely take up in 
the next kalpa where we left off before. 

Answer: For the gods it is just like the temporary cessation in 
sleep. Furthermore, the karma ofbeings in the world prior to pralaya 
cause the creation of a world after pralayain which that karma can be 
worked off. 

The last three siitras return to the question of the capacity of the 
gods to have personalities and know Brahman. 

1.3.34-38 (E135-139; T223-229). Sidras, however, are not entitled 
to Brahman-knowledge, since they do not study the Vedas, donot 
receive the upanayana, etc. Nevertheless, some sadras do acquire such 
knowledge by other means than Vedic study, admits Samkara. 

I.3.39-43 (E139-144; T229-236). A few more passages are studied 
and interpreted as referring to Brahman. 


FIRST CHAPTER, FOURTH SECTION 


1.4.1-7 (E144-155; T237-252). In this section Samkara returns 
to deal with the Samkhya system. There are texts, says the Samkhya, 
that suggest that pradhana is after all the material cause of the world— 
for example, in the Katha Upanisad I.3.11 we seem to be told that 
“beyond the buddhi is prakrti and beyond that is purusa.’ Thus our 
Samkhya view is based on Vedic authority. Samkara labors to 
show that the passage need not be interpreted that way, since the 
term used is not ‘‘prakrti”? (or “‘pradhdna’’?) but rather ‘‘avyakta.”’ 
Samkara suggests that “‘avyakta” here refers to the body that is being 
compared to a chariot in which rides the Self. Not the gross body, 
of course, but the subtle body is intended, and itis called ‘‘avyakta”’ 
because it is the potential state of what will become actualized in the 
gross state. 

Objector: Then you admit our contention, for that is precisely 
what we mean by ‘“‘fradhdna,”’ that is, a potential form of the world. 

Answer: Not precisely, for you think that the potential form is 
independently capable of producing the world, whereas our view is 
that its capacity is dependent on God (faramesvara). Of course we 
admit, as you do, that some form of the world exists prior to its gross 
manifestation. But in my (Samkara’s) view this “potential form” 
or subtle body is in fact avidyé, made of maya, having God as its 
abode, a great sleep (mahdsupti) in which the transmigrating selves 
(jiva) wait free of their particular characters. It is also sometimes 
called ‘‘akasa’’ or ‘‘aksara’”’. Another difference between my view of 
the avyakia and yours is that, where you suppose the pradhdna needs 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 141 


to be distinguished from and by the purusa to achieve liberation, 
nothing in the text (the Katha) suggests this; rather, the Upanisad 
goes on to advise one to perceive what is without qualities and thus 
one will be ‘‘freed from the jaws of death’”—but Samkhya does not 
suppose that by merely perceiving pradhdna one will be liberated, so 
the passage is after all not referring to pradhana but rather to the 
Highest Self, meditation upon which will result in liberation— 
which is just my view and not yours. 

1.4.8-14 (E155-161; T252-263). Svetafvatara Upanisad IV.5 is 
not a reference to pradhdna. Furthermore, in Brhaddranyaka Upanisad 
IV.4.17 the “‘five groups of five” does not refer to the twenty-five 
Samkhya categories, for those categories cannot be subdivided into 
pentads. 

1.4.14-15 (E161-165; T263-268). Objection: It is impossible to 
prove that the Upanisadic texts refer to Brahman as the origin, etc. 
of the world, because these texts contradict each other. 

Answer: The texts are entirely consistent in their description of 
the ultimate cause of the world, although they do differ in their 
accounts of the specific order in which creation comes about. But 
this inconsistency is of no importance, since the ways of the world are 
not what scripture teaches, and man’s welfare doesn’t depend on 
their so teaching. 

Certain texts (for example, Taittiriya Upanisad 11.1; Chandogya 
Upanisad 111.19.1; Brhaddranyaka Upanisad 1.4.7,) seem to say that 
the world was created from nonbeing (asat), but in order to fit the 
contexts we must assume that the reference is to nirguna Brahman, 
which precedes saguna Brahman. 

1.4.16-18 (165-168; T268-274). Kausitaki Upanisad IV.19 is 
interpreted. It does not refer to pradna, and according to Samkara 
the sitras also refute the notion that it refers to the individual self. 
The reference is rather to Brahman. 

1.4.19-22 (E168-174; T274-283). The discussion here is about 
the well-known text in which YAjfiavalkya counsels his wife Maitreyi 
in Brhadaranyaka Upanisad IV.5.6 to know dtman. The objector thinks 
the reference is to jivdtman since it is that self that can be “dear” to 
us in the way a husband, etc., can be; further, the passage concludes 
‘how should one know the knower ?” and the individual self is the 
knower. 

Answer: The context requires that the reference be construed as 
applying to the Highest Self, not the jiva. It is only knowledge of 
the Highest Self that provides immortality, and it is only by knowl- 
edge of the Highest Self that everything becomes known, 


142 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Sutras 20-22 refer to the views of three ancient sages, Asmarathya, 
Audulomi, and Kagakrtsna, concerning the relation between the 
individual self and the Highest Self. Samkara takes it that Agma- 
rathya’s view is that the individual self should be viewed as nondiffer- 
ent from the Highest Selfwhereas Audulomi’s is that the individual 
self, initially different from the Highest Self, becomes identical with 
it at the time of liberation. Kasakrtsna, however, holds the correct 
view, which is that the two selves are absolutely nondifferent. It is 
correct because it is the only view of the three on which liberation 
results from Self-knowledge alone. 

1.4.23-27 (E174-178; T283-289). Opponent: Brahman is only 
the efficient (nimitia) cause of the world, and not the material cause 
(prakrti), because, one, efficient causes, but not material causes, are 
capable of consciousness, two, we refer to efficient causes, but not 
material ones, as “Lords” and, three, the material cause should 
resemble its effects in nature, so that the world—having parts, non- 
sentient and impure—should have as material cause something with 
parts, nonsentient and impure, and Brahman is the opposite of that. 

Answer: Scriptural passages clearly indicate that Brahman is 
the material cause as well as the efficient cause; if it were not so we 
could not know everything by knowing Brahman; the Self could not 
reflect ‘““Let me be many’’; the Self could not transform (parindma) 
itself into its own self. As for objection one, it is an argument depend- 
ing on inference, which in turn depends on ordinary experience; 
but we are speaking of matters beyond ordinary experience, so that 
scripture here holds sway, and it tells us that the cause of the world is 
conscious. 

Special and prior attention has been given to Samkhya theories, 
because Samkhya, like Advaita, holds the theory that the effect 
pre-exists in the cause (satkdryavdda). Theories that assume the 
opposite need also to be considered, however. 


SECOND CHAPTER, FIRST SECTION 


II.1.1-2 (E179-182; T290-296). The purpose of this chapter is to 
refute objections to our doctrine that are founded on nonauthoritative 
texts (smrli) or on reasoning. 

Objection : Certain traditional texts, called smrti, would have no 
purpose unless we assume they are intended to tell us that pradhana 
is the cause of the world; for example, the Kapilasmrti (i.e., the 
Samkhya §astra). We need such texts to help us understand the 
Vedanta texts, and because such smrtis were composed by sage-like 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 143 


authorities we must believe what they say. If your view, that 
Brahman is the material cause of the world, were true, these smrtis 
would have no point; so, your view must be false. 

Answer: But there are other smrtis that teach our doctrine, and 
your thesis would leave no purpose for them! So that argument 
only produces a standoff, and then we have to choose, and naturally 
we must choose that thesis which is favored by scripture, as is enjoined 
by the Mimdmsdsitras. And we have shown that scripture favors 
our doctrine. 

Objection: Kapila and other sages have perfect knowledge and 
must therefore be considered authoritative. 

Answer: No. Any perfect knowledge, they have, depends on 
performance of dharma in conformity to Vedic injunctions; thus 
scripture, the Vedas, precedes those sages, and its meaning cannot 
be called into question by them. Furthermore, since the various 
alleged sages contradict each other, one can only decide by appeal 
to scripture. And anyway, there were various ‘‘Kapilas’—which 
one does the Svetdsvatara Upanisad refer to? It might not be the 
Samkhyin—there are lots of others. 

There is also a limit to the scope of the appeal to smrti, that is, it 
must speak of things that are known to either common sense experi- 
ence or are spoken of in the Vedas. Now Kapila’s smrti speaks of 
things like mahat, which are found in neither place; therefore it is 
untrustworthy and we need not trust it when it speaks of pradhdna 
either. We have seen how those passages in the Vedas that appear 
to speak of such things are to be interpreted: they do not speak of 
Samkhya things but rather of Vedanta topics. 

II.1.3 (E182-184; T296-299). Objection: In the Upanisads we 
find references to yoga practices, so the smrtt that expounds them 
(the Yogasiitras) should be accepted as authoritative. 

Answer: No, although that part of them which speaks in accord. 
ance with scripture can be accepted, it cannot be accepted as a whole 
for the reasons given in the previous section. 

Question: Why do you limit this claim to the Samkhya and Yoga 
smrtis; do not the arguments apply to all systems not based on scrip- 
ture? 

Answer: There is special room for confusion with respect to 
Samkhya and Yoga, since some of their tenets are identical with ours 
and since there is a Vedic passage (Svetdfvatara Upanisad V1.3) that 
might appear to corroborate the claims of those systems to 
authority. 

1J.1.4-11 (E184-198; T299-317). So much for objections to our 


144 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


view based on smrti. We now turn to those objections based on reason- 
ing (tarka). 

Question : How can reasoning even be relevant here ? The tenet 
in question is the Vedantin’s thesis that Brahman is both the efficient 
and material cause of the world, and with respect to Brahman as with 
respect to dharma, there is no other authority save scripture. 

Opponent answers: No, because Brahman, unlike dharma, is an 
existing thing (not one to be accomplished), and so other pramdnas 
besides scripture are relevant to it. In sucha case, where there is 
doubt as to the interpretation of scripture, one should choose that 
interpretation which best accords with the other pramdyas. After 
all, you hold that Brahman is finally realized through direct experience; 
reasoning, which provides knowledge of unseen objects on analogy 
with seen ones, is nearer to experience than scripture, which is entirely 
dependent on tradition. Too, scripture itself tells us that Brahman 
is to be reflected upon as wellas heard (Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 11.4.5). 
So, since reasoning is clearly relevant in this instance, we proceed 
now to deny your Advaita thesis on the basis of arguments. 

Brahman cannot be the material cause of the world, because the 
effect (the world) is entirely different from the cause (Brahman). 
The world is nonconscious (acetana) and impure (asuddha) and thus 
the opposite in character to Brahman. But in the world effects always 
resemble in character their material causes. That the world is 
impure and nonconscious is clear ; it consists of pleasure, frustration, 
and delusion, marks of impurity, and as bodies and organs it subserves 
the intentions of conscious beings, such subservience being a mark 
of nonconsciousness. 

Another objector (objecting to the first one) : Right you are; the 
effect must resemble its cause; and since Brahman, a conscious being, 
is its cause, the world too must be conscious. The reason why we do 
not perceive the consciousness in a lump of clay or a log is that they 
are asleep or in a faint—for when humans are in those states we don’t 
perceive their being conscious either. 

First objector answers : Well, but you haven’t explained the other 
disparity, concerning impurity. And anyway, you’ve asserted that 
the whole world is conscious on the basis solely of scripture, but scrip- 
ture doesn’t bear you out; it says that the world is partly conscious, 
partly not. Even though scripture frequently seems to attribute 
consciousness to material elements like fire and water, this is a mis- 
interpretation; that to which consciousness is attributed in such pas- 
sages is the presiding deity, not the material itself. So my objection 
to the Advaita tenet stands, 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 145 


Answer (beginning with II.1.6.) : In the world we do find that 
nonconscious effects arise from conscious causes, for example, from 
conscious humans, nonconscious hairs, etc., arise, and for that matter 
the reverse is true too : scorpions come from cowdung. An effect 
must have some disparate characteristics from its cause, otherwise 
it would be indistinguishable from it and be not an effect at all. So 
the general premise of your argument, that effects cannot differ from 
their causes, cannot be maintained. 

Earlier you argued that Brahman, unlike dharma, can be known by 
other pramanas. But that is mistaken, since Brahman has no percep- 
tible, and thus no inferential, marks by which it could be perceived 
or inferred. When the Brhaddranyaka Upanisad exhorts reasoning as 
well as hearing it does not mean that Brahman can be grasped by 
reasoning alone, but that one should use one’s head in understanding 
the implications of scriptural pronouncements. 

Finally, tw quogue ! If difference in properties makes it impossible 
for a conscious being, Brahman, to have nonconscious effects, then 
in the same way a nonconscious being, pradhana, cannot have con- 
scious effects—mahat, etc. 

Objection (11.1.7): If Brahman is the cause of the impure world, 
and It is pure, that world cannot exist in It. But your view on causa- 
tion is that the effect pre-exists in the cause, so you are caught in an 
inconsistency. 

Answer: No. Our view is that the effect only has its being in and 
through its cause, Brahman, and not otherwise. Therefore your talk 
of an effect ‘‘not existing before its origination” is empty talk about 
nothing. Or if it is about something, something that exists prior to 
its coming into being, then you cannot very well say that it doesn’t 
exist ! 

Objection (11.1.8) : (1) At the end ofa cycle, at the time of dis- 
solution of the world (fralaya, or here, dpiti), the impure world will 
be absorbed into Brahman and pollute it. (2) Furthermore, if the 
world loses its distinctions in Brahman at pralaya, the specific occasions 
for subsequent differentiations in the next cycle will be lost. And 
finally (3) we would have the untoward consequence that the muktas— 
the liberated selves—would be reborn again into the world. And 
you cannot maintain that the world remains distinct from Brahman 
at pralaya, since then there will be no pralaya and anyway it will violate 
your rule that an effect cannot exist apart from its cause. 

Answer (11.1.9) : Not so. (1) We find examples in experience 
of things that return to their original state without being visited by 
the qualities of their effects ; for example, clay that has been made 


146 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


into a pot and then returns to a state of mere clay docs not have the 
qualities of the pot. If any such thing were found, indeed, there 
would be no possibility of pralaya. Furthermore, why do you confine 
your argument to pralaya? The effect would pollute its cause all the 
time, were it not that, on our view, it is a mere superimposition of 
avidya, just as the illusion produced by a magician, or a dream, the 
fantasies of which do not affect the magician or the dreamer. Like- 
wise, the fantasies that appear in the waking, dreaming, and deep- 
sleep states do not touch the Highest Self, any more than the snake 
affects the rope for which it is mistaken. 

(2) Again, in deep sleep all distinctions are dissolved into the Self, 
but because of ignorance the old distinctions reappear as soon as one 
awakes. And that also explains why (3) the freed selves will not be 
reborn, since they have no ignorance that will determine future 
births. 

Anyway, the arguments the Samkhya urges against the Vedantins 
afflict his own system as much as theirs. If the world cannot arise 
from Brahman because it has different qualities, the same is true of 
pradhana, which lacks sounds, etc., and so cannot produce a world that 
has them. Pralaya presents parallel difficulties for Samkhya and 
Vedanta. 

Reasoning is an unstable foundation as a basis for understanding 
things that should be realized from scripture; for it is notorious how 
arguments may be found to contradict any thesis, and the most pro- 
found logical philosophers have contradicted one another. 

Objection: That cannot stand as a valid refutation of the utility 
of reasoning, for it is itself an instance of reasoning. Again if all 
reasoning were unstable practical affairs would be impossible, for we 
depend on predictions based on observed similarities to get through 
life. Again, reasoning is required in even understanding the scrip- 
ture. Finally, the fact that past logicians have contradicted each 
other is no reason why in future they should. 

Answer (1I.1.11) : No, for then there will be no liberation. No 
doubt reasoning works well for some things, but liberation is not a 
matter of perception and therefore cannot be reached by inference; 
scripture is the only means by which we can arrive at any knowledge 
of it. After all, everyone who argues about the nature of liberation 
agrees that it results from true knowledge, and true knowledge must 
be absolute, not changing all the time. You cannot say that the 
Samkhya view is accepted by everyone as truth, for many reject it. 
Nor can you collect all the logicians—past, present, and future— 
and achieve a consensus | The Vedas, however, being eternal, 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 147 


are not subject to this difficulty and can provide the perfectly true 
knowledge required. 

1.1.12 (E194-195; T317-318), In the same manner views based 
on reasoning, but with even less authority than the Samkhya (as, 
for example, the Vaisesika view), are refuted. 

IL.1.13 (E195-196; T318-320). Objection : When scripture is 
contradicted by another pramdna it indicates that its authority is being 
extended beyond its proper province, and it must give way to the other 
pramana, just as you Advaitins argue that reasoning should give way 
to scripture when it is incompetent to grasp things beyond its proper 
province. Very well : everyone knows the distinction between per- 
sons who enjoy things, for example, by eating them, and the things 
enjoyed by, for example, being eaten. Your view would rub out 
this distinction by making enjoyers and their objects identical. 
Therefore you should give up the view of Brahman being the material 
cause of the world. 

Answer: Your argument is based on the notion that nondifference 
entails the absence of distinctions. But it is not so in ordinary experi- 
ence—for example, foam, waves, and bubbles are distinct from each 
other although they are all nondifferent from the ocean. Likewise, 
enjoyers and their objects are distinct from each other although they 
are nondifferent from Brahman. 

1I.1.14-20 (E196-208; T320-343). To pursue the same point 
further, scripture indicates clearly that the distinctions among effects 
are merely words, the result of speech, whereas the truth is that these 
effects are really nondifferent from the cause. Thus in Chdndogya 
Upanisad V1.1.4 we are told that just as a lump of clay, a single cause, 
gives rise to multiple effects by virtue of being called “pot,” etc., so 
it is with Brahman and its effects, the world. The effects are unreal; 
only the cause is real, and the effects are only real insofar as they are 
modifications of that cause. Otherwise we couldn’t understand the 
teaching that by knowledge of the one cause all the effects become 
known. So, just as the parts of space limited in jars, etc., are not differ- 
ent from space itself, or just as the mirage is not different from the 
surface of the desert, so the world is not different from Brahman; 
in each case the effects have no existence except in dependence on the 
cause. 

Objection : It is more plausible to explain the situation as involving 
identity-in-difference. Just as the ocean is one gua ocean but many 
qua waves, foam, and bubbles, or just as the clay is one qua clay but 
many qua pots, etc., so Brahman is one qua Brahman but many qua 
the manifold world. Then knowledge of the unity of Brahman leads 


148 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to liberation, whereas knowledge of the manifoldness of the world 
leads to both the ordinary and Vedic doctrines about action. 

Answer: No, for then both kinds of knowledge would be equally 
true, since both unity and multiplicity are equally true, and there 
would be no reason why knowledge of the former should lead uniquely 
to liberation. Scripture indicates the unreality of the effects as well 
as their nondifference from Brahman. 

Objection: If what you say is true, then the pramdnas such as per- 
ception, inference, etc., become invalid, since there are in reality no 
objects for them to grasp. Furthermore, scriptural injunctions will 
lose their force, since they require the existence of objects that on 
your view are nonexistent. Finally, the entire science of liberation 
(moksasastra) is undermined if the distinction between pupil and 
teacher is unreal; and if liberation is not real, what good is your 
doctrine ? 

Answer: As long as we are not liberated all these distinctions are 
accepted as real and the pramdnas , injunctions, and distinctions refer- 
red to can operate in precisely the way we ordinarily suppose. When 
we become liberated it is as if we awake from a dream—all the dream 
distinctions are set aside as unreal at that point, whereas a moment 
before, in the dream, they were accepted without question. 

Objection: But then how can the Vedanta texts, if untrue, tell us the 
truth about Brahman ? 

Answer: We sometimes find that unreal causes produce real 
effects, for example, a man bitten by a fancied snake may die, or a 
person who bathes in a dream may feel cleansed. 

Objector: But these results are unreal ! 

Answer: Yes, but the awareness one has of them is quite real. 
When one wakes from a dream he says that the things he dreamt of 
are unreal, but he doesn’t deny he dreamt. (This also shows that 
consciousness, not the body, is our real Self.) 

We think Brahman has multiplicity in it by nature because in our 
worldly state we are visited by desires that call for distinctions 
between desire, desirer, and things desired; once the unity of Brahman 
is appreciated, however, no further desires arise and thus the condi- 
tions leading to drawing distinctions are removed. Various passages 
from scripture support this view. 

Objection: If Brahman is without modifications then how can that 
Brahman be described as the Lord, controller of the world, since there 
is no room for a distinction between controller and controlled ? 

Answer : The Lord’s qualities, such as omniscience, omnipotence, 
etc., depend on avidyd, the limitations of name-and-form, just as the 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 149 


particular parts of space depend on the limiting adjuncts like pots, 
etc. But none of these qualities—omniscience, etc.—belongs to 
Brahman, which is without any adjuncts whatever. 

Further (II.1.15), it is only when the cause exists that we perceive 
the effect, and this relationship shows the nondifference of cause and 
effect. 

Objection : We find things in the world that are distinct, but one 
depends upon the other—for example, smoke depends on fire. 

Answer: No, since we sometimes see smoke even after the fire 
has gone out! And in any case our idea is chat the dependence in 
question is more a matter of the awareness af something depending on 
the awareness of (what is supposed to be) something else—when that 
relationship holds we have nondifference, not otherwise. And that 
relationship does not hold between smoke and fire. (An alternative 
explanation of the sitra is also offered.) 

Further (II.1.16), if something x is different from a_y that precedes 
x, then x cannot arise from »—for example, oil does not arise from 
sand. Thus, since any effect x must be nondifferent from its cause y 
prior to its production, it must be inferred that it remains nondifferent 
after its production. 

Objection (II.1.17) : But scripture sometimes describes the effect 
as nonexistent prior to its production. 

Answer: That is not what those texts mean. What is meant is 
that prior to the effect’s production it lacks properties that it takes on 
at the time of production, not that it doesn’t exist at all then. 

II.1.18 (Here is an argument for satkdryavdda): If asatkdrya- 
vada were true, since the effect is nonexistent prior to its production 
what would stop our producing curds from clay or pots from milk ? 

Opponent (the asatkaryavddin) : Each substance has a certain power 
(Sakti) to produce certain kinds of effects and not others. 

Samkara: And this “power” to produce a certain kind of effect 
is precisely the nature of the effect as existent in the cause prior to its 
production ! 

Naiydyika : We hold that cause and effect are different, being 
related to each other by the relation of inherence (samavaya). 

Samkara: ‘Then what connects this inherence with its relata ? 
You must either postulate an infinite series of connections or give up 
your thesis that inherence is distinct from its relata. 

Naiyadyika : Inherence connects itself to its relata without requiring 
further relations. 

Samkara : Then contact (samyoga) should likewise relate itself to 
its relata without any further relation. And anyway, since we 


150 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


experience the cause (say, a substance) and the effect (say, its quality) 
as identical (¢édaétmya), the postulation of inherence is superfluous. 

Again, does the whole effect reside by inherence in all its causal 
parts collectively or only in each part distributively ? If the former, 
we can never see wholes, which contradicts your theory. If the latter, 
that alleged “whole” cannot be a unity but must be a collection of 
many parts itself. 

Naiyayika + Wholes, like universal properties, are fully present in 
each of their instances without losing their unity. 

Samkara: No, for although we see potness in each pot, we do not 
see the whole in each of its parts. 

Furthermore, in ordinary language we find ourselves saying ‘‘the 
pot arises’; if the asatkdryavadin were right, we should say “‘the potter 
arises,” since only the potter, and not the pot, would on his view exist 
to perform any action of arising at the time in question. But we 
don’t say that. 

Naiydyika : What happens is that the effect comes into the in- 
herence relation with its cause. 

Samkara : But it doesn’t exist yet,and so can’t come into any 
relation! Furthermore, your way of describing your view is in- 
coherent. You say “‘the effect is nonexistent prior to its production”’; 
if you really mean that the effect doesn’t exist, then we can’t talk 
about that nonexistence as “‘prior to production’’—a barren woman's 
son is not properly described as ‘“‘nonexistent prior to production”; 
he is merely nonexistent, period. But effects are not like that; there- 
fore they are not nonexistent. 

Objection: If the effect already exists nobody would exert himself 
to produce it. 

Answer: It exists already, but not in the form it is to take as effect, 
and it is to bring about the cause’s assuming the form of the effect 
that the exertion is directed. And that does not imply difference of 
effect from cause, for a mere difference in form does not entail differ- 
ence in essence. Devadatta with legs together is not a different 
person from Devadatta with legs apart. This refutes the momentari- 
ness doctrine of the Buddhists. 

II.1.19-20. The nondifference of effect from cause is like the non- 
difference of a folded piece of cloth from the cloth unfolded. Or it 
is like the relation between the breath when held and the various 
breaths that support the motions of a living body—the latter are 
manifestations of the former but nondifferent from it. 

II.1.21-23  (E208-210; 1343-346). Odjection (11.1.21) : If what 
you say is true, that is, that Brahman and the individual self are non- 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 151 


different, then It would not have produced effects such as bondage 
and suffering, or, if It did, since It would have had the power toliber- 
ate Itself from them It would certainly have long since done 0. 
But here is the world, full of bondage and suffering, and therefore 
what you say must be wrong, and the world was not created by an 
intelligent agent. 

Answer (1.1.22) : Brahman, not the jiva, is the creator of the 
world and is not identical with it. Brahman is not at fault for creat- 
ing bondage and suffering, since for It, as opposed to the jiva, there 
is nothing to be achieved or avoided. 

Objection : But in scriptural statements like “tat tvam asi (that art 
thou) ,”” Brahman and the self are said to be nondifferent. Are you 
now denying that? 

Answer: They are both different and nondifferent, like space 
and the portion of space enclosed in a jar. Furthermore, as soon as 
awareness of nondifference arises all distinctions are sublated, includ- 
ing that between Brahman and individual self; the world-illusion 
vanishes and with it the question of creation of bondage and 
suffering. 

II.1.23. Brahman may have various distinctions in It, including 
distinctions of value—just as the earth generates stones of different 
value—but this does not adversely affect its ultimate unity. 

I1.1.24-25 (E210-211; 1346-349). Objection: An _ intelligent 
cause requires materials and instruments to carry out its intentions— 
for example, a potter requires clay, a wheel, etc. But Brahman can 
have no such aids, so how can It create? 

Answer : In some cases the material has within it the capacity to 
cause effects without assistance : for example, milk becomes curds, 
or water ice, without any help. 

Objection: Milk requires heat to become curd. 

Answer : No. Heat hastens the process, but it becomes sour eventually. 
In Brahman’s case, since Its powers are perfect, no help of any kind 
is needed. 

Objector (11.1.25) : Well, all right, nonconscious things like milk 
and water can do that, but our point is that conscious agents require 
instruments, 

Answer : Gods, sages, and others do not require instruments, yet 
they are conscious. For that matter, the spider spins its own web. 

Objection : But all these create from materia] substances that are 
distinct from their conscious selves, whereas Brahman is alleged to 
create from His very consciousness; thus the analogy does not apply. 

Answer: It applies, since its point was merely to show that not 


152 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


all cases of creation by an intelligent being were precisely like that_of 
the potter. 

JI.1.26-29 (E212-215; 1349-354). Objection: Either Brahman 
has parts, or else when It creates It transforms Itself wholly into 
something entirely different. But then Brahman will be destroyed; 
the texts that tell us to seek to ‘“‘see” It are without point, there being 
nothing left to ‘‘see’’ except Its effects, which we see quite readily; 
and scripture will be violated. 

Answer (11.1.27) : Scripture shows both that Brahman is without 
parts and that It does not transform Itself wholly into something 
different. 

Objector: Even scripture cannot make us agree to something 
incoherent. Our argument is not met. 

Answer: Your dilemma is not a real one. The change in Brah- 
man due to Its creative capacities is not a matter of transforming 
Itself either in whole or in part, but rather it is a matter of illusory 
plurality produced from ignorance, as two moons are produced by 
double vision but the moon is not thereby changed either totally or 
partly. Or as in the case of a dream, the dreaming person is not 
totally or even partly changed. And anyway, your argument applies 
equally against you (Samkhyas), since if prakrti produces it must 
either change totally or in part, and it has no parts. 

Samkhya : Surely it does have parts, namely, the gunas. 

Samkara: But the gunas have no parts, though they are respon- 
sible for that part of the world that resembles each of them in nature 
respectively. And if you say that even they have parts, then prakrti 
cannot be eternal. The same argument applies against atomic theory 
(e.g., of Vaisesika). Either atoms have parts or they haven’t; if 
they have they aren’t atoms, and if they haven’t they can’t combine. 

11.1.30-31 (E215-216; 1354-356). Brahman has all the powers 
required for creation, for scripture tells us so, even though It lacks 
the kinds of organs that the gods are said to require in order to create. 

1I.1.32-33 (E216-217; 1356-357). Objection: An intelligent 
creator always acts for some purpose, but Brahman has nothing left 
to achieve, hence no purposes. 

Answer: Some acts are the manifestation of mere sport (lild). 

Objection: Then His acts are merely senseless. 

Answer: No, for scripture tells us He is omniscient. 

I1.1.34-36 (E217-219; 1357-361). Objection: God gives different 
selves differing amounts of happiness and suffering and thus treats 
men unequally. Furthermore, He is cruel, for He produces pain 
and destruction (at pralaya). 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 153 


Answer: God is not free in this matter; He is bound to create 
according to the karmic potentialities of each bound self. 

Objection: This might be an excuse as regards creations sub- 
sequent to the first one, but since scripture tells us that Being existed 
prior to all differentiation, God is necessarily responsible for that 
first creation and thus for the inequality and cruelty alleged. 

Answer : No, it is like the seed and the sprout; samsara is beginning- 
less. If the world had a beginning it would have arisen without a 
cause, and then it would follow that the liberated selves would return 
to samsdra, that a person would become liable for what another did, 
and soon, and this is unreasonable. In the same manner, scripture 
affirms the truth of the beginninglessness of samsdra. 

II.1.37 (E219; T361-362). So the various properties ascribed to 
Brahman, such as being both material and efficient cause of the world, 
are thus seen to be appropriate. 


SECOND CHAPTER, SECOND SECTION 


IJ.2.1-10 (£220-228; T363-381). In an introductory passage it 
is explained that in this section other systems, for example, Samkhya, 
will be dealt with purely in terms of reasoning, without reference to 
scripture. 

Samkhya ; Just as pots require clay as their causes, since they are 
made of clay, so the world, which is made up of pleasure, frustration, 
and delusion, requires something made up of these qualities as its 
cause. ‘This something is pradhéna. Since it is nonconscious it evol- 
ves into varied modifications to effect the purposes of conscious 
things, namely, purusas. 

Samkara: Since we never see nonconscious things modifying 
themselves to suit the purposes of conscious beings, but rather we 
see that transformations of nonconscious things into effects such 
as pots, etc., always require the activity of a conscious agent, for 
example, a potter, in shaping the result, this argument of yours fails 
to prove what you intend it to. On the basis of your own example 
you should admit that conscious agency plays a part in the production 
of the world. 

Sadmkhya : We never observe activity on the part of isolated con- 
sciousness; activity is always located in a nonconscious substratum— 
for example, a chariot. Thus it is all right to attribute agency to 
the nonconscious pradhdna. 

Samkara : True, activity is always observed in nonconscious beings, 
but only when a conscious being is also present. Since the presence 


154 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of consciousness is the peculiar occasion of activity, always there when 
activity occurs and never there when it is absent, we find it appro- 
priate to denominate it as the agent-cause. 

Samkhya : Since pure consciousness cannot move, it cannot in- 
duce activity in another. 

Samkara: It cando so like a magnet, which though immobile 
induces motion in others. 

Samkhya : Nonconscious things can, after all, move by them- 
selves; for example, milk and water flow naturally without requiring 
a conscious agent. 

Samkara : On our view we can infer a conscious cause for any 
motion, including those. For example, the milk flows from a cow 
by virtue of her conscious intention to provide sustenance to her calf. 
At best these examples beg the question—they stand in need of being 
proved as much as the major contention (about pradhdna). 

J1.2.4. Again, why does pradhéna—which consists of three gunas, 
you say-—sometimes produce one thing, sometimes another, or some- 
times not produce at all? 

Samkhya ; It transforms spontaneously, just as grass spontaneously 
becomes milk (when eaten by a cow). 

Samkara : Hardly, since it doesn’t become milk when it is not eaten 
at all, or is eaten by a bull. And anyway, you hold that transfor- 
mation is always for the benefit of a conscious being—so how can it 
be “spontaneous” in the sense you now maintain ? 

Samkhya : Although activity on the part of nonconscious stuff 
may occur spontaneously, that is, without any cooperating conscious 
agent, it must, we agree, occur for the benefit of something conscious. 

Samkara ; What benefit—pleasure for the self, or its liberation ? 
It can’t be pleasure, for on your view the self (purusa) can’t gain or 
lose pleasure. So it must be liberation. But the purusa is already 
liberated before pradhéna acts ! So that can’t be it. Oris it the 
satisfaction of the purusa’s longing for liberation? But a purusa 
can’t long for anything, and the pradhdna, being nonconscious, can’t 
either ! 

Sdmkhya : It is as if a lame man rode on the back of a blind one : 
being able to see, he moves the other to act; so it is with purusa and 
prakrti. 

Samkara: I see; you give up, then, the notion that pradhana can 
move spontaneously. And how does the purusa make pradhdna act ? 
A lame man may speak to his blind friend, or steer him by touch; 
nothing like that is possible in the case of prakrti and purusa. The 
purusa cannot be said to induce activity in prakrtt merely by its 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 155 


proximity, since then, it being eternally proximate, prakrti would 
never cease acting and there would be no liberation. 

Again, how precisely does pradhina act? The three gunas are in 
equilibrium initially; what is responsible for disturbing that equilib- 
rium? If gunas are said to be like that, that is, unsteady, the result 
will be that we will be unable to explain the order in the world, 
since these gunas are nonconscious. And if consciousness is attributed 
to pradhéna, our position has been accepted—this pradhdna is our 
Brahman. 

11.2.10. Again, the Samkhya is inconsistent : Samkhya philos- 
ophers give differing accounts of the number of sense organs, the 
origin of the tanmdtras, and so forth. 

Samkhya : Your view, that Brahman is both the nature of the 
suffering in the world and the cause of that same suffering, is 
objectionable on several counts. For one, if these attributes belong 
to the same Brahman release wil] be impossible, for the cessation of 
suffering would involve Brahman’s losing an essential property. 
Furthermore, it is evident to everyone that the cause of suffering 
and the suffering caused are distinct things, as are the desirer and the 
thing desired; if the latter two were not distinct we could not ascribe 
the property of being desirous to the desirer, since he would have 
nothing lacking in him to desire. 

Samkara : Your argument rests on the premise that the two proper- 
ties—being the nature of suffering and being its cause—must have 
distinct abodes, but this we deny. Fire, although it has different 
properties such as giving off heat and giving off light, and although 
it is capable of change, doesn’t burn itself up or light itself up, since 
it is only one thing, not two; likewise with Brahman. The appear- 
ance of suffering and the cause of it reside entirely in the realm of 
avidya : the body is the sufferer, and the sun (say) the cause of suffer- 
ing (through sunburn). 

Samkhya : But the body is nonconscious; how can it undergo 
suffering ? 

Samkara : It only seems to: that is my point. How canconscious- 
ness itself undergo suffering? In fact, on your view, what does 
undergo suffering? Your own metaphysics does not account for it, 
so you too must accept it as a result of avidyd. 

Samkhya : No. Suffering must be held to be real, not apparent. 

Samkara: Then liberation will be impossible, since its cause 
(pradhana) is eternal. 

11.2.11-17 (E228-238; 1381-400). Vazsestka : The qualities that 
inhere in a substance that is a cause produce qualities of the same 


156 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


kind in the effect; for example, white threads produce a white cloth. 
But the Vedanta view is that conscious Brahman produces noncon- 
scious world, which violates the principle. 

Samkara: As a matter of fact that is not even the Vaiéesika view. 
For Vaisesika postulates as the ultimate causes atoms, which have 
by nature a size called ‘“‘atomic”’ (parimdndalya); the atoms are held 
to produce dyads, which in turn produce triads of dyads, and so on. 
Doubtless it is true that by this theory white atoms produce white 
dyads; however, from the “‘atomic size” of the atoms, a like ‘‘atomic 
size”? is not produced in the dyads; rather the dyads have a size 
called “small” (anu). Again, when two dyads combine to form a 
quatrad we have a small substance being the cause of a large (mahat) 
one. There is no reason, therefore, why conscious Brahman should 
not produce the nonconscious world. 

Vaisestka : You misunderstand the principle we appeal to. The 
qualities of the effect must resemble those of the cause except where 
the effect has by nature qualities contrary to those of the cause. Now 
largeness is a quality that the quatrad has by nature, so the dyad 
cannot produce its opposite; but in the case of the world it has no 
quality contrary to consciousness—‘“‘nonconsciousness” is not a 
positive quality but a mere Jack. Thus here the principle should 
apply, but since Brahman and the world violate it, your Advaita 
theory should be rejected. 

Samkara : No, for your own view requires that the effect and its 
qualities not exist until after the cause has operated. Indeed, you 
even hold that the effect must exist for a moment without qualities 
before they arise in that effect. Thus the effect has no ‘“‘natural” 
qualities of the kind you allude to. 

Vaisestka : The cause of the size of the dyad is not the sizes of the 
atoms but rather their multiplicity (bahutva), etc. 

Samkara : No matter; at the time of origination all the qualities 
of the cause are related to their abode by the same relation, namely, 
inherence, so the principle in question is violated. For that matter, 
it is violated even more evidently on your own view when you allege, 
for example, that substances are produced by contact, for contact 
is not even a substance. 

II.2.12. Samkara now proceeds to outline the atomic theory of 
Vaisesika, according to which the bodies that inhabit the world are 
built up from initial contact among atoms following pralaya. Sam- 
kara’s criticism directs our attention to the first motion, allegedly 
in the atoms of air, which produce contacts and lead to further con- 
tacts, etc. According to the theory this first motion isdue to some- 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 157 


thing “unseen” (adrsta). Now no matter what this adrsta may 
be—an effort on the part of the selves, an original impact, an invi- 
sible cause—it cannot operate during pralaya, since at that time the 
internal organs are not in contact with the selves, and the selves 
are in pralaya not conscious and so incapable of causing motion. 
And nonconscious atoms cannot move except as impelled initially 
by conscious causes. Where is this adrsta located—in the selves or 
in the atoms? Ifin the selves, then it cannot produce motion, not 
being connected with the atoms. Or if you say that the omnipresent 
selves, having adrsta as their qualities, are in contact with the atoms, 
the result will be that the atoms will never stop acting, and there will 
be no pralaya at all. 

Further, how can we even make sense of contact between atoms, 
which have no parts ? If they touch at all they must interpenetrate, 
and thus no increase in size will occur when they combine. 

1I.2.13. Again, the postulation of inherence as the relation con- 
necting the dyad to its two constituent atoms won’t do, since it leads 
to infinite regress. Inherence is postulated to connect relata that 
are absolutely different; but as it is absolutely different from its relata, 
it will require still another inherence to relate itself and one of its 
relata, and so on ad infinitum. 

Vaisesika : Inherence is experienced as being present where it 
does occur, and not as depending on other relations for its presence. 

Samkara : But then, contact is also so experienced, but on your 
theory it requires inherence to connect it to its relata ! 

II.2.14. Again, either the atoms are mobile by nature or are 
immobile by nature, or both or neither. But none of these is possi- 
ble. If mobile by nature, no pralaya could take place. If immobile 
by nature, no creation could take place. The third possibility is 
contradictory. And if they are neither mobile nor immobile by 
nature their motion depends on something else, like adrsta; but as 
before, either adrsta is in contact with the atoms, in which case pralaya 
is precluded, or it is not in relation to the atoms, in which case no 
creation will take place. 

II.2.15. Again, since whatever has qualities such as color, etc., 
is gross and impermanent by comparison with its more subtle cause, 
and since on the VaiSesika theory atoms are held to have color, it 
follows that they must have more subtle causes, being themselves 
gross and impermanent. Kanada argues that atoms are permanent 
because otherwise we should not have the expression ‘‘impermanent”’ 
in our language; but this does not prove that atoms are permanent— 
something else, for example, Brahman, will do as well. Anyway, 


158 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


one cannot prove the existence of something merely from facts about 
verbal usage. 

II.2.16. The substance earth is said in Vaisesika to have four 
kinds of sense qualities and to be gross; water has three and is more 
subtle; fire, two and is still more subtle; and air has one quality and 
is subtlest. What, then, about the atoms of each of these four kinds 
of substance—do they have differing numbers of qualities or the 
same ? Since substances with more qualities are bigger than those 
with fewer, if earth atoms have more qualities than air atoms they 
should be bigger, but this contradicts atomic theory according to 
which all atoms are without parts and so of the same size. If they 
all have the same number of qualities, however, then either we won’t 
be able to touch earth or we will find all sense qualities in all four 
kinds of substance, contrary to actual experience. 

I1.2.17. Still other objections to Vaisesika. For one, Vaiéesika 
holds that two things can be different and yet related to each other 
by a relation of dependence called ayutasiddha. (Two things are 
ayutasiddha if one cannot exist without the other.) We ask : between 
two such things what constitutes the inability of one to exist without 
the other ? Is it that they must occur at the same place, or at the same 
time, or with the same character? Not the first, since your view 
is that the cloth and the threads occupy different places. Not the 
second, since if so the two horns of a cow will be ayutasiddha | And 
surely not the third, since if so qualities and substances will be identical 
in character. 

Again, the notion of inherence as the peculiar relation, distinct 
from contact, which connects effect with cause, is a pointless one. 
Since the effect does not exist before it is produced (on Vaisesika 
theory ) it cannot be connected to the cause at that time in any fashion. 
Once it is produced, being a substance in relation to another substance, 
the cause, the appropriate relation is contact, for that is a proper 
relation between two substances. 

Relations such as inherence and contact do not, in any case, exist 
separately from their relata. The fact that we have words in our 
language referring to relations does not prove that they are not in 
fact words referring to aspects of the relata. Devadatta, though 
one, is described in many ways according as we have in mind his 
various activities. 

Contact only occurs between entities that have parts, as far as our 
observation goes; thus it cannot be postulated between atoms, selves, 
and internal organs. 


Finally, the Vaisesika assumes that composition and decomposition 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 159 


take place by, respectively, the combining and separating of their 
parts, but it need not always be so. For example, some substances— 
ghee, gold—decompose by melting, a process wherein no parts are 
separated but rather the substance gradually passes back into an 
undifferentiated condition. And some substances are produced, 
not by combining parts, but, for example, as milk produces curds or 
water ice. 

II,2.18-27 (239-246; T400-418). Turning to the Buddhists, 
we find three principal viewpoints among them: (1) everything is 
real (sarvdstivaéda); (2) only consciousness (vijfidna) is real; and 
(3) everything is void (Sanyavdda). 

Sarvastivada holds that both external and internal entities are real, 
externals including elements (bhita) and elementaries (bhautika), 
internals including mind (citta) and mental associates (caitia). 
The elements are earth, fire, etc.; the elementaries are color, etc., and 
the sense organs. Internals make up the five skandhas. It is by the 
aggregating of such entities that the external and internal objects 
and states of experience are produced. 

But the Sarvastivadins cannot explain how this aggregating comes 
about. For on their own assumptions there is nothing of the appro- 
priate kind that can function to bring about the aggregation. The 
Buddhists do not admit any God, and their view is that consciousness 
depends on the prior existence of an aggregate of atoms—so what 
brings that about? It can’t be the Glayavijiidna, for either that is 
another name for the self (4iman), which they deny, or else it is momen- 
tary and cannot bring about motion in the atoms, 

Sarvdstivadin: The aggregating comes about through operation 
of the mutual causality (of the twelvefold chain) beginning with 
avidyd, etc. 

Answer: Members of this chain can be explained as caused by 
other members, but our question is about the aggregates that are 
required in order that avidya, etc., can function at all. 

Sarvastivadin : Yes, they must be assumed, as we say. 

Samkara : But our question is : what occasions the aggregating, 
and this you haven’t answered. 

Sarvastivadin : Samsara is beginningless; aggregates produce other 
aggregates, and avidyds reside in these aggregates, producing other 
members of the chain. 

Samkara : Do the aggregates produce on principle or not? If they 
only produce others of the same kind, a human body could never be 
reborn in a different form; or, if they operate without principle, 
anyone might at any instant become something else entirely ! 


160 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Furthermore, liberation cannot occur or even be desired, since you 
admit no permanent self to enjoy or desire it. 

If.2.20. For that matter, avidyé and the rest cannot even function 
to cause other members of the (twelvefold) chain (of pratityasamut- 
pada), since they are held to be momentary, for a momentary thing 
has ceased before it can operate. And further : are the origination 
and destruction of an entity the very nature of that entity, or another 
state of it, or something altogether different ? None of these exhaus- 
tive alternatives fits the Buddhist position. If a thing is identical 
with its origination and destruction, we should find ourselves using 
the words “origination,” ‘destruction’, and “‘pot” interchangeably, 
and we don’t. If these are states of the pot, then the pot exists for 
at least three moments, contrary to the Buddhist assumption. And 
if they are altogether different, then the pot must be eternal, since 
it never comes into any connection with origination and destruction. 

I¥.2.21. And things cannot arise without causes, since you your- 
self hold that mind and mental associates arise depending on causal 
factors (pratyaya) and since without causes operating anything might 
originate at any time. 

II.2.22-24. Sarvastivadin: We believe in three kinds of absolute 
cessation (nirodha) : a kind that involves will (pratisamkhya), a kind 
that does not involve will (apratisamkhya), and mere space (dkdfa). 

Samkara : None of these kinds of cessation is possible. As to the 
first two, they would involve either the cessation of the stream (sam- 
tana) to which they belong, or else the nonorigination of a member 
of that stream. But the stream cannot stop, since each of its members 
occasions another. And it is observed that when a thing is ‘‘des- 
troyed”’ it enters into a different state but does not cease altogether in 
any form whatsoever. Anyway, you believe that such cessations 
arise either as a result of true knowledge or all by themselves. But 
if the former, destruction is not natural but occasioned, and if the 
latter, what is the point of the path (being practiced)? As _ for 
akdfa , it is not a mere absence but a positive entity. It is to be infer- 
red as the substratum of sounds. If it were a mere nothing, there 
would be no room for more than one bird to fly at once! Again, 
your own scriptures indicate that wind is grounded on akdSa. Finally, 
though you say that dkdsa, and for that matter all three nirodhas, are 
nondescribable, yet you aver they are eternal. You can’t have it 
both ways. 

II.2.25. Further, all things cannot be momentary, since then we 
could not account for memory and recognition, which requires that 
one and the same person sees and later recalls. 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 161 


Sarvdstivadin : What happens is that two momentary cognitions 
occur that are closely similar to each other. 

Samkara: But to grasp the similarity one cognizing subject is 
required. Otherwise we should not say “this is similar to that” but 
merely “‘look, similarity’? ! The conscious subject is never in doubt 
as to whether it is itself or only similar to itself. 

II.2.26-27. The Buddhist holds that entities arise from non- 
entities, that is, after the destruction of their causes. But ifit were so 
anything could arise from anything, even from hare’s horns. If the 
Buddhist, to meet this, says there are different kinds of nonentity, 
we merely point out that he has then made his “‘nonentity’’ into an 
entity, since it has a character that determines a certain kind of effect. 
And furthermore, labor would become exceedingly easy, since every- 
one has nonentity at his disposal and could produce whatever he 
needs. And then no one would wish or work for liberation. 

II.2.28-32 (E247-252; T418-428). Versus Vijfianavada. Accord- 
ing to Vijfianavada, means of knowing (pramdna), objects (prameya), 
and results (phala) are all internal to our cognizing, for there are no 
external objects. External things must be either atoms or aggregates 
of atoms, but atoms are too small to be represented, and aggregates 
of atoms are either nondifferent from atoms (after all) or else (if 
they are different) they cannot be composed of atoms. In the same 
fashion we can show that there are no external universal properties, 
etc. 

Furthermore (continues the Vijfianavadin) ideas do differ among 
themselves according as they represent different objects, and this 
difference is a function of consciousness, so the object form (visayda- 
kara) is just consciousness and external objects are merely construc- 
tion (kalpand). After all, we are never conscious of the one without 
also being conscious of the other, and this shows they are nondifferent. 
Just like dream objects, objects of waking experience are internal 
only; there are no external objects. 

Question: If there are no external objects what is responsible for 
the differentiations among our ideas ? 

Answer: The variety among the traces (vdsand). 

Samkara’s reply to all this: Since consciousness is of an external 
object, there must necessarily be such objects. We are not conscious 
of consciousness but rather of things. If the Buddhist’s point is that 
external objects are impossible and therefore cannot be apprehended, 
we reply that he has got the case backward—what is possible or 
impossible is to be justified by appeal to pramdnas, the pramanas 
cannot in turn be justified by appealing to preconceived possibilities 


162 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


or impossibilities. Since perception grasps external objects and the 
other pramdpas confirm that they are indeed external, it is not possible 
to doubt that there are external objects. 

In addition, since the Buddhist adopts his thesis of extreme momen- 
tariness, according to which ideas last no more than a moment, the 
things that he alleges about ideas will not stand examination. We 
could not know, on the assumption of momentariness, whether two 
ideas are different from each other, which idea leaves a trace, 
what is real and what is not, and so on, since all such judgments 
presuppose a categorical difference between knower and known, 
which is what is denied by the Vijfianavadin. 

Further, an idea cannot illuminate itself, any more than fire can 
burn itself; to explain consciousness one must posit a knowing Self, 
which is entirely different from Its ideas. Even the lamp does not 
become evident to consciousness by itself; it requires a knower for 
that, like any other object. And whereas an idea cannot illuminate 
itself, not lasting long enough for that, a permanent cognizing Self can. 

11.2.29. As for the analogy drawn between dream objects and 
those of the waking state, by reference to which the Vijfianavadin 
argues that both are unreal, Samkara points out that there is a great 
difference : dream objects are always sublated when we wake up, 
but only some waking objects—those we denominate as illusory— 
are sublated; the rest are never negated in any state. Again, 
there is the further difference that dream objects are the results of 
memory impressions, whereas perceptions in the waking state are 
immediately presented without the intermediacy of memory. 

1I.2.30. Anyway, how can one possibly individuate momentary 
ideas except in terms of their disparate contents? But what is res- 
ponsible for the disparate contents? You deny that external objects 
can be and must say that it is due to traces. But traces cannot operate 
without a substratum in which to reside—and no such substratum is 
admissible in your system. 

Vijfianavadin : We believe in the existence of an dlayavijfidna, a 
“storehouse of traces,’ which provides the required substratum. 

II.2.31. But it cannot, since it is momentary—or else you give up 
your thesis that everything is momentary. 

Thus we have refuted the first two Buddhist viewpoints mentioned 
above, that is, those of the Sarvastivadins and Vijfianavadins. As 
for the third, that of the Sinyavadins (Madhyamikas), who main- 
tain that all is void (Sanya), it does not merit discussion, for the 
pramanas clearly refute the thesis and the Sinyavadins put forth no 
fresh positive reason to justify their contention, 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 163 


IT.2.32. Indeed, that the Buddha’s words could have spawned 
three positions so widely different suggests that either intentionally 
or unintentionally he did not make himself clear, and we can safely 
dismiss the whole theory. 

11.2.33-36 (E252-256; T428-434). Samkara considers Jain philos- 
ophy, mentioning the most prominent features of it—its categories 
of jiva and ajiva and others and its method of saptabhangi or “‘sevenfold 
predication,” according to which seven different ways of viewing a 
proposition are distinguished and combined. 

II.2.33. Contradictory attributes cannot belong to one thing. 
The upshot of your sevenfold-predication method is that nothing 
definite is claimed—your categories are neither catcgorically affirmed 
nor denied; everything is indefinite and thus doubtful, and so 
cannot be made the basis for action with an aim to gain release; no 
clear advice is forthcoming. 

II.2.34. One characteristic Jain thesis concerns the size of the self 
(jiva); it is said to be of the same size as the body it inhabits. Sam- 
kara points out that in that case either it is fixed—and would be too 
big to enter some bodies and too small to fill up others—or else it is 
flexible, expanding or contracting to suit. But if the latter is the 
case, it must have parts that it loses or gains to attain the right dimen- 
sion. In that case the Jains adopt a form of the atomic theory (pre- 
viously refuted) and must in effect hold that the self is noneternal. 

11.2.35. The notion that the self may undergo change of size by 
adding or dropping particles contradicts another characteristic Jain 
theory, according to which upon release the self rises to the top of the 
universe like a pot emerging from the mud, for there is no reason to 
hold that any particular particles are essential to the self, and in any 
case it has been shown to be impermanent. 

1I.2.36. Anyway, upon release the size of the self is presumed to 
be fixed, so we should properly infer that the size of the self is fixed 
always, or at least that its initial size and its intervening size must 
have been permanent as well, which would then entail the same con- 
clusion—that it is fixed in size. 

1I.2.37-41 (E256-259; T434-439). (Sétra 37) This sitra, which 
appears to state that theism is inadequate, is interpreted by Samkara 
as intended to refute the thesis that God is only the efficient, but not 
the material, cause of the world (otherwise, Samkara contends, this 
siitra would be inconsistent with, for example, 1.4.23-24, and others, 
where God is affirmed to be the cause in both senses). Thus he 
takes it to address theistic Samkhya and Yoga as well as Saivas and 
Vaisesikas, 


164 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


On these views, Samkara contends, God is just another self like us, 
and if in particular He willfully causes evil and ignorance resulting 
in differential status for animals, men, etc., He is subject to passions 
and is no better than any other self and doesn’t deserve our devotion. 
To say, as is sometimes said, that He creates in response to and deter- 
mined by the merit and demerit of the other selves will produce 
mutual dependence between God and the selves’ karma, neither 
being ultimately responsible; that the series of reciprocal influences 
is beginningless doesn’t help. Again, since agency requires im- 
perfection (according to Nydyasiira [I.1.18]) God must be imperfect. 
And if He is a self in the Yoga system’s sense like their purusas, He 
must be inactive. 

II.2.38. Further, it is impossible to conceive how God could be 
related to the other selves or to prakrit consistently with His agency. 
What could the relation be? It can’t be contact, since all three 
relata are all-pervasive. It can’t be inherence : which is the substra- 
tum and which the superstratum ? It can’t be any other relation 
inferred from God’s agency, because that is preciscly what is in question. 

Objection : How does the Advaitin relate God to the world, then ? 

Answer: We have no difficulty; for us the relation is one of identity 
(tadaétmya). And whereas these theists we are discussing must invoke 
a relation whose knowledge is possible through empirical means so 
that they may prove it through inference, we Advaitins, who depend 
entirely on scripture, do not have to posit a perceptible relation. 
If the theist retorts that he, too, can appeal to scripture, he will be 
begging the question in a different manner, for he, unlike ourselves, 
considers scripture to be a creation of God. 

II.2.39. The theist says that God produces changes in prakrti just 
as a potter produces changes in clay. But this cannot be right; 
prakrti does not have qualities like color, ctc., and is not an object of 
perception, so cannot be manipulated in the required manner. 

1I.2.40. Theist: We say that the way God rules prakrti is ana- 
logous to the way the self rules its sense organs. 

Samkara: The analogy is unconvincing : we infer that the self 
rules its sense organs because it experiences pain and pleasure resulting 
from them, but God does not experience pleasure and pain resulting 
from prakrti. 

II.2.41. According to the ¢arkikas both God and frakrti are of 
infinite duration. But if God is omniscient, he must know the extent 
of prakrti and of the jivas. But then their extent must be finite, since 
it is a matter of experience that everything whose extent is measurable 
is of finite duration, Thus God is not omniscient. 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 165 


11.2.42-45 (E259-261; T439-443). (Sétra 42) Samkara explains 
that this section deals with the view of the Bhagavatas. This view 
is described as follows : God, namely Vasudeva, is both the material 
and efficient cause of everything; specifically, He is the cause of the 
individual selves (samkarsana), the internal organ (pradyumna), and 
the ego principle (aniruddha). Samkara dissents only from the view 
that God creates the selves. If that were the case the selves would 
be impermanent and release would be impossible. 

II.2.43. The Bhagavatas apparently hold that pradyumna arises 
from samkarsana, and aniruddha from pradyumna. But this disagrees 
with experience : we never observe that an instrument, like an axe, 
arises from the agent. And there is no scriptural authority for it either. 

1I.2.44. Bhagavata: Let us then understand “‘samkarsana’’ and 
the other two words as denoting, not the individual self, internal 
organ, and ego principle, but rather their presiding deities (thus not 
participating in prakric). 

Samkara : Are these deities equal to the Lord in excellence? In 
that case they are unnecessary. Or are they equal to one another 
in excellence, but less than the Lord? Then the objection in sitra 
42 remains in force, since given two things of equivalent attributes 
one cannot be the cause of the other. Experience shows that when 
x causes y, x is superior to y in certain respects—for example, the clay 
that causes a pot is more flexible. 

II.2.45. Furthermore, the Bhagavata theories are internally in- 
consistent, as well as being inconsistent with the Veda. 


SECOND CHAPTER, THIRD SECTION 


II.3.1-7 (E262-270; T [volume 2] 3-18.) We have charged other 
systems with inconsistencies arising from their ways of handling 
problems about creation. But one may in turn suspect that such 
inconsistencies infect our own system. This section allays this doubt 
by studying the purport of Vedanta texts concerning the origination 
of various elements. 

The first element to be discussed is dkéfa. The opponent (in 
siitras 1-6) charges that dkdfa does not originate since there is no 
scriptural passage saying it does. Chdndogya Upanisad VI.2.3 says 
that water, fire, and air were produced, but not akdfa. 

There are, however, passages that appear to assert the origination 
of akafa, for example, Taittiriya Upanisad 11.1. The apparent contra- 
diction by this passage of the previously cited Chdndogya passage is 
explained away. But this passage must be understood ina secondary 
sense, since well-known theses about origination—for example, the 


166 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Vaigesika analysis of causation involving inherence, noninherence, 
and instrumental causes—show that akafa cannot be an effect. 

11.3.7. Answer: Akdfa is an effect. The principle is that what- 
ever is found distinct from other things is an effect. Since dkdsa is 
found distinct from earth, etc., it is an effect. In this way also spatial 
direction (dik), time, internal organs, and atoms are also proved to 
be effects. 

Opponent : Then the Highest Self is an effect, since It is distinct 
from dkdafa, etc. 

Answer: We infer that the Self is not distinct from the fact that 
scripture mentions nothing beyond the Self that It could be an effect 
of. If there is not an ultimate something that is not an effect we will 
end up in Sinyavada. 

As to the opponent’s argument above, that effects require inherence 
causes, noninherence causes, etc., cited on Vaigesika authority, counter- 
examples are cited to refute the Vaisesika theory. A rope, for 
example, may be made of things of different kinds—threads and cow- 
hair—which shows that the inherence cause of an effect need not be 
of the same genus as that effect. Again, one atom is the inherence 
cause of its initial motion. 

Again, we argue thus: Akasa is noneternal because it is the sub- 
stratum of a noneternal quality (namely, sound), like jars. And the 
argument cannot be extended to the Self, since we do not admit that 
the Self is the substratum of noneternal qualities. 

11.3.8 (E270; T18-19). Likewise, air is an effect, even though 
there are apparently inconsistent passages. 

11.3.9 (E271; 19-20). Opponent : ‘Then Brahman too is an effect ! 

Answer : What could be Its cause? It would have to be superior 
to Brahman in some fashion (as we saw above). Brahman cannot 
arise from particulars, since we never find generals produced from 
particulars. It cannot spring from nonbeing (asat), as Chdandogya 
Upanisad VI.2.2 shows. 

J1.3.10-13 (E271-274; T20-25). Fire comes from air, water from fire, 
and earth from water. None of them arises directly from Brahman. But 
of course Brahman is indirectly the cause of them, as of everything. 

I1.3.14-15 (E275-276; T25-28). The order in which the elements 
are reabsorbed into Brahman is precisely the reverse of that in which 
they came out (even though scripture does not speak precisely to the 
question), since experience as well as smrti point to this conclusion. 
Apparently conflicting scriptural passages are explained away. 

11.3.16 (E276-277; T403-404). The Self is not born and does 
not die; expressions that seem to say so refer primarily to the body. 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 167 


II.3.17 (E277-279; T29-33). The Self is, in fact, eternal. A 
variety of opposing arguments, mostly already dealt with, are reviewed 
and rejected. 

II.3.18 (E280-281; T33-35). Opponent: Consciousness is adven- 
titious to the self, produced by contact between self and internal 
organ; if the self were essentially conscious there could be no uncon- 
sciousness. 

Answer: The self is essentially conscious, as scripture proves. 
“Unconsciousness”’ is not the absence of consciousness but rather the 
absence of intended objects (visaya). 

1I.3.19-32 (E281-289; T35-49). (Sitras 19-28) Opponent: The 
self is of atomic size, since it goes out and comes into the body, and 
since scripture alleges it to be infinitesimal. 

Question : If the self is atomic, how can one feel a sensation through- 
out his body ? 

Opponent’s answer: It can do so, just as sandal-paste, though 
applied in one place, gives pleasure over the whole body. Further, 
just as a lamp, occupying one place in a room, illuminates all of it, 
so the self, though occupying only the heart, disseminates conscious- 
ness throughout the body. 

Samkara (11.3.29-32): Atomic size belongs properly to the 
buddhi, and is improperly attributed to the Self, which is actually all- 
pervasive. The answers the opponent gives above to the questions 
raised won’t do. When we step on a thorn we do not experience 
pain all over the body. And the analogy of the lamp is misplaced : 
light is a substance that pervades the room, but the quality of an atom 
cannot spread beyond the space occupied by the atom. The exist- 
ence of the atomic-sized buddhi must be admitted in order to explain 
why everything is not perceived at once, and also to explain indi- 
viduation in samsdra. 

T1.3.33-42 (E289-297; T49-61). That the self is an agent is proved 
in various ways, because scripture enjoins actions, attributes motion 
to the self, has instruments, meditates. It is not just the buddhi that 
does these things. However (sitra 40), the self’s agency is adven- 
titious, not natural, to it; it is due to adjuncts. If it were a natural 
property of the self to be agent, release would not be possible, since 
activity breeds bondage. 

Objection: Release might still be possible, by avoiding the results 
of activity through avoiding the occasions (nimitta) for acting, just 
as burning is avoided, even though fire has a natural capacity to 
burn, provided no fuel is present. 

Answer: Since in the case of activity the occasions are connected 


168 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to the self through the capacity (fakii) to act, they cannot be alto- 
gether avoided. 

Objector (11.3.41) : The agency of the self is independent of God, 
since each self has its own specific problems, motives, passions, etc., 
as well as its own instruments, etc., to carry out actions and has no 
need of God for that. Furthermore, if activity depended on God 
it would follow that God is cruel and unjust because responsible for 
unequal frustrations for different selves. 

Answer : Because scripture teaches that God is a causal agent in all 
activity we infer that each self’s activity is a result, in part, of God’s 
permission, and by the same token we must infer that release is in 
part a result of God’s grace. 

11.3.42. As for the objection that God is cruel and unjust, it can- 
not stand. God allots appropriate results corresponding to the merit 
or demerit of the selves, merit or demerit that was earned by each 
self through its previous activities. Just as the rain causes all kinds 
of seeds, good and bad, to sprout, so God causes all kinds of seeds of 
action to sprout, whether good or bad. 

11.3.43-53 (E297-304; T61-73). Sitra 43 states that the self is a 
part (of God), which Samkara says cannot be meant literally, since 
Brahman has no parts. Then why isn’t Brahman identical with the self? 
Because scripture, for example, Chdndogya Upanisad VIII.7.1, says they 
are different. Then mustn’t we view the self as the servant of its mas- 
ter, God ? No, because other passages declare their identity. Thus the 
part-whole relation is appropriate (provided it isn’t taken seriously !), 
Sutras 44-45 cite scripture and smrti to support this interpretation. 

Objection : If the selves are parts of God then God must suffer as 
the selves do in samsdra, and those who realize Brahman must suffer 
more as a result. 

Answer: No, the selves suffer because they, out of ignorance, 
identify themselves with the body, etc. Their suffering is conditional 
upon ignorance, whereas God does not suffer, not being ignorant. 
Analogies are provided : a holy man, not identifying himself as a man 
with relations, does not suffer from hearing that a relation has died; 
light is not affected by conditioning adjuncts. 

Objection (11.3.47-48) : If there is only one inner Self for all 
beings how can there be Vedic injunctions and prohibitions ? 

Answer: The possibility of such injunctions and prohibitions is 
contingent upon the Self identifying itself through ignorance with 
bodies, etc. 

Objection : Then Vedic injunctions have no purport for one who 
knows rightly. 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 169 


Answer: No, the injunctions are not purportless, they simply 
don’t apply to such a one, since obligations can only arise with respect 
to things to be acquired or avoided, and for the realized Self there are 
no such things. 

Opponent : These injunctions and prohibitions pertain for anyone 
who has discriminated the self from the body. Since one who knows 
rightly has made this discrimination, he is obligated. 

Answer : No, obligation is, rather, contingent on the self identify- 
ing himself with the body. It doesn’t follow that the realized person 
can act any way he likes, for he does not act at all, the very possibility 
of action depending on self-body identification. 

Objection (11.3.49-50) : Since there is only one Self operating the 
various bodies the results of the actions of the various bodies will be 
mixed up. 

Answer : No, it is the individual jivas that are connected to bodies, 
so the difficulty does not arise. The jivas are merely reflections 
(abhasa) of the Highest Self. Just as, if the sun is reflected in water, 
the trembling of one reflected image does not mean the next one has 
to tremble also, so the connections of jivas with the results of actions 
do not get mixed up. 

Actually, it is those (like Samkhya and Vaisesika) who hold that 
there are a plurality of all-pervading selves who get into this diffi- 
culty (of the results of actions getting mixed up), because the connec- 
tion of action with all selves are contingent upon the same factors. 

Samkhya : The differences among the results of the actions of the 
several embodied selves is due to prakrti’s questing for release. If it 
were not so there would not be any liberation. 

Samkara : This merely assumes what you wish to prove but gives 
no reason for it. Ifno reason can be offered to differentiate the results 
of different selves’ actions, we should conclude that liberation is not 
possible. 

Vaisesika : In our case the differences among the results of the 
actions of the various selves is due to their connection with their 
respective internal organs. 

Samkara : But since each self is all-pervading it is in connection 
with all the internal organs as much as any, and the difficulty isnot 
removed. 

Samkhya and Vaisesika: Then the difference is due to adrsfa, the 
karmic potentialities. 

Samkara (11.351): But in Samkhya adysta resides in prakrti, 
which is common to all embodied selves, and in Vaisesika it is created 
by the contact of internal organ and self, which contact as we have 


170 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


just seen is equally present for each internal organ and every self. 
So the difficulty is still not removed. 

Vaifesika (11.3.53) : Even though selves are all-pervading, since 
the contact is between the internal organ and that part of a self en- 
closed within a body, the difficulty does not arise for us. 

Samkara : No, since all selves are equally within each body. And 
various absurdities arise if the critical connection is made to depend 
on presence in a certain place—suppose one body moves out of that 
place and another into it, then the two internal organs occupy the 
same place, and confusion of results again occurs. 

Anyway, there cannot be more than one all-pervading self, since 
we never experience many things occupying the same place. 

Vaisesika : Yes we do; various qualities reside in one locus at the 
same time. 

Samkara : But they have different characteristics, whereas your 
all-pervading selves are all precisely alike ! We never see anything 
like that. 


SECOND CHAPTER, FOURTH SECTION 


1I.4.1-4 (304-308; T74-79). Despite some passages (e.g., 
Satapatha Brahmana V1.1.1) that say that the vital breaths (prdna) 
existed before the beginning (of the worlds), they actually arise from 
Brahman (like everything else), as many scriptural passages in 
fact assert. 

II.4.5-7 (E308-312; T79-84). There are not merely seven 
“breaths,” but eleven, all told : five sense organs, five action organs, 
and the internal organ. They are held to be “‘small’’ (anu) in size, 
though not atomic, for they could not then produce effects throughout 
the body. 

II.4.8-13 (E312-317; T84-91). The chief breath is produced 
from Brahman, is different from wind and from the functioning of 
the organs, has the other breaths as its functions, and is limited in 
size and is subtle like the sense organs. 

II.4.14-16 (E317-319; T91-93). The “breaths’—that is, the 
organs—are dependent on, and supervised by, their respective 
deities but produce experiences in the embodied self, not in those 
deities. 

II.4.17-19 (E319-321; T93-96). The chief breath is distinct 
from the sense organs (called “breaths” also here), because (among 
other things) when the sense organs are ‘asleep’? the chief breath 
remains active. 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 17] 


II.4.20-22 - (E321-323; T96-100). Chandogya Upanisad VI.3.2 
says “That divinity thought ‘let me enter the three divinities (asso- 
ciated with the three elements) with this jivdéman and let me then 
develop name-and-form.’ *’ Does this mean that the jiva created the 
specific characteristics of things? No, it is God who did that, as 
other passages in the Upanisads clearly indicate. All gross things 
are constructed from the three subtle elements—earth, water, fire. 


THIRD CHAPTER, FIRST SECTION 


IIL.1.1-7 (E324-330; T101-112). This section deals with the 
mechanics of samséra. These siitras consider whether the subtle trans- 
migrating body includes, in addition to sense organs, manas, karma, 
etc., also the subtle elements that will constitute the seeds of the 
next body. Samkara understands the answer to be yes and that in 
fact elements of earth and fire, as well as water, help make up the 
transmigrating body. 

III.1.8-11 (E330-335; T112-121). Samkara here explains how 
it is that the transmigrating body goes to other worlds, experiences 
there the results of previous actions, and then is reborn into this world 
in a body determined by karma. The problem is that if all the fruits 
of karma are experienced before rebirth, what is left to determine the 
new body? ‘The opponent argues that the texts tell us that the 
adrsta (karma) earned in this life has results that are to be entirely 
experienced in heaven—the fruits of sacrifice, etc.—and that there- 
fore nothing is left over to determine rebirth into this world. Sam- 
kara’s view is that some of one’s karma produces experiences in heaven 
(as a god, say) whereas the rest (anusaya) remains and determines the 
next body here—the good karma produces heavenly experiences, the 
bad determines the new body. 

TIE.1.12-21 (E335-339; T121-126). Only those who perform 
sacrifices go to the lunar heaven; the others go to hell, the abode of 
Yama, or rather to one of the seven hells ruled over by Yama. 
Those in hell can be reborn into earthly form even without performing 
the requisite sacrifices occasioning conception, etc., as we find that 
various sorts of beings come into the world in other fashions than by 
birth from the womb. 

III.1.22-27 (E339-343; T126-132). Sitras 22-23 concern details 
of the descent of the subtle body from the lunar world to this one— 
it assumes a subtle form but does not become 4kd@éa, etc., and it stays 
in that form for a very brief period. When it arrives here (sitra 25) 
it enters into foodstuffs—plants, etc.—but it does not become embodied 


172 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in those things, it does not experience states as a result of its presence 
there; it resides there merely on the way to entering into new animal 
bodies through digestive processes. There are embodied selves in 
plants, but they do not get there by descending from the lunar regions. 
It is not that plants embody sacrificers who have killed animals, etc.— 
done unholy things—and so have earned this reward; sacrifice of 
animals is not unholy, for Vedic authority, which is our only guide in 
these matters, condones it. The last two siitras review the process of 
conception and birth. 


THIRD CHAPTER, SECOND SECTION 


I1J.2.1-6 (343-348; T133-141). The world of our dreams is 
not real, it is merely mdyd, since things happen in dreams that cannot 
happen in reality (that is, in the waking world). For example, 
there isn’t room for dreamt of chariots in the actual body; the sleeper 
cannot go to points far away in a single moment; the sleeper’s body 
cannot remain visible to others on acouch while it is far away experienc- 
ing things in quite another place; he dreams it is day when it is 
night, and it can’t be both at once. Nevertheless these illusory dreams 
may be prophetic. The waking world—‘‘real’’ by comparison with 
the dream world—is still not absolutely real, as we have seen earlier; 
the dream world is sublated each morning when we awake, whereas 
the waking world remains until ultimate realization of Brahman’s 
identity with the Self. As long as the self is blinded by ignorance it 
cannot produce for its experience anything real, even though it is 
ultimately nondifferent from God; thus whereas God can create the 
waking world, which is relatively real, the self bound by ignorance 
can only produce unreal dream objects, its true powers concealed by 
ignorance. 

TII.2.7-9 (H348-353; T141-149). Question: Where does the 
jiva reside in deep sleep—in the arteries (ndgz), the heart (puritat), 
or the Highest Self? 

Answer : In all ofthese, but essentially in the latter, thatis, Brahman. 

Question : How can we be sure that the self that wakes up from 
deep sleep is the same one that entered that state, any more than we 
can be sure that the same drop of water is extracted from a lake after 
it has once been dissolved in that lake ? 

Answer : There are several reasons : the person waking from deep 
sleep is seen to complete work left unfinished, he remembers his ex- 
periences before,—injunctions would otherwise be meaningless,— 
and, finally, a person could become liberated merely by falling asleep 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 173 


and scriptural injunctions would be pointless. The drop of water 
dissolves into the water completely—that is, without adjuncts—but 
the jiva is conditioned by adjuncts even while it is “dissolved” in 
Brahman in sleep—so the analogy is not apt. 

TI.2.10 (E353-355; T149-152). What kind of a state is attained 
when in a faint? None from waking, dream, deep sleep, or death 
seems appropriate; a person does not see objects as one awake or 
dreaming, his body behaves differently from one deeply asleep, and 
he is not dead. Samkara’s solution is that in faint we are in a state of 
half union with the deep sleep state. 

TII.2.11-21 (E355-363; T152-166). These séras state the nature 
of Brahman, experienced in deep sleep. Brahman is without quali- 
ties (nirvifesa), without form (aripa) though capable of assuming 
form as light can, consciousness-only (caitanyamdtra) though appearing 
as objects because reflected like the sun, etc. 

Objection : Whereas the sun’s light is reflected in anentirely differ- 
ent body, the water, for Brahman there is no comparable reflecting 
medium; thus the analogy suggested won’t work. 

Answer : No analogy is perfect. Brahman, like the reflected sun, 
appears affected when certain adjuncts change, but neither are really 
affected, and it is in these features that the analogy has point. 

The commentary on sitra 21 contains a long section dealing with 
someone who suggests that the Vedas enjoin us to annihilate the dual- 
ity of the world-appearance  (dvaitaprapaiicavilaya). Samkara is 
puzzled how the Vedas can enjoin such a thing. Either it would be 
like literally enjoining us to destroy all the objects in the world, which 
is quite beyond our capacities, or it is to enjoin an effort to destroy 
something that does not exist, in which case the injunction is not 
necessary—all that is required is knowledge of Brahman. Those 
Vedic passages that seem to enjoin us to know something are in fact 
meant merely to call our attention to it. One cannot enjoin knowl- 
edge, for truth depends on what is the case and not merely on human 
actions or wishes. 

III.2.22-30 (E363-369; T166-175). Sitra 22 deals with the famous 
Upanisadic ‘‘neéi neti’’ (“not this, not this”). An opponent proposes 
to construe this as denying Brahman altogether, and Samkara shows 
that it denies everything but Brahman. Brahman is known by yogis 
in meditation. 

Objection: If a yogi knows Brahman in meditation that must 
mean that one self—a lower self—knows another self—a higher one. 

Answer : No, there is no such distinction in reality; it only appears 
so because of the adjuncts limiting the individual self. So, after 


174 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


having set aside ignorance, the self passes into unity with the Highest 
Self (prajfiendimanaikatam gacchati). The relation of the Highest Self 
to the bound one may be conceived by analogy with the relation 
between a snake and its coils, or between light and the fire that is its 
substratum. 

III.2.31-37 (E369-373; T175-180). Scripture is interpreted to 
show that thcre is nothing other than Brahman. 

III.2.38-41 (E373-375; T180-183). God is responsible for the 
results accruing from human actions, for the actions disappear imme- 
diately and cannot effect results ata later time. There is no proof 
for such a thing as an apiirva to do it, and even if there were such a 
thing it would require a conscious agent to occasion its operation. 


THIRD CHAPTER, THIRD SECTION 


III.3.1-10 (E375-384; T184-201). Do the different Upanisadic 
texts teach differing ways to know Brahman or only the same ones ? 
Samkara holds that the texts, despite their differences, teach a common 
set of meditative cognitions, that the Tazittiriyaka , Vajasaneyaka, Kau- 
sitaki versions of the Vedas all contain the same message. On the 
other hand, some apparently identical texts (e.g., Brhaddranyaka 
Upanisad 1.3.7 and Chandogya Upanisad 1.2.7) are different in their 
subject matter, even though they may pass under the same name 
(here, the Udgithavidya). 

Opponent (III.3.9) : When (in Chdndogya Upanisad 1.1.1) it is said 


> 


“Let a man meditate on om as the udgitha,”” what is the relation bet- 
ween om and udgitha? It could be any one of four : superimposition 
(adhydsa), sublation (apavada), identity (ekatva), or qualification 
(vigesana), and since there is no particular reason to prefer any one of 
these, we cannot decide. 

Samkara : It can only be the last relation (of qualification); thus 
the text in question-enjoins us to meditate on that utterance of om 
which is (a part of) the udgitha. 

Where different texts have the same essential meaning one should 
combine together the particular specifications that may only occur 
in one such text but not the others. 

III.3.11-25 (E384-399; T201-225). Thus when different texts 
mention different essential qualities of Brahman we should combine 
them all in thinking about Brahman. This principle is applied in a 
number of contexts. 

III.3.26-32 (E399-407; T225-238). A number of problems are 
considered concerning texts that specify the details of the liberated 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 175 


self’s “path to the Brahma-world.”” The liberated self has to com- 
pletely burn off his karma while embodied; it is only those who know 
saguna Brahman who travel the path of the gods—those who know 
nirguna Brahman do not travel at all. 

ITI.3.33-39 (E407-413; T238-249). More cases where different 
texts are to be understood as conveying identical messages. 

TII.3.40-52 (E414-423; T249-268). Some points about medita- 
tion and sacrifices are made here. 

II1.3.53-54 (E423-425; T268-272). Lokdyataka (i.e., Carvaka) : 
There is no self distinct from the body; it is the body that is conscious, 
since we observe that consciousness is found only where a body is. 

Answer : But bodies are found where consciousness is not; so your 
view cannot stand. Further, we are conscious of the elements of the 
body, but if consciousness is a quality of those same elements this will 
not be possible, no more than it is possible for fire to burn itself. 

ITI.3.55-66 (E425-432; T272-284). More on meditation and sacrifice. 


THIRD CHAPTER, FOURTH SECTION 


III.4.11-17 (E433-439; T285-295). Knowledge (vidya) alone is 
the cause of achieving the goals of mankind (purusértha). 

Objection (by Jaimini) : Knowledge of the Self cannot by itself 
produce anything; it is supportive of sacrificial action that may have 
the results wished for. Thus the passages (in scripture) that appear 
to say that knowledge has fruits must be taken as arthavada, praise of 
instruments supportive of actions with beneficial results. Several 
passages are cited in support of Jaimini’s interpretation. 

Answer (11.4.8 ef passim): Since the Upanisads teach a Self 
(=Brahman) different from the embodied self, they cannot be 
understood as merely arthavaddas, as they might if the self taught were 
just the transmigrating self. Furthermore, knowledge of the Highest 
Self not only does not support action, it undermines it, for when one 
realizes Brahman the entire world in which action must take place 
is. destroyed. And since it is samnydsins, who no longer work, who 
have the knowledge in question, that knowledge can hardly be sub- 
servient to action. 

TII.4.18-20 (E439-442; T295-303). Jaimini thinks that the 
passages that appear to enjoin samnydsa only mention that state and 
do not enjoin it. Badarayana’s view, on the other hand, is that 
samnydsa is a state to be achieved like the other three dframas. 

TII.4.21-25 (E443-445; 1303-306). Certain other texts are 
interpreted, and in sitra 25 the conclusion is once more drawn that 


176 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sacrificial acts are not necessary for one who secks liberation, since 
knowledge is what brings that about. 

TI1.4.26-27 (E445-446; T306-309). But action is useful in helping 
produce knowledge, for one who seeks knowledge must be calm, 
disciplined, etc., and sacrificial action is propaedeutic to these states. 
Nevertheless, Samkara insists, it is knowledge alone that brings about 
the desired result. 

III.4.28-31 (E446-448; T309-312). Chandogya Upanisad VI.1.2, 
which might be thought to relax prohibitions on certain kinds of food 
for the Brahman-knower, is rather an arthavada glorifying the food of 
the “breaths.” The only exception to the laws about which food to 
take arises when one’s life is in danger. 

ITE.4.32-35 (E448-450; 1T312-315). Objection: Since you tell 
us that actions are for the purpose of gaining knowledge leading to 
achievement of man’s end (that is, liberation) it presumably follows 
that someone who does not desire liberation need not perform the 
duties of his drama ! Or if they are nevertheless duties, they cannot 
(as you allege) produce knowledge, because then there will be the 
contradiction that such an instrument is both permanently and 
impermanently connected with its result. 

Answer: The Vedas enjoin ritual action on all dsramins regardless 
of their desire or lack of desire for release. There are two sorts of 
texts : one kind enjoins actions as “‘permanent’’ (nitya) duties of 
members of a certain class of persons; the other kind advises action 
as a means to knowledge for those who seek release—and the two 
kinds of texts relate to one and the same action, but that involves no 
contradiction. 

III.4.36-39 (E450-451; 1315-317). Can those who do not 
belong to any one of the @ramas still gain the releasing knowledge ? 
Yes, says Samkara, since scripture speaks of such cases and 
smrti does too; for example, a widower, though not belonging to an 
d§rama, can through praying, fasting, etc., gain knowledge conducive 
to liberation. 

III.4.40-43 (E451-453; T317-320). These passages concern back- 
sliders. In the first place, no one backslides from samnydsa; the texts 
do not recognize any such thing. If one who has taken the vow of 
chastity carelessly breaks it he does not lose his class but, rather, 
must perform expiatory sacrificial acts befitting the situation. In 
any case these apparent backsliders should not be associated with. 

TII.4.44-46 (E453-454; 1320-321). Concerns a question about 
who is to perform the subordinate meditations involved in sacrifices, 
The priest is, not the sacrificer. 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 177 


T11.4.47-49 (E454-456; 1322-325). Does Brhaddranyaka Upanisad 
III.5 enjoin the state of being a muni (silent meditator) or not? 
“Yes,” says Samkara; it also enjoins achieving the other dframas as 
well. 

TII.4.5 (£456-457; 1325-327). The same passage (Brhada- 
ranyaka Upanisad 111.5) enjoins “being a child.” 

Opponent : Yes, what is enjoined is a state in which one can do 
whatever one likes without incurring sin, just as a samnydsin can ! 

Samkara : No, what is enjoined is innocence, absence of sensuality, 
etc. 

1.4.51 (£457-458; T327-329). Do the means—meditation, 
sacrifice, etc.—leading to knowledge of Brahman always do so in this 
life, or may they have this result in a subsequent life? Samkara 
says that unless there is some kind of obstruction the knowledge will 
arise in this life, but when an obstruction exists the result will arise in 
a subsequent life. 

III.4.52 (E458-459; T329-330). Does knowledge always produce 
liberation as soon and in the same degree ? 

Samkara : Well, liberation is not a result; it is a permanent state, 
without degrees; knowledge, also, does not admit of a higher and 
lower degree, at least the knowledge of nirguna Brahman, which alone 
leads to release. 


FOURTH CHAPTER, FIRST SECTION 


IV.1.1-12 (E459-472; T331-352). How to meditate is here detail- 
ed. One should repeatedly meditate on Brahman as constituting 
the Self. 

Objection : Repetition of meditation on, for example, “that art 
thou 
going to after countless repetitions. 

Answer : But we know from experience that that isn’t so; people 
hear something and don’t always understand it the first time but 
eventually come to do so. Particularly in the case of sucha deep 
truth as is conveyed by ‘‘that art thou” one must fully understand the 
meanings of the constituent words to be able to understand the whole 
sentence. Or again, the word “‘self” (dtman) has to be understood 
in some cases as referring both to Brahman and one’s own self. When 
one is advised to meditate on other things (e.g., the manas) as Brah- 
man (as in Chdndogya Upanisad I11.18.1) one should not see Brahman 
in the symbol (e.g., the manas), but vice versa, since the purpose is 


>? is useless : if one doesn’t understand it the first time one isn’t 


178 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to find the unity (of Brahman) in the diversity of the world 
Meditation should be carried on seated, not standing upor lying down; 
Samkara cites scripture and smrti (viz., Bhagavadgita and YogaSastra) 
in favor. One can meditate at any time, at any place,and in any 
direction; any apparent restrictions on this should be viewed as sugges- 
tions and not as rules. Such meditations are to be continued until 
death or realization. 

IV.1.13-19 (E472-478; T353-363). When one attains realization 
all karma disappears, including both the traces of earlier karma and 
the future results of one’s acts, both good and bad karma. The 
exception to this is the result of karma that has already begun to 
operate (prarabdhakarman)—such karmic results must work themselves 
out in a natural manner, and knowledge has no power to affect 
them. This is attested by observation that the body of the realized 
person does not disappear immediately. 

Objection : The results of permanent actions (nityakarman) such as 
performance of the agnihotra sacrifice, since they are different from the 
result of knowledge, must also disappear, as they are the results of 
good actions (and thus the only karma left operating after knowledge 
of Brahman may be bad !) 


Answer : No, since these acts contribute to knowledge, as we have 
seen. 

Objection: Then what “good karma” were you talking about 
before, when you said that both bad and good karma disappear upon 
knowledge ? 

Answer: Acts undertaken to gain some specific good results; 
these do not contribute toward gaining knowledge of Brahman. 
These are in general unlike the nityakarmans, which as a class contribute 
in some fashion toward achievement of true knowledge and thus are 
such that their results continue to death. Now, a knower of Brahman 
thus has destroyed all karma except the prarabdha sort produced by 
nityakarmans—when at death these are exhausted the knower achieves 
stability in liberation (sampadyate). 

Objection : Why does he not continue even after that to see multi- 
plicity, just as one who knows there is only one moon may continue 
to see two of them despite his knowledge ? 

Answer : Because there is nothing to produce such a perception— 
all karma has been exhausted. 

Objection : But new actions will produce more karma, etc. 

Answer : There will be no more actions; actions presuppose false 
awareness (mithydjfidna), but by this point that has been destroyed by 
right awareness (samyagjiidna). 


BRAHMASUTRABHASYA 179 


FOURTH CHAPTER, SECOND SECTION 


IV.2.1-21 (E478-489; T364-381). This section describes what 
happens to the unrealized self at death. Speech (vak) is merged in 
manas; the rest of the organs follow along; the manas is then merged 
in “breath” (prana); it is in turn merged in the jiva, which then comes 
to occupy the elements that will make up the next body. The self, 
whether of a person who knows saguna Brahman or of one who does 
not, goes out in the same way, namely, the way just described, except 
that, whereas the ordinary self is reborn as described above, the 
knower of saguna Brahman enters a vein (or artery, nai) leading toward 
a relative immortality. The subtle body endures until liberation and 
is responsible for the warmth we feel in living bodies, which is absent 
in dead ones. When death after liberation occurs the subtle body 
dissolves—it does not depart from the body at all; the various consti- 
tuents of the subtle body are absorbed into Brahman and are no 
longer distinct from It in any way. As for the one who knows only 
saguna Brahman, the texts tell us his subtle body departs through a 
certain vein out of the top of the skull and follows the rays of the 
sun—this is true of those who die at night as well as of those who die 
in the daytime, and for those who die in the inauspicious half of the 
year as well as for those who die in the auspicious half. 


FOURTH CHAPTER, THIRD SECTION 


IV.3.1-16 (E490-503; T382-404). The description of the progress 
of the knower of saguna Brahman continues. Despite different accounts 
in scripture about the path of the gods (devaydna) leading to the 
Brahma-world, they all refer to the same path. The stages along 
the path, associated with various deities, are detailed; the subtle body 
is guided along by these divinities, eventually reaching saguna Brah- 
man (but not nirguna Brahman), that is, the ‘‘Brahma-world”’ ruled 
over by Hiranyagarbha. Jaimini’s view that the Highest Brahman is 
thus reached is refuted—one cannot literally “‘go”’ to nirguna Brahman. 

Here an opponent comes in to suggest that, if one performs no actions 
other than the permanent (nitya) ones and avoids those which are 
forbidden, then, because the permanent acts are supposed to have 
their fruition in this life, there will be no cause when one dies for 
any rebirth and one can thus achieve liberation without Self-knowl- 
edge. .Samkara refutes this by merely noting that one cannot hope 
to exhaust all his karma in this lifetime for even if one confines himself 
to nityakarmans the results of former acts will conflict with that of 
later ones and thus both cannot be worked off simultaneously, with 


180 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the result that it will take time to work all of them off—meanwhile 
one is likely to die. 

Siitras 15-16 exclude from the ranks of those who travel the path 
of the gods to brahmaloka those who meditate upon symbols rather 
than on (saguna) Brahman; these persons achieve results appropriate 
to that on which they meditate. 


FOURTH CHAPTER, FOURTH SECTION 


IV.4.1-22 (E503-513; T405-419). Finally, the nature of libera- 
tion is indicated. Liberation is the self’s manifesting its own nature; 
it does not take on any new characteristics but is nondistinct from 
Brahman. The views about whether the released self is omniscient, 
omnipotent, and pure, or is merely pure consciousness, or some 
combination of these, are reconciled by Samkara as speaking to the 
question from different standpoints. Sitras 8 following, which 
appear to grant to the released self positive powers, are viewed by 
Samkara as referring to the knower of saguna Brahman. The truly 
“released self,” unlike God, has nothing to do with the world of bodies, 
organs, etc., and so questions about power cannot arise. On the 
other hand, those who have attained the brakmaloka have all lordly 
powers except that of creation, which is specifically God’s business. 
When it is said they have unlimited powers what is meant is not that 
they share God’s power but rather that they never return into embodi- 
ment in this world. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYA 


The Brhadaranyaka is the longest and one of the oldest of the Upani- 
sads. This Upanisad is found in two recensions, the Kanva and the 
Madhyandina of the White Yajurveda.*1 The material is classified 
with the Vajasaneyi Samhita and Satapatha Brahmana. 

There is no reason to doubt Samkara’s authorship of this commen- 
tary. Suresvara’s vast Varttika, summarized below, develops Sam- 
kara’s thought as expressed here, following the master closely and 
shedding occasional light on the references found there. There 
are scholarly studies proving the authenticity of this work.22 

Daniel Ingalls has offered some interesting comments on the rela- 
tionship between this commentary and the Brahmasitrabhasya. He 
writes : ‘‘Samkara’s Brhadaranyakopanisad-bhdsya is a far more original 
piece of writing than his Brahma-sitra-bhasya,”’ arguing that in the 
former work Samkara breaks with tradition frequently, whereas in 
the Brahmasiitrabhasya he is “very careful not to depart from tradition.’ 


BRHADARANYAKABHASYA 18] 


The “tradition” in question is identified by Ingalls as the work of 
the ‘“‘Protocommentator,” or Vrttikara, and Ingalls suggests that 
both Samkara and the Bhedabhedavadin Bhaskara followed the 
Vrttikara, even though Bhaskara is quite outspoken in his criticism 
of Samkara’s interpretations of certain features of their common 
source. By comparing Samkara’s theses and arguments developed 
in the Brhaddaranyakabhasya with those found in the Brahmas iitrabhasya 
—and especially the ones found in Bhaskara’s commentary as well— 
one can distinguish “what is original... in Samkara’s philosophy” 
from what goes back to the Vrttikara. 

The edition followed in the summary below, referred to as ‘“‘E,” 
is that by H. R. Bhagavat, and is part two of the second volume of 
Works of Shankaracharya (Poona: Ashtekar & Co., 1928). The 
translation (“T”) is by Swami Madhavananda (Almora : Advaita 
Ashrama, third edition, 1950). 

Introduction (E1-3; TI-8). An “‘upanisad” means something 
knowledge of which removes samsara together with its cause, which 
is what this Upanisad does. It is large and was taught in the forest, 
which explains its name (Brhadéranyaka). Now we will explain the 
connection of this Upanisad with the karmakénda—the section of the 
Vedas concerning action. The Vedas are concerned with providing 
an understanding of how to obtain what is desired and avoid what is 
not desired, specifically an understanding of those aspects that are 
not available to perception or inference, that concern future lives. 
Thus the first requisite is that one who hears this Upanisad must 
believe that there is a self that persists through future lives; this is 
taught in various places throughout the Upanisads, including this 
one (at II.1.16-17). 

Objection : Knowledge of future embodiments is a matter of per- 
ception. 

Answer: No, since there are different opinions about it—for 
example, the materialists and Buddhists deny it—but nobody quarrels 
about a matter of perception like a pot. And since the self cannot 
be perceived in its future state, it cannot be known by inference 
either. 

Anyway, if a man believes in future lives he wants to know how 
to maximize good and minimize bad, and the karmakanda tells him 
that; it tells him that by two kinds of actions he can improve his lot— 
by ritual acts he can attain the world of the fathers, and by medi- 
tation he can attain the world of the gods. But he naturally wants 
to remove the ignorance that is responsible for samsdra—and it is to 
explain this that this Upanisad exists. 


182 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Now the horse-sacrifice, which is the first topic here, is the most 
noble sacrifice of all and leads to identity with Hiranyagarbha. Its 
mention here at the outset shows that all ritual action falls within 
samséra. Not even the nityakarmans are without their karmic residue, 
since scripture speaks of all ritual action collectively, showing that 
it is produced by desire and produces future births in this world, the 
world of the fathers or of the gods. Since this is the case, only knowl- 
edge of Brahman, not any actions, can gain liberation from samsdra. 

1.2.1 (E6-10; T15-26). The text begins “there was nothing at 
all here in the beginning. It was covered over by Death....” 
The second sentence disproves the theory that something can come 
from nothing—from the void or from prior absence—for then there 
would have been nothing for Death to cover over. So scripture 
disproves the asatkdrana view. Inference also disproves it : seeing 
that effects only take place when there is a cause, we infer that the 
cause of the universe too must have existed prior to creation, as in the 
case of a pot. 

Objection: The cause of a pot does not exist prior to its produc- 
tion, for the lump of clay is destroyed as the pot is produced. 

Answer: No, the clay (though not the lump) is the cause. The 
clay persists despite the lump being destroyed, as is evident from 
perception. 

Objection: Nothing persists—we ‘merely notice a similarity bet- 
ween different entities. 

Answer: No, for every attribution would become nonsense, 


> 


including the attribution of “being similar to x,” if all entities were 
momentary; or if there were no entities, only momentary ideas based 
on nothing, then all ideas would be false and nothing could be estab- 
lished at all. 

Besides, the effect exists before it is produced, for to be produced 
means becoming manifested to perception, and we know that a thing 
becomes manifested to perception which exists unilluminated and 
then becomes illuminated. A nonexistent jar is not manifested when 
the sun rises. 

Objection : Since according to you the effect pre-exists, if it exists 
at all it must exist prior to its production, so what is to stop its mani- 
festing itself when the sun comes up? 

Answer: There are two kinds of covering (dvarana) : one consists 
of darkness or something blocking our perception of a jar, the other 
consists of its parts having some other form, for example, a lump of 
clay. 

Objector: You are equivocating on ‘‘covering’’; the one kind of 


BRHADARANYAKABHASYA 183 


covering (darkness, or the wall) does not occupy the same place as 
the jar, whereas the other kind (the clay) does. 

Answer: Not always; water mixed with milk is concealed by the 
milk, which occupies the same place as the water. 

Objector : If you are right one ought to try to makea jar by removing 
obstructions to it, namely, the clay. But no one makes a jar that way! 

Answer: Not necessarily; when one manifests a jar one does it 
by lighting a lamp. And this is not just to remove darkness; it is to 
produce the light to illuminate the jar. 

Again, the effect must pre-exist because we find people trying to 
produce an object in the future, and therefore we conclude they must 
know the object they are trying to produce. 

Another argument : God and yogis have infallible knowledge about 
the future. Now if the future jar did not exist, their perceptions 
would be false. 

However, there is of course a certain sense in which the effect does 
not exist before its production: it does not exist in its manifested form 
before production, only in its potential form as, say, a lump of clay. 
When we say the effect exists before its production we are saying it 
exists in potential form. 

Vaisesika : The prior absence (pragabhdva) of the jar precedes 
and causes the production of the jar. 

Samkara : Then you must be treating prior absence, like the others 
of your absences, as positive entities—otherwise it could hardly be 
related to the jar by a causal relation. 

Vaisesika : Such a relation is possible with respect to two things 
that are inseparably related (ayutasiddha). 

Answer: No, there cannot be inseparability between an existent 
and a nonexistent thing. 

1.3.1 (E16-21; T41-53). Mimamsaka : This section (the Udgitha 
section) is preface to an injunction to repeat certain mantras. 

Answer: No, for this Upanisad deals with knowledge (vidya). 
We cannot act correctly without correct knowledge; we cannot 
meditate properly without having correct knowledge of what we are 
meditating on. 

Objection : No, since the scriptures direct us to look on Brahman, 
for example, as a name, etc., which is an error (viparyaya), like seeing 
a stump as a man. 

Answer: The direction is intended for one who knows the differ- 
ence between Brahman and Its name—for him there is no error in 
worshiping Brahman by meditating on Its name, any more than 
there is in worshiping God by means of images. 


184 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objection : But in fact there is no Brahman, only a name. 

Answer : No; because (1) scripture also tells us to look on the Rk 
(hymn) as the earth, and we know there are both a hymn and the 
earth; (2) a figurative sense presupposes a direct one—so the name 
“Brahman” presupposes a thing, Brahman; and (3) scripture is 
authoritative with regard to all supersensuous things, whether they 
are results of sacrifices or the existence of entities. 

Opponent : Scriptural statements are only authoritative as injunc- 
tions, and so the only information they give us refers to what has to 
be done; so declarative statements about the existence of things do 
not have any authority, or at any rate they have authority only in 
connection with what has to be done—and Brahman has no connec- 
tion with purposive action. 

Answer: There are texts that make that connection. Anyhow, 
your rule cannot be correct, since it is the Vedas that tell us what a 
prohibited act leads to, and a prohibited act is not something that is 
to be done. One who avoids eating poisoned meat, for example, 
does so because he comes to know the meat is poisoned; thus, convey- 
ing information—through declarative sentences—is the way in which 
we are able to avoid prohibited acts. Likewise, a man who learns 
the nature of the Self will come to check his impulses—and it is the 
Vedas that convey that information. 

Opponent : Very well, information causes us to avoid prohibited 
acts; but it is not the case that knowledge of the Self should cause 
us to stop following Vedic injunctions. 

Answer: Why not? They are both alike—both eating poisoned 
meat and following Vedic injunctions produce results contrary to 
our purposes (anartha), and so both are stopped by the knower of the 
Self. 

Opponent: Perhaps this is so for the (naimittika and kdmya) acts 
that you are thinking of, but the nityakarmans produce no harmful 
effects and shouldn’t be stopped. 

Answer: No, they too are enjoined on persons subject to avidyd, 
passion, and aversion. And anyway, a rite such as the agnihotra 
is not by nature either kdmya or nitya. It depends on the purpose of 
the sacrificer—if he wants one kind of outcome—heaven—it is kdmya, 
if he merely acts out of natural desire to do good and avoid evil, it is 
nitya. But the Self-knower is not enjoined to any acts at all, for 
that requires obliteration of the cause of all acts, namely, awareness 
of their means. If one thinks he is Brahman—unlimited in space, 
time, etc.—he cannot act. 

Objection: Well, he has to eat ! 


BRHADARANYAKABHASYA 185 


Answer: Yes, but that is not like a nityakarman—eating is not 
supposed to be compulsory; it is irregular, not enjoined at any parti- 
cular time. 

Objection : Nevertheless scripture does regulate eating. 

Answer: It regulates what can be eaten, etc., but these are not 
injunctions to act or incentives to action, and so they donot impede 
knowledge. 

1.4.7 (E44-55; T111-140). The Upanisad is speaking of Viraj 
or the cosmic Purusa and its creation, the universe, and it Says at this 
point ‘‘He entered into it,” that is, the universe. Samkara says 
“He”? is the Self, who has entered into all bodies ‘from Hiranyagarbha 
down to a blade of grass.” 

Objection: If the Self is the universe how can It ‘‘enter into” it ? 
Only a finite thing can enter into a space, but an unlimited thing, 
like akafa, cannot enter into anything because, being omnipresent, 
it is already there. And further, if It somehow did so It must be 
subject to samsdra and be subject to frustration, etc. 

A number of replies to these conundrums are considered and _re- 
jected. 

With respect to the possibility of the Self’s being subject to frustra- 
tion, Samkara denies it. When the opponent then tries to conclude 
that if there is only one Self and It is not frustrated there is nothing 
left to be frustrated and so any knowledge one might get from scrip- 
ture would be useless, Samkara counters with the tale of the tenth 
man (keeping track of a group of ten, the leader counts only nine 
until reminded that he is the tenth). 

As for the problem about the Self’s entering itself, Samkara even- 
tually explains this using the analogy of reflection. Just as the sun 
“enters into” the water in the sense of being perceived there because 
of its reflection, so the Self enters into the undifferentiated universe 
in the sense of being perceived in the differentiated universe by the 
differentiated jivas. 

The Upanisad goes on to say “the Self alone is to be meditated 
upon.” Is this an initial injunction (apiirvavidhi)? Some say it 
must be, since the text has in fact just said “He... does not know 
(the Self),”? and the next sentence—the one now considered— 
must therefore enjoin us to meditate for the first time on something 
hitherto unknown. The case is similar for injunctions to act— 
illustrations are offered. 

Samkara : But there is nothing to be done; therefore it is not an 
initial injunction. Knowledge of the Self is conveyed in the very 
sentence under discussion; the sentence is itself the knowledge that is 


186 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


supposed to be enjoined. Now an injunction cannot itself be the very 
act it enjoins. Therefore this sentence merely removes ignorance 
about the Self; it does not enjoin any further action such as medita- 
tion, for such action is impossible once Self-knowledge is gained. 

Objection: The knowledge gained from hearing this passage isn’t 
sufficient to obliterate awareness of everything other than Brahman. 
A person does not know the Self merely on hearing a statement about 
its nature; he must be enjoined to do so. 

Answer: But he’s already gained the knowledge just from hearing 
it ! 

Objection : The recollection of Self-knowledge is different from the 
awareness arising from hearing it stated, and it is this recollection 
that is enjoined. 

Answer: No, for recollection comes automatically. Since Self- 
knowledge destroys ignorance immediately, memories of the objects 
known when one was subject to ignorance automatically disappear; 
all that is left is Self-knowledge. 

Objection: Then it is suppression (nirodha) that is enjoined, this 
being different from the knowledge conveyed in the texts. Suppres- 
sion is prescribed in another system (viz., Yoga). 

Answer: But scripture does not indicate that suppression is a 
means to liberation; it only indicates Self-knowledgeis that. Besides, 
there is no way of suppressing other than Self-knowledge. Then 
again, once Self-knowledge is gained there is no expectation (dkamksa) 
about details—what act is required, how to perform it, what to use, 
etc.—since no further effort is required. 

Objection: Being a mere declaration, the sentences (e.g., ‘‘that 
art thou,” etc., apparently including the one under discussion) 
that you hold to vouchsafe knowledge are not authoritative, any 
more than those (‘‘Fire cried’’) that merely narrate an event. 

Answer: Authority is contingent, not upon the mood of the 
verb, but on whether or not the passage speaks the truth. 

Now, although ‘‘the Self alone is to be meditated upon” is not an 
initial injunction it is nevertheless true that it is a kind of injunction, 
namely, a_ restrictive (niyama) one, for it does limit the Self-knower 
to recollection of his knowledge : this is because even after Self- 
knowledge the residues of prarabdhakarman are still operative and so 
might obscure once again the knowledge gained from hearing a text. 
So the Self-knower is enjoined to think only on the Self. 

1.4.10 (E57-68; T145-172). Two views about who the Brahman 
is who became all as a result of knowledge (according to this passage) : 
one, it must be the lower Brahman (brahmdpara), since effort on its 


BRHADARANYAKABHASYA 187 


part is indicated and the Highest Brahman is incapable of effort 
(commentators say this is the Vrttikara); two, it must be Brahmins 
who are referred to, men who attain identity with Brahman (com- 
Mmentators say this is Bhartrprapafica). 

Samkara : Neither of these views is correct, since in each case the 
identity with all would be noneternal. And since it is eternal, every- 
body is already identical with all, and the supposition otherwise is 
due to avidyd; therefore it is the Highest Brahman who is spoken of 
here, who was conditioned by avidyé and then uncovered. 

Objection: It is improper to suppose that avidya conditions Brah- 
man. 

Answer: No, since otherwise it would not be necessary to know 
Brahman; if there were no superimposition (adhyaropa) of avidyd on 
Brahman knowledge of unity would not have been enjoined. 

Objector : We mean that Brahman cannot be supposed to be the 
cause of superimposition, the creator of avidyé. 

Samkara: That’s right. But one should not suppose that there- 
fore something else is the cause of superimposition or the creator of 
avidya. 

Objector : Then scripture will be useless. 

Answer: It is, for one who knows the truth. 

Objection : But it is also useless to know the truth. 

Answer: No, since it removes ignorance. 

Objection: But, since Brahman is one, removal of ignorance is 
impossible. 

Samkara: Since it is evident that knowledge of unity does remove 
ignorance, it cannot very well be impossible ! 

Objection : It is even impossible that you can say “‘that is impossi- 
ble” ! 

Answer: But you see—I just did ! 

Objection : From various scriptural texts, from the authority of 
various systems of philosophy, for example, of Kanada and Gautama, 
from the fact that everyone speaks of first seeking and then gaining 
liberation, and because of the difference between action and knowl- 
edge being inappropriate for God, the individual self must be diffe- 
rent from God. So it is proper to understand the word “‘Brahman” 
in this text as denoting someone who aspires to be Brahman. 

Answer: Then the transmigrating self is supposed to be liberated 
by knowing himself, falsely, to be Brahman—and for this scriptural 
authority is not necessary ! 

Objector : The identity texts actually counsel a kind of meditation 
(sampat) based on the resemblance (of the individual self) with 


188 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Brahman, to be practised by one who knows Brahman fully (and 
knows It to be different from the transmigrating self). 

Samkara: But then why do the scriptures repeatedly assert the 
identity of the Self with Brahman? If the Self and Brahman are 
different they cannot be made identical by meditation or by scripture 
or by anything else. Further, if the knowledge counseled is knowledge 
of the individual self and not of Brahman, why is it termed “knowl- 
edge of Brahman” ? 

Objector : Suppose we say that “Self” in these passages refers to 
Brahman and not to the individual self. 

Samkara : But the texts explicitly say “I am Brahman,” etc. If 
your assumption were correct they should say “‘That is Brahman,”’ 
etc. And a thing can’t be both Brahman and not Brahman; to 
speak in that way merely incurs doubt and does evil thereby. 

The text says “It [Brahman] knew only Itself”—that is, Its natural 
(suabhavika) state. The opponent presses Samkara for a specification 
of the intrinsic character of this natural Self. Samkara identifies 
this character as the property of being the scer of sight, the hearer of 
hearing, etc. 

Objector : Surely the seer, whether of sight or of a jar, is the same ? 

Samkara: No. The seer of sight is identical with sight and is 
eternal, whereas the seer of the jar is transitory, for jars come and go. 
There are in fact two kinds of sight (drsfi). One kind is well known 
to us; it is the transitory kind, as is shown by the fact of blindness in 
certain people—if the eternal sight were the only kind everyone would 
have vision. But there is also the eternal fact of consciousness, 
without which the blind man could not have visions in his dreams, 
etc. So the text means that Brahman knew only Itself, eternal 
consciousness, without the transitory, noneternal consciousness super- 
imposed on It. 

Objector: But in III.4.2 we are told “One should not try to know 
the knower of knowledge,” so such knowledge as you say Brahman 
had is self-contradictory. 

Samkara : No, since the knowledge of the Self, which Brahman 
had, does not involve taking the Self as a content (vsaya)—Self- 
knowledge is just the cessation of avidyd, nothing else. 

The one who knows Brahman becomes all; even the gods cannot 
prevail against him—so the text goes on to say. Why should one 
even suppose the gods had such a power? Because the gods depend 
on men for ritual support, etc., and fearing that by liberation they 
would lose that support they may try to hinder liberation. 

Objection ; Hf gods can do that, they can also obstruct the good 


BRHADARANYAKABHASYA 189 


outcome of sacrificing, etc., and then men would become doubtful 
about the worth of ritual action. 

Samkara: No. Everything comes from its appropriate cause; 
nothing happens from its own nature (svabhdva) alone. The good 
outcome of actions is a result of karma; though gods or God or time 
or whatever may be auxiliaries in the process, they cannot disturb 
the karmic mechanism’s eventual fruition, although they may tempo- 
rarily delay it. In the case of Self-knowledge they cannot even do 
that, since the removal of avidya upon knowledge of the Self is auto- 
matic and instantaneous, involving no spatial, temporal, or causal 
relations with which the gods can tamper. 

Objection: Surely it is the stream (samtati) of consciousness that 
removes avidyd. 

Samkara : No, since such a stream can contain thoughts of self- 
preservation (jivana), etc. 

Objector: Well, let’s suppose that a stream unmixed with unto- 
ward thoughts extending up to death is what liberates. 

Samkara : No, for that would make the meaning of the scriptures 
indefinite, which is not right. We would not be able to tell whether 
it was the first stream (after the initial moment of Self-knowledge), 
or the last stream (prior to death) that was the liberating one. 

Anyway, the initial Self-knowledge liberates despite the persistence 
of effects of an opposite nature. What Self-knowledge destroys are 
the results of past actions that have not yet begun to bear fruit, as well 
as the potentiality of producing more karmic results in the future. 
What it does not destroy are those results that are responsible for the 
present body and which have not spent themselves yet, though they 
have begun to; these (prdrabdha) results require false notions and 
faults in order that they be worked off, but only so much as is required 
will be experienced and no more. Actually, even these false notions 
are merely memories due to impressions laid down at a time prior to 
realization; a man of Self-knowledge cannot really entertain false 
ideas, for there is no content possible for them. A false idea is one of 
something having a property similar to something else for which it is 
mistaken, for example, of shell as silver. Just as one who has pro- 
perly perceived the shell cannot really have false ideas about it, just 
so one who has realized the Self cannot really have false ideas that 
something not-Self, for example, the body, is the Self. 

IE.1.20 (E115-127; T291-318). The Upanisadic text says that 
the secret name (upanisat) of atman, the self, is “truth of truth.” 

Question: Is the “self” referred to here the individual transmigrat- 
ing self, or is it the Supreme Self, Brahman? If these selves are 


190 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


different then the texts that teach their identity are false, and if they 
are identical there will be no one for the Vedas to instruct, so they 
will be useless. 

One view is this: The self meant cannot be Brahman, for the 
preceding Upanisadic texts in this section have been speaking of the 
individual self, which wakes, dreams, and sleeps. So the suggestion 
must be that the individual self is what is under discussion here, a 
self that creates a world of experience when waking or dreaming 
and knowledge of which liberates in deep sleep. There is no_tran- 
scendent Self or Brahman. 

A second view is this: The transcendent Supreme Self created the 
universe, not the transmigrating self, which is different from it. It is 
by worshiping this transcendent Self that one attains liberation, not 
by identifying oneself with It. 

Samkara : Neither view is correct. The individual self is identical 
with the transcendent Supreme Self, as the text declares. 

Objection : ‘Then either the Vedic teachings become useless or else 
the transcendent Self loses its transcendence, being infected by the 
frustrations, etc., of the transmigrating self. 

One possible solution to this: The Supreme Self underwent a modi- 
fication (vikdra) before becoming the individual self (vijf%anatman), 
so that the individual self is both the same as and different from the 
Supreme Self. Thus the difficulty cited can be avoided. 

Critique of this: There are at least three ways in which the indi- 
vidual self might be a modification of the Supreme Self. One, it 
may be a modification of a part of Brahman, supposing Brahman 
has parts, or two, the Supreme Self may retain Its form but a part of 
It be modified, like hair; or three, the whole Supreme Self may be 
modified, like milk. On view one, the scripturally affirmed identity 
between the self and the Self could only be at best figurative, since the 
Self will be just an aggregate of Its parts. On two, since the whole 
inheres in its parts anything that affects a part will affect the whole, 
so that the Supreme Self will become subject to evil. View three 
is also wrong, being explicitly denied by both scripture and smrti. 

Another suggestion: The individual self is a part of the Highest 
Self as a spark of fire is a part of the fire. Scripture speaks in this 
way. 

Critique of that: Then the Supreme Self must be wounded, which 
is contrary to scripture. The passages you have in mind, about 
sparks, are not meant literally but are intended to suggest the unity 
of the Self. In all the Upanisads, unity is first proposed (pratijfdia), 
then by reasons (hetu) and examples (drsfanta) the world (jagat) 


BRHADARANYAKABHASYA 191 


is shown to be a part or modification of the Highest Self, and then 
unity is offered as conclusion (upasamhyti). So it is here. The 
illustration of sparks of fire is sometimes used, as in the story told by 
earlier proponents of our tradition (sampradayavid; commentators 
say the reference is to Dravidacarya) about the fowler’s son who, 
learning that he was actually a prince and realizing his unity with 
royalty, gave up a fowler’s duties and took on royal ways. Likewise, 
they say, the individual self, separated from the Supreme Self like a 
spark of fire, takes on worldly attributes, but when it learns of its 
identity with the Supreme Self it loses those attributes. Here again, 
the analogy of sparks is meant as illustration of unity. 

The Supreme Self is intrinsically invisible, hence without parts; 
so a part of It cannot become the individual self. And if you say that 
the individual self is a part because of the imposition of some adjunct 
or obstruction, as the dkafa enclosed in a jar is a part of the great 
akasa, then discriminating people would never think that the self 
is a part of the Self, since it would appear as something quite distinct. 
So any such notions about the self’s difference from the Self are 
erroneous (bhrania). 

Question : If all Upanisads teach only the single Supreme Self, 
why is there any reference to the individual self at all ? 

Some say: It is so that the karmakdnda or ritual portion of scripture 
will have purport—if there were no one to sacrifice, etc., that section 
of scripture would be pointless. Indeed, this is why only the karma- 
kanda portion of the Vedas is authoritative: the Upanisads are not 
authoritative, for in order to make sense of them one must interpret 
them figuratively. 

Answer: We have already answered this. A pramdna is what 
leads to valid knowledge; since the Upanisads lead to valid knowl- 
edge they are authoritative. Furthermore, the Upanisads do not 
contradict themselves, as you imply. Nor are they even ambiguous. 
First, they do not say that Brahman both is and is not unitary; second, 
they never contradict the unity of Brahman. 

Although you’ve charged that the Upanisads undermine the 
authority of the karmakanda of the Vedas, it is not so, since they speak 
of a different thing, namely, the unity of Brahman; they do not 
negate directions about how to act meant for someone who wants 
something, etc.; these passages about action are all absolutely correct. 

Objection: But if Brahman is the only real thing, the passages 
about action have nothing to apply to, and so they certainly cannot 
lead to valid knowledge. 

Answer: But it is evident to perception that injunctive passages 


192 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


are about something; since your argument (that their authority is 
undermined by absence of a real object) stems from inference it must 
bow to perception. What they are about are things created out of 
avidya, unreal but the topic of these passages nevertheless. 

Objection: But only those who have correct knowledge (vidya) 
are capable of (successful) action. 

Answer: No, quite the contrary; those who have knowledge are 
incapable of performing actions, as we have shown. 

Still other pundits, following their own ways of thinking, argue 
against us that if Brahman is the only real thing perception is contra- 
dicted—since we see different sights, hear many sounds, etc.—and 
that it also contradicts inference, for example, from the fact of differ- 
ences in karmic results to a difference in the selves who earned those 
results—and even that it contradicts scriptural passages that imply 
that things desired are distinct from those who desire them. To 
them we reply as follows : 

These are the lowest among Brahmins and other castes who, having 
minds poisoned by bad reasoning, hold views contrary to tradition 
about the meaning of the Vedas. First, as to perception: does the 
fact that many sounds are perceived contradict the unity of dkdsa? 
If not, the fact that many selves are perceived does not contradict 
the unity of Brahman. Second, as to inference: we askthem, ‘‘who 
are you who do the inferring?” Suppose they say ‘‘we (Naiya- 
yikas), the experts in logic,”’ and we reply, “but who are you really 
who call yourselves so ?”? Suppose now they say, ‘‘evidently we are 
an aggregation of self, body, organs, and mind.” We wish to point 
out that they have already assumed themselves multiple, that is, 
they do not know the self they are making inferences about, that 
“self” they claim is joined with body, mind, and organs. For bet- 
ween one such self and another—on their own view—there is no 
intrinsic difference, so the differences that they infer exist between 
the selves are actually accidental differences owing to differences 
among adjuncts. And indeed no intrinsic differences can be inferred 
in the Self, for the Self is not a content of inference at all—anything 
that can be a content of inference is 7pso facto not the Self—and of 
course we admit the Self is different from all contents of awareness, 
all of which is name-and-form. The contention about scripture is 
answered in the same fashion. 

The argument (offered more than once above) that if there is 
only one Brahman there will be no one to receive the Vedic teachings 
has no force. If you mean that once Brahman has been realized the 
Upanisads and the rest of scripture will have no use, we agree readily; 


BRHADARANYAKABHASYA 193 


on the other hand, if you mean that before realization the scripture 
has no use, this will contradict the assumption of anyone who believes 
in the Self at all, including yourselves, since you believe there are 
selves } 

11.3.6 (E134-138; T337-346). This is the famous ‘‘not this, not 
this” (neti neti) passage; it begins, according to Samkara, with several 
characterizations of the subtle body, then contrasts that subtle body 
with Brahman hy indicating that Brahman can only be described 
negatively, as it were. 

Here some other ‘‘Upanisadists’” (commentators say Bhartrpra- 
pafica) argue as follows : the gross and subtle elements are the lowest, 
the Highest Self is the highest, and in between is a third kind of entity, 
one that is a combination of the individual self, the agent and expe- 
riencer, with its knowledge, actions, and previous awareness. They 
try to find a middle ground between Samkhya and Vaisesika; al- 
though the actions are the cause and the body and organs the effect, 
these same actions are maintained in that portion of the Highest 
Self (corresponding to Vaisesika’s dtman) which becomes conditioned 
by these actions whose origins are in the elements. This conditioned 
self is then the agent—experiencer, subject to bondage and liberation, 
but the actions and ignorance that bind it are adventitious only to 
that part of the Highest Self, which is not affected by it any more than 
the earth as a whole is affected by a desert covering part of it. 

These philosophers do not see that their theory is contrary to the 
Upanisads as well as to good reasoning, as we have argued previously. 
The Highest Self cannot have parts; either the individual self is differ- 
ent from or identical with the Highest Self. If it is said to be only 
figuratively identical, then it can’t be held that impressions or igno- 
rance (belonging to the subtle body) somehow qualify that “portion” 
of the Highest Self. The theory that Brahman has three forms 
doesn’t agree with the text that assigns two forms to It. 

How is it that by the expression “‘not this, not this” the truth of 
truth is to be described ? Words convey their meanings by relating 
to adjuncts such as name, form, action, genus, species, quality, etc. 
Brahman has none of these, so it cannot be described as a cow can 
be. To be sure, Brahman is sometimes described by expressions 
such as “knowledge, bliss, Brahman, Atman’’, etc., but if we wish to 
describe its true nature it is impossible. Thus we are reduced to 
“not this, not this,” eliminating all positive characteristics that might 
be thought to apply to it. 

III.2 (E169-170; T429-432). What is this “death” that a liber- 
ated man is said (in the text) to be free from? It is the functioning of 


194 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


organs toward their objects, as the Upanisad states in those passages 
(e.g., III.2.2,3,7) that speak of the senses (graha)—mind, nose, speech, 
etc.—and their objects (atigraha)—respectively, desires, odors, names, 
etc. And we have argued previously that what causes bondage 
cannot be the cause of its cessation. 

Some, though, think that everything leads to the cessation of bond- 
age, that we are relatively liberated each time we die, and that every- 
thing is therefore a form of death until duality ends, when one really 
transcends death. 

But this is not the view of the Brhadéranyaka Upanisad, whose point 
is that the texts teaching identity provide knowledge that negates all 
action, not that the injunctions to act are themselves the means of 
understanding that identity. 

Objection: Identity is the purpose of Vedic injunctions, but 
samsdra follows automatically from them, just as, when a lamp is 
lighted to illuminate a certain object everything thereabouts is illumi- 
nated also. 

Answer : No, for if the Vedic actions have only identity as their 
purpose there is no evidence to show that bondage follows automati- 
cally. Both identity and samsara cannot be conveyed by the same 
sentence; this would be contrary to a proper theory of meaning. 

TI.2.13 (E174-175; 1442-446). Some (commentators say 
Bhartrprapafica) say that even when the organs and their objects 
are destroyed one is not yet liberated—one finds a mediate stage 
called apavarga, after which meditation has to be practiced in order 
to gain final liberation. 

Samkara : But how, on that view, could such a disembodied man, 
lacking any organs, manage to meditate? It must be, rather, 
that the man retains his organs and body but turns away from the 
world to meditate on the Supreme Self. But then he cannot use the 
same means both to attain an intermediate state of heavenly enjoy- 
ment and eventually to gain final release, for one activity cannot 
produce two opposite results. Finally, if the idea is that after the 
death of the body he attains the state of heavenly enjoyment and 
then, with his organs destroyed and being name only, is qualified 
for attainment of final release (somehow), the result will be that the 
Vedas cannot teach identity to ordinary folk, because for them it will 
be meaningless; only those who have reached the intermediate stage 
will be capable of knowing the identity that gives final release. 

III.3 (E175-180; 1447-459). The purpose of this section is to 
show that no matter how excellent action is it cannot lead to 
liberation, 


BRHADARANYAKABHASYA 195 


Some say: Disinterested action combined with vidya can give rise 
to a different kind of effect (from action), just as poison or curd can 
(produce effects different from their usual one under certain circum- 
stances), 

Answer : No, for liberation has no origin (andrabhya); it is not an 
effect at all; but the destruction of bondage. And we have said that 
bondage is just avidyaé, which cannot be destroyed by action, since 
actions only function with respect to contents that are visible. In 
other words, actions can produce or obtain or modify or purify some- 
thing, but they have no other functions. 

Opponent : Yes, action by itself is like that, but our point is that 
combined with vidya it can produce something different. 

Samkara : None of the pramdnas give evidence of such an outcome. 

Opponent : Well, injunctions to act must be supposed to have an 
expected outcome (for the action enjoined); in the Visvajit sacrifice, 
since no other outcome is mentioned, that outcome should be supposed 
to be liberation; otherwise no one will act. 

Samkara: In the case of the Viévajit sacrifice the assumption is 
that heaven is the outcome—and so it should be in general. You 
can’t use an analogy to prove the opposite of what it shows. And 
you can’t very well say that liberation is not a result at all, since that 
is our position. 

Opponent : Well, it is like knowledge—although liberation is not 
produced by knowledge it is said to be so produced. In the same way, 
our position is that actions “produce” liberation, as it were. 

Samkara: No. Avidya is what must be destroyed for liberation 
to ensue, and only knowledge, not actions, can destroy avidya. A 
thing destroys what is opposite to it in nature. Now the nature of 
avidya is nonmanifestation (anabhivyakti), so what destroys it is that 
which has the opposite nature, manifestation, and that is knowledge, 
not action. 

Opponent: Then we shall suppose that action has an unseen 
(adrsta) power to destroy avidyd. 

Samkara : It is unreasonable to suppose so when we know some- 
thing that is seen to destroy avzdpd. 

Opponent: Our position is that the nityakarmans must produce 
liberation, since there is nothing else they can be supposed to produce, 
it having been specifically excluded that they produce the same kinds 
of results as the other acts (e.g., heaven, children, etc.). 

Samkara : You cannot reason in that fashion, for the kinds of 
results that might accrue to these acts are infinite, and you have no 
reason to exclude all of them, The desires and purposes of human 


196 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


beings are indefinite in number. Besides, the results of actions are, 
as we have said, either the production, attainment, modification, 
or purification of something, and liberation is none of these. Since 
it is eternal, it cannot be produced, attained, or modified, and it is 
surely not something that becomes purified as a sacrificial post might 
be. 

Now we do not deny that, like poison or curds, actions combined 
with vidya can produce a different effect from actions not so combined, 
but the results must still be the kinds of things forthcoming from 
actions, no matter how exalted. 

III.4.2 (£184-186; T469-473). The Upanisadic passage is the 
famous one in which YAjfiavalkya argues “‘you cannot see the seer 
of seeing, you cannot hear the hearer of hearing, etc.” 

Samkara comments here that there are two kinds of “seeing”? 
(drsti), an ordinary (laukika) and a higher (pdramarthika) kind, 
The ordinary kind involves the internal organ (antahkarana) combined 
with the visual organ and is an act, with a beginning and anend. 
But the higher kind is the very nature of the Witness-Self and has no 
beginning and no end. Even the distinction of Witness and ordinary 
vision is a result of adjuncts— ordinary vision is an adjunct. Now 
ordinary vision displays the colors, etc. of its contents; although it 
is a reflection of the higher kind that higher kind does not appear as 
the content of ordinary vision. That is what YAajfiavalkya means, 
that ordinary vision does not display the inner Self, which is the 
Witness of that ordinary vision. 

Others (commentators say Bhartrprapafica) explain the passage in 
a different way. They think the expression “‘seer’? means that which 
sees, the agent of the act of seeing. But that interpretation makes 
the words ‘‘of seeing’’ redundant, and this makes for a faulty reading. 
Besides, as we have argued elsewhere the resulting theory is inconsist- 
ent with other passages in the text. 

I1I.5.1 (E187-198; 1474-491). Yajriavalkya is now dealing with 
the question of Kahola, who wants a clear account of diman. Some 
(commentators say Bhartrprapafica) say that the question concerns 
the individual self, not the Highest Self, but Samkara rejects this ; 
the answer to this question goes beyond the answer to the previous 
one in that it makes clear that the Supreme Self is beyond the prop- 
erties of samsdra such as hunger, etc. 

Question : How can the very same self both have and lack a prop- 
erty like hunger ? 

Answer: We have already explained that. It is like a snake, a 
piece of silver, and the blue color that arise through ignorance in a 


BRHADARANYAKABHASYA 197 


rope, a shell, and the sky respectively, even though they are con- 
trary in nature to their substrata. 

Objection : But the Upanisads say that the Highest Self is ‘‘one 
without a second” and “‘there is no difference in It.” 

Answer: Those statements are quite true. They stem from the 
highest standpoint (paramarthadrs{i), for then name-and-form (néma- 
riipa) cease to be separate from their locus, just like the foam on the 
ocean. But from the standpoint of ordinary vision, since Brahman 
has not been discriminated from its adjuncts like body and organs— 
which were produced from (by ?) name-and-form, there is the com- 
mon experience (vyavahdra) of the existence of all sorts of distinct 
reals (vastu). Indeed, this experience, though false, is found alike 
in those who believe that those things do not exist as different from 
Brahman and those who do not believe so. But those who believe 
in the highest truth, though they discuss the question in accordance 
with scriptural passages concerning it, are confident that Brahman is 
one alone, without a second, free from all experiencings (sarvavyava- 
hdraSiinya). 

The remainder of the Upanisadic passage dwells on the behavior 
of the Self-knower, who is said to lead the life of a bhiksu, renouncing 
all kinds of desires. Samkara takes this to involve giving up the holy 
thread and quotes various authorities concerning the way of life of the 
mendicant, defending the literal reading of such passages. 

Vidya and avidydé cannot coexist in the same person, being contra- 
dictory like light and darkness. Therefore the knower of the Self 
should not have anything to do with the contents of avidyd, namely, 
actions, their means, and results. Even such objects as the holy 
thread fall within these “‘contents.”” ‘The text means to emphasize 
that all desires are the same and should be shunned in toto by the 
Self-knower. 

III.9.28.7 (E222-224; T563-568). As a kind of postscript to this 
section Samkara introduces a discussion of the meaning of the word 
‘bliss’ (Gnanda) as applied to Brahman. “‘Bliss” is in common par- 
lance a synonym for pleasure or for a kind of pleasure. Now some 
scriptural texts say that bliss is to be known as Brahman, whereas 
others imply that no attributes of Brahman can be known. 

One disputant argues that Brahman is bliss, but since It is con- 
sciousness as well It cognizes Its own bliss, and since liberated selves 
are essentially Brahman they cognize it too. 

Samkara: No, since cognizing something requires a body and 
organs, which are lacking in liberation, which is (here) final separa- 
tion of the body (Sariraviyogo hi moksa dtyantikah). Also if Brahman 


198 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


could cognize Itself It would contradict Brahman’s unity. So it is 
not that Brahman knows Itself as bliss; Brahman is bliss, no doubt, 
but that bliss is not cognized; the happiness of the liberated self is 
merely a natural manifestation of his state, not a cognition. 

IV.3.6 (E235-239; T601-608). The passage says that the Self 
is the immaterial inner light that helps the body and organs to operate 
when external sources of light (sun and moon) are inoperative. 

Objection (by a materialist): Since we know that the body and 
senses are helped to act by the light of material bodies like the sun and 
moon, it is wrong to infer that in their absence there is an immaterial 
body giving off light, since only things of the same type help each 
other. The only light that can be inferred, therefore, is that “‘light”’ 
which is the visual organ, which is material. You also argue that that 
which reveals a thing is different in kind from it, but that inference 
is faulty, since we see that, for example, the eye reveals the body but 
is not different from it, both being material. We sce that the aggre- 
gate of body and senses is quite capable of seeing, etc., so we infer that 
it is this aggregate that is the self, the agent of the acts of seeing, etc. 

Answer: This theory cannot explain the fact that in our dreams 
we only see things that we have already seen. If the aggregate 
of body and senses were the seer it could see anything in dream: blind 
men could see things never known to them when they had eyes, etc. 
Likewise, in memory we can close our eyes and recall what we have 
seen previously; what is shut can’t be the seer—the seer is that which 
sees what it saw when the eyes were open. Finally, on your 
view a dead man should be able to see, since he has body and 
organs. 

Objector: Let us say that the organs alone are the seers, then. 

Answer: No, for then one could not know that one is touching the 
same thing one sees, since the agents of the two sensations would be 
different. 

Objector: ‘Then the seer is the manas. 

Answer : No, since the manas is a content of cognition, like color, 
etc. and so cannot be the cognizer of contents. 

As for your argument that what helps something to act must be of 
the same type as that something, there is no such regularity—some- 
times it is one way, sometimes another. Sometimes men are helped 
by their own species, sometimes by animals. 

IV.3.7  (E239-248; T609-629). The passage begins by asking 
“which is the self ?”? and answers that itis the purusa, made of vijitana, 
the light within the heart, among the frdnas, that it, being like 
(samana), moves between two worlds, thinking and shaking as it 


BRHAD ARANYAKABHASYA 199 


were, and that, being dream (svapna) it goes beyond (atikramati) this 
world with its forms of death. 

Samkara: “being like....” what? Being like the buddhi, 
which is what is meant by the word “heart.” So the dbuddhi is illu- 
mined by the self, and we cannot distinguish the two, since light is 
pure and assumes the image of what it illumines. This is why all 
beings constantly superimpose the one on the other with constructions 
(vikalpa). So the self, assuming the likeness of the buddhi, moves 
constantly between this world and the next by constant births and 
deaths, appearing to think and move (‘‘shake’”). To show that the 
self is pure light and that samsdra does not pertain to it in its natural 
state the text adds that the self can transcend the waking world in 
dreams, which shows that it is not dependent on the body and organs, 
etc. 

Objection (by a Buddhist) : There is no self distinct from the buddhi 
and revealing it, for the only evidence we have from perception or 
inference is of one kind of conscious entity (dhi), and nothing attests 
a second kind. Actually the contents of consciousness just are con- 
sciousness, it reveals itself; there is nothing other than consciousness. 

Samkara : This is the (Buddhist) view. Some of them hold that 
consciousness (vijfidna) is pure and momentary, untainted by any 
duality between grasped and grasper (grahyagrahaka), whereas the 
Madhyamikas go even further and hold that both consciousness and 
external objects are simply void. So some (Buddhists) believe in 
external objects (bdhydrtha) and others do not. To those who do we 
reply that a pot is not self-luminous—when it is in the dark it does not 
illumine itself. 

Objection: But a lamp does! 

Samkara: No, since a lamp, like a jar, requires something else 
to reveal it even though it, unlike the jar, is luminous. 

Objector: The difference is that the jar requires a light to reveal 
it, whereas a lamp, being self-luminous, does not require another light. 

Samkara: No, both are alike revealed by consciousness. For 
something to be “‘revealed’’ (avabhdsa) requires that we notice some 
difference in it in the presence or absence of the revealer; thus what 
is revealed must be capable of being present or absent to its revealer. 
But the lamp cannot be absent to itself, so it cannot be its own reveal- 
er. Now both the lamp and the jar can be present or absent to their 
common revealer, consciousness. And this consciousness must, by 
analogy with other cases, be something distinct from what is revealed, 
Further, since that consciousness (of lamp or pot) is itself revealed, 
there must be another consciousness that reveals it, and that conscious- 
ness is the Self. 


200 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objector: That will produce an infinite regress. 

Samkara : No, the regress would only follow if we adopted as a 
principle that when A reveals B there must be a different thing C 
that reveals A. This principle is not generally true, since, for example, 
the eye, which reveals the lamp that reveals the jar, docs not require 
any other external revealer. Thus since there are counterexamples 
to the principle we cannot assume it in general, and no regress results. 

New objection: There are no external objects like jar or lamp apart 
from consciousness (vijfdna), since we never find them apart from 
consciousness. In this respect they are like dream objects, which are 
universally accepted as nothing but consciousness because they are 
not perceived apart from dream consciousness. Likewise, since 
the jar, lamp, etc., are not perceived apart from waking consciousness 
we draw the analogous conclusion. Thus the previous discussion is 
beside the point. 

Samkara : You must admit external objects in some sense, since 
you suppose that different words like ‘‘jar,” “lamp,” and ‘‘conscious- 
riess’”” mean different things. If you didn’t suppose there were differ- 
ent things to be meant these words would have to be viewed by you 
as synonymous, and Buddhist scriptures would have to be condemned 
as useless—debates would be impossible, etc. Since you admit dream 
consciousness to be real you must admit that its contents, the things 
we dream of, are distinct from consciousness, whether you wish to 
term them “real” or “unreal.” 

The Buddhist also objects to our view of a permanent Self (=con- 
sciousness) because of his doctrine of momentariness. But that doc- 


> 


trine is disproved by the fact that we recognize, for example, a jar to 
be the same jar as the one seen earlier. 

Objector : That recognition is due to similarity (sddrsya), as when 
we “recognize” hair, fingernails, etc., that have been cut and have 
grown again. 

Samkara : No, your example conflicts with your thesis of momen- 
tariness. And anyway, it is an inadequate analogy. When we sce 
hair, nails, etc., that have grown again we do not recognize them as 
the identical hair, nails, etc.; we only see that these things are the same 
kind of thing. But in the case of recognizing a jar we see that it is the 
identical jar. Furthermore, on your doctrine it would not be possi- 
ble to perceive similarity, since to do that something must persist long 
enough to perceive two things at different times and to see that they 
are similar. 

Objector: We hold that a single chain-like perception (eka... 
$rnkhalavatpratyaya) includes both the preceding and the later perceptions. 


BRHADARANYAKABHASYA 201 


Samkara : This is inconsistent with the doctrine of momentariness. 
Further, on your view consciousness is self-conscious (svasamvedya) 
only, unwitnessed by anything else; this being the case it cannot be 
viewed as having parts, being transitory, frustrating, void, etc., unless 
it is that way in its pure state, in which case liberation will be im- 
possible, purification of consciousness being out of the question. You 
may say that impurity enters consciousness when the grasper-grasped 
distinction qualifies it—but, if consciousness is the only thing therc is, 
nothing occasions the grasper-grasped distinction and so again 
either it is natura] to consciousness or it cannot arise there con- 
sistently with your view. Finally, there being no persisting self you 
cannot talk of consciousness as the highest end of life, since it is ex- 
tinguished upon death. 

IV.3.9 (E249-251; T631-636). This passage explains the mecha- 
nism of dreaming. Dream is said to be the third state, between this 
world and the next, in which one experiences the results of past karma 
and glimpses the results of future actions. In dreams the self, tinged 
by the impressions of his present waking life, “puts the body aside” 
by making it unconscious through exhausting some of its karma and 
creates a dream body (nirmana) comprised of past impressions 
(vdsand) as the consequence of past deeds; the impressions are then 
illuminated as contents (visaya) by the self’s “‘own light,” that is, by 
consciousness, and so the self becomes as if the subject of those con- 
tents as objects, but actually free from contact with elements (bh iia) 
and their accompaniments (bhautika), both external and internal. 

IV.3.22 (E265-266; T669-672). Some (commentators say Bhartr- 
prapafica) hold that desires (kéma) and impressions (vdsand) tinge 
the self and the buddhi “‘as the scent of flowers in the oil in which they 
have been boiled.”” The arguments of Vaisesikas and other systems 
are adduced to support this. 

Samkara: The arguments of other systems—Vaisesika, etc.— 
contradict scripture and thus are fallacious. Furthermore, if desires 
and impressions inhere in the self they cannot be known as its contents, 
just as the eye cannot see its own qualities. 

IV.3.23 (E266-268; T673-676). The question here is : why doesn’t 
the self “‘see” in the state of deep sleep, if it is naturally conscious ? 
How can a thing be conscious by nature and not know ? This puzzle 
is discussed at some length. The solution Samkara gives is that 
though the self is eternally conscious, in deep sleep there is no content, 
because in deep sleep the internal organ, senses, etc., are unified with 
the Highest Self. 

IV.3.30 (E269-270; T678-682). Samkara here defends the above 


202 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


interpretation against an alternative one, which has the text saying 
that the Self is both one and many (commentators say this is Bhartr- 
prapafica again), so that perception, etc., are different from one 
another and yet identical with the Self. Samkara’s answer is, first, 
that this is not what it is intended to prove, and, second, that the 
view is unacceptable. The apparent diversity among perceptions 
is due to adjuncts, just as a naturally transparent crystal appears to 
take on different colors due to reflecting things of those colors. 
Further, substances with no parts cannot have multiple properties; 
consider dkésa, which is said to have properties like all-pervadingness, 
etc., whereas in fact it is due to the presence of other things that 
aka§a appears all-pervasive. Or again, an atom of earth is said to 
have smell, but actually it zs smell, and the appearance that it has 
other qualities is due to its contact with other substances that are in 
turn naturally watery, etc. 

IV.4.2 (E279-281; T703-709). The discussion here concerns the 
precise mechanism of death and rebirth. First the organs collect in 
the subtle body and cease functioning; then the subtle body departs 
from the heart through its upper portion, leaving the body either 
through the eye, the top of the head, or another part of the body, 
depending on the kind of karmic store it takes with it. The experiences 
the karma-conditioned self now undergoes are, as in the case of 
dreams, dependent on that karma, and it in turn determines the 
kind of body the self will be reborn into. As for just how it gets to 
that next body, Samkara’s answer is that the vdsands form a stream 
that stretches from the old body to the new one, and they finally leave 
the old body when the new one has been made, the analogy given in 
the next Upanisadic passage being that of a leech’s motion along a 
straw. 

IV.4.6 (E285-289; T718-727). Now the text considers what 
happens at death in the case of “‘one who is without desires,” who is 
said to “merge into Brahman” (brahmdpyeti). Samkara interprets 
this as referring to the final body of the liberated self. His internal 
organ, etc., does not depart from the body. The passage about 
“merging with Brahman” is carefully explained to mean the achieve- 
ment of liberation while still alive, for if liberation were supposed to 
be a change of state occurring at death the doctrine of the unity of 
the self would be undermined and liberation would become the result 
of action, not of knowledge, and would not be eternal. 

Liberation is eternal and therefore must be the inherent nature of 
the self that is liberated. It is like fire, which is naturally hot and 
light-producing; its heat and light are not literally produced by one 


BRHADARANYAKABHASYA 203 


who builds a fire, but, rather, the natural properties of the fire become 
manifested upon the removal of obstructions. But one should not 
conclude that liberation is the production of absence (abhdva) of 
something, like breaking one’s bonds; for there is nothing else but 
the Self and thus no real bonds to be broken. Liberation is only the 
cessation of avidyd, like the cessation of a snake mistaken for a rope. 

Others hold that in liberation a consciousness and bliss are mani- 
fested different from the consciousness and pleasures experienced in 
this life. But they must say what they mean by “manifested.” If 
these properties are the natural, eternally experienced properties of 
the self then there is no point in saying they are manifested, since they 
are never not experienced. But if they are only manifested at certain 
times because of adjuncts obstructing them, they could never be 
manifested, since there would then have to be something else to bring 
about their manifestation and in which they reside, and liberation 
will be no different from bondage. If, however, these properties 
are said to reside in the self they cannot be experienced, for one does 
not experience one’s own properties. 

Objection : Liberation must make some difference, or no one would 
care about it and scripture would become useless. 

Answer: No, for ignorance must be removed, and both effort 
and scripture are required for that. 

Objection: The self that is under the sway of ignorance is surely 
affected by it, and so there is some difference in that self that differ- 
entiates bondage from release. 

Answer: No. One reason is that the Self witnesses ignorance. 
One cannot witness his own natural property, so ignorance must not 
be a natural property of the Self. 

Objector: But surely the Self is subject to error, since one has the 
feeling “I am confused,I do not know.” 

Samkara: No, because the confusion and ignorance are clearly 
recognized to be the contents of that feeling, not its subject! On our 
view, one who knows that he is confused is not confused. 

IV.5.15 (E312-316; 1785-796). The scriptural passages relating 
to samnydsa and the other dframas are inconsistent; thus here we shall 
discuss the real meaning of the scriptures on this point. One view 
is that the Vedas enjoin ritual actions for everyone except those who 
are unfit to perform them because of various shortcomings of their 
bodies, etc.; for such persons exceptions are made, and the life of the 
recluse (samnydsa) is meant for them. Samkara’s view, on the other 
hand, is that samnydsa is recommended for those who seek liberation, 
because in that state one can cultivate the kind of virtues required for 


204 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Self-knowledge, that is, meditation, discrimination, nonattachment, 
control of the senses. 

Objection: But the Vedas explicitly say that the injunction to 
perform the nityakarmans is for life. 

Answer: Right, it is for life for those unenlightened who are desir- 
ous of their fruits. But it does not follow that others must practise 
rites forever. The injunctions are graded in their applicability 
depending on the capacity and knowledge of men. It may be that 
we can say, in general, that castes (varya) other than Brahmins 
are so enjoined. 

V.I.1 (£318-322; T804-813). Once again an opponent (commen- 
tators say Bhartrprapafica) argues for a different view of Brahman, 
according to which Brahman is both dual (dvaita) and nondual 
(advaita), just as the ocean is real and nondual and the waves are also 
real but dual. By adopting this interpretation both the jfanakanda 
and the karmakdénda portions of scripture become valid, since they 
each deal with their respective aspect of Brahman. 

Answer: No. A thing cannot be both one and many. And the 
view contradicts scripture. The illustration of ocean and waves 
is applicable only in connection with effects that have parts; the 
Self; Brahman, has no parts and so is not in this way analogous to the 
ocean. Nor does your view help make sense of the two parts of 
scripture, since people do not have to be taught duality; they can see 
it as soon as they are born. Thus it is proper to assume that the 
karmakénda is addressed to people in their natural state of ignorance 
and that the jidnakaénda is meant for those who become disgusted with 
that state, so that each of the two has a distinct audience, and there 
is thus no conflict between the two. Finally, even supposing your 
account of Brahman were true, how would it help? How can 
Brahman instruct Itself, even if It be both one and many? If Deva- 
datta is both one and many (having hands, ears, tongue, etc.) it 
doesn’t make sense to suppose that the tongue will instruct the ear 
while the unitary Devadatta is unaffected, for Devadatta has only 
one consciousness, just as the ocean has only one water. 


TAITTIRIYOPANISADBHASYA 


Because Suresvara comments on this work its ascription to Sam- 
kara is rather straightforward. In addition, Van Boetzelaer briefly 
tries out some of Hacker’s criteria, although his concern is merely 
to point up Suregvara’s emphases.™ 

The Taittiriya Upanisad forms part of the Taittiriya Aranyaka of the 


TRAITTIRIYABHASYA 205 


(Black?) Yajurveda. It has three chapters: Siksavalli, Brahmavalli, 
and Bhrguvalli. The first, Siksavalli, is sometimes referred to as the 
Samhiti Upanisad, and the latter two chapters together are called the 
Varuni Upanisad.2® 

Balasubramaniam points out that “this Upanisad has become a 
classic for three of its outstanding teachings: (1) for the definition of 
Brahman in terms of its essential nature (svariipalaksana) as real, as 
knowledge, and infinite (safyam jianam anantam brahma) and also for 
the definition per accidens (tatasthalaksana) of Brahman as the cause, 
etc., of the universe; (2) for the method of discrimination between 
the Self and the not-Self through an inquiry into the fivefold sheath 
(koSa-paiicaka-viveka), and (3) for the calculus of pleasure (dnandasya 
mimamsa), which points to Brahman as bliss par excellence.’’?6 

“EK” references in the following summary are to the edition by 
H. R. Bhagavat in Works of Shankaracharya (Poona : Ashtekar & Co., 
1928). “‘T”? refers to the translation by Gambhirananda in Eight 
Upanishads (Calcutta: Advaita Ashrama, 1938), volume one. 


CHAPTER ONE : ON PRONUNCIATION (SIKSAVALLI) 


1. Introduction (E335-336; T231-237). After offering the 
usual salutations, Samkara explains that the Taittiriya Aranyaka prior 
to this point has discussed nityakarmans and kamyakarmans and now 
begins to discuss Brahman-knowledge, which is undertaken for the 
purpose of avoiding the cause of the performance of actions. That 
cause is desire (kama), for it incites one to act; nobody acts when his 
desires have been satisfied. Now, if one “desires,”’ that is, is devoted 
to the True Self his desires will be satisfied, for the Self is Brahman, 
and it will be said (below) that the knower of Brahman gains the 
Highest. Thus to be established in one’s own Self, when ignorance 
has ceased, is to attain the Highest. 

2. Objection: Liberation consists in being established in one’s 
Self without effort, and it arises from the nonarising of any further 
kaémya and pratisiddha (prohibited ) acts, from the cessation of experienc- 
ing of those that have begun (to ripen), and from the absence of sin 
(pratyavdya) from performance of the nityakarmans. Or else, libera- 
tion comes directly from actions alone, since they are the cause of 
the unsurpassable state called “heaven.” 

Answer: No, for acts are of many sorts, and so all karma cannot 
become exhausted in the experiencings of any single life; thus a new 
body will arise because of the remaining karma. 

3. Objection: ‘The nttyakarmans have the purpose of bringing to 
an end the good and bad fruits of that karma which has not yet begun 
to ripen, 


206 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer : No, for it is stated that notdoing (required acts) produces 
sin, And even if it were admitted that performance of nitya- 
karmans may bring an end to the fruition of karma not yet operative, 
still it is only the results of impure acts that could be thus destroyed, 
not those of pure acts. Since actions that have favorable results 
are naturally pure there is no opposition between them and the 
nityakarmans; only impure acts oppose pure ones. 

4. Furthermore, desires, which cause karma, cannot cease (entire- 
ly) unless there is knowledge. Desire belongs to those who know 
only the not-Self and is inappropriate with respect to one’s own Self 
since that (Self) is eternally realized, and one’s Self is the Highest 
Brahman—so it has been said. 

5. Anyway, the nonperformance of an act cannot literally pro- 
duce sin, since a negation cannot produce a positive entity. Non- 
performance of the nityakarmans thus “‘produces” sin only in the 
sense that it points to the fruition of sinful acts done in the past. So 
neither performance nor nonperformance of nityakarmans can destroy 
all karma. 

6. As for your alternative argument (section 2 above) that 
“liberation comes directly from actions alone since they are the cause 
of gaining heaven,” that is also wrong, for liberation is an eternal 
thing and so cannot be produced from actions. 

7. Objection: But actions together with knowledge (vidya) can 
produce an eternal thing, just as posterior absence (pradhvamsabhava) 
of pot is produced by destroying the pot but is never afterward capable 
of being destroyed. 

Answer: No, for liberation (unlike posterior nonexistence) is a 
positive thing (bhava). Anyway, posterior absence cannot have a 
beginning—there is only one absence (abhdva) and it only seems to 
be differentiated by conceptual constructions (vikalpa) endowing it 
with connections with motions, qualities, and the like. Absences 
cannot really have qualities, etc., as a lotus can; if they could, 
they would become positive entities, not negative ones. 

8. Objection: Well, the subject of knowledge and actions (the 
Self) is eternal, so Its liberation is eternal. 

Answer: No, for agency naturally involves frustration. And 
further, if it were to cease, liberation would also cease. ‘Therefore 
liberation involves remaining in one’s own Self after the cessation of 
the material causes (updddnahetu) (of bondage), namely, ignorance, 
desires, and actions. Now the cessation of ignorance follows from 
knowledge that one’s very own Self is Brahman, and that is why the 
Upanisad is begun, for the purpose of conveying Brahman-knowledge. 


TAITTIRIYABHASYA 207 


9. That knowledge is actually denoted by the term “‘upanisad,” 
either because it ends birth and old age, etc., or because it takes one 
near Brahman, or because the highest good is nearby in it. And so 
this book is also called “‘upanisad,” since it is meant for that purpose. 

10. 1.11 (E350-358; T283-294). Here begins a discussion as to 
whether liberation comes from action alone, or from action assisted 
by knowledge, or from a combination of action and knowledge, or 
from knowledge assisted by action, or from knowledge alone. 

11. First opponent: Liberation comes from actions alone, since 
according to smrfi a man who knows the Vedas thoroughly is pre- 
pared for (adhikéra) action. And some say that the whole of the 
Vedas have action as their purport, andif liberation cannot be achiev- 
ed by action the Vedas will be useless. 

Answer: No, since liberation is eternal, and every effect of action 
is well known in the world to be noneternal. 

12. Objection: When kémya- and pratisiddha- actions no longer 
arise, and when the actions already performed are consumed by 
experiencing (their fruits), then from the eternal performance of the 
nityakarmans, since sin cannot come from them, liberation accrues 
without dependence on knowledge. 

Answer: No; as was explained in the introduction (see section 2 
above) the residual karma of past actions may still produce new 
births, etc. Now, as for the opponent’s assertion that a man who 
knows the Vedas thoroughly is prepared for action, that is wrong, 
for meditation (updsana) is a different thing from gaining knowledge 
through hearing (the Vedas). One becomes competent for action 
merely by hearing the Vedas; meditation on them is not necessary for 
that. But meditation is enjoined as a different thing from Vedic 
study, and it is well known that it is different and that it, rather than 
mere study, results in liberation. 

13. Second opponent: So liberation must result from action assist- 
ed by knowledge. Actions when accompanied by knowledge can 
produce different results than actions alone, just as poison, curd, etc., 
which by themselves cause death, discomfort, etc., when mixed with 
mantras, sugar, etc., produce other results. 

Answer: No, since anything produced by action is noneternal. 

14. Opponent: The Chandogya Upanisad (VIII.15.1) says that 
liberation is both eternal and produced. 

Answer : Scripture cannot create something that does not exist— 
even a hundred passages cannot make something that has an origin 
into something eternal. 

15. This reasoning also disproves the third opponent’s position— 


208 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


which says that action and knowledge in combination can produce 
liberation. Indeed, liberation is not something that can be produced 
at all, at least in the sense in which someone has to go to a different 
place or state to get it, because one’s very self, always present, is not a 
different place or state. 

16. Objection: This contradicts scriptural texts concerning the 
paths (gatz) that are followed by those departing the body, as well 
as the power (aifvarya) they attain, etc. 

Answer: No, those texts relate only to Brahmanas effect (karya- 
brahman). Anyway, knowledge and action are contradictory in 
nature and so cannot be combined. The latter requires distinctions 
between agent, action, and result, etc.; the latter presupposes their 
absence ; thus one or the other must be false (mithyd). And the 
scriptures are very clear that it is the one involving differences that is 
false, not the other. 

17. Objection: If actions are false then the Vedas surely would 
not enjoin them! But in fact the Vedas do enjoin us to act, and 
since scripture is a valid means of knowledge it must view action as 
the means to the highest end. 

Answer: No. The purpose of scripture is to instruct us concerning 
human goals (purusartha), that is, to convey knowledge that will cause 
the cessation of ignorance and so lead to liberation. 

18. Objector: Even so, scripture establishes the existence of 
agency, etc., and your account contradicts that. 

Answer: No. The scripture proceeds hypothetically, by assum- 
ing the existence of distinctions between agent, act, and fruit, etc., 
and enjoining actions for those who wish for liberation, but it does 
not establish the existence of those distinctions. Rather, the injunc- 
tive portions of the scripture are addressed to those who have desires 
and other hindrances resulting from past actions, and they enjoin 
nityakarmans in order to remove these hindrances so that desirelessness 
will result, upon which ignorance may be dispatched and liberation 
achieved. The Vedic texts that enjoin acts are not contradictory to 
the requirements of (the Upanisadic account of) knowledge. They 
support that account, but just because of that, actions have no place 
in the achievement of the highest goal. 

19. Objection: Then there can only be one stage of life, house- 
holdership, since actions are enjoined for householders only. 

Answer: Certainly not. There are many actions, and lots of them 
are practiced in other stages of life—for example, celibacy, truthful- 
ness, nonviolence, meditation, etc. Even before becoming a house- 
holder one may gain knowledge from actions performed in previous 


TAITTIRIYABHASYA 209 


lives, and in that case, since householdership is intended for perform- 
ance of acts that will provide just that kind of knowledge, entry into 
it at this point is unnecessary. Again, one who has lost all desire for 
worldly ends and has nothing to achieve through action will not 
perform acts even if he accepts (outwardly) the stage of householder- 
ship, and will properly be accounted a monk, etc. 

20. Objector: Since the Vedas enjoin such difficult actions as 
the agnihotra sacrifice, etc., which involve much effort, and since 
these injunctions apply to the householder, whereas the other kinds 
of actions you mention can be more easily performed in all the stages, 
it is not right to say that the householder’s duties are on the same 
footing as those of the other stages. 

Answer: No, for even the householder’s actions may be easier 
due to other acts performed in previous lives. As for the fact that the 
Vedas dwell on the agnihotra, etc., the kinds of acts householders per- 
form with effort, that is true but presents no problem for our account: 
for those who are not attached to the world other stages are appro- 
priate, whereas for those who are attached there is a variety of actions 
for which such people have desire, and it is natural that the Vedas 
should spend a lot of time on them, especially since these actions are 
beneficial in obtaining the knowledge leading to liberation. 

21. Objection: Well, if that is true—that actions produce the 
knowledge leading to liberation—then there is no need for any other 
kind of effort like, for example, studying the Upanisads, etc. 

Answer: No, for there is no rule that knowledge arises merely 
from removal of the obstructions to it; it is not precluded that the 
grace of God, asceticism, or meditation may be required in addition 
for gaining the knowledge in question. That is why other stages of 
life are needed, and it also shows that people in any stage of life may 
be prepared for knowledge, and that it is through knowledge alone 
that the highest goal is attained. 


CHAPTER TWO : THE BLISS OF BRAHMAN 
(BRAHMAVALLI) 


1. (E355-362; T298-318). The Upanisad states that the one 
who knows Brahman attains the Highest, that Brahman is truth 
(satya), knowledge (jfidna), and unending (ananta), that he who 
knows Brahman as existing in the secret place (guha) simultaneously 
enjoys all desires. It goes on to say that from Brahman, which is 
the Self, came akasa, from akafa came wind, from wind fire, from fire 
water, from water earth, from earth plants, from plants food, from 
food man, who is of the essence of food. The self (déman) is the head, 
the sides, the tail of man. 


210 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


2. Objection: As it will be said that Brahman is the Self of all, 
and all-pervading, it follows It cannot be attained. Something is 
only seen to be attained when it is a limited thing and attained by 
another limited thing, but Brahman is unlimited. 

Answer: That is no fault, for the attainment or nonattainment of 
Brahman depends on Its being seen or not. Just as the tenth man 
counting the present company counts nine and fails to count himself, 
so the self, veiled by ignorance, counts himself as the body, etc., and 
fails to count his real Self; likewise, just as someone may point out 
to the tenth man that he is the tenth in the company, so scripture 
may point out to the ignorant self that the omnipresent Brahman is 
actually his real Self. 

3. The statement that Brahman is truth, knowledge, and unend- 
ing is meant as a definition of Brahman; it indicates differentia of 
Brahman by marking out this noun ‘“‘Brahman’’ from other nouns. 

4. Objection: Indication of the meaning of a noun by specifying 
differentiating features is appropriate only when the differentia stand 
in contrast to other possible qualifications; for example, a lotus may 
be singled out by the qualification ‘“‘blue”’ but only because “‘blue”’ 
contrasts with “‘red’’ and other possible qualities that might qualify 
other nouns of that class. Now there is only one Brahman, and so 
there are no other nouns of that class from which ‘Brahman’ can be 
distinguished. So the sentence in question cannot be a definition. 

Answer : No, for the adjectives used here have a defining, though 
not a qualifying, function. A qualifying adjective distinguishes a 
thing named by a noun from other things of its own class, but a 
definition demarcates the thing from everything else. Now the defin- 
ing adjectives here mentioned distinguish Brahman from everything 
else, all that is unreal, finite, and characterized by the knower-known 
relationship. 

5. Objection: Since it is said (e.g., in Chandogya Upanisad 
VII.24.1) that one does not know anything else (but Brahman) it 
follows that the Self is knowable. 

Answer : No, that sentence too is a definition; it says that Brahman 
is (by definition) that in which one does not see anything else, that is, 
It is that in which that kind of action—seeing other things—does not 
occur at all. And since there are now such differences in one’s Self, 
knowledge (vijfiana) is impossible in It. And if the Self were an 
object of knowledge (vijfieya) there would be no knower. 

6. Objection: The one Self can be both knower and known. 

Answer: No, since the Self has no parts it cannot simultaneously 
be both knower and known, Again, if the Self were cognizable like 


TAITTIRIYABHASYA 211 


a pot instruction about It would be pointless. If, like a pot, It were 
already familiar there would be no point in the Vedas pointing It 
out. If the Self were a knower (in that sense) It could not be said 
to be unending or absolute truth; so the expression “‘Brahman is 
knowledge”’ is intended to exclude all activities such as agency, etc., 
from It, as well as to deny that It is nonconscious like earth, etc. 

7. Objection: You say that the purpose of this sentence ‘‘Brah- 
man is truth, etc.’ .is only to preclude certain characteristics apply- 
ing. But since Brahman is not well known to us, as, for example, a 
lotus is, this ‘‘definition” may as well apply to nothing at all (sénya), 
as is the case with the following sentence : ‘Having bathed in a 
mirage and put sky-flowers on his head, the son of a barren woman 
goes armed with a bow made of hare’s horn !” 

Answer : No, for our sentence is a definition and there is no point 
to a definition of nonentities. When we say that the adjectives 
“truth, knowledge, unending’’ are used to define but not to qualify 
we do not mean to imply that they do not distinguish the things they 
are applied to from other things—indeed they do so by denying their 
opposites (unlike the terms used in your nonsense example). Even 
the word ‘‘Brahman”’ has its own specific meaning (and so is not like 
nondenoting expressions such as “‘hare’s horn,” etc.). 

8. The text goes on to say “from that Brahman that is the Self,’ 
thus indicating that Brahman is the cognizer, the agent of cognition. 

9. Objection: If Brahman is the cognizer, the agent of cognition, 
then it follows that It is capable of having desires, that It is imperma- 
nent, and that It is dependent. Even if you insist that Brahman is 
consciousness, and so not the cognizer, still It is impermanent and 
dependent, because the meanings of verb roots (dhdtu) are dependent 
on the cases (kdraka) of nouns, and ‘‘consciousness’’, that is, ‘‘knowl- 
edge,” has meaning derived from a verb root (and so is dependent 
on a noun). 

10. Answer: No, the consciousness that is the very nature of the 
Self and inseparable from It is referred to here in only a secondary 
sense (upacdra) as an effect. The cognitions that are effects are the 
transformations of the buddhi, which take the form of their objects, 
having passed out through the openings of the visual organ, etc. 
These transformations are illuminated by consciousness and so resem- 
ble It; it is they that are the cognitions and that relate to the verb 
root “to know,” and it is they that are mistakenly supposed to be 
properties of the Self and subject to change. But the consciousness 
of Brahman is inseparable from It, just as the sun’s light is inseparable 
from the sun or the heat of the fire from fire. Consciousness is not 


212 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


dependent on any other cause. Since everything is nondisjoined 
from Brahman in time or space, and since Brahman is exceedingly 
subtle, it follows that there is nothing different from It, subtler than 
It, or in any way remote from Brahman in such a way that it is un- 
knowable in past, present, or future; thus Brahman is omniscient. 
So Brahman is not the agent of cognition and cannot even be 
denoted (properly) by the word “knowledge” (jfidna), though 
that word is used to indicate Brahman figuratively, for knowledge 
resembles pure consciousness. Likewise, Brahman is not denoted 
by the word “truth” (satya), which naturally means external reality 
but can be secondarily indicated by it. In this way these words 
“knowledge,” “truth,” “unending”? when juxtaposed in this way and 
mutually restricting each other, though they neither separately nor 
together denote Brahman, can nevertheless serve as a definition. 
Actually, however, Brahman cannot be spoken of (directly) and 
unlike the blue lotus cannot be taken to be the meaning of any 
sentence. 

11, Samkara now turns to the next part of the textual passage, 
which states that one who knows Brahman enjoys all desires. The 
“secret place” referred to is the buddhi. The Brahman-knower is 
here said to enjoy all desires simultaneously—through a single, eternal 
consciousness—and not progressively as conditioned by merit and 
demerit, sense organs, etc. 

12. The remainder of the text is construed as a kind of gloss on 
the preceding—and major—portion and is intended to show how 
Brahman can be understood as truth, knowledge, and unending. 
There are three kinds of unendingness—spatial, temporal, and with 
respect to real things. For example, dkdfa is unending spatially but 
not temporally because it is a product. But Brahman is unending 
both spatially and temporally. Again, with respect to real things— 
substances—ordinary substantial things, like cows and horses, limit 
each other in virtue of their classifications; an idea of cowhood is in 
opposition to that of horsehood, etc. But Brahman is not differen- 
tiated in this way, and so has unendingness in the third sense as well. 
Why? Because Brahman is the cause of everything. 

Objection: In this latter respect Brahman is limited by being 
dependent on Its own effects. 

Answer: No, for those “effects” are unreal (anria). For there 
are no real effects distinct from their causes. 

13. 1.5 (E366-368; T332-338). The dnandamaya sheath is not 
Brahman, but a conditioned self, since the Upanisad will say (11.8.5) 
that the dnandamaya self is obtained, and only non-Self can be an 


TAITTIRIYABHASYA 913 


effect. Furthermore, the Self cannot obtain Itself, since It is never 
divorced from It. Again, the kinds of things the Upanisad says 
about the dnandamaya self—that it is the ‘‘head”’ (symbolically) of the 
“body” consisting of the sheaths—are inappropriate as applied to 
Brahman. Bliss (dnanda) is the result (phala) of knowledge (vidya) 
and action (karman); knowledge and action are undertaken in order 
to acquire bliss. Thus it is appropriate that the self of bliss (dnanda- 
maya) should be the inmost sheath. 

14. I1.6 (E368-374; T338-355). Samkara finds three questions 
asked in this passage : one, does Brahman exist or not? two, does 
the unenlightened man reach Brahman or doesn’t he? and, three, 
does the enlightened man reach Brahman or doesn’t he? 

As to one, Brahman exists, since It has been spoken of as “‘truth’’ 
(satya). 

15. Objection: I suspect that Brahman does not exist, for what- 
ever exists is grasped as possessing distinctive properties (vifesa), 
like a pot, whereas what does not exist is not perceived, for example, 
a hare’s horn; now Brahman is not perceived, so It does not exist. 

Answer: No, for Brahman is the cause of @kafa, etc. In the world 
we note that the causes of existing things themselves exist, for example, 
the earth that is the cause of the pot is held to exist. So Brahman, 
being the cause of dkdfa, exists. An existing thing cannot come 
from a nonentity. 

16. Objector: If Brahman is a cause like earth It will be non- 
conscious (acetana). 

Answer: No, for Brahman is capable of desires. 

17. Opponent: Then Brahman must have wants, as we do! 

Answer: No, for Brahman is independent, that is, Brahman’s 
desires do not impel Him to activity as ours do us. Brahman’s 
desires are truth and knowledge, and they are pure because they are 
of Brahman’s very nature. Although Brahman is not impelled to 
act by them He is the inciter of them in accordance with the karma 
of living beings. And so He has no wants. 

18. Furthermore, whereas we are dependent on instrumental 
causes (nimitta) such as merit, etc., and require causes and effects 
over and beyond ourselves in order to realize our desires, Brahman 
is not dependent on such instrumental causes. 

19. Question: Then how is Brahman related to such instrumental 


causes ? 
Answer: They are nondifferent from It. 


20. Question: How can something become many except by 
entering into something else? 


214 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer: Through manifestation of name-and-form residing in 
itself. When the name-and-form that exists unmanifested in the 
Self are manifested, then they become manifested in all the spatial 
and temporal states that are not different from Brahman, though 
without abandoning their own natures. Thus Brahman appears 
as many. But Brahman does not consist of name-and-form. They 
are said to be of the nature of Brahman because when Brahman is 
denied they are too. They are the two adjuncts through which 
Brahman enters as an aspect of empirical dealings involving knower, 
known, and knowing. 

21. The Upanisad goes on to speak of creation, saying that Brah- 
man created all this through austerities (tapas), and having created 
it, entered it. The question then arises : did the Creator enter the 
world in His own form or another form ? 

22. First opponent: On grounds of the grammar of the text He 
must have entered it in His own form. 

Second opponent: That’s not right, for if Brahman is a cause like 
clay, Its effects are nondifferent from It, and so It cannot enter into 
Its effects any more than clay can enter into a pot already made. 

First opponent: But the clay may enter into a pot made of clay in 
some other guise, say as dust; likewise Brahman can enter into the 
world as, say, name-and-form. 

Second opponent: No, for Brahman is single, unlike clay; some- 
thing made up of many parts can enter in “another form,” but not as 
a single entity. 

First opponent: Perhaps, then, Brahman enters as the hand enters 
the mouth. 

Second opponent : No, for there’s no empty space that is not already 
Brahman. 

First opponent: Then let’s just say that one effect of Brahman, 
the jiva, enters into another effect, name-and-form. 

Second opponent: No. A pot doesn’tenter into another pot. Again, 
the Vedas carefully distinguished the jiva from name-and-form. 
And finally, if the jiva actually enters into the world liberation will 
be impossible—one doesn’t enter into what he tries to get free of. 
First opponent: Then the entry may be in the sense of becoming 
reflected (pratibimbatva), as the sun is reflected in water. 

Second opponent: No, for Brahman is not limited and has no fea- 
tures. A thing like the sun, which has features and is limited, may 
be reflected, but the Self cannot be since It has no shape and is all- 
pervasive, and since there is thus no place outside the Self where the 
reflecting medium might be located. So there is no way in which 


TAITTIRIYABHASYA 215 


Brahman can enter the world, and we must disregard the text in 
question, 

23. Samkara: The passage has a different meaning, one appro- 
priate to the context, which has to do with gaining knowledge of 
Brahman. The successive effects beginning with akdfa and ending 
with food have been introduced in order to induce knowledge of 
Brahman, and the progress goes on through the ‘“‘selves’”? made of 
breath (prdna), knowledge (vijfana), and bliss (dnanda). When 
the text here speaks of ‘‘entering,’”’ it has in mind this progression, 
that is, that the inquisitive self—which is Brahman_ itself—enters 
into its own creation to rediscover itself successively. But all of this 
way of speaking is empirical (vydvaha@rika), not from the highest stand- 
point (pdramarthika). 

24. II.8.5 (E379-382; 1370-382). The Upanisad here says 
that this Brahman is both in the person (purusa) and in the sun. One 
who knows the self as made of food (annamaya), made of breath 
(pranamaya), made of manas (manomaya), made of knowledge (vijfana- 
maya), and made of bliss (dnandamaya), he attains the self of each sort 
progressively. 

25. Samkara: Who is this “cone who knows the self,” and how 
does he attain the self of each sort? Is the attainer different from 
the Highest Self? If so, scripture will be contradicted; if not, the 
same self will be said to attain itself, and the Highest Self will be 
reduced to a transmigrating being or the “highest absence” ! 

Now the attainer must be the Highest Self, since it is said that it 
“becomes that,’ and one cannot become something other than what 
one is. And that is not unsound, because the idea is that the attainer 
must remove the things that are not of the nature of the Self but that 
are produced from ignorance—things such as the “self made of 
food,” etc. For the instruction has to do with knowledge alone, and 
the result of knowledge is to remove ignorance. 

26. Objection : Rather, the situation may be like the information 
offered to someone who is asking his way—one seeks information about 
the village he wants to get to, but it doesn’t follow that he is that 
village ! 

Answer: The example is not apt, for the knowledge provided to 
one asking his way concerns the path that one should follow by walk- 
ing, not by knowing, whereas in the present case no path other than 
knowledge itself is alluded to. 

27. Objection: ‘The path is knowledge of Brahman coupled with 
performance of previously enjoined actions. 

Answer: No, for it has already been shown that liberation is 


216 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


eternal, and the present texts (about the Self entering) agree with 
that. The enlightened man sees nothing different from his Self, 
and so nothing exists for him as a separate thing that could cause 
bondage (here, “fear” [bhaya]). Anyway, it is appropriate that 
knowledge be adduced to destroy duality if duality is a product of 
ignorance, just as the absence of a real second moon is not grasped 
by one whose visual organ is diseased (taimirika). 

28. Objection: But we do not thus grasp absence-of-duality-in- 
general. 

Answer: Yes we do, in deep sleep and in samadhi. 

29. Objection: Duality exists, since we perceive it in the waking 
and dream states. 

Answer: No, since those states are the results of ignorance; when 
ignorance ceases, perception of duality in waking and dream experi- 
ences cease. 

30. Objector: Then the nonperception of duality in deep sleep 
is also a result of ignorance. 

Answer: No, for there it is natural. The nature of a substance 
(dravya) is unchangeable (avikriya) because it does not depend on any 
other thing. Change is not natural, since it is dependent. Now 
any differentiating characteristic (visesa) of an existing thing is depen- 
dent on causal factors, so differentiation is change. And perceptions 
in waking and dream states are differentiations, thus dependent on 
something else, and so nonperception of things in those states is not 
natural, but in deep sleep there are no differentiations, so non- 
perception in that state is natural. 

31. For those for whom God is different from the Self, and for 
those for whom creation is different, there is no cessation of fear, 
for fear is caused by something being the cause of another, but if that 
cause exists it cannot be destroyed, and if it doesn’t exist it cannot 
attain itself. 

32. Objection: Both knowledge and ignorance are properties 
of the Self. 

Answer: No, because they are perceived, like colors, etc., as states 
of the internal organ (antahkarana). Color, etc., cannot be properties 
of the perceiver. Knowledge and ignorance, being perceptible, 
are name-and-form, not properties of the Self; name-and-form are 
only imagined or constructed (kalpita), like night and day (are imagi- 
ned) in the sun; really, they do not occur. 


UPADESASAHASRI 217 
UPADESASAHASRI 


For the most careful scholarship on this work we are indebted to 
Sengaku Mayeda, who has examined it exhaustively.2? Since it is a 
prakarana or topical treatise rather than a commentary, and since so 
many such treatises traditionally ascribed to Samkara are likely to 
be spurious, the authenticity of this one is especially worthy of close 
attention. Mayeda has compared the style and content of the 
Upadesasahasri with the Brahmasitrabhasya, using Hacker’s criteria. 
He has also examined the fact, indicated long ago by G. A. Jacob,” 
that Suresvara’s Naiskarmyasiddhi depends on and quotes voluminously 
from the Upadesasahasri, and he has discussed evidence supporting 
Suregvara’s having ascribed the UpadeSasdhasri to his teacher Sam- 
kara. Evidence from the writings of others—Bhaskara, Vidyaranya, 
Sadananda—is also adduced. The upshot is overwhelmingly in 
favor of Samkara’s authorship. 

This work has two parts, one metrical, the other in prose. Only 
the metrical sections are quoted by the authors Mayeda studies, 
and one might therefore question whether the prose part has as much 
claim to authenticity. Mayeda argues that the prose passages as 
well as the metrical ones show agreement in doctrine and style with 
Samkara’s unquestioned work. He remarks, in addition, “It is not 
common in India that works in prose except the Srutis are quoted 
verbatim,’’” 

Mayeda returns to the question of the two parts in another article,30 
in which he develops the arguments summarized above and adds 
other information. One conclusion of some interest is that the nine- 
teen chapters of the verse section were each composed independently 
at different times. Another is that the prose section shows a unity 
of purpose that suggests it is a complete work in itself. Further- 
more, the prose section quotes from the fifteenth chapter of the 
verse section. The order followed in the summary below places the 
prose section before the verse section, following the practice of all the 
printed editions, though some manuscripts (Mayeda points out) 
reverse the order, and commentators on the work differ in their 
assumptions about the order. 

The edition and translation to which “ET” references are made 
in the summary are to Swami Jagadananda, Upadeshasahasri of Sri 
Sankaracharya (Mylapore, Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1949). 
Numbering of passages follows Jagadananda’s work. 


218 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


PART I (PROSE) 


CHAPTER ONE : TREATISE ON INSTRUCTIONS FOR 
TEACHERS 


I.1.1 (ETI). The instruction is to be used to teach those seekers 
of liberation who desire and have faith in its purport. 

1.1.2 (ET2). The means of liberation, namely, knowledge (jidna), 
needs to be repeatedly explained to a pure Brahmin pupil whois without 
desire for anything noneternal, who has abandoned desire for sons, 
wealth, and for this world or the next, who has taken up the life of a 
wandering monk (paramahamsa parivrijaka), who has control over his 
mind and senses, who has qualities such as compassion, etc., as well 
as being versed in the Sdstras, and who has come to the teacher in the 
manner prescribed and been examined about his background. 

1.1.3 (ET2-3). Upanisads and Bhagavadgitaé are quoted in support 
of the previous passage. 

1.1.4-5 (ET4). When theteacher finds thatthe pupil doesn’t under- 
stand, he must remove the causes of that lack of understanding, those 
causes being lack of merit, lax conduct, failure to discriminate between 
things that are eternal and those that are not, playing to the public, 
pride in caste, etc. These faults can be removed by practising means such 
as nonanger and observance of the vows of noninjury, etc., as long as 
the means are not incompatible with knowledge. The teacher should 
also encourage the development of virtues such as modesty, etc. 

1.1.6 (ET5). The teacher is one who knows thearguments for and 
against, understands and remembers the pupil’s questions, has such 
virtues as tranquillity, self-control, compassion, and a desire to help 
others, one who knows the Sastras and is nonattached to any pleasures or 
frustrations both present and future, who has renounced actions and 
their means, who knows Brahman and is fixed in It, who observes the 
rules of conduct and lacks faults such as pride, deceit, jealousy, etc. 
His only purpose is to help others attain knowledge of Brahman. 
He should begin by teaching those scriptural texts dealing with 
the identity of Self and Brahman. 

I.1.7-8 (ET6-7). Next he should teach the defining marks of 
Brahman as set forth in scripture. Examples are provided. 

1.1.9-11 (ET7). Now, if the pupil has grasped those marks and 
wishes to achieve liberation, the teacher should ask him ‘‘Who are 
you ?” If he says, “I am a member of such and such family, have 
been a student and am now amonk...” the teacher should say 
‘““How can you hope to cross the ocean of samsdéra when your body 
will be eaten by birds or will turn into earth ?” 


UPADESASAHASRI 219 


1.1.12-13 (ET8-9). Ifthe pupil should then say “But Iam not the 
body; I enter into and leave bodies beginninglessly and so am bound 
into an endless cycle of births and deaths. I am tired of this circling 
and have come to you to terminate it,”’ the teacher should say “You are 
right; so why did you first say you were a member of such and such 
a family, etc,...?” 

I.1.14-17 (ET9-10). ‘To say what you first said identifies the 
self with the body, but the two are quite different.” 

1.1.18 (ET11-12). When the pupil has remembered the definition of 
the Self that he was taught (I.1.7-8), the teacher should summarize 
the truth about that Self. It is different from name-and-form, has 
no body, isnot gross or containing demerit, not touched by samsdra, 
is of the nature of eternal knowledge, all-pervading, without inside 
or outside, omnipotent, the Self of all, without desires, omnipresent. 
By Its unthinkable power It is the support of name-and-form, the 
seeds of the world, merely by existing in the world in an indescrib- 
able (anirvacaniya) way. 

1.1.19-20 (ET 12-13). The name-and-form first took the name 
and form of dkéfa; this name-and-form rose from the Highest Self like 
dirtyfoam from clear water. Becoming grosser as evolution progress- 
ed the name-and-form took the form of air, then fire, water, and 
earth. In this order each preceding element entered each succeed- 
ing one, and so the five gross elements came into existence. From 
earth, made up of all five elements, various food-providing plants 
are produced, and when they are eaten they form sperm and blood 
in the bodies of men and women. When these are churned forth by 
sexual passion springing from avidyé and are sanctified by mantras, 
they are poured into the womb, and an embryo is developed, which 
is delivered in the ninth or tenth month. 

1.1.21 (ET13-14). The child, when born, is givena name and form 
and is purified by mantras at various ceremonies. When invested it 
gets the name of student, and when married it gets the name of 
householder, etc. Thus the body, which is subject to these changes 
of name-and-form, is different from the Self. 

1.1.22 (ET14). The internal organ and the sense organs are 
also of the nature of name-and-form. 

I.1.23-24 (ET14-16). So you see that your Self is quite different 
from the ‘“‘you”’ that has a caste and a family and which undergoes 
purification at ceremonies, etc. 

1.1.25 (ET16-17). If the pupil says “(I see !) That Self and I 
are entirely different. So I want to worship Him and by doing so 
escape from samsdra. But how can I then be that Self?” 


220 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


I.1.26-29 (ET17-19), The teacher should then say “Don’t you believe 
it; it is prohibited to believe that the Self and oneself are different. 
Why ? Because the scripture indicates that one who believes in the 
difference of the two will surely get more samsdra, but it also declares 
that those who realize the identity of Self and Brahman will 
achieve final release.” 

1.1.30-32 (ET19-21). ‘Now since it is forbidden to believe in differ- 
ence, once one has realized that one is identical with the Supreme Self the 
ritual acts such as investiture are also forbidden, since they involve 
the assumption of difference and are thus inconsistent with the knowl- 
edge gained. Thus the injunctions in the Vedas to perform ritual 
acts are binding only on transmigrating beings, and not on those 
who have gained the knowledge of their identity with the Supreme Self. 
Scripture bears out that rites, etc., have nothing to do with the Self, 
and scripture wouldn’t have stated thus if it was not intended that 
such actions should be given up.” 

1.1.33 (ET21-22). The pupil may now say “I perceive directly 
the pain produced by burning or cutting my body and from my hunger, 
etc. But the Highest Self I know to be free from pain and hunger, 
etc. So how can I be identical with that Self?” 

1.1.34 (ET 22-23). The teacher should say in answer to this: “It 
isn’t right to localize your pain in your Self, for pain is always 
localized in the place where the injury occurred. We say ‘I have a 
pain in the head, or the chest, or the stomach,’ but we don’t say ‘I 
have a pain in my Self?!” 

1.1.35 (ET23-24). “Furthermore, if pain were in the Self it couldn’t 
be felt at all, just as the eye’s own color cannot be perceived by that 
eye. Since it is an effect, pain must have a locus, just as cooked rice 
must be cooked in something. Now the trace (samskdéra) set up by 
pain must have the same locus as the feeling of pain, since one 
perceives them in memory. Likewise the aversion to pain must be 
located in the same place.” 

1.1.36 (ET24-25). ‘What is the locus of the traces of pain and 
of colors, desires, aversions, etc. ? It is the buddhi, as scripture shows.” 

1.1.37-38 (ET25-28). ‘Therefore the traces of color and form 
etc., have no relation with you, and thus you are nondifferent essen- 
tially from the Highest Self. Perception does not controvert this.” 
Scriptural and smrti passages are adduced. 

1.1.39 (ET28). The pupil may now say “If this is all so, what 
is referred to in the scripture and smi and ordinary talk when the 
subject is action, agent, and object, about which there is a great 
deal of controversy ?” 


UPADESASAHASRI 221 


1.1.40 (ET28-29). The teacher should answer : ‘Everything ex- 
perienced or spoken of in scripture is made from avidya. Really 
there is only the one Self, which appears to be many, as the moon 
appears many to one with an eye disease.” 

1.1.41 (ET29-30). Pupil : “Then why do the scriptures speak of 
the differences among ends, means, etc., as well as the origination 
and destruction of things ?’’ 

1.1.42 (ET30-31). Teacher : “Scripture gradually teaches an ignor- 
ant man to discriminate what will really achieve what is desirable 
and toavoid what is undesirable, and it is this that is the purpose of 
scripture; it does not prove differences among ends and means, etc., 
since it is just these differences that constitute samsdra. Scripture, 
therefore, roots out avidya by demonstrating the unity of origination 
and dissolution, etc.” 

1.1.43 (ET31). ‘And when this has occurred one’s knowledge 
becomes established in the one Self in which the least taint of impurity 
is inconceivable.” 

1.1.44 (ET31-32). ‘(One who wants to achieve this highest knowl- 
edge must abandon the desires for son, wealth, and worlds, which 
desires arise from the notion that the self belongs to castes, stages of 
life, etc. Thus all ritual actions must be given up, since they are the 
result of ignorance.” 


CHAPTER TWO : ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE CHANGELESS, 
NONDUAL SELF 


1.2.45 (ET33-34). <A student aspiring to liberation approached in 
the proper manner a knower of Brahman and asked : “Sir, how can 
I be liberated from this samsdra? I possess feelings of the body, senses, 
and their objects in waking and in dream and again after I have slept. 
Is this (experiencing) natural to me or is it accidental, my true 
nature being different? If it is natural to me I can have no hope 
of liberation, since one cannot change his own nature. But if it be 
accidental, liberation may be achieved by removing the cause.” 

1.2.46 (ET34). The teacher said: ‘Listen, my child, it is not 
natural, and it is accidental.” 

1.2.47 (ET34). Pupil: “Then what is the cause, and what will 
remove it, and what is my own nature? Once the cause is removed 
the effect will become absent and I shall return tomy own nature, 
just like a patient who returns to health when the cause of his 
disease is removed.” 

1.2.48 (ET34-35). Teacher : “The cause is avidya. Knowledge (vidya) 
removes it. And when ignorance is removed you will be liberated from 


222 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Samsara and will never again feel frustration in the waking and dream 
states.” 

1.2.49 (ET35). Pupil: ‘‘What is this avidyé and what does it 
concern? What is the knowledge by which I may find my own 
nature ?” 

1.2.50 (ET35). Teacher : ‘You think you transmigrate, but you are 
really the nontransmigrating Supreme Self. Likewise, although you are 
really not an agent or experiencer, you suppose yourself to be an 
agent, an experiencer, a noneternal being.” 

1.2.51 (ET35-36). Pupil : “But I am an agent and an experiencer. 
This is not due to avidyé, because my awareness cannot have the 
Self for its object. Avidyé involves the superimposition of the 
properties of one thing on another, and both the properties and thing 
must be known. For example, one superimposes silver on shell, or a 
man on a post, and vice versa—and we are acquainted with silver, 
shells, men, and posts. But nothing can be superimposed on some- 
thing with which we are not acquainted, and since we are not ac- 
quainted with the Highest Self there can beno question of super- 
imposition.” 

1.2.52 (ET36-37). Teacher: ‘No, that is not an invariable rule, 
since we regularly experience the superimposition of other things 
on the Self. For example, properties of the body such as color, etc., 
are superimposed on the Sclf when we say “I am white” or “I 
am. black.” 

1.2.53 (ET37). Pupil: “Then we are acquainted with the Self 
as the object of our consciousness of egoity, and since we are also 
evidently acquainted with the body, superimposition is all right 
because it does satisfy the rule I mentioned. So why do you say the 
rule is not invariable >” 

1.2.54 (ET38). Teacher: “Listen, It is true that we are acquain- 
ted with the Self and with the body, but not everyone is aware of 
them as different from each other. They are regularly known rather 
as undiscriminated—the Self is regularly identified with the body. 
This is what I had in mind when I said the rule was not invariable.” 

1.2.55 (ET38-40). Pupil: ‘When x issuperimposed on y it is 
(eventually) discovered that x did not exist in y. For example, the 
silver did not exist in the shell, the man did not exist in the post, 
the snake did not exist in the rope, and the blue-dome-form did not 
exist in the sky. Now if the Self and the non-Self were superimposed 
on each other neither would exist. But that is not right; it is the 
position of the nihilists. Now if the body alone is superimposed on 
the Self (and not vice versa), the body will be nonexistent in the 


UPADESASAHASRI 223 


existing Self, and that also is not right, since it is contrary to sense 
perception, etc. So, the body and the Self are not mutually super- 
imposed upon each other. Instead, they are in a relation of perma- 
nent contact, like pillars and bamboos (making a house).” 

1.2.56 (ET40), Teacher : “No, if it were a relationship of contact 
the Self would exist for another’s sake and would be noneternal. So 
the Self cannot be in contact with the body; indeed, it is quite 
different from the body, being eternal, etc.” 

1.2.57 (ET40-41). Pupil: “Then the nihilist position follows.” 

1.2.58-59 (ET41-42). Teacher : ““No, because the Self, like akaga, is by 
nature not in contact with anything. Evenso, just as nothing is in 
contact with akdfa and yet itis related to everything, so the Self is 
related to the body even though It is not in contact with it. So 
the nihilist position does not come into the situation. And, contrary to 
what you argued, the nonexistence of the body in the existing Self 
is not contrary to sense perception, because it is not sense perception 
or any other pramdna that tells us that the body is present in the 
Self it is not like our seeing a fruit in a pot, ghee in milk, oil in 
sesamum, or a picture on a wall.” 

1.2.60 (ET42). Pupil: “Since the Self is not an object of sense 
perception, how can the body be superimposed on it and vice versa ?” 

1.2.61 (ET42-43). Teacher: ‘There is no problem here. We 
see that the blue-dome-form is superimposed on the sky even though 
the sky (akafa) is permanently known. So there cannot be any rule 
that superimposition can only be on things that are occasionally 
known. 

The Self, like akafa, is permanently known, and the body is super- 
imposed on it.” 

1.2.62 (ET43). Pupil: “Sir, is the mutual superimposition of 
body and Self made by the body, etc., or by the Self?” 

1.2.63. (ET43). Teacher: “‘Why does it matter ?” 

1.2.64 (ET 43-44). Pupil: “If I am merely an aggregate of 
body, etc., I am then nonconscious and exist for another’s sake only 
and am incapable of making a superimposition. If, however, I am 
the Self I am quite different from that aggregate, exist for my 
own sake only am conscious, and am capable of making the super- 
imposition.” 

1.2.65 (ET44). Teacher: “Well, don’t make it if it is the root of 
all trouble !” 

1.2.66 (ET44). Pupil : “I can’t help making it, for I am depen- 
dent on something else.” 

1.2.67 (ET44). Teacher: “Then you are nonconscious and exist 


224 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


for the sake of another, and that other is conscious and exists for itself. 
You are only an aggregate !” 

1.2.68 (ET44). Pupil: “If I am nonconscious how can I ex- 
perience pleasure and frustration and what you are saying ?”’ 

1.2.69 (ET45). Teacher: “‘Are you different from, or the same 
as, the consciousness of pain and frustration and what I am saying ?” 

1.2.70 (ET45). Pupil: “Yes, I am different from them, since 
they are objects of my experience, like jars, etc., and if I weren’t 
different from them I couldn’t know them. Furthermore if I were 
the same as those experiences they would exist for themselves, but 
that is absurd; so they must exist for another, that is, for me who 
know them.” 

1.2.71 (ET46). Teacher: “Right ! A conscious being does not 
exist for another’s sake, whether that other be conscious or noncon- 
scious. If one conscious being existed for the sake of another conscious 
being it would be as ifa lamp needed another lamp to illuminate 
it, which is absurd. And a nonconscious being by its very nature 
exists for the sake of another.” 

1.2.72 (ET46). Pupil: “But a servant and his master serve 
each other’s purposes even though they are both conscious.” 

1.2.73 (ET46-47). Teacher: ‘No, for consciousness is analogous to 
light, which is why I usedthe example of the twolamps. Conscious- 
ness is changeless and eternal and illuminates everything presented to 
your buddhi, like the light of a fire. Now then, since that is the case, 
were you right when you said what you said at the outset (in 1.2.45) ? 
Has your confusion disappeared ?” 

1.2.74 (ET47-49). Pupil: “Sir, the confusion has disappeared 
thanks to you. But I still have doubts about my allegedly changeless 
nature. Sounds, etc., are known when ideas (pratyaya) arise having 
the form of sound, etc. These ideas in turn require a consciousness 
to entertain them, a knower for whose sake they exist. Now this 
knower, the Self, must change, since it entertains these various notions 
of different colors, (sounds), etc. And yet you say the Self is 
changeless.”” 

1.2.75 (ET49-50). Teacher: “No need to doubt. If you were 
subject to change like the internal organ or the sense organs you 
would only knowa portion of the objects of your knowledge as they do. 
But because you are completely aware of the contents of your knowl- 
edge it follows that your Self is free from change.” 

1.2.76 (ET50). Pupil: “ ‘Know’ is a verb and suggests (activity 
and) change; yet you say the knower is changeless. How is this ?” 


UPADESASAHASRI 225 


1.2.77 (ET50). Teacher: ‘No, the word ‘know’ means an activity 
only in a secondary sense. The activity of the buddhi, an idea, comes 
to be called ‘knowledge’ because it is a reflection of knowledge 
(proper), just as the word ‘cut’? means the separation into two of 
something in only a secondary sense.” 

1.2.78 (ET50-51). Pupil: “That example won’t do. Just as 
‘cutting’ is used figuratively to suggest a change in the object cut, 
so ‘know’ figuratively suggests a change in the Self’s knowledge, and 
so the Self is not changeless.”’ 

1.2.79 (ET51). Teacher: ‘‘That would be so if there were a 
difference between the knower and knowledge. But there isn’t, since 
the knower is just knowledge itself, unlike the situation as understood 
by the logicians (éarkika).” 

1.2.80 (ET51). Pupil: “Then how can this knowledge (being 
eternal) result from an action ?” 

1.2.81 (ET52). Teacher : “Listen. I didn’t say that the result 
was knowledge, but rather, it is the reflection of knowledge (cf. 1.2.77).” 

1.2.82-84 (ET52-53). Pupil: ‘Then how am I the changeless 
knower, completely aware of the contents of my knowledge (cf. 
1.2.75) ? If I am so, then it is not my fault that ideas of sound, etc., 
occur in my buddhi and result in the reflection of knowledge, since 
I am changeless and eternal knowledge !” 

1.2.85 (ET53). Teacher: “Correct, you are not at fault. The only 
fault is avidya.”’ 

1.2.86 (ET53). Pupil: “But sir, if I am changeless like one in 
deep sleep, how is it that I experience different states of waking and 
dream ?” 

1.2.87 (ET53). Teacher: “Do you experience these states all the 
time ?” 

1.2.88 (ET53). Pupil: “‘No, I experience them intermittently.” 

1.2.89 (ET53-54). Teacher: ‘So they are accidental features only, 
and not of your own nature. If they were natural to you you would 
experience them continuously, as you do experience pure consciousness, 
which is your nature. What is a thing’s own nature is never found to 
be lacking in it. Since waking and dream are sometimes lacking in 
us, that is, when we are in deep sleep, it follows that they are not 
natural to us.” 

1.2.90 (ET54-55). Pupil: ‘‘But then pure consciousness also must 
be accidental, since it is not known in deep sleep—or else I am not 
of the nature of pure consciousness.” 

1.2.91 (ET55-56). Teacher: ‘No, that’s not right; think about it : 
you may speak of an accidental consciousness, but you cannot prove 


226 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


it. On the other hand, that the Self is pure consciousness is impossible 
to refute.” 

1.2.92 (ET56). Pupil: “But I have pointed out an exception !” 

1.2.93 (ET56-57). Teacher: ‘‘What you say involves a contra- 
diction. You say that in deep sleep you are not conscious when you 
are. In deep sleep objects of knowledge are absent, but knowledge 
is not absent. That consciousness which allows you to say ‘in deep 
sleep I was not conscious of anything’ is the consciousness that is 
your Self. It is self-evident and does not require a pramdana to prove 
It. It is analogous to the case of iron or water, etc., which depend 
on the sun or fire to heat them or light them up, whereas the sun 
or the fire do not in turn need something else to heat or to illumi- 
nate them.” 

1.2.94 (ET57-58). Pupil : ‘‘It (consciousness) can only be veridical 
(pramaé) if it is noneternal, but not if it is eternal.” 

1.2.95 (ET58). Teacher: ‘No, for in knowledge there cannot 
even arise the question about its noneternity.” 

1.2.96 (ET58). Pupil: ‘But there is such a distinction : eternal 
knowledge is not dependent on a veridical observer (pramdtr), whereas 
noneternal knowledge does so depend because it involves exertion of 
effort on the part of an observer.” 

1.2.97 (ET58). Teacher: ‘So it is clear that the knower, the 
Self, is self-evident, since it does not require a pramdna.” 

1.2.98 (ET59). Pupil: ‘‘Well, then, even when there is no pramana 
there should be veridical knowledge, since the knower is eternal.” 

1.2.99 (ET59-61). Teacher: “No. If the knower depends ona 
pramana to be known, to whom will the desire to know belong ? If we 
postulate another knower who desires to know the first knower, we 
will land in an infinite regress. Anyway, the Self cannot be an object 
of knowledge, for a thing is considered to be an object of knowledge 
when it is arrived at by an intervening desire, memory, effort, or pramdna 
on the part of a knower who is distinguished from that thing. Now 
the knower cannot distinguish himself from himself by desire, memory, 
effort, or pramdna, for these varieties of awareness take as their 
object something distinguished from the subject of that awareness, 
and as before, an infinite regress would arise if we were to deny this.” 

1.2.100 (ET61). Pupil: “If we cannot know the knower it will 
remain forever unknown to us.” 

1.2.101 (ET61-62). Teacher: ‘No, I have already given several 
proofs that the knower cannot be an object of knowledge.”’ 

1,2.102 (ET62-63). Pupil: “If the knower is not the locus of 
veridical knowledge, how can it be properly called a ‘knower’ ?”’ 


UPADESASAHASRI 227 


1.2.103 (ET63-64). Teacher : ‘“Veridical knowledge remains what 
it is by nature whether or not it is considered as eternal or noneternal. 
Just as standing is what it is whether it be considered as preceded by 
motion or not so preceded, so that we say both ‘people stand’ and 
‘mountains stand,’ so it is in the case of knowing.” 

1.2.104 (ET64). Pupil: ‘The Self, which is eternal knowledge, is 
changeless, so it cannot act without being connected with the body 
and senses, just as the carpenter requires tools to ply his trade. But 
if the Self, being unconnected with the body and the organs, uses 
them as instruments (this will require a tertium quid to connect them, 
and so) an infinite regress will result. No regress results in the case 
of the carpenter since he is always connected with his body and senses.” 

1.2.105 (ET64-66). Teacher: ‘Indeed, agency requires the use 
of instruments, but the taking up of an instrument is itself an action, 
so it will require still other instruments, ad infinitum. So the Self 
cannot be an agent at all. 

If someone were to propose that the occurrence of an action causes 
the Self to become an agent, no, since the action requires an agent to 
perform it in order that it occur at all. Again, if someone suggests 
that something else makes the Self act, no, for nothing else except 
the Self can have an independent existence and be a nonobject, etc. 
Everything else, nonconscious and so not self-established, depends for 
its manifestation on its becoming the contents of consciousness. Nor 
can we accept that there is more than one Self, noncomposite, exist- 
ing for Its own sake and for another’s. And it is impossible to suppose 
that the body and the senses and their objects exist for their own sake, 
since they depend on consciousness for their manifestation.” 

1.2.106 (ET66). Pupil: ‘We don’t depend on perceptual ideas 
in knowing our own bodies.” 

1.2.107 (ET66-67). Teacher: ‘That is true in the waking state 
but not after death or in deep sleep. The same is true for the sense 
organs.” 

1.2.108 (ET67-68). Pupil: “You have said that the Self is the 
same as that knowledge which is the result of pramdnas. But this is a 
contradiction.” 

Teacher : ‘No it isn’t. Knowledge is a result; even though changeless 
and eternal, it is made manifest by perception and the other pramdnas; 
the result of their operations produce what we call ‘knowledge’ and 
also make it appear that knowledge is noneternal.” 

1.2.109 (ET68-69). Pupil: “If that is so, everything other than the 
Self, pure consciousness, has existence only for Its sake. But since it 
is only when apprehended as causing pleasure, frustration, or delusion 


228 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that anything non-Self serves another’s purpose, it follows that every- 
thing that is not the Self does not really exist at all except as the pure 
Self; they are like the snake in a rope, the water in the mirage, etc. 
Thus all duality experienced in waking and dream does not exist 
except as knowledge itself. So there is nothing else except my Self.” 
1.2.110 (ET70). Teacher: ‘“‘Right ! It is avidyd that brings about 
waking and dream experiences, and it is vidya that destroys avidyd. 
You have attained fearlessness and will no longer feel frustration in 
dream or waking. You are liberated from the frustrations of samsdra.”’ 
12.111 (ET70). Pupil : “Om? 


CHAPTER THREE : ON PARISAMKHYANA 


1.3.112 (ET71). Parisamkhyana is (a type of meditation) intended 
for those desiring liberation through destroying the merit and demerit 
that has been accumulated while trying to not collect any more. 
Faults, caused by avidyé, produce efforts of body, internal organ, and 
speech, and it is through these efforts that karma is accumulated 
which has effects that are desirable, undesirable, and mixed in 
nature. 

1.3.113 (ET71-72). Things are known—sounds, sights, tastes, etc. 
—that are of a completely different kind from the knower. It is as 
connected with one another that these known things come to possess 
properties such as birth, growth, death, contact and separation, cause 
and effect, and sex, all of which produce pleasure and/or frustrations. 
The knower is quite different. 

1.3.114-115 (ET72-75). So the knower of Brahman will perform 
the parisamkhyana meditation (as follows) : ‘I am of the nature of con- 
sciousness, changeless, endless, fearless, and subtle, not an object; I 
cannot be made an object and be connected with sound either in general 
or in its specific forms such as musical notes, praise, abuse, etc. So 
what can sound do to me? Pleasant and unpleasant sound can elevate 
or injure an ignorant man who does not discriminate, but it cannot 
elevate or harm one who understands.” He should then repeat the 
same pattern of meditation with respect to touch, color (or form : 
riipa), taste, and smell. ; 

I.3.116 (ET75-77). (Then he should continue :) ‘Furthermore, 
these kinds of things (sound, etc.), when assuming states as body, audi- 
tory organ, and of the two kinds of internal organs and their objects, 
are connected and combined in all actions. Since this is so, for me, 
who understands, there is no enemy, friend, or even neutral other. So, 
anyone who through false knowledge tries to connect me with pleasure 
or frustration, which depend on action, strives in vain, forI am not within 


UPADESASAHASRI 229 


the reach of pleasure or frustration, as scripture and smrti aver. The 
reason is that nothing other than the Self exists.” So, since duality 
does not exist, those parts of the Upanisads that deal with the unity of 
the Self should be carefully studied. 


PART II (VERSE) 
CHAPTER ONE : INTRODUCTION 


II.1.1 (ET79). Invocation to Brahman. 

II.1.2 (ET79-80). After the Vedas have dealt with all actions 
enjoined and prohibited following marriage and the sacred fire estab- 
lished then, they go on to describe the knowledge of Brahman. 

TI.1.3-5 (ET80-81). Samsdra is described. Since ignorance is its 
root, knowledge of Brahman, which liberates man from ignorance, is 
set forth in the Upanisads. 

II.1.6-7  (ET81). Actions are not incompatible with ignorance 
and so do not destroy it, but knowledge (vidya) alone does so. As long 
as ignorance is not destroyed, desires and aversions cannot be avoided, 
leading to actions. 

II. 1.8-lla (ET81-82). Objection : The obligatory rites (nityakarman) 
should be practised as long as life lasts, because they cooperate with 
knowledge in producing liberation, because they are enjoined, and 
because failure to perform them breeds sin. Now you may say that 
knowledge produces a sure result (viz., liberation) and so is indepen- 
dent of anything else, but that is wrong; for just as the agnisfoma rite 
produces a sure result (viz., heaven) but nevertheless depends on 
something other than itself (viz., accessories such as speaking certain 
mantras, etc.), so knowledge depends on other things, namely, obliga- 
tory rites, in producing a sure result. 

II.1.11b-15 (ET82-84). Answer: No, for since actions are incompa- 
tible with knowledge it cannot depend on them. Actions are (always) 
accompanied by egoism (abhimana) and so are incompatible with 
knowledge, for it is obvious that the Upanisads teach that (the liberat- 
ing) knowledge is the awareness that the Self is without change. Now 
actions, having their origin in the awareness that one is an agent and 
in the desire to get results, depend on the agent, whereas knowledge 
only depends on a real thing (vastu). True knowledge undermines the 
idea of agency as (understanding the mirage undermines the idea of) 
water. So how can a man both accept the truth and still perform 
actions? So one who desires liberation should give up actions. 

II.1.16-2la (ET84-85). As long as the natural conviction that the 
Self is not different from the body, etc., prevails, the Vedic injunctions 
remain authoritative. But when one, through understanding the 


230 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


statement “not this...,’’ understands that the Self is without attributes, 
avidya is caused to cease. After that, avidyé cannot arise again, since it 
is not present either in the Self—which is without attributes—or in the 
non-Self. So, since actions depend on our idea of agency, and since 
such an idea cannot arise from avidyé once the knowledge ‘I am 
Brahman” has arisen, it follows that knowledge is independent of actions 
(in producing liberation). Scripture supports this. 

II.1.21b-24 (ET85-86). As for the objection (in II.1.8-lla) about 
the analogy with the agnistoma, the analogy is faulty, for each ritual act 
requires several mutually distinct accessories and differs from the next 
in the quality of the results it secures, whereas knowledge has an 
opposite nature. Since each action is intended to secure its own specific 
results the accessories differ in each case and the action depends on 
them for its success. But what other thing can knowledge depend on ? 
Only if one has the idea that he is an agent, etc., can he incur sin. 
But a man who has Self-knowledge has neither an idea of ego (i.e., of 
agency) nor any desire for the results of actions. 

JI.1.25-26 (ET87). The Upanisads, which teach Brahman-knowl- 
edge, are called by that name because it suggests something that will 
certainly slacken the bondage of birth, etc. 


CHAPTER TWO : DENIAL (PRATISEDHA) 


II.2.1-2 (ET88). It is impossible to deny the Self, for It is what 
is left after everything else is denied in the words ‘‘not this, not this.”’ 
So, reflecting thus, one comes to know the Self clearly. However, the 
notion of ‘I’ concerns what arises from words, and since that is denied 
(by ‘‘not this, not this”) the notion of ‘I’ can never again be regarded 
as well founded. 

II.2.3-4 (ET89). A (right) awareness that follows another always 
sublates its predecessor. Now consciousness itself (drsir eka svayam) is not 
sublated, being proved through the nature of its fruit. By crossing the 
forest of the body in which dwell the dangers of grief, delusion, etc., 
one finds his own Self, just as the man of Gandhara reached his own 
country by crossing the forest (cf. Chandogya Upanisad V1.14). 


CHAPTER THREE : THE SELF IS GOD 


11.3.1 (ET90). If God (ifvara) were non-Self one could not know 
that “I am that.” But if he is rightly aware that the Self is God, 
this right knowledge produces the cessation of any other. 

11,.3.2-3. (ET90-91). Why should scripture (i.e., Brhadaranpaka 
Upanisad 111.8.8) describe something as “not large,” etc., if these 
qualities belong to something other than the Self—-since we are not 


UPADESASAHASRI 231 


seeking knowledge about what is other than the Self? Since the 
Self 1s so qualified the opposite ideas (‘‘large,” etc.) are denied in It. 
Understand then that these passages are intended to remove false super- 
imposition (of largeness on the Self), since if they were intended to 
deny them of what is not Self they would describe a void (Sinyaid). 


CHAPTER FOUR : KNOWLEDGE OF THE NATURE OF 
THINGS (TATTVAJNANA) 


II.4.1 (ET92). How can the karma, whose seed is egoism and 
which remains (stored up) in the notion of ‘I’, still produce results 
after the acts have been burnt in the fire of the idea of nonegoism? 

TI.4.2 (ET92-93). Objection: Such acts produce results just like 
the ones that are seen. 

Answer: No, the seen results are due to another cause. 

Objector: But how can there be action when egoism is destroyed ? 

1J.4.3-5 (ET93-94). Answer: (Some acts) produce results by 
overpowering your knowledge of Brahman through their power of 
giving rise to bodies, etc. When these acts come to an end, however, 
that knowledge becomes manifest. It is reasonable that knowledge and 
experience (bhoga) are not incompatible, since they are the results of 
karma that has already begun to work itself out. But other kinds of 
karma are different. When one’s knowledge of one’s identity with the 
Self becomes as firm as the belief of (another) man that he is a 
human being, that knowledge will liberate him even against his will ! 


CHAPTER FIVE : ERROR OF THE BUDDHI 


IL.5.1 (ET95). Just as Udanka did not accept the nectar, think- 
ing it was urine, so Self-knowledge is not grasped because of the fear 
that one’s karma will be destroyed. 

11.5.2-3 (ET95-96). The Self seems to move and to stop when 
it is actually the buddhi that moves and stops, just as trees seem to 
move to one who is in a moving ship. Likewise, the Self is mistakenly 
thought to transmigrate. 

11.5.4 (ET96). The appearances of sounds, etc., should be under- 
stood as awareness that belongs to the buddhi but is pervaded by the 
reflection (pratibimba) of consciousness (cattanya). People are confused 
by this. 


CHAPTER SIX : DENIAL OF DIFFERENTIA (VISESAPOHA) 


11.6.1-2 (ET98). The Self is not in itself qualified by a limb that 
has been cut off and thrown away, and likewise, It is not qualified 
by any other things. Therefore all qualifiers are like the limb cut 


232 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


off and thrown away, for they are all non-Self. Thus the Self is free 
from all qualifiers. 

1J.6.3-6 (ET98-100). All these are qualifications only because of 
superimposition due to avidya; they are like ornaments. They all 
should be known as unreal when the Self is known. Having realized 
that the Self is not the object of the ego notion, one should accept the 
Self as the knower free from all qualifiers. The ego too is like the limb 
cut off and thrown away. In the sentence “‘I am Brahman’’ the 
word “‘I’’ denotes pure consciousness, which was previously (thought 
to be) the object of the ego notion. 


CHAPTER SEVEN : PERVASION BY THE BUDDHI 


IJ.7.1-2 (ET101-102). I am the omniscient, omnipresent, Highest 
Brahman. Everything seen in whatever manner is seen by me as 
pervaded by the buddhi. Just as I am the witness (sdksin) of my 
buddhi’s objects, so I am of the objects of others also. It is not possible 
for me to be accepted or rejected; therefore I am the Highest 
Brahman. 

11.7.3 (ET102). The Self does not change, is not impure or 
elemental; because It is the witness of all the buddhis, It is not of 
little feeling like the buddhis. 

II.7.4 (ET102). Just as, when the sun shines, red color is seen 
in a crystal, so all is seen when illuminated by my ‘‘sunlight.”’ 

Ji.7.5 (ET102-103). Things seen may exist in the buddhi when the 
buddhi exists, but not when it is inoperative. The knower, however, 
is always the knower. Therefore, duality does not exist. 

II.7.6 (ET103). Before discrimination the buddhi’s understanding 
is erroneous. After discrimination there is neither buddhi nor anything 
other than the Highest (Brahman). 


CHAPTER EIGHT : DESTRUCTION OF MIND 
(MATIVILAPANA ) 


Ii.8.1 (ET104). Oh my mind ! Since I am really conscious- 
ness by nature, my connection with tastes, etc., is a delusion created 
by you. But since I am quite without qualifications no fruit comes 
to me from your efforts. 

IJ.8.2 (ET104-105). Stop seeking effects made of maya; be at 
peace in Me; J am the Highest Brahman, as if liberated; I am 
unborn (aja) and one without a second. 

11.8.4 (ET105). Being single, nothing different from Me can 
belong to Me, nor can I belong to anythingelse. Therefore, I get 
no benefit from your activities. As you (oh mind !) are not different 
from Me you can neither exert effort nor gain results. 


UPADESASAHASRI 233 


11.8.5 (ET105). Since people are attached to effects and causes, 
this dialogue helps to liberate people by leading them to correct 
thoughts about the nature of the Self. 


CHAPTER NINE : SUBTLENESS AND PERVASIVENESS 


II.9.1 (ET107). In the series from earth to the innermost Self each 
succeeding item is found to be subtler and more pervasive. 

II.9.2 (ET107-108). Earth, water, etc., are validly (pramdnatas) 
known to be external, as bodies. 

11.9.4 (ET108). All beings from Brahma to immobile things 
(sthavara) are My bodies. So from where should faults like lust and 
anger come into Me ? 

11.9.5 (ET108-109). People think that I, the Lord, who resides 
in everything and am untouched by faults, am tainted, just as a 
child thinks the sky is blue. 


CHAPTER TEN : RIGHT WAY OF SEEING THE 
NATURE OF CONSCIOUSNESS 


11.10.4 (ET112). Ihave no sight (darsana) in deep sleep, waking, 
or dream. These states are due to confusion (mohana), for they have 
no independent existence nor do they depend on the Self. Therefore 
I am just the Fourth (turiya), the Seer, and without a second. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN : WITNESS 


II.11.1 (ET116). All things are by nature pure consciousness 
and only appear different because of avidyd. The apparent difference 
is caused to cease by the teaching “‘You are existent (sadasiti).” 

1I.11.5 (ET117). Just as dreams appear true as long as one does 
not wake up, so the identification of oneself with the body, and the 
validity of perception, etc., continue in the waking state as long as 
there is no Self-knowledge. 

II.11.6 (ET117). I am Brahman, pure consciousness, without 
qualities, which like space (vyoma) remains in all beings. I am the 
witness, free from all the faults of beings. 

11.11.8 (ET118). Those who think that they are Brahman and 
yet believe themselves to be agents and enjoyers have fallen from 
both knowledge and action. They are without doubt heterodox 
(nastika). 

II.11.9 (ET118). Just as the unseen (adrsta) results of merit 
and demerit are accepted on the basis of scripture (astra), it must 
be accepted on the same basis that the Self is Brahman and that 
liberation comes from knowledge. 


234 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


II.11.10 (ET118-119). Yellow-colored clothes, etc., are the sub- 
conscious impressions (vdsand) experienced by dreamers. The unique 
Seer (drsi) is different from them. 

II.11.11  (ET119). Just as a sword when taken from its sheath is 
seen as it is, so the Knower, the Self-existent (svayambhu) is experienc- 
ed in sleep in its self-illuminating nature free from cause and effect. 


CHAPTER TWELVE : ILLUMINATION 


TI.12.1 (ET122). Just as a man supposes his body to have light 
in it when it is exposed to the sun, so he makes the same supposition 
about the citta when it is reflecting pure consciousness. 

II.12.3 (ET123). The ignorant man identifies himself with what 
is seen and does not know the seer, like the tenth man who got identi- 
fied with the other nine. 

JI.12.4 (ET123). Say how there can reasonably be the two 
contrary ideas ‘“‘do this” and “‘you are that (Brahman)” with respect 
to the same person at the same time. 

1J.12.6 (ET124). Identifying the seer and seen is like identifying 
one’s self with one’s face in the mirror. 

11.12.8 (ET124). In “that art thou’’ it is the Knower of knowl- 
edge, the Self, that is denoted by the word “thou,” and not the 
other (the jiva)—that other sense is due to superimposition. 

1¥.12.10 (ET125). Just as the light of the sun together with (a 
part of) the body is what the knower knows, so things’ natures together 
with the things in which they reside are what the Knower knows. 

II.12.14-15 (ET126). Discrimination is an idea in the buddhi, 
and since it is something seen it is liable to destruction. The Self’s 
consciousness, on the other hand, is never destroyed, not being 
produced; its producibility is imagined in it by another consciousness 
that is actually its object and different from it. 

11.12.19 (ET127). Just as space (vyoma) is within everything, so 
I am even within space. So Iam changeless, immobile, pure, unaging, 
without a second. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN : EYELESSNESS (ACAKSUTVA) 


1I.13.1-8 (ET128-130). I, who am of the nature of pure con- 
sciousness only, have no perception or conception, since I have no sense 
organs or internal organ. Likewise, I do not act because I have no life 
breath (prdna). I am rather the witness of the fluctuations (vrtiz) of the 
internal organ produced by the sense organ together with its objects, 
as well as other fluctuations such as memory, attachment, dreams, etc. 

1I.13.9-10 (ET130). Because of failure to discriminate between 


UPADESASAHASRI 235 


the Self and the fluctuations of the internal organ men continue in 
samsdra, misconceiving themselves to be ignorant or pure, etc., as 
they identify themselves with various fluctuations. 

11.13.14-17 (ET131-132). So, I have neither restlessness (viksepa) 
nor samadhi; both of these belong to the internal organ, which can 
change. Since the Self is changeless it cannot act either in samadhi 
or out of it. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN : DREAM (SVAPNA) AND 
MEMORY (SMRTI) 


JI.14.1 (ET136). Since jars, etc., seem to appear in dreams and 
in memory, we may infer that the knower (dhi) having those objects 
as its form was seen before. 

II.14.2 (ET136). Just as one is different from the body wander- 
ing about in one’s dreams, so the Seer, witnessing the body in the 
waking state, must be different from that body. 

II.14.3-6 (ET136-137). The internal organ—pervading colors, 
etc.—takes on their form, just as copper takes on the form of the mold 
when poured into it, or just as light assumes the form of the objects 
it reveals. It was the internal organ (the knower, dhi) in its form 
as the object that was seen before—otherwise how could one remem- 
ber or dream of the forms of such objects? But the Self witnesses 
these modifications. 

II.14.15 (ET140). For one who knows prdna everything is prana 
and so there is no day or night for him; how much more then for the 
knower of nondual Brahman ! 

11.14.16 (ET140). Since the Self’s consciousness never stops 
It neither remembers nor forgets itself. If the internal organ remem- 
bers the Self that is awareness conditioned by avidya. 

1I.14.27-28 (ET143-144). For the Self-knower even Brahma 
and Indra are pitiful objects. Why should he wish to become (like) 
Brahma or Indra if all desires that cause frustration have been cut off? 

II.14.33 (ET145). The Self, with prdjfia and prana as adjuncts, 
is reflected in the fluctuations as the sun is reflected in water. The 
Self is pure and liberated naturally. 

11.14.40 (ET147). The internal organ is a pilgrimage place 
(tirtha) where the gods (deva), Vedas, and all other purifying agen- 
cies are united. Bathing in that place makes one immortal. 

11.14.46 (ET148-149). If your view is that the internal organ 
takes on the forms of jars, etc., through its fluctuations and yet is 
not illuminated (by the Self), then the faults and impurities in that 
self could not be avoided. 


236 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN : ONE THING IS NOT ANOTHER 


II.15.1 (ET151). Since one thing cannot be another, one should 
not suppose that Brahman is different from oneself, for if one supposes 
that they are different the one (the self) will surely be destroyed. 

11.15.2 (ET151). Things seen appear like a picture painted ona 
canvas when it is remembered. That by which they are seen is 
the jiva (here, samjiaka\, that in which they are seen, the buddhi 
(here, sattvaksetrajfia). 

11.15.14 (ET155). In meditation one assumes the form of the 
object meditated upon, and the object is different from the meditator. 
No such action is possible on the part of the Self; it is ind ependent of 
all actions, including meditation. 

T1.15.21-23 (ET157-158). The 6uddhi, burning with ignorance, 
desire, and action, like fuel in the fire of the Self, shines forth through 
the doors that are the senses. The Self’s fire experiences objects when 
the buddhi, ignited by oblations, functions among the senses. If 
one remembers that all perceptions are but oblations offered to the 
Self’s fire one does not become attached. 

TI.15.24-25 (ET158). The Self is called taijasa when witnessing 
dream objects produced by the impressions of karma arising from 
avidyad. It is called prajfia when (in deep sleep) it is not aware of 
either objects or impressions. 

JI.15.41 (ET162). Awareness (bodha) does not require another 
awareness so that it be known—it is its own nature to illumine, just 
as it is the sun’s nature to light itself. 

11.15.42 (ET163). A light does not depend on another to be 
revealed; one’s own nature does not depend on anything else. 

11.15.44 (ET163). When something previously nonexistent 
comes into existence from something else it is called its effect. But 
light, being the sun’s own nature, does not come into existence as the 
sun’s effect. 

1I.15.45-46 (ET164). Just as the sun reveals jars or a snake com- 
ing out of its hole without exerting any agency in that revealing, so 
Self-awareness, having revealing as its nature, is a knower but not 
an agent. 

11.15.48 (ET165). In similar fashion the Self, though without 
effort, is called an agent, just as a magnet is so called, though with- 
out agency. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN : EARTHY 


II.16.1-2 (ET167). The solid matter in the body is earthy, the 
liquid part watery; its heat, motion, and the space contained in it 


UPADESASAHASRI 237 


consist of fire, air, and dkdsa respectively. The senses and their objects 
are also produced from earth, etc., respectively. 

11.16.3-4 (ET168). These senses are called organs of the buddhi; 
the speech organ, the hand, etc., are the organs of action; and the 
manas, situated within, has as its purpose the imaginings (or construc- 
tions?) (vikalpa) through those (organs). The buddhi has as its 
purpose ascertainment of things. The Self is the Knower, always 
manifesting by its own nature, that is, illumination, everything that 
is experienced. 

If.16.5 (ET168). Just as light, the manifester, takes on the forms 
of the objects it manifests but is really different from them, so the 
Self is different from ideas. 

1I1.16.9 (ET169). One becomes frustrated when one believes 
himself to be frustrated, not merely by seeing frustration. The 
seer of the frustration in the body does not experience frustration. 

1.16.10 (ET170). Cannot the Self be both subject and object, 
like the eye? No, for the eye consists of parts (so that one part 
might be subject, another object), but the Self is (only) the seer and 
does not become object. 

I.16.11 (ET170). Odbjection: The Self is a combination of 
parts, since It consists of qualities such as knowledge, effort, etc. 

Answer: No; like light It has only one quality, knowledge. 

1J.16.19-20 (ETI73). Just as the closing and opening of the eye, 
which are properties of air (va@yu) and not of the eye, are mistaken 
for properties of the visual organ, which actually has the nature of 
light, and just as motion, not a property of the manas or the buddhi, 
is wrongly attributed to them, so the Self is mistaken for an agent 
because actions occur when the body, the duddhz, the manas, the eye, 
light, and objects are connected with It. 

11.16.21 (ET173). The property of the manas is to imagine 
(samkalpa) and that of the buddhi is to ascertain (adhyavasdya), and 
not the other way around. Everything is imagined (constructed ?) 
(kalpita) in the Self. 

II.16.23 (ET174). Odjection: Knowledge and its objects are 
momentary, merely dharmas (streaming) continuously. Just as a 
lamp seems to persist because of the similarity (of the dkarmas of one 
moment to those of the next), so it is (with knowledge and its objects). 
The ultimate human purpose is to destroy this notion. 

11.16.24 (ET174-175). Answer: One version of this theory has 
it that riéipa, etc., are appearances in another form of existent things 
that have their own form (svékdra). Another version is that no 
external objects exist. We address ourselves here to the first version. 


238 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


11.16.25-26 (ET175). (On this version) knowledge has the same 
form as that of some external thing; but since everything is momentary 
and the buddhi (here, dhi) thus also momentary and incapable of 
supporting traces, there will be no memory. 

I¥.16.27 (ET175-176). Again, it would be futile (on this view) 
to teach the means to attaining an end, since it needs no effort to 
destroy the notion of persistence; all things being (naturally) 
momentary the destruction of the persistence doesn’t depend on 
anything else. 

1J.16.28 (ET176), Objection: The effect (the destruction of the 
notion of persistence) does depend on something though that 
something is different from its effect. 

Answer: Then the effect depends on a series that is completely 
different (from the one that exhibits similarity). Anyway, on your 
view of the momentariness of everything, nothing can depend on 
anything. 

1I.16.29 (ET176). For x to depend on y the two must exist at the 
same time and be connected with each other so that connection with x 
is of benefit to_y. 

IJ.16.30 (ET177). We hold, in contrast, that there is false super- 
imposition in the Self and the destruction of that in the same Self. 
On your view, who will attain liberation, since everything is always 
being destroyed ? 

11.16.31 (ET177). One cannot deny the existence of one’s Self, 
since it is the witness of all. 

II.16.32 (ET177). If the witness didn’t exist no one would be 
aware of the existence or nonexistence of anything. 

II.16.39-41 (ET179). Liberation is artificial and fleeting accord- 
ing to those who view its attainment as the change of state on the 
part of the self. Again, liberation can’t be union with Brahman or 
separation (from prakrti); both union and separation being noneter- 
nal, liberation cannot consist of the individual going to Brahman 
or of Brahman coming to it. However, the true nature of the Self 
is never destroyed. 

11.16.45 (ET181). Going out of equilibrium on the part of the 
gunas is an unreasonable notion; since avidyd is at that point merged 
(into avyaktaprakrti) there is no cause for the alleged going out of 
equilibrium. 

11.16.46 (ET181). If the gunas cause their own changes either 
they will always change or they never will, and there will be no regu- 
lation of those changes. 

11.16.47 (ET182). If prakrti works for the purusas there will be 


UPADESASAHASRI 239 


no difference between the bound and the liberated. Again, since 
purusa has no desires prakrti cannot serve them ! 

11.16.49 (ET182). And since there can’t reasonably be any 
relation between prakrti and purusa, and since prakrti is not conscious, 
prakrti cannot serve the purusa. 

1I.16.51 (ET183). The followers of Kanada—the Vaisesikas— 
hold that pleasure, etc., are objects of knowledge, but they cannot 
be so, since they are qualities of the Knower and the Knower cannot 
know its own qualities, just as heat cannot be revealed by light. 

1J.16.52 (ET183). Further, since pleasure and knowledge are 
both produced by mind-self contact, they cannot inhere simultaneously 
in the self; so pleasure cannot be an object of knowledge. 

IT.16.53-54 (ET184). As for the other qualities, they too cannot 
occur simultaneously, being different from one another. 

Objection : Knowledge of qualities is just their coinherence in the 
same self. 

Answer: No, since pleasure, etc., are qualified by knowledge, 
and also since one remembers “‘pleasure was known by me,” and the 
self is without awareness according to you. 

11.16.55 (ET184). The self is changeless according to you, so 
pleasure, etc., cannot be qualities of it. Furthermore, since pleasure, 
etc., are as different from one self as from any of them—and from 
the internal organ, for that matter—why shouldn’t they be present 
in those too? 

11.16.56 (ET185). If knowledge be knowable by a second knowl- 
edge an infinite regress will result. And if the two knowledges are 
produced simultaneously from contact between internal organ and 
self, then you ought to accept (simultaneous production of other 
qualities that you hold to arise successively). 

11.16.57 (ET185). The Self is not bound since It does not change, 
It is not impure since It is not attached. 

1I.16.58-59 (ET185). Objection: Ifthat is so, since there is no 
bondage there is no liberation and the scriptures are useless. 

Answer: No, bondage is error (bhranti) of the buddhi, and its 
removal is liberation. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN : RIGHT THINKING 
(SAMYANMATI) 


1I.17.1 (ET191). Nothing exists other than the Self. 

11.17.10 (ET194). Odjection : Scripture states that three things 
exist besides the Self, namely, form (ria), name (ndéman), and action 
(karman). 


240 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


11.17.11-12 (ET194-195). These three are constructed (or imagin- 
ed, kalpita), for they are interdependent; for example, a painting and 
its description are mutually dependent and so involve imagination. 
So, just as form is constructed as related to words and buddhi, 
likewise the whole world is constructed (vikalpiia) from error and 
buddhi. 

11.17.13 (ET195). What is existent (sat) and mere consciousness 
(citmdtra) is not imagined. It is both knower and known. What is 
other than that is constructed. 

II.17.14-15 (ET195). This thing which is existent and pure 
consciousness is the knower by which everything in dream is known, 
as well as what is known in dream by méyd. 

1J.17.16 (ET196). Just as a jewel seems to become colored be- 
cause of its proximity to colored things, so pure consciousness assumes 
different form because of the superimposition of different adjuncts. 

1I.17.17 (ET196). Both in dream and in the waking state differ- 
ent forms are constructed. The difference makes manifest states 
of the buddhi as objects, leading to actions arising from desire through 
error. 

1I.17.18 (ET196). What is in the waking state is like what is in 
dream. The ideas of what is interna] (in dream) and external (in 
waking) are mutually dependent, like reading and writing. 

1I.17.19 (ET197). When the self imagines different things it 
desires them and so determines to have them, and then arise actions 
according to those desires and determinations. 

JI.17.20 (ET197). Even though it is not perceived in deep sleep 
the whole universe is perceived as a product of avidya; it is quite 
unreal. 

JI.17.22 (ET197-198). When the citta is pure like a (clean) 
mirror, knowledge (vidya) is revealed. So, one should take care to 
purify it by forbearance (yama), performance of the regular duties 
(nityakarman), sacrifices, and austerities (tapas). 

1.17.23 (ET198). One should practice the best austerities regard- 
ing the body, etc., in order to purify the internal organ. One should 
undertake to control the internal organ, etc., and to wither the body 
away. 

11.17.24 (ET198). The best austerity is the one-pointedness of 
the internal organ and the senses; it is better than all duties. 

11.17.26 (ET199). That which is called deep sleep is darkness 
or ignorance (ajfi@na), the seed of sleeping and waking awareness. 
It ought to be completely burnt up by Self-knowledge like a burnt 
seed that does not mature. 


UPADESASAHASRI 241 


IT.17.27 (ET199). That seed, called maya, evolves into the three 
states that succeed each other over and over. The Self, the locus of 
maya, though without change and single, appears as many like reflec- 
tions in the water. 

11.17.29 (ET200). Or, like a magician who comes and goes on 
an elephant (which he has created), so the Self, though without 
motion, appears to be undergoing conditions of various sorts. 

JI.17.31 (ET200). But there is no magic for those whose vision 
is not obscured or for the magician himself. 

11.17.33 (ET201). Objection : Since the Self is not perceptible 
to the sense organs being devoid of sensible qualities like sound, etc., 
and being different from pleasure, etc., how can it be perceived by 
the buddhi? 

11.17.34 (ET201). Just as Rahu, though invisible, is seen as a 
reflection in the moon, so the Self, though omnipresent, is grasped in 
the buddhi. 

11.17.35 (ET202). Just as the reflection and the heat of the sun, 
perceived in water, do not belong there, so consciousness is experienc- 
ed in the duddhi though it is not a property of the duddhi, since its 
nature is opposed to the buddhi. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN : THAT ART THOU 


The interpretation here follows that of A. J. Alston, That Art 
Thou (London, 1967) on various points. 

11.18.2 (ET128). The author pays his respects to his teacher’s 
teacher. 

I1.18.9-18 (ET220-223). Objection : Liberation does not arise when 
one hears ‘“‘that art thou”; one must practice meditation (prasamkh- 
yana) along with reasoning (yukiz). Since one doesn’t perceive 
the Self directly just from hearing the sentence, there must be an 
injunction (niyoga) (to some sort of action), just as there is in the 
case of ritual action. And this is not inconsistent (with knowledge) 
as long as the knowledge remains fitful. Again, if a man could 
get Self-knowledge by behaving as he pleases, prescriptions would 
be pointless; so meditation and reasoning are acts that are (pres- 
cribed) to be performed until there is Self-knowledge. The tend- 
encies (samskéra) produced by perception surely sublate the notion 
“I am the existent,”’ (sadasmi) which one derives from hearing the 
sentence in question. Also, one is attracted by defects (dosa) toward 
objects. Perception, which gives us particular knowledge of objects, 
can certainly contradict ideas arising from hearing or from inference, 
since those give us general knowledge of things. No one becomes 


242 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


free from pain merely from understanding the meaning of a sentence. 
And even if someone were to become free, it would be inferred that 
he had meditated on the sentence’s meaning in previous lives. In- 
deed, if people could become free from pain in this way we would 
have to conclude that there is no basis in scripture for our actions, 
which is not desirable. Furthermore, in the Vedas a result (phala) 
has been set forth in this sentence, and so there must be a means 
(sadhana) for its attainment. Since this result can only be an entity 
that already exists, that is, the Self, the only appropriate means must 
be meditation. Therefore, meditation should be practiced in order 
to realize the Self by one who is tranquil (sama), etc., and who has 
given up everything that is inconsistent with the means and its goal. 

1.18.19 (ET223-224). Answer: This is not right. Liberation is 
not a goal that depends on action for its achieving. 

1T.18.20-21 (ET224). Rather, in the text “not this, not this,” 
scripture prohibits the practice of superimposition. Just as a father 
superimposes his son’s troubles on himself, so the ego is superimposed 
onto the Self, and the text in question removes the superimposition, 
after which no later injunction to act is possible (since action requires 
superimposition). 

1J.18.22-23 (ET224-225). Just as ignorant people superimpose 
impurities onto the sky and are advised to stop doing so, so there 
can be both superimposition on the Self and prohibitions of it. But 
if the prohibited superimposition had been real, liberation would be 
transient, so superimposition must be unreal and its prohibition 
must be like a rule against constructing an altar (agnicayana) in the sky. 

1.18.24 (ET225). Words cannot refer to the Self, since they can 
only refer to objects. Likewise the ego sense cannot reveal the Self. 

II.18.28 (ET226). Words can refer to something associated with 
a universal or a motion, etc., but since the Self is not associated with 
such things words cannot refer to It. 

1I.18.29-31 (ET226-227). Words can indirectly (by /aksana) indi- 
cate the Witness when they directly name (abhidhd) a reflection 
(abhasa) of It; but they cannot directly refer to It. It is as when one 
uses a word indirectly suggesting fire in referring to torches, etc. 

II.18.32-33  (ET227-228). The reflection of a face is different 
from the face since it conforms to the mirror, whereas the face is 
different from the reflection because it does not conform to the mirror. 
The reflection of the Self in the ego sense is like that—they are 
different, but are not distinguished. 

11.18.34 (ET228). Some say that the reflection alone, the ego 
sense, is the transmigrator (samsdrin). They say that a shadow 


UPADESASAHASRI 243 


(chdy@) is real, since we learn that from smrti, and also because a sha- 
dow causes a (real) result such as coolness, etc. 

1I.18.35 (ET228-229). Others say that the transmigrator is a 
part or modification of the Knower and is itself the reflection of that 
(Knower, that is, the Self). Others again say that the transmigra- 
tor is the independent ego sense only. 

II.18.36 (ET229). The Buddhists say that the transmigrator is 
the series (samtdna) consisting of the ego sense, etc., and that there is 
no positive (permanent) element (anvayin) there. We shall consider 
these various opinions below (II.18.44ff.). 

11.18.37 (ET229). Let us now return to the present topic. The 
reflection of the face in the mirror is a property of neither the face nor 
the mirror, for if it were a property of either it would persist when 
they were parted. 

11.18.39 (ET230). Objection: It is the property of both to- 
gether). 

Answer : No, because it is not always seen even when both are 
present (but wrongly positioned ). 

Objection ; But, for example, Rahu, a real thing, is sometimes 
seen in the sun and the moon (at an eclipse). 

I¥.18.40 (ET230). Answer: If Rahu is taken to be already 
proved as real, the reflection of the face is not, and the example is 
irrelevant. But if Rahu is taken to be a shadow, then it is unreal 
as we have shown. 

11.18.41 (ET231). The smrti text (referred to in II.18.34) prohi- 
bits one from stepping over certain persons’ shadows, but being a 
prohibition it cannot establish the reality of anything. 

11.18.42 (ET231). The coolness referred to in II.18.34 arises 
from avoiding hot substances, and when such behavior has a positive 
cause it is perceptible, for example, water. But a shadow is not 
perceptible. 

11.18.44 (ET231-232). Objection: ‘Then who is the transmigra- 
tor? Not the Seer (drf) for It cannot change, and not the reflec- 
tion, for it is not real, and not the ego sense, since it is not conscious. 

11.18.45 (ET232). Answer: Transmigration must therefore be 
mere avidyd arising from nondiscrimination. 

11.18.46 (ET232). Just as the rope-snake, though unreal, has 
existence by virtue of the rope’s existence until discrimination occurs, 
so likewise transmigration has existence by virtue of the changeless 
Self (until discrimination occurs). 

11.18.47 (ET232). Second objector of 11.18.35: The self, itself the 
locus of the reflection of the Self through Its own ideas possessing 


244 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


changes, is the transmigrator; eternal, it experiences pleasures and 
pains. 

11.18.48 (ET233). Answer: This opinion arises from misinter- 
pretation of the scriptures and from lack of right knowledge of the 
Self, as a result of which you identify the Self with the ego. Not 
discriminating them, you will continue to transmigrate. But accept- 
ing my view one can explain how the Vedas can refer to the Self 
(indirectly) by words meaning ‘‘knowledge.”’ 

11.18.51-52 (ET234). Objection: On your analysis, in the sen- 
tence “the knows,” the agent and the action belong to different loci. 
But it is evident and well recognized in the world that the act and its 
agent, denoted respectively by the verb and the pronoun, belong to 
the same locus, as in ‘‘he does” or “‘he goes.”” So you should explain 
why it is different in the case of ‘“‘he knows.” 

11.18.53-54 (ET234). Answer: Through nondiscrimination the 
word ‘‘knows”’ is mistakenly predicated of the Self. Since the buddhi 
has no knowledge and the Self has no activity, the expression “‘he 
knows”’ cannot be properly applied to either of them. 

11.18.59-60 (ET236). Objection: If a word has no primary sense 
it cannot have a secondary one either. What is the primary sense 
of “knows” on your view? If words have no meaning, the Vedas 
will cease to be an authority, and since you don’t want that you’d 
better admit that the sentence ‘‘he knows” refers to the act of knowing 
as it is ordinarily understood to refer. 

TI.18.61-62 (ET236). Answer: If you accept what seems evident 
to ignorant people you will end up holding the Lokayata position, 
which you don’t wish to uphold. But if one takes the position of the 
learned (in grammar) then it will be hard to understand the mean- 
ing of the word “knowledge” as it is used in the Vedas to designate 
the Self. The Vedas must be held authoritative, however, and there 
is a way out of this. 

JI.18.63-69 (ET236-238). Ordinary people’s usage construes 
knowing as an act, since they do not distinguish the thing from its 
reflection and so superimpose agency, which properly belongs to the 
buddhi, onto the Self. Thus we come to speak of the buddhi as the 
knower. But we know from scripture that knowledge is eternal, so 
that it cannot be produced by the buddhi or indeed by anything at 
all. We come to speak of the buddhi and the Self both as the agents 
of the act of knowing, just as we speak of our selves as our bodies. 
The Logicians (tarkikas) are deluded also in this way and judge that 
knowledge is produced. But the correct view is that the word 
‘‘knows,”’ as well as the experiences corresponding to that word and 


UPADESASAHASRI 245 


the memories of them, all proceed from failure to distinguish the 
Self from the buddhi and the reflection of the Self in the buddhi. 

11.18.72-73 (ET239). The Buddhists deny the existence of a 
knower by holding that (ideas) are self-illuminating and are them- 
selves knowers. This theory will be hard to refute unless one insists 
that (ideas are nonconscious and) illuminated by something com- 
pletely different in nature from them. 

11.18.74 (ET239-240). But if you say that there is a persistent 
knower actively cognizing the ideas, that is no better, for such a 
knowing agent must itself be nonconscious too, and there would be 
nothing else to know it. 

11.18.75 (ET240). Objection: The knower and known are en- 
tirely different, but knowledge arises merely from the proximity of 
the knower to the known (and not from reflection or superimposition). 

Answer: No, since the knowing witness is proximate to everything 
and so everything will become conscious. 

1I.18.76-77 (ET240-241). Furthermore, is the frustrated hearer- 
seeker the Witness Itself or something else ? You do not accept that 
the Witness suffers or strives. But you cannot admit either that the 
sufferer and striver can understand that he is the Witness, since he 
is an agent. So the scriptural statement “‘that art thou” will be 
false, and that is wrong. 

11.18.78 (ET241). This statement makes sense if it is made from 
the standpoint of nondiscrimination, but if the ego has been discrimi- 
nated from the Witness and then the two are identified that will 
bring in the faults mentioned. 

11.18.79 (ET241). Now if you say that the word “‘thou’’ indirect- 
ly refers to the Witness, then you will have to show what relation 
exists between the Witness and the ego that is the direct meaning of 
“thou.” 

II.18.80 (ET241-242). Opponent: The relation is of the seer to 
the seen. 

Answer : How can the Witness be a seer, since It is without activity ? 

11.18.81 (ET242). If the relation between Witness and ego is 
identity (iadatmya), understanding the Witness to be without activity; 
still unless one can perceive that relation the idea (of the Witness) 
could not arise. 

11.18.82 (ET242). And if you think that the relation in question 
is found explained in scripture, that cannot be, for the three defects 
explained earlier will apply, and in any case the relation must be 
grasped in the form “‘there is a witness of mine” (and not “I am the 
Witness”’ ). 


246 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


11.18.83 (ET242). But when the duddhi, not conscious, is reflect- 
ed as if conscious, then its ideas also are reflected as if conscious, 
as sparks from a red-hot iron appear to be fire. 

II.18.84 (ET243). Only if a Witness exists, which is not rejected 
when these other things are, can it be explained how people may 
sometimes experience a reflection of consciousness and sometimes 
not, and how one can hope to know the Witness. 

1].18.88 (ET244). Neither scripture nor reasoning support the 
notion that cztta is conscious, since then the body, the eye, etc., would 
be also. 

11.18.89 (ET244). Objection: So what if they are? 

Answer : Then you fall into the Lokayata position. Furthermore 
there could never be the idea “I am the seer’ unless consciousness 
were reflected in the buddhi (here, cetas). 

II.18.90 (ET244). Unless one is already convinced that he is 
the seer the teaching “‘thou are that’ willbe useless, It can only be 
meaningful to one who knows the difference between the Self and the 
not-Self. 

11.18.91 (ET245). A thing known as ‘“‘mine”’ or “‘this” is without 
doubt part of the “thou” (i.e., not Self). A thing known as “‘I”’ 
(alone) is part of the ‘that’? (the Self), whereas what is known as 
“I am this” belongs to both spheres. 

1J.18.92 (ET245). All these ideas express the Self more or less 
directly, but the question which of them qualify which must be worked 
out by reasoning. 

II.18.93 (ET245). “Mine” and “this” are qualifiers of the inter- 
mediate one (the “J am this” of 11.18.91). Just as for a wealthy 
man the wealth is the qualifier of the whole man including his body, 
so the body is a qualifier of the pure Self qualified by the ego sense. 

II.18.94 (ET245-246). Everything involving the buddhi, includ- 
ing the ego sense, is a qualifier of the Witness. And that pure con- 
sciousness, touched by nothing, is reflected in everything. 

II.18.95 (ET246). From the ordinary point of view all this is just 
the reverse of what we suppose. For the undiscriminating every- 
thing exists, for those who discriminate, nothing exists (except the Self) . 

JI.18.96 (ET246-247). Only reasoning, considering cases of agree- 
ment and difference of words and things denoted by them, can 
determine the meaning of “I”? (and not common sense). 

II.18.99 (ET247-248). When the meaning of “that art thou” 
has been understood on the basis of scripture and worldly analogies 
the scripture again says ‘‘that art thou” to (finally) remove the delu- 
sion of the hearer. 


UPADESASAHASRI 247 


IT.18.100 (ET247-248). It is as when Brahma told Rama ‘‘Thou 
art Visnu, not Daéaratha’s son’ and removed Rama’s delusion. 
He did not indicate any further effort that Rama had to make in 
order to realize his Visnu-nature. 

IJ.18.101 (ET248). In this way (under these circumstances) 
the word “I”? reveals the innermost Self. The sentence “that art 
thou” provides the same revelation. The result is liberation. 

II.18.102 (ET248-249). If right knowledge were not produced 
directly from hearing the relevant texts, one would have to assume 
there is some further act that has to be performed. But even before 
experiencing it (directly through the text’s hearing) the existence of 
one’s Self is admitted. 

J1.18.103 (ET249). Right knowledge of the meaning of 
“that thou art’? arises immediately on hearing it and results in 
liberation. 

1I.18.105-106 (ET250). Does “I am Brahman” mean that I am 
Brahman or something else? If it means that I truly am Brahman, 
then the Self and Brahman are identical. But if something else is 
meant the sentence would be false. So, it is only by taking the Self 
and Brahman as identical that a contradiction with the experience of 
liberation can be avoided. 

II.18.107 (ET250). Ideas and the buddhi exist for the sake of the 
Self, which is reflected in them. Since they are not conscious, it is 
supposed (kalpyate) that the result of the liberating knowledge belongs 
to pure consciousness. 

1I.18.108 (ET250-251). Since the causes of the “‘result’’ (libera- 
tion )—that is, the activity of the buddhi and its ideas—are not of the 
nature of that “result”? (being nonconscious), it is proper to attribute 
it.to the unchanging (Self), just as a victory won by his army can 
be properly attributed to the king. 

1I.18.109 (ET251). Just as the reflection of one’s face in the 
mirror may be identified with the face, so the reflection in the mirror 
of ideas is in fact the Self. 

11.18.110 (ET251). Only in this way is the sentence “I am the 
existent (Brahman)’’ to be understood. Without a (similar) bridge, 
the teaching ‘‘that art thou”? would also be useless. 

1I.18.111 (ET251). Teaching is useful only when addressed to a 
hearer. If the Witness is not the hearer, who else could it be ? 

11.18.112 (ET251-252). If you say that the buddhi may be the 
hearer because of its proximity to the Witness, no, because the Witness 
cannot help the buddhi to hear any more than a piece of wood can ! 

11.18.1138 (ET252). And if the Witness did help the buddhi it 


248 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


would follow that it acted and changed, and that is undesirable. 
But if reflection is accepted this problem does not arise. 

11.18.115-116 (ET252-253). Objection: In order to know that 
something is a reflection of the Self we must know that the Self exists 
independently of the reflection. But in order to know that the Self 
exists independently of the reflection we must know that the thing 
is a reflection of the Self. So your case depends on mutual depen- 
dence (anyonydSraya). 

11.18.117 (ET253). Answer : No, for in dreams the dream notions 
and the seer are known to be distinct. In that state there are no 
(external) chariots, etc., so that the Self must directly apprehend 
the ideas. 

J1.18.118 (ET253-254). (In the waking state too) an idea per- 
vaded by consciousness takes on objective form. That whose form 
it is is called the external object. 

T1.18.119 (ET253-254). This latter (the external object) is the 
objective (karman) because it is desired, and one who desires it is 
enjoined to action relating to it. In the present case (of knowing), 
that which is modified into the form of the (external) object (viz., 
the buddhi) is said to be the instrument by which the object is obtained. 

1J.18.120 (ET254). And that (ego) which is pervaded by a re- 
flection of consciousness is called the ‘“‘knower.’’ One who distin- 
guishes between these three (object, instrument, and agent of know- 
ing) knows the Self. 

I¥.18.121-122 (ET254-255). Ideas vary, some being true, some 
false, some doubtful. Consciousness is one in all of them, and the 
difference stems from the ideas alone, just as a crystal takes on differ- 
ent colors because of the differences in the adjuncts with which it 
becomes associated. 

I1.18.123 (ET255). The ideas are manifested, apprehended, 
and have their existence proved by something else that is immediate- 
ly known. This inference may take as an illustration the lamp. 

1].18.124 (ET255). Can one get another to know the Self through 
a pramana? Or is it to be done rather by negation of everything 
else other than the Self without a pramana? 

11.18.125 (ET255-256). Opponent: It is done by negating every- 
thing else on the authority of scripture alone. 

Answer: That will lead to a mere void (Sinyata), as there would 
be no familiarity (prasiddhi) with the Witness. 

11.18.126 (ET256). Opponent: One reasons “‘you are conscious; 
how can you be the body ?” 

Answer: No, for one is not familiar (with pure consciousness). 


UPADESASAHASRI 249 


The inference would only be valid if one already had proved the 
Self as pure consciousness. 

TI.18.127 (ET256). Opponent: Pure consciousness is immediate- 
ly evident, so the Witness (does not need to be proved). 

Answer : If that were the case it should also be evident to the Voidist. 

11.18.128 (ET256). Opponent : We remember that we saw some- 
thing. This proves that the agent, object, and instrument exist 
simultaneously for the witnessing Self. 

11.18.129 (ET257). Answer: Supposing that memory were a 
valid means of knowing, still the agent, object, and instrument are 
known successively, and the memory must likewise cognize them 
successively. ‘The notion of their simultaneity is a false one. 

1I.18.130 (ET257). Between the ideas “I knew this” and “I knew 
myself as agent” there is mutual dependence, and where that is the 
case there cannot be simultaneous awareness. 

11.18.131 (ET257), Furthermore, to know each of the three 
{agent, object, and instrument) all three are required. When the 
knower is engaged in knowing the agent it is not available to know 
simultaneously the object and instrument. 

11.18.132 (ET258). In any case, an object is what an agent 
strives to obtain, and so it helps prove an agent and nothing else (not, 
e.g., a Witness). 

11.18.133 (ET258). When someone does not know something a 
pramaéna—such as verbal testimony or inference—is required. 

11.18.134 (ET258). Is the Witness also established by a pramdna, 
or not? It is. 

11.18.135 (ET258). And this is so whether the one who doesn’t 
yet know is the Witness itself or something else. 

II.18.136 (ET259). What does ‘established’? mean (in ITI.18.134) ? 
Does it mean ‘‘made known” or ‘“‘made to exist’’ or something else ? 

1I.18.137 (ET259). If it means ‘‘made to exist’’ all efforts are 
useless, since it is evident that things come to exist from their 
natural causes. 

II.18.138 (ET259). So here ‘‘established’’ means “made known.” 

11.18.139 (ET259-260). Opponent : Being established means 
being known through a clear distinction between act, agent, etc. 

Answer: No, for ‘“‘clear” and ‘“‘unclear”’ only make sense as applied 
to something other than the Self. 

11.18.140 (ET260). The reason why a pot is not “clear” to a 
blind man is that he is not a seer. For the agent, instrument, and 
object of Self-knowledge to be “‘clear’’ there will have to be a seer 
beyond all of them to apprehend this. 


250 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


II.18.141-143 (ET260-261)}. Odjection (by a Vijfianavadin): Why 
do we need to say that experience requires a Witness different from 
it? On our view experience is the experiencer. Through error, 
consciousness, which is really undifferentiated, appears to have 
distinctions of object (grahya), grasper (grdhaka), and knowledge 
(samvittz). But since consciousness is the only reality, it is both the 
act and the agent and object as well. 

1I.18.143-144 (ET261). Answer: If consciousness is destroyed 
every moment it will require an agent to bring it into existence. 

Buddhist : Consciousness has no properties. 

Samkara : Then you contradict your own thesis that it is momen- 
tary. 

Buddhist : Such properties are just the absence of their opposites, 
for example, the absence of nonexistence. 

Samkara : Then consciousness is not momentary, for you hold 
that it is svalaksana (and so of a positive character). 

J1.18.145-146 (ET261-262). You define cowhood as absence of 
noncow, but this will not do. No more will it do to define destruction 
as absence of nondestruction. For you even a moment is only the 
absence of the nonmomentary. 

11.18.147 (ET262). Buddhist: Absence has no distinctions in 
itself; the distinctions are due to names. 

Answer: How can plurality be introduced into a unity merely 
through names ? 

1J.18.148 (ET262-263). If a word signifies the absence of (all) 
things different how can it uniquely apply to a particular, say, a cow? 
An absence cannot create distinctions, nor is it itself particular. 

1I.18.149 (ET263). And since on your view there are no quali- 
fications of knowledge by names, universal properties, etc., likewise 
there are no qualifications of negation (which may particularize a 
cow). 

11.18.150 (ET263). But for practical purposes we need percep- 
tion and inference, which require qualifications in their objects dis- 
tinguishing acts and their factors (viz., object and instrument). 

1J.18.151 (ET263). So you must admit pot, blue, yellow, etc., 
as qualifiers of consciousness, as well as a knower by which these are 
known. 

II.18.152 (ET263-264). And as the perceiver is different from 
the colors and objects he perceives, so the knower of ideas is different 
from them since he illuminates them like a lamp. 

1I.18.154-155 (ET264). Is knowing anact? Or does the knower 
pervade its object? Neither. Assistance (upakdra) is given to the 


UPADESASAHASRI 251 


ideas by the constant Knower. We have already said that this 
assistance consists in the reflection of consciousness. Assisted by it 
the buddhi pervades pots, etc., as their illuminator, like light. 

T].18.156 (ET264-265). A pot becomes invested with buddhi 
just as it becomes lit up by standing in the light. This investing of 
the pot with the buddhi is the pervading of it by the buddhi, and it is 
a process with stages. 

11.18.157 (ET265). First the idea encompasses the pot, and sub- 
sequently it becomes assisted by the Self. But the Self does not 
participate in the process any more than time or space, etc. 

¥I.18.158 (ET265). Only a knower depending on instruments 
(karana) for grasping objects, since it knows only a part of its field, 
can be an evolver (parindmin). 

11.18.159 (ET265-266). Only the buddhi, and not the Witness, 
can have the knowledge “I am the Witness,” for there is nothing 
different from the Witness (with which to make the contrast). 

11.18.160 (ET266). On the other hand, the ego is not that which 
experiences liberation, since it cannot be without pain or pleasure. 

11.18.161-162 (ET266). Rather, the undiscriminating notion that 
one is in pain, which arises from identification with the body, etc., 
is sublated by the discrimination revealing one’s identity with the 
Self, just as the notion that ‘I am the one with the earrings on” is 
sublated when one takes them off. If it were the reverse a pramdna 
would lead to unreality and would not be a pramana. 

11.18.170 (ET268). The words “that” and “thou” (in ‘‘that 
art thou’’), which refer to one and the same thing, function as the 
words in “the black horse’’ do. 

11.18.171 (ET269). The word “thou’’ loses its meaning of the 
empirical ego subject to frustration by being set in apposition to 
“that,”? meaning the pure Witness not subject to frustration. Like- 
wise, the term “‘that,’? set in apposition to ‘‘thou,’’ which indicates 
the inner Self, loses its sense of something not immediately known. 

1I.18.173 (ET269). So the two words, without completely giving 
up their own proper meanings, together convey a qualified mean- 
ing leading to immediate awareness of the inner Self. Any other 
way of construing the sentence leads to contradiction. 

1J.18.174-175 (ET270). The tenth man—led astray by the idea 
of nine—only needs to know himself (no act is needed). Likewise, 
the one whose buddhi has been led astray by desire because his eyes 
have been bandaged by avidya@ needs only to know himself as pure 
consciousness distinct from everything else. 

1J.18.177-178 (ET270-271). In understanding the meaning of 


252 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


a sentence one must first determine the relationships among the words 
by positive and negative concomitance (anvayavyatireka), for the 
meaning of a sentence is a function of our memory of the words that 
are heard to compose it. 

II.18.179 (ET271). In the case of sentences that state eternal 
truths, once the meanings of the words have been rightly discrimi- 
nated resulting in an understanding of the meaning of the whole 
sentence, no further questioning of the meaning is appropriate. 

II.18.180-183 (ET271-272). This method of positive and nega- 
tive concomitance is only needed for the understanding of the word 
“thou” as the pure Self. Once this discrimination has occurred, 
the meaning of the sentence becomes as clear as a piece of fruit in 
one’s palm. In this way the meaning of ‘“‘that art thou” as meaning 
the pure Self becomes clear from understanding the meanings of 
the words therein, through the rejection of the false idea of the 
Self as sufferer (which is inconsistent with the word ‘‘that’’). 

11.18.185 (ET273). Perception, etc., can contradict a sen- 
tence such as “‘cook the pieces of gold’’ (since one can’t cook gold). 
But how can there be contradiction of a sentence (such as ‘“‘that art 
thou’’) by things caused by the organs ? 

1I.18.186-188 (ET273-274). Objection: As long as one _per- 
ceives that he is frustrated (or “in pain’’) the belief that he is free 
from frustration cannot arise merely from hearing the sentence ‘I 
am free from frustration” ! 

Answer : No, for we regularly realize that we are free from suffer- 
ing—for example, when we wake up from a nightmare. 

Objection : The example is irrelevant; we did not hear a sentence 
in our dream ! 

Answer: Nevertheless, once the dream is over we believe the 
suffering not only not to persist but indeed never to have really occur- 
red at all. A persistence (samtana) of error or suffering is never 
found. 

1I.18.189 (ET274). Once a man knows that his self is the inner 
Self through sublation of the notion that is suffering, his knowledge 
is uncontradictable as was that of the one who realized he was the 
tenth. 

II.18.194 (ET275-276). Truth (framaé) does not arise from hear- 
ing such texts as ‘‘cook the gold pieces,’’ since such texts must be 
interpreted figuratively. But since “that art thou’’ does not contra- 
dict known truths this is not the case for it. 

II.18.201 (ET278). Objection: One cannot achieve a concrete 
experience of satisfaction like that which follows eating merely from 


UPADESASAHASRI 253 


hearing a sentence. To analyze a sentence hoping to achieve a 
concrete experience is like trying to make milk pudding from cow 
dung. 

1T.18.202 (ET278). Answer: Al sentences about the not-Self 
produce abstract knowledge only, but such is not the case with 
sentences about the inner Self, for there are exceptions, for example, 
the tenth man. 

11.18.203 (ET278). The Self is its own pramdna; that is, it is self- 
known. 

1].18.207 (ET279-280). Had the texts said “thou will be Brah- 
man” (instead of ‘‘thou art Brahman’’) then one would have to 
practice actions like hearing, considering, and meditating. But 
then liberation would be treated as impermanent, which would 
involve a contradiction. So to read the Vedas as implying that is 
incorrect. 

11.18.208 (ET280). Or again, if the hearer were different from 
what was to be heard about, the hearing might be viewed as an 
enjoined act. But the opponent accepts their identity too. So if the 
text is interpreted following his principles it becomes quite unintelli- 
gible. 

1T.18.209-210 (ET280). Ifa man once knows he is liberation 
itself, self-existent and self-evident, then if he should desire to act he 
is crazy and flouts the scripture. For that which is self-existent and 
self-evident there is nothing to do, whereas that which has some- 
thing to do is not self-existent and self-evident. 

I1.18.211 (ET281). Objection : The words “I am_ liberation, 
self-evident and self-existent”’ just state a fact. But why should there 
be any activity on the part of the hearer to understand them ? 

JI.18.212-214 (ET281-282). Answer: One knows from percep- 
tion that one is an agent and feels frustrated, and then arise efforts 
to avoid that state. The scripture, recognizing this state of the 
hearer, enjoins reasoning, etc., on his part so that he may understand 
who he is. But once one has understood this, how can he ever there- 
after accept any idea contrary to that ? 

1¥.18.215 (ET282). Objection: Then why, if I am in fact con- 
trary in nature, should I have the impression that I am a desirer, 
an agent, and not the self-existent, self-evident One ? 

II.18.216 (ET282). Answer: It makes sense to ask why one has 
the impression of being desirer and agent, but it makes no sense to 
ask why one is liberated. For one only questions what is contrary 
to pramanas. 

1I.18.217 (ET282). Now the experience “I am liberated” accords 


254 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


with a pramdna, that is, with verbal testimony in the text “that art 
thou.”” However, the impression of being frustrated should be 
questioned, since it arises from a fallacious perception (pratyaksa- 
bhasa). 

II.18.220 (ET283). Scripture cannot be doubted in what it 
says about the nature of the Self, for in this sphere it is the authorita- 
tive pramdna. 

1I.18.221 (ET283-284). No notion of the Self other than that 
indicated by scripture is authoritative. 


CHAPTER NINETEEN : CONVERSATION BETWEEN 
SELF AND INTERNAL ORGAN (= MIND) 


1J.19.1 (ET288). If one treats with the medicines of knowledge 
and nonattachment the sickness of desire, one will be cured. 

II.19.2-3 (ET288-289 ). Oh mind, your ideas of “me” and ‘“‘mine”’ 
are efforts for someone else other than yourself. Since you are not 
conscious and I don’t want anything, being quite content, you should 
keep quiet; I am thinking of your welfare. 

IJ.19.4 (ET289). Scripture and the other pramdanas tell me that 
the one that is beyond the six continual waves is the Self of the world 
and ofus. Your efforts are useless therefore. 

1I.19.5 (ET289-290). The cause of all wrong notions is the 
perception of difference. So when you are quieted, the idea of 
difference disappearing, people will not be deluded. 

11.19.15 (ET293). If duality, assumed by us to be real so that 
there can be inquiry, were nonexistent, then inquiry would be im- 
possible and truth would not be known, and that is not desirable. 

II.19.16-17 (ET294). Odjection : What is called ‘‘real’’ is actually 
unreal, like a horn on a human’s head, because it doesn’t serve any 
purpose. 

Answer: Serving a purpose is not a proper criterion of reality. 
And anyway, the Self does serve a purpose, since it is the subject 
matter of inquiry as well as the source of creation through maya. 


CHANDOGYOPANISADBHASYA 


The Chdandogya Upanisad, the second longest and one of the oldest 
and most authoritative Upanisads, belongs to the Sama Veda. A. 
Weber long ago argued that the Chdndogya antedates at least the sixth 
book of the Brhadéranyaka, with which Upanisad it overlaps at certain 
points.*%! The Chandogya Upanisad belongs to the Tandin Brahmana 
of the Sama Veda. I am not aware that the question of the authenticity 


CHANDOGYOPANISADBHASYA 255 


of Samkara’s commentary on this Upanisad has as yet been explored 
using modern standards, but no one has questioned the ascription 
of the work to Samkara. 

“E” references are to the edition by H. R. Bhagavat, Works of 
Shankaracharya, volume two, part one (Poona: Ashtekar & Co., 1927), 
pp. 113-334. “T” refers to the translation by Ganganatha Jha in 
Poona Oriental Series 78 (Poona: Oriental Book Agency, 1942). 


BOOK ONE 


Introduction (E113-114; T1-5). One can fulfill the aims of man 
neither by action alone, which leads to the region of the moon by 
‘“‘path of smoke,”’ nor by action accompanied 
by knowledge of pradna, etc., which leads to the region of the sun by 


the southern path, or 


the northern path, or ‘‘path of fire.” Deviating from either of these 
paths according to one’s nature one merely earns further rebirths. 
It is only knowledge of the nondual Self, without dependence on any 
action, that causes the cessation of these three “paths,” and this is what 
is explained in the Chandogya Upanisad. 

Indeed, this kind of knowledge is absolutely inconsistent with 
action because it undermines all distinctions involving act, instrument, 
and result and so cannot in turn be undermined by any idea involv- 
ing such distinctions. 

Objector: But there are injunctions to act (which undermine this 
kind of knowledge); these are enjoined on those who know the 
Vedas, and thus, among others, on those who know the nondual Self. 

Answer : No, since in the absence of awareness of distinction of 
agent, experiencer, etc., which lie in the ambit of action, no action 
is possible. It follows that actions are only enjoined on those visited 
by the fault of avidyd, not on the Self-knower. 

In this Upanisad knowledge of the nondual Self is the main sub- 
ject matter, along with scveral kinds of worship (updsana) and medi- 
tative means (sadhana) to higher ends (abhyudaya), which are close 
to isolation (kaivalya) and which relate to the sphere of modified 
(vikrta) Brahman—these (worship and meditation) help effect the 
results of action and yet are like knowledge of the nondual Self in that 
they involve the functioning of the internal organ (manas)}. The 
difference, however, is that, whereas worship and meditation work 
by helping to concentrate the internal organ on some supporting 
object (dlambana) and thus assist one in achieving purity of sativa, 
which in turn illuminates the nature of reality (vastutattvdvabhasa), 
knowledge of the nondual Self undermines all ideas of difference 
(including that of any supporting object) that are superimposed on 


256 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the Self, just as knowledge of rope undermines the idea of snake. 
Because worship and meditation, involving a supporting object, 
are easier to practice they are expounded first (in this Upanisad). 
Indeed, the very first to be expounded are those practices which re- 
late to the elements (aziga) of (sacrificial) action, since they are more 
familiar and overhasty abandonment of action will make any medi- 
tation or worship very difficult. 

I.1.10 (E117-118; T13-15). This section discusses the role of 
“om” in sacrifice and recommends meditation upon it. 

Objector: Why meditate upon it? Pronouncing it is efficacious 
in sacrifice (as long as it is done correctly) whether one understands 
it or not, just as a person who doesn’t understand medicine is cured 
by a drug just as much as one who understands. 

Answer : Knowledge renders acts more effective; a jeweler, because 
of his knowledge of jewels, does better in business than the amateur, 
even though both are qualified to barter; likewise, though both those 
ignorant of “‘om’ and those knowledgeable are fit to worship, the 
latter are more likely to succeed. 

II.23.1 (E158-161; T103-115). This Upanisadic passage states 
that three kinds of persons achieve ‘‘a meritorious place’’ (punyaloka, 
i.e., heaven), whereas one who stands in Brahman (brahmasamstha) 
achieves immortality. The three kinds of heaven-bound persons 
are (1) householders who perform sacrifices, study the scriptures, 
and practice charity to mendicants within their means; (2) wander- 
ing ascetics who have achieved the fourth dsrama (i.e., samnydsa) but 
do not ‘‘stand in Brahman”; and (3) the lifelong brahmacaérin, who 
dwells with a teacher throughout his life studying and practicing 
penance. Those who “stand in Brahman” are a fourth kind; they 
are wandering mendicants who rest firmly in Brahman and achieve 
final immortality, not just temporary immortality such as gods, etc. 
have. 

Now some (Anandagiri says the Vittikara) interpret this passage 
differently. They say that it is intended to show that persons of all 
four stages of life reach heaven by performing their proper duty 
(svuadharma) even without gaining knowledge. Thus  brahmacdrins, 
householders, and renunciates alike reach heaven by knowledge, 
restraints (yama), and observances (niyama), so that the second type 
of person, (2) above (the “wandering ascetic’’), includes both ascetics 
and renunciates. The rest of the passage asserts that persons in any 
of these stages of life will attain immortality and will ‘stand in Brah- 
man”? by meditating on “om” and that this outcome is not restricted 
to members of the fourth stage. There is no authority to suppose 


CHANDOGYOPANISADBHASYA 257 


that liberation is possible only for the wandering mendicant; indeed, 
the teaching of the Upanisads is that liberation comes from knowledge, 
which may be combined with the duties of any of the stages of life. 
Therefore the view must be that anyone performing the duty of his 
stage of life and gaining knowledge attains immortality. 

This interpretation is not correct, for there is a contradiction bet- 
ween the ideas that must be accepted in order to perform actions 
(or duties) and those that lead to knowledge. For action one must 
distinguish agent, instrument, action, result, etc., notions that are 
found in everyone and do not arise from scripture; on the other 
hand, knowledge arises from scripture but is not attainable until 
distinctions of all kinds are set aside, just as one who has experienced 
the double-moon illusion will not correct it until the erroneous idea 
of difference (between the two moons) is removed, even though 
the night may end. Now the only kind of person for whom distinc- 
tions have ceased is the wandering mendicant. Any other person, 
seeing other persons and things as different from himself and others 
and therefore thinking in terms of possession and acquisition, cannot 
be one who “‘stands in Brahman,” for his ideas are clearly wrong, 
relating to unreal things that are modifications merely arising from 
speech (vdcdrambhanamatravikara). 

Objector : ‘Then the injunctions of the Veda become untrustworthy 
(apramana). 

Answer : No, the injunctions are valid for those who make dis- 
tinctions, just as dream ideas are valid before waking. 

Objector: But because discriminating men will not follow the 
injunctions their validity will be impugned. 

Answer: No, for the fact that discriminating persons do not wish 
to perform kdmya acts (i.e., acts intended to realize rewards such as 
wealth, children, etc., does not impugn the validity of injunctions to 
perform them, for only those who desire such rewards perform them. 
Likewise, with respect to other kinds of acts. 

Objection : Since you must admit that the wandering mendicant 
continues to perform actions such as begging, etc., even after gaining 
knowledge, you must also allow that householders, etc., should conti- 
nue to perform acts even after they have gained knowledge. 

Answer : No, no more than the fact that someone has killed some- 
one should make a discriminating person want to kill; since he does 
not recognize anything to be acted upon, the wise man is not urged 
to perform the agnihotra and other such acts (as are enjoined by 
scripture). As for the mendicant’s begging, this is just a response to 
hunger. 


258 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objector : Yes, and performance of the agnihotra is just a response 
to fear of doing evil. 

Answer: No, for one who does not recognize diversity will not be 
motivated by such a fear, since a man does not fear evil accruing 
from actions he is not entitled to perform. 

Objector: All right then, a man may become a wandering mendi- 
cant as soon as he gains the idea of the unity of everything, while 
remaining in his stage of life—whichever it may be. 

Answer : No, since all the other three stages of life require accep- 
tance of the distinction of owner and owned; the fourth stage is just 
that involving abandonment of that distinction. 

Opponent : Since, then, the mendicant has abandoned distinctions 
he cannot practice observances and restraints, etc. 

Answer : No, he may deviate from the idea of unity because of 
hunger, etc., temporarily. Observances and restraints are for the 
purpose of cessation from acts, and practising them cannot involve 
violating prohibitions, since prohibitions apply to men prior to their 
realization of unity. Because someone falls into a well in the dark 
does not mean he will do so when it is light. 

The wrong interpretation proposed above is correct insofar as it 
claims that persons of all stages may gain heaven but wrong in saying 
that the second type of person mentioned in the text includes 
both ascetics and renunciates. Asceticism also requires acceptance of 
distinctions and ceases upon realization that differences do not really 
exist, whereas the passage clearly speaks of a fourth kind of person 
who ‘“‘stands in Brahman,” etc., and is different from the others. 
Now this description must apply, not just to anyone who wanders 
about with a sacrificial thread, a triple stick and a water pot, etc., 
but rather to one who is rightly called a “‘paramahamsa” by virtue of 
his having abandoned actions altogether through abandoning the 
distinctions between agent, result, and so forth, which are their pre- 
requisites. 

The Samkhya, Buddhist Sinyavada, and other teachings that counsel 
renunciation of actions are incorrect inasmuch as they are based on 
continued recognition of difference. 

From all this it follows that the real renunciate is one who has 
abandoned all notions of distinctions and that a householder who has 
achieved this becomes thereby a “‘wandering mendicant’’ in the sense 
intended by this passage. 

Objection : Ifa householder were to do this he would destroy his 
sacrificial fire and thus incur sin—this follows from scriptural authority. 

Answer: No, he does not destroy his fire; it merely comes to an 


CHANDOGYOPANISADBHASYA 259 


end. As scripture says, ‘‘its fireness disappears” (cf. VI.4 below) 
when unity is realized. 

III.14.1 (E178-179; T151-152). The Upanisad says ‘‘All this is 
Brahman” (sarvam khalvidam brahma’’), etc. By “‘all this” is meant 
this world of modifications of name-and-form, the contents of our 
perceptions, etc. How is this world Brahman? Everything is born 
from Brahman in succession through fire, food, etc. Likewise, the 
world at pralaya is progressively absorbed into Brahman. Finally 
the world lives and moves in Brahman. Thus in all the three times 
it exists undifferentiated from Brahman, for it is never perceived 
apart from Brahman. See Book Six for an explanation as to how 
this same Brahman is one and “without a second.” Here it is ex- 
plained how one should meditate on Brahman. 

III.19.1 (E188; T172-173). The Upanisad says ‘In the begin- 
ning this was indeed nonexistent; it became existent....’’ What is 
meant is not that the universe didn’t exist at all before some time (, 
but rather that its name-and-form were undifferentiated (avyakrta) 
before it became differentiated. The term “existent” (sat) is found 
used here in the sense of “differentiated name-and-form.” 

V.10.2 (E226-228; T249-255). The Upanisad here describes the 
devaydna or way of the gods. This path is meant for celibates, house- 
holders who know the doctrine of the “‘five fires’? (discussed prior to 
this point in the Upanisad), and it is also called the “‘northern path,” 
in contrast to the “southern path,” the path of smoke, which is the 
way of those who perform ritual action without understanding the 
theories underlying them. This northern path is also followed by 
**forest-dwellers’’, that is, hermits and ascetics. The “‘immortality”’ 
that this path leads to is not absolute; however, their rebirth will 
not be in human form. The same path is also followed by lifelong 
brahmacarins and those who meditate upon Hiranyagarbha. The path 
culminates in the heaven called satyaloka. 

V.10.3-8 (E228-234; T255-272). The southern path, or way of 
smoke, is followed by householders who perform sacrifices and works 
of public service and charity. At death they travel to smoke, to the 
heaven of the fathers, then to dkdfa, and then to the moon. After 
the karma produced by those works is exhausted they rcturn by some 
similar reverse route to be reborn in a body determined by other 
acts, quite possibly acts performed in lives other than the just-prior 
one. 

Objection : When a person dies all his karmic residues become 
operative in determining the next birth. 

Answer: No. A man may have been in previous lives a peacock, 


260 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


an ape, and a man; if his rebirth next time round as an ape is deter- 
mined by the residues arising from his previous apish existence the 
other traces—laid down when he was peacock and man—are stored 
up and passed along. This helps explain how the newly born ape 
knows how to jump from branch to branch and cling to its mother— 
if all it had to determine it were traces of the human condition this 
would be inexplicable. 

The route by which those following the southern path re-enter the 
world is by way of rain, which carries them down onto the earth, 
where they may or may not be eventually eaten or absorbed into 
plants or animals. Those who eventually find themselves ina human 
male body may, if it isn’t celibate, pass into the womb as seed, and 
then, influenced by the humanness of the father, the child’s body 
will be born human and determined by the karmic residues of past 
human and other bodies conveyed to the father in his food. 

A third type of person is he who is burdened by sinful karmic 
residues. These do not follow the path of smoke but go directly into 
grains and then perhaps in food into man, or if not, they jump from 
one plant to another—but all the time they remain conscious and thus 
have hellish experiences. 

Objection : Since those who follow the southern path also are pro- 
pelled by their karma into new bodies just as these last-mentioned 
sinful types, they should also have hellish experiences—and then 
people would stop listening to the scriptures, for it would become 
clear that performance of ritual acts and acts of service, etc., produce 
greater unhappiness. 

Answer : We must distinguish the cases analogously to the differ- 
ence between climbing a tree and falling down from it. While 
climbing a tree one is consciously desirous of reaching the top; when 
falling one becomes unconscious—one’s organs become anesthetized. 
So it is that both the sinful ones who go into grains and the moon- 
bound ones on the southern path are conscious and desirous of where 
they are going, whereas the ones coming back to earth from the moon 
are unconscious or practically so. 

Persons whose lives have been predominantly virtuous and who 
travel by the southern path are reborn in higher-caste bodies— 
Brahmin, Ksatriya, or Vaigya—whereas those whose conduct has 
been bad are reborn as a dog or pig or outcaste (canddla). The 
third kind of person, who has not observed ritual or other kinds of 
proper action, is reborn over and over as small creatures—insects, 
etc. That is why the heavens are not overpopulated. 

Seeing how much misery and trouble is involved in the karmic 


CHANDOGYOPANISADBHASYA 261 


process one should develop a feeling of disgust toward samsdra and 
try to avoid it. 

VI.1.4 (E245; T293-294). Svetaketu is taught by his father that 
“all things made of clay are known by knowing a lump of clay, for 
modifications are dependent on names’’. 

Objection : How is it that when the cause, the lump of clay, is known, 
the effect, which is a different thing, is also known ? 

Answer: Because the effect is not different from its cause. The 
apparent differences between effect and cause are due merely to 
language; that is, (the effect) is only name, just a supporting object 
of speech (udcdlambhanamdtra), not an actual object (vastu) called a 


modification, since it is the clay alone that is an actual, real (satya) 
object. 


VI.2.1 (E246-247; T295-299). The Upanisad says that in the 
beginning there was only Being (sat), without duality (advitiya), but 
that some say that in the beginning there was only Nonbeing 
(asat), without duality, and that being was born from that. 

Question : If this Being is here now, why is it qualified as being 
here only “in the beginning”’ ? 

Answer : Because, although now this Being is qualified by name- 
and-form, in the beginning It had no name-and-form. Just as in 
deep sleep and just upon waking from it one knows only unqualified 
Being, so before the world arose there was Being alone. 

The passage says that Being is “‘without a second” in order to reject 
the supposition that in the beginning there were things other than 
Being that acted as accessory causal factors analogous to the potter, 
etc., in the case of the production of pots. Thus the present position 
is to be distinguished from that of the Vaisesika in two regards—ane, 
the effect does not exist prior to its origination, and, two, before its 
production there must be, according to them, more than one factor, 
and these factors by their combination will occasion’the production 
of the effect. So it is clear that what the Vaisesikas imagine as 
“Being”’ is a different thing from the Being that we call the cause. 

On this point some nihilist Buddhists say that in the beginning 
Being was absent, though they do not assert that this absence of 
Being is some other entity additional to Being, as the Naiyayikas 
are prone to do, since they (the Naiyayikas) construe positive (b4dua) 
and negative (abhdva) things as both actual entities. 

Objection : But the Buddhists also hold that prior to its birth the 
universe was absence of Being, and that this absence was “‘without 
duality.” 

Answer: True, but it is not a correct view if what is meant is that 


262 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


there was only absence of positive things, since one who says this 
must be denying his own existence. 

Objector: The person who says this exists after his birth but not before. 

Answer : No, for there is no proof that there was absence of Being 
prior to origination; so the notion that in the beginning there was 
Nonbeing is a misconception (Kalpana). 

Objection: For a word to be meaningful it must pick out the form 
(akrti) of a thing, and a sentence made up of meaningless words is 
itself meaningless. Now the sentence ‘“‘there was only Nonbeing, 
one, without duality” is composed of meaningless words, since none 
of them pick out the form of anything, and so that sentence must 
be meaningless and hence unauthoritative (apramana). (But it occurs 
in the Vedas !) 

Answer: There is no fault here. The word “Being” does pick 
out the form of Being, and the adjectives are coordinate (samanddhi- 
karana) with it. Then the negative particle “‘non’’ is introduced, but 
not toname something else, rather to contrast the meaningful expression 
“Being” with a possible wrong notion that someone might have. So the 
sentence in question serves a purpose and is by no means unauthoritative, 
since it has a function, though the function involved is one that 
impugns the truth of the wrong opinion quoted in the sentence. 

VI.2.2 (E248-249; T299-304). There is no proof that Being 
arises from Nonbeing. The Buddhist argues that the sprout arises 
only after the seed is destroyed. Even though that is true, it remains 
the case that the parts of the seed persist in the sprout. And further, 
the Buddhist does not even allow that there is such a thing as the seed 
in distinction from its constituent parts. 

Opponent: What is always destroyed on the arising of the sprout 
is the shape of the seed, a form that is admitted by the Buddhist to 
exist, though only as samzrtz. 

Answer: What is this samurti ? Is it a positive or negative thing ? 
If it is a negative thing, there is no corroborative instance to show 
that a positive entity can arise from a negative one. If it is a positive 
thing, then the sprout does not arise from Nonbeing but rather from 
something positive. 

Opponent : In any case we do not accept that the parts of the seed 
persist in the sprout—they are destroyed too (at the time of the 
birth of the sprout). 

Answer : Our argument (about samurti) applies equally to the parts 
—either they are positive or negative, and so forth. And further, if 
there is an infinite series of parts of parts...of seed, there is no 
way it can be destroyed, and our view prevails. 


CHANDOGYOPANISADBHASYA 263 


Objection : There is no proof for your theory either, since there is 
no instance of a jar being produced from another jar. 

Answer : Right—no entity is produced from another entity; rather, 
production is when one and the same entity takes on a different 
form. It is the same clay that takes on the forms of jar, lump, etc. 

Objection : Your Being is held to be single, indivisible, without 
parts, inactive, etc. How can it take on various forms? 

Answer : The parts are imagined (parikalpita) by our buddhi, just 
as the snake, etc., is imagined in the rope, etc. 

VI.2.4 (E250-251; T306-309). This Upanisadic passage and the 
previous one are describing the gradual production of the world 
by a series of thoughts and actions, first on the part of Being, which 
intentionally produced fire, then by fire, which intentionally pro- 
duced water, and then by water, which intentionally produced tood. 

Objection: Fire, water, etc., are not the kinds of things that can 
think and act. 

Answer: The sense is figurative; it is meant that Being did the 
thinking and producing. 

Objector: Then we can say that with respect to Being too the sense 
is figurative ! 

Answer: No, since we only know about Being from verbal (i-e., 
scriptural) authority. 

Objector : But it is possible to know from inference that Being is 
unconscious, like clay; thus it must be that the origin of the world is 
from an unconscious pradhdna (i.e., prakrti). 

Answer : No, since we shall be told soon that this Being is the Self. 

Objector : Yes, this too is figurative, just as in the statement ‘“‘Bhadra- 
sena is my very Self’? spoken by someone to whom Bhadrasena is 
very dear. 

_ Answer: No, for we are taught that liberation comes to one who 
identifies his Self with Being. 

Objector: Even that is figurative and indicates that by identifica- 
tion one gets close to liberation (but not all the way there), just as 
one may say ‘I am in the village’? meaning he is heading there quickly. 

Answer : The whole present treatment is governed by the state- 
ment that Being is that by the knowledge of which everything is 
known, which clearly indicates the nondifference of everything else 
and Being. Furthermore, scripture does not declare anything 
other than Being as ‘“‘to be known,”’ nor can anything else be inferred 
from scripture, as would be the case if these usages were merely 
figurative. If it is imagined that the whole discussion is merely 
figurative the efforts of its author would be futile, for knowledge of 


264 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the ultimate purpose of mankind could be had from reasoning (tarka) 
alone. Since our assumption is that the Vedas are authoritative 
we cannot write its meaning off as entirely figurative. 

VIL3.2 (E252-253; 1311-313). The Upanisad says that this 
deity (devaia) conceived a plan to produce modifications of name- 
and-form by entering into fire, water, and food as “this jivdtman.”’ 
“This deity’? means Being, says Samkara, and the reason the text 
says ‘“‘this jivdtman’’ is because Being remembers, prior to the begin- 
ning of each creative cycle, its own Self, endowed with breath, which 
had experiences in the previous cycle and resolves to re-enter the 
world through this living self or jivdtman. 

Objection : It cannot be correct to say that Being, which is not 
subject to transmigration, which is omniscient, should, while It is 
fully in control of Itself (svatantra), wish to subject Itself to embodi- 
ment and the resulting experiences. 

Answer : True, it would not be correct to say that Being does this 
in Its unmodified form. But the text does not say that—it says that 
Being enters into embodiment through the jivdtman. Now this 
jivatman is merely a reflection (dbhdsa) of the “deity” (i.e., Being) 
resulting from its connection with buddhi, etc., and the various elements 
(bhitta), just as a man or the sun is reflected ina mirror. The ‘‘deity”’ 
is not affected by the frustrating experiences of the embodiments, 
any more than the man, sun, etc., are affected by the defects that 
the images reflected owe to the reflecting medium. 

Objection : If jivatman is merely a reflection it must be untruthfully 
obtained (mrsaiva prapta), and so must its peregrinations in this and 
other worlds. 

Answer: There is no fault; it is truthfully experienced insofar 
as it has the nature of Being. All name-and-forms, all modifications, 
are true as having the nature of Being, though in themselves they 
are untrue (anrta), since they are merely dependent on language. 
The same is the case, then, with jivaétman. The logicians cannot 
find any fault with this, since it can be shown that all doctrines of 
duality (dvaitavaéda) involve mutual contradiction and are merely 
conceptual constructions (vikalpa) of the buddhi and so not based in 
actuality. 

VI.4.1-4 (E253-255; T315-318). This section explains by illus- 
tration the theory of triplication, according to which Being differen- 
tiated things by making fire, water, and food triple. For example, 
of the various colors we see in fire, the white color belongs to untripli- 
cated water, the black to untriplicated food (or earth), and the red 
to untriplicated fire. So, when you experience triplicated fire 


CHANDOGYOPANISADBHASYA 265 


and think of the fire as distinct from its three colors, the fire you are 
thinking of is not a single entity characterized by fireness and does 
not answer to the term “‘fire’”’ in the sense you had in mind before 
you made the discrimination. It is as in the case of one’s experienc- 
ing a crystal as a ruby when it happens to be placed in front of a red 
object; the term “ruby” and this thing’s rubyness last only as long 
as we have not distinguished the crystal from the object—as soon as 
we have, both the name and the idea of ruby (as a kind of thing 
characterized by rubyness) disappear. So we conclude that there is 
no such thing as fire; the idea of fire is untrue (mysd), all there is really 
are the three colors. Now, by the same token, since the whole uni- 
verse has been triplicated, universeness, and so the idea of a universe, 
will disappear on discrimination, and all that remains will be the three 
“divinities’’ fire, water, and food—but since Being made each of 
these triplicate in the beginning (according to VI.3.4) fireness, 
waterness, and foodness will likewise disappear along with the res- 
pective notions, and all that will be left is Being, everything else being 
mere modifications of words. 

This reasoning can be extended by analogy to include all things 
not clearly falling under fire, water, or food, as well as to matters 
involving qualities other than color, where other patterns such as 
quintuplication (pafcikarana) may apply. 

VI.8.1 (E260-262; T328-331). The Upanisad says that Udda- 
laka Aruni discussed with his son Svetaketu the final stage of sleep 
(svapndnta) and explained that when a man is said to be sleeping he 
has become absorbed into Being and has gone to his own (svamdpita). 

The “‘final stage of sleep”? Samkara construes as deep sleep (susupit). 
Now just as when the mirror has been removed the reflection of a 
man in the mirror ‘‘goes into his own’, that is, into the man himself, 
so when the internal organ, etc., have ceased the deity (Being) that 
entered the internal organ through the jivdtman for the purpose of 
differentiating name-and-form goes to its own Self. In dreaming, 
the self clearly has not gone into its own Self, so that cannot be the 
sleep referred to. Now when a man is said to be in deep sleep he has 
gone to his own, that is, become absorbed into Being. 

Question : How is this “going into one’s own” known to ordinary 
men ? 

Answer : By inference from the experience of fatigue. After many 
experiences in the waking state a man’s organs become tired and they 
are temporarily absorbed into préya, which alone lies awake and the 
resulting state of deep sleep is termed “going to one’s own.” 

VI.13 (E270-271; 1348-350). The Upanisadic text is the one in 


266 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


which Uddalaka has his son dissolve salt in water. ‘The point of the 
experiment is to show Svctaketu how it is that Being may be the root- 
cause or essence of everything and yct that that fact may not be 
readily recognized by people. For example, they may become 
absorbed into Being in deep sleep but not recognize that fact, just as 
the salt may disappear from sight but still remain as testified to by 
taste. 

Then by what means is Being apprehended ? asks Svetaketu. 

VI1.14 (E271-273; T331-356). The answer is the parable of the man 
from Gandhara who arrives blindfolded and only finds his way home 
by having the right direction pointed out by villagers; just so, one 
lost in samsaéra must have the way pointed out by a teacher and 
only then is liberated, merged into Being. 

Objection : Being merged into Being docs not directly follow on 
liberation, for the remaining karma that has begun to operate must 
still be burnt off by further actions. But these will in turn breed 
more karma, which in turn will generate rebirth, and so on, with 
the result that even one who knows the truth about Being and the 
Self will not escape samsdéra. On the other hand, if it should be held 
that true knowledge immediately destroys all karmic residues then 
the body should immediately die, and not only would there be no 
time to find a teacher, but liberation would not necessarily follow 
from knowledge. 

Answer: Two kinds of karmic residue must be distinguished. 
The kind that has already begun to operate, like the motion of an 
arrow already shot into the air, ceases only when its momentum is 
spent; this kind of karma produces experiences that must be lived 
through to exhaust it. But other residues that have not yet become 
operative, including those earned in the present life whether before 
or after the attainment of knowledge, are all burned up by true 
knowledge just as they are also burned up by ritual acts according to 
the Bhagavadgitd, etc. 

VI.15.2 (E274; 1357-358). The general sense of this section is 
to argue that both the wise man and the ignorant one, upon death, 
are merged into Being by following the same path—by a succession 
of absorptions of internal organ into prana, prana into fire, and fire 
into the Highest Deity, though the ignorant one eventually gets reborn, 
unlike the Self-knower. 

An alternative account of the process of absorption is cited, accord- 
ing to which at death the man goes out through the artery in the 
top of the head and on to the sun and other “‘doors’’ before arriving at 
Being. Samkara points out that this account cannot be right, at 


CHANDOGY OPANISADBHASYA 267 


least for the wise man, for one who has recognized the truth has no 
such notions as time, place, causes, etc., and thus cannot progress 
through times and places as this account would require. 

Svetaketu naturally wants to know why the wise man is not reborn 
like the ignorant one. 

VI.16 (E275-277; 1358-365). The Upanisad explains that just 
as truth protects a man from being burnt by the axe in the ancient 
form of the lie-detection test, so the wise man is protected from rebirth 
by the true knowledge he has gained. 

Question : (Since the Self is supposed to be self-illuminating ) what 
is the result with regard to the Self that this just-completed chapter 
is supposed to have brought about ? 

Answer : Its point was to eliminate the misconceptions that the 
Self is the agent or enjoyer and to teach that the jivdtman is the entity 
that is referred to by the word “thou” in “That thou art, Svetaketu” 
(the repeated conclusions of many passages in this chapter), the 
entity that is supposed to hear and study the truth. Once that 
truth has been properly appreciated, however, since all difference is 
rejected there cannot be any supposition that the Self is agent or 
enjoyer or that It is supposed to hear or study, since the idea of the 
jivétman will then be known to be an untrue modification. 

Objection : What “‘that thou art’? means is that the thing denoted 
by ‘“‘thou’’ has Being just as the sun, internal organ, etc., answer 
to the notion of Brahman and other deities, just as religious repre- 
sentations are referred to as Visnu, etc. 

Answer : No, this assertion has a different form. In the passages 
about the sun, etc., it is expressly said that ‘“‘the sun is called 
‘Brahman’ ” (ddityo brahmetyddau)—the term “called” (z#i) not being 
present in ‘‘tativamast.”’ 

Objection : ‘““That thou art” is figurative just like “‘you are a lion” 
said of a hero. 

Answer: <A figurative expression, being false, cannot be properly 
said to bring absorption into Being. Nor can this sentence be viewed 
as a eulogy, for Svetaketu is not a person to be eulogized, and it is no 
eulogy of Brahman for It to be called “Svetaketu” ! 

VIII. Introduction (E299; T413-414). Even though the pre- 
ceding two chapters have expounded Brahman as Being, single, 
without duality, still for many people of dull intellect (mamdabuddhi) 
it is not possible to think of anything not located in space and time, 
etc. So this chapter explains Brahman in a way suitable to their 
gifts, with the hope that it will lead them along the way gradually. 
It thus describes Brahman as located in a particular place in the body, 


268 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


as having qualities, as requiring celibacy for its realization, as reach- 
ed upon death by passing out from the top of the head, etc., even 
though these characterizations are from the higher standpoint imposs- 
ible since the distinctions involved in them do not exist. 

VIII.5.4 (E310-311; T437-440). In the course of preceding 
sections there has been reference to various things—oceans, trees, 
cities—and events—meeting one’s ancestors, etc. 

Question : Are these things, which have been described as arising 
from one’s wishes (samkalpa), here in the world like ordinary oceans, 
trees, etc., or are they mental ideas (mdnasapratyaya) only? If they 
are gross there isn’t room for them in the body, and anyway the 
Puranas say clearly that things in the brahmaloka are purely mental. 
But if they only exist in the mind this conflicts with other Puranic 
statements to the effect that oceans, etc., go to Brahman in their gross 
forms. 

Answer : Well, they can’t very well go in their gross forms, since 
they’re too big for that. So the most reasonable supposition is that 
they are mental things, like the bodies of the men and women we see 
in dreams. 

Questioner : But those dream objects are unreal, and the Vedas 
say that “‘his desires are real.” 

Samkara : Well, there is a reality in mental ideas; men and women 
are actually perceived in dreams. 

Questioner : The things perceived in dreams are only forms of 
traces (vdsand) from the waking world. 

Samkara: That’s only a small part of the truth. The objects 
perceived in the waking state are also mental ideas only, since they 
are merely reflections of Being, and it is said in scripture that all 
regions are rooted in wishes. Therefore there are mutual causal 
relations between external and mental things. But even though 
the mental are just external, and the external just mental, they are 
not unreal with respect to one’s own self. 

Questioner : But objects perceived in dreams become unreal upon 
waking. 

Samkara : True, but the unreality is relative, in relation to waking, 
not in dream itself. Likewise, waking objects are unreal in relation 
to dream experiences. What is unreal in all cases is the specific form, 
arising as name in dependence on speech and occasioning false aware- 
ness; the three colors alone are real—but then even these three colors 
are unreal in their particular forms, though as pure Being they are 
real. So prior to knowledge of Being all ideas are true with respect 
to their own objects, just as dreams are—so there is no inconsistency. 


CHANDOGYOPANISADBHASYA 269 


VIIT.12.1 (E324-328; T467-477). The Upanisad says here that 
the embodied being is visited by pleasure and pain and cannot be 
rid of it, but the disembodied Being is not touched by pleasure or 
pain. 

Objection : If pleasure does not touch the pure Self then in deep 
sleep a person must become annihilated. 

Answer: We are talking of the pleasure produced by meritorious 
acts from past lives—it is this that is absent in deep sleep. The 
passage does not deny that bliss is present, for bliss is the very nature 
of things, as the Upanisad asserts that abundance, that is, Brahman, 
is_ bliss. 

Objection: If abundance (=Brahman) and bliss are identical 
then either bliss is unknowable or else by Its very nature It will be 
constantly known—and in either case liberation is impossible. 

Answer : There is nothing wrong in the thesis that the All-Self 
(sarvatman) is related to all results, just as clay is related to all pots, 
jugs, etc. 

Objector: ‘Then the All-Self must be related to frustrations also! 

Answer: Frustrations are contained within the Self, to be sure; 
they are constructions born of avidya just like the snake in the rope. 

The true Self does not transmigrate, for transmigration is super- 
imposed on the Self through avidyd. 

VIII.12.3 (E329-330; T478-481). In the course of describing 
how the enlightened Self laughs and_ plays it is remarked that in this 
pure state It does not remember Its previous embodiments. 

Objection : Ifso It cannot be omniscient. 

Answer: That the Self does not remember Its experiences in the 
body when affected by avidyd does not impugn Its omniscience, any 
more than failing to remember what one experienced while insane 
impugns the knowledge a wise man has. 

Objection : We were told that abundance (i.e., Brahman, the true 
Self) does not see another, hear another, etc., but now we are being 
told that that same Self is described as seeing the things It plays with 
in the brahmaloka, etc. This is an inconsistency. 

Answer : As said elsewhere in the Vedas, It both sees and does not 
see them—since the Self is consciousness, It does not stop being cons- 
cious when liberated, so is aware of and sees things. But since desired 
objects have no existence apart from the Self, It does not “see” 
them. 


270 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


AITAREYOPANISADBHASYA 


The Aitareya Brahmana of the Rg Veda is onc of the oldest of the Brah- 
manas. To it are added five Aranyakas, or ‘‘forest-treatises.”” A 
portion of the second of these is known as the Attareya or Bahorca 
Upanisad, or sometimes as Atmasatka since it has six sections. 

As in the case of the Chdndogya, Isa, Ratha, Mundaka, and Prasna 
Upanisads, the authenticity of the commentary traditionally ascribed 
to Samkara has not been tested by modern methods. However, 
as the Aitareya is generally accepted to be one of the oldest Upanisads, 
and no one has questioned Samkara’s authorship of the commen- 
tary in question, we here accept the work as genuine. 

References (“ET’’) are to the edition and translation by D. 
Venkatramiah (Bangalore: Bangalore Press, 1934). 


INTRODUCTION 


1 (ET1-3). Noting that the Aitareya Upanisad is a portion of the 
Aitareya Aranyaka that follows a section dealing with actionand devotion 
to God and that some philosophers think that salvation is gained by 
following a combined path of knowledge and action (jfdnakarma- 
samuccaya), Samkara argues to the contrary that the way of knowledge 
alone leads to salvation according to the ultimate view espoused in 
this Upanisad. For though in the earlier section gods are mentioned 
as subjects of meditation, later on in the Upanisad they are shown 
to be subject to samsdara inasmuch as they are visited with hunger and 
thirst, etc. On the other hand, the Highest Brahman is declared in 
(other) scriptural passages to be free from hunger, etc. 

2 (ET4-9). Opponent : Yes, knowledge of the Self does lead to 
liberation. But there is no reason to believe that only sammnydsins 
can practice the way of knowledge; indeed, the Aitareya Aranyaka 
begins by discussing karma and then passes immediately on to discuss 
knowledge, suggesting that the person who performs prescribed 
duties is the one fit to follow the path of knowledge. Various scrip- 
tural passages favor the view that the way of action can coexist with 
the way of knowledge. 

An objector to the opponent argues that the combined-path inter- 
pretation will have the result of making the second part of the Aran- 
yaka superfluous, for it will then be taken to repeat the message of 
the earlier section. The opponent has at hand several ways of answer- 
ing, each of which finds a purpose for the Upanisad that is compati- 
ble with the combined-path view. 

If one objects that passages enjoining samnydsa will be contradicted, 


AITAREYOPANISADBHASYA 271 


the opponent answers that these passages are meant either to praise 
knowledge of the Self or to apply to those who are for some physical 
reason unable to perform actions. 

3 (ET!0-14). Answer : No, a combined-path is impossible, for 
once one knows the Self ene will recognize there is nothing to be gained 
from works and thus one will not engage in them. 

Objection : One engages in ritual works merely because scriptures 
enjoin it. 

Answer : No, since Self-knowledge involves the conviction that 
injunctions no longer carry any force. For no one acts without the 
belief that some benefit will result from his doing so. and this belief 
is undermined by Self-knowledge. 

Objector : Scripture enjoins actions regardless of the fitness, etc., 
of those on whom it is enjoined. 

Answer : Then it would follow that everyone is enjoined to do all 
actions at once, which is absurd! And anyway, the one who has 
attained Self-knowledge is not subject to commands, even Vedic 
commands, since those injunctions have sprung from himself, and 
it is a contradiction for someone to be both enjoiner and enjoined 
with respect to the same injunction. Jn addition, it would be absurd 
for the Vedas, which are God’s (=-the Self’s) creation, to instruct 
their creator-—just as absurd as a servant instructing his master. 

Objector : The scripture itself enjoins both action and knowledge 
for the same individual. 

Answer : That would mean that the scripture would enjoin incon- 
sistent things, since (as was argued) action presupposes lack of Self- 
knowledge and Self-knowledge presupposes lack of action. 

4 (ET14-16). Opponent: The knower of the Self would not by 
himself desire the results of actions, but scripture generates such 
desires. 

Answer: No. Scripture supplies the means of obtaining ends, 
desire for which is already present in someone who cannot obtain 
those ends by other devices. Having supplied the means to Self- 
knowledge, which is incompatible with action, it would be absurd 
to suppose it will turn around and generate the opposite desire ! 

Opponent : Scripture isn’t engaged in supplying the means to Self- 
knowledge. 

Answer: Surely it is, according to various scriptural passages 
themselves (which are cited). And these passages are intelligible, 
clear, and not contradicted. 

5. (ET16-21). Opponent: We are advised (by the Bhagavadgita) 
that for the knower of the Self “‘no purpose is served by perform- 


272 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ing some deed or not performing it” (Bhagavadgita I11.18). Thus 
renunciation (tydga) is no more appropriate for the Self-knower than 
action is. 

Answer: That is not the point. When one has realized the Self 
the necessary conditions for action—that is, desire arising from igno- 
rance (avidya)—are absent; it is not through any effort on the part 
of the person that this occurs. It is merely his very nature. 

Opponent: Very well! Since it is a natural thing, it cannot be 
the subject of scriptural injunctions. And it follows, too, that the 
Self-knower may as well remain a householder as become a samnydsin. 

Answer: No. The stage of householder implies the presence of 
desires, and the absence of desires implies the stage of samnyasa. For 
that matter, even discipleship under a guru, meditation, etc., are 
incompatible with Self-knowledge. Samkara suggests that those 
who argue as the last opponent has are afraid of the life of a samnyasin. 
But he maintains that as long as one thinks he owns a home, he must 
have some desire for it. Once the sense of ownership is lost the life 
of a samnyasin will follow on naturally. 

6 (ET21-27). Opponent : The scriptures enjoin certain ways in 
which an ascetic should accept food, bathe, etc. Likewise the house- 
holder who has attained Self-knowledge and renounced desires should 
continue to perform the obligatory duties (nityakarman). 

Answer: Such a person is not subject to the command of the 
scripture, although persons who are not yet realized are so subject. 
There is no analogy between the householder and the samnydsin— 
the injunctions to the householder are binding, whereas those (if 
any) that may be thought to apply to the samnyasin are incidental 
to him, because he does not have any desires to provide a motive for 
his actions. Nevertheless the samnydsin will continue to act in a 
disciplined way, but only because he has acquired the habit of doing 
so and has no motive for departing from that habit. 

Self-restraint (fama), detachment (dama), etc., are necessary for 
gaining Self-knowledge and are not in the end compatible with any 
life other than that of the samnydsin. Although the householder may 
practice these in some degree, full accomplishment requires with- 
drawal from the home; otherwise the means will be inadequate for 
producing the intended result. Further, scripture tells us that the 
rites enjoined upon householders, for example, meditation on saguna 
Brahman, result in the performer’s attaining the divine state but 
within the limits of samsdéra, whereas the knowledge of the Self has 
no relation to action. If action alone could gain one knowledge of 
the Self it could not produce a reward within the limits of samsdra, 


AITAREYOPANISADBHASYA 273 


Objection : Why cannot attainment of the divine state within samsdra 
be a subsidiary result (a#gaphala) ? 

Answer: Because the two are quite incompatible. Knowledge 
of the Self involves going beyond language, form, and acts; it relates 
to an object without attributes. .\ction must be toward something 
capable of being the object of an action; samsdra involves a distinction 
between action, agent, and fruit. 

7 (ET 27-31). Only the unenlightened are under obligation to 
men, ancestors, and gods; the enlightened ones who seek the world 
of the Self are under no such obligation. 

Objection : Unenlightened persons, since they have not fulfilled 
their obligations, cannot enter sanmydsa. 

Answer: No. No obligation exists before a person enters the 
state of householder. 

Opponent: Surely obligations exist even prior to becoming a 
householder. 

Answer : No, since obligations would bind persons in all the stages 
of life, which would be undesirable. Samnydsa can be entered into 
from any stage of life, provided a person becomes enlightened. 

8 (ET 31-34}. Certain scriptural texts that appear to contradict 
Samkara’s theses are discussed and interpreted in such a way as to 
accord with the view maintained. 


CHAPTER ONE 


The Upanisad speaks of the fact that first there was only the Self 
and nothing else. He thought “let me create’ and created the 
worlds; then He created purusa from the waters, and brooding like 
a bird over that purusa hatched out speech, breath, sight, sound, and 
touch along with the presiding deities governing their respective 
objects, followed by the other vital parts. 

9 (ET 35-46). Opponent: Doesn’t the wording “‘at first there 
was only the Self” suggest that now there are other things besides > 
And if so, doesn’t that contradict Advaita ? 

Answer: No. It is like saying “before there was only water, now 
there is also foam’’; since foam is nothing but water, it is still correct 
to say ‘‘there is only water’; likewise here. 

Opponent : How can an agent create without any materials? A 
carpenter can’t build without wood to work with! 

Answer : Again, itis like water and foam. The Selfis both the efficient 
and material cause of His creation, just as is the water of the particular 
kinds of bubbles of foam. Or better, He is like a magician who without 
any material projects himself into another (magically created) self. 


274 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Samkara likens the purusa of this passage to a lump of clay that the 
Self by merely willing it caused to develop, first the several bodily 
seats of the senses, then the sense organs themselves, and finally the 
presiding deity of each of the respective kinds of objects—in that order 
-—and including the inner sense (antahkarana). 


CHAPTER TWO 


The Upanisad continues : The presiding deities thus created fell 
into the great ocean and, developing hunger and thirst, requested 
sustenance. He showed them a horse and a cow but they weren’t 
satisfied, but when he showed them a man they were glad, and He 
ordered each deity to enter into the appropriate part of the man’s 
body. Hunger and thirst were also allotted a place with the deities 
in the human body. 

10 (ET 47-55). The “great ocean” is samsdra, says Samkara: it 
is filled with suffering bornof ignorance and desire, endlessly surging 
with desire but still holding on its bosom the ship of wisdom sailing 
toward liberation. Samkara extracts from this suggestion a proof 
that the combined path of knowledge and works is not adequate. 

The Lord (=the Self) instilled hunger and thirst into the purusa 
initially and so the deities suffered these pangs also. When the deities 
were transferred to the human bodies, hunger and thirst were assign- 
ed to those embodied deities as well, which is why food and drink 
when offered to the gods also satisfy hunger and thirst (of the priests, 
presumably ). 


CHAPTER THREE 


The Upanisad continues: The Lord next created solid matter 
as food for the hunger of the gods, now embodied in human beings, 
but they had difficulty finding a way of ingesting this food, until 
they discovered the downward breath (apdna) and sucked in the food 
through their mouths. This posed a question for the Lord: He 
had created speech, smell, vision, hearing, touch, mind, and breath 
to perform the various functions of the body, and what was left for 
Him? So he slit open the skulls of the bodies and entered there, 
and occupied three seats and three dreams. Then He, having been 
born within the individual body, named everything he could think 
of, and then, perceiving Brahman (=purusa) everywhere, cried ‘‘I 
have seen It’? (idam adarsam), which is why the Lord is called ‘‘Indra’’ 
(a contraction of ‘“‘idamdra’’). The gods love secrecy ! 

1] (ET 56-72). The question that the Lord reflected on is like a 
king’s reflecting concerning a city : “‘Since this city and its inhabitants 


AITAREYOPANISADBH ASYA 275 


are by nature intended for the benefit of someone other than them- 
selves, namely me, the lord of the city, I must find some way of becom- 
ing available to them as enjoyer of the fruits of their (worshipful) 
deeds; otherwise they will never come to know of my existence or my 
nature, and their activities will be in vain.” The Lord’s reflecting 
thus led him to the notion that if He entered the human body as its 
seat of consciousness He would play the appropriate role, and so He 
did so through the skull—an hypothesis born out by our experience 
that when the top of the head is anointed with oil it produces a blissful 
sensation. 

The “‘three seats’? may be the visual sense, the mind, and the akdasa 
in the heart, or it may refer to the father’s body, the mother’s womb, 
and one’s own body. The ‘‘three dreams’ are the waking, dream, 
and deep sleep states—they are all “‘dreams’’ since they are condi- 
tioned by avidyd, the individual self not ‘‘waking up” from these 
states even though hammered by suffering. 

(ET 72-76) Objection: Since the Self is all-pervading it makes no 
sense to speak of Him entering a body through a split in the skull. 
So this whole passage is irrational (anupapanna). 

Answer : No, the passage is meant to explain the nature of the 
Self; everything else in it is arthavada, not to be taken literally; or 
better, it is taught by the Lord in order that the nature of the 
Self can be more easily comprehended. 

(ET 76-82) Objection: You have spoken of one Self, but there 
are in fact three: the individual self (jiva), the Lord (ifvara) and the 
purusa of the Upanisads; so how can you maintain Advaita (non- 
dualism ) ? 

Answer : How do you know of the existence of the jiva ? 

Objector : The jiva is inferred as the agent of hearing, seeing, think- 
ing, etc., from the fact something must hear, see, think, etc. 

Samkara : When hearing something one is only aware of sounds, 
and so cannot infer something quite different, that is, an agent-self. 

Objector: One can be aware, through mental activity going on 
simultaneously with hearing, that hearing is going on, and that 
awareness is itself the hetu in the inference. 

Samkara : No, for one can hear without this awareness occurring. 

Objection : But whatever is known is known through the manas. 

Samkara : But what knows the manas? There must be a knower 
that is not itself known, and that is the Self. And shat self (the Self) 
cannot be an object of inference. 

(ET 83-97) Objection: But scripture says the Self is to be known 
as both hearer and thinker. 


276 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer : Sometimes the Self hears, and other times He thinks. 
There is no contradiction in that. 

Vaisesika : Aha! So consciousness is an adventitious quality of 
the Self, now present, now absent, as we contend. 

Samkara: So you contend, but scripture can’t mean that, since 
it tells us that the Self is neither hearer nor thinker. This text means 
that the Self is not something that has these traits; rather, Its hearing, 
etc.—Its consciousness—is eternal. 

Objection : Then we should be conscious of everything at once ! 

Samkara : We must distinguish two kinds of consciousness of which 
the Self is the ultimate seat. On the one hand, there is the kind of 
consciousness that involves the internal organ and the sense organs; 
it is impermanent and requires sense-object contact. On the other, 
there is the eternal, nonmaterial consciousness that is the Self. It 
is of this latter that scripture speaks. The existence of this latter 
kind of consciousness is shown by the fact that though the senses are 
destroyed internal awareness (e.g. in dreams) continues. Further- 
more, the kind of consciousness that requires the sense organs depends 
on the second sort, the witness-consciousness, since it provides (as it 
were) the light that illuminates all, whether dream or waking state 
objects. The Vaisesikas and others who suppose that consciousness 
is adventitious confuse the first kind of awareness with the second 
and so miss the second’s peculiar characteristics. Failing to see the 
eternal consciousness that is the Self, they naturally find the world 
full of distinctions, for example, between the different “‘selves” of jiva, 
God, and purusa. But really all such distinctions are the result of 
superimposition—which is why scripture tells us ‘‘He (the Self) is 
not this, not this’’. 

Objection : If all this is so, then how can the jiva know the Self? 

Answer : Only by scripture’s telling him he is nothing else. If 
he doesn’t understand that, he won’t understand the positive state- 
ment “You are Brahman.” And without understanding his identity 
with Brahman he will circle endlessly in samsara. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


The Upanisad says: (Let the pregnant women withdraw! We 
shall now discuss the mechanics of the birth of the jiva.) The jiva 
is first implanted into the father’s semen as a minute image of himself; 
it is then implanted into his mate, and becomes an image of her; 
in due course a son is born. This is why the father cherishes his son, 
since that son is truly himself; likewise, when the son grows up, he 
replaces his father in his place in society. The father dies and 


AITAREYOPANISADBHASYA 277 


eventually takes on another body. Thus the jiva is born three times in 
this process: once in his father’s seed, a second time when he emerges 
from the womb, and a third time when he enters the subtle body when 
leaving the gross body at death. Vamadeva gained liberation even 
while yet in the womb. (We have finished. Let the women return !) 

12 (ET 98-110). The jiva, having peregrinated to the lunar 
spheres, comes down with the rain and enters into food, and is thus 
ingested into the father’s body and into his semen. The period of 
conception and gestation is described, as is the care of the child by 
its parents. The importance of having sons is brought out: it is in 
order that samsdara will continue, and this is binding on ordinary folk, 
though it has no relevance for one seeking liberation. At whatever 
point a jiva realizes the nature of the Self, however, he becomes imme- 
diately liberated, even if this occurs while in the womb, as it did to 
Vamadeva, who forced his way out of the womb, shed his body, and 
rose upwards, attaining bliss and immortality. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


The Upanisad says: Which self of the two is the one we adore ? 
That by which one sees, hears, smells, speaks, tastes, which is the 
heart, the internal organ, which carries on all sorts of mental and 
volitional activities—that is Brahman, the Lord of all, also called 
“Prajfia.”’ By this Prajfia-Self one obtains the supreme bliss of 
immortality. 

13 (ET 111-127). According to Samkara the two selves referred 
to are one (prdna, or hiranyagarbha) that entered the body by the feet, 
and the other that entered it through a split in the skull. The question 
posed is; which of these should we meditate on? The one that came 
by the feet provided the organs by which we grasp things; but the 
one that came by the head is that by which we are aware of not only 
the organs but their functions and objects. Those organs, functions, 
and objects are all names of Prajfia, the lower Brahman (apara brah- 
man), who, as Hiranyagarbha, has entered the internal organ, the 
reflecting medium, and is reflected therefrom as different images of 
the sun are reflected in varied waters. The Higher Brahman, when 
conditioned by mdyd, is known as Lord (évara), inner ruler (antar- 
yamin), Hiranyagarbha, Viraj, Prajapati, and so on down the whole 
gamut of orders of being. It was this understanding that Vamadeva 
got and which led him to liberation. 


CHAPTER SIX 


Concluding invocation. 


278 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ISOPANISADBHASYA 


The Ja Upanisad is sometimes called Samhita Upanisad, presumably 
since it occurs in the mantra or samhitaé portion of the White Yajurveda. 
It is a short Upanisad, only eighteen verses long, but probably among 
the oldest. Others have found a happy attempt at a synthesis in this 
Upanisad between action and knowledge as paths.*? Samkara, in 
contrast to that interpretation, finds that portions of the eighteen 
verses are addressed to different persons—some verses are meant for 
Self-knowers (samnyasins), the rest for those who have not known the 
Self. Far from a synthesis, Samkara’s notion is that the two paths 
are mutually inconsistent and so cannot be practiced simultaneously. 
Although both are aids, action is only an ‘extrinsic aid” (bahiranga) 
whereas knowledge is an ‘‘intrinsic aid’’ (antaranga) to liberation.®? 

Vidyarnava*‘ points out that the Upanisad mentions four kinds of 
wrong views—(1) updsandvddins, who spend their time in prayer, 
(2) mahdydjfias, who spend their time in good works, (3) those who 
spend their time studying milaprakrii, i.e., Samkhyas, and (4) those 
who worship created nature (Hiranyagarbha) through yoga. Each 
gets an appropriate result. 

“E” references are to the edition by H. R. Bhagavat, Works of 
Shankaracharya (2d edition : Poona: Ashtekar & Co., 1927), volume 
2, part 1. “T” refers to the translation by Swami Gambhira- 
nanda in Eight Upanishads (Calcutta: Advaita Ashrama, 1957), 
volume 1}. 

Introduction (El; T3-4). The verses constituting this Upanisad 
are not used in rituals, for they reveal the true nature of the Self 
and do not deal with (ritual) action. This is appropriate, for the 
Self is not an agent nor can it in any way become involved in action, 
since action requires attributing qualities to the Self that it does not 
really have. Thus the point of this Upanisad is to reveal the true 
nature of the Self and thus to remove ignorance. 

1 (E1-2; T4-6). This verse is addressed to the knower of the 
Self and says that for such a person liberation will arise from firm 
devotion to that knowledge together with renunciation of the three- 
fold desire (for sons, wealth, and worlds). 

2 (E2-3; T6-8). The second verse, however, is addressed to one 
who does not know the Self and advises performing ritual actions 
such as the agnihotra. Why the difference between the audiences add- 
ressed in the first two verses? Because Self-knowledge and action 
are mutually incompatible, as was shown in the introduction. 

3 (E3; T8-9). Those who ‘kill the Self?’ (dtémahan) are those 


ISOPANISADBHASYA 279 


ignorant common folk from whom the Self is concealed by avidyd, 
just as the consciousness of one who is killed is hidden. 

4 (E3-4; T9-12). The verse describes the Self in apparently contra- 
dictory terms—for example, it says the Self is both “‘motionless” and 
yet “‘faster than the mind.”” How can this be? The answer is that 
some adjectives describe the Self in its unconditioned state, others 
describe It in its conditioned states. 

6-7 (E5; T13-14). When one realizes that all this is just the one 
Self he will be unable to hate others; for it is common experience 
that one only hates what is seen as different from oneself. Again, 
sorrow and delusion do not affect one who knows the Self. 

8 (E5-7; T15-18). The point of insisting that action and knowl- 
edge are incompatible is in part to recommend to the nonknower 
of the Self both knowledge and works—as we find in Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad 1.5.16, for example, that by vidya one attains the world of 
the gods, thus this vidyd—that is, meditation and worship—has its 
own result and should be practiced in addition to ritual acts. 

9-11 (E7; Ti8-21). By construing “‘avidya’’ in these verses as 
meaning karma, and ‘“‘vidyd’? as meaning meditation, and taking it 
that each of the two have their distinct outcomes, that is, progression 
of the subtle body to the world of the fathers (pitrloka) as the outcome 
of ritual action, progression to the world of the gods (devaloka) as the 
outcome of meditation on and worship of the gods, these three verses 
become intelligible. 

12-14 (E8-9; T21-24). As for worship, it may be either of the 
unmanifested (avpakrtaprakrti) or of the manifested (Hiranyagarbha )— 
these again have different results, for worship of the unmanifested 
prakrti results in absorption into that prakrti (prakrtilaya). That is 
the highest state attainable through human and divine methods 
(i.e., by action or worship) ; beyond all this is the liberation attainable 
by Self-knowledge. 

15-17 (E9-10; T25-28). These verses proceed to illustrate the 
meditation on the gods through prayer. 

18 (E10-11; T28-31). The verse finishes the prayer. 

Question : When the texts talk of “crossing over death, attaining 
immortality through ‘‘vidyd,”’ etc., why should they not be construed 
as speaking of liberation rather than (as you have urged) merely 
the path of the gods or absorption into prakrti? 

Answer : As we have said, Self-knowledge and action are opposed 
in means and end and cannot be combined. 

Question : Well, then, why can’t we say that action and Self- 
knowledge arise successively—that is, first we perform ritual acts, 


280 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
then achieve Self-knowledge and go on performing acts ? 
Answer : No, since once knowledge arises action ceases altogether. 


KATHOPANISADBHASYA 


The Katha, one of the best known of the Upanisads, is probably 
among the dozen or so “earliest.” It tells the story of Naciketas’ 
trip to the netherworld and his reception by Yama, who cventually 
teaches Naciketas the truth about liberation. 

Samkara’s commentary is presumably authentic—no one has ques- 
tioned it—but it is essentially repetitive of his comments on other 
Upanisads; hence the brevity of our summary. 

“FE” references are to H. R. Bhagavat’s edition in Works of Shankara- 
charya (Poona: Ashtekar & Co., 1927), volume two, part one, pp. 36-77. 
“T” refers to the translation by Swami Gambhirananda in Eight 
Upanishads (Calcutta : Advaita Ashrama, 1957), volume one, pp. 
96-228. 

Introduction (E36-37; T97-100). The word “upanisad’” is derived 
from the root sad meaning to split up (vifarana), go (gati) or loosen 
(avasadana) plus prefixes. As a result an Upanisad is something that 
splits up or destroys the avidyd that binds us, or something that goes 
to Brahman. 


CHAPTER ONE, SECTION TWO, OR SECOND VALLI 


1 (E45-46; T128-129). The better (Sreyas) is glossed as liberation 
(nihSreyasa) and is said to be different from the more pleasant (pre- 
yas), since the former has the nature of knowledge (vidy@), whereas 
the latter has the nature of avidya@. One cannot follow both paths. 
The wise man follows the former, the unintelligent one the latter. 

8 (E48; 1137-139). That the Self cannot be reasoned out (atarkya 
in the Upanisadic text) means that it cannot be reasoned out by 
one’s own buddhi alone. Why? Because there is no end to hypo- 
theses one may invent about It—for cxample, one person may hold 
It to be very small, another smaller, a third the smallest, etc.—so 
there is no end to reasoning. 


CHAPTER TWO, SECTION THREE, OR SIXTH VALLI 


1 (E70-71; T207-210). The Upanisad speaks of the peepul or 
fig tree, which has its roots above and its branches below. 

Samkara : The tree symbolizes the world; the root is Visnu, that 
is, Brahman. The world is like a tree because it is cut down. 
From Brahman, its root, it grows from the seeds of avidyd, desire, 


KENOPANISADBHASYA 31 


karma, and the unmanifest into the sprout called Hiranyagarbha, 
the lower Brahman: its trunk is all living things; it grows through 
being sprinkled with the waters of thirst; its sprouts are the objects 
of the senses, its leaves the Vedas and smrtis, its flowers are sacrificial 
acts, and so forth. Like the pcepul tree it is continually shaken by 
the wind of desires and deeds. Its branches—-hcaven, hell, the beastly 
and ghostly states--are below its root. 

4 (E71; T212). One should try hard for self-realization while 
alive on this earth, for except for the brahmaloka there is no other 
world where the Self appears as clearly as a face in the mirror—and 
the brahmaloka is difficult to attain. 


KENOPANISADBHASYA 


There are in fact two commentaries on the Aena Upanisad ascribed 
to Samkara, one on the words (pada), the other on the sentences 
(vakya). Some scholars have doubted the authenticity of the senten- 
ces commentary, though none has questioned that the word commen- 
tary is Samkara’s.35 A recent study by Mayeda** argues that both 
are authentic and uses more careful methods than others had 
previously. 

The Upanisad belongs to the Talavakara Brahman of the Séma 
Veda and is itself in two parts, half verse and halfprose. Its name is 
taken from the first word of the first verse—-“‘kena,” “‘by whom ?” 


PADABHASYA 


“EK” references are to the edition by H. R. Bhagavat, Works of 
Shankaracharya (Poona: Ashtekar & Co., 1927), volume 2, part 1, pp. 
78-112. ‘“‘T’’ refers to the translation by Swami Gambhirananda 
in Eight Upanishads (Calcutta : Advaita Ashrama, 1957), volume one, 
pp. 35-94. 


PART ONE 


Introductory Section (78-79; T35-39). Samkara reviews the 
distinctions among the northern and southern paths and the type of 
rebirth (as “small creatures,” e.g., insects) that those who do not 
even adhere to scriptural injunctions will earn. Distinct from all 
three of these outcomes is that accruing to the renunciate free from 
desire, who through meditation on the true Self overcomes ignorance 
and bondage; he alone can achieve Brahman-realization. It is shown 
again that knowledge cannot be combined with action. 

Let us suppose that someone committed to knowing Brahman 


282 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


approaches a teacher who understands Brahman and that the follow- 
ing discussion ensues. 

I.1 (E79-80; T39-42). The Upanisad has the pupil ask ‘by whom 
(kena) are the internal organ, préna, speech, and the sense organs 
ruled in their several activities ?” 

Samkara : The questioner is actually asking “‘by whom is the direct- 
ed (presita) internal organ willed to go toward its object ?”? The 
implication is that the internal organ, etc., are not independently 
(svatantra) capable of activity or cessation of activity with respect 
to objects; if they were so, they would not commit evils knowing 
the consequences. Since they do so it is appropriate to ask who or 
what impels them to do so. 

1.2 (E80-82; T42-47). The answer given in the Upanisad is that 
‘‘He is the ear of the ear, the internal organ of the internal organ... .”’ 
Question : We expected an answer to the question in the form ‘‘x 


> 


rules the internal organ, prdna, speech, etc.,’ with a description of 
x so that the pupil can identify him; the answer provided is not 
appropriate for the question asked. 

Samkara : But in this case no description of the required x can 
be given except by reference to the activities of the ears, etc. It is 
not that x has his own activity apart from that of the organs. 
Nevertheless, because of the rule that aggregates always serve the 
purposes of something else, we can presume that there is an x whose 
purposes the ears, etc., serve, and that is the x the teacher speaks 
of here. 

Objection : ‘“The ear of the ear’? makes no sense, as an ear does 
not need another ear any more than a light needs another light. 

Answer: Though the ear has the capacity of revealing its own 
objects, it only does so when the light of the Self, i-e., consciousness, 
is present, and it is in virtue of this that the phrase “‘ear of the ear”’ 
is used to designate that Self. 

1.3 (E82; T48-49). Brahman cannot be the object of the activity 
of the sense organs, speech, or the internal organ—so, says the Upa- 
nisad, there is no way of instructing concerning It. Samkara says 
that the text means to suggest that it is very difficult to teach about 
Brahman. That it is not altogether impossible is suggested by the 
very next stanza, which invokes scripture to teach about Brahman. 

1.4 (E82-83; T49-52). The text says that Brahman is different 
from what is known and above what is not known. 

Samkara : Everything that is known is little (a/pa), mortal (mrtyu), 
and frustrating by nature, and Brahman is different from that, so 
the text means that Brahman is not to be avoided. But since Brahman 


KENOPANISADBHASYA 283 


is nothing different from one’s Self, Brahman is not something to be 
obtained, and that is what is meant by saying that Brahman is above 
what is not known. And since Brahman is thus shown to be some- 
thing neither to be obtained or avoided, the disciple will have no 
desire to treat It as an object of knowledge, realizing that It is his 
very own Self. 


PART TWO 


II.1 (E85-87; T58-62). The Upanisad : Teacher : If you think 
“I know Brahman well” you do not really know Him, and should 
study (mimdmsya) more. 

Pupil: 1 think (Brahman) is known. 

Samkara: The knower cannot be known by the knower, any more 
than fire can burn itself-—thus anyone who thinks it is easy to know 
Brahman is mistaken. Rather they probably comprehend only certain 
aspects of Him. 

Objection : Since a thing is known when one comprehends its 
essential nature, and since the essential nature of Brahman is con- 
sciousness, one knows Brahman well when he knows that It is con- 
sciousness. 

Answer : That is true. But the point here is that even when one 
thinks he knows this he really only knows consciousness in relation 
to its states when limited by adjuncts such as the internal organ and 
the senses, with which consciousness he is likely to identify his self. 
Even when Brahman is known as conditioned by divine adjuncts 
It is still known conditionally and not fully understood. 

So the pupil sat and meditated on what the teacher had said, and 
then approached him and said “I think Brahman is known.” And 
the teacher asked : ‘““Why?.” Said the pupil: “Listen !” 

II.2 (E87; T62-64). ‘I do know Brahman, but also I do not 
know.” 

Teacher : Isn’t that contradictory ? 

Pupil: (Possibly; but) anyone who understands this sentence I 
have just uttered understands Brahman. 

TI.3 (E87-88; T64-66). That is to say, those who think they know 
that Brahman is this or that—say, the organs, or the intellect, they 
do not know. 

But is Brahman wholly unknowable ? 

II.4 (E88-90; T66-71). Yes, when the Self, Brahman, is known 
in relation to all ideas in all states of consciousness as the Witness 
thereof and thus nondifferent from them, then It is known. 

Objection : No, the Self is really known when we understand that 


284 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


It is the agent in the act of knowing, just as one knows the wind when 
one understands that which moves the branches of a tree. 

Answer : Then you would interpret the Self as a substance possess- 
ing the power of knowing, not consciousness itself. Thus on your 
view knowledge comes and goes, modifying the self when present. 
It follows that the self you are talking of is changeable, composed of 
parts, noneternal, impure, etc. (And that is not a proper under- 
standing of the Self). 

Vaisesika : Consciousness is an adventitious quality arising from 
contact between the Self and the internal organ, but it does not follow 
that the Self is changeable, etc., any more than the pot can be said 
to change when it is painted a different color. 

Answer : Then Brahman, the Self, is mere substance without 
consciousness and this contradicts scripture. Furthermore, since the 
Self is without parts the internal organ must always (or never !) be in 
contact with It, which is contrary to the Vaisesika theory. Finally, 
only things that have properties can be said to ‘“‘come into contact”’ 
with something else, and then only with something else of the same 
kind—but on the Vaisesika view the Self—without properties, un- 
differentiated, etc., is supposed to come into contact with something 
else—the internal organ—which is of a different kind altogether. 


MUNDAKOPANISADBHASYA 


Ranade explains ‘‘Mundaka Upanisad”’ etymologically as ‘‘an ‘Upa- 
nishad addressed to Shavelings.’’’3? Max Miller explains that 
““Mundaka, in its commonest acceptation, is used as a term of 
reproach for Buddhist mendicants, who are called ‘Shavelings,’ 
in opposition to the Brahmins, who dress their hair carefully, and 
often display by its peculiar arrangement either their family or their 
rank... .”’38 

Ranade calls the Mundaka an emotional work in contrast with the 
Katha, with which he thinks it is roughly contemporaneous. It is 
an Upanisad of the Atharva Veda. Since it is in verse it is sometimes 
called Mantropanisad, as are other verse Upanisads such as the Ja. 

“E” references are to H. R. Bhagavat’s edition in Works of Shankara- 
charya (Poona: Ashtekar & Co., 1927), volume 2, part 1, pp. 498-531. 
“T” refers to the translation by Swami Gambhirananda in 
Fight Upanishads (Calcutta : Advaita Ashrama; 2d edition, 1966), 
volume 2, pp. 77-172. 


FIRST MUNDAKA, PART ONE 
Introduction (E498-499; T79-81). This Upanisad is a part of 


MUNDAKOPANISADBHASYA 285 


the Atharva Veda. Samkara gives a general account of the purpose 
of the Upanisad, which is to make knowledge of Brahman attractive 
by distinguishing it from lower knowledge, so that people will engage 
in it; this is initially accomplished by indicating the great teachers 
who have passed this knowledge down, and subsequently by showing 
that Brahman-knowledge comes only to those in sammydsa and cannot 
be associated with actions. 

3-6 (E£500-502; T84=91). ‘The Upanisad relates that Saunaka, 
a great householder, asked Angiras what it is by which, when it is 
known, all this becomes known. Angiras answers that there are two 
kinds of knowledge, a higher and a lower, and of these the lower 
consists in knowledge of the Vedas, the sciences of pronunciation 
(stks@), ritual (kalpa), grammar (vyakarana), etymology (nirukta), 
prosody (chanda), and astrology (jyotisa), whereas the higher consists 
in knowledge of the immutable (cksara). It is by the higher know- 
ledge that wise men understand that which is beyond the senses and 
is eternal, all-pervading, extremely subtle, etc., and which is the 
source of all, 

An objector complains : This “higher knowledge,” since it is outside 
the Rg Veda, etc.~how can it be “higher” and the means of libera- 
tion ? If it is outside the Vedas it is useless, as Manu (XII.9) shows; 
furthermore the Upanisads will be classed as ‘“‘outside the Vedas’”— 
or if they are inside, then the distinction between “higher” and 
“lower”? is pointless. 

Answer: No, the point being made is that knowledge of the immut- 
able is conveyed only by the Upanisads and that knowledge is the 
“higher’’—it does not refer tothe collection of words that are found in 
the Upanisads. But by the word ‘‘Veda’’ a collection of words is 
always meant. The idea, then, is that merely by learning the words 
in the Vedas one does not necessarily get the higher knowledge. 


FIRST MUNDAKA, SECOND PART 


Introduction (E504; T95-96). The lower knowledge has ignor- 
ance as its content, and involves samsdra with its differences between 
agent, action, actor, etc.; it is without beginning or end, and since it 
has the nature of frustration it has to be totally destroyed by each 
embodied being. The higher knowledge on the other hand has 
liberation as its content—the destruction of that bondage; it is without 
beginning or end, without age, fear, death; it is supreme bliss and 
without a second, since it is nothing but being stabilized in one’s own 
Self. So the text first speaks of the lower knowledge, since eradica- 
tion of it requires first our understanding that it is there. 


286 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


1] (E508; 1106-108). The text speaks of forest-dwellers, and 
samnyasins, as well as learned householders, who become free from 
passion (virdja) and so, leaving the body, proceed along the “‘path of 
the sun’’—the “northern path’’—to the place where the immortal 
purusa_ lives. 

Question: Isn’t this liberation ? 

Answer: No; the Upanisad will subsequently explain that libera- 
tion takes place right here and involves no journeying. Anyway, 
the context precludes that we can speak of liberation in this case. 
The ‘“‘freedom from passion’? mentioned here is a dependent variety 
since it involves duality. 

12 (E508-509; T109-111). ‘The text now advises a Brahmin who 
has examined the worlds, realized that everything here is only karma 
and so has renounced them, to find a teacher who knows the Vedas 
and is stabilized in Brahman. 

That is, using the pramdnas—perception, inference, comparison, and 
scripture—to appreciate that the lower knowledge is meant for igno- 
rant persons and has no capacity for releasing us from bondage, which 
is to say that such a one realizes that all the worlds are dependent 
and so like mda, water in a mirage, the Gandharva city, dreams, 
bubbles in water or foam subject to periodic destruction—realizing 
all this one should turn away from virtue and vice and renounce 
everything that has to do with karma. The Brahmin is uniquely 
qualified for Brahman-knowledge after renunciation. So he should 
become detached and seek out a teacher. 


SECOND MUNDARBA, FIRST PART 

Introduction (E510; T113). This section explains that the immut- 
able is called “Self”? (purusa), and that it is this Self from which 
Samsara arises and into which it becomes dissolved. ‘This is what, 
being known, leads to all clse being known, the subject of the higher 
knowledge of Brahman. 

1 (E510; T113-114). Samkara explains that the immutable Self 
is the originator and destroyer of things in the same sense that, e.g., 
different parts of space arise when dkdéa is limited by pots, etc., and 
are dissolved back into akasa when the pots, etc., disappear, and dkasa 
is held to be the cause in both such eventuations. 

2 (E510-511; T115-117). The text speaks of two “high immut- 
ables,” of which the Self is the higher. Samkara explains that the 
lower of these two is the unmanifested, or mdyd, which is the adjunct 
of Brahman appearing as name-and-form, which is itself higher than 
the evolved world of modifications. 


MUNDAKOPANISADBHASYA 287 


3 (ES1i-512;  T117-119). This highest immutable permeates 
the other one, which is also called akasa, and becomes empirical 
content. 

Question : How can it do that, since it lacks life-breath, etc. 

Answer: Tf like the Self the life-breath, etc., exist in their own form 
before origination (of the world), then the Self will possess them since 
they will occur along with It. But they do not exist in their own form 
prior to origination. Therefore the Self is without life-breath, etc., 
just as Devadatta is without a son prior to a son’s being born. 

The textual passage explains that the life-breath, along with the 
internal organ (manas), scnse organs, space (kha), air, light, water, 
and earth, are born from the Self. Samkara explains that they are 
born as content and modification of avidya, exist only in name, and 
are “unreal” (anrta) (quoting Chandogya Upanisad V1.1.4). For just 
as a man does not possess a son by dreaming of one, so the Self does 
not possess the life-breath, etc. 


SECOND MUNDAKA, SECOND PART 


Introduction (£515; T128). ‘This section explains how the immut- 
able is to be known despite Its being without form. 


THIRD MUNDAKA, FIRST PART 


Introduction (E521; T143). This section now turns to consider 
various aids to the yoga of meditation on the immutable Self, which 
yoga has been shown to be the means to obtain the realization that 
destroys completely all causes of samsdra. 

1-2 (E521-522; T143-147). The text of the first of the two pass- 
ages presents the famous simile of the two birds, constant companions 
and having the same name, which cling to the same tree, but where 
one eats the fruit the other looks on without eating. Samkara ex- 
plains that one of these two is the individual self, or ““knower of the 
field” (ksetrajfia), and the other is God—both are conditioned by the 
limiting adjuncts of the subtle body (dimga) that is the locus of the 
vdsands of avidya, desire and karma. The “‘tree” is the body, being 
like the banyan tree (asvatiha) with its roots up and its branches down, 
the root being the unmanifest, which supports all the results of the 
actions of living things. God, unlike the individual self, remains the 
eternal Witness. 

The simile is continued in the second passage—the individual self, 
stuck on that tree, worries about his impotence by reflecting on _ his 
inability to maintain the occasions of his enjoyments. But when he 
sees the other (bird), that is, God, and appreciates His glory, then 


288 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the individual self becomes free of sorrow (vitasoka). Samkara ex- 
plains that this will happen if through accumulation of good karma 
he finds a kindly person who teaches him yoga. 

4 (E522-523; T148-151). It becomes clear from Samkara’s com- 
ment on this verse that the God spoken of in this section is the life- 
breath (prana) and that the individual self who sees him attains 
pleasure (ratz) from the Self alone, that is, renounces all other sources 
of enjoyment like wife, sons, etc., and takes to activities that are 
spiritual. Samkara takes occasion to show that the text does not 
imply that knowledge of Brahman and action are to be practised 
together. 

6 (E524; T153). The text says that truth (satya) alone conquers, 
not untruth (anrta), and that by truth the way of the gods is main- 
tained indefinitely. It is this path by which those sages, free from 
desire, proceed to the place where the optimum treasure truly exists. 


THIRD MUNDAKA, SECOND PART 


3 (E527-528; T161-162). The text says that this Self is not 
gotten through study (pravacana) nor by interpreting (medha) nor 
by listening extensively to scripture. Rather it is that upon aban- 
doning everything else this Self shines through by Its own light when 
prayed for. 

4 (£528; T162-163). Samkara interprets this passage as saying 
that one cannot pray for the Self successfully without being strong 
and undeluded, and that one must be a samnydsin (he interprets 
“ltiga’”’ here to mean samnydisa). 

5 (E528; T164). What happens when such a one ‘enters Brah- 
man”? They “‘enter into everything” in the sense that all limiting 
adjuncts are given up, so that the analogy is with what happens 
when akdfa ceases being confined within pots due to the breaking 
of the pots. 

6 (E529; T165-166). Thus it is not that the liberated self has to 
go anywhere to achieve liberation; Brahman cannot be approached 
through change of place. Liberation is not a product, but merely 
removal of avidyd. 

7 (£529-530; T167-168). The constituents of the body—the 
senses, etc.~go to their respective deities (e.g., the sun) at the time of 
liberation. The karma that has not yet begun to operate, along with 
the self made of consciousness (vijfdnamaya), all become unified in 
Brahman when the limiting adjunct is removed. 

9 (E530-531; T169-170). Objection : Everyone knows that there 
are many obstacles to achievement of the highest goal. Therefore, 


PRASNOPANISADBHASYA 289 


even one who knows Brahman may, after death, be visited by afflic- 
tions (klefa) or by one of the gods or something and so may not 
reach Brahman. 

Answer : No, the only obstacle to liberation is avidyad; there is no 
other source of bondage. Thus one who knows Brahman becomes 
Brahman, and is not born again, attaining immortality. 


PRASNOPANISADBHASYA 


Like the Mundaka this work belongs to the Atharva Veda; indeed, 
on Samkara’s interpretation it is parasitic upon the Mundaka. How- 
ever, it is in prose rather than verse. 

Again, no one has either questioned or studied Samkara’s author- 
ship of the work. 

“E” refers to the edition by H. R. Bhagavat, Works of Shankara- 
charya (Poona: Ashtekar & Co., 1927), volume two, part one, pp. 
393-423. ‘‘T’ refers to the translation by Swami Gambhirananda 
in Hight Upanishads (Calcutta : Advaita Ashrama, 1957), volume 
two, pp. 407-506. 


FIRST QUESTION 


Introduction (E393; T407-408). This Brahmana is an extensive 
reiteration of the subject of the mantra(-portion) (viz., the Mundaka 
Upanisad?). It consists of a story in the form of questions and ans- 
wers, and is intended to explain who can gain knowledge and who 
can teach it. 

1.16 (E398; T424-425). The text says that the pure Brahmaloka 
is for those who are not crooked, not false, not mdyd. Samkara 
explains that the higher way, or northern path, which is pure like 
the prana or sun and not tainted with passion like the heaven of the 
moon, is followed by those who are without guile, in contrast to 
householders for whom crookedness is unavoidable because they are 
involved in many contradictory purposes characterizing worldly 
dealings (vyavahéra). Likewise, it is to be followed by those who 
are not false, unlike householders who practice untruthfulness when 
at play. Again, one who follows this path must be free from médyé, 
unlike householders. Mayda is false conduct (mithydcéra) involving 
dissimulation, making an external show of something while acting 
quite differently. In sum, this path is meant for the brahmacdrins, 
forest-dwellers, and monks (bhiksu) in whom such faults are 
absent. 


290 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


FOURTH QUESTION 


IV.5 (E408-410; T456-461). The text indicates that it is the 
internal organ (manas) that in dreams takes on the various forms 
experienced and so experiences them. 

Objection: The internal organ is an instrument (karana) of the one 
who experiences, that is, the self. So how can it be properly held 
here that the internal organ is an independent knower ? Only the 
knower of the field (ksetrajiia), that is, the self, is independent. 

Answer: There is no fault here. The knower of the field that is 
independent is precisely that which is conditioned by the internal 
organ, since the Highest Self is not something that either sleeps or wakes. 

Objection : If the Self is conditioned by the internal organ during 
sleep Its self-illuminatingness will be sublated ! 

Answer : You misunderstand the purport of scripture. Common 
language reference to everything from self-illumination to liberation 
itself with respect to the Self has avidya as its content, and so is caused 
by the conditioning of the internal organ, etc. 

Objection: But scripture tells us, for example, ‘in this (dream) 
state the Self is self-illuminating’? (Brhaddaranyaka Upanisad IV.3.9), 
and on your view the statement is meaningless. 

Answer: Your idea is that the intent is that in sleep the Self is 
unconditioned—but of course there It is still associated with the nerves 
and heart. 

Objector ; Well then, what does that passage (IV.3.9) mean? 

Another party : The passage is irrelevant since it belongs to another 
branch of the Vedas. 

Objector: No, for the Vedas must surely all point to a common 
conclusion. And so the self-illuminatingness of the Self must be 
upheld, since the scripture speaks truly. 

Samkara : Then hear the true meaning of the scripture. Just as 
the self-illuminatingness of the Self is not sublated when sleeping 
in the heart or nerves, since it has no relation with them, just so in 
dream, through the internal organ along with vdsands whose activity 
is occasioned by ignorance, desire, and karma, the Self remains self- 
illuminating, being dissociated from all causes and effects while 
yet witnessing their results. 


SIXTH QUESTION 


VI.2 (E416-418; T482-491). In answer to a question as to where 
the purusa exists the answer is given in this text that it is within the 
body. Here purusa is also indicated as “that in which the sixteen 
parts—prdana, etc arise. 


PRASNOPANISADBHASYA 291 


Samkara argues that the idea is that the partless purusa appears to 
have parts by superimposition on it of adjuncts. This purusa is actual- 
ly consciousness, invariable, pure, and without properties or parts, 
but people have various misconceptions about it, such as that it arises 
afresh at each moment, or that when it stops everything is as if void, or 
that it is a property of the elements (the view of the Lokayata). But 
consciousness is in reality nothing but the Self. That it is unchanging 
follows from the fact that it remains the same while other objects 
differ in nature from one another, and from the fact that objects 
depend on consciousness for their existence, just as color depends on 
the eye for its manifestation. Knowables may not exist when they 
are known, but knowledge cannot fail to exist when there is an object. 

Objection : Consciousness is not felt in deep sleep and so it changes 
like its objects. 

Answer : No, since knowledge illuminates its objects like light, its 
absence cannot be inferred in sleep any more than one can infer the 
absence of light from the absence of anything to be lighted up. 

Objection : The nihilist holds that there is no knowledge where 
there is no object. 

Answer: Then he should explain how he can know that that 
knowledge is absent without knowing something! 

Objection : Since knowledge is not nonconcomitant (avyatireka) 
with its object, the nonexistence of knowledge follows from the non- 
existence of objects. 

Answer : No, since nonexistences—that is, absences—are admitted 
to be knowable objects by the nihilists. Indeed, they hold that an 
absence is eternal. So if knowledge is not nonconcomitant with its 
object, an absence, it too must be eternal, and so to talk of its non- 
existence is nonsense. But from the highest standpoint knowledge is 
neither an absence nor is it noneternal. 

Objection: The object is different from knowledge, but knowledge 
is not different from its object. 

Answer : You might as well say that vahni (fire) is distinct from agni 
(fire) though agni is not distinct from vahni. This is mere talk. 

Objection : Since there is no awareness (darfana) when there is no 
object, knowledge must be absent if there is no object present. 

Answer: No, since the nihilists admit the existence of knowledge 
in deep sleep. 

Objector : Yes, but there knowledge is known by itself alone. 

Answer : No, since the difference (between knowledge and objects 
of knowledge) is established. 

Objection : Now if knowledge is known by another knowledge, 


292 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that knowledge must have another knowledge to know it, etc., and 
this incurs the fault of overextension (atiprasanga) (i.e., infinite regress). 

Answer: No, we don’t accept that knowledge knows itself. Only 
objects are known, and knowledge is that which knows them. Thus 
objects and knowledge are completely different in nature, and no 
regress results. 

Objector : But if knowledge is not known, omniscience is impossible. 

Answer: That affects only the one who makes the wrong assump- 
tion. And one who makes that assumption, unlike us, invites an 
infinite regress, as he has just argued. Our theory does not invite 
such a difficulty because we hold that consciousness is single. 

Objection: The present text says that the purusa is in the body like 
a berry in a cup (kumdabadaravat). 

Answer: No, for the body, constituted by prana, etc., said to be the 
“products” of purusa, cannot contain its own source in itself like a 
berry in a cup. 

Objection : Well, it is possible for a mango to contain in itself a 
seed, which produces a mango tree. 

Answer: But the seed it contains is not the same seed that produc- 
ed the tree on which that mango grew. Anyway, although trees 
and seeds may be related in this way, purusa cannot be since it is 
partless. Purusa cannot be literally contained in the body, since it is 
the cause of aka@fa, which obviously cannot be contained in the body 
in a literal sense. 

V1.3 (E418-421; T491-499). The text says: ‘“‘He thought: ‘At 
whose departure shall I come to be, and because of whose mainte- 
nance shall I be maintained »?’.” 

Objection: Now the Self is not an agent, but pradhdna is, and is 


> 


therefore properly viewed as the ‘‘creator,” organizing the atoms for 
the purposes of the purusa. So in this text it must be that it is pradhdna 
that is spoken of as “the,” being figuratively referred to as conscious 
since he is as if conscious. 

Answer : It is just as natural to take “‘he”’ as referring to the purusa, 
the enjoyer, and to treat the implied agency as figurative. 

Objector : If purusa is taken to be intrinsically the enjoyer, experienc- 
ing of pleasure or pain constitutes no real change in the purusa. 
But if you who follow the Vedas admit that the Self is a creator, you 
must admit that the Self undergoes intrinsic change and so becomes 
subject to faults like impermanence, etc. 

Answer : No, since on our view the creative agency is manifested 
through the presence or absence of adjuncts consisting of name-and- 
form by means of ignorance. We speak this way so that talk about 


PRASNOPANISADBHASYA 293 


bondage and liberation of the Self in the sastras becomes intelligible. 
In reality however the Self is neither agent nor enjoyer, whereas the 
Samkhyas, understanding that agency is superimposed on the Self, 
do not, because they do not follow the Vedas, hold the parallel view 
about enjoyership. Too, by assuming that pradhdna is a real thing 
distinct from the Self they become misled by sophistry and mislead 
others, so that endless disputation occurs among the various schools 
(who admit differences as real). We do not argue in the same spirit- 
as these sophists, but only so that those seeking liberation can under- 
stand the true meaning of the Upanisads by ignoring these other 
theories. 

In any case, no distinction can be found between enjoyership and 
agency. What distinctive attribute is it that the purusa has allowing 
it to be called enjoyer, but that pradhdna lacks so that it is merely 
agent ? 

Samkhya opponent: It is the property of mere consciousness (ciN- 
mdtra), so that purusa can change internally as its experiences differ 
but does not become transformed into something different. Pradhana, 
on the other hand, does transform into other things. 

Answer : That is a merely verbal distinction. If purusa is originally 
mere consciousness, and then a new property—some specific ex- 
perience—comes to qualify it and then disappears, after which purusa 
becomes pure consciousness once more, well, likewise, prakrti also is 
originally (unmanifest) pradhdna, then becomes mahat, etc., and then 
these disappear, upon which prakrti is pure pradhana again. So 
where is the difference? But if purusa remains pure consciousness 
while experiencing, then there is no real experiencing in it at all. 

Samkhya : The peculiarity of experiencing is that it involves a 
change in pure consciousness. 

Samkara ; Then fire, etc., which undergo change of attributes, 
ought to be called ‘‘enjoyers,”’ which is absurd. 

Objector : Well, enjoyership may belong to both pradhdna and purusa. 

Answer: That repudiates the Samkhya theory that pradhdna acts 
for the benefit of purusa, since between two enjoyers there is no domi- 
nance and subordination, just as two lights cannot illuminate each 
other. 

Objector: The enjoyership of the purusa involves its being reflect- 
ed in intelligence (cetas) in a sattvic fashion. 

Answer : Then purusa is not an enjoyer, only being reflected; 
nothing has affected it. And if purusa, being without attributes, 
experiences no bad (anartha) things, then what is it that the Samkhya 
scriptures are composed in order to remove ? 


294 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Samkhya : Those scriptures are composed to remove bad things 
superimposed through avidya. 

Answer: Then the hypotheses that purusa is only enjoyer and not 
agent whereas pradhdna is agent and not enjoyer, and that pradhdna 
is a real thing different from purusa, are useless and unwarranted 
opinions (kalpand) and need not be paid any attention to by those 
seeking liberation. 

Saémkhya : From (your) monistic standpoint also composing of 
scriptures is useless. 

Answer: No, since the question cannot arise. So sophistry cannot 
arise at all. 


BHAG AVADGITABHASYA 


We move now to works whose ascription to Samkara has been 
questioned, beginning with the commentary on the famous epic 
poem, the Bhagavadgita, most beloved of all classical literature to 
Indians far and wide. Perhaps because of the celebrated nature 
of the Gita a good deal has been written on Samkara’s interpretation 
of the text, although one would suppose that rivalry among the 
various Vedanta schools would as likely focus on differences in inter- 
pretation of the Upanisads and the Brahmasiitras, which are equally 
common ground. The Gitd, unlike the Upanisads on which Sam- 
kara comments or the Brahmasitras, appears to have been most in- 
fluenced by Samkhya thought, which adds still another dimension 
to the polemics. 

First, as to Samkara’s authorship of the work. That it is Sam- 
kara’s has been questioned, by Hacker and others, on the basis of 
discrepancies between the accounts in this work and in the Brahma- 
Siitrabhdsya concerning God’s role and the workings of avidya.%® 
Ingalls and Raghavan,*! however, maintain the work is authentic. 
Both point out that Bhaskara quotes this work word for word. 
Furthermore, Ingalls suggests that to test Samkara’s authorship of 
any work one should examine the arguments propounded there to 
see if they are found in any of (what he considers to be) the four 
unquestionably genuine works of Samkara, that is, Brahmasiitra- 
bhasya, Upadesasahasri, and the commentaries on the Brhadaranyaka 
and Taittiriya. The Bhagavadgitabhasya passes this test, Ingalls claims. 

Mayeda has examined the question of authenticity using Hacker’s 
criteria and has concluded that there is no reason, on those criteria, 
to reject Samkara’s authorship.*? However, this is largely a matter 
of lack of evidence against, rather than positive evidence for. One 


BHAGAVADGITABHASYA 295 


does not find in this work the term avidya used in ways characteristic 
of later Advaita. On the other hand, one doesn’t find it used synony- 
mously with ndmariipa, as that term hardly appears in the Bhagavad- 
gitdbhasya. The terms ‘“‘dnanda’’ and “‘vivarta’’ are not found in this work 
used in ways later Advaitins use them, and ‘“‘ifvara’’ appears frequently 
as in Samkara’s clearly genuine works. The ratio of use of “maya” 
to ‘‘avidya” is about | to 3 in both this work and the Brahmasiitrabhasya. 

A second strand in discussions of this work concern Samkara’s 
success in interpreting the meaning of the Gita. Some writers have 
taxed him with willful distortion of the Gita’s sense, notably P. M. 
Modi, who has written voluminously to this effect.4* Particular 
points that arise in this attack concern the relation of karma and 
jitana to moksa—many writers find that the Gita, unlike Samkara, 
teaches that action is either the primary way to liberation or at least a 
viable one to knowledge. Again, it is claimed that the Gita makes no 
distinction such as Samkara’s between nirguna and saguna Brahman.“ 

*““E” references are the edition by H. R. Bhagavat in Works of 
Shankaracharya (2d edition : Poona : Ashtekar & Co., 1929). “*T” 
refers to the translation by A. Mahadeva Sastry (Madras : V. Rama- 
swamy Sastrulu & Sons, 1972; first published in 1897). 

Introduction (El-2; T1-6). Samkara explains that it is the two- 
fold dharma of pravrtti and nivrttimworks and renunciation—main- 
tenance of which by men will preserve the order that God gave to 
the universe. When dharma gave way to adharma Visnu incarnated 
himself as Krsna and came on earth and taught Arjuna without any 
purpose of His own but merely to help people, whom He expected to 
heed His teachings. This teaching is what Veda-Vyasa arranged 
into the Bhagavadgita. 

Samkara finds that, despite previous commentaries, the meaning 
of the Gita is difficult, and he proposes therefore to give a brief com- 
mentary (vivarana) on it. 

The purport of the Gita is that the supreme state (nihSreyasa), 
complete end to samsdra and its cause, will come from dharma which 
involves Self-knowledge preceded by renunciation (samnydsa) of all 
karma. He quotes several passages from the Anugita (ASvamedha 
Parvan of the Mahdabhérata). 

The dharma of activity (pravrtti) leads its practitioners to the gods, 
etc. When practised in a spirit of devotion to God (ifvara), without 
concern for results, it produces purity of mind (sattvasuddhi), and thus 
indirectly conduces also toward the supreme state. 

11.10 (E8-12; T22-29). The story up to this point shows that 
when a man is confused by grief and delusion he accumulates merit 


296 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and demerit that produce samsdra. Secing that Self-knowledge preced- 
ed by renunciation of karma is the only way for him to avoid samsara, 
Krsna sets out his teachings in what follows. 

Here some (the Vittikara, according to Anandagiri) say: Libera- 
tion cannot be attained merely by Self-knowledge preceded by 
samnydsa; it requires knowledge coupled with the performance of 
prescribed actions, such as the agnihotra sacrifice. Gita 11.33, 11.47, 
IV.15 are cited as examples of texts favoring this interpretation. 

Samkara : No. In 11.39 Krsna distinguishes between the stand- 
points of karma and of jadna. In II.11-31 he sets out the true nature 
of the Self from the standpoint of jfana, calling it the “‘Samkhya”’ 
standpoint, and later he develops the doctrine of performance of 
actions and calls it the “Yoga” standpoint. One cannot follow both 
paths at the same time, since the ‘‘“Samkhya” way is based on belief 
in nonagency and unity whereas the “‘Yoga’’ way is based on belief 
in agency and multiplicity. The Satapatha Brahmana also care- 
fully distinguishes these two paths and assigns them to two distinct 
classes of people. ‘That these are distinct is also shown by the follow- 
ing: Arjuna asks (III.1) which path is the right one, presupposing 
that he thinks them genuine alternatives. 

Why did the combined-paths doctrine arise? One reason might 
be that since we find persons who know the Self continuing to act, 
a confusion might arise along these lines—but this appearance of 
activity on the part of the wise man cannot be viewed as part of the 
path, since his knowledge assures him that he is not an agent at all. 
Again, one might start an agnihotra, say, intending to get to heaven, 
but part way through attain Selfknowledge—though he continues 
the ritual it is no longer an action in the relevant sense. Then there 
are texts (IV.15, III.20) that seem to counsel action, but these are 
easily explained: either they suggest that Janaka and the rest of the 
ancients acted even though they had knowledge—in which case 
their “acts”? were merely for the edification of others and were not 
interested ones; or if they did not have Self-knowledge then their 
actions conduced to purity of mind and thus indirectly to the attain- 
ment of Self-knowledge. 

11.16 (E14-15; 134-37). Samkara interprets this passage as 
denying that both causes and effects are real, even though they are 
perceived, because they do not exist forever. 

Objection : Then nothing at all exists ! 

Answer : Not so. A content (visaya) is real if we never fail to be 
conscious of it; it is unreal if we ever fail to be conscious of it. What 
satisfies the former requirement is existence: we never fail to have 


BHAGAVA DGITABHASYA 297 


consciousness of existence, though the kind of existence—pot, cloth, 
etc.—changes every moment and so shows those things to be unreal. 
Specifically, every simple experience involves a qualifier (visesana) 
and a qualificand (visesya)—in “‘the pot exists’ pot is the qualificand 
and existence is the qualifier. 

Objection: When we have been conscious of a pot and it disappears, 
we fail to be conscious of fot, but we also fail to be conscious of 
existence, so it is equally unreal. 

Answer : You are still conscious of existence, only it is now resi- 
dent in another qualificand, that is, the Self. You are always con- 
scious of the Self, whether you are conscious of any other qualificand 
or not. 

Objector : But the qualifier and the qualificand must both be real 
throughout our experience, since they both relate to the same thing. 

Answer : Certainly not. In the experience “‘this is water,” refer- 
ring to a mirage, this is (relatively) real but water is not, even though 
both terms have the same thing (the mirage) as their extension. 

11.21 (E18-21; T43-48). ‘This verse, says Samkara, asserts that 
the enlightened man (vidvdn) does not act at all, and so in particular 
does not kill. It has been shown that the Highest Self is unchange- 
able, and since the enlightened man is identical with his Highest 
Self, the conclusion follows that actions enjoined by scripture are 
intended for the unenlightened. 

Objection: Knowledge too is meant for the unenlightened, since 
there would be no point in imparting it to one already knowing it. 

Samkara: No, the point is that when the unenlightened man 
understands the injunction to perform the agnihotra, for example, 
there is something left that he thinks he is to do and can do, that is, 
perform the agnihotra. For the enlightened man, on the other hand, 
when he has heard the truth, there is nothing that he thinks he is 
to do and can do, since he realizes he is a nonagent. 

Objection : No one can know the Self as nonagent, immutable, etc., 
because the Self is unreachable by any of the sense organs. 

Answer: No. Scripture (Brhadéranyaka Upanisad IV.4.19) tells 
us that It can be seen by the manas. So the possibility of knowledge 
of the Self must be admitted. This knowledge precludes any further 
action; it leads one to renounce all action (as indicated in Gita 
V.13). 

Objection: That passage does not indicate renunciation of all 
acts, since it teaches renouncing actions ‘‘by thought,”’ so it does not 
teach renunciation of acts of speech and of the body, only of mental 
acts. 


298 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer : No, since acts of speech and of the body depend on acti- 
vity of the mind. And other ways of trying to construe that passage 
are of no avail. 

11.25 (E23; T51). “The Self is... unthinkable....”’ The rule 
is that a real thing can only be a content of thought (cintavisaya) 
if it lies within the scope of the organs (indriyagocara). Since the 
Self is beyond the organs It is unthinkable. 

II.69 (E38-39; T77-79). The duty of the enlightened man is to 
renounce. 

Objection: There is no impelling pramdna (pravartaka pramana) 
to indicate that activity (of renunciation). 

Answer : There need be none. Since the very nature of a pra- 
mana is to lead to Self-knowledge, such knowledge is naturally indicat- 
ed, but no action is enjoined, since when knowledge is acquired the 
instruments of action—organs, objects—no longer are present. The 
Veda teaches that the Self is not a percipient of objects and as 
a result of that teaching ceases to be authoritative, just as dreams 
cease to be authoritative in the waking state. 

TI. Introduction (E41-44; T82-89). Arjuna’s next question 
(in ITI.1) is this : ‘If you think that knowledge is better than action, 
why do you tell me to act in this way (viz., to fight in this war) ?” 
The question only makes sense if there is a clear distinction between 
knowledge and action. But some (viz., the Vrttikara), who inter- 
pret the whole Gita as teaching the combined-path view (jfdnakarma- 
samuccaya), then take this third chapter as teaching that only one 
path is worthwhile. This is inconsistent. He might try to explain 
the inconsistency away by saying that householders, but not others, 
are unable to achieve liberation through knowledge alone (Arjuna 
being a householder), but this is also inconsistent, since he (the 
Vrttikara) explicitly says at the outset that the combined-path view 
is taught for all the aframas. Again, he might say that what is meant 
is that for the householder, unlike the samnydsin, knowledge must be 
combined with actions enjoined by scripture to be efficacious—in 
the case of samnydsins knowledge combined merely with action en- 
joined in smrti is sufficient. But how can any sensible person accept 
such an ad hoc explanation? No special reason is given why the house- 
holder should be restricted in this manner. Is it rather that the poor 
householder must practice both the actions prescribed by scripture and 
those prescribed by smrti, then? ! That would be too hard on him ! 

Perhaps, then, the idea is that only householders—not samnypdsins— 
can attain liberation, since the other dramas have nityakarmans to 
perform? No, since the texts recommend renunciation of actions 


BHAGAVADGITABHASYA 299 


for all seekers of liberation, and the suggestion is that one should 
progress either stepwise or all of a sudden to the samnydsin 
state. 

In any case, liberation is not the result of any action, and so no 
action will help him. 

Objection : Performance of nityakarmans is required, since omitting 
them will breed sin. 

Answer : No, since sin only occurs for those dsramas prior to the 
fourth, the samnydsin, stage; no one supposes that the samnydsin who 
omits the worship of the sacred fire incurs sin as does the brahmacarin. 
Anyway, sin cannot arise from mere omission of action, for something 
cannot come out of nothing. 

IV.11-14 (E64-66; T123-127). These stanzas explain God’s attitude 
toward man’s deserts. God rewards men precisely in accord with 
the way in which they seek Him. If they do not pursue libera- 
tion they don’t get it; if they seek pleasure they get it, etc. God 
never rewards out of affection or aversion, or out of delusion. 
Indeed, He created the four castes (varna) according to the distribu- 
tion of gunas and karma on the part of their members—in Brahmins 
sativa predominates, in Ksatriyas rajas predominates intermixed with 
sattva, in Vaisyas rajas predominates intermixed with tamas, in Sidras 
tamas predominates. 

Objection : Since You created the four castes You must be non- 
eternal and bound by Your effects ! 

Answer : No—it is only from the standpoint of maya: in reality 
I am no agent and thus unbound. I have no ahamkéra, am not 
attached to the fruits of acts such as creation, and thus do not enter 
Samsara because of them, as ordinary mortals do. 

IV.18 (E67-70; T128-134). “He who sees inaction in action, 
and action in inaction, he is wise among men, he is the disciplined 
doer of all actions.” Samkara interprets this to mean that both 
activity (pravrtti) and inactivity (nivrttt) require an agent, thus pre- 
suppose that avidyd holds sway; through this ignorance people fall 
into error and confuse action with inaction and vice versa. 

Objector: But we never see action as anything else than action— 
so it isnot a case of erroneous knowing. 

Answer : It is like the illusion we have, on board a ship, that the 
trees on the shore are moving when in fact they are stationary. We 
impute to the Self action, when in fact It is unable to act; it is only 
the body that can act. Likewise, inaction—failure to act or cessa- 
tion of activity—is also falsely attributed to one’s Self; since the 
Self is unable to act It is likewise unable to cease acting. 


300 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Some commentators interpret this stanza differently. According 
to them, it means: one who sees that the nityakarmans are not actions, 
since they do not produce any effects, and one who sees that the 
failure to perform nityakarmans is action, since it produces results like 
going to hell, etc.—these are the wise, etc. But this interpretation 
is wrong. For Krsna has just told us (1V.16) that these wise ones 
win liberation by correct knowledge about action and inaction; 
now even if performance of the nityakarmans could produce liberation 
(which we deny), at any rate the mere knowledge that they don’t 
produce any effect can hardly produce liberation. Furthermore, 
the interpretation pictures Krsna as using figurative language to say 
what could easily be said directly, and produces possible misunder- 
standing thereby; our interpretation makes the Lord’s meaning straight- 
forward and direct. 

IV.21 (E71-72; T136-138). The samnydsin is allowed in this verse 
to “do mere bodily action.”?> What does this mean? Not that he 
is allowed to any old action of the body, but rather that he only does 
the minimal amount to secure the maintenance of the body. 

V. Introduction (E82-86; T154-159). Arjuna will now ask (V.1) 
which, samnydsa or yoga, is the better. 

Objection: The question is irrelevant since Arjuna has already 
been told that pravrtti and nivrtti are required of distinct classes of people. 

Answer: Yes, from your point of view it is irrelevant, but from 
Arjuna’s point of view it makes excellent sense, since he is asking 
which of the two fe should follow, and both have been enjoined. 
Furthermore, the answer (V.2) will be that both samnydsa and yoga 
lead to liberation, but that yoga is the better of the two—now from 
what point of view can this answer make sense ? Since neither 
samnydsa nor yoga is efficacious for one who has already attained Self- 
knowledge, obviously the question is understood as applying only 
to those who have not reached the state of Self-knowledge. 

Question: Are both samnydsa and yoga quite impossible for one 
who knows the Self? 

Answer : Yoga certainly is, for it requires a belief in the Self as 
agent, which is precisely what the Self-knower knows to be wrong. 
As for samnydsa, we must distinguish two kinds of samnydsa. One 
kind is the sort practised by the realized self—of course that is appro- 
priate for him being taught as such by the Lord. The kind of sam- 
nydsa we have to do with here, however, consists in renouncing only 
some actions (not all as in the case of the Self-knower). It is with 
respect to this kind of samnydsa that the Lord answers Arjuna’s ques- 
tion: for one who does not know the Self, karmayoga is better than 


BHAGAVADGITABHASYA 301 


karmasamnydsa, since the latter is more difficult to follow, involving 
yama and niyama, etc. 

VI. Introduction (E97-99; T179-182). In V.27-29 the Lord 
has briefly described dhydnayoga, the meditative processes by which 
one immediately gains right knowledge. A householder should 
practice karmayoga until he is able to practice dhydnayoga. 

Objection : Why not continue to practice both ? 

Answer: Because VI.3 divides yogins into two classes and a dvises 
action for only one of them. 

Objector: No, the distinction drawn there is between those who 
don’t practice yoga at all and those who do. 

Answer: No, since the passage explicitly identifies the second 
class as persons who have attained to yoga. Anyway, in VI.37-38 
we are told about the ruin that befalls those who are failures in yoga. 
On your view a householder practices both performance of actions 
and renunciation of them together; if he failed at the latter, he would 
not necessarily be ruined, for he would still get the fruits of his good 
actions. The assumption there must be therefore that the two things 
are incompatible, that dhydnayoga is meant for the samnydsin, not the 
householder. 

Opponent : Those actions, performed by the householder, have 
been offered to the Lord and therefore bring about no results other 
than liberation; failure in them surely leads to ruin. 

Answer: The description of dhydnayoga in V1.10, 14, etc., precludes 
that they should apply to householders. 

Opponent: But VI.1 says that the karmayogin is both a samnydsin 
and a yogi. 

Answer: That verse merely praises abandonment of expectation 
of fruits (phalakamksdsamnyasa), which is an external aid (bahiraiga) 
to dhydnayoga. 

XITI.2 (E189-197; 1318-335). XIII.1-2 teach that the one 
Lord is the knower of all objects. 

Objection : If God is the only knower, then either God is subject to 
bondage in samsdra, or else there is no samséra at all (there being no 
subject other than God to experience it). Neither conclusion is accept- 
able to scripture or to experience. So this reading must be wrong. 

Answer : Both God and the individual selves appear to be 
Samsarins subject to bondage due to adjuncts produced by avidyd. 
Just as a pillar is mistaken as a man through ignorance without any 
essential quality of the man being transferred to the pillar, so con- 
sciousness (=God, the knower) is mistaken as embodied, but no 
bodily qualities actually qualify consciousness. 


302 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objection: ‘The analogy fails, since although pillar and man are 
both objects of consciousness and can be mistaken for one another, 
the body and consciousness are not both objects of consciousness. 
So, the cases being dissimilar, we should conclude that consciousness 
really does become embodied. 

Answer : No, for then the knower would have all the attributes of 
the known and would, for example, become unconscious! Why 
should some qualities of objects actually pertain to the knower whereas 
others don’t? And the analogy isn’t useless—it serves its purpose, 
in that the two cases agree in the relevant respects, even if not in all 
respects—no analogy is perfect, or it would cease to be an analogy. 

Objector : The knower, you say, possesses ignorance (avidyd); there- 
fore He must be bound, a samsdrin. 

Answer : No, since avidyd is produced out of tamas, from whence it 
gets its veiling capacity; it disappears upon illumination. It is like 
an eye disease, which temporarily leads us to see what is not the case; 
the perceptions had while diseased are not essential properties of the 
perceiver, as they are due to the diseased condition. In any case the 
objects of knowledge are not properties of the knower, any more than 
the objects lit up are properties of a lamp. 

Objection : Well, then, if there is neither samsdra nor samsdrin 
scripture serves no purpose. 

Answer : Yes, it has no purpose for the liberated self; but for those 
saddled with avidya it has a purpose to serve. 

Objector : Scripture only has a purpose to serve if there is something 
really to be avoided and something to be achieved, as well as a real 
means to accomplish it. Since from the Advaita point of view these 
are lacking, scripture is useless. 

Answer : The Self cannot really have different states. If the Self 
really could be bound and liberated, it would have to be either simul- 
taneously or successively. It can’t be so simultaneously, since the 
states are mutually contradictory. So it would have to be thatthe 
Self was successively bound and then free. But either these states 
are or are not caused by something else. If they are not caused by 
something else there can be no liberation. And if they are caused by 
something else, they cannot be inherent in the Self really. So the 
dualistic hypothesis won’t stand scrutiny. Anyway, if bondage 
were real it would have to have no beginning but an end, and libera- 
tion would have to have a beginning but no end—and this is con- 
trary to experience. 

Anyway, scripture is meant for the ignorant, not for the wise, so the 
objection about the uselessness of scripture has no force. Even if an 


BHAGAVADGITABHASYA 303 


ignorant philosopher might think himself bound by injunctions meant 
for someone else, that would not change the situation. 

Objection: Nevertheless a man, even though he knows the Self, 
may still think himself enjoined by scriptural commands, thinking 
that he has to obtain certain ends and avoid others. 

Answer : No, he can only think so prior to Self-knowledge, which 
regularly follows observation of scriptural injunctions but does not 
precede it. 

Objection : Those who think the Self to be independent of the body, 
as well as those who think the two are identical, are not interested in 
injunctions : so for whom will the scripture be relevant ? 

Answer : For those who know about the Self through scripture but 
who do not yet directly know the Self in its essential nature. 

Objector: If the wise do not perform Vedic ritual others may 
emulate them and refuse to perform it, and then no one will follow 
scripture. 

Answer : No, since very few attain Self-knowledge, and ignorant 
men do not necessarily emulate the wise. 

Objector : Even the pundits, the learned, think ‘“‘I am so-and-so,” 
“this is mine,” just like ordinary bound samsdrins. 

Answer : Then they are not really learned. There are other pundits 
who think their self is distinct from God’s, and think that in order to 
achieve liberation they must understand the distinction between 
knower and known, followed by direct knowledge of God; they 
also are ignorant, even though they may be learned in all the 
Sastras. 

Opponent : Whose is this avidyd? (i.e., in what does it reside ?) 

Answer : Whoever sees it. 

Opponent : And who is that? 

Answer : The question is pointless, as much as asking when one is 
acquainted with the owner of some cows, ““Whose are these cows ?.” 

Opponent: No, it is not like that; the cows and their owner are 
both objects of perception, but avidya and its owner are not both 
objects of perception. 

Answer : Well, apparently you know who the owner is! So 
there’s no point in asking. You must know the Self by inference, 
since you cannot directly perceive yourself and avidya at the same time 
—for you cannot both be the perceiver and perceived; and nothing 
else can perceive both, for that would lead to infinite regress. 

Opponent : If the Self cognizes avidyd It is then tainted by it. 

Answer: No, it is a figure of speech to say that unchanging con- 
sciousness is the cognizer of avidya; as we have already seen, the Lord 


304 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


has taught that the Self is intrinsically without any relation to 
avidya. 

AIII.5-6 (E198-199; 1337-339). A variety of Samkhya elements 
are distinguished in stanza 5, and certain psychological attributes in 
stanza 6. Samkara explains the former in the usual way and care- 
fully emphasizes that psychological attributes—desire, hatred, plea- 
sure, pain, etc.—are objects and not consciousness. 

XIII.12 (E202-203; T344-349). The verse describes Brahman as 
“not said to be either existent nor nonexistent’’ (na sattanndsaducyate). 

Objection : The Lord has shouted that He is going to explain what 
is knowable—it is unbecoming now to say that it neither exists nor 
does not exist. 

Answer: No. In the Upanisads we find it described as “‘not this, 


3 


not this,’’ etc. 

Objector : There is no real thing that is beyond expression and is 
yet knowable—-that is a contradiction. 

Answer : Nor is it nonexistent, since it is not a content of cognition. 
It is beyond the senses and can only be known by verbal testimony. 
Since scripture declares Brahman to have these apparently contra- 
dictory properties it is no contradiction to speak thus. 

Objection : Scripture is itself contradictory when it says this, as in 
other places. 

Answer : No—the other places you have in mind may be mere 
arthavdda passages of praise. In any case, it is appropriate not to 
speak of Brahman as existent, for everything said to be existent is 
immediately taken by all to be associated with some genus (jai) 
or motion or quality or relation, but Brahman is associated with none 
of these. 

XIII.23 (E210-211; 1362-365). This stanza says that the Self- 
knower is not born again. 

Objection : How can karmic effects of acts done in a previous life, 
in this life before realization, or even afterwards, be avoided ? 

Answer : Deeds performed without desire and egotism are with- 
out karmic results, as the Lord has been saying. 

Opponent: All right, but that still leaves the results of previous 
acts to be worked off. 

Answer: Here we must distinguish between those karmic results 
that have already begun to work in this life, and the ones that have 
not. The latter are nullified by Self-knowledge, but the former 
must continue until exhausted; so the Self-knower’s body continues 
until death working off the karma begun in this life—then he is not 
reborn, as the stanza states. 


BHAGAVADGITABHASYA 305 


XVIII.48 (E276-278; T477-482). The stanza says that one should 
not abandon one’s svadharma, the duty one is born with. Samkara 
understands this to mean that a nonknower of the Self should stick 
to performing his own duty, since he cannot give up action altogether; 
on the other hand, the Self-knower, since he can give up action 
altogether, should do so, including his svadharma. 

Now the Samkhya and Buddhist philosophers cannot, because of 
their metaphysical views, allow that entire renunciation of actions 
is possible, so they should recommend without qualification giving 
up svadharma, and thus they would advise counter to the advice given 
here by the Lord. 

Vaisesika : But our metaphysical theory does not have this diffi- 
culty. On our view one can give up all actions; for on our view the 
self is intrinsically immobile, a substance in which actions arise and 
disappear. 

Samkara: This view is mistaken, since it allows that the nonexis- 
tent becomes existent, and the existent becomes nonexistent, which 
contradicts what Krsna has said (e.g., in II.16). On your view a 
double atom (dvyanuka) does not exist, then it is produced and 
exists for a time, and then is destroyed and becomes nonexistent. 
You say that production is due to a combination of three kinds of 
causal factors. But then cannot an absence—like a hare’s horn-— 
come into existence, being a nonexistent just like your double atom 
prior to production ? How can a causal factor relate to what is non- 
existent to occasion its coming into existence ? And if it can, why 
can it not relate to an absence? And why should prior absence alone 
occasion the existence of something—why shouldn’t other kinds of 
absence (Samkara lists an impressive group) do so too, since they 
are indistinguishable from prior absence ? Actually the same argu- 
ment refutes Samkhya and Buddhism too; all these theories propose 
that what is nonexistent becomes existent, which is unreasonable. 

The only alternative, which is ours, is to view causation as illu- 
sory, to accept that change is always a product of avidyd, that the 
Self is unaffected by it. Then it will be the case that the ignorant 
man, viewing action as an attribute of his self, is unable to renounce 
all actions, but the wise man, realizing that the Self is nonagent, will 
be unable not to renounce all actions. 

XVIII.50 (E279-281; 1484-489). Objection: How is knowledge 
of the Self possible ? Knowledge requires a content with a form, but 
nowhere is it admitted that the Self has a form (dkéra). 

Answer : Its form is extreme purity, extreme clarity, and extreme 
subtlety. Buddhi is as pure, and so can take on the form of the Self’s 


306 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


consciousness, and in turn the manas, the sense organs, and the body 
take on that form and thus come to think of the body as the self. 

Objection: The buddhi cannot grasp the Self since it is formless; 
therefore Self-knowledge is impossible. 

Answer : It is impossible for those not properly prepared; for those 
who have been properly prepared, it is impossible to see anything 
but the Self. Self-knowledge only requires the discontinuation of 
perception of the various forms of external objects—since the Self 
is known all the time it is not something that has to be acquired 
fresh. The Self——consciousness—is known immediately; even those 
who hold that awareness (jiidna) is without form (nirékéra) and thus 
not perceptible directly must admit that since objects are known by 
awareness it must be perfectly well known, as much so as_ pleasure, 
etc. One seeks to know objects with his awareness; one doesn’t 
have to seek awareness in the same fashion. Thus no effort is needed, 
and no injunctions to act, to get Self-knowledge, which we already 
have; all that is needed is to remove the notion of the not-self as the 
Self. So it is easy to have Self-knowledge. 

XVIII.66 (E288-293; T499-516). Samkara reviews the arguments 
for viewing Self-knowledge alone as the path to liberation. 

Objector ; Liberation is gained by action only, since it (liberation) 
is eternal. Listen: not doing the nityakarmans breeds sin and leads 
to hell, so one must perform these acts. By doing so, coupled with 
avoiding prohibited (pratisiddha) acts as well as those acts (kdmya- 
karman) predicated on desires, one stops further karmic results, 
and when the results of past karma are burned off no more cause 
exists for rebirth and liberation is attained without further effort. 

Counterobjection : But the results of past karma have not neces- 
sarily been worked off at the end of one’s life; some have not at all 
started to work themselves out yet. 

Objector’s reply: Either one works those effects out precisely in 
performing the nityakarmans, or else the nityakarman destroys past sins. 

Samkara : These explanations are not satisfactory. Present acts 
cannot destroy past sins. As for the notion that the very performance 
of the nityakarmans constitutes the working out of karmic effects, they 
might constitute a way of working out those effects that had already 
started—that produced this body, etc.—but what you have to show 
is that they could constitute the working out of those results of past 
karma that have not started working themselves out yet. If you 
mean to suggest that all effects of past deeds have started to work 
themselves out in this life, then performance of nityakarmans is unneces- 
sary—one merely has to wait, doing nothing, and one will be liberated. 


BHAGAVADGITABHASYA 307 


Furthermore, if the idea is that it is the trouble one goes to, and the 
pain stemming therefrom, when performing nityakarmans that consti- 
tute the working out of past karma, then the same thing can equally be 
said about the kdmyakarmans, since they too involve trouble and pain. 
So one should infer that nityakarmans produce karmic effects quite 
as much as kdmyakarmans, because they are alike in the relevant 
respects. 

So we should accept the Gita’s message, namely, that the paths of 
knowledge and of action are intended for distinct classes of people 
and cannot be combined. Action is only possible for one confused 
by avidya; it is impossible for one who knows the truth. 

Objection: It is not true that all actions involve confusion by 
avidyd. It is true that we must regard the body, etc., as the self in 
order to act, but this notion is not avidyd, it is merely figurative (gauna). 
Avidyd, that is, false knowledge, occurs when we mistake a post for a 
man, etc., but here when we say “‘the body is the agent-self,” etc., 
we have in mind that the body belongs to the self, and our way of 
expressing ourselves is intended to figuratively make that point. 

Answer : Wrong. For one thing, figurative expressions are merely 
intended to praise; they do not lead to any real results. To say 
“Devadatta is a lion’ does not produce a lion, but merely extols 
Devadatta’s fierceness, etc. Secondly, in genuinely figurative lan- 
guage the speaker knows that the things spoken of are not as the 
figure would imply if taken literally: thus someone saying “‘Deva- 
datta is a lion” in a figurative way must know that Devadatta is a 
man, nota lion. So, if saying ‘“‘the body is the self” is figurative, the 
speaker must know that the body is not the self, and would not then 
regard the acts of the body as really belonging to the self. Likewise, 
if Devadatta hears himself described as a lion figuratively, he knows 
he is not literally a lion; similarly, if one hears that his body is his 
self in a figurative sense he would infer that the body’s acts are not 
his (self’s). For all these reasons no real purposes of the true self can 
be accomplished by the body if the identity in question were merely 
figurative. 

Objection : Scripture speaks this way about the self, so it must be 
really efficacious. 

Answer: No. Scripture is authoritative only in matters pertain- 
ing to things beyond human experience. Within the field of human 
experience the ordinary pramanas—perception, etc.—hold sway. Since 
it is evident to anyone that the notion of “I” applied to the body, 
etc., is the result of an illusion, not a figurative expression, scrip- 
ture cannot affect the matter. A hundred scriptural passages might 


308 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


say that fire is cold, but they would not make fire cold; rather, we 
should interpret the texts in some alternative manner. 

Objection : If actions require avidyd, then when avidyd ceases scrip- 
ture, which enjoins acts, will be false. 

Answer: No, for it conveys true knowledge about the Self, about 
Brahman. 

Objection : If scripture concerning acts is no authority the same 
scripture concerning Self-knowledge is no authority either. 

Answer : No, since nothing can remove true Self-knowledge. And 
we do not even admit that scripture concerning action is useless or 
ultimately misleading, since one can teach the truth by using false 
means, just as one can bring about correct results by telling falsehoods, 
for example, when one induces a child or a madman to drink milk 
by telling him his hair will grow, etc. 

Another objector : The self is an agent, in the same way that a king 
is said to fight when in fact it is his soldiers, not he, who are acting, 
or as the patron is said to sacrifice when it is the priest, not he, who 
is performing the various acts. A person or thing is termed agent 
when the results of an action accrue to him. Even a magnet is the 
agent in making the piece of iron move, even though it does not 
itself move. 

Answer : No, when we speak of the king or the patron as agent 
we know they are capable of action and may in fact perform certain 
acts themselves; then the extension of that agency to the activities of 
the soldiers or the priest is a figure of speech, and since a figure of 
speech does not make the connection (between the soldier’s acts and 
the king, for example) real we conclude that in the same way the 
figurative extension of “‘agent’’ to the Self does not make the Self 
a real doer of actions. It all becomes clear when we notice that all 
actions are the result of avidyd. Samsara itself, then, being a product 
of avidyd, it is right to say that it ceases upon true knowledge. 


MANDOKYOPANISADBHASYA with GAUDAPADAKARIKA- 
BHASYA or AGAMASASTRAVIVARANA 


A number of scholars have doubted that this commentary is the 
work of the author of the Brahmasiitrabhdsya, beginning at least with 
Jacobi,4® and including such stalwarts as Suryanarayana Sastri,‘6 
‘Belvalkar,4? and de Smet.4® Others have suggested that if this is the 
master’s work it is flawed by youthful ineptness. Ingalls speculates 
that perhaps Samkara began as a Bhedabhedavadin, then was in- 
fluenced by Gaudapada’s work to become an Advaitin.? Hacker 


GAUDAPADAKARIKABHASYA 309 


makes a similar suggestion, only his idea is that Samkara was first 
a Patafijala Yogin (and even wrote the commentary on the Yoga- 
bhasya ascribed to a Samkara), then heard or heard of Gaudapada 
and converted to Advaita.*° Majumdar has attempted to indicate 
in detail the precise points where the author of this commentary 
misunderstands Gaudapada, concluding that the errors are so serious 
that the work cannot be by the same hand that wrought the Advaita 
masterpieces. 5! 

In addition to the authority of tradition, followed by most Advaita 
interpreters, the ascription of this commentary to Samkara has 
several modern champions. Vetter,5*? Hacker,5? and Mayeda®™ all 
utilize Hacker’s criteria. Hacker finds no serious discrepancy 
between the style of this work and that of Samkara’s genuine works, 
although he admits some differences in emphasis between Samkara 
and Gaudapada, for example, over the antipathy of the latter, though 
not the former to such an extent, toward Buddhism. WHacker also 
finds in this commentary “‘two elements of a pre-illusionistic Vedanta 
tradition. One is the idea of the cosmic Viraj and Hiranyagarbha 
as corresponding to the body and the soul in man; the other is the 
doctrine of the Praga as a cosmic and at the same time an anthropo- 
logical entity.”®> The idea is found in other places in Samkara’s 
corpus as well, Hacker argues. Hacker also finds a “theory of 
bija and dspada,” which replaces “the theory, useless to his (Sam- 
kara’s) own mind, of the substratum of nescience’”’;5* the theory 
of bija and dspada is also developed in the Taittiriyopanisadbhasya. 

Mayeda, in addition to carefully testing the commentary against 
Hacker’s criteria, considers several arguments offered by those who 
reject Samkara’s authorship of the work. Most of them turn on this 
author’s apparently inadequate knowledge of Buddhism, as contrast- 
ed with the thorough understanding displayed by the author of the 
Brahmas iitrabhdgya. Mayeda thinks that the author of this commen- 
tary intentionally misinterprets Buddhist terms so as to give Advaita 
readings to the passages on which he comments, but that he needed 
to know Buddhism to do that. Mayeda suggests that Samkara simi- 
larly misinterprets Bhedabhedavada in the Brahmasitrabhasya, and 
Samkhya terms in the Bhagavadgitabhdsya. A final argument, stem- 
ming from the fact that manuscripts of this work start with an invoca- 
tion (mangala), is easily met by pointing out that the Bhagavadgita- 
bhdsya and Upadefasahasri (already demonstrated to Mayeda’s satis- 
faction as being Samkara’s work) also have invocations.5? 

Despite these considerations, I retain serious doubts about the work’s 
authenticity. A good many of the favorable arguments smack of 


310 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


special pleading intended to explain away what is used by their 
opponents as reasons for suspecting the ascription. Even the argu- 
ments from Hacker’s criteria, although doubtless the weightiest among 
reasons for ascribing the work to Samkara, stem largely from the 
absence of uses of Advaita terms characteristic of later Advaita. 
This line of argument will not avail, for example, against a reconstruc- 
tion that postulates two Samkaras, both Advaitins, one of which was 
responsible for this work and perhaps other Upanisad commenta- 
ries (the Katha ?, the vékya commentary on the Kena ?) as well as 
perhaps works not on Advaita such as the Yogabhdsyavivarana, follow- 
ing Hacker’s line of thought. I am not putting forth this hypothesis 
with any great seriousness, merely suggesting it is untested and 
compatible with most of what we now know. 

“E” references are to the edition by H. R. Bhagavat, Works of 
Shankaracharya (Poona: Ashtekar & Co., 1927), volume two, part 
one, pp. 424-497. The translation indicated by “‘T’’ is by Manilal 
N. Dvivedi (Bombay: Tookaram Tatya, 1894). 


COMMENTARY ON MANDUKYA UPANISAD 1-6 


Introduction (E424-425; T2-3). The subject matter, purpose, 
relation between them, and audience addressed are the same as for 
any Vedantic text. The first prakarana (i.e., Book One) explains 
the word “‘aum’’ as conducive to Self-knowledge and deals with 
scripture. The second prakarana shows the unreality of duality on 
the analogy of the rope-snake. The third shows the reality of non- 
duality by reasoning. The fourth prakarana adduces and refutes 
those systems that hold views conflicting with Advaita. 

1 (E425-426; T3-5). Now how can ‘‘aum’’ help achieve Self- 
knowledge ? Just as the Highest Self is the locus of the conceptual 
constructions (vzkalpa) that It is préna, etc.—like thinking a rope is 
a snake—so every kind of verbalization (vdkprapatica) is just ‘“‘aum,”’ 
having as its content the conceptual construction that the Self is 
préna, etc. Thus aum is the Self, being the word for Self. Nothing 
can exist apart from being named (abhidheya), and all names are 
modifications of aum. (Thus one understands the Self by under- 
standing aum.) 

2 (E426; T5-6). Indeed, name and thing named are one and the 
same; this is meant literally and is emphasized in order to show that 
it is possible to do away with both simultaneously, thus realizing 
Brahman as distinct from both. 

3 (E426-427; T6-8). The first portion of ‘“‘aum’’ is the state of 
waking (vifva or vaisfvdnara), and the passage says it is conscious of 


GAUDAPADAKARIKABHASYA 311 


external things (bahihprajfia) (through avidydé, says Samkara); seven 
members (explained as head=region of light, eye=sun, breath= 
wind, trunk=dkdfa, penis=water, feet=earth, mouth =sacrificial 
fire); nineteen mouths (the five sense organs, the five action organs, 
the five pranas, manas, buddhi, citta, and ahamkéra); and its results are 
confined to gross things. 

Question ; Since the point is to describe the inner Self (pratyagdtman) 
why has the text wandered into describing it in terms of external things ? 

Answer: The whole universe, both inner and outer, is described 
in these passages, the difference being merely verbal. If we do not 
take it that way we shall be open to the Samkhya interpretation, 
which is inconsistent with Brahman’s unity. 

4 (E427; T9-10). The second portion of “‘aum” is the dream 
state (taijasa), with the same members and mouths. It is conscious 
of what is ‘“‘within’”’ (antahprajfia) and is confined to subtle results. 

5 (E427-428; T10-12). The third portion of “‘aum” is deep sleep 
(prdjfia), in which there is no desire, no dreams, where all becomes 
one, made of consciousness (prajfidna) and bliss (dnanda). Its results 
are_ blissful. 

6 (E428; T12). This (pure prdajfia or consciousness) is God, 
all-knowing (sarvajfia), the creative source as well as the final resting- 
place of all beings. 


COMMENTARY ON GAUDAPADAKARIKAS, BOOK ONE, 1-9 


1 Karikds 1-5 (E429-431; T13-17). These stanzas explain the pre- 
ceding text. Their subject is the same as that of the Upanisad itself. 
The person who realizes that enjoyments and enjoyer are the same 
is not affected through enjoying, since It knows not modifications to 
differentiate It. 

2. Karikds 6-9 (E431-432; T17-19). Analogies are proposed to 
explain how purusa can produce citta through prdna—just as the 
snake is in the rope even before it is manifested, so all beings are ‘in 
prana before they come into existence. Sparks from a fire, rays of the 
sun, the spider who spins his web from himself are also relevant as 
analogies. The first part of karika 7 (“creation through expansion 
of the self”) is explained by Samkara as meaning that some hold that 
God flows (srsfi) into creation. As analogy for the idea that creation 
is like a magic show Samkara offers a description of the rope trick. 


COMMENTARY ON MANDUKYOPANISAD 7 


3 (E432-434; T20-25). The text deals with the “fourth” 
(turiya), the fourth part of “aum.” It is not conscious of either external 


312 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


or internal or both, or indeed of anything; it is not an object of any 
ordinary apprehension through thought or perception. It is the Self 
Itself. 

The fourth is not mere absence either, though it can only be des- 
cribed by negative terms. But since it is the negation of the other 
three parts it follows that no added effort or knowledge is needed to 
realize the fourth, any more than one needs to do or know something 
further in order to be free from the snake illusion; all one has to do 
is to know the rope as rope. 


COMMENTARY ON GAUDAPADAKARIKAS 10-18 


4. Karika 11 (E435; T27). ‘‘Vifva and taijasa can be both causes 
and effects.” Specifically, vifva is cause and effect of the nongrasp- 
ing of reality (tattvdgrahana), taijasa of the grasping of things in a 
fashion other than they are (anyathdgrahana). ‘“‘Prajfia (is) cause 
only”’ in that its only function is to cause ignorance of reality. 

Karika 12 (E435; T27). “‘Prdjfia knows nothing,’ that is, it is not 
conscious of anything external and dual, “‘whereas turiya is always 
seeing,”’ is conscious of everything everywhere. And since it is always 
seeing it is ‘‘omniscient.”’ 


COMMENTARY ON MANDOKYOPANISAD 8-11 
(E437-438; T30-33). The four parts of diman just identified 


correspond to the four parts of the word ‘‘aum,”’ since, as we have seen, 
objects and their names are identical. 


COMMENTARY ON GAUDAPADAKARIKAS 19-23 
Karika 23 (E439; T34). If one meditates on the first letter (a), 
that is, if he makes that letter his intended object (alambana), he is 
identified with vatsvanara and is carried to vifva (the waking state). 
Likewise, if he meditates on the second letter he is carried to the 
dream state, and on the third letter, to deep sleep. 


COMMENTARY ON MANDOKYOPANISAD 12 
(E439-440; T34-35). The turiya is the partless (amdtra) Self, in- 
describable, all bliss, and nondual—so It is the same as that Self 


with the three parts corresponding to the waking, dream, and deep 
sleep stages. 


COMMENTARY ON GAUDAPADAKARIKAS : BOOK TWO: 
UNREALITY (VAITATHYA) 


6. Karikés 1-3 (E441-442; T37-39). The point of Book Two is 
to prove by reasoning (upapatti:) what the first has shown by reference 


GAUDAPADAKARIKABHASYA 313 


to authority. The argument is phrased by wise men as follows: 
All things seen in dreams are unreal (vaitathya), because they are 
inside (antahsthana) the body in a subtle (‘covered up’) condition. 
That is, since an elephant can be seen in a dream but obviously 
cannot really be inside the body, it must be unreal. 

7. Karika 4 (E442; T40). The precise form of the argument is 
this: Objects seen in the waking state are unreal, because they are 
seen, like things seen in dream. The argument is valid even though 
it is granted that dream objects are unlike waking ones in certain 
respects. 

(£443-444; T40-43). The example given of something that is 
‘nonexistent at the beginning and at the end” is a mirage. 

Objection: The argument is incorrect, for things seen in the waking 
state, like food and drink, are used to assuage hunger and thirst, 
whereas dream objects do not do so. 

Answer : No. One who has just eaten and goes to sleep may dream 
he is hungry, and, likewise, one who has just been dreaming of eating 
a meal will wake up to find himself hungry. 

Karika 8. Samkara understands this stanza as answering an objector 
who argues that the example in the above inference, that is, things 
seen in dream, is fallacious because ‘‘unestablished” (asiddha). 
Things seen in dream are quite unlike those seen in the waking state 
since they transcend experience (apiirva)—for example, one dreams 
of having eight hands and the like. Samkara’s answer is that the 
objection is irrelevant, since ‘transcending experience” isa property 
of the cognizer (the dreamer), not of the objects of his cognition. 

9. Kariké 13 (E445; T44). How the self ‘‘conceptually constructs” 
experience is explained as involving especially words and vdsands. 

ll. Kdariké 32 (E449-450; T51-54). ‘Nothing originates... .” 
Samkara says that this verse, declaring ‘‘the highest truth,”’ summariz- 
es the preceding discussion and takes the opportunity to set forth the 
teaching in his own words. Where there is no duality there cannot 
be, on pain of contradiction, origination, etc., any more than a snake 
can, on pain of contradiction, originate from or in a rope. 

Objection : If so, scripture should teach the absence of duality, not 
nonduality, for they are opposed. And so, since there is no pramdna 
to show the reality of nonduality the conclusion of Sényavdda is reached, 
since no duality exists. 

Answer: No, since a snake, despite its opposition to the rope, 
nevertheless seems to exist there. 

Objector: We do not accept the example, since the rope is as 
imaginary as the snake! 


314 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Samkara : No, since when the snake is sublated the rope remains, 
or at any rate the imaginer (vikalpayitr) does. 

Objector : But if there is no operation possible due to the very 
nature (of the Self), how can scripture dispel the idea of duality ? 

Answer : Ajl duality is merely superimposed by avidyd on the Self 
through judgments like “I am happy,” ‘‘this is mine,” etc. 

Objector : Then since the Self’s nature is evident, what role is there 
for scripture? A pramdna, such as scripture, only functions if there 
is something to accomplish that has not already been accomplished. 

Answer : Its function is to remove the obstructions produced by 
avidyaé, which preclude us from a better state, by dispelling duality 
through teaching (e.g., by ‘“‘not this, not this,” etc.) the character- 
lessness of the pure Self. 

Karika 36 (E451; T56). ‘‘As if inert,” that is, declaring himself 
as the Self only and not what he thought he was or has become. 

Karika 37 (E451-452; T57). The wise person should become a 
completely retired paramahamsa and should leave provision of food, 
etc., entirely to chance (yadrechd) . 


BOOK THREE : NONDUALITY 


12 Kariké 1 (E452-453; T58-59). This book tries to prove 
nonduality by reasoning (tarka). 

Karika 2 (E453; T60). The ‘‘nonmiserable state’ is in fact 
Brahman, the unlimited, partless, infinite consciousness. 

Kaérika 5 (E454-455; T62-64). The stanza states that when one 
tiva is bound or freed it doesn’t follow that all jivas are bound or freed, 
any more than when one part of dkdfa is soiled it follows that all of 
akafa is. 

Objection (by the Simkhya): But you believe (wrongly) that there 
is only one Self and so cannot maintain the above thesis. 

Answer : We do believe there is only one Self. There is no basis 
for your doctrine of the plurality of selves. 

Samkhya ; The basis is that prakrti cannot serve another’s purpose; 
since it does so, we postulate the selves as the things that it serves. 

Answer: But you do not believe that prakrti and purusa are related 
in an inseparable manner; indeed, the purusas are viewed as ever free, 
and it is only the buddhis—aspects of prakrti—that are subject to 
bondage or liberation. So the ‘‘serving another’s purpose”’ is easily 
accounted for just by the fact that there is something else other than 
prakrti—and it may as well be a single Self. 

The Vaigesikas, to be sure, do maintain that desire, etc., inhere in 
the selves, that is, are related to them in an inseparable manner. 


GAUDAPADAKARIKABHASYA 315 


But they are wrong, for some of the qualities in question—that is, 
traces (samskdra)—-cannot be in an inseparable relation with a self 
that has no parts and no size—or else memory will be continuous and 
occur simultaneously with perception. (If you say it is occasioned 
by contact of manas with dtman,) contact between the internal organ 
and the self cannot occur, for selves are entirely without touch 
(sparfa). Anyway, qualities (guna) such as desire cannot be insepara- 
bly related to a substance such as a self, since qualities are evane- 
scent, whereas the self is permanent. Or if you insist that the quali- 
ties are permanent too, then liberation will be impossible. Again, 
if inherence (samavdya) is distinct from substance it will require some 
third relation to connect them; if not, then everything will be eternally 
related to everything else to which it is related at all. 

Kariké 7 (E456; T65). Objection : The space in a pot is as real 
as space per se. 

Answer: No, for the space in a pot is not a modification of 
big space (mahdkésa); no more are jivas modifications of the 
Self. 

14 Kariké 18 (E460-461; T73). Samkara says that there is no 
conflict between the Advaitin and the dualist, any more than there 
is conflict between a man seated on an elephant and a madman on 
the ground who thinks he is on another elephant and riding against 
him. 

17 Kéariké 42 (E439; T89). Samkara glosses ‘“‘laya’”” as deep 
sleep (susupt:). 

Kariké 44 (E439; T90). To wake someone up from Jaya involves 
disciplining him by discriminative self-insight. 


BOOK FOUR : THE PEACE OF THE FIREBRAND 
(ALATASANT]I) 


18 Karika 1 (E471; T92-93). This book is intended to show the 
mutual inconsistencies of the other systems and thus demonstrate 
their falsity. This first stanza salutes the originator of the Advaita 
view (darsana) and tradition (samprad@ya). The text intends us to 
understand that consciousness and its objects are ultimately non- 
different. 

19 Karika 3 (E472; T94-95). The two parties are identified 
respectively as the Samkhya and the Nyaya-Vaisesika schools. 

20 Kariké 9 (E473; T96-97). The ‘“‘own-nature” (svabhdva) 
of a thing is explained as that which belongs to it completely from the 
beginning, its essence, inborn and not artificially produced. This 
own-nature does not change. 


316 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Karika 10 (E473; T97). The own-nature of a jiva is that it is the 
Self; if it imagines otherwise that does not cause it to abandon its 
own nature for some other. 

22. Karika 19 (E475; T100-101). The ‘“‘buddhas’’ who explain the 
theory of nonorigination are, according to Samkara, the learned Samkh- 
yas and Vaisesikas who by their polemics indirectly prove the true thesis. 
. Kariké 20 (E476; T103-104). The opponent offers the seed and 
the sprout as an example of a beginningless series of causes and effects, 
but this commits a fallacy that Gaudapada chooses to call “‘sédhya- 
sama,” implying that the hetu or reason stands in as much need of proof 
as the sddhya or thing to be proved. Actually the fallacy has more to 
do with an example (drsfanta) that allegedly supports the inference 
but does not really do so, since it is not evident that the series of seeds 
and sprouts is itself beginningless, for seeds require causes; so do 
sprouts, and as for the series, since it is a thing (or considered as one) 
it too requires a cause, and so forth. 

23. Karika 22 (E476-477; T103-104). Samkara displays dia- 
lectical arguments to prove nonorigination. For example, the follow- 
ing: if x is by its own nature existent, it can never become existent, 
and if it is both existent and nonexistent by nature nothing will be 
produced since its contradictory nature precludes that. 

24. Kadriké 25 (E478; T105-106). The reason why what the 
opponent takes as an occasion is not real is that, for example, a jar, 
which is the occasion for our identifying something (prajfiapti) as a 
jar, cannot really be occasion since it is not real. Thus the “‘cause’’ 
is ‘‘no cause,’ as the stanza puts it. 

Karika 28 (E479; T107-108). This section, proving the illusori- 
ness of external objects, consists of Vijfianavada arguments. But 
in this stanza those arguments are turned against the Vijfiana- 
vadin’s conclusion. The Vijfianavadin believes that the mind (citta) 
is causally efficacious even though objects are not; but his arguments 
apply equally against the causality of mind. The Sinyavadins are 
fools who wish to hold the universe in their hands. 

25. Karika 41 (E482; T113). Here Samkara attributes both 
experience of the waking and dream worlds to construction (vikalpa), 
calling both worlds error (viparydsa). 

32. Kéarika 83 (E491; T128). Samkara lists the erroneous notions 
about things held by several schools, explicitly identifying as “nihi- 
lists’’ those who hold that the self doesn’t exist and the Digambara 
(Jains) who hold that it both does and doesn’t exist. 

33. Karikas 87-88 (E492-493; T130-131). Samkara identifies 
the three states described in these stanzas as respectively the stages 


DAKSINAMURTISTOTRA 317 


of waking, dream, and deep sleep and distinguishes them from the 
fourth (turiya) state, which is the highest truth (paramdrthasatya). 

34. Karika 90 (E493-494; T132). Samkara takes this stanza 
to say that of the four preliminary things only the thing to be known, 
namely, Brahman, exists from the highest standpoint (here called the 
agrayana), though all should be studied by the aspirant (bhiksu). 
Of the other three, the things to be avoided are the three stages of 
waking, dream, and deep sleep, the things to be attained by a pundit 
free from desires for children, wealth, and fame are the three proper 
means to knowledge—theoretical knowledge, innocence, and con- 
centration. And the things to be developed are the faults called 
kasdya—passion, aversion, delusion, etc. But none are real things. 

Karika 99 (E496; T136). Samkara pointedly remarks that despite 
some resemblances—denial of the existence of external objects, etc.— 
the Advaita theory is different from that of the Buddha, since that is 
not nondualism. 


DAKSINAMURTISTOTRA 


This brief hymn (stotra) is held traditionally to have been comment- 
ed on by Suresvara in the Manasolldsa. If the Manasolldsa is actually 
Suregvara’s work we might have reason to accept Samkara’s author- 
ship of the hymn. But as that ascription is doubtful (see below 
under Suregvara), and as we have no real reason to think that Sam- 
kara wrote any hymns at all (though we have no particular reason 
to think he didn’t either), the matter must be left in suspense. 

“ET” refers to the edition and translation by T.M.P. Mahadevan 
in The Hymns of Sankara (Madras : Ganesh & Co., 1970). 

1 (ET 5). The hymn is addressed to the south-facing Lord 
(daksindmirti), incarnate in the guru, who by mdyd as in a dream sees 
the universe, which exists within Him like a city in a mirror, as 
manifested outside, but who when awake sees only His own, nondual 
Self. 

2 (ET 7). Respect is paid to the south-facing Lord who, like 
a magician or a yogi, makes manifest the universe by His own will, 
the universe, which is in the beginning undifferentiated like a sprout 
in its seed, but which becomes differentiated into spatial and temporal 
states when imagined under the influence of maya. 

3 (ET 9-10). To that south-facing Lord whose light, the nature 
of existence, illuminates objects that are asif nonexistent, who causes 
those who resort to Him to understand (the Self) directly through 
the Vedic text “that art thou,” on the direct understanding of whom 
there will be no returning to this ocean of transmigration. 


318 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


4 (ET 11-12). To that south-facing Lord whose consciousness 
moves out through the visual and other organs like the light of a great 
lamp set in the belly of a pot with many holes, so that the whole 
universe shines because He shines in the awareness ‘‘I know.” 

5 (ET 13-14). To the south-facing Lord who destroys the great 
delusion, apparently produced (kalpita) by the power of maya, found 
in people who talk much and think of the self as the body or the senses, 
etc. 

6 (ET 15-16). To that south-facing Lord who in deep sleep 
when the sense organs are withdrawn becomes the one existence 
veiled by mdyd like the sun or moon in an eclipse, and who on waking 
is aware that He has slept. 

7 (ET 17). To that south-facing Lord who, shining within as “I” 
unchanging through childhood, youth, and old age, dream, waking, 
and deep sleep, manifests Himself to His followers by the blessed 
mudra. 

8 (ET 19). To that south-facing Lord, the Self, who dreaming 
or waking, deluded by mayd, sees differences such as cause and effect, 
owner and owned, teacher and pupil, father and son. 

9 (ET 20-21). To the south-facing Lord whose eight-fold form 
comprises the whole universe—earth, water, fire, air, space (ambara) , 
sun, moon, and self (pumaén)—beyond whom nothing exists for any- 
one who seeks. 

10 (ET 22-23). By hearing, reflecting, and meditating on the 
universe’s being completely Self, and by reciting it, one will naturally 
attain Lordship (isvaratva) along with the supreme splendor of the 
universal Self, and will achieve unimpeded divine power involving 
the eight forms. 


PANCIKARANA 


Belvalkar believes this small treatise is properly ascribed to Sam- 
kara, arguing on the ground of a traditional line of commentaries on 
it beginning with Suregvara. However, he admits “there is nothing 
in the work itself that warrants its ascription to Samkara. . . .7°58 
The Varitika on it, supposedly by Suresvara, being clearly redolent 
of Tantra, is extremely suspect. 

“ET” refers to the edition and translation by members of the 
Ramakrishna Mission Sevashrama (Mathura: Mathura Printing 
Press, 1962). 

1 (ET 1-2). The term “‘viraj”’ is used to stand for the collection 
of all the quintuplicated (aficikrta) five elements (mahdbhiitas) and 


PANCIKARANA 319 


their results. This is the gross body of the Self. The waking state 
(jgarita) is the state where the sense organs produce knowledge of 
objects. The Self, conceived (abhimana) as both the waking state 
and the gross, body is called ‘‘vifva.”” These three (virdj, jagarita, 
and vifva) are together represented by the letter a in “aum.”’ 

2 (ET 2-3). The five nonquintuplicated tanmdtras and their 
result, that is, the subtle body (diiga), together comprise what is 
called “‘Atranyagarbha.” The subtle body has seventeen parts—five 
prduas, ten organs (of sense and of action), the internal organ (manas) , 
and the buddhi. 

3 (ET 3-4). When the sense organs are withdrawn, ideas (pra~ 
tyaya) arisng from traces (samskaéra) produced in the waking state 
with their contents are called the dream state (suapna). The Self 
conceived as both (the subtle body and the dream state) is called 
‘‘taijasa.”’ The three (subtle body, dream state, and faijasa) are 
represented by u in “‘aum.”’ 

4 (ET 4-5). Nonknowledge (ajfidna) of the Self, which causes 
both the gross and the subtle bodies, along with the reflection (dbhdsa) 
(of the Self) is called ‘“‘avpakrta’”’ or unmanifested. This is the causa] 
body of the Self. It neither exists (sat) nor doesn’t exist, nor both 
exists and doesn’t exist; it is neither different from, nor not differ- 
ent from, nor both different and not different from, the Self. This 
nonknowledge is neither made up of parts, nor without parts, nor 
both, and it is only removable by knowledge of the identity of Brah- 
man and the Self. 

5 (ET 5-6). When all awareness of qualifications (sarvaprakdra- 
jiiana) stops and the buddhi stands still in its causal nature, it is called 
“deep sleep.”” The Self conceived as these two (viz., deep sleep 
and‘ the causal body or nonknowledge) is called “praia.” The 
three (viz., nonknowledge, deep sleep, and frdjfia) are represented by 
the letter m in ‘‘aum.” 

6 (ET 6-7). Now a goes into u, u into m, m into ‘‘aum,” and ‘‘aum” 
into “akam,”’ that is, “I.” I am the Witness-Self, isolated and having 
the nature of pure consciousness only, I am not nonknowledge nor 
even its result, but I am Brahman alone, eternally pure, enlightened, 
liberated, and existent. I am the highest bliss, one without a second, 
the inner consciousness. This remaining in a state of nondifference 
is what is called “‘samddhi.”’ 

7 (ET 8-9). (The above is evidenced) by scriptural sentences 
such as “that art thou,’’ “I am Brahman,”’ ‘‘Brahman is consciousness 
and bliss,’? ‘This Self is Brahman,”’ etc. 


320 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
APAROKSANUBHOUTI 


Belvalkar is inclined to regard this work as having ‘“‘a fairly satis- 
factory claim to Samkara’s authorship” since it is “honored by many 
commentaries.” He expresses doubts about the ascription of the 
commentaries to their traditional authors, however, and remarks 
“Even the original work does not rise very much above the common- 
place, and may have been an early effort of the Acarya.’’® Ingalls® 
and Mayeda®! reject Samkara’s authorship of all prakarana or exposi- 
tory works except for the Upadefasdhasri. Hacker, in addition, finds 
evidence from colophons suggesting the work is spurious.® 

“ET” identifies the edition and translation by S. Venkataramanan 
in Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya (2d edition; Madras: G. A. Natesan 
& Co., n.d.). 

2 (ET 39). Direct (aparoksa) experience (anubhiiti) is here ex- 
plained as a means to liberation. It should be studied zealously. 

3 (ET 39). By performing the duties of one’s caste and station 
(svavarndsramadharma), by asceticism and by worship of the Lord 
(hari), men will obtain the fourfold (requirements of) nonattach- 
ment, etc. 

4 (ET 40). Pure nonattachment involves having the same attitude 
toward all objects from Brahma down to inanimate things as one has 
toward crow droppings. 

5 (ET 40). Right discrimination means determining that the Self 
is eternal and everything perceptible is not. 

6 (ET 40). Control of mind (Sama) is the abandoning of sub- 
conscious impressions (vdsané). Control of body is the restraint of 
external fluctuations (bdhya urtti). 

7 (ET 40-41). Abstention (pardurtti) is turning away from objects. 
Resignation (ttiksd) is enduring all frustrations. 

8 (ET 41). Faith (Sraddhé) is devotion (bhakti) to the sayings of 
scripture and teacher. Concentration (samddhéna) is fixing one’s 
mind on reality. 

9 (ET 41). Desire for liberation (mumuksata@) is the intense thought 
“‘How and when, O Lord, shall I be liberated ?” 

10 (ET 41-42). One desiring welfare for oneself, after satisfying 
the above-mentioned requirements, should begin an inquiry (vicdra) 
in order to establish knowledge. 

11 (ET 42). Knowledge cannot arise except through inquiry, 
just as perception is impossible without light. 

12-16 (ET 42-43). Examples of the kind of inquiry meant are 
provided: for example, ‘‘Who am I >?” 


APAROKSANUBHOTI 321 


17-21 (ET 44-45). An analysis is given of the misidentifications 
common among ignorant men between the self and the body. 

22-40 (ET 45-51). It is shown how the self differs from both gross 
and subtle bodies. 

41 (ET 51). Objection : By distinguishing the self from the body 
all you have shown is that the world (prapajica) exists, as is indeed 
stated by the Tarkika (the logician). What is the point of that ? 

42 (ET 51). Answer : We have so far shown that the self and body 
differ. Now we shall show that the distinction of the body as differ- 
ent is unreal. 

43-46 (ET 52-53). Consciousness is by nature one, and every- 
thing else is unreal, like the rope-snake. Everything is Brahman- 
Atman and nothing else. 

47-55 (ET 53-55). The Vedas declare this. 

56-86 (ET 56-65). Many illustrative analogies are offered to show 
the unreality of duality, including (56-57) dreams; (59-60) the dis- 
appearance of the pot, the silver, and the earring when one knows 
that it is (respectively) clay, shell, and gold; (61) the blue of the sky, 
the mirage, the man in the post; (62) the ghost in an empty place, 
the city of the Gandharvas, the double moon; (63) waves of water, 
vessels of copper; (74) the house in the lumber, the sword in the 
steel; (75) reflections in the water; (76) apparent movement of 
things seen by one on a ship; (77) yellow seen by a jaundiced man; 
(78) dizziness; (79) the wheel-of-fire; (80) big things seem small 
when far away; (81) small things seem big when close up; (82) 
glass mistaken for water; (83) charcoal mistaken for a jewel; (84) 
apparent movement of the moon when clouds are moving; (85) 
motions perceived by one in a faint. 

87-89 (ET 65-66). In the way illustrated thus, the Self is mis- 
taken for the body, but the mistake disappears when Brahman is 
realized. 

90 (ET 66). Objection: But even when the Self has been realized 
the results of karma already begun (prarabdha) cannot be avoided. 

91 (ET 66-67). Answer: No. Once knowledge of reality (tattva- 
jitana) has arisen there can be no results of prarabdhakarman, just 
as after waking there is no dream. 

92 (ET 67). It is acts done in past lives that are called prdrabdha. 
But since there is no past life, those acts don’t exist. 

93 (ET 67). The (waking) body is superimposed (adhyasta) as 
much as the dream body is. But an illusion is not alive, and there- 
fore it can’t act. 

98 (ET 69). In speaking of the destruction of karma when the 


322 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Self is realized the Vedas use the plural case ending (karmani) (and 
not the singular or dual) to indicate that prarabdhakarman (in addition 
to the other two kinds) is destroyed. 

100-103 (ET 70-71). Here is a fifteen-step process of meditation 
leading to liberation, consisting of (1) forbearance (yama), (2) 
observance (niyama), (3) renunciation (tydéga), (4) silence (mauna), 
(5) place (defa), (6) time (dla), (7) posture (dsana), (8) subduing 
the root (mialabandha), (9) equilibrium of the body (dehasémya), (10) 
fixed vision (drksthiti), (11) breath control (prandyama), (12) 
withdrawal of the senses (pratydhdra), (13) attention (dhdrand), (14) 
contemplation (dhyana), (15) samadhi. 

107-109 (ET 72-73). “Silence” is explained as either (a) the 
silence of Brahman, which defies expression and with which the seeker 
should identify himself, also known as sahaja, or (b) literal silence of 
speech. 

110 (ET 73). “Place” is that by which the universe is pervaded. 

111 (ET 73). ‘Time’ is another name for Brahman since all crea- 
tures from Brahma on down are manifested in the twinkling of an eye 
(nimesa). 

112-113 (ET 74). ‘‘Posture’? is explained as the condition in 
which Brahman is blissfully contemplated, and the posture called 
‘*siddha”’ is that in which the perfected ones repose. 

114 (ET 74). ‘‘Subduing the root,” that is, control of citta, is 
proper for rdjayogins. 

115 (ET 75). Bodily equilibrium is not just stiffening the body, 
but absorption in Brahman. 

116-117 (ET 75). Fixed vision is not necessarily just studying the 
tip of one’s nose, but directing one’s vision in some fashion that will 
cause the distinctions of seer, sight, and object to cease, for example, 
by realizing that the whole world is Brahman. 

118-120 (ET 76). Breath control isn’t just pressing the nose but 
has to be understood more deeply as control of all the life forces. 

124-126 (ET 77-78). Samadhi is forgetting all fluctuations by 
making them unmodifiable and then of the form of Brahman. One 
should practice this until one can do it instantly at will. Then one 
is a siddha and king of yogis (yogirdj), though the real nature of samadhi 
cannot be reached by word or thought. 

127-128 (ET 78-79). Obstacles to samadhi are listed. 

129 (ET 79). One’s consciousness becomes what he thinks on; 
one should think on the fullness (férnatva) of Brahman and so become 
full. 

130-134 (ET 79-80). Those who, having once realized Brahman, 


ATMABODHA 323 


give it up are, though human, like animals, whereas those who develop 
what they have achieved are the best of men. They become identical 
with eternal Brahman, as Saunaka, Suka, and others have, whereas 
the others, clever in their talk and swayed by passion, merely fight 
about words and transmigrate over and over. 

135-142 (ET 81-83). The meditation on the clay and the pot, 
illustrating how to identify with and thus become the cause, should 
be repeated. 

143-144 (ET 83-84). The steps outlined detail a scheme calied 
“rajayoga.”’ "Those whose passions are only partly rooted out should 
combine this yoga with hathayoga. But those whose internal organ 
is ripe will easily and quickly reach perfection by practising the above 
yoga alone with faith in their teacher and in God. 


ATMABODHA 


This is a very popular short treatise that has been commented on 
by a number of Advaita luminaries. Belvalkar is inclined to view it 
as genuine, but without giving any particular reasons.68 As with 
the Aparoksdnubhiti, Hacker and others suggest the work is not 
Samkara’s.®4 

“ET” references are to the edition and translation by P. N. Menon, 
Atma Bodha of Sri Sankaracharya (2d edition: Palghat, 1964). 

1 (ET3). The work is for those who have satisfied the four require- 
ments. 

2 (ET 4-6). Compared with other means Self-knowledge is the 
one direct means to liberation, a necessary condition for it as fire is 
for cooking. 

3 (ET 9-10). Action, not being opposed to avidyd, cannot destroy 
it, but knowledge can. 

5 (ET 14-15). The jiva, tainted with ignorance but having been 
made pure by repetition of his knowledge (jrdndbhydsa), dies of itself 
as the clearing-nut does in water. 

6-8 (ET 16-19). Analogies of dream, shell-silver, bubbles in water 
adduced. 

9 (ET 20). The various individuals are imputed (prakalpita) to 
eternal Visnu as bangles are to gold. 

11 (ET 23). Just as differences of taste, color, etc., are super- 
imposed (dropita) on water, so distinctions of caste, name, stage of 
life, etc., are superimposed on the Self. 

12-14 (ET 24-29). The three bodies—gross, subtle, and causal— 
are explained. The gross body is a fivefold combination of elements; 


324 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the subtle body consists of five pranas, ten sense organs, manas, and 
buddhi; the causal body is avidyd. 

15-16 (ET 31-36). The doctrine of the five sheaths (paficakosa) 
is explained. By reason one should husk the sheaths to discover the 
grain that is the inner Self. 

17 (ET 40). Though the Self is eternal and omnipresent, It does 
not shine in everything, but only in the buddhi, where It is reflected 
as if from a mirror. 

25 (ET 54). Mixing (samyojya) parts of existence (sat) and 
consciousness (cit) with the fluctuations of citta, by nondiscrimination 
of them the idea “I know” arises. 

42 (ET 81-82). By rubbing contemplation on the wood of the 
Self the flame of knowledge will arise that will consume all the fuel 
of avidya. 

43-44 (ET 83-85). When avidyd is destroyed by knowledge the 
Self will manifest itself, just as the sun does when darkness is dis- 
pelled at dawn. The Self always exists but seems not to because 
of avidya. When avidya is destroyed It is discovered, like the necklace 
on one’s neck. 

49-53 (ET 93-102). Liberation while living (jivanmukti) occurs 
when the knowing one (jfignin) gives up the adjuncts that previously 
limited him and, giving up all attachment, enjoys the bliss of the 
Self, unaffected by the adjuncts even though they are all around, 
just like the sky. Knowing everything he can move about like a de- 
luded person but unattached. When the adjuncts are (eventually) 
destroyed the sage (muni) merges into Visnu. 

58 (ET 107). Brahma and the others, residing in a portion of 
the bliss that is Brahman’s in Its infinite form, become blissful 
themselves in proportion to their respective portions. 

59 (ET 108-109). Ail real things (vastu) are united with Brah- 
man. Practical affairs (vyavahdra) are imbued with consciousness. 
Brahman pervades all, as milk pervades butter. 

63 (ET 114-115). Brahman is different from this (universe). 
There is no other than Brahman. If anything shines other than 
Brahman it is false (mithyd) like the mirage. 


SATASLOKI 


The Satasloki, consisting of one hundred stanzas, is ‘‘remarkable 
for the easy familiarity with which it marshalls forth Vedic and 
Upanisadic texts in support of Advaitic conclusions”.®® Belvalkar 
regards it as probably Samkara’s. Hacker and Mayeda reject it.® 


SATASLOKI 325 


“ET” refers to the edition and translation by S. Venkataramanan 
in Select Works of Sri Samkara (2d edition: Madras: G. A. Natesan & 
Co., n.d.). 

1-2 (ET 85-86). Salutation to the guru. 

3 (ET 86-87). Scripture holds that knowledge of Brahman 
comes through experience (sudnubhiti) and reasoning (upapatti). 

4-13 (ET 87-93). The Self is distinguished from what is not-Self 
as Witness from agent or enjoyer. 

14 (ET 93-94). There are two kinds of nonattachment: the former 
springs from disgust occasioned by noting that one’s desires are not 
usually satisfied; the latter springs from knowledge and _ involves 
rejecting the objects of desire. 

14-21 (ET 93-99). Renunciation is examined. 

22-25 (ET 99-102). Verses on creation and dissolution. 

26-32 (ET 102-106). The ways of méya. 

33-38 (ET 107-111). Dreams and waking experience compared. 
The reality or unreality of things depends only on the length 
of time they last. Everything has construction (kalpand) as its 
root. 

42 (ET 113). First comes jivanmukti or liberation while living, 
and then final liberation. These are the result of practice (abhydsa) 
and the discipline of knowledge (jfdnayoga) and require the advice 
and assistance of a guru. Practice is of two kinds, bodily—including 
postures, etc.—and the other, equivalent to the discipline of knowl- 
edge, which involves abstention (uparatz). 

43-46 (ET 114-116). ivanmukti characterized, and the stages of 
attaining final liberation. 

47-49 (ET 117-118). Upanisadic analogies to illuminate the 
nature of Brahman. 

50-54 (ET 119-122). The reflection analogy explored. 

75-82 (ET 136-141). Dreaming is reviewed. By analogy it is 
concluded that everything is merely created by experience (drsjisrsti), 
that the world is as unreal (mrsd) as a juggler’s illusion. 

83-86 (ET 141-144). Action and knowledge and their results 
are contrasted. 

87-90 (ET 144-147). Self-illumination; the operation of the 
pranas. 

91-101 (ET 147-154). The saving knowledge and how it leads 
to liberation. 


326 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ATMAJNANOPADESAVIDHI or PRAKARANA or 
BALABODHINI or ATMAVIDYOPADESA 


Belvalkar classes this as a work which is “usually, but not convin- 
cingly, supposed to belong to Samkara’s authorship.’ Hacker 
concludes from colophons that it is not genuine.® 

“ET” refers to the edition and translation by Swami Jagadananda 
(Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1953). 


PART ONE 


I,1 (ET 1-2). The teaching is meant for those who have satisfied 
the four requirements. 

1.2 (ET 2). Everybody knows that the seen is different from the 
seer. But what is the Self? 

I.3-6 (ET 2-5). The body is not the Self. 

I.7-9 (ET 7-8). The sense organs are not the Self. 

1.10 (ET 8). The internal organ (manas) is not the Self. 

L.11 (ET 8). The buddhi is not the Self. 

I.12-14 (ET 8-10). The Self is not prana, because prana is without 
consciousness in deep sleep. 

1.15 (ET 8-10). Objection: Prana appears to be without con- 
sciousness in deep sleep because the sense organs have temporarily 
stopped functioning, not because it is not conscious. 

Answer: No, for the senses cannot stop functioning while their 
owner (svdmi) is functioning, just as the king’s officers cannot cease 
working as long as he is working. So, the sense organs do not belong 
to prana but rather to jiva. 

1.16-17 (ET 11-12). The senses operate toward their respective 
objects when the jiva comes out (bahth nirgatya) in the waking state 
when karma occasions it to wake from sleep. When the results of 
that karma have been exhausted the jiva draws in all the organs of 
object consciousness (visayavijfidna) produced from connection with 
its adjunct, buddhi, and then experiences dream or deep sleep. 

I.18-20 (ET 13-14). So, the jiva experiences the three states 
successively, going to waking and sleep due to its karma, and to 
deep sleep in order to remove fatigue. 

1.21 (ET 15). Now frana functions in all three states—otherwise 
the body would be taken to be dead when asleep. 

1.22-24 (ET 15-16). The ego (aham) is likewise not the Self but 
rather an object of perception, like a jar, etc., since it does not exist 
during deep sleep and has various qualities. 

J.25 (ET 17). The reason why the body, etc., are taken for the 
Self is because of that want of discrimination between seer and seen. 


ATMAJNANOPADESA 327 


PART TWO 


II.} (ET 19-20). The nature of the Self is described according 
to. various Upanisads. 

11.2 (ET 20-21). The all-pervading Self, without parts, cannot 
have the buddhi as its locus (ddhdra), but It is said to reside in the 
heart of everyone since It is qualified by all buddhis. 

II.3-7 (ET 21-25). Objection : The Self cannot be properly called 
a “‘seer,” for the act of seeing involves subject, object, desire, or aver- 
sion. Furthermore, if It is a seer It cannot see all the buddhis at once, 
since an act involves instruments that are independent of the agent; so 
if It sees It must only see a limited number of objects or in succession. 

II.8 (ET 25). And why did you say (in II.2) that It is qualified 
by buddhi(s) ? 

II.9-11 (ET 25-27). Answer: As for the last point, a relation 
between them (Self and buddhi) is possible since they are both subtle, 
transparent (svaccha), and partless. And though they cannot be 
connected as varnish with wood, not having form, there is a connec- 
tion due to superimposition, since the buddhi, though nonilluminative 
like a gem, appears to be so because of the proximity of the illuminat- 
ing Self. 

II.12 (ET 27-29). And so, just as the sun, though without notions, 
desire, etc., still can be said to illuminate things just by its proximity 
to them, likewise the Self is called a “‘seer’’ since, though devoid of 
ideas of subject, object, desire, or aversion, It is naturally illumina- 
tive and is in proximity to objects. So only the ignorant impute 
agency to the Self, agency in an act of knowing; It does not know 
in that way. 

I1.13-18 (ET 30-32). Likewise, the Self is an “agent”? only as a 
magnet is, which moves metal only by its proximity. In the case of 
the Self it is the proximity occasioned by Its being the Witness that 
allows the ignorant to impute agency to It. 

TI.19 (ET 32-33). Odjection : If the Self is pure consciousness 
how can one know It by means of the buddhi ? 

II.20 (ET 32-33). Answer: The Self cannot be known by the 
intellect any more than the sun can be illumined by color. 

1.21-22 (ET 33-34). And also because the buddhi, being an 
object of knowledge, cannot also be a knower, just as two lamps 
cannot be illuminated by each other. 


PART THREE 


III.1-9 (ET 35-45). Waking, dream, and deep sleep are explained 
and distinguished from each other and from consciousness, 


328 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


PART FOUR 


IV.1-6 (ET 46-48). The Self is thus not these states but the fourth 
(turiya), consciousness only. The fourth is not another state but 
rather the Witness of the three states through Its proximity. If 
turiya were a fourth state the result would be emptiness (Siinyaia), 
since then the Self could not be known (and likewise therefore the 
not-Self). And the doctrine of emptiness can’t be right, since super- 
imposition requires a (positive) substratum (dspada). 

IV.8 (ET 49-51). Question : How can the three states give us 
knowledge of the pure Self? 

Answer : Since It persists in all three states, whereas each of them 
does not persist. 

IV.9 (ET 49-51). Objection : But in deep sleep consciousness does 
not persist. 

Answer: No, objects do not persist then, but consciousness does, 
as one reports on waking that he has been asleep. 

IV.10 (ET 52-53). For this reason the Self is not dependent on 
a pramdna (for our knowledge of It), because only noneternal and 
limited things are so dependent. Who would be the pramatr—the 
one who uses the pramana? It can only be the Self itself (and It 
doesn’t need a pramdna !) 

IV.11 (ET 52-53). Objection: The Self is proved by scripture 
(agama). 

Answer : No, not even by it. The Vedas are proof of the knowl- 
edge of unity of Self and Brahman, not by making Brahman an object 
of a pramana, but by negating the properties of not-Self that have been 
superimposed on the Self. 


ATMANATMAVIVEKA 


The Atmandatmaviveka is another spurious work, not specifically 
mentioned by Belvalkar or Hacker. 

“E”’ refers to the edition by H. R. Bhagavat, Minor Works of Sam- 
karacarya (2d edition: Poona Oriental Series 8, 1952), pp. 405-414. 
‘“*T” refers to the translation by Mohini M. Chatterjee in A Compen- 
dium of the Raja Yoga Philosophy (edited by M. N. Dvivedi) (Bombay, 
1885). 

1-2 (E405; T34). Everything that is seen (drfya) is not-Self. 
The Self is the seer. The distinction between Self and not-Self is set 
forth in many books and is explained here. 

3-10 (E405-406; T34-35). Frustration comes to the self from its 
taking on bodies, which is in turn produced by karma, which in turn 


ATMANATMAVIVEKA 329 


arises from . passion, etc., which are produced by the ego notion 
(abhimana), which comes from lack of discrimination, which is due to 
lack of knowledge (ajfiana). Ajfiana is not produced by anything, 
being the beginningless mixture of sat and asat. It has the three 
gunas as its nature and is said to be by nature contradictory to knowl- 
edge because it leads to the experience “I am unknowing.” This 
nonknowledge will not cease until the unity of the Self with Brahman 
leads to cessation of avidya. 

11 (E406 ; 135-36). Objection: The nityakarmans lead to cessa- 
tion of avidyd, so what is the point of knowledge ? 

Answer: Actions, etc., cannot lead to the cessation of avidyd, since 
action and knowledge are contradictory. 

12 (E406; T36). Knowledge is gained from discussion (vicdra) of the 
distinction between Self and not-Self. Who are ready for such dis- 
cussion ? Those who satisfy the fourfold requirement of discriminat- 
ing eternal from noneternal things, being nonattached to enjoying 
the fruits of actions here and hereafter, possessing the six properties 
of Sama, etc., and desire for liberation. Nonattachment is explained 
as having the same disinclination against objects like garlands, women, 
etc., as one has against vomited food, and this should extend to the 
higher spheres from heaven to the Brahmaloka. 

12-16 (E406-407; T37). Of the six qualities, fama is restraining 
the internal organ so that it only engages in listening (Sravana), 
reflecting (manana), and meditating (nididhydsana). ‘These are illus- 
trated and explained. 

17-18 (E407-408; T37). Dama is the restraint of the external 
senses, explained as the ten organs of sense and action, and they 
should be restrained from doing anything other than participating in 
listening, reflecting, and meditating. 

Uparati is refraining from actions prescribed in scripture. Or, 
it is just that state of the internal organ in which it is limited to listen- 
ing, etc. 

Titiksa is bearing with equanimity opposites such as heat and cold 
as well as bodily cuts, etc. Or, it is pardoning those one is capable 
of punishing. 

Samadhéna is when an internal organ practicing listening, etc., 
considers things capable of producing impressions (vdsand) but finding 
faults in them returns to the samadhi involved in listening, etc. 

Sraddha is faith in the guru and in the Vedantic sentences. 

18-20 (E408; T37-38). Those brahmacdrins who satisfy the four- 
fold requirement are obligated to engage in the discussions mentioned. 
Householders are also advised to do so, for it leads to improvement. 


330 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


21 (E408; T38). What is Self? It is that which is different 
from the three bodies, from the five sheaths, which witnesses the three 
states, and is sat, cit, and dnanda. 

22 (E408; T38). The three bodies are the gross, subtle, and causal 
bodies. The gross body is the effect of the (maha) bhiitas that are 
paiicikrta (composed of the five subtle elements); it is born of karma 
and subject to six transformations including birth, etc. 

23 (E408-409; T38-39). The theory of paficikarana is explained. 

24 (E409-410; T39-40). The subtle body is the effect of the 
elements not pafcikrta and it has seventeen marks. These seventeen 
include five sense organs, five action organs, five prdnas, manas, and 
buddhi. Each organ is explained. Vac (the action organ of “‘speech’’ ) 
is explained as something other than speech but in which speech is 
located and which itself occurs in eight places, thatis, breast, throat, 
head, upper and lower lips, palate, tongue, and the muscle that 
binds the lower jaw to the tongue. The inner organ (antahkarana) 
is explained as having four parts—manas, buddhi, citta, and ahamkara. 
They have different loci—manas is in the root of the throat (galdnta), 
buddhi in the vadana—the mouth or face, citta is in the navel (ndbhi), 
and the ahamkéra is in the heart (hrdaya). Their functions are (res- 
pectively ?) doubt, ascertainment, retention (dharand), and egoism. 

The prdnas are likewise located differently. Prana itself is in the 
heart, apdna in the rectum, samdna in the navel, udéna in the throat 
(kamtha), and vyéna throughout the body. Also they have different 
functions—frana goes out, apdna goes down, udéna goes up, samdna 
breaks up (? -samikarana, lit. “makes things [food?] the same’’) and 
vydna circulates within the body. 

25-28 (E410-411; T41). These pranas have five more upavdyus, 
that is, ndga (vomiting), kirma (opening the eyes), krkara (appetite), 
devadatia (yawning), and dhanafijaya (digestion or nourishment). The 
presiding deities (adhipati) of each of the seventeen are identified. 

Among these (seventeen), that having the nature ofan effect and 
possessing the power of agency is known as the pradnamaya_ sheath 
(kesa), whereas that having the nature of an instrument (karaya) 
and possessing the power of desiring is called the manomaya sheath, 
and that having the nature of an agent and possessing the power 
of knowledge is called the vijfidnamaya sheath. Collectively all this 
is called the subtle body (dingasarira; the etymology is explained). 

29-31 (E411-412; T41-42). The causal body is the cause of the 
other two bodies; it is beginningless, anirvacaniya, is accompanied by a 
reflection (sébhdsa), responsible for the notion that Brahman and Self 
are not the same—that is, it is nonknowledge (ajfana). 


TATTVABODHA 331 


All three bodies, constituting the not-Self, are impermanent (anrta), 
nonconscious (jada), and by nature frustrating (dukkhdtmaka). Imper- 
manence is not being found to be a thing (vastu) in all the three times 
(past, present, and future). To be nonconscious is to be a_ thing 
free from the knowledge of either true or false contents. 

The three states (of which the Self is witness) are waking, dream, 
and dreamless sleep. 

37 (E412-413; T43-44). The five sheaths are named. The annamaya 
sheath is the gross body. It is so-called since the food eaten by the 
father and mother is transformed into semen and blood, which is in turn 
transformed into the shape of a body. This body wraps up the Self 
like a sheath, concealing the Self as the sheath conceals the sword. 

Pranamaya sheath is the next sheath, so-called because the combi- 
nation of the five action organs and five pranas make the Self appear 
to speak, move, hunger, thirst, etc. 

The third sheath is manomaya, which makes the Self appear to 
perceive, doubt, suffer, etc., because it consists of the five organs of 
sense combined with the internal organ. 

37-38 (E413; T44). The vijfianamaya sheath is the five sense organs 
combined with the buddhi. It is commonly known as the jiva, which, 
through being considered as agent and enjoyer through avidyd, goes to 
other worlds and returns thence. 

The final sheath is dnandamaya. It is the antahkarana in which 
avidya dominates, and it produces fluctuations (vrtt:) that are pleasant 
(priyamoda), joyful (pramoda), etc., thus showing the Self—which 
lacks desires, enjoyments, pleasure, and joy—as having these ex- 
periences. 

39-41 (E413-414; T44-45). The reasons why the Self is different 
from the three bodies and five sheaths and why it is the witness of the 
three states are detailed. The expression “‘saccidénanda”’ is also ex- 
plained. 


TATTVABODHA 


This work is regarded as spurious by Belvalkar.® 

“ET”? refers to the edition and translation by L. Simha (Sialkot, 
1877). 

1 (ET 1). Invocation to Vasudeva, the Lord of the yogis and the 
guru who give knowledge. 

2-9 (ET 1-3). The four requirements are explained. 

10-28 (ET 3-9). The Self is differentiated from the three bodies 
(gross, subtle causal), the five sheaths, the three states (of waking, 


332 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


dream, and deep sleep) and is characterized as reality, consciousness, 
and bliss (saccidénanda). All of these notions are succinctly explained. 

29-33 (ET 9-11). The order of creation in twenty-four categories 
is set forth. First came the five elements, from which the five sense 
organs, the four internal organs (manas, buddhi, citta, and ahamkéra), 
five action organs and five pranas arise. From the tamasic form of 
the five elements through quintuplication arise the gross body. Quint- 
uplication is explained as (1) dividing the tamasic nature of each 
element into two; (2) dividing one of the two halves into four equal 
parts; (3) combining the undivided half of each element with one- 
eighth of each one of the other four elements. 

34 (ET 11). The jiva is explained as the self attached to the gross 
body and limited by avidya; it views God as different from itself under 
the influence of prakrti. 

35 (ET 12). God is the Self limited by maya, which is a different 
limitation from avidyd or at least conceived as such by the jiva. As 
long as this conception on the jiva’s part is maintained, transmigra- 
tion will continue. 

36 (ET 12). Objection: If jiva and God are so different, how can 
“that art thou,” etc., produce knowledge of their identity ? 

37-39 (ET 12-13). Answer : Because the literal meaning (vdcyartha) 
of ‘‘thou”’ involves the conception of a gross and/or subtle body, but 
its secondary or implied meaning (laksyartha) is of pure conscious- 
ness, free from limitations. Likewise, the literal meaning of the 
word “‘that’”’? is God—qualified by omniscience, etc.—whereas its 
implied meaning is pure consciousness free from limitations. Thus the 
sentence in question identifies jiva and God through indication by 
means of their implied meanings. 

40 (ET 13). The nature of a jivanmukta is described—he is one 
who knows even in this life that he is nothing but pure consciousness. 

41-46 (ET 14-15). Three kinds of karma are explained. Agamin 
karma is what is done by a knower (jfidnin) after attaining know- 
ledge. Saficita karma is the stored-up results of past births that is 
the seed of indefinite numbers of future births. Prdérabdha karma is 
what has brought the present body into being and produces experienc- 
es in this world, and which is destroyed when those experiences 
are finished. Saficitta karma, on the other hand, has to be destroyed 
by certain knowledge (niScayajfidna) that one is Brahman; in this 
way also dgamin karma is destroyed. In addition, those who worship, 
serve, and praise a knower get his meritorious karma, whereas those 
who blame or hate him and do him injury get his bad dgamin 
karma. 


DASASLOKI 333 


47 (ET 15). Whether one dies in Banaras or in the house of one 
who eats dogmeat, no matter; only if one knows the Self does one 
become liberated and go beyond samsdra. 


DASASLOKI 


The Dasasloki is a hymn attributed to Samkara. Its importance 
largely derives from Madhusidana Sarasvati’s (sixteenth century) 
important commentary on it titled Siddhantabindu. 

“ET” refers to the edition and translation by T. M. P. Mahadevan 
and N. Veezhinathan (Madras: Sankara Vihar, 1965). 

1 (ET 1). Iam not the elements or sense organs or the collection 
of them, since they are transient (anaikdntika). The one in deep 
sleep, established as one, the one remaining, isolate, bliss (siva)— 
that I am. 

2 (ET 6-7). For me there are not caste (varna) or rules of conduct 
for caste and stage of life, nor is there attention (dhdrand), contempla- 
tion (dhyana), or yoga, etc., since the superimposition of ‘I’? and 
“mine”? on the not-Self has been destroyed. The one remaining, 
isolate, bliss—that I am. 

3 (ET 9-10). In deep sleep, they say, there is neither mother 
nor father, gods nor worlds, not Vedas, sacrifices, nor places of pil- 
grimage; for in deep sleep I am not voidness, but am the one remain- 
ing, isolate, bliss. 

4 (ET 12-13). Samkhya, Saiva, Paficaratra, Jaina, Mimams, etc. 
—none of these doctrines holds good, for by a particular experience 
(visistanubhiti) (it is known that) the Self is pure. The one remaining, 
isolate, bliss—that I am. 

5 (ET 17-18). I am not locatable, since I am all-pervading like 
space (viyat), single and partless. I am the one remaining, isolate, 
bliss. 

6 (ET 19). Without color or size or form am I, for I have the 
nature of light. The one remaining, isolate, bliss—that I am. 

7 (ET 21). (There is) neither teacher nor teaching nor pupil, 
neither you nor I nor this universe. Understanding of one’s true 
nature does not allow alternatives (vikalpa). I am the one remaining, 
isolate, bliss. 

8 (ET 23). I have nothing to do with the three states of waking, 
dream, and deep sleep. Since they are of the nature of avidyd, I am 
the fourth (turiya). I am the one remaining .... 

9 (ET 26). Since (the Self) is all-pervading, the final goal, self- 
established, and not located in anything else, the whole world, being 
different from It, is unreal (iuccha). I am the one remaining.... 


334 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


10 (ET 28). (The Self) is not one—whence could there be a 
second other than It? It is neither isolate nor nonisolate, neither 
void nor nonvoid, because it is nondual (advaitaka). How may I 
explain what is established in the Vedanta (texts)? 


VAKYAVRTTI 


Traditionally ascribed to Samkara, this is a work dealing with the 
interpretation of “that art thou’? and making use of the form of 
teacher-pupil exchange so tellingly utilized by Samkara in the 
UpadeSfasahasri. 

Edition and translation (““ET’”’) by Swami Jagadananda (2d edition; 
Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1953). 

1-2 (ET 2-3). Invocation to Visnu. 

3-4 (ET 3-4). <A pupil comes to a teacher and asks what is the 
means of liberation. 

5-6 (ET 5-6). Teacher: Good question! Liberation comes from 
that knowledge of the identity of the jiva and the Highest Self which 
arises from sentences such as “that art thou.” 

7 (ET 6-7). Pupil: What are these—jiva and Highest Self? How 
can they be identical, and how can such sentences show that they are ? 

8 (ET 7). Teacher : You are the jiva, and you who ask ‘“‘who am 
I?” are Brahman itself. 

9 (ET 7-8). Pupil : I don’t even know what these words mean— 
how can I understand what ‘“‘I am Brahman” might mean ? 

10-27 (ET 8-19). Teacher: You're right—you must know the 
meanings of the words to understand a sentence composed of them. 
You must understand that the Self is not the body but the Witness 
of the nature of reality, consciousness, and bliss. No more are you 
the sense organs, the internal organ, the buddhi or prana. Rather, 
you are like the light that illuminates all these; as a lamp must be 
different from what it illuminates, so must the Self be different from 
everything else. Now, it is this witnessing Self that is the meaning 
of the word “thou” (in “that art thou’’). 

28-36 (ET 20-25). As for the word “that,” it means nothing 
else but Brahman, known in the Upanisads in various ways (listed 
here). 

37-48 (ET 26-34). Now as to the meaning of the whole sentence 
“that art thou.” This meaning is not to be understood as relational 
(samsarga) or qualificational (vifista), but rather as partless (akhanda) 
single essence (rasa) only. The two words mean precisely the same 
thing. Understanding the sentence means knowing that neither 


VIVEKACUDAMANI 335 


word means anything other than the other one. More technically: 
each of the two words “‘thou’”’ and “that” have a literal meaning 
(vdcyartha), “thou”? meaning consciousness connected with internal 
organ (antahkarana) and illuminated as object (dlambana) of the idea 
and word “I,’? whereas “that”? means that which has mdyd as its 
limitation, which is the cause of the universe, omniscient, etc. Now 
since the literal meanings of the two words are incompatible, in 
explaining the meaning of the sentence “that art thou’ one resorts 
to implied or secondary meanings of the words (laksydrtha). And 
one does this by leaving out certain aspects of the literal meaning. 
Thus one can make sense of the sentence. 

49-53 (ET 35-38). One should listen, etc., to scripture and 
practice restraint (fama), etc., until the meaning of the sentence “I 
am Brahman” becomes firm. When this happens, then by grace 
of scripture and teacher the cause of samsdara will be completely des- 
troyed. Then when one’s bodies (gross and subtle) are dissolved, 
freed from subtle objects, and released from karma, one is imme- 
diately liberated. When karma not yet arisen (andrabdha) is thus 
destroyed, one yet remains, because of prarabdha karma, liberated in 
life (jivanmukia) for some time, until he comes to isolation (kaivalya), 
from which there is no return, which is the highest abode of Visnu. 


VIVEKACUDAMANI 


This is a sizable work, extremely popular among Advaita adepts. 
Ingalls argues that it is not genuine Samkara since it propounds theories 
not found in Samkara’s unquestioned works. For example, “the 
author of the Viveka-ciidamani makes an absolute equation of the 
waking and dream states after the fashion of Gaudapada. Samkara 
may liken the two to each other, but he is careful to distinguish them. 
Again, and most decisive of all, the Viveka-ciidamani accepts the classical 
theory of the three truth values, the existent, the nonexistent, and that 
which is anirvacaniya .. ..Now, Paul Hacker has pointed out that when 
Samkara uses the word anirvacaniya, he uses it in a sense quite differ- 
ent from that... .”’7 

Hacker,?! interestingly enough, finds reason to affirm the genuineness 
of the work on the basis of colophons, but Mayeda, like Ingalls follow- 
ing out the criteria Hacker proposes elsewhere, holds it to be spurious.”* 

Edition and translation (““ET’’?) by Swami Madhavananda (2d 
edition: Calcutta: Advaita Ashrama, 1966). 

1 (ET 1). Invocation to Govinda, the Sadguru. 

2-13 (ET 2-6). A human birth is rare, rarer is a male birth, 
rarer still a Brahmin birth. More rare progressively are knowledge 


336 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of scripture, discrimination of Self from not-Self, and most rare is 
liberation, which requires the merit of a hundred births. Three 
things require God’s grace—a human birth, desire for liberation, 
and the case of a perfected person. So, a male who has mastered 
the Vedas and does not strive for liberation commits suicide—he 
is the greatest fool of them all. Only Self-knowledge can yield 
liberation. Actions cannot do so; at best they can yield purity 
of citta. 

14-27 (ET 6-10). Only one who satisfies the four qualifications 
(an adhikarin) can achieve liberation. They are explained. 

28-30 (ET 10-11). These four qualifications should be practised 
with intensity, as only so will they yield the ultimate result, namely, 
liberation. Even if they are initially pursued with only moderate 
intensity, through the guru’s grace they may eventually lead to the 
desired results when combined with nonattachment, etc. If they 
remain languid, however, the various practices are merely appear- 
ances, 

31-32 (ET 11-12). Devotion (bhakti) is the chief factor among 
those causal factors leading to liberation. It is defined as the seeking 
after one’s own real nature (svasvariipdnusamdhana or svatmatattva- 
nusamdhdna). 

32-40 (ET 11-15). One who satisfies the four requirements should 
approach a teacher and ask him for instruction in the means to 
liberation. 

41-47 (ET 15-18). The teacher replies that there is such a means, 
and that it involves consideration of the meaning of the Vedanta 
texts together with faith, devotion, and meditation. 

48-49 (ET 18-19). Pupil : What is bondage, and how did it come ? 
How is liberation achieved ? What is Self and not-Self and how can 
one discriminate between them? 

50-68 (ET 19-25). Teacher: Bondage is avidyd, and the only 
means of gaining liberation from it is through direct realization— 
one cannot get it by Yoga or Samkhya or actions or learning (vidya). 

69-70 (ET 25-26). The cause of liberation is, first, complete 
nonattachment to any noneternal things, then fama, dama, titiksd, 
and renunciation (nydsa) of all actions enjoined in scripture. Then 
come hearing (Vedantic sentences), thinking on them, and constant 
meditation on the truth. This leads to the supreme nirvikalpa state, 
that is, jivanmuktt. 

71-92 (ET 26-34). The Self distinguished from the gross body. 

93-107 (ET 34-39). The Self distinguished from subtle body, 
pranas. 


VIVEKACUDAMANI 337 


108-123 (ET 40-46). Avidya, or maya, is the power (Sakti) of God, 
and is made up of the three gunas. Rajas has the power of projection 
(viksepa), which, constantly active, creates the modifications of the 
manas such as frustration, etc. Its properties include lust, anger, 
envy, jealousy, etc. Tamas has the veiling (dzrtti) power, which 
makes things appear otherwise than they really are. It causes trans- 
migration and also is the cause of the initiation of projection. Its 
properties include ignorance, sleep, and stupidity. Sativa, finally, 
is clear as water but in conjunction with the others conduces to 
transmigration until it is purified. The properties of mixed sativa 
include humility, restraints and observances, faith, devotion, desire 
for liberation. The properties of pure sativa are peace, bliss, self- 
realization, etc. Another name for avidyaé is the undifferentiated 
(avyakta), the causal body, whose special state is deep sleep. 

124-135 (ET 46-51). Description of the Witnessing Self, which 
illuminates all modifications of the manas, unchanging and different 
from prakrti, etc. 

136-168 (ET 52-66). How discrimination removes bondage by 
successively leading us to distinguish each of the sheaths from the 
Self, culminating in the manomaya sheath. 

169-171 (ET 67-68). The manas is avidyé. When it is destroyed 
everything else is destroyed, since it is the necessary condition of the 
manifestation of anything. The whole universe is the projection of 
the manas. Samséra does not really exist. 

172-183 (ET 68-73). How the manas produces bondage. 

184-191 (ET 73-76). The buddhi with its fluctuations and the 
sense organs form the vijfdnamaya sheath. It is also called the jiva. 
It is this which appears to act as agent, impelled by karma born of 
past desires; it is this which is born and dies, and has experiences of 
waking, dream, pleasures, and frustrations. It is a limitation of the 
Highest Self, which shines within and appears to act and experience 
through that limitation. 

192-193 (ET 76-77). Pupil: Since avidyé is beginningless, trans- 
migration must go on forever—so how can liberation occur ? 

194-211 (ET 77-84). Teacher : Good question! But since it is 
only through error that the Self appears involved with avidyd, when 
the error disappears all the effects of avidyd, including transmigration, 
disappear also, like the snake erroneously seen in the rope. Now, 
the vijfidnamaya sheath is not the true Self since it changes, is uncon- 
scious, limited, a sense object, and is not always present (for example, 
in deep sleep). Within it lies the dnandamaya sheath, a blissful re- 
flection of the prototype of bliss, the Self, which spontaneously 


338 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


manifests itself to those experiencing the results of meritorious acts as a 
pleasant feeling. It is untrammeled during deep sleep, less evident 
in dream and waking. But it is not the Highest Self either, since it 
changes, is a modification of prakrti, is the effect of past acts. So all 
five sheaths must be eliminated by reasoning on the basis of scripture. 

212 (ET 84). Pupil: But when these five sheaths are eliminated 
nothing remains. What (positive) real thing is left when the Self- 
knower realizes his identity ? 

213-240 (ET 85-95). Teacher: Clever question! There is one 
positive thing left, namely, the Self. Even though It is not perceived 
then, the Self is the presupposition of all experiences of whatever 
sort; It is pure consciousness; It is Brahman. Now the Upanisads 
assure us that all the things in the universe are effects whose cause 
is Brahman; therefore since effects are identical with their causes, it 
follows that everything is Brahman, and since the Self is Brahman, 
that the Self is the one positive, real thing—the only existent, the only 
consciousness, the only bliss. 

241-249 (ET 96-100). How “‘that art thou” is to be interpreted 
so as to yield the same message. 

250-264 (ET 100-106). How to meditate on “that art thou.” 

265-267 (ET 106-107). Even after realizing the truth the begin- 
ningless subconscious impression (vdsan@) that one is agent and en- 
joyer remains, which causes transmigration. Liberation is the attenua- 
tion of the vdsands. 

268-444 (ET 108-172). Verses that counsel the Self-knower in 
careful meditations designed to attenuate the vdsanés. 

445-463 (ET 172-179). Prarabdha karma continues to bear fruit 
during this period, though saficita is destroyed by Self-knowledge and 
Ggamin fails to affect the Self-knower. Indeed, none of the three kinds 
—even prdrabdha—are even considered by the wise man who is forever 
concentrated on the identity of Self with Brahman and knows nothing 
else. Everyday acts, with respect to which we may consider prarabdha 
karma as causes, are experienced by the Self-knower as memories, 
just as one remembers objects seen in a dream. Certainly such karma 
cannot be attributed to the Self; and it cannot even be attributed to 
the body except by superimposition, since the body itself is unreal. 
Scripture speaks of prdrabdhakarman only to answer ignorant questions 
about how the body continues to exist after Self-realization, but 
one cannot infer the reality of the body of the Self-knower from that. 

464-580 (ET 179-223). The remainder of the work consists of 
repetition of ideas already expressed for the Self-knower to continue 
meditating on prior to final release. 


SARVAVEDANTASIDDHANTASARASAMGRAHA 339 


SARVAVEDANTASIDDHANTASARASAMGRAHA 


Belvalkar finds this work ‘“‘nongenuine.’’?3 

Edition and translation (“E” and “‘T’?) are by Swami Tattwa- 
nanda, The Quintessence of Vedanta (Ernakulam : Sri Ramakrishna 
Advaita Ashrama, 1960). 

1-4 (El; Tl-2). Invocation to Govinda, the guru, and to Ganefa. 
(In some versions there is also an invocation to Advayananda, the 
guru. ) 

5-15 (EI-3; T2-3). Every work must begin by setting forth who 
is fit to study it, its subject matter, its relevance, and its purpose. 
Those who satisfy the four requirements (set forth elsewhere), who 
reason well, are intelligent and learned in the scriptures are qualified 
to study this text. Its subject matter is pure consciousness as marked 
by the identity of jiva and Brahman. The proof of this identity 
provides the relevance. And its purpose is liberation. 

16-47 (E3-7; T3-10). The first of the four requirements is dis- 
crimination between the eternal and the noneternal. It leads to 
nonattachment by indicating the defects in the noneternal—and 
when the faults in a thing are recognized, who seeks it further? 
Examples : 

48-49 (E7-14; T10-17). Verses on the temptations of worldly 
things and exhortations to become nonattached to them. Non- 
attachment leads to the six virtues. 

95-103 (E24-25; T17-19). Tranquillity (Sama) has three kinds: 
(1) the internal organ fixed on reality alone (vastumdatra), having 
abandoned its own modifications, is the highest peace, marked by 
the nirvana of Brahman. (2) Where the series of ideas (samtdna) is 
the instrument of knowledge (dhi), this is the medium peace, marked 
by pure being only. (3) When the internal organ abandons objects 
and devotes itself to scripture, that is the other (third) peace, which 
is sattva mixed (with other qualities). 

104-150 (E15-21; T19-27). Serenity (prasdda) is gained by the 
practice of virtuous actions and attitudes, as well as yoga. 

151-209 (E21-29;T27-38). Renunciation (uparati) is the abandon- 
ing of all actions. By its practice one realizes one’s true Brahman 
nature, since Brahman is devoid of action or indeed of any qualities. 
Thus the seeker after liberation must give up all actions, even ritually 
prescribed ones, and follow the path of knowledge alone. The paths 
of action and of karma are incompatible. 

210-217 (29-30; T38-40). Faith in the guru and in the Upanisads 
leads to liberation. The Vedas (including the Upanisads) are 


340 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


deserving of faith since they speak the truth, and they speak the truth 
since they are the word of God. The guru, being one with God, 
is also trustworthy. 

218-225 (E30-31; 140-41). Concentration (samadhana) is complete 
absorption in what scripture says. 

226-296 (E32-43; T41-53). Desire for liberation (mumuksutva) has 
four forms. (1) The very eager aspirant is one who is willing to 
renounce everything including pleasures. (2) The second order is 
the seeker who has indirect knowledge of Brahman, who perceives 
the threefold sorrows and desires to leave his family. (3) The third 
form is one who thinks ‘“‘there is plenty of time for liberation—why 
hurry ? First I shall enjoy the world.” (4) The lowest form is one 
who thinks liberation is a lucky accident. A brief dialogue between 
an aspirant and his guru is provided. 

297-309 (E43-45; T53-55). Superimposition (adhydropa) is to 
attribute what is not real to something real, for example, a snake to 
a rope, or being silver to a shell. Avzdyd is its cause; it neither is nor 
is not but is anirvdcya. Likewise, it is neither the same as Brahman 
nor entirely different, just as a lamp is not the same as its light nor 
is it entirely different. It has a collective (samasti) and distributive 
(uyasfi) aspect. Its collective aspect, dominated by sativa, is known 
as maya. 

310-315 (E45; T55-56). Pure consciousness with mdyd as its 
adjunct dominated by sativa is known as unmanifest (avydkrta, avyakia) 
or as God (ifvara). God is omnipresent, omnipotent, and omniscient. 

316-326. (E46-47; T56-58). Inits distributive aspect avidyd takes 
the forms of various individual selves, dominated by rajas and tamas. 
Thus the distributive aspect is inferior to the collective one. Now 
pure consciousness when limited by avidyd in Its distributive aspect 
becomes known as the inner Self (pratyagaiman), and when It identi- 
fies itself with that aspect and so comes under the sway of the gunas 
it is known as jive. This distributive aspect is the causal body, and 
the inner Self is otherwise known as frdjfia when it is identified with 
the illuminator of this causal body. This causal body of prajfia is the 
same as the dnandamaya sheath, specially exhibited in deep sleep. Prdjiia 
is blissful in nature, as everyone knows upon waking up; since bliss is 
common to all, there is no real difference between God and prajfia, 
the collective and distributive aspects of avidya, at that stage. 

330-333 (E47-48; T59-60). God, in conjunction with madyé, 
creates the whole universe, for He is both material and efficient cause; 
as pure consciousness He is efficient, and as limited by maya He is 
material. 


SARVAVEDANTASIDDH ANTASARASAMGRAHA 341 


334-337 (E48; T60). The creation of the five elements. 

338-341 (E48-49; T60-61). The constitution of the subtle body. 

342-349 (E49-50; T61-63). The internal organ (antahkarana) 
is the result of the interaction of the five sattvic parts of the five ele- 
ments. It has four functions: (1) as manas, to imagine (samkalpa), 
(2) as buddhi, to ascertain (nifcaya), (3) as ego sense (ahamkdra) to 
have a notion of ego (abhimana), (4) as citta to be conscious (cintana). 
The buddhi is the agent, and the manas is its instrument. The self 
that through delusion identifies with them is subject to transmigration. 

350-354 (E50-51; T63-64). The buddki, manas, and sense organs 
taken together constitute the vijfidnamaya sheath. 

355-374 (E51-54; T64-68). The manas together with the five 
sense organs constitutes the manomaya sheath. 

375-408 (E54-58; T68-73). The pranas and action organs taken 
together are known as the prapamaya sheath. 

The subtle body, which lies within all the last three sheaths is known 
by different names suggesting its various roles, for example, Hiranya- 
garbha, Siitratman, prana, taijasa. These are explained. How the 
gross elements arise from their subtle origins is explained. 

409-416 (E59; 174-75). Quintuplication is explained. 

416-429 (E59-61; T75-77). The presiding deities for each sense. 

430-433 (E62; T78). The creation of the universe. 

434.456 (E62-65; 178-82). Four different kinds of beings— 
womb-born, egg-born, sweat-born and seed-born. The annamaya 
sheath. 

457-509 (E65-73; T83-94). The nature of Self. How super- 
imposition can occur on something (the Self) that is not perceived 
(review of arguments in opening sections of Samkara’s Brahmasiitra- 
bhasya). Maya as millavidya. 

510-519 (E73-74; T94-95). By knowledge one destroys ignorance 
(ajfidna), but not by actions. 

520-580 (E75-82; T95-108). Refutation of false views about the 
nature of the Self—(1) that one’s son is one’s Self (i.e., that one’s 
welfare lies in one’s children); (2) that the senses are the Self; 
(3) that prana is the Self; (4) that the internal organ (manas) is the 
Self; (5) that knowledge and ignorance are both properties of the 
Self; (6) that the Self is void (Sinya). 

581-611 (E82-87; T108-114). Refutation of Sinyavdda. (1) In 
deep sleep something exists, which shows that when the internal 
organ is reabsorbed into the unmanifest something (positive) exists. 
(2) Something cannot come from nothing. (3) No proof is required 
of the Self—It is instinctively known to ail. 


342 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


612-631 (E87-90; T115-119). The Self is eternal, self-illuminating, 
blissful. 

632-634 (E90-91; T119). Pupil : If the Self is blissful then why 
do people strive for pleasure (since they already have it) ? 

635-672 (E51-56; T120-126). Teacher: Because people do not 
know the nature of their Self and so suppose that the sources of plea- 
sure lie in external objects. Now clearly pleasure is not a property 
of external objects, since it is we (not external objects) who experi- 
ence it when we grasp external objects through our internal organ 
(manas). But it is clear also that it is not an intrinsic property of the 
manas either, since it does not always accompany activities of that 
organ. So the truth is that a person experiences pleasure when, as a 
result of past meritorious actions, he acquires some object he desires 
and gets a reflection (dbhdsa) of the bliss that is intrinsic to the Self. 
This is confirmed by noting that pleasure has degrees, which shows 
its dependence on the amount of merit operating, as well as on the 
fact that pleasure eventually disappears as the meritorious karma is 
exhausted, and that pleasure is always mixed with frustration, showing 
its dependence on karma. 

673-699 (E96-100; T126-132). But it is not that bliss or existence 
or consciousness either are properties of the Self, for the Self is without 
diversity and has no properties. It is by nature bliss, existence, con- 
sciousness. It is nondual. 

700-792 (E100-113; T132-150). ‘That art thou” analyzed. 

793-794 (E114; 1150-151). Pupil : Surely merely listening to 
“that art thou” isn’t enough to obtain liberation. What else must 
one do—how many ways can one attain samadhi ? What are the 
obstacles to realization ? 

795-818 (E114-117; T151-156). Teacher: There are two kinds 
of aspirants to liberation, the fully qualified and the only moderate- 
ly qualified. For the former, merely hearing ‘“‘that art thou” and 
understanding it as explained above produces final realization. But 
the other kind should practice hearing, consideration, and meditation 
until all wrong ideas about the Self are dispelled. And the question 
of samadhi comes up in connection with this meditation. 

819-898 (E117-129; T156-171). There are two kinds of samddhi, 
savikalpa and nirvikalpa. Savikalpa samadhi is so-called because one is 
still aware of the distinctions between knower, known, and knowing, 
whereas in nirvikalpa samadhi these are absent. 

Now savikalpa samadhi has two kinds—having to do with the body 
and with the scripture. The former involves progressively meditat- 
ing on the differences between one’s body, etc., and one’s Self until 


ADVAITAPANCARATNA 343 


one merges all objects of knowledge into Self-consciousness. The 
former proceeds through meditation on the words of scripture. 

899-921 (E129-132; T171-176). Nirvikalpa samadhi is medita- 
tion on Brahman alone. The eightfold yoga (of Patafijali) is set 
forth. 

922-923 (E133; T176). Obstacles to yoga enumerated. 

924-937 (E133-135; T176-179). Pupil: Tell me the difference 
between jivanmukti and videhamukti: let me understand. 

938-1006 (E135-144; T179-191). Teacher : There are seven stages 
of knowledge (jfanabhiimi): (1) the desire to know; (2) inquiry 
(vicarana); (3) attenuation of mental attachment (?) (éanumdnasin); 
(4) attainment of sativa nature; (5) nonattachment (asamfakti); (6) 
padarthabhdvanad (text), but ‘‘absence of consciousness of all external 
objects (translation: the translator apparently reads ‘“‘padartha- 
abhavana”’); (7) the fourth (turiya). Achieving this final stage, 
one obtains the bliss while awake that one normally only has in deep 
sleep. This is jivanmukti. Even beyond this is videhamukti, where 
all that remains is silence. 


ADVAITAPANCARATNA or ATMAPANCAKA 


Belvalkar does not notice this work. It is edited (“E’’) by Sur- 
nath Kanjan Pillai in the Journal of the Kerala University Oriental Manu- 
scripts Library 9 (1957), 3: 69-84; 4: 37-48, 95, and is reprinted as 
Trivandrum Sanskrit Series 190, 1958. There is a translation (‘“T’’) 
by K. R. Pisharoti in Vedanta Kesari 36 (1949-50), pp. 241-242, which 
is also found in Prabuddha Bharata 56 (1951), pp. 301-305. The 
summary provided below is taken from K. Raghavan Pillai’s Intro- 
duction to his edition. 

1 (E4; T241). Study the Veda always. This must be done at 
appropriate times. Perform the action enjoined by the Veda pro- 
perly. Through the proper performance of Vedic action, perform 
the worship of God. Take the mind away from the idea of perform- 
ing actions intended to achieve particular desires. Avoid sins like 
desire, anger, etc. Remember that the pleasures of life are faulty. 
Endeavor toward the realization of the Self. Leave the home. 

2 (E9; T241). Seek the company of the good. Intensify your 
devotion to the all-powerful God. Cultivate mastery over the senses. 
Quickly renounce action, which has become too firm to give up. 
Approach a teacher who is good and learned. And daily attend on 
him. Seek after the one and imperishable Brahman. Listen to the 
declarations of the Upanisads. 


344 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


3 (E15; T241). Think about the meanings of these sentences. 
Accept the conclusion of the Vedanta. Withdraw from hostile 
reasoning. Accept the arguments of those well-versed in the scrip- 
ture. (Accept logic that is not antagonistic to the scripture.) 
Constantly dwell on the idea “I am Brahman.” Destroy the haughti- 
ness that steadily increases (along with the increase of knowledge). 
Renounce the identification of the Self with the bedy. Give up 
arguing with the wise. 

4 (E20; T241). Seek to remedy hunger and sickness, hunger 
through begging for alms, and sickness through medicine. Do not 
try to procure tasty food. Do not be joyful if by chance delicious 
food, etc., is obtained. Yearn for detachment. Be neither kind nor 
cruel to people. Cultivate equanimity in experiences of the opposites 
like cold and heat, pain and pleasure. Do not speak futile words 
{i.e., words that do not contribute towards liberation). 

5 (E23; T1242). Sit comfortably in solitude. Concentrate on 
the supreme Brahman. Understand the omnipresent Self and see 
this phenomenal world as sublated by the true knowledge of Brahman. 
Burn the accumulated actions of previous lives in the fire of knowledge. 
As for subsequent actions they will not bind you. Experience the 
fruits of the commenced actions in this life. And then stay firmly 
established solely in Brahman. 


VAKYASUDHA or DRGDRSYAVIVEKA 


Belvalkar reports that a commentary on this printed in Banaras 
Sanskrit Series edition (B1944) ascribes the work to Bharatitirtha.’4 
“The work has not... been included in the Vanivilas edition and 
so stands suspect.” It is however printed in Minor Works of Samkara 
(H. R. Bhagavat, ed.), and comprises forty-six verses. Terms such 
as “‘cidabhasa’”’ and “‘pratibhasika’’ abound, suggesting a later origin 
than Samkara’s time. 


UPADESAPANCAKA 


This work is comprised of five stanzas beginning with ‘‘Vedo 
nityam adhiyatam.”’ 


MAYAPANCAKA 


This consists of five stanzas describing maya as ‘‘skilled in associat- 
ing the dissociate’ (Pisharoti’s translation of aghafitaghajanapatiyasi 
mayG), that is, as that which maintains an apparent connection bet- 
ween things that are really unconnected. 


LAGHUVAKYAVRTTI 345 


LAGHUVAKYAVRTTI 


Eighteen verses on Advaita themes. Uses expressions like ‘‘nir- 
vikalpakacattanyam’” and “‘savikalpakajivo,’ 


? 


which seem un-Samkaran. 
COMMENTARIES ON OTHER UPANISADS 


There are commentaries on various Upanisads, notably the Svetd- 
fvatara, Nrsimhottaratapaniya, and Kausitaki Upanisads, which appear 
to be erroneously ascribed to Samkara. However, the evidence on 
these has not been systematically collected and studied. 


MANDANA MISRA 


Traditionally, Mandana Misra was supposed to be both the pupil 
and the brother-in-law of Kumarila. Allen Thrasher, who has done 
the most careful work to date on this philosopher, thinks that tradi- 
tion is unlikely. However, Mandana certainly follows Kumiarila 
in time, as well as Dharmakirti and Prabhakara, all of whom Man- 
dana quotes.!_ Frauwallner gives Dharmakirti’s dates as a.D. 600- 
660;2 Thrasher suggests 660 as the terminus a quo for Mandana’s date. 
Umveka, the Mimamsa commentator who comments on Mandana’s 
Bhavandviveka, wrote his commentary between 760 and 790. Thus, 
Thrasher concludes, Mandana must have lived around a.pD. 660-720,3 

Tradition also makes Mandana a contemporary of Samkara. 
This tradition Thrasher finds consistent with all that we can tell 
on the evidence available. Thrasher remarks: ‘Many of Samkara’s 
themes appear in Mandana—for example, that the universe and its 
divisions have only a practical reality, not a final one, but that the 
practical reality lasts until liberation; that liberation is the manifesta- 
tion of the soul’s own form; that something unreal can lead to a 
real result; that the Upanisads deny all difference; that to allow any 
parinama in Brahman would be to give it parts, and that reality must 
be free from all change whatever; that the jiva really is Brahman, 
but appears to be divided from it by false knowledge and by limiting 
adjuncts....’4 One might retort that this suggests that Samkara 
got his ideas from Mandana. Thrasher responds to this in continu- 
ing the passage quoted : ‘“These common themes are so numerous that 
if Mandana did write before Samkara, Samkara’s intellectual contribu- 
tion would shrink to the vanishing point. Prima facie, 1 do not find 
this very plausible... .’5 

Rather, Thrasher is inclined to accept Advaita tradition, which 
makes Mandana and Samkara contemporaries, Mandana perhaps 
the older of the two. Mandana was evidently a Mimamsaka earlier 
in his career, for he wrote several Mimamsa treatises before he wrote 


BRAHMASIDDHI 347 


the Brahmasiddhi. Thrasher indicates several passages in the Brahma- 
siddhi that he believes provide evidence that Mandana knew of 
Samkara’s views when he wrote his Advaita work. Kuppuswami 
Sastri and Vetter have noted at least one of these (32.13-34.23).® 

Advaita tradition goes further still, in that it identifies Mandana 
with Samkara’s pupil Suresvara. This has given rise to lengthy 
scholarly debate, which still goes on. There is plenty of reason to 
conclude that Suresvara knows of Mandana’s work. The tradition 
is recorded in, if not original with, Madhava’s Samkaradigvijaya, 
where it is said that Mandana, Suresvara, and Visvartpa are the same 
person.? Other authorities find this person is also the same as Bhava- 
bhati and Umveka.8 One of the earliest of modern scholars to dis- 
cuss the question was Mysore Hiriyanna, who found reason to doubt 
the identification.» His arguments were developed and added to by 
P. V. Kane,!° D. CG. Bhattacharya, and S. Kuppuswami Sastri.!? 
Others, however, most recently R. Balasubramaniam, have pointed 
to the close similarity in thought and style between Brahmasiddhi 
1.28-31 and Sambandhavarttika 342-350 and 377-436. He also suggests 
another possible relationship among Mandana, Samkara, and Sureé- 
vara; perhaps Mandana wrote the Brahmasiddhi setting forth a non- 
Samkaran brand of Advaita, then became converted by Samkara, 
took the name of Suresvara and wrote the Samkaran Advaita works 
commonly attributed to Suresvara. Although admitting discrepan- 
cies between views and attitudes displayed in Mandana’s and Sures- 
vara’s works, Balasubramaniam is not convinced these are sufficient 
reason to rule out the possibility of the identity of their authors. 

The only clearly Advaita work by Mandana is the Brahmasiddhi. 
All of his other known works are cither Mimamsa or grammatical 
works, with the possible exception of the Vibhramaviveka, a treatise on 
theories of error, which appears to come down in favor of a form of 
the anyathakhyati theory of Mimamsa. In the Brahmasiddhi he men- 
tions a theory called anirvacaniyakhyati, which term later became the 
stock term for an Advaita theory of error. Thrasher has also dis- 
cussed the issues raised by this and concludes that in the Brahmasiddhi 
Mandana accepts both theories, applying them to explain different 
things.44 Ifhe is right, it suggests that Mandana was not an Advaitin 
when he wrote the Vibhramaviveka. 


BRAHMASIDDHI 


“BE” refers to the edition by 8. Kuppuswami Sastri, Madras Govern- 
ment Oriental Series 4 (Madras : Government Oriental Manu- 
scripts Library, 1937). (B1346). Summarized by Allen W. Thrasher. 


348 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


CHAPTER ONE : ON BRAHMAN (BRAHMAKANDA) 


1.1, including kariké 1 (1). Intelligent men differ about the 
texts of the Upanisads. 

(1) Some say they are not instruments of knowledge (pramdna). 
For either (a) the Self is established by some other pramdna, in which 
case the Upanisadic texts are restatements (anuvddaka) {and not 
praména, for a prama@na must give new knowledge), or (b) it is not 
established by another pramdna. If it is not, one cannot grasp its 
connection with the word that names it, and if therefore it is not the 
object of a word (padartha), it cannot be the topic (visaya) of a sentence 
(vakya). 

Besides, the Upanisadic texts have no reference toaction (praortti) 
or to abstention from action (nivrtt?), and therefore are not an end of 
man (purusdrtha) (and consequently, it would appear, not a pramdana). 

(2) Others teach that the Upanisads are not a pramdna, under the 
pretext of saying that they are a pramana for apprehending (prati- 
patti) that the Self is something that should be done (kartavyata). 

(3) Others think the Upanisads have a secondary reference 
(upacdritartha). For, if the primary meaning (Srutdrtha) is accepted 
they are contradictory to the Vedic injunctions (vidhi) to action, and 
also contradictory to perception and the pramdnas based on it (because 
they deny the existence of diversity). 

This book is begun to establish that the Upanisadic texts are 
pramana for the Self as It is described in karika I.1, by means of refuting 
opposing views. 

Verse2: ‘Bliss, one immortal, unborn, cognition (vijfdna), im- 
perishable (or “syllable,” aksara), who is not all (asarva), who is 
all (sarva), fearless, we bow to the Lord of Creatures (prajdpati).”’ 

1.2 (E1-2). (Discussion of “‘bliss’”) Odjection: Brahman cannot 
be of the nature of bliss because, if It were, the activity of a person 
desiring liberation would be derived from a passion (raga) for bliss. 
But activity based on passion is the seed of samsdra and so cannot 
result in liberation. Moreover, scripture (Brhaddéranyaka Upanisad 
IV.4.23) says that it is the pacified and controlled person who sees 
the Self, and one acting from a passion for bliss cannot be such a one. 
Therefore the scriptural passages that describe bliss refer to the trans- 
cendence (atikrama) of all frustration. In ordinary life we observe 
that the word ‘‘pleasure’’ is used upon the cessation of frustration. 
Others say that pleasure zs this cessation. You cannot object that in this 
case a stone would be blissful, because pleasure is an inner fluctuation 
that is experienced, or else it is the apprehension of the self as qua- 
lified by that (fluctuation, or perhaps by the cessation of frustration). 


BRAHMASIDDHI 349 


Answer: No, bliss (or pleasure) is not merely the cessation of 
frustration. We observe that a person up to his waist in a cool pond has 
pleasure in the lower part of his body and frustration {irritation ) from 
the heat of the day in the upper part. Also, if pleasure were merely 
the absence of frustration, the denizens of one hell would have pleasure 
from the absence of the frustrations of the other hells. Moreover, we 
see that people not in a previous state of frustration may experience 
pleasure from contact with certain sense objects. Also, there is a 
difference of degree in pleasures, but none in the cessation of frustration. 

1.3 (E2-3). Objection : Pleasure is produced by the removal of a 
desire (kdma) , which (if unfulfilled) is frustrating. 

Answer: No, we observe that people indifferent to a thing still 
may enjoy it when it is experienced. Nor does enjoyment produce 
desire and then produce pleasure by desire’s extinction. For enjoy- 
ment does not necessarily extinguish desire. And the removal of a 
desire by seeing the object’s faults does not produce pleasure. It is 
not true that the difference of degree in pleasures can be accounted 
for by the difference in degree of the previous frustrating desire, 
because it is things that come to us undesired and without effort 
that produce greater pleasure. In addition, we do not consider 
that the state before the awakening of desire and after enjoyment 
and the cessation of desire is pleasurable. Anyway, if an object 
produces desire when it is experienced, how can its enjoyment 
extinguish desire? In addition, sometimes the enjoyment of desired 
objects produces not pleasure, but frustration. In every case it is the 
previous experience of something as pleasurable that produces 
desires. Apparent exceptions can be explained as due to experience 
in previous births. The difference in the desire of different people 
is accounted for by their varying (previous) births, whereas there is 
no distinction in the cessation of desire. Sometimes people are 
frustrated by the cessation of desire, for example, if they have certain 
illnesses, and this is because they cannot experience certain pleasures. 
Everyone may experience that there is such a thing as (positive) 
pleasure. We think that the teachers have said that pleasure is the 
absence of frustration to encourage people attached to pleasure. 
The primary meaning of the word “bliss” is pleasure, as something 
other than the cessation of frustration. (This is how the word 
‘‘pliss” should be taken where it occurs in the Upanisads with reference 
to Brahman, because) something for which the Vedic word (fabda) 
is the only pramana should be understood in accordance with the word. 

1.4 (E3). Not all wishing (icch@) is passion (réga), and so activity 
toward the bliss of Brahman is not based on passion. Passion is an 


350 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


insistence (abhinivefa) of nonexistent qualities (guna) projected by 
avidya. But the wishing, the complacency of the mind  (cetasah 
prasada), and the inclination (abhiriici) toward the truth that results 
from clarity in seeing the truth are not passion. If the activity of 
escaping from the suffering of samsdra and reaching the bliss of Brah. 
man were passion, no one could ever escape samsdra. If all desire 
were forbidden by scripture, no activity would be possible, including 
activity for liberation. 

1.5 (E3-4). Objection: If bliss is the experienceable in Brahman, 
then there will be the duality of agent (kartr) and object (karman) 
of action, and consequently also of action (kriyé) and means (karana). 
But if it is not experienceable, it is as good as nonexistent, and cannot 
be an end of man (purusartha). 

Answer: The fruit of a pramdna (namely, valid knowledge itself, 
prama) is not nonexperienceable, because the possibility of anything’s 
being experienced is dependent on its being experienced, nor is it 
an object of experience in the same way the thing known is, because 
pramdana has only one fruit, and also there would be an infinite regress. 
It is experienceable as being self-luminous (svaprakésaka). Likewise 
the agent of knowledge is experienceable as being self-luminous, 
because if it is not known one will not be able to have the connection 
(or reflective consciousness, anusamdhdna) between the agent, object, 
and fruit of pramdna, and so there will be no difference between what 
is known by oneself and what is known by someone else. Nor is it 
experienceable as the thing known (karman), because then it would be 
different from itself and would not be a Self (dtman, i.e., it would 
not be conscious—or perhaps, ‘‘it would not be itself”). Like the 
fruit and the agent of pramdana, the blissful nature of Brahman is ex- 
perienceable as being self-luminous, and not experienceable as not 
being the object of experience. 

I.6  (E4-6). Opponent: Properties (dharma) are of two sorts, 
positive (bhdvariipa) and negative (abhdvariipa). If bliss were a 
positive property of Brahman, it would differ from Brahman’s con- 
sciousness (vijfidna), so that one of the two would be the substrate 
(dharmin) and the other the property (dharma). Thus there would 
be duality. Therefore, the word ‘“‘bliss’’ in reference to Brahman 
means only the absence of pain, just as scripture calls Brahman 
“not coarse, not fine, not long’”’, etc. (Brhadaranyaka Upanisad I11.8.8). 

Answer : No, in Brahman bliss and consciousness are identical 
with each other, as in the case of the moon a light (frakdfa) identical 
with pleasure (ahldda) is communicated by two words (‘‘pleasant”’ 
and “‘light’’), or as in the case of the sentence ‘‘the sun is an exalted 


BRAHMASIDDHI 351 


(prakrsta) light” the form of light and exaltation (prakarsa) are not 
different from each other. 

The supremacy of Brahman’s bliss is not merely the absence from 
it of suffering in the form of dependence on means (sédhana) or of 
perishableness, for in things whose knowledge depends on scripture 
(Sabda) we must follow scripture. Only if Brahman is positive bliss 
can worldly blisses be portions (mdtra) of it, as scripture says. This 
is so by limitation (avaccheda) of its bliss. 

The Self is bliss for the additional reason that It is the object of the 
highest love (preman), as scripture says. For every creature desires 
its own existence. 

Bliss is experienced (anubhava) in deep sleep, as we know from our 
reflection (paramarfa) upon waking that we slept well, and from 
scripture. 

1.7 (E6). (Discussion of the word ‘“‘one”’ in Karika 1.1.) Objection 
(according to Anandapirna, by a Naiyayika): The scriptural pas- 
sages that teach oneness are metaphorical (upacdra); they say that in 
Brahman differences of genus (jati), place, and time are absent. 
The text ‘The Self is all this’? (Chandogya Upanisad VII.25.22) is 
metaphorical, occasioned by the fact that everything is for the sake 
of Brahman. This is because 

(1) there is a difference (vyavastha) of enjoyment (bhoga) in differ- 
ent people; (2) there is a difference between the transmigrating and 
the liberated; (3) the power of sight (drk-Sakti, i.e., cognition in gene- 
ral) must have an object different from itself, because it is contradic- 
tory for it to function (urtti) on itself; and (4) we perceive objects to 
be different, and to possess the different qualities of pleasure, frus- 
tration, and delusion. 

Answer : No. Scripture clearly teaches the real nonexistence 
of all diversity, and that diversity is based on mayd. We can only 
attribute to scripture the employment of secondary usage when there 
is a reason for it, and there is none visible here. Besides, scripture 
emphasizes the point by repetition. 

1.8 (E7-8). Answer to (1): The difference of enjoyments can be 
accounted for by an imagined (kalpita) difference (of selves), just as 
pain, which is in the Self, is attributed to this or that limb of the body. 
Also, we see a difference of color or shape (samsthana) in the various 
reflections of a face in different surfaces. 

Answer to (2): We can use the same analogy just given: without 
a mirror the original appears without the faults of the mirror. Be- 
sides, imagined differences can produce real effects—death from an 
imaginary snakebite, illumination from a reflected sun. 


352 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer to (3) and {4): The seer (drastr) is not different from the 
seen (drsya), because there is no contradiction in cognition’s function- 
ing on itself, in the sense that it is like a lamp self-luminous, as was 
explained above by the analogy of the fruit of pramdna. Indeed, if 
you deny the unity of seer and seen there is no way to account for 
their relationship. The various suggested alternatives do not stand 
examination. Therefore the seer transforms (parindma) itself into, 
or appears (vivartana) in this or that way. 

1.9 (E8-9). (Discussion of the words ‘“‘immortal, unborn’ in 
Kariké 1.1) (Against Vijfianavada) The Self is not momentary cogni- 
tion (jfidna), nor is liberation the cessation of cognition by the elimi- 
nation of vdsands and klegas, or the production of pure cognition freed 
from the form (dkara) or the objects (visaya). The Vijfianavadin 
says that only on this theory of his can there be something to be 
removed (apaneya) and something to be gained (upaneya) by the 
activities based on Sdstras, so that neither sdstras nor activities will 
have a goal. But we say that the thing to be removed is beginningless 
avidya. For all doctrines believe there is a beginningless avidyd to 
be destroyed. 

Avidya is neither absolutely (atyanta) real nor absolutely unreal, 
neither identical (svabhdva) with Brahman nor another thing. It is 
just for this reason that it is called avidya, maya, ‘“‘false appearance.” 
If it were either identical with Brahman or different it would be ulti- 
mately real (paramdrtha), not avidyé. If it were absolutely unreal 
like a sky flower it would not enter into practical usage (vyavahdra) 
{i.e., it is precisely because avidyd is logically contradictory that we 
call it “ignorance” or “‘illusion”). Not being absolutely real, it can 
be destroyed; thus providing something to be removed. Likewise, 
it does not introduce a second thing different from Brahman. 

L.11 (E10-11). To whom does avidya belong ? To the sivas. 

Not to Brahman, because Brahman is knowledge (vidya) itself and 
therefore is void of false imagination (kalpand-fiinya). Mutual 
dependency, such as that of the jivas, since the jivas are different from 
Brahman only by false imagination (kalpand-avidya), is only a fault in 
reference to real things, not in reference to a thing that is mere mayd. 
If the object of mayd were not logically impossible (anupapadyamdandartha), 
it would not be méayé. 

This mutual dependence is no fault for the additional reason that 
avidya and the jiva are both beginningless. 

Moreover, on this theory there is no need to posit a motive 
(prayojana) for the emanation (sarga) of the world, because avidya, 
being an error (vibhrama), does not act with reference to a motive. 


BRAHMASIDDHI 353 


The dilemmas that some (atheists) raise—that the motive of 
emanation cannot be to show favor to others, because there are no 
others before emanation and the world is mostly frustrating, or that 
it cannot be something like Its own play (dtmakridadi), because 
Brahman has everything It desires—do not apply to an emanation 
based on motiveless avidyé. Anyway, those who have their desires 
fulfilled may exert themselves toward play out of exuberance 
(ullasa), whereas those who are afflicted by desire may be averse to 
play for that very reason. 

A magician is not cruel or unjust (vatsamya-nairghrnya) in cutting 
up an illusory person. Nor are painters cruel or unjust because of the 
difference between intact and mutilated people in paintings. Nor 
are children in playing with clay images. 

Anyway, rewards differ in accordance with works. Brahman 
does not cease to be a Lord (i.e., It does not become dependent) 
in doing so, because a Lord who gives different rewards in accordance 
with different service is still a Lord. 

The objection (in Kumiarila’s Slokavérttika) that an emanation from 
Brahman cannot be an impure modification of a pure purusa (i.e., 
Brahman) does not apply if the emanation is based on avidya. Besides, 
there may, in fact, be an impure modification of something pure, 
for if there were no difference at all between original state (prakrti) 
and modification the relation of these two would not be. For example, 
water, a liquid, has solid modifications such as hail, and unconscious 
cowdung a conscious modification in scorpions. 

Anyway, the impurity of the jivas is an error (vibhrama), as is their 
apparent difference from Brahman, like the apparent impurity and 
difference from the original of a reflection. 

1.12 (E11-12). There is no cause (hetu) for avidyd, which is con- 
natural (svabhavika), beginningless, and causeless. 

It can nevertheless be destroyed, because, first, the texts that teach 
the means to its destruction would otherwise be purposeless, and 
second, other beginningless things can be destroyed, as (on the Nyaya- 
Vaisesika view) the beginningless black color of atoms of earth is 
destroyed by baking a pot. 

Knowledge (vidya), though eternal in Brahman, is adventitious in 
the jivas. When they get it, they are released. 

If avidya belonged to Brahman, Brahman would be the transmigrant, 
and when it was released all would be released at once, which is 
absurd. 

1.13 (E12-14). The means (such as listening to the Upanisadic 
texts, or meditation), even though they involve difference, destroy 


354 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


other differences before disappearing themselves, leaving nothing but 
pure Brahman. It is like the powder made from a certain nut 
(kataka), which precipitates other dust from water before itself precipi- 
tating, or like the fluid (in the stomach), which digests other liquids 
and is itself digested, or like a poison (used as antidote), which destroys 
another poison and is itself destroyed. Thus we may interpret [fa 
Upanisad 11: “Crossing over death by avidyd, by vidya one obtains 
immortality.” These means merely remove ignorance; they do not 
produce any positive result, which would be impermanent. 

Another interpretation of Is@ Upanisad 11: Avidya does not exist without 
vidya. Even the vision of difference is not devoid of light (prakéfa), 
because in the absence of the light nothing would appear (prakdSeta). 
Therefore the highest light alone appears in this or that way, only 
bound up with avidya. The vidya of hearing of the unicity of the 
Self cannot be without the avidya of the division of hearer, etc., and so 
by this avidyd, which is proximate to vidyd, one may cross over death. 

Objection: Hearing, reflection, and meditation based on difference, 
which is unreal, are also unreal, and so how can they exist, and to 
what effect ? (How can something unreal produce real knowledge ?) 
Moreover, the apprehension of truth from something unreal is false, 
like that of fire by inference from steam falsely apprehended as smoke. 

Answer: Unreal things may have real effects. Magic (mdyd@) is the 
cause of pleasure and fear. Unreal things may also be the cause of the 
apprehension of real things, as a drawing of a gayal teaches us about 
that animal, or written “‘letters’? communicate the real spoken 
letters. 

Objection : In their own form these things are real, not void. But 
in your doctrine the means to the knowledge of Brahman are unreal 
in their own form. 

Answer: Inthe examples, the things are unreal in the form in 
which they communicate (pratipddika). Moreover, the means to the 
knowledge of Brahman are not unreal in their own form, because 
their own form is Brahman. Therefore Brahman itself, as bound up 
with avidyd, is the means for obtaining Brahman. This capacity 
of unreal things to produce real knowledge is not from similarity 
(of the gayal and its picture), or from convention (linking the written 
characters and spoken syllables). For in ordinary usage we say 
“this is a gayal,”’ meaning the picture, and instruct children that the 
characters are syllables. Likewise an inference based on a mirror 
image, which is false, is not necessarily false itself. The apprehension 
of a difference of meaning from a vowel sound that participates in un- 
real differences of long and short may be true. An illusory snakebite 


BRAHMASIDDHI 355 


may cause death, and one may also infer from the illusory snakebite 
real effects to come to him who thinks himself bitten. 

1.14 (E14-15). Against the Vijfianavadin: The faults of there 
being nothing to be gained or lost by efforts for liberation that the 
Vijfianavadin urges against the Advaita are present in his own theory. 
If the Self is instantaneous cognition there is nothing to be removed, 
because something instantaneous ceases of itself, and there is nothing 
to be gained, because there is no distinction in a moment of being 
without and with something extra added (atifaya). You cannot 
add to or remove anything from a stream of moments, either, because 
astream is not a thing (vastu), whereas the transmigrant must be 
to bean agent and enjoyer. 

Objection : The stream is neither absolutely unreal nor absolutely 
real; it is real by imagination (kalpand). Efforts are for its liberation. 

Answer: Then it is something imagined that transmigrates and is 
released, and the transmigration and release of something imagined 
must themselves be imaginary. Why don’t you agree with this when 
we say it? Transmigration and release are with respect to something 
imaginary, not the highest absolute truth. 

You cannot object to our Self that It is beginningless and endless, 
because even if one accepts instantaneous cognition your stream is 
beginningless and endless. 

Moreover, there is this objection to your theory of the stream: 
Its final moment must either have an effect or not. If it does, it isn’t 
final. If it doesn’t, it is nonexistent, because it has no effect, which 
on your theory means it is powerless and therefore nonexistent. But 
if this moment is nonexistent, the previous moment is nonexistent by 
the same reasoning, and so on back ad infinitum. Should you say that 
the final moment produces the first moment in another stream, an 
omniscient one (samtdndntara sarvajfia), well then, how is it another ? 
For there is nothing that distinguishes one stream from another other 
than the relation of cause and effect. 

1.15 (E15-16). Objection (by a Naiydyika): Cognition is a quality 
(guna) of the self, not its essence. The attainment of Brahman is the 
self’s abiding in its own form (svariipdvasthana), from which all specific 
qualities (vifesaguna) have beenremoved. For this state (of abiding in its 
own form) may fitly be called “Brahman,” because itis “great” (brhati). 
If the essence of the self is cognition, it will, being omnipresent and 
not dependent on the body, etc., for cognition, be ever more a 
transmigrant, having cognition of all things knowable. Moreover, it 
is illogical to say that in liberation the self is cognition but does not 
cognize anything, because the verb “cognize” requires an object. 


356 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer: To this the verse says “cognition.” Scripture says that 
the Self is cognition. Fire only burns what is brought into proximity 
to it and is capable of combustion. Mirrors only reflect what is 
brought near them. Similarly the Self only enjoys sense objects 
when It is in the body and they are brought near by the senses. On 
the Nyaya theory cognition arises in the self when it is in contact 
with the internal organ (manas). But if all selves and all internal 
organs are omnipresent, everyone will experience everything, so the 
difference of enjoyments is no better accounted for than on our theory. 
The response that it is brought about by deeds (karman) can be used 
by us equally well as by you. Anyway, once one has seen nondiffer- 
ence and everything has come to the state of being the Self (déma- 
bhdvam dGpanna), there is nothing for the Self to see (and therefore no 
real problem of the difference of enjoyments), even though its nature 
is sight. 

A liberation defined as the cessation of distinguishing properties, 
including cognition, would mean the absolute nonexistence of sight, 
but this is in no way different from the (Buddhist) position that 
liberation is a destruction (uccheda). Who would desire the non- 
existence of the (or his) Self, which is dearer than everything ? 

Objection: People are observed to desire their own destruction, 
because it may end various frustrations. 

Answer: This does happen in those for whom every pleasure has 
been extinguished by grievous illness. But transmigrating beings are 
not in this situation, because they experience manifold pleasures. 
The cessation of frustration is a purpose of man, but not one’s own 
destruction, which would end many pleasures. But for us, who hold 
that liberation is the highest and unadulterated bliss, liberation is an 
unequivocal (ekdntika) end of man. 

1.16 (E16-18). [Gloss on the word “‘syllable” (aksara) in verse 1. ] 
Brahman is the word (Sabdatman), specifically the omkdra, as scripture 
says. The omkara is Brahman itself, not just a symbol (fratika) of 
It, as a statue is a symbol of a god, a support (dlambana) for worship 
(updsand). The omkara, according to scripture, is present in all 
speech (vac), and speech is the Self of everything, because of scrip- 
tural authority to that effect, and also because of logic. For, modi- 
fications (vikdra) are accompanied by the form of their original 
(prakrtt), and all the universe is accompanied by the form of speech, 
because everything is known by cognition (vijfana) that has a tincture 
(uparaga) of speech. We know this last point from the following 
considerations : 

1.17 (E18-19). (a) Cognition of the word (Sabda) accompanies 


BRAHMASIDDHI 357 


that of the object (in verbal cognition). If it is not known, the object 
is not known, which is not the case with the sense organs (which need 
not themselves be known to be used to know an object). 

(b) When one knows by means of an inference, one refers the 
inferential sign, for example, smoke, and the thing known, fire, to 
different loci (vyadhikarana),15 which is not the case with verbal knowl- 
edge (one says, “this isa pot”). The relation of qualifier and quali- 
fied (viSesanaviSesyabhava) that belongs to the two words in “‘the lotus is 
blue” (nilam utpélam) belongs to the object as well. But in the case 
of an inference from two marks, for example, “Since, even though 
it is upright, a crow settles on it, it is a post (and not a man),” one 
apprehends a third thing from two things that mutually delimit each 
other (parasparavyavacchinna). So verbal cognition and inference are 
not parallel. 

(c) A judgment (nifcaya) reflects the form of speech (Sabda- 
riipaparamarsin) even in cognition gained by some other pramdna 
than speech, whereas the cognition of fire does not have the form of 
smoke. 

(d) Even the activity of babies for their mother’s breast requires 
a judgment of the verbal form “‘this.”” Judgment cannot be free from 
the tincture of the form of the word. Therefore even babies have 
cognitions tinctured by the form of words, as they participate in the 
impressions (bhdvand) of words in former births. 

(e) There are objects that belong solely to verbal usage (that are 
in everyday use ?—vyavaharika), that have no nature other than an 
appearance (vivarta) of language (Sabda). Other objects should be 
considered to be the same because they belong to the same class (tat- 
samanyat, i.e., they also are the objects of words). For example : 

(i) Injunction (vidhkt) and prohibition (nisedha). These are no- 
thing substantial (avastuka), because they refer to no activity or absten- 
tion from activity (pravrtti-nivrtti) in any particular one of the three 
times past, present, and future. Therefore they are a mere intuition 
(pratibha) conducive to activity or abstention from activity. 

(ii) Sentence meaning (vdkydrtha). Conjunction (samsarga) is 
nothing over and above the things conjoined, and the things conjoined 
are nothing over and above their form as unconjoined. (There- 
fore sentence meaning as a separate thing or complex whole is 
unreal, ) 

(iii) A collection (as a complex whole comprised of parts). The 
same reasoning applies as for the sentence meaning. 

(iv) Nonexistent things such as the circle of fire made by a whirled 
firebrand (dldtacakra), by the same reasoning. 


358 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


In all these the reality that is speech (vdg-tattva, Sabda-tattva) appears 
in this or that way (tathd tathé vivartate) because no cognition can be 
without a support. Examples ii-iv are examples of cognition with 
constructions (vikalpa-pratyaya) that cannot exist without the tincture 
of the form of language. 

(f) Even if (we grant that) there is cognition prior to language, 
it becomes more vivid (sphufatara) and becomes distinct (vivekavati) 
after the entrance of language. Take for example the application 
of names to the notes of the scale, or the names given by herdsmen to 
their animals. 

(g) Conversely, when the form of language is withdrawn, things 
even if one is conscious of them are as good as unknown, for example, 
when a man sees grass, etc., when walking along a path. 

Therefore, that consciousness is consciousness depends on the form 
of speech, or else (Mandana’s final conclusion, presumably), con- 
sciousness simply is the power of speech (vdk-Sakti). Some say (Mandana 
probably agrees) that even when the power of speech is with- 
drawn there remains a subtle (sitksma) power of speech. In any 
case, the awareness of objects in cognition depends on the form of 
speech. So, since every object of cognition is accompanied by the 
form of speech, everything is a modification of speech, as pots of clay, 
or an appearance (vivarta), as reflections of the moon in rippling 
water. 

1.18 (E19). (Another interpretation of ‘“‘aksara’’ in verse 1, here 
interpreting it to mean “imperishable”’:) Brahman does not undergo 
change (vikdra, paripama). Scripture calls It “immovable” (dhruva) 
and “eternal” (nitya). If It changed in Its entirety It would be 
destroyed. If It changed in part (ekadefa) It would have to have 
parts and would be neither eternal nor one. 

1.19 (E19-20). [Gloss on the word “‘not everything” (asarvam) 
in verse 1:] Objection :1® Brahman is identical with everything (sarvdtmata 
brahmanak). This is shown by scriptural passages such as ‘“‘having 
all smells, having all tastes” (Chdndogya Upanisad III.14.2). Also, 
if the objects of enjoyment, whose nature is light (prakasa), were 
different from Brahman, they would not appear (na prakdferan), and, 
being inert (jada), they would not be experienced. 

Answer: To this we respond, “not everything.”’ Scripture denies 
all diversity. If the diversity of the world is real and is the nature of 
Brahman there can be no deliverance, because one cannot separate a 
thing from its nature. Also, if, as we say, there is only one Self, 
Brahman, there would be no difference among Selves of enjoyments, 
and no difference of bound and released. Therefore Brahman is not 


BRAHMASIDDHI 359 


identical with the diversity of the world (prapajica), but the diversity 
is simply the display (vilasita), the play (kridita) of avidyd. 

1.20 (E20). [Gloss on the word ‘everything’? (sarvam) in the 
verse:] Although Brahman does not have everything as Its self, 
everything has Brahman as its Self. Everything has positive reality 

(riipa) through the positive reality of Brahman and is not simply 
void (finya). If everything were void, if the nonexistence of diver- 
sity were the highest truth, this would be equally so in bondage and in 
liberation, and so everyone would be freed from all eternity (niéya- 
muktiprasanga). 

In addition, avidyé is not merely absence of apprehension (grahand- 
bhaéva), because this (nonapprehension of the things in the world) 
is equally present in liberation, and also nothing would appear 
(during transmigration). Avidyd is therefore apprehension (of the 
object) otherwise than as it is (anyatharthagrahana) and the super- 
imposition (adhydsa) of a nonexistent form (avidyamdnariipa) on it. 
This is impossible with respect to the void; an error based on a void 
would be without a cause (bija). Scripture also teaches that Brah- 
man has positive reality. 

1.21 (E20-22). [Gloss on the word “‘fearless’”’ (abhaya) in verse 1:] 
Objection : Some (Carvakas, probably) say that there is no pleasure 
unmixed with frustration, and that pleasure only remains pleasure so 
long as it belongs to a person who is frustrated. 

Answer : We have already shown that pleasure is not merely the 
cessation of frustration. There is no fear (or “danger,” bhaya) or 
distress (k/efa) in Brahman, as scripture repeatedly says. There is no 
connatural (svdbhdvika) fear in Brahman, because that would contradict 
Its blissful nature. There is no fear that is adventitious, because there 
is no second thing other than Brahman. 

(Another interpretation of “‘fearless’”): There is no fear of the 
liberated person returning again (punardvrtti) to samséra on account 
of the infinity of works accumulated in past lives, because knowledge 
destroys works like a penance (prdyafcitta), though they be infinite in 
number. This we know from scripture and from the fact that knowl- 
edge dissolves the distinction of agent, object, and result essential to 
actions. How could this distinction arise again? Not from avidya, 
because avidyd is beginningless and therefore has no cause, because a 
cause cannot act on something already existent. Once destroyed, 
avidya cannot act as a prior nonexistence for the cause to act on 
[because the only possible cause would be the Self, and that is un- 
changeable (kufastha), says Anandapirna]. On the other hand, it 
cannot begin again without a cause. 


360 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(The apparent cessation of avidyd in deep sleep and the fact that 
scripture calls deep sleep the attainment of Brahman are not objec- 
tions to this.) In deep sleep only avidya’s projecting (viksepa) -(of 
false appearances) ceases, but the influence (samskdra) of that pro- 
jection and the nonapprehension (agrahana) (of reality) continue. 
If this were not so, there would be no difference between deep sleep 
and the fourth (turiya). Scripture calls deep sleep the attainment 
of Brahman because projection is absent. 

1,22, introduction to verse 2 (E22-23). Odbjection: What is the 
pramana for Brahman ? Not perception (pratyaksa), because its object 
(visaya) is difference (or ‘‘different individual things,” bheda). Not 
inference, because that is preceded by perception. Not comparison 
(upamana), because the object of comparison is a similarity (sédrfya), 
which is based on difference. Presumption (arthdpatti) can be a 
pramana only for the reverse of nondifference. That is, an arthdpatti 
comes in the form: No practical activity is possible without difference, 
for it is impossible to apprehend anything, even nondifference, without 
the difference of knower, etc. (Therefore difference exists.) Nega- 
tion (abhdva) cannot be a pramana for a positive entity like Brahman. 
Neither can it be a pramdana for the nonexistence of diversity, because 
it is impossible so long as perception, etc., exist (and function as 
pramanas for difference). 

Neither can tradition (dgama) be a pramana for Brahman. If it be 
a tradition set in motion by a qualified individual (dptapraneirka), 
it would be dependent on other pramanas and therefore share their 
incapacity to act as pramdnas for Brahman. If it be an independent 
(svatantra) tradition (i.e., the Vedas), it can be a pramdna only for 
injunctions and prohibitions, not for established entities such as 
Brahman. Statements of established facts are dependent on other 
praménas. Moreover, in everyday life we see that words not aiming 
at something to be done have no purpose-and-meaning (artha).1” 

Moreover, we see that children learn the meaning of words from 
watching their use to produce activity. 

If the object (artha, not in the sense of the abstract “meaning” but 
the concrete reference) of words such as “Brahman”? that name 
Brahman can be known by other pramdnas, language (Sabda) cannot 
be a pramana for It (because pramanas give only new knowledge). But if 
It is not known, It is not the object ofa word (because to employ langu- 
age one must know the connection of word and object, which is impossi- 
ble if one doesn’t know the object), and ifIt is not the object of a 
word, It cannot be the topic (visaya) of asentence as being qualified. 
For the meaning of a sentence is the uniting of the objects of the words. 


BRAHMASIDDHI 361 


An entity in which all distinction (avaccheda) is dissolved cannot be 
the object (gocara) of apprehension, because every apprehension 
proceeds by the distinction (vyavaccheda) ‘“‘It is this way, it is not that 
way.” 

1.23 (E23). Answer : Verse 2: “The sages say that It comes 
into currency (prasiddhi) from tradition (dmnaya), and that It is 
described via the dissolution of the diversity (prapafica) of difference 
(bheda).” 

We will explain below (in Chapter Three) that scripture is not 
dependent even if it expresses already existent things. 

1.24 (E23-25). Certain sentences are observed to have as their 
motive the production of pleasure, without regard to any activity 
or abstention from activity, for example, “A son is born to you.” 
There may be a certain activity in the case of the employment of 
these sentences, but that activity is the intent (éatparya), not of the 
understanding (pratipatti) of the speech, but of its production (utpatti). 
The intent of the understanding is an already existent fact. More- 
over, there can be no injunction of anything here as a means to an 
end, because the birth of a son is already accomplished, and the 
resulting pleasure requires no further activity to produce pleasure once 
one knows of it. Other examples would be the employment of 
unpleasant words by evil people to produce sadness, or informing a 
frightened person that the thing he is entangled in is not a snake but a 
rope, so that his fear may cease. Likewise, communications of events 
in distant places, whose aim is to quiet the curiosity of questioners, 
are not for any loss or gain (hdnopddana). In statements of existent 
facts that are for some loss or gain, such as “This road has _ thieves” 
or “This spot of earth contains a treasure,” the language is not con- 
cerned with the loss or gain but solely with the existent fact. The 
activity or abstention from activity comes from the knowledge of 
the fact combined with the memory, ascertained earlier from other 
pramanas, that the thing described is a cause of benefit or harm. Such 
sentences as these are not mere substitutes for injunctions, such as 
‘Don’t go by this road,” ‘“Take this treasure.” For, other pramdanas, 
such as perception, may enter into activity or abstention, but they 
aim at or fulfill themselves in (paryavasita) nothing but accomplished 
facts. 

1.25. (E25). Objection: Activity and abstention are intended by 
the speaker (which is not the case in perception and other non-linguistic- 
praménas). 

Answer: The fact of being the meaning of a word arises not from 
the intention of the speaker, but from the capacity of the word. If 


362 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


it were not so, even the obtaining of various desirable things with the 
treasure would be a meaning of the words employed, since it also is 
intended by the speaker. When one desires to know something by 
perception, etc., with activity or abstention in mind, activity and 
abstention are not the objects of perception, etc. Besides, if activity 
were the meaning of the words, everyone would have the thought 
of acquiring the treasure upon hearing of its existence, whereas some 
are indifferent to it. 

The objector is wrong when he says that all language learning is 
from observing the use of injunctive words, as an examination of the 
learning of the words “‘a son is born to you”’ shows. 

1.26 (E25-26). Let us grant that all utterances impel to action 
(pravartaka) and that one arrives at their connection (with their 
objects) from that action. Still, one must consider whether the words 
other than the specifically injunctive word (vidhdyakapada) aim at 
only their own objects, or their union with the thing to be done 
(karyartha), or at the union only of the meanings of the words. It 
cannot be the first, because if they aimed at only their own objects 
there would be no understanding of the object of a sentence, and so 
the employment of words would be purposeless. Therefore they do 
aim at some union with other objects. But since the use of words 
and their understanding is explicable merely by this (by some sort 
of union with other objects, whether they be something to be done or 
not), there is no pramdna}® for any particular union (i.e., for union with 
a thing to be done). 

Words must necessarily aim at the union of their objects, so that 
from this there results the cognition of a qualified (vifisja) already 
existent object. Otherwise, the association (anvaya) of the objects of 
words in everyday language would be based on the speaker’s intention, 
and consequently there would be no connection in Vedic language, 
where there is no speaker. 

If all the words are associated with the thing to be done there will 
be no mutual connection of the objects of words. In that case no 
prescription (niyoga) having as its object an object that is qualified 
will be understood, for the prescription will be accomplished by the 
object of a single word (i.e., the verb). The prescription comes after 
the application (viniyoga) (of the words ?).1® 

It is, in fact, possible to describe an entity unknown by any pramdna 
other than fabda—by the negation (pratisedha) of all particulars 
(visesa). For, although one does not know the entity Brahman, nor 
its connection with the word of which it is the object, one does 
know words for particulars, and the word “not” (naif). By the 


BRAHMASIDDHI 363 


combination of these, scripture teaches Brahman by such words as “‘not 
coarse,”’ etc. Thus verse 2 says, “By the dissolution of the diversity 
of difference.” 

1.27, (E26). Another explanation of these words of verse 2: The 
objector said that an entity in which all particulars have disappeared 
cannot be the object of apprehension. But it is precisely through 
the cessation of particulars that Brahman is described, as the entity 
gold is known through the abandonment of its particular configura- 
tions such as a lump, a necklace, etc. 

1.28 (E26-28). Problem: Does the whole of tradition (Ggama) 
describe Brahman via the dissolution of the diversity of difference, 
or only some part of it. (As will be evident from the discussion, this 
is also the question of the relationship of knowledge and works.) 

On this point there are the following positions: 

(a) All of the Veda, including the portions relating to works, 
teach the dissolution of something with respect to something. For 
example, the injunction ‘“‘One who desires heaven should sacrifice,” 
because it implies the existence of a self after death, dissolves the 
notion that the body is the self. Prohibitions and injunctions dissolve 
natural (naisargika) activities based on passion (rdga), etc., by prohibit- 
ing them or directing toward other activities, respectively. Thus 
they are accessory (upayogin) to qualification (adhikara) for knowledge 
of the Self, because one who is not pacified and self-controlled is 
incapable of that knowledge. (According to Anandapirna, this is 
the position of Brahmadatta. ) 

(b) Works accomplish the destruction of desires (by fulfilling 
them). One who by works lasting a thousand years accomplishes 
the destruction of desire obtains the highest nondual Self from the 
state of Prajapati (Brahma). 

In both (a) and (b) the whole tradition aims at the knowledge of 
the Self as the one thing to be done. There are also the following 
positions that say that knowledge is not the sole end of the Veda: 

(c) The injunctions to action aim at qualifying a man for knowl- 
edge by first removing the disqualification of not having discharged 
the three debts. 

(d) Works and knowledge are connected by “severality of con- 
nection” (samyogaprthaktva). As the Veda says, ‘““They desire to know 
by sacrifice’? (Brhadaéranyaka Upanisad I1V.4.22). (The point seems 
to be that works may be made instrumental to the desire to know 
optionally, if the one who performs them so chooses. This is part 
of Mandana’s own position.) 

(e) Works are connected with the qualification for knowledge as 


364 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


being a perfection (samskdra) of the person (purusa). (This is also 
part of Mandana’s own position. ) 

(f) Knowledge of the Self is a perfection (samskdra) of the agent 
(karir) for the sake of qualification for the performance of works. 
(The usual Mimamsa position. ) 

(g) Knowledge and works are unconnected and contradictory. 
(Samkara or Sureévara, probably.) 

1.29 (E28-30). Response to (a): Injunctions to works and injunc- 
tions to knowledge both have their own separate effects (kdarya) 
mentioned in scripture. Moreover, because the expectancy (aékamksa) 
of means (sadhana) for knowledge is already satisfied, by the enu- 
meration of the means of knowledge, such as celibacy and the like, 
the injunction to knowledge does not require injunctions of works (as 
an injunction to perform a certain sacrifice creates an “‘expectancy,” 
a need to know the means of sacrifice, which is fulfilled by injunc- 
tions of means). If all injunctions and prohibitions have their fulfill- 
ment (apavarga) in the effect consisting of the dissolution of name-and- 
form, (they will have no further effect, and so) the rise and fall of 
creatures in samsdara will not be caused by works and so will be cause- 
less (or ‘“‘random”’—dkasmika), as will also be release (apavarga—but 
in a different sense than just above). Therefore the Sastra (of the 
Vedanta) will be useless. 

Objection : Injunctions of works enter into qualification for knowl- 
edge by their effects, such as heaven, just as instructions to go to 
villages along the way enter into the instruction to go to the city, 
which is the goal desired. 

Answer: No, for in the example getting to the villages is not an 
object of desire, whereas the fruits of works are objects of desire, so 
there is no need to suppose another object, namely liberation. A 
speaker may describe the merits of the intermediate villages so as to 
induce us to get to the city at the end. But that is not the intent of 
his words; we learn that that was his intent from some other pramana. 
But there is no other praména than language for the objects of Vedic 
injunctions; so we must accept the ends that are mentioned as the 
real ends—heaven, etc.—for injunctions to works, liberation for the 
injunction to knowledge. Moreover, if the instruction about going 
to the villages on the way is for the sake of getting the person to go to 
the final city, getting to the villages will not be the result of the instruc- 
tion, because one might get to the city by another route. Similarly, 
if injunctions to works have as their end obtaining liberation, heaven, 
etc., will not be the end of the injunctions to works.” 

Prohibitions may contribute to knowledge by preventing works 


BRAHMASIDDHI 365 


based on passion, but injunctions of works do not do so. They are 
neither exclusive (parisamkhyayaka = parisamkhyanavidhi) nor restrictive 
(niydmaka =niyamavidhi), because their object is something _ totally 
nonestablished (aprdpta).2!_ It is injunctions whose subject matter 
is already established that result in abstention (nizrtti) from something 
else. Besides, there is nothing contradictory between performing the 
rite for gaining a village, which is the object of an injunction, and 
serving a king for the same end, so Vedic injunctions to works do not 
obstruct secular activities based on passion. Vedic injunctions do 
not obstruct activities for visible ends, for, if they did, they would 
prevent acting for a visible end such as the acquiring of wealth 
which is necessary for the performance of the very sacrifices that are 
the objects of Vedic injunctions. In fact, Vedic injunctions such as 
‘Let him who desires heaven perform sacrifice” imply that the person 
they are addressed to is motivated by passion, for heaven. Activities 
(pravrttayah) with a visible end and works with an invisible end are 
equal in being thrown up by passion, etc., and in persistent attach- 
ment (abhinivefa) to multiplicity (prapafica); there is no distinction by 
which one can say that those based on Vedic prescription (niyoga) 
are conducive to the knowledge of the Self and others are not.2? 

Should someone say that works are not a means (updya) of desires 
(kama), we reply again that randomness of the rise and fall of crea- 
tures and of liberation will result, as we said before. This idea has 
been refuted in the Svargakamddhikarana section of the Mimdmsdsittras 
(VI.1-13). Moreover, this will render absurd the opponent’s own 
position that Vedic works contradict worldly works because they have 
the same end. 

1.30 (E30). Response to (b): The obtaining of desires does not 
destroy desire but increases it. It is not enjoyment but repeated 
meditation that sees the faults of sense objects, that destroys desire. 
One who had no means of satisfying his desires might desist from them 
and have recourse to the knowledge of the Self, but one to whom 
scripture has shown multiple means of satisfying his desires will apply 
himself to those very pleasures that naturally bear one away and would 
become averse to knowledge of the Self. The bliss that is in the 
Self, which has merely been heard about, is unable to reduce the 
fondness for that bliss, which has actually been experienced in sense 
objects. 

Further response to (a): The Vedic sentence ‘‘One who desires 
heaven should sacrifice” does not have for its intent the dissolution 
of the idea that the body is the Self, because the sentence does not 
have that as its literal intent, and it cannot have that as its intent by 


366 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


implication (artha=arthapatti) when the dissolution of the body and 
the senses is directly pointed out in the passage that begins ‘‘Not 
coarse....” (Brhadéranyaka Upanisad I11.8.8). It would be like 
inferring an elephant from its footprints when it has already been 
seen. Rather, if we were to look for an implied meaning, it would 
have to be that the Veda intends that knot of desire be firm (because 
no one without desire would be moved to act by this injunction). 
(But this is absurd.) 

1.31 (E30-31). Further response to (b): Desirable things cannot 
destroy desire. There is, besides, no proof that they could enter into 
another result without regard to their individual results. If all works 
aim at knowledge, there is but one qualification, and so all works 
must be performed by the same person (the one desiring liberation), 
which is impossible. 

Response to (f): What proof (pramaéna) can the opponent give for 
the connection of knowledge to action ? There is neither mention in 
the context (prakarana) of any injunction to action, nor syntactical 
connection (vdékya) resulting from invariable (avyabhicarin) connec- 
tion (sambandha) with works. But there is a separate statement of the 
fruit of knowledge, namely, “‘He does not return again” (Chandogya 
Upanisad VIII.15.1). There being no reason to believe that this 
statement has a meaning other than the literal one, it is not a mere 
supplementary statement (arthavéda), and on the basis of it, it is 
clear that there are separate qualifications for knowledge and for 
works (because they have separate fruits). 

1.32 (E31-32). Objection: The statement “He does not return 
again” is in the present tense (not in the optative, and therefore not 
an injunction). There being a visible fruit of injunction to Self- 
knowledge, namely, procuring activity for works whose fruits may be 
enjoyed in other bodies, there is no need to look for an invisible fruit 
of Self-knowledge and so no need to construe the statement of non- 
returning as a statement of this fruit, after changing its form (into the 
customary optative, thus, ‘“Let one who is desirous of non-returning 
perform knowledge of the Self”). 

Answer: No, because the Person (purusa) described in the Upani- 
sads is other than the one that is an agent and enjoyer. The latter 
is known to everyone by perception, there is no need for fabda as a 
pramana for him. (Sabda only teaches what other pramépas can’t.) 
This one, the jiva, is indeed one with the supreme Self. But to the 
Jjiva, and to him alone,” belongs the form of agent and enjoyer that is 
bound up with avidyd and ascertained by perception. This form is 
the cause of activity of works. That (form or Self) that is self-luminous 


BRAHMASIDDHI 367 


and void of all divisions is what is desired to be known from scripture, 
and It is incompatible with works, for one who knows the bliss of the 
nondual Brahman cannot desire anything as the result of works, since 
all his desires are fulfilled, nor can he act for It, because the means 
of action are absent. Passages such as Chandogya Upanisad 1.1.10 and 
Brhadéranyaka Upanisad T1I.8.10 and IV.4.2, in which the knowledge 
of the Person described in the Upanisads (the supreme Self) seems to 
be prescribed as accessory to works, can be better interpreted. 

1.33 (E32). Response to (g): From the supposition that knowl- 
edge and works are contradictory, having as their spheres the non- 
duality and duality respectively, there would result the nonproduction 
of knowledge, because the division of pramana, object and agent of 
knowledge is contradictory to the apprehension of nonduality. Should 
you deny this contradiction, saying that they are not simultaneous, 
the means (updéya) that involve duality coming before the knowledge 
of nonduality and ceasing immediately upon that knowledge, we 
respond that then there is no such contradiction as you allege between 
works and knowledge. 

1.34 (E32-34). Opponent :*4 Works are useless in the knowledge 
of Brahman, because Brahman is not something that must be accom- 
plished (sddhya), and as scripture says (Mundaka Upanisad 1.2.12), 
“That which is not made is not (obtained) by what is done (krta).” 
Neither do works have any utility (upayoga) in the production (utpatii) 
of knowledge, because that depends solely upon the pramdnas. They 
are not accessories (sahakdrin) to knowledge, because knowledge has 
nothing to accomplish besides itself. Liberation cannot be such a 
thing to be accomplished, because if it were it would be imperma- 
nent. Nor can the thing to be accomplished be the removal of the 
cause of bondage, because the cause of bondage is avidyé, and the 
arising of knowledge is itself the exclusion (vyduriti) of avidyd. 

Objector: The arising of knowledge may be the exclusion of that 
avidya which is defined as nonapprehension (agrahana), but not of that 
which is positive erroneous cognition (viparydsajfidna).25 Now, one 
positive entity (bhava) cannot be the exclusion of another positive 
entity. 

Opponent : Erroneous cognition, being caused (nimitta) by non- 
apprehension, ceases when its cause ceases. 

Objector : A nonexistence cannot be the cause of anything. The 
cause of erroneous cognition is beginningless, motiveless avidyd, as was 
said before (at I.11). There is no room for asking about a cause for 
it (because it is beginningless). Error (viparydsa) and its influence 
(samskdra) are established as mutually cause and effect of each other 


368 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(and therefore need no further cause). Therefore the cessation of 
error is something to be accomplished by knowledge. In that task it 
might require works as an accessory. 

Opponent : Persons in whom right cognition with regard to mother- 
of-pearl has been produced after a previous error do not make a sepa- 
rate effort for the removal of error, nor do they need any accessory. 
The destruction of the previous entity is nothing other than the arising 
of another, contradictory entity, not a mere void. Otherwise the 
destruction would have no cause. Knowledge is contradictory to 
error; on its production error is destroyed. 

Objector: Works are causes of bondage. They are ended by knowl- 
edge, which requires an accessory. 

Opponent : When knowledge cleansed of all particulars (vifesa) 
has arisen, the worldly usage (vyavahdra) of the division of works and 
fruits is impossible. Also, Mundaka Upanisad 11.2.8 equates works as 
equivalent to error and doubt: ‘““The knot of the heart is broken, all 
doubts are cut, and his works waste away, when that is seen in its 
completeness.” 

Objector: Knowledge requires something else for perfect clarity 
(vaimalya). 

Opponent : No, doubt and error, which are the blemishes of cogni- 
tion, are impossible in knowledge that has arisen from a pramdna. 

Objector : Some knowledge other than verbal knowledge is neces- 
sary to know Brahman, one that is direct (pratyaksa), without any 
apprehension of separation (vibhdga), and beyond all conceptual 
constructions (vikalpa), because verbal knowledge, which grasps the 
connection of separate objects of words (or, “‘which grasps the con- 
nection of the objects of inflected words,”’ vibhakta-padartha-samsargod- 
grahin), cannot have the nondual Brahman for its object. In the 
production of this there is dependency upon works, adoration 
(updsand), etc. 

Opponent : What is the distinctive feature on account of which this 
other knowledge is sought ? Not vividness (spastabhdtva), for knowl- 
edge is for the pervasion (abhivyapti) of the object, and that is obtained 
when verbal knowledge arises. 

Objector: For direct perception, since all right cognition (pramit:) 
has perception as its goal. 

Opponent : This is not so, because once the thing to be known is 
known, nothing else is necessary. 

Objector: Another pramapa, then. 

Opponent: But a pramdana is necessary for establishing its object 
(not for establishing an object already established by another pramdna). 


BRAHMASIDDHI 369 


It cannot be necessary for establishing it a second time, because that 
could be done by the first prama@na. You may say that the very exist- 
ence of another pramdna or a special pleasure might be the cause of a 
need for another pramdna. But this special pleasure results also from 
the vision (darfana) produced by the first pramaéna. Since there exist 
other pramanas that can know a thing seen by direct perception, there 
would be an equal need for them to be employed upon an object 
known by perception; there is no difference among pramdnas in their 
giving certainty. 

Objector : Perception’s object is something nearby, and therefore 
something capable of being abandoned or gained, whereas this is not 
so of the objects of other pramdnas. (Therefore perception is of more 
practical utility. ) 

Opponent : In this case it is not another praméana that is necessary, 
but some cause of bringing the object known closer. 

Objector : Language (fabda) and the other pramanas besides per- 
ception have for their object the universal (sémdnya), whereas percep- 
tion has for its object the particular (vifesa). 

Opponent : Then the object of perception is not arrived at by 
language (and so it can’t help to make it better known). More- 
over, if Brahman is not arrived at by language, how is it that adora- 
tion (updsand) of Brahman goes on? One cannot make one thing 
immediately present by adoration of another thing. The injunction 
of sacrifice and the like is for the sake of making the Self that is Brah- 
man immediately present in that form presented by Vedic language, 
as blissful, sinless, etc. If this were not the true form of Brahman 
and it were possible that Brahman were not the end of man, the 
injunction will have a false object (asad-artha). Therefore, once the 
Self has become clear (prakata) from Vedic language, which is free 
from doubt, no other pramdna is needed. 

Objector: Even when one has arrived at the identity of the Self 
and Brahman from the scriptural statement ‘That art thou,” the 
properties of a transmigrant are still observed, and something else is 
required to stop them. 

Opponent : No. One who has seen Brahman as It is cannot be 
conjoined with properties caused by false vision (mithyd-darfana). 
Various passages of scripture confirm that these properties, and the 
state of embodiedness, come from false (mithya) conceit (abhimana). 
Therefore he who does participate in these properties has not arrived 
at the identity of Brahman and the Self. 

1.35 (E35-36). Response to the entire previous discussion (in 
1.34): Even when the reality (tattva) has been determined with 


370 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


certainty (nifcita) from a pramdna, false appearances do not neces- 
sarily cease. For example, the error of seeing a double moon, or of 
confusion about directions (digviparydsa), does not cease in a person 
who has ascertained the truth from the speech of a qualified person 
(@pta). Similarly, false appearances continue even in the case of one 
who has arrived at the reality of the Self from tradition, free from 
doubt, because of the force of powerful traces (samskdra), accumulat- 
ed by the repetition of beginningless false vision. For their cessation 
something additional (to verbal knowledge) is necessary. From 
ordinary experience that thing is known to be repetition of the vision 
of reality, and from the Veda it is known to be sacrifice, etc. (i-e., 
both repetition of the vision of reality and sacrifice and other good 
works help to eliminate the traces). Repetition creates a firm 
trace of its own and obstructs the previous traces. Sacrifice, etc., 
does the same thing in some unseen (adrsta) manner. Or else, as 
others say, sacrifice, etc., does so by destroying impurities (kalusa) 
that get in the way of the highest good (Sreyas); for the purpose of 
obligatory rites (nityakarman) is the washing away (ksaya) of sins,6 

Objection: False appearances may continue, but certitude comes 
from the pramdna, and practical activity (zyavahdra) conforms to reality 
(tattva) and to certitude (nifcaya). So there is no activity (pravrtti) 
whatever on the part of one who has arrived at the reality of the Self. 
(The appearances continue, but not any activity, including medita- 
tion or sacrifice and other works.) 

Answer: Even after the vision of reality has arisen certitude may 
have a false object, if the trace already produced by false vision is 
strong and a strong trace of true vision has not been implanted. For 
instance, we observe that one confused about the directions who doesn’t 
keep in mind the truth told him by a qualified person may become 
confused again, because his activity is just as before. Or a person who 
previously became afraid of a rope, thinking it to be a snake, may 
again become afraid if he does not continuously keep in mind the 
pramana by which he learned it was a rope. Therefore repetition of 
the vision of reality makes for the subjugation or elimination of the 
stronger trace produced by the repetition of beginningless false vision, 
Thus scripture says “He is to be thought about, to be meditated 
upon” (Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 11.4.5) and prescribes means such as 
celibacy, sacrifice, and other things. Otherwise this instruction would 
have no meaning. 

Objection : Knowledge of reality comes from tradition when it is 
assisted by celibacy and other means. (The opponent is now willing 
to grant that activity may have some use in producing knowledge, 


BRAHMASIDDHI 37] 


before it is produced, but he still wants to deny the idea that it exists 
and has a function even after the arising of knowledge. ) 

Answer: No, for apprehension arises from language by itself. 
Tradition, whose purpose is the understanding of reality, is not mute 
before certain special means, nor does it fail to give certitude, because 
it is free from all doubt. If it were not a source of certainty one could 
not even learn about the means from it. 

(Some more examples of the continuation of false appearances and 
their effects after the gaining of certitude.) Even if one knows with 
certitude that a play is not reality, the actors on the stage are the 
causes of emotions in the audience via false appearances. Even if 
he knows with certitude that molasses is sweet, the false appearance 
that it is bitter continues in a sick man. Thus even one who knows 
with certitude that Brahman is the Self needs the means for the cessa- 
tion of error. 

The employment of means does not make liberation an _ effect 
(kdrya). Just as the manifestation of reality by means of a pramdna 
does not make liberation an effect, neither does the special manifes- 
tation (that of the reality of the Self) by the means. The scriptural 
passages (that state that liberation comes from knowledge, not men- 
tioning activities or means) refer to the state of the completion of 
practice, (not to verbal knowledge by itself). Or else let them apply 
to verbal knowledge, insofar as the knowledge of which language is 
the means is the cause of the later knowledge. 

1.36 (E36). Response to (¢c): One does not have to have discharged 
the three debts (of sacrificing to the gods, begetting a son, and teach- 
ing the Veda) before embarking upon knowledge as an_ inflexible 
rule, because smrtis such as Gautama Dharma Sitra 1.3.1 and scriptural 
passages such as 7abdla Upanisad 4 and others allow an option as to 
what stage of life (arama) one may enter after one’s period of studying 
the Veda. Moreover, various passages in scripture teach the aban- 
donment of works. Manu 6.35, which seems to teach that one must 
have discharged the three debts before entering upon knowledge, 
actually teaches that one who in fact has taken up householdership 
but considers that by the knowledge of the Self everything he needs 
to do is accomplished (krta-krtya-ta) and therefore neglects the dis- 
charge of the three debts incurs a sin that prevents the rise of knowl- 
edge, by not doing what is enjoined. 

1.37 (E36). Acceptance of (d): This is the proper position. Even 
actions that have no necessary reference to another effect (kdrya) have 
a severalty of connection (samyoga-prthak-tva), and therefore are acces- 
sory to knowledge. Thus scripture says, “Brahmins desire to know 


372 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Ss 


Him by recitation of the Veda, by sacrifice....” (Brhaddranyaka 
Upanisad 1V.4.22). However, they are for the sake of production of 
knowledge, not by serviceableness to some effect (of knowledge), 
because knowledge has no effect other than itself. 

Acceptance of (e): Or else, works are a perfection (samskdra), 
because smrti says that knowledge arises in one who is perfected: 
‘And also the work of the dframas, because they are enjoined” 
(Brahmasiitra I1I.4.32). 

1.38 (E36-37). Objection: The means for producing knowledge 
are obvious (drsfa), such things as quietude, self-control, etc., which 
destroy the distraction (viksepa) of the mind, for only in one who is 
concentrated (samdhita, cf. samadhi) and who uses repetition (abhyasa) 
does clarity (prasdda) of knowledge arise. But if these means are 
sufficient by themselves to produce knowledge, how can such things 
as sacrifice (and other external actions, such as gift-giving) be means ? 

Answer : What you say is true. Even celibate hermits obtain 
knowledge without such means as sacrifice. But knowledge is mani- 
fested quicker by these special means, and slower without them. 
(Note that this implies that the householder’s state is more conducive 
to knowledge of Brahman than the hermit’s.) Thus Brahmasittra 
III.4.26 says: ““There is dependence on all (means), because of scrip- 
ture, like the horse.” The scripture in question is Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad IV.4.22 (see just above for translation). The séra means 
that as one may reach a village without a horse, but gets there faster 
with one, so one may gain knowledge by repetition, but works are 
required to gain it quicker and without difficulty. 

1.39 (E37). Objection : Knowledge is the very form of Brahman, 
not something different from It. But Brahman is eternal and not an 
effect. So how can anything “be required” for knowledge ? (Things 
“are required” to produce effects. ) 

Answer: A piece of rock crystal whose form has been concealed by 
an adjunct (upddhana=upddhi) “‘requires”’ the removal of the adjunct 
for the sake of the manifestation of its own form, but the form of the 
crystal was not removed by the presence of the adjunct, nor was it 
produced as an effect by the adjunct’s removal. So the form of the 
Self “requires” (means). (Brief excursus against the Buddhist doctrine 
of momentariness.) The form of the crystal was not destroyed or 
produced, because it is impossible that for no reason a moment 
(of clear crystal) should come into being that is like a previous (mo- 
ment of clear crystal) but has several moments (of colored crystal) 
intervening. When fire has ceased a succession (of moments) of 
wood does not arise again from the coals. 


BRAHMASIDDHI 373 


Objection: (The example of the crystal is not parallel to the knowl- 
edge of the Self.) It is the cognition of the crystal (not the form of 
the crystal) that “requires” the removal of the adjunct. But cogni- 
tion is an effect, and different from the crystal (unlike the knowledge 
that is identical with Brahman). For the human effort exerted for the 
removal of the crystal is for the sake of cognizing it. 

Answer: (In fact, it is the form of the crystal that requires the 
removal of the adjunct, for the following reasons:) Cognition is not 
aimed at for its own sake, but for establishing the nature of the object. 
For one performs practical activity with the object, it is not based on 
bare cognition, since then one could perform it even with false cogni- 
tion. (It is not cognition as such that permits successful practical 
activity, but cognition specified by the object as it really is.) There- 
fore cognition is aimed at for the sake of the nature of the object, and 
consequently activity for the sake of cognition is for the sake of the 
object and is required by the object. (And so the object—the form 
of crystal or the form of the Self—even though it is not an effect (at 
least, in the case of the crystal, of any activity in the situation we are 
presently considering), may still “require” something else.) 

Cognition does not produce any modification in the object (for the 
sake of which the object might “require” it). For cognition and 
object are not connected. [If being cognized produced a real modi- 
fication in the object, namely what the Mimamsa calls “‘being reveal- 
ed” (prakatya)] it would result that all things would be known by 
everyone. Finally, a change is impossible in things cognized that 
are in the past or future. 

Therefore an object, such as crystal or the Self, which is as it were 
concealed requires an effort that it may be as it were manifested. 
(Note that this emphasizes the weakness of the sense in which the 
object ‘‘requires” an effort with means for it to be known.) 

1.40 (E37). Verse 3: ‘“Therefore he is described as being a universal 
(sémanya) in which all different individuals (bheda) are absorbed, 
as gold as pointed out by the absorption of individuals such as 
bracelets, etc.” 

1.41 (E37-38). Because, as verse 2 says, It is described by the 
disappearance of particulars, Brahman is described by those who 
know It as a universal. It is the universal Being (satid), according to 
passages such as “This is the great unborn Atman, defined as Being 
(sattalaksana),’®” or “Being (satid) alone is the womb of all beings, 
the highest original form (prakrtih para).”*® It is like the description 
of the reality of gold by the absorption of its particular forms, such as 


bracelet or ring. 


374 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The words “in which all different individuals are absorbed”’ refute 
those who say that such a thing does not exist because there is no 
universal without particulars (e.g., Kumarila in Slokavarttika, akrti- 
vada, verse 10.). It is quite true that Brahman is not strictly speaking 
a universal, but It is called a universal metaphorically because of the 
disappearance of all particulars in it. But you cannot prove that a 
thing that has no particulars of necessity does not exist, because there 
are particulars (such as atoms) that have no further particulars.” 


CHAPTER TWO : ON REASONING (TARKAKANDA) 

II.1 (E39-44). Opponent : Vedic tradition (agama) is against per- 
ception, which presents us with the mutual difference of things; 
therefore it cannot be a pramdna for nonduality. 

Answer: Verse 1: Perception does not negate, but merely affirms; 
therefore it cannot deny oneness. 

Objection 1: Neither Vedic tradition nor perception, etc., is depen- 
dent on the other, and so there is no reason that if they come into 
conflict tradition, and not perception, should lose its authoritativeness. 
Therefore there is no need to attempt to remove apparent conflicts 
between them as you are proposing to do. 

Objection 2: If there is a conflict, tradition is the weaker, because 
it is dependent on perception for its existence. 

Objection 3: The pramana language (Sabda) may depart from truth 
without preceding damage to its means, namely, words, whereas 
perception never departs from truth except as a result of damage to 
its means, namely, the sense organs. Therefore in a conflict percep- 
tion is the stronger of the two. 

Objection 4: That which has an “opportunity for explanation” 
(avakd§a) is stronger than that which does not, and the Vedic state- 
ments of oneness have the opportunity to be explained away by some 
other application, such as having a secondary sense or being meaning- 
less but useful for repeated recitation (japa), whereas the evidence 
of perception cannot be so explained away, and so must be accepted. 

Objection 5: Perception is stronger than language, because the 
Vedic language is self-contradictory, but perception is not. 

Objection 6: Perception is stronger than Vedic tradition because 
tradition is experienced later in the individual’s life, and because 
before one understands the meaning of a verbal communication one 
must first apprehend the world through perception. 

Objection 7: Even if perception and Vedic tradition are equal in 
strength of authority, one must try to remove apparent contradictions 


between them, because there can be no option in regard to an objective 
thing (vastu). 


BRAHMASIDDHI 375 


Response to objections 3 and 6: Tradition is stronger than perception, 
because in the temporal sequence of pramanas the later are stronger 
than the earlier. The knowledge of nonduality depends on that of 
duality and follows it in time, but sublates it. Tradition is stronger 
because the faults of the agent that can exist in the case of perception 
cannot exist in the nonpersonal Vedic tradition. All perception is 
vitiated by the influence (samskdra) of avidya. Perception is a pramdna 
with respect to practical life, but not in giving final truth. 

Response to objections 2 and6: Language is not dependent on percep- 
tion for its being a means of knowledge, but for its being established, 
that is, for being heard. Perception itself depends on other things to 
be produced. We see that later cognitions that require certain 
earlier cognitions may be stronger than them and sublate them. 
For example, we may first mistake a distant grove of trees for a herd 
of elephants, and then, after looking more carefully, without approach- 
ing nearer, see that it is a grove. Similarly, the cognition of higher 
numbers requires that of lower. 

Response to objection 5: The Veda is not self-contradictory, because 
duality is not taught in it, but is temporarily assumed as the basis for 
a later apprehension of nonduality. 

Response to objection 3: Perception and language may equally vary 
from the truth, and so one cannot decide on this basis which of the two 
has the stronger authority. 

Response to objection 4: The lack of any other opportunity for ex- 
planation is equal in the cases of both language and of perception. For 
if the texts of the Upanisads don’t apply to establishing the truth of 
nonduality, they cannot be explained as having any other application. 
If it be possible either that tradition is stronger or that tradition and 
perception are equal in strength, one should not say that a Vedic 
passage has a secondary meaning or no meaning merely because it is 
contradicted by another pramapa. One should say so only when no 
reference in the literal sense of the words can be found, because every 
pramana is independent in establishing its object. In a conflict one 
can just as easily assume an imaginary or metaphorical object for 
perception as for tradition, and just as easily assume perception has no 
object. When two pramanas are independent in producing the appre- 
hension of an object, the later is stronger in authority. 

Additional response to objection 5: ‘The Vedas are not self-contradic- 
tory in teaching duality in the parts that enjoin to works, and teaching 
nonduality in the Upanisads. For injunctions to works do not teach 
duality as a truth, but merely assume a duality already experienced. 

11.2 (E44-45). Perception may either: (1) posit (vi-dhd) the 


376 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


essence of an object, (2) exclude (uy-d-vrt) other objects, or (3) do 
both (a) simultaneously or (b) with exclusion followed by positing 
or (c) with positing followed by exclusion. 

Only on the acceptance of (1) will there be no contradiction between 
perception and the Vedas. 

Verse 2: Alternatives (2), (3a) and (3b) are impossible because one 
must have posited some definite positive thing before one can negate. 

Here a problem arises: how are we to explain how we negate things 
that we don’t believe exist ? There are two possible explanations: 
First, we may say that we deny the presence of a certain already 
established object, quality, or the like, in a certain established locus, 
for example, of a lotus in the sky. Or second, we may say that we 
deny the objective externality of things that have obtained a form in 
the intellect (buddhi). In any case, a negation without regard to an 
already posited locus and object of negation would be asserting Bud- 
dhist voidness as the ultimate truth or would be a negation of every- 
thing with respect to every possible locus. 

II.3 (E45-46). Alternative (3c) is also impossible, because (verse 
3) there cannot be two successive operations (vyapdra) in one act 
of knowledge (buddhi), because the act of knowledge produced by a 
pramana is instantaneous. 

Besides, perception illuminates objects that are proximate, and there- 
fore it cannot in addition illuminate nonproximate objects such as the 
negandum. 

11.4, including verse 4 (E46-47). It is not true (as the Buddhist 
theory of apoha maintains) that the positing of one thing as having a 
certain definite nature is itself the exclusion of the things that are 
other than it. For in every perception, if this were true, we would 
perceive the difference of the object of perception from absolutely 
every other thing that is different from it, whether or not each of these 
other things were the sort of thing that could be perceived by the same 
sense at the same place and time. (For example, the perception that 
something is blue excludes that it is yellow, but it does not exclude 
that it is sweet, which may or may not be true, that it is made up of 
invisible atoms, etc.) 

II.5, including verse 5 (E47-48). Difference cannot be the essence 
(riipa, suabhdva) of anything, as the Buddhists say it is. For differ- 
ence is one single thing, but it resides in two things as differentiating 
them from each other. But if it is the essence of these things, they 
will be identical with it, and thereby with each other, and will not be 
different. On the other hand, if difference is not the essence of things, 
they are not by essence different. If, again, difference is the essence 


BRAHMASIDDHI 377 


of things, then, since it is reciprocal nonexistence, which is a sub- 
division of nonexistence, things will be by their essence nonexistent. 
In addition, if difference is the essence of things, nothing can be one, 
and therefore no wholes can exist, because wholes are made up of 
unitary parts. The (Buddhist) opponent may object to our trying 
to show by these alternatives that the notion of difference is unable 
to stand logical scrutiny, saying that difference is not a thing (vast), 
so that one cannot ask whether it is identical with things or different 
from them, but that it is simply based on the beginningless influences 
of logical constructs (vikalpa). But this is exactly what we say: we 
say that difference does not really exist but is simply the projection 
(vilasita) of beginningless avidyd. 

11.6, including verse 6a (E48-50). Things are not dependent for 
their natures on their relation (in particular, difference) to other 
things. If they were, all things would be mutually dependent and 
nothing would ever get established. ‘‘Relation”’ is a quality of human 
thought, and the natures of things are established by their own proper 
causes, and not by human thought. 

Objection: Difference is not a single thing that resides in the same 
manner in two different things; rather, it differs from thing to thing, 
residing in one thing as its essence, and in the other via relation, and 
establishes them as different. 

Answer: No, relation is created by human thought, which relates 
one already established thing to another already established thing 
for a specific purpose. If relation is necessary for establishing the 
nature of an object, then the prior causes of a thing are not sufficient 
to produce it—to produce it requires in addition something subse- 
quent to its production, namely, its relation of difference from a 
counterpositive (pratiyogin)—all of which is absurd. Difference can- 
not be the essence of a thing for the additional reason that difference 
is understood as being relative to something else, and therefore extrin- 
sic to the thing. 

II.7, including verses 6b-7a (E50-52). Words of relation, such as 
“father/son”’ or ‘‘short/long,’’ are indeed relative, but not the objects 
themselves. We apply these relation words to objects in virtue of 
their different participation in the same action. For example, the 
application of the words “father”? and “‘son” depends on the different 
roles two people play in the action of procreation, in which both are 
involved. Similarly, the words “long” and “short” are applied 
because of a difference of less and more in the similar action of pervad- 
ing space. The existence of the effect is caused not by “relation” but 
by the action of the cause. 


378 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


One cannot prove that the difference of things is real from the 
difference of their effects or their uses in purposeful actions (artha- 
kriyé) because this assumes the reality of difference at the start of the 
argument, begging the question. Moreover, one cannot prove a real 
difference of things from a difference of purposeful action because one 
object may produce several purposeful actions, either simultaneously 
or successively. 

Objection : We can tell there is a difference of things from the differ- 
ence of their effects, because otherwise there is no property that 
distinguishes seeing an effect and not seeing it. 

Answer : We ourselves admit such a distinguishing property, but 
as an object of imagination or construction (kalpandvisaya). It cannot 
really exist, because it can neither be identical with the object it resides 
in, nor different. Just as the Buddhist says that the similarity, and 
therefore the unity, of cause and effect is imagined (kalpita), so we 
may say the difference of effects is imagined. And as you say several 
causes may cooperate to produce one effect so we may say that one 
cause may have several effects. One may with equal justice say that 
the difference of effects from the cause and from each other is imagined, 
as we do, or that the unity of an effect is imagined (as you do). 

I1.8 (E52-54). The simultaneous presence of contradictory pur- 
poseful actions is not a proof of difference. For what does it mean 
for them to be contradictory? Not the impossibility of their occur- 
ring together in the same locus, because that is precisely what needs 
to be proven. Nor does it mean their being mutually exclusive by 
nature (parasparayyavacchinnatmatd), for we observe mutually exclusive 
properties in one locus, such as burning and cooking in fire. If this 
differentiates things from one another, no single thing with several 
properties can exist. Neither is contradiction to be of the nature of 
reciprocal nonexistence, for then the supposed contradictory actions, 
being nonexistences rather than existences, would not be real pro- 
perties. Moreover, since in absolutely nonexistent things like sky 
flowers both of any set of contradictory actions are absent, they would 
both be present, because each is simply the absence of the other. 
Neither is contradiction the relationship of destroyer and destroyed, 
because the destroyer must come into being before it can destroy 
something, and until it does destroy it it is coexistent with the destroy- 
ed. Nor can we say that those properties are contradictory of which 
one is something positive and the other is its exclusion, because a 
positive property and its exclusion may reside in different parts of 
one thing. 

Nor do we know the existence of difference in things from the fixed 


BRAHMASIDDHI 379 


distinction (vyavastha) of purposeful actions (arthakriya). For, what 
is this ‘“‘fixed distinction”? It cannot be, firstly, the diversity of 
effects, for we just saw that one thing may have diverse effects. 
Secondly, it cannot be the fact that a certain thing can be produced 
from one thing and not from others, because ‘‘otherness”’ is exactly 
what needs to proven. Nor, thirdly, can it be the power of producing 
a certain effect and its absence; for we have seen that one single thing 
may have contradictory properties, being connected in different 
times and places with a certain property and its absence. With 
regard to an infinite thing (such as Brahman, it is implied), it is 
logical that it should possess different, contradictory, finite properties, 
If the relation of a thing and its properties is one either of difference 
or indescribability (as identical or different), there is no reason they 
shouldn’t be different in regard to their infinitude and finitude. If, 
to take the sole remaining alternative, their relationship is that of 
identity, the case may still be like that ofa short stretch of time residing 
in a long one. If someone (the Buddhist believer in instantaneous- 
ness) should not allow that a long time is a single thing, we may give 
the further examples of a fire’s simultaneously burning one thing and 
not burning another, but cooking it; or of its burning or cooking one 
thing and doing another act of burning or cooking on it; or of a cause, 
such as a seed, which in producing a certain effect, such as a sprout, 
does not produce another effect of the same cause, and thus is both 
productive and nonproductive. 

We do not know the reality of difference from the distinctions of 
application to purposeful actions, for example, the application of milk 
to producing curds and not of sand, because we see that the same thing 
may be applied to different purposeful actions when accompanied by 
certain accessories. If you reply that it is the accessories that 
create the difference of application, then this is just our doctrine that 
difference is something extrinsic (aupadhika), not something ultimately 
real, 

If difference is deduced from the universal difference supposedly 
caused by instantaneity, then, everything being equally different 
from everything else, everything may be applied to every use, or else 
nothing to any use. The Buddhist opponent may then say that the 
fact that it is not so derives from an imagined unity (between similar 
sorts of things acting as causes). But we may with equal justice say 
that the difference of application is brought about by an imagined 
difference of objects. 

II.9, including verses 8b-9a (E54-56). Since, because of the 
previous arguments, it is possible for a single thing, such as Brahman, 


380 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to have diverse contradictory effects, just as a fire does, there is no 
need to assert a real diversity of things. This is what the Purusasikta 
(Rg Veda X.90) says. 

Even if you imagine a real difference on account of the difference 
of effects or of the fixed distinction of purposeful actions, this does 
not explain why certain causes produce certain effects and not others. 
You may reply that it is because certain things have certain definite 
capacities that can’t be known a priori or explained by logic. But 
then isn’t it easier to assume one thing, Brahman, and say that It has 
the capacity, incomprehensible by logic, to produce many diverse 
effects, which in turn have fixed distinctions among themselves and 
always produce only certain effects and not others ? 

II.10 (E56-57). Objection : One cause does not, in fact, have 
several effects, because the difference of effects is based on a difference 
of powers (Sakti), which are the real, direct causes. 

Answer (verses 9b-10a): If one thing may have many powers 
residing in it, without affecting its unity, can’t it have many effects 
residing outside it without affecting its unity ? 

Opponent (mainly Kumarila): Difference can be known by the 
pramana abhdva. For difference is identical with reciprocal nonexist- 
ence and a nonexistence can only be known by the pramana of the 
same name (viz., abhdva). 

II.11, including verses 10b-lla (E57-58). Answer: No. Abhava 
only acts with reference to some particular locus of negation and 
some particular negandum, thus ““This is not that,” or ‘That is not 
in this.” But this assumes difference, which is what abhdva as a sepa- 
rate pramdna is posited to establish, so there is the logical fault of 
“mutual dependence.”’ Also, knowledge of nonexistence is not from 
the bare absence of knowledge of something, but from the absence of 
knowledge when all of the causes of knowledge are present except 
the object, and the perception of some other object in its place. But 
this again assumes the difference of objects. This is true whether the 
knowledge of nonexistence is like an inference from the difference of 
objects, or from the difference of cognitions. 

We have already shown that perception can’t grasp difference imme- 
diately. Nor (contrary to the Nyaya-Vaisesika view) can a second 
perception of the locus helped by the first perception of it and the 
remembrance of the negandum prove the nonexistence that is differ- 
ence. For, this once more assumes the difference of locus and negan- 
dum, the very thing to be proven. 

11.12, including verse 11b (E58-59). We do, in fact, see a single 
form in things conceived of as different, because perception, etc., do 


BRAHMASIDDHI 381 


not apprehend difference, and there is no separate pramdna abhdva, 
as we have just shown. Every pramdna tells us that something is, 
and not that something is not or that something is different and 
nothing else. Thus every pramdna apprehends the common form 
Being (sat). It is not true that this common form is only produced 
by a second, construction-filled (savikalpaka) cognition, called “‘identi- 
fication”’ (anusamdhdna). For, in that case even as ingle thing considered 
by identification with reference to its connection with different places 
and times would not be one. In addition, as Kumarila says, we can see 
other universal forms directly, for example, cowness in a herd of cows. 

TI.13, including verse !1b (E59-60). (Against Bhedabhedavada, 
probably mainly that of Kumarila, but also perhaps that of the Jains 
and some Vedantins:) The existence of two cognitions, reflecting 
nondifference (abheda)—that which is continuous—and difference 
(bheda)—that which is discontinuous—does not show the ultimate 
reality of difference, but only its empirical reality. For, a cognition 
must derive from a pramdna and be in accord with logic to reflect 
reality, and we have shown that the cognition of difference does 
neither. Therefore, neither difference nor even the cognition of 
difference exists ultimately, but only empirically (vyavahara). It is 
error, avidyd, indescribable (na nirucyate) as existent or nonexistent. 

Four alternatives can explain the fact of these two cognitions: 
(1) universal (sémdnya) and particular (vyakti) are two different things 
that are joined together (the Nydya-Vaisesika view); (2) the thing 
is one, made up of both universal and particular (vifesa) (the view 
of Kumirila and the Jains?); (3) the particulars (viSesa) alone are 
the real things, nondifference is imagined on the basis of them and 
having them as its reference (the Buddhist view); (4) nondifference 
alone is ultimately real, and difference is imagined because of begin- 
ningless avidyaé, having nondifference as the basis and reference of the 
imagination (Mandana’s own view). 

11.14, including verses 12b-13a (E60-61). Response to (1): Uni- 
versal and particular are not two different things, because we apply 
universal and particular terms to the same thing (samanddhikaranya), 
expressing identity (parasparatmatva), not relation (sambandha), 
saying, for example, ‘“The pot is existent.” If we did really appre- 
hend universal and particular as different, everyone would agree on 
this doctrine, but they don’t; rather, everyone apprehends them as 
identical. Moreover, we immediately perceive (pratyaksa) both univer- 
sal and particular together. But, if they were different, we would 
comprehend one of them mediately (faroksa) via the other, as fire 
from smoke in inference. 


382 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Your special sort of relation, inherence, which supposedly unites 
universal and particular, is illogical, because two things must be 
either identical or different. The representation of two things as one 
is self-contradictory. 

II.15 (E61-62). Objection : Inherence can conceal the difference 
of two things, as the conjunction of fire and iron conceals their 
difference. 

Answer (including verses 13b-14a) : Then one thing may also appear 
as many, as in the case of ‘‘variegated color’? (citrarfipa) (which the 
Nyaya-Vaisesika accepts as a separate color), or the cognition of a 
city that is a unity but appears witht he forms of the various things 
in the city (a Buddhist account). 

II.16, including verse 17 (E62-64). Everyday usage (vyavahdéra— 
here clearly meant both as practical activity and as verbal usage) 
is not a criterion of what really is. You the opponent (Nyaya-Vaiée- 
sika, Mimamsa?) may say that qualities (guna) and universals (jai) 
are upddhis different from substances (dravya), but yet in sentences 
such as ‘‘the cow is white”’ we identify both a universal, cowness, and a 
quality, white, with a substance, the individual cow. But the content 
of thought and that of verbal usage are the same. Therefore thought 
also is not a sure guide to reality, and the thought of difference is not 
a proof of its reality. 

The awareness of the continuous and the discontinuous may be 
explained not by an objective reality, but by a defect in the knower, 
just as we see visual errors may arise solely from defects of the subject, 
such as eye disease or strong emotions, without any exterior cause. 
Avidyd is this defect which accounts for the apprehension of difference, 
and it resides in the individual. 

II.17 (E64). Response to position (2): To say that the thing is 
one but comprises two elements, the continuous (avydurtta) universal 
and the discontinuous (zydurtia) particular, is self-contradictory and 
therefore impossible. No cognition that is self-contradictory, for 
example, doubt, can be a pramdana. 

(Verse 18) If there is no contradiction in essence, that is, reciprocal 
nonexistence, between universal and particular, they are simply one 
thing, and there is no difference between them; if there is a contra- 
diction, they are simply two. 

II.18, including verse 19 (E64-65). You cannot say that the diffe- 
rence comes not from a difference of essence but from a biformity in 
the cognition, the object itself remaining one, for either the cognition 
grasps two forms, in which case there are two objects, or it grasps 
one form, in which case there is only one object. 


BRAHMASIDDHI 383 


II.19, including verse 20 (E65-66). Objection: If universal and 
particular are not different, why is a second cognition necessary 
to know one of them after first knowing the other ? 

II.20, including verse 21 (E66-67). Answer : Since according to 
your doctrine the essence of the object is compounded of universal 
and particular, the essence of the object does not carry over into other 
objects, and therefore you must say that the particulars alone are real. 

Objection: ‘That which carries over into other objects may not be 
the object itself, but it may be a component part (amSa) of it; otherwise 
the cognition of something shared with other objects would be an 
imagination without a cause (nirbija kalpana). 

Answer: This “‘component part”? may be the thing itself, and then 
it will be different from the particular. Or it may be some other 
thing than that thing, and the absurdity will result that there are 
three things, universal, particular, and that which possesses them. 
Therefore this “part,” being neither the thing itself nor another 
separate thing, is the object of imagination, indescribable as identical 
with the thing or different from it (tattvdnyatudbhyam anirvacaniya). 

Objection: The part is neither the thing itself nor another thing 
nor not a thing at all, because nonexistent things like sky lotuses cannot 
be portions of anything. (In other words, the opponent tries to 
define the relationship of the part to the object in purely negative 
terms, to avoid the contradictions that will follow if it is described 
positively as identical or different. He implicitly denies that the 
‘indescribability” of the relationship means that it is purely imagined. ) 
Since the universal portion of an object may carry over into other 
things, the thing itself carries over (and therefore things are partly 
identical with each other, because the portion is not different from the 
object itself). 

Answer: But since the other portion, the particular portion, does 
not carry over, the thing itself doesn’t carry over. Moreover, if the 
thing is a collection of universal and particular, then, if both portions 
don’t carry over, the thing itself does not carry over at all, and there- 
fore things are really just different from each other, and not the same 
at all. 

11.21, including verse 22 (E67-68). On the other hand, since 
one portion, the universal, that is, such forms as (being an) existent, 
a substance, and the like, does carry over in all things, everything will 
be identical with everything else, and this is just our doctrine of non- 
difference. For example, a horse sharing such universals as those 
just named with a cow, will carry over into a cow and be identical 
with it and vice versa. If you say that the particular does not carry 


384 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


over, then only difference will be real, as we proved before. There 
is no way to avoid the alternatives of absolute difference and absolute 
nondifference. 

JI.22, including verse 23 (E68). The same argument works 
against those (the Digambara Jains) who say that there is ar elation 
of difference and nondifference between the substance and its modes 
(paryaya). ‘They seek to establish both the nondifference of substance, 
for example, of gold, by the indifference of one whose desire is merely 
for gold to what forms it is in, and the difference of modes, for example, 
of a plate and a necklace, by the joy and sorrow of those who want 
one or the other mode when it is changed into another mode. But 
in fact, either the thing carries over into another thing, in which case 
it will be the substance that is the thing, since the other portion, the 
mode, is absent; or if the thing itself does not carry over, the thing 
itself will be just the modes, since the same substance is found else- 
where. A portion isolated out of a thing is merely imaginary, because 
the object is mixed (citra) on this account, and the portion is not 
mixed (and therefore not the object and therefore not real. It is 
important to note that “‘thing,”’ vastu, has the double meaning of both 
“object” and also “reality.’’) 

II.23, including verse 24 (E68-69). In addition, if, as you say, 
substance is not merely different, but also nondifferent from its modes, 
then if some mode were destroyed and another produced, the substance 
itself would be in the old mode, abide as itself, and be produced in 
the new mode. It would follow that there would be a confusion 
(samkara) in the reactions of joy, sorrow, and indifference of those 
who want the new mode, the old mode, and the substance. But in 
fact there is a fixed distinction among them. You hold that neither 
difference nor nondifference is absolute. But if nothing is absolute, 
the nonabsoluteness itself is not absolute, and therefore you cannot 
say that nondifference is not absolute, and so you cannot avoid the 
confusion of reactions. 

II.25, including verse 26 (E69-70). Now let us examine the remain- 
ing options of the four (that were stated at II.13): (3) difference 
alone is real, and (4) nondifference alone is real. 

Response to position (3): It is impossible that difference alone is 
rea] and that the imagination of nondifference is based on it. For 
difference is relative and can’t be apprehended without first appre- 
hending some second thing as different from the first. But this in 
turn depends on previously having apprehended difference. There- 
fore difference cannot be apprehended. But if it is not apprehended, 
it cannot be the basis for the imagination of nondifference. 


BRAHMASIDDHI 385 


The apprehension of nondifference, on the other hand, does not 
depend on a previous apprehension of nondifference, nor on the 
apprehension of difference. Therefore, having apprehended non- 
difference, taking it as basis, there is, on account of the inability to 
ascertain it as it is, the imagination of difference. The cognition of 
identification (anusamdhana) ‘‘this is that” does not imply difference, 
because it may be applied to what all agree is a single object, but 
considered with reference to different places and times. 

11.26, including verse 27 (E70-71). Everyone can experience for 
himself that the first perception grasps the bare object and is without 
constructions (vikalpa), whereas the cognitions with constructions® 
that follow plunge into particulars. Moreover, it is self-contradic- 
tory to say that the first perception grasps the object along with its 
particulars, but that the particulars, not yet being linked with words, 
are not noticed. A thing must either appear in a cognition or be 
absent from it. 

11.27, including verse 28 (E71). We have shown that neither (1) 
nor (2) is possible, that is, (1) neither are universal and particular 
different things, and (2) nor are they portions of a single thing. 
Therefore either the universal or the particular must be false. This 
can’t be the bare object.*4 For, as we see in everyday errors, such as 
the mistaking of a piece of shell for silver, we are never mistaken 
about the bare reality “this,” which appears (i.e., it is constant in the 
first, erroneous, cognition “this is silver,” and in the later correct 
cognition “‘this is shell.”’) The particulars, silver and shell, on the other 
hand, are not constant. 

Objection : It is in the manas alone that error resides. Therefore 
the different sensory cognitions are not errors, and they establish 
difference. 

Answer : No. The senses themselves may err, because we find 
that errors may correspond to the defects of the sense organs. 

II.28, including verse 29 (E71-72). Objection (a Buddhist) : 
Entities have mutually exclusive individual marks (vydvrttasvalaksana). 
Therefore reciprocal nonexistence is either their essence or an attri- 
bute of them. Otherwise the phrase “‘mutually exclusive’ would 
lack an occasion for its use, and so would be meaningless. 

Answer : Reciprocal nonexistence cannot be the essence of things, 
because if one thing first exists independently, another whose form 
is its nonexistence may also exist, but if everything is by essence reci- 
procal nonexistence, nothing at all can exist, because everything’s 
existence is dependent on everything else. If, on the other hand, 
you say that reciprocal nonexistence is an attribute, that is, an extrinsic 


386 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


property (upadhi) of entities, then in their essence they don’t differ. 
If you say that reciprocal nonexistence is not a something (kaScit), 
which could be either the same as entities or different, that is just our 
position: if reciprocal nonexistence is not anything, then nondifference 
is proven. 

We see that nondifference is the basis of difference, as a face is the 
basis of its various reflections. The reflections are not real new differ- 
ent things, because their dimensions differ from the original and from 
each other (and therefore they are a sort of error). 

The cognition of oneness in a collection, such as a forest of trees, 
is not ultimately based on difference, because then there would be an 
infinite regress, and nothing would ever be one. Whenever we do 
stop, that cognition will be of unity, not of difference, and therefore 
it will not have difference as its basis. 

II.29, including verses 30-31 (E72). Difference, for example, 
that of reflections, always appears as penetrated by the nondifference, 
for example, of the original object. Therefore difference is false. 
Similarly, the difference of the universe (vifva) is penetrated by the 
nondifference expressed by ‘“‘this,” ‘‘that,”’ ‘‘object,” “thing.” In 
the case of differences such as that of the trees in a forest, even if we 
were to grant that the difference were not false, still, the case is 
different in that the unity expressed by such words as ‘‘forest”’ is 
not in each tree severally. 

II.30, including verse 32 (E72-73). If the essences or individual 
natures of things are mutually exclusive, the proponent of the reality 
of difference must explain the appearance and practical usage of 
nondifference. (a) It can’t be from similarity (sddrsya), because 
things are ex hypothesi utterly unconnected. (b) It can’t be from 
mere failure to note exclusion, because if exclusion isn’t noticed in 
things that are mutually exclusive, when will it be noticed ? (c) 
It can’t be from the fact that perception is not final knowledge (nifcaya, 
here used as equal to savikalpa jiana). For we observe that there is 
practical usage (vyavahdra, including verbal usage) based both on 
difference, for example, of a cow from other cows, and on nondiffer- 
ence, for example, of the universal cowness. Therefore nondiffer- 
ence occurs not just on the level of perception (which Mandana 
apparently thinks must be nirvikalpa), but also on that of practical 
usage (which is dependent on savikalpa cognition). (d) It can’t be 
because different things may perform one purposeful action, excluding 
those which don’t perform it. Purposeful actions are just as different 
from each other as everything else is, and every exclusion is different 
from every other exclusion. 


BRAHMASIDDHI 387 


You may try to avoid these problems by saying that mutual exclu- 
sion is not the essence of things. But then how can it belong to them 
as the same in all of them ? 

Objection : It may have as its basis beginningless traces (samskdra), 
rather than being dependent on any particular feature residing in 
the object. 

Answer : But then there would be no restriction as to what things 
appeared nondifferent from each other. Therefore you must assume 
certain real capacities in things by nature different from each other, 
which capacities produce the idea of nondifference. But these capa- 
cities are on your hypothesis contrary to the [utterly different natures 
of the entities that possess them (i.e., they are the same whereas the 
objects are different)]. It is more economical to assume one single 
thing that by its greatness appears as many. 

II.31, including verse 33 (E73). This idea is as good as the other 
three positions (see II.13), all of which say that usage based on non- 
difference is in accordance with appearance, notreality. (1) Those 
who teach a conjunction of universal and particular must admit that 
there is usage based on the false identification of universal and parti- 
cular, which are different. (2) Those who teach a mixed object 
must say that both usages (of difference and nondifference) are 
according to appearance only, since the thing itself is mixed and its 
nature does not carry over—as was said above. (3) Those who teach 
absolute difference must say that the usage of nondifference is in 
accord with appearance only. So it is just as reasonable for us to 
assume that the usage of nondifference is in accordance with reality 
and that of difference with appearance. 


CHAPTER THREE : INJUNCTIONS (NIYOGAKANDA) 


III.1 (E74). We will now refute those who say that the Veda is 
a pramana only for things to be done that are the objects of injunction 
(vidhi, codana), not for things already in existence, and that therefore 
what the texts of the Upanisads teach is the injunction “One should 
perform knowledge of the Self”; they do not teach the Self directly. 

Now, there may be three sorts of knowledge of the Brahman-Self 
that might be the object of such an Upanisadic injunction : (1) 
verbal knowledge, from language (fabda) (refuted below, III.2-46); 
(2) immediate manifestation (saksdtkarana) without constructions 
(vikalpa) (refuted below, III.47-68); and (3) meditational knowledge, 
called dhydna, bhdvand, or updsana, consisting in a continuous succession 
(samtdna) of verbal knowledge (refuted below, III.69). 

(1) Refutation of verbal knowledge of the Self as the object of an injunction 


388 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


III.2, including verse 1 (E74-75). The verbal knowledge of 
Brahman cannot be enjoined, because this knowledge arises directly 
from hearing Vedic sentences about Brahman, without any need for 
an injunction. 

III.3, including verse 2 (E75-76). If to understand the meaning 
of a sentence an injunction were needed, we would need an injunc- 
tion to understand the sentence communicating the injunction, and 
another to understand the latter injunction, and thus would enter 
an infinite regress. 

III.4, including verses 3-4 (E76). The end of an injunction is 
activity, posterior to the hearing of the injunction, but the understand- 
ing of the injunction is simultaneous with hearing it. 

If the indicative sentences of the Upanisads give knowledge of 
Brahman, there is no need to enjoin the knowledge; if they do not, 
there is no use in enjoining a verbal knowledge that can’t be obtained. 
Nor can the injunction add “‘certainty’’ (nifcaya): if indicative langu- 
age can’t give it, some other pramdna than language is necessary, not 
an injunction. 

ITI.5, including verses 5-7 (E76-77). Objection: An injunction of 
knowledge serves to avert the suspicion that there is no intended 
meaning, as in the case of mantras meant solely for recitation (japa). 

Answer: No, because according to the Mimdamsdsiitras the meaning 
of words should be taken to be the same in the Veda as in secular 
language, unless proven otherwise. Just as an injunctive word has 
a meaning by itself without depending upon another injunctive word 
to establish that it is not meaningless, so we can observe that the 
indicative words about Brahman have a meaning in themselves and 
do not require an injunction to reassure themselves they are not 
meaningless. 

IIT.6, including verses 8-9 (E77-78). Objection : An injunction is 
necessary to know that Self-knowledge is a human good (purusdrtha). 

Answer : No, injunctions inform us of future results, but the result 
of knowledge, that is, the pervasion of the object by the knower, its 
becoming clear to him, occurs immediately. 

Liberation can’t be a future fruit, because it is not something 
accomplished by a cause; if it were, it would cease. Liberation is 
something positive—unsurpassable bliss and lordship (aifvarya)—and, 
though negative effects, such as (liberation defined as) the posterior 
nonexistence of connection with the body, etc., can be unending, 
effects that are positive can’t. Ifyou say that liberation is the cessa- 
tion of the causes of bondage, which is the object of an injunction, 
we respond that the cause is avidydé, and its destruction is nothing 


BRAHMASIDDHI 389 


other than knowledge. Liberation is abiding in one’s own form, 
which is not something to be effected. If you (trying to preserve the 
need for an injunction, which always has an effect in view) say that 
we may accept that liberation is an unending (positive) effect on the 
strength of scripture, we reply that one shouldn’t interpret scripture 
as contrary to ordinary experience as long as it can be explained 
otherwise. 

III.7, including verses 10-12 (E78-79). Odjection : Even though 
there may be no fruit of the knowledge of Brahman subsequent to 
that very knowledge, an injunction is still necessary for the texts 
about Brahman to be authoritative (pramana). For if they merely 
state what is already in existence, they must merely repeat (anuvdda) 
what can be known from another pramdna, and therefore are not 
themselves an independent pramana. 

IIL.8, including verses 13-14 (E79). Answer: The Veda is an 
independent pramdana if it tells something unknowable by another 
pramana, even when it gives information about something already 
existent. 

III.9, including verses 15-16a (E79-80). Perception and infer- 
ence are independent framdnas, even though their object also is 
something already existent. Vedic language, not being derived from 
the thoughts of any person, is an independent pramdya. Human 
language, on the other hand, communicates first that a man has a 
certain thought, and only then does it communicate the object of that 
thought. 

III.10, including verses 16b-17a (E80-81). Objection : With re- 
gard to already existent things, which can be known both by language 
and by other pramdnas, there is a suspicion that one of those other 
praménas may contradict language. Therefore language about things 
already existent depends on the other pramdna, on its noncontradic- 
tion of language, to ratify its validity. Being dependent, it is not an 
independent pramdya by itself. On the other hand, injunctive langu- 
age, about things to be done in the future, communicates what cannot 
be known by any other pramdna and is therefore independent as a 
pramana. Therefore an injunction to know Brahman is necessary to 
establish the validity of the Upanisadic sentences about Brahman. 

Answer : If the possibility of being contradicted by another pramdana 
makes a pramana cease to be independent, why can’t we say that the 
other pramdnas are dependent on language, inasmuch as they may 
be contradicted by it ? 

III.11, including verses 17b-18 (E81). Besides, the fact that two 
pramanas may each grasp the same object does not make one dependent 


390 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


on the other, because we see that perception and inference may 
both apprehend the same object, and that several senses may appre- 
hend Being (satté), qualityness (gunatva) and substance (dravya). 
In the case of secular language it is the very fact of its object being 
apprehended by another pramdna that makes language a pramdna; 
how much less can nonpersonal Vedic language, whose object can’t 
be known from other framdnas, be prevented from being an inde- 
pendent pramdna about things already existing. 

ITII.12, including verses 19-20 (E81-82). If (as the school of Pra- 
bhakara assumes) it is being a “command” (niyoga—a Prabhakara 
technical term) that makes language an independent pramdna, then 
commands in secular language would necessarily be independent 
and valid pramaénas, whereas we see they may be dependent or invalid. 

JII.13, including verse 21 (E82). Objection : Human commands 
are preceded by a desire to communicate the desire of ends and means, 
which desire, being a thought of a person, does not exist in the non- 
personal Veda. 

Answer : Then it is the presence or absence of a personal thought 
that is the cause of the dependence or independence of language 
as a pramdna, not whether or not the sentence refers to something 
already accomplished, or whether or not it can be known by another 
pramana. 

III.14, including verses 22-23 (E82). Objection : Vedic language 
intends a command (niyoga), unknowable by any other pramdna, 
whereas injunctions in secular language intend the “application” 
(viniyoga) of means to ends, which can be known by other pramdnas. 
Therefore Vedic language is an independent pramdna, whereas secular 
language is dependent. 

Answer : No, because words have the same meanings in the Veda 
and in secular language. 

III.15, including verses 24-27a (E82-83). Objection : Commands 
can only be known from the Veda, whereas applications can be known 
from other pramanas. 

Answer : In saying this, you are admitting that it is not the mere 
possibility that an object may be known by some other pramdna that 
causes language to be dependent, but the fact that, as is the case in 
secular language, language is employed only after something has 
been known by another praména. For, you have just assumed that 
the application of means to ends may be known both by the pramana 
language and by other pramdnas. In the case of human verbal 
communication, it is a speaker who talks of what is possible to be 
apprehended, and who would not speak of something without having 


BRAHMASIDDHI 391 


known it, who is regarded as reliable. Conversely, it is one who 
speaks of what it is impossible to apprehend, or who might speak 
of something without having known it, who is unreliable, whose 
speech is not a pramadna. The Buddha is an example. (The implica- 
tion seems to be that at least in the case of human language, it is that 
whose object is a thing that might be “apprehended”—that is, by 
another pramdéna than language—that is pramana, not that whose 
object can’t be apprehended by another praména. ) 

ITI.16, including verses 27b-28 (E83-84). Therefore the sole 
cause whether or not language is dependent as a pramdna is whether 
it is personal or nonpersonal. And, whether its object is something 
already existent or something to be done in the future is irrelevant to 
whether it is dependent. If, as Mimdamsdsiitra 1.1.5 says, ‘The rela- 
tionship of word and object is natural (autpattika),” it is not necessarily 
true that language is preceded by thoughts of persons based on other 
pramanas, and is therefore dependent. The effort of Mimamsdsitra 
1.1.4 and commentary to show that no other pramdna for dharma is 
possible than Vedic impulsion (codand) is not meant to show that 
Vedic language is independent and a pramdna, but to show that no 
other pretended pramdna for dharma is possible, lest someone accept 
something like the words of the Buddha as such a pramdna. 

Objection : But then, for the Veda to be a finally authoritative 
pramana we must prove that any other pramdna for the things it com- 
municates is impossible, and so the Veda’s being a pramdna is depen- 
dent on the absence of any other such pramdna. 

Answer: Even if it depends on the absence of another praméana, 
it is not dependent on another pramdéna. Anyway, if the language of 
the Veda ceased to be a pramana merely because another pramdana 
for its object were possible, the same would hold true for ordinary 
pramdanas such as perception, inference, and the like (which is absurd). 
Moreover, you maintain that Vedic language teaches certain already 
existent things by way of teaching things to be done. Now, another 
pramana might be possible for these already existent things, and 
might contradict Vedic language. And so the Veda would cease 
to be a praména equally on your opinion as on ours. But in fact, as we 
said before, it is not whether or not another framdna is possible for the 
same object that determined the dependency of a pramana, but whether 
or not it is personal, that is, preceded by the thought of a person. 

TII.17, including verse 29 (E84-85). Odyection : The presence of 
an injunction is necessary to supply the action of a verb, without 
which the remaining words of a sentence are not connected. 

Answer : Then the verb “‘is’” may be supplied where necessary. 


392 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


III.18, including verses 30-32 (E85-86). Objection (Prabhakara) : 
The meaning of “‘is” is that something is apprehensible by a pramdga; 
therefore sentences of which “‘is’” is the verb must convey an object 
whose knowledge is dependent upon another prama@na, and so these 
sentences cannot be by themselves an independent pramdna. 

Answer: No, because a praména may be in contact with an object 
in any one of the three times, past, present, and future, and so its 
existence may give the ideas “‘was,” “‘is,” and ‘“‘will be,” not just the 
idea ‘‘is” alone. 

III.19, including verses 33-34a (E86-87). Objection : In inference 
it is precisely the present contact with a logical mark (linga=hetu) 
that lets us know the possibility of something’s being knowable by 
perception in the past, present, or future, and therefore we have the 
idea of the three times. 

Answer : No, because there are objects knowable only by inference, 
never at any time by perception. 

Anyway, if the meaning of “‘is’’ is the existence of a pramana (other 
than language), this will be equally true in the case of the Veda 
(which will then not give us knowledge otherwise inaccessible, which 
knowledge we agree it does give us). 

III.20, including verses 34b-35a (E87). Objection: Inference and 
Vedic language differ in that the object of inference can be reached by 
another pramana, but not so Brahman as the object of Vedic language, 
because it lacks any distinctive qualifying attributes (vifesa) to act as 
logical mark. 

Answer : No, because once avidyd is absorbed Brahman may also be 
known by direct vision (sdéksatkara). 

III.21, including verses 35b-36a (E87). If it is solely the fact of 
being known at present by a pramdna that constitutes Being, then 
everything that is known at present will itself be present, there will 
be no threefold temporality in objects. 

III.22, including verses 36b-38 (E87-88). Is that which consti- 
tutes Being (a) being connected with a present pramdna, or (b) being 
connected with any pramdana? 

If (a), we would always say of any object of memory (considered 
as a pramana), “It is,” whereas we actually say neither “It is’ nor 
“It is not’ (but rather “It was’’). 

If (b), objects once known and then destroyed would exist and 
serve purposeful action, and we would never desire to know if some- 
thing once known still exists. 

III.23, including verse 39 (E88-89). Odjection: Then it is capa- 
bility (yegyatva) of being joined with a pramdana that constitutes Being. 


BRAHMASIDDHI 393 


Answer : This “capability” is nothing but the nature of the object, 
and therefore there is no need to make the existence of a pramdna 
a condition of the existence of the object. Similarly, when we say 
a blue object is one capable of being known as having the form blue, 
the knowledge of blue is not a condition of the word ‘“‘blue.”’ 

Conclusion: Since “‘is’? therefore denotes the nature of the object, 
a sentence in which the meaning of “‘is’’ predominates communicates, 
without dependence on another pramdna, the nature of the object. 

JII.24 (E89-91). Even if there are many natures of objects, and 
not a single (universal called) ‘‘Being,”’ our present point still stands— 
that it is not the connection with a pramdna that causes the use of the 
word ‘‘is.”’ 

(Against Prabhakara, Nydya-Vaisestka, and the Buddhists, who deny the 
reality of Being considered as the highest universal :) Nonetheless, there 
is, in fact, only a single Being; otherwise the same word ‘‘is’’ could 
not be applied to an infinite number of objects, since we see that 
homonymous (in the Scholastic sense—sddhdrana) words, such as 
“organ” (aksa)*? apply only to a limited number of class character- 
istics (jdtz) or extrinsic indicatory marks (upalaksana). This universal 
subsumes the three universals supposed by the Nyaya-Vaisesika to be 
the most inclusive true universals, namely, being a substance, being 
a quality, and being a motion (dravyatva, gunatva, karmatva). ‘‘Be- 
ing’ thus has one meaning, not three separate ones. Besides, there 
is no reason to say that such categories as universal, particularity, 
and inherence (sdmdnya, visesa, samavdya) cannot be said to “be” in 
the same way as substance, quality, and action, You can’t say we 
apply the word “‘is” to them metaphorically, because metaphorical 
usage requires something in common, and that common thing would 
be precisely what is meant by the term ‘“‘Being.”’ Being must be one, 
not just a term applied to several properties, one or the other of which 
every sort of entity (padartha) must have. For a collection requires 
some single thing to unify its members, and if the single thing is 
merely the fact of having the word ‘‘being”’ applied to them, we cannot 
be sure it includes ail entities. And if there is no common element 
that includes all entities, we will not be able to know whether any 
system’s set of categories includes all entities, and consequently to 
tell whether that system is true. 

Objection : The single all-inclusive thing necessary is being suscep- 
tible to a pramana, or else capacity for purposeful action (arthakriya). 

Answer : Then there is no need for a number of properties to define 
being, and the two things you suggest may be merely indicatory marks 
(upalaksana) of Being, which is a single property common to all things 


394 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that are. Also, if there were several occasions (nimitia) for the use 
of the word “being,” we could be in doubt as to which was in question, 
as in the case of the word “‘organ’’—but we see it is not so. 

But in fact the single thing that is Being is neither (1) the praméana, 
nor (2) purposeful action. (1) It cannot be the pramdna either (a) as 
true qualifier (vifesana=jati) or (b) as indicatory sign (upalaksana). 
It is not (a) the pramdna as qualifier, because as explained in III.18, 
a pramdna may refer to past things, because a pramdna is known after 
it has completed its operation of producing knowledge, so cannot 
qualify that knowledge; and because one may have doubt about the 
existence of some things even though we know there is no pramana 
by which we might know them, whereas there can be no doubt whether 
or not a thing is qualified ina certain way once we know the qualifier 
is absent. It is not (b), the pramdna as indicatory mark, because the 
relationship of indicatory sign and thing indicated remains even 
after the sign has perished, but “‘is” is not applied to things that have 
perished or whose existence is in doubt. 

The single unitary thing that is Being (2) cannot be purposeful 
action. If it were, we couldn’t use the word “being” for anything 
before seeing its effect. Ifit is the pramdna itself that is the effect, the 
idea “‘it is’ would come not from the pramdna by itself, but from some- 
thing else (i.e., the subsequent second-degree apperception of the 
pramdana). 

Moreover, every object is qualified by being as qualifier (vifesana), 
and the object cannot be qualified by its supposed efficaciousness 
(arthakriya), namely, pramana, because they aren’t simultaneous. If 
having an effect is not a qualifier but an indicatory sign of being, it 
would again result that what is past exists. 

(Reprise and summary of previous argument on being, with no new 
material.) Neither purposeful action nor pramdna can be made the 
criterion of being or nonbeing, because the idea of being is already 
present in them—there would be an infinite regress. Therefore 
Being (satta@) equals the nature of object(s), and it is one. 

III.25, including verse 40 (E91). Objection : But a definition of 
“capability” (yogyatva) (to be joined with a pramdna, i.e., of being) 
other than “‘having the nature of object,” is possible, namely, the 
existence of a cause of a pramdna (pramdna-hetu-sadbhava). 

Answer: No. A treasure trove buried in the earth, without present 
perception, inferential sign, anything that can’t be explained without 
assuming it, or living witnesses, is inaccessible to all pramdnas, and yet 
we may wonder whether such a thing “‘is” or “‘is not.” 

III.26, including verse 41 (E91-92). Besides, because it is the 


BRAHMASIDDHI 395 


function of pramdnas to distinguish what is and is not, nonbeing can 
also be the object of a pramdna, and therefore the existence of a pramdna 
can’t be the definition of being. 

III.27, including verses 42-43a (E92). We know nonexistence, 
for instance, that of thorns in a spot we are considering stepping on. 
This is not (1) simply the knowledge of other things present, because 
we can perceive other things even where there are thorns and before 
looking at the spot of ground. Nor is it (2) the bare absence of 
determination (pariccheda) of thorns, because that exists even before 
we examine the place, and anyway we can’t reflect upon this absence 
unless it is already assumed that absences are objects of knowledge. 

III.28, including verses 43b-44a (E92-93). Nor is the knowledge 
of nonexistence merely (3) the absence of determination of the object 
when the other causes of determination are present. For there is no 
difference in that absence whether or not the thing inquired about 
can in fact be the object of pramdyas (which also is against your own 
suggested definition of being as the existence of a pramdna). 

III.29, including verses 44b-46 (E93). Neither is the knowledge 
of nonexistence merely (4) the knowledge of the spot isolated from 
other things. (a) If it is the isolation of the knowledge from other 
things than the spot, there would never be any need for a closer exami- 
nation of the spot after a rough glance at it. (b) If it is the isolation 
of the object of knowledge, then (1) if the object is isolated in its own 
proper form, then the knowledge of this, the proper form, would be 
present even if it were mixed up with other things. If (2) it is isolated 
in conjunction with a qualifier, the only possible qualifier would be 
the absence of thorns (which is against your hypothesis). 

III.30, including verses 46b-47a (E93-94). What is the object 
of the cognition and the verbal expression “is not’ ? If you say it is 
the nonexistence of a pramdna, why can’t it be the nonexistence of the 
object itself, for both are equally nonexistent? 

III.31, including verses 47b-51a (E94). Objection : The idea and 
verbal expression “‘is not’? are errors, arising in the absence of the 
idea and verbal expression of “‘is.”’ 

Answer : No, because this nonexistence is present even when there 
is no awareness, as in deep sleep, and so in deep sleep we would have 
the idea of the nonexistence of the whole universe. 

Error requires the apprehension of a locus (visaya) of superimposi- 
tion and of the thing superimposed, but nonexistences, such as the 
nonexistence of the idea and verbal expression “‘is,”’ can’t be a locus 
or thing superimposed. 

IJI.32, including verses 51b-53a (E94-95). Even if we grant for 


396 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the sake of the argument that being is capability for a pramana, still 
the statements of the Upanisads are not dependent on another pra- 
mana. For the existence of the object of the texts of the Upanisads, 
that is, Brahman, may then be defined as Its fitness for a pramana, 
specifically tradition (dgama=veda). And, because this is the only 
praména for Brahman, it is independent of any other. Nor is another 
pramana, other than a sentence saying this object exists, necessary to 
tell us about the object as qualified, because that is included in the 
existence of the object. 

TII.33, including verses 53b-58 (E95-96). Even if we were to grant 
that a pramdna for Brahman other than Vedic language is possible, 
tradition is still a praména for it. 

Language is still a pramana even when it is connected with another 
pramaya, as in the case of a qualified person communicating his 
knowledge. It is indeed dependent—on the speaker’s knowledge—as 
far as the object goes, because the hearer does not think “‘This object 
is thus,” but “This person has such-and-such knowledge.” It is 
independent insofar as it is a pramdna for the latter apprehension, 
which in turn gives rise in the hearer to the former. One may, to be 
sure, reject human speech as regards its being a pramdna without 
necessarily rejecting its object, on the grounds that this speech is 
dependent if its object is something beyond the senses that no human 
being could know. An example would be the words of the Buddha. 
Similarly one rejects the speech of a liar on the grounds that one 
knows from some pramdana that he does not tell things as he has seen 
them. But a qualified person’s speech is rejected neither in respect 
to its being a pramdna nor in respect to its object. If a qualified 
person’s speech were not independent as regards its being a pramdna, 
there would be no practical activity based on words, but there is. 
Thus, even if the odject of the texts of the Upanisads can be known by 
another pramdaya, they are still a pramdna. 

Indeed, the Vedanta texts do bring us to a prama@na other than 
themselves, one that is supernatural (alaukika), without the division 
of knower and object of knowledge, self-luminous; and they may be 
dependent, as regards their object—not as regards their being a 
pramana—on. this. 

III.34, including verses 59-64 (E96-98). Therefore being is not 
the fact of being knowable by a pramana. 

Objection : We have the idea of a universal when we recollect 
(avamarsa) a form previously seen, as when seeing one cow we recall 
another and think, “This is the same.”? But we do not have this 
recollection of one “‘being” with respect to another one seen later. 


BRAHMASIDDHI 397 


Answer: The “recollection” may be either (a) the appearance 
of the previous form of the mind (buddhi), or (b) the identification 
(anusamdhdna) of earlier and later in the form “This is that.” 

(a) Between two things with the same universal one never sees 
a complete identity like that of seeing the same individual twice. 
Yet one sees a common universal shared by all existent things, by their 
difference from absolute nonexistence. Something may share one 
universal with one thing and another universal with another. 

IIT.35, including verses 65-67a (E98). In regard to (b), we say 
that “identification” is not from the bringing together of two things, 
but from the appearance of a nondifferent form, because it may be 
performed with reference to the same object at the same place and 
time. Nor do we have this cognition with reference to a jug and a 
cup, which nonetheless share the universal clay. When the common 
traits are more numerous and more in evidence than the differences, 
we say that it is “that”? (sort of thing). 

III.36, including verses 67b-68a (E98-99). “Being” is not occa- 
sioned by connection with something else (namely, a pramdna) that 
serves as its qualifier, as in the case of words like “‘having-a-stick”’ or 
“cooking.” The application of a qualifier precedes the idea of a 
thing as qualified, whereas the idea of a pramana, being inferred from 
its effect, knowledge, is apprehended after being is apprehended. 
Since the idea of being and the idea of a pramdna are not simultaneous, 
they are not connected (as qualified and qualifier). There is a differ- 
ence of time as past, present, and future on the basis of the time of 
connection with the pramana, but this connection is not a true qualifier 
of being, but an extrinsic adjunct (updadhi). 

ITI.37, including verses 68b-69a (E99). The argument has been 
assuming that there is no connection of the meanings of words without 
an action, and that “‘is’? can stand as the word for that action. But 
now Mandana says, against III.17 : It is not true that there is no con- 
nection of the meanings of the individual words ina sentence without 
an action. Such sentences as ‘““The man (is) the king’s (servant) ,” 
or ‘‘The trees (are) in fruit’? communicate the relation of one thing 
to another, not the existence of anything. 

TII.38, including verses 69b-70a (E99-100). Still, even if there 
is in fact no connection of words into a sentence without an action, 
there is no problem in getting the indicative sentences of the Veda 
to communicate Brahman without reference to an injunction, be- 
cause certain sentences in the Upanisads communicate the existence 
of Brahman as cause of the world by stating the origination of the 
world from It. 


398 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


III.39, including verses 70b-73a (E100-102). Objection: In secular 
language the connection of the meanings of words is dependent on 
another pramdna (i.e., it is the knowledge gained from another pramana 
that is expressed in the sentence); where there is conflict with other 
pram4nas, in nonsense sentences, there is no connection of word 
meanings. But in Vedic language, whose objects other pramdnas 
can’t arrive at, the connection of word meanings depends on an 
injunction. 

Answer : No. (1) The hearer does not employ the other pramdnas; 
otherwise language would be useless. (2) The fact that the hearer 
may use the other pramanas to determine that the things referred to by 
the words are susceptible to connection is true with reference both 
to secular and to Vedic language—which destroys your distinction. 
(3) It is the desire to express (vivaksa) that produces the connection 
of words, not a pramdna other than language, because that’s what 
conveys the meaning to the hearer, and that’s what makes the speaker 
speak. (4) We understand the speech of a liar, although there is 
no other pramdna for the meaning he communicates, since it is untrue. 
(5) We can understand the connection even where the meaning of 
the sentence is contradicted by other pramanas. Otherwise there 
would be no difference between meaningless and false sentences. 
(6) Even if it is the fact that the speaker has knowledge gained by 
another pramdna that gives the word-meaning connection, nevertheless 
the place of the other pramdna may in the case of the Veda be taken 
by the object described, Brahman itself. In addition, introducing 
an injunction won’t solve the problem any better, because there is no 
other pramana for it any more than for the content of Vedic indicative 
sentences. Since the Veda has no speaker, there is the difficulty 
that there is no person whose having a pramd@na for a certain thing is 
conveyed by the Veda, in the case of both indicative and injunctive 
sentences alike. (7) In Vedic and secular language equally, we 
conclude by presumption (arthdpatti) from the meaninglessness of 
words by themselves, not the presence of another praména in the spea- 
ker’s mind, but the connection of the meanings of the words into a 
whole. (8) Or, if secular and Vedic language are different in this 
regard, then in secular language we may arrive by presumption at the 
presence of a pramdna in the speaker, but in Vedic language words 
may convey their meaning independently (either of another praména 
or of an injunction). 

TII.40, including verses 73b-78a (E102-103). By presumption 
(aksepa = arthépatti) we deduce the connection of the meanings of the 
words in a sentence from the fact that without such connection a 


BRAHMASIDDHI 399 


series of words does not communicate any new object. There is no 
need to introduce a similar presumption of the connectedness of the 
meanings of words from the fact that otherwise the injunctive word 
would be useless. Besides, if the object corresponding to the injunc- 
tive word in a sentence is not knowable by another pramana, one 
cannot know the connection of that word and the thing it refers to, 
and so cannot know how to act in obedience to the injunction. 

JII.41, including verses 78b-80a (E104). Objection : The connec- 
tion of the injunctive word and its object is learned by a child not from 
the word directly, but is inferred to be in the minds of others by 
observing the use of it by an older person and the action of another 
person brought about by its use. But this knowledge and use on the 
part of the child’s elders is still dependent on the word. 

III.42, including verses 80b-85a. (E104-110) Answer : If it is 
inferred, language is not the sole pramdna for it. All use of language 
is preceded by inference (in learning it), as in your example. 
Therefore inference and language are like the seed and the sprout; 
neither is first. Moreover, because every understanding of a word 
is preceded by an inference by which its meaning is learned, the word 
is purely repetitive, and therefore not a source of new knowledge. 
Injunction (niyoga), for instance, is knowable by a pramdna other 
than language. The /earner’s knowledge of the object (in his case 
injunction) is not solely from the word, even though the observed 
hearer’s knowledge of it may be (at that particular time). 

Inasmuch as the learning (vyutpatti) of the relation of the injunctive 
word and its meaning arrives only at the existence of some cause of 
activity or another, there is no reason to infer a special nonsecular 
(alaukika) cause of activity in the Veda different from those we see 
in secular speech (such as the niyoga of Prabhakara). In fact (as 
the Mimamsa principle states), words should be taken to have the 
same meaning in the Veda as they have in secular speech. 

Objection : We know the existence of the nonsecular cause of activity 
by two successive inferences, first, the inference of some cause of 
activity or another, and then, second, an inference from the absence 
of everyday secular causes of activity to the Vedic cause of activity’s 
being of another, nonsecular, sort. 

Answer: Then the nonsecular cause is also known by inference, 
and not just by language. Anyway, the fact that the activity pres- 
cribed by the Veda is a means of happiness is a cause of activity (and 
therefore Prabhakara’s niyoga is unnecessary). Also, if one cannot 
know the thing corresponding to the Vedic injunctive word by some 
pramana other than language, one cannot know the connection of the 


400 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


word with it, and therefore the use and meaning of the word. For 
one can know the relation of two things only if both things are already 
known. 

Objection: It is the power (Sakti, samarthya) of the word that is the 
connection of the word. But the word is connected not with the 
object but with the idea of the object, because the effect of this connec- 
tion defined as power cannot be the object, because that is already 
in existence, and so it must be the idea, which is not already in exist- 
ence before the use of the word. In our case, that of learning the 
use of injunctive words from watching the activity of elders, this idea 
is learned by inference from the observed activity. [The point— 
implied, not expressed—-seems to be that one can know in advance, 
by pramanas other than language, the idea conveyed by injunctive or 
other words, but not the (individual) object to which they refer. 
Therefore language is the sole pramdna for that, in the case of Vedic 
injunction, at least.] 

Answer : If we infer the idea of a nonsecular cause of activity from 
the behavior of others, we also can thereby infer, at the time we first 
learn the use of a word, the cause of activity itself, because it qualifies 
the idea, or else we remember it as something previously known by 
another pramdna. In either case it forms the object of a pramana 
other than language. 

Objection: We can infer only the existence of the idea of the object, 
not that this idea is pramdna or memory (and so we can’t infer the 
object itself). 

Answer : No, because an idea must fall into one of five sorts of 
cognition—memory, pramana, doubt, error, and conceptual construc- 
tion (vikalpa). But of these this idea can only be pramana; so there 
still is another pramana for the existence of a cause of activity besides 
language. In addition, the child’s own knowledge is not purely 
verbal, but inferential, and therefore he knows the cause of activity by 
a pramana other than language. 

Objection: The child’s knowledge of the object of the injunctive 
word is not pramdpa unless it is from a verbal communication free 
from defects. Therefore the child’s knowledge does depend on the 
word, though indirectly through the speaker’s valid cognition. 

Answer : No, because the definition of verbal knowledge is knowl- 
edge from a word (and this the child does not yet have of that 
particular word). The knowledge of the object (the cause of acti- 
vity) is not arrived at solely through the speaker’s knowledge. One 
person cannot know by means of another’s knowledge. 

As to the necessity that a verbal communication must be free 


BRAHMASIDDHI 401 


from defects if it is to be a pramaéna—specifically, in the case of human 
communication, that the speaker must have a pramdana for the thing 
he asserts—this is a criterion for judging whether the sentence is a 
pramana, not the cause of its being a pramana. The possibility of 
the speaker’s having a pramana for the thing he asserts establishes 
that the sentence is a pramdna in the sense that the absence of that 
possibility sublates it. As we said before, human language is depen- 
dent on other pramdnas as regards its being a praména, not as regards 
its object. Language connects directly with its object, not solely 
with the idea in someone’s mind. This is the meaning of Mimamsa- 
siitra 1.1.5, “But the connection of word with object is innate (autpat- 
tika).” Therefore there is a connection of the word and the object 
by themselves (to the exclusion of the idea), and this connection is 
their mutual fitness (anyonya-yogyatd). This can’t be grasped unless 
the object is known, and the object can’t be known except by another 
praména than language. 

The fact of being apprehensible by another pramdna is not part of 
the meaning of a word (in particular, of the optative termination 
[lin ]). For, one determines the meaning of a word both by positive 
and by negative concomitance (anvaya and vyatireka), not by either 
alone. Now, the optative ending is used when something is cause of 
welfare (freyo-hetu) and not used when something is not a cause of 
welfare. Something accessible to another pramdna, on the other hand, 
may or may not be a cause of welfare; there is not negative concomi- 
tance, though there may be positive concomitance. If both positive 
and negative concomitance were not necessary in determining the 
meaning of a word, such things as the universal Being would enter 
into the meaning of the word “‘fimfapa” (the tree Dahlbergia sissu). 

Objection : But if the cause of activity (pravrtti-hetu), being a cause 
of welfare, is known by a pramdéna other than language, yet, in the 
case of Vedic injunction, cannot be known by any pramdpa other 
than Vedic language, the Veda will cease to be a pramana with respect 
to it. 

Answer : No, something apprehensible by more than one framdna 
may, in certain special circumstances, be apprehensible by only one 
praména. Besides, a thing apprehensible by only one praména is still 
real. Thus, that certain actions whose fruits are far-off are causes 
of welfare is knowable only from the Veda, although there are other 
pramanas for knowing that actions whose fruits follow immediately 
are means to welfare. Besides, even in everyday life some actions, 
like ploughing, produce a far-off result, and so the distinction bet- 
ween Vedic and secular causes of activity as having respectively far-off 


402 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and immediate results is not invariably valid. (Therefore worldly 
and Vedic injunctive language have the same meaning.) The mean- 
ing of the optative termination is merely the general fact of being a 
cause of welfare, at some time or another. 

Another reason that the word is connected with the object directly, 
not just with the speaker’s idea, is that we infer, from facial expres- 
sions and other signs, such things as pleasure at the same time we 
infer their experience by a person. We do not need a separate 
pramana for pleasure in addition to that for its experience. Similarly 
we do not need a separate pramdpa for the object in addition to lan- 
guage as the pramdna for the speaker’s idea, because we know them 
both together. 

Even if there is a separate pramdna (i.e., inference) for the object 
of the speaker’s idea (the object being here some cause of action), 
still, since it is inferred, it is known by some other pramdna_ besides 
language. 

III.43, including verses 85b-87a (E110). Odbjection : We do not 
say that the connection of words depends on an injunction (vidhi) 
on the grounds that otherwise the injunction will be useless (vrthd), 
but on the grounds that the injunctive word as a pramdpa com- 
municates its object (i.e., niyoga) as itself also being a pramdna, and 
as such it causes us to posit by presumption something previously 
unknown, namely, the conjunction of the objects of the words, which 
does not need to be previously known by another pramdna, as it would 
if it were the object of a word. 

Answer : No, because the same problem as before (cf. III.40) 
would arise: words depend on our knowledge of their connection 
with their objects, and that depends on our knowing the objects. If 
it were not so, one not already conversant with the use of the injunc- 
tive word would be moved to act. So pramdnas other than language 
must enable us to know the object of injunction. Besides, language 
itself can let us know of the conjunction of the objects of words; why 
bring in the (nonsecular) object of the injunctive word ? 

III.44, including verses 87b-91a (E111-112). What is the object 
of the injunctive word, we ask. (1) Not Vedic action, such as 
sacrifice itself, because that is known by language such as “he sacri- 
fices.”” (2) Not the connection of the objects of words, because we 
see that even in secular language and in sentences that are not in- 
junctive, by means of the proximity of words that are in various 
grammatical cases indicating various relations of their corresponding 
objects. Also, we see in the case of secular, noninjunctive sentences 
not only the conjunction of objects of words, but even activity caused 


BRAHMASIDDHI 403 


by the sentence; so there is no need of an injunctive word to give rise 
to activity. (3) Not a pramdana to tell us the action has the capacity 
to realize the fruit, because the word itself may tell us that. 

IIJ.45, including verses 91b-95 (E112-113). Another argument 
why the Veda is a pramdéna only for actions. Objection : Sentences 
have no object (artha as both use and meaning) unless they are em- 
ployed for action (pravrtti) or abstention from action (nivrtti), and an 
injunction is necessary to fulfil this need. 

Answer : In the case of the Upanisads, the injunctive word would 
be ‘‘one should understand it as being of this sort.” But from such 
an injunction the only result possible is knowledge of the object’s 
proper form—which is obtainable from the indicative sentence with- 
out an injunction. 

ITI.46, including verses 96-100 (E113-115). Objection: The in- 
junction to know in the Upanisads is not an originative injunction 
(utpattividhi), which would tell the proper form of the object as other 
originative injunctions tell the proper form of a rite. Rather, it is 
an injunction of eligibility (adhikdravidhi), which tells us the connec- 
tion of an action with a desired end. An injunctive word is necessary 
in a sentence of this latter sort to get a person to act, and thereby 
for the sentence to have an object. 

Answer : No, an originative injunction tells the proper form of a 
rite and the general fact of its being a means to a human good 
(purusdrtha), and thus creates the expectation (4kdmksd) of a parti- 
cular human good that the injunction of eligibility supplies. Now, 
in the case of the injunction to know the truth (tattva-pratipattt), 
the object of the injunction is not the truth of the Self, because that 
is not an action. On the other hand, the knowledge of the truth of 
the Self is not related to the qualification, because it is things already 
known that are related to the qualification, because they take part 
in the actual performance of the action enjoined, not the means by 
which we know the things. 

Discussion of (2) (in III.1), the suggestion that it is immediate mani- 
festation (saksatkdra) that is enjoined : 

III.47, including verses 101-105a (E115-118). Objection : The reality 
of the Selfis not the object of verbal knowledge, because the language 
that is a pramana is in the form of sentences, and the object of a sentence 
consists in the conjunction of diverse objects of words, whereas in the 
Self there isno duality. Also, the knowledge of the Self lacks the duality 
of agent and object of knowledge. Thus there is no ordinary (lauktka) 
pramdna to produce it, and therefore it is enjoined by the Veda along with 
its means, such as self-control, meditation, and the like. 


404 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer : ‘The awareness of the reality of the Self, being nondual 
and without differentiations (avaccheda), is one’s abiding in one’s 
own form, which is unsurpassable bliss in which all sorrow and other 
evils are extinguished, and so an end of man. 

But, precisely because it is an end, it cannot be enjoined, because 
only means are enjoined, not ends. They are enjoined because other- 
wise we wouldn’t know they produced some particular desirable 
thing. Now, one acts because of desire for something, a desire that 
arises spontaneously without need for an injunction. Neither can 
the object of injunction be how (or that) the thing is to be brought 
about (ittham-bhdva, which, according to the commentators, is equal 
to itikartavyata), because activity with respect to that also arises from 
the object without need of an injunction, just like the activity for the 
end. We can know from other pramanas than Vedic injunctive lan- 
guage that something is desirable, and therefore act for it once we know 
the means are available; injunction serves solely to tell us the means. 

Whatever definition you give of injunction, it will require some 
cause, and none other is possible than being a means to something 
desirable. Its cause cannot be its mere enunciation by the optative 
termination, because nothing causes activity by merely being named; 
rather, naming is the cause only of the idea of something, not activity. 
Also, if activity came merely from the word alone, even someone 
unversed in the meaning of the word would be moved to act upon 
hearing it. 

Neither is the object of the injunctive word a prescription (niyoga), 
something that is the cause of the idea “I should do this’; for this is 
nothing but the fact of being thought to be a means of something 
desirable. Everyone invariably acts for something when he thinks 
that it is a means to something desirable and does not act when he 
does not think it is. This being true in secular usage, there is no 
justification for positing some nonsecular cause of action knowable 
only from language in Vedic usage such as the idea “‘It is to be done.” 

Moreover, this prescription (niyoga) can’t come from language 
alone, for it must, if it is to be anything other than the fact of being a 
means to something desirable, either belong to someone who lays 
down an injunction, or be independent (of any person, i.e., derived 
from the Vedic word itself). But the fact of being something to be 
done (which the follower of Prabhakara gives as the definition of 
niyoga), is neither of these, but belongs to the object. 

Objection : It resides in the object, but comes from prescription. 

Answer: Still, the word can’t be a pramdna for the action’s being 
something that has to be done, because that still resides in the object, 


BRAHMASIDDHI 405 


whereas the word directly denotes prescription, which is not in the 
object. 

Also, one can’t arrive by presumption at the to-be-doneness in the 
object from the presence of prescription, because in secular usage we 
see unqualified people give prescriptions of things that shouldn’t be 
done. 

Nor can you say that prescription is something to be carried out 
(karya), which in turn requires carrying out its object (and therefore 
the word is pramdpa with respect to the object indirectly). For in 
secular usage we understand the to-be-doneness only with respect 
to the object, not with respect to the prescription. For example, if 
we are ordered to milk the cow and it has already been milked, we 
don’t milk it again to fulfil the prescription. Conversely, the other 
person has not fulfilled the prescription in this case, since it was not 
given to him, although he has effected its object. 

IIT.48 (E118-119). Objection: There can be the enjoinment of 
the knowledge of the nondual Self, because it is a means—of gaining 
liberation. Since all our knowledge about liberation comes only from 
Vedic language, none from reason (tarka), one can’t argue that if 
liberation is effected by knowledge as a means it may have an end, 
for the Vedas tell us that it has no end. Or else, since liberation is 
the result of a knowledge without an end, it itself is without an end. 
This is possible even if you say (as the Buddhists do) that knowledge 
is a series of instantaneous cognitions. 

III.49, including verses 105b-106 (E119-123). Answer: If libe- 
ration is defined as the prior nonexistence of the body, organs, and 
buddhi, we reply that nonexistences cannot be results. 

If liberation is defined as “the attainment (prdpti) of Brahman,” 
we reject the definition. Let us examine various alternative defini- 
tions of ‘attaining’? in this context : 

(1) Attaining Brahman is like someone reaching a village. No, 
because Brahman is omnipresent and also is not different from him 
who would attain it. 

(2) Attaining Brahman is nonseparation from it, like the non- 
separation of the nectars of various flowers from honey or of rivers 
from the sea. No, for the same reasons as in (1), and also because 
nonseparation is the mixture of the parts of one thing with the parts 
of another, and Brahman is partless. 

(3) Attaining Brahman is the effect’s reaching the state of being 
the cause. No, because the effect is at all times the cause. Nor can 
you revise the definition to mean the destruction of the form of the 
effect, because liberation is not a destruction of one’s self, which would 


406 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


be undesirable, but immortality. Anyway, the effect, as an effect, 
does not really exist. 

(4) Attaining Brahman is transformation (parindma) into Brah- 
man’s form. No, because nothing is different from Brahman, and in 
particular the jiva and Brahman are identical insofar as they are 
consciousness (caitanya). Nor can you define the form of Brahman 
into which the jiva becomes transformed as Brahman’s special Lord- 
ship, because this Lordship would be either inferior to Brahman’s 
or equal. If it were inferior, it could come to an end at Brahman’s 
wish. If it were equal, there would result the absurdity of there being 
two or more supreme Lords, whose wills might conflict. Moreover, 
scripture speaks of none but Brahman emanating the world. 

(5) Conclusion: Therefore attaining Brahman is the manifesta- 
tion (avirbhdva) of one’s own form (svariipa), like the manifestation of 
the proper form of a piece of rock crystal upon the removal of a red 
flower next to it. Therefore, liberation is not an effect. It is nothing 
different from knowledge. Knowledge, when it arises, automatically 
excludes its negation, ignorance, which in turn is identical with trans- 
migration. 

TII.50 (£123-128). (Consideration of certain Vedic passages 
that imply the reality of difference and therefore apparently support 
the alternative definitions [1-4] in the preceding section.) Re (1): 
Those passages of scripture that speak of a “path” are talking about 
gradual liberation in stages (kramamukti) in which an individual 
goes first to the world of Brahma, who is an effect, gains knowledge 
of Brahman there, and is liberated at the destruction of that world 
at the time of the great dissolution (mahdpralaya). For Brahman 
cannot have a special place to which one might go. Alternatively 
the “nonreturning” (apunardvriti) spoken of in connection with the 
one who goes to the world of Brahma may refer to nonreturning until 
the time of the great dissolution, after which one returns from the 
world of Brahma to a new cycle in a new universe. 

Re (2): The scriptural passages that talk of ‘‘nonseparation’”’ are 
referring to the absence of discriminatory cognition (vivekajfidna) once 
Brahman is known. 

Re (part of) (4): The scriptural passages that teach the emanation 
of the world from Brahman as its cause do not aim to teach causality 
in the literal (yathdsabda), primary (mukhya) sense, which would imply 
duality, but to teach the identity of all things with their cause, Brah- 
man. The effect is no separate real thing from its cause, for, insofar 
as it is an effect, it cannot be either identical with or different from 
its cause (and so is illogical). It is just a construction (vikalpa). 


BRAHMASIDDHI 407 


In the same way as reflections are not produced from their original, 
nor words, sentences, paragraphs produced from syllables, since they 
have no separate identity from them, are neither different nor non- 
different from them, and so are just the objects of imagination (kal- 
pana) based on them, so difference is a construction based on Brahman. 

Re (another part of ) (4): The scriptural statements about the Lord- 
ship that is reached by the knower refer not to liberation but to a 
result of the knowledge of the Brahman with qualities (saguna). 
Or else, they may refer to liberation, but then the fact that they say 
that the liberated obtain all enjoyments refers to the manifestation 
of the form of Brahman, which is everything, which includes all 
enjoyments in itself as identical with It. Such (negative) things 
as sorrow, delusion, and the like are not the form of Brahman, but 
are projected (adhyasta) by avidyd. 

Brahman’s Lordship and knowledge do not depend on the real 
separate existence of something to be ruled or an object of knowledge, 
but on Brahman’s already existent power of ruling (ifanasakti) and 
form of knowledge (jiidnariipa), just as fire has the power of burning 
and illuminating regardless of whether a suitable object to exercise 
these powers on is present or not. 

One “‘obtains all desires’? in liberation by obtaining Brahman, 
which is the highest bliss, not by obtaining actual particular blisses, 
such as that of intercourse with women. 

The Lord (bhagavdn) identifies (in Bhagavadgitd X) with Himself 
things in which the imagined limitation of his own knowledge, Lord- 
ship, etc., is not very great. 

Another opinion : Some think that the passages designating the higher 
Brahman by words based on name-and-form are not literally intend- 
ed, but are for the sake of meditation. Similarly the passages ascrib- 
ing to Brahman omniscience, Lordship, etc., are not literal, but are for 
meditation. 

III.51 (E128-129). Objection: Granted that liberation itself is 
not something to be accomplished (and therefore not the object of an 
injunction), still, the exhaustion (ksaya) of the causes of bondage, that 
is, past works, is something that may be accomplished, as it is accom- 
plished by penances (préyaScitta), and this exhaustion is necessary for 
liberation. The knowledge of the Self may be a means for this ex- 
haustion. Moreover, the exhaustion of past works, being a destruc- 
tion, is without end, even though it is an effect, so there is no need 
to fear an end of liberation. 

III.52, including verses 107-108a (E129-130). Answer : The 
knowledge of the Self, immediately and by itself, dissolves (pravilaya) 


408 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the usage of avidya (avidyavyavahara), and thereby all works, because 
they are projected by avidyaé. The verse that may be claimed to 
contradict this, Chandogya Upanisad V1.14.2, “‘For him there is just 
this much delay, until he is not released, then he attains,” can be 
explained satisfactorily in either of two ways : (1) The shedding of 
the body comes swiftly after Self-knowledge, not with a substantial 
delay, or (2) The passage assumes the delay, but teaches that the delay 
has as its limit the destruction of the body.®% 

II1.53 (E130-134). Odjection to (1) of the previous paragraph: 
But then it is illogical for the Bhagavadgita (11.54 ff.) to give the 
characteristics for what it calls “the man of stable insight” (sthita- 
prajfid). Objection to (2): If all works are exhausted it is impossible 
there be any delay. 

Answer in favor of (1): The Gita refers to an aspirant at a parti- 
cular stage, not to a perfected person. Answer in favor of (2): The 
separation from the body follows not immediately, but upon the 
exhaustion of works that have already begun to bear their fruit 
(drabdhakaérya). ‘Therefore some people obtain liberation immediate- 
ly upon knowledge, others after some delay. Just as trembling at 
a serpent may continue after the knowledge that it is really a rope, 
because of the influence (samskdra) of the fear, so the body continues 
for a while because of traces (samskaéra). In a similar manner a pot- 
ter’s wheel keeps spinning after the potter has ceased moving it, 
because of the samskdra of motion. But the mere fact that it continues 
does not mean that it continues long. Nothing besides the knowledge 
of the real rope already possessed is necessary to make the trembling 
caused by the imagined serpent stop; the root cause having ceased, 
the effect eventually ceases. Likewise, the body eventually ceases 
once the Self is known. 

The “man of stable insight”’ (sthitaprajfa) may thus also be explain- 
ed as one who knows the Self and pays no attention to the body, 
which is but a mere shadow or appearance (chdyémdtra). This is 
“liberation while living”’ (jivanmukiz). 

The act by which a given body has been produced, because it has 
already begun to produce its effect, has the appearance of continuing 
to ripen in that same body. The acts whose traces have not yet 
begun to produce their effects, which have not yet reached a state 
of activity, cannot produce an impression that would continue even 
after the knowledge of the Self. The remainder of the effect (of 
the trace) may be explained as due to the impression either (1) of 
the cause that has already reached a state of activity (e.g., a past 
deed, or fear), or (2) of the effect (e.g., embodiment or trembling), 


BRAHMASIDDHI 409 


or (3) of both. In any case the impression of the effect continues 
after the cause is gone. 

Just as an arrow already in motion may be stopped, works that 
have already begun to be enjoyed can be destroyed; we do not need 
to await their destruction by enjoyment. For example, there are 
expiatory rites for works whose ripening is indicated by dreams or 
the like. Therefore the persistence of the body after knowledge has 
been obtained is from the impression (samskara) alone (not from the 
past works).#4 This is a mere appearance of ripening of works, 
which does not affect or bind the liberated person. The impressions 
of avidya, being themselves avidyd, are swallowed up by knowledge, 
in that they no longer bind. Consequently nothing further, such 
as enjoyment, is needed for liberation but knowledge. 

III.54 (E134). Objection: Ifthe bondage that continues after the 
knowledge of the truth is merely apparent, why are meditation and 
the like necessary even after knowledge of the truth has arisen from 
language ? 

Answer: Verbal knowledge, which is indirect, and the appear- 
ance of diversity, which is directly experienced, are not mutually 
exclusive. Therefore verbal knowledge must be supplemented by 
direct knowledge produced by meditation, which is contradictory to the 
appearance of diversity. 

Moreover, verbal knowledge being the result of a pramdna and 
lasting but an instant (ksanika), may be supplanted by a repetition of 
error. Therefore the knowledge must be continuously repeated, and 
this repetition is meditation. 

Therefore knowledge is in itself the destruction of the causes of 
bondage, rather than being the cause of their destruction (i.e., 
there is no injunction to knowledge, because an injunction is of a 
means as a cause of the end, its effect). 

In the same way, the scriptural passages that say that sins subse- 
quent to knowledge do not adhere to the knower [according to the 
commentator Anandapiirna, these are due to ‘“‘carelessness” (pra- 
mdda)}| do not mean that this nonadhesion is an effect of knowledge 
(so that knowledge could be prescribed by an injunction as a means 
to effect nonadhesion as an end). 

III.55, including verses 108b-114a (E134-136). (Reply to the 
first objection in III.47) Brahman is indeed the object of verbal 
knowledge. You yourself, opponent, say that the knowledge of 
Brahman is the object of injunction. But one cannot prescribe what 
is not known, and Brahman is known from no other source than 


language. 


410 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


A knowledge of the Self that is the object of injunction cannot 
be a pramana for the reality of the Self. For, if injunction (vidhi) 
is understood as prescription (ntyoga), and it is solely the prescription 
that is to be accomplished, the prescription and the word that denotes 
it complete their operation in producing the prescription, and so they 
cannot go on from there to establish an object (vastu). If you say 
that the prescription tells us that its object (namely, the action) is to 
be done, then it exhausts itself in that; it still does not touch the 
essence of a thing (because it deals solely with an action). 

The injunction of a cognition does not establish the essence of a 
thing, but merely that the thing should be thought of in a certain 
manner, just as in the case of arthavadas, which do not teach the reality 
of the events they describe, but something else (usually, according 
to the Mimamsa, the “glorification” of a certain rite). 

The essence of a thing is not something that can be enjoined, because 
it is not something that can be performed, an action, but something 
already existent. The individual form (svariipa) of a thing is estab- 
lished by its connection with Being (satté) in one of the three times, 
whereas the action that is the object of injunction is not in any parti- 
cular time. 

When an act of apprehension is the object of injunction, the general 
rule thatan injunctionis a pramana both for the act and for everything that 
qualifies it does not holdtrue. For, apprehension may be by super- 
imposition of a certain appearance on what is really otherwise. There- 
fore Brahman is not established by the injunction to apprehend It. 

III.56, including verses 114b-115a (E136). Objection : No cogni- 
tion has an erroneous object, because a cognition that did not imitate 
the form of its object would have no object at all. Therefore error 
comes about by the mere negative failure to discriminate an object 
of present perception (e.g., mother of pearl) and an object of memory 
(e.g., silver), because of some common trait. 

III.57, including verses 115b-123 (E137-138). Answer: No, it 
is the present fragment of mother of pearl that we consider silver and 
direct our action toward, not remembered silver. The mere failure 
to grasp the nonproximity of the remembered silver does not account 
for the regularity of action, because the mere absence of this discri- 
mination is present with respect to other things than mother of pearl, 
such as clods of earth not presently seen. One cannot superimpose 
anything (including things remembered) on something that is notin 
contact with a sense organ. It is because it is silver that it is cognized, 
and because it is cognized in the mother of pearl that one moves 
toward that. 


BRAHMASIDDHI 41 


Should you respond that there is not just an absence of the aware- 
ness of the distinction of silver and mother of pearl, but a positive 
cognition of their identity, this is granting our doctrine of (positive) 
error. 

III.58, including verses 124-129a (E138-140). In addition, memory 
must either (1) by itself discriminate its object from an object of 
pramana, or (2) simply present the object without so discriminating 
it. But (1) is obviously not the case in your model of error, and, 
if one accepts (2), all memory of one thing while one is looking at 
another thing with common traits would produce error. But this is 
not so, because in some cases there is neither error nor pramdna but 
doubt whether it is the same thing or not. 

Objection : Error occurs where only one thing is remembered, but 
doubt where more than one thing is remembered. 

Answer : No. (1) There can be error when more than one thing 
is remembered (as being similar, but you think the thing before you 
is one of those things in particular). (2) Also, sometimes one may 
remember only one thing, and see traits common to it and the thing 
perceived but still have neither doubt nor error. (3) Again, there 
are errors not born of a memory of something previously perceived, 
such as that of a second moon in an astigmatic person. (4) In 
addition, one may remember one thing but still have the erroneous 
cognition of another, for example, a thirsty man may upon seeing 
shell recall water, but still think that it is silver. 

TII.59, including verses 129b-131 (E140). Not all error is based 
on similarity, for example, the error of a jaundiced person who takes 
what is white as yellow and what is sweet as bitter. Error can’t be 
from the mere fact of similarity with the other thing and failure to 
notice the difference, because, since everything has some similarity 
with everything else, there would be no regularity in the arising of 
such errors. Therefore errors arise from specific defects in the sense 
organs. 

TII.60, including verses 132-139a (E140-142). Objection: The 
thing remembered is discriminated from the thing being perceived 
by its own cognition (i.e., by memory itself), but sometimes one does 
not apprehend the distinguishing properties (vifesa) in it. (The 
point is that one is aware that silver is a memory content, but does 
not note the differences between silver and the thing in front of one 
at present.) Thus there may be an absence of doubt when two 
alternative things are remembered, and neither doubt nor error when 
only one is. 

Answer : Still, this doesn’t explain how there can be error when two 


412 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


things are remembered. Also, in memory one may indeed appre- 
hend the distinguishing traits. 

Objection : In memory the difference of place and time of the thing 
remembered from the present object of perception is grasped, but in 
error it is not grasped. 

Answer: No. Something known at many places and times, and 
even at the place in question, may still be discriminated from what 
is being perceived. Also, one can’t remember an infinite number 
of places and times so as to grasp their difference from the present 
thing. 

Objection : In error one doesn’t discriminate the thing remembered 
from the thing present because of the fact that one does not appre- 
hend that one is remembering, whereas in memory one is conscious 
that one is remembering and so one discriminates then. 

Answer: Well, then, memory discriminates its object by itself 
from what is perceived and present, and in that case error cannot 
exist ever; but if it does not discriminate its own object, there would 
always be error when we see common traits and do not recognize 
that we are remembering (as was said at III.58). (Therefore error 
is not a mere failure to grasp the difference of time and place.) The 
discrimination (of memory from perception) “I am remembering’? is 
therefore something in addition to memory. Besides, even if we do 
make this discrimination of memory and perception, we may still have 
an error of recognition (pratyabhijnabhrama), ‘“This is the same one.” 

Moreover, perception is also discriminated by the very act of dis- 
criminating memory from it; and therefore when what is perceived 
is discriminated from what is remembered we should have an erro- 
neous cognition that it is a memory, not that it is a perception. 

If this nondiscrimination of what is remembered from what is per- 
ceived is the idea that what is in fact not present is present, then this 
is teaching the very same (positive) false object of memory that we 
preach. This is not just a failure to apprehend absence of proxi- 
mity, because there is no such false memory in errors caused by a 
defect in a sense organ rather than in the manas. And as said before 
(III.57), there would not be the regular order in errors by which we 
move toward only the thing present to us. 

Moreover, error can’t just be the failure to grasp the object in some 
aspect, because no cognition can grasp the totality of an object, and 
therefore all cognition will be erroneous. 

Also, errors such as seeing a double moon or confusion as to the 
directions of space (dig-moha, dizziness?) continue even after they 
have been corrected by another pramdna. 


BRAHMASIDDHI 413 


TII.61, including verses 139b-149a (E142-144). The theory that 
error is a nonapprehension of difference cannot explain the pheno- 
menon of the sublation of error. The form of this sublation is, for 
example, “This is not silver,” that is, the denial of a raised possibility 
(prasajyapratisedha). But nonapprehension is an absence (abhdva), 
which does not raise any possibility. What is denied is not just silver 
or the object present to the eye, but their (positive) identification, 
which requires a (positive) cause, which is our “erroneous cognition” 
(viparitakhyatz). 

Nor is it merely a nonapprehension that is sublated when denying 
an error, because all cognitions (whether false or true) have the form 
of sublating a nonapprehension. 

Moreover, a person may remember silver and see the common 
traits in the object present to the eye, and not apprehend the distinc- 
tion of the two—but also not apprehend their nondistinction. Later 
he may see the object clearly, and apprehend the distinction, but this 
is not the sublation of an error. Nor is this cognition doubt, if one 
does not remember two possible alternatives. 

Objection : A combination of the nonapprehension of the distinc- 
tion and the consciousness of proximity in time (of the thing remem- 
bered) makes the thing in contact with the eye appear as silver or 
vice versa. 

Answer : This is just our position of erroneous cognition, which is 
precisely the appearance of something as that which it is not. Igno- 
rance (ajfidna) of the truth is a condition (nimitta) of this, but the 
(false) cognition of proximity is its cause. It is the latter that is denied. 

Also, on your theory error, defined as nonapprehension of difference, 
is based on nonapprehension—a vicious circle. 

In a dream there is no second thing to the dreamer, no external 
object whose distinction from the remembered object could be over- 
looked. If you say that in a dream there is a nondiscrimination of the 
remembered object as remembered, then the noticing of hitherto 
unnoticed qualities in an object is a case of the sublation of error, 
since these have not previously been discriminated. 

III.62, including verses 149b-151 (E144-145). The opponent’s 
theory is opposed to our actual experience, because in error we think 
“This white thing is silver,” thus attributing both the present white- 
ness and the remembered silver to the same locus. 

(A defense of the self-validity [svatah-pramayya of cognition— 
against III.56].) The very arising of the cognition that a certain 
thing is so blocks the arising of a doubt about the object known; that 
is just what it is required for. 


414 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


A pram@na’s lack of invariable concomitance (vyabhicéra) with its 
object (viz., that it does not always exist where the object exists) 
does not prevent the pramdna’s being a pramana. For, it is the ‘“‘deter- 
mination” (pariccheda) of the object that the pramdna brings about that 
makes it a means of valid knowledge, not whether or not it is invariably 
concomitant. When an object is properly determined, that itself 
rules out doubt; it does not require invariable concomitance. If 
this viewpoint is not accepted, you must test your own knowledge of 
invariable concomitance to see if it itself is invariably concomitant, 
and thus you begin an infinite regress. Therefore the form of cogni- 
tion by itself establishes its own validity. 

III.63, including verses 152-157a (E145-146). (Against the idea 
that the absence of defects in the senses is necessary to the validity 
of knowledge.) The absence or presence of defects in the senses may 
be the cause of distinguishing pramdna from error as much on our 
theory that error is a (positive) false apprehension as on yours that 
it is a failure of apprehension. On our theory the defects are more 
powerful than on yours, because they produce not only failure to 
apprehend, as in your theory, but also error. One cannot infer the 
existence of an effect (such as pramdna) from the existence of its cause 
(such as a sense organ without defects), but one may infer (on our 
theory) the nonexistence of an effect (wrong cognition) from the 
nonexistence of its cause (the defect). So the theory of false cognition 
is preferable. 

III.64, including verses 157b-16la (E146-147). On either theory 
of error the external object in contact with the senses may be said to 
lose its character of being the ‘‘objective support’? (dlambana) of 
cognition, since its proper form does not appear, or it may be said to 
be the objective support, since, on either theory, some of its forms 
appear and some don’t. [So the opponent cannot say that in our 
theory of error the external object ceases to be the objective support 
of cognition, and that cognition will then be without support (andlam- 
bana)—a Buddhist position that both we and our Prabhakara oppo- 
nent reject.] Moreover, to either theory it could be objected that, 
if erroneous cognition lacks an objective support, even pramana may 
lack it. Equally on both theories one may say that there must be an 
objective support on the grounds that something produces practical 
activity toward the supposed object (i.e., the shell produces activity 
directed towards silver). 

III.65, including verses 161b-165a (E147-148). Odjection : Although 
the intent of an injunction is action, an injunction of knowledge may 
establish the nature of a thing, just as, although the injunction 


BRAHMASIDDHI 415 


of sprinkling the rice intends an action, nonetheless the injunction is 
for the sake of the substance rice. Similarly the action of knowing 
is directed toward the thing known. So we know the Self from the 
injunction to know the Self, as the existence in the rice ofa perfection 
(samskadra) is known from the injunction of sprinkling, or the fact 
that sacrifice is a means to heaven from the injunction “He who 
desires heaven should sacrifice.” 

TII.66, including verses 165b-17la (E148-151). Answer: An 
injunction of knowledge makes an object appear, but it may appear 
with its own form or with the form of something else, as we have shown. 
Now the end of an injunction of knowledge of the Self must be the 
dissolution of the appearance of that which is not the Self; so neces- 
sarily it must be possible for the Self to appear with the form of the 
diversity of name-and-form. 

Objection : But there are two sorts of avidyd, that which “‘covers” 
(acchadika) the light and that which “‘projects” (viksepika). The 
former is found alone in deep sleep and is defined as dissolution 
(Jaya) ; the latter is found in waking and dreaming. The fruit of the 
injunction of knowledge is the destruction of covering avidya (and 
not of projective avidya—which would correspond to Mandana’s 
notion of error as a positive falsehood). 

Answer : No, projective avidya is more necessary to be destroyed, 
because it produces all suffering, whereas dissolution is praised in 
scripture many times as bliss, because it is the end of various sufferings. 
Covering avidyé equals nonapprehension; projective avidya equals 
false apprehension. The former is the cause; the latter its effect. 

Objection: But you can divide these two not in that manner, but 
as nonapprehension and imperfect apprehension. (Hence one does 
not need the theory of false cognition to explain the facts of error. ) 

Answer: No, imperfect apprehension is still knowledge (jfdana, 
here apparently meaning not just ‘‘awareness’’ but ‘‘valid cognition’’), 
rather than avidyd. Besides, no cognition grasps the object in its 
entirety. To repeat, it is not the mere nonapprehension of nondiffer- 
ence that must be stopped, but the apprehension of difference, that 
is, a false cognition, because it causes suffering. 

Objection : But when one can see a visible fruit of an injunction if 
it establishes the object—the Self—in Its own true form, why should 
we suppose the invisible fruit of its establishing the Self under a form 
that doesn’t really belong to It ? 

Answer : An injunction must serve an end of man, but apprehend- 
ing a thing as it is and otherwise than it is may both serve ends of 
man. Apprehending the Self as free from sin, etc., may make one 


416 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


free from suffering, liberated while living; but so may apprehending 
it as such by continual meditation, even if it weren’t such; for conti- 
nual meditation may produce the practical activity of a thing that 
doesn’t exist. 

Only in this way can there be no contradiction of perception 
and the other pramdnas (i.e., apparently, only if one says that an 
injunction may present an object with a form other than its own 
proper form can one avoid a contradiction between scriptural passages 
such as ‘One should worship speech as a cow,’ which apparently 
represents speech as a cow, and perception, etc.). Moreover (you 
should want this to be true, because if all injunctions represent things 
under their own form), the injunction to know the Self as nondual 
will establish the voidness of phenomenal diversity as the highest 
truth, and injunctions of works would apply to objects established 
by practical usage based on the imagination of something nonexistent. 
Therefore the injunction of the knowledge of the nondual Self is in 
order only as not being the highest truth.35 

III.67, including verses 171b-173 (E15]-152). Injunctions to 
“know” or “‘cognize’’8* the Self do not necessarily mean to cognize 
it as it is, for the word “cognition”? (jfidna) is qualified in various 
ways—‘‘false cognition,” “right cognition,” ‘doubtful cognition.” 

Besides, there cannot be an injunction simply such as this, “Cognize 
the Self,” that is, in Its true form. For, either that form must be 
already established by another fpramana (in which case an injunction 
is not necessary), or, if it isn’t so established, the injunction to know 
it will be impossible of fulfilment. Vedic language may enjoin 
cognition of it under a certain form, but the injunction does not tell 
us if that form is the true one. 

III.68, including verses 174-179 (E152-153). If knowledge has a 
visible result there is no need for an injunction to get someone to act 
for it. One who desires to experience the form of the Self (which is 
the result of knowing It) acts toward that end spontaneously. 

One cannot even enjoin knowledge as a means to that experience, 
because the experience is a visible fruit of the knowledge, and one 
wanting the fruit acts for the means, knowledge, spontaneously, 
without an injunction. 

Even though that experience of the Self and the knowledge that is 
the means to it are not things in this world (alaukika), and are known 
only from Vedic language, one acts spontaneously for them, if one 
wants them at all, once one has learned of them from Vedic language, 
and therefore there is no need for an injunction. 

JII.69, including verses 180-183 (E153-155). 


BRAHMASIDDHI 417 


Refutation of (3) of IIL.1, the possibility of an injunction of the continuous 
repetition of the knowledge obtained from Vedic language. 

One cannot maintain that apparently indicative sentences in the 
Upanisads in reality are injunctions of a continuous stream of cogni- 
tions, a reflection (anucintana), a meditation (dhyana), for the very 
same reason as before—that an injunction cannot establish the true 
form of an object. 

It is, however, possible that such a stream of cognitions may be 
enjoined after the form is known from an indicative sentence. But 
there is still no need for an injunction, because the visible fruit of the 
first knowledge and that of its repetition is the same—direct vision 
(saksatka@rana)—and one does not need an injunction to act for either 
knowledge. 

Repeated practice of knowledge may produce greater clarity of 
knowledge in everyday life. Continuous concentration (bhdvand) may 
make even a nonexistent object be experienced, how much more so 
when applied to a real object. 

Certain scriptural passages that seem to enjoin a meditation on the 
Self can be better explained. Chdndogya Upanisad I1I.14.1 really 
enjoins a meditation on the Self as extrinsically limited by name- 
and-form, which leads to lordship, or if to direct vision, only by 
stages. Other passages really intend the cessation of doing meditation 
on other things than the Self. 

Therefore, since none of the three knowledges (in III.1) can be 
the object of an injunction, one understands that the Upanisads are 
a pramana for the Self as an already existent object, not for a knowledge 
to be performed as the object of an injunction. 

Mimamsdsitra 1.1.2 : “Dharma is the meaning, marked by impul- 
sion”’ (codandlaksano’artho dharmah) does not mean that the Vedas teach 
only things to be done and that the Upanisads, teaching an already 
existent object, are for the sake of some injunction. 

Just as the Veda is an independent pramdana for certain actions to 
be performed, so it is an independent pramana for the knowledge of the 
Self, which is something already existent. 


CHAPTER FOUR : ON REALIZATION (SIDDHI) 


IV.1, including verse 1 (E156). Objection: The sentences of the 
Upanisads cannot be a pramana for an otherwise unknown object such 
as Brahman. Because a sentence communicates the conjunction of 
the objects of the words in it, and the ability of a word to commu- 
nicate its object depends on the hearer’s knowledge of its relation to its 
object. This in turn depends on a previous knowledge of the object. 


418 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The object must therefore be known by another pramana. So, Brah- 
man being known by no other pramdna than language, neither single 
words applied to It nor sentences can give knowledge of It. On 
the other hand, if It is known from another pramdna, Vedic language 
is redundant (and therefore not a pramana, for a pramana must give 
new knowledge). Therefore the purpose of the Upanisads is not to 
be the cause of knowledge (pratipattihetu), but for employment in 
recitation (japa-upayoga). 

IV.2, inchuding verse 2 (E156-157). Answer: We see in secular 
usage that a sentence communicates a hitherto unknown particular 
form by communicating an already known class characteristic con- 
joined with a collection of already known qualities, which collection 
is not shared by other things. This is what every sentence does insofar 
as it is a pramana. In the Veda, the Upanisadic sentences work in 
the same way to communicate Brahman as a hitherto unknown 
object. The class characteristic in the case of Brahman is that of a 
cause, or of Being, and the conjunction of the objects of such words 
as ‘‘From whom these beings are born....” (Taittiriya Upanisad 
III.1) or “Not coarse, not subtle, not long....” (Brhaddranyaka 
Upanisad 111.8.8) communicates a particular form. 

IV.3, including verses 3-4 (E157). Besides, Brahman is not entirely 
unknown already, because since there is nothing over and above 
Brahman, Brahman is the object of every cognition. For the cogni- 
tions of particulars are accompanied by the form of the common 
characteristics, and Brahman is the true thing that is left over when 
diversity is absorbed. 

The new thing the Upanisads communicate is the nonexistence of 
diversity. Both diversity and negation are already known; the 
Upanisads communicate their conjunction. 

The other pramanas, being associated with avidyé, do not present 
their conjunction. Therefore it is a new truth for which tradition 
(agama) is the only pramdana. 

IV.4, including verses 5-11 (E157-159). Objection: A sentence 
that does not produce activity for an end of man, but merely com- 
municates something already existent, is not a pramdna. 

Answer: The fruit of a pramana is not necessarily something that 
is an end of man, because a praména may sometimes produce indiffer- 
ence. Whatever is a cause of valid cognition is a pramdna. 

Besides, the knowledge that the state of being a jiva, which involves 
suffering, is not real, and the cessation, identical with this knowledge, 
of that false cognition, is by its nature an end of man. Even the false 
cognition continues for a while, by virtue of its trace, but it does not 


BRAHMASIDDHI 419 


affect one as before, and eventually ceases by repetition of the verbal 
knowledge in meditation. 

Moreover, the mere production of knowledge by itself can be an 
end of man for people agitated by curiosity about a thing. 

Further, an end of man is not necessarily the object of activity or 
abstinence from activity, for pramamas such as perception have as 
their objects not activity but already existent objects, yet the pramdnas 
are ends of man. 

Objection : The pramdnas are ends of man insofar as they are helpful 
for getting accomplished things that are useful toward ends of man. 

Answer : Even if we grant this, Brahman is an end of man in itself 
{ie., not for another action) as being supremely blissful and the 
cessation of all sufferings. 

It is precisely because Brahman is an end of man that the Upanisads 
teach It as nondifferent from the person instructed, saying ‘“That art 
Thou”; if It were different, It would not be an end ofman. Knowing 
his identity with It, and thereby becoming identical with It, all evil 
is extinguished and he becomes the supreme good (or the Highest 
Siva, paramasivabhdva, probably a punning compliment to Siva) and 
reaches the perfect end of man. 

Objection : The pramanas are accessories to activity with respect to 
the objects they give knowledge of. (So the Upanisads must either 
be accessory to activity or else they are not a pramdna.) 

Answer : This is true in the case of the Upanisads also, because once 
one knows Brahman one acts to make it directly seen (saksdtkdrana). 


SURESVARA 


We know little about Sureévara on the basis of firm historical evidence. 
Tradition, as has been noted, makes Suresvara the same as Mandana, 
holding that Mandana took the name Suregvara after he and his wife 
became Samkara’s disciples following a crucial debate. The same 
traditional accounts go on to tell of Samkara assigning to Padma- 
pada and Suregvara the responsibility of commenting on his most 
important works. Finally, there is the question of which of the 
pithas Suresvara was given charge of. One tradition associates him 
specifically with the matha at Srmgeri, Samkara’s birthplace. On 
the other hand, in the guruparamparas of all the pithas Sureégvara’s 
name appears, and a different tradition holds that Suresvara was 
indeed given control of all of them. 

Suregvara’s date clearly depends on Samkara’s, as well as on one’s 
views on the question of Surevara’s identity with Mandana. 

Of the works ascribed to Surefvara, a clearcut case can be made for 
three: the two commentaries on Samkara’s bhasyas on the Brhada- 
ranyaka and Taittiriya Upanisads and the Naiskarmyasiddhi. He is also 
credited with the commentary on the Daksinamirti hymn that is 
titled Ménasolldsa, and with a vdrttika on the Paficikarana sometimes 
ascribed to Samkara. Manuscripts of works titled Svardjyasiddhi and 
Kasimoksavicdra also bear his name. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 


This is one of the longest works of Indian philosophy, running to 
some 11,151 stanzas, ‘“‘half the length of the Ramayana’’ says Maha- 
devan.1 It begins with an introduction, referred to as Sambandha- 
varttika, whose purpose is “‘to set forth the relation (sambandha) between 
the two sections of the Vedas... through a criticism of the position 
taken by the Mimamsakas and the other Vedantins.”* Van Boetzelaer 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 421 


reports that the tradition is that Samkara first asked Sureévara 
to write the Taittiriya Varttika, afterwards the Brhadaranyaka Varttika.3 
Vidyaranya explains why Suresvara wrote commentaries on these 
particular Upanisads : ‘In honour of his teacher, Samkara, who 
belonged to the Taittiriya recension (sakh@) of the Yajurveda, Sureévara 
took up the Taittiriyopanisad-bhasya for explanation; and as hisown 
Sakhé was the Kanva of the Yajurveda, it was but appropriate that 
he took up the Brhadaranyaka-bhasya for his Varttika thereon’”’.4 

“EB” references in the following summary refer to the edition of the 
Sambandhavarttika by T. M. P. Mahadevan (B2390; Madras 1958), and 
for the rest of the work to the edition by K.S. Agasein the Anandasrama 
Sanskrit Series (B2386; volume 16, 1892-1894). ‘‘T”’ references in the 
Sambandhavaritika summary are likewise to the Mahadevan translation 
in B2390; the remainder of the work is untranslated. The summary 
is by S. Subrahmanya Sastri as revised by K. H. Potter. 


BOOK ONE—INTRODUCTORY SECTION : SAMBANDHA- 
VARTTIKA 


This section is an extended commentary on Samkara’s introductory 
comments, especially with respect to the proper understanding of the 
relation between the karmakanda or portion of the Veda dealing with 
action, and the jfdnakénda or portion that provides knowledge of 
Brahman or the Self. It consists of about 1135 stanzas (1136 1/2 in 
Mahadevan’s rendering), and the numbering adopted here corres- 
ponds to that in the Mahadevan text and translation here followed. 

1 (ET 1-6) 1-9. Sureévara gives several renderings of the word 
“‘upanisad.”” 

2 (ET 6-11) 10-19. One who is eligible for Vedantic study 
must have abandoned action altogether, be anxious to be rid of 
samsdra, and know that there is only the one Self. Even Vedic recita- 
tion and other ritual acts are to be abandoned by such a person. 
It is clear, therefore, that the class of persons who are eligible for 
Vedantic study is entirely distinct from the class of those who are 
enjoined to perform ritual acts. 

3 (ET 11-15) 20-25. Odjectton : Nothing can be obtained except 
through actions. Just as heaven, etc., are obtained through actions, not 
to speak of worldly results, so liberation too is to be obtained through 
the kinds of actions enjoined in such Vedic texts as the one that enjoins 
us to “meditate,”’ etc. 

Answer : No. Worldly results and heaven are things that originate. 
Liberation, however, is eternal, it is Brahman itself and not the result 
of any action. 


422 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


4 (ET 16-18) 26-31. Objector: But liberation has not been 
obtained yet, and so it must originate, like the gaining of heaven. 

Answer: No. It is not a fresh thing to be brought about somehow; 
rather, it is the removal of error. When a person’s disease is cured 
we do not say he has obtained something new, but merely that he has 
been restored to his natural healthy state. Scripture need not enjoin 
liberation, but it merely wakes a person up to the realization of his 
actual nature. 

5 (ET 20-28) 32-45. Objection: Yes, but it is only by actions 
that one can wake up to the natural state of his self. The Vedas 
teach that only through action can one obtain any human goal, and 
indeed they indicate which actions are in point through injunctions 
and prohibitions. Statements in scripture that speak of existing 
things should be construed as subsidiary to injunctions, on the autho- 
rity of Jaimini’s Mimamsdsiitras. Actions lead to liberation as follows: 
one shuns prohibited (nisiddha) and optional (kdmya) actions and 
performs the required rituals (nityakarman). By so doing, one’s past 
merit and demerit will be destroyed, and when there is no karma 
left to produce further births, liberation is obtained. Knowledge of 
the Self is not necessary Thus texts that appear to teach that knowl- 
edge is the means to liberation must be understood as explanatory 
(arthavada), following the Mimamsa rule (cf. Mimdmsdsiitra IV.3.1). 

6 (ET 28-31) 46-50. Answer: No. The nature and causes 
of liberation on the one hand and of worldly prosperity (abhyudaya) 
on the other are contradictory to each other. You admit that realiza- 
tion of the true nature of the Self is liberation. But didn’t the Self 
have that nature all along? If so, what are actions supposed to be 
for ? If not, it couldn’t be the Self’s nature, since it would depend on 
causes. If the nature of the Self involves actions there can be no 
liberation at all. 

7 (ET 31-39) 51-69. Odjectton: Actions are required in order 
to remove the sources of bondage arising from sensory contact. 

Answer ; What is supposed to be the cause of that contact ? If it is 
accidental, then, there being no control over what is accidental, 
there will be no liberation. If the contacts are the result of (past) 
merit and demerit, how can they produce contact in a Self that is by 
nature unattached (asatga)? Or if the Self is not unattached, again 
there is no hope of liberation. 

Objection : The Self is potentially an agent and an enjoyer, but it is 
the actualization of the results of these traits that constitutes bondage. 
When merely the potentiality (Sakt2) remains but all actualization 
of them is stopped, liberation ensues. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 423 


Answer : Is this “‘potentiality’’ essentially connected with its results 
or not ? If it is, there can be no liberation in the fashion you describe. 
But since there is liberation, the “potentiality” cannot be causally 
related to its effects. Again, if the potentiality is essentially identical 
with its results neither can exist without the other. Furthermore, 
if the ‘‘potentiality’’ exists at the time of liberation then its effects 
cannot be ruled out, any more than the sun can exist without giving 
off heat. 

8 (ET 40-57) 70-107. You say one gets liberation by abandon- 
ing the prohibited and optional actions. But even the most careful 
person will find it impossible to accomplish this—at least, it will be 
very difficult, and thus no one will follow your path. 

Opponent : Nevertheless, that is the path, no matter how difficult. 

Answer: No. Action is only a dubious means to liberation, and 
one wants a method that provides certainty. That method is through 
Self-knowledge. In any case, there is no Vedic maxim to the effect 
that one should abandon prohibited and optional acts in order to get 
liberation. In fact, scripture clearly says that liberation is obtained 
through knowledge. Now actions can at best only be a doubtful 
means to anything, since no matter what one may obtain by abandon- 
ing prohibited and optional acts one may also experience the results 
of present and future sins. Only through knowledge can one find 
a sure way to liberation. Ritual acts may purify the agent and ready 
him for Self-knowledge, but one who knows the truth of the Veda 
will realize that action is futile. A person may even be born free from 
desire because of previous (yogic) practice; he is eligible for Self- 
knowledge immediately. For one who is without attachment and 
desires knowledge actions are pointless, as is seen in cases such as those 
of Vamadeva, Maitreyi, and Gargi, all of whom gained Self-knowledge 
without performance of ritual actions. 

Even if one avoids prohibited and optional actions in this life he 
may, on death, go to heaven because of his past good deeds, and thus 
he will not get liberation thereby. The same reasoning shows that 
the performance of the required actions (nityakarman) is not a sure 
means to liberation. Again, one cannot be sure that one will get 
liberation at the end of any one lifetime, for some very sinful deeds, 
such as killing a Brahmin, need more than one lifetime for their 
karmic results to be worked out. 

Nor is it the case that the performance of required actions fails to 
incur any karmic results. This is indicated by Apastambha (Apa- 
stambhadharmasiitra 1.20.3) when he explains that good deeds produce 
good results. 


424 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


So, once the Self is supposed to be an agent and an enjoyer there 
is no possibility of liberation. Thus the Self-knowledge that we 
contend leads to liberation is not the knowledge of that self which is 
the agent in sacrificial actions, etc., and which might be the subject 
of explanatory sentences subsidiary to injunctions (as the opponent 
argued in section 5 above). Knowledge of the true Self cannot be a 
subsidiary to action. 

Objection : In order that a sacrificer can even make sense of his 
ritual actions he must know that his self is capable of transmigrating 
into future bodies; so self-knowledge is subsidiary to action. 

9 (ET 58-64) 108-121. Answer: That transmigrating self is 
only known by one who is ignorant of the truth, for its nature involves 
relation with something that is not a self, that is, bodies. Knowl- 
edge of such a self may be subsidiary to action, but that knowledge 
leads to karmic processes and bondage. The Self-knowledge we 
speak of is knowledge of the pure Self; Its association with anything 
else is ignorance—agency, enjoyership, action, and experience of its 
fruits, body, sons, wife, etc., indeed all things making one eligible 
for action are products of ignorance. Any notion of the nature of 
one thing as residing in another is a sign of ignorance. 

10 (ET 65-72) 122-140a. It is a self that identifies itself with 
something different from itself that is eligible for actions. That 
identification arises from ignorance, and true Self-knowledge removes 
that ignorance. That knowledge arises from the Vedanta. That 
knowledge removes ignorance and is not what makes one eligible for 
actions. Thus scriptural sentences that speak of the result of that 
knowledge cannot be taken as explanatory (arthavéda) and subsidiary 
to injunctions to act. Or, if we admit that such sentences are expla- 
natory and auxiliary, they are auxiliary, not to injunctions to act, 
but rather to major texts such as ‘“‘that thou art,” that is, the scriptural 
sentences in question are explanations of existent things (bhétdrtha- 
vdda), not of nonexistent things (ebhiitarthavdda) that have to be 
obtained through acting. Action is an obstacle to liberation, not its 
means. The seeker of liberation, being nonattached, will avoid action; 
the Self-knower, recognizing no differences cannot act. 

11 (ET 73-83) 140b-16la. Objection : Agency, etc., constitute the 
nature of the seeker. 

Answer: No. The pramdnas tell us otherwise, and furthermore, if 
it were so there could be no liberation. 

Objection (from a materialist): There is no liberation, since the 
self is constantly changing in its experiences from moment to moment. 

Answer : The Self is eternal and not constantly changing. It has 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 425 


no shape, etc., as do the particles of nature. Thus there is no possi- 
bility of prior absence (pragabhava) in the Self, as there is in a composite 
material thing. Having no parts, there is no question of change in 
the Self. Indeed, the Self is the witness (saéksin) of agency, etc., 
which are therefore not Its attributes. It is not the object of the 
pramanas, which can grasp only those composite things that exist for 
the sake of something else. For the same reason, desire, aversion, 
etc., are not qualities of the Self; rather, they are properties of the 
internal organ (manas), and indeed they too are the products of 
ignorance. If desire, etc., were caused by oneself, that self would not 
desire what is evil; if they were caused by God we couldn’t be sure of 
getting rid of them. The released self cannot rid himself of desire, 
etc., lacking such instruments for the purposes as a body, etc. Thus 
it must be ignorance that is the cause. 

12 (ET 83-89) 161b-174a. Objection : If what you say is true 
the karmakdénda is invalid; but if so, everyone must lose faith in 
scripture, including the Vedanta. 

Answer: No. All pramdnas, including scripture, are valid until 
Self-knowledge is acquired; after that, they all cease to be applicable. 
The injunctions prescribed in the karmakanda are valid for the man 
still under the sway of ignorance, but they fail to apply to the realized 
man. 

Objection: Granted that agency and nonagency are not possible 
together, why cannot they apply in sequence and in either order— 
a man sometimes acting, sometimes thinking ? 

Answer: No. Knowledge is the nature of the Self, not action. 
Thus whereas action may precede knowledge, the reverse order cannot 
occur, any more than fire, which is naturally hot, can by itself become 
cold. 

Objection: Reality has the nature of difference-cum-nondifference 
(bhedabheda), so there is no problem. 

Answer : One thing cannot possess a self-contradictory nature. 

13 (ET 88-96) 174b-188a. Objection : Is the world (samsdra) differ- 
ent from Brahman or nondifferent? If different, Brahman becomes 
limited. If nondifferent, either Brahman has parts (like the world) 
or knowledge will be unnecessary (since we will already have it, 
being in samsaéra= Brahman) ! And if Brahman is itself ignorant, that 
is a serious fault in It; while It is tree from ignorance, knowledge has 
no purpose. 

Answer: Ignorance is imputed (prakalpyate) to Brahman by the 
ignorant jiva; from Brahman’s point of view ignorance doesn’t exist. 
Ignorance is not intelligible when examined using pramdnas; it is not 


426 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


a real entity, and thus no one can have valid knowledge of it. Still, 
the Bhedabhedavadin has to make a number of assumptions to subs- 
tantiate his view, whereas the Advaitin has to make only this one 
postulation, of ignorance. 

Objection : The world of plurality is known to everyone, so it is 
real, and not the nondual (advaya). 

Answer : Merely being commonly known is not a valid reason to 
assume the existence of something. Indeed, all of ordinary experience 
is false. 

14 (ET 97-111) 188b-217. Objection: But ordinary perception 
is immediate, whereas the Self-knowledge gained from scripture is not. 

Answer: What do you mean by “not immediate’? ? The content 
of Self-knowledge is the most immediate thing of all, the inner Self. 
And perception depends on consciousness, which is the Self, so that 
scripture tells us of the most immediate means of all. Indeed the 
immediacy of perception depends entirely on the greater immediacy 
of consciousness, the Self itself. 

You argued earlier (section 5 above) that since scripture, etc., 
speak only of action it is only actions that lead to liberation. We 
admit that actions may constitute an indirect means to liberation; 
what we deny is that they constitute a direct means thereto. Actions 
may help gain release, either by producing desire for Self-knowledge 
or by purifying the aspirant. And scripture, etc., clearly do not 
speak only of action; Self-knowledge is also spoken of there. If you 
mean that scripture does not enjoin Self-knowledge, we have answered 
that before and will address it again. 

Objection : The Vedas do not teach Self-knowledge in texts suchas 
“The knower of the Self is free from sorrow.” Such texts are eulogies 
of that self which is the agent in ritual actions. 

Answer; Why do you resort to secondary meaning (laksand) when 
it is inappropriate ? The primary meaning is quite clear and accept- 
able, when we realize that the text in question refers to the true Self 
and the agent-self. 

Objection : All of what you say is sheer imagination. I donot 
find from experience that knowledge produces such a result as you 
claim. 

Answer: You may legitimately raise such a doubt if you satisfy 
the conditions for eligibility for knowledge, hear a sentence like ‘‘that 
art thou,” and do not realize Self-knowledge. Of course, it is possible 
too that, hearing the sentence, one does not understand what the words 
in it mean. But if one does, the truth must come to him, like the 
realization “‘I am the tenth man.” 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 427 


Thus we conclude that renunciation of all actions is a subsidiary 
cause of liberation, since it helps one to understand the meaning of 
the great sentences (such as ‘‘that art thou’’). 

15. (ET 111-115) 218-226. The gods, afraid that men would 
get liberated, confused men and as a result men took up ritual action. 
That one should abandon all actions and thus gain knowledge is 
attested to in scripture and tradition (smrti). 

16. (ET 116-126) 227-246. Objection: Without something to be 
accomplished (kdrya) there can be no eligibility (adhikdra) for knowl- 
edge. [Thus, since a karya requires an act (kriya@), action leads to 
liberation.] 

Answer : Do you mean that karya is required to establish eligibility 
for acquiring the means to knowledge, or for knowledge itself ? Since 
the means to knowledge, that is, hearing the great sentences of scrip- 
ture, results from the prior abandonment of actions, the first alter- 
native is inapplicable. And with respect to Self-knowledge, since it is 
an existing entity there is no question of “‘eligibility’’ as there is in the 
case of things gotten through injunctions. 

There is no need for injunctions in the case of Self-knowledge. 
Vamadeva got knowledge while he was still in his mother’s womb— 
clearly no one enjoined anything on him there! The situation is 
analogous to that of the son of a king who happened to be brought 
up in the family of a hunter and who thought that he, too, was a 
hunter. The recollection that he was a king removed his huntership. 
Likewise, for the ignorant the recollection that one is Brahman— 
through hearing ‘“‘that art thou”—removes ignorance along with its 
products. Thus there is no question of injunction here. 

What could an injunction accomplish, after all? The purposes 
of injunction are precisely four—(1) origination (utpatti), (2) obtain- 
ing something (apti), (3) purification (samskara), and (4) modi- 
fication of something (vikdra). Liberation cannot be any of these, 
since it is not brought about at all. The knowledge seeker is not 
caused—by an injunction or anything else—to get something, but is 
rather awakened, as a sleeping king is by his bards. The master is 
not ordered to act by his servant. 

Injunctions have their scope with respect to dharma, as is clear on 
examining the Mimdamsasiitras, which deal only with future results of 
human activity. Relating to a different subject matter, the evidence 
of Mimamsa cannot controvert the Vedanta. 

17. (ET 126-135) 247-267. Brahman, the content of all Vedan- 
tic texts, is not something with relation to which we can speak of a 
productive operation (bhdvand). Where the question of the proper 


428 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


instrument (karana) and the method of proceeding (itikartavyata) 
arise, injunctions are appropriate; but liberation is not something 
that can be produced, so injunctions are out of point. 

Objection: If the only obstacle to release were indeed ignorance 
(moha) you would be correct. But if the bound self (samsdrin) is a 
part (ekadefa) or a modification (vikdra) of the Self liberation cannot 
be gotten solely by removing ignorance, but must involve action as 
well. 

Answer : Even on those construals of the transmigrating self libe- 
ration still is not produced by action, since the real Self already exists; 
rather, liberation is revealed through the destruction of the binding 
ignorance. However, neither of the two relations proposed as hold- 
ing between jiva and Self are correct. No causal relation can connect 
these two. Either jiva and Self are identical or they are different. 
If they are identical there can be no causal relation between them. 
If they are different the only liberation would involve destruction of 
the jiva. Such “liberation” does not involve action in any case. 

18 (ET 135-145) 268-288. Again, completeness (parna) is perfec- 
tion (nihsreyasa), and anything short of complete appears only 
because of ignorance; thus liberation comes from removal of ignorance 
by its opposite, knowledge, and not by action, and so injunctions are 
useless. Appeal to Jaimini (in section 5 above) won’t help, for in the 
Mimamsdasiitra passage (1.2.1) “‘since scripture (dmnaya) has action 
as its subject” the word “‘scripture’’ refers only to the karmakdnda, 
not to the Upanisads. Since the Upanisads have an altogether 
different subject matter they cannot be viewed as subsidiary to the 
injunctions in the karmakénda. Other Mimamsa passages are like- 
wise interpreted to show that the Upanisads are not subsidiary to 
injunctions. 

Objection : They should be viewed as subsidiary, on the rule that 
where a single sentence meaning (ekavdkyat@) is possible, splitting 
the sentence (vdkyabheda) is precluded. 

Answer : That rule only applies to cases where a single sentence 
meaning is possible. Since injunctions relate to a subject matter entirely 
distinct from that which the Upanisads relate to, the rule does not 
apply. 

Objection : But you yourself argue that the karmakdnda is subsidiary to 
the jrdnakanda | 

Answer : Yes, but that doesn’t mean they have the same subject 
matter. Karman is subsidiary to jfidna in that, whereas actions may 
or may not be used as a means to knowledge, meditation is an action 
that does serve as a means to knowledge; thus the rule here relates 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBH ASYAVARTTIKA 429 


to the cooperation between two sentences (vdkyaikavdkyata) and not 
to single sentence meaning. Cooperation between two sentences 
can occur even when each sentence has its own distinct subject matter. 

Objection : Since the beginning and end of the Vedas agree the 
whole Veda must have one subject matter. Thus the one who is 
eligible for release is the one who follows the injunctions prescribed 
there, rather than your view according to which eligibility involves 
renunciation of all actions. 

Answer : No one could possibly follow all the injunctions found in 
the Vedas in one lifetime !_ Thus no one will be eligible for release ! 

19 (ET 145-150) 289-298. Objection: You specify desire for 
liberation as one of the conditions of eligibility for release. But if 
liberation is not validly understood it cannot be desired; yet if it is 
validly understood there is no need for desire. 

Answer : We find that some persons desire pleasure unattached to 
any particular place or time. Furthermore, on our view, as opposed 
to yours, knowledge unlike action yields immediate results rather 
than results at some future time. If knowledge had only future 
results, like action, then the kind of doubt you raise might arise—that 
is, as to whether there are any eligible persons, because the future 
result might not actually occur. But since the result of knowledge 
is immediate no such doubt need arise. 

Objection : Where does this knowledge come from ? 

Answer: From the removal of bondage. 

Objection : That bondage is either past, present, or future. If it is 
past, it is not an obstacle, and if future, it does not now bind. But 
there can be no present bondage for one who validly understands. 

Answer: One may have studied the Veda and understood its 
meaning, yet not be liberated because of a present obstacle; the 
Chandogya Upanisad gives as analogy the case of the man who walks 
over buried treasure without knowing it. 

20 (ET 150-155) 299-308. Objection : Liberation is eternal plea- 
sure (atyantikasukha), so of course it is desired. And I agree that the 
karmakanda is subsidiary to the jfanakdnda; actions purify the self that 
is seeking liberation. So the two sections of the Veda complement 
each other. It is not that one who performs actions seeks one goal, 
heaven, whereas the Self-knower seeks another, liberation. In scripture 
the term “heaven” is used synonymously with “‘liberation.” 

Answer: No. If “heaven” merely means any sort of happiness 
then one would not be inclined to perform ritual acts supervening 
on other actions that produce happiness. “Heaven” must mean 
conditioned pleasure and so is different from liberation, which is 


430 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


unconditioned. Again, if liberation (=heaven) is accepted to be 
the result of optional (kamya) actions it could be attained by a single 
act, which would render senseless all the other injunctions in scripture. 
In any case, scripture (Mundaka Upanisad 1.2.7, 1.2.12; Chandogya 
Upanisad V.10.7) shows that one does not get liberation through action. 

21 (ET 156-158) 309-312. Objection: It would be quite rash to 
abandon acting, since scripture enjoins ritual acts. 

Answer : It would be even more rash to ignore scripture, which 
indicates that one who is nonattached should renounce actions. And 
scripture is not inconsistent between these two; it is speaking to differ- 
ent classes of persons in the two sections. 

22 (ET 158-168) 313-331. Objection : If that is true, why doesn’t 
Samkara say so directly ? All he says is that scripture provides evi- 
dence for the existence of the Self. 

Answer: Samkara is proving that the Vedanta is valid. Only 
when that is shown can he go on to show the relation between the 
two parts of scripture. Or else Samkara may think that there is no 
relation at all between the two sections, since they have different 
subject matters. 

Objection : In any case scripture at best only indicates the required 
(nitya) and occasional (naimitiika) actions as means to Self-knowledge; 
so the two parts of scripture cannot be entirely related. 

Answer: All actions are connoted by the term ‘“‘sacrifice”’ (yajfia) 
(in Brhadéranyaka Upanisad 1V.4.22), since even optional acts, which 
no doubt normally have purposes other than knowledge, may operate 
as means to knowledge. 

Objection : No, optional acts are expressly condemned in scripture 
as being “transitory” (Mundaka Upanisad 1.2.7), etc. 

Answer; ‘True, but they are enjoined. The condemnation is not 
of the act as such, but of attachment to the fruits of such an act. 

Now the passages on meditation (updsand) that appear in the jfdna- 
kanda suggest meditation as a way of getting ready for Self-knowledge, 
but they do not lead directly to liberation. 

23 (ET 168-176) 332-342a. None of the six kinds of evidence 
can show that knowledge is subsidiary in meaning to action. (1) 
There is no express statement in scripture (Sruti) to show that Self- 
knowledge is auxiliary to ritual action. (2) Nor is that shown by 
an inferential connection (diiga) drawn from the meaning of the words 
used in scripture. (3) And it cannot be inferred from any needed 
syntactical connection among the words constituting the sentence 
(vékya), as is possible in such a case as “He who has a ladle made of 
parna wood hears no evil sound” (yasya parnamayi juhur bhavati na sa 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 431 


pdpam flokam frunoti, Taittiriyasamhita TII.5.7.1), where syntactical 
connection forces us to presume that the ladle is made of parna wood; 
mention of a ladle leads us to expect an account of the material of 
which it is made, but Self-knowledge cannot lead us to expect mention 
of action to which it is subsidiary, since knowledge completely under- 
mines the presumption of agency. (4) Nor can it be inferred from 
context (prakarana), since as we have said the contact governing 
knowledge is entirely different from that governing action. (5 and 6) 
It cannot be shown on the basis of name (ndma) or sequence (krama) 
either, since they operate only when inferential connection (litga) 
operates, and as we have seen it does not operate here. 

24 (ET 176-183) 342b-356a. Objection (by a kamavilayavadin) : 
We agree that action is subsidiary to knowledge; it is so just because 
as long as desires hold sway there can be no Self-knowledge. Thus 
actions are required so that all one’s desires are fulfilled; one thus 
obtains a god-like state (of Prajapati) and from there one can realize 
the Self. 

Answer: No. Even a life of a hundred years will not allow one to 
fulfil all his desires; rather, they just become multiplied by experience 
of pleasure. Desires can only be eradicated when one recognizes 
their faults; then one abandons them, and abandons the actions that 
would fulfil them as well. Gaining the god-like state of Prajapati 
does not open the door to liberation; all particularizations (vifesa) 
alike block progress to liberation, and the Prajapati state is no excep- 
tion. Prajapati has no more nor less reality than a worm, since reality 
is without particularizations. 

25 (ET 183-195) 356b-377a. Objection (by a combined-path 
theorist or jfdnakarmasamuccayavadin): There are three ways in which 
knowledge and action can be combined, depending on whether the 
one or the other or neither are subsidiary. 

Answer : It can’t be that neither are subsidiary; as has been indi- 
cated, the two kinds of texts have entirely distinct subject matters 
and thus cannot function together to yield a common meaning, and 
they produce distinct kinds of results (liberation for knowledge, 
heaven for ritual action). And neither one can be subsidiary to the 
other, since they are mutually opposed in what they presuppose. 
Of course, other kinds of knowledge regularly assist action—for exam- 
ple, knowing that one is a Brahmin is helpful to performing ritual 
acts. But Self-knowledge isn’t helpful in this way, since it completely 
undermines the idea of agency that is critical in performing action. 
Self-knowledge precludes action. The only combination possible 
between Self-knowledge and action is succession—action preceding 


432 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Self-knowledge, since action is the external means whereas knowledge 
is the internal means to liberation. 

26. (ET 195-211) 377b-410a. Objection (by a prapaficavilayavadin) : 
The karmakanda is subsidiary to the jfidnakdnda, since the karmakanda 
teaches the means by which all differences found in the world are 
dissolved (laya; vilaya). For example, the text enjoining one who 
desires heaven to sacrifice actually enjoins us to give up the notion 
that the body is the Self; prohibitions enjoin us to give up actions 
instigated by attachment, etc.; the injunctions to perform required 
and occasional ritual actions likewise enjoin us to stop performing 
optional actions. It is in scripture as it is in the world; commands 
and warnings are used to prevent actions or to change the course of 
things. In this way all the karmakdnda texts prepare one for Self- 
knowledge by dissolving actions based on attachment. 

Answer: No. For which person is the karmakanda supposed to 
teach the dissolution of worldly actions ? Not for the one who seeks 
liberation, as scripture says that the result of the actions it enjoins is 
heaven, which is a different state from liberation. But it does not 
teach dissolution for one who desires heaven either, since one must 
perform actions (not dissolve them) in order to reach heaven, on the 
authority of scripture itself. Does the teaching exist then for one who 
wishes to destroy the world altogether? But nonexistence cannot be 
the result striven after. Finally, is it that the karmakdnda teaches 
dissolution as a means to arriving at the true knowledge that in turn 
produces release ? But one can have true knowledge even while the 
world exists, and when it is dissolved, as in deep sleep, there is no 
Self-knowledge. 

Tf the world is natural (svdbhavika) it cannot be dissolved; if it is a 
product it is removed by destroying its cause, not by destroying it. 
The only way the world can be dissolved is by removing its cause 
(ignorance) through knowledge; dissolving one’s faculties into deep 
sleep happens periodically by nature and does not arise from scriptural 
teaching. 

Again, if the idea is that the injunctions both enjoin dissolution of 
the universe and attainment of heaven this won’t do as a way of ex- 
plaining the scriptural texts—one sentence can’t have two opposed 
meanings. Anyway, if injunctions have as their meaning the disso- 
lution of the world there can be no hearing of the great sentences, 
etc., which are the means to liberation, and thus liberation, as well 
as heaven, will become accidental, and the scripture will lose its 
point. 

Objection: Both kandas have liberation as their intent; heaven is 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 433 


not an accidental result but is an intermediate step on the way to 
liberation, just as one may go through a village to get to the town. 

Answer : No, the analogy is not apt, since one does not desire to 
reach the village by which one reaches the town, but one does desire 
to gain heaven. 

Objector : Well, heaven is desired as means to the final end of libe- 
ration, just as the village is desired to be reached in order to get to the 
town. 

Answer: No. In the karmakaénda one only hears about heaven, 
not liberation; one who only hears of the village will not go on to the 
town beyond ! 

27 (ET 211-221) 410b-427. Objection : But injunctions must 
be subsidiary to the texts on knowledge, since they help one become 
eligible for Self-knowledge. 

Answer : No. Prohibitions help one become eligible for knowledge 
by producing a turning-away (nivriti) from actions stemming from 
attachment, etc. But how can (positive) injunctions destroy attach- 
ment? None of the several kinds of injunctions could do that. A 
specifying injunction (niyamavidhi, which states the operation by which 
an already established activity is to be carried out) cannot destroy 
attachment. Neither can an excluding injunction (parisamkhydavidhi, 
which excludes one of several alternative interpretations concerning 
which act is enjoined). The only relevant kind of injunction for your 
claim is the main kind of injunction that commands us to do something 
not established otherwise (apirvavidhi). 

Objector: Yes, and such an injunction may cause one to turn away 
from actions stemming from attachment, just as one who desires to ac- 
quire a village by performing a certain kind of rite (the samgrahani) turns 
away from getting the same result by undertaking service to the king. 

Answer : Again, your analogy is inapt. The samgrahani rite may 
get you your village in the future, whereas service should get it for you 
in this life; thus they do not have the same result, and the one does 
not necessarily cause you to turn away from the other. Anyway, 
activity enjoined by scripture cannot very well remove all activity 
stemming from attachment, since, for example, one would then have 
no money and could not pay for the activity enjoined ! There would 
then be no actions at all resulting from scriptural injunctions, and the 
karmakénda would become useless. 

28 (ET 222-228) 428-440a. Objection: The texts on knowledge 
are subsidiary to those on action. 

Answer : That would have to be proved by recourse to the six kinds 
of proof (see above, section 22), but none of them suffice. 


434 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objection: The proof arises from presumption (arthaksepa)—one 
has to know the Self in order to be able to act as an agent in acts 
intended to produce heaven, etc. 

Answer: Yes, one must know the agent-self, but one need not (and 
cannot) know the real Self. 

Objection: Our thesis is proved from the passages (Mdanavadharma- 
§astra V1.35; Taittiriyasamhita V1.3.11) that say that one must gain 
Self-knowledge before discharging the three debts (to gods, ancestors, 
and teachers). 

Answer: No. Scripture indicates that even the brahmacarin may 
renounce (7abala Upanisad 4), and anyway, the texts you mention 
only show that one should discharge the three debts some time, not 
necessarily after Self-knowledge. 

29 (ET 228-236) 440b-455a. Objection (by the Prabhakara or 
Niyogavadin) : The Self, being the meaning of a word (padartha), 
like corn, etc., must be known through pramdnas other than scripture. 
The Self can be recognized by examining the states of waking, dream- 
ing, and deep sleep. Scripture’s function is to suppress (nirodha) 
the vdsands arising from those three states or to suppress the internal 
organ. When the vdsands have been suppressed the Self, being self- 
luminous, shines without dependence on any pramdna. Thus the 
Upanisads are not pramanas of the Self, but only as enjoining something, 
that is, the suppressions of vdsands, which are the sole causes of any 
relation between the Self and what is bad (anartha). Thus it is 
release from them that constitutes liberation, and nothing else. 

The operation of words is impossible except as dependent upon the 
injunctive force (niyoga), and it is impossible that the injunctive force 
should relate to what already exists. Again, only something yet-to- 
be-experienced can be an aim of human activity. Therefore scrip- 
ture is not a valid pramana of the Self—both the jidnakdnda and the 
karmakaénda are auxiliary to the injunction to eliminate obstruction. 

30 (ET 236-248) 455b-478a. Answer : That is not right. Even with- 
out an injunction to do so we find that men accomplish their ends 
by using pramdnas. Through inference we can come to know that 
the vdsanés produce relations between the Self and what is bad, and 
that by suppressing them one will remove bondage. For you, as for the 
Buddhists, scripture is of no help at all in gaining liberation. Further- 
more, since vds:nds are endless it isn’t possible to suppress them. 

Can direct Self-knowledge destroy ignorance, and so destroy the 
vdsands, or not? If so, you accept our view. If not, how could 
meditation (bhdvand) destroy them, since meditation is itself destroyed 
by frustration (dubkha), etc, 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 435 


The Self is not in fact the meaning of a word, or for that matter, 
the meaning of a sentence. Scripture gives us knowledge of the Self 
not by a direct meaning-relation with its words, but rather by denying 
such a relation. 

There are no vdsands in deep sleep, etc., and yet those states do not 
constitute liberation. As for the notion that the Self shines self 
luminously without dependence upon any pramdéna, we answer that 
only through a pramdna can one grasp its so shining. 

Likewise, you yourself cannot grasp the injunctive force except 
through your consciousness, which is the Self. The Self is not to be 
established by pramdnas, since all things are established only by the 
Self (i.e., consciousness), so It doesn’t depend on anything else. 

As for the notion that only what is yet-to-be-experienced can be 
an aim of human activity, it is experience that is the aim, not objects; 
experience, that is, consciousness or the Self, is constant whereas 
objects vary, so it is the former that is the ultimate human aim, as 
well as the content of all the pramdpas. Thus it is clear that the 
Upanisads speak of It too. Indeed, all empirical usage, whether 
ordinary or based on the Vedas, is for the sake of the enjoyer, who is 
essentially consciousness. Yajfiavalkya’s words in the present Upani- 
sad (‘‘for the Self’s sake everything is loved,” etc.) illustrate this. 

31 (ET 248-286) 478b-542a. Objection (by the Niyogavadin) : 
Only what is to be done (karya) can be the meaning of scripture, and 
so scripture cannot concern the Self. Existing entities are known 
by the other pramdnas; if scripture grasped them also it would have no 
function of its own and would be dependent on the others. Every 
word is attested to by common experience as pertaining to activity 
(pravrtti) or its cessation (nivrtit). We learn the meanings of words 
by noticing their capacity to elicit, etc., activity or inactivity. 

Counterobjection : Other pramdpas can grasp what-is-to-be-done 
(karya). 

Objector : No, the only means for knowing it is the Vedas. Now 
the Vedic sentences do not produce activity—if they did, everyone 
would act whenever they heard a sentence; rather it indicates or makes 
known (jfdpaka) activity. 

Counterobjection : It is desires, etc., that make us understand which 
actions to perform on hearing words. 

Objector: No. Desires, etc., are the causes of prompting (prerana) 
one to act; the sound of the words make known this prompting. For 
example, a student may be commanded to act by his master when 
there is no desire on his part, nor even any recognition of desire, 
etc., on the part of his master. Thus desires, anger, etc., become 


436 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


prompters to activity only as they are known through other pramdnas. 
It is therefore the injunctive force indicating what is to be done 
that is what prompts us to activity. 

Other counterobjections to the Niyogavada thesis are considered, 
most of them turning on grammatical considerations relating to verb 
endings. The Niyogavadin shows how even indicative verbs have 
an injunctive sense or force, and thus that obligation is a pervasive 
feature of our language. It is the fundamental feature, to which 
other features are subservient in function. The injunction “fone who 
desires heaven should sacrifice’? is exhaustively analyzed. 

32 (ET 287-301) 542b-569a. Answer: The Vedanta texts produce 
the modifications (vriti) of awareness in which the Self is reflected. 
The Self is self-evident. 

Objection : If so the Vedantic texts have no use. 

Answer: Their function is to dispel the ignorance that veils the 
Self. Both knowledge and ignorance are experienced in the Self; 
that is not incomprehensible, any more than what experience also 
tells us, that is, that in deep sleep there is consciousness but no cognizer. 
Both sections of the Veda tell us about what is beyond the reach of 
the senses, but the karmakdnda tells us what is to be done, whereas the 
jitanakanda teaches the Self. Both parts are pramana, but of different 
kinds of things. (Other ways of interpreting the relevant parts of 
Samkara’s comments are considered. ) 

Objection : Since the Vedantic texts are not injunctive, like mantras 
and arthavadas, they cannot be pramdanas. 

Answer: Mantras and arthavddas are subsidiary to injunctions, so 
it is clear why they don’t constitute independent pramdnas. But the 
Vedantic texts are not subsidiary to injunctions, so the analogy doesn’t 
hold. There are three kinds of arthavddas : (1) gunavadda or metaphor, 
where the literal meaning is incompatible with what is established 
by some other pramdna; (2) anuvdda or restatement, where the mean- 
ing is established by another pramana; and (3) bhitarthavada, where 
the meaning is neither established nor precluded by other pramdnas. 
In all three cases the arthavéda, even though subsidiary to an injunc- 
tion, has its own meaning—so what is the objection to allowing 
Vedantic texts to have their own meaning ? 

33. (ET 301-315) 569b-602a. The function of a pramdna can 
relate only to what is existent and as yet unknown. If perception 
and the rest (excluding scripture) are claimed to relate to the Self 
it would have to be shown that their object is as yet unknown. How 
could this unknownness be shown? Not by another pramdna, since 
this would involve mutual dependence, So, perception and_ the 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 437 


other nonscriptural pramdnas cannot relate to the Self. But they 
cannot conflict with the scriptural (Vedanta) testimony, since con- 
sciousness is the locus of all awareness of any kind. 

There is no rule that words can only by used to mention what is 
to be done. For example, “Be happy! You have a fine son” en- 
joins neither activity nor cessation of it. Yet such a sentence can give 
happiness. Again, telling a man who imagines himself to be bitten 
by a (nonexistent) snake ‘Don’t be afraid, it’s not a snake” does not 
issue an injunction not to be afraid; the fear vanishes when the truth 
is known. An injunctive force (niyoga) occurs only when a person 
who knows that something is to be done is moved to act to do it in 
order that he may get what the injunction advises. In the Vedantic 
texts, however, as soon as he hears the words the goal is realized and 
nothing remains to be done; an apt analogy would be telling some- 
body a story to satisfy his curiosity. Of course, a statement of fact 
may be followed by action; someone told ‘“‘This road is infested with 
robbers” may leave the road, but that is because he desires to avoid 
being robbed—the statement itself does not prompt one to activity, 
rather the desire does. 

Objection: ‘This road is infested with robbers” surely is intended 
by its speaker as enjoining the hearer against traveling the road. 

Answer: No. The meaning of a sentence is not a function of the 
intention of the speaker but of what the words have the capacity to 
mean. Especially you (Mimamsakas) should accept that, since 
according to you scripture has no speaker! And since a speaker 
may intend all sorts of things, his words would then have to mean all 
sorts of things. The case is analogous to the other pramdnas : one 
who desires to avoid snakes turns away when he sees a snake, but the 
seeing is not the turning away. 

34 (ET 315-324) 602b-620. What is your theory of meaning ? 
(1) Do you hold that words have meanings independently of their 
use in sentences ? (2) Or do you take it that words mean only future 
results (kdrya) ? Or (3) does word meaning depend on the words’ 
connections with other words ? 

(1) If words have independent meanings, then how can they 
combine to yield sentence meaning ? The combination would be 
semantically nonsensical. 

(3) If word meaning depends on connection with other words, 
then since not all words are injunctive in sense your position will have 
to be abandoned. 

(2) So, your view must be that words mean only future results. 
But if so, all words speaking of the same future result will become 


438 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


synonymous, which is absurd. Further, declarative statements will 
become meaningless. Again, what about a word—a verb, say—that 
directly means a future result : on the theory in question it does 
not have independent meaning and so must depend on other words, 
but those words are either injunctive or not; if not, those words have 
no meaning themselves, but if so, those (injunctive) words require 
further words, ad infinitum. Indeed, if all words only have sense as 
related to future effects, then they couldn’t combine into sentences, 
since they would lack expectancy (andpeksaiva). As a result, an 
injunctive force (niyoga) cannot be the meaning of an injunctive 
sentence. Yet if not, how does it figure in producing sentence mean- 
ing ? For example, in the sentence “‘sacrifice with soma,’’ what relates 
the words “sacrifice” and “‘soma’’?? Either the words require niyoga 
to relate them, or they are related without dependence on niyoga. 
But we have shown that niyoga cannot operate without depending on 
other already meaningful expressions with which to combine to form 
a sentence. So the niyoga or connection with the expected future 
result is only one content of words, not the meaning:of a whole (in- 
junctive) sentence. This fits well the relevant passage in Sabara’s 
(Mimamsésiitra) bhasya. 

Objection : But one needs to know the future result in order to 
connect the injunction with sacrifice. 

Answer: That is, I gather, one must know the future result before 
one knows anything. But then one must know the future result 
before one can know the future result, which is impossible. 

Objection: No. One can know a future result without dependence 
on another knowledge of one. 

Answer: Then the obligation of “sacrifice” can equally well be 
known without dependence on any other knowledge. 

Objection: But sacrificing is onerous, and one needs to have a future 
result indicated in order to be motivated to sacrifice. 

Answer: Merely indicating a future result is not enough; the future 
result must be connected with sacrificing by an appropriate syntac- 
tical indication (e.g., an injunctive verb ending); but then, since the 
niyoga depends on the verb ending and the verb ending depends 
(according to you) on the niyoga, there will be (the fault of) mutual 
dependence. 

Anyway, what is obligatory—that is, what ts the “future result” 
(kdrya) ? It is something that requires human effort for it to occur. 
But then it is the sacrifice that is the obligatory future result, and 
not niyoga. 

Objection: But niyoga precisely zs the obligatoriness. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 439 


Answer: Then it can’t have obligatoriness! Only what is not 
now existing can be obligatory, but according to you niyoga exists 
now. 

So, the right theory of meaning is this : some words denote existing 
things, some future results; likewise, sentences may or may not have 
as their sense existing things or future results. 

35 (ET 325-331) 621-633. Question: Then why does activity 
arise after hearing certain words ? 

Answer : Well, if one desires something spoken of in what he hears, 
he will naturally act. There is no such thing as niyoga over and be- 
yond the instrument (karana), modus operandi (itikartavyata) and the 
thing to be accomplished (bhavya). Indeed, what is niyoga ? 

Niyoga is not (1) inducement (prerapa); for inducement is a func- 
tion of words that has niyoga as its sense, and the sense of words cannot 
be identical with the words. 

It is not (2) internal effort (antaras prayatna), for effort is mental, 
and niyoga isn’t. 

It is not (3) action (Kriya), since action belongs to its agent, whereas 
niyoga belongs to the person prompted by the injunction to act, and 
these need not be the same. 

It is not (4) the result (phala), since niyoga is not what is desired. 

It is not (5) an instrument (kéraka) for obtaining a result, for niyoga 
is what is yet to be obtained, whereas the instrument exists already 
to obtain it. 

And it is not (6) anything else, for there is no clear statement of 
any other alternative. 

And it is not (7) something unqualified temporarily, since if some- 
one says “‘pot,”’ there being no temporal qualification, it must become 
a niyoga ! 

And it is not (8) something beyond the senses (atindriya), since it is 
the operation (vyapara) of the person prompted to act, which certainly 
cannot be beyond the senses. 

Objection : Niyoga is what is accomplished when sacrifice is carried 
out. 

Answer : Not if niyoga is eternal, as I gather you claim. 

Objection: Niyoga is the expected future result (kdrya) that functions 
to produce the ultimate human purpose (viz., heaven). 

Answer: Is this niyoga always present, or is it produced by human 
activity and then produces heaven, etc.? If the former, since niyoga 
is always present, heaven, etc., should be also. If the latter, this 
contradicts your own. view, for an eternal thing cannot be produced. 
Indeed, the expected future result must be identical with the sacrifice, 


440 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


etc., since they are what produce heaven, and they are produced by 
human activity, not niyoga. So niyoga is not identical with karya. 

36 (ET 332-342) 634-653. Objection (by a Bhatla) : Right. 
Sacrifice, etc., are the objects to which a person is induced, and the 
optative mood (in which injunctions are expressed) express induce- 
ment (prerana). Niyoga doesn’t come into it, as you say. 

Answer: Wrong! The same difficulties arise for the theory that 
inducement is what an injunction expresses as we have shown arise 
for the theory that an expected future result is what it expresses. 
Furthermore, what is this “inducement”? It can’t be the essential 
nature (svariipa) of the injunctive mood, since its essence is to make 
known (jidpaka) what is not known; again, other moods can express 
inducement. And inducement can’t be the ability (Sakti) of the 
injunctive mood, since the claim is that inducement is expressed by 
that mood, and the ability cannot be identical with what is expressed. 
Nor can it be the operation (vydpdra) of the enjoiner. Since we are 
concerned with Vedic injunctions there is no enjoiner other than the 
Veda itself, and its operation consists in making known what is un- 
known, which is therefore identical with ‘‘inducement.’”? The Vedas 
are valid through making known (jfdpana), not through inducing. 
However, we agree that sacrifice, etc., which are what injunctions 
are about, do lead to desired ends such as heaven, etc. 

Objection : Even when sacrifice, etc., are performed heaven is not 
always seen to result. 

Answer: True, but the same difficulty obtains on your own view, 
since even if niyoga were what is expressed by injunctions the results 
are not always seen to occur immediately thereafter. 

Objection : But sacrifice, etc. (unlike niyoga), are acts, and must 
have immediate results. 

Answer: No, not all acts have immediate results; consider service 
to the king. In any case, our theory is simpler than yours. On 
your view niyoga is interposed between the sacrifice and its result 
(heaven), whereas on ours it is not; so ours is simpler and thus better. 
And there are difficulties in relating sacrifice, etc., to niyoga—does 
sacrifice generate niyoga directly ? But then no sacrifice could fail to 
generate heaven immediately; and no other relation seems possible 
on your view. 

37. (ET 343-364) 654-692. So, the ntyega theory is invalid as 
respects the karmakanda. It is also invalid in regard to the jrdnakanda. 
Such a passage (in the Upanisads) as “‘the Self is to be seen” is not 
an injunction—the Self is not the kind of thing whose knowledge can 
be enjoined, for reasons already indicated. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 44] 


If Self-knowledge is enjoined, what is the supposed content of the 
injunction ? Is it (1) verbal knowledge (Sabda), (2) contemplation 
(bhdvana@), or (3) direct experience (sdksatkara)? 

(1) Since a text like “The Self is Brahman” gives us knowledge 
of its meaning merely by being heard, there is no need for an injunc- 
tion on us to know it, any more than understanding an injunction 
“Sacrifice !”’ requires another injunction to understand it. Further- 
more, the result of an injunction to know is an activity, but what is 
being enjoined is activity aimed at knowing the meaning of the 
injunction ! 

Objection : What is enjoined is activity designed to verify the inter- 
pretation of the text. 

Answer: Is the interpretation to be based on the text or on some- 
thing else? If on the text the injunction is useless. If it depends on 
another pramdna the Vedas would become dependent on something 
else for its validation. 

Objection: The injunction is required to remove a meaning not 
intended. 

Answer: No, since words of all sorts, Vedic or otherwise, don’t 
require an injunction in order that they be properly understood. 
Likewise for sentences. 

Objection : The injunction makes knowledge appropriate as the 
means to liberation, just as the injunction to sacrifice makes ritual 
acts appropriate as means to heaven, etc. 

Answer: No. Knowledge is not an action and is not a means to 
an end. Liberation will result from knowledge whether or not an 
injunction is present. 

Objection: A sentence that states a fact is not by itselfa pramdna, 
since it only restates (anuvdda) what can be known by other pramdnas; 
but if an injunctive context is inferred this will make the text an 
independent pramdna. 

Answer : But sentences about Brahman are not restatements. 
They make known an existing thing not known through any other 
praména. In any case, the fact that two pramdnas may know a given 
thing does not make the pramdnas dependent. 

Objection : But if we know x by one pramana, where x is previously 
unknown, and then subsequently know it by another, the earlier 
pramdna is valid since its content was unknown. 

Answer : This “‘unknownness” of a thing—how do you propose to 
establish its presence ? Not by a pramdna, since ex hypothest the pramana 
removes the unknownness! And it surely can’t establish itself. 

38 (ET 364-371) 693-705. Objection : But miyoga (unlike 


442 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Brahman, apparently, according to your admission) is only known 
through verbal testimony as pramdna; thus verbal testimony is an 
independent pramdana specifically in regard to niyoga. 

Answer : Ordinary injunctions (e.g., ‘‘eat this fruit?) must then 
require Vedic texts to make them known ! 

Objector: The difference is that in ordinary (non-Vedic) injunc- 
tions the injunction relates to something about which we have knowl- 
edge by other framdnas; not so in the case of Vedic injunctions. 

Answer: Precisely; so Vedantic statements are not dependent on 
other pramdnas, since they are not about things about which we have 
knowledge by other pramdnas. 

Objector: No, it is the Vedic sentences involving words governed 
by niyoga, which are independent pramdnas. 

Answer : No—the same words and meanings apply in the Vedas 
as elsewhere; the optative case can’t mean one thing in the Vedas and 
something else in other places. 

Objection: Anyhow, the reason why we must construe Self-knowl- 
edge as enjoined is that we cannot understand the meaning of Vedic 
sentences providing it unless we postulate a verb governing all Vedic 
contexts. 

Answer: A verb, to be sure, but not any particular kind of verb; 
declarative statements have verbs. In ‘‘that thou art’ we have a 
verb, but it doesn’t designate any action enjoined, since there is no 
expected result—jiva doesn’t become the Self, nor does this sentence 
speak of any relation between them other than identity. Thus 
scriptural texts teach the nature of the Self directly, through secondary 
meaning (laksand), even though the Self is beyond the scope of words. 

39 (ET 371-379) 706-719. Even if reality could be made 
known by other pramdnas than scripture, scripture doesn’t depend on 
those other pramdnas. When what it says is understood, it has validly 
made known its subject matter, and no further pramdnas are needed, 
any more than understanding niyoga requires another pramdna to make 
known its nature. A pramdna only makes something known; whether 
something is to be done or not depends on the object, not the pramdna. 

Objection : But niyoga is something to be established (sddhya), not 
already established (siddha) like Brahman; so your analogy fails against 
me. 

Answer: Either niyoga gets established by action or it doesn’t. If 
it does, your argument is wrong; if it doesn’t, performance of actions 
is useless. 

40 (ET 379-397) 720-755. Brahman (unlike niyoga) is only made 
known by verbal testimony (i.e., scripture), since other pramdanas 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 443 


only make known things on the presumption of their difference from 
the knowing subject. 

Objection: But scriptural texts cannot constitute the pramdna unless 
something is adduced to explain how the several word meanings in 
a Vedic sentence conspire to yield a sentence meaning. In the case 
of other words conveying the knowledge made known ‘by other 
pramanas, the production of sentence meaning from the word mean- 
ings arises from the speaker’s intention, and so in the case of Vedic 
sentences, since they have no author, unless we postulate an injunc- 
tive sense (to relate the word meanings) they will be nonsense. 

Answer : Why so ? Perhaps a verb must be postulated, but why 
an injunctive one? 

Objector : Only injunctive verbs indicate niyoga independently; 
other words are restatements (anuvdda) and cannot independently 
explain how sentence meaning arises from word meanings. 

Answer : Do you mean that the meaning of an injunction will be 
known even if we do not understand the words? That can’t be right. 

Objector: Yes. It is only the sentence that has the meaning asso- 
ciated with niyoga, not the words. 

Answer : Then each sentence means something entirely different 
from any other, unrelated in any way, which is absurd. “Bring 
the cow” would be unrelated to ‘‘tie the cow.”’ But “‘cow’”’ is meaning- 
ful only when cowness qualifies other things than this one, and 
“bring” is meaningful only when things other than this one can be 
brought. 

Objection: Still, we see that sentence meanings are learned this 
way: the grandfather gives a command to the father, and the son, 
seeing the connection between the command and his father’s action, 
understands the relation between the optative mood and the niyoga. 

Answer: The niyoga in this case is inferred from the father’s acts— 
so it is not gotten from verbal testimony alone. Indeed, the inference 
is the critical aspect, as it must precede activity. 

We conclude that niyoga is not necessary for anything. Words 
when properly related by expectancy (akdmksd@), fitness (yogyatd), 
and proximity (samnidhz) give rise to sentence meaning without postu- 
lating an injunctive sense or niyoga. 

41 (ET 398-401) 756-761. Objection: There are two kinds of 
injunction, originative (utpattividht) and injunction as to eligibility 
(adhikdravidht). In the karmakdnda we find originative injunctions 
such as “‘Sacrifice !,’’ in the jfdnakadnda such as ‘“The Selfis to be seen.” 
We also find the other kind of injunction, as in ‘‘He who wants 
liberation should gain knowledge.” The former kind makes known 


444 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


what is not previously known; the latter kind makes one who is inactive 
active. 

Answer: But Self-knowledge cannot lie within the scope of either. 
It is not the subject of an originative injunction, since such an injunc- 
tion not only makes known what is not previously known, but goes 
on to indicate what should be done; as we have seen, Self-knowledge 
cannot be the subject of such an injunction. But Self-knowledge 
cannot fall under the second kind of injunction either, since the Self 
cannot be enjoined, whether it is the jiva or the diman, since both are 
existing things. 

42 (ET 401-420) 762-790. (2, from section 37 above) : Nor 
is the content of the supposed injunction contemplation of the 
Self. 

Objection (by a Prasamkhyadnavadin): What is enjoined is not 
Self-knowledge but the means to that through reflection (manana) 
and meditation (dhyana) with their auxiliaries (such as calmness, 
etc.), more specifically through that effort called continued medi- 
tation (prasamkhyana). Just as in the world we find that the study of 
the fdstras leads to enlightenment, so in the Vedas continued medi- 
tation is enjoined as a means to experiencing (darfana). It is as in 
medicine: a prescription may be known to cure various things, and 
then there may be doubt as to whether it cures typhoid (kasfajuara), 
and so it is specifically stated (in Ayur Veda) that it does, that is, that 
it should be used in that case too. Granted, meditation does not 
immediately produce liberating insight; still, the Vedic authority 
indicates that it does, and nothing can prove otherwise, since Vedic 
authority outweighs all else in the absence of any pramana to the con- 
trary. (The Prasamkhyanavadin continues.) Now in the karmakénda 
the injunctions are primary, but in the jfdnakdnda it is the statements 
(such as “‘that art thou”’) that are primary, the injunctions to meditate 
being subsidiary to them, since unless it is first known what to meditate 
upon such injunctions would have no point. Thus the assertive statements 
give mediate (paroksa) knowledge that has to be made immediate 
through continued meditation. The subsidiary injunction does not 
obscure the sense of the primary assertion; nor is there the problem 
of scripture meaning two different things by one and the same sentence, 
since meditation is enjoined by scripture as the operation by which 
scripture makes its sense known. This subsidiary injunction is not the 
only such aid—reasoning (yukti) likewise assists; but neither scriptural 
injunctions nor logic alone can produce immediate awareness of 
reality. Yet both are required so that the knowledge gained from 
scriptural assertions may validly yield immediate knowledge of the 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 445 


Self. If scripture is not interpreted this way, then one who has heard 
of the Sclf but has not arrived at immediate experience of It would 
construe scriptural assertions as auxiliary (arthavéda). He will not 
arrive at immediate knowledge without continued meditation. It is 
analogous to the case of ‘‘Sacrifice with the vifvajit!,”” which is shown 
in the Mimamsasitras (IV.3.10-16) to require the addition of the 
notion of desiring heaven (svargakaéma), without which the injunction 
would be without validity since it leads to no result. Now just as the 
words “‘sacrifice’? and ‘“‘visvajit” have their own meanings, no doubt, 
but do not function as pramdna unless one supplies ‘“‘svargakama,” 
scriptural assertions and reasoning, while no doubt preserving their 
natural meaning, do not produce valid knowledge until associated 
with continued meditation. 

43 (ET 421-438) 791-819. Answer: What is this continued 
meditation supposed to accomplish ? Surely not the supposed 
reality of knower, knowing, and known, since they are nothing but 
pure consciousness (samvit). Nor can continued meditation remove 
the mediateness from the Witness-Self, since it is never mediate. 
And, since the Self is self established (svatahsiddha), continued medi- 
tation is not needed to avoid its nonestablishment. As for the removal 
of ignorance—that is accomplished by pramdnas, not by continued 
meditation. Continued meditation cannot effect the release of the 
Self, since It is always liberated. It is knowledge that removes 
ignorance, and that does not require any kind of practice, whether of 
meditation or anything else. 

In any case, continued meditation cannot be the content of niyoga, 
for it is not itself an act, but rather it is the repetition of the acts of 
hearing (Sravana) and reflection (manana). And so it is those acts 
(at best) that may be enjoined, not continued meditation. Repeti- 
tion is not enjoined, but rather the act is enjoined, which is then 
repeated; the result arises from the act, not the repetition. 

You said that meditation and reasoning assist one who has heard 
of the Self from scripture. But that is not right, for it would make 
scripture depend on reasoning in order to be valid. 

Objection : Reasoning is not a distinct pramdpa from the others, but 
rather a part of a pramana, the other parts of which are verbal testi- 
mony, meditation and the Self. Together, they make known the 
unity of the Self. 

Answer: But none of them is then the pramdna, since it is the 
praména that reveals the truth. If all the supposed factors together 
produced the result, no one of them would assist the pramana—but 
your view was that continued meditation does just that. Just as oil, 


446 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


wick, and fire in combination produce a lamp that is the illuminator, 
but the lamp is self-illuminating, so likewise a praména may be causally 
composed or conditioned by various things but by itself be quite 
sufficient for producing valid knowledge. None of these supposed 
factors are independent pramdnas; if they were, scripture would be 
a restatement of what reasoning, etc., can provide, or else reasoning 
would be merely a restatement of what scripture yields. 

44 (ET 438-453) 820-847. Continued meditation is repetition, 
but it cannot improve an object, any more than a pramdna can improve 
an object by repeatedly knowing it. 

Objection : When an object is in the dusk repeated perception of 
it may make it clearer. 

Answer: But there the object of each perception is different from 
the preceding one—first a thing, then a living thing, then a human 
living thing, and so on. Or if you insist that all these things are the 
same object and the perception is single, then it would follow that all 
the pramdnas—perception, inference, etc.—are the same one since 
they can all grasp the same object. 

Anyway, continued meditation is a causal factor (kdraka), not 
something that makes something known (jfapaka). 

Now, you argued that injunctions to continued meditation are 
subsidiary to assertions in the jfdnekdnda. But that can only be if 
they can function together to provide a consistent sense, which they 
cannot, since they speak of different things. The assertions speak 
of reality, whereas an injunction to meditate speaks of niyoga. 

Objection : They are consistent since they have the same expected 
result. 

Answer: Since you do not hold that heaven is that fruit I assume 
it must be liberation. But liberation is self-established and needs 
no injunction at all; and since scripture is eternal (on your view) 
it doesn’t need anything such as continued meditation to establish 
its sense. 

If continued meditation is supposed to produce a result, does it do 
it immediately or only after a time ? If the former, repetition is 
unnecessary. But there is no specification of a period of time after 
which it will produce its result, as there is (in scripture) with respect 
to other prescribed actions. Or else we must suppose continued 
meditation either has results in subsequent lives—in which case it is a 
primary act, not a subsidiary one—or else that it is subsidiary to 
ritual acts, not to scriptural assertions. In either case one who 
desires liberation will not feel any obligation to follow the injunction 
to meditate. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 447 


45 (ET 453-475) 848-884. Either scripture expounds the true 
nature of the Self or it doesn’t. If it doesn’t, it cannot be valid— 
but we agree that it is. If it does, then realization will arise from the 
experiencing of the Self; which results directly therefrom, and conti- 
nued meditation will be unnecessary. 

Other reasons are offered why there is no need for continued medi- 
tation, or indeed any dependence on any sort of injunction or niyoga, 
Nor is there any dependence on reasoning in order that the liberating 
experience be realized. Reason removes doubts but does not provide 
valid knowledge; if it did scripture would cease to be a pramédna. 

Objection : You say that, for example, “that thou art” is the pramana 
for the truth, since “that”? means Brahman and ‘‘thou”? means déman. 
But either we already understand what “Brahman” and “‘diman” mean 
or we don’t. If we do, then “‘that thou art” is merely a restatement, 
whereas ifwe don’t, we need some other pramana to tell us what they mean. 

Answer: We know the meaning of “Brahman” and “‘étman” from 
ordinary usage (laukikaprayoga). But the statement “Brahman is 
Gtman” (or “that thou art’) is not merely a restatement, since the 
sense of the sentence goes beyond ordinary usage. It is analogous 
to the use of words such as “‘apiirva,” ‘‘adevata’”’ or “heaven” (svarga), 
which have ordinary senses but are used in the karmakanda in special, 
extraordinary senses. And it’s not the words that provide valid 
knowledge, but the sentence that is the pramdna. We learn the mean- 
ings of the constituent words of a sentence by finding out what happens 
when a word is left out or added; however, it is not the words sub- 
tracted or added but the sentences resulting that convey the meaning. 
Just as there are words, and word meanings they express, so there are 
sentencés and sentence meanings they express. A sentence is made 
up of words, and a sentence meaning is made up of word meanings. 
Thus whether in the Vedas or in ordinary speech the sentence meaning 
is made up of word meanings properly juxtaposed; the difference, 
therefore, is that in the Vedas (some of) the words have extraordinary 
meanings, and so thus too do the sentences that they compose. 

Objection : Since the relation of a word to its meaning is established 
by the usage of elders, verbal testimony cannot be a pramdna, forit has 
a beginning. 

Answer: No. The meanings of words are beginningless. 

Objector: If so, how could anyone hear the word “‘cow”’ and not 
know its meaning? Since that does happen, meaning must be con- 
ventional. 

Answer: Not so; if someone doesn’t know the meaning of a word, 
all that shows is that he doesn’t have the capacity to understand the 


448 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


meaning, not that the word doesn’t have the meaning. Anyway, 
how could meaning be conventional ? Do we learn it from the elders ? 
But where did they learn it from? Or did God establish meaning ? 
But no one remembers Him, or anyone else, doing so. 

Objection : Failure to remember a thing doesn’t prove it didn’t 
happen. 

Answer : Nevertheless, in the absence of any evidence through 
remembering what has been experienced there is no basis for postu- 
lating anyone who established meanings; so we conclude they are 
beginningless. Thus scripture, that is, verbal testimony, is valid— 
both the karmakanda and jidnakanda parts. 

46 (ET 475-483) 885-902. Now, men desire to attain what is 
worthwhile and to avoid what isn’t. But human goals are of two 
sorts, (1) something not yet attained, like a village one is traveling 
to, or (2) something already attained but forgotten, like a 
piece of gold in one’s hand. To attain the former one should 
follow the injunctions set forth in the karmakdnda. But since what 
blocks one from attaining the latter is ignorance, the only way to 
obtain it is to become aware of the truth. Sentences in the jfidna- 
kanda like “‘you are Brahman” or “‘that art thou”’ remove the ignorance 
that hides the ultimate human goal of the second sort; thus they are 
valid means of knowing (pramdna), just as the injunctions are valid. 

Objection: The cause of the knowledge “‘that art thou” is, by your 
admission, false (mithya); so the judgment can’t be valid. 

Answer: Before one is enlightened the means is not known to be 
false; and after enlightenment it doesn’t matter that it is, since one 
no longer depends on any pramana once the goal has been reached. 
A false means may lead to truth—and for that matter a true means 
may lead to falsity! And if you mean that a true means must be 
“real” (paramartha), then scripture would contradict itself, for it 
declares that only Brahman is real, and if scripture in addition were 
real this would undermine the scriptural declaration. 

47 (ET 484-500) 903-938a. The sentence “that art thou’’ is 
to be analyzed differently from sentences whose subject and predicate 
are opposed to each other, or are different things in relation. The 
Self and Brahman are in fact identical, so the subject and predicate 
designate the very same thing. 

Objection : Since both perception and scriptural authority as found 
in the karmakanda prove or presuppose difference between the self and 
Brahman, your view is impossible to substantiate. And neither you 
nor I accept the view of identity-with-difference between them, for 
identity and difference are contradictories. Now you can’t argue that 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 449 


Vedanta texts sublate perception and scripture, since one needs 
perception even to become aware of the syllables (of scripture), and 
since you yourself accept the karmakdnda as valid. So the Vedanta 
texts must be either figurative, or else they counsel meditation. 

Answer : The karmakaénda is not opposed to the Vedanta texts, for 
they have different subject matters. And perception cannot go against 
the Upanisadic teaching, since its function is to reveal the identity 
of a thing, not to produce an idea of difference. Difference cannot 
be real, since reality cannot be dependent. So nondifference is 
the very nature of reality; indeed, even the apparent difference bet- 
ween a praména and its (real) object must be illusory, for all reality 
is nondifferent. Two absences (abhdva) cannot be related to each 
other, since being both absences they are nondifferent. Nor can an 
absence be related to a real existent by either contact (samyoga), 
inherence (samavdya), or identity (tada@tmya). So absences are not 
real; only positive existents (bhdva) can be real, and there can be no 
relation between an absence and a positive existent. All there is is 
the positive existent, which is essentially nondifferentiated. 

48 (ET 501-507) 938b-949. Objection : Absence is itself a 
pramana, and what it grasps validly are absences of objects. 

Answer: Certainly not. A pramdna must be something known that 
makes known what has previously been unknown. Now what could 
make known the absence that you say is a pramaéna? Absence cannot 
make itself known. 

Again, does an absence have qualifiers or not? If not there is no 
way of making it known, and if so, what is the qualifier? If it is a 
praména, it cannot be known by a pramdépa—an object cannot be known 
by its own quality. If you say that the qualifier of absence is an ob- 
ject—as is suggested by the phrase “the absence of pot”—-I say that 
that phrase makes no sense, since I have shown that there can be no 
relation between an absence and a positive existent. 

Objection : Perhaps the things are opposed, but still we can combine 
into a phrase or sentence words that are opposed, for example, 
“darkness” and “light.” 

Answer : No we can’t, since the one word sets up expectations that 
preclude the use of the other. 

Objection : What is meant by “absence” is another, different thing 
(i.e., “absence of pot” denotes cloth, say). 

Answer: Then it would follow that when I say “the pot is absent” 
I am saying “the pot is a cloth”! 

So I conclude that perception cannot grasp absences or differences. 

49 (ET 507-513) 950-960. Odjection : Perhaps perception both 


450 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


reveals the identity of an object and its difference from other things 
at the same time. 

Answer : That would be to attribute contradictory functions to it 
at the same time. 

Objector : All right, then let’s suppose perception first grasps iden- 
tity and then difference, or the reverse order. 

Answer: Cognitions are momentary, and thus one cognition does 
not last long enough to perform a sequence of functions. In any 
case, it couldn’t do so even if it did last long enough: to know that x 
is blue we would have to know that x is not yellow or red or purple 
or..., but to know thatxis not yellow we would have to know 
that yellow is not blue or red or purple or..., soneither grasping 
of identity nor of difference can precede the other. 

Objector: You misunderstand. Our view is that difference and 
nondifference are not incompatible, since they are the very nature of 
reality. 

Answer : That description of reality involves a contradiction. 

50 (ET 514-529) 961-989a. Vaifesika : On our view differ- 
ence is a quality—separateness (prthaktva)—which resides in real 
substances and is perceptible like other qualities such as colors, etc. 

Answer: Is this separateness different from its locus (=substance) 
or not? If it isn’t, then it is just the substance. If separateness is 
different from its locus, however, the locus is not different, that is, 
nonseparate, that is, it doesn’t have separateness, which contradicts the 
hypothesis. 

Objection : The locus is separate and nonseparate (with respect to 
different things). 

Answer: All right, but the locus is not for that reason differen- 
tiated, any more than a lily is composite merely because it has several 
distinct qualities. We cognize the different qualities, but the reality 
that supports that difference is the nondifferentiated locus. Like- 
wise, we perceive differences among the various existent substances— 
cow, pot, etc.—but the reality that supports those different things, 
and is the real object of our cognition, is the underlying existence 
(sanmétra), which is undifferentiated. 

Now what relation can connect properties with their real under- 
lying loci ? Not inherence, since the property is not seen to be differ- 
ent from its locus, and inherence is supposed to connect two distinct 
relata. Not contact, for the same reason—what would connect the 
contact with its relata? 

It cannot be that difference is real and unity unreal, nor can it 
consistently be maintained that one thing can be constituted of both 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 451 


particularity and generality—so it must be that the general—non- 
difference—is real and the particular—difference—illusory. 
Arguments pertaining to the unreality of absences—difference— 
are repeated. The conclusion is thus drawn that all differences are 
superimposed on the one existent consciousness. So the Vedanta 


texts do not conflict with the pramanas, which require consciousness 
for their very operation. 

51 (ET 530-537) 989b-1005a. Objection: In order for a pramana 
to function, its object must be unknown prior to its functioning. You 
argue that consciousness alone is the object, but it isknown prior to the 
operation of any pramdna; thus no pramdna can function. 

Answer: A praména destroys unknownness—therefore it cannot 
have unknownness as its object. When we say “Now I know the pot; 
I did not know it before,” we recognize that the unknownness existed 
before our cognition—thus the unknownness is established, not by a 
pramdna, but by experience (anubhava). Likewise, the knownness of 
the pot after it has been validly known by a pramdna is given to us by 
experience. When we wake up from sleep we realize we did not know 
anything while we were asleep—the pramanas did not operate there, 
and yet we experienced unknownness. 

Objection : When we are asleep we aren’t aware of anything, and 
that’s why we say “I did not know anything when asleep.” 

Answer : If it were so we couldn’t report on our sleeping state 
afterwards. 

Objector : We infer that we did not know anything on the basis of 
our present knowledge after waking up. 

Answer : Awareness cannot be different merely because of a differ- 
ence in time. Indeed, time, cognizer, pramdnas, etc., all depend on 
awareness. They come and go, but awareness must continue through- 
out. Thus experience is self-established, and it is in dependence on 
it that the pramdnas gain their validity. 

52. (ET 537-546) 1005b-1023a. Now just as a pot, previously 
unknown though existent, loses its unknownness when grasped by 
a pramdna, so likewise the Self, being a real thing, only loses its un- 
knownness when grasped by a pramdna, that is, scripture. It is only 
scripture that can be a pramdna with respect to the Self; perception 
and the others necessarily grasp things conditioned by ignorance. 

Objection: You apparently suppose that achievement of Self-knowledge 
yields some kind of happiness or pleasure. But surely only the destruc- 
tion of all sources of frustration and transmigration can properly be said 
to constitute the ultimate human aim, since to pursue positive pleasure 
involves attachment and thus duality of knower and known, etc. 


452 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer : The destruction of frustration is not the same thing as 
happiness, since one can experience pleasure and pain simultaneously. 
And those who are happy desire more happiness—thus happiness 
cannot be the mere destruction of frustration. For example, one 
who is not frustrated gains increased happiness from the birth of a 
son: this happiness cannot be derived from the destruction of the 
frustration arising from the nonbirth of a son, for he wasn’t even 
aware previously of any such frustration. Thus the ultimate human 
aim is supreme happiness, and all creatures, animals too, desire it, 
though they do not know the means of getting it. The Veda is the 
means of coming to know the supreme happiness, and thus becomes 
a pramana. 

As for the contention that desire for supreme happiness is attach- 
ment, we deny that: not all desire is attachment. The teacher who 
desires a solitary place to meditate in is not thereby attached. 

53 (ET 547-560) 1023b-1049a. Objection: If the supreme happi- 
ness, that is, Brahman or the Self, is an object of knowledge there is 
duality: if it is not known, it cannot be the goal we desire. 

Answer : The pure Self is not the kind of thing that can become 
an object of knowledge; only things that are not themselves pure 
consciousness may be objects of consciousness. Even he who desires 
heaven desires liberation, but not vice versa. Allare eligible for Self- 
knowledge provided they have the four prerequisites mentioned, for 
all desire the bliss of liberation. 

Objection : Scripture cannot be the peculiar cause of Self-knowledge 
in the fashion you have stated. It is evident that a person acts only 
on the basis of previous knowledge; even a child learns which acts 
to perform by watching his elders act when ordered, say, to bring the 
cow; the child learns that it is the knowledge of cow that prompts 
one to act, since action is a conscious activity. 

Answer : Then it would follow that the injunctive force of prescrip- 
tions arises from ordinary, not scriptural, sources, which is objection- 
able to you. Scripture, if it is relevant, must function to reveal 
something already established; a pramdna is not a causal agent but a 
revealer. In fact, what you leave out of your account is the desire 
of the agent for happiness. Injunctions, even Vedic ones, are only 
instruments for effecting desires. No one would go to the trouble to 
sacrifice if he didn’t expect good to come from it and if he didn’t 
desire that good. In any case, whether injunctions are causes or acts 
or results of acts they operate in the sphere of empirical or ordinary 
(laukika) affairs and thus can be established by ordinary pramdnas 
(i.e., those other than scripture). Brahman, by contrast, is not within 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 453 


the sphere of ordinary pramdnas, as is shown in texts like “neti neti’ 
(“not this, not this’), etc. 

54 (ET 560-602) 1049b-1137a. If you do not grant that the 
Vedic scriptures are pramdnas with respect to what is real, the karma- 
kanda will lose its meaning too. For the validity of the injunctions 
in the karmakanda depends on the assumption of transmigration and 
rebirth, of heaven, of various sorts of future results that are outside 
the range of the ordinary pramdnas. Thus you must admit a self that 
remains through change of body, etc. So why do you not admit 
that the Vedas are pramdna with respect to Brahman ? The self under- 
stood as in Samkhya or in Vaigsesika won’t be satisfactory for your 
purposes—the Samkhya self is not related to bodies, and the Vaisesika 
self cannot be an agent, or if it is, it can never get liberated. Indeed, 
no version of the self that can be attested to by ordinary pramdnas 
will do. So only scripture can grasp the true Self. 

The nature of that true Self is now delineated in familiar fashion. 
The remainder of this section glosses Samkara’s Bhdsya. 


SECOND BRAHMANA 


3-27 (E301-306). “There was nothing here...,” that is, no 
effect existed (says the Upanisad), though the cause did, pace the 
nihilist (ndstitvamukta). ‘It was covered over by Death....” This 
“death” is in fact the supreme God (aramefvara), likened to an ocean. 
The word “asat” (‘‘nothing’?) does not designate nonexistence. 
Either it designates difference or nondifference from existent (sat) : 
if nondifference it is clearly existence, whereas if it is different from 
existence it still must exist since it is the locus of difference. Non- 
existence cannot be spoken of. Posterior absence (dhvamsa) is un- 
acceptable (as the designation of ‘“‘asat”), whether it be construed as an 
act (kriyd) or a result (phala), since neither can destroy its own cause; 
nor can it be the thing that is destroyed, since how can one destroy 
that by which the destruction gains existence? It (this “asat’’) cannot 
even be awareness (vijfidna), for awareness must have a cause; further- 
more, there would be the unwelcome consequence (for the Yogacara) 
that awareness would be eternal. And if the nihilist tries to prove his 
point by inference his proof will lack an example, since on nihilist 
assumptions nothing exists to be an example. 

28-73 (E306-315). Perception, inference, and verbal testimony 
all establish only existence (sat), not nonexistence. The inference 
is: ““The universe has an existent as cause, because it is an effect, like 
a pot.” The opponent’s argument is: “The universe has nonexistence 
as its cause, because it originates only by destroying its cause, like the 


454 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


seed producing a sprout.” But that cannot be right, since before its 
origination the effect was not there to destroy its cause. If what is 
not originated can destroy its cause then both cause and effect must 
exist, since nonexistence cannot destroy anything. 

In any case, whether the effect exists or not it cannot destroy its 
cause. If it exists, then destruction of the cause isn’t necessary to 
originate it. And if the rule is that production of effect requires 
destruction of cause, then since destruction of a cause (say, destruction 
of clay to produce a pot) is itself an effect it should destroy its cause 
(viz., clay)! Just as motion is impossible without something that 
moves, so destruction is impossible without a locus. So no effect 
destroys its cause. 

The cause in the case of a pot is clay, not the lump (pinda) of clay. 
The lump is, like the pot, an effect of the clay; the pot originates even 
without the lump. Many effects cannot exist in one cause at the 
same time, so the clay may produce first a lump and then the pot; 
still, that which continues to exist (the clay) is the cause, and that 
which is newly brought about is the effect. 

Objection : The cognition of continuity through change is an error 
(bhranti) occasioned by the similarity between the stages. 

Answer : When the same thing recurs we recognize it—that is, we 
perceive it, and since perception is superior to inference this perception 
overrides your inference. Anyway, on your thesis of momentariness 
no recognition is possible, but unless recognition is possible your 
alleged “cognition of continuity occasioned by similarity’ is impossible, 
since you must at least recognize similarity ! 

74-107 (E316-322). “The effect exists before it is produced... .”; 
otherwise, like a hare’s horn, it would not appear even when the 
conditions for its manifestation are present. 

Objector : So what stops every existent from manifesting itself when 
“the sun comes up”, that is, when the conditions for manifestation 
are present ? 

Answer : On the (Nyaya) view that there are three kinds of causal 
factors whose collocation (sdmagri) occasions a result, that contingency 
would occur—if the three causal factors operate always and every- 
where then everything would occur always and everywhere. Or if 
their operation is required for production, still, since the operation is 
itself an effect, either no effect is ever produced or it will once again 
always be being produced ! 

“There are two kinds of covering. ...’’ Likewise, there are two 
kinds of manifestation corresponding to the two kinds of covering— 
in one the clay manifests itself as pot, in the other the wall manifests 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 455 


itself in the light. In both cases what is already existent is manifest- 
ed; ignorance (ajfidna) is removed, and something previously unknown 
is cognized. In both cases effort is exerted to gain knowledge, though 
the kinds of effects that are manifested are different. 

125-227 (E326-346). The word “death” here signifies the supreme 
Brahman, which with the help of the causal ignorance (ajfidna) is 
the cause of the origination and dissolution of the universe. Brah- 
man is called ‘‘avyakrta,” “undeveloped,” when considered with 
maya as primary cause, but when mdyé is considered as subservient 
It is called ‘inner controller” (antaryémin). Even though illusory 
(the mdyd-clad) Brahman is the cause of the universe. Scripture, 
too, is illusory but gives us knowledge of the real, Brahman. 

The word ‘‘death” in the passage here indicates mdyé also. In 
other places the word is used to indicate knowledge and action, or 
water, or the jiva. Some creation myths are reviewed, myths con- 
cerning Hiranyagarbha, Viraj, and the pranas, and the derivation of 
the term afvamedha (the horse-sacrifice) is traced. 


THIRD BRAHMANA 


1-37 (E347-354). In the previous Brahmana it was shown that 
the result of meditation combined with action is attainment of identity 
with Hiranyagarbha as “‘death.” Now the nature of that “death” 
by which one gains liberation is detailed. The combination of 
meditation with action doesn’t produce attainment of the Brahma- 
loka if they are accompanied by attachment, etc. So meditation 
on prana is introduced in order to remove such obstacles. A myth 
based on a previous life of Prajapati is told, symbolising opposition 
between two kinds of organs—identified as ‘“‘gods” (deva) and ‘“‘de- 
mons” (asura). The gods are bent on providing éastric knowledge 
and activity, the demons bent on breeding anger, etc. The battle 
between them is waged on the field of the mental modifications. The 
gods enlisted the chanter (udgdtr) of the soma sacrifice in their cause, 
so that right knowledge and action is prefaced by meditation on prana. 

38-87 (E354-358). When frana is termed “pure,” etc., this is not 
just for the purpose of worship—rdara actually has these qualities. 
Of course they may be unreal considered from the highest stand- 
point; the concepts of real and unreal are the outcome of ignorance. 
God (ifvara) is reflected in ignorance (ajfidna) and thus becomes the 
substratum of the universe, controlling its destinies. But the world 
of ignorance is nondifferent from Brahman; the Self is everything. 
Knowledge by its nature stands on reality, and so cannot reveal 
unreal things. 


456 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


130-191 (E374-386). Having decided that the udgitd (the chant) 
was the best means to defeat the demons, the gods began to examine 
it. They asked the deity presiding over speech (viz., Vak) to sing 
a mantra on fire. Vak began to sing. By the benefit derived from 
that, Vak saves all the other prapas in the body. 

When the demons realized that desire, anger, etc., were being 
driven away by the singing, they attacked the singer (udgdir), that is, 
Vak, with their arrows—the natural instincts—and as a result Vak 
began to speak falsehoods, etc. Finding this defect of falsehood in 
ordinary speech we can infer the same defect in its cause; the sins 
committed by the demons in the body of Prajapati continue even now 
in his children (i.e., our organs). 

Similar events occurred pertaining to the other organs. Now 
when all the organs were afflicted by defects, the gods approached 
praya, the vital breath, and asked it to sing. The point of the story 
is to indicate what it is that should be meditated upon by one desirous 
of release, and that thing is prdpa, because the special qualities of all 
the other organs and breaths rest on the vital breath. The demons 
were unable successfully to attack prana, and so it was accepted as 
the object of meditation. By meditating on prada as one’s own self 
an individual attains the all-pervading prana-hood and his organs 
achieve the nature of fire, etc., leaving their limitations behind. 
Prana is Hiranyagarbha. The meditator should meditate so intensely 
on it that even when living he becomes the deity and after death 
reaches him. This cannot be achieved merely by knowledge—as in 
the case of the jiva realizing Brahman—-since both the meditator and 
the deity are products of Brahman. Meditation drives out all the 
enemies of the meditator. 

192-200 (E387-388). Or we may say that the fruit of meditation 
is liberation, since that is enjoined (in the seventh book below). The 
attainment of Hiranyagarbha is only a byproduct. When meditation 
is enjoined directly as leading to a certain result, other aspects conduce 
to special side-effects. 

The remainder of this section explains the remaining passages in 
the Upanisad. 


FOURTH BRAHMANA 


1-70 (E427-441). In the previous Brahmanas the results of the 
combination of meditation and action were mentioned. But what is 
really intended is that the result is still samsdra since Prajapati, who 
created the world, had his own weaknesses—fear, etc. So aversion 
even to the results of Prajapati-hood must be cultivated; such aversion 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 457 


makes one eligible for Brahman-knowledge, and without it one cannot 
be eligible. Vedic rituals bring about a purity of mind, and one with 
a pure mind will realize the nature of samsdra and become detached 
from it, even from being Prajapati or Brahma. One must realize 
that all results of action are perishable, adopt samnydsa, and take up 
listening to Vedanta. Since even the required actions (nityakarman) 
lead to rebirth, one must abandon them as well. 

When Brahman is not cognized things are created with the help 
of beginningless maya. From Visnu was born the Sitratman with 
capacities of knowledge and action, and from him came Viraj with 
the three worlds as his body. Creation after the great dissolution 
(mahdpralaya) is by Brahma; after the intermediate dissolution (antara- 
pralaya) it is by Viraj. Before creation he was alone; there were no 
worlds. If the world is realized as Brahman liberation results; if it is 
realized as different from Brahman samsdra results. When there is 
no notion of “I” and “mine” one obtains liberation. 

The supreme Self, afflicted by desire, etc., took on the form of a 
purusa; thus we worship Him as purusa. 

Viraj purusa, though endowed with superior knowledge and karman, 
became afraid like a child because of its avidyd. Avidyd is the cause 
of all fear. Just as our predecessor was afraid of being alone—through 
avidya—so we, through the same cause, are also afraid of being lonely. 

But though thus fearful, he examined his position like any other 
person and realized what was real. Having realized Brahman, 
burnt the big darkness of avidyd, and attained all the ends of man 
(purusartha), he thought “why should I fear, since there is nothing 
different from me?” This shows that ignorance of the Self alone is 
the cause of fear. 

71-166 (E441-460). Question : How, without scripture or teacher’s 
initiation into the great sentences (mahdvdkya), did Prajapati get 
Brahman-knowledge? If it was without any cause, it may as well 
come to us in the same manner. If he was initiated in a previous 
birth then there’s no point in indicating the means to Brahman- 
knowledge for us either. For if Brahman-knowledge in the previous 
life didn’t remove avidyd, then it is hopelessly difficult to remove it ! 

Answer : For Prajapati the merit of his good deeds and knowledge 
is such that it gives immediate recollection of the great sentences. 
Manu says that Prajapati’s knowledge, nonattachment, power, and 
merit are supreme and natural, which shows that he does not require 
a teacher. As for the complaint that indication of the means to 
Brahman-knowledge is pointless—since devotion, acquaintance with 
texts, etc., are found in different degrees among men and are required 


458 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in varying amounts, instruction about them is necessary. It is like 
the case of perceiving color—a cat does not require illumination; 
yogis see color with their internal organs alone; but we men require 
all the means— illumination, internal organs, and senses as well. 

Question : Then how is it that Prajapati became fearful, given his 
natural inclination to liberation ? 

Answer: Prajapati is an official of God, an adhikdrika purusa. 
Though endowed with supreme knowledge and thus having realized 
Brahman, he is visited with fear due to the latent impression arising 
from the same feeling in past lives carried over by prdrabdhakarman. 
The “‘fear’’ of being alone, due to a spark of avidya remaining in him, 
caused him to become through his own imagination a couple—man 
and woman—and the couple, Manu and Satariipa, in turn created 
all the animals, etc., in the world by their union, as well as the other 
gods, the four castes, etc. 

1.4.7; 167-222 (E460-471). Avidyd is ignorance of Self, and 
through its destruction one attains all the ends of man. Ignorance, 
arising from identification of Self with body, is the cause. Then 
come merit and demerit, which produce the body. These two are 
brought about by acts—enjoined, prohibited—and are the results of 
karakas, means of action—desire and hatred, which operate through 
the notions “this is good”’ and “‘that is bad,” etc. And these in turn 
require objects, since without objects no cognition arises. Thus the 
notion of existence of objects requires ignorance of Self; all pramdnas 
reveal the Self, but they do not grasp the Self since It is veiled by 
ignorance. 

The word “unmanifested’’ (avydkria, in the Upanisad) indicates 
that there is no destruction of what exists or beginning for what does 
not exist. The word covers avidyd, merit, demerit, traces, the Sitrat- 
man, the five elements, and the enjoyer. This avidyd was transformed 
into name-and-form. The world manifested itself only as name- 
and-form and not in its own form. ‘Though the universe was manifest, 
the manifestation is not complete since the Self is not manifested. The 
Self is self-luminous, pure and free from avidyd; It is only apparently 
associated with avidyd, but associated thus It is the cause of the universe. 

223-340 (472-499). The division of known and unknown depends 
upon the luminosity of the Self, which is self-luminous. The Self 
realizes itself without any pramdna. It realizes ignorance by outward cog- 
nition, not inwardly. (A long section here refutes the Vaisesika and the 
Buddhists on the question of self-validation and self-illumination. ) 
The recollection after deep sleep—‘I did not know anything’”— 
is only a superimposition of ignorance and past time, since the Self 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 459 


is always immediate. It sees itself by Its everlasting intelligence in 
all the three states (waking, etc.) as well as in all other bodies. Since 
the internal organ, etc., are inert (jada) and the products of ignorance, 
ignorance does not reside in them. 

341-364 (E499-504). In the Self reflected in primal darkness 
(=avydkria) the world is born, is sustained, and perishes. The 
supreme Self, having ignorance as prominent, causes the universe; 
having intelligence as prominent, it causes the souls with the help 
of latent impressions (bhdvand), ignorance, and karman. These last 
are located in ignorance and through that in the Self. Brahman 
alone, in the form of all the intermediate causes, is the cause. He 
is the prana of the Chandogya; He is akdfa and truth (or reality, satya) ; 
the unmanifest (avydkria) of scripture is the Self itself. 

365-397 (E504-511). Why should latent impressions, etc., produce 
the universe? To help the person who created them. First, they 
create air and dkdSa and then the other three elements. The mani- 
festation of the unmanifest is the work of God (antaryaémin). Though 
without form He, like a whirlwind, induces the world into action. 
Resting on ignorance, He as Brahma is the cause. That same Self 
is known by those affected by ignorance as the Witness, by those 
whose intellects are not ripe as inert. 

The cause of the superimpositions of Witness on world and vice 
versa is ignorance, which has the nature of false awareness. At the 
time of creation, without external cause it is manifested as name- 
and-form. Thus God, Brahman, becomes object of usage (vyava- 
hara), since name is a genus of which ‘“‘Devadatta’’, etc., are species, 
and “form” (riipa) is a genus of which white, blue, etc., are species. 

398-413 (E511-525). By ‘‘name-and-form” is not meant the 
combination (samuccaya) of the two, since the deaf only grasp the 
latter and the blind only the former. The sense is that there is no 
creation; thus the apparently conflicting scriptural accounts of crea- 
tion are actually consistent, being intended only to help remove igno- 
rance and desire. Even the (Kama)Sdstra of Vatsyayana is meant to 
divert the attention of the reader to what is good. And the Buddha, 
who says that things are noneternal, painful, and void, wants to cut 
off desire. Or, we may say ‘that the common purport of scriptures 
is the generation of the knowledge of identity, since all pramanas give 
rise to knowledge of the unknown and what is unknown is just the 
Self on whom the universe is superimposed. 

414-446 (E516-523.) Objection: How can there be superimposi- 
tion on the Self, since the Self has no generic or specific properties ? 
When «x is superimposed on y, it is because the general features of y 


460 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


are cognized but the specific features (which differentiate it from x) 
are suppressed. But in the pure Self this is impossible. Further- 
more, in error the nonawareness of the difference between y and x 
is necessary, but in this case we are presumed to know that the universe 
is different from the Self—so how can the awareness of nondifference 
occur? 

Answer: We need not answer this objection, since on our view 
ignorance alone is the cause of error. It is for those who do not 
accept ignorance as the cause to answer this. 

Objection : How can ignorance, not being a real entity, be the cause 
of samsdra? Since false awareness (mithydjfiana) actually occurs, let 
it be the cause ! 

Answer : False awareness isn’t a real entity either; it is a product 
of ignorance. 

Objector : But false awareness occurs—it is not a nonentity, so it 
must be real. 

Answer : The ‘reality’? of awareness is ascribable in virtue of 
awareness’ taking the form of its object, not its nonsublatability. That 
awareness which by assuming the form of its object grasps that object 
removes ignorance. For a thing to be real is to exist independently 
in its own nature. Anything that exists through dependence on 
another is unreal. Thus an illusion, such as the shell-silver, is unreal. 
But so are all specific awarenesses such as ‘“‘this is a pot,” “‘this is a 
cloth,” etc., for these depend on Brahman, the one existent, and 
hence they are unreal. Only the Self exists independently and is 
thus real. Therefore, through Self-knowledge duality perishes. 
When by knowledge of reality ignorance perishes false awareness 
also perishes, since it is a product of ignorance. Since error and 
doubt arise only with respect to what is not known, they must be 
products of ignorance. But they are also real insofar as they are an 
aspect whose substratum is Brahman. In their own nature, however, 
they are not real. 

447-477 (E523-530). Objection : Error arises when we apprehend 
the general features of a thing but import through memory special 
features not actually present. 

Answer : No, since there are other kinds of illusion—for example, when 
a man with jaundice sees a shell as yellow. Ignorance is the inva- 
riable cause of illusions, whichever sort it is—shell-silver, the sky look- 
ing like a blue lotus, mistaking one direction for another, dreams, etc. 

478-493 (E530-533). Thus it has been established that samsdra 
is a superimposition of not-Self on Self. 

Samkhya : No, prakrti (here, pradhéna) is the cause of samsdra. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 461 


Answer : The cause of the world is the Self in association with 
ignorance, that is, name-and-form. Real things do not remove 
ignorance; only knowledge can remove ignorance. The Self is pure 
and without a second; Its association with a second is due to ignorance, 
and by the negation of ignorance It is pure. God, avydakrta, prana, 
Viraj, the sense organs, etc.—none of these are present in the Self save 
through dependence on ignorance. The view (Bhartrprapafica’s) 
that the Self is an object of external perception is incorrect, as shown 
on the authority of the Katha Upanisad. 

494-514 (E533-537). The Lord, in association with ignorance, 
created the entire universe from Brahma to a blade of grass, and 
entered it. The “entry” of the Self is Its association with ignorance. 
The implication to be drawn is that all jivas from Hiranyagarbha to 
the blades of grass are one with Brahman. The adjuncts (upddhi) 
being illusory, there is no problem in Brahman’s being nonattached. 
Sitratman, first born of God, was endowed with the twin capacities 
of knowledge and action and is called “‘Hiranyagarbha.” Next to 
be created was Viraj purusa, Lord of the gross elements. Gods (deva) 
such as Indra, Agni, Varuna, etc., are his creations. 

515-556 (E537-545). Objection: It was said that the universe 
was manifested. Now, no manifesting agent was mentioned, so the 
phrase ‘‘he entered into it” is not correct. Though the supreme 
Self is said elsewhere to be the creator It is not present in the context 
here—rather, what is present is only the unmanifest (i.e., prakrti). 

Answer: There is no difficulty in our reading. Though God is not 
mentioned, He is implied by the statement ‘“‘the universe became 
manifest” since without an agent such an event would be impossible. 
Just as the universe is now associated with an agent, etc., so also before 
creation it had an agent, who was the witness of the unmanifest. 
Just as the word “‘village’? means both the houses and the people 
living there in expressions such as “‘the village caught fire,” etc., so 
the word “unmanifest’’ implies an agent of manifestation also. ‘The 
Self is pure, nondual, etc.,’’ refers to the Self alone, but here the 
agent is also implied. 

Objection: The Self cannot enter into the world since, being all- 
pervasive, He is there already. Only something spatially delimited 
can enter. 

Answer : No, for it is not indicated that the person who “entered” 
underwent any transformation. (The commentary proceeds to gloss 
the answers to the conundrums discussed in Samkara’s commentary. ) 

557-574 (E545-548). Objection: You quote scripture to show 
that the Self is not subject to frustration, but your scripture is in 


462 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


conflict with perception, through which one perceives frustration in 
oneself, and perception is superior in authority to scripture. 

Answer: We perceive the frustration present in the conditioning 
adjunct (upadhi, viz., the mind) of the Self who is identified with it. 
If the Self were subject to frustration, what witness could perceive it? 
It is that witness who is aloof, and He is the Self. This Witness sees 
the buddhi bound by pleasures and frustration, etc. ‘You are that 
reality” conveys the true nature of the Self that is Brahman. Per- 
ception cannot grasp the Self, as shown in the text “by what can you 
cognize the knower, etc.” The judgment “I am frustrated” is a 
figurative expression, analogous to “I feel pain in my nose,” etc. If 
the pain or frustration were really in the Self it would be experienced 
always, since the Self is all-pervasive. Or else it would never be 
experienced, since like intelligence that is the nature of the Self it 
could not be experienced. 

Objection : According to the text “everything is dear for the sake 
of the Self” the Self must have pleasure as its attribute. 

Answer : No, this applies to the Self only as conditioned by ignorance, 
as in ‘‘where another as it were, then by what can one see another, etc.” 

575-605 (E548-554). Objection: According to tarkasastra (i.e., 
Nyaya-Vaisesika) the qualities of the self are desire, aversion, plea- 
sure, frustration, etc. 

Answer : Tarkagastra is no authority, since it conflicts with other 
Sastras. Anyway, scripture declares desire, etc., to be properties of 
the buddhi. The inner Self is not perceptible. Perception becomes 
a pramadna only in dependence upon the shadow of the Self; so it is 
not capable of grasping the Self. The analogy between the Self and, 
say, @kafa is faulty; frustration is not a quality of the Self as sound is 
of dkasa. The one Self cannot be both knower and known, being 
partless. Again, being without parts the Self cannot contact the 
internal organ (as in Nyaya) so that frustration be produced. 

Objection: But an eternal thing may have parts; for example, 
Vajra (Indra’s thunderbolt), etc. 

Answer: No. Contact is always followed by eventual disjunction. 
Even Vajra is the result of contact, dependent on ignorance. 

The destruction of ignorance alone is required for liberation. It is 
as when a stranger says ‘“‘you are the tenth”’ to one who is puzzled that 
his team seems to be lacking a member—likewise by hearing, from 
scripture or teacher, “that art thou” one’s ignorance is destroyed and 
one gains Self-knowledge. 

606-656 (E554-564). The reflectionist model is defended; it provides 
a way of understanding how the Self ‘‘enters.” 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 463 


Two illustrations are provided to distinguish the two ways in which 
Brahman exists in ignorance and its products. Just as razors kept 
in a barber’s box differ among themselves and from their container, 
so also the Self differs through the various nerves in accordance with 
which It is called seer, bearer, etc., and from the body. But on the 
other hand, just as the fire in a burning log pervades throughout 
the log, so the Self pervades bodies, etc., throughout. Again, the 
Self realizes two specific states—waking and dream—and one general 
state—deep sleep—all of which are due to our false identifications of 
the Self that actually pervade everything. We see general and specific 
features and record them through false cognitions such as “‘this is an 
object,” “I am the seer,” “‘this is a sense organ,” etc. Such false 
notions should be abandoned. 

654-670 (E564-572). Objection : Since people do see such features, 
it is contradictory to assert that they do not ! 

Answer : No, the idea is that they do not see reality. Reality is 
one without a second, and the point is that men do not see that; all 
perception of features is thus not seeing reality. No feature is all- 
pervasive; every feature contradicts some other. This is illustrated 
from scripture. 

671-719 (E572-578). The text “‘all activities combine in the Self” 
is not an injunction to meditate on the distributive as well as collec- 
tive aspects of the Self. Such a meaning in a text would be redundant, 
since inference can indicate the same; but in any case such medi- 
tation is impossible since the various aspects of the Selfare not com- 
prehensible in a lifetime, and the aspects of body, etc., are based on 
ignorance. 

720-735 (E578-581). One must see beyond cause and effect to 
reach the changeless Self. The division of manifest and unmanifest 
(effect and cause) is illusory, like the supposition of the difference 
between day and night in the sun. Likewise the distinction between 
Self and not-Self is based on ignorance. The Self is self-established, 
the other established only in dependence on the Self. 

Objection : By saying “‘the Self should be seen in the not-Self” you 
presuppose duality ! 

Answer: No. Rather by distinguishing the not-Self from the Self 
you perceive the latter in Its real nature. The not-Self cannot be 
established as different or nondifferent from the Self; thus it is false. 
Even the Self’s nature as seer is false, since It is consciousness itself. 

736-750 (E581-583). We have dealt with the true nature of the 
Self. Now we proceed to deal with the nature of the word “Self” 
(@iman). He is so-called because He pervades, He takes, He enjoys 


464 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


objects here, He exists eternally. He pervades all not-Self as the rope 
pervades the rope-snake, etc., that is, fully. Since He sees all the 
fluctuations of the mind in which He is reflected by His own luminosity, 
He is called “Self.” Thus by seeing Him everything is seen, and so 
the Self alone is to be cognized. 

751-808 (E583-595). ‘Some say (this) must be” an initial injunc- 
tion (apirva vidhi), others think it a restrictive injunction (niyama 
vidhi), still others an exclusive injunction (parisamkhyad vidhi). But 
Samkara shows it is not an injunction at all because the knowledge 
allegedly enjoined is not dependent on human effort. An initial 
injunction is not possible, since the knowledge allegedly enjoined is 
already partly in hand. 

Objection : Since the real Self is not fully experienced let the text 
constitute a restrictive injunction or even an initial one. 

Answer : No. Meditation is the repetition of knowledge of one and 
the same object until the attainment of identity. 

Objection : Meditation and knowledge are the same thing in this 
context; we are being enjoined to meditate, that is, to cognize; mental 
activity is required, involving the three aspects (agent, object, action) 
as in ‘‘one should sacrifice.” The Self is to be known by the mind 
with the aid of repetition, the result being liberation. ‘Other enlight- 
ened followers of the tradition” say: Texts devoid of injunctions 
are not valid. Such texts are mere repetitions. Only actions can be 
enjoined, not substances of qualities, etc., Self-knowledge is obtained 
through the injunction pertaining to study of the Vedas. Self-knowl- 
edge should lead to identity with the Self; but the knowledge arising 
from words is always complex since derived from combination of word 
senses, so it will not reveal Brahman, which is partless. Therefore 
another knowledge, arising after verbal knowledge, is what is enjoined 
—thus meditation on verbal knowledge. 

809-898 (E595-613). Answer: These views are not correct. An 
injunction will have results where there is something to do after one 
gains verbal knowledge—for example, in the agnihotra sacrifice, where 
human activity is effective in beginning it, etc. But liberation is not 
such a result. Only one who thinks himself an agent will act; for 
one for whom that notion has disappeared there will be no activity 
after he has realized his identity with Brahman. The verbal knowl- 
edge of the Self itself dispels ignorance. 

Objection : Without an injunction, merely by knowing the inner 
Self through understanding sentence meanings, no one can dispel 
ignorance. 

Answer : No, since from those very texts, which explain the nature 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 465 


of the Self, the realization arises and ignorance perishes. What else 
is needed ? 

Objection : Injunction is required to retain the Self-realization in 
memory. 

Answer: No. Self-knowledge is always available to anyone, being 
his very nature. Even if repetition is required it will be easily obtained 
without recourse to an injunction. 

Samkara’s comments on this section are then glossed. 

899-920 (E614-618). Odjection: If the Self is not to be meditated 
on, the text “He should be heard, thought, meditated (nididhydsana) 
on....” will be contradicted. 

Answer: No. By the word “‘nididhydsana’’ direct awareness is 
indicated, direct awareness of what is set forth in the next sentence 
(in the text, viz., ‘“‘by knowledge of Self all else is known’’). It is 
nonrelational Brahman that is made known by the (great) sentences. 

921-947 (E619-623). Samkara says “‘it is nevertheless true that it 
is a kind of injunction, that is, a restrictive one... .’ But this 
admission is only offered in the context of the illogical view of the 
opponent. Just as in sacrificing the removal of the husk of the corn 
is to be accomplished only by striking it with the pestle though there 
are many ways of removing the husk, so in this case by counseling 
“meditation” on the Self other kinds of meditation—on not-Self— 
are rejected as a result. In point of fact meditation on the Self is a 
universal habit, since every judgment starts with recognition of the “I.” 

948-993 (E623-633). Some say that in the Self, which is general, 
all particulars are contained, and that Brahman is to be meditated on 
as both general and with particulars. Or again, that Brahman is the 
locus of several states, or the cause of various effects, or the whole 
comprising parts, like the spokes in a wheel. We do not approve of 
this since it is neither the intention of scripture nor is it reasonable. 
Brahman’s completeness is that when It is known everything is known; 
It is not exemplified in general and particular aspects, mutually differ- 
ing, as a cow or a tree is. Since there are innumerable such aspects 
they cannot be known either simultaneously or in succession. 

When the Self is known nothing remains unknown; so it is the Self 
that is to be realized. The case of not-Self is different. By its knowl- 
edge neither its locus nor what is superimposed on it is known. So 
it is Self, not non-Self, that is to be known. 

Relation involves unreality. Then how can what is not-Self be 
known at all? Because it is not different from Self. By knowledge 
of Self everything is known, since the Self is the reality of the not-Self. 

994-1008 (E633-635). The word “pada” means footprints. By 


466 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the cognition of footprints we come to know the whereabouts of the 
cow. So also by the names and forms of the universe we understand 
Brahman. Ordinarily, identity with Self is not cognized because of 
contradiction. To repel ignorance the Self needs to be known through 
a pramana. By itself It will not remove ignorance—if It could, 
pramaénas would be futile and there would be no samsdra. So, first 
of all, the jiva should be identified as different from the body, the 
senses, etc., and then eventually be understood as Brahman. 

1009-1028 (E636-639). Question : Having begun by saying that 
by knowing the Self everything is known, how is it that the passage 
concludes by saying ‘‘he obtains fame,” etc. ? 

Answer: Because that obtaining is not different from knowledge, 
since obtaining the Self is only the destruction of ignorance. The 
Self is eternally obtained; his ‘‘obtainment” is only the removal of 
ignorance. So by realizing the Self the knower obtains “fame,” 
etc., but this is only an arthavdda, since freed selves do not want fame, 
etc., these also constituting bondage. 

1.4.8; 1025-1054 (E639-645). Bhartrprapaitca (according to 
Anandagiri): This section tells us that love toward objects is to be 
avoided and love of Self established. According to Samkara the 
section provides an additional reason why the Self should be known, 
that is, lovability. Or else it is intended to reject the liberation of 
the Samkhya, where there is no bliss. Scripture says that there is 
bliss in liberation. In the world a son is more lovable than riches, 
the body more than a son, the senses more than the body, préna more 
than the senses, and the Self most lovable of all. 

“Riches” (vitta) are of two kinds—worldly and divine. Love of 
either is not reasonable; a person suffering from pain longs for death. 
But in the Self love is natural, as heat is in fire. The Samkhyas say 
that love of not-self is natural, since all things consist of the three 
gunas. But this is not correct; external things do not actually possess 
these qualities, but it is because of our ways of thinking that we get 
likes and dislikes, just as the same sunrise confuses the thief, blinds the 
sore-eyed and pleases the lost traveler. 

Why is the Self alone lovable? Because He is the innermost, as 
will be shown later. Being the innermost is natural for the Self. For 
us (says Bhartrprapafica) who hold that the Self is the inner self of 
eight stages—body, light, Viraj, etc_—the Self cannot be said to be 
the innermost, as It is the inner soul for each of the eight. Love for 
the not-Self is due to an adjunct; which should be removed to provide 
scope for pure Self-love. 

1055-1074 (E645-649). It was stated above that the Self, being 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 467 


all, is the only thing that needs to be known. The Self is complete, 
but as long as one sees another self he is not full. The remainder of 
this Book and the whole of the second Book are meant to explain this 
thought. 

1089-1124 (E652-658). The questions here are: (1) Which 
Brahman (lower or highest) is it by the knowledge of which we be- 
come complete? (2) Through knowledge of what did Brahman he- 
come complete ? Clearly, it must be the highest Brahman that is 
‘full? ; only when the word has this primary sense can it take on an 
implied sense. 

Is Brahmanhood natural (svatas) or dependent (paratas)? Not the 
first, since then Brahman-knowledge would be futile. If the second, 
however, Brahman cannot be a product of karma since then It 
would not be permanent but transitory. If It is produced by knowl- 
edge the question arises: was Brahman’s knowledge about Brahman 
or about non-Brahman ? Not the first, since the same thing cannot 
be both agent and object. Not the second, because of infinite regress. 
The passage is intended to explain how none of these questions should 
arise. 

1125-1202 (E659-673). Bhartrprapafica says, however : Meditators 
who contemplate Sitratman as identity-cum-difference enjoy identity 
with that Sitratman, that is, a Brahmin gradually becomes libe- 
rated. But since the knowledge of identity-cum-difference does not 
lead to completeness, Brahman-knowledge is required. The content 
of Brahman-knowledge is just Brahman; all else is superimposed 
on It. Brahman is the reality of the whole universe, sentient and 
insentient. By knowing It we become the imperishable Brahman 
Itself. Before Brahman-knowledge we are Brahman but are ignorant 
of It; that is avidya. Brahman-knowledge does not lead to further 
action; by it all actions come to a halt. 

Answer: Alt of what you say is acceptable to us vivartavddins, or 
can be interpreted so as to be acceptable, except your notion that in 
the passage ‘‘Brahman became all by knowing all”’ it is the Brahmin— 
the meditator—who is referred to. 

Bhartrprapafica : But listen. The word brahmaya in that passage 
must at best refer to the lower Brahman, not the highest, for the 
highest Brahman does not require any knowledge. Furthermore 
the passage uses the past tense, which is not suitable for Brahman, 
which is not subject to temporal passage. However, these very same 
arguments prove that it is not the lower Brahman either that is being 
referred to—the same difficulties prevail. So we must understand, 
by this occurrence of the word, the man who tries to become 


468 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Brahman, a person who by meditation and action has attained lower- 
Brahmanhood and who, through meditation of the highest Brahman, 
will in the near future become that highest Brahman. The use of 
the word brahmana to apply to him is appropriate in the light of his 
future attainment, just as we say “‘he cooks food” although the raw 
rice is not yet food, though it will be. 

1203-1232 (E673-679). Answer: This interpretation is unreason- 
able since “becoming all’? would be impermanent, being dependent 
on a means. If the removal of limitations due to avidyd is intended, 
then the notion of “becoming Brahman” is uncalled for, since even 
before knowledge all jivas are Brahman by nature, and limitations are 
all superimpositions of avidyé. Non-Brahmanhood is a product of 
avidya and perishes with knowledge of reality. Thus the attempt to 
find a secondary meaning, etc., as in the above interpretation, are all 
unnecessary. 

Question : How is ignorance possible, since it is contradictory to 
Brahman? 

Answer : From our experience “I am ignorant” it is clear that 
ignorance resides in Brahman. Furthermore, since Brahman-knowl- 
edge is enjoined we conclude that Brahman must be unknown. 

Question: If ignorance resides in Brahman, how, being omniscient, 
can Brahman bring about ignorance in the jiva ? Anyone acting with 
any sense would not throw the mischievous avidyd onto the jiva. 
Anyway, this is bad logic: since avidyd is beginningless, it is not a pro- 
duct. Brahman is the only locus and there is nothing apart from It. 
Scriptural texts such as ‘‘purusa is all this,” “the Self is all this” clearly 
deny anything other than Brahman. Thus your interpretation makes 
scripture futile. 

Answer: No. The teaching is fruitful for Brahman. Though 
before knowledge Brahman was without bondage, yet through avidya 
It is the locus of bondage. By knowledge of identity we get ignorance 
removed. When identity is realized the removal of ignorance is not 
possible, but for one who has realized Brahman liberation is not 
desired. 

1237-1283 (E680-689). Objection: iva is different from Brah- 
man as the jiva is enveloped by good and bad deeds that earn good 
and bad results. The authors of tarkasastra stress the difference. 
We see people engaged in removing frustrations. The Vedas teach 
the means for liberation, and surely God does not need to be liberated. 
All these reasons show the existence of jiva as distinct from God. 

Answer: No. On that view there would be no need for Brahman- 
knowledge since by knowledge of the jiva itself one would become all, 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 469 


Objector : Brahman-knowledge involves contemplating the jiva as 
Brahman. 

Answer: If Brahman is not known, how can one meditate on Its 
identity with jiva ? If Brahman is known, all human ends are obtained 
through Brahman-knowledge and meditation is without point. 

Olyection: Brahman-knowledge is taught for some other purpose. 

Answer: No. Other cognitions can serve other purposes, but not 
Self-knowledge. Because it is stated that “the Self is Brahman” we 
conclude that the identity is in reality and not only in contempla- 
tion. Attainment of Brahmanhood is impossible by mere meditation, 
which cannot remove ignorance. The name “Brahman-knowledge”’ 
will not be appropriate if by the knowledge of something else libera- 
tion is attained. 

1284-1304 (E689-693). Question : What is the proof for the exist- 
ence of Brahman ? If there is something else that proves Brahman 
then Brahman cannot be identical with everything as was claimed. 

Answer : No. Acceptance of proof does not contradict the descrip- 
tion of Brahman given. True, if any entity other than Brahman 
be accepted there will be contradiction. But proof functions to re- 
move ignorance and reveal reality. Things require pramdnas only 
before and up to the time of their knowledge, not afterwards. The 
past tense—‘‘became”’ in “Brahman became all... .”—depends on 
ignorance and is not a statement of reality, for there is no connection 
of past, present, or future with Brahman. Only one Brahman exists; 
before the operation of pramanas It was not a knower, but rather the 
witness of the darkness of ignorance. 

1305-1329 (E693-698). Scripture is useful inasmuch as it repels 
ignorance. Though ignorance is beginningless it is removed by 
knowledge. If this is not accepted all pramdnas will be worthless. 
The inner Self is what is known. Brahman is not an agent but only 
a witness; hence there is no conflict. Scriptural texts that say that 
Brahman is not knowable mean that Brahman, being self-luminous, 
is not to be illuminated by anything. 

Brahman, being untransferable and unconnected, has no real 
relation with avidyad. But avidyd is established only by the illumina- 
tion of the Self. Since the universe and its origination, etc., are not 
real apart from Brahman, knowledge. of them is false like a dream 
cognition. The locus and content of valid cognition is Brahman 
conditioned by the manifest and unmanifest universe. Thus when 
ignorance is removed its products also perish. 

1387-1435 (E709-718). That Brahman (as jiva) by the grace of 
a guru realized its own self as Self and became Brahman by the 


470 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


removal of ignorance. The word “only” conveys the idea that Self 
alone is Brahman and Brahman alone is Self. 

Objection: Scripture says “‘you cannot know the knower”’, so how 
can you assert that the Self knows itself ? 

Answer: The Self is not known as an object, but as the witness 
of cognitions. Of all cognitions that of the inner Self comes first, 
and as there is no difference between cognizer and cognized the Self 
is cognized by the Self, resulting in removal of ignorance and hence 
realization. The sentence “I am Brahman” is analyzed. 

1436-1526 (E718-735). Knowledge requires no eligibility, since 
anyone who gets Self-knowledge becomes Brahman, whether he be 
god, man, or rsi. The word “only” indicates that no other means 
(sddhana) is required for liberation. Brahman itself undergoes 
samsara and is liberated by knowledge—thus the words ‘‘god,” “‘man,”’ 
etc., are used in their ordinary senses. 

Objection: If Self-knowledge can be attained without eligibility 
it cannot arise. 

Answer: No, since knowledge can be gained because of traces 
(samskdra) acquired in past lives, as in the case of Vamadeva. The 
Vamadeva. episode is recommended here to make students believe. 
Vamadeva saw Brahman and exclaimed “I was Manu! I was the 
sun !,” etc. This is the beginning of the Sikta of Vamadeva. The 
whole Siikta is implied here. 

Objection: Liberation might have been possible for gods and great 
men of the past, but not for men of our times. 

Answer: No. Even now whoever gets Brahman-knowledge be- 
comes all. When knowledge is attained even the gods cannot bring 
any obstacles. 

Bhartrprapafica says that without enjoying all the fruits of action 
liberation is not possible. Thus liberation can only come after all 
enjoyment. But this is not wise, as such enjoyment will take many 
lives. Thus scripture says that even the gods are not competent to 
obstruct liberation. 

Objection : But men are debtors to the gods. It is said that they 
help them like herds of cows helping a human being. Thus if a man 
becomes Brahman his dependence on them will cease and thus the 
gods do not brook his independence. Further, God also can obstruct 
our endeavors, since He is all-powerful. ‘Thus there is doubt about 
all our undertakings, whether action or knowledge. 

Answer: No. The gods and God, being objects of worship, will 
not hinder the fruits of karma. Even to obstruct they need the agent’s 
past karma. God, time, gods—we have to take each as principal 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 47) 


or subsidiary causal condition according to the occasion, and which 
is the principal is not easily known. Though some say that in getting 
the fruit, karman is the cause, whereas other say the gods are, and yet 
others say nature is, scriptural passages concur in accepting karman 
alone as the cause. As for knowledge, the gods cannot hinder our 
gaining liberation by knowledge since knowledge itself is liberation. 
Time, gods, doubt, error, etc., all are products of ignorance. When 
ignorance is removed they all cease to exist. 

Objection: Repetition (abhydsa) is required before liberation can 
ensue. 

Answer: No, for we cannot be sure how many times knowledge 
must be repeated, and so there will be no decision. 

Objection: The Self is cognized by the notion of “I”; so scriptural 
advice to know is merely arthavdda. 

Answer: No, the Self taught in the Upanisads is never cognizable 
by the notion of “I.” 

1527-1557 (E736-741). Objection : Since we find that even 
knowers of reality have desires, etc., knowledge does not remove 
ignorance. 

Answer : This is because of prarabdhakarman, which continues even 
after knowledge like a wheel. This kind of karma does not perish 
even by knowledge. 

Objection : If prarabdhakarman is not destroyed by knowledge the 
other kinds of karma won’t be either. 

Answer : Scripture speaks of liberation while living. Further, the 
tradition of Self-knowledge continues in the world (and would be 
lost if Self-knowers were not around long enough to communicate 
the tradition). 

Others say that liberation comes from suppression of the functioning 
of the mind (citiavrttinirodha). This is not reasonable, since as suppres- 
sion of mental functions at fralaya does not bring about liberation 
it will not do so any other time either. Likewise, multiplying traces 
born of the notion “I am Brahman’’ will not cause liberation, since 
the results of traces are also impermanent. 

1558-1599 (E741-749). Now the gods will cease to be creditors 
in respect of the knower, Brahman, as debtorship is the product of 
ignorance and agency, etc., have no place in one whose ignorance 
has been removed. The gift of light by the sun and of breeze by the 
air do not bind Him, since sun, air, and other gods are bound to do 
their duties. The scriptural passage that says that men are threefold 
debtors by birth is an arthavdda. 

He who sees the god as different from himself does not realize 


472 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


reality. He is visited by ignorance and surrounded by its products, 
hence takes the place of a cow by his actions toward the gods. 
That is, just as a cow helps the ordinary man in many ways so also 
this ignorant person helps the gods. One cow sometimes helps one 
person, sometimes many when it drags a cart filled with many persons. 
So also one man sometimes helps the whole world. When one cow 
is stolen the owner, though he has many cows, becomes unhappy. 
What shall we say about him when all his cows are stolen! That is 
the nature of Brahman-knowledge; it deprives the knower of his 
agency for all action. Therefore the gods do not like men getting 
Brahman-knowledge. Hence if we want Brahman-knowledge we 
must propitiate the gods carefully; only with their blessing can we 
get this knowledge. People who want to get liberation without 
satisfying the gods will be deprived of heaven, etc., as well as libera- 
tion. Even now we see samnydsins who are external-object-minded. 

1600-1664 (E750-762). Brahman thought that without the four 
castes we cannot perform actions and hence It created the Ksatriya 
class comprising Indra, etc. Since the Ksatriya is more powerful 
than the Brahmin the latter extols him sitting below the king’s chair 
in the Rajasiya sacrifice. The king addresses the Brahmin as 
“Brahma”, and the Brahmin replies “you are Brahmin,” thus giving 
back the fame earned by him. But at the end of the Rajasiya the 
king submits to the Brahmin as he is his cause. A king who ill-treats 
his cause—the Brahmin—courts unhappy results. 

Again not satisfied with the creation of the four castes Brahman 
wanted to create dharma which will overrule Ksatriyas and in the ab- 
sence of which the warrior class might with its physical strength ill- 
treat the Brahmin. This dharma is the ruler of Ksatriya also. It is 
above might; it rules over Ksatriyas. Hence it is that though feeble 
and powerless one wants to conquer the strong race with the help of 
dharma. Dharma is truth (satya) and vice versa. Truth is the purport 
of scripture and dharma is the proper procedure in performing action. 
Both should coincide to make the performance fruitful as otherwise 
either the meaning of scripture or the performance of action may go 
wrong. 

Dharma is also a god. It is a truth of Vedanta that the one Brahman 
assumes the forms of several gods. 

Now the divisions of caste among men are described. Brahman 
or the Brahmin became fire among the gods and himself was among 
men as Brahmin without undergoing any change. Fire is the divine 
form of the Brahmin. So he helps the human form of the Brahmin. 
The Brahmin can obtain all he wants by propitiating fire. The 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 473 


Brahminhood obtainable by Ksatriyas and Vaiéyas is not natural; 
it requires the help of fire and of Brahmins. The distinction among 
castes is mentioned here only to assist in performance of actions. 
Fire is the important factor in (ritual) action and is also the god there. 
But it cannot give liberation, since knowledge alone is the cause of 
that. 

1665-1714 (E762-771). He who has performed all actions but 
has no knowledge of Brahman cannot be liberated. The death of the 
ignorant is connected with darkness, but for knowers it is the removal 
of darkness. The supreme Brahman does not save one who has not 
known that Brahman, any more than the Vedas or any worldly work 
does. Even if the nonknower performs actions night and day for 
crores of kalpas he does not get liberation. But Self-knowledge alone 
saves him. The knower does not require actions, for the effects of 
action, being brought about naturally, perish. When the reality 
of the inner Self is known everything is known and infinite bliss is 
acquired. Whatever the knower wants he can have by Self-knowl- 
edge itself, since all the pleasures in the world are contained in the 
bliss of Brahman. 

According to Bhartrprapafica, however, the foregoing passage must 
be construed differently, as follows: 

Objection: Now action will not lead to liberation as it is perishable 
and the gods hold him in bondage without providing him liberation. 
He cannot leave off actions, since they are eternal (or required, 
nitya). The Self without being seen will not provide liberation, and 
since the seeker is a servant of the gods he cannot strive for Brahman- 
knowledge. There is no combination of knowledge with action. The 
agent is subject to the three debts. 

Answer (on Bhartrprapafica’s interpretation): He must meditate 
on the Self alone and perform action. The performance of nitya- 
karmans together with meditation on the Sutratman, having an origin, 
may perish. But the state of Brahman, having no specific aspects, 
is eternal. By meditating on this Brahman the seeker gains eternal 
results. When he sees action as Brahman itself actions will not 
perish. The combination of action with knowledge is twofold: 
First, there is the combination of nityakarmans with meditation on 
Hiranyagarbha. Second, there is the combination of action with 
the causal Brahman (Sitratman). The result of the first combination 
is the removal of all desires, since by attaining Hiranyagarbhahood 
one’s desires will all be fulfilled. After this both the gross and subtle 
bodies perish. Through the second combination one gets liberation. 

1715-1779 (E771-782). SureSvara’s answer to  Bhartrprapaiica’s 


474 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


interpretation : This interpretation is defective. On Bhartrprapafica’s 
view the result of the second combination of meditation and action 
will never be over. Furthermore, scripture tells us that when desires 
perish liberation ensues. This is contradictory to Bhartrprapafica’s 
view. At the time of liberation (kaivalya) no karma should be left 
unfulfilled. Furthermore, the result of the first combination is the 
attainment of Hiranyagarbhahood, not the destruction of bodies. 

Objection: After attaining Hiranyagarbhahood he enjoys all desires 
and then the two bodies (gross and subtle) perish. 

Answer: No, since in that case Brahman-knowledge would be 
fruitless. 

Objection: In the [sa Upanisad the combination of action and knowl- 
edge is advocated—‘‘He who sees vidyd and avidyd together,”’ etc.... 

Answer: No, for “death” in this passage means a natural event 
and “‘vidya’’? means scriptural knowledge. By ‘‘death” one conquers 
natural tendencies, and by pure vidyd one attains liberation. So 
there is no room for the combination of knowledge andaction. Self- 
knowledge alone is the cause of liberation in the Upanisad as well. 

1780-1883 (E782-797). Now the text describes how the ignorant 
helps the gods like a cow, and whom he helps. The “ignorant” 
is the one who has not realized the Self. ‘‘Self”? means the groups of 
body, mind, and senses and the self who identifies itself with them. 
By action he has produced his body as well as the gods to whom he 
gives oblations. Agency and enjoyership are likewise false. By 
Brahman-knowledge they will expire. Briefly, all are the products 
and causes of everything. The householders who perform homa 
and ydga are the products of the actions of the gods. By his (the 
householder’s) daily chanting of the Vedas he produces enjoyment 
for the sages. Since he is always helping all jivas, they all desire that 
he should not die, and this is why they do not allow him to get knowl- 
edge of Brahman. He must repay his debts. 

Question : Since men are free to take up action (pravriti) or to 
abandon it (nivrtti), why do they take up action instead of abandoning 
it? Their protection is assured regardless. Avidyd only veils reality, 
So it is not the cause. 

Answer: Desire (kdma) is the product of ignorance. Having not 
gained his desires he wants to obtain them by other means. Before 
marriage one is single, but afterwards one begets sons, and they grand- 
sons. One does not know reality. He becomes influenced by the 
senses and the objects, confounded by them and induced by desire 
to desire a wife, sons, and all the materials for action. 


BRHADARA NYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 475 


FIFTH BRAHMANA 


1-12 (E797-799). In the state of ignorance every person through 
his actions creates the universe and enjoys its fruits. Since each 
individual enjoys common objects as well as individual ones, enjoy- 
ment will not be possible without his having contributed toward its 
origination by his action. All actions whether meritorious or not 
naturally generate both common and specific results—actions of 
Sitratman down to those of a worm. In some cases, like seeing a 
dance, the action that causes is general, whereas in others, like seeing 
one’s own child, the causative action is specific. Thus each man 
creates the universe by his knowledge and action. This will be ex- 
plained in the Madhu Brahmana. 

13-94 (E799-814). This section develops 1.5.1-2, which speaks 
of various kinds of food. The commentary provides interesting in- 
sights on the use of foodstuffs in sacrifice. 

95-206 (E814-833). 1.5.3 identifies three foods as speech (vak), 
life breath (prdna), and the internal organ (manas). The senses are 
but operations of the internal organ, since being touched in the back 
one knows that he is touched. Vyasa is quoted in support. 

Each of the three is explained as regards its relation to body, the 
outer world, and the gods (I.5.4-13). 

207-263 (E834-844). Prajapati (1.5.14-15) has two aspects— 
as the world, and as time. In the former aspect he has the forms of 
the three foods just discussed. In his time aspects his nature is the 
moon (candra)—he creates the fortnight, season, and year. As he 
has increase and decline (as moon) he is of the nature of riches. He 
causes the transformation of the world. On Amavasya day only one 
of his parts remains. Through that he enters all jivas and again is 
born on the first day of the waxing moon. Since through him Praja- 
pati enters all the prdpas one should not kill on that day. 

Worship (pia) of Prajapati is also intended here, as mere knowl- 
edge does not effect the desired end. The adept should meditate 
that he is Prajapati, and that his riches are Prajapati’s parts. 

Sons and two kinds of riches produce the three worlds. One who 
desires liberation should renounce the three worlds. 

Bhartrprapafica : Sons and the two kinds of riches produce liberation. 

Answer: Means that are independently causes of their respective 
effects should not be combined. 

Bhartrprapafica : But the world of human beings is obtained by 
ritual action (the jyotisfoma), and one overcomes that by means of 
one’s sons. 

Answer: No. This world is obtained by sons, not by rites. The 


476 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Mahabharata confirms this. Furthermore, in the Upanisads it is 
said that the fruit of actions is the moon world (candraloka), not the 
world of human beings. And then, if through one’s sons one over- 
comes the results of karma Brahman-knowledge will become pointless. 

The world of the fathers (piirloka) is obtained by action, and by 
meditation the world of Brahma (brahmaloka). Were “‘vidya’’ (in 
the text ‘‘vidydéya devaloka’’) means meditation, not Brahman-knowl- 
edge. The world of the gods (devaloka) is the foremost of the worlds, 
and “‘conquering”’ (jaya) it is only obtaining it. If by “conquering” 
were meant abandoning it or any of the other worlds, then since 
the purposes of men (furusértha) would be obtained, there would 
be no reason to say that such persons are eligible for performing 
actions. 

264-301 (844-851). Now with regard to samnydsa taken accord- 
ing to the ‘ordinary sequence ({i.e., brakmacarya, grhasthya, and then 
samnydsa), scripture recommends what is called sampratti karman 
(renunciatory action). 1.5.17 indicates how this involves one’s 
sons. Samnydsins who take up samnydsa directly from brahmacarya 
are not eligible, since they have no sons. This type of action is in- 
tended for those that because of old age and the resulting incapacity 
to perform ritual acts wish to place them with their sons. The son, 
after having been advised by his father in the fashion indicated in the 
text, is capable of obeying his orders and becomes a means for the 
father to attain the worlds mentioned. 

302-390 (E851-868). Bharirprapafica : After performing this renun- 
ciatory action, if the father lives he must perform the agnihotra. 

Answer: But this act in fact involves an injunction of samnyasa, 
so the person who performs it must take up samnydsa afterwards. 
Kausitaki Upanisad is cited, as well as Manu. After taking up samnydsa 
he should contemplate frana, or he may live without any meditation. 
When he dies he becomes one with his son along with his pranas. The 
entry of the father into his son is not literal; it means that the son 
gets the determinations that his father had before performing this 
sampratti karman. 

When his duties are transferred to his son the father becomes the 
divine prana. After death he enjoys the fruits of his karma but remains 
in this world in the shape of the son and performs actions. Because 
the son fulfils the duties of his father he is called “‘puira’’ (“‘son’’). 

The father who has contemplated on the divine prana Hiranya- 
garbha merges with him. Mimamsakas say that by sons, action, 
and lower knowledge liberation is attained. Bhartrprapafica says 
that by these three the father is redeemed from the three worlds and 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 477 


gains liberation. Both these views are wrong, for scripture says that 
these are all optional (kamya) actions. Therefore they are for those 
who have not yet realized Brahman. 


SIXTH BRAHMANA 


1-45 (E868-876). This Brahmana gives briefly the products of 
ignorance, though that has been dealt with previously. 

46-93 (E876-885). Bhartrprapafica : Brahman is difference-cum- 
nondifference. Though the powers (Sakti) of Brahman are many 
Brahman is one. Though the bodies of cows are different the genus 
(jati) cowhood is the same throughout them. So the universe is by 
nature difference-cum-nondifference. 

Answer: This view is corrupt, since difference and nondifference 
in one object is inconsistent. In fact generality (sdmdnya) and parti- 
cularity (viSesa) are both superimposed; hence Bhartrprapafica’s 
view cannot be maintained. 


BOOK TWO—FIRST BRAHMANA 


20-25 (E890-891). Gargya is a nonknower of Brahman, and so 
haughty; Ajatasatru, having attained the highest end of man, is the 
guru. The story provides easy understanding of the siitra about 
knowledge (vidya). 

Others, however, say that in this story the person who entered the 
body is explained. The opponent, Gargya, is of the view that gods 
alone are agents and enjoyers in the body, whereas the siddhdntin, 
the king of Kasi, emphasizes the agency and enjoyership of the jiva. 

This is pointless, since it is inconsistent with the siddhdntin’s espousal 
of the identity of jiva and Brahman as set forth in the previous chapter. 
Further, even if the gods are in the body the existence of jivas is 
accepted—so what is the point of the siddhdntin ? 

40-204 (E894-921). The story in the text is explained (II.1.1-16). 

205-247 (E921-928). The author says that since the king has 
already promised to teach Gargya Brahman he has to tell him the 
true nature of the enjoyer and what is enjoyed. The nature of what 
is known is unreal, since it is not associated with a person in sleep. 
One’s nature is just consciousness. Since before he awoke there 
was no trace of karma in him it is clear that karma is not his nature. 

The buddhi and other organs originate from karma, and their disso- 
lution is also caused by karma. The enjoyership of the Self is due to 
the reflection of consciousness (cidabhdsa) and its agency is due to 
ignorance. The pure Self identified with each of these things is called 
respectively “enjoyer”’ and “agent.” When the karma that produces 


478 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


waking ends one goes to sleep. Latent impressions (vdsand) continue 
through that state, and when one awakes those impressions freshen 
and one is led by desire, aversion, etc., to perform more acts. Thus 
the beginningless ignorance gives rise to samsdra. But the jiva becomes 
one with its reflection and settles in the pure Brahman during deep 
sleep. 

Here it is stated that by realizing the jiva in its pure nature by 
negating the body, senses, and object superimposed upon it, we must 
know that the Self is no other than Brahman. This is the meaning 
here. iva is in the buddhi, and Brahman is also said to be in the 
buddhi only to convey the identity of jiva and Brahman. 

248-272 (E928-936). Others, however, interpret the passage this 
way: The jiva, before waking, takes away the awarenesses (vijfidna) 
called speech, vision, etc., by the buddhi, and settles in the akafa con- 
tained in (or conditioned by) the heart. The Self, having the latent 
impressions of the buddhi, gets out of this akdfa through the nerves 
(nddi) and sees dreams with the help of the buddhi. 

This interpretation is not correct, since it says that along with the 
latent impressions the internal organ is dissolved. It is better that 
jiva is the agent and when all are dissolved Brahman alone is made 
the locus of dissolution. ‘“‘Svapiti” (‘‘it sleeps”) (in II.1.17) is 
interpreted in the Chandogya as dissolution into a thing’s own self, and 
this is only Brahman. 

The three states of waking, dream, and deep sleep are all illusory. 
To illustrate this scripture says that everything seen in dreams is 
illusory. The whole world is moving in agony thinking that these 
states are real, like the person who is confused finding his path in a 
jungle. He who realizes that the whole universe is the Self, he alone 
is called “one who has fulfilled all obligations” (kridrtha). Percep- 
tion and the other pramaénas do not embrace Brahman. Avidya is 
not in the Self really. It is illusion. By the traces awakened by 
karma the jiva falls to dreaming and like a magician he creates big 
and small things all of which are false. 

293-318 (E936-940). The king and other things (seen in dream) 
are not the attributes of the dreamer, since he sees them. The king 
seen by the dreamer is different from the king who is sleeping on the 
couch in the palace. What is observed in waking is not observed in 
dream, and vice versa. So being mutually inconstant they are both 
unreal. There is no doubt about the unreality of dreams, since the 
dead people, etc., seen in dreams do not exist at that time nor is there 
space for streets, coaches, etc., inside the body. Nor does the dreamer 
go out and see during sleep, since without a body he cannot move. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 479 


The immutable, nonrelated Self that goes out is apparently related 
with unreal adjuncts. Being naturally nonrelated he can have no 
real connection with the not-Self. 

Objection: How can the Self be pure, since It is wandering in 
dreams through the power of desire (kama), and being the seer of 
them militates against Its purity ? 

Answer : No, since It is nonrelated to desires or even to ignorance. 
The next section proves that the Self is secondless, being seen in deep 
sleep. It is the immutable (kujfastha) witness. 

319-363 (E940-947). In what manner does sleep come about ? 
There is a lump of flesh called the “heart”? (Ardaya) hanging from the 
neck “like a lotus facing downwards. The seats of dream are nerves 
colored blue, etc. For each sense organ ten nerves go out to fetch 
their objects.” Each nerve has numerous subnerves. They start 
from the heart, and are called “good-making” (hita). Spreading 
Its various vdsands the Self sees various objects in dream. After 
enjoying the dream one goes into deep sleep and sleeps in the Self, 
which pervades with general awareness all over the body. The 
seat of the internal organ (antakkarana) is the heart; from here the 
buddhi controls the senses. By one’s karma the modifications of 
consciousness are spread out; when the modifications are controlled 
one dreams. Through the nerves he gets to puritat (a skin over the 
heart) and spreads throughout the body with consciousness, like a 
hot iron. The Self in itself has no birth or death; It is like the dkafa 
in a pot; by association with the buddhi It gets born and dies. 

In deep sleep the Self has no connection with the body. This 
state is beyond all the pains of samsdra, just like a child’s who has no 
desire or hatred. Or like a king whose subjects are obedient. But 
a child has no discrimination, and the king might be a drunkard. 
Thus a third example is given—like a Brahmin who, having the 
experience of pure Brahman, has carried out his duties and attained 
final happiness. Being rid of modifications the minds of all three 
enjoy full happiness. 

364-413 (E947-955). So far the king’s question “‘where does he 
rest while sleeping ?”’ has been answered. The next section (JI.1.20) 
answers the second question, ‘from whence does he come out to the 
waking state ?” 

To explain this the example of the spider and its thread is given. 
Just as the thread does not exist independently of the spider, so also 
the world of not-Self does not exist independently of the Self. Talk 
about creation here is to assist the listener; in reality there is no 
creation. This has been fully explained by Gaudapada. Just as the 


480 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


spider does not require any external things to create threads, so also 
Brahman creates the world without any external means. 

Objection : God is the creator! 

Answer: If so, why doesn’t he always create (even in pralaya)? 
Whether one adopts the identity-cum-difference view or the non- 
difference view, in any case the cause-effect relationship cannot be 
defended. 

414-711 (E955-987). In the Upanisads the pranas are mentioned 
as being the seventeen—the hearing organ, etc.—which make up the 
subtle body (liga). “‘Worlds” (loka) are the different types of 
bodies of this world—divine, etc. The ‘“‘selves’ referred to here are 
the jivas, whose birth is like that of sparks from fire. Since only 
through ignorance does the Self get the names of ‘‘prdna,” etc., He 
is the pure Brahman. For the purpose of meditation His secret 
name (ndma upanisad) is now given. The effect of this is the arising 
of the knowledge of Self and nothing else. That secret name is 
“Truth of truth” (satyasya satyam). The first “truth” is prana, that is, 
the whole world of name-and-form. Its reality derives from the reality 
of Brahman, its substratum. 

Now the discussion on II.1.20 by Samkara begins, and carries 
through to the conclusion of this section. The commentary does not 
add anything important to Samkara’s thought. 


SECOND BRAHMANA 


1-31 (E987-992). This section expands on the prdnas, the first to 
be created in the account alluded to in the previous section. Prdna 
is seated in the head preeminently, and throughout the body. It 
derives its strength from food, and with that strength supports the 
sense organs and satisfies them. Only by the strength gained from 
the intake of food can prana stay in the body, and so food is the rope 
by which prdna is tied to the body. When the rope becomes weak 
because of the exhaustion of karma, the pranas leave the body and it 


dies. 


THIRD BRAHMANA 


1-67 (E992-1003). This section dwells on the two forms of Brah- 
man—the gross or corporeal, and the subtle or incorporeal. The 
gross form has parts, is perishable, dependent, limited spatially, 
cognizable by the senses; earth, water, and fire among the five ele- 
ments belong here. Its essence is the sun. The subtle form is immor- 
tal, unlimited, indeterminate; air and dkdfa characterize it, and its 
essence is the person in the sun. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 481 


This is now developed with respect to the divinities. Just as the 
eye is the seat of the sense of sight, so also the sun is the seat of Hiranya- 
garbha. Hiranyagarbha is that deity that is the president of all the 
senses of all creatures; He is of the essence of air and dkdfa. 

Bhartrprapafica : The jiva-Hiranyagarbha is the essence. 

Answer: No, for the essence should be something nonconscious, 
as we have here to do with the gross, not the subtle realm. 

68-104 (E1003-1010). Now the text develops the distinction with 
respect to the body. The essence of the first three elements (earth, 
water, fire) is the sense of sight. Scripture says that when the body 
is formed in the mother’s womb it is the eye that is first manifested. 

Now the form of the subtle body (di#ga) is explained. It is filled 
with vdsands, like a curious cloth of many colors, like a magical spell 
confusing the individual. The Vijfianavadins and Naiyayikas 
believe this to be the self. The Vaigesikas say that self is substance 
and the vdsands are its qualities. Samkhya says that pradhana (pra- 
krti) with the three gunas operates independently for the sake of the 
purusa. 

Bhartrprapafica (‘“‘some pseudo Vedantins’’) says that all effects 
surrounding the jiva, whether gross or subtle, are included in the gross 
and subtle forms of Brahman. They are respectively ‘‘sat” and 
“tyat,’ thus the word for “truth,” satya. The pranas, being such 
products, are satya; though devoid of name-and-form they are so 
because of their association with the elements. At this stage it is not 
possible to differentiate between the jivas and their adjuncts. Then 
the nature of the Self (purusa) is described. When the gross and 
subtle natures are negated what remains of jiva is pure, supreme Self. 
The jiva’s nature is a collection of vdsands, here described by compari- 
son with a cloth dipped in yellow-colored water. 

105-148 (E1010-1017). Answer to Bhartrprapafica : This is erro- 
neous, since vdsands cannot attach to intelligence, which is not matter 
and indeed a completely different kind of thing. Furthermore, vdsands 
do not attach to cognitions of pots, etc., and the Self is always 
nonrelated or nonattached. It is foolish to say that the product of 
the five elements has no connection with vdsands. Bhartrprapafica 
distinguishes three groups: (1) the five elements, (2) the supreme 
Self, (3) vasands. This last group includes (the results of) vidyd or 
meditative actions as well as other latent impressions. Located in 
the subtle body they yet produce results in the Self. Though the 
Self is by nature qualityless, yet by karma it gets qualities and 
thus becomes a transmigrator through agency and enjoyership. But 
those like Bhartrprapafica who think thus are mistaken, for on this 


482 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


view there is no room for liberation. Desire, determination, doubt, 
etc., are properties of the internal organ, not of the Self. The presump- 
tion of the three groups is not valid. iva belongs with Brahman; 
the vdsands appear in the jiva, and there is no third entity. If the two 
forms (gross and subtle) belong to Brahman only through the jiva 
and not directly, then the tone of scripture would be different. 

Objection: There are other forms in Brahman, but for the jiva 
vdsanaé alone is the form. 

Answer : Even so, for Brahman, which evolves as jiva, the vdsands arise. 

149-170 (E1017-1020). The person described as “existing in the 
right eye” (daksino’ksan) is the subtle body and not the jiva, since the 
Jjiva is identified as pure Brahman and is not the same as the subtle 
body. The teaching of ‘‘not this, not this’? only applies to the jiva 
(cf. Book Four). The various vdsands in the subtle body give differ- 
ent colors to the Witness as the blemishes do in jewels. The subtle 
body with vdsands of desire is yellow, or it may be white like wool. 
The differences are due to the intensities of the three gunas. 

171-214 (E1020-1028). So far, truth (satya) has been explained. 
Now the highest reality (paramarthasatya) will be explained, the ‘truth 
of truth.” As it is beyond speech or thought it is taught only by 
precept. How do the words “‘truth” and “‘of truth” reveal Brahman ? 
Because they reject primal avidyd and its products such as names, 
actions, prdnas, worlds, and all sorts of causes and effects. By rejecting 
all external objects the inner Self which is unrejected is shown to be 
the Supreme Reality. The word “this” (in “‘not this’) refers to 
name-and-form. The not-Self rejected in Brahman does not exist 
anywhere else since, being the product of ignorance in a substrate, 
it does not exist at all. Objects that have sprung from ignorance of 
the real Self cannot exist either as Self or as independent of It. The 
word “‘this” (in “not this’’) does not refer to Brahman, since it gives 
existence and illumination to the not-Self and so cannot be negated. 
Moreover, It is self-luminous, and the negation (in “not this’’) is not 
only of ignorance and its products but also their negations. Hence 
there is no positive or negative existence in the Self. The repetition 
of ‘‘not this” signifies all that is desired to be known. 

Question: After the gross and subtle forms have been negated 
there may still be something left unnegated. 

Answer: No. That will lead to nihilism (Sényavdda). The whole 
text is a teaching (a@désa) of some new insight, and nihilism is not 
athing to be taught. Since the not-Self is dependent on ignorance, 
its annihilation is by Self-knowledge alone. Thus by repetition of 
“not this’ man attains the supreme state of Self-awareness, 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 483 


215-254 (E1028-1034). The difference between Brahman and 
Its gross and subtle forms is rooted out by the negation. However, 
this negation does not have negation as its purpose; rather, it pur- 
ports identity. How is this? The duality is negated even before the 
Upanisads speak, since it is naturally inconstant, being absent in 
deep sleep. Therefore the two negatives (“not this, not this’’) 
by implication (laksana) reveal the Witness, which gives light to the 
negations. This Witness is the immutable Self. The word ‘“‘this’’ 
signifies Brahman. Thus identity of jiva with Brahman is the meaning 
of the sentence. This is its only possible meaning. The teaching 
of Brahman through positive means is not possible, for Brahman is 
qualityless. The pranas are said to be truth. Brahman is the truth 
of truth, so it is the superior truth. 


FOURTH BRAHMANA 


1-38 (E1035-1040). He who is averse to all sense objects includ- 
ing Brahmaloka is eligible for Brahman-knowledge. In becoming 
purified through performance of the nityakarmans the mind remembers 
the sufferings of samsdra and searches for the means to remove them. 
He must take up sammydsa, ordained in scripture as the means to 
Brahman-knowledge. 

The not-Self has been rejected by “‘not this, not this.”” If the not- 
Self is nondifferent from Brahman then Brahman would be miserable. 
If the denial results in nihilism then Brahman will disappear. If 
there is a second entity then Brahmanhood will be lost. 

To bring out the idea of pure Brahman from the text “‘all is the Self” 
(sarvam dima) this Brahmana, the Maztreyi Brahmana, comes next. 

Though Yajfiavalkya had achieved the supreme knowledge he had 
to take up samnydsa, without which liberation is not attainable. Just 
as sons, etc., are the means of obtaining this world, so also samnydsa 
is the means for liberation. To enjoin samnydsa for liberation is why 
this Brahmana is begun. 

39-70 (E1040-1045). Explanation of the first four sections. 

71-147 (E1045-1057). Yajfiavalkya, after praising Maitreyi’s 
state of mind, began to teach her. First, in order that she attain 
nonattachment he says that for a wife the husband is dear, not because 
he is the husband but because he does her good. In the same way 
the whole world is dear only because it is his. There are worlds 
that are agreeable to some and distasteful to others. This is because 
they are agreeable to one’s own taste and not because they are in 
themselves good or bad. The whole world of not-Self is disagreeable 
because it leads one to sorrow and confusion. The Self is never 


484 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


disagreeable to anybody at any time. But one’s wife, friends, etc., are 
only agreeable sometimes. Therefore love of Selfis not due to any causal 
conditions, but is natural. Therefore we must maintain our love of 
Self; by Its mere knowledge all sorrows disappear and bliss is attained. 

In the text’s “the Self is to be seen, heard, thought on and meditated 
upon” (dimd vd dre drastavyah Srotavyo mantavyo nididhyadsitavyo) the 
word “‘Self” refers to the inner Self, being clearly intended. The 
knowledge of ‘‘I,”’ being common to everyone, is not what is enjoined; 
the knowledge “‘I am all’’ is what is enjoined. In Chandogya Upanisad 
VII the nature of bhumdn is given, and then rejecting the ego prin- 
ciple’s (ahamkaéra) Selfhood Self-knowledge is emphasized by saying 
‘in all the Upanisads ahamkdara is dismissed as self and contemplation 
of the Self is stressed”. There too scripture says that all is Self. 

In deep sleep nobody sees not-Self. In waking and dreaming 
everybody sees Self and not-Self, so what is enjoined is not medita- 
tion on these two but rather the discrimination between the two. 
To understand sentence meaning knowledge of the meanings of the 
words is required. The knowledge “‘the Self is all’? is born on the 
strength of its object; it cannot be enjoined. If it is enjoined it will 
be like contemplation of the words as fire. But there is no injunction 
here, since knowledge is not a thing to be carried out by men. Hear- 
ing, thinking, and meditating are enjoined; they can be accomplished. 
But the fruit, that is, the knowledge or realization, cannot be enjoined. 
Self-knowledge is always there but will only be realized when the 
adjuncts are eliminated. 

148-211 (E1057-1067). Though the identity of jiva with the 
supreme Self is an existent entity and injunction has no scope, yet the 
Vedantic scriptures are valid inasmuch as they reveal the identity 
that is not known by any other pramdna. Just as words wake a sleeping 
person, so the Vedanta removes the ignorance that obscures the 
identity. 

212-249 (E1068-1074). The Self being the object of ‘“‘seeing’’ the 
pramapas might be thought appropriate for grasping It. To avoid 
this the text says that It should be “‘heard”’ (Srotavya), thereby indicat- 
ing the scripture alone is the pramdna for the Self. “Seeing” is not 
enjoined, but rather its means, hearing, etc., with the help of which 
the Self will be “seen,” that is, realized. By enjoining thinking 
(manana) the text indicates that it is reality (vastutattva) that is being 
intended here, since where one speaks only of meditation (which does 
not require its object to be real) one does not also speak of “thinking 
on” or reflection. ‘‘Meditating,’’ here mentioned, is realization of 
Self in contrast to “seeing,” which is superficial knowledge. Thus 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 485 


the three—hearing, thinking, and meditation—converge into one 
and the same entity, that is, the Self. That nididhydsana is not medi- 
tation but only realization is indicated by the word “‘vijfianena’’ (which 
is used as a synonym for ‘‘nididhydsana’’ in that last line of this text). 

250-297 (E1074-1082). The next section (11.4.6) says that he 
who thinks that the castes—Brahmin, Ksatriya, etc.—are different 
from Brahman is ineligible for liberation. This is because such a 
one does not see what is, but sees what is not. The Self persists in 
all not-Self, but the not-Selves differ and so are unreal. The Self 
alone is to be seen as setting aside the not-Self. What persists is real; 
what differs is unreal, like the rope among snake, wreath, etc., super- 
imposed on it. The examples of drum, etc. (11.4.7-9), show that the 
generality of drum sound is real, the particular sounds unreal. In 
the same way, reality (sat) that persists is real and the varying objects 
unreal. The mention of many examples is to stress the fact that all 
particulars dissolve into the biggest generality, that is, Brahman. 
The Chandogya says that name and other entities up to prdna dissolve 
into bhumadn=Brahman. 

298-326 (E1082-1087). Not only in the state of existence is there 
unity of Self but also in the state of origination. To illustrate this 
the text (II.4.10) gives the example of fire, sparks, and smoke. 
The sparks and smoke are nondifferent from fire. In fact, all things 
being only consciousness, there is no difference. Just as the fire 
releases smoke, etc., without effort, so also Brahman releases prana 
and other products without effort. Likening them to breath (in the 
text) is intended to substantiate this. Though the Vedas are not 
products of some person they are valid, and their validity is because 
of their being nondependent. When in such a text as “‘all is Self” 
the Vedas appear to be invalid, scripture, in order to protect their 
validity, says that the Vedas are products of Brahman and _ hence 
valid. Other works—mantras, brahmanas, itihdsas, etc.—are also mention- 
ed in the text as products of Brahman. In this list “‘ézhdsa’”’ (“‘stories’’ ) 
does not mean the Mahdbhdrata, but only the stories given in the 
Vedas. ‘‘Veda’ here means the bulk of the literature consisting of 
mantras and brahmanas. 

327-485 (E1087-1113). Just as there are no things different from 
consciousness during origination and maintenance of the world, so 
also there are no entities during pralaya. To reveal this he cites the 
example of the rivers flowing into the sea though nondifferent from 
it. The dissolution of the elements (earth, air, etc.) is in Brahman 
through avidyd, since Brahman is the material cause of the universe, 


The Puranas say that this is the natural dissolution. Dissolution 


486 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


through Brahman-knowledge is final and has no return whereas the 
other dissolutions mentioned here are temporary and lead to rebirth. 

To substantiate this Yajfiavalkya says that just as a lump of salt 
dropped in a pot of water dissolves and cannot be taken out, yet can 
be tasted in the water, so also the mass of intelligence (vijfa@naghana) 
called jiva, due to the realization of the Self’s identity with Brahman 
becomes one with It and its individual name and form are -ternally 
lost. The jiva’s individuality, being conditioned on ignorance, senses, 
and body, is no more. There will be no individual name. 

Hearing this, Maitreyi suspected the death of the Self, since her 
husband had said that the Self is a mass of intelligence and that It 
dies with knowledge. 

To pacify her, Yajfiavalkya explained that he meant by “‘mass of 
intelligence’ the unity of the Self, and by ‘“‘the death of the Self” the 
demise of the individual name and jiva-hood. 

When the Self is confined to the body, etc., through ignorance the 
knower, the known, and knowledge are felt to be different entities. 
But this is only in the state of ignorance. All the senses are the pro- 
ducts of gross elements, since each cognizes only the quality of the 
corresponding element. Otherwise they could have cognized all 
qualities in the way that the internal organ and the buddhi do, which 
are products of five elements. All movements of the body belong 
to the buddhi, which is the same as prana. All sense organs are energies 
of prana. ‘The energies of action and knowledge dissolve in Brahman. 

The text “Because when there is duality, as it were’? does not allow 
the possibility of duality. It is possible to compare one thing with 
itself, as in “The Rama-Ravana war was like the Rama-Ravana war.” 
Or else the comparison is with objects in the dream state. 


FIFTH BRAHMANA 


1-49 (E1113-1120). The substance of this Madhukanda is this : 
helper and helped should have come from the same origin. All 
creatures of the world have created the earth to enjoy the results of 
their karma, and hence it is honey (madhu) for them. All creatures 
being the products of the earth are likewise honey for the earth. 
Therefore the relationship of enjoyer and enjoyed is common to both 
(earth and creatures) as both are products of each other. 

So it is said that the earth and earthen products, the body and gods, 
are all the Self. Dharma in the series developed in the text is what 
is the cause of the fate of all and what helps us all. 

50-147. (E1120-1134). Truth (satya in I1.5.12) is the Vedic 
activity called dharma. Humanity (ménusa) (in 11.5.13) is the two 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBH ASYAVARTTIKA 487 


bodies--gross and subtle—belonging to ordinary jivas as well as to 
Viraj and Hiranyagarbha. ‘“Atman” (in II.5.14) means the combi- 
nation of Viraj and Hiranyagarbha. This dtman has no cause or 
effect, and no middle place. 

This dtman is a king (11.5.15) as he shines with his own effulgence 
after Brahman-knowledge. Bhartrprapafica says that what is said 
here is that we must concentrate on Brahman as the locus of super- 
imposition of the world as the spokes in a wheel. But this inter- 
pretation is wrong, not being in accord with the text. There is no 
word in the text conveying meditation, only the mention of the 
illusoriness of the world culminating in the unity of Brahman. 

The Brahmana closes with a small story designed to eulogize Brah- 
man-knowledge. 


BOOK THREE—SECOND BRAHMANA 


1-31 (E1147-1152). Death (mrtyu) in the story told in the fore- 
going Brahmana (III.1) is the senses and their objects as associated 
with desires, aversions, etc. It was stated that the attainment of 
Agni and Hiranyagarbha brings freedom from death. But that is 
not final liberation since they also are subject to birth and death. 
Therefore the real liberation by Brahman-knowledge needs to be 
taught. Even Prajapati, who has speech, mind, and breath, is not 
free since he has these three senses (graha), which are called here 
*‘deaths.”” 

Now, is there a death of this ‘‘death” or not? Yajfiavalkya says 
yes. Water destroys fire, which destroys other things. But there is 
no infinite regress, as the destroyer of the universe cannot be destroyed. 
“Death,’”’ which is of the nature of ignorance, is destroyed by knowledge. 
Thus Self-knowledge is the death of death. 

32-165 (E1152-1176). Odjection: For him who realizes the Self 
and then dies, is there the exit of the pranas from the body or not ? 
If they leave the body then there should be rebirth. But if not, the 
person is not dead. 

Answer: (III.2.11) No. Since ignorance has been destroyed there 
is no rebirth, and so the pranas do not leave the body but are absorbed 
into Brahman. It is only “name” that remains (III.2.12), that is, 
nothing remains of him. Since names signify the universal and not 
particular aspects they do not perish. 

The next section (III.2.13) aims at revealing the cause of ‘“‘death,” 
that is, senses and their objects. Here the word purusa signifies the 
ignorant jiva and not the realized Self, since the latter has no karma 
left (and the explanation alludes to karma). The words “speech” 


488 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(véc), etc., mean the contributions of the gods in connection with 
each sense. When the person dies the gods withhold the help they 
give each sense while the person lived, and when he is reborn they 
again help the senses of the newborn body. Now, when the dying 
man has left all his component parts where does he exist? What is his 
support ? Does he attain pfrakrti or God or the three gunas or any 
other thing or his own past deeds ? Yajfiavalkya led Artabhaga 
off to tell him the secret, which is that the dead jiva is supported by 
his karma as -protected by God. 

Karman also implies avidydé and traces (bhdvand), since these are also 
required in producing the body. But since karman alone is the crucial 
factor on which the dead man relies we can boldly say that those who 
have merit get superior bodies and those with sins get inferior ones. 


FOURTH BRAHMANA 


1-63 (E1208-1218). That self which is different from the body 
and who is the agent of actions is the subject of the karmakaénda. But 
the Self who is the Witness of this self and is called the seer of knowl- 
edge is revealed here. That is, who is it that can teach Brahman- 
knowledge ? 

Objection : Brahman cannot be the person who teaches, since Its 
nature is Brahmanhood and thus It need not be taught. For a non- 
Brahmin, Brahmanhood is impossible. 

Answer : Brahman alone, veiled by ignorance, is the person eligible 
to teach. This is here established by removing the illusion of differ- 
ence between Brahman and jiva. 

Now USasta Cakrayana asks Yajfiavalkya: ‘‘Please tell me which 
is directly visible (sdéksa-aparoksa) and which is the inner Self within 
all.” By the word “direct” the seer (of visual, etc., sights) is excluded, 
and by “‘visible” the triad of seer, seen, and sight is excluded. The 
word “Brahman” eliminates the doubt whether It is one with a 
second. The word “Self” indicates that It is an object of human 
endeavor. The words ‘inner within all’ reject the view of the 
Samkhyas that there are many Selves, one in each body. This combi- 
nation of terms indicates that it is the jiva that is Brahman of which 
Usasta speaks. 

64-187 (E1218-1239). Usasta (in III.4.2) complains that Yajfia- 
valkya promised to show the Self directly but (in II.4.1) has only 
proffered an inference. Yajfiavalkya defends his position by remark- 
ing that, not being an object of the pramdnas, the Self cannot be taught 
directly except by the process he has adopted. The remainder of the 
comment follows Samkara. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 489 


FIFTH BRAHMANA 

1-60 (E1240-1249). Question: Why does Kahola come (in this 
section) and ask the same question that was asked by USasta ? 

Answer: It is not the same question; though the wording is the 
same, its meaning is different in that this question is about the Self’s 
freedom from hunger, thirst, misery, and the rest of the attributes of 
samsara. 

61-86 (E1249-1253). Of these, “grief” (Soka) is the cause of 
other qualities. It is restlessness of mind. Confusion (moha) is non- 
understanding, taking the one as many. Thirst and hunger are 
qualities of prana. The restlessness in grief produces activity, confusion 
brings about destruction; so they are not compounded. ‘Old age”’ 
(Jara) is a stage of the body, whereas ‘‘death” is separation of the 
pranas from the body. These qualities belong to prdnas, the mind, 
and the body, and are not attributes of the Self, for the Self is non- 
attached. They are associated with the Self through ignorance; they 
disappear on the advent of knowledge. Since the Self’s association 
with prana ends at liberation there is no trace of hunger and the rest, 
which are products of prdna. 

Grief and confusion comprehend the products of the Sitratman, 
that is, Hiranyagarbha. Old age and death comprehend the products 
of Viraj. Thus we have here comprehended the whole universe, 
gross and subtle. By bringing in the Sitratman and Viraj it is 
meant that in all acts of worship (updsand) ordained in the Upanisads 
the dissolution of all effects—the universe—constitutes liberation. 

86-114 (E1253-1258). Apprehending this Self, the Brahmins 
take up samnydsa and go begging. The word ‘Brahmin’? (bréhmana) 
indicates eligibility here, since the other vargas are not eligible for 
samnyasa. This is the view of Samkara. Suregvara, however, thinks 
the three highest varpas are eligible for samnydsa. Since samnydsa 
depends on the arising of realization, it is that which constitutes 
eligibility for samnydsa, and so no restriction is appropriate; thus the 
word “Brahmin” here just means the person who has known the Self. 

What kind of “‘knowing”’ is referred to here ? If it means complete 
Self-realization then samnydsa cannot be enjoined. If it means verbal 
knowledge samnydsa can be enjoined. Now if we change the reading 
(in the text) so that it says “‘taking up samnydsa and realizing Brahman 
the Brahmin....”, samnydsa will be a means to knowledge, since 
once having heard of Brahman in samnydsa he can, by reasoning and 
meditation, realize Brahman. 

115-148 (E1258-1264). ‘Abandoning desire for sons, wealth, 
and worlds” includes things gotten by worship as well. The desire 


490 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


for children and the desire for wealth are the same since for the 
married man the two are essential and both attain some end. 

149-214 (E1264-1276). There are two kinds of samnydsa—directly 
gained from brahmacarya, and progressive, or step-by-step. The 
latter is favored for those who have not enough aversion to objects 
in their boyhood. By performing actions enjoined for the intervening 
stages of life (arama) one gets purity of mind and can then get sam- 
nydsa. Samnydsa is ordained in many places in the Vedas. 

The samnyasin should undertake hearing, reflection, and meditation. 
“By hearing’ (Sravana) four kinds of cognitions are meant. First, 
understanding the senses of words; secondly, knowing which are the 
principal and which the subsidiary; third, which of those attributes 
constituting contraries is to be removed; fourth, understanding a 
sentence such as “‘that thou art.’’ He then acquires the capacity to 
reflect on the coordination of positive descriptions and the negations 
of their opposites and on the single meaning of the sentence. The 
word “‘panda’? means knowledge, and a knower is a “‘pandita.”’ By 
gaining stability in the Self through the s4stras and one’s teacher he 
should meditate fixedly on the Self, thus removing the wandering of 
the mind in not-Self. Then he attains the status of a “‘sage’”’ (muni) 
and will be a true Brahmin, being himself Brahman. 

Question : How can such a one become a true Brahmin ? One 
has to get there indirectly through sacrificing, step by step. 

Answer: No. All actions must be abandoned, as is indicated by 
scripture. Liberation cannot be achieved by any means, being the 
beginningless Brahman. 


EIGHTH BRAHMANA 

1-29 (E1290-1295). In answer to GéArgi’s questioning Y4Ajjia- 
valkya explains that dkdfa pervades the universe. Here by the word 
“akaga”’ the Self alone is meant, since nothing else can be the inner 
controller of all, But this inner controller is not the final unmanifest 
or immutable (aksara), which has not been mentioned anywhere. 
Even in the First Book, where it is said that the universe was initially 
in the form ofthe unmanifest, only the inner controller was referred to. 

30-72 (E1295-1302). Bhartrprapafica says that knowledge, action, 
and traces are the causes of the body, thus what is referred to here is 
ignorance, without which these three would not operate. Controller- 
ship requires ignorance, since the Self is without qualities such as 
controllership. 

Gargi asks Yajfiavalkya what pervades the akaSa. When by Self- 
knowledge ignorance is expelled, the Self becomes immutable or 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 491 


aksara. Sitratman is not easily known, and dGkéfa is even more obs- 
cure. But aksara is hard for even Brhaspati to know or speak of, 
since It is beyond all pramdnas. It is neither known nor unknown, 
hence cannot be defined in words. Since It is said to be directly 
knowable it cannot be denied. Gargi thought by her question to 
put Yajiiavalkya to an impossible task. 

Yajfiavalkya’s answer (III.8.8) is “this is that,’ meaning that Iv is 
known to the Witness. It is not differentiated, nor is It continuous 
in many things like a universal property. The word “‘that’’ indicates 
that the thing in question was previously referred to as ‘direct’? and 
“free from thirst, hunger, etc.’”” The word “‘this” indicates that It 
is ‘direct.’ Even a thing that is only an object of perception, like 
the sweetness of sugar, cannot be described in words. What shall 
we say about the inmost Self! 

It is called “‘aksara’” because It is opposite to cause and effect, 
which are perishable because interdependent. By saying (in the 
text) “‘Brahmins say” Yajfiavalkya wants to show that he has answered 
the question correctly, as well as to indicate that aksara is beyond the 
scope of inference and can only be taught by the Upanisads. The 
Brahmins who have dispelled ignorance by Brahman-knowledge say this. 

73-108 (E1302-1307). The question arises concerning the kind 
of negation to be understood from the adjectives that appear in the 
text describing aksara—for example, “‘not large,” ‘‘not small,” etc. 
Is the negation here of the ‘‘absolute” (prasajyapratisedha) or ‘restrict- 
ed’? (paryudasa) variety ? If the second meaning were intended it 
would imply that there is something that is nonlarge, and that would 
contradict monism. 

Objection : But otherwise the denial leads to nihilism. 

Answer : No, since all denials require a substratum. But even on 
the second interpretation (the “restricted’’ negation) there is no 
duality, since the adjectives negated, being mutually dependent, 
have no independent standing and thus no reality. So, it may be 
that using the ‘‘absolute”’ kind of negation it is intended to remove the 
ignorance that is the cause of the use of “large,” ‘“‘small,”’ etc. Or it 
may be viewed as intended to reject the view that Brahman is both 
the whole and the parts. Or perhaps it negates in Brahman every- 
thing in the scope of the pramdnas. 

The word ‘‘amdtra’’ indicates that aksara is not a hetu in inference. 

109-180 (E1307-1318). Odjectton: If everything is denied in 
aksara how can we come to know of Its existence ? 

Answer: It is self-luminous. Even though there is no proof for 
It yet It exists, like a pot in darkness, veiled by ignorance. There is 


499 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


no proof for either the existence or the nonexistence-of aksara, for It is 
self-luminous. 

But regarding the existence of the inner controller there is disagree- 
ment among disputants, and to remove this the Upanisad goes on to 
give reasons for its existence. The difference between aksara and the 
inner controller is illusory, but the inference can only be in regard 
to the inner controller. Just as people can exist peacefully only 
when there is control by a powerful king, so only when there is control 
of this world can it exist without transgressing its limits. The sun 
and the moon are the creation of one who knows their uses, just as a 
powerful light on top of a mansion. That earth and heaven do not 
break apart or fall down, though they are heavy, presupposes a senti- 
ent ruler. The various parts of time—minute, hour, etc.—presuppose 
a controller. The systematic diversity of rivers—running east and 
west and vice versa-—presupposes a controller. That men give things 
as gifts and thus gain heaven presupposes someone who rewards them, 
since nobody would part with money without a reward. And _ since 
the giver, the gift, and the donee may all perish, there must be some- 
one to reward people in subsequent lives. We observe in ordinary 
life that service by itself does not earn any reward unless it comes under 
the survey of a superior person competent to reward the worker. 
The same rule applies in the case of Vedic acts. Therefore the regu- 
larity of reward for one’s acts in subsequent lives cannot be merely 
due to the dharma arising from the act. And likewise, as was said 
before, cessation of samsdra cannot be had by action. If there were 
no controller we would not see in the world realized souls free from 
miserliness, Brahmins who have fulfilled their obligations, free from 
samsdra and with their aims accomplished. 


NINTH BRAHMANA 


1-153 (E1318-1342). The aksara by being reflected in ignorance 
becomes the controller. The aksara is also called “‘prana’” in the 
Kausitaki Upanisad, where it is said that the senses merge in préna 
during deep sleep. Scripture also says ‘He is Brahman,” meaning 
prana. The aksara controls the Sitratman through the inner controller, 
which is ignorance with the aksara reflected in it. Through the 
Siitratman it controls the whole universe. This prana, then, pervades 
the whole universe in its individual aspect and in its aspect as the 
many gods. 

Now the text proceeds to discuss the number and nature of these 


many gods according to a variety of classifications. 
154-210 (E1342-1351). The word “bliss” (dnanda) is used here 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 493 


to indicate Brahman, as it is also in the Taittiriya Upanisad. But 
there is room here for discussion, since scripture says that Brahman is 
beyond the pramanas and since some theorists say that Brahman has 
no “bliss.” 

Opponent: .... “Brahman is bliss, but since It is consciousness as 
well It cognizes Its own bliss,”’ etc. 

Answer : This is untenable since ‘“‘cognizing something requires a 
body and organs,” etc. There is no difference between consciousness 
and bliss, both of which are Brahman’s nature. The text ‘“‘the 
released soul eats, plays, and is happy” should be taken figuratively 
to mean that He is all and so all happinesses are His. By being “‘all’”’ 
it is not intended that He has all miseries too, as those are illusory. 
All worldly happiness is brought about by some means, but in libe- 
ration the Self is bliss. He is also consciousness. He is also endless 
(anantya). Such experience of happiness is known to us in deep sleep. 


BOOK FOUR—SECOND BRAHMANA 


10-33 (E1360-1364). (The text tells of Janaka, who fell at Yajfia- 
valkya’s feet and said he didn’t know where he would go after death 
and wanted to be told.) 

Objection : It has been said that worshipers attain the nature of the 
objects of their worship. How could the king not know this ? 

Answer : The king knew that, but worship also conduces to libe- 
ration, which is Brahmanhood, and the king did not know this. 

Another objection: No, what the king didn’t know is the path to 
liberation, and that is what he wants Y4ajfiavalkya to tell him. 

Answer : This is not correct, since there is no mention ofa pathin 
YAjfiavalkya’s reply, nor is there mention of Brahman-knowledge in 
the previous Brahmana. The question is not about the path but 
only about the destination. Further, it was stated in the previous 
Book that the Self is Brahman, and since the not-Self is the Self himself 
there is no possibility of going out and searching for a path. One 
cannot take a path to the highest Self. Since the whole universe is 
superimposed on Brahman, it has no other substratum than Brahman. 
Scripture says ‘‘the knower of Brahman becomes Brahman.” There 
is no curtain dividing liberation from us other than the darkness of 
ignorance. We have to remove the curtain. 

34-85 (E1364-1372). ‘“This being who is in the right eye is named 
Indra,” says the text. He is so called because he is the enjoyer of 
gross objects in the waking state. The right eye is more powerful 
than the left. He is jiva, the enjoyer. People call him “Indra,” 
showing respect by omitting the original name, since the gods do not 


494 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


like people getting at the secret of the nature of the name. His wife 
lives in the left eye and is Viraj, the object enjoyed. 

This division as enjoyer and enjoyed is only for one god. It is 
intended for meditating on Agni and Soma. The two (enjoyer and 
enjoyed) meet in the heart. The essence of the food we eat assumes 
the form of blood and serves as the food for these two. Their cover- 
ing, formed by nerves, looks like a net since it contains numerous 
holes. The nerve that shoots up from the heart is their path to come 
to the waking state from the dream state. The nerves are very thin, 
like a thousandth of a hair. They carry the sense objects to the 
senses and through the mind they satisfy the jiva. All the gods 
(devata) in the body pass through these nerves for the enjoyment of the 
jiva. The experiences of pleasure or pain are only their proximity 
to the shadow of the knowing Self (cidatman). This too is dependent 
on the gods, and these latter are subject to the food we consume. 
The subtler part of that food satisfies the prdna devatds and reaches the 
subtle body. The juice derived from the food nourishes the gross body. 

Why is it said that the subtle body is nourished by the subtler part 
of food ? ‘The words “‘iva’”’ and “‘eva’’ (in the last sentence of IV.2.3) 
have to be interpreted as follows: just (eva) the gross body (vifva) 
is nourished by the gross part of the food, whereas the dreaming subtle 
body (taijasa) has what is as if (iva) the subtler part of the food. 
But the causal body has the subtlest part of the food, not just what is 
“as if” the subtlest part. 

Bhartrprapajfica interprets this passage like this: The Sutra located 
in the heart pervades the nerves which project outward. All the other 
gods also pervade the nerves, since the body and the senses are common 
to all of them. When for example the sun, the god of the eye, func- 
tions by helping, the other gods become subservient to it. Thus 
there are as many Prajapatis as there are nerves. The bodily limita- 
tion of the prdna should be brought into Viraj, Viraj into Hiranya- 
garbha, and he in turn into the supreme Self. This latter view is the 
author’s view also. The visva is to be brought into taijasa, and taijasa 
into prajfia, whom the aspirer should bring into the supreme Self. 
This pure Self is devoid of all senses and their presiding divinities; it 
is pure intelligence. 

106-113 (E1375-1376). Question : How can the king give fearless- 
ness to Yajfiavalkya (in the last sentence of this Brahmana), since 
he has already attained that stage ? 

Some reply: The sage had not attained Self-realization. Others 
say that the king wishes final release from the body (widehamukii) 
for the sage who has already attained jivanmukt. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 495 


These answers are not reasonable. YAjfiavalkya is entitled to be a 
teacher, so he must have attained Self-realization. As such, videha- 
mukti is not far off for him. The real answer is this: the king used 
these words to show that he had attained Self-knowledge. 


THIRD BRAHMANA 


9-12 (E1378-1379). The text says either “Yajfiavalkya went to 
the king vowing he would not talk (na vddisya)’’ or “‘...that he would 
talk extensively (samvddisya).” The latter meaning is more appro- 
priate, according to Suregvara, since if the sage had a vow not to talk 
the king would not have compelled him to talk, and there is no men- 
tion of any reason for taking such a vow. 

116-155 (E1396-1403). The materialist objection raised in Sam- 
kara’s comment on IV.3.6 is here rehearsed, starting with an objection 
by one who believes the body is the self (dehatmavddin). 

Dehétmavadin : The text “the Self is Brahman,” being contrary to 
perception, should be interpreted figuratively. The body is the 
product of the combination of the four elements, and by combination 
intelligence is born. The thought “I am a man” shows that I, the 
Self; and man, the body, are one, just as a snake is black. 

Counterobjection : But the Self is self-revealed and so intelligence 
cannot be a property of It. 

Dehatmavadin : No, for the same proof that proves the existence of 
intelligence also proves it to be a property of the body. 

Counterobjector : The body is seen as “‘this,”” and the Self as “I.” 
How can the Self be a property of the body under these circumstances. 

Dehatmavadin : Just as an ornament made of gold has gold as its 
property though it seems to us as something different, so the body has 
intelligence as its property even though it is seen as different. 

Question : Then why is a dead body not seen to be conscious ? 

Dehatmavadin : Because the body is the product of four elements, 
and when the air—one of the elements—gets out, consciousness goes 
out with it. 

Counterobjection : The dream body—for example, a tiger—differs 
from the waking body—human. But because of the recognition “I 
dreamt,” in waking we infer that the Self is the same in both states— 
so the Self is different from the body. 

Dehatmavadin : The elements themselves create the dream body, 
parallel to the creation of consciousness in the waking body. 

Counterobjection : Some yogis remember their previous births. Thus 
their Self must be different from their bodies. 

Dehatmavadin ; By the same principle you invoke we should be 


496 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


forced to the absurd conclusion that if someone remembers his past 
birth in a body having a head wound and now experiences a wound 
in the same place his body must be eternal ! 

Furthermore, we know that the helper and the helped are of the 
same species, as in the case of the eye and the sun, and unlike sound, 
which does not help the eye in cognizing. Therefore, elements help 
elements; this is the rule. Thus the luminous thing that helps the 
body should be an elemental thing, like the sun. And the Self should 
be of the same species as the sun, since like the eye the Self is inside the 
body and invisible. 

We rest our case on perception. We do not accept inference as 
evidence, since the following question arises : if invariable concomi- 
tance is between two specific (vifesa) things (fire on the hill inferred 
from smoke there) there can be no positive example (sapaksa). But 
if it is something general that has to be inferred (for example, fire in 
general inferred from smoke in general) then there is the proving only 
of what is already proved (siddhasddhana). 

Question : How is it then that the body, supposed to be the Self, 
is conscious sometimes and unconscious at others ? 

Dehadimavadin : Well, it is so in ordinary experience and so should 
be accepted, just as we find a glowworm dark in one place and lit up 
in another. 

156-203 (E1403-1412). Suresvara answers : How can one question 
that by which all the authors belonging to various systems establish 
their beliefs ? First of all, is it correct to say it is “contrary to percep- 
tion,” since there is no object other than Self for perception to grasp ? 
Everyone accepts that the validity of the pramdnas is due to their grasp- 
ing an object not already known. But before the pramdna arises 
we cannot know that an object is unknown or that it is not. The 
existence of unknown objects can be established only by pure conscious- 
ness, Brahman. 

The one who sees the seer, the seen, and sight in dreaming, and 
their absence in deep sleep, is the Self, different from the body. If 
consciousness is a property of the body, then the conception of “I” 
must be in another’s body as well as in one’s own ! 

204-239 (E1412-1418). Further, the same body cannot be cogniz- 
ed both as ‘I’? and as “‘this” because of their inconsistency. So, 
since the body is “‘this’ it cannot be “I.” Perception does not reach 
beyond the external object; it does not grasp the knower. The 
Witness, consciousness itself, cannot be known. Again, to suppose 
that consciousness arises from the elements is without proof, since 
there is no trace of the properties of the elements there. When the 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 497 


body dies the death of consciousness cannot be known by the inert 
body nor by the Self, since one cannot see one’s own death. 

If you do not accept inference as a pramana, you Cannot say that the 
helper and helped should be of the same class, or that consciousness 
is elemental. Again, if intelligence is in the body which is elemental, 
why is the sun, etc., needed for seeing an object ? Actually, the 
helper and the helped should be of different classes. A pot does not 
help a pot to be seen. The body is the product of the four elements; 
they are of different kinds, yet they help each other. Moreover, 
negation also helps the body, for example, the absence of thorns on 
the road helps the pedestrian. But negation belongs to a different genus. 

240-275 (E1419-1425). As for the argument against the validity 
of inference—that it cannot prove either specificor general things—this 
is wrong, for what inference proves is both specific and general, thus 
there is no defect. Furthermore, since you invoke inference to estab- 
lish the nonvalidity of inference there arises a self-contradiction. 
Without inference the ordinary activities of men, like drinking, eating, 
speaking, etc., will not be possible. 

As for your remark that the body is naturally sometimes conscious 
and sometimes not, that is not right, for we find in daily life that 
happiness is brought about by praise and unhappiness by insult. 

276-339 (E1426-1436). Now Janaka asks (IV.3.7) “Which is the 
Self ?”. The word “‘atman”’ is used sometimes to indicate the body, or 
the mind, or the Witness, or other things; therefore I ask you, which 
among these is the (true) Self? The answer indicates that there are 
two entities that help a man. One is external light, the sun, etc., 
and the other is the internal light, the Witness (sdksin). All illumi- 
nating objects are noneternal except the Witness, with whose aid the 
sun, moon, etc., illuminate things and by which we experience dreams. 
With this Witness’ help the pramanas come to exist. 

Since the Self is cognizable only in Its association with the buddhi 
and not separately, the word “‘vijftanamaya” is put here. The word 
“‘maya’” here indicates abundance. Those who interpret ‘“‘maya’’ 
as meaning “produced by” flirt with contradiction, since on their 
own interpretation the words (elsewhere) “‘vijfidnamaya,”’ ‘‘manomaya,” 
etc., cannot mean “made of” or “produced by” vijfdna or manas, 
etc., since the Self is not a product. There is a rule that when a 
word’s neaning is doubted we must decide according to the interpret- 
ation of the same word elsewhere. 

“Among the prdpas” indicates that the Self is different from the 
senses or “‘prdnas.” ‘‘In the heart” indicates the Self is different 
from buddhi (here=heart). ‘‘Within” the heart serves to distinguish 


498 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the Self from the modifications (ertt?) of the buddhi, which are not 
inside the buddhi but go out from the buddhi. He who witnesses all 
these modifications is the Self, by whose presence they arise and are 
destroyed. 

340-378 (E1436-1442). The word “‘light” is used in the text to 
exclude the view of the Nyaya school, where the self is taken to be inert. 
Buddhi, etc., function for the benefit of others, but the Self does not. 
The Self, ‘“‘light,’’ is self-luminous and self-evident. Being conscious- 
ness It is reflected in buddhi, manas, senses, and the body and makes 
them all appear to be conscious, just as a green pearl thrown in milk 
makes it appear green. The cause of this illusion is ignorance. It is 
illumined by the Self, consciousness. Since the Self is nonattached, 
His being the cause, the Witness, etc., are due to this same ignorance. 
The reflections are successive—first in ignorance, then in the buddhi, 
manas, senses, and body in that order. Hence the view that ‘‘I’’ is 
the first illusion. The text ‘‘He is consciousness of the conscious” 
conveys the same idea. 

Though the light of the Self is existent also in waking, because of 
the other illuminators there—buddhi, manas, senses, sun—it is not 
possible to show It to students. Therefore YAjfiavalkya takes up 
dream cognitions to demonstrate the existence of the self-luminous 
Self, since only vdsands are there to condition It. 

471-495 (E1457-1464). Buddhist: The difference between a pot 
and a light doesn’t exist. The pot in the light is momentary and 
differs from the pot in the dark. Or else consciousness alone is real 
and momentary. Everything is cognition. The relation of knowledge, 
knower, and known constitutes the impurity of consciousness, and 
pure consciousness is gained by wiping out this impurity. Your 
Self cannot be established by perception, inference, or scripture. 
But we have inference to support our view, since it is not opposed to 
perception and perception alone is valid. 

Question : But aren’t knowledge and its knower different ? 

Buddhist: No. The difference is known only through construc- 
tion-filled (savikalpaka) perception, which is erroneous. Construction- 
free (nirvikalpaka) awareness alone is valid, and it cannot grasp differ- 
ence. 

496-530 (E1465-1470). Those Buddhists who accept external 
objects (bahyarthavadins, i.e., Sautrantika and Vaibhasika) are now 
refuted. The external pot cannot illuminate itself; it requires light 
and does not shine in the dark. So light and pot are different. But 
a lamp likewise does not illumine itself, since like the pot it is illumi- 
nated by being known. This does not lead to an infinite regress, 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 499 


since the Witness is self-revealed. That the Witness is different 
from the ordinary knower has already been established. This Witness 
is conscious of both the ordinary knower and the pramdnas. Thus 
supported, perception, inference, and scripture can all function in 
cognizing external objects. 

531-652 (E1470-1493). Vijfidnavadin : There are no external 
objects. That which is not found apart from x is not different from x. 
Objects are not found apart from consciousness, thus they do not exist 
apart from consciousness, any more than dream objects do. 

Answer : If you do not accept anything different from consciousness 
then you have no example for your inference, since dreaming is also 
consciousness. But if you accept external objects we can establish 
our view by inference. And you do accept them. When you say 
that what appears as external is illusory, you accept them; when 
you use words in their ordinary senses to refer to objects you accept 
them, for “‘pot,” “light,” ‘‘knowledge’ are not synonyms. You 
should recognize difference between an instrument of knowing, an 
object known, a knower, etc. In addition, you take a pramdna to 
cognize an as-yet-unknown object, so you must admit their difference. 
If your view were to imply that the end and means are the same, 
your §astra will be purposeless and its author a fool. Furthermore, 
you must accept your opponent in argument as different from yourself. 

If you say that the pot doesn’t exist you must accept existence, 
without which denial is impossible. Thus the momentariness of things 
is impossible, since without existing they cannot be the causes of any 
useful purpose. The evidence from the fact of recognition shows 
that a thing must exist for at least eight moments. 

Vijfidnavadin : But the stream ofmomentary events (samitdna) is eternal. 

Answer: Not for you, because this would admit a self, the agent of 
the eternal stream that survives through it. Either the stream is the 
same as, or different from, the individual members of it. If they 
are different, then the stream must be eternal with the above dis- 
comfiting result. If they are not different, then they must be eternal 
like the stream ! 

653-696 (E1494-1502). The relationship of cause and effect 
must be accepted between two momentary things since they belong 
to different times. If they belong to a single moment then that rela- 
tionship cannot arise. Thus there is no evidence to prove that every- 
thing is knowledge. Nor can Sinyavdda be maintained, because 
there is no evidence. The Bhattas, who say that the self has two 
aspects—of knower and known—goes against the Upanisads, which 
emphatically say that the Self is without parts. 


500 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The Vijiianavadin cannot explain recognition of the form “This 
person is the same man whom I saw years back.” He cannot invoke 
similarity (sadrfya), since similarity is impossible between momentary 
things and there is ex hypothesi no permanent seer who experiences 
the similarity. Again, recognition doesn’t only tell us that these things 
are in general like those were, but in some cases, such as the one 
quoted above, it reports that the individual is precisely the same one. 

Vijidnavadin : The earlier cognition generates a residual impression 
that is responsible for the recognition later. 

Answer : But since nothing lasts more than a moment on your view, 
nothing can persist long enough to be responsible for something else. 

Furthermore, in your view the merit or demerit earned by one’s 
good or bad deeds will disappear without giving results—so grief or 
happiness would come to people undeserved. 

697-741 (E1502-1512). The view that cognition has different 
aspects is also wrong. Consciousness is pure and untainted. Objects 
are other than consciousness, for they are outside and cognitions 
inside the body. 

Finally, nirvana will never be accomplished, since there is no persist- 
ing person to enjoy it. 

Now the inference of the Advaitin that ‘‘All ordinary affairs require 
external illumination, as daily life requires the sun” is examined. 
We say this is correct. Inference cannot be set aside as not evidence, 
since we see smoke, infer fire, and get the use of fire as a result. Thus 
inference receives practical support. 

742-808 (E1512-1527). [The Buddhist contends that the hetu in 
a successful inference must be either (1) a thing’s nature (svabhdva), 
(2) an effect (karya), or (3) noncognition (anupalabdhi).] Answer : 
The nature of fire is hotness, but one cannot infer that what is hot is 
fire, since other things (hot water) are hot. Or if your idea is that 
wherever you have invariable concomitance (avindbhdvatva) it is 
through a thing’s nature, then effects will become a thing’s nature ! 
Smoke, an effect, is caused by fire, but it is also caused (on your view) 
by the previous momentary smoke; so it is not invariably concomitant 
with fire. Furthermore, there are some perfectly good inferences 
that are none of these kinds—for example, the inference that Krttika 
(a constellation) will rise since Rohini (another constellation) is 
rising. Various attempts to save the Buddhist theory by construing 
the word “‘svabhdva’”’ in other ways are refuted. Noncognition per se 
is not a third kind of hetu, for we need to know the counterpositive by 
some means, and if the means is inference from another noncognition 
we get an infinite regress. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 501 


809-830 (E1527-1531). To return to the text (IV.3.8) : The 
Jjiva, when going to dream, passes the body, senses, etc., which are 
symbols of death. The Self’s “birth”? is His taking on a body, for 
He is eternal and has no real birth. His “death” is the departure of 
the subtle body. The word “evils” (pdpma) (in the text) signify 
both good and bad deeds of the past. As all good and bad deeds 
lead to embodiment, and bodies, even those of gods, are to be aban- 
doned eventually, even merit is in this sense a “‘sin.”” Being enveloped 
by avidyd the jiva goes to the other world and returns again and again 
until its final release. From this it is plain that it is different from 
the body. All its attributes are merely illusory superimpositions. 
The states of waking and dream are visible, the existence of another 
world after death is made known by the Vedas. 

831-912 (E1531-1544). “‘... Revealing his own lustre by his own 
light—(he) dreams.” (IV.3.9) When the karma producing waking 
experiences is over one goes to sleep and sees the illusion of his dreams. 
Each individual by his own karma creates his dream world; he lays 
down his waking body, creates the dream body and the dream world 
only by his vdsands. Here by “his own” the natural light of the 
Self is meant. One sees by this light all the activities of the mind. 
Having eliminated all the “lights” of the waking state he sees them in 
dream with his vdsanés alone. Knowership, knowledge, etc., are 
all seen as objects. In dream one is self-luminous, he makes the 
vasands shine without any accessories. He is the witness of all that 
shines there. Being only the witness he has no connection with the 
objects, nor any activity. This is what is meant by “che dreams.” 
When he was awake he had the help of the sun, the mind, the eye, 
etc., which illumined objects. But in dreaming they are absent. 
The vdsands are not accessories here; they are themselves the objects 
of his awareness. Ignorance, desire, and karma are the only acces- 
sories in the creation of dreams. The witness is detached from all. 
Even his witnessness is a superimposition. The self does not enjoy 
happiness in dreams; everything is phenomenal. 

946-948 (E1549). It is commonly said one should not wake up 
a person in deep sleep. The reason is this: having left the waking 
nerves he has gone with the dream nerves. If he were woken up 
suddenly he might enter a wrong nerve and be deaf or dumb for life. 

974-1013 (E1553-1559). The Self who was detached in dream 
becomes tranquil in deep sleep. Like water purified by the kafaka 
nut, the Self when rid of all impressions (bhdvand) of samséra becomes 
clear. No vdsanés are brought to the deep-sleep state. Though he 
becomes somewhat tranquil in dream he is most tranquil in deep sleep. 


502 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Here only ignorance persists, the seed of the other two states. How 
is this state gained ? YaAajfiavalkya explains that the jiva goes back 
and forth among the states of dream and waking. In dream, with 
the help of the vdsands, he only sees good and bad, but there is no acti- 
vity here, only witnessing. Good and bad are the results of good and 
bad deeds he performed while awake. But he is not attached to them 
in dream, as is shown by the fact that when he awakes he does not 
experience the results of his dreams; for example, having eaten in 
one’s dream one may wake up and immediately feel hungry. 

1014-1045 (E1560-1565). Bhartrprapafica interprets this section 
as follows : By the word ‘‘ananvagaia’”’ is meant detachment from 
karma, and by the word ‘“‘asafga’’ is meant detachment from desires 
(kama). So the text means “He is without any karma produced in 
that (deep sleep) state, because he is without any desires in this 
(dream) state.” Desire is the cause of deeds, but there is no desire 
in the dream state; desires are located in the waking state and exist 
in dreams no more than chariots, etc., do. 

Or, the word “‘asatga’” may mean changelessness, since change is 
due to activity. How is this? Because the Self is not the real agent. 
Its agency is due to vdsands, which belonging to the mind tinge the 
Self “‘as the scent of flowers in the oil in which they have been boiled.” 

1045-1066 (E1565-1569). Question: How can one “wander and 
enjoy”’ in deep sleep? One is unconscious and cannot wander or enjoy. 

Prima facie answer: The passage must be read “‘he does not wander 
(acéritva) and does not enjoy (aratva).”’ 

Reply: But the Self is said to be nonattached even in dream later 
in the same passage; so what is the difference ? 

Another prima facie answer: As the Mandiikya Upanisad says, one enjoys 
bliss in deep sleep. Or else because of being in deep sleep identical 
with God he enjoys God’s happiness. But still the Self is not touched 
by the good or bad of the dream or waking states while in deep sleep. 

Surefvara’s answer: Each of the three stages—waking, dream, and 
deep sleep—are divided into three states. For example, in the waking 
stage the waking state is veridical knowledge, dream is error, and 
deep sleep is when, being overcome with desire, one is unable to 
discriminate between good and bad. Again, in the dream stage the 
waking state is when a man seems to work, etc. The dream state in 
dreaming is when one dreams in his dream. When he is unable to 
express after waking what he saw in his dream, that is deep sleep in 
dream. 

Now in the deep sleep stage there are likewise three states. The 
waking state of deep sleep is when there is a modification (vrtti) in 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 503 


the sattvic form of happiness, that is waking; when the form is rajasic, 
it is dream, and when tamasic it is deep sleep. So, even in deep sleep 
“wandering,” etc. is possible. 

1067-1146 (E1569-1570). Indeep sleep one enjoys all bliss and 
comes back to dreaming with his vdsands. But he does not go out of 
the body. If he did his body would die. Being “‘asanga’”’ he is not 
associated in deep sleep with waking karma as in dreams. Waking 
is false ike dreaming. Even in the waking stage his agency is false. 
He is only a witness, and so does not really enter either the stages of 
dream or waking. 

Now (IV.3.18) an example is given. Just as a big fish swims 
from one bank of the stream to the other, and being different from 
the banks is ‘“‘asanga,”’ so also the jiva, wandering from dream to waking 
successively, is asaiga, untouched by the “‘banks’”’ of waking and sleep. 
For the Carvaka, however, the two states could occur simultaneously, 

1147-1187 (E1578-1583). Bhartrprapafica interprets this differ- 
ently. He says : Karma is located in the subtle body. The vasands, 
resulting from karma, tinge the Self. Therefore to discriminate the 
Self from karma and vdsandé the text involving the word “‘asanga”’ 
was adduced. Avidyd is located in the Self alone, and it changes the 
Self and gives it illusion. This Self-awareness, being overpowered 
by ignorance, cognizes sounds, etc., which is to say that the avidyd 
becomes sound, etc., as well as becoming the means of knowing 
sounds, etc. In dealing with dream, desire was discriminated from the 
Self. Now in this present text (the fish example) avidyd is discrimi- 
nated from the Self. The Self sees the world built by karma through 
avidya. By knowing that both are not the Self he gains liberation. 
Likewise the next example (in IV.3.19) of the hawk is intended to 
distinguish the Self from avidyaé. When he goes into deep sleep and 
is merged with Brahman he is rid of avidyd, as it does him no harm. 

This interpretation (of Bhartrprapafica’s) is not correct, since the 
senses and their objects are mere avidyd and not something different. 
Therefore to say that nonattachment (asanga) is discovered by the 
Self through the senses is incorrect. Avidyd is not really existent in 
the Self and hence you cannot say that avidyd defiles the Self’s aware- 
ness. The rest of the section‘is intended to discriminate the Self from 
the dream and waking states, as explained. 

1188-1204 (E1583-1593). Now we have to decide whether con- 
sciousness is elemental or eternal. The opponent’s position is that it is 
a product of elements. The Self gets knowledge through contact of 
the senses with their objects. This is refuted following the manner 
of refuting the Dehatmavadin (E1396-1403 above). 


504 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Our position is this. In dreaming the gods have no hold on our 
senses. The Self leaves Its connection with the body when dreaming: 
there are no senses operating, only vdsands. By the example of the 
fish we are informed that the Self is different from bodies. He is 
pure consciousness devoid of activity, and so also distinct from desire 
and karma. Therefore everything is a product of avidyd, by eliminat- 
ing which the Self enjoys liberation. In waking the Self is seen 
accompanied by body and senses; in dream He is seen with ignorance 
and karma; and in deep sleep He is experienced as clear. ‘To explain 
His true nature the example of the hawk is given. This example 
reveals the Self as pure intelligence, or perhaps it is an example to 
show His nature in deep sleep. Just as a hawk wanders in the sky in 
search of food and when tired goes to its nest, so also after wandering 
in waking and dream the Self comes to Brahman to take His rest. 
When He goes there He does not see dreams of any kind, or any kind 
of experience. Like the hawk the jiva takes rest in avidyaé where con- 
sciousness is reflected. ‘The Self is different from avidyd and its pro- 
ducts. The relationship of avidyé with the Self is indefinable and false 
and so will be destroyed by Brahman-knowledge. 

1205-1242 (E1593-1601). The nature of the Self is that which we 
experience in deep sleep, where ignorance, desire, and karma are 
absent. To demonstrate the Self’s real nature and to explain the 
products of avidyd the next section (IV.3.20) dealing with the ‘‘nerves”’ 
begins. The products of ignorance are seen only by association with 
avidya. Or else the section on the nerves is introduced to demonstrate 
that the waking and dream states are unreal. Mountains, etc., are 
seen in the nerves, which are very small, and so the mountains, etc., 
must be unreal. 

There are several nerves projecting from the heart. They are as 
minute as a thousandth part of a hair, and are filled with the juices 
of food. The Self, who has these nerves as adjuncts during dream, 
thinks that He is red, yellow, etc. The subtle body is very minute 
and enters these nerves, and so takes on all kinds of colors according 
to the jiva’s karma. Because of the jiva’s false identification with the 
subtle body he experiences all kinds of things, all of which are unreal. 
The division of real and unreal in waking is like the division in dream, 
since everything in waking is also unreal. 

The nerves are white when phlegm is predominant, blue and black 
when wind is predominant, and yellow when bile is predominant. 
When all of these are equal the nerves will be of a thick red color. 

1243-1262 (E1601-1604). During dreams the jiva creates by his 
avidyé a new world and enjoys it. Though there is only one avidyé, 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASY AVARTTIKA 505 


still for each subtle body it is different. It appears before the Self 
in the manifold forms of horse, chariot, etc. Sometimes he thinks he 
is tortured or made to surrender. All this is false. When karma 
producing dream is exhausted he wakes up. He acquires other 
vadsands in waking by other deeds and again dreams. Thus being tied 
up with avidyd the jiva seems to be agent and enjoyer. As the Self 
is changeless there is no element other than avidyd, which causes Him 
to be agent, etc. 

1263-1287 (E1605-1609). These impressions (bhdvand =vdsand) 
reside in the reflection of consciousness (caitanyabhasa). Both (impres- 
sions and reflection of consciousness) reside in the internal organ. 
Being the witness of the internal organ, the Self is taken to be the 
locus of vdsanés. When an individual meditates as a god he gets the 
notion of ‘“‘I am the deity”’ in dream; when the Self is meditated on as 
free from delusion and its results, the meditator has the dream ‘The 
whole universe is myself alone.” In this latter case consciousness 
alone is seen. The words “I am the whole universe’ (ahamevedam) 
are capable of removing one’s avidyd. This world of the Self is the 
most superior world gotten by knowledge, for the other worlds are 
imposed by avidyd. In other cases the meditation is “‘as if ” one were 
god, or king, thus they are not the results of vidya. But the wholeness- 
experience in dream is real, not just a dream. In “I am all this” 
(ahamevedam) the word “‘I”’ (aham) denotes the unity of the Self, 
the word ‘“‘this’” (idam) denotes all the products of avidyd. 

1288-1357 (E1609-1620). Even when avidya persists we have this 
dream experience, and it arises before the pramdnas are invoked. 
Thus it shows the real nature of the Self. 

In the next section (IV.3.21) the Self in deep sleep is described, 
where avidyd is in a latent state, untouched by desire, free from merit 
and demerit, and thus free from fear. This is the Self’s real nature 
since there is no delusion, etc., which produce desire and karma. 
The example of the man and woman embracing illustrates this: before 
they were united they were aware of duality, but after embracing they 
are not aware of any external objects. In the same way, when avidyd 
is operant there is experience of duality, but when it is latent the jiva 
becomes one with pure Brahman. 

The words in this section of the text are glossed, and some variant 
readings are mentioned. 

1358-1406 (E1621-1629). The next section (IV.3.22) says that in 
the stage of deep sleep a father is not a father, etc., since ignorance is 
absent, ignorance, which is the cause of generation. All such relation- 
ships cease to exist in deep sleep, avidyé being absent in its operative 


506 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


state. The Self, being unattached, is in all states really free from 
such relationships. So in deep sleep the jiva is free from robbery and 
killing of Brahmins, and Chandalas and Pulkasas become non-Chan- 
dalas and non-Pulkasas, since karma does not operate there. The 
Jjiva in this state is free from all desires connected with caste (varna) 
and stage of life (aframa), because merit and demerit do not operate 
in him at that time. Actually, the Self is never involved in these 
things; His only property is consciousness, and He has nothing to do 
with ignorance, desire, and karma. 

1407-1495 (E1630-1643). Now the question arises : if the Self is 
intrinsically conscious He should remain conscious in sleep as well 
as when awake. But in deep sleep He doesn’t. So He is not intrin- 
sically conscious. In answer to this the next few sections (IV.3.23-31) 
say: when the pramdnas operate one has awareness of specific things. 
But in deep sleep they do not operate, and thus the Self is conscious 
only of Itself. So He sees; indeed, His sight never fails. But because 
He has no senses or objects to see, He does not see. Since the mind 
is absent there are no mental operations. 

Just as the sun does not do any work but its presence alone causes 
knowledge, so also the Self’s presence is His being a witness without 
operating. The experience of perception in dreams by persons who 
have lost their eyes shows the Self’s eternal perceptive nature. 

In these sections the word “‘vai’’ shows this. By “he does not see”’ 
the text denies the Self’s seership because of the absence of objects of 
vision and of the senses. By the words ‘“‘He sees” the Self’s intrinsic 
consciousness is implied. 

1496-1536 (E1644-1651). There are two kinds of destruction. 
Of these, destruction without residue is intended by the words ‘‘na 
ju,” whereas the denial of change is meant by “‘avindsatvat.”” Thus 
the Self is established as changeless. “Because there is no second 
thing,”’ adduced as the reason (hetu), means because of the absence 
of ignorance in its operating state, though it is there in its latent 
causal state. 

1537-1638 (E1651-1668). Others (Bhartrprapajica), however, 
interpret these sections differently. They say : it was declared by 
reasoning that the Self is of the nature of self-luminosity. Now if it 
be said that the Self does not see in deep sleep, no, we say, He does 
see. He is not an inanimate element. But He has no knowledge of 
individuals. The Self is not only producer of knowledge, but He is 
also the agent of experiencing (samvedana), the fruit of knowledge. 
Knowledge does not stop, for it is the quality of the Self and qualities 
exist as long as the substance persists. Thus knowledge persists as 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 507 


long as the Self exists, but the Self never dies since He is the Self of 
all and is single. All that is second to Him is not different from Him; 
He cannot kill himself. So, since the Self is shining in sleep with 
knowledge, He is permanent. The passage that says “He does not 
see”’ says that because of duality, that is, objects, He does not see. 

Suresvara : This interpretation does not give the real meaning. 
If knowing in deep sleep is an activity, like going or coming, it should 
perish. How is it that it does not perish? You say knowledge in 
sleep is produced by the Self but does not perish, but that is self- 
contradictory, since everything that originates should perish. 

Your idea that the Self is said in this passage to do two things— 
produce knowledge and enjoy it—is wrong, since the “‘seeing’’ element 
is restatement whereas the “‘does not see’’ is the predicate. Since 
the former is already made clear, the phrase ‘‘does not see” negates 
agency in knowing. The Self is not the agent of seeing; He is sight 
itself. His enjoyership too is His pervasion through the reflection of 
consciousness and is not real. 

1639-1793 (E1668-1696). Bhartrprapaitca : Every object in the 
world has two aspects—difference and nondifference. These two 
are not opposed to each other. The Self also, being an object, is 
likewise different-cum-nondifferent. 

Answer: This view is false. There is no difference in the whole 
when properly understood. Individuals are different from each 
other according to the specific qualities of each object. The universal 
properties of different classes are different. But difference and non- 
difference cannot be both the property of one object. On the oppo- 
nent’s view the scriptural texts that negate difference, such as “‘not 
this, not this,”? would become meaningless. Inferences supposed to 
establish difference-cum-nondifference are also corrupt, since on the 
opponent’s assumption hypothesis, reason, and example cannot be 
completely different, which they should be if inference is to be valid. 
On the other hand, if all the things in the world are nondifferent, 
there can be no communication between one person and another. 

1794-1812 (E1696-1698). As all the causal relations are due to 
avidyaé the knowledge of reality destroys all of them, the Self alone 
remains, and now He becomes pure “‘like water” (IV.3.32). He 
isone. There is no internal difference in Him. By the word “‘water’’ 
difference from objects of different species is negated. 

1813-1845 (E1698-1703). Having completed his teaching for 
liberation, the sage says (IV.3.32) “This is the highest world,” that 
is, the Brahmaloka. Here “‘this’’ indicates the Self. The ‘‘world” 
mentioned here is not any world but consciousness itself. “Brahmaloka’’ 


508 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is Brahman that is consciousness, not a world. In this way the 
sage instructed Janaka to get rid of ignorance, which brings all dis- 
tress. This attainment is the most superior one. All other attain- 
ments are transitory, as they are caused by desire and karma, the off- 
spring of avidya. It is the supreme bliss, as happiness ends with it. 
To explain this the text says: “On a particle of this very bliss other 
beings live.” All happiness rising from objects are only the bliss of 
Brahman conditioned by buddhi and its modifications. 

1846-1886 (E1703-1710). The next section (IV.3.33) aims at 
instructing the king about the supreme bliss by grades beginning from 
human bliss. As desires decrease bliss increases, so that the pinnacle 
of happiness coincides with the extinction of desires. Knowledge of 
the Vedas is counseled as leading from each stage to the next. 

Objection : Since a combination of Vedic knowledge and destruc- 
tion of desires is here made equivalent to Brahman-knowledge, the 
position of combined-knowledge-and-action (jfdnakarmasamuccayavada) 
is upheld. 

Answer: No, since the Vedic knowledge referred to destroys agency 
and karma. 

1887-1975 (E1710-1723). In this way Yajfiavalkya completed 
his answer to the king’s question, but the king now (IV.3.34) again 
asks him to explain the way to liberation. The king realized that the 
talk of wandering from dream to waking is only an example of going 
to the next world from this body, and the explanation of deep sleep 
is an example of the state of liberation. So the king asks Yajfiavalkya 
to explain liberation. 

So Yajiiavalkya proceeds to explain samsdra in detail. The Self 
is always conscious, so He awakes from deep sleep, and after living 
a lifetime alternating between the stages of waking and dream in a 
body—tike the driver in a chariot (IV.3.35)—he becomes old and 
feeble and the subtle body drops off as a fruit falls from the stalk 
(IV.3.36). The senses, though located in different parts of the gross 
body, collect into one place that is praéga. When the subtle body 
proceeds it is waited upon by many gross bodies. Just as when a 
king goes to a town and the people there assemble to receive him with 
food and drink, so also people wait for the jiva with a body intended 
for his enjoyment according to his karma (IV.3.37). Likewise the 
king when departing is accompanied by various persons, good or bad 
(IV.3.38), so when the jiva prepares to depart he is accompanied by 
the traces of his good and bad deeds, as well as the frdnas and 


organs, etc. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 509 


FOURTH BRAHMANA 


43-73 (E1731-1736). Now the jiva along with the senses assemble 
“in the heart’? (IV.4.1) with the subtle body, which is the cause of all 
cognitions. The Self has no cognition, and Its association with the 
subtle body is like water saturated with salt being felt saltish. By the 
word “heart” the buddhi is meant. 

“When the presiding deity of the eye turns back . . . the man 
fails to notice color.” The sense of sight is an aspect of the sun, which 
aids the eye in its cognition. When the jiva comes to the heart this 
portion goes back to the sun, which is the withdrawal of aid, and this 
occurs because the karma that was giving enjoyment to the jiva is 
now exhausted. So the jiva no longer sees colors, since that sun- 
aspect has become one with the sun ([V.4.2) and the sense of sight 
has become one with the subtle body. Then persons nearby say 
“‘he does not see.”’ Likewise with the other organs. 

97-125 (E1740-1744). “The top of the heart brightens...” 
(IV.4.2)—this is the knowledge of buddhi due to karma. In this 
knowledge the dying man sees his future body in which he is to be 
born again. The text alludes here to the sdsands lit with the reflection 
of consciousness, as one had in daily dreams; it is intended to instruct 
us that we must be careful to do good deeds and meditate on God 
so that we can have a good cognition. 

The subtle body goes out through any nerve, since all are open to 
him. If he goes out through the eye he goes to the sun, if by the top 
of the head he goes to the Brahmaloka. As it rises up prdna and all 
the other senses follow it. The jiva, having knowledge of his future 
body, gets out with the vdsands and remains conscious till he gets the 
next body. But he cannot have knowledge of everything since he is 
not independent. To get independent knowledge of the future body, 
etc., he must practice yoga. All the Sastras are intended to provide 
the knowledge of the various means that one can attain through body, 
mind, and speech either to gain uplift or to earn calamity. The jiva 
takes with him vidya, karma, and “past experience” (piirvaprajiia). 
These constitute the means of his attaining a future body. Here 
“vidya”? means ordinary knowledge, doubts, and errors, and not 
Brahman-knowledge. By “‘karma”’ is meant all actions done by body, 
speech, and mind, both éastric and otherwise. By ‘“‘past experience” 
is meant those latent impressions of past deeds the fruits of which have 
been or have not been enjoyed. 

126-146 (E1744-1747). There are different views as to how the 
Jjiva leaves this body and takes another. The Jains say that it is like 
a bird going from one tree to another. Some say that the gods take 


510 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the jivas to other bodies. The Samkhyas say that jivas attain expan- 
sion and contraction in another body. The Vaisesikas think that the 
internal organ alone flies from one body to another like a bird. The 
Vedantin’s view is that the senses and prdyas are all-pervasive but 
undergo contraction in bodies as conditioned by karma. The next 
text (IV.4.3) gives as an example the progress of a leech from one 
piece of grass to another, contracting its body as it goes. 

Does the jiva use the materials from the old body to construct the 
new one, or does he take new material for each body? The text 
(IV.4.4) indicates that, just as the goldsmith melts down old gold 
and uses it to make new ornaments, so the jiva uses old elements (the 
five material elements) to create new bodies according to karma, 
whether in this world or in the various other worlds of fathers, 
gandharvas, gods, etc. 

147-184 (E1747-1753). In the next section (IV.4.5) the Self’s 
original nature and characteristics dependent on avidyd are explained. 
The transmigrating self, whose nature is nontransient and innermost, 
is the witness. The not-Self has no reality apart from the Self. 
“Atman is Brahman, and Brahman Atman,” and all else is unreal. 

Samsara is due to association with avidya. When this association 
ends the Self is released. Though He is the prana of pranas He becomes 
so by error; He thinks He is prdya, He thinks He is mind, etc., by 
ignorance alone. By ignorance there arise in the Self the elements— 
akaSa, etc. Thus, though not an agent, He seems to become the 
speaker of words through avidyd. 

In this section both the gross body and the subtle body are men- 
tioned. The mind is filled with desires, hatred, etc., because of 
vasands. These are the Self’s many sheaths. Being saturated with 
merit and demerit the self becomes “‘one with all’ (sarvamaya), be- 
cause he becomes soaked with what he does. Whatever he does, 
that he becomes, “‘by good deeds he becomes good, by bad deeds bad.” 

185-234 (E1753-1761). But desire is also the cause of karma, 
so the text says “‘the Self is full of desire (kémamaya).” 
the cause of desire also. There is no activity without desire. When 
a desire becomes intense it is called “‘resolve’’ (kratu), and so the man 
acts according to this resolve. Depending on which actions he does, 
the mind wanders with the Self reflected in it. Thus the Self, though 
nonattached, is through superimposition connected with the subtle 
body and is said to go to other worlds, though it is actually the subtle 
body that goes. The words “what it works out, it attains” refer to 
the world attained, not to the object of desire. 

235-250 (E1761-1763). Since it is said that the jiva goes according 


Ignorance is 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 511 


to the maturity of its mind, it is clear that desire is the most important 
cause of samsara. After enjoying the results of its karma the jiva comes 
back to the body in this world to perform actions again. Thus, 
forgetting its real nature, it travels between this body and the future 
body without rest, like a water pot in a Persian wheel. 

251-303 (E1763-1771). Up to this point samsara has been explain- 
ed. Now liberation is explained. 

The man who has no desire—the cause of desire, ignorance, having 
been uprooted by knowledge—is not born again. Such a man does 
not see any not-Self object as real and hence has no desire. One who 
has no latent impressions deriving from the senses becomes desireless. 
To do this he must first become desirous of attainment (dptakdma) 
and desirous of the Self (aimakama). He has attained all bliss (i.e., 
all desires) by his Self-knowledge, since all the minor blisses form 
parts of the supreme bliss. 

Thus by being desirous of the Self one becomes desirous of attain- 
ment, then desireless (niskdma), and finally without desire (akdma). 
Now being firmly one with the Self he has no samsdra. His pranas 
do not go out, since ignorance is the cause of prdanas existence and 
travel and it is destroyed. Just as the rope is the reality of the snake’s 
existence so that when the rope is known the snake’s existence and 
destruction are not known, so the Self is the reality of prdna’s existence: 
when the Self is known none of them exist. So the release of the 
already released is obtained. 

304-323 (E1771-1774). He who realizes the secondless, pure Self 
as in deep sleep is the real knower of the Self; others are all fools. 
There is no difference between a dead and a living mukta. Hence 
scripture says “‘being already released he is released.” His attainment 
of Brahman is only the departure of the separating ignorance. 

324-375 (E1775-1782). Those who say that in liberation there 
arises cognition of eternal bliss should explain what this arisal of 
knowledge is. Was bliss there before the arising or not ? If it was 
already there then it is the nature of the Self and consciousness too is 
the Self’s nature. So the Samkhya view of distinction (abhivyakt:) 
(between Self and not-Self) is refuted. The view of those who believe 
in. asatkaryavada or Grambhavada (i.e., the Nyaya-Vaisesikas) is likewise 
wrong, since nonexistents can never come into existence. 

376-390 (E1783-1786). The next section (IV.4.7) says that when 
all the desires existing in the heart subside along with their objects 
then the mortal becomes immortal. In deep sleep also, desires dry 
out but their vdsands exist. In liberation the vdsands too dry out. 
This is indicated by the word “all (the desires).”” The words ‘‘exist 


512 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in the heart” show that desires are properties of the mind and not of 
the self as the Tarkikas say. Since the mind is a product of avidya, 
desires die when the mind dies along with ignorance. 

391-412 (E1785-1789). Bhartrprapafica, however, interprets the 
passage otherwise. He ‘says there are two kinds of desires, some in 
the mind and others in the self. The idea is that when the desires 
in the mind die out the self becomes immortal. But even then the 
desires in the self persist, and do not die. ‘‘The heart’? here has two 
meanings: one is the heart, the other the jiva who is separated from 
Brahman by desires. When the desires die jiva becomes Brahman. 
The desires that reside in jiva do not perish, however, since they are 
identical with the jiva who is released. 

413-501 (E1789-1803). Answer to Bhartrprapatica: This view is 
against scripture. Why? The first Book, after explaining the fruit 
of knowledge, that is, all becoming the Self, also explains the fruit of 
ignorance, that is, the knowledge of difference as cause, effect, etc. 
In the course of that explanation the first Book says that desires, etc., 
are the products of ignorance. Of the seven foods the mind is one 
and its property is desire—that is what was said. Furthermore, in 
the explanation of the unmanifest (avyakrta), where name, form, and 
action are mentioned as products of ignorance, it is clear that desire, 
being part of name-and-form, is avydkrta and thus not a property of 
the Self. 

The view of Jaimini and Kanada that desire is a property of the 
self is wrong, since it is against the teaching of the Vedas. Book One 
says that everything knowable in form is located in the mind, which 
supports all forms; that speech supports all that illuminates; and that 
prana supports all activities. Further, it is said in Book Three that all 
name, form, and action are located in the heart and that the Self 
is pure. Thus the Upanisad indicates that all desires should be re- 
moved. The Chandogya Upanisad is adduced in support also. Scripture 
overrides Kanada’s view as much as that of the Buddhists. 

502-531 (E1803-1807). The person who has realized the pure 
Brahman will have no connection, no identification with the body. 
The body will be left, as a snake’s outer sheath is left on the anthill, 
without any attachment. Though others say that that body is the 
body of a realized soul, the liberated one has no idea of “‘I”’ or ‘‘mine”’ 
in it. Just as the snake feels that the thrown-off sheath is not “TI,” 
so the wise one feels that “‘his’? body is not “I” or “‘mine” since the 
connection with that body has been cut. When ignorance has been 
destroyed by Self-knowledge, the Self becomes bodiless, for the connec- 
tion with the body was only through ignorance. There is no connection 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 513 


between the real and the imagined (kalpita) even when there is 
imagination. But in the absence of avidyd there is no imagining at 
all; so a fortiori there can be no connection. 

The Madhyandinas read (in IV.4.7, in the phrase “‘athdyamasariro- 
*mrtah’”’) “anasthika’” (before “‘afariras’’) meaning ‘‘devoid of bones,” 
that is, implying that the realized Self has no gross body. The word 
‘‘agarira,”’ ‘“‘bodiless,”’ negates both the gross and subtle bodies. 

532-545 (E1807-1810). Now the king’s questions have been 
answered according to his desired ends and he has become an enlight- 
ened soul, having attained all that is to be attained. He offers 
Yajfiavalkya a thousand cows. 

Question : Why didn’t Janaka give Yajfiavalkya all he has ? Why 
only a fraction ? 

Some answer that the king wanted to hear the stanzas (below) 
from him and so did not offer him the whole kingdom for fear 
Yajfiavalkya would stop with what he has already said. 

Suresvara : No, this is not a good reason, for scripture, being free 
from desire or hatred, will not indulge in such mean deviance. The 
reason is that the king wanted to hear the means to Brahman-knowl- 
edge such as samnydsa, hearing, considering, and meditating. 

545-560 (E£1810-1812). Now some mantras. (the stanzas referred 
to above) are given to prove that knowledge alone is the cause of 
liberation. 

1 (IV.4.8) Knowledge, the path to liberation, is very subtle. 
Since its content is all-pervasive it is wide. Since it is based on the 
old Veda it is also “‘old”’ (vitata). ‘‘Vitara’”’ is another reading, mean- 
ing that it is the cause of crossing over from samsdra. ... has touched 
me,” that is, Ihave realized it through the guru’s teaching. “Heaven” 
(svarga) here is Brahman-bliss and not heaven, since the context 


ce 


is that of liberation. By this knowledge those already released attain 
release, for ignorance is the only impediment, and knowledge is the 
only remedy. 

561-598 (E1812-1818) 2 (IV.4.9). Those who are ignorant 
suggest various paths to liberation. Some say it is pure, others say 
it is blue, yellow, green, or red. They speak of the single, spotless, 
and pure Brahman in this way, like blind men touching an elephant. 

Some say he who performs meritorious deeds and becomes pure 
minded attains Brahman. They suggest a combination of Brahman- 
knowledge with action as the means to attain the knowledge of identity. 

This combination of action with knowledge can be accepted only 
in succession, not simultaneously. Scripture says that the abandon- 
ment of action alone is the means to liberation. 


514 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


599-615 (E1818-1821) (IV.4.10-12). Those who stick to actions, 
though free from sensual pleasures, gain only the utmost darkness. 
According to the Madhyandinas “‘sambhati” is read in place of 
“‘avidyd,’”? but the meaning is the same. Those who indulge in medi- 
tations (updsand) gain the eight siddhis that are opposed to liberation. 
These siddhis lead to worlds that have no happiness. If one realizes 
the Self, which is the Witness of cognitions as Brahman, what will 
he desire ? For what purpose will the body be afflicted ? He has no 
desires. 

616-623 (E1821-1822) (1V.4.13). The person who lives in the 
everchanging body who has realized the Self as Lord becomes the 
creator himself. He has done all that is to be done, and nothing is 
left for him to do. 

624-656 (E1822-1828) (IV.4.14-16). If we realize Brahman 
here and now, because our sins have subsided we will have perform- 
ed our duty. If not it is a “‘great destruction” (mahati vinasti) for 
us. The great destruction is the persistence of ignorance. When 
one realizes the Self as Brahman then there is nothing to control one, 
one does not hate anything nor does he want to save himself from the 
outer world. Since he has overcome time he has no change—the 
years, etc., revolve under him, and he is the real nature of the universe. 
Since the cause of duality has been destroyed the knower is deathless. 
He is the “‘prana of prana,”’ the life-giver of life. 

657-767 (1829-1832) (1V.4.19). To realize Brahman the mind 
alone is the instrument and nothing else. 

Objection: If Brahman is scen by the mind then there must be 
dualities as between seer, seen, and sight. 

Answer: In Brahman there is no non-Brahman, seen or unscen. 
In perception only positive elements appear and hence there is no 
possibility of difference being observed. If a man sees the super- 
imposed duality he obtains the cause of going from death to death, 
that is, Hiranyagarbha; the cause is ignorance. 

677-698 (E1832-1835) (IV.4.20). Therefore Brahman is to be 
seen “in one form only,” as consciousness (caitanya) according to the 
scripture ‘‘satyam jndnam anantam brahma’’ (‘Brahman is truth, knowl- 
edge, endless”). It is clear now that Bhartrprapafica’s difference- 
cum-nondifference is baseless and runs afoul of this passage ‘Brahman 
is to be seen in one form only.” 

Objection : If Brahman is seen there must be difference between 
seer and seen, and if so how can It be said to be “‘nonobject’’ ? 

Answer: First, it is seen by negating other objects. Second, it 
is only the object of mental operations (vrtt?) and not of consciousness 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 515 


(cit). Ignorance is destroyed by mental operations and Brahman 
shines, being self-luminous. Since the Self is the inner soul of the 
seer, seen, and sight and is itself of the nature of consciousness It cannot 
be an object. Just as the sleeping person is awakened directly by a 
word without his remembering the relationship between the word 
and its sense, so also by the text “‘that art thou”’ the Self is awakened. 
This is because the capacity of the word is inexplicable (acintya) and 
sleep is illuminated by the Self, which is consciousness. 

699-769 (E1836-1847) (IV.4.21-22). “Knowing (vijfiaya) the 
nature of” Brahman “‘the wisc man should attain prajfa,” that is, he 
should learn the sentence sense of great sentences such as ‘I am 
Brahman.”’ 

Some commentators interpret this another way. They say that by 
“‘vijfidya”’ is meant the verbal knowledge of the identity of jiva and 
Brahman, and by “attaining prajfd’’ it is meant that he must make 
that knowledge a direct realization by repeating the verbal knowledge. 
This realization is brought about by the mind, and so it was said above 
that the Self should be realized by the mind. When the jiva con- 
templates a deity as his own self he becomes one with it. Thus he 
contemplates Hiranyagarbha and after attaining identity with it he 
looks upon Brahman as self and become Brahman. 

This view is corrupt. The activities of mind, speech, and body 
depend on the person. He can do them or keep quiet. But the 
knowledge of identity between Self and Brahman that arises from the 
Vedic text is not dependent on a person. The person whose mind 
is free from tamas and rajas and who possesses equanimity, control of 
mind, etc., directly sees the Self by the great sentences and then all 
his ignorance is removed. He becomes all-knowing. All his duties 
are over; he has attained the fruits of his labor. 

770-834 (E1848-1857). Others interpret the stanza thus: After 
knowing, one must meditate. Since sentences in general generate 
only the relation of one word-sense with another, the great sentences 
give only the knowledge of related Brahman. To get direct knowl- 
edge of nonrelational Brahman one has to meditate, and it is this 
knowledge alone that removes ignorance. 

This view also is not good. All pramdnas generate knowledge of 
the unknown. Brahman is unknown, and the text must generate a 
knowledge of Brahman that is nonrelational. This is natural. So 
additional meditation is useless. Indeed, by meditating on a false 
object nobody gains the truth. 

835-877 (E1858-1864). Our view of the meaning of this passage 
is this. One should get knowledge of Brahman from the Vedic text, 


516 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


This is ‘“‘vijfana.” By “‘prajiana” is meant the realization of Brahman 
as “IT am that.” 

Or, by the pervasion of pramdna called “‘vijfdna’”’ knowledge arises, 
but there is duality of seer and seen. By the pervasion of the object, 
called “‘prajita,” that duality comes to an end. 

Or, the knowledge derived from hearing and reflection is what 
is meant by “‘vijfdna.”’ By “‘prajiana’’ direct realization through the 
text is meant. 

Or, “‘vijfiana’”’ is knowledge of the Self as Brahman, whereas “‘pra- 
jiidna”’ is the knowledge of Brahman as Self. By the word ‘only’ 
(eva) duality and mediacy in Brahman are eliminated, since these 
are due to ignorance and perish through Vedic knowledge. 

Or, by ‘“‘vijitana” is meant knowledge of the word-senses in the 
great sentences. By “‘prajfia@na’”’ the knowledge of the sentence meaning 
is intended. The text “‘the Self should be known” enjoins only the 
knowledge of the real nature of jiva through inference. When this 
is known it is easy to get at the purport of the sentence. 

Or, “‘prajna’’ is the knowledge of Brahman, the aim of man. The 
injunction (“‘the Self should be known’) says that this knowledge 
should come after knowledge of the Self (‘‘vijftana’’). 

Or, when ‘‘prajiiadna’”’ is ordained without mention of an object the 
word “‘vijfidna’’ is given only to supply the object of prajfia. 

Or, ‘“‘prajia@’” is Brahman. Knowing the Self (“‘vijftana’’) you must 
know Him as the supreme. 

878-891 (E1865-1866). Some commentators say that though at 
the time of the knowledge of the sense of a great sentence ignorance 
should perish, yet it does not do so since even after realization one 
sees desire, grief, etc., in the adept. Therefore there are two igno- 
rances, one natural (naisargya), the other accidental (dgantuki). 
The accidental one perishes by the rise of realization, but though the 
natural ignorance perishes through knowledge yet it rises again and 
causes aversion, etc. Therefore to remove this natural ignorance 
one must practice knowledge repeatedly after “‘vijfdna.” 

891-935 (E1866-1874). This interpretation is not correct, since 
there is only one ignorance, not two. For realization, only that which 
is not known can be the content. The Self is such. Ignorance is 
located only in consciousness (cit). The knower is not the locus since 
he is always known. When one Brahman-knowledge is obtained by 
the great sentences all ignorance perishes, one becomes all-knowing 
and has attained everything to be attained. If ignorance that has 
perished can come out again there is no guarantee that it will not 
rise again after death. Ignorance that is necessarily removed by 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 517 


knowledge can never hinder knowledge from functioning. Further, 
when ignorance, which is the cause of all, is removed by knowledge 
how can it come back again? Destruction of ignorance is not its 
dissociation from Brahman but Brahman itself, and hence there is no 
possibility of its coming out of Brahman again. The one thing the 
great sentence has to do is to reveal the unknown. When this is done 
nothing remains. Ordinary knowledge of Self does not need any 
repetition since in the views of the Prabhakaras, Bhattas, Nyaya, 
and Vaisesika it is possible without any injunction to repeat it. In 
the view of the Vedantin, since the Self is consciousness, all the world 
including the buddhi is pervaded by It and hence contemplation is 
unnecessary. 

936-961 (E1874-1878). Knowledge of Self derived from scripture 
cannot be ordained to be repeated. If the injunction be restrictive 
(niyama) or eliminative (parisamkhya) the karmakanda will have no 
eligible person to address itself to. Since injunction concerning karma 
or its fruit would then not be possible, how much more difficult would 
be an injunction to repeat meditation, since when knowledge has 
been attained the difference between knower, known, and knowledge 
comes to an end. The knowledge that destroys ignorance does not 
require any instrument for destroying it. 

962-979 (E1878-1882). The adept should not think of many 
words. Since it is tiring for the speech organ, words conveying the 
not-Self should be avoided. One should always meditate through 
the pranava {i.e., om). By repeating it he will eventually get the 
desire for Brahman-knowledge. After getting that desire he should 
leave off repeating it and take up the few great sentences to get 
Brahman-knowledge. Too, there is conflict between the karma- and 
jitanakdndas and when a person becomes eligible for knowledge he 
should leave off repeating the karmakdanda. 

Now the text begins to show how the karmakdnda helps the rise of 
desire to know Brahman. The jiva called “‘vijfiénamaya’’ and who is 
near the pranas is the supreme Brahman. Its attributes are all- 
controllership, omnipotence, and unchangingness. 

980-1062 (E1882-1895). The person who was spoken of in the 
third Brahmana as self-luminous and free from desire and karma is 
now stated to be the Lord of all. Thus, the jiva’s dependence upon 
Brahman is also denied here. Just as when it is said “‘the akdfa in 
the pot is the great dkafa’”’ the attributes of both dkdfas are negated, 
so itis here. Brahman’s Lordship is full, not like that of the sun or the 
emperor. His Lordship is over origination, sustention, and destruc- 
tion. He is not an agent of karma nor enjoyer of its fruit. He is not 


518 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


born, etc., for those are the products of ignorance. Therefore He 
cannot become superior or inferior by karma, not being an agent; 
He is nonattached. Since He protects all creatures He is called 
“Bhitapala.”’ Being himself the cause of all He, in the form of Praja- 
pati, Indra, ctc., protects the world. Just as a dam protects the waters 
on both sides from mixing, so is the Self protecting the eternal values. 

Brahmins wish to know such a person by repeating the Vedas. 
Since such a desire does not arise independenily, the Upanisad gives 
us the means of acquiring such desires. 

As actions are advised for getting one’s desircs, and knowledge for 
getting liberation, there is no sentence unity between the two kdndas 
(karma- and jfidna-). Since recitation of the Vedas, etc., are laid down 
to inculcate desire for knowledge they cannot bring about knowledge, 
for which yama and niyama alone are the causes. Desire for knowl- 
edge is available to any stage of life without distinction. The word 
“Brahmins” (brdhmana, in IV.4.22) implies the first three varnas, 
which are all competent for Vedic study. “The study of the Vedas, 
sacrifices,” etc., are individually the causes, or else this indicates the 
whole of the karmakanda. 

The interpretation that Brahman is to be known by “study of the 
Vedas” (IV.4.22) is not right, since Brahman is revealed by the 
Upanisads alone, not by the karmakanda. All obligatory rites are 
implied in this text as to be done. These rites bring about purity of 
mind and the desire for knowledge follows. The optional rites 
(kamyakarman) are also to be performed without desire for the fruit. 
Performed in this way they produce purity of mind. 

The ‘‘austerity’’ (tapas) referred to here indicates forbearance of 
the pairs of opposites such as cold and heat, etc. ‘“‘Anagaka’’ suggests 
not taking tasty food. Even if one dies such a one is sure to get the 
fruit in a later life. By the purity of the organs earned in many lives 
he will get release in the first stage of life (viz., brahmacarya) itself. 
However, fasting unto death should not be undertaken by one who is 
able to undertake hearing and thinking (about Brahman) in this life. 
But it may be undertaken in Prayaga (Allahabad), etc., by inefficient 
persons, since death then brings him liberation. 

1063-1143 (1895-1907). Or, this text ([V.4.22) intends that the 
brahmacdrin “becomes a sage”’ by “‘study of the Vedas” (vedanuvacana), 
the householder by “‘sacrifice’’ (yajfia), and the forest-dweller, and 
the samnydsin by “austerity.” All stages of life performed perfectly 
lead toward liberation. A “sage”? is a samnydsin who undertakes medi- 
tation (dhyana) after hearing and considering. By being a sage he 
gets Brahman-knowledge. 


BRHADARANYAKOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 519 


Now the text praises samnydsa, speaking of the wise old men who 
had attained Brahman-knowledge and did not desire sons, actions, 
inferior knowledge, etc. 

1144-1179 (E1908-1914). Some say that samnydsa is for those 
unable to perform actions, such as the lame, the blind, etc. This is 
not so, as the text does not indicate that such men are eligible for 
samnyasa. 

Objection : Why should those who desire Self-knowledge abandon 
action ? Let them perform actions and not samnyésa. 

Answer : No, since action has nothing to do with the world of the 
Self, as is indicated by “not this, not this.’ Vyasa tells us that 
neither good nor bad acts affect him. 

1180-1300 (E1914-1936). The next section (IV.4.23) gives a 
mantra making the same point, that Brahman-knowers arc not affected 
by action, and so one should know the Sclf. Having attained desire 
for that knowledge one should foresake desires, should attain tran- 
quillity and the other prerequisite qualities and, by eliminating all 
that is not-Self, should realize the Self by the text “that art thou.” 
The six qualities are explained. In samnydésa abandonment (uparati) 
is natural, but begging for food and hearing the Upanisads are not 
prohibited for the samnydsin since they are important for one to gain 
knowledge. But even in begging one should leave the idea of “I” 
and “‘mine.”’ 

1301-1345 (E1936-1943). “This is the Brahman-world, and you 
have attained it,’’ says Yajfiavalkya, and having bcen thus instructed 
Janaka gave him his empire and his self. 

(IV.4.25) Only by Self-knowledge does one become accomplished 
(kriakrtya). This Self is the “‘eater’? (annada). By meditating on 
Brahman thus one gets prosperity. 

(IV.4.25) In the last section the four foregoing books are summed 
up. The Self is all-pervasive, Brahman, beginningless and endless. 
All the stages of life are herein negated. Brahman is fearless, for 
ignorance is destroyed. And we come to know Brahman by these 
qualities, though superimposed on Brahman, just as we get the knowl- 
edge of number by learning figures. 


FIFTH BRAHMANA 


1-30 (E1944-1948). In the Madhukanda Brahman was explained 
through scripture. Then in the Munikanda it was further explained 
by reasoning, and by discussion in the Fourth Brahmana. This brahma- 
vidya is now concluded in the Maitreyi Brahmana, called Nigamana- 
kanda. It repeats the story told in Book Two. 


520 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


BOOK FIVE—FIRST BRAHMANA 


1-62 (E1949-1959). The Yajfiavalkyakanda is over. Now the 
Khilakanda begins. Though everything has been explained in the 
two kandas (karma- and jfidna-) some activities remain to be explained, 
and this is ‘‘khila,’’ that is, some rituals pertaining to the qualified 
Brahman not put forth above, which are good for prosperity and 
indirectly lead to liberation. Likewise, the pranava needs to be ex- 
plained further, along with control of senses, charity, sympathy, 
etc., which are aids (aga) for all ritual acts of worship (updsanda). 

In the preceding Book Brahman was explained through the rela- 
tionship of cause and effect. Now both these are denied. The 
universe is not existent apart from Brahman, nor is it Brahman’s 
nature, since the universe is inert. But the universe is not a non- 
entity. Therefore Brahman is full (pina), identical with the universe. 
It is not pervasive like cowness, nor is It a separate individual like an 
individual cow. It is self-evident, bliss, and full. All effects have 
for their reality the full Brahman. 

Now we have to understand the fullness of the qualified Brahman 
by removing phenomenal difference through Brahman-knowledge, 
thus cognizing its nature of purity, Selfhood and bliss, fully nondual 
consciousness. 

63-116 (E1959-1968). The polemic against Bhartrprapafica follows 
Samkara. 

117-130 (E1968-1970). The text says “Brahman is om, akéfa, 
purana.”” These are mantras for use in meditation. 


SECOND TO THIRTEENTH BRAHMANAS 


(E1970-1983) II.1-XIII.5. Qualifications for meditation (rest- 
raint of senses, charity, and sympathy) are illustrated in a story 
(Brahmana II). Then the following Brahmanas enjoin meditation 
on the qualified Brahman as heart (III), truth (IV-V), mind (VI), 
lightning (vidyut)(VII), speech (vak)(VIII), Vaisvanara or the 
digestive ‘‘fire’ (IX). Brahmana X briefly describes the soul’s 
path from the body at death. Further meditative forms of qualified 
Brahman are set forth in Brahmanas XI-XIII. 

(E1983-1985) XIV.1-15. Here the Gayatri (the most important 
meditative stanza for ordinary worship) is analyzed. 


BOOK SIX 


(E2005-2073) I.1-V.25. This Book continues with subjects similar 
to those of the previous Book. Suregvara’s commentary follows the 
text closely and does not add materially to Samkara’s. 


TAITTIRIYOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 521 


TAITTIRIYOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 


“A Varttika has been defined as a work that examines what is said 
(ukia), what is not said (anukta), and what is not well-said (durukta) 
in the original.”§ This Varttika on Samkara’s commentary on the 
Taitttiriya Upanisad is a work in 1027 verses that attempts to fulfil 
the requirements specified, including the third one, which Suregvara 
addresses by providing explanations of certain passages of the Upani- 
sad alternative to Samkara’s interpretations but without rejecting 
them outright.® 

“ET” references are to the edition and translation by R. Bala- 
subramaniam, The Taittiriyopanisad Bhasya-Varttika of Suresvara (Centre 
for Advanced Study in Philosophy : University of Madras, 1974), 


PART ONE: SIKSAVALLI (ON PRONUNCIATION) 


32 (ET 15). Introductory section, part 7 : Samkara has argued that 
“absences cannot really have qualities,” etc. Suresvara draws the 
conclusion that absences generally (i.e., posterior, etc.) are construc- 
tions (kalpand) acceptable only for practical affairs (vyavahdra). 

(Suresvara does not comment on the long discussion in section 11.) 


PART TWO : BRAHMAVALLI (THE BLISS OF 
BRAHMAN) 


63-69 (ET 95-98). Commenting on section 7 : Suregvara construes the 
objector as an apohavddin who believes that the only function a word 
has is to deny its negate. This objector then argues that words 
cannot give us any positive knowledge ex hypothest, and since we don’t 
know Brahman by any other pramdna the sentence in question (‘“Brah- 
man is truth, etc.’’) is about nothing at all. 

Suresvara’s answer: Nothing false (vitatha) is experienced except 
as it is dependent (dlingya) on the highest reality (paramartha). So, 
all falsity is based on reality. So a word does indicate a positive 
reality—the word “‘lotus’”’ gives rise to a thought of the flower, the 
meaning of that word. A word by itself cannot indicate the absence 
of something—that can only be done by a sentence. Nevertheless, 
after coming to know the thing meant by a word, one of course comes 
to understand the absence of what is contradictory to that. In the 
present case, what the sentence (‘‘Brahman is truth, etc.) gives us 
directly is the knowledge of the relation (i.e., identity) between a 
property (truth) and its possessor (Brahman). The absence of an 
absence (apoha) is not derived from this sentence, however, but from 
some other means of knowledge (viz., presumption or arthdpatti). 
The idea of blue does not arise independently of the idea of a thing 


522 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that is blue, any more than the idea of a qualified thing (a blue thing, 
a true thing) arises independently of the idea of its qualifier (blue, 
truth). From a word like “‘blue’’ or ‘‘truth”? we derive the sense of 
the sentence (in which it occurs); and then through expectancy 
(akanks@) we get to the notion of “the blue thing” or “‘the thing that 
is truth (viz., Brahman ).”’ 

70-73 (ET 99-101). Since all real entities (vastu) are known by 
perception it is not possible to establish the momentariness of any- 
thing. Ifa pot exists it is not destroyed, and if it is destroyed there is 
no locus for its “destruction”; if-you say that it exists after its destruc- 
tion as the locus of that destruction, then it wasn’t destroyed after all! 
If you want to talk of the destruction of destruction, may you live a 
hundred years! Our view is that the pot is indestructible. Destruc- 
tion does not destroy its locus, any more than motion can destroy the 
thing that moves. How can anything that depends on a locus L for 
its existence destroy that L ? 

(13) 135 (ZT 129). That which is not apparently-created or 
-constructed (akalpita) cannot be limited (pariccheda) by what is 
apparently-created or -constructed (kalpita). Now time, etc., are 
apparently-created, as is attested by the “‘vdcdrambha...”’ passage, 
Chandogya Upanisad V1.1.4 (=V1.4.1). 

140-151 (ET 132-141). We cannot explain creation by referring to 
Brahman for Brahman is nondifferent from everything, unchanging, 
single, and neither an effect nor a cause. And nothing else can be 
the cause of the world, since everything else is an effect. Brahman 
cannot even be the cause of the world by Its mere presence, since 
then It would always be creating and nothing would get destroyed. 
Again, since Brahman is not in time it is not the case that Brahman 
created the world in the past or will create in the future—but Brahman, 
being the cause of time, cannot be limited by time. Anyway, Brahman 
is not involved in any action, so cannot create in any time—past, 
present, or future. To speak of Brahman as qualified by temporal 
predicates makes no more sense than to speak of an atom as a camel. 
The only cause of the world is avidyé. Again, there is no cause of 
what does not exist (asat), and what exists does not have a beginning, 
indeed, has no qualities at all that could originate or disappear. 
Birth, destruction, etc., are unchanging (kifastha); if birth needed a 
birth, or destruction a destruction, etc., there would be an infinite 
regress. All candidates for the role of cause of the world cannot 
serve, since they all arise from avidyd. Creation is only apparent, 
like the arising of two moons from eye disease, or the snake in the 


rope. 


TAI1 TIRIYOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 523 


158-162 (ET 144-148). In the course of commenting on the section 
describing the order of creation Suregvara here brings in the notions 
of Viraj and Sitratman. Viraj is described as ‘“‘the god marked by 
spatial directions, etc., who wears a body consisting of the five 
elements and who arises in (or from?) the notion ‘I am everything’.”’ 
Before it was Satratman, its cause, that has the form of the “‘compact 
form of knowledge’? (Van Boetzelaer’s rendering of ‘prajfdnaghana’ ) 
before it produces Viraj. 

163-172 (ET 149-152). Herbs, constituted of the five clements, 
are born from earth moistened by rain and provide us with food. 
Digested food produces bodily fluid (rasa), and from that comes blood, 
from that flesh, from that fat, from fat bones, from bones marrow, 
from marrow semen. Sexual desire is poetically characterized as 
stemming from avidyd-conditioned passion as well as the karma of the 
one who is to be born (?-janyakarman). From the semen, conditioned 
by karma and Sruta (=updsand? cf. Katha Upanisad 11.2.7) and 
entering the womb, comes the embryonic state (kalala) having the 
form of a bubble (budbuda). From this embryo comes the fetus 
(pesi) and thence a body (ghana), from which come limbs and thence 
hairs. This new human body is composed of the same elements and 
organs as its karmic predecessor was. 

176-179 (ET 155-157). Avidyé is responsible for the Self, as Sitrat- 
man and Viraj, appearing as the limited self (ksetrajfia). However, 
it is impossible to prove avidya by a pramdna, any more than it is possible 
to see the darkness in a cave with a lamp. The not-Self, which is 
the result of avidya, can be said to be avidyé. Its nature is nothing 
other than the nongrasping (or concealing) of the Self. “‘Auvzdya,”’ 
“nonknowledge,”’ is like ‘“‘amitra,” “‘ 
{i.e., it is not the name of an absence of, but of something opposed 


nonfriend,”” that is, ‘enemy’ 


to, knowledge). 

182-198 (ET 158-165). This section describes the development 
of the foetus in the womb. The food eaten by the mother is divided 
into three kinds: solid food becomes feces, flesh and buddhi, and the 
sense organs; liquid food becomes urine, blood, and prdna; fiery food 
becomes bone, marrow, and speech (i.e., the organs of action). The 
sense organs evolve from the ahamkéra conditioned by former karma 
and knowledge (Sruta) through traces (bhdvand). As the gross body 
grows the subtle body does also. The condition of the jiva in the 
womb it finds painful and disgusting, remembering its previous ex- 
periences through impressions (vdsané), and the experience of birth 
is likewise painful. 

199-221 (ET 165-171). The misery of human life—youth to old 


524 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


age—is likewise expressed vividly. After death the jiva is led along 
by his karma to another birth. 

232-237 (ET 177-182). The utility of the theory of the sheaths, 
about to be explained, is indicated. It provides a method of indi- 
cating the Self by approximation, just as one can point out the moon 
by pointing to a tree branch. Avidyd leads us to divide the Self into 
the “Thou” and the “‘I.’? Now both (apparent) divisions can be 
understood as consisting of five sheaths (kofa), the annamaya, etc., 
indicating the subject or “I,” food (anna), etc., indicating the object 
or “Thou.” By dissolving these sheaths in their respective causes 
and then dissolving even the ultimate cause itself, one may under- 
stand Brahman. 

238-241 (ET 183-186). Viraj is food, evolved from prana. The 
manomaya (sheath) has the Veda—Rg, Yajus and Sdéma—as its nature. 
The dbuddhi, which ascertains the meaning of the Vedas, is vijfidna. 
Bliss (dnanda), resulting from knowledge and action, is the innermost 
essence of the other four sheaths. 

(13a) 5. 320-351 (ET 230-247). Objection : The bliss-sheath is 
the highest Self, because (in the next section, the Bhrguvalli) the 
conversation between Bhrgu and Varuna terminates when it arrives 
at this point; furthermore, scripture frequently identifies Brahman as 
having the nature of bliss. Finally, this very chapter is (sometimes) 
called the ‘‘Anandavalli.” 

Answer : No, since bliss is an effect, something obtained. Again, 
God (ifvara) doesn’t obtain His self by himself; no aspirant, nomatier 
how clever, can mount onto his own shoulder. Since the dnandamaya 
sheath has form (dkara), the doubt whether Brahman exists or not 
could not arise in the fashion it does so in the Bhrguvalli. As for 
the opponent’s objections : In the Anandavalli—the present part— 
Brahman is taught first, and then when (in the Bhrguvalli) Bhrgu 
is taught by Varuna, he stops when he has finished teaching the means 
—the five sheaths—since the goal—Brahman—has already been 
explained. In the context it is only appropriate for Varuna to speak 
of what is dependent on his will; since Brahman is independent 
(svdtantrya) knowledge of Him is not dependent on the agent’s will, 
so there is no point in Varuna’s speaking of that, as once the bliss- 
sheath is realized the rest takes place of its own accord. 

Again, Brahman is of the nature of bliss, as scripture avers; the 
bliss is freedom from all difference. This bliss, however, is free of all 
distinctions of grades of happiness, etc., and is not a content of thought, 
and it should not be confused with the ‘“‘bliss’? of the bliss-sheath 
(Gnandamaya). The Brahman-bliss fills all five sheaths, including the 


TAITTIRIYOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 525 


Gnandamaya. The dnandamaya sheath involves an adjunct—the buddhi, 
which experiences joy as a result of knowledge and action. Again, 
this dnandamaya self is known in our dreams, in our love of our children, 
in acquiring desired objects, etc. As a result of merit produced by 
good actions the buddhi becomes stabilized (svastha) and joy is more 
and more manifested. 

8.5 550-558 (ET 348-352). (25) Suresvara uses the example of 
the tenth man to illustrate how a self can ‘‘attain itself,” that is, come 
to realize who he is by dispelling his ignorance. 

(26) Attaining Brahman by being informed is not like getting to 
a village by following directions, for in giving directions one is not 
given a description of the nature of the village, whereas in imparting 
knowledge of Brahman one does. 

9 595-614 (ET 375-385). The text of the Upanisad here 
mentions that words and concepts cannot grasp Brahman. Suregvara 
points out that although words cannot directly denote Brahman 
they can indirectly (through laksand) reveal Its nature, by removing 
ignorance, just as by speaking to a sleeping man one wakes him up 
even though the sleeper doesn’t understand the meanings of the words 
used in waking him up. 

Thus from hearing scripture one understands “I am Brahman” 
and ignorance is destroyed, and the cognition (by which one under- 
stands this) also disappears thereafter, as the medicine goes away 
after curing the disease. After that all that remains is Brahman, 
which is consciousness, and no pramdna is needed for further conscious- 
ness of It. The Self is not an empirical object, so perception, etc., 
are not needed, as they are in the case of someone telling you that 
there are fruit trees on the bank of the river (since you need your 
senses to confirm this statement). 

615-630 (ET 385-394). Brahman cannot be reached by word 
or concept; injunctions to us to know It are futile. Likewise, It 
cannot be meditated upon, for in order to meditate on something 
one must identify something as the object of the meditation that 
is previously known to us. Since Brahman is not known to us prior 
to realization it follows that we can’t meditate on It. Again, though 
the subject matter of the Vedas though unworldly (alaukika) can be 
conveyed as the meaning of a sentence since it can arise from the 
combinations of the meanings of the words, Brahman, being non- 
relational, cannot be made known by a sentence directly. And one 
shouldn’t suppose that therefore Brahman doesn’t exist, for it is only 
through Brahman that pramdna, what is not praména, and what only 
appears to be prama (pramabhasa) can become evident to us at all. 


526 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


There occurs now an extensive discussion with a niyogavddin, who 
holds that the Vedas enjoin Self-knowledge, and that it is through 
them as pramaéna that Brahman comes to be known, Suresvara’s 
response begins by pointing out (1) that the declarative portions of 
scripture (abhidhdsruti) have independent validity, (2) that no injunc- 
tion can have validity without consciousness (which is the subject 
matter of the declarative portions), (3) that injunctions command 
people to do things but do not explain the nature of an object, so an 
injunction cannot provide Self-knowledge, (4) that since a person 
cannot perform an act he is not competent to perform no matter 
how many injunctions are addressed to him, the critical awareness 
centers on the object, not the injunction or any act, (5) that as long 
as declarative portions of scripture are viewed as subservient to the 
injunctive portions, it cannot independently indicate the nature of 
the Self, (6) since the Self cannot be perceived, no injunction can be 
relevant to It. 

631-634 (ET 395-397). The ntyogavddin now argues that it is only 
in the context of injunction that an object can be made known, and 
that a declarative statement independently of such a context is only 
a repetition (anuvdda) and without validity. 

Answer: No, since a real thing (i.e., the Self) already exists It 
cannot be enjoined, for an injunction can only speak of what is to be 
accomplished; and Self-knowledge does not need enjoining, for it will 
occur (according to you) as a result of the presupposed injunction 
that each man should study the appropriate portion of the Veda— 
it needs no additional injunction any more than, having been enjoined 
to act, one needs another injunction to gain knowledge of action. 

635-638 (ET 397-398). Niyogavddin: This would be so if men 
knew, without an injunction, that Self-knowlcdge is the means to the 
desired end. But men do not know that except by an injunction; 
it cannot be known from any other pramdna, nor from a declarative 
statement (of scripture). 

Answer: No, for knowledge manifests its object-—here, the Scelf— 
without any intervening activity, so there’s no scope for an injunction 
other than the one enjoining everyone to study the Vedas. 

639-673 (ET 399-412). Niyogavadin : True, the knowledge arising 
from Vedantic declarative statements is not enjoined. Rather, a 
different knowledge, one that is not (mediate and relational) like 
knowledge arising from words (Sabdajfidna) and yet is gotten by a 
means (updya), 1s enjoined. Since Brahman cannot be the direct 
meaning of a sentence it cannot be understood from scripture, since 
scriptural sentences (like any sentences) have a meaning that is 


TAITTIRIYOPANISADBHASYAVARTTIKA 527 


derived from the relations among the meanings of its constituent 
words and Brahman is nonrelational. Nevertheless, scripture is assuredly 
the pramana for coming to know Brahman. 

Objection to the Niyogavadin: If Brahman cannot be understood 
from the sentences of scripture the Vedas cannot be about Brahman. 

Niyogavddin : Brahman is the subject matter of the Vedas (vedartha), 
since by meditating upon the indirect, relational knowledge of 
Brahman one gains direct nonrelational knowledge. But Brahman 
is not the subject matter of the sentences of the Vedas (vedavakyartha), 
for (1) the Vedic utterances are commands, and Brahman is not 
dependent on human effort and so cannot be the subject matter of a 
command; (2) furthermore, Brahman (unlike e.g., dharma,) is not 
the denotatum of any word (since It lacks the kinds of features that 
make denotation of it possible), and therefore a fortiorn It cannot be 
referred to in a sentence; (3) even if Brahman could be denoted, 
there is nothing the sentence could say about It beyond what the words 
say, which is quite general (i.e., whereas in other cases a sentence 
specifies features of what is denoted by its subject term, here there are 
no features to be specified, Brahman being nirguna). 

Answer : We have answered this above (at 595). We do not need 
a pramdna to tell us “this is the content of my awareness,’’ “‘this is 
awareness,” or “‘I am the cognizer’’—these are directly given to the 
Witnessing consciousness, and pramdnas are only nceded to give us 
knowledge of what is other than given. Yet the differences among 
subject, object, and act of cognizing are illusory—the Self is unchang- 
ing and there is no other than It, so that even this witnessing is only 
construed as cognizing because of association with avidya. Thus 
the Self is not the knower; it is the buddhi that is the knower. What 
the secker has to do is to apply scientific reasoning (anvayavyatireka) 
to convince himself that all objects are mind only in all the three 
states and to discriminate them from the pure consciousness (cinmditra), 
which cannot be referred to in a sentence. Such a one then, upon 
hearing a sentence like “that art thou,” has his ignorance dispelled 
completely so that the unconditioned reality is made known. That 
is, because of the coordinate relation (sdmdnddhikaranya) between 
the words ‘‘that’’ and “‘thou,”’ which serves to remove the incompati- 
bility between their meanings, the direct nonrelational sense is made 
known to us, and so the nonrelational Brahman is conveyed by the 
sentence, contrary to what the Niyogavadin said. 

Again, one does not need to be enjoined to remove his ignorance 
by this means, since ignorance, error, and doubt can only arise with 
respect to objects like pots, etc., for as we have just said subject, 


528 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


object, and act of awareness are directly known and do not require a 
pram&na—thus no error, doubt, or ignorance needs to be dispelled in 
their case, and so no additional understanding (beyond the nonrela- 
tional knowledge of Brahman) is required or need be enjoined. 

674 (ET 418). Niyogavadin : We infer our conclusion as follows: 
The Vedanta texts are connected with an injunction, because they 
are sentences, like sentences about actions. 

Answer: An inference to the effect that Vedanta texts require 
injunctions (such as the one just given) is faulty, since pervasion 
between the 4 and the s cannot be established (in this case, since not 
all sentences are connected with injunctions, even on the Niyoga- 
vadin’s own presuppositions ). 

678 (ET 421). One should not deprive the Vedanta texts of their 
validity by making them subsidiary to injunctions. 

Objection: On the contrary, Vedanta texts without association 
with injunctions are not instruments of knowledge (pramdna). 

Answer : Then it will be impossible to know Brahman and injunc- 
tions would have no content, which contradicts your own view. 

687-688 (ET 426-427). The Niyogavadin’s position is that only 
injunctions have validity (prdmdanya); words in the Vedic corpus 
have no independent validity. 

Suresvara: This is wrong. Among these are words like “milk” 
(uttered by one who already knows milk). If this word does not 
validly convey its own meaning, it cannot play its appropriate part 
in an injunction like “Sacrifice by offering milk’’ and even injunctions 
will lack validity. 

Niyogavadin : ‘‘Milk” in such a context does not have anything to 
do with the act, but only with determining its result, that is, heaven. 

Answer : It doesn’t matter, it still must function independently to 
denote heaven or whatever. 

691-692 (ET 429-430). Niyogavadin : Since only texts that com- 
mand something to be gotten or given up (i.e., injunctions) are valid, 
the sentence “I am Brahman”’ is not valid, since it commands neither. 

Answer : Injunctions are valid insofar as they successfully lead men 
toward their purposes (purusdrtha). Since the knowledge of the 
identity of Brahman and the Self, conveyed by the text in question, 
is the highest human purpose, the text must be valid independently ! 

699-700 (ET 432-433). Niyogavddin: A word by itself has no 
validity because (1) it depends on something else to convey its mean- 
ing, and (2) it is a repetition (anuvdda). 

Suresvara ; How do you know this—that is, by what valid means 
of knowing (pramdéna)? You cannot say: from the nature of the word 


TAITTIRIYOPANISADBHASY AVARTTIKA 529 


itself, since you contend words have no validity. And you cannot 
say: from an injunction, since an injunction cannot reveal the nature 
of words. So there must be another pramana besides injunction. Again, 
a word cannot depend on “‘something else,’ for example, another 
word, to convey its meaning, for if it is not a valid instrument for 
conveying what it signifies, how can the sense of a sentence arise from 
combinations of words? 

701 (ET 433). Indeed, how can any pramaéna convince you that 
words are not valid means of coming to know their meanings ? What 
pramdana can give you knowledge of the absence of validity (in words) ? 
Not through perception, etc ., for these cannot grasp absences (abhdva). 
Or is it through words (Sabda== verbal authority) ? If so, words are 
valid means of knowing, contrary to your assumption. 

702-705 (ET 434-436). Scripture, as we have said, conveys Self- 
knowledge by progressively negating other things (like the sheaths, 
see above). 

Niyogavadin : No, the Self must be known as different from not- 
Self items like sheaths, etc. 

Surefvara: Is this ‘‘difference’” (bheda) a negative entity or 
“absence”? (abhdva)? If so, it can have no relation with a sense organ 
and cannot therefore be grasped by any of the pramanas. And you 
cannot say that difference is known from noncognition (anupalabdhi), 
for absence of knowledge or pramaéna cannot make anything known, 
and anyway you yourselves do not admit absences ! 

707-713 (ET 437-439). Niyogavddin: Your arguments presuppose 
that Self-knowledge leads to liberation, but that assumption is based 
on the validity of scriptural injunction. 

Suresvara : How do we know the validity of that scriptural injunc- 
tion? By another injunction? Then there will be an infinite regress 
of injunctions. Anyway, you suppose that the injunction’ ‘Study 
your section of the Vedas” is known without dependence on another 
injunction, so here too you should admit that the statement of other 
scriptural texts is known without dependence on injunction. Either 
the statement (of Self-knowledge, e.g., “I am Brahman’) or the 
injunction must depend on the other if they are to cooperate in the 
way you maintain. But if the statement is subordinate to the injunc- 
tion, meditation on it will only give rise to ideas about heaven as is 
the case with other meditations on injunctions, and we will never 
come to know Brahman. On the other hand, if the injunction is 
subordinate to the statement it is useless, since the statement has the 
power to convey its own meaning. 

714-720 (ET 439-442). All this does not mean that injunctions 


530 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


have no role to play on our view. They are necessary, prior to 
attainment of Self-knowledge, to direct seekers to reflect on the mean- 
ings of the words in the assertions that impart Self-knowledge. Since 
those reflections must be achieved and require causal factors to be 
made present it is appropriate that injunctions relate to them, unlike 
the case of Brahman, which is not something requiring causal factors, 
etc. 

Niyogavadin : You don’t understand: the injunction is needed to 
get the secker to meditate (nididhyasana) on the meaning of the 
scriptural assertion—for example, ‘1 am Brahman.” 

Surefvara : You don’t understand. Once Self-knowledge is realiz- 
ed, since ignorance is already destroyed, there is no possibility of or 
need for an injunction to meditate. If knowledge could not by itself 
remove ignorance it couldn’t do so in combination with an injunction 
either. ‘This is why the wise man, who knows the bliss of Brahman, 
the unchanging nondual One, is without fear of anything at all. 


NAISKARMYASIDDHI 


This is an independent exposition of Advaita in 423 stanzas connect- 
ed by a prose commentary. It is divided into four chapters or 
“books” of about 100 stanzas each. Alston points out that Suresvara 
here follows the Upadefasahasri of Samkara very closely and suggests 
that this work also “contains clear echoes of Sri Samkara’s ‘Gita 
Bhasya’.””? Jacob points out that at least thirty-six karikas of this work 
are also found in the Brhadéranyaka-Varttika.8 

Hiriyanna remarks of this work: “The style is quite charming 
and the author handles philosophic arguments with equal ease whether 
it be in verse or prose.’’® It is, he says, ‘‘simple and clear and forms 
an excellent introduction to Samkara’s system.’”!@ He suggests that the 
stanzas were composed originally and form a complete and connected 
whole, the prose passage being added later.1! 

References to “E”’ are to the edition by G. A. Jacob, revised by 
M. Hiriyanna, in the Bombay Sanskrit and Prakrit Series Volume 38, 
1925. ‘‘T” references are to the translation by Anthony J. Alston, 
London 1959. 


BOOK ONE 


Introduction (E1-5; T1-2). All beings, from Brahma to a clump 
of grass, naturally wish to avoid frustration. The only material 
cause (updédana) of frustration is the body, which is rooted in karma; 
karma in turn is rooted in prescribed and prohibited actions already 


NAISKARMYASIDDHI 531 


performed. Actions, again, depend on attraction and aversion, 
which are themselves caused by superimposition of the ideas of good- 
ness and badness. This superimposition is caused by our accepting 
the duality of things. Finally, this acceptance of duality rests on our 
noncomprehension of the self-evident nondual Self; and so that non- 
comprehension (anavabodha) is the ultimate cause of everything not 
worthwhile (anartha) and precludes our experiencing the bliss that is 
the nature of the Self. Therefore the eradication of noncomprehen- 
sion achieves every human purpose. 

The cessation of nonknowledge (ajfiéna) comes from right know- 
ledge (samyagjfana), which comes only from the sentences of Vedanta 
scripture (dgama), since the Sclf, obscured by noncomprehension, 
cannot be grasped by the other pramanas. ‘Thus this treatise (pra- 
karana) is begun as representing the collected essence of the entire 
Upanisads (aSesavedantasdrasamgraha). 

1-3 (E5-6; T2-3). Invocatory verses addressed to God (hari) 
and the supreme guru, showing the authoritativeness of Suregvara’s 
tradition. 

4 (E7; T3). The present treatise explains the nature of that single 
basis which is the inner character on which everything depends. 

5-6 (E8; T3-4). My guru has well said what has to be said in 
exposition of the Vedanta; I do not write my work to gain fame or 
wealth but rather to improve my own understanding by exposing it 
for criticism by those wise concerning Brahman. 

7-8 (E9; T4-5). Avidya is the failure to understand that there is 
but one Self. Its seed is samsdara, its destruction is liberation, and this 
result comes from understanding the sentences of the Upanisads. 
The result does not come from action, since knowledge and action 
are incompatible. 

9-21 (E10-15; T5-10). Objection (by a Mimamsaka): Action 
alone produces liberation. One who performs the prescribed daily 
and occasional ritual acts (nityanaimittikakarman) and avoids acts that 
are forbidden (nisiddha) or that arise from desire (kdmya) avoids 
breeding further results such as becoming a god, as well as avoiding 
lower births in hell. Through experiencing their affective results he 
gradually exhausts the stored up merit and demerit, and by perform- 
ing the prescribed rituals he does not get the demerit that accrues 
from neglecting them. So knowledge is quite unnecessary. There 
are no injunctions to know either in scripture or in smrtz, and we admit 
no other authorities on this matter. Jaimini interprets scripture 
as entirely exhausted in injunctive purport. Words cannot make up 
a sentence unless they depend on a verb, and the verb signifies an 


532 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


injunction. Further, even if knowledge occurs the texts indicate 
that it must be combined with action in order that liberation be 
achieved. So, men of all stages of life attain liberation only through 
mental, bodily, and speech acts. 

22-28 (E15-18; T10-13). Answer: Since action cannot destroy 
avidya it cannot cause liberation. Anyway, is liberation supposed 
to be the result of one act or of all (enjoined) actstogether ? If it is 
the result of one act, then the rest of the Vedic injunctions would be 
useless, and if it is the results of all of them together, the result of every 
ritual action would be the same, which is contrary to what the scripture 
itself indicates, since it specifies particular results for particular acts. 

29 (E19-20; T13-14). So liberation does not come from action 
alone. We now argue that it arises from Self-knowledge alone, and 
our argument also involves inquiry into the causes of activity in the 
largest sense of the word. 

Here the following question arises: Everyone knows that in the 
case of many acts—for example, those prohibited in scripture, as well 
as natural acts like eating, etc.—a person naturally imagines (pari- 
kalpyate) particular things to be worth acquiring or avoiding, and then 
depending on ordinary instruments of knowledge (/aukikapraména) 
acts appropriately, all of this happening whether the object in question 
is, for example, a mirage, or veridical. Now the question is: in the 
case of those acts, whether prescribed ritual acts or those arising from 
desire, which breed future karma (adrsta)—does a person proceed 
on the same basis as before, or in some other way ? 

This question is important. If pramdnas, whether ordinary or 
scriptural, ascertain actions to be done, then the renunciation of 
action is based on error (bhranti). But if ald acts are based on error 
about what is real, like the acts of one who tries to drink the water in 
a mirage, then we are right and you are wrong. 

30 (E21; T15-16). Indeed, all action whatever depends on false 
awareness (mithydjfidna), since perception, inference, and scripture 
all agree that the Self never lacks supreme pleasure and that there is 
no unpleasantness in It; thus our wish to get the pleasant and avoid 
the unpleasant depends on natural ignorance about the Self. 

It is not scripture that moves a man to action. His motives are 
natural; indeed, they are found in animals too. All scripture does 
is to illuminate. 

31-35 (E22-23; T16-18). With respect to things that one does 
not already have and that are not unreal, scripture can indicate how 
to get or avoid them, and then by acting appropriately one may get 
or avoid them. But when one desires to get what one already has, 


NAISKARMYASIDDHI 533 


or to avoid what doesn’t exist, one cannot get or avoid them through 
action; since delusion alone is the obstacle (to one’s knowing that 
one has got or not got them), the only “getting” or “avoiding’’ is 
through knowledge. Action cannot destroy ignorance—indeed, action 
depends on ignorance. 

36-37 (E24-25; T18-20). Objection : Self-knowledge itself is caused 
by avidyd, since scripture, pupil, and teacher are all dependent on 
avidyad, and without them no one acquires Self-knowledge. 

Answer : No. Self-knowledge depends only on the self-illumined 
highest reality in its nature; it only depends on scripture, etc., for its 
origination, but once having arisen it doesn’t depend on them at all. 
But action depends on avidyé both in its nature and for its origination, 
since an act by nature requires an agent. Furthermore, even after 
an action has occurred it requires something as a locus to account for 
its being able to produce its fruit many aeons later. Whereas action 
thus takes time and needs help to produce its fruit, Self-knowledge 
produces its result immediately without dependence on time or other 
means. It cannot be sublated since it is the supreme pramdna, and 
it requires no other means to protect it against subsequent sublation. 
So right knowledge is the right way, and the only way, to destroy 
ajfiana, which is responsible for frustration. 

38 (E25-26; T20). Objection : Right knowledge must sometimes be 
sublated by wrong knowledge, since we find that even in one in whom 
the highest understanding has arisen ideas of agency, enjoyership, 
desire, and aversion do occur, and this could not happen unless right 
knowledge had been suppressed. 

Answer: No, since avidya has by then been sublated, it cannot in 
turn suppress right knowledge. It is the impressions (vdsand) arising 
from it that remind the knower of right knowledge. 

39-44 (E26-29; T20-23). Samsara continues as long as avidyd does, 
and ceases when avidyd does. 

45-53 (E29-33; T23-26). Still, though actions do not produce 
liberation, in a sense they serve as accessory conditions for it. A 
man, because of having much merit and having a mind purified by 
performance of the nityakarmans, may have nonattachment arise in 
him, and glimpsing the truth he may become fearful of the results of 
kamyakarmans as he previously was of hell; as a result he may confine 
himself to ritual action only, and by offering all his actions to God 
come to nonattachment to all beings from the Brahmaloka on down. 
So, with rajas and tamas polished away by performance of nitya- 
karmans, the internal organ becomes pure like a clear mirror, naturally 
reflecting the light of the inner Self, and thus its only remaining 


534 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


desire is to dissolve in that inner Self. Since the buddhi’s remaining 
acts have now produced this desire to dissolve within, they then come 
to an end with their purpose achieved. 

Again, the chain leading to liberation goes as follows: From 
performing nityakarmans comes merit, from that destruction of demerit, 
from that purity of citéa, from that appreciation of samsara, from that 
nonattachment, from that desire for liberation, from that the seeking 
of its means, from that the renunciation (samnydsa) of all actions 
and their instruments, from that the practice of yoga, from that desire 
to dissolve in the inner Self, from that understanding of the meaning 
of the great sentences of scripturc, from that the cutting off of avidpa, 
from that establishment in the Self. 

54-66 (E33-38; T27-30). But it is not that knowlcdge destroys 
avidya in conjunction with action, since knowledge and action cannot 
exist simultaneously, one being an end, the other a means, and since 
they are related as sublater and sublated, action having to do with 
what is unreal, knowledge having to do with the highest reality— 
conjunction of them would be like conjunction between the sun and 
the night. Just as the Ksatriya docs not perform ceremonies appro- 
priate for Brahmins, and vice versa, so the one who denies that the 
body is his Self takes no notice of action at all. 

Of course knowledge and action are sometimes conjoined, that is, 
when knowledge prompts one to act. But knowledge prompts onc 
to action only when that knowledge is false. For example, when a 
man takes a tree stump for a thief he runs away, but when he knows 
the stump for what it is he does not run. So two kinds of knowledge 
need to be distinguished—the kind (false) that plays a subordinate 
role in prompting action, and the kind (true) that by its mere appear- 
ance destroys avzdyd and is never a partner with action. 

The reason why knowledge of the second kind is incompatible with 
action is that it cannot appear without destroying avidyd; since when 
avidya is destroyed plurality is too, and since action requires a plurality 
of factors, it follows that action is incompatible with knowledge of 
that kind. 

67 (E38; T30-32). Some (Brahmadatta, according to Alston and 
Hiriyanna) say: Avidyd is not destroyed merely by the knowledge 
“IT am Brahman.” Avidyd only disappears after one meditates at 
length and acquires mental conviction (bhdvand). 

Others (Mandana Misra, according to Alston and Hiriyanna) 
say: the judgment “I am Brahman” is relational (samsargdtmaka) 
and so does not yield a true knowledge of the Self. But by medita- 
tion on the meaning of such sentences another kind of consciousness 


NAISKARMYASIDDHI 535 


arises that is nonrelational and goes beyond the meaning of the sen- 
tence (s), and it is this knowledge that destroys avidya. 

But the knowledge produced by scripture destroys avidya completely 
and immediately, and so there is no possibility of further acts such as 
meditation. So the combination of knowledge and action (as pro- 
posed by the above thinkers) is impossible. 

68 (E39; T33). Now we turn to another type of view (the Bheda- 
bhedavada of Bhartrprapafica, according to Alston), which also 
maintains the aforesaid combination of action and knowledge. For 
them, Brahman is everlastingly manifold. 

69-71 (E39-40; T33-34). There are two varicties of this view, 
according as it is held that (1) jiva and Brahman are identical in 
Samsara, or (2) that they are different there. 

If (1) they are identical, then failure to attain liberation is due to 
avidya only, and since actions cannot destroy avidya, the combined- 
path view is impossible. But (2) if they are different, then liberation 
is impossible, since of two different things—jiva and Brahman—one 
cannot become the other. 

72-77 (E41-44; 'T35-39). Still another variety of this view agrees 
that liberation comes through knowledge only, but construes “knowl- 
edge’’ as something that results from an action, namely, meditation 
enjoined by the Vedas. But as we have pointed out, action requires 
plurality and so contradicts the very nature of the Self, so it cannot 
produce liberation. Furthermore, a Vedic injunction to meditate 
will have no effect on one who has abandoned everything but Brah- 
man and sees no plurality everywhere. Again, all Vedic injunctions 
are addressed to men of specific castes, yet on the assumption of the 
Bhedabhedavadin of type (1) all people of whatever caste are identical 
with Brahman, so those injunctions will make no sense anyhow. 

Bhedabhedavadin : The jiva may know that he is identical with 
Brahman and still identify himself with his body (and thus his caste). 

Answer: If the alleged knower identifies himself with his body it 
shows he isn’t a knower after all—so of course he can _ perform 
actions. And if the idea is that this ‘‘knower’’ is the yogi who is the 
self of all actions, then since action is natural to him it can’t be the 
intent of an injunction, any more than one can be enjoined to breathe ! 

78 (E44-45; T40-41). Bheddbhedavaddin : Anyway, since Brah- 
man is both differentiated and nondifferentiated, a combined-path 
view is possible, for knowledge, has reference to Its undifferentiated 
aspect and action to Its differentiated aspect. 

Answer: No, since difference and nondifference are inconsistent 
with each other. Furthermore, since presumably I can pick either 


536 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


property as truly characterizing Brahman, I choose His ‘‘undifferen- 
tiated” aspect and conclude that Brahman must be subject to frustra- 
tion, being identical with all things including those subject to frustra- 
tion; indeed, Brahman must be the supremely miserable thing, since 
all frustrations anywhere apply to It ! 

80-84 (E45-48; T41-44). Another reason why liberation cannot 
be attained through action is this : (1) the prarabdhakarman of a present 
birth can be exhausted by experience, and (2) the bad karmic results 
that are not scheduled to be experienced in this birth can nevertheless 
be destroyed through certain penances (frdyascitta). But no one 
can exhaust results laid down by actions in infinite numbers of previous 
births, and in any case no one can avoid performing an occasional 
kdémya act. Nor does scripture ordain any such command as your 
position would require. 

Objection: The karmic results can be destroyed by performing nitya- 
karmans. 

Answer: No. On your own view nityakarmans have no results. And 
scripture does not support the notion that nityakarmans destroy the 
results of previous kKdmyakarmans. And the kémyakarmans of this life don’t 
destroy the results of kamyakarmans of previous lives, any more than 
this life’s sins eradicate the sins of previous lives. 

85-89 (E49-51; T45-49). To return to the Mimamsa objection 
(in stanza 16, see above, 9-21) he says that there are no injunctions 
to know in either scripture or smrti. The reason might be thought 
to be that there are many passages speaking of ritual action but few 
speaking of knowledge. But we submit that this is not a numbers 
game; authoritativeness does not depend on preponderance of number 
of texts, and since there is only one Self and many actions it is natural 
that more texts speak of the latter than of the former. If.on the other 
hand you seriously mean that you cannot find any texts, consider, 
for example, Mundaka Upanisad 1.2.12. 

Objection : In texts like Brhaddranyaka Upanisad 1.4.7 and 11.4.5 
scripture enjoins men to gain Self-knowledge through meditation. 

Answer: No. True Self-knowledge is the very nature of the 
Self and cannot be subject to man’s will. Not being the subject of an 
action it cannot be enjoined, Even if there could per impossibile be 
such an injunction, it could not be a direct or novel injunction (aparva- 
vidhi), but only a regulative (niyamavidhi) or restrictive (parisamkhya- 
vidhi) one, since we can meditate on the Self only after we have excluded 
the not-Self. 

As for the remark that “we admit no other authorities’’—that is 
the babbling of one whose mind is asleep. The Self is self-revealed 


NAISKARMYASIDDHI 537 


and thus does not depend on any praména—including scripture—to 
give us knowledge of It. 

91-96 (E52-55; T50-53). As for your claim (in stanza 17, see 9-21 
above) that “‘Jaimini interprets scripture as entirely exhausted in 
injunctive purport,” you misunderstand Jaimini. If Jaimini had 
thought that he never would have written the Brahmasitras, for they 
are filled with passages that merely state the true nature of Brahman 
and explicate It further. So we assume that Jaimini believed that the 
two kinds of scriptural passages—injunctions and assertions—are 
each authoritative in their own sphere. A statement like ‘that art 
thou” can’t be supposed to be an injunction. 

Furthermore, it is just as hard to make room for ritual action on 
Jaimini’s principles as on ours. Since Jaimini believes he is different 
from his body, he must be beyond the scope of injunctions to act, 
beyond the pramdnas, beyond pleasure and pain, for there should be 
no relation at all between Self and body on his principles. 

97-100 (E55-57; T53-55). And as for the Mimamsa theory that 
‘words can’t make up a sentence unless they depend on a verb, and the 
verb signifies an injunction,” that is wrong, since many scriptural 
sentences lack verbs signifying injunctions. And you cannot go 
around supplying such words indiscriminately, but only when the 
meaning requires them. Now in the sentence ‘‘that art thou” the 
verb ‘‘art”’ clearly is a copula and has no injunctive sense, and it is 
quite wrongheaded to misinterpret it to mean something else, just as 
it would be wrongheaded to misinterpret an occurrence of the word 


” 


“run” to mean “‘give.”” 
BOOK TWO 


1 (E58; T57). In this Book the author will set right certain mis- 
understandings concerning the meaning of the great sentences of 
scripture, starting with those which relate to the word “thou” in “that 
art thou.” 

2-3 (E59-60; T57-59). Objection: There are four possible ways 
one might obtain the ultimate end: (1) by the not-Self suddenly dis- 
appearing; (2) by remembering a sentence that one had heard before; 
(3) by being reminded of a sentence one had heard before; (4) 
by merely hearing the words of the sentence. Among these, (1), 
(3), and (4) are merely due to chance; only in the case of (2) does 
Self-knowledge arise intentionally. 

4-8 (E60-61; 759-61). Answer: The correct alternative is (4), since 
Self-knowledge arises directly from what is conveyed in the sentences 
themselves. Of course certain conditions must be satisfied in the one 


538 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


who hears them in order that the hearing occasion its result—the 
hearer must be nonattached from samsdra, must desire liberation and 
so have consulted a guru, must have learned to discriminate the Self 
from the not-Self by reasoning according to agreement and difference 
(anvayavyatireka). 

9-23 (62-66; T62-65). Suresvara now reviews how reasoning 
as well as scripture attests to the difference between the Self and the 
not-Self, for example, the body, the internal organ (manas), etc. 

24-27 (E66-68; T66-69). The one Self cannot function as subject 
and object simultaneously. 

Mimdamsaka : When the Self is grasped by the idea expressed by 
“f° It is both subject and object. 

Answer: No. The manas cannot have the Self for its object, since 
it itself is the object of the Self, like a pot. 

Mimdémsaka : Your answer is in the form of an inference, but since 
inference depends on perception and our contention is that the Self 
is given in perception, your answer is beside the point. 

Answer: But the Self is not given in perception. The thing corres- 
ponding to “‘I’’ is just an attribute (guna) of the internal organ. If 
that thing were the seer Itself it could not be an object, any more than 
knowing itself is an object. So, since perception does not corroborate 
your view, you should accept my inference as given above. 

Furthermore, since the Self is without parts or activity the thing 
corresponding to “I”? cannot be an attribute of It. Even ifit could 
be such an attribute, it could not be known by the Self as object at the 
same time the Self is functioning as subject. 

Objection : ‘Then it comes to be object at some later time. 

Answer: If by “‘it’? you mean the subject, the Self, it cannot do so 
then any more than now. 

28-45 (E68-74; T69-76). Objection: In the great sentence “I am 
Brahman” the word “I,”’ according to you, refers to the ego sense; 
yet since it is expressly identified with the Self in the sentence, it cannot 
be not-Self, and so must be nondifferent from the Self. 

Answer: Not all statements made using the term “I”? are about 
the ego sense; for example, in ‘“‘I am fair’’ the “I” refers to the body. 
What “I am Brahman”’ does is to negate the ego sense; just as “‘that 
stump is a man’’ negates the idea of stump, so ‘I am Brahman” negates 
the idea of the ego sense. And when the idea of the ego sense is negat- 
ed, since it is the only root of our relation with duality, all duality 
ceases. 

Furthermore, the ego sense is different from the Self in many res- 
pects—it is not eternal, it is subject to change, its knowledge is gained 


NAISKARMY ASIDDHI 539 


by inference and not by direct experience. Somcthing with such proper- 
ties cannot be identical with or even a characteristic of an entity whose 
nature is contradictory to them. Indeed, there is no real entity 
(vastu) other than the Self, whether it is taken tobe nondifferent or 
different from the Self. 

46-53 (E74-77; T76-79). Objects are constructions (kirpia); the 
subject is nirguna Brahman; the ego (aham), both subject and object 
at once, enters the Self and causes error (bhranti). All differences 
in the one pure consciousness are due to Its being appropriated by 
Its reflections. Just as the sun, whose light is reflected in the rippling 
water as various things, is appropriated by those things and made to 
share their shape, motions, etc., so the pure consciousness, the Self, 
is appropriated by the many buddhis and made to share their proper- 
ties, being considered attractive or repellent, etc. In this way it is 
the ahamkara, sharing the characteristics of Self and not-Self, which is 
the root of all evil, even though there is no real relationship between 
it and the Self. 

54-56 (E77-79; T80-83). The word “I” in “I am Brahman’’ has 
a secondary or figurative sense, analogous to the sense that “I”? has in 
the sentence “‘I knew nothing” spoken by one who has woken up from 
a deep sleep; in both cases “‘I’’ has as its secondary (/aksana) meaning 
the highest Self. And it is appropriate that the word whose primary 
meaning is the ego sense be secondarily used to speak of the Self, for 
the ego sense is internal to everything else exccpt the Self, is extremely 
subtle, and imitates the vision of the Self, and it cannot exist without 
the Self. 

57-73 (E79-84; T83-90). We have just finished considering the 
Self as conditioned by agency, that is, by ignorance (ajfdna), for 
if we had discussed the pure Self itself we could not have applied reason- 
ing to It at all. Likewise, we shall now consider the Self as witness, 
even though once again witnesshood is itself imagined (parikalpita) 
through avidyd, and we shall deny to the Self in this condition all forms 
of agency. 

Philosophers notoriously disagree on most points. Yet at least 
they all agree in being concerned with direct experience (anubhava). 

Objection: If experience is accepted as the Self we will be at fault 
whether we hold that the Self is subject to modification or whether we 
deny it. If it changes, it is noneternal; but if it doesn’t, it can’t be a 
knower (pramdtr). 

Answer : When smoke rises is space (kha) divided or not? If not, 
the smoke isn’t rising. If it is divided, what is it divided by ? The 
idea that the Self can be an experiencer (bhokir) is an error due to the 


540 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ego notion (ahambuddhi), like the idea that the hills are moving when 
actually the boat on which one rides is. The Self illuminates every- 
thing, but “‘illumining”’ is not the name of an act; thus though change- 
less the Self can still function as witness. This witnessing Self is 
beyond time; thus, the kind of knowledge we experience progressively 
is grounded in the intellect (dhi) which is subject to transformations 
(parinamin). The witness does not see, hear, or desire; it is without 
action, without effort, feels no pain or pleasure, nor is it subject to 
delusion, imagination, or memory. It never sleeps. 

74-96 (E85-92; T90-98). By contrast, the intellect has form, 
exists for another, is temporal, indeed momentarily destroyed, depen- 
dent, and limited. The sufferer (duhkhin) is not the witness: to suffer 
is to undergo change, and if the Self were the sufferer what would 
witness the changes ? It is the pot that is born, remains, and is even- 
tually destroyed, and not the space it seems to contain; similarly, 
birth, life, and death pertain to the buddhiandtome. The intellect’s 
awareness is confined to the particular contents of the moment to which 
its attention is entirely limited; all such states occur within the eternal, 
motionless Self, since all require the illumination of that Seer, though 
they differ according to their specific content. ‘The Seer in the buddhi 
of the Candala is the same as the Seer in the buddhi of Brahma; the 
apparent differences between those buddhis is due to the objects that 
each one illumines. 

The capacity for suffering before true knowledge (bodha) comes 
from one’s own body, not another’s. Since even it turns out to be 
illusory, how can the suffering arising from the bodies of others affect 
one after true knowledge is attained ? The whole universe, along 
with the ego sense, comes and goes before consciousness, and is thus 
as unreal as the lights seen when one presses his eyeball with his finger. 

97-102 (E92-95; T98-101). Weagree with Samkhya that the whole 
of samsdra can be shown by reasoning to be not-Self. But we disagree 
with them when they derive all of it from prakrti, for prakrti is not-Self 
and quite distinct from the self-revealed Self. Rather, we hold that 
the locus of the world is in the failure to understand (anavabodha) 
the Self, an ignorance that is accepted only because of failure to inquire 
thoroughly (avicéra). Through an inference—for example, “things 
don’t exist except when knowledge does, but knowledge exists when 
things are absent’’—the Self and the intellect cannot only be distin- 
guished, but it can be shown that the not-Self is unreal and that all 
common knowing involving pramdnas and their objects (pramdnapra- 
meyavyavahara) depends on anavabodha as its locus and so cannot grasp 
the Self as object. For in order to be known as object a thing must 


NAISKARMYASIDDHI 541 


be known as different from oneself—but since the Self is oneself, who 
can know It as different? So, the distinction between Self and not- 
Self arises only on the level of the pramanas and is based on avidya. 

103-109 (E95-98; T102-104). Avidyd can be removed through the 
vision of reality (tattvadarsana). 

Question : How do you justify that contention ? 

Answer : Everyone recognizes that awareness based on falsehood 
(aprama) is sublated by awareness based on veridical knowledge 
(prama). In ordinary knowing sublation produces awareness of what 
was not known before, but since the pure Self is not an object of 
ordinary knowing the result of awareness of It is merely the destruc- 
tion of avidya, which is indicated (by secondary meaning) as a ‘‘result.”” 
Ordinary knowing involves three factors—knower, known, and know- 
ledge. But they are all objects and require a witness that is different 
from all of them. 

110-119 (E98-102; T105-109). Odbjection : ‘The witness will need 
another witness to witness it, so an infinite regress will result. 

Answer : No, since the witness, unlike the factors of ordinary 
knowing, is self-aware. It does not require something external to 
It as they do. Everything other than the Self is a magic show of 
duality, only apparently established through lack of inquiry. Now 
if buddhi, body, and objects are all inconsistent with the Self they must, 
from the ultimate point of view (paramdrthatas) be assumed to belong 
to the scope of the sixth pramdna (viz., anupalabdhi or nonapprehen- 
sion) (i.e., they don’t really exist). 

Objection : By what argument (nydya) do you establish that ? 

Answer : The awareness of the intellect is established only by locat- 
ing it in the eternal, changeless, self-established pure consciousness. 
The body and objects such as a pot depend (for their being made 
known) on the awareness of the intellect. Thus all not-Self is a false 
superimposition (mithyd adhydésa) on the pure Self. The seeker for 
liberation, hearing from scripture “‘neti neti” (“not this, not this’), 
resorts to isolation (kaivalya) and like one awakened from a dream 
becomes awake to the Self and a stranger to the intellect, etc. 


BOOK THREE 


Introduction (E103-108; T111-114). We have shown that all this 
world from Brahma to a clump of grass, marked by the knower 
(pramatr), the object of knowledge (prameya), the instrument of know- 
ing (pramaéna) and ,its result (pramiti), is nothing but a false super- 
imposition. Between the Self and this world there is no relation 
except through ignorance (ajfidna). Wherever some positive relation 


542 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


or identity is asserted to exist between the world and the Self, such a 
passage should be interpreted as an injunction to perform symbolic 
meditation, just as the assertion ‘‘this earth is the Rg Veda,” etc., should 
be interpreted as enjoining one to meditate on the earth as the 
Rg Veda, etc. 

Now ignorance must be ignorance of someone about something, 
it must have a conscious locus and a content that it conceals. We have 
shown that only two categories exist—Self and not-Self. The locus 
of ajfidna cannot be the not-Self, for it is itself ajfana; if it were the 
locus the arising of it in itself would not be an event of any significance, 
and worse, there could be no obtaining of knowledge; ignorance is 
also the cause of the not-Self, and it is absurd to suppose that the 
cause can exist only as supported by its effect. The same arguments 
show that the not-Self cannot be the content of ignorance either. 
So the locus and content of ignorance must be the Self. 

The arguments adduced against the not-Self’s being the locus and 
content of avidya do not mitigate against the Self’s fulfilling those roles. 
The Self is not itself ignorance, for It is pure consciousness. Again, 
if the Self is the locus of ignorance the arising of ignorance in that 
locus is a significant event, and there can be obtaining of knowledge 
through the Self’s reflection in the internal organ. Nor is the Self 
the effect of which ignorance is the cause, since It is not an effect of 
anything, being eternal and changeless. 

Objection: How can the Self be the object that ignorance conceals, 
since ignorance and the Self are incompatible, the Self being intrinsi- 
cally knowledge, nonrelational, and productive of the very opposite 
of ignorance ? 

Answer: The Self seems to become separated (into knower, knowl- 
edge, known) only through ignorance, just as the rope appears to 
be different from the snake; in reality the Self, like the rope, is quite 
unaffected. Thus all duality disappears when ignorance disappears, 
and this arises from a man who understands the meaning of the 
scriptural texts hearing them. Thus the present Book explains the 
meaning of the sentences of scripture such as “that art thou,” etc., 
by applying the method of reasoning through positive and negative 
concomitance (anvayauyatireka). 

1-3 (E108-109; T117-118). When a man understands that the 
text “that art thou”? means “I am Brahman” he loses his ego sense and 
his sense of possession, having grasped something that is beyond the 
range of speech or thought, since it depends not only on the direct 
meanings of the constituent words (e.g., ‘“‘that’? and “‘thou’’) but on 
their secondary meanings as well, 


NAISKARMYASIDDHI 543 


4-5 (E110-111; T118-120). Objection: You have argued that 
in order to understand the meaning of scripture a man has to give up 
ritual actions and apply methods of reasoning to the texts before he 
can hope to hear them (from his guru and so achieve liberation). 
Now this practice you recommend—is it something enjoined by 
scripture, or is it a natural inclination on his part? Ifit is an injunc- 
tion, and he does all these things and then fails to achieve liberation, 
he loses much merit. But if he takes up the practice from natural 
inclination no such fault ensues. 

Answer: Our view is that he takes up the practice as the result of 
an injunction, for example, as phrased in Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 
IV.4.23, which commands men who have attained equanimity, etc., 
and have by reasoning recognized that the not-Sclf is unreal, to ‘‘sec 
the Self”’—to such a man who then asks ‘“‘who am I”’ (ko’smi) scripture 
answers compassionately ‘‘that art thou.” 

6 (E111-112; T120-121). Sdmkhya objector : Ajitana is the false 
awareness that causes us to think that the body, sense, etc., are the 
Self, and it can be overcome by reasoning. So sentences like ‘“‘that 
art thou” are pointless. 

Answer: Awareness based on difference is the effect of avidya, since 
in the witness there is no difference whatsoever. One should let the 
texts destroy it. 

7-8 (E112-114; T121-126). Another objector : Since false awareness 
is just absence of awareness, what is it that the texts destroy ? Absence 
of awareness is not a real entity, so what is the cause of samsa@ra? Not 


> 


your “ignorance,” since it doesn’t exist. 

Answer : Everything is unknown before our first awareness of it 
arises in the buddhi; it exists (then) through the one existent, and it is 
that existent which is that unknown thing. That existent is the Self, 
thereality that manifests itself as both knower and instrument of knowl- 
edge when there is desire to know and is revealed by Its own power— 
that is the unknown thing we speak of. 

9-18 (E114-119; T126-132). Objection: The meaning of any 
sentence, whether ordinary or scriptural, is relational. Thus the 
understanding we get from a sentence like ‘‘that art thou’’ is neces- 
sarily relational, and from it we derive the idea “I am Brahman,” 
whose meaning is to be analyzed in the same fashion that we analyze a 
sentence like ‘‘the lotus is blue”’ (i.e., as meaning a substance quali- 
fied by an attribute). That being the case, the idea of the inner 
Self, which leads to liberation, requires us to meditate (nididhydsana) 
on such texts until a meaning arises different from the actual (i.e., 


relational) meaning they have. 


544 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer: Consider the sentence “the akafa in the pot and the dkdsa 
in the sky have the same locus.” Here the meaning of the sentence 
is not a subject qualified by a predicate, but rather an entity not 
actually mentioned in the sentence, that is, the pure dkafa unlimited 
by pot or sky. Likewise in the sentence “that art thou”? we under- 
stand directly something going beyond the literal meaning of the 
sentence. This is true even though “that art thou’ is a subject- 
predicate sentence and the one about the akdfa is not; both manage to 
convey something beyond their literal purport by the same mechanism, 
that is, apparently referring to several things in order to speak of a 
single thing. ‘Thus ‘“‘thou’’ can’t mean the jiva (as it would naturally 
be supposed to) since it is qualified by ‘‘that,” i.e., Brahman, and 
“that” can’t mean not-Self because it is apposite to ‘‘thou’’; in this 
way the changeless consciousness and interiority that is the Self is 
collectively indicated—these properties are not qualifications or dis- 
tinctions but intrinsic to the Self. When predicated of the buddhi, 
the ego, etc., they may be discriminated and contrasted as qualities, 
but when predicated of the Self they are not limitations of the Self, 
the Self is not affected by discriminations and contrasts, since in the 
Self consciousness and interiority are Its very nature. 

19-21 (E119-120; T132-133). The way that the buddhi knows is 
contrasted with the way the Self knows. The buddhi’s knowing consists 
of ideas that come and go; some of them are true, some doubt- 
ing, some false. ‘This flow of ideas is superimposed on the Self through 
delusion. That the Self is the witness underlying the stream of 
ideas is clear when one recognizes that an idea cannot be aware of 
itself after it disappears, nor can an idea know itself as it arises. 

22-28 (E121-124; 1134-136). First one must distinguish the Self 
from the not-Self by reasoning, and then hear ‘“‘that art thou’ ifone 
hopes to achieve liberation. For if one construes that sentence in 
its natural meaning it is evidently false. But when one knows that the 
meaning must relate to the inner Self and not the not-Self, the words 
“that” and “‘thou”’ will come to be known to denote the same thing. 

29-32 (E124-127; T136-137) Question: But since the body, etc., 
have been shown by reasoning to be not-Self why does one continue 
to suppose that they are the Self ? 

Answer: One doesn’t. Not-Self and ignorance denote the same 
things, and when ignorance ceases the body, internal organ, etc., 
likewise cease. Only as long as one is in ignorance does one suppose 
they are either Self or not-Self. When they are destroyed one merely 
remains in one’s Self, free from ignorance, having a kind of awareness 
that cannot be the meaning of any sentence, 


NAISKARMYASIDDHI 545 


33-42 (E127-132; T137-141). Reasoning alone does not serve to 
destroy avidyé; hearing scripture is required. The Buddhists who 
neglect scripture, even though they utilize inference, nonetheless 
end up in a denial of the Self. Scripture indicates directly and simply 
the Self, which cannot be known by the other pramanas. It also pro- 
vides absolute certainty—wherever doubts exist you may be sure that 
the not-Self is present. Upanisadic support for these remarks is cited. 

43-46 (E132-133; T141-142). It is through the functioning of 
the ego (ahamvrtti) that one comes to know that one is Brahman, 
but the ego sense manages this by dissolving itself. 

Question : Then when the ego sense is known why isn’t the Knower 
known directly ? It must be because there is a contradiction between 
scripture and sense perception. 

Answer : No, there can be no such contradiction, for the two means 
relate to entirely different subject matters. The senses are outer- 
direct, do not relate to the Self; scriptural texts like “you are that 
Real” (tat sad asi) are inward-direct toward the Self. 

47-56 (E134-138; 1142-148). Objection: The Self cannot be 
validly indicated by such texts as “that art thou” alone, since they are 
merely declarations and so require pramanas to make them authorita- 
tive. The relevant pramdna is the injunctions of scripture. 

Answer : These declarative sentences are themselves scripture and 
constitute the pramana in question; they do not depend on the other 
pramanas, and they relate to a subject matter beyond the senses, func- 
tioning by removing the idea that the other pramdnas have any validity 
at all, waking us up as words may wake a sleeping man. Since the 
Self is eternally conscious It needs no other pramdana to reveal It. 
Perception and the others are irrelevant to It, since they point out- 
wards toward the not-Self. The contrasts between Self and not-Self 
are once again reviewed. 

57-58 (E139-141; T149-154). Objection : We can know the Self 
by inference, specifically, by noting the behavior and features of the 
not-Self and inferring the contrasting features of the Self. So the 
scriptural texts are beside the point. 

Answer : No, for inference gives us only mediate knowledge. 

Objector: True, but what possible addition could scripture make 
to the mediate knowledge we get from inference ? 

Answer: Inference merely establishes the existence of the Self, 
but the Self is actually beyond existence and nonexistence (sadasad- 
vyutthita) and so must be learned from scriptural texts. 

Objector: If that’s all you mean, everyone gets “knowledge” of 
that every time he falls asleep ! 


546 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer : No, for even in sleep ignorance is present; if it were not so 
everyone would become liberated merely by falling asleep. 

Objector: One is temporarily liberated when asleep, and then 
returns when he wakes up. 

Answer : That undermines the possibility of final liberation, since 
there would always be the possibility of returning. 

Objection : A man is liberated when he goes to sleep; it is a differ- 
ent man who “wakes up.” 

Answer : No, since we all recognize that we are the very same 
person who went to sleep and while asleep had no experiences. 

Objector: Well, if ignorance is present in deep sleep we should be 
aware of it during our sleep; since we aren’t, it follows that it isn’t 
there at all. 

Answer : It is there, but there is nothing to manifest it, no opera- 
tion of the internal organ (antahkarana), since the internal organ is 
dissolved during sleep. 

59-62 (E141-145; T155-159). The internal organ is the object 
of the Self’s witnessing consciousness directly, but the Self goes on 
to take on the ego as mask (kajicuka), thus becoming (apparently) 
related to external objects by judging them as ‘“‘mine,” etc. The 
Self, that is, knows objects as “this” through the condition (upddhi) 
of ignorance, and then, becoming associated with the ego, knows 
them as ‘“‘mine.” 

Question : How do you know this difference between the pure Self’s 
awareness and that of the Self as associated with the ego ? 

Answer : By reasoning, since the object as witnessed by the pure 
Self neither hinders nor helps the Self, and so is judged as a mere 
“this.” 

Neither of these two kinds of awareness (of object as ‘‘this’’ or as 
“mine”) arise when avidyd is absent, for example, in deep sleep; only 
when a man wakes up does he have even the awareness that he 
knew nothing while asleep. 

63-70 (E145-148; T160-165). In II.2-3 above we distinguished 
four ways of obtaining liberation, that is, four kinds of hearers. 
We consider here the fourth kind, the man who has repeatedly heard 
the texts so that he may understand their meaning. One may well 
ask, how can a final hearing convey something to him over and _be- 
yond what he has already gleaned by reasoning based on hearing 
them ? The answer is that it is like the tenth man, who didn’t know 
he was the tenth. Just so, one may distinguish the Self from the not- 
Self by reasoning but not be directly aware that he is that Self because 
of ignorance, ignorance that is without a support (niralamba) and 


NAISKARMYASIDDHI 547 


contradictory to all reasoning and thus not something that can be 
investigated (vicdra). The direct knowledge of the inner Self that 
does not arise from the other pramanas destroys any need for investi- 
gations. “That art thou” produces knowledge (pramd) in the aspirant 
for liberation just as “you are the tenth” produces it in the puzzled 
fellow who is counting the company as nine. Again, both knowl- 
edges are incorrigible once they arise. 

73-75 (E150-151; T165-167). Objection: If the Self is nondual 
as you say, why do the Upanisads continually refer to the Self as 
agent, knower, etc.? 

Answer : To deny an erroneous idea one has to use language initially 
in such a way as to refer to it in order to deny it. Thus to deny that 
a post (mistakenly taken for a man) is a man one can’t just say 
‘post... post... .’’, but he has to make initial reference to the man 
in order to say ‘‘that is not a man but a post.”’ Likewise, in the state- 
ment ‘‘that art thou’? the terms “that” and “thou” initially refer 
to erroneous notions but scripture must make use of them in order to 
deny the error through their apposition. The universals connoted 
by the two words are in opposition, but as scripture intends them they 
are freed from their ordinary senses and come to consistently denote 
the same entity, that is, the Self. 

76-80 (E151-155; 1167-173). Objection : Admitting that the 
words are not here intended in their direct meanings and that the 
sentence “that art thou’? would constitute a contradiction if they 
were so intended, nevertheless, it is still possible that in the sense 
intended by scripture that sentence indicates a substance-attribute 
relation, as does the sentence “‘the lotus is blue.” 

Answer : No, since both terms mean the same Self, free from duality 
and mediacy; since Brahman and Self are identical there is no room 
for a substance-attribute construction. 

Objection : But if the word “that,” for example, means nondual 
Reality, since it has no connection with anything else such as notions 
of suffering and duality, how can it negate them ? 

Answer : We do not claim that what the word “that”? denotes 
directly destroys the ideas of suffering and duality. What we do say 
is that the word ‘‘that”? causes ignorance to be removed so that there 
is a waking-up to the fact of nonduality. The sentence thus teaches 
the Self primarily, and by implication denies the relation of the 
Self to samsdara, etc. 

81-86 (E155-158; T173-177). Even if someone should insist that 
the scriptural sentence contradicts perception, we can always reply 
“all right, take it as a theme for meditation.” However, if the 


548 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sentence refers to a real entity it cannot be about an action to be done, 
even a meditative one. But scripture can’t contradict perception, 
since they pertain to entirely different subject matters; thus they can 
both be pramdnas. 

Objection : But suppose the two pramanas speak about the same thing 
in conflicting ways ? 

Answer : This cannot occur between scripture and perception. If 
a thing is perceived with the senses it cannot be known through 
verbal testimony, and vice versa; again, fallacious perceptions are 
corrected by more perceptions, whereas fallacious testimony is correct- 
ed by further texts. Nor must pramdnas cooperate in order to be 
accounted as valid; if x is a pramdna it is so in its own right. 

87-89 (E158-160; T178-179). Inall this we have been allowing 
for the sake of argument that a limited and suffering Self can be validly 
attested by some pramana; we have argued that even if it can be, this 
does not contradict the validity of scripture. In fact, however, such 
a Self is not known through any of the pramdanas, for the pramdnas 
can only deal with objects, never with the subject itself. 

Even if we concede for the moment that the Self can be known by 
pramanas as limited and suffering, and that thus the sentences of 
scripture are contradicted by other pramdnas—how in that case do 
you propose to interpret those sentences ? If you say, as meditative 
(prasamkhyana), the upshot will be much worse than any meditation 
could avert. For if it is valid knowledge that the Self is limited and 
suffering meditation cannot change it; as a result, if one goes on to 
hold that the Self can lose its suffering nature, the Buddhist view of 
no-self will result. Again, if meditation negates the limited, suffer- 
ing nature of the Self, how can it produce right knowledge, since such 
knowledge will contradict perception and the other pramdnas ? 

90-93 (E160-161; T179-181). Objection : When one has discri- 
minated the Self from the not-Self by reasoning on the basis of the 
scriptural sentences like “‘that art thou,” one then meditates on the 
ideas that result. When properly performed this improves on the 
kind of knowledge the pramanas can give us and generates perfectly 
valid knowledge. For example, one can meditate on the body of a 
woman and see beauty where reasoning suggests only matter and 
impurity, and the same method produces improved knowledge of 
reality, the difference being that in this case the knowledge is true. 

Answer: No. All that meditation can produce is greater con- 
centration of the mind, not new knowledge. 

Objector : Through spiritual conviction (Alston’s translation of bhd- 
vand) collected from repeated meditation one brings samsdara to an end, 


NAISKARMYASIDDHI 549 


Answer : Not altogether, for then the cessation of samsdra is a result 
and so cannot be eternal. After all, the belief that one is the jiva 
lasts for millions of years and yet it can be rejected on your own 
account; do you suppose that a conviction based on a little meditation 
in one life will withstand all pressures ? 

Objector : Its ability to withstand all pressures arises from its Vedic 
authority. 

Answer : No, since all it can do is to reveal things as they actually 
are; it cannot change the nature of things. So effects, whether of 
actions or of meditation, cannot be considered stable. 

94-104 (E162-167; T182-188). Again, supposing for the moment 
that there is some felt conflict between perception and scripture, the 
former telling us that the Self is frustrated, etc., the latter that the 
Self is pure, nondual, etc., one must surely pick scripture over per- 
ception, since what perception and the other pramdnas produce are 
judgments subject to error and subsequent rejection, whereas what 
scripture speaks to is self-illuminating and so eternally valid. But, 
as we remarked above, in fact two pramdnas cannot contradict each 
other, being each valid in its own sphere. To suppose that they do 
contradict each other is a result of our ignorance, since there is no 
contradiction in reality. We do indeed mistakenly interpret our 
sense experience in a secondary sense, thus supposing that it is the 
Self and not the ego that is the knower of empirical objects, etc. Asa 
matter of fact this shows that all use of language to indicate the Self 
is false; the Self cannot be directly named, and only a few words have 
primary meanings that make more appropriate than not their use 
to indicate the Self in a secondary way. Still, a false means may 
point the way if the other conditions are right, in this case if one is 
suitably disciplined before one hears the sentence “that art thou.” 

105-106 (E167-168; T189). Odjector : You still haven’t explained 
how a word that has no connection whatsoever with something can 
nevertheless produce right knowledge about that thing. 

Answer: It is just as when we wake somebody up from sleeping 
by uttering his name. There is no connection between the name and 
the sleeping person who is “out of” his body when asleep—yet he 
wakes up. 

108-109 (E169; T191). Odjection: A false means cannot be a 
valid means for producing truth; for example, inferring the presence 
of fire from haze (mistaken for smoke) does not produce truth. 

Answer : Empirical objects are neither real nor unreal, and yet 
they produce results; thus something can be (relatively) “false” and 
yet produce something (relatively) “real.” 


550 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


111-112 (E170-171; 1192-193). Objection : How could avidya 
ever come into being at all, since it depends on the pure, changeless 
Self ? 

Answer: Well, it does; regardless of pramdnas or reality it just 
stands there as if it were the Self! 

116 (E172; T194). The objection “how can avidyd exist ?” is not 
legitimate whether it is asked before or after knowledge. Before 
knowledge it is evidently there, and after knowledge it is known to 
be nonexistent in all times—past, present, and future. 

123-126 (E175-177; T196-199). Odjector : Knowledge derived 
from words is mediate, but it becomes indubitable through meditation. 

Answer : If meditation on the texts following upon reasoning does 
not produce direct knowledge in the first place, how can mere repeti- 
tion of it produce it later on ? 

Opponent : Brahmasiitra 1V.1.1 directs us to meditate repeatedly, 
but what it means is that by continuing to study one may understand 
what was not understood on the first hearing. 

Objector : If you refuse to admit that there are scriptural injunctions 
to meditate then samnydsins are as much outside the scope of Vedic 
teaching as Buddhists are, and thus arc liable to fall from grace, in 
which case they cannot become free from karma. 

Answer: But we do admit that scripture enjoins us to hear and 
study the great sentences, so this objection does not apply. 


BOOK FOUR 


1 (E171; T201). This book repeats more briefly what has been 
discussed heretofore. 

19-35 (E184-190; T208-215). Suresvara quotes a number of pass- 
ages from Samkara’s Upadesasahasri in support of his doctrines. 

41-42 (E192-193; 1217-218). Quotations from the Gaudapdda- 
karikas. 

43, 65-66 (E193; T218; E200-201; T225-226). More quotations 
from Upadesasdhasri. 

72-77 (E203-205; T227-230). Concluding words paying deep 


respects to Samkara. 
DAKSINAMURTIVARTTIKA or MANASOLLASA 


C. Markandeya Sastri writes: “It is not easy to accept this tradi- 
tion (that Suresvara wrote this work) after a perusal of the contents 
as well as perhaps language of this book.’!2 He cites R. B. Amar- 
nath Ray’s opinion that the Daksinamirti hymn itself and this 


MANASOLLASA 551 


commentary on it are the work of Abhinavagupta and his disciple, 
since the work appears to teach the Kashmir Saiva brand of idealism.13 
It refers to the thirty-six categories of Kashmir Saiva, as well as other 
peculiar features of the Pratyabhijiia system. 

“E” references are to the edition by Maheshananda Giri (Sri- 
daksinamurti Samskrta Granthamala 2, Agra 1963). ‘“‘T”’ refers to 
the translation by A. Mahadeva Sastri in The Vedanta Doctrine of Sri 
Samkaracharya (Madras 1899), 


CHAPTER ONE 


1-3. (E3-6; T1-2). The invocation is addressed to Vinayaka, 
Sarasvati, Mahesvara, Sadagiva. The (Daksinamirti) hymn is 
addressed to the guru’s own Self, than which there is no greater wealth, 
that Self who, having entered into the universe It created, remains 
in the mind (manas) of everyone. 

4-7 (E8; T2-4). A student asks his teacher several questions: 
We say that things ‘‘are’’ and “appear.” In what does this existence, 
this appearing, reside ? Do they reside in things distributively, or in 
God (ifvara), the Selfof all? What is God ? What is self (jiva) ? 
What is the “Self of all” ? How should the jiva understand It ? What 
is the means to that knowledge ? What is the result of that knowledge? 
And. how can jiva and God be one ? How can the Self be the knower 
and doer of everything ? 

8-15 (E14-22; T4-6). The teacher answers: All worldly things, 
which exist within (antas), appear as if without (bahis) by madyd, 
as reflections in a mirror. Just as, in dreams, the world exists in one’s 
Self but appears to be external, so it is in the waking state too. Both 
kinds of objects (dream and waking) are impermanent and insentient 
(jada). In dreams objects appear by the light one’s Self—there is no 
other light; so the same is true of waking objects. And just as a man 
awake does not see the things he saw when dreaming, so when he 
attains true knowledge he does not see the universe. (Gaudapada- 
karikds 1.16 quoted here). When one gains Self-knowledge through 
scripture, the teacher’s instruction, yoga, and God’s grace he sees 
the world as within himself, just as one who eats food regards it as 
within himself. 

16-20 (E25-26; T6-70). ‘‘What is self (jiva)?” The Self-con- 
sciousness (cidatman) becomes God just as a man in dream becomes a 
king, but just as when he is defeated by the enemy and spends what 
seems to him a long period of penance in the forest, its length only his 
imagination, so in the waking state that Self as jiva imagines his own 
world, unaware of the passing of time. Even God Himself, deluded 


5352 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


by maya, seems to have only limited power and limited knowledge. 
To be “God” is to be in control; to be jiva is to be dependent. 

21-31 (E30-43; T7-11). All jivas, being identical with Siva, have 
awareness (jfidna) and action (kriya@). Waving thus the powers 
(Sakti) of God we infer the jivas are God. Consciousness self-illumines 
itself in all awarenesses, like the light of the sun; if it did not, the 
universe would be dark, there would be no awareness. And if God 
does not act, how could there be any other activity ? Fer action is 
either motion (farispanda) or transformation (parindma): motion 
becomes manifested as the result of consciousness moving toward the 
outside, whereas transformation involves change of condition, that is, 
of consciousness in awareness. Siva appears as the all-knowing in 
Brahman, etc., and as varying degrees of awareness in gods, animals, 
and men. But when the highest Self is directly known all beings from 
Brahma down to the lowest plant are mere constructions (kalpand) 
as if imagined in dream. 


CHAPTER TWO 


1-6 (E40-50; T13-16). VaiSesika : Atoms combining together 
constitute the material cause of the world; it is atoms, not God, that 
make up the world, and changes are due to qualities (guza) producing 
like qualities in things. There are three kinds of cause: inherence, 
noninherence, and instrumental cause. Each effect resides in the 
place occupied by its cause. 

7-8 (E51; T16). Samkhya: The three gunas—-sattva, rajas, and 
tamas—constitute pradhdna (i.e., prakrti) and so are the causes of 
creation, maintenance, and destruction of the world. 

9-14 (E55-62; T17-22). Answer: Since existence (astitva) is 
found in every created thing (but atoms are not created), where do 
the atoms come from ? Everyone admits that the effect is contained 
in the cause; therefore existence (sattd) and illumination (sphuratta), 
found everywhere (are the cause, not the atoms). Furthermore, 
(contrary to Vaisesika) change involves the production of properties 
different from the properties a thing had before; (sweet) milk becomes 
(sour) curd, (thus the Vaisesikas cannot explain change), Whereas 
on our account cause and effect, part and whole, genus and species, 
action and agent, etc., are all constructions (kalpand) of just the one 
Light (prakdfa). Again, consciousness cannot arise from either 
atoms or prakrti, since neither are themselves conscious things, and 
consciousness must be located in a conscious locus. Rather, milk 
is transformed into curds by God’s power of activity (kriydfakti) in 
the form of time (kdla), whereas the world comes to be by His power 


MANASOLLASA 553 


of awareness (jfdnasakti), involving the forms of knower, knowledge, 
and known. 

15-16 (E63-64; T23). Awareness may be construction-free (nir- 
vikalpaka), which illuminates real things, or construction-filled (savi- 
kalpaka), which takes many forms according to its illuminating verbal 
designations (samjfid), etc. Other forms of consciousness include 
imagination, doubt, error, memory, (knowledge of) similarity, guess 
(?-tha) and uncertainty (anadhyavasdya). 

17-19 (E65; T24). The Carvakas accept one pramdna, perception. 
Kanada and Sugata (i.e., the Buddha) accept in addition inference. 
Samkhya adds verbal authority (fabda), as do some Naiyayikas, 
whereas other Naiyayikas add comparison (upamdna) as well. Pra- 
bhakara adds presumption (arthdpatti) to these, and the Bhattas and 
Vedantins add negation (abhdva) as well as presumption. The 
Pauranikas add to these inclusion (sambhava) and tradition (aitéhya). 

20-30 (E70-76; T27-29). The six Vaisesika categories are enume- 
rated, with their subdivisions. (The list is without surprises, except 
that the internal organ (manas) is not counted among the minute 
(anu) things along with the four kinds of atoms. 

31-41 (E78-85; T29-32). Another set of categories (attributed to 
“theistic Samkhya” by modern commentators) is expounded : it 
involves mdya =pradhdna) (other names are provided), which, with 
Brahman’s consciousness reflected in it, produces mahat, time (kdla), 
and purusa. From mahat comes ahamkéra. From tamasic ahamkara 
comes dkdfa, earth, fire, water, and air, as well as their associated 
qualities (sound, smell, etc.). From sattvic ahamkdra comes the 
antahkarana and the sense organs. The antahkarana comprises manas, 
buddhi, ahamkdéra and citta, which have as their contents doubt, cer- 
tainty, pride (garvas), and memory. The devatds (gods) for each of 
these, as well as for the various organs, are enumerated. From the 
rajasic ahamkdra come the action organs. These together with the 
five pranas (breaths) make up the twenty-four categories of Sam- 
khya-Sastra (i.e., fourteen organs, five breaths, and five elements). 

42-43 (E86-87; 133-34). The Pauranikas count thirty categories 
by adding to the above twenty-four the following : mahat, time, 
pradhkana, mayd, avidyd, and purusa. The professors of Saivagama 
add to these bindu, ndda, Sakti, Siva, §anta, and atita. 

44-52 (E88-97; T35-38). All these (categories) are constructions 
(vikalpa) that exist previously in the Self and that are displayed by 
maya having the form of desire, awareness, and action. This is why 
every creature is (a) God (isvara)—all changes come from their desires, 
awarenesses, and actions. 


554 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objection : Do you mean that there are many Gods, one for each 
universe in succession like the seed and the sprout ? 

Answer : No. God, though one, creates without any instruments 
outside Himself, just as ancient yogis like Visvamitra created heaven 
by their mere will. God needs nothing other to create, nor does He 
need pramdnas or organs for His awareness. He has absolute freedom 
(svacchandakarita). 

53-57 (E98-102; T38-39). If God were only the instrumental 
cause (nimitia) of the world, He would be subject to change and 
destructible, like a potter. On the other hand, if He has eternal 
qualities of the sort the Vaisesika posits, for example, eternal will, 
then He would always be creating incessantly. Then samsdéra would 
never stop, and the teaching about liberation would be pointless. 
So God’s creation is all a display of maya, and all empirical experience 
including teachings about bondage and liberation is likewise through 
maya. 

CHAPTER THREE 


1-7 (E103-112; 140-44). How is it that existence and illumina- 
tion have come to be joined (in experience) with the objects (of the 
world) ? Questioning thus through the example (nydya) of the proto- 
type and the mirror, the teacher explains : Existence and light come 
from God; objects are inert, momentary, and almost nonexistent 
(asatkalpa); they appear (to our awareness) through the illumination 
of the Self. Or again, our multifarious awarenesses and their objects 
are tied to the ahamkdra, like pearls on a string. We cannot distin- 
guish the world from its illumination, any more than waves can be 
distinguished from water. This awareness of objects, which is ex- 
pressed by ‘“‘I know (this object),”’ turns back and resting in the Self 
is expressed as ‘‘(this object) is known by me.” And since products 
(pot) rest in their causes (clay), the world, indiscriminable from illu- 
mination, must rest in the highest Lord. 

8-9 (E113-115; T44-45). The workings of avidyd are illustrated 
by use of both the analogy of the reflection in a dirty mirror, and by 
the analogy of pot-space. 

10-18 (E116-124; T45-48). There follows a discussion of the 
meaning of “that art thou.” ‘“That” denotes the cause of the universe, 
whereas ‘‘thou” denotes the jiva. The relation between them is 
identity, as the identity between a person seen at one time and the 
same person seen at a later time. “That” and “thou” stand in the 
relation of apposition (samanddhikaranya), whereas the things these 
words mean should have a relation of qualifier and qualified (vifesana- 


MANASOLLASA 555 


visesyabhdva). But since God and jiva, the primary denotata of “that” 
and “‘thou” respectively, cannot bear such a relation to each other, 
these words must be understood in a secondary sense (laksand). The 
kind of secondary meaning involved here is “‘partial’’ (bhdgalaksana), 
partially including and partially excluding the primary senses of the 
words. 

19-25 (E126-135; T49-52). Various other ways of construing 
“that art thou” are rejected. The sentence does not mean that the 
Jjiva is a part or mode of God, since God is partless and without change. 
Nor does it merely praise God. It does not speak of mere similarity 
between jiva and God, nor does it impute a causal relation between 
them, or a relation between genus and species, or between substance 
and attribute. And it doesn’t merely recommend meditation. 

26-32 (E135-150; T52-53). The Self, when mixed with body, 
organs, breaths, and ego sense, is regarded by ignorant persons as the 
self, just as fuel burning is regarded as fire itself. This is further 
explained through the teaching of the sheaths. 

32-40 (E150-158; T53-55). Calling God and self cause and effect 
is to speak of them in their accidental (atastha) definition, like defining 
the moon to be on the branch of a tree. But the essential (svariipa) 
definition of the Self is saccidananda. When one becomes steady in the 
awareness that he is one with the Light, the Self of all, he reaches 
isolation (kaivalya) or liberation. Even if he only once has by chance 
the idea that he is the Self in all, he is freed from all his sins and is 
adored in Siva’s realm as Siva himself. That great Self delivers all 
from samsara, for He is God Himself. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


1-6 (£150-157; T56-60). Objection: The pot, cloth, etc., shine 
as self-existent, not through God’s light. 

Answer: Stanza 4 of the Daksinamirti hymn answers this. If 
the ‘“‘I’? did not shine in awareness there would be self-awareness of 
the form “I know.” Then nothing at all would shine. Objects 
cannot exist by themselves; they depend on God for their being. If 
objects could shine by themselves, they would be shining all the time, 
or none of the time, which is contrary to fact. Again, if both conscious 
and unconscious things were self-luminous then both would perceive 
each other, in which case tastes could be grasped by the eye, etc. 

7-22 (E159-177; T60-66). God is spoken of as the knower inas- 
much as he appears through reflection in the two sides of the antah- 
karana—the kriyafakti and the jfanasakti—like the dull and clear sides 
of a mirror respectively. Buddhi is like the clear side of the mirror 


556 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


because sativa dominates in it; thus it can take on the image (chdya) 
of an object. Likewise the sense organs, because of their connection 
with the antahkarana. The connection is made through the nddis, 
enabling the senses to proceed toward external objects. The center 
of the nddi system is the mulddhara, located between anus and penis; 
there dwells the highest power (pardSakti) called Kundalini or Saras- 
vati, mother of breath (prdna), digestion (agni), sound (bindu and 
ndda). From the mulddhdra the susumna naddi extends to the head. 
On its left and right are the two nédis respectively named idé and 
pingala, and these composed the basis of the nddi system (nddicakra). 
Other nddis are described, and the Katha Upanisad quoted. 

23-27 (E178-181; T66-69). When the self perceives objects through 
the sense organs impelled by merit deposited in the buddhi, then 
that is the waking state. When the organs are withdrawn the self is 
aware of the traces laid down by waking experience, and this is the 
dream state. When even the manas is withdrawn the state is called 
deep sleep. But the Self is throughout covered by maya and appears 
deluded, ignorant, etc. When the Self wakes up It is illuminated as 
saccidananda in the awareness “I slept happily.” 

28-38 (E181-197; T70-72). Everything shines by the light of God; 
thus Brahman is called ‘“‘saccidanantam.”” God manifests Himself as 
the ego in everyone. The ego has three forms : construction-free 
(nirvikalpa), pure (Suddha) and impure (malina). The first is the 
highest Brahman, without differences, like dkdSa without dirt. The 
second, pure ego, is manifest at the time of discrimination (viveka), 
when God is free from embodiment, etc., as dkdfa is seen when all the 
stars have faded away (in the early morning). The third, impure 
ego, is the Self conjoined with body, etc., just as dkdfa looks as though 
it is without illumination when pervaded by darkness. One should 
meditate on the first of these three; then the Self shines fully. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


1-8 (E198-209; T73-77). Carvdka: Perception is the only pra- 
mana; the only real things are the four elements (bhita). There is 
no liberation; kdma and artha are the ends of man. There is no God 
or world beyond this one. The body is the self, for it is what is per- 
ceived to be born, grow, change, decay, and die, and it is based on 
bodily differences that all ascriptions of state (such as caste or order) 
are based. 

Others say that the self is the breaths (prdna), or the senses, or the 
buddhi. 

9-28 (E212-236; T77-83). Answer: The body is not the self, 


MANASOLLASA 557 


since it is visible and constituted. Nor are the sense organs the self, 
since they are mere instruments, like a lamp. The breath is not the 
self either, since there is no consciousness in deep sleep yet breathing 
goes on. And the buddhi is not the self, for the buddhi is momentary 
and dependent on something else for its illumination. Finally, the 
self cannot even be the aggregation of all these things, since if that 
were the case, when one of them were missing there would be no 
consciousness, but as we know, there are conscious blind and deaf 
people, etc. 

28-32 (E236-240; T84-85). The size of the self is all-pervading; 
if it were only the size of an atom, it couldn’t pervade the body, and 
if it were the size of the body, the youth could not be the same as the 
old man he becomes. Further, the self would be perishable. 

32-36 (E240-243; T85-86). The notion “I am in the body” is a 
delusion produced by great maya, for once God (sadéafiva) is seen, 
that delusion vanishes. 


CHAPTER SIX 


1-12 (E245-256; T87-92). (Mddhyamika): Everything is momen- 
tary and void (Sénya). 

(Buddhist Logician): Everything is a momentary particular (sva- 
laksana). 

(Abhidharma Buddhist): External objects are aggregates of atoms, 
whereas men, etc., are aggregates of the five skandhas—(1) riipa, 
including objects and organs; (2) vijfidna, consciousness; (3) samjiid, 
including names, qualities, motions, ideas, and natural kinds; 
(4) samskdra, attachment, dharma, and adharma, etc.; (5) vedand, 
including pleasure, pain, and liberation (moksa) (or delusion [moha]). 
There is no self beyond these five. There is no God, no creator, for 
the universe is self-made, born of momentary skandhas and atoms, one 
momentary awareness after another. The identity of things through 
time is an illusion, as is the idea of self and that of external objects. 

13-20 (E257-268; T92-95). The sixth stanza of the Daksina- 
mirti hymn is addressed to the Buddhists in order to refute them. 
If the cause of the universe be void, then the universe cannot exist 
at all, and would never have even appeared to exist. But then whom 
should one seek out as teacher, what constitutes the bondage we seek 
to be liberated from, who could be responsible for the illusion ? 

As to the theory of the skandhas—an aggregate, like a pot, requires 
a cause, a maker, and cannot make itself. And if identity through 
time is illusory, why should one initiate acting, since to act pre- 
supposes a belief that the motives of the action can be satisfied. The 


558 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


self is no more a nonexistent than dka@fa; both have functions, akdaSa’s 
being to provide space, the self’s to provide consciousness. 

21-32 (E269-283; T95-99). “The Self is recognized in deep 
sleep,” we say, and the passive construction implies that the Self 
knows itself through itself. It is only maya that precludes self-aware- 
ness in deep sleep; the Self always shines as the lord of the adjuncts 
such as the body, etc. Liberation is the removal of this mdyd. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


1-8 (E284-294; T100-103). Question : If the Self is to be established 
on the basis of recognition (pratyabhijnia), what is this recognition and 
what is its purpose ? Why isn’t recognition counted among the 
pramdnas ? 

Answer : Recognition is a judgment of the form ‘“‘this is the same 
thing as that”’ by which we cognize once again something we have seen 
before. In the case of the Self we recognize the omniscience, etc., 
of the Self by casting aside the notion that It has only limited aware- 
ness, etc.—notions produced by maya. By remembering experiences 
in former births a newborn animal knows enough to seek its mother’s 
breast. This proves that the Self must have been there then and must 
be here now in order to have husbanded the trace (samskara) of the 
former experience. 

9-20 (E295-310; T103-108). Question: Then recognition means 
memory. How can mere memory be authoritative in proving the 
existence of the Self ? For if memory be accepted as authority then 
anything’s existence can be proved (since one can remember anything 
whatsoever ). 

Answer: Memory (is not itself recognition; rather it) provides us 
with the materials whereby we can recognize the persistence of 
the same entity (the Self) through time. Recognition is the right 
knowledge (vidya) that unveils the Self from Its maya; thus recog- 
nition underlies all the pramdnas. It is the awareness that one is 
God. 

21-33 (E315-328; T108-112). How the world is a result of false 
attribution is explained. The other theories of error—that in error 
the content is real, or that it is nonexistent, etc.—are refuted, and it 
is concluded that error cannot be defined—if it could be, there would 
be no error. The universe is superimposed on the Self through 
error, and when the error is removed the self-luminous Self, unaffected 
by this error, is recognized for what It is, that is, Mahesvara. This 
truth is attested to by smrtz, by perception, by tradition, etc. 


MANASOLLASA 559 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


1-12 (E326-345; T113-114). Question : If nothing actually exists 
apart from the Self, how can practical affairs (vyavahdra) come to 
be? Who is bound, who liberated? By what cause does bondage 
occur? What is the definition of maya? 

Answer : This has been answered in the foregoing, but it will be 
repeated in brief again as in this science repetition is no fault. To 
attribute causality to the Self is like saying Rahu has a head. All 
notions of difference are false, caused by mayd. ‘False’ means 
sublated by right awareness. Even the guru instructing his pupil is 
appearance only, though a false idea—as in the Upanisads—can 
cause enlightenment, as an image of God, a painting or a reflection 
can illuminate their originals. All practical affairs are the result of 
maya. But mdyd is sublated, like deep sleep, by Self-knowledge. 

13-16 (E346-349; T116). ‘‘AMdaya” is a name for an appearance 
that is contrary to reason. It is not nonexistent, since it appears; it 
is not existent, since it is sublated. It is not different from conscious- 
ness (prakafa), and it is not identical with consciousness, since it is 
inert (jada). It is not composite, since no parts caused it; it does not 
lack parts, since its effects are and are made up of parts. Maya is 
like a harlot; she deceives a man only as long as she is not scrutinized. 

17-28 (E350-360; T116-118). The mind (manas) is subject to 
the three states—waking, dream, deep sleep—and because of these 
it acts and is bound by the results. But the Self is not bound by the 
mind’s doings, any more than the sun is affected by smoke, vapors, 
etc., covering it, though it looks as if it is, so the Self is untouched 
by mdya though It seems to be. It is like a boy whirling around and 
around and seeing a world containing hundreds of moons; so the 
jiva sees this whole universe revolving in various forms due to the 
vasands. By practicing yoga and freeing the mind from contents a 
man turns away (nivrtia) from the world and becomes a jivanmukta. 


CHAPTER NINE 


1-6 (E361-368; T119-122). Questzon : How does this mdyd cease ? 

Answer : Through devotion to God. Eight of the thirty-six forms 
(mirti) of God (mentioned at II.31-42 above) are visible to all, and 
it is contemplation (bhdvand) of these that is taught. The body of 
Maheévara is made up of the thirty-six principles, as is a man’s body; 
the distributive (vpasfi) mind pervades his body, and so should be 
thought of as the entire Self. By devotion to this distributive form 
one obtains the collective (samasfi) form, as has been ten times taught 


in scripture. 


560 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


7-20 (E369-376; T122-125). A number of parallels between the 
collective or macrocosmic, and the distributive or microcosmic, forms 
are now detailed. 

21-48 (E377-397; T125-132). The eight limbs of (Pataijala) Yoga 
are now reviewed, and it is explained how the yogi progresses. 


CHAPTER TEN 


1-25 (E398-416; T133-138). The nature of godliness is expounded 
through recapitulating the eight siddhis (as in PaAtafijala Yoga). 
These powers come to one who sees his Self in all, though one should 
not seek them for their own sake. 


PANCIKARANAVARTTIKA or PRANAVAVARTTIKA 


This is supposed to be a commentary on a work of Samkara’s, but 
the ascription of the Pafcikarana to Samkara is extremely dubious, 
as was indicated above. There is no other good reason to suppose 
Suregvara authored this Varttika other than that the original was his 
teacher’s work. Furthermore, the commentary as well as the original 
work involves several kinds of yoga—zmantra, laya, hatha, raja—which 
suggest a different origin later than Samkara’s time. It is primarily 
concerned with the analysis of the sacred syllable (pranava) “om” 
as a basis for discipline leading to union with saguna Brahman, and is 
thus not really concerned with Samkara’s Advaitic views, though it is 
not clear that it is necessarily incompatible with them either. 

“ET” references are to the edition and translation published by 
the Advaita Ashrama (2d revised edition), Calcutta, 1972. 

1-2 (ET 9-11). Concentration on “om” is here expounded for 
liberation seekers. The highest Brahman existed alone. Then, with 
its own mdyd superimposed upon It, It became, as it were, the seed 
of the universe. 

3-11 (ET 13-18). From Brahman arose akéfa; from Gkafa, air; 
from air, fire (light); from fire, water; from water, earth. Akdga’s 
only quality is sound; air has sound and touch; fire has those two 
plus color; water has those three plus taste; earth has those four plus 
smell. From these arose the great, all-pervasive principle called 
Siitra. These elements also produce the gross (sthiila) elements, 
which in turn produce Viraj. This process is known as quintupli- 
cation. It proceeds as follows: each (subtle) element is divided in 
two, and one of these two is divided into four. To one-half of each 
element is added one quarter of each of the other four halved elements. 
Thus each resulting gross element is one-half constituted by a single 
type of subtle element, the other half constituted by four equal parts 


PANCIKARANAVARTTIKA 561 


of each of the other types of subtle elements (e.g., gross dkdfa is 
one-half subtle dkafa, with the other half composed of equal parts of 
air, fire, water, and earth). And so on. 

The effect of the gross elements is Viraj, which is the gross body 
(sthiilasarira) of the disembodied Self. 

12-13 (ET 18-19). The same Brahman appears in three forms 
because of error (bhrama)—in forms pertaining to the gods (adhidaivika), 
pertaining to the body (adhyaétma), and pertaining to the elements 
(adhibhiita). 

14-29 (ET 19-29). Awareness of objects arises from the sense 
organs aided by the appropriate gods. Awareness having sound, etc., 
for its content is called the waking state. There the aspects pertaining 
to the body are the organs—auditory, visual, tactual, etc.—the aspects 
pertaining to the elements are objects—-sounds, sights, touches, etc.— 
and the aspects pertaining to the gods are the deities associated 
with each sense. This analysis is extended to cover the action organs 
as well as the sense organs. Speech takes sounds as objects and has 
Agni as its god; the hands take touches as objects and Indra is their 
god; the feet take places gone to as objects and Visnu is their god; 
excretion takes excrescence as object and Death is its god; sex takes 
women, etc., as objects and Prajapati is its god. The mind (manas) 
takes thoughts as objects and the Moon is its god. The buddhi takes 
as object what is ascertained (?-bodhavya) and its god is Brhaspati. 
The ego sense (ahamkéra) takes the ego as object and its god is Rudra. 
Citta has as object that which one is conscious of (cetavya), and its 
god is the knower (Ksetrajfia). Likewise, ignorance (‘‘darkness,”’ 
tamas) has as object its evolved forms (vikdra), and its deity is God 
(ifvara). Thus is to be understood the waking state. 

30-3la (ET 29-30). The vifva (referred to in Samkara’s first 
verse) should be seen as (identical with) Viraj so that difference 
(bheda) will be removed. 

3lb-37a (ET 30-33). The subtle body is now explained. It has 
five sense organs, five action organs, and four internal organs, that is, 
the manas, buddhi, ahamkdéra, and citta. The manas is that which 
considers (samkalpakhya), the buddhi ascertains (nifcayariipa), the 
ahamkara provides awareness of self, and citta is that which conducts 
contemplation (anusamdhdana) of memory. There are also the five 
pranas and five subtle elements. These five groups (sense organs, 
action organs, internal organs, prdnas, and subtle elements) together 
with avidyd, desire, and karma, constitute the eight parts of the subtle 
body of the innermost Self. 

37b-38 (ET 34-35). Dream is explained as the state when the 


562 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sense organs are inactive, when consciousness (sphurana) appears 
as both grasper and grasped and possessing awareness arising from 
traces laid down by the waking state. That which possesses the 
notion of both (the dream state and the subtle body) is called taijasa, 
which should be identified with Hiranyagarbha. 

42-43 (ET 37-38). When the buddhi rests in its causal state—like 
a banyan tree in its seed—when all awarenesses are withdrawn, that 
state is deep sleep. That which has the notion of both (deep sleep 
and the causal body or ignorance) is called prajfia, and one should 
identify it with God. 

44-49 (ET 39-43). Pure consciousness (ciddiman) appears through 
delusion as many—visva, tayjasa, prajiia, Viraj, Sitratman or Hiranya- 
garbha, and Aksara (God). But vifva, taijasa, and prajiia should be 
viewed as one with Viraj, Satratman, and Aksara respectively, in 
order that the nonexistence of difference be established. How this 
is symbolized in the ‘‘om’ analysis is recapitulated following Pajfici- 
karana, verse six. 

50-65a (ET 44-59). Suregvara repeats the Pafcikarana’s verse six, 
on the nature of the Self as contemplated in samadhi. This contem- 
plation culminates in direct awareness of the Self and is not possible 
without renunciation of the whole world of empirical objects. When 
one has come to see the Self nothing remains to be known—the Self 
is peace, bliss, without a second. One who achieves it becomes a 
Jjivanmukta, liberated while living. Even when in carrying on hence- 
forth in life he sees duality he does not really see it, since he does not 
see it as distinct from the Self; he secs it as unreal, just as one may sce 
two moons knowing there is only one. The illusion of the body lasts 
up to the final experiencing of the results of prarabdhakarman. Scrip- 
tural passages are adduced to support this. After prarabdhakarman 
is exhausted the liberated one attains the status of Visnu, transcendent 


reality. 


PADMAPADA 


Padmapada is said to have been Samkara’s first pupil, and one who 
stayed with his master throughout Samkara’s career. Eventually, 
tradition affirms, Padmapada was made the head abbot of the Puri 
monastery, but he did not stay there and in fact is alleged to have 
saved his teacher’s life in the affair with Abhinavagupta. 

His only known authentic work is titled Paficapadikad. This title 
should indicate that the work covered five padas, and indeed there is a 
tradition, reported by Venkatramiah,! that after Padmapada’s 
complete commentary (7ikd) on the Brahmasiirabhasya had been 
completed it was burned to ashes by an unsympathetic uncle, and 
Samkara himself was able to remember the Jikd on the first five 
padas—that is, on Book One and the first section of Book Two—and 
dictated it to Padmapada. However, Venkatramiah points out, 
no one has been able to explain why the work so named now consists 
only of comment on the first four sitras of Book One, part one, and 
indeed Vidyaranya, who reports the above-related story, says himself 
that he is ‘‘not quite sure of the authenticity of the incident but that 
he is relying only on report.’’? 

There are, however, indications that Padmapada’s commentary 
originally covered more than its present extent. Furthermore, the 
fact that the known manuscripts break off at the end of the comment 
on sitra 1.1.4 without any ending verses suggests that the present state 
of the work is incomplete. 

In the summary that follows, “E’’ references are to the edition by 
S. Srirama Sastri and 8. R. Krishnamurthi Sastri in Madras Govern- 
ment Oriental Serics 155, Madras, 1958. ‘“T” refers to the transla- 
tion by D. Venkatramiah in Gaekwad’s Oriental Series 107, Baroda: 
Oriental Institute, 1948. The section headings constituted of a roman 
numeral followed by anarabic numeral correspond to the headings in 
“T.” The work begins with five verses of invocation, not summarized, 


564 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
PANCAPADIKA 


FIRST VARNAKA 


I.1 (E7-14; T1-5). Samkara’s opening sentence (in the Brahma- 
siitrabhdsya) explains what the subject matter (visaya) and purpose 
(prayojana) of the Brahmasiitras are by implication. 

Objection: The subject matter is how to gain knowledge of the 
unity of the Self, and the purpose is the getting rid of the cause of 
what is not worthwhile. So what is the point of Samkara’s passages 
about superimposition ? 

Answer : It needs to be shown that the cause of What is not worth- 
while is not real and thus can be got rid of by knowledge; if it were 
real, knowledge would not avail, since knowledge can only remove 
nonknowledge (ajfdna). The siitrakara (Badarayana) himself indi- 
cates that this is the case in Brahmasitra I1.3.29. 

Objection : Then why doesn’t the Brahmasiitras begin with verse 
II.3.29 ? 

Answer : That passage is an answer to an objection against an 
interpretation of the sitras which makes their meaning converge 
(samanvaya) (on Brahman), and thus that interpretation must be 
introduced first to make the objection relevant. 

II.6-7 (E15-19; T5-6). Objection : Why doesn’t Samkara start 
his work with an invocation ? 

Answer : From the meaning of Samkara’s introduction it is clear 
he has the Highest in mind, so what he says counts in effect as an 
invocation. 

III.8-9 (E19-21; T6-7). Now Padmapada quotes the opening 
sentence of Samkara’s commentary, “‘it is evident that the ‘I’ and the 
‘Thow’ are different....”’ like darkness and light. 

Objection : What is the nature of this difference? After all, in a 
dimly lit room both light and darkness exist to some degree, so the 
“difference” can’t be ‘‘nonresidence in the same locus.” 

Answer: ‘Difference’? means that there is no mutual relation 
between them as there is, for example, between a universal and the 
particulars in which it inheres. Since the “I” is essentially uncon- 
scious whereas the “Thou” is untransformable and unattached, 
neither can really take on the nature of the other. 

IV.10-12 (E21-23; T7-8). “...as well as their properties.” 
Although when two things are superimposed their properties must 
be too, still it can happen that properties are superimposed without 
their substrata, for example, if a deaf man should say “I can hear.” 

Superimposition is the appearance of the form of something in 


PANCAPADIKA 565 


something that does not (really) have that form (atadriipe tadriipava- 
bhasa). Thus it is false (mithya). The word “false”? has two mean- 
ings: it may signify negation or inexpressibility (anirvacaniyata). Here 
it signifies negation. 

V.13-15 (E23-26; T8-10). “...it is a natural propensity... ., 
that is, men’s judgments and the language in which they are expressed 
involve it when they think and speak of “I”? and “mine.” 

VI.16 (E27-30; TI11-12). Objection: Since superimposition is 
said to be the product of false knowledge, how can it be said to be 
“natural,” that is, beginningless ? 

Answer : It must be admitted that the power of avidyd exists in 
both external and internal things by their very nature. Otherwise false 
appearances are inexplicable. Now this avidyé does not obstruct 
the appearance of the real nature of insentient (jada) objects, since 
their failure to appear arises merely from the absence of any pramdna 
(operating to manifest them). Both before and after the “‘silver”’ 
appears (in the case of the shell being falsely perceived as_ silver) 
the actual nature of silver is perceived even though avidyd exists. 
Thus avidya is only the cause of the appearance of something of a 
different nature (from the nature the thing really has). On the 
other hand, in the case of the inner Self Its nonappearance is due to 
beginningless avidya, since that cannot be explained in any other way. 
And so it is that avidyé obstructs the appearance of Brahman in Its 
real nature in the inner consciousness and becomes the cause of the 
appearance of something of a different nature like the ego sense, etc. 
In this way superimposition is both beginningless as concealing the 
Self and a product of false knowledge, though not in the sense 
of being an accidental effect (i.e., superimposition requires avidyd 
logically). 

VII.17-18 (E30-32; T13-14). Objection: In “that is mine” 
(cited by Samkara as a case of superimposition) the word “that” 
refers to the body and is related to the ego sense as its property. Where 
is the superimposition in that ? 

Answer: Since the ego sense is a superimposition its auxiliary 
(upakarana) must also be so. When one is crowned king in a dream 
the trappings of royalty have no existence. 

VIII.19-22 (E32-37; T14-16). The next section (of the introduc- 
tion, concerning superimposition) is subdivided as follows: first the 
doctrine of superimposition is established, then its nature is outlined 
and its possibility defended, and finally its existence is demonstrated. 

Objection : The first two parts are unnecessary, then, for only what 
is defensible and possible can be established by a pramdna, and if 


566 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


something is established, for example, by perception, there is no 
need to defend its possibility. 

Answer: In this case, however, it is not enough merely to point 
to a man saying “‘that is mine’’; one has to show what the cause is of 
that notion. As in the case of the shell-silver or double moon, avidyd 
is not experienced directly, but only when the notion has been sub- 
lated. But here the sublation is not found. So here the definition 
must be given first and then it has to be shown that such notions as 
these fall under it. 

Objection : Even so, all that needs to be done is to prove the exist- 
ence of something falling under that definition, nothing more. One 
doesn’t need then to go on to show its possibility ! 

Answer: True. But an object may be known to us and yet because 
of another pramdna be judged not real (i.e., impossible). Likewise, 
one might doubt whether superimposition on the interior Self is 
possible on the grounds of an accepted pramdna, and this doubt 
needs to be removed. 

IX.24 (E39-42; T17-18). “Superimposition... is the appear- 
ance in the form ofa memory....” That is, the object that appears 
is not remembered but is of the same kind as an object that has been 
seen before. So the meaning is that there is an appearance, in a 
manner that resembles memory, of something given to us in the past 
by a pramdana. 

X.25-26 (E42-44; T19-20). Objection (by an akhydtivddin, say 
the commentators): When there is knowledge of x and only » is in 
contact with the visual organ, this must be memory (not just something 
like memory). Because of some defect in the capacity of the organ, 
silver (rather than shell) is remembered but is not recognized as a 
case of memory, and then this remembered silver is identified with 
what is being perceived because of a failure to discriminate between 
perception and memory. 

Objector to the akhyativadin: It can’t be memory, since, for example, 
a boy who has never tasted anything bitter may because of sickness 
taste bitterness in something sweet ! 

Akhyativadin : He must have experienced bitterness in some previous 
birth; otherwise he could just as well taste some taste heretofore unknown. 

XI1.27-30 (E45-48; T21-24). Padmapada : What does it mean to 
say that it is “‘not recognized as a case of memory’’? In fact the 
quality of being a case of memory is almost never experienced along 
with the object remembered, and so the fact that a given case of 
memory is not recognized as such is not sufficient reason to differ- 
entiate error from valid cognition. 


PANCAPADIKA 567 


Even in the occasional cases where memory of an object is accom- 
panied explicitly with an awareness that it is remembered, expressed 
as “I remember,” the awareness results from our having realized 
that this is an object we have seen before and so properly termed a 
“remembered”? object, and so even here there is no notion that ‘this 
is a case of memory,” and thus even these occasional cases do not give 
the objector any grounds. Anyway, in the case of superimposition 
it is not the object of a past pramdna that appears—what appears is a 
present object. So the knowledge of x when only » is in contact with 
the sense organ is not a case of memory, but a case of superimposition. 

X11.31-36 (E48-50; T24-27). Akhyativadin : If that’s so—if silver (x) 
appears but it is shell (y) that is the supporting object (alambana)— 
they are opposed, and this is an unattractive view. 

Another objector (an Anyathakhyativadin, according to the commen- 
tators): Why is it unattractive? Being a supporting object only 
means fitness for ordinary practice pertaining to consciousness, and 
here the shell indeed is so fit—so why can’t it be the supporting object? 

Akhyativadin ; Is the appearance of the shell in the form of silver 
correct (paramarthika) or not? If it is correct, there should be no 
sublation of it, but there is. 

Anyathakhyativadin : The appearance of silver is occasioned by a 
defect (in the organ) and is a transformation (parindma) of the shell. 

Akhyativadin : That’s silly—sublation does not occur after milk 
is transformed into curds, and once something has transformed into 
something else it doesn’t return to its original form, whereas the 
shell become “‘silver’’ returns to shell. 

Anyathakhyativadin ; It may—the bud becomes blossom when the 
sun shines and returns to the bud state at night. Likewise here. 

Akhyativadin : No, since on that analogy there would be no subla- 
tion—rather we would say “‘the shell has resumed its former state !’’ 

Another party (an Atmakhyativadin): You (the Akhydtivadin) say that 
the silver is produced from an idea (pratiti) occasioned by some 
vitiated (dusta) cause. But that’s wrong, since whichever idea pro- 
duces the apprehension of silver cannot be the one in which the 
silver is manifested, since they occur at different times. And it 
can’t be produced by some other awareness altogether, since then the 
valid cognition of some other person might also manifest the silver. 

Akhyativadin : It doesn’t matter whose awareness it is, if it’s occa- 
sioned by a vitiated cause it can’t have an actual silver as its object, 
and so by elimination it must be due to the failure to recognize it as a 
case of memory. 

XIII.37-43 (E51-55; 127-32). Anyathdkhyativadin : But it has 


568 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


been well argued above that such failure to recognize never occurs 
anyway. 

Akhyativadin : Then why does silver appear when there is sense 
contact only with shell ? 

Padmapdada (?-Anirvacaniyakhyativadin): It’s not that memory minus 
the recognition that it is memory arises in distinction from the 
perception depending on sense-object contact. Rather there is one 
awareness arising from the sense organ in combination with the 
traces (samskdra). More fully: the faulty or “‘vitiated’’ cause, having 
its ability to produce awareness of shell restricted, activates the parti- 
cular traces, and the two together produce a single awareness and a 
single result. As a consequence the false silver-in-shell appears as the 
supporting object. So a false cognition has a false supporting object, 
and it is that which is sublated, for no sublation of the awareness 
itself occurs. ‘The part played by traces in various types of awareness 
is easily discerned—in inference and in recognition traces combine 
with sensed contents to produce the respective kinds of awareness; 
the difference is that in those cases the awarenesses are valid because 
they arise from nonvitiated causes, unlike the case of error. 

So the silver is made of maya. If it had been real (paramdrthika) 
it would have been grasped by everyone, since its cause would not 
be vitiated. Whereas, given that the silver is made of maya it follows 
that only those whose organs are faulty perceive the silver. The fact 
of the silver’s being sublated also suggests its mdyd-nature—for we 
sublated it by saying “‘this was not silver,”’ not (as would be suggested 
by the Anyathakhydtivadin’s view) ‘‘this was a different silver than the 
one we supposed,” or by the Atmakhyativadin’s view “there is no silver 
independent of consciousness.” 

XIV.44-48 (E55-59; T33-36). Objection: The (Advaita) defini- 
tion of superimposition underpervades its definiendum, since it fails 
to extend to dream and sorrow (Soka); in these two false awarenesses 
there is no contact (of the senses) with anything that could be confused 
with something else. Indeed, the only cause is vdsands, and so these 
are cases of memory, not “‘like’? memory. 

Answer : They are not cases of memory, for an object is immediate- 
ly manifested. 

Objector: They are not memory-like, since these awarenesses arise 
merely because of the traces born of previous pramdnas. 

Answer: Memory is just the appearance of a content arising from 
a previous pramdna. But here the internal organ (manas), being 
disturbed by sleep, together with particular traces activated by 
adrsta produces an awareness that has a false object as its content. 


PANCAPADIKA 569 


And the power of avidya residing in immediate consciousness as limited 
by that (internal organ) manifests itself having that (false thing) 
as its supporting object. 

Objection: Then the manifestation of the dream objects is internal 
only. But in our dream experience we are aware of (the object in a) 
delimited place, just as we are in waking, so that an internal locus will 
not serve to explain dream. 

Answer : There is no fault here. For in the waking state also valid 
awareness is experienced as immediately interior, so that there is no 
difference between the immediately experienced and the awareness 
of a content, since they are both manifested in the same way. So 
even in the waking state an object is experienced just as intimately 
connected with internal immediate awareness; otherwise what is 
not conscious couldn’t be manifested in awareness. For example, 
a pot in the dark doesn’t become manifested except when a lamp 
lights it up. 

That objects appear in experience to be distinct (from awareness) 
even in the waking state is the result of maya. The whole world has 
its single locus in consciousness, and consciousness is without parts, 
since it has no spatial distinctions. So it is what is limited by cons- 
truction (kalpitdvaccheda) that is manifested as worldly distinctions such 
as being limited, being internal, being external. 

XV.49-51 (E59-60; T36-37). Objection : The definition (of super- 
imposition) overextends to include the superimposition of Brahman 
on names. Since it involves neither a faulty cause nor the manifesta- 
tion of a false object, it is not a superimposition (yet on your definition 
it must be). 

Answer: True, it is not a superimposition, but that is because it is 
not an awareness (jfdna) but rather an act of the internal organ (i.e., 
a meditative act), for it is something done out of desire through the 
influence of an injunction. Awareness is dependent on facts; it is 
not possible to produce it or avoid it voluntarily. 

Objection: It is evident that memory is voluntarily produced and 
that it can be suppressed by the internal organ. 

Answer : True, but the effort of will, or of the internal organ, is 
directed toward bringing about or inhibiting the causes (of memory’s 
arising ) such as opening or closing one’s eyes, but they are not opera- 
tive in the production of awareness. So the meditation on names as 
Brahman is only ‘“‘superimposition” through an injunction and for a 
result, like thinking of another man’s wife as one’s own mother in 
order to avoid sexual desire for her. 

XVII.56-59 (E62-66; T40-42). In the definition of superimposition, 


570 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


iT3 


if the phrase . in some other place’ were not to appear the 
definition would be compatible with there being no locus of super- 
imposition. 

Objection : Why is that view wrong ? Sometimes we see, for 
example, hairs without their having any locus. 

Answer : No, for the light parts are the locus. 

Objection : Well, then, let it be that the silver (in the shell-silver 
illusion) is the locus of awareness and the awareness the locus of the 
silver in a beginningless interdependence, like seed and sprout. 

Answer: No, it is not like the seed and sprout, for there seed 1 
depends on sprout 1, which depends on seed 2, which depends on 
sprout 2, etc., but here we have only two things. Anyway, even in 
the seed-and-sprout case one cannot conclude that they serve each 
other as locus—clearly we shall continue to search for their material 
cause (i.e., their locus). So the analogy is pointless. 

Furthermore, when sublation occurs it does not involve mere 
denial, but denial of something in some locus. When we find out 
that this is not a snake but a rope our denial of snake is a denial of 
snake in this (rope). Even when one denies someone else’s funda- 
mental metaphysical concepts one means to say that the ultimate 
cause of things is not that but something else. 

Or else, one can say that the locus of all negations and illusions is 
the witnessing Self. But the superimposed object is not nonexistent. 

XVIII.60-61 (E66-68; T42-43). Objection : Isn’t your view that 
everything is nonexistent ? 

Answer : Who said so? Our view is that the world is anirvacaniya 
and of the nature of beginningless avidyd. Still, we agree that at the 
dawn of vidya the false object disappears altogether. It is not the 
case that it is known to be somewhere else, as the Naiyayika thinks— 
when one says “this is not a snake’ one does not become aware of 
the snake somewhere else. 

XX.64-66 (E69-71; T44-46). Samkara offers two examples to 
show that his definition ‘ 
shell-silver example is intended to show how the ego sense, being 


‘agrees with ordinary experience.” The 


illuminated by consciousness, comes under the scope of ‘‘Thou” 
and is then superimposed on the pure consciousness. The double- 
moon case is intended to show that the difference between jiva and 
God, in the form of the non-Self-nature of the jiva, is only appearance. 

XXI1.69 (E73; T47-48). Objection : By what pramana do you 
know that there is a fault having avidyd as its nature and which veils 
the manifestation (of Brahman)? 

Answer : We know this from scripture and from presumption 


PANCAPADIKA 571 


of the fruta kind (Srutdrthdpatt:). For example, Chandogya Upanisad 
VIII.3.2, Mundaka Upanisad I11.1.2, etc., tell us. Again, since in 
scripture it is the vidya of Brahman that is said to give release, by 
presumption one must conclude that it is avidyd, involving failure to 
comprehend Brahman, that causes bondage. 

XXI.72 (E75; T49-50). Objection: Neither scripture nor’ pre- 
sumption can prove this when they are contradicted by some other 
pramdna. But here it is contrary to reason that something without 
parts and selfilluminating should not be naturally manifested in 
appearance. 

XXII.73-81 (E75-82; T50-54). Answer: This happens because 
of the false notion “I am a man.” 

Objection : If the idea of “‘I” has the same locus as the body, then 
the existence of an independent Self is impossible to prove, since we 
do not have such an idea and since scripture and inference cannot 
prove if perception is opposed to them. If you say that there is no 
such opposition since the idea of “I” is a false one, we answer— 
how do you know this ? Not from scripture or inference, since if they 
are right in this, perception is invalid (since it proves the reverse), 
and if perception is invalid then so are scripture and inference. 
Therefore anyone who believes in the Self must admit that the idea 
“I”? denotes the Self and not the body, etc., or else they would be 
unable to prove the Self. And so the statement ‘I am a man” is not 
a false notion, but a metaphor. 

Answer : Even if the idea of “I”? denotes the enjoyer distinct from 
the body, etc., still that is not known to people for sure (anadhya- 
vasdya), and so the superimposition occurs. An analogy is that the 


2) 


sound “‘a,”’ though it reveals its true nature to us, is still—through 
superimposition occasioned by lack of understanding of that nature— 
thought to be characterized by being a short vowel (or being a long vowel). 
Just as experience alone suggests that the syllable ‘“‘a’’ is ashort vowel, 
so it suggests that the ego is the Self. 

Objection : The cases are not alike, since in the former case ex- 
perience helped by reasoning (éarka) tells us that ‘‘a”’ is different from 
shoriness but not vice versa, whereas in the latter case it is evident 
that both body and Self are distinct from each other. 

Answer : No, since ifx is different from_y, y is surely different from x. 

Objection : Well, it is jugglery (indrajala) to suppose that one who 
knows that two things are different on the basis of valid means of 
knowing strengthened by reasoning may yet judge them identical 
and not be speaking metaphorically. 

Answer : Yes, it is jugglery; it is the work of avidya. And that’s why 


572 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


it is not a metaphor. The idea of “I” is properly about the Self, 
but denotes the body also through avidyd; thus even if reasoning dis- 
tinguishes the two, the “I”? idea continues to point to both, since 
they are both given in immediate awareness (i.e., perception) that 
is not affected by mediate awareness. 

XXIII.84 (E84-86; T56). “The Self isn’t nonobject ... for it is 
the object of our notion of ‘I?....” 

Objection : How can the Self be an object (visaya)? An “object” 
must be something external (fardégbhava) which is made known as 
“‘this,”’ as opposed to the subject (visayin), which is internal (pratyak), 
self-illuminating, and “‘not this.” 

Answer : The ego sense is that which has the notion of “I’’, and it 
is well known that it is made known both as “this” and as ‘‘not this.” 
Can anyone disagree with this ? 

XXIV.85-87 (E87-90; T57-58). Opponent (a Prabhakara): Surely 
the ego notion is not made known as “this.” The knower, known, 
and knowledge (pramiti) are all immediately given; however, the 
known (prameya) is given as object whereas the other two are not. 
Pramana, the activity of the knower, is inferred on the basis of the 
result (phala). Now in “I know this” the cognitive activity of the 
knower relates to the object (visaya) and not to the Self. The Self 
does reveal itself as “‘I’? both in the result (the awareness or pramiti) 
and in the visaya (the pot, etc.,) through the instrumentality of the 
experiencing of the visaya. 

Answer (by someone else, say a Bhatta): No, the idea of “I” 
has the Self as its visaya; it is also the knower of that idea. So the 
Self is known as both “‘this’” and ‘“‘not this.” 

Prabhakara : That can’t be, for the Self has no parts—so one 
part can’t be knower and the other known—and It doesn’t change— 
so It can’t be first one and then the other. What is external cannot 
be Self, and so the Self cannot be the “‘this.”” So pramana is inferred from 
experience (anubhava) that manifests both the “‘this’’ and the ‘“‘not this.” 

XXV.88-94 (E90-97; T58-66). Padmapdda: Is it that (1) Self 
manifests itself as consciousness whereas experience manifests itself 
as unconscious (jada) ? or that (2) both Self and experience mani- 
fest themselves as consciousness ? or that (3) experience manifests 
itself as consciousness whereas the Self is unconscious ? The first 
alternative is wrong, since if experience is unconscious the world will 
not be made known. 

Prabhakara : No, the Self—the knower—being conscious, with the 
help of experience It makes known an object as “‘this” and itself as 
“not this.” 


PANCAPADIKA 573 


Answer : How can the Self make something known using experience 
which is ex hypothesi unconscious ? There will also be an infinite 
regress if the Self needs the result of pramédna (i.e., experience) to 
manifest both the object and itself. 

Now, as to (2): On this view the Self manifests itself and so does 
not need experience to help. If something is conscious by nature it 
doesn’t make sense to say that it is only mediately perceptible and 
needs something else for its immediate perceptibility. Finally, like 
two lights one does not need the other. 

Finally, as to (3): The view that Self is unconscious and experience 
conscious, that will not do either. For if (3) were correct each 
experience should be different from every other one qua experience, 
and they should all instantiate experienceness just as cows instantiate 
cowness. But it is quite clear that the experience of blue and the 
experience of yellow differ because of the differences in their contents 
and not qua experience. 

Prabhakara : The difference (between experiencings) is due to 
destruction or lack of destruction (i.e., when experience of x occurs 
experience of y does not). 

Answer : But the destruction of experience cannot be established, 
since experience is not something that is born (and so it can’t be 
destroyed). This incidentally refutes the (Vijfianavada) theory of 
extreme similarity (atisddrfya) being responsible for our failure to 
perceive the differences among distinct experiencings. 

Thus we conclude that it is the Self alone that is conscious by 
nature, and It comes to be called “experience”? when It is limited 
(upadhiyamana) by different objects of knowledge. 

Prabhakara: All right, let’s accept that. It is then the ego sense 
that answers to the “‘not this,” that is, the knower. 

Answer : True, but the ego sense is not the Self (the ultimate 
knower ) since if it were there could be no deep sleep, since the ego 
sense would manifest itself even in the absence of any object. 

Prabhakara ; We do experience the ego sense in deep sleep, but it 
is not experienced as “‘I”’ because of the absence of objects. 

Answer : That cannot be right, for the thesis is that the ego sense 
is naturally conscious of itself; so it should naturally manifest itself 
whether an object is there or not. If it did in sleep we should there- 
fore remember that when we wake up—but we don’t do so. 

Prabhakara : Well, we do remember it; we say “TI slept well,” and 
this shows we experienced the “I” in deep sleep as well as the pleasure 
that arose then. 

Answer: True, we do say that, but the memory is (produced by 


574 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Self-awareness and) not produced from traces laid down by experienc- 
ing pleasure; rather it is because of the absence of any sense percep- 
tions that we say this. 

XXVI.95-97 (E98-99; T66-68). So, avidya—denoted in various 
contexts as ndmariipa, avydkrta, maya, prakrti, avyakta, tamas, cause, 
$akti, sleep, aksara, GkaSa—which has as its nature the blocking of the 
manifestation of the nature of Brahman, produces selfhood (jivatva)— 
that of which the ego sense is a transformation (parindma) having God 
as its locus; the ego sense is the locus of the powers of awareness and 
action, it is the only basis of agency and enjoyership, it is a light 
produced by its relation with unchanging consciousness and is self- 
illuminating; it is known immediately. 

The ego sense is not an evolute (of prakrti), for if it were it would 
have no relation to the Self and function as “‘this”’ only; but since it 
functions as both “‘this’’ and “‘not this” it is to be understood as falsely 
attributed to the Self because of its intimate relation with the internal 
organ (antahkarana), just as the crystal falsely appears red because 
of its proximity to the hibiscus. 

XXVII.98-100 (E100-102; T69-70). Question : Why is the crys- 
tal’s red color false ? 

Answer : Because if the rays of the eyes got to the flower they would 
reveal validly its red color. But one cannot validly perceive a color 
without its locus, nor even the reflection of a color without its locus. 

Objection : The red color appears, but it is not that the crystal 
appears red. 


Answer : Then the crystal’s own color should also appear. 
Objector : It is obstructed. 
Answer : Then how could we see it ? 


Objector : Wesceit becausc itis not discriminated from the red color. 

Answer : Then we should see air (véyu) when it is not discriminated 
from the color of a substance. 

Objector : ‘Then the red color actually qualifies the crystal ! 

Answer : No, for then when the flower is removed the crystal would 
continue to be red. 

XXVIII.101-103 (E102-104; T70-72). The confusion of con- 
scious and unconscious in the egosense is immediately evident to the 
Self without taking It as an object. Thus the ego sense is viewed both 
as “this” and “‘not this.” 

(This case contrasts with that of a face reflected in a mirror.) 
There the point is that the face and its reflection are actually identical, 
so that the error comes in thinking them different (whereas in the 
crystal-flower case the redness of the crystal is similar to but not 


PANCAPADIKA 575 


crystal-flower case the redness of the crystal is similar to but not 
identical with the redness of the flower). So by analogy in “I am 
agent” the “not this” (viz., the Self) is identical with Brahman (and 
not, as in the ego sense case, merely the apparent sharer of conscious- 
ness with Brahman). 

XXIX.104-111 (E104-109; T72-76). Question: Why are they 
identical ? 

Answer: For example, Devadatta has certain features when out- 
side the house, and he is also recognized to have those same features 
when he goes inside. This recognition would not be possible if the 
“two Devadattas” were different; no more would it be possible to re- 
cognize Devadatta’s reflection in the mirror if it were not identical with 
him—in that case we should have to say that the mirror transforms 
itself when the prototype (bimba) is nearby. Nor does the prototype 
leave its impression as does a seal, since the reflection is not (necessarily) 
the same size as the prototype, since there isno contact between the 
prototype and the mirror, and since if it were thus the mirror would 
continue to reflect the prototype even after it was removed. 

Question : Perhaps the mirror is like the rolled-up mat that, having 
been spread out by some circumstance, rolls back up again as soon 
as the circumstance disappears. 

Answer: The cause of the mat rolling up is the dispositional ten- 
dency (samskara) it has gotten because of being rolled up for a long 
time, not the removal of any circumstance. So a mirror that had 
been in the vicinity of a certain object for a long time ought, by 
analogy, to remain with a tendency to reflect that object even when 
the object has disappeared—but we know that doesn’t happen. 

Opponent : Very well—the reflection is not a different object from 
its prototype; still, it is not really identical with the prototype, any 
more than the silver falsely found in a shell is really identical with 
real silver. 

Answer : The cases are not the same, for in the shell-silver case the 
silver is sublated, whereas in the mirror-reflection case the reflection 
(though it disappears) is not sublated (i.c., we do not judge “this 
reflection is not my face’’). 

Opponent : Well, doesn’t “that art thou” sublate error ? 

Answer : No, what it says is that the jiva (=reflection or prati- 
bimba) has the same nature as Brahman (=prototype or bimba). 
If it were sublatory it would be negative—‘“‘thou art not’? analogous 
to “(this is) not silver.” 

Prabhakara : How can some one thing that manifests itself complete- 
ly in two separate places really be in both ? 


576 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer . We don’t say that a single thing can really manifest itself 
completely in separate places at the same time, but we do say that 
such a thing is single. Its appearance as many is due to maya, which 
is good at producing impossible appearances. 

XXX.112-114 (E110-112; T76-78). Objection: Even when we 
apprehend the identity of the reflection with its prototype they still 
appear to be separate; likewise, even when we apprehend the identity 
of the jiva with Brahman their separateness still continues to be mani- 
fested; thus it cannot be got rid of. 

Answer : Though Devadatta’s knowledge that the reflection in the 
mirror is identical with his face cannot destroy the mirror—which is 
why the separation continues to appear—the jiva’s knowledge sublat- 
ing the difference between jiva and Brahman destroys all the adjuncts 
including the internal organ (antahkarana) that is the reflecting medium. 

Objection: Both the mirror image and the rose-colored crystal 
arise because there is a real object nearby—the mirror or the rose— 
whereas in the case of the supposedly false appearance of the jiva 
there is no such real object to serve as adjunct. 

Answer : ‘That’s why scripture alludes to the case of the rope- 
snake. 

XXXI.115-118 (E112-114; T78-80). Opponent : Even in the rope- 
snake case, though the snake is not there, the trace of some past 
experience of snake must be, and it acts as the adjunct. 

Answer : Yes, and the difference is that in all three cases—mirror 
image, rosy crystal and rope-snakc—traces must operate, but in the 
first two some othcr object is present whereas in the last one there is 
no such entity there. Still, from these three examples it is not made 
clear that the “‘prototype”—the face, the flower or the rope—may 
be unrelated to other elements in the situation. This point, however, 
is brought out in still another familiar analogy from scripture, that 
is, the example of the dk@fa in a pot, for there the “‘prototype’”’—the 
akasa—is unrelated to the pot, the adjunct. 

Not that these examples are sufficient in themselves to prove the 
point; they merely assist the pramapas by removing doubts that may 
arise. And so we conclude that the Selfis ‘‘not this” but is figuratively 
spoken of as “‘this’’ in practical affairs. 

XXXIT.119-121 (2114-117; T80-83). The mechanics of empirical 
perception arc as follows: A functioning (vrtti) of the internal organ 
(antahkarana) in its object or “‘this’’ aspect points to an object (visaya). 
Apparent change (vivarta) occurs in both the consciousness and in 
the object that also manifests consciousness, so that the two come to 
appear as subject and object respectively of a cognitive act. The 


PANCAPADIKA 577 


result of this act is an experiencing of the object, so that the result of 
the act has the same object as the act itself. Asa result of its derived 
consciousness and its association with the functioning (urtt:) the ego 
sense then assumes the role of knower (pramdir), and so it is said that 
the Self knows the object presented in the buddhi. This is also why, 
though the consciousness of the Self is all-pervading, it becomes 
restricted to a specific object and is differentiated as belonging to a 
specific person as his experience. 

XXXITI.122-134 (E118-133; T83-100). Objection: If objective 
things like blue color are consciousness by nature (as is implied in 
the above) then how is that different from the Buddhist position ? 

Answer: In this way: blue and yellow, etc., are mutually exclusive 
awarenesses, but immediacy (aparoksaté) is not multiple in this way, 
since it is known as one while the manifestations of objects are differ- 
ent. So blue color, etc., are not consciousness by nature; if they 
were, then consciousness would appear as excluding other things, 
and that is not the case. 

Furthermore, they (the Vijfianavadins) admit as different from 
the awareness of blue color a conceptual construction (vikalpa) that 
is immediate and has to do with what is internal, distinct from the 
external—that is, accounting for the “‘I’’ in “I know the blue.”’ So 
they really admit that there are two things, mutually exclusive, that 
have the nature of grasper and grasped (despite their protestations 
to the contrary). 

Vijftanavadin : No, our position is that ‘‘I know the blue’’ is consti- 
tuted by three types of vikalpa—of “I,” “this (blue),” and ‘(I) 
know,” these all being mutually exclusive. 

Padmapada : If they are so different, how do they become related 
in a knowledge situation ? 

Vijnanavadin : Indeed, they do not actually do so; since the (three) 
single vikalpa cognitions are momentary and pass away immediately, 
the complex cognition (“I know the blue’) arises immediately 
thereafter along with vdsands produced by the three. Momentary 
entities cannot act; only if ‘I’? and “‘blue”’ were persisting beyond a 
moment could they actually come into relation. 

Padmapida : Then the awareness of ego (“I’?) must be a pure 
particular (svalaksana) lasting only a moment. 

Vijfidgnavadin : Right. But the difference between the “‘I’’ aware- 
nesses from moment to moment is not known to us (normally) because 
of the extreme similarity in the ‘I’? awarenesses. 

Padmapada : Wf the nature of consciousness is to cognize difference, 
but difference is not cognized, then nothing will be known at all, 


578 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Anyway, there is no pramdna to prove that similarity is responsible for 
an awareness of a single thing. 

Vijiianavadin : But since awareness of a single thing is (on our view) 
erroneous of course a pramana doesn’t prove it ! 

Padmapéda : Your position involves mutual dependence, for the 
illusoriness of unit cognition depends on similarity, which in turn 
depends on the illusoriness. 

Vijfianavadin : True, but the same fault would occur even if the 
unit cognition were not erroneous, since if the postulation of simila- 
rity is contradicted by pramdnas the unit cognition will be valid, whereas 
if the unit cognition is shown to be valid the postulation of similarity 
is too. 

Padmapéda : No, for the validity of awareness is self-justified and 
doesn’t depend on something else, so that the postulation of similarity 
is opposed to pramdanas, since that postulation is only possible if we 
suppose that recognition is invalid. 

Vijftdnavddin : The momentariness of everything follows from the 
experienced fact that everything is destroyed the moment after it arises. 

Padmapada : The persistence of pot is proved by the experienced 
fact that it is recognized as still present at the moment after it arises. 

Vijidnavadin : But persistent entities are not real, because they lack 
efficiency (arthakriyakaritua). For consider: a thing that persists, 
remaining the same in its nature, cannot produce any results either 
successively or all at once. Not successively, for since it is unchanging 
there is no cause for its not producing anything or everything at any 
time. And not all at once, for having done so it would have to 
vanish at the next moment (having exhausted its causal efficiency) 
and so would not be persistent after all ! 

Padmapada : What is this efficiency that according to you is a neces- 
sary condition of existence ? 

Vijfianavadin : It is the ability to produce awareness of its object 
in the next awareness in a series. 

Padmapada: If so, no awarenesses exist, since they are all self- 
revealed (svasamvid) and need no other awareness to produce aware- 
ness of their objects. Or if the series in question is different from the 
one characterizing the “cognizer”’ of the first awareness, then another’s 
awareness cannot be grasped by the senses, and inference does not 
grasp what is real anyhow, since it only grasps universals. Or if, 
finally, the series is God’s then God’s knowledge becomes identical 
with that of the sivas. 

Vijriénavadin : What we believe is that causal efficiency means being 
the occasion of another moment. 


PANCAPADIKA 579 


Padmapada : Then the Jast moment (before the end of the scries) 
won’t exist, and there will be no liberation. Or if “liberation” be 
construed as an awareness on the part of the omniscient (God), then 
the “last moment”? will not be the last moment ! 

Reverting to one of your arguments above, that a persisting thing 
remaining constant in nature cannot produce effects successively; 
your argument is mistaken, since a cause cooperates with accessory 
conditions in producing things and so can produce different things 
because of differences in the accessories while remaining itself the same. 

A discussion follows in which various opponents try to question the 
notion that a cause can cooperate with accessories. 

Vijfianavadin : Our view is that the momentary cause (say, a seed ) 
is competent to produce the effect (the sprout) without the help of 
any accessories, but the sprout only comes to exist in company with 
other things—things, however, that do not stand in the causal relation 
to the sprout, since they do not arise until after the cause operates and 
disappears. 

Padmapada : That can’t be right. Your view says that cause C 
does not need accessories A to produce effect E, but that E occurs if 
and only if A occurs at the same time. Now either A is entircly acci- 
dental—in which case we best give up depending on causal relations 
since we can’t depend on them—or else C plus A constitutes the real 
cause, that is, the collection of conditions (sdmagri) sufficient for 
producing the effect. 

Vijidnavadin : Well anyway, your view is really the same as ours; 
we hold that the awareness and its object are identical, and so do you. 

Padmapada : The difference, however, is that we hold there to be a 
permanent Self, and you don’t. 

Objection : (Since you hold that the object is presented immediate- 
ly because it manifests consciousness,) you should hold that the 
object of inference is known immediately, since it too must manifest 
consciousness. 

Answer : No, since in inference, unlike perception, the object is not 
operative in producing the functioning and so is not manifested in the 
inferential cognition—it may be far away or even absent at that time. 

Objector: If the object is absent why should the inference infer it 
rather than something else ? 

Answer : Because that object is related (by pervasion) to the hetu 
(which is immediately presented). 

XXXV.136 (E135-136; T102-104). It is not that the Self becomes 
fit for superimposition only because It is the object of the “I”’ notion; 
It is so because It is immediately experienced. 


580 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objection (by a Bhatta): It is known to us by a distinct awareness 
of which the Self is the object. 

Padmapéda : Does that distinct awareness occur at the same time 
as the awareness, say, of the pot, or at a different time? If at a differ- 
ent time, then there is nothing to tell me which awareness (of pot, 
etc.) belongs to me and which to someone else. And it can’t 
be simultaneous—the (Bhatta) knower-self (being without parts) 
cannot have two distinct objects immediately presented at the same 
time. 

XXXVII.138-140 (E137-138; T104-106). Objection : Samkara 
first explains superimposition and only then tells us that superimposi- 
tion is avidyad whose opposite is vidyé—surely this is a perverse order 
of exposition ! 

Answer: No, for if Samkara had started by expounding avidya 
only the veiling aspect would have been brought out; by beginning 
with superimposition the positive potency (vzksepa) of avidya to distort 
reality is properly emphasized. 

XLIV.166 (E160; T124). Objection: You say that superimposi- 
tion is endless and yet you also contend that the study of Vedanta 
brings it to an end! 

Answer: The meaning is that superimposition will be endless 
without the study of Vedanta. 

XLVII.179-182 (E170-172; T132-135). Objection: Samkara says 
one should ‘acquire understanding (vidya) of the unity of the 
Self... ,’? which sounds as if vidy4 were something that could be 
acquired like a cow; but the implication is incorrect, since awareness 
of the unity of the Self arises at the same time it manifests its content. 

Answer : That is normally so, but in this particular case the content 
is something that is counterintuitive to ordinary men, who do not 
find it easy to accept the unity of the Self. Thus they do not recog- 
nize Self-knowledge, even though it has arisen, and that is why vidya 
requires tarka to make that knowledge certain. Logicians tell us that 
tarka is an accessory to the pramdnas. Tarka is reasoning (yukti), 
specifically that which ascertains that the pramdna operates properly, 
that a sentence means what it does mean, what the content really is. 

Objection: If so, the Vedantic teaching becomes invalid, since it. 
is no longer independent. 

Answer: No; the teaching (viz., “that art thou,” for example) 
is independently capable of producing indubitable Self-knowledge, 

Objector : Then what’s the point of tarka? 

Answer : It removes obstacles arising frorn the natural feeling that 
the doctrine of the unity of the Self is an improbably (or impossible ) one 


PANCAPADIKA 581 


XLVIII.183-184 (E173-174; T135-137). Objection : Awareness of 
the identity of the jiva and Brahman is no different from the aware- 
ness that the self is distinct from the body. But since it is evident 
that bondage persists even when the latter awareness is acquired, it 
is also clear that the former one cannot remove bondage. 

Answer: No, they are quite different. The knowledge of identity 
makes impossible the notions of enjoyership, etc., unlike the knowledge 
of difference from the body. 

Objection: Then if avidyd disappears at the time knowledge of the 
identity of jiva and Brahman arises, the whole ego knot (ahamkdara- 
granthi, i.e., the body, etc.) should disappear, since it has avidya as its 
condition. 

Answer: No, for avidyé still remains as a result of the traces (sams- 
kara), just as fear remains even after its occasion is past. 

XLIX.185-186 (E174-175; 1137-138). Objection: Not all the 
Vedantic texts expound vidya. Some of them set forth various kinds 
of meditation (upasand) leading to progressive salvation (kramamukti), 
to divine powers (aisvarya) and to the quick maturation of karma 
leading to heaven (abhyudaya). 

Answer: ‘True, but the object of these meditations is Brahman, so 
it is appropriate that exposition of Vedanta begins by explaining the 
identity of the jiva with Brahman, etc. Meditation on Brahman as 
limited by specific properties is enjoined for specific kinds of results 
in the other part of the Vedanta, but as that part is subordinate (to 
the section relating to nirguna Brahman) there is no defect. 


SECOND VARNAKA 


I.1-2 (E180; T142). Opponent (an Andrambhaka): Since Jaimini 
(in the Mimdamsdsitras) investigates the whole meaning of the Vedas 
as indicated by his opening sentence ‘““Then therefore the inquiry into 
dharma,’ and since Brahman-knowledge is enjoined, it is included 
under dharma, and since there is no further doubt that would require 
further inquiry, the inquiry into Brahman (brahmajijidsd) is already 
accomplished. 

II.3-7 (E180-183; T142-145). Here some (Arambhakas) say that 
there is a further doubt that requires inquiry into Brahman, and that 
doubt arises because some Vedic texts are not injunctions at all— 
for example, Chandogya Upanisad V1.2.1, “Existence alone was this 
(world) in the beginning, my dear.’ Again, even injunctive texts 
that appear to enjoin meditation on the Self or Brahman cannot be 
construed that way, since the Self is not a thing that can change asa 
result of an action such as meditation—none of the functions of an act 


582 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


are appropriate with respect to It—It cannot be produced, gotten to, 
modified, or purified, since It already exists in pure form. Thus, 
since no action pertains to the Self, there must be a separate inquiry 
into It, and that is why the first sé#tra here announces such an inquiry. 

IV.10-11 (£184-185; T146-147). Others argue that, since the 
pramadnas other than verbal testimony cannot grasp Brahman, and 
since verbal testimony (i.e., the Vedas) relates to something yet to 
be achieved and so cannot grasp Brahman, inquiry ends where the 
Mimamsdasiitras end. In order to refute this notion this first stitra is 
proposed. 

V.12-15 (E185-187; T147-150).  Andrambhavadin : Just from 
injunctive implication in “‘one should study one’s own branch of the 
Vedas” one is enjoincd to take up Vedantic inquiry. Though the 
Sclf cannot be the object of the injunction, nevertheless it is through 
meditation (on It) as enjoined by scripture that liberation is achieved. 

VI.16-17  (E188-189; T150-151). Still another view is this: 
Brahman can be the content of Vedic injunctions. For example, 
when the Upanisad (Brhadaranyaka Upanisad IV.5) says that “all 
this is the Self,” it docsn’t mean merely to state that everything is 
the Self, since that would make the Self unconscious like the world, 
but rather that knowledge of reality arises from the elimination of 
non-Self, and so one should postulate (kalpayati) an injunction in 
connection with this passage that has the effect of “‘know all this as the 
Self.” 

VII.18-20 (E189-190; T151-153). Andrambhavadin : Even if there 
may be cases where postulating an injunction is appropriate, this 
can’t be one of them (since the Self is not something to be achieved). 

VIIIL.22 (E190-191; T154). Moreover, merely being enjoined to 
meditate on or know the world to be not-Self will not make the not- 
Self character of the world disappear. 

IX.23-26 (E191-193; T154-157). Arambhavadin: It is like the 
mantras (which are enjoined to be recited at the sacrifice to remind 
one of the factors involved in the sacrifice)—though the knowledge 
in question has already been achieved, one may be enjoined to acquire 
it again (so that liberation may ensue). So “all this is Brahman” 
can be construed as an injunction as well as expressing knowledge. 

Anérambhavadin : This would result in contradictions—for example, 
Brahman would be both the primary object (because the knowledge 
expressed is of Brahman) and the subordinate object (because 
Brahman-knowledge is enjoined as a means to liberation). Again, 
Brahman will be both something to be achieved (in liberation) and 
something already achieved (as knowledge), something to be known 


PANCAPADIKA 583 


for the first time (as the object of an injunction) and already known 
(since the knowledge is enjoined to be re-acquired). 

X.27-29 (E193-195; 1158-159). Arambhavadin : If what you say 
is right, any injunction involving subordinate items will be useless 
(since contradictory). For example, since “sprinkle the rice with 
water” involves knowing the rice through some other pramdna— 
perception, say—on your reasoning this will constitute a contradic- 
tion. 

Anarambhavadin : No, the analogy is not apt, since in the case under 
discussion (‘‘all this is Brahman”’ construed as an injunction) the 
‘subordinate item” is not known independently of the sentence, whereas 
in the example you allude to, the rice 7s known by perception prior 
to and independently of the injunction. 

Furthermore, a part of a sentence (avdntaravakya, lit. ‘‘a lower 
sentence”’) cannot be (or express) a pramdna. 

Arambhavadin : Our opinion is that a statement like ‘Brahman is 
truth, knowledge, endless’? (satyam jitanam anantam Brahma) gives us 
knowledge and may be also a subordinate item in an injunction. 

Anarambhavadin : Thatis not right; the sentence you mention is 
complete in itself and provides knowledge, unlike subordinate items, 
for example, arthavddas, which are subsidiary to an injunction. 

XI.30-32 (E195-196; T160-162). Arambhavadin : But since imme- 
diate awareness (anubhava) does not come from verbal knowledge 
(fabdajfiana), an injunction is needed; verbal knowledge accompanied 
by an injunction can provide anubhava, the injunction being to the 
effect that one should meditate upon the verbal knowledge, a reminder 
of what the verbal knowledge provides. 

Andrambhavadin : Then the injunction is hardly necessary, since 
the verbal knowledge is the pramana and one naturally meditates on 
the truth once one has realized it. 

XII.33-35 (E196-198; T162-165). The Arambhavadin provides 
examples to support his opinion; these are rejected by his opponent. 

XIII.36-37  (E199-200; T165-166). Arambhavadin : Well, then, 
let us suppose that there are not two knowledges (an injunction and 
a verbal knowledge) but merely one, the injunction; it is by presump- 
tion (arthdpatti) that one arrives at the conviction of the truth that all 
is Brahman, presumption based on the truth that the injunctive 


knowledge must have an object. 
Andérambhavadin : You’ve got it just backwards—surely the state- 


ment “all this is Brahman” naturally points to the truth, and it is 
crazy to set that aside to get at the same truth by presumption ! 
Furthermore, the object of an injunction doesn’t always have to be 


584 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


an actual thing; one may be enjoined to meditate, for example, “on 
speech as a cow,” etc. 

XIV.38-39 (E200-201; TI166-167). Andrambhavadin : Therefore, 
we conclude that words like “Self,” “Brahman,” etc., refer to the self 
that is identical with the “I” notion, and that in the Vedas one is 
enjoined to meditate on It in ways that are conducive to liberation. 
So there is nothing further needed that would require an inquiry into 
the nature of Brahman. 

XV.40-43 (E201-204; T167-169). Padmapdda : It might be so 
if Jaimini had commented on the whole of the Vedas; but he only 
concerned himself with that part concerning the effects of actions, 
not that part which describes reality. This is shown by his opening 
sentence, ‘‘then therefore the inquiry into dharma,” in which Jaimini 
advises one who has finished study of the Veda not to leave his guru’s 
abode but to remain and study dharma. That this is the correct way 
of understanding Jaimini is suggested by the fact that there are differ- 
ent views about what dharma is—some say it is agnihotra, others say 
it is other kinds of ritual action. Furthermore, the words ‘“‘then 
therefore” suggest that one needs to understand what dharma is in 
order to use ritual action as a means to heaven, etc. But this proves 
also that dharma does not exhaust the meaning of the Vedas. 

XVI.44-47 (E205-208; T169-172). Likewise, in Jaimini’s second 
siittra it is said ‘‘dharma is that object whose mark is codand,”’ not that 
dharma is the object whose mark is the Vedas in general. 

Andrambhavadin : No. The point of using the word ‘‘codana’’ is to 
indicate that by following the Vedic injunctions one will get to heaven. 

XVII.48-51 (E208-210; T172-175). Andrambhavadin : Further- 
more, both Jaimini and Sabara expressly state that action (kriyé) 
is the purport of the Vedas. 

Padmapada ; True, they seem to say that, but in the context we must 
conclude they are referring to only a part of the Vedas when they 
speak thus, for Sabara also indicates that the need to inquire into 
dharma should lead one not to terminate his studies after studying the 
Vedas. Their statements should be read to show that the Vedas 
have some meaning, not that dharma is their only meaning. 

XVIIL.52-55 (E211-215; 1175-178). Here some (Prabhakaras) 
say: The reason one should inquire into dharma is just that it is possible 
to interpret the Vedas in a wrong manner; thus the meaning of the 
first Mimdmsdsitra is that one should inquire into the meaning of the 
Vedas and not only into dharma. 

Padmapada : If so, the first sitra should have read ‘“‘then therefore 
the inquiry into the meaning of the Vedas.” 


PANCAPADIKA 585 


Prabhakara : The word “‘dharma’’ is used instead merely to indicate 
that the meaning of the Vedas serves human purposes. 

Padmapada : This doesn’t fit with the subsequent séiras, since the 
third sitra and what follows it go on to justify the validity of the 
Vedas, and on your interpretation the person enjoined to inquire into 
the meaning of dharma, that is, the Vedas, already accepts the validity 
of the Vedas, so these sitras would then be beside the point. 


THIRD VARNAKA 


J.1-6 (E216-219; T179-182). Odjection: The first sitra means 
that an inquiry (vicdra or mimémsd) into Brahman should be started, 


Answer : No, the word ‘“‘jijfasa@’”’ means “‘desire to know’ and need 
not be thought of as synonymous with exegesis (mimadmsd). Indeed, 
the natural sense of the word indicates the desire to gain knowledge 
resulting from inquiry, so that ‘‘ijfdsa’’ presupposes inquiry rather 
than naming it. 

II.7-10 (E219-222; T182-184). Objection: Even so, the word 
“then” (atha) indicates the initiating of jijfdsd, since it announces 
that scripture (Sastra) should be begun to be studied in order to 
acquire Brahman-knowledge. 

Answer: No one can desire to acquire Brahman-knowledge, since 
its acquisition precludes happiness, requiring cessation of all sense- 
object contact. 

Objector: But with it one obtains bliss ! 

Answer: But one hasn’t experienced that bliss, so no one will 
desire it in contrast to happiness of the sort that has been experienced. 
If that were so, furthermore, everyone would have long since aban- 
doned sensory desires in favor of Brahman-knowledge. 

Objector: Well, everyone knows that Brahman-knowledge produces 
supreme Satisfaction (partirpa); thus a man who is satisfied will still 
desire this higher satisfaction, since desire arises from not being fully 
satisfied. 

Answer : No, satisfaction breeds repulsion, since it destroys appetite 
for objects. 

III.11-13 (E222-224; T184-187). Objection: Still, “then” does 
not indicate the unique antecedents, as is claimed by Samkara, since 
they are already enjoined in the general mandate on everyone to study 
the Vedas, in which Brahman is the chief subject. 

Answer: But all the general mandate enjoins .is that people learn 
to recite the words of scripture; so that understanding the meaning of 
the Vedas is separate from the injunction to study them. 


586 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


IV.14 (E224; T187). Even if we admit that understanding the 
meaning is the result of the general mandate to study, still that man- 
date can’t be the reason why one desires to know Brahman, since 
prior to Vedic study the meaning is not understood. So we still need 
to know in advance who the adhikdrin is, that is, who possesses the 
unique antecedents of the inquiry into Brahman. 

V.15-17 (E224-226; T187-190). Objector : Then, since the man- 
date doesn’t specify the adhikarin, it will become useless. 

Prabhékara : Since it is the teacher who will benefit it is he who 
causes the general mandate to be enjoined on the student. 

Answer: If so there will be no obligation on the student to study ! 
Furthermore, teaching is a noneternal or optional mandate, one 
among those that Brahmins may or may not perform, whereas Vedic 
study, like the sacred-thread investiture, is eternal, that is, obligatory 
upon the apprentice. So how can what is noneternal produce what 
is eternal ? 

VI.18-20 (E226-228; T190-191). Prabhakara : The mandate to teach 
is not optional, since it is by teaching that the teacher earns his living. 

Answer: That nonoptionality arises from the constancy of the 
teacher’s desire for a result—that is, money, but it is still not obliga- 
tory in the relevant sense, since there are other ways of making money 
and one does not incur sin by not making a career of teaching. 

VII.21-25 (E228-231; T191-195). First objector: Still, it zs an 
obligatory mandate that a father should instruct his son; it must be 
that a teacher has an obligatory mandate to instruct his pupils. 

Padmapdda : That latter “‘mandate”’ is only ancillary to the duty 
a man has to support his ancestors by instructing his son, investing him, 
etc. Furthermore, if the general mandate is understood as enjoined 
on the teacher to teach, and not the pupil to study, then if a teacher 
should suddenly die in the middle of the course of study the pupil will 
not be obliged or inclined to seek another teacher ! 

(This discussion concerning the proper interpretation of “then” 
in I.1.1 continues for several pages. Since it involves some very 
technical issues in grammar and exegetics it is not further summarized 
here. ) 

XV.52-54 (E245-247; T209-211). Objection: The word “then” 
indicates that the desire to know Brahman arises after the performance 
of purificatory rites. 

Answer: That would be all right if the results of actions always 
purified a man in the same life and thus prepared him for Brahman- 
knowledge; but the purification may be due to acts performed in 
previous lives as well, as is attested by scripture. 


PANCAPADIKA 587 


XVI.55-56 (E247-248; T211-212). Odjection: Very well, the 
precedence of ritual acts may include those in previous lives. 

Padmapada : Then there is no scriptural sanction for the view. 

XVII.57-61 (E248-251; 'T212-215). And in any case, as Samkara 
says, the results of inquiry into dharma and inquiry into Brahman are 
entirely different, so there is no basis for supposing any regular order 
of succession between their respective accomplishments. 

Thus something must be postulated, denoted by the word “then,” 
after which the inquiry into Brahman is to be taken up. 

XVIII.62-66 (E251-253; T215-217). The four adhikéras or “unique 
antecedents” are explained. 

XIX.67-70 (E253-255; T217-220). Objection : Since the scrip- 
ture indicates that the results of meritorious acts are imperishable, 
discriminating men do not necessarily renounce the objects of enjoy- 
ment. Nor does desire for liberation arise merely from knowing that 
there is an unchanging, eternal Being. And these not necessarily 
occurring, there is likewise no regularity in such men practicing the 
virtues such as tranquillity, etc. Since the identity of the jiva with 
Brahman is unlikely—they are opposite in nature—no desire for 
liberation is likely to arise, especially as no positive pleasure will be 
found in that state. So the desire for liberation cannot be the cause of 
the desire to know Brahman. 

Answer : The scriptural passages you interpret as indicating the 
imperishability of meritorious acts are mcre arthavddas, being contrary 
to other scriptural passages that enjoy the support of reasoning. And 
scripture also indicates that Brahman is the supreme end of man. 

(The remainder of this section is devoted to grammatical analysis 
of the words of the siira.) 


FOURTH VARNAKA 

L.1-2 (E264-265; T229-230). Objection: “‘Is Brahman generally 
known to us or not ?”’ Because of this dilemma the present work has 
neither purpose, subject matter or relation. Something can be the 
subject matter of a given treatise only in case it has yet to be expound- 
ed. If Brahman is already known expounding It will be without 
purpose, and the exposition will lack a subject matter (in the technical 
sense). However, if Brahman is not already well known It cannot 
be expounded, since in order to explain something one must first have 
it in mind, that is, know it at least to that extent. 

11.3-8 (E265-268; 1230-234). Answer: ‘‘Brahman is known to 
us’—so the work has all three perquisites. (The rest of the section 
refutes various arguments purporting to show that all three need not 
or cannot be specified.) 


588 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


TII.10-15 (E268-272; T234-239). Objection: It is Vedanta only, 
and not the fdstra—that is, the Vedantasiitras—that has the three 
perquisites, for it is Vedanta that concerns Brahman, whereas the 
subject matter of the Vedantasiitras concerns the reasons why the 
Upanisads should be understood as producing Brahman-knowledge. 

Answer: The exegesis (mimdmsé or vicdra) assists one in understand- 
ing of Vedanta and thus of Vedanta’s subject matter, that is, Brah- 
man, just as preliminary sacrifices are auxiliary to the main one and 
so have heaven as their result too. 

Objection : The analogy is incorrect, since in the sacrifice case the 
auxiliaries are necessary for the result, whereas in the present case 
one does not need exegesis to know Brahman—one can be enlightened 
directly by hearing a text, according to you. 

Answer: Still, the exegesis removes doubts about the meaning of 
the text that is heard. 

Objector: That must be wrong. A sentence that appears ambi- 
guous has to be understood as expressing a single proposition 
(meaning), and ordinary methods of disambiguating a sentence 
having been applied, the sentence then produces knowledge of its 
meaning without further inquiry. You seem to suggest that scripture 
first produces doubtful or false awareness and then with the aid of 
exegesis produces certain knowledge, but that is not correct—rather 
scripture has by its own capacity the power to produce that knowledge 
before any such exegesis. 

Padmapada : It is true that the meaning of the sentence arises prior to 
exegesis of the sitras. However, that meaning arises along with others 
that are contrary to it, due to the ambiguity of the words involved, 
etc., and as a result seems to belong in the category of doubtful 
assertions. In this situation exegesis sees to it that the contrary 
meanings do not arise when the sentence is heard and thus that 
doubt does not occur, and as a result it functions as an auxiliary to the 
understanding of the sentence, which is of course the direct cause of 
the certain knowledge. Since this is so, it is naturally important that 
the purpose, subject matter, and relation of the Vedanta-siitras—that 
is, exegesis—be explained; otherwise one might not study it and so 
be deprived of the beneficial results of hearing the Vedantic sentences. 


IV.16-23 (E272-277; T239-244). Objection : How is “Brahman... 
known to us’—that is, by what means? 

Answer: Since it clearly (from context) does not mean a member 
of the Brahmin caste, or Brahma, or the individual soul (jiva), etc., 
one concludes it means some other thing. The case is analogous to 
the word “‘heaven.” 


PANCAPADIKA 589 


Objector: Nonsense: if that were so we would be able to know the 
meaning of any word merely by hearing it used, even though we had 
never heard it before and knew of it by no pramana. The meanings 
of words like “‘heaven”’ are not made known merely from their use. 

Answer : Suppose you understand all the other words in a sentence 
except one—you don’t abandon all attempt to understand the sentence, 
but rather try to understand the meaning of that word from consi- 
derations of fittingness (nigama), etymology, and grammar. 

Objector: No, these are appropriate in clarifying that a word is 
being used in an unusual sense—for example, from fittingness we may 
conclude that a certain meaning among others fits the context best. 

Answer: Well, you admit that fittingness, etc., can be used to pick 
out one use from others; we add that even where a use has not been 
found prior to this point these means can be used to arrive at the 
appropriate one. And that is what Samkara alludes to in conclud- 
ing that from the meaning of the root ‘‘brh’? (to become great) one 
may conclude to the features of Brahman. 

V.24-25 (E277-278; T244-245). Objection: Even if one might 
get an idea of such an entity as Brahman through etymology, etc., 
still a mere word (pada) cannot establish the existence of anything, 
for it is not a pramana. 

Answer : True, and that’s why there must be inquiry into it, through 
providing reasons such as the next one offered by Samkara, “(2) 
because Brahman is known to each person as his Self....” 

VI.26-29 (E278-280; T245-246). As example of “‘mistaken opinions” 
the Lokayata view is reviewed and criticized here. 

VII.30-33 (E280-282; T246-247). And here those who think the 
senses are the self, or the internal organ, or vijfiana, or the void. 

VIII.34-37 (E282-286; 1248-250). Here the view of the Naiya- 
yikas that “‘there is an agent and enjoyer different from the body... .”’ 
is criticized. 

1X.38-40 (E286-289; 1250-254). And here the Samkhya view 
“that that being is enjoyer only, not agent,”’ as well as the theists. 

X.41-43 (E289-292; 1254-257). Thus there are all these con- 
flicting opinions, and if one should inadvertently be misled by one of 
them he may miss gaining liberation. So there should be inquiry 
into Brahman—brahmajijfiadsa—to avoid that. 


FIFTH VARNAKA 


1.1-4 (E293-295; T258-260). It is clearly appropriate, then, that 
the sitrakdra (i.e., Badarayana) should go on to explain the nature of 
Brahman. 


590 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


I1.5-8 (E296-298; T261-263). Samkara’s commentary (‘Brah- 
man is the omniscient, omnipotent cause. ...’’) expounds the essen- 
tial definition (svariipalaksana) of Brahman. Such definitions are of 
two sorts—indicative definitions (upalaksana) and descriptive defini- 
tions (viSesalaksana). An indicative definition speaks in terms of 
worldly properties existing separately (from the definiendum), 
and not in terms of the intrinsic properties (of the definiendum). 
So the descriptive definition (of Brahman) has still to be stated. 

**... The world of name and form’’: each system of philosophy 
has its own categorial classification of things in the world; this repre- 
sents the Advaita classification. 

III.9-11 (E298-301; T263-265). All other kinds of change are 
comprised within the three alluded to here (viz., origination, main- 
tenance, and destruction). 

IV.12-14 (E301-303; 1266-267). Samkara in saying “... it 
cannot arise from an unconscious fradhdna....,” etc., suggests a 
way of proving the existence of God, namely, by inference through 
exclusion of all possible alternatives (parisesanumdna). 

V.15-17 (E303-305; T267-269). Kanada and others think that 
this argument through inference by exclusion is sufficient by itself to 
prove the existence of God and ask what further purpose the Vedantic 
texts then have? 

Answer: ‘This last argument by itself is not sufficient... .” 


SIXTH VARNAKA 


I-II (£314-316; 1277-278). “From (Brahman’s) being the 
source of scripture”’ we conclude to Brahman’s omniscience. 

Objection: If so scripture is dependent on human intellects. 

Answer: No; like Brahman it is changeless and eternal. 

Objector : Then how can it arise from Brahman ? 

Answer: It doesn’t “arise” in time, but it is dependent on Brah- 
man, as the snake is dependent on the rope. The scriptures say that 
they were “breathed” by Brahman; breathing is a spontaneous 
activity. 

Objection : Then how do you maintain that Brahman is omniscient ? 

Answer: Both names and forms depend for their manifestation 
(vivartana) on the power of awareness (jfdnasakti) of Brahman, 


SEVENTH VARNAKA 


I (E317-318; T279-280). The alternative explanation of sutra 3 
is explained here. It is not a defect in a sitra to be capable of 
expressing more than one meaning—indeed, this is an embellishment, 


PANCAPADIKA 591 


EIGHTH VARNAKA 


I.1-4 (E319-321; T281-283). “Objection: Scripture is not the 
means of knowing Brahman... .” 

Objection to the objection : Since the Vedas are not written by human 
beings scripture needs no other pramdnas to corroborate its validity. 

Objector : True, but we find that pramdnas sometimes conflict with 
each other—for example, when we see nearness and distance in a 
picture with our eyes but find this to be wrong when we attempt to 
verify it by touching the surface. Likewise perception and scripture 
conflict on certain points, and scripture must give way to perception. 
Furthermore, scripture is invalid since it is devoid of significance for 
human values. Since scripture (you say) relates only to something 
already accomplished it has no relation to action and thus no 
relation to future happiness or frustration, relevance to which exhausts 
the sphere of human significance. ‘‘All scriptural passages are... 
injunctive.” 

Furthermore, even in regard to objects that are not available to 
perception scripture, unless injunctive, cannot be a pramdna. For 
scripture can only illuminate its object by illuminating other objects 
that are grasped by other pramdnas (since the object is ex hypothesi 
already in existence, if it has no relation to other things it is not 
graspable. ) 

II.5-6 (E321-322; T283-284). Objector continues : Now even if it 
is admitted that the Vedanta portion of scripturé is ancillary to 
injunctions to meditate, still an omniscient, etc. Being cannot be 
proved, and so those passages should be understood as providing one 
with a description of the world-cause to use in the meditations 
enjoined in the general injunction that one should study his branch 
of the Vedas. 

III.7-8 (E322-324; T284-288). Answer : The fourth sitra answers 
all this by appealing to the congruence (samanvaya) among the 
Vedantic texts. What is this congruence? It is a connection among 
the words (of the Vedanta texts) that (1) does not involve any mu- 
tually limiting relation (parasparanavacchinnartha); (2) does not pre- 
suppose an injunction (ananyaékamksa); (3) requires no supplementation 
(avyatirikta); (4) has a single essence (ekarasa); and (5) relates to the 
uninflected stems alone. This connection (found in a sentence such 
as ‘“‘that art thou”’) is like the connection between the words “this” 
and “that” in “this is that Devadatta,’? or as between the words 
“brightest” and “shining” in “the moon is that brightest shining 
thing.” What is excluded by this ‘“‘congruence” is a relation such as 
that between an action and its object. 


592 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


IV.9-11 (E324-326; T288-290). Objection : The question related 
to the validity as exemplified in sentences such as those in the second 
sutra (“Brahman is that from which birth, etc.’’)—so why are we now 
given a different illustration (by Samkara) ? 

Answer: We has a reason. In the second sitra an accidental 
definition (tafasthalaksana) of Brahman was offered; in a sentence 
such as “that art thou” the identity of Self and Brahman is being 
exhibited, not an accidental feature of Brahman. 

Now, to revert to your objection about the dependence of scripture 
on other pramdnas—this is to be initially answered by pointing out 
that Brahman is without form and so not apprehensible by the senses. 

Objection: Yes, and since that is so scripture as a whole cannot be 
a pramana by which to prove Brahman. 

Answer : Even though words generally must relate to perceptible 
things, still, consider how a child learns the language. He does so 
by observing the behavior of those who hear a word. No other 
pramdna is involved at the time, and yet he learns to understand what 
the word means. Now once having learned how to use the word he 
may subsequently want to explain its meaning to someone else; he 
realizes that he understood the meaning himself by a pramana other 
than verbal knowledge (viz., perception), and so in explaining how 
he can convey the meaning to someone else he (wrongly) supposes 
that two pramanas are involved—perception and verbal testimony; 
in fact, however, perception plays no role at all in bringing about the 
understanding of the meaning by his hearer. Therefore, at the time 
of understanding the meaning of a word it is not that one cognizes 
the word as denoting an object that is given to one by some other 
pramdna, but rather that verbal testimony produces the understanding 
without requiring anything else, and the perceptibility of its object 
is irrelevant. 

V.12-13 (E326-328; T290-291). Anyway, how can one suppose 
that what is not of human origin and so requires the assistance of no 
other pramapas can be invalid? 

Objector: As we said, because of the analogy of the picture, that is, 
pramanas sometimes conflict. 

Answer: The analogy is faulty. The conflicting pramanas are 
alleged to be verbal testimony and perception, but the one—verbal 
testimony—is ex hypothesi without fault (because nonhuman in origin) 
and for the same reason there can’t be any relevant faultiness in 
perception, say through a defect in the sense organ (since the object 
in question—Brahman—is not perceptible through the senses ). 

Furthermore, your implied analysis of the picture example is 


PANCAPADIKA 593 


incorrect. In fact, touch corroborates sight in this case. For per- 
ception as pramana provides knowledge of the picture free from the 
illusion of nearness and distance—an illusion that is produced by 
subtle shadings and that would disappear if those lines were deleted— 
and touch corroborates that perception. 

Now just as scriptural injunctions are valid with respect to actions, 
their validity stemming from the fact that they discriminate something 
not otherwise known, so the scriptural statements concerning the 
actual nature (of Brahman) are valid with respect to the object of 
which they speak, since they too discriminate something not otherwise 
known. 

VI.14-16 (E328-330; T291-294). Objection : Only injunctions are 
valid, since the subject matter of scripture is actions. 

Answer: No, that will involve mutual dependence. The only 
way to prove that the Vedas have only actions as their subject matter 
is on the basis that only injunctive statements are valid, but the only 
way to prove that only injunctive statements are valid is to assume 
that the Vedas have only actions as their subject matter. It is aware- 
ness, not action, about which the question of validity arises; even in 
the case of perception, its validity stems from the fact that it makes 
something known that was not known before. 

Objection : That is only because perception has nothing to do with 
actions. But for scripture, which does have to do with actions, the 
test of validity must derive from its satisfying some human purpose. 

Answer : But there are two ways in which one may hope to have 
one’s purposes satisfied. Either one hopes to perform some action 
that is capable of gaining him some desired end (or avoid some feared 
outcome), or else he hopes to remove an illusion that makes him seem 
not to have that which is already there (or to lack that which he 
already lacks). The first kind of end can be accomplished through 
action, the second only through knowledge. Both, however, lead 
to the satisfaction of human purposes—indeed, the latter kind leads 
to the highest human purpose. 


NINTH VARNAKA 


I.1-2 (E331-332; T295-296). Objection : Even though scripture 
does provide proof of Brahman, still this occurs only in conjunction 
with injunctions to act, for otherwise communication would be im- 
possible. Communication arises from human desire to obtain what 
he wants and avoid what he dislikes. Now obtaining and avoiding 
these does not necessarily come about merely by destroying their 
relation to pleasure and pain. Whereas one may obtain pleasure 


594 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


by recognizing the gold he forgot, or avoid pain by recognizing 
that the rope-snake is not a snake, one does not obtain pleasure and 
avoid pain merely by hearing scripture and appreciating the nature 
of Brahman. Samsdra still goes on as before. Meditation is still 
required after Brahman-knowledge. So even if we concede that in 
some empirical cases declarations have a human purpose, in the case 
of the Vedas that is not admitted, and the statements of Brahman’s 
nature must be understood as subordinate to the injunctions to men 
to study and meditate upon Brahman. 

II.3-4 (E333-335; T296-299). Answer: What is the source of 
that knowledge having Brahman as its object that is enjoined in 
injunctions to meditate ? 

Objector : It is the continual calling to mind of the knowledge that 
arises from the study of the Vedas. 

Answer : But we see no results arising from that ! 

Objector: By continually thinking on a desired object one may 
bring to pass a continual series of pleasures. 

Answer : If so an injunction is without purpose (since one can have 
pleasure without it). 

Objector : Our idea is that the injunction to continually think on 
it is laid down in order that one may gain direct realization (sdksat- 
kara). 

Answer : That is unreasonable : one cannot get a perceptual result 
(like direct realization) from verbal testimony, any more than one can 
get perceptual awareness of fire from inferential knowledge of smoke’s 
relation to fire. 

Objector: Direct realization does not arise from recalling only 
verbal knowledge, but rather from another awareness arising from 
that stream of recollections. 

Answer : There’s no proof of that. 

Objection : Then let us say that what is enjoined is meditation 
(dhyana) on that object made known by verbal testimony—in the 
very form in which it is thus made known—in order to produce 
immediate realization of it. 

Answer: Ome does not directly realize the object on which he 
meditates if that object is beyond the range of immediate awareness. 
And even if we were to admit that it happens, that still wouldn’t 
prove that the object is real—one can meditate on imaginary objects. 

III.5-6 (E335-337; T299-300). Another says : What is enjoined 
is some extraordinary (alaukika) awareness not arising from verbal 
testimony. 

Answer ; We ne2d to know what pramana it is obtained by, and what 


PANCAPADIKA 595 


its content is, in order to know what to say about it. But once we 
know that there will be no purpose to the injunction ! 

IV.7-9 (E337-339; T300-303). Another opponent : Brahman, which 
is beyond the world, must be meditated on, and the injunction is 
to that effect. By analogy with injunctions to meditate on certain 
divinities to get appropriate results, one is enjoined here to meditate 
on Brahman to achieve liberation. 

Objection to this opponent : Since on your view liberation has a begin- 
ning it must have an end, which is wrong. 

Opponent’s answer: No, for scripture says “the does not return 
again” (Chandogya Upanisad IV.15-6; VIII.15.1; Brhadadranyaka Upanisad 
VI.2.15), 

Objection : But reasoning (tarka) leads to the opposite conclusion. 

Opponent: If reasoning carries the day, we could conclude the 
nature of liberation by reasoning alone. 

Padmapada: As Samkara says, “... knowledge cannot be viewed 
as a means conducive to some action designed to gain liberation,” 
because liberation is not a result of action. If it were, like heaven it 
would be enjoyed in some body, but scripture tells us that liberation 
is disembodied. Again, if liberation is thought of as a high degree 
of pleasure resulting from action, then it would be noneternal as 
reasoning rightly intimates. 

V.10-13 (E339-342; T303-304). Discussion of other scriptural 
passages bearing on this problem. 

VI.14 (E342; T304-305). That liberation results from knowledge 
and not action is also agreed on by the Naiyayikas. 

VII.15-16 (E342-343; T305-306). Objection: Granted all this, 
we still contend that the knowledge of the identity of Brahman and 
jiva is not valid but imaginary; still, it is to be meditated on in order 
to achieve certain results that may themselves be understood as 
imagined. 

VIII.17-19 (E344-345; T306-307). Answer: This is contrary 
to texts, such as “‘that art thou,”’ which establish the identity as real. 

1X.20-21 (E345-347; T307-308). Objection: Brahman in any 
case becomes the object of the verb “to know” and so It does have 
relation to action; so there is no reason It cannot be the object of an 
injunction. 

Answer: No; the statements like “that art thou” do not provide 
knowledge of Brahman in which Brahman is the object of knowing, 
but rather they serve to remove from Brahman the distinctions born 
of avidyd; among those distinctions are those between knower, known, 
and knowing. 


596 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


X.22-26 (E347-350; T308-311). Liberation is not something that 
can be produced. An action can produce something in one of four 
ways: by giving rise to it (uipatti), getting to it (dpti), changing it 
(vikéra), or purifying it. But action cannot produce liberation in 
any of these ways. 

X1.27-34 (E350-354; T311-315). Objection : “But knowledge . . . is 
itself a mental act.” 

Answer: “No... they are entirely unlike each other.” Knowl- 
cdge involves an already existing object, action involves one that is 
yet to occur. For that reason, apparent injunctions (in the Vedas) 
like “‘the Self is to be seen, heard about, thought over, and meditated 
on” are not to be interpreted as injunctions but rather as arthavddas. 

XII.35-37 (£355-357; T315-318). Objection : If the Vedas speak 
of anything other than actions they cease to be the Vedas. 

Answer : The Self is clearly indicated by the Upanisads alone, not 
by any other pramana, and so It has no relation with action. 

XIII.38-40 (E357-359; 1318-319). Opponent: Mimamsasiitra 
1.2.1 states that the Veda only speaks of actions, and that statements 
that do not do so are without sense. This is because it is through 
the action indicated that the denotative significance (Sabdafakt7) 
is made known by inference; without the indication of action this 
inference would be impossible and we are then unable to understand 
the meaning of the words. 

Answer : You don’t properly understand the Mimdémsasiitra. 
Consider : in the injunction “Devadatta, drivethe cow. ...” surely 
“Devadatta’”’ is known to mean Devadatta even though by itself it 
does not prompt action; so Jaimini means, not that the words in 
declarative statements are without meaning, but that such sentences 
are without purpose. However, understanding that to be Jaimini’s 
intent, it is still inapplicable, since one can hardly maintain that a 
sentence like “that art thou” is purposeless, as that sentence generates 
knowledge of the identity if jiva and Self. 

XIV.41-46 (E359-364; 1320-323). Objection : What you are 
saying is irrelevant. Of course a single word has various capacities 
to signify different things in different contexts—it may be an action 
or something else. But the context that supplies a univocal meaning 
to that word is, in the Vedas, invariably injunctive in character, 
as Jaimini and Sabara have both clearly stated, and as Samkara has 
recognized (when he states the opponent’s position as “... all 
scriptural texts are either injunctions, prohibitions or supplements 
to those two.” 

Answer : But there are many statements (even in the karmakanda) 


PANCAPADIKA 597 


in which there is no word expressing action and yet it is clear what the 
words mean. And as for the statements of Jaimini and Sabara, they 
have been misconstrued—the context of the passages is confined to 
performance of sacrifices. Generally, the connection between words 
arises after the understanding of the words, and not the reverse. 

XV.47-52 (E364-369; T324-327). Again, consider the sentence 
‘‘a Brahman is not to be killed’”’; it does not enjoin an action, but 
rather enjoins refraining from an action; here the negative prefix 
attached to the word forms a new (contrary) meaning in connection 
with the word it precedes and has nothing to do with action. 

“And you can’t assume that the ‘not’ .. . itself denotes some other 
(opposed ) action, for. . . what ‘not’ means is passivity—inaction. ...” 

XVI.53-54 (E369-371; 1327-328). You objected earlier that 
since the Brabman-knower remains in samsdra statements of Brahman’s 
nature are without purpose. However, we do not accept that: the 
Brahman-knower does abandon samsdra at the moment of realization, 
since avidya ceases and because of that there is no longer any connec- 
tion between the body and the Self. The apparent consciousness 
of objects that persists is due to the remaining karma, which has 
already begun to fructify (drabdhakarman); it is like the continuing 
appearance of the double moon because of an eye defect even after 
one has recognized the error. 

XVII.55-57 (E371-375; 1328-332). Conclusion. 


TOTAKA (or TROTAKA) 


Advaita tradition makes Totaka a quiet young man named Giri, 
who became a devoted but not overly quick pupil of Samkaracarya. 
He is credited with composing a work of 179 stanzas called Srutisara- 
samuddharana. Since practically all these verses are in the tofaka, 
or anapastic meter, Paul Hacker speculates that the author of this 
work may be an unknown person, possibly a pupil of Samkara, and 
that the person received the name “‘Totaka’’ because of the style in 
which the work was composed. There is also a brief set of eight 
verses, Totakdstaka, ascribed to this person. 

Hacker has compared the features of Totaka and Samkara’s Advaita 
and finds that they have striking similarities—Totaka, like Samkara, 
does not speak of vivarta and fails to distinguish parindma from vivarta; 
“‘avidya” is used in Samkara’s way; “‘bliss” (ananda) is absent in the 
description of Brahman. The form of the Srutisdérasamuddhdrana is 
like that of the Gadyaprabandha, or prose section of the Upadesasahasri, 
a dialogue between teacher and pupil. 

Hacker also mentions some reasons why Samkara himself is not 
the author of the Srutisdrasamuddhdrana—the use of the Samkhya 
theory of the gunas, the invocation addressed to Visnu as istadevaid, 
and an alien use of the word “‘sphurana.’”! 

In the following summary “E” references are to the edition by 
R. Krishnaswami Iyer (Srirangam, n.d.). The work is untranslated. 
The summary is based on the German summary by Paul Hacker in 
B6956, pp. 156ff. The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance 
of Ms. Edeltraud Harzer in preparing this material. 


SRUTISARASAMUDDHARANA 
1 (El). The author bows to Hari, lord of the three worlds. 


2-6 (E8-11). When one realizes that the world is ephemeral and 
becomes bored with it, one looks for something permanent. This 


SRUTISARASAMUDDHARANA 599 


cannot be discovered through ritual acts, for the impermanent course 
of the world is operated by deeds. Therefore the seeker wants to 
become a samnydsin, to abandon all ritualism. The path brings him 
to a guru, who instructs him that the Self is not the body nor the 
internal organ nor the five sheaths, but an endless, qualityless 
consciousness. 

7-13 (E12-18). The Self is changeless; the internal sense changes 
according to its different thoughts (matibheda). The relation between 
the two is illustrated by the analogies of reflection and limitation. 
The internal organ cognizes only when it is “‘colored’’ by objects 
(uparagam Gpeksya). But all thought functions require an unchang- 
ing consciousness to make them evident. This consciousness is self- 
conscious (svacit), Self-consciousness (atmacit). Thus the internal 
organ stands with external objects in requiring consciousness to make 
them known. 

14-20 (E19-24). The internal organ has two practical (vyavahdra) 
functions—as object, and as subject, egoity (ahamkdrana). Foolishly, 
people misidentify it as the basis of ordinary life practices. First 
there is the notion “I see’; then the appropriate sense organ faces 
toward the relevant object, and so practical affairs are accomplished. 

21-33 (E24-34). Is the ego sense a quality (guna) of conscious- 
ness (citifakti) or of the internal organ or of both ? Not the first, for 
we have seen that it is the object of the Self, and a quality cannot 
become an object of its bearer (gunin) or of other qualities, just as the 
qualities of fire (heat, light) cannot become objects of the fire or of 
each other. The Vaisesika thesis that an eternal self can have non- 
eternal qualities is refuted. Thus the ego sense must be an attribute 
of the internal organ, standing in the same relation to the Self as do 
the other functions (sensing, etc.) of that organ. 

34-45 (E35-46). What is the relation between the individual 
self and the highest Self? They are identical, as the Upanisads 
attest. It is like the space in a pot and space per se—the former is 
not a part or transformation of the latter, and just as the pot-space 
gets its name from the pot, so the individual self (jiva) gets its name 
from the body. 

The doctrine of creation of the world by the Self is also meant to 
convey the identity between self and Self. Actually, the world has 
no origin, since it is not true, and so teaching about creation could 
serve no human purpose if literally intended or understood. 

46-106 (E46-96). Though the jiva is identical with the highest 
Self, a man requires something to awaken him to realization of that, 
just as Rama, though really Visnu, must be awakened to a realization 


600 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of that by being praised as Visnu. Now all the Upanisads teach 
identity, but “that thou art” is particularly apt for the purpose. 

Some Vedantins object that “that thou art” has a different purpose. 
Some say (1) that it is an injunction to meditate on the highest Self 
by identifying It with the individual self. Others say (2) it is in- 
tended as a metaphor—it means “‘the individual selfis like the highest 
Self.” Others still say (3) it is a way of praising the Highest. Still 
others say (4) the Highest is but a variety of the individual self. 

Totaka responds mainly to (1). For one thing, when injunctions 
are given, their injunctive force is clearly evident in the words, but 
there is no clearly injunctive word in “‘that art thou.’ Secondly, 
no one through worship or meditation can make something what it is 
not; worshiping, praising, meditating are all actions, and actions 
produce only impermanent effects; thus the self and the Self could 
never become identical by worshiping, etc. These points also meet 
(2) and (3). As for (4), the terms used in the Upanisads in alluding 
to the Highest show clearly that It cannot be reduced to the individual, 
that it is rather the other way around. 

Totaka explains the meaning of “‘that art thou”’ in now familiar fashion. 

107-115 (E96-102). The highest Self is explained not to be material 
in constitution; It is noncomposite, nonperishable, nondual. 

116-132 (E103-117). The whole world of elements, objects, 
organs, etc., is unreal. Totaka appeals inventively (says Hacker) 
to a combination of Brhadaranyaka and Chandogya teachings about the 
way in which the light of the Self sustains the world. Just as the gold 
is true, jewelry untrue, or the threads true, the cloth untrue, so 
whatever comes to be is untrue. 

133-150 (E117-130). The reason the jewelry, cloth, and world 
are “untrue” is that nothing can be really produced. The product 
(vikrti) is not separate from the original stuff (prakrti), it is nothing 
in addition. So-called “‘products’’ are only forms (dkrti) of the primal 
matter. Totaka challenges Samkhya, which believes in real produc- 
tion, with the following argument: Was the specific character of the 
effect in the causal stuff before production or not ? If so, then the 
notion that by becoming associated with this new specific character 
a change has taken place is an erroneous notion. But if that character 
was not there before, then something new has arisen, and it will perish, 
having a beginning, and the Samkhya view will not differ from 
Vaisesika’s. Totaka recapitulates the consequences of this in the 
manner of Gaudapada. 

151-178 (E130-151). Brahman can only be characterized nega- 
tively, except for Its positive nature as consciousness. 


HASTAMALAKA 


Hacker believes that it is dubious that a person with the name Hasta- 
malaka actually lived in Samkara’s time.! Tradition makes Hasta- 
malaka another pupil of Samkara’s and either the author or the 
addressee of the fourteen verse poem of Hastdmalakaslokas. We know 
nothing more. 

Edeltraud Harzer has translated Paul Hacker’s German translation, 
and since the work is short it may provide a fitting conclusion to this 
volume.? 


HASTAMALAKASLOKAH 


1. ‘Who are you, child ? Whose ? Where do you want to go ? 
How do they call you? From where did you come ? 
Tell me that—that’s for certain—for my 
Pleasure; increaser of my joy are you !” 
2. “I am not a man, nor god, neither a sprite; 
Nor Brahmana, Ksatriya, Vaisya, Sidra; 
Nor householder, hermit, brahmacarin, 
Nor pilgrim monk—, the awareness itself am I. 
3. The inner sense organ is under management of the cause, 
As cause lets the course of the world shine by the rays of the sun, 
That which is like the space-ether, free from boundaries, 
That which is the perpetual warrant, am I myself, my being. 
4. As heat is for fire, the perpetual awareness is 
For him essential; sensory stupor of activity 
Effects by the One, that unchanging. 
That which is the perpetual warrant, am I myself, my being. 
5. As a reflection of a face in the mirror no being 
Has a being-here (Dasein) without a countenance; so also is 
The soul only a reflex of the spirit in the heart. 
That which is the perpetual warrant, am I myself, my being. 


602 


6. 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


When the mirror vanishes then also the reflection perishes; 
Only the face remains, free from confusion, alone. 

Thus remains, free from inner sense organ, the One without 
reflection, 

That which is the perpetual warrant, am I myself, my being. 
That really free from every thoughtfulness, 

The thoughtfulness is for the thoughtfulness, whose 

Nature is always closed to thoughtfulness; 

That which is the prepetual warrant, am I myself, my being. 
That which is pure spirit, radiating some light 

Into many internal sense organs; that radiance—like the sun— 
The one that is splitting itself on the waters of jugs, 

That which is the perpetual warrant, am I myself, my being. 
The sun bestows its light on all eyes at once, 

Illuminating the things that seek light. Thus shines 

The one awareness for many inner sense organs, 

That which is the perpetual warrant, am I myself, my being. 
The eye grasps only what is lighted by the sun, 

The sun only the lightless things. The One 

Makes shining that which is lighted by the sun for the eye; 
That which is the perpetual warrant, am I myself, my being. 
It wanders with the wandering waters, the sun; 

It breaks itself in the lakes in the same way, manifold the One. 
Thus breaks itself and flows in the hearts the One. 

That which is the perpetual warrant, am I myself, my being. 
That understanding covered by clouds of the dull man 
Believes the sun to be lightless, covered with clouds. 

Thus it seems to the foolish inner-sense-bound. 

That which is the perpetual warrant, am I myself, my being. 
That which does not touch any of the many objects, 

That unity intertwined in all objects, 

The eternal purity, clear and comparable to space-ether, 
That which is the perpetual warrant, am I myself, my being. 
Celebrations differ according to the encampment: 

Thus you sit in the multitude of hearts; 

Like moons wander along in the lowest waters— 

Only in this way is your being changeable, O Visnu ! 


NOTES 


References given with ‘B” followed by a number are to items in Karl H. Potter 
(ed.), Bibliography of Indian Philosophies (Delhi : Motilal Banarsidass, 1970). 


CHAPTER ONE 


1. Cf. J. F. Staal, Nambudiri Vedic Recitation (Mouton : The Hague, 1961). 

2. Sangam Lal Pandey, Pre-Samkara Advaita Philosophy (Allahabad: Darshan 
Peeth, 1974), pp. 9Iff. 

3. Brahmasitra 1.4.20-22. 

“‘avasthites.”’ 

S. L. Pandey, op. cit., pp. 21-27. 

Brahmas iitrabhasya on 111.3.53. 

Sabarabhasya on Mimdmsésitras 1.1.5. 
J.A.B. Van Buitenen, B2853, p. 19, n. 53. 
S. L. Pandey, op. cit., pp. 173ff. 

10. Van Buitenen, B2853, pp. 19-23; also V. Bhattacharya, B1254, 

11. For opinions, cf. V. Bhattacharya, B1254; Kane, B7789; Guha, B6664; 
Nakamura in Acta Asiatica (Toho Gakkai) 5 (1963), p. 69; Chintamani, B2054; 
Vv. A. Ramaswami Sastri, “Old Vrttikaras on the Parva Mimamsa Sitras,” Indian 
Historical Quarterly 10 (1934), p. 431 ff. 

12. Cf. Van Buitenen, B2853, pp. 301-302. 

13. Vedanta Desika, Tattvafika, cited by Van Buitenen as on p. 149 of an 
unspecified edition. 

14, On these issues cf. S. L. Pandey, op. cit.; Van Buitenen, B2853; S. Kuppu- 
swami Sastri, ““Bodhayana and Dramidacarya—two old Vedantins presupposed by 
Ramanuja,” Proceedings of the All-India Orientalists Congress 3 (1924), p. 465; 
Jacobi, B7535, p. 17; Kane, op. cit.; T.K.G. Aiyengar, “Upavarsa and Bodha- 
yana,” Journal of the Sri Venkatesvara Research Institute 2.1 (1941), pp. 1-8. 

15. S. L. Pandey, op. cit., p. 180. 

16. Ibid., p. 89. 

\7. Ibid., pp. 91-93, 203. 

18. Van Buitenen, B2853, p. 28. 

19. S. L. Pandey, op. cit., pp. 199-202. 

20. Ibid., pp. 194-197. 

21. On Bhartrprapajica, cf. S. L. Pandey, ibid., pp. 210-226; Hiriyanna, 
B1044, B1045; P. N. Srinivasachari, B7303. On Brahmadatta cf. Hiriyanna, 
B1143, B1144; also “Two old Vedantins” in Indian Philosophical Studies I (Mysore : 
Kavyalaya, 1972), pp. 17-25; S. L. Pandey, op. cit., pp. 238-243. On Bhartrmitra 
see S. L. Pandey, ibid., pp. 229-235. 

22. At Gaudapadakarikabhasya 1V.100 and Upadesasahasri I1.18.2. 


CENA S 


604 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


23. See the section on Gaudapada below for references to this literature. 

24. For a discussion, see the section on Mandana. 

25. For example, consultation of Volume Two of this Encyclopedia, dealing 
with Nydyavaisesika (Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology : The Tradition of Nyaya- 
Vaisesika up to Gangesa), ed. Karl H. Potter (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1976; Prince- 
ton: Princeton University Press, 1977) will suggest that writers such as Sridhara 
and Apararkadeva of the 10th-12th centuries notice Mandana’s arguments but not 
Samkara’s. 

26. For discussion of these influences see S. Kuppuswami Sastri’s Introduction 
to B1346. 

27. Cf, e.g., Brahmasitrabhasya on 11.2.32. 

28. See J. L. Majumdar, B1259, B1260. 

29. The number of those who have discovered close relations between Buddh- 
ism and Advaita is legion. See, e.g., Joshi, B2225; V. Bhattacharya’s Introduction 
to B1254, B1231, B1247; Naga Raja Sarma, B6688; C. D. Sharma, B5807; L. de la 
Vallée Poussin, B5492; L. M. Joshi, “Gaudapada’s rapprochement between Bud- 
dhism and Vedanta,” Rtam 1.1, 1969, 11-22; Ganganatha Jha, B2112; Daniel H. H. 
Ingalls, “The study of Samkaracarya,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute 33 (1952), pp. 1-14. 

30. K. A. Krishnaswamy Aiyar, B2078. 

31. Others among the many who reject Buddhist influence on or even signi- 
ficant parallelisms with Advaita include: Purohit, B1242; Budhakar, B208], B. K. 
Sengupta, B2188; Devaraja, B2245; Kawada, B5942; S. Roy, The Heritage of 
Samkara (Allahabad, 1965); Anantakrishna Sastri, B4586; Mahadevan, B1256. 


CHAPTER TWO 


1. N. Veezhinathan, “The nature and destiny of the individual soul in 
Advaita,” Journal of the Madras University 47.2 (1975), pp. 19-20, understands 
Saftcita to include prdrabdhakarman. 

2. K. S. Iyer, B6629: 3 (1916-17), pp. 39-41. 

3. Veezhinathan, op. cit., pp. 11-12. 

4. Indian philosophers use this term to mean the place within the body 
where feeling, willing, thinking, etc., takes place. It does not necessarily denote the 
physical organ that goes by that name in Indian anatomy. 

5. This is one of the points of divergence in the texts. Cf. Paul Deussen, 
B6623, Chapters 30, 32. 

6. And in Brahmasitrabhasya I1I.1.1, alluding to the same passage. 

7. Chandogya Upanisad V.10.1. 

8. Chandogya Upanisad VII. liberally illustrates the kind of rewards intended. 

9. Cf. Brahmasitras IV.3.10, 22, Brhadaranyaka Upanisad VI1.2.15 and 
Samkara’s comments thereon. 

10, Mandana Misra, Brahmasiddhi with Sankhapani’s commentary, edited by 
S. Kuppuswami Sastri. Madras Government Oriental Manuscripts Series 4 
(Madras 1937), pp. 123-124. 

il. On V.10.6. 

12, On IV.2.3. 
13.  Taittiriyopanisadbhasya 11.189-200. 


NOTES 605 


14. B1443, pp. 106-110. 

15. B1559, p. 365. 

16. Cf. K. S. Iyer, B6629, 1 (1914-15), p. 278. 

17. Bhagavadgita 11.46. 

18. Bhagavadgita ITI.5. 

19. Mundakopansadbhdsya 1112.5. 

20. Gaudapadakarikas 1.31-38. 

21. See, for example, A. C. Das, B7010; G. R. Malkani, B7033; M.A. V. 
Rao, “Karma samnydsa,” Vedanta Kesari 20 (1933-34), pp. 345-352. 

22. Cf., eg., W. S. Urqhart, Vedanta and Modern Thought (London, 1928), 
pp. 172-190. 

23. See, eg., Nikhilananda, B1244; K. S. Iyer, B6629; Kumarappa, B2072. 

24. See S. N. Mitra, ‘‘Advaita and morality—or Advaitic transformation of 
will,” Vedanta Kesari 26 (1940), pp. 407-414; D. M. Datta, B7063  [cf. also 
Malkani contra Datta, in Philosophical Quarterly (Amalner) 30 (1957), pp. 201- 
206]; S. C. Chakravarti in Prabuddha Bharati 71 (1966), pp. 409-414. 

25. Mandana’s views appear to be the subject of the entire ninth book of the 
Paftcapadika. 

26. See above, p. 30. 

27. Chéandog yopanisadbhasya on 11.23.1. 


CHAPTER THREE 


1. See above, p. 30. 

2. E.g., widhi, codand, niyoga. 

3. See Mysore Hiriyanna, “The doctrine of niyoga,” in Indian Philosophical 
Studies II (Mysore : Kavyalaya, 1972), pp. 87-96. 

4. An analysis that discovers twenty-six separate arguments in Suresvara’s 
writing is C. Markandeya Sastri, Suresvara’s Contribution to Advaita (Vemur: Sundari 
Samskrita Vidyalaya, 1973); see also V. P. Upadhyaya, B7113. 

5. On kaéma-pradhvamsa-vada see M. Hiriyanna, B1045. 

6. Cf. M. Hiriyanna, “Prapafica-vilayavada—a doctrine of pre-Samkara 
Vedanta” in Indian Philosophical Studies IT (Mysore: Kavyalaya, 1972), pp. 28-35. 

7. Hiriyanna, B1045. 

8. This aspect of Samkara’s thought is emphasized in papers by Ganeswar 
Misra in his Analytical Studies in Indian Philosophical Problems (Bhubaneshwar: Utkal 
University, 1971). 

9. See Kunjunni Raja, B6510A, pp. 70-72. 

10. Ibid., Chapter 3. 

11. Cf. N. M. Sastri, B2126. Taitttiriya Upanisad 1¥.1.1—satyam jfidnam anan- 
tam brahma—is frequently cited as a mahdvdkya. Other authcrities cite more—Sastri 
cites G. A. Jacob’s report that a work title Mahdvakyavivarana recognizes twelve great 


sentences. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


1. Caterina Conio, The Philosophy of Mandikya Karika (Varanasi: Bharatiya 
Vidya Prakashan, 1971). 


606 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


2. V. Bhattacharya, B1254. 

3. Introduction to B4586, 

4. Ibid., p. 6. 

5. Deussen, B6623. 

6. The counterpositive of an absence is the thing that is absent. See Volume 
II of this Encyclopedia (cited in note 25 of Chapter One above), p. 53. 

7. See this editor’s article in a Festschrift honoring Daniel H. H. Ingalls’ 
sixtieth birthday, forthcoming. 

8. The term is used, but only in the innocuous sense of “a possible interpre- 
tation, not mine” or as “option” in the grammarians sense. Cf. P. K. Sundaram, 
Word Index to the Brahmas iitrabhasya, Volume II (Madras: Centre of Advanced Study 
in Philosophy, 1973), p. 830. 

9. P. P. Subrahmanya Sastri’s foreword to B1346. Cf. S. Suryanarayana 
Sastri’s comments, B1362. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


It appears to occur first in the Mrsimhottaratapani Upanisad. 
E.g., Brahmasiitrabhdsya 1.4.15. 
Krishna Warrier, B7136A, p. 251. 
R. B. Joshi, B2225. 
Krishna Warrier, B1736, p. 306. 
P. D. Devanandan, B7012. 
7. R.D. Ranade, A Constructive Survey of Upanisadic Philosophy. Poona 
Oriental Series 7 (Poona: Oriental Book Agency, 1926). 
8. R. B. Joshi, B2225. 
9. Ibid. 
10. Ibid. 
11. S. Sarasvati in B7178G. 
12. D. H. H. Ingalls, B2173. 
13. Ibid. 
14. Brhaddranyaka Upanisad 1.4.7. 
15. Paftcapadiké, First Varnaka, XXVI.95 ff. 
16. E.g., at Brahmasiitrabhésya 1.1.4. 
17. E.g., Brhaddranyakopanisadbhasya 11.1.20. 
18. U. C. Bhattacharjee, B7969, p. 82. 
19. Brhadéranyaka Upanisad IV.3.9. 
20. Upadefasahasri 11.17.26-29. 
21. At Brhadaranyakopanisadbhdasyavarttika 11.1.319-363. 


OOP re 0) Nie 


CHAPTER SIX 


1. This remark relates to the occasions (nimitta), not to the material cause, 
(upadana), which must of course ultimately be real. 

2. Mandana accepts these; cf. Brahmasiddhi 1.22 below. 

3. Brhadaranyakopanisadbhésya 11.1.20, 


NOTES 607 
GAUDAPADA 


1. On these points, cf. Walleser, B7541; Barnett in Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, 1910; V. Bhattacharya, B1254; Kunjunni Raja in Adyar Library 
Bulletin 24 (1960); S. L. Pandey, Pre-Samkara Advaita Philosophy (A\lahabad: Dar- 
shan Peeth, 1974). 

2. Walleser, B7541. 

S. L. Pandey, op. cit. 

V. Bhattacharya, B1254, pp. Ixvi-lxvii. 

Ibid., pp. lxxii-lxxiii. 

Despite misgivings; cf. the paper referred to in note 7, Chapter 4, above. 
V. Bhattacharya, B1232. 

B. N. K. Sharma, B1236, B1268. 

V. Bhattacharya, B1254. 

10. E.g., Venkatasubbiah, B1245, B1249; Ray, B1250; Mahadevan, B1256; 
Cc. D. Sharma, B5807. 

11. Cf. Conio, op. cit., pp. 7 ff.; also V. A. Gadgil, “The Mandikyopanishad 
and the Gaudapadakarikas,” Journal of the University of Bombay 6 (1937-38), 
pp. 66-79. 

12. V. Bhattacharya, B1231, B1247, B5707. But cf. C. D. Sharma, B5807; 
Divanji, B1252. Also Majumdar, B1259, B1260, who traces Gaudapada’s Buddhism 
to the Lankdavatarasitra; de la Vallée Poussin, B5492. 

13. Kawada, B5942; S. Roy, The Heritage of Samkara (Allahabad, 1965); 
L. M. Joshi, ““Gaudapada’s rapprochement....”, Rtam 1.1, 1969, 11-22; Maha- 
devan, Bi256; Paul Hacker, ‘Notes on the Mandikyopanisad and Samkara’s Agama- 
§astravivarana”’ in India Maior (Congratulatory Volume presented to J. Gonda), 
Leiden, 1972, pp. 115-132; Saccidanandendra Sarasvati, Mand akyarahasyavivrti 
(Holenarsipur; the author, 1958). 


CON A HP w 


SAMKARA 


1. Hacker, B2162; Mayeda, B1942B; Mayeda, “On the author of the 
Mandikyopanisad—and the Gaudapadiyabhasya,” Adyar Library Bulletin 31-32 
(1967-68), pp. 73-94; “On Samkara’s authorship of the Kenopanisadbhasya,” 
Indo-Iranian Journal 10 (1967), pp. 33-55; ‘“Samkara’s Upadesasahasri: its present 
form,” Journal of the Oriental Institute (Baroda) 15 (1966), pp. 252-257; 
“The authenticity of the Bhagavadgitabhasya ascribed to Samkara,” Wiener Zeitschrift 
fur des Kunde Sud- und Ostasien 9 (1965), pp. 155-197. 

2. Ingalls, “The study of Samkaracarya,” op. cit. 

3. Cf. also Marschner, BI680. 

4, Mayeda, B1942B. 

5. The grounds for this statement are reviewed in S. K. Belvalkar, Vedanta 
Philosophy Part I: Lectures 1-6 (Poona, 1929). 

6. In Upadesasthasri 11.18.2, as wel} as in Gaudapadakarikabhésya 1V.100, if 
we accept the latter work as authentic. 

7. Belvalkar, op. cit. 

8. Kunjunni Raja in Adyar Library Bulletin 24 (1960)., 

9. Cf. Allen Wright Thrasher, The Advaita of Mandana Miéra’s Brahma- 
siddhi. Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University, 197. 


608 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


10. Ibid. Sce below, under Mandana Misra, for references on the Mandana- 
Suregvara equation. 

11, For more complete accounts based on this literature see, e.g., Baijnath, 
B6562; Seshadri, B2156; D.N. Pillai, Samkara the Sublime (Calcutta, 1912); K. T. 
Telanga, Shamkaracharya, Philosopher and Mystic (Adyar, 1911); T. S. Narayana 
Sastri, The Age of Samkara (Madras 1916; enlarged ed. 1971); Menon, B1522; Agama- 
nanda’s introduction to Tattvananda (tr.), The Quintessence of Vedanta (Calcutta, 
n.d.; Ernakulam, 1960). 

12. Belvalkar, op. cit., regards this story as “silly myth-mongering” (p. 233, 
note); Daya Krishna, B2268A, discusses its implications. 

13. Consult A. Nataraja Aiyer and S. Laksminarasimha Sastri, The Traditional 
Age of Sri Samkaracharya and the Math (Madras 1962), as well as the works cited 
under the preceding notes. 

14. An “ulcerated sore, or fistula,’ says K. T. Telanga, op. cit. 

15. Ingalls, op. cit.; see also B2173 and B2177. 

16. Wacker, “Samkara der Yogin und Samkara der Advaitin. Einige Beo- 
bachtungen,” Wiener Zeitschrift fir des Kunde Sid- und Ostasien 12-13 (1968-69), 
pp. 119-148. 

17. Hacker, “Relations of early Advaitins to Vaisnavism”, Wiener Zeitschrift 
Sir des Kunde Sid- und Ostasien 9 (1965), pp. 147-154. 

18. E.g., Ghate, B7609; Radhakrishnan, B8996; B.N.K. Sharma, B1242. 

19. Thibaut, introduction to B1610. See Amalnerkar, B1613; Faddegon, B6672. 

20. E.g., Modi, B1663, B1668; A. K. Banerjee, B6758. 

21. Mahadevan, B2390. 

22. Miarschner, B1680; Hacker, B6956, p. 1918. 

23, Ingalls, B2177, p. 295. 

24, Van Boetzelaer’s introduction to his translation of Suresvara’s Taittiriyo- 
panisadbhasyavarttika (Leiden, 1971). 

25. R. Balasubramaniam, Introduction to his translation of Suresvara’s Taitti- 
riyopanisadbhasyavarttika, Madras University Philosophy Series 20 (Madras, 1974), 
pp. 15-16. 

26. Ibid., p. 21. 

27. Mayeda, Bi942B; Mayeda, ‘“Samkara’s Upadesasahasri,” op. cit.; 
Mayeda’s introduction to his edition of Upadesasdhasri (Tokyo, 1873). 

28. G.A. Jacob, preface to B2394, pp. 8 ff. Cf. Mayeda, B1942B, p. 188. 

29. Mayeda, Bi942B, p. 196. 

30. Mayeda, “Samkara’s Upadesgasahasri,” op. cit. 

31. Cited in Mitra, B1688. 

32. R. D. Ranade, op. cit., p. 24. 

33. Hiriyanna, introduction to B1775, pp. iv-v. 

34. §S. C. Vidyarnava, B1770. 

35. Budhakar, B2081; R. M. Sastri, B2064; Belvalkar, op. cit. 

36. Mayeda, “On Samkara’s authorship of the Kenopanisadbhasya,’ 

37. Ranade, op. cit., p. 29. 

38. The Upanisads, translated by F. Max Miiller. Part II. Sacred Books of 
the East 15 (Oxford, 1884; New York, 1962), pp. xxvii. 

39. Anam Charan Swain, “Authenticity of the Bhagavadgitabhasya attributed 
to Samkaracarya,” Mysore Orientalist 2.1 (1969), pp. 32-38, citing Hacker, B2162, 
Cf. also Karmarkar, B1587, 


’ 


op. cit. 


NOTES 609 


40. Ingalls, “Study of Samkaracarya,” op. cit., pp. 7-8. 

41. V. Raghavan, “‘Bhaskara’s Gitabhasya,” Wiener Zeitschrift fiir des Kunde 
Siid- und Ostasien 12-13 (1968-69), pp. 281-294, esp. 283 ff. 

42. Mayeda, “The authenticity of the Bhagavadgitabhasya,” op. cit. 

43. See, ¢g., Modi B1582, B1583, B1585. 

44. Cf. Mukherji, B9184; B.N.K. Sharma in Principle Karmarkar Comme- 
moration Volume (Poona, 1948), 180-195; Ray, B6860 (=B1583A); K. S. lyer 
in Vedanta Kesari 1 (1914-15), pp. 42-47. 

45. In Journal of the American Oriental Society 33 (1913), p. 52, note 2; cited in 
Mayeda, “On the author of the Mandikyopanisad,” op. cit. 

46. Suryanarayana Sastri, “Some observations on the Mandiikyakarikas” 
in Collected Papers of S. Suryanarayana Sastri (ed. T.M.P. Mahadevan) (Madras 
1961), pp. 262-271. 

47. Belvalkar, op. cit., p. 218. 

48. R. V. de Smet, “The law of karma,” Indian Philosophical Annual 2 (1966), 
pp. 328-335. 

49. Ingalls, “Study of Samkaracarya, 

50. Hacker, ‘‘Notes on the Mandikyopanisad,” op. cit. 

51. Majumdar, B1260. 

52. Tilmann Vetter, “Zur Bedeutung des Illusionismus bei Samkara,’? Wiener 
Reitschrift fiir des Kunde Siid- und Ostasiens 12-13 (1968-69), pp. 407-423. 

53. Hacker, “Notes on the Mandukyopanisad,” op. cit. 

54, Mayeda, “On the author of the Mandtikyopanisad,”’ op. cit. 

55. Hacker, ‘‘Notes on the Mandikyopanisad,” op. cit., p. 130. 

56. Ibid., p. 131. 

57. Mayeda, “On the author of the Mandikyopanisad,”’ op. cit. 

58. Belvalkar, op. cit., pp. 226-227. 

59. Ibid., p. 226. 

60. Ingalls, “The Study of Samkaracarya,” op. cit. 

61. Mayeda, introduction to his edition of Upadesasahasri, op. cit., p. xi. 

62. Hacker, B2142. 

63. Belvalkar, op. cit. 

64. Hacker, B2142; Ingalls, “The study of Samkaracarya,” op. cit.; Mayeda, 
introduction to his edition of Upadesasdhasri, op. cit. 


65. Belvalkar, op. cit., p. 227. 
66. Hacker, B2142; Mayeda, introduction to his edition of Upadesasdhasri, 


” 


op. cit., p. 12. 


op. cit. 
67. Belvalkar, op. cit., p. 227. 
68. Hacker, B2142. 
69. Belvalkar, op. cit., p. 229. 
70. Ingalls, “Study of Samkaracarya,” p. 7. 
71. Hacker, B2142. 
72. Mayeda, “Samkara’s Upadesasahasri,” op. cit. 
73. Belvalkar, op. cit., p. 229. 
74. Ibid., p. 228. 


610 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
MANDANA MISRA 
(Footnotes 15-36 by Allen Thrasher) 


1. Allen Wright Thrasher, The Advaita of Mandana Miéra’s Brahmasidchi. 
Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University, 1972, pp. 174-176. 


2. Frauwallner, B9032, p. 137. 

3. Thrasher, op. cit., p. 199. 

4. Thrasher, op. cit., pp. 176-177. 
3. Thrasher, op. cit., p. 177. 

6. Thrasher, op. cit., pp. 178ff. 


~I 


D. C. Bhattacharya, B1358, cites Canto VII of the Samkaradiguijaya as 
the source of this identification. See also Balasubramaniam, “Identity of Mandana- 
migra,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 82 (1962), pp. 522-532. 

8. See D. C. Bhattacharya, B1358; also B. R. Gupta, B2408. 

9. Hirivanna, ‘‘Suresvara and Mandanamisra,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society (1923), pp. 259-263. 

10. P. V. Kane, “The chronological position of Mandana, Umbeka, Bhava- 
bhiti, Suresvara,’? Jounal of the Asiatic Society, Bombay Branch, n.s. 3 (1928), 
pp. 289-293. 

ll, D. C. Bhattacharya, B1358. 

12. S. Kuppuswami Sastri in Proceedings of the All-India Oriental Congress 3 
(1924), pp. 480-481. 

13. Balasubramanian, “Identity of Mandanamisra,”’ op. cit. 

14. Thrasher, op. cit. 

15. Vy-adhikarana also means “in different grammatical cases,” i.e., in ‘from 
the smoke, it is fire,” “smoke” is in the ablative and “fire” in the nominative. 
Both meanings are probably intended. 

16. The commentator Sankhapani says that these are those who teach a real 
universe of diversity (satya-prapafica-vadin). They would presumably be a sort of 
Vedantin, of the Bhedabheda sort, probably. 

17. This argument seems to depend on the fact that artha means both “point,” 
or “purpose,” and ‘“‘meaning.”? Thus statements without a point are also in the 
opponent’s opinion without a meaning, and they have no point unless they are 
employed to produce action or its avoidance. 

18. As there is a pramdna, presumably arthapatti, for the existence of some sort 
of union with the objects of other words. 

19. It is not clear what “‘vintyoga’”? means here. The commentators seem to 
take it as equivalent to anvaya, the connection of the objects of words in a sentence. 
This whole passage is somewhat obscure. 

20. Mandana here seems to be doing two things. First, he is affirming that 
the injunctions to works have an end in themselves, heaven, etc. Second, he is 
preparing the way for his own opinion that works may be made accessory to know- 
ledge rather than secular ends. 

21. In an exclusive injunction (farisamkhydnavidhi), something is enjoined 
with respect to some things so that everything else previously established (prapta) 
is excluded. Thus the injunction ‘Five five-nailed animals should be eaten” 
limits the “established” eating of all five-nailed animals to five sorts of animals 
only. In a restrictive injunction (niyamavidhi) one thing is prescribed, where in 


NOTES 611 


the absence of that injunction either one of two ‘established’ options would be 
possible. Thus the injunction “One pounds the rice” eliminates the possibility 
that one might use the other possible way of removing the husks from the grain, 
namely, cracking them with the fingernails. In both these the question of some 
course of action has already arisen, they are ‘established.’ But it is otherwise with 
prohibitions, according to Mandana. 

22. This is directed not only toward the present point at issue, but against the 
Prabhakara idea of niyoga as the object of Vedic injunctions. 

23. Cf. Mandana’s insistence clsewhere that avidya belongs only to the jivas. 

24, From here to the end of 1.34 there is a long discussion between an oppo- 
nent (piérvapaksin) and an objector to him who represents Mandana’s views in part 
(see the statement of his viewpoint in I.35 and later at III.48-54), but with whom 
he does not entirely agree (an ekadesa-siddhantin, “‘one who states a partial conclu- 
sion”). The opponent apparently bases himself on Samkara’s views, but holds 
a stricter disjunction between knowledge and works than Samkara. Perhaps he 
is Suresvara. See also Vetter’s discussion at n. 212, p. 113. of his edition and trans- 
lation of the Brahmasiddhi (Wien, 1969). I introduce the parvapaksin’s arguments 
by the word ‘“‘Opponent,”’ and the ekadesasiddhantin’s by “Objector,” to call attention 
to the isolation of the argument, replacing the customary “Objection” before the 
pirvapaksa and ‘‘Response” before the siddhanta. 

25. Cf. the distinction of two kinds of avidyd at 1.9, 1.20, 1.21, I1I.61, and 
II1.63. 

26. The point is that one may either hold that sacrifices and the like produce 
a Counter-samskdra in some way that is not obvious (‘“‘visible’’) and must be learned 
or inferred from scripture, as the injunction to sprinkle the rice grains before they 
are pounded has no visible purpose and so we must infer that sprinkling produces 
a samskdra, or else that sacrifices have an obvious purpose and samskéra in producing 
the destruction of sins previously committed, like the pounding of rice grains that 
they may be made into cakes. Thus Citsukha’s commentary. 

27. Brhadéranyaka Upanisad 1V.4.24, where, however, the words “defined as 
Being” are absent. They are found in the \’rtti on Vakyapadiya 1.145. 

28. Unknown quote. But cf. Vakyapadiya WI, Dravya (1), 15. 

29. Visesa, “particular” is not being used here solely in the Nyaya-Vaisesika 
sense of ‘‘ultimate particularity.” 

30. Note that Mandana does not use the term savikalpa pratyaksa. It is possible 
that he thought that all pratyaksa was nirvikalpa. 

31. Vastu-matra, which, N. B., on Mandana’s view equals the universal ! 

32. I translate ‘“‘aksa” by “‘organ’’ because it often means, not specifically the 
eye, but any sense organ, and “organ” has the advantage of being an equivocal 
term in English. 

33. According to the Mimamsa, what a Vedic passage “assumes” or “repeats” 
(anuvada) cannot be the point it wishes to teach. 

34. The commentator Sankh4pani says this is directed against Samkara, with 
special reference to Brahmas itrabhasya 1V.1.15 and 19. 

35. This sentence is a literal translation of Mandana’s sentence concluding 
the commentary on these verses. It is not clear what point it makes, whether no 
injunction, including that to know the Atman as without duality, can deal with the 
highest truth, or whether the injunction to know the Atman as without duality some- 
how misrepresents It, even though the Atman is in fact without duality. 


612 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


36. It should be kept in mind here that the Sanskrit root “yfa’’? has the 
usual root meaning “to know”? in ordinary language, and covers any sort of cognition 
“Knowledge” as valid cognition” is pramépa. An injunction to know and to 
“cognize” the Atman is the same (jidnavidhi). I have chosen cognize as the broader 
word in English. 


SURESVARA 


1. Mahadevan, B2390. 

2. Mahadevan, B2390, p. xiii. 

3. Van Boetzelaer, introduction to his translation of Taittiriyopanisadbhasya- 
varttika, op. cit., p. 3. 

4. Balasubramaniam, Translation of Taittiriyopanisadbhasyavarttika (Madras 
University Philosophy Series 20, 1974), p. 9, referring to Canto 13 of Samkara- 
digvijaya, verses 65-66. 

5. Balasubramaniam, ibid., p. 10. 

6. Cf. Balasubramanian, ibid., pp. 12ff, for more on Suresvara as Varttika- 


7. Alston, B2400, p. 11. 

8. Jacob, preface to the second edition (1925) of B2394, p. xi. 

9. Hiriyanna, introduction to second edition of B2394, p. xxxi. 
10. Ibid., p. xxx. 

ll. Ibid., pp. xxx-xxxi. 

12. Markandeya Sastri, op. cit., p. 12. 

13. Ibid., p. 12. 


PADMAPADA 


1. Venkatramiah, introduction to B2419, p. xv. 
2. Ybid., citing sloka 116 of the Sarvadarsanasamgraha. 
3. Ibid., p. xiv, note 2. 


TOTAKA 


1. Hacker, B6956, pp. 28-32. 


HASTAMALAKA 


1. Hacker, B6956, p. 33. 

2. The following is an attempt at a metrical translation of the Hasta- 
malaka verses. It is to be noted that the inner sense organ (buddhi, manas, dhi) is 
designated by “‘sense (sg.),” “‘heart,”’ etc. 

In verse 3, lines 2 and 3, and in verse 13, lines 1 and 2 have been rearranged. 
For the meter see Hacker’s introduction (ibid., ITI.2). (E. Harzer). 


INDEX 


abhasa (appearance, reflection) 84-85, 120, 
169, 173, 242, 264, 319, 339, 342. See 
also reflection model 
abhava (negation, negative entity, absence) 
as a pramana 97, 360, 380-81, 449, 553 
in Buddhism 250, 261-62 
in Nyaya-Vaisesika 261, 305 
in nihilism 291 
mutual absence (anyonyabhava) 378, 382, 
385-86, 529 

nonproductive 206, 367, 405, 449 

not grasped by a pramdna 529 

of things believed not to exist 376 

perceptibility of 449-451 

posterior absence (dhvamsabhava) 206, 
388, 453 

prior absence (pragabhava) 66, 183, 305, 
405, 425 


-riipa (negative property) 350 
abheda (nondifference) 147, 356, 381, 
383-87, 397 
Abhidharma Buddhism 557 
abhihitanvayavada 57, 59 
abhimana (ego notion) 229, 329, 341, 369, 
See also ahamkara 
Abhinavagupta 16, 118, 551, 563 
abhinivesa. See attachment 
abhyasa (practice, repetition) 
of knowledge (jfanabhyasa) 323, 370, 
372, 471. See also meditation 
two kinds of 325 
abhyudaya (heaven, higher ends of man) 
255, 422, 581 
absence. See abhava 
Acarya, Narayana Ram 120 
act, action (karman, kriyé) 66, 92-93 
and knowledge (jfidna), relation between 
192, 229-30, 255, 257, 272, 278-81, 
285, 288, 296-98, 325, 339, 363-69, 
429-24, 428-29, 431-32, 441, 531, 534. 
See also jianakarmasamuccaya 
agent and result, distinction between. 
See difference 
as signified by verb 57, 397 
bodily (kdyika) 30, 297-98, 300, 515, 532 
desireless (niskama) 511 
eligibility for. See adhikara 
enjoined. See injunction 
expiatory (prayascitta) 30, 359, 407-8, 
536 


four kinds of results of 39-40, 427, 596 

meditative. See meditation 

mental (mdnasa) 30, 126, 139, 297-98, 
515, 532, 596 

occasional (naimittika) 30, 44, 184, 430, 
432 

optional, desired (kdmya) 30, 44, 47, 
184, 205, 207, 257, 306-7, 422-23, 430, 
477, 518, 531, 533, 536 

organs of (karmendriya) 22-23, 34, 170, 
237, 311, 319, 330-32, 561 


prohibited, proscribed (nisedha, prati- 
sedha) 30, 40, 47, 127, 179, 184, 205, 
207, 229, 258, 306, 357, 360, 363-65, 
422-23, 432-33, 458, 530-31 
purposeful. See arthakriya 
regular daily (nitya) 36, 42-44, 47, 50, 
176, 178-79, 182, 184-85, 195, 203-8, 
229, 240, 272, 298-300, 306-7, 329, 370, 
422-23, 430, 432, 457-58, 473, 483, 
518, 530-31, 533-34, 536 
ritual. See sacrifice 
role of in liberation 38-46, 194-95, 
207-9, 242, 295-96, 306-7, 336, 421-34, 
473, 532-33 
Sampratti (renunciatory) 476 
section of scripture on. See karmakaénda 
stems from desire 404, 458, 478, 502, 530 
traces, residues. See karma 
vocal (vdcika) 30, 54, 297-98, 515, 532 
activity. See pravriti 
adhikara (eligibility, preparation) 
for action 207 
for studying a text 339 
for Vedic study. See scripture, entitle- 
ment to study 
four requirements for brahmajijfidsad or 
inquiry into Brahman 36-37, 122, 140, 
218, 323, 326, 329, 331, 336, 339, 363, 
421, 426-27, 429, 452, 586-87 
-ka purusa (official of God) 458 
two kinds of 342 
Aditya. See sun 
adrsta 171, 195, 233, 370, 532, 568. See 
also karma 
in Samkhya 169 
in Vaisesika 157, 169 
Advaita Vedanta 5-19 
relation to other systems 19-21 
Advaitapaficaraina (attributed to Samkara) 
19, 343-44 
Advayananda 339 
agama. See scripture 
Agamananda 608 
Agamasastra (of Gaudapada). 
padakarikas 
Agamasastravivarana. See Gaudapadakarikabha- 
sya (of Samkara) 
Agase, K. S. 421 
agent (kartr) 65-66, 88, 122-23, 168-69, 
206, 222, 264 
difference from act and result. Sze 
act, agent, result, distinction between 
aggregation of elements 
as self 192, 198, 223-24, 557 
in Sarvastivada 159-61, 557 
Agni 461, 487, 494, 561 
agni. See fire, digestive 
agnicayana. See fire, sacred 
Agnihotra, Agnistoma (daily fire sacri- 
fice) 44, 178, 184, 209, 229-30, 257-58, 
278, 296-97, 464, 476, 584 


See Gauda- 


614 


agnosticism 7 

agrayana 113, 317 

ahamkara (ego sense, egoity) 20, 22, 60, 
86-87, 126, 242-43, 299, 311, 326, 330, 
332, 341, 484, 523, 538-40, 542, 545, 
553-54, 361, 565, 572-74, 577, 599 
-granthi 581 
part of antahkarana 553 
three forms of 556 

air (vayu) 24, 27, 237, 287, 311, 
459, 481, 560, 574 

aifvarya (lordliness, divine power) 208, 
388, 406-7, 417, 517, 581 

Aitareya Brahmana 270 

Aitareya Upanisad 28-29, 59, 270, 273-77 

Aitareyopanisadbhasya (of Samkara) 18, 
27-28, 116, 270-77 

Aiyar, A. Nataraj 608 

Aiyar, K. A. Krishnaswami 21, 

Aiyengar, T. G. K. 603 

Ajatasatru 477 

ajativada (nonorigination, no-cause theory ) 
7, 21, 63-68, 72, 108-9, 111-13, 232, 
296, 305, 313, 316, 480, 522, 599-600 

ajiva in Jainism 163 

ajfiana (nonknowledge, ignorance) 70, 
78-79, 90, 240, 319, 329-30, 341, 413, 455, 
531, 533, 539, 541, 543, 564. See also 


avidya 
akamksa (expectancy) 186, 364, 403, 438, 
443, 522, 591 
Gkara, akyti (form) 55-56, 139, 162 
in Vinanavads 352 
of Brahman 305-6, 480-83, 524 
akasa 24, 27, 83, 98, ‘108-9, 129, 133-34, 
140, i60, 165-66, 171, 185, 192, 202, 
209, 212, 219, 237, 259, 286-87, 292, 
311, 314, 462, 481, 490, 560, 574. See 
also pot-space 
as (color of the) sky 94, 120, 196, 222-23, 
459, 478 
mahé- (big-) 315 
akasmika (random) 364-65 
akhandartha _(partlessness of 
meaning) 57 
akhyativada 566-68 
aksara (imperishable, the syllable om) 
135-37, 140, 285-87, 348, 356, 358, 
490-92, 562, 574. See also aum 
alambana (supporting object) 94, 255-56, 
312, 335, 356, 414, 567 
dlatacakra or alatasanti (wheel of fire) 83- 
84, 110, 112, 315, 321, 357 
alayavijftana 159, 162 
Allahabad. See Prayaga 
Alston, Anthony J. 241, 
548, 612 
Amalnerkar, 608 
Amavasya 475 
anadhyavasdya (uncertainty) 553, 571 
Gnanda. See bliss 
Anandagiri 11-12, 105, 117-18, 256, 296, 


318, 


604 


sentence 


530, 534-35, 


466 
Anandapirna Vidyasagara 351, 359, 363, 


Anandavalli (=Brahmavalli chapter of 
Taittiriya Upanigad) 524 

andrambhavada 581-84 

Angiras 285 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


animal 25, 27, 121. 172 
(re) births 259-60, 281 
aniruddha 165 
anirvacaniya 80, 115, 219, 330, 335, 565, 
570 
-khyativada 347 
antahkarana (internal organ) 22, 86, 196, 
216, 330-31, 335, 341, 479, 546, 553, 
555-56, 574, 576 
antaryéamin (inner controller) 77, 134, 277, 
455, 459, 490, 492 
antinomianism 35-36, 40-41 
anubhava (immediate awareness) 54, 92, 
98, 123, 144, 320, 333, 351, 451, 539, 
572, 583 
Anugita (Asvamedhaparvan of Maha- 
bharata) 295 
anupalabdhi 529, 541 
~hetu 500 
anusamdhaéna (reflective consciousness, re- 
identification) 350, 381, 384, 397 
anuSaya (karmic residual traces). See karma 
anuvada (restatement) 348, 389, 436, 
441, 443, 447, 464, 526, 528, 612 
anvayavyatireka (positive and negative 
concomitance) 252, 401, 527, 538, 542 
anvitabhidanavada 57-59, 
anyathakhyativada 347, 567-68 
apdna (inhalation) 274, 330 
Apararkadeva 604 
Aparoksdnubhit: (attributed to Samkara) 
_ 18, 320-23 
Apastambhadharmasiitra 423 
apavada 8, 174 
apavarga 50-51, 194, 364 
apoha (vada) 55, 71, 250, 376, 521 
apophasis 8 
apratisamkhyanirodha \60 
apti (obtaining ) 39-40, 196, 210, 427, 596 
aptirva 31, 174, 313, 447 
drambhavada 581-84 
Aranya (one of the dasanémas) 118 
Aranyakas 3, 270 
Aristotle 65 
Arjuna 45, 295-96, 298, 300 
Artabhaga 488 
arthakriya (purposeful 
386, 392-9 
-karitva (efficiency) 578 
arthapatti (presumption) 58, 97, 360, 366, 
398, 405, 434, 521, 553, 583, 610 
$rutarthapatti_ 570-71 
arthavada (supplemental text, explanatory 
to injunction) 48, 51, 124, 175-76, 
267, 275, 304, 366, 410, 422, 424, 436, 
445, 466, 471 587, 596, 600 
three kinds of 436 
asana (posture) 322 
asat (nonbeing, nonexistence) 65, 75, 262, 
395, 453, 511, 522. See also unreality; 
abhava 
-kalpa 554 
-kdranavada 141, 161, 166, 261-62 
-karyavada 7, 41, 144-46, 149-50, 
158, S11 
ascertainment, certainty (nirnaya, niscaya) 
330, 341, 370-71, 386, 388, 482, 545, 553 
ascetic(ism) 45, 209, 259, 272, 320 
“wandering mendicant” 256-58 


378-79, 


action ) 


156, 


INDEX 


asiddha (a fallacy) 313 
Asmarathya 10, 87, 135, 142 
aspada (ground) 309, 328 
asrama (stage of life) 121, 323, 371-72, 506 
duties of 37, 43. See also dharma, 
morality 
enjoined by scripture 177 
four ideal stages of life 34-35, 44-45, 
219, 476, 490 
Samkara’s list of 45 
dsrama (retreat, monastery) 118 
srama (one of the dasanémas) 118 
astrology (jyotisa) 285 
asura (demon) 455-56 
Atharva Veda 284-85, 289 
atheism 7, 556-57 
atita (a Saiva category) 553 
Atmabodha (attributed to Samkara) 18, 
116, 323-24 : 
Atmajitanopadesa (attributed to Samkara) 
18, 326-28 
Gtmakhyativdda 567-68 
dtman (Self). See Brahman 
the word “‘atman” 463-64 
Atmandtmaviveka (attributed to Samkara) 
18, 328-31 
Atmapaiicaka, See Advaitapaiicaratna 
Atmasatka, See Aitareya Upanisad 
Atmavidyopadesa See Atmajianopadesa 
atom, atomic theory 123, 152, 156-58, 
161, 163, 166, 202, 353, 552 
double, See dvyaruka 
attachment (réga) 30, 44, 234, 317, 329, 
348-50, 363, 433 
to life (abhinivefa) 350, 365 
Audulomi 10, 87, 142 
aum (sacred syllable) 13, 89, 104, 107, 
136, 174, 256, 310-12, 319, 356, 517, 
520, 560, 562. See also aksara 
avaccheda (limitation, differentiation) 351, 
361, 404 
mutual (anyonya-, paraspara-) 357 
-vada. See limitation model 
avastha (state or stage) 88-91, 104, 106-7, 
241, 275, 316-17, 328, 330-31, 333, 
434, 459, 463, 478, 502, 508, 559. See 
also dream; sleep, deep; waking, turiya 
aversion (dvesa) 229, 279, 304, 317 
a karaka 458, 478 
avidya (ignorance). See also ajftana 
as ca body. See body, causal 
as God’s power 337 
as reflecting medium 77, 498, 504 
as superimposition. See Superimposition 
inningless, uncaused 70, 337, 352-53, 
367, 468, 516, 546, 565 
cannot be validly known 426, 523 
cause of bondage, rebirth 6, 32, 195, 
243, 269, 289, 336, 388, 503 
cause of fear 457-58, 505 
cause of God’s qualities 148, 187, 332 
cause of jiva 332, 574 
cause of the world, of constructions, 
distinctions, chan 50, 62, 67, 70, 
76, 121, 125, 140, 146, 197, 221, 233, 
235, 240, 269, 287, 299, 305, 382, 504, 
522-23 
coexists with vidya 354 
collective/distributive (samasfi/vyasti) 


615 


aspects of 340 

covering (dvarana, dcchadika 71, 79, 
86-87, 115, 182-83, 251, a, 302, 324 
337, 360, 415, 474, 565, 611 

pyar of 458, 531 
estroyed by vidyd alone 33, 38, 50, 69 
_195, 221, 228-30, 323, 329, 494°” 

different for each subtle body 505 

in Buddhism 21, 159-60 

latent in deep sleep 505 

locus of 80, 86, 88, 303, 352-53, 382, 
425, 468, 503-4, 516, 542, 611 

merges into avyaktaprakrti 238 

motiveless 353, 367 

occurrence of the word 
scripture 78, 279, 354 

eee status of 20, 33, 80, 352, 381, 


> 


“avidya” in 


a Pauranika category 553 

play (krida, lila) of 359 

produced from tamas 302 

productive of desires, pleasures 272, 
280, 425 


Projective (viksepika) 71, 79, 87, 93-94, 


115, 359-60, 377, 408, 415, 565, 569, 
580, 611 

relation to maya 79-80 

removal of. See liberation as removal 


of avidya 
required for action 307-8, 366 
root (miila-) 79-80 
secondary (tla-) 79-80 
single (not many) 505 
unrelated to Brahman 304, 458 
usage of term in Samkara 115, 294-95, 
311, 598 
-vdsana (impressions of avidya) 409 
-vyavahéra 408 
auyakrta 458-59, 461, 512, 574 
avyakta 140, 337, 340, 574 
-prakrti. See prakrti 
awareness. See jftdna 
Ayur Veda 444, See also medicine 
ayutasiddha 158, 183 


Badarayana 4, 10, 12, 26, 31, 119, 175» 
564, 589 

Badari 135 

Badrinath 16, 18, 104, 117-18 

Bahored Upanisad. See Aitareya Upanisad 

bahyarthavada 498 

Baijnath 608 

Bélabodhinit. See AtmajAanopadesa 

Balasubramaniam, R. 205, 347, 521, 608, 


610, 612 
Banara 16, 117, 333 
Banerjee, A. K. 608 


Barnett, L. D. 607 

begging 257, 519 

beginningless(ness) 70, 113 
series. See seed and sprout 

Belvalkar, Sripad Krishna 116, 308, 318, 
320, 323-24, 326, 328, 331, 339, 343-44, 
607-10 

Bengal 18, 103-4 

Bhagavadgita 5, 11, 32, 45, 78, 118, 138, 
178, 218, 266, 271-72, 294-308, 407-8 


616 


Bhagavadgitabhasya (of Samkara) 18, 29, 
40, 45, 78, 96, 116, 294-308, 530 
Bhagavat, H. R. 181, 205, 255, 278, 280- 
81, 284, 289, 295, 310, 328, 344 

Bhagavata 165 

bhakti (devotion) 320, 336-37 _ 

Bhaémati (commentary on  Samkara’s 
Brahmasitrabhasya by Vacaspati Misra) 

17 ‘ 

Bharati (wife of Mandana Misra) 15-16, 
117-18, 420 

Bharati (one of the dafandmas) 118 

Bharatitirtha 344 

Bhartrhari 20, 54, 56, 59, 116, 118 

Bhartrmitra 12 

Bhartrprapafica 12, 40, 50-52, 87, 187, 
193-94, 196, 201-2, 204, 461, 466-67, 
470, 473-77, 481, 487, 490, 494, 502-3, 
506-7, 512, 514, 520, 535 

Bhaskara 11, 40, 118, 181, 217, 294 

Bhatta Mimamsa 15, 20, 57, 440, 499, 
517, 553, 572, 580 

Bhattacharya, Dinesh Chandra 347, 610 

Bhattacharya, Umesh Chandra 88, 606 

Bhattacharya, Vidhusekhara 64, 104-5, 
603-4, 606-7 

bhava (state) 111, 367 
(positive entity) 261, 449 
-rdua_ 115, 350 

Bhavabhiti 347 

bhévand (continuous concentration) 417, 
434, 441, 534, 548, 559 

bhavand (latent impression) 357, 459, 488, 
501, 505, 523 

Bhévandviveka (of Mandana Misra) 346 

Bhavaviveka 12, 103 

bhaya. See fear 

bheda. See difference 

Bhedabhedavada 40-41, 43, 50-52, 87, 
118, 181, 309, 381, 425-26, 443, 467, 
477, 507, 514, 535, 610 

bitksu (monk) 289, 317 

bhoga (experience) 23, 29-31, 33-34, 108, 
231, 266, 351. See also happiness, pain 

bhoktr (enjoyer, lit. “eater”) 122-33, 134, 
147, 1 458, 493, 506, 539 

Bhrgu 524 

Bhrguvalli (chapter of Taittiriva Upanisad) 
205 


bhita. See element 
bindu (a Saiva category) 553, 556 
birds, two, symbolizing two selves 136, 
287-88 
birth (jati) 26-30, 32, 34, 202 
physiology of 523 
“three births” of Aitareya Upanisad 28-29, 
276-77 
blind leading blind, analogy of 128 
blind man carrying lame man on his back, 
analogy of 154 
bliss (dnanda) 
G@nandamayakega 91, 131-32, 212-13, 215, 
331, 337-38, 340, 524 
and prajia 106 
definition of 349 
in liberation, Self-knowledge 343, 388, 
404 
of Brahman 7, 76, 115, 131-32, 136, 
197-98, 205, 269, 285, 324, 337, 342, 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


348-51, 
492-93 
of deep sleep. See susupti 
relation to love 351 
relation to pleasure, happiness 76, 197- 
98, 342, 348-50, 365, 429, 451-52 
result of knowledge and action 213 
the term ‘‘dnanda’’ 295 
blood 26-27, 219, 331, 494, 523 
Bodhayana 11 
body (Sarira) 121, 227, 306 
as cause of the world 67, 78, 81-88, 
123-24, 130, 133, 139, 141-44, 147, 
151, 153, 170, 214, 219, 287, 292, 
397, 406, 459, 480, 485, 522, 599 
as reflecting medium 498 
bodily act. See act, bodily 
causal 319, 324, 330, 331, 335, 337, 
340, 494 
dead- 495 
dream 495, 501 
equilibrium of 322 
formation of the 523 
not the self 122, 175, 218-19, 222-23, 
326, 336, 458, 495-96, 556-57 
physical or gross (sthila) 20, 22, 24, 
83, 140, 319, 321, 323-24, 330-331, 
335, 336, 341, 473-74, 481, 487, 494 
subtle (siksmafarira, linga) 24-25, 27-29, 
108, 140, 171-72, 179, 193, 202, 
277, 287, 319, 321, 324, 330-331, 
335-336, 341, 473-74, 480-82, 487, 
494, 501, 503-5, 508-9, 561 
watery 26-27 
bondage. 6, 22, 32, 239, 336-37 
See also samsdra 
Brahma 87-88, 235, 247, 320, 324, 363, 
457, 459, 461, 530, 540-41, 580 
brahmacarya 34, 36, 118, 208, 289, 299, 
329, 370, 490, 518 
lifelong 45, 256, 259 
Brahmadatta 12, 363, 534 
Brahmaloka 26-27, 137, 175, 179-80, 
268-69, 281, 289, 329, 406, 476, 483, 
507, 509, 519, 533 
path to the. See path, devaydna 
Brahman (ultimate world principle, 
Highest Self) 
and Its states, relation to. See bhava 
as inner ruler. See antaryamin 
as pure consciousness 6-7, 20, 54, 75- 
76, 92, 188, 225-27, 233-34, 321, 
504, 506, 514, 539, 542 
as source of scripture 124, 485, 488 
as support of world 136-37 
as witness, seer. See saksin, drk 
as word (fabdabrahman) 139, 356 
=Atman 7, 61, 124, 132, 172, 188, 
215, 232, 328, 338, 478, 480, 510, 
528. See also tattvamasi 
Bhedabheda view of 193, 204 
bliss of. See bliss of Brahman 
can It be an object of awareness? 76, 
94, 110, 120, 122-23, 125-27, 145, 
188, 210-11, 226, 232, 237, 275, 283, 
328, 360, 409, 417-18, 452, 479, 496, 
514-15, 525, 538, 540, 545, 572, 587. 
See also Self-knowledge. 
can It be referred to or spoken about ? 


365, 367, 407, 419, 452, 


IN DEX 


95, 59-61, 74, 125, 193, 242, 282, 
327, 360, 369, 392, 417-18, 434, 459, 
525-27. See also neti neti 

definition per accidens (tatasthalaksana) 
of 75, 205, 555, 592 

disembodied 128 

does It have efforts or desires ? 
187, 213, 353, 425, 462 

essential definition (svarlipalaksana) of 
75, 205, 208-11, 330, 514, 555, 590 

eternal, omnipresent 122, 137, 232, 
327, 333, 342, 351, 372, 379, 424, 
493, 519, 522, 590, 600 

the (only) existent, “‘one without a 
second” 7, 21, 75, 213, 263, 317, 338, 
448 

“fixed in Brahman” 
256-57, 286 

form of. See akéra of Brahman 

full (parna) 76, 78, 126, 269, 322, 421, 
465-67, 517, 520 

has absolute freedom, 
524, 554 

higher Brahman (para, nirguna) 26, 74- 
75, 77, 80-81, 107, 131, 137, 141, 173, 
175, 187, 232-33, 277, 295, 465- 
466, 515, 527, 539, 581. See also 
Saksin 

how proved ? 280, 348, 360, 396, 409, 
417-18, 425, 434, 442, 451-52, 458, 
466, 469, 478, 488, 531, 536, 545, 
582, 587-89 

identical with liberation. 

inquiry into (brahmajijiiasa) 
343, 517-18, 581, 584-89. 
adhikara 

interior (pratyagdtman) 120, 196, 311, 
324, 340 


132, 


(brahmasamstha ) 


independence 


See liberation 
121-23, 
See also 


> 

relation to jiva 10, 28, 37, 41, 60-61, 
73, 86-87, 132, 134, 136, 142, 159-61, 
172, 174, 188-91, 193, 196, 219-20, 
236, 315, 334, 406, 428, 461, 466, 
483-84, 488, 505, 512, 517, 535, 
555, 587, 599, 

knowledge of. See Self-knowledge 

lovability of 466, 484 

lower (apara, saguna) 24, 26, 31, 50-51, 
74, 77-78, 107, 137, 141, 175, 179-80, 
186-87, 267, 272, 277, 281, 296, 407, 
467, 515, 520, 539, 560. See also God 

neither existent nor nonexistent 304 
554 

nondifferentiated, unmodified, _ partless 
53, 148, 152, 168, 191-93, 197-98, 
204, 213-14, 227, 237, 255, 311, 
354, 358 

nondifferent from, not dependent on 
nimittas 213-14, 354 

nondifferent from world 259, 280, 406-7, 
455, 478 

nonagent 52, 126, 128, 167, 211, 227, 
278, 292-93, 297, 299, 305, 308, 327, 
422-25, 477, 502, 505, 517 

not a product 49, 110, 122, 166, 196, 
283, 372, 427, 468, 518, 522, 582 

not subject to duhkha or samsdra 6, 185, 
196-27, 213, 231, 239, 244, 269-70, 
293, 359, 423, 425, 489, 517 

not a ssa 127, 231 -32 


617 


not prakrti 130-36 
not attained (aprapta) 405-6, 523 
omnipotent 122-23: 149, 407, 517 
omniscient 110, 122-24. 129, 149, 232, 
269, 468, 590 
pure 122, 126, 145 
Sarvatman (‘“all-Self”) 269, 359. 
self-luminous, self-evident 76, 138, 267. 
290, 314, 342, 434, 436, 445, 453, 
458, 482, 495, 506, 515, 520, 527, 
531, 536, 540 
size of 135, 137-38, 167, 231, 425 
states (avasthd) of. See avastha 
unchangeable (kufastha) 137, 227, 231, 
287, 297, 302, 359, 479, 505-6, 517, 
522, 540, 590, 599 
union with 131-32, 174, 179, 187, 202, 
268, 485-86 
a universal 373-74, 418, 485 
brahmana (Vedic directions for sacrifice ) 
3, 46, 485 
brahmana (priestly caste). 
Brahmanandin 12, 18 
Brahmasiddhi_ (of Mandana Misra) 
17, 19, 56, 58-59, 99, 347-419 
(aham) brahmaésmi (a mahavakya) 232, 
247, 319, 335, 470, 525, 528-30, 534, 
538-39, 542 
Brahmasitras (of Badarayana) 4-5, 9-11, 
25, 75, 77, 87, 118-180, 294, 372, 550, 
562, 588 
attributed to Jaimini 537 
Brahmasiitrabhasya (of Samkara) 11, 15, 
17-19, 23, 24-27, 31, 45, 51, 65, 69, 72, 
74, 84-85, 89, 94-95, 115-16, 119-81, 
217, 294, 308-9, 341, 564 
Brahmasitrabhasyatiké (of 
563 
Brahmasiitravrtti (of Upavarsa) 11, 18 
Brahmas iitravyttivarttika (of Sundara Pan- 
dya) 12, 18 
Brahmavalli (chapter of Taittiriya Upani- 
gad) 205, 521-30 
Brahmin (brahmana) 30, 187, 192, 286, 299, 
431, 467-68, 472-73, 489, 491, 518, 
534, 588 
killing a Brahmin, 423, 506 
a true Brahmin 490 
breath. See prana 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 25, 59, 75, 87-88, 
107, 109, 124, 133-34, 136, 141, 144-45, 
174, 177, 230, 254, 279, 290, 297, 348, 
350, 363, 366-67, 370, 372, 418, 430, 
453, 536, 582, 595, 600 Fs 
Brhadéranyakopanisadbhasya (of Samkara) 
15, 18, 25, 48, 76, 95, 116, 180-204, 
294, 436, 453, 461, 464-66, 480, 488 
495, 520, 543 
Brhadéranyakopanisadbhasyavarttika (of Sures- 
vara) 17, 19, 72, 180, 420-520, 530 
Brhaspati 491, 561 
(Gautama) Buddha 163, 317, 391, 396, 
459, 553 
buddha (enlightened person) 110-12, 
used ironically 316 
buddhi 22 
activity of 225, 244, 341, 346, 544 
and reasoning 280 
and the sense organs 236-37, 479 


See Brahmin 


15, 


Padmapada) 


114 


618 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


as the discriminator of jiva from dtman 


232, 234 

as “heart” 199, 212, 497, 509, 613 

as prototype in reflection analogy 86, 
246, 251 

as reflecting medium 20, 85, 199, 241, 
245-46, 248, 264, 305-6, 324, 327, 498, 
555-56, 577 

as upadhi of saksin 246, 251 

errors or constructions of 231-32, 239- 
40, 263-64, 376 

immobile 237 

in Buddhism 238 

in the “cave” of the Katha Upanisad 134 

in deep sleep. See susupti 

inert 232, 244 

its order of creation 332 

locus of desires and impressions 291, 
229, 236, 462, 478 

locus of merit 525, 556 

=mahat 149, 143, 145, 293, 314, 353 

material for 523 

not the Self 199, 326-27, 334, 556-57 

part of antahkarana 330, 341, 553 

part of subtle body 311, 319, 324, 330 

part of vijfidnamayakosa 331, 337, 341 

=prana 486, 497 

product of karma 477 

ruled by Brhaspati 561 

role in dream production 478 

size of 167 

orttis of 497 

Buddhism, Buddhists 8, 13, 19-21, 55, 64- 

65, 71, 79, 83-84, 93,95, 105, 118, 150, 

159-163, 181, 200, 243, 245, 305, 309, 356, 

372, 376, 378, 385, 393, 405, 414, 434, 

458, 498, 512, 545, 548, 550, 577. See 

also Abhidharma, Dignaga, Madhya- 

mika, Vijhanavada, Yogacara 

crypto-Buddhism 13 

Budhakar, G. V. 604, 608 


Candalas 260, 506, 540 
Carvaka (or Lokayata, a materialist) 
8, 19, 22, 122, 175, 181, 198, 244, 246, 
291, 359, 503, 553, 556, 589. See also 
dehatmavada 
caste. See varna 
catuskofi 113 
cause, causality 7, 62-67, 113, 379-80, 463, 
499 
and effect, distinction between 41, 
144-46, 149-50, 156. See also 
Satkaryavada, asatkaryavdda, parinadma, 
vivarta, etc. 
inherence cause. See samavdyikarana 
instrumental cause. See nimittakdrana 
material cause. See upddana 
nonorigination, no-cause theory. See 
ajativada 
Nyaya-Vaisesika analysis into three 
sorts 165, 305, 454, 552 
Chakravarti, S. C. 605 
chanda (meter, prosody) 133, 285 
Chandog ya Upanisad 12, 25, 59, 88, 130-37, 
141, 147, 165-66, 168, 171, 174, 176-77, 
207, 230, 254-55, 259, 261, 263-67, 


269-70, 287, 351, 358, 366-67, 408, 417, 
429-30, 459, 478, 484-85, 512, 522, 571, 
581, 595, 600 : 

Chandog yopanisadbhasya (of Samkara) 15, 
18, 17, 66, 85, 104, 116, 254-269 
Hee opie eraaio 8 (of Brahmanandin ) 

12, 18 


Chandog yopanisadvakyabhasya (of Dravida- 
carya) 12, 18 
change 62-67, 590. See also parindma, 
vivarta 
illusion of persistence through change. 
See also dlatacakra 454 
charity (déna) 256, 259 520 
Chatterjee, Mohini M. 328 
chéya (shadow) 243, 556 
-matra (mere appearance) 408 
Chintamani, T. R. 603 
Christianity 37 
Cidambaram 14, 17, 19, 117 
Cidvilasa 117 
citta (individual consciousness) 82, 85, 
106, 108, 111, 159, 234, 240, 311, 322, 
330, 332, 341, 561 
in Vijianavada 316 
not conscious (ness) 246 
part of antahkarana 533 
-vrtti 324 
-urttinirodha 47) 
color 264-65, 268, 291, 353, 560 
conditions for seeing 458, 509 
variegated (citrariipa) 382 
commentary 4-5 
comparison (upamdna) 97, 286, 360, 553 
concentration. See samadhi 
conceptualism 55 
Conio, Caterina 64, 606-7 
Conjeeveram. See Kanchi 
consciousness (cit. cattanya, samvit) 
analogous to light 224, See also jftana, 
vijfidna, citta; prakdsa 
and bliss, relation between 76, 493 
and superimposition. See superim- 
position 
as the power of speech 54 
between births 27-29 
cidabhasa 344, 477, 505 
cinmatra 293 
cidatman 494, 551, 562, 599 
citigakti 599 
eternal 93, 167, 188, 225-26, 276, 284, 
291 
immediate. See anubhava 
in Buddhism 21, 199, 498-500 
in deep sleep. See susupti 
not an act 92 
not dependent on another 224 
of the jiva. See jilana 
pure 21, 92, 154, 248, 445, 498. See also 
Brahman as _ pure consciousness; 
jitana, nirvikalpa 21 
reflective. See anusamdhdna 
self-revealing, self-evident. See svaprakasa 
contact. See samyoga 
contradiction 8, 378 
self-contradiction 382 
counterpositive (of an absence [pratiyogén }) 
66, 377, 500, 606 


INDEX 


creation 81-88, 106, 150-51, 185, 214-15, 


325, 332, 341, 352-53. See also 
Brahman as cause; God as efficient 
cause 


apparent creation (kalpayati) 107 

creation of universe by each individual’s 

acts 475 

myths of creation 87-88, 273-75, 455- 
61, 560 


dahéva 137-38 
Daksinémirtimanasollasa (attributed to 
Suresvara). See Manasollasa 7 
Daksinamirtistotra (attributed to Sam- 
kara) 18, 317-18, 420, 555, 557 
Das, A. C, 605 
dama (detachment, restraint of organs) 
36, 122, 272, 329, 336.515, 520 
Daéganamins 16, 118 
DaSsaratha 247 : 
DaSasloki (attributed to Samkara) 18, 
333-34 
Dasgupta, Surendra Nath 116 
Datta, Dhirendra Mohan 605 
death 22-24, 29, 33, 179, 182, 193-94, 
202, 266, 453, 455, 474, 487-89, 497, 501 
as a god 561 
death of death 487 
debts, three, to the gods 273, 363, 371, 
434, 470-71, 473-74 
dehatmavada 495-96, 503 
demerit (adharma) 31-32, 36, 44, 108, 
128, 132, 206, 218, 228-29, 233, 258, 
295-96, 299, 422, 458, 510, 531, 534 
dependence 113, 149, 238 
dependent nature (paratantra) 68, 111 
mutual dependence (anyonydSraya) 28, 
240, 248-49, 352, 380, 578, 593 
desire (kéma) 23-24, 34, 44, 49, 53, 201, 
205-6, 226, 229, 235, 271-72, 280, 287, 
304, 314-15, 349, 365-66, 429, 431, 
435-36, 474, 479, 482, 502, 511-12, 561 
for liberation (mumuksutva). See libe- 
ration, desire for 
a karaka. See act, stems from desire 
threefold (for sons, wealth, worlds) 
278, 317, 489-90 
De Smet, R. V. 308, 609 
destruction (ndsa, vindfa) 506, 522 
determinism and free will 29-31 
Deussen, Paul 65, 78, 604, 606 
deva. See gods 
devadatia (yawning) 330 
devaloka (world of the gods) 476 
attained by meditation 181, 279 
path of the. See path, northern 
Devanandan, P. D. 78, 606 
Devaraja, N. K. 604 
dhanaitjaya (digestion) 330. 
fire, digestive 
dharana (attention) 322, 330, 333 
dharma (duty, morality) 108, 121-23, 143- 
45, 176, 320, 391, 417, 427, 472, 584-85 
varndsramadharma 176, 320 
svadharma 256, 305, 320 
dharma (in Buddhist sense o} 
111, 237, 350 
dharma (property) 111, 350 


See also 


“entity” ) 


619 


Dharmakirti 115-16, 346 
Dharmapala 103 
dhyana (contemplation) 322, 333. See 
also updsana 
dialectic 8 
difference (bheda) 6, 7, 34, 40-42, 50, 
62, 68, 70, 114, 254-55, 257-58, 318, 
353-54, 361, 373, 385-87, 409, 418, 
527, 529, 559, 564 
arguments against the reality of differ- 
ence 71-73, 109, 147-49, 358, 376- 
84, 449-51, 507 
as separateness. See prthakiva 
between agent, act, and result 41, 220- 


between cause and effect. See cause 
liberation as destruction of. See libe- 
ration 
nondifference. See abheda 
Dignaga’s school of Buddhism 55. 
also Vijntanavada, Yogacara 
dik (spatial direction) 
an effect? 166 
dtkviparyasa (dizziness )321, 379, 412,460 
discrimination (viveka) 
awareness of (vivekajftana) 406 
of eternal from noneternal 122, 320 
divinities. See gods 
dizziness. See dikviparydsa 
dosa. See fault 
doubt (samSaya) 330, 394, 400, 411, 460, 
482, 553 
Dravidacarya 12, 18, 191 
dream (svapna) 13, 21, 24-26, 63, 72,85, 
89-91, 106-9, 146, 172, 199-202, 225, 
228, 233-35, 240, 248, 252, 257, 265, 
268, 286, 289, 298, 319, 321, 325-27, 
338, 413, 460, 478-79, 484, 502, 504, 
551, 556, 561-62, 568-69 
as result of karma 90, 201, 234, 276, 
290, 311-13, 318, 501, 505 
analogy of 148, 152, 161,321, 323, 499 
threc states of 502 
Dredrsyaviveka. See Vakyasudha 
drk, drsti (vision) 369-70, 444 
drksthiti. (fixed vision) 322 
drkSakti (power of vision) 351 
adrstisrsti 326 
mithyddrs{i (false vision) 369 
tattvadrsji (vision of reality) 541 
two kinds of 188, 196 
duality. See difference 
duhkha (frustration) 110, 113, 128, 155, 
168. 269, 285, 328, 331, 337, 348-49, 
462. See also pain 
Durgasaptati (of Gaudapada?) 104 
dvaitavada (doctrine of duality) 264 
Dvaita (Vedanta) 9, 14 
Dvivedi, Manilal N. 310, 328 
dvyanuka (double atom) 305 
Dwarka 16, 18, 118 


See 


earrings, loss of, analogy of 128 

earrings, disappearance of when known 
to be gold 321 

earth (prthivi)22, 24, 27, 88, 236, 287, 
311, 318, 560 

eating not a nityakarman 185 

eclipse 318 


620 


seks (yatna, prayaina) 39, 226, 228, 439, 
56 : 


dependence of dharma on 123 
necessity of it for liberation 209 


ego, “I? 21, 121, 230, 251. See also 
ahamkara, abhimana 

elements 108, 166, 171, 193, 201, 264, 
332, 321, 458, 510, 556. See also 


earth, air, fire, water, dkdsa 
gross (bhiita, mahabhiita) 24, 219, 318, 
560 
subtle. 
empty terms 211. 
envy 337 
Epics 25. See also Mahabharata, Ramayana 
epistemology. See knowledge, theory of 
error (viparydya, viparydsa, bhranti) 7, 39, 
42, 67, 79, 91, 120-21, 128, 178, 183, 
189, 316, 367-68, 370, 385, 400, 409, 
454, 460, 532. See also avidya, ajRana 
theories of error (khydtivada) 20, 69-71, 
93-94, 347, 411-15, 539, 553, 558. 
See also akhyati-, atma-, asat-, anyatha-, 
and anirvacaniya-khyativada 
excretion, organs of 22 
exegesis of scripture (mimamsda) 4-5, 46-53, 
72, 585, 588 
six principles of 430-31 
external world, object 
See also bahyarthavada 
existence of 161-62, 199-201 
awareness of 311 
eye 31]. See also visual organ 


See tanmdatra 
See also hare’s horn 


(bahyartha) 306. 


Faddegon, Barend 608 

fainting 173, 

faith. See Sraddhé 

fatalism 29-30 

fatigue 265 

fault (dosa) 228, 241 
in the knower 38 
in the (sense) organs 414, 456, 566 

fear (bhaya) 128, 216, 231, 359, 456-58, 581 
elessness (abhaya) 228, 494, 519, 530 
of doing evil 258 

figurative language, figure of speech. 
See meaning, figurative; metaphor 

fire, light (tjas) 24, 88, 292-93, 237, 
263-66, 318, 379, 650. See also Agni, 
prakasa 
digestive 135, 556. See also agni 
five fires 259 
sacred fire 229, 242, 258-59, 299, 311 
sparks from a fire, analogy of 84, 191, 

311, 485 

wheel of fire. See dlatacakra 

food (anna) 26, 28, 88, 171-72, 176, 185, 
263-65, 480, 494, 518, 523-24 
foodstuffs in sacrifice 475 
matter as food for the gods 274 
sheath of (annamayakosa) 91,215, 331, 

341, 524 

three kinds of 475 

forbearance. See Yama 

forest-dwelling (vanaprasthya) 34, 36, 286, 
289 

fowler’s son, analogy of 191 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Frauwallner, Erich 346, 610 

free will 29-31, 168 
and determinism. See 
and free will 

frustration. See duhkha 


determinism 


Gadgil, V. A. 607 
Seubhaends 205, 278, 280-81, 284, 
9 

Gandhara, mean reaching, analogy of 
230, 266 

Gandharvas, city of the 286, 321, 510 

Ganega 339 

Ganga, Ganges 117 

Gargi 423, 490-91 

Gargya 477 

Gauda 13 

Gaudapada 12-14, 18, 20, 33, 45, 63-70, 
72, 79, 83-84, 87, 89,91, 103-14, 116-18, 
309, 335, 479, 600 

Gaugapadakarikas 12-14, 18, 81, 89, 103-14, 
550-51 ( 

Gaudapadakérikabhasya (of Samkara) 18, 
82, 103-4, 116, 118, 308-17 

Gautama, author of Nyayasiitras 187 

Gautamadharmasiitras 371 

gavaya 354 

Gayatri 520 

gestation of foetus in mother’s womb 


(preta) 
in an empty place, analogy of 321 
-ly state 281 
Giri. See Totaka 
Giri (one of the dasanémas) 118 
Giri, Maheshananda 551 
God (Ivara). See also Visnu, Siva, etc. 
abode of subtle body 140 
as cause of difference 77-78, 132, 554 
as creator of jivas 82, 87, 123, 164-65 
as creator of dharma or universal order 
295 
as creator of scripture 164, 340 
as “death” 453 
as (non)different from jivas 130, 133, 
164, 168, 187, 276, 303, 332, 558, 574 
as efficient cause of the world 77, 81-89, 
123, 163-65, 172, 273-75, 340, 480, 
554 
as establisher of meanings of 
56, 448 
as manipulator of karmic developments 
31,68, 70, 77, 123, 153, 164, 168, 174, 
189, 213, 299, 311, 317-18, 455, 468, 
488 
as material cause of the world 77, 84, 
163-65, 340 
as obstructor of endeavors 470 
as sagupa Brahman. See Brahman, 
lower 
as Witness. See sdaksin 
the devaté of darkness 561 
devotion to, faith in 295, 323, 531 
does He have desires? 77, 106, 


164, 168 
embodied? 132, 301-2 


words 


113, 


INDEX 


free from sin 132, 152-53, 164 168 
Sees play (lila, krida) 77-78, 106, 152, 
grace of 168, 209, 336, 551 
Iearatva 318, 553. See also aisvarya 
meditation on, worship of. See updsand 
omnipotent 77, 87, 123, 148, 340, 470 
omnipresent 137, 164, 340 
omniscient 77, 87, 113, 123, 148, 152, 
164, 183, 301, 311, 332, 340, 349 
=prajita. See prajita 
proofs of the existence of God 123-24, 
590 
qualified by avidyd, mayd, upadhis? 88, 
148-49, 287, 332, 340, 461, 551-52, 
554 
reflected in avidya 455, 552 
Saktis of 337, 552-53, 555, 590 
the term ‘Ifvara” 115, 295 
thirty-six muirtis of 559 
gods (deva) 25-26, 108, 138-40, 188-89, 
235, 270, 274, 289, 295, 427, 455-56, 
461, 472, 481, 488, 492, 494, 504, 510, 
553 
Presiding (adhipati) 330, 341 
their bodies 138-39 
way of the gods. See path, northern 
world of the gods, See devaloka 
Govindananda 11 
ar a Bhagavatpada 14, 16, 117, 335, 
grammar 244 
arguments from 48 
the science of (vydkarana) 285 
Grammarians (Vaiyakaranas) 20 
grahyagréhaka (grasper and_ grasped) 
199, 201 
grasping, organ of 22 
Guha, A. 603 
guna 329, 337, 350, 482, 488, 538, 599 
gunatva. 390, 393 
in Samkhya 108, 128-29, 
238, 466, 552, 598 
in Vaisesika 239, 315, 355, 382, 552 
visesaguna 358 
guru (teacher, guide) 8, 37-38, 117, 272, 
317, 325, 531, 559, 599 
grace of 336, 469 
as one with God 340 
guruparampara (teacher lineage) 420 


152, 155, 


Hacker, Paul 115-16, 118-19, 204, 217, 
294, 308-10, 320, 323-25, 328, 335, 
598, 600, 607-19, 613 

happiness 26, 29. See also pleasure 

hare’s horn 161, 305, 454 

Harzer, Edeltraud 598, 601-2 

Hastamalaka 16, 18-19, 601 

Hastémdlakastotra 18-19, 601-2 

hathayoga 323, 560 

“heart” (hrdaya) 24, 133-34, 479, 494, 
497, 512, 604 

heat 236, 241 

heaven (svarga) 8, 25-27, 30, 32-33, 38, 
47, 49-50, 171, 194-95, 229, 256, 258-59, 
273, 281, 296, 421, 423, 429-30, 432- 
33, 439, 440, 445-47, 513, 529, 588-89 


621 


hell 25-27, 171, 260, 281, 349. See also 
Samyamanam 

hetu or linga in inference 392, 500 

Himalaya 16 

Hinduism 3, 5, 34, 37, 44 

Hiranyagarbha 27, 50, 87, 179, 182, 185, 
259, 277-79, 281, 307, 319, 341, 455-56, 
461, 473-74, 476, 481, 487, 489, 494, 
514-15, 562 

Hiriyanna, Mysore 50, 347, 530, 534, 
603, 605, 608, 610, 612 

householdership (grhasthya) 34, 36, 45, 
208-9, 256-59, 272, 289, 298, 301, 329, 
371-72, 474, 518 

humility 337 

hunger and thirst 258, 270, 274, 489 

hymn (stotra) 317 


iccha (desire, wishing) 349 
identity (tddétmya, ekatva) 150, 174, 194, 
381 
identity and difference 62-73, 147-48 
identity statements. See tattvamast 
of diman and Brahman. See Brahman, 
tattvamasi 
of jiva and atman. 
to jiva 
of positive with negative 449 
of Witness and ego 245 
ignorance 7-8, 65, 73, 78. See 
avidyd, ajitana 
illusion, See error 
Indo-European languages 3 
Indra 88, 133, 138, 235, 274, 461, 472, 
493, 518, 561 
thunderbolt of. See Vajra 
inference (anumana) 97, 99, 123, 142, 
241, 275, 286, 354, 357, 360, 381, 389- 
92, 399-400, 434, 499-500, 528, 540, 
553, 571, 579 
critique of 496-97 
parisesanumana 590 
infinite regress (anavastha )157, 200, 226-27, 
239, 292, 350, 386, 388, 394, 438, 
498, 522, 529, 541 
Ingalls, Daniel H.H. 80, 116, 118, 180-81, 
294, 308, 320, 335, 604, 606-10 
inherence. See samavdya 
injunction (vidhi, codana) 357. See also 
niyoga, lin, karmakapda, act 
all scripture dominated by injunctive 
mood. See karmakdnda, jftdnakainda 
as pramana, See scripture, validity of 
cannot provide Self-knowledge 526 
exclusive (parisamkhyavidhi) 365, 433, 
464, 517, 536, 611 
four purposes or results of. See acts, 
four kinds of results of 
injunction to know Brahman 364-66, 
487-91, 409-10, 414-17, 441-42, 
484, 525, 530, 535-36, 581-83, 594- 
95, 600, 612 
injunction to know the truth (prati- 
pattividhi) 403 
injunction to meditate on Brahman 
51-52, 465, 530 
negative injunction proscription. 


See Brahman, relation 


also 


See 


622 


act, prohibited 
of eligibility (adhikaraviddht) 403, 443-44 


of or in the Vedas. See scripture, 
Vedas 

originative injunction  (utpattividhi) 
403, 443-44 

possibility of 168-69 

primary or initial (apérvavidhi) 38, 


185-86, 433, 464, 536 
restrictive injunction (ntyamavidhi) 18, 
365, 433, 464-65, 517, 536, 611 
to a Self-knower 43-44, 168-69, 184, 
255, 271-72 
source of force of 452 
what can be enjoined 123, 126-27, 173, 
195, 271, 388-91, 402-5, 432, 434, 
437, 611 
innocence 317 
insects 25 
rebirth as 260, 281 
intention (tatparya) 
awareness 22 
of speaker 58, 437 
internal organ 23-24, 87, 90, 121, 123, 
170, 202, 228, 235, 254, 265, 277, 282, 
284, 459, 462, 482, 505, 533, 540, 
599. See also buddhi, manas, antah- 
karana 
as effect 166 
as self 122, 599 
in Vaisesika 169-70 
invariable concomitance (avyabhicara, 
avinabhava, vydptr) 414, 496, 500. See 
also anvayavyatireka 
Isa Upanisad 270, 278-79, 284, 354, 474 
Ksopanisadbhasya (of Samkara) 18, 278-80 
ifvara. See God 
itihasa 485 
itikartavyata or itthambhava (modus ope- 
randi) 404-5, 428, 439 
Iyer, K. S. 23, 604-5, 609 
Iyer, R. Krishnaswami 598 


Jabala Upanisad 135, 371, 434 

Jacob, G. A. 217, 530, 605, 608, 612 

Jacobi, Hermann 308, 603 

jada (inert) 108, 115, 331, 358, 459, 551, 
565 

Jagadananda 217, 326, 334 

Jaimini 4, 31, 135, 175, 179, 422, 428, 
512, 531, 537, 581, 584, 596-97 

Jainism 8, 19, 71, 163, 333, 381, 509 

Digambaras 316, 384 

Janaka 296, 493-95, 497, 508, 513, 519 

Japa (repeated recitation) 374, 388, 481 

jara (old age) 489 


jati (genus, class-characteristic) 55-56, 
351, 393-94, 418, 477. See also 
universal. 

jati. See birth 


jaundice, illusion produced by 321, 411, 
460 

Jayanta Bhatta 11 

jealousy 337 

Jha, Ganganatha 255, 604 

jiva (atman, individual self) 
as agent. See agent 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


as constructor of dream objects 89-90 
501, 504 
as “death” 455 
as experiencer. See bhoktr 
as ksetrajfia 287, 523 
as transmigrator 24-25, 27, 29, 140, 
151, 179, 276-77, 424, 478, 501-2, 
508-11, 523. See also karma 
as vijfdanamayakosa, s.v. 
beginningless 352 
defined 109, 332 
embodied in plants 172 
how created? 82-83, 87, 108-9, 340, 
480 
in Jainism 163 
in sleep. See sleep 
locus of avidya? 80, 352, 468 
misinterpretations of 108 
perceptible 366 
proof of 275 
a reflection. See reflection 
relation to Brahman. See Brahman, 
relation to jiva 
relation to God. See God 
relation to its body 169-70, 287, 326, 
487, 504, 510 
relation to Witness. See saksin 
relation to world 81, 151, 171, 214, 
264, 551 
subject of Self-knowledge 576 
untrue 264, 418 
jivanmukti (liberation while living) 34-35, 
43, 202, 324-25, 335-36, 342-43, 352, 
408, 416, 494, 559, 562 
jfiana (awareness, cognition) 24, 62, 75, 
111-12, 373, 415-16, 569, 612 
and action. See act and knowledge 
false (mithya-). See error 
momentary 352, 355, 405, 450 
in Nyaya-Vaisesika 239, 353, 356 
nirvikalpakajftana 92, 110, 353, 386, 498 
savikalpakajfiana 92, 353, 381, 386, 498 
Ssakara|nirakdra 306 
true (samyak) 531. 
vidya 
-vidhi. See injunction to knowledge 
jnanabhimi (stages of knowledge) 343 
jftanakanda (declarative section of scrip- 
ture) 8, 46-54, 57, 204, 208, 270, 421, 
428-30, 432-34, 436, 440, 443-44, 446, 
448, 517-18 
jiténakarmasamuccaya (vada) (combined-path 
view) 20, 40-41, 45, 49-51, 270-71, 296, 
298, 431, 508, 513, 535 
jitanayoga (path of knowledge) 45, 325 
jiapaka (function of making something 
known) 53, 435, 440, 446 
Joshi, Lal Mani 604, 607 
Joshi, R. B. 78-79, 606 
juggler (indrajala) 325, 357 
jyotistoma 475 


See also pramd, 


Kahola 196, 489 

kaivalya (isolation) 255, 335, 474, 541, 
555. See also liberation 

Kaladi 16, 117 

kalpa 139-40 


INDEX 


the science of ritual 285 
kalpana (constructing, construction) 68, 
216, 237, 240, 262, 294, 318, 325, 
351-52, 355, 407, 513, 521-22, 569, 582. 
See also vikalpa 
bepenrtiate (constructed object) 378, 
3 
nirbijakalpana 383 
kama. See desire 
Kamakoti Pitha (at Conjecveram) 17-18 
kamasastra 16, 459 
kamavilayavada 49-50, 431 
kdmyakarman. See act, optional 
Kanada 157, 187, 512, 553, 590 
Kanchi (Conjeeveram) 17-18, 118 
kaftcuka (mask) 546 
Kane, P. V. 347, 603 | 
Kanva_ recension of Sukla-Yajurveda 
180, 421 
Kapila 142-43 
kéraka (function of prompting activity 
to obtain a result) 53, 439, 446, 458 
kéraka (grammatical case ending) 211 
karana (instrument) 251, 290, 428, 43 
karma. See also act, adrsta, apiirva 
dgamin or saftciyamana karman 23, 29, 
34, 338 
and dreams. See dream 
and samnydsa. See samnydsa 
conditions world-creation 459, 503 
demeritorious 27, 29, 205-6, 260, 500- 
501 


destroyed by Self-knowledge 178, 189, 
231, 266, 304, 423, 487, 531-33 
how it controls destiny of the jiva 24-30, 
171-72, 202, 231, 259-60, 328, 349, 
423, 471, 477-79, 488, 501, 508, 
511, 523, 530 
karmatva 393 
karmavipaka and karmaksaya (matura- 
tion and exhaustion of karma) 22- 
23, 31, 42, 178-79, 201, 205-7, 259, 
326, 342, 307-9, 422-23, 474, 536 
karmic residues (karmanuSaya) 22-34, 
36, 140, 171, 259-60, 306. See also 
samskdra, vasana 
law of 29-30, 49-50, 189 
locus of 503, 561 
meritorious 26, 178, 189, 205-6, 500-501 
prarabdhakarman 23, 29, 31, 34-35, 42, 
178, 186, 189, 205, 231, 266, 288, 
304-5, 321-22, 335, 338, 408, 458, 
471, 536, 562, 597, 604 
produced by effort 228 
produced by nityakarmans. 
regular daily 
Saftcitakarman 23, 29, 31, 266, 332, 335, 
338, 408, 604 
karmakénda (injunctive section of scrip- 
ture) 8, 46-53, 57, 181, 191-92, 204, 
208, 270, 421, 425, 428-29, 432-34, 436, 
440, 443-44, 447-49, 453, 488, 517- 
18, 596. See also injunction 
karman (grammatical object, objective) 
248, 350 
Karmarkar, R. D. 609 
karmayoga 301, 306 
kartavyata (future result) 348, 434-35 


See act, 


623 


karya (effect) 7, 48, 196,406. See also 
cause 

kérya_ (something to be accomplished) 
427, 435-39 

karyahetu 500 

Kasakrtsna 10, 87, 142 

kdsaya (faults) 317 

Kasi, King of 477 

Kasimoksavicéra (attributed to Suresvara) 
19, 420 

Kashmir 14 

Kashmir Saivism 16, 551 

kastajvara (typhoid fever) 444 

kataka (clearing- or soap-nut) 43, 90, 
323, 354, 501 

Ratha Upanisad 134, 138, 140-41, 270, 280, 
284, 461, 556 é 

Kathopanisadbhasya (of Samkara) 18, 20- 
21, 310 

Kausitaki Upanisad 133, 141, 174, 476, 492 

Kausitakyupanisadbhasya (attributed to 
Samkara) 19, 345 

Kawada, Kumataro 604, 607 

Kena Upanisad 281-83 . 

Kenopanisad (pada) bhasya (of Samkara) 18, 
116, 281-84 : 

Kenopanisad (vakya)bhasya (of Samkara) 
18, 281, 310 

Kerala 16, 18, 117 

Khilakanda (section of Brhada@ranyaka 
Upanisad) 520 

kleSa_ (hindrance, impurity) 111, 208, 
289, 352, 359 

knower (jadtr, pramatr) 6, 121, 235, 248. 
See also jiva 
and knowledge, relation between 225 
and known, relation between 42, 228 

knowledge 62. See jftdna, vidya, prama 
is it an act? 33, 38-40, 225, 244, 250-51, 

284, See also act, incompatible with 
knowledge 

not a result 227 
rolein liberation. See vidya, jhdnayoga, etc. 
theory of knowledge 92-100 

koSa (sheath), theory of 91, 109, 205, 
324, 330-31, 338, 510, 524-25, 529 

krama (a kind of exegetical evidence) 
431 

kramamukti. See liberation, 

kratu (resolve) 510 

Krishna, Daya 608 

krkara (-appetite) 330 

Krsna 5, 45, 295-96, 300 

krttika 500 

ksdtriya 299, 472-73, 534 

Kumarappa, B. 605 

Kumirila 4, 15-17, 20, 57, 59, 71, 116, 
346, 353, 374, 380-81 

kundalini 556 

kirma (opening the eyes) 330 


progressive 


Laghuvakyavrtti (attributed to Samkara) 
19, 345 

lamp, analogy of 95, 199-200, 248, 334, 
498 


language 8, 357-58. See also meaning, 
fabda 


624 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


acquisition or learning of 48, 57-58, 360, 
362, 399-400, 435, 443, 592. See 
also vyutpatti 

as communication 58, 361, 398, 400-1, 
417, 437, 593 

philosophy of language 46-61 

Lankavatara Sitra 607 

laya (dissolution) 110, 415, 432, 478 
layayoga 560 

leech 25, 510 

length of life (ayus) 28-30, 32, 34 

liberation (moksa, mukti, nihsreyasa). See 
also kaivalya 

and Brahmaloka. See Brahmaloka 

and karma. See karma 

and samnyasa. See samnyasa 

as eternal pleasure. See bliss 

as removal of avidya 36, 39-40, 43, 
125-26, 288 

backsliding from 35, 42, 145-46, 153, 
176, 359, 406 

definition, nature of 32-38, 180, 205, 
335, 338, 352, 405, 422, 489, 546 

desire for liberation (mumuksutva) 36, 
122, 176, 218, 221, 320, 337, 339-40, 
429, 452 

eligibility for. See adhikara 

eternal, beginningless and endless 39, 
125-26, 177, 195, 202, 206, 306, 405, 
421-22, 595 

four ways of obtaining liberation 537-38, 
546 

in Bhedabhedavada 49, 51, 476-77 

in deep sleep. See susupti 

in Mimamsa 32, 47, 476 

in Nyaya 355-56, 595 


in the womb 28-29, 277. See also 


Vamadeva 
is Brahman 421-22, 490, 493 


is or requires Self-knowledge. See 


Self-knowledge 

means of achieving. See paths 

not an effect 32-33, 97, 196, 203, 238, 
242, 286, 288, 371, 388-89, 405-7, 
421-22, 427, 464 


occasioned by hearing a mahdvakya 54, 247 


possibility of 167, 169, 238-39, 315, 
337, 422, 424, 470, 535 

progressive (kramamukti) 27, 406, 581 

properties of liberated one 37, 94, 180 


role of action in. See act, karmakénda, 


Self-knowledge, injunction 
role of meditation in. See updsana 
science of (moksasastra) 148 
while living. See jivanmukti 
life (jivana) 29-32, 189 
length of. See length of life 
light (prakéfa) 24, 138, 287, 311, 354, 
358, 552, 554. See also fire 
lightning 25-26 


Lokayata. See Carvaka 
love (prema) 35-37, 351, 466 
lust 337 
lying 396, 398 

lie-detection test 267 


Madhava 117, 347 

Madhavananda 181, 335 

Madhu Brahmana (section of Brhadéranyaka 
Upanisad) 475, 486, 519 

Madhusidana Sarasvati 333 

Madhva 14, 105 

Madhyamika (Buddhism) 13, 21, 162, 
199, 557 : 

Madhyandina recension of Sukla-Yajur- 
veda 180, 513-14 

magic show, magician, analogy of 88, 
90, 106, 146, 241, 273, 311, 317, 353-54, 
478, 541 

Mahabharata 5, 476, 485 

Mahadevan, T. M. P. 17, 317 333, 
420-21, 604, 607-8, 612 

mahat. See buddhi=mahat 

mahavakya (great sentences of the Upani- 
sads) 51, 54, 59, 427, 457, 465, 515-17, 
550, 583 
interpretation of 59-61, 537 

Maitreyi (Yajfiavalkya’s wife) 141, 423, 
483 


-Brihmana (section of Brhaddranyaka 
Upanisad) 483, 519 
Maitri Upanisad 78 
Majumdar, J. L. 20, 309, 604, 607, 609 
Malabar 16 
Malkani, G. R. 605 
manas (intellectual organ) 
as reflecting medium 498 
control of 110 
does it move? 237, 556 
grasps external objects 342, 475 
in Nydaya-Vaisesika 315, 356, 553 
in subtle body, transmigratory process 
23, 171, 179, 319, 324, 330, 475, 561 
locus of desire, aversion, etc. 425 
locus of error, constructions 237, 385, 
412, 561. See also dream 
locus of meditation, worship 255, 297 
locus of taijasa 106 
manasapratyaya 268 
manasika act. See act, mental 
manomayakoga 91, 215, 331, 341, 497, 
524, 559, 568 
modifications of 337 
not the Self 198, 275, 326, 334, 341 
operator of sense organs 475 
order of creation of 332 
part of antahkarana 341, 553 
presiding divinity of 475, 561 
a reflection of buddhit 20, 306 


limitation model  (avacchedavdda) 599. Ménasollasa (of Suresvara?) 19, 317, 


See also pot-space 
lin (optative) 48, 401-2, 404, 442 
linga, a kind of exegetical evidence 430 
linga=hetu. See hetu 
linga. See body, subtle 
locomotion, organ of 22 
lokasamgraha (world-order) 37 


420, 550-60 


ManavadharmaSastra (the ‘‘Laws of Manu’’) 


24, 285, 371, 434, 457, 476 


Mandana Misra 14-17, 19-20, 27, 42-43, 


51-52, 54, 56-59, 63, 71-72, 75-76, 
79-80, 85, 90, 98-100, 116-8, 346-420, 
534 


INDEX 


Manditkyakarikés (of Gaudapada). See 
Gaudapadakéarikas 

Mandiikya Upanisad 12, 59, 89, 104-5, 502 

Mee (of Samkara) 18, 


mangala (invocation) 121, 309 
mantavya 123, 125, 127 
mantra 104, 183, 219, 229, 388, 436, 485, 
519-20, 582 
mantrayoga 560 
Mantra Upanisad. 
Manu 470 
“Laws of.” 
marriage 229 
Marschner, Kathe 607-8 
materialism. See Carvaka 
matha 16-18, 420 
maya 559 
and deep sleep. See susupti 
as avyakta (prakrti) 286, 553 
as dissimulation 289 
as God’s power? 79, 554 
cannot cause real results 109 
cause of dreams 172, 240 
cause of jive 60, 551-52 
cause of, nature of world-appearance 
65, 68, 106, 113, 232, 317, 325, 551, 
554, 568-69 
destroyed by devotion 559 
frequency of term in Samkara 115 
in Vijianavada 20, 79 
jiva’s power 81, 107 
a Pauranika category 553 
relation to avidya 78-80, 140, 277, 299, 
318, 332, 337, 340, 351-52, 455, 457, 
553, 558-60, 574, 576 
seed of awareness 240-41 
scholarship on 78 y 
Maydapaftcaka (attributed to Samkara) 
19, 344 


See Mundaka Upanisad 


See Maéanavadharmasastra 


Mayeda, Sengaku 115-16, 217, 281, 294, 
309, 320, 324, 335, 607-10 

meaning 
connection of words in a sentence 397- 


figurative (gauna) 55, 59-61, 225, 263, 
267, 292, 300, 303, 307-8. See also 
metaphor 
primary (abhidhd, Sakti) 55, 242, 244, 
348, 400, 426, 539, 596 
relational 543 
secondary (laksané) 55, 225, 242, 244, 
351, 426, 442, 483, 525, 539, 541-42, 
555 
sentence-meaning (vakydrtha) 57-58, 
252-53, 262, 357, 388, 393, 397-98, 
402-3, 418, 443, 447, 484, 521, 543- 
44, 588. See also tattvamasi, mahéa- 
vakya 
single sentence meaning (ekavakyatd) 
428-29 
theory of meaning 54-60, 99, 139, 334- 
35, 388, 391, 401-2, 437-39, 447-48, 
521, 529, 531, 589, 596-97 
medicine 256, 422, 444 
meditation. See updsana 
memory, recollection 69, 94, 120, 186, 
189, 226, 234-35, 249, 252, 315, 338, 


625 


392, 396-97, 400, 411-12, 460, 553, 
558, 561, 566-69 
impossible in Buddhism 238 
memory of previous births 495-96 
memory traces 83 
Menon, P. N. 323, 608 
merit (dharma) 31, 44, 108, 128, 228, 233, 
269, 295, 422, 457-58, 510, 531, 534. 
See also karma, meritorious 
metaphor (upacdra) 59-60, 110, 125, 128, 
130, 134, 184, 190, 211-12, 348, 351, 
393, 436, 571, 600 
metaphysics 74-91 
milk and curds, analogy of 151, 379 
(Parva) Mimamsa 4-5, 11, 15, 19, 31, 
38-40, 43, 47-49, 52-53, 55-56, 92-93, 
99, 117-18,127, 139, 183, 333, 346-47, 
364, 382, 399, 410, 420, 427, 437, 476, 
531-32, 536-38, 612 
(Piva) Mimamsasiitras (of Jaimini) 4, 
11, 124, 139, 143, 365, 388, 391, 401, 
417, 422, 427-28, 445, 581-82, 584, 596 
Mimamsasiitrabhasya (of Sabara) 438 
mirage, analogy of 228-29, 286, 297, 313, 
321, 324, 532 
(dirty) mirror, analogy of 33, 60, 73, 
85-86, 126, 234, 240, 242-43, 247, 264-65, 
281, 317, 324, 351, 354, 533, 554, 
574-76 
Misra, Ganeswar 605 
Mithila 19 
Mitra 608 
modesty 218 
Modi, P. M. 296, 608-9 
modification. See vikdra 
moha_ (confusion, delusion, 
233, 317, 337, 428, 489 
moksa. See liberation 
momentariness (ksapikatva) 21, 55, 
159-61, 200, 409, 522, 578 
momentary cognition as self 122, 237-38 
monism 7, 63 
monotheism 7 
moon 24, 27, 289, 318 
as fruit of actions 476 
as a god 581 
as time aspect of Prajapati 475 
double moon, illustration of error 42, 
120, 216, 221, 257, 321, 358, 370, 
411-12, 522, 562, 566, 570, 597 
way of the moon. See path, southern 
morality 35-36, 44. See also dharma 
beyond. See antinominomianism 
moral obligation 41 
motion 236, 552 
first motion in Vaisesika 156-57 
mudra 318 
Mukherji, A. C. 609 
milabandha (subduing the root) 322 
miladhara 356 
Miller, F. Max 284, 609 
mundaka, meaning of the term 284 
Murdaka Upanisad 135-36, 138, 270, 284- 
89, 367-68, 430, 536, 571 
Mundakopanisadbhasya (of Samkara) 18, 
116, 284-89 
muni (sage; silent meditator) 177, 324, 
490, 518 


stupidity ) 


150, 


626 


Munikanda (section of Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad) 519 

marta (material) 108 

mutual dependence, 
dependence, mutual 


fallacy of. See 


Naciketas 280 
ndda (a Saiva category) 553, 556 
nadi (nerve, vein) 24, 90, 172, 266, 478- 
79, 494, 504, 509, 556 
naga (vomiting) 330 
Nagarjuna 96 
naimititka act. See act, occasional 
Naiskarmyasiddht (of Suresvara) 17, 19, 
217, 420, 530-50 
Nakamura, Hajime 603 
name (ndman) 239, 250, 310, 323, 459, 
487 
and form (ndmariipa) 74, 79, 115, 123, 
131, 135, 148, 171, 197, 214, 216, 
219, 259, 261, 264-65, 286, 292, 295, 
364, 415, 417, 458-59, 461, 481, 512, 
574 
a kind of exegetical evidence 431 
nameable (abhidheya) 310 


secret (naman upanisad). See truth of 
truth 
Narada 136 
Narayana, author of Méndikyopanisad- 
tika 


Narmada river 14, 117 

nastika (heterodox thinkers) 233 

neti neti (“‘not this, not this”) 54, 60, 74- 
75, 109, 173, 193, 230, 242, 304, 314, 
453, 482-83, 541 

Nigamanakanda (of Brhadéranyaka Upa- 
nisad). See Maitreyi Bréhmana 

nihilism 222-23, 291, 316, 453, 482-83. 
See also Madhyamika, Carvaka 

niksreyasa. See liberation 

Nikhilananda 605 

nimefa (“the twinkling of an eye” : a 
short period of time) 322 

nimitta (kaérana, instrumental cause; occa- 
sion) 142, 213, 394, 413, 606 

nirméuakaya (dream body) 201 

ntrodha (suppression, cessation) 186 
three kinds of in Sarvastivada 160 

nirukta (science of etymology) 285 

nirvana 21, 500. See also liberation 
brahmanirvéna 339 

ntsedha. See act, prohibited 

nitya 
nityakarman. See act, regular daily 
nonapplicability of term 113 
parinaminitya vs. kufasthanitya 125 

nivrttt (inaction, abstention from activity ) 
295, 299-300. 348, 357, 361-62, 365, 
403, 419, 433, 435, 474, 559 

niyama (observances) 256, 258, 301, 322, 
337, 518 

myoga (prescription) 48, 241, 362, 365, 
387, 390, 399, 402, 404, 410, 434, 437- 
43, 445, 447 
Niyogavada 48-49, 434-44, 525-30. 

See also Prabhakara 


nominalism 55 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nonattachment (vairagya, asanga) 36, 40, 
44-45, 113-14, 122, 195, 218, 286, 320, 
329, 336, 339, 343, 422, 457, 483, 490, 
502-3, 533 
two kinds of 325 

noneternal (anitya), nonapplicability of 
term 113 

nonviolence (ahkimsd) 208, 218 

Nrsimhatapaniyopanisadbhasya (of Gauda- 
pada?) 104 

Nrsimhottaratépaniyopanisadbhasya (attribut- 
ed to Samkara) 19, 345 

Nyaya, Naiyayika 8, 11, 19, 55-57, 71, 
93, 100, 149-50, 192, 261, 315, 351, 
353, 380-82, 393, 454, 481, 498, 511, 
517, 553, 570, 589, 595 

Nyayasttras (of Gautama) 164 


object. See also visaya 

bare object 385 

object of injunction 404-5, 409 

object of Self-awareness 7 

supporting object. See dlambana 
obligations to man, ancestors, and gods. 

See debts 
om. See aum 
omniscience 

God 


of prakrti 129 
optative mood See linorgans 
as self 122. See sense organs; 
action, organs of, internal organ 
overintellectualism 3, 5-6 


106, 292. See Brahman, 


pada (footprint) 465-66 

padartha (meaning of a word) 348, 434 
as category in Vaisesika 393 

Padmapada 11, 16-17, 19, 43, 72-73, 75, 

79, 82-83, 86-87, 117-18, 420, 563-97 

pain 26-27, 304, 494, 593-94. See also 
duhkha 
location of 220 

Pancapadika (commentary by Padma- 
pada on Samkara’s Brahmas iitrabhasya) 

17, 19, 82-83, 563-97 

Paficaratra 5, 333 : 

Paficikarana (attributed to Samkara) 18, 
318-19, 560, 562 

Paficikaranavarttika (attributed to Suresvara) 
19, 318, 420, 560-62 

Pandey, Sangam Lal 103-4, 603, 607 

pandita, etymology of 490 

Panini 136 

papma (evil) 501 

paradox 8, 34-35 

paramahamsa 118, 218, 258, 314 

parémarsa (consideration) 351 
in inference 357 

baramartha, -ika (higher standpoint, rea- 
lity) 34-35, 67, 108, 113, 197, 215, 
352, 448, 521, 541, 567-68 

pardvriti (abstention) 320 

parental influence 27-28 

paints (imaginary nature) 263, 532, 
539 


in Yogacara 68 


INDEX 


baripama(vdda) 7, 66-67, 82, 84, 86, 142, 
346, 352, 358, 406, 552, 567, 574, 598 
paripamin (evolver) 251, 540 
parinispanna (absolute nature), in Yoga- 
cara 68 
barivrajaka 118 
part and whole 383-84 
Parvata (one of the dasandmas) 118 
path (ydna, gati) 208, 493, 513 
northern, way of gods (devaydna) 24-27, 
175, 179-80, 255, 259, 281, 286, 
288-89. 
southern, way of fathers (pitryana) 24- 
25, 255, 259-60, 281 wore) 
perception (pratyaksa) 
an act 196 
and immediate awareness of Self 97-98, 
241, 368, 426 
and memory distinguished 412 
as pramana for Brahman? 360, 392, 
495-96 
conditions of perceptibility of things 
65, 869, 380-81, 412 
fallacious (pratyaksdbhdsa) 254 
grasps difference? 98, 360, 380-81, 449. 
See also abhava, perceptibility of 
a pramapa 97, 286, 389, 553, 556 
relation to inference 191-92 
savikalpakapratyaksa 386, 611. See also 
jitana, savikalpaka 
scope of 97-99, 123, 192, 223, 252, 306, 
348, 368-69, 374-76, 389-92, 416, 
446, 462, 571. See also Sabdapramana; 
scripture 
phala (fruit, result) 123, 161, 242 
niyoga is not a 439 
of pramana 350, 352 
picture or painting, analogy of 236, 240, 
353, 559, 592-93 
Pillai, D. N. 608 
Pillai, K. Raghavan 343-44 
Pillai, Surnath Kanjan 343 
Pisharoti, K. R. 343-44 
pitha. See matha 
Kamakoti Pitha s.r. 
pitrloka (world of the fathers) 279, 476. 
See also path, southern 
place (defa) 322, 412 
plants 25, 27, 172 
in rebirth 260 
Plato 95 
pleasure (sukha, rati) 76, 110, 113, 269, 
288, 304, 306, 331, 342, 348-49, 359, 
494, 593-94. See also bliss 
in Vaisesika 239 
polytheism 7 
pot, disappearance of when known to be 
clay 321 
pot-space analogy 33, 60, 83, 86, 88-89, 
108-9, 129, 149, 151, 191, 286, 288, 
315, 479, 517, 540, 544, 554, 576, 599 
Potter, Karl H. 603-4 
Poussin, Louis de la Vallée 604, 607 
Prabhakara, founder of school of a branch 
of Mimamsa 4, 15, 57-58, 346, 393, 
399, 553 
Prabhakara, father of Hastamalaka 18 
Prabhakara school of Mimamsa 57, 390, 


627 


392, 414, 434, 517, 572-73, 575, 584-85 
practice. See abhydsa 
pracirya 132 
pradhana. See prakrti 
pradyumna 165 
Prajapati 87-88, 137-39, 277, 348, 363, 
431, 455-58, 487, 494, 518, 561 
two aspects of 475 
prajia, prajita 85, 89, 104, 106-7, 
235-36, 277, 311-12, 319, 340, 
515-16, 562 
prajftanaghana 523 
pirvaprajfia 509 
prajnapti 111, 316 
prakalpa (imputation) 425 
pbrakarana (treatise) 4, 105 (context), 
a kind of exegetical evidence) 431 
prakatya (being revealed) 373 
prakrti or pradhana 
avyaktaprakrti 85, 88, 238, 279, 461 
=avidya 574 
in Samkhya 20, 33, 79, 86, 115, 123, 
128-32, 134-35, 140-43, 145-46, 
152-55, 164-65, 169, 238-39, 263, 
278, 292-93, 314, 332, 337-38, 460, 
481, 488, 540, 552-53, 590 
prakrtilaya 279 
pralaya (period of reabsorption between 
creations) 26, 88, 139-40, 145-46, 152, 
156-57, 259, 406, 457, 471, 485-86 
pramaé (truth, veridical awareness) 226- 
27, 252, 350, 541 
praméda (carelessness) 409 
bramana (instrument of knowledge) 191, 
418. See also perception, inference, 
comparison, Jfabda, scripture,  arthd- 


paite 

alaukika 396 

conditioned by avidya 7, 96-97, 418, 
541 


110, 
494, 


for Self-knowledge. See Brahman, how 
proved 
give certainty 368-69, 381 
how known ? 394, 397, 401, 572 
independent in establishing its object 
375, 389-93, 396, 441-42 
must give new knowledge 348, 368-69 
389, 436, 441, 451 
number of 97, 553 
pravartakapraména 298 
proper scope of 96-97, 146-47, 161, 195, 
249, 286, 307-8, 314, 369, 375, 
394-95, 401-2, 435, 453, 469, 499, 
532, 548-49, 591-92 
pramanya (validity, truth) 99, 148, 251, 
400-1, 414, 451 
svatah|paratah 7, 226, 253, 413-14, 458, 
528 
pramatr  (knower, subject of veridical 
awareness) 226, 539, 541, 572, 577 
prameya (object of veridical awareness) 
121, 161, 543, 572 
pramiti (right cognition) 368, 541, 572 
prana (breath, vital airs) 
absorbs organs during sleep 170, 265, 
492 
as aksara 492 
as conceptual construction 108, 234, 310 


628 


as Hiranyagarbha 277, 288, 309, 456, 
475-76 
as reflecting medium 82, 85, 106 
as seventeen components of subtle 
body 319, 324, 330, 341, 475, 480, 
561 
chief prana 170 
constituents of 332, 523 
daughter of Kundalini 556 
eleven 170 
five 319, 324, 330, 341, 475, 480, 561 
held to body by food 480 
in creation myths 87, 455 
in liberation 511 
in theistic Samkhya 553 
loci of in the body 330, 480 
not the Self 133, 136, 141, 198, 287, 
326, 334, 336, 341, 497, 557 
omnipresent 492 
operation of 325, 330 
pranamayakoga 91, 215, 330-31, 341 
presiding deities of 492, 494 
products of 489, 524 
qualities of 455, 489 
role in transmigratory process 23-24, 
179, 266, 476, 508-9 
pranava. See aum 
Pranavavaritika 560-62 
pranayama (breath control) 322 
pregenes (the world) 106, 321, 359, 361, 


Peepers (quiescence of the world) 


vakprapaiica (verbalization) 310 
prapaitcavilayavada 50, 173, 432 
prasdda 339, 350, 372. See also dama 
prasamkhyana. See meditation,  prasam- 
khyana 
Prasamkhyanavada 444-47 
Prasna Upanisad 78, 137, 270, 289-90, 292 
oe (of Samkara) 18, 116, 


prasthanatrayi (triple basis of Vedanta) 5 

pratibha (intuition) 357 

pratibhdsika 344 

ital (prototype in reflection model ) 
8 


pratika (symbol) 356 

bratisamkhyanirodha 160 

pratisedha (denial, negation) 230 
pratisedhakarman. See act, prohibited 
paryudasa (restricted negation) 491 
prasajya (absolute negation) 413, 491 

pratityasamutpada 160 

pratyahara (withdrawal of the senses) 322 

pratyabhijfia (recognition) 200, 500, 558 
error of recognition (bhrama) 412 

Pratyabhijiia system of Kashmir Saivism 
551 


prayascitia. See act, expiatory 
pratyaya (idea) 224, 319 
pravitit: (activity) 22, 295, 299-300, 348, 
357, 361-62, 365, 370, 388, 403, 419, 
435, 439, 474 
cause of 400-1 
Prayaga (Allahabad) 117, 518 
praygjana (purpose) 
of creation 352-53 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of a text 339, 564, 587-88 
prerana (prompting to activity) 
439-40 
pride (garvas) 218, 553 
prthaktva (separateness) 450 
puja (worship) 475 
Pulkasas 506 
Purana 268, 485 
and Pauranikas 553 
Puri (the town) 16, 18, 118, 563 
Puri (a dafandma) 118 
puritat (“heart’?) 172, 479. See 
‘heart’ 
Purohit, N. B. 604 
purusa 
cosmic. See Viraj 
in Samkhya 128, 130, 140-41, 153-54, 
238-39, 295, 314 
a Pauranika category 553 
purusartha (human purpose, end of man) 
175, 255, 348, 350, 388, 403-4, 415-16, 
418-19, 457, 476, 528, 556 
Purusasikta (Rg Veda X.90) 38 
Pirvamimamsa. See (Pirva) Mimamsa. 


435-36, 


also 


quintuplication theory of creation (pafici- 
karana) 88, 265, 318, 323, 330, 332, 
341, 560-61 


Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli 608 

Raghavan, V. 294, 609 

Rahu 243, 559 

Raja, K.,.Kunjunni 56, 116, 605, 607-8 

rae Ane guna) 299, 337, 340, 515, 533, 
5 


Rajasiya 472 

rajayoga 322, 560 

Rama 247, 600 

Ramakrishna Mission Sevashrama 318 

Ramanuja 9-12, 14, 105, 119 

Ramayana 5, 17, 420 

Ranade, R. D. 78, 284, 606, 608-9 

Rao, M. A. V. 605 

rasa (taste) 560 

Ray, R. B. Amarnath 550-51, 607, 609 

reasoning 146-47, 153, 253, 310, 544-45 

red crystal, analogy of 82, 85-86, 93, 138, 
202, 232, 240, 248, 265, 372-73, 406, 
574-76. See also tarka, yukti 

reflection model 20, 73, 77, 83-89, 94, 
185, 214, 225, 231, 234-35, 241, 245-46, 
248, 321, 325, 351, 386, 407, 417, 462, 
539, 542, 554, 575-76, 599. See also 
abhasa; micror; bimba; pratibimba; etc. 

relation (sambandha) theory of relations 
62-73, 377. See also difference; iden- 
tity; inherence, etc. 
between the two sections of the Vedas. 

See jitanakanda; karmakauda 

requirement of a text 587-88 
unreal 465 


release. See liberation 

renunciation. See iydga; samnydsa 
renunciatory act. See act, renunciatory 
repetition. See abhydsa 


Rg Veda 78, 285 


INDEX 


Rohini 500 

rope-snake, analogy of 39, 68-70, 81-83, 
86, 88-89, 93-94, 108, 125, 127, 138, 
146, 196-97, 222, 228, 243, 256, 269, 
310-11, 313-14, 321, 337, 340, 370, 
408, 485, 511, 522, 542, 570, 576, 594 

Roy, S. 604, 607 

Rudra 561 

ripa (form) 239, 459 

rapa (color). See color 

riipaskandha 557 


Sabara 4, 11, 438, 584, 596-97 
fabda (verbal testimony, a praména). 
See scripture 
Sabditman. See Brahman as word 
Sabdabodha or Sabdajftana (verbal cognition ) 
357, 368, 370, 387-88, 400, 409, 441, 
464, 515, 526, 583 
Sabdadvaita 54, 59 
Saccidananda 75, 330-32, 342, 555-56 
sacrifice (yajfta) 108, 121, 125, 139, 175-77, 
189, 240, 256, 369-70, 372, 402, 415, 
424, 430, 432, 438-40, 445, 474, 518, 
528, 588, 597, 611 
animal sacrifice 172 
horse sacrifice (afvamedha) 182, 455 
Sadananda 117, 217 
Sadasiti (a mahavakya) 233 
sadismi (a mahdvakya) 241 
sadhana (meditative means) 242, 255 
sGdhyasama (a fallacy) 31}, 316 
Sagara (a dafandma) 118 
Saiva, Saivism 119, 163, 333, 553. See 
also Kashmir Saivism 
saksatkara (immediate manifestation, di- 
rect vision) 417, 419, 426, 441, 594. 
See also Self-knowledge; anubhava 
is nididhydsana 465 
saksin (Witness) 75, 92, 121, 127, 196, 
203, 232-35, 238, 245-49, 251, 276, 
283, 287, 319, 327-28, 330, 334, 337, 
425, 445, 459, 462, 479, 482-83, 488, 
491, 497-99, 505, 510, 514, 539-41, 544 
Sakti (potency) 149, 168, 380, 422-23 
as primary meaning. See meaning, 
primary 
dvaranasekti. See 
equals avidya 574 
for knowing 129 
of Brahman 477 
of the injunctive mood 440 
paragakti 556 
a Saiva category 553 
viksepasakti. See ignorance, projective 
salt dissolved in water, analogy of 266, 
486 
fama{iva) (tranquillity, self-restraint) 36, 
122, 218, 242, 272, 320, 329, 335-37, 
515 
two kinds of 339 
samadhi, samadhana (concentration) 36, 
110, 113, 216, 235, 317, 319-20, 322, 
329, 340-41, 372, 562 
nirvikalpakasamadhi 35, 336, 342-43 
samnyasa not a kind of 35 
savikalpakasamédhi 342-43 


ignorance, veiling 


629 


sémagri (collection of causal factors) 454 
Samana (a préna) 330 


sdmanadhikaranya ammatical agree- 
ment) 262, 381, 527, 554 
Samavaya (inherence) 149-50, 156-58, 


164, 315, 382, 393, 449-50 
Samavayikarana (inherence cause) 166 
Samaveda 254, 281 
Sambandhavarttika (section of Sureév- 

ara’s Brhadéranyakopanisadbhasyavaritika) 

347, 420-53 
Sambhava (inclusion) 553 
samhita (Vedic ritual formulae) 46 
Samhita Upanisad. See Ifa Upanisad 
Samgrahani ritual 433 
Samhiti Upanisad 205 
samjfia (verbal designation) 553 
Samjitéskandha 557 
samkalpa (wish, imagination) 268, 341 
samkara (mixture, confusion) 384 
Samkara (acarya) 6, 9-21, 23-26, 28, 

30-31, 33-46, 48-52, 54, 56, 59-60, 

65-66, 68-81, 83-85, 87-98, 103-4, 115- 

347, 364, 430, 489, 550, 560, 563-65, 

570, 580, 585, 587, 589-90, 595-96, 598, 

601, 611-12 

as author of devotional poetry 78 

his date 115-16 

his work 115-16 

a realist 79-81 

traditional accounts of his life 116-18, 

420-21 
Samkara(dig)vijaya 117, 347, 610 
samkarsana 165 
Samkhya 19-20, 33, 66-67, 85, 88, 93, 

V11, 115, 118, 128-30, 134-35, 140-43, 

146-47, 152-55, 169, 193, 258, 278, 

293-94, 304-5, 309, 311, 314-16, 333, 

336, 453, 460, 466, 481, 488, 510-11, 

540, 543, 552-53, 589, 598, 600 

standpoint, in Bhagavadgita 296 

theistic Samkhya 163, 553 
Samkhyakarikas (of Iévarakrsna) 65 
Samkhyakarikabhasya (of Gaudapada) 104 
samnidhi (proximity), as condition of 

sentence meaning 443 
samnyasa, samnyasin 16, 34-37, 41, 43-45, 

117, 175, 197, 203-4, 256, 270, 272, 

278, 285-86, 288, 295-96, 298-300, 

325, 336, 427, 457, 476, 483, 489, 513, 

518-19, 550, 599 

and karma 35 

as means for liberation 483 

false samnydsa 472 

two kinds of 300-1, 490 
samséra (cycle of rebirth, transmigration) 

6, 22, 127-28, 153, 171, 181, 194, 218- 

21, 228-29, 235, 242-43, 266, 270, 

272-74, 285-86, 295-96, 302, 308, 332, 

337-38, 341, 348, 355, 364, 460, 478, 

508. See also bondage 

appreciation of 534 

beginningless 112, 153, 159, 164 
Samsarga (relation, conjunction) 357 

relevance of a text 339 
samsarin (transmigrator) 122-23, 171, 222 
samskara (trace, tendency) 22, 220, 241 

315, 319, 360, 367, 370, 375, 387, 


630 


408-9, 458, 470-71, 500, 558, 568, 575, 
581 
samskara (purification) 30, 32, 39-40, 47, 
126, 196, 364, 372, 425 
a purpose of injunction 427, 611 
a result of action 39-40, 596 
samskaraskandha 557 
samsthana (shape, configuration) 351 
samtana (stream of consciousness) 
189, 243, 252, 339, 355, 499 
of verbal knowledge 357 
samurta, samvrti 107, 113, 313 
in Buddhism 262 
samyamanam (Yama’s world, hell) 24-25 
samyoga (contact) 149, 158, 164, 223, 
284, 449-50, 462 
Sanatkumara 136 
Sankhapani 610, 612 
fanta (a Saiva category) 553 
sapaksa, in inference 496 
saptabhangi (sevenfold preication) 163 
Sarasvati 556 
a dasanama \\8 
Saraswati, Balakrsnananda 104 
Sarasvati, Saccidanandendra 79-80, 606-7 
Sarirakamimamsasitras. See Brahmasitras 
Sarirakamimamsdaortti. (of Upavarsa ?) 11 
Sarma, B. N. Krishnamurti 105, 607-9 
Sarma, R. Nagaraja 604 
Sarvadarsanasamgraha (of Madhava) 612 
Sarvajiiatman 12 
Sarvastivada 159-61 
Sarvavedantasiddhantasamgraha 
to Samkara) 19, 339-43 
Sastri, A. Mahadevan 295, 551 
Sastri, Anantakumar 64-65, 604 
Sastri, C. Markandeya 550, 605, 612 
Sastri, N. M. 605 
Sastri, P. P. Subrahmanya 606 
Sastri, R. M. 608 
Sastri, S. Kuppuswami 347, 603-4, 610 
Sastri, S. Laksminrsimha 608 
Sastri, S. R. Krishnamurthi 563 


160, 


(attributed 


Sastri, S. Srirama 563 

Sastri, S. Suryanarayana 308, 606, 609 
Sastri, T. S. Narayana 608 

Sastri, V. A. Ramaswami 603 . 
sat, saita (existent, existence, being, 


reality) 109, 240, 259, 262-66, 296-97, 
373, 381, 390, 393-94, 396-97, 410, 450, 
459, 552, 554 
criterion of 7, 75, 296 
inference to establish existence 453-54 

_ Sat, cit, abanda. See saccidananda 

Satapatha Bréhmana 170, 180, 296 

Satasloki (attributed to Samkara) 18, 324- 
25 


satkévanavada 66, 147-49, 261, 405, 454 
satkdryavada 7, 65-66, 111, 142, 149, 182- 
83, 454 
satta. See sat 
as Brahman 75 
in Vaisesika 75 
sativa (the guna) 129, 255, 299, 337, 339- 
41, 343, 553, 556 
sativasuddhi 295, 
Satyaprapaitcavada 610 
Saunaka 285, 323 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Sautrantika 498 
scorpion 145, 353 
scripture (Sruti; dgama; Veda; sabda). See 
also jitanakanda; karmakanda 
and smrti, weight of 143 
as producing Self-knowledge ? 98-99, 
124-25, 146-47, 173, 233, 254, 257, 
272, 298, 328, 360, 366-67, 371,387-90, 
396, 403, 416-18, 426, 435-36, 442, 
444, 447, 451-53, 469, 526-27, 531, 533, 
545, 582, 591-93 
authorless 58, 398, 443, 485, 591 
composition of 3, 46 
conditioned by avidya, superimposition ? 
97, 121, 208, 221, 418 
contrasted with secular language 396- 
401, 442 
entitlement to study 138, 140, 586 
howit functions 99, 125, 271, 314, 328, 
343, 435-36, 441, 469, 527, 530, 545 
interpretation of. See exegesis; niyoga; 
Mimamsa, etc. 
is it entirely injunctive in force? 38, 
47,49, 124, 127, 173, 184, 242, 360 
387, 390, 403-5, 417-18, 426, 435-36, 
444, 526, 531-32, 582, 584, 596 
primary purpose of 47, 50, 122, 208, 
418, 585, 591, 594 
recitation of 421, 474, 518, 585 
relation to perception 98-99, 147, 241, 
307-8, 369, 374-76, 389, 396, 401, 
416, 426, 442, 452-53, 461-62, 571, 
591-93 
relation to reasoning and inference 99, 
144, 146-47, 152, 396, 399, 401, 
ait, 442, 444-45, 452-53, 462, 545, 
Samkhya on 128-29, 293 
validity of scripture as a Pramana 47, 
49, 53, 97-99, 123, 244, 254, 257, 
262, 264, 307-8, 339-40, 348-49, 366, 
375, 387-92, 396, 399, 401, 403, 418, 
425, 430, 441, 447, 452-53, 484, 
526-29, 531-32, 545, 570-71, 591-93 
which texts are scripture? 3, 14 
seed 292 
and sprout, analogy of 111, 113, 153, 
262, 316-17, 379, 399, 570, 579 
(bya) 106, 309 
burnt, analogy of 34, 240-41 
self (atman). See also Brahman 
highest (paramdtman). See Brahman 
in Buddhism 21 
individual (jivétman). See jiva 
in Nyaya-Vaisesika 284, 355-56 
in Samkhya. See purusa 
self-control 218 
Self-illumination (svaprakasatva) 199-200, 
226, 290-92, 325, 350, 396, 458, 578 
analogy with fire burning itself 155, 162 
as property of Brahman or pure 
consciousness 75-76, 95, 236 
in Buddhism 201, 245 
self-knowledge, Brahman-knowledge (dtma- 
jflana, brahmajitana) 
and bliss. See bliss 
as removal of avidya 36, 39, 41-42, 50, 
53, 186, 188-89, 229-30, 232, 298, 


INDEX 


300, 306, 372-73, 403-4, 406-8, 424, 
434, 457, 470, 472, 484, 597 
enjoined ? See injunction to knowledge 
entitlement to. See adhikara 
how gotten. See scripture; sravana 
is it identical with liberation ? 34-36, 
40, 53, 125, 177, 189, 205, 285, 296, 
323, 325, 406, 469, 487, 533 
need for meditation after? See updsand 
nothing can sublate it 308, 533 
possibility of 96, 241, 305-6, 465, 470 
pramana for? See scripture 
relation to action. See act and know- 
ledge, relation between 
statements of. Sve mahdvakya 
semen 26-27, 29, 219, 276, 331, 523 
Sengupta, Bratindra Kumar 604 
sense organs (bhutendriya) 22-24, 34, 83, 
90, 93, 121, 170-71, 194, 198, 227, 
237, 282, 287-88, 306, 311, 318-19, 324, 
330-31, 337, 341, 357, 412, 461, 475, 
561, 612 
as reflecting medium 498 
material 486, 523 
not self 326, 334, 341, 556-57 
number of, in Samkhya 155 
sense presentations 70, 121 
sentence (vakya) 55 
declarative. See jianakanda 
injunctive. See  karmakénda, 
injunction 
meaning. See meaning 
service to mankind 35- 3, 259-60, 278 
sex 117, 219 
organs of 22 
sexual desire 523 
sexual intercourse 407 
Sharma, C. D. 604, 607 
sheaths. See kosa 
shell-silver illusion 120, 
323, 340, 385, 410-11, 
566-70 
ship, illusion of trees moving from 299, 321 
Siddhantabindu. (of Madhusidana Saras- 
vati) 333 
siddhasddhana (begging the question) 496 
siddhi (realization) 322, 417 
eight powers in Yoga 514, 560 
Siksd (science of pronunciation ) 285 
Siksavalli (a chapter of Taittiriya Upa- 
nisad) 205 
silence (mauna) 322 
Simha, L. 331 
similarity (sddr§ya, sdriipya) 161, 200, 
237, 360, 378, 386, 411, 454, 500, 553, 
573, 577-78 
sin. See demerit; papma 
Siva 419, 551-53, 555 
Sivaguru | 117 
skandha 159, 507 
skepticism. See Carvaka 
sky, blue dome of, analogy of 321, 460. 
See also akasa 
sky-flower 352, 378 
Sleep 337, 478-79, 515, 545-46 
deep. See susupti 
Slokavarttika (of Kumirila) 353, 374 


smell (gandha) 560 


niyoga, 


196, 222, 321, 
413-14, 460, 


631 


smoke 24, 27 
path of. See path, southern 
smrti (traditional writings) 5, 
139, 142-44, 220, 243, 372 
snake and rope. See rope-snake 
snakebite, imaginary, causing death 351, 
354-55 
snake, fear of, trembling at 408 
Soka (grief) 489, 568 
soma 438, 455, 494 
son of a barren woman 109 
sons, role in liberation 475-76 
South India 18 
space (vyoma, dkdSa, kha, ambara) 88, 108, 
233-34, 236-37, 287, 318, 539 
sparks, analogy. of See fire 
speech (vak) 59, 475 
act of. See act, vocal 
vacarambhanamatra(vikara) 257, 261 
vak-Sakti 358 
vag-tativa 358 
speech, organ of (vak) 22-23, 179, 228, 
282, 330, 356, 488, 517, 523 
speech-acts, theory of. See language as 
communication 
Sphoja 20, 56 
sentence-sphofa 56-57 
Sphofavéda 57, 59, 139 
word-sphota 57 
ees (of Mandana Misra) 20, 56, 


133, 135, 


ae web, analogy of 84, 90, 135, 151, 
311, 479-80 
Sraddha (faith) 36, 320, 329, 336-37 
as worship of ancestors 30 
in the guru 329 
Sravana_ (hearing) 
conditions of 537-38 
four kinds of awareness 590 
$ravana, manana, nididhyésana 52, 318, 
329, 354, 427, 445, 484, 489, 513, 
544-45 


Sridhara 604 

Srinivasachari, P. N. 603 

Sri Vidyaratna Sitra (of Gaudapada?) 104 

Srividyasubhrgodaya (of Gaudapada?) 104 

Srmngeri 16, 18, 118, 420 

Srotavya 123, 125, 127 

Sruti. See scripture 

Srutisdrasamuddharana (of Totaka) 18-19, 
598-600 

Staal, J. F. 603 

sthitaprajfia (man of stable insight) 408 

studentship (brahmacarya). See brahma- 
carya 

study (fravacana) 288 

subject object relationship 6-7, 62, 67-71, 
76, 113 

sublation (bddha) 7, 39, 82, 230, 241, 
290, 413, 533, 541, 566-67, 570 

substance (dravya) 216, 315, 382-83, 390 
and mode (faryaya) 384 
substanceness (dravyatva) 393 

substance attribute distinction 71 

Sadra 140, 299 

Suka 323 

sun (4ditya) 24-26, 267, 288-89, 311, 318 
as god of the eye 494 


632 


as gross form of Brahman 480 
as seat of Hiranyagarbha 481 
person in the 480 
rays, of analogy of 84, 234, 311, 327 
reflection of in rippling water 84-85, 
264, 277 
way of the See 
Sundaram, P. K. 606 
Sundara Pandya 12, 18 
Sinya(ta) (void, voidness) 122, 231, 248, 
_ 328, 341, 376 
Stnyavada 159, 161-62, 166, 249, 258, 
261, 313, 316, 341, 482, 499, 557, 589 
superimposition (adhydsa, dropa) 69-73, 76, 
78-80, 93-94, 118, 120-21, 146, 174, 
187, 222-23, 231, 234, 238, 240, 242, 
255, 269, 276, 291, 321, 323, 328, 333, 
338, 340-41, 359, 407, 410, 458-60, 468, 
485, 510, 530, 541, 564-71, 579-80 
Suregvara 12, 15-17, 19-20, 28, 43, 48-50, 
54, 59-61, 72-73, 75-76, 80, 83, 88, 90- 
91, 116-18, 204, 217, 317-18, 347, 364, 
420, 562, 611 
susupti (deep sleep) 
as danandamayakoga s.v. 
associated with “‘m’’ in “‘aum” 89, 319 
association with prajfia 106, 236, 311, 
319, 337, 562 
bliss experienced in 7, 269, 311, 343, 
351, 479, 493, 502-3 
buddhi stilled during 319, 326, 562 
compare with pralaya 139-40 
ego doesn’t exist during 326 
equals laya 315 
how it comes about 479 
mahasusupti 140 
ard withdrawn during 24, 110, 201, 
no liberation directly from 89 
organs not functioning during 24, 90, 
201, 216, 326 
prapa and deep sleep 136, 265, 326 
proof of continuity of jiva during172- 
73, 269, 351 
pure consciousness experienced in 7, 
76, 90, 93, 173, 216, 225-26, 261, 
265, 328, 333, 478, 506, 558 
relation to ignorance 90, 337, 415, 478, 
502-3, 505-7 
three states of 91, 502-3 
traces still present or not ? 89, 360, 501 
vasands cleared away during? 90, 501 
why one should not wake a person 
from deep sleep 90, 501 
Siitra 4-5 
Satratman 50, 87, 341, 457-58, 461, 467, 
473, 475, 489, 491-92, 494, 523, 560, 
562 
svabhava, svaripa (a thing’s own nature, 
essence) 188-89, 315-16, 410 
an essential feature 225 
in Buddhism 71, 376-77, 385-87 
svabhdvahetu, in Buddhist logic 500 
svadharma 256, 305, 320. See also dharma 
svalaksana 250, 385, 577 


path, northern 


svaprakéSa(tva). See self-illumination 
Svdrajyasiddhi (attributed to Suregvara) 
19, 420 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


svariipa (essential form). See svabhava 

svariipalaksana (essential definition of 
Brahman). See Brahman 

svariipavirbhava (manifestation of one’s 

_ own form) 406 

Svetaketu 59-60, 130, 261, 265-67 

Scetasvatara Upanisad 778, 131, 141, 143 

Suetésvataropanisadbhasya (attributed to 
Samkara) 19, 345 

Swain, Anam Charan 609 

symbol, in meditation 25-26 

sympathy 520 

syntax 55 


taijasa 89, 104, 106-7, 236, 311-12, 319, 
341, 494, 562 

Taittiriya Aranyaka 204-5 

Taittiriyasamhita 430-31, 434 

Taittirtya Upanisad 75, 91, 124, 
141, 165, 174, 204, 418, 493 

Taittiriyopanisadbhasya (of Samkara) 18, 
116, 119, 204-16, 294, 309, 521 

Taittiriyopanisadbhasyavartttka (of Sures- 
vara) 17, 19, 28, 420-21, 521-30 

Talavakéra Bréhmana 281 

tamas (the guna) 299, 3-2, 332, 337, 340, 
515, 533, 553 

Tamil 5 

Tamil Nadu 117 

Tandin Brahmana 

Tanka 12 

tanmétra (subtle element) 24, 171, 
319, 341, 560-61 
origin of, in Samkhya 155 

Tantra 318 

tanumdénasa (attenuation of mental attach- 
ment ?) 343 

tapas (austerity) 214, 240, 518 

tarka (reasoning) 144, 264, 280, 314, 374, 
405, 571, 580, 595. See also reasoning 
as argument ]23 

Tarkikas (“logicians”, i.e., Naiyayikas) 
164, 225, 244, 264, 321, 462, 468, 512, 
580 

tatasthalaksana (accidental definition of 
Brahman). See Brahman 

tatparya (speaker’s intention) 361 

tattva 108 

Tattvabodha (attributed to Samkara) 18, 
331-33 

tattvajfiana (knowledge of the nature of 
things) 231, 321 

tattvamasi (“that art thou”) 51, 53-55, 
59-61, 73, 124, 130-31, 151, 177, 186, 
234, 241, 245-47, 251-52, 267, 317, 
319, 332-34, 338, 342, 419, 424, 427, 
442, 444, 447-48, 462, 490, 515, 527, 
537, 542-45, 547, 554-55, 580, 591-92, 
595-96, 600 

Tattvananda 339 

teaching, mandate for 586 

teaching, possibility of its leading to 
liberation 96-97 

Telanga, K. T. 608 

tenth man, story of the 185, 210, 234, 
251, 253, 426, 462, 525, 546 


131-32, 


(of the Sama Veda) 254 
179, 


INDEX 


theism 7, 163-64 
Thibaut, George 119-20, 608 
thirst. See hunger and _ thirst 
Thrasher, Allen Wright 116-17, 346-47. 
608, 610 
time (kala) 108, 322, 392, 397, 412. 522. 
552-53 
as cause of the world 106 
as effect of avidya 88, 166 
aspect of Prajapati 475 
Tirtha (a dasanéma) 118 
titiksad (resignation) 36, 320, 329. 336 
Totaka 16-17, 19, 598 
Totakastaka 17, 19, 598 
touch (sparga) 315, 560 
trace. See samskdra 
tradition (Gmndya) 3, 9, 361, 370-71. See 
also smrti 
oral tradition 3 
tradition (sampradaya) 9, 315. 531 
tradition (aitihya) 553 
transformation. See parinama 
tree = 
banyan or asvattha 287 
peepul or fig 280-81 
SimSapa tree 401 
trees in the forest 386 
tridanda, tridandin (triple staff; 
staff holder) 258 
triplication theory of creation 88, 264-65 
truth (satya) 62, 96-97, 288, 472, 481-82, 
486. See also pramanya 
as attribute of Brahman 75, 213 
highest truth (paramarthasatya) 317, 482 
truthfulness 208 
truth of truth (satyasya satya) 75, 189- 
90, 480, 482° 
two truths 118 
turtya (the “fourth”, a state of awareness | 
13, 89-91, 104, 106-7, 233, 311-12. 
333, 343, 360 
tydga (renunciation) 272, 297, 322 


triple- 


Udanka 231 

Uddalaka Aruni 9, 59, 265-66 

udéna (a prana) 330 

Udgitha (section of Brhadéranyaka Upa- 
nisad) 183, 455-56 

Udgithavidya 174 

ttha (guess ?) 553 

Umveka 346-47 

universal (sémdnya) 60, 75, 150, 161, 369, 
373-74, 381-83, 385, 387, 396-97, 477, 
611. See also jati 
in Vaisesika 75, 382-83, 393 

unreality (vattathya, mrsa, tuccha) 64. 67, 
1-7, 1-9, 352, 521. See also asat 
has real effects 354 
of the world 21, 310, 312, 325, 333 

upadana (material cause) 123, 530, 606 

Upadesapaiicaka (attributed to Samkara) 
1 


9, 

Upadesasdhasri (of Samkara) 18, 70, 82, 
84, 88, 93-94, 97, 103, 116, 119, 217-54, 
294, 309, 320, 334, 530, 550, 598 

upadhi (adjunct) 74, 78, 82-83, 86-89, 
129-31, 196, 288, 324, $72, 379, 382, 


633 


386, 397, 461-62, 481, 546. 573 
upalaksana (extrinsic indicatory 
393-94, 590 
upamana. See comparison 
upanayana (sacred thread) 30, 140, 
258, 586 
Upanisad 3-5, 9-12, 19, 23-26, 46-47, 
76. 78, 87, 107, 121, 123, 125, 131, 139, 
143, 190-91, 193, 229-30, 257, 285, 
293-94, 339, 348, 375, 387, 417, 428, 
476 
meaning of the term 181, 207, 280, 421 
uparati (abstention) 325, 329, 339, 519 
upasanéd (meditation, worship). See also 
injunction to meditate; pija 
and dhydnayoga 287, 301 
and sacrifice. See sacrifice 
as mental act. See act, mental 
conditions for 41, 183, 255, 320 
duty to 108 
enjoined by scripture. 
to meditate 
how to meditate 177-78. 338 
necd for, possibility of after Self-knowl- 
edge 177. 272, 370. 409, 416-17, 
419, 55-57, 534-35, 594 
nididh dsana 334, 465. 484-85. 518, 530, 
543 
on om. See aum 
on the part of the gods 138-39. 270, 
453-56 
parisamkhyéna 228-29 
prasamkhyana 42-43, 51-52, 241, 444-47, 


mark ) 


197, 


See injunction 


548 
results of 26, 107, 131, 180-81, 188, 
207, 236. 242, 255, 272, 277. 279, 


323, 369, 456, 464, 509, 514, 550, 581 
role of meditation in getting liberation 
20, 26, 41, 50, 128, 177,194, 242, 
255, 281 336, 353-54, 368-69, 430, 
456, 473-74, 535 
sampat 187-88 
supporting object of. 
upasanavada 278 
worship of God 50, 320 
Upavarsa 11, 18, 139 
Urghart, W. S. 605 
USsasta Cakrayana 488-89 
utpaiti (origination) 
a kind of result of action 39-40, 596 
a purpose of injunction 427 
Uttaragitabhasya (of Gaudapada) 104 
Uttaramimamsa 4 


See dlambana 


Vacaspati Misra 17. 79 

Vaibhasika 498 

Vaisesika 8, 19. 55-57, 71, 75, 100, 147, 
152, 155-59, 163, 165-66, 169-70, 193, 
201, 239, 261, 276, 284, 305, 314-16, 
353, 380-82, 393, 450, 453, 458, 481, 
510-11, 516-17, 552-53, 599-600 

Vaisnava 119 

Vaisvanara. See Visva 

Vaisya 299. 473 

Vajasaneyaka 174 

Vajasaneyakasamhita 180 

Vajra 462 


634 


Vak (god of speech) 456 

vakya. See sentence 
a kind of exegetical evidence +30-31 
avantaravakya 383 

Vakyapadiya (of Bhartrhari) 611 

Vakyasudhé (attributed to Samkara) 19, 
344 

Vakyavrtt: (attributed to Samkara) 18, 
334-35 

value, theory of 22-45 

Vamadeva 28-29, 133, 277, 423, 427, +70 

Vamadevasiikta 470 

Vana (a dasandma) 118 

Van Boetzelaer 204, 420-21, 523, 608, 612 

Van Buitenen, J. A. B. 603 

varna (caste or class) 121, 204, 219, 260, 
299, 323, 333, 472-73, 485, 589, 506 

varna (morpheme, syllable, letter) 35, 
139, 354, 571 

varnasramadharma, See dharma 

Varttika, nature of 521 

Varuna 461, 324 

Varuni Upansad 205 

vasana (impression, tendency) 23-25, 28- 
34, 36, 68, 90, 94. 161-62, 189, 201-2, 
234, 268, 287, 290, 313, 320, 338, 352, 
434, 478-79, 481-82, 498, 501-3, 505, 
509-11, 523, 533, 559, 3568, 577 

vastn (real object) 197, 229, 255, 261, 
324, 331, 355, 374, 377, 384, 410, 522, 
539 
vastumatra 611 
vastutattva 484 

Vasubandhu 68 

Vasudeva 165, 331 

Vatsyayana, author of Kamasiitias +39 

Veda. See scripture 

vedanaskandha 557 

Vedanta 3-6, 9-10, 19, 71 

Vedanta Desika 11, 603 

Vedantasitras. See Brahmasitras 

Vedavyasa 295 

Veezhinathan, N. 333, 604 

veins. See nadi 

Venkataramanan, S. 320, 325 

Venkataramiah, D. 270, 563, 612 

Venkatasubbiah, A. 607 

verb 
as critical part of a meaningful sentence 

57, 442-43, 537 

meaning of verb root 211 
verbal endings 436, 438 

verbal testimony. See Sabda 

Vetter, Tilmann 309, 347, 609, 611 

Vibhramaviveka (of Mandana Misra) 347 

vibku (all-pervading) 202 

vicdra (inquiry, discussion) 320, 329, 343 

videhamukti 343, 494-95 

vidha (to posit) 375-76 

vidvan (enlightened person) 297-98, 300 

vidya (perfect knowledge; understanding) 
6, 21, 33-34, 41, 69, 74,78, 80, 120-21, 
128, 131, 143, 175, 183, 192, 195-97, 
206, 221, 228-29, 240, 279-80, 336, 
352-54, 474, 476-77, 509, 553, 358, 
570, 580-81 
higher v. lower 285-86 
stages of vidya 113 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN 


PHILOSOPHIES 


Vidyadhiraja 117 

Vidyaranya 217, 563 

Vidyarnava, S. C. 278, 608 

vijfdna 83, 112-13, 160-62, 198-200, 210, 
348, 453, 478, 515-16 
alayavijfiana s.v. 


vijfénamayakosa 91, 131, 215, 288, 
331, 337, 341, 497, 517, 524 
vyfanaskandha 557 
vyhanatman 138, 190 
wsayavijhana 326 
Vijhanavada Buddhism 13, 20, 94-95, 


159, 161-62, 250, 316, 352, 355, 481, 
499-500, 573, 577-79, 589 

vikalpa (conceptual construction) 21, 54, 
65, 67-69, 106, 161, 199, 206, 237, 240, 
264, 269, 310, 313, 316, 323, 358, 368, 
377, 385, 387, 400, 406, 553, 577 
internal external 107-8. See also kalpana 

vikalpaka (one who wrongly interprets) 
68, 314 

wkdra (modification) 39-40, 126, 190, 
196, 356, 428 
a kind of result of action 39-40, 596 
a purpose of an injunction 427 

viksepa (restlessness/distraction) 235, 372 

viksepa (power of projection) 337, 360, 
377, See avidya, projective 

violence 29 

vipaka (maturation, fruition of karmic 
residues) 22, 28-29, 31. See also karma 

Viraj 87-88, 185, 273-77, 286, 290-92, 
309, 311, 318-19, 366-67, 455, 457, 
461, 466, 487, 489, 523-24, 560-62 
wife of Indra 494 

virtue, moral 35-36 

visaya (content, object of awareness) 6, 
40, 93, 108, 111-12, 201, 296, 348, 352, 
360, 395, 572, 576, 588 
subject matter of a text 339, 564, 587 

visayin (subject of awareness of an object) 
120, 572 

visesa (particular) 369, 381, 477 
as distinguishing property 411 
in Vaisesika 393 
visesalaksana 590 

visesana (qualifier) 174, 297, 394 
of absence 449 

visesanavisesyabhava (relation of qualifier 
and qualified) 357, 522, 554-55 

visesya (qualificand) 297 

Visistadvaita 5, 9-11 

Visnu 27, 87, 247, 267, 280, 295, 323-24, 
334-35, 457, 561-62, 598, 600 

visual organ 23, 196, 237 

Visva, Vaisvanara 89, 104, 106-7, 135, 
310-12, 319, 494, 561-62 

Visvamitra 554 

Visvajit sacrifice 195, 445 

Visvaripa 347 

vitta (riches), two kinds of 466, 475 

Vivarana school 73 

vivarta 54, 59, 65, 84, 115, 118, 352, 357- 
58, 376, 590, 598 
the term 295 

Vivartavada 7, 67, 82, 467 | 

Vivekaciidémam (attributed to Samkara) 
19, 116, 335-38 


INDEX 


vow 127 
of chastity 176 

Vrtti (a kind of commentary) 5, 11 

vrtti (operation of the internal organ) 
92, 234, 331, 436, 514, 576-77 
bahyavrtti 320 

Vrttikara 11, 40, 181, 187, 256, 296, 298 

wadhikarana (in inference) 357, 610 

yakti (particular individual) 55, 374, 
381-83, 385, 387. See also visesa 

wana (a prana) 330 

wéapara (operation) 439 

Vyasa, author of Epics 5, 475, 519 

Vyasa, author of the Yogabhadsya 118 

wavahéra (ordinary affairs, _ practical 
usage) 121, 197, 289, 324, 352, 357, 
370, 381-82, 386, 435, 447, 452, 459, 
521, 540, 559, 599 

vyavahérika (lower standpoint) 34-36, 
67, 215 

vyavasthé (fixed distinction) 378-79 

Done (excluded, discontinuous) 378, 
82 


vyuipatti (learning meanings of words) 
399 


waking state of awareness (jdgarita) 13, 
89-91, 106-7, 225, 228, 233, 235, 240, 
248, 268, 310-13, 319, 325-27, 484, 556 
dangers of sudden waking. See susupti 
three states of 502 

Walleser, Mac 105-7 

Warrier, A. G. Krishna 606 

water 22, 24, 88, 236, 264-65, 287, 311, 
318, 560 
and foam, analogy of 84, 147, 197, 

219, 273, 286, 323 
and waves, analogy of 321, 554 

wealth 30 

Weber, Albrecht 254 

welfare (Sreyas) 40, 402 

whole and part 150, 190 

will. See effort 

wind, See air 

withdrawal from the world 35 

word (pada) 55, 108 


635 


homonymous (sédhdérana) 393 

words and their meanings. 
361-62. See meaning 

noe and syllables, relation between 


139, 193, 


world (jagat) 
dissolution of. See laya 
not a nonentity 520 
modification of the Highest Self 191 
unreal 240, 426, 520 


worship. See updsana 


Yajnavalkya 9, 141, 196, 435, 483, 486, 
488, 490-91, 493-95, 498, 502, 508, 
513, 519 

Yajfiavalkyakanda (of Brhadaranyaka Upani- 
gad) 520 

Yajurveda 
Black 205 
White (sukla) 180, 278, 421 

Yama 24-25, 171, 280 

yama (forbearance) 240, 256, 258, 301, 
322, 337, 518 

Yamunacarya 12 

year 25 

yoga 3, 44-45, 173, 183, 278, 287-88, 300, 
323, 333, 339, 423 
asparfayoga 45, 105, 110 
jilanayoga s.v. 
karmayoga s.v. 

Yoga standpoint, in Bhagavadgita 296 

(Patafijala) Yoga 19, 35, 45, 92, 118, 163, 
178, 186, 309, 336, 342, 560 

Yogabhasya (of Vyasa) 118 

Yogabhasyavivarana (ascribed to a Sam- 
kara) 3, 9-10 

Yogacara 68, 70, 92, 453. See also Vijiana- 
vada 

Yogasitras (of Patafijali) 143 

yogin 317, 495. See also yoga 

yogyatva, yogyata (capability, fitness) 
between word and object 401 
a condition of sentence meaning 443 
for being validly known 394-96 

yukti (reasoning) 123, 241, 441, 445-47, 
580 


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Main entry under title: 
Encyclopedia of Indian philosophies. 


Includes index. 

1. Advaita—Dictionaries. 2. Vedanta— 
Dictionaries. 3. Philosophy, Indic—Dictionaries. 
I. Potter, Karl H. 

B132.A3E52 181’.482 7785558 
ISBN 0-691-07182-9 AACR2 


