ENGYCLOPEDIA OF [INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
General Editor, Kar] Potter 


The following volumes are published: 
I, Bibliography, 2nd ed. (1984) 


II. Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology: The Tradition of 
Nydya-Vaisesika up to Gangesa (1978) 


III. Advaita Vedanta up to Samkara and His Pupils (1982) 
IV. Samkhya: A Dualist Tradition in Indian Philosophy (1987) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF 
INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Samkhya 
A Dualist Tradition in 
Indian Philosophy 


EDITED BY 


GERALD JAMES LARSON 


AND 


RAM SHANKAR BHATTACHARYA 


PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Princeton, New Jersey 


Copyright © 1987 by Princeton University Press 


Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, 
Princeton, New Jersey 08540 


In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, Guildford, Surrey 
All Rights Reserved 


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data will 
be found on the last printed page on this book 


ISBN: 0-691-07301-5 


This book has been composed in India by Shantilal Jain at 
Shri Jainendra Press, A-45, Naraina, Phase I, New Delhi 110028 


Clothbound editions of Princeton University Press books are 
printed on acid-free paper, and binding materials are 
chosen for strength and durability 


Printed in the United States of America 
by Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey. 


Contributors: 


Dayanand Bhargava, Department of Sanskrit, University of Jodhpur 
(Rajasthan ), India 

Kalidas Bhattacharya, Department of Philosophy, Visva-Bharati 
University, Santiniketan (Bengal), India 

Harsh Narain, Department of Philosophy, University of Lucknow 
(UP), India 

Kapil Deo Pandey, Department of Sanskrit, Arya Mahila Degree 
College, Lahuravir Chowmuhani, Varanasi (UP), India 

Sangamlal Pandey, Department of Philosophy, Allahabad University, 
Allahabad (UP), India 

Karl H. Potter, Department of Philosophy, University of Washington, 
Seattle, USA 

Anima Sen Gupta, Department of Philosophy, Patna University, Patna 
(Bihar ), India 

Prabal Kumar Sen, Department of Philosophy, University of Calcutta 
(Bengal), India 

Raghunatha Sharma, Sampurnananda Sanskrit University, Varanasi 
(UP), India 

Shiv Kumar Sharma, Department of Sanskrit, University of Poona, 
Poona (Maharashtra), India 

Esther A. Solomon, Department of Sanskrit, University of Gujarat, 
Ahmedabad (Gujarat), India 

Kedaranatha Tripathi, College of Oriental Learning, Banaras Hindu 
University, Varanasi (UP), India 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE xi 


PART ONE : 
INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF 
SAMKHYA (Gerald Fames Larson) 


The History and Literature of Samkhya 3 
I. Proto-Samkhya and Pre-K 4arika-Samkhya 3 
II. The Samkhya Textual Tradition 14 
Karika-Samkhya and Patafijala-Samkhya 18 
Karika-Kaumudi-Samkhya 29 
Samasa-Samkhya 32 
Siitra-Samkhya 35 
The Philosophy of Samkhya 43 
Preliminary Remarks 43 
I. Samkhya as Enumeration 48 
II. Samkhya as Process Materialism 65 
III. Samkhya as Contentless Consciousness 73 
IV. Samkhya as Rational Reflection 83 
PART TWO: 
SUMMARIES OF WORKS 
1. Kapila 107 
2. Asuri 107 
3. Paficasikha 113 
4. Sastitantra 125 
5. Paurika 129 
6. Paficadhikarana 129 
7. Patafijali (the Samkhya teacher) 129 
8. Varsaganya 131 
9. Vindhyavasin 141 
10. Madhava 147 
11. ISvarakrsna 149 
Samkhyakarikaé (Karl H. Potter; Gerald 7. Larson) 149 
12. Patafijali (the Yoga teacher) 165 
13. Suvarnasaptati (G. F. Larson) 167 
14. Samkhyaortti (Esther A. Solomon) 179 
15. Sdamkhyasaptatiortti (E. A. Solomon) 193 
16. Gaudapada 209 


Samkhyakarikabhasya (G. F. Larson) 210 


Vili CONTENTS 


17. Vyasa, or Vedavyasa 225 
18. Yuktidipika (Raghunatha Sharma, Dayanand Bhargava, 
and Shiv Kumar Sharma) 227 
19. Fayamangala (Ram Shankar Bhattacharya) 271 
20. Samkara 289 
21. Matharavrtti (Harsh Narain) 291 
22. WVacaspati Misra , 301 
Tattvakaumudi (G. F. Larson) 301 
Tativavaisaradi 312 
23. Bhojaraja 313 
24. Tattvasamasasiitra 315 
25. Kramadipika (Anima Sen Gupta) 321 
26. Samkhyasiitra 327 
27. Aniruddha 333 
Samkhyasiitravytti (G. F. Larson) 333 
28. Vijfianabhiksu 375 
Samkhyapravacanabhasya ( Sangamlal Pandey) 376 
Samkhyasara (R. S'. Bhattacharya) 401 
Yogavarttika, Yogasdrasamgraha 412 
29. Bhavaganesa 413 
Tattvayatharthyadipana (Kapil Deo Pandey) 413 
30. Mahadeva Vedantin 417 
31. Svayamprakasayati 419 
Gunatrayaviveka (R. S. Bhattacharya) 419 
32. Narayanatirtha 421 
Samkhyacandriké (A. Sen Gupta) 421 
33. Nagoji Bhatta 429 
34. Vamsidhara Misra 431 
Tattvavibhakara (Kedaranatha Tripathi andR. S. Bhattacharya) 431 
35. Simananda 443 
Sdamkhyatattvavivecana (A. Sen Gupta) 443 
36. Sarvopakarinitika (K. D. Pandey) 445 
37. Sdmkhyasiitravivarana (A. Sen Gupta) 447 
38. Kaviraja Yati 449 
39. Mudumba Narasimhasvamin 451 
Samkhyataruvasanta (R. S. Bhattacharya) 451 
40. Raghunatha Tarkavagisa 459 
41. Devatirtha Svamin 461 
42. Taranatha Tarkavacaspati 463 
Upodghata (R. S. Bhattacharya) 463 
43. Narendranatha Tattvanidhi 465 
44, Bharati Yati 467 
Tattvakaumudivyakhya (E. A. Solomon) 467 
45, Pramathanatha Tarkabhisana - 473 


Amala (Kalidas Bhattacharya) 473 


CONTENTS 


46, 


47, 


48, 


49, 


50. 


Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana 
Avaranavarini (K. D. Bhattacharya) 
Hariprasada 

Samkhyasitraortti (R. S. Bhattacharya) 
Balarama Udasina 

Vidvattosini (R. S. Bhattacharya) 
Paficanana Tarkaratna 

Piryima (K. D. Bhatiacharya) 
Kufijavihari Tarkasiddhanta 
Tattvabodhini (Prabal Kumar Sen) 


51. Krsnavallabhacarya 
Kirandvali (RS. Bhattacharya) 
Samkhyakarikabhasya (A. Sen Gupta) 

52. Rajesvara Sastrin Dravida 
Tattvakaumuditika (R. S. Bhattacharya) 

53. Ramesacandra Tarkatirtha 
Gunamayi (K. D. Bhattacharya) 

54, Kalipada Tarkacarya 
Saraprabha (R. S. Bhattacharya) 

55. Hariharananda Aranya 
Samkhyatattvdloka (R. S. Bhattacharya) 

56. Harirama Sukla 
Susama (R. S. Bhattacharya) 

57. Sivanarayana Sastrin 
SGrabodhini (A. Sen Gupta) 

58. Naraharinatha 

59. Sitarama Sastri 

60. Brahmamuni 

61. KefSava 

62. Krsna Misra 

63. Samkhyaparibhasa 

64. M.V. Upadhyaya 

65, Sri Rama Pandeya 

NOTES 


INDEX 


ix 


487 
488 
501 
501 
509 
509 
521 
521 
545 
545 
551 
551 
554 
559 
559 
563 
563 
577 
577 
581 
581 
591 
591 
599 
599 
611 
613 
615 
617 
617 
617 
619 
621 


623 
661 


PREFACE 


Many years ago when I met the great Gopinath Kaviraj for the first 
time in Varanasi, he inquired about my work. I commented that I was 
working on one of the ancient systems of Indian philosophy, namely, 
the Samkhya. He impatiently waved his hand to interrupt me. 
“Samkhya,”’ he said, “‘is not one of the systems of Indian philosophy. 
Samkhya is the philosophy of India!” He was referring, of course, to 
the ancient period, but he also went on to stress the remarkable influ- 
ence that Samkhya has had on almost every phase of Indian culture 
and learning. Philosophy, mythology, theology, law, medicine, art, 
and the various traditions of Yoga and Tantra have all been touched 
by the categories and basic notions of the Samkhya. This is not at all 
to claim that these various areas of learning and cultural practice have 
accepted the dualist metaphysics of Samkhya or its overall classical 
systematic formulation. To the contrary, there have been intense 
polemics over the centuries against the Samkhya position. What is 
striking, however, is the ubiquitous presence of the Samkhya network 
of notions, functioning almost as a kind of cultural “code” (to use a 
semiotics idiom) to which intellectuals in every phase of cultural life 
in India have felt a need to respond. 

The present volume of the Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies attempts 
to trace the history and to interpret the meaning of Samkhya philoso- 
phy from its beginnings in the ancient period to the present time, a 
period of some twenty-five hundred years. As might well be imagined, 
it has not been an easy task to accomplish this in one volume. Ram 
Shankar Bhattacharya and I have had to make some difficult editorial 
decisions by way of limiting the boundaries of our undertaking. One 
such decision concerned the manner in which we would treat ancient 
and/or “popular” (nontechnical) Samkhya passages. For a time we 
considered the possibility of including summaries of Samkhya passages 
in the Upanisads, the Mahabharata (including the Bhagavadgita), the 
Puranas, the medical literature, and so forth. As we proceeded in our 
work, however, it became clear that these passages could be best 
treated in the Introduction to the present volume. More than that, it 
became clear that these passages represent what could be called 
“Proto-Samkhya” and should be clearly distinguished from what we 
are calling in the present volume “Pre-Karika-Samkhya,”’ ‘‘Karika- 
Samkhya,” ‘‘Patafijala-Samkhya,” ‘‘Karika~Kaumudi-Samkhya,” 
“Samasa-Samkhya,” and “Sutra-Samkhya” (and see Introduction) . 

A second editorial decision concerned the manner in which we 
would deal with the extensive number of passages in Indian philoso- 


xii PREFACE 


phical literature that criticize Samkhya from the perspective of other 
traditions, passages, for example, from Nyaya, Vaisesika, Buddhist, 
Jaina, Mimamsa, and Vedanta works. Again, for a time we considered 
the possibility of including at least some of these passages, but we 
ultimately determined that such passages appropriately belong in their 
own respective volumes in the Encyclopedia series and not in the 
Samkhya volume itself. 

A third editorial decision concerned the manner in which we would 
deal with the issue of the literature of Yoga. Our own view is that 
“Patafijala-Samkhya”’ is an important type of Samkhya philosophy 
and deserves to be treated as such, but we encountered the practical 
difficulty of some seventy Sanskrit texts on Yoga that should be 
considered. The only sensible solution appeared to be, therefore, to 
prepare a separate volume of the Encyclopedia series for the Yoga 
materials with appropriate cross-references in both the Samkhya and 
Yoga volumes. Eventually, then, when both volumes are published, 
they can be used in tandem. 

Apart from such external editorial decisions, that is to say, what to 
exclude from the volume, we also had to make a number of decisions 
regarding the internal boundaries of the volume. It was obvious from 
the beginning, for example, that three of our texts required special 
treatment, namely, the Saémkhyakarikd, the Tattvasamdsasitra, and the 
Samkhyasitra. These are the three fundamental and primary texts of 
the tradition upon which most other texts are based, and each pre- 
sented a unique problem. Because the Samkhyakarika is the oldest 
systematic text available, we thought it appropriate to present an 
extensive treatment of it. Indeed, the so-called “summary”’ of the 
Samkhyakarika in the volume is considerably longer than the original 
text itself! In our view, however, since our task was not that of trans- 
lation but, rather, that of presenting an overview of the systematic 
philosophical arguments in the text, we felt justified in taking some 
liberties in unpacking those arguments. Regarding the Tativasamdsa- 
stitra, the problem was the reverse. The Tattvasamdsa is not really a text 
in any sense. It is a checklist of topics upon which several commen- 
taries have been written. We have, therefore, presented it in its 
entirety as a checklist. The Samkhyasiitra, as is well known, is a late 
compilation, and there is no authoritative tradition either for the 
sequence of si#tras or their intepretation apart from the reading and 
interpretation offered, first, by Aniruddha, and then later by Vijfiana- 
bhiksu (who generally follows Aniruddha throughout). We have, 
therefore, presented the séras themselves in a bare, outline form. We 
have, then, presented a full summary of Aniruddha’s reading and 
interpretation followed by a shorter summary of Vijfianabhiksu’s 
reading and interpretation (stressing only those views of Vijfianabhiksu 
that clearly differ from Aniruddha). 


PREFACE Xili 


In three instances in the volume we have presented unusually 
detailed summaries, namely, those for the Samkhyaurtti, the Samkhya- 
Saptatioriti, and the Yuktidipika. The former two texts are those recently 
edited by Esther A. Solomon, and because they have been unknown in 
Samkhya studies until now, we invited Professor Solomon to prepare 
full treatments of both. The latter text, the Yuktidipika, is undoubtedly 
the most important text for understanding the details of the Samkhya 
system, but until now no translation has been available. We thought 
it appropriate, therefore, to include as full a treatment of it as possible. 
The summary of the Yuktidipikd in this volume is not by any means 
exhaustive, but it does provide a wealth of information that has until 
now been unavailable. 

Dr. Ram Shankar Bhattacharya and I would like to take this 
opportunity to thank all of those who helped to bring this volume to 
completion. First, of course, our thanks to the many contributors (see 
List of Contributors) who prepared the published summaries. Second, 
a special word of thanks and acknowledgment to those who prepared 
summaries of passages that could not be included in the final published 
version of the volume—passages, for example, from Jaina, Buddhist, or 
epic literature that, based on our final editorial decisions, finally fell 
outside of the boundaries of the volume, or summaries in which it 
became apparent that a particular text was simply repeating what had 
been said earlier in terms of philosophical interpretation. In this 
regard, we would like to thank and acknowledge the help of Dr. 
Biswanath Bhattacharya (Calcutta Sanskrit College), Dr. Sabhajit 
Misra (University of Gorakhpur), Dr. A. N. Pandey (Kashi Vidya- 
pith), Dr. R.R. Pande (Banaras Hindu University), Dr. R. K. Tripathi 
(Banaras Hindu University), and Dr. S. P. Verma (Kuruksetra 
University) . 

Several research assistants have helped us in our work along the 
way, and we would like to thank and acknowledge them as well : 
Dr. Jayandra Soni, formerly of Banaras Hindu University and 
currently at McMaster University in Ontario, Canada; Dr. Paul 
Muller-Ortega, Dr. Wade Dazey, Dr. Michiko Yusa, and Dr. James 
McNamara, former doctoral students in religious studies at the 
University of California, Santa Barbara. Also, a special word of 
thanks for the research assistance of Dr. Edeltraud Harzer, of the 
University of Washington, Seattle. Our thanks, furthermore, to the 
American Institute of Indian Studies and the Indo-U.S. Subcommis- 
sion for Education and Culture for financial assistance to our various 
contributors and to the coeditors, and, finally, our thanks and appre- 
ciation to Karl H. Potter for his continuing patience, encourage- 
ment, and help in his capacity as general editor of the Encyclopedia of 
Indian Philosophies. 

For the nonspecialist reader of the volume, it should be noted that 


xiv PREFACE 


the Index provides brief definitions of many technical Samkhya terms 
before listing page numbers and may be used, therefore, as a glossary 
for those unfamiliar with the Sanskrit terminology of the Samkhya 
system. An additional glossary for classical Samkhya terminology may 
also be found in Gerald J. Larson, Classical Samkhya (2nd edition, Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass, 1979), pp. 237-247. 

Full diacritical marks are given only for all primary entries of texts 
and authorsin the volume. In the case of modern Indian scholars, 
namely, authors of secondary works, summarizers, and other contri- 
butors, names are cited without diacritical marks, in accordance with 
current convention in modern India, Likewise, the names of modern 
Indian cities are given without diacritical marks. 


GERALD JAMES LARSON 
January 1987 Santa Barbara, California, USA 


PART ONE 


INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY 
OF SAMKHYA 


THE HISTORY AND LITERATURE 
OF SAMKHYA 


I. Proro-SAMKHYA AND Pre-KARIKA-SAMKHYA 


The term “samkhya” means “relating to number, enumeration, or 
calculation.” As an adjective, the term refers to any enumerated set 
or grouping and can presumably be used in any inquiry in which enu- 
meration or calculation is a prominent feature (for example, mathe- 
matics, grammar, prosody, psychology, medicine, and so forth), As a 
masculine noun, the term refers to someone who calculates, enumerates, 
or discriminates properly or correctly. As a neuter noun, the term 
comes to refer to a specific system of dualist philosophizing that pro- 
ceeds by a method of enumerating the contents of experience and the 
world for the purpose of attaining radical liberation (moksa, kaivalya) 
from frustration and rebirth. 

These three dimensions of meaning in the word “sdmkhya’’ are not 
simply synchronic distinctions but indicate as well the diachronic or 
historical development of the word in the ancient period. That is to 
say, in the ancient history of South Asian culture there appear to be 
three identifiable phases of development of the term “sdmkhya’” that 
roughly correspond to these three basic meaning dimensions.1 These 
can be briefly characterized as follows: 

(1) Intellectual inquiry in the oldest learned traditions of ancient India 
(from the Vedic period, ca. 1500 before the Common Era _ [B.c.£. ], 
through the Mauryan period in the fourth and third centuries B.c.E.) was 
frequently cast in the format of elaborate enumerations of the contents of 
a particular subject matter — for example, the principles of statecraft as 
preserved in Kautilya’s Arthasdstra, the principles of medicine as pre- 
served in the Carakasamhiia and Susrutasamhita, and so forth. The Vedic 
corpus itself exhibits this tendency as do traditions of law (nitifdstra) and 
politics (rajadharma), and it is in such environments that one finds some 
of the early references to sdamkhya. Kautilya, for example, refers to 


4 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


samkhya as one of three traditions of dnviksiki.2 The notion of dnviksiki 
in these ancient contexts means something like the enumeration of the 
contents of a particular subject matter by means of systematic reason- 
ing. The practice of dnviksiki is not really “philosophy” in our usual 
senses of the term; it is, rather, a kind of general “scientific” inquiry by 
means of the systematic enumeration of basic principles. Such enu- 
merations appeared in a variety of intellectual subject areas, including 
phonology, grammar, statecraft, medicine, law, cosmology, and icono- 
graphy, and the compilations of these subject-area enumerations some- 
times came to be called ‘‘tantras’’ (meaning a scientific work, and syno- 
nymous with such terms as “‘sastra,”’ ‘vidya’, and so forth). Moreover, 
certain stylistic rules or ‘““methodological devices” (yuktis) came to be 
accepted in composing scientific works — for example, a brief statement 
of a position (uddesa), a lengthy exposition of a position (nirdefa), an 
etymological explanation (nirvacana), the proper order or sequence in 
enumerating a subject (vidhdna), and so forth.’ Kautilya’s Arthasastra 
provides a list of such methodological devices, and the author illustrates 
how his work uses the various methodological devices, thereby estab- 
lishing that his treatise is a scientific work. The medical texts (Caraka 
and Sufruta) are also scientific works in this sense and likewise provide 
lists of methodological devices. This may well explain why the later 
technical Samkhya philosophy is frequently referred to as a tantra, and 
it helps in understanding the reasons why the long introduction to the 
Yuktidipika (the most important commentary on the Samkhyakarika), 
contains a detailed discussion of the methodological devices essential 
for any systematic inquiry. In this oldest period, however, it is un- 
doubtedly an anachronism to interpret references to sémkhya, anviksiki, 
or tantra as themselves completed or distinct systems of thought, as some 
older scholars have suggested (Garbe, for example).® It is more plau- 
sible to interpret these references in a much more general sense as the 
first and groping attempts at systematic thinking, which proceeded 
by determining and enumerating the components of anything (whether 
it be the components of the human body, the components of the sacri- 
ficial ritual, the components of the heavens, or the components of 
grammar). 

(2) A second phase in the development of the term “‘sdmkhya’”’ be- 
gins from the period of the oldest, pre-Buddhistic Upanisads, ca. eighth 
or seventh centuries B.c.E., and can be traced through traditions of 
the early ascetic spirituality in South Asia, namely, the various mona- 
stic (Sramana and yati) groups, the early Jain and Buddhist movements, 
and so forth, reaching a culmination in the sorts of speculative thinking 
one finds in the Moksadharma portion of the Mahabharata, in the Bhaga- 
vadgitd, and in the cosmological descriptions of the oldest Puranas (or, 
in other words, reaching into the first centuries of the Common Era). 
If in the oldest period the term “‘samkhya’” could refer generally to any 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 3 


enumerated set of principles (in an environment of dnviksiki for the 
sake of constructing a scientific work), in this second period the notion 
becomes linked to a methodology of reasoning that results in spiritual 
knowledge (vidya, jfidna, viveka) that leads to liberation from the cycle 
of frustration and rebirth. It is possible, of course, perhaps even likely, 
that in the oldest period the term “‘sémkhya’’ in its general sense of intel- 
lectual enumeration was applied on occasion in contexts of meditation 
and religious cosmology — the enumerations in Rg Veda 1.164, X.90, 
or X.129, or the enumerations of the parts of the body or the breaths 
in the Atharva Veda or in the Brahmana literature would suggest as 
much — but there is little doubt that it is primarily in this second period 
that “‘samkhya’”’ becomes a prominent notion in those environments in 
which meditation, spirititual exercises, and religious cosmology repre- 
sent the crucial subject matters. 

The archaic ontology of Chandogya Upanisad VI.2-5, for example, 
with its emphasis on primordial Being (sat) in its tripartite manifesta- 
tions as fire (red), water (white), and food (black), correlated with 
speech, breath, and mind, probably foreshadows the later Samkhya 
ontological notions of prakrti, the three gunas, and the preexistence of 
the effect. On one level, of course, this kind of reflection echoes older 
Vedic notions (for example, some of the number sequences and sym- 
bolism of RV.X.164), but, on another level, it represents a transition 
to later formulations such as those in Svetdsvatara Upanisad— for example, 
“The One unborn, red, white, and black... .” (Svet. Up. IV.5), and 
“Two birds, companions (who are) always united, cling to the self- 
same tree...” (Svet. Up. 1V.6-7) —a text in which the older Vedic 
symbolism is clearly present and yet a text in which the terms ‘‘samkhya” 
and ‘“‘yoga’’ are actually used. Cosmological speculations such as 
these are combined with elaborate descriptions of yogic experience in 
such texts as Katha Upanisad, Moksadharma, Bhagavadgita, and Buddha- 
caritta. The same sorts of speculation are used in the medical litera- 
ture (Carakasamhita and Susrutasamhita), and the hierarchical ordering 
of basic principles (tattva) is given a cosmological turn with respect to 
the periodic creation and dissolution of the manifest world in Manu- 
smytt and in most of the oldest Puranas. Certain characteristic notions 
become associated with Samkhya, but throughout the period Samkhya 
is primarily a methodology for attaining liberation and appears to 
allow for a great variety of philosophical formulations. Edgerton has 
expressed the matter well: “Any formula of metaphysical truth, pro- 
vided that knowledge thereof was conceived to tend towards salvation, 
might be called Samkhya.’ ... It appears, then, that Samkhya means 
in the Upanisads and the Epic simply the way of salvation by knowl- 
edge, and does not imply any system of metaphysical truth whatever.’’8 

On one level, Samkhya as a methodology for attaining salvation by 
knowing carries further many of the older cosmological notions of the 


6 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


oldest Upanisads as set forth in Chandogya Upanisad VI, and so forth. 
On another level, Samkhya as a methodology for attaining salvation 
by knowing carries further the various psychological analyses of expe- 
rience that first appear in the oldest Upanisads and then become domi- 
nant motifs in Jain and Buddhist meditation contexts and in such later 
Upanisads as Katha and Sveta$cvatara. The enumeration of basic prin- 
ciples in a hierarchical order is a fundamental aspect of the methodo- 
logy, but the precise number of enumerated items varies widely. In 
some passages seventeen basic principles are enumerated;® in other 
passages twenty;?° or-twenty-four;" or the later, standard listing of 
twenty-fivel? are enumerated. On occasion the highest principle is 
the old Upanisadic brahman or diman, or, again, the highest principle 
is God (ifvara). In some contexts the Samkhya methodology implies 
a monistic perspective, in others a theistic or dualist perspective. 
Throughout the period, however, a characteristic terminology and a 
recurrent set of intellectual issues begin to develop around the metho- 
dology: reflections about a primordial materiality (pradhana); enume- 
rations of psychic states or conditions (bhdvas, gunas) that can be cons- 
trued psychologically and/or cosmologically ; analyses of the various 
aspects of intellectual experience in terms of intellect/will (hereafter 
translated simply as “‘intellect”) (buddhi), egoity (ahamkara), and mind 
(manas); speculations about the nature of the inner self (purusa) in 
terms of a cosmic Self (aman) or the self in the body orin the manifest 
world (jiva, bhitdtman); elaborations of the five sense capacities 
(indriya) correlated with the five gross elements (bhiita), the five action 
capacities (karmendriya), and the five contents or “objects” (visaya) 
of the senses; and a general polarity between subjectivity and objecti- 
vity in terms of “the knower of the field” (ksetrajfia) and “‘the field” 
(ksetra). Clearly there is a system (or systems) in the process of deve- 
loping, but the focus in this second period is rather on the process 
or methodology itself and not on the contents that result from the 
process. 

In contrast to methods of spiritual discipline (yoga) that emphasize 
posture, breathing, recitation, and ascetic practices (tapas), sdmkhya 
is the intellectual or reasoning method. The follower of sdmkhya is 
one who reasons or discriminates properly, one whose spiritual discip- 
line is meditative reasoning. This is probably the sense of the term 
“samkhya’ in the compound sémkhya-yoga-adhigamya (“to be understood 
by proper reasoning and spiritual discipline”) in Svetdsvatara Upanisad 
VI.13. It is probably also the sense meant in the twelfth chapter of 
ASsvaghosa’s Buddhacarita, in which reference is made to older spiritual 
methodologies studied by Gotama the Buddha prior to the discovery 
of his own unique method of meditation. Regarding the specific 
contents of this reasoning methodology, J.A.B. van Buitenen has offered 
the following comment: 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 7 


There must have existed scores of more or less isolated little centres 
where parallel doctrines were being evolved out of a common source. 
Occasional meetings at pilgrimages and festivals, reports from other 
and remote dframas brought by wandering ascetics, polemic encoun- 
ters with other preachers must have resulted in a laborious process 
of partial renovation and conservation, more precise definitions of 
doctrines and eclecticisms, readjustments of terminology, etc. At 
this stage to credit these little centres with the name “schools” is 
to do them too much or too little honor.... Most of the process 
must elude us necessarily, but we stand a better chance of recovering 
the little that is left by allowing for the greatest diversity, rather 
than the greatest uniformity of doctrine.” 


In the Moksadharma portion of the Mahabharata various names of 
ancient teachers are associated with these developing traditions, in- 
cluding Kapila, Asuri, Bhrgu, Yajfiavalkya, Sanatkum4ra, Vasistha, 
Suka, Asita Devala (or Asita and Devala), Vyasa, Janaka, and Pafica- 
sikha. Some of these names can be traced back to the older Upani- 
sads, and many of them also appear in the later Puranic literature. 
Three of them are frequently referred to in the later technical philo- 
sophical literature as important precursors of Samkhya philosophy, 
namely, Kapila, Asuri, and Paficasikha. The Sdmkhyakdrika and its 
commentaries refer to Kapila and Asuri as the founders of the philo- 
sophical system and to Paficagikha as a teacher who greatly expanded 
or revised the original teachings. Unfortunately, all three teachers 
are lost to antiquity. References to Kapila and Asuri are brief and 
largely eulogistic, and the situation is not much better with Paficagikha. 
Fragments here and there are attributed to a certain ‘“‘Paficasikha,”’ 
and Pajficasikha on occasion is referred to as the author of a massive 
treatise in verse on Samkhya philosophy called Sastitantra. The views 
attributed to Pajicasikha in the Moksadharma, however, appear to be 
clearly different from the views that can be pieced together from the 
fragments, suggesting that there was more than one Paficasikha or 
that the name Paficasikha was a revered name in the tradition to which 
a variety of views were ascribed.'4 Moreover, the claim that Pafica- 
Sikha is the author of the Sasfitantra is contradicted by other references 
that attribute authorship of Sastitantra to Kapila or to a certain Varsa- 
ganya. It is reasonable to suppose, however, that Paficasikha was a 
revered teacher of sémkhya in the sense that has been indicated in this 
second period, that is, sdémkhya not yet as a fixed philosophical system, 
but as a general methodology of salvation by knowing or reasoning. 
It is also reasonable to suppose that practitioners of samkhya in this 
sense represent various kinds of ancient lines of teachers (guruparampara) 
that traced their lineages to archaic figures such as Kapila and Asuri 


8 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(in much the same fashion as Jains and Buddhists claimed archaic 
precursors for their traditions). 

What is missing in all of these environments, however, is a critical 
appreciation for the need to argue for or establish an intellectual basis 
for these speculative intuitions. Reasoning, to be sure, is being used, 
but it is a reasoning not yet distinguished from the immediacy of per- 
sonal experience and the accumulated heritage of ritual performance 
and priestly wisdom. There is, of course, some groping for indepen- 
dence and a growing recognition that thinking itself may be a unique 
human activity that can exert its own identity against the established 
and received ordering of things. The very fact that much Upanisadic 
speculation appears to have been developed in princely (rdjanya) or 
warrior (ksatriya) circles (as opposed to priestly groups) and that the 
early independent ascetic movements (Jains, Buddhists, and so forth) 
were especially successful among the newly emerging commercial 
classes in towns where commerce and a monied economy were develop- 
ing, certainly suggest that thoughtful persons were in need of new and 
independent ways of thinking and behaving. Moreover, that the 
political consolidation achieved under the Mauryans appears to have 
been legitimized by a notion of dharma and a theory of the state that 
owed more to Jain and Buddhist paradigms than to older Vedic models 
is also symptomatic of changes that were occurring in other areas of 
intellectual life. Similarly, the rise of devotional and theistic move- 
ments (the Krsna cult, and so forth) in the last centuries before the 
beginning of the Common Era is an additional symptom of a broadly 
based cultural need to develop new and different patterns of intellec- 
tual formulation. Many of these tensions and changes come together 
intellectually in the Bhagavadgita, and it is surely no accident that the 
so-called ‘“‘philosophy” of the Gita is little more than a potpourri of 
Upanisadic speculation, cosmological and psychological simkhya reason- 
ing, Jain and Buddhist ascetic motifs, varndsramadharma as karmayoga, 
tied together with an apologia for early Vaisnava bhaktiyoga —~ a pot- 
pourri that confuses a modern reader almost as much as it confused 
Arjuna. 

In older German scholarship there was an interesting debate as to 
whether the kind of ‘‘philosophy” one finds in the epics (including 
the Gita) and the Puranas is pure syncretism (Mischphilosophie, as in 
Garbe) or transitional philosophy (Ubergangsphilosophie, as in Olden- 
berg).1® The resolution of the debate is surely the correctness of both, 
or possibly neither, for the crucial point is that there is no evidence of 
serious independent philosophizing of any kind in these texts. Whether 
one wishes to call these traditions syncretistic religion (or what we 
usually mean when we use the terms “Hinduism” and “Buddhism” ) 
or prephilosophical speculation on the way to becoming philosophy 
(or what we usually mean when we use the expressions “the philosophy 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 9 


of the Vedas and Upanisads” in regard to the Vedic corpus or “early 
Buddhist philosophy” in regard to the Buddhist canonical texts of the 
Tripitaka) makes little difference. They all have in common a predi-. 
lection for speculative intuition in an environment of received authority. 
Returning, however, to Samkhya, the point to be stressed is that in 
this ancient period there is only a Proto-Samkhya. There was, of 
course, an incipient philosophical Samkhya gradually distilling itself 
out of this diffuse and varied intellectual heritage, but the evidence 
suggests that it was not at first taken very seriously. Whenever it is 
referred to (in the Moksadharma or the Gitd, for example), it is simply 
discounted and characterized as not really being different from Yoga.'* 
Taken overall, then, it is heuristically permissible to refer to this second 
period of development of Samkhya as Kapila-Paficasikha-Samkhya, or 
to carry through the association of the term “‘sdémkhya’’ with the term 
“tantra” from the oldest period, to refer to this second period as Kapila- 
Paficagikha-Tantra, or simply as Kapila-Tantra. 

(3) The third phase in the development of the term “‘sdmkhya” 
marks the beginning of the technical philosophical tradition and coin- 
cides with the end of the second period, namely, from about the last 
century 8.c.E. through the first several centuries c.z. Until recently 
this third phase was as shrouded in obscurity as the second phase, and 
Edgerton, for example, in 1924 claimed that Samkhya as a technical 
philosophical system was not really in existence prior to Igvarakrsna’s 
Samkhyakérika.? Since then, however, three sources have become 
available that clearly indicate that Samkhya as a technical system exis- 
ted prior to Igvarakrsna, and that Isvarakrsna’s own formulation 
comes at the end of the normative period of formulation rather than at 
the beginning. These three sources are (A) the publication of a pre- 
viously unknown commentary on the Samkhyakarika called Yuktidipika 
(edited by P. Ghakravarti in 1938, and edited a second time by R. C. 
Pandeya in 1967) ;18 (B) the reconstruction of a pre-Karika interpreta- 
tion of Samkhya epistemology based on quotations from older Samkhya 
texts cited in Dignaga, Jinendrabuddhi, Mallavadin, and Simhasiri 
by E. Frauwallner;!® and (C) the reconstruction of a Samkhya “ema- 
nation text” or a “‘short instructional tract’ from the earliest Puranas 
and the Moksadharma, which Puranic editors then brought into con- 
formity with the normative view of an established Samkhya philoso- 
phical system, by P. Hacker.?° 

(A) From the Yuktidipika it becomes clear that there was a tradi- 
tion of philosophical Samkhya in the early centuries of the Common 
Era that was more than a methodology of liberation by knowing (that 
is to say, more than the rather diffuse Samkhya-Yoga traditions charac- 
teristic of the second period described above), and, specifically, that 
this tradition (1) attempted to establish certain instruments of knowl- 
edge (pramdyas) and to offer careful definitions of these instruments; 


10 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(2) developed a special interest in inference (anumdna) and construc- 
ted a sequence for making inferences made up of ten members (avaya- 
vas); (3) attempted, after much debate, to fix the number of basic 
principles, together with the precise order of their enumeration, in- 
cluding the technical term “‘subtle element” (tanmdtra); (4) fully deve- 
loped the related notions of prakrti, the three gunas, the transformation 
of the gunas (gunaparindma), and the effect’s preexistence in the cause 
(satkdrya); (5) finally accepted after much controversy one primordial 
prakrti but a plurality of purusas; (6) maintained a rich fabric of internal 
debate involving such teachers as Paurika, Paficadhikarana, Patafijali, 
Varsaganya, and various schools such as the ‘followers of Varsaganya,” 
including Vindhyavasin and Iévarakrsna,*4 and (7) maintained as 
well a vigorous polemic of external debate with certain Buddhist philo- 
sophers and with the followers of early Vaisesika. (8) It also identi- 
fied itself with a tradition known as sastitantra, which apparently refer- 
red to a scheme of sixty topics made up of ten principal topics (mili- 
kartha) and fifty subsidiary categories (padartha) and which also appa- 
rently referred to a text (or possibly texts, that is to say, more than one 
version) by the same name (Sastitantra); and (9) it received its final 
normative formulation in Isvarakrsna’s Samkhyakarika, which, though 
a brief text, nevertheless encompassed all of the important issues of 
the system in a concise and cogent fashion. 

(B) From Frauwallner’s reconstruction it becomes clear that Pre- 
Karika philosophical Samkhya operated with a definition of perception 
(“the functioning of the ear, etc.”’, Srotradi-vritih) and a definition of 
inference (“because of the perception of one aspect of an established 
relation, one is able to infer the other aspect of a relation,” sambandhad 
ekasmat pratyaksat Sesasiddhir anumaénam, based on a scheme of seven 
established relations, or saptasambandha) that [gvarakrsna clearly built 
upon and improved. Frauwallner speculates that this older Samkhya 
epistemology derives from a revised version of Sastitanitra composed 
by Varsaganya at the beginning of the fourth century of the Common 
Era. Such may or may not be the case, but the reconstructed passages 
do point to a pre-kdrikd philosophical Samkhya epistemology.” 

(C) Finally, from Hacker’s reconstruction it becomes clear that 
there was an older Samkhya oniology-cosmology that, again, formed 
the bases for Igvarakrsna’s normative conceptualization in the Sam- 
khyakarika.* 

Apparently, this philosophical tradition of Samkhya developed 
some time between the sorts of speculation one finds in the Moksa- 
dharma and the Bhagavadgita, on the one hand, and the sort of normative 
conceptualization one finds in the Samkhyakdrikd, on the other. More- 
over, it appears to coincide with the development of comparable con- 
ceptualizations within traditions of early Buddhist thought and early 
Vaisesika. It is tempting to suggest with Frauwallner that this 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 1 


Samkhya philosophical tradition is the oldest of the technical schools 
of Indian philosophy (Hindu, Buddhist, or Jain) and that Buddhist 
ontology, Vaisesika atomism, and Nyaya epistemology may all have 
arisen out of an earlier Samkhya philosophical environment, but this 
is perhaps to claim too much. To be sure, all of the later technical 
systems undoubtedly derive from the sorts of fluid speculation one 
finds inthe ‘“‘middle’’-verse Upanisads (Katha, and so forth), the 
Moksadharma, and the Bhagavadgita, in which Samkhya is primarily a 
methodology for liberation by knowing. When the term ‘“samkhya” 
becomes linked with a technical philosophical system, however, one 
has the impression that there has been a definite turn away from the 
older diffuse speculations and that philosophical Samkhya has become 
a parallel or sibling intellectual movement alongside Vaisesika and the 
early Buddhist schools, rather than a parental tradition to these schools. 

Unfortunately, although the Yuktidipika refers to a number of older 
Samkhya philosophical teachers, it is difficult to ascertain even rough 
approximations of their dates. Paurika, who evidently accepted a 
plurality of prakrtis along witha plurality of purusas, was probably an 
older teacher whose views were finally rejected during the final stages 
of normative consolidation. Similarly, Paficadhikarana, who accepted 
only ten organs instead of the normative thirteen, was also probably an 
older teacher. Moreover, Paficadhikarana appears to have had a 
somewhat eccentric view concerning the subtle body, which later 
teachers rejected. Also, Patafijali (not to be confused with the compiler 
of the Yogasiitra and/or the grammarian) is apparently an older figure, 
for his views that there was a new subtle body for each rebirth and 
that egoity has no separate existence as a basic principle apart from 
the intellect were discounted in the final formulation of the Sdmkhya 
system. 

Varsaganya, however, and the followers of Varsaganya, including 
Vindhyavasin, appear to have been closer to the time of Iévarakrsna. 
Indeed, it could well be the case that Isvarakrsna was himself in the 
lineage of Varsaganya. Frauwallner has suggested, basing his opinion 
primarily on citations of Varsaganya’s views in the works of Vacaspati 
Misra, that Varsaganya was the author of a revised version of the Sasti- 
tantra, older versions of which had been attributed to Kapila or Pafica- 
sikha. Vindhyavasin is said to have been a pupil of Varsaganya, to 
have revised the developing system further, and, according to Para- 
martha’s “‘Life of Vasubandhu,” to have defeated Vasubandhu’s 
teacher (Buddhamitra, according to Paramartha, or Manoratha, 
according to Hsiian Tsang’s pupil, Kuei-chi) in a debate during the 
reign of Candragupta II (ca. fourth century).** Vasubandhu, 
according to Chinese sources, then composed a rejoinder to Vindhya- 
vasin. Also, Hstian-tsang (seventh century) refers to a later debate 
between Gunama‘’ and a certain Samkhya teacher, Madhava, by 


12 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


name.”5 It is interesting to observe, however, that the views of Vindhya- 
vasin (as set forth in the Yuktidipika) and Madhava (as set forth in 
Dignaga) diverge considerably from the views of Igvarakrsna. Vin- 
dhyavasin clearly preceded Iévarakrsna, for the author of the Yukti- 
dipikd indicates that [svarakrsna refrained from discussing the tenfold 
inference, since it had already been discussed by Vindhyavasin. 
Moreover, the author of the Yuktidipikad claims that Vindhyavasin 
rejected the notion of a subtle body (because the sense capacities are 
ubiquitous and do not, therefore, require a subtle vehicle for trans- 
migration ) ; and that he accepted neither the contention that the subtle 
elements emerge out of egoity (since they emerge, rather, along with 
egoity from the intellect) nor the notion of a thirteenfold instrument 
(trayodasakarana) (since he argued instead that experience occurs in 
the mind, thus reducing intellect, egoity, and mind to one organ of 
internal experience, which, along with the ten sense capacities make 
a total of eleven organs instead of thirteen). These variant views of 
Vindhyavasin are suspiciously similar to the views of Vyasa in his 
Yogasitrabhdsya, a similarity that has inclined both Chakravarti and 
Frauwallner to suggest that the Varsaganya-Vindhyavasin line of 
Samkhya is preserved in the Patafijala-Samkhya of classical Yoga 
philosophy.”® 

Madhava, on the other hand, appears to have been later than Isvara- 
krsna, for the reported debate with Gunamati occurred around the 
time of Dignaga (ca. 480-540) a period in which the normative view 
of Samkhya was already established. Moreoever, Dignaga refers to 
Madhava as a Samkhya heretic or “‘destroyer of Samkhya” (sdmkhya- 
vaindsika, samkhya-nasaka) because he interprets the notion of prakrti 
and the three gunas as a plurality of primordial materialities (thus 
taking prakrti in the direction of Vaisesika atomism). Then, too, 
Madhava appears to have believed that action (karman) resides in this 
plurality of kinds of stuff and that the cycle of rebirth (samsdra) is begin- 
ningless (thereby implicitly denying the Samkhya notion of emana- 
tion). 

In all of this, itis quite clear that Samkhya was a vigorous and pole- 
mical philosophical system, and oneis tempted to believe the old Chinese 
claim that there were as many as eighteen schools of philosophical 
Samkhya (though the parallel with the eighteen Buddhist schools is 
probably no accident). This must have been intellectually a remark- 
able stage in the development of Samkhya, and of Indian philosophy 
generally, for it was evidently in this creative and formative period in 
the first several centuries of the Common Era that the main issues of 
Indian philosophy were first formulated and polemically discussed: 
the number and definition of .the instruments of knowledge, theories 
of ontology and causation, the role and function of knowing and igno- 
rance, the theory of error, the problem of selfhood, the problem of 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 13 


action and rebirth, and the problem of freedom and bondage. All of 
these issues had been discussed earlier, but the crucial task in this first 
philosophical period was that of systematic formulation, overall intel- 
lectual coherence, and persuasive presentation. Earlier diffuse tradi- 
tions were brought together and codified in collections of siitras and 
karikas — one thinks, for example, not only of the Saémkhyakarika but of 
Nagarjuna’s, and, later, Gaudapada’s kdrikas, and, of course, the early 
sittra collections of Vaisesika, Nyaya, Mimamsa, and Vedanta; patterns 
of training students were being established; commentaries were being 
composed explaining the emerging technical terminology; and rules 
for discussion and debate were being formulated. These developments 
in Indian philosophy mirrored similar developments in literature, art, 
law, medicine, and social reality generally. The older Mauryan poli- 
tical hegemony had collapsed centuries earlier and the resulting decen- 
tralized regionalism had generated a resurgence of local traditions 
that now found themselves in creative tension with one another as the 
Gupta political unification (beginning in the fourth century under 
Candra Gupta [ca. 320]) reopened once again a broader cultural 
environment that transcended the older provincialism. 
Taking all of these disparate (and admittedly problematic) histori- 
cal observations together, one might suggest a tentative chronology for 
early philosophical Samkhya: 
(1)  Sasgitantra, a tradition of “sixty topics” that was either a format 
for the treatment of philosophical Samkhya or the actual name 
of a text, an old form of which was attributed either to Kapila 
or Paficasikha—ca. 100 B.C.E.-200 C.E.?” 
(2) Paurika, Paficadhikarana, Patafijali, and other early philo- 
sophical dcdéryas—100-300 C.E. 
(3) Varsaganya, who composes a revision of the Sasftitantra— 
ca. 100-300 C.E. 
(4) Followers of Varsaganya, including 
(a) Vindhyavasin, ca. 300-400, who further revises the 
Samkhya system and who carries on a vigorous polemic 
with the Buddhists, and 

(b) Isvarakrsna, ca. 350-450, who composes a definitive 
summary of the Samkhya position, the Samkhyakarikd, 
based on Varsaganya’s Sastitantra but corrected as a result 
of the Buddhist debates and the work of Vindhyavasin. 

(5) Madhava, the “destroyer of Samkhya,” who goes even further 
in adjusting the views of Samkhya to Vaisesika and Buddhist 
thought—ca. 450-500. 

(6) Patafijali’s Yogasiitra and Vyasa’s Yogasiitrabhasya, which pos- 
sibly preserve the older Varsaganya-Vindhyavasin inter- 
pretation of Samkhya in the format of Patafijala-“Samkhya— 
ca. 500-700. 


14 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


This, then, brings us to the threshold of the beginning of technical 
philosophical Samkhya as set forth in the normative account of Iévara- 
krsna’s Samkhyakarika. Up to this point there has been no available 
Samkhya textual tradition, and the historical account has been based 
on reconstructions and occasional references in the ancient literature. 
Nevertheless, we have been able to identify (at least heuristically) 
three phases in the development of Samkhya that roughly parallel the 
three basic meanings of the term, namely, sémkhya as any enumerated 
set or grouping (Tantra); sdmkhya as a method properly employed by 
a discriminating person (Kapila-Tantra); and sdmkhya as an early 
tradition of dualist philosophizing (Sasti-Tantra), which attained a 
normative formulation in the work of Igvarakrsna. 

From this point on there is an identifiable textual tradition, and the 
task of writing a history of Samkhya thought is on somewhat firmer 
ground,”8 


Il. Tue SAmxuya TexTuaL TRADITION 


Because we have now reached the beginning of the Samkhya textual 
tradition, summaries of the contents of which make up the main part 
of the volume, it may be useful, first of all, to present a Checklist of 
Texts and Authors of the Samkhya tradition as a whole and then to 
comment in some detail about the historical development of the textual 
tradition in its various parts. We are dealing, of course, with a sweep 
of intellectual history that covers nearly two thousand years (indeed, 
more than two thousand years if one includes the Proto-Samkhya and 
Pre-Karika traditions already briefly discussed), so it will only be 
possible to discuss the high points of Samkhya’s intellectual history. 
It is important, however, to provide at least a rough outline of the 
history of the tradition so that the philosophical discussions in the sequel 
have an appropriate historical framework. 


CHECKLIST OF TEXTS AND AUTHORS 
TEXT AUTHOR DATE 


(PROTO-SAMKHYA): 


Chandogya Upanisad ? ca. 800-600 B.C.E, 
Katha Upanisad ? 400-200 
Svetésvatara Upanisad > 400-200 
Arthasastra Kautilya 300 (core text) 
Moksadharma (Mahabharata) ? ca. 200 B.C.E.- 
200 G.E. 
Bhagavadgita (Mahabharata) s 200 B.C.E.- 
200 C.E. 
Manusmrti (and other i 200 B.C.E.- 
lawbooks) 200 G.E. 


Buddhacarita ASvaghosa ca. 100 C.E, 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 


15 





TEXT AUTHOR DATE 
Carakasamhita (Ayurveda) Caraka 100-200 C.E. 
Susrutasamhita (Ayur- Susruta 200-300 C.E, 

veda) 
Puranas (Markandeya, ? 300 C.E. and 
Vayu, etc.) after 
? (Kapila, Asuri, and e 
Pajicasikha are 
names frequently 
linked with the 
old Samkhya 
traditions men- 
tioned in the 
above texts) 
(PRE-KARIKA-SAMKHYA ) : 
Sastitantra (either a text Paficasikha (but ca. 100 B.C.E.- 
or systematic format also attributed to 200 C.E. 


for discussing Sam- Kapila and Varsa- 
khya) ganya) 
2 Paurika 
Paficadhikarana 
? Patafijali (other 
than the Patafi- 
jali of the Yoga 
tradition) 
Varsaganya 


2 


Sastitantra (possibly a 
revised version or for- (but also attri- 
mat of an older tradi- buted, as noted 
tion) above, to 
Kapila and 
Pajficasikha) 

Vindhyavasin 

? Madhava (referred 

to as a Samkhya 
heretic by Dig- 
naga) 


ca. 100-300 C.E. 


ca. 300-400 C.E. 
2 


(but probably later 
than Igvarakrsna) 





(KARIKA-SAMKHYA and PATANJALA-SAMKHYA) : 


Samkhyakarika (sk) Isvarakrsna 
* (Yogasiitra) (Patafijali) 
Suvarnasaptati (ss) rs 


(translated by 

Paramartha into 
Chinese) 

Samkhyavrtti (sv) ? 


ca. 350-450 CLE. 

(ca. 400-500 C.E.) 
translated into 
Chinese, 557-569C.E. 
composed ca. 500C.E. 


ca. 500-600 


*A few important Yoga texts are included in the résumé for comparative pur- 
poses. They are not dealt with in detail, however, since another volume in this series 


will be given over to the history of Yoga philosophy. 


16 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


TEXT 


Samkhyasaptativriti (ssv) 

Bhasya (GB) 

* (Samkhyapravacana- 
bhasya) (on Yoga- 
sitra) 

Yuktidipika (xp) 

Javamangala (J) 


* (Yogasittrabhasya- 
vivarana) 
Matharaortti (mM) 


AUTHOR 


° 
Gaudapada 
(Vyasa) 


? 

? 
(Samkara or 
Samkararya) 


(Samkarabhagavat) 


Mathara 


DATE 
ca. 500-600 


ca. 500-600 
(ca. 500-700) (?) 


ca, 600-700 
ca. 700 or later 


(ca. 700 or later) 


ca. 800 or later 


(KARIKA-KAUMUDI-SAMKHYA ; SAMASA-SAMKHYA; and SUTRA-SAMKHYA ) ; 


Samkhyatattvakaumudi 
(STK) 
* (Tattvavaisaradi) 
* (Rajamartanda) 
Tattvasamasasittra 
Kramadipika 
(on Tattvasamasa) 
Samkhyasittra 
Samkhyas itravytti 
Samkhyapravacanabhasya 
(on Samkhyasiitra) 
* (Yogavarttika) 
Samkhyasara 
* (Yogasdrasamgraha) 
Tattvayatharthyadipana 
(on Tattvasamasa) 
Vritisdra 
(on Séamkhyas titra) 
Gunatrayaviveka 
Samkhyacandrika 
(on Samkhyakarika as 
read by Gaudapada) 
Samkhyas iitravytti 
(on Samkhyasiitra)y 
Samkhyatattvavibhakara 
(on Tattvakaumudi) 


Vacaspati Misra 


(Vacaspati Misra) 
(Bhojaraja) 

2 

? 


>? 
Aniruddha 
Vijfianabhiksu 


(Vijfianabhiksu) 
Vijhanabhiksu 
(Vijfianabhiksu) 
Bhavaganesa 


Mahadeva 
Vedantin 

Svayamprakasayati 

Narayanatirtha 


Nagoji Bhatta, or 
Nagesa 
Vamsidhara 


ca. 850 or 975 C.E. 


(ca. 850 or 975 C.E.) 
(ca. 1150) 

ca. 1300-1400 

ca. 1300-1400 


ca. 1400-1500 
ca, 1400-1500 
ca. 1550-1600 
(ca. 1550-1600) 
ca. 1550-1600 
(ca. 1550-1600) 
ca. 1550-1600 
ca. 1650-1700 
ca. 1650-1700 
ca. 1680-1720 
ca, 1700-1750 


ca. 1750 


(KARIKA-KAUMUDI-SAMKHYA; SAMASA-SAMKHYA; and sUTRA-SAMKHYA continued) 


Samkhyatattvavivecana 
(on Tattvasamasay 
Sarvopakarinijika 
(on Tattvasamasa) 
Samkhyas iitravivarana 
(on Tattvasamdsa) 
Samkhyatattvapradipa 
Samkhyataruvasanta 


Simananda 
(or Ksemendra) 
2 


Kaviraja Yati 
Mudumba Nara- 
simhasvamin 


ca. 1700-1900 


ca. 1700-1900 


ca. 1700-1900 


ca. 1700-1900 
ca. 1700-1900 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 


TEXT 


AUTHOR 


17 


DATE 


(RARIKA-SAMKHYA; SAMASA-SAMKHYA; and sOTRA-SAMKHYA continued) : 


Samkhyatativavilasa 
(on Tattvasamasa) 
Samkhyataratiga 
Upodghata 
(on Tattvakaumudiy 
Tattvasamasabhasya 


Tativakaumudinyakhya 
Amala 
(on Samkhyasiitravrtti) 


Avaranavarint 

(on Tattvakaumudi) 
Vriti 

(on Samkhyasiitra) 
Vidvattosint 

(on Tattvakaumudi) 
Piirnima 

(on Tattvakaumudi) 
Tattvabodhint 

(on Samkhyasitraortti) 
Kirandvalit 

(on Tattvakaumudi) 
Samkhyakarikabhasya 


Tativakaumuditika 
Gunamayi 


Vivekapradipa 

(on Samkhyasara) 
Séraprabha 

(on Samkhyasara) 
Samkhyatattvaloka 


Susama 

(on Tattvakaumudi) 
Sarabodhini 

(on Tattvakaumudi) 
Samkhyavasanta 


Abhinavarajalaksmi 
(on Tattvakaumudt) 
Samkhyasiitrabhasya 


Samkhyatattvapradipika 





*Here and following are works of the twentieth century. 


Raghunatha 
Tarkavagisa 
Devatirtha Svamin 
Taranatha 
Tarkavacaspati 
Narendranatha 
Tattvanidhi 
Bharati Yati 
Pramathanatha 
Tarkabhisana 


Krsnanatha 
Nyayapaficanana 
Hariprasada 


Balarama Udasina 


Paficanana Tarka- 
ratna 

Kufijavihari 
Tarkasiddhanta 

Krsnavallabhacarya 


Krsnavallabhacarya 


Rajesvara Sastri 
Dravida 
Ramescandra 
Tarkatirtha 
Ramescandra 
Tarkatirtha 
Kalipada Tarka- 
carya 
Hariharananda 
Aranya 
Harirama Sukla 


Sivanarayana 
Sastrin 

Naraharinatha 

Sitarama Sastri 


Brahmamuni 


Kegava 


available published editions in libraries and bookstores. 


ca. 1800-1900 


ca. 1850 
ca, 1865 


ca, 1871 


ca, 1889 
*ca, 20th century 

(published edi- 
tion, 1900) 

ca, 20th century 
(1902) 

ca. 20th century 
(1905) 

ca. 20th century 
(1907) 

ca, 20th century 
(1919) 

ca. 20th century 
(1919) 

ca, 20th century 
(1924) 

ca. 20th century 
(1933) 

ca, 20th century 
(1932) 

ca. 20th century 
(1935) 

ca. 20th century 


ca. 20th century 


ca. 20th century 
(1936) 

ca, 20th century 
(1937) 

ca. 20th century 
(1940) 

ca, 20th century 
(1946) 

ca. 20th century 
(1953) 

ca. 20th century 
(1955) 

ca. 20th century 
(1969) 


Specific dates indicate 


18 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


TEXT AUTHOR DATE 
Tattvamimamsa Krsna Misra ca. 20th century 
(1969) 
Samkhyaparibhasa ? ca. 20th century 
(1969) 
Samkhyasiddhantaparamarsa MLV. Upadhyaya ca, 20th century 
(1972) 
Samkhyarahasya Sri Rama Pandeya ca. 20th century 


The Checklist begins with a sequence of texts that clearly are not 
Samkhya philosophical texts but represent, rather, the probable intel- 
lectual environments from which the later Samkhya philosophy arose. 
These may be conveniently designated as Proto-Samkhya environ- 
ments. Samkhya philosophy proper begins with what the Checklist 
calls Pre-Karika-Samkhya, including the tradition known as sastitantra, 
older teachers such as Paurika, Paficadhikarana, Varsaganya, Vindhya- 
vasin, and so forth. As already suggested, this was undoubtedly an 
exciting and crucial period in the development of Samkhya philosophy. 
Unfortunately, however, the important details of this formative period 
escape us, for no texts remain and the interpreter is forced to recons- 
truct what might have occurred from stray references and occasional 
quotations in the later literature. 


A. Karika-Samkhya and Péataitjala-Samkhya 


What is available and what perforce must represent the beginning 
of the Samkhya textual tradition are two summary compilations, 
namely, [gvarakrsna’s Samkhyakarika and Patafijali’s Yogasitra, truly 
remarkable works by any measure, but nevertheless reflecting the end 
products of a process of intellectual formulation rather than the process 
itself. These are two victors, as it were, in an intellectual war whose 
memories of specific battles have become hazy, reflecting, on one level, 
the arrogance of victory that attracts fellow travellers who in many 
cases were not part of the original conflict (namely, copyists and com- 
mentators ) and, on another level, the security of peace that inevitably 
allows for endless scholastic recapitulation and a mindless defensive- 
ness that can only finally be dislodged by yet another major conflict. 
Both of these summary compilations have many commentaries attached 
to them, but with the exception of the Yuktidipika and the Tattvakau- 
mudi on the Samkhyakariké and Vyasa’s Bhdsya, Samkara’s Vivarana, 
and Vacaspati’s Tattvavaisaradi on the Yogasitra, all of the commenta- 
ries are less than satisfactory. To be sure, here and there each commen- 
tary offers valuable explanations of basic terms or helpful illustrations 
on a particular issue, but the reader gains an unmistakable sense that 
somehow the commentator neglects to come to grips with the deeper 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 19 


issues or fundamental rationality of the Samkhya system. One possible 
explanation is that the commentators are simply assuming a knowledge 
of the basic system itself and construing their task as one of providing 
notations on this or that point. Another possible explanation, perhaps 
more likely, is that there was a definite break in the tradition at an 
early point and that the commentators are themselves at a loss in under- 
standing the deeper issues of the system. In any case, what comes 
through is that there is a basic and normative Samkhya philosophy, 
concisely yet completely set forth in Isvarakrsna’s Samkhyakarikéd and 
appropriated with a somewhat different inflection in Patafijali’s Yoga- 
siitra for the sake of yogic praxis. The former can be called simply the 
tradition of Karika-Samkhya and the latter, Patafijala-Samkhya. 
From a historical point of view we know very little about this early 
textual period extending from the fourth to the eighth century. The 
precise date of Igvarakrsna’s Samhhyakariké is unknown, but the text 
together with a commentary was translated into Chinese by Para- 
martha during the last phase of his literary activity, 557-569. Little is 
known about Isvarakrsna beyond the passing reference in the Chinese 
commentary to his being a Brahmin of the Kausika family and the 
reference in the Jayamangald that he was a parivrajaka. If we assume 
with Frauwallner and others that a normative Samkhya philosophical 
system was known in the time of Dignaga (ca. 480-540) and that the 
views of a certain Samkhya teacher, Madhava, were judged to be 
heretical from the perspective of the normative system, this would 
suggest that a philosophical school of Samkhya must have been in 
existence well before the middle of the fifth century. Moreover, if we 
accept the evidence of the Yuktidipika that Varsaganya and Vindhya- 
vasin preceded Igvarakrsna, and if we accept Frauwallner’s view 
that Varsaganya worked probably at the beginning of the fourth 
century (ca. 300) or earlier, this would indicate that Tévarakrsna’s 
Samkhyakarika may be reasonably placed in the middle of the fourth 
century (ca. 350). It must be admitted, however, that the date for a 
so-called “normative” Samkhya —~ the term ‘‘normative”’ referring to 
the Samkhya system as reflected in the Sdmkhyakarika — may be older 
than Iévarakrsna. The Samkhyakarika by its own admission is only a 
summary account of an older tradition or text called sastitantra, and it 
could well be the case that Igvarakrsna in his Sémkhyakarika is summariz- 
ing an old normative Samkhya system that predates both Varsaganya 
and Vindhyavasin. In other words, simply because [svarakrsna post- 
dates Varsaganya and Vindhyavasin (as suggested in the Yuktidipika), 
it does not at all follow that his account of the Samkhya is later than 
theirs conceptually. To the contrary, according to the Yuktidipika, 
Igvarakrsna appears to have disagreed with some of the views of Varsa- 
ganya and Vindhyavasin and may have cast his summary account of 
the Samkhya system using an older model. In any case, it appears 


20 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


likely that Isvarakrsna was familiar with the views of Varsaganya and 
Vindhyavasin and, more than that, was familiar with the various 
debates that were taking place in the first centuries of the Common Era 
with the Buddhist and early Vaisesika thinkers, and it is reasonable to 
assume that he was attempting a final definitive statement of the Sam- 
khya position in his Samkhyakarika. Whether other Samkhya teachers 
of the time accepted ISvarakrsna’s account or even considered it a 
faithful summary of the whole system is an open question, although 
there can be no doubt that in subsequent centuries the Sdmkhyakarika 
became the definitive and normative statement of the Samkhya position. 
To place the Karika account of Samkhya in the middle of the fourth 
century, therefore, or to link the normative views of Samkhya with the 
Karikd is only to offer a reasonable interpretation of the extant evidence. 
The normative system may, in fact, be much older, and there must 
have surely been fuller accounts of the normative system than that 
found in the Harika. Current evidence, however, relegates such sugges- 
tions to the realm of scholarly speculation. 

There are eight available commentaries on the Samkhyakarika from 
this early commentarial period, namely, (1) Suvarpasaptati (Para- 
martha’s Chinese translation), (2) Sdamkhyavriti, (3) Samkhyasaptativrtti, 
(4) Gaudapada’s Bhdsya, (5) Yuktidipika, (6) Fayamangald, (7) Mathara- 
oytti, and (8) Vacaspati Misra’s Sdmkhyatativakaumudi. Reliable dates 
are only available for the first and last texts on the list. As already 
mentioned, Paramartha’s Chinese translation of the Suvarnasoptati 
was completed by the middle of the sixth century (557-569). It is 
also known that the famous Vacaspati Misra did his work in the ninth 
or tenth century (either 841 or 976).° Apart from these two approxi- 
mations, unfortunately, there is little reliable evidence for dating the 
other commentaries, although there are suggestive hints here and 
there. The Yuktidipika for example, probably precedes Vacaspati 
Misra, for the latter quotes some verses regarding the makeup of the 
sastitantra, verses that are also quoted in the opening section of the 
Yuktidipika. Moreover, the Yuktidipikd quotes both Dignaga  (ca., 
480-540) and Bhartrhari (ca., fifth to early sixth century) but does 
not seem to quote directly Dharmakirti (ca., 650), thus making it 
plausible to suggest that it is a work of the beginning of the seventh 
century (ca., 600). Regarding Gaudapada, if one accepts that the 
Gaudapada of the Bhdsya on the Harika is the same as the early Vedan- 
tin Gaudapada of the Mandikya-Karikd, a sixth-century date for the 
Bhasya is not implausible. The problem, however, is that the views in 
the two texts attributed to Gaudapada diverge widely, although it 
must be conceded that Gaudapada may well have avoided expressing 
his own philosophical views when composing his elementary commen- 
tary on the Samkhyakarikd. There is insufficient evidence, unfortunately, 
to make a clear judgment either way. 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 21 


Regarding the Matharavrtti, it was suggested long ago by Belvalkar 
that it is the original commentary on the Karika and the one on which 
the Chinese commentary (Suvarnasaptati) was based. Moreover, 
Belvalkar suggested that the Bhdsya is simply a plagiarized version of 
the Matharavrtti. This would make the Matharavrtti the oldest com- 
mentary on the Karikd. Unfortunately, however, Belvalkar’s claims 
have been challenged for a variety of reasons including (a) the Méatha- 
ravrtti quotes the Bhdgavatapurana and the Visnupurana, both of which 
are later texts; (b) the Matharavrtti’s discussion of Samkhya episte- 
mology in verses 4 through 6 of the Karika presupposes a number of 
distinctions regarding the nature of inference that appear to come from 
later Nyaya technical discussions; and (c) perhaps most telling, in 
almost every instance in which the Mafharavriti has common content 
with other Karikd commentaries, the discussion in the Matharavrtti 
is fuller and more systematic.*! These are not by any means conclusive 
arguments, but it is difficult to avoid the judgment that the Mathara- 
vrtti is a very late commentary (possibly ninth century or later) and 
represents an explicit attempt to expand and systematize the older 
commentarial tradition. With the question whether there were one 
or two Gaudapadas, so also here the evidence is insufficient to warrant 
an unambiguous conclusion. 

The existence of the commentaries Saémkhyavrtti and Sdamkhyasaptati- 
ott, recently edited by E. A. Solomon (Ahmedabad, Gujarat Univer- 
sity, 1973), only exacerbates the problem of dating the various Karika 
commentaries.*? Solomon argues that the Samkhyavriti is the original 
commentary upon which the Suvarnasapiati, the Sdmkhyasaptativrtti, 
the Bhdsya, and the Matharavriti are based, and she has based her con- 
clusion on a painstaking and valuable comparative analysis of all the 
commentaries on the 4rikd.33 What Solomon has demonstrated, 
however, is a remarkable common core of content that appears in all 
five works. On the basis of this evidence one can plausibly argue for 
(a) the priority of the Sdmkhyavriti, (b) the priority of the Suvarna- 
saptati, or (c) some sort of original Ur-commentary upon which all 
five commentaries are based. Given the present state of the evidence, 
it is impossible to choose any one of these alternatives as being better 
than the other two, or, to put the matter somewhat differently, prob- 
lems relating to the common content in the various Karikd commen- 
taries have not yet been satisfactorily solved. 

Finally, regarding the Jayamangald, it has been argued that it pre- 
cedes the Sdmkhyatattvakaumudi, for Vacaspati Misra refers to an alter- 
native explanation of the s¢ddhis in verse 51 of the Aarikd that is re- 
markably similar to the explanation of the Jayamangala. Moreover, the 
FJayamangala is possibly somewhat later than the Yuktidipikd, for the 
Jayamangalad refers to an interpretation of the expression “kdranakarya- 
vibhagat” in Karika 15 that mirrors a similar view in the Yuktidipika.*4 


22 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


It may be noted, furthermore, that the Fayamangald (in verse 5) ap- 
pears to preserve the old Samkhya view of the “sevenfold inference” 
(saptadhaé sambandha) (which is also found, by the way, in the Saémkhya- 
vrtti). This is hardly evidence for suggesting an early date, however, 
because the JFayamangalaé may well be a late text that preserves some 
older views. Kaviraj has suggested, interestingly, that the author of 
the Fayamangald, a certain Samkara, or Samkararya, may be the same 
as a Hindu author of commentaries (one of which is called Fayamangala) 
on the Kamandakanitiséra and Kamasiira from the fourteenth century. 
This suggestion is undercut, however, by the benedictory verse of the 
Fayamangala (“ ... lokottaravddinam pranamya munim’’), which suggests 
that the author of the Fayamangala was a Buddhist. Clearly, then, the 
date and authorship of the Fayamangald remains something of a mystery 
in Samkhya studies, although its anteriority to the Samkhyatattvakaumudi 
and its posteriority to the Yuktidipika is perhaps not an unreasonable 
suggestion. 

Pulling together these various hints and suggestions, then, it can be 
reasonably asserted that the commentarial tradition on the Karika 
extends from about the beginning of the sixth century, assuming that 
the Suvarnasaptati that Paramartha translated had been known in the 
tradition for some time prior to his work, through the ninth or tenth 
century (the time of Vacaspati Misra’s Sdmkhyatattvakaumudi). The 
Samkhyavriti, Samkhyasaptativriti, and Bhasya are probably contempo- 
rary or slightly later than the Suvarnasaptati. The Yuktidipika and 
Jaamangala are most likely products of the seventh century with the 
JFavamangala being slightly later than the Yuktidipikad. Finally the 
Matharavriti appears to be a late expansion of the Suvarnasaptati, 
Samkhyaortti, Siamkhyasaptativrtti, and Bhasya and may have been compos- 
ed in the ninth century (or later). 

The situation regarding date and authorship for the early textual 
tradition of Patafijala-Samkhya is even murkier than that for the 
Kariké tradition. The Yogasiitra is obviously a compilation of older 
sitra collections, and it is highly unlikely that the extant ordering of the 
Sitras is reliable. We know nothing about Patafijali, and attempts to 
link the Patafijali of the Yogasiiras with the grammarian Patafijali of 
the Mahabhasya are generally unconvincing. Keith may well have been 
correct in suggesting that the appearance of the Sdmkhyakarika may 
have been the occasion for an attempt by the followers of Yoga to 
systematize their own older traditions. The so-called Bhdasya of Vyasa 
is also a mystery. The name “Vyasa” is obviously incorrect, and the 
highly condensed and aphoristic Bhdsya is hardly an exhaustive com- 
mentary in the traditional sense. 

The Yogasitrabhasyavivarana, attributed to the great Vedantin Sam- 
kara, is, if authentic, a most important text on Yoga. Unfortunately, 
its authenticity is not yet established.** It is only with Vacaspati 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 23 


Misra’s Taitvavaiséradi in the ninth or tenth century that one reaches a 
historically identifiable text. As already mentioned, the views of 
Patafijala Samkhya appear to be similar to the views of Varsaganya 
and Vindhyavasin, and it may well be the case that the early textual 
tradition of Yoga philosophy represents their particular school of 
Samkhya philosophizing.? 

These early centuries of Samkhya textual tradition saw a series of 
external invasions (the Hinas) and internal rivalries in India that 
had, by the middle of the sixth century, resulted in the disappearance 
of the Gupta political consolidation and ushered in centuries of feudal 
regionalism. This decentralization of political power was accompanied 
by the progressive decline of Buddhist traditions (as described, for 
example, by Hsiian Tsang in the seventh century) and the progressive 
strengthening of Hindu orthodoxy and rigid social stratification (the 
caste system). This trend toward a narrow orthodoxy was, however, 
tempered by popular syncretistic religion (the Tantra, Saktism, and 
so forth) and exuberant bhakti spirituality (beginning in the south by 
the seventh century) that provided some personal relief from the pon- 
derous presence that the established order was becoming. We know 
that other systems of Indian philosophy (Nyaya, Mimamsa, early 
Vedanta, the philosophy of language of Bhartrhari, and so forth) were 
undergoing vigorous development, and one part of that development 
in each case involved polemical encounter with Samkhya philosophy, 
but little remains of the Samkhya response, if indeed there was a Sam- 
khya response. 

Although Karika-Samkhya and Patafijala-Samkhya are available 
only through the summary compilations of Isvarakrsna and Patafijali 
(together with the commentaries already mentioned), there is suffi- 
cient evidence to indicate that both were systematic philosophical 
systems. They may be summarized as follows: 


KARIKA-SAMKHYA: 


1. Ontology: A dualism of two all-pervasive ultimate principles, 
namely, pure consciousness (pfurusa), construed pluralisti- 
cally, and one primordial materiality (milaprakrti). 

(A) Primordial materiality is made up of three constituent 
processes (guna), that is, intelligibility (sattva), activity 
(rajas), and inertia (tamas). 

(B) Because of the all-pervasive copresence of the two ulti- 
mate principles, the three constituent processes of pri- 
mordial materiality undergo a continuing transformation 
(parinama) and combination (samghdata) for the sake of 
consciousness (purusdrtha). Viewed analytically, the 
various transformations and combinations of primordial 
materiality are simply parts of a totally functioning 


24 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


whole. Viewed synthetically, primordial materiality 
(with its constituents) is construed as a basic unmanifest 
material cause (kdrana, avyakta) from which twenty- 
three preexistent effects become manifest (vyakta); they 
are (1) intellect; (2) egoity; (3-7) a group of five subtle 
elements, all of which are described as being both crea- 
tive (prakrti) and created (vikrti); (8-23) a group of 
sixteen additional emergents, including mind, the five 
sense capacities, the five action capacities, and the five 
gross elements described as being only created (vikrt.). 
The five subtle elements, the five sense-capacities, the 
five action capacities and mind emerge from and make 
up the structure of egoity. Egoity emerges from intellect. 
Gross elements emerge from the five subtle elements 
and together constitute the natural body and the pheno- 
menal world. 


2. Epistemology: A critical realism based upon three distinct instru- 
ments of knowledge (framana), that is, perception (drsta), 
inference (anumdna), and reliable verbal testimony (&ptavacana). 


(A) 


(B) 


(C) 


Awareness (jiiéna) is a fundamental predisposition 
(bhava) characteristic of intellect whereby the intellect 
assumes the form of that which is to be known (termed 
buddhivrtti, or intellectual operations) assisted by the self- 
awareness (abhimdna) of egoity, the intentionality (in 
the sense of purposive intellectual activity [samkalpa] ) 
of the mind, and the various mere sensings (dlocanamdatra) 
by the sense capacities in immediate perception. These 
mere sensings arise from present or immediate intellec- 
tual operations, but the intentionality of mind, the self- 
awareness of egoity and the basic determinations of 
intellect encompass the operations of past, present, and 
future (including, for example, memory, imagination, 
fantasy, dreaming, and so forth). 

Awareness by means of the three instruments of knowl- 
edge issues in reflective discerning (adhyavasdya) by the 
intellect, which is possible because of the presence of 
consciousness, which, though distinct from the intellect, 
is nevertheless an essential catalyst in the process of the 
occurrence of awareness. 

Although inferences are in some sense always related to 
perception, it is nevertheless possible to make valid in- 
ferences regarding matters that are imperceptible in 
principle. Such inferences are called sdményatodrsta and 
make possible the inference of the two ultimate unmani- 
fest principles of purusa and prakrti. The inference of 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 25 


primordial materiality is based upon (1) the presence 
of the three constituents in both the unmanifest and 
manifest transformations of primordial materiality; and 
(2) a corollary observation that the transformations 
and combinations of the constituents, whether constru- 
ed analytically or synthetically, must be in a rela- 
tion of preexistent identity with an original “material 
cause.” The inference of purusa is based upon the need 
for a catalytic consciousness, itself distinct from intellect 
and primordial materiality, but the presence of which 
is essential for the occurrence of the awareness function 
of intellect and the transformations of primordial mate- 
riality. The former inference (namely, the inference to 
primordial materiality) provides the realism in Samkhya 
epistemology. The latter inference (namely, the infer- 
ence to purusa) provides a critical basis for Samkhya 
epistemology in the absence of which Samkhya would 
be a reductive materialism unable to account for its own 
rationality. 


3. Psychology|Physiology: An organic psycho-physiology in which 
the polarity of mind-body or thought-extension is interpreted 
as a polarity between, on the one hand, a detachable “subtle 
body” capable of transmigration and rebirth, and on the other 
hand, a one-time-only “gross body” born of father and mother. 


(A) 
(B) 


(C) 


(D) 


(E) 


There is a subtle, material “internal organ” (antahkarana) 
made up of intellect, egoity, and mind. 

The internal organ is within a larger framework of a 
thirteenfold instrument made up of the threefold internal 
organ together with the five sense capacities and the five 
action capacities. 

The thirteenfold instrument together with the five subtle 
elements make up the eighteenfold subtle body (linga- 
Sarira), which transmigrates and undergoes a sequence 
of rebirths impelled by the effects of varying predisposi- 
tions that réside in the intellect and that represent the 
karmic heritage of the organism. 

The eighteenfold subtle body is reborn sequentially in 
one-time-only “gross bodies” (sthilaSarira) produced 
genetically by father and mother. 

Common to the organism as a whole is a sequence of 
five vital breaths (paficavayu), namely, prana, apdna, udana, 
samdna, and vydna, which regulate such varied functions 
as respiration, swallowing, speaking, digestion, excre- 
tion, sexual activity, circulation of bodily fluids, and 
the general homeostasis of the organism. 


26 


4, 


wo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Phenomenology (meant here only in the sense of the apparent 

everyday world of ordinary experience): A dynamic, projec- 

tive phenomenalism based upon a network of fundamental 
predispositions that generate the everyday, phenomenal world 
of ordinary experience (upabhoga) made up of fifty categories 

(padarthas) and referred to as the “‘intellectual creation” (pratyaya- 

Sarga). 

(A) There are eight fundamental predispositions (bhavas), four 
of which are sdtivika: meritorious behavior (dharma), 
knowledge (jfidna), nonattachment (vairdgya), and power 
(aisvarya); and four of which are tdémasa, the opposites of 
the above four: adharma, ajfidna, avairdgya, and anaisvarya. 
All these eight predispositions reside in intellect. The 
projective force of these fundamental predispositions is 
determined by the activities of the organism in past lives 
and determines in turn the trajectory of the organism in 
present and future lives. 

(B) In any given rebirth the projective force of the funda- 
mental predispositions results in a particular constellation 
of categories that provides a sort of grid through which 
an organism experiences its world. The particular constel- 
lation of categories for a given organism is made up of 
five kinds of misconception (viparyaya), twenty-eight kinds 
of dysfunction (afakti), nine kinds of contentment (tusfi), 
and eight kinds of perfection (siddhi). 

(C) The projective force of the fundamental predispositions, 
together with the subtle body, generates not only the hu- 
man realm but also an eightfold divine or cosmic realm 
and a fivefold animal and plant realm. Taken together, 
the projected realms are referred to as the external world 
(bhautikasarga), with sattva predominating in the divine 
realm, rajas in the human realm, and tamas in the animal 
and plant realm. 

Ethics: A rational renunciation of ordinary experience based 

upon a psychological hedonism that generates an awareness that 

the entire pleasure-pain continuum must finally be overcome. 

(A) The experience of frustration (duhkha) is threefold: inter- 
nal or personal (whether mental or physical) (adhyatmika), 
external (whether from other persons, animals, objects 
in the world, and so forth) (ddhibhautika), and celestial 
(whether from supernatural beings, astrological pheno- 
mena, cosmic forces, and so forth) (adhidaivika). 

(B) Such frustration is inescapable in ordinary experience and 
generates the desire to know (jijfiasd) the means for over- 
coming it. 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 27 


(C) Frustration is an experience of discomfort and may be 
contrasted with two other typical feelings that occur in 
ordinary experience, that is, satisfaction (sukha) and con- 
fusion (moha). Satisfaction is an experience of restful 
tranquillity (Santa), and confusion is an experience of 
bewilderment or alienation (miadha). All three experiences 
occur in the specific (vifesa) contexts of ordinary life, 
but it is the experience of frustration that arouses the 
faculty of awareness (the intellect) to discriminate the 
reasons for frustration and to pursue the means for over- 
coming it. 

(D) Reflection reveals that the satisfaction-frustration-confu- 
sion continuum refers to three constituent dimensions 
that permeate the manifest world, namely, reflective 
intelligibility (prakhya, prakafa), externalizing activity 
(pravrtti, cala), and reifying inertia (sthiti, dvarana), or, 
in other words, sativa, rajas, and tamas. 

(E) Further reflection (by means of perception, inference, and 
reliable authority) reveals that the three constituents 
together make up primordial materiality in its manifest 
and unmanifest aspects. 

(F) To overcome frustration, therefore, it is necessary to 
transcend the transformations and combinations of pri- 
mordial materiality altogether (including even reflective 
intelligibility or sativa). 

(G) The ethical goal of Samkhya, then, is to discriminate the 
presence of a transcendent consciousness, distinct from 
primordial materiality and its three constituents, and 
thereby to attain a radical isolation (kaivalya) or liberation 
from ordinary human experience. 


PATANJALA-SAMKHYA 


1. Ontology: Basically the same as Karika-Samkhya with three 
important exceptions, namely: 

(A) Intellect, egoity, and mind are brought together into a 
single all-pervasive cognitive faculty called awareness 
(citta). 

(B) The notions of transformation and combination are inter- 
preted in terms of momentary manifestations or aspects 
of primordial materiality that exhibit changes in external 
property (dharma), present functioning (/aksana), and state 
of development (avastha).38 

(C) The existence of God is admitted, although the Lord is not 
considered to be an additional principle of the system. 
Rather, He is a particular kind of purusa. 


28 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Epistemology: Basically the same as Karika-Samkhya, although 
the process of awareness is called cittavrtti instead of buddhiortti 
or antahkaranavrtti. 

Psychology; Physiology: Basically the same as Karika-Samkhya 
with the important exception that there is no subtle, transmig- 
rating body. Because the citia is all-pervasive, a subtle body is 
unnecessary. 

Phenomenology: Similar in intent to Karika-Samkhya, but the 
explanatory mode is dramatically different. Whereas Karika- 
Samkhya develops its phenomenology using the notion of the 
eight predispositions and the fifty categories (misconceptions, 
incapacities, contentments, and perfections), Patafijala-Samkhya 
develops its phenomenology around the notion of the five cogni- 
tive conditions (vrtti) of awareness, namely, knowledge (pramdana) 
error (viparyaya), conceptual construction (vikalpa), sleep (nidra), 
and memory (smrii). These conditions may be afflicted (lista) 
or unafflicted (aklista). ‘The former conditions generate latent 
dispositions (vdsand, samskara) and karmic residues (karmdSaya) 
that exacerbate “ignorance” (avidya) and progressively lead to 
further frustration, rebirth, and transmigration. The latter condi- 
tions generate latent dispositions that counteract the afflicted 
dispositions, gradually destroy the residues that exacerbate igno- 
rance, and progressively lead to the discriminative realization 
(vivekakhyati) of the distinction between sattva and purusa. Fin- 
ally, all cognitive conditions (both afflicted and unafflicted) 
must be stopped, for Patafijala-Samkhya defines the term ‘‘yoga”’ 
as “‘the cessation of the cognitive conditions of awareness” (citta- 
urttinirodha). 

Ethics: Basically the same ethical goal as Karika-Samkhya, 
although the methodology for attaining the goal is different. 
Whereas Karika-Samkhya appears to recommend a progressive 
sequence of reflective discriminations that naturally or sponta- 
neously leads to the desired goal of liberation, Patafijala-Samkhya 
stresses a systematic and rigorous meditative praxis that is a 
prerequisite for reflective discrimination. To some extent the 
difference is only one of perspective, with Karika-Samkhya focus- 
ing on the final stages of reflective discrimination and Patafjala- 
Samkhya focusing on the requisite preparatory discipline. On 
another level, however, the difference appears to relate to diver- 
gent interpretations with respect to the role and function of the 
intellect and the cognitive faculty. Whereas Karika-Samkhya 
focuses primarily on the “‘intellect” dimension of buddhi Patanjala 
Samkhya focuses primarily on the “will” dimension of ciéta. In 
Patafijala-Samkhya the yogin practices personal austerities (tapas), 
recitation and study (svddhydya), and devotion to God (isvaraprani- 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 29 


dhana) in order to discipline body and mind (kriydyoga). The 
yogin also pursues a systematic eightfold program of discipline 
(yogangas) made up of external and internal cleansing (yama 
and niyama), controlled posture (asana), controlled breathing 
(pranayama), the restraint of capacities (pratyahara), focused 
concentration (dharand), continuous meditation (dhydna), and 
the cultivation of altered states of awareness (samddhi). Pataii- 
jala-Samkhya provides detailed accounts of the various levels 
of altered states of awareness (including savitarka, savicara, 
sdnanda, and sdsmita), referred to as “altered states of awareness 
that have content or support” (samprajfidtasamadhi), and Pataii- 
jala-Samkhya also provides an account ofa final samadhi that 
transcends all content or support (asamprajiidtasamadhi). Accord- 
ing to Patafijala~“Samkhya, the attainment of the advanced levels 
of awareness requires continuous and rigorous effort (abhydsa) 
and the total nonattachment (vairégya) to ordinary experience. 
Also, devotion to God is strongly recommended, since the object 
of devotion (namely, the transcendent consciousness of the Lord) 
is the perfect model or exemplar of what the yogin is seeking to 
achieve in his own discipline. 


B. Karikd-Kaumudi-Samkhya 


By the eighth and ninth centuries a crucial development had occurred 
that paradoxically both salvaged and destroyed the old Samkhya philo- 
sophy, namely, the emergence of Advaita Vedanta in the work of Sam- 
kara and his successors.®® Vedanta salvaged and destroyed Samkhya 
philosophy in much the same manner as Christian theology in the medi- 
eval period both salvaged and destroyed Plato and Aristotle. That is 
to say, while polemically regretting the errors of the older tradition, the 
newly emerging tradition unashamedly stole many of the essential fea- 
tures of the conceptual structure of the heretics. Vedanta, stripped of 
its scripture-based monistic brahman-diman, is in many ways a warmed- 
over Samkhya ontology and epistemology spooned up with the philo- 
sophical methodology of the old negative dialectic of the Madhyamika 
Buddhists. What Samkara could not intellectually tolerate, however, 
was the Samkhya notion of an independent material (pradhdna or pra- 
kytt) apart from consciousness (purusa), and even more difficult to 
accept was the crucial role for inference apart from scriptural authority 
that the Samkhya notion of materiality permitted. Samkhya had never 
denied reliable verbal testimony (dtavacana or Sruti) as a legitimate and 
important means of knowing, but Samkhya clearly gave pride of place 
in knowing to independent reasoning, even in the area of sampagdarsana 
and adhyatmavidyd (that is to say, in the area of ultimate truth and the 
science of liberation). 


30 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


One has the impression in reading Samkara’s Brahmasiitrabhdsya that 
the author is not especially vexed by the naive realism and the neat, 
logical distinctions of Nyaya, or by the quaint atomism of Vaisesika, 
or by the action-orientation of Mimamsa, or by the harmless devotion 
of the theological bhakti enthusiasts. The genuine enemy is the pradhana- 
karanavada (namely, the Samkhya), because Samkhya offers an alter- 
native account of the role and function of philosophy on precisely the 
same ground and for precisely the same purpose (liberation) as does 
Vedanta.” To allow Samkhya to stand is to threaten the entire edifice 
of the received tradition. Moreover, as Samkara himself points out, 
to demolish Samkhya is to demolish by implication the other systems 
of Indian thought that harbor the pretence of the adequacy of inde- 
pendent reasoning. 


... Wwe have taken special trouble to refute the pradhana doctrine, 
without paying much attention to the atomic and other theories. 
These latter theories, however, must likewise be refuted, as they also 
are opposed to the doctrine of Brahman being the general cause. . . . 
Hence the Siitrakara formally extends, in the above Sitra, the refu- 
tation already accomplished of the pradhana doctrine to all similar 
doctrines which need not be demolished in detail after their protago- 
nist, the pradhdna doctrine, has been so completely disposed of. 


Apart from this crucial disagreement, however, Vedanta adopts many 
of the Samkhya conceptualizations (with, of course, numerous varia- 
tions in nuance): the theory of causation (which becomes vivartavdda 
with the collapse of the Samkhya dualism), the notion of the three gunas, 
the importance of the science of liberation and nondiscrimination 
(aviveka), the notion of a subtle body, technical terms such as ‘“‘buddhi,” 
“‘ahamkara,” ‘“‘manas,’ and so forth. 

This tendency of Vedanta to absorb the conceptual structure of 
Samkhya had the double effect of, on one level, decisively destroying 
the old Samkhya dualism (through the refutation of the Samkhya 
notion of primordial materiality on the basis of independent reasoning ), 
but, on another level, of reviving and refurbishing many of the old 
Samkhya notions. This latter effect helps to explain why an important 
thinker such as Vacaspati Misra, composed a major commentary on 
the Samkhyakarika (the Samkhyatattvakaumudi) in the ninth or tenth 
century. Vacaspati, of course, composed a variety of commentaries on 
many of the older schools of Indian philosophy (including Nyaya, 
Mimamsa, Yoga, and Vedanta), but his work on Samkhya is especially 
significant in the sense that it triggered a subsequent commentarial 
Samkhya tradition that reaches down to the present day and that pro- 
bably would otherwise not have existed. In other words, whereas his 
work on Nyaya, Mimamsa, and Vedanta represents an important con- 
tribution to each of these systems, his work on Samkhya actually inau- 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 31 


gurated an independent tradition. As the Checklist clearly shows, many 
of the Samkhya texts after the tenth century are based on VAcaspati’s 
reading of the Saémkhyakarika. This is true everywhere in India in recent 
centuries but especially so in Bengal, where many pandits refuse to 
take the Samkhyasiitra or Vijfianabhiksu’s work as serious Samkhya texts. 
Vamsidhara’s Tattvavibhakara, Kaviraja Yati’s Tattvapradipa, Sri 
Bharati Yati’s Tattvakaumudivyakhyd, Nyayapaficanana’s Avaranavarini, 
Balarama Udiasina’s Vidvattosini, Paficanana Tarkaratna’s Purnimd, 
Krsnavallabhacarya’s Kirandvali, Ramescandra Tarkatirtha’s Gunamayi, 
Harirama Sukla’s Susamé, Sivanarayana Sastri’s Sarabodhini, and Sita- 
rama Sastri’s Abhinavardjalaksmi, works ranging from the 17th to the 
20th centuries, are all important later texts that interpret the Samkhya 
system through Vacaspati Miéra’s Tattvakaumudi. 

What must be noted, however, is that Vacaspati’s reading of Samkhya 
is more than a little influenced by the emerging Advaita Vedanta and 
its characteristic network of intellectual issues, and in this sense it should 
be distinguished from Pre-Karika-Samkhya, Karika-Samkhya and 
Patafijala-Samkhya. For convenience it can be designated simply as 
Karika-Kaumudi-Samkhya, that is to say, the Sdmkhyakarika as read 
through Vacaspati’s Tattvakaumudi. 

Some of the characteristic emphases in Vacaspati Misra’s inter- 
pretation may be outlined as follows (using the same format that was 
used earlier in the outlines of Karika-Samkhya and Patafijala-Sam- 


khya): 


KARIKA-KAUMUDI-SAMKHYA: 


1. Ontology: Whereas Vacaspati closely follows Karika-Samkhya, he 
is much more concerned with discussing the problem of the rela- 
tion between intellect (as a manifestation of primordial materia- 
lity) and consciousness. According to Vacaspati, a theory of 
reflection (pratibimba) is required in order to explain how intel- 
lect is able to have experience. Consciousness becomes reflected 
in the intellect, thus making it appear as if the intellect were 
conscious. Experience actually occurs only in intellect, but it 
appears as if consciousness experiences, because its image (chdya) 
has become reflected in the intellect (see summary of Taitva- 
kaumudi under Karikés 5 and 37). Such a theory of reflection is 
only hinted at in the Karikd itself (and the other early commen- 
taries), and it is undoubtedly the Vedanta preoccupation with 
the problem of consciousness and its reflection that explains 
Vacaspati’s concern about the issue. 

2. Epistemology: Again, Vacaspati closely follows Karika-Samkhya, 
but there are at least two important extensions beyond what is 
found in the K@rika itself (and the other early commentaries). 
First, regarding the problem of inference, Vacaspati discusses 


32 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the threefold inference in terms of positive (vita) and exclusion- 
ary (avita) types, placing both parvavat and sdmdanyatodrsta 
under vita, and Sesavat under avita. Vacaspati’s discussion shows 
a familiarity with logical problems and technical logical issues 
that arose considerably later than the time of the K@rika itself, 
problems and issues that were especially prominent in Nyaya 
philosophy and were becoming prominent as well in the various 
traditions of Vedanta philosophy after Samkara. Second, re- 
garding the problem of perception, Vacaspati argues that the 
sense capacities are only capable of mere sensing (dlocanamdtra), 
for they apprehend sense objects without any mental order- 
ing or verbal characterization (nirvikalpa), whereas the mind 
performs the task of ordering and verbalizing (savikalpa) the 
impressions of the senses. Such a distinction had perhaps been 
hinted at in the earlier texts, but it was Vacaspati who spelled 
out this important distinction, 

3.  Psychology/Physiology: Vacaspati accepts the basic psychology/ 
physiology of the Xariké and indicates specifically that the subtle 
body is made up of the five subtle elements, which accompany 
the thirteenfold instrument in the cycle of transmigration. 

4. Phenomenology: Wacaspati provides no new explanations of the 
predispositions or the intellectual creation, although he indicates 
that the five misconceptions, (tamas, moha, maha&moha, tdmisra, 
and andhatdmisra) of the intellectual creation are equivalent to 
the five afflictions (Klefas) (avidya, asmitd, raga, dvesa, and abhi- 
nivesa) of Patafijala-Samkhya. 

5. Ethics: Again, Vacaspati closely follows the presentation of 
Karika-Samkhya, but throughout he appears to be casting Sam- 
khya notions into a Vedanta idiom. Vacaspati begins his com- 
mentary with a clear allusion to the Svetasvatara Upanisad, indi- 
cating thereby that the Samkhya concern for overcoming frustra- 
tion has a firm Upanisadic base. Moreover, in his interpreta- 
tion of the Samkhya rejection of Vedic means for the allevia- 
tion of frustration (under Karika 2), Vacaspati is quick to point 
out that only the ritual portion of the Veda is intended, and in 
his discussion of the perfections (under K@rika 51) he correlates 
Samkhya meditational techniques with the Vedanta triad hear- 
ing (Sravana), considering (manana), and meditating (nididhyd- 
sana). 


CQ. Samdsa-Samkhya 
Yet another independent tradition of Samkhya philosophy is that 


found in a cryptic little text entitled Samkhyatativasamasa.* Because it 
is not mentioned in Madhava’s Sarvadarsanasamgraha (from the four- 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 33 


teenth century) and because none of its commentaries appears to be 
much earlier than the medieval period, it is usually assigned a late date 
(that is to say, some time after the fourteenth century). Max Miller, 
however, suspected that it may well be much earlier, and more recently 
Frauwalliner has described the Samkhya of Varsaganya as having close 
parallels with the Tativasamasa. Some of the notions of the Tattvasamasa 
(for example, the five sources of action and the presentation of mate- 
riality in terms of eight generative principles) are either not mentioned 
in the Sdmkhyakariké or are explained in a different manner, whereas 
the presentation of Samkhya as found in the Yuktidipikd, an authenti- 
cally older Samkhya text, does mirror to some extent the Tattvasamasa.8 
Possibly, then, the Tativasamaésa may represent an older formulation. 
In any case, the Tattvasamdsa does have a modern (largely Vedantin) 
commentarial tradition reaching from the fourteenth or fifteenth cen- 
tury down to the present day, including such texts as the Kramadipika 
(possibly of the fourteenth century or even earlier), the Tativayatharth- 
yadipana of BhavaganeSa (sixteenth century), the Sarvopakdrinitika 
(eighteenth or nineteenth century), the Samkhyasiitravivarana (eight- 
eenth or nineteenth century), the Sdamkhyatativavivecana (eighteenth 
or nineteenth century), and the Sdmkhyatativavildsa (nineteenth 
century ). 

According to Max Miiller, the Tattvasamdsa has been especially popu- 
lar among the panditas of Varanasi and presents Samkhya philosophy 
in amanner notably different from the traditions of Karika-Samkhya, 
Patafijala-Samkhya, and Karika-Kaumudi-Samkhya. The important 
differences may be outlined as follows: 


SAMASA-SAMKHYA: 


1. Ontology: There is a distinct difference in emphasis. Whereas 
the Karika begins by calling attention to the three kinds of frus- 
tration and then moves on to discuss the instruments of knowl- 
edge and the various inferences for establishing primordial 
materiality and consciousness, the séifras of the Tattvasamdsa begin 
with the ontology and cosmology of Samkhya (sétras 1-6). Ins- 
tead of discussing primordial materiality and its seven basic 
emergents (intellect, etc.), which are described in the Karika 
as being both creative (prakrti) and created (vikyti), the Tattva- 
samasa refers to “eight prakrtis” (siitra 1), ‘sixteen emergents” 
(siitra 2), and “consciousness” (purusa) (siitra 3). The presen- 
tation of the Taltvasamdsa calls to mind older nonphilosophical 
or popular accounts of Samkhya such as those found in the Maha- 
bharata (the Gita and the Moksadharma) and the Puranas. More- 
over, in sitras 5 and 6 reference is made to the creation or emer- 
gence of the manifest world (safcara) and its periodic dissolution 
(pratisaficara), again calling to mind older, cosmological account 


34 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of Samkhya common to popular texts such as the Puranas and 
the Mdnavadharmasastra. 

Epistemology: Except for one brief reference (siitra 23) to the 
three instruments of knowledge, epistemological notions are not 
enumerated in the Tatlvasamdésa. This may simply mean, of 
course, that the compiler of the sitras is presupposing the fully 
developed Samkhya epistemology, but it may also mean that 
the Tattvasamasa form of Samkhya represents an older, cosmo- 
logical form of Samkhya that did not concern itself with episte- 
mological issues. 

Psychology/Physiology: The Tattvasamasa mentions none of the 
characteristic psychological notions of Karika-Samkhya apart 
from a reference to the five “breaths” (vdyus or pranas). Instead, 
it introduces a set of distinctively new notions that are not men- 
tioned at allin the Karika account of Samkhya, namely, the 
“five functions of the buddhi”’ (abhibuddhi, t.e., vyavasdya, abhimana, 
iccha, kartavyata, and kriyd), the ‘five sources of action’? (karma- 
yoni, ice., dhrti, Sraddha, sukha, vividisa, and avividisd), and the “‘five 
essences of action’? (karmdtman, i.e., vaikdrika, taijasa, bhiitadi, 
sdnumana, and niranumdna). 

Phenomenology: The Tattvasamasa refers to the “five miscon- 
ceptions” (avidy@), the “twenty-eight dysfunctions” (aSakti), 
the “nine contentments” (dust), and the “eight perfections” 
(siddhi)together with the ‘“‘ten principal topics’ (dasamitlikar- 
thas), thus making a total of sixty topics, which evidently repre- 
sent the enumerated components of the Samkhya sastitantra (“the 
system of sixty topics”). The Tattvasamaésa then introduces the 
expression “‘anugrahasarga’’ (siitra 19), which means something 
like “‘the supporting creation” and is probably synonomous with 
the more common expression “‘fratyayasarga”’ (or “‘intellectual 
creation’’). Interestingly, the expression ‘“‘anugrahasarga’’ is found 
in a number of Puranic texts, again suggesting that the Tattva- 
samasa may represent an old cosmological form of Samkhya. 
Ethics: Unlike Karika-Samkhya, which apparently refers only 
to one kind of bondage and one kind of release, the Tattvasamdsa 
refers to a “threefold bondage’? (trividho bandah) and a “‘three- 
fold liberation” (frividho moksah). Presumably these tripartite 
notions relate tothe “threefold instrument of knowledge”’ (siitra 
23) and the “threefold frustration” (sitra 24), but the commen- 
taries on the Tattvasamdésa do not elucidate any correlation. This 
may be because the notions are archaic formulations that the 
later commentators failed to understand, or it may possibly be 
because these enumerations are heuristic learning devices that 
have no particular conceptual significance for the system as a 
whole. The former explanation is probably correct, since there 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 35 


are references in some of the commentaries on the Karikd, in 
some Puranas, and in other older literature to a “threefold bon- 
dage” and a ‘“‘threefold liberation,” suggesting that these were 
older formulations that were simplified or eliminated in later 
accounts of the system. 


D. Sitra-Samkhya 


Finally, there is one additional independent tradition of philosophical 
Samkhya, that of the Samkhyasitra and its attendant commentaries. 
As is the case with the Tativasamdsa, possibly many or at least some of 
the silras may be very early, perhaps reaching back to the formative 
period. Unfortunately, however, there is no old commentarial tradi- 
tion that would enable us to sort out the earlier from the later sitras. 
We have only a series of modern commentaries and subcommentaries 
composed mainly by various Vedantins, the chief among whom is 
Vijfianabhiksu. Commentaries on the Samkhyasitra include the 
following: the Sémkhyasitravrtti of Aniruddha (fifteenth century), the 
Samkhyapravacanabhasya of Vijfianabhiksu (sixteenth century), the 
Vritisdra of Mahadeva Vedantin (seventeenth century), the Samkhya- 
siitravriti of Nagoji Bhatta or NageSa (eighteenth century), the Amald 
of Pramathanatha Tarkabhiisana (early twentieth century), the Vrtti 
of Hariprasada (twentieth century), the Tattvabodhini of Kufjavihari 
Tarkasiddhanta (twentieth century), and the Sdmkhyasittrabhdsya of 
Brahmamuni (twentieth century). 

In this tradition the process of what might be called the Vedantini- 
zation of Samkhya is carried much further than it had been by Vacas- 
pati, Vijfianabhiksu construes Samkhya in terms of a grand metaphy- 
sical cosmology on analogy with Vedanta, with a highest self (paramdt- 
man), a creative God (ifvara), and gradations of reality in terms of 
the old Samkhya basic principles. Moreover, he documents his inter- 
pretation of Samkhya with extensive quotations from the theistic por- 
tion of the Moksadharma, the Gitd and the Puranas (that is to say, largely 
from Proto-Samkhya references). He freely offers his own views on a 
variety of Samkhya notions (for example, the three guyas, the relation 
between purusa and prakrti, and so forth), and he argues at length that 
the atheistic orientation of philosophical Samkhya can really be read 
in terms of Vedanta theism. Samkhya becomes, in other words, a 
variation on a theme of Vijfianabhiksu’s own Vedanta, and he deals 
with allof the older schools of Indian philosophy (Nyaya, Vaisesika, 
and Mimamsa) in much the same manner. The differences between 
the older schools of Indian philosophy are transcended in the direction 
of a grand Vedanta synthesis, and Samkhya is assigned its rung (but 
interestingly, a very high rung) on a ladder of Indian philosophical 
truth, the highest rung of which is the Vedanta philosophy.*4 Some of 


36 


ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the more distinctive features of this late form of Samkhya may be out- 
lined as follows: 


SUTRA-SAMKHYA: 


1. Ontology: 


(A) 


(B) 


As was noted earlier in the discussion of Karika-Kaumudi- 
Samkhya, so also for the Satra-Samkhya of Vijfianabhiksu 
(and the other commentators on the Samkhyasitra), the 
problem of the relation between intellect (as a manifesta- 
tion of primordial materiality) and pure consciousness is 
a dominant theme in ontological discussions. Vijfiana- 
bhiksu argues, however, that Vacaspati’s theory of reflec- 
tion is not a sufficient explanation of the problem. Vacas- 
pati had argued that pure consciousness and intellect are 
not in contact and that pure consciousness becomes reflec- 
ted in the intellect, thus making the latter appear as if it 
were conscious. According to Vijiianabhiksu, this expla- 
nation deprives pure consciousness of experience and does 
not adequately elucidate the subtlety of the Samkhya 
dualism. Instead of Vacaspati’s simple theory of reflec- 
tion, therefore, Vijifianabhiksu introduces his own theory 
of ‘‘mutual reflection’ (anyonyapratibimba, mainly in his 
discussion under sélrz 1.99 but passim as well), in which 
pure consciousness becomes reflected in intellect (whereby 
the buddhi becomes “‘intelligized,’’ as it were) but in which 
buddhi’s transactions (including satisfaction, frustration, 
confusion, awareness, etc.) in turn become reflected back 
in pure consciousness as limiting adjuncts (upddhi)— 
thus making it possible for pure consciousness to “have” 
experience (albeit a mistaken or distorted experience). 
There is, therefore, a mutual contact (through this double 
reflection) between pure consciousness and intellect, but 
such contact does not in any way involve any change or 
activity in pure consciousness. 

In addition, in Sitra-Samkhya the problem of the plura- 
lity of pure consciousness is taken further. Karika- 
Samkhya and Karika-Kaumudi-Samkhya had simply 
asserted the classical Samkhya notion of plurality. The 
Vedanta discussions of one ultimate Self, however, in the 
later centuries had obviously posed a challenge to the old 
Samkhya view. In Siitra-Samkhya the problem is hand- 
led by arguing (primarily under 1.154 but passim as well) 
that Vedic references to nonduality (advaita) imply only 
a simple, generic essence (jaz) of selfhood and need not 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 37 


(C) 


(D) 


be taken to mean that there is only one undivided Self. 
In other words, there is a plurality of selves, but they all 
have one, simple, generic essence. Uncovering or discri- 
minating the limiting adjuncts that distort this simple, 
generic essence of selfhood is the goal both of Samkhya 
philosophy and the Vedic scripture. 

Also, in the Satra-Samkhya of Vijfianabhiksu, there is an 
inclination to make room for the notion of a God (isvara). 
Although the siiras themselves (see 1.92-99 and V. 1-12) 
appear to be clearly non-theistic, Vijiianabhiksu goes to 
great length to show that God is not really a problem for 
Samkhya. The apparently nontheistic arguments only 
show that the notion of God is not really essential for estab- 
lishing the rationality of Samkhya. This does not at 
all mean, according to Vijfianabhiksu, that God need be 
denied, and Vijfianabhiksu proceeds to quote extensively 
from pre-Karika epic and Puranic passages to document 
that God has a useful role to play in the Samkhya tradi- 
tion. 

Perhaps the most significant innovation of Vijfianabhi- 
ksu’s Sitra-Samkhya, however, is his interpretation of the 
gunas. Unlike the earlier Samkhya traditions, which des- 
cribe the gunas as constituent processes and affective states, 
Vijfianabhiksu interprets the gunas as subtle substances 
(dravyas) that are originally in a condition of homogene- 
ous equilibrium (sémydvastha) and then combine in various 
heterogeneous collocations of manifest principles (tattva) 
when the equilibrium is disrupted by the presence of pure 
consciousness (see 1.61, VI.39 and passim). In other 
words, Vijfianabhiksu develops an elaborate metaphysical 
ontology/cosmology of periodic manifestation and dis- 
solution, more reminiscent of epic and Puranic cosmologies 
than of the older Samkhya traditions as found in Karika- 
Samkhya, Patafijala-‘Samkhya or Karika-Kaumudi- 
Samkhya. Whereas the older Samkhya traditions had 
focused largely on epistemology, psychology/physiology, 
and ethics, the Sitra-Samkhya of Vijfianabhiksu focuses 
on a metaphysical cosmology centering on the interaction 
of gunas as substances. One may well argue (as, for exam- 
ple, S. Dasgupta argues) that Vijfianabhiksu’s meta- 
physical guna substances were implicit even in the earlier 
traditions, but there is little or no support for such an 
argument in the earlier Samkhya texts themselves. The 
only support for such an argument is to be found in pre- 
philosophical epic and Puranic passages, which is pro- 


38 


(E) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


bably the primary reason why Vijfianabhiksu quotes so 
extensively from the old cosmological literature. 

One further innovation of Vijfianabhiksu’s Sittra-~Sam- 
khya relates to the threefold structure of egoity (vazkrta, 
taijasa, and bhitadi, from Samkhyakariké 25). Older inter- 
pretations had suggested that vaikrta is sattva and encom- 
passes the elevenfold cognitive apparatus (the five sense 
capacities, the five action capacities, and mind); bhatadi 
is éamas and encompasses the five subtle elements; and 
taijasa is rajas, which pertains both to vaikrta and bhiilddi 
(thereby assisting both in cognition and material deve- 
lopment). According to Vijfanabhiksu (see under II.18), 
however, this is not correct. Rather, vaikrta as sativa per- 
tains only to manas or mind; taijasa as rajas pertains to the 
five sense capacities and the five action capacities; and 
bhiitddi as tamas pertains to the five subtle elements. The 
reference in the Karikd verse to taijasa or rajas pertaining 
to ‘‘both” means simply that the sense capacities and ac- 
tion capacities mediate between sativa (mind) and tamas 
(matter). Vijfiianabhiksu quotes some verses from the 
Bhdagavata Purdna in support of his view, but it should be 
noted that this interpretation is not to be found in any of 
the older, extant Samkhya philosophical traditions. 


2. Epistemology: 


(A) 


(B) 


The only innovative epistemological argument of impor- 
tance in Vijfidnabhiksu’s Saitra-Samkhya relates to the 
role and function of the sense capacities in perception. 
Karika-Samkhya and Patafijala-Samkhya refer respec- 
tively to buddhivyiti and cittavrtti but do not spell out 
the specific functions in the cognitive process. Vacaspati 
Misra carried the discussion further by attributing bare 
awareness without mental elaboration (nirvikalpa) to the 
sense capacities and mental elaboration (savikalpa) to 
mind. Vijfianabhiksu disagrees with Vacaspati (under 
II.32), arguing that the sense capacities are capable of 
both nirvikalpa and savikalpa perception. Mind only plays 
arole of focusing attention (samkalpa) and initiating con- 
ceptual constructions (vikalpa). Perception, then, accord- 
ing to Vijfianabhiksu, is primarily a result of the inter- 
action of intellect/ will and the sense capacities. Mind, as 
a result, plays a very minor role in Sitra-Samkhya. 

Although there are few other epistemological innovations 
by Vijfianabhiksu, it should be noted that there are 
elaborate polemical discussions against other schools of 
Indian philosophy. There is much of interest in these 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 39 


discussions, but it is difficult to knowif the Samkhya views 
expressed are those of the earlier tradition or simply possi- 
ble interpretations that Vijfianabhiksu himself favored. 
One has the strong sense that the latter is the case rather 
than the former. At V.51ff., for example, there are elabo- 
rate discussions of the validity of knowledge, sphofa theory, 
and the theory of error. According to Vijfianabhiksu, 
Samkhya philosophy accepts (V.51) the theory that 
knowledge is intrinsically valid (svaiah pramdnya), rejects 
the theory of sphota (V.57), and accepts a theory of error 
known as sadasatkhyati (V.56) (wherein the basic fativas 
are existent, or sat, but certain relations superimposed on 
the tattvas are nonexistent, or asat). All of these views are 
reasonable implications regarding the Samkhya philo- 
sophical position, and Vacaspati Miéra in earlier times 
had strongly suggested the intrinsic validity argument. 
Overall, however, one has the sense that these discussions 
reflect a later philosophical period long after Samkhya 
had attained its normative formulation. 

3. Psychology|Physiology: Sitra-Samkhya extends the old Samkhya 
psychology/physiology in a cosmological direction. Intellect/ 
will becomes a cosmic entity (hiranyagarbha, Brahma, and so forth), 
and the various cognitive principles (sense organs, and so forth) 
are linked up with various deities on analogy with the old epic 
and Puranic cosmologies. 

4. Phenomenology: Sitra-Samkhya conflates the old Karika-Sam- 
khya and Patafijala-Samkhya. Whereas Karika-Samkhya des- 
cribes ordinary experience in terms of the eight predispositions 
and fifty categories (misconceptions, dysfunctions content- 
ments and perfections) and Patafijala-Samkhya describes ordi- 
nary experience in terms of cittavrtiis, samskadras, and vasands, 
Vijfianabhiksu’s Siitra-Samkhya uses both explanatory approa- 
ches and does not distinguish one from the other. Moreover, the 
Sitra-Samkhya of Vijfianabhiksu presents the various explana- 
tions in an apparently haphazard manner, which has led most 
interpreters to conclude that the sdras either are not in proper 
order or represent a compilation of a variety of old Samkhya 
traditions. 

5. EHihics: The ethical thrust of Vijfianabhiksu’s Sitra-Samkhya is 
akin to the other Samkhya traditions already outlined, although 
Vijfianabhiksu’s tendency to emphasize Samkhya as a meta- 
physical cosmology and his predilection for quoting older, non- 
philosophical theistic passages from the epics and Puranas gives 
a characteristic flavor or tone to his presentation that is clearly 
different from the older Samkhya philosophical texts. More- 


40 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


over, Vijfianabhiksu’s synthetic perspective in which Samkhya 
and Yoga (along with the other orthodox schools) represent a 
preparatio evangelium for Vedanta strikes a distinctively different 
posture from the older Samkhya literature. 

Samkara’s encounter with Samkhya had been intense and polemical, 
even bitter. Vacaspati’s had been more dispassionate and descriptive, 
an obvious effort to lay out those dimensions of Samkhya philosophy 
that could be appropriated with respect to the set of philosophical 
issues that had become pressing in his time. Vijfianabhiksu’s encounter 
with Samkhya was generous and clearly synthetic, symptomatic pro- 
bably of Vedanta philosophy’s having emerged as the most favored 
variety of systematic reflection. There were, of course, numerous varie- 
ties of Vedanta, just as there were numerous varieties of theology 
among Christian groups in medieval Europe, but intellectual athletics 
had largely become intramural. The task now was to place the various 
older traditions in an appropriate hierarchical network that reflected 
the new intellectual environment. Vijfianabhiksu was an expert in this 
task, and much of the tone and flavor of Indian philosophy in modern 
times is traceable to the kind of intellectual synthesizing that Vijfiana- 
bhiksu represents. It is apparent in most of the Sanskrit philosophical 
texts of the modern period, and it is noticeable even in the Western- 
style scholarly treatments of Indian philosophy of Dasgupta, Radha- 
krishnan, Simha, and others. It has had a profound impact not only 
on the way Indian intellectuals think of their tradition but also on the 
entire tradition of the European scholarly treatment of Indian thought. 
The Vedanta bias is almost everywhere in modern Indian thought. 
There is no use in regretting this, however (except perhaps for the 
occasional old soul who wonders what Samkhya was before the Vedan- 
tins got their hands onit), because, for better or worse, India has allow- 
ed Samkhya to subsist as an appendage to its modern Vedanta bias 
in much the same way as Christian thought has been characterized 
as a “Platonism for the masses” (Nietzsche) for generations of Euro- 
pean and American believers. 

To summarize this overview, then, it is useful to distinguish the 
following types of Samkhya in India’s intellectual heritage: 

(1) Proto-Samkhya: 800 B.C.E.—100 CG.E. 

(2) Pre-Karika Samkhya: 100-500 C.E. 

(3) Karika-Samkhya: 350-850 C.E. 

(4) Patafijala-“Samkhya: 400-850 C.E. 

(5) Karika-Kaumudi-Samkhya: 850 (or 975)-present 

(6) Samasa-Samkhya: 1300-present 

(7) Sutra-Samkhya: 1400-present 

The original philosophical formulation occurs with the emergence 
of Pre-Karika Samkhya, and the normative formulations in summary 
form appear in Karika-Samkhya and Patafijala-Samkhya. Somewhere 


HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF SAMKHYA 4] 


in these ancient traditions there appears to have been a clear break 
with the original genius and vitality of the system, and the later tradi- 
tions of Karika-Kaumudi-Samkhya, Samasa-Samkhya, and Sitra- 
Samkhya present the system through a Vedanta prism, a prism, to be 
sure, that frequently irritates the Samkhya interpreter, but neverthe- 
less a prism without which one of the truly remarkable traditions of 
ancient philosophizing would possibly have vanished from India’s 
intellectual heritage and from the general history of cross-cultural 
philosophy. 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 


Preliminary Remarks 


Although the main outlines of the history and literature of Samkhya 
are reasonably clear, the same cannot be said about the details of the 
system qua philosophical system. As was mentioned in the last chapter, 
there appears to have been a break in the Samkhya textual tradition 
at an early date. Beginning with Ivarakrsna’s Samkhyakarika and there- 
after, there are only summaries and digests of the system, and many 
of the commentators are almost as much at a loss to explain the full 
system as is a modern interpreter. This is unfortunate, for in many 
ways the evidence suggests that Samkhya philosophy stands at the 
fountainhead of systematic Indian reflection, somewhat on analogy 
with Pythagoreanism and other pre-Socratic systems in ancient Greece. 
As is well known, the influence of Samkhya is ubiquitous in South 
Asian cultural life, not only in philosophy but in medicine, law, state- 
craft, mythology, cosmology, theology, and devotional literature. 
Samkhya was evidently a direct descendent of older and unsystematic 
Upanisadic speculation, a precursor of much of India’s scientific lite- 
rature and an older sibling of the first philosophical efforts in South 
Asia (including Jain, Buddhist, Vaisesika, Mimamsa, and Yoga tradi- 
tions). 

To be sure, certain characteristic philosophical notions are conti- 
nually attributed to Samkhya in the history of Indian philosophy— 
for example, the dualism of consciousness and materiality (purusa and 
prakrti), the guna theory, the theory that the effect preexists in the cause 
in a potential state (satkdryavdda), the plurality of purusas, and so forth— 
but there is a notable absence of the larger conceptual and specula- 
tive framework from which these characteristic Samkhya notions are 
derived, and more than that, an absence of any firm sense that these 
so-called characteristic notions were, in fact, central within the Sam- 


44 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


khya tradition itself. Regarding this latter point, one has the impression 
that many of the characteristic notions of Samkhya were central 
largely to the later issues in Indian philosophy and were probably much 
less prominent within the original Samkhya speculative environ- 
ment. In other words, later commentators were interrogating 
Samkhya philosophy from the perspective of their own philosophical 
agendas — for example, Nyaya argumentation, Buddhist logic, Vedanta 
metaphysics, and so forth—and were simply uninterested in, or un- 
aware of, Samkhya’s own speculative agenda. K. C. Bhattacharya has 
expressed the matter well: 


Much of Samkhya literature appears to have been lost, and there 
seems to be no continuity of tradition from ancient times up to the 
age of the commentators. In such systematic works as we have, one 
seems to have a hazy view of a grand system of speculative meta- 
physics.... The interpretation of all ancient systems requires a 
constructive effort; but while in the case of some systems where we 
have a large volume of literature and a continuity of tradition, the 
construction is mainly of the nature of translation of ideas in to 
modern concepts, herein Samkhya the construction at many places 
involves supplying of missing links from one’s imagination. It is 
risky work, but unless one does it one cannot be said to understand 
Samkhya as a philosophy. It is a task that one is obliged to under- 
take. It is a fascinating task because Samkhya is a bold, construc- 
tive philosophy. 


The Samkhya system qua system, then, is an interesting lacuna in our 
understanding of ancient India’s first systematic philosophizing, an 
intriguing intellectual puzzle that requires a “‘constructive effort” 
(to use K. C. Bhattacharya’s idiom) in order to piece it together, but 
a puzzle that if even partly unscrambled could provide many valuable 
perspectives for the cultural historian, the historian of philosophy, and 
the pure philosopher. For the cultural historian, a fuller grasp of 
Samkhya could possibly provide improved interpretive perspectives 
for understanding the complex symbol systems that underlie so much 
of Indian religion, art, law, mythology, and medical theorizing. 
For the historian of Indian philosophy, a fuller grasp of the Samkhya 
system could possibly provide a sharper awareness of the network of 
archaic notions and values that launched many of the first systematic 
reflections in Indian philosophy. For the pure philosopher, a fuller 
grasp of the Samkhya system could possibly provide a better grasp 
of that set of primordial intuitions by means of which South Asians 
first addressed questions about being, nonbeing, change, causation, 
and so forth, in a systematic way —a South Asian surrogate, as it were, 
for a context of primordial philosophizing that thinkers such as Heideg- 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 45 


ger have pursued among the pre-Socratic traditions of the Western 
philosophical tradition. 

In any case, the task of discussing Samkhya as a philosophical system 
involves a good deal more than historical research, philological investi- 
gation, and comparison and contrast with the agenda items of classical 
Indian philosophy, though, of course, such conventional approaches 
are a prerequisite for reaching the threshold of the system. Historical re- 
search provides some helpful bits and pieces of the puzzle, glimpses, and 
hints of how the Samkhya methodology of enumeration slowly emerged 
into a conceptual system, even though the final system qua system 
is nowhere fully exposed in an extant text in other than a summary 
fashion. Philological work takes one a bit further, helping to determine 
the relevant set of technical terms and providing some sense of which 
lists and enumerations are more important than others. The Samkhya 
texts, however, are largely laconic lists, and the later commentators 
are remarkably unhelpful in explaining the relevance or meaning of 
the various lists (and, in this sense, notably unlike the later commen- 
tators on the other systems of classical Indian philosophy). Further 
progress can be made by examining the manner in which Samkhya 
is criticized in later philosophical traditions — for example, by Dignaga, 
Jinendrabuddhi, Mallavadin, Simhasiri, Samkara, Ramanuja, and 
so forth —but as was mentioned earlier this later agenda of Indian 
philosophy has moved considerably beyond the older Samkhya specu- 
lative environment. Moreover, there remains not a single Samkhya 
rejoinder to these ripostes by Samkhya’s opponents -— with the possible 
exception of the Yuktidipika, which is clearly a Samkhya polemic 
vis-a-vis Buddhist and Naiyayika critiques of Samkhya. Samkhya’s 
role in the history of classical Indian philosophy is comparable, mutatis 
mutandis, to that of Carvaka materialism, that is to say, a sort of philo- 
sophical “whipping boy” abused by all but never allowed to respond — 
or to shift metaphors, an intellectual ‘“‘paper tiger” seldom taken 
seriously but providing a convenient point of departure for doing other 
things. 

In discussing Samkhya philosophy, then, after one has pursued his- 
torical work as far as possible, after one has read all of the extant texts, 
and after one has studied all of the criticisms of Samkhya in the larger 
classical philosophical literature, one has only attained what K.C. 
Bhattacharya has aptly called “...a hazy view of a grand system of 
speculative metaphysics.” To sharpen the view, the interpreter must 
engage in “‘... supplying of missing links from one’s imagination.” 
This cannot mean, of course, inventing notions or projecting a favored 
perspective on the evidence that is unwarranted. The “supplying of 
missing links from one’s imagination” means, rather, searching for 
relations, bundles of relations, and possible interpretive perspectives 
that may not be directly expressed in the texts but that bring together 


46 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the various Samkhya enumerations into more coherent patterns. 

To some extent, of course, the textual tradition itself offers some halt- 
ing steps in this direction. The Yuktidipika, for example, offers several 
intriguing interpretations that provide a larger view of the Samkhya 
system as a whole, certainly more so than the Karikd itself and all of its 
other commentaries. Similarly, BhavaganeSa in his Tativaydtharthya- 
dipana (on the Tattvasamdsa) provides a “‘constructive effort” in Bhatta- 
charya’s sense, as does Vijfianabhiksu in his Sdamkhyapravacanabhasya, 
although both of them, unfortunately, Vedanticize Samkhya more 
than would seem warranted. Such efforts are important, however, in 
providing helpful clues about the manner in which the indigenous 
philosophical tradition interpreted the old Samkhya system, as well 
as in warning against the dangers of bias, excessive polemic, and ana- 
chronism in any constructive undertaking. 

Among modern scholarly ‘“‘constructive efforts’ (apart, of course, 
from the standard summaries of Samkhya that one finds in numerous 
textbooks), one can identify four distinct approaches to reconstructing 
the Samkhya system, namely, those of Richard Garbe, Surendranath 
Dasgupta, Erich Frauwallner, and K. C. Bhattacharya.? Garbe cons- 
trues the old Samkhya system as primarily an ancient philosophy of 
nature, a unique system that must have been the product of a single 
mind (either Kapila or Paficasikha) in ancient times. There is, there- 
fore, neither a ‘“‘preclassical Samkhya” nor a postclassical Samkhya. 
There is one ancient system, and one can range freely throughout the 
entire scope of Samkhya literature in reconstructing that system.’ 
Surendranath Dasgupta approaches his construction from the oppo- 
site direction. The old Samkhya-Yoga texts are notoriously difficult 
to interpret, and it is only with Vijfianabhiksu in his Samkhyapravacana- 
bhasya (in the medieval period) that one reaches a firm basis for piecing 
together the contours of the Samkhya system as a whole. The key 
notions of the system, therefore, are presented through the interpretive 
perspective of Vijfianabhiksu’s Vedantin metaphysics.* Erich Frau- 
wallner (following the anti-Garbe polemic of Hermann Oldenberg) 
focuses primarily on Samkhya as an important position in the history 
of epistemological discussions within Indian philosophy. Frauwallner 
construes Samkhya’s philosophy of nature as deriving largely from 
Paficasikha with its epistemological giounding given by Varsaganya 
and Vindhyavasin. [svarakrsna’s Karikdis only a later summary of the 
system and fails to provide an adequate account of the old Samkhya 
epistemology, which, therefore, must be reconstructed from other 
sources. Frauwallner relies heavily on the Yuktidipikd in his construc- 
tion of the final Samkhya system and reconstructs Samkhya cosmology 
from the old Puranas.* Finally, K. C. Bhattacharya construes the 
Samkhya system as a bold “philosophy of the subject” that is“... 
based on speculative insight” and that ‘‘... demands imaginative- 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 47 


introspective effort at every stage on the part of the interpreter.” 
Like Dasgupta, Bhattacharya relies heavily on Vijfianabhiksu, al- 
though Bhattacharya is much more critical in his use of Vijianabhiksu 
than is Dasgupta.® 

Each approach is clearly a “constructive effort” and has offered 
important new insights in understanding the system as a whole. Strik- 
ing, however, is the divergence in perspective that each approach 
represents. There is usually, in the history of scholarship, an overall 
convergence of scholarly views, but in the case of Samkhya philosophy 
a scholarly consensus has not obtained. Garbe and Frauwallner can- 
not both be correct. K.C. Bhattacharya’s “... grand system of 
speculative metaphysics” bears little resemblance to Garbe’s ancient 
philosophy of nature or Frauwallner’s view of Samkhya as an elemen- 
tary and simplistic, though nevertheless important, epistemology. 
Dasgupta and Bhattacharya come close to convergence in their 
common use of Vijfianabhiksu, but, whereas Dasgupta sees the genius 
of Samkhya in the explanatory power of its guna theory (as interpreted 
by Vijfianabhiksu and given an updated scientific explanation by 
B. N. Seal), K. C. Bhattacharya identifies the genius of Samkhya in 
its emphasis on “reflection as spiritual function’? and on its being a 
philosophy of spontaneous freedom. 

In the present chapter, rather than following any one of these an- 
cient or modern approaches, the Samkhya system is constructed in a 
somewhat different manner. While, of course, benefiting from, and 
using where appropriate the approaches already mentioned, the 
“constructive effort” in the present context seeks to present Samkhya 
philosophy as a total functioning system, on analogy with what Witt- 
genstein calls a “complete system of human communication.” or a 
“form of life,” or a “system of thought and action’ for purposes of 
communicating a way of life.” The focus, in other words, is on grasping 
Samkhya philosophy as a systemic, synchronic, and paradigmatic 
network of notions in which the various transactions within the larger 
system come to be exhibited in a more coherent intrasystemic way. 
Admittedly, such an interpretive approach is not as useful for compar- 
ing and contrasting Samkhya with other kinds of modeling systems in 
Indian philosophy (for example, Vaisesika, Buddhist, or Vedanta 
models), nor is it an especially useful approach if one is attempting 
a historical treatment of Samkhya. It is to be noted, however, that 
these latter shortcomings are notoriously typical of Samkhya litera- 
ture itself. That is to say, the usual intersystemic polemics of Indian 
philosophy are glaringly absent in most Samkhya literature, and more 
than that, there is no concern whatever in the Samkhya literature for 
dealing with the history of the tradition. In other words, a systemic, 
synchronic, and paradigmatic approach may, in fact, more accurately 
reflect an original and authentic Samkhya method of philosophizing. 


48 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


At the same time, of course, it is clear enough that the Samkhya 
system did not emerge fully grown, like Athena from the head of Zeus, 
even though the Samkhya texts make precisely such claims for the 
founder of the system, Kapila.8 Samkhya philosophy was hardly the 
product of a single mind in ancient times, pace Garbe, nor was it a 
blurred set of intuitions that finally got its house in order through the 
genius of Vijfianabhiksu, pace Dasgupta. The history of the tradition 
has already been surveyed in the last chapter and need not be repeated 
here, but it may be useful to summarize briefly the diachronic, 
locations for the synchronic system that is to be presented in the sequel, 
namely: 

(1) There was a coherent Samkhya conceptual system, often refer- 
red to as the sastitantra (“‘the system or science of sixty topics’’), 
that was widely known by the year 400 of the Common Era 
(that is to say, the interim period that is post-I§varakrsna and 
pre-Dignaga). 

(2) The conceptual system had been in existence for some centu- 
ries earlier and had been undergoing considerable modifica- 
tion through the work of Paficasikha, Varsaganya, Vindhya- 
vasin, and so on. 

(3) There were probably a variety of attempts in this early period 
to summarize the basic contours of the system, but one sum- 
mary came to be accepted as a standard presentation, namely, 
that summary as set forth in Igvarakrsna’s Samkhyakdarika. 

(4) This system, modified in some important respects (along the 
lines of Varsaganya’s and Vindhyavasin’s views) is the basis 
of Patajijali’s Yogasiitra and its commentaries. 

(5) The commentaries on the Karikd come considerably later, and 
apart from the Yuktidipikd, appear to lack a firsthand grasp 
of the system qua system, and even the Yuktidipska presupposes 
the full content of the system instead of presenting that con- 
tent. 

(6) The Tattvasamasa and the Samkhyasitra together with their 
commentaries, though undoubtedly preserving much old 
material, are nevertheless late texts (post-1000) that tend to 
interpret the old Samkhya system with a notable Vedanta 
bias. 


I. SAmkuya As ENUMERATION 


Because the term “sdmkhya’’? means “enumeration” or “relating to 
number,”’ one reasonable point of departure for presenting the Sam- 
khya philosophical system as a “‘complete system of human communi- 
cation” is to outline the more prominent sets of enumerations. 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 49 
(A) Enumerations relating to the basic principles (tativas) 


The set of 25. First and foremost, of course, is the set of 25 that 
encompasses the basic principles of the system, namely: 


(1) pure consciousness (purusa), 
(2) primordial materiality (milaprakriz), 

(3) intellect (buddhi or mahat), 

(4) egoity (ahamkara), and 

(5) mind (manas)—both a sense capacity and an action capacity; 
(6) hearing (frotra), 

(7) touching (tvac), 

(8) seeing (caksus), the five sense capacities 
(9) tasting (rasana), and ( (buddhindriyas ) 

(10) smelling (ghrana); 
(11) speaking (vac), 

(12) grasping/prehending (pani), 
(13) walking/motion (pada), 


~~ 


ws we 


rd 


the five action capacities 


(14) excreting (pdyu), and (karmendriyas ) 

(15) procreating (upastha) ; 

(16) sound (fabda), 

(17) contact (sparga), 

(18) form (rapa), the five subtle elements 
(19) taste (rasa), and (tanmditras ) 

(20) smell (gandha) ; 


(21) “space” ether (akaga), 
(22) wind/air (vdyu), 

(23) fire (dejas), 

(24) water (ap), and 

(25) earth (prthivi). 


According to Samkhya philosophy, among these twenty-five princi- 
ples, only the first two are independent existents, namely, pure con- 
sciousness (purusa) and primordial materiality (mdlaprakrti). In other 
words, only items (1) and (2) exist in some sense as “distinct” or 
“separate” from one another. The two are described in Samkhya 
philosophy as being ungenerated, outside of ordinary space and time, 
stable, simple, unsupported, nonmergent (or nondissolvable), without 
parts, and independent (SK 10).9 The relation between them is one 
of simple copresence (SK 19). Pure consciousness is inherently inac- 
tive, but primordial materiality is inherently generative in the sense 
that it is capable of generating a set of discrete or manifest subdivisions 
when activated by the catalytic presence of pure consciousness. Items 
(3) through (25) make up the various subdivisions of primordial mate- 
riality and are, thus, internal to primordial materiality or represent 


the five gross elements 
(mahabh itas ) 


Ws 


50 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


“parts” of a totally functioning “whole,” which is primordial materia- 
lity. These twenty-three subdivisions are described as being generated, 
temporal, spatial, unstable, composite, supported, mergent (or dissolv- 
able), made up of parts, and contingent (SK 10). Seven of the sub- 
divisions of primordial materiality, namely, intellect, egoity, and the 
five subtle elements are described as being both generated, thatis to say, 
emergents from primordial materiality, and generative, that is to say, 
capable of generating subsequent subdivisions. The remaining sixteen 
subdivisions, namely, the mind, the five sense capacities, the five action 
capacities, and the five gross elements are only generated, that is 
to say, incapable of generating additional subdivisions. Intellect is 
generated out of primordial materiality but also generates egoity. 
Egoity is generated out of intellect but also generates the mind, the 
five sense capacities, the five action capacities, and the five subtle 
elements. The five subtle elements are generated out of egoity but also 
generate the five gross elements. Subtle elements are so called because 
they are the generic (avifesa) material essences for all specific (vifesa) 
elements. They are imperceptible to ordinary persons, whereas gross 
elements can be perceived by ordinary persons. 

The subtle elements are the generic presuppositions for the experi- 
ence ofall specific objectivity. Five kinds of specific sensations may be 
experienced, namely, specific vibrations via the ear (speaking, music, 
sounds, and so forth), specific contacts via the skin (hot, cold, and so 
forth), specific forms via the eyes (colors, shapes), specific tastes via the 
tongue (bitter, sweet), and specific smells via the nose. According to 
Samkhya, the apprehension of a specific vibration is only possible if 
there is an undifferentiated generic receptivity for sound, or put differ- 
ently, if the experiencer is in some sense actually constituted by the 
generic, material essence of sound, that is, actually made up of a subtle 
sound element. The subtle sound element itself is not any particular 
sound. It is the generic essence of sound, the presupposition for all 
particular sounds, the universal possibility of sound-as-such. Simi- 
larly, the apprehension of a specific contact is only possible if there is 
an undifferentiated generic receptivity for touch, the universal possi- 
bility of touch-as-such, namely, the subtle touch element, and so forth. 
The subtle elements, therefore, are not functions or capacities (as are, 
for example, the five senses or the motor capacities of an organism) nor 
are they the actual sense organs (eye, ear, and so forth) which, of 
course, are aggregates of gross elements. They are, rather, subtle, 
material essences or presuppositions with which perceptual and motor 
functioning correlate and through which certain aspects of the mate- 
rial world become differentiated. If such subtle, material essences or 
presuppositions were not present, no specific objects could possibly be 
experienced or become manifest, and in this sense the subtle elements 
correlate with and may be said to “generate” the gross elements. In 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 51 


the absence of subtle elements, in other words, there would only be an 
unmanifest mass of primordial materiality. Some have suggested that 
the subtle elements might be usefully compared to Platonic ideas or 
universals, but it must be kept in mind that for Samkhya all such ideas 
or universals have some sort of subtle, material basis (requiring, in 
other words, a reconceptualization of idealism in terms of reductive 
materialism, as will be discussed further in the sequel ).1° 

Regarding the manner in which gross elements are derived from 
subtle elements, the important Samkhya texts differ, suggesting that 
the manner of derivation was an open issue even in the classical period. 
The Karika itself simply asserts that the five gross elements are derived 
from the five subtle elements (SK 22 and 28). Some commentaries 
(The Tattvakaumudi, Matharavriti, Fayamangala, and so forth) argue for 
a so-called “‘accumulation theory” of derivation, according to which 
each successive subtle element combines with the preceding ones in 
order to generate a gross element. The subtle sound element gene- 
rates the space/ether gross element (akéfa); the subtle touch element 
and the subtle sound element generate the gross air/wind element 
(vdyu) ; the subtle form element with the subtle sound and touch ele- 
ments generate the gross fire element (tejas); the subtle taste element 
with subtle sound, touch, and form elements generate the gross water 
element (dp); and the subtle smell element with the subtle sound, 
touch, form, and taste elements generate the gross earth element (prthivi ). 
According to the Yuktidipikd (Pandeya edition, p. 91 and pp. 117-118, 
and hereafter all page references are to the Pandeya edition), this 
‘accumulation theory” is attributed to Varsaganya. The commentary 
of Gaudapada argues, however, that each subtle element is capable 
of generating each gross element singly. The Chinese commentary on 
the K4arika offers yet another interpretation.2 According to it, each 
subtle element generates not only a respective gross element but a 
respective sense capacity as well. Thus, the subtle sound element 
generates not only dkafa but also the sense capacity of hearing (Srotra), 
and so forth. Although an attractive idea, it tends to confuse the actual 
physical sense organ with an actual sense capacity. This may well 
be an old notion, but it is hard to imagine that the final philosophical 
system would have settled for such a view. Still other East Asian com- 
mentaries offer further interpretations, according to one of which the 
five subtle elements generate not only gross elements (in an accumu- 
lation manner) but the entire set of eleven sense and action capacities 
as well.18 For Isvarakrsna and the classical tradition, however, it is 
clear enough that the five subtle elements are only generative of the 
five gross elements (and not the various sense and action capacities), 
although the manner of derivation was evidently a continuing matter of 
debate. All specific objects (visaya) in the phenomenal empirical world 
of ordinary experience are collocations or aggregations of the various 


52 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


gross elements and are never themselves numbered as basic principles. 
Given these various distinctions regarding their derivation, the initial 
listing of 25 principles may now be more precisely exhibited in a chart. 


(1) consciousness / (2) primordial materiality 
1 


Y 
(3) intellect 
‘ 
(4) egoity 
4 NX 
a -N 
(5) mind 
(6) hearing (11) speaking (16) sound (21) space 
(7) touching (12) grasping (17) touch (22) wind 
(8) seeing (13) walking (18) form = }—> (23) fire 
(9) tasting (14) excreting (19) taste (24) water 
(10) smelling (15) procreating (20) smell (25) earth 
(the elevenfold capacities: sens- (the five subtle (the five gross 
ing, motor functioning, and mind) elements) elements) 


Principles (5) through (15), and (21) through (25) are generated 
products (vikara, SK 3).14 Principles (3), (4), and (16) through 
(20) are both generative and generated (prakrti-vikrti, SK 3). Princi- 
ple (2) is generative but ungenerated (avikyti), and (1) is neither gene- 
rative nor generated (na prakrtir na vikrtih purusah, SK 3). 

The set of 3. Principles (3), (4), and (5), namely, intellect, egoity, 
and mind, taken together are referred to as the “internal organ” (antah- 
karana, SK 33), and their three respective functions are “reflective 
discerning” (adhyavasdya), ‘“‘self-awareness” (abhimdna), and “‘inten- 
tionality” (samkalpaka). Together they perform the task of intellec- 
tual awareness, which functions not only in immediate experience but 
encompasses the past and future as well (SK 33). 

The set of 10. Items (6) through (10), and (11) through (15), 
namely, the five sense capacities and the five motor functions, taken 
together are referred to as the “external organ” (bahyakarana, SK 33), 
and their respective activities provide mere sensings (dlocanamditra, 
SK 28), namely, hearing, touching, and so forth; and basic motor 
skills, namely, speaking, grasping, and so forth (SK 28). These ope- 
rate only in immediate or present experience (SK 33). 

The set of 13. Items (3) through (15), namely, intellect, egoity, 
mind, the five sense capacities, and the five motor functions, taken 
together are referred to as the ‘‘thirteenfold instrument’’ (trayodasa- 
karana, SK32), or what is often called simply the “essential core” 
(linga, SK 40), which is the presupposition for all experience. The 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 53 


“thirteenfold instrument” or litga functions as a whole by “seizing”’ 
(aharana) (presumably through the motor capacities), “holding” 
(dhdrana) (presumably through the sense capacities), and “‘illuminat- 
ing” (prakdfa) (presumably through the “internal organ”) (SK 32).45 
The tenfold “external” divisions of the liaga are referred to as the 
“doors” (dvdra) of awareness, and the three divisions of the “internal 
organ” are referred to as the “door-keepers” (dvdrins) (SK 35). 

The set of 17. Items (4) through (20) represent the structure of 
egoity (ahamkara), and it should be noted, therefore, that “‘self-aware- 
ness,” according to Samkhya philosophy, is a complex phenomenon 
encompassing mental states (mind, sense capacities, and motor func- 
tioning) and physical components (the subtle elements ).1® 

The set of 18. Items (3) through (20), namely, intellect, egoity, 
mind, the five sense capacities, the five motor functions, and the five 
subtle elements, taken together are referred to as the “subtle body” 
(lingaSarira or sitksmasarira), which is detachable from any particular 
gross body and is, therefore, capable of transmigration in a continuing 
series of gross embodiments.!? Gross bodies (sthilafarira) are one- 
time-only aggregations of gross elements. In the case of human gross 
bodies, these are genetically derived from mother and father (with 
hair, blood, and flesh from the maternal line, and bone, tendon, and 
marrow from the paternal line). Such human gross bodies are “womb 
born” (jarayuja) and become enlivened when linked with a transmigrat- 
ing “subtle body.” There are also “egg born” (andaja), “seed born” 
(udbhijja) and ‘“‘moisture born” (svedaja) gross bodies for other sorts 
of sentient beings (and see Yuktidipikd, p. 120 on SK 39). 


(B) Enumerations relating to the fundamental predispositions (bhava). 


The set of 8. Inherent to the intellect, in addition to its basic tattva 
nature of reflective discerning, is a set of 8 fundamental predispositions 
(bhava) or instinctual tendencies that guide the life-trajectory of a 
sentient being, namely: 

(1) the predisposition toward meritorious behavior (dharma), 

(2) the predisposition toward knowledge (jfdna), 

(3) the predisposition toward nonattachment (vairdgya), 

(4) the predisposition toward power (aifvarya), 

(5) the predisposition toward demeritorious behavior (adharma), 

(6) the predisposition toward ignorance (ajfana), 

(7) the predisposition toward attachment (avairdgya), and 

(8) the predisposition toward impotence (anaifvarya) (SK 23). 
Whereas reflective discerning represents the material dimension of 
buddhi, the fundamental predispositions represent the “‘efficient”’ possi- 
bilities of the buddhi. The fundamental predispositions, therefore, are 


54 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


called ‘‘efficient causes’’ (nimitias) and are correlated with eight result- 
ing (naimitlika) trajectories, namely: 

(1) the tendency to move upward in the cycle of transmigration 

(ardhva), 

(2) the tendency to move toward final release (apavarga), 

(3) the tendency to move toward merger in primal materiality 
(prakrtilaya), 

(4) the tendency to move toward increasing control over life 
(avighdta), 

(5) the tendency to move downward in the cycle of transmigration 
(adhastat), 

(6) the tendency to move toward increasing attachment and bond- 

age (bandha), 

(7) the tendency to move toward further involvement in transmi- 

gration (samsara), 

(8) the tendency to move toward declining control over life (vighdia) 

(SK 42-45). 

The fundamental predispositions are innate or inherent (sdmsiddhika 
or prakrtika), but they can be modified (vaikrta) in terms of intensity 
or dominance of one (or more) over another (or others) through the 
cycle of continuing transmigration (SK 43). The “essential core” 
(linga) or the subtle body carries a particular constellation of these 
predispositions as it proceeds in the process of rebirth, and a parti- 
cular sentient being, which becomes enlivened by the coalescence of a 
linga with a gross body, is, as it were, “‘coded’’ or ‘“‘programmed”’ 
at birth by these tendencies and, hence, predisposed to a certain life 
trajectory. 

Comparing this set of 8 predispositions with the earlier set of 25 
basic principles, it is perhaps helpful to use a computer or a linguistic 
metaphor. Regarding a computer metaphor, it might be suggested 
that the set of 25 basic principles is the “hardware” of the Samkhya 
system, whereas the set of 8 predispositions with the resultant trajec- 
tories represents the “software” of the Samkhya system. Or, using a 
metaphor from linguistics, it might be suggested that the set of 25 basic 
principles represents the deep structural “syntactic”? component of 
the Samkhya system, whereas the set of 8 predispositions with the re- 
sultant trajectories represents the deep structural ‘‘semantic’? compo- 
nent of the Samkhya system. In any case, the Samkhya system asserts 
that these two sets are fundamental and presuppose one another. 

The litga (namely the realm of tativas) cannot function without the 

bhadvas. The bhavas cannot function without the liiga. Therefore, a 

two fold creation (sarga) operates (or functions) called liiga and 

bhava. (SK 52). 

The set of 5 life breaths (vdyu prana). In addition to the set of 8 funda- 
mental predispositions that determine the life trajectory of an organism, 


PHILOSOPILY OF SAMKHYA 55 


a particular life-support system is also necessary for the maintenance 
of a given life. According to Samkhya philosophy, this support 
system is provided by a network of five ‘‘winds”’ or “breaths,” namely: 

(1) “respiration” or “breathing’’ (pfrana), located in the heart 
primarily, but also circulating in the mouth, nose, and lungs, 

(2) ‘excretion’ or “disposing breath” (apana), located in the navel 
and lower portions of the body, 

(3) “digestion” or “nutrient breath?’ (samdna), located primarily 
in the region between the navel and the heart, but carrying 
nutrients equally to all parts of the body, 

(4) “cognition” or “up breath” (uddna), located primarily in the 
nose and brain and enabling an organism to utter intelligible 
sounds (communication, language, and so forth), and 

(5) “homeostasis” or ‘diffused breath”? (vyana), pervading the 
entire body and presumably maintaining the general physical 
and emotional balance of an organism (SK 29). 

The author of the Yuktidipika, interestingly, further relates these biolo- 
gical “‘winds”’ or “breaths” to certain external or social tendencies as 
well, with prana being related to social obedience, apdna being related 
to striving for a higher or lower social status, samdua being associated 
with social cooperation, uddna being related to a sense of social superio- 
rity, and vydna being linked with a strong sense of devotion or any decp 
bond of love (Vuktidipikd, p. 106 on SK 29). 

The set of 5 sources of action (karmayoni), Although the Aarihd docs 
not mention the set of 5 karinayonis, the author of the Yuklidipika indi- 
cates that the set of sources of action is related to the set of 5 “winds” 
or “breaths” just enumerated (Yuktidipika, pp. 107-108). ‘The set 
explains the basic motivations for the maintenance of life, namely: 

(L) “perseverance” (dhyli), an organism’s innate urge to follow 

through over a given period of time on a particular trajectory, 

(2) “faith” (Sraddhé), aa organism’s innate urge to maintain a tra- 
jectory on the basis of belicf or trust in the validity of a social or 
religious heritage, 

(3) “the desire for satisfaction”’ (sukha or icchd,) an organism’s innate 
urge to seek its own sclf-gratification, 

(4) “the desire to know” (vividisdé), an organisin’s innate urge to 
be curious and critical, and 

(5) ‘‘the desire not to know” (avividisé), an organism’s innate urge 
to be insufficiently discriminating. 

The sources of action are also mentioned in the Tatlvasamdsa (siitra 9) 
and appear just before the five “breaths” or “winds,” lending perhaps 
some support to the Yuktidipika’s claim that the sources of action should 
be construed together with the breaths. The commentaries vary widely 
in their interpretations of the sources of action, possibly suggesting that 
they are very old notions that eventually became less important as the 


56 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


system developed. In any case, the sources of action appear to be rela- 
ted to the same sorts of concerns that find expression in the set of 8 
predispositions, that is to say, basic attitudes and dispositions that propel 
an organism in a given direction. Unlike the predispositions, however, 
which are quite unconscious and represent the inherited karmic pro- 
pensities of an organism, the sources of action appear to be conscious 
and could presumably represent the dispositional possibilities available 
to an organism in any given life. Furthermore, it would appear that 
these sources of action can be construed either positively or negatively.18 
Positively, they would suggest that an organism can be disciplined, 
faithful, pleasant, thoughful, and circumspect in avoiding matters that 
cannot be known. Negatively, they would suggest that an organism 
can be stubborn, gullible, pleasure seeking, overly critical, or skeptical, 
and insensitive or thick headed regarding obvious truths. 


(C) Enumerations relating to the phenomenal, empirical world of ordinary 
life (pratyayasarga) (bhautikasarga). 


The set of 50 “categories” (padarthas). The set of 25 basic principles 
interacting with the set of 8 predispositions within the intellect 
generate what the Samkhya system calls the “phenomenal creation” 
(pratyayasarga), made up of the set of 5 fundamental “misconceptions” 
(viparyayas ), the set of 28 “‘dysfunctions’’ (asaktis), the set of 9 “‘content- 
ments” (éustis) and the set of 8 “spiritual attainments” (séddhis). Taken 
together, they are referred to as the set of 50 “‘categories,” namely: 

(1-5) the five categories of fundamental misconception (viparyaya) 

with the ancient technical names tamas, moha, mahamoha, 
tamisra, and andhatamisra (or, according to Patafijala-Samkhya, 
called the five “afflictions” or klefas, namely, avidyd, asmitd, 
raga, dvesa, and abhinivesa) 

(1) ‘‘darkness” (éamas) or “ignorance” (avidyd), described 
as having 8 subdivisions in the sense that there is a failure to 
discriminate (aviveka) pure consciousness (purusa) from the 
eight generative principles (or, in other words, the failure 
to distinguish furusa from primordial materiality, intellect, 
egoity, and the five subtle elements) (SK 48), 
(2)‘‘confusion” (moha) or preoccupation with one’s own iden- 
tity (asmita), also described as having 8 subdivisions in the 
sense that finite beings seek to overcome their finitude by 
pursuing the eight well-known omnipotent or supernatural 
powers (siddhis) (including becoming atomic in size, becom- 
ing exceedingly large in size, becoming light or buoyant, 
becoming heavy, becoming all-pervasive, attaining all desires, 
gaining lordship over elemental forces and immediate grati- 
fication) (SK.48), 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 57 


(6-33) 


(34-42) 


(43-50) 


(3) “extreme confusion” (mahdmoha) or passionate attach- 
ment (raga), described as having 10 subdivisions either (a) 
in the sense that one becomes attached to the five subtle ele- 
ments and the five gross elements (according to most of the 
Karika commentaries) or (b) in the sense that one becomes 
attached to the 10 basic social relationships (including father, 
mother, son, brother, sister, wife, daughter, teacher, friend, 
or colleague) (according to the Yuktidipikd under SK 48), 
(4)“gloom” (idmisra) or aversion (dvesa), described as having 
18 subdivisions in the sense that one becomes frustrated and 
cynical because of the failure to attain the eight conventional 
siddhis or supernatural attainments and one becomes angry 
or hateful toward the tenfold material existence (subtle and 
gross) or the 10 basic social relationships (SK 48), and 
(5) “utter darkness” (andhatdmisra) or the instinctive fear of 
death (abhinivefa), described also as having 18 subdivisions in 
the sense that although one has become cynical about material 
and social life one nevertheless clings to it tenaciously (SK 48). 
These five fundamental “misconceptions” with their 62 sub- 
divisions are characteristic of most conventional sentient life 
and represent the core afflictions of ordinary finite existence; 
the twenty-eight categories of perceptual, motor, and mental 
dysfunction (afakii), 11 of which are correlated with dis- 
orders of the five sense capacities (for example, deafness, 
blindness, and so forth), the five motor capacities, and the 
mind, and 17 of which are correlated with disorders of the 
intellect (the number 17 representing the negation of the 9 
tustis and 8 siddhis next to be described) (SK 49); 

the nine categories for a reasonably balanced and conven- 
tional mendicant life, the contentments (tusfi), described as 
referring to certain more advanced forms of sentient life who 
have not yet overcome the first of the fundamental miscon- 
ceptions but who have made considerable progress in under- 
standing sentient existence, both internally (in terms of a 
proper conception of primordial materiality, a proper con- 
ception of the appropriate means for living a conventional 
mendicant existence, a proper conception of delayed grati- 
fication, and the ability to withstand the vicissitudes of ordi- 
nary existence) and externally (in terms of not being exces- 
sively attached to the fivefold structure of material existence 
and thereby not being involved in the acquisition, preserva- 
tion, waste, enjoyment, or injury of ordinary worldly life) 
(SK49); 

the eight categories that represent the authentic attain- 
ments (siddhi) (in contrast to the conventional supernatural 


58 


(43) 
(44) 
(45) 
(46) 
(47) 
(48) 
(49) 


(50) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


attainments as already described above under “confusion’’) 
that are conducive to final discrimination and release, namely: 
rational reflection and reasoning (aha), 

appropriate verbal instruction from a qualified teacher (Sabda), 
careful study (adhyayana), 

thoughtful discussion with appropriate peers (suhrlprapti), 
an open yet disciplined temperament (dana), 

a progressive overcoming of the frustrations of body and mind, 
a progressive overcoming of the frustrations of material and 
social existence, and 

a progressive overcoming of the frustrations related to the 
cycle of rebirth and transmigration (the three being cons- 
trued together and referring to overcoming the three kinds of 
frustration or duhkhatraya) (SK 51).° 

The author of the Yuktidipika correlates this set of 50 categories 
with the set of the 8 predispositions in the following fashion: 
the primacy of the predisposition toward ignorance (ajfdna) 
accompanied by nonmerit (adharma), passionate attach- 
ment (avairdgya), and impotence (anaifvarya) generates the 
fundamental misconceptions (viparyaya) that are at the core of 
most ordinary sentient life; the primacy of the predisposition 
toward impotence (anaifvarya), accompanied by adharma, 
ajitina, and avairdgya generates the disorders of perceptual, 
motor, and mental functioning (aSakti); the primacy of the 
predisposition toward non-attachment (vairdégya), accompa- 
nied by dharma and aisvarya, generates conventional mendicant 
life (tusti); and the predisposition toward knowledge (jfdna) 
generates the spiritual attainments (siddhi) conducive to final 
discrimination and release (Yuktidipika, pp. 124-136). The 
author of the Yuktidipikad also relates the set of 50 categories to 
an old creation myth, thereby linking the pratyayasarga or 
“phenomenal creation” to what is apparently an archaic 
cosmogony reminiscent of the old Upanisads. According to 
the myth, at the beginning of the world cycle, the Great Be- 
ing (mdhdtmyasarira, presumably Brahma or Hiranyagarbha), 
though endowed with all the requisite organs, was neverthe- 
less alone and needed offspring to perform his work (karman). 
Meditating, he first created from his mind a set of 5 “‘funda- 
mental streams” (mukhyasrotas), but he found them insuffi- 
cient for satisfying his needs. He next created a set of 28 
“horizontal strearas” (tiryaksrotas) but again was dissatisfied. 
He then created a set of 9 ‘‘upward moving streams” (érdhva- 
srotas), but his work still could not be accomplished. Finally, 
he created a set of 8 ‘downward streams”? (arvdksrotas), which 
did fulfil his needs. These streams (srotas), of course, are the 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 59 


5 viparyayas, the 28 afaktis, the 9 tustis and the 8 siddhis. The 
fundamental streams are characteristic of the plant realm (or 
the simplest forms of life). The twenty-eight horizontal 
streams are characteristic of the realm of animals, birds, and 
insects. The nine upward streams are characteristic of the divine 
realm, and the eight downward streams are characteristic of 
the human realm (Yuktidipikd on SK 46, p. 127). 

The set of 14 types (caturdagavidha) of sentient life (bhautikasarga). There 
are fourteen levels or realms of sentient creatures “from Brahma down 
to a blade of grass” (SK 53-54): 

(1) the realm of Brahma, 

(2) the realm of Prajapati, 

(3) the realm of Indra, 

(4) the realm of the Pitrs, 

(5) the realm of the Gandharvas, 

6) the realm of the Yaksas or Nagas, 
7) the realm of the Raksases, and 
(8) the realm of the Pisacas. 


The eightfold celestial 
realms (daiva) 


gre 


eS 


(9) the human realm (mdnusaka) 


(10) the realm of (domestic) animals (pagu), | fivefold animal 
(11) the realm of (wild) animals (mrga) | and plant 

(12) the realm of birds and flying insects (paksin), realms 

(13) the realm of crawling creatures (sarisrpa), and (tairyagyona) 
(14) the realm of plants and immovables (sthdvara). J 


The set is obviously a hierarchical cosmology or cosmogony encompass- 
ing the divine or celestial realm (adhidaiva), the external natural world 
(adhibhitta) apart from the human condition, and the human realm 
(adhyalma), and it is within these realms that one encounters the three 
kinds of frustration (dukkhalraya) SK 55 and SK 1). The human realin 
and the animal/plant realm are relatively easy to understand. The divine 
or cclestial realm, liowever, is not as clear, but there are some passages in 
the Yuktidipika that offer some clarification. From one point of view, the 
divine realm is the realm of the mahdtmyasariras, Brahma, Hiranya- 
garbha, Prajapati, and so forth, who perform specific tasks (adhikdra) in 
the cosmos and who arc able to generate their own bodies by a simple 
act of will. From another point of view, the divine realm is the realm 
of the great Samkhya precursors, especially Kapila who emerges at the 
beginning of the world cycle fully endowed with the positive funda- 
mental predispositions of meritorious behavior, knowledge, renuncia- 
tion, and power. Kapila passes on his knowledge to six other great 
Samkhya sadhus, namely, Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana, Asuri, Vodhu, 
and Paficasikha, and an old verse refers to the group together as the 
“seven great seers’ (saptamaharsis) (quoted by Gaudapada under 
SK. 1). From still another point of view, the divine realm is clearly 


60 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


linked up with the process of transmigration through the heavenly 
spheres. The author of the Yuktidipika, in explaining the adjectives 
“samsiddhika,” “‘prakrta,” and “‘vaikrta’”’ as modifiers of the term ‘‘bhava” 
in verse 43 of the Karika (Yuktidipikd, p. 124) comments that those 
beings endowed with “modified” (vaikria) predispositions transmigrate 
in the usual fashion through a continuing process of rebirth, (b) those 
beings endowed with “inherently powerful” (prakria) predispositions 
(namely, the mahdtmyasariras, or Great Beings) can generate whatever 
bodies they wish; and (c) those beings endowed with “innate” (sdm- 
siddhika) or perfect predispositions have subtle bodies that transmigrate 
among “‘the planets, the lunar mansions, and the stars” (grahanaksatra- 
taradi). Furthermore, the author of the Yuktidipika introduces a mythi- 
cal scheme of “‘six ways of reproduction” (safsiddhi) that was presum- 
ably an ancient way of explaining the manner in which divine realm 
reproduction differs from natural reproduction. According to the 
myth (Yuktidipikd, pp.120-121), in the time prior to creaton, spiritual 
entities simply willed or desired themselves into existence. Such is the 
manahsiddhi or the “spiritual power of simple willing or desire.”” When 
this capacity became weakened, entities reproduced themselves with the 
“spiritual power of amorous glances” (caksuhsiddhi). When this became 
weakened, reproduction occurred by the “spiritual power of speaking 
with one another” (vdksiddhi). When this weakened, reproduction 
took place by the “spiritual power of touching” (hastasiddhi). When 
this weakened, reproduction occurred through the “spiritual power of 
embracing”’ (dflesasiddhi), Finally, when even this weakened, repro- 
duction required the “spiritual power of sexual intercourse” (dvandva- 
siddhi), and from then onward the ordinary process of transmigration 
was in operation.?! 

The daiva realm is given a further explication in the late text, Krama- 
dipikd, and although it is difficult to be sure if the interpretation therein 
is an authentic reading of the old Samkhya philosophy, it nevertheless 
provides an interesting set of correlations. In explaining siira 7 of the 
Tattvasamasa (namely, “‘adhyatmam adhibhiitam adhidaivatam ca”) the 
author of the Kramadipika offers the following correlations :”* 


adhydima adhibhiita adhidaiva 

(1) intellect (buddhz) what can be Brahma 
ascertained 
(boddhavya) 

(2) egoity (ahamkara) | what can be Rudra 
thought (mantavya) 

(3) mind (manas) what can be Candra 
intended 


(samkalpitavya ) 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 


(4) 
(3) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 


(13) 


hearing 
touching 
seeing 
tasting 
smelling 
speaking 
grasping 
walking 
excreting 


procreating 


what can be 
heard 

what can be 
touched 
what can be 
seen 

what can be 
tasted 

what can be 
smelled 
what can be 
spoken 

what can be 
grasped 
what can be 
gone to 

what can be 
expelled 
what can be 
sexually enjoyed 


61 
Dig 
Vayu 
Aditya 
Varuna 
Prthivi 
Agni 
Indra 
Visnu 
Mitra 


Prajapati 


The scheme in the Kramadipika is clearly different from the scheme of 
Igvarakrsna in Karikd 53, but both schemes may well have in common a 
tendency to make the divine realm recapitulate the human realm (or 
vice versa, of course). In this regard one wonders if Iévarakrsna’s 
scheme in Karika 53 might be a recapitulation, for example, of the old 
eightfold prakrti, namely: 


(1) 


(2) 
(3) 


(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 


primordial materiality 


(avyakta or prakyti) 
intellect ( buddhi ) 
egoity 

(ahamkara ) 
sound-tanmdira or 
space/ether (bhita) 
touch-tanmdtra or 
wind (bhita ) 
form-tanmdtra or 
fire (bhitta) 


taste-lanmdira or 
water (bhilia) 


smell-tanmdira or earth (bhita) 


(1) 


(6) 
(7) 
(8) 


Brahma 


Prajapati 
Indra 


Pitrs 

Gandharvas 
Yaksas or Nagas 
Raksases 


Pisacas 


Or possibly the first three levels of the divine realm may be a recapitu- 
lation of the threefold ‘internal organ” in the following fashion:?4 


62 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(1) intellect (1) Brahma 

(2) egoity (2) Prajapati 

(3) mind (3) Indra 

(4) sound or space/ether (4)  Pitrs 

(5) touch or wind (5) Gandharvas 

(6) form or fire (6) Yaksas or Nagas 
(7) taste or water (7) Raksases 

(8) smell or earth (8) Pisacas 


One also wonders if a similar recapitulation may be operating with 
respect to the action capacities in relation to the mythical notion of 
“the six ways of reproduction” in the following fashion :?5 


(1)  buddhifahamkara/manas (1) manahsiddhi 
(2) speaking (2) vaksiddhi 

(3) grasping (3) hastasiddhi 
(4) walking (4) caksuhsiddhi 
(5) expelling (5)  aglesasiddhi 
(6) procreating (6) dvandvasiddhi 


Such reconstructions are admittedly risky and may well be wrong, but 
there is ample evidence in the texts that the old Samkhya teachers did 
make methodological use of correlations and recapitulations in their 
speculative attempts to synthesize an overall view of the world. 


Thus far, three kinds of Samkhya enumerations have been presented, 
and it may be useful to pause at this point to summarize in outline form 
the material that has been covered. 


(A) 


Enumerations relating to the basic principles: 

(1) The set of 25 principles; 

(a) The set of 2 principles that are actually distinct or 
separate, namely, pure consciousness and primordial 
materiality ; 

(b) The set of 23 subdivisions of primordial materiality; 

(i) The set of 7 that are generated and also generative, 
including intellect, egoity, and the five subtle elements; 

(ii) The set of 16 products that are generated but not 
generative, including mind, the five senses, the five 
motor capacities, and the five gross elements; 

(2) The set of 3 making up the “internal organ,” including 
intellect, egoity, and mind; 

(3) The set of 10 making up the “external organ,” including 
the five senses and the five motor capacities; 

(4) The set of 13 making up the “essential core” that is a pre- 
requisite for experience, a combination of the threefold 
internal organ and the tenfold external organ; 

(5) The set of 17 representing the complex mental and physical 
structure of egoity; 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 63 


(6) The set of 18 making up the “subtle body” that transmi- 
grates through successive rebirths, including the thirteenfold 
linga together with the five subtle elements ;*° 

(7) Collocations of gross elements that generate one-time-only 
gross bodies that are womb-born, egg-born, seed-born, and 
moisture-born. 


(B) Enumerations relating to the fundamental predispositions: 

(1) The set of 8 predispositions inherent in the intellect, 
carried by the essential core in the course of transmigra- 
tion, “coding” or “programming” a particular life tra- 
jectory in successive rebirths, including meritorious be- 
havior, knowledge, nonattachment, power, demeritorious 
behavior, ignorance, attachment, and impotence—called 
also “efficient causes” ; 

(2) The set of 8 resultant life trajectories, including moving 
upward, final release, dissolution in primordial materiality, 
nonrestraint, moving downward, bondage, transmigration, 
and declining control; 

(3) The set of 5 “winds” or “breaths” that support the embodied 
condition ; 

(4) The set of 5 sources of action that enable an organism to 
persevere through an embodiment; 


(C) Enumerations relating to the phenomenal, empirical world of 
ordinary life: 

(1) The set of 50 categories or the phenomenal creation; 

(a) The set of 5 fundamental misconceptions; 62 subdivisions; 
(b) The set of 28 dysfunctions; 

(c) The set of 9 contentments; 

(d) The set of 8 spiritual attainments; 

(2) The set of 50 “‘streams,’’ which cosmologically recapitulate 
the 50 padarthas; 

(a) The set of 5 mukhpasrotas (plant and other simple life 
forms) ; 

(b) The set of 28 fryaksrotas (animal life) ; 

(c) The set of 9 ardhvasrotas (divine or celestial realms) ; 

(d) The set of 8 arvaksrotas (human realm) ; 

(3) The set of 14 levels of sentient life, including the eightfold 
celestial realm, the one human realm, and the fivefold 
animal and plant realm, or, in other words, adhidaiva, 
adhyatma, and adhibhiita;?” 

(4) The set of 6 “spiritual powers, of reproduction”? (safsiddhis) 
(in descending order from mind-only, amorous glances, speak- 
ing, touching, embracing and, finally, sexual intercourse). 


When one inquires into the manner in which these three kinds of enu- 


64 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


merations are related to one another, a crucial clue is available from the 
Yuktidipika. Yn referring to the various levels of creation in the Samkhya 
system (Yuktidipika, p. 21, on SK 2), the author of the Yuktidipika offers 
the following observation concerning the manifest world (vyakta) : 


The manifest world has three dimensions: (1) a “form (ripa) 
dimension, (b) a “projective” (pravriti) dimension, and (c) a 
“consequent” (phala) dimension. To be specific, the ‘‘form’’ dimen- 
sion ismadeup of intellect, egoity, the five subtle elements, the 
eleven sense and motor capacities, and the five gross elements. 
The “projective” dimension, generally speaking, is twofold: gett- 
ing what is advantageous (hitakdmaprayojana) and avoiding what 
is disadvantageous (ahitakamaprayojana). Specifically, it involves 
the various functions of the “sources of action’ and the 
maintenance of life (prdna, and so forth) in terms of the five 
“winds.” The “consequent” dimension is (likewise) twofold, 
namely, the perceptible, manifest, or apparent (drsta) and the 
imperceptible or latent (adysta). The perceptible or manifest 
relates to the attainments, contentments, dysfunctions, and funda- 
mental misconceptions. The imperceptible or latent relates to the 
acquisition of a particular body in the cycle of rebirth (samsdra) 
within the hierarchy of manifest life from the realm of the gods 
(Brahma, and so forth) to simple plant life.” 

Elsewhere, the author of the Yuktidipika refers to the three dimensions of 


the manifest world with a slightly different terminology, namely, under 
SK 56 (p. 140): 


(There is a dimension) called tativa, made up of intellect and so 
forth; (a dimension) called bhdva, made up of meritorious behavior, 
and so forth; (and a dimension) called bhiia, made up of the at- 
mosphere, and so forth. 


Bringing together, then, the three kinds of enumerations presented thus 
far with these references from the Yuktidipika, there would appear to 
be three distinct yet related dimensions in the full Samkhya system: 

(A) The “‘constitutive’? dimension, referred to as the “form” 
(rapa), the ‘“‘principle”’ (tativa) or the ‘‘essential core” (linga) 
realm; 

(B) The “projective” dimension, referred to as the “‘projecting”’ or 
the “intentional” (pravrtii), the “‘predispositional” (bhava), or 
the “‘efficient cause and effect” (nimittanaimittika) realm; and 

(G) The ‘‘consequent’” dimension, referred to as the “resultant” 
(phala), the ‘‘creaturely” or ‘‘what has become” (bhita), or 
the “phenomenal creation”’ (pratyayasarga) realm, or, in other 
words, the phenomenal, empirical world of ordinary experi- 
ence (bhautikasarga). 

Dimensions (A) and (B) interact or combine with one another in gene- 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 65 


rating dimension (C). Referring once again to the computer and lin- 
guistic metaphors mentioned earlier, if (A) is the “hardware” of the 
Samkhya system and (B) the “software,” then dimension (C) is, as it 
were, the “‘priniout”’ of the functioning system. Or, again, if dimension 
(A) is the deep-structural “syntactic” component of the Samkhya 
system, and dimension (B) the deep-structural “‘semantic’”’ component 
of the system, then dimension (C) is, as it were, the surface-structural 
phonological component. Such metaphors, of course, are only rough 
approximations, but they have at least a heuristic value in directing 
attention to the systemic aspects of the old Samkhya philosophy. 


II. SAmxKuya as Process MATERIALISM 


At the outset of the discussion of Samkhya enumerations, primordial 
materiality was described as being inherently generative, but attention 
was thereafter focused on the various principles, predispositions, and 
categories of the Samkhya world view, or what the Yuktidipika calls the 
“constitutive” or “form” (ripa) realm, the “projective” or “inten- 
tional” (pravrtii) realm, and the ‘‘consequent”’ or “‘resultant’’ (phaia) 
realm. As a result, the basic components and core structures of the 
Samkhya world have been exhibited, but little has been said about the 
Samkhya conceptualization of the inner essence or the underlying 
reality of primordial materiality itself. Regarding this latter issue, 
Samkhya philosophy makes use of a formulation that is unique in the 
history of Indian philosophy (and unique, for that matter, in the general 
history of philosophy as well), namely, the notion of ériguna or traigunya, 
which may be translated in this context as “tripartite constituent pro- 
cess.” 

The word “guna” in Sanskrit usually means a “cord,” “string,” or 
“thread.” The term can refer to a “rope” or to the various “strands”’ 
that make up a rope. Moreover, the word can be used in the sense of 
“secondary” or “subordinate,” and in much of Indian philosophical 
discussion (for example, especially in Nyaya-Vaisesika) the term is 
used to refer to the notion of a “quality” or “attribute” of a “‘substance” 
(dravya) or thing. The term also comes to be employed in moral dis- 
course, so that “‘guna’”’ may refer to “outstanding merit” or ‘“‘moral excel- 
lence.” 

In Samkhya philosophy, however, the term takes on a peculiar techni- 
cal sense, which combines many of the above meanings but goes much 
further as well. On one level in Samkhya, guna is a “cord” or “thread,” 
a constituent “strand” of primordial materiality. On another level, 
guna is “secondary” or “subordinate” in the sense that it is secondary 
to what is primary or principal (pradhdna). On still another level, 
guna implies moral distinctions in that it refers to the activity of prakrtt 
as the basis of satisfaction, frustration, and confusion, or moral excel- 


65 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


lence, moral decadence, and amoral indifference. On yet other levels, 
guna refers to aesthetic and intellectual matters and is said to pervade 
the entire sphere of ordinary experience. The term “guna,” in other 
words, comes to encompass, according to Samkhya, the entire range of 
subjective and objective reality, whether manifest (vyakia) or unmani- 
fest (avpakia). It becomes the “thread” that runs through all of ordi- 
nary experience and throughout the natural world, tying together, as it 
were, the tattva realm, the bhava realm, and the bhitta realm. 

In attempting to understand the Samkhya notion of guna, it is impor- 
tant to recognize at the outset that guna is never enumerated or counted 
as a tattva, a bhava, or a bhiita (that is to say, guna is never included within 
the list of 25 tattvas). It is not an “‘entity,” a “predisposition,” or a 
phenomenal “‘structure,”’ nor is it any combination of these, although, 
to be sure, it is presupposed in the formulation of all entities, predisposi- 
tions, and structures. Moreover, although three gunas are mentioned, 
namely, sativa, rajas, and tamas, the basic Samkhya conceptualization 
is that of one, continuous and unique process with three discernible 
“moments” or “constituents.” There is one continuous process of 
transformation (parindma), which is the inherent generativity of pri- 
mordial materiality, but this one continuous process manifests itself in 
three inextricably related ‘“‘constituents” that intensionally define the 
unique, continuous process itself. Rather than referring to “three” 
gunas, therefore, it is perhaps more accurate to refer to a “tripartite 
process,” which the Sanskrit language permits withsuch expressions 
as “‘triguna” or another word meaning the same thing, “‘traigunya” 
(meaning “‘possessed of three constituents” or “the state or condition 
of being made up of three constituents” ). 

This tripartite process, which is primordial materiality, may be des- 
cribed either with reference to objectivity or with reference to subjecti- 
vity, because, according to Samkhya philosophy, the tripartite process 
underlies both sorts of descriptions. From an objective perspective, 
Samkhya describes the tripartite process as a continuing flow of primal 
material energy that is capable of spontaneous activity (rajas), rational 
ordering (saitva), and determinate formulation or objectivation (tamas). 
Primal material energy can activate or externalize (pravrtti, cala) itself 
in a manner that is transparent or intelligible (/aghu, prakdfaka) and 
substantial or determinate (guru, niyama), and all manifestations of 
primary material energy are, therefore, purposeful, coherent, and ob- 
jective. From a subjective perspective, Samkhya describes the tripar- 
tite process as a continuing flow of experience that is capable of pre- 
reflective spontaneous desiring or longing (rajas), reflective discerning 
or discriminating (sattva), and continuing awareness of an opaque, 
enveloping world (tamas). The continuing flow of experience actively 
seeks continuing gratification (cala, upastambhaka), reflectively discerns 
the intelligible dimensions within the flow of experience (prakhyd, 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 67 


prakdsa), and continually encounters contents within experience that 
are opaque (varanaka) and oppressive (visdda). Moreover, the quest for 
gratification is frequently frustrated (dukkha), and, although there are 
occasional times of reflective discernment that bring satisfaction (sukha), 
there are also moments when experience is completely overwhelmed 
by the sheer plenitude of the world (moha). In everyday, ordinary 
life, therefore, experience tends to vacilate between the discomforting 
failure (ghora) to attain gratification, occasional moments of reflective 
comprehension that bring a sense of comfort (santa), and moments of 
confused (mid¢ha) uncertainty. 

Philosophy (jijfidsa@) begins, according to Samkhya, as a result of the 
experience of failure and frustration and represents a desire to overcome 
that frustration. Reflection reveals, however, what might be called a 
double-bind problem. There is, first of all, the recognition of tripartite 
process within the flow of experience itself, that is to say, the realiza- 
tion that frustration (ghora, duhkha) is but a moment or modality in- 
extricably linked with occasional other moments of comfort (sdnta, 
sukha) and confused uncertainty (midha, moha). There is no possibi- 
lity, in other words, of permanently overcoming frustration without also 
relinquishing the other constituents of the tripartite process that are 
inextricably allied with it. The constituents of the tripartite process 
presuppose one another in a dialectical fashion. There can be no grati- 
fication unless there is something external to be appropriated; there 
can be no reflective discerning in the absence of discernibles; and there 
can be no confused uncertainty in the absence of someone seeking dis- 
cernment. Thus, the constituents of the tripartite process are described 
as being “mutually dominant over, dependent upon, generative of, 
and cooperative with, one another” (anyonydfrayajananamithunavrttayas 
ca gunadh, SK 12). Although apparently distinct and contradictory in 
function to one another, the constituents of tripartite process neverthe- 
less operate together as the wick, oil, and flame of a lamp operate 
together in producing light (SK13). More than this, however, there is, 
secondly, the recognition that the subjective dilemma of the flow of 
experience is the obverse side of the inherent objective dilemma of 
primordial materiality itself. That is to say, according to Samkhya 
philosophy, there is no polarity or bifurcation of subjective and objec- 
tive within tripartite process, no ontological distinction between ‘“‘mind” 
and “matter” or “thought” and “‘extension.”’ The subjective flow of 
experience is simply another way of describing the objective primal 
material energy that unfolds in a continuing tripartite process of spon- 
taneous activity, rational ordering, and determinate formulation, Put 
another way, the subjective flow of experience that is at one and an- 
other time frustrating, pleasurably discernible, and overwhelmingly 
encompassing is nondifferent from the primal material energy that is 
at one and another time purposeful, coherent, and objective. The 


68 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tripartite process of miilaprakrti is, in other words, a sort of philosophical 
Klein bottle or Mébius strip in which the usual distinctions of subjec- 
tive/objective, mind/body, thought/extension simply do not apply. 
Therefore, the subjective dilemma of frustration is aninherent dilemma 
of the world itself, or as the refrain in the Gita puts it, “‘...gund gunesu 
vartanta iti,” or “‘...the constituents (primordial materiality) flow on 
(endlessly ).”’30 

From the perspective of the analysis of the inner essence or under- 
lying reality of primordial materiality itself, therefore, the notion of 
tripartite process in Samkhya philosophy is clearly tending in the direc- 
tion of a reductive materialism in the sense that it “reduces” our usual 
notions of mind, thinking, ideas, sensations, feelings, and so forth, to 
constituents of primal material energy.*! Intellect, egoity, or mind are 
as much manifestations of tripartite process as are trees, stones, or other 
manifestations of gross matter. Ordinary awareness or thinking (antah- 
Karanavrtti, cittavytti, buddhi) is but a “moment,” or constituent, of conti- 
nuous tripartite process that is inextricably linked with spontaneous 
activity and determinate formulation. 

The constituents of tripartite process (sativa, rajas, tamas, gunapari- 
nama, triguna, traigunya) encompass manifest and unmanifest reality 
from “Brahma down to a blade of grass” (brahmddistambaparyanta, 
SK 54). Therefore, the three realms described in the previous section 
on Samkhya enumerations (namely, the “constitutive,” the “projec- 
tive,” and the “consequent” ) have tripartite process as their underlying 
reality or essence, but, according to Samkhya, actual transformation 
(parinama) only occurs in the first realm (the ripa or tattva realm). 
In the other two realms, that is to say, in the “projective” and “‘conse- 
quent” realms, there is apparently only simple “continuing activity” 
(praspanda). 

The transactions in the first or tativa realm represent what K. C. 
Bhattacharya has aptly called actual ‘‘causal” or “noumenal’’ trans- 
formations.32 That is to say, the tattvas (buddhi, and so forth) that 
emerge from miilaprakrti (because of the catalytic presence of purusa) 
are actual material transformations of primordial materiality made up 
of the constituents of tripartite process. The set of 23 ‘“‘evolutes” or 
emergents are called material effects (kdrya) of a primary material 
cause (kdrana), which is milaprakrti or pradhdna. These 23 effects pre- 
exist (satkdrya) in the material cause in the sense, described earlier, that 
they are specifications of the inherent generativity of primordial mate- 
riality. Put another way, they are actual manifestations (vyakia) of the 
unmanifest (avyakia) potencies that reside inherently in primordial 
materiality. Moreover, because materiality itself is construed primarily 
in terms of tripartite process, it follows that the emegence of the various 
effects together with the causal matrix from which they derive is charac- 
terized in terms of continuing dynamic transformation. Because 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 69 


tripartite process encompasses both “subjective” and “objective” (or 
“mind” and “matter” or “thought” and “‘extension”’), dynamic trans- 
formation is both analytic and synthetic (or both a priori and a poste- 
riori). Analytically, each manifest component is a “‘part”’ of the “whole” 
that is primordial materiality. Synthetically, each emergent is the 
manifestation of an actual “effect” that preexists in the unmanifest 
potentiality of the primary material ‘“‘cause.”’ The tripartite process of 
emergence is, thus, both “logical” and “natural.” 

From the perspective of the “logic” of tripartite process, it would 
appear that Samkhya wishes to argue that prereflective spontaneous 
activity (rajas) implies an inherent, though latent, rational ordering 
(sattva) and determinate formulation (tamas), for an awareness of 
spontaneous activity could not arise in the absence of reflective discern- 
ing vis-4-vis some kind of formulation. Reflective discerning (sativa) 
implies an inherent, though latent, determinate formulation (amas) 
and spontaneous activity (rajas), for reflective discerning could not 
occur in the absence of a content discernible through some kind of 
process of appropriation. Determinate formulation (¢amas) implies 
an inherent, though latent, reflective discerning (sativa) and sponta- 
neous activity (rajas), for a determinate formulation could not arise in 
the absence of a spontaneous process that allows for reflective discern- 
ing. All three constituents of tripartite process are always present to, 
or presuppose, one another. If one refrains from attempting to formu- 
late an interpretation of tripartite process, then the process is simply 
“unmanifest” (avyakia). When, however, any attempt at formulation 
takes place, a logical sequence manifests (vyakia) itself in which each 
constituent implies or presupposes the other two.%* 

From the perspective of the “nature’”’ of tripartite process, it would 
appear that Samkhya wishes to argue that, although it must be con- 
ceded that prereflective spontaneous activity (rajas) is a prerequisite 
for all process (whether logical or natural), reflective discerning (sativa) 
is nevertheless first in the emergence of manifest ‘‘effects”’ insofar as 
tripartite process only begins to be aware of itself in that constituent. 
Thus, intellect as a principle or an effect is said to be the first mani- 
festation of primordial materiality. Its unique function is reflective 
discerning, ascertainment, or determination (adhyavasdya, SK 23), 
largely derivative, in other words, of sativa as reflective discerning or 
rational ordering but presupposing the latent possibilities of spontane- 
ous activity (rajas) and determinate formulation (amas). It reflects, 
therefore, or encompasses the complete content of tripartite process, at 
least implicitly, so that the entire order of manifest being is present in it 
as the reflective constituent of primordial materiality. It is presubject- 
ive (or intersubjective) and preobjective in the sense that it is at one 
and the same time the inherent reflective discerning and the inherent 
rationality of tripartite process. Moreover, to the extent that its 


70 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


discerning reveals the necessity for prereflective spontaneous activity 
(rajas) as preceding (at least logically) its inherent discerning, the buddhi 
also becomes the locus for what might be called prereflective “willing,” 
not in the sense of egoistic willing (which comes “later” with the emer- 
gence of egoity), but in the sense of being predisposed to certain kinds 
of activity, and in the sense of being capable of initiating or creating 
new courses of action and various transformations within experience. 
The buddhi, in other words, is also the locus of the fundamental predis- 
positions and is capable of generating the pratyayasarga or “phenomenal 
creation.” Reflective discerning by the intellect, therefore, is both 
passive and active, passive in the sense that it reflectively discerns 
the ongoing transactions of tripartite process and active in the sense 
that it is able to project its own destiny and its own formulation of 
itself. 

Egoity is implicit in intellect as reflective discerning becoming aware 
that it functions as only one constituent of tripartite process, which 
also implies spontaneous activity and determinate formulation or objec- 
tivation. Reflective discerning loses its innocence, as it were, as itrecog- 
nizes that its pure reflecting function cannot be disembodied from that 
which it reflects. Egoity, therefore, is ‘‘self-awareness” (abhimana, SK 
24), not in thesense of free-floating and creative discerning, but, rather, 
in the sense that creative discerning is dependent upon and derivative 
of embodiment. The pleasure or joy of reflective discerning gives way 
to the emergence of a sense of finitude or, as K. C. Bhattacharya puts 
it, egoity is “*...the mind as active I becoming the standing me.” Egoity, 
in other words, is ordinary subjectivity in which reflective discerning 
is always revealed as being inextricably involved with spontaneous 
activity (rajas) and determinate formulation (tamas), that is to say, 
the “‘...I becoming the standing me.” Asa result, egoity is the locus of 
frustration and is largely derivative of rajas, for it is on this level that 
tripartite process begins to reveal itself as the embodied specifications 
upon which both reflective discerning (sattva) and determinate for- 
mulation (tamas) are dependent. Egoity generates (taijasdd ubhayam, 
SK 25) a “twofold creation” (dvividhasarga, SK 24), the “specified” 
or “modified” (vaikrta, SK 23) presuppositions for all reflective dis- 
cerning (sativa), namely, the functions of conceptualizing or ‘‘explicat- 
ing” (samkalpaka, SK 27) or thinking (manas) together with sensing 
(the five buddhindriyas) and motor functioning (the five karmendriyas), 
and the first (bhatadi, SK 25) determinate formulation (tamas) or 
objectivation, namely, the five subtle elements (tanmdatras). Finally, the 
five subtle elements, generated out of egoity in its tamas modality as 
determinate formulation, generate the further tamas specifications of 
the gross elements (mahdabhittas). 

That the five subtle elements as tamas or determinate formulation are 
derived from egoity and in turn generate gross material existence under- 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 7] 


scores in the most radical fashion the Samkhya claim that tripartite 
process is overall a closed, causal system of reductive or process material- 
ismin which the most pleasurable reflective discerning (sattva, sukha, 
buddhi) differs neither in essence nor in kind from the most painful 
transactions of frustrated gratification (rajas, duhkha, ahamkara) nor 
from the most oppressive presence of opaque formulation (danas, 
moha, tanmdatra/bhita). Ordinary thinking, willing, and feeling are but 
the “subjective” obverse side of the ‘‘objective” ongoing transactions 
of tripartite process in its constituent unfoldings as sativa, rajas, and 
lamas. It has been said that the intention of Hegelian philosophy is to 
show that, finally, substance is subject. The Samkhya conceptualiza- 
tion of the tripartite process appears to intend precisely the opposite. 
For Samkhya the apparent subject (namely, internal awareness in 
terms of buddhi, ahamkéra, manas, and so forth) is really substance 
(miilaprakyti as triguna).*® 

Such, then, is the underlying nature of the “‘causal” or “‘noumenal”’ 
tattva (or riipa) realm with its transactions as the tripartite process. 
The transactions in the second and third realms (that is to say, the 
bhava and bhiita realms) are also related to tripartite process but pre- 
sumably not in terms of the ‘‘causal” tripartite process. The bhava 
and. bhita realms are secondary or derivative constructions that can be 
generated or projected by the ongoing simple ‘‘continuing activity” 
(praspanda) of the tripartite process. Again, to use K. C. Bhattacharya’s 
idiom, if the attva realm is the realm of “causal” or ‘“‘noumenal”’ trans- 
formations, then the bAdva and bhata realms are the realms of “non- 
causal” or “phenomenal” transactions.** Residing in the buddhi, in 
other words, in addition to its constitutive tativa identity as reflective 
discerning or ascertainment is a special projective capacity (the bhdvas) 
capable of generating a derivative, secondary set of manifestations, 
constituted to be sure by sativa, rajas, and tamas, (as are all manifesta- 
tions), but not unfolding in terms of the tripartite process. This deri- 
vative, secondary set of manifestations unfolds, presumably, by simple 
continuing activity, and its components are related to one another as 
nimittanaimittika (efficient causes and effects), or, in other words, the 
karmic transactions of ordinary life and experience (bhoga, upabhoga). 
The Yuktidipika provides some documentation for such an interpreta- 
tion in its discussion of the inherent activity of ériguna: 


...activity or change can be construed in two ways, namely (a) 
fundamental transformation and (b) simple continuing activity. 
When there emerges a new state or condition of manifestation that 
has distinctly different characteristics, there is a fundamental trans- 
formation. The maintenance of ordinary life and its ongoing activi- 
ties, like speaking, and so forth, may be referred to as simple conti- 
nuing activity.3” 


72 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Fundamental transformation is chiefly characteristic of the ripa or 
tattva realm. Simple continuous activity is characteristic of the pravriti 
(bhava) and phala (bhiita) realms. Or, putting the matter in terms of 
causation, the riipa or tattva realm is that realm in which material 
(kdranakarya) causation operates, the pravriti and phala realms are those 
realms in which efficient (nimittanaimittika) causation operates. 

Within the predispositional or projective realm (bhava or pravrtit), 
those predispositions of the intellect that evoke the inherent reflective 
discerning of the buddhi principle are referred to as its sattvika predis- 
positions (namely, meritorious behavior, knowledge, nonattachment, 
and power, SK 23). Those predispositions of the buddhi which evoke 
the objectifying or reifying tendencies of the buddhi principle are refer- 
red to as its tdmasa predispositions (namely, demeritorious behavior, 
ignorance, attachment, and impotence). Presumably, as mentioned 
earlier, the predispositions themselves, as the active or creative capacity 
of intellect in contrast to its passive tattvic constitution as reflective 
discerning, are derivative of the spontaneous externalizing activity of 
prereflective rajasa tendencies within primordial materiality, though 
this is nowhere directly stated in the extant Samkhya texts. In any 
case, the constellation of predispositions residing in the buddhi principle 
in any particular rebirth predisposes the transmigrating liga to 
project a resultant phenomenal creation with its fifty categories of 
ordinary experience, with sativa tendencies dominant in the divine or 
celestial regions, rajas tendencies dominant on the human level and 
tamas tendencies dominant in the external gross world.*8 

Whereas the progression of fundamental principles in terms of the 
tripartite process and material causality cannot be changed inasmuch 
as they constitute the “‘causal”’ or ‘“‘noumenal”’ reality of everything that 
is, the transactions of the projective (bhava) and consequent (phala) 
realms inasmuch as they are ‘“‘noncausal”’ (in a material, constitutive 
sense) or “‘phenomenal’’ tendencies in terms of gunapraspanda and effi- 
cient causality, are subject to change. In other words, one cannot 
change what is, but one can change one’s perspective or one’s predis- 
position toward what is. Thus, knowledge or knowing (jfdna) and 
insufficient discriminating or ignorance (ajfidna), according to Sam- 
khya philosophy, pertain only to the projective and consequent realms. 
Knowledge and ignorance are only predispositions. They are never 
principles. Put another way, knowing can never change or reconsti- 
tute being; it can only change our predisposition toward what is and 
the manner in which we pursue our life trajectories. 

Before proceeding to discuss the Samkhya notion of purusa and the 
Samkhya epistemology, it may be useful to offer a chart, which brings 
together the material presented thus far. 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 73 


(1) consciousness / (2) primordial materiality =the unmanifest (ayyakéa) 
(furusa) (milaprakrti) =traigunya (sattva, rajas, 
tamas) 


“the manifest world” (vyakta) =triguna 


ee 


‘The constitutive realm The projective realm The consequent realm 
(A) ripa-realm (B) pravrtti-realm (C) phala-realm 
tattva realm bhava realm bhita realm 
linga realm nimittanaimittika pratyayasarga 
buddhi buddhibhavas 50 padarthas 
ahamkéra dharmaladharma 5 viparyayas 
11 indriyas Jiténalajiiana 28 asaktis 
5 tanmatras vairag yalavairégya 9 tustis 
5 mahabhitas aisvarya/anaisvarya 8 siddhis 
L LINGA | + | BHAVA ———> BHAUTIKASARGA | 
triguna|parindma triguna/praspanda 
karanalkarya, satkdrya nimittanaimittika 
nirupabhoga (devoid of upabhoga, apavarga (ordinary experience and the 
ordinary experience) experience of release) 
avifesa (with the ex- visesa 
ception of the bhatas) 
“causal” or “nou- “noncausal” or “phenomenal” 
menal” pratyaksa, anumdna, aptavacana 


karman and samsdra 


duhkha andfor kaivalya 


III. SAmxkuya Aas CONTENTLESS CONSCIOUSNESS 


The discussion of the Samkhya system has thus far focused almost 
exclusively on the notion of primordial materiality, its underlying 
essence as tripartite process, its “‘causal’? or “noumena]”’ transforma- 
tion into the manifest tattva realm, and its “‘noncausal”’ or “‘pheno- 
menal” projections and permutationsin terms of the fundamental 
predispositions, the intellectual creation, and the spheres of rebirth 
and transmigration. Thus, although twenty-four of the twenty-five 
basic principles have been discussed, in reality, according to Samkhya, 
only one “thing” or “‘entity”’ or “existent” has been described, name- 
ly, primordial materiality. The twenty-three fundamental principles 
(intellect, and so forth) that “manifest” (vyakta) themselves from 
“unmanifest”’ (avyakta) primordial materiality are all “parts” of a 
totally functioning “whole,” which is primordial materiality, or mate- 
rial “effects” (kdrya) of a primal material “cause” (kdrana). The 
“thread” that ties the “whole” together is tripartite process. 

The Samkhya notion of tripartite process was an attractive and 


74 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


powerful solution to many of the older speculative problems in South 
Asian thought, attractive and powerful because it pulled together so 
many loose ends from the older speculative potpourri of random theori- 
zing, but attractive and powerful also because it provided an indepen- 
dent rational basis for serious reflection quite apart from received reve- 
lation, but nevertheless very much in harmony with the received heri- 
tage. There had been a variety of speculations in the ancient brahma- 
nical and heterodox periods regarding the notion of selfhood, ranging 
from the cosmic dtman of the oldest Upanisads through such notions as 
ksetrajita, bhatatman, mahan Gtman the Jain notion of jiva, and, of course, 
archaic Buddhist notions of no-self (andiman).*® Similarly, there had 
been a variety of speculations concerning the cosmos, the process of 
rebirth and transmigration, and the manner in which the physical 
world had come into existence — including archaic element lists in the 
Upanisads, the atomism of the early Vaisesika, the pratityasamutpdda 
of the Buddhists, theories about a creative ‘‘Lord” or ifvara among 
early bhakti followers, and even “arguments” about random chance 
among materialists.4° Moreover, the issue of the relation between self- 
hood, on the one hand, and the phenomenal, empirical world, on the 
other, was a pressing issue even in the earliest phases of speculation. 
What Samkhya philosophy accomplished with its conceptualization of 
the tripartite process was an intuitively cogent intellectual synthesis of 
many of these older strands of speculation. The transactions of intellect, 
egoity, and mind were now construed as rational manifestations of an 
intelligible, uniform, and real world “from Brahma down to a blade 
of grass,”’ and the process of rebirth and transmigration was given a 
meaningful interpretation. More than this, however, as already indi- 
cated, this was accomplished largely on the basis of independent reason- 
ing, aided to be sure by the “‘reliable testimony” of the rsis and the 
pronouncements of scripture, but independently derived nevertheless. 
It is perhaps hardly surprising, therefore, that Samkhya philosophy 
should have been so influential in ancient Indian culture. Its concep- 
tualization of the tripartite process became a kind of intellectual charter 
for many aspects of scientific and rational endeavour, widely used both 
in its technical sense and as a useful heuristic device in such divergent 
fields as medicine, law, ethics, philosophy, and cosmology. 

In addition to the twenty-four principles that make up the one 
“entity” or “existent” that is primordial materiality as tripartite, how- 
ever, the Samkhya system also asserts that there is a second kind of 
“existent,” distinct from primordial materiality and uninvolved in its 
transactions, yet nevertheless a crucial component for the manifest 
functioning of that materiality. The Samkhya system refers to this 
second kind of “‘existent”’ as “‘purusa.”’ The term “purusa,” though in 
origin meaning ‘‘man” or “‘person”’? and used synonymously in pre- 
philosophical contexts with the old Upanisadic notion of dtman or Self, 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 75 


came to have a peculiar technical meaning in philosophical Samkhya 
in much the same way as the old word “‘guna”’ was reinterpreted and 
given a new sense by the Samkhya teachers.*! It is quite likely, in fact, 
that the two technical notions of the constituent process and conscious- 
ness developed in tandem, for it is clear enough that the precision and 
comprehensiveness of the notion of ériguna would require a fundamental 
rethinking of the old Upanisadic “ghost in the machine”’.** To be sure, 
one might anticipate that the notion of the constituent process with its 
tendency toward a “reductive materialism” might well have rendered 
the older Upanisadic notions of selfhood superfluous. In other words, 
one might anticipate that Samkhya would have moved in the direction 
of some sort of no-self theory on analogy with comparable develop- 
ments within archaic Buddhist traditions or in the direction of a 
thoroughgoing materialism. This did not happen, however. Instead, 
the Samkhya teachers worked out an eccentric form of dualism with pri- 
mordial materiality or the tripartite constituent process (encompassing 
twenty-four fundamental principles) as one kind of “existent,” and 
pure consciousness (purusa, a twenty-fifth fativa) as a second kind of 
“existent.” 

The term “eccentric” is meant to indicate simply that the Samkhya 
dualism does not fitthe usual or conventional notions of dualism. If 
one looks, for example, at the classic expression of the dualist position 
in Western thought, namely, that of Descartes, one realizes immedia- 
tely that the Samkhya somehow misses the mark. In his Principles of 
Philosophy Descartes comments as follows about the dualist position: 


Thus extension in length, breadth and depth, constitutes the nature 
of corporeal substance; and thought constitutes the nature of think- 
ing substance. For all else that may be attributed to body presup- 
poses extension, and is but a mode of this extended thing; as every- 
thing that we find in mind is but so many diverse forms of thinking.® 


In his Meditations Descartes sets forth the essence of the dualist pers- 
pective as follows: 


... because, on the one side, I have a clear and distinct idea of myself 
inasmuch as I am only a thinking and unextended thing, and as, 
on the other, I possess a distinct idea of body, inasmuch as itis only 
an extended and unthinking thing, it is certain that this I (that is 
to say, my soul by which Iam what I am), is entirely and abso- 
lutely distinct from my body and can exist without it.“ 


A modern statement of the conventional dualist position is that of the 
analytic philosopher Kai Nielsen, who puts the matter as follows: 


The core of the dualist claim...could...be put in this way: There 
are at least two radically different kinds of reality, existence or 


76 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


phenomena: the physical and the mental.... Physical phenomena 
or realities are extended in space and time and are perceptually 
public, or, like electrons and photons, are constituents of things 
that are perceptually public.... Mental phenomena or realities, 
by contrast, are unextended, not in space, and are inherently private.® 


Whether one considers the Cartesian position or the modern, analytic 
restatement of it, according to Kai Nielsen, the interpreter of Samkhya 
must admit that the Samkhya is not a dualism in these senses. Simi- 
larly, if one considers the theological or ethical dualism of Christian 
thought — in the manner of Pauline theology or later treatments such 
as those of Augustine, and so forth — again, the Samkhya is not a dual- 
ism in these senses. Similarly, if one considers the dualistic analyses 
in Plato or Aristotle, or the Kantian dualism of noumenon and pheno- 
mena, or a phenomenological dualism of noesis and noema, the Samkhya 
is not really dualist in any of these senses. Even within the framework 
of Indian philosophy, the garden-variety dualisms of the later Vedanta 
schools or the older archaic jiva-ajiva dualism of the Jains do not ade- 
quately fit the Samkhya case. Regarding all of these positions, Sam- 
khya philosophy with its notion of tripartite process would be a critique 
of the traditional or conventional dualist position and approaches, 
rather, as has been shown in the preceding section, the opposite 
position or what modern Western philosophy of mind would call 
“reductive materialism,” that is to say, a philosophical view that 
“reduces” ‘‘mind”’ talk, or ‘‘mentalistic” talk to “brain-process” talk, 
or, in other words, construes mind, thought, ideas, sensations, and so 
forth, in terms of some sort of material stuff, or energy, or force (as has 
been argued, for example, by such thinkers as H. Feigl, J. J. C. Smart, 
Kai Nielsen, and others).4* For, according to Samkhya philosophy, 
the experiences of intellect, egoity, and mind, and the “raw feels” 
such as frustration or satisfaction — or, in other words, what conven- 
tional dualists would consider to be “inherently private’””— are simply 
subtle reflections of a primordial materiality, a primordial materiality 
undergoing continuous transformation by means of its constituent 
unfolding as spontaneous activity, reflective discerning, and determi- 
nate formulation. Thus, the modern reductive materialists’ claim 
that “sensations are identical with certain brain processes” would 
have a peculiar counterpart in the Samkhya claim that ‘‘awarenesses”’ 
(antahkaranavrtti or cittavriti) are identical with certain guna modalities. 
Or again, the modern reductive materialists’ claim that the conven- 
tional notions of the “inherently private’ or the ‘‘mental” are only 
linguistic fictions that inhibit a more correct understanding of the 
human situation would find its peculiar counterpart in the Samkhya 
claim that the notion of the discreet ‘individual’ or the “individual 
ego” seriously inhibits a more correct understanding of an organism 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 77 


as a composite constellation of a subtle material transmigrating linga 
(made up of intellect, egoity, mind, and so forth) periodically being 
reborn in gross physical bodies. Both positions, in other words, appear 
to criticize the notion of an inherently private, mentalistic “ghost 
in the machine” as being a product of verbal carelessness (vikalpa) 
brought about by the failure to make relevant distinctions (aviveka, 
avidya). 

At this point, however, the comparison of Samkhya philosophy with 
reductive materialism breaks down, for instead of expelling the tradi- 
tional or conventional ‘“‘ghost in the machine” and getting on with the 
task of describing the world and experience without “ghost talk,” 
Samkhya as it were refurbishes the “ghost,” stripping it of its conven- 
tional attributes and reintroducing it in the framework of an ‘‘eccen- 
tric’ dualism in the sense that the “ghost”? no longer has to do with 
“mind talk, “mentalist” talk, or ‘‘ego”’ talk, all of which latter are fully 
reducible to guna talk in good reductive materialist fashion. Samkhya 
designates its eccentric ghost as ‘‘consciousness” (cetana, purusa), thus 
introducing a fundamental distinction between “awareness” (antah- 
karanavrtti, cittavrttt) and ‘‘consciousness”’ (cetana, purusa) and requiring 
a radically different kind of dualism, namely, a dualism between a 
closed, causal system of reductive materialism (encompassing ‘“‘aware- 
ness” or the “private” life of the mind), on the one hand, and a non- 
intentional and contentless consciousness, on the other. Whereas aware- 
ness (antahkaranavrtti) (namely, intellect, egoity and mind) is active, 
intentional, engaged and at every moment a reflection of subtle mate- 
riality; consciousness (purusa) cannot think or act and is not ontologi- 
cally involved or intentionally related in any sense to primordial mate- 
riality other than being passively present. Consciousness, in other 
words, is sheer contentless presence (sdksitva). Samkhya philosophy 
thereby rejects idealism without giving up an ultimately transcendent 
“consciousness.” It also rejects conventional dualism by reducing 
“mentalist”? talk to one or another transformation of material “‘aware- 
ness”; and it modifies reductive materialism by introducing a unique 
notion of “‘consciousness”’ that is nonintentional and has nothing to do 
with ordinary mental awareness. 

This eccentric Samkhya dualism is set forth in verses 3, 10, and 11 of 
the Samkhyakarika. The dualism is introduced in the following fashion: 
Primordial materiality is ungenerated; the seven — intellect, and so 
forth — are both generated and generative. The sixteen are generated. 
Consciousness is neither generated nor generative. (SK 3) 

The four hemistichs of the verse may be exhibited as follows: 

(I) Primordial materiality is ungenerated (miilaprakrtir avikrtir) ; 
(II) The seven —intellect, and so forth—are both generated and 
generative (mahadddyah prakrtivikrtayah sapta) ; 

(III) The sixteen are generated (sodasakas tu vikaro) ; 


78 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(IV) Consciousness is neither generated nor generative (na prakrtir 
na vikrtih purusah).47 

The purusa is clearly distinguished from all other fundamental princi- 
ples in the sense of not being implicated in what is generating or gene- 
rated. Moreover, the first hemistich is a negation of the third hemistich, 
and the fourth hemistich is a negation of the second hemistich. It 
follows, then, that whatever is predicated of the second part will provide 
a negative description of the fourth part, and whatever is predicated 
of the third part will provide negative descriptions of both the first 
part and the fourth part (inasmuch as the fourth part is similar to the 
first part to the extent that it too is ungenerated), The sequences of 
predications are then presented in verses 10-11 and may be exhibited 
in the accompanying chart. 


Consciousness Primordial Materiality 
(purusa) (milaprakrti) 
Unmanifest Manifest 
(jfia or purusa) (avyakta) (vyakta) 
Sao uncaused (ahetumat) caused (hetumat) 
(Predications : . 
of the third nontemporal (nitya) temporal (anitya) 
Pian nonspatial (uyapin) spatial (axydpin) 
negative stable (akriya) unstable (sakriya) 
eee simple (eka) complex (ancka) 
and fourth unsupported (andérita) supported (4srita) 
pe) nonmergent (alinga) mergent (liga) 
without parts (anavayava) having parts (avayava) 


independent (aparatantra) contingent (paratantra) 


(jfia or purusa) \ (avyakta) (yyakta) } 


without tripartite process tripartite process (triguna) 
(Predications (aiveeuna) 
of the second abriguna 
part ae differentiated (vivekin) undifferentiated (avivekin) 
rovide a : ; 
negative non-content (avisaya) content (visaya) 
description uncharacterizable (asémdnya) characterizable (sdmanya) 
of the fourth : : 
Bait) conscious (cetana) nonconscious (acetana) 


unproductive (aprasavadharmin) productive (prasavadharmin) 


The first sequence establishes the manner in which the manifest world 
differs both from unmanifest materiality and consciousness. Both 
unmanifest materiality and consciousness, in other words, are alike in 
the sense of being uncaused, nontemporal, nonspatial, and so forth.@ 
The second sequence establishes the manner in which unmanifest and 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 79 


manifest taken together differ from consciousness, the crucial difference 
having to do with the tripartite process. Because both the unmanifest 
and manifest dimensions of primordial materiality are inherently tri- 
partite process, it follows, according to Samkhya, that primordial 
materiality is uniform overall (avivekin) in the sense thut it is one 
“existent” in which “parts” and ‘‘whole” or “effects” and ‘“‘cause”’ 
make up one undifferentiated entity; that it is, therefore, a content of 
consciousness (visaya); that it can be rationally or relationally charac- 
terized (sémdanya); that it is not conscious (acetana); and that itis in- 
herently productive (prasavadharmin ). Consciousness, therefore, accord- 
ing to Samkhya, refers to an “existent” that is distinct from tripartite 
process and thus differentiated from all of the transactions of awareness 
(intellect and so forth), transcending all objectivity whether specific 
or unspecific, utterly unique or uncharacterizable, sentient or intelli- 
gent, and incapable of producing anything. 

According to Samkhya philosophy, such a notion of contentless con- 
sciousness is essential for several important reasons (SK 17). First, 
because the combinations (samghdta) of tripartite process appear to be 
purposeful (pardrthatva) overall and because these transactions are 
themselves finally only objective or manifestations of primal material 
energy, there must be some ultimate grounding for such purposeful- 
ness that is itself not objective, or, in other words, not implicated in 
tripartite process. This ultimate grounding is pure consciousness and 
it is that for which primordial materiality functions. Second, although 
pure consciousness is nonintentional and incapable of producing any- 
thing, nevertheless, there must be a sentient principle that by its mere 
presence exercises a function of passive overseeing (adhisthana). Third, 
there must be a substratum that is the recipient or beneficiary (bhoktr- 
bhava) of the various awarenesses of primordial materiality. Finally, 
because the quest or urge for liberation is such a crucial component in 
all experience, there must be a principle of sentience apart from the 
closed causal system of reductive materialism that renders such a quest 
intelligible. All of these arguments amount to one basic claim, namely, 
that the very notion of tripartite process itself becomes unintelligible in 
the absence of a distinct principle of sentience. In other words, tripar- 
tite process, although a powerful intellectual synthesis or conceptuali- 
zation, cannot stand alone in and of itself, for even the awareness of the 
concept presupposes a ground or basis, or perhaps better, a ‘“‘medium” 
through which and for which the concept becomes meaningful. Other- 
wise what appeared to be a uniform, rational, and meaningful world 
“from Brahma down to a blade of grass” would finally show itself as 
an endless mechanical process in which the transactions of ordinary 
experience would amount to little more than occasional pleasurable 
respites from an endlessly unfolding tragedy. Or, putting the matter 
another way, one would come upon the remarkable paradox that an 


80 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


apparently uniform, rational, and meaningful world is finally point- 
less. 

Moreover, according to Samkhya philosophy, the notion of content- 
less consciousness requires that it be construed pluralistically (bahutva). 
That is to say, because consciousness is a contentless, nonintentional 
presence incapable of performing any activity, it, therefore, cannot 
know or intuit itself. The presence of contentless consciousness can only 
be intuited by the intellect in its reflective discerning (sattva) and in an 
intuition by the intellect that in itself is not consciousness. The presence 
of consciousness, thus, is an awareness that occurs within intellect, an 
awareness that the intellect itself is not consciousness. According to 
the Yuktidipikd, this realization of the presence of consciousness emerges 
as an awareness of the difference between tripartite process and con- 
sciousness (jidnam gunapurusantaraupalabdhilaksanam). Because there 
is a plurality of intellects engaging in reflective discernment; because 
these intellects are following various life trajectories; and because they 
are functioning, therefore, at various times and under varying circum- 
stances in accordance with the varied manifestations of tripartite pro- 
cess, contentless consciousness can only be disclosed pluralistically (SK 
18), or, putting the matter somewhat differently, there may be as 
many disclosures of contentless consciousness as there are intellects 
capable of reflective discernment. Samkhya philosophy, therefore, 
rejects the old cosmic dtman of the Upanisads and argues instead that 
contentless consciousness accompanies every intellect, stressing thereby 
that the awareness of consciousness is an achievement of the intellect 
and is a negative discernment of what the intellect is not. The Samkhya 
arguments for a plurality of pure consciousnesses, in other words, 
appear to be directed at epistemological concerns rather than ontologi- 
cal matters, Because contentless consciousness can never bea content 
and cannot be characterized as are materiality or the tripartite process, 
it is hardly likely that the Samkhya teachers were thinking of the plura- 
lity of consciousnesses as a set of knowable entities to be counted. 
They were thinking, rather, of a plurality of intellects through which 
the disclosure of contentless consciousness occurs, Vijfianabhiksu (in 
his commentary on Saémkhyasiitra 1.154) makes a somewhat comparable 
point when he suggests that the Samkhya plurality of consciousnesses 
does not contradict the evidence of the Veda that there is only one Self 
or subject. In the Veda, according to Vijfianabhiksu, oneness or uni- 
formity refers to the essential nature (svariipa) of selfhood in terms only 
of genus (jati). Vedic references to oneness need not be construed as 
implying entirety or undividedness. There are numerous passages in 
the Veda that show that selfhood shows itself under limiting adjuncts 
(upadhi), and, hence, there is no contradiction between Vedic testimony 
and the Samkhya notion of the plurality of consciousnesses. Whether 
in fact Vedic references can be so construed, of course, is a matter for 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 81 


debate and textual interpretation. (Generally speaking, it would 
appear that Vijfianabhiksu is wrong. Vedic references to selfhood do 
seem to imply entirety or undividedness.) Vijfianabhiksu is probably 
correct, however, in suggesting that Samkhya’s intention with its notion 
of a plurality of consciousnesses was largely epistemological. 

Putting all of this together, contentless consciousness, according to 
Samkhya philosophy, is (a) pure passive presence (saksitva); (b) dis- 
tinct from the tripartite process (kaivalya); (c) uninvolved in the tran- 
sactions of the three gunas except for its passive presence (mddhyasthya) ; 
(d) the foundation for subjectivity or pure consciousness (drastrtva) ; 
and (e) incapable of activity (akartrbhava) (SK 19). 

It is outside the realm of causality, outside space and time, completely 
inactive, utterly simple, unrelated apart from its sheer presence, un- 
involved in emergence or transformation, without parts, completely 
independent, transcendent yet always immanent by reason of its pre- 
sence, the presupposition for all apparent discrimination or differen- 
tiation, neither an objcct nor a subject (in any conventional sense), 
verbally uncharacterizable, a pure witness whose only relation to pri- 
mordial materiality is sheer presence, utterly isolated, completely 
indifferent, the presupposition for apprehending unmanifest or mani- 
fest being, a nonagent, and potentially present in the awareness of all 
intellects as not being that awareness. 

Samkhya philosophy strips consciousness of most of the usual attri- 
butes of a mutable subject. Even the discrimination (viveka) of its very 
presence is delegated to the intellect as a negative apprehension that 
intellect is not contentless consciousness (ndsmi, na me, naham ity apari- 
Sesam, SK 64). As the Samkhyasiitra (111.75) puts it, “The attainment 
of the discrimination (of purusa) occurs as a result of the meditative 
analysis (abhydsa) of the fundamental principles through which one 
progressively abandons (tyaga) all contents, saying ‘It is not this,’ 
‘It is not that.’” 

Such an unusual notion of consciousness entails, of course, some 
equally unusual corollaries. First of all, if consciousness is inactive and 
distinct from the tripartite process, then consciousness is neither the 
material nor the efficient cause of the transactions of primordial mate- 
riality, and yet all causal transactions occur in the presence of conscious- 
ness and are illuminated by consciousness. Second, if consciousness is 
only a contentless passive presence, it can only appear as what it is not, 
passively taking on all content (whether subjective or objective) as a 
transparent witness. Third, tripartite process appears to be conscious 
until such time as it is realized that consciousness is the radical absence 
of content (whether subjective or objective). A double negation occurs, 
in other words, whereby contentlessness appears to have content 
(gunakartrtve ‘pi tatha karte ‘va bhavaty udasinah, SK 20) and content 
appears to be conscious (acetanam cetanavad iva lingam, SK 20).° Fourth, 


82 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


when contentless consciousness is present to primordial materiality, 
this double negation occurs quite spontaneously or naturally and be- 
comes the occasion for the manifest world and experience to occur. 
Hence, because consciousness and primordial materiality (in any 
given world cycle) are all-pervasive “‘existents’’ it can be said that this 
spontaneous double negation is beginningless. Fifth, the manifest 
world and experience, therefore, though fully real, are nevertheless 
distorted appearances in which pure consciousness appears to be bound 
up in the transactions of tripartite process (and hence caught in the clo- 
sed causal system) and tripartite process appears to be conscious (and 
hence lacking any basis outside of the closed causal system for the 
possibility of freedom or release). Whether this double negation is 
construed with a simple theory of reflection (pratibimba), whereby con- 
sciousness becomes reflected in intellect (thereby occasioning experi- 
ence) — as in Vacaspati Misra — or witha double theory of reflection 
(anyonyapratibimba\, whereby consciousness becomes reflected in intellect 
and intellect in turn is reflected back on consciousness — as in Vijfiana- 
bhiksu — makes little difference in terms of the basic thrust of the 
Samkhya position, which is that there is a basic epistemological distor- 
tion at the root of experience.®! Vacaspati Misra’s interpretation is 
perhaps cleaner in the sense that all transactions of experience occur 
only in intellect after it has been “‘intelligized”’ by consciousness. Vijiia- 
nabhiksu’s interpretation has the merit of ascribing experience to con- 
sciousness (because the contents of intellect awareness are reflected 
back on consciousness). In either case, however, the crucial point is 
that intellect is only a surrogate for contentless consciousness, and only 
proper discrimination (viveka) by the intellect is sufficient finally to 
eliminate the beginningless distortion (aviveka). Finally, and most 
important, bondage and release, according to Samkhya philosophy, 
are never ontological problems. The two ultimate ‘“‘existents” (pure 
consciousness and primordial materiality) in fact both exist, and their 
presence to one another cannot be changed. What can change is the 
fundamental epistemological distortion that is the occasion for the 
appearance of the manifest world and experience. The intellect is 
capable finally of discriminating the presence of contentless conscious- 
ness, thereby intuiting a radical foundation for liberation that dissi- 
pates the pain or frustration of ordinary experience. Both bondage and 
freedom, in other words, pertain to intellect, the former being the case 
when beginningless nondiscrimination, occasioned by the natural co- 
presence of consciousness and materiality, obtains and the intellect is 
on a trajectory toward ordinary experience (upabhoga), the latter being 
the case when discrimination (viveka) arises — occasioned by the intel- 
lect’s sufficiently distinguishing itself from consciousness — and the intel- 
lect is predisposed toward liberation and/or isolation. As ISvarakrsna 
puts the maiter in verse 62:“‘Therefore, it is surely the case that (purusa) 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 83 


is never bound, nor released nor subject to transmigration. Only 
prakyti in its various forms transmigrates, is bound and is released.” 
Primordial materiality, therefore, provides both ordinary experience 
and the extraordinary knowledge that consciousness exists. 

Ultimately, of course, contentless consciousness and primordial 
materiality go beyond what can be reasonably described in ordinary 
discourse. Both the notions of consciousness and materiality (or the 
tripartite process) are like certain ultimate notions in Plato’s thought 
for which Plato turned to the language of myth, metaphor, and simile. 
It is hardly surprising, then, that Samkhya philosophy should also 
make use of metaphor and simile regarding its ultimate conceptions. 
To some extent, of course, such metaphors and similes were often used 
in Indian philosophy as “‘illustrations’’ (drstdnta) in framing the so- 
called Indian syllogism, but metaphors and similes were also used as 
vivid images for evoking a brief intuitive glimpse of an idea that did not 
easily lend itself to rational formulation.®? Thus, the relation between 
contentless consciousness and primordial materiality is like that between 
a lame man and a blind man, whereby each functions for the other in 
accomplishing a common goal. Or again, consciousness is the crystal; 
materiality the China rose that distorts the clarity of the crystal and 
makes it appear as what it is not. Consciousness is the spectator; 
materiality is the dancer performing for him until such time as the 
aesthetic performance has been completed. Consciousness is the young 
calf; materiality the nourishing milk. Consciousness is the young lover; 
materiality is the shy virgin who withdraws from his sight having been 
seen by him in her nakedness. Consciousness is the master; materiality 
is the obedient servant. (See SK 13, 21, 36, 41, 42, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 
65, 66, and 67; see also Book IV of the Samkhyasiitra, which is given 
over to reciting various narratives, metaphors, and similes about the 
basic Samkhya conceptions. ) 


TV. SAmxKuya As RATIONAL REFLECTION 


Now that the basic components and overall contours of the Samkhya 
system have been presented, attention can be directed, finally, to the 
manner in which the Samkhya teachers argued their case. That is to 
say, it is appropriate now to address such issues as the philosophical 
methodology, logic, and epistemology of the Samkhya. To some extent, 
of course, such matters have been implicit throughout the preceding 
sections, for it has become clear enough that the genius of the Sam- 
khya in the ancient Indian context was its success in formulating a 
tight set of conceptualizations that pulled together a great variety of 
speculative loose ends from the older heritage. The notions of triguna, 
buddhi, ahamkaéra, manas, miilaprakrti, purusa, and so forth, set forth ina 
systematic pattern that rendered the world and human experience 


84 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


intelligible was a remarkable intellectual achievement by any measure, 
and it is no accident, therefore, that Samkhya exercised an enormous 
influence in so many areas of ancient Indian intellectual life. To be 
sure, Samkhya was vigorously criticized by later and more sophistica- 
ted philosophical traditions, but that in itselfisa measure of its stature 
in the formative phase of Indian intellectual history. As Frauwallner 
and others have eloquently argued, Samkhya’s contribution to Indian 
philosophy was evidently fundamental and basic, perhaps even semi- 
nal.®3 That its later opponents were quick to pounce on the obvious 
weaknesses of the system should not deflect our attention from an appre- 
ciation for Samkhya’s crucial contribution in its own time. Only 
VaiSsesika, early Nyaya, and early Buddhist thought came even close to 
exercising a comparable influence in terms of Indian systematic philo- 
sophizing. Yoga, Vedanta, and Mimamsa in these early centuries 
had not yet (and perhaps really never did) adequately differentiate 
themselves from their religious roots. Moreover, even when these latter 
traditions did finally emerge as philosophical (cum religious) move- 
ments, the influence of Samkhya in them was extensive (to the extent 
that “Yoga philosophy” can really only be taken as itself a theme and 
variation on Samkhya). As was mentioned in Chapter One, later 
Vedanta is really only a warmed over Samkhya, upgraded somewhat 
with the sophisticated dialectic of Madhyamika and Nyaya but in 
most respects a regression to prephilosophical religious intuition and 
scriptural authority. 

Be that as it may, the task now is to piece together in as systematic a 
way as possible Samkhya’s contribution in such areas as philosophical 
methodology, logic, and epistemology. In many ways, unfortunately, 
this is the most difficult dimension of Samkhya to uncover, for the ex- 
tant Samkhya textual evidence contains very little information. Unlike 
the other systems of classical Indian philosophy, there is no lengthy 
ancient Samkhya sitra collection, which would be the normal source 
for uncovering such issues (if not in the sétras themselves, certainly in 
the detailed commentaries that accompany such collections). There 
is, of course, a Sdmkhyasiitra, commented on by Aniruddha, Vijfiana- 
bhiksu, and others, but this is a medieval tradition (fifteenth or six- 
teenth century) that is largely useless for purposes of studying the old 
Samkhya system. Whether Samkhya, in fact, ever had a set of ancient 
sittras is difficult to know. There are fragments quoted here and there 
in the general philosophical literature of India (attributed to Pafica- 
sikha, Varsaganya, and so on) that suggest there may have been siira 
collections that were subsequently lost or discarded. There is also the 
little Tattvasamdsasiitra, which may well be very old, but its laconic 
presentation makes it impossible to decipher without commentaries; 
and the extant commentaries on the text are very late (with the possible 
exception of the Kramadipika@). In any case, the Tattvasamdasa offers little 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 83 


of importance about matters of methodology, logic, or epistemology. 

What evidence is available tends to indicate that Samkhya probably 
did not have an ancient sira collection. Instead, there are numerous 
references to a so-called sastitantra or “system or science of sixty topics,” 
which, as suggested earlier, may refer to an extensive literature or to a 
tradition of presenting Samkhya in terms of sixty topics. Authorship 
of the sastitantra has been attributed variously to Kapila, Paficasikha, 
or Varsaganya, suggesting, according to Frauwallner, that there were 
several editions or reworkings of an original sasfitantra. Possibly the 
sastitantra was originally a collection of verses (on analogy perhaps 
with a sitra collection), later greatly expanded in verse and prose by 
Paficasikha and Varsaganya as the system developed. Another possi- 
bility, of course, as has already been mentioned, is that Samkhya in 
ancient times was simply known as sastilanira (“the system of sixty 
topics’) and that, therefore, there may have becn a variety of texts 
with that appellation. 

What presumably happened was that Isvarakrsna’s Samhyakarika, 
which is purportedly a summary of the sastitantra tradition, supplanted 
the older material in classical times (namely, after the fifth and sixth 
centuries) and came to be accepted as an adequate account of the old 
Samkhya philosophy, which by classical times had already had its day 
and was being superseded by newer philosophical developments. Un- 
fortunately, however, whereas Iévarakrsna neatly summarized the 
components of the system as a whole, he dealt with the philosophical 
methodology, logic, and epistemology of the system only in the most 
cursory fashion in the first twenty-one verses of his text. According to 
the author of the Yuktidipikd, lévarakrsna dealt only briefly with these 
matters, because they had been exhaustively dealt with by other 5am- 
khya dcaryas (Varsaganya, Vindhyavasin, and others.) and, hence, 
did not require extensive treatment in his summary compilation. In 
other words, the reason for his cursory treatment was not thai metho- 
dology, logic, and epistemology were unimportant. Quite the contrary, 
they had been dealt with extensively in the tradition of sastilantra and 
were so well known as not to require further elucidation. Thus, there 
appears to have occurred a most unfortunate historical anomaly, 
namely, that one of the crucial aspects of Samkhya philosophy became 
lost because the summarizer of the system in later times, whose work 
has come down to us, had simply assumed that everyone knew this 
dimension of the system. 

Whether the methodology, logic, and epistemology of Samkhya can 
ever be adequately recovered is still an open question in Samkhya 
studies. Frauwallner and Oberhammer have devoted much attention 
to the problem, and in more recent times Nakada and Wezler have 
addressed these issues.5> The Yuktidipika has been an important new 
source of information, and some progress has been made in recons- 


86 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tructing the old Samkhya epistemology from occasional references to 
Samkhya views in the classical philosophical literature (for example, 
in the work of Dignaga, Jinendrabuddhi, Candramati, Kumarila, 
Jayanta Bhatta, Kamalagila, Mallavadin, Simhasiri, and others). 
Tt is clear enough, especially as a result of the research of Frauwallner 
with respect to crtitiques of Samkhya in Dignaga and Candramati 
(and related commentaries), that Samkhya philosophy as set forth in 
the sastitantra tradition made some important contributions to the for- 
mulation of the “instruments of knowledge” (pramdna), the definitions 
of these means, the theory of inference, and the manner in which infer- 
ences are to be framed.5¢ These contributions are usually linked to the 
names Varsaganya and Vindhyavasin, but the relation of these latter 
names to the work of Isvarakrsna remains obscure. Presumably Isvara- 
krsna knew about these contributions, but, as indicated above, passed 
over them in a cursory manner because they had been written about 
extensively and were generally well known. 

In reconstructing the methodology, logic, and epistemology of 
Samkhya in what follows, therefore, it is important to keep in mind that 
these matters are far from clear and may require considerable revision 
or refinement as further research proceeds. 

Philosophical methodology: dyads, triads and pentads. In examining the 
extant texts of the Samkhya tradition, one is impressed, first of all, 
with the predilection for enumeration (from which predilection, of 
course, the term “‘sémkhya’’ itself derives). Although the method of 
enumeration is common in Indian philosophy (primarily for mnemo- 
nic reasons relating to the aphoristic style of Indian scientific writing), 
and although Samkhya enumerations encompass a variety of what 
appear to be random sequences, it is notable that the preponderance 
of enumeration tends to be dyadic, triadic, and pentadic.°” 

Some of the more common dyadic analyses include the following: 


Consciousness / Materiality 
(purusa) (prakrti) 
Unmanifest / Manifest 
(avyakta) (vyakta) 
(Material { (Material 
Cause) Effect) 
(kdrana) (karya) 
Generative / Generated 
(prakyii) (vikrti) 
“Causal” / “Projective” 
(linga) (bhava) 
Subtle / Gross 
(sttksma) (sthila) 
Nonspecific / Specific 
(avisesa) (visesay 
Noumenal { Phenomenal 


(nirupabhoga) (upabhogay 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 


Internal Organ / 

(antahkarana) 

(Efficient / 

Cause) 

(nimitta) 

Merit | 

(dharma) 

Knowledge / 

(jftana) 

Nonattachment / 

(vairdg ya) 

Power / 

(aifvarya) 

Upward Going / 

(ardhva) 

Liberation / 

(apavarga) 

Dissolution in / 
prakyti 

(prakrtilaya) / 

Nonrestraint / 

(avighata) 


87 


External Organ 
(bahyakarana) 
(Efficient 
Effect) 
(naimittikay 
Demerit 
(adharmay 
Ignorance 

( ajftdna) 
Attachment 
(avairig ya) 
Impotence 
(anaisvarya) 
Downward Going 
(adhastat) 
Bondage 
(bandha) 


Transmigration 


(samsara) 
Restraint 
(vighdta) 


Moreover, the sequence of predications for establishing the basic 
Samkhya dualism, which was presented in the preceding section on 


purusa, is also dyadic in structure. 


Some of the triadic analyses include the following: 


Intelligibility | Activity | Inertia 

(or reflective (or spontaneous (or determinate 
discerning ) unfolding) formulation) 
(sativa) (rajas) (tamas) 
Illuminating / Externalizing / Objectifying 
(prakasa) (pravriti) (niyama) 
Intellect/will { Egoity / Subtle Elements 
(buddhi) (ahamkara) (tanmatra) 
Divine/Celestial / Human / Animal/Plant 
(daiva) (mdanusya) (tairyagyona) 
Generated / Fiery / Elemental 
(vatkria) (tatjasa) (bh ittadi) 
Satisfaction / Frustration i] Confusion 
(sukha) (dukkha) (moha) 
Agreeable / Disagrceable / Depressing 
(priti) (apriti) (visdda) 
Peaceful / Uncomfortable / Confusion 
(santa) (ghora) (midha) 


Furthermore, most of the ethical and epistemological notions of the 
Samkhya system appear to be discussed in triadic analyses: 


Internal / External / Celestial 
Frustration Frustration Frustration 
(ddhyatmika) (adhibhautika) (adhidaivika) 


88 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Natural / Generated / Sacrificial or Celestial 
Bondage Bondage ; Bondage 
(prakrtibandha) (vaikarikabandha) | (daksinabandha) 
Final Liberation / Release from / Release as Total 
Passion Destruction 
(moksa or jfléna) (ragaksaya) (krisnaksaya) 
Perception / Inference / Reliable Authority 
(drsta, pratyaksa) (anuména) (aptavacana) 
Inference from | Inference from | Inference based on 
cause to effect effect to cause general correlation 
(pirvavat) (Sesavat) (samanyatodrsta) 
Reflective discerning / Self-awareness / Intentionality 
(adhyavasaya) (abhimana) (samkalpa) 


Finally, some of the common pentadic analyses include the following: 


Sound / Touch / Form / Taste / Smell 
(Sabda) (sparsa) (riipa) (rasa) (gandha) 
Space-Ether { Wind { Fire { Water { Earth 
(akasa) (vdyu) (tejas) (ap) (prthivi) 
Hearing / Touching / Seeing / Tasting / Smelling 
(Srotra) (tac) (caksus) (rasana) (ghrana) 
Speaking / Grasping / Walking / Procreat- / Expelling 
ing 
(vac) (pani) (pada) (upastha) (payu) 
Life Breath | Up / Diffuse | Digestive | Down 
Breath Breath Breath Breath 
(prana) (udana) (wana) (samana) (apana) 
Steadfastness / Faith / Pleasure / Desire to / Desire not 
Know to Know 
(dhytt) (Sraddha) (sukha) (vividisa) (avividisa) 


In addition, the arguments presented for proving the basic Samkhya 
conceptualizations are presented in the format of pentads. ‘There are 
five arguments for the notion of the “preexisting” effect (satkdrya) 
(SK 9); five arguments for proving that the “unmanifest’’ (avyakta) 
is the cause (kdrana) (SK 15); five arguments for the existence of purusa 
(SK 17); five arguments for establishing the plurality of purusas (purusa- 
bahutva) (SK 18); five predications of ériguna (SK 11); and five basic 
predications of purusa (SK 19). 

Dyadic, triadic, and pentadic analyses are, of course, common in the 
older Indian religious literature (Brahmanical, Buddhist, and Jain), 
and in this sense Samkhya is clearly a descendent from those older 
speculative contexts. Whereas those older analyses represent what 
Edgerton once aptly called an archaic “‘logic of identification,” how- 
ever, the Samkhya analyses appear to represent something more sophis- 
ticated. The dyadic analyses in Samkhya appear to be concerned with 
ontology and with the logic of basic relations. The triadic analyses in 
Samkhya are clearly concerned with tripartite process, ethics, and 
epistemology. The pentadic analyses in Samkhya appear to be concern- 
ed primarily with the natural world and the psychophysiology of 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 89 


biological life or what might be called the phenomenal, empirical world 
of ordinary life. This is also true for the various pentadic arguments 
given for establishing the basic Samkhya conceptualizations, for in each 
instance the arguments are derived from ordinary empirical experi- 
ence. 

Taken together, the dyads, triads, and pentads appear to provide a 
mechanism of mediation. The goal of Samkhya is to intuit or discri- 
minate certain basic relations, the primary one of which isthe onto- 
logical distinction between consciousness and materiality. Experience 
occurs, however, within the fivefold realm of ordinary awareness and 
life (through the senses, motor capacities, and an organism’s encounter 
with the external world). That which mediates between the ordinary 
(pentadic) phenomenal realm and the extraordinary (dyadic) onto- 
logical realm is the epistemological (triadic) mediating realm. This 
latter mediating realm encompasses tripartite process, thereby posi- 
tively defining materiality and negatively defining consciousness and 
serving as the locus both for (a) the awareness of satisfaction, frustra- 
tion, and confusion characteristic of all ordinary life and (b) the aware- 
ness of liberation. The basic ontic dyad (consciousness and materia- 
lity) activates the basic epistemic triad (sattva, rajas, tamas or sukha, 
dulkha, moha as the internal structure of materiality), and the dyad 
and triad together generate the basic phenomenal pentad (tanmdtra, 
bhiita, buddhindriya, karmendriya). In such fashion is the realm of ordi- 
nary experience generated, but the very process of generation cloaks 
or hides the basic ontic dyad (or, in other words, makes it appear as an 
epistemic triad), From the other side, ordinary (pentadic) experience 
generates the epistemological triad of frustration, which issues in the 
desire to know (jijfidsd) or discriminate, which in turn may finally 
reveal the basic ontic dyad but which also reveals that the structure of 
frustration itself is only epistemic. Samkhya philosophy, then, would 
not deny the existence of consciousness or the natural world; but it 
would argue that our epistemic perspectives concerning what is real 
are seriously distorted or insufficiently discriminating and that the 
task of philosophy is to clarify the nature of what is (namely, purusa 
and prakrti) and thereby to eliminate epistemological distortions that 
generate frustration. 

Samkhya numbers.The numbers 2, 3, and 5 (presupposed in the dyads, 
triads and pentads) are, of course, the first three prime numbers, 3 
being the arithmetic mean between | and 2, and 5 being the arithmetic 
mean between 2 and 3. When one combines this observation with the 
further observation that other prime numbers are prominent among 
the 25 Samkhya fundamental principles — for example, 7 as the prin- 
ciples that are both generative and generated; 11 as the principles 
that make up the set of capacities; 13 as the number of principles that 
make up the dinga; 17 as the number of principles relating to egoity; 


90 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and 23 the total number of principles that are subdivisions or compo- 
nents of primordial materiality —it is difficult to avoid the suspicion 
that Samkhya philosophy was making use of somesort of archaic mathe- 
matical methodology perhaps not unlike the mathematical theorizing 
characteristic of Pythagoreanism in the ancient Greek tradition. 
Unfortunately, there is at the present time insufficient evidence for 
making any strong claims along these lines one way or the other. The 
predilection for prime numbers on the principles level may have had 
some deeper meaning that the ancient Samkhya teachers were con- 
sciously using in building their system (on analogy with Pythagorean 
attempts to link “‘numbers”’ with “‘things”’). On the other hand, such 
numbers may have been well known in learned religious circles as 
having some sort of religious or mystical significance that could natu- 
rally be employed for speculative purposes. In other words, the use 
of such numbers may not have had any rational purpose whatever. 
One suspects, however, that the former, rather than the latter, is 
the case, not only because the predilection for primes suggests a rational 
motivation rather than a purely religious motivation but also because 
other Samkhya numbers also appear to be more than random mnemo- 
nic sequences. It appears to be hardly accidental, for example, that 
the intellectual creation and its 50 categories, which the Yuktidipika 
characterizes as the “consequent” (phala) creation, is a doubling or 
replication of the 25 fundamental principles. Moreover, just as there 
are 1+7 principles that generate the form or “causal” (riipa) level, so 
there are 1-+-7 predispositions (namely, knowledge and the other 7 
predispositions) that generate the “noncausal” or phenomenal world. 
Furthermore, the numbers within the 50 ‘‘categories” appear to be 
more than random lists. There are 62 subvarieties of the 5 misconcep- 
tions, 28 varieties of dysfunction, and 9 varieties of contentment, all 
of which numbers have astronomical significance. Twelve lunar 
months make only 354 days, and the conflict between the lunar year 
and the solar year was dealt with in ancient India by inserting an 
extra month every thirty months. Sixty-two lunar months are approxi- 
mately equivalent to 60 solar months, and so by inserting an extra 
month every 30 months, the problem was solved. Twenty-eight (speci- 
fically, 27 days plus 8 hours) is, of course, the approximate number 
of solar days needed for the moon to pass through its cycle of rela- 
tions to the fixed stars, and the heavens were divided into 27 or 28 
portions (naksatra) to mark this cyclic progression. The number 9 is 
likewise common in ancient India as the number of “planets” (sun, 
moon, the five basic planets, plus Rahu and Ketu). The numbers 62, 
28, and 9, in other words, appear to be largely nocturnal and/or lunar 
variants of diurnal and/or solar numbers such as 30 and 60. In ancient 
India there were 360 days in the solar year, 30 days in the month and 
7 days in the week. Seasons were determined by combining months 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 91 


in dyads (of 60 days each), making a total of 6 seasons for one year 
(or, in other words, 360 days). The ancient Indians, of course, learn- 
ed most of their astronomy from the Greeks and from ancient Near 
Eastern sources, and one important system of calculation for astrono- 
mical purposes was the sexagesimal system (as opposed to the decimal 
system) in which 1 =60 (and which comes down even to modern times 
in our 60-minute hour and 60-second minute). One cannot help 
but wonder if the Samkhya use of the number 60 (sasfitantra) (“the 
system or science of 60 topics”) may be somehow related to archaic 
astronomical traditions such as this. 

Some further hints about the possible significance of Samkhya 
numbers may also be found in the apparently unlikely context of 
ancient acoustical theory. Ernest McClain in his Myth of Invariance 
has shown that the ancient Greek-Hindu diatonic scale with two similar 
tetrachords encompasses D e? £G A b? (b) cD (when rising) and 
D c+tb A Gf+# (f) e D (when falling).®* The octave increment is a 
ratio of 1:2, and if one wishes to give expression to the ratios between the 
7 tones of the scale in the smallest possible whole numbers, the sequence 
is 30, 32, 36, 40, 45, 48, (50), 54, 60 or the ratio 30:60. Moreover, 
if one wishes to reduce this sequence to its smallest integers in a 
formulaic manner, one has the formula 2?.39.5'.<60.% That is to 
say, all of the tones in the basic scale can be reduced to 2, 3, and 5 
in the following manner: 30=2-3-5; 32=25; 36=2?.32; 40=23.5; 
45 = 37.5; 48=28-3; 50 = 2-57; 54 = 2-38 and 60 = 27.3.5.84 
Similarly, if one wishes to give expression to the 11 semitones of the 
chromatic scale, one needs a multiple of 60, namely, 360, and the result- 
ing set of smallest whole numbers to express the ratios would be 360, 
384, 400, 432, 450, 480, 540, 576, 600, 648, 675, and 720, and a revised 
formula 2P-34-5'<S720.6° McClain argues that both formulas were 
widely known in the ancient world, and that the Rg Vedic poets knew 
of these sequences (as can be seen in the number sequences of such 
hymns as RV 1.164). McClain also argues that many of the large cos- 
mological numbers in the epics and Puranas reflect these ancient acous- 
tical or “tonal” formulas.6* The former formula (2?-39-5'< 60) 
is basic to ancient Greek and Indian tonal theory. The latter formula 
2P-34.5'<S720) was the “tonal basis’ for astronomical extensions based 
on the 360-day solar year. 

Returning, however, to Samkhya philosophy, the only thing that 
can be said with certainty is that the system is built largely on dyads, 
triads, and pentads with other prime numbers playing an important 
role on the principles level, and the system overall is referred as “the 
system or science of 60 topics.” The formula 2?-34-5'<60, in other 
words, does appear to fit the Samkhya case in an intriguing and provo- 
cative way, and one wonders if such ancient traditions of mathema- 
tical (and astronomical/musical) theorizing represent the intellectual 


92 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


environment in which the ancient Samkhya teachers first began their 
philosophical work. Moreover, we know that Samkhya philosophy 
did involve cosmology and/or astronomy and that some of the Sam- 
khya numbers reflect possible astronomical phenomena. We know, 
furthermore, that Samkhya philosophy (along with other traditions 
of ancient Indian speculation) sought to correlate macrocosmic and 
microcosmic phenomena so that each appears to recapitulate the other. 
Then, too, from the evidence of Yoga and Tantric materials, which 
frequently make use of Samkhya notions, we know that there were ela- 
borate speculations about the role and function of certain ‘‘tones,” 
mantras, and patterns of recitation. In this connection, it might be 
briefly noted, one wonders if the Samkhya conceptualization of “subtle 
element” (tanmaira) may be related to older phonetic speculation in 
which attempts were made to measure the length of sounds in terms of 
matras.8’ The term “‘mdtra’ is, of course, also well known in Yoga 
traditions, in which the Yogin’s breathing discipline is measured in 
matras. 

It could be the case, therefore, that the Samkhya enumerations over- 
all are far from being arbitrary or random. There may have been 
operating some sort of archaic, but nevertheless rational, mathematical 
theorizing in which prime numbers, archaic acoustical theory (in 
music and sacred recitation), and cosmological/astronomical observa- 
tion were crucial concerns. Again, of course, the possible parallel with 
Pythagoreanism in the ancient Greek tradition is obvious, for the 
Pythagoreans were likewise keen on relating number theory, musical 
acoustics, and astronomy to philosophy.® 

It must be stressed once more that all of this is highly speculative and 
that further research is essential for building a plausible case. As 
Frauwallner, Hacker, and others have noted, however, the origins 
of Samkhya appear to be very different from many of the other tradi- 
tions of Indian philosophy. Whereas much of Indian philosophy 
appears to have emerged from religious meditation and dialectical 
disputation, Samkhya may well have derived from older “‘scientific”’ 
traditions. That Samkhya does not appear to have a set of ancient 
siltras, that it refers to itself as a tantra (specifically, sastitantra) and 
makes use (according to the Yuktidipikd) of tantrayuktis or systematic 
“‘methodological devices,” that it has affinities with cosmology/astro- 
nomy and medical theorizing, and that it unfolds seemingly endless 
patterns of enumeration may all suggest that the point of origin for 
Samkhya is to be found in early scientific theorizing (in such subject 
areas as mathematics, astronomy, acoustics, and medicine). If such 
is the case, then a basic philosophical methodology focusing on ration- 
al enumeration would not at all be surprising. 

Logic and epistemology. In attempting to piece together Samkhya’s 
logic and epistemology, a convenient point of departure is to refer to 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 93 


what the Samkhya teachers themselves considered to be the ten 
“fundamental matters” (milikartha) requiring rational elucidation. 
These matters are as follows (using the formulations set forth in the 
Jayamangala, the Tattvakaumudi, and the Yuktidipika): 


(1) The existence of materiality and consciousness (astifva) ; 

(2) The uniformity or oneness of materiality (ekatva) ; 

(3) The objectivity of materiality (arthavattva) ; 

(4) The purposefulness or inherent teleology of materiality 
(pararthya) ; 

(5) The ontological distinction of consciousness (from materia- 
lity) (anyatua) ; 

(6) The nonagency or nonactivity of consciousness (akartrbhava) ; 

(7) The transactions that occur when materiality and conscious- 
ness are not distinguished from one another (yoga); 

(8) The transactions that occur when materiality and conscious- 
ness are distinguished from one another (viyoga); 

(9) The plurality of consciousnesses (purusabahutva) ; 

(10) The continuous functioning of gross and subtle things even 
after consciousness and materiality have been distinguished 
(sthitih Sarirasya...Sesavrttih).” 


These matters evidently pertain both to the ‘‘basic principle” realm 
and to the “‘predispositional’ or “projective” realm (or, in other words, 
the “twofold creation” mentioned in SK 52). They also obviously 
refer to Samkhya’s two fundamental cxistents, consciousness and mate- 
riality. Items (2), (3), and (4), according to most commentators, 
deal with materiality in and of itself. Items (5), (6), and (9) deal 
with consciousness. Items (1), (7), (8), and (10 ) deal with the rela- 
tion between consciousness and materiality. Commentaries inform us, 
further, that item (2) refers to preexistence of the effect and material 
causality or, in other words, the twenty-three inherent subdivisions of 
materiality; item (3) refers to the tripartite process; item (4) refers to 
the predispositions; items (5) and (6) refer to the absence of the tri- 
partite process in consciousness; and items (7), (8), and (10) refer to 
the experience of frustration or liberation when materiality and con- 
sciousness are in relation to one another.”4 

These ten “fundamental matters” (milikdrtha), making up the 
“form” realm and the “projective” realm (tattva and bhava), when 
combined with the fifty “categories” (padartha) of the “‘consequent”’ 
(phala) or “intellectual creation” (pratyayasarga), made up of the five 
misconceptions, the twenty-eight dysfunctions, the nine contentments, 
and the eight atiainments, represent the ‘“‘system or science of sixty 
topics” (sastitantra). The sasfilantra, in other words, appears to bea 
shorthand way of referring to the three realms (éattva, bhava, and 


94 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


bhiita) that have been referred to throughout this exposition, the fattva 
realm being the ontological dyad, the bhava realm being the epistemo- 
logical triad, and the bhita realm being the phenomenal, empirical 
pentad. Referring again to the computer and linguistic metaphors 
mentioned earlier, the éativa and bhava realms represent as it were the 
hardware and software of the Samkhya system, and the bhita realm, 
the resulting printout; or, the tattva and bhdva realms represent as 
it were the deep-structural syntactic and semantic components 
of the Samkhya system, and the bhiiia realm the level of surface 
structure. 

From an epistemological standpoint, the bhita realm would obvi- 
ously be the sphere of perception (pratyaksa, drsta) for this is the realm 
of ordinary experience. The fativa and bhava realms, however, tran- 
scend ordinary experience (or are nirupabhoga) and can only be estab- 
lished on the basis of inferential reasoning (anumdna). Inference, 
therefore, must have had pride of place among the “instruments of 
knowledge” to the early Samkhya teachers, for the ten “fundamental 
matters” could not persuasively be established in any other way. 
Moreover, if the sequence of inferences establishes that frustration itself 
is epistemic, then it certainly would follow that release from frustration 
is only possible by means of the path of inferential reasoning pursued 
in an appropriate meditative context. As [gvarakrsna puts the matter 
in Karikad 2. 


The revealed (or scriptural, means of removing frustration) are 
like the perceptible (that is to say, ultimately inadequate), for 
they are connected with impurity, destruction, and excess (or, in 
other words, are bound up with finite relations) ; a superior means, 
different from both, is the (discriminative) knowledge of the mani- 
fest, the unmanifest and the knower (jfa or purusa). 


It is reasonable to conclude, therefore, that a significant portion of 
the so-called sastitantra would involve careful consideration of the logic 
of inference, and Frauwallner has provocatively shown that this was 
probably the case.” Piecing together quotations of Samkhya authors 
from the work of Dignaga, Jinendrabuddhi, Mallavadin, and Simha- 
stiri, Frauwallner was able to reconstruct portions of an older Sam- 
khya discussion regarding the logic of inference. Frauwallner argues 
that his reconstructed text is a portion of Varsaganya’s Sastitantra 
and can be dated about the beginning of the fourth-century of the 
Common Era.”* Whether or not one agrees with Frauwallner’s con- 
clusions regarding authorship and date of the reconstructed material, 
the content of the discussion is interesting and provides useful insights 
into early Samkhya discussions of epistemology. 

According to the reconstructed material, Samkhya philosophy assig- 
ned primary status to inference among the instruments of knowledge 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 95 


but also accepted perception and reliable testimony.”* With respect to 
inference, the task is one of identifying what sort of relation (sambandha) 
is relevant in a given instance and then to infer an appropriate imper- 
ceptible or unknown relatum on the basis of a given perceptible rela- 
tum (sambandhad ekasmat pratyaksac chesasiddhir anumaénam). In Samkhya 
philosophy, according to the reconstructed material, seven types or 
kinds of relation (saptasambandha) were basic and fundamental, namely: 


(1) 


“The relation between possession and possessor” (svasvdmi- 
bhavasambandha)—for example, a king and his servant; 

‘The relation between primary and derivative” or “principal 
and secondary” (prakrtivikdrasambandha)— for example, sweet 
milk and sour milk; 

‘The relation between material effect and cause” (karyakdrana- 
sambandha\—for example, a wagon and its parts; 

“The relation between efficient cause and effect’ (nimitta- 
naimittikasambandha)—for example, a potter anda pot; 
“The relation between source and offspring” (mdatramdtrika- 
sambandha\—for example, a tree and its branch; 

“The relation of cooperation or association” (sahacdrisam- 
bandha)—for example, two Cakravaka birds; 

“The relation of opposition or hostility’ (vadhyaghdlakasam- 
bandha)—-for example, a snake and an ichneumon. 


Regarding the application of these relations to the fundamental prin- 
ciples of Samkhya, the following would appear to be the case, accord- 
ing to Frauwallner’s reconstruction: 


(1) 


(7) 


Possession and possessor—-the relation between consciousness 
and materiality; 

Principal and secondary—the relation between materiality 
and its twenty-three subdivisions; 

Material effect and cause—the relation between saltva, rajas, 
and tamas; 

Efficient cause and effect—the rclation between sativa, rajas, 
and famas in their predispositional projections; 

Source and offspring—the relation between the subtle ele- 
ments and the gross elements; 

Cooperation or association—the cooperating modality of the 
tripartite process; and 

Opposition or hostility--the negating modality of the tripartite 
process.75 


Furthermore, according to the reconstructed discussion, various 
types of inference can be framed. Basically, therc are two fundamental 
types, namely, inferences based on a specific perception in one situation 


96 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(visesato drsta) and inferences based on a specific perception in more 
than one situation (sdmdnyato drsta). The former would be the infer- 
ence of fire because of the presence of smoke in a sepecific location so 
that each time one perceives the same smoke in that location, one in- 
fers the presence of fire. The latter would be the more general inference 
of the relation between fire and smoke so that whenever one perceives 
smoke, one infers the presence of fire. This more general inference, 
that is to say, inference based on general correlation (sdéményato drsta) 
in turn, is twofold, namely, parvavat and fesavat. The former is infe- 
rence-from-cause-to-effect : the imminent occurrence of rain may be 
inferred from the perception of gathering storm clouds. The latter 
is inference-from-effect-to-cause: when one perceives the rising level 
of water in a river, one infers that it has rained upsiream. Moreover, 
itis also possible to infer what isin principle imperceptible (atindriya) by 
means of inference based on general correlation, and such inferences 
may be framed directly (vita) or through exclusion (avita). The direct 
samanyato dysta inference is when an argument for a specific conclusion 
is set forth in its own form without reference to its opposing thesis. 
Such an inference follows a fivefold format of (a) an assertion to be 
proved (sddhya); (b) an appropriate reason (sadhana); (c) a concrete 
example (nidarsana); (d) an explanation relating the example to the 
assertion (upasamhdra); and (e) a drawing of the appropriate conclu- 
sion (nigamana). An exclusionary (avita) sdmdanyato drsta inference 
establishes a conclusion as a definite possibility or a distinct remaining 
possibility. One procceds by refuting an opposing thesis and establish- 
ing one’s own as a distinct remaining possibility. A vita inference in 
Samkhya philosophy, for exampic, might argue that sensations (hearing, 
touching, and so forth) give rise to experiences of pleasure, pain, 
and indifference. An avita inference, for example, might seek to refute 
those who argue that the manifest world arises out of nonbeing and to 
seek to establish the existence of a primordial undifferentiated mate- 
riality as a distinct remaining possibility.” 

Unfortunately, [svarakrsna’s Samkhyakarikaé and the subsequent 
commentarial tradition add little if anything to the Samkhya treatment 
of the discussion of inference. [svarakrsna simply asserts that there 
are three varieties of inference (anwmdna) (SK 5) and that inference is 
based on a relation between a “characteristic mark” (liga) and that 
which possesses or bears such a mark (léigin). He mentions only sdman- 
yato dysta as one of the three types, and he indicates that sdindnyato 
dysta can be used for establishing matters that are in principle 
imperceptible (alindriya) (SK 6). He also comments that primordial 
materiality is imperceptible in principle because of its subtlety but that 
its existence can be inferred on the basis of its effects (SK 8). The 
various commentaries on the Aarika suggest that the three types of 
inference [Svarakrsna had in mind were parvavat, Sesavat, and samanyato 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 97 


drsta, but, generally speaking, the commentators seem to be following 
later Nyaya accounts of inference. Overall it must be admitted that 
the various discussions of inference in the Samkhya literature proper 
are less than satisfactory and are not as informative as the reconstruc- 
ted material that Frauwallner has put together from citations in the 
work of Samkhya’s opponents. Gaudapada suggests that péarvavat is 
inference-from-cause-to-effect, Sesavat is inference from a part to a 
whole (as when one infers that sea water is salty because a drop of it 
tastes salty), and sdmdnyato drsta is inference based on analogy (Gau- 
dapada under SK 5). The Fayamangalad (under SK 5) suggests that 
pirvavat is inference-from-cause-to-effect and has to do with the future; 
Sesavat is inference-from-effect-to-cause and has to do with the past; 
and samdanyato drsta is inference by analogy that has to do with the pre- 
sent. The Matharaortti (under SK 5) follows Gaudapada. Vacaspati 
Misra’s, Tattvakaumudi (under SK 5) appears to be following yet 
another approach when it is suggested that parvavat and sdmdnyato 
drsta inferences are of the vita type and Sesavat is only avita or exclu- 
sionary. The Yuktidipika suggests that pdrvavat is inference-from-cause- 
to-effect (for example, rain from gathering storm clouds), Sesavat is 
inference-from-effect-to-cause (for example, seeing a child one infers 
a prior parental act of intercourse), and sdmdnyato drsta is inference 
related to generalities (jai) that pertain at various times and places 
(for example, the general observation that where there is smoke, there 
is fire) (p. 38). 

Regarding the manner in which inferences are to be framed, the 
discussions in the various Samkhya texts are also less than satisfactory. 
Igvarakrsna himself says nothing about the issue. The Matharazrtti 
(SK 4-5) suggests that inferences may be framed with three members 
(namely, the assertion to be proved, or pratijfd, the reason, or hetu, and 
an appropriate illustration, or udéharana) or with the standard five mem- 
bers (pratijiid, hetu, udaharana, plus application, or upasamhaéra, and con- 
clusion, or nigamana). The latter more elaborate format is for convinc- 
ing others (parartham anumanam). The Yuktidipika suggests interestingly 
that older Samkhya teachers used a ten-membered inferential format, 
the first five members of which provide a preliminary explication of a 
problem (vpakhydngabhiita) in terms of (1) the desire to know (jifidsa), 
(2) the occasion for doubt (samgaya), (3) the purpose for the under- 
taking (prayojana), (4) the likelihood of a solution (Sakyaprapti), and 
(5) the elimination of extraneous doubts (samsayavyudasa), and the 
last five members of which constitute a persuasive demonstration or 
proof (parapratipadandngabhita), namely (6) the basic assertion to be 
proved (pratij#a), (7) the reason (hetu), (8) an appropriate illustra- 
tion (drstanta), (9) an appropriate application (upasamhara) and (10) 
the drawing of a final conclusion (nigamana).” 

As is well known, later classical Indian philosophy pursues the logic 


98 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of inference in a much more sophisticated and detailed manner, but very 
little remains of any important Samkhya contribution to these discus- 
sions. It is perhaps clear enough, however, that Samkhya’s early con- 
cern for defining certain precise and important relations (sapia sam- 
bandha) and its concern for giving pride of place to inference (anu- 
mana) and the proper formulation of the types of inference, all repre- 
sent important bits of evidence for suggesting that Samkhya philosophy 
played an important role in the formative stages of the history of epis- 
temological and logical reflection in India. 

Epistemology, of course, is not simply philosophical methodology, 
the logic of relations, and the framing of persuasive inferences, impor- 
tant as these matters were to the early Samkhya teachers. Equally 
important were such issues as the number and definition of the instru- 
ments of knowledge, the functioning of the senses, mind, egoity, and 
intellect/will in the process of experience, the actual content of the 
arguments for such key notions as satkdrya, kdranakarya, and triguna, 
the manner in which nondiscrimination occurs, the status of the ex- 
ternal world, the manner in which knowing affects being, the rela- 
tion between awareness (the transactions of intellect, egoity, and 
mind) and consciousness, and most important, the function of 
knowing with respect to ordinary experience and the ultimate ex- 
perience of liberation from frustration. Most of these matters have 
been discussed in passing throughout this essay on the philosophy of 
Samkhya, and the only remaining task is to bring them together in 
a systematic manner so that the Samkhya epistemology is shown to 
be an integral part of the system as a whole. 

Regarding the instruments of knowledge, Samkhya philosophy 
accepts a threefold classification, namely, perception, inference, and 
reliable authority. Because knowing as reflective discerning is a 
constituent of tripartite process, there is a basic uniformity in the 
knowing process ‘‘from Brahma down to a blade of grass,” and it 
would be a mistake, therefore, to interpret the threefold classification 
as suggesting separate kinds of knowing. The process of knowing is 
uniform, according to the author of the Yuktidipika (p. 29), but 
because of limiting conditions certain methodological variations can 
be described. Reflective discerning occurs through ascertainment or 
determination by the intellect, assisted by the self-awareness of egoity, 
the explication or intellectual elaboration of mind, and the function- 
ing of the various sense and action capacities. Specific awarenesses 
(vrtti), whether derivative from external objects or internal states, 
are processed through contacts with the sense capacities, mind, and 
egoity, and a determinate judgment is accomplished by the intellect. 
To the extent that reflective discerning occurs in immediate experi- 
ence (SK 33) as a result of the contact of a sense capacity with an 
object (or a mind with an internal feeling), such reflective discern- 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 99 


ing is known as perception. For ordinary persons such perceptions 
are limited to ‘‘specific’’? (vifesa) awarenesses related to the gross 
aspects of experience, but Yogins and other higher beings (for exam- 
ples, gods) are also able to perceive “nonspecific” (avifesa) matters 
such as the subtle elements (Yuktidipika, p. 35). To the extent 
that reflective discerning occurs as a result of reasoning from 
ordinary experience to the more general principles or relations in- 
variably associated with ordinary experience and required in order 
to have ordinary experience, such reflective discerning is known as 
inference. There are three varieties of inference, as already des- 
cribed, and inferences, though dependent on perception, may ex- 
tend, if properly framed, to matters that are imperceptible in princi- 
ple (for example, establishing the existence of such matters as materi- 
ality and consciousness). To the extent that reflective discerning 
occurs as a result of the trustworthy verbal testimony of the Veda 
and smyti teachings, or from the ysis or holy men, who are free from 
personal biases, such reflective discerning is known as reliable autho- 
rity and concerns matters that transcend perception and cannot be 
framed in a proper inference (for example, the precise sequence and 
ordering of the fundamenta) principles and matters relating to 
higher beings like the mahdtmyaSariras, and so forth). 

All knowing transactions, however, whether from perception, 
inference, or reliable authority are for the sake of the consciousness 
(purusdrtha) (SK, 31, 37, and 57). That is to say, reflective discern- 
ing as the sattva constituent of tripartite process is but a part of its 
total functioning as a teleological but unconscious (acetana) material 
process, in much the same way, says [svarakrsna in Harika 57, as 
unconscious milk nourishes a young calf. The results of all knowing 
transactions, therefore, together with the total functioning of pri- 
mordial materiality, are ascribed or belong finally to consciousness 
(purusartha). 

Moreover, because reflective discerning (sativa) is a constituent 
of a continuous tripartite process, Samkhya describes the knowing 
process in terms of intellect, egoity, mind, and the various sense 
capacities actually assuming or becoming the various forms or mani- 
festations that appear. Hearing assumes or becomes the vibration 
or sound heard; seeing becomes the color or form seen, and so forth, 
So, likewise, mind becomes the idea elaborated; egoity is the assimi- 
lation of the contents of experience to oneself (so that egoity, as it 
were, “makes” or ‘‘forms”’ itself, ahamkdra, aham karomi); and in- 
tellect becomes the final, total configuration insofar as it can be 
reflectively discerned in a pure sativa transparency.” Put another 
way, the process of knowing is simply a subtle material process in 
which reflective discerning (through intellect, egoity, mind, and the 
capacities) is inextricably allied with spontaneous activity (rajas) 


100 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and determinate formulation (tamas, tanmatra, bhiita). Hence, accor- 
ding to Samkhya, all experience deriving from the pentadic or five- 
fold realm (indriya, tanmatra, bhita) manifests itself initially as speci- 
fic (vifesa) comfortable (santa), uncomfortable (ghora), or bewilder- 
ing (midha) experiences, which upon reflection will finally reveal 
themselves as one or another constituent of tripartite process. The 
apparent subject-object dichotomy of ordinary experience will pro- 
gressively show itself through the process of reflective discerning as 
not being a dichotomy. That is to say, ordinary or apparent sub- 
jectivity (intellect, egoity, mind, and the other internal capacities) 
will show itself as a modality of objectivity (triguna as visaya). Per- 
ception, inference, and reliable authority, then, represent one conti- 
nuous process of reflective discerning (sativa) that progressively re- 
veals the absence of consciousness, or perhaps better, that reveals 
the process of knowing as a material process ‘‘for the sake of another” 
(parartha, purusdrtha). As mentioned earlier, Samkhya philosophy is, 
therefore, the antithesis of Hegelian philosophy. For Hegel, know- 
ing is the progressive revelation of substance as subject. For Sam- 
khya, knowing is the progressive revelation of the ordinary or appa- 
rent subject (antahkarana, citta, buddhi, ahamkara, manas) as subs- 
tance !80 

Primordial materiality as tripartite process is, according to Sam- 
khya, (a) undifferentiated (avivekin), (b) a content (visaya) (c) 
general (sémanya) and, hence, intelligible in principle, (d) uncon- 
scious (acetana), and (e) inherently productive (prasavadharmin) 
(SK 11). 

Moreover, primordial materiality can be shown to exist as the 

ultimate material cause, 

(a) because that which is manifest is perceived to be limited 
(pariména) (and no limited thing can itself serve as an ulti- 
mate cause without getting into an infinite regress), 

(b) because all manifest things, insofar as their characteristics 
are uniform and/or homogeneous (samanvaya), require a 
single, ultimate cause as their causal source, 

(c) because the emergence and/or process of that which is mani- 
fest presupposes a causal capacity (Sakti) that enables emer- 
gence or process to occur, 

(d) because that which is manifest is just a transformation and, 
hence, presupposes an ultimate cause different from it 
which is not a transformation, and 

(e) because that which is manifest and, hence, defined in terms 
of ordinary space and time, presupposes an ultimate cause 
that is not so defined, and, hence, in which the manifest 
can reside prior to manifestation (SK 15-16). 

Furthermore, according to Samkhya, all manifest material effects 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 101 


(karya) already exist (satkarya) in the primal material cause in a 
potential state or condition prior to manifestation, because (a) some- 
thing (namely, any material effect) cannot arise from nothing, 
(b) any material effect must have a common material basis (namely, 
a real relation) with its cause, (c) anything (namely, any manifest 
effect) cannot arise from just everything, (d) something (namely, 
an ultimate cause) can only produce what it is capable of producing, 
and (e) the very nature or essence of the cause is nondifferent from 
the effect (as, for example, a cloth and its threads) (SK 9). 

The manifest world, then, is a series of material effects from a pri- 
mal material cause. The effects preexist potentially in the cause 
and, thus, are only manifest transformations of one basic “‘existent” 
(viz, primordial materiality). That which links material effect to 
material cause is tripartite process, which first shows itself as specific 
satisfying, frustrating, and confusing experiences but is finally re- 
flectively discerned as a closed causal system of reductive material- 
ism in which consciousness is absent. 

As mentioned earlier in the section on contentless consciousness, 
Samkhya presumably could have settled with the elimination of the 
old Upanisadic “‘ghost in the machine” and developed itself as a 
pure materialism or as a variant of Buddhist no-self theorizing. Such 
moves, however, would have required a rejection of the Vedic heri- 
tage or a rejection of any significant notion of freedom or release. 
More than that, however, it would have required reducing its epis- 
temology to some sort of epiphenomenal status within an overall 
materialist position. Samkhya philosophy rejected such moves and 
introduced, instead, its ‘‘eccentric’’ dualism andits anomalous no- 
tion of contentless or nonintentional consciousness, which has al- 
ready been described. 

Epistemologically, the introduction of consciousness means a shift 
from reductive materialism to critical realism.§t Knowing and the 
content of knowing are separated from an uncharacterizable (asd- 
manya) “presupposition for knowing”’ (jfia, purusa) that is neither 
the material nor efficient cause of the manifest world and can only 
be pointed to as being “‘not this, not that’? (neti, neti). Moreover, 
the “‘presupposition of knowing’’ cannot really know, because the 
process of knowing resides finally in intellect as the focus of reflective 
discerning (sativa). Consciousness is only a mysterious, transcendent, 
yet immanent, presence (sdksitva ) that enables knowing to function but 
finally reveals that knowing itself falls outside of consciousness or, 
put another way, that knowing itself is only a dimension of manifest 
being. Thus, finally, for Samkhya, the manifest-external world is fully 
real, as is the mysterious presence of transcendent consciousness, 
and the final discrimination (viveka) of the intellect is the realiza- 
tion that the two “‘existents’”? are distinct (gunapurusdntraopalabdhi, 


102 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


as the Yuktidipika characterizes it), with knowing itself being reduced 
to the guna side of the dualism. 

What shows itself as being unreal for Samkhya are the miscons- 
trued relations (anyathakhyati, sadasatkhyati) projected on what is real 
prior to the discrimination of the triparite process from conscious- 
ness. Because consciousness is contentless and nonintentional, it 
appears to take on the content of the tripartite process, and that 
process appears as if possessing consciousness. There is a beginning- 
less predisposition towards nondiscrimination, which leads naturally 
towards the experiences of bondage and frustration (SK 55), and this 
beginningless predisposition towards nondiscrimination functions in 
Samkhya almost like a Kantian a priori form of intuition—in the 
sense that ordinary experience always shows itself under this limi- 
tation or condition. This basic nondiscrimination is a fundmental 
predisposition of the intellect and generates along with the other 
predispositions the ‘‘intellectual creation’? and the phenomenal, 
empirical world of ordinary space, time, and causality (the phala 
realm or the bhata realm). Also inherent in the intellect, however, 
is a natural tendency towards discrimination that reflects the true 
or real ¢attva dimension of what is. Seven of the predispositions, in 
other words, foster the primal nondiscrimination and predispose the 
transmigrating intellect to become further involved in the experiences 
of bondage and frustration; only one predisposition (namely, knowl- 
edge) fosters a predisposition towards a correct apprehension of 
what truly is, namely, the tripartite process and pure consciousness 
(SK 63), in which ordinary space, time, and causality show them- 
selves as the ongoing transformations (parindma) and combinations 
(samghdta) of an undifferentiated (avivekin) or uniform primordial 
materiality (milaprakrti as triguna, satkdrya, and kadranakdrya) in which 
consciousness is absent and to which consciousness is indifferent 
(udasina, madhyasthya). Samkhya, in other words, wants to make a 
clear distinction between ‘‘phenomenal”’ and ‘“‘noumenal,’’ almost 
in a Kantian sense, but with the important difference, of course, 
that the Kantian ‘“‘noumenal”’ is knowable.*? For Samkhya what 
is finally truly ‘‘noumenal’’ is consciousness, but unlike Kant, 
Samkhya dissociates ‘“‘consciousness’’ from ‘“‘awareness’’ ontologically, 
thereby making a claim that Kantian philosophy or Western philos- 
ophy in general does not address. 

Finally, however, both frustration and liberation are shown to be 
related to the epistemological transactions of the intellect in its on- 
going functioning. In other words, bondage and release pertain only 
to the tripartite process, never to consciousness, although the pre- 
sence (sdaksitva) of consciousness allows all transactions to become 
manifest. Knowing, therefore, cannot change what is; it can only 
create interpretive perspectives that either perpetuate conventional 


PHILOSOPHY OF SAMKHYA 103 


views about the world that are insufficiently discriminating, or that 
reflect the true nature of things. Knowing, then, when insufficiently 
pursued, is at the root of our bondage to frustration and rebirth 
(duhkha, samsara, bandha), but it may also become the occasion, 
when properly cultivated, for a glimpse of the true nature of things, 
one aspect of which is an intelligible, coherent, and determinate world 
(triguna, milaprakrti) and the other aspect of which is the presence 
of nonintentional consciousness (purusa) for which the world exists. 


PART TWO 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 
(arranged chronologically) 


KAPILA, ASURI 


In verse 69 of the Samkhyakarika, [Svarakrsna indicates that the 
Samkhya system has been “‘fully enumerated” or “‘explained’”’ by 
the “‘supreme sage” (paramarsi), who is unanimously identified with- 
in the Samkhya tradition as the sage Kapila. In verse 70 of the 
Karika, Iévarakrsna informs us further that out of compassion Kapila 
transmitted the knowledge of Samkhya to Asuri who in turn passed 
on the system to Paficagikha. Moreover, according to [svarakrsna 
in verse 70, the Samkhya system (tantra) was “expanded” or “‘widely 
disseminated”’ (bahudha krta) by Paficasikha. Various attempts have 
been made in the commentarial tradition to trace the line of teachers 
from Paficagikha to Isvarakrsna. Mdjharavrtti, for example, men- 
tions the sequence “Bhargava, Ulika, Valmikin, Harita, Devala, 
and many others (prabhrti)”” (under SK 71). JFayamangald offers the 
sequence ‘‘Garga, Gautama, and many others” (under SK 71). 
Paramartha’s Chinese translation (under SK 70) suggests the sequ- 
ence “‘Hokia, Ulaika, Po-p’o-li, Iévarakrsna,”’ the name “Hokia”’ 
possibly meaning ‘‘Garga”’ and the name ‘‘Po-p’o-li’”’ possibly mean- 
ing ‘“‘Varsa” (according to Takakusu), Devala (according to Bel- 
valkar), or “‘Kapila’’ (or “derived from Kapila,’’ according to 
R. CG. Pandeya). Yuktidipikad refers to ‘‘Harita, Baddhali, Kairata, 
Paurika, Rsabhegvara, Paficadhikarana, Patafijali, WVarsaganya, 
Kaundinya, Mika, and so forth” (under SK 71). Revealing, how- 
ever, is another comment by the author of the Yuktidipika (under 
SK 70) that the lineage of Samkhya teachers, unlike the lineage 
of other fastras, cannot be adequately calculated even in terms of 
hundreds and/or thousands of years (varsafatasahasra), implying, in 
in other words, either that the Samkhya tradition is very old indeed 
or that its origin is divine. Itis permissible to conclude, therefore, 
that by the sixth-century of the Common Era (the approximate 
date of the Chinese translation) and thereafter, the writers of 
Samkhya texts (a) identified Kapila as the founder of the system, 
(b) recognized Asuri as someone who inherited the teaching, (c) 
considered Paficasixha as someone who further formulated the 


108 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


system (tantra) and widely disseminated it, and(d) described Iévara- 
krsna as someone who summarized and simplified the old system 
after an interval of some centuries (Paramartha’s Chinese trans- 
lation) or more (Yuktidipika). 

As was already pointed out in the Introduction, Kapila and Asuri 
are only vague memories. According to the oldest commentary on 
the Karikd (Paramartha’s Chinese translation), Kapila is a ‘‘wise 
ascetic,” ‘‘born of heaven,” “innately endowed with the four funda- 
mental predispositions of virtue, knowledge, renunciation, and 
supernatural power,” who takes pity on suffering humanity and 
selects a Brahmin, Asuri by name, as an appropriate person to whom 
to reveal the knowledge (of Samkhya). Kapila approaches Asuri, 
who is described as being a Brahmin householder (grhastha) and as 
having been “‘performing sacrifices for a thousand years” (varsa- 
sahasraydjin), but Asuri does not heed the call of Kapila. Kapila 
returns on two additional occasions, each one after an additional 
interval of a thousand years, and finally Asuri renounces the life of 
a householder, commences ascetic observances, and becomes a disci- 
ple of Kapila. According to Matharavrtti (under SK 1), Kapila is 
a “great sage’? (maharsi), born of Manu Svayambhuva’s daughter, 
Devahiti, and Prajapati’s son, Kardama. According to the Bhdsya 
of Gaudapada (under SK 1), Kapila is one of the seven “‘great 
sages” or “‘seers’’ (sapta maharsi) (along with Sanaka, Sananda, 
Sanatana, Asuri, Vodhu, and Paficagikha). Vy4sa in his Yogasitra- 
bhasya 1.25, quotes an old statement that describes Kapila as the 
“primal wise man”’ or “‘knower’’ (ddividvdn) who assumes an “‘arti- 
fical mind’’ (nirmdanacitta) in order to instruct Asuri about the Sam- 
khya system (tantra). Vacaspati Misra, in his commentary on the 
passage, asserts that this old statement is from Paficasikha. More- 
over, according to Vacaspati Misra, Kapila was born at the begin- 
ning of creation, attained complete knowledge immediately from 
MaheSvara, and may be considered one of the incarnations (ava- 
tara) of Visnu. As such, Kapila is also known as “‘self-existent”’ 
(svayambha) Hiranyagarbha, the Lord (ifvara) of the descendants of 
Svayambhi (“‘sodyambhuvdndm .. . ifvara iti bhdvah,” Tattvavaisaradi 
on. Yogasitrabhdsya 1.25). References such as these and others persu- 
aded Albrecht Wezler to suggest that Kapila may have himself been 
considered to be the Lord (isvara) or God of Samkhya.1 Kapila is 
also credited with authorship of the Sastitantra (‘‘the science of sixty 
topics”), according to the author of the Yuktidipika (in the intro- 
ductory verses of his commentary) and according to the Ahirbudhny- 
asamhité (XII.30), but other texts ascribe authorship of the Sasti- 
tantra to Paficasikha or Varsaganya (see below under separate 
entries). 

In older Sanskrit literature there are various references to Kapila 


KAPILA, ASURI 109 


and Asuri, but it is difficult to determine if the older citations can 
be linked with the later Samkhya references mentioned above. The 
term “‘kapila’’ appears already in the Rg Veda (X.27.16), “...one 
tawny one among the ten... .” (daSanam ekam kapilam), and is appa- 
rently only a term for the color “‘tawny” or “‘reddish brown.” Similar 
color references may also be found in Brhaddranyaka Upanisad VI.4.15, 
Maitri V1.30, Atharvasiras 5 and Garbha 1. In SvetaSvatara Upanisad V.2, 
however, a text in which the term sémkhya appears for the first time in 
Indian literature, kapila as a color reference is also linked with a “‘seer”’ 
(rst) who is born at the beginning of creation (rsim prasiiiam kapilam 
... tam agre....). When this reference is compared with other Sveta- 
$vatara references, namely, IV.12, VI.1-2, VI.18 and III.4, it becomes 
clear that kapila is to be construed with reference to Hiranyagarbha 
and Rudra. In Aitareyabrahmana VII.17, reference is made to the 
“clans of Kapila” (kdpileya), and there was evidently a Kapila sakha 
of the Yajurveda. In the “addenda” (parigista) to the Atharvaveda, 
Kapila, along with Asuri and Pajicagikha, is mentioned in connection 
with the tarpana or “‘libation” ritual (at XLIII.3.4). In the Baudh- 
ayanagrhyasiitra (IV.16.1) a system of rules for pursuing the ascetic life 
is linked with Kapila (kapilasannydsavidha). Kapila is also referred to 
in the canonical literature of the Jains, specifically in adhyaya VIII of 
the Uttarddhyayanasiitra, a poetical discourse entitled ““Kaviliyam” (or 
“‘Kapila’s Verses”). Santisiiri’s commentary on the discourse reports 
that Kapila Muni was the son of a Brahmin, Kaégyapa, and his wife, 
Yaéa. The verses extol the ascetic life, but both Winternitz and Jacobi 
have commented that there is nothing especially Samkhyan about the 
verses. In the Anuyogadvarasiitra of the Jains, however, there is a speci- 
fic reference to “Kavila,” along with references to “Satthitantam,” 
““Kanagasattati,”’ and a certain “‘Madhara,” which appear to be res- 
pectively Kapila (“derived from Kapila’’), Sastitantra (‘‘the science 
of sixty topics”), Kanakasaptati (the “‘Gold-Seventy,” an old name 
of the Samkhyakarika), and Mathara or Madhava (old Samkhya tea- 
chers). The latter reference appears to be late, however, and there is 
apparently no connection with the ‘““Kaviliyam” section of the Uttara- 
dhyayana other than an identity of name. From early Buddhist environ- 
ments, the only reference to Kapila is, of course, the well-known refer- 
ence to Kapilavastu, the birthplace of the Buddha. Garbe construed 
the name Kapilavastu to mean “‘the place of Kapila,’ thereby 
suggesting that Kapilavastu was a center for Samkhya or at 
least a center for certain specific ascetic traditions, but Oldenberg 
argued to the contrary that the term ‘‘kapila’’ is best taken as a 
description of the place. Garbe’s interpretation presupposes that 
there could have been an existent Samkhya system in the pre-Buddhis- 
tic period, a presupposition for which there is little or no evidence. 
Oldenberg’s interpretation presupposes that there was no Samkhya 


110 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


system in this ancient period, a presupposition that subsequent re- 
search has shown to be largely correct. 

There are also a number of references to Asuri in the older literature, 
especially in the Satapathabrahmana, namely, 1.6.3.26, I1.1.4.27, 11.6.1.- 
33, II.6.3.17, and IV.3.4.33 (the latter in the Kanva recension), all 
of which refer to a certain Asuri who was a specialist in the sacrificial 
ritual (and which parallel, interestingly, the later Samkhya epithet of 
Asuri, namely, varsasahasrayajin, “performing sacrifices for a thousand 
years”). Moreover, Asuri is regularly mentioned in the lists of teachers 
enumerated in the Brhadaranyaka (at 11.6.3, IV.6.3, and VI.5.2.). 
These old references to Kapila and Asuri became the basis for B. 
Barua’s claim (in A History of Pre-Buddhistic Indian Philosophy) that it 
is useful to trace four periods in the development of Samkhya, namely 
(a) the Kapila phase as found in Vedic speculations such as Rg Veda 
X.90 and X.129; (b) the Asuri phase as found in the Fourth Brah- 
mana of the Brhadaranyaka (thereby linking Asuri with both Yajfiavalkya 
and Uddalaka); (c) the Paficasikha phase as found in the Santiparvan 
portions of the Mahabharata; and (d) the final summation of the sys- 
tem in Iévarakrsna’s Saémkhyakarikd. The reason for linking Kapila with 
the first phase, according to Barua, is that in the Mudgala Upanisad the 
Purusasikta (RV X.90) is said to be the starting point of Samkhya. 
Moreover, according to the later Samkhya texts, Kapila’s first teach- 
ing to Asuri was “In the beginning there was just darkness. . . .”” (tama 
eva khalu idam agra asit....) (cited by Mafharavriti and Fayamangala 
under SK 70 and cited in a slightly different manner in Maitri V.2), 
obviously calling to mind RV X.129. Although Barua’s periodization 
for the Paficasikha phase and the Isvarakrsna phase is reasonable 
enough, the same cannot be said for his Kapila phase and his Asuri 
phase. Here again the issue comes down to whether one can reason- 
ably argue for an existent Samkhya system that is pre-Buddhistic or 
at least pre-Moksadharma. The textual evidence clearly suggests that 
one cannot. The oldest reference to what can reasonably be construed 
as important Samkhya notions or the rudiments for some kind of Sam- 
khya system are to be found in the Katha and Svetdfvatara Upanisads. 
The former does not include the term “‘samkhya,”’ but there are a num- 
ber of technical terms in a general environment of yogic praxis that 
render it plausible that some kind of Samkhya system may have been 
congealing. The latter does include the term “‘sémkhya’’ (VI.13) along 
with the term “‘iriguna’’? (V.7) together with a variety of “‘enumer- 
ations” that can be construed as being identifiably Samkhyan. In 
both texts, however, there isa lack of systematic treatment or presen- 
tation that seriously calls into question any claim that the authors of 
the texts were aware of any kind of established system. Much more 
likely is that both texts, which may be roughly dated in the fourth or 
third century B.C.E., represent further specifications of the kinds of 


KAPILA, ASURI lll 


speculations one finds in older Upanisads such as the Chandogya and 
the Brhadaranyaka. Somewhat more systematic reflection of a Samkhya 
kind begins to appear in the Moksadharma and the Bhagavadgita (both 
of which develop between 200 B.C.E. and 200 C.E.), reflection that 
has striking analogues in such texts as ASvaghosa’s Buddhacarita (ca., 
first century of the Common Era), Carakasamhita (ca. second century), 
the earliest Puranas (ca., the first centuries of the Common Era), and 
Manavadharmasastra (the cosmological portions of which probably 
derive from the first centuries of the Common Era). Even in these 
textual environments, however, one is still a long way from the Sam- 
khya system as summarized by Isvarakrsna, although it is plausible to 
suggest that some kind of Samkhya system(s) was in existence in this 
period. Moreover, the name Paficasikha becomes prominent in this 
period, although the texts clearly indicate that his views were only 
one tradition among many that were developing. In any case, prior 
to the Katha, Svetasvatara, Moksadharma, and Bhagavadgita, there is no 
evidence whatever for a Samkhya system, and even in these environ- 
ments (Katha, and so forth) one should properly speak only of Proto- 
Samkhya traditions. Barua’s Kapila phase or Asuri phase, therefore, 
cannot be taken seriously. 

In the Moksadharma and Bhagavadgita of the Mahabharata, Kapila 
and Asuri are regularly mentioned as important precursors of the 
Samkhya tradition, but there is no uniformity whatever about their 
identity or about their views. In the Bhagavadgita (X.6) Kapila is re- 
ferred to as a muni among the “perfected ones’’ (siddha). In the Moksa- 
dharma Kapila is linked variously with Agni, Visnu, and Siva, but 
generally in the epic Kapila and Asuri are referred to as two teachers 
in the Samkhya lineage of teachers. At XII.306.56-60, for example, 
the following list of Samkhya teachers is given: Jaigisavya, Asita 
Devala, Parasara, Varsaganya, Paficasikha, Kapila, Suka, Gautama, 
Arstisena, Garga, Narada, Asuri, Pulastya, Sanatkumara, Sukra, and 
Kasyapa. In XII.211, Asuri and Pajicagikha (and see below under 
Paficagikha entry) are associated with the doctrine of Brahman, and 
the term “‘kapileya,”’ is derived from the feminine, kapild, who is said 
to have been Asuri’s (brahmani) wife, from whom Paficagikha received 
the pure milk of the knowledge of Samkhya. One has the impression 
that Kapila and Asuri are little more than honored names in the 
Moksadharma and that any specific content about them has been long 
forgotten. This possibly explains the tendency for them to become 
mythological figures as the tradition develops further, with Kapila 
coming to be linked to Hiranyagarbha and Asuri coming to be viewed 
as a culture hero who perseveres over thousands of years with the 
sacrificial ritual, eventually abandoning it for the life of an ascetic. 

There is, finally, a long passage in the Moksadharma purporting to 
be a dialogue between Kapila and Asuri about the basic principles of 


112 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Samkhya. The form of Samkhya discussed therein is closely related 
to the Samkhya system attributed to Paficasikha in XII.211-212 (see 
the Paficasikha entry below). This “Kapila-Asuri dialogue,” how- 
ever, appears only in the southern recension of the Mahabharata (the 
Kumbhakonam edition) and is not included by the editors of the criti- 
cal edition in the main text of the epic. It is printed as appendix I, 
no. 29 in the critical edition, pages 2075 following. It is probably a 
late interpolation and cannot be taken seriously as a representation of 
the views of Kapila and Asuri. Likewise, the reference by Gunaratna- 
sri in his commentary on Haribhadrasiri’s Saddarfanasamuccaya to an 
old verse of Asuri can hardly be taken as a reliable quotation. The 
verse asserts that purusa comes to be the locus of experience when the 
transactions of the buddhi become reflected in it, just as the crystal 
takes on the color of the flower reflected in it and just as the moon 
becomes reflected in the water. The content of the verse is clearly 
related to later Samkhya debates about the nature of experience and 
probably postdates even Iévarakrsna’s discussion. 

In conclusion, then, all that can be said is that Kapila and Asuri are 
linked with the beginning of the Samkhya tradition. There is little 
reliable information about them apart from Kapila’s linkage with an- 
cient ascetic traditions and Asuri’s association with the brahmanical 
sacrificial system. That the later Samkhya teachers unanimously refer 
to Kapila and Asuri as the founders of the system probably reflects the 
Samkhya tradition’s attempts to appropriate traditions of ascetic specu- 
lation as its own and to relate that ascetic speculation to dissatisfaction 
with the older sacrificial religion. Moreover, what might be called the 
upgrading of Kapila to the status of Hiranyagarbha or one or another 
mythological figure (Agni, Rudra, Siva, and so forth) together with 
efforts to list Kapila, Asuri, and other Samkhya teachers in enumera- 
tions of the “‘great seers’? in the epic and Purdanic literature may be 
taken as further attempts to establish a proper lineage for the Samkhya 
philosophy. 


PANCASIKHA 


If Kapila and Asuri are only vague memories in the Samkhya tradi- 
tion, then it must be said that Paficasikha, the third teacher within the 
tradition, is a confused memory. There are a number of references to 
Paficasikha in the older literature, and it is quite clear that Paficasikha 
is a revered teacher for both the Samkhya and Yoga traditions, 
or, put somewhat differently, Paficasikha may well represent a period 
in which Samkhya and Yoga had not yet become separate or distinct 
traditions. The name “‘Paficasikha” appears already in the Pali Canon 
(in the Sakkapathasutta 1.2 of the Dighanikaya) wherein a certain “‘paf- 
casitkho gandhabbadevaputto’”’, one of the celestial musicians attendant 
upon the King of the Gods, serenades the Buddha prior to his discourse 
with the great Sakka on the Vediya mountain, but the passage as a 
whole has nothing whatever to do with Samkhya or Yoga. A more in- 
triguing Pali reference, however, appears in the Indriyabhdvandsutta 
(I1I.52) of the Majjhimanikaya, in which the doctrine ofa certain Para- 
sariya Brahmin is refuted (“‘... pdrdsariyassa bradhmanassa vacanam.’’). 
The doctrine of the Parasariya Brahmin is that yogic meditation leads 
to the total cessation of the functioning of the senses, whereas the 
Buddha emphasizes only control over the senses. The reference to the 
Parasariya Brahmin may well be to Paficasikha, for in Asvaghosa’s 
Buddhacarita (X1I.67) the name Vrddha Parasara is mentioned along 
with Janaka and Jaigisavya as old teachers of Yoga, and from Moksa- 
dharma XI11.308.24 we know that pardsarya is a gotra name for Pafica- 
Sikha (“‘pdrdSaryasagotrasya vrddhasya sumahdtmanah bhiksoh paitcasikh- 
asya....). Buddhacarita and Moksadharma can both be reasonably 
dated from the first (Buddhacarita) through the third or fourth cen- 
turies of the Common Era, and it is reasonable to conclude, therefore, 
that the name “Paficasikha”’ was linked to Samkhya and Yoga by at 
least this period. Whether it is possible to push Paficasikha back to 
the time of the Buddha (as the Pali reference would suggest) is a more 
difficult matter to determine. As is well known, there were ascetic, 
Yoga-like traditions flourishing in the period of the Buddha (Sramana 
and yati traditions, Ajivikas, Jains, and so forth). Moreover, the older 
Buddhist literature indicates clearly that Gotama studied various medi- 


114 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tation techniques prior to the discovery of his own unique approach 
to meditation, and Asvaghosa’s Buddhacarita (chapter XII) would 
have us believe that Arada Kalama’s tradition of meditation was in- 
deed an old form of Samkhyayoga. Garbe, Jacobi, Barua, and others, 
on the basis of these traditions concluded, therefore, that some form 
of Samkhya and Yoga was known at the time of the Buddha. More- 
over, they also tried to show possible influences of Samkhya and Yoga 
on early Buddhist thought. Subsequent research has tended to show, 
however, that these older assumptions about a pre-Buddhistic or even 
a pre-Moksadharma form of Samkhya and Yoga are probably ana- 
chronistic. The work of Oldenberg, Edgerton, Keith, Johnston, Frau- 
wallner, and van Buitenen has cogently shown that there are no syste- 
matic forms of Samkhya and Yoga before the period of the Bhagavad- 
gitd, the Moksadharma, the Carakasamhita, and the Buddhacarita, all of 
which texts derive from the first centuries of the Common Era (at 
least in their extant forms). Moreover, even in these texts one hardly 
finds a full-blown systematic Samkhya or Yoga. One can also find 
Samkhya.and Yoga references in Upanisads such as the Katha, Sveta- 
$vatara, Maitri, and so forth, but these references, taken separately or 
together, only show that there were a variety of incipient Samkhya 
and Yoga reflections in the process of formulation. Thus, the pre- 
ponderance of evidence would seem to suggest that the most reliable 
date for Paficasikha would be the milieu of the Buddhacarita and the 
Moksadharma or, in other words, the first century of the Common Era 
and thereafter. What Paficasikha appears to represent, then, is the 
conclusion of what might be called a period of Proto-Samkhya tradi- 
tions or, putting the matter somewhat differently, Paficasikha brings 
us to the threshold of Samkhya philosophy proper. As already indi- 
cated, the Samkhya textual tradition itself tends to support-such a 
view of Paficasikha, for Isvarakrsna in SK 70 states that, although 
the tradition was founded by Kapila and transmitted through Asuri, 
it was really Paficagikha who consolidated, ‘“‘expanded,” or “widely 
disseminated” (bahudha krta) the tradition (tantra). 

Before turning to the various views and quotations attributed to 
Paficasikha, it may be useful, first of all, to clarify somewhat what is 
meant by saying that Paficasikha represents the end of the period of 
proto-Samkhya traditions and/or the threshold of Samkhya philosophy 
proper. Put simply, the name ‘“‘Paficasikha” is more important as a 
symbolic designation ofa certain phase in the history of prephilosophical 
Samkhya than as a designation of an historic teacher. Regarding the 
latter, the actual teacher, although there is no reason to doubt that 
there was such an historic figure, there is no satisfactory way to re- 
construct what his views were. Like Kapila and Asuri, the historic 
Paficasikha is lost to antiquity. Regarding the former, however, the 
symbolic Paficasikha, a great deal can be said to flesh out what Sam- 


PANCASIKHA 115 


khya represented at the threshold of its becoming a philosophical posi- 
tion. As was pointed out in the Introduction, it appears to be reason- 
ably clear that the intellectual environments of the oldest Upanisads 
(the Brhadaranyaka, Chandogya, and so forth) represent the context out 
of which the earliest Samkhya and Yoga speculations were to arise, 
although it is also reasonably clear that there were no identifiable 
forms of Samkhya and Yoga in this ancient context. It was most likely 
the period after the oldest Upanisads (possibly from the fifth through 
the third or second centuries B.C.E.) that proto-Samkhya and proto- 
Yoga traditions begin to develop, a period roughly contemporaneous 
with the rise of early Buddhist and Jain thought. According to the 
testimony of Kautilya’s ArthaSastra (the oldest portion of which can 
be dated about 300 B.C.E.), there were three traditions of dnviksiki 
or “systematic reflection” in this period, namely, “. . . sémkhyam yogo 
lokdyatam ca....” According to some old verses in the Moksadharma 
portion of the Mahabharata (XI1.337.59 ff.), five traditions of syste- 
matic reflection are mentioned: “‘sdmkhyam yogam pdiicaratram vedah 
pasupatam tatha....” This reference appears to be later than the Kau- 
tilya reference, for it obviously reflects a speculative environment in 
which theistic traditions are coming to the fore and taking their place 
alongside Vedic speculations and incipient Samkhya and Yoga. In 
any case, both references indicate clearly that the terms “‘sdémkhya”’ 
and “‘yoga’’ were being used to refer to distinct traditions of speculation. 
Regarding the content of these distinct traditions in this ancient period 
(the fifth through the second century B.C.E.), the only reliable clues 
are to be found in the so-called “middle”? Upanisads, the Katha, Svetd- 
§vatara, Maitri, and so forth, in which one finds various enumerations 
(sets of 2, 3, 5, 8, 16, 50, etc.) and a developing technical terminology 
(triguna, prakrti, purusa, and so forth) in a general environment of 
Yogic praxis. At the same time, however, one also finds in these texts 
the old Upanisadic brahman and diman, one or another kind of theistic 
speculation, and many of the general themes (ritual performance, 
mythology, and so forth) from the older Vedic heritage. Samkhya and 
Yoga are clearly in the process of being formulated, but there is obvi- 
ously no uniform or systematic metaphysical system present or im- 
plied. The fact that there is no systematic formulation present promp- 
ted Franklin Edgerton to argue that the terms “sdmkhya’’ and ‘“‘yoga”’ 
are best construed in these contexts as methodological notions rather 
than metaphysical notions; hence, “‘sdmkhya’’, says Edgerton, means 
“reason-method”’ and “‘yoga’’ means “‘discipline-method.” This is also 
what prompted J.A.B. van Buitenen’s important observation that the 
the interpreter is best guided by “‘allowing for the greatest diversity, 
rather than the greatest uniformity of doctrine.” The evidence indi- 
cates, in other words, that there was a great variety of diffuse spiritual 
methodologies in the process of developing, a plethora of speculative 


116 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


traditions, some of which were focusing on theoretical issues and others 
of which were emphasizing various types of practical meditation. To 
quote van Buitenen again: “At this stage to credit these litlte centres 
with the name “‘schools” is to do them too much or too little honor. 

..” This fluid, pluralistic samkhya-cum-yoga environment reaches its 
culmination by the first century of the Common Era and thereafter and 
is expressed in such texts as the Moksadharma, the Bhagvadgita, the 
Buddhacarita of ASvaghoga, the Carakasamhita, the speculative portions of 
the Manusmrti, the early. Puranas, the Sanatsujatiya, and the Anugitd. 
Taken together, all of these texts reflect the general condition of Indian 
reflection at the beginning of the Common Era. From a religious point 
of view, they represent what we usually mean by the term “‘Hinduism.” 
From a philosophical point of view, they represent a prephilosophical 
threshold of speculation from which all of the later traditions of Hindu 
philosophy derive. Iffrom one point of view they represent Proto-Sam- 
khya and Proto-Yoga, it can also be said that they likewise represent 
Proto-Vedanta, Proto-Mimamsa, Proto-Vaisesika, and so forth. 
The fluid and pluralistic quality of this speculation is perhaps best 
revealed in the Moksadharma portion of the Mahabharata, the speci- 
fically Samkhya and Yoga portions of which are to be found in X1I.187- 
188, 211-212, 228, 231, 232, 233, 238, 240-242, 244, 261, 267, 289, 290- 
291, 293-296, 298, 303-304, 306, 308, 337-339, all of which passages 
have been nicely summarized by V. M. Bedekar! and most of which 
have been translated by Edgerton.2, One might add to this the 
“Kapila-Asuri dialogue,” referred to earlier, which the editors of the 
critical edition relegate to appendix I, no. 29, pages 2075 following. 
The Proto-Samkhya of Carakasamhité has been aptly summarized by 
S.N. Dasgupta.’ The Proto-Samkhya and Proto-Yoga of Asvaghosa’s 
Buddhacarita have been treated in detail by E.H. Johnston,* and in 
Johnston’s translation of Canto XII.5 Erich Frauwallner has closely 
studied Moksadharma XIJ.187 and its variants in XIJ.239-241, claim- 
ing that these passages represent the Ur form of Samkhya in which an 
evolution theory is absent,® but J.A.B. van Buitenen’ was able to recon- 
struct from the same passages a “‘little text” that ‘‘definitely gives the 
lie to a primitive Samkhya without evolution.” Claims by S. N. Das- 
gupta and P. Chakravarti that the form of Samkhya found in Moksa- 
dharma XI1.211-212 (the so-called ‘“‘Paficasikhavakya”, and see fur- 
ther below) and in Carakasamhita (Sarirasthana portion) are the 
same in accepting only 24 tattvas (instead of 25), thereby coalescing 
purusa and avyakta, is cogently refuted by V.M. Bedekar.® Dasgupta, 
Frauwallner, Johnston, van Buitenen, and others have all attempted 
to outline various historic stages in this Proto-Samkhya and Proto- 
Yoga material, and these various attempts have been summarized in 
detail in Gerald J. Larson.® All such efforts to delineate a precise 
historical sequence, although frequently ingenious, must nevertheless 


PANGASIKHA 117 


be judged to have failed. There is simply insufficient evidence for 
tracing historical stages. Put more strongly, there is a mistake in 
historical judgment insuch efforts. That is to say, the evidence strongly 
suggests that there were a variety of parallel traditions developing, no 
one of which can be considered more important than another. To 
impose a linear development on these traditions is seriously to dis- 
tort the available evidence. 

In the early centuries of the Common Era, the fluid, pluralistic 
samkhya-cum-yoga traditions just described begin to form themselves 
into distinct “‘schools,”’ most likely through the work of such teachers 
as Varsaganya, Vindhyavasin, Madhava, and Iévarakrsna (see the 
respective entries below). To some extent it is plausible to believe that 
this tendency toward systematic formulation was triggered by the 
appearance of systematic Buddhist philosophy, but it is equally plau- 
sible to believe that the general cultural environment was simply ripe 
in the first centuries of the Common Era for a turn from the older 
diffuse religious-cum-philosophical speculation to a more technical, 
precise treatment of intellectual matters in a variety of subject areas 
(including religion, law, cosmology, medicine, philosophy, and so 
forth). In any case, it appears that the later systematic Samkhya 
teachers looked back upon the older diffuse traditions as having been 
consolidated and widely disseminated by a certain Paficasikha. All of 
the later teachers, however, clearly indicate that there was a gap bet- 
ween the work of Paficasikha and their own systematic work. The 
various commentaries, as was pointed out earlier, give different lists 
of intervening teachers between Paficasikha and Iévarakrsna, strongly 
suggesting that Paficagikha is functioning more as a heuristic link with 
an older heritage than as a contemporary colleague. Hence, the rele- 
vance of a distinction between an “historic” and a “‘symbolic” Pafica- 
sikha. From Moksadharma XI1I.306.56-60 (quoted above under the 
Kapila and Asuri entries), of course, it is clear enough that there was 
an ancient Samkhyayoga teacher named Paficasikha, but one has the 
strong impression from the later Samkhya texts proper that the name 
‘*Paficasikha”’ represents an ancient revered figure to whom one might 
attribute a great variety of hallowed Samkhya or Yoga notions, This 
is certainly true for all of the quotations attributed by Vacaspati Misra 
to Paficagikha in his Tattvavaisaradi on Yogasitrabhdsya, It is also surely 
true of Vijfianabhiksu’s references to Paficasikha in his Samkhyaprava- 
canabhdsya and in the references to Paficasikha in the late Samkhyasitra. 
Itis probable also that, even in the Moksadharma portion of the Maha- 
bharaia, Paficasikha is functioning more as a heuristic, symbolic name, 
perhaps not unlike the revered Kapila and Asuri, although it must be 
conceded that at least some portions of Moksadharma (perhaps especially 
XII.211-212) may be representing the views of an historic tedcher. 
Finally, the attribution of the famed Sasfitantra to Paficasikha (by the 


118 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Chincse commentary and the Jayamangald) appears to be more sym- 
bolic and honorific than reliably historic. In much the same fashion 
the Yuktidipika and Ahirbudhnyasamhité attribute Sastitantra to Kapila ! 

Keeping in mind, then, that most of what follows is to be assigned 
to a “symbolic” Paficasikha, the specific references to Paficasikha are: 


(A) Moksadharma X11.211-212: ‘‘Paficasikha-Janadeva Janaka 
Dialogue” ; 

(B) Quotations attributed to Paficasikha by Vacaspati Misra in 
the Yogasiitrabhadsya of Vyasa, namely, at 1.4, 1.25, 1.36, 11.5, 
II.6, 11.13, 11.17, 11.18, 11.20 (and repeated again at IV.22), 
II.22 and III.41; 

(CG) Quotations attributed to Paficasikha in the Samkhyasiitra at 
V.32 and VI.68; 

(D) Quotation attributed to Paficagikha by Vijfianabhiksu in his 
Samkhyapravacanabhasya at 1.127; 

(E) Quotation of a verse attributed to Paficasikha by Bhava- 
ganesa and Haribhadrasiri and cited at numerous places in 
the Samkhya literature, including Gaudapada’s Bhasya (under 
K.1), Matharavriti, (under K.22) and Fayamangala (under 
K.1). 


(A) Moksadharma X11.211-212 has been summarized by V. M. 
Bedekar: ‘“Janadeva Janaka (the king of Mithila) was pre-occupied 
with the question as to what happened to the soul after death. A hund- 
red teachers had assembled at his court and put forth different views 
on the subject. Some of these were heretical and did not satisfy the 
king. At this juncture, there arrived at the king’s court a great sage 
named Paficasikha KApileya (from kapild, the brahmani wife of Asuri), 
who was the first pupil of Asuri. Paficasikha joined in the debate and 
overwhelmed all the hundred teachers by means of his logical 
reasoning. Janaka, therefore, sent away all the teachers and followed 
Paficasikha for instruction. Paficasikha then expounded to him 
the doctrine which led to liberation. He emphasized that everything 
other than the Self was subject to decay and death and that it was 
wrong to identify the Self with the non-self...Paficagikha expounds 
what is said to be the highest Samkhya doctrine leading to 
Moksa (211.19). He propounds, in particular, the imporiant entities 
of which a human being is constituted. The five elements... come 
together on account of their suabhdva (inherent nature) and dissolve 
by svabhdva. The body, which is the result of the conglomeration of the 
elements, functions through jfdna, asman, and vayu. The entities which 
are essential for the life of an individual are: the senses, the objects of 
senses, svabhdva, cetanad, manas, buddhi, prana, apana, and other modifica- 
tions (vikdéra). The buddhi experiences threefold experience—pleasure, 
pain, and non-pleasure-pain—which is the result of the three gunas. 


PANGASIKHA 119 


The body, which is the conglomeration of the elements, is the kseira 
(“field’”’ ) and the entity which indwells the manas is the ksetrajiia (“‘field- 
knower’”) (212.40). Sorrow results from the identification of the 
gunas with the Atman. To realize the error of this identification by 
means of right thinking and discrimination and also to realize the true 
nature of the Atman as an entity, which is pure and characterless, leads 
one to the highest happiness of Brahman. As rivers falling into the 
ocean lose their identity, so also does one who has realized the Self 
lose himself in Brahman’. 

(B) Vyasa in his Yogasitrabhasya quotes extensively from an older 
source, and Vacaspati Misra in his Tattvavaisdradi attributes many of 
these quotations to Paficasikha. The quotations are as follows (in the 
order in which they appear in the Yogasiitrabhasya and as translated by 
J.-H. Woods," The Yoga System of Patafijali, Harvard Oriental Series, 
volume 17, passim): 


(1) “There is only one appearance (for both) (that is to say, for 
both furusa and buddhi)—that appearance is knowledge 
(khyati)”. (YSB 1.4, in a discussion of how consciousness or 
purusa appears as if it were buddhi) 

(2) “The First Knower (Kapila), assuming a created mind-siuff 
(nirmanacitta) through compassion, the Exalted, the supreme 
Sage, unto Asuri who desired to know, declared this doctrine.” 
(YSB 1.25, in a discussion of God or isvara in which Vacaspati 
Misra points out that Kapila, though himself not ifvara, is 
nevertheless Hiranyagarbha and an incarnation of Visnu) 

(3) “Pondering upon this self which is a mere atom (anumdtra) 
(or possibly exceedingly small or subtle), one is conscious in 
the same way as when one is conscious to the extent that one 
says ‘I am.” 

(YSB II.36, in a discussion of the altered states of awareness 
growing out of Yoga praxis) 

(4) “He who counts any existing thing, whether phenomena- 
lized (vyakta) or unphenomenalized (avyakta) (primary 
matter), as himself; or who rejoices in the success of these 
(tasya) things, deeming it his own success, or who grieves at 
the ill-success of these (things), deeming it his own ill-success— 
these are all unenlightened.” 

(YSB II.5, in a discussion of difficulties that arise by reason of 
confusing buddhi and purusa) 

(5) ‘‘He who should fail to see that the Self is other than the think- 
ing-substance (buddhi), distinct in nature and in character 
and in consciousness and in other respects, would make the 
mistake of putting his own thinking-substance (buddhi) in the 
place of that (Self).” 


120 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(YSB IL.6, in a discussion of the failure to distinguish buddhi 
and purusa) 

(6) “Should there be a very slight admixture of guilt in the sacri- 
fice, it is either to be removed or to be overlooked. (There- 
fore this admixture) is not enough to remove the good-fortune 
(won by merit). Why not? Because in my case there is much 
other good-fortune. Where then this (admixture of guilt) is 
cast away (into the dominant karma), even in heaven it will 
make only a slight reduction of merit.” 

(YSB IT.13, in a discussion of the effects of karman) 

(7) “By avoidance of the cause of correlation with this (thinking- 
substance, buddhi) the antidote for pain would be absolute.” 
(YSB IJ.17, in a discussion of discriminating buddhi from 
purusa) 

(8) “But he who in the three aspects (gua) which are agents and 
in the Self which is not an agent-——but which is of the same 
kind in some respects and of a different kind in other respects — 
sees all the produced states presented to the fourth, the wit- 
ness of their action—he has no suspicion that there is another 
kind of knowledge (the pure intelligence).” 

(YSB JI.18, in a discussion of the difference between the 
internal organ and pure consciousness ). 

(9) “For the power of the enjoyer enters not into mutation (pari- 
ndma) nor unites (with objects). Seeming to unite with a 
thing in mutation (the thinking-substance or buddhi) it con- 
forms itself to the fluctuations (which that thinking-substance 
undergoes). And it is commonly termed a fluctuation of the 
thinking-substance in so far as it resembles a fluctuation of 
thinking-substance that has come under the influence (upa- 
graha) of intelligence (caitanya).” 

(YSB IT.20 and again at 1V.22, in a discussion of the differ- 
ence between buddhi and purusa) 

(10) “The substances being in correlation from the time without 

beginning, the external-aspects in general are also in cor- 
relation from time without beginning.” 
(YSB 11.22, and although the quotation is introduced in the 
same manner as all of the preceding, Vacaspati Misra docs 
not directly attribute it to Paficasikha; it is, however, so attri- 
buted by Vijfianabhiksu ) 

(11) ‘‘All those whose processes of hearing (Sravana) are in the 
same place have the same kind-of-hearing (ekasrulitvam).”’ 
(YSB III.41, in a discussion of the functioning of the sense- 
capacities ) 

(CG) Two sitras from the Sdmkhyasiitra appear as direct quotations 

from Paficasikha (following the translation of N. Simha): 


PANCASIKHA 121 


(1) (“Logical pervasion” or “‘concomitance,” vpapti) (is) con- 
nection with the power of that which is contained (ddheya- 
$aktiyoga itt Paticasikha).”\* 

(Samkhyastira V.32 in a general discussion of vpapii) 

(2) “Or, (it is the same if the relation of the owned and the 
owner) be, as says Paficasikha, due to the instrumentality of 
non-discrimination (avivekanimitto va Paficasikha).”' 
(Samkhyasiitra V1.68, in a discussion of svasvémibhdvasambandha, 
one of the seven basic relations dealt with in older Samkhya 
discussions, and see Introduction to the present volume for a 
full discussion ) 

(D) Vijfianabhiksu in his discussion of the doctrine of ériguna in 
Samkhyapravacanabhasya attributes the following quotation to Pafica- 
Sikha: 

**What is called Sativa, is of infinite variety under the forms 
of purity or clearness, lightness, love, agrecableness, renun- 
ciation, contentment, etc., which are summed up by the word 
Pleasant. Similarly, Rajas also possesses many varieties, such 
as grief, etc., which are summed up by the word Painful. So, 
also, does Tamas possess many varieties, such as sleep, etc., 
which are summed up by the word Bewildering.”’!4 

(E) Finally, an old verse frequently cited in Samkhya literature 
(in Gaudapada’s Bhdsya, Matharavrtti, Fayamangald, and so forth) is 
attributed to Paficasikha: 

“There can be no doubt in this that a knower of the twenty- 
five principles, in whatever order of life he may be and whether 
he wears braided hair (jatin), a top-knot only (stkhin), or be 
shaven (mundin), is liberated from existence.” 
pancavimsatitattvajno yatra tatrasrame vaset, 

jati mundi Sikhi vdpi mucyate ndtra samSayah. 

(Fayamangala under K.1 cites the second pada of the verse as 
“‘yatra kutrasrame ratah” ; and Matharavriti cites the second pada 
as ‘‘yatra tatraSrame ratah.” ) 

Even a casual study of the above attributions makes it clear that we 
are dealing with a “symbolic” Paficagikha. That is to say, it is quite 
unlikely that the quotations derive from one historic teacher. The 
material in section (A) from the Moksadharma exhibits the fluid, plural- 
istic sdmkhya-cum-yoga pre~philosophical Proto-Samkhya, and it is 
precisely the sort of speculation one finds also in the Carakasamhité and 
the twelfth canto of Asvaghosa’s Buddhacarita. It is also reminiscent of 
the Samkhya and Yoga material found in the Bhagavadgita. V.M. 
Bedekar has nicely summarized the differences between this sort of 
fluid Samkhya and Yoga and later philosophical Samkhya: 


“G) In the Moksadharma Samkhya, there is not always emphasized 


122 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


an absolute and clear-cut dualism as in the classical Samkhya. 
Many of the teachers of the Samkhya in the Moksadharma appear 
generally to posit, at the apex, one single Principle or entity which 
overrides the dualism. (ii) The Moksadharma Samkhya, often, 
speaks of the doctrine of the eight Prakrtis, as against the one Pra- 
kriti of the classical Samkhya. (iii) The doctrine of the tanmdtras 
(subtle elements) does not seem to have yet developed. There is, 
however, a mention of the five objects of senses or the five qualities 
of the elements. (iv) The teaching regarding the number, place and 
functions of the psychical faculties like manas, ahamkdra and buddhi 
does not appear to have been consolidated in the Moksadharma. 
Different teachers have expressed different views on the subject. 
(v) The origin or the source of the five senses of knowledge has not 
been fixed as in the classical Samkhya.’’2¢ 


The quotations attributed to Paficagikha in sections (B), (C), and 
(D), however, breath a totally different air. A distinct dualism is 
clearly emphasized. The doctrine of triguna and parindma is definitely 
present. Issues of logical pervasion and the manner in which infer- 
ences are to be framed are prominent, and discussions of the manifest 
world and the manner in which the sense capacities function appear 
to be much more sophisticated. One has the strong sense that the 
quotations in sections (B), (C:), and (D) derive from a systematic 
and philosophical form of Samkhya and/or Yoga. Moreover, there is 
even some evidence in the texts that suggests that the quotations in 
sections (B), (C), and (D) come from a later period. Vyasa’s Yoga- 
siitrabhasya under [11.13 quotes a passage in which the relation between 
vipa or bhdva, on the one hand, and zvrtti, on the other, is discussed. 
Vacaspati Misra in his TattvavaiSaradi informs us that this is yet an- 
other quotation from Paficagikha, but the author of the Yuktidipikd, 
an older and more reliable source, indicates that the quotation really 
comes from Varsaganya, one of the later systematic Samkhya teachers 
(and see below under the Varsaganya entry). P. Chakravarti,!” not- 
ing this mistake by Vacaspati Miéra, proceeds to argue that all of the 
longer quotations in prose attributed to Paficasikha should really be 
ascribed to Varsaganya. Frauwallner™ largely follows Chakravarti in 
this regard, arguing that there was a later prose revision of an older 
poetic Sastitanitra and that this prose revision was carried through by 
Varsaganya. Frauwallner claims to have reconstructed portions of 
this prose Sastitantra of Varsaganya from occasional quotations in later 
Buddhist and Jain texts. Frauwallner claims,!® further, that the form 
of Samkhya one finds in Patafijala-Yoga is largely that of the Varsa- 
ganya-Vindhyavasin variety together with influences from early Vai- 
Sesika and early Buddhist meditation traditions. These matters will 
be discussed further in the sequel. It need only be pointed out in this 


PANCASIKHA 123 


context that the so-called “‘Paficasikha”’ quotations, at least those found 
in sections (B), (C), and (D) above, are probably a good deal later 
than the old Samkhya teacher mentioned in the Moksadharma. Whe- 
ther Chakravarti and Frauwallner are correct in assigning them to 
Varsaganya or Vindhyavasin, or in deriving Patafijala Yoga generally 
from Varsaganya-Vindhyavasin, is difficult to know with certainty. 
There are a variety of hints here and there that this may well be the 
case, but no definitive conclusions can be drawn at the present time. 


SASTITANTRA 


The “Science of Sixty Topics” (sastitantra) appears to represent 
either (a) one or more philosophical texts of Samkhya by that name, 
or (b) a sort of stereotyped format for discussing Samkhya, that is to 
say, the “‘system of sixty topics,” or even a proper name for the system 
in the early philosophical period. Regarding the enumeration of the 
sixty topics, there are two divergent accounts in the literature. Accord- 
ing to the Samkhya philosophical texts proper, namely, Suvarna- 
saptati, Samkhyavrtti, Samkhyasaptatatiortti, Yuktidipika, Fayamangala, 
Matharavrtti, and Sdmkhyatattvakaumudi, sastitantra breaks down as fol- 
Jows: ten “principal topics” (miilikartha), and fifty “categories” (padar- 
tha), including five “fundamental misconceptions” (viparyaya) twenty- 
eight “dysfunctions” (afakti) nine “‘contentments”’ (éusfi) eight “attain- 
ments” (siddhi). 

These have all been discussed at length in the Introduction and re- 
quire no further comment in this context. According to the Ahirbudh- 
nyasamhité, an Agama (ca. 800) of the Paficaratra school of early 
Vaisnavism, sastitantra or “the system of sixty topics” is made up of 
two sections: (1) a “‘principal’’ network of notions (prakrtamandala) 
with thirty-two subdivisions, and (2) a ‘“‘derived” network of notions 
(vaikrtamandala) with twenty-eight subdivisions. The subdivisions of 
the “principal” network are called tantras and include the following: 
(1) brahman, (2) purusa, (3) Sakti, (4) niyati, (5) kala, (6-8) sativa, 
rajas, tamas, (9) aksara, (10) prana, (11) kartr, (12) sami or svamin, 
(13-17) the five buddhindriyas, (18-22) the five karmendriyas, (23-27) the 
five tanmdtras, and (28-32) the five bhdtas. The subdivisions of the 
“derived” network are called kaéndas and include the following: (1-5) 
the five krtyas (possibly the karmayonis), (6) bhoga, (7) vrtta, (8-12) 
the five klefas, (13-15) the three pramdnas, (16) khydati, (17) dharma, 
(18) vairdgya, (19) aifvarya, (20) guna, (21) linga, (22) drsti, (23) anu- 
$ravika, (24) duhkha, (25) siddhi, (26) kasdya, (27) samaya, and (28) 
moksa. These enumerations are given at Ahirbudhnyasamhita X11.20-30, 
but the text also informs the reader (in verse 30) that there are many 
versions (ndndvidha) of sastitantra. 

There can be no serious doubt that the former enumeration of “the 


126 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


system of sixty topics’”—the ten principal topics plus the five funda- 
mental misconceptions, the twenty-eight dysfunctions, the nine content- 
ments and the eight attainments—represents the normative formu- 
lation of classical, philosophical Samkhya. All extant Samkhya philo- 
sophical texts unanimously agree in this regard. The latter enumera- 
tion (as found in the Ahirbudhnya) is clearly a later reworking of 
Sastitantra in Vaisnava theological circles, very much on analogy with 
other reworkings of Samkhya notions among Saiva theologians (for 
example, in Saiva Siddhanta and Kashmir Saivism). This tendency 
to appropriate Samkhya notions for theological purposes probably 
explains also the reference in Ahirbudhnya XIJ.30 to the “many ver- 
sions” of sastitantra. F. Otto Schrader, it should be noted to the con- 
trary, argues that the Ahirbudhnya account of sasfitantra is earlier than 
the classical, philosophical enumeration, since the Ahirbudhnya account 
parallels the description of ancient philosophical systems as found in 
Moksadharma X11.337.59ff.1 Both Keith? and Dasgupta? follow Schra- 
der in this regard. In both the Ahirbudhnya and the Moksadharma pass- 
age, Samkhya is mentioned along with four other systems, namely, 
the Vedas, Yoga, Paficaratra (or Satvata), and Pasupata. Nothing 
is said, however, about the content of Samkhya (or any of the other 
systems) in the Moksadharma passage (which may be dated in the first 
few centuries of the Common Era), whereas the Ahirbudhnya account 
of the content of the systems comes from many centuries later (ca. 
the ninth century). Schrader’s argument, therefore, that the content 
of the Samkhya as set forth in the Ahirbudhnya may be taken as a reli- 
able account of the Samkhya mentioned in the Moksadharma appears 
to be anachronistic. A more plausible view is that in the first cen- 
turies of the Common Era (roughly the time of the Moksadharma) the 
Samkhya along with other systems of Indian philosophy proper were 
taking shape, and the Samkhya systematization eventually issued in a 
“system of sixty topics” made up of ten principal topics plus fifty sub- 
sidiary “categories” (5 misconceptions, 28 dysfunctions, 9 content- 
ments, and 8 attainments). At about the same time, but more likely 
somewhat later, various sectarian theologians appropriated ‘‘the sys- 
tem of sixty topics” for their own theological purposes; hence, the 
divergent enumeration of the sixty topics and the reference to the 
“many versions”’ of the sastitantra. This is not to deny, of course, yet 
older formulations of the “‘sixty topics” that precede the philosophical 
account. It is only to deny that the Ahirbudhnya account is older than 
the philosophical account. As already mentioned, it may well be the 
case that the sastitantra is simply a proper name for the old Samkhya 
system(s) and that the “sixty topics’ may have been construed in a 
great variety of schemes. 

‘Turning now to the philosophical account of sastitanira, namely the 
ten principal topics and the fifty subsidiary categories, the Samkhya 


SASTITANTRA 127 


literature provides varying accounts of its nature and authorship. 
The Yuktidipika indicates in its introductory verses that the scheme 
was handed down by Kapila himself and that it involved a huge trea- 
tise that could not be mastered even in a hundred years; hence, the 
need for Isvarakrsna’s summary. Paramartha’s Chinese translation 
(under SK 71), on the other hand, tells us that sastitanira was 
devised by Paficasikha in a treatise of sixty thousand verses. The 
Jayamangalad (under SK 70) agrees with the Chinese translation that 
the scheme was devised by Paficasikha, but Jayamangala indicates that 
its extent was only sixty chapters. Vacaspati Misra in his Tattvavai- 
Sdradi identifies a quotation in Vyasa’s Yogasitrabhasya (under 1V.13 
and see below under Varsaganya) as deriving from a work entitled 
Sastitantra, and Vacaspati, in his commentary on Brahmasiira I1.1.3., 
identifies the same quotation as coming from a fastra of Yoga composed 
by Varsaganya, thereby leading to the conclusion that sastitantra was 
a Yoga Sdstra authored by Varsaganya. The “system of sixty topics,” 
therefore, is attributed variously to Kapila, Paficasikha, and Varsa- 
ganya. More than that, it is said to be a Samkhya scheme, accord- 
ing to the Yuktidipika, Fayamangald, and Paramartha, but Vacaspati 
Misra holds it to be a Sastra of Yoga. ‘To make matters worse, Gauda- 
pada (under SK 17) and Matharavrtti (under SK 17) quote a passage 
from a certain Sasfitantra—‘purusddhisthitam pradhanam pravartate,” or 
“primordial materiality performs its function controlled by conscious- 
ness”’——that appears to be a prose statement, but the Yukizdipika and 
Vacaspati Misra quote passages from the Sastitanira that are clearly in 
gathas, or verses. Frauwallner has argued that these varying references 
indicate that there was more than one sastitantra, perhaps an original 
verse sastitantra by Paficasikha and a later, more systematic prose revi- 
sion of sastitantra by Varsaganya. Moreover, as has been discussed at 
some length in the Introduction, Frauwallner claims to have recons- 
tructed important parts of the later prose revision of sastitanira by 
Varsaganya.* Chakravarti argues along similar lines, suggesting an 
original verse sasfitantra by Kapila, greatly expanded in verse by 
Paficasikha and finally revised into a verse-cum-prose treatise by 
Varsaganya.® Both theories, Frauwallner’s and Chakravarti’s, are 
plausible possibilities, but there is insufficient evidence at the present 
time to prove either of them. 

What is clear, however, is that sastitanira brings us into Samkhya 
philosophy proper. That is to say, the scheme of ten principal topics 
and fifty subsidiary categories appears to be a fundamental framework 
or format in which the Samkhya philosophy is discussed in classical and 
later times. According to all of the commentaries on Iévarakrsna’s 
Samkhyakarika, the format of sastitantra is what I$varakrsna was follow- 
ing. Likewise in the Tattvasamdsa and in the later Sdmkhyasitra, the 
“system of sixty topics’ is presupposed throughout. Whether sasti- 


128 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tantra was one particular treatise, a group of treatises or simply a stereo- 
typed format or proper name for the Samkhya philosophical system 
itself cannot, at least at the present time, be definitely determined. 
What can be said, however, is that when a system of twenty-five éativas 
is presented in terms of ten principal topics and fifty subsidiary cate- 
gories we have moved beyond the Proto-Samkhya of Kapila-Asuri- 
Paficasikha into classical Samkhya philosophy proper. 


PAURIKA, PANCADHIKARANA 
PATANJALI (the Samkhya teacher) 


From the evidence of the Yuktidipika (and see below under separate 
entry) it is now clear that there were a number of teachers of Sam- 
khya philosophy proper (as distinct from the Proto-Samkhya tradi- 
tions discussed thus far) prior to [évarakrsna, including such as Pau- 
rika, Paficadhikarana, Patafijali (the Samkhya teacher), Varsaganya, 
and Vindhyavasin. These teachers are mentioned in passing through- 
out the Yuktidipika as exponents of Samkhya whose views diverged 
from Igvarakrsna or whose views were synthesized by Iévarakrsna. It 
is difficult to offer even approximate dates for these older teachers 
(especially Paurika, Paficadhikarana, and Patajijali, and see separate 
entries below for Varsaganya and Vindhyavasin), but it is reasonable 
to suppose that they were active in a period shortly after or contem- 
poraneous with the latest period of epic (Moksadharma) speculation, 
that is, the first centuries of the Common Era. Moreover, it is reason- 
able to suppose that they represent Samkhya as a technical philo- 
sophical position, since they are mentioned by the author of the Yukti- 
dipika at those points in his commentary in which purely philosophical 
issues are addressed (for example, the definition of perception, the 
number and sequence of the emergence of the tativas, the problem of 
the subtle body, and so forth). Finally, if one combines these names 
with the emergence of the “‘system of sixty topics’”’ (sastitantra) (con- 
sisting of 10 principal topics and 50 subsidiary categories), one is able 
to posit a tradition (or traditions) of Pre-Karika Samkhya as distinct, 
on the one hand, from older traditions of Proto-Samkhya, and, on the 
other, from the later summary-formulations of Karika-Samkhya 
(Isvarakrsna) and Patafijala-Samkhya (Patafijali, the Yoga teacher). 

Paurika is mentioned by the author of the Yuktidipikd at two places 
(under SK 56, p. 141; and under SK 71, p. 145), the former referring 
to Paurika’s view that there are a plurality of prakrtis (one accompany- 
ing each purusa), a view that may have paved the way for the later 
Madhava’s reinterpretation of the guna theory in terms ofa plurality of 
pradhdnas (as discussed by Dignaga in section 5 of his chapter on per- 


130 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ception in his Pramdnasamuccaya, and see below under Madhava entry), 
and the latter referring to Paurika’s place in the sequence of Samkhya 
teachers, namely, Harita, Baddhali, Kairata, Paurika, Rsabhesvara, 
Paficadhikarana, Patafijali, Varsaganya, Kaundinya, Mika, ‘‘and so 
forth.” Paficadhikarana is mentioned as one of a group of Tantrikas 
(under SK 32, p. 112), and his views are mentioned at a number of 
points in the Yuktidipika, including (a) his view that the sense capa- 
cities are composed of gross elements (under SK 22, p. 91); (b) his 
view that there are only ten capacities (as opposed to Iévarakrsna’s 
view that there is a thirteenfold set of organs) (under SK 32, p. 112); 
(c) his view that the subtle body is called ‘‘vaivartasarira’”’ and created 
by materiality but transmigrates according to the influences of dharma 
and adharma (under SK 39, p. 121); (d) his view that “knowledge” 
(jana) is twofold (prakrta and vaikrta), the former of which breaks 
down into three subvarieties, namely, “knowledge identical with the 
tattva itself’ (tattvasama), “knowledge that is inherent when sattva is 
pure” (samsiddhika), and ‘‘knowledge that arises spontaneously when 
there is an appropriate stimulus” (dbhisyandika), and the latter of 
which breaks down into two subvarieties, ‘‘derived knowledge from 
within” (svavaikrta) and ‘derived knowledge from without” (paravai- 
kyta) (under SK 42, p. 123); and(e) his view that the organs cannot 
function on their own (but require being empowered by mate- 
riality) (under SK 43, p. 124 and also under SK 22, p. 91). Patafi- 
jali, a certain old Samkhya teacher, is credited by the author of the 
Yuktidipika with the following views: (a) that egoity is not a separate 
principle but should be construed as part of intellect/will (under SK 3, 
p. 27); (b) that there are, therefore, twelve capacities (instead of 
Igvarakrsna’s thirteen or Paficadhikarana’s ten) (under SK 32, p. 
112); (c) that there is a subtle body but that it is created anew with 
each embodiment and lasts only as long as a particular embodiment 
(under SK 39, p. 121); and (d) that the capacities are able to func- 
tion on their own from within (in contrast to Paficadhikarana’s view 
that they can only function from without and in contrast to Varsa- 
ganya who argues a synthetic both/and position; see also under Varsa- 
ganya entry below) (under SK 43, p. 124). 

Although these various references in the Yuktidipika do not provide 
by any means a complete picture of these older interpretations of the 
Samkhya philosophical system as a whole, they do offer intriguing 
glimpses of the sorts of issues that were being discussed in the pre- 
Karika period. 


VARSAGANYA or Vrsagana, 
Vrsaganavira or Varsagana 


The earliest reference to a certain Varsaganya is to be found in Mok- 
sadharma X11.306.57, in which the name figures as one among many 
older teachers of Samkhya and Yoga. The list is as follows: Jaigisavya, 
Asita, Devala (sometimes Asita Devala), Paraéara, Varsaganya, Pafi- 
casikha, Kapila, Suka, Gautama, Arstisena, Garga, Narada, Asuri, 
Pulastya, Sanatkumara, Sukra, and Kagyapa. The listing is obviously 
not meant to be chronological and indicates little more than that, in 
the first centuries of the Common Era (the approximate date for the 
later portions of the epic), the name Varsaganya was linked with older 
Samkhya and Yoga traditions. 

Further references to Varsaganya, albeit muddled, appear in Chi- 
nese Buddhist sources. Paramartha, who translated the Samkhyakarika 
together with a prose commentary into Chinese during the last period 
of his literary activity (557-569C.E.) in Canton, also composed a bio- 
graphy of the well-known Vasubandhu (“Life of Vasubandhw”) in 
which the following is set forth: 


Nine hundred years after the death of the Buddha, there was a here- 
tic named P’in-ché-ho-p’o-so (Vindhyavasa). P’in-ché-ho (Vin- 
dhya) is the name of a mountain, and P’o-so (vdésa) means “living 
in.” This heretic was so called because he lived on this mountain. 
There was a king of the Nagas, named P’i-li-cha-kia-na (Vrsagana 
or Varsagana), who lived by a pond at the base of this mountain. 
The king of the Nagas was very knowledgeable in the Samkhya- 
astra. The aforementioned heretic, realizing that the Naga was 
very knowledgeable (in the doctrine), desired to study under him.t 


Paramartha then goes on to describe how Vindhyavasa became Vrsa- 
gana’s pupil, learned the sastra, and finally put together a complete 
revision of it. Eventually, Vindhyavasa travels to Ayodhya in order to 
engage some great Buddhist “masters” in debate, for, according to the 
text, Buddhism was the supreme philosophy of the time. Unfortuna- 
tely, the truly great “doctors of the law,” that is, Manoratha and Vasu- 


132 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


bandhu, were traveling outside of Ayodhya when Vindhyavasa arrived 
in the city with his challenge for a debate, but one old monk was pre- 
sent, namely, Buddhamitra, the teacher of Vasubandhu. Though fee- 
ble, Buddhamitra accepted Vindhyavasa’s challenge but was quickly 
vanquished in the debate by Vindhyavasa. Vindhyavasa was rewarded 
for his victory with three lakhs of gold by the reigning king, Vikrama- 
ditya. Vindhyavasa then returned to the Vindhya mountains and died 
soon after. Vasubandhu was enraged when he learned that his old 
teacher had been humiliated in the debate. He searched for Vindhya- 
vasa in order to stage another debate but discovered that Vindhyavasa 
had, in the interim, died. He did, however, compose a rejoinder called 
Paramarthasaptati (“Seventy Verses on Ultimate Truth”) that refuted 
the Samkhyasastra of Vindhyavasa and for which he was rewarded by 
the successor of Vikramaditya with three lakhs of gold. 

Hsiian-tsang (seventh century), however, asserts that the teacher of 
Vasubandhu was Manoratha, and Hsiian-tsang’s direct disciple, Kuei- 
chi, in one of his commentaries, reports the following: 


There was a master-heretic named Kapila, which means ‘‘red”. 
He was so called because his complexion and his hair were of red 
color; even now the most honored Brahmins of India are all of red 
color. And at that time one called him (that is to say, Kapila) “the 
red hermit”. Among his disciples, the principal ones were made up 
of eighteen groups whose chief was called Fa-li-cha (Varsa), which 
means “rain”, because he was born in the rainy season. His com- 
panions were called the heretics of the “rain-group” (Varsaganya). 
‘*‘Samkhya” in Sanskrit means ‘‘number’’, that is to say, “calculat- 
ing by means of knowledge”. This name is used since the notion of 
number is fundamental for calculation, that is to say, the discussion 
proceeds from number and hence one calls it “discourse on num- 
bers”, or perhaps better: the discussion produces number and so one 
calls it ‘‘discourse on numbers”. Those who compose the discourse on 
Samkhya or who study it are called “discoursers of Samkhya”’. The 
work of this master [Varsaganya ] is called Suvarpasaptati (“‘Gold- 
Seventy”’).? 


Kuei-chi goes on to point out that the Suvarnasaptati was occasioned 
by a debate with a Buddhist monk (unnamed) in which the Samkhya 
teacher was victorious and for which he was rewarded with a gift of 
gold—hence, the title of the text, ‘“Gold-Seventy.”’ Kuei-chi also points 
out that the great Vasubandhu composed a prose commentary on the 
**Gold-Seventy” in which he both explained the basic meaning of the 
text and discussed its fundamental flaws. According to Kuei-chi (and 
East Asian Buddhist traditions generally), in other words, the prose 
commentary on the Sdmkhyakérikd, translated by Paramartha in the 
middle of the sixth century, was the work of Vasubandhu. 


VARSAGANYA 133 


If one follows the account of Paramartha, then the following would 
appear to be the case: an original teacher, Vrsagana or Varsagana, 
instructs a pupil, Vindhyavasa, who revises the work of his teacher and 
composes a Sémkhyasdstra. Vindhyavasa then defeats a Buddhist monk, 
Buddbamitra (the teacher of Vasubandhu), in a debate, and Vasu- 
bandhu, after the death of Vindhyavasa, composes a rejoinder called 
Paramarthasaptati. If one follows the account of Hsiian-tsang and his 
disciple, Kuei-chi, the following is the case: the original Samkhya tea- 
cher is Kapila (the “red hermit’), whose followers in subsequent 
centuries divide into eighteen “groups” the chief abbot of which is a 
certain Varsa (meaning “rain” since he was born in the rainy season) 
and who are referred to as the ‘“‘followers of Varsa” (or, in other 
words, Varsaganya, the “rain-group’”’). One of these followers wins 
a debate against a Buddhist monk, and the Samkhya text that marks 
that debate is called the “‘Gold-Seventy” (Suvarpasaptati). Somewhat 
later, the great Vasubandhu composes a prose commentary on the 
“Gold-Seventy”’ that, on one level, explains the meaning of the Sam- 
khya text but, on another level, points out its basic flaws. 

Takakusu resolves the conflict between the two accounts in an inge- 
nious (but alas wrong) manner as follows: The original teacher is a 
certain Varsa or Vrsagana. His followers are called Varsaganya (that 
is to say, “belonging to Vrsagana” or ‘‘followers of Vrsagana’’), one 
of whom is a certain Vindhyavasa, an appellation meaning simply 
“living in the Vindhya mountains.” This Vindhyavasa revises the 
work of his teacher and composes the Samkhyasastra otherwise known 
as the Suvarpasaptati (‘“‘Gold-Seventy”) or the Samkhyakarika. This 
“follower of Vrsagana”’ (Varsaganya), who is “‘living in the Vindhya 
mountains” (Vindhyavasa), is none other than the Kausika Brahmin 
whose proper name is [gvarakrsna. In other words, “Varsaganya,” 
‘“‘Vindhyavasa,” and “Isvarakrsna” all refer to the same person.® 
Takakusu also argues that it is highly unlikely that Vasubandhu is the 
author of the prose commentary on the Karikd. This wrong attribution, 
says Takakusu, was introduced into the East Asian tradition by Kuei- 
chi. Paramartha, who is more reliable, nowhere claims that Vasu- 
bandhu is the author of the commentary. He claims only that Vasu- 
bandhu composed a refutation of the Karika called Paramdarthasaptati 
some time after the death of Vindhyavasa. The prose commentary on 
the Harika, translated by Paramartha into Chinese, was, according to 
Takakusu, composed either by Isvarakrsna himself or one of his early 
pupils probably some time in the fifth century (because it would have 
taken about a century for the text to be sufficiently well known for 
Paramartha to have translated it between 557 and 569). 

As already indicated, Takakusu’s solution, though ingenious, is 
clearly wrong, although for many years it was widely accepted by, 
among others, A.B. Keith and N. Aiyaswami Sastri. The discovery of 


134 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the commentary Yuktidipika radically changed the nature of the evi- 
dence upon which the resolution of the Chinese accounts depends, for 
in the Yuktidipika there is incontrovertible testimony that Varsaganya, 
Vindhyavasa, and Iévarakrsna are three distinct teachers whose views 
diverge on a number of crucial points. There is no way, therefore, that 
Takakusu’s hypothesis of the identity of Vindhyavasa and Igvarakrsna 
(as a “follower of Vrsagana” or Varsaganya) can stand. 

Before turning to the divergent views of the three, however, it may 
be useful to clarify the forms of the names involved. In the Yuktidipika 
the following names are mentioned: Varsaganya, Varsagana, Vrsa- 
ganavira, Vindhyavasin and Iévarakrsna. The latter, of course, pre- 
sents no problem. The next to the last, that is, Vindhyavasin, is cited 
throughout the Yuktidipika (at least in the editions prepared by Chakra- 
varti and Pandeya) as Vindhyavasin, and there are no serious grounds 
for doubting that Vindhyavasa and Vindhyavasin refer to the same 
person (see below under Vindhyavasin). The case of Varsaganya, 
however, is not as clear. E. Frauwallner refers to Vrsagana as the 
proper name and accepts Varsaganya or Varsagana as forms referring 
to the “followers of Vrsagana.”’ P. Chakravarti, however, has cogent- 
ly argued that Varsaganya is the correct proper name. The form 
“vrsaganavira” (under SK 30, p. 110) simply means “son of Vrsagana”’ 
(or Varsaganya) and does not at all imply that the father, Vrsagana, 
was a Samkhya teacher. The form “‘vérsagana,”’ according to Chakra- 
varti, refers to the “followers of Varsaganya,”’ and it is to be noted 
that all of the references in the Yuktidipika to ‘‘varsagana’’ are without 
exception to be construed as plurals (or, in other words, vdrsaganah) 
and are most often introduced in the stereotyped formulation “‘tatha 
ca varsaganah pathanti....”’ It would appear to be a reasonable con- 
clusion, then, that Varsaganyais the correct proper name; orsagana- 
vira simply means “‘son of Vrsagana”’ (and not implying that the father 
was a Samkhya teacher); and vdrsagana (vdrsagandh) refers to the 
‘followers of Varsaganya.”’ 

The detailed views of Varsaganya, Vindhyavasin, and Iévarakrsna 
will be set forth at the appropriate places (later in this entry and in 
the sequel), but it may be useful at this point to summarize the most 
important differences by way of making clear that there can be no 
question that we are dealing with three distinct Samkhya teachers: 
(1) Varsaganya defines perception simply as ‘“‘the functioning of the 
ear, etc.” (Srotradivrttir itt); Vindhyavasin extends the definition to the 
“functioning of the ear, etc., without construction or verbalization”’ 
(Srotradivritir avikalpika); but Isvarakrsna defines perception as ‘‘the 
ascertainment of specific objects” (prativisayddhyavasayo drstam, SK 5), 
implying, according to the Yuktidipika (under SK 5, pp. 37-38), both 
external and internal contents and thereby being an improvement over 
the definitions of both Varsaganya and Vindhyavasin (in the sense that 


VARSAGANYA 135 


the latter two definitions do not account forinternal contents). (2) Var- 
saganya speaks of an elevenfold set of sense capacities that are limited 
in extent, thereby requiring a subtle body for transmigration; Vindhya- 
vasin also argues for an elevenfold set but claims that they are all- 
pervasive, thereby obviating the need for a subtle body; but [évara- 
krsna accepts a thirteenfold set of capacities of limited extent, thereby 
disagreeing with both Varsaganya (in terms of the number of the 
capacities) and Vindhyavasin (in terms of the need for a subtle body). 
(3) Varsaganya defines inference as ‘on account of the perception of 
one aspect of an established relation, one is able to infer the other 
aspect of a relation”? (sambandhad ekasmat pratyaksat Sesasiddhir anumé- 
nam) and develops a scheme of seven basic relations (saptasambandha) ; 
Vindhyavasin and others develop the logic of inference by means of 
the tenfold syllogism (the ten avayavas, Yuktidipiké under the intro- 
duction, p. 3); but Isvarakrsna refers to a scheme of “‘threefold 
inference” involving a relation between a “mark” and “that which 
bears the mark” (érividham anumanam akhyatam tallingalingipirvakam, 
SK 5), and the author of the Yuktidipikd points out that [Svarakrsna 
did not repeat what had been said by Varsaganya and Vindhyavasin 
(and others) since these matters had been adequately discussed by 
them. There can be no doubt, therefore, that the author of the Yukti- 
dipika was familiar with three distinct teachers whose view on impor- 
tant issues in Samkhya philosophy were clearly divergent. 

Turning now to the difficult problem of the date of Varsaganya, 
there is much uncertainty, but at least some intelligent guesses are 
possible. As was mentioned in the entry under “‘Sasfitantra’’ and as 
was discussed in detail in the Introduction, Frauwallner claims that 
Varsaganya revised an older sastitantra. Moreover, Frauwallner claims 
to have reconstructed the epistemological portions of that revision 
(from quotations and extracts in Dignaga, Jinendrabuddhi, Malla- 
vadin, and Simhasuri), and he suggests that Varsaganya probably 
lived around 300 of the Common Era. On the basis of the Chinese 
Buddhist evidence (that is, the comments of Paramartha, Hsiian- 
tsang, and Kuei-chi), although there is much confusion about the 
specific forms of names and about the attribution of particular texts, 
it is clear enough that Varsaganya and Vindhyavasin (or the tradi- 
tions they represent) were in polemical contact with the (Sautrantika) 
Vasubandhu of AbhidharmakoSa, who can be dated either in the first 
part of the fifth century (Frauwallner) or some time in the fourth 
century (Warder). On the basis of the evidence in the Yuktedipika it 
appears to be clearly the case that Varsaganya precedes both Vindhya- 
vasin and Iévarakrsna, and that Isvarakrsna himself is either contem- 
porary or slightly later than Vindhyavasin. Paramartha, as has been 
mentioned several] times, translated the Sadmkhyakarika together with a 
prose commentary in the middle of the sixth century (537-569), and 


136 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


it is reasonable to infer, therefore, that the work of all three Samkhya 
teachers, namely, Varsaganya, Vindhyavasin and Iévarakrsna, was 
generally well known by the end of the fifth century (ca. 500). This 
is further confirmed by the work of Dignaga (ca. 480-540), who identi- 
fies the later Samkhya teacher, Madhava (ca. 500, and see entry be- 
low), as a Samkhya ‘“‘destroyer’’ (Sdmkhyanasaka: one who deviates so 
much from the standard Samkhya position as to destroy it), implying 
that there was a standard Samkhya philosophical position that was fully 
known and understood at that time. Given all of this, it is probably 
not far from the truth to place Vindhyavasin and Isvarakrsna between 
300 and 450 with Vindhyavasin (ca. 300-400) being an older contem- 
porary of Igvarakrsna (ca. 350-450). It must be noted, however, that 
Igvarakrsna, though probably somewhat later than Vindhyavasin, 
does not at all follow Vindhyavasin’s interpretation of Samkhya. 
Though the Yuktidipika gives evidence that Isvarakrsna knew of 
the work of Vindhyavasin, [svarakrsna’s summary of the Samkhya 
position appears to harken back to an older form of the doctrine. 
Regarding the date of Varsaganya, it would appear that Frau- 
wallner’s suggestion that he lived around 300, errs on the side of being 
too late. Frauwallner’s recnstruction of the revised form of sastitantra 
need not be the work of Varsaganya himself but may well be, rather, 
the work of the “followers of Varsaganya”’ (the vdrsaganah of Yukti- 
dipika), Varsaganya himself, then, might be placed back in the second 
and possibly even the first century of the Common Era, a date that 
would correlate nicely with the reference to Varsaganya in the Moksa- 
dharma, Also, an early date for Varsaganya would make plausible 
Vacaspati Miégra’s claim in his Tattvakaumudi (under SK 47) that the 
expression “‘paficaparva avidya’’ is attributable to Bhagavan Varsaganya, 
an expression that appears, interestingly as the twelfth utterance in 
the Tattvasamdsasiitra, and is quoted, even more interestingly, at XII.33 
in Agvaghosa’s Buddhacarita (from the first century of the Common 
Era). 

Although references to Varsaganya and the “followers of Varsa- 
ganya”’ are not sufficient to providea complete picture of this early 
tradition of Samkhya philosophy, enough references are present in the 
literature to offer at leasta glimpse of this old tradition. The most 
important of these are: 

(1) As mentioned previously, Varsaganya’s definition of percep- 
tion is simply “‘the functioning of the ear, etc.” (Srotradivrtti), 
and his definition of inference is ‘“‘on account of the perception 
of one aspect of an established relation, one is able to infer 
the other aspect of a relation” (sambandhad ekasmat Sesasiddhir). 
Both definitions are quoted by the author of the Yuktidipika in 
his introduction (p. 3), but they are not attributed to VArsa- 
ganya at that point. Under SK 5, however, the above defi- 


VARSAGANYA 137 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


nition of perception is ascribed to the “followers of Varsa- 
ganya.”’ For a full discussion of Varsaganya’s notion of infer- 
ence and his general theory of knowledge, see Frauwallner.* 
In a discussion of the process of manifestation, the followers 
of Varsaganya are quoted to suggest that, although the entire 
manifest world (trailokya) disappears from manifestation (from 
time to time), it does not follow that the world actually loses 
its existence, since Samkhya philosophy does not accept the 
notion that existence can be destroyed (tad etat trailokyam 
vyakter apaiti, na sattvad apetam apy asti, vindsapratisedhat) (YD, 
under SK 10, p. 57). The same quotation with a slight ex- 
pansion in wording may be found in Yogasiitrabhasya 11.13. 
Regarding the problem of how the three gunas, though appa- 
rently so different, can cooperate together to bring about 
manifestation, the author of the Yuktidipika quotes ‘Lord 
Varsaganya” (bhagavdn vdrsaganyah) as follows: ‘‘When the 
riipas (namely, fundamental dispositions) and orttis (namely, 
transformations of awareness in terms of pleasure, pain, and 
so forth) are developed to their full extent, they, of course, 
oppose one another, but ordinary ripas and orttis (that is to 
say, the transactions of ordinary experience) are able to func- 
tion in cooperation with the more intense or fully developed 
ones (ripdtifaya vrttyatifaya§ ca virudhyante; samanydni tu ati- 
Sayaih saha vartante).”’ (YD under SK 13, p.61) The same quota- 
tion appears also in the Yogasitrabhdsya under II.15, but it 
should be noted that Vacaspati Misra in his Tattvavaisaradi 
attributes the quotation wrongly to Paficasikha. This has sug- 
gested to P. Chakravarti that most of the long prose quotations 
in the Yogasiitrabhdsya, attributed by Vacaspati to Paficasikha 
(and see above under Paficasikha entry), should really be 
ascribed to Varsaganya.® 

In a discussion of the relationship between purusa and buddhi, 
the followers of Varsaganya are quoted to the effect that the 
purusa, having come upon the orttis of buddhi, conforms itself 
to those transformations (buddhivritydvisto hi pratyayatvena anu- 
vartamandm anuyati purusa iti, YD under SK 17, p. 79). 

In a discussion of the “isolation” (kaivalya) or non-involve- 
ment of purusa in the transactions of the gunas, the followers 
of Varsaganya are quoted as claiming that materiality func- 
tions from the very beginning of creation quite independently 
of purusa (pradhdnapravrttir apratyayad purusena aparigrhyamana 
Gdisarge vartante—probably vartante should be vartate here, 
according to Pandeya) (YD under SK 19, p. 85). 

The author of the Yuktidipika ascribes to Varsaganya the 
accumulation theory for the genesis of the subtle elements, 


138 


(7) 


(9) 


(10) 


(11) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that is to say, each subsequent subtle element is made up of 
its own unique essence in combination with the essences of 
its predecessors so that fabda is pure sound, sparsa is pure con- 
tact plus pure sound, rapa is pure form plus pure contact plus 
pure sound, and so forth (ekariipani tanmatrani iti anye; ekotta- 
rani itt Varsaganyah) (YD under SK 22, p. 91). 

As opposed to Paficadhikarana, who accepts a tenfold set of 
capacities, and Patafijali (the Samkhya teacher), who accepts 
a twelvefold set, and, of course, Isvarakrsna, who accepts a 
thirteenfold set, the followers of Varsaganya are said to be- 
lieve in an elevenfold set of capacities (ekddasavidham itt varsa- 
ganah, YD under SK 32, p. 112). 

In a discussion of the transmigrating lizga under SK 40 in 
which it is said that a liga accompanies each purusa through- 
out the process of transmigration, the author of the Yuktidipika 
says that it is nevertheless the view of the followers of Varsa- 
ganya that there is one general or common mahat derived 
from prakrti (and which presumably resides in all lingas) 
(sadharano hi mahan prakrtitodd iti varsagandném paksah, YD under 
SK 40, p. 121). 

In a discussion of the simile in SK 57 involving prakrti function- 
ing for the sake of purusa just as the unconscious milk serves 
the needs of the calf, the author of the Yuktidipika mentions 
a drstanta (an illustrative example) from the followers of Varsa- 
ganya, namely, that the interaction between prakrti and purusa 
might be compared to the manner in which men and women 
become sexually aroused by contemplating or noticing their 
unconscious bodies (vdrsagandnam tu _yathd stripumsarirandm aceta- 
nanam uddisya itaretaram pravritis tatha pradhanasya iti ayam drstan- 
tak, YD under SK 57, p. 142). 

Regarding the disagreement between Paficadhikarana and 
Patafijali (the Samkhya teacher) concerning whether the or- 
gans function on their own or are empowered from without 
by prakrti (and see above under Paurika, Paficadhikarana, 
and Patafijali), the author of the Yuktidipikd suggests that 
Varsaganya takes a both-and view, namely, that extraordinary 
accomplishments of the capacities are empowered from with- 
out through the inherent power of prakrtt, whereas ordinary 
functioning occurs from within (karandndém mahati svabhavati- 
orttth pradhanat, svalpa ca svata iti varsaganyah, YD under SK 22, 
p- 91). 

Vyasa in his Yogasitrabhasya, in a discussion comparing the 
Vaisesika theory of atoms with the Samkhya notion of mila- 
prakyti, quotes the following utterance of Varsaganya: “Since 
there is no difference as to limitation-in-extent or by reason 


VARSAGANYA 139 


(12) 


(13) 


(14) 


of intervening-space or of species there is no distinction in the 
(primary) root (of things) [miirtivyavadhiatibhedabhavan na 
asti miilaprthaktva, Yogasiitrabhasya]”? (III. 53).8 

Vyasa in his Yogasitrabhadsya, in a discussion of the difference 
between the gunas in their ultimate constitutive nature, on the 
one hand, and the realm of ordinary perception, on the other, 
quotes the following verse, as rendered by J.H. woods: 


The aspects from their utmost height 
Come not within the range of sight. 
But all within the range of sight 
A phantom seems and empty quite.’ 
The Sanskrit is as follows: 
gundnim paramam riipam na drstipatham rechati, 
yat tu drstipatham praptam tanmayé iva sutucchakam. 
Vyasa does not mention the source of the quotation, but 
Vacaspati Misra in his Bhdmati on Brahmasitra Y1.1.2.3 claims 
that it is from the Yogasastra of Varsaganya. 


Vacaspati Misra under SK 47 of his Tattvakaumudi claims that 
the quotation “there are five kinds of ignorance” (paficaparva 
avidya) comes from Varsaganya. The same quotation can be 
found in siitra 12 of the Tattvasamasasutra and in XII.33 of 
ASvaghosa’s Buddhacarita. Since these five kinds of ignorance 
are the same as the five misconceptions of the fiftyfold intel- 
lectual creation of [gvarakrsna, and since this fiftyfold scheme 
is part of the classical Samkhya formulation of sasfitantra, 
Frauwallner (Geschichte der indischen Philosophie, I, pp. 319ff.) 
has speculated that Varsaganya may be credited with the 
classical Samkhya formulation of sastitantra. This is an intri- 
guing suggestion, but the evidence is hardly compelling. 
Vasubandhu in his Abhidharmakoga, in a discussion of the 
Sarvastivada theory of causation comments as follows: “In the 
end it comes to the same as the theory of the followers of 
Varsaganya. According to them ‘there is neither production 
of something new nor extinction of something existent: what 
exists is always existent, what does not exist will never be- 
come existent.’’’8 The first portion, namely, “there is nei- 
ther. . .”, is quoted also by Yogasiitrabhasya at the beginning of 
IV.12 (‘‘na asati satah sambhavah, na ca asti sato vindga iti’). 
Vatsyayana (in Npdpasitrabhasya under J.1.29) quotes a com- 
parable statement with slightly different wording: ‘‘na asata 
atmalabhah, na sata Gtmahanam... iti Samkhyanam.’® One is 
reminded also, of course, of the first half of sloka 16 of the 
second chapter of the Bhagavadgita: “‘na asato vidyate bhdvo, na 
abhavo vidyate satah.” 


140 


(15) 


ENGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The Yogacérabhimi of Asaiga or Maitreya-Asanga from some 
time in the fourth century comments as follows regarding 
Varsaganya: “As to the nature of the doctrine according to 
which the effect exists in the cause, a certain Sramana or 
Brahmana holds this opinion saying that the effect in fact 
exists in the cause perpetually through perpetual time and 
constantly through constant time, such a one is Varsaganya.” 
See D. Seyfort Ruegg, ‘Note on Varsaganya and the Yogdcara- 
bhimi,” Indo-Iranian Journal 6( 1962) , pp. 137-140. This reference 
strongly suggests that Varsaganya’s views were generally 
known by the beginning of the fourth century. As has already 
been mentioned several times, there are numerous other 
references to Varsaganya and the followers of Varsaganya in 
Buddhist and Jain texts (Dignaga, Jinendrabuddhi, Mallava- 
din, Simhasiri, and so forth), most of which have been 
collected and pieced together by Frauwallner in order to 
reconstruct what he takes to be the epistemological portion 
of Varsaganya’s revised version of sastitantra (and see 
Introduction to the present volume for a full discussion. 


VINDHYAVASIN, or Vindhyavasa 


Although it is true with regard to the Chinese Buddhist evidence men- 
tioned at the outset of the entry on Varsaganya, that is, the accounts 
of Paramartha, Hsiian-tsang, and Kuei-chi, that Takakusu’s suggested 
identification of Varsaganya, Vindhyavasin and Iévarakrsna is clearly 
incorrect, Takakusu has nevertheless persuasively shown that Paramar- 
tha’s “Life of Vasubandhu”’ can be taken seriously as a reasonably ac- 
curate (albeit rough) account of events relating to Samkhya. Kuei-chi’s 
account is, on the other hand, highly suspect, for he appears to have 
confused a number of matters. His reference, for example, to eighteen 
schools of Samkhya is suspiciously similar to Buddhist traditions of 
eighteen schools. His interpretation of ‘‘Kapila” as the “red hermit” 
shows a lack of familiarity with the Indian tradition. His claim that 
the Suvarnasaptati (the Chinese designation of the Samkhyakarika) was a 
text used in debate is impossible to believe, as is his further claim that 
Vasubandhu is the author of the prose commentary on the Karika ! 
Paramartha, however, provides quite a different picture, one that 
correlates in significant ways with the Indian evidence. According to 
Paramartha, Varsaganya’s (or Varsaganya’s followers’) formulation 
of Samkhya was revised by a certain Vindhyavasin, and Vindhyavasin 
took part in a debate with Buddhamitra, a teacher of Vasubandhu. 
Vindhyavasin was successful in the debate and received a gift of gold 
from the then reigning king, who was known as Vikramaditya. Later, 
after Vindhyavasin had died, Vasubandhu composed a rejoinder to 
the Sdmkhyasastra of Vindhyavasin, entitled Paramdarthasaptati, for which 
Vasubandhu himself received a gift of gold from the successor of 
Vikramaditya. What rings true in Paramartha’s account, apart from a 
great variety of legendary detail, is the sequence that emerges, that is, 
Varsaganya or the followers of Varsaganya; a revision of Samkhya- 
§astra by Vindhyavasin; a debate (or debates) with Buddhist philo- 
sophers who precede Vasubandhu; and a definitive rejoinder to the 
Samkhyasastra of Vindhyavasin by Vasubandhu called Paramdarthasap- 
tati. As was suggested in the preceding discussion of Varsaganya, 
Paramartha is probably mistaken in suggesting that Varsaganya was 


142 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


himself the direct teacher of Vindhyavasin. It would appear more 
plausible from the Indian evidence that Vindhyavasin revised the 
form of Samkhya that was characteristic of the followers of Varsaganya 
(namely, the varsaganah of the Yuktidipika), thereby allowing for a 
greater time span between Varsaganya himself and Vindhyavasin. In 
this sense, of course, Vindhyavasin himself becomes a ‘‘follower of 
Varsaganya” (in other words,-one of the vdrsaganéh), but one who 
considerably changed the doctrines of the school. It is interesting to 
note, by the way, that Paramartha’s “Life of Vasubandhu” does not 
mention [’varakrsna or the Saémkhyakarika in the context of Vindhya- 
vasin’s debate with Buddhamitra and Vasubandhu’s final rejoinder. 
Paramartha’s ‘account only tells us that Vindhyavasin’s revision of 
Samkhya was known as ‘“‘Samkhyasastra.”’ It is usually assumed that 
because Vasubandhu entitled his rejoinder Paramarthasaptati (“Seventy 
Verses on Ultimate Truth”), that it was probably directed against the 
so-called ‘“‘Gold-Seventy’”’ or Suvarnasaptati, the Chinese version of 
Tsvarakrsna’s Samkhyakarika. It may well have been Kuei-chi who 
first made this assumption, drawing the conclusion, therefore, that 
Vindhyavasin’s revised form of Samkhya used in debate was none 
other than the Sdamkhyakarika. He evidently also assumed, therefore, 
that the prose commentary on the Karika was composed by Vasu- 
bandhu as the rejoinder. In view of the Indian evidence, however, all 
of these assumptions are unlikely. It is now clear that [$varakrsna’s 
views are clearly different from Vindhyavasin’s (as will be documented 
in the sequel) and that Vasubandhu is not the author of the prose 
commentary to the Karika that was translated into Chinese. Most 
important, it is obvious even to a casual reader that the Samkhyakartka 
is not a polemical, debating text. Indeed, Harika 72 (admittedly a 
later, interpolated verse but nevertheless one that was already added 
by the time Paramartha translated the Xariké and its commentary into 
Chinese in the middle of the sixth century) directly states that the 
Samkhyakarika is devoid of the discussion of polemical views (“‘. 

paravadavivarjitas ca api’). The Samkhyakarikd claims, rather, that it is 
a brief summary of the tradition of sastitanira (see Kartkds 70-72). One 
likely possibility is that the Samkhyakarika is a later summary of the 
Samkhya position overall, which attempts to reconcile and synthesize 
what had been happening in the Samkhya tradition since the time of 
Varsaganya, or, in other words, a final summary formulation of sasti- 
tantra that attempts to mediate the views of Paurika, Paficadhikarana, 
Patafijali (the Samkhya teacher), Varsaganya, the followers of Varsa- 
ganya, Vindhyavasin, and the various critiques of Samkhya that had 
been pressed by Vaisesikas and Buddhists. It should be stressed, how- 
ever, that the Saémkhyakarikad gives every appearance of being an ‘‘in- 
house”? document, a document, in other words, whose audience was 
made up of followers (students?) of Samkhya, and not at all directed 


VINDHYAVASIN 143 


at the system’s opponents. The primary evidence for this possibility, 
of course, is the Yuktidipika, which begins by showing that the Karika, 
though brief, is a full and complete statement of the tantra (Samkhya 
system) and which throughout attempts to show how Iévarakrsna’s 
account of the system brings together all of the older lines of discussion 
into one final systematic formulation. 

A plausible chronology for all of this, then, is the following: 

(a) Paurika, Pajicidhikarana, and Patafijali (the Samkhya 
teacher) first or second century of the Common Era; 
(b) Varsaganya ca. 100-300 but probably earlier rather than 
later; 
(c) Followers of Varsaganya (varsaganah) ca., 300-400; 
(d) Vindhyavasin ca. 300-400; 
(e) Isvarakrsna ca. 350-450, the final synthesizer of earlier 
developments. 
Such a chronology agrees in large measure with both Frauwallner and 
Chakravarti, although in contrast to Frauwallner it places Varsaganya 
at an earlier date, and in contrast to Chakravarti it dissociates the 
Samkhyakarika from the unlikely context of debate and allows it to stand 
instead as a final ‘‘ia-house”’ summary of the Samkhya tantra (or sasti- 
tantra). Such a chronology also places Vindhyavasin’s revisions of 
Samkhya ideas during the period of Brahmanical revival under the 
Gupta kings and just prior to the work of Vasubandhu (that is to say, 
some time in the fourth century) and makes [Svarakrsna possibly a 
younger contemporary of Vindhyavasin (as well as a full contemporary 
of Vasubandhu, whose rejoinder against Vindhyavasin may have be- 
come the occasion for Isvarakrsna’s own attempt at some sort of fur- 
ther systematic statement of the Samkhya position). 

With regard to the specific views of Vindhyavasin, the task is, as 
with Varsaganya, one of reconstruction or pulling together occasional 
remarks and quotations that appear in the literature. Again, although 
a complete picture cannot be reconstructed, one can formulate an 
illuminating glimpse of what Pre-A@rikd Sainkhya encompassed. 

(1) As has been mentioned previously, Vindhyavasin’s definition 
of perception is ‘‘the functioning of the ear, etc., without cons- 
truction or verbalization”’ (‘‘Srotrddivrttir avikalpikd itt vindhya- 
vasipratyaksalaksanam...,” from Siddhasena Divakara’s San- 
matitarka) + 

(2) Vindhyavasin evidently wrote a treatise on the ten-membered 
“syllogism” in Samkhya logic, for the author of the Yuktidipika 
indicates that Isvarakrsna did not discuss these matters in his 
text since they had been discussed in earlier authoritative 
treatises (‘‘kifica tantrantarokteh; tantrantaresu hi vindhyavasi- 
brabhytibhir dcdryair upadistah; pramapam ca nas te acdrya ity atas 
ca anupadeso jijiasaddindm iti,’’ YD in the introduction, p. 3). 


144 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(9) 


(10) 


ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Unlike the views of those who derived the subtle elements 
from egoity, Vindhyavasin held the view that the six specific 
forms (namely, egoity and the five subtle elements) all emer- 
ged directly out of buddhi or mahat (“mahatah sadavisesah srj- 
yante paiica tanmatrani ahamkards ca iti vindhyavdsimatam,” YD 
under SK 22, p. 91). 

Unlike those who argued that the sense capacities are per- 
vasive but nevertheless limited in extent, Vindhyavasin held 
the view that the sense capacities (including mind) are all- 
pervasive (indriydni . . . vibhitni iti vindhyavasimatam,’’ YD under 
SK 22, p. 91). 

Like Varsaganya, but unlike Paficadhikarana, Patafijali (the 
Samkhya teacher), and Iévarakrsna, Vindhyavasin thought 
that there was an elevenfold set of organs (and not ten, twelve, 
or thirteen) (“‘ekddasfakam iti vindhyavasi,”’ YD under SK 22, 
p. 9l). 

Unlike others who held that apprehension takes place finally 
on the level of mahat or buddhi, Vindhyavasin took the position 
that experience occurs in the mind (“‘tathd anyesdm mahati sar- 
varthopalabdhih, manasi vindhyavasinah,’ YD under SK 22, p.91). 
Unlike others who thought that samkalpa, abhimadna, and adhya- 
vasdya are three distinct functions (of manas, ahamkara, and 
buddhi, respectively) Vindhyavasin held the view that all three 
are simply modalities of one (‘‘samkalpabhimanddhyavasdyana- 
ndtvam anyesam, ekatvam vindhyavasinah,’” YD under SK 22, 
p. 91). 

Because Vindhyavasin held the view that the sense capacities 
are all-pervasive, he therefore also denied the need for a subtle 
body in transmigration (“‘vindhyavdsinas tu vibhutvdd indriydnam 
bijadeSe vrttya janma; tattydgo maranam; tasman na asti siiksma- 
Sariram,’ YD under SK 39, p. 121). 

Paficadhikarana (see above under Paficadhikarana entry) had 
suggested that knowledge is twofold, that is, prakrta and vai- 
krta, the former of which has three subvarieties, tativasama, 
sdmsiddhika, and abhisyandika, and the latter of which has two 
subvarieties, svavatkrta and paravaikrta, Vindhyavasin, how- 
ever, rejected both tattvasama (or knowledge that is the same as 
the tattva) and sdmsiddhika (or knowledge that is inherent), 
arguing that knowledge always requires an outside stimulus 
and is thus largely derived and not inherent (‘‘vindhyavdsinas 
tu na asti tattvasamam samsiddhikam ca,’ YD under SK 43, 
p. 123). 

According to Kumiarila in his Slokavarttika and his commen- 
tator, Umbeka (akrtivada, 76 and 65),? Vindhyavasin accepted 
Varsaganya’s interpretation of vyaktivada, or the notion of 


VINDHYAVASIN 145 


particularity (in contrast to dkrti or “‘genus”’ or “‘class”’) with 
respect to the meaning of words, and Vindhyavasin also held 
the view that the notions of sémdnya and/or jati (that is, com- 
monness or universality) are not separate categories or enti- 
ties but can be interpreted simply as a general similarity 
(sdriipya) among things belonging to the same group or genus 
(“... vindhyavdsinas ... pindasdriipyam sdmdanyam iti...”). In- 
terestingly, both of these views are similar to the views of 
an ancient grammarian, Vyadi, a coincidence that has raised 
the question as to whether Vyadi and Vindhyavasin are the 
same person. Such an identification is unlikely, however, since 
Vyadi lived many centuries before the Samkhya Vindhya- 
vasin. Possibly, of course, as Chakravarti suggests, both the 
grammarian and the Samkhya teacher were given the same 
appellation, “‘Vindhyavasin.’’’ 

(11) Bhojaraja in his commentary, Rajamartanda, on Yogasiitra 1V.23 
attributes to Vindhyavasin the quotation: “‘sattvatapyatvam evam 
purusatapyatvam,” which means simply that the discriminating 
activity of buddhi appears to be that of the purusa. 

(12) Medhatithi in his commentary on Manusmrti 1.55 comments 
that some Samkhyans, Vindhyavasin, and others, do not 
accept a subtle body: “‘samkhya hi kecin na antarabhavam icchanti 
vindhyavasaprabhrtayah.” A similar comment is made by Kuma- 
vila (Slokavarttika, Gtmavada, 62): “‘antarabhavadehas tu nisiddho 
vindhyavasinad.”4 These attributions are now confirmed, of 
course, in view of the evidence of the Yuktidipikd (and see item 
8 above in this listing of Vindhyavasin’s views). 

(13) Finally, Gunaratna, in his commentary on Saddarfanasamuc- 
caya, attributes the following verse to Vindhyavasin: “‘puruso 
‘vikrtatma eva svanirbhasam acetanam manah karoti sdnnidhyadd upda- 
dheh sphutiko yatha. The purusa, though inactive, by its mere 
proximity makes the unconscious mind appear to be conscious, 
just as a pure crystal (appears to be red) because of being 
near the limiting condition or presence (of the rose).’’® 

It is clear enough from these various fragments and attributions that 
Vindhyavasin, though very much in the tradition of Varsaganya (and 
therefore in an important sense one of the followers of Varsaganya 
[vdrsagandéh] ), nevertheless considerably revised the tradition of the 
older school. By the same token, it is also clear that [svarakrsna’s 
Samkhyakarika likewise owes a great deal to Varsaganya (thereby also 
making Iévarakrsna one of the followers of Varsaganya), although 
Isvarakrsna also considerably revised the older doctrines albeit in a 
manner clearly different from that of Vindhyavasin. We know, of 
course, what happened to Isvarakrsna’s revision: it became the stan- 
dard or normative formulation of what we now know as classical Sam- 


146 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


khya philosophy. What happened, however, to Vindhyavasin’s revi- 
sion? The obvious guess (and it can only be a guess, given the present 
state of the evidence) is that Vindhyavasin’s revision of Samkhya 
eventually became the classical Yoga philosophy of Patafijali and 
Vyasa (or, in other words, what we have referred to as Patafijala- 
Samkhya in contrast to Karika-Samkhya). P. Chakravarti® has co- 
gently argued that such is the case, and Frauwallner’ has expressed 
the same view. Some of the more obvious points of contact include 
the following: 

(a) The reduction of the functions of buddhi, ahamkara, and manas 
to ekatva, or oneness, appears to correlate with Yoga’s empha- 
sis on the notion of citta. 

(b) The consequent all-pervasiveness of the sense capacities, which 
eliminates the need for a subtle body, is paralleled in Yoga 
philosophy by the all-pervasiveness of citta, which also eli- 
minates the need for a subtle body. 

(c) The interpretation of sdmdnya and jati as sariipya, or similarity, 
appears to be common to both Vindhyavasin and Yoga philos- 
ophy. 

Beyond this there are numerous expressions throughout the Yogasitra- 
bhasya that appear to be strikingly parallel with both Varsaganya’s 
and Vindhyavasin’s manner of discussing basic Samkhya notions. 
These are described in detail by Chakravarti.® 


MADHAVA 


Another well-known name of a Samkhya teacher coming down from 
ancient times is that of Madhava. Madhava is mentioned by Hsiian- 
tsang, Dignaga, Jinendrabuddhi, Kumarila, Karnagomin, Santarak- 
sita, and Bhasarvajiia as being an eminent Samkhya teacher but one 
who seriously deviated from the Samkhya position, so much so that he 
is frequently called “Samkhyandsaka,”’ or ‘‘a destroyer of the Samkhya.”’ 
Hsiian-tsang refers to a debate that Madhava held (and lost) against 
the Buddhist teacher, Gunamati, and Frauwallner dates this debate 
near the year 500 of the Common Era.) Hattori suggests that Madhava 
was, therefore, an older contemporary of Dignaga (480-540) and had 
probably died by the time Dignaga wrote his Pramanasamuccaya.* If, 
as has been suggested earlier, Igvarakrsna can be dated roughly bet- 
ween 350 and 450, Madhava may have been a younger contemporary, 
living some time between 400 and 500. 

On the basis of section 5 of Dignaga’s Pramdnasamuccaya (the section 
on the Samkhya theory of perception) and Jinendrabuddhi’s commen- 
tary thereon,? we know that Madhava introduced a major innovation 
with respect to the Samkhya theory of triguna. According to the stan- 
dard Samkhya view, there is only one primordial materiality, which is 
triguna. All objects, therefore, whether “mental” or “‘physical,”’ repre- 
sent collections of triguna, and there are five basic “configurations” 
(samsthana) of guna-collocations corresponding to objects of sound, con- 
tact, form, taste, and smell that can then be apprehended by a parti- 
cular sense capacity (hearing, touching, seeing, tasting, and smelling). 
Dignaga argues (as presumably do other Buddhists) that the Samkhya 
theory is unacceptable because it does not adequately account for specific 
sense awarenesses. If itis true that all objects are simply configurations 
of triguna, then this appears to entail either (a) that there are an infinite 
variety of sensations (thereby making unintelligible any limitation to 
five types) or (b) that any one sense capacity should be capable of 
apprehending all objects (since all objects are simply configurations 
of triguna). In either case the Samkhya is incapable of accounting for 
specifically five kinds of perception (hearing, touching, seeing, tasting, 


148 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and smelling), Madhava, according to Dignaga and his commentator, 
gets around this problem (and thereby greatly improves the Samkhya 
position, in their view) by arguing that there are five different types 
of guna-configurations already on the level of primordial materiality. 
That is to say, there are sound-gunas, touch-gunas, etc., as heterogene- 
ous atoms within praxrti from the beginning, and therefore, the appre- 
hension of five distinct types of objects becomes fully intelligible. More- 
over, says Dignaga, Madhava calls these ‘‘quanta”’ or atoms of distinct 
gunas “pradhdnas,” or material constituents (using the plural). In other 
words, Madhava has given up the unity of prakrti and has reworked 
the notion of triguna into a theory of atomism that moves the Samkhya 
view suspiciously close to the atomism of Vaisesika. As is obvious, this 
is a radical innovation in the Samkhya view of a unified cosmic pra- 
krtit (and hence the antithesis of atomism), and it is surely not an acci- 
dent that Madhava came to be known as ‘‘the destroyer of Samkhya.”’ 

Very little more is known about Madhava. Frauwallner suggests 
that Madhava also rejected the older Samkhya view of the periodic 
emergence and disappearance of the world, arguing instead for a 
beginningless process of manifestation impelled by karman.* Also, 
according to Frauwallner, he made a distinction between the qualities 
of things (dharma) and that in which the quality resides (dharmin), 
again taking Samkhya in the direction of Vaisesika. 

£.A. Solomon has conveniently collected all of the various references 
to Madhava.5 She speculates that Madhava may be the same as 
Mathara, the commentator of Mdaftharavrtti and an ancient authority 
on Samkhya. Our present Matharavrtti, however, says Solomon, is a 
late revision of an original Métharavrtti, which is now lost. Her own 
recently edited text, Samkhyasaptativrtti,s however (see appropriate entry 
below), called ‘*V,,”> may be the original Matharavurtti, and Solomon 
cautiously suggests that this V, may be the work of Mathara or 
Madhava. This is an interesting suggestion, but the views of V,, though 
admittedly diverging somewhat from other Samkhya commentaries, 
do not seem to warrant authorship by someone as radical as Madhava. 
V,, as will become apparent in the sequel, is a “garden-variety” com- 
mentary on Sdmkhyakarika, far removed from the sorts of incisive philo- 
sophical discussions that appear to be characteristic of the great Sam- 
khya heretic Madhava and his Buddhist critics. 


ISVARAKRSNA 


We have already discussed (see above entries on Varsaganya and 
Vindhyavasin) the approximate date of Igvarakrsna (350-450) and 
have suggested that [svarakrsna’s work, the Samkhyakarikd, represents 
an “‘in-house’”’ final summary formulation of the “‘system of sixty topics”’ 
(sastitantra). About Igvarakrsna himself, nothing is known beyond the 
testimony of the Chinese translation that he was a Brahmin of the 
Kausika gotra, or family, and the testimony of Jayamangald that he 
was a parivrdjaka. From the evidence of the Yuktidipika it is fair to say 
that he was in the tradition of the followers of Varsaganya, and in 
view of the fact that he does not follow the innovations of Vindhya- 
vasin itis also fair to suggest that his final summary formulation 
harkens back to some of the older views of that tradition. Also, if the 
testimony of Yuktidipika is to be believed, Igvarakrsna considered his 
role to be one of mediator among the many opposing views within the 
developing Samkhya tradition. For better or worse, his summary for- 
mulation of the Samkhya position proved to be definitive, for all later 
texts within the tradition, including not only the commentarial tradi- 
tion up through Vacaspati Misra but also the tradition of the Samkhya- 
stra and its commentaries, consider Isvarakrsna’s formulation to be 
normative. The one possible exception is the little Tattvasamdsasiitra, 
which includes material not mentioned in the work of Isvarakrsna, but 
all of the commentaries on the Tattvasamasa are fully aware of and 
make extensive use of the Samkhyakarika. 


SAMKHYAKARIKA 


The Samkhyakariké is hardly a “philosophical” text as that desig- 
nation is understood in an Indian intellectual environment. There is 
very little of the polemical give and take so typical of darsana or philo- 
sophical literature. Instead, the Samkhpakarika is a philosophical poem, 
laying out the contours of the Samkhya system in a relaxed and artful 
manner, presenting its content in serious and elegant arya verses that 
flow easily and make use of striking similes and metaphors throughout. 


150 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


If the term “‘darfana’’ is to be taken in its original sense as an “intuitive 
seeing”’ that nurtures a quiet wisdom and invites ongoing thoughtful 
meditation, then surely the Samkhyakarika must stand as one of the 
most remarkable productions of its class, far removed, on one level, 
from the laconic séira style that glories in saying as little as possible 
and presupposing everything, and even further removed, on another 
level, from the frequently petty and tedious quibbling of Indian 
philosophy. (It should be noted, however, that the Yuktidipika (p. 2, 
lines 18-19) suggests that the SK is composed in sitra style). But 
alas, philosophers are seldom poets, and it is hardly surprising, 
therefore, that more prosaic minds both ancient and modern have 
faulted the text for its lack of precision and incisive polemic. In any 
case, the seventy verses of Isvarakrsna have been remarkably influ- 
ential both as a summary of the Samkhya position and as a symptom 
of Samkhya’s contribution to India’s philosophical and cultural heri- 
tage. It is surely appropriate, therefore, that the present volume begins 
its sequence of full summaries with this ancient philosophical poem. 

As has been mentioned, the text together with a full prose commen- 
tary was translated into Chinese by Paramartha during the last phase 
of his literary activity in Canton, between 557 and 569, and it is fair 
to infer, therefore, that the text was reasonably well known by about 
500 of the Common Era. Since the text is referred to in Chinese as 
Suvarnasaptati (the “‘Gold-Seventy”’), it is also reasonable to infer that 
the original text of the poem had precisely seventy verses. This has 
proved to be something of a problem, however, since the Karika has 
been transmitted with varying numbers of verses. The commentary of 
Gaudapada, for example, though it reads seventy-two verses, com- 
ments only on the first sixty-nine. The Chinese translation of Para- 
martha, Suvarnasaptati, reads seventy-one verses but omits verse 63. 
The commentaries JFayamangald, Yuktidipika, and Tattvakaumudi read 
seventy-two verses, but Matharavriti reads seventy-three verses. The 
two newly edited commentaries on the Karikad by E.A. Solomon, 
namely, Sdmkhyasaptativrtti (V,) and Samkhyavrtti (V,), read respec- 
tively seventy-three verses and seventy-one verses. As early as 1915 
Lokamanya B.G. Tilak argued that verses 70-72 in the Gaudapada 
text are later additions, since Gaudapada does not comment upon 
them. The original text, then, represents the sixty-nine verses com- 
mented upon by Gaudapada plus a missing verse. Tilak argues fur- 
ther that the missing verse may be reconstructed from the last portion 
of Gaudapada’s commentary on verse 61 as follows: 


karanam igvaram eke bruvate kalam pare svabhdvam va 

prajah katham nirgunato vyaktah kalah svabhavas ca 

Some argue that isvara is the ultimate cause; others suggest time 
or inherent nature; 


ISVARAKRSNA 151 


(But) how can finite creatures be said to derive from that which 
is without attributes (namely isvara); (moreover,) time and 
inherent nature are manifest entities (and hence cannot be 
the ultimate cause), 


Tilak suggests that this verse was dropped because it denies ifvara as 
creator. Though an ingenious suggestion, most scholars have hesitated 
to follow Tilak’s reconstruction, mainly because the commentary on 
verse 61 in Gaudapada appears to fit quite naturally within the total 
framework of his continuing discussion and shows no signs of having 
been tampered with. Others have suggested that verses 70-72, since 
they simply enumerate the tradition of Samkhya teachers and stress 
that the text is a complete summary of the sastitantra, require no com- 
ment, and hence Gaudapada felt no need to comment beyond verse 
69. This is unlikely, however, since most commentators would com- 
ment on the guruparampara of a tradition, especially on one as problem- 
atic as that of the Samkhya. Suryanarayana Sastri has proposed per- 
haps the best suggestion.? He argues that the earliest commentary is 
the one translated by Paramartha into Chinese in the middle of the 
sixth-century, and that in this commentary verse 63 is missing. It is 
interesting to note, says Sastri, that verse 63 simply repeats what has 
already been said in verses 44-45, and more than that, the progression 
between verse 62 and 64 is a natural one, with verse 63 suddenly 
referring back to the doctrine of eight predispositions. In other words, 
says Sastri, verse 63 looks very much like a later interpolation. In 
addition, the Chinese translation reads just seventy-one verses and 
indicates in its introduction to verse 71 that this final verse was uttered 
by an “intelligent man”? (medhdvin) of the school (or, in other words, 
someone other than [gvarakrsna). In other words, the original seventy 
verses of the Samkhyakarika include verses 1-62 and 64-71 (for a total 
of 70). Verses 63 and 72, as also verse 73 (as read by Matharavrtti and 
V,), are later interpolations. 

Variant readings of the verses of the Samkhyakariké in the various 
commentaries are conveniently collected by R. C. Pandeya in Appen- 
dix I of his edition of the Yuktidipika.* E.A. Solomon in her The Com- 
mentaries of the Samkhya Karika—A Study, pages 194-207, cites additional 
variants from the Sdmkhyasaptativytti (V,) and Samkhyavrtti (V_).” 

The edition and translation (ET) used for the following summary 
is that of Gerald J. Larson, translation, Classical Samkhya, second edi- 
tion, revised (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979), pp. 255-277. 


(Summary by Karl H. Potter and Gerald F. Larson) 


I. Intropuctrory VERSES: THE SCOPE AND TASK OF THE SAMKHYA 


(Karika 1) (ET255) Because of the affliction occasioned by the 


152 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


three kinds of frustration (dubkhatraya: explained by all commentators 
as internal [ddhyatmika] , external and/or natural [a@dhibhautika] , and 
divine and/or celestial [a@dhidatvika] ) , there arises in experience a desire 
to know what will eliminate that affliction. 

Objection: One might argue that a philosophical inquiry into that 
which will eliminate the affliction is useless, since there are ordinary 
remedies (medicines, etc.) available. 

Answer: This is not the case, however, because all such ordinary 
remedies are only temporary palliatives that treat the symptoms of the 
affliction. Such remedies fail to deal with the underlying cause of the 
affliction and, hence, provide only limited and temporary relief. The 
issue is to remove the ultimate cause of the affliction and thereby pro- 
vide relief that is permanent (atyanta) and complete (ekdnia). This 
can only be accomplished by philosophical analysis—hence, the occa- 
sion for the Samkhya. 

(Kariké 2) (ET256) Scriptural remedies (as, for example, the per- 
formance of sacred rituals, etc.) are like ordinary remedies in the sense 
that they also provide only limited and temporary relief. This is so 
because the scriptural remedies are connected with impurity (avisud- 
dhi), destruction (ksaya), and excess or surpassibility (at7faya). In con- 
trast to this, a better method for the elimination of affliction is avail- 
able, namely, the discriminative understanding of the difference bet- 
ween the manifest (vyakia), the unmanifest (avyakia), and the absolute 
knower (jfia) (i.e., wyaktdvyaktajiavijiana). 

(Kariké 3) (ET256) Primordial materiality (malaprakrit) is ungener- 
ated (avikrti). (That is to say, it subsists by and in itself.) The seven, 
namely, the “great one” or intellect (mahat or buddhi), egoity (aham- 
kara), and the five subtle elements (tanmdira), are generated products 
(vtkrti) as well as generative principles (prakrti). (That is to say, the 
seven are modifications of primordial materiality and, hence, are 
derived; but they also in turn generate subsequent principles [tattva ] 
and in that sense are creative.) Sixteen of the principles are simple 
derived products, namely, mind (manas), the five sense capacities 
(buddhindriya), the five action capacities (karmendriya), and the five 
gross elements (bhita). Consciousness (purusa) is neither a generating 
principle nor generated. 


Il. Tue INsrRuMENTs OF KNOWLEDGE 


(4) (ET256-257) There are three instruments of knowing (pra- 
mana): (a) perception (drsta); (b) inference (anumana) and (c) reli- 
able authority (dptavacana), All other instruments of knowing can be 
reduced to one of these three. (That is to say, other so-called separate 
instruments of knowing as put forth by other schools of Indian thought 
can be reduced to perception, inference, or reliable authority.) Any- 


ISVARAKRSNA 153 


thing that can be known (frameya) must be demonstrably established 
vis-a-vis one of these three reliable instruments of knowing. 

(5) (ET257) Perception is the reflective discerning (adhyavasdya) 
that arises through (sense contact with) the particular contents (vis- 
aya) of sensing. Inference is of three varieties and is based on a charac- 
teristic mark (Jinga) and that which bears a characteristic mark (lin- 
gin). Reliable authority is reliable scriptural testimony and/or reliable 
utterance. 

(6) (ET257) Knowledge of what is beyond the senses arises through 
the variety of inference known as “inference based on general cor- 
relation” (saémdanyatodrsta). That which can be known but not estab- 
lished even through this kind of inference is to be established through 
reliable authority (Gptdgama). 

(7) (ET257-258) Something that can be known may not be known 
through perception for the following reasons: it is too far away; it is 
too close; a sense capacity may not be functioning adequately; the 
mind may be inattentive; the thing is too subtle; it is hidden (as, for 
example, an object behind a veil or wall); it is overpowered by some- 
thing else (as, for example, something overcome by darkness or over- 
come by the brightness of the sun, etc.); or it is mixed with similar 
things (as, for example, a grain of rice in a heap of rice or a drop of 
water in the ocean, etc.). 

(8) (ET258) With respect to materiality, it is not perceived not 
because it does not exist; it is not perceived because of its subtlety. 
Materiality is known through its effects, namely, the “great one” 
(mahat) or intellect (buddhi), etc., whose effects are both similar to 
and different in form from materiality. (That is to say, primordial 
materiality is to be established through inference. ) 


III. Tue Notion oF PREEXISTENT EFFECT 


(9) (ET258) The effect (karya) exists or resides (satkarya) in the 
cause in a potential state or condition prior to the operation of the 
cause for the following reasons: (a) something cannot arise from no- 
thing; (b) any effect requires a material basis (upd@dana) ; (c) anything 
cannot arise from just everything; (d) something can only produce 
what it is capable of producing; and (e) the very nature or essence of 
the cause is nondifferent from the effect. 


IV. Toe Maniresr AND UNMANIFEsT ASPECTS OF MATERIALITY 


(10) (ET258-259) Materiality as manifest is characterized as (a) 
having a cause (hefumat); (b) impermanent (anitya); (c) nonpervasive 
(avyapin); (d) mobile (sakriya); (e) multiple (aneka); (f) supported 
(asrita); (g) mergent (liga); (h) being made up of parts (sdvayava) ; 


154 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and (i) dependent (paratantra). Materiality as unmanifest is the re- 
verse (that is to say, uncaused, permanent, pervasive, etc.). (Com- 
pare commentaries for alternative explanations. ) 

(11) (ET259) Although the manifest and unmanifest have these 
contrary characteristics, nevertheless, they are alike in the sense that 
they share certain common characteristics, namely, (a) both are consti- 
tuted by the tripartite constituent process (ériguna); (b) neither can 
be clearly distinguished from the other in a final sense (avivekin) ; 
(c) both are objects or objective (visaya) ; (d) both are general 
(samdanya, that is to say, capable of objective apprehension either by 
perception or inference); (e) both are non-conscious (acetana) ; and (f) 
both are productive (prasavadharmin). With respect to these common 
characteristics of the manifest and unmanifest, consciousness (purusa, 
or the specific term used here, pums) is the reverse of these character- 
istics. It should be noted, however, that consciousness shares certain 
characteristics with the unmanifest—specifically, those characteristics 
as set forth in verse 10 (see above). 


V. Tue THREE CONSTITUENTS 


(12) (ET259) The constituents or constituent processes (guna) are 
experienced as agreeable (priti), disagreeable (apriti), and oppressive 
(visdda). Moreover, these constituents have as their purpose illumi- 
nation (prakasa), activity (pravrtti), and restriction (niyama). Finally, 
with respect to the operation of the constituents, they mutually and 
successively dominate, support, activate, and interact with one another. 

(13) (ET259-260) The intelligibility constituent (saftva) is light- 
weight (Jaghu) and illuminating (prakasaka) (that is to say, it provides 
the intellectual clarity and/or the intelligibility of primal, creative 
nature); the activity constituent (rajas) is stimulating (upastambhaka) 
and moving (cala) (that is to say, it provides the capacity for change 
and/or the continuing process of primal, creative nature); the inertia 
constituent (famas) is heavy (guru) and enveloping (varanaka) (that is 
td say, it provides the substance and/or the “‘thingness’” of primal, 
creative nature). These three, though different in operation and make- 
up, nevertheless function together for a purpose just as the wick, oil, 
and flame of a lamp, though different in their makeup, nevertheless 
function together for the purpose of illumination. 


VI. THE INFERENCES THAT EsTABLISH THE EXISTENCE AND MAKEUP 
OF PRIMORDIAL MATERIALITY AND CONSCIOUSNESS 


(14) (ET250) It can be argued that the characteristics of that 
which is manifest (namely, that the manifest cannot be distinguished, 
is objective, general, nonconscious, and productive as was described 


ISVARAKRSNA 155 


in verse 11) are established or determined primarily because the mani- 
fest is made up of the three constituents. It would follow by inference, 
therefore, that consciousness is nof made up of the three constituents 
insofar as it has been described as being the reverse of the manifest 
(see verse 11). Moreover, it can be inferred further that the unmanifest 
is made up of the three constituents because of the argument of verse 9 
in which it is established that the effect preexists in the cause (in a subtle 
form) prior to the operation of the cause. (That is to say, in so far 
as the unmanifest and manifest are related to one another as cause 
and effect, it follows that if the manifest has the three constituents, 
then the unmanifest must also have them.) (Compare commentaries 
for alternative explanations. ) 

(15-16) (ET260-261) The unmanifest is the ultimate cause because 
(a) that which is manifest is perceived to be limited in size (parimana) 
(and no limited thing can itself serve as an ultimate cause); (b) all 
manifest things, in so far as their characteristics are uniform and/or 
homogeneous (samanvaya), require a single, ultimate cause as their 
causal source; (c) the emergence and/or process of that which is mani- 
fest presupposes a causal efficiency (sakti) that enables emergence or 
process to occur; (d) that which is manifest is just a modification and, 
hence, presupposes an ultimate cause different from it that is not a 
modification (but, rather, is the source or presupposition for modi- 
fication) ; and (e) that which is manifest and, hence, defined in terms 
of ordinary space and time, presupposes an ultimate cause that is not 
so defined, and, hence, in which the manifest can reside prior to mani- 
festation—that is to say, although cause and effect differ with respect 
to the contraries manifest/unmanifest, they are identical when there is 
no manifestation, or, putting the matter another way, the effect dis- 
appears when there is no manifestation, but it continues to exist be- 
cause the effect always preexists in the cause prior to the operation of 
the cause. Moreover, this unmanifest functions because of the three 
constituents that individually and together constitute its very being. 
These constituents undergo continuing transformation, which can be 
accounted for by the respective capacities that reside in each of the 
constituents. This notion of the unmanifest undergoing transformation 
because of its constituent capacities is like (the taste of) water (which, 
though basically of one taste, is modified in various transformations 
into a sour taste, a bitter taste, a sweet taste, etc.). 

(17) (ET261) Consciousness exists because of the following infer- 
ences: (a) all aggregates exist for the sake of something else (parar- 
thatva) (as, for example, the components of a bed either as a whole 
or in its respective parts serve the needs of something else, namely, the 
person who uses the bed for sleeping) ; (b) since it has been established 
(in verses 14, 15, and 16) that the manifest an] unmanifest are both 
aggregates in the sense that they are made up of the three constituents, 


156 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


it must be inferred further, in order to avoid an infinite regress, that 
the ‘‘something else’’ referred to in the first inference must be distinct 
from that which has the three constituents (that is to say, one cannot 
argue that aggregates serve only the needs of other aggregates without 
getting caught in an infinite regress, for any given aggregate posited 
as that for which another aggregate exists will itself require another 
aggregate, and soon;) (c) moreover, this ‘‘something else” different 
from the constituents must be inferred because there is a ‘ standing- 
place,” ‘controlling factor’’, or ‘‘basis’? (adhisthana) required for both 
the manifest and unmanifest (that is to say, there must be a principle 
that ‘‘accompanies” all composite aggregates and thus provides a 
raison d’étre and, hence, an authoritative motive for primal, creative 
nature’s activity or its objective transformations); (d) in addition, 
this ‘‘something else’’ different from the constituents must be inferred 
because there is a need for a ground or basis for all subjective expe- 
rience (bhokirbhava) (that is to say, insofar as the unmanifest encom- 
passes all subjective aggregates as well as objective aggregates, there 
must be ‘‘something else’ that provides the basis for subjectivity as 
well as objectivity); and finally (e) this “‘something else” different 
from the constituents must be inferred because there is an inclination 
in experience to seck freedom or “‘isolation’’ (that is to say, there must 
be ‘“‘something else’’ distinct from the manifest and the unmanifest, 
for otherwise the inclination to seek freedom would be unintelligible 
or pointless). 

(18) (ET261 ) Moreover, (a) since there are varieties of births, deaths, 
and functional capacities; and (b) since these three divergent mani- 
festations do not occur simultaneously; and (c) since these three differ- 
entiations are to be accounted for because of the diversity occasioned 
by the constituents, consciousness, insofar as it is that for which all 
such manifestations and transformations occur, must be construed 
pluralistically. 

(19) (ET261-262) Finally, because consciousness is the reverse of 
that which has the three constituents (namely, the manifest and un- 
manifest as described in verse 11), it follows that consciousness can be 
characterized as that which is the basis for there being a witness (sdksi- 
toa); as that which is “‘isolation”’ or liberation; as that which is the 
condition of neutrality (or, in other words, the condition of being 
separate from all specific experience) (madhyasthya); and as that which 
is the condition of nonagency (akarirbhava). 


VII. Tue AssociariIon or Proximity OF MATERIALITY AND 
CONSCIOUSNESS 


(20) (ET262) Because of the association or proximity (samyoga) of 


ISVARAKRSNA 157 


primordial materiality and pure consciousness, that which is manifest 
appears as if it is characterized by consciousness, and, similarly, even 
though all agency or activity occurs only in the constituents, conscious- 
ness (here the term “uddsina’”’ is used) appears as if characterized by 
agency or activity. 

(21) (ET262) Moreover, this association or proximity is like the 
association of the lame man and the blind man (that is to say, both 
are quite distinct, but they come together in order to benefit from the 
capacities of one another). Materiality “performs its task,”’ as it were, 
so that consciousness may have content, and consciousness ‘“‘performs 
its task’, by revealing itself as radically distinct or isolated from all 
subjective and objective transformations. Because of this association, 
the manifest and experiential world has come into being. 


VIII. THe Derivation oF THE Basic PRINCIPLES (TATTVA) 


(22) (ET262-263) The “great one,” that is, the intellect, arises 
from materiality. Egoity arises from the intellect. The mind, the sense 
capacities, the action capacities, and the subtle elements arise from the 
ego. The five gross elements arise from the five subtle elements. 


IX. Tue FuNcTIONING OF THE THIRTEENFOLD INSTRUMENT 
(TRAYODASAKARANA ) 


(23) (ET253) Intellect is characterized by reflective discerning 
(adhyavasdya). When its intelligibility constituent (sativa) is dominent, 
it is characterized by four forms (rapa): (1) the basic predisposition 
toward meritorious behavior (dharma); (2) the basic predisposition 
toward discriminating knowledge (jiana); (3) the basic predisposition 
toward nonattachment (virdga); and (4) the basic predisposition to- 
ward mastery or control (aifvarya). When its inertia constituent 
(tamas) is dominant, it is characterized by the four opposite forms or 
predispositions (namely, (5) adharma or “‘demeritorious behavior,” 
(6) ajfiana or “ignorance,” (7) raga or “attachment,” and (8) anai- 
Svarya or “impotence”? ). 

(24) (ET263) Egoity is characterized by self-awareness (abhi- 
mana). A twofold creation comes forth from it, namely, the elevenfold 
aggregate (made up of the mind, the sense capacities and the action 
capacities) and the fivefold subtle aggregate (made up of the five 
subtle elements ). 

(25) (ET263-264) The elevenfold aggregate, dominated by the 
intelligibility constituent emerges out of egoity and is called “modified” 
(vaikrta).> The fivefold subtle aggregate dominated by the inertia 
constituent emerges from what is called “‘the source of the gross ele- 
ments” (bhitadi). Both aggregates are able to manifest themselves 


158 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


because of what is called “‘the fiery one”’ (taijasa) (that is to say, both 
come into manifestation because of the capacity for change or activity 
that is provided by the activity constituent). 

(26) (ET264) The sense capacities are those of seeing, hearing, 
smelling, tasting, and touching. The action capacities are speaking, 
grasping, walking or locomotion, excreting, and sexual functioning. 

(27) (ET264) The mind is similar to both the sense capacities 
and the action capacities and so is also a capacity. Its function is inten- 
tionality (samkalpaka) ; it apprehends the contents of the various action 
capacities and sense capacities. The variety of the capacities and the 
external differences (among things apprehended by the mind) arise 
because of the particular transformations of the constituents. 

(28) (ET264) The function of the five sense capacities is bare 
awareness (dlocanamatra), or perhaps better, the ‘ indeterminate sens- 
ing’? of sound, etc. The functions of the five action capacities are speak- 
ing, grasping, walking, excretion, and orgasm. 

(29) (ET264-265) As already pointed out, intellect, egoity, and 
mind have specific and separate functions, namely, reflective discern- 
ing, self-awareness, and intentionality which, set forth in verses 23, 
24, and 27, are also their essential characteristics. Taken together, 
however, they also have a common function or common essential cha- 
racteristic, and that is the (support or maintenance of the) five vital 
breaths (prana, etc.) (that is to say, the common function or common 
essential characteristic of the intellect, ego, and mind is the mainte- 
nance of life). 

(30) (ET265) When perception of something takes place, the 
four (intellect, egoity, mind, and one of the capacities) function either 
simultaneously or successively. Similarly, when awareness occurs of 
something unperceived (as, for example, in conceptualization, infer- 
ence, etc.), the intellect/will, egoity, and mind function on the basis of 
prior perceptions (retained in memory, imagination, etc.).® 

(31) (ET265) All of these capacities in their respective ways 
function coordinately with one another. The reason for the function- 
ing is always one “‘for the sake of consciousness” (purusdrtha) (that is, 
for the sake of the two purposes of consciousness: experience (bhoga) 
and liberation (apavarga)). None of these capacities ever functions for 
any other purpose. 

(32) (ET265-266) This, then, is the “‘thirteenfold instrument’ 
(namely, intellect, egoity, mind, and the sense and action capacities), 
and it functions with respect to seizing (dharana), holding (dhdrana), 
and illuminating (prakafa). The objects, or in other words, the things 
to be seized, held, and illuminated, are tenfold. 

(33) (ET266) The internal organ (antahkarana, or intellect, 
egoity, and mind taken together) is threefold. The external (dahya, or 
the five sense capacities and the five action capacities) is tenfold and 


ISVARAKRSNA 159 


provides the sense contents (visaya) of experience. The external func- 
tions in present time, whereas the internal functions in all three times 
(trikala). 

(34) (ET266) The five sense capacities have or provide both 
specific (visesa) and nonspecific (avifesa) sense contents. The action 
capacity of speech has or provides only the content of sound. The other 
four action capacities have or provide the contents of all five kinds of 
sensing and their contents. 

(35) (ET266) Because intellect together with the other compo- 
nents of the internal organ comprehends every content, the threefold 
internal organ, therefore, can be said to be the ‘‘door-keeper,” (dvdrin) 
whereas the tenfold external organ can be said to be the “doors” 
(dvdra).” 

(36) (ET267) Egoity, mind, the five sense capacities and the 
five action capacities, all of which are differentiated by reason of the 
specific modifications of the constituents, and all of which function 
together like the components of a lamp, thereby illuminating or provid- 
ing access to all of reality, present or deliver up to intellect that which 
has been illuminated. They do all of this for the sake of the entire pur- 
pose of consciousness (namely, experience and liberation). 

(37) (ET267) Intellect provides certitude (sddhayati) regarding 
every aspect of experience for consciousness and, even more than that, 
reveals the subtle difference between primordial materiality and con- 
sciousness. 


X. Tue Sustte anp Gross ELEMENTS 


(38) (ET267) The subtle elements are nonspecific. The five 
gross elements (mahdbhitas), which are specific, arise from these. The 
five gross elements are experienced as being comfortable (Santa), un- 
comfortable (ghora), and confusing (midha). 

(39) (ET267-268) There are three kinds of specific aggregates in the 
manifest world: (a) subtle bodies (saksma); (b) gross bodies born of 
maternal and paternal seeds (matdpitrja) ; and(c) various objects made 
up of gross elements (prabhita). Of these, the subtle body persists from 
one existence to another, whereas the gross bodies born of parents 
cease. 


XI. Tur Susrte Bopy 


(40) (ET268) The subtle body (linga), which is preexistent to all other 
bodies (parvotpanna), unconfined (asakta), persistent (niyata) (for each 
individual in the course of transmigration), and made up of intellect, 
egoity, mind, the five sense capacities, the five action capacities, and 
the five subtle elements, and which in itself is devoid of experience, 


160 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


transmigrates, permeated or “perfumed” (adhivdsita) (and, hence, 
given a characteristic ‘‘scent’’ as it were) by its basic predispositions. 

(41) (ET268) Just as a painting cannot exist without a canvas or 
just as a shadow cannot exist without a pillar or post, in a similar 
manner the subtle body cannot exist without an appropriate support. 

(42) (ET258-269) The subtle body, motivated for the purpose of 
consciousness, behaves like a dramatic actor, functioning by means of 
the efficient causes and effects (nimittanaimittika) derived from the 
inherent power of materiality.® 


XII. Tue Basic PREDISPOSITIONS 


(43) (ET269) The innate (sdmsiddhika) predispositions (bhava), 
namely, meritorious behavior etc. are either natural (prakrtika) or 
acquired (vaikria), The predispositions reside in the subtle body (and, 
specifically, in intellect, as was stated in verse 23). These innate pre- 
dispositions determine the quality of life of the gross embryo, etc. (that 
is to say, the predispositions, which reside on the level of the subtle 
body, nevertheless bring about certain effects on the level of the gross, 
perishable body). 

(44) (ET269) By means of (the predisposition toward) meritorious 
behavior one transmigrates into higher forms of life; by means of (the 
innate predisposition toward) demeritorious behavior, one transmigrates 
into lower forms of life; by means of (the predisposition toward) knowl- 
edge, one comes to liberation; and by means of (the predisposition 
toward) the opposite of knowledge, one comes to bondage. 

(45) (ET269) By means of (the predisposition toward) nonattach- 
ment, one attains dissolution in materiality; by means of (the predis- 
position toward) passionate attachment, one attains transmigration; 
by means of (the predisposition toward) power, one attains control 
over life; by means of (the predisposition toward) impotence, one 
attains declining control over life. 

(46) (ET270) This is the ‘‘intellectual creation” (pratyayasarga), 
and it manifests itself on the level of ordinary experience in fifty divi- 
sions that arise because of the varying collocations (occasioned by the 
unequal distributions) of the constituents. The fifty divisions are 
broadly classified into four groups: misconceptions (viparyaya), dys- 
functions (afakti), contentments (éusfi), and attainments (siddht). 

(47) (ET270) There are five kinds of misconception; twenty-eight 
kinds of dysfunction due to defects in the functioning of one’s capa- 
cities; nine kinds of contentment; and eight attainments. 

(48) (ET270) The five kinds of misconception are darkness 
(tamas), confusion (moha), great confusion (mahdmoha), gloom (tamisra), 
and blind gloom (andhatimisra). Among these five kinds of miscon- 
ception, there are eight varieties of darkness, eight varieties of delu- 


ISVARAKRSNA 161 


sion, ten varieties of great delusion, eighteen varieties of gloom, and 
eighteen varieties of blind gloom. 

(49) (ET270) The twenty-eight kinds of dysfunction include in- 
juries to the eleven capacities (namely, the mind, the five sense capa- 
cities and the five action capacities) together with seventeen kinds of 
injury to intellect. The list of seventeen injuries to intellect refers to 
the reverse of the nine contentments and the eight attainments. 

(50) (ET271) The nine kinds of contentment are divided into two 
groups: (a) the internal, including belief in primordial materiality as 
ultimate, belief in a material basis (updddna) as ultimate, belief in 
time (kala) as ultimate, and belief in destiny (bhagya) as ultimate; and 
(b) the external, including the turning away from the contents of the 
five kinds of activity that relate to the five sense capacities. 

(51) (ET271) The eight attainments are reflective reasoning (dha), 
oral instruction, study, removal of the three kinds of frustration (see 
verse 1), association with appropriate persons, and an open yet discip- 
lined temperament (dana). The misconceptions, dysfunctions, and 
contentments all hinder the development of the attainments. 

(52) (ET271) The subtle body cannot function without the predis- 
positions; likewise the predispositions cannot function without the 
subtle body. Therefore, a “‘twofold creation’’ (dvividhasarga) operates, 
referred to as the “subtle creation” (limga) and the “predisposition 
creation” (bhava). 


XIII. Tue Emprarca, Worip 


(53) (ET271-272) The divine order has eight varieties; the animal 
and plant order has five varieties; and the human order is of one 
variety. Such, briefly, is the scope of the total, empirical world ex- 
perience (bhautikasarga). 

(54) (ET272) In the upper (divine) order there is a preponderance 
of the intelligibility constituent (saéiva) ; in the animal/plant order the 
inertia constituent (tamas) is preponderant; and in the middle, human 
order, the activity constituent (rajas) is preponderant. This classifica- 
tion applies to all of creation from Brahma down to a blade of grass. 

(55) (ET272) Consciousness in this empirical world comes upon 
frustrations that are occasioned by old age and death.® So long as 
the subtle body continues to function (by means of the lack of dis- 
crimination), just so long suffering will appear to be a completely 
natural part of experience. 

(56) (ET273-274) This entire manifest world, from intellect down 
to the gross elements, has been constructed by materiality. The entire 
effort, though it appears to be for her own benefit, is really for the 
sake of another, namely, for the sake of the liberation of each con- 
sciousness. 


162 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


XIV. Siies ILLusTrRATING THE ROLE AND FUNCTION OF 
MATERIALITY 


(57) (ET272-273) Just as unconscious milk functions for the 
nourishment of a calf, so materiality functions for the sake of the free- 
dom or liberation of consciousness. 

(58) (ET273) Just as in the world someone acts so as to bring 
about the cessation of a desire, so the unmanifest (materiality) func- 
tions for the sake of the liberation of consciousness. 

(59) (ET273) Just as a dancer ceases from the dance after having 
been seen by the audience, so materiality ceases after having shown 
herself to consciousness. 

(60) (ET273) Materiality, made up of the constituents, helps 
consciousness in various ways and behaves selflessly toward conscious- 
ness, who does not return the favor (that is to say, materiality behaves 
like a servant or like a generous man who assists all). 

(61) (ET273-274) In my view, there is nothing more sensitive and 
delicate than primal, creative nature, who, having realized that she 
has been seen, withdraws and never again comes into the sight of 
consciousness (that is to say, primordial materiality behaves like a 
lovely and shy young virgin who, having been seen in her nakedness 
by a man, quickly withdraws from his view). 


XV. LiBeRATION AND IsOLATION (MOKSA AND KAIVALYA) 


(62) (ET274) Not any (consciousness), therefore, is really bound, 
is liberated or transmigrates. Only materiality in her various mani- 
festations is bound, is liberated or transmigrates. 

(63) (ET274) Materiality binds herself by herself by means of the 
seven predispositions (described in verses 43-45 and 46-31). She re- 
leases herself by means of one form (ekariipa) or one predisposition 
(namely, the predisposition toward knowledge or jana) for the sake 
of consciousness (purusartha) 3° 

(64) (ET274) As a result of the meditative analysis (abhydsa) 
on the principles (of the Samkhya), the discriminating knowledge 
(jfana) arises, “I am not (conscious), (consciousness) does not be- 
long to me, the ‘I’ is not (conscious).’’ This discriminating knowledge 
is complete (aparisesa), pure (vifuddha) because it is free from error 
(viparyaya), and not mixed with any other thing (kevala). 

(65) (ET275) Then, consciousness like a spectator sees materiality, 
for at that moment materiality has turned away from the other seven 
predispositions. 

(66) (ET275) The indifferent one (namely, consciousness) thinks, 
“I have seen her.” The other (namely, materiality) thinks, “I have 
been seen,” and ceases. Though the two continue to be in proximity 
with one another, no new transformations take place. 


ISVARAKRSNA 163 


(67) (ET275) When the seven predispositions no longer operate 
because of the realization of correct, discriminating knowledge (samyag- 
jiana), nevertheless, the subtle body (associated, with purusa) conti- 
nues to subsist because of the force of latent dispositions (samskara), 
just as the potter’s wheel continues for a time even after the potter 
ceases exerting force. 

(68) (ET275) When distinction from the body (and its attendant 
processes) has been attained (that is to say, when materiality has 
ceased to function after having accomplished her purpose), there is 
the realization of isolation that is both complete (aikantika) and perma- 
nent (dtyantika). 

(69) (ET276) This profound (guhya) discriminating knowledge, 
which brings about the realization that consciousness is the radical 
foundation for freedom or isolation, has been expounded by the sage. 
The very nature of all of reality, its duration in time (sthiti), its origin 
(utpatti), and its final dissolution (pralaya) has been analyzed herein. 


XVI. THE TRANsMISSION OF THE SAMKHYA TRADITION 


(70) (ET276) This excellent and pure (discriminating knowledge) 
was given out of compassion to Asuri. He, in turn, passed it on to 
Pajicasikha. By Paficasikha the doctrine (tantra) was widely dissemi- 
nated and/or variously expanded (bahudha). 

(71) (ET276) And this (knowledge) handed down by a succession 
of pupils has been summarized in these verses by the noble-minded 
Igvarakrsna who has understood the doctrine correctly. 

(72) (ET276-277)4 Moreover, it is to be noted that in these seventy 
verses all of the sixty topics (sasfitantra) of the traditional Samkhya 
have been included. Only illustrative tales and polemics against 
opposing views have been excluded. 

(73) (ET277)™ Thus, this briefly summarized system of thought 
(Sastra) is not defective with respect to the complete subject matter of 
the Samkhya. It is a reflected mirror image of the vast (Samkhya) 
doctrine (tantra). 


PATANJALI (the Yoga teacher) 
YOGASUTRA 


The literature of the philosophy of Yoga will be treated in a separate 
volume of the Encyclopedia, so, there is no need to discuss it in detail here. 
Because we have construed Yoga philosophy as one type of Samkhya, 
however-—Patafijala-Samkhya—and because there are some indica- 
tions that this divergent form of Samkhya may represent the Vindhya- 
vasin revision of the followers of Varsaganya, it may be useful to offer 
chronological approximations for some of the more important texts 
of Yoga. 

Concerning the compiler of the Yogasittra,) namely Patafijali the 
Yoga teacher, there is no clear consensus. The later Indian tradition 
(beginning perhaps with Bhojaraja and Cakrapanidatta in the eleventh 
century and thereafter) tends to identify Patafijali the Yoga teacher 
with the famous grammarian Patafijali of the Mahabhasya. This identi- 
fication has been rejected by J. H. Woods, partly because the notion of 
substance or dravya in the two Patafijalis appears to be clearly different 
and partly because the Yogasitra appears to reflect a philosophical 
environment of a period much later than that of the grammarian Patafi- 
jali (of the second century before the Common Era).? $8. N. Dasgupta, 
however, disputes Woods, arguing instead that the notion of dravya is 
not very different in the two Patafijalis and that the supposed later 
philosophical milieu is more a reflection of the commentators on the 
Yogasitra than it is a reflection of the sitras themselves. Moreover, 
Dasgupta sees Book IV of the Yogasitra, which contains most of the 
later Buddhist material, as a later interpolation. J. W. Hauer in Der 
Yoga has argued that the Yogasitra isa composite text, the oldest portion 
of which the yogdaga section (from 11.28 through III.55) may indeed 
harken back to the time of the grammarian Patajfijali, but the most 
recent portion of which the nirodha section (or I.-1-22) appears to 
be much later.4 Frauwallner, perhaps wisely, has refused to comment 
one way or the other about the sitras themselves or Patafijali, claiming 
that there is simply insufficient evidence to offer even a guess.® Frau- 
wallner is inclined to suggest, however, as is also Chakravarti,® that the 


166 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Yogasiitrabhasya of Vyasa appears to be dependent in important respects 
on the work of Vindhyavasin (whom we have tentatively placed bet- 
ween 300 and 400 of the Common Era). Frauwaliner ventures the 
further suggestion (only in the most tentative fashion) that the Yoga- 
siitrabhadsya of Vyasa may have been composed some time around 500. 
Woods is inclined to date the Yogasiitrabhasya somewhat later, that is 
to say, some time between 650 and 850.? 

All of this leaves us with little more than the suggestion that there is 
virtually no evidence of a philosophical literature of Yoga much before 
the sixth century of the Common Era (if one accepts Frauwallner’s 
tentative dating for the Yogasitrabhasya and its dependence on Vindhya- 
vasin). Prior to the sixth century, there is only the older pre-karika 
Samkhya and the yet older samkhya-cum-yoga proto-Samkhya of texts 
such as the Moksadharma and the Bhagavadgita. "This does not rule out 
the possibility that there were older sitra collections on Yoga, some 
of which may have been current in the time of the grammarian Patafi- 
jali (per Hauer’s suggestion). One gets an overall impression, however, 
that the present form of the Yogasitra probably took shape during or 
after the time of Vindhyavasin and that its attribution to Patafijali 
(or Hiranyagarbha) is somewhat on analogy with the Samkhya tradi- 
tion’s attribution of its founding to Kapila, Asuri, and Paficasikha. 
A.B. Keith is probably not far off the mark when he suggests that the 
final compilation of the Yogasittra may have been occasioned by the 
appearance of Iévarakrsna’s Samkhyakarika. 


SUVARNASAPTATI 


(Paramartha’s Chinese Translation of the Samkhyakariké with a 
Prose Commentary) 


Among the eight commentaries on the Sdmkhyakarikd, five of them 
are so alike in overall content and specific wording as to suggest an 
identity among one or more of them, an extensive borrowing of one 
from another, or that all five stem from a common original (some 
sort of Ur-commentary, now lost). The five commentaries with com- 
mon content are Paramartha’s Suvarnasaptati, Gaudapada’s Bhdsya, 
the Matharavrtti, the Samkhyasaptativrtti (V,), and the Samkhyavrtti (V2). 
It was originally thought that Paramartha’s Chinese version (trans- 
lated by Paramartha between 557 and 569) was the same as the 
Bhasya of Gaudapada, but Takakusu’s exhaustive (and still important) 
work with the Chinese text and the Gaudapada Bhdsya in 1904 clearly 
proved that the two commentaries, though having much in common, 
are not identical Takakusu argues that the original of the Chinese 
commentary may have been written by the author of the Harika him- 
self and that Gaudapada borrowed from the author of Paramartha’s 
original when he composed his Bhdsya at a later date. When the com- 
mentary called Matharavriti was discovered, the problem of the original 
commentary on the Kariké became even more exacerbated, for it was 
realized that the Mdatharavrtti had even more in common with the 
Chinese commentary and with the Bhdsya of Gaudapada. S. K. Belval- 
kar then argued that the Matharavriti was the original commentary 
upon which the Chinese translation is based and that Gaudapada’s 
Bhasya is a shorter and largely plagiarized version of Matharavrtti.? 
A.B. Keith expressed considerable skepticism about Belvalkar’s pro- 
posal, because there was at least some content in Paramartha’s com- 
mentary, and in the Bhdsya of Gaudapada, and the Matharazrtti that 
was clearly not common to all.? This in turn inspired 8. S. Surya- 
narayana Sastri to pursue a detailed comparison of the Matharaortti 
and Paramartha’s Chinese version in which he argued that the two 
commentaries are clearly different at important points and that our 
extant Mdatharavriti cannot be taken as Paramartha’s original. 8.5. 


168 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Suryanarayana Sastri also prepared a complete English translation of 
Takakusu’s French translation of the Chinese original.5 Umesha 
Mishra meanwhile set about the task of showing that the Méatharavrtt 
and Gaudapada’s Bhasya differ in interesting ways and that one can- 
not dismiss the latter as a plagiarized form of the former.* Then in 
1944 N. Aiyaswami Sastri published a reconstruction of the original 
Sanskrit of the Chinese version.” In his introduction to the book he 
carries through a detailed and exhaustive comparison between the 
Matharavrtti and the Chinese commentary. He clearly proves that the 
present text of the Matharavriti is not the same as the Chinese com- 
mentary (contra Belvalkar), and he also cogently argues that the 
author of the Chinese original was different from the author of the 
Samkhyakarika (contra Takakusu). Regarding the original of the Chi- 
nese version, Aiyaswami Sastri offers an interesting suggestion. Already 
in the Anuyogadvarasiitra (ca. fifth century of the Common Era) of the 
Jains, mention is made of a certain ‘‘Madhava”’ in the context of a 
listing of early works and teachers on Samkhya (including a revised 
version of sastitantra, and Samkhyakarika). Madhava is probably none 
other than Mathara. Gunaratna in his commentary on Saddar§ana- 
samuccaya also makes reference to a certain Mathara text, which he 
refers to as “‘mdtharapranta’’ (a text coming from the Mathara “‘cor- 
ner’ or school). According to Aiyaswami Sastri, Gunaratna quotes 
one verse from the métharapranta that also appears in our extant 
Matharavriti® It is clear, however, that this mdtharapranta is a later, 
expanded, and revised version of an older Mathara tradition. In other 
words, there may have been an original Métharabhasya, now lost, and 
a later expanded version of Mathara, called “‘mdtharapranta,” which is 
none other than our extant text called Matharavriti. This suggestion 
has the obvious merit of explaining the common content between our 
extant Matharavrtti and the Chinese version (and also Gaudapada for 
that matter), but it also posits a later revised version of Mathara, 
which explains why the present Mafharavriti contains so much obvi- 
ously later material (quotations from the Puranas, much fuller dis- 
cussions of logical issues, and so forth). Aiyaswami Sastri’s work, in 
other words, tends to support the view, long since held by A. B. Keith 
and 8.8. Suryanarayana Sastri, that there is an original or Ur-com- 
mentary, now no longer extant, to which many of the later commen- 
taries on the Samkhyakarikad are indebted. 

To all of these discussions must now be added the recent work of 
E. A. Solomon, who has recently edited two additional commentaries, 
the Samkhyasaptativrtti (V,) and the Samkhyavriti(V,)®, and a pains- 
taking comparative analysis of all of the commentaries on the 
Samkhyakarikd. Solomon frankly admits that the two new commen- 
taries do not solve any of the old problems, but she is personally 
inclined to think that V. could be an original commentary by the 


SUVARNASAPTATI 169 


author of the Sdamkhyakaérika (and hence the original upon which 
Paramartha based his translation) and that V, is the original upon 
which our extant Matharavriti is based. She also suggests, as has been 
mentioned earlier, that the Mathara of V, may be the same as the 
famous Samkhya ndfaka (‘destroyer of Samkhya’”’?), mentioned by 
Dignaga and other Buddhists. All of this is highly speculative, as Solo- 
mon herself admits, and cannot be definitely proved in the absence 
of considerable additional evidence. 

In any case, given the present state of the evidence, it appears likely 
that Paramartha’s Chinese translation can still be said to be the earliest 
extant commentary available on the Karika (having been translated 
between 557 and 569), that its author is different from the author 
of the Samkhyakarika, and that it and the Bhdsya of Gaudapada, the 
Matharavriti, the Sémkhyavriti (Solomon’s V,), and the Samkhyasaptativrtti 
(Solomon’s V,) are all apparently dependent on an original or Ur- 
commentary that is no longer extant. One might wish that there were 
more to say about the chronology and ordering of these commentaries, 
but Frauwallner is surely right when he comments: “Uber die Zeit 
der Kommentare zur Samkhya-Ka@rikd vor allem der Matharavritih und 
des Gaudapadabhasyam ist mehr geschrieben worden, als ihrem inhaltli- 
chen Wert entspricht,” or, in other words, too much has been written 
already !4 

The edition (E) for the following summary is that of N. Aiyaswami 
Sastri, editor, Suvarnasaptati Sastra, Samkhya Karika Saptati of Isvara 
Krsna with a Commentary Reconstructed into Sanskrit from the Chinese Trans- 
lation of Paramartha (Tirupati: Tirumalai-Tirupati Devasthanams 
Press, 1944; Sri Venkatesvara Oriental Series No. 7). The translation 
(T) used for the summary is that of S.S. Suryanarayana Sastri, The 
Sdmkhya Karka studied in the Light of its Chinese Version, by M. 'Takakusu 
(rendered from the French into English) (Madras: The Diocesan 
Press Vepery, 1933). Both of the above are based largely on M. J. 
Takakusu, editor and translator, ‘“La Samkhyakarika étudiée a la 
lumiére de sa version chinoise (II),” Bulletin de VEcole Frangaise d’ 
Extréme-Orient, Vol. IV, Hanoi (1904), pp. 978-1064. 

In this summary and those of other commentaries on the Sdmkhya- 
karika, section headings parallel the headings of the summary of the 
Samkhyakarikd, which should be consulted as one reads the summaries 
of the commentaries. 


(Summary by Gerald 7. Larson) 


I. IntTRopucToRY VERsEs: THE SCOPE AND TASK OF 
THE SAMKHYA (E1-6; T1-6) 


(Karika 1) A wise ascetic, Kapila, heaven-born and innately pos- 
sessed of the four constructive predispositions, namely, meritorious 


170 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


behavior, discriminating knowledge, nonattachment, and power, no- 
ticed that all creatures in the world were abiding in the darkness of 
ignorance. Out of compassion he approached the Brahmin house- 
holder, Asuri, who for a thousand years had been making sacrifices to 
heaven. Kapila spoke to Asuri, calling into question the value of the 
householder’s life, but Asuri offered no reply. After another thousand 
years, Kapila approached Asuri again. On this second occasion Asuri 
commented that he enjoyed the life of a householder. Later, Kapila 
approached Asuri yet a third time and inquired whether Asuri had 
the requisite discipline and fortitude to pursue the life of an ascetic. 
Asuri finally accepted the invitation of Kapila, abandoned his family, 
and became Kapila’s disciple. Hence, the origin of the Samkhya 
tradition. 

One is compelled ultimately to pursue the life of an ascetic because 
of -the three kinds of frustration: internal, external and celestial. 
Internal frustration includes both mental and physical illness. External 
frustration is that brought about by other men, birds, beasts, serpents, 
and so forth. Celestial frustration includes such natural phenomena 
as cold, wind, rain, and thunder. There are various ordinary remedies 
(medicine, and so forth) for alleviating frustration, but no ordinary 
remedy is certain and final. Even the remedies available from Vedic 
sacrifices and sacred tradition are problematic. The Vedic verse, ‘“We 
have drunk soma, we have become immortal . . . ,”’ is quoted. 

(Karika 2) Whereas ordinary remedies for the alleviation of frus- 
tration are neither certain nor final, the remedies available from Vedic 
sacrifice and sacred tradition have the defects of (a) being impure 
(because they involve killing, and so forth), (b) being impermanent 
(because even the heavenly realm is subject to time), and (c) being 
uneven (because of the inequitable rewards of the sacrificial rites). 

There is another, superior way, however, for overcoming frustration, 
which is (a) certain, (b) final, (c) pure, (d) permanent, and (e) 
universal. This superior way involves the discriminating knowledge 
(vijiiana) of the manifest, the unmanifest, and the knower. The manifest 
world is made up of: 

(a) the ‘“‘great one”’ or intellect; 

(b) egoity; 

(c) the five subtle elements; 

(d) the five sense capacities; 

(e) the five action capacities; 

(f) the mind; and 

(g) the five gross elements. 

The unmanifest is materiality. The “knower” is consciousness. There is 
an ancient verse (here quoted) asserting that anyone who truly knows 
these twenty-five principles attains liberation regardless of the stage of 
life or the particular group to which he belongs. 


SUVARNASAPTATI 171 


(3) Primal creative nature produces all manifestations without it- 
self being produced. For this reason the term “‘prakyti” also appears 
as “‘miilaprakrti” or primordial materiality. Intellect, egoity, and the 
five subtle elements are both generative principles and generated pro- 
ducts. They are generated products because they are all produced 
from materiality. They are generating principles because intellect 
generates egoity, egoity generates the five subtle elements, and the five 
subtle elements generate both the five gross elements and the five sense 
capacities.12 The five gross elements, the five sense capacities, the five 
action capacities and the mind are all simply derived products (vikdra). 
Consciousness is neither a generative principle nor a generated product. 


II. Tse InsrruMENTs OF KNOWLEDGE (E7-12, T6-12) 


(5) Inference is dependent on perception and is of three kinds: 
(a) prior or antecedent inference (pirvavat) based upon the perception 
of a cause, for example, when one perceives a black rain-cloud, one 
infers that it will rain; (b) subsequent or posterior inference (Sesavat) 
based upon the perception of an effect, for example, when one per- 
ceives that a river is swelling and muddy, one infers that it has rained 
further up the river; and (c) inference based upon general correlation 
(samanyatodrsta), for example, when one perceives that mangoes are 
flowering in Pataliputra, one infers that they are also flowering in 
Kogala. These three kinds of inference also clearly relate to the three 
times: (a) pirvavat is an inference of what will occur; (b) Sesavat is an 
inference of what has occurred; and (c) sdmdnyatodrsta is an inference 
of what is now occurring under certain comparable and general condi- 
tions. 

(6) The third kind ofinference (namely, sémdnyatodrsta) also allows 
one to infer that which in principle is beyond perception (atindriya), 
and it is this kind of inference that enables one to establish the imper- 
ceptible principles of materiality and consciousness. In order to account 
for the experiences of satisfaction, frustration, and confusion, which 
accompany all awareness, there must be some root-cause that is so 
constituted. Therefore, one is able to infer the existence of materiality 
as constituted by the intelligibility constituent (sativa), the activity 
constituent (rajas), and the inertia constituent (famas). Moreover, 
since all experience requires an experiencer for which all experience is 
constituted, one is able to infer the existence of consciousness as distinct 
from materiality. 

(7) In addition to these eight conditions that prevent ordinary 
perception, there are also four additional things that do not now exist 
but can be talked about in terms of their absence (abhdva): (a) “‘prior 
nonexistence”’ (pragabhdva) as, for example, a utensil that is to be made 
from a lump of clay but has not yet been made; (b) ‘‘consequent non- 


172 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


existence” (pradhvamsabhdva) as, for example, a pitcher that has been 
broken and thus no longer exists as a pitcher; (c) “mutual nonexist- 
ence” (anyonyabhava) as, for example, a cow that is not a horse and a 
horse that is not a cow; and (d) “‘absolute nonexistence” (atyantébhava) 
as, for example, the second head or third arm of an ordinary mortal. 
(8) There are three views regarding the problem of cause and 
effect: (a) the correct Samkhya view that the effect already resides or 
exists potentially in the cause; (b) the Buddhist view that the effect 
neither exists nor does not exist in the cause; and (c) the Vaisesika view 
that the effect does not reside in the cause but rather arises later or 
subsequent to the cause. The Buddhist view can be disposed of quick- 
ly, since it is obviously self-contradictory. To say that the effect neither 
exists nor does not exist in the cause is like saying that a certain man 
is neither dead nor living. Such self-contradictions cannot be admitted 
in a serious philosophical discussion. The Vaisesika view will be dis- 
cussed in the next portion of the commentary (that is, in verse 9). 


III. Tse Notion oF Preexistent Errect (E12-13, T12-13) 


(9) Illustrations for the five arguments in favor of the Samkhya 
theory that the effect preexists in the cause are that (a) something can- 
not arise from nothing—e.g., oil cannot be derived from sand, only 
from sesamum,; (b) any effect requires an appropriate material cause 
or basis—e.g., curds can only be derived from milk, not from water; 
(c) anything cannot arise from just anything—e.g., grass, gravel, or 
stones cannot produce gold; (d) something can only produce what it 
is capable of producing—e.g., a potter makes a pot from a lump of 
clay, not from plants or trees; and (e) the very essence of the cause is 
nondifferent from the effect—e.g., barley plants derive from barley 
seeds, not from the seeds of beans. For all of these reasons the effect 
must necessarily exist in the cause, and the Vaisesika view that the 
effect is not preexistent in the cause is, therefore, inadmissible. 


IV. THe Maniresr AND Unmanirest AspEcTs OF MATERIALITY 
(E13-15, T13-16) 


(11) The term “‘avivekin’’ or “undifferentiated”’ is taken to mean 
‘““nseparable.”’ That is to say, materiality and its products are insepa- 
rable from the three constituents. Consciousness is dissimilar from the 
six characteristics (namely, triguna, avivekin, visaya, sémdnya, acetana, and 
prasavadharmin) that describe the manifest and the unmanifest. On the 
other hand, consciousness is similar to eight of the nine characteristics 
of materiality described in verse 10. In other words, consciousness is 
similar to materiality in being uncaused, eternal, all-pervasive, not 
characterized by transmigration, not capable of dissolution, partless, 


SUVARNASAPTATI 173 


not related to another, and self-sufficient. Unlike materiality, which 
is one, however, consciousness is multiple. 


V. Tue THREE ConsTITUENTs (E16-19, T17-19) 


(12) The constituents interact with one another in five ways, 
namely, in terms of dominance, mutual dependence, origination (or 
one occasioning another to become dominant), pairing, and interven- 
tion (one for another), or substitution (one for another). 


VI. THe INFERENCES THAT EsTABLISH THE EXISTENCE AND 
Makeup OF PRIMORDIAL MATERIALITY AND CONSCIOUSNESS 
(E19-28, T20-28) 


(16) Two kinds of production are ordinarily distinguished: (a) 
production that involves significant transformation (parinéma) as when 
milk produces cream; and (b) production that does not involve signi- 
ficant transformation (aparindma) as when parents produce a child. 
When Samkhya philosophy refers to the productivity of materiality, 
production in the former sense is intended. That is to say, the produc- 
tivity of materiality involves significant transformation. 

(17) (In the Chinese text, according to S. S. Suryanarayana 
Sastri, the Sastitantra is referred to as the ‘“Treatise of the Sixty Cate- 
gories,” suggesting, therefore, that Paramartha considered Sastitantra 
to be a text and not simply a conventional list of topics.) In order to 
give an intelligible account of purposeful activities such as religious 
rites, it is necessary to infer the existence of consciousness. Also, we 
know that consciousness exists because of the testimony of sages (and 
a verse from the ancient sages is quoted here, suggesting that the nerves, 
bones, blood, and flesh of the body is like the earth and plaster of a 
house in which consciousness resides). 

(18) (a) Ifconsciousness were one, then when one person is born, 
all would be born, etc. Also, (b) if consciousness were one, then the 
varying collocations of the constituents would be unintelligible or mean- 
ingless. 

(19) Consciousness is a passive spectator. Only the constituents 
engage in activities, and consciousness is separate from the activity of 
the constituents. 


VII. Tue AssociaTION oR Proximity OF MATERIALITY AND 
Consciousness (E29-3], T28-30) 


(20) Just as gold becomes hot when placed in fire and cold 
when placed in water and just as a person is sometimes taken to be a 
thief because he associates with thieves, so both materiality and 


174 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


consciousness appear to take on the characteristics of one another 
when they are in proximity. Consciousness appears to be active, like the 
constituents, and materiality appears to be conscious. 

(21) Consciousness is able to see and to know. Materiality is able 
to act. Consciousness sees and knows the constituents. The instinctual 
activities of the constituents spontaneously function for the sake of 
consciousness. The interaction of consciousness and materiality can be 
heuristically compared to the story of the cooperation between the blind 
man and the lame man. Acaravan was attacked bya group of thieves. 
The merchants fled and left behind a blind man and a paralytic. The 
paralytic mounted the shoulders of the blind man, and the two to- 
gether were able to get to their homes, after which they separated. Or, 
again, just as a male and female come together to produce offspring, 
so the association of consciousness and materiality brings about 
creation. 


VIII. Tue DERIVATION oF THE Basic PrincipLes (E31-32, T30-31) 


(22) Synonyms for ‘“‘mahat’’ are ‘‘intellect’’ (buddhi), ‘‘intelligence’’ 
(mati), “idea” or “assertion” (khydti), “knowledge” (jfdna), or 
“wisdom” (prajid). The commentary then simply enumerates the 
various principles. 


IX. Tue Funcrioninc oF THE THIRTEENFOLD INSTRUMENT 
(E33-55, T31-46) 


(26) The sense capacities and the gross elements are derived 
from the subtle elements in the following manner. The subtle 
element of sound gives rise to the organ of hearing and is related to 
the gross element ether. The subtle element of touch gives rise to the 
organ of touch and is related to the gross element air. The subtle ele- 
ment of form gives rise to the eyes and is related to the five gross ele- 
ments. The subtle element of taste gives rise to the tongue and is rela- 
ted to the gross element water. The subtle element of odor gives rise 
to the nose and is related to the gross element earth.4 Each action 
capacity (the organ of speech, and so forth) functions with the various 
sense capacities. 

(27) Among the ten senses, two (seeing and hearing ) are for avoid- 
ing danger, since they function over great distances. The other eight 
are localized and function largely to protect the body. 

(32) The thirteenfold instrument functions with respect to the ten 
objects of the five sense capacities and the five action capacities. Over- 
all there are three classes of functioning, namely, seizing (dharana), 
holding (dhdrana), and illuminating (prakdsa). Seizing is the primary 
function of intellect, ego, and mind. Holding is the primary func- 


SUVARNASAPTATI 175 


tion of the five action capacities. Illuminating is the primary function 
of the five sense capacities. 

(34) Specific objects are those constituted by all three constitu- 
ents. Nonspecific objects are those constituted by only one constituent. 


X. Tue Susrre anp Gross ELements (E55-58, 146-49) 


(38) The subtle elements are nonspecific, and are characte- 
rized by the constituent sativa. They are devoid of rajas and tamas. 
The gross elements are specific, and are characterized by all three 
constituents. 

(39) Thesubtle body is made up of the five subtle elements only. 
It enters into the gross body born of father and mother and is nourish- 
ed by the gross body. The subtle body transmigrates from life to 
life, but the gross body perishes at the time of death. 


XI. THE Sustrite Bopy (E58-60, T49-51) 


(40) The subtle body is made up of intellect, egoity, and the 
five subtle elements. It transmigrates accompanied by the eleven 
capacities (namely, the five sense capacities, the five action capacities 
and mind).%6 

(41) The transmigrating entity is supported by the five subtle 
elements, which are ‘“‘nonspecific.”’ 

(42) The “‘causes and effects” referred to in the verse relate to the 
innate predispositions, which will be discussed further in verses 43-52. 


XII. Tse Bastc Prepisposrtions (E61-80, T52-69) 


(46) ‘The story of the Brahmin with his four disciples is recount- 
ed in order to illustrate the notions of ‘‘misconception,” ‘‘dysfunc- 
tion,”’ ‘‘contentment,”’ and ‘“‘attainment.’’ Before sunrise the Brahmin 
and his disciples notice an object on the road in front of them. The 
Brahmin asks his disciples to find out what the object is. The first 
disciple expresses doubt as to whether the object is a post or a man. 
The second disciple claims that he is incapable of approaching the 
object. The third disciple says that he is content to wait until sun- 
rise before approaching the object. The fourth disciple goes over to 
the object, examines it closely, and returns to tell the Brahmin that 
the object is a post. The first disciple illustrates misconception; the 
second, dysfunction; the third, contentment; and the fourth, attain- 
ment. The intellectual creation is said to be made up of sixteen causes 
and effects. The eight causes are the eight predispositions (dharma, 
and so forth). These eight effects are rebirth in heaven, release, 
absorption in primordial materiality, and are as enumerated in ver- 
ses 44-45. These sixteen causes and effects are either sdttvika or 
tamasa. The causes dharma, jfiana, virdga, and aisvarya together with 


176 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


their effects are made up of the intelligibility constituent (sativa). 
The remaining causes and effects are made up of the inertia consti- 
tuent (amas). When these two sets of causes and effects interact with 
one another, they generate fifty subdivisions, and the fifty subdivisions 
are to be classified into five kinds of misconception, twentyeight kinds 
of dysfunction, nine kinds of contentment, and eight kinds of attainment. 

(51) In realizing the attainments one must practice the eight divi- 
sions of knowledge and the six contemplations. The eight divisions 
of knowledge include the following: 

(1) listening with joy (prit?); 

(2) listening with focused attention (sraddha) ; 

(3) grasping (what is said) (grahana) ; 

(4) remembering (smrit); 

(5) comprehending the basic principles (padéartha) ; 

(6) reasoning (ha); 

(7) denying what is not true (apohana); and 

(8) acting in accordance with what is true (yathabhita). 


The six contemplations include the following: 


(1) understanding the level of gross reality (mahabhita) and 
turning away from it (or the contemplation called ihapada) ; 
(2) understanding the reality of the sense capacities, the action 
capacities and the mind (in other words, understanding the 
eleven organs) and turning away from them (or the con- 
templation called (dhrtipada) ; 
(3) understanding the level of subtle reality (tanmdira) and turning 
away from it (or the contemplation called upagatasamapada) ; 
(4) understanding the ego (ahamkara) and the eight supernormal 
powers (animan, etc.) and turning away from them (or the 
contemplation called praptipada) ; 
(5) understanding the intellect (Suddhi) and turning away from 
it (or the contemplation called nivrttipada); and 
(6) understanding primal creative nature (pradhdna) and turning 
away from it to abide in contentless consciousness (or the con- 
templation called kaivalyapadz). 
At this point in the commentary, a subcommentary is added (presum- 
ably by Paramartha himself), explaining the meaning of the eight 
attainments on the basis of their ancient names. These ancient names 
are, according to N. Aiyaswami Sastri’s Sanskrit reconstruction: 
(1) svatara, 
(2) sutara, 
(3)  tdratara, 
(4) pramodatara, 
(5)  pramuditatara, 
(6) mohanatara (or perhaps better modana or pramodamdana), 


SUV ARNASAPTATI 177 


(7) ramyakatara, 

(8) sadapramuditasiddhi. 

The interpretation is the following: 

(1) ‘‘crossing by oneself’’: attaining wisdom (frajfia) by one’s own 
unaided reasoning; 

(2) ‘‘crossing well’: attaining wisdom and release by one’s own 
effort as well as by the help of another; 

(3) “crossing all’: attaining wisdom solely through the instruc- 
tion of another; 

(4) “crossing with joy”: overcoming internal suffering and also 
attaining wisdom and release from a master of Samkhya; 

(5) “crossing with an excessive joy’’: overcoming internal and ex- 
ternal suffering and also attaining wisdom and release from 
a master of Samkhya; 

(6) “crossing with full joy’: overcoming internal, external, and 
divine or celestial suffering and also attaining wisdom and 
release from a master of Samkhya; 

(7) ‘crossing by love’: attaining wisdom and _ release solely 
through the love or compassion of the master; 

(8) ‘‘crossing by universal love’: attaining wisdom and release 
by giving away all one has and thereby making oneself uni- 
versally loved.t? 


XIII. THe Emprrica, Worip (E81-84, T69-71) 


(53) The eightfold divine realm is made up of Brahma, Prajapati, 
Indra, Gandharva, Asura, Yaksa, Raksas, and Pisaca.'8 


XIV. Smires In-tusrRaATinc THE ROLE AND FUNCTION OF 
MatTERIALITY (E84-90, T72-76) 


(61) Only materiality is the cause of release. Those who argue 
that God, own-being (svabhdva), time (kala), or consciousness itself 
is the cause are wrong. Why? God has no constituents and, thus, can- 
not be the cause. Own-being cannot be established by means of per- 
ception, inference, or reliable authority and, thus, cannot be the cause. 
Time does not exist; it is only a modality of the manifest world. Con- 
sciousness cannot be the cause because it cannot do anything. 


XV. Liperation anD Isoiation (E90-97, 176-83)? 


(69 or, according to Paramartha, 68) The reference to the dura- 
tion, origin, and dissolution of the world means the following: 
(a) duration: the period during which the subtle body transmig- 
rates influenced by the predispositions; 


178 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(b) origin: the productive power of primordial materiality; 

(c) dissolution: the condition of isolation attained by means of 

the eight attainments. 

(70-71 or, according to Paramartha, 69-70) The knowledge of 
Samkhya was established even before the four Vedas. The Vedas and 
all the important schools were based on that knowledge. Kapila was 
the original sage, and the line of transmission was as follows: Kapila, 
Asuri, Paficasikha (who composed a treatise of 60,000 verses, thereby 
greatly expanding the treatment of the Samkhya, (Vindhyavdsa),?° 
Ho-Kia (Gargya), Ulika, Po-p’o-li (possibly Vrsa or the Varsaganya 
school), and finally Isvarakrsna (of the Brahmin family named Kau- 
Sika). A quotation attributed to Kapila is cited: ‘‘In the beginning 
there was just darkness (tamas); in this darkness, the field knower 
(ksetrajia) dwelled; the field knower was purusa; purusa was, but knowl- 
edge did not exist; hence, only a “‘field’’ was spoken about.’#! Pafica- 
sikha wrote a treatise of about 60,000 verses and Igvarakrsna summa- 
rized the content of Paficasikha’s work in these seventy verses known 
as the Samkhyakarika. 

(72 or, according to Paramartha, 71).22 The Samkhyakarika is a 
precise and careful summary of the Sastitantra. The reference to “‘sixty 
topics’ (sasti) includes the five misconceptions, the twenty-eight dys- 
functions, the nine contentments and the eight attainments together 
with ten additional important subjects, namely: 

(1) the existence of the effect in the cause; 

(2) the uniqueness (or oneness) of materiality; 

(3) the goal of consciousness ; 

(4) _ the five reasons for the existence of primordial materiality; 

(5) the five reasons for the existence of consciousness ; 

(6) isolation; 

(7) the proximity of consciousness and materiality; 

(8) the separation of consciousness and materiality ; 

(9) the plurality of consciousnesses ; 

(10) thecontinual transmigration of the subtle body until release 
is attained.?8 


SAMKHYAVRTTI 


This manuscript was edited for the first time by E. A. Solomon and 
published by Gujarat University in 1973.1 The edition is based on a 
single palm-leaf manuscript preserved in the Jesalmere Grantha Bhan- 
dara. The first seventy-one verses of the Karikd are commented upon 
by the Samkhyavrtti. The name of the author of the commentary is not 
mentioned, but Solomon has ventured the hypothesis that this may be 
the earliest of the extant commentaries on the K@rikd, possibly written 
by Iévarakrsna himself (hence making it a svopajfavrtti or autocom- 
mentary) and thereby representing the original Sanskrit commentary 
upon which Paramartha based his Chinese translation (see above entry 
on Suvarnasaptati). Solomon is quick to point out, however, that her 
hypothesis is only an impressionistic hunch and that a good deal of 
additional evidence and further research would be required before 
asserting her hypothesis as a firm conclusion. In support of Solomon’s 
hypothesis there are indeed many similarities between Samkhyaovrtti and 
the Chinese version of Paramartha. At the same time, however, there 
are also a number of differences (for example, Sdmkhyavrtti reads 
and comments upon verse 63, which is not read by Paramartha), 
suggesting that Sdmkhyavrtti and Paramartha’s Chinese version are both 
dependent on a common source (or sources? ) that they have used select- 
ively. In any case, Samkhyavriti does appear to be an old text and may 
well be roughly contemporary with the Chinese Suvarnasaptati (or, in 
other words, some time in the sixth century of the Common Era). 

The following summary of the text is based on the E. A. Solomon 
edition (E) of the manuscript. 


(Summary by Esther A. Solomon) 


J. Intrropucrory VErRsEs: THE Scopk AND TASK OF THE 
Samxuya (EI-8) 


(1) The Samkhyavrtti does not have any introductory stanza or 
namaskdra to Kapila. It begins immediately with the story of Asuri’s 
encounter with the great Kapila. The threefold frustration is respon- 


180 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sible for the desire to know (a) what is ultimate, (b) what is not, (c) 
what is truth, (d) what is the final good, and (e) what must be done. 
This threefold frustration is (i) internal (both physical and mental; 
the physical being due to the disorder or imbalance of the three bodily 
humors, viz., wind (vata), bile (pitta), and phlegm (kapha), and the 
mental being due to separation from what is dear, association with what 
one dislikes, and not attaining what one wants to attain); (ii) external, 
caused by man’s natural environment (e.g., men, animals, etc.); and 
(iii) celestial (caused by forces constituting nature, namely, cold, heat 
wind, etc., and also by some evil influences, e.g., possession by spirits). 
Asuri asks if there is any cause or remedy that can eradicate this three- 
fold frustration, and whether this frustration is related to the body or to 
consciousness. If there is a means to get rid of these frustrations, he 
would apply himself to it; and if there were not, he would endure with- 
out uttering a word. Prompted by such a spirit of inquiry, Asuri ap- 
proaches the revered Kapila. 

A doubt may arise as to how an inquiry deriving from frustration 
can itself also eradicate frustration. One born of the mother does not 
usually kill her. The answer to this is that sometimes this is exactly 
what we find in the world. A prince born of a king sometimes kills his 
father. Another doubt may arise: since there are well-known and easily 
accessible means for the removal of frustration, this inquiry becomes 
meaningless. The science of medicine (Gyurveda) with its eight branches 
can cure physical ailments. Gaining an object of desire brings an end 
to mental frustration. A secure dwelling protects people from external 
forces. Religious rituals can bring an end to frustration due to cosmic 
and supernatural factors. Hence, what is the need for this inquiry? The 
answer is that the cure by these means is not definite or necessary 
(ekanta) and is not final (atpanta); the desired result may or may not 
occur, and there is no guarantee that the frustrations will not return. 

(2) A follower of the Veda may suggest that the Veda provides a 
definite means for removing frustration. According to Rg Veda VIII. 
48.3, the gods have drunk soma and become immortal; they will not 
have to suffer from disease, old age, or death. If such remedies are 
available, what is the need for renunciation and the knowledge of 
Samkhya ? It is said in the Veda that by sacrificing an animal, one wins 
all worlds. Scriptural means, however, are like perceptible means (e.g., 
Ayurveda) incapable of definitely and finally bringing an end to frus- 
tration, since they involve impurity (killing of animals, etc.), destruc- 
tion (on the fruit being destroyed the sacrificer falls from that state 
which has been attained), and excess (there is a hierarchy in the fruits 
of sacrifices, and this leads to jealousy and consequent suffering). Thus, 
the means enjoined in the Veda are of no avail. Something that is the 
reverse of scriptural and perceptible means, that is to say, something 
that is definite, final, pure, and free from destruction and excess, would 


SAMKHYAVRTTI 181 


obviously be superior. Such a means leading to the final elimination 
of suffering is the discriminative knowledge of the manifest, the unmani- 
fest, and the knower, which together account for the twenty-five prin- 
ciples of Samkhya philosophy. Intellect (buddhi), egoity, the five 
subtle elements, the eleven organs, and the five gross elements consti- 
tute the manifest; primordial materiality is the unmanifest, and ‘‘the 
knower signifies consciousness. It is said that if one knows these twenty- 
five principles, in whatever stage of life, whether he has matted hair, 
or a shaven head, or a tuft of hair, he would be released. 

(3) These twenty-five principles can be further classified into a 
fourfold scheme as follows: ungenerated, generated and also genera- 
ting, generated but not generating, and neither generated nor gene- 
rating. 


II. THe INsrRuMENTs oF KNOWLEDGE (E8-14) 


(4) According to this commentary, arthdpatti (presumption), 
abhiva (nonapprehension), pratibhd (intuition), and cesta (activity) 
can be subsumed under inference. Aitihya (tradition) and aupamya 
(analogy) are included in reliable authority. Illustrations are given 
for all these. The recognition of the three instruments of valid knowl- 
edge is essential, because the objects of knowledge (prameya) can be 
established by these. 

The term “‘pramana’’ presupposes (a) one direct instrument of 
knowing (namely, perception) and (b) and (c) two indirect instru- 
ments of knowing (namely, inference and reliable authority). Simi- 
larly, the term “‘frameya’”? presupposes (a) one direct object to be 
known (namely, manifest objects) and (b) and (c) two indirect 
objects to be known (namely, the unmanifest and the knower). 
Thus, the term “‘pramdna’’ stands for the class of the various instru- 
ments of knowledge, and the term “‘prameya”’ stands for the class of 
things to be known. 

Sound, touch, color, taste, and smell are the objects of knowledge 
that are perceived by the sense capacities. What cannot be grasped 
by the five sense capacities is to be established by inference (e.g., 
fire from seeing smoke); and what cannot be established by either 
of these is established by reliable verbal testimony (e.g., Indra is 
the king of the gods; the Kuru country is in the north; and there 
are apsaras(es) in heaven). Reliable authority refers to the state- 
ments of someone who has no faults and, therefore, cannot utter a 
false statement. Thus, the twenty-five principles are the cognizables 
cognized by these three sources of knowledge. 

(5) Perception is the reflective discerning by the five sense capa- 
cities of their respective objects. Inference is threefold: (i) pérvavat, 
inference from what precedes, e.g., seeing a cloud in the rainy season, 


182 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


one infers that it will rain. (ii) Sesavat, inference about the whole 
from a part, e.g., tasting a drop of ocean water and inferring that 
the rest also is salty. (ili) sdémdnyatodrsta, e.g., seeing a mango tree in 
bloom in this city, one infers that mango trees are in bloom elsewhere. 
Inference is based on the knowledge of the characteristic mark (litga) 
and that to which the mark belongs (litgin). For instance, seeing the 
triple staff, one establishes that the wandering mendicant (parivrdjaka) 
is the lingin, that the staff belongs to him; or seeing the wandering men- 
dicant as possessed of the mark, one infers the mark, namely, the triple, 
staff. The relation of the linga and the lingin can be any of the follow- 
ing types: (a) ownership (svasvami); (b) whole-part (prakrtivikriz) ; 
(c) material cause-effect (kdranakarya) ;(d) measure-measured (mdtra- 
mdtrika); (e) opposition (pratidvandvi); (£) companionship (sahacara) ; 
and (g) efficient cause-effect (nimittanaimittika). Reliable authority is 
unimpeachable verbal testimony. It is aptasruti (i.e., the hearing of 
that which is intuitively known by the dptas namely, Hari, Hara, 
Hiranyagarbha, etc.) and dptavacana (the statement of the dptas, 
namely, the authors of the lawbooks, Manu and others). 

(6) Which object is known by which source of knowledge? The 
answer is that the imperceptible materiality and consciousness are 
established by the sdmdnyatodrsta (inference). The linga (mergent, 
characteristic mark), comprehending intellect, etc., is constituted of 
the three constituents, so primordial materiality from which intellect, 
etc., are produced must also be constituted of the three constituents. 
Likewise, consciousness is established by inference—there must be a 
consciousness for whom materiality produces the liiga (intellect, etc.). 
Reliable, authoritative statements give knowledge with regard to that 
which cannot be established by perception or inference, e.g., Indra 
is the king of the gods, etc. 

(7) It may be argued that what is not perceived in the world is 
not existent, and since materiality and consciousness are not perceived, 
they must be nonexistent. The answer to this is that, even though 
something is not apprehended, it does not necessarily follow that it is 
nonexistent. There are eight causes accounting for the nonperception 
of an existent thing. 

(8) Of these eight causes accounting for the nonperception of an 
existent thing, it is due to subtlety that primordial materiality is not 
perceived. It is not nonexistent, for one can know of its existence on 
the basis of its effects, intellect, etc. Seeing that the effect is possessed 
of the three constituents, it is inferred that primordial materiality also 
is possessed of three constituents. The effect (intellect, etc.) is similar 
in certain respects to primordial materiality and dissimilar in others 
just as the son may be like his father with respect to physical form, but 
not with respect to virtue, etc. 


SAMKHYAVRTTI 183 
III. Tue Notion or PreexistentT Errect(E14-15) 


(9) There is much difference of opinion among the venerable 
teachers of different schools regarding the relation between cause 
and effect. The Vaisesikas are of the opinion that the pot does not 
exist in the lump of clay before its production. The Jainas say that 
it both exists and does not exist; and the Buddhists that it neither exists 
nor does not exist. The Jaina view is not tenable, for existence and non- 
existence are contradictory, and if a thing is existent it cannot be non- 
existent and vice versa. The Buddhists do not take up any position, 
so there can be no dialogue with them. The Vaisesikas, however, repre- 
sent an apparently cogent view that the effect is nonexistent (asatkarya) 
before its production, but this view must be repudiated. 

The effect (intellect, etc.) is existent in primordial materiality be- 
fore its production: (a) because what is nonexistent cannot be produ- 
ced (otherwise oil could have been produced from grains of sand); 
(b) because of the need for an appropriate material cause (e.g., one 
desirous of curds uses milk); (c) because of the impossibility of all 
things coming from all things (e.g., gold, silver, and diamonds could 
be produced from grass, sand, and pebbles); (d) because something 
can produce only what it is capable of (e.g., a capable potter produces 
a pot from a lump of clay); and (e) because the effect is of the nature of 
the cause (e.g., rice is produced from rice seeds, not from kodrava seeds). 


IV. Tse Manirest AND UNMANIFEST ASPECTS OF 
Materiatiry (E15-19) 


(11) Thus is explained the dissimilarity between manifest and 
unmanifest. The points of similarity are as follows: both are charac- 
terized by the three constituents; both cannot be clearly discriminated 
from the constituents of which they are constituted; both are objects 
of enjoyment for all the consciousnesses; both are common (objects 
of enjoyment) to all the consciousnesses, both are nonconscious, and 
both are productive. Consciousness is said to have the opposite 
characteristics in certain respects, and to be like the manifest and the 
unmanifest in other respects. Consciousness is not constituted of the 
three constituents; it can be clearly distinguished from the consti- 
tuents; itis not an object but, rather, is the subject; it is not general 
but is particular; it is conscious and it is nonproductive. But like pri- 
mordial materiality it is uncaused, permanent, pervasive, immobile, 
unsupported, nonmergent, noncomposite, and independent.? 


V. Tue Turee Constiryents (E19-24) 


(12) The constituents dominate, support, activate, and interact 
with one another. When one of these constituents becomes powerful, 


184 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


it overpowers the other two. They support each other and work toge- 
ther, just as three sticks supporting each other serve to support a basin. 
These constituents rouse each other, and each one makes the others do 
their own function, as also its own; thus they form a unity. They also 
interact and work in association. Various parables are given to illus- 
trate the manner in which the constituents work together. 

(13) Each constituent has its unique characteristic: sativa is light 
and illuminating, rajas is stimulating and dynamic, and tamas is 
heavy and enveloping. Yet they also function jointly as do the oil, 
wick, and flame of a lamp in illuminating objects like a potin the inner 
recesses of a mansion. When the limbs are light and the organs are 
pure and capable of grasping their objects, sativa is dominant. When 
one is scattered and fickle minded but also inquisitive, rajas is domi- 
nant. On the other hand, when tamas is dominant, the limbs are heavy 
and the organs are inert, incapable of grasping any object. Yet the three 
constituents, though having differing characteristics, work in unison 
for the sake of consciousness, just like the parts of a lamp. 


VI. Tue INFERENCES THAT EsTABLISH THE EXISTENCE AND MAKEUP 
oF PrimorpIAL MATERIALITY AND Consciousness (E24-32) 


(14) The unmanifest is characterized by the three constituents. 
If the effect is present, the cause must invariably be there. Moreover, 
the effect is of the same nature as the cause. If the threads are black, 
the cloth also is black. Thus, the cause (primordial materiality) 
also must be known to have these characteristics. In other words, 
the ultimate cause is inferred from its effects. 

(15) Yet how can it be said that the unmanifest exists and is 
the cause of the manifest when it is not apprehended? The answer 
to this is that the unmanifest is existent and is the cause: (a) be- 
cause of the finiteness of specific things in the world that require a 
nonfinite ultimate cause; (b) because of homogeneity (e.g., seeing 
a Brahmin boy one understands that his parents also must be Brah- 
mins); (c) because of the potency of the cause that the process of 
production implies (e.g., people are active in respect of that alone 
of which they are capable) ; and (d) because of the separation or 
distinction between cause and effect (e.g., clay is the cause, pot is 
the effect). (e) Because of the uniformity of the universe (three 
worlds) (e.g., curds and milk). 

(16) How can one primordial materiality produce a multiple 
world? One thread does not produce a cloth; one grass fibre does 
not make a mat. The answer is: creative nature can produce a multi- 
ple world because of the joint interaction of the three constituents. 
The constituents are transformed by the process of modification, so 
that the effect is nondifferent from the cause. This production is 


SAMKHYAVRTTI 185 


not like parents producing a child, but is like milk being transformed 
into curds, This results in a variegated world. Water drunk by a 
serpent turns into poison, that drunk by a cow turns into milk, and 
that drunk by a camel into urine. Rain water as it falls from the sky 
is the same but assumes different tastes in accordance with the place 
where it falls. Thus, because of the differences among the three 
constituents, there is diversity in the world, depending on whether 
Sativa or rajas or tamas is predominant. 

(18) The plurality of purusas can be inferred for the following 
reasons: (a) There is great diversity in births, deaths and faculties. 
If there were only one consciousness, a number of pregnant women 
would give birth to one child. If one were born, all would be born; 
and if one died, all would die. Similarly, there is diversity in facul- 
ties. Some are deaf or dumb or have impaired capacities, whereas 
others are not impaired. (b) The actions of different individuals 
take place at different times. One strives for merit (dharma), an- 
other for love (kdéma), a third for wealth (artha), and a fourth for 
liberation (moksa). (c) There is a difference in the predominance of 
the constituents. The three sons of a Brahmin are born in the same, 
family and yet one has sattva predominant in him, another rajas, 
and the third tamas. Had there been one consciousness, this would 
not have been so. 

(19) The followers of Samkhya argue that consciousness is a 
nondoer. According to Kanada, Aksapada, and others, however, he 
is a doer. Nonphilosophers also suggest consciousness is a doer of 
action; there is a superimposition of action on consciousness, e.g., 
purusa walks, he runs, he does this and that. The correct view, 
however, is that he is a nondoer. Since consciousness is different 
from the three constituents, etc., consciousness is simply a witnessing 
presence and is, thus, isolated, indifferent, a spectator and a non- 
doer. This can be explained by an analogy. A wandering mendi- 
cant comes to live in a village. The village folk keep on doing or 
not doing their work in the field, but the mendicant remains isolated, 
indifferent, and a nondoer of their actions. Consciousness is like that, 
a nondoer, whereas the constituents are active. Thus the existence 
of consciousness is established together with the plurality of con- 
sciousnesses, 


VII. Tue AssociIATION OR PRoximITY OF MATERIALITY AND 
Consciousness (E32-34, verses 20-21 ) 


(20) Because of the proximity of creative nature and conscious- 
ness, the unconscious linga (intellect, etc.) appears to be characterized 
by consciousness, just as a pot that is neither hot nor cold in touch 
appears to be intrinsically cold or hot when in contact with cold or 


186 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


hot water. Likewise, the indifferent consciousness appears to be 
characterized by activity because of the activity of the constituents. 
A parable illustrates this. Some robbers were going to their own 
village after completing their work. A learned Brahmin happened 
to be going the same way along with them. When the robbers were 
caught by the police and accused of being robbers, the Brahmin also 
was caught and similarly accused. Though not a robber, he appeared 
to be one because of his association with the robbers. In a similar 
manner, consciousness appears to be active because of association 
with the constituents, and the constituents appear to be conscious 
because of the presence of consciousness. 

(21) Consciousness enables creative nature to be seen, and crea- 
tive nature finally provides the means of liberation for consciousness. 
Thus, the two principles become associated, just as a king and a ser- 
vant become associated with each other. One wants someone to 
work for him, and the other wants someone who can provide the 
means of maintenance. Or, again, it is like the association of the 
lame man and the blind man. One is able to see, and the other is 
able to move. Together they attain a common purpose. Creation 
occurs because of the association. 

The commentary indicates here that the discussion of the ten funda- 
mental topics of Samkhya is now basically complete, although ‘‘sepa- 
ration’”’ (viyoga) and “‘the continuation of life after the attainment of 
knowledge”’ (Sesavrtti) will also be discussed later. 


VIII. Tue DerivaTion oF THE Basic PRIncIPLES (E34-35) 


(22) The manifest, experiential world (sarga) referred to in verse 
21 is threefold : elemental or essential creation (tattvasarga), predis- 
positional creation (bhdvasarga), and consequent or gross creation 
(bhittasarga). Since the process of emergence is fundamental, essen- 
tial creation (éativasarga) is described first of all. Intellect emerges 
from creative nature. Egoity emerges from intellect; the group of 
sixteen (namely, the eleven sense capacities and the five subtle ele- 
ments) emerges from ego; and the five gross elements emerge from 
the five subtle elements. These are the basic twenty-five principles 
the true knowledge of which leads to release. 


TX. Tue FuncrioninG of THE THIRTEENFOLD InsTRUMENT (E35-52) 


(23) Meritorious behaviour is characterized by restraint (yama) 
and restriction (niyama). The five restraints are: not to kill, to prac- 
tice continence, to speak the truth, not to indulge in vulgar worldly 
mundane activities (avyavaharata), and not to steal. The five restric- 
tions are: not to become angry, to serve one’s preceptor, purity, to 


SAMKHYAVRTTI 187 


be moderate in eating, and not to be irresponsible or careless (apra- 
mada).4 Knowledge is twofold: external (that of musical instruments, 
sculpture, grammar, etc.) and internal (that of the difference between 
the constituents and consciousness). By external knowledge the cul- 
tural world is maintained, and by internal knowledge liberation is at- 
tained. Nonattachment is also twofold. Seeing the drawbacks in the acti- 
vities of acquiring, protecting, and so on, one becomes nonattached 
and gives up worldly life. Such a person is not liberated, however, for 
such nonattachment is external. If a person has discriminative knowl- 
edge of materiality and consciousness, however, and turns away from 
worldly life, then this nonattachment is due to internal knowledge and 
leads to liberation. Power is eightfold: one becomes very minute and 
subtle in form (animan); one becomes light and moves like the wind 
(laghiman) ; one is adored and worshiped in the three worlds (mahi- 
man); one gets whatever one wants (prdpti) ; one moves about being 
the master of the three worlds (isttva); one has profuse ambition, and 
has sufficient potency to enjoy the objects of enjoyment (prakamya); 
one brings others under one’s control (vaSitva); and one is undeterred 
in whatever condition desired (yatrakaémavasdyitva), whether among the 
gods or among insentient things. The forms of intellect with tamas 
preponderant are the opposite. 

(23) Egoity itself is threefold: (i) “modified” (vaikrta or vaika- 
rika) with a preponderance of sativa from which the pure sdttvika sense 
and action capacities emerge; (ii) “‘elemental” (bhatadi) witha pre- 
ponderance of tamas, from which the five subtle elements emerge; 
and (iii) “‘fiery’’ (taijasa) with a preponderance of rajas. The “‘fiery 
one”’ assists the ‘“‘modified’” and ‘‘elemental’’ by providing force or 
energy, and without it the “‘modified” and “elemental” egos would 
not be able to function. 

(27) The mind is both a sense capacity and an action capacity, 
because it determines or arranges the impulses and sensations coming 
from these capacities—just as a man may be a wrestler among wrest- 
lers and a cowherd among cowherds. Intentionality is the peculiar 
function of the mind. It functions with respect to objects in the past, 
present, and future.5 

A question arises: by whom are the eleven organs created—by con- 
sciousness, or by God or naturally (svabhdva)? Samkhya rejects all 
such causal entities and ascribes all creative activity to materiality 
and the three constituents. 

(28) The term ‘‘dlocana”’ signifies awareness, and the term “‘mdtra’’ 
(bare) specifies a particular or unique grasping (e.g., seeing, hearing, 
etc.). 

(29) Intellect decides; egoity gives rise to self-awareness; and the 
mind reflects or analyzes. Each has, in other words, its unique func- 
tion, but the three together also have a common function. This com- 


188 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


mon function is the maintenance of life, constituted by the five breaths. 
That which comes out of the mouth and nostrils and operates with 
respect to external objects is prana. The function of apdana is to go away 
or down, of udana to rise, of samana to stay together, and of vpdna to 
pervade the body up to the hair and nails. 

(30) In perception the internal organ (namely, intellect, egoity 
and mind) and one of the senses function either simultaneously or 
successively. The four function simultaneously, but they can function 
one after the other also. Walking along a road, Devadatta sees a 
post, and he thinks, ‘Is it a post, or could it be a man?” If he sees a 
creeper going up the post he has the certain knowledge that it is a 
post, but if he sees movements like contracting, walking, etc., he 
decides, ‘‘It is a man.”’ The post is seen and yet not seen, and there 
is successive functioning with respect to it. Regarding the experience 
of the past and future, there is simultaneous functioning of intellect, 
ego, and mind, but such experiences always presuppose some kind of 
prior perception. 

(31) The thirteenfold instrument (intellect, egoity, mind, and the 
ten sense capacities) functions for the sake of consciousness. By no- 
thing else is the thirteenfold instrument actuated. An illustration will 
explain this: a band of a hundred dacoits intends to raid a village. 
The leader of the band determines certain signs or hints to be followed, 
namely, “If someone says, ‘Ha, Ha,’ you enter,” etc. Here the leader 
is like the intellect, and the robbers are like the capacities. They do 
their respective jobs knowing the intention of the intellect. The organs 
do this not for themselves but for the sake of consciousness, but they 
are not controlled by God or by consciousness. 

(32) Seizing and holding are the functions of the organs of action, 
and manifesting, that of the organs of knowledge. 

(33) The internal organ is threefold, and the external tenfold 
organ is subservient to the threefold internal organ. The external 
sense and action capacities function with respect to present objects, 
and the internal organ with respect to objects in all three times (past, 
present, and future). 

(34) The five sense capacities function with respect to objects 
that are specific and nonspecific. In the case of the gods, objects are 
characterized by satisfaction, and are nonspecific; on the other 
hand, in the case of mortals, objects are characterized by frustration 
and confusion also, and they are specific. Of the organs of action, 
speech alone has sound as its object. The remaining organs of action 
have all five (sound, touch, color, taste, odor) as their sphere of 
operation. 

(35) Intellect, egoity, and mind comprehend all objects in all 
three worlds; so this threefold internal organ is the doorkeeper (that 
for which the doors exist; principal) and the remaining ten organs are 


SAMKHYAVRTTI 189 


the doors (that is to say, subsidiary to them) through which the for- 
mer grasps objects. 

(36) The eleven organs and egoity are different from each other 
inasmuch as all have their own objects and are distinct specifications 
of the constituents. They illuminate (manifest) whatever there is in 
the three worlds just as a lamp lighted in the interior of a house illumi- 
nates the interior. They present the object to the intellect, and con- 
sciousness apprehends the object in the intellect, the object being 
characterized by pleasure and pain. 

(37) All objects are grasped and presented by the organs to the 
intellect, and the intellect presents the objects to consciousness, just as 
a minister who receives information from spies, conveys it to the king. 
It is the intellect, moreover, that distinguishes the subtle difference 
between materiality and consciousness. Thus, the intellect enlightens 
consciousness, and he attains liberation. The intellect, therefore, pro- 
vides both experience and liberation for consciousness. 


X. Tue SuBTLte AND Gross ELEMENTS (E52-53) 


(38) The commentator clarifies what is meant by “‘nonspecific’’ 
and ‘“‘specific,” thus throwing light on what was said in verse 34— 
that the sense organs have both of these as their objects. The subtle 
elements operate in the sphere of the gods. They are nonspecific, be- 
cause they are characterized by pleasure, and not by pain or delusion. 
From these evolve the five gross elements (dkafa from Sabdatanmatra, 
vdyu from sparfatanmdatra and so on), which are said to be specific be- 
cause they are comfortable, uncomfortable, and bewildering. Each of 
the five elements (namely, space, wind, fire, water, and earth) may 
bring about satisfaction, frustration, or confusion, depending on the 
circumstances. 


XI. Tue Susrite Bopy (E53-55) 


(40) The subtle body is made up of intellect, egoity, mind, the 
five sense capacities, the five action capacities, and the five subtle ele- 
ments, and was produced from creative nature before the world be- 
came manifest. The subtle body is not confined to a particular place. 
It is constant, that is to say, fixed in transmigration, depending on the 
level of ignorance. It is devoid of experience when separated from the 
gross body. It is influenced by the predispositions. At the time of 
world dissolution, the subtle body along with the organs is dissolved 
into creative nature and is referred to as mergent (linga). 


XII. Te Basic PrepisposiTions (E55-58) 


(45) Nonattachment leads to dissolution in primordial materiality. 


190 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Nonattachment is the instrumental cause (nimitia) and dissolution in 
materiality that which is brought about (naimittika). From attachment 
that is passionate (rdjasa) comes transmigration. Because of rajas, 
a person performs sacrifice and gives alms so that he can be happy in 
the next world. This attachment’ gives rise to transmigration. From 
power consisting of the eight attainments comes nonobstruction. A 
person can go unobstructed anywhere in the world. From the reverse 
of this, i.e., lack of power, there is the reverse situation. One is obs- 
tructed and frustrated in all respects. Thus, there are eight causes and 
eight consequences. This is the sixteenfold ‘“‘consequent creation’’ 
(naimittika sarga). 

(46) This is also known as the intellectual creation (pratyayasarga), 
since it arises out ofthe intellect. The intellectual creation is fourfold: 
misconceptions, dysfunctions, contentments, and attainments. A par- 
able (cited above in verse 46 of the Chinese edition) illustrates the 
four. 


XIV. Srmires ILLustratinc THE ROLE AND FUNCTION OF 
Materiatity (E60) 


(61) Some say nature (svabhdva) is the cause of the world. The 
knowers of the Veda differ and say that consciousness is the cause. 
Samkhya asserts, however, that primordial materiality (made up of 
the three constituents) is the cause. The constituents—sativa, rajas, 
tamas—exist in all manifest things and, therefore, the manifest world 
is produced from materiality. We get white cloth from white threads 
and black cloth from black threads. Thus, the world possessed of 
constituents is produced from materiality having the three constituents. 
Such worlds cannot reasonably be produced from God or from con- 
sciousness, both of which are devoid of constituents. Moreover, there 
is no such entity as nature (svabhdva). Some say that time is the cause 
of everything. According to the Samkhya however, there is no 
entity like time. It is not distinct from materiality. 


XV. LiBeRATION AND ISOLATION (E61-67) 


(62) Consciousness cannot be said to transmigrate, since it is de- 
void of constituents. Being unmodified and inactive, consciousness is 
not an agent, and, thus, it cannot be bound; if it is not bound, it can- 
not be said to be freed. Ever free as it is, it never undergoes trans- 
migration. Consciousness is ubiquitous (omnipresent), so it cannot 
transmigrate. It is materiality that is bound and that is released. It 
puts itself in bondage and frees itself. The subtle body made up of the 
subtle elements, along with the thirteenfold instrument is bound by a 
triple bondage, namely, ‘“‘personal’”’ (daksina), ‘‘natural’”’ (prakria), and 


SAMKHYAVRTTI 19] 


“acquired” (vaikdrika). When knowledge arises, it is released. Mate- 
riality, which is the support of many, i.e., of the three worlds, is bound, 
transmigrates, and is released. Here, by ‘‘materiality’’ is meant the 
subtle body constituted by materiality. 

(64) From meditative analysis on the twenty-five principles arises 
the knowledge “‘I am not just a body; I am different from it; the body 
is not mine; I am different from it.’’? This knowledge is complete and 
free from doubt, and thus, is pure and isolated; that is to say, this pure 
absolute knowledge is liberation. 

(66) Since both materiality and consciousness are ubiquitous, is it 
not likely that another body would emerge again as a result of their 
association ? The answer is that no further creation takes place, since 
the motives for the individual ‘dance’ of life have been fulfilled 
(namely, experience and emancipation). Now that materiality has 
been seen by consciousness, both have their purposes achieved. Even 
though both are ubiquitous and, hence, will remain conjoined, there 
is no purpose served by the production of another individual body. 
This can be explained by the parable of the creditor and the debtor. 
The creditor keeps on approaching the debtor for his money and fin- 
ally after the lapse of considerable time the debtor repays it. Both 
have their purposes fulfilled ; the debtor is free from debt, and the credit- 
or gets his money. Subsequently, they may come into contact again, 
but no purpose is served thereby. So also, the later association of 
materiality and consciousness does not give rise to another individual 
body. 

(67) When true knowledge of the twenty-five principles has been 
achieved, the seven predispositions that lead to bondage (namely, 
merit, nonattachment, power, demerit, ignorance, attachment, and 
impotence) can no longer give rise to anything. As seeds being scor- 
ched by fire are incapable of sprouting forth, so with the rise of knowl- 
edge, the other predispositions cannot produce any new fruit. They 
no longer have causal efficacy. Yet consciousness (associated with 
body) continues to remain by virtue of latent dispositions. The body 
is produced by reason of merit or demerit achieved from a previous 
birth. This residue does not come to an end without yielding its fruit, 
and, thus, the body does not immediately perish when someone has 
attained knowledge. The body continues to remain for a time by vir- 
tue of merit and demerit even in the case of a man of knowledge, just 
as the potter’s wheel continues to revolve even after the potter has 
finished his work. 


XVI. THE TRANSMISSION OF THE SAMKHYA TRADITION (E67-68) 


(70) The great sage Kapila imparted this knowledge to the one 
born in the family of Asuri. Asuri in turn gave it to the Brahmin 


192 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Paficasikha, and by him it was expanded. The knowledge in brief was 
as follows: “In the beginning there was darkness (tamas) alone. In 
that darkness there was a field (ksetra) (or ksetrajta?). Darkness (tamas) 
signifies prakrti and ksetra (or ksetrajfia) signifies purusa.”? In this 
concise form it came down to Paficasikha who expanded it. A Brah- 
min of Kosala, Igvarakrsna,’ summarized the Sastitantra for the benefit 
of students. 

(71) The list of descent (parampara) by which this knowledge was 
handed down is as follows: Kapila, Asuri, Paficasikha, Gargya, Khika- 
caficali (Ulika-Baddhali) and others, a hundred, Isvarakrsna. I$vara- 
krsna of noble understanding (dryamati) gave it a concise form in a 
text of seventy verses beginning from ‘‘dubkhatraya...”’ (verse 1) to 
“‘etat pavitram...°? (verse 70), after having understood the doctrine 
properly. 

(This commentary ends with verse 71 ) 


SAMKHYASAPTATIVRTTI 


This is the second of two newly edited texts (see preceding entry on 
Samkhyavrtti) prepared by E.A. Solomon and published by Gujarat 
University.! The edition is based on a single palm-leaf manuscript pre- 
served in the Jesalmere Grantha Bhandara. The name of the author 
of this commentary starts with the syllable “ma” but the manuscript 
leaf is broken after that point and the full name cannot be recovered. 
The commentary is nearly identical to the extant version of Mathara- 
vriti (and see below under appropriate entry). In fact, argues Solomon, 
our present Matharavrtti appears to be an expanded version of this 
commentary. Unlike the Matharavrtti, however, it does not quote ex- 
tensively from the Puranas, and this suggests that it is earlier than 
Mtaharavyiti. Interestingly, it quotes extensively from an Ayurvedic 
text. There are seventy-three verses commented upon here as in the 
Miatharavrtti. Verses 72 and 73—the latter being found only here 
and in the Matharavrtti—may be, according to Solomon, the compo- 
sition of the author of the commentary, for Paramartha quotes verse 72 
and indicates that it is a verse composed by an “‘intelligent man of 
this (school). The Yuitidipika (see below under appropriate entry) 
also seems to think that verse 72 is not an original part of the text, 
yet in the Fayamangala and the Tattvakaumudi the verse is included in 
the original text.? 

Regarding date, a reasonable guess is that this commentary is also 
an old text, possibly a bit later than Samkhyaorttt (and hence dependent 
on it) but roughly contemporary with Sdamkhyavrttt and Paramartha 
(and thus composed some time in the sixth century). Ifit is the origi- 
nal of Matharavrtti—and it must be said that the similarities are many 
and striking—it would nicely confirm N. Aiyaswami Sastri’s sugges- 
tion (discussed in the Suvarnasaptati entry above) that our present 
Matharavrtti (referred to by Gunaratna as a later, revised text of the 
matharapranta or Mathara “‘school’’ ) is different from an older commen- 
tary by Mathara. 

The following summary of the text is based upon the E. A. Solomon 
edition (E) of the manuscript. 


194 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
(Summary by Esther A. Solomon) 


I. Inrropuctrory Verses: Tue Scope AND TASK OF THE 
SAmkuyA (EI-10) 


(1) The commentary begins with an obeisance to Kapila, who, out 
of compassion for the world that was drowning in the ocean of ignor- 
ance, made a boat of Samkhya for crossing over. Then the introduc- 
tory episode of Kapila—with dharma, etc., manifest in him from his 
birth, and desirous of rescuing the world from ignorance—and a repu- 
ted Brahmin (Asurisagotra and Varsasahasrayajin) is given. The dis- 
cussion of physical and mental suffering includes many references to 
Ayurveda. The places of the different humors are mentioned—the 
place of wind is up to the navel, of bile up to the heart, of phlegm up 
to the head. A list of diseases resulting from the imbalance of these 
humors is given at the end of the discussion of personal physical frus- 
tration. Mental frustration may be (a) due to separation from what is 
dear (e.g., Devadatta is separated from someone dear to him and be- 
cause he continues to think of the person, personal mental frustration 
arises), (b) due to association with what is unpleasant (e.g., Devadatta 
captured by his enemies in a battle thinks, ‘‘What will they do to me?” 
and mental frustration arises), (c) due to nonattainment of what one 
desires (e.g., once Devadatta had ample prosperity, but destiny was 
perverse, and as he keeps on pondering over past joys, he does not get 
what he wants and thus experiences mental frustration), The com- 
mentary raises the question as to whom these frustrations affect—is it 
the body, or is there a consciousness different from the body that is 
affected ? Asuri also asks if these sufferings can be eliminated. If not, 
one must suffer silently like an ox. As Devadatta, bitten by a scorpion, 
inquires as to who could remove the poison and finds the right person, 
so Asuri resorted to the revered Kapila, confident that he would show 
him the means of removing the cause of the threefold frustration. 

Now one may raise a doubt as to how inquiry arising from frustra- 
tion could eradicate it as well; the son born of the mother does not kill 
her. The answer is that we find in the world that one destroys the one 
from whom one is born, e.g., certain insects kill their mothers. 

An objection may be raised that when the cause for the removal of 
these frustrations is visible (e.g., Ayurveda with its eight branches, and 
the like), this inquiry becomes meaningless. Satisfying objects of the 
senses could bring an end to mental frustration. Similarly, visible 
causes of the removal of the frustration due to external and celestial 
factors are mentioned. Hence this inquiry is meaningless. The answer 
to this objection is that there are two drawbacks in Ayurveda—‘‘nai- 
kantabhava’’ (itis not definite, or the result does not necessarily follow) 
and “‘ndlyaniabhava’’ (it is not final, the disease may return).? So also, 


SAMKHYASAPTATIVRTTI 195 


the remedies in the case of the other frustrations do not bring about a 
definite and final cure. 

(2) There is another remedy, prescribed by the Veda, and the 
Veda tells us of a definite result—‘‘by sacrificing animals one attains 
all desires.”” Ifa Vedavadin were, therefore, to say that the injunctions 
of the Veda are capable of eradicating frustrations definitely and final- 
ly, the Samkhya teacher’s answer is: Scriptural means is like the visible 
means, incapable of definitely and finally bringing an end to suffering. 
A woman may observe all that is enjoined in the Veda and yet not 
have a son. One may pray for a life of a hundred years, and yet the 
child may die in the womb itself. Moreover, Vedic remedies involve 
impurity, for slaughter of animals and men, impure practices (incest, 
etc.) and falsehood (on occasions) are enjoined or permitted. As to 
the drinking of soma, we know that Nahusa, Indra, and Yayati had 
drunk soma but also fell from the enjoyment of the fruits of their rites. 
And when these rites last for a day or two. .. or fora year and so are 
limited, how could what they have brought about be unlimited? A 
limited lump of clay produces a pot of limited size. Thus the fruits of 
Vedic rites are limited and perish. Moreover, thereis a hierarchy 
among them, one fruit exceeding another. We know that in the world 
a poor person is frustrated on seeing a rich man, an ugly man on seeing 
a handsome one, a fool on seeing a wise man; so also in the world of the 
gods. Something that is the reverse of this—definite, final, pure, un- 
exhausted, of infinite fruits, and unsurpassed because of being isola- 
ted—is necessary. Such a means is the discriminative knowledge of the 
manifest, unmanifest, and knower. It necessarily gives rise to its fruit 
so it is definite; because of the knowledge of primordial materiality 
it is final; since it consists of restraints and restrictions it is pure; on the 
body being disintegrated one does not return to the mundane world, 
so its fruit is unending; because it is isolated and because there is 
nothing superior to it, it is unexcelled.4 (The second line is different 
from the well-known one—‘‘prakytijito vikdrajfiah sarvair duhkhair 
vimucyate.”? ) 


Il. Tue Instruments or KNnow.ence (EI1-17) 


(4) An alternative definition of reliable testimony is given: “He 
who is proficient in any work and has not known a fault even in thou- 
ght is reliable (@pta); and what is taught by him is reliable testimony 
(dptavacana).” This commentary includes arthdpatti, sambhava, abhava, 
pratibhd (or pratibhana), aupamya, and cesta in anumdna, and aitihya in 
Gptavacana. Aitihya is explained as the proper (correct) recollection of 
the VedaSruti in a Sasira; that is to say, the Dharmasasiras. Illustrations 
are given for all these instruments of knowledge. Knowable objects 
are those that can be known by an instrument of knowledge. Know- 


196 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ables consist of 25 principles of which some are known by perception, 
some by inference, and some by verbal testimony. 

(6) On seeing a vikdra (child) we infer that the séri (woman, mo- 
ther) must be such, so primordial materiality is established by sdmd- 
nyatodrsta inference. Similarly, consciousness is established by infer- 
ences, as, e.g., it is consciousness for whom materiality produces the 
lirga (intellect, etc.). Thus the supersensuous materiality and con- 
sciousness can be established by inference, and what is manifest can be 
established by perception. 

(8) Primordial materiality is ‘subtle’? because it is not characteri- 
zed by words, etc., and itis by reason of this subtlety that it is not ap- 
prehended, and not because it is nonexistent. How is it then apprehen- 
ded? Seeing the effect we infer the existence of the cause, just as seeing 
the Nyagrodha tree we infer that there is something powerful that gives 
rise to the Nyagrodha tree which is its effect. But there is no effect of 
a hare’s horn from which it could be inferred. Therefore, primordial 
materiality is existent and is inferred from its effects. 


Ilf. THe Notion or PREEXISTENT Errect (E17-18) 


(9) The discussion here is meant to refute the asatkaryavadins. The 
following five reasons prove that the effect (intellect, etc.) exists in 
materiality before its production: (a) because what is nonexistent 
cannot be produced, e.g., oil from sand, the daughter of a barren 
woman, etc., (b) because of the need for an appropriate material 
cause —one desirous of curds uses milk. If the effect were nonexistent, 
he would have used water for getting it, but he does not do so. We 
therefore know that the effect (intellect, etc.) is existent in materiality. 
(c) Because of the impossibility of all things coming from all things. 
In this world, a thing is produced from that in which it exists, e.g., oil 
from sesamum; ghee from curds, etc. If the effect were nonexistent, 
everything could be produced from everything: silver, gold, pearls, 
coral, etc., could have been produced from grass, dust, sand, etc. 
(d) Because something can produce only what it is capable of, e.g., 
an artisan being equipped with instruments, material, time, and means, 
pro-luces from an adequate cause that which is capable of being pro- 
duced, and not what cannot be made from an inadequate cause. For 
example, a capable potter produces a pot out of a lump of clay. A pot 
cannot be produced from a jewel, etc. (ce) Because the effect is of the 
nature of the cause; kodrava grows from kodrava seeds, and rice from 
rice seeds; otherwise rice could have been produced from fodrava seeds. 


IV. Tue MaAnirest anp UNMANIFEST ASPECTS OF 
MatTeriALity (E19-23) 


(10) Materiality is the cause (hetu), and intellect, etc., are the 


SAMKHYASAPTATIVRTTI 197 


effects (hetumat). The intellect is derived from primordial materiality, 
egoity from intellect, and so on. Cause (hetu) is twofold: karaka (pro- 
ductive) and jidpaka (cognitive). Materiality, intellect, egoity, and 
the subtle elements are the fourfold productive causes; and miscon- 
ception, dysfunction, contentment, attainment, and the supporting cre- 
ation (anugraha) are the fivefold cognitive causes. What results from 
this twofold cause is the “‘effect”? (hetumat). At the time of trans- 
migration, the effect (intellect, etc.) belonging to the subtle body 
associated with the thirteenfold organ, transmigrates, so it is “mobile.” 
A thing is ‘‘supported”’ in that from which it is produced: intellect is 
supported in primordial materiality, egoity in intellect, and so on. 
The five gross elements are dissolved in the subtle elements and so on. 
Thus, the effect (intellect, etc.) is mergent (linga). As in the world, 
so long as the father is living the son is not independent, so intellect, 
etc., are dependent (paratantra); intellect is dependent on primordial 
materiality, egoity on intellect and so on. After explaining these 
characteristics of the manifest, the commentary says that the unmani- 
fest has the opposite characteristics. It comments on the reverse nature 
in each case. 

(11) The points of similarity between manifest and unmanifest are 
shown. The effects (intellect and so forth) are possessed of three consti- 
tuents (saétva, rajas, tamas); so also is materiality possessed of them; 
for it is said that the effect is of the nature of the cause. Black cloth 
only can be produced out of black threads. So, seeing that the mani- 
fest world is possessed of three constituents, one infers that primordial 
materiality also has three constituents. No clear-cut division can be 
made between the manifest and the constituents, for what are the 
constituents is the manifest, and what is the manifest are the consti- 
tuents. So also, materiality cannot be distinguished. Hence, the mani- 
fest and the unmanifest are not distinctively different (avivekin). This 
commentary, although showing that the consciousness has the opposite 
characteristics, and is like the manifest or unmanifest in others, speci- 
fically states that consciousness is not common or one: One conscious- 
ness is not common as an enjoyer to different bodies. Rather, conscious- 
nesses are many. 


V. Tse Turee Constituents (E23-26) 


(12) Various qualities are mentioned as being characteristic of 
each constituent:(a) intelligibility constituent (sativa): agrecableness, 
(priti), satisfactoriness (sukha), propriety (djava), kindness (marddava), 
truth (satya), honesty (Sauca), modesty (Ari), intelligence (buddhi), 
purity (suddhi), patience (sama), compassion (anukampd), knowledge 
(jfidna), etc.—all these are characteristic of the predominance of sativa; 
(b) activity constituent (rajas): disagreeableness (apriti), frustration 


198 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(dukkha), hatred (dvesa), malice (droha), envy (matsara), blame (nin- 
da), pride (stambha), sexual desire (utkantha), dishonesty (niki), mur- 
der (vadha), binding (bandhana), cutting (chedana), etc.; (c) inertia 
constituent (famas): oppressive (visdda), confusion (moha), ignorance 
(ajfidna), intoxication (mada), sloth (dlasya), fear (bhaya), depression 
(dainya), heterodoxy (ndstikya), insanity (unmdda), sleep (svapna), etc. 
(13) An opponent objects that sativa, rajas, and tamas should not 
be regarded as distinct when their nature is such that one can produce 
the functions of all. This is wrong, however. Each constituent has its 
exclusive characteristic and so it is different from the other two. 


VI. Tue INFERENCES THAT EsTABLISH THE EXISTENCE AND MAKEUP 
OF PrimorDIAL MATERIALITY AND Consciousness (E26-35) 


(14) It has been said that the manifest is made up of three consti- 
tuents, not distinctly different, etc.: how can it be known that the un- 
manifest also has these characteristics ? This is proved from the pos- 
session of the three constituents. What is constituted is not distinc- 
tively different (avivikta), what is not distinctly different is objective 
(visaya), what is objective is general (sdémdnya), what is general is 
nonconscious (acefana), and what is nonconscious is productive in 
nature (prasavadharmin). Thus all these characteristics are established 
just on the basis of the constituted nature of the unmanifest. The effect 
and the cause are present together. Where the threads are, the cloth 
is; and where the cloth is, the threads are. He who sees the threads 
sees the cloth and vice versa. So also is the relation between manifest 
and unmanifest. Primordial materiality is distant and the manifest is 
close. He who sees the manifest sees the unmanifest and the Yogin who 
sees primordial materiality sees also the manifest. Thus, since the effect 
and the cause are found together, it is established that the unmanifest 
is endowed with the characteristics of not being clearly distinct, etc. 
Moreover, the effect is of the same nature as the cause. This is what 
we see in the world. From a bitter nimba tree, we get bitter juice, and 
from a sweet tree we get the sweet juice of grapes, etc. 

(15) But how can it be said that primordial materiality and pure 
consciousness exist when they are not apprehended ? Things may exist 
even when not apprehended, e.g., the peak of the Himalaya. 

(16) The one primordial materiality produces manifold effects 
because of the interaction of the three constituents. As the streams 
come together to form the Ganga, and as threads unite to produce the 
cloth, so the three constituents in creative nature together produce the 
manifest. It is to be noted that a cause produces an effect by (a) under- 
going modification or (b) not undergoing modification. A lump of 
clay, a stick and threads, etc., are the cause of a pot without under- 
going modifications, whereas milk is the cause of curds by a process 


sSAMKHYASAPTATIVRTTI 199 


of modification. What sort of cause is materiality ? It is a cause that 
works by means of transformation. (How then can the diversity be 
accounted for?) As water turns into snow in the Himalayas or as 
sugarcane juice is modified into different kinds of sugar, etc., or as 
milk is turned into whey, curds, etc., so one unmanifest materiality is 
turned into the (personal) intellect, egoity, etc., and into the (exter- 
nal) cold, heat, etc., and into the (celestial) gods, gandharvas, etc. 

If it is asked how the three worlds produced from one materiality 
are so unlike each other—gods are happy, human beings are miser- 
able, and lower beings stupefied or deluded—the answer is: because 
of the difference in the respective substrata of the constituents. As 
water of uniform nature falls from the sky and reaching the earth 
assumes different tastes and conditions, so the three worlds produced 
from one materiality become different owing to the unevenness of the 
constituents, sattva being predominant among the gods, rajas among 
human beings, and tamas among lower beings, which accounts for their 
happiness, misery, and delusion respectively. 

(17) Some teachers say that there is not a supreme self (paramdt- 
man) different from the body, organs, intellect, etc. Theansweris: asin 
the case of a sheath for a sword, so there is a self different from the body, 
and it is subtle like materiality. In the explanation of “‘basis’’ (adhis- 
thdna) a quotation from Sastitanira is given: ‘‘Materiality is active, 
having consciousness as its basis” (purusddhisthitam pradhanam pravar- 
tate). “Subjective experience”’ is explained thus: there are six tastes: 
seeing food possessed of these, an enjoyer is established—there is an 
enjoyer whose food this is. So, seeing the manifest and unmanifest 
materiality, it is established that there is this highest self or conscious- 
ness of whom the manifest and the unmanifest is the object of enjoy- 
ment (bhojana). 

(18) By means of the above-mentioned five reasons we understand 
that there is consciousness over and beyond the body. A question 
arises: is there one consciousness in all the bodies, or is there a consci- 
ousness in each body ? This doubt arises because teachers hold differ- 
ent views. The followers of the Veda say that one consciousness is 
apprehended in all bodies like one thread running through all the 
beads (jewels). Or are there consciousnesses like the ‘‘jalacandra’’ 
(moon in the water)—i.e., numerous moons seen in the river, well, 
pond, sea, etc.? Is there one consciousness according to the first ana- 
logy, or are there many consciousnesses like the numerous moons ? 
The answer is: there are many consciousnesses: (a) because of the 
individual restriction seen in respect of birth, death, and organs. Some 
are of low birth, some of middling, and some of high birth. If there 
were one consciousness, one and the selfsame would be of low birth 
and high birth; but some are low, some middling, and some high. 
Hence, there is a plurality of consciousnesses. This individual restric- 


200 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tion is seen in the case of death. ‘‘My brother is dead,”’ ‘“My father is 
dead” (that is to say, death pertains individually to each), Hence, 
there is a plurality of consciousnesses. Some interpret the first reason 
(a) differently. In this world when at some time someone dies, ex- 
actly then another dies. If there be one consciousness, all would die 
on one dying, and all would be born on one being born, but we find 
that others die. Hence, there is a plurality of consciousnesses. ‘‘Func- 
tional capacities’ (karanantyama) signifies the sense capacities. Some 
are deaf, others are not deaf, some blind, others not, and so on. So 
those with impaired capacities are different and those with unimpaired 
capacities are different. Thus, because of the individual restriction in 
respect of the sense capacities we see that there are many conscious- 
nesses. (b) The actions of different individuals take place noncon- 
currently. There are people with different motives. One acts being 
motivated by merit (dharma), another by desire (dma), and a third 
by liberation (moksa). A Brahmin is engaged in the work of a Brah- 
min, a Ksatriya in that of a Ksatriyaandsoon. Thus, consciousnesses 
are many. (c) There is difference in the respective predominance of 
the constituents. A Brahmin had three sons—all costudents and born 
of the selfsame parents. Yet one was dominated by sativa and was 
intelligent, happy, and pure. The second had rajas predominant, was 
miserable, and was of wicked intellect; and the third had tamas pre- 
dominant and was deluded. Hence, there is a plurality of conscious- 
nesses. 

(19) Is consciousness a doer or a nondoer ? We hear in the world: 
consciousness goes, runs, stands; this was done by consciousness. The 
teachers who are followers of the Veda say that consciousness is a doer; 
and so also the Vaifesikas. Because of this difference of opinion there 
is doubt. The (Samkhya) answer is that consciousness is a nondoer. 
Devoted to restraints and restrictions, an ascetic is living in a town. 
Whereas the citizens are performing their functions—sacrificing, agri- 
culture, trade, etc.—he is just a witness; he experiences cold and heat 
that come according to the seasons. Similarly, consciousness (ksetra- 
jiia) in the midst of the manifold modifications of the constituents is 
just a witness. Unlike the monk telling the quarreling citizens that 
their action was good or bad, he is just indifferent and has nothing 
to do with anyone. He is neither a doer, nor one who provokes to 
action. 


VII. Tse Association on Proximiry oF MATERIALITY AND 
Consciousness (E35-37) 


(20) Various kinds of mutual contact (samyoga) are listed (see 
Matharavrtti for enumeration), but all are rejected in favor of the Sam- 
khya teleological view (arthahetuka). 


SAMKHYASAPTATIVRTTI 201 


(21) The word ‘“‘tat’’ in “‘tatkrtah sargah” is explained as referring 
to the association between materiality and consciousness. As by the 
union of a woman and a man, a son is born, so there is the production 
of the empirical world by the contact of materiality and consciousness. 


IX. Tue Funcrioninc or THE THIRTEENFOLD INsTRUMENT (E38-53) 


(23) Intellect is characterized by reflectively discerning, e.g., “This 
is a post; this is a man.’ Meritorious behavior (dharma) is character- 
ized by yama (restraint) and ntyama (restriction) and is taught to the 
people of different varnas and aframas. The five restraints and restric- 
tions are explained as in Sdamkhyavrtti. Continence (brahmacarya) is 
broadly defined as desisting from the attachment to all pleasures— 
sexual or others. In the exposition of the t@masa form of intellect, the 
commentary is quite elaborate. The ten vices contrary to the res- 
traints and restrictions are mentioned as constituting demeritorious 
behavior. “Ignorance” signifies the lack of apprehension of materiality 
and consciousness and obsession for grammar and similar worldly 
pursuits; ‘‘attachment’’ signifies passion for or attachment to objects 
and to materiality. Impotence signifies not having the eight attain- 
ments. From intellect possessed of four sdtivika forms and four tdémasa 
forms is produced egoity. 

(27) Mind is an organ of action among the organs of action and 
an organ of knowledge among the organs of knowledge, as Devadatta 
does the work of a cowherd among cowherds, of a Brahmin among 
Brahmins, and of a wrestler among wrestlers. The mind is such be- 
cause it operates with respect to the functioning both of the organs of 
knowledge and of the organs of action. It is an organ because of 
similarity of characteristics, for like the organs of knowledge and 
the organs of action, the mind also is produced from the sdttvika 
egoity. 

A question arises: by whom are the eleven capacities created—by 
consciousness, by God, or by a thing’s own nature? It may be argued 
that primordial materiality, intellect, and egoity are insentient, so the 
organs grasping their respective objects must have been created by the 
sentient consciousness of God or nature. According to Samkhya, the 
difference of the organs is in accordance with the particular modi- 
fications that the constituents undergo. The eleven capacities grasp 
their respective objects. Another questions arises: Who put these or- 
gans in their own places? Was it consciousness or God or nature? 
This is refuted as above, the Samkhya answer being that it was the 
constituents present in egoity that located the organs in their own 
places. Therefore, it is owing to the particular modification of the 
constituents and owing to the difference of the external objects of the 
organs that the organs are different. 


202 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(30) In perception, intellect, egoity, mind, and one of the senses 
function simultaneously or successively. In fact, the functioning is 
always successive, but the time between the functioning is so little that 
the functioning is said to be simultaneous. To illustrate this, the exam- 
ple of Devadatta going on a road and having a doubt whether a thing 
at a distance is a post or a man is given. The eye sees form; the mind 
reflects on it; egoity conceives; and intellect arrives at decisive knowl- 
edge. Such is the case with the other senses also. 

(32) ‘Seizing’ refers to the capacities, “holding” refers to egoity, 
and ‘illuminating’ refers to the intellect; but surprisingly, imme- 
diately afterward the action capacities are said to seize and hold the 
thing manifested by the sense capacities; e.g., the hand seizes and 
holds a pot manifested by a light. 


X. Tue Sustre ann Gross ELEMENTS (E53-55) 


(38) The subtle elements are nonspecific inasmuch as they are 
characterized by happiness and are the objects of the gods. Even 
among the gods, of course, rajas and tamas are certainly present, but 
sattva is predominant. The objects of the gods are nonspecific, whereas 
those of human beings are physical (gross) and are characterized by 
happiness, misery, and delusion, and are specific. 

(39) At the beginning of the creation of all three worlds, subtle 
bodies are constituted out of the five subtle elements. This subtle body 
enters the mother’s womb; and the mother’s blood and the father’s 
semen are assimilated with it. The juice of what the mother eats or 
drinks is assimilated to what is contributed by the father and the 
mother. This enables the child’s body to grow. The shape of the sub- 
tle body becomes like that of the external body—hands, feet, etc. The 
learned say that the external body has six constituents—blood, flesh, 
and hair are generated from the mother, and muscles, bones, fat from 
the father. Thus, this external body is assimilated with the subtle 
body. When the child emerges from the mother’s womb at the time 
of birth, it begins to assimilate unto itself the external world. Thus, 
the specific components of the human body are threefold—(a) the 
subtle, (b) what is generated by the parents, and (c) the gross ele- 
ments. The prefix “pra” in “‘prabhitaih’’ (“gross elements’’) signifies 
that earth (the external gross elements), etc., are meant. These are 
the threefold specific components and are the basis for comfortable, 
uncomfortable, and bewildering experiences. The subtle bodies pro- 
duced in the initial creation are constant. They transmigrate, impelled 
by the merit and demerit accrued in the course of gross embodiments. 
At the time of death the part contributed by the parents leaves the 
subtle body and perishes, and the subtle body transmigrates. The sub- 
tle body remains constant so long as transmigration continues. So long 


SAMKHYASAPTATIVRTTI 203 


as knowledge is not produced, the subtle body continues transmigrating. 
When knowledge arises, it ceases to exist. 


XI. Tse Susriz Bony (E56-58) 


(41) The relation between the thirteenfold instrument and the 
subtle body is that of supporter-supported. The supported cannot re- 
main without the support. The picture cannot remain without the sup- 
port of wall or canvas (on which it is painted), so the thirteenfold organ 
cannot remain without the support of the subtle body made of the non- 
specific subtle elements. 

(42) Thesubtle body, in order to achieve the goal of consciousness, 
assumes many roles in the context of the efficient causes (nimitia) (viz., 
meritorious or demeritorious behavior, etc.) and what is achieved 
thereby (naimittika, viz., birth as gods, men, etc.). 


XII. Tue Basic Prepispositions (E358-67) 


(43) The predispositions that determine rebirth are threefold— 
innate (sdémsiddhika), natural (prakrtika), and derived (vaikrtika). The 
innate dispositions are four—meritorious behavior, knowledge, non- 
attachment and power—which were innate in the great sage Kapila 
born in the initial creation. The natural are the predispositions that 
arose all of a sudden in the four sons of Brahma (Sanaka and others), 
when they were sixteen years of age. The derived are those that arise 
from the instructions of teachers. Knowledge is derived from the tea- 
cher; from knowledge comes nonattachment; from nonattachment, 
merit; and from merit comes power. 

(44) What are the efficient causes and consequences ? Merit is the 
efficient cause by means of which the subtle body goes upward, i.e. 
assumes a godly existence. The divine realm is eightfold, encompass- 
ing the realms of Brahma, Prajapati, Indra, Pitrs, Gandharvas, Yaksas, 
Raksases, and Pisacas. By means of demerit the subtle body goes down- 
ward into the five kinds of lower beings: pasu (domestic animals), 
myga (wild animals), paksin (birds), sarisrpa (reptiles), sthavara (immov- 
ables, trees, etc.). Demerit is the efficient cause and going downward 
is the consequence thereof. By means of the knowledge of the twenty- 
five principles, the subtle body ceases to exist, that is to say, is finally 
released. So knowledge is the efficient cause and liberation is the con- 
sequence thereof. From the opposite, i.e., from ignorance, when one 
thinks “I am handsome’’, etc., one binds oneself to births among the 
lower beings, human beings, and gods and does not attain emancipa- 
tion. So ignorance is the efficient cause, and bondage (bandha) is the 
consequence thereof. Bondage is threefold: (i) when one conceives the 
eight generative pri:.ciples—the unmanifest, intellect, egoity, and the 


204 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


five subtle elements—as the highest (prakrtibandha), (ii) when one 
regards birth in the region of Brahma, etc., as the final good (vaikarika- 
bandha), (iii) when one uses sacrifices and religious acts for personal 
gain (daksinabandha). 

(45) Nonattachment leads to dissolution in materiality. For ex- 
ample, a person is detached; he has control over his organs; he is not 
attached to the objects of enjoyment; he is devoted to restraints and 
restrictions; only he does not have the knowledge of the 25 principles. 
By virtue of this nonattachment backed by ignorance he does not get 
liberation. But he regards himself as released when he is just merged 
in the eight generative principles. Again, at the time of transmigration 
he transmigrates, a body is produced for him in one of the three worlds. 
One who has attachment that is passionate (rdjasa) performs sacrifice, 
gives gifts (in charity) with the idea that he would be happy in the next 
world. Due to this attachment there is transmigration—birth among 
the gods, human beings, lower beings, or inanimate things. Attach- 
ment is the efficient cause, and transmigration (samsdra) is the conse- 
quence thereof. By means of power consisting of the eight attainments, 
there is nonobstruction in respect of all that is desired, but not attach- 
ment. Here power is the efficient cause and nonobstruction is the con- 
sequence thereof. And from the reverse of this (i.e., from impotence) 
there is obstruction, i.e., nonobtainment of what is desired. Here im- 
potence is the efficient cause and obstruction the consequence thereof. 
Thus, there are eight efficient causes and eight consequences resulting 
from them. This is the sixteen-fold nimittanaimittika sarga. 

(46) The nimittanaimittika sarga is known as the intellectual crea- 
tion (pratyayasarga), because it arises from the intellect. It is again four- 
fold—misconception, dysfunction, contentment, and perfection. Mis- 
conception signifies doubtful knowledge. “Is it a post or a man?” 
Second, seeing a post, a man does not know the difference. This is 
dysfunction. Third, he does not want either to doubt or to know. This 
is contentment. Fourth, the thing being seen, he sees a creeper climb- 
ing up the thing and a bird sitting on it and he has the determinate or 
certain knowledge, ‘“‘This is a post.’? This is attainment. Due to the 
impact of the imbalance of the three constituents, when one or the 
other of the constituents is predominant, and the others subdued, there 
arise 50 varieties of these four kinds of intellectual disposition, viz., 
5 kinds of misconception, 28 kinds of dysfunction, 9 kinds of content- 
ment, and 8 kinds of attainment. 

(48) (a) Darkness (tamas) is eightfold. One who recognizes the 
eight generative principles as the highest merges into these and merged 
into these thinks that he is liberated. This is the eightfold darkness. 
(b) Gods like Brahma, Indra, and others, being attached to power 
(namely, the eight attainments), do not attain liberation and when 
power is exhausted, they transmigrate. This is the eightfold confusion 


SAMKHYASAPTATIVRTTI 205 


(moha). (c) The five objects of sense of the gods are characterized by 
satisfactoriness, and the five of human beings are characterized by be- 
ing satisfying, frustrating and confusing. All beings from the gods to 
the lower beings are attached to these and think that there could not 
be any higher happiness. They do not try to attain knowledge. This is 
the tenfold great confusion (mahdmoha). (d) A person frustrated with 
respect to the above-mentioned ten sense objects and eight attainments 
becomes angry, and this anger is the eighteenfold gloom (tdmisra). 
(e) Blind gloom (andhatamisra) is also eighteenfold. If, while one is 
enjoying the above eight powers and ten sense objects of the gods and 
men, one has to leave them and to be taken away by death, one ex- 
periences mental anguish. This is the eighteenfold blind gloom. Thus 
there are 62 sub-varieties of the five misconceptions. 

49, Injuries to the 11 organs together with the seventeenfold 
injuries to the intellect together make up the 28 varieties of dysfunc- 
tion. Injuries to any of the eleven organs (blindness, etc.) render them 
incapable of grasping their objects. The 17 injuries to the intellect are 
due to the failure of the ninefold contentments and eightfold per- 
fections (attainments). 

(50) There are four kinds of internal contentment: (al) Belief in 
primordial materiality. For example, someone has the knowledge of 
just materiality, but does not know whether it is eternal or noneternal, 
sentient or insentient, possessed of constituents or devoid of them, ubi- 
quitous or not. He is contented with the knowledge of just the existence 
of materiality and renounces worldly life. Such a one does not attain 
liberation. (a2) Beliefin a material basis. Someone acquires the triple 
staff, basin, gourd, black deer skin, rosary, etc., and hopes to be libe- 
rated. Being so contented, he does not acquire knowledge. Such a 
person is not released. (a3) Belief in time as ultimate. A person does 
not go to a teacher who knows the principles, for he thinks that there 
will be liberation by virtue of time (i.e., when the right time comes) ; 
he does not acquire knowledge for he feels that it will serve no purpose. 
For such a person with this complacent disposition there is no release. 
(a4) Belief in destiny. A person does not approach a teacher who 
knows the principles, for he thinks there will be release by virtue of 
destiny or providence; he does not acquire knowledge for he feels that 
it will serve no purpose, For a man with such an attitude there is no 
release. 

The remaining five contentments are external. (bl) A person feels 
that in order to acquire objects of enjoyment he has to engage himself 
in agriculture, cattle rearing, trade, etc., and this means suffering in 
the form of worry, effort, etc. He keeps himself away from the objects 
of enjoyment and rests contented. This is the fifth contentment. (b2) 
One finds that whatever wealth, grains, etc., he acquires have to be 
protected from the king, thieves, etc., so he desists from them. This is 


206 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the sixth contentment. (b3) Moreover, even when the earned things 
are protected, they get exhausted when enjoyed. Thinking thus, a 
person desists from them. This is the seventh contentment. (bt) One 
may find ways of ensuring against the evils of earning, protecting, ex- 
hausting, but our organs are never satisfied. Thinking thus, a person 
desists from the objects of enjoyment and aitains complacency. This is 
the eighth contentment. (b3) Even when one can fight against the evils 
of earning, protecting, exhausting, and nonsatisfaction, the operation 
of earning, etc., is not free from violence (himsd). He has to obstruct 
and injure other creatures in the process. Thinking thus, a person keeps 
away from the objects of enjoyment and attains complacency. This is 
the ninth contentment. These contentments signify that the person 
feels that he can obtain liberation by virtue of nonattachment alone, 
even without knowledge; but actually these contentments cannot lead 
to emancipation. (These contentments arc here provided respectively 
technical names: ambhas, salila, augha, vrsti, suldra, supara, sunetra, mari- 
cika, andhamambhasikam. The reverse of these are called atustis (non- 
contentment): anambhas, asalila, anaugha, avrsti, asuldra, asupara, asu- 
netra, amaricika, anandhamanbhasikam. ) 

(51) The eight attainments are: reflective reasoning, oral instruc- 
tion, study, the threefold destruction of frustration, acquiring knowl- 
edge from friends, and an open temperament. (The exposition of the 
first four siddhis and a part of the exposition of the fifth is missing.) 
(These attainments have been given the following technical names by 
the early teachers: tara, sutdra, taranyanta, pramoda, pranvudita, modamana, 
ramyaka, sadapramudita. The reverse of these are the asiddhis: atara, 
asutdra, atdrayanta, apramoda, apramudita, amodamana, aramyaka, asada- 
pramudita.) As an elephant curbed by a hook can be controlled easily, 
so one hindered or checked by misconception, dysfunction, and con- 
tentment does not attain knowledge. So one must avoid these and re- 
sort to the attainments. True knowledge results from the attainments, 
and from true knowledge there will be emancipation. 

(52) Predispositions cannot exist without the subtle body and the 
subtle body cannot exist with the dispositions. That is to say, the linga- 
sarga and bhdvasarga arose in the initial creation. 


XU. Tue Evpiricar Worip (E67-70) 


(53) There is a third creation known as the empirical world. In 
it, the divine order is eightfold, relating to Brahma, Prajapati, Indra, 
Pitr, Gandharva, Yaksa, Raksasa, and Pigaca. The order of lower 
beings is fivefold: pasu (cattle, animals), mrga (wild animals), paksin 
(birds), sarisrpa (reptiles) and sth@vara (immovables). The human 
order is one from Brahmins to low classes (candéla). 

(54) The upper, cightfold creation from Brahma to the Pisaca is 


SAMKHYASAPTATIVRTTI 207 


dominated by sativa (though rajas and tamas are there), and the gods 
are mostly happy. The lower, fivefold creation from animal to immov- 
able is dominated by tamas, and the middle creation of human beings 
is dominated by rajas (and characterized by frustration). This 
fourteenfold creation from Brahma to a blade of grass is the empirical 
world. 

(55) A question arises: who is it among the gods, inen, and lower 
beings who experiences satisfaction and frustration? The answer is 
given that it is the sentient consciousness that is the basis for the experi- 
ences of the suffering of old age and death. Creative nature and its 
effects are insentient: the consciousnesses are sentient, and, thus, it is 
consciousness that experiences frustration. How long does the con- 
sciousness experience frustration? Until the essential core (liga) con- 
sisting of intellect, etc., recedes or retires. And when the essential core 
recedes, consciousness attains emancipation. 

(56) This creation, starting with intellect and ending with the 
gross elements, was brought about by materiality. Now, it may he 
asked why this creation was brought about. It was for the sake of the 
release of each consciousness so that the consciousnesses in the world 
of gods, man, and lower beings could atttain emancipation. 


XV. Lisperation Anp Isotation (E74-79) 


(62) In the world, the sista (learned, well-instructed) say that 
consciousness is bound, consciousness is freed, consciousness trans- 
migrates. In fact, consciousness is not bound, because it is ubiquitous, 
unchanging, immobile and a non-doer. Since it is not bound, it is not 
freed. It is ubiquitous so it does not transmigrate. Consciousness is 
all-pervading. Those who do not know consciousness say that it is 
bound, released, and transmigrates. What, then, is released? What 
transmigrates? Itis materiality that binds itself, frees itself, and trans- 
migrates. 


XVI. THe TRANsMISSION OF THE SAMKHYA TRaADiTION (79-81 ) 


(70) Kapila imparted the doctrine of the Samkhya to Asuri. Asuri 
in turn imparted it to Paficasikha, and Paficasikua, imparted it to 
many disciples. A passage is quoted: ‘‘In the beginuing there was only 
darkness. In that darkness the ‘knower of the field’ (Ksetrajita) function- 
ed.”? The darkness refers to materiality. The “knower of the field” 
refers to consciousness. The term “‘doctrine’’ (tantra) signifies Sasfi- 
tantra—that Sastra in which sixty topics (padértha) are taught. Having 
mastered the Sastitantra, USvarakrsna became proficient. He then 
summarized the Sastitantra. 


(71) This knowledge descended in a line of pupils—Kapila, Asuri, 


208 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Paficasikha, Bhargava, Uliika, Valmiki, Harita, and others. Isvara- 
krsna inherited the tradition from them. 

(72) All the subjects that have been stated in the Sastitantra have 
been stated in the Saptati (collection of 70 verses) .SK 47 speaks of the 
fifty intellectual dispositions (fratyaya); and there are ten fundamental 
topics, namely, astitvam, ekatvam, arthavativam, pardrthyam, anyatvam, 
nivyttih, yogah, viyogah, bahavah purusah sthitih farirasya ca Sesavrttih. (See 
Introduction to the present volume for translation.) The five reasons 
in verse 15 establish the ekatva (oneness) and arthatva (necessity) of 
primordial materiality. Verse 17 establishes its pararthata (being meant 
for another), “‘tadviparitas tathd ca pumdn’’ (verse 11) establishes the anya- 
tua (difference) between materiality and consciousness. Verse 21 
establishes the nivrtti (cessation) of materiality. Verse 21 establishes 
the samyoga (contact), and verse 68, the viyoga (separation, dissocia- 
tion). Verse 18 establishes the bahuiva (plurality) of purusas; “‘cakra- 
bhramavat’’ (verse 67) establishes fesavrtti. Thus, sixty subjects are taught 
in the Sastitantra. The same sixty are taught in the Saptati. Only the 
parables (illustrative stories) and the dialectical discussions are left 
out. 

(73) How could this tiny text state all the subjects? Since the Sasti- 
tantra is vast, it has been summarized in this text. It is fastra—that by 
which people are summoned from the wrong path. There is consider- 
ation of doer, enjoyer, object of enjoyment, and emancipation. Or, 
it is called “‘fastra’”’ because it teaches about suffering. Regarding con- 
tent, this Sapiati is not lacking in anything. As even a huge body can 
be reflected even in a small mirror, so inthis tiny fdstra there is the 
manifestation of the complete Sastitantra. 


GAUDAPADA 


If one does not accept the identity of the Gaudapada of the Samkhya- 
karikabhasya with the early Vedantin Gaudapada of the Mandikya- 
karika, then nothing is known about Gaudapada the Samkhya writer 
other than the fact that he wrote a commentary on the Karikd that has 
much in common with Paramartha’s Chinese translation, and with the 
Samkhyavrtti, Sdmkhyasaptativriti and Méatharavrtti. As we have been 
suggesting, these five commentaries bear astrong family resemblance, 
and, although they are not by any means identical, they all appear to 
have used a common original and may, in addition, be dependent to 
some extent on one another. E. A. Solomon, for example, has pointed 
out that Gaudapada’s Bhasya appears to follow both the Samkhyaortti 
and Paramartha’s Chinese translation, whereas the Matharaortti appears 
to be heavily dependent on the Samkhyasaptativrtti.1 Among the five, 
the Matharavrtti (see below under appropriate entry) is clearly late 
(ninth century or later) and may well represent a later attempt to 
systematize and expand the earlier four commentaries with the Sdm- 
khyavrtti being used as the core text in the expansion. In any case, in 
the absence of additional evidence, the Bhdsya of Gaudapada can be 
placed at a date that is rougnly contemporary with Paramartha, the 
Samkhyavrtti and the Samkhyasaptativorttt, that is to say, some time in the 
sixth century. As mentioned earlier, Gaudapada comments only on 
the first sixty-nine verses of the Karika. 

If one accepts the identity of Gaudapada the Samkhya writer with 
the early Vedantin Gaudapada of the Mandikyakarika, then one 
gains a certain confirmation for the above-suggested dating around 
500 or shortly thereafter, for there is now a general consensus that the 
Vedantin Gaudapada is to be dated about 500 of the Common Era 
(based upon III.5 of the Manditkyakarikad, cited in Bhavaviveka’s 
Tarkajvala, which was composed toward the middle of the sixth cen- 
tury). The arguments pro and con for identifying the two Gauda- 
padas are not especially strong on either side. The arguments against 
identity are basically two: (a) the philosophical views of the two Gauda- 
padas are clearly different; and (b) the Gaudapada of the Samkhya- 


210 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


karikabhasya does not appear to have the philosophical depth of the 
Gaudapada of the Mandakyakérikaé. Both arguments are trivial and 
can be easily answered. Regarding the former, it is hardly surprising 
that the philosophical views are different, since each text addresses a 
different philosophical subject area (that is to say, Samkhya and early 
Vedanta). Regarding the latter, it is hardly surprising that an ele- 
mentary or introductory commentary on a text would come across as 
having less philosophical depth (namely, Gaudapada’s Sdmkhyakarika- 
bhdsya) than a text in which an author is making a specific effort to 
set forth his own original philosophical views (namely, Gaudapada’s 
Mandikyakarika). The arguments in favor of identity appear also to 
be basically two: (a) in this early period in the history of Indian philos- 
ophy it is not at all anomalous that someone such as Gaudapada 
should be interested in and influenced by Samkhya just as he appears 
to have been interested in and influenced by Madhyamika Buddhism; 
and (b) there are a number of quotations from the Brahmanical tradi- 
tion in the Gaudapadabhasya (for example, the Rgveda, Bhagavadgita, 
and so forth) , which suggest that the author may have been an early 
Vedantin. These are also trivial arguments because they both beg the 
question. Anybody studying philosophy in the sixth century would 
have been interested in Samkhya, and almost anybody writing in 
Sanskrit (with the possible exception of some Buddhists) would have 
been inclined to quote from well-known Brahmanical sources. The 
issue, however, is whether the Gaudapada of the Mandikyakarika 
can. be specifically linked with the author of the Sdmkhyakarikabhdsya 
(by a quotation, for example, or evena few vague parallels). Un- 
happily, such specific evidence is simply not available, and the issue 
of the identity of the two Gaudapadas finally comes down to a matter 
of personal taste or bias.? 

It might be noted, finally, that Alberuni, in his account of Samkhya 
in the eleventh century of the Common Era, clearly uses the Samkhya- 
karika.3 He also makes reference to acertain anchorite by the name 
of ‘“‘“Gauda” who could well be the Gaudapada of the Sdmkhyakarika- 
bhasya. Unfortunately, the reference might also be to the Vedantin 
Gaudapada, for Alberuni also discusses Vedanta and Yoga. 

The edition and translation (ET) used for the following summary 
is that of T. G. Mainkar, translator, The Samkhyakarika of [svarakrsna 
with the Commentary of Gaudapada (Poona : Oriental Book Agency, 1964). 


SAMKHYAKARIKABHASYA 
(Summary by Gerald F. Larson) 
I. InrRopuctory VERsEs: Tae Scope anp Task oF SAMKuYA (ET1-10) 


(1) In two introductory verses, homage is made to Kapila who 


GAUDAPADA 211 


provided a boat (namely, the Samkhya) for crossing the ocean of ignor- 
ance, and this commentary (by Gaudapada) is characterized as being 
a brief and clear statement that clarifies the meaning of the verses for 
the benefit of students. 

Kapila is one of the seven great sages (maharsi) (including, in addi- 
tion, Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana, Asuri, Vodhu, and Paficagikha). 
Kapila himself was born already in possession of the four constructive 
innate predispositions (namely, meritorious behavior, discriminating 
knowledge, nonattachment, and power), and because of his great 
compassion, he taught the twenty-five principles of the Samkhya to 
Asuri. There is an ancient verse (here quoted) asserting that anyone 
who truly knows the twenty-five principles attains liberation regardless 
of the stage of life or the particular group to which he belongs. 

Internal frustration encompasses both mental (separation from what 
is satisfying, etc.) and bodily (fever, etc.) afflictions. External frus- 
tration encompasses afflictions arising from external beings and things 
(including insects, other men, stones, etc.). Divine or celestial frus- 
tration encompasses afflictions coming from the gods, fate, natural dis- 
asters, etc. To the objection that everyday remedies (Ayurvedic medi- 
cine, etc.) are available to cope with these frustrations, the answer is 
given that such remedies are neither certain (avasya) nor permanent 
(nitya). Hence, a philosophical enquiry (vividisd) is required. 

(2) Ifeveryday remedies are neither certain and permanent, then 
surely Vedic (dnusravika, dgama) remedies are capable of removing 
frustration. ‘‘We drank the Soma, and have become immortal,” etc., 
and other Vedic passages indicate that frustrations can be overcome 
by Vedic sacrifices, etc. Unfortunately, however, this is not the case, 
because sacrificial rites involve (a) the slaughter of animals (and, 
hence, imply “‘impurity”); (b) being overcome by time or, in other 
words, temporality, even on the level of the gods as with, Indra, etc. 
(and, hence, imply ‘‘destruction”) and (c) unequal benefits for per- 
sons performing the sacrifices (and, hence, imply ‘‘excess”’ or ‘‘surpass- 
ability’). f 

That which is superior to both everyday remedies and Vedic reme- 
dies is the discriminating knowledge (vijfidna) of the difference bet- 
ween the manifest (vyakta, including intellect, ego, the five subtle ele- 
ments, the eleven sense capacities and five gross elements), the unmani- 
fest (avyakta, or primordial materiality) and the “knower’’ (conscious- 
ness ). 

(3) With respect to the issue of generation, the following: intellect 
is generated from primordial materiality, but it, in turn, produces 
egoity; egoity, produced from intellect, produces, in turn, the five 
subtle elements. The subtle clements, produced from egoity, in turn, 
produce the gross elements, each subtle element producing one gross 
element. Hence, the subtle element of sound produces ether; touch 


212 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


produces wind; smell produces earth; form produces light; and taste 
produces water. 


II. Tue Instruments or KNOWLEDGE (ET12-25) 


(4) It is necessary to establish the instruments of knowing and to 
determine which things are known by what instruments. Any claim to 
know the world presupposes that the instruments of knowing have been 
established. The sense capacities, which make perception possible, 
are the ear, the skin, the eye, the tongue, and the nose’ and these 
perceive respectively sound, touch, form, taste, and smell., An object 
comprehended neither by perception nor inference may be known 
through reliable testimony (dptavacana). This latter includes such items 
as “Indra is king of the gods’’, “‘there is a country called Kuru in the 
north’? and “‘there are nymphs in heaven,” etc. Also, the Veda is 
considered to be reliable testimony. A reliable person is someone who 
does his own work and is free from hatred and attachment. Such a 
person is to be believed. 

Other schools assert additional instruments of knowing, but Sam- 
khya accepts only the three that have been mentioned, because, accord- 
ing to Samkhya, these three encompass all of the rest. Jaimini, for 
example, mentions six additional instruments of knowing: presump- 
tion (arthdépatti), inclusion (sambhava), nonapprehension (abhdva), 
imagination (pratibha), tradition (aitihya), and comparison (upamdna).® 
In fact, however, these six instruments are encompassed by percep< 
tion, inference, and reliable authority. Presumption is really a variety 
of inference. Probability, negation, imagination, tradition, and analogy 
are all varieties of reliable authority.® 

That which is to be known by the three instruments of knowing 
(namely, perception, inference, and reliable testimony) include the 
twenty-five principles of the Samkhya (the manifest, the unmanifest, 
and the knower). Some of the principles are established by perception, 
some by inference, and some by reliable testimony. 

(5) With respect to definitions of the three instruments of know- 
ing, (a) perception is the reflective discerning of specific objects by 
appropriate sense capacities ; (b) inference is that knowledge which 
is preceded by knowledge of the ‘‘characteristic mark” (liga) and 
that which bears the mark (Jiigin) (as, for example, by perceiving a 
staff or danda, one infers that there is a mendicant or yati, for one 
invariably finds these two together); and (c) reliable testimony is 
knowledge made available through authoritative teachers (ptdcdrya) 
and authoritative Vedic utterances (dptasruti). 

The three kinds of inference are prior (parvavat), consequent (Sesa- 
vat), and inference based upon general correlation (samanyatodysfa). 
Prior inference is from cause to effect, as from rising clouds rain being 


GAUDAPADA 213 


inferred. Consequent inference is from effect to cause, as from a mea- 
sure of water from the sea being salty, the saltiness of thesea in general 
is inferred. Inference based on general correlation is arguing for one 
thing on the basis of another, as from noticing that there must be move- 
ment because Caitra is first in one place and then in another, and then 
arguing that the moon and the stars must move because their posi- 
tions change (even though the movement itself is not noticeable 
directly). 

(6) That which is unmanifest is established by inference based on 
general correlation. Consciousness is also established by the same type 
of inference. That which is manifest (namely, intellect and the other 
principles that are effects of prakrti) is established by means of percep- 
tion. Such items of knowledge as “‘Indra is the king of the gods,” etc., 
are established by means of reliable testimony. 

Inference based on general correlation with respect to establishing 
the existence and makeup of creative nature is based upon the three 
constituents. Inference based on general correlation with respect to 
establishing the existence and makeup of consciousness is based on the 
awareness in ordinary experience of the appearance of consciousness 
(that is to say, since it is observed that that which is manifest is uncon- 
scious (acetana), but nevertheless appears to be conscious, so there must 
be a basis or ground for consciousness apart from creative nature). 


III. Tue Notion oF Pazexistent Errect (ET25-27) 


(9) The five reasons given in support of the theory of the “‘pre- 
existent effect” (satkdryavada) are meant to answer the opposite theory 
that the effects are not preexistent in the cause (asatkaryavdda) put forth 
by the Buddhists and others. 


IV. THe MAniIrest anD UNMANIFEST ASPECTS OF 
Mareriarity (ET29-37) 


(10) In SK 8, it was said that primordial materiality, the unmani- 
fest, is similar and yet different from its effects, the manifest. In this 
verse [Svarakrsna explains how the unmanifest and manifest are differ- 
ent from one another. The manifest is caused (hefumat) by the un- 
manifest or primordial materiality, The terms ‘“‘upddana’’, “‘hetu’’, 
“‘kdrana’, and ‘“‘nimitta’? are synonyms for the word “‘cause.” The 
manifest is impermanent (anitya) in the sense that it is produced, like 
a jar. It is nonpervading (avyapin) because only primordial materia- 
lity and consciousness are all-pervading. It is mobile (sakriya) in the 
sense that it migrates (samsarati) at the time of creation. It is multiple 
(aneka) in the sense that there isa plurality of principles (intellect, 
egoity, etc.). Itis supported (4srita) in the sense that it is supported 


214 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


by the cause. It is mergent (linga) in the sense that at the time of dis- 
solution all of the principles finally merge in primordial materiality. 
It has parts (savayava), in the sense that it has sound, taste, touch, etc. 
Itis dependent (paratantra) in the sense that all of the principles are 
governed by materiality. In all of these senses, the unmanifest, primor- 
dial materiality, is the opposite of the manifest. 

(11) Both the manifest and unmanifest are made up of the three 
constituents; are not capable simply by themselves of discriminating 
(avivekin) (as, for example, “‘this is a horse’); are both objects (visaya) 
in the sense that they are objects of experience (bhojya) for conscious- 
ness; are common to all (sdmdnya) like a harlot; are not conscious 
(acetana) in the sense that they are incapable by themselves of being 
conscious of satisfaction, frustration, and confusion; and are productive 
(prasavadharmin) in that intellect, ego, and the five subtle elements are 
productive (as was described earlier in verse 3). 

Consciousness is opposite to both the unmanifest and manifest in the 
sense that consciousness is distinct from the three constituents; is that 
which enables discrimination to take place; is individual or particular 
{and not general); is conscious of satisfaction, frustration, and con- 
fusion; and is totally unproductive. 

From another perspective, however, it can be said that consciousness 
is similar to the unmanifest. In SK 10, it was said that the unmanifest 
is uncaused; all pervasive; immobile (in the sense that it does not 
“migrate” ) ; one; not itself dependent on a cause; nonmergent (in the 
sense that it does not dissolve at the time of dissolution) ; not made up 
of parts; and totally self-subsistent or independent. In all of these 
senses, consciousness is similar to the unmanifest. 


V. Tue Turee Constituents (ET38-43) 


(12) The term “purpose”? (artha) in the verse is expressive 
of capacity or power. The three constituents mutually suppress, 
support, produce, consort, and coexist with one another. They 
mutually ‘“‘suppress”’ (abhibhava) in the sense of successively dominat- 
ing one another with, first, the intelligibility constituent (sattva) 
being dominant, second, the activity constituent (rajas) being 
dominant and, finally, the inertia constituent (tamas) being domi- 
nant. They mutually “support”? (dfraya) one another like a binary 
or dyad (doyanukavat). They mutually ‘‘produce’’ (janana) in the 
sense that a jar is produced from clay. hey mutually ‘‘consort,” 
(mithuna) asa man and woman make love. Sativa is the consort of 
rajas; and rajas is the consort of sativa. Tamas is said to be the consort 
of both the other two. Finally, the constituents mutually ‘‘coexist” 
(vrttt) in the sense that each constituent produces a condition condu- 
cive not only to itself but also to the other two constituents. Thus, 


GAUDAPADA 215 


sativa, like a beautiful woman, is a joy to her husband, a trial 
to her cowives, and arouses passion in other men. Ina similar way, 
rajas and tamas likewise generate divergent conditions among the 
constituents. 

(13) The intelligibility constituent, when dominant, generates a 
sense of lightness in the limbs and clarity in the senses. The activity 
constituent, when dominant, excites or stimulates, as when a bull 
is excited by another bull. The inertia constituent, when dominant, 
generates a sense of heaviness in the limbs, and the senses become 
obtuse and incapable of precise apprehension. 

Although the three constituents are, thus, very different from one 
another, they nevertheless together produce one effect, just as the 
wick, oil, and flame of a lamp, though different in nature, work to- 
gether to generate light for the illumination of objects. 


VI, Tse Inrerences THar Estasuts Tar EXIsTENCE AND MakruP 
oF PrimorpiAL MATERIALITY AND ConscatousNess (ET44-61 ) 


(14) In verse 11, it was said that the unmanifest and the manifest 
are similar, and the question naturally arises as to how it can be 
known that the unmanifest has the same attributes or characteristics 
as the manifest. This question is answered in this verse with two 
arguments. First, negatively, it can be established that the unmanifest 
is similar to the manifest (in having the three constituents etc., as 
was set forth in verse 11) because the cause cannot be contrary to 
the effect, just as when one has a cloth one cannot argue that the 
threads are different from the cloth. In other words, it isnot possible 
for the cause to have a different makeup, than the effect. Second, 
positively, even though the unmanifest is not perceived, it can never- 
theless be established as existing, because whatever is the makeup 
of the cause is the very same as the makeup of the effect. Black cloth 
can only be produced from black thread. 

(15-16) Five arguments are given to support the existence and 
makeup of the unmanifest or primordial materiality. The thrust 
of each of the five arguments is as follows: (a) Because ‘‘the manifest 
is limited” there must be an ultimate cause that is not limited. (b) 
Because the manifest is ‘‘uniform” or “‘homogeneous,”’ there is 
“natural sequence,” as, for example, when one sees a boy perform- 
ing Vedic rites, one infers that his parents are Brahmins. (c) Be- 
cause of the observance of causal efficiency; therefore, it can be said 
that a thing can only produce what it is capable of producing, as, 
for example, a potter can make a jar but not a chariot. (d) Because 
there must be some distinction between cause and effect; therefore, 
one must have appropriate sequential modification, as, for example, 
a lump of clay produces a jar, but a jar does not produce a lump of 


216 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


clay. (e) Because there is a final reunion of the universe (vaifvaritpya) 
in the sense that the gross elements are absorbed in to the subtle 
elements, and the subtle elements into the ego, and the ego into intel- 
lect, and the intellect into primordial materiality; therefore, 
there must be an ultimate ground or source wherein all of these 
effects abide in an unmanifest state. 

For all of these reasons, ‘‘the unmanifest is the ultimate cause,” 
and the unmanifest is made up of the three constituents. Sometimes 
the constituents are in equivalent mutuality, and sometimes they 
mutually dominate one another, etc. (as was described above in the 
commentary on verse 12), The three constituents are like the three 
streams of the Ganga that come together in the hair of Siva, or are 
like threads that come together to make a cloth. The constituents 
become diversely modified, thereby accounting for the diversity 
of the manifest world, just as water from the atmosphere, though of 
one taste, becomes modified into a variety of tastes because of its 
contact with the earth. 

(18) These arguments are given to show that it is not possible to 
maintain that consciousness is one, for if consciousness were one, all 
of the issues raised in this verse having to do with the diversity of the 
manifest world could not be intelligibly interpreted. In other words, 
the one consciousness or self would be now this, now that, etc., 
and one would get caught in hopeless contradictions. 

(19) Consciousness can be compared metaphorically to the 
following :a bystander, a middle man, a wandering mendicant, and a 
spectator. 


VII. THe AssociaTION oR Proximity OF MATERIALITY AND 
Consciousness (ET62-66 ) 


(20) It appears to be the case that consciousness is the agent, 
but it has been shown that consciousness is a nonagent. How is this 
to be explained? Two illustrations are especially helpful in this 
regard. Just as a jar appears to be cold when filled with cold liquid 
or hot when filled with something hot, but, in fact, is in itself neither 
hot nor cold, so consciousness appears to be the agent though, in fact, 
all agency is accomplished by the constituents. Or again, just as a 
man who is not a thief is taken to be a thief when he happens to 
be arrested along with others who are thieves, just so consciousness 
is taken to be an agent because of its proximity to the agency of the 
three constituents. 

(21) The purpose for the coming together of creative nature and 
consciousness is to bring about the contemplation (darfana) of con- 
sciousness and liberation (kaivalya). The coming together may be 
illustrated by the story of the blind man and the lame man. 


GAUDAPADA 217 


VII. Tue Derivation or THe Basic Principtes (ET67-69) 


(22) Synonyms for the term ‘‘prakrti” are ‘“‘the principal one” 
(pradhdna), “‘the greatest’? (Brahman), “the unmanifest” (avyakta), 
“possessing much wealth” (bahudhanaka?), and “creative capacity”’ 
(maya). Synonyms for mahat or the “great one” are “‘intellect”’ 
(buddhi), ‘‘Asuri’” “‘intention” or ‘‘determination”’ (mati), ‘‘discrimina- 
tion” (khyati), “knowledge” (jfidna), and ‘‘wisdom’’ or “‘insight” 
(prajfia). Synonyms for ego or ahamkara are ‘‘the first of the ele- 
ments’? (bhiitddi), ‘‘generated”’ (vaikrta), ‘‘the bright one’”’ or “fiery 
one” (taijasa), and ‘‘self-awareness’”’ (abhimana). The five gross ele- 
ments are produced from the five subtle elements (here called par- 
amanu) as was described above in the commentary on verse 3. 


IX. THe FuNcTIONING OF THE THIRTEENFOLD 
InstruMENT (ET70-103) 


(23) The term tattva is a neuter abstract made from the pronoun 
“tad”? hence, taé-tva or ‘‘that-ness’? or ‘‘principle.” 

Intellect is said to be reflective discerning and can be glossed by 
the term ‘‘ascertainment”’ (adhyavasdya). Just as a future sprout is 
contained in a seed, so ascertainment is contained in intellect. ‘‘Ascer- 
tainment”’ means definite cognition as, for example, “‘this is a jar’ 
or “‘this is a cloth.” 

Intellect in its “‘intelligibility mode’’ (sattvika) has four forms (ripa), 
namely, meritorious behavior (dharma), knowledge (jidna), non- 
attachment (vairagya), and power (aifvarya). 

Meritorious behavior (dharma) includes mercy and charity as well 
as the restraints and restrictions as set forth in Yogasiira I1.30 and 
TI.32. 

Knowledge has three synonyms: light (prakéfa), understanding 
(avagama), and manifestation (bhana). There are two kinds of knowl- 
edge: (a) external, including the knowledge of the Vedas, the rela- 
ted six disciplines (ofritual, grammar, etc.), the Puranas, the Nyaya, 
the Mim4msa, and the Dharmafastras and (b) internal, including the 
knowledge of materiality and consciousness. External knowledge 
brings worldly acclaim. Internal knowledge provides liberation. 

Nonattachment is also twofold: (a) external, including freedom 
from the objects of sense and the correlates of earning, protecting, 
decreasing, attachment, and injury, etc., and (b) internal, includ- 
ing the desire to be free from materiality. 

Power is lordliness (ifvarabhava) and includes the eight attain- 
ments. 

Intellect in its “inertia mode’? (¢dmasa) is the opposite of these 
four forms, namely, demerit, ignorance, attachment, and impotence. 


218 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(25) The ego in its ‘‘intelligibility mode” (sdévika) produces 
the mind, the five sense capacities and the five action capacities. These 
are called sattvika because they are pure (vifuddha) and capable 
(samartha) of apprehension. The ego in its “‘inertia mode”’ (tdémasa) 
produces the five subtle elements. The productions of both modes 
are assisted by the “‘activity constituent’’ (rajas), because without the 
“activity constituent” (rajas), both the “‘intelligibility constituent” 
(sattva) and the “‘inertia constituent’ (éamas) would be incapable 
of activity. 

The ancient Samkhya teachers named the ego in its sdttvika mode 
by the term ‘‘yaikrta’”’ (‘‘generated’’), in its t@masa mode by the term 
“bhitadi” (‘the first of the elements’’), and in its activity mode by 
the term ‘‘taijasa’”’ (the “‘bright” or ‘‘fiery one’’). 

(27) Mind is both a sense capacity and an action capacity, 
because it elaborates intellectually (pravrttim kalpayati) the functions 
of both. Moreover, it is similar in structure to the sense capacities 
and action capacities—that is to say, mind is likewise produced from 
ego in its “intelligibility mode” (sdttvika). Because the mind is res- 
ponsible for intellectual elaboration, it is referred to as the ‘‘inten- 
tional” (samtkalpaka) capacity. 

The variety of these capacities together with the diversity of the 
external world is brought about by the modification of the constituents 
(gunaparinama), functioning spontaneously (svabhava). Variety and 
diversity cannot be explained as the work of God, or egoity, or intel- 
lect, or materiality, or consciousness. In the same manner, as uncon- 
scious milk functions for the nourishment of the calf (see SK57), 
so the constituents function spontaneously (svabhdva) to bring about 
all variety and diversity. 

(28) The term “‘mdtra’’ is to be construed in the sense of special 
capacity. That is to say, the eye has the special capacity to see form, 
but it cannot smell, etc. The apprehensions of form, taste, smell, sound, 
and touch are the functions of the five sense capacities. The capacities 
to speak, grasp, walk, excrete, and have sexual relations are the func- 
tions of the five action capacities. 

(29) The specific functions (and unique characteristics) of intel- 
lect, egoity, and mind have now been discussed (in terms of 
“ascertainment,” “‘self-delusion,” and ‘‘explicating”’ in SK 23, 24and 
27). In this verse the common function or common nature of the 
three is given. This common function (sdémdnyakaranavriti) has to do 
with the five vital breaths or airs (vdyu), namely, prana (in the mouth 
and nose, supportive of life itself), apana (the breath that carries away 
or downward); samana (the digestive breath for assimilating food, 
located in the center of the body); wdana or (the breath that carries 
upward or ascends between the region of the navel and the head); 
and, finally, vydna (the breath that circulates or pervades the entire 


GAUDAPADA 219 


body). (In other words, in addition to the separate psychological 
and intellectual aspects of intellect, ego, and mind, the three to- 
gether function commonly to support the physiological life of the 
organism as well, including respiration, digestion, the functioning 
of the nervous system, etc.). 

(30) Perception occurs either simultaneously or gradually. It 
occurs simultaneously when there is a direct cognition, as, for example, 
in realizing “‘this is a post.’’ In such an instance, intellect, egoity, the 
mind and asense capacity formulate the cognition simultaneously. 
When there is a doubt, however, as, for example, when one is not 
sure whether something is a post or a man, then there is gradual 
functioning. Such is the case with perception in present time. 

When, however, cognition occurs with respect to that which is past 
or future, cognition is always only gradual. With respect to cognition 
of something past, for example, the functioning of the intellect, ego, 
and mind is preceded by a prior perception. 

(31) It is to be noted that the last sentence, ‘None of these capaci- 
ties ever functions for any other purpose,” refers to the Samkhya 
rejection of God (ifvara). 

(32) The action capacities seize (dharana) and hold (dharana). The 
sense capacities illuminate (frakafa). The reference to ‘‘tenfold”’ 
(dafadha) means the five action capacities and the five sense capacities 
taken together. 

(34) The sense capacities of human beings apprehend specific, 
gross objects (sounds, smells, etc.). The sense capacities of the gods 
are also able to apprehend the nonspecific (that is to say, the 
subtle elements). The action capacity of speech has sound for its 
object, and this is true for human beings and gods. The other action 
capacities have to do with all five sense contents (namely, sound, touch, 
form, taste, and smell). 

(37) The reference to “every aspect’? means not only all objects 
but also all three times (that is, past, present, and future). The 
reference to ‘“‘subtle difference’ means that which cannot be understood 
by those who have not performed religious austerities (tapas). 


X. Tue Sustte anp Gross ExvemMents (ET104-107) 


(38) The subtle elements can only be apprehended by the gods, 
and this apprehension is only pleasurable (hence, unmixed with the 
experiences of pain and delusion). From the five subtle elements are 
produced the five gross elements (as was described in the commentary 
on verse 3), and these gross elements are apprehended by human be- 
ings as comfortable, uncomfortable, and bewildering (that is to say, 
as mixed, respectively, with satisfaction, frustration, and confusion). 

(39) The subtle body is made up of intellect, egoity, mind, the 


220 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sense capacities, the action capacities, and the five subtle elements. 
The gross body is the body produced from the mixture of seminal 
fluids that result because of sexual intercourse between father and 
mother. The gross body is sustained by the gross elements. Similarly 
the subtle body is nourished and sustained by food provided to the 
organism through the umbilical cord of the mother. In this fashion the 
embryo (made up of subtle body, gross body, and gross elements) 
slowly begins to develop a stomach, thighs, chest, head, etc., and is 
endowed with blood, flesh, tendons, semen, bones, and marrow. 
During the gestation period the embryo is wrapped in six sheaths. 
When the gestation period is finished, a baby is born from the 
mother’s womb. 

Of these specific forms (that is, subtle body, gross body, and gross 
elements), only the subtle body is permanent and transmigrates from 
life to life (into the forms of animals, deer, birds, reptiles, or plants). 
If the subtle body has been impelled continuously by meritorious 
behavior, it may transmigrate to the divine regions of Indra, etc. 
Gross bodies and gross elements perish at the moment of death and 
merge again into the undifferentiated gross elements. 


XI. Tse Sustte Bopy (ET108-115) 


(40) The subtle body is the first creation of primordial materiality. 
It is unimpeded or unrestrained until it becomes attached to a gross 
body. Moreover, the subtle body is devoid of experience, for ex- 
perience only arises through the gross body form of parents. The 
subtle body is “perfumed” or motivated by certain innate predis- 
positions, but this is to be discussed later (verse 43 and following). The 
subtle body is referred to as a “‘litga’”’ because at the time of dissolution 
(pralaya) it “merges” into primordial materiality and does not reemerge 
until that materiality begins another creative phase. 

(41) The reference to “nonspecific”? means the subtle elements. 
Moreover, ‘“‘without an appropriate support” refers both to subtle 
elements as well as to gross elements. The term “‘/i#ga’’ in this verse 
refers to the “‘thirteenfold instrument”? (namely, intellect, ego, mind, 
the five sense capacities and the five action capacities). 

(42) The reference to “efficient causes and effects” (nimittanai- 
mittika) means the innate predispositions of meritorious behavior, 
etc., which will be described subsequently. 


XII. Tue Basic Prepisposirions (ET115-138) 
(43) In verse 40 it was said that the linga or subtle body is ‘“‘perfu- 


med or motivated by basic predispositions.’’ Now, in verse 43 and 
following, these basic predispositions are to be explained. 


GAUDAPADA 221 


The predispositions, meritorious behavior, etc, are of three types: 
(a) innate (sdémsiddhika), meaning merit, etc., in one’s inherent nature; 
(b) natural (prakrtika), meaning merit, etc., in one’s nature as a result 
of previously virtuous lives, as was the case with the four sons of 
Brahman (namely, Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana, and Sanatkumara) ; 
and (c) acquired (vatkrtika), meaning merit, etc., acquired by ordi- 
nary human beings in this life because of having learned of the truth 
from a teacher. 

The predispositions reside in the intellect and determine the quality 
of life of the gross embryo. 

(44) In this verse the reference to “‘efficient causes and effects” 
nimittanaimittika (of verse 42) is explained. The phrase “‘higher forms 
of life’? (ardhva) refers to the realms of Brahma, etc. The phrase 
“‘lower forms of life’? refers to animals, deer, etc. Liberation is to be 
attained by means of the basic predisposition called knowledge. The 
content of knowledge is the twenty-five basic principles of Samkhya. 
Bondage is attained by means of the basic predisposition called igno- 
rance. It is of three types; natural (prakrtika), acquired (vaikdrika), 
and personal (daksinaka). There is a verse in the Vayu Purana (101.59- 
60) (here quoted) that asserts that these three kinds of bondage can 
only be overcome by knowledge. 

(45) The basic predisposition called “nonattachment,” when 
unaccompanied by knowledge, leads to dissolution (laya) into the 
eight generative principles. Such a person at the moment of death 
becomes dissolved into primordial materiality, intellect, egoity, and 
the five subtle elements, but subsequently migration occurs again. 
Similarly by means of the predisposition called ‘‘passion’”’ one becomes 
caught in worldly transmigration. The predisposition called ‘“‘power”’ 
leads to the lordliness already described (in verse 23), and lack of 
power or impotence leads to the contrary condition or obstruction. 

(46-47) These eight predispositions together with their eight 
effects (as have been described in verses 44-45) make up what is called 
the “intellectual creation” (pratyayasarga). The expression “‘pratyaya- 
sarga’’? means the creation of the intellect. Because of disparities 
in the reciprocal influence of the constituents (with, sometimes, sativa 
being dominant and, other times, rajas being dominant, etc.), this 
intellectual creation comes to manifest itself vis-4-vis ordinary experi- 
ence in fifty varieties. These “‘fifty varieties’? fall under four general 
types: (a) misconception, which is occasioned mainly by doubt 
(samSaya), (b) dysfunction, occasioned by a defect in one’s sense or 
action capacities; (c) contentment, occasioned by indifference or 
the lack ofa desire to know; and (d) attainment, occasioned by correct 
apprehension. 

(48) Misconception, as has been said, is of five varieties. These 
five are as follows: (a) darkness (éamas), which in turn has eight 


222 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


subdivisions, for ‘darkness’ is the wrong belief that liberation arises 
because of merging into one of the eight generative principles: materia- 
lity, intellect, egoity, or any one of the five subtle elements; (b) confusion 
(moha), which, in turn, also has eight subdivisions for ‘“‘confusion”’ 
means the wrong belief that liberation arises because of the attainment 
of the eight varieties of power; (c) great confusion (mahdémoha), which, 
in turn, has ten subdivisions, for “great confusion’? means the wrong 
belief that permanent or abiding pleasure can come from the five 
objects of sense (sound, etc.) both for the gods and for men (that is to 
say, five objects pertaining to the gods, and five objects pertaining to 
men, making a total of ten); (d) gloom (tdmisra), which, in turn, has 
eighteen subdivisions, for ‘‘gloom’’ means the wrong belief that the 
ten objects of sense (both human and divine), together with the eight 
varieties of power, bring enjoyment; and, finally (e) blind gloom 
(andhatamisra), which, in turn, also has eighteen subdivisions, for 
‘blind gloom” means the grief that occurs when someone, who wants 
the ten objects of sense and the eight varieties of power, dies or loses 
control over power. Altogether, then, the five varieties of miscon- 
ception have sixty-two subdivisions. 

(49) The injuries of the eleven capacities are the following: deaf- 
ness, blindness, paralysis, inability to taste, inability to smell, dumb- 
ness, mutilation, lameness, constipation, impotence, and insanity. 

(50) The nine varieties of contentment are subdivided into two 
groups, internal and external. Four of the contentments are internal 
or related to the self (adhyatmika). They are (a) belief in primordial 
materiality, or the tendency to be satisfied with the knowledge of 
creative nature alone; (b) belief in a material basis, or the tendency 
to think that the external signs of the ascetic life (e.g., carrying a sacred 
staff, a water pot, etc.) are sufficient for attaining liberation; (c) belief 
in time, or the tendency to think that liberation will occur spontane- 
ously in due time for all; and (d) belief in destiny, or the tendency 
to believe that liberation can arise by chance or without effort. Five 
of the contentments are external and involve being satisfied with having 
turned away from the objects of sense (sound, touch, form, taste, 
and smell) together with turning away from the five evils attached 
to them, that is, acquisition, protection, waste, attachment, and 
injury. In another text, these nine ‘‘complacencies’” are given the 
following technical names: ambhas, salila, ogha, vrsti, sutamas, para, 
sunetra, nadrika and anuttamambhasika. 

(51) ‘Proper reasoning” means learning to think about philo- 
sophical issues like ‘“‘what is truth here in this world,” etc. ‘Oral 
instruction’? means learning about truth as a result of verbal 
instruction. “‘Study” means attending to the Veda and other sacred 
writings. ““Removal of the three kinds of frustration’? means attending 
to a teacher and benefiting from his instruction. ‘‘Association with 


GAUDAPADA 223 


appropriate persons” means association with those who are able to 
increase one’s knowledge. ‘“‘Generosity” means making appropriate 
gifts to holy men. In another text, these eight “‘perfections” are given 
the following technical names: tara, sutara, taratara, pramoda, pramoda- 
mana, ramyaka and sadaépramudita. 

(52) The predisposition (bhdva) creation has now been described, 
or, in other words, the intellectual creation (from verse 43 through 51). 
Previously (in verses 40-42) the “‘subtle” (limga) creation was des- 
cribed, made up of the subtle elements. The two creations (namely, 
bhava and linga) function reciprocally that is to say, each presupposes 
the other just as the seed and the sprout; and the relationship between 
the two is beginningless. 


XIII. Tae Empiricat Worip (ET140-146) 


(53) The eight divine orders are brahma, prajapatya, saumya, aindra, 
gandharva, yaksa raksasa and paisaca. 

(54) Although a particular constituent dominates in each realm, 
nevertheless, the three are always present together. 


XIV. Sites ILLusTRATING THE RoLE AND FUNCTION OF 
MatTeERIALITY (ET147-154) 


(57) This simile answers the objection that an unconscious materia- 
lity could not serve the purpose of another. In fact, however, there 
are many examples of unconscious functioning that is purposive. 

(58) This simile shows that after a particular task is accomplished, 
activity ceases. 

(61) This simile illustrates that materiality is the sole cause. Those 
who argue that God is the cause, or that a thing’s own nature is the 
cause, or that time is the cause are wrong. The Samkhya teachers 
argue that primordial materiality alone is the most intelligible account 
of manifestation. God must be rejected as cause, because God has no 
qualities or constituents (guna) and, hence, it would not be possible 
to establish a relationship between cause and effect. Own-nature 
and time are to be rejected as ultimate causes because they are both 
manifest and, hence, themselves require the unmanifest materiality 
as ultimate cause. 


XV. Liperation anp Isotation (ET155-167) 


(64) Repeated meditation on the twenty-five principles leads to 
the knowledge “I am not”, etc. This knowledge is referred to as being 
“pure” and “‘absolute”’ because only this knowledge leads to liberation. 

(65) “Like a spectator’? means like the spectator of a play who 
perceives the dancer from his own seat in the audience. 


224 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(66) Another analogy is that of the debtor and the creditor. When 
a loan has been repaid, no further money transactions take place 
between the two, although both continue to exist and may even main- 
tain contact with one another. 

(67) Knowledge is capable of destroying the effects of all future 
acts as well as the effects of acts being performed in the present. Acts 
performed in the past, however, have left latent dispositions that must 
work themselves off in the present life, just like the momentum of the 
potter’s wheel, after the potter has completed his work, must run 
itself off. 

(69) The “sage” (paramarsi) mentioned in the verse is Kapila. 
(Gaudapada ends his commentary here at verse 69.) 


VYASA, or VEDAVYASA 
YOGASUTRABHASYA 


We have already discussed (see above entry on Patafijali the Yoga 
teacher) some of the problems relating to the date of the Yogasiitra- 
bhasya and Frauwallner’s tentative guess that it may have been com- 
posed by around 500 of the Common Era. The name ‘‘Vyasa” or 
**Vedavyasa”’ is obviously not correct, and there is no way of deter- 
mining the correct name of the author. P. Chakravarti! and Frau- 
walliner® are probably on the right track in suggesting that the author 
of the Yogasiitrabhdsya is indebted to that revision of Samkhya philos- 
ophy put forth by Vindhyavasin (see Vindhyavasin entry above). 


YUKTIDIPIKA 


As this volume has made abundantly clear, the Yuktidipika is without 
doubt our most important extant text for understanding Samkhya 
in its early and formative philosophical development. No other text 
compares with it in terms of its detailed treatment of Samkhya argu- 
ments and its apparently thorough familiarity with the various 
teachers and schools that preceded Iévarakrsna, and it is no exag- 
geration to assert, therefore, that it is the only commentary on the 
Karika that appears to understand the full scope and details of classi- 
cal Samkhya philosophy. Since its discovery has been comparatively 
recent—it was first carefully edited and studied by P. Chakravarti,! 
based upon a single manuscript, and then reedited with an additional 
manuscript by R. CG. Pandeya?—most of the older historical and philo- 
sophical treatments of Samkhya are now outdated and require exten- 
sive revision. Even more than that, the contribution of Samkhya to 
early Indian philosophy (and hence the entire history of early Indian 
philosophy) must be recast because of the evidence of the Yuktidipik a. 
Unfortunately, there is still lacking a good critical edition of the text, 
but that will soon be corrected with the (promised) critical edition 
of Albrecht Wezler.? There is also forthcoming a complete English 
translation of the Yuktidipika being prepared by Dayanand Bhargava 
and §.K. Sharma, and to be published by Motilal Banarsidass. 

The title of the text, ‘“A Lamp on the Intellectual Coherence (of 
the Samkhyakarika),” indicates that the purpose of the commentary 
is to explain the overall reasoning of the Karikd and to defend the 
intellectual coherence of the whole from all objections. The author 
of the text is unknown. The colophon refers to Vacaspati Miéra as 
author, but it is unlikely that Vacaspati would have written two 
commentaries on the Samkhyakarikaé, and, even more than that, the 
Yuktidipika appears to be older than the time of VAcaspati Misra. 
R.C. Pandeya is inclined to think that the author is a certain Raja, 
because Vacaspati Misra quotes three verses from a text entitled 
Rajavaritika (“A Varttika composed by Raja”), and these three 
verses appear to be the same as three verses in the introductory 


228 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


verses of the Yuktidipika.* Wezler, however, in his article cited just 
above has argued that the Yuktidipika is itself a commentary on an old 
Samkhya Varttika and that portions of the Varttika are embedded 
in the present text of the Yuktidipika.® If this is the case, then Vacaspati’s 
reference to the Rajavarttika may not at all bea reference to the Yukti- 
dipikd. In other words, both Vacaspati and the author of the Yukti- 
dipikd may have quoted from the Rajavarttika. The identity of the author 
of the Yuktidipika, therefore, continues to be a problem. 

The date of the text is likewise a problem, although some rough 
approximations are possible. There are quotations in the Yuktidipika 
from Dignaga (ca., 480-540 C. E., according to Frauwallner and Hat- 
tori) and from Bhartrhari (ca., 450-510, according to Frauwallner), 
and it would seem that the text overall is older than Vacaspati Misra 
(who can be placed in the ninth or tenth century). Whether or not 
the author is familiar with the views of Dharmakirti (seventh century) 
is an open question, although it is odd that the views of Dharmakirti 
concerning perception are not cited in the Yuktdipika if the Yuktdipika 
is, indeed, later than the seventh century. Frauwallner is persuaded 
by this latter negative evidence and, therefore, places Yuktidipika 
about the middle of the sixth century. One might add to this the 
additional negative evidence that the Yuktidipikd does not appear to be 
aware of the rigorous critique of Samkhya by the great Sankara, and, 
if Sankara’s date can now be plausibly put at 700 of the Common Era 
or slightly earlier (as Allen W. Thrasher has now cogently demons- 
trated”), one is tempted to think that Yuktidipika cannot be much later 
than the late seventh or early eighth century. R. C. Pandeya, on the 
other hand, cautions against accepting such negative evidence and sug- 
gests simply that the Yukiidipika be placed somewhere between the 
time of Dignaga (the sixth century) and the time of Vacaspati Misra 
(the ninth or tenth century).® Possibly, when a critical edition of the 
text has been completed and some of the many quotations identified, 
one will be able to determine a more precise date. 

The author of the Yuktidipika tends to treat the Samkhyakarika as if 
written in sétra style and breaks up the Sémkhyakarika into four praka- 
ranas, namely: 

(I) verses 1-14 (subdivided into three subsections or dhnikas: ver- 
ses 1-2, 3-8, and 9-14); 

(II) verses 15-21 (subdivided into two subsections: 15-16, 17-21); 

(IIT) verses 22-45 (subdivided into three subsections: 22-27, 28- 
34, and 35-45); 

(IV) verses 46-71 (subdivided into three subsections: 46-51, 52- 
59, and 64-71). 

No commentary is available on verses 11-12, 60-63, and 65-66. Verse 
72 is mentioned in the Yuktidipika, but there is no commentary directly 


YUKTIDIPIKA 229 


upon it. Also, it is introduced in a manner that suggests that it may 
possibly have not been originally a verse of Igvarakrsna’s test. 

The following summary of the text has been helped along by a num- 
ber of persons. First, Pandit Raghunath Sharma of Sampiirnananda 
Sanskrit University in Varanasi prepared a general summary of the 
entire text in Sanskrit. Then, V. P. Bhatta, a Sanskrit language consul- 
tant at the University of California, Berkeley, prepared a rough English 
rendering of Sharma’s Sanskrit summary. Next, Dayanand Bhargava 
and S.K. Sharma put together a lengthy summary of the entire text 
based upon their forthcoming English translation of the text (to be 
published by Motilal Banarsidass). In addition, Edeltraud Harzer, 
a doctoral student at the University of Washington, Seattle, 
who is preparing a dissertation on Samkhya epistemology, offered a 
number of helpful comments regarding epistemological issues in the 
text. Finally, Gerald J. Larson and Ram Shankar Bhattacharya put 
together the final form of the summary. Primary credit for the overall 
content of the summary, however, belongs to Raghunath Sharma, 
Dayanand Bhargava, and 8. K. Sharma. 

For the sake of consistency in the overall volume, we have followed 
the topic headings that have been used in other summaries, but it 
should be repeated that the author of the Yuktidipikad has organized 
his commentary in a different manner—in four prakaranas and eleven 
Ghnikas). 

Because a full discussion of this text is not yet available, we have 
attempted to prepare as full a summary as possible. The text itself, 
however, is very long and at many points does not lend itself to brief 
summarization. Many long polemical discussions have been shortened 
or only briefly alluded to. Every effort has been made, however, to 
mention important contents of the text that do not appear in other 
Samkhya texts. 

The following summary is based upon the edition of R. C. Pandeya, 
editor, Yuktidipika: An Ancient Commentary on the Samkhya-Karikas of 
fvarakrsna (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1967). 

The text begins with fifteen introductory verses (pp. 1-2) followed 
by a long introduction (pp. 2-5) in which the author argues that the 
Samkhyakarika possesses the basic characteristics of an authentic scien- 
tific tradition (tantraguna). The commentary itself begins on page 5. 
The author tends to break down the k@rikas into four parts for separate 
comment, thereby appearing to convert the longer kdrikds into shorter 
sitras.? The author also tensd to comment, briefly at first, about the 
meaning of an expression or a phrase and then to expand his brief 
comment into a longer discussion in which the views of varying op- 
ponents are refuted. 


230 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(Summary by Raghunatha Sharma, Dayanand Bhargava, and 
Shiv Kumar Sharma) 


I. Inrropuctory VERSES: THE ScoPE AND TASK OF THE 
SAmknya (E1-29) 


(Fifteen introductory verses present a brief synopsis of the occasion 
and purpose of the Samkhyakarika. Though the text of the Harika is 
short, nevertheless it presents a reliable overview of the full Samkhya 
system and provides an adequate refutation of the views of opponents. ) 

Samkhya is like an elephant whose two tusks are two of the kinds of 
inference (namely, positive and exclusionary inference). The elephant 
is located in a jungle, and it is surrounded by various creepers (namely, 
opposing views) that threaten to entangle it. In fact, however, the 
creepers are fragile and can be easily cut through by the tusks of the 
Samkhya elephant. Reverence is offered to the greatest guru (Kapila) 
whose sunlike brilliance is able to destroy the darkness of samséra. 
Kapila transmitted the system (tantra), which is designed to bring 
about the cessation of the threefold frustration, to the Brahmin Asuri, 
who was desiring to learn the truth (attva). Kapila’s teaching was 
so extensive that it could not be mastered even in a hundred years. 
Moreover, on account of many opponents (theists, atomists, Buddhists, 
materialists, and so forth), the basic doctrine was further developed 
in many smaller works by various eminent teachers. Finally, a point 
was reached when pupils could no longer understand the intricacies 
of the system, and at that point [gvarakrsna composed his brief text in 
seventy verses in which all of the basic categories are clearly explained. 
Tgvarakrsna’s work is a brief summary of the entire Sastra of Samkhya. 
It contains the ten principal topics and the fifty categories, making 
a total of sixty. The topics are presented in correct order, and the 
Samkhyakarika, though a small text, nevertheless possesses all of the 
characteristics of a complete system and is like a reflection in a 
mirror of the complete Samkhya system. The author indicates that 
he will provide an explanation of the Sdmkhyakarika according to 
correct principles of logic. 

If one asks about the basic characteristics of a complete system, 


there is a verse (here quoted) that enumerates those characteristics 
as follows: 


(A complete science contains) aphoristic statements that indicate 
the main topics (sara). 

a discussion of the instruments of knowing (pramana) ; 

a discussion of the “‘parts” relevant to a subject matter (avayava) ; 

a statement that describes the overall structural components of the 
system (anyinaia) ; 


YUKTIDIPIKA 231 


a discussion of doubts relating to general principles (samfaya) ; 

a discussion of specific technical problems (nirnaya) ; 

brief definitions (uddesa) ; 

longer or expanded definitions (nirdefa); 

a discussion of basic principles in sequential order (anukrama) ; 

a discussion of technical terminology (samjia); 

a discussion of what is to be done or practical advice that one should 
follow as a result of following the science (upadesa). 


One might also refer to other characteristics as well, but the above 
ones are the most important. The Samkhyakarikaé contains all of these 
characteristics. (Specific quotations are given from the Karikd illus- 
trating each characteristic.) In come instances Isyarakrsna does 
not discuss all of the details. He relies on earlier discussions (in other 
books) so long as they do not contradict his own views. Also, he 
relies on reasonable deductions. That is to say, he does not directly 
express what can be reasonably inferred. At the same time he does 
not hesitate to express his own views even if they differ from other 
teachers. 

Thus, it can be argued that the Samkhyakarika is not simply a work 
on a portion of the system (that is to say, a prakarana) but is, rather, 
an independent and coherent account of the entire Simkhya system.” 

(1) (B5-14) The fact that Kapila explained it to Asuri indicates 
that this treatise should be explained only to a worthy disciple who, 
intelligent and inquisitive, approaches the teacher. The activity 
constituent (rajas) is itself misery, which is alleviated by the intelli- 
gibility constituent (sativa). 

The desire to know arises because of the occurrence of the three 
types of frustration occasioned by the relationship between the power 
of consciousness (cefandfakti), on the one hand, and the internal organ 
(antahkarana), which is characterized by the threefold frustration, 
on the other. 

The desire to know arises with reference to the alleviation of frus- 
tration." The text mentions “‘frustration” at the outset, but this is 
not inauspicious, because independent words taken out of a sentence 
do not convey any particular sense. Bhartrhari has said that words 
taken out of a sentence are like senses taken out of the body.” The 
word “frustration” here in the sentence does not convey its own 
meaning but rather the meaning of the “removal of frustration.” 
The expression “‘duhkha-traya-abhighdta,” therefore, is an auspicious 
beginning. 

Objection : If it is the case that the activity constituent is one, then it 
is wrong to say that frustration is threefold. To say that the reference 
to the three types of frustration is meant only loosely in order to charac- 
terize frustration that arises externally, internally, and celestially is 


232 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


also wrong, because there are many occasions for frustration. Hence, 
there should be as many types of frustration as there are occasions 
for it. 

Answer : This is only a broad classification like that of castes into 
four, even though one caste may have many subcastes. 

Objection : If the occurrence of frustration gives rise to the desire to 
know the means of alleviating it, it should be present in all, and in 
Asuri also it should have been present earlier, You should have men- 
tioned that it arises because of the destruction of demerit and because 
of the ripening of previous acquired merit in the case of any person. 

Secondly, liberation means not only emancipation from the divine 
realm, the human realm, and the animal plant realm but also from 
the realm of desire (kdmadhatu), the realm of form (ripadhatu), and the 
formless (drijpyadhdtu). (These latter three represent Buddhist notions. ) 
Moreover, the desire for knowledge is possible even in a detached 
person and not always because of the occurrence of frustration. Fur- 
ther, consciousness is devoid of desire, or any other quality (guna) for 
that matter, and desire cannot be ascribed to the nonsentient cons- 
tituents of cosmic matter. 

Answer : The desire to know arises only in the case of a nonattached 
person. All, though afflicted, do not realise the occurrence of frustra- 
tion because of attachment, nor do they renounce the violence involved 
in maintaining an ordinary worldly life. The desire to know in Asuri 
arose because of the realization of the occurrence of threefold frustra- 
tion. If you insist upon asking about the reason for this realization 
of the occurrence of frustration, though the question is irrelevant and 
involves the danger of infinite regress, nevertheless it can be said that 
the practice of merit may be adduced as the cause for this realization. 

We accept a fourteenfold world—the eight types of divine being, 
the five types of animal and plant life, and one type of human being 
(SK 53). Such realms as the three (Buddhist) realms (mentioned above) 
are not accepted by us. 

Regarding the issue of nonattachment, we shall speak of it under the 
next stanza. Even the satisfactions of meditation do not transcend des- 
truction (ksaya) and excess (atifaya). Hence the proposition that 
nonattachment also contributes toward the desire for knowledge is 
acceptable. Desire arises in the constituents of materiality, which though 
insentient are capable of desire. This will be explained later. 

Objection : The term “that” (tat) in the statement “‘there arises the 
desire to know the means for alleviating that’? is meaningless. This 
word cannot refer to the “desire to know” since no one wants to 
alleviate that desire. If we take occurrence (abhighdta) as the meaning 
of the word “‘that,’? for the occurrence is only the effect, the cause 
therefore will remain intact. Thus, there would be no final alleviation 
of frustration. The term “that”? cannot refer to “‘triad” (traya), 


YUKTIDIPIKA 233 


since that simply indicates a number and not any objects. If one 
argues that the term “that” refers to frustration, there are several 
objections. First, the word ‘‘frustration” is separated from the term 
“that” by many intervening words. Second, in the compound ‘‘dubkh- 
atraya,” “‘dubkha” is a subordinate member. Moreover, frustration is 
an external fact and can, therefore, never be alleviated. Nor can the 
functioning of frustration be permanently alleviated so long as its cause, 
frustration, is present. Further, because the functioning of frustration 
is identical with its locus, viz, frustration, the objections with reference 
to frustration hold good with reference to its functioning also. 

Answer : The term “‘that” refers to frustration. Although one word 
ought not to be related to another distant word (in a sentence), it is 
possible to have a relation based on the meaning of the words.13 More- 
over, there are examples where even a pronoun is separated from its 
antecedent by several intervening words. A relation between words 
based primarily on meaning is also accepted by the grammarians.™ 
The word “frustration” is subordinate only as a component of the 
compound and as such cannot be connected with another word, but it 
is here taken out of the compound and is thought of as an independent 
word conceptually and is related to another word as in the usage of the 
Mahabhasya (1.1.1): ‘Hereafter the word-teaching. Of which words?” 

As regards ‘‘alleviation,”’ it means neither the destruction of the 
constituents of materiality nor suppression of their functions, but 
rather that the power of the constituents of materiality continues to 
exist only in its own form, having no further purpose to function for 
the sake of consciousness. Thus the statement that ‘‘there arises the 
desire to know the means for alleviating that (frustration)” is correct. 

Objection : The desire to know is superfluous since there are worldly 
remedies available. There are drugs for alleviating bodily frustrations ; 
enjoyable worldly pursuits for alleviating mental frustrations; and 
rituals for alleviating frustrations that arise from the gods or other 
cosmic forces. 

Answer : Perceptible means are neither certain (ekdnia) nor final 
(atyanta). The satisfactions of life, being only occasional, are difficult 
to attain and, if attained, they are sustained only with great difficulty. 
They are all perishable because they are produced. Also, they involve 
attachment and violence. 

The limitations of perceptible means are obvious. Medical science 
accepts that there are diseases arising from previous births that can be 
cured only with death, and that there are diseases of old age that are 
simply symptoms of approaching death. Moreover, the recurrence 
of disease is common. 

Regarding mental frustrations, the attainment of one object of enjoy- 
ment leads to the desire for another object. Satisfactions do not lead 
to the final pacification of desire. They rather intensify desire. More- 


234 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


over, enjoying satisfactions without sharing them with those who lack 
them is cruel. If these satisfying objects are shared with others, limited 
as they are, they become exhausted. Also, it is too much to expect 
that all satisfying objects will be readily available. The lack of some 
of them will always cause frustration. Moreover, desires lead to pitfalls 
and are the source of all frustrations. Thoughtful people condemn 
worldly enjoyments. Hence the insufficiency of perceptible means. 

(2) (El4-24) Odjection : Why not resort to rituals prescribed by the 
scriptures ? They are invariably successful provided that their perform- 
ance is free from defects. In statements such as “‘I have drunk soma 
and have become immortal’ the permanence of the results of scriptural 
remedies is clearly implied. 

Answer : The revealed literature includes the Vedas, the sciences 
related to the Vedas, and logic, but these are like perceptible means 
in that they are connected with impurity, destruction, and excess. 

Impurity comes from the violence involved. Violence involves des- 
truction of the body of the victim. 

Objection : Having once accepted the authority of the Vedas, it is 
illogical to say that what has been prescribed by the Vedas is impure. 
The Vedas, being divine, cannot be questioned as a human statement 
can. After all, the impurity of violence is also to be known through 
the scriptures. If the same scriptures prescribe violence in the sacrifice, 
this has to be accepted as an exception to the general rule of non- 
violence. Of course, to say that violence is bad because it injures 
others would imply that inducing a student to pious observations like 
celibacy and study would also be bad. Similarly, to say that non- 
violence is good because it pleases others may make illicit relations 
with one’s teacher’s wife good. Consequently, the scriptures and noth- 
ing else could decide the goodness or badness of an act. 

Answer : The authority of the Vedas is acceptable to us and we 
accept that sacrifice leads to heaven. We only question the desirability 
of attaining heaven at the cost of the life of others. The criterion for 
meritorious behavior is that one should not do to others that which is 
disagreeable to one’s own self. 

When we say violence is impure, we speak metaphorically and mean 
the effect of the violence, i.e., the grief generated in the mind because 
of the disposition toward compassion. In the next line of the text, 
knowledge is spoken of as superior to rituals, which implies that rituals 
themselves are not condemned. They are only considered to be inferior 
to knowledge. 

Objection : How can rituals be held inferior when their life-long 
performance is recommended ? 

Answer : The rituals require association with a wife, which is not 
always possible. The scriptures also enjoin performance of sacrifice 
only for one who is capable. This proves that rituals are not always 


YUKTIDIPIKA 235 


obligatory but can be abandoned under some circumstances (e.g., in 
extreme old age). Moreover, the scriptures prescribe not only rituals 
but their renunciation also. For renunciation, one may refer to Kaivalya 
Upanisad 3 or Chandogya Upanisad 5.10. 

Objection : The scriptures prescribe rituals, whereas the statement of 
renunciation is merely an expression of approval. 

Answer : But even an expression of approval implies prescription. 
An act is approved only for calling attention to it and recommending 
it. Otherwise the expression of approval would become meaningless. 
The scriptures cannot just praise something falsely. 

Objection : There is no prescription for renunciation as there is for 
rituals, 

Answer : This is so because renunciation means absence of all acts. 
What, therefore, could be prescribed for renunciation has been pres- 
cribed, namely, penance, faith, forest-dwelling, calmness, scholarship, 
and alms-begging (Mundaka Upanisad 1.2.11). Manu and others 
have explained these duties of an ascetic. 

Regarding rituals, they do yield a result, but that result is tem- 
porary. The means of the sacrifice being limited, it can yield only 
a temporary result. In fact, we observe that actions lead to trans- 
migration and not liberation. 

Objection : The scriptures proclaim that “the crosses death”? and 
“the crosses sin.”” How, then, can one say that rituals lead only to 
temporary results ? 

Answr : The scriptures also declare that the ritualists are involved 
in the circle of transmigration (Chandogya Upanisad 5.10.3-6). In such 
a situation, to avoid the conflict of scriptural statements, the statement 
“‘he crosses death” is to be taken in the metaphorical sense that he is 
saved from death for a long time. 

Objection : But why not take the statement regarding involvement 
in transmigration as metaphorical to avoid the conflict ? 

Answer : Because all other instruments of knowledge favor the inter- 
pretation offered by us. We perceive worldly existence, and we can 
infer the fact that an eternal result cannot be achieved by limited 
means. Scriptural proof has been already quoted to prove our point. 
The daily metaphorical usages like “always laughing” or “always 
talking” also favor the view that the meaning accepted by us is correct. 

The defect of excess or surpassability (i.e., the fruit of one action 
being superior to that of the other) is known, first, because we repeat 
the action. Second, the parts of the sacrifice, such as donations to the 
Brahmins, involve gradations; their result must also involve grada- 
tions. If one argues that it is the presiding deity that is the focus of the 
sacrifice and not donations, etc., and that the deity has no gradations, 
then, first it has to be proved that the deity has no gradation and, 
second, consciousness, neutral as it is, cannot become part of an action. 


236 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Moreover, if deity—and not the sacrificial matter—is the focus of 
the sacrifice, why kill animals? All gods reside in the body, which is 
invariably a means to any action. Any action would, therefore, 
suffice; why then is there sacrifice involving violence? Hence the 
surpassability of one ritual by another. 

The means for alleviating frustration ‘“‘which is contrary to that 
(tadviparita) is superior.” Here ‘‘that’? (taf) means heaven, which 
is achieved by rituals. ‘‘Superior” here refers to liberation. It is su- 
perior, because it is pure, permanent, and without gradations. Libera- 
tion arises out of the dissociation (asamyoga) of consciousness from 
materiality. The purpose of the association of the two shall be spoken 
of later in SK 21. 

This dissociation is achieved by ‘‘the discriminative knowledge of 
the manifest, the unmanifest, and the knower.” Alternatively, it 
could be interpreted as “‘the discriminative knowledge of the knower 
of the manifest and the unmanifest.”’ This will be explained later 
in verse 66. 

Such knowledge involves discriminating the difference between 
the manifest, the unmanifest, and the knower. The unmanifest is 
equivalent to materiality. The knower is equivalent to consciousness. 
The manifest is the ordinary world of experience, which has three 
dimensions: (a) a “form” (riipa) dimension; (b) a “projective” 
(pravrtti) dimension; and (c) a “‘consequential’ (phala) dimension. 
The form dimension is the level of the basic principles, namely, in- 
tellect, egoity, mind, the capacities, the subtle elements, and the gross 
elements. The projective dimension is the level of an organism’s basic 
tendencies (or, in other words, the eight predispositions that will be 
described later). The projective dimension can be described generally 
as involving the inclination to pursue what appears to be advantageous 
and the inclination to avoid what appears to be disadvantageous. 
More specifically, the projective dimension involves the five sources 
of action and the five breaths. Finally, the consequential dimension 
is the manifestation of ordinary experience and can be described as 
being twofold; “the perceptible” (drsta) and the “imperceptible” 
adrsta. The “perceptible” is constituted by the “intellectual” or 
“intentional” creation (or, in other words, the pratyayasarga, and see 
SK 46) and is made up of the five misconceptions, the twenty-eight 
dysfunctions, the nine contentments, and the eight attainments. The 
“imperceptible” is made up of the karmic heritage that results from 
the activities of the organism and that leaves its impression upon the 
projective dimension, thereby determining the nature of rebirth in the 
body of a god or a plant, and so forth. Frustration is caused by the 
proximity or association (samyoga) of the manifest, the unmanifest, 
and the knower. The cause of frustration is the failure to discrimi- 
nate between these three, and, more specifically, the cause of frustra- 


YUKTIDIPIKA 237 


tion is the tendency to ascribe the activities of the manifest and un- 
manifest (namely, materiality and its three constituents) to the 
power of consciousness. By discriminating (vijfdna) between mani- 
fest and unmanifest, onthe one hand, and between them and con- 
sciousness, on the other, one attains liberation. Discrimination is 
like the distinguishing between darkness and light. In the darkness, 
objects like pots and so forth are undifferentiated from the darkness, 
but when the light of a lamp is present the darkness is dispelled and 
the objects can be correctly differentiated. This is supported by 
scriptures such as Taittiriya Upanisad 2.1 and 2.41, Svetdsvatara 3.8, 
Chandogya 7.1.3, and Mundaka 3.2.9. 

Objection: If this is the case, then the ritualistic scriptures will 
become meaningless. 

Answer : But what of the scriptures that praise knowledge ? Those 
will be meaningless. 

Objection : Therefore, let there be a combination of the two—ritual 
(action) and knowledge. 

Answer : If actions were to lead to liberation, all would be liberated. 
Moreover, the scriptural statement that (ritual) actions lead to rebirth 
will be violated. How can actions and knowledge—leading to diverse 
results—be combined ? The scriptures declare heaven to be the result 
of ritual actions. 

Objection : Ritual actions are prescribed, and, therefore, let them be 
accepted as primary. 

Answer : Knowledge is equally prescribed in the Chandogya Upanisad 
8.7.1, and there is no predominance of one over another. The combi- 
nation of knowledge and action, therefore, is not possible. 

Objection : Let us then accept that those who are incapable of 
performing actions be allowed to follow the path of knowledge. 

Answer : We have quoted scriptures saying that a learned man 
renounces. It nowhere speaks of an incapable man. The fact is that the 
secret of the Vedas is spoken of in the end (cf. Chandogya Upanisad 
3.11.4-6). In other words, knowledge is spoken of in the end. 

The scriptures no doubt speak of rituals for a knower, but they 
declare him to be first amongst the wise who renounces actions. Yajfia- 
valkya and others have corroborated this. Those who are attached 
do not appreciate it. One should, therefore, leave the houscholder’s 
life and take up the life of an ascetic. 

(3) (E25-29) The discriminative knowledge of the triad of the 
manifest, the unmanifest, and the knower can be described either briefly 
or in detail and this triad can be discussed in five ways, in terms of: 
(a) the generative original and its generated transformations (prakyti- 
vikdra), (b) cause and effect (kdranakarya), (c) excess and nonexcess 
(atifayanatifaya), (d) efficient cause and effect (nimittanaimittika), or 
(e) content and its awareness (visayavisayin). 


238 ENGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The first of these, which is the most fundamental, determines four 
varieties (among the principles); (a) that which is only the cause 
and not the effect, (b) that which is only the effect and not the cause, 
(c) that which is the cause as well as the effect and, (d) that which is 
neither the cause nor the effect. 


(a) Primordial materiality, the root of all, is not an effect. 


Primordial materiality, the root of the intellect, etc., produces vari- 
ously (prakaroti). In the compound “primordial materiality” (miéla- 
prakrti), the word “primordial” (mila) means “‘root of the great prin- 
ciple, etc.” The word “primordial,’’ which is a part of the compoun- 
ded word, cannot be attached to another word such as “of the great 
principle, etc,’ but interrelated words are always used together and 
they can be used in a complex formation (vrtii). For example, the 
word ‘“‘teacher,” though requiring the word “‘of Devadatta’’ for com- 
pletion of its sense, is used in a complex formation with the word “clan” 
in the expression ‘‘Devadatta’s teacher-clan” (Devadattasya gurukula). 
Grammarians themselves have made such usages.!® 

It should not be said that the etymology of a technical term is 
irrelevant; it may be so with a conventional term but not with an etymo- 
logically meaningful word like “‘saptaparna’’ [(which has actually sapta 
(seven) parna (leaves) ]. 

Primordial materiality, by implication, is known to be the cause 
and, therefore, it is not stated to be so. 

Though mention of primordial materiality as such makes the speci- 
fication ‘‘uncaused”’ superfluous, it has been provided to show that 
it is the final cause so as to avoid an infinite regress. Primordial 
materiality is uncaused, because it could only have either God or 
consciousness or the constituents as its cause. The existence of God 
shall be refuted later on. Consciousness is inactive. The effect means 
the attainment of some gross form by the subtle. Now, the consti- 
tuents of materiality in the state of equilibrium apart from all modi- 
fications have no subtler form of which they could be said to be the 
effect. They are, therefore, uncaused. 


(b) The seven, beginning with intellect, etc., are both generative 
and generated. Any one of them is a modification of the preceding 
one and the cause of the following. 

Objection : Paficasikha mentions twenty-five elements, one of 
which (primordial materiality) is not caused, sixteen are only 
products and the sentient entity is neither the cause nor the effect. 
Hence, by process of elimination, the remaining seven are both 
the cause and the effect. There is no necessity of using the term 
“seven”. 

Answer : Patafijali (the Samkhya teacher) holds that the principle 


YUKTIDIPIKA 239 


of egoity is included in the intellect itself. It is to refute his view that 
the term “‘seven”’ is used. 

Objection : The principle of egoity shall be separately spoken of in 
Karika 22. 

Answer : These seven principles have various subvarieties. The 
purpose of saying ‘‘seven’’ is to show that an element remains only one 
in spite of the fact that it may have many varieties. This shall be 
elaborated later on. 


(c) Sixteen principles are transformations only. 

Five gross elements and eleven capacities constitute the group of 
sixteen. 

By the word “‘only’—-the word ‘‘tu’’ in Sanskrit, the use of which is 
discussed in some detail—-the sense has been restricted in the sense 
that these (sixteen) are only generated and not generative. The body 
and other objects are not transformations of the gross elements, because 
they are not essentially different. 

Objection : No effect, according to Samkhya, is essentially different 
from the cause. Hence all the categories will be nongenerative in this 
way. The transformability of the five gross elements is perceptible 
also. 

Answer : The difference between an object being transformable and 
its giving birth to a different principle has to be appreciated. Primor- 
dial materiality being the subtlest is the final cause; similarly this 
group of sixteen is only a modification and not generative. 


(d) Consciousness is neither generative nor generated. 


That it is not generative shall be explained in Karikd 19. It cannot 
be a modification of another consciousness—a selfsame thing could 
not give birth to a selfsame thing. Moreover, consciousness, being all- 
pervasive and devoid of activity, cannot be a cause. The constituents 
of materiality, being of different genus, i.e., insentient (acetana), can- 
not give birth to consciousness, which is sentient (cetana). 


II. Tse Instruments or KNOWLEDGE (E29-47) 


(4) (£29-34) Intellect being one, the instruments of knowledge are 
also one, but they become manifold as perception or inference due to 
limiting adjuncts. Here, instruments of knowledge (framdna) are 
spoken of as one, overlooking the difference of the limiting adjuncts. 
The word ‘ hi” (=only) is used in the restrictive sense to indicate 
that the objects of knowledge are known “‘only through the instruments 
of knowledge.” To say that “‘only the objects of knowledge” are known 
would be superfluous, as nonobjects of knowledge cannot be known at 
all. Regarding the innate knowledge of the seers, though it comes 


240 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


directly without any instrument of knowledge (SK 43), yet it is an 
accomplished fact, and it does not require a means at all. Alter- 
natively, the word ‘‘fi?’ (only) could be restrictive with reference 
to knowledge. To say that knowledge does not arise sometimes, even 
if its instruments are present, would be wrong, for the failure to know 
in such cases is due to the predominance of tamas—the inertia consti- 
tuent of materiality. It does not affect the fact that the nature of an 
instrument of knowledge is to ascertain objects of knowledge. 

The instruments of knowledge are said to be threefold, but these 
three kinds should not be thought of as three independent instruments 
of knowledge as, for example, in Nyaya. There is only one intellect 
that becomes differentiated due to the difference ofinstrument. Regard- 
ing the question as to how a single power can be differentiated, we 
have many examples in which one thing becomes differentiated. For 
example, the constituents of primordial materiality are differentiations 
within a single entity. 

The instruments of knowledge are threefold “because all other means 
are included in this threefold instrument of knowledge.’ Or, 
alternatively, the expression could be explained as “‘the threefold 
instruments of knowledge are known in all the instruments of 
knowledge’’.!” 

The three kinds of instruments of knowledge are perception, infer- 
ence, and verbal testimony. These three will be defined in Karikas 
5 and 6. As regards the instruments of knowledge accepted by other 
systems, let us take, first, comparison (upamdna), which is defined as 
“the knowledge of an object by means of its resemblance to something 
wellknown.’!8 Others, however, define it as ‘‘the knowledge of the 
relation of a name and its denotation in the form that ‘such and such 
an object is denoted by such and such a word’ on the basis of a knowl- 
edge of similarity through the statement of an authority.” In such a 
case it is not only similarity but the force of authority that leads to this 
knowledge. Likewise with tradition, which is accepted asa different 
instrument of knowledge by some. 

Objection : The deciding factor in comparison is similarity, and not 
verbal testimony. If the use of words were to lead to the inclusion 
of comparison under verbal testimony, the same logic could be applied 
for including inference also under verbal testimony. 

Answer : The similarity is only an aid. The speaker, finding it 
difficult to explain something, takes the help of a similarity. If this 
leads to the acceptance of mere similarity as an instrument of knowl- 
edge, then different gestures such as walking, etc., should also be 
accepted as an instrument of knowledge. The distinctive feature is not, 
therefore, similarity, but the authority of the speaker; otherwise, the 
sentence “‘gavaya (an animal resembling a cow) is like a horse’? would 
also convey knowledge. The relationship of a word to the object it 


YUKTIDIPIKA 241 


denotes is known not only through similarity but through the descrip- 
tion of other qualities of the object also. So this is not a distinct feature 
of this so-called instrument of knowledge, comparison. Moreover, 
similarity is not always known through the teaching of someone else 
but could be known by oneself through his own observation. 

Regarding presumption (arthdpatti), it is an instrument of knowledge 
that makes one aware of one thing, with which an invariable concomi- 
tance with something else is known, and this something else has been 
either heard or seen. For example, after seeing treacle or hearing its 
name, its sweetness is also known. There is another type of presump- 
tion where, after observing the invariable concomitance between two 
properties, there is the presumption of an association of their opposite 
properties also, e.g., knowing that a conjoined object is noneternal, 
one can imply that a nonconjoined object is eternal. An example of 
this type of presumption without exception is the case in which we 
know the defeat of the boar when we see the lion walking all alone 
stained with the blood of the boar. Yet this is really a case of inference. 
There is invariable concomitance between the victory of the lion 
and the defeat of the boar. So one of them can be inferred by 
another. 

Inclusion (sambhava) is exemplified in calculating a half-measure 
when one is aware of the extent of a full measure of a drona (a measure 
of capacity). But this is a case of presumption and is not really 
different from inference. 

Nonapprehension (abhdva) is the knowledge of the absence of fire 
through the absence of smoke. Now, this being a kind of presumption 
of an association between things of an opposite nature, it is, therefore, 
to be included in inference. The example quoted here has the excep- 
tion of an ironball, where the absence of smoke cannot lead to the 
presumption of the absence of fire. This is, therefore, not an instrument 
of knowledge at all. In such cases as the presumption of eternality 
by noncreatedness, the awareness is valid, but it is included in inference. 
The knowledge of the existence of Devadatta outside the house from 
his absence in the house is, similarly, a presumption and, therefore, 
an inference. 

Gestures (cesta) like that of a begging posture indicating hunger 
are only forms of inference. They donot form an independent instru- 
ment of knowledge. 

Latent dispositions created by repeated experience lead to knowl- 
edge when certain words are uttered, even without the presence of the 
object. This is intuition (pratibhd), but this cannot be an independent 
instrument of knowledge, which is gained only through perception, 
etc. The knowledge of the supreme seer (Kapila) is already accom- 
plished, and it does not stand in need of an instrument. Awareness 
inspired by desire and anger, etc., is not valid. Likewise, the aware- 


242 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ness inspired by intuition is not valid. Hence there are only three 
types of instruments of knowledge. 

(5) (E34-39) Perception has been differently defined as knowl- 
edge (a) “arising from sense-object contact (and which is) not caused 
by words, nonerroneous and is of a definite character” (Nydyasitra 
1.1.4), (b) “which arises from the contact of the self, sense organ, 
internal organ, and the object”? (Vaisestkasiitra 3.1.18) and (c) ‘‘which 
arises due to the contact of a man’s senses with something that is pre- 
sent” (Mimamsdsiitra 1.1.4). The followers of Varsaganya define it 
as ‘“‘the functioning of the ear and the rest.” Others (Dignaga and 
other Buddhists) define it as “‘nonconceptual knowledge’ or “‘knowl- 
edge devoid of constructions”. (kalpandpodham). In fact, percep- 
tion is “‘reflective discerning of particular objects through contact 
with the senses.” These objects are either specific (visista), like the 
earth, or nonspecific (avisista), like the subtle elements (SK 34). 
Intellect is ascertainment or reflective discerning (K 23). Percep- 
tion is a pure form of sativa unmixed with rajas and tamas and this 
is the instrument; the result is that sativa illuminated by consciousness 
or sentience (cetandSakti or purusa). 

The instrument, being located in the intellect, is different from its 
result, which is located in consciousness, the existence of which will 
be proved in Karika 20. 

The object known through perception is also known as “‘pratyaksa’ 
only figuratively. The object of perception bears upon the sense as the 
favoring thing and upon the determinative knowledge as the favored. 
So, both of them are denoted by the same term. The fire is known 
through inference, but nothing is inferred through fire. Hence 
inference and the object of inference are not denoted by the same 
term. 

Obviously the term “reflective discerning’? in the definition is 
necessary to indicate the instrument of knowledge, because the 
object itself is not the instrument of knowledge. Nor is the operation 
of the senses the instrument of knowledge. We know satisfactions, etc., 
from the efficient cause and its effect and not through the senses. The 
knowledge of Yogins is also suprasensuous. The inclusion of the 
term “‘reflective discerning” therefore serves many purposes. 

The expression “through contact with the senses’’ is included to 
exclude the case of mirage from perception. The term ‘“‘contact” 
signifies proximity of the senses with the object so as to exclude in- 
ference from the purview of perception. Memory is not an instrument 
of knowledge because it does not cognize anything new. Perception, 
in fact, includes objects that are known through the contact with the 
senses and includes also internal knowledge and the suprasensuous 
knowledge of Yogins.!® 

Inference is declared to be threefold—a priori (pirvavat), a posteriori 


YUKTIDIPIKA 243 


(fesavat), and based on general correlation (sdmdnyatodrsta). A 

priort means having a cause, a@ posteriori’ means having an effect. In 
an a priori inference, one infers the effect from the cause, e.g., rain 
from the dark clouds. Of course, the possibility of an obstruction in 
the appearance of an effect has to be dealt with in some cases. An 
a posteriori inference is the inference of a cause from the effect, e.g., 
the inference of a sexual act by the parents from the existence of a boy, 
or of a seed from the sprout. When we infer the rains in the upper part 
of the river through the floods in the lower part, we have to be sure 
through exclusionary inference (avita) that it is not due to some reason 
other than the rain, such as the melting of snow, etc. taking into account, 
in other words, time and place, etc. For example, if it is in South 
India, the flood cannot be caused by the melting of snow (there being 
no snow in South India). 

Where, after once observing the invariable association of two objects, 
one comes to know the invariable association of the objects of the same 
groups at some other place and time, the inference is said to be based 
on general correlation. 

Now, this is a common characteristic of all types of inferences and is 
not the truly unique feature in this kind of inference. In fact, this type 
of inference is meant for inferring things that are in principle imper- 
ceptible (SK 6). The inference of consciousness is not possible even 
through comparison because consciousness is unique and there is no 
object of the same kind. The distinguishing feature, therefore, is this, 
that we infer the coexistence of certain things on the basis of general 
correlation—for example, that a sound (Sabda) is not eternal because 
it is produced. 

Verbal testimony is reliable statement. Statements not made by human 
beings, i.e., the Veda, as well as statements made by detached persons 
like Manu are included under reliable authority. 

(6-7) (E40-46) Objects directly in contact with the senses are 
known through perception, and those that are not directly in contact 
with the senses are known through inference. Objects that are in 
principle beyond perception can be known through inference based 
on general correlation. 

Having realized the invariable concomitance between production 
and noneternality in the case of a pot, the same is inferred in the case 
of a sound also. Those who think that this type of inference is identical 
with a posteriori inference cannot account for the inference of con- 
sciousness that has no effect. The operations (vrtti) of consciousness 
even if taken metaphorically to be its effect, do not lead to its inference, 
since the text (in SK. 17) gives the nature of composite objects serving 
the purpose of some other object as the reason for the inference of 
consciousness. 

This type of inference is positive (vita) when the reason is employed 


244 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in its own form; it is exclusionary (aviia) when some other object is 
implied. 

The form of proof is twofold: general and particular. In the general 
form, the proof being coexistent with what is to be proved, indicates it. 
Karikaé 17, while giving the proofs of consciousness, uses the particular 
form of proof. An example of exclusionary inference might be the 
following: having excluded the possibility of atoms, the soul, God, 
action, fate, time, nature, or accident being the ultimate first cause, 
one infers that primordial materiality is that cause. When wishing to 
convey to others the manner in which an inference is to be made, the 
ten members of correct argumentation are employed. The conditions 
for an inference (vydkhydaga) are the desire to know (jijfdsd), doubt 
(samfaya), purpose (prayojana), conjecturing various possible alter- 
natives (Sakyaprapti), and removal of doubts (samSayavyudasa). The 
remaining members of an argument (parapratipddandnga) are thesis 
(pratijid), reason (hetu), example (drstanta), application (upasamhara), 
and conclusion (nigamana). 

Take, for example, the inference of the existence of consciousness: 
(a) there is a desire to know consciousness; (b) a doubt arises because 
consciousness is imperceptible;(c) the purpose is the realization of 
truth and thereby the attainment of liberation; (d) in the event that 
consciousness does not exist, the Buddhist’s position of voidness might 
be acceptable; and (e) the removal of doubt leads to the ascertainment 
of the existence of consciousness. 

Then the proof is formulated as follows: (a) a thesis is set forth that 
is the statement of what is to be proved, e.g., ‘‘consciousness exists”; 
(b) an appropriate reason is given, e.g., because things exist for 
another; (c) an example is offered, an illustration, e.g., like a couch— 
it may include a counter-example also, which is used in exclusionary 
inference; (d) bringing together what is to be proved and the example 
into one exposition, e.g., ‘“‘as is this, so is that also,”’ is the application; 
and {e) the conclusion is the repetition of the thesis. This connects 
the various components of the argument together in the form “‘there- 
fore, consciousness exists.”’ 

Objection : The use of these members is unnecessary, because one 
knows objects for oneself without them and, therefore, their use for 
conveying knowledge to others is also unnecessary. When both parties 
are sure about their position, the question of doubt does not arise. 
They have no purpose for probing each other’s doubt. The wise do 
not go after that which is meaningless or impossible. The mention of 
the purpose or of the possible alternatives is, therefore, unnecessary. 
The desire to know, etc., is hardly necessary. Similarly, if a thesis 
states what is to be proved, the proof and the example should also 
be stated. To say that the proof is the hetu is begging the question. 
Proof is of various types; to indicate all of them by one definition is 


YUKTIDIPIKA 245 


wrong. The example is that of an object, which cannot be part ofa 
sentence. The example and the application convey only invariable 
concomitance. The conclusion is just the thesis. 

Answer : The tradition is meant for all and not the selected few. 
We have no objection if one can understand without these various 
members. They have been stated for those who need them, There 
are places where even the thesis is not mentioned. The rule is, there- 
fore, that all these members become meaningful only when there is a 
necessity for them. 

The nature of exclusionary inference is such that it should be used 
only after positive inference. If one uses exclusionary inference from 
the very beginning, one might end up eliminating everything including 
the unmanifest, and hence, end up proving nothing. If, however, the 
object is ascertained in its very nature, the conclusion that the manifest, 
being not a product of atoms, etc., is the product of the unmanifest, 
will be easily drawn. 

Objection : There are reasons like excessive distance, etc. (SK 7), 
for the nonperception of an object. For example, a bird may soar out 
of sight, the light of a planet may be suppressed by the light of the 
sun, and so forth. How can these objects be known through inference 
based on general correlation? They haveno general characteristics. 

Answer : The farther away the bird, the greater the effort in perceiv- 
ingit. It can be inferred by this that the bird can disappear also. 
Soin other cases. 

Objects like heaven, liberation, and the gods, which are neither 
perceived nor have any general characteristics, are known through 
the verbal testimony of the scriptures. Regarding the validity of verbal 
testimony, we accept the words of a seer who is detached, free from 
doubt, and has experienced supersensuous things. We do not accept 
the verbal testimony of just anybody. Verbal testimony is different 
from inference because it does not require a proof. 

Objection : The meaning of a word is also understood through 
positive and negative examples. It is, therefore, not different from 
inference. We infer that if the words of Mr. X are authentic, so are 
those of Mr, Y. 

Answer : This objection could be true of some words like “‘tree,”’ 
etc., but not of words like ‘‘heaven,”’ etc., whose meaning is ascertained 
only through scripture and not through inference. Moreover, infer- 
ence does not depend upon the speaker for its validity, whereas verbal 
testimony does. The meaning of a word changes with time and place; 
this is not so with a hetu term. The Mahabhdsya (1.1.1) speaks of words 
used in a particular sense in a particular country only. A hetu, more- 
over, has a natural relation to its sddhya (and not just a conventional 
one). Smoke cannot be drawn away from fire. 

The hetu in an inference cannot be connected with anything what- 


246 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ever at the sweet will of the speaker. Inference can be with reference 
to objects having generality and not with reference to words that are 
only particular, like “‘moon”’ or ‘‘heaven,’’ which, being unique, have 
no generality. 

Objection : Statements that are verifiable by perception or inference 
can be valid, but that does not apply to statements about objects like 
heaven. 

Answer : An object proved through one instrument of knowledge 
does not have to be verified by another. Otherwise, all veridical state- 
ments—and not only about heaven, etc.—will have to be questioned. 
After all, inference is also accepted as an instrument of knowledge 
under the same circumstances. 

The only actual objects are those proved by the above instruments 
of knowledge. 

(8) (E47) Objection : The unmanifest is free from all the conditions 
given in Karikd 7 for nonperception of an object. It is still not per- 
ceived. It should, therefore, be presumed to be nonexistent, as, for 
example, a hare’s horn. 

Answer : The hare’s horn has, obviously, no effect, and hence, itisa 
different case. 

Objection : Having spoken of subtlety as a reason for nonperception 
of the unmanifest, speaking of its apprehension through its effects is 
superfluous. 

Answer : The first part is meant to prove it through positive in- 
ference, whereas the second one is meant to prove it through exclusion- 
ary inference. The Aetu ‘“‘not due to nonexistence” is useful for both 
of these inferences. We, along with others, accept that both of the 
inferences prove the selfsame object. 


JIJ. Tue Notion or Preexistent Errecr (E48-55) 


(9) Objection : The effect should be examined. It should be dis- 
cussed first whether the effect exists in the cause before its manifesta- 
tion. Such a topic is not irrelevant, for the difference of opinion among 
teachers compells us to consider it. The followers of Kanada and 
Gautama hold the nonexistence of the effect prior to its origination, 
whereas the Buddhists hold that it is both existent and nonexistent. 
There are still others who believe that the effect is neither existent 
nor nonexistent. Because of this diversity, the Samkhyas should also 
clarify their position. 

Answer : The effect does exist in the cause. If the effects, such as 
intellect, etc., would not exist in primordial materiality, they could 
not have come into existence, because the effect is only a particular 
arrangement of its cause. The three constituents serve as the ultimate 
cause of the universe. They are endowed with potencies. The parti- 


YUKTIDIPIKA 247 


cularly arranged form of them forms the effect. This position refutes 
the theory of origination from nonexistence. 

Objection: The theory of the identity of cause and effect leading to 
the theory of the prior existence of the effect is unproved. On the 
other hand, the composite originates as different from the components. 
The following reasons also lead to the theory of the nonexistence of 
the effect prior to its origination. First, the effect is not perceived in 
the cause even though the conditions of its perception are fulfilled. 
It can also not be argued here that the nonperception is caused by 
some reason of the nonperception of an existent object, because reasons 
like extreme distance, etc., admitted by the Samkhyas are not appli- 
cable here. Moreover, if cause and effect are located at the same place, 
the nonperception of an effect would imply the nonperception of a 
cause as well. Nor does the effect here come under the scope of 
inference that gives knowledge of nonperceptible objects, because 
there is no possibility of activity, property, or name of an effect that 
can serve as proof for its existence. Second, because the success of the 
agent in his efforts proves prior nonexistence of the effect, the Samkhyas 
cannot argue here that the effort by the agent would be useful in 
bringing out the transformation; because transformation implies the 
introduction of some new qualities and the giving up of some old 
qualities, it would lead to the origination of a fresh object. Third, if the 
object is already existent, there would remain no criterion to stop or 
to begin the causal operation, Fourth, the theory of the prior exist- 
ence of an effect implies the absurdity of the relation of the quality of 
origination prior to the causal operation in the way it is found after 
the causal operation. Fifth, if the existent object originates, origination 
and existence would be synonymous. 

Answer : The composite cannot be produced as different from the 
components, because the former is not cognized to be different from 
the latter. If a cloth, for example, could be different from the threads 
serving as its components, it would be known as different from them 
as it is known to be different from some other piece of cloth or the 
heap of threads. It would not be logical to argue that the absence 
of cognition of the difference between the two is due to the relation 
of inference between them, which, unlike conjunction, does not allow 
cognition of distinction in relation. It is still to be proved that the 
composite is different from its components and that they are related 
through inference. Moreover, there is no example to support such a 
thesis. The objector may argue that the distinction between the two 
is not cognized because they are mutually pervasive. This argument 
also presupposes the causality and the relation of inference between 
them, both of which are still unestablished. 

The objector may cite the example of loom and cloth to establish 
the distinction between cause and effect. Such as example would be 


248 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


unlike the present situation. The discussion is about the relation bet- 
ween material cause and effect whereas loom is the instrumental cause. 
In addition, the example would violate the rule of pervasion between 
cause and effect because loom and cloth are not mutually pervasive. 
Moreover, objects like threads and cloth, having different types of 
touch, activity, form, and weight, cannot be mutually pervasive. 

The objector further cannot explain logically whether a composite 
exists in all the components collectively or separately in each com- 
ponent. The objector may again try to establish the difference bet- 
ween components and the composite on the ground that the effect 
is absent (prior to production and after destruction), whereas the 
cause is present. This argument also is inconclusive because the 
origination and destruction refer to the particular arrangement and 
not to the object, i.e., cloth. The first argument of the objector 
is based upon the wrong understanding of the Samkhya theory. The 
effect does not exist in the cause in the way that the jujube fruit is in a 
bowl; rather, the effect is the cause itself. The cause is endowed with 
various potencies, and through the assisting potencies some of the 
potencies disappear and the others are manifested in the state of the 
effect. The potencies manifested are not perceived in the state of the 
cause. 

The argument that there is no applicability of inference because 
of the absence of proof in the form of action, property, or name is 
also applicable to those who admit cause and effect to be different, 
but not to the Samkhyas who accept the identity of the two. More- 
over, here the Nyaya theory also suffers from the same defect. 
The Naiyayikas hold that the objects exist in the first moment after 
origination without property, etc., and hence there remains no 
proof for their existence. The theory of the Samkhyas is based upon the 
authority of Paficasikha, etc., who perceived the effect in the state of 
the cause. 

The second argument is also wrong, because that which is non- 
existent cannot be brought into existence. The effect may be related 
to the causal operation or not. In both the cases the theory of the 
nonexistence of the effect proves defective. The aforesaid relation 
may occur in the state of causal operation or the accomplished state 
of the effect. 

Objection : The effect is related to the causal operation in the inter- 
mediary state. 

Answer : There is no state of this kind. There can be either the 
state of existence or that of nonexistence but no third state called 
existence-cum-nonexistence. 

The above defect does not apply to the Samkhya theory, because of 
the relation of the cause (with the causal operation). Since cause 
and effect are identical, the effect is also related to the operation. 


YUKTIDIPIKA 249 


Objection : The effect should be distinct from the cause as is the 
case with the instrumental cause. 

Answer : It is not so, because the effect is not different from its mate- 
rial cause. Moreover, everything is not possible everywhere. With- 
out admitting the prior existence of the effect, the effect will be equally 
related to everything and would come out of everything. Moreover, 
in that case the effect would be distinct and of a different genus from 
cause just as it is from the instrumental cause. The selection of a parti- 
cular cause proves the existence of the effect in that cause. Though 
coming together, manifestation, etc., are additional in the effect, yet 
it does not disturb the theory of the prior existence of the effect. 
These have nothing to do with the nature of the object. In fact, ori- 
gination or destruction are only conventional notions, and in reality 
there is no production or destruction. Nor is it right to say that the 
word “‘production’”’ proves prior nonexistence, because it is still to be 
considered whether production refers to nonexistent or existent objects. 
In conventional discourse ‘‘production’”’ is used with an existent object 
also as ‘the makes a fist, or a knot, or an earring.” The production 
from the nonexistent would prove the production of the horn of a 
hare also. 

Here is another reason to prove the prior existence of effect. An 
efficient cause can produce an efficient effect only. It cannot be argued 
that the effect should not be considered existent in the material cause, 
since it is not existent in the efficient causes, which also have efficiency. 
If the assisting cause helps in producing by entering into the material 
cause, as water entering into a seed produces a sprout, the prior exist- 
ence of the effect in it is still to be proved. Otherwise, the rule should 
be restricted to the material cause only. 

Moreover, whatever does not contain the object cannot serve as a 
cause, just as a barren woman cannot give birth to a son, The 
object that does not contain the effect cannot be the cause, not to speak 
of the notion. The existing effect has a cause and vice versa. It should 
not again be argued that the consciousness, being existent, would 
also have to be considered as an effect. The above maxim applies 
to objects having particular arrangements. 

The theory of the Buddhists involves many defects. They hold that 
there is neither conjunction (efficient cause) nor the composite as a 
distinct object, and hence, origination and destruction are all illusory. 
This is, however, strange in itself. By the force of the ‘‘and’’ in the 
Karika, the author refutes the view that the object is neither existent 
nor nonexistent, because it is already established that the effect exists 
in the cause. 


250 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


IV. Tue Manirest AND UNMANIFEST ASPECTS OF 
Materiatity (E55-60) 


(10-11) Now we proceed to discuss the similarity and dissimilarity 
between the manifest and the unmanifest. 

Objection : The similarity should be discussed first because it makes 
understanding easier. 

Answer : No, it makes no difference, because both the similarity 
and dissimilarity are mutually dependent. 

Objection : In this case it should be mentioned why dissimilarity 
is discussed first. 

Answer : It is because similarity forms the present context. After 
knowing the similarity between the manifest and the unmanifest, the 
latter is known as a cause, then consciousness is known as an enjoyer, 
and the objects of creation as serving the means of enjoyment. Thus, 
dissimilarity that is not the main topic is discussed. 

Objection : If it is so, what are the points of dissimilarity? 

Answer : Karika 10 is quoted. 

Objection : The property of having a cause (hetw) is common to all 
because even materiality and consciousness have causes. 

Answer : Here, cause is understood in the narrow sense of a creating 
cause (kdraka). 

Objection : The particular reason for such a restriction is not stated. 

Answer : But it is implied by the context. Or, due to the association 
with the following word, “‘noneternal’’, it should be taken in the sense 
of having a cause that is invariably associated with noneternality. 
That cause is the creating cause. 

Objection : In the case of noneternal objects also, both the creating 
(karaka) and the revealing (hetu) causes are available. 

Answer : To avoid absolutism some eternal entity must be accepted, 
and having a cause here excludes that eternal entity. 

Objection : The idea of noneternity goes against the theory of the 
prior existence of an effect. The destruction would imply the pro- 
duction of a nonexistent object. 

Answer : No, because we recognize the manifestation and dis- 
appearance of an object and not its absolute destruction. Disappearance 
or destruction means its becoming subtle. It is of two types—periodic 
world dissolution and dissolution for some time. 

Objection : The above position is not final, because some philosophers, 
for example, Buddhists, believe in the momentariness of all the objects. 
Answer : No, because there is no reason to support their theory. 

Objection : The object is destructible because it meets destruction in 
the end. 

Answer : Momentariness is still to be proved. 

Objection : Here are the reasons to prove the momentariness of a 


YUKTIDIPIKA 251 


flame. First, there is no addition in a flame when the flame continues 
burning with additional fuel. Second, due to the absence of a support, 
it is not always found. Third, because there would be a division in a 
flame when it is struck, if it were not momentary. A sound is also 
momentary, since, first, ifit were not momentary, it would increase 
when a new sound is added. Second, it is directly perceived to be 
destructible every moment. Third, because, unlike eternal objects, 
it is heard at a place different from its production. 

Answer : The first reason proves only the destructibility of flames and 
not their momentariness. The second reason is still to be proved. The 
third argument involves the undesirable consequence of the nonmomen- 
tariness of threads, etc., where such a division is seen. Similar argu- 
ments are also used to refute the momentariness of sounds. 

Objections : Objects are momentary because there is no reason to 
prove nonmomentariness; otherwise objects would be immutable. 

Answer : Latent dispositions (samskdra) serve as the cause for the 
subsistence of objects. Thus, there is no immutability of objects. More- 
over, the theory would involve the undesirable result of the extirpation 
of the whole world. The objector may argue that the object produced 
earlier may serve as a cause for the production of what comes later. 
This will, however, be a deviation from the earlier argument, Nor 
should it be argued here that destruction is natural, because objects 
subsist for the purpose of consciousness and then they pass into non- 
manifestation. 

Moreover, the theory of momentariness involvesthe undesirable 
result of the absence of the perception of objects in the next moment. 
If their perception is supposed to be caused by the production of similar 
objects subsequently, it would also be wrong. First, because there is no 
material cause of objects. Second, there is no perception of sequence 
that is found in production. Third, because there are no instrumental 
causes at that time to produce the object. Fourth, there is no product 
of some other product. Fifth, with the production of some effect the 
causal form is destroyed and there remains nothing to produce anything 
from it. It would again involve causeless and continuous production. 
If it is argued that destruction of cause and origination of effect take 
place simultaneously, it would not leave a scope for causality between 
them. It would also not be right to argue that a particular change seen 
in objects proves momentariness, first, because it would imply pro- 
duction in the absence of an effect, and second, such a production is 
not perceived. 

(The textof thefurther portion of the Yuktidipikd up to the 12th 
kariké is not available. ) 


252 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


V. Tse THREE Constiruents (E60-62) 


(12-13) The word “only” (eva) is construed with the respective 
nature of each constituent. “Buoyancy” brings about the arising of 
effects and the efficient operation of the senses. ‘‘Illumination” causes 
the removal of darkness and the rise of knowledge in the senses. ‘“‘Stimu- 
lation” and “mobility” refer to special effort and activity respectively. 
Activity causes change from an earlier state to another state, and there 
are two kinds of activity, namely, evolving or transforming (parindma) 
and simple continuous motion (praspanda). The former is a basic 
change in characteristics (as, for example, when intellect becomes 
egoity, and so forth). The latter is simply motion without change 
or characteristics, as, for example, the motion or activity of the five 
breaths or the activities of the action capacities. ‘“‘Heaviness’’ causes 
increasing density in an object and inertness in activities; “‘enveloping” 
causes concealment from sight in the case of objects, as also impurity 
in the senses. An object is composed of three constituents and the quality 
of a certain constituent dominates while the other constituents assist it. 
Their individual form and qualities are sometimes experienced also 
when they have not become subordinate. 

Objection : There is no criterion to say that sattva, etc., becomes 
subordinate when experienced as intermixed with the other consti- 
tuents. 

Answer : If such distinctions cannot be made, then a husband would 
find his beautiful wife miserable just as the cowives find her. Hence, 
the dominance or subordinance of a certain constituent in a certain 
case must be admitted, and their individual form is not an intermixture 
of the said qualities. 

It should also not be argued that the constituents, having mutually 
contradictory qualities, cannot coexist. 

Just as the mutually contradictory components of a lamp such as 
the oil, wick, and flame work jointly for a single purpose of illuminating, 
the constituents work together for serving the purpose of consciousness. 
Although objects having equal powers cannot remain together, yet 
the principal and subordinate can remain together. The same rule 
holds good in the case of the constituents. 

Objection : If the constituents are considered to be distinct in accord- 
ance with their qualities, a single constituent comes to be two because 
ofits having two qualities. If the internal contradiction in the qualities 
of constituents is not admitted, it would be better to admit one consti- 
tuent only, ignoring their differences. Their relation of subordinate 
and principal and the service rendered by the subordinate to the 
principal again implies that the constituents are either of one form 
or are of mixed form. 

Answer : Admitting two qualities in each constituent does not 


YUKTIDIPIKA 253 


amount to their being six. The constituents attain the state of principal 
and subordinate, which would not be possible if there were only 
one constituent. Moreover, it is not established that there are as 
many substances as qualities. Furthermore, the supposition implies 
that each object is unique. The latter argument is also wrong because 
the attainment of the state of principal and subordinate in the consti- 
tuents is meant in a secondary sense. The above examples show that 
such a state is necessary in order to account for effects. 


VI. Tue INFERENCES THAT EsTABLISH THE EXISTENCE AND MaxkEup 
OF PRIMORDIAL MATERIALITY AND Consciousness (E62-86 ) 


(15) (E62-74) Objection: Due to the acceptance of similarity bet- 
ween effect and cause, primordial materiality, like its effects, is caused. 

Answer : No, because the characteristics (see SK 10) that are op- 
posed to the effect are the exception to the rule of similarity between 
cause and effect. 

Objection : Objects are not known to be limited in magnitude in 
their past and future states. 

Answer : There is no reason to deny their limited magnitude in those 
states also. 

Objection : The nature of being specific is also not settled in the case 
of worldly objects. 

Answer : The objects are distinct and specific and consequently 
limited in magnitude. This finite nature leads to inference of the 
existence of the unmanifest. 

The common element in homogeneous objects exists as their essence 
or cause, like clay ina pot, etc. Similarly, all the objects have sativa, 
rajas, and tamas that should be understood as their cause. 

Objection : How is it known that objects have pleasure, etc.? 

Answer : It is because the objects give rise to these experiences. 

Objection : Dissimilarity in cause and effect is observed and, hence, 
homogeneity is not established. 

Answer : Our theory is that to whatever genus a particular effect 
belongs, that is the effect of that. 

Objection : There is no proof for a particular causal efficacy (Sakti). 
It is not observed before the origination of effect. If it is supposed to 
exist in the cause without giving rise to the effect, the efficacy would 
be incapable and hence would not be efficient. Therefore, causal 
efficacies arise because of the coming together of assisting factors. 
Moreover, their difference form or nondifference with primordial 
materiality cannot be logically explained. 

Answer: It is not the case that there is no proof for a causal efficacy 
before the origination of an effect. Causal efficacy is the cause itself, 
which does exist before the effects. It does not deviate from its essential 


254 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nature before producing an effect, because it exists in a potential form, 
just as a lamp, the light of which is obstructed by a wall, etc. Causal 
efficacy does not originate by assisting factors. On the contrary, such 
an argument proves the prior existence of causal efficacy, because 
objects capable of manifesting effects are selected by an agent. As 
regards the relation between the causal efficacies and primordial 
materiality, let it be nondifference. It will not give rise to the undesir- 
able result of the plurality of primordial materialities or the oneness 
of causal efficacies, because number depends on knowledge or con- 
ceptualization. A single efficacy is manifested in many forms in the 
objects. The existence of causal efficacies is manifested in many forms 
in the objects. The existence of causal efficacies is proved through the 
inference based upon general correlation. 

The relation between cause and effect is one of mutual interaction, 
and this is explained through the mutual subservience of the cons- 
tituents. 

Objection : The mutual subservience among the constituents is not 
in succession or in simultaneity. The constituents cannot function 
singly without requiring the activity of others before the existence of 
the other two. Those that are born simultansously cannot be mutually 
subservient. Moreover, it cannot be explained whether illumination, 
etc., through which the constituents favor each other, exist prior to the 
activity of the constituents or come into existence afterward. The 
former alternative would lead to the single nature and the indepen- 
dent character of the constituents, whereas the latter goes against the 
prior existence of the effect. 

Answer : The subservience among the constituents is simultaneous. 
Objects taking place simultaneously can be mutually subservient when 
acting for a single purpose. As regards illumination, etc., these are 
through mutual contact just as with the lame and the blind man. It 
does not involve the theory of causation because contact is not a sub- 
stance. The potency of mutual subservience exists in the constituents 
and is manifested when they come into mutual interaction. 

Objection : The theory of primordial materiality as the ultimate 
cause of the universe cannot be accepted unless other possibilities are 
excluded, including atoms (paramanu), consciousness (purusa), God 
(ifeara), action (karman), fate or destiny (daiva), inherent nature 
(svabhdva), time (kala), chance (yadrcché), and negation (abhdva). 

Answer : Atoms cannot be the cause because their existence is not 
proved. Their existence cannot be established on the basis of their 
homogeneity with worldly objects, because that homogeneity can be 
explained in other ways. 

Objection : Let us accept the atoms in the form of the subtle elements 
ofthe Samkhyas. 

Answer : The subtle elements, being the cause of the gross elements, 


YUKTIDIPIKA 255 


are greater than the latter, but this is not true of atoms. Even if the 
existence of atoms is accepted for the sake of argument, they cannot be 
the cause of the universe because they are products, whereas the ultimate 
cause must be unproduced. Otherwise, there will arise the defect of 
infinite regress. The caused nature of atoms must be accepted because 
of their finite magnitude, possessing form, heat, speed, etc., because 
of being located in space, because of interacting with one another in 
union, because of giving rise to other objects, and because of their 
being perceptible. Their subtlety cannot be taken as a cause for their 
being uncaused, since this would entail that the subtle baked atoms 
of earth are uncaused. 

Consciousness cannot be the cause because it is not a causal prin- 
ciple. Because God is like pure consciousness in nature, God cannot 
be the cause of the universe. 

Objection : The PaSupatas and the Vaisesikas accept God as differ- 
ent from*pure consciousness, first because particular effects should 
be caused by some superior intellect, and second, because the union 
between conscious and unconscious is caused by some sentient 
entity. 

Answer : It is still to be proved that objects are created by some 
superior intellect, because the intellect of God does not exist before the 
activity of primordial materiality, and there is no example to prove 
that God’s intellect comes into being merely through His own will. 
Further, there is no God because there is no purpose for a God to 
fulfil. Moreover, objects such as trees, etc., are not caused by God’s 
intellect, and there would be impropriety in God’s creating objects 
that result in frustration. God is not needed for bringing about the 
contact between materiality and consciousness. Moreover, God’s 
body must be accepted, first, because it is a requirement for the 
inference to His existence, and second, because His body is mentioned 
in the scripture. The Samkhya equivalent to God is the ‘“‘body of 
greatness” (mdhdtmyasarira). Thus, the Pasupatas are wrong in accept- 
ing God as cause. 

The following are the defects in the theory of |the VazSesikas. They 
cannot logically explain whether God is included in the categories 
accepted by them or not. Hence, itis not accepted by Kanada. More- 
over, it is neither mentioned by Kanada nor by any other old Vaiéesika 
teacher in their writings. The theory of the Pasupatas about God is 
imposed on the Vaisesikasitras. 

Because it has been explained that atoms are not the cause, so action 
or karman can also not be the cause. 

Time can also not be the cause of the universe, because it does not 
exist as a separate entity. It is nothing but the continuing activity 
(sbandana) of causes. 

Accidence or chance is also not the cause of the universe, because 


256 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


it cannot account for the cause-effect relation found among objects 
in the world. 

Negation also cannot be the cause, since it cannot account for the 
limited magnitude of worldly objects and the homogeneity of cause 
and effect. The universe is not caused by causal efficiency, because 
it has no independent existence. Favor (upakdraka) also is not the 
cause, for this would involve infinite regress. Disjunction (vibhdga) 
also is not the cause, because it is also not an independent entity. 

(16) (E74-75) Objection: Because primordial materiality is single, 
it cannot give rise to differentiated objects. 

Answer : At the time of creation the constituents mix together and 
bring about differentiation. 

Objection : In the absence of activity, primordial materiality cannot 
give rise to creation. If it has activity, it will be like the manifest. 

Answer : Primordial materiality, being subtle, has no activity of 
movement, but it has the activity of transformation. It creates the 
universe through transformation. 

Objection : Transformation also should not be accepted in subtle 
objects like primordial materiality. 

Answer : Though primordial materiality is subtle, yet its trans- 
formation is possible. 

Objection : What is the transformation? 

Answer: When the object without deviating from its essence acquires 
new qualities different from the earlier, that is called transformation. 

Objection : What is the example here? 

Answer : Just as an object made of pala@fa wood without ceasing to 
be palasa changes from black to yellow because of heat. 

Objection : Why is it not considered that a new object is produced? 

Answer : It is because we do not believe in momentariness. 

Objection : The emergence of new qualities and the destruction of 
old qualities implies fresh emergence and destruction of an object, 
because you believe in the identity of cause and effect. 

Answer : No, it can be explained on the analogy of an army and its 
parts. 

Objection : The Samkhyas do not have an adequate interpretation 
to explain the general (sdmdnya) and specific (vifesa) features of an 
object. 

Answer : Let the object (to be qualified) be understood as the gene- 
ral. It remains general until the knowledge of its cause (in the 
wider sense) becomes an issue. Or, the general (to be qualified) 
may be interpreted as the powers of sattva, rajas, and tamas. 

Objection : But then there is no way to account for specific features. 

Answer : The constituents attain differentiation through mutual 
combination, just as water gets many tastes and forms after coming 
into contact with various objects. 


YUKTIDIPIKA 257 


(17) (E75-82) Objection : The existence of consciousness needs 
to be established. Its existence is doubtful, first, because imperceptible 
objects are found to be existent as well as nonexistent, and, second, 
because no instrument of knowledge confirms its existence. More- 
over, there is difference of opinion about its existence amongst the 
philosophers. The Buddhists deny its existence. 

Answer : The existence of consciousness is established through the 
inference based on general correlation. The body, like a bed, etc., 
being composite in nature, is meant for something other, namely, 
consciousness. 

Objection : Such an inference would simply lead to the existence of 
another composite object. 

Answer : The discussion presupposes the noncomposite nature of 
consciousness, for its imperceptibility establishes its noncomposite 
nature. 

Objection : One composite is meant for some other composite, just 
like the bed for Devadatta. 

Answer : The other should be understood as the noncomposite. 
Moreover, there should be some entity under whose contro] the consti- 
tuents give rise to manifest objects. 

Objection : This would imply agency in pure consciousness. 

Answer : No, here the purpose of consciousness is metaphorically 
spoken of as controller. The constituents depend on consciousness 
insofar as they serve his purpose. 

Objection : The manifest and the unmanifest being of the nature of 
satisfaction, frustration and neutrality, require some enjoyer of them. 
What is then the enjoyment? 

Answer : It is the capability of obtaining the objects. 

Objection : It also implies no need of consciousness, because the 
purpose may be served by knowledge (or mind). 

Answer : No, because knowledge, or mind, is the product of pri- 
mordial materiality and hence unconscious in nature. Therefore, 
it cannot be an enjoyer. 

Objection : If ordinary experience and consciousness are the same, 
you should accept only one of them. 

Answer : No, the difference can be explained on the analogy of the 
difference between knowledge and the object of knowledge. In this 
way the relation between the object of enjoyment and the enjoyer 
can be established between intellect and consciousness. 

Objection : If the mind is also considered an object, it would involve 
infinite regress because consciousness would again require some enjoyer. 

Answer : The mind, being insentient in nature, requires an enjoyer, 
whereas consciousness, being sentient, does not. Therefore, there is 
no infinite regress. 


258 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objection : The knowledge in this case would belong to consciousness 
and, thus, no scope for intellect is left. 

Answer : Consciousness is free from the mixture of constituents and, 
hence, not anagent of knowledge. Otherwise, there would be knowledge 
even when the mind does not function, i.e., in thestate of deep sleep, etc. 

The activity of every object is purposeful. Primordial materiality’s 
activity is meant for consciousness. Here, it cannot be argued that 
the existence of primordial materiality is also equally doubtful, be- 
cause its existence is already proved. Nor should it be argued that, 
because of the controversy about it, consciousness does not exist, for 
this would imply the nonexistence of every object, as there is some 
controversy about every object. This disproves the argument that 
there is no reason to prove the existence of consciousness. 

(18) (E82-83) Objection : Now it should be discussed whether 
consciousness is one or many. 

Answer : Our assertion is that there are many consciousnesses. 
Birth and death being contradictory states of the body, they cannot 
be found in the case of a single consciousness simultaneously. The 
different capacities of the organs also lead to the same conclusion. 

Primordial materiality’s activity to produce bodies for the enjoyment 
of various consciousnesses is not simultaneous. If consciousness were 
single, it could enjoy all the bodies simultaneously. 

The qualities of the three constituents and the like are in different 
proportion in many bodies. Consciousnesses, therefore, must be many. 

(19) (E83-86) Objection : How are the witness-hood (sdksitva), 
isolation (kaivalya), neutrality (mddhyasthya), subjectivity (drastrtva), 
and nonagency (akarirbhava) of consciousness established ? 

Answer : Through witnesshood the author suggests the dependence 
of the constituent’s activities on the purpose of consciousness. 

Objection : How does consciousness control the activities of the 
constituents ? 

Answer : The agent acts in accordance with the desire of the witness 
and not independently. The activity of primordial materiality is for 
the purpose of consciousness. Isolation negates consciousness’ contact 
with the constituents. Neutrality implies the absence of increase or 
decrease in consciousness and, hence, the absence of extenuating 
interference or assistance. Subjectivity confirms consciousness’ receiv- 
ing the form of the objects merely through contact. Through non- 
agency the seven kinds of agency are negated. Witnesshood is proved 
through consciousness’ being devoid of constituents. 

Objections: Consciousness’ nature of being devoid of the constitu- 
ents is not proved, for it cannot be admitted by the one who admits 
that consciousness is endowed with satisfaction, frustration, etc., 
since the constituents are expressed and experienced as existing in 
consciousness as “I am happy,” etc. 


YUKTIDIPIKA 259 


Answer : But this would imply the quality of being white, etc., also 
belonging to consciousness, because one says ‘‘I am white.” 

Objection : What type of dissociation from the constituents is in- 
tended here? 

Answer : Dissociation here means the absence of a common pur- 
pose. In absence of a single purpose the constituents work separately. 
Consciousness is neutral because ofits being the subject of experience. 

Objection : Why is it so? 

Answer : Because consciousness neither obstructs nor assists. Con- 
sciousness is a seer because of being conscious. It is inactive because 
of its being nonproductive. Therefore, it is devoid of activities. More- 
over, consciousness is inactive due to its being conscious and of unmixed 
form, for activity is found in nonconscious objects and objects of mixed 
nature. It cannot be maintained that consciousness may be active 
because it is all-pervasive like primordial materiality, because the 
activity of primordial materiality is due to unconsciousness, which is 
not found in consciousness. Nor should it be argued here that con- 
sciousness created bodies merely through thinking, because the possibility 
of thinking or resolution is already refuted in the case of consciousness. 


VII. Tuer AssociATION OR Proximity OF PrimorRDIAL MATERIALITY 
AND Consciousness (E87-90) 


(20-21) Objection : Why is consciousness transferred only to the 
intellect and not to a pot, etc., which also equally comes into contact 
with consciousness due to the all-pervasive nature of consciousness ? 

Answer : Consciousness is erroneously transferred to an object 
capable of receiving it. The intellect is capable, but the pot is not. 

Objection : If consciousness is supposed to receive the form of the 
intellect, it would be modifiable. 

Answer : Transference of formis meant metaphorically. The intel- 
lect’s form is falsely attributed to consciousness because of their contact 
just as the attribution of victory and defeat of the servant is attributed 
to the king, or, just as impurity, to the sky, because of to its contact 
with clouds, etc. 

Objection : How does Samkhya account for contact? 

Answer : The contact postulated just through proximity in general 
on account of the sameness of location, like that between space and a 
cow. It is a particular kind of contact postulated by the system for a 
certain purpose. 

Objection : What is the purpose for which the above contact is postu- 
lated? 

Answer : Since consciousness is conscious, itis so related to materia- 
lity. Or, it is meant for the experience of materiality by consciousness 
and comes to an end with the fulfilment of that purpose. 


260 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Purusa’s power of consciousness becomes meaningful in the presence 
of primordial materiality, and materiality also becomes useful in the 
presence of consciousness. It is the contact through mutual expectancy 
called bondage of capability. This is like the contact of a blind man 
and a lame man, who function with mutual help for a single purpose. 

Through such mutual expectancy the creation of elements, mental 
modes, and physical beings is brought about. Since consciousnesses 
are many, creation does not cease at any one time. Materiality keeps 
on functioning for the bound consciousnesses. 


VIII. THe DertvaTIon OF THE Basic Princretes (E91-92) 


(22) There are varying views among teachers concerning the 
derivation and nature of the various basic principles, and the purpose 
of this verse is to set forth clearly the view of Iévarakrsna. For example, 
some teachers assert that there is a separate, indescribable principle 
between primordial materiality and intellect/will. On the other hand, 
however, Patafijali (the Samkhya teacher), Paficadhikarana, and 
the followers of Varsaganya assert that the intellect emerges directly 
out of primordial materiality. Still others assert the view that egoity 
has no separate status. Egoity is simply the notion of “I am” per- 
formed by the intellect. Yet again, some say that the subtle elements 
come from egoity, but Vindhyavasin teaches that the five subtle ele- 
ments and egoity all come directly out of the intellect. Similarly, all 
the teachers suggest that the sense capacities arise from egoity—except 
for Paficadhikarana, who teaches that the sense capacities are derived 
from the gross elements. Others suggest that each subtle element has 
only one generic form, but others suggest a theory of accumulation 
(that is to say, each subtle element in the series becomes increasingly 
complex). This latter view is that of Varsaganya. Some suggest that 
the sense capacities function together. Others suggest that they function 
separately. Vindhyavasin suggests that the sense capacities are all- 
pervasive. Some suggest that the internal instrument is thirteenfold, 
but Vindhyavasin suggests that it is only elevenfold. Again, some 
suggest that all experience occurs in the intellect, but Vindhyavasin 
suggests that experience occurs in the mind. Some suggest that inten- 
tionality (samkalpa), self-awareness (abhimana) and reflective dis- 
cerning (adhyavasdya) are plural or separate functions, but Vindhya- 
vasin suggests that they are one. Similarly, Paficadhikarana argues 
that the sense capacities function only because of the power of primor- 
dial materiality and have no capacity in and of themselves, but others 
do not agree with this view. Varsaganya suggests that the organs act 
both within (subjectively) and without (objectively). Patafijali sug- 
gests that the activity in them is inherent. Paficadhikarana suggests 
that the activity in them depends upon external factors. Some argue 


YUKTIDIPIKA 261 


that the intellect is momentary, but others argue that it extends over 
time. Thus, there are numerous conflicting views among the teachers, 
and verse 22 sets forth the correct view of Isvarakrsna, namely, that 
the intellect (‘‘buddhi’’) (also called ‘“‘great”’ or mahat because it occu- 
pies great space and time and has more magnitude) emerges from 
materiality, that egoity emerges from intellect, that the five sense- 
capacities, the five action capacities and the five subtle elements emerge 
from egoity; and that the five gross elements emerge from the subtle 
elements. Synonyms for “‘buddhi’’ include ‘“‘mahat,” ‘‘mati,” ‘“‘brahmda,” 
“‘khyati,” “‘ifvara,’” etc. The term ‘‘bhita’ was used by some ancient 
teachers for subtle element and ‘“‘mahdbhitta’’ for gross element. The 
Mimamsakas and Jains believe in the eternity of elements, but that 
is refuted here. 


IX. Tue FuncTIONING OF THE THIRTEENFOLD INSTRUMENT (E92-117) 


(23) The intellect is characterized by reflective discerning in the 
form of “this is a cow” or “this is a man.” It is a transformation of 
materiality, and, hence, it is not momentary (as the Buddhists assert). 
When sativa is dominant in it, then the basic predispositions of meri- 
torious behavior, knowledge, nonattachment, and power come into 
prominence. Meritorious behavior is of two varieties, namely, (a) 
those religious practices that lead to the enjoyment of bodies, organs, 
and objects in the realm of Brahma, etc.; and (b) those religious 
practices of meditation including restraint, restriction, and so forth. 
Knowledge is also of two varieties, namely, (a) verbal or intellectual 
knowledge based on perception, inference, and verbal testimony; 
and (b) the ultimate discrimination of the difference between con- 
sciousness and the constituents (or, in other words, materiality). Non- 
attachment has four varieties of intensity, namely, (a) restrained 
apperception (yatamdnasamjha) ; (b) restricted apperception (vyatireka- 
Samjnad); (c) concentrated apperception (ekendriyasamjnid) and (d) 
totally controlled apperception (vasikdrasamjia). Power has eight 
varieties, or, in other words, the eight supernormal attainments, sub- 
tlety, greatness, etc. (see other commentaries for the standard listing). 
When tamas is dominant in the intellect, then the opposite tendencies 
(from the above) come into prominence. 

(24) The notion of egoity is clearly distinguished from intellect, 
and both are transformations of materiality. Various technical terms 
for egoity are discussed, namely, ‘‘vaikdrika,” “‘taijasa,” and “‘bhitddi.”’ 
These provide useful distinctions, for they specify the many effects 
of egoity. 

(26-27) External organs are necessary, and they are different from 
the actual physical organs in the body. They are not derived from the 
gross elements. They are more than one in number. Otherwise, all 


262 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


things would be experienced simultancously. The mind is both a 
sense capacity and an action capacity. Its function is intentionality. 

(28) The term “sensing” (dlocana) refers to revealing and not to 
determining. The precise function of each sense capacity is described. 
The view of the Nyaya is refuted, namely, that the organs are derived 
from the elements. Rather, the sense capacities are derived from 
egoity. 

(29) Reflective discerning, self-awareness and intentionality re- 
present the particular or unique functions of the intellect, egoity, and 
mind respectively. Moreover, since intellect, egoity, and mind are 
extremely subtle, it is permissible to look to their specific functions 
as defining attributes (svalaksana). These three also have a_ general 
or common function, however, and that is the maintenance of the 
life of the organism both internally and externally. This common 
maintenance of life manifests itself in terms of the five life breaths, 
namely, prana (the breath in the heart and mouth, which internally 
maintains respiration and externally maintains obedience), apdna 
(the breath of the lower limbs, which internally maintains the eli- 
mination of waste products and externally maintains a person’s ability 
to change life style), samana (the breath of the heart and stomach, 
which internally maintains digestion and externally maintains an 
organism’s ability to relate socially), udéna (the breath of the body’s 
fluids, which flows upward into the head and which internally main- 
tains the ability to speak and externally maintains an organism’s self- 
confidence), and vydna (the breath diffused throughout the body, 
which internally maintains the homeostasis of the organism and ex- 
ternally maintains a sense of unity with all of nature). These five 
breaths together with the sense capacities, action capacities, and 
egoity make up what the ancient teachers called the ‘‘prandstaka,” ora 
group of eight entities beginning with prana. This eightfold vitality 
arises from the five sources of action, which reside in the intellect and 
have rajas as their dominant constituent.2° These sources of action 
include the following: 

(a) perseverance (dhrti), a combination of rajas with tamas; (b) dutiful 
faith in conventional religious practice (sraddhé), a combination of 
rajas with sattva; (c) the desire for satisfaction (sukha), a combination 
of sattva and tamas wherein the activity component of rajas has been 
quieted; (d) the desire for wisdom (vividis@) ), wherein the activity of 
rajas as the act of thinking is dominant; and (e) the desire for the 
cessation of the act of thinking (avividisd), wherein the reification of 
pure tamas becomes dominant. The first four sources of action can 
be productive for seeking truth. Even the fifth source (avzidis@) can 
be productive if one interprets it to mean turning away from knowing 
trivial or counter-productive matters. Finally, the true seeker should 
come to be attracted to the purely sdttivika reflections of the world 


YUKTIDIPIKA 263 


and should devote all of his activity to the attainment of discriminat- 
ing knowledge. 

(30) Although some of the older teachers argue that the function- 
ing of intellect, egoity, mind, and a particular sense capacity may 
occur simultaneously, Isvarakrsna teaches in this kariké that they 
function sequentially. Recognition (pratyabhijfia) falls within the sphere 
of perception, and memory (smrti) may arise even without a specific 
cause, that is to say, it may be accidental (akasmat). 

(31) Two explanations of “mutual coordination” (parasparakita) 
are given, the first referring to the mutual impulsion of the organs, 
the second to the mutual influence of the objects. The organs are de- 
void of ideas (pratyaya) and are guided by the mind (mdnasadhisthita). 
Several reasons are given for the assertion that everything functions 
“for the sake of the purusa’’ (purusartha). 

(32) The question of how many instruments there are is disputed 
in the tradition. The followers of Varsaganya assert that there are 
eleven instruments with intellect as the only internal organ. The 
Tantrikas, Paficadhikarana, and so forth, assert that there are ten 
instruments, and Patafijali (the Samkhya teacher) asserts that there 
are twelve instruments. The correct view is that there are thirteen 
instruments, namely, intellect, ego, mind, the five sense capacities 
and the five action capacities, and the commentary argues in favor 
of this view. Theterm ‘‘karana” means the instrument of action. 
Seizing (Gharana) is accomplished by the action capacities. Holding 
(dhérana) is accomplished by the sense capacities. Illuminating (pra- 
kaSana) is accomplished by the internal organ. Other teachers suggest 
that the action capacities accomplish seizing; mind and egoity accom- 
plish holding; and intellect together with the sense capacities accom- 
plish illuminating. The reference to the tenfold objects means the five 
specific objects (uisesa, i.e., the gross elements) and the five generic 
objects (avisesa), i.e., the five subtle elements. 

(33) The external sense capacities function through perception in 
present time only. The internal organ functions not only in perception 
but also through memory of the past and intentionality (or inference) 
with respect to the future. In other words, the internal organ functions 
in all three times. Reasons are given for the view that there are ten 
external organs even though the tenfold division of the external 
organs has already been referred to in verses 26 and 28. 

(34) The sense capacities of gods and Yogis are able to experience 
generic objects, but ordinary mortals only experience specific objects. 
The action capacities relate to the activities of things having form. 
Speech grasps the vibrations of sounds alone. The other action capa- 
cities function with respect to the activities of all five kinds of objects. 
Organs cannot be regarded as having no objects of their own (asad- 
visaya). 


264 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(35) The term ‘‘door” (dvdra) refers to a direct means of percep- 
tion, as, for example, seeing a color. The term “possessing the door” 
(dvarin.) refers to indirect or internal perception, as, for example, in- 
tellect, egoity, and mind. The latter can perceive a great variety of 
matters. The former is definitely restricted to certain specific kinds 
of perception. 

(36) The term “‘artha’’ is taken in the sense of effect (arya) in 
relation to specific and generic objects. The consciousness principle 
(cetandsakti) becomes related to intellect when it determines something. 
Ordinary experience (upabhoga) begins with the apprehension of sound, 
etc., and reaches a conclusion when the difference between consti- 
tuent and consciousness is attained. 

(37) The activity of knowing is accomplished by the intellect 
as well as all decisions to act. Consciousness sees by means of the 
intellect and appears to act because of the intellect. When the intellect 
is confused (under the influence of tamas), a misconception occurs. 
When the intellect discriminates properly, however (under the influ- 
ence of saftva), the misconception is removed. The intellect then 
realizes the difference between consciousness and the constituents. 


X. Tue SustLe anp Gross ELEMENTS (E117-121) 


(38) The five subtle elements are produced from egoity. They are 
referred to as “generic.” They are referred to as “subtle elements” 
because they represent general categories, e.g., the essence of audibility 
or the essence of visibility, and so forth. The gross elements are 
produced from the subtle elements. One subtle element produces only 
one gross element, that is to say, the subtle element of sound produces 
the sound-producing gross element or space; the subtle element of 
touch produces wind; the subtle element of form produces light; the 
subtle element of taste produces water; and the subtle element of smeil 
produces earth. Space has only one quality, sound. Wind has two 
qualities, sound and touch. Light has three qualities, sound, touch, 
and form. Water has four qualities, sound, touch, form, and taste. 
Earth has five qualities, sound, touch form, taste, and smell. The ele- 
ments are called “specific”? because they are experienced as specific 
feelings that are comforting, discomforting, and confusing. Apart 
from the five qualities, namely, sound, etc., there are other qualities 
that are known as ‘‘one helping the other’ (parasparanugrahaka), and 
seven verses are quoted that enumerate these qualities. The subtle 
elements do not give rise to specific feelings, and, hence, they are called 
“generic.” The specific features and qualities of each of the gross 
elements are given. 

(39) The threefold specific bodies are as follows: (a) the subtle 
body (prandsfaka, and see above under verse 29, made up of the five 


YUKTIDIPIKA 265 


breaths plus the sense capacities, the action capacities, and egoity), 
which depends on activity (ces#d) and transmigrates from life to life; 
(b) bodies born of mother and father, which are of two types, namely, 
womb-born (jarayuja) and egg-born (andaja), and which are wrapped 
in the sheaths (kofa) ofhair, blood, and flesh (derived from the mother) 
and bone, tendon, and marrow (derived from the father); and (c) 
bodies born from the elements (prabhita), which are also of two types, 
namely, seed-born or “‘coming out as a result of breaking through”’ 
(udbhijja) and sweat-born (svedaja). The gods and other transhuman 
personages have bodies that are womb-born, egg-born, seed-born, 
and sweat-born, depending on their functions. Of these various bodies, 
the subtle bodies are permanent and transmigrate from life to life. 
The other bodies cease at the moment of death. 

Whereas the bodies born of mother and father and the bodies deri- 
ved from the elements are simple enough to comprehend, the deri- 
vation of subtle bodies is not as clear. There is an old mythological 
tradition that describes the manner in which spiritual bodies are deri- 
ved. This old tradition is that of the “six kinds of reproduction” 
(satsiddhi). According to this tradition, in the time just prior to crea- 
tion, spiritual entities simply willed or desired themselves into exist- 
ence. This is the manahsiddhi. When this capacity became weakened, 
creatures reproduced themselves simply with amorous glances. This is 
the caksuhsiddhi. When this became weakened, reproduction occurred 
simply by speaking or talking with one another. This is the vaksiddhi. 
When this weakened, reproduction took place simply by touching. 
This is the hastasiddhi. When this weakened, reproduction occurred 
through embracing. This is the dslesasiddhi. Finally, when even this 
weakened, reproduction occurred through sexual intercourse. This 
is the dvandvasiddhi, and it was at this point that the ordinary world 
of creation began to function with rebirth and transmigration. Only 
the last variety is our ordinary human level; the preceding varieties 
make up the hierarchy of supernatural beings. 

The older Samkhya teachers have interpreted the problem of the 
subtle body in various ways. Paficadhikarana, for example, referred 
to the subtle body as vaivarta, a moving body that serves as a carrier 
(dtivahika) of consciousness. Patafijali (the Samkhya teacher) accept- 
ed a subtle body that is propelled by merit and demerit. Vindhya- 
vasin, however, did not accept the notion of a subtle body, mainly be- 
cause he believed that the sense capacities are all-pervasive. Hence, 
according to Vindhyavasin, the notion of a subtle body was un- 
necessary. 


XI. THe Sustte Bopy (E121-123) 


(40) The expression ‘‘mahadddisiksmaparyanta’’ means the eightfold 


266 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


vitality or subtle body (prandstaka) that transmigrates from life to life. 
Varsaganya says that intellect is universal or general (sddhdrana), 
but here mahadadi refers to the eight pranas (pranastaka) (and cf. above 
under SK 29). There is no need to accept many subtle bodies for each 
consciousness. There is only one subtle body that accompanies a 
consciousness from life to life. 

(41) The notion (of Vindhyavasin) that the sense capacities are 
all-pervasive is wrong. If the sense capacities were all-pervasive, then 
one would know all things everywhere, which is not the case. There 
are lengthy discussions of the subtle body and the process of rebirth. 

(42) Transmigration of the essential core (linga) is determined by 
the force of the basic predispositions, empowered by the constituents 
of materiality. When these causes are checked, then liberation results. 


XII. Tue Basic Prepispositions (E123-137) 


(43) According to Isvarakrsna, the basic predispositions (bhdva) 
are (a) innate (sdmsiddhika), (b) natural (prakrtika), or (c) acquired 
(vaikrta). In sages such as Kapila knowledge is innate. In lesser sages 
it is natural and can be easily aroused. In ordinary mortals it is present 
as a possibility that can be acquired (vaikrta) by proper study and 
instruction. Other Samkhya teachers hold different views. Paficadhi- 
karana, for example, asserts that knowledge is either natural or 
acquired. The former then breaks down into three varieties, namely, 
tattvasamakaéla (knowledge that arises simultaneously with a_ basic 
principle), sdmsiddhika (knowledge that can easily be aroused in a 
composite body), and dbhisyandika (potential knowledge that can be 
aroused but with more difficulty). The latter has two varieties; 
svavaikrta (knowledge cultivated by oneself) and paravaikrta (knowl- 
edge cultivated by means of others). Vindhyavasin, on the other 
hand, does not accept tattvasamakdla or sdmsiddhika, but he does accept 
the other varieties. 

(44) The terms “‘upward’? (irdiva) and ‘downward’? (adhastat) 
do not refer to physical regions (bhimivisesa) but simply higher and 
lower births. Only knowledge is a means to liberation. 

(45) The basic cause of bondage is ignorance. When ignorance 
is conjoined with nonattachment, then dissolution in materiality results, 
which is known as prakrtibandha. When ignorance is conjoined with 
pursuing various kinds of worldly power, then acquired bondage 
results, known as vaikarikabandha. When ignorance is conjomed with 
passionate attachment to seen and heard objects, then ordinary or 
worldly bondage results, known as daksindbandha. The term “‘non- 
attachment”’ in this context refers to improper nonattachment. The 
term “‘rdjasa’’ indicates that passionate attachment toward objects 
is the cause of ordinary existence (samsdra). 


YUKTIDIPIKA 267 


(46-51) The term “‘fratyaya’ is synonymous with ‘‘category” 
(padartha) or “‘distinguishing characteristic’? (Jaksana). Hence, the 
expressions “‘pratyayasarga,” “‘padarthasarga,” and “‘laksanasarga’’ are 
roughly synonymous. On the other hand, one can also argue that the 
term “‘pratyaya’”’ is synonymous with “‘buddhi,” “‘niscaya,” or ‘“‘adhya- 
vasdya,’’ Hence, “‘pratyayasarga’”? means the intellectual creation as 
certainty and ascertainment. There is an old mythological tradition 
(here quoted) that describes the emergence of the intellectual creation 
as follows. The body of greatness (mahdimyaSarira), at the beginning 
of creation, felt alone and wanted sons who would do his bidding. 
By an act of will (or inner contemplation) he produced five kinds of 
beings whose principal energy-streams (mukhyasrotas) became enveloped 
in immovable tamas. By another act of will (or thought) he produced 
twenty-eight kinds of beings whose energy-streams were more mobile but 
who were still largely dominated by tamas and were characterized as 
being ¢iryaksrotas. By yet another act of will (or thought) he produced 
nine kinds of beings whose energy-streams tended to flow upward and 
who were, thus, dominated by sativa and characterized as being ardhva- 
srotas. Finally, by an act of will (or thought) he produced eight kinds 
of beings whose energy-streams tended to flow downward and who 
were, thus, dominated by rajas and characterized as being arvaksrotas. 
Therefore, the intellectual creation has five misconceptions, twenty- 
eight dysfunctions, nine contentments, and eight attainments. The 
misconceptions and dysfunctions (dominated by tamas) are especially 
found among plants and animals (wherein there is a predominance of 
mukhyasrotas and tiryaksrotas respectively). The contentments are espe- 
cially found among the gods (wherein there is a predominance of 
irdhvasrotas). The attainments are especially found in the human realm 
(wherein there is a predominance of arvaksrotas). 

The five misconceptions break down into various subdivisions. 
There are eight varieties of tamas and cight varieties of confusion (see 
Gaudapada’s Bhasya for an enumeration of both groups). There are 
ten varieties of great confusion, including problems related to the 
ten familial relationships, namely, those of mother, father, brother, 
sister, wife, son, daughter, teacher, friend, and personal assistant. 
There are eighteen varieties of gloom, made up of the ten problems 
related to familial relationships and eight varieties of power. Finally, 
there are also eighteen varieties of blind gloom made up of the fear 
of losing the ten familial relationships and the eight varieties of power. 
These five misconceptions are in a sequence of descending inferiority. 

Reference in passing is also made to the eight generative principles 
indicating that each has fifteen subvarieties, based on five (samhata, 
vivikta, parinata, vyasta, and samasta) for each of the three constituents. 

The twenty-eight dysfunctions are made up of the eleven injuries to 
the capacities (inclu ling mind, the five sense capacities, and the five 


268 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


action capacities) together with the seventeen kinds of injury to the 
intellect (see SK 49 and Gaudapada’s Bhasya for an enumeration). 

There are nine kinds of contentment and eight kinds of attainment. 
The nine kinds of contentment have the following ancient names: 
ambhas (“‘endless water’’), salila (‘“‘absorbed along with endless water”’), 
ogha (“carrying like a flood of water’’), vrsfi (‘rain that pleases every- 
thing’’), suédra (“easily crossing’), supara (“crossing to the other 
shore’), sunetra (‘‘easily leading to liberation”), sumdrica (“the well- 
praised”’ ) and uttamabhaya (“‘the greatest fear’’). Moreover, contentments 
are said overall to have two varieties, one for the wise (vyutpanna) 
and the other for the unwise (avyutpanna). Contentment is said to be 
relative as it relates to higher and lower objects. The eight kinds of 
attainments have the following ancient names: ¢draka (“‘crossing the 
ocean of birth and rebirth’’), sué@ra (‘‘crossing the difficulties of the 
ocean of rebirth’’), tarayanta (‘crossing now’’), pramoda (“‘enjoying’’), 
pramudita (‘exceedingly joyous’), modamana (‘‘delighting”), ramyaka 
(“pleasure of good friends’’), and sadapramudita (‘‘always delighted’). 
The differences between contentments and attainments are discussed, 
and reasons are given for not including destiny (bhdgya) in time (kala)! 
(The basic meanings for the éustis and siddhis may be found in Sam- 
Khyakariké 50-51; and see the commentaries of Gaudapada, Vacaspati 
Misra, and Paramartha’s Chinese version for variant listings of the 
ancient names. A precise characterization of each of these ancient 
lists is no longer available. The interpretations of the ancient termino- 
logy in each of the commentaries appear forced and fanciful. ) 

(52) (The effects of) merit and demerit are not the cause of crea- 
tion. The ultimate cause is the unmanifest (or, in other words, primor- 
dial materiality), which fulfills its unique task (adhikdara). 


XIII. Tae Emprrican Woriv (E137-141) 


(55) Satisfaction is always associated with frustration, but birth 
is not considered one of the causes of frustration. Decay (jara@) ope- 
rates even in the region of the gods. Decay and death (jardmarana) 
are said to be the fundamental causes of frustration. 

(56) Three kinds of creation are described: of principles (tattva), 
elemental (bhita) and predispositional (bhava). The older Samkhya 
view that each consciousness has its own primordial materiality (name- 
ly, the view of Paurika) is refuted. There is only one primordial 
materiality. 


XIV. Simires ILLusTRATING THE ROLE AND FUNCTION OF 
PriMorDIAL MATERIALITY (E141-142) 


(57) The simile of milk (ksira) is discussed at length. Manifes- 


YUKTIDIPIKA 269 


tation is due to consciousness’ purpose (viz, experience and liberation) 
and not to the ‘‘proximity of consciousness” (purusasannidht). 


XV. LIBERATION AND IsOLATION (E143-144) 


(62-63) (No commentary available) 

(64) (Only a portion of the commentary is available, and it follows 
other standard commentaries) 

(65-66) (No commentary available) 

(68) Isolation (kaivalya) appears to be identified with the Buddhist 
nirvana. In this state, called brahman, the properties of the constituents 
disappear. 

(69) Various explanations of duration, origination, and absorp- 
tion are given, and the use of the term ‘‘bhiia’” is explained. 


XVI. Tue TRaAnsmissioN oF THE SAMKUYA TRADITION (E145-146) 


(70) Kapila out of compassion taught the truth to Asuri. Asuri 
taught the truth to Paficasikha, who expanded it and passed it on to 
many others. It is impossible to list all of the many teachers of Sam- 
khya, because it was set forth in the beginning by the blessed one 
(bhagavat, Kapila) and hence goes back hundreds and thousands of 
years (or one hundred thousand years). 

(71) Other teachers after Paficasikha include Harita, Baddhali, 
Kairata, Paurika, Rsabhesvara, Paficadhikarana, Patafijali, Varsaganya, 
Kaundinya, Mika, and so forth. Isvarakrsna presents a balanced and 
useful account of Samkhya. He is not biased toward anyone’s inter- 
pretation, and he presents the system in a way that can be easily 
comprehended by students. 

(72) Isvarakrsna summarized the views of the vast tradition, 
leaving out many detailed disputations and focusing, rather, on the 
essence of the entire system. 


JAYAMANGALA 


The date and authorship of this commentary is unknown. It con- 
tains a good deal of material, however, from the commentaries already 
dealt with (namely, Paramartha’s Chinese version, the Sdamkhyavrtti, 
the Samkhyasaptatiortti, and Gaudapada’s Bhasya). P. Chakravarti points 
out, furthermore, that it appears to know of certain views mentioned 
only in the Yuktidipika (that is, the discussion of seven types of 
action under SK 19 and the interpretation of the expression ‘‘karana- 
karyavibhaga’”’? under SK 15).1 On the other hand, also according 
to Chakravarti, Vacaspati’s Tattvakaumudi appears to presuppose 
the Fayamangala, for Vacaspati describes and rejects an interpretation 
of the eight attainments (under SK 51), an interpretation set forth 
only in Jayamangala*. All of this, of course, is very slim evidence, but 
overall it is perhaps not unreasonable to place Jayamangald some time 
between Yuktidipiké and Tattvakaumudi, or, in other words, some time 
between about the seventh century and the ninth century. 

Gopinath Kaviraj, in his introduction to the printed edition of 
Jaamangala by H. Sarma, suggests that the author of the Fayamangala 
may be the same as the author of two other texts (also called 
Fayamangala), namely, the Kdmandakanitisa@ra and the Kéamasitra.® 
Moreover, on the basis of the benedictory verse of Fayamangald, which 
includes the expression “lokottaravddindm pranamya munim,”’ Kaviraj con- 
cludes that the author was a Buddhist. In a later article, however, 
entitled ‘Literary Gleanings, Jayamangala,’’* Kaviraj offers yet an- 
other suggestion. He argues that the author of all of these commen- 
taries called Fayamangala is a certain Sankararya of the Payyur 
family, who lived some time in the fourteenth century. The name 
Sankararya became somewhat garbled in the process of manuscript 
transmission and, therefore, comes to appear in the colophon of our 
extant version of the Jayamangala as Sankaracarya (the great Vedan- 
tin). Moreover, argues Kaviraj, this Sankararya of the fourteenth 
century is very possibly also the author of the Yogasitrabhasya- 
vivarana, a text that is also wrongly attributed (according to Gopinath 
Kaviraj) to the great Sankaracarya. 


272 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


All of these are interesting speculations deserving of further explo- 
ration, but at the present time no firm conclusions are possible. The 
date and authorship of Fayamangald is simply an open question, although 
Chakravarti’s claim that it precedes Vacaspati and comes after Yukti- 
dipikd appears to be the most likely avenue for further research. 

The following summary is based on the edition of the text prepared 
by Haradutta Sarma (Fayamangald, Calcutta Sanskrit Series, No. 19, 
Calcutta: N.N. Law, 1926). 


(Summary by Ram Shankar Bhattacharya) 


I. InrropucTorRy VERSES: THE ScOPpE AND TASK OF THE 
SAmxuHya (E1-5) 


In the benedictory verse there is a salutation to a certain muni who 
is said to be a “‘lokottaravadin.’’® The object of composing the present 
work consisting of 70 verses is to help those who desire to comprehend 
the vast treatise called Sastitantra. 

(1) The “three kinds of frustration” are said to be internal, ex- 
ternal, and celestial. Internal frustration is said to arise in the body 
and the mind. Mental frustrations can be annihilated by the power 
of knowledge (samkhyanabala) or by experiencing satisfying objects. 
External frustrations are said to be caused by six factors: human 
beings (mdnusa); domestic animals (pau), e.g., cows; wild animals, 
(mrga), e.g., lions; birds (paksin); reptiles (sarisrpa), e.g., snakes; 
and stationary beings (sthdvara), trees, posts, etc.* External frustrations 
can be annihilated by resorting to suitable places that are properly 
guarded. Celestial frustrations are caused by the influence of the 
planets; they arise in the body. 

(2) The verse says that the method of understanding (vijfdna), 
i.e. knowledge of the principles is better than scriptural means to 
annihilate frustrations. Why? Because knowledge of the principles 
has pure results (suddhaphala) owing to the forsaking of the body, 
undecaying results (aksayaphala) owing to the forsaking of materia- 
lity, and unsurpassable results (niratifayaphala) owing to its having 
nothing higher than it. “Understanding of what is manifested and 
unmanifested” is defined as correct cognition of the actual nature of 
things (svaripapariccheda). It is remarked that the verses from 3 onward 
are to be understood as elucidations of the first 2 verses. 

(3) The word ‘“‘prakrti”’ is analyzed to mean ‘“‘that which is origina- 
ted from pradhana, i.e., the three gunas’’ (“‘prakriyate utpadyate pradhanat 
asyah?’)", “Ungenerated” is that which does not undergo any change. 
The five subtle elements produce the five gross elements respectively. 
The etymology of ‘‘purusa’”’ is given as “‘puram fariram tasmin vasat’ 
(he who resides in the city, i.e., the body), with the remark that this 


JAYAMANGALA 273 


derivation is in accordance with the rules of the Wirukta’. Since con- 
sciousness is bereft of action (niskriya) nothing can come out of it. As 
consciousness has no beginning it is not generated?. 


II. Tue InsrRUMENTs oF KNOWLEDGE 


(4) (E5-7) There is a long discussion on the inclusion of all 
instruments of knowledge in the accepted three, namely, (a) drsta, 
explained as perception, (b) inference, that by which something is 
inferred, and (c) reliable authority, the statements of persons whose 
faults are completely destroyed. Intuition (pratibhd) falls under either 
perception or inference depending on the particular case. Comparison 
(aupamya, i.e., upamadna) is included in either reliable authority or in 
inference depending on the case. Tradition (aitihya) is the same as 
reliable authority. Nonapprehension (abhdva) comes under percep- 
tion. Inclusion (sambhava) is included in inference, since there is a 
cause-effect relation between parts and whole. Presumption (arthdpatti) 
is the same as inference. An object to be known (prameya) can only 
be acquired or abandoned by use of an instrument of knowledge. 

(5) (E5-7) ‘‘Ascertainment of (sense) contents” is explained 
as the awareness (buddhi) of sound, touch, etc., by the five (external) 
sense organs, viz., auditory, tactual, etc. In such an awareness, atten- 
tion to what is particular (vifesdvadhdrana) predominates. Perception 
is an instrument of knowledge provided it is pure (fuddha), i.e., free 
from faults. That which is not an instrument of knowledge is of four 
kinds: (1) savyapadesya, when one thinks someone approaching from 
far off is Devadatta because of resemblance; (2) savikalpa, when one 
in the same situation says, “‘this must be Devadatta,”’ because it is 
doubtful; (3) arthavyatirekin, when one sees two moons because of some 
eye disease; (4) indriyavyatirekin, when one sees things in dreams when 
the organs are subdued by sleep. We are told that the three kinds of 
inference—piarvavat, Sesavat, and sdmdnyatodrsta—were treated in the 
sastitantra. In the pirvavat type, we infer a future occurrence; in 
Sesavat, a previous occurrence; in sdmdnyatodrsta, a present fact is infer- 
red, e.g., the fact that the sun is moving is inferred from the change 
of position observed in both human beings and the sun. 

‘Depending on a mark and the bearer of that mark’’ is explained as 
(a) lingaparvaka, inferring a mark-bearer, e.g., a cuckoo, from the 
perception of its mark, i.e., its coo; (b) lingipirvaka, inferring the 
mark, e.g., the coo, from the mark-bearer, the cuckoo. The relation 
(which makes inference possible) between mark-bearer and mark is 
of seven kinds: (1) possessor-possessed relation (svasvémibhdva), as 
between a king and his officers; (2) relation between stuff and its 
modification (prakrtivikara), as between barleycorn and fried flour 
made from it; (3) cause-effect relation (karyakadrana), as between 


274 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


a cow and its calf; (4) utensil-user relation (pdtrapdtrika), as between 
an ascetic and his staff (éridanda); (5) constant association (sahacarya), 
as between male and female; (6) contrariety (pratidvandin), as between 
hot and cold; (7) efficient causality (nimitianaimittika), as between 
an eater and what he eats, 

A reliable person is defined as a person bereft of attachment and 
hatred and in whom others have faith. Statements (sruti) of such 
reliable persons handed down through a tradition (parampard) are 
called ‘‘reliable,”’ and the cognition that arises after hearing these 
statements is called “reliable”? authority. (Sruti may be taken in the 
sense of Veda also.) The particle ‘‘ca’’ at the end of the karika 
suggests that reliable authority is like inference in providing a basis 
for cognizing past and future, as well as present, object. 

(6) (E9) Objects to be known (prameya) are either perceivable 
by the organs (pratyaksa), beyond the field of perception (atindriya), 
or absolutely beyond the field of perception (atyantaparoksa). The 
last mentioned includes things like heaven and liberation, which 
can only be known through reliable authority.” 

(7) (E9-10) Materiality and consciousness are absolutely beyond 
perception. Nonperception of existent things occurs owing to four 
kinds of factors: (1) defects in spatial position (defadosa); (2) defects 
in the sense organs (indriyadosa) ;(3) defects in the contents of aware- 
ness (visayadosa); (4) defects due to other things (arthantaradosa). The 
verse lists eight reasons for nonperception, which are brought under 
the above fourfold scheme. Being too far away or too close are cases of 
(1); injury of an organ is a case of (2), as is unsteadiness of the mind 
(because the mind is a sense organ); subtlety is a case of (3); and the 
rest come under (4). Though the mind isa sense organ, its unsteadiness 
is mentioned separately from defects in the other organs because 
of its prominence. 

(8) (F19-11) ‘“‘Nonexistence’’ here means the Nyaya’s four kinds of 
absence. 


III. Tue Notion oF PREEXISTENT EFFEcT 


(9) (£11-12) The Vaisesikas hold that the effect is not existent 
in its cause, but the effect is existent there, according to Samkhya, 
as causal efficacy (Sakti). Illustrations explicate the five reasons 
offered in the verse. What does not exist does not get caused, e.g., a 
hare’s horn cannot be produced, whereas a pot can be produced from 
a lump of clay. If oil or curd were not already existent in their res- 
pective material causes, viz., sesame seed and milk, we might well 
find them arising from sand, or water. If asatkdryavada were true, 
anything might arise anywhere, at any time. If effects were not de- 
pendent on things having an appropriate causal efficiency, we might 


JAY AMANGALA 275 


find a sprout growing from a seed whose potentiality had been des- 
troyed. The last reason—skdranabhava—is explained alternatively as 
either the being or the nature of the cause: the nature of an effect 
is said to be the same as is found in the cause. 


IV. Tue Manirest AND UNMANIFEST ASPECTS OF MATERIALITY 


(10) (£12-14) The manifested entities are those from the 
intellect to the gross elements. ‘“Nonpervading’’ means that the mani- 
fested things occupy a particular region only, as contrasted with the 
avyakta, which pervades all the three worlds at all times. ‘Mobility’ 
is said to mean transmigration (samsdra) here, because, if it means 
“activity” it would imply that unmanifested materiality has no 
activity, which would conflict with its being the agent of the universe. 
The manifested materiality is said to be ‘“‘many,”’ because it has twenty- 
three forms. It has a locus, namely, unmanifested materiality. It is a 
linga, because the unmanifested materiality is inferred through it— 
or the karika may mean that manifested materiality goes to dissolution 
(layam gacchati), i.e., all of the forms of manifested materiality become 
dissolved in their respective material causes. Its “‘parts’”? are sound, 
etc. It is “dependent on another,” and not self-dependent (na svatan- 
tram), because effects of the manifested materiality accord with the 
nature of its cause, namely, unmanifested materiality. 

(11) (E14-16) “Undifferentiated”? (vivekin) here means either 
nonsentient, having no power to discriminate, or else nonseparable 
from the constituents. “‘General’’ (samdnya) means capable of being 
experienced by all consciousnesses. ‘‘Nonconscious” (acefana) means 
that the power of experiencing satisfaction, frustration, or confusion 
is lacking. The last part of the verse means that consciousness is 
opposite in nature to manifested materiality. It is, however, similar 
to unmanifested materiality in some respects: Consciousness 
is without a cause, owing to its having no beginning, and eternal 
for the same reason; it is pervasive when liberated from materia- 
lity, immobile because it is not an agent, without a locus because it 
has no cause, aliiga (not being a mark of anything, or incapable of 
being dissolved), without parts, because it has no qualities such as 
sound, etc., and independent, not being originated from any cause. 

It is pointed out that, although in verse 10 manifested materiality 
is called “‘many”’ (aneka), according to this verse, consciousness must 
be single. However consciousnesses are in fact shown to be many 
in karika 18 ; therefore it is not appropriate to call consciousness 
“single,”? and in this regard consciousness is dissimilar to unmanifested 
materiality, which is single.!? Consciousness is without constituents 
(nirguna); the illuminator (vivekty) because of its power or illuminat- 


ing (cetanatva); or owing to its being distinct from the constituents, 


276 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


contentless (nirvisaya) owing to its being the enjoyer; not general 
(asémanya) because of its contentlesseness; conscious (cetana) because 
it experiences pleasure, etc., and nonproductive (aprasavadharmin) 
since it lacks agency. 


V. Tye THREE CONSTITUENTS 


(12) (E16-18) The constituents are beyond the senses and 
must be inferred from the nature of satisfaction, frustration, and 
indifference. Illumination, etc., are the purpose (prayojana) of the 
constituents. The constituents are not themselves operations (vrtti), 
as the verse might be thought to imply; rather, they cause operation, 
so the expression must be read in a secondary sense. ‘‘Mutual opera- 
tions” (“‘anyonya vriti’’) shows that each constituent is the cause of the 
change in the other two, owing to which change, there arises satis- 
faction, etc. 

(13) (E18-19) “Lightweightness” in sativa is responsible for the 
feeling of lightness in a body as well as in objects. It is because of 
the “‘shining”’ of sattva that the organs can illuminate objects, and 
external objects become devoid of impurity (nzrmala) for this reason. 
“Enveloping”’ is a property owing to which the limbs become heavy, 
tired, or languid; the organs are subdued by weakness or stupor, and 
external objects become heavy and dirty (anirmala). The attributes 
of the constituents listed here are only illustrative; they have other 
attributes. “For the sake (of consciousness)’’ includes the functions 
of the constituents that lead to experience or liberation.¥ 


VI. Tue INFERENCES THAT ESTABLISH THE EXISTENCE AND 
MaAKEuP OF PRIMORDIAL MATERIALITY AND CONSCIOUSNESS 


(14) (E19-20) Because an effect has the nature of its material 
cause, unmanifest materiality possesses properties such as being un- 
differentiated, etc., for these properties characterize the constituents. 

(15) (E20-23) Because different things are limited, there must be 
something, the subject of the limiting relation, that is the cause of those 
things. “Because they share common characteristics” (samanvayat) 
argues that effects possessing a single universal property (jaiz) must 
have a cause exhibiting that property. In this case the property is hav- 
ing satisfaction, frustration, and confusion, a property that characte- 
rizes all internal and external entities, and so their cause must be some- 
thing that also has that property, namely, unmanifest materiality. 
“Because of the disjunction between a cause and its effect”’ argues that, 
because an effect is that which is separated from its cause, the effects— 
twenty-three kinds—of manifested materiality must have been sepa- 
rated from a cause, which is unmanifested materiality. “Because of 


JAY AMANGALA 277 


the nondisjunction of the whole world” is explained in two ways: (1) 
owing to the absence of disjunction (vibhdga), and (2) owing to the 
occurrence of dissolution of the variegated world. The cause in which 
all effects become dissolved cannot be God, and this cause must be 
single in number. 

(16) (E23-24) The unmanifest functions in two ways: (1) in 
the equilibrium state through the three constituents by virtue of the 
predominance of any one of them, which results in a state known as dis- 
equilibrium (vaisamya); (2) through transformation in which the world 
is the specific locus of the respective constituents just as a tree is a locus 
of the effects of its specific seed. 

(17) (E24-26) “Because the aggregates exist for the sake of some- 
thing else’””—that which is aggregated or organized as a whole must be 
for others. The intellect, etc., that is, bodies, are “aggregates”; the 
“others” must be consciousness and nothing else. Because conscious- 
ness is entirely different from that which is undifferentiated, etc. (see 
karika 11), it cannot be identified with the intellect, etc. Every body 
has a controller (adhisthatr). This controller cannot be the internal 
organ, because it is nonconscious. Because the intellect, etc., are cap- 
able of being experienced, there must be some “‘enjoyer,’’ someone who 
knows or experiences them and who is different from the nonconscious 
internal organ. This enjoyer is the self (dtman) in the body associated 
with other entities of a nature similar to it (e.g., the mind), because 
they are regulated in the same way with regards to rebirth, etc. “Be- 
cause there is activity in order to gain isolation’’—this activity consists 
in the intellect having cognitive awareness as one of its aspects. Had 
there been no consciousness, this would have been impossible. Thus, 
consciousness exists. 

(18) (E26-27) Different views about the number of selves are 
alluded to—some say there is just one self in all bodies; others say 
there are different selves for each body; the “‘Vedantins” hold that 
there is just one “‘ancient”’ (purdna) purusa, but from it are manifested 
(avirbhita) as sparks from fire, a consciousness for each body.!# 
“Because births and deaths are regulated causally”—if there were 
only one consciousness, when one consciousness is (as it were) born, 
or dies, everyone would be born, or die. Actually, consciousnesses 
are not literally born nor do they die, since they are eternal.1® 
“Because activity is not simultaneous’—again, if there were only 
one consciousness, then when merit and demerit, purpose and what 
is not one’s purpose, satisfaction, and frustration operate, they 
should operate equally for everyone. “Because of opposition (in, 
or to) the three constituents’? —because the controller (cf. commen- 
tary on SK 17) is made of the three constituents, consciousness, being 
associated with it, can be said to be of the nature of the three consti- 
tuents. But if there were only consciousness and it was, say, sdttvika, 


278 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


then all will be sdttvika. However, because the constituents are 
(mutually) opposed, consciousness must be held as many. If the 
various consciousnesses in each body came out of one “‘old” purusa 
like sparks out of fire (as the “‘Vedantins” hold) the multiplicity of 
consciousnesses is nevertheless established: there will then be two 
views possible, differing in whether these consciousnesses are differ- 
ent or nondifferent from the one ‘‘ancient’”’ purusa. I (the author of 
the Fayamangala) have discussed this at length in another work.!® 

(19) (E27-28) “Because of the opposition” (viparydsa)—i.e., the 
opposition among the three constituents. The nonagency of conscious- 
ness is due to its not being productive. Because consciousness is non- 
agent, it is neutral (udd@sina), sitting apart unaffected by the activities 
of the constituents (cf. SK 02). This “‘neutrality” is of seven kinds.” 
Because consciousness is neutral, it is the witness (sa@ksin) of the activi- 
ties pertaining to materiality. The isolation of consciousness is due to 
its not being associated with anything, and its percipience is due to its 
being conscious. A verse (which is not quite intelligible) is quoted to 
explain how consciousness can be an experiencer (bhoktr) without be- 
ing an agent,. 

(20) (£28) The linga is defined as containing the fundamental 
principles beginning with intellect and ending with the subtle elements. 
As to how a nonconscious entity appears conscious, the illustration 
is offered of the hotness of a lump of gold owing to its contact with 
fire. Agency lies in the constituents and is falsely attributed to neutral 
consciousness, as fighting is attributed to the commander who does 
not directly fight. 

(21) (E29) ‘The connection between consciousness and materia- 
lity is like the connection between a fish and water or between a 
mosquito and the udumbara tree8 The illustration of the lame and 
the blind indicates that nonconscious materiality becomes conscious 
Owing to consciousness’ controllership. This illustration also shows 
that as two men leave each other after reaching their destination, 
so there arises disjunction between consciousness and materiality 
after achievement of consciousness’ purposes. The connection is 
the cause of creation (sarga) of intellect, etc. 

(22) (E30) Materiality is also called by such names as “‘great 
darkness” (tamobahula) and ‘‘unmanifest’’ (avyakrta).19 Intellect 
(buddhi) has other names, too—‘‘mahat,” “‘pratyaya,’ “upalabdht.”’ 
The subtle elements are also sometimes called “‘subtle’’ (siksma), 
“unspecific”? (avisesa), and ‘‘small’’ (anw).2° The five gross elements 
are space (dkdSa), air (vdyu), fire (tejas), water (ap), and earth 
(prthivi). They evolve from the five subtle elements according to the 
ekottaravrddhi principle—i.e., each succeeding principle possesses 
the qualities it causes as well as its own quality. Thus, space 
has only one quality, sound, whereas earth has five qualities, viz., 


JAYAMANGALA 279 


sound, touch, sight, taste, and smell. The gross elements are some- 
times called “‘specific” (vigesa). 


VII. THe FuNcTIONING OF THE THIRTEENFOLD INSTRUMENT 


(23) (E31-32) ‘Reflective discerning” involves determination 
ofa content as expressed in an assertion suchas “this is a smell.” 
Meritorious behavior is that kind of reflective discerning leading 
to the performance of restraints (yama) and restrictions (niyama) 
as described Yogasitra 11.30, 32, which are quoted here. Correct 
awareness is the determination (avadhadrana) of the twenty-five 
basic principles leading to awareness of the difference between 
consciousness and the constituents. Everything else is non-correct 
awareness. Nonattachment is turning away from the faults in 
the body, the senses, and their contents. Attachment is craving 
for these. Mastery is of eight kinds: (1) Animan is the power of 
becoming very small. (2) Laghiman is the ability to become lighter 
than air. (3) Mahiman is the power to attain “greatness” (mahattva). 
(4) Prapti is the power to attain what is desired. (5) Prakamya is the 
power to satisfy various kinds of desires. (6) [fitvais lordship. (7) Vasitva 
is the power of independent action. (8) Yatrakdmavasdyitva is the 
power through which one can remain in the sky (div), atmosphere 
(antariksa), or earth according to one’s will. 

(24) (E32-33) ‘‘Self-awareness arises when one thinks, with 
respect to contents like color, etc., ‘I am characterized by them” 
or ‘‘they are mine.’’ In the word “‘tanmdtra,” “‘mdtra’’ signifies that 
though sound, etc., are possessed by both the gross and the subtle 
elements, they are distinct in the subtle elements.”! 

(25) (E33) The group of eleven organs evolving from egoity 
is sdttvika, because they grasp their own contents. Because these 
organs as well as the gross elements are characterized by both illu- 
mination (praka@Sa) and inertia (sthiti) they require the help of the 
“fiery” form of egoity, which is characterized by action (Kriya). 

(25) (E33-34) The sense organs are called “‘buddhindriya’’ 
because they depend on the intellect for their activity. The order 
listed should have been auditory, tactual, visual, gustatory, and 
olfactory, because that is the order in which the respective con- 
tents grasped are listed. The action organs (karmendriya) are so- 
called because their business is to accomplish an action.?? 

(27) (E34-35) Mind has the nature of both kinds of organs. 
It is samkalpaka, i.e., its original nature is to form intentions. It is 
called an organ (“‘indriya),” because it is the mark of Indra (the 
self). The distinctive nature of the sense and action organs along 
with the mind (all being organs) are each based on the parti- 
cular transformation of the constituents following their attributes, 


280 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


namely, mutual suppression, etc. These particular transformations 
are the cause of the difference in location and function of organs 
as well as of their contents. 

(28) (E35) The ‘‘mere” in “‘mere awareness’? (Glocana-mdatra), 
the function of the organs, means that the organs serve to illuminate 
their contents only, whereas belief (nifcaya) (concerning name, 
species, etc.) is the business of the intellect. Really, according to 
Samkhya, it is consciousness that causes those objects to be known 
(cetayate} which have already been grasped by the intellect. The 
function of the action organs is nothing but action. “Speaking” 
means the uttering of syllables (varna). 

(29)  (E35-36) The defining attributes of all the organs, 
including intellect, egoity, and mind, are also to be understood as 
their operations. According to the Fayamangald, each of the 13 
organs (capacities)—and not the three internal organs along—has 
its own (asdémdnya) function. The fourfold functions of the thirteen 
instruments is spoken of; they would seem to include the three func- 
tions of the three internal organs and one function of each of the ex- 
ternal organs. Likewise, the ‘common operation”? belongs to the 
thirteen organs, not to the three internal ones only. We are told 
that the udana ‘‘breath’’ produces noise while flowing toward the 
head. 

(30) (36-37) An example of the simultaneous functioning of 
the four is when one recognizes a cobra revealed by a flash of lightning. 
Here the visual organ provides the sensing (dlocana), the intellect 
provides reflective discernment (adhyavasdya), the ego relates it to the 
self, and the mind resolves to act (presumably by fleeing the vicinity). 
On the other hand, an example of progressive functioning occurs when, 
through increase of illumination, we first see an object indistinctly as a 
post or a man (a mental construction), then ascertain that it is a man, 
relate him to ourselves, and develop a resolution to act accordingly. 
The activities of the three internal organs must be preceded by the 
functioning of an external organ. 

(31) (E37-38) The functioning of the three internal organs 
with any one of the external organs, whether simultaneous or succes- 
sive, is prompted by “‘coordination” or mutual impulsion (paraspara- 
savyapeksa). ‘Akita’? is the experience of one’s own operating (sva- 
orttibhoga). It does not occur simultaneously in all of the organs. God 
cannot be held to be the agent, since He would also have to depend 
on materiality. The Samkhya view is that consciousness only is the 
controller, since materiality is nonconscious. 

(32) (E29) Seizing is the function of the action organs, holding, 
of the internal organs; and illuminating, of the sense organs. The ten 
effects of the functions of the sense organs, called prakdsya, are the five 
qualities—sound, etc.—each one having two subdivisions : (1) the 


JAYAMANGALA 28] 


subtle, celestial elements and (2) the gross, noncelestial elements. 
The effects of the functions of the action organs are called dharya. The 
effects of the functions of the internal organs are called dharya, because 
they are capable of being determined (avadhdryamana) through their 
own internal functions. 

(33) (E40-41) The internal organ includes the intellect, ego, 
and mind. The ten “‘externals” of the verse are the sense and action 
organs, which are both the “gates” (dvdra) as well as the contents 
(visaya, i.e., things experienced, bhogya) of the internal organ(s). Time 
does not exist apart from contents, which are either past or future or 
present. So time is not a twenty-sixth principle. 

(35) (E42) Sense contents are of two kinds: (1) the subtle 
elements known here as ‘“‘nonspecific” (avigesa) and (2) the gross ele- 
ments, known here as “‘specific’’ (vifesa). Both kinds are capable of 
being perceived by the organs.*3 

(35) (E42) The term ‘‘every”’ refers to all contents whether past, 
present, or future. 

(36) (E42-43) The thirteen organs, each having a distinct 
character, become manifested as a result of mutual suppression of 
the three constituents. They become associated with their contents 
with the help of their operations. Illuminating “everything”, i.e., 
the gross as well as the subtle forms of sense contents: it is the con- 
sciousness that makes known those objects that have already been 
grasped by the intellect. 

(37) (E43) Although the intellect is an organ, it is the chief 
of all the organs inasmuch as it accomplishes (sampddayati) fully 
all experience of the contents grasped by it while colored by tamas, 
and inasmuch as it furnishes discrimination between consciousness 
and materiality, a kind of awareness that is not empirical. 


X. THe Susrte anD Gross ELEMENTS 


(38) (E43-44) Because nothing is specified or particularized 
by the subtle elements, the subtle elements are called “nonspecific.” 
The subtle elements are almost imperceptible. Each gross element 
possesses one quality more than its cause. For example, space has 
only one quality, sound, originating from the subtle sound element, 
whereas the gross element air has two qualities, namely, sound and 
touch. Similarly, the gross element earth has all of the five quali- 
ties, earth being a product of the gross element water, which has 
four qualities, namely, sound, touch, color, and taste. The gross 
elements are either comforting, uncomfortable, or confusing. 

(39) Those subtle elements that have become the locus of body 
are known as “‘specific,” though in reality, the subtle elements are 
nonspecific, as already mentioned. “Bodies born of mother and 


282 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


father” have six components, namely, hair, blood, etc. The gross 
body, having six sheaths, is the product of these six “specifics.” The 
external gross elements are called “‘prabhiita,’’ meaning “‘eminent,” 
because they are capable of (1) giving way (avakésa), (2) arrange- 
ment, (3) causing cooking or burning,” (4) moistening, (5) sustain- 
ing (through their hardness or solidity) the gross body. The subtle 
body persists until the acquisition of discrimination, but the gross 
body perishes. 


XI. Tue SustTLe Bopy 


(40) (E45) Each consciousness possesses a subtle body that 
is created by primordial materiality at the beginning of creation 
{adisarga). ‘The motion of this body cannot be obstructed by any- 
thing. It will persist until discrimination. It is composed of the 
principles beginning with intellect and ending with the subtle 
elements. Because it is devoid of the gross body, it is incapable 
of experiencing contents. It is called ‘“‘linga’’ because it becomes 
dissolved at pralaya.® 

(42) (E46-47) ‘“‘Behaves like a player’ refers to the taking 
on of various kinds of gross bodies belonging to gods, men, and 
animals. The plurality of subtle bodies is due to the power of their 
efficient causes (nimitta, i.ec., merit and the like: cf. SK 44-45). It 
is the all-pervasiveness of materiality that is the sole cause of the 
play of the subtle body. Neither God nor a thing’s own nature 
(svabhava) are agents in its actions, which are influenced by the 
eight basic predispositions. 


XII. THe Basic PREDISPOSITIONS 


(43) (E47) The predispositions are mentioned in Karika 23 
and are of eight sorts, four sdéttvika and four taémasa. “Innate” pre- 
dispositions are those that are found at birth in, for example, Kapila 
and others, who appeared at the beginning of creation. The “ac- 
quired” predispositions are those that are acquired through effort 
by persons after creation. Both these two kinds of predispositions 
reside either in the thirteen instruments or in the five kinds of effects.?6 

(44) (E47-48) The predispositions are called nimittas, and 
the moving upward, etc., are the results, the naimittikas. Meri- 
torious behavior consists in respecting the restraints and_restric- 
tions. “‘“Moving upward’ means the attainment of the world of 
the gods, etc. Similarly, “moving downward” is the state of resid- 
ing in animals. ‘““Knowledge” here means discriminative awareness 
of the difference between materiality and consciousness. “‘Libera- 
tion”? means the cessation (nivrtti) of the subtle body. Misconception 


JAYAMANGALA 283 


(viparyaya) is the opposite of “‘ (discriminative) awareness,” i.e., it 
is ajfidna that is of the nature of bondage in samsdra. Bondage is of 
three kinds: (1) of those for whom materiality alone is the highest 
principle (prakrtibandha) (2) of those karmavadins who think that human 
purposes are confined to the heavenly goals attainable by sacrifices, 
etc. (daksinabandha); (3) of those who take the modifications 
(vikéra: organs and gross elements) alone as the mark of the powers 
that constitute human purposes (vikaérabandha). Between meritorious 
and nonmeritorious behavior, this author finds a third variety 
called “‘mixed” (mifra), which leads to rebirth among humans. 

(45) (E48-49) A nonattached person who finds fault with sense- 
contents but is not desirous of discrimination becomes dissolved into 
any one of the eight generative principles (namely, the three internal 
organs and five subtle elements) at death but does not attain libera- 
tion, because at the time of creation (sargakdla) he is born again into 
samsdara, 

(46) (E49-50) The group of sixteen comprising the efficient 
causes and their results (cf. SK 44) is known collectively as “‘intellec- 
tual creation” (pratyayasarga) (“‘pratyaya’’ is a synonym of “‘buddhi’’) 
and can be subdivided into four groups: (1) misconception; (2) dys- 
function, or the inability to acquire discriminative knowledge in spite 
of one’s desire to know ; (3) contentment, aversion to the means of 
liberation; (4) attainment, i.e., acquisition of discriminative knowl- 
edge. Disequilibrium of the three constituents consists in the predomi- 
nance of one (or two) constituents. Because the disturbance of 
each constituent may be of the form of increase or decrease, there 
must be six such varieties.?? 

(47) (E50) The five varieties of misconception, tamas, etc. 
(cf. the next verse), are equivalent to the Yoga system’s five klesas 
(cf. Yogasiitra I1.3). 

(47) (E50) The eight kinds of tamas correspond to the eight 
generative principles. The eight forms of confusion are associated 
with the eight kinds of Supernatural Powers (cf. SK 23). The ten 
forms of great confusion are associated with the five subtle elements 
(divya, yielding satisfaction) and the five gross elements (adiuya, yield- 
ing satisfaction, frustration, and confusion). The eighteen forms of 
gloom (equals =dvesa, hatred) are associated with the eight forms of 
Supernatural Power and the ten elements. The eighteen forms of 
blind gloom (equals = abhinivefa, will to live) are associated with the 
same eighteen factors. 

(49) (E51-52) Dysfunction is injury, due to defect or disease, 
of the eleven organs. As to why the defects of the organs are called 
“‘pratyayasarga,” inasmuch as the organs cannot be regarded as pratyaya 
(equals = buddhi), it is replied that egoity being a modification of the 
intellect, at least the ahamkdarasarga may rightly be called pratyayasarga, 


284 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and the creations of egoity are the organs. Or, “pratyaya’? may be 
taken in the sense of property or attribute (dharma) and, as the organs 
are properties of the intellect, the defects in them may come under 
pratyayasarga.*8 

(50) (E52-54) The four internal contentments are also called 
ambhas (=prakrti), salila (=upddana), ogha (=kdla), and ors (= 
bhagya). The word “internal” (ddhydtmika) shows that these content- 
ments are to be experienced in one’s own mind. The “mark” or 
“symbol”? contentment (updddna tusti) consists in thinking that an 
external means is enough to attain liberation. The five “turnings 
away from sense contents” (visayoparéma) come from observing the 
faults involved in acquisition (arjana), preservation (raksana), destruc- 
tion (ksaya), enjoyment (savga), and injury (himsd). The five external 
contentments are also called by the names “‘suédra,” ‘‘supara,’”’ etc.?® 
Contentment isa form ofinjury to the buddhi and as such it falls 
under dysfunction.®° 

(51) (E54-56) An attainment (siddhi) is explained as the acqui- 
sition of knowledge.*! Uha, etc., are also called by such names as 
“tara,” “‘sutara,”’ etc.22 The contraries of the attainments (asiddhi) 
are injuries to the intellect and thus fall also under dysfunction.* 
The explanation of aha is not clear. It seems to be a kind of reflection 
(utpreks@) of the cause of bondage and liberation. ‘“‘Oral instruction” 
is the hearing of Samkhya treatises. ‘“Study’’ is reading and reflection 
on Samkhya works. Through these three one can attain knowledge 
that helps one to annihilate three kinds of frustration. Misconception, 
dysfunction, and contentment are like a hook (arkusa), i.c., the curb- 
ing factors by which persons are compelled to remain in samsdra; 
thus they are obstacles to attainment. These fifty categories along 
with ten others form the sixty topics of Samkhya called “‘sastitantra’’ 34 


$2: 1 8¢ > 


XIII. THe Emprrica Worip 


(52) (E56-57) Sarga is what is created and not creation. 

(53) (E57-58) The eight kinds of divine creation are related to 
Brahma, Prajapati, Sirya, Asura, Gandharvas, Yaksas, Raksases, 
and Pisacas. The animal creation has five subdivisions: (1) pasu, begin- 
ning with cows and ending with donkeys; (2) mrga, beginning with 
lions and ending with cats; (3) paksin, beginning with swans and 
ending with mosquitoes; (4) sarpa, beginning with worms and ending 
with snakes; and (5) sthdvara, beginning with trees and ending with 
other forms of life.3* The human order has no variety, as there is 
only one human form. It is noted that beings can be grouped in a 
different way. There is a fourfold division based on the four sources, 


viz., the uterus (jardyu), the egg (anda), sweat (isman), etc., and plants 
(udbhid) 3° 


JAYAMANGALA 285 


(54) (E58) ‘“‘Above”’ signifies the region of the gods (devaloka) 
where sativa exists in abundance. ‘‘Lower order”’ (miilatah sarga) refers 
to the animals (cf. verse 53) where tamas predominates. ‘“‘Middle”’ 
refers to the region of human beings. Owing to the predominance of 
rajas they are full of frustrations. 

(55) (E58-59) Frustration has four kinds according to its four 
sources, viz., the womb (garbha), birth (janman), old age (jara), and 
death (marana). These form internal frustration. Consciousness 
continues to be the recipient of these until the cessation of the subtle 
body by attainment of discrimination. Although sometimes satis- 
faction is also achieved, not being a regular result, it is not mentioned. 
Frustration as a result of old age, etc., is regular, inevitable, and in- 
variable’. 


XIV. Simires ILLustTraTING THE ROLE AND FUNCTION OF 
MATERIALITY 


(56) (E59-60) There are three kinds of created things—subtle 
bodies (lizga), predispositions, andelements. Neither God, conscious- 
ness, nor a thing’s own nature are the cause of these three. Creation is 
nothing but the three constituents in essence. Created things cannot 
be held as self-produced (svabhdvika) as this will lead to an obvious 
contradiction, and the law of spatial association (defaniyama) would 
be violated.3? Elements comprise gross bodies as well as subtle and 
gross objects. 

(59) (E61-62) ‘Having illuminated itself’? means having assu- 
med the forms of gods and the like. 

(60) (E62) The “various ways’ are the seven forms of intellect 
of Karikaé 63, except knowledge. These are the accessories for awareness 
of the three kinds of objects.3® Knowledge is, on the other hand, a 
means to isolation. Materiality is active because it possesses consti- 
tuents; consciousness is inactive because it lacks them.*° 

(61) (E63) The unmanifested form of materiality is the same as 
the state of equilibrium (known as parama riipa) of the constituents, and 
is incapable of being perceived. The perceptible aspect of the consti- 
tuents should be known as maya and unreal (tuccha).41 Sukumdra (‘‘reti- 
cent’) is glossed as “‘subtle’’ (siksma). The word ‘‘me’’ in the verse 
refers to prakrti. 

(62) (£63-64) The loci of materiality are of the forms of predis- 
positions, subtle bodies, and elements. 


XV. LIBERATION AND ISOLATION 


(63) (E64) The “‘self” (aman) that becomes bound is the subtle 
body. Bondage is of three kinds (cf. commentary on vs. 44). It is dis- 


286 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


criminative knowledge, a product of the unmanifested, which makes 
the unmanifested associated with a given consciousness cease. Merit, 
etc., are not properties of consciousness. ““The sake of each conscious- 
ness”’ means here only isolation. ‘“‘By means of one form’? means by 
knowledge, one of the eight forms of intellect. 

(64) (£64-65) “Concentration on fundamental principles’ 
means repeated reflection on the real nature of the twenty-five cate- 
gories. The expression “I am not” signifies that the self does not 
reside in the subtle or gross bodies. The expression ‘‘nothing belongs 
to me”’ shows that these bodies belong to materiality and not to 
the self. ““There is no “I”? suggests that the self is not materiality. 
Discriminative knowledge is complete in all respects, pure (aparisesa), 
being devoid of the blemishes involved in mundane existence. ‘‘Iso- 
lated”’ is explained as “‘single,”? which seems to mean that this knowl- 
edge remains of one form always. 

(65) (E65) “Ceased producing” the two kinds of creation, 
namely, the lingasarga and the bhdvasarga: when materiality ceases 
from producing effects, it assumes unmanifested form. Consciousness 
perceives materiality whether it is engaged in creation or has ceased 
to be productive. ‘‘Spectator”’ indicates a state in which the self abides 
in itself. 

(65) (E56) Objection: Because materiality is always connected 
with consciousness owing to its all-pervasiveness, why does creation 
come to an end? The verse answers this objection—there is no reason 
for it to begin again. 

(67) (E56-67) “Correct awareness’’ means self-knowledge. ‘“‘Non- 
causative state” is that of the burnt seed, having no power to pro- 
duce effects. The latent dispositions are those that have been acquired 
in previous births. 

(68) (E57) ‘Separation’ is the separation of the subtle body 
from the (last) gross body.4 ‘“‘Prakrti’? here stands for its transfor- 
mation, the subtle body, which ceases forever after the destruction of 
the (last) body. Isolation is certain and inevitable (avasyambhdavin). 
It is final also, for, owing to the absence of purpose, the creation of 
intellect, etc., will cease forever. 


XVI. THe TRANSMISSION OF THE SAMKHYA TRADITION 


(69) (67-68) The ‘greatest sage’’ is Kapila. 

(70) (E63) The doctrine is ‘“‘pure,’ because it purifies, the 
three kinds of frustration. Its “excellence” (agrya) is analyzed as 
“agre baavatodt’ i.e., “‘existing before all,”’ and is explained as coming 
into existence before all the bhedas.48 Asuri was a great sacrificer who 
eventually became a samnydsin.4 The Sastitantra was composed by 
Paficasikha in sixty parts in which sixty topics are discussed. 


JAYAMANGALA 287 


(71) (E69) The names of two ancient teachers of Samkhya are 
Garga and Gautama. Isvarakrsna is said to have been a wandering 
monk (parivrajaka).4* 

(72) (E69) The Sdmkhyakarikaés (or Sdmkhyasaptati) is said to 
be “complete” in all respects, because it treats of all matters pertaining 
to bondage and liberation. 


SAMKARA 
YOGASUTRABHASYAVIVARANA 


If this commentary on Vyasa’s Yogasiitrabhasya should prove finally 
to be anauthentic commentary of the great Samkaracarya (the Vedan- 
tin), the work will add a fascinating, though puzzling, chapter both 
to the early history of Vedanta and the early history of Samkhya- 
Yoga. More than anything else, it will show that what we have been 
calling Patafijala-Samkhya was an important component in the for- 
mulation of Advaita Vedanta philosophy. It might also render more 
likely the possibility that the Gaudapada of the Samkhyakarikabhasya 
is the same as the early Advaitin Gaudapada of the Méandikyakarika 
in the sense that there may have been an interest among early Advai- 
tins in the philosophy of Samkhya and Yoga. We have already dis- 
cussed the literature regarding the authenticity of this commentary 
(see note 36 Part One of the present volume) in which it was men- 
tioned that Leggett, Hacker, Mayeda, and Nakamura are all in favor 
of the commentary’s authenticity. At the same time, however, it 
should be remembered that Gopinath Kaviraj (see above entry under 
Jayamangala) attributes this commentary, as well as the Fayamangala, 
to a certain Sankararya of the fourteenth century. 

Quite apart from the authenticity of the Yogasitrabhasyavivarana, 
it should also be noted that Samkara’s Brahmasitrabhdsya is itself an 
important, albeit highly critical, source for piecing together the history 
of Samkhya philosophy. Sections I.1.5-11 and 18, I.4.1-28, IT.1.1-11 
and II.2.1-10 of Samkara’s Brahmasittrabhasya are given over to a de- 
tailed treatment of Samkhya philosophy (based largely on the 
Samkhyakarika). A full discussion of this material may be found in the 
epilogue to Gerald J. Larson’s Classical Samkhya If we accept Allen 
Thrasher’s suggestion that Samkara can be plausibly dated at about 
700 or slightly earlier, Samkara’s presentation of Samkhya clearly 
shows that the Karika-Samkhya of Iévarakrsna was evidently a potent 
rival in Brahmanical philosophical circles at the beginning of the 
eighth century.? 


MATHARAVRTTI 


As has already been discussed (see entries on the Suvarnasaptati, 
Samkhyavrtti, Samkhyasaptativriti and Gaudapada’s Bhdsya), our extant 
Matharavrtti has a common core of content with four other early com- 
mentaries on the Samkhyakaérika. Although for many years it was 
thought that the Matharavriti may have been the original upon which 
the other four were based, there is now a general consensus that our 
extant Matharavrtti is the latest of the five commentaries and may be 
dated anywhere from the ninth century onward. The commentary 
contains quotations from the Puranas, appears to presuppose a much 
more sophisticated logic (based most likely on later Nyaya discussions), 
and presents overall a fuller and more systematic treatment of Sam- 
khya (strongly suggesting that it is a later expansion of the earlier and 
briefer discussions in the other related commentaries). E. A. Solomon 
has suggested that our extant Matharavrtti closely follows her recently 
edited Samkhyasaptativrtti, and that the former may be an expanded 
version of the latter (with some borrowing also from the other three). 
She also suggests that Sdmkhyasaptativrtti may have been an original 
Matharabhasya by the ancient Samkhya teacher Mathara, mentioned 
in the Anuyogadvarasittra of the Jains, and that our extant Matharaourtti 
may be the same as the commentary referred to by Gunaratnasiri in 
his commentary (from the fifteenth century) on the Saddarsanasamuc- 
caya by the expression matharapranta (the Mathara ‘‘corner’’ or school). 
She also speculates that the ancient Mathara may be the same as 
Madhava (see entry above). These are all interesting suggestions 
worthy of further exploration. The dependence of the Matharavrtti on 
the Samkhyasaptativrtti is sufficiently close that the latter may be consi- 
dered an expansion of the former. Whether Samkhyasaptativrtti repre- 
sents an original Matharabhdsya, however or whether Matharavrtti is 
to be identified with matharapranta, or whether Mathara is the same as 
Madhava, are all open questions and cannot be definitely determined 
by the present limited evidence. 

For a full bibliography regarding the relationship of the Mathara- 


292 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ortti to the other four commentaries having common. content, see above 
under the Suvarnasaptati entry. 

The edition used for the following summary is that of Vishnu Prasad 
Sharma, editor Samkhyakarika of Srimad Isvarakrsna with the Mathara- 
vrtti of Matharacarya and the Fayamangala of Sri Sankara (the latter edited 
by S.S. Vangiya) (Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Work No. 56, 
Varanasi, 1970). 


(Summary by Harsh Narain) 


I. InrropucTory VERSES: THE SCOPE AND ‘TASK OF THE 
SAMKHYA (E1-7) 


(1) Kapila is a great seer (maharsi) born of Svayambhuva Manu’s 
daughter Devahiiti to Prajapati Kardama, (and having the four cons- 
tructive basic predispositions, namely, meritorious behaviour, discri- 
minating knowledge, nonattachment, and power, see SK23). The 
end of Samkhya is to abolish the three kinds of frustration. Of these the 
first, internal sort is of two kinds: physical and mental. The desire 
to eliminate the three kinds of frustration leads to their elimination-— 
even though the desire is born of these—just as a crab kills its own 
mother. 

(2) Heaven is perishable because it is limited. The knowledge 
of the manifest, the unmanifest, and the knower is absolute (aikdantika) 
because it necessarily bears fruit; final (dtyantika) because it is the 
knowledge of nature itself; pure because it is accompanied with the 
rules of restraint (yama) and restriction (niyama); and bearing maxi- 
mum and inexhaustible fruit because it is exclusive and perfect. (The 
commentary under this verse contains a number of quotations from 
the Brahmana- and Srauta-Sitra-texts as also one quotation from the 
Bhagavata bearing upon the slaughter of animals in Vedic sacrifices. ) 


II. Tse INsrRuMENTS oF KNOWLEDGE (E8-12) 


(4) The manifest, the unmanifest, and the knower are objects 
of knowledge that are established by the instruments of knowledge. 
The instruments of knowledge are three: perception, inference, and 
reliable testimony. Perception is caused by the sense capacities. Per- 
ception is the principal instrument of knowledge and is hence stated 
first. Where perception fails, inference comes into play. It takes 
the form of a three-membered or five-membered argument. It oper- 
ates in the absence of perception and has to be free from the thirty- 
three faults (recounted in the next verse). What operates on the basis 
of, and follows upon a reason (hetu), is called inference. For example, 
fire is inferred on the basis of prior perception of smoke in the kitchen. 


MATHARAVRTTI 293 


What cannot be established by inference is established by reliable 
testimony, as, for example, the propositions that there are nymphs in 
heaven, etc. Sanatkumara and others are reliable persons being free 
from attachment and hatred. The Vedas also are reliable. 

(5) The three members of the syllogism are subject (paksa), reason 
(hetu), and example (drstdnta). The subject is the enunciation of 
what is to be established. For instance, ‘‘this region is fiery.” The 
reason has three forms: presence in the subject (paksadharmatva), 
presence in the positive example (sapakse sativam), and absence from 
the negative example (vipakse asattvam). Fallacies of the hetu are four- 
teen. Examples are of two kinds, viz., by similarity and by dissimila- 
rity (sadharmyavaidharmya). False examples are ten. So, inference has 
three members and has to be free from thirty-three fallacies. Accord- 
ing to others, inference takes the form of a five-membered argument: 
thesis (pratijfid), reason (apadefa), example (nidarfana) application 
(anusandhana), and conclusion (pratyamndya). Inference is either for 
oneself, private (svdrtha), or for others, public (pardrtha). Inference 
for others is either a priori (purvavat), a posteriori (Sesavat), or based 
on general correlation (sdémdnyatodrsta). The a priori inference covers 
inference of both the past and the future on the basis of prior experi- 
ence. Reliable testimony is twofold: reliable persons and the Vedas.? 

(6) Because materiality is creative even though it is unconscious, 
there must be consciousness, which moves it just as a magnet moves a 
piece of iron. 

(7) Nonapprehension of existents is eightfold, whereas absences 
are fourfold: prior absence (prégabhdva), posterior absence (pradhvam- 
sabhdva), mutual absence (itaretarabhdva), and absolute absence (atyan- 
tabhava). Primordial materiality is subtle because it is not characteri- 
zed by sound, etc., as are atoms, etc. 


III. Tue Notion oF PreexisTent Errect (E12-13) 


(9) The Vaisesika philosophers say that an existent comes out of 
nonexistence. The Ajivakas say that the existent is and is not in its 
cause before production. The Buddhists are also of the same view. 


IV. Tue Manirest anD UNMANIFEST ASPECTS OF 
Materiatiry (£13-15) 


(10) The specific feature of Karika 10 is that itspeaks of two kinds 
of cause or reason (hetu): productive (kdraka) and informative (jid- 
paka). Materiality, intellect, egoity, and the subtle elements are pro- 
ductive whereas misconception, dysfunction, contentment, attainment, 
and grace (anugraha) are informative. ‘‘Productive”’ refers to material 
cause; ‘‘informative’’ refers to the ‘‘intellectual creation”’ or pratyaya = 
sarga [see Introduction ]. 


294 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


V. Tse THREE Constituents (E15-18) 


(12) The intelligibility constituent (sativa) is agreeable (priti) and 
satisfying (sukha) as exemplified in simplicity, sweetness, truth, purity, 
intelligence, forbearance, compassion, knowledge, etc. The activity 
constituent (rajas) is of the nature of frustration exemplified by hate, 
animosity, jealousy, reproach, rigidity, anxiety, wickedness, deception, 
bondage, killing, cutting, etc. The inertia constituent (famas) is of the 
nature of oppression (visdda) and confusion (moha), exemplified by 
ignorance, vanity, sloth, fear, misery, inactivity, infidelity, sorrowful- 
ness, dream, etc. The suppression (abhibhava) of rajas and tamas gives 
rise to the peaceful tendency of meritorious behaviour (dharma), etc., 
belonging to sativa. The suppression of sativa and tamas gives rise to the 
violent tendency of demeritorious behavior (adharma), etc., belonging 
to rajas. The suppression of sativa and rajas gives rise to the delusive 
tendency of ignorance, etc., belonging to tamas. 

Sativa, rajas, and tamas perform each other’s functions. For example, 
the same woman possessing charm and chastity is an instance of sattva. 
She is a joy to her husband and relations but a pain and delusion to 
her cowives, thereby functioning as sativa, rajas, and tamas atthe same 
time. 

(13) The three constituents of materiality are different in kind for 
the simple reason that they have different properties. 


VI. Tue INFERENCES THAT ESTABLISH THE EXISTENCE AND MAKE- 
up OF PrimorpIAL MATERIALITY AND ConscIousNEss (E18-25 ) 


(14) The nondiscriminating character of the manifest and the 
unmanifest (postulated in SK 11) is established on the ground, inter 
alia, that both have the three constituents. What has the three consti- 
tuents is undiscriminating, what is undiscriminating is objective, what 
is objective is general, what is general is unconscious, and what is 
unconscious is productive. Hence, lack of discrimination, etc., are 
established by the fact of having the three constituents. Another 
argument is that the cause, such as the yarn, is bound to be similar to 
the effect, and the unmanifest and the manifest are related by way 
of cause and effect. Nondiscrimination, etc., reside in the manifest 
and the unmanifest on account of the absence of the contraries of the 
three constituents therein. A Yogin perceives both the manifest and 
the unmanifest. 

(16) Causation is twofold: transforming (pfarindmaka) and non- 
transforming (aparinadmaka). Anexample of the first is milk’s becoming 
curd and that of the second, clay, etc. (becoming a pot, etc.). 

(17) Consciousness is ‘‘paramdtman’’ (the supreme self), and its 
presence impels materiality to act for liberation. The Sasfitantra says, 


MATHARAVRTTI 295 


“The creative nature acts under the guidance of consciousness” (purusa- 
dhisthitam pradhanam pravartate). 

(18) Consciousnesses are many. Some are born in high families 
and some in low families. Hence, consciousnesses are many. Some 
interpret it like this. If there is only one consciousness, in the event of 
the birth or death of one, there will be the birth or death of all. 

(19) There are two kinds of agents: user (prayokiy) and maker 
(kartr). Because consciousness is neutral (udésina) and free from the 
three constituents (agunalaksana), it is not an agent (of either kind) at 
all.3 

(21) (E25-26) There are many kinds of conjunction (samyoga): 
unilateral (anyatarakarmaja), like that between a bare trunk and a fal- 
con; bilateral (sampdtaja), like that between two fingers; innate (svd- 
bhavika), like that between fire and heat; due to special capacity (sakti- 
hetuka), like that between fish and water; and accidental (yadrcchika), 
like that between two birds. But the conjunction between materiality 
and consciousness is teleological (arthahetuka), as in the next karika.4 

(22) (E26-28) Mahat (the great one), buddhi (intellect), mati 
(determination), prajid (wisdom), samvitti (awareness), khydti (dis- 
crimination), citi (understanding), smrti(memory), dsuri (?), Hari 
(Visnu), Hara (Siva), and Hiranyagarbha (the Golden Egg, Brahma) 
are synonyms. The synonyms for egoity (ahamkara) are: vaikrta (gene- 
rated), taijasa (the bright one), bhitddi (the first of the elements), 
abhimana (self-awareness), and asmité (I am-ness, egotism). Ahamkara 
is so called because its base, “‘aham’’, represents all the sixty-four letters 
of the Sanskrit alphabet, which begins with ‘‘a”? and ends with “‘ha,” 
by way of grammatical comprehension (pratydhdra), thereby standing 
for everything that is the object of language and thought. Tamasa, 
bhatadi egoity, gives rise to the subtle elements; hence, they are delu- 
sive. Sdttvika, generated egoity, gives rise to the eleven capacities. 
Hence, they are capable of sensing something (hificij jananti).° Rajasa, 
taijasa egoity gives rise to both subtle elements and capacities. Subtle 
elements give rise to gross elements: sound to the physical space 
( aka§a), touch to air, color to fire, flavor to water, and odor to earth. 
Of these, each of the latter is a superaddition to the former. Kapila is 
called Bhagavat because “‘bha’” stands for knowledge of creation and 
dissolution of things, ‘‘ga’’ for knowledge of the coming and going 
of things, ‘‘va” for vidvat (knower) or Yogin, and ‘‘an” for “‘anati”? 
(moves). Combining all the letters, we have Bhagavat. 


IX. Tse FUNcTIONING OF THE THIRTEENFOLD InsTRUMENT (E28-40) 
(23) ‘‘Dharma’’ means the general rules of conduct called ‘‘rest- 


raints”’: noninjury (ahimsa@), truth (satya), nonstealing (asteya), chastity 
(brahmacarya), and nonpossession (aparigraha) (see Yogasitra 2.30)— 


296 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and “restrictions” are purity (Sauca), contentment (santosa), auste- 
rity (tapas), self-study (svadhydya), meditation upon God (ifvaraprani- 
dhana) (see Yogasitra 2.32), prescribed for all the castes (varna) and 
stages of life (dsrama). Meritorious behaviour prevents people from 
falling into a bad condition. Chastity means detachment from enjoy- 
ment of sex in all its forms, even at the level of sound, touch vision, 
audition, and smell, experienced directly or remembered. Besides, 
semen is the germ of Brahma, and one who does not part with it is a 
Brahmacarin (a chaste person), Again, “Brahma”? means the Vedas. 
One who follows them or one’s teacher is a Brahmacarin. Lastly, 
one who bears a staff and an ascetic’s water pot in imitation of Brahma 
is a Brahmacarin. 

(25) The word “‘indriya’? contains ‘‘in’? which means ‘“‘object.” 
Indriyas run after objects, hence, they are called indriyas. The repro- 
ductive organ is for reproduction as well as for pleasure. 

(27) Diversity in the world is not due to God, consciousness, or 
self-nature (svabhdva), but due to the transformations of the consti- 
tuents and diversity of the objects of knowledge. Capacities have also 
been planted in our body not by God, consciousness, or self-nature, but 
by the three constituents. 

(23) ‘‘Mere awareness” is the capacity of the sense capacities to 
apprehend their own respective objects. 

(29) Here, ‘‘karanavrtti”? means, not external, but internal organs, 

(30) Simultaneous operation (yugapadvrtti) means that the inter- 
nal sense capacities appear to work simultaneously though, in fact, 
they work gradually. But the interval between them is too small to be 
apprehended. If we prick a needle into a bunch of betel leaves seem- 
ingly all at once, even then we in fact prick the first leaf first, then the 
second, then the third, and so on. So, eye, mind, egoity, and intellect 
seem to be working simultaneously in apprehending something, but 
they in fact work gradually. 

(31) The constituents tend naturally and necessarily to fulfil the 
purpose of consciousness. The thirteen instruments move toward their 
objects automatically, without being moved by God or consciousness. 
And there is nothing like self-nature to impart motion to them. 

(32) ‘‘Seizer’? means capacities, ‘holder’? means egoity, and 
“illuminator”? means intellect.® 

(34) The five subtle elements are nonspecific, because they have 
the character of causing only satisfaction to the gods, and neither frus- 
tration nor confusion. To human beings, they cause satisfaction, frus- 
tration, and confusion and are hence called specific. 

(35) The intellect, ego, and mind are the gate keepers, and the ten 
capacities are the gates, for it is the intellect, egoity, and mind that 
apprehend things through capacities. 


MATHARAVRTTI 297 


(36) Satisfaction, frustration, etc., residing in the intellect are 
experienced by consciousness. 

(37) In Kapila’s system, there is no duty that is binding. Knowl- 
edge of the twenty-five principles alone leads to liberation. Someone 
has said, ‘Laugh, drink, play, enjoy pleasures—do not hesitate. If you 
know Kapila’s philosophy, then you are bound to attain liberation.’”? 


X. Tue Sustite anp Gross ELEMENTS (E40-42) 


(39) There are [primary] subtle bodies (saksma) made up of the 
five subtle elements. They produced the [secondary] subtle bodies 
(sitksmaSarira) of the three worlds in the beginning of creation. The 
subtle body enters the mother’s womb during the time favourable for 
conception. It lasts until the end of this world or until the discrimi- 
nation between consciousness and materiality dawns, whichever is 
earlier. 


XI. Tue Sustte Bopy (42-44) 


(40) The subtle body (linga) is so called because it merges with 
primordial materiality during the time of dissolution (pralaya). Pra- 
dhana is so called because all is consigned to it. 

(41) ‘The subtle bodies emerging at the beginning of creation con- 
sist of thirteen subtle constituents: intellect, egoity, the five sense capa- 
cities, the five action capacities, and the mind. They cannot stand 
without the /iigasariras (another name for the secondary subtle bodies) 
having the five subtle elements in addition. 


XII. Tse Basic Prepisposirions (E44-51) 


(43) The subtle body that enters the mother’s womb is developed 
by the mother’s blood and the father’s semen. 

(44) ‘Above’ signifies the eight species of the gods: Brahma, 
Prajapati (the creative god), Indra, patriarchs, gandharva, yaksa, 
raksasa, and pisdca. There, meritorious behaviour is the efficient cause 
(nimitta) and rising above is its effect (naimittika). “Below” means the 
five species of cattle, etc.: cattle, animals, birds, reptiles, and immov- 
able species (trees, etc.). Here, demeritorious behaviour is the efficient 
cause, and sinking low is the effect. Knowledge of the twenty-five 
principles does away with the subtle body, followed by the liberation 
of consciousness (paramdiman). Here, knowledge is the efficient cause, 
and liberation its effect. Ignorance (ajfidna) binds consciousness to the 
body. Hence, ignorance is the efficient cause and bondage its effect. 
Bondage is of three kinds: material bondage (prakrtibandha), acquired 
bondage (vaikdrikabandha), and personal bondage (daksindbandha). 


298 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Material bondage means identification of oneself with the eight gene- 
rative principles (namely, prakrti, buddhi, ahamkara, and the five subtle 
elements). Acquired bondage means treating the vikdras, namely, 
buddhi, etc., as best. Personal bondage is caused by charity, sacrifice, 
eic. 

(45) The basic predisposition called power (aifvarya) leads to 
unobstructed fulfilment of desires, but not to liberation. Lack of power 
or impotence yields an opposite result, or, in other words, resulting 
in the nonfulfilment of desires. Merger with nature is called innate 
bondage; sacrifice, etc., are called personal bondage; and enjoyment 
caused by power, etc., is called acquired bondage. 

(48) Tamas is what spoils something (tad vastu malayatiti). 

(51) Knowledge arises through the teacher, scripture, and one’s 
own self. 


XIII. Tue EmpiricaL Woritp (E52-54) 


(55) The subtle (diiga) ceases to exist when knowledge dawns. 
(56) Materiality serves two purposes of consciousness: knowledge 
of sound, etc., and knowledge of the distinction between the consti- 


tuents and consciousness (the distinction is repeated under verses 42, 
58, 60). 


XIV. Simives ILLusTRATING THE ROLE AND FUNCTION OF 
MatERIALITY (E54-56) 


(59) When materiality operates, consciousness experiences the 
three kinds of frustration. When frustration is destroyed, conscious- 
ness is liberated. 

(60) Materiality fulfils two purposes of consciousness-—enjoyment 
of things and liberation—though consciousness does not return the good 
done to it. 

(61) Because God is attributeless (nirguna), He cannot cause a 
world having the three constituents. Hence, the world is caused by 
materiality, not by God. Self-nature (svabhdva) is not an entity, hence 
it cannot be generative. Time also is not an entity, for Samkhya pcstu- 
lates only three kinds of entities: the manifest, the unmanifest, and 
consciousness. And time is subsumed under them. Hence, creative 
nature alone is the cause of the world. 


XV. LIBERATION AND IsoLaTION (E57-61) 


(62) The subtle body of the five subtle elements having thirteen 
instruments alone transmigrates. When knowledge supervenes, the 
subtle body is liberated. “Subtle body,” “‘the principal one”’ (pradhana), 
“materiality” are synonymous. 


MATHARAVRITTI 299 


(64) Knowledge means discrimination between the constituents 
and consciousness. Constant meditation on the twenty-five principles 
leads to the knowledge, “‘I am not the principles,” “the principles are 
not mine,” “I am not of the principles.” 

(65) Consciousness perceives materiality in its various modes by 
by dint of its innate knowledge (Gtmakrtena jftanena). 

(66) Consciousness is single, isolated, pure. Materiality is also 
one and only one for the entire cosmos. 

(67) Latent dispositions lead to meritorious and demeritorious 
behaviour, which is responsible for birth in different species. 

(68) The enlightened one renders his actions incapable of fruition 
and is seedless. So, his actions do not cause another body. The past 
actions that have not yet begun to bear fruit are burnt up, though 
these that have begun to fructify have to be exhausted by reaping their 
consequences. When the past actions are destroyed, the body breaks 
up. Then the causal body called primordial materiality and compo- 
sed of the subtle elements in the beginning of creation ceases to exist. 
Since the purpose of primordial materiality stands fulfilled, it does not 
start another body for the enlightened soul. 

(69) Perseverance (sthiti) (of the world process) means presence 
of the gods, humans, subhumans in their respective abodes. Creation 
(utpatti) means emergence of intellect, etc., from primordial materia- 
lity. Dissolution (Jaya) means reduction of the gross elements into 
subtle ones, of the latter into the sense and action capacities, of these 
into ego, of this into intellect, and of it into primordial materiality. 


XVI. THE TRANSMISSION OF THE SAMKHYA TRADITION (E61-64) 


(70) The knowledge of the twenty-five principles is supreme (agrya), 
because, being absolute and final, it is the highest. 

(71) Liberation means the end of the causally determined body 
and nonreincarnation. 

(72) Sastitantra means a system dealing with sixty topics: five 
misconceptions, twenty-eight dysfunctions, nine contentments, eight 
attainments, and the ten principal topics. The term ‘‘tantra’? means 
where topics are dealt with (tantryante, vyutpadyante).® 


VACASPATI MISRA 


According to tradition, this famous interpreter of Indian philosophy 
was a Maithila Brahmin from the region of Bihar. He lived either in 
the middle of the ninth century (ca., 841) or toward the latter half of 
the tenth century (ca., 976). The reason for the discrepancy in date 
relates to a reference in one of Vacaspati’s own writings, namely, the 
Nyayasiicinibandha, in which Vacaspati reports that he composed the 
work in 898. If this latter date is calculated according to the Vikrama 
era (beginning in 58 B.C.E.), it becomes 841 of the Common Era. If 
the date is calculated according to the Saka era (beginning in 78 C.E., 
it becomes 976 of the Common Era, Arguments have been given for 
preferring either of these dates, and the issue has yet tobe resolved, 
although there appears to be a growing consensus in favor of the date 
976.1 For helpful discussions of both sides of the continuing debate, see 
S. A. Srinivasan.” 

According to Umesha Mishra, the order of Vacaspati’s writings are 
as follows: Nydyakagikd (a commentary on Mandana Misra’s Vidhi- 
viveka), Tattvasamiksaé (now lost), Tattvabindu (an original work on the 
theory of meaning in Parva Mimamsa), Nydyasiicinibandha (a work 
attempting to establish the number and order of the Nyéyasiira), 
Nyayavartitkatatparyatika (a commentary on Uddyotakara’s Npdyavart- 
tika), Tattvakaumudi (on Igvarakrsna’s Samkhyakarika), Tattvavaisaradi 
(a commentary on Patafijali’s Yogasitra and the Bhasya by Vyasa), 
and Bhamati (on Samkara’s Brahmasitrabhasya) 3 


TATTVAKAUMUDI 


The Tattvakaumudi (“Moonlight on the Truth” of Samkhya) was 
translated into German by Richard Garbe in 1891.4 The text was 
critically edited (based on some 90 manuscripts) by S. A. Srinivasan 
in 1967.5 An English translation was prepared by G. Jha in 1896, which 
was revised and re-edited by M. M. Patkar (along with an introduc- 
tion and critical notes by Har Dutt Sharma) in 1965.8 The following 
summary is based on this latter edition and translation of the text. 


302 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The Tattvakaumudi itself is a fairly simple and straightforward 
exposition of the Saémkhyakarika and lacks the detailed analyses and 
incisive polemic so typical of some of the other works of Vacaspati 
(for example, the Tattvavaisaradi, the Nydyavarttikatatparyatika, and the 
Bhamati). One has the impression either that Samkhya was no longer 
an important philosophical tradition in Vacaspati’s time or that Vacas- 
pati himself was not familiar with the details of the old Samkhya system. 
The text has been historically very important, however, for it has ins- 
pired a long tradition of subcommentaries coming down to the present 
day. Moreover, it is fair to say that itis by far the best-known text of 
Samkhya all over India. 


(Summary by Gerald F. Larson) 


I. Inrropuctory VrErsEs: THE SCOPE AND TASK OF THE 
SAmkuya (ET1-16) 


(1) The commentary begins with two poetic verses. The first 
verse pays homage to the feminine “‘unborn one”’ (ajam ekém) (namely, 
materiality), who is red, white, and black (lohita, fukla, and krgna, 
corresponding to the three constituents rajas, sattva, and tamas) and 
who produces the many creatures of the manifest world, and to the 
many masculine ‘“‘unborn ones” (that is, the many consciousnesses), 
who for a time enjoy the feminine ‘‘unborn one”’ but finally abandon 
her after having completed their enjoyment of her. The second verse 
pays homage to the tradition of Samkhya teachers, including Kapila, 
Asuri, Paficasikha, and Igvarakrsna.” 

The Samkhyakariké is a science (fastra) whose subject matter is the 
attainment of a correct and complete understanding of the end or aim 
of man (paramapurusartha). The science supplies the means to attain 
this highest goal, and, therefore, it is worthy to be studied by those 
who desire to attain ultimate philosophical understanding. The Sam- 
khya asserts (a) that there is frustration in the world; (b) that people 
desire to be free from it; (c) that its removal is possible; (d) that the 
Samkhya science provides a necessary and sufficient means for remov- 
ing it; and (e) that all worldly remedies for the removal of frustration 
(e.g., medicine, and so forth) are inadequate because such ordinary 
remedies are neither certain nor able to prevent the recurrence of 
frustration. 

(2) The rejection of Vedic means for the ultimate removal of frus- 
tration refers only to the ritualistic portions of scripture. The philo- 
sophical portions of scripture (as, for example, in speculative Upani- 
sads such as Brhadaranyaka and Chandogya) are not rejected. Moreover, 
Vedic rituals are not being completely discarded by this verse. The 
point, rather, is the following: Vedic rituals are useful, but the way of 


VAGASPATI MISRA 303 


discriminative knowing is ultimately more useful. ‘““We drank the 
Soma, and have become immortal,” etc., and other scriptural passages 
reveal that the alleviation of frustration by ritualistic means is tainted 
with negative side effects (as, for example, the killing of sacrificial ani- 
mals must be expiated, and so forth), leads to inequality of results, 
and provides an “immortality” that is really only a “long duration.” 
The ancient Samkhya teacher Paficasikha is quoted to the effect that 
Vedic rituals bring about negative side effects. A superior means for 
the certain and permanent alleviation of frustration is through the dis- 
criminative awareness of the manifest, the unmanifest, and the knower. 
The manifest is an effect, and by analyzing the effect, one discovers 
the unmanifest, which is its cause. By then realizing that the manifest 
and unmanifest must be construed together (namely, as effect and 
cause) and that these two exist together for the sake of another (pdardr- 
thya), one then infers the existence of a knower. One attains the ulti- 
mate discriminative awareness (vijfdéna) by means of precise scientific 


reasoning (Sdstrayukti) that is accompanied by patient meditation 
(bhavand). 


IJ. Tue INstRuMENTs oF KNowLeDGcE (ET16-42) 


(4) The instruments of knowledge are the instruments for 
attaining the correct cognition (pramd) of objects (prameya). Samkhya 
recognizes three instruments of knowledge: perception, inference, and 
reliable testimony. Other instruments such as comparison (upamdna) 
can be reduced to one of the three. Extraordinary or supernatural 
instruments of knowledge such as the intuition of Yogins are not dis- 
cussed here because they have no relevance with respect to the aware- 
ness of ordinary people. 

(5) Perception is the reflective discerning (adhyavasdya) that arises 
through the direct contact (sannikarsa) between a sense capacity (ind- 
riya) and a knowable and real object (prameya) such as earth or plea- 
sure, and so forth. Such reflective discerning, which is an operation 
of intellect, is one important kind of awareness, and this kind of aware- 
ness arises when the intellect is in its sattva modality and the tamas 
modality has been subverted. When there is such contact between a 
sense capacity and an object with the resulting awareness taking place 
in intellect, the condition is also known as an operation (urtt.). Aware- 
ness, operation, and intellect, it should be noted, are manifestations 
of materiality and, thus, are devoid of consciousness. Nevertheless, the 
intellect casts a kind of shadow or, perhaps better, becomes a reflection 
(pratibimba) in the pure medium of consciousness so that it appears 
as if it were conscious. By the same token the images that manifest 
themselves in consciousness appear to characterize the nature of con- 
sciousness itself. Finally, it should be noted that the description of per- 


304 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ception as direct contact with a specific object excludes doubt, mis- 
conception, inference, and memory. 

Inference depends upon perception and provides mediate knowledge 
based upon general conditions that invariably coincide in a knowing 
situation, as, for example, when the sight of smoke on a hill is present, 
even though the fire is not directly perceived. The sddhya or more 
inclusive term (namely, the fire or what is called the lingin or ‘“‘that 
which bears or supports a mark’’) overlaps with the less inclusive term 
(namely, the smoke or what is called the linga or the “mark’’), and the 
linga overlaps with the paksa (that is, the hill), which is the locus for 
the initial perception and the resulting inference. In formulating a 
correct inference, it is important to eliminate all distorting elements or 
“limiting adjuncts” (upddhi). There are three kinds of inference, 
namely, @ priori (pirvavat), a posteriori (Sesavat), and inference based 
on general correlation (sdmdnyatodrsta). These three can be classified 
into two types: (a) exclusionary inference (avita), wherein knowledge 
arises based on that which remains or is left over after appropriate 
negations have been made; and (b) positive or affirmative inference 
(vita), wherein knowledge arises based on an affirmative assertion of 
invariable concomitance. A posteriori inference is, thus, an exclu- 
sionary inference (and see under verse 9 for examples). A priori 
inference and inference based on general correlation are both positive 
inferences. ‘‘A priori inference” refers to the positive inference of the 
presence of a particular instance of the general notion of fire as a result 
of perceiving smoke on the hill. One is able to make such an inference 
because of previous perceptions of the concomitance of smoke with 
fire, as, for example, ina kitchen. Inference based on general cor- 
relation refers to the positive inference of the presence of a general notion 
for which no particular instance has been perceived, as, for example, 
when one infers the presence of a sense capacity as a requisite instru- 
ment in a knowing situation even though such a capacity cannot be 
directly perceived. (Vacaspati comments at this point that he has 
explained all of this much more fully in his Vydyavarttikatatparyatika. ) 

Reliable testimony depends upon inference and involves the knowl- 
edge that arises as a result of the use of language. It depends upon 
inference inasmuch as one must infer that there is an invariable 
concomitance between certain verbalizations and certain objects 
or actions, but it is not itself an instance of inference. Reliable autho- 
rity functions with verbal utterances that describe or relate objects 
and actions, but the verbal utterances (or sentences) are not inferen- 
tial markers in the sense that smoke is an inferential mark for fire. 
Thus, reliable authority is different from inference. Also, the notion of 
creativity in the use of language shows clearly that verbalization is 
not simply inference. Whereas smoke is invariably and replicably 
concomitant with fire, a verbal utterance or sentence (e.g., of a 


vACASPATI MISRA 305 


poet) may express a meaning that is totally new or that has never 
been uttered in quite the same way. That which guarantees the vali- 
dity of reliable authority (or trustworthy verbalization) is its ultimate 
source, and the only truly reliable source is the Veda or Sruti, because 
it is free from human authorship and free from all defects. Other 
kinds of literature (e.g., smrti and itihdsa) and certain respected tea- 
chers (e.g., Kapila) are also trustworthy inasmuch as their utter- 
ances are based on the Veda. 

There are no other reliable instruments of knowledge in addition to 
perception, inference, and reliable testimony. What some schools call 
“comparison” (upamdna) is really a mixture of perception, inference, 
and reliable authority. “‘Presumption”’ (arthdpatti) is really an instance 
of inference. “‘Nonapprehension’”’ (abhdva) is really a form of per- 
ception, “Inclusion”? (sambhava) is only a case of inference, and 
“tradition”? (aitihya)is only a form of reliable authority, and, in many 
instances, is only vague opinion (with no validity whatever). 

(G6) Imperceptible things (as, for example, materiality, conscious- 
ness, and so forth) can be known through inference based on general 
correlation and exclusionary or a posteriori inference (Sesavat). 


III. THe Norton or PREEXISTENT Errect (ET42-53) 


(9) The Buddhist view that the cause is nonexistent but the 
effects are existent, the Vedanta view that the cause is existent (and 
unitary) but the effects are nonexistent, and the Nyaya-Vaisesika 
vicw that the existent cause is completely different from the effect 
are all mistaken views inasmuch as they render the cause and 
effect relation unintelligible. Only the Samkhya view is correct 
whereby the basic experiences (as effects) of satisfaction, frustration, 
and confusion are traced to their causal constituents sativa, rajas, 
and tamas, thus allowing for a valid inference that there is an ullti- 
mate root cause (namely, primordial materiality) that is constituted 
by the three constituents. 

The arguments for the notion of satkdrya, or the “existent effect,” 
in this verse are directed primarily against the Nyaya-Vaisesika no- 
tion of asatkarya or the ‘“‘nonexistent effect’? (or, in other words, the 
notion that the effect is not existent at the time of causal operation but 
only afterward). These arguments are as follows: (a) If one argues 
that what was nonexistent has been produced, one has to explain how 
something can come from nothing. The “nonexistent”? must some- 
how be interpreted as being part of the causal process. Yet there 
is no intelligible way of speaking about causal operation vis-a-vis 
the “nonexistent”. (b) If one argues that the effect is nonexistent 
at the time of causal operation, then one is denying that there is an 
existent relation between cause and effect. Hence, again, the very 


306 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


notion of causation becomes unintelligible. (c) Moreover, if one argues 
that the effect is nonexistent at the time of causal operation, then 
one cannot avoid the conclusion that any thing might come from any- 
thing. In other words, by denying an existent relation between an 
existent cause and an existent effect, one can no longer account for 
specific effects arising from specific causes. (d) Likewise, if one argues 
that the effect is nonexistent at the time of causal operation, one 
cannot account for a cause being able to accomplish that which it is 
capable of accomplishing. (e) Finally, if one argues that the effect 
is nonexistent at the time of causal operation, it is not possible to 
maintain any significant continuity in nature between cause and 
effect. In other words, everything becomes distinct and unrelated, 
and the whole notion of cause and effect becomes meaningless, 

In addition to these arguments, which establish that the Nyaya- 
Vaisesika notion of asatkdrya is wrong, one can also set forth four 
exclusionary inferences (see above under verse 5) that prove that 
there is no difference between the cause and the effect. These are (a) 
A cloth (as an effect) subsists or is coextensive with its threads (as a 
cause), but two different things cannot subsist or be coextensive with 
one another—as, for example, a cow and a horse. Therefore, cause 
and effect are nondifferent. (b) The threads are the material cons- 
tituents of a cloth, but two different things cannot be made up of 
the same material constituents—as, for example, a jar and a cloth. 
Therefore, cause and effect are nondifferent. (c) There can be no 
conjunction or separation between a cloth and its threads, but two 
different things can only relate to one another by means of conjunc- 
tion and separation—as, for example, a well and a bucket. There- 
fore, cause and effect are nondifferent. (d) Finally, there can be no 
difference in weight between a cloth and its threads, but two differ- 
ent things almost always have at least a slightly different weight—as, 
for example, two bracelets. Therefore, cause and effect are non- 
different. 

A cloth (the effect) is only a transformation or rearrangement of 
the threads (the cause) into a particular shape or form. Effects 
appear (dvirbhava) and disappear (tirobhdva), but they are not differ- 
ent in essence from the cause. Effects may serve varying functions, 
but this does not change their basic identity with the cause. The 
relation of cause and effect can be compared to a turtle and its limbs. 
The limbs appear on some occasions and disappear on others. Or 
again, cause and effect can be compared to clay and a jar or gold and 
a crown. A jar is a particular appearance of clay, and a crownis a 
particular appearance of gold. Yet the jar is nondifferent in essence 
from the clay, and the crown is nondifferent in essence from the 
gold. 

Finally, the Nyaya-Vaigesikas might attempt to force the Samkhya 


VACASPATI MISRA 307 


into the following problem: prior to the operation of a cause, is an 
effect as manifestation existent or nonexistent? If it is existent, then 
there is no need for a cause, for there is already an effect as mani- 
festation. If it is nonexistent, then one must concede the Nyaya- 
Vaisesika position of a nonexistent manifestation. One cannot argue 
that there is a manifestation of the manifestation without ending in 
an infinite regress. It is to be noted, however, that the Nyaya-Vaisesika 
has the very same problem with its notions of ‘‘production’’ (utpatti), 
“inherence” (samavdya), and ‘‘existence” (satid). If one argues for 
a “‘nonexistent effect,’ how can one possibly explain ‘‘production’’? 
One cannot bring in notions like ‘‘inherence”’ or “‘existence,”’ because 
these notions are eternal and cannot be used unequivocally in speak- 
ing about ‘‘production” or ‘‘destruction.”” Nor can one speak about 
the “production” of “production” without ending up in an infinite 
regress. Moreover, one cannot avoid these problems by speaking 
about the ‘‘form”’ (rijpa) of the effect and the ‘‘form’’ of the cause, 
because what is at issue is the problem of causal operation (kripd).8 


IV. Tue MaAnirest AND UNMANIFEST ASPECTS OF 
MaterRia.ity (ET53-60) 


(10-11) ‘‘Being made up of parts” may also mean characterized 
by conjunction (samyoga), as, for example, the conjunction between 
earth and water, and so forth. Conjunction cannot occur, however, 
between primordial materiality and the intellect (and the other basic 
principles), because there is a fundamental identity (tdéddtmya) among 
the various principles of materiality. ‘“Undiscriminated’? may mean 
that the various principles cannot be distinguished from primordial 
materiality, or it may mean that the various principles cannot be 
separated—that is to say, they must cooperate with primordial 
materiality. “Objective” and “general” are included as characteristics 
of the manifest and unmanifest in order to distinguish Samkhya 
from any idealist interpretation (whether Buddhist or Vedantin). 
Primordial materiality and its related principles exist apart from 
consciousness. Finally, in some respects consciousness is similar to 
the unmanifest—for example, both are uncaused (see 10)—but in 
other respects it is different—for example, consciousness is not made 
up of the three constituents, etc.® 


V. Tue THREE ConsTITUENTs (ET60-68) 


(12-13) The term “operation” (vrtti) applies to each member 
of the compound in 12, so that the compound means that the three 
constituents mutually dominate, support, activate, and interact with 
one another. 


308 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


VI. Tue INFERENCES THAT ESTABLISH THE EXISTENCE AND MAKEUP 
OF PRIMORDIAL MATERIALITY AND ConsclousNness (ET68-92 ) 


(14) One can infer (largely on the basis of exclusionary infer- 
ence) that the three constituents are absent from consciousness 
inasmuch as they are present in all modalities of the satisfaction, 
frustration, and confusion of the manifest world of experience. In 
addition, one can infer that the three constituents are present in the 
unmanifest on the basis of the essential identity of cause and effect. 
In other words, satisfaction, frustration, and confusion must have a 
causal basis in materiality in the form of sativa, rajas, and tamas. 

(15-16) The arguments in these verses are directed primarily 
against the atomism of Nydya-Vaiéesika. Finite, manifest reality 
can only be intelligibly accounted for by positing an all-pervasive 
and all-powerful unmanifest whole within which (both analytically 
and synthetically) finite modalities subsist (occasionally appearing 
and occasionally disappearing). 

(17-19) Verse 17 is directed against materialists who deny the 
separate existence of consciousness. Verse 18 is directed against the 
Vedantins who think that consciousness is one. Verse 19 sets forth 
the essential characteristics of consciousness, for the understanding 
of these leads to ultimate discrimination and release. 

(20) In ordinary awareness it appears to be the case that con- 
sciousness is active, but in fact only awareness (antahkaranavrtti) is 
active. Consciousness only appears to be active. In fact, it is not. 
Similarly, . the transformations of materiality appear to be conscious, 
but in fact they are not. 

(21) Primordial materiality performs two functions vis-a-vis 
consciousness, namely, experience and release. Because consciousness 
is inactive it cannot perform these functions, and yet these functions 
are necessary if consciousness is to be discriminated. 

(22) The gross elements emerge from the subtle elements in the 
following fashion: (a) the subtle element sound produces dkdésa, 
characterized by the quality of sound;(b) sound plus touch produces 
wind, characterized by the qualities of sound and touch; (c) sound, plus 
touch, plus form produces fire, characterized by the qualities of sound, 
touch and color; (d) sound, plus touch, plus form, plus taste pro- 
duces water, characterized by the qualities of sound, touch, color 
and taste; and, finally ; (e) sound, plus touch, plus form, plus taste, 
plus smell produces earth, characterized by the qualities of sound, 
touch, color, taste and smell. 


IX. THe Function oF Toe THIRTEENFOLD INSTRUMENTS (ET92-119) 


(23) The notion of the intellect suggests reflective discerning as 


VACASPATI MISRA 309 


well as its agent. There are four varieties or stages of nonattachment 
(viréga): (a) restrained apperception (yatamdnasamjia), in which 
one restrains emotional reactions to experience generally; (b) restric- 
ted apperception (vyatirekasamjfia), in which one restrains whatever 
other emotional reactions still remain after the “‘striving’’ stage (c) 
concentrated apperception (ekendriyasamjfa), in which one overcomes 
the yearning or longing for ordinary experience; and (d) totally 
controlled apperception (vasikdrasamjfta), in which one has no desire 
either for worldly or otherworldly attainments. Patafijali has des- 
cribed this latter stage in Yogasutra 1.15, 

(27) The sense capacities apprehend objects only in a way free 
from qualifying adjuncts (nirvikalpa). The mind performs the func- 
tion of determining or explicating an object (savikalpa—that is to 
say, in terms of its general and specific properties. Kumiarila’s Sloka- 
varitika is quoted in explaining this construction-free/construction 
filled distinction. All differentiations of experience arise because of 
the particular modifications of the three basic constituents. Even 
the latent karmic residues (adrsta) are so constituted. 

(29) The five vital breaths represent the common function of the 
internal organ. 

(32) The action capacities have the function of ‘‘seizing’’; the 
internal organ (made up of intellect, ego, and mind) has the func- 
tion of ‘‘holding” by means of the vital breaths, and so forth; and 
the sense capacities have the function of “illuminating.” The action 
capacities ‘‘seize’’ or extend to speaking, handling, walking, excret- 
ing, and sexual gratification, and these five spheres encompass both 
the celestial (divya) and noncelestial (adivya), thus being altogether 
tenfold. Similarly, the internal organ holds together the body made 
up of the five gross elements by means of the vital breaths, and it 
should be noted that the element earth is a composite of sound, touch, 
color, taste, and smell. Moreover, these elementary bodies are both 
celestial and noncelestial, and so again the aggregate is tenfold. Final- 
ly, the sense capacities illumine the five objects of sense, both celestial 
and noncelestial, thus again being tenfold. 

(33) According to the Vaisesikas time is one and indivisible. 
According to Samkhya, however, the divisions of time are nothing 
more than heuristic distinctions or limiting adjuncts. There is no 
need to posit a distinct entity called ‘‘time.” 

(34) The term “specific”? refers to gross elements. The term 
“nonspecific”’ refers to subtle elements. Ordinary mortals apprehend 
only specific or gross objects. Gods and sages can also apprehend 
nonspecific objects. Among the action capacities, speech apprehends 
sound alone. The other action capacities apprehend the whole range 
of manifest things made up of the gross elements. 

(37) Consciousness comes to have satisfying or frustrating expe- 


310 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


riences because of the presence of the intellect, which casts its shadow 
or reflects its image in consciousness. Likewise it is the intellect that 
provides the ultimate discriminative realization of the difference bet- 
ween consciousness and materiality. The intellect ultimately reveals 
that which has always been the case, namely, that there is a fundamen- 
tal distinction between materiality and consciousness. Because of non- 
discrimination this fundamental distinction has become blurred. 


X. Tue Sustte anp Gross Evements (ET119-122) 


(38) The term ‘‘mdtra’”’ in the compound “‘tanmdtra’”’ suggests that 
the subte elements are devoid of that “‘specific’? or gross dimension 
that would permit their apprehension as being comforting (sania), un- 
comfortable (ghora), and confusing (midha). 

(39) Bodies born of paternal and maternal seed (mdtdpitrja) are 
made up of six sheaths, namely, hair, blood, and flesh from the mother 
and arteries, bones, and marrow from the father. 


XI. Tse Susrte Bopy (ET122-127) 


(40-41) The term ‘‘/iiga’”’ in 40 encompasses intellect, egoity, mind, 
the five sense capacities, the five action capacities, and the five subtle 
elements, but the term ‘“‘/iiga”’ in 41 encompasses only intellect, ego- 
ity, mind, the five sense capacities and the five action capacities. The 
five subtle elements in this latter verse are taken to be the subtle locus 
(asraya) for the transmigrating instrument. The term “‘specific” in 
verse 41 refers to a specific, subtle body that is necessary for transmi- 
gration. A passage from the Mahdbhdrata is quoted, which refers to 
extracting consciousness from the body, and consciousness is said to 
have the size of a thumb (angusthamdatra). The traditional (and fanci- 
ful) etymology of the word “‘furusa’’ is given, namely, that it “sleeps” 
(Sete) in the city (pur), which is the gross body. 

(42) As a dramatic actor assumes various parts, so the subtle 
body occupies various gross physical bodies. 


XII. Tue Basic Prepisposirions (ET127-149) 


(43) (It should be noted that Vacaspati accepts only two types 
of basic predispositions, namely innate (prakrtika) and acquired 
(vatkrttka), and not three as do Gaudapada and the Chinese 
commentary). 

(44) Three kinds of bondage are enumerated: (a) prakrtika or 
“innate” for those who abide in materiality; (b) vaikrtika or “acquired” 
for those who abide in the products (vikdra) of materiality; and (c) 
daksinaka or ‘‘personal’’ for those who are intent on religious activities 
that lead to personal gain. 


VACASPATI MISRA 311 


(47) The five kinds of misconception are the same as the five 
“afflictions” (klefa) enumerated in the Yogasitra. 

(51) Two interpretations of the eight attainments are given, one 
following Gaudapada’s exposition and the other apparently that of 
Paramartha’s Chinese commentary. No preference is expressed for 
either interpretation. Removal of the three kinds of frustration is 
primary. The other five attainments are secondary. 


XIV. Siires ILLustRATING THE ROLE AND FUNCTION OF 
MateriaLity (ET154-168) 


(57) Only materiality is the material and efficient cause of mani- 
festation. God cannot be the cause. For God to be the cause it would 
have to be shown that He acts either out of self-interest (svdrtha) or 
out of compassion (kdrunya). Both motivations, however, are inappro- 
priate for God. Hence, materiality is the only cause. 

(58-61) Each of the similes in this series of karikas (namely, 57- 
61) is designed to answer an objection to the Samkhya philosophy. 
The simile of unconscious milk (57) answers the objections raised 
against the Samkhya atheism. The simile of someone engaging in an 
action to fulfill a desire (58) answers the objection of the purposeless- 
ness of materiality. That isto say, materiality functions for the sake 
of consciousness. The simile of the dancing girl ceasing her dance 
(59) answers the objection that materiality will continue to act end- 
lessly. The simile of the unselfish servant (60) answers the objection 
that materiality does not benefit from its interactions with con- 
sciousness. 


XV. Liperation anp Isoration (ET160-172) 


(64) Theexpression “I am not..., etc.’? may be taken tomean the 
denial of productivity and possession in consciousness, or it may be 
taken to mean the denial of agency or activity. The term ‘‘truth” 
or ‘“‘principle”’ (fattva) refers to the direct perception of truth (tattva= 
saksatkara). 

(65) The final discrimination implies the complete overcoming of 
rajas and tamas, although a small amount of pure sattva remains. 
That is to say, all ordinary activity ceases. 


XVI. Tue TRANSMISSION OF THE SAMKHYA TRADITION (ET172-174) 


(72) The contents of the “sixty topics” (sasfitantra) are enumera- 
ted as follows in the Rdjavarttika: 

(1) The existence of nature (pradhandstitva) ; 

(2) Singleness of nature (ekatva) ; 


312 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(3) Objectivity (arthavativa) ; 

(4) Distinction of purusa (from prakrti) (anyata) ; 

(5) Subservience (of prakrii to purusa) (pararthya) ; 

(6) Plurality (of purusas) (anatkya) 

(7) Disjunction (of purusa from prakrii) (viyoga) ; 

(8) Conjunction (of purusa and prakrti) (yoga); 

(9) Duration (Sesavriiz) ; 

(10) Inactivity (akarirbhava). 

These are the ten fundamental topics (maulikértha). The remaining 
fifty are the five misconceptions, the nine contentments, the twenty- 
eight dysfunctions and the eight attainments.’ 

Among the fundamental (maulikartha) topics, singleness, objectivity, 
and subservience characterize materiality; distinction, inactivity, 
and plurality characterize consciousness; existence, disjunction, and 
conjunction characterize both materiality and consciousness ; and 
duration characterizes gross and subtle transformations. 


TATTVAVAISARADI 


This is a commentary on Patafijali’s Yogasiitra and Vyasa’s Yoga- 
siitrabhasya, probably written by Vacaspati Misra at about the same 
time as or in tandem with the Tativakaumudi. Unlike the Tattvakaumudi, 
the Tativavaifaradi is a detailed and technically proficient treatment 
of Patafijala-Samkhya. It will be summarized in detail in the 
forthcoming Yoga volume of the Encyclopedia. A complete translation 
of the entire text of the Tattvavaiséradi may be foundin J. H. Woods’ 
translation. The Yoga-System of Patatjali™ 


BHOJARAJA 
RAJAMARTANDA 


Bhojaraja, or Bhojadeva, who was, according to Frauwallner,1 
the king of Malawa in the middle of the eleventh century, wrote a 
commentary on the Yogasiitra entitled Rdjamdrianda (King-Sun’”’ or 
“Sun among Kings’’). It is a clear exposition of the old Yoga philos- 
ophy, which does not, however, go much beyond the views of 
Vyasa’s Yogasitrabhasya. J. H. Woods points out, interestingly (in 
The Yoga-System, pp. xiii-xiv), that stanza 5 of the opening verses 
to this commentary contains the first reference in Sanskrit literature 
to the identity of the two Patafyalis, namely, the Patamfjali of the 
Mahdabhasya and the Patafijali of the Yogasiitra. 


TATTVASAMASASUTRA 


Following the work of Vacaspati Misra in the ninth or tenth century, 
there is a lacuna in the development of Samkhya literature encom- 
passing a period of several hundred years, i.e, from about 1000 through 
1300 or 1400 of the Common Era. As Frauwallner has observed,! 
the creative period in the history of the Samkhya had been in the 
first centuries of the Common Era with the work of Varsaganya, 
Vindhyavasin, Madhava, and so forth, and to some extent with the 
summary work of Igvarakrsna. There had been vigorous polemics 
with Buddhists, Jains, and the followers of Nydya-Vaisesika as can 
be seen from references to Samkhya in Dignaga’s Pramdnasamuccaya, 
Jinendrabuddhi’s Tika (on Dignaga’s text), Mallavadin’s Dvddasa- 
ranayacakra with Simhasiri’s commentary and Candramati’s Dafapada- 
rthasastra.2, Moreover, from the evidence of the Yuktidipika there had 
also been wide-ranging debates within the Samkhya tradition itself. 
Eventually, of course, Igvarakrsna’s Samkhyakarika was accepted as a 
normative summary formulation of the tradition, and the next several 
centuries—the sixth through the tenth century—represent for the most 
part attempts to explicate and consolidate Isvarakrsna’s interpreta- 
tion of Samkhya, with the Yuktidipikd providing the best overall picture 
of the manner in which this explication and consolidation was accom- 
plished. By the eighth century and onward Iévarakrsna’s formulation 
of Samkhya had clearly won the day, and references to Samkhya there- 
after in the general philosophical literature uniformly reflect the 
Samkhya of Isvarakrsna. This is true, for example, in the dialectical 
criticisms of Samkhya in the work of Santaraksita (Tattvasamgraha) 
and Kamalagila (Pafijika) of the eighth century. This is also true, 
of course, in Samkara’s critique of Samkhya in his Brahmas iitrabhdgya. 
References to Samkhya in Jain literature also reflect the Samkhya of 
Igvarakrsna. Haribhadrasiri’s Saddarsanasamuccaya of the eighth century 
(verses 33-44) summarizes the Samkhya of Tévarakrsna, as does the 
Anyayogavyavacchedadvatrimsika (verse 15) of Hemacandra (twelfth- 
century) with its commentary, Syddvddamafyari, by Mallisena (thir- 
teenth century). Likewise, Rajasekhara’s Saddarsanasamuccaya (verses 


316 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


42-59) of the fourteenth century follows Ivarakrsna in its description 
of Samkhya, and Gunaratna’s commentary (entitled Tarkarahasyadi- 
pika) on Haribhadra’s Saddarsanasamuccaya in its discussion of Samkhya 
does not depart from Isvarakrsna. The only additional information 
about Samkhya from these later Jain summaries is that, according 
to Haribhadra, Rajasekhara, and Gunaratna, there were two groups 
of Samkhya followers, one of which was theistic (followers of Narayana, 
according to RajaSekhara) and the other of which was atheistic. Also, 
according to Gunaratna, some ancient Samkhya teachers (maulikya- 
samkhya) asserted a plurality of prakrtis along with a plurality of purusas, 
obviously calling to mind Paurika or Madhava (see above under ap- 
propriate entries), Alberuni’s account of Samkhya (see above under 
Gaudapada entry) from the eleventh century likewise follows that of 
the Samkhyakarika, and, finally, the Sarvadarfanasamgraha (chapter 
14) of the Advaitin Madhava, from the fourteenth century, also is 
simply a restatement of Iévarakrsna’s Samkhyakarika. 

By the ninth or tenth century of the Common Era, then, it appears 
to be the case that the Karika-Samkhya of Isvarakrsna (as well as the 
Patafijala-Samkhya of Patafijali and Vyasa) had about run its course. 
Its creative phase was definitely over, and its explication and consoli- 
dation phase never moved much further than the sorts of formulation 
found in the Yuktidipika and to a lesser extent in Vacaspati Misra’s 
Tattvakaumudi. Indian philosophy generally was moving into new 
areas (for example, the metaphysical debates among the developing 
Vedanta traditions, more sophisticated logical discussions among 
Nyaya, Jain, and Mimamsa traditions, the philosophy of language, 
and so forth), and the older bhakti traditions were in the process of 
shaping themselves into impressive systematic theologies (for example, 
Saiva Siddhanta, Kashmiri Saivism, and the various Vaisnava sys- 
tems). Many of these new trends in Indian intellectual history ob- 
viously owed a profound debt to Samkhya, especially perhaps the vari- 
ous Vedanta traditions and the developing systematic theologies, but 
it is clear enough that the old Samkhya was not itself to be counted as 
a vital and active participant in these new trends. It is perhaps hardly 
an accident, therefore, that we find a lacuna in the history of Samkhya 
literature after the tenth century. 

Samkhya philosophy reappears, however, sometime in the four- 
teenth or fifteenth century of the Common Era, and its reemergence 
(renaissance), both at that time and subsequently, appears to be 
linked with three distinct yet interrelated textual sources: (a) a cryptic 
little collection of sitras, entitled Tativasamasasitra, (b) a lengthy col- 
lection of saras (numbering 527, arranged in six books, according. to 
the oldest version of Aniruddha), entitled Sdamkhyasiitra, and (c) what 
might be called a subcommentarial tradition on Vacaspati Miéra’s 
Tattvakaumudi. The Tativasamasasitira and the Samkhyasitra are both 


TATTVASAMASASUTRA 317 


attributed to Kapila (wrongly), and Vijfianabhiksu (see below under 
appropriate entry) informs us in the introduction to his Samkhyapra- 
vacanabhasya that the Tativasamasa is simply a shortened form of the 
larger Samkhyasitira. This latter comment of Vijfianabhiksu is hardly 
likely, but there is no doubt that Vijfianabhiksu wanted it to be so ! 
In any case, Vijfianabhiksu (latter half of the sixteenth century) is 
himself indebted to Aniruddha’s edition (ca., latter part of the fif- 
teenth century, see appropriate entry below) of the Sdmkhyasiitra, for, 
as Garbe has shown in his critical edition of Aniruddha’s Sdmkhya- 
sitravrtti,s Vijfianabhiksu utilized Aniruddha’s version of the sitras 
as the basis for his own Saémkhyapravacanabhasya. Garbe has also shown? 
that Aniruddha in turn is dependent on Vacaspati Misra’s Tattva- 
kaumudi, for Aniruddha borrows from Vacaspati in his comments at 
I.2, 1.120, 1.123, 1.124, 1.132, II.1 and V.94. Thus, there appears to 
be a close relationship between Aniruddha’s Samkhyasdtraortti and 
Vacaspati’s Tattvakaumudi. It is also the case that Vijfianabhiksu is 
aware of the Tativakaumudi, for he disagrees with Vacaspati Misra’s 
interpretation of Samkhya notions at several places in his Samkhya- 
pravacanabhdsya. Finally, according to Vijiianabhiksu, there is a pur- 
ported relationship between the Tattvasamasasitra and the Samkhya- 
siitra, in which the former is simply a summary version of the latter. 
These later Samkhya traditions are, therefore, clearly interrelated, at 
least in the minds of the early commentators, but by the same token 
it is clear enough that three distinct traditions are operating—what 
we are calling in this volume Karika-Kaumudi-Samkhya (later 
Samkhya as read through Vacaspati’s Tativakaumudi), Samasa-Samkhya 
(later Samkhya as read through the Tativasamasasiitra) and Siutra- 
Samkhya (later Samkhya as read through the Samkhyasiitra). 

These later sétra collections, that is, the Tattvasamdsasiitra and Sdam- 
khyasiitra, are as it were, wild cards in the Samkhya deck, since there is 
no way of determining their precise origin or authorship. They simply 
appear for the first time in the fourteenth or fifteenth century. They 
are neither mentioned in the older literature of Samkhya nor are 
referred to in any of the summary accounts of Samkhya up through 
and including Madhava’s Sarvadarsanasamgraha in the middle of the 
fourteenth century. 

Regarding the Samkhyasitra, one might speculate that there were 
attempts in earlier centuries to put together various séira collections 
related to the old Samkhya and that Aniruddha or someone like Ani- 
ruddha compiled these older collections into our extant Sdmkhyasitra 
perhaps some time in the fifteenth century. One might speculate fur- 
ther that the motivation for such a compilation might have been dis- 
satisfaction with Vacaspati’s less than detailed treatment of Samkhya 
philosophy in his Tattvakaumudi. There is, unfortunately, no evidence 
one way or the other for such speculations. It is obvious, of course, 


318 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


even to a casual reader, that the first three books of the Samkhyasiitra 
follow the order as well as the mode of expression of the Samkhyakdrika, 
thereby suggesting that the Samkhyasiitra is merely a restatement of the 
Samkhyakarika in siitrastyle. It is also obvious that the polemics dealt 
with in the fifth book of the Samkhyasiitra (on theory of error, sphota- 
theory, and so forth) reflect a much later period in the history of Indian 
philosophy than the Samkhyakariké appears to reflect. Such observa- 
tions do not prove, however, that all of the sitras are later than the 
Samkhyakarika. Many may indeed be very old. There is simply no 
way of knowing. 

Regarding the Tattvasamdsasitra, the situation is equally murky, 
although there are a few hints here and there in the literature that 
would suggest that the Tattvasamdsa may be independent of the larger 
Samkhyasiitra and possibly somewhat earlier. Max Miller suggested 
many years ago that the technical terminology in the cryptic Tativa- 
Samasa gives every appearance of being archaic and different from 
both Karika-Samkhya and Sitra-Samkhya and that it may represent 
an extremely old collection that has been preserved by the pandita 
communities in Varanasi.6 Max Miiller’s suggestion was only a hypo- 
thesis when first put forth, but in more recent studies there has been 
some indication that at least some of the sitras may be quite old. The 
sitra ‘there are five kinds of ignorance” (paficaparvd avidya) , for example 
which appears as the twelfth sitra of the Tattvasamdsa (according 
to the Kramadipikd, see appropriate entry below), is quoted by 
Vacaspati under SK47 of his Tattvakaumudi as an ancient utterance 
of the Samkhya teacher Varsaganya. Also, the various groupings of 
‘fives’ (siiras 8-11) followed by the enumeration of “‘fifty’’ 
(siitras 12-15) reminds one of Svetdsvatara Upanisad 1.5. Even more 
significant, however, is the siitra “‘there are five sources of action” 
(paiicakarmayonayah), which appears as siira 9in the Tattvasamasa 
and is followed by ‘‘there are five breaths or winds” (paficavdyavah) 
or siitra 10 of the Tattvasamdsa (according to Kramadipikd). A com- 
parable juxtaposition of the ‘“‘five sources of action’’ and the ‘‘five 
breaths”? (vdyus or prdpas) is also discussed in the Yuktidipika (pp. 107- 
108), lending perhaps some support to the notion that such a sequence 
may go back to older Samkhya traditions. In a similar vein, Chakra- 
varti cites an old Jain text (perhaps from the eighth or ninth century), 
the Bhagavadajjukiyam, in which the sdiras ‘“‘there are eight prakrtis” 
(astau prakrtayah), ‘‘there are sixteen products” (sodafa vikdrah), “there 
are five breaths or winds” (paficavdyavah), ‘‘the three constituents” 
(traigunya)), “manifestation” (saficarah), and “dissolution”? (pratisaf- 
carah), or, in other words, siéras 1, 2, 4, 5,6, and 10 of the Tattva- 
sSamasa (according to Kramadipika), all find their place.? None of this 
evidence proves, of course, that there was a Tattvasamdsa collection in 
the older period. It only establishes that there were certain old utter- 


TATTVASAMASASUTRA 319 


ances circulating in the ancient period. It is quite possible, even likely, 
that old utterances such as this became the basis for putting together 
the later séra collections that we now know as Tativasamdsasiitra and 
Samkhyas iitra. 

In any case, our extant Tattvasamdsasittra is completely unintelli- 
gible apart from its related commentaries, and the commentaries, 
(to be summarized in the sequel) are all late with the possible 
exception of the Kramadipika. That there is no reference whatever 
to a Tattvasamasa collection prior to the Kramadipikad, however, is a 
strong indication that even it is not much earlier than the 
fourteenth century. Following is a complete listing of the siiras 
of the Tativasamasa as set forth at the outset of the commentary Krama- 
dipika. The edition used is that of V. P. Dvivedi, editor, Samkhyasangraha 
(Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1969; Work No. 
50), p. 74. 


(1) (There are) eight generative principles (astau prakrtayah) ; 
(2) (There are) sixteen generated products (sodaSa vikarah) ; 
(3) Consciousness (purusa) ; 
(4) The three constituents (¢raigunyam) ; 
(5) Emergence of the manifest world (safcarah) ; 
(6) Periodic dissolution of the manifest world (pratisaficarah) ; 
(7) Pertaining to the internal (world), pertaining to the external 
(world) and pertaining to the celestial (world) (adhyatmam 
adhibhiitam adhidaivatam ca); 
(8) Five functions pertaining to intellect/will (pafica abhibuddhayah) ; 
(9) Five sources of action (pafica karmayonayah) ; 
(10) Five breaths or winds (pajica vdyavah) ; 
(11) Five essences of action (patica karmadtmdanah) ; 
(12) (There are) five varieties of ignorance (paficaparva avidya) ; 
(13) (There are) twenty-eight varieties of dysfunction (astavimsatt- 
dha asaktih) ; 
(14) (There are) nine varieties of contentment (navadha tustih); 
(15) (There are) eight varieties of attainment (astadhd siddhih) ; 
(16) The fundamental principles are tenfold (dasadha milikarthah) ; 
(17) (There is a) supporting creation (anugrahasargah) ; 
(18) (There is a) manifest (or gross) creation of fourteen levels 
( caturdasavidho bhiitasargah) ; 
(19) (There is an) elemental creation that is threefold (érividho 
dhatusargah) ; 
(20) Bondage is threefold (érividho bandhah); 
(21) Liberation is threefold (trividho moksah) ; 
(22) Instruments of knowledge are threefold (irividham pramanam) ; 
(23) Frustration is threefold (érividham duhkham). 


320 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Following this listing of the satras the commentary Kramadipiké com- 
ments as follows: “He who has properly understood this (doctrine or 
collection) in its proper sequence has nothing more to do and is no 
longer subjected to the threefold frustration’ (“‘etat paramparayd yatha- 
tathyam etat samyag jndivd, krtakrtyah syan na punas trividhena duhkhena 
abhibhiyate”’). In Bhavaganeéa’s reading of the Tattvasamadsa, how- 


ever, this concluding comment is numbered as a separate siira of 
the Tativasamasa. 


KRAMADIPIKA, or 
TATTVASAMASASUTRAVRITTI 


The date and authorship of this commentary on the Tattvasamdsa 
are unknown, but Chakravarti has argued, perhaps with some justi- 
fication, that it is probably the oldest extant commentary on the 
Tattvasamasa and that both it and the Tattvasamésa are somewhat 
older than the Sdmkhyasiitra and its commentaries! The primary 
reason for suggesting an older date for the Kramadipikaé is that both 
Vijfianabhiksu and Bhavaganesa appear to know the text. Bhavaganesga 
in his Tattvayatharthyadipana indicates in his introductory verses that 
he is following a gloss (vyakhya@) by Paficasikha, and in the course of his 
commentary he quotes three verses (see pp. 39,46, and 52 of the Tativa- 
patharthyadipana in the Chowkhamba Samkhyasangraha edition), which 
he attributes to Paficasikha. It is interesting to note, however, that 
Kramadipiké (see pp. 78, 82, and 87 of the Chowkhamba edition) 
quotes the same verses under the same siiras but without attribution 
to Paficasikha. A reasonable explanation for this coincidence is that 
Bhavaganesa was following Kramadipika and, in addition, thought that 
the author of Kramadipika was Paficasikha. Similarly, Bhavaganesa’s 
teacher, Vijfianabhiksu, in his commentary on Sdmkhyasitra 1.127 
quotes a prose passage about the nature of the three gunas, which he 
attributes to Paficasikha. The same passage (although with some 
additional words) appears in the Kramadipika (p. 81, Samkhyasangraha 
edition) as part of the main text. Taken together, then, there would 
appear to be a distinct possibility that Bhavaganesa and Vijfiana- 
bhiksu were both familiar with the Kramadipika and considered it to 
be a work of Paficasikha. 

The Kramadipiké quotes a number of old verses (for example, from 
the Svetasvatara Upanisad, the Bhagavadgitd, and so forth), and at one 
point it quotes an old verse about egoity that finds an interesting echo 
in the Yuktidipika. The verse in the Kramadipika is as follows: 

aham sabde aham sparse aham riipe aham rase, 

aham gandhe aham svami dhanavan aham isvarah, 


322 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(“I am in sound; I am in touch; I am in form; I am in taste; Iam 
in smell; I am the ruler; I am the wealthy lord.’’) 


In the Yuktidipikd (p. 97) one finds the following comment: ‘‘yasya 
asmipratyayasya pisesagrahanam bhavati—sabde ham sparse ham ripe "ham rase 
*ham gandhe *ham iti, which might be translated “‘when there is a sense 
of egoity, specific apprehensions occur as (in the old saying) ‘ I am in 
sound; I am in touch; I am in form; I am in taste; I am in smell.” 

That the Kramadipika contains a number of old verses does not at 
all mean, of course, that the text as a whole is old. It is perhaps 
reasonable enough, however, to accept with Chakravarti that it is 
probably somewhat older than the other commentaries on the Tattva- 
samasa. 

The following summary of the text is based on the Chowkhamba 
Sanskrit Series Office edition of Samkhyasangraha, pp. 74-89, edited 
by V.P. Dvivedi (Varanasi, 1969; Work No. 50). 


(Summary by Anima Sen Gupta) 


(E74) The Samkhyasitras, forming the content of the Tattvasamasa, 
will now be explained. A Brahmin, afflicted by the three kinds of 
frustration, approached the great teacher (maharsi) of Samkhya, 
Kapila, for refuge. He inquired of the great teacher about ultimate 
truth and what he must do to attain it. Kapila then recited the twenty- 
three sitras (see the sétra listing in the preceding entry). 


EicHT GENERATIVE PRINCIPLES (E74-77) 


The unmanifest, intellect, egoity, and the five subtle elements cons- 
titute the eight generative principles (prakrti). The unmanifest is so 
designated because it is not manifested in the manner in which jars, 
clothes, etc., are manifested. In other words, the unmanifest is incap- 
able of becoming known through the sense organs, such as the organ 
of hearing, etc.; and it is so because it has no beginning, middle, or 
end. The unmanifest is subtle, nonmergent, unconscious, beginning- 
less, endless, productive, noncomposite, common, and one. 

Intellect (duddhi) is reflective discerning (adhyavasdya). Itis called 
that since it produces definite knowledge of objects, such as “‘it is that 
and not another’’; “‘it is a cow and not a horse.”’ The intellect possesses 
eight predispositions: merit, knowledge, nonattachment, and power, 
and their opposites. 

Egoity is expressed in the feelings of “mine” and “TI.” “I am in 
sound,” “‘I am in touch,” etc., are the forms that the ego assumes. 
That which generates the idea of “‘I’’ is called egoity. The five subtle 
elements, linked with the ego, are (a) the subtle element of sound, (b) 


KRAMADIPIKA 323 


the subtle element of touch, (c) the subtle element of color, (d) the 
subtle element of taste, and (e) the subtle element of smell. 

The old verse, ““He who knows the twenty-five principles...is re- 
leased...,”? is quoted. 


GENERATED Propucts (E77-78) 


The sixteen generated products are the five sense capacities, the 
five action capacities, mind, and the five gross elements. 


Consciousness (E77-78) 


Consciousness is beginningless, subtle, all-penetrating, conscious, 
devoid of the constituents, eternal, a seer, pure, the knower of the 
field (ksetrajfia), and nonproductive. Consciousness is called “‘purusa”’ 
because it is primeval, because it resides in the body, and because it is by 
nature the bestower of “‘fulfillment.”’ It is beginningless because it has 
neither beginning, middle, nor end. It is subtle because it is partless 
and is beyond the range of sense perception. It is all-penetrating be- 
cause it permeates everything and because it does not move toward 
anything. It is devoid of the three constituents. It is eternal because 
it is not a product, i.e., it has no origination. It is called a seer because 
the modifications of primordial materiality are revealed by it. It is an 
enjoyer because it is conscious and so satisfaction and frustration are 
experienced by it. It is a nondoer because it is neutral and because it is 
devoid of the constituents. It is called the knower of the field because 
it knows the characteristics of the field. It is pure because it is not the 
substratum of meritorious or demeritorious actions. It is nonpro- 
ductive because it is devoid of seeds and so never produces anything. 

Whereas activity belongs to the constituents, consciousness has been 
established as the nondoer. It is only the ignorant man who, being 
blinded and excited by the feelings of ‘‘me,”’ “‘mine,” and “‘I’’ considers 
himself as the doer, and thinks “‘I am the doer of all this and this is 
mine.” 

Because there are diversities in the experiences of satisfaction, frustra- 
tion, and confusion and also in the sets of sense capacities, birth, and 
death, the plurality of consciousnesses is established. Differences in 
the stages of life and also of duties are other reasons to prove plurality. 
Had there been only one consciousness, then all would have been 
miserable with the misery of one, and all would have been happy with 
the happiness of one. With the birth of one, all would have been born; 
with the death of one, all would have died. The Vedanta teachers, 
however, speak of a single self. (Here a number of old Vedanta verses 
are quoted. ) 


324 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Havinc THREE Constituents (E80-81 ) 


The three constituents are saftva, rajas, and tamas. Kindness, light- 
ness, pleasantness, affection, contentment, endurance, satisfaction, 
etc., are the numerous effects of saitva. Misery, perspiration, anxiety, 
anger, vanity, etc. are the numerous effects of rajas. Veiling, covering, 
ugliness, poverty, extreme idleness, sleepiness, delusion, etc., are the 
numerous effects of tamas. 


EMERGENCE AND DissOLUTION OF THE ManiFest Worip (E81) 


Emergence (saficara) means the origination of objects. Dissolution 
(pratisaficara) means the mergence of objects. Origination means 
manifestation (as before) from the unmanifest, which, being watched 
over by consciousness (which is superior to it), produces intellect. 
From intellect arises egoity. Egoity is of three kinds, being dominated 
by each of the three constituents. 

From the form of egoity in which sattva dominates originate the 
organs; from the form of egoity in which tamas dominates originate 
the five subtle elements. The form of egoity in which rajas dominates 
is operative in the production of both the organs and the five subtle 
elements. In the state of dissolution, the five gross elements disappear 
in the five subtle elements, the five subtle elements in egoity, egoity 
in intellect, intellect in the unmanifest. As the unmanifest is uncaused, 
it does not disappear in anything else. 


PERTAINING TO THE INTERNAL, EXTERNAL AND 
CELESTIAL WORLDs (E81-82) 


The thirteenfold capacities are the internal world. The objects of 
the capacities constitute the external world; for example, the external 
object of the intellect is the object to be apprehended by the intellect. 
The external object of egoity is the object to be owned by the ego. 
The external object of the mind is the object to be determined by the 
mind and so on. The presiding deities of the organs are the objects 
of the celestial world. For example, the presiding deity of the intellect 
is Brahma. The presiding deity of the ego is Rudra, the presiding deity 
of the mind is the moon and so on. 


Five Functions Perrainine to Inrevtect/WILL 
(ABHIBUDDHI) (E82) 


These are five in number: ascertainment (vyavasdya), expressed in 
the form ‘‘This should be done by me” is the function of the intellect 
and this is called determination (vyavasdya). The awareness of “I’’ 


KRAMADIPIKA 325 


or of “‘mine” (abhimana), which produces the idea ofselfand not-self 
is called egoity, which is also a manifestation of the intellect (buddhi- 
Kriya). The wishes, desires, and intentions (iccha) of the mind are 
likewise activities of theintellect. The indeteminate sensing (karta- 
uyata), like hearing of the sound, etc., of the sense capacities are also 
functions of the intellect, and the activities (kriya), like speaking, etc., 
performed by the action capacities, are the functions of the intellect. 
The five functions of the intellect, then, are vyavasdya, abhimana, icchd, 
kartavyaté and kriyd. 


Five Sources oF Action (£82-83) 


These are perseverance (dhyti), faith (sraddhd), desire for satis- 
fation (sukha), lack of desire to know (avividisd), and desire to know 
(vividisd). (Some verses are quoted that appear in a somewhat differ- 
ent reading in the Yuktidipika [p. 108].) 


Five Breatus or Winps (E83) 


Prana, being seated in the mouth and the nose, keeps the body in a 
living condition. Apéna has its seat in the navel region and it removes 
the impure things through downward passages. Samdna has its seat 
in the heart. Udana has its seat in the throat. It goes upward. Vydna 
has its seat in the joints; it causes circulation of the blood. 


Five Essences or Action KarMATMAN (E83) 


The five essences of action pertain to the nature and functioning 
of egoity: (1) the doer of good works (ahamkara or vaikarika); (2) 
the doer of bad works (taijasa) ; (3) the doer of deluded works (bhiitadt) ; 
(4) the doer of what is reasonable (sanumdna); and (5) the doer of 
what is nonreasonable (niranumana). 


Five VARIETIES OF IGNORANCE 
Twenty-E1icHT VARIETIES OF DysFUNCTION 
NINE VARIETIES OF CONTENTMENT 
Eicur Varieties oF ATTAINMENT (E84-86) 
(The description of these fifty padarthas follows that of the Karika). 
Ten FUNDAMENTAL Topics (E86) 


(The account of the ten fundamental topics follows that of the 


326 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


standard Karika summaries. See also Introduction to the present 
volume. ) 


SuBTLE CREATION (E86) 
This is the realm of the subtle elements, created by Brahma. 
Gross CREATION OF FourTEEN LEVELS (E86) 
(This is the same as the standard Karikd accounts. ) 
‘THREEFOLD ELEMENTAL CREATION (E87) 


(This refers to subtle bodies, gross bodies, and gross elements as 
outlined in SK 39). 


THREEFOLD BonpDaAGE (E87) 


Bondage is said to be of three forms: (a) natural bondage (prakrti- 
bandha), (b) acquired bondage (vaikarikabandha), and (c) personal 
bondage (daksindbandha). 

Natural bondage is that of a person who views the eight generative 
principles as the highest principles. Such a person becomes merged 
in nature and this is called natural bondage. 

There are other persons, who, having embraced the life of renun- 
ciation, are still not able to prevent their minds from getting interested 
in objects like sound, etc.; such persons who have not conquered their 
sense organs and are ignorant of true knowledge suffer from acquired 
bondage. Personal bondage is of those who perform actions such as 
sacrifices, charities, etc. having their minds influenced by personal 
desires, etc. 


THREEFOLD LIBERATION (E87) 


Liberation is due to : (a) the awakening of knowledge, (b) the des- 
truction of attachment through control of the sense capacities, and 
(c) the total eliminations of all impressions of merit and demerit. 


THREEFOLD INsTRUMENT OF KNOWLEDGE (E87-88) 


The three instruments of knowledge are perception, inference, and 
verbal testimony. (The text follows the standard Karikdé account.) 


THREEFOLD FRusTRATION (E88-89) 


(Standard Karka account. ) 


SAMKHYASUTRA 


As indicated in the earlier entry on the Tattvasamasasiitra, nothing 
can be said about the Samkhyasitra apart from noting its traditional 
attribution to Kapila, which is obviously not the case, and that it 
first appears in the Samkhyasitravrtti of Aniruddha some time in the 
fifteenth century. The only other reading of the sitras themselves is 
to be found in Vijfianabhiksu’s Samkhyapravacanabhasya from the latter 
half of the sixteenth century, and, as Garbe has clearly demonstrated 
(in his critical edition of Samkhyasitravrtti), Vijfianabhiksu is depen- 
dent throughout on both Aniruddha’s reading and his interpretation 
of the sitra collection.1 There is no mention of, or reference to, this 
siitra collection in the older Samkhya literature, nor is any mention of 
it to be found in any of the standard summaries of Samkhya by out- 
siders (Haribhadra, Rajasekhara, Gunaratna, and so forth, up through 
and including Madhava’s Sarvadarfanasamgraha of the fourteenth 
century). There can be hardly any doubt, therefore, that the Sam- 
Khyasiitra is a late compilation, possibly put together by Aniruddha 
himself or an older contemporary in the fifteenth century. Possibly, 
of course, many of the sitras may be very old, but there is no way of 
sorting out the newer from the older. As already mentioned (see 
Tattvasamasasiira entry), the sitras of the first three books appear to 
follow the sequence and the language of the Samkhyakaérikd and are 
probably little more than a late recasting of the older Adrikds in siitra- 
style. Moreover, many of the references to other philosophical views 
in both the first and fifth books of the Samkhyasitra appear to reflect 
a much later period in the history of Indian philosophy than does 
the Samkhyakarikd. Possibly, the sdéras in the fourth and sixth books 
have some claim to antiquity, but there is no way of establishing such 
a claim in the absence of additional evidence. 

Since our reading of the séiras is totally dependent on Aniruddha’s 
compilation (with some occasional variations proposed by Vijfdna- 
bhiksu), the only reasonable approach to a summary of the content of 
the siitras is to present them in tandem with the summary of Aniruddha’s 
Samkhyasittravrtt, (see entry below) and with occasional reference to 


328 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


variations set forth by Vijfianabhiksu. In the present context only a 
topic outline of the séra collection as a whole will be presented. The 
outline is based on Aniruddha’s reading of the sitra collection as criti- 
cally edited by Richard Garbe (B3574; RB5524), pp. 1-300. 


BOOK I: The Section on Topics (visayadhyaya) 


A. 


B. 


Hm OF 


BOOK IT: 


{roughly parallel to Samkhyakarika 1-21) 

Introductory sitras: On the Problem of the Scope and 
Task of the Samkhya (1-6) 
On the Problem of Bondage in Samkhya (7-60) 

1. Bondage and essential nature (svabhdva) (7-11) 

2. Bondage and time (12) 

3. Bondage and place (13) 

4. Bondage and the body (14-15) 

5. Bondage and action (16-17) 

6. Bondage and materiality (18-19) 

7. Bondage and ignorance (20-26) 

8. Bondage and Buddhist theories of momentariness 

(27-41) 

9. Bondage and Vijfianavada Buddhist theories (42) 
10. Bondage and Madhyamika Buddhist theories (43-47 ) 
11. Bondage and Jain views (48-54) 

12. Summation of the discussion on bondage (55-60) 
Derivation of the basic principles of Samkhya (61-74) 
Materiality as material cause and its relation to 
discrimination (75-86) 

The instruments of knowledge in Samkhya (87-107) 

Three instruments of knowledge (87-88) 
Perception (89) 

Perception and yogic experience (90-91) 
Perception and the existence of God (92-99) 
Inference (100) 

Verbal testimony (101) 

Means of establishing the existence of primordial 
materiality and consciousness (102-107) 
Materiality and the theory of cause and effect (108-123) 
Manifest and unmanifest aspects of materiality (124- 
126) 

The three constituents (127-128) 
Inferences that establish the existence of primordial mate- 
riality and consciousness (128-164) 


NOQPoONe 


The Section on the Effects of Primordial Materiality 
(pradhanakaryadhydya) (roughly parallel to Saémkhyakartka 
22-37) 


SAMKHYASUTRA 329 


> 


mh QARoOOm 


BOOK IilI 


BOOK 


Mm OES 


V. 


On the activity of materiality and its distinction from 
consciousness (1-9) 

Materiality and its effects (10-11) 

Space and time (12) 

Intellect and the basic predispositions (13-15) 

Egoity, sense capacities, and action capacities (16-24) 
Mind as a capacity (25-25) 

The capacities and their differentiation from conscious- 
ness (27-37) 

The thirteenfold instrument and its overall functioning 
(38-47) 


The Section on Nonattachment (vairdgyadhydya) (roughly 
parallel to Sdamkhyakariké 38-69) 

The specific and the nonspecific (1-6) 

The gross body and the subtle body (7-19) 

The gross and subtle bodies not made up of consciousness 
(20-22) 

On bondage and release (23-25) 

Dreaming, waking, and yogic awareness (26-29) 

On the nature of meditation (30-36) 

Misconception, dysfunction, contentment, and attain- 
ment (37-45) 

The manifest universe (46-53) 

The role and function of materiality with respect to 
discrimination (54-62) 

Discrimination and liberation (63-75) 

The liberated-in-life (jivanmukta) (76-84) 


The Section on Narrative Stories and Illustrations 
(akhyayikadhyaya) 

The story of the prince (1) 

The story of the imp (2) 

The need for frequent instruction (3) 

The story of the father and the son (4) 

The story of the hawk (5) 

The story of the snake (6) 

The story of the amputated hand (7) 

The story of King Bharata (8) 

The need to avoid others (9) 

The need to avoid even one other (10) 

The story of Pingala (11) 

The case of the serpent in another’s house (12) 
The need to act like a bee (13) 

The story of the arrow maker (14) 

The need to follow prescribed rules (15) 


330 


BOOK V: 


o 


air Om 


AS 


mB 


HeROWOAEZ 


<c 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The story of the she-frog (16) 

The story of Indra and Virocana (17-19) 
The story of Vamadeva and others (20-22) 
The story of the swan and the milk (23-24) 
The case of Suka and Vyasa (25) 

The case of a parrot bound by a cord (25) 
The argument of ascetics like Kanva, and so forth (27-28) 
The story of King Aja (29) 

The illustration of the dirty mirror (30) 

The illustration of the lotus (31) 

The insufficiency of supernatural powers (32) 


The Section on Arguments against Opponents (parapaksa- 
nirajayadhydya) Introduction: On the problem of an 
auspicious utterance (1) 

On the problem of the existence of God (2-12) 

On the problem of the notion of ignorance in Vedanta 
(13-19) 

On. the problem of the existence of meritorious behaviour 
(20-24) 

On the problem of meritorious behaviour, qualities, in- 
ference, and so forth, in Nyaya-Vaisesika (25-36) 

On the problem of word and meaning (37-50) 

On the problem of knowledge and error (51-56) 

On the problem of the nature and meaning of words 
(57-60) 

On the problem of nonduality in Vedanta (61-68) 
On the problem of the mind and the internal organ 
(69-73 ) 

On the problem of liberation (74-83) 

On the problem of the derivation of the sense capacities 
(84) 

On the problem of the categories and the theory of atom- 
ism in Nyaya-Vaisesika (85-88) 

On the problem of perception (89) 

On the problem of dimension (90) 

On the problem of generality (91-96) 

On the problem of relation (97-100) 

On the problem of motion (101) 

On the problem of the material cause of the body (102) 
On the problem of the gross body and the subtle body (103) 
On the problem of the scope of the sense capacities (104- 
110) 

On the problem of the nature of bodies (111-115) 
On the problem of the experience of liberation (116-120) 
On the problem of types of beings (121-128) 


SAMKHYASUTRA 331 


X. 
Y. 


BOOK VI: 


> 


mmo Ow 


On the problem of supernatural attainments (129) 
On the problem of consciousness and the elements (130) 


The Section on the Sixth or Summary Tantra (sasthatan- 
tradhyaya) 

On the nature of the Self and the discrimination of the 
Self (1-21) 

On the means for attaining liberation (22-31) 

On creative nature (32-44) 

On the plurality of consciousnesses (45-51) 

On the manifest world (52-66) 

On consciousness and materiality being together as 
possessor and possessed (67-70) 


ANIRUDDHA 


In his critical edition to Aniruddha’s Sadmkhyasitravrtti, Garbe sug- 
gests that Aniruddha was evidently familiar with the Sarvadarsana- 
samgraha (from the middle of the fourteenth century) and clearly pre- 
dated Vijfianabhiksu (latter half of the sixteenth century ). He, there- 
fore, places Aniruddha about 1500 of the Common Era.! Garbe also 
calls attention to a report by R.G. Bhandarkar ofa certain Aniruddha,? 
the son of Bhavasarman and grandson of Mahasarman, born in 1464 
of the Common Era and who composed at the age of thirty-one (or, 
in other words, in 1495) a commentary on the astronomical treatise 
Bhasvatikarana, by Satananda. Garbe suspects that this Aniruddha of 
the astronomical commentary may be the same person as the Ani- 
ruddha of the Samkhyasitravrtti, thereby confirming a fifteenth century 
date for Aniruddha. 

As already indicated, Aniruddha’s reading and interpretation of 
the Samkhyasiitra is the oldest one available, and Vijfiianabhiksu’s 
Samkhyapravacanabhasya is dependent upon it. The following summary 
of the text is based on Richard Garbe’s edition (E) and translation 
(T) of the text (The Samkhya Sitra Vrtti or Aniruddha’s Commentary and 
the Original Parts of Vedantin Mahddeva’s Commentary to the Sdmkhya 
Siitras, edited with Indices, Calcutta: J. W. Thomas, 1888 and 1891). 


SAMKHYASUTRAVRTTI 
(Summary by Gerald 3. Larson) 


Boox I : SEcTION on Topics 


A. Introductory sitras: On the Problem of the Scope and Task of the 
Samkhya (TI.1-6) (E1-8; T1-8) 


(1) The complete or absolute cessation of internal, external, and 
celestial frustration (trividhaduhkha) is the final or ultimate goal of 
Samkhya. (2) Perceptible means for alleviating frustration (medi- 
cines, etc.) are ineffective because they are only temporary and, hence, 
leave open the possibility of subsequent frustration. (3-4) If someone 


334 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


objects by suggesting that frustrations can be alleviated ona continuing, 
temporary basis just as a person overcomes the pain of hunger by eating 
every day, it is to be replied that this is to miss the point of our basic 
assertion. (Of course, frustrations can be eliminated occasionally 
be temporary means). What is at issue is that such means are not 
certain and permanent. Sometimes, for example, temporary remedies 
are not available. Moreover, even when remedies are available, 
the alleviation of frustration is not permanent. The issue, then, is one 
of determining the ultimate cause of frustration and its cessation. 
In other words, the issue is a philosophical matter. (5) In addition, 
it should be pointed out that temporary remedies admit of degrees of 
superiority (that is to say, this remedy is better than that one, etc.), 
whereas the ultimate cessation of frustration or the realization of 
liberation is, as it were, the presupposition for all remedies. Libera- 
tion, according to the Veda, is superior to all else, and in this sense, 
then, our philosophical quest for the ultimate cessation of frustration 
is fully in accordance with the Veda. (6) It should also be pointed 
out, however, that ordinary religious actions (sacrifices, etc.) are as 
ineffective as the temporary or perceptible remedies mentioned earlier. 


(B) On the Problem of Bondage in Saémkhya (I.7-11) (E8-10; T8-10) 


Bondage and Essential Nature (7-8) It is not correct to assert that 
consciousness is bound essentially (svabhdvatas), for this would render 
liberation from bondage impossible by definition. Hence, the injunc- 
tions to seek liberation would be pointless. Moreover, since the 
injunctions could not be carried out, the Veda would be unauthori- 
tative (aprdmadnya). (9) This obviously leads to the absurdity that 
the injunctions of the Veda are really not injunctions (that is to say, 
because the injunction cannot be followed, it cannot be considered as 
an injunction). (10-11) If someone objects by suggesting that the 
bondage of consciousness is essential although it can be altered, just 
as an essentially white cloth can be dyed or the productive power 
of a seed can be destroyed when the seed becomes a sprout, it is to be 
replied that both of these examples are inappropriate. In the case 
of the white cloth, whiteness is not destroyed—it is simply overpowered 
by another color. In the case of the seed, the sprouting capacity that 
is subdued can be revived. Therefore, with respect to both examples 
(that is to say, the white cloth and the seed), nothing impossible is 
being suggested, whereas the liberation of consciousness that is 
essentially bound is obviously an impossibility. 

Bondage and Time (1.12) (E10; T10) It is also not correct to assert 
that consciousness is bound because of its connection with time, for 
consciousness is eternal and pervasive, and, hence, the issue of ordi- 
nary temporal bondage does not arise. 


ANIRUDDHA 335 


Bondage and Place (1.13) (E10; T10) Similarly, consciousness is 
not bound because of its connection with a place (defa), for, again, 
consciousness as eternal and pervasive cannot be construed vis-a-vis 
ordinary spatial limitations. 

Bondage and the Body (1.14-15) (E10-11; T10-11) Similarly, consci- 
ousness is not bound because of its connection with a bodily condition 
(avastha). “Condition” is a quality or attribute of the body and does 
not apply to consciousness, which is declared to be ‘“‘unattached”’ 
(asanga) (in the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 1V.3.16). 

Bondage and Action (1.16-17) (E11-12; T11-12) It is also not correct 
to assert that consciousness is bound because of its connection with 
action, for action is an attribute of another (namely, materiality 
and the three constituents) and the attribution of the qualities of one 
thing to another thing is logically impermissible. Moreover, even if 
such attribution were permissible, one would be unable to explain 
the diversity in experience. (That is to say, if the qualities or attri- 
butes of one thing are relevant in explaining another thing, then, 
anything can be explained by anything, which is absurd.) 

Bondage and Primordial Materiality (1.18-19) (E12-13; T12-13) Also, 
consciousness is not bound because of its connection with primordial 
materiality. Materiality is itself dependent on action and, hence, the 
preceding argument still applies. Bondage cannot arise other than 
through association with materiality; association occurs because of 
nondiscrimination between that which is eternal, pure, and intelli- 
gent, onthe one hand (namely, consciousness) and that (which is 
characterized by the three constituents and action), on the other 
(namely, materiality).3 

Bondage and Ignorance (1.20-26) (E13-16; T13-15) (20) Similarly, 
it is not correct to assert that consciousness is bound because of igno- 
rance (avidya) —that is to say, according to the theory of avidyé as put 
forth in Samkara’s Vedanta—because it is not possible for something 
that is by definition a nonentity (avastu) to be a genuine cause. (21- 
22) Ifit is claimed (by the Vedantin) that somehow ignorance is an 
entity, then, obviously monism must be given up. If ignorance has 
a reality in any sense apart from the one thing that exists—namely, 
Brahman or alman—then the monist position is no longer tenable, for 
there is then a duality of two different things—namely, Brahman and 
avidyd. (23-24) Moreover, if it is argued (by a Vedantin) that ignor- 
ance is both real and not real, then one has simply a contradiction 
in terms or a situation that is rationally inconceivable (that is to say, 
such an argument simply places the issue in sucha way that rational 
discourse can no longer deal with it). (23) Finally, since the Samkhya 
position does not accept the categories of predication as set forth by the 
Vaisesika (and Nyaya) schools, someone might object that the above 
argument rejecting ignorance as both real and not real cannot be 


336 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sustained because the Samkhya does not have an identifiable theory of 
predication on which to base its argumentation. (26) Such an ob- 
jection, however, is ridiculous. Because the Samkhya does not accept 
a definite number of possible predications (as does the Nyaya and 
Vaisesika), it does not follow that Samkhya does not accept any 
logic or any theory of predication. Ifthe latter were the case, we would 
be reduced to the level of children or madmen. 

Bondage and Buddhist Theories of Momentariness (1.27-41) (F16-22; 
T16-23) (27) Buddhists argue that bondage is brought about because 
of the beginningless influence of the contents of awareness (visaya) 
(that is to say, bondage is caused by upardgas or “traces” that remain 
because of the influence of transient objects). (28) It is not the case, 
however, that there is a relation of the “‘influenced”’ and the ‘‘influen- 
cer” between the external and the internal, as the Buddhists suggest, 
just as there is no relation between the residents of Srughna and Patali- 
putra. (29) Moreover, even if such influence were possible, then there 
would be no way of distinguishing between the bound and released, for 
the influence would always be present. (30-31) If one wants to avoid 
this difficulty by arguing for the theory of the ‘“‘unseen,” or adrsta (that 
is to say, the influence of earlier actions imperceptibly influencing sub- 
sequent events), such an argument presupposes a continuity that the 
theory of momentariness does not allow. (32-33) For example, when 
ceremonies or rituals are performed for the sake of purification of the 
unborn son (that is to say, the putresii ceremony), the benefits to the 
son are only intelligible on the assumption that there is an abiding 
entity or self (dman)—an assumption that cannot be allowed on the 
basis of the Buddhist pcsition of momentariness. (34) The Buddhist 
also wants to argue that bondage is momentary along with everything 
else, because any kind of permanent entity cannot be proved. (35-36) 
This is not the case, however, because then there would be no way of 
explaining the fact of recognition, and such a view clearly is contra- 
dicted both by logic (nydya) and Vedic authority (sruti). (37) Finally, 
and perhaps most important, the theory of momentariness cannot be 
framed into a valid inference having an example (drstania) (because 
everything is included in what is to be established and, hence, there is 
nothing left by means of which the principle could be illustrated).4 
(38-41) Furthermore, causation becomes unintelligible on the theory 
of momentariness, because there can obviously be no cause-effect rela- 
tion between two things that arise simultaneously, or between two 
things that arise successively (that is to say, one preceding the other) 
because in both cases there can be no connection between the things 
on the theory of momentariness. Simple antecedence never establishes 
causal uniformity. 

Bondage and Vijianavada Buddhist Theories (1.42) (£.22-24; T23-26) 
Other Buddhists (namely, Vijiianavadins) argue that all external 


ANIRUDDHA 337 


objects are mere ideas (vijfdnamatra) (and, hence, bondage is likewise 
a mere idea), but this is not the case because everyone has an incontro- 
vertible conviction of some kind of external reality. 

Bondage and .Madhyamika Buddhist Theories (1.43-47) (E24-27; T26- 
29) (43) Still other Buddhists (namely, Siinyavadins) argue that if 
external objects do not exist, then by the same token even ideas cannot 
be shown, to be real. Hence, there can only be a void (sanya) (and, 
by implication, bondage is likewise a void). (44) “‘Reality is void,” 
they assert; every entity is characterized by perishing. (45) But this 
sort of argumentation is little more than glib posturing by those who 
are not very intelligent. (46) The same arguments that we asserted 
earlier (in sitra 35 against the adherents of momentariness and in 
siitra 42 against the Vijfianavadins) are to be directed against the 
Siinyavadins. (47) Moreover, apart from the logical difficulties of the 
theory of the void, there is the practical consideration that no one 
could possibly desire some such thing or state like the “‘void,’’ whether 
such a void be considered a kind of nonexistence, or as something 
transcending both existence and nonexistence. 

Bondage and Fain Views (1.45-54) (E25-30; T29-32) (48) Others 
(presumably various Jains) argue against the notion of the void on the 
basis of asserting that the soul is characterized by a kind of “wander- 
ing’ or motion (gati), and that, therefore, the soul assumes the size 
of the particular body in which it resides. (49) But this idea (though 
more intelligible than the Buddhist view) is still wrong, because con- 
sciousness is incapable of activity and, hence, of any kind of motion. 
(50) If consciousness were material, then it would have the character- 
istics of material entities; but that is not the case even in your own 
(Jain) view. (51) Now, to be sure, in the Vedic literature the soul 
is sometimes described as “wandering” or in motion, but this is only a 
figure of speech. Consciousness, which is immutable and all-pervasive, 
appears to be characterized by the contexts in which it resides, but 
these are only limiting adjuncts or disguises, as it were, similar to the 
relationship between space and a jar. (That is to say, it appears to 
be the case that the space within a jar moves when the jar is moving, 
but such a “‘moving”’ of space is, of course, not the case. The appear- 
ance of movement is brought about because of space being cloaked or 
disguised by its relationship with the moving jar.) (52) By the same 
token it cannot be said that bondage is brought about by action, since 
action is not a property of consciousness (cf. 1.16). (53) The Vedic 
literature clearly declares that consciousness is without all such charac- 
teristics, etc. (54) If one argues, then, that action is responsible for 
bondage, one comes upon the same difficulty that was discussed earlier 
(in I.16-17), for one is arguing in effect that the qualities of one thing 
determine the condition of something else (anyadharma).® 


338 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Summation of the Discussion of Bondage (1.55-60) (E30-34; T32-37) 
(55) To the extent that our previous arguments indicate that we accept 
the reality of such factors as action, merit, etc., and that, therefore, 
such factors are related to the problem of bondage, it might be argued 
by our opponents that in the final analysis our views about bondage 
amount to about the same position as theirs. In fact, however, this is 
not the case, because in our view nondiscrimination is the crucial, 
fundamental factor that determines bondage. (56) Moreover, just 
as the reality of darkness is dispelled only by the coming of the reality 
of light, so nondiscrimination is dispelled only by discrimination. (57) 
The fundamental nondiscrimination of the difference between mate- 
riality and consciousness is the basis for all other nondiscriminations 
and, hence, for all subsidiary bondages related to action, merit, etc. 
Therefore, if the fundamental nondiscrimination is removed, then all 
nondiscriminations and types of bondage are removed in principle. 
(58) Our view implies, furthermore, that it is, therefore, really only a 
matter of verbal convenience (vdimdira) to talk about the bondage of 
consciousness. Nondiscrimination belongs to materiality in its mani- 
festation as ordinary awareness (citta), and hence, bondage is a func- 
tion or reality of that manifestation. There is no nondiscrimination 
that adheres to consciousness gua consciousness. (59) It should be 
noted, however, that the realization of discrimination is not simply a 
matter of philosophical argument (yukti). It must also be realized in 
immediate awareness, just as one confused about direction must per- 
sonally come to realize his error. (60) Finally, if one argues that our 
Samkhya principles do not exist because they cannot be perceived, we 
reply that this objection would be valid if perception were the only 
reliable instrument of knowledge. In fact, however, fundamental prin- 
ciples, which transcend direct experience, can be apprehended by 
means of inference (as well as ‘“‘verbal testimony) ,”” and, hence a, our 
interpretation of discrimination and nondiscrimination can be argued 
and realized by means of philosophical reflection just as one infers the 
existence of fire from smoke. 


(C) The Derivation of the Fundamental Principles of Sémkhya (1.61-74) 
(E34-39; T37-42) 


(61) Materiality isa condition in which the intelligibility consti- 
tuent (sativa), the activity constituent (rajas) and the inertia consti- 
tuent (tamas) abide in equilibrium (sémya). The ‘‘great one” (mahat, 
i.e., the intellect) arises from primordial materiality. Egoity arises 
from the great one or intellect. The five subtle elements arise from 
egoity. Then there are also the two kinds of capacities (sense capacities 
and action capacities) and the gross elements, and, finally, conscious- 
ness. Altogether, then, there is an aggregate (gana) of twenty-five. 


ANIRUDDHA 339 


(62) The five subtle elements (are inferred) from the gross objects. 
(63) Egoity (is inferred) from the five subtle elements together with 
the various capacities (sense capacities and action capacities). (64) 
The internal organ (in its form as buddhi) (is inferred) from egoity.® 
(65) Primordial materiality (is inferred) from that. (66) Conscious- 
ness is neither a cause nor an effect, but it must be inferred to exist, 
since the various causal aggregates must function for the sake of some- 
thing else (samghdtapardrthatua) (cf. SK 17 and SS 1.140). (67) Primor- 
dial materiality is the root (mala) that itself does not have a root (amiia) 
(cf. SK 3). (68) In other words, it is a limiting notion, as it were a 
mere name (samjfdmdatra), since the sequence of causes must be stopped 
somewhere in order to avoid an infinite regress. (69) In this sense it 
is like the ultimate atomic constituents or particles of the atomists.? 
(70) That our system is 4 rational system does not entail that all persons 
should achieve discrimination at once (upon learning of the inferen- 
tial process), for it is a well-known fact that people have varying capa- 
cities for doing philosophy. There are at least three such types of per- 
sons (namely, the very bright, the mediocre, and the dull). (71) 
The first effect is called “the great one’ (mahat). It is the thinking 
capacity (manas).8 (72) The subsequent effect is egoity. (73) All 
of the other effects can be traced to egoity. (74) It is, therefore, the 
mediate first cause of all manifest awareness (both in terms of the ex- 
perience of hearing, touching, etc., and in terms of the experience of 
what is heard, touched, etc.). 


(D) Materiality as Material Cause and Its Relation to Discrimination 
(1.75-86) (E40-45; T42-48) 


(75) Although consciousness and primordial materiality precede 
these effects, only materiality is the material cause, since we have 
already argued (see, for example, 1.53 and elsewhere) that consci- 
ousness does not have this character (of being the cause of anything). 
(76) The theory of the atomists that atoms are the ultimate material 
cause is not as useful as our theory of primordial materiality as mate- 
rial cause, since such limited entities as atoms cannot account for 
all material causation. (77) Moreover, the Vedic tradition tends to 
support our theory of primordial materiality as the material cause. 
(78) Furthermore, it is not correct to argue that prior absence is 
the material cause (as, for example, is maintained by those who assert 
that the coming into being of a jar is caused by its prior absence, 
because something cannot come from nothing). (79) Moreover, it 
is not correct to argue that the world is unreal, for no convincing 
argument can be given to support its unreality, and more than that, 
it is not the case that there is faulty perception in our apprehension 
of the world. (80) The notions of cause and effect are intelligible 


340 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


only if the cause is existent; for if one argues for a nonexistent cause, 
there must by the same token be a nonexistent effect, which is absurd. 
(81) Then, too, it is also not correct to argue that action (karman) 
is the material cause, for action is not a material entity. (82) If one 
argues that action is a sufficient cause, because in the Veda it is said 
that ritual actions bring about results, it is to be replied that 
actions are always linked with repetition or returning (dvriti) and, 
thus, cannot be considered to bring about the realization of the ulti- 
mate freedom of consciousness. (83) Only one who has attained dis- 
crimination, according to the Veda, acquires nonrepetition or non- 
returning—that is to say, ultimate liberation. (84) Action is always 
linked with some frustration, and hence if the realization of liberation 
were caused by action, liberation would entail frustration. One gains 
relief from cold by acquiring warmth, not by pouring water on oneself. 
(85) This is true even for ‘‘desireless’” action (akémya)—that is to 
say, this too is not-the cause of liberation (because a desireless 
action like ordinary action is connected with repetition and with 
frustration—that is to say, is connected with the finite, temporal 
human condition). (Compare Aniruddha and Vijfianabhiksu for 
differing interpretations of this sara.) (86) Finally, if one were to 
argue that discrimination is as perishable or finite as action and that, 
therefore, there is no difference between our two views, our reply is 
that this is simply not the case. For one attaining discrimination there 
is a complete destruction of bondage, and, hence, there can be no 
question of return or reversion or continuance as there always is 
with action. 


(E) The Instruments of Knowledge in Samkhya (1.87-88) (E46-47; 
T48-50) 


Knowledge (pramé) has to do with a connection that takes place 
between a sense capacity and an object (namely, perception), or 
between an inferential mark and an object (namely, inference), or 
between an authoritative word and an object (namely, verbal testi- 
mony). It must now be determined what the best instruments of 
knowledge are. There are three instruments of knowing that encompass 
all other means of knowing (cf. SK 4). 

Perception (1.89) (E49-50) ; T50-52) Perception (pratyaksa) is the 
experience (vijfdna) that arises when a sense capacity comes into con- 
tact with an object and assumes its form. 

Perception and Yogins (1.90-91) (E50-51; T52) This definition ap- 
plies to ordinary external perception and does not, therefore, address 
the issue of yogic perception. But even from the point of view of yogic 
perception there is still contact with an object, as is true in ordinary 
perception, but, of course, the important difference is that the object 


ANIRUDDHA 341 


cognized in yogic perception is of a special kind (namely, the object 
in its subtle form). 

Perception and the Existence of God (1.92-99) (E50-54; T53-57) (92) 
Moreover, our definition of perception is not incorrect because it does 
not extend to the perception of God, for there is no adequate proof 
for the existence of God. (93-94) If God were existent, He would 
have to be connected with the world or not be connected with the 
world. If He were connected with the world, He could not be God, 
since connection with the world would entail limitation. If He were 
not connected with the world, He could also not be God, for He 
could not be the creator or an agent in any sense. (95) In the Veda 
when God is praised, this is just a verbal statement in praise of the 
liberated self (muktatman) or in praise of the accomplished Yogin 
(siddha)}. (96) Moreover, when we say that there is controllership, 
we do not mean this in the sense of God. Rather, we mean controller- 
ship in the sense of a crystal that assumes the reflection of a proximate 
object (thus leading to the wrong impression that the crystal possesses 
the characteristics of the object). (97) In fact, however, the empiri- 
cal selves (jiva) are the agents vis-a-vis individual actions. (98) Dis- 
criminating knowledge, therefore, as well as agency, occur within 
materiality in its manifestation as the “internal organ.” Hence, 
when in the Vedic literature one is taught to pursue knowledge, this 
means in effect that one should cultivate correct discrimination by 
means of the internal organ. (99) Consciousness provides the illu- 
mination (ujjvalitatvua) that enables the internal organ to function as 
controller. Consciousness functions, then, like a magnet—that is to 
say, it brings about activity though in itsef it is inactive. 

Inference (1.100) (E53-54; T57-58) Inference is knowledge derived 
from invariable concomitance by someone who knows the concomi- 
tance (that is to say, when someone perceives smoke, he knows by 
inference that there is fire, assuming that he also knows that wherever 
there is smoke, there is fire). 

Reliable Authority (1.101) (E55; T58-59) Verbal testimony (fabda) 
is the authoritative teaching of the Veda (dptopadesa). 

Means of Knowing Materiality and Consciousness (1.102-107) (E56-38; 
T59-62) (102) Both primordial materiality and consciousness can be 
established by an instrument of knowledge, and that is why the Samkhya 
teaches the existence of both. (103) Primordial materiality and con- 
sciousness are established by means of inference, and specifically that 
variety of inference known as inference based on general correlation. 
(104) When materiality in its manifestation as internal organ discri- 
minates its difference from consciousness, then experience ends. (105) 
Experience, therefore, is for the sake of another (namely, conscious- 
ness), just as a cook prepares food for his master. (106) Or, putting 
the matter in a different way, because of nondiscrimination it appears 


342 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to be the case that consciousness possesses the fruit of experience be- 
cause it is the agent. (107) In fact, however, consciousness does not 
possess the fruit nor is consciousness the agent. 


(F) Materiality and the Theory of Preexistent Effect (1.108-123) 
(E58-66 ; T62-69) 


(108) On the one hand, an object is perceived when there is a 
direct contact a between the object and a sense capacity. On the other 
hand, something may not be perceived for a variety of reasons as, for 
example, excessive distance (atidura), etc. (cf. SK 7). (109) Primor- 
dial materiality is imperceptible because of its subtlety (and not be- 
cause of its nonexistence) (cf. SK 8). (110) The existence of primordial 
materiality can be inferred, however, because of its effects (cf. SK 8). 
(111-112) If someone objects that primordial materiality does not 
exist because this contradicts other teachers, our reply is that this begs 
the question. The issue is not what this or that teacher asserts. The 
issue, rather, is the validity of inferential reasoning. Our inferences 
are as follows : (113) In our ordinary apprehension of the world we 
experience satisfaction, frustration, and confusion, and this apprehen- 
sion is most adequately accounted for by the positing of primordial 
materiality as material cause that is constituted by these three (sattva, 
rajas, and tamas as the very constituents of the ultimate material cause). 
If one denies the existence of primordial materiality in this sense or 
posits instead some other cause, this entails the contradiction of our 
ordinary apprehension. (114) Moreover, it cannot be argued that 
something can be produced from nothing, like a man’s horn (and, 
therefore, it is necessary to infer that this ultimate cause does, in fact, 
exist). (115) Then, too, it is to be observed that there must be an 
appropriate material cause for every product. (116) Furthermore, 
since it is obvious that everything does not come forth from every- 
where and always, there is, therefore, an intelligible sequence of causa- 
tion. (117-118) Also, since it is observed that a thing produces 
only that which it is capable of producing, and that, likewise, it is 
observed that there is always a homogeneity between cause and effect 
(kdranabhiva) (we, therefore, conclude that creative nature is the 
ultimate material cause; that it, in fact, exists; that likewise all effects 
pre-exist in it prior to manifestation; that the process of causation is 
sequential, rational, and homogeneous; and that this explanation of 
cause and effect fully accounts for our ordinary experience of satis- 
faction, frustration, and confusion). (119-120) If someone objects 
that such a theory of causation (namely, satkdrya) does not allow making 
temporal distinctions (in asserting, for example, that ajar will be, or a 
jar is, or a jar has been destroyed, etc.), our reply is that this is not the 
case. All such expressions are relative to a given manifestation and must 


ANIRUDDHA 343 


be dealt with contextually. (121) Destruction is simply dissolution 
into the cause (as, for example, when a jar is broken, it becomes clay 
once again). (122) Moreover, our position does not entail a vicious 
regress, but, rather, describes an ongoing sequence of intelligible cau- 
sal reciprocity, like that between a seed and a sprout (that is to say, 
that the seed becomes the sprout and the sprout produces a seed, is, 
admittedly, a regress, but it is not a logically vicious one). (123) 
Furthermore, it should be pointed out that our theory of existent 
effects has no more defects than our opponents theory of nonexistent 
effects (asatkdrya).¥ 


(G) The Manifest and Unmanifest Aspects of Materiality (I.124-126) 
(E67; T70-72) 


(124) The manifest effects are caused (hetumat), transient (anitya), 
mobile (sakriya), complex and multiple (aneka), supported (dfrita), 
and mergent (Jinga) (cf. SK 10). (123) Although our manner of predi- 
cation is different from the categorization or theory of predication 
of the Vaisesikas, it is not correct to assume that we deny the relevant 
issues of predication (namely, quality, generality, etc.) as raised in the 
Vaisesika system. Rather, we deal with these issues within the con- 
text of our twenty-five principles, or else these issues are dealt with 
within our notion of primordial materiality. (125) Both the manifest 
effects and the unmanifest cause are made up of the three constituents, 
are nonconscious, etc. (cf. SK 11). 


(H) The Three Constituents (1.127-128) (E69-70; T72-73) 


(127) The three constituents are differentiated respectively by 
agreeableness (priti, a characteristic of the intelligibility constituent, 
or sattva-guna), disagreeableness (apriti, a characteristic of the activity 
constituent, or rajas), and insensibility (visdda, a characteristic of the 
inertia constituent, or tamas), etc. (cf. SK 12). (128) By the distin- 
guishing characteristics of being light (Jaghu), etc., the constituents 
function reciprocally (sddharmya) as well as differentially (vaidharmya) 
(cf. SK 12). 


(I) Inferences that Establish the Existence and Makeup of Primordial 
Materiality and Consciousness (1.129-164) (E70-86; 73-88) 


Primordial Materiality and its Effects (129) The “great one’ (mahat) 
and all of the subsequent principles are different from consciousness 
and primordial materiality and, hence, are effects, like jars, etc. (cf. 
SK 8). (130-132) Moreover, they are finite (parimdna), uniform, or 
coherent (samanvaya) in being derivable from an ultimate material 


344 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cause, and partake of the power (Sakti) of the material cause (cf. 
SK 15 and 16). (133-134) Apart from these effects, there is only 
primordial materiality and one consciousness, and anything else (apart 
from these effects and apart from primordial materiality and consci- 
ousness) is simply nothing (tucchatva). (135) Cause is inferred from 
the effect because of the invariable concomitance between cause and 
effect. (136) The unmanifest can be inferred from the intellect, which 
is made up of the three constituents (cf. SK 14). (137) Hence, if the 
effects are established, the cause cannot be denied. 

Consciousness (138) It should be noted, first of all, that because 
consciousness has no effects, its existence cannot be established in the 
same manner as primordial materiality is established. It should 
also be noted, however, that generally speaking, the existence of 
consciousness is not really disputed or questionable. Like the notion 
of merit, people generally assume its existence (that is to say, the 
existence of consciousness is to a large extent self-evident and incon- 
trovertible). (139) Consciousness is distinct from the body and from 
the unmanifest cause (namely, primordial materiality) and all of the 
manifest effects (the intellect, etc.) (cf. SK 11). (140-144) Moreover, 
its existence is indicated (a) because aggregates exist for the sake of 
something else (samghdta-pardrthatva); (b) because this ‘‘something 
else’’ is distinct from the three constituents; (c) because of the need 
for a controlling basis (adhisthana) ; (d) because of the need for a ground 
or basis for subjective experience (bhokirbhava); and (e) because there 
is an inclination in experience to seek freedom or isolation (kaivalya) 
(cf. SK.17 and SS 1.66). (145) Furthermore,, since illumination 
cannot have its ground in what is nonconscious(jada)_ it follows that 
illumination is the very essence of consciousness. (146) In other words, 
consciousness (cif) is not an attribute (of the soul) because it is attri- 
buteless (nirguna) (that is to say, purusa is consciousness). (147) Our 
view is supported by the Veda, whereas those who assert that 
the self has attributes are clearly in contradiction to the Veda (namely, 
the Nyaya and Vaisesika systems, which assert that consciousness is 
only an attribute of the self). (148) Also, it should be noted that if 
consciousness were only an attribute of the self(as maintained in Nyaya 
and Vaisesika) there would be no way of adequately accounting for 
the awareness in deep sleep, dream, etc. (149) In addition to the 
existence of consciousness, for which we have been arguing, it is also 
necessary to infer that consciousness is to be construed pluralistically 
because of the varieties of births, etc. (cf. SK 18). (150) Though 
consciousness is uniform in its essence (in the sense that it has no attri- 
butes and is only pure, contentless consciousness in and of itself), 
nevertheless, it is plural or multiple because one can only become 
aware of it by means of limiting adjuncts, just as one can only become 
aware of space by means of its location in jars, etc. (151-152) More- 


ANIRUDDHA 345 


over, the problem of nondiscrimination resides with these adjuncts, 
and, hence, nondiscrimination is a problem that must be discussed 
from the perspective of a plurality of consciousnesses. If one were to 
argue, as does the Vedantin, that the adjuncts are plural but consci- 
ousness is one, one gets into the peculiar bind of attributing contradic- 
tory claims concerning the one consciousness (namely, that it issome- 
times liberated and sometimes not). A problem like this can only be 
resolved by construing consciousness pluralistically. (153) This is not 
to suggest, however, that the limiting adjuncts actually constitute 
consciousness, for consciousness is absolutely simple and any imputa- 
tion of the characteristics of the adjuncts onto consciousness is due to 
nondiscrimination. (154) It should be noted, furthermore, that a 
plurality of consciousnesses is not in conflict with the claim of the Veda 
that consciousness is nondual (advaita), because the reference to non- 
duality in the Veda has to do only with the generic essence (jati) of 
consciousness. (155) Now, if one should argue that the notion of the 
plurality of consciousnesses leads to contradiction in the sense that 
something simple is sometimes bound and sometimes released, our 
reply is that this is not the case because neither bondage nor release 
resides in consciousness. For the one who has come to know the cause 
of bondage (namely, nondiscrimination), there is the realization by 
direct discrimination (drsti) that consciousness is in fact absolutely 
simple (and always has been and always will be). (156) Then, too, 
because some are blind it does not at all follow that no one can see 
(but such a conclusion would follow as a result of arguing for the one- 
ness of consciousness). (157) Similarly, when it is said in the sacred 
texts that “‘Vamadeva has been released,” it would necessarily follow 
on the argument for one consciousness that, therefore, all are liberated, 
which is obviously not the case. (158-159) Moreover, our view that 
there are some consciousnesses gradually attaining liberation does not 
imply that eventually all will be liberated. Such liberation has not 
happened thus far nor will it happen at any point in the future (that 
is to say, the plurality of consciousnesses rather than implying a final 
void, implies, to the contrary, that there will be no absolute cessation 
at any time.) (160) Finally, our notion of consciousness implies that it 
is not correct to attribute either bondage or liberation to it, for the very 
notion of consciousness (as we have described it) goes beyond such 
categorization. (161) Through the medium of the capacities, con- 
sciousness is the basis for there being a witness (sdksitva). (162) Con- 
sciousness is the condition of being eternally free (nttyamuktatva). (163) 
Consciousness is sheer neutrality (auddsinya) (cf. SK 19-20). (164) 
The agency of consciousness is only an appearance, due to its proximity 
to creative nature (cf. SK 20). 


346 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


BOOK II : Secrion on THe EFFects OF PRIMORDIAL MATERIALITY 


(A) On the Activity of Materiality and Its Distinction from Consciousness 
(II.1-9) (E87-92; T89-95) 


(1) Primordial materiality functions ultimately for the sake of libe- 
ration, In a manner of speaking one can refer to materiality function- 
ing for the sake of the release of the released (vimukta or conscious- 
ness), but it is perhaps more precise to suggest that creative nature 
functions for its own release (svdrtha). (2) Only the one who has 
become completely nonattached attains liberation. (3) Such libera- 
tion cannot be quickly or easily attained because of the force (pafutva) 
of beginningless latent dispositions (vdsan@). Hence, liberation is not 
accomplished by merely hearing about the notions of the Samkhya. 
One must, rather, realize the notions and have an aptitude for over- 
coming the force of the latent dispositions. (4) The process of materia- 
lity is single, but it manifests endless differentiations on account of the 
proximity of the plurality of consciousnesses, just as a wealthy house- 
holder is associated with a variety of servants. (5) It is important to 
keep in mind, however, that activity for the sake of liberation is 
really only in materiality. Consciousness only appears (adhydsa) 
to be involved in bondage and liberation. (6) That, primordial 
materiality is, in fact, active is proved by inference from its effects 
and, hence, bondage belongs to materiality. (7) Nevertheless, this 
ongoing activity does not affect the one who has achieved the requisite 
discrimination, just as a thorn, though painful to some, is not painful 
to the one who knows it for what it is and avoids it. (8) Although 
consciousness is present in all experience, it is not the case that there 
is a real connection between consciousness, on the one hand, and 
bondage on the other. This can be illustrated with the example of the 
red-hot iron. It appears to be the case that iron burns, but iron is not 
intrinsically hot. Only the presence of fire makes the iron appear to 
be intrinsically hot. (9) Consciousness is related to nonattachment and 
leads to disciplined meditation (yoga). Materiality is related to pas- 
sion (raga) and leads to activity and the manifest world (srsiz). 


(B) Materiality and Its Effects (11.10-11) (E93-94; 95-96) 


(10) The effects of creative nature are inclusive of intellect through 
the five gross elements (that is to say, intellect, egoity, mind, and the 
five sense capacities, the five action capacities, the five subtle elements, 
and the five gross elements (cf. I.61 and SK 3 and 22). (11) All of 
these effects function for the sake of consciousness, but only as media- 
ted through the activity of materiality (as was outlined in IJ.1-9 
above). 


ANIRUDDHA 347 
(C) Space and Time (11.12) (E94; T96) 


Space and time are not included among the enumerated effects; 
they are to be considered only on the gross, manifest level of dkdfa, 
etc.18 


(D) Intellect and the Basic Predispositions (11.13-15) (E94-95 ; T96-97) 


(13) Intellect is (possessed of) reflective discerning (cf. SK 23). 
(14) Its effects are the basic predispositions of meritorious behaviour, 
etc. (cf. SK 23). (15) Each positive basic predisposition also has its 
opposing correlate when counterproductive influences (upardga) are 
present. (Compare SK 23 and 43-45.) 


(E) Ego and Capacities (11.16-25) (E95-98; T97-100) 


(16) Egoity is (possessed of) self-awareness (abhimdna) (cf. SK 24). 
(17) Its effects are the five sense capacities, the five action capacities, 
mind, and the five subtle elements. (18-19) The sense capacities, 
action capacities and mind arise from egoity in its mode called ‘“‘genera- 
ted” (vaikria) (cf. SK 25).14 (20) These capacities are not derived 
from the gross elements; they arise solely from egoity. (21-22) More- 
over, it is taught in the Veda that the elements dissolve into the deities— 
in other words, they dissolve into their causes. But the deities are not 
generative and, hence, do not produce the capacities. (23) Each 
capacity is itself imperceptible and, although a capacity resides in a 
given gross organ (e.g., the eye, etc.), it is a mistake to link the capa- 
city with the gross organ either in terms of function or origin. (24) 
The various capacities perform distinct functions and, hence, cannot 
be reduced to one. (25) If someone objects that a plurality of capa- 
cities coming forth from one principle (namely, egoity) violates the 
rules of thought (kalpand), it must be replied that rules of thought can- 
not be allowed to set aside what has been established by instruments 
of knowledge. 


(F) Mind as a Capacity (11.26) (E99; T101) 


Mind is both a sense capacity and an action capacity (cf. SK 27 and 
cf. above I.71). 


(G) The Capacities and Their Differentiation from Consciousness 
(I1.27-37) (E99-103; T101-105) 


(27) The diversity among the capacities arising from ego can be 
accounted for because of the differentiations occasioned by the trans- 


348 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


formations of the constituents, just as there are different conditions 
of a body in one lifetime (e.g., infancy, youth, etc.). (28) Each capa- 
city relates to a specific content (e.g., seeing to visible form, etc.) 
(cf. SK 26). (29) The capacities taken together provide instrumenta- 
lity (karanatva), whereas consciousness is the ‘‘seer’? (drastrtva) etc. 
(30-31) Intellect, egoity, and mind, in addition to their unique and 
essential feature as already mentioned (in II.13, 16, 25-26), also 
have the common feature of the maintenance of life (prana, etc.) (cf. 
SK 29). (32) The various capacities operate simultaneously and suc- 
cessively (cf. SK 30). (33) These operations are fivefold and are 
either hindering (Alisia) or not hindering (aklista) (cf. Yogasiitra, 1.5). 

(34) When these functions subside (nivrtti), consciousness, released 
from all influences (upardga) appears as it is in itself (svastha) (that 
is to say, unattached and free). (35) This can be illustrated by the 
well-known example of the crystal and the rose. (That is to say, 
when the two are in proximity, the crystal appears to be red; but 
when, the flower is removed, the crystal can be apprehended in its 
clarity and purity.) (36) The instrumental capacities (senses, etc.) 
derive their specific mode or function from the force of the “unseen” 
(adrsta) (which, in turn, is derived from meritorious behaviour or non- 
meritorious behaviour, just as the cow spontaneously provides milk 
for the calf). 


(H) The Thirteenfold Instrument and Its Overall Functioning 
(I1.38-47) (103-107; T106-109) 


(38) Intellect, egoity, and mind together with the five sense capa- 
cities and the five action capacities make up the thirteenfold instrument 
(cf. SK. 32). (39) These taken together are the most effective means 
for accomplishing any act, just as an axe is the most effective means 
for cutting. (40) Among the capacities (namely, senses and actions), 
mind is the chief one, just as in everyday life a group of servants needs 
a leader. (41) Moreover, the mind’s intellectual function is indis- 
pensable (avyabhicara). (42-43) Furthermore, it is the abiding place 
(ddhara) for latent dispositions (samskara) ; and it is the basis for infer- 
ence in that it provides the function of memory (which is essential 
in the inferential process and which cannot be explained as a function 
of the sense capacities). (44) Memory cannot be provided by 
consciousness, because it has already been pointed out that conscious- 
ness is without attributes (cf. I.146). 

(45) Finally, it should be pointed out that the distinction between 
“primary” (pradhana) and “‘secondary’’ (guna) among the various 
instruments is based on the different kinds of activities that they per- 
form. (46) Various aggregations of actions accrue to each conscious- 
ness, just as in everyday life a servant fulfills the needs of his particular 


ANIRUDDHA 349 


master. (47) Overall, of course, the place of superiority (pradhanya) 
belongs to the intellect, just as in the world the governor of a state 
is superior to all lesser functionaries. 


BOOK III : Section on NoNATTACHMENT 
(A) The Specific and the Nonspecific (II1.1-6) (E105-110; T110-112) 


(1) The specific or gross comes out of the nonspecific or subtle (cf. 
SK 38). (2) The gross body is made up of the specific. (3) The 
manifest world is, thus, produced from the gross elements. (4) This 
system of transformation continues to function until discrimination 
is attained. (5) In other words, for the one not having discrimination, 
ordinary experience continues. (6) Consciousness in and of itself, 
however, is free in fact from attachment both to the nonspecific and 
the specific (that is to say, free from the gross and the subtle); but it 
does become ‘‘embraced” (parisvakta) by the two in appearance. 


(B) The Gross Body and the Subtle Body (III.7-19) (E110-117 ; 
T113-119) 


(7) The gross body is produced from the father and mother; the 
subtle body is not so produced. (8) The subtle body, devoid of ex- 
perience, is previously arisen (pérvotpanna) or, in other words, is the 
causal presupposition of the gross (cf. SK 40). (9) The subtle body 
is made up of eighteen factors; intellect, egoity, mind, the five sense- 
capacities, the five action capacities, and the five subtle elements 
(cf. SK 40). (10) The varieties among individuals are to be explained 
by the different kinds of action (previously done). (11) The gross 
body and the subtle body function together. (12) Moreover, each 
body depends upon the other, just as a painting depends upon the 
canvas or frame (cf. SK 41). (13) Though conceptually one can 
speak about the subtle body separately, in its actual functioning it 
always operates with the gross, just as one can talk about the sun 
separately from that which it illuminates.* (14) The mind is of atomic 
magnitude (anuparimana) because according to the Vedas it possesses 
activity. (15) Moreover, one also knows from the Veda that the 
subtle body is said to be nourished by food (anna), etc. (16) The 
subtle bodies transmigrate for the sake of consciousness, just as the cook 
prepares food for the king. (17-19) The gross body is made up of the 
five gross elements, although other traditions argue that it is made 
up of only four elements (excluding dka@fa) or only one element (namely, 
earth).1? 


(C.) The Gross and Subtle Bodies are not Made Up of Consctousness 
(IU1.20-22) (E117-118; T120-121) 


(20) Those (namely, Caérvdkas) who maintain that consciousness 


350 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES. 


(cattanya) arises from the material components of the body are wrong, 
because it is obvious that consciousness is not present in any one of the 
material components. (21) Moreover, if consciousness were intrinsic 
to the material components, the disappearance of consciousness at 
death etc., would be unintelligible. (22) Nor can it be successfully 
argued that consciousness emerges because of the combination of the 
various material components, just as the capacity to intoxicate arises, 
not in any one thing but, rather, in a combination of contributing 
factors. For in the case of the power of intoxication, it can be demon- 
strated that there is an inherent capacity for intoxication in a given 
thing that can be made manifest under certain controlled conditions 
(in the winery or brewery), but the production of consciousness can- 
not be so demonstrated. 


(D) On Bondage and Release (IT1.23-25) (E119-120; T122-123) 


(23-24) Liberation is because of discrimination or knowledge; 
bondage is because of misconception. (25) These causes are such 
that they do not require the notions of ‘‘aggregation’’ (samuccaya) or 
“Intermediacy”’ (vikalpa) (e.g., with action, etc.).18 


(E) Dreaming, Waking, and Yogic Awareness (II1.26-29) (E120-122; 
T123-125) 


(26) Arguing that liberation can arise from a combination of knowl- 
edge and action is like arguing that an unreal dream object being 
combined with a real object of the waking state can produce some 
result or can fulfill some purpose. (27) The dream object is not to- 
tally false because, after all, it is constructed from latent dispositions 
left over from waking awareness, but at the same time, it is obvious 
that the dream object is not as real as the waking object. Indeed, if 
this were not the case—that is to say, if one were to maintain the 
position that waking and dream are equally real or equally unreal— 
then it would be impossible even to distinguish between a dream- 
object and a waking object. (28) In a similar way, even the inten- 
tional (samkalpita) constructions of accomplished Yogins are not 
conjured out of nothing. (29) That is not to suggest, however, that 
the creativity of accomplished Yogins is not real or important. Indeed, 
the person whose awareness is purified as a result of continuing medi- 
tation (bhavana) develops extraordinary power on analogy with the 
power of materiality itself. 


(F) On the Nature of Meditation (I1I.30-36) (E123-125; T125-127) 


(30) Meditation (dhyana) brings about the elimination of desire. 
(31) Meditation is accomplished by the cessation of the operations 


ANIRUDDHA 35] 


of awareness (cf. Yogasiitra 1.2). (32) One attains meditation by means 
of concentration or collectedness (dhdrand), prescribed posture (dsana), 
and appropriate kinds of action (svakarma) (33) Posture should be 
steady and comfortable. (34) The attainment of meditation is promot- 
ed by the controlled exhalation and retention of breath. (35) Appro- 
priate kinds of action are those prescribed by the various religious 
stages of life (arama). (36) One also attains cessation of the opera- 
tions of awareness by means of the cultivation of nonattachment 
(vairagya) and ongoing practice (abhydsa). 


(G) Misconception, Dysfunction, Contentment, and Attainment (I1I.34-45) 
(III.37-45) (£126-135; T128-136) 


(37) There are five kinds of misconception (cf. SK 47). (38) Dys- 
functions are of twenty-eight varieties (cf. SK 49). (39) Contentments 
are of nine varieties (cf. SK 50). (40) Attainments (siddhi) have eight 
varieties (cf. SK.51). (41-42) The various subdivisions within these 
categories are well known from the older tradition. (43) ‘“‘Content- 
ment’ has reference both to internal and external factors (cf. SK 50). 
(44) Attainment includes reasoning (aha), etc. (cf. SK 51). (45) 
One cannot attain the benefits of the attainments until misconceptions, 
dysfunctions, and contentments have been overcome (cf. SK 51.) 


(H) The Manifest Universe (I11.46-53) (E135-138; T137-140) 


(46) The manifest world is divided into subdivisions such as the 
divine, etc. (cf. SK 53). (47) From the world of Brahma down to the 
lowest blade of grass, all functions for the sake of consciousness (cf. 
SK 54). (48-50) In the upper realm of the divine world, there is a 
predominance of the intelligibility constituent (sativa); in the lowest 
material world, there is a predominance of the inertia constituent 
(tamas) ; and in the middle, human world, there is a predominance of 
the activity constituent (rajas) (cf. SK 54). (51) Asa born slave per- 
forms his various duties for his master, so materiality performs many 
diverse actions for consciousness. (52-53) Even on the highest levels of 
materiality (namely, the celestial level), rebirth (drtti) occurs; hence, 
it also should be abandoned, for the frustrations occasioned by old age, 
death, etc., are equally present on these highest levels. 


(I) Role and Function of Materiality with Respect to Discrimination 
(III. 54-62) (E138-144; T140-146) 


(54) The final elimination of frustration is not accomplished even 
by dissolution into primordial materiality (that is to say, into the pure 
causal condition) because there is always a rising again (ufthdna), 


352 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


just as when a swimmer dives into a deep pool, he always rises again to 
the surface. (55) Though primordial materiality is itself not a product, 
it is nevertheless involved with bondage for it subserves or is under 
the influence of consciousness.”° (56) Consciousness, being reflected in 
materiality, may manifest itself as omniscient (sarvavid) and omni- 
potent (sarvakartr). (57) The existence of such a God is accepted (in 
Samkhya).4 (58) What is created by materiality is for the sake of 
another. Materiality by itself is not capable of being an experiencer. 
Just as a camel carries the saffron for a merchant, so materiality func- 
tions for the sake of consciousness.”2 Even though materiality is, there- 
fore, unconscious, this does not create a problem for our position. 
Materiality’s functioning for another is just like unconscious milk 
serving as nourishment for the calf (cf. SK 59). (60) Or, again, 
one can compare materiality’s activity for another with the example 
of time, etc. (e.g., the farmer is served by time in the production of 
crops). (61) The activity of materiality arises from inherent capacity 
(svabhdva) and not from conscious motivation, just as a servant often 
functions for his master without being consciously motivated. (62) 
Or, again, it might be said that materiality functions because of the 
force of beginningless action. 


(J) Discrimination and Liberation (111.63-75) (E144-152; T146-153) 


(63) When discrimination takes place, then there is cessation of the 
manifestation of materiality, just as the cook stops working after the 
meal has been prepared. (64) Consciousness comes to be revealed 
as being distinct from materiality and its faults. (65) Liberation 
(apavarga) is the condition of neutrality, and this can verbally be ex- 
pressed as the neutrality either of one or both (that is to say, of either 
consciousness or materiality). (66) Materiality ceases to function 
only for the consciousness that has been discriminated. For other con- 
sciousnesses it continues to function, just as the illusion of the snake in 
the rope disappears only for the one who realizes the illusion and not 
for the one who continues to be caught up in the illusion (cf. II.7). 
(67) Moreover, materiality continues to function for the undiscri- 
minated because of the ongoing efficient causation of action. (68) 
Basically, however (cf. 1.57 and III.24), nondiscrimination is the effi- 
cient cause operative in materiality. (69) After accomplishing the 
purpose of providing discrimination for consciousness, materiality 
ceases activity, just as a dancing girl ceases dancing after her perform- 
ance (cf. SK 59 and 68). (70) Moreover, when materiality with 
all of her faults has been distinguished from consciousness (by the in- 
tellect) she no longer shows herself to consciousness, just as a woman 
of good family withdraws after having been seen in her nakedness 
(cf. SK 61). (71) The notions of bondage and liberation arise because 


ANIRUDDHA 353 


of nondiscrimination. In fact (that is to say, ontologically), con- 
sciousness is never in bondage or liberated. (72) Only materiality is 
bound, just as a beast is bound by a cord or rope (cf. K. 62). (73) 
Materiality brings about its own bondage because of the seven basic 
predispositions, like a silkworm; it becomes released by means of the 
basic predisposition toward knowledge (cf. SK 63). (74) Nondis- 
crimination is the cause of ordinary existence and its elimination by 
knowledge brings the fruit of liberation. There is no fault in this.24 
(75) Because of the continual meditation on the principles (tattvd- 
bhyasa) and because of the systematic abandoning (tydga) by realizing 
“not this,” “not this” (na iti na iti), discrimination comes to be estab- 
lished (cf. SK 64). 


(K) The Liberated-While-Living (Fivanmukta) (I11.76-84) (E152-157; 
T153-158) 


(76) Discrimination becomes established in varying degrees be- 
cause of the different capabilities of persons who practice the Sam- 
khya path (cf. 1.70). (77) For those of highest capability, after dis- 
crimination, there is no further experience; but for those of middle- 
level capability some further experience occurs on account of the force 
of past action (cf. SK 67-68).?° (78) The condition of being liberated- 
while-living (jivanmukia) is an example of the middle-level capability. 
(79) It is this condition that allows for the teaching of the tradition, 
for the liberated-while-living by continuing to live is able to teach 
others. (80) This notion of the liberated-while-living is also support- 
ed in the Veda. (81) Moreover, if such a notion were not admitted, 
then the various traditions would be traditions of the blind leading 
the blind. (82) The liberated-while-living continues to function in 
the body for a time, just as the wheel of a potter turns for a while even 
after the potter has ceased from his work (cf. SK 67). (83) Some 
minimal latent dispositions continue to operate (cf. SK 67). (84) 
Finally, when frustrations have been completely removed through 
discrimination, the ultimate condition (krtakrtyatd) is attained, and not 
through anything else. 


Boox IV: SEcTION ON NARRATIVE STORIES AND ILLUSTRATIONS 
The Story of the Prince (IV.1) (E158-178; T159) 


The son of a king, because of inauspicious signs at his birth, is sent 
away and is brought up by a hunter. When the king dies, the minis- 
ters of state bring the son back to the palace, and, after suitable instruc- 
tions, the prince is able to resume his true identity. 


354 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
The Story of the Imp (IV.2) (T159-160) 


A certain teacher is instructing his pupil in a lonely place, but the 
instruction is overheard by an imp (piféca). The imp, by hearing the 
instruction, attains liberation.?® 


Frequent Instruction is Sometimes Needed (IV.3) (T160) 


When persons are not very intelligent, sometimes frequent repe- 
tition of the teaching is required. 


The Story of the Father and the Son ({V.4) (T160-161) 


A poor priest must leave his pregnant wife in order to travel to 
another country for the sake of getting alms, etc. When he returns, 
after a long time, the son, who has in the meantime been born, does 
not know his father, nor does the father know the son. The wife, 
however, provides the necessary instructions, and father and son come 
to know each other. Thus there can be no knowledge of the principles 
without the help of a preceptor. 


The Story of the Hawk (IV.5) (T161-162) 


Aman brings up a hawk from its early childhood, feeding and caring 
for it. When the hawk reaches his full growth, the man releases 
the hawk because he does not wish to keep the bird in bondage and 
frustration. The hawk is delighted to be free, but regrets his sepa- 
ration from the one who cared for him. 


The Story of the Snake (IV.6) (T161) 


A certain snake sheds its skin in due season but is so attached to it 
that he keeps it near the entrance of his hole. A snake charmer even- 
tually captures the snake because he sees the abandoned skin and 
thereby finds the entrance to the dwelling of the snake. 


The Story of the Amputated Hand (IV.7) (T163) 


A certain ascetic enters the dwelling place of his brother to gather 
food. The brother accuses him of theft. Even though the ascetic’s 
food gathering was not intended as theft, nevertheless the ascetic 
insists that his hand be amputated, for he feels as if he must make up 
for his inadvertent act. 


The Story of King Bharata (IV.8) (T163-164) 


King Bharata, though about ready to attain liberation, takes com- 


ANIRUDDHA 355 


passion on a small female deer whose mother had died, as a result of 
her birth. Bharata cares for and nourishes the deer and, hence 
becomes attached. At the moment of his own death, therefore, Bharata 
does not attain liberation. 


One Should Avoid the Company of Others (IV.9-10) (T164) 


Social contact hinders progress, and confusion results, just as many 
individual shells when tied together into a girl’s bracelet, make a 
jingling sound. Even contact with one other may be a mistake. 


The Story of Pingala (IV.11) (T164-165) 


A prostitute named Pingala is waiting for her lover to come. When 
he does not arrive, she becomes despondent and is unable to sleep 
because her hope for love is frustrated. Only when she stops hoping 
for his arrival is she finally able to sleep peacefully. 


The Case of the Serpent in Another's House (IV.12) (T165) 


One can live quite happily without activity, just as a serpent finds 
a comfortable dwelling in a house built by a certain man. 


One Should Take the Essence of the Various Sciences (Sastras) Like a Bee 
(IV.13) (T165) 


In the various intellectual traditions there is much quibbling and 
disagreement. A wise student should take only the essence of a given 
science, just as the bee only takes honey from the flower. 


The Story of the Arrow Maker (IV.14) (T166) 


A certain arrow maker is so engrossed in his work that he fails to 
take notice even when the king passes by. 


One Should Follow the Prescribed Rules of Discipline (IV.15) (T166-167) 
A student should not fail to observe all of the prescribed rules for his 
training in meditation, just as in the world a person who does not 
follow prescribed traditions of behaviour (in terms of contracts, 
commitments, etc.) is soon not trusted by anyone and is abandoned. 


The Story of the She-Frog (IV.16) (T167-168) 


A certain king falls in love with a maiden, who agrees to marry him 


356 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


so long as he promises never to show water to her. He agrees, and 
they are married. One day, when she becomes thirsty, she asks for 
water, and the king without thinking shows water to her. At once 
the lovely woman turns into a frog, for her true identity is that she is 
the daughter of the king of frogs. The king suffers grievously and is 
unable to find her again. 


The Story of Indra and Virocana (IV.17-19) (T168-169) 


Both Indra and Virocana go to the world of Brahma and are in- 
structed concerning the highest knowledge. Virocana returns to his 
home but fails to reflect further upon what he has learned. Asa result, 
he does not gain release, whereas Indra, who does reflect further, 
gains release. Moreover, Indra does proper obeisance, observes stu- 
dent celibacy, and attends upon his teacher—all of which brings 
success in due time (cf. Chandogya Upanisad VIII). 


The Story of Vamadeva and Others (IV. 20-22) (T169-172) 


(20) One cannot predict the amount of time it will take to attain 
liberation. There is the story, for example, of Vamadeva who attained 
liberation even when he was in the womb of his mother (cf. Brhada- 
ranyaka Upanisad 1.4.10 and see Aitareya Upanisad 2.1.5). 

(21) Others, however, come to liberation gradually or mediately 
through the performance of appropriate sacrifices. (22) In all cases, 
however, liberation is attained, finally, only through discrimination. 
According to the Veda, all other means, including even the perform- 
ance of the ritual of the five sacrificial fires, lead to rebirth. 


The Story of the Swan and the Milk (IV.23-24) (T172-173) 


Unlike the crow, a swan is able to separate milk, from water. The 
swan discards the water and uses only the milk. Similarly an accom- 
plished teacher is able to separate important knowledge from trivial 
knowledge, and such a teacher should be sought. 


The Story of Suka and Vyasa (IV.25) (1173) 


Suka, the son of Vyasa, attains liberation because of his nonattach- 
ment. Vyasa, on the other hand, does not attain liberation because 
he is still attached to some things.?? 


One Becomes Bound by a Cord Like the Parrot (IV.26) (1173-174) 


Bondage arises because of connection with the three constituents, 
just as a parrot is bound by a cord (guna). 


ANIRUDDHA 357 


The Argument of Ascetics Like Kanva, Saubhari, etc. (IV.27-28) (T174) 


There are some ancient sages like Kanva, Saubhari, etc., who argue 
that attachment to worldly desires may lead eventually to attachment 
to transcendental objects. They are wrong. One must avoid attach- 
ment both to the empirical self and to other worldly objects. 


The Story of King Aja (IV.29) (T175) 


King Aja is grieving over the loss of his beloved wife. Because of 
this, the teachings of Vasistha, which are presented to Aja during 
his grief, do not have any effect. 


The Illustration of the Dirty Mirror (IV.30) (1175-176) 
In a dirty mirror there can be no adequate reflection of a face. 
The Illustration of the Lotus, etc. (IV.31) (T176) 


Though a lotus emerges from the mud, it dwells in purity apart 
from its source. 


Supernatural Powers are no Substitute for Discrimination (IV.32) 
(T176-177) 


One does not attain the ultimate goal of discrimination by pursuing 
the attainment of supernatural powers.”8 


Book V: SecTION ON ARGUMENTS AGAINST OPPONENTS 


Introduction: On the Problem of an ‘‘Auspicious Utterance’ (V. 1) 
(E179; T178-179) 


A treatise should begin with an “‘auspicious utterance” (mangald- 
carana) because this is a generally accepted custom (Jisfdcdra), be- 
cause it often leads to fruitful results (phaladarfana), and because a 
treatise so begun often becomes authoritative (bhaii). This practice 
need not be disputed, therefore. 


(A) On the Problem of the Existence of God (V.2-12) (E179-184; 
T179-184) 


(2) With respect to the problem of fruitful results, these grow out 
of action or work (karman). The notion of fruitful result does not 
imply the existence of God. (3) One cannot intelligibly assert that 


358 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


God is responsible for this action or fruitful results because action is 
undertaken in everyday life for a specific personal reason or need, 
and God can have no such personal motive or need.” (4) To suggest 
that God has personal needs is to reduce Him to the status of a worldly 
ruler. (5) Or, again, if one argues that consciousness appears to be an 
agent when nondiscrimination makes materiality appear to be con- 
scious, and in that sense it is legitimate to refer to consciousness at that 
stage as God (cf. III.57), that is permissible; but it is obvious that 
such a “God” is only a convenient verbal designation (pdribhdsika) 
and nothing more. (6) In fact, however, there can be no action 
without desire or passion that is invariably associated with action; 
and God, of course, cannot be said to be characterized by desire or 
passion. (7) If He were so characterized, He could not be one who is 
permanently liberated. (8) If one argues that God acts through asso- 
ciation with the activities of materiality, this also would entail an 
attachment on the part of God. (9) Moreover, if one argues that 
the mere existence of materiality’s functioning is sufficient to make 
consciousness appear as God, then this entails that all consciousnesses 
are Gods. (10) The existence of an independent God cannot be esta- 
blished, since there is no adequate instrument for knowing such an 
existent entity. (11) Nor can the existence of God ever be established 
on the basis of inference because there would be no way of establishing 
an invariable concomitance. (12) Even in the Veda the manifest 
world is spoken of as an effect of primordial materiality.*4 


(B) On the Problem of the Notion of Ignorance (in Vedanta) (V.13-19) 
(E184-188; T184-187) 


(13) Because consciousness is without any contact with anything 
(nihsanga), it is self-contradictory to assert that the self is somehow 
connected with the power of ignorance (avidydfakti), as the Vedantins 
wish to maintain. (14) Moreover, if one argues that there cannot 
be any creation without ignorance and that there cannot be any 
ignorance without creation, as the Vedantin argues, then one gets 
caught in a vicious circle. (15) Similarly, one cannot maintain that 
these two are logically related as the seed and the sprout, because, 
one knows from the Veda that the manifest world has a beginning, 
that is to say, is temporal. (16) Also, ifit is said that ignorance (avidyd) 
is that which is different from knowledge (vidyé), then Brahman, 
being different from knowledge (vidya), would be identical with 
ignorance and so Brahman will be destroyed by knowledge. (17-19) 
There is also another difficulty in the Vedantin notion of ignorance, 
which can be expressed as follows : is ignorance not disproved by 
knowledge or is it disproved? If ignorance is not disproved by knowl- 
edge, then obviously knowledge is useless, and more than that, a 


ANIRUDDHA 359 


meaningless term. If ignorance is disproved by knowledge, then the 
manifest world is likewise disproved, for the Vedantin links ignorance 
and the manifest world together inseparably. This entails, however, 
that ignorance has a beginning in time or is temporal, since the 
manifest world is temporal. But the temporality of ignorance cannot 
be admitted by the Vedantin without giving up his claim that igno- 
rance is beginningless. 


(G) On the Problem of the Existence of Meritorious Behavior 
(V.20-24) (E188-190; T187-189) 


(20) Although primordial materiality is one and eternal, it never- 
theless manifests a great variety of products. The notion of meri- 
torious behavior (dharma) as the primary efficient cause is necessary 
in order to account for this diversity, and it is not correct to deny, 
this notion (of dharma), as the Carvakas or materialists want to do, 
on the ground that things like merit are imperceptible. (21) This 
notion of merit is established both on the basis of verbal testimony 
(fruti) and on the basis of inference (linga), etc. (22-24) This, ofcourse, 
is not to deny other efficient causes in addition to merit. It is only 
to suggest that meritorious behavior is the most important efficient 
cause. Other subsidiary causes are not ruled out, so long as they are 
established by reliable proofs. 


(D) On the Problem of Meritorious Behavior, Qualities, Inference, etc. 
(in Nyaya and Vaisesika) (V.25-36) (E190-196; T190-198) 


(25) Having defended the notion of meritorious behavior, it must 
also be pointed out, however, that our view of its status differs from 
that of the Naiyayikas. Whereas Ny4aya asserts that merit is a quality 
of the self or consciousness, our view is that merit is a quality of the 
internal organ (that is to say, merit, etc., are aspects of materiality 
in its manifestation as intellect, ego, and mind). (26) Similarly, we 
differ from the Nyaya in our view of ‘“‘quality” (guna), etc., although 
we do not completely deny the various kinds of predication dealt with 
in the Nyaya. All predication, however, in our view, is to be inter- 
preted from within the context of materiality and the three consti- 
tuents (cf. 1.25-26 and I.125-126). (27) Regarding the problem of 
inference, our view is that the fivefold inference is the correct formula- 
tion of inference. This fivefold structure includes (a) thesis (pratijfa), 
(b) reason (hetu), (c) example (drstanta), (d) application (upanaya), 
and (e) conclusion (nigamana). An inference can be easily and clearly 
established using these inferential components (and those Naiyayikas 
who wish to reduce these five to two are misguided).3? (28) The 
invariable concomitance that is the basis of inference is not established 


360 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


because of one instance (sakrd grahana) of apprehension. (29) It is 
established only on the basis of constant or invariable association 
with a characteristic property (niyata dharmasdhitya), and may work 
two ways or only one.3 (30) This invariable concomitance is not a 
new principle, it is simply a theoretical elaboration (kalpand) of the 
relation between things. (31) The ancient teachers declare that in- 
variable concomitance is grasped as an inherent capacity (nijasakti) 
that exists in things—e.g., the “innate power” that exists in fire and 
smoke, which accounts for their being apprehended together. (32) 
The Samkhya teacher Paficasikha, however, thought that invariable 
concomitance is a power (Sakti) conferred or imposed upon two things 
by a person apprehending them. (33) Paficasikha’s view has merit 
to the extent that it avoids the tautology (punarvada) of saying that a 
thing has its own capacity, or simply is what it is. (34) To say that 
something is “‘powerful”’ in this latter sense would be completely super- 
fluous. (In other words, all adjectives would become useless.) (35) 
Similarly, in various religious and magical rites, the ‘“‘power” would 
reside inherently in the implements used—e.g., leaves, etc., used in 
certain rites—and the use of spells or mantras would become quite 
superfluous. (36) Perhaps the best interpretation, however, is to 
describe invariable concomitance in both senses—that is to say, to 
some extent it represents an “innate power’ and to some extent it 
also requires that the person apprehending the concomitance be aware 
of the concomitance. Both these senses are, however, not basically 
different. 


(E) On the Problem of Word and Meaning (V.37-50) (E197-205; 
T199-207) 


(37) It is not correct to identify word (fabda) and meaning (artha), 
as some philosophers of language wish to do. A clear distinction must 
be made between the signifying (vdcaka or Sabda) and that which is 
signified (vdcya or artha). (38) The relation between the signifying 
and the signified is established (a) by ostensive definition (for example, 
by someone pointing and saying, “This is a jar’); (b) by observing 
the behavior of someone who understands a word (for example, a 
child learning what “Bring a cow hither’? means when he continually 
observes that someone brings a cow each time this utterance is spoken) ; 
and (c) by contextual usage (padasamanddhikaranya) (for example, 
someone learning anew word by hearing it used ina context of fami- 
liar words). (39) Moreover, the distinction between word and mean- 
ing or signifying and signified is not to be restricted only to impera- 
tive statements, as the Mimamsakas argue. Imperative statements, 
declaratory statements, hymns, etc., all involve the distinction 
between signifying and signified and, hence, are capable of being 


ANIRUDDHA 361 


meaningful utterances. (40) With respect to the contents of the Veda, 
which sometimes deals with matters that go beyond perception and 
inference, one is able to uriderstand the relation between, the signifying 
and signified on the basis of the analogy with secular words. In other 
words, one who knows ordinary usage is able to make an analogous 
connection with the special usage of the Veda. (41) The Veda was 
not composed by a person because (a) we have already shown 
(in 1.92,99 and V.1-12) that there is no God who could have 
composed it; (b) certainly, no other person could possibly have com- 
posed it; and (c) even if for the sake of argument it is asserted that 
a person composed it, the Veda could not then be authoritative, be- 
cause its contents would reflect the errors and limitations of the finite 
author. We know, however, that the content of the Veda deals with 
that which goes beyond perception, and, hence, it can have no human 
author. (42) It should be noted also that sacrifices, etc., as enjoined 
by the Veda are not to be understood mechanically or as providing 
automatic benefits. These acts are to be understood contextually and 
utilized properly by those who are fit to perform the sacrifices, etc. 
(43) One comes to understand the semantic significance (nijafakti) 
of the Veda by means of the careful study of the meanings of the Vedic 
words. (44) Words lead to certain conceptions whether or not the 
objects talked about are immediately evident or not. (45-48) Because 
words are produced in time or are finite manifestations, it cannot be 
argued, therefore, that the Veda is eternal. To be sure, as already 
pointed out (in V.41), the Veda was not composed by a person— 
either one liberated or not liberated, but it does not follow from this 
that the Veda is eternal. Plants, etc., develop from seeds and plants 
have no human author, and yet no one would argue that because a 
plant has no human author, therefore, it is eternal. (49) If one wants 
to argue for some sort of invisible maker or author for plants, etc., 
there is no convincing inference to establish the argument. (50) One 
can argue convincingly for an unseen or invisible maker only for 
things that are obviously constructed like jars, etc. One cannot 
argue ina similar way for natural objects (like trees, etc.), for there 
is no appropriate inference to establish the contention. 


(F) On the Problem of Knowledge and Error (V.51-56) (E205-209; 
T207-213) 


(51) The validity of knowledge (based on perception, inference, 
or reliable authority ) arises out ofits own inherent capacity (nijasakti). 
It is not correct to assert that the validity of knowledge depends upon 
some outside factor (that is to say, a factor other than that which 
gives rise to knowledge), as Naiyayikas and others argue.?4 

(52) Regarding the problem of error, there are numerous theories 


362 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of error, some of the more important of which are (a) the theory of 
asatkhyati (of the Buddhists); (b) the theory of satkhyati (of the Mim- 
amsa of Prabhakara); (c) the theory of anirvacaniya (of the Vedan- 
tins); (d) the theory of anyathakhyati (of the Naiyayikas); and (e) 
the theory of sadasatkhyati (of our own Samkhya tradition). (a) The 
Buddhist (presumably, Madhyamika) theory of asatkhydti (or the 
theory of the “apprehension of that which is nonexistent”) (as, for 
example, when mother-of-pearl is taken for silver) is not convincing 
because this theory entails that nonexistence has the capacity to bring 
about a conception, but, of course, nonexistence per se has no such 
capacity. (53) (b) Similarly, the Mimamsaka (Prabhakara) theory 
of satkhyati (or the theory of the ‘‘apprehension of that which is exis- 
tent’’) is faulty because it begs the question. According to this theory, 
when mother-of-pearl is taken for silver, the “‘this’’ of “‘this is silver”’ 
and the “silver” of ‘‘this is silver’? are both correct apprehensions 
(the former being based on perception, and the latter on memory), 
but there is a failure to distinguish the two when the error occurs.3* 
The problem with this theory is that it only isolates the correct cogni- 
tion. The issue, however, is to account for the error. Hence, it begs 
the question. (54) (c) Likewise, the theory of anirvacaniya (or the 
theory of the “indescribable’’) is not convincing, because, again, 
the theory fails to account for error. To say that error neither is, 
nor is not, nor both, nor neither, or to say that error is “indescribable” 
is simply to say that there is no rational explanation for error. (55) 
(d) Finally, the Naiyayika theory of anyathdkhydati (or the theory of 
the ‘‘apprehension of something under the guise of something else’) 
is mistaken because the theory leads to self-contradiction. The theory 
entails that something nonexistent can be apprehended, but the 
Naiyayika has already rejected such a notion in his criticism of the 
theory of asatkhyati. (56) (e) The correct theory (as set forth in the 
Samkhya tradition) is that of sadasatkhyati (or the theory of the ‘“‘ap- 
prehension of both what is existent and nonexistent’). According to 
our theory, an error involves both that which, in fact, is, and that 
which, in fact, is not. To some extent, there is a true perception when 
anyone mistakes one thing for another—that is to say, something, in 
fact, is perceived that cannot be denied. The problem, however, is 
that the thing perceived is mistaken to be something else. To this 
extent, therefore, something, in fact, is perceived as what it is not. The 
failure to distinguish between what is, in fact, the case and what is, in 
fact, not the case is the occasion for error. In other words, error involves 
both “‘what is’ and “what is not” equally—hence, sadasatkhydti. 


(G) On the Problem of the Nature and Meaning of Words (V.57-60) 
(E210-212; T213-215) 


(57) The meaning of a word (namely, its semantic significance) 


ANIRUDDHA 363 


is revealed by the word itself. There is no need to posit the existence 
of a “‘special disclosing capacity’? (sphofa) as some philosophers of 
language (as well as Yoga philosophers) are inclined to argue. Ifa 
word, either in its constituent parts or as a whole, is incapable of 
disclosing meaning, then how can one account for an additional “spe- 
cial disclosing capacity”? Oragain, if a word is able to disclose mean- 
ing, then what is the use of positing an additional “special disclosing 
capacity’? Either way, the notion of a “special disclosing capacity” 
is superfluous. 

(58) Words convey meaning, and a word is revealed by a series 
of sounds, The sounds that make up a word are not eternal, as the 
Mimamsakas suggest, because they are obviously products and 
anything that is produced cannot be eternal. (59-60) If one argues 
that sounds have a kind of permanence because they preexist prior 
to their actual manifestation in the same way that a jar preexists in 
an, unmanifest condition in a dark room prior to lighting a lamp, we 
have no difficulty with such a claim, because that is quite in keeping 
with our own Samkhya view of the “‘preexistent effect’? (satkdrya). 
We object only to the notion that sound qua sound is eternal. 


(H) On the Problem of Nonduality (in the Vedanta) (V.61-68) 
(E212-218; T215-221) 


(61) It is not correct to argue (as the Vedantins do) that the self is 
one and nondual, because then it would be- impossible to account 
adequately for the many differences that appear among people (e.g., 
in old age, youth, etc.) (cf. 1.149-164). (62) Also, our immediate 
perception reveals that the self is not identical with the nonself. (63) 
Through perception, therefore, it becomes evident that there are many 
selves or consciousnesses, and that these selves are different from the 
nonself. (64) In the Veda, when nonduality is asserted, the reference 
is only to generic essence and does not imply numerical oneness (cf. 
1.154), 

(65) Moreover, it is not correct to assert (as the Vedantins do) 
that the self (diman) or ignorance (avidya) or both are responsible 
for material creation (upadanakarana). The self is free from all relations 
or attachments (nihsanga) and, hence, cannot be a material cause 
nor a locus for ignorance. 

(66) Furthermore, it is not correct to argue, as do the Vedantins, 
that the self is characterized by both bliss (ananda) and consciousness. 
(cit). According to Vedanta, bliss and consciousness are two distinct 
things, but if that is the case then it is impossible to maintain that the 
self is free from all characterizations. (67-68) In fact, when the Veda 
refers to “bliss,” that is just a verbal expression for the cessation of 
frustration, or, putting it another way, the term “‘bliss’ is used to make 
liberation appear tc be attractive to the unenlightened. 


364 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(I) On the Problem of the Mind and the Internal Organ (V.69-73) 
(218, 221; 1222-224) 


(69) The mind is not all-pervasive (as are materiality and con- 
sciousness) because the mind is a functioning instrument or a sense- 
capacity. It is an instrument (karana) in the sense that an axe is an 
instrument; and it is a sense capacity (indriya) in the sense that seeing 
is a sense capacity. (70) From the Veda we know that the mind 
wanders (gati); and we also know that it is movable. (71) The mind 
is a finite entity having parts, like a jar—that is to say, it has extension 
in time and space as does a jar. (72) Only materiality and consci- 
ousness are eternal. (73) Materiality in and of itself—that is to say, 
taken as a whole—is not derived from any parts. The Veda teaches 
that it exists in and of itself. 


(J) On the Problem of Liberation (V.74-83) (E221-226; T224-231) 


(74) Liberation involves the realization of contentless conscious- 
ness, and hence the experience cannot be described as being blissful, 
as the Vedantins want to describe it. (75) Nor is it correct to suggest 
(as Naiyayikas do) that liberation involves the destruction of specific 
qualities (visesaguna) because consciousness has no specific qualities. 
(76) For the same reason, one cannot describe liberation in terms 
of a specific kind of wandering (vifesagati), as the Jains describe it, 
for consciousness does not have the characteristic of wandering. (77) 
Nor is it correct to attribute liberation to the destruction or elimina- 
tion of “forms” (dkara), as some Buddhists suggest, because the 
Buddhist position denies the very existence of a permanent consci- 
ousness and, hence, there is nothing to be liberated. (78) Other 
Buddhists (possibly Vijfianavadins) suggest that liberation means 
the destruction of everything (sarvocchitti) (except consciousness), 
but such a view is absurd for a variety of reasons, the main one being 
that it is counterproductive to the purpose of consciousness. (79) For 
the same reason one must also reject the view of still other Buddhists 
(namely, Siinyavadins) that everything is void—that is to say, it too 
is counterproductive to the purpose of consciousness. 

(80) Furthermore, liberation cannot be equated with the attain- 
ment of any place or time, because all such attainments are limited 
or finite, and hence liberation would not be permanent. (81) One 
cannot argue that that which is without parts can be related to that 
which has parts, as the Vedantin does when he argues that the individual 
selves become one with Brahman. (82) Nor can one argue that libera- 
tion is the attainment of supernatural powers as, for example, assum- 
ing very small size (animan), etc., because all such attainments are 
not permanent and final. (83) Similarly, one cannot argue that libera- 


ANIRUDDHA 365 


tion is the attainment of the condition of a god like Indra, etc., 
for again, all such conditions are limited and subject to change. 
(ef. V.78-83 with I.7-60, and for the actual position of Samkhya 
regarding bondage and liberation, see 1.55-60). 


(K) On the Problem of the Derivation of the Sense Capacities (V.84) 
(E227; T231-252) 


It is not correct to derive the sense capacities from the gross elements, 
as the Nyaya school does, because the Veda teaches that the sense- 
capacities are derived from egoity. 


(L) On the Problem of the Nyaya-Vaisesika Categories and Atomism 
(V.85-88) (E227-232; T232-238) 


(85) The reduction of philosophical categories to six (as set forth 
in the Vaisesika) has no authoritative basis, and it is not correct to 
argue that liberation arises from the cognition of these six (namely, 
substance, quality, motion, universal, individuator, and inherence). 
(86) The same is true for the sixteen principles, etc., of Nyaya (name- 
ly, instrument of knowledge, object of knowledge, doubt, purpose, 
example, tenet, members of an inference, tarka, ascertainment, dis- 
cussion, sophistry, cavil, fallacies of the reason, quibble, futile rejoin- 
der, and way of losing an argument) (see Wydyasiira I.1.1.). 

(87) The Veda teaches that everything is derived from materiality. 
Hence, even the atoms are products and, therefore, cannot be eternal. 
(88) Similarly, because they are products, they cannot be claimed 
to be without parts, because everything produced has parts. 


(M) On the Problem of Perception (V.89) (E232; T238) 


It cannot be argued that perception is only external and based on 
color or form (because space is perceived when one says ‘‘a bird is 
here’ in the sky and because Yogins perceive many unusual entities 
in their contemplation). Hence, one cannot confine cognition only 
to external perception of form. 


(O) On the Problem of Universals (V. 91-96) (E233-236; T239-243) 


(91-92) It is true that only materiality and consciousness are eternal, 
but, nevertheless, the category of universal property (sémdnya) has a 
certain constancy. Therefore, we do not deny the existence of a more 
or less permanent universal property. We only deny that a universal 
property is eternal in the same sense that materiality and conscious- 
ness are eternal. (93) A universal, in our view, is a positive appre- 


366 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


hension and is not an apprehension of exclusion, as some Naiyayikas 
assert. (That is to say, when I apprehend “‘cowness,” I apprehend 
something positive. I do not simply apprehend everything that is 
noncow.) (94) Moreover, the notion of similarity (sddrSya) is a variety 
of universal and is not a separate principle as the Mimamsakas of the 
Prabhakara school and some Buddhists assert. One apprehends simi- 
larity by perceiving sameness in a greater number of parts (between 
two things). (95) Or, putting the matter another way, similarity is the 
apprehension of an innate characteristic, which is the same in two 
things. (96) This apprehension of similarity is not necessarily de- 
pendent upon the relation between a thing and its name (samjitdsam- 
jitisambandha), for sometimes a similarity is apprehended without re- 
course to language (as, for example, when perceiving two similar jars). 


(P) On the Problem of Relation (V.97-100) (E236-239; 1243-247) 


(97) The relation (sambandha) between word and meaning (Sabdar- 
tha) is not eternal because both relata are noneternal. (98) Moreover, 
there are no beginningless relations, because perception and infer- 
ence do not provide us with any reliable knowledge of such a begin- 
ningless relation. We apprehend relations through our apprehension 
of relata, and relata are never perceived as being beginningless. (99) 
Hence, the category of inherence (samavdya) that, according to Nyaya- 
VaisSesika, is an eternal relation, cannot be proved. (100) The appre- 
hension of constant connections between things (e.g., a “white cow” 
or “‘the horse runs’’) is to be explained by means of perception and 
inference, and there is no need to invoke a category of eternal relation, 
such as inherence. 


(Q) On the Problem of Motion (V.101) (E239-240; T247-248) 


Motion (kriyd) can be directly perceived by one who is standing 
near at hand and who observes the locus of the motion. There is no 
need, therefore, to hold that motion is inferable only. 


(R) On the Problem of the Material Cause of the Body (V. 102) (E240; 
T248) 


The body does not have five material causes (coinciding with the 
five gross elements). The gross body is derived only from earth. The 
other four gross elements are only auxiliary. 


(S) On the Problem of the Gross Body and the Subtle Body (V. 103) 
(E241; 'T249-250) 


There are two bodies. One is the gross, physical body, and the other 


ANIRUDDHA 367 


is the transmigrating subtle body. The materialists, who accept only 
the gross body, are unable to givea full account of the human condition. 


(T) On the Problem of the Scope of the Sense Capacities (V. 104-110) 
(242-246 ; T250-255) 


(104) It is not correct to assert that the sense capacities can provide 
cognition for that which goes beyond their reach. If it were the case 
that they could, then one should be able to perceive the entire uni- 
verse, which is absurd. The correct view is that the sense capacities 
have specific operations and limitations. (105) It is the operation 
of sight to see things even at a distance, but it does not follow, there- 
fore, that this operation is the same as light, as the Naiyayikas hold. 
(106) That there is such a special operation (vrtti) of seeing is demon- 
strated when we cognize objects that are distant from us. (107) The 
special operation is neither a “part”? (bhdga) nora “quality” (guna); 
it is a different principle (¢attvantara) that moves (sarpali) in order 
to establish a relationship with an object (sambandhdrtha). (108) 
Qua operation it is to be understood as being derived from egoity, 
and it is not restricted to substances. (109) Hence, seeing (together 
with the other sense capacities) originates and gets its function from 
the ego. Seeing is not a product of the material elements. (110) It is 
true, of course, that the gross elements are concomitant causes and 
that the sense capacities operate in the context of the gross elements. 
This is not to be denied. What we want to stress, however, is 
that the sense capacities originate and get their operations from 
egoity. 


(U) On the Problem of the Nature of Bodies (V.111-115) (E246-249; 
T255-258) 


(111) The conventional view that bodies are sweat-born, egg-born, 
embryo-born, seed-born, will-born and self-generated is too limited. 
One must keep an open mind in such matters, for bodies are produced 
in a variety of ways. (112) Bodies are mainly made up of earth with 
regard to their material cause, although one should keep in mind 
what was asserted above in stra 110. (113) Vital breath is not the 
origin of the body, because the vital breath subsists in the body in 
association with the sense capacities. (114) The body is enlivened 
because of the controllership of the experiencer (namely, consciousness ). 
Without the presence of consciousness, decay takes place. (115) 
Consciousness does not control directly, but works, rather, through 
materiality, just as a master accomplishes his purposes through a 
servant. 


368 ENGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(V) On the Problem of the Experience of Liberation (V.116-120) (E246- 
253; T258-261 ) 


(116) Concentration (samadhi), deep sleep (susupti), and liberation 
(moksa) are analogous in the sense that they do not involve the ex- 
perience of external objects. The content of these experiences is just 
the form of the Absolute (brahmariipata). (117) In concentration and 
deep sleep, however, some seeds that may lead to further ordinary 
experience, remain—that is to say, these experiences are not permanent 
and final states. They lead to regression—that is to say, to ordinary 
experience. Only liberation is the permanent and final experience 
in which all of the seeds are destroyed. (118) All three states exist 
(namely, concentration, deep sleep, and liberation) and are estab- 
lished by means of perception and inference. The first two, however, 
are secondary ‘to the third. (119) Bondage is caused by faults like 
desire, etc., and also by latent dispositions that obstruct liberation. 
(129) A disposition possesses a certain speed or velocity, and one 
disposition is sufficient to account for one motion. 


(W) On the Problem of Types of Beings (V. 121-128) (253-257; 
T261-265) 


(121) Beings are of various types and cannot be restricted to the 
human condition alone. (122-123) Trees, bushes, and plants like- 
wise are abodes of experience for an experiencer, for this is clearly 
taught in tradition and was referred to previously in V. 114. (124) 
This is not to suggest, of course, that trees and bushes engage in meri- 
torious behavior as do people, for the Veda clearly indicates that 
meritorious behavior, etc., are characteristics of only certain bodily 
conditions. (125) With respect to types of bodies there are three 
varieties: (a) bodies that act (karmadeha); (b) bodies that experience 
( bhogadeha); and (c) bodies that act and experience (ubhayadeha). 
(126) The accomplished Yogin (anuSayin) is in a class by himself, 
and nothing whatever can be ascribed to him. (127-128) Under- 
standing, knowledge, desire, and action are noneternal, and it cannot 
be argued that these reside in God, for we have already shown that 
God cannot be proved. 


(X) On the Problem of Supernatural Attanments (V. 129) 
(E257-258; T266) 


The supernatural attainments of Yoga praxis (yogasiddhi) are as 
real as are the effects of drugs, etc. 


ANIRUDDHA 369 


(Y) On the Problem of Consciousness and the Elements (V. 130) 
(E258-259; T266-267) 


Consciousness is not a property of the gross elements either singly 
or in combination. 


Book VI: SumMARY SECTION 


(A) On the Nature of the Self and the Discrimination of the Self 
(VI.1-21) (E260-270; T268-277) 


(1) The self exists because there is no adequate proof for its non- 
existence (cf. I.138). (2) The self is distinct from the body and other 
material things, because if it were not distinct, then the qualities of 
the body, etc., would be ascribed to the self, the knower, which cannot 
be allowed logically. (3) Furthermore, one uses the genitive case 
when referring to the self, as when we say, for example, “my body’’; 
hence, there is a clear distinction between the possessor and the posses- 
sed (namely, the self and the body). (4) If someone should object that 
the genitive case is also used in such expressions as “‘the body of the 
stone’’ (for grinding, etc.), that is to say, in an expression in which 
the “‘body”’ and the “‘stone”’ refer to the same thing—and that, there- 
fore one need not maintain a distinction between the self and the body, 
our reply is that in such expressions the genitive casc is being used only 
figuratively (whereas, in fact, there is an identity between ‘“‘body” 
and “‘stone’”’ by way of perception), but in our usage, we employ the 
use of the genitive case in its grammatically correct form (wherein 
there is a distinction between the possessor and the possessed). (5) 
The ultimate condition (krtakrtyata) is attained when frustration has 

een completely overcome (cf. III.84). (6) Frustration and satis- 
faction usually occur together—that is to say, there is no satisfaction 
without frustration and there is no frustration without satisfaction. 
(7) No one anywhere is completely satisfied—that is to say, there is 
no pure condition of satisfaction without some frustration. (8) 
Therefore, because pleasure is always linked with pain, the discrimi- 
nating person considers even that satisfaction on the same level as 
frustration—that is to say, one who discriminates correctly does not 
seek satisfaction but seeks, rather, the nonexistence of frustration. 
(9) To seek satisfaction is to be motivated by a desire; but to seck the 
nonexistence of frustration is to be free from all desire; hence, the goal 
is twofold: frustration and the absence of frustration. (10) The self 
is devoid of all qualities, and in the Veda it is taught that nothing 
adheres to the self. (11) Owing to nondiscrimination, consciousness 
is said to attain heaven, etc., although such things are the transfor- 
mations of materiality. In fact, consciousness is completely attribute- 


370 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


less. (12) Nondiscrimination is without beginning. If one were to 
argue that nondiscrimination has a beginning then two insuperable 
difficulties would arise: either the liberated would have to become 
bound (at that moment when nondiscrimination arises), or activity 
to remove nondiscrimination would be pointless (because there would 
be prior absence of nondiscrimination). (13) To say that nondiscri- 
mination is without beginning, however, is not to say that itis eternal 
like consciousness and materiality. If nondiscrimination were eternal, 
it could never be eliminated. Hence, nondiscrimination is without 
beginning, but it does have an end. (14-15) As darkness can be eli- 
minated by light only, so nondiscrimination can be eliminated by dis- 
crimination only. (16) By implication, therefore, we must say that 
bondage is caused only by nondiscrimination. (17) Discrimination 
alone brings about liberation from bondage, and in the Veda it is 
taught that there is no renewal or returning (dvriti) after discrimina- 
tion has occurred. (18) Ifa renewal or return could take place, then 
discrimination could not bring complete cessation of frustration, which 
is the ultimate goal or end of beings. (19) Also, there would be no 
intelligible distinction between the bound and the liberated, for both 
would be caught up in renewal or returning. (20) Liberation is not a 
state or condition; it is nothing other than the absolute elimination 
of all obstacles or hindrances that create distractions. (21) Even if one 
accepts that there must arise some state or condition in liberation, the 
view does not make any substantial change in the view of Samkhya, 
for it is accepted that there is no return from the state of liberation. 


(B) On the Means of Attaining Discrimination (VI.22-31) (E271-275; 
1277-281 ) 


(22) There are three types of aspirants: the very bright, the medio- 
cre, and the dull, and for each type there is an appropriate means 
for attaining discrimination (cf. I.70 and ITI.76). (23) (Hearing 
[Sravana] is sufficient for the very bright; hearing and thinking 
[manana ] are sufficient for the mediocre) ; and hearing, thinking and 
meditation (nididhydsana) are required for the dull. (24) Posture 
should be steady and comfortable, and there are a variety of useful 
postures (cf. IITI.33). (25) Meditation is a condition in which the 
mind is free from awareness of objects (cf. III.31). (26) In medi- 
tation one becomes free from all impulses or influences (upardga). 
(In deep sleep, however, the influences continue to operate.) (cf. 
V.117). (27) Consciousness in and of itself, of course, is free from all 
influences; the appearance of influence is brought about by non- 
discrimination. (28) The influence is like the case of the rose and 
the crystal (cf. IJ.35). There is no actual redness in the crystal; there 
is only the appearance of redness. Similarly, there is no real influence 


ANIRUDDHA 371 


in consciousness. (29) One attains the cessation of influence by 
means of meditation, concentration, constant practice, and nonattach- 
ment (cf. III. 30-36). (30) Liberation is attained by going beyond 
waking awareness and the state of deep sleep. (31) There is no special 
rule regarding the place for meditation. Any place is suitable so long 
as it is conducive to the goal, which is the cessation of worldly aware- 
ness (cittaprasdda). 


(C) Primordial Materiality (V1.32-44) (E275-280; T281-287) 


(32) Primordial materiality is the primal material cause, for we 
know from the Veda that all other things are of the nature of effects. 
(33) The self or consciousness cannot be the material cause because 
such a cause is unsuitable to consciousness (cf. 1.66, 1.75). (34) 
Anyone who ascribes causative agency to the self is in clear contradic- 
tion with the Veda. (35) Materiality operates as the basic material 
cause throughout all of the manifest world, although this primal cau- 
sation operates mediately through the various effects. (36) Mate- 
riality is omnipresent as everything is its effect. (37) If one would 
argue that materiality is not omnipresent and that it is somehow a 
limited entity that moves from place to place, one then encounters 
the difficulty that the atomists have—that is to say, limited entities 
that move are really products and cannot be the final material cause 
(cf. 1.76 and V.87). (38) Furthermore, if one asks whether mate- 
riality is one of the nine substances set forth in the Nyaya analysis of 
substance, our answer is no. Materiality is another kind of substance, 
for there is no need to restrict the number of substances to nine. (39) 
The three constituents are not attributes or properties of materiality. 
They are, rather, the actual constituents of materiality. (40) Mate- 
riality is devoid of experience in and of itself, but it functions for the 
sake of consciousness just as a camel carries saffron for a merchant 
(cf. IJ1.58). (41) Although there is only one material cause, the 
manifoldness of creation is due to merit, demerit, etc., which are the 
results of action. (42) Materiality in its diversified condition is brought 
about when the constituents are out of equilibrium. Materiality in 
its quiescent condition is when the constituents abide in equilibrium 
(cf. 1.61). (43) For the one who has become liberated, materiality 
no longer produces any diversified manifestations, just as in everyday 
life one ceases to work when a task has been accomplished. (44) Al- 
though materiality continues to be present, there is no inclination for 
further experience on the part of the one liberated, because nondis- 
crimination has been removed, or in other words, the occasion for 
further ordinary experience (has been removed). 


372 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(D) On the Plurality of Consciousnesses (V1.45-51) (E281-286; 
T287-294) 


(45) As has already been argued, the plurality of consciousnesses 
follows from diversity (cf. 1.149). (46-48) The limiting adjuncts or 
disguises, as it were, cannot by themselves account for diversity, as the 
Vedantin wants to argue. If the adjuncts are real, then diversity is 
real, and the Vedantin notion of monism must be given up. If, on 
the other hand, the adjuncts are unreal, they obviously cannot ac- 
count for diversity, for something real cannot arise from something 
unreal. The only solution is to accept a plurality of consciousnesses 
in addition to the adjuncts, and to assert that the nonduality of selves 
has reference to their having a simple generic essence (cf. I.150-154), 
(49) Moreover, the Vedantin position of nonduality has the difficulty 
that there is no way that it could be known. The self cannot be known 
by the nonself, since the nonself is unintelligent. By the same token, 
the self cannot know itself without committing the logical fallacy of 
claiming that the subject and object of an assertion are the same thing. 
(50) The self whose very nature is pure contentless consciousness 
illuminates that which is nonself. (51) When bliss or joy is ascribed 
to the self in the Veda, this is simply a figurative device for making 
liberation appear to be attractive for those affected by desires (cf. 
V.67-68). 


(E) On the Manifest World (VI (VI.52-65) (E286-297; T294-306) 


(52) The manifest world exists, as has already been argued. It is 
neither some sort of illusion, nor is there any adequate proof for its 
nonexistence (cf. 1.79). (53) Because the manifest world could not 
have arisen from nonbeing, therefore it must be accepted that the 
manifest world has been derived from that which is eternally real 
(namely, materiality). 

(54) Egoity, not consciousness, is the agent. (55) Experience 
ends when the realization of discrimination occurs, for experience is 
dependent on the activities of egoity (cf. 1.104 and II.46). (56) Even 
the intense pleasure of the celestial realms (namely, the world of the 
moon, etc.) is not permanent, since renewal, or return, operates even 
there (because efficient causes continue to exist) (cf. III.52-53). 
(57) Liberation from the manifest world does not arise through instruc- 
tion, as has been stated before in 1.70 and VI.22, but rather through 
the practices prescribed for the various types of aspirants. (58) Hear- 
ing is said to be a means to liberation, though it is not the direct or 
immediate means. (59) When in the Veda consciousness, or the self, 
is referred to as “‘wandering”’ (gati), this is only a figurative expression 
and has relevance only with respect to the limiting adjuncts. In a 


ANIRUDDHA 373 


similar way, space sometimes appears to move because of its associa- 
tion with a jar, but, of course, space does not move (cf. 1.51). (60) 
Consciousness is present during all stages of the formation of the 
embryo. When consciousness is not present, decay takes place (cf. 
V.114). (61) The body is not kept from decaying because of the 
“unseen” (adrsta) power of meritorious acts, etc., because the ‘‘un- 
seen”? is unconnected with the body. The body, therefore, is not an 
effect of the “unseen,” just as a sprout is not the effect of water but, 
rather, the effect of a seed. (62) Such qualities as meritorious be- 
havior, etc., belong to egoity and do not belong to consciousness, 
which is free from all qualities. (63) The empirical self having charac- 
teristics is known as the jiva, and the jiva is not consciousness, because 
consciousness is devoid of all characteristics. (64) All agency be- 
longs to egoity; hence, all of the effects (of the manifest world) de- 
pend upon egoity. As has already been argued (in V.1-12 and 
I.92-99) there is no proof for an additional entity known as ‘“‘God.” 
(65) As the manifestation of adrsta is agentless, so egoity has no agent 
to produce it. (66) Everything arises from egoity except the “‘great 
one”’ or intellect (and this latter arises directly from primordial 
materiality. 


(F) On Consciousness and Creative Nature Being Together as Possessor 
and Possessed (V1.67-70) (E298-300; T307-309) 


(67) The relation of consciousness and materiality being toge- 
ther—that is to say, the relation of “‘possessor’” and “‘possessed”’ 
(svasvémibhava—has been explained in various ways. Some have sug- 
gested that the relation is brought about by the beginningless instru- 
mentality of action (within creative nature) like that between a seed 
and a sprout. (68) Others, like Paficasikha, have explained the 
relation as due to the instrumentality of nondiscrimination. (69) 
Still others, like Sanandana, have explained the relation as due to the 
instrumentality of the subtle body. (70) However one wishes to 
explain the relation, what is important to realize is that the ultimate 
end or goal of beings is only attained when this relation (namely, the 
svasvdmibhdva) is permanently and finally destroyed. 


VIJINANABHIKSU 


If it is legitimate to use the term “renaissance”? with reference to 
these 1ater Samkhya traditions that focus on the Tattvasamdsasitira 
and the Samkhyasiitra, it is surely because of the work of Vijfiianabhiksu 
(and to a lesser extent his pupil, Bhavaganesga). In the Kramadipika 
and Aniruddha’s Sdamkhyasiitravrtti, the interpretation of Samkhya 
still very much followed along the older lines of the main tradition of 
the Samkhyakériké and’ its commentaries, even though the occasions 
for the Kramadipika and Samkhyasiitravrtti were the emergence of the 
apparently recent sitra collection. With Vijfianabhiksu, however, 
new directions in the interpretation of the old Samkhya are clearly 
evident. On one level, theré is a much more synthetic attitude overall 
in which epic and Puranic themes, theistic devotional trends, and 
the developing themes of Vedanta philosophy (primarily of the 
bhedabheda or “identity and difference” variety) are being welded 
together into a grand metaphysical system. Samkhya and Yoga, 
along with Nyaya, Vaisesika, and Mimamsa, are all assigned an 
appropriate place in this larger Vedanta synthesis. Ona second level, 
however, the syncretism is hardly complete, for it is quite clear that 
Vijfianabhiksu has very little patience with the mdyavdda or Advaita 
Vedanta of Samkara and his followers, whom he unkindly charac- 
terizes as ‘‘crypto-Buddhists” (pracchannam bauddham) in his remarks 
on 1.22 of Samkhyapravacanabhdsya. On this second level, one has the 
impression that Vijfianabhiksu construes one part of his intellectual 
mission as one of rescuing Vedanta from the Advaitins, and some such 
motivation may well explain his predilection for Samkhya, Yoga, 
and the older epic and Puranic materials. A discussion of the intra- 
mural polemics of later Vedanta is, of course, beyond the scope of the 
present volume except, perhaps, to point out that Vijfianabhiksu’s 
interest in Samkhya and Yoga may have been occasioned by motives 
quite different from that of a faithful bhdsyakdra trying to understand 
the old Samkhya tradition. Fora useful, general treatment of Vijfia- 
nabhiksu’s own Vedanta philosophy vis-a-vis other forms of Vedanta, 


376 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


see S. N. Dasgupta’s chapter entitled “The Philosophy of Vijfiana 
Bhiksu.”2 

The best estimate for the date of Vijfianabhiksu is still the latter 
half of the sixteenth century as was argued long ago by Garbe® and 
accepted by Keith, Winternitz,* and most others. Udayavira Sastrin, 
however, has argued for a fourteenth century date,® claiming that 
Vijfianabhiksu knew the work of Sadananda of the Vedantasdéra and 
must, therefore, be placed at the end of the fourteenth century. 
Chakravarti argues for a fifteenth century date based on a notation 
in a catalogue of manuscripts indicating that a manuscript of Vijiia- 
nabhiksu had been copied in the fifteenth century.* These latter 
arguments appear to be based on rather limited evidence, and it is 
probably wise to retain the sixteenth century date in the absence 
of additional data. 

Vijnanabhiksu composed a number of works, and R. T. Rukmani 
in the Introduction to her new translation of the first part of Vijfia- 
nabhiksu’s Yogavarttika suggests that Vijfianabhiksu’s writings be 
placed in the following chronological order:? (a) Upadesarainamala 
(a Vedanta work), (b) Vijfdnamrtabhdsya (his commentary on the 
Brahmasitra), (c) a series of eight commentaries on various Upanisads, 
(d) Lsvaragitabhasya, (e) Brahmadarsa (a Vedanta work), (£) Samkhya- 
apravacanabhasya and Yogavarttika (both of which were written about the 
same time), (x) Sdmkhyasdra and finally (h) Yogasdrasamgraha. 


SAMKHYAPRAVACANABHASYA 
(Summary by Sangamlal Pandey) 


The following summary is based on the edition (E) of the text 
prepared by Ram Shankar Bhattacarya (Bharatiya Vidya Prakasana, 
Varanasi, 1966). The English translation (T) used is that of Nandalal 
Sinha in The Samkhya Philosophy containing (1) Samkhya-Pravachana 
Sitram, with the Vritti of Aniruddha, and the Bhdsya of Vijfiana Bhiksu 
and extracts from the Vritti-Sara of Mahadeva Vedantin; (2) Tatva 
Samdsa; (3) Samkhya Karika; (4) Panchagikha Siitram (New Delhi: 
Oriental Books Reprint Corporation, 1979; reprint of the 1915 Sacred 
Books of the Hindus edition). 

Because Vijfianabhiksu’s commentary frequently repeats what 
Aniruddha has said, the reader is referred back to the Aniruddha 
summary for those portions of the Bhdsya not covered in the following. 

The Samkhyapravacanabhdsya literally means the ‘‘commentary on 
the exposition of Samkhya.” It is a full-length commentary on the 
Sdmkhyasiitra. These aphorisms may be called the “Larger Samkhya 
Aphorisms” and the other, that is, the Tattvasamdasa, the ‘‘Shorter 
Samkhya Aphorisms.” Vijfiianabhiksu was aware of both of the 


VIJNANABHIKSU 377 


aphorisms and treated them as the detailed and the brief expositions 
of Kapila’s formulation of the Samkhya system respectively. 


Boox I 
Introduction (El-7; T2-12) 


The text begins with seven verses. (Verse 1) The author says that 
“one, without a second’? (Chdndogya VI.11.1) means that there is an 
absence of difference in consciousnesses and not that the conscious- 
ness is nondual (akhanda). (Verse 2) He bows down to Kapila, the 
author of the Samkhya, who is an incarnation of Narayana and inven- 
ted a complete system of arguments to clarify the meaning of Upani- 
sadic passages. (Verse 3) He adores the universal consciousness 
that uniformly shines in all creatures under different limiting condi- 
tions. (Verse 4) There is one uniform consciousness, although the 
unenlightened perceive differences (divinity, nondivinity, etc.). 
(Verse 5) He promises to complete the Samkhya system, which had 
been swallowed by the sun of time (kdlarka) and has survived only 
in parts up to his time. (Verse 6) By writing this commentary, he will 
cut asunder the knot of consciousness and unconsciousness for his own 
benefit as well as for others. (Verse 7) Nondifference of all consci- 
ousnesses, declared by hundreds of scriptural passages, is the subject 
matter of this philosophy. 

The nature of the self should be known from the study of the 
Upanisads. It should be thought about with the help of the Samkhya 
system, which is the science of discrimination taught by Kapila 
consisting of six books, and it should be meditated upon with the 
help of the Yoga philosophy. There is no conflict among the six 
systems of Hindu philosophy. 

It is true that the Nyaya and the Vaisesika also prepare the ground 
for the discrimination of the self from the body. They are not the 
final or transcendental philosophy, however, since they take the self 
to be an agent. The Bhagavadgita (111.29) rejects their view and 
establishes the Samkhya view. The view is further proved by hund- 
reds of Upanisadic texts such as the Brhaddranyaka, and hundreds of 
smrtis such as the Visnu Purana. Thus the Nyaya and the Vaiéesika 
are contradicted at the transcendental level (paramarthabhiimi). They 
are not void of importance, however, since they have their own 
specific subject matter. The significance of a word (and also of a 
philosophy) is that to which it is directed. The significance of the 
Nyaya and the Vaisesika is different from that of the Samkhya. The 
Samkhya does not contradict them, nor do they contradict it. 

The Vedanta and Yoga, however, which accept an eternal God, 
seem to conflict with Samkhya, which excludes God from its purview, 


378 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


but a little consideration will remove this conflict. Here too the 
relation of the empirical and the transcendental obtains.. The exclu- 
sion of God in the Samkhya is for practical purposes only; it is desig- 
ned to produce indifference toward lordliness. Nowhere is there any 
condemnation of theism as such. There is no wisdom equal to, or 
greater than, the Samkhya system of thought. The superiority of 
Samkhya over other systems rests upon its focus on discrimination 
and not upon its rejection of God. Hence, cultured persons like 
Paragara unanimously maintain that there is a God that is tran- 
scendentally real. The followers of the Vedas should give up those 
portions in the teachings of Aksapada, Kanada, Samkhya, and Yoga, 
which are in conflict with the Vedas. There is again no conflict bet- 
ween the system of Jaimini and the system of Vyasa, since both of 
them make use of the Upanisads. The arguments of the Vedanta, 
the Nyaya, the Vaisesika, the Moksadharma (Mahabharata), and 
other systems that demonstrate the existence of God must be accept- 
ed as having greater validity than the Samkhya rejection of God. 
The Karma Purana declares that Samkhya Jacks in the knowledge 
of God. Moreover, the principal object of the Vedanta is God and 
if this object is contradicted then the Vedanta would be altogether 
void of its principal object—a_ case that is impossible according to 
the maxim that the significance of a word is that to which it is 
directed. The principal object of the Samkhya is the discrimina- 
tion between self and nonself. 

Thus, Vedanta and Samkhya are not in conflict with each other. 
Their spheres and purposes are different. The Samkhya is certainly 
weak to the extent that it rejects God. Its rejection of God is simply 
a concession to current views (abhyupagamavada) or simply a dogmatic 
assertion (praudhivéda). Such concessions and assertions are recorded 
in the Sdstras. They can be safely ignored and it will then be found 
that the Samkhya has no conflict with Vedanta and Yoga. Or for the 
purpose of impeding the knowledge of the sinful persons, even in 
theistic philosophies some portions that are opposed to the Vedas 
are included, although these portions are not authoritative. Hence 
Lord Siva condemns in the Padmapuréna (VI.263.66-75) the Pagu- 
pata, the Vaigesika, the Nyaya, the Samkhya, the Mimamsa, the 
Buddhist philosophy, and the Vedanta of Samkara and says that 
he himself included some wrong doctrines in these systems in order 
to confuse some people. 

Thus none of the orthodox systems is either unauthoritative or 
contradicted by another. Every one of them is authoritative in its 
own sphere and remains uncontradicted by other orthodox systems 
in that sphere. 

Objection : Is not the doctrine of the plurality of consciousnesses 


VIJNANABHIKSU 379 


in the Samkhya a concession to current views (abhyupagama), for it 
contradicts the monism of the Vedanta? 

Reply : No. There is no contradiction between Samkhya and 
Vedanta, for the Brahmasittra (2.3.43-50) itself establishes the plurality 
of jivas. Although the plurality of consciousnesses is contradicted by 
the Vedanta doctrine of one universal consciousness, the Samkhya 
is not invalidated thereby, for there is no contradiction in the doctrine 
of the plurality of empirical selves being useful in the discipline of 
liberation. Thus, the relation between the Samkhya and the Vedanta 
is that between the practical view and the transcendental view. This 
has been discussed in greater detail by the author in the Vijfidnda- 
mrtabhasya. 

This Samkhyasiitra of Six Books is not a repetition of the Tattvasamdasa 
because the Samkhyasitra is an elaborate exposition of the Samkhya, 
whereas the Tativasamdsa is just a short description of it. 

Now, the name “‘Samkhya”’ is significant. This system discrimi- 
nates the self correctly (samyak viveka); hence it is called ‘“Samkhya.” 
Moreover, it enumerates the principles beginning with materiality; 
thus, it is called ‘“Samkhya”’ or the science of enumeration. 

This philosophy is the science of liberation (moksafastra). Like 
medical science, it has four divisions (oyiiha): i.e., what is to be 
avoided (heya), its avoidance (hdna), the cause of what is to be 
avoided (heyahetu), and the way of avoiding it (hanopdya). Frustration 
is threefold; its cause is nondiscrimination on the part of conscious- 
ness. The way for the elimination of frustration is the discrimination 
between consciousness and materiality. The absolute eradication of 
frustration is the goal or end of consciousness. 


(A) On the Problem of the Scope and Task of the Samkhya 


(1.1) (E7-13); T12-26) Now, the complete cessation of the three- 
fold suffering is the supreme end of consciousness. 

The word “‘now’’ (atha) indicates auspiciousness, and it is used 
here as an introductory adverb to introduce the main theme. The 
conclusion of the theme will be the cessation of frustration (see 
VI.70). Thus the meaning of the aphorism is that the Samkhya has 
been begun to determine the supreme end of consciousness. 

Frustrations are threefold: (2) originating from the sufferer him- 
self (ddhydtmika), (2) originating from created beings (ddhibhautika), 
and (3) originating from the gods (ddhidaivika). The first is of two 
kinds, physical and mental. Although all frustration is without 
exception mental, yet there is the distinction of the mental and 
nonmental since some frustrations are produced entirely by the 
mind, whereas other frustrations are not so produced. The complete 
cessation means the cessation of the threefold frustration without 


380 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


leaving any remainder (either gross or subtle). The frustration that 
is felt at the present moment ceases automatically in the second 
moment. Hence, it does not require knowledge for its cessation. 
Again, past frustration has already disappeared. Hence, it does not 
require any means of eradication. Only the frustration that is to 
come needs to be eradicated. That is why the Yogasitra (II.16) 
states that the frustration that is avoidable is future frustration. 
Cessation does not mean destruction but a state that is over because 
posterior absence and prior absence are essentially the same as the 
past and the future states respectively. Absence is not admitted by 
the upholders of satkaryavada. 

Objection : Frustration that is not yet come is unreal, like a sky 
flower. So there is no need for any means to eradicate it. 

Reply : Not so. For, it is well known in the philosophy of Patafijali 
that the power of things to produce their effects lasts so long as the 
things themselves endure. The existence of fire devoid of the power 
of burning is nowhere seen. This power lies in the form of those 
effects that are not yet come. This very power is called the capability 
of being the material cause of experience. Hence, the existence of 
future frustration is inferred so long as there is the existence of the 
cognitive faculty (citta). To remove it is the supreme end of con- 
sciousness, In the state of liberation-while-living (jivanmuktz) the 
seeds of all actions except those already begun (prdrabdha) are burnt 
up, whereas in that of liberation from the body (videhamukti) they 
are destroyed together with the cognitive faculty. The burning up 
of seeds means only the destruction of the contributory cause of 
ignorance. 

Objection : But still the cessation of frustration cannot be the sup- 
reme end of consciousness, because frustration is a quality of the 
cognitive faculty of consciousness and its cessation is not possible. 
Frustration is eternal like conciousness. If it is said that frustration 
arises from the foregetfulness of consciousness, then the discipline 
of meditation (nididhydsana) that is enjoined after hearing and rea- 
soning would remove the said forgetfulness. Moreover, the Veda, 
which has the power of removing all confusion, says that he who 
knows the self overcomes frustration. So the existence of frustration 
is established and it does not rest upon forgetfulness of conscious- 
ness. 

Reply : No. This objection will be met by Aphorism 1.19, name- 
ly, except for the relation with materiality there is no other bon- 
dage in consciousness, which is eternally pure, enlightened, and 
free. So, satisfaction and frustration exist in consciousness in the form 
of the intellect, but such a transformation is not possible in the case 
of the unchanging consciousness (kifastha diman). Consciousness only 
receives the transformations of intellect in the form of an image. 


VIJNANABHIKSU 381 


Yogasiitra 1.4 also supports this view. Samkhyasitra 11.35 also holds 
that as the crystal gets the color of the China rose because of its proxi- 
mity with it, so consciousness gets the influence of the intellect be- 
cause of its proximity with it. Vedantins (Yogavdsistha 5.91.133) 
also state that an object of knowledge is known only as it is super- 
imposed upon, or reflected in, consciousness. This reflection means the 
transformation of the intellect in the form of the objects under their 
respective conditions. There the association with frustrations, called 
experience, exists in consciousness in the form of reflection. Hence 
the cessation of frustration in that very form becomes a proper object 
of the pursuit of consciousness. 

The complete cessation of frustration is an intrinsic object of desire 
by itself. 

(1.3) Objection : If wealth, etc., fail to give relief from frustration, 
then they are useless, like bathing an elephant. Why do people engage 
in such pursuits then? 

Reply : Cessation of frustration, produced by worldly objects, is 
not the ultimate object of desires. To some extent, of course, it is cer- 
tainly an object of desire. People seek the removal of frustrations 
by means of wealth, etc., and such activity is justified. The bathing 
of an elephant gives temporary relief from pain and so it is an object 
of desire, although of a lower kind. 

(I.4) The cessation of frustration by ordinary means should ulti- 
mately be given up, since it is not possible to eradicate all frustration 
by such means. Even if it were possible, there would still necessarily 
exist some connection with the cause of frustration. 

(1.5) The superiority of liberation to kingdom and other objects 
of desire is declared by the Vedas. Further, the objects of desire are 
the modifications of the constituents, which are the abodes of frustra- 
tions. No object can be found that is unmixed with frustration. 

(1.6) The author here quotes Sémkhyakarika, verse 2, to prove that 
the scriptural means are similar to ordinary means. The scriptural 
means, like the ordinary means, are also mixed with impurity or sin, 
because they enjoin the killing of animals. 

Objection : Killing in a sacrifice is lawful, because it is enjoined by 
the scriptures. The significance of an injunction consists in its en- 
couraging conduct (in accordance to it) that leads to the realization 
of a good that is not followed by a greater evil. If lawful killing will 
be productive of evil, it would not be possible. 

Reply : Not so. The conduct related to an injunction is not pro- 
ductive of frustration in addition to the frustration immediately 
following the production of the good. Since the evil produced by 
lawful killing immediately follows the production of the good, the 
significance of the injunction remains intact. Some, however, hold 
that only killing other than lawful killing is productive of sin, but 


382 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


they are not right. Yudhisthira and others had to perform penances 
in order to condone the sin that they committed in killing their 
kinsmen in the great war of,the Mahabharata, although it was their 
svadharma to kill their enemies in battle. The author also quotes from 
the Markandeya Purina (X.31) to prove that Vedic performances are 
mixed with demerit and hence resemble a fruit that is hard to digest. 
Scriptural texts such as Chandogya (VI1I.65.1) allow for certain kinds 
of lawful killing. They do not declare that lawful killing is unmixed 
with evil. More on this point is to be found in the author’s Yoga- 
varitika. Moreover the attainment of immortality by drinking the soma 
juice is only meant in a secondary sense. In the primary sense im- 
mortality can be gained only by renunciation (éyaéga) and not by 
progeny, wealth, action, or sacrifices. 


(B) On the Problem of Bondage in Sdamkhya 


(I.7-11) (E13-15; T26-31) Bondage is not natural to conscious- 
ness. Frustration is natural to the intellect only, and not to consci- 
ousness, because it is so constituted by three constituents. If bondage 
were natural to consciousness, there would be no liberation, and the 
teachings of the Veda for the attainment of liberation would become 
irrelevant. ‘ 

Objection : Annihilation of even that which is natural is observed. 
So the annihilation of natural bondage in consciousness (in case it is 
admitted ) is possible. 

Reply : No. Removal of bondage involves a change of nature, 
which is impossible for consciousness. 

(1.12) (E15-16; T31-32) The author now refutes the theory that 
bondage is related to time. If frustration, which is the mark of bon- 
dage, were occasional in consciousness, it would not be capable of 
being eradicated completely by knowledge and other means, inas- 
much as subtle frustration in the form of the not-yet-come would 
remain so long as its substratum, consciousness, exists. Thus, because 
time, which is eternal, is connected with all consciousnesses, liberated 
or unliberated, and the determination of everything in time will 
entail the bondage of all consciousnesses at all times, liberation would 
be impossible on that hypothesis. 

Objection : In the hypothesis that bondage is occasioned by time, 
gradation of consciousness as liberated and unliberated is possible, 
on account of the presence and absence of other secondary causes. 

Reply : In that case bondage would be accidental only and so it 
can be accepted. 

(1.17) (E17-18; T35-36) The consciousness’ connection with 
frustrations is only apparent. The relation between the intellect and 


VIJNANABHIKSU 383 


consciousness is like that of a servant and his master and is beginning- 
less. This topic is discussed in detail in the Yogabhasya. 

(1.18) (E18; 37) Objection : Does not the bondage of conscious- 
ness arise from materiality? 

Reply : No, because materiality is dependent on consciousness. 
If bondage were possible without the particular relation of conscious- 
ness with materiality, then there would be bondage in the state of the 
dissolution of the world, too. 

(1.19) (El8-22; T38-43) Vaisesika philosophers hold that the 
relation of frustration to consciousness is real, but they are not correct. 
The relation of frustration to consciousness is only accidental (aupa- 
dhika) and is like the relation of redness in a crystal that is in relation 
to a rose. 

Objection : Since Samkhya is the science of reasoning (mananaSastra), 
there must be reasons for the above nature of consciousness. 

Reply : Yes. The principal clause in I.19 supplies the required 
reason. The internal organ (antahkarana) is said to be the material 
cause of frustration and so forth, by the argument of concomitant 
agreement and variation, that is to say, where there is an internal 
organ, there is frustration and where there is no internal organ there 
is no frustration. Moreover, to regard both consciousness and the 
internal organ as the cause of frustration will be superfluous, for 
where one cause is sufficient it is superfluous to postulate another 
cause. 

Objection : But experience such as “I am frustrated”? proves that 
consciousness is the cause of frustration. 

Reply : No; such experiences are mistaken, such as the experience 
that I am fair. 

Objection : Like time, etc., the relation to materiality is common 
to all consciousnesses, free and bound. So how can relation become 
the cause of bondage? . 

Reply : No. The meaning of the word “relation” is technical. 
It is only by reason of the function of the intellect as limiting adjunct 
that a relation to frustration occurs in consciousness. Further, the 
relation of the internal organ to frustration is different from the 
relation of the intellect to frustration. 

The author further refutes the opinion of some (e.g., Aniruddha) 
who believe that the relation of materiality with consciousness is, 
in fact, nondiscrimination, for then the experience of frustration 
would be entailed during the dissolution of the world also, as 
nondiscrimination exists in that state, too. Moreover, to hold that the 
relation consists of nondiscrimination in the form of false knowledge 
would involve the fallacy of arguing in a circle. Hence, relation 
is something more than nondiscrimination. 

Objection : Is relation then transformation? 


384 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Reply : No. It is the cause of transformation, 

Objection : How can a temporary relation of materiality with con- 
sciousness take place when both are eternal ? 

Reply : The relation of materiality with consciousness is possible 
by means of the limitation imposed by the manifested constituents. 

Objection : Does not the relation of materiality with consciousness 
consist only of their respective fitness as the enjoyed and the enjoyer? 

Reply : No. If fitness were eternal, it would be unreasonable to 
say that it could be terminated by knowledge, and if fitness were 
noneternal, then it would admit of transformation. Moreover, no- 
where in the sitras has it been declared that the relation consists of 
fitness as the enjoyer and the enjoyed. Such a view is not autho- 
ritative. Thus it follows that only a particular form of relation is the 
cause of bondage, namely, the relation with the intellect. 

(1.2)-22) (E22-23; T43-47) Now the author proceeds to exa- 
mine the views of non-Vedic philosophers concerning the cause 
of bondage. First of all, he examines the view of the Buddhist idealists. 
Ignorance (avidya) cannot be the cause of bondage, because ignorance 
is a nonentity and bondage is not unreal. 

Objection : Why cannot ignorance be taken as real? 

Reply : This entails the abandonment of the momentariness doctrine 
accepted by the Buddhists. There would be a second entity in addi- 
tion to fleeting ideas, which cannot be allowed by the Buddhists. 

Objection : Since ignorance is a kind of awareness, how can duality 
arise? 

Reply : The ignorance that is a kind of awareness is subsequent to 
bondage, whereas the ignorance that is the cause of bondage is 
called “‘latent disposition.” 

Objection : Does this criticism apply to Advaita also? 

Reply : No, because the Brahmasitra nowhere says that ignorance 
is the cause of bondage, but our criticism perfectly applies to modern 
Vedantists who are Buddhists in disguise (pracchanna bauddha). In our 
opinion ignorance lacks permanent being, but it has as much reality 
as a water pot. 

(1.23-24) (23-24; T47-48) Objection : Because ignorance is both 
real and unreal and as such it is different from the real as well as 
from the unreal, there is no defect in the theory of transcendental 
nondualism. 

Reply : Not so, because such a thing is not observed. Moreover, if 
ignorance were the direct cause of bondage, then there would be no 
possibility of the experience of the action that has already begun 
(prarabdha). 

(1.25-23) (E24-25; T49-51) Objection : We do not accept the 
Vaisesika theory of six categories and the like. Hence a category 
that is both real and unreal, e.g., ignorance, may be admitted. 


VIJNANABHIKSU 385 


Reply : Even in that case something that is illogical cannot be 
accepted, otherwise we would be reduced to the level of children 
or madmen. 

(1.27) (E25; T51) Objection from the Buddhist (ndstika): External 
objects of momentary duration exist, and in consequence of their 
influence the bondage of the embodied self takes place. 

(1.28) (E25-26; T52-53) Reply: Not so. It is only where a rela- 
tion exists that an adjacent tincture called “latent disposition’’ is 
observed as in the case of flower and crystal. But this relation is not 
possible in your theory of self, because you take self to be something 
limited and lying wholly within the body. Between the external and 
the internal] there is no relation of the influenced and the influencer, 
because there is a spatial separation, as there is between the inhabi- 
tants of Srughna and Pataliputra. 

(1.30-31) (E26; T54) Odjection : Granting that a liberated soul 
and a bound soul are alike in respect of their coming into contact 
with objects, yet the reception of the influence may result from the 
force of the unseen (adrsta) residues on the soul. 

Reply : It is impossible that there should be an influence of objects 
taking effect on someone occasioned by the unseen residues belonging 
to an agent, because, given the theory of momentariness, the agent 
and the one benefiting from an action do not exist at one and the 
same time. 

(1.32-33) (E26-27; T55-58) Objection : As the works of a father 
benefit his son, so there may be an influence of objects. 

Reply : In your theory there is no permanent soul of the son that is 
benefited by the works of his father. Thus, the illustration proves 
nothing. Moreover, in our theory it is possible that the benefit to the 
son should arise from the unseen merit deposited in the son’s soul 
that is permanent. 

(I.34-35) (E27-28; T56-58) Objection: Bondage is momentary, 
because it exists and everything that exists is momentary, like the 
apex of the lamp flame. As a momentary thing, bondage has no fixed 
cause at all. 

Reply : No. Nothing is momentary. The absurdity of the doctrine 
of momentariness is proved by such experiences as recognition or 
memory. 

(1.37) (E28; T59) The thesis of momentariness is illustrated by 
the lamp flame, but this illustration is unproven. 

(1.39-41) (E29; T60-62) Further, the doctrine of momentariness 
asserts that the effect arises from the destruction of its cause. Hence 
the doctrine of causality is not possible on the hypothesis of universal 
momentariness. Although the antecedent exists, the consequence is 
incompatible, because the two are always separate. The relation of 
cause and effect is not possible in this theory. The cause is not merely 


386 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


an antecedent, because there are two types of cause, material and 
efficient. Antecedence constitutes no distinction between these two 
causes. Hence a causal phenomenon is not just a flux of events as the 
theory of universal momentariness argues. 

(1.44-45) (E31-32 ; T66-68) Odjection : Then accept the doctrine 
of the void. 

Reply : No. This doctrine is foolish. The destruction of a thing is 
also something positive as nothing can exist without its own nature. 
There is no evidence for the void as the ultimate reality. 

(1.50) (E34; T72-73) Moreover, if consciousness be material, like 
a jar, then it would consist of parts and would be perishable, but these 
traits of consciousness are contradicted by our system. 

(I.52-52) (E35; T75) The bondage of consciousness is not caused 
by latent residues (adrsta) directly, because those residues are not the 
attributes of consciousness. 

Objection : Even if latent residues are not attributes of conscious- 
ness, they may also bind it. 

Reply : No. Then even the liberated ones would be bound. 

(1.54) (E35; T76) Moreover, the alleged causes of the bondage of 
the soul are contradicted by the scriptures that declare that the 
soul is without qualities (nirguna). 

(1.55) (E36-39; T77-82) The relation of consciousness and materia- 
lity is caused by nondiscrimination, which is not manifested in libera- 
ted consciousness. Hence the liberated are not in relation with 
materiality. 

Objection : Nondiscrimination is either a prior absence of discri- 
mination or a latent disposition. In either case it isnot a characteristic 
of consciousness, but that of the intellect. So, if the quality of the 
intellect binds consciousness, it may bind both liberated and unlibera- 
ted consciousness. 

Reply : Not so. Nondiscrimination is only an object to conscious- 
ness. For the purpose of displaying its transformations materiality 
enters into relation, by the form of intellect, with consciousness. 

Objection : Your reply presupposes a beginningless relation between 
materiality and consciousness in the form of the owned and its owner, 
Is not this very relation a sufficient explanation? 

Reply : No, because by this relation the liberation of consciousness, 
which takes place only by means of knowledge, cannot be explained. 

Objection : Why is action (karman) not the cause of the relation? 

Reply : Because action is also dependent upon nondiscrimination, 
So in our theory it is nondiscriminatior only that is the cause of re- 
lation in three ways, i.e, (1) immediately, (2) by the production of 
merit and demerit and (3) by means of visible influences such as 
desire, and so forth. 

(1.56) (E39-40; T82-86) The older Vedantins regarded action 


VIJNANABHIKSU 387 


as a subsidiary part of knowledge leading to liberation, but they did 
not mean that action is the direct cause of liberation. 

(1.57) (E40-41; T86-88) The nondiscrimination of the intellect 
(from consciousness ) is produced from the nondiscrimination of materi- 
ality from consciousness. The former is just an effect of the latter. 
So the former is also annihilated when the latter is annihilated. 

(1.58) (E42; T89-90) The ‘“‘bondage” of consciousness is merely 
verbal and not real because it belongs only to the intellect. 

Objection : Then how is it that the removal of bondage is called 
the supreme value? 

Reply : The apparent experiencing of consciousness consists in the 
mere reflection of frustrations. Hence, although frustrations are unreal, 
the removal thereof is a value because it is an object that is desired. 

(1.59) (E43; T91-92) Objection : If bondage is a mere word, then 
let its removal take place by reasoning alone. 

Reply : No. It cannot be removed with immediate cognition. Re- 
moval of bondage is nothing but the disappearance of the idea of 
bondage in consciousness, and not the immediate cognition of non- 
being. Like confusion about the points of the compass (digbhrama), 
nondiscrimination, which is the cause of bondage, is removed by 
direct or immediate cognition of the truth. 

(1.60) (E43-44; T92-93) As fire that is not perceived is proved to 
exist by means of its smoke, so things that are not cognizable by senses 
are proved to exist by means of inference. The author here says that 
Samkhya is preeminently the science of reasoning, so here only in- 
ference is mentioned as an instrument of knowledge although Samkhya 
also accepts perception and verbal testimony as instruments of 
knowledge. 


(CQ) Derivation of the Basic Principles of Samkhya 


(I.61) (E44-46; T94-98) Primordial materiality is the equilibrium 
of sativa, rajas, and tamas. From it evolves intellect; from intellect, 
egoity, from egoity, the five subtle elements and the two sets of capa- 
cities. From the subtle elements evolve the gross elements. Then, 
in addition to these principles, there is consciousness. Thus there are 
twenty-five principles. Sativa, rajas, and tamas are substances (dravya), 
and not qualities in the sense of Vaisesika philosophy, because they 
admit of conjunction and disjunction and because they possess the 
properties of lightness, activity, and weight respectively. They are 
called “‘guna’’ (quality), because their existence is only subservient 
and not primary, and because they bind consciousness as a guna 
(which also means rope) binds a beast. The equilibrium of primordial 
materiality means a state of the constituents in which none of them 
is more or less than the other two. That is, that state is not developed, 


388 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


into that of an effect. In other words, materiality is the genus of 
the constituents, All the constituents are said to have the nature of 
materiality. 

Over and above the twenty-five principles there is no category 
(padartha). The six categories of the Vaisesika philosophers are in- 
cluded in them. Those who have only one category (e.g., Advaita) 
and those who have six (Vaisesika) or sixteen (Nyaya) categories are 
really only reinterpreting the twenty-five principles of Samkhya in 
their own ways. 

(1.62) (E46-48; T99-101) The inference to the existence of the 
five subtle elements from the gross elements goes as follows: gross ele- 
ments must be produced from substances possessing their own distinc- 
tive attributes as a pot is produced from clay. The search for their 
causes must be stopped at some point in order to be intelligible. Such 
a stopping point is the subtlest material state of the cause, or in other 
words, the subtle elements. This inference is confirmed by the consi- 
deration that in absence of any counteracting agent, the production of 
the attributes of the effect in conformity with the attributes of the cause 
follows necessarily. Moreover, the Vedas and the Smrtis also confirm 
the above inference. In the matter of the production of the subtle 
elements the process described in Vyasa’s commentary on the Yoga- 
sitra should alone be accepted. Thus the subtle element of sound is 
produced from egoity, etc. 

The inference to the existence of capacities is like that for dkdsa, 
that is to say, made by means of their functions; seeing, touching, and 
so forth. 

(1.63) (E48-49; T102-103) Knowledge of the existence of egoity 
is derived by an inference from the externa] and internal sense capa- 
cities and from the subtle elements. The inference is this: the subtle 
elements and the capacities are made up of things consisting of egoity, 
because they are the products of egoity. Whatever is not so (i.e., made 
up of egoity) is not thus (i.e., a product of egoity), like the soul. 

(1.64) (E49-51; T103-105) The knowledge of the existence of the 
intellect is derived by inference from egoity. Egoity has the intellect 
(whose function is determination or nifcaya) as its material cause 
(upadana). 

Here the inference is based on the rule that the occurrence of an 
operation of the effect must result from the occurrence of the operation 
of the cause. 

(1.65) (51-52; T106-108) The knowledge of the existence of 
primordial materiality 1s derived by inference from the intellect. The 
inference is as follows: intellect, whose properties are satisfaction, 
frustration, and confusion, is produced from something that has these 
properties, because these properties, satisfaction, frustration, and con- 
fusion are products; and everything that occasions satisfaction, frus- 


VIJNANABHIKSU 389 


tration, or confusion arises from something that is composed of these— 
like a lovely woman. The inference is based on the rule that the 
qualities of the effect must be in conformity with the qualities of the 
cause. 

(1.66) (E52-53; T108-111) The existence of consciousness is in- 
ferred from the fact that the combination of the parts of materiality 
is for the sake of another (i.e., other than materiality). The inference 
in this case is this: primordial materiality and its products have an 
end, because they are composite, and every composite thing such asa 
couch or a seat is for another’s use. Hence, consciousness, for whom 
materiality and its products are combined, exists. 

(I.67-68) (E54; T111-112) A “root” (mala) has no origin and so 
the original is without an origin. Here “root’? means primordial 
materiality, the original substance of twenty-three principles. It is 
proved to be without an origin, for otherwise there would result an 
infinite regress. 

Objection : Why not take consciousness as the cause of primordial 
materiality ? Consciousness is eternal and so it can avoid the infinite 
regress. 

Reply : No. Where there is a succession of causes, the halt must be 
at a point in the same series of causes. ‘“‘Primordial materiality” is 
merely a name that we give to the point in question. It is just a pro- 
per name of the root cause of all things. 

(1.69) (E54-56; T112-115) Objection : Is ignorance (avidyd) not 
the primal cause of all things? 

Reply : No. Ignorance, as declared in the Yogasiitras, is not a sepa- 
rate entity but a property of the mind. Moreover, the scriptures speak 
of the production of ignorance, too, since it is produced from the 
intellect. 

(1.70) (E56; T116) Objection : If such were the inferences for the 
existence of primordial materiality and consciousness, then why does 
discrimination in the form of reflection not take place in all men? 

Reply : There is no rule that all should equally grasp truth. Those 
who are qualified to meditate are of three kinds, dull, mediocre, and 
very bright. For the dull, Samkhya arguments are set aside by the 
false arguments of Buddhists. For the mediocre, they are confronted 
with equally cogent contrary arguments. For the very bright, how- 
ever, Samkhya arguments are found to be genuine and true. 

(1.71) (E57; T116-117) The first product of prakrtiis called “‘mahat.” 
It is used synonymously with ‘‘manas,”’ since its operation is reasoning 
(manana). “Reasoning” includes the operations of belief. 

(1.74) Primordial materiality is the first cause of all products in 
and through the mediation of the intellect. This type of causality is 
also ascribed to atoms by Vaisesikas. 


390 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
(D) Materiality as Material Cause and Its Relation to Discrimination 


(1.79) (E60-61; T123-124) The world is not unreal, because it is 
never contradicted and because it is not a result of false causes. The 
scriptural passages like neti neti (not this, not this) do not negate the 
existence of the world, but only give clues for discrimination. 

(1.80) (E61; T124-125) An entity can have only an entity as its 
cause. How can a nonentity be the cause of an entity, since there is 
no union of the two? 

(1.81) (E61; 1125-125) Action is also not the material cause of 
the world. It is only the efficient cause of the world. Here action 
means ignorance also. So ignorance is not the material cause of the 
world. 

(1.83) The word “‘tatra’” in the siitra is understood by Aniruddha 
as “in the context of materiality and consciousness.” But Vijfiana- 
bhiksu understands it as ‘in the highest heaven = brahmaloka.” Vijfia- 
nabhiksu contends that, even here, if one seeks liberation one has to 
attain final intuitive discrimination. 

(1.84) (E63; T129) Those who resort to ritualism only get frus- 
tration after frustration, like the man suffering from being cold only 
gets pain from pouring water on himself. 

(1.86) (£64; T131-132) Objection : Liberation is generated by 
knowledge. Hence, liberation is also perishable, because what is 
generated is perishable. 

Reply : No. Knowledge generates only the removal of nondiscri- 
mination. The soul itself is free by its very nature. 


(E) The Instruments of Knowledge in Samkhya 


(1.87) The ascertainment of something, not previously known 
in the soul or the mind or in either of them, is knowledge (praméa), 
and that which produces right knowledge is an instrument of knowl- 
edge (pramana). 

(a) If knowledge is spoken of as located in consciousness, then an 
instrument of knowledge is an affection of the intellect. If it is spoken 
of as located in the intellect, then an instrument of knowledge is a 
relation between a sense capacity and its object. But if both consci- 
ousness’ awareness and the operations of the intellect are spoken of, 
then both the operations of the intellect and the relation of a sense 
capacity with its object are instruments of knowledge. 

(b) The process by which an instrument of knowledge works is 
this. First, the intellect assumes the form of an object as a result of a 
direct contact or through an inferential mark. Then, that form is 
reflected as an image in consciousness. Since consciousness cannot 
be modified, this reflection can only be an image. 


VIJNANABHIKSU 391 


(1.88) (E68; T137) Comparison (upamdna) is included under 
inference. Nonperception (abhdva, anupalabdhi) is included under 
perception. 

(1.99) (E73-75; T149-152) Actual controllership belongs to the 
intellect illuminated by consciousness like fire in iron. 

Objection : Then consciousness must be connected with the intellect. 

Reply : No. The illumination of the intellect consists merely in its 
presence to consciousness. Hence only a reflection of consciousness 
is produced in the intellect through this copresence, which is the cause 
of the mutual reflection of the intellect and consciousness in each other. 

The reflection of consciousness in the intellect is referred to as the 
falling of the shadow or superimposition of purusa or possession by 
consciousness, and the reflection of the intellect in consciousness is 
intended for the manifestation of the intellect together with the objects 
that have been apprehended by it. The theory of mutual reflection is 
found in (Vyasa’s) commentary on the Yogasitra and in the author’s 
Yogavarttika. 


(F) Materiality and the Theory of Preexistent Effect 


(I.111-112) (E80; T163 T1635) Objection: If the effect were existent be- 
fore its production, then the existence of primordial materiality can be 
established. But for those who do not accept satkarya, the inference 
of primordial materiality cannot be established. 

Reply: Nevertheless the observation of an effect in your opinion 
proves the existence of its cause. So an eternal cause is certainly a 
possibility. From this changing cause is distinguished consciousness 
which is unchanging. 

(1.113) (E80-81 ; T165-169) Moreover, all causes are past, present, 
and future. If an effect were not existent in its cause before its pro- 
duction, then this division of causes would be impossible. 

(1.119-120) (E83-84; T171-173) Objection: If your view is accept- 
ed, then there is no possibility of a thing becoming another because 
the latter is already in the former. 

Reply: No. It is not the case that what is cannot become. What 
is produced or not produced is a matter of manifestation or non- 
manifestation. 


(G) The Manifest and Unmanifest Aspects of Materiality 


(I.125) (E88; T180-182) There are many arguments for the exist- 
ence of an effect as something over and above its cause. It is proved, 
sometimes by perception itself, sometimes by inference based on cor- 
relation. The first cause is called the principal one (pradhdna), because 
all effects are sustained in it. 


392 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(H) The Three Constituents 


(1.127) (E89-90; T183-185) The constituents differ among them- 
selves in terms of satisfaction, frustration, confusion, and so forth. 
Paficasikha says that sattva means satisfaction, butit has innumerable 
variations such as happiness, lightness, affection, love, endurance, 
satisfaction, and the like. Similarly rajas and tamas have innumerable 
variations, 


(I) Inferences that Establish the Existence of Primordial Materiality and 
Consciousness 


(I.130-132) (E92-93; T188-190) Other reasons why there are 
effects are (a) because they are limited, (b) because they are com- 
ponents of prakyti, and (c) because they are the instruments of the 
purusa. 

(1.133-134) (E93; T190-191) Ifa thing is not an effect, then it is 
either primordial materiality or consciousness. Further, if it be neither 
of the two also, then it would be a nonentity (tuccha), like a hare’s horn. 

(1.138) (E 94-95; T193-195) The existence of consciousness, like 
that of merit, is by and large beyond dispute. Hence there is no need 
of proof for the existence of consciousness. If there were no conscious- 
ness, then the whole world would become blind. Certain aspects of 
consciousness, however, can be established by inference, namely, 
its being the basis of discrimination, its being eternal, and so forth. 

(1.147) What is established by the scriptures cannot be denied. The 
scriptures declare that consciousness is free from all qualities. So the 
perception of qualities belonging to consciousness is contradicted by 
the scriptures. 

(1.149-152) (E101-105; T207-213) The plurality of consciousnesses 
is proved by the fact of their separate births. 

Objection: Let there be only one consciousness, for the so-called 
consciousnesses differ only in their limitations as pots do although they 
contain one and the same space. Limitations of consciousness are 
different and consciousness is not different from limitation to limitation. 

Reply : Not so. It is not reasonable to introduce the simultaneous 
presence of contradictory properties in the form of birth, death, etc., 
in the case of one consciousness that is present everywhere. For, when 
Devadatta is born, Yajfiadatta dies and it is contradictory to as- 
cribe birth and death to the same soul at one time.8 

(1.153) (E205-206; T213-216) As there is a well-regulated dis- 
tribution of the properties of redness, blueness, etc., appearing in 
crystals, although these properties are only superimposed on them, 
so in the case of consciousness also, there is, according to the scriptures, 
a well-regulated distribution of the properties of the intellect and the 


VIJNANABHIKSU 393 


body, although these properties are only superimposed on them. The 
distribution, like that of birth and death, cannot be explained on the 
theory of the unity of consciousness. The Advaita doctrines of limita- 
tion (avacchedavada) and reflection (pratibimbavada) are perverse, as 
has been shown in the author’s commentary on the Brahmasittra. 

(1.154) (E106-109; T2i6-221) Moreover, there is no contra- 
diction with the Upanisadic texts that assert that the soul is nondual, 
because these texts refer to the genus (jati) of consciousness. The 
author says that he has discussed this noncontradiction in his commen- 
tary on the Brahmasiitra in detail. 

(1158-159) (E110-111; 1225-227) Objection: The liberation of 
the sage Vamadeva and others is not absolute, but relative only. 

Reply : If until now absolute liberation has not been attained by 
anyone whatever, no absolute liberation will take place in the future. 

(1.160) (E111; 1226-227) Objection: Does the uniformity of con- 
sciousness arise at the moment of liberation? Or does it exist at all times? 

Reply: The consciousness is, in fact, the same in the states of both 
bondage and freedom, because its uniformity is established by scrip- 
ture, tradition, and reasoning. 

(1.161) (E111; 'T227-228) Objection: As the character of being the 
witness is not permanent, how, then, can there be constant uniformity 
of consciousness? 

Reply : The character of being a witness refers only to the notion of 
reflection. Consciousness is not at all involved in the transformations 
of materiality. 

(1.164) (E112-113; T229-230) Objection: How can the scriptural 
texts that say that consciousness is an agent and the intellect is a knower 
be justified? 

Reply: The agency attributed to consciousness arises from the in- 
fluence of the intellect and the character of being a knower attributed 
to the intellect arises as a result of proximity to consciousness. This 
double reflection is the basis of nondiscrimination. Both the agency 
of consciousness and the consciousness in the intellect are unreal 
appearances. 


Boox II 


(A) On the Activity of Materiality and Its Distinction from Consciousness 
Introduction (E114; T231) 


In the second Book the unchanging character of consciousness and 
the process ofcreation from primordial materiality will be discussed. 
(II.1) (E114; T234) Materiality makes the world for the sake of 
removing the frustration that is really a shadow belonging to con- 
sciousness, or, that actually consists of itself. Although enjoyment is 


394 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


also a purpose of creation, liberation alone is mentioned in the sitra 
because it is the principal purpose. 

Objection: If creation were for the sake of liberation, then since 
liberation might take place through creation once for all, there would 
be no creation again and again. 

(11.2) (E114-115; T234-235) Reply: Liberation does not take place 
through creation once for all. It occurs only in the case of one in whom 
complete dispassion arises. 

(11.3) (E115; 1235-236) Nonattachment is not established through 
the mere hearing of the scriptures, but through direct cognition, which, 
moreover, does not take place suddenly, but through the completion 
of concentration. There are many obstacles to concentration, and 
many rebirths are required before concentration, nonattachment, 
and liberation are realized. 

(11.4) (E115; T1236) There is another reason for the perpetual 
flow of creation. There are innumerable consciousnesses to be libera- 
ted. The creation has ceased to exist for him who is liberated but not 
for others. It takes place for their liberation. 

(11.5) (E115-116; T237-238) Objection: Does consciousness not 
create? 

Reply: Creativity belongs to materiality. The scriptures ascribe 
creativity to consciousness only by superimposition (adhydsa). 

(11.6) (E116; 1238-239) Odjection: According to this view, crea- 
tion is real. But do the scriptures not declare that creation is like a 
dream? 

Reply: The products of materiality are real because they produce 
latent dispositions and perform actions. So creation is real. When 
scriptures declare that creation is like a dream, they mean that its 
superimposition on consciousness is unreal. 

(11.7) (E116-117; T239-240) Materiality does not cause frustra- 
tion to the one who knows it. It causes frustration only to those who 
do not know it. 

Objection: It is not proper to say that creativity is superimposed on 
consciousness, for, by reason ofits relation to materiality, consciousness 
is also modified into the intellect, etc. 

(11.8) (E117; T240-241) Reply: Although there is a relation of 
consciousness with matcriality, creativity does not belong to consci- 
ousness immediately. Asa piece of iron does not possess the power 
of burning directly but only in relation with wood, so consciousness 
does not have creativity directly, but only in relation with materiality. 

(11.9) (E117-118; T2142) Now passion is proved to be the prin- 
cipal efficient cause of creation by the argument of positive and nega- 
tive instances; i.e., wherc there is passion, there is creation, and where 
there is no passion, there is no creation. 


VIJNANABHIKSU 395 
(C) Space and Time 


(11.12) (E112-113; T245-246) Space and time, which are eternal, 
are of the nature of akaéa and represent the functioning of the material 
constituents. Hence, space and time are all-pervasive. Empirical 
or limited space and time arise from dkdfa in terms of its limiting 
adjuncts. 


(E) Egoity, Sense Capacities, and Action Capacities 


(II.18) (E122-123; T251-252) The eleventh capacity is mind. It 
is produced from the sattva of egoity. The other ten capacities are 
produced from the rajas of egoity, and the five subtle elements are 
produced from the tamas of egoity. 


(G) The Capacities and Their Differentiation from Consciousness (27-37) 


(11.27) (E126; T258-259) As a man becomes a lover in the com- 
pany of women, an ascetic in the company of ascetics and so on, so 
the mind assumes different roles in association with the different 
capacities, 

(11.29) (E127-128; T259-261) As a king, though he does not fight, 
becomes a fighter through the instrumentality of his army, so con- 
sciousness, though inactive, becomes a seer, a speaker, a judge, and the 
like through the instrumentality ofits capacities. Through its proximity 
consciousness motivates the organs just as the lodestone moves a piece 
of iron. 

(II.30-31) (E128-129; T261-262) The functions of intellect, egoity, 
and mind are reflective discerning, self-awareness, and conceptuali- 
zation respectively. The five vital airs are the common function of 
the threefold internal organ. The author does not agree with the 
Vaisesikas who hold that the functions of the capacities take place 
only successively. 

{II.32) (E130-131; 1264-265) The sense capacities are capable 
of both construction filled (savikalpaka) and construction-free (nirvikal- 
paka) apprehension, and those who deny savikalpaka apprehension to 
the series (namely, Vacaspati) are wrong. 

(11.33) (E131; T266-267) There are five operations (vrttz) of 
awareness; knowledge (pramdna), error (viparyaya), conceptual con- 
struction (vikalpa), deep sleep (nidra), and memory (smrti), and these 
may be hindering (lista) or not hindering (aklisfa). These are des- 
cribed in Patafijali’s Yogasitra. The only difference is that Vijfiana- 
bhiksu takes ‘‘error” (viparyaya) as referring only to the failure to 
distinguish consciousness from materiality. Other kinds of misap- 
prehension, wherein one takes one thing for another (usually called 


396 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


anyathakhyati), are not to be included since Vijfianabiksu rejects 
the notion of anyathdkhyati (see below). 

(1I.34-35) (E131-132; T267-258) On the cessation of these modi- 
fications, consciousness becomes quiet and free from all influences and 
abides in itself. The author quotes the Yogasatra and the Yogavdsistha 
as documentation and explains the status of consciousness by the ana- 
logy of the crystal and the China rose. 

Objection: As consciousness is motionless, and there is no God, by 
whose effort do the capacities come into operation? 

(1I.35-37) (E132-133; T2658-270) Reply: Asa cow secretes milk 
for the sake of its calf so the capacities arise for the sake of their Lord, 
consciousness. 


(H) The Thirteenfold Instrument and Its Overall Functioning 


(II.38-40) (E133-134; T270-272) In all there are thirteen organs: 
three internal organs, five sense capacities, and five action capacities. 
The intellect is the principal organ and the rest are secondary, Hence 
the function of the understanding is distributed among all the secon- 
dary capacities. The sara text here uses the term ‘‘manas’’ instead of 
“buddhi” for the principal organ. Vijfianabhiksu solves the problem 
by asserting that buddhi is clearly meant and that the term manas is not 
the same as the manas tattva. 

(II.41-44) (£134-135; T72-274) The intellect is the principal 
organ, because it pervades all the other capacities, because it is the 
receptacle for all of the fundamental predispositions, because it is 
capable of accomplishing inferences using memory, and because we 
infer its prominence by reason of awareness (cinta). 

Objection: Is not awareness characteristic of consciousness ; 

Reply: No. Consciousness is immutable, whereas awareness is an 
activity. 

(11.45-46) (E135-136; T274-276) Objection: If the intellect is the 
principal organ, how was it said before (see Aph. 26) that itis the mind 
(manas) that is both a sense capacity and action capacity? 

Reply: The relation of principal and secondary organs is relative 
because of the difference of functions. In the operation of sight (vision), 
the mind is principal; in the operation of the mind, the ego is prin- 
cipal; and in the operation of the ego, the intellect is principal. As 
an axe is purchased for cutting for the man who purchases it, so the 
operation of a capacity is performed for its master, namely, conscious- 
ness. The author here refutes the vicw of Aniruddha, who holds that 
action belongs to consciousness as reflected in the intellect. 


VIJNANABHIKSU 397 
Boox III 
(A) The Specific and the Nonspecific 


(III.2) (E138; T279) From the twenty-three principles, intellect, 
and so forth, two sorts of body are produced. 

(III.3) (E138-139; T279) The twenty-three principles are the 
seed of the body that transmigrates from one life to another. 

(111.4) (E139; T280) Transmigration continues until discrimina- 
tion arises. 

(111.5) (E139; T280-281) Transmigration occurs so that the jiva 
can experience the fruits of its own acts. 


(B) The Gross and Sutble Body 


(III.7) (E140; T282-283) The gross body usually arises from the 
parents, for there is no mention of a gross body not arising from the 
parents. The subtle body does not arise from the parents. It arises 
at the beginning of creation. 

(III.8) (E149; T283-284) Satisfactions and frustrations are charac- 
teristic of the subtle body and not of the gross body. 

(III.9) (E141; T284-286) The subtle body is twofold. In the 
beginning of creation it is one in the form of an aggregate. Later on, 
eleven capacities, five subtle elements, and the intellect—these seven- 
teen principles constitute another subtle body. Egoity is here included 
in intellect and hence it is not separately counted as a factor of the 
subtle body. Five vital breaths are the functions of the internal organ 
and so they are also included in the subtle body.® 

(III.10) (E142; 1286-287) Although in the beginning of creation 
there was one subtle body in the shape of Hiranyagarbha, subsequently 
there becomes a division of it into many other jivas, because of the 
diversity of actions (karman).'0 

(TIT.11) (2142-143; T287-288) The subtle body is the locus of 
experience. There is a subtle form of the five gross elements that 
provides a cover or wrap for the subtle body. Finally, there is also a 
gross body. Hence three kinds of body are established. 

(I1I.12) (£143-144; T288-290) As a shadow or a picture do not 
exist without a support, so the subtle body does not exist without its 
support, that is, the gross body. When a jiva gives up its gross body, 
it takes a substantive body to go to another world. This substantive 
body is called the eightfold city (puryastaka) because it consists of 
intellect, ego, mind, and the five subtle elements. The proponents 
of mdydvada believe that there are five vital breaths in the eightfold 
city instead of the five subtle elements, but their belief is baseless. 

(1IT.14-15) (2144-145; T291-293) The subtle body is very small, 
though not an atom, because it has parts. 


398 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(III.17-19) (E146; T294-295) Now the gross body is the modi- 
fication of the intermingling of the five elements. There is another 
view also according to which it consists of four elements, because in 
this view dkdfa (space) does not enter into the production of anything. 
A third view describes the gross body as consisting of only one element. 
In the gross body of human beings there is predominance of earth, 
so it is said to be composed of earth only. The other elements are just 
its accessories. 


(C) Gross and Subtle Bodies Not Made up of Consciousness 


(IIT.20) (£146; T295-296) Since we do not find consciousness in 
the separate elements, consciousness is not natural to the body but 
is adventitious. 


(E) Dreaming, Waking, and Yogic Awareness 


(III.26-29) (E149-150; T201-304) As no value is attained from 
the combination of waking and dream objects, so liberation cannot be 
attained by the combination of knowledge and action. Action is un- 
real because it is impermanent and is the product of materiality; 
whereas consciousness is real because it is permanent and not the 
effect of materiality. 

Objection: Can worship be combined with knowledge? 

Reply: No. The object of worship is not completely real, because 
many categories are superimposed on. it. 

Objection: Wherein does the unreality of the object of worship 
consist? 

Reply : It consists in that portion of the object meditated on which 
is imagined by the mind. 

Objection: Then what is the result of worship? 

Reply: Worship that is meditation makes the mind pure. Pure 
mind has all the powers of materiality. 


(F) On the Nature of Meditation 


(III.30) (E150-151; T304-305) Meditation is the cause of the 
removal of the passions of the mind. It involves concentration (dhd- 
rana), pure, free-flowing awareness (dhyana), and higher or altered 
states of awareness (samadhi). 

(III.31) (E151; T305-306) Meditation detaches the mind from 
all objects other than the object of meditation. 


(G) Misconception, Dysfunction, Contentment, and Attainment 


(III.38-45) A standard account of the 50 “categories” of the intel- 


VIJNANABHIKSU 399 


lectual creation is given. The only unique observation of Vijfianabhiksu 
has to do with the meaning of the expression “‘threefold goad” (ankuSa) 
in SK 51. Vijfianabhiksu argues that the “threefold ankusa’’ refers 
to the first three attainments (siddhis) which encourage or attract the 
seeker to overcome the threefold frustrations. 


(I) Role and Function of Materiality with Respect to Discrimination 


(TII.55) (E161; 1329-330) Objection: Primordial materiality is 
self-subsistent, and so there should not be a rising of the individual 
who has absorbed himself into primordial materiality. 

Reply: No. Materiality exists for the sake of consciousness. So he 
who is absorbed in it is again raised up by materiality for the sake of 
consciousness. ‘The author cites the authority of the Yogasitra in his 
favor. 

(III.56) (E161-162; T330-331) He who is absorbed into materia- 
lity rises again for the becomes omniscient and omnipotent, 
that is, an individual who has attained absorption into materiality 
in his present birth becomes the omniscient and omnipotent God 
in his next birth. 

(III.57) (E162-163; T332) The existence of God is a settled point. 
The dispute is, however, over the existence of an eternal God (as the 
Nyaya system asserts and Samkhya denies). 


(J) Discrimination and Liberation 


(III.63-67) (E164-165; T337-338) When the aim of consciousness 
has been accomplished by means of nonattachment to all else through 
discriminative knowledge, materiality ceases to create, just as the 
labor of a cook ceases when cooking is completed. 

Objection: Because materiality ceases to create when discriminative 
knowledge arises in the case of a single individual, would not all indi- 
viduals then be liberated? 

Reply: No. The creation of materiality ceases only for that indi- 
vidual who has discriminative knowledge and not for all others. (Note 
here that our author’s reading of siira 64 is different from that of 
Aniruddha., ) 

(III.65-66) (E165-166; 1339-341) The fruit of materiality’s ceas- 
ing to act is the neutrality of both materiality and consciousness. It is 
liberation. 

Objection: But then how could materiality engage itself in creation 
again for the sake of another consciousness? 

Reply: Materiality, though ceasing to function for the liberated 
consciousness, does function for other consciousnesses; just as the snake 
in the rope-snake analogy does not produce fear in him who is aware 


400 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of the reality of the rope, but does produce it in him who is ignorant 
of the reality of the rope. Some pseudo-Vedantins have failed to 
understand the significance of the rope-snake analogy and maintained 
that materiality is an absolute nothing, or something merely imaginary. 
The analogy is not to be pushed too far. The reality of materiality is 
not to be denied, and the Vedas and the lawbooks should be under- 
stood according to Samkhya philosophy and not the pseudo-Vedanta. 
(See the summary of Aniruddha’s Samkhya-sitra-vrtti for the content of 
Book IV. Vijfianabhiksu adds nothing new.) 


Boox V 
Introduction: On the Problem of an Auspicious Utterance 


(V.I) (E190; T388) Vijfianabhiksu reads ‘‘frutt” instead of ‘‘bhaeti.”” 
Hence the third reason for commencing a treatise with an auspicious 
utterance is ““because it is commanded by scripture (sruti).” 


(A) On the Problem of the Existence of God 


(V.12) (E193; T396-397) Vijfianabhiksu softens the denial of 
God by referring to his comments in the introduction, in which he 
argues that Samkhya’s denial of God is only a concession to current 
views and a dogmatic assertion that need not be taken seriously. 


(D) On the Problem of Meritorious Behavior, Qualities, Inference, etc. 
(in Nydya -Vaisesika) 


(V.25) (E198; T407) Merit, etc., are the properties of the internal 
organ. 

Objection: What is the locus of merit and demerit at the time of the 
dissolution of the world, because then there is no internal organ? 

Reply: The internal organ is not completely destroyed. It is causal 
as well as effectual. The causal internal organ dwells in primordial 
materiality and in it dwell merit, demerit, and other properties, even 
at the time of the dissolution of the world. 

(V.26) (E198; T408-409) Objection: The existence of merit, etc., 
cannot be established by scripture and the inference based on the di- 
versity of the products of materiality, because scripture asserts that 
materiality does not exist at all. 

Reply: No. Scripture does not deny the existence of the consti- 
tuents of materiality and its products like the intellect, etc. It only 
says that there is no intermixture of them with consciousness. 

(V.27) (E198-199; T409-411) Although the sara mentions only 
satisfaction as an exemplification of inference, other aspects of mate- 
riality can also be established by inference. He gives a five-membered 
argument that consists of proposition, reason, example, application, 


VIJNANABHIKSU 401 


and conclusion. The argument is this: (1) satisfaction exists, (2) be- 
cause it produces a cognitive awareness that leads to action, (3) what- 
ever produces cognitive awareness that leads to action exists—like 
the intellect, (4) satisfaction produces cognition leading to action as, 
for example, when one’s hair stands on end because of an exhilarating 
experience, (5) therefore, it exists. 


(F) On the Problem of Knowledge and Error 


(V.51) (E206; T432-433) The validity of the Vedas is estab- 
lished intrinsically by the manifestation of their own natural power— 
like that of invocations and medical prescriptions. Because Vijfiana- 
bhiksu limits his comment here only to the Vedas, he is construing 
this sara with the preceding rather than the following discussion. 
(No summary is provided of Book VI, because it simply repeats Ani- 
ruddha’s Vytti.) 


SAMKHYASARA 
(Summary by Ram Shankar Bhattacarya) 


This text presents a short overview of the Samkhya system and was 
composed by Vijfianabhiksu toward the end of his life. It has two 
sections, the first (called parvabhdga) containing three short prose 
chapters and the second (called uttarabhaga) containing seven chapters 
in verse. 

The edition (E) for the following summary is that by Ram Shankar 
Bhattacharya (Varanasi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakasana, 1965). 

(T) references are to the partial translation by Megumu Honda, 
which appears in Indogaku Bukkyogaku Kenkyu (Journal of Indian and 
Buddhist Studies), volume 19.1, 1970, 489-477 and volume 2).1, 1971, 
488-474. The translation covers the first section only. References 
preceded by ““Tl’’ refer to pages in the 1970 issue, ““T'2”’ to those in the 
1971 issue. 


Section I, CHaprer I 


(El; T1489) In these introductory verses the author pays obei- 
sance to the self-born Visnu, who is known as the mahattattva, and 
indicates that this little text is designed to give a brief overview of the 
author’s larger work. 

(El-2; T1.489-487) It has been declared in Sruti and smrti that 
liberation (or the absolute cessation of the three kinds of frustration) 
is attained at the end of such actions as have already begun to bear 
fruit (prdrabdha), owing to the absence of rebirth as a result of the anni- 


402 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


hilation of the fruits of action (vipaka). This cessation is caused by the 
eradication of the cooperating causes (ignorance, etc.) of the previous 
(i.e., stored) actions which (eradication) comes into existence in 
the absence of passion, aversion, etc., which are the effects of 
the erroneous notion that properties like agenthood, etc., really belong 
to the self. This erroneous thinking ceases when the difference between 
the selfand the not-self is directly realized. Some scriptural passages 
are quoted to uphold this view. 

(E2-3; T1.487-485) Passion cooperates with actions in producing 
birth, span of life, and the experience of satisfaction and frustration. 
Although the five afflictions (klefas), namely, ignorance, etc., are said 
to cooperate with action in producing birth, etc., yet passion is to be 
regarded as the chief cause. This character of passion is proved by its 
being the source of aversion and fear, and also by its mention in 
Yogasiitra II.3. It is said that knowledge not only nullifies actions but 
also eradicates them. 

In fact, actions cease to produce their results when ignorance is 
destroyed by knowledge. Discriminative knowledge is the cause of the 
cessation of the afflictions. When, on account of the realization of 
discrimination the afflictions cease, the highest end (paramapurusartha), 
i.e., the absolute negation of all kinds of frustration, is attained. 


CHAPTER 2 


(E3-4; Tl. 485-484) Ordinary perception shows that the self (dtman 
is the experiencer of satisfaction and frustration, and the not-self 
comprises all inanimate objects, namely, materiality and the like. Self 
is immutable, indestructible, and without any attachment, wherea 
the not-self is mutable and capable of being forsaken. Materiality 
can be eschewed with the help of the knowledge of the fundamental 
principles. This knowledge consists in recognizing the difference 
between animate (cetana) and the inanimate (acetana) entities, begin- 
ning with the unmanifest materiality and ending with the five gross 
elements. 

(£4; T1.484-482) To recognize the difference between, the self and 
the not-self is said to be the means to liberation. 

Objection: How can discriminative knowledge of the difference 
between the self and the not-self eradicate ignorance, which is defined 
as the knowledge of the self in the not-self? 

Reply: Discrimination can annihilate ignorance in an indirect way. 
Discrimination (in which the chief qualifier is the not-self) naturally 
gives rise to the knowledge that the not-self is different from the self, 
and, being opposite to ignorance (i.e., the recognition of the not-self 
as the self,) it is capable to eradicating avidyd. 

The construction-free (nirvikalpaka) knowledge of the self derived 


VIJNANABHIKSU 403 


through yoga is the indirect means (i.e., through discriminative know]l- 
edge) to liberation. Because from ignorance comes the knowledge 
that the self really possesses the qualities of the body and mind, it 
follows that the knowledge that the self is devoid of these qualities is 
capable of uprooting ignorance. 

(E4-5; T1482) The realization of the pure self through yoga shows 
that the self is devoid of properties like satisfaction, etc., which belong 
to the limiting adjuncts. This realization is the cause of the cessation 
of ignorance, etc. 

The feeling of equality and the feeling that the self is all are to be 
taken as the helping factor or the means (Sesabhiita, i.e., serving the 
purpose of another) to discriminative knowledge. According to the 
Brahmamimamsa the true knowledge of the supreme self is the means 
to liberation, while according to Samkhya the true knowledge that 
the self is different from the not-selves is the means. 

(E5; T1.482-481) Objection: Discriminative knowledge cannot 
annihilate ignorance but can only obstruct it. 

Reply: This contention is wrong, for the simple reason that mistaken 
perceptions are caused by some fault (dosa) residing either in the 
objects or in the organ. Such faults are completely eradicated before 
the acquisition of the discriminative knowledge, and this is why there 
is no possibility of the rise of misconception in a person who has achie- 
ved discriminative knowledge. 

(E5-7 ; T1.480-477) As the illuminator (e.g., light) is different from 
the illuminated (e.g., a jar), so the illuminator and perceiver self is 
different from the intellect, which is directly illuminated by it and 
also from the objects illuminated by the operations of awareness (cilta- 
ortti). It is to be noted that the self is not directly illuminated by the 
self; it, however, becomes its own object through the operations of 
awareness. As the operations are always known to their illuminator 
it is proved that the illuminator self is all-pervading, immutable, eter- 
nal, and of the nature of pure consciousness. 

Because the intellect and the self are proved to be illuminated (per- 
ceived) and illuminator (perceiver) respectively, it follows that the 
self has attributes like all-pervasiveness, eternality, etc. The knowledge 
of the difference of the sativa (i.e., the intellect) and self (i.e., conscious- 
ness) has been regarded as the cause of liberation in Yoga philosophy. 
From the knowledge that self is different from the intellect it can be 
deduced that it is different from primordial materiality (the generative 
cause of the intellect, etc.), which is not perceived directly. The dis- 
criminative knowledge of the perceiver and the perceived has been 
declared to be the cause of the cessation of ignorance. 

(EI.2; 11.477) The different forms of discriminative knowledge 
(viz., that the self is neither the body, nor the organs, and so on) are 


404 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to be regarded as different aspects of the general discriminative knowl- 
edge (that the self is different from the not-self). 


CHAPTER 3 


(7-8; T2.488-486) The entities from which consciousnesses are to 
be distinguished are 24 in number, namely, primordial materiality, 
intellect, egoity, five subtle elements, eleven capacities, and five gross 
elements. The entities like quality, universal property, etc., as accept- 
ed in other systems are included in these. Primordial materiality is 
the direct or indirect material (or generative) cause of all modi- 
fications. It consists of three constituents—sattva, rajas, and tamas— 
existing either in the state of equilibrium or in the state of unequal 
balance. In the state of equilibrium primordial materiality does not 
produce any effect (or more precisely, does not assume the form of 
any object). It must not be supposed to be a distinct entity possessing 
the constituents but, rather, an aggregate of the constituents. The 
three constituents may also be viewed as assuming the character of 
being an effect. Thus we get three more entities (i.e., the three “‘effect 
constituents”), and by adding them with the traditional twenty-five 
fundamental principles, we get an enumeration of twenty-eight prin- 
ciples—a view accepted by some ancient teachers. The words “‘sativa,”’ 
etc., are found to be used in the Upanisads to refer to the state of dis- 
equilibrium. Sativa, etc., are to be known as substance (dravya), 
because they have no locus (dfraya) and because they possess modi- 
fications. These are called “‘guna’’, because they tie the selves (‘‘guna”’ 
meaning a rope or a strand) and also because they are the accessories 
(upakarana) of the self (‘‘guna’’ usually meaning a subordinate part or 
a secondary object). 

(E8-9; T2.486-484) Although the three constituents are the causes 
of satisfaction, frustration, and confusion respectively, yet they are 
figuratively stated to be identical with satisfaction, etc. Although 
sativa has more attributes than satisfaction, yet it is called one whose 
essence is satisfaction (suwkhatmaka) on account of the predominance of 
satisfaction. Similar reasoning is to be applied with rajas and tamas in 
connection with their attributes, namely, frustration and confusion. 
These three attributes are the distinguishing characteristics of the three 
constituents. As sc itva means the state of being sat (good, high, righ- 
teous, etc.), it isthe highest accessory of consciousness (i.e., the sattva- 
guna is the best means of achieving the highest goal). As rajas signifies 
passion, it is the middling accessory. Tamas, being of veiling nature, 
is the lowest accessory. Each of these constituents has innumerable 
individualities (vyakti, i.e., self-existent, manifested entities), as is 
stated in Saémkhyasiatra 1.128, which clearly points to the plurality of 
each constituent. The innumerable manifoldness of the effects could 


VIJNANABHIKSU 405 


not have been explained if the constituents were three entities only, for 
in this view the constituents, being all-pervasive, would be unable to 
produce innumerable manifoldness (vaicitrya). The varieties of the 
conjunction of the three constituents cannot be conceived as capable 
of producing innumerable manifoldness without the help of some deter- 
minant entity (avacchedakibhitta dravyantara). As there is no such 
entity, each constituent must be regarded as having innumerable in- 
dividuals. Each constituent 1s either of atomic or all-pervading magni- 
tude as all their effects are either of limited or of unlimited magnitude. 
This two fold division of magnitude of the constituents is in accordance 
with the ever mutating nature of the rajas guna 

(E9-10; T2.484-482) It is wrong to hold materiality to be identical 
with the atoms (of the Vaisesika school), for materiality in its unmani- 
fested form is devoid of the qualities like sound, touch, etc., whereas 
atoms possess such qualities. The existence of atomic qualities cannot 
properly be inferred in the primal cause, materiality. 

Objection: Because materiality is an assemblage of innumerable 
individuals of atomic and all-pervading magnitude, it cannot be un- 
limited (aparicchinna), one, and devoid of activity. 

Reply: “‘Aparicchinna’’? simply means being a causal substance 
(karanadravya). Primordial materiality must be regarded as all-per- 
vasive, for the evolving cause of akafa and the like must be all-pervasive. 
Because there is no difference of primordial materiality either in differ- 
ent creations or in its association with consciousness, it is one. “Being 
devoid of activity’? must be taken to mean being bereft of reflective 
discerning, etc., and not having the sense of ‘‘inactive.’”? Otherwise 
the phenomenon known as the agitation (ksobha) of materiality as 
stated in scripture would be inexplicable. Since effects like intellect, 
etc., consist in satisfaction, frustration, and confusion, they must be 
inferred as originating from a cause of similar nature. As inference 
proves the thing inferred in a very general way, the particularities of 
primordial materiality are to be known from the Sastras or from yogic 
power. As to how the existence of satisfyingness, etc., in the external 
objects can be proved, it is to be noted that, because the internal organ 
is the cause of satisfaction, etc., they are proved to be existing in the 
external objects. 

(E10-11; T2.482-480) ‘The principle called ‘“‘buddhi” (the intellect 
that underlies all forms of awareness), is produced from primordial 
materiality. It is called “‘mahat’’ (great), as it possesses merit, etc., 
which are its distinguishing characteristics. It pervades all. It has 
three aspects based on the three constituents, being the adjuncts of the 
three deities Brahma, Visnu, and Siva. Sometimes it is regarded as 
identical with these deities. Although some scriptural statements say 
that the intellect itself is the same as the power of becoming small and 
other supernormal attainments, yet these are to be regarded as the 


406 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


attributes of the intellect. Sometimes the intellect is stated to be Visnu 
himself because of the predominance of this deity. The intellect, being 
modified by the rajas and tamas constituents, is turned into a limited 
form characterized by demerit, etc. Its chief and distinguishing func- 
tion is reflective discerning. It is the seed state of the internal organ. 
The producing of intellect by primordial materiality and of egoity by 
intellect is borne out by scripture alone. Inference cannot ascertain 
the order of the generated principles precisely. 

(E11-12; T2.480-479) As a branch of a tree comes out from a 
sprout, so the ego comes out from the intellect. Its function as well as 
its distinguishing characteristic is self-awareness (abhimana). Egoity 
has three aspects, characterized by the predominance of sattva (called 
vaikdrika), of rajas (called taijasa), and of tamas (called bhiitadi). Tazjasa 
is said to be the cause of capacities; vaikdrika, of eleven gods; and bhi- 
tadi, of the gross and the subtle elements. 

(E12; T2.479-478) Egoity produces the mind before producing 
the external capacities, as they are said to be caused by the operations 
of awareness. Egoity, by its power of intentionality (samkalpa), pro- 
duces both the ten capacities and the five subtle elements. 

(E13; T2.478-476) The subtle body (litgasarira) consists of seven- 
teen parts: the intellect (with egoity included in it). five subtle ele- 
ments, and eleven organs. It is the place of the manifestation of the 
self. It comes into existence at the beginning of creation and lasts till 
the end of dissolution. The five vital breaths, being included in the 
functions of the intellect, are not separately mentioned. Five gross 
elements constitute the seat of the subtle body. Without this seat a 
subtle body is unable to move from one region to another. The subtle 
body is the adjunct of Svayambhii (the “‘self-born,” viz., Hiranya- 
garbha, the creator). From this original subtle body proceed the 
subtle bodies of other individual selves. 

(E13-14; T2.476-475) The gross body is the product of earth, 
which is covered by water, light, air, @kdfa, egoity, and intellect, 
one after another, each following having a ten times bigger magnitude 
in comparison to each preceding. The earth is transformed into the 
egg-shaped universe in which exists the gross body of Svayambhu 
consisting of fourteen regions. This first embodied Being is called 
Brahma or Narayana in authoritative texts. The Being is also called 
“one diman’’ in scripture, as it is the source of origination and dissolu- 
tion of individual beings (vyastipurusa). This Being creates Brahma 
and makes him create other beings ending with the vegetable world. 

(E14-16; 12.474) The twenty-four principles are constantly under- 
going transformation. This is why all inanimate entities are called non- 
existent from the transcendental standpoint. It is the absolutely real 
self that is to be realized for the eradication of frustration. One tran- 
scends the cycle of birth and death by correctly knowing the tree of 


VIJNANABHIKSU 407 


brahman (consisting of the evolutes of primordial materiality with 
actions and results) but by cutting it with the sword of knowledge 
and by thereby attaining imperishableness (i.e., brahmanhood), 


Section IT, CHAPTER I 


(E17-19) The self (dtman) called “‘purusa’’ is to be known as dis- 
tinct from primordial materiality and its evolutes. The experience 
“I know” proves the existence of the self in a very general way (i.e., 
it does not refer to the self as an absolute and immutable entity). As 
the intellect and other evolutes exist for the sake of the self, the enjoyer, 
being originated by the action of the self, the intellect is to be 
regarded as beginningless. Again, the beginninglessness of the intellect 
proves the beginninglessness of its enjoyer, the self. The beginning- 
less relation of property and proprietor between the intellect and 
consciousness shows that the self, the enjoyer, is eternal. As the intellect 
contains the operations and latent dispositions enjoyed by conscious- 
ness, it is called a property (sua) of consciousness. The quality of 
being the proprietor (svdmya) is consciousness’ illuminating the opera- 
tion that give rise to latent impressions. When the intellect is free from 
these operations and dispositions of the self, it is eternal. 

As the self is eternal, its illuminating power is not caused. Although 
the self is nothing but consciousness, yet it is regarded as a substance 
because of its similarity with substance. That is why the experience 
that ‘I am the locus or substratum of knowledge” is also accepted 
as valid. Being deluded by the beginningless erroneous awareness, an 
individual self considers himself to be identical with the body. Because 
of the self’s association with the body it appears to possess knowledge. 

Although knowledge is eternal, yet it seems to be noneternal be- 
cause of its association with objects. Therefore it is perfectly reason- 
able to conclude that the eternal self is nothing but consciousness (c7t). 
The apprehension of objects means tne projecting of the reflections of 
objects on the self. It is the operations of awareness that cast their 
reflection on the self. An object is apprehended by the self through 
these operations. 

As desire and the like are produced by operations of awareness, 
they exist not in the self but in the intellect. Thus it follows that all 
selves are immutable (sama), changelessly permanent. The self is 
pure, self-luminous, and eternally liberated. 

It may be held that the self, like the akdSa, is one in number. Some- 
one’s being satisfied and other’s being frustrated cannot disprove the 
unity of self, because satisfaction and other qualities reside in the in- 
tellect. Because experiencing and absence of experiencing cannot be 
ascribed to one and the same person simultaneously it is justified to 
hold that the selves are innumerable. 


408 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Section IT, CHAPTER 2 


(E19-22) The nature of both self and not-self is to be known in 
order to comprehend their difference. The phenomenon of this mun- 
dane existence appears and disappears because of its proximity with 
the self. The self is said to be the material cause (updddna) of this world 
because it is the abode (ddhara) of all. The self is paramdarthasat (a 
really existent entity) because it does not exist for others and because 
its existence is proved by one’s own experience (i.e., it is self-luminous). 
As it is self-existent it is called ‘“‘sat.”’ 

Materiality and all inanimate objects change constantly. This is 
why they are called ‘‘not self existent’”’ (asat). Because an actual entity 
(vastu) is defined as an entity that undergoes no change, materiality 
and its evolutes must be regarded as nonactual (avasiu). Moreover, 
because the existence of materiality depends upon another, and_be- 
cause it comes to be known being illuminated by another, materiality 
is called “not self-existent”’ (asat). 

Consciousness is the essence of this world. It is the constant part, 
(sthira améa) within mundane existence. 

As the world is constantly changing it is wrong to hold it to be per- 
manent. It exists only as transitory form. The selfis true, all-pervading, 
calm, of inconceivable nature, pure awareness alone, taintless, and 
omnipotent. It apparently seems to assume the forms of the intellect. 
The world appears and disappears in the self like a mirage in the 
desert. The illusory world proceeds from the mind. The world is 
called “‘mind-made’’ (manomaya), as it is created by the creator by 
his mind. It appears to be existent to a deluded person who is ignorant 
of the self. As a man ignorantof gold cannot understand a bracelet 
as nothing but a piece of gold, so an unwise person cannot perceive 
the true nature of the world. 

These statements show that the world is not absolutely nonexistent. 
Some other statements, however, show that existence has been ascri- 
bed to the evolutes of materiality. The world, being bereft of name 
and form, exists in materiality (also called ‘‘mdya” or ‘anu’? by some 
teachers). In the self the world exists in a potential state. 


Section II, CHaprtTer 3 


(E22-25) The difference of the self from the operations (vriti) of 
the intellect is now to be discussed. Illumination, because it is related 
to objects capable of being Uluminated, becomes illuminator. The 
self becomes the seat of qualified knowledge when it is associated 
with cognizable objects. The connection of the self with the cogniz- 
able objects is not as real as its connection with the intellect. The 
reflection of images of the objects on the self occurs either directly 
or indirectly (i.e., through the operations). 


VIJNANABHIKSU 409 


In the absence of operations of the intellect the self remains in an 
unmanifest state. The operations of the intellect have forms similar 
to those of their objects. They are limited or conditioned and of 
momentary existence. These are inanimate, as they are illuminated 
by another entity (viz, the self). They are expressive of the objects, 
as they are capable of assuming the forms of all objects. It is the self 
that is the seer absolute. Objects coming in touch with the intellect 
are reflected in it. This reflection is seen by the self (and not by the 
intellect). 

The difference of the self from the intellect, the body, etc., is well 
known. As there arises mutual reflection between the intellect and 
consciousness, the operations of the intellect look like consciousness. 
It is most difficult to distinguish pure consciousness from ordinary 
awareness. Some Bauddhas, not knowing this distinction, consider 
momentary awareness to be the same as the self of the Upanisads. 

As an illuminator is always regarded as different from the things 
illuminated, the illuminator self must be different from the operations 
of awareness. Thus is shown the difference between the illuminating- 
ness of the intellect and the illuminatingness of consciousness. 

By the examples of dream, etc., as given in the Upanisads, it is pro- 
ved that consciousness is different from the body, organs, and the like. 
While in the dream state the body, etc., is reflected in consciousness, 
in the waking state the external things also reflect in it. Because the 
dream contents are mental, they are the direct objects of consciousness. 
In the waking state the external things are the objects through the 
organs. In both these states all things are, however, equally illumina- 
ted by consciousness. In the dream state, cognition arises from latent 
dispositions (vdsand), whereas in the waking state it arises from the 
instruments of knowledge. Dream cognition is to be regarded as the 
best example for understanding the self-vision. In the sleeping state 
the self abides in itself. The other two states are illusory, for in them the 
self is falsely identified with the intellect. The sleep of the intellect 
is its covering (dvarana) by the tamas constituent. The sleeping state 
of the self is the state that is devoid of all operations of the intellect. 

The changelessly eternal self illuminates the intellect only. Because 
the operations (which are objects to be seen) do not exist always, the 
self cannot be regarded as a perpetual seer. The self is (falsely) seen 
to assume the forms of the operations. The ignorant think that the self 
really undergoes change. It is the intellect residing in the body that 
is cause of all frustration. If the intellect is not properly distinguished 
through the help of discrimination, there is no hope for liberation. 
The mere renunciation of external things is no means to it. All selves, 
being nothing but consciousness, are alike. Because of its super- 
imposition of agency on the attributeless self, the intellect falls into 
bondage. 


410 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Section II CHapTer 4 


(E26-28) The blissful nature of the self is now to be discussed. Real 
satisfaction is the absence of frustration as well as (worldly) satis- 
factions. As the nature of the self consists in the absence of frustration, 
it is called “satisfaction” (sukha). That the word “‘sukha” means 
absence of frustration is to be accepted. Consciousness is secondarily 
said to be identical with satisfaction in order to show that it is the 
dearest of all. 

Love for a thing is always dependent on the self, but love for the 
self has no reference to any other thing. Incomparable satisfaction 
arising from the perception of the self is enjoyed by the liberated- 
while-living. Internal satisfaction concerning the self, which is enjoyed 
by the Yogins, is unattainable by persons desirous of external satis- 
factions. 


Section II Cuapter 5 


(E28-32) Now the dissimilarity (vaidharmya) of the self and the 
not-self is to be discussed. Satisfaction and the like, being the effect 
of the operations of the intellect, are to be regarded as the attributes 
of the intellect. Because the effect and its cause belong to the same 
class (sdjdtya), primordial materiality, the material cause of the 
intellect, etc., is to be accepted as inanimate, devoid of consciousness. 
The self is nothing but consciousness. It is attributeless and change- 
lessly permanent. All generated products belong to materiality. Be- 
cause of contact with the objects there arises an influence (uparaga) 
in the intellect, which may be called ‘‘lepa’’ (‘‘stain’’ or “‘defilement’’). 
The connection causing lepa is to be known as safga (attachment). 
The self is bereft of all attachment or stain. 

Because pure consciousness is the impelling factor (preraka) of the 
world, it is called ‘‘God.’? The whole inanimate world acts for its 
lord. The organs in the body deposit all enjoyable objects in the mind, 
which in turn present them to the intellect. Objects placed in the 
intellect are enjoyed by the witness self, which is the lord of the intellect. 
The self, being the supreme controller, is called “God” (parameSsvara). 

The self in the absolute state is called paramdtman. It is called “‘indi- 
vidual self’? (jiva) when, associated with the internal organ. As the 
pervader with reference to the pervaded is called ‘‘brahman,” primordial 
materiality and its generated products are called ‘‘brahman.”’ Others, 
however, do not accept this view and state that consciousness is to be 
regarded as brahman because of its controllership (adhyaksatva) and 
all-pervasiveness (vpapakatva). 

The self, which is the absolute seer and immutable consciousness, 
does not require any illuminator and is called self-luminous (svapra- 


VIJNANABHIKSU 41} 


ka§a). Experience exists not in the self but in the intellect. The re- 
flection of the operations of the intellect may be said to exist secondarily 
in the self, which, being the seer of the intellect, is known to be the 
witness of it, The quality of being a witness (séksin) is, however, not 
permanent or everlasting, because the influence caused by the noneter- 
nal objects is itself noneternal. 

Because there is no dissimilarity among selves, the self is called 
immutable (sama). 

Although the self in reality is bereft of association, yet it is called the 
lord and knower of all because it possesses the power of illuminating 
all. The self is called “‘nondual’’ (advaita) as all selves belong to the 
same class (i.e., they possess absolute similarity). 


Section II, CHAPTER 6 


(E32-37) Now the discussion on Rajayoga. One should take up 
Hathayoga, if one is unable to practice Rajayoga as has been advised 
by Vasistha and others. In Rajayoga the place of jfdna is predomi- 
nant; in Hathayoga pranayama and dsana (yogic posture) are the chief 
means. 

(The remaining sections present a standard explanation of yogic 
praxis. ) 


Section II, CHAPTER 7 


(E38-40) The characteristics of the liberated-while-living are now 
to be discussed. 

One who perceives everything in the self transcends frustration and 
confusion. Spiritual insight (prajia) becomes steady or firmly footed 
in him who neither rejoices nor hates. A wise man never fails to re- 
member the existence of the transcending self. One liberated-while- 
living possesses an even and unshaken mind, and acts without any 
attachment. He is devoid of passion and aversion and has no 
attraction to the nonself. As all things are the transformations of the 
power of the self, he is not deluded by them. Even acting like an 
ordinary man he experiences the bliss of the self. He is introspective 
(antarmukha, i.e., having the group of organs turned away from the 
sense objects and directed toward the inner self). He, being free from 
duties, attains liberation. He is the same in honor and dishonor. In 
him lust, greed, anger, etc., have dwindled and erroneous awareness 
has come to an end forever. By crossing the cycle of birth and death 
he abides in the fourth (i.e., the liberated) state (the other three states 
being waking, dreaming, and dreamless sleep). 

Liberation is manifested as soon as the mind is destroyed, owing 
to the dwindling of latent dispositions. One acquiring the state of 


412 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


liberation-while-living naturally attains the state called bodiless libera- 
tion (adehamukti, i.e., liberation acquired after death). When on ac- 
count of the cessation of the reflections of objects the self becomes 
absolutely devoid of the operations of the intellect, then isolation 
becomes manifested. At that time the self abides in itself. The self 
is devoid of objects, decay, and death; it is eternal; it is neither void, 
nor seen, nor the act of seeking; it is andkhya (one that has no name or 
appellation). 


YOGAVARTTIKA 
YOGASARASAMGRAHA 


These two Yoga works of Vijfianabhiksu parallel the two Samkhya 
texts summarized above. The Yogavarttika is a complete explication 
of Patafijali’s Yogasitra and Vyasa’s Yogasiitrabhasya. The Yogasdra- 
samgraha is a summary overview of Yoga philosophy and is evidently 
the last work that Vijfianabhiksu composed in his lifetime. 


BHAVAGANESA 


Bhavaganega or Ganega Diksita was a direct disciple of Vijfiana- 
bhiksu and can be dated, therefore, along with Vijfianabhiksu in the 
latter half of the sixteenth century. His Tikd on the Tattvasamdsasitra, 
entitled Tativayatharthyadipana (‘‘Illuminating the Complete Meaning 
of the Truth” ), is probably the oldest commentary on the Tativasamasa 
after Kramadipikd. 

The edition (E) used for the summary is that found in V.P. Dvivedi, 
editor Samkhyasangraha (Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, 
Work No. 50, pp. 50-92). 


TATTVAYATHARTHYADIPANA 
(Summary by Kapil Deo Pandey) 


It should be noted, first, that Bhavaganega reads the sitras in a 
slightly different order than Kramadipika. Sutra 7, “‘adhyadtmam adhibhi- 
tam adhidaivatam ca,” is broken up into three separate parts (thus 
becoming 7, 8, and9). Stra 19, ‘‘trividho dhatusargah,’’ is eliminated, 
and the concluding statement in the Kramadipika listing, namely, 
“He who has properly understood.” etc., is counted as a separate 
siitra, which is not the case in Kramadipikad. Bhavaganesa, then, reads 
a total of 25 sitras beginning with “eight generative principles” 
(sdtra 1) and ending with “the who has properly understood.”’... (sétra 
25). (See above entry under Tativasamdsasitra for a comparison with 
the Kramadipiké ordering.) 

(E50) The commentator opens his work with three verses of invo- 
cation, in the first of which he glorifies consciousness and materiality. 
In the second verse, he invokes Kapila, Asuri, Paficagikha, and his 
teacher Vijfianabhiksu. In the third, he proposes to write the com- 
mentary, depending on the Samdsasiitras and the gloss by Paficasikha,? 

(1) (E50-54) The commentary starts with the etymology of “‘pra- 
krti’’ and a general definition of the eight generative principles (prakrti) 
namely, the unmanifest, intellect, egoity, and the five subtle elements. 


414 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


In defining the unmanifest, the term “‘guya’”’ is used twice and in two 
senses: one as used in the Nyaya system and the other as used in the 
Samkhya system. Including these three constituents, the number of 
principles becomes twenty-eight. Although they are substances, yet 
they are called ‘guna’? on account of their being the accessories of 
consciousness. Limitedness, oneness, etc., of materiality (as accepted 
by Samkhya) have been established by reason, and some contradic- 
tory arguments have been refuted with the remark that the Samkhya 
views are in accordance with fruti and smrti. 

(E54-57) After a description of primordial materiality, intellect is 
defined in three ways. ‘‘Manas,”’ ‘‘mati,” “‘mahat,”’ etc., as synonyms 
of the intellect, are enumerated and verses from the Mahabharata 
are quoted to confirm the view. Intellect, because it possesses rajas 
and tamas, is said to be limited in size in the individual self. It is the 
adjunct of the creator. The same is called “‘saratman,” “‘prajitd,” 
and “‘ifvara’’ in different states. In Visnupurdna, its three types— 
sativika, rdjasa, and tamasa—have been described. Those who think 
of materiality as self attain the innate (prakrtika) from of bondage 
and those who think of intellect, etc., as self attain the acquired 
(vaikrtika) from of bondage. 

(3) (E60-62) The essential nature of pure consciousness is des- 
cribed. By the knowledge of the twenty-five principles one becomes 
liberated and a verse ascribed to Paficasikha (possibly derived from 
Kranadipika) has been quoted to this effect. The multiplicity of 
consciousness is established on the evidence of Saémkhyapravacanasitra 
1.149, and it is remarked that if there were only one consciousness 
the whole universe would have been celighted or distressed with the 
delight or distress of one. All the Samkhya preceptors (Kapila, 
Asuri, Paficasikha, Patafijali, and others) and the followecs of Nyaya- 
Vaisesika systems propounded the plurality of consciousnesses. Others, 
such as the preceptors of the Upanisads, argue forthe oneness of 
consciousness. 

(5-6) (E63-71) These two sdtras are interpreted to justify mainly 
the Vedic sentences on saguna and nirguna dtman. At the beginning of 
creation, the primordial materiality is disturbed by itself and a contact 
with ndrdyana consciousness takes place. As a result of this contact, 
the intellect (mahat), made up of three material constituents, is mani- 
fested. When the intellect is produced, consciousness is manifested in 
it. Manifestation is sometimes called an effect. 

The subtle body consists of the five subtle elements, ten organs, the 
mind, and the intellect (egoity is included in the intellect). The 
intellect, etc., cannot subsist without a subtle body. The distinction 
of individuals is proved by their distinct actions. Manusmrti (1.16) 
is quoted to justify this view. 


BHAVAGANESA 415 


Tt is remarked that a thing is dissolved into another thing from which 
ithas emerged. Transformations of the form of creation, preservation, 
and dissolution are gross and occur for the purpose of the discrimination 
of the immutable consciousness. Consciousness unchangeable and 
pure, is to be discriminated from materiality, etc. Chandogya Upanisad 
6.2.1. is quoted. 

(7-9) (E71-73) ‘‘Pertaining to the internal’’ is the group of thirteen 
organs; “‘pertaining to the external,’ the group of objects; and 
“pertaining to the celestial,” the group of governing deities of the 
organs. 

(10) (E73) Svetasvatara Upanisad 1.5 is quoted as the source of 
sittras 10-14. The five functions (abhibuddhi) are said to be as follows: 
intellectual functioning (abhibuddhi), self-awareness (abhimdana), desire 
(iccha), the functioning of the sense capacities (kartavyaia), and the 
functioning of the action capacities (kriya). Intellectual functioning, 
self-awareness, and desire refer respectively to intellect, egoity, and 
mind, Identification and action are the functions of the sense capa- 
cities and action capacities respectively. 

(11) (E73-74) The five sources of action, namely, perseverence, 
faith, satisfaction, the desire not to know, and the desire to know are 
explained. Four out of these lead to bondage, but the last is helpful 
in attaining liberation. Four verses, quoted in relation to this point, 
are found in the Yuktidipika (under SK 29, p. 108). 

(12) (E74-75) Five vital breaths—prana, apana, samdana, udana, 
and vyéna—with their respective seats and function are described as in 
Kramadipika. According to some exponents of Samkhya, there are 
five more vital breaths known as naga, kirma, krkala, devadatta, and 
dhanaftjaya. 

(13) (E75) Five agents, namely, vaikarika, taijasa, bhiitadi, sdnumana, 
and niranumana are defined as in Kramadipika. 

(18) (E80) After propounding fifty components of the sarga (intel- 
lectual creation), a standard enumeration of the ten fundamental 
topics is given to show the appropriateness of the name ‘‘Sastitantra” 
for Samkhya. 

(19) (E80-81) The creation from the five subtle elements (as 
material cause) is called the supporting creation (anugraha). The 
creation of exalted beings in crder to show favor or kindness to the 
devotees is also termed ‘“‘supporting.”’ 

(20) (E81) There are fourteen types of gross or elemental crea- 
tion. Out of these, eight are celestial, five are subhuman, and one 
is human. 

(21-23) (E81-86) Bondage is threefold: innate ( prakrtika), acqui- 
red (vaikytika), and personal (daksina). These are explained by 
quoting a verse ascribed to Paficasikha (and also found in the Krama- 
dipika). Three types of liberation are discussed. The highest form 


416 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of liberation is defined as the complete cessation of the three types 
of frustration, and Nydyasiitra 1.1.2 is quoted. 

It is remarked that as the objects of knowledge (prameya) cannot be 
established without the help of the instruments of knowledge; three 
instruments of knowledge—perception, inference, and reliable autho- 
rity—are accepted (see siitra 23). 

(25) (E87-92) By following the order of these principles, one 
overcomes the threefold frustration. Extensive quotations from older 
popular texts (Purdna) are given. 

In three benedictory verses, the commentator dedicates his work to 
competent persons and aspires for the favor of Hari (Sri Krsna) for 
the act of dedication. 


MAHADEVA VEDANTIN 


This commentator, also known as Mahadeva Sarasvati or Vedantin 
Mahadeva, lived in the latter part of the seventeenth century, accor- 
ding to Keith and others.! He was a disciple of Svayamprakasa Tirtha, 
according to a citation by F. E. Hall.? Although his commentary, 
entitled Samkhyasitravrttisdra, purports to be based on Aniruddha, 
Garbe discovered that almost all of the first two books have been 
lifted from the Samkhyapravacanabhasya of Vijfianabhiksu.2 The remain- 
der is a paraphrase of Aniruddha. Garbe included a few extracts 
from Mahadeva Vedantin’s commentary in his critical edition of 
Aniruddha’s Samkhyasitravrtti, but there is nothing of importance in 
this that has not already been stated by Aniruddha or Vijfianabhiksu 
from a philosophical point of view. Hence, a summary of these 
extracts need not be given. 


SVAYAMPRAKASAYATI 


This author, also known as Svayamprakaéga Muni or Yatindra, is 
listed in A Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Adyar 
Library, IX, as having lived in the latter part of the seventeenth cen- 
tury and as having composed a number of works on Vedanta. He 
also wrote, evidently, a fifty-verse booklet on the functioning of the 
gunas, entitled Gunatrayaviveka. The author appears to have been a 
devotee of Rama and to have been a pupil of Vasudevendrayati 

The following summary of the booklet is based on its publication 
by V. Krishnamacharya in the Adyar Library Bulletin 24 (1960): 
175-181. 


GUNATRAYAVIVEKA 
(Summary by Ram Shankar Bhattacharya) 


The author has divided the transformations of the three consti- 
tuents into three groups, the first giving rise to the second, and the 
second giving rise to the third, thus making a total of 39 kinds of 
transformations, each associated with a particular group of sentient 
beings. To be explicit: originally, there is a threefold transformation 
(based on the predominance of each of the three constituents), 
namely, témasa, rdjasa, and sdtivika, (It should be noted here that 
the constituents, though distinct from one another, are incapable of 
being disjoimed and remain combined producing transformations. ) 
The sthavaras (herbs, trees, plants, and the like, which are the 
immovable beings) come under the é@masa transformation ; the jatgamas 
{i.e., the living beings that can move) come under the rdjasa trans- 
formation; the divinities such as Brahma and others come under the 
sativika transformation. 

The témasa transformation is again divided into three subdivisions 
according to the predominance of tamas (inertia constituent), rajas 
(activity constituent), and sativa (intelligibility constituent). The 
three subdivisions of the sthdvaras, comprising (1) soil, etc., (2) tree, 


420 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


etc., and (3) corn etc., come respectively under these three tdmasa 
transformations. ; 

Similarly the rdjasa transformation is again divided into three sub- 
divisions according to the predominance of the imertia, activity, and 
intelligibility constituents. The three subdivisions of the moving beings, 
comprising (1) beings born of sweat, etc., (2) lion, etc., and (3) the 
Brahmins and other human beings, come under these three rdjasa 
transformations respectively. 

Similarly, the sdttvika transformation is divided into three subdivi- 
sions according to the predominance of tamas, rajas, and sativa. The 
subdivisions of the group comprising Brahma and other gods, namely 
(1) the group of the Yaksas and others, (2) the group of Devarsis 
and others, and (3) the group of Viraj and others come under these 
three sdttvika transformations respectively. 

The three ¢@masa aspects predominated by the three constituents 
have been further divided into three divisions according to the pre- 
dominance of the three constituents, and thus nine transformations 
come into existence. Similar is the case with the three rajasa and the 
three sditvika aspects. Thus there arise 94+-9+9=27 transformations. 
These 27 transformations are connected with the 27 kinds of groups 
of living beings, i.e., the tripartite group of the sthavara (immovable) 
beings has been divided into 9 groups (each group having three sub- 
divisions based on the three constituents); similar is the case with 
the category of movable beings and the category of beings forming the 
group of Brahma and other gods. The author has clearly shown the 
twenty seven subdivisions of beings. 

Thus the total number of the transformations of the constituents 
comes to 3+9+427=39. The equilibrium state (sémydvasth@) of the 
constituents is said to be connected with the witness (sdaksin, the 
attributeless immutable self). 


NARAYANATIRTHA 


Narayana Tirtha, the author of the Sdmkhyacandrika was well versed 
not only in the Samkhya-Yoga philosophy but also in the philosophical 
systems of the Nyaya-Vaiéesika school and the Vedanta. He belonged 
to the last part of the seventeenth century. The following summary 
is based on the edition of Samkhyacandrika by Dundhiraja Sastri Nyaya~ 
carya (Varanasi: Haridas Sankrit Series 132, 1977). 


SAMKHYACANDRIKA 
(Summary by Anima Sen Gupta) 


(1-3) (El-6) Life in this world is affected by the triad of frustra- 
tions, namely, (1) internal frustrations of one’s own body and mind, 
(2) external frustrations caused by beings external to one’s body and 
mind, and (3) celestial frustrations due to natural and supernatural 
causes. 

The frustration of the present moment is destroyed naturally in the 
subsequent moment; past frustrations are already gone; so, it is future 
frustration that is to be alleviated. The Samkhya, being the upholder 
of the theory of the existence of the effect in the cause prior to its 
production, does not believe in the prior absence or the posterior 
absence of any object. Cessation of anything, therefore, means getting 
merged in the subtle causal form and becoming incapable of appearing 
in a gross form, owing to subtlety. 

The only means for the permanent removal of threefold frustration 
is discriminative knowledge; which is the correct knowledge of the 
manifested world of psychical principles and physical elements, 
the unmanifested primary cause, and the cognizer in the form 
of consciousness. 

(4-8) (E6-12) Perception is that reflective discerning which is ob- 
tained through the relation between the sense organ and the object. On 
perceiving a cloud, we think of unperceived rain. This is a case of 
inferential knowledge. Inference is that process which depends on the 


422 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


knowledge of a universal relation between the hetu and the sddhya 
and also on the knowledge of the presence of the hetu in the paksa. 

In other words, knowledge so produced, giving us the knowledge 
of the presence of the hetu in the paksa qualified by knowledge of the 
invariable relation between the hetu and the sddhya, is called knowledge 
by inference (anumiti); it is in the form of fire in the hill. Inference 
is of three kinds: (1) to infer the effect from the cause (pérvavat), 
(2) to infer the cause from the effect (fesavat), and (3) inference due to 
the relation other than the cause and the effect (“‘kdrya-kdrana-anya- 
lingaka, sdmanyato drsta’’). “Aptavcana’’ refers to the words of trust- 
worthy persons. Statements are combinations of terms having 
expectancy (dkamksa), proximity (dsatti), and suitableness (yogyata) 
and also referring to the intention of the speaker (tdiparya). An dpta 
is a trustworthy person who possesses correct knowledge of the 
meaning of sentences. 

The sense capacities are not the instrumental causes of knowledge. 
The instrumental cause is the operation of awareness (vrtti) produced 
by the functioning of the sense capacities. Knowledge is the new and 
uncontradicted cognition of an object. When the reflective discern- 
ment of a specific object that is in contact witha sense capacity 
arises in the form of an awareness of the specific object, it is called 
perception (as for example, “‘it is a jar’’). Inferential knowledge is 
that knowledge in which the operation of the intellect in the form of 
the inferred object (sadhya) takes place on the basis of the invariable 
relation between the hetu and the sddhya coupled with the knowledge 
of the presence of the Aetu in the paksa. When there is the awareness 
of an object, signified by language uttered by a trustworthy person, 
then that is to be treated as a case of knowledge through testimony. 

Those objects, which are capable of being related to organs of 
cognition, are proved to be existent by means of perception. Primordial 
materiality, which is supersensuous, is to be established by means of 
inference. Apérva and similar things, which by issuing forth from the 
performance of sacrifices, etc., cause heavenly satisfactions, are to be 
known through scriptures, because of their supersensuous nature. 

Primordial materiality cannot be perceived because of its very subtle 
nature. It is not nonexistent. Its existence is proved by means of the 
effects it brings into being. The intellect, egoity, the subtle elements, 
the gross elements, etc., are the effects that originate from materiality. 

The effects that originate from materiality are of two kinds : similar 
and dissimilar. 

The great principle (mahattattva), egoity, and the five subtle ele- 
ments (seven in all) are similar to primordial materiality because 
these are characterized by the property of dividing themselves into 
further categories. Ether, air, etc. are dissimilar in the sense that these 
are not the originators of further categories. 


NARAYANATIRTHA 423 


(9) (E12-14) The effect is existent in the cause even before the 
causal operation. If we admit that a nonexistent effect can be pro- 
duced, then we shall have to hold that even horns can issue forth from 
the head of a man. To produce curd, one always seeks milk, which is 
its inherence cause (samavdyikdrana). Had the effect been nonexistent 
in the cause prior to its production, one could have produced it from 
water as well. Again, if the effect is nonexistent in the cause prior 
to its production, then this prior absence of the effect being identical 
in all possible causes, every effect will arise from every cause. Scripture 
speaks of the identity between the cause and the effect even prior to the 
production of the effect. For this reason also, the effect cannot be 
regarded as nonexistent because in that case we shall have to admit 
the absurd identity between the existent and the nonexistent. 

It cannot be urged that if the effect is always existent, then the 
operation of the causal factors for producing the effect becomes 
meaningless. The operation of the causal factors is necessary for the 
manifestation of the effect. Is the manifestation eternal or produced? 
If it is eternal, then there should always be the manifestation of effects. 
If it is produced, then one manifestation is to be produced by another 
manifestation, that by another, and so on. Thus, there arises the 
fallacy of infinite regress. There is no such fault, because, although 
the effect is existent, still it is not manifested on account of certain 
obstacles that prevent its manifestation. Being not manifested in the 
“effect form,” it is not always practically useful. It is because of 
the presence of sattva in the effect that the effect is manifested by the 
operation of causal factors and becomes useful. Although the cause 
and the effect are identical, still, practical needs can be satisfied by 
the effect alone. 

(10-11) (E15-18) The whole manifested world, consisting of prin- 
ciples beginning with the intellect and ending with the five gross 
elements, are caused, noneternal and nonpervasive. These are also 
active because intellect, egoity, etc., can pass from one body to another. 
Intellects, egoities, etc. are many in number, because these are differ- 
ently associated with different consciousnesses. They are also many 
because creations too are many in number. On the basis of these effects, 
the existence of the unmanifest primary cause is inferred. These effects, 
which are the objects of enjoyment, also establish inferentially the 
existence of consiousness as the enjoyer. The manifest is the sign or 
reason (litga=hetu) to establish the existence of both primordial 
materiality and consciousness. 

Primordial materiality is the objective basis of awareness, as all its 
effects become the contents (visaya) of awareness. They are not of the 
nature of awareness, as is held by the Yogacara school. Had the content 
been of the form of awareness, then it could not have become the 
common content of enjoyment of many persons. Consciousness is 


424 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


devoid of the three constituents, is not a content (nirvisaya), and hence 
not a common content of enjoyment. It is conscious and nonproductive. 
Like the unmanifest, consciousness is uncaused, eternal, etc., and like 
the manifest, consciousnesses are many in number. 

(12-13) (E19-21) Satisfaction is the effect of sativa; straight- 
forwardness, mildness, respect, forgiveness, knowledge, etc. are the 
different offshoots of satisfaction. Frustration is the effect of rajas; 
harted, envy, jealousy, disgrace, etc., are the distinctive features of 
frustration. Confusion is the effect of tamas; fear, crookedness, miser- 
liness, ignorance, etc., are the distinctive features of confusion. Sativa 
and tamas produce effects being excited by rajas. 

(14-19) (E22-30) It is because the intellect and other effects are 
formed of the three constituents that they are endowed with the pro- 
perties of being undifferentiated, etc. That which is opposed to what 
possesses undifferentiatedness, etc., is consciousness; it is devoid 
of the three constituents. If we do not consider the intellect 
and the other principles as the products of some cause, then they will 
have to be regarded as eternal. In that case, consciousness will never 
be liberated. Hence, these principles are to be regarded as the pro- 
ducts of some uncaused root cause. Because the effects are different 
from each other, they are to be regarded as specific and finite; because 
of multiplicity and differences, these products are also limited and 
nonpervasive. All these specific, limited, and finite products prove 
the existence of an eternal, infinite, and unlimited cause that is the 
primary cause. 

Again the intellect and other effects are different from each other. 
Even then all of them are capable of producing satisfaction, frustration, 
and confusion. This common capacity, noticeable in all the products, 
proves that they have originated from a common cause. It is only 
primordial materiality that possesses such fitness. Again, it is the 
potency of the cause that brings about the effect. The potency to 
produce the great principle, etc., is possessed only by primordial 
materiality. 

The effect emerges from causes and is differentiated from them. 
At the time of dissolution, all products get merged in a single cause. 
During creation, these are different, but in the state of dissolution, 
different effects are reduced to the same nature because of their ori- 
gination from a single cause. Brahma cannot be regarded as_ the 
cause because Brahma can become the cause only (indirectly) by 
becoming the possessor of creative power, whereas the primary cause 
itself is the creative power and as such is the fit cause of the universe. 
Because the primary cause is of the nature of the three constituents, 
it can produce diversities of the world. 

The Samkhyakarika proves the existence of consciousness by the 
following arguments: 


NARAYANATIRTHA 425 


All composite objects are created for the benefit of another, like the 
cot, etc. The benefit takes the form of the experiencing of satisfactions, 
frustrations, etc. Such experience is possible only in the case of consci- 
ousness and not in the case of anything that is unconscious. 

The three constituents and their products are unconscious. An 
unconscious object can be made serviceable only by a conscious prin- 
ciple. The jar cannot, by itself, bring water. It can render this service 
only through the efforts of a conscious being. It is only in conscious- 
ness that the three constituents are absent. Consciousness, being the 
locus of the absence of the three constituents, is, therefore, necessary 
to make the unconscious products of the unconscious constituents ser- 
viceable. Just as an unconscious chariot can move in a systematic 
manner, being controlled by the charioteer, in the same manner, all 
these unconscious products do their respective functions, being watched 
over by consciousness. Consciousness, which is the seer and the illu- 
minator of all objects, is, therefore, necessary. The wise people make 
sincere efforts to attain liberation. Liberation from satisfactions and 
frustrations can never be possible in the realm of materiality because 
satisfaction, frustration, and confusion are effects of the three consti- 
tuents. Hence, there must be a consciousness. 

Consciousnesses are many in number. Had there been only one 
consciousness then all would have been born simultaneously and all 
would have died simultaneously. Further, had there been one con- 
sciousness, then everyone would have been engaged in action simul- 
taneously. We, however, find that, when one is engaged in religious 
activity, another engages himself in academic pursuits. So consci- 
ousnesses are many in number. Unequal aggregations of the three 
constituents are also noticed in this world. Some are satisfied, some 
frustrated and some suffer from confusion. It cannot be urged that 
such differences occur owing to the multiplicity of the internal organs, 
because the multiplicity of the internal organs proves the multiplicity 
of consciousnesses. 

Consciousness gets seemingly involved in the worldly life because of 
materiality. In its true form, consciousness is wholly uninvolved and 
indifferent, It produces neither good nor evil. It is devoid of all good 
and bad qualities. 

(20-21) (30-32) Association is, indeed, the seed of illusion. The 
association is nothing but consciousness’ capacity of being reflected 
in the intellect. Owimg to such reflection of consciousness in the intel- 
lect, the unconscious intellect becomes permeated with consciousness, 
and it appears to have awareness in the form of “I am knowing.” 
Agency is reflected in consciousness, resting on the intellect. As a 
result of reflection, the indifferent consciousness falsely appears as the 
doer of actions. The realization of the distinction of the intellect from 
consciousness is, however, not possible without the primary cause and 


426 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


its evolutes. So, consciousness needs the primary cause and there is 
the association of consciousness with the primary cause in the form 
of the relation of the enjoyer and the enjoyed. Creation, which may 
be regarded as the door to both enjoyment and liberation, is also due 
to this association. 

It cannot be held that the five gross elements arise directly from 
egoity; this is because qualities like sound, etc., can never be produced 
from egoity as there is nonexistence of qualities like sound, etc., in it. 
There is no ground to hold that egoity possesses five qualities. The 
five qualities belong only to the five elements such as akéfa and others. 

(23-37) (E34-49) Reflective discerning, expressed in the form 
‘This is to be done by me,” is the function of the intellect. The intel- 
lect possesses merit, knowledge, nonattachment, and power when 
it is dominated by sattva. The intellect comes to possess demerit, igno- 
rance, attachment, and impotence when it is dominated by éamas. 
The function of egoity is self-awareness, which is expressed in the form 
“T am knowing,” “I am doing.’’ Because there is nondifference bet- 
ween the cause and the effect, there is nondifference between egoity 
and the self-awareness of egoity. The intellect makes all its discernings, 
keeping harmony with egoity. Owing to nonrealization of the dis- 
tinction, egoity (falsely) seems to reside in consciousness. 

Sattva and tamas are by nature devoid of activity. They are moved 
to act by the active influence of rajas. The sense capacities, which are 
established as the causes of various sensations (color, etc.) are super- 
senuous: they remain in their respective seats. 

The function of the mind is to apprehend as qualified or specific 
what is presented by the sense capacity in a general form. It gives us 
the knowledge of the “‘substance-attribute’ form. In other words, 
the mind is generative of qualified knowledge. Some hold that al- 
though the mind assists the capacities, it itself is not a capacity. A 
thing cannot become a capacity merely by assisting the capacities. 
At the time of functioning, capacities are also assisted by a light of 
some kind. The light that assists the capacities should therefore be 
included in the group of capacities. This is wrong. The mind is 
regarded as a capacity because of its similarity with other capacities. 
Like other capacities, the mind, too, originates from that aspect of 
egoity in which sativa dominates. 

The awareness that arises from the operation of the five external 
sense capacities is of a construction-free nature. The word ‘‘mdatra’’ 
signifies that the eye possesses the potency of receiving color alone; the 
tongue can receive only taste; the nose only smell; the ear only sound; 
and the skin only touch. Speech, grasping, etc., are the functions of 
the action capacities. The five vital airs sustain life. So long as these 
vital powers remain operative, the living condition of a living being 
persists. Life flickers when the vital airs become completely inoperative. 


NARAYANATIRTHA 427 


The operation of the three internal capacities and one external 
capacity may be both simultaneous and successive (in the case of 
perception). In the case of inference and verbal testimony, the ex- 
ternal capacities do not operate. In these two cases, therefore, there 
is no construction-free awareness, caused by the operation of an ex- 
ternal capacity. The mind, here, is the capacity that operates first. 
Inference is dependent on perception because the universal] relation 
between the hefu and the sadhya is established through it. In the case 
of verbal testimony, the potency inherent in language is to be inferred, 
and inference is dependent on perception. 

(38-39) (E50-51) The five subtle elements are nonspecific in nature 
as these are not fit to be endowed with specific qualities. From these 
five subtle elements emerge the five gross elements, namely, ether, 
etc. These gross elements, being fit for the possession of specific charac- 
teristics of calmness, turbulence, and delusiveness, are specific. 

(40-42) (E51-53) According to some, harika 41 speaks of the need 
of a gross body. The subtle body consisting of the principles such as 
the intellect, etc., cannot exist without a specific gross body. 

(43-52) (E54-64) Dispositions like merit, etc., are innate. The 
“acquired’’ dispositions are brought about by personal efforts. The 
instrumental cause of virtue, etc., is the intellect. Merit enables a 
man to attain a higher plane, whereas vice leads him to hell. Dis- 
criminative knowledge alone enables a man to attain the highest 
good (i.e., liberation). 

Misconceptions, dysfunctions, contentments, and attainments are 
the creations of the intellect (pratyayasarga). Being included in the 
intellect, these do not create any new category, owing to non- 
difference between the cause and the effect. 

(54-56) (E65-68) According to Samkhya-Yoga, the whole crea- 
tion (from the intellect down to the five gross elements) emanates 
from materiality. God is not the creator; nor does creation depend 
on merits and demerits. If God creates (depending on merits and 
demerits), then merits and demerits may very well be regarded as the 
cause of creation. Why should we then admit the existence of a 
controller God in addition to merits and demerits? If God does not 
create in accordance with merits and demerits, then, there will be no 
diversity in the world. Further, an immutable principle can never 
become the cause of the world (because of its immutable nature). 
Materiality also, being unconscious, cannot act for its own personal 
benefit; its creation, therefore, is for the benefit of each consciousness. 
So, even if one consciousness is liberated, creation will not come to 
an end. 

(57-61) (E69-72) In practical life we find that unconscious milk 
flows from the udders of a cow for the nourishment of her calf. Acti- 
vity, here, is controlled, not by a conscious principle, but by the matured 


428 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


merits and demerits of adrsta. Hence, there is nothing to prevent us 
from holding that even an unconscious materiality can act for the 
liberation of consciousness. The flow of milk is not controlled by God 
because there is no proof for the existence of God as a controller. 
Even if evidence in favor of God as a controller is available, still He 
canaot be regarded as an active and working God; because He has 
no unfulfilled desire of His own that can be fulfilled by creation. Nor 
can God be supposed to create, being inspired by the feeling of com- 
passion for frustrated beings; because before creation, there cannot be 
any form of frustration. So, a desire for removal of the frustration of 
living beings, prior to creation, is also impossible. Hence, it is proper 
to admit that materiality, though unconscious, can be engaged in 
creative activity for the benefit of consciousness, like unconscious milk. 

Just as man acts with the thought, ‘“This should be enjoyed by me,” 
in the same manner materiality acts, being driven by the urge that its 
activity should serve the purposes of consciousness. Thus, by serving 
the purposes of consciousness, materiality, too, is satisfying its own 
urge. So there is no fault. 

(62-69) (E73-79) Materiality keeps the embodied soul involved in 
worldly life by means of the seven predispositions of the intellect. It 
releases consciousness from worldly life by means of knowledge alone. 
This proves that, even in the absence of nonattachment, etc., dis- 
criminative knowledge can become the means of liberation. The 
liberated person, being the possessor of discriminative knowledge, 
perceives materiality in a disinterested manner with the help of his 
pure intellect, which abounds in saftva. Consciousness no longer re- 
gards as its integral parts the satisfying, frustrating, and confusing 
transformations of nature, owing to the arousal of discriminative aware- 
ness. The body of the wise, however, continues for some time on 
account of the impulse supplied by dispositions, the fruition of which 
has already commenced and which can be annihilated only through 
enjoyment with the body (which is their effect). 

When, through enjoyment, previous fruit-bearing impressions are 
completely destroyed, then the body also comes to an end. Thus, 
when the two purposes of enjoyment and liberation have been served 
by the intellect, etc., consciousness attains self-fulfillment, and materia- 
lity ceases its activity in relation to it. Consciousness thus attains the 
inevitable and absolute freedom from frustration. 


NAGOJ{i BHATTA, or NAGESA 


Nagoji Bhatta, or Nageéga, lived in the first part of the eighteenth 
century, according to Keith! and others, and worked in the areas of 
philosophy of language, Nydya-Vaisesika, Vedanta, Yoga, and Sam- 
khya (see Potter, Bibliography of Indian Philosophies, 2d Rev. ed. 
{Delhi; Motilal Banarsidass, 1983], pp. 327-328, for citations to 
his work).? His Laghusdmkhyavrtti on the Samkhyasitra is rightly charac- 
terized by Keith as a “‘mere imitation” of Vijfianabhiksu’s Samkhya- 
pravacanabhdsya®, Because it contains nothing original, the text will 
not be summarized in this volume. 


VAMSIDHARA MISRA 


Because this author refers to the views of Mahadeva Punatamkara 
who is likely to have flourished in 1710, it may be presumed that he 
composed his commentary after 1750.1 Nothing else is known about 
him. In the six benedictory verses we find no information either 
about him or his teacher. 

The edition (E) used for this summary was prepared by Rama 
Sastri Bhandari and was published as Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series 
54, Varanasi 1921. 


TATTVAVIBHAKARA 
(Summary by Kedaranatha Tripathi and Ram Shankar Bhattacharya) 


This is the most extensive commentary on Vacaspati’s Tattvakau- 
mudi. It deals with the views and statements of Vacaspati in a manner 
found in the later works on Nyaya, and thus it is not very useful in 
understanding Samkhya notions in their original forms. It is similar 
in essence to other commentaries on Tattvakaumudi of traditional 
Sanskrit scholars. Its criticisms and refutations are, however, often 
characterized by an incisiveness (using the terminology of Navyanyaya) 
that is seldom found in other commentaries. In addition, its elaborate 
treatment of the theories of error (khyati) is highly polemical and 
deserves to be studied by serious students of Indian philosophy.* 


I. Inrropuctory Verses: THE Scope AND TASK OF THE SAMKHYA 
(E1-117) 


Vacaspati is said to have composed the first invocative verse by 
changing a few letters of the Svetafvatara Upanisad mantra (4.5), to indi- 
cate that the Samkhyan materiality is not non-Vedic. 

Although no scriptural statement is available to prove that 
invocation (mangala) is the cause of the completion of a literary 
composition, yet such a statement should be inferred. In ancient times 
such scriptural statements existed, but because of various kinds of 
unfavorable conditions Vedic study was neglected and consequently 
Vedic statements enjoining invocations came to be forgotten. 


432 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Now the commentator tries to show the significance of some of the 
words in this initial verse. The word “one” (in “unborn one”’) shows 
that the Nyaya-Vaisesika theory that the atoms are the (material) 
cause of the world is untenable. 

The words ‘‘red, white, and black’’ refer to the three constituents, 
viz., rajas, sativa, and tamas respectively, through secondary signi- 
ficance (gauni vrtti). These constituents have, respectively, the func- 
tions of coloring (rafijana), illuminating (prakaga), and concealing 
(a@varana). ‘‘Red’’ has been placed first to indicate that rajas, being 
dynamic, is the most powerful factor in the act of creation. 

Who “‘produces”—it is remarked that Vacaspati, instead of using 
“srjati,”’? used the word “‘srjamdna’”’ to indicate that materiality is an 
everchanging entity. The use of the term ‘‘unborn ones’’ in the plural 
indicates the plurality of consciousnesses. That is why the use of the 
singular word “unborn” in the original verse of the Svetasvatara 
Upanisad is to be taken as indicating consciousness in general (puru- 
sasdmanya, the property common to all consciousnesses ). 

Materiality is described as one that has been enjoyed (bhuktabhoga). 
Although experience of satisfaction and frustration belongs to consci- 
ousness, it is caused by materiality. Because experience is a trans- 
formation, it cannot arise in the immutable consciousness. Satis- 
faction, etc., which are operations of the intellect, get reflected in 
consciousness and this reflection is what is known as the experiencing 
of consciousness. When this experiencing ceases, consciousness is 
liberated from materiality. 

Materiality is capable of being avoided (heya), because connection 
with frustration is prompted by it. A proper means is to be adopted 
for disjoining consciousness from materiality; this means is awareness 
of the difference between the intellect and consciousness. 

A question may be raised as to how association, the source of 
bondage, is possible between two unlimited (aparicchinna) and all- 
pervading (vibhu) entities, because, if such an association is admitted 
it will create bondage in liberated consciousnesses also. The commen- 
tator comes to the conclusion that consciousness becomes associated, 
not with materiality, but with the intellect, a transformation of materia- 
lity. As the intellect is limited, its association with consciousness 
cannot be eternal and thus the aforesaid problem does not arise at all. 
This association has its own peculiarities: e.g., in deep sleep, although 
there is association, there is no experience of frustration. 

The association is caused by nondiscrimination and so cannot be 
eternal. As it does not exist in liberated consciousnesses, these consci- 
ousnesses cannot be associated with bondage again. It should be noted 
in this connection that consciousness does not become mutable or 
attached because of its association with the intellect. 

Objection. Because nondiscrimination is a kind of latent disposition 


VAMSIDHARA MISRA 433 


(vdsana), it is an attribute of the intellect. If association caused by an 
attribute of the intellect (viz., nondiscrimination) can exist in consci- 
ousness in the bondage state, it can exist in a liberated consciousness 
also. 

Reply: Nondiscrimination is attributed to consciousness through its 
reflection in the intellect. Because nondiscrimination has been anni- 
hilated in a liberated consciousness, its reflection cannot arise in that 
consciousness. And, as a liberated consciousness cannot be in asso- 
ciation with the intellect, bondage does not take place again. Non- 
discrimination causes bondage, not directly, but through association. 

(1) Objection: The Veda is the only means to self-realization leading 
to liberation, and so no one will be interested in studying Samkhya. 

Reply: Because hearing, reasoning, and meditation are prescribed 
in the Vedas as the means for realizing the self, there will naturally 
arise a desire to study Samkhya, for without a study of Samkhya, 
reasoning is not possible. Although reasoning has been treated in Nyaya 
and Vaisesika also, yet the study of Sarnk hya is necessary, for Nyaya- 
Vaisesika regards the self as the substrate of satisfaction, frustration, 
etc., a view that is not in accordance with the Veda. 

The Samkhya atheism is not anti-Vedic, for, in refuting the existence 
of God, Samkhya simply follows the worldly point of view, which 
does not accept the existence of God. The purpose of this refutation is 
to lay stress on practising nonattachment. Since Samkhya does not 
enjoin that the mind is to be fixed on the eternal God in order to 
acquire discriminative wisdom, Samkhya must be regarded as a sys- 
tem that does not accept the existence of God.? 

Because Samkhya asserts that frustration is a modification of rajas, 
it is evidence that Samkhya does not follow the originationism (dram- 
bhavdda) of the Vaisesikas or the manifestationism (vivartavdda) of the 
Advaita Vedantins. Although it is the absolute cessation of frustra- 
tion, and not satisfaction, that is called the ultimate human goal 
(purusartha), yet satisfaction is sometimes called an ultimate human 
goal, because at the time of experiencing satisfaction cessation of 
frustration occurs. 

The commentator criticizes the Vedantic view that the attainment 
of eternal bliss is liberation. He remarks that so long as a conscious- 
ness is not liberated, absolute cessation of all frustrations is not possible, 
and that so long as a consciousness is in the state of bondage, there 
cannot arise absolute cessation of all frustrations. 

(2) Objection: There is no contradiction between the Vedic state- 
ments (a) “‘no living thing should be killed” and (b) “‘a goat is to be 
killed in the Agnistoma sacrifice.” 

Reply: No, (a) is a general rule, and (b) a specific one that limits, 
and so vitiates it. Violence of all kinds invariably gives rise to ill 
results to the person concerned. That is why the victorious Ksatriya 


434 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


heroes of the Mahabharata had to perform expiatory rites (prayascitia) 
for their killing in the war, though such killing is enjoined for Ksatri- 
yas. The statement made in Chdndogya Upanisad 8.15 says that if one 
ceases from committing violence which is not sanctioned he will 
achieve the desired result. 

The cavity (guha) in which the self is said to dwell (in scripture) is 
the body or, according to some, the heart. One who has attained the 
Brahmaloka returns to the world if he has not acquired knowledge 
of the fundamental principles (of Samkhya). 

(3) The word ‘‘gina’’ in Samkhya signifies that it is the accessory 
(upakarana) of consciousness. Or it may meana strand (rajjuz) that binds 
consciousness through the strand’s transformations, viz., intellect, etc. 

The categories of Vaisesika are said to be included within the 
twenty-five principles of Samkhya. It is remarked that spatial direc- 
tion (dif) and time (kdla) are all-pervading, and that the entities 
known as limited (khanda) direction and time arise from dkdfa as 
limited by adjuncts. 

In contrast to the Nyaya-Vaisesika way of treating properties and 
their possessors as always distinct, it is more logical to accept non- 
difference between properties and their possessors. Vamsidhara 
remarks that the doctrines of inherence and of universal properties, 
as found in the Nyaya-Vaigesika system, are untenable. 


II. THe INSTRUMENTS OF KNOWLEDGE 


(6) (E182-184) Materiality, consciousness, and their association 
can only be known through inference, not perception. 

(8) (E186-188) The word ‘‘subtlety” (sauksmya) in this kériké must 
not be taken in the sense of small dimension (anuiva), since both 
materiality and consciousness are all-pervading. Rather, the sense 
of this term is to refer to the state of having no component parts. 


III. Tue Notion oF PREEXISTENT EFFECT 


(9) (E187-200) In the course of discussion of the first argument 
Vacaspati remarks “‘As long as there is no sublator of nonexistence, 
it is not possible to cognize the empirical world as false” (prapafica- 
pratyayascasati badhake na Sakyo mithyeti viditum iti). While explaining 
this comment, Vaméidhara says that, instead of saying “since there 
is no sublating factor’ (bddhakabhdve), Vacaspati deliberately uses 
the expression ‘‘asati badhake”’ with a view to intimating the fact that 
there does exist a sublator, viz., the scriptural statement “‘neha nanasti 
kificana”’ (Brhadéranyaka Upanisad IV.4.19). As Vacaspati was com- 
menting on a Samkhya text, he simply presents the view of a Samkhya 
teacher. 


VAMSIDHARA MISRA 435 


Vamsidhara further says that the passage “‘avyakrtam Gsit’” (Brha- 
daranyaka Upanisad 1.4.7) shows that all effects (intellect and the rest) 
remain in an unmanifested state during dissolution and come out of 
this state at the time of creation. In the Samkhya doctrine of satkarya, 
prior absence and posterior absence of the Nyaya-Vaisesika are re- 
garded as the future and past states of an effect respectively, and a 
creating cause (kdraka) is regarded as necessary for rendering the 
future state of an effect to be manifested. Although the future state is 
manifested because of such a creating cause, once that state is des- 
troyed (i.e., gone to the past state), the effect cannot reappear. 

At the end of this section the commentator refers to the Vedantic 
view that, because it is impossible to determine whether the manifes- 
tation of an effect is caused or not, it is proper to regard the origination 
of effects as inexplicable (anirvacaniya).5 


IV. Tue ManiresT AND UNMANIFEST AspPEecTs OF MATERIALITY 


(10) (E201-207) “Cause” (hetw) in this verse is to be taken in the 
sense of a cause for manifestation or emergence (dvirbhava). The com- 
mentator elaborately discusses the nature of transformation and des- 
cribes its three varieties, viz., dharma, laksana, and avastha.® 

Although some scriptural statements say that materiality is innum- 
erable (asdmkhyeya), such statements should be taken to mean that 
although materiality is single in reality it becomes diversified in 
different creations. 

(11) (£207-213) When it is said that the essential nature of the 
sativa constituent is satisfaction, “‘satisfaction” stands for tranquillity 
(prasada), lightness, contentment, and the like. Similarly ‘‘frustration”’ 
(the essential nature of rajas) stands for grief, etc., and “confusion” 
(the essential nature of tamas), for sleep, etc. Paficagikha is quoted to 
uphold this view. 

While elucidating Vijfianavada the commentator at first establishes 
that objects are different from awareness of them and then explains 
idealism on the basis of the reason of the co-arising of the two (saho- 
palambha), While refuting this idealism in detail Vamsidhara remarks 
that one and the same entity cannot be both grasped and the instru- 
ment of grasping, and that if all objects are regarded as the forms of 
awareness then the blue form would be nondifferent from the yellow 
form, both being not different from awareness, and that offering co- 
arising as a reason for idealism is faulty, for it presupposes the differ- 
ence between an object and its awareness. 


V. THe THREE CONSTITUENTS 


(12) (E213-220) A constituent is said to obstruct other constituents 


436 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


when it becomes manifest (udbhiia), being incited by adrsta, which 
is the cause of the attainment of human goals (i.e., experience and 
liberation). Because the constituents are all-pervading, a constituent 
cannot exist without being associated with the other two constituents. 
It is remarked that there is no logical fault in holding that there is 
association between beginningless entities. 

(13) (E22)-227) As in the Vaisesika view there exists the common 
property of earthiness in both earth atoms and the things made up 
these atoms, so lightness (laghuiva), etc. are the common properties 
of the innumerable individuals (vyakiz) of sativa, etc. When a large 
number of individuals of a constituent get united, the constituent be- 
comes increased ; similarly when they become disunited decrease occurs 
in the constituent. Although sativa, rajas, and tamas have innumerable 
individuals, they are not the same as the atoms of the Vaisesikas, for 
the constituents are devoid of sound, touch, etc. 

Although sativa is the same as satisfaction, lightness, and illumi- 
nation, yet they are not to be regarded as three distinct aspects of 
sattva, for there is no opposition in them. A similar view applies to 
rajas and tamas. That is why materiality is said to consist of three 
constituents only, and not nine. 

The Vedantin’s criticism that in the Samkhya view a thing would be 
experienced in a uniform way at all times by all experiencing beings is 
refuted, and it is established that the nature of experience depends on 
many facts, namely, time, state, etc., and a change in these necessarily 
brings about change in experience. 


VI. Tue INFERENCES THAT ESTABLISH THE EXISTENCE OF 
MATERIALITY AND CONSCIOUSNESS 


(14) (E227-229) It is shown that there arises the fault of overcom- 
plexity (gaurava) in the Mimasa view that causal efficacy (Sakti) is a 
distinct category, and that it is correct to hold that causal efficacy is 
the same as the unmanifested state of an effect. 

(17) (B252-264) VamSsidhara affords a corroborative argument 
(anukiila tarka) to prove that all aggregates act for others, and refutes 
an argument given by Samkaracarya at Brahmasitrabhdsya 11.2.39 that 
materiality cannot be held to be capable of being ruled, because it 
is devoid of color, etc. 

Consciousness, being of the nature of eternal illumination, does not 
require any helping factor to illuminate objects. It becomes associated 
with objects through the operations of the intellect. Materiality can- 
not be regarded as experiencing satisfaction, etc. for such experienc- 
ing would involve the fault of the contradition of agent with its action 
(karmakarirvirodha). 

Because unmanifest materiality is not conscious, it is under the 


VAMSIDHARA MISRA 437 


control of some conscious being. To be “‘under the control’? means ‘‘to 
be connected in such a way as to become the occasion of activities” 
(pravrttiprayojaka). This isa special kind of contact (vilaksanasamyoga). 
That there exists contacts between eternal entities is a proved fact. 

It is time that gives rise to the disturbance (ksobha) in the consti- 
tuents. Then the aforesaid contact comes into existence because of 
action. This contact in turn gives rise to the transformation, viz., 
intellect, egoity, etc. Thus it follows that there isno effort or activity 
in consciousness to activate materiality and itis this association that 
causes materiality to transform. 

(18) (E264-271) There is an elaboration of the Vedantic view 
about the unity of consciousness (the self) with such reasons 
as are usually given by Vedantists, and refuting the plurality of 
consciousnesses.? 

(19) (E271-273) Because consciousness perceives objects immedia- 
tely, it is called a witness (saksin). These objects are the intellect and 
its operations. Because consciousness’ connection with objects other 
than these is through the intellect, it (the intellect) is called a “‘seer”’ 
(drastr). 

It is remarked that neutrality (mddhyasthya, auddsinya) is different 
from nonagency (akaririva). Because the word “neutral” is used for 
those persons who, though without attachment or passion, act to 
maintain their bodies—a fact that shows that they possess agency— 
the word “nonagency”’ has been used to indicate that consciousness 
is absolutely bereft of agency. 

(21) (F274-279) Dependence (apeksa@), which is necessary for affect- 
ing association between two separate entities, is defined as acting as 
an accessory in order to produce effects. 

Explaining the simile of the union of a blind and a lame man, 
Vamsidhara remarks that as these two leave each other when the pur- 
pose of the union (i.e., reaching the destination) is fully served, so 
materiality ceases from its activities when consciousness is liberated 
and consciousness gets rid of materiality as soon as it attains isolation. 

(22) (E279-301) Creatorship really belongs to materiality, as is 
proved by Svetdsvatara Upanisad 4.5. 

Vaméidhara offers a long discussion showing that all Samkhya 
principles are mentioned in the Upanisads. He also shows that, al- 
though in some scriptural passages the Samkhya process of transfor- 
mation has not been stated in full, yet such nonmention is no fault, 
for in other scriptural passages the unmentioned principles are found 
to be mentioned. 


IX. THe FuNcTIONING OF THE THIRTEENFOLD INSTRUMENT 


(23) (E301-336) Because the intellect pervades its effects and 


438 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


because it possesses power, it is called ‘‘mahat.’? Hiranyagarbha is also 
called “‘mahat,’’ as he takes the intellect as his empirical self (buddhy- 
abhimanin). 

Because the intellect receives the reflection of consciousness, its 
character is different from that of objects like a jar, etc. Although 
consciousness is without color, yet there is no logical fault in its 
reflecting on the intellect. 

(24) (E336-342) Reasons are adduced to prove the nonelemental 
character of the capacities and to refute the Nyaya view (propounded 
here in detail) that the capacities are elemental. Vaméidhara further 
establishes that the capacities are transformations of egoity and not 
to be confused with their vehicles, which are bodily regions called 
*‘golaka.”’ 

VamiSidhara is in favor of the view that the mind is the only trans- 
formation of the acquired (vaikrta), i.e., sdttvika aspect of egoity, 
whereas the capacities are the transformations of the tazjasa, i.e., the 
rdjasa aspect of egoity. The view ofsome exponent that the acquired as- 
pect of egoity gives rise to the superintending deities of the capacities, a 
doctrine not stated in the Sdamkhyakdriké, is regarded as secondary 
for the deities are not in reality created by the acquired aspect of egoity. 

(27) (E352-395) The mind is regarded as of the nature of both the 
sense and action capacities, for the functions of these two kinds of 
capacities depend on it. It cannot be urged that since the mind is a 
single entity, awareness (jfidna), which is a transformation of the 
mind, cannot be of various kinds. As the same body becomes fat or 
thin through the use or nonuse of food, similarly awareness assumes 
various forms through its relation with different capacities, audi- 
tory, etc. 

The Nyaya view that the sense organs are prapyakdrin (coming into 
actual contact with their objects) is elucidated and refuted. It is esta- 
blished that construction-free (nirvikalpaka) awareness is caused first 
by the sense capacities and then construction-filled (savikalpaka) aware- 
ness is caused by the mind. 

(30) (399-405) In the simultaneous rise of the operating of four 
organs (three internal organs and any one of the external capacities), 
all four give rise to many operations separately. Since cross-connec- 
tion of universals (samkarya) is not recognized as a defect, there is 
no logical fault in holding that many organs give rise to one operation 
at a time. The use of plural number in the verb (prdadur bhavanti) 
predicated of operation(s) is not wrong; it is used to show mani- 
foldness in one and the same operation. If the operation is not ac- 
cepted as single, the use of the singular number in the word ortti in this 
verse would be wrong. 

In imperceptible objects there arises simultaneously only one opera- 
tion of the three internal organs. But if the operations arise gradually, 


VAMSIDHARA MISRA 439 


they will be many. In the gradual rise of operations there arise many 
operations whether the object is perceptible or not. 

(31) (E405-407) Consciousness, being immutable, cannot be an 
instigator (pravdriaka). Instigating cannot be attributed to God, 
either, for His existence is refuted in Samkhya. Even if God is ac- 
cepted, He cannot be an instigator of organs of all embodied selves. 
That is why the cause for the activity of the organs is said to be the ends 
of man, namely, experience and liberation.® 

If the organs were regarded as impelled by an agent (and not by the 
ends of man as accepted in Samkhya) then there would arise the fault 
of self-dependence (dtmagraya). To be explicit: awareness, desire, and 
effort constitute agency (kartrtva), and awareness, being an effect, is 
dependent on agency. Agency is not always necessary for activity; 
for example, there is no function of any agent in the act of waking 
after dreamless sleep. 

(32) (E407-415) ‘Instrument’? (karana) must not be taken in the 
technical sense of the Nydya i.e., as a nongeneric (asddhdrana) cause 
possessing operation (vydpdra) but in the sense of a particular kind of 
creating cause (kdraka). The commentary provides an elaborate 
discussion on the nature of karana, the sense of verbal terminations 
(tin), the meaning of the mood and tense indicators (/akara), etc. 

The subtle body is not the material cause of the gross body. It 
resides within it. The subtle body is an aggregate of seventeen factors— 
eleven organs, five subtle elements, and the intellect, egoity included 
in the intellect. 

In reality, experience (bhoga) belongs to the subtle body and not to 
the gross body. There is no experiencing of objects in a dead body. 
The gross body is called a body only in a secondary sense, because it is 
the seat of the subtle body. 

(35) (E418-419) It is remarked that the internal organs are the 
chief instruments (karana), whereas the external capacities are regar- 
ded as instruments only in a secondary sense. Such a division of instru- 
ments is an established fact; that is, in the act of cutting it is the strik- 
ing (prahara) that is the actual instrument, whereas the axe is regarded 
as an indirect (parampara) instrument. 

(37) (E42)-422) The experiencing of satisfaction, etc., which are 
operations of the intellect in association with consciousness, is a reflec- 
tion (pratibimba). Consciousness perceives images through its own 
reflection existing in the intellect. Itis the intellect that, because it 
has taken on the reflection of consciousness, helps it experience satis- 
faction, etc. Consciousness’ experience of satisfaction, etc., is depen- 
dent on the question of the intellect, which acts not for itself but for 
another’s purpose. 


440 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


X. Tue Sustte AnD Gross ELEMENTS 


(39) (424-426) The subtle body is “‘persistent’’ (niyata), be- 
cause it remains until liberation is attained. 

Vaméidhara expressly states that the ‘‘subtles” of this verse are not 
the same as the subtle body of verse 40 and that they are the effects of 
the subtle elements. These bodies (siiksmadeha) are subtle in compa- 
rison to the bodies born of parents. The bodies are the seats of the 
subtle bodies, i.e., of the liigafariras. Vamsidhara says that this view 
does not contradict Vacaspati’s view about the subtle body. 


XI. THe SustLte Bopy 


(40) (E425-428) The subtle body is not a whole (avayavin) but 
an aggregate of intellect, etc. Trees, creepers, and the like possess gross 
bodies in spite of the fact that they don’t have limbs (hands, feet, etc.). 
Merit, etc., give rise to satisfaction in an embodied self with the help 
of appropriate contributory causes (sahakdrikérana), which are also 
produced by merit, etc. Because the subtle body is a product of mate- 
riality and because it gets dissolved in primordial materiality, it may 
be regarded as the inferential mark for the proof of primordial mate- 
riality. 


XII. Tue Basic PREDISPOSITIONS 


(46) (E435-437) The inclusion of the predispositions among the 
four aspects of the intellectual creation is discussed here. It is stated 
that demerit and ignorance are included among the misconceptions ; 
impotence and attachment among the dysfunctions; merit, power, 
and nonattachment within contentment. Some are said to hold that 
misconception is included in ignorance, dysfunction in demerit, con- 
tentment in merit, and attainment in knowledge. 


XIII. Tue Empirrca, Woritp 


(53) (E451-452) Objection: Because trees, etc., are embodied and 
conscious, the predispositions such as merit, etc., should arise in them. 

Reply: No, for it is said that only the bodies of Brahmins, etc., are 
capable of that. Such bodies are of four kinds: (1) those capable of 
performing actions (karmadeha), belonging to the great sages (para- 
marsi); (2) those capable of experiencing only the results of actions 
(the gods such as Indra); (3) those capable of both acting and ex- 
periencing the results of actions (sagacious kings (rajarsi); and (4) 
the kind that belongs to nonattached persons such as Dattatreya and 
others, 


VAMSIDHARA MISRA 44] 


There is no requirement that bodies have to be born only from one of 
the four sources mentioned—the womb, the egg, sweat, or seed—for 
there are bodies that are produced by intentionality (samkalpa), etc.® 

(55) (E453-486) Vamsidhara provides an elaborate discussion 
of the theories of error of the Sautrantika Buddhists (atmakhyati), the 
Vaibhasikas (asatkhydti), the Naiyayikas (anyathakhyati), and the Ad- 
vaitins (anirvacaniyakhyati). After criticizing these, he argues that it is 
akhyati, i.e., nonapprehension of difference (bhedagraha), that is the 
logically sound position and that of Samkhya. He says that although 
there are some merits in the anyathakhyati and anirvacaniyakhyati theories, 
on closer examination they are found to have logical faults. 


XIV. Simmes ILLusTRATING THE ROLE OF MATERIALITY 


(57) (E488-492) A few verses are quoted from Kumirila’s Sloka- 
varttika to show that because of the absence of purpose the existence 
of an intelligent creator cannot be logically proved. 

The view of Samkaracarya (cf. Brahmasiitrabhdsya II.2.3) that the 
activity of a nonintelligent entity is due to the existence of an 
intelligent agent is faulty. There is Puranic authority for the doctrine 
of creation not preceded by awareness (abuddhipirvakasarga). 

The controllership of consciousness is said to be secondary since it 
is of the nature of association or proximity. In fact it is the internal 
organ reflecting consciousness that possesses controllership. 

(59) (E493-495) Cessation (nivrtti) of materiality means its dis- 
junction from consciousness. Since the association of consciousness 
with materiality is caused by nondiscrimination, a liberated self, 
because he is without nondiscrimination, does not fall again into 
bondage. 

(60) (E495-496) Objection: Because materiality is nonconscious 
there can be no regularity in its activities. 

Reply: No. The activities of materiality are like those of a born slave, 
not random but fully regulated by natural tendencies. In the activities 
of materiality adrsta has its own play, as has been propounded by 
Vijfianabhiksu in his Samkhyasiitrabhdsya. 

(61) (£495-497) The word “‘prakrti’’ (in this verse) stands for the 
intellect (along with the organs), which seems to be conscious because 
of its association with consciousness. Because nondiscrimination, 
which causes the association, is repressed by discriminative enlighten- 
ment, the activities of materiality come to a close forever. 

(62) (E497-499) “Prakriti” again stands here for the intellect. It is 
said to be “the locus of many” (ndndgraya), as it is endowed with 
eight predispositions. 

(63) (E499-500) Materiality binds consciousness, not directly, but 
through the intellect. Knowledge, i.e., discrimination, is the only 


442 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


means for liberation. In the word “‘ekariipa’’ in the verse referring to 
knowledge, ‘‘eka’? means “principal.” Here the Vedantic view is 
quoted to the effect that the result of nonattachment is not liberation 
but indifference to the enjoyment of objects; similarly the result of the 
cessation of the intellect is not liberation but nonapprehension of 
duality. 

(64) (E500-506) Vaméidhara remarks that although faultless 
knowledge of the principles (tativajfiana) has a beginning, yet it is not 
contradicted or sublated by the beginningless misconception. The 
knowledge that leads to liberation is the discernment of the difference 
between materiality and consciousness. If this discernment is acquired, 
misconceptions of all kinds are uprooted. 


SIMANANDA, or KSEMENDRA 


A commentary on the Tattvasamdsasiitra, called Samkhyatattvann 
vecana, is published in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series No. 50, Sdém- 
khyasangraha, edited by V.P. Dvivedi, pp. 1-49. Its author’s name is 
Simananda, or Ksemendra, and he was a Brahmin from Kanyakubja. 
About his date, we know nothing. Because Ksemendra follows Vijiia- 
nabhiksu’s views on Samkhya, he probably wrote after Vijfianabhiksu. 
As a rough estimate we place this commentary somewhere in the 
eighteenth or nineteenth century, anywhere, in other words, between 
17090 and 1900. In the following summary (based on the Samkhyasan- 
graha edition), attention is given primarily to the ordering of the 
siitras and the manner in which the commentary explains the meaning 
of the siitras, so that readers can compare this commentary with the two 
earlier commentaries on the Tattvasamdsasitra already summarized, 
namely, the Kramadipika and Tattvayatharthyadipana. 

“E” references are to the Samkhyasangraha edition. 


SAMKHYATATTVAVIVECANA 
(Summary by Anima Sen Gupta) 


(1) (F2-9) Eight generative principles; 

(2) (E9-10) Sixteen generated products; 

(3) (E10-14) Consciousness; 

(4) (E14-15) Having three constituents; 

(5) (E15) Emergence of the manifest world; 

(6) (E15) Periodic dissolution of the manifest world; 

(7) (E15-16) Pertaining to the internal, external, and celestial 
(worlds) ; 

(8) (E17) Five functions pertaining to the intellect; 

(9) (E17-18) Five sources of action (karmayoni), explained here 
as perseverence (dhrti), faith (fraddhé), satisfaction 
(sukha), desire (iccha), and the desire to know 
( vividisa) ; 


444 


(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 
(15) 
(16) 
(17) 
(18) 
(19) 
(20) 


(21) 
(22) 
(23) 


(24) 


(25) 


(E18) 
(E18) 
(E18-19) 
(E19-20) 
(E21) 
(E21-22) 
(E22-23) 
(£23) 
(E23) 
(E24) 
(E24) 


(E24) 
(E23) 
(E25) 


(E25) 


(E25) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Five breaths or winds; 

Five essences of action; 

Five varieties of ignorance; 

Twenty-eight varieties of dysfunction; 

Nine varieties of contentment; 

Eight varieties of attainments; 

Ten principal topics; 

Supporting creation (anugrahasarga) ; 

Elemental creation (bhitusarga) ; 

Threefold bondage; 

Threefold liberation, explained as increase of knowl- 
edge, destruction of merit and demerit, and passing 
on to total extinction in kaivalya; 

Threefold instrument of knowledge; 

Threefold frustration; 

This is the correct sequence for proper under- 
standing (‘‘etat paramparayd yathatathyam’’ ) ; 

For one who understands all of this, everything has 
been done that needs to be done (“‘etat sarvain jftatud 
krtakrtyah spat” ) ; 

Moreover, one is no longer overcome by the three- 
fold frustration (‘‘na punas trividhena duhkhena abhi- 
bhityate’’ ). 


Simananda explains each of the sitras in a series of verses (pp. 1-25). 
His explanations follow those of the Kramadipikd and Tattvayatharthyadi- 
pana, except for a few instances, as mentioned in the preceding list of 
sitras. The latter portion of his commentary is in prose (pp. 25-49), 
in which he simply paraphrases the meaning of the Samkhya system 
as found in Vijfianabhiksu’s Samkhyapravacanabhasya and Sémkhyasdra. 


SARVOPAKARINITIKA 


This work appears in Samkhyasangraha, pp. 93-104. Nothing is 
known about its author. 


(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 


(9) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) 


(14) 
(15) 


(E94) 
(E94) 
(E94) 
(E95) 


(E95-96) 
(E96) 


(E96) 
(E96) 


(E96) 


(E97) 


(E97) 
(E97) 


(E97-98) 
(E98) 
(E98-99) 


(Summary by Kapil Deo Pandey) 


Eight generative principles; 

Sixteen generated products; 

Consciousness ; 

Emergence of tne three constituents (traigunyasaitcdra 
[reading saficdra instead of saficara, and combining 
saficdra with traigunya represents a deviation from all 
the other commentaries on Tattvasamasa]) ; 
Dissolution (but reading pratisaficéra instead of 
pratisancara) ; 

Pertaining to the internal; 

Pertaining to the external; 

Pertaining to the celestial—and interpreting (6-8) 
as describing the three ways in which frustrations 
arise; 

Five functions pertaining to the buddhi—described 
here as the five sense capacities, hearing, touching, 
seeing, and so forth; 

Five sources of action—explained here as the five 
action capacities, speaking, grasping, walking, and 
so forth; 

Five breaths or winds; 

Five essences of action (the commentary is corrupt 
at this point and cannot be read intelligibly); 
Five varieties of ignorance; 

Twenty-eight varieties of dysfunction; 

Nine varieties of contentment; 


(16) (99-100) Eight varicties of attainment; 
(17) (E100-101) Ten principal topics. The commentary quotes a 


passage from the Réjavdritika setting forth the ten 


(18) (E101) 


(19) (E101-102) 
(20) (E102) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


principal topics that is identical to the passage 
quoted by Vacaspati Misra in his Tativakaumudi 
(under SK 72) and that appears also in the intro- 
ductory verses of the Yuktidipiki—the commentator 
is probably following Vacaspati Misra here; 
“Creation of help or kindness” (anugrahasarga)— 
instead of taking anugrahasarga as the creation of 
the subtle elements as the other commentaries do, 
the author of this commentary refers to the help 
or kindness of materiality in allowing creation, indi- 
cating that in Samkhya, materiality takes the place 
of God; 

Gross creation of fourteen varieties; 

Threefold bondage; 


(21) (E102-103) Threefold liberation; 
(22) (E103-104) Threefold instrument of knowledge. 


This commentary does not read “threefold frustration” (trividham 
duhkham) as a separate siitra, because in the commentator’s view, 
it is already presupposed in his interpretation of sitras 6-8. Throughout 
the commentary the author appears to be following the Samkhyakarika 
closely, and his interpretation of the abhibuddhis and the karmayonis 
appears clearly designed to bring these technical notions into line with 
the old Samkhya of Igvarakrsna. 


SAMKHYASUTRAVIVARANA 


This commentary is published in the Sdmkhyasangraha pp. 105- 
116. It does not number the various sitras, but they appear in the 
text in the following order: 


(1) (E105) 
(2) (E105-106) 
(3) (E106) 
(4) (E106) 
(5) (E106-107) 
(6) (E106-107) 
(7-9) (E107-108) 


(10) (E108-109) 
(11) (E109) 


(12) (E109-110) 
(13) (E110) 


(14) (E110-111) 
(15) (E111) 
(16) (E111-112) 
(17) (E112) 
(18) (E112-113) 


(Summary by Anima Sen Gupta) 


Eight generative principles; 

Sixteen generated products; 

Consciousness ; 

Having three constituents ; 

Emergence; 

Dissolution; 

Pertaining to the internal, pertaining to the ex- 
ternal; and pertaining to the celestial (worlds); 
Five functions pertaining to the intellect—listed 
here as intellect itself (buddhi), self-awareness 
(abhimaéna@), desire or intention (icchd@), activities 
of the five senses (kartavya), and actions of the five 
action capacities (kriyd); 

Five sources of action—listed as perseverence 
(dhrti), faith (sraddhd), satisfaction (sukha), the 
desire not to know (avividisé), and the desire to 
know (vividisa), the first four conducing to bondage 
and the last one to release; 

Five breaths or winds; 

Five essences of action—same as in the Kramadi- 
pikaé and Tattvayatharthyadipana; 

Five varieties of ignorance ; 

Twenty-eight varieties of dysfunction; 

Nine varieties of contentment; 

Eight varieties of attainment; 

Ten principal topics (quoting the same verse 
as does the Sarvopakdrini that is, from the Rdjavdrt- 
ttka and probably following Vacaspati’s citation 


448 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of the same but without citing the source); 
(19) (E113) Supporting creation (anugrahasarga) ; 
(20) (E113) Elemental creation (bhitasarga) ; 
(21) (E113-114) Threefold bondage; 
(22) (E114) Threefold liberation; 
(23) (E114-115) Threefold means of knowledge. 


The commentary does not read “threefold frustration” (trividham 
duhkham) as a separate sitra, probably because it presupposes its dis- 
cussion from siitras 7-9, although the commentator makes no comment 
about this. 


KAVIRAJA YATI 


Nothing is known about this author beyond his name and the fact 
that he wrote a little text entitled Samkhyatattvapradipa, probably some 
time in the eighteenth or nineteenth century. The text is not a com- 
mentary. It isan independent manual that provides an overview of the 
Samkhya based on the Sdmkhyakarika as interpreted by Vacaspati 
Misra in his Tattvakaumudi. It contains nothing original and, hence, 
will not be summarized. It does provide, however, a short and ac- 
curate account of the Samkhyakariké and the Tattvakaumudi and was 
probably used as a textbook by beginning students. It is published 
in the Chowkhamba anthology Samkhyasamgraha, pp. 151-178. 


MUDUMBA NARASIMHASVAMIN 


The manuscript of Mudumba Narasimhasvamin’s Sdamkhyataru- 
vasanta, a commentary on the Samkhyakdrikd, is preserved in the Adyar 
Library, Madras (Descriptive Catalogues Vol. 8;s. no. 1OE). The author 
has shown remarkable originality in explaining some of the expressions 
of the Samkhyakarikad. He does not seem to follow any of the commen- 
tators of the SK, though in a few places he appears to regard the views 
of Vijfianabhiksu as highly authoritative. At the beginning we find 
the expression ‘‘Wrsimhakarikabhdsyam,’ which simply means ‘“‘a bhasya 
on the Sdamkhyakariké composed by one who is known as nrsimha.” 
The word “‘nrsimha’’ undoubtedly refers to the author (see the expres- 
sion “narasimha” in the name of the author). The author seems to be 
a devotee of Narasimha (an incarnation of Visnu) as is proved by the 
passage “‘anena bhagavaén prindtu varéhanarasimhah’’ in the colophon. No 
other work of the author is known to us. As he has quoted Vijfiana- 
bhiksu, he may be placed some time in the eighteenth or nineteenth 
century. 

Because the commentary has not been published, we have not pre- 
pared a regular summary, but a summary of most of the important 
views held by the commentator. In a very few places we have only 
alluded to the views instead of stating them fully. 


SAMKHYATARUVASANTA 
(Summary by Ram Shankar Bhattacharya) 
INTRODUCTORY VERSES: THE SCOPE AND TASK OF THE SAMKHYA 


(1) Fijtdsé (inquiry) is explained as discussion or deliberation 
(vicdrand); reason has been afforded for the nonemployment of the 
word ‘‘jijfidsd’’ in the first aphorism of the Samkhyasiitra, which is 
regarded as a work by Kapila (Kapilaprokta tantra) by the commentator. 

(2) Purusértha (the purposes of consciousness) is said to be of two 


kinds: secular (dryta) or scriptural (dnuSravika). It is remarked that 


452 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


liberation is attainable by means of the discriminative knowledge of 
the difference between consciousness and materiality. 

(3) Significance of the term “primordial”? (mila) in the term 
“milaprakyti”’ ; reasons for not regarding the earth, etc., as materiality; 
comparison of the Samkhyan views expressed in Samkhyasiitra 1.61 
with the Vedantic views; Kapila’s doctrines regarded as not contra- 
dictory to the views of Vedanta. 


Il. THe INstRUMENTS OF KNOWLEDGE 


(4) Meaning of the word “inference” (anumdna) and its nature; 
nature of instrument of knowledge called verbal testimony (dptava- 
cana); the varieties to be included in the three Samkhya instruments 
of knowledge are named as upamdna (comparison), arthdpatli (presump- 
tion), dksepa (also called pratibhd, intuition, which is of two kinds), 
aitthya (tradition), sambhava (possibility), and abhdva (nonperception) ; 
comparison and verbal testimony as indirect (paroksa) instruments 
of knowledge. 

(5) All objects are said to be revealed through the instrument 
called perception; perception is said to be of six kinds: five external aad 
one internal, i.e., mental; the three forms of inference, namely, a 
priori, a posteriori, and based on general correlation are said to have 
their objects existing in the past, future, and present times; verbal 
testimony is the hearing of valid statements. 

(6) The process of applying the form of inference based on general 
correlation to prove the existence of the elements, etc.; inability of 
inference to prove an anti-Vedic entity or view; inference is said to 
to be applied to prove a thing already known through the Vedas. 

(8) A nonexistent thing is said to be either absolutely nonexistent 
like the horn of a man or illusorily perceived like water in a mirage; 
an effect cannot be nonexistent, because it is the cause of other effects; 
an effect is a transformation of a substance and is as existent as its 
cause. 


IV. Tse Manirest anp Unmanirest Aspects OF MATERIALITY 
(10) The manifested is said to be manifold, because it possesses 


subdivision and to be mergent (linga), because it gets dissolved in its 
material cause. 


(11) Both the manifest and the unmanifest are called undiffer- 
entiated, because they are the locus of nondifferentiation. 


V. Tue THREE ConstTiITUENTS 


(12-13) Illumination (prakaga), activity (pravrtli), and restraint 


MUDUMBA NARASIMHASVAMIN 453 


(nivartana) are said to be the effects of the three constituents, sativa, 
rajas, and tamas respectively. The rise of sativa is to be inferred from 
buoyance or lightness (laghava) and illumination; of rajas, from the 
power to go upward by subduing inertia (aithilya) and from mobility; 
of tamas, from heaviness (durbharatva) of the limbs. ‘“‘Operation”’ 
(urtti) is explained to mean “‘illumination of objects” and is defined 
in accordance with the Samkhyasiitra 5.107 with the remark that, accor- 
ding to the Samkhyan tradition, an operation is a transformation 
of the organs. 


VI. INFERENCES FOR MATERIALITY AND CONSCIOUSNESS 


(14) The unmanifest, which is the generative cause of the intellect, 
is none other than the three constituents. In the samdnatanira (sister 
system, i.e., the Yoga philosophy) it is held that one object (substance ) 
has three sorts of transformations, namely, (1) transformation of 
essential attributes (dharmaparindma), (2) transformation of temporal 
characters (laksanaparinéma), and (3) transformation of state (avasthd- 
parindma). See Yogasiitra 3.13. 

(15-16) The unmanifest, which is the inferred cause of the manifest, 
is said to be all-productive, all-pervasive, and one in number. 

(17) An aggregate (samghdta) is defined as an assemblage of many 
component parts that produces a result. By its function an aggregate 
serves the purpose of its controller, who must be regarded as a con- 
scious entity possessing desire and effort that is aware of its egoity 
(ahampratyayavisaya). Had there been no conscious entity, no Yogin 
would have strived for acquiring discriminative discernment (prasam- 
khydna). 

(18) Had there been only one enjoyer (i.e., one consciousness) 
in all the embodied beings, one being would have been associated 
with the birth, death, and organic faculties of other beings and 
would also have maintained the bodies of others as his bodies. 
The variation in the constituents as found in different beings would 
not have come into existence had there been only one conscious- 
ness. 

(19) In reality the constituents are the agents, and consciousness 
is the witness of the transformations of the constituents. Consciousness’ 
perceiving of the transformations of the constituents is what is known 
as uritisdriipya (assuming the forms of the operations of awareness). 
See Yogasiitra 1.4. Consciousness is called seer as it is the seat of ex- 
perience. The superimposition of materiality’s agency on conscious- 
ness is called bondage. 

(20) Although the subtle body (composed of the intellect and the 
rest, see SK 40) is perceived by consciousness, yet because it is affected 
by beginningless ignorance, consciousness (caifanya) seems to exist 


454 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in a subordinate state in it. As consciousness is covered by the subtle 
body, it is not known as distinct from it. 

(21) The conjunction (samyoga) of consciousness and materiality 
is for experience as well as for the liberation of consciousness. Con- 
sciousness becomes associated with materiality as a result of forget- 
ting its own nature, and consequently it experiences the fruits of 
its deeds. The embodied self acquires discriminative knowledge 
being properly instructed by a teacher and gradually it transcends 
transitory existence. 


IX. FUNCTIONING OF THE THIRTEENFOLD INSTRUMENT 


(23) Reflective discerning is awareness free from doubting. It is 
the characteristic of the intellect and continues to exist (anuvartate) 
in egoity and its transformations. 

(25) The view of the Bhagavata Purana that the motor organs pro- 
ceed from egoity dominated by rajas is quoted here. 

(27) The mind possesses both the powers of perceiving and action. 
It possesses similarity with egoity also. The purpose of diverse modi- 
fications of the constituents is to serve the various purposes of 
consciousness. 

(28) Alocana (perception in general, jfaptimatra) exists in all the 
five particular external perceptions. Similarly, all the motor organs 
have a common function known as acting (kriyd). Samkhyasiitra 5.107 
(“Bhagagunabhyam.”) has been quoted and explained. The word 
“‘vrtti’’? (operation of the two kinds of organs) is derived from the 
root ‘‘vrt’”? and it is defined as the transformation, of an organ assum- 
ing a form similar to its objects. 

(29) Although the operations, namely, reflective discerning, etc. 
(see verses 23, 24, anc 27), are suspended in sleep, yet the vital breath, 
the general operation of the internal organs, does not cease to act. 
The internal organ, because of its proximity to consciousness, actuates 
or incites the vital air to act, and this action is regarded as the opera- 
tion of the internal organs. The Prasna Upanisad, passage 6.4, speaks 
of the vital breath described in this verse. 

(30) Simultaneous cognition of many objects is accepted in Sam- 
khya. The Nyaya view about the gradual operation of the organs 
is refuted and the Samkhyan view of the simultaneous operating of all 
the organs is established here. It is remarked that the operation of 
an external capacity may be ascribed to the intellect, egoity, and mind. 

(31) An organ is found to be helped by other organs at the time of 
discharging its functions. It is the nature of the nonconscious materia- 
lity to act for consciousness. Consciousness’ power to make materia- 
lity act is said to be its agency. 

(32) The operation of the action capacities is seizing (dharana) 


MUDUMBA NARASIMHASVAMIN 455 


and holding (vidhdrana), whereas that of the sense capacities and the 
internal organs is illuminating or disclosing (prakasa). The ten opera- 
tions of the external capacities are regarded as the operations of the 
internal organs also. 

(33) The assertion that the ten external capacities are the con- 
tents of the internal organs means they are capable of being percei- 
ved by the internal organs. 

(34) The sense capacities are capable of perceiving a thing as 
distinguished from others. The organ speech (vac) can produce sounds 
of the nature of dhvani and varna (inarticulate and articulate sounds) 
and the letters become the object of the ear. This organ can imitate 
the sounds uttered by other persons. Yogasiitra 2.19 has been quoted 
and explained here with the remark that the general form (sdémdanya- 
akdra) of the constituents is eternal and the specific forms are tran- 
sitory. The views of some teachers that tie subtle elements, egoity, 
intellect, and materiality serve as the bodies of gods, exalted persons, 
and others, and that nirguna brahman has no body, have been quoted 
here. 

(35) Awareness of external objects arises in the mind when the 
objects are in connection with their respective capacities. 

(36) The expression ‘‘krisna purusartha’’ means ‘‘all things capable 
of being enjoyed.” 


X. THe Susprte anp Gross ELEMENTS 


(38) The organs of the gods are said to be capable of perceiving the 
subtle elements. It is remarked that the Yoga philosophy uses the 
word ‘‘anu’” for “subtle element” (the author is in favor of using the 
word. “‘tanmdtra,”’ ending in long 4, which is not in accordance with 
the use of ancient teachers). 

(39) The word ‘‘siiksma’’ is explained to mean “‘of atomic size,” 
i.e., invisible to the eyes of ordinary beings. 


XI. Tue SustLe Bopy 


(40) The doctrine that the subtle body is composed of 174+1=18 
entities (as stated in Sdmkhyasitra 3.9) is in consonance with this 
verse. The word “‘saptadasaika”’ in Samkhyasiitra 3.9 means “‘one (i.e., 
intellect) in which exist 17 other entities,’ namely, five subtle 
elements, ten capacities, mind, and egoity. 

(41) The author is in favor of reading “‘viSesath’’? (and not “‘avise- 
saif’’ as has been read by Gaudapada and others) and he shows two 
faults, namely, aprdmdnika (admission of an absurd position) and 
dtmasraya (self-dependence) if the reading “‘avisesath’’ is accepted. 

(42) The word ‘‘nimitta’’ stands for “merit, demerit, ignorance, 


456 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


desire, and action’’; ‘‘naimittika’”’ stands for “birth, span of life, and 
experience.’ See Yogasitra 2.13. The commentator says that the 
exposition of this verse by Gaudapada may also be taken as valid. 


XI. Tue Basic PREDISPOSITIONS 


(43) Innate predispositions are caused by the eight generative 
principles. The acquired predispositions are caused by the sixteen 
generated principles. 

The sattva constituent predominates in the former predispositions, 
which exist in God, in His incarnations, and in sages like Kapila. 
The latter predispositions exist in ordinary persons who are required 
to be instructed by teachers. The commentator seems to hold the 
view that the acquired predispositions (and not the innate ones) 
are to be found in ordinary persons and they exist in the thirteen 
organs only. 

(45) The prakrtilina(s) (persons subsisting in elemental constituents 
through nonattachment) are said to remain in a state that is almost 
similar to the state of liberation. 

(48) Confusion is said to be of ten kinds (and not of eight kinds 
as held by Vacaspati and others) because of egoism’s attachment to 
five kinds of celestial and five kinds of worldly objects, namely, sound, 
etc. Extreme confusion is said to be of eighteen kinds (and not of ten 
kinds as held by Vacaspati and others). The commentator shows 
alternative explanations while dealing with the nature of extreme 
delusion, gloom, and utter darkness. 

(50) The author has quoted Samkhyasitra 3.37-40 with reference to 
misconceptions, dysfunctions, contentments, and attainments and 
has remarked that the five contentments are called external inasmuch 
as they are based on nonattachment to the five external objects, namely, 
sound, etc. 

(51) The eight attainments are said to produce knowledge that 
leads to liberation. The use of the expression “‘goad’’ (ankusa) sug- 
gests that ignorance, etc., are obstacles to knowledge. 

(52) The subtle body has seventeen component parts (ten capa- 
cities, the mind, egoity, and the five subtle elements). It exists in a 
seat made up of the subtle forms of the five elements. It is affected 
by the eight predispositions and by ignorance, etc. (see SK 46). Both 
subtle bodies and consciousnesses are innumerable. 


XII. Tue Emprrica, Worip 
(53) Krmi (worms in general) are regarded as forming the fifth 


subdivision of the subhuman beings—a view not found in other 
commentaries. 


MUDUMBA NARASIMHASVAMIN 457 


(53) One cannot get rid of frustration even after attaining the 
region of Brahma, the creator, who has a definite span of life and who 
is said to attain liberation as a result of acquiring discriminative 
discernment. 


XIV. Stites [ILLUSTRATING THE ROLE OF MATERIALITY 


(57) Materiality being inspired by the human goal called libera- 
tion produces discriminative knowledge, which leads to liberation. 
Giving reasons to support the Samkhyan view embodied in this 
verse, the commentator informs us that God, the great teacher, 
appeared as Kapila in order to impart divine knowledge. Sdmkhya- 
siitra 1.92 and 3.57 have been quoted to show the theistic nature of 
the Samkhya philosophy. 

(58) The factor that causes materiality to function is the idea that 
consciousness is to be released. 

(59) The beginningless union of consciousness with materiality 
is the source of nondiscriminative awareness, which is uprooted by 
discriminative knowledge. 

(61) The doctrine of materiality being perceived by consciousness 
is explained in two ways:(1) ‘“‘materiality is perceived so far as it is 
perceivable,”’ and (2) ‘‘the faults of materiality are perceived at the 
time of the rise of discriminative knowledge.”’ 


XV. LIBERATION AND ISOLATION 


(62) The three activities of materiality mentioned here are said 
to serve the purpose of consciousness. 

(63) Although bondage and liberation are connected with materia- 
lity, yet they are realized by consciousness. So long as consciousness 
is in bondage, experience is to be taken as a goal of consciousness. 
When bondage (i.e., consciousness’ association with materiality) is 
about to be destroyed because of the rise of discriminative knowledge, 
consciousness becomes delighted (ullasati). As this state is desired by 
consciousness, it is rightly called purusartha (the goal of consciousness). 

(64) Fundamental principle is explained to mean the twenty-five 
entities or principles as enumerated in Samkhyasiira 1.61. (Sdmkhya- 
sitra 3.73 and 3.75 are also quoted.) Kevala jndna is the realization 
of consciousness as distinct from materiality. The three expressions 
“nasmi,” “na me,” and ‘“‘nadham’ negate the three ideas (1) that 
“T? am included either in materiality or in its generated products, 
(2) “I? possess materiality, and (3) ‘‘I’? am identical with the body 
respectively. 

(67) It is the latent dispositions of action that have begun to 


458 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


work themselves out (and not the newly performed acts) that 
sustain or maintain the living organism. 

(68) The commentary reads “abhaya’”’ (fearless) in the place of 
“‘ubhaya’ and remarks that isolation is free from fear. 

(69) The commentator thinks that the extant Sdmkhyasiitra (in 
six chapters) called ‘“‘Tantra’ was taught by Kapila. 


RAGHUNATHA TARKAVAGISA 


The Samkhyatattvavilasa (also known as the Samkhyaorttiprakasa) by 
Raghunatha Tarkavagiga, son of Sivarama Cakravartin, is purpor- 
tedly a commentary on the Samkhyakarikd, but only the introductory 
(upodghdta) portion of this commentary has been published (with a 
Sanskrit subcommentary_by Ramesacandra Tarkatirtha) (Calcutta: 
Metropolitan Publishing House, 1935; Calcutta Sanskrit Series No. 
15). It was possibly composed some time in the nineteenth century. 
For the manuscripts of this text, see the Catalogue of Sanskrit Manus- 
cripts in the Asiatic Society, Calcutta, and the Catalogue of Sanskrit 
Manuscripts of Calcutta Sanskrit College. The text has been referred 
to in the “Index to the Bibliography” by F. E. Hall (p. 6). 

The introductory (upodghata) portion is a short statement of the 
Tattvasamasasiitra, giving twenty-five sitras. While commenting on the 
twenty-third sétra, the author remarks that there will be ‘‘further eluci- 
dation....in the Vrtti.”” The word “Vriti’ probably stands for the 
commentary on the Samkhyakarika by Raghunatha Tarkavagisa. It 
appears that the author referred to the Tattvasamdsasiitra at the begin- 
ning of his commentary to show the original teaching of the Samkhya 
Sastra that was later enlarged upon by Iévarakrsna. 

His comments on the Tativasamdsasiitra show no originality and, 
hence, no further summarization is needed. 


DEVATIRTHA SVAMIN 


Devatirtha Svamin, also known as Kasthajihva Svamin, was a 
disciple of Vidyaranyatirtha. He was patronized by the Maharaja of 
Kasi during his scholarly career. He died in 1852 at the age of eighty. 
His text, the Samkhyataranga, is a booklet containing a collection of the 
important sdiras of the Saémkhyasitra with occasional brief observations 
of the author. In the introductory part there is a discussion of the word 
“‘atha.” Curiously enough, the author gives the meaning of its two 
component parts (letters), namely, ‘‘a’’ and ‘“‘tha’”’ as “‘purusa’’ and 
“prakrti” respectively. Some verses from the Garbha Upanisad have 
been quoted to show the reason for following the path of Samkhya- 
Yoga. The word “Samkhya”’ has been derived from samkhya, mean- 
ing “‘a methodical or ordered reflection or investigation” (‘‘krama- 
piurvd vicdran@’’). There is a short note on frustration and the means 
for its eradication. It is remarked that Samkhya was originally dec- 
lared by Kapila to his mother, Devahiti. 

After these introductory remarks the author sums up serially the 
views propounded in the six chapters of the Samkhyasitra either by 
quoting the siéras in full or in part, or by using expressions similar to 
the sitras. There is a short note on the meaning ofthe word “‘atyanta’”’ 
used in the first sara. Some verses from the Saurarahasya (an Upa- 
purdna) have been quoted to show the divine character of the sun. In 
these verses, prakrti has been compared with the sun. It is remarked 
that the word ‘‘mdtra” in the word “‘tanmdtra’ means ‘“‘avadhdrana’’ 
(limitation of the sense of a word). 


TARANATHA TARKAVACASPATI 


Taranatha Tarkavacaspati worked in the middle of the nine- 
teenth century. In addition to his Upodghdia on Vacaspati’s Tattva- 
kaumudi, he published works on Nyaya and Vedanta. 

The Upodghata, as the title clearly indicates, is not a full commen- 
tary. It is only a series of introductory notes about the Tattvakau- 
mudi, possibly composed for the author’s students. It was first publi- 
shed in Varanasi in 1868; a second edition was issued in Jivananda 
Vidyasagara in 1895. 

Ram Shankar Bhattacharya did not prepare a full summary of the 
work but, instead, calls attention to the following checklist of topics 
covered in the text: 


UPODGHATA 


(Summary by Ram Shankar Bhattacharya) 
(1-5) Discussions of the terms ‘“‘Johita,”’ ‘ 
of cetand-Sakti; 
(6-8) Lengthy discussions of inference, both vita and avita, and svatah 
pramanya; 
(9) Elaborate notes on asatkdryavada and. vivartavdda; 
(11) Notes on Buddhist vijfdnavada; 
(23) Explanation of the word “‘kamdvasdyitva’’ ; 
(26) Useful discussions of buddhindriya and karmendriya ; 
(82) Discussion of the reason for calling buddhi, “‘purusa-riipa iva”’ 
(‘as if it were in the form of purusa’’ ) 
(50-51) Attempts to explain the names of the various tustis and 
siddhis ; 
(56) Reasons showing that God cannot control prakrii; and 
(64) Useful notations regarding the meaning of doubt (samJaya). 


tydga,”’ and the anugraha 


NARENDRANATHA TATTVANIDHI 


Narendranatha Tattvanidhi composed his commentary on the 
Tattvasamdsasittra toward the end of thenineteenth century. Itis included 
in The Samkhya Philosophy, volume 11 of the Sacred Books of the Hindus, 
translated by Nandalal Sinha (Panini Office, 1915 but recently re- 
printed by the Oriental Books Reprint Corporation, New Delhi, 1979). 

As has been the case in the preceding summaries of the Tattoasamasa- 
sitra commentaries, attention will be given primarily to the ordering 
of the satras and the manner in which Narendra explains them differ- 
ently from the others. 

(1) Now, hence, a summary regarding the truth (“‘atha atas tattve 

samasah”\—no other commentary reads this sitra; 

(2) I declare eight generative principles (“‘kathayaimi astau praky- 
tayah’’)—the expression ‘‘I declare” appears as “I shall now 
declare” (“‘kathayisyami)”? in the Kramadipikd, as spoken by 
Kapila, but the Kramadipikd does not consider the expression 
part of the sitra; 

(3) Sixteen generated products; 

(4) Consciousness ; 

(5) Having three constituents; 

(6) Emergence (and) dissolution; 

(7) Frustration is threefold: internal, external, and celestial; 

(8) Five functions pertaining to the intellect (paficabhibuddhi) — 
listed here as adhyavasdya, abhimadna, samkalpa (pertaining 
respectively to buddhi, ahamkdra, and manas), kartavya (per- 
taining to the activities of the sense capacities), and kripya 
(pertaining to the actions of the five action capacities) ; 

(9) Five sources of action—listed here, interestingly, as instru- 
ment of knowledge (praména), misconception (viparyaya), 
constructed or verbal knowledge (vikalpa), sleep (nidr@), and 
memory (smrti) or, in other words, the ciéta orttis of Yogasiitra 
1.6; 

(10) Five vital breaths; 
(11) Five essences of action—listed here, interestingly, as restraint 


466 


(17) 


(18) 
(19) 
(20) 
(21) 
(22) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(yama), yogic practice (abhydsa), nonattachment (vairdgya), 
concentration (samadhi), and insight or wisdom (prajfta); 
Five varieties of ignorance—listed here as ignorance, egoity, 
passion, hatred, and love of life or, in other words, the five 
afflictions of Yoga philosophy; 

Twenty-eight varieties of dysfunction; 

Nine varieties of contentment; 

Fight varieties of attainment; 

Ten principal topics—again reference is made to the old 
verse quoted in Yuktidipika, Tattvakaumudi, and so forth, but in 
this commentary the verse is said to have been derived from 
Bhojavaritika; 

Supporting creation—said here to relate to the subtle ele- 
ments and the latent dispositions; 

Gross creation of fourteen varieties; 

Threefold bondage; 

Threefold liberation; 

Threefold instrument of knowledge; 

By knowing this properly, everything that needs to be done 
will have been done and one will no longer come under the 
control of the threefold frustration (“‘etat samyak jnadtva krtaky- 
tyah syat na punas trividhena duhkhena anubhityate. 


Narendra does not read “threefold frustration” (trividham duhkham) 
as a separate siira, because he obviously believes that it is included 
in siitra 7, Also, he is keen throughout to include Yoga notions in 
his interpretation of the Tattvasamdasa, very much in the manner of 
Vijfianabhiksu’s approach in the Sdamkhyapravacanasitra. 


BHARATI YATI 


Sri Bharati Yati, a disciple of Sri Bodharanya Yati, wrote his 
Tattvakaumudivyakhya, a commentary on the Samkhyatattvakaumudi of 
Vacaspati, in 1889. It was printed at the Jaina Prabhakara Press, 
Varanasi, in 1889 and published by Babu Kaulesvarasimha Bookseller, 
Varanasi, the same year. 


TATTVAKAUMUDIVYAKHYA 
(Summary By Esther A. Solomon) 
I. Inrropuctory VeERSEs: THE Scope AND TAsK OF THE SAMKHYA 


(1) Frustration is something not desired. Frustration being of the 
nature of rajas, which is eternal, cannot be completely destroyed, but 
it can certainly be subdued and hence the relevance of this science. 
A point raised by Vacaspati is clarified. In the verse ‘‘Because of 
the onslaught of the threefold frustration, there is the desire to know 
the cause of its removal,’”’ ‘‘onslaught” is the principal term, “the 
threefold frustration’ being its qualifier or epithet, so ‘it’? in “‘its’’ 
should refer to onslaughtand not to the threefold frustration as 
Vacaspati maintains, The explanation given in V4caspati is that 
the threefold frustration is uppermost in the thought of the inquirer 
and so “‘it”? refers to this threefold frustration. Bharati Yati adds that 
what Vacaspati intends fo say is that the mention of onslaught would 
become meaningful only if the threefold frustration is taken as meant. 
Vacaspati explains that, although it is true that in the beginning ofa 
scientific treatise something auspicious should be mentioned, and 
frustration is not auspicious, yet the removal of frustration is cer- 
tainly auspicious and it is but proper that it is mentioned in the 
beginning. In the Vedic expression “‘we have drunk soma and become 
immortal’’ immortality is mentioned but not inexhaustibility, so Vacas- 
pati clarifies that inexhaustibility can be taken as established by pre- 
sumption (arthdpattt), because immortality could not be possible 
without inexhaustibility. 


468 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(2) Summing up Vacaspati’s argument, Bharati Yati says that the 
two statements “One should not kill or injure any creature” and 
“One should slaughter the agnisomiya animal” refer to two different 
subjects—one says that injury or killing is the cause of evil and the 
other says that slaughter of the agnisomiya animal contributes to the 
sacrifice—so there is no conflict between the two. Moreover, their 
contents also are not contradictory to each other and so one cannot 
sublate the other. The slaughter that is meant for the sacrifice will 
bring about demerit for the man and at the same time contribute 
to the success of the sacrifice. It can do both without entailing any 
contradiction. It is said that what is mentioned in the Veda is asso- 
ciated with destruction and excess (atifaya). Actually, the destruction 
and excess pertain to the fruit of the sacrifice, etc. Then, how are they 
referred to as pertaining to the Vedic rites? Vacaspati answers this by 
saying that the cause and the effect are secondarily regarded as 
nondifferent and hence such a statement is made. 

Again, it may be argued that even the destruction of frustration 
should be noneternal (it cannot be eternal) because it is something 
brought about, like heaven, etc. But this is not so; for the rule that 
what is brought about is noneternal applies only to positively 
existent things. That which, being positive, is brought about is non- 
eternal, whereas destruction of frustration is the reverse of this. And 
another frustration will also not arise, for the cause of frustration is 
the nondiscrimination of materiality and consciousness, and this 
latter no longer being present, the effect, frustration, will not 
arise. This cause can function only until the discriminative knowledge 
arises. 

At the end of the commentary on (2), Bharati Yati clarifies that 
manifest, unmanifest, and knower constitute the subject of this scientific 
treatise; the treatise propounds the subject and the subject is pro- 
pounded—there is the relation of propounder-propounded between the 
treatise and its subject matter. Isolation is the purpose (prayojana), 
and one who is disenchanted or detached from the seen objects and 
Vedic rites is the one qualified for this treatise. 

(3) We cannot infinitely go on searching for the cause of the cause 
of the cause..., for whatever cause of materiality we may hypostatize, 
we will have to show something special and different about it, other- 
wise the relation of cause-effect will not be there. And if the difference 
is said to consist in the fact that it is hypostatized as sentient and 
devoid of constituents and so on, even then it cannot be the cause, 
for it could not undergo transformation. If it is regarded as of the 
nature of causal efficacy, then this is how materiality also is con- 
ceived, and the difference of opinion would be only in regard to the 
terminology. 


BHARATI YATI 469 


II. InsrRuMENTs OF KNOWLEDGE 


(4) Commenting on this verse, Vacaspati himself says that he has 
not followed the order of mention in the text, but rather he followed 
the order of relevance of the topics (arthakrama). He explains “‘pramana”’ 
first and then mentions their number. Justifying this, Bharati Yati 
says that when words are related by expectancy (dkamksa), fitness 
(yogyata), and contiguity (samnidhi), they convey some meaning. 

(5) Here, Bharati Yati justifies particular expressions used by 
Vacaspati. For instance, Vacaspati describes determination as “‘tadas- 
rita,” “supported by or dependent on it (the sense organ, which is in 
contact with the object) ’—in order to answer the objection that 
‘reflective discerning” is a transformation of the intellect and not an 
attribute of the sense capacity; and he defines “reflective discerning” 
as an awareness that is an operation of the intellect in order to 
show its nature and rise. Bharati Yati explains by means of syllogistic 
reasoning why Vacaspati believes that even the Lokayatika will have 
to admit inference as an instrument of knowledge in order to infer the 
ignorance or doubt or the like of the person he is speaking to. While 
explaining Vacaspati’s exposition of ‘‘less inclusive” and more inclu- 
sive” terms, Bharati Yati explains what a limiting adjunct (updadhi) 
is and its types, giving quotations from Udayana and Kumirila. 
“‘ Mukhena”’ in “‘anvayamukhena’’ and ‘ vyatirekamukhena’’ is meant to pre- 
vent the definition from applying to the rule of positive-negative 
concomitance, in which both positive concomitance and negative 
concomitance are equally prominent. Bharati Yati clarifies the con- 
cept of “‘sdmdnyavisesa,’ generality-cum-particularity. A doubt may 
arise that in the definition we find the term ‘‘adrsfa,’? ‘‘not seen”? in 
*‘adrstasvalaksanasya,”’ whereas what is to be defined is “‘sdéméanyato- 
drsta.”” To answer this objection, Vacaspati explains that “drsfa’’ in 
“‘sdmanyatodrsta’’ signifies “‘darfana,”” a seeing or perceiving of a 
generality-cum-particularity the particular individual substratum of 
which has not been perceived. 

The commentary explains, mostly on the lines of the Pirva- 
mimamsa, how Vedic language is intrinsically valid. The term 
“*Sakya’’ in Vacaspti’s commentary signifies Buddhists ; “Bhzksu’’ signifies 
the Avadhutas; ‘‘Nirgrantha,” the Jainas; and ‘‘Samsdaramocaka,”’ those 
who believe that when the body is torn apart, the self in its interior 
is released. ‘“‘Etc.” (adi) comprehends the Carvakas. The state- 
ments of all these are dgamdbhasa, semblances of verbal testimony, 
and to exclude them the term “‘apia”’ is used. Their invalidity can be 
known from their mutual contradictions. The commentary asserts 
that, although the Mimamsaka holds that the relation of language 
and meaning is eternal, it is language alone, along with the knowl- 
edge of its relation derived from the usage of elders, that enables 


470 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


us to know. The meaning of a sentence is based on the meaning of 
the words, so the sentence does not stand in expectancy of the knowl- 
edge of relation in order to convey its meaning. 


TiI. Tue Notion or PREEXISTENT EFFECT 


(9) Bharati Yati says that Vacaspati has refuted here the other 
theories of causality and established that the effect is existent even 
before as well as after the operation of the cause. The commentary is 
very brief, connecting each statement in Vacaspati’s commentary 
with the words in the verse. It also explains some difficult words in 
the commentary. To explain that the effect and the cause are 
nondifferent even though they are differently designated, Vacaspati 
gives the example of “‘cloth in the threads” and ‘“‘tlaka (trees) in 
the forest.”? Bharati Yati remarks that the forest is just an aggregate 
of tilaka trees, the forest is nondifferent from it; still the two are 
mentioned differently. If their nondifference is what is meant to 
be conveyed, the example should be worded differently —‘“‘forest in the 
tilaka trees” corresponding to “‘cloth in the threads.” 


IV. Manirest AND UNMANIFEST ASPECTS OF MATERIALITY 


(10) Noneternal (anitya) is explained as perishing (vindsin). But 
previously it was stated that origination signifies emergence or mani- 
festation, and destruction signifies being hidden or merging. So 
Vacaspati mentions another synonym—anityavindsin = trobhavin (merg- 
ing, disappearing). “‘Prakrtya pira’ signifies the addition made by 
materiality, help received from materiality. 

(11) Bharati Yati explains that Vacaspati is referring to the view of 
the Vaisesikas when he speaks of others who hold that satisfaction, 
etc., are qualities of the self. 


V. Tue Turee COoNsTITUENTS 


(12) Someone objects that, because the constituents are beginning- 
less and devoid of a cause, they cannot be said to be mutually creative. 
Vacaspati answers by saying that creation signifies transformation, 
which is homogeneous in the case of the constituents. Hence they 
are causeless because there is no other entity that is their cause; neither 
are they noneternal for they are not dissolved in a distinct principle. 


TX. Tue FunctTioninc OF THE THIRTEENFOLD INSTRUMENT 


(33) When we speak of Yudhisthira having existed in the past or 
Kalkin as existing in the future, speech operates on things that are 


BHARATI YATI 47] 


not present. To answer such an objection Vacaspati says that the 
near past and the near future are also included in the present and so 
speech can be said to operate in respect of objects in the present. One 
may doubt that the Samkhya accepts time as an independent principle, 
for then the principles would be more than twenty-five. To avert such 
a doubt, Vacaspati explains that the Samkhya does not accept time 
as a distinct independent principle. 


XI. Tue Susrte Bopy 


(40) It may be urged that, because the subtle elements are said to 
be nonspecific, the subtle body could not be said to be specific. Vacas- 
pati explains that the subtle body is said to be specific because it is 
associated with the capacities that are comforting, discomforting, and 
confusing. The subtle body transmigrates, being influenced by the 
predispositions (merit, etc.). Bharati Yati says that this amounts to 
saying that the subtle body transmigrates in the company of the intellect, 
because these predispositions are associated with the intellect. 


XIV. Smmites InLusTRATING THE ROLE oF MATERIALITY 


(57-59) The commentary explains why, according to Vacaspati, 
God cannot be regarded as controlling and provoking materiality 
to activity. There is no logical fault in regarding materiality as active, 
although it is unconscious. 


XV. LipeRATION AND ISOLATION 


(64) From persistent efforts, knowledge free from doubt, and so on, 
arises and leads to realization of the truth. The intellect has a partiality 
for truth. Even the Buddhists who do not admit the authority of the 
Veda accept this. ‘“Knowledge of the nature of reality, which is free 
from faults, cannot be sublated by false knowledge even if one makes 
no effort, for the intellect has a partiality for truth,” say the Buddhists. 
Bharati Yati discusses different readings of this stanza from a Buddhist 
work. 

Vacaspati has with the help of grammar explained ‘‘ndsmi”’ as 
negating action in general with respect to the self. Consequently all 
particular actions like determining, arrogating to oneself, conceiving, 
perceiving, and all external actions are negated of the self. He gives 
another explanation of this expression, construing it as ‘‘nd asmi”’ 
—‘‘na being the nominative singular of “‘ny,’? man, purusa (I am 
the noncreative purusa [and am not creative ].) The purusa realizes 
that no action pertains to him; because he is not the doer, lordship 
does not belong to him. 


PRAMATHANATHA 
TARKABHUSANA 


Pramathanatha Tarkabhisana (1865-1941), son of Taracarana- 
tarkaratna, was a versatile scholar of very high rank. Equally profi- 
cient in literature, religious and social study (Smrti), neo-Nyaya, 
Samkhya, Mimamsa, and Vedanta, he was, perhaps, most learned 
in Mimamsa and Vedanta. He learned Smrti under VireSvarasmrti- 
tirtha, neo-Nyaya under Sivacandrasarvabhauma, Samkhya under 
HrsikegaSastri, and Mimama and Vedanta under Svami Visuddha- 
nanda—all outstanding teachers. Pramathanatha Tarkabhiisana tau- 
ght smyt: and Indian philosophy at, among other institutions, Calcutta 
Sanskrit College, the University of Calcutta, and Banaras Hindu 
University. He retired from Banaras Hindu University in 1922 as 
Principal, College of Oriental Learning. In recognition of his superb 
scholarship he was awarded the title ““Mahamahopadhyaya” by the 
British Indian Government and the honorary degree of Doctor of 
Letters by Banaras Hindu University. 

The subcommentary Amalé on Aniruddha’s Vriti was written, it 
appears, as an elementary textbook, clarifying not so much the Sam- 
khya principles (ativa) as studing Samkhya arguments vis-a-vis paral- 
lel counterarguments in non Samkhya systems of philosophy and, 
at important places, the ways in which some Samkhya thinkers other 
than Aniruddha interpreted some of the Samkhyasitras. Unlike other 
subcommentaries of his day, Amald is a refreshing study, free of un- 
necessary neo-Nyaya techniques. 

The significant new points stated in this subcommentary may be 
summarized as follows: 


AMALA ON SAMKHYASUTRAVRTTI 
(Summary By Kalidas Bhattacharya) 


The subcommentary begins with a preface in which Pramathanatha 
tries to fix Aniruddha in a particular century. He argues as follows: 


474 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Of the three commentaries on the Samkhya (pravacana) siitra, that 
is, Aniruddhavrttt, Sadmkhyapravacanabhdsya, and the one by Vedanti- 
mahadeva, the first must be the earliest, for not only Vedantimaha- 
deva has himself admitied this in the introductory verse in his com- 
mentary, but there are at least seven texts in the Samkhyapravacana- 
bhadsya (which Pramathanatha summarizes in the preface), strongly 
suggesting that Vijfianabhiksu must have read the Aniruddhavrtti. 
If Aniruddha is thus earlier than Vijfianabhiksu, certain passages 
in the Aniruddhavrtti itself (which too Pramathanatha summarizes 
in the preface), as verbatim reproductions of what (the elder) 
Vacaspati Misra and Sayanamadhavacarya have said in their Tattva- 
kaumudi and Sarvadar§anasamgraha, prove that Aniruddha must have 
lived after them. It may not be hazardous, therefore, to fix him 
some time in the fifteenth century. To which part of India he belonged 
is not known. 

Pramathanatha says that he is not quite sure which of the three 
theories, parindmavada (holding that effects are only transformations of 
their constitutive causes), vivartavdda (holding that effects are but 
false appearances of their constitutive causes), and drambhavada 
(holding that effects are novel events), Aniruddha really subscribes 
to. For, although he appears generally to subscribe to the first theory, 
there are passages in the Aniruddhavrtti in which some Samkhya 
concepts are interpreted in the language of the other two theories 
(see Sétras I.9, 10, and 11). Pramathanatha writes that he has, 
for this reason, tried to reconcile these three theories as far as is 
practicable. 

The points worth noting in the subcommentary are as follows: 


ANIRUDDHA’S INTRODUCTION 


1. Aniruddha says that itis nonattachment that puts a man on 
the path to liberation. Pramathanatha adds that to be on this path 
involves as much the reading of authoritative texts as acting upon 
them. 

2. Aniruddha distinguishes two kinds of nonattachment—one born 
of frustration and the other resulting from the exhaustion of Karmic 
potentials (traces and dispositions) accumulated through previous 
life cycles. Pramathanatha states the point more precisely, saying 
that the Karmic potentials in question must not include those that 
are responsible for the present life cycle and its experiences (these 
potentials, forming a lump, are called prdarabdha). Only other 
potentials (called saficita) must be so exhausted, The prarabdha can 
be exhausted only through experiencing whatever has to be experi- 
enced in the present life because of it. The saficita potentials, parti- 
cularly those for which we may suffer in some subsequent life cycle, 


PRAMATHANATHA TARKABHUSANA 475 


can be exhausted through expiation, visiting holy places, worshiping 
God, etc. The second type of nonattachment, mentioned above, is 
again of two varieties—proximate and ultimate. It is only the proxi- 
mate variety (traced by Aniruddha to the Jabala scripture) that is 
a necessary condition for entry onto the path of liberation. The under- 
lying idea is that proximate nona ttachment is necessary for “‘puri- 
fication of awareness”’ (cittasuddhi), and, unless that is achieved, the 
discriminating intuition of the metaphysical separateness of pure con- 
sciousness and primordial materiality does not arise. 


Boox I: 
(A) Introductory Sutras: On the Problem of the Scope and Task of Samkhya 


(Stra) (1.1) (a) Aniruddha writes that every satisfaction or frus- 
tration lasts for “‘two or three’? moments. Pramathanatha corrects 
the statement, saying: 

As a matter of fact, it lasts for two moments only. Indeed, in some, 
texts the reading actually runs as ‘‘lasts for two moments.”” The addi- 
tion “‘or three’’ is a slip. 

(b) ‘Absolute cessation of frustration’? means that in the self in 
question there is not merely no frustration now but also no prior ab- 
sence of any suffering (that is, no frustration in the offing, either). 
In case older Samkhyans object that Samkhya cannot admit absence 
(abhava), the whole thing might be rewritten as that in the self in 
question all frustrations are ever in the past. Modern Samkhyans do 
not see any reason why Samkhya should not admit absence; its prin- 
ciples are, indeed, all positive, but outside of these one may well admit 
absence. 

(c) When Aniruddha writes that liberation is nitya and prakasariipa, 
“nitya’’ means sui generis, not simply eternal, and “‘prakasariipa’? means 
that freedom is of the very nature of (pure) consciousness. 

(1.2-4) “Absolute cessation of the origination’? (utpattinivriti) of 
frustration “‘means that it is kept ever as future, never allowed to occur 
at any present moment of time. I.3 is an objection from the Carvakas, 
who hold that the main objective of life is to get rid of frustration every 
time it occurs (and also to prevent frustrations as far as possible, 
through “natural”? means). Pramathanatha interpretation of I.4 differs 
from Aniruddha’s. It is as follows: 

By the application of ordinary ‘natural’? means one cannot get rid 
of all the frustrations that occur to him, and, in case such removal 
occurs by chance, even then there is no assurance that no further frus- 
tration is in store for him. 


(B) On the Problem of Bondage in Samkhya 


(1.7) (a) According to Vaisesika and kindred systems, frustration’ 


476 ENGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


like many other qualities, really belongs to the self and, therefore, 
bondage is one of its real features. But the problem for Samkhya is 
precisely whether it is so. 

(b) The term “‘svabhdvatah” in the siitra means “‘svaripatah,” “‘sva- 
ria’? meaning essential character. 

(1.9) If Aniruddha here anticipates an objection, itis only to show 
that in some sense bondage, too, really belongs to the self and can be 
removed exactly as, according to satkdryavdda, cause can be removed 
(really, suppressed) to make room for its effect. (Pramathanatha be- 
lieves that Aniruddha is here describing bondage and salvation in 
the language of satkdryavdda and vivartavada simultaneously. He re- 
ferred to this anomaly in his preface)? 

(1.19) Aniruddha interprets ‘“‘tadyogat’? as prakrtiyogdt. Pramatha- 
natha interprets it as avivekayogat and says that nondiscrimination is to 
be understood not merely as the absence of discrimination but posi- 
tively, as the false owner-owned relation. That relation, really a mode 
of intellect, is reflected on (pure) consciousness, which, therefore, 
only appears to be bound by it. 

(1.20) This sara and the next three are against the Advaita 
Vedanta theory that ignorance (avzdyd) is the principle that binds. 
The refutation of that theory would be as follows: “Ignorance” 
is either the prior or posterior absence of knowledge and either 
way, sheer negation, unless characterized by the counterpositive 
of the absence. But, first, sheer negation is just nothing and cannot by 
itself bind; and, second, as necessarily characterized by the coun- 
terpositive, how possibly can it bind another, when it is itself bound 
by the counterpositive ? That which cannot stand on its own cannot 
influence another. 

(1.22-28) Should ignorance be regarded as something positive and 
yet not of the nature of consciousness, it would be different, entiatively, 
not only from that consciousness but also from the things of the 
phenomenal world, as the latter are, unlike ignorance, not eternal; 
and then Vedanta would only be doubly dualistic, never monistic 
(advaiia).” 

“Influence” in I.27, means vdsand, i.e., latent attitudinal disposition 
left by what is past. The same word, however, in the introduction to 
1.28 has meant relation of contact and, again, as implied by the ex- 
pression “‘uparafijyoparantjakabhava’’ in the body of the sé#tra, knower- 
known relation.? 

(1.34-38) Pramathanatha interprets the Buddhist notion of 
arthakriyakaritva in an unorthodox way and offers some details of the 
traditional Buddhist argument for universal momentariness. In I.35 
he elaborates an argument, which Aniruddha has just noted in 
passing, for the Buddhist theory of universal momentariness. 
Pramathanatha elaborates as follows on 1.38 and Aniruddha’s com- 


PRAMATHANATHA TARKABHUSANA 477 


mentary on it: Everybody admits that the constituent material 
(updddna) of every effect is synchronous with it (at least at the 
moment the effect emerges) and yet that it is its cause (material 
cause—upddainakarana). If, now, this (material) cause is taken, as by 
the Buddhists, to be momentary, i.e., real only for that moment, there 
would be no ground (for the Buddhists) to call it cause (because the 
effect in question does not arise after the cause is destroyed). This 
proves that at least no material cause is momentary.‘ 

(1.40) The difficulty for the advocate of universal momentariness 
is that he cannot prove the cause-effect relation ; for momentariness 
implies that when the cause is gone (i.e., absent) the effect is there and 
when the cause is there the effect has not arisen (i.e., is absent).5 

Some Buddhists might still contend that whatever be the real situa- 
tion there is at least the linguistic (or phenomenal) use of cause-effect 
relation. One would, however, reply that, in that case, anything in 
the world that immediately precedes the effect would be called its 
cause and anything that occurs after whatever is called cause would 
be called its effect. 

(1.41) After explaining Aniruddha’s points against the Buddhists 
Pramathanatha concludes that, according to the Samkhya theory of 
transformation, a just-preceding phenomenon is called cause only 
insofar as it continues nonmanifestly (or half manifestly?) in the form 
of functional intermediary, called the operation (vydpdra). 

(1.42) When the Vijfianavada Buddhist contends that things are 
not outside awareness, this does not amount to total negation of such 
things. They need not be outside awareness. But the very proposition 
that they are not outside logically implies that they are at least other 
than knowledge. How, otherwise, could one have asserted this pro- 
position at all? If there are no such things at all, one would only be 
denying what is not there. In order, therefore, that the Vijfianavadin’s 
contention be of any worth at all his proposition has first to be stated 
more precisely. Aniruddha states it precisely and then refutes it. 

(I.43) Whereas Aniruddha interprets the sitra in a simple manner, 
saying that were there no object there would be no awareness either 
and that, in that case, vijfidnavdda would reduce itself to fanyavdda, 
Pramathanatha interprets the séira as follows: If even while seeing 
an object as other than awareness the Vijfianavadin could deny it, he 
should, on the same ground, deny awareness also, for it too is seen 
as an object, and, to that extent, an “‘other,” in self-consciousness, 
not as that seeing itself. The Vijfianavadin cannot take conscious- 
ness to be self-illuminating. That would amount to a sort of contra- 
diction; what is subject cannot itself be its object. 

(1.44-45 ) Pramathanatha interprets Aniruddha’s commentary on the 
two sitras differently. His interpretation is as follows: 

If positive entities could cease of their own nature, then frustration 


478 ENCGCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


too, as a positive entity, would cease of itself, which means that libera- 
tion would be automatic, needing no effort whatsoever. This posi- 
tion, however, is refuted by the Samkhya thesis that there is no absence 
(abhava) other than that which is said to be its locus. To speak of it 
as other is only a language habit mistaken as knowledge. 

Pramathanatha next seeks to present all the forms of absence in 
the Samkhya language of nonmanifestness. 

If Aniruddha has, in the context of siitra 45, admitted absence as 
other than its locus, this admission is from the point of view of 
modern Samkhyists. 

(1.48) In the context of 1.48, Pramathanatha gives a short 
but fairly complete account of Jaina metaphysics and, in connec- 
tion with I.58, regarding whether darkness is only absence of light 
or something positive, he supports Aniruddha’s point that it is 
positive. 


(C) The Derivation of the Basic Principles of Samkhya 


(1.61) By themselves, the three constituents—intelligibility (sativa), 
activity (rajas), and inertia (tamas)—are each a substance (dravya). 
They are called gunas (qualifying characters) only insofar as they are 
used as means to bondage or release of (pure) consciousness. Pri- 
marily, materiality is nothing but these substantives sattva, rajas, 
and tamas, not their receptacle. 


(E) The Instruments of Knowledge in Samkhya 


(1.87) Aniruddha is apparently content with claiming that knowl- 
edge (prama) has for its object something that is not already known 
(anadmgata). Pramathanatha supplements this, saying that it must 
also be one that is not contradicted (abadhita), the object of which, in 
other words, is not sublated. Pramathanatha quotes in full Vijfiana- 
bhiksu’s commentary on the siiira. 

(1.92) Aniruddha writes that whichever of the two alternatives— 
God has a body; God has no body—is taken, He cannot be the agent 
cause of the world. Pramathanatha adds that if He has a body 
He is in bondage, like any ordinary man; and if He has no body He 
is one of the liberated consciousnesses, entirely disinterested whether 
there be a world or not.® 

Those to whom Aniruddha is referring by the name ‘‘visesavddin’’ 
are the Samkhyists. 

The word “‘abhasa’’ in “‘kdryatvabhasa’’ in Aniruddha’s commentary 
means a fallacy regarding the ground of the inference (hetvadbhdsa). 

(1.103) (From the statement “‘All compounds are for the purpose 
of something else, and materiality is a compound’’, one can infer con- 
sciousness in very general terms only, not immediately the conscious- 


PRAMATHANATHA TARKABHUSANA 479 


ness of Samkhya with whatever it further implies. That could be 
inferred through a series of other such inferences based on general 
correlation supplementing the most generalone. 


(F) Materiality and the Theory of Preexistent Effect 


(1.108) Aniruddha interprets I.108 in one way. Pramathanatha 
accepts it but points out at the same time that others have inter- 
preted it differently (he does not say, however, who these others are). 
The interpretation to which he refers is as follows: Distant things can 
or cannot be objects for the senses (i.e., perceived), according as_ they 
are accepted or avoided by the senses (exactly as near things are), 
because of the presence or absence of attractive features in them. 
(Pramathanatha probably intends here to include the case of “‘yogaja 
and other extraordinary (alaukika) types of perception” of Nyaya- 
Vaisesika ). 

(1.148) There are two stages of dreamless sleep. In one, even though 
it is very deep, the depth is yet not at its maximum; in the other it is 
so. As one awakes from the former one’s memory is of the form 
“T slept a pleasant sleep,” but when awakened from the latter it is of 
the form ‘I knew nothing.” 

(1.149) Birth (jamwnan) is the connection of consciousness with a 
body-mind complex such as has never been experienced before, and 
death its separation from that. 


BOOK IT: On Tue Errects oF MATERIALITY 
(A) On the Activity of Materiality and Its Distinction from Consciousness 


(II.1) (a) Aniruddha mentions only four kinds of nonattachment. 
Pramathanatha gives a fuller account, reproducing verbatim what 
Vacaspati Misra has said in his Tattvakaumudi on Sdmkhyakarika. 

(b) Even existing satisfactions are a form of frustration, not only 
because they contain some frustration, however little (there is no 
pleasure with which no pain is intertwined), but also because the 
very attachment to this satisfaction brings inits trail other items con- 
ducing to frustration. 

(c) Literally, avidya is actual wrong knowledge. But, secondarily, 
it also means the disposition to have such wrong knowledge. 

(d) Not to allow something (e.g., frustration) to emerge into 
being is to keep it even in a state of prior absence, that is, even in the 
state of potentiality, by keeping ever at a distance whatever tends 
to end that antecedent absence. 

(e) If Aniruddha here speaks of God as an ultimate conscious- 
ness, this is in deference to that school of Samkhya which admits 


480 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


God. For, he has already said that there is no evidence whatsoever 
for God. 

(II.3) Aniruddha’s commentary on II.3 is not at all clear. Indeed, 
it is positively confusing. For this reason Pramathanatha writes some- 
thing else in its stead and passes that off as Aniruddha’s real inten- 
tion. Pramathanatha writes: 

For the removal of defective dispositions accumulated through pre- 
vious life cycles, one will, in the present life, have to listen to scriptures 
unceasingly and also to practice meditation. Only if one had already 
done these things in the just-preceding life cycle can he attain libera- 
tion quickly, that is, without going through the entire process once 
again. 

(II.7) Pramathanatha offers an alternative interpretation that, he 
says, has been given by others but that, it appears, does not differ sub- 
stantially from Aniruddha’s interpretation. 

(II.9) According to Pramathanatha the word “‘yoga’’ in the sétra 
has to be connected with the word “‘virdga,” and “‘srsfi?? with “‘rdga.”’ 

Yoga’? here, he holds, means liberation as the true character of 
consciousness.” 


(CG) Space and Time 


(II.12) Aniruddha writes that the ablative case ending in “‘Gkdse- 
bhyah’”’ should here, more desirably, be a locative case ending and that 
the word ‘‘ad1”’ (“‘etc.’’) suffixed to “‘akafa’”’ is redundant. Pramatha- 
natha however, finds some justification for both in the siira. He 
says that ‘‘dd:”’ here means ‘‘other limiting adjuncts,’’ the idea be- 
ing that one can only speak of space (in the sense of ‘‘direction’’) 
and time of akdfa is considered as somehow limited by these adjuncts. 
And, because dkdga as so limited is, in each case, the result of (gene- 
rated by) dkafa and the relevant adjunct, the ablative case ending, 
implying generation from out of some thing or things, has not been 
improper. 


(D) Intellect and the Basic Pre-dispositions 


(I1.13) Aniruddha writes that “reflective discerning”? means the 
objective assurance that a thing is such and such. Pramathanatha 
adds that objective assurance need not be theoretical only, it in- 
cludes objective assurance even of what one ought to do. 


(G) The Capacities and Their Differentiation from Consciousness 


(11.29) Consciousness is spoken of as “‘seer,”’ that is, one who owns 
awareness (drasfa). Pramathanatha says that this so-called owner- 


PRAMATHANATHA TARKABHUSANA 481 


ship is because of the intervention of intellect, modes of which are 
reflected on consciousness. 

(11.32) The Nyaya philosophers will never agree that external 
senses and mind (in Samkhya, all psychic capacities, including egoity 
and intellect) can ever function simultaneously. That sort of cross- 
operation would, according to them, be as illogical as cross-division. 
But Samkhya has no such scruple : it abides by facts as they are found 
to be (unless contradicted). Although this is the correct Samkhya 
position, Aniruddha has missed it and holds (almost apologetically) 
that these different capacities cannot operate simultaneously (on a 
given object) ; it is only because of very rapid succession that one fails 
to detect their sequence. 

As a matter of fact, “‘construction-filled perception’’ (savikalpapra- 
tyaksa), where, undoubtedly, mental capacities have functioned, 
occurs at the level of the external senses. This proves that the different 
capacities have functioned simultaneously. This has been clearly 
stated not only in the oft-quoted passage ‘‘Asti hydlocanam jiidnam...” 
but also in Vyasa’s Yogabhdsya. 

(11.33) Aniruddha describes vikalpa as “‘touching both.” Prama- 
thanatha understands by “‘both’’ two alternatives, as in doubt, and 
so identifies vikalpa as doubt (samfaya). Naturally, he argues that 
this notion of vikalpa is different from Vyasa’s in his Yogabhasya and 
from Vijfianabhiksu’s (in his commentary thereon.”’)§ 


Boox III: Szcrion or NONATTACHMENT 
(A) The Specific and the Nonspecific 


(III.1) Gross materials (sthilabhiitani) are called “‘specific’’ (vtsesa) 
(perceptively distinguishable in themselves and from one another) 
because they differ in being more or less comforting, uncomfortable, 
and confusing. 

(III.2) According to Pramathanatha the literal meaning of IIT.2 
is that the subtle and the gross material bodies rise out of the twenty- 
five metaphysical principles.® 


(B) The Gross Body and the Subtle Body 


(III.14) The ‘‘atomic’? (anu) size (which otherwise means the 
size that is infinitesimal) of mind here means only finite size. In 
contrast, “‘vydpaka size,’ in Aniruddha’s commentary, means the size 
that is limitlessly infinite.2® 


(F) On the Nature of Meditation 


(III.30) By “‘urttinirodha’? (prevention of a mode of intellect 


482 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


from emerging) is meant prevention of all modes of intellect except 
those that refer to objects concentrated on. 


(G) Misconception, Dysfunction, Contentment, Attainment 


(III.37) The difference is not so much regarding the objects of 
attachment, aversion, and fear (of death) as of the corresponding 
cognitive states. 

(III.38) Aniruddha does not detail the twenty-eight types of 
dysfunction (agaktt); Pramathanatha collects them from the 
Sdmkhyakarika. 


(I) Role of Materiality in Discrimination 


(III.56) According to Aniruddha, the word ‘sah’? (he) in IJI.56 
means consciousness. Some others mean by it “materiality,” holding 
that it is materiality, rather than consciousness, that is omniscient 
and omnipotent. Vijfianabhiksu understands by the term “‘sah’’ one 
who, having practiced all regular spiritual exercises, has ultimately 
merged in the unmanifest materiality. Vijfianabhikgu’s interpreta- 
tion of the stra is that, when such a person re-emerges at the begin- 
ning of the next cycle of creation he reemerges as omniscient and 
omnipotent God, the first to emerge as a person. 


(J) Discrimination and Liberation 


(TII.64) For ‘‘starajjahat”’ there is an alternative reading, ‘‘itara- 
vajjahait.”’ According to this latter reading, the meaning of the sitra 
would be: with mere listening to scriptures, even the wise one (i.e., 
one who apparently knows the separateness of materiality and con- 
sciousness) would, like other fools, miss liberation, because mere 
listening is not enough and has to be followed by spiritual practices. 


(K) The Liberated-While-Living 
(III.83) The last lingering traces (adysta), in the case of a jivan- 
mukta, operate only as his apparent attachment, aversion, etc.—‘‘ap- 
parent’’ in the sense of being without sting. 
Book V: ARGUMENTS AGAINST OPPONENTS 


(B) On the Notion of Ignorance 


(V.15) In support of his thesis that the world has a beginning, 
Aniruddha quotes a scriptural passage that asserts this. The passage 


PRAMATHANATHA TARKABHUSANA 483 


asserts equally, however, that the world comes from God. Aniruddha 
would never go so far. Pramathanatha defends Aniruddha, arguing 
that the term ‘“‘God”’ here stands for materiality as it evolves in the 
form of “‘collective intellect”? called ‘“‘mahat.” 


(D) Merit, Qualities, Inference 


(V.28) The judgment “wherever there is M there is P’’ is arrived 
at neither through perceiving a single case of P going with M nor 
through perceiving a number of such cases, but only through the 
supplementation of such perceived agreement-in-presence by the 
perception of agreement-in-absence of the form ‘‘wherever there is 
no P there is no M.” Pramathanatha holds that this conclusion is 
what Aniruddha intends. (But how Pramathanatha could gather this 
is difficult to see. ) 

(V.29) “‘Krtaka” in Aniruddha’s commentary should mean that 
which, being a positive entity, emerges at a point of time, not, like 
destruction, a negation that originates at a point of time. Similarly, 
“anitya’”’ in Aniruddha’s commentary should mean that which, being 
a positive entity, is liable to get destroyed at a point of time, not the 
prior absence of a thing that gets destroyed when that thing gets into 
being. 

(V.31, 36) Because, in Samkhya, power is not understood as any- 
thing wholly different from that which possesses it, therefore, power 
need not be considered as belonging to a separate category. This is 
more clearly stated in V.36 where it is said that between power and 
the holder of power there is identity-in-difference (bhedaghatitabheda). 


(E) Word and Meaning 


(V.39) Aniruddha refutes the Mimamsa doctrine that the meaning 
of a sentence uttered by a speaker consists in some act to be done by 
the hearer—all sentences being imperative in import directly or indi- 
rectly—and that the constitutive words, therefore, are to be under- 
stood as having meanings only in the context of such an act, nor as 
meaning independent objects standing on their own right. According 
to the Mimamsakas all sentences are imperative, none indicative, and 
meaning is always act-orientedly holistic. They interpret scriptural 
sentences, particularly, from this point of view. Obviously, however, 
this doctrine cannot be accepted by those who believe that knowledge 
is an autonomous affair. 

(V.42, 43) The question of the validity of scriptural injunctions 
(such as those concerning performance of rites) has relevance only so 
far as supernatural (supersensuous) elements and their functions are 
concerned, not so far as visible ‘‘natural” things are concerned. In 


484 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


other words, it is relevant primarily for those who know these super- 
natural elements and their functions. For those, however, who just 
see the results occurring, the validity of these injunctions is only secon- 
darily relevant. (That is why these rites have to be performed directly 
by those who know. ) 

(V.44) According to Samkhya, all awarenessis intrinsically valid. 
When it becomes invalid, it is because of some defect in the way it is 
derived. This is true as much of the awareness of supernatural scrip- 
tural truths as of any cognition of ordinary affairs of the world. The 
only difference is that in the former case no such defect can possibly 
be pointed out there; for the way in which that awareness is derived 
is itself also supernatural and has nothing to do with the defects that 
vitiate perception and inference. 

(V.50) The word ‘‘nijasaki? in Aniruddha’s commentary means 
“intrinsic”? and is used there as an adjective of “‘jfianajanakasdmagri,”’ 
meaning that the validity of the awareness in question is due to that 
awareness itself. Other important points in Aniruddha’s commentary 
on this sitra are that (1) the word “‘autsargiki’? means “not depending 
on any merit of the factors that make one aware of the knowledge” 
and (2) the word ‘“‘tat” and ‘“‘abhivyaktt” in “‘tadabhivyakti,”? both in 
the sara and the commentary, mean ‘‘object”’ and “‘the manifestation 
of object,’ respectively, the latter in its turn meaning knowledge 
that refers to that object. 


(F) Knowledge and Error 


(V.53-54) Under 53, Pramathanatha gives a short account of the 
Prabhakara theory of illusion and, in connection with 54, he gives 
a short introductory note on the Advaita Vedantic theory of illusion 
as it could be developed in contrast to the Vaisesika theory. Prama- 
thanatha notes also that the purport of the last three sentences in 
Aniruddha’s commentary on 54 is that because the illusory rope- 
snake is after all described as ‘‘It is a snake,’’ it cannot be indescrib- 
able as the Advaita Vedantin holds. 

(V.56) Pramathanatha gives a short introductory account of the 
grammarian’s concept of sphota. 


(H) On Nonduality 


(V.66) Aniruddha writes that ignorance is nothing positive that 
could conceal consciousness from our view. Pramathanatha adds that 
this refutes the Advaita Vedantic theory that it is positive wrong 
knowledge, or a positive disposition that way. 

Pramathanatha interprets the last three sentences in Aniruddha’s 
commentary as follows: Just as the self-luminosity of consciousness 


PRAMATHANATHA TARKABHUSANA 485 


through the three stages—waking, dreaming, and dreamless sleep— 
cannot by itself prove eternal existence of the self, because these 
three stages all somehow hang on to one’s body, so is the case with 
(pure) satisfaction in the meditation stage called samadhi, in which 
with the removal of all operations of the intellect one is said to ex- 
perience that (pure) satisfaction. Here Aniruddha uses the term 
“samadhi” thrice—twice in connection with the self-luminosity of 
consciousness and once in connection with the removal of the opera- 
tions of the intellect. In the first two cases it means ‘‘proving”’ (samd- 
dhana), but in the third it refers to the final stage of meditation. 
(But was this interpretation, with the same word taken to be used so 
differently in two successive sentences, at all necessary?) 

(V.68) Aniruddha interprets the word “‘manda’’ in V.68 as “‘grow- 
ing out of the inertia constituent” (fa@masa). Pramathanatha notes 
that, by implication, one has to include also “growing out of the 
activity constituent’’ (rdjasa). 


(I) Mind and Internal Organ 


(V.71) Two important points regarding Aniruddha’s commentary 
are: 

(a) That mind is not partless is evident from the fact that its con- 
stituent cause, egoity, is not itself so. Egoity is directly apprehended 
in the form “‘I’’ by the intellect, but nothing that is partless could 
ever be so apprehended. 

(b) Pramathanatha says that some others interpret the sitra 
differently. They understand the word “‘bhdga’”’ in the sitra’”? to mean 
“cause”? and take the stra to mean that mind cannot be uncaused, 
because egoity is known to be its cause. 


(J) Liberation 


(V.74) This séira is meant for refuting the Bhatta Mimamsa view 
that liberation is but the manifestation of eternal satisfaction. 

(V.78) “Cessation of everything’? (sarvocchitti), in V.78, should 
mean cessation of everything other than self (or itself’) .1? 

(V.80) The view rejected in this sara is that of the Mimamsakas. 

(V.82) Although Aniruddha gives a fairly long account of the 
Naiyayika’s sixteen types of entities (sodasapadartha), Pramathanatha 
elaborates the account to a greater length. 


(P) Relations 


V.100) “‘Ubhayatra’’ (“in both cases’’) is interpreted by Pramatha- 
natha as ‘fas much in the case of property as in that of what possesses 
the property.’ 


486 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
(V) The Experience of Liberation 


(V.119) Pramathanatha understands ‘‘vdsana’’ as that through 
which one becomes aware of beauty (saundarya) and ugliness (asaun- 
darya). The term ‘“‘anarthakhyépana’”’ means, according to him, this 
awareness.14 


(W) Types of Beings 
(V.127) The purport of this séira is to refute the Nyaya view that 


God’s intellect (buddhi—in Nyaya, cognition) is all uncaused: none 
of his cognitions either originate or ever cease to be. 


KRSNANATHA NYAYAPANCANANA 


This subcommentary was written in 1902 by M. M. Krsnanatha 
Nyayapaficanana. He was a famous Bengali scholar, versed in vari- 
ous branches of learning, particularly in Nyaya, for which he earned 
the degrees Nyayapaficanana, Nyayaratna, and others, and the hono- 
rary title Mahamahopadhyaya. He belonged to a village named 
Pirvasthali near Navadvipa, in an area then noted as a great seat 
of learning. 

The subcommentary was a textbook for beginners in Samkhya 
philosophy. Samkhya at that time was understood to include only 
Igvarakrsna’s karikés with Vacaspati Miésra’s commentary, and 
perhaps Gaudapada’s commentary in addition. Vijfianabhiksu’s Sam- 
khyapravacanabhasya (on the Samkhyasiitra) and Yogavarttika (on the 
Yogasiitra) were not unknown, but orthodox scholars seldom attached 
importance to them. Texts like Aniruddha’s Vriti and the Matharavrtti 
were probably unknown, and acquaintance with the Yuktidipika was 
obviously out of the question. Thus despite his scholarship, Nyayapafi- 
canana could not go beyond Tattvakaumudi, or at most Gaudapada’s 
commentary. If, in the interest of clarification he has referred to, or 
quoted passages from, other texts, these are, as was usual in those days, 
either some Upanisads or Puranas or Patafijali’s Yogasdtra with Vyasa’s 
Bhasya and Vacaspati Misra’s Tativavaisaradi on the Bhasya. He has 
also referred to other Indian systems of philosophy such as Mimamsa, 
Buddhism and (Advaita) Vedanta for comparison and contrast. His 
task was nothing more, and nothing less, than elucidating for begin- 
ners Vacaspati Miéra’s Tattvakaumudi. 

Indeed, he has wherever possible rewritten Vacaspati Misra’s sen- 
tences more precisely according to the Nyaya technique, and the 
commentator’s implicit and explicit arguments too in clear Nyaya 
forms—a style that, even to this date, is very much in fashion with 
oriental scholars. But generally speaking, he has added very little 
that is substantially new. If his Avaranavarini is widely read even 
to this day, it is because the book is a brilliant introductory text 
written in excellent lucid Sanskrit. 


488 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


His significant recasting of Vacaspati Misra’s sentences, and the 
new points he has added, are stated below. 


AVARANAVARINI ON TATTVAKAUMUDI 
(Summary by Kalidas Bhattacharya) 
I. InrRopuctory VERSES: SCOPE AND TASK OF SAMKHYA 


(1) In the Tattvakaumudi Vacaspati Misra writes that, because 
frustration is felt as antagonistic to the self-awareness of pure consci- 
ousness, it is taken as “‘hitting’’ it (from outside), and that this very 
antagonism is the reason why one spontaneously seeks to get rid of 
frustration. Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana explains this as follows: 
Because frustration is felt as(so) antagonistic, it follows that it is not 
eternal (i.e., not coeternal with pure consciousness). Were it so, 
there could be no question of antagonism at all. Nor of any nonanta- 
gonism either. — 

(2) In the course of explaining Vacaspati Miéra’s point that the 
slaughter of animals, even though done in performing a rite, gener- 
ates some sin (demerit), although subordinate to the central merit 
generated by that rite, Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana writes: Although 
the final Mimamsa theory is that by the time one has got the appropriate 
satisfaction as the final result of the rite performed, the sin (demerit) 
accumulated is over, yet this (according to Paficasikha, not according 
to Mimamsa) does not nullify the force of that sin altogether. (What 
Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana means is that all the time the potential 
sin was doing its appropriate job, it was pressing the agent for ex- 
piation; and where through inadvertence the agent does not expiate, 
it goeson generating in him, in the meantime, a sort of calm endu- 
rance of all the “implicit’”’ frustration that ensues. ) 

The Mimamsakas permit slaughter of animals where that is neces- 
sary for the performance of certain rites. They permit it on the follow- 
ing simple ground: If a discourse starts with a general prohibition 
but if in the same discourse the prohibition is explicitly suspended 
(and even the opposite course of action is recommended) for certain 
specific cases, the suspension of the prohibition stands justified if only 
because the specific cases are of stronger import. Vacaspati Misra 
writes he would concede this logic if only there were some contradic- 
tion (of whatever sort) between the prohibition and its suspension 
(or the corresponding recommendation). He maintains, however, 
there is no contradiction here between the general prohibition of 
slaughter and its recommendation in the context of certain rites. 
What, according to him, is meant in such cases is that, whereas slau- 
ghter in general produces demerit in the agent (and is, therefore, 


KRSNANATHA NYAYAPANCANANA 489 


prohibited), specific cases of slaughter are recommended explicitly 
as necessary means to the performance of the rites in question and 
nothing is said so far as to whether any demerit accrues here or not. 
In course of further clarification of this position, Krsnanatha Nyaya- 
paficanana writes that an opponent might still argue that unless the 
means injunction is also understood as producing some merit (or, at 
least, the absence of the demerit of general slaughter) the agent would 
not feel inclined to abide by it; and this means that there is some 
awareness of some contradiction—the contradiction, say, between 
not slaughtering and slaughtering, or between generation and 
nongeneration of demerit. 

Some Samkhyans, Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana imagines, might 
reply that even then there is no contradiction: all that is to be inquired 
into is whether here the frustration that the agent would undergo 
because of the slaughter is just sufficient for or exceeds the satisfaction 
that would result from the performance of the rite. These Samkhyans, 
Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana claims, would hold that it is just suffi- 
cient and does not exceed, which means that there is no question of 
contradiction so far. 

Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana rejects this claim of the hypothetical 
opponent on another ground, however. He holds that the agent’s 
frustration that results from slaughter of animalsis not like the frust- 
ration caused by fast, huge expenditure, physical exertion, etc., re- 
quired for the performance of a rite. The latter type of frustration ends 
with the performance of that rite and pales into insignificance when 
compared with the total merit gained and the total satisfaction to be 
gained. On the other hand, the demerit caused by slaughter conti- 
nues even after the riteis over and produces appropriate frustration 
at the appropriate time (maybe, in hell). That way, therefore, there 
is still some contradiction involved—contradiction (i.e., trial of stren- 
gth) between the merit of the rite (and the consequent satisfaction) 
and the palpable (i.e., not ‘“‘implicit’’ ) frustration caused by slaughter. 

Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana concludes, however, that the relation 
that truly obtains here is between greater satisfaction and lesser frust- 
ration, and that thatrelationis not contradiction. One who performs 
a rite through slaughter of animals earns greater satisfaction, though 
with some frustration (because of slaughter), and, decidedly, the 
frustration is less in magnitude. 

But even then Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana anticipates a further 
objection: if only that act that produces greater frustration must be 
desisted from (i.e., more frustration and lesser satisfaction), why then 
should Samkhya find fault at all with the slaughter, which is necessary 
for the performance of rites and which the Mimamsakas in so many 
words recommend? Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana’s reply is twofold: 
Even as a necessary meansslaughter is unjustified, first, because there 


490 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is the general prohibition against (any) slaughter (whatever), and, 
second, because frustration in hell (i.e., after the merit gained through 
the rite has produced appropriate mundane satisfaction) is greater in 
magnitude (particularly, in intensity) than any mundane satisfaction. 


II. THe InsrRuMENTs OF KNOWLEDGE 


(4) In connection with the three instruments of knowledge that are 
recognized in Samkhya, Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana writes: The 
Lokayatas recognize only one instrument, perception; the Vaisesikas 
two, perception and inference; Nyaya, four, perception, inference, 
comparison, and verbal testimony; the Prabhakaras add a fifth, pre- 
sumption; the (Bhatta) Mimamsakas add another, (appropriate) 
nonperception; and the Pauranikas two more, inclusion and tradition. 

(5) In connection with the definition of perception Vacaspati 
Misra explains “‘reflective discerning”’ as belief (nifcaya), as opposed to 
doubt and vacillation. Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana, however, 
understands it as judgment of the form ‘““This is such and such” (without 
underscoring “‘is”). Of course, a few lines later he accepts Vacaspati 
Misra’s interpretation almost in toto: he calls it ‘‘belief”’ (niScaya) 
in the sense that there is no vacillation between unassured alternatives. 

In connection with the analysis of the concepts “having wider 
denotation” (vydépaka) and “having narrower denotation”’ (vydpya), 
in the context of inference (anumana), Vacaspati Migra only insists 
that for a legitimate inference there must not be any other limiting 
adjunct (upadhi) involved, assured, or suspected. Krsnanatha Nya- 
yapaficanana elaborates this notion of upddhi further in the line of neo- 
Nyaya. He writes: If from a case of M one seeks to infer P, one has 
first to see that there is no adjunct x (updadhi) involved such that the 
class of x-s includes the class of P-s (i.e., wherever there is P, there is x, 
or negatively, there is no P without x) and also that it is not true that 
the class of x-s includes the class of M-s (i.e., wherever there is M, 
there is x). The relation between M and P will be unconditional 
(svdbhavika) if only such x, assured or suspected, is known to be absent. 

The presence of x is ‘‘assured”’ when it is either perceived or correctly 
inferred (of course, this would be an additional inference) ; it is “‘sus- 
pected” when it is neither perceived nor (correctly) inferred but just 
believed to be there on some ground, say, on some testimony. 

Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana refers, in this connection, to the 
Vaiéesika doctrine that the relation between M and P is unconditional 
(svdbhavika) if only M is the effect of, or the cause of, or in contact 
with, or opposed to P, or where P inheres in M. But he does not ela- 
borate it further. 

In connection with the type of inference called positive (vita) 
Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana adds that this is a type of inference 


KRSNANATHA NYAYAPANCGANANA 491 


that is based on a merely affirmative universal proposition, or two 
universal propositions, one of which is affirmative and the other nega- 
tive. “Vita,” in other words, stands both for only-positive (kevaldn- 
vayi) and positive-negative (anvayavyatireki) inference. Exclusionary 
(avita) is that type of inference which is based on a mere negative 
universal proposition. It is what is otherwise called only-negative 
(kevalavyatireki) inference. 

In connection with exclusionary inference he, by way of clarification, 
adds the following further point: The traditional example of exclu- 
sionary inference is: “‘Earth (soil) is other than water, fire, air, and 
akasa, because it has the quality of smell.’? The corresponding general 
proposition is spelled out as: whatever material is not other than water, 
fire, air, and dkdfa has no smell. Obviously, it cannot be ‘“‘whatever 
material has smell is other than water, fire, air, and dkdéa,”’ for that 
precisely is what has to be established, given that earth is the only 
example of the material (we have so far) that has smell and is other 
than water, fire, air, and akdfa. Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana des- 
cribes the inferential process that is involved here as follows: Finding 
that in water there is otherness neither from water nor smell; in fire, 
otherness neither from fire nor smell; and so on in air and ether, one 
is assured (provided he is assured also that these are all the cases of 
“being other than whatever is not earth”) that wherever there is 
absence of anything other than earth there is absence of smell. All 
these other materials being thus exluded, it follows, reductio ad absur- 
dum, that what has that smell (viz., earth) is other than all other 
materials. This is why this type of inference is also called ‘‘inference 
by elimination” (parifesa anumana). 

*‘Other than earth’? cannot here mean anything other than earth. 
For, whenever we relevantly compare two or more entities we compare 
them on the ground of their proximate generic features, not on the 
ground of any of their distant generic features; or better, a proximate 
generic feature being available, no relevant comparison should pro- 
ceed on the ground of a more distant generic feature. In the present 
context, the proximate generic feature is their “being materials” 
(bhitatva). So, their “being just things” (dravyatva) is an irrelevant, 
consideration here. 

In connection with knowledge from verbal testimony, i.e., knowledge 
of an object acquired through hearing someone speak of it, Krsna- 
natha Nyayapaficanana writes: When somebody is speaking about 
an object that the hearer happens also to perceive (i.e., where both 
testimony and perception are available as methods of acquiring 
knowledge), the resulting knowledge comes through perception, not 
through hearing (except that we then have awareness of certain 
sounds). Perception takes the upper hand and testimony ceases to 
function as a method. This is certified by whatever introspection we 


492 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


have into the resulting cognition: the introspection in such cases, is 
invariably of the form “‘I perceive this,’ not of the form” I learn it 
through testimony.” 

In connection with Vacaspati Miséra’s thesis (common practically 
to all systems of Indian philosophy) that awareness derived through 
hearing (or reading) Vedic statements is intrinsically valid (svatah 
pramana) Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana adds a short note on intrinsic 
and extrinsic validity of awareness. An awareness is intrinsically 
valid if only the very factors that make us take it as an awareness 
also guarantee its validity, i.e., when for its validation, or for the 
awareness of its validity, other factors or other confirming awarenesses 
are required. Such is the case with awareness of things derived from 
hearing (or reading) Vedic statements that are about them. These 
statements as eternal, i.e., as not spoken by any person, are free from 
all limitations of time and personality and, therefore, cannot be false. 
Hence, knowledge derived through hearing (or reading) them does 
not require extrinsic validation. It is intrinsically valid. 

Another point that Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana discusses in this 
connection is worth noting: That sentences have the general capacity 
for indicating (meaning) particular states of affair is indeed inferred 
from the (perceptual) awareness that different states of affairs emerge 
consequent upon the utterance of different particular sentences. That 
the constituent words also have similar general capacity for indicating 
constituent items or relations is equally a matter of inference. Yet, 
however, for a definite particular sentence or word to mean a definite 
particular type of state of affair, item, or relation (where the state of 
affairs, etc., are known through our hearing that sentence, etc.) is not 
necessarily a case of inference (though sometimes it is so). According 
to Vacaspati Misra and Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana, it is a case 
of immediate knowledge, and this immediate knowledge—obviously, 
not perception—is precisely what is called “‘knowledge through testi- 
mony’ (sabda jitdna). 

Vacaspati Misra reduces comparison partly to testimony, partly to 
inference, and partly to perception. In connection with its partial 
reduction to perception he claims that the perceived similarity and the 
remembered similarity are entitatively one and the same. Obviously, 
by “‘comparison”’ here he understands the upamdna of the Naiyayikas. 
Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana adds that Vacaspati Misra’s state- 
ment with regard to the identity of the two similarities applies equally 
against the Mimamsa notion of upamdna. 

In connection with the reduction of (appropriate) nonperception, 
Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana writes that there is not only no separate 
instrument of knowledge called nonperception, for Samkhya there is 
also no object (of knowledge) called absence (abhdva). Krsnanatha 
Nyayapaficanana believes that Vacaspati Misra has hinted at this 


KRSNANATHA NYAYAPANGANANA 493 


when he named the instrument in question as “‘abhdva’’? and not 
“‘anupalabdhi.”’ 

In connection with Vacaspati Misra’s reduction of the Pauranika’s 
inclusion (sambhava) to inference, Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana 
gives, as examples of this instrument of knowledge, the passing from 
the knowledge of a thousand rupees to that of a hundred rupees and 
from the knowledge of the Brahminhood of a man to that of his being 
learned, etc.t 


III. Tue Notion oF PREEXISTENT EFFECT 


(9) By way of introducing this kariké, Vacaspati Misra states four 
different views. They are (1) Being arises from nonbeing; (2) every- 
thing whatsoever that arises from one primal Being is, insofar as it 
arises, nonbeing; (3) nonbeing arises from Being; and (4) Being arises 
from Being. Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana further specifies these 
views as follows: View (1) is of the Buddhists—a can arise from b 
only after b has ceased to be. View (2) is of the (Advaita) Vedantin. 
(A little later, in the Avaranavarni the Advaita theory of Vivarta has 
been explained). View (3) is of Nyaya and Vaisesika—the effect 
that was not there, that, in other words, was so long nonbeing, arises 
out of the cause that was there. (Atoms are the ultimate causes. ) 
View (4) is of Samkhya. 

Vacaspati Misra writes that thisverse is addressed to the Nalyayikas 
and Vaisesikas, not to the Buddhists or (Advaita) Vedantists. 
Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana explains why it is addressed to Nyaya- 
Vaisesika only. In the course of this explanation he gives a short 
account of the five-membered inference for others (pardrthanumana) 
and repeats Vacaspati Miéra’s contention that the arguments in this 
verse are not relevant against Buddhism or (Advaita) Vedanta. 


TV. MaAniFrEsrt AND UNMANIFEST ASPECTS OF MATERIALITY 


(10) Vacaspati Misra holds that the manifest aspects of materiality 
—from intellect downward—are noneternal because some time or 
other they get destroyed (cease to be). Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana, 
unhappy over the expression “get destroyed” (or ‘cease to be’), puts 
Vacaspati Miésra’s view a little differently, as follows: These manifest 
principles cannot be said to have originated, for that would go against 
the Samkhya theory of preexistent effect. But then the theory of 
preexistent effect is equally against destruction (something ceasing 
to be). So by “destruction” Vacaspati Misra must have meant 
getting latent again in the (material) cause, quite as much as “‘origi- 
national” should mean just getting patent. 

(11) Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana explains why the three consti- 


494 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tuents are named by Vacaspati Misra (and also by the author of the 
Karika) as (1) agreeableness (priti=sukha), (2) disagreeableness 
(apriti=duhkha), and (3) lethargy, apathy, sluggishness, and, in the 
extreme case, dumbfoundedness (all represented by the Sanskrit term 
“‘yisdda’’ or ‘‘moha’’), and why they have not been named here, as 
is the usual practice elsewhere, as intelligibility (sattva), activity (rajas), 
and inertia (tamas). The reason, as Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana 
states it, is that up till now no verse has stated these under the latter 
names, nor has it till now been established that the manifest and the 
unmanifest possess them (under such names). Krsnanatha Nyaya- 
paficanana holds that this is a broad enough hint that sativa, rajas, 
and tamas are inferred as causes that produce satisfaction, frustration, 
and confusion respectively. 

Further, these three constituents belong, according to Samkhya, 
to the manifest and the unmanifest, not to self that is pure 
consciousness. 

In connection with Vacaspati Miéra’s contention that neither the 
unmanifest nor any of the manifest principles can transform itself 
alone, i.e., merely through its own effort, Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana 
writes, by way of clarification, that none of these can be transformed 
without the help of merit or demerit (good or bad adrsta) acquired 
through acts done in the prior life. 

Tn introducing the Samkhya view that the manifest principles and 
the unmanifest are all objects (not modes of pure consciousness), 
Vacaspati Miégra says that this view is posited against the opposite view 
of the Vijfianavada Buddhist; Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana, by way 
of elucidation, adds a short but on the whole adequate account of this 


Buddhist view along with the arguments that are usually offered in 
its behalf. 


VI. INFERENCES FOR EXISTENCE OF PRIMORDIAL 
MATERIALITY AND CONSCIOUSNESS 


(17) Vacaspati Misra, after explaining how self that is pure con- 
sciousness is to be inferred from ‘“‘bhokirbhava’’ (hedonic experience of 
satisfaction, frustration, etc.), gives an alternative interpretation of 
the term. He says that some others mean by it (i.e., by “‘bhoktirbhdva’’ ) 
“drastrbhava’’ (cognitive experience of objects). But he does not criti- 
cize this other interpretation. Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana, how- 
ever, declares openly that this alternative interpretation is definitely 
less acceptable, because the Sanskrit root “‘bhuj”’ cannot mean cognitive 
experience, except secondarily. 

(18) Vacaspati Misra defines “‘birth’’ as the first-instant relation 
of a self (pure consciousness) with a unique complex of the subtle 
and gross (physical) body. 


KRSNANATHA NYAYAPANCANANA 495 


Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana adds that this definition successfully 
excludes the possibility of several other relations being (wrongly) 
called birth. At the very beginning of creation, for example, when 
subtle bodies were created (creation of subtle bodies corresponds to 
that which in other religions is called creation of selves), one for each 
single self, the self (pure consciousness) in question, which is eternal, 
came to be related to the subtle body appointed for it. But this was 
no case of birth, because no gross body was there at that time. And, 
similarly with regard to the transitional “‘life’? between one death 
and the next birth (the theory of transmigration of the subtle body 
being assumed). Again, though from one birth to the next death the 
self remains in close relation with one and the same complex of subtle 
and gross body, this is not to be understood as continuous birth (or 
a series of births), for it is no first-instant relation (except at the first 
instant). The gross body in that particular life, no doubt, changes 
from moment to moment, but its continuant identity is experienced 
at every two successive segments of time, whether by the agent himself 
or by observers from outside. The gross body is one that is initially 
contributed by parents, though in consonance with the merits and 
demerits acquired by the agent in his prior life. 

(20) In this verse, and in Vacaspati Misra’s commentary on it, 
it is stated that the nonconscious subtle body appears (wrongly) as 
with conscious. Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana clarifies this statement 
the help of a traditional analogy: a white crystal appearing (falsely) 
as red when adjacent to it there is a red flower. 

Similarly, for the second thesis of the verse—that due to the nearness 
of the subtle body, which is truly the agent of all action, the self (as 
pure consciousness) appears (falsely) as an agent—Krsnanatha Nya- 
yapaficanana offers another traditional analogy. It is that of a red- 
hot iron ball (falsely) said to burn whatever comes in contact with 
it, because of some fire being inits maximum vicinity (i.e., penetrating 
it through and through). 


IX. THe Funcrioninc OF THE THIRTEENFOLD INSTRUMENT 


(29) Vacaspati Misra identifies each of the five airs (vdyu) by the 
places they occupy in the body. Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana does 
not elucidate this further. Rather, he collects from earlier literature 
(Upanisads, Yogasiitra, and medical literature) various bits of edifying 
information regarding this. 

(30) Vacaspati Misra explains the appropriate functions of the 
instruments, intellect, egoity, and the different capacities (mind as 
the internal organ and the sense and action capacities), all teleologi- 
cally. Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana adds that teleology here is only 


496 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


another name for merits and demerits (acquired through actions 
done in the prior life) now functioning (i.e., maturing). 

(35) In connection with the distinction between the functions of 
external capacities and internal organs Vacaspati Misra writes, follow- 
ing the karika@, that, although the former have to be in relation with 
objects that are copresent with them, the latter may have for their 
objects things and events that are past or future too. But he adds 
that in the case of sound as the object of the action capacity called 
speech its presentness means ‘immediate past,’’ which is contiguous 
with the present. Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana explains thisas 
follows: According to Samkhya, as opposed to the view of the Mima- 
msakas, sound is not eternal. It is generated by contact of things— 
here, in the case of speech, by some contact in the throat and the 
cavity of the mouth (kanthatdlusamyoga)—and, therefore, occurs after 
this contact has taken place. Yet, as that future occurrence is immedia- 
tely after the contact it is taken, in common parlance, as copresent 
with it, much as when intending that I shall come immediately I often 
say “I am coming.” 

(34) Vacaspati Misra, in identifying the nonspecific (avifesa) as 
subtle elements (tanmdtra), writes that the word ‘‘mdtra’’ (tanmatra= 
tat4-matra = “‘that only’’), suffixed to the word ‘“‘iat,’? shows that ian- 
matras are not elements (bhitia). Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana adds, 
in the interest of precision, that ‘“bhata’’ here stands for the gross ele- 
ments (mahdbhita) only, for tanmdatras are, after all, subtle elements. 

(37) After explaining whatever Vacaspati Misra has said, Krsna- 
natha Nyayapaficanana adds: Although liberation cannot be sought 
by consciousness, because liberation constitutes the very essence of 
consciousness that is, its being other than materiality, which is the 
source of all frustration, yet as we have started our life with the con- 
fusion of the two (precisely because of which we are frustrated ), consci- 
ousness’ true essence (as being other than materiality) remains hidden 
so far from our view. It is only against this background that one can 
intelligibly seek recovery from the confusion—seek, in other words, 
to intuit this otherness of consciousness from materiality. And, that 
comes to the same thing as seeking absolute cessation of frustration. 


X. SUBTLE AND Gross ELEMENTS 


(39) Vacaspati Misra writes that the existence of the subtle body 
constituted by intellect, egoity, mind, and the five subtle elements is 
(only) inferred, never known directly (except by Yogis and super- 
human beings). Vacaspati Misra, however, does not give any hint 
as to how it can be inferred. Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana adds that 
it is to be inferred on the ground that in its absence there cannot be 
any experience of satisfaction, frustration, or confusion, or even of 
dumbfoundedness.? 


KRSNANATHA NYAYAPANCGANANA 497 


At this point he diverts the discussion by bringing in a quite different 
consideration, that is, whether there could be any such experience 
in the absence of the gross physical body. He replies that there 
can be because, otherwise, no transmigrating self, during the period 
between one death and the next birth, could experience pleasures of 
heaven or sufferings of hell. It follows, he concludes, that the subtle 
body is the minimum that is required (as a medium) for experiencing 
satisfaction, frustration, etc., whether in this earthly life or elsewhere. 
The gross body, in addition, is required for earthly satisfactions and 
frustrations. 

Vacaspati Misra holds that from the mother’s side one gets his hairs 
(loman), blood, and flesh. Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana adds that by 
“hairs’’ he must have meant skin, for that is what is stated in the scrip- 
ture. Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana holds that Vacaspati Misra does 
not use the word “‘skin’’ (tvak) lestreaders confuse it with the sense- 
capacity ‘touch’. 


XI. THe Sustite Bopy 


(40) Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana refers to a different reading of 
the verse in which, in place of “‘asakia” there is the word “‘afakia’’ 
which means “‘than which there is nothing more powerful,” in short, 
“that which is capable of doing everything.” 

Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana holds that where in (38) it has been 
said that the gross elements are specific as distinct from the subtle 
elements, which are nonspecific, what has really been meant is that 
the gross elements are so because they are either comforting or uncom- 
fortable or confusing. This further means, Krsnanatha Nyayapafi- 
canana holds, that whatever is comforting or uncomfortable or con- 
fusing is a specific. Now, sense and action capacities, egoity, and intel- 
lect are immediately experienced that way, which means further 
that whatever else involve them are of that nature. This is why in 
Samkhya, Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana holds, the subtle body is 
taken as a specific. But on all counts subtle elements are excluded. 


XII. THe Basic PREDISPOSITIONS 


(45) In connection with the distinction between the innate 
predispositions of the intellect and those predispositions that are 
modalized by other factors, that is, by good or bad deeds (Samkhya 
calls these acquired predispositions) (asdmsiddhika=vaikyta), Krsna- 
natha Nyayapaficanana writes that this distinction is valid with regard 
to the right (as opposed to “‘wrong’’) states only,* that is, to merito- 
rious behavior, knowledge, nonattachment, andsupernormal powers, 
not with regard to the corresponding wrong states, demeritorious 


498 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


behavior, ignorance, attachment, and loss or lack of supernormal 
powers. These latter are all acquired through bad deeds. What 
Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana means is that right predispositions of 
intellect are either intrinsic to it—and are thus innate predispositions— 
or acquired by good deeds, and are, therefore, partly extrinsic. All 
wrong predispositions, on the other hand, are distorted—and thus 
extrinsic—modes effected through bad deeds. 

II. Although Vacaspati Miéra has never said anything about whe- 
ther the different predispositions of the gross physical body can also 
be grouped as either innate or acquired, Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana 
does. He says that the different predispositions in the development 
of the fetus are all innate in it, and all other states of the physical 
body (obviously, states after one is born), that is, childhood, puberty, 
youth, and decrepitude, are acquired from outside. Vacaspati Migra 
has only said that there are four crucial fetal states and four crucial 
postnatal states. 

Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana, in support of his point, has quoted 
medical and semimedical passages from ancient literature. 

(48) In connection with sixty-two varieties of misconception Krsna- 
natha Nydyapaficanana shows in detail how every variety of confusion, 
attachment, aversion, and fear involves error through chain impli- 
cation. 

(50) To Vacaspati Misra’s commentary Krsnanatha Nyayapafi- 
canana adds that every second form of ddhydimika tusti (deeper con- 
tentment) points, by implication, to the invalidity of the just preced- 
ing form. He shows it very clearly in the case of the fourth form 
(called sopddana or salila). Madalasa’s (a mythical princess) children 
could intuit the separateness of pure consciousness and materiality 
apparently without any spiritual exercise, only because they had gone 
through it all in their prior life. The spiritual exercise in question is 
listening to scriptural truths (Sravana), justifying them by analysis 
and arguments (manana), and concentrating on them in meditation 
(nididhyasana). Those complacent people who, finding that even chil- 
dren who, apparently, had not undergone these exercises could intuit 
the final truth, conclude that these exercises are, therefore, not neces- 
sary prerequisites are wrong in that they do not know that those 
children practiced them in their previous life, as the full story 
testifies.® 

(51) After offering his account of eight attainments, VAcaspati 
Misra puts forward another interpretation. He writes “vinopadesadina 
jfiani jfidnam prayacchati”’? and simply ends with the remark that the 
merits and defects of this interpretation are to be judged by wise 
scholars. He himself does not examine it. 

Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana, however, examines it and exposes 
its defects one by one. (Vacaspati Misra, he says, did not care to exa- 


KRSNANATHA NYAYAPANCGANANA 499 


mine it, because its defects were evident.) The defects as Krsnanatha 
Nyayapaficanana finds them are as follows: 

(1) In spite of all spiritual practice in the prior life, what is absolu- 
tely needed in the present life is the expert teacher’s advice (imparting 
the final truth through the medium of language). 

(2) If it were possible to intuit the separateness of consciousness 
and materiality just through hearing others reading Samkhya one could 
as well intuit it through just reading Samkhya himself. Why not, then, 
add this last as a ninth accomplishment? And this so-called ninth 
is certainly not identical with ratiocination (i#ha). 

(3) Further, again, if it were possible to intuit the separateness of 
consciousness and materiality just through hearing others reading 
Samkhya, then even ‘“‘learning the scripture under the tutelage of a 
teacher’? (adhyayana) would be redundant, because that teacher is 
as much an “‘other person” as anybody else. 

(4) As for getting in touch with another spiritual practitioner 
(suhrtprapti), this could be of use only if that experienced practitioner 
imparts advice (upadefa) through speech; and similarly with the fee 
paid to him (déna), for learned men, properly paid, will after all impart 
advice. So such cases would only be repetitious. 

Toward the end of his commentary Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana 
refers to another “modern” interpretation of the text “‘siddheh 
parvo’ nkusas trividhah’’ in the Kariké without, however, naming this 
“modern” interpreter. He, of course, exposes the errors of this 
interpretation. 


XIII. THe EmprricaL WorLD 


(52) Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana holds that body as the medium 
through which one is to have experience (with hedonic tone) is pri- 
marily the subtle body and, through that only, the gross physical 
body secondarily. 

(56) Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana explains Vacaspati Miéra’s 
“‘akaranatve atyantabhavah etc.” as follows: The world is not without 
some cause. It has a cause because, being composite in structure and 
having a shape, it must have emerged at a point of time (and must 
get destroyed too at some other point of time). That which has no 
cause can neither emerge nor disappear at a point of time. 


XIV. Smmites ILLustRaATING MATERIALITY 


(57) Where Vacaspati Misra writes that all actions of an agent 
are determined by desire for some satisfaction (or removal of some 
frustration) of his own or of others (as in the case of benevolence), 
Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana adds that the satisfaction (or the removal 


500 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of frustration) of others is never a direct determinant. The direct 
determinant is always some satisfaction (or removal of frustration) of 
one’s own. 


XV. LiseraATION AND ISOLATION 


(64) Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana writes that what has to be 
practiced with care, etc., is not the intuition of the separateness of 
consciousness and materiality—for obviously that cannot be practiced 
—hbut the corresponding conceptual knowledge derived from the 
teacher. 


HARIPRASADA 


Hariprasada’s commentary on the Samkhyasittras is based on the 
Bhasya of Vijfianabhiksu and also quotes, in one or two places, Ani- 
ruddha’s Vriti. Views summarized here are those either not found 
in the Bhdsya or those especially held by the author in adducing argu- 
ments. The author is the disciple of a teacher named Atmarama 
who belonged to the order of the Udasina sect. The commentary was 
published in 1905 towards the end of the author’s 1’Fetime. 


SAMKHYASUTRAVRTTI 


(Summary by Ram Shankar Bhattacharya) 


Boox I: 
(A) Introductory Verses? The Scope and Task of Samkhya 


(I.1) Among the two human goals, that is, experience of objects 
and liberation, experience of objects cannot be regarded as final as 
it is capable of being annihilated. As absolute cessation of frustration 
has no end; it can reasonably be regarded as the supreme goal. Fru- 
stration is superimposed on consciousness. 

(1.5) Liberation is regarded as the highest goal; the goal to be 
attained by secular means is regarded as forsakable (heya). 


(B) Bondage 


(1.7) Bondage is nothing but connection with frustration. 

(I.10) As a seed’s natural power of producing sprouts can be des- 
troyed so the natural bondage of consciousness can be eradicated by 
the means prescribed by the scripture. 

(1.26) It is remarked that some of the views of Samkaracarya (e.g., 
that ignorance is inexplicable [anirvacaniya]) are similar to those 
of the Yogacara school. 

(1.95) The purpose of the scriptural passages on God is either to 


502 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


glorify liberated souls or to prescribe devout meditation for perfect 
beings. 

(I.96) Because of His association with consciousness and materia- 
lity, God becomes their controller. 

(I.104-105) Although experience of objects is a kind of modifica- 
tion of the intellect, yet it does not ultimately reside in the intellect, 
which is inert. That is why it cannot be regarded as enjoyer. Consci- 
ousness, although devoid of agency, is enjoyer because it is aware- 
ness. Experience becomes reflected in the modifications of the intellect, 
which is influenced by objects. Consciousness enjoys the fruits of 
actions performed by the intellect. 

(1.107) Both agency and enjoyership cease if the essential nature 
of consciousness and materiality is realized. 


(F) Materiality and the Theory of Preexistent Effect 


(1.108) The word “‘Adna’”’ in the siitra means injury to the organs 
and “‘upaddna’’? means nonsteadiness of the mind. 

(I.113) The three kinds of opposition mean contradiction with 
the Vedas, smptis, and ratiocination (nydya). 


(H) Three Constituents 


(I.128) The similarities in the constituents are to be understood 
in respect of human goals, etc., and the divergences in respect of 
their characteristics such as lightness, etc. 


(1) Inferences Establishing Primordial Materiality and Consciousness 


(I.130-132) The three arguments stated in these two sitras show 
that the intellect, etc., are of the nature of effect. 

(1.142) Although it is God, and not the embodied self (jiva), who 
is the controller of materiality, yet an embodied self is said to be the 
controller as he is regarded as the enjoyer. In fact an embodied 
self is the controller of his own intellect. 

(1.145) Consciousness is nothing but awareness (jfidna) that is 
divine (aprakrta, of the nature of anti-guna). 

(1.146) Awareness cannot be regarded as a property of conscious- 
ness, for consciousness is not a substrate of properties or qualities 
(guna). 

(1.160-162) God is different from consciousness and materiality. 
He is a particular kind of consciousness who is not touched or affected 
by afflictions, etc. He is the witness of all and is eternally liberated. 

(1.164) The agency of God is due to His association with materia- 
lity, and it is of the nature of prompting or instigating (prayojaka- 


HARIPRASADA 503 


Kariya). In reality proper agency belongs to materiality because 
of its association with God. 


Boox II: Erreots or MATERIALITY 
(A) Activity of Materiality and the Distinction from Consciousness 


(II.8) The power of creation found in the divine consciousness 
(puruseSvara) is dependent on His association with materiality. 

(II.9) The association of materiality (called réga in this sitra) and 
the divine consciousness (called virdga in this sitra) is the cause of 
creation (the word “‘creation,” [srsfi ] stands for the cause of creation). 


(B) Materiality and Its Effects 


(II.11) The creation done by materiality is for itself as well as for 
others. Creation done by intellect, etc., is not for themselves but 
for others only. 


(C) Space and Time 


(11.12) In this sitra, “akafa’? means “Gkadfa characterized by 
different limiting adjuncts “‘ (tattadupadhivisistakasa). 


(E) Ego and Capacities 


(11.18) The word “‘ekddasaka’”’ means the eleven organs (according 
to Bhiksu, the word means ‘‘eleventh,” i.e , the organ of mind). 


(G) Capacities and Their Differences from Consciousness 


(II.31) Vital breath is the general function of the internal as well 
as the external capacities. The author has refuted the view of Bala- 
rama Udasina that breath is the operation of the three internal organs 
only. Here he has referred to his commentary, Cittaprasddini on the 
Samkhyakarika. 


(H) The Thirteenfold Instrument 


(11.39) An instrument (karana) is an uncommon (asddhdrana) 
cause possessing operation (vyapara). 

(11.43) The existence of latent dispositions is inferred through 
the existence of memory caused by past experience. 

(11.44) Without the help of external organs the intellect cannot 
apprehend exernal objects. 


504 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Boox JIT: NonaTTACHMENT 
(A) Specific and Nonspecific 


(TII.2-4) The gross body is the product of the five gross elements; 
the subtle body, which is made up of seventeen factors, is the seed (bija) 
of the gross body; the intellect, etc., create the body. 


(B) Gross and Subile Body 


(III.8-10) It is the subtle and not the gross body that is the seat 
(ayatana) of experience. Each subtle body is associated with one 
consciousness and the difference in the subtle bodies is due to the 
difference of actions. 

(III.11-14) Properly speaking, the word “‘body’’ (Sarira) means 
subtle body (lingafarira); it means the gross body in a secondary 
sense only. The subtle body has a form (miirta); it is of medium 
magnitude; it affords experience to consciousness, when it becomes 
associated with a gross body. Intellect cannot exist without it. 


(E) Dreaming, Waking, and Yogic Awareness 


(III.27-28) The results of the threefold actions, namely, nitya 
(obligatory), naimittika (obligatory on special occasion), and kamya 
(to be performed with a view to attaining a desired object) cannot 
be everlasting (dtyantika). 

(III.29) Knowledge dawns in a purified heart as a result of 
practicing the higher forms of meditation by suppressing attach- 
ment to objects. 


(I) Materiality and Discrimination 


(III.55-57) The all-producing materiality is under the control of 
God, who is omniscient and omnipotent and whose existence is pro- 
ved by the Vedas only. An individual self comes again and again to 
this world, a product of materiality, in accordance with the divine 
law. 


(J) Discrimination and Liberation 
(IIT.74) It is nondiscrimination that is the cause of bondage. 
Boox V : ArcumEentTs AGAINsT OPPONENTS 
(A) On the Existence of God 


(V.10-12) Divine nature cannot be attributed to all embodied or 


HARIPRASADA 505 


individual selves (jiva). The powers of the selves are the products of 
materiality. 


(B) Notion of Ignorance 


(V.13-14) Brahman, which is beyond all attachment, is called 
“God” when it becomes associated with the power called ignorance. 
This association with ignorance cannot be proved to be false. 

(V.19) If the transitory world (jagat) is essentially the same as 
nescience then the latter must have a beginning. 


(C) The Existence of Meritorious Behavior 


(V.21) Because the experience of satisfaction is a form of ex- 
perience it must have a cause, as is found in the case of frustration. 
This cause is called “‘adrsta’’ (unseen), i.e., merit. Yogic perception 
is also a proof for the existence of merit. 


(D) Merit, Qualities, ‘Inference 


(V.26-27) The word ‘“‘gunddi’’ (in sitra 26) means merit and the 
rest (see V.25), whose existence can easily be proved through 
inference. 

(V.30-36) Pervasion (uyapti) is nothing but invariable coexistence, 
which is manifested by the natural power of things. What is pervaded 
has natural concomitance with its pervader. The word ‘‘ddheyaSakti”’ 
(in V.32) signifies the relation between pervaded and pervader. It 
is remarked that the view of the sage Paficagikha on pervasion is not 
identical with the generally accepted view of Samkhya teachers. 


(E) Word and Meaning 


(V.46-51) ‘“‘Pauruseya’”? means “not composed by the embodied or 
individual self (jiva)” (and not ‘‘not composed by God”’ as is explained 
by some commentators). Although the Vedas are not composed by 
an embodied self, yet they are not eternal. The Vedas are self 
evident, as they are not based on any other means of knowledge. 


(F) Knowledge and Error 


(V.53-56) This stra is explained as refuting the illusion theory 
of the Vijfianavadins saying that had silver (apprehended in a mother 
of pearl) been identical with its consciousness (vijfiana) it would not 
have been sublated. It is remarked that (1) the theory of anyathakhyati 
(taking one thing for another) is not in accordance with the Nyaya 


506 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


theory declaring correspondence between cognition and its content 
and that (2) in reality erroneous knowledge is nondiscrimination of 
two cognitions (such nondiscrimination arises in every case of erroneous 
knowledge, as we find in the case of the erroneous knowledge of silver 
in mother of pearl), 


(H) Nonduality 


(V.65) God is existence-consciousness-bliss, whereas the individual 
self is existence-consciousness. The essential nature of an embodied 
self consists in consciousness only and not in consciousness and bliss, 
for there is no feeling of bliss at the time of experiencing frustration. 

(V.68) It is the ignorant who hold the anti-Vedic doctrine that 
in the state of release the individual self becomes full of bliss. 


(1) Mind and Internal Organ 


(V.73) Both the individual self and materiality have no parts— 
a view sanctioned by the Vedas. 


(L) Nyaya-Vaisesika Categories and Atomism 


(V.87) The word ‘‘anu’? means trasarenu (triad, an aggregate of 
three dyads), which are the products of the five subtle elements. 


(O) Universals 


(V.91-92) A universal is a property inhering in many things; 
it is neither materiality nor consciousness, and it is noneternal. Re- 
cognition (pratyabhijfd) is based on it. 

(V.96) The knowledge of the relation between a name (samjfi@) 
and the named (samjfiin) is not based on similarity. This relation 
is to be known through the statements of trustworthy persons 
(aptopadesa). 


(P) Relations 


(V.98) The contact or association between noneternal things must 
be noneternal. All contacts are invariably preceded by disjunctions. 

(V.99) The relation called inherence in the Nyaya-Vaisesika sys- 
tem is known as a self-linking connector (svaripasambandha) in Sam- 
khya-Yoga and as identity (dddaimya) in Vedanta. 


(OU) Bodies 


(V.113) The vital breath is originated from a particular power 
of the capacities. 


HARIPRASADA 507 


(V.115) The body, being the seat of the embodied self, is said to be 
the seat of God, as the former is under the control of the latter. The 
former is similar to and not identical with the latter. Properties like 
the absence of frustration and the like are common to both the 
embodied and the Supreme Self. 


(W) Types of Beings 


(V.127) Awareness, etc., being the properties of intellect (and 
not of the individual self) cannot be eternal. 


Boox VI : SumMMARY 
(A) Nature and Discrimination of the Self 


(VI.9) Although according to Samkhya, absolute absence of all 
frustration is liberation, yet it is held that an embodied self attains 
Brahman’s bliss in the state of liberation. This attainment of bliss 
is, however, not the result of any effort but is manifested naturally. 
That is why the supreme goal is said to be one only. 

(VI.20) Liberation is nothing but the eradication of nondiscri- 
mination. 


(B) On the Means of Attaining Discrimination 


(VI.25) When the mind becomes engrossed in dtman (and not in 
any other object), then the state is called meditation (dhyana). 

(VI.30) Latent dispositions (vdsand) come to an end if all the five 
kinds of operations of awareness (see YS 1.5-6) are repressed by 
means of meditations, etc. 


(C) Primordial Materiality 


(VI.37) Although materiality acts in accordance with the will 
of God yet there is no wrong in holding that it is the primal (ddya) 
cause of the world. 


(D) Plurality of Consciousnesses 


(VI.48) Advaitins support their theory of the unity of self (dian) 
by taking the divergence of birth, etc., of embodied beings as asso- 
ciated with the limiting adjuncts only and not with self. This, how- 
ever, is untenable and there is no proof to prove the unity of selves. 

(VI.50) Consciousness is not the substrate (d@fraya) of awareness 
(prakdsa, illumination) but is awareness only; it is the all-witnessing 
entity. 


508 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(E) The Manifest World 


(VI.55) Consciousness is associated with action through the ego; 
this is why it is regarded as the doer. Agentship and enjoyership 
cannot be attributed to consciousness, as both of them are in essence 
of the same nature. Consciousness is regarded as enjoyer, for egoity, 
being inert, cannot be an enjoyer. 

(VI. 59) According to Samkhya, consciousness is of atomic 
magnitude and is devoid of motion. 

(VI.63) Consciousness is called embodied self (jiva) when it be- 
comes associated with egoity. An embodied self is independent, not in 
experiencing satisfaction and frustration, but in performing actions. 


BALARAMA UDASINA 


Balarama Udasina, born in 1855, was a follower of the Udasina 
sect and studied Vedanta with Ramamisra Sastrin. He went to 
Bengal to study Nyaya and lived, for last part of his life, in Varanasi. 
He composed a short Sanskrit commentary on the Vydsabhasya-Tattva- 
vaisdradi, a Hindi commentary on the Yogasiitras, and a few works 
on religious matters also (Srautasarvasva, etc.). 

The Vidvattosini on Vacaspati’s Tattvakaumudi was composed by 
the commentator up to verse 33. The remaining part of the com- 
mentary (along with the last four paragraphs of the commentary 
on the 33rd verse )—which is obviously very brief—was composed 
by Pandit Ramavatara Sarman, one of his disciples. 

The summary is prepared from the edition published by Atma- 
svaripa Udasina in Varanasi in 1930. 


VIDVATTOSINI ON TATTVAKAUMUDI 
(Summary by R. S. Bhattacharya) 
I. Inrropucrory Verses: Scope AND TAsK oF SAMKHYA 


The creativity of the unmanifest materiality (the three constituents 
in their unmanifested form) in some sastric passages means assuming 
the state of nonequilibrium of the constituents, which immediately 
gives rise to the evolutes. Similarly, the dissolution of the unmanifest 
in consciousness (as stated in some authoritative texts) means the 
unmanifested state of the constituents. 

It is further remarked that sastric statements showing origination and 
dissolution of consciousness are to be regarded as secondary—that is, 
the origination of consciousness is its enjoyership because of limiting 
adjuncts; dissolution is consciousness’ abiding in its own immutable 
form. Vijfianabhiksu, however, thinks that association and disjunc- 
tion of consciousness and materiality are called their origination and 
dissolution respectively. Materiality is regarded as one, because there 
is no other entity that is of the same kind (sajatiyadvitiyarahita). 


510 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The three colors (red, white, and black) of the three constituents 
(as stated in the relevant stanza of the Svetdsvatara Upanisad) are not 
real; they are used in a figurative sense. For example the sativa 
constituent is called white, for as white water cleans everything so 
sativa cleans the mind through knowledge. Materiality in the state 
of equilibrium is called “‘lohitasuklakrsna’’ (red-white-black), for ma- 
teriality is nothing but a whole composed of three parts, i.e., the 
three constituents. 

(1) Internal frustration—which is of two kinds, bodily and mental— 
is said to be amenable to internal remedies. It may be asked: although 
mental frustration is of this nature, yet can bodily frustration (dis- 
ease) be called so, for the medicines are notinternal? The reply is: 
because medicines become effective if they are taken in, there arises 
no logical fault in holding that bodily frustration is also amenable to 
internal remedies. The commentator is in favor of taking the word 
“‘sadhya’’ in the expression ‘‘dntaropdyasddhya’’? (amenable to internal 
remedies) in the sense of ‘‘janya’’ (to be produced). Because bodily 
and mental frustrations happen in the body and the mind they are 
regarded as internal. 

As to the question that since a subtle entity existing in the future 
state may appear in a gross from because of causal operation, why 
cannot an entity acquiring the past state appear again in a gross 
form, it is replied that because experience does not attest that fact, we 
hold that a past entity is incapable of appearing again in a gross 
form. This is in accordance with the Vydsabhdsya on Yogasiitra 3.14. 

(2) Balarama remarks that besides meaning ‘‘satisfaction unatta~ 
ched with frustration” the word ‘‘svarga’”’ means a place connected with 
some asterism (naksatradesa) or meruprstha (the summit of the mountain 
Meru). 

Balarama considers the question of violence in sacrificial acts (espe- 
cially in killing animals in sacrifices )in various ways, quoting the views of 
some Vedantins, Mimamsakas, and Vijfianabhiksu and concludes with 
cogent reasons thatin reality violence in sacrificial acts is prohibited. 

(3) While explaining vicious infinite regress (anavastha)Balarama 
gives reasons why materiality can not possibly have a cause. 

Question: The word “‘avikrti?? (in “milaprakrtiravikrtih” ) can legiti- 
mately suggest the idea that materiality is also the primordial (or 
“root” ) cause, and thus itis pointless to use the word “primordial” 
in the term “‘primordial materiality.” 

Reply: Because “‘prakrti”’? simply means the generative cause of a 
fundamental principle (thatis why intellect, etc., are rightly regarded 
as prakrtis), it is necessary to use the word “primordial” (mula’’) in 
order to indicate that there isa generative cause that is not the product 
of any other principle. Here Samkhyasitras 1.67-68 are quoted and 
explained. 


BALARAMA UDASINA 511 


The commentary has quoted the definitions of materiality as given 
in the Puranas and an attempt is made to show the validity of the 
definition of prakrti (tattvantaropadanatoam prakrtitvam) as given in the 
Tattoakaumudi. The expression “‘tattvdntara’’ in the definition has been 
explained elaborately, and it is shown that this view is based on V)4- 
sabhasya 2.19. 


II. InsrRUMENTs OF KNOWLEDGE 


(4) The commentary thinks that the Vaisesika sutra is anterior to 
the Samkhyakarika. 

‘““Pramdana’’ in the verse is to be taken as two words; whereas the first 
“pramana’’ is the thing to be defined (laksya), the second ‘‘pramana’’ 
is the definition (Jaksana), i.e., “the instrument of knowledge.” Knowl- 
edge is regarded as anadhigata (not known previously), aviparita (not 
erroneous; error includes mental construction (vikalpa) or vague con- 
ception also; see YS 1.8) and asandigdha (not doubtful). An instru- 
ment of knowledge is a kind of operation of the intellect. 

Knowledge is twofold: secondary and primary. Secondary (gauna) 
knowledge is caused by the contact of organs. Primary (mukhya) 
knowledge is the result of the operations of awareness. It is called 
pauruseya (existing in consciousness). This twofold knowledge has been 
elaborately discussed by quoting Sdamkhyasitra 1.81 and Vydsabhasya 
1.7, and it is remarked that in reality consciousness is not knower (pra- 
matr, the seat of prama@) and so knowledge, which is regarded as re- 
siding in consciousness, is only to be ascribed to consciousness in a 
figurative sense. 

An instrument of knowledge is also said to be of two kinds. The 
organs are the secondary instruments of knowledge, having contact 
(sannikarsa) as their operation (vyapara), whereas awareness is the 
chief instrument of knowledge. The former is the instrument of the 
secondary knowledge, the latter, of knowledge residing in consciousness. 

It is remarked that the knowledge of Yogins is a kind of perception 
and so it has not been separately stated in thé Karikas. Similarly sid- 
dhadarsSana (perception caused by the application of various kinds of 
medicinal preparations, [collyrium, etc. ]) is also included in percep- 
tion. The commentary quotes Samkhyasiitra 1.88 and Manusmrti 12.105 
to uphold the Samkhya view of the threefold instrument of knowledge; 
it quotes Narayanatirtha’s explanation of the expression “‘sarvapramana- 
siddha,”’? which is different from that of Vacaspati. 

(5) It is remarked that a defining attribute (/aksana) may be taken 
as a reason based on negative concomitance (upatirekihetu). For exam- 
ple, smell is the defining attribute of earth and it can be taken asa 
reason to prove that earth is different from all similar and dissimilar 
things. 


512 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Although the literal meaning of the word “‘prativisaya’” ‘“‘visayam 
visayam prati vartate’? may suggest that the organs reach the place of 
their respective objects, yet this meaning is not applicable. The opera- 
tion of the organs is to be known as association (sannikarsa). The rela- 
tion, which is also called “operation”? (vyépaéra) is favorable to pro- 
ducing effects; e.g., the particular association is the function of threads 
in producing a cloth. 

Reflective discerning is not the property of the sense capacities; in 
reality it belongs to the intellect. That is why reflective discerning or 
awareness is regarded as the operation (vrtii) of the intellect. The 
intellect becomes connected with the objects through the capacities 
and gets modified in the forms of objects. This intellect (also called 
“‘citta’’) is composite or conjunct (sévayava) and so must be taken as 
possessing middling dimension (madhyama parimana). 

Knowledge and its instruments have been exemplified as follows: 
The reflective discerning that “‘this is a jar’ is an instrument of knowl- 
edge, whereas the experience ‘‘I am aware of the jar’? (which arises 
afterward) is knowledge. An instrument of knowledge (a kind of 
intellectual operation) exists in the intellect. Knowledge, though 
called “‘connected with consciousness,”’ in reality arises in the intellect 
and not in the unattached consciousness. Because consciousness and 
intellect are not discriminated, knowledge (though existing in the 
intellect) is regarded as belonging to purusa. 

Here Balarama has referred to the view of the Naiyayikas that aware- 
ness, satisfaction, etc., are the attributes of the self and has remarked 
that the view is anti-Vedic. He has also referred to Vijfianabhiksu’s 
criticism of Vacaspati’s view about the existence of knowledge in 
the intellect and has refuted the criticism by showing that it is against 
the view of Vydsabhdsya and Paficasikha. There is a discussion here 
on the nature of consciousness’ reflection in the intellect. It is further 
remarked that there is no necessity to accept two kinds of knowledge 
(as shown above); it is quite sufficient to accept awareness based in 
consciousness as knowledge. 

The word “‘lokdyata’’ is explained to mean “‘pratyaksapramana”’ (per- 
ception as an instrument of knowledge) and it is said that this very 
word means the Carvaka system in a secondary sense. The argu- 
ments given to refute the view of this school denying the validity or 
truth of inference have been elucidated by quoting relevant passages 
from Bhanati, etc. 

The commentary contains elaborate discussion on (1) limiting 
adjunct (upadhi), (2) exclusionary inference, (3) different interpreta- 
tions of pirvavat, sesavat, and sdmanyatodrsta, (4) authoritativeness and 
eternity of the Vedas, (5) authoritativeness of the smrti works, (6) 
criticism of omniscience by the Mimamsakas, and (7) the nature of 
comparison, presumption, inclusion, and nonperception, with quo- 


BALARAMA UDASINA 513 


tations from authoritative texts upholding them as independent 
instruments of knowledge. 

While commenting on the Tattvakaumudi passages refuting the inde- 
pendent position of the aforesaid instruments, Balarama sometimes 
indicates views of other schools also; for example, he says that although 
Samkhya includes nonperception in perception, yet most of the fol- 
lowers of the Nyaya-Vaisesika system include it in inference. 

(6) Strictly speaking it is unmanifest materiality and pure consci- 
ousness that are the proper objects of knowledge for Samkhya and that 
are capable of being known by general correlation. This is in accord- 
ance with Sdmkhyasitra 1.103. Entities like subtle elements, etc., 
may be known through the a posteriori form of inference. 


TII. THe Notion or PREEXISTENT EFFECT 


(9) Balarama quotes Nydyasiitra 4.1.14 to elucidate the Buddhist 
view that nonexistence (abhdva) is the cause of existent things. It 
defines the relation of identity (taédaimya) as ‘“‘nondifference existing 
with the notion of difference not considered properly’? (avicdritabheda- 
pratitisahakrtabheda). The Vedantic view of causal relations has been 
propounded by quoting Samkara’s comment on Brahmasiitra 2.1.14 
“tadananyatvam. ...”’ as “‘it is understood that in reality the effect is 
nondifferent from the cause and it has no existence apart from 
the cause.” The argument given in Bhdmati 2.2.36 against the 
Buddhist doctrine of the causality of nonexistence has been quoted 
here. 

The fruti passage ‘“‘vdcadrembhanam vikaro naémadheyam mrttikety eva 
saiyam’’ (Chandogya Upanisad 6.1.4) usually quoted to prove the falsity 
of the world is interpreted to justify the Samkhyan view. It is explai- 
ned to mean that in order to accomplish the functions of fetching 
water, etc., clay is arranged in a jar form, this is why a jar is essentially 
nothing but clay only. It is remarked that this fruti passage estab- 
lishes that the effect is essentially the same as its cause and not that 
an effect is illusory. 

Aslighily different interpretation of two arguments ‘“‘upadanagrahana”’ 
and. ‘‘sarvasambhavabhava’’ is given here. 

In elucidating the argument “‘faktasya Sakyakaranat’ Balarama has 
discussed the nature of causal efficacy (Sakti) according to the view of 
Samkhya, and it is shown that the view has been accepted by Samkara 
(see his comments on Brahmasiitra 2.1.18) . 

The view of the logicians that “it is its prior absence that is the 
cause of the effect”’ is refuted and it is remarked that it is impossible for 
a logician to answer the question “what is the locus of the prior ab- 
sence of a cloth when the threads have not come into existence.” 
Moreover, the perceptual knowledge of future effects as found in Yogis 


514 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


would be impossible if it is not accepted that effects exist in their causes 
(in subtle forms), 

While elucidating the argument of “‘gurutvdntarakadryagrahana”’ (not 
making any difference in weight) Balarama says that weight is super- 
sensible and refutes the view of the Nydyakandali about the fall of a 
body because of its weight. 

Balarama Udasina has shown that some of the arguments given by 
Vacaspati to prove real difference between the (material) cause and 
its effect were originally given by Uddyotakara (in Nypdyavartiika 
2.1.36). He quotes a new argument given in Bhdmati (1.2.15) 
refuting the view that practical efficiency (arthakriyd) proves the 
difference between cause and effect. Incidentally he discusses (1) the 
nature of a self-linking connection (svaripasambandha) and (2) the 
causes of erroneous perception, etc. He indicates that arguments in 
favor of satkdryavada are to be found in Sribhasya (of Ramanuja) 2.1.15, 
Vijfianamrtabhdsya (of Vijfianabhiksu) 2.1.21 and Vydsabhdsya 3.13. 
Some Sdmkhyasiitras and a few scriptural passages have been quoted 
to support the views propounded in the Tattvakaumudi and the Sdm- 
khyakarikas. 


IV. MAnIrEsT AND UNMANIFEST MATERIALITY 


(10) Destruction (vindfa) is explained as disappearance (tirobhava), 
for destruction, according to Samkhya is ‘“‘the existence of the effect 
in its (material) cause in a subtle form.” Vijfianabhiksu’s finding 
fault in Vacaspati’s explanation of “‘sakriya’’ (possessed of activity) 
and his own explanation of this term are criticized by Balarama, and 
the validity of Vacaspati’s view is shown. Vijfianabhiksu’s explanation 
of the plurality of the manifest is shown to be untenable. An alter- 
native explanation of “‘linga’’ has been given as ‘“‘that which gets dis- 
solved in its own material cause.” 

Both the unmanifest and consciousness are said to possess opposite 
characteristics to manifest materiality (e.g., both are causeless). Al- 
though the unmanifest is not many yet oneness is not to be attributed 
to consciousness, as the plurality of consciousnesses is an established 
doctrine of Samkhya. 

(11) Sativa, rajas, and tamas possessing satisfaction, frustration, and 
confusion as their characteristic properties are called constituents 
because they resemble strands (guna, i.e., rajju meaning” a strand’) 
in binding the consciousnesses. Sometimes satisfaction, frustration, 
and confusion are called “‘guna’’ in a secondary sense (by taking an 
attribute as identical with its substrate). 

It is remarked that although some authoritative texts aver that the 
subtle elements are devoid of satisfaction, etc., yet such statements 
should be taken to mean that the subtle elements are incapable of 


BALARAMA UDASINA al5 


producing satisfaction, etc., in sentient beings like us. In fact the 
subtle elements, being products of the constituents, possess satisfaction, 
etc., and are also capable of producing satisfaction, etc., but the power 
of producing the effects varies. Had the subtle elements been devoid 
of satisfaction, etc., their transformations (i.e., the gross elements and 
objects) would not possess satisfaction, etc. 

Vijfianabhiksu’s view that the subtle elements are devoid of satis- 
faction, etc., has been criticized by Balarama, and it is shown that 
Vijfianabhiksu contradicts himself, for he adds that the subtle elements 
afford satisfaction to the gods. Incidentally it is remarked that the 
Nyaya view declaring that statisfaction, etc., are the attributes of the 
self is anti-Vedic. 

While explaining the Vijfianavada (idealism) of the Yogacara 
Buddhists Balarama adduces the well-known reason of ‘sahopalambha- 
niyama’”’ of the Buddhist teachers. It is shown that no meaning of the 
word ‘‘saha” is applicable in the present context and that the rule of 
sahopalambha is incapable of proving identily of an object with its 
awareness. Arguments given in the Vydsabhdsya and in other works 
to refute Buddhist idealism have also been quoted. 


V. THe THREE CONSTITUENTS 


(12) Balarama has shown that it would be wrong to interpret the 
expression ‘‘pritpapritivisadatmakah’’ in the verse as meaning ‘“‘each of 
the three gunas possesses agreeableness, disagreeableness, and oppres- 
siveness.”” The intended meaning is: the essential characteristic of 
sattva is satisfaction; of rajas, frustration; and of tamas, confusion. 
According to Samkhya an attribute is identical with its substrate. In 
the expression ‘‘prityapritivisdda,’’ ‘‘agreeableness,’’ etc., are to be 
taken as indicators (upalaksana) of other attributes, for example, 
‘“‘agreeableness’ stands for lightness (/éghava), etc., as has been stated 
by ancient teachers. SamkhyasiitraI.127 has been quoted to uphold 
this view. Balarama provides a discussion on the similar and dissimilar 
transformations of materiality. 

(13) Arguments are given for proving lightness as an independent 
quality like heaviness. As to why Vacaspati has given another example 
to illustrate “‘mutul opposition of the three constituents,” although the 
verse has only one example, the lamp, the commentary remarks that 
as the three things (wick, oil, and fire) making a lamp are not fully 
opposite in character, the second example of wind-bile-phlegm (vatapit- 
takapha) has been given, for they are fully opposite to one another 
according to the teachers of Ayurveda. 

It is said that, as there are appropriate efficient causes (nimittc) 
for the rise of sativa, rajas, and tamas, so there are contributory 
causes (sahakarin), namely, species, time, etc. Owing to the absence of 


516 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


appropriate contributory cause, thorns are not pleasurable to human 
beings though they are pleasurable to camels. 

There isan alternative interpretation of the passage ‘‘aira ca sukha- 
duhkhamohah. ...’ According to this interpretation, satisfaction, etc., 
are said to exist in awareness (citta) and their appearance is said to be 
due to the efficient causes like satisfaction, etc., existing in the objects. 


VI. INFERENCES TO PRIMORDIAL MATERIALITY AND CONSCIOUSNESS 


(15-16) Balarama’s comment at the beginning contains a clear 
account of the process of creation according to the Vaisesika system. 
It quotes Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 1.4.7 and Bhagavadgité 2.28 to prove 
the existence of the unmanifest. It is remarked that although “‘pari- 
mana’? signifies limitation because of space, time, etc., yet such a sense 
is not applicable here; here “‘parimdna’’ must be taken to mean “‘the 
state of not being all-pervasive.”’ A passage from Vydsabhdsya 2.18 
is quoted here to show that the three constituents are mutually 
pervasive. This mutual pervasion exists even in the state of dissolution. 
Balarama has here criticized Bhdmati for holding that the three 
constituents are not mutually pervasive. 

Balarama quotes a passage from Samkara’s commentary on Brahma- 
siitra 2.2.1 saying that the Samkhyan argument of homogeneity (saman- 
vaya) (see SK 15) is incapable of proving the existence of the unmanifest 
and remarks that Samkara’s view is against Bhagavadgitd 18.40. There 
is a discussion on the two states of materiality on the basis of Samkhya 
sitra VI.42 and of Paficasikha’s statement quoted in Vydsabhasya 2.23. 

Acting in collaboration (samhatyakdaritva) is said to exist in both the 
constituents and their transformations. These transformations are 
dependent on the filling in of the evolving cause (prakriydpira) (see 
Yogasittra 4.2) while functioning. Yogasitra 4.24, along with Vy4sa’s 
bhasya thereon, has been quoted to elucidate the argument that aggre- 
gations serve a purpose of some being other than themselves (samhata- 
pararthatva). 

It is remarked that the controllership of the inactive consciousness 
is not of the nature of activity. It is nothing but proximity (sannidhi- 
maira), as has been stated in Sdamkhyasiitra 1.96. A passage from the 
Sastitantra has been quoted to the effect that primordial materiality’s 
activity is due to the controlling of consciousness. 

Vacaspati has offered two explanations of enjoyership (bhokirbhdva). 
The first explanation is said tobe faulty, for it takes the unattached 
consciousness as an enjoyer. Balarama at the end remarks that, be- 
cause subjectivity and enjoyership depend upon the limiting adjunct 
of intellect, etc., the first.explanation may also be taken as valid. 

(18) While explaining the respective restrictions of the instru- 
ments (karanapratiniyama) the commentator remarks that though 


BALARAMA UDASINA 517 


blindness, etc., are the attributes of organs, yet they are attributed to 
consciousness, for it is the superintendent of the aggregate (samghdta) 
made up of the organs. 

Incidentally, Balarama has refuted the view of the logicians that a 
whole (avayavin) is destroyed as soon as one of its parts is destroyed 
and a new whole is originated as soon as a new component part comes 
into existence, for this view fails to explain recognition. Moreover 
it compels the logicians to run on the path of the Buddhists—their 
opponents. 

Balarama quotes Sdamkhyasittras 1.149-151 to justify the Samkhyan 
view of the plurality of consciousness and quotes the view of Vacas- 
pati (Tattvavaisaradi on Yogasiitra 2.22) that the scriptural passages 
declaring oneness of consciousness are to be taken as secondary, i.e., 
they propound that there is no distinction in purusa because of space 
or time. According to Vijfianabhiksu nondifference (abheda) in dtman 
means “‘nondivergence in dtmans’’. 

(19) Consciousness is witness in connection with the intellect 
only; he may be regarded as subject of awareness so far as the other 
organs are concerned. 

(20). It is remarked that the erroneous notion that one and the 
same entity is both subject of awareness and agent is caused by the 
affliction called egoism (asmitd) (Yogasiitra 2.6). Because intellect 
and consciousness are not distinguished, the properties of one are 
attributed to the other. 

(21) Itis remarked that the simile of a lame man and a blind one 
suggests that (1) primordial materiality depends upon the superin- 
tending consciousness in creating transformations like intellect, etc., 
and that (2) consciousness (in the bondage state) attains liberation 
with the help of materiality. 

(22) It is remarked that the view of the Vydsabhasya that the subtle 
elements are the products of the intellect is to be taken in the sense 
that egoity, the modification of intellect, is the direct material cause of 
the subtle elements. The Vydsabhdsya on Yogasitra 1.45 expressly 
states that egoity is the cause of the subtle elements—a view that is 
supported by the Gopdlatdpani Upanisad and the Samkhyasiitra (V.61) 
as well, It is further remarked that the inference given by Vacaspati 
(Tattvavaisaradi on Yogasiitra 2.19) proving that the subtle elements 
are the effects of the intellect is wrong, because it contradicts authori- 
tative texts. Balarama here quotes the Vydsabhasya on Yogasiitra 2.19 
about the nature and origination of the five subtle elements. 


IX. Tue FUNCTIONING OF THE THIRTEENFOLD INSTRUMENT 


(25) Balarama refutes the view of Vijfianabhiksu (see his Bhdsya 
on Samkhyasitra 11.18) that from sdttvika egoity come the gods (i.e., 


518 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the superintending deities of the capacitics) and the mind; from rajasa 
egoity come the sense and action capacities, and from tdémasa egoity 
come the subtle elements. He establishes the view propounded in this 
verse with the remarks that the view of the Sémkhyakérikds is in con- 
sonance with Samkhyasitra T1.18-19. 

(26) A scriptural passage has been quoted in which the word 
Indra has been used in the sense of déman. 

(27) After clearly explaining the two verses (quoted from ancient 
works) on the twofold perception, Balarama criticizes Vijfianabhiksu’s 
view on twofold perception and holds that not only general but also 
specific characteristics are apprehended by the capacities, as has been 
clearly stated in Vydsabhasya 3.47. It further says that Kumarila’s 
view on the construction-free form of perception is in consonance 
with the Vydsabhasya. 

Balarama refutes Uddyotakara’s view that if only one entity is regar- 
ded as the.material cause of the organs (as is accepted by Samkhya) 
then either all organs would apprehend all kinds of objects or each of 
the organs would apprehend all objects, and asserts that it is the adrsta 
(merit and demerit) that regulates the power of organs. 

(29) The five vital breaths are called “‘air’’ (vdyu), as their move- 
ments are similar to that of air. Balarama is of the opinion that in the 
Vyasabhdsya passage on the vital breath (on Yogasiitra 2.39), the expres- 
sion ‘‘samastendriya’’? must be taken to mean the three internal capa- 
cities only and not the external capacities also. Itis further stated that 
the vital breaths are not the operations of the external capacities, 
because in dreamless sleep vital breaths continue to function although 
the external capacities cease to act. Balarama takes the views of 
Vacaspati and Vijfianabhiksu ‘on the nature of the vital breaths as un- 
tenable. 

Because the operations of the external capacities are said to be simul- 
taneous also, there may arise five kinds of knowledge in the five sense 
capacities simultaneously. Although this is against the Nyaya view, 
yet there is no logical fault in the Samkhya doctrine, for, according to 
Samkhya, the mind possessing middling dimension can be associated 
with all the five sense capacities at the same time. 

(31) While elucidating the view that human purpose (i.e., expe- 
rience and liberation) is the instigator of all the capacities, Balarama 
remarks that although consciousness is the controller and knower 
(abhijfia), yet because, it is unattached and immutable, consciousness 
cannot be regarded as the instigator of the capacities. 

(32) It is remarked that, although the physical body is made up 
of the five gross elements, yet it may be called earthy, watery, etc., 
because earth, water, etc., predominate. 

(33) Balarama quotes the Vydsabhasya passage (on Yogasiitra 3.52) 
on time and establishes the view that in reality time is nothing but 


BALARAMA UDASINA 519 


moment only. It refutes the Vaisesika view that time is one and eter- 
nal, saying that there is no proof of this view. 

(34) It is remarked that one and the same egoity predominated 
by sativa gives rise to the sense capacities; and predominated by rajas, 
to the action capacities. It produces the mind when it possesses the 
operation of self-awareness only. All of these are called “‘specific. 
In the five subtle elements (sound, touch, color, taste, and smell) each 
one following contains the attributes of the preceding one in the 
list as well as of its own, for the simple reason that the following subtle 
element is the effect of the preceding element or elements. 


X. SusTLe AND Gross ELEMENTS 


(38) It should be noted that among the five gross elements (dkdsa, 
air, fire, water, and earth) the following gross element is the effect of 
the preceding subtle element, that is, akdfa is the effect of the sound 
tanmatra, air is the effect of both the sound and touch subtle elements, 
and earth is effect of all the five subtle elements. 


XI. Tue Sustie Bopy 


(41) Balarama quotes Brahmasitra 2.3.25 to justify the measure of 
a thumb in connection with “‘purusa’’ (i.e., the subtle body). 


XII. Te Basic PREDISPOSITIONS 


(K. 44) Prakrtilayas, i.e., those who are engrossed in prakrti are those 
beings who take their bodies as identical with the self. These are said 
to be the followers of the Carvaka school. Vaikrtikas, i.e., who re- 
gard the elements, organs, egoity, and intellect as identical with the 
self, are also said to be the followers of the same school. 

(50-51) Balarama shows the significance of the alternative names 
of the contentments (salila etc.) and the attainments (édra. etc.). 


XUI. Tue Empiicat Wortp 
(54) It is remarked that the words ‘‘miila” and “‘madhya’’ in the 
Samkhyakarika do not signify direction (dif); the former signifies tamas, 
the latter, rajas. 


XIV. Simi.Les FOR MATERIALITY 


(57) Balarama holds that in the act of transforming grass into 
milk there is no effort of either the cow or the calf and further states 


520 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that Samkaracarya’s criticism of the Samkhyan view about the func- 
tion of unknowing milk for the nourishment of the calf (Bhasya on 
Brahmasitra 2.2.4) is untenable. Incidentally he remarks that accord- 
ing to some exponents , self-interest (svdrtha) and compassion (karunya) 
are not the two separate causes of activity (pravriti) of the wise, for 
compassion is found to be based on self-interest. 


XV. LIBERATION AND ISOLATION 


(64) It is remarked that, according to the Naiyayikas, a begin- 
ningless thing may be destroyed by a thing having a beginning, for 
example, the beginningless prior absence (prdgabhdva) is destroyed by 
posterior absence (dhvamsa), which has a beginning. 

(69) The commentator is of the opinion that Kapila instructed 
Asuri orally; he did not compose any formal treatise on Samkhya. 


PANCANANA TARKARATNA 


Paficananatarkaratna, son of Nandalalakavi of Bhatpara, West 
Bengal, was born in 1865. A brilliant student of Sivacandrasarva- 
bhauma and famous since his youth for his extraordinary erudition 
and native intelligence, he soon won recognition as a scholar of a very 
high order. He worked as a professor in a Bhatpara catuspathi and 
later at Bangabasi College, Calcutta, and was for some time the Dean 
of the Faculty of Religious Learning at Banaras Hindu University. 
He was awarded the honorary title “‘A¢ahdmahopadhydya”’ by the then 
British Indian Government. He died in 1940. He published a number 
of books, translated into Bengali the Srimad-Bhagavata and about 
thirty major and minor Puranas, and edited a number of the Puranas. 

His Pirnima, published in 1919, is a subcommentary on Vacaspati 
Misra’s Tattvakaumudi on Samkhyakarika. He understood, in accordance 
with the practice in those days, particularly in Bengal, that his task 
was to be largely a restatement of Vacaspati Misra’s points in precise 
neo-Nyaya language, as clearly presented as possible, and with all the 
paraphernalia of neo-Nyaya techniques, the implied or explicit argu- 
ments in Vacaspati Miégra’s text, and the anticipation and refutation 
of all possible objections. Occasionally, he has referred to different 
Samkhya views on particular topics and refuted, wherever possible, 
the views of Vijfianabhiksu that are opposed to Vacaspati Miséra’s 
views. Like the vast majority of scholars in those days, he refused to 
recognize the Samkhyasiitra and Vijfianabhiksu’s Pravacanabhasya as 
authentic Samkhya texts. 

The salient points of the subcommentary Pirnimd are noted below: 


PURNIMA ON TATTVAKAUMUDI 
(Summary by Kalidas Bhattacharya) 
I. InrrRopucToRY VERSES; SCOPE AND Task OF SAMKHYA 


Vacaspati Misra begins with the mantra ‘‘Ajamekam, etc.” Pafi- 


omso 


cananatarkaratna in course of elucidating the term “‘aja’’, writes that 


522 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


although its etymological meaning is “‘that which has never origina- 
ted’’ it equally means “eternal,” i.e., “that which not only does not 
originate but also does not cease to be.”” He adds that to be without 
cessation follows from “being without origination’’, for, except prior 
absence, i.e., the absence of anything prior to its origination, nothing 
that ends isever found without a beginning, and Paficananatarkaratna 
reminds the reader that Samkhya does not recognize prior absence. 

Even for those who recognize prior absence, Samkhya would only 
state the corresponding premise more correctly as “whatever posi- 
tive entity is without a beginning is without an end “ (and, therefore, 
eternal).” That materiality is a positive entity is clear from its charac- 
terization (in the mantra) as red, white, and black. 

In reply to an anticipated objection that the (Advaita) Vedantin’s 
“ignorance” (avidyd) is both positive and without beginning and yet 
ends, Paficananatarkaratna writes that this ignorance of the (Advaita) 
Vedantin being itself conceptually inadmissible, the question does 
not arise. That concept of ignorance is inadmissible inasmuch as it 
has been illegitimately characterized as neither existent nor non- 
existent. (Every entity in the world is either existent or nonexistent. ) 

Ignorance, being after all illusion (basic illusion, though), has 
to originate as all other illusions do and cannot, therefore, be begin- 
ningless. (Hence, this ignorance could not have been meant in the 
mantra. ) 

Paficananatarkaratna goes further and argues that because the 
same adjective “aja” (or its feminine form “aja’’) has been used 
in the mantra to characterize both materiality and consciousness, it 
must have one and the same meaning in both the cases, for where 
ambiguity could be avoided, no scripture would indulge in that. Now, 
in the case of consciousness it, assuredly, means “without cessation’, 
that is, eternal. Hence, the other thing, too, materiality, to which 
this adjective has been applied, must also be as much without end as 
without beginning. 

Materiality is not only eternal, it is also “one without a second.” 
This one “without a second” may mean either (a) one without a 
second of the same sort or (b) whatever, being the constituent (cause) 
of everything else, and having nothing beyond itself as its own con- 
stituent (cause), has no plurality within itself (i.e., is not breakable 
into parts). The former, (a), is the definition of “one without a se- 
cond” given by the advocates of the theory of asatkhyati, who mean 
to say that any such “second of the same sort,’ though a conceptual 
possibility, is after all negated, the possibility being no more than 
that of a negatum. The latter, (b), is the definition given by others 
(those who were not the advocates of the theory of asatkhyati). Obvi- 
ously, this definition excludes the possibility that atoms are the last 
constituents. 


PANCANANA TARKARATNA 523 


Vijfianabhiksu who admits (intrinsic) plurality of materiality 
would understand its (so-called) unity (ekaiva) to be no more than 
belonging to one and the same class (sdémdnya). He would not also 
understand “class” in the Nyaya sense of (a really existent) property 
called “universal; it is what is just meant as covering all the instances 
in question. 

In the mantra, materiality is represented as red, white, and black, 
i.e., (balanced copresence of) sattva, rajas, and tamas. (Materiality is 
the three constituents; these three are not the constituents of materia- 
lity.) This is a clear indication, (at least) according to this scriptural 
mantra, that the ultimate constituent of the manifest world is not the 
(Advaitin’s) featureless Brahman. The ultimate constituent, as the 
mantra understands it, has three constituents. 

Materiality is not only the ultimate constituent of the manifest 
world, it is also the agent that creates that world. This is evident from 
the word “srjamandm’ in the mantra. There is nothing incongrous 
here, for the precise Samkhya doctrine is that all activity, involving 
attachment or detachment, belongs to materiality only, not to con- 
sciousness. This disposes of the theory (held by others) that the mani- 
fest world is created by God. 

Paficananatarkaratna here anticipates an objection and answers 
it. The objection is this: Undoubtedly from the mantra under study 
it follows that materiality is the agent that creates the world; but where 
is there any indication (in the mantra) that it is the ultimate constetuent 
of the world? Paficananatarkaratna admits that as Vacaspati Misra 
quotes the mantra there is no such indication anywhere. The real 
mantra, however, as it occurs in the Svetéfvatara Upanisad, contains the 
word ‘“‘sariipah” meaning similar to “‘itself” (see bahvih prajah srjamaném 
saripah’. This word suggests that materiality is the ultimate consti- 
tuent: effects could be similar to their cause if only the cause were 
their constituent, that is, material (cause). 

If Vacaspati Misra begins his Tativakaumudi with the mantra, it is 
only to show that Samkhya philosophy is approved by the scripture, 
and not heterodox. Vacaspati Misra, however, has not quoted the 
mantra exactly as it occurs in the Svetéfvatara Upanisad. The mantra 
there is 

ajamekam lohitasuklakrsnam 

bahvih prajah srjamandm sariipah 

ajo hyeko jusamano’ ’nuSete 

jahatyenim bhuktabhogdmajo’nyah. 
‘‘Fko”’ in the third line means one “class of’, that is, those purusas who 
are still in bondage, and “‘anyah’” in the fourth line means “another 
class of,’’ that is, those purusas who have attained liberation.t 

As for the second invocatory verse, the important points Paficanana- 
tarkaratna adds are: 


524 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(1) There is no reason to hold that Kapila, author of Samkhya 
philosophy, is other than the Kapila mentioned in the Vedas. 

(2) Samkhya, therefore, is not a heterodox system. If scripture and 
traditional texts do not refer to it with as much regard as they pay to 
other orthodox systems, that is because it 1s meant for the superior few 
who are past the stages of detachment, etc., recommended in those 
orthodox scriptures and traditional texts. 

(3) Kapila, Asuri, and Paficagikha were three immediately suc- 
cessive Samkhya philosophers, each one being the teacher of the next. 
It is only between Paficasgikha and Iévarakrsna that there was a long 
gap. Paficananatarkaratna says that this is unerringly suggested by 
the word “‘tatha’”’ in the verse. (“‘Tatha’? here means “and’’.) 

(1) The author of the Samkhyakarika, and Vacaspati Misra, too, 
says that no ordinary means can remove frustration necessarily, that is, 
there is no ordinary means about which one can say that it must remove 
the frustration in question. In Indian philosophy, under the influence 
of Nyaya, such necessities are stated through double negation. Follow- 
ing this tradition Paficananatarkaratna writes the whole thing as 
follows: There is no means that does not have some exception. ‘‘Hav- 
ing exception’? = anaikantika. Hence, ‘‘ekdnta’’ means “‘not having any 
exception.” 

Absolute cessation of frustration (atyantikaduhkhavindsa) is also stated 
more analytically by Paficananatarkaratna, in a subtle neo-Nyaya 
phraseology in terms of prior absence, alternatively to another Sam- 
khya way of putting it.? 

(2) To Vacaspati Miéra’s criticism of the Mimamsa doctrine of 
legitimate slaughter, Paficananatarkaratna adds a long discussion 
purported to represent the central idea of Vacaspati Misra’s criticism. 
The idea, he says, is this. 

When a means is enjoined (in the case of a Vedic injunction), it is 
either because something desired will be attained thereby or because 
something greatly undesirable will be avoided. The two motives do 
not operate jointly. Had that been the case, the Vedas would never 
enjoin the “‘fyena rite,”? which eventually brings in great frustration 
(greater than that which is positively gained as satisfaction). 

It cannot be said that in such cases there is no greater demerit, just 
as there is none such, according to Manu, in the case of killing outright 
an enemy who is about to kill one. The parallelism is wrong; for, 
injunctions such as “Kill outright the enemy who is about to kill you” 
is only sociopolitical, meaning that neither the society nor the body 
politic to which you belong will punish you for this act. Manu never 
meant that this act will not generate any great spiritual demerit. 

So, as one acts according to a Vedic injunction, only one of the two 
principles—(1) leading to the realization of what is desired and (2) 
not generating a great demerit—not both of them, operates as the occa- 


PANCANANA TARKARATNA 525 


sion demands. When, for example, an animal has to be slaughtered 
for the performance of a rite, it is only the first principle that operates, 
whereas cases of prohibition like ‘“‘Do not kill any animal” are gover- 
ned by the second principle only. 

Tt would be no use (for a defector) arguing that prohibitions are 
after all negative injunctions and, therefore, like all positive pres- 
criptions, understood as leading to the attainment of something 
that is desired (here just the absence of great frustration). Such argu- 
ment would be of no avail if only because avoidance as a mode of 
action is here more directly and centrally operative (and a more parsi- 
monious objective) than the attainment of the absence of an undesir- 
able end. Attainment of what is desired and avoidance of great 
frustration being thus two different interests altogether, there is, 
equally, no clash between the two. 

It follows that there is no clash also between slaughter of animals 
as a means to the performance of a rite and the undesirable frustration 
that results from that slaughter, quite as much as there is none between 
eating a sumptuous dinner and the languor that ensues. 

Even granting that the two principles—attainment of a desired 
and avoidance of great frustration—are disparate and, therefore, 
nonclashing, might not one still ask whether “‘prescription” (vdhz) 
and “‘prohibition”’ (nisedha) are not after all each “injunction” and so 
far indistinguishable from the other and, therefore, governed by the 
two principles, either indiscriminately or together. Paficananatarka- 
ratna replies that the distinction is clear enough. Prescriptions are 
unerringly understood as urging one to do something positive and 
and their guiding principle is, obviously, to attain something desired; 
whereas prohibitions are clearly understood as urging one not to do 
certain things in order that certain undesirable consequences (ulti- 
mately some great frustration) may not occur. That prescriptions are 
for realizing certain positive ends is a self-complete proposition, and 
should one seek to add that they are for avoiding undesirable conse- 
quences too, that would only be an additional different proposition 
not needed for defining prescription. Similarly, prohibitions are for 
avoiding undesirable consequences. This is what Vacaspati Misra 
has in mind when he uses the term ‘“‘vdkyabheda’’: he means to say 
that there are two sentences, not one, meaning two different situations. 

Paficananatarkaratna then indulges in certain niceties of gramati- 
cal and linguistic analysis and, after that, discusses in some greater 
details the Mimamsa theory of injunction, particularly in relation to 
slaughter, and its refutation by Samkhya.? 

Vacaspati Misra holds that even the (perfect) bliss of heaven (in- 
deed, heaven= bliss) has to undergo decay and infers this character 
of decaying on the ground that as a positive being (as distinct from 
absence, which is negative) it has emerged (i.e., come into being at 


526 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


a moment of time). Paficananatarkaratna adds: Although for the 
Samkhyan himself the first half of the ground (viz., positive being) is 
unnecessary, because Samkhya would never admit anything that is 
not a positive existent, this half has yet been stated in so many words 
in order only to convince others who do recognize that even (effected) 
destruction (dhvamsa) is a sort of being. What Payicananatarkaratna 
means is that if the decay of heavenly bliss were sought to be inferred 
from ‘‘that bliss merely coming into being (i.e., getting effected) ,” 
then even destruction would also have to be taken as decaying, which, 
in the face of it, is absurd. 

Paficananatarkaratna adds that ‘“‘modern Samkhyans” still insist on 
this first half of the ground. They hold that decay is not what Vacaspati 
Miéra has literally meant: according to them, he meant by that term 
nothing but “becoming latent’? (tirobhdva). and, in paralled fashion, 
by the term “coming into being” becoming patent (dvirbhdva). They 
hold that, had the fact of something becoming latent been inferred 
merely” on the ground of its once having become patent, then even the 
very fact of becoming latent would have to undergo a second latency, 
which is absurd. So, just in order to exclude this possibility a second 
ground like “‘because it is not tirobhdva itself’? has to be added. And 
this gound is, from the Samkhya point of view, the same thing as “‘it 
is a positive being.” 

Decaying (ksayin) = not everlasting = (some time) ceasing to be= 
(in Samkhya language) capable of becoming latent. X as becoming 
latent (tirobhdva of X) is for that X to remain thenceforward as only 
future X, that is as any X that will, in future, emerge into being (will 
be manifest = patent). A latent X to become latent again is normally 
inconceivable, unless it means (quite in another interest and context) 
the process of step-by-step retrogression ultimately into primordial 
materiality. 

(3) As elsewhere, here too Paficananatarkaratna indulges in ana- 
lytical niceties in the style of neo-Nyaya. A few specimens: 

(a) In connection with Vacaspati Miéra’s statement, ‘Some 
(Samkhya) ‘essence’(s) is (are) not-both’’ (kascidanubhayariipah), he 
writes that ‘“‘not-both’’ here does not literally mean not “both” (.e., 
either); it means “neither.” 

(b) In clarification of Vacaspati Misra’s sentence ‘Primordial 
materiality is the three constituents in the state of equilibrium” 
(‘prakrtih pradhdnam  sattvarajastamasdm sdmyavastha”’), he writes: 
What is intended is that materiality is capable of (characterizable as) 
being in such equilibrium. This explains why, even at the time of 
creation, when it modifies itself into intellect, etc., it is still characteriz- 
able as materiality. The state of complete dissolution (pralaya), how- 
ever, is an actual state of equilibrium. 

(c) Vacaspati Misra writes that individual cows, pots, etc., are 


PANGANANA TARKARATNA 527 


not “metaphysically different’ (tativantara) from the “‘essences”’ 
called gross elements (soil, water, fire, etc.) because they are as much 
gross (i.e., productive of satisfaction, frustration, and confusion) 
and possess as much sensory qualities as those gross elements them- 
selves. Paficananatarkaratna adds: That these are not metaphysically 
different from the gross elements is not inferred on the ground of that 
similarity. The ground here is either their grossness (sthilata) 
or their possessing sensuous qualities (ndriyagrahyata), the similarity 
spoken of being only to exclude the fallacies of svaripasiddht and drstan- 
tasiddha (the fallacies, viz., (1) that the paksa that has to be proved 
in the sddhya—on the ground of the hetu—is not already known 
to be obtaining anywhere in the world and (2) there is no known 
instance whatsoever of a thing that, possessing /, also possesses p. 
The similarity in question forms no part of the ground. 

(d) He then puts the whole inference in the typical Nyaya form, 
taking all precautions, and shows how it excludes all that ought to 
be excluded and includes whatever ought to be included. In that 
connection he further shows: Even atoms of gross elements are not 
excluded, for they too possess the grossness and the sensuous qualities 
in question; or, probably, Vacaspati Misra and Isvarakrsna would, 
as does (the Naiyayika) Raghunatha, deny atoms and replace them 
by minimal perceptibles (trasarenu). In the latter case, the gross ele- 
ments would also be gross (sthdla) in another commonly accepted 
sense, that is, being of finite size. 

Other metaphysical entities (fundamental principles = categories )5 
recognized in other systems of philosophy are all reducible to the 
twenty five Samkhya principles.6 The Nyaya-Vaisesika’s ‘‘attributes”’ 
(guna), that is, color, taste, etc., are nondifferent from substances 
(dravya), and so it is with their motions (karma) and “universals” 
(jatt): these latter are but substances in different forms and func- 
tions. Different distinct substances, too, are but the three Samkhya 
constituents (sativa, rajas, and tamas) in different unbalanced forms of 
combined manifestation. As for inherence (samavdya), it too is, in a 
way, nondifferent from that which the inherent inheres in (or, maybe, 
from the inherent itself). Absence (abhdva) of A is nothing except 
that which is said to be the locus of that absence; posterior absence 
and prior absence are just the latency respectively of what has been 
and what will be patent. As for time (kala), Samkhya does not recog- 
nize its reality, and similarly with space (dif). 


II. InsrRuMENTs oF KNOWLEDGE 
(4) In the neo-Nyaya style Paficananatarkaratna offers a com- 


plete and yet concise definition of instrument of knowledge and shows 
how noninstruments like doubt, error, and memory, are excluded. 


528 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


As instruments, instruments of knowledge are but transformations 
of intellect, which, in Samkhya, is nonconscious. Knowledge is the 
corresponding awareness, that is, awareness as that mode (it being pre- 
supposed that awareness by itself, i.e., pure consciousness, is a separate 
metaphysical principle that is only reflected in that mode). Knowl- 
edge, thus, is the mode of intellect only insofar as it has been enligh- 
tened (manifested) by the light of pure consciousness. Not that here 
the means and what it is a means of are one and the same. It is 
an instrument of knowledge only so far as it is an operation of intellect, 
other than doubt, error, and memory; but it is the result (knowledge) 
only insofar as consciousness has enlightened (manifested) it. Again, 
it cannot be said that the operation has continued for a certain period 
of time (however small) and then become enlightened. Without 
being in contact with pure consciousness no such operation can conti- 
nue even for a moment, and they are in contact from the beginning, 
which shows that, though synchronous, the operation by itself and 
the same operation as enlightened (manifested) are not wholly iden- 
tical. It follows that all operations of intellect are, insofar as they are 
in themselves and are not enlightened by pure consciousness, instru- 
ments of knowledge, and such enlightened operations in general are 
called true awarenesses (pram&). Knowledgehood (pramétva) of an 
intellectual operation is thus, in whatever way, effected by its con- 
tact with (the reflection of) pure consciousness. 

So far there is a distinction between (a) the operation of intellect 
according to the thing (object) perceived’? and (b) knowledge of this 
this (ghafajfiana= enlightened ghatakara vrtti). This enlightened ope- 
ration stands necessarily revealed as enlightened to after-cognition 
(anuvyavasdya) of the form “‘T know this pot (ghafa),”’ though this intro- 
spection does not enlighten the enlightenedness of the operation in 
question (i.e., enlightened modes in general). It, too, is just another 
operation of intellect, as much enlightened as any other operation; 
only it is a necessary prerequisite for any operation to become en- 
lightened. Enlightenedness of an operation of intellect requires no 
further enlightenment: it is self-enlightening (svaprakdsa). 

Or, as some others hold, no intervention of after-cognition is needed 
for, if other operations have to be enlightened through some inter- 
vention of after-cognition, this after-cognition, being itself an intel- 
lectual operation, has in its turn to require another after-cognition 
(and that, too, as an intellectual operation) to intervene in order 
that the first after-cognition may become enlightened, which means 
fruitless infinite regress. According to this second view, even an 
unreflective (unintrospected) operation becomes directly enlightened, 
and that unreflective enlightenedness is self-enlightening.® 

(5) Vacaspati Miéra states three reasons why, of all the instru- 
ments of knowledge, perception has to be considered first. They are 


PANGANANA TARKARATNA 529 


(1) perception occurs in time before the other instruments (such as 
inference, etc.), (2) the other instruments of knowledge depend on 
perception, and (3) every system of philosophy accords the first 
place to perception. Paficananatarkaratna. explains this as follows: 
In this beginningless world (of human speculation), where perception 
and other instruments of knowledge (inferences, etc.) precede one 
another in a beginningless chain, who will determine which instru- 
ment has really preceded, and how? This is why Vacaspati Miéra 
has added the second reason stated above. But, even then, because 
in performing rites it is inference, rather than perception, that pri- 
marily guides us and makes perception depend so far on it, Vacaspati 
Misra adds the third reason as the last resort.® 

As Paficananatarkaratna understands the Samkhyakarika and Tat- 
tvakaumudi, perception as an instrument of knowledge is either a 
sense capacity insofar as it is connected with the object (to be known) 
or intellect operating on an operation of that sense capacity (i.e., on 
the sense capacity itself that has taken shape, as it were, of the object), 
the operation in question being effected by its relation with the 
object.l° 

In either case, the relation of the sense capacity to the object may 
be of various kinds according as the capacities, those objects, and 
other factors differ in different cases; and the relations may in some 
cases be even understood (in the Nyaya fashion) as extraordinary 
(alaukika). Only Samkhya, Paficananatarkaratna claims, cannot re- 
cognize jfdnalaksanapratyaksa (a nonperceptual idea becoming fused 
with other presented data in such a manner that it is turned thereby 
into a veritable presentation). 

Vacaspati Migra and others speak often of “the favor” (anugraha) 
of pure consciousness conferred on intellect (buddhi). Paficanana- 
tarkaratna analyses it etymologically as intellect accepts (acceptance= 
grahana) the excellence or similarity of consciousness. The prefix 
‘anu’? suggests this. 

The operation of intellect on an operation of a sense capacity is to 
be understood as such an operation of intellect according to the ob- 
ject (which is said to be known), which is also, at the same time, of 
the nature of belief (nifcaya). In other words, the said operation of 
intellect is but belief of the form “J know that this is such and such.” 
In contrast, the operation of a sense capacity—especially of mind 
(manas)—is only of the form “This is such and such.” 

One may, therefore, legitimately ask whether the mere operations 
of sense capacities are not to be excluded from the category of knowl- 
edge until the operation of intellect has supervened. Some might 
reply that they are to be excluded on the ground that they are 
not necessarily of the form of the belief “‘I know that, etc.” (whereas 
modalizations of intellect are always of that form). Paficananatarka- 


530 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ratna, however, would not accept this reply. He argues that the reply 
misfires inasmuch as Vacaspati Miéra himself has claimed elsewhere 
that the function of mind is intentional (samkalpa). Yet (he would 
claim that) no operation of mind is ever by itself an instrument of 
knowledge. It would be an instrument of knowledge only insofar 
as it forms part of the operation of intellect. In fact, the operation of 
intellect consists of three distinct operations, though functioning 
jointly. One of these is the operation of mind, through which intel- 
lect relates itself to the object, shaping itself, according to the form 
of the object, in to the form ‘“‘This is such and such’’ (“‘is” under- 
scored, indicating that there is belief). The second operation is that 
of egoity, through which intellect relates itself to consciousness, 
shaping itself into the form ‘J am such and such” or ‘‘Things are in 
such and such ways relevant to me,” underscoring the way the 
“YT”? feeling evolves. The third operation is that of intellect exclusively, 
which, according to Vacaspati Misra is of the form of belief as to what 
“T have to do.”18 Paficananatarkaratna’s point is that it is only when 
all these three operations function that intellect, shaping itself accor- 
ding to the form of object, is entitled to the name “‘instrument of 
knowledge.’’ What is meant here by ‘‘three operations of the intel- 
lect” is that each such operation, though not depending for its exer- 
cise on the other two, yet exercises itself only in the context of the 
other two operating jointly with itself. The second operation stated 
above is, qua independent, precisely the autonomous operation of 
ego, and the first, similarly, of sense capacity (particularly, of 
mind). 

Or, as Paficananatarkaratna contends, “‘intellect with three oper- 
ations” means just the three fundamental principles, each with its 
specific operation, functioning successively—mind just presenting the 
object, egoity presenting the same object to consciousness, and intel- 
lect deciding (involving belief or objectivity) what to do with it. 

Vijfianabhiksu holds that intellect and consciousness must each get 
reflected on the other, because there is nothing here to determine that 
one specifically is capable of receiving reflection and the other not. 
This view, according to Paficananatarkaratna is wrong, because there 
are such determinants. Intellect as sdtivika (i.e., made of sattva= 
intelligibility constituent) is, like a mirror, capable of taking in reflec- 
tion (image of other things); and consciousness, as it is made of no- 
thing, is incapable of that. Vijfianabhiksu’s view is unacceptable for 
another reason also. If intellect and consciousness were like two 
mirrors facing each other, then there being a single object between 
them to be reflected in one of the mirrors, there would be an in- 
finite number of such reflections (images) in each mirror. 

Paficananatarkaratna has, in this connection, very thoroughly 
examined Vijfianabhiksu’s theory of mutual reflection by raising some 


PANCANANA TARKARATNA 531 


other crushing objections against him. He has also studied the rele- 
vance of the well-known citation “‘tasmimsciddarpane sphare...” 
to Samkhya philosophy and shown also that the term pratisamvedin” 
in “buddheh pratisamvedi purusah’ (Vyasabhdsya) does not in any way 
connote anything like reflection (imaging=copying). Even an echo, 
according to him, is not, at least obviously, reflectionlike. 

Paficananatarkaratna has also, in this connection, analyzed the 
concept of doubt, distinguishing between two kinds of indefinitude 
(awareness of the indefinite)—one, of a thing being apprehended 
simultaneously as X and not X and the other, of a thing being simul- 
taneously apprehended as X, Y, etc. 

Vacaspati Misra has shown why inference has to be studied after 
perception. Paficananatarkaratna adds that “‘after’? here means 
immediately after and states the whole problem in a very precise 
(neo-Nyaya) form and, he, as usual shows in detail the relevance 
of every word of the statement—shows, in other words, why no type 
of instrument of knowledge that is not inference should be consi- 
dered immediately after perception and why no type of inference 
should be excluded by this rule. 

Paficananatarkaratna also offers another simpler interpretation of 
Vacaspati Migra’s claim that inference has to be considered after 
perception. In this interpretation he ceases to insist on ‘‘immediately 
after,” understanding the expression ‘‘pratyaksakaryatvat’”’ not as ‘‘infer- 
ence is somehow effected by perception” but as “‘the consideration 
of inference, as a work to be done, comes naturally after the consider- 
ation of perception as a work.”’? The work in question is the work of 
consideration. 

Paficananatarkaratna discusses in detail (1) the Nyaya concept of 
upddhi (limiting condition that vitiates inference), (2) its two forms, 
suspected and assured upadhi, (3) the entire mechanism of inference 
in neo-Nyaya fashion, (4) the Samkhya view of universal (jati) as 
distinguished from the Nyaya view, (5) bow Vacaspati Miéra’s 
definition of inference distinguishes it adequately from all other 
instruments of knowledge and (6) how in exclusionary inference the 
negative predicate (‘‘other than what is other than X”’) really points 
to something being X, without X being shown as a predicate in the 
knowledge content (jfanakara). (It is, however, only the object of 
that knowledge.) For example, in the inference ‘Earth is other than 
whatever is not earth, because it has smell” the predicate is indeed 
negative (a negation of negations — not-water, not-fire, not-air 
and not-ether), but whaf is meant is thatitis earth, which, however, 
does not figure here as a predicate, earthness here being the very iden- 
tity of the soil. This exclusionary inference is, in this point, different 
from what the Naiyayikas call ‘“‘only-negative inference”’ (kevalavyati- 
rekyanumdna) which, according to them, is no form of Vacaspati Miéra’s 


532 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


@ posteriori inference, though Vacaspati Misra’s exclusionary infer- 
ence is exactly that. In Samkhya, the final result of exclusionary in- 
ference is the inferential knowledge of what remains over after all the 
other alternatives are negated. According to Nyaya, this knowledge 
of what remains over is only an ad hoc mental intuition (mdnasaprat- 
yaksa) that follows. 

As usual, Paficananatarkaratna formulates Vacaspati Misra’s account 
of verbal testimony (both as an instrument and as knowledge) in precise 
neo-Nyaya style and shows the relevance of every term of that formula. 

In connection with the instrument of verbal testimony, Paficanana- 
tarkaratna clarifies the notions of self-validation and extrinsic vali- 
dation. 

Knowledge is validated either intrinsically, that is, independently 
of any extrinsic consideration, or on extrinsic grounds. Perceptual and 
inferential knowledge and knowledge of X derived from hearing some- 
body speaking of X have all got to be extrinsically validated (by condi- 
tions other than those that cause such knowledge). Why? Because in 
such cases there is alwasys the possibility of some defect. But scriptural 
knowledge, which looks like knowledge derived from hearing some- 
body speaking out those truths, is yet intrinsically valid because, as 
a matter of fact, these truths are not originally spoken by anybody and 
are, therefore, free of all defects that might belong to a speaker. (This 
is what orthodox thinkers mean by “‘original scripture’), That which, 
on the other hand, is spoken by some person can be taken as true (1) if, 
and so far as, it is derived directly from the original scripture (as in the 
case of ethico-social studies called smrti, itihdsa, purdna, etc.) or (2) if 
it is a literal reproduction of the original scripture every time the world 
is created anew after total dissolution. Kapila’s Samkhya refers to 
the latter. 

Some scholars hold that in Samkhya all awarenesses (even percep- 
tual and inferential ones) are self-validating. Paficananatarkaratna 
rejects that view on the ground that ordinarily at least verbal testi- 
monies are often found to be invalid. Further, the word “‘tat’’ (“that’’), 
in Vacaspati Misra’s commentary “‘tat ca svatah pramanam’” “‘and that 
is self-validating’’) does not, in the context where it occurs, refer to 
ordinary testimonies (but only to scriptural testimony); and, a for- 
tiori, it does not refer to other instruments of knowledge such as per- 
ception and inference. 

Some Samkhyans, again, have understood ‘‘self-validating’’ (svatah- 
pramana) as “‘self-illuminating”’ (svatahprakasa) and held, on this assump- 
tion, that all knowledge (and, therefore, all instruments of knowledge) 
is self-validating because knowledge as manifestness, i.e., as in the 
context of consciousness, is always sclfmanifesting. According to 
Paficananatarkaratna this assumption is unwarranted and, further, 
even if on this assumption all knowledge insofar as it is in the context 


PANCANANA TARKARATNA 533 


of consciousness self-manifesting, none of the corresponding modes 
of intellect, which alone are called instruments of knowledge, are defi- 
nitely of that character. 

In connection with Vacaspati Migra’s reduction of comparison 
(upamana) to inference, Paficananatarkaratna adds: What is meant 
by the word “‘gavaya’™® is, according to some, the universal gavayahood 
(gavayatva) and, according to others, particular gavayas insofar as they 
are instantiations of the universal gavayahood (gavayatvdvacchinnaga- 
vaya). Paficananatarkaratna admits both. 

Some hold that the word ‘‘gavaya’? means as much the universal 
gavayahood as also the similarity of the animal in question to the cow, 
and that, whereas the former is known through comparison, the latter 
1s known through inference. But Paficananatarkaratna would reply 
that where both the similarity and the universal gavayahood (both as 
possible designata of the word “‘gavaya’’) are perceptually present, it 
would be more parsimonious to take the universal gavayahood as the 
designatum than alternating between the two. (The mere similarity 
cannot be taken as the designatum because (1) the universal is equally 
present to perception!® and (2) whereas the presented similarity can 
be understood in terms of the universal, the reverse is not possible. ) 

That in the case under consideration the word “‘gavaya’’ signifies the 
universal gavayahood (or any animal as aninstantiation of gavayahood) 
is, as a matter of fact, inferred onthe ground of the major premise 
‘When elders use a word for me to have an attitude to something 
present to my perception they mean that thing by that word.” (In the 
case under consideration they have used the word ‘‘gavaya’’ for me to 
understand that the animal called gavaya is like a cow.) But this major 
premise itself could not be unless, through a new instrument of knowl- 
edge, one had taken a particular animal present before him as bearing 
the name “‘gavaya.” This latter is possible, in the case under consi- 
deration, through the perception of the similarity of the animal to 
what is called ‘‘cow.”’ In case, on the other hand, an elder asks me to 
bring an animal that is present before us both by saying “Bring that 
gavaya,”’ I would know that the animal is called “‘gavaya’’ merely on the 
strength of the testimony of that elder. 

Where Vacaspati Misra simply writes that it is one and the same 
similarity whether it is the similarity of cow with a gavaya or of a gavaya 
with a cow, Paficananatarkaratna adds: To say in this case that the 
cow perceived in the past and now only remembered is similar to the 
gavaya now perceived would indeed pose a difficulty. As the gavaya 
is perceived, its similarity with any cow (whether that cow is now 
perceived or not) is also perceived, for the similarity in question is after 
all the presence (in the gavaya) of quite a good number of perceivable 
features of any cow. In the case, on the other hand, of the similarity 
of a remembered (rot now perceived) cow—when the gavaya stands 


534 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


perceived—with that gavaya, one might object that it (i.e., the simi- 
larity) cannot be perceived, because that cow itself is not then per- 
ceived. This objection can, however, be met (Paficananatarkaratna 
holds) through the Nyaya theory of jftdnalaksanapratyaksa, the theory 
that the remembered object becomes so fused (complicated) with the 
perceived object as to be itself also presented to perception (as in the 
case of a block of ice looking cold).1” 

While explaining Vacaspati Miéra’s notes on the instrument of know- 
ledge called presumption, Paficananatarkaratna adds the following: 
According to the Mimamsakas presumption as an instrument of know- 
ing is to be understood in two ways—either explaining an enigmatic 
situation by imagining (i.e., with the hypothesis of) something without 
which it cannot be explained (the enigmatic situation, forexample, that 
somebody is known to be living and is yet not found in his residence, 
cannot be explained except by postulating that he is outside his resi- 
dence) or by defining the situation so precisely that no contradiction 
remains (the contradiction, for example, between his remaining else- 
where—for he is still living—and not remaining in his house—the 
house being after all one of the ‘“‘anywhere(s)”—is removed by 
defining ‘‘anywhere’’ as anywhere else). 

Again, according to the Mimamsakas, presumption, could look like 
inference if only it were of the exclusionary type in which the major 
premise merely shows that the absence of the sd@dhya has (so far) been 
found to be concomitant with the absence of the hetu. But they hold 
at the same time that this type of argument is no inference at all; it is 
precisely what they call presumption. Paficananatarkaratna adds 
that it is just in order to counter this challenge that Vacaspati Misra 
has reduced presumption to a positive (vita) form of inference. 

Regarding nonapprchension as an instrument of knowledge, Pafica- 
nanatarkaratna adds: According to the Bhatta Mimamsaka, when I 
assert (know) the absence of an object X, this is not possible except 
through the absence of my knowledge of X (though other conditions 
are also required). This absence of the knowledge of X is the instru- 
ment called nonapprehension (abhdva=anupalabdhi). In Samkhya 
language, it ought to be the absence of the operation relating to X. But 
(as Paficananatarkaratna claims) this absence is itself an operation 
after all, though of the form “‘absence of the operation (vrtii) of X.” 
According to Samkhya, absence of X in Y is nothing but that mere Y, 
that is, Y as even uncharacterized in any manner by that absence. 
Hence, the absence of an operation, which absence must be taken as 
another operation, has to be nothing but that other operation uncha- 
racterized even by that absence. 

Paficananatarkaratna next explains this identity of the absence of 
X in Y with mere Y with reference to different types of absence and 
also with reference to the two broad categories of counterpositives, 


PANCANANA TARKARATNA 535 


that is, the counterpositive that occupies a part of the locus and one 
that occupies the whole of it. 

One might object (as Paficananatarkaratna imagines it) that if the 
absence of X in Y is the same thing as Y itself, there could not be an 
expression like ‘‘the absence of X in Y.”’ But the reply (as Paficanana- 
tarkaratna offers it) is that as much as m the case of seawater and 
waves here too there is some difference (in spite of identity), which 
would guarantee the use of the said expression and all that is like it. 
Paficananatarkaratna next raises some subtle points and disposes of 
them in the neo-Nyaya fashion. . 

(6) Intellect and egoity are inferred exactly in the same way as 
unmanifest materiality is inferred, that is, by passing from relative 
limitedness to relative ‘beyond that limit.” 

Paficananatarkaratna next shows that subtle elements are inferred 
on the ground that every gross entity must have for its causal basis 
what is subtler than it. The well-known process of inferring sense capa- 
cities is stated over again here. 

All such inferences are of the general correlation (sdmanyatodrsta) 
type. 

Vacaspati Misra holds that neither the a@ posteriori (Sesavat) nor 
general correlation type of inference applies in the case of the order of 
sequence of the fundamental principles from intellect to gross elements. 
But Vijfianabhiksu has actually applied the @ posteriori type of infer- 
ence here. Paficananatarkaratna states these inferences and has gone 
so far as even to refute a relevant objection against Vijfianabhiksu’s 
venture. Yet he explodes these inferences on the ground that exactly 
in the same manner counter conclusions could be arrived at in all 
these cases. 

Paficananatarkaratna next quotes a large number of passages from 
different scriptures in support of the Samkhya order of the emergence 
of the fundamental principles and shows how some apparently differ- 
ent statements can be reconciled.18 


III. Tue Norion oF PREEXISTENT EFFECT 


(9) By way of introducing the theory of preexistent effect Vacaspati 
Misra refers to three other theories and states them very briefly. 
Paficananatarkaratna elaborates and identifies these theories as 
follows: 

The first is the Buddhist theory, according to which beings come out 
of nonbeing: An effect arises just after its (material) cause has ceased 
to be. Just before a seed sprouts it has ceased to be a seed, and from this 
we may infer that this is the rule of causation everywhere—even where, 
as in the case of a cloth arising out of threads, this cessation of being 
is not visible. Paficananatarkaratna here raises a relevant objection: 


536 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


but, then, like the burning of the cloth following upon the burning of 
its constituent threads, would not the cessation of the being of the 
threads lead to the cessation of the being of the cloth itself? Pafica- 
nanatarkaratna replies on behalf of the Buddhists: the threads having 
already ceased to be cannot now burn; what is commonly called ‘‘burn- 
ing of threads” is really the burning of the cloth itself. 

The second is the (Advaita) Vedanta theory. It is that from Being 
(ultimate Being = Brahman) appears the world as constituted by ignor- 
ance but wholly to be rejected by knowledge proper and, therefore, 
as not ultimately real. In this respect the world is like the false snake 
that appears in the locus of a real rope except that this rope too is not 
ultimately real. There are, in effect, three types of reality=being: 
(1) ultimate reality (pdramarthikasatta), (2) worldly reality = useful 
reality (vpavaharikasatta), and (3) apparent reality (pratibhdsikasatta). 

The third view is that of the Vaisesika and Nyaya thinkers. By 
“real,” in this view, is meant the eternal = permanent, and by “not real” 
the noneternal=impermanent. All impermanent beings come out 
of permanent beings, like atoms. 

All these three views are exploded immediately, for it is shown that 
all impermanent worldly things are made of satisfaction-yielding, 
frustration-yielding, and confusion-yielding constituents and that there 
is a relation of identity of the (material) cause and its effect. This is 
precisely what Samkhya proposes to show. That the gross elements 
are so is perceptually evident. That subtle elements are so is inferred 
on the basis of (material-) cause-effect identity, and that the further 
subtler essences are so can be inferred in the same manner step-by-step 
retrogressively. Even primordial materiality is so, though only in 
chain relation to the other essences, not in its intrinsic status. 

(11) (Vacaspati Misra in the Tattoakaumudi writes “‘nawéayikanayacru- 
dbhavaniyam.” Paficananatarkaratna points out that there is another 
alternative reading. It is “‘naiyayikatanayaih.”’ He rejects this alterna- 
tive reading as childish and practically out of context. ) 

All the arguments for the theory of satkdrya, stated in the Samkhya- 
karika and elaborated in the Tattvakaumudi, are reformulated by 
Paficananatarkaratna in precise neo-Nyaya forms and defended 
against possible objections. 

Because the effect and its (material) cause are substantively identi- 
cal, it follows that qualities (guna), in the Nydya-Vaisesika sense, 
motions (karman), and universals (jaz) are identical with the corres- 
ponding (individual) substances.¥ 


Y. Tue Turee CONSTITUENTS 


(13) In verse 12 it has been stated that the constituents are for (i.e., 
aids to) enlightenment= manifestation (prakdfa), activity (pravrtt.), 


PANGANANA TARKARATNA 537 


and regulation (niyama). The present verse, 13, shows that these 
belong to the very nature of the three constituents respectively. 

Or, in the previous verse the functions of the three constituents have 
been stated in lump, without any attempt at showing which one is 
to be connected with which. This has been done in the present verse. 

Vacaspati Misra writes that the constituent rajas drives the consti- 
tuentsto behaveas they do. Paficananatarkaratnaadds: There isnothing 
paradoxical here. It is not that one and the same rajas is here as much 
the wielder as the object that is wielded, at one and the same point 
of time. As in the case of a tree obtaining in a group of trees, called 
forest, or a tenth man in a group counting himself as the tenth, there 
is here some difference somewhere involved in spite of all identity, a 
difference that we have to postulate. This is how some Samkhyists 
understand the situation. Some modern Samkhyists, however, are 
bold enough to assert that, even about the agent and the object of his 
act being identical, there is nothing that is wrong, for how, otherwise, 
could one explain the phenomenon that one knows himself? What is 
required here, they claim, is only a clear analysis of the apparently 
paradoxical situation. Paficananatarkaratna offers that analysis here 
in correct neo-Nyaya language. 

That satisfaction (sativa), frustration (rajas), and confusion (tamas) 
must belong to the objects that appear to produce these is to be in- 
ferred from cases such as the following: Through the senses one can 
perceive color, taste, etc., of an object only if that object already 
possesses color, taste, etc. Again, just as one can perceive color only 
through his eyes, not through his tongue, so, we contend, the same 
object produces satisfaction in one person, not in another, only 
because of the differing constitutions (temporary though they may be) 
of these different persons (sattva dominating in one and rajas and 
tamas dominating in others). 

It should not be said that the object is always neutral but that it 
produces satisfaction, frustration, etc., in different minds according as 
these minds have different constitutions. For, then, the same thing 
could be said about the color sensation, taste sensation, etc., noted 
above. 

Nor should one argue that the object outside is only an efficient 
cause of the satisfaction, frustration, etc., in the mind, much as rods, 
wheels, etc., are of the pots that are made, and as these efficient causes 
do not contain the pots, so with the object that produces satisfaction, 
frustration, etc. As for the said production of satisfaction, frustration, 
etc., this would only be an unnecessarily complicated (i.e., involving 
the defect called complexity (gaurava)) account, however true it may 
be of the production of pots. A simpler account would be that the 
object itself contains (and is, therefore, ofthe nature of) satisfaction, 
frustration, and confusion.”? 


538 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


VI. INFERENCES TO PRIMORDIAL MATERIALITY AND CONSCIOUSNESS 


(16) The word “samudaya’”’ (in “samudayat”) in the Sémkhyakarika 
is sought to be rendered clearly by Vacaspati Misra by means of the 
word “samavaya.” Paficananatarkaratna writes: The word “sama- 
vaya’? used by Vacaspati Misra means the state of being just on the 
point of a (material) cause changing itself into an effect. 

(17) Vacaspati Migra writes: Whatever is composed of the three 
constituents is a composite entity, where the denotation of the term 
“composite entity’? is wider than that of the term “composed of the 
three constituents.” It follows that the denial of the latter (i.e., of the 
composite character of pure consciousness) would necessarily entail 
denial of the former (i.e., of pure consciousness being composed of the 
three constituents). 

So far so good, but immediately after this he writes something that 
seems to contradict what he has just written. He writes that, by deny- 
ing the three constituents, etc., of pure consciousness (i.e., by means of 
the premise that pure consciousness is not composed of the three cons- 
tituents, etc.), the author of the Samkhyakarika seeks as it were to deny 
the composite character of it (i.e., that it has a composite character). 

This looks illogical, but Paficananatarkaratna removes the anomaly. 
We must not forget that Vacaspati Misra has added an “etc.”’ after 
“three constituents.” This means that Igvarakrsna has taken into con- 
sideration, not merely the three,constituents, but along with these, and in 
the same act of denial, all other coordinate characters of pure consci- 
ousness (except its being a composite entity). “To be composed of 
the three constituents, etc., provided it is a composite entity”’ is not 
of narrower denotation than ‘“‘to be a composite entity.” 

“Whatever is a composite entity is designed to serve some other’s 
interest’’—this is no statement of the ground of the inference in question. 
(In other words, “‘to be a composite entity’’ is not the hetu here. For, 
whereas in every inference the hetu has to be found in the locus of the 
sddhya, this is not the case here.) To be a composite entity is only an 
instigating factor (prayojaka) of the inference in question. This point 
must be kept in view in all the different inferences leading to the esta- 
blishment of (pure) consciousness. 

Vacaspati Misra writes—and this is what everybody would admit— 
that satisfaction is that which, in effect, is appreciated as favorable to 
oneself, and frustration is that which, in effect, is appreciated as inimi- 
cal. But satisfaction and frustration are, after all, operations of the 
intellect. Hence, the one that appreciates must be other than the in- 
tellect. Were it not so, the situation would be a contradictory one of 
the form ‘“‘X (as subject) knowing itself (as object)’’—one and the 
same act having an identical entity as the agent and the object. Pafica- 
nanatarkaratna asks, in this context, the question whether the injunc- 


PANCGANANA TARKARATNA 539 


tion ‘Know thyself” would then be a self-contradictory and shows in 
various ways that it is not.74 

(18) Birth is to be understood as the (first-moment) relation (of 
a self) with a novel (apérva) body, etc., not the relation (with the same 
body) that continues. 

The relation that explains birth is called by Vacaspati Misra abhisam- 
bandha. Paficananatarkaratna explains it as follows. This relation 
(contextually, at the first moment, but equally so at all subsequent 
moments of the same life) is called “‘abhisambandha,’ because it is no 
genuinely real relation. It is a relation that is superimposed, taken 
as though it is a relation (dropitasambandha). 

Vacaspati Misra says that birth is the (superimposed) relation (of 
a self) with a particular system of novel body, sense capacities, egoity, 
intellect, and native dispositions (adrsta) for particular satisfactions 
and frustrations (to be reaped in the life to begin). Paficananatarka 
ratna explains why, over and above body, these other entities are 
required: If, over and above novel body, there must be in birth these 
other novel entities, that is, novel sense capacities, novel egoity, novel 
intellect, and novel dispositions for particular satisfactions and frus- 
trations, this is only to exclude the self-created body system of the Yogin, 
in which, though the body so created (sometimes several such bodies 
simultaneously), along with the necessary sense capacities, etc., is 
novel, the dispositions for satisfactions and frustrations are not so 
(they being exactly those for the speedy exhaustion of which the yogin 
creates that body system). 

But what inadequacy, it may be asked, would be there if novel sense 
capacities, novel ego, and novel intellect were not required? The reply 
is that without them the body system would not have its full uniqueness. 
Equally again, intellect alone (though along with body and disposi- 
tions, i.e., without egoity and sense capacities) would not be suffi- 
cient, for, as a matter of necessity, a unique egoity and a unique set 
of sense capacities always accompany a unique intellect. 

In different stages of life, such as childhood, youth, and decrepitude 
we do not, in spite of substantial changes otherwise, have (with each 
stage) a novel body (those changes being but changes in the same 
body). 

(21) Paficananatarkaratna speaks of a kind of nonmanifest feel- 
ing-toned experience before the world of any particular creative cycle 
comes into being (manifestation). It is exactly what is otherwise called 
not-yet-maturing-into-actual-feeling-toned experience and to-mature- 
that-way-later disposition (adrsta). 

(22) Paficananatarkaratna shows in his own way why all the 
twenty-five fundamental principles (tativa) have to be admitted and 
confirms what he says by reference to what a great teacher has already 
said.?? He proceeds as follows: To start with, at least two principles 


540 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


have to be admitted, consciousness and objects (both gross and subtle), 
all objects together being called materiality. But, certainly, over and 
above these two we must admit some relation of the objects to that 
consciousness, for without this there could not be any experience. Now, 
does this relation belong to the nature of consciousness or does it be- 
long to the nature of materiality, or to that of the objects themselves, 
or to something else? The first two alternatives are unacceptable, for 
had we accepted them there could be no liberation. Nor does the rela- 
tion belong merely to the nature of the objects, for then the distinction 
between direct (perceptual) and indirect (nonperceptual) experience 
would go unexplained. In order that this distinction is explained we 
have to admit something else, that is, sense capacities, without the 
operation of which there could not be perceptual experience. But still 
all difficulties are not over. Even though an object stands in relation 
to a sense capacity, it sometimes goes unnoticed, which means that 
yet another principle is required to make a sense capacity help expe- 
riencing object. That other principle is exactly what we have called 
mind. Other phenomena, for the explanation of which three other 
principles, egoity, intellect, and unmanifest materiality, have to be 
admitted are (1) dream experience, (2) experience in dreamless sleep, 
and (3) the difficulty that if intellect is a permanent principle then 
there would be no liberation (which implies that intellect, before it 
comes into being (manifestation) and after it ceases to be (manifest), 
remains unmanifest (as unmanifest materiality).*°) 


IX. Funcrioninc ofr THE THIRTEENFOLD INSTRUMENT 


(23) Reflective discerning = belief = rational objectivity is as much 
operative in will as in cognition. Objectivity in willing is the aware- 
ness of what I ought to do, and that in cognition, the awareness of what 
ought to be. 

Supernormal powers, called aisvarya, form also a kind of willing. 
(Rational objectivity here is the awareness of attaining the maximum 
in the line.) As forms of willing they should not be taken as states (or 
attitudes) of the body. 

Meritorious behavior, knowledge, nonattachment, and power 
(atsvarya) are composed of sattva constituents, and demeritorious be- 
havior, ignorance, attachment, and impotence are composed of tamas 
constituents. But rajas is required in both cases, for without rajas 
nothing can be exercised into operation. Thus all the three constitu- 
ents are required—sativa and tamas as constitutive, and rajas, helping 
both to get into operation. 

In connection with the notion of eightfold yoga, Paficananatarka- 
ratna gives a short account of the entire Yoga discipline according to 
Patafijali. 


PANCANANA TARKARATNA 541 


All the types of nonattachment that Vacaspati Misra mentions are 
only provisional (apard). The ultimate (para) nonattachment is dis- 
interestedness even in the direct intuition of the difference of (pure) 
consciousness and materiality. Although Vacaspati Miéra has not 
mentioned it as a predisposition of intellect it is one (Paficananatarka- 
ratna says), as held by Patafijali who calls it a “lingering cognitive 
tone” or, as it has sometimes been understood, ‘‘knowledge at its ex- 
cellence”’ (jfidnaprasdda). 

Demeritorious behavior, ignorance, attachment, and impotence 
are not mere absences of their opposites, meritorious behavior, etc. 
They are positive counterstates (or counterattitudes). 

From the account of merit, knowledge, etc., and satisfaction, frus- 
tration, etc., given in this karikd, it follows that they belong to intellect 
and not to consciousness. 

(24) Paficananatarkaratna collects a good number of passages 
from the Upanisads and Puranas and reconciles their differences. 
Further, he contends that when we awake from deep (dreamless) 
sleep we pass through stages where the order of the Samkhya princi- 
ples is rehearsed in that context, and in the reverse order when from 
the waking stage we lapse into deep (dreamless) sleep. 

(29) Ifthe five vital breaths are called air (vayu) of different types, 
this must not be understood literally. They are called air of different 
types merely on the ground of the similarity of function. 

(31) At the time one instrument of knowledge and/or action is 
activated to perform its own function other instruments of knowledge 
and/or action (of the same individual)are activated. The former, so 
far, is the occasioning cause of the latter, both meeting at the same 
point of time. Yet this is neither a matter of accidental coincidence nor 
due to the agency of any conscious being. The coincidence is all deter- 
mined teleologically, in the interest (experience or liberation) of the 
individual whose instruments they are. The interest in question is the 
maturation of dispositions that, among other things, constitute the 
individuality of that individual. 

What Igvarakrsna and Vacaspati Misra call ‘‘akiita”’ (to be on the 
point of starting an operation) is but the activation of the sdtteika 
and tamasika dispositions by the rdjasika constituents, Or, it is nothing 
but the dispositions themselves just insofar as all impediments to their 
maturation into actuality are gone. It may also be said that the dis- 
positions and their operations (in effect, the operative = maturing 
dispositions) are entitatively identical (the only point to be 
noted being that the operations in question are constitutionally end 
oriented). 

What is denied here is only pure consciousness as agent, not pure 
consciousness as itself. 

(32) “Seizing” is a wide term comprehending creation of sound 


542 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(in speech), acceptance of things, reaching up to things, ejection and 
enjoyment. 

According to Samkhya, a substance, say, earth, and the correspond- 
ing attribute, say, smell, are entitatively identical. 

(33) Just as in the case of speech, the sound that is created comes 
after the exercise of the instrument of speech, so is the case with every 
satisfaction and like phenomena, which, according to some, last for 
two successive moments. In all these cases, the present (vartamdna) 
time may cover adjacent moments.4 

(39) Where Vacaspati Migra writes that the gross physical body 
(sdtkausikadeha) is made of such and such strands he does not mention 
semen, which, following the tradition on this line, ought to have been 
included. Paficananatarkaratna writes that it has, in effect, been 
included, because it is at the back of all the rest. 

‘Hairs’? (loman) here means skin. Paficananatarkaratna shows 
elaborately why it should mean that. 


XII. Tue Basic PREDISPOSITIONS 


(46) Vacaspati Misra writes that within the four intellectual crea- 
tions are to be included the eight predispositions of the intellect, each 
as it fits in with one or another of them. He says that seven of these 
predispositions, i.e., all of them except knowledge, are to be included 
in the first three intellectual creations, and knowledge in the last one 
called attainment. Paficananatarkaratna takes up the problem in all 
seriousness and discusses in this connection how certain difficulties that 
arise can be removed and what alternative views there are regarding 
this. 

(50) Contentment is a kind of satisfaction resulting either from 
following wrong paths (wrongly prescribed or understood) for intuit- 
ing the otherness of (pure) consciousness from materiality or from 
wrongly understanding materiality, at any of its transformational 
stages, to be the real ‘‘I’’, that is, pure consciousness. Vacaspati Misra 
has distinguished four kinds of the former type of contentment and 
five kinds of the latter. Paficananatarkaratna has, in this connection, 
and in reference to harika 49, discussed, in addition, the kinds of dys- 
function, “to attain contentment”’ and says that, as contentment is of 
nine kinds so is this dysfunction, called tustiviparyaya. Alternatively, 
too, he understands tustiviparyaya as just not getting the contentment in 
question, though he makes it clear at the same time that this “not 
getting the contentment in question” (tustyabhdva) is not, therefore, 
what is called attainment (that which is direcly conducive to the in- 
tuition of the otherness of pure consciousness from materiality), and 
that way he refutes Vijfianabhiksu’s charge that all forms of tustivi- 
paryaya ought not to have been included in dysfunction. 


PANCANANA TARKARATNA 543 


Paficananatarkaratna explains, too, the relevance of the five techni- 
cal names—ambhas, salila, etc.—for the five kinds of the first type of 
contentment. Similarly, with the five names—pdra, supara, etc. 

(51) Vacasapati Misra after he has explained the eight kinds of 
attainment in one way, explains them in another alternative way. 
He begins this alternative interpretation saying, “‘Others, however, .. .” 

Paficananatarkaratna says that by “‘others’’ Vacaspati Misra means 
Gaudapada and his followers. 

Vijfianabhiksu understands by the term “‘ankusa’? “that which 
attracts.”? He holds that ha, fabda, and adhyayana,* as attracting what 
is called intuition of the otherness of consciousness from materiality, 
are ankugas that way. From this he concludes that these three alone 
constitute the main means to this realization and the other two only 
secondary (indirect) means. But (Paficananatarkaratna holds that) 
such interpretation is unacceptable, because the Samkhyakarikéd never 
distinguishes that way between main and subordinate means. 


XIII. Tae EmpreicaL WoriLp 


(53) The word “fagfu? stands for a creature possessing a hairy 
tail, and the word “‘mrga’’ for a quadruped that does not possess a 
hairy tail. 

(54) ‘‘Zoka’’ here means not regions but residents of the regions. 

(56) The three views that Vacaspati Misra rejects one by one, 
viz., (1) the world is not caused (i.e., no transformation of any ulte- 
rior substance), (2) it is a transformation of consciousness and (3) 
God (a pure consciousness freely possessing infinite capacities) changes 
the ultimate substance into the world, are the views, respectively, of 
the Sarvastivada Buddhists, (Advaita) Vedantins, and the Yoga 
system of Patafijali.?’ 


XIV. SmmiLes FOR MATERIALITY 


(57) The urge, the active force, behind the (initial and all later) 
movement of materiality is but “‘a form of (intrinsic) transformation” 
(rajahparmnamabheda), and it always requires “‘a third contributory 
factor’’ (vyapara), for which reason such urge cannot belong to con- 
sciousness. The idea is that no transformation of materiality can ever 
be (‘“‘efficiently’’ or “materially’’) caused by consciousness. 


XV. LIBERATION AND ISOLATION 
(66) The “‘contact’? (samyoga) of materiality and consciousness, 


because of which creation takes place, is actual contact (sannidhana) 
caused (in its turn) by the prenatal disposition complex (adrsta) 


544 ENGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of the worldly person (jiva). Over and above this, however, there is an 
eternal contact that is only the capability (yogyata) of consciousness 
to experience materiality and of materiality to be experienced by con- 
sciousness. This capability is far removed from “‘actual contact.” 
Vacaspati Misra therefore, never understood by “‘contact that generates 
experience” the mere capability (yogyaté) for contact, for, then, he 
could not have called the contact in question ‘“‘occasioned’’ (naimit- 
ka) and “‘many”? (ndnd). Vijfianabhiksu did not follow this distinc- 
tion and was, therefore, wrong and only wrongly believed that by 
“contact”? Vacaspati Misra had always meant capability for contact. 


KUNJAVIHARI TARKASIDDHANTA 


Kufijavihari Tarkasiddhanta (Bhattacarya), the second son of 
Rupacandra Bhattacarya and Sarada Devi, was born in Mediniman- 
dala, Dacca (now in Bangladesh). He studied Vyakarana, Nyaya, 
and Samkhya from eminent scholars such as Ganganarayana Cakra- 
varti, Durgacarana Samkhyavedantatirtha, Rasamohana Sarvabha- 
uma, Kailasacandra Siromani, and Vamacarana Bhattacarya. Having 
taught at different seminaries, he joined Government Sanskrit College, 
Calcutta, as a teacher of Nyaya and trained a number of eminent 
Naiyayikas, of whom special mention may be made of Anantakumara 
Nyayatarkatirtha and Heramba Tarkatirtha. In 1933, the then British 
Indian Government conferred on him the honorary title ‘““Mahdmaho- 
padhyaya’’. 

Among the numerous literary and scholarly works of Kufijavihari 
Tarkasiddhanta, we may mention here the Tattvabodhini (a commen- 
tary on Aniruddha’s Samkhyasitravriti), Pratibha (a literary work), 
and annotated editions of the Siddhantamuktavali, Malatimadhavam and 
Pingala’s Chandahsitra with Halayudha’s commentary. For some time, 
Kufijavihari Tarkasiddhanta also edited the journal Aryaprabha. 

**E”’ references are to the edition of Tativabodhini, published from 
Berobeltora, Manbhum, 1919. 


TATTVABODHINI 
(Summary by Prabal Kumar Sen) 


As has been stated above, the Tattvabodhini is a commentary on 
Aniruddha’s Sdamkhyasitravrtti. Although the Sdmkhyasitravrttt is not 
a profound work, certain portions of it are difficult to understand, 
and according to Tarkasiddhanta, the Tativabodhini was written 
primarily for elucidating these portions (E3-4). Most of these dif_i- 
culties are due to incorrect readings, and Tarkasiddhanta tried to 
correct them by collating three earlier editions of the Samkhyasiitra- 
ortin. 


546 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


As an exposition of the Sdamkhyasiitravriti, the Tativabodhini is useful 
and comprehensive, though mostly conventional in character. On 
some points, the Tattvabodhini has explained the Samkhyasitra in ways 
that have not been adequately explained in the Samkhyasitravrtt. 
It also provides novel explanations of some words in the two texts. 
Occasionally, however, Tarkasiddhanta’s predilection for Nyaya- 
Vaisesika doctrines have made him ascribe to Samkhya views that are 
totally alien to it. 


Book I: On Topics 
(A) Introductory Siatras:; Scope and Task of Sdmkhya 


(1.1) (E4) The Samkhyasitravrtti maintains that the word ‘‘atha’’ 
in siitra | stands for ‘‘auspiciousness.”” The Tativabodhini points out on 
cogent grounds that in this case, atha does not stand for auspiciousness, 
though its utterance ensures an auspicious beginning. It may be noted 
that on this point, Tarkasiddhanta has followed Vijfianabhiksu. 

(E7) The Samkhyasitravrtt. adduces reasons for maintaining that 
dharma, artha, and kama cannot be regarded as summum bonum. The 
reasons are (1) they are subject to destruction (ksayitvat) and (2) they 
are satisfactions generated by desired contents (visayajasukhatvdt va). 

It is to be noted that the second reason adduced here is an alter- 
native one (as suggested by the particle ‘‘va’’). The Sdmkhyasatravrtte 
does not explain the necessity for adducing an alternative reason. The 
Tattvabodhini points out that, because the possibility of destruction is 
not admitted in Samkhya metaphysics, the first reason is not accept- 
able and is, therefore, rejected in favor of the second one. 


(B) On Bondage 


(L111) Aniruddha has not explained the word ‘‘asakya’’ in ‘“‘Saktyud- 
bhavabhyam nasakyopadesah.”? The Tattvabodhinit maintains that afakya 
means, in this context, ‘‘natural’’ or ‘‘intrinsic’? (svdbhdvika) It is 
further suggested that the word “‘upadefah’’ should be understood to 
be followed by the word “‘sambhavati,’’ as otherwise the sentence would 
remain incomplete. 

(1.12-13) According to the Tattvabodhini, the word “‘kdlayogatah’’ 
in (12) and the word ‘‘defayogatah’’ in (13) should be understood to be 
followed by the word ‘“‘bandhah.’’ These two aphorisms would then 
apparently mean that bondage is not caused by space and time, be- 
cause on that assumption consciousness, being eternal and ubiquitous, 
would always be in bondage. But they really mean that space and 
time are not the specific instrumental factors of bondage. As a matter 
of fact, space and time are general instrumental factors of bondage. 


KUNJAVIHARI TARKASIDDHANTA 547 


(1.15) (E19) The word ‘it’? asango’yam purusa iti), left unexplain- 
ed in the Sdmkhyasiitravrtt, indicates that the different stages of life, 
e.g., childhood, youth, etc., cannot belong to consciousness. 

(1.59) (E68) This siéra (yuktito’pi na badhyate dinmidhavadaparok 
sddyte) has not been fully explained in the Samkhyasitravriti. The Tattva- 
bodhini suggests that “‘ywkiz”? stands for reasoning (manana), and “‘api”’ 
suggests the association (samuccaya) of scriptural knowledge (sravana). 
Moreover, ‘‘badhyate”’ should be understood to be followed by “‘aviveka.” 
The aphorism thus means that, in the absence of immediate knowledge 
of consciousness, nondiscrimination cannot be sublated by scripture 
or reasoning, which are accredited sources of mediate knowledge 
alone. 


(C) Derivation of the Fundamental Principles 


(1.61) (E71) The Tattvabodhini maintains that although sativa, 
rajas, and tamas are called ‘“‘guna’”’ in the Samkhya system, the word 
‘‘guna’’ should not be understood in the sense in which it is used in the 
Vaisesika system. These three constituents should be regarded as sub- 
stances (dravya), because they are characterized by features like move- 
ment, etc. 


(E) Instruments of Knowledge 


(1.89) (E95) The Tattvabodhini gives an interesting explanation 
of (89). It appears at first sight that the expression “‘yatsambandhastd- 
dham’? is a single compounded word. But this is not tenable, for in that 
case the sitra would mean, inter alia, that the operation of the intel- 
lect, produced by sense-object contact and assuming the form of the 
object, is regarded as the causal condition par excellence of the per- 
ceptual knowledge of that object. But such an interpretation is incon- 
sistent with Samkhyasitra V.107, which specifically states that the intel- 
lectual operation concerned is not produced by sense object contact. 
Hence, the word “‘ya#’’ should be associated with the word ‘“‘vuftdnam.” 
Moreover, ‘‘sambandhasiddham’’ should be treated as a word formed by 
caturthi tatpurusa compound, the word ‘‘siddhum’’ being treated as a 
synonym of prasiddham. Thus construed, the s#ira would mean that 
the intellectual operation that assumes the form of an object and estab- 
lishes a relation with the latter, should be regarded as the causal condi- 
tion par excellence of the perceptual knowledge of that object. 


(H) The Three Constituents 


(1.127) (E130-131) The dissimilarity of the three constituents 
is stated in (127). The Samkhyasitracriti maintains that the word 


548 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


“adi” in this sitra means that sattva is light and revealing, rajas is 
mobile and exciting, whereas tamas is heavy and enveloping. Neverthe- 
less, it is stated in (128) that features like lightness, etc., constitute 
the similarity and dissimilarity of the constituents. The Tativabodhini 
following Vijfianabhiksu, points out that the mention of dissimilarity 
in this sara serves no specific purpose, since it has been already men- 
tioned in the foregoing stra. 


Book III: NonaTTAGHMENT 
(B) Gross and Subtle Bodies 


(III.15) (E192) The sara maintains that since the internal sense 
organ is material (annamaya), it cannot be identified with conscious- 
ness. The Samkhyasitravrtti is somewhat clumsy and confusing on this 
point. According to it, the internal sense organ is material, and being 
material, it is lunar in nature. In support of this, it quotes a scriptural 
passage to the effect that the vital breath is material in nature (‘‘annam 
vai pranah”’). It is difficult to give a coherent explanation of these lines. 
The Tattvabodhini has tried to clear up the difficulty by drawing our 
attention to Chdndogya Upanisad, 6.5.4, which maintains that the inter- 
nal sense organ is material and “‘somya”’ (annamayam hi somya manah). 
The Tattvabodhini points out that, according to the Samkhyasitravritt, 
the word ‘‘somya’’ occurring in this passage should not be taken in its 
usual sense of address, but as an adjective of the internal sense organ. 
Thus, the relevant part of the Samkhyasitravrtti means that the inter- 
nal sense organ is both material and lunar in character, and, because 
consciousness is not identical with the moon, it cannot be identical 
with the internal sense organ that is lunar in nature. Although this 
succeeds to some extent in setting the matter straight, one feels never- 
theless that this portion of the Sdmkhyasiitravrtti is unnecessarily com- 
plicated and obtuse. It seems that the Tattvabodhini, being primarily 
expository in character, has tried to defend the Sdmkhyasitravrttt as 
much as possible. 


Book V: ARGUMENTS AGAINST OPPONENTS 
(D) Merit, Qualities, Inference, etc. 


(V. 30) (£264) Aniruddha has not explained the word. ‘“‘vastu- 
kalpana.”” The Tativabodhini explains the satra to mean that pervasion 
need not be considered as an entity over and above the nondeviation 
(avyabhicara) obtaining between the pervaded and the pervader. 


(U) The Nature of Bodies 


(V 114) (E329) Apart from some introductory remarks, Ani- 


KUNJAVIHARI TARKASIDDHANTA 549 


ruddha does not provide any explanation of this sara. Accordinng to 
the Tattvabodhini, the siitra means that a body is formed only when it 
is connected with the enjoyer, i.e., the conscious principle. Otherwise, 


like the dead body, the body unconnected with consciousness would 
have putrefied 


KRSNAVALLABHACARYA 


This subcommentary was composed in Varanasi by Krsnavallabha- 
carya, a teacher of the Svami Narayana sect, in 1926. It is a running 
commentary on the Yativakaumudi and explains the expressions of 
the text in a very elaborate but lucid manner. The important views of 
the commentator are noted below. 


KIRANAVALI ON TATTVAKAUMUDI 
( Summary by Ram Shankar Bhattacharya) 


I. InrropucTory Verses: Score aND TasK OF SAMKHYA 


Second benedictory verse. The sage Kapila is said to have been 
mentioned in SvetdSvatara Upanisad 5.2., and in the chapter on one 
thousand names of Visnu (Mahdbhdrata, Anugdsana Parvan 149.70). 
Paficasikha was so called because he had five tufts, or locks, of hair 
(Stkhas) on his head. 

(1) The word “‘abhighata’” is said to mean ‘‘conjunction that pro- 
duces sound,” according to Nyaya, and ‘‘conjunction that creates 
bondage,” according to Samkhya. Frustration is said to arise because 
of its reflection existing in the intellect. 

(3) As to why the grossness and the capability of being perceived 
by the organs of a jar and the like are said to be equal to those of the 
earth, this is answered by saying that both the jar and the earth possess 
all the five qualities (sound, touch, color, taste, and smell) and that 
both are the objects of all the five sense organs. 


II. INstRuMENTS OF KNOWLEDGE 


(4) Gesture (cesta) is said to be the ninth instrument of knowledge 
according to the rhetoricians; the word “‘ardhvasrotas’’ is explained as 
meaning those persons who possess the awareness of supersensuous 
objects. 


552 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(5) Krsnavallabha discusses the significance of defining the defin- 
ing attribute (Jaksana) as that which distinguishes the laksya (defini- 
endum) from both the things of the same kind and things of a different 
kind (samandsamdanajatiyavyavaccheda). He gives a clear elucidation of 
“pauruseya bodha.”’ The word “‘lokdyata’’ is explained as meaning “‘secu- 
lar perception.’ There is an elucidation of upddhi (limiting adjunct) 
and of the three varieties of inference, and an explanation of the expres- 
sion “‘vahnitvasdmanyavigesa.”? Inference by general correlation is ex- 
plained as having for its object a universal of which a specific indivi- 
dual has not been perceived. Two kinds of apauruseyatva (the character 
of not having an author) of the Vedas are distinguished, based on the 
viewpoints of the theist and the atheist. The sect called samsdramocaka 
is identified with the followers of Carvaka. The Vaisesika view that 
the proof called verbal testimony is included in inference is explained. 

(7) There is a clear explanation of the nonperception of objects 
capable of being perceived (yogyapratyaksanivrttt). 


IIJ. PREExIsTENT ErrecT 


(9) Elucidation is provided of the view of the Mayavadins about 
the nature of the transitory existence and its relation to Brahman. 
Brahmasitra 1.1.14 is said to establish, not identity (abheda) of the 
objects with Brahman, but the absence of their separate existence from 
Brahman. There is an elaborate explanation of the sentence “‘kriydni- 
rodhabuddhi ....” taking it as speaking of either five or three reasons 
and also showing a variant reading that speaks of one additional reason 
called vyavastha. Samkhyasiitras 1.122-23 are quoted and explained. 


VI. INFERENCES TO PRIMORDIAL MATERIALITY AND CONSCIOUSNESS 


(15-16) Homogeneity consisting in the similarity of different ob- 
jects (samanvaya) is explained by quoting the explanations of others. 
One constituent’s being more powerful than the other two is dependent 
on relative suppressiveness (upamardyaupamaradkabhava) otherwise known 
as relative subjugation. Agitation (ksobha) is said to appear in 
materiality because of the agency of the purposes of consciousness. 
The agitated materiality gives rise to the principles, namely, the intel- 
lect and the rest, and this process is said to be called the tendency to 
action (gatiriipad pravrit). 

(18) Derivation of the word “‘purusa.”’ Not all creatures possess all 
the ten sense and action capacities. The word “‘kifastha’”’ suggests the 
sense of “an everlasting entity having only one form’? (ekaripatayd 
kalavyapin). 

(21) Creation is‘said to be of three kinds, namely, creation of the 
principles such as the intellect and the rest; creation of the eight basic 


KRSNAVALLABHACARYA 553 


predispositions (merit, demerit, etc.) and creation of the elements, 
(the earth, etc.). 


TX. FUNCTIONING OF THE THIRTEENFOLD INSTRUMENT 


(23) In the group of attainments, gariman (the power to become 
extremely heavy) is enumerated and ‘‘kdmdvasdyitva’’ is taken to be 
another name of the attainment called lordship (ifiva). Ignorance is 
explained as nonapprehension of difference (vivekdgraha); and mis- 
conception, conceptual construction (vikalpa), etc., are said to be 
varieties of ignorance. 

(25) The view of some teachers, that the mind (the eleventh organ) 
is an effect of egoity dominated by sativa and that both of the two kinds 
of organs are the effects of egoity dominated by rajas, is set forth. 

(27) Explanation of the term ‘“‘pravrttinimitta’” (the reason for 
using a word in a particular sense).1 

(28) The purpose of using the word “‘mdtra’”’ in the expression 
Glocanamdtra is said to exclude the attributes, that is, in the perception 
called “‘alocana,”’ an object is perceived being devoid of the relation of 
substance and attribute. (It is, however, to be noted that in dlocana 
perception, characteristics or attributes are perceived, but they are 
not perceived as the features of the object. The object would thus be 
a simple entity and not anything complex.) 

(29) Vital breath and its varieties, namely, apdna, etc., which are 
nothing but air, are said to disappear in the absence of the internal 
organs. Life (jivana) consists in maintaining the body, which is a joint 
function of all the three internal organs. Naga, Karma, and the rest 
are also accepted as forms of air. 

(30) Svami Narayana is mentioned as the supreme Brahman and 
other gods or deities are regarded as His incarnations. 

(31) Traditional reasons are given for not holding consciousness 
(which is regarded as the controller) as the directive agency or insti- 
gator (pravartaka). 

(33) <A precise description of the function of speech is given. 


XI. Tue Sustte Bopy 
(44) The subtle body, according to the school of Svami Narayana, 
is said to consist of 19 principles, namely, the ten capacities, five vital 
breaths, and four internal organs—mind, intellect, egoity, and the 
awareness faculty (manas, buddhi, ahamkara, and citia, respectively). 


XII. Basic PREDISPOSITIONS 


(45) The word ‘‘prakrti’? in the expression “‘prakrtilaya’’ is explai- 


554 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ned as referring to primordial materiality, intellect, egoity, the subtle 
and gross elements, and the ten capacities. 

(46) Relative strength and weakness of the three constituents 
is shown to be of 36 kinds (each of the two aspects having 18 
subdivisions), 


XIII. Tue Emprrican Worip 


(53) Pasu is said to be an animal having hoofs and four feet, where- 
as mrga is said to be an animal having many legs but no hoof. 


XIV. Smites ror MareRIALiry 


(61) The word ‘me’? (of mine) is explained as referring to the 
author of the Samkhyakarika (some, however, take it as referring to 
consciousness ). 


XY. LIBERATION 


(65) The epithet ‘‘inactive’ (niskriya) applied to consciousness 
is explained as meaning “‘devoid of all actions other than the act of 
seeing.” 

(67) It is remarked that the expressions like “‘intelligence of 
consciousness” (purusasya caitanyam) and “‘inertness of materiality”’ 
(prakrter jadatvam) are to be taken in a secondary sense, for in reality 
intelligence and inertness are not the attributes of consciousness and 
materiality respectively, but are their essential nature. 


XVI. Transmission oF SAMKHYA TRADITION 


(72) A verse has been quoted about the ten principal topics that 
enumerates them in a way different from the way shown in the Tativa- 
kaumudi; the ten topics, accorhing the this enumeration, are: (1) 
consciousness, (2) primordial materiality, (3) intellect, (4) egoity, 
(5-7) the three constituents, (8) subtle elements, (9) capacities, and 
(10) gross elements. 


SAMKHYAKARIKABHASYA 
(Summary by Anima Sen Gupta) 


In addition to Ktrandvali, Krsnavallabhacarya also composed 
an independent commentary on the Karikd. It was published in 
Varanasi in 1933 by the Jyotish Prakash Press, It closely follows 
Vacaspati’s interpretation of the Samkhyakariké throughout the text. 


KRSNAVALLABHAGARYA 555 


The following summary, therefore, calls attention only to a few pas- 
sages that are somewhat different from the standard viewpoint of 
Vacaspati. 

Introductory passages. For those who argue that Samkhya is non- 
Vedic because it does not explicate the teachings of the Veda, the 
commentator remarks that “‘non-Vedic’? means only that a school 
does not accept the authority of the Veda. The Samkhya, which does 
accept the authority of the Veda, is not, therefore, non-Vedic. More- 
over, the absence of a discussion of God is not necessarily a defect. 
The Samkhya discussion of purusa clearly indicates its commitment to a 
concern for a highest spiritual principle. The explicit nontreatment 
of God in this tradition, therefore, does not at all prove that the author 
is a nonbeliever. A ndstika or ‘“nonbeliever” is one who admits neither 
the authority of the Veda nor the existence of God. 

(1-3) To the critic who argues that frustration applies only to 
buddhi, because purusa is always pure and free, and that, therefore, it 
is absurd to speak about the cessation of frustration as the supreme 
end or purpose of purusa (paramapurusartha), it can be pointed out to 
such a critic that purusa, though pure in itself, does become reflected 
in the buddhi or internal organ. Purusa then appears to’ be characterized 
by the various intellectual modifications, and both buddhi and purusa 
appear to have the same nature of frustration. In other words, there 
is an apparent transfer of frustration to purusa, even though, in actual 
fact, purusa cannot be frustrated. 

Purusa is neutral in character. It is neither the cause nor the effect. 
It is not a cause because it does not become the material cause of an 
effect of a different order. It is not an effect because it does not pos- 
sess the characteristic of being produced. Buddhi, on the other hand, 
is mutable because it sometimes knows an object and sometimes not. 
Purusa, however, is always the seer or revealer, and as such it is different 
from the intellect (buddhi). 

The commentator then provides an elaborate description and re- 
futation of the Buddhist Vijfiianavada discussion of consciousness. 
Naiyayika and Jaina views are also refuted. 

(4-8) Knowledge is discussed in terms of the five “‘cognitive con- 
ditions” (vriti) of the citta as formulated in Patafijala-Samkhya, and 
thereafter follows a long discussion of Samkhya epistemology along 
the lines of Vacaspati’s interpretation. 

(9) A standard discussion of satkdryavéda is given. If one asks 
“What is the proof that the effect is always existent?’’ it is suggested 
that the existence of the effect in the past as well as in the future can 
be proved on the basis of the extrasensory perception of Yogins. Events 
taking place in different temporal periods can be perceived by Yogins 
through powers (siddhis) born of yogic concentration and meditation. 

(11-16) <A standard discussion of éfriguna is given. The primary 


556 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cause (pradhana) undergoes modifications even when the various 
“evolutes”’ remain in an unmanifested condition, because the primary 
cause is actually constituted by the three constituents. In the state 
of dissolution, the three constituents give up the method of functioning 
in a heterogeneous manner (that is to say, in a mixing or blending 
way) and engage only in homogeneous transformation (with each 
guna functioning totally in terms of itself). 

(17-20) The supposition of a single consciousness principle is 
incapable of providing a satisfactory explanation of the various forms 
of experience among differing creatures. 

(30-37) The purposes of the purusa are directly accomplished by 
the buddhi. The buddhi, therefore, is the supreme evolute. Its supre- 
macy is due to the following five factors: (a) it accomplishes the pur- 
poses of the purusa directly; (b) it is the common substratum for the 
latent impressions and the contents of cognition received through the 
various sense and action capacities; (c) it exists as the locus of im- 
pressions even when the mind and egoity become dissolved as a result 
of discriminative realization (viveka-khyati); (d) itis also the substra- 
tum for the reflection of purusa; and (e) it is the substratum for the 
highest mode of awareness (vrtti) that occurs in meditation (dhyana) 
and concentration (samadhi). The buddhi, first, provides experience 
for purusa; finally, it becomes the vehicle for ultimate release. 

(40-42) At the beginning of the process of manifestation (evolu- 
tion), the fitst item to appear was the subtle body, one for each purusa. 
During the state of dissolution, purusa remains merged along with the 
subtle body to which it is inseparably related. It is manifested again 
at the time of creation. This association continues until the time of 
liberation. 

(64-68) One might argue that prakrit will continue its ordinary 
activities even after the attainment of liberation because of the contact 
between purusa and prakrti (that is to say, because purusa and prakrti 
are always present to one another). This, however, is not the case, 
for the sort of contact or presence that brings about ordinary experi- 
ence is always qualified by the absence of discriminative discernment 
(aviveka). By developing the presence of discrimination, though prakrtz 
and purusa continue to be present to one another, the condition for the 
recycling of frustrating experience is no longer the case. In other 
words, ordinary (frustrating) experience will no longer manifest itself. 

Actions are of two kinds: the accumulated action (karman) from 
past lives, the fruition of which has not yet started (saficita); and the 
accumulated action of the past, which has begun to bear fruit (prérab- 
dha). The first is destroyed by discriminative realization (viveka-khyatz), 
whereas the second is exhausted within the context of ordinary ex- 
perience (upabhoga). So long as the second is not completely exhausted, 
the body remains associated with the purusa. 


KRSNAVALLABHACARYA 557 


According to the commentator, the second form, too, namely, 
prarabdha, can be destroyed through devotion to God. After the des- 
truction of prérabdha karman, the liberated soul continues to live in the 
body according to its own will, with the sole motive of helping others. 


RAJESVARA SASTRIN DRAVIDA 


Rajegvara Sastrin Dravida, son of the well-known Vedantic scholar, 
M.M. Laksmana Sastrin Dravida, was a renowned traditional scholar 
of Nyaya, Vedanta, and ancient Indian political science as well. Asso- 
ciated with many learned institutions, notably the Sanga Veda Maha- 
vidyalaya and the All-India Kashiraj Trust of Varanasi, he was a 
professor in the Sanskrit University at Varanasifor a few years in the 
later part of his life. As well as the Samkhya commentary summarized 
below, he also composed a few works on Nyaya and Vedanta. 

R.S. Dravida’s commentary on the Tativakaumudi of Vacaspati was 
published in the Haridas Sanskrit Series in 1932. It is not a running 
commentary, but rather a series of notes. The commentator’s purpose 
seems to be to explain the difficult expressions and to elucidate only 
the most important doctrines. Most of his views are to be found as 
well in other commentaries on the Tativakaumudi. Sections are identi- 
fied by the numbers of the karakds commented on. 


NOTES ON TATTVAKAUMUDI 
(Summary by Ram Shankar Bhattacharya) 


(2) In the expression ‘“‘séhasrasamvatsara’’ (one thousand years) 
used in connection with the time to be taken in performing the jyotis- 
toma and other sacrifices, the word “‘samvatsara’’ is said to mean “‘a 
day’’, as has been established in Parvamimamsa. The impure Vedic 
means are said to be the sacrificial acts that are the sources of 
frustration. 

(3) The gradations of subtlety in earth, water, fire, air, and akasa 
consist in each possessing a lesser number of qualities, so that earth 
possesses all five qualities (smell, taste, color, touch, and sound ); water, 
the last four; fire, the last three; air, the last two; and akasa, the last, 
that is, sound alone. Moreover, the earth can be apprehended by 
five sense capacities, water by four, and so forth, in a corresponding 
fashion. The writer here refers to a passage in the Bhdamati(1I.2.16), 


560 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


which contains a discussion on the gradation in subtlety of the 
elements. 

(4) The definition of perception as ‘‘one whose object has not 
been apprehended before’ (anadhigata) is not vitiated by that type 
of perception called ‘“‘continuous’” for the awareness in each 
moment is different from the awareness occurring in the moment 
preceding. Here the writer reviews the Samkhya view on time and 
has shown elaborately that the awareness in each succesive moment 
must vary. 

Knowledge (pramé) may be taken as an operation of the intellect 
qualified by a reflection of consciousness (caitanyapratibimbavisistabuddhi- 
vrtti) or as consciousness reflected in the intellect. The sense capacities, 
being the instruments of the instruments of knowledge, are sometimes 
called instrument. of knowledge in a secondary sense. 

Knowledge and the instruments of knowledge are of two kinds. 
When the capacities are taken as instruments, the operations of the 
inteJlect are called knowledge; when the operations of the intellect 
are considered to be the instruments, then it is the resulting cognition 
(pauruseya bodha) that is called knowledge. 

The writer is in favor of the view that consciousness is reflected in 
the intellect. This is the reason that satisfaction, frustration, etc., 
existing in the intellect are superimposed on consciousness, and that the 
unchanging awareness (caitanya) found in consciousness is thought to 
exist in the intellect. Sentences such as ‘‘tasmim$ ciddarpane,”’ which 
identify consciousness as the mirror in which the intellect is reflected, 
are to be interpreted as showing that the reflection of consciousness 
(cttpratibimba), and not consciousness itself, is the mirror. 

Memory cannot be veridical, for at the time of the rise of memory 
the thing remembered no longer exists in the same state in which it 
was cognized. 

(5) Inference by exclusion (parisesa, Sesavat) as discussed, e.g., by 
Vatsyayana in the Nydyabhasya, is not the same as the only-negative 
form of inference. Vacaspati here follows his own view on inference 
by exclusion, which he also propounds in his Mydyavarttikatatparyatika. 

The author offers elaborate discussion concerning the inclusion of 
verbal testimony in inference, comparison in inference, and nonappre- 
hension in perception. 

(9) Explanations are provided of the following: (1) the views of 
the Stinyavadins and the Vedantins on causal relations; (2) the dif- 
ference proving the existence of primordial materiality; (3) the reasons 
advanced by Vedantins for not regarding primordial materiality as 
the material cause of the world; (4) the argument, given in the Tattva- 
kaumudi, from the absence of difference between the weight of an 
effect and of its material cause (gurutvdntarakaryagrahana). 


(10) Elucidation of the argument, adduced by the Yogacara 


RAJESVARA SASTRIN DRAVIDA 561 


school, intended to prove that objects are nothing but forms of 
awareness. 

(12) The constituents are not related as container and contained 
(ddharadheyabhdva), because they are all-pervading. There is a funda- 
mental difference between each constituent and the others, even though 
they are eternally united. 

(16) Although an effect and its material cause are identical, yet 
there arises the notion that this 1s an effect and that is its cause (bheda- 
buddhi) having an apparent, not a real, difference as its content. That 
is why nothing can be regarded as a newly produced thing. 

(23) Because rajas acts as the helping factor in the rise of the two 
aspects of the intellect as characterized by the predominance of sativa 
or tamas, it is not necessary to speak of aspects dominated by rajas. 
Both sativika and tamasa aspects can be regarded as rdjasa aspects. 

(30) The Samkhyakarika refutes the Vaisesika view that there 
cannot be simultaneously arising awarenesses. 

(47) The afflictions are called misconceptions in a figurative 
sense. 

(51) Vijfianabhiksu’s explanation (regarding Samkhyasiitra 3.44) 
of the word “‘anrkusa’”’ (goad) as ““adkarsaka’”’ (one that attracts or draws, 
i.e., that helps something rise or appear) is wrong. He is trying to 
make out that the first three attainments (dha, fabda, and adhyayana) 
are the chief ones, because they are the most powerful means for 
eradicating the threefold frustration. 


RAMESACANDRA TARKATIRTHA 


RameSacandra Tarkatirtha was born in 1881 in the village of 
Suhilapura, adjacent to Tripura in the eastern part of Bengal. His 
father was Candrakumara and mother Gunamayi, and he named the 
subcommentary in memory of his mother. In his student life he specia- 
lized in different branches of Indian philosophy and obtained highest 
degrees in Samkhya, Vedanta, and Mimamsa. We learn from the 
subcommentary that RameSacandra’s teacher’s name was Raghunatha 
Tarkavagisa. S. N. Dasgupta was one of his students. The title 
Mahamahopadhyaya was conferred on him in 1944. He died in 1960. 

The subcommentary was published in 1935 while Ramegacandra 
was Professor of Samkhya at the Sanskrit College, Rajsahi and was 
meant as a lucid textbook for beginners in Samkhya philosophy. The 
author’s purpose was to clarify Vacaspati Misra’s Tattvakaumudi, 
and, as was usual in those days in Bengal, clarification meant, first, 
stating over again the points of the original commentary in terms of 
the Samkhya that was prevalent at the time and, second, reformulating 
Vacaspati Misra’s sentences, wherever possible, in precise neo-Nyaya 
language. The fundamental obscurities of Samkhya remained, therefore, 
as they were in the Tativakaumudi. 

In the present summary, we note only the special features of Guna- 
mayi and whatever points of special worth RameSgacandra added. 


GUNAMAYI ON TATTVAKAUMUDI 
(Summary by Kalidas Bhattacharya) 


Two striking features of the Gunamayi are the author’s long excellent 
preface, very unusual with oriental scholars and the inclusion, by way 
of beginning the subcommentary, of an entire monograph—named 
Samkhyatattvavilasiya and written by RameSacandra’s teacher Raghu- 
natha Tarkavagisa. This monograph, in its turn, is a commentary 
on twenty-five (supposed) Samkhya aphorisms (having nothing todo 
with the aphorisms collected under the title Samkhyapravacanasiitram). 
In the present article we shall omit the monograph altogether. 


564 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


There are at least ten points in the preface worth noting. They are: 

(i) What man seeks primarily is the cessation of frustration, not so 
much the attainment of satisfaction. Whether the latter follows by 
implication or not is irrelevant to Samkhya pursuit.t 

(ii) A modern Indological attempt is made at identifying Kapila, 
Asuri, Paficasikha, Varsaganya, Paramartha, Vindhyavasin, and a 
few others. RameSacandra has supported his arguments by means 
of texts collected from ancient Sanskrit literature and has not hesitated 
to rely also on tradition. 

(iii) A study is made of the influence of Samkhya on different 
Indian literatures of the past—different systems of Indian philosophy 
(including Tantra), Indian medicine, mythology (purdna), and history 
(itihdsa). 

(iv) A short biography of Vacaspati Misra is given and what is 
more important, a full list of available Samkhya works in print or 
otherwise, written in Sanskrit. 

(v) Ashort, yet full, account of the philosophy of Samkhya as pro- 
pounded by Vacaspati Miéra in his Tattvakaumudi on the Samkhya- 
karikd. 

(vi), (vii), and (viii) New interpretations are given of three famous 
similes used by Igvarakrsna (a) the cooperation of the lame man and 
the blind man, (b) materiality as a dancing girl and (c) spontaneous 
flow of milk to the mother cow’s udder for the benefit of the calf. 

(ix) There is a short discussion of “theistic”? (sefvara) and ‘‘athei- 
stic’? (nirifvara) Samkhya and also a discussion, in this connection, 
on the role of God in Yoga. 

(x) A list is given of the different views regarding the exact number 
of the couplets in the Samkhyakarika. In the Tattvakaumudi and in the 
commentary of Narayanatirtha, it is 72; in Gaudapada’s commentary, 
71; in Mathara, 70; and Iévarakrsna himself, 70. In different Chinese 
editions of the Samkhyakarika, we again find other numbers. Some 
scholars have added even a seventy-third, which runs as: 

Kadranam ifvarameke bruvate kalam pare svabhdvam va 

prajah katham nirgunatah vyaktah kalah svabhdvas ca. 
But, evidently, this is a gross interpolation, for in saémkhyakarika 56 it 
has been clearly stated that all this (world) is created by materiality 
(ityesah prakrtikrtah). 

And let it be borne in mind that, whatever the number of the cou- 
plets, the main Samkhya doctrine has been stated in seventy couplets 
only. 


II. InsrRUMENTs OF KNOWLEDGE 


(4) Knowledge as effected by its instruments is but the enlighten- 
ment (prakdsa) of the operation of awareness by (pure) consciousness 


RAMESACANDRA TARKATIRTHA 565 


and is (necessarily) of the form “J am knowing (perceiving) this pot,” 
“TI am inferring fire on the hill,” etc. 

Vacaspati Misra writes, ‘This excludes the pramanas that lead to 
doubt, error, and remembering (Etesu samsayaviparyayasmrtisadharanesu 
pramanesu na prasangah.’ RameSacandra adds: Instead of ‘‘pramdna’’ 
Vacaspati Misra ought to have called these three “‘apramdna’’ (non- 
pramana). 

Vacaspati Misra calls the supernormal cognitions of Yogins ‘‘vijfidna.”” 
Rameégacandra adds: “‘Vijfigna”’ is a technical name given to such 
operations (vrtiz).3 

(5) While clarifying the definition of perception as an instrument of 
knowledge Vacaspati uses the word “‘visayin,’? meaning awareness. 
Ramefacandra clarifies this further by saying: ‘‘Awareness’”’ here means 
the operation (vrtti) (of awareness). 

The term ‘“‘direct contact’? (sannikarsa) used by Vacaspati as indi- 
cating the relation between sense capacity and object means the opera- 
tion of the sense capacity according to the form (dkdra= distinctive 
feature) of the object. This necessity for sense capacity to operate 
that way automatically excludes the possibility of perceiving subtle 
elements. Subtle elements have no definite forms (ékéra, here visesa= 
specific feature ).4 

Vacaspati Misra writes that even in the case of perception reflective 
discerning is a function of intellect. RameSacandra corrects him, 
saying: Reflective discerning here is really a function of mind. (See 
Vacaspati Misra’s own commentary on kdariké 30). Or, if “intellect” 
(here) is understood as composed of three parts (some modern Sam- 
khyists understand it that way), that is, of intellect (buddhi proper), 
egoity, and mind, then reflective discerning is a function of intellect 
just insofar as it is mind. Vacaspati Misra has used the term “‘opera- 
tion of the intellect” indiscriminately elsewhere, too, in his Tattva- 
kaumudi. In every such case the function has to be properly understood. 

Older Samkhyists (like Vacaspati Misra) do not, while accounting 
for knowledge (perception, in particular), follow the way of the later 
Naiyayika by recognizing additional necessary factors (called vyapara)5 
between the instrument (i.e., the stated = direct cause) and its effect, 
on the ground that this would unnecessarily complicate the issue. 

Knowledge that results from an operation of awareness is called by 
Vacaspati a “‘favor’’ (anugraha) of consciousness. This ‘favor’ can be 
understood in various ways. (1) It may be understood as just the rela- 
tion of the operation to (pure) consciousness. (2) (Pure) consciousness, 
being only reflected on (i.e., not bodily present in) the awareness, 
may be understood as incorporating that awareness. This is evident 
in the awareness of the form ‘J know it (the object).’? According to 
this meaning, the same operation of awareness stands as either so in- 
corporated (another name of which is ‘“‘enlightened”’) or not so incor- 


566 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


porated (enlightened). According to this view, the operation insofar 
as it is unenlightened is the instrument of knowledge and the same 
state as enlightened is that knowledge itself. (3) A third view is that, 
because of the reflection of consciousness on intellect, egoity appro- 
priates the operation reflexively. (4) A fourth view is that the opera- 
tion also is reflected, in its turn, on consciousness. Vijianabhiksu holds 
this fourth view. RameSacandra confesses that he is unable to decide 
which view is correct. 

The pervasion ‘‘All cases of A are cases of B’’ is said to be the natural 
(svabhavika) relation of A to B. ‘Natural’? here means “‘not depending 
on any other extrinsic factor (called upddhi).” 

In other systems of philosophy pervasion has been defined in other 
different ways. But the Samkhya definition stated above is by far 
the best, because it is simple and covers all those other definitions. 
Ramefacandra then discusses the notion of ‘‘updadhi” in the Nyaya 
fashion. 

Vacaspati Misra’s ‘‘samdropitopadhi’’ is nothing but assured upddhi 
as distinct from suspected updadhi. 

Natural relation of A to B is not merely the universal concomitance 
of A and B but also that of not-B and not-A. Both these types of con- 
comitance have to be kept in view except when the former is consti- 
tutionally unavailable. In such cases exclusionary inference as stated 
above is the only recourse; and by a secondary process we arrive at 
whatever is left over when the already asserted cases of those that are 
characterized as A because of the hetu in question are excluded one by 
one. The remaining one stands as the object of the secondary 
knowledge. 

Vacaspati Misra clarifies the notion of svalaksanasdémdanya as follows: 
The object that is inferred when one concludes “‘There is fire on the 
hill” (because smoke is found there) is only an instantiation of the 
universal firehood, i.e., a particular fire (svalaksana) like the one found 
in the kitchen from the perception of which one could arrive at the 
corresponding universal concomitance. Ramesacandra adds: This is 
only the older Nyaya way of understanding the term “‘svalaksana- 
samanya.’ There is, however, another way. The term may be under- 
stood as ‘‘svalaksana-and-sdmanya,” meaning ‘‘definite particular fire 
and universal firchood,’’ not samdnya of svalaksana (better, svalaksana 
understood just in the light of the corresponding sdémdnya). The idea is 
that, in order that there be inference, both these have to be perceived; 
and further also, even though that which is inferred may be a definite 
particular fire, in the same awareness there is equally the awareness 
of firehood; quite as much as in perceiving a definite particular fire, 
one also perceives firehood. 

Regarding the inference by general correlation like “‘ (Perceptual) 
knowledge of color, etc., must be effected by some instrumental agency 


RAMESACANDRA TARKATIRTHA 567 


(viz., sense capacity ) quite as much as the separation of a branch from 
a tree is effected by an axe,” Rameéacandra says the following: 
Normally, this inference is possible only if different other supposed 
agencies are eliminated one by one according to their impossibility of 
acceptance. This is how the Naiyayikas understand the sdmdnyaiodrsta 
inference in question. Yet, however, the simple way in which Vacaspati 
Misra has put forward this inference is not wrong, for he has taken 
for granted (started with the assumption) that (perceptual) knowl- 
edge is an act (like the act of separating the branch).® 

In connection with testimony, and in elaboration of what Vacaspati 
Misra has said, Ramesacandra offers a short full account, right on 
Nyaya lines, of the entire process involved in the knowledge derived 
from testimony. 

The part “@pta’”’ in the expression “‘dptasruti’’ is to be paraphrased 
as obtained through preceptor-disciple tradition, meaning that the 
words and sentences concerned have not been spoken (and, therefore, 
caused) by some person. 

Vacaspati Misra holds that knowledge derived on the testimony of 
scripture has to be self-validating. Ramegacandra adds that, by impli- 
cation, other cases of knowledge are not self-validating. 

That knowledge is self-valid, the validity of which is derived from 
the very factors that produce the knowledge. This applies only to the 
case of knowledge obtained on the testimony of scriptural sentences 
(ie., through hearing them), and not to other cases of knowledge such 
as perception, inference, etc. In these other cases of knowledge vali- 
dity is known (inferred) from their pragmatic success or when we 
somehow come to know that they contain no defect. 

Scripture (Vedas) (according to Samkhya) is noneternal, because, 
according to Samkhya the only eternal things are consciousness and 
primordial materiality. How possibly could, then, the noneternal 
scripture be uncreated (unspoken) by some person? Ramegacandra 
believes that Samkhya can avoid this difficulty by holding that the 
scripture emerges of itself from materiality. 

Vacaspati Misra has shown why knowledge derived from testimony 
cannot be a case of inference. Ramesacandra adds another ground. 
He shows how in another way an opponent might try to reduce such 
knowledge (fabdajfiana) to inference and then refutes that. If the desig- 
nata of different words have after all to be related with one another 
into a complete fact—for that is what is meant by a whole sentence— 
this has to be inferred from the remembered relations between the 
different words. This exactly (Ramesacandra contends) has been 
refuted by Vacaspati Migra when he writes that a sentence to mean a 
complete fact need not always presuppose knowledge of the relations 
between constituent words. 

RameSacandra then refers to the Nyaya-Vaisesika thinker Visva- 


568 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


natha Nyayapaficanana, who holds that the memory of the relations 
between constituent words is immediately followed by the knowledge 
of the complete fact without intermediation by any awareness of per- 
vasion coupled with that which has to possess the inferred character 
(paksadharmata). (As such, it is no case of inference.) 

Against this contention of Visvanatha, however, an opponent might 
hold that it is only an undeveloped logical mind that misses the gap 
between remembering the relations of the words (on the one hand) 
and the knowledge of the complete fact (said to be meant on the other), 
and that it would be more logical (economical) to admit such a gap 
and lessen the number of instruments of knowledge “by reducing 
knowledge from testimony” to inference. It is this objection (against 
Vigvanatha) that (Ramegacandra holds) is refuted by Vacaspati 
Miéra when he refers to the case of poetic sentences. 

In the passage in which Vacaspati Misra shows that comparison is 
not a separate instrument of knowing, the first part deals with the refu- 
tation of the Nyaya view of comparison and the second part, with that 
of the Mimamsa view. 

The Naiyayikas reduce presumption to inference of the only-negative 
(wyatirekin) type, but Vacaspati Miéra reduces it to inference of the 
only-positive (anvayin) type. 

In the last few lines of Vacaspti Miéra’s reduction of presumption 
to inference, presumption is understood as the reconciliation of two 
apparently contradictory cognitions arrived at through different ins- 
truments of knowledge (i.e., in two different ways). This is different 
from presumption as the postulation of a valid hypothesis to explain a 
difficulty (not necessarily a contradiction) arising out of a knowledge 
situation—that hypothesis, that is, without which the difficulty could 
not be overcome. 

In connection with Vacaspati Miséra’s reduction of nonapprehen- 
sion to inference, Ramesacandra offers a succinct account of this instru- 
ment of knowledge as developed in Mimamsa against the Naiya- 
yikas who hold that what is said to be known through this instrument, 
that is, absence of a content, is primarily perceived. 

Vacaspati Misra has reduced five kinds of so-called “instruments of 
knowledge’”’ to the Samkhyist’s three. Ramesacandra adds: The Sam- 
khyist would reduce that way all other imaginable (so-called) “‘instru- 
ments of knowledge’’—mystical or otherwise. 

(6) Rameégacandra shows in brief how exactly the fundamental 
principles, from subtle elements up to primordial materiality and con- 
sciousness, are inferred. Each subtler principle in inferred as the mate- 
rial cause of each grosser principle. And conscionsness is inferred on a 
ground of teleology. All these inferences (Ramegacandra says) will 
be taken up in detail later.’ 

Vacaspati holds that the order of the sequence of the emergence of 


RAMESACANDRA TARKATIRTHA 569 


the fundamental principles, and entities like heaven and hell, are to 
be known from the scriptures only. Ramesacandra quotes some such 
scriptural passages. 


III. Pre-ExisTeNT EFFECT 


(9) Vacaspati Misra refers to three types of non-Samkhya theories 
of the relation between material cause and effect. Ramesgacandra gives 
a somewhat more elaborate account. 

The Vainasika Buddhists hold that every effect is immediately 
preceded by the destruction of its so-called constitutive cause. Hence 
it really comes from absence. Hence, too, the world must have come 
from a great void. RameSacandra quotes scriptural passages in support. 

The (Advaita) Vedanta view is that the world with everything in 
it arises from (the absolute) Being and that in relation to that 
Being the world is false, i.e., not ultimately rea] (in effect, neither 
being nor nonbeing). Rameéacandra quotes scriptural passages in 
support. 

Nyaya-Vaisesika thinkers hold that from what is arises what is not— 
fiom the constitutive cause arises what was not in that cause. Dyads, 
which were not there (before production), arise from (eternally exist- 
ing) atoms, and similarly, minimal perceptibilia from dyads, and so 
on. 

Samkhya, which is older than all these philosophies, holds an alto- 
gether different view. 

Ramesacandra taking a cue from Vacaspati Misra’s use of the words 
“thesis” (pratijfia) and ‘‘reason” (hetu) understands his (Vacaspati’s) 
first argument for preexistent effect (the theory that what is comes from 
what is) as arranged (almost) neatly in the Nyaya order of five mem- 
bered inference. RameSacandra first explains this five-membered 
order and then points it out in Vacaspati’s argument. Similarly, in 
the other four inferences. 


TV. Manirest aNnD UNMANIFEST MATERIALITY 


(11)The Vaisesikas hold that satisfaction, frustration, and con- 
fusion are features of the self (and not of outer objects). Rameéa- 
candra adds: They are felt equally as in the relation of (predicative) 
identity with things of the world (outer objects), as when we say such 
and such things (sandalpaste, girls, etc.} are satisfactions (and simi- 
larly, with regard to frustration=pain and bewildement = confusion). 
It would be more parsimonious to understand predicative identity as 
constitutive identity than to interpret it otherwise and satisfaction 
(happiness), frustration (unhappiness), and confusion (bewilder- 
ment) can be so understood. 


570 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


In the course of elaborating Vacaspati’s refutation of Yogacara 
idealism, Ramegacandra offers a short account of its central features. 

When Vacaspati Misra says that primordial materiality, intellect, 
etc., are nonconscious (acetana), RameSacandra adds: They are non- 
conscious just in the sense that they are other than consciousness, not in 
the (Advaita) Vedantic sense that they are not self-enlightened (re- 
vealed) by something else (here, by pure consciousness). The reason 
he offers is that even consciousness itself is also first revealed by some 
thing other than itself, that is, by some operation of awareness that is 
a state of intellect containing reflection of pure consciousness. 


V. Tue THREE ConstiruENTs 


(12) In Samkhya, when intelligibility (sattva), activity (rajas), 
and inertia (tamas) are called ‘“‘guna,’? the term ‘“‘guna’’ means what is 
conducive to others’ interests. RameSacandra says this is just what 
distinguishes Samkhya ‘“‘guna’’ from the Vaisesika’s “‘guna.” 

The passage that Vacaspati Misra quotes toward the beginning 
of his commentary on the verse is a saying of Paficasikha. Accord- 
ing to Rameégacandra “‘moha’’= (confusion) stands for erroneous 
cognition. 

Each constituent, when it emerges into prominence, suppresses the 
other two. Here (according to RameSacandra) ‘“‘emergence into 
prominence” means that it begins to produce effect, and “‘suppression”’ 
means that the constituent that is said to be suppressed has not, first, 
begun to produce effect and, second, as in that state, it (somehow) 
helps the constituent that has emerged into prominence. 

(13) According to Samkhya, if constituents emerge into activity 
and join with one another, it is only in the interest of consciousness. 
Commentators have generally understood this interest to be either the 
mundane experience of consciousness as jiva or the attainment of its 
absolute liberation. RameSacandra adds a third alternative: Pure 
consciousness’s interest is, alternatively, its experience as it is effected 
by traces and dispositions acquired from the preceding cycle of life 
(adrsta). 

Rameéacandra puts Vacaspati Misra’s statements in Nyaya forms 
of arguments. Modern commentators consider it almost as a sacred 
duty to do so. 


VI. INFERENCES TO PRIMORDIAL MATERIALITY AND CONSCIOUSNESS 


(15) If Vacaspati Misra has, through the arguments stated in this 
verse, established unmanifest materiality as the ultimate source of the 
world, this, by implication, refutes the (Advaita Vedanta) thesis that 
the ultimate source is pure consciousness. 


RAMESAGANDRA TARKATIRTHA 571 


(16) As itis of the very nature of the three constituents to be dyna- 
mic (always in some form of transformation), evidently for this intrinsic 
dynamism no consciousness need be postulated. However, for all 
their heterogeneous dynamism (= manifest activity), that is, for these 
constituents to change into entities like intellect, egoity, etc., conscious- 
ness has to be postulated, because all these changes are teleologically 
in the interest of consciousness, that is, either for mundane experience 
or for attainment of complete freedom. 

(17) Vacaspati Misra’s first argument for proving that there is 
consciousness is not of an ordinary type. How much could be proved 
by any ordinary type of inference is that, (as) materiality at any of its 
stages (is complex, it) must be meant for some other entity. But that 
is not what precisely is sought to be proved here. What is sought to 
be proved is (the existence of) pure consciousness. And yet with this 
desired sddhya one cannot associate the hetu complexity in structure. 
Nor is it easy to decide whether even the unmanifest materiality is 
of any complex structure. It is because of these difficulties that Vacas- 
pati Misra (in the opinion of Ramegacandra) rewrites the argument 
as he does. 

““Meant for some other entity’ is to be understood as “to be expe- 
rienced (with affective fringe) by some other entity,” and, obviously, 
no nonconscious entity can in that way experience anything. Once 
nonconscious entities are thus excluded what remains over is conscious- 
ness. 

As for unmanifest materiality, (Rameégacandra holds that) it, too, 
is of complex structure. It is complex in the sense that it is made of 
three constituents. Some Samkhyists, again, have understood by 
“complexity”’ a situation in which several entities act in cooperation. 
This definition applies to unmanifest materiality also. 

One of the arguments for establishing consciousness is “because there 
has to be some control” (adhisthanat). The idea is: whatever is consti- 
tuted by the three constituents must depend on some contro] (adhis- 
thdna), that is, must be informed by a certain other principle, in order 
that it may operate. RameSacandra says that consciousness is the 
controller or the informing principle here, though only as reflected on 
it. 

Sumilarly with the notion of experiencership (bhokértva) in the argu- 
ment ‘“‘bhoktrbhdvat’’ (“because there is experience’). Satisfaction, 
frustration, etc., as psychic states are operations of the intellect. What, 
however, this really means is that they are certain psychic attitudes 
(at the level of intellect) toward objects that are known (experienced). 
Without implying such awareness of objects, there are satisfactions, 
frustrations, etc. This awareness, on the other hand, belongs to con- 
sciousness through its reflection on intellect. Hence, the expressions 
“object to be experienced with” (i) ‘fa favoring attitude,” (ii) “a 


572 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


disfavoring attitude,” etc., to it (anukilavedaniya, pratikilavedaniya, 
etc. ). 

Vacaspati Migra holds that the activities of all scriptures and all 
sages are for the attainment of complete cessation of frustration. 
RameSacandra explains this as follows: Activities of scryptures consists 
in establishment of truth, and when sages exercise themselves it means 
their actual effort for attaining (realizing) the truth. Truth here is the 
complete cessation of frustration, that is, liberation. 

(18) Vacaspati Miéra defines birth as a novel relation of self (pure 
consciousness) with body, sense capacities, mind, ego, intellect, and 
the “‘traces and dispositions” (samskdra) derived from the prior cycle of 
life. Obviously, by ‘‘body’’ here is meant the gross (physical) body, 
and by the rest, the subtle body. Mention of “‘traces and dispositions’ 
is designed to exclude the Yogin’s direct assumption of self-created 
(gross) body. 

(19) The distinction between consciousness as witness (sdksin) and 
consciousness as knower (drastr) is this: As witness, (pure) conscious- 
ness knows (incorporates through enlightenment) the intellect and its 
operations directly, whereas as knower, it knows (incorporates through 
enlightenment—also through the intermediation of intellect) the ob- 
jects of (i.e., the objects that are referred to by) these models—that is 
pots, linens, etc. 

(20) Vacaspati Misra, after saying that the false identification of 
consciousness with intellect is due to their contact, immediately replaces 
the word “‘contact’’ by “‘contiguity” (sannidhana), the latter implying 
that consciousness is reflected on intellect. RameSacandra adds: This 
replacement is justified by the fact that, whereas all cases of contact 
are not false, all cases of (the type of) contiguity (mentioned above) 
are false—for example, the case of a red rose (contiguous to a crystal 
column.) being reflected on (the) crystal column and making it appear 
red. 

(21) Vacaspati Misra does not explain the analogy of a lame man 
and a blind man cooperating with each other. RameSacaridra explains 
it, saying: Each takes the help of the other to reach their common goal 
and then separate, each in the state of separation doing his own job. 
Just in the same way, materiality and consciousness cooperate for their 
common mundane life at all stages (up to the stage of knowing the 
separateness of each) and then separate, each, after the separation, 
pursuing its own course (consciousness remaining absolutely in itself 
and materiality continuing in its intrinsic status as the three consti- 
tuents in equiposise). 


IX. Funcrioninc oF THE THIRTEENFOLD INSTRUMENT 


(23) Vacaspati Misra writes that in this verse Isvarakrsna dis- 


RAMESACANDRA TARKATIRTHA 573 


tinguishes intellect from whatever looks similar and whatever looks 
dissimilar to it. Ramegacandra adds: The principles that are similar 
to intellect are egoity and mind; and those that are dissimilar are the 
sense capacities. 

Rameéacandra introduces a whole reflection of his own (much on 
the line of Nyaya) as to why intellect has to be admitted over and above 
sense capacities and ego. It is as follows: Mere sense contact (with ob- 
jects) is not sufficient for awareness, for many things in contact with 
the senses are cognitively igonored. Hence, mind as the principle of 
attention (according to Nydaya, of infinitesimal size) has to be admit- 
ted; and, further too, it has to be admitted that the senses come into 
contact with it. But even then all things do not get explained. What, 
for example, is the principle that determines the behavior of a man in 
dreamless sleep, a man whose senses and mind (as understood by the 
Naiyayika) have stopped functioning? A third principle has, there- 
fore, to be admitted, and that is intellect. Such behavior is not of the 
(gross) body only, for it isnot found in corpses; neither is it of the mind, 
for the mind (in Nyaya, “internal organ’’, not very different from the 
ego of Samkhya), left to itself, has the function of intentionality (sam- 
kalpa), whose function is absent here. It will not do to object here that, 
after all, senses and mind are kept here in forced suppression and are, 
therefore, unable to discharge their functions, for that would be a more 
complicated account than the simpler one admitting a third principle, 
intellect, operating alone at this stage. But why then (it may be asked) 
is it that this sleeping man is not aware of the function of intellect? 
The reply is twofold: first, mind that was to aid such awareness is not 
functioning and, second, pure consciousness, left to itself, cannot ac- 
count for the behaviors of such a sleeping man. 

(24) In contrast with the deep-sleeping man, Ramesacandra 
considers the case of a dreaming man to show that in this latter 
case the only operating principle other than senses and mind is 
egoity. The I-sense in dream, fully explicit in examples such as “I am 
a tiger” and less explicit in other cases, cannot be due to the function 
of mind. 


X. SUBTLE AND Gross ELEMENTS 


(39) Loman (literally, hairs) here means skin. Mamsa (literally, 
flesh) means flesh (muscles, etc.) with fat. Similarly, majjan (humors) 
include semen. 


XI. Tue SuBTLE Bopy 


(40) Vacaspati Misra writes that the subtle body continues up to 
the time of the major dissolution of the world. Ramegacandra adds: 
To say that the subtle body continues until the major dissolution of 


574 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the world would only be intelligible if one looks at the whole thing 
from a collective point of view, that is if all such bodies are considered 
together. Otherwise, a single subtle body continues much further, 
until the attainment of liberation. 


XII. THe Basic PREDISPOSITIONS 


(44) Igvarakrsna in this verse says that knowledge as a predis- 
position leads to the realization of liberation. Ramegacandra holds 
that by liberation he (Isvarakrsna) must have meant both liberation- 
while-living (jivanmukti) and liberation after the present cycle of life 
is over, that is, after death (videhamukti). 

(45) Isvarakrsna writes that practice of nonattachment leads to 
final absorption in materiality. This he calls ‘“‘prakrtilaya.” Vacaspati 
Miéra puts the case more precisely by adding a “‘mere’’ before the word 
“detachment.” Ramesgacandra clarifies the idea further by adding: 
Practice of nonattachment along with knowledge of the separateness (in 
metaphysical status) of the materiality and consciousness leads to the 
attainment of liberation. 

(47) In connection with Vacaspati Misra’s reference to the afflic- 
tions, Ramesacandra quotes their definitions as found in the Yoga 
system of philosophy. 

Vacaspati Misra says that these five are called five kinds of miscon- 
ception, because the last four, egoism, passion, hatred, and love of 
life, are all traceable to ignorance, which is misconception par excel- 
lence. However, immediately after saying this, he offers another ex- 
planation. RameSacandra holds that this second explanation could 
only be suggested because the first one was not considered happy by 
Vacaspati Misra. 

(51) Because frustration are of three kinds, that is (1) those for 
which the person himself is (mainly) responsible (called ‘‘internal’’), 
(2) those that are caused by other persons (and living beings) (called 
“external”), and (3) natural evil (called ‘‘celestial’’ )—because that 
way there are three kinds of frustration, therefore, cessation of frustra- 
tion must also be of three (corresponding) kinds. 

“‘Attainment”’ means success in catering to one’s needs. Cessation of 
frustration is everybody’s most primary need, not subservient to any 
other need. Hence, success in catering to this need is the central suc- 
cess (and, as just shown, of three kinds). 


XII. THe EmpriricAaL WoriLp 


(53) The word “‘mrga”’ stands for all kinds of quadrupeds, whereas 
the word “pagu’? stands for particular kinds of quadrupeds, such as 


RAMESACANDRA TARKATIRTHA 575 
rats, having tails and hairs of a different kind. The word ‘“‘paksin”’ 
stands not only for birds but also for winged insects. 


VIVEKAPRADIPA 


Rameéacandra Tarkatirtha is also credited with a running commen- 
tary on the Sdamkhyasdra of Vijiianabhiksu. Its title is Vivekapradipa 
and it was published in 1922 by Rajkumar Roy at the Pasupati Press. 

(Calcutta). It simply paraphrases the Samkhyasdra and, hence, need 


not be summarized. 


KALIPADA TARKACARYA 


Kalipada Tarkacarya was one of the most erudite traditional Sanskrit 
scholars in modern times. He specialized primarily in Nyaya, especially 
Navyanyaya. He composed several works (texts, commentaries, and 
learned papers) on different systems of Indian philosophy. He was 
also known for his work in poetry. He served as Professor of Nyaya 
for many years in the Government Sanskrit College, Calcutta, and 
the honorary title ““Mahamahopadhyaya” was conferred on him by 
the Government of India. He died about ten years ago. 

The Sdraprabha, a commentary composed by Kalipada Tarkacarya 
on Vijfianabhiksu’s Samkhysdra, was published by Chhatra Pusta- 
kalaya, Calcutta, in 1930. 

It is to be noted that in the first part of the work (in prose) the num- 
bers of the sections are given by the commentator and not by the ori- 
ginal author. The second part (in verse) follows the numbering of 
the original author, namely Vijfianabhiksu. 


SARAPRABHA 
(Summary by Ram Shankar Bhattacharya) 
PORVABHAGA (Part I), Cuaprer | 


Introductory comments: Because Kapila’s Samkhya does not accept an 
entity like the eternal God (nityefvara), God in this system must be 
taken to mean the aggregate of the mahat-tattvas. Sucha God 
has not been repudiated in Samkhyasiitra 1.92. This mahat-tativa has 
three aspects, namely, Brahma, Visnu, and Siva. Because its appear- 
ance is not dependent on any other factor it is called self-existent 
(svayambhi). Whereas Samkhya chiefly deals with creation, sesvara- 
Samkhya (that is to say, Yoga philosophy or theistic Samkhya) chiefly 
deals with those means that are conducive to the attainment of eman- 
cipation. 

(Section 5) That form of action which is usually called “‘saficita” 
(accumulated) is called here “‘pirvotpanna,’”’ and that form of action 


578 ENQGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


which is usually called ‘‘prarabdha’’ (past actions already bearing 
fruit) is called here “‘arabdha.” 

(14) Actions called prarabdha are worked out within the course 
of ordinary experience (bhoga). 


Part I, CHAPTER 2 


(4) The verse has been explained in two ways: (a) knowledge 
of difference between all the modifications of avyakta (that is to say, 
the twenty-three nonsentient principles) and the sentient self (cetana 
dtman) is called discriminative knowledge (jana); and (b) knowl- 
edge of difference between all the twenty-four principles along 
with the gross modifications of the bhitas and the sentient self is called 
jitana. 

(8) The knowledge that the self is different from what is not the 
self is the means of emancipation, because this realization uproots 
ignorance. 

(10) Direct perception of the absolute self is explained in two 
ways: (a) perception of diman associated with pleasure, etc.; and 
(b) perception of dtman devoid of all kinds of qualifications. 


Part I, CHAPTER 3 


(2) Because qualities (guna), actions (karman), etc., are never 
apprehended without the gunin or substratum, they are to be taken 
as identical with the substratum. 

(3) Sativa, rajas, and tamas are not to be regarded as attributes 
(dharma) of prakyti; rather, they are identical with prakrti. Sativa, etc., 
are neither the effects of prakrii nor are they to be regarded as existing 
in prakrti as air exists in the sky. 

(5) Gunas are to be regarded as “instrument” or “implement” 
(upakarana) of pure consciousness (purusa). 


UTTARABHAGA, (Part II) 
Part II, CHAPTER 3 


(6) When buddhi becomes bereft of all latent impressions (sams- 
karas), there arises no reflection of buddhi in the self; consequently 
Gtman abides in itself. 

(7) A beginningless positive entity cannot be destroyed, although 
a beginningless negative entity (for example, prior absence) can be 
destroyed. 

(25-26) Bhoga or experience is not the experience of pleasure 
and pain; in fact, bhoga is of the nature of reflection (pratibimba) of 


KALIPADA TARKAGARYA 579 


pleasure and pain (both of which are modifications of duddhi) on the 
transparent self. 

(27) The world is compared to a cloud to indicate that it has 
momentary destruction. The simile of a cloud’s existing in the sky 
suggests that although the world is originated in the self, the self neither 
becomes attached to the world nor becomes modified. 

(36) The word ‘“‘mdétra’’ in ‘‘sva-sva-dhi-matra-drk’’ suggests that the 
atman perceives its own buddhi and not the buddhis associated with 
other dimans. 


Part II, Cxaprer 6 


(2) According to the Vedantins, the essential character of the 
self is pleasure (sukhditmaka), which is not the absence of pain but a 
positive entity. 

(31) Omnipotence and other powers (siddhis) are to be under- 
stood as existing in the self so long as it is associated with prakrti. 

(36) The expression “‘pumdn ekah’’ (purusa is one) is to be taken 
in the sense of “‘ekariipa’’ (of one form, thatis to say, without change, 
immutable). 

(37) Samkhya appears to argue that the world, which is of the 
nature of reflection (pratibimba-riipa), is different from the external 
world and that, whereas the former is unreal, the latter is real. 

(59) Yogins can realize that the objects and their cognition are 
different from each other (though they seem to be inseparable) and 
that this is the reason that Yogins can apprehend cognition separately, 
dissociating it from the objects. 

(62-63) Buddhi being transformed into the forms of objects is 
reflected on the transparent self because of proximity and the self 
possessing this reflection transmigrates. 


HARIHARANANDA ARANYA 


Swami Hariharananda Aranya, a Bengali samnydsin, lived from 
1869 to 1947. He is the founder of Kapila Matha, located in Bihar, a 
monastic community claiming to maintain the tradition of Samkhya 
and Yoga in modern India. Hariharananda was a disciple of Swami 
Triloki Aranya, but nothing is known of this teacher or his tradition. 

Hariharananda wrote a number of works on Samkhyayoga in Bengali 
and Sanskrit. His best-known work in Bengali is the Kapilasramiya- 
patatijalayogadarfana, which has been partly rendered into English by 
P.N. Mukerji under the title, The Yoga Philosophy of Pataftjali (Calcutta: 
University of Calcutta, 1963) with a foreword by Dharmamegha 
Aranya, the current head of Kapila Matha. His Sanskrit commentary 
Bhasvati on. Vydsa-bhésya has also been published. 

Hariharananda also composed a work, entitled Sdamkhyatattvdloka 
and edited by J. Ghosh, with a foreword by Gopi Nath Kaviraj 
(Princess of Wales Saraswati Bhavana Texts, No. 59, Varanasi), Hit- 
chintak Press, 1936). It is a composite Samkhya-Yoga work in seventy- 
two paragraphs and gives a good overview of Hariharananda’s thought. 
“E”? references below are to this edition. 


SAMKHYATATTVALOKA 
(Summary by Ram Shankar Bhattacharya) 
(El) In six benedictory verses there is a salutation to Kapila (1-2), 


praise of Samkhya (3) and a statement regarding the precise charac- 
ter of the work (4-6). 


I. Sec. 1-8: Consciousness (E1-5) 


(1) Awareness (prakafa) is twofold, absolute or unconditioned 
awareness (svaprakafa) and awareness caused by some illuminator 
(vaisayika prakdsa). The awareness by itself is the indicatory mark of 
absolute awareness (i.e., pure consciousness). Its object is constantly 


582 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cognized because it is the illuminator of the intellect. The objects 
of awareness caused by some illuminator become known only when 
they color the intellect. 

(2) Proper revelation of absolute awareness is impossible in 
the state of distraction (vyutthdna). In this state consciousness is in- 
directly realized with the help of the functions of the empirical self. 
It is realized in the state called the “concentration of cessation” 
(nirodhasamadhi). 

(3) Transformation is either aupadanika (in which there is plurality 
of material causes) or laksanika. The latter consists in the difference in 
position of space or time. It is nothing but the change of form and the 
like (without any change in the material cause itself). 

(4) Absolute consciousness (svacaitanya) existing in every sentient 
being, not being a composite element and having no limit, cannot be 
affected by transformation. No temporal or spatial relation can be 
attributed to consciousness. It is devoid of parts and as such the act 
of pervading cannot be applied to it. It is wrong to hold that conscious- 
ness is one in number and is common to all beings. 

(5) The objection that consciousnesses would lose their propery of 
limitlessness if they are said to be many in number is untenable as the 
argument cannot be applied to entities that have no spatial dimension. 

(6) It is reasonable to hold that consciousnesses are many (innu- 
merable) in number and they are equal in all respects, as is stated in 
Sveté§vatara Upanisad 4.5. 

(7) The word ‘‘eka’”’ in propositions like “‘ekam eva advitiyam’’ shows 
that consciousnesses belong to the one and the same species or that 
there is absence of dualistic apprehension in consciousnesses. Texts 
like “‘eko vydpi,”’ etc., do not refer to the nature of pure consciousness 
but tothe character of God. Consciousnesses are devoid of all attri- 
butes found in objects of awareness. 

(8) Consciousness remains immutable though awareness remains 
in a distracted or inhibited state. All stimulations after reaching the 
intellect are transformed into awareness. (The process 1s technically 
known as prakdsya paryavasana), Consciousness remains unaffected 
by these stimulations. It is said to be the immutable perceiver. The 
intellect with its objects becomes object of consciousness and is wrongly 
identified with consciousness. 


II. 9-13: MATERIALITY AND THE THREE CONSTITUENTS (E5-9) 


(9) Through the concentration of cessation, awareness and the 
capacities attain an absolutely unmanifested state. This state is known 
as primordial materiality, the ultimate form of the three constituents, 
and it is regarded as the material cause of citta (mind) and the capa- 
cities. It is positive and real, although said to be unreal owing to its 


HARIHARANANDA ARANYA 583 


perceptual unmanifestedness to a person who attains liberation. The 
word ‘‘avyakta’”’ in Katha Upanisad 1.3.11 refers to this primordial 
materiality, which is also referred to by the word “‘tamas.” 

(10) In fluctuating states the experiencer is to be taken as the 
transforming seer (consciousness). It is the same as the ego. 

(11) Egoity has three aspects, characterized by prakafa (capacity 
for expression), kriyé (capacity for mutation; it is the cause of trans- 
formations), and sthiti (capacity for remaining in a latent state), res- 
pectively called sattva, rajas, and tamas. There arises equilibrium in 
these three constituents when the internal organ dissolves primordial 
materiality. 

(12) The state known as disequilibrium found in citta (mind) 
and the capacities consists in the predominance of one constituent and 
the subordination of the other two. All pervading constituents are 
inseparable and they help one another act. All phenomenal forms 
are but particular collocations of the constituents. A thing isnamed 
after a particular constituent (as sdttocka, etc.) because of its 
predominance. 

(13) There are two fundamental goals of consciousness, experience 
(bhoga) of satisfaction and experience of frustration; consciousness is 
defined as the realization of the beneficial and injurious forms of the 
constituents and liberation, realization of the true nature of conscious- 
ness. The absolute illuminator consciousness and the unmanifested 
state of the three constituents are respectively the efficient and the 
material cause of the phenomenal state. From these two opposite 
causes proceed three aspects in the manifested entities, namely, prakdfa 
(resembling purusa), sthiti (resembling avyakta), and kriyd (concerning 
the mutual relation of these two and possessing the nature of transitori- 
ness or unsteadiness), respectively known as sdtivika, tamasa, and rajasa. 


TH. 14-22: Tae Turee INTERNAL ORGANS AND THEIR 
Functions (E9-12) 


(14) The first evolute, intellect, also called experiencer (grahitr), 
is the I-sense, which dissolves in the state of liberation. It can be re- 
alized through the concentration with egoity (sdsmita samadhi). Its 
illumination is mutable, and cognitions, etc., are completed with 
reference to it. 

(15) Intellect is atomic (anumditra, i.e., siiksma, subtle). 

(16) Being in close proximity to consciousness, intellect is possessed 
of the highest illumination. That is why consciousness is described as 
one whose dwelling place is sattva, or the intellect. 

(17) Egoity is the dynamic aspect of the intellect, through which 
a not-self becomes related to the self. It is rdéjasa and the source of 
“‘me’’ and “‘mine”’ feelings (mamata, ahamté). 


584 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(18) The heart (Ardaya), also called ‘‘mind’’ (manas), is that aspect 
of the internal organ by which nonselves become attached to the self. 
It is tamasa and has the preponderance of sthiti. 

(19) Intellect, egoity, and mind are called the internal organ 
(anta hkarana) because they exist between consciousness and the external 
capacities. 

(20) Awareness (prakhyd or jfidna) is of the nature of illumination, 
and it arises when the intellect becomes affected or excited by external 
stimuli. The modifications of awareness caused by a stimulus are 
related to the I-self by egoity. 

(21) Because the internal organ is a product of the three consti- 
tuents, the transformation of any of its parts involves the transformation 
of the other two. 

(22) The character of awareness, activity, and inertia shows that 
they possess the preponderance of sativa, rajas, and tamas respectively. 


IV. 23-26: AwarENEss AND Ecorry (E12-14) 


(23) I-awareness (asmita) is the internal organ transformed into 
awareness and capacities. It is I-awareness through which feelings 
like “I am the hearer” and the like come into existence. 

(24) I-awareness has two kinds of transformation, which are also 
the cause of transformation into a different species ( jatyantaraparinama). 
The first is the knowledge transformation (vidydparindma); it is sativika 
as it flows toward illumination or knowledge; the second is the igno- 
rance transformation (avidydparindma), which flows toward concealment 
and which has a greater relation to what is different from the self. 

(25) Three kinds of external organs arise from the internal organ 
because of its contact with external objects. They are five sense capa- 
cities, five action capacities, and five vital breaths, in which there is 
predominance of prakdsa, kriyad, and sthiti respectively. 

(26) Awareness (citia) is the aggregate of the operations of the 
internal organ that arise from the contact of the internal organ with 
objects through the external capacities. It has two kinds of operations, 
the fakti operations, by which thinking and the like are performed, 
and the avasthé operations, the states of awareness that are invariably 
associated with cognition, conation, and retention. The internal 
organ has two kinds of properties, pratyayas (cognitions and conations) 
and samskdéras (latent dispositions, the objects of Ardaya). 


V. 27-35: THE OPERATIONS OF AWARENESS (E14-20) 
(27) Cognition (prakhya) has five operations, instrument of knowl- 


edge (pramana), memory (smrti), cognition of activities (pravrttivi- 
jitana), conceptual constructions (vague notions based on verbal cogni- 


HARIHARANANDA ARANYA 585 


tion) (vikalpa), and misconception (viparyaya). Similarly, activity 
pravrttt) has five subdivisions, intentionality (samkalpa), imagination 
(kalpand), effort employed in voluntary activity (krti), wandering of 
mind caused by doubt and hesitation (vikalpana), and futile effort as 
in dream and the like (viparydsta). Similarly, inertia (sthitt), the pro- 
perty of hrdaya, has five kinds of latent dispositions concerning the five 
operations of cognition as its objects. 

The two opposite aspects (sativa and famas) in the tripartite internal 
organ give rise to a fivefold subdivision of the external capacities and 
also of the power residing in awareness. Thus, three of the subdivisions 
have the predominance of the three constituents. The fourth subdivi- 
sion is predominated by the properties of both sativa and rajas, and the 
fifth, by the properties of both rajas and tamas. 

(28) Vijfidna is the cognition pertaining to the field of cetas and it is 
accomplished with the help of the capacities. Pramdna is the instrument 
of knowledge (pram@), the correct cognition of that which was not 
known before. Perception (an instrument of knowledge) is the aware- 
ness through the channels of the sense capacities. The sense capacities 
give rise to sensation (dlocanajfiana) only, which is devoid of the notion 
of species (jai), etc. After sensation there arises perception, which is 
characterized by species, etc. 

(29) Inference depends upon the invariable concomitance, which 
is either positive (sahabhadvin) or negative (asahabhdvin). 

Verbal testimony arises in a person’s awareness after hearing a 
sentence pronounced by a trustworthy person who is able to convey 
his ideas to his audience (dpia). It is different from ascertainment 
through reading. The presence of the speaker and hearer is an indispen- 
sable condition in verbal testimony. 

(30) Whereas inference and verbal testimony give knowledge 
of general properties, perception gives knowledge of particulars, which 
consists in peculiar properties and forms. 

(31) Memory is the experience of that object only which exist; 
in the form of latent dispositions. It is sétvikerdjasa and has threc 
subdivisions concerning vijfidna, pravrtti, and inhibited states like sleep 
etc. 

(32) Pravrtti vijana is the consciousness of voluntary activities 
efforts also of the involuntary activities of the five vital breaths. It’ 
rdjasa. 

(33) Conceptual construction (vikalpa) is based on the verh: 
cognition with respect to a thing that does not exist. It is of three kind 
(1) vastuvikalpa is that in which one and the same thing is taken 
more than one; (2) kriydvikalpa is that in which’a nonagent is tak: 
as if it were an agent; and (3) abhdvavikalpa arises when the ci 
thinks with the help of words denoting nonexistence. Place and ti 
are regarded as arising from conceptual construction. In reality thi 


586 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is no place absolutely devoid of color and the other four qualities. 
Although place and time have no reality, yet they have their use. 
This operation of awareness falls under the class rajasa-tamasa. 

(34) Misconception is mistaken awareness. It is based on a thing 
as other than what it is. It is t@masa. To understand the not-self as 
self is the fundamental misconception. 

(35) Intentionality (samkalpa), the first activity (of awareness), 
is the application of the I-awareness in conscious activities. The resolve 
in such statements as ‘‘I shall go’”’ is to be known asintentionality. It 
is sdttvika. Imagination (kalpana), the second activity, is that activity 
which superimposes previously known objects one on the other. It 
consists in joining names, species, etc. It is sattvikardjasa. Effort (krti), 
the third activity, follows desire. It helps the organs to poduce the 
desired results. Wandering of mind (vikalpand), the fourth activity, 
arises at the time of doubt or while a man employs the entities (like 
time, etc.) known through the conceptual construction (see 33). Futile 
effort (viparydsta) is the effort that follows misconception; the mental 
effort in dream is an example of this activity. Activity comes to the 
action capacities from within. 

The “‘inertias’’ (sthiti) or latent dispositions are also of five kinds. 
The traces of knowledge, memory, activity, conceptual construction, 
and misconception have respectively the predominance of sattva, 
sattvarajas, rajas, rajastamas, and tamas. 


VI. 36-40: THe Static OPERATIONS (AVASTHA VRTTI) (E20-23) 


(36) Satisfaction, etc., are the nine static operations that arise in 
awareness while it performs its functions. Cognitions and other func- 
tions of the citia are not caused by these operations. 

(37) Satisfaction, frustration, and confusion are the three static 
operations related to cognition. Satisfaction and frustration are due to 
stimulation by things that are beneficial and injurious respectively. 
Confusion arises from the excessive experience of satisfaction and 
frustration. 

(38) Craving the types of satisfactions already enjoyed (raga), 
aversion to frustrations of a sort already suffered (dvesa), and love of 
life (abhinivesa) are the three static operations related to effort. Love 
of life is instinctive dread in general and not the fear for death only. 
It springs naturally from the latent dispositions. 

(39) Waking state (jagrat), dreaming state (svapna), and dream- 
less sleep (susupti) are the three static operations related to the body, 
that is, they are psycho-physical states, in which there is predominance 
of sativa, rajas, and tamas respectively. In the first the seats of aware- 
ness and capacities remain active; in the second the sense and action 
capacities become inactive though the mind remains active; in the 


HARIHARANANDA ARANYA 587 


third all these capacities become inactive. In nightmare (utsvapna) 
the seats of the action capacities become active. 

(40) Determination, the conjoint action of the faculties belonging 
to awareness (vyavasdya), is threefold. Sadvyavasdya is direct perception, 
anuvyavasdya is reflection, and paridrsta vyavasdya is the undistinguished 
activity that causes mutation in sleep or sustains the latent dispositions 
and other subconscious characteristics. 


VIII. 41-52: Exrernat Capacities AND THEIR Functions (E20-30) 


(41) The ear, etc., are the five sense organs, which are the channels 
of the modification called perception. Egoity, the essence of the capa- 
cities, becomes excited by contact with external objects. This excita- 
tion in the ego is received by the grasper (grahitr), and the objects 
become illuminated. This illumination is called sensory perception 
(indriyajfiana). Sense capacities or the cognitive senses receive external 
impressions that are converted into sensations. 

(42) The ear receives sound. The skin receives thermal] sensations 
(heat and cold) only. Pressure, weight, and hardness are known 
through the activity of the action organs and the vital breaths. The 
eye receives color, the tongue taste and the nose smell only. In these 
five there is the predominance of sativa, sattvarajas, rajas, rajastamas, 
and tamas respectively. The objects of sense organs are called cogniz- 
ables (prakafya). 

(43) Speech, grasping, locomotion, excretion, and sex are the 
action capacities whose common function is voluntary employment 
(svecchacdlana). These are employed in speech, manipulation, locomo- 
tion, excretion, and reproduction respectively. 

(44) The five vital breaths, whose chief function is to sustain the 
body, are also to be known as external capacities. 

(45) The chief function of prana is to sustain the living organism. 

(46) The chief function of uddna is to sustain the tissues (dhdiu). 

(47) The chief function of oydna is to sustain the power of voluntary 
actions. 

(48) The chief function of apana is to sustain those organs of 
the body that separate excreta (mala) from different parts of the 
body. 

(49) The chief function of samdna is to sustain digestion. 

(50) A body is the aggregate of the five vital breaths. 

(51) The vital breaths proceed from egoity. In other words, it is 
the internal organ that gives rise to the vital breaths. 

(52) Because of the predominance of illumination, of activity, 
and of inertia, the sense capacities, the action capacities and the vital 
breaths are to be known as sdftvika, rdjasa, and tdmasa respectively. 


588 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


VIII. 53-59: Tue ExTERNAL OpjecTs OF THE Capacities (E30-36) 


(53) The contents of the instruments reside in the objects grasped 
(grahya). They are the results of the interaction of the grahana (internal 
and external capacities) and objects. Because contents are the results 
of the said interaction it is practically impossible to perceive directly 
the ultimate material cause of the external objects. Yogins, however, 
can perceive the subtle forms of objects through particular yogic 
concentrations, but the reality behind the objects cannot be perceived. 
The nature of this 1eality can be indirectly known through inference. 

(54) There are three original properties in external objects, per- 
ceptibility (bodhyatva), mutability (kripdtva), and inertness (jadya). 

(55) Some varieties of these three kinds of properties reside in all 
the external substances called elemental (bhautika). 

(56) Akasa, an element, is that inanimate and mutable thing 
which has sound as the only property. Similarly the elements air, 
fire, water, and earth possess temperature, color, taste, and smell as 
their only properties respectively. 

(57) It is the Yogins who directly perceive the elements as having 
only one of the five illuminating properties. . 

(58) An analysis of the illuminating properties reveals that there is a 
predominance of sativa, sattvarajas, rajas, rajastamas, and tamas in sound, 
temperature, color, taste, and smell respectively. 

(59) Sound, etc., possess differentiation (vifesa). When sound, 
etc., attain such subtlety that these differentiations disappear, then the 
substrata in which such sound, etc., inhere are called subtle elements. 
The five subtle elements are the causes of the five gross elements 
respectively. Because they are devoid of all differentiations they are 
called generic (avisesa). They do not give rise to the feeling of satis- 
faction, frustration, and confusion. The subtle elements are directly 
perceived through yogic concentration. 


IX. 60-64: Tae Mareriau Cause oF THE SUBTLE ELEMENTS (E36-39) 


(60) The material cause of the subtle elements cannot be perceived 
externally, but is to be inferred only. Because this substance excites 
our mind through the organs, it must be of the nature of mind. Again, 
because this substance is devoid of sound, etc., its action must be without 
any spatial dimension. Such an action must belong to the mind only. 
Thus the source of the external objects is proved to be mental in nature. 

(61) Because external qualities like color, etc., cannot be attri- 
buted to the source of external objects, it is reasonable to ascribe internal 
qualities to it as we have no knowledge ofa thing that is neither external 
nor internal. 


(62) The being whose mind is the source of external objects is 


HARIHARANANDA ARANYA 589 


called Virdt purusa. The manifestation and dissolution of the universe 
are the result of his awakening and sleeping states. 

(63) The doctrine of some schools that the will of God is the only 
cause of the universe points to the aforesaid viewpoint, because will 
is a transformation of the internal organ. The mind, which is the 
source of all objects, is called bhitadi. The three functions of the 
internal organ are transformed into cognizability, mutability, and 
inertia in the field of the cognizable objects. Time is the locus of mental 
process (grahanabhava), whereas space is the container of grasped 
things (grahyabhava). 

(64) A gross external element is not a principle; it is an aggregate of 
the three kinds of attributes as stated above. 

A living organism is an assemblage (samghdta) made up of these three 
properties. 


X. 65-71: CREATION AND DissOLUTION OF THE BRAHMANDA 
(E39-44) 


(65) Primordial materiality and consciousness are said to be, 
respectively, the ultimate material and efficient cause of the beginning- 
less capacities (karana). These associated with the subtle elements are 
called “‘subtle bodies,’ which are innumerable in number, a fact that 
establishes the plurality of consciousnesses. The capacities, being products 
of the three constituents, possess infinite varieties. This is why the 
subtle bodies, either with dissolved organs or with manifested organs, 
lead their lives in various realms. 

(66) The subtle bodies become dissolved either through Yoga or 
through the dissolution of objects. Such subtle bodies appear again 
when the objects become manifested. 

(67) When the vairdja abhimana (the mind of the virdf, the Praja- 
pati) sinks into quiescence, objects become dissolved. This is the 
sleeping state of Prajapati. 

(68) When Prajapati remains in the sleeping state the external 
existence assumes a motionless, immovable, and undistinguishable 
state. Creation, which in reality is the imagination of Prajapati, takes 
place in the intermediate state between waking and deep sleep. Praja- 
pati’s imagination of subtle forms of the gross elements gives rise to 
the creation of subtle elements. 

(69) The creation of subtle elements, being associated with the 
mental procss of other Virat consciousnesses, becomes more and more 
gross and consequently there appears the manifestation of the gross 
elements (elemental creation), which consists of properties like 
solidity, fluidity, etc. 


590 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


XI. 70-72: THe GreaTeED BRAHMANDA AND OTHER SENTIENT 
Benes (E44-46) 


(71) A brahmanda is said to comprise seven realms (loka). The 
first, called bhirloka, is visible. The realms from bhuvar to satya are 
invisible to ordinary persons. All the realms are established in the 
satyaloka, which is established in the mahaddiman of the virat purusa. 
This realm is the center of the cosmos as the mahat principle is the center 
of all mental activities. 

(72) After the manifestation of the bhitddi there appeared Hiran- 
yagarbha the creator, endowed with omniscience and omnipotence. 
Because he acquired lordship in the previous cycle he, through the 
power of his will, created this brahmadnda inhabited by beings. 


HARIRAMA SUKLA 


Harirama Sukla was a professor of Sampirnananda Sanskrit Uni- 
versity, Varanasi, and was well known for his erudition in the field 
of Nydya, which he studied with Rajeévara Sastrin Dravida, the re- 
nowned scholar of Nyaya and Advaita Vedanta in modern times. He 
died in about 1975. 

The commentary chiefly explains the expressions of the Tativakau- 
mudi and discusses difficult points in detail. It has very little new to 
say. In a few places it criticizes the views of other commentators. 

The summary is prepared from the edition published in the Kashi 
Sanskrit Series no. 123 from the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 
Varanasi in 1937. 


SUSAMA 
( Summary by Ram Shankar Bhattacharya) 
I, INTRODUCTORY: SCOPE AND TASK OF SAMKHYA 


First benedictory stanza. Although there are systematic statements 
showing the origination and destruction of materiality and conscious- 
ness, yet because of being directly contradicted by the express state- 
ment of Svetasvatara Upanisad 4.5, “prakyti” and “‘purusa”’ are to be taken 
in a restricted sense, “‘prakrti”’ in the sense of the power of creation and 
“‘surusa’’ in the sense of consciousness’ reflection in the intellect. Ac- 
cording to Vijfianabhiksu (whose view has been quoted by the com- 
mentaior) ‘the origination of materiality” means its conjunction with 
consciousness and ‘‘the destruction of materiality” means its disjunc- 
tion from consciousness. 

Some are of the opinion that although materiality is established in 
the Vedas, yet it may be inferred from its effects, which are stated in 
the Svetafvatara passage “bahvih prajah srjamandm sariipal’? (4.5). 
This view is not accepted by the commentator. According to him 
“that entity is established in the Vedas which cannot be proved by 


592 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


inference” (See Samkhyakarika 6). Because materiality can be proved 
by inference, it cannot be regarded as capable of being established 
by the Vedas. 

The word “‘eka’” in the Svetdfvatara passage means “devoid of a se- 
cond thing of a similar nature”’ (sajatiyadvitiyarahita). It cannot be 
urged that because some statements of the system speak of “‘a plurality 
of mayds” materiality cannot be accepted as one, for in those state- 
ments “‘mdya’’ is to be taken in the sense of the three constituents, and 
so the use of the plural number in the word “‘mdya’’ becomes justified. 
In the statements of the system mentioning eight prakrtis the word 
““prakrit” is to be taken in thesense of “‘the material cause of a tattva”’ 
( tattvdntaropadina), that is, in these statements ‘‘prakrtt” would mean 
eight entities, namely, the unmanifest, intellect, egoity, and the five 
subtle elements, The commentary shows the significance of the order 
of the words in the expression “red-white-black”’ (lohitasuklakrsnam) ; 
the word “‘lohita” (representing the rajas guna) hasbeen mentioned first 
because rajas is the inciting factor (pravdrtaka) in creation. 

(1) Vacaspati refers to two kinds of persons: ordinary persons( laukika) 
and specialists or experts (pariksaka). Harirama remarks that the 
ordinary persons are those who do not take the Vedas and the systems 
dependent on them as authoritative whereas the specialists are those 
who accept the Vedas, etc., as authoritative. 

Because frustration is mental (i.e., it is an attribute of the mind), 
the division of frustrations into mental and bodily seems to be illogical. 
This difficulty can be avoided by taking the word “mental” in the 
sense of “caused by the mind only”. Thus bodily frustration does not 
fall under mental frustration, because itis caused by both the body 
and the mind. Some, however, think that “mental”? means ‘‘caused 
by those factors that exist in the mind.”’ 

The word “‘dntaropayasadhya’’ (used to refer to internal frustration) 
may mean either ‘“‘caused by internal means” or “‘removed by internal 
means,”’ that is frustration is called mental either because it is caused 
by internal factors or because it is removed by internal factors. 

(2) While elucidating the relation between a sdmanya fastra (a 
generic rule) and a vtSesa Sastra (a specific rule) (as stated in Tattva- 
kaumudi), Harirama quotes the view of some teacher that because Vedic 
himsa (sanctioned violence as is found in sacrificial acts) yields much 
more satisfaction than frustration, people are naturally attracted to 
sacrificial acts associated with violence. There is an elaborate exposi- 
tion of kraivartha (subserving the purposes of sacrifices) and purusartha 
(subserving the purposes of men) —the two Mimamsa terms. 

On the authority of statements in the system, Vacaspati concludes 
that sacrificial acts invariably lead to death (i.e., frustration). Thus 
it follows that heaven, being the result of sacrificial acts, must be 
associated with frustration, and so to define it as ‘“‘not mixed with 


HARIRAMA SUKLA 593 


frustration” (see the verse’? yan na duhkhena,” etc., quoted by Vacas- 
pati) becomes faulty. To avoid this difficulty, some think that in the 
expression’’ not mixed with frustration’’ frustration is to be taken in 
the sense of “bodily frustration” only. As has been stated in some 
authoritative texts, beings residing in heaven are devoid of such frus- 
tration although they face death. The commentator thinks that the 
aforesaid verse “(yan na duhkhena,” etc.) is a supplemental text (artha- 
vdda) and so simply glorifies heaven. 


II. InsTRuMENTs oF KNOWLEDGE 


(6) It is the unmanifest and consciousness that are chiefly discussed 
in Samkhya, and the main purpose of Samkhya is to prove their ex- 
istence. Harirama refers to the view of another commentator who 
says that the indeclinable “tu’’ suggests the exclusion of perception 
and that the expression “‘sdémdnyatodrsta” suggests exclusion of the 
piérvavat form of inference. A few passages of the system on the evolu- 
tion of the intellect, etc., on heaven, and on apirva (the invisible 
potency leading to certain results) have been quoted. 


III. PreexisTent EFFECT 


(9) It is remarked that, whena material cause is inferred from its 
effects, it is assumed that the cause possesses the same qualities ( guna) 
as the effects. 

Harirama says that Vacaspati accepted, not the absolute existence, 
but conventional or empirical existence of the world (jagat). Accor- 
ding to Vedanta, the world, which is superimposed on brahman, is not 
different from brahman (i.e., it has no independent existence) , although 
it is not identical with Brahman. Brahmasiitra 2.1.14 (tadananyatvam...) 
has been quoted to show the Vedantic view on the cause-effect 
relation. 

While explaining the Tattvakaumudi passages refuting the view of the 
Buddhists, the commentator says that so longas aseed remains intact, 
there arises no sprout from it. This is why destruction of the seed is 
also a condition for the genesis of asprout. It may be reasonably held 
that a seed in an intact state is an obstacle (pratibandhaka) for the 
genesis of a sprout, Thus ‘t follows that the destruction of a seed must 
be regarded as the absence of obstacle, which also falls under the 
causes of an effect. The following argument (from Bhdmati 2.2.26) 
has also been adduced in this connection: because jar, etc., are not 
homogeneous (anvita) with nonexistence, they cannot be regarded as 
the effects of nonexistence. 

While refuting the Vedantic view Harirama quotes the scriptural 
passage “‘vdcdrambhanam...satyam’’ (Chdndogya Upanisad 6.1.4) that is 


594 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


usually cited by the Vedantins to prove the unreality or illusoriness 
of theeffects. He interprets it to mean that the effect is nothing but 
a special combination (samsthdnavisesa) of its (material) cause; as for 
example a jar is essentially nothing but clay in a new arrangement— 
it isas real as clay. Thus, it is clear that the aforequoted scriptural 
passage shows nondifference between the cause and its effect. It is 
incidentally remarked that the Samkhya process of inference has five 
members and not three, like the Vedantic process of inference. 

Commenting on Vacaspati’s passage stating that the statement 
“this cloth is in these threads” is similar to “there are tilaka trees in 
this forest” and so there is no difference between a cloth and the 
threads (as there is no difference between the trees and the forest), 
Susama remarks that it may be objected that there is no real difference 
between the trees and the forest, because the statement ‘‘there are 
tilaka trees in the forest’’ lays stress on the relation of the container 
and the contained between the forest and the trees and so this state- 
ment (i.e., “there are tilaka trees in the forest’’) is secondary, whereas 
in the statement ‘‘this cloth is in these threads” the notion of differ- 
ence is real and so it is not similarto the former illustration. In reply 
to this Harirama says that because the Chdndogya passage (vdcdrambha- 
nam, etc.) expressly shows nondifference between a cause and its 
effects, the notion of difference in the statement “this cloth is in these 
threads” must be taken as metaphorical. 

Harirama quotes Samkhyasitra 1. 122-123 while refuting the Nyaya 
view criticizing the Samkhya theory of manifestation (abhivyakti). He 
quotes a passage from the Samkhyacandrika (by Narayanatirtha) that 
justifies the Samkhya view and shows why a cause is needed in giving 
rise to the manifestation of an effect. Manifestation being sdttvika 
(chiefly caused by sativa) is sometimes obstructed by tamas and so 
some factor is needed to give rise to it. 

(10) It is remarked that, because the manifest has a cause, the 
mind has also a cause and consequently it is to be regarded as non- 
eternal—a view that is opposed to the Nyaya view. Harirama argues 
that the word “kriya”’ (activity, mobility) is to be taken in the sense 
of vibration (farispanda) and not in the sense of transformation, for 
mutation exists in materiality also, whereas vibration does not, as 
materiality is all-pervasive. The word “aneka’’ (an epithet of the 
manifest) does not means “not-one” but “associated with things of 
similar kind.” 

(11) Although the word ‘guna’ usually refers to sativa, rajas, and 
tamas, yet in the expression “‘trigunam’’, guna means satisfaction, frus- 
tration, and confusion, which are the properties of the constituents. 
(According to Samkhya, there is no difference between a dharmin, 
substrate, and its characteristics, properties). 

While refuting the argument of sahopalambhantyama given by the 


HARIRAMA SUKLA 595 


Buddhists to prove idealism (vijfdnavéda), Harirama remarks that 
none of the meanings of the word “‘saha” (in “‘sahopalambha’’) is appli- 
cable here. 


V. Tue Turee ConsTITUENTS 


(12) While elucidating tantrayukti Harirama says that because 
in Bhagavadgité 14.5 we find the order of sattva-rajas-tamas in the enu- 
meration of the three constituents, the same order is to be followed in 
this verse also. This is why the agreeableness, disagreeableness, and 
oppressiveness referred to in this verse are to be connected with sativa, 
rajas, and tamas respectively. 

Harirama remarks that the word “‘anyonydSrayavrtti”” suggests that 
a constituent takes the help of the other two constituentsin producing 
the effect of the nature of dissimilar transformation (viriipaparinamc) , 
whereas “‘anyonyajananavriti”? suggests that a constituent takes the help 
of others in producing the effect of the nature of similar transforma- 
tion (svariipaparindma). Because in similar transformation no new 
principle is produced, this transformation is said to be “‘devoid of 
cause.” In the proposition ‘‘the manifest has a cause” (verse 10), the 
cause is a principle. In the similar transformation, because sativa is 
caused, not by anything other than sativa, but by sattva itself, this 
transformation is rightly regarded as causeless. 

(13) Like weight, lightness is also an inferable quality. Although 
lightness is the cause of going upward, it cannot be taken to be the 
cause of going downward, both the motions being of opposite nature. 
(Two opposite things cannot be produced by the same cause). 

Although the constituents possess the characteristic of mutual 
opposition, yet in their transformations the constituents exist in the 
principal—subordinate relation, that is, while one constituent becomes 
principal, the other two remain subordinate to it. 


VI. INFERENCE TO PRIMORDIAL MATERIALITY AND CONSCIOUSNESS 


(17) Commenting on Vacaspati’s definition of satisfaction as that 
which is experienced as desirable (anukilavedaniya), Harirama adds 
that it should not be subservient to any other desire. Similarly he says 
that although frustration is defined as that which is experienced as 
undesirable, yet this dislike must not be subservient to any other dis- 
like. 

The argument from enjoyership (bhoktrbhava) has been interpreted 
in two ways in Talivakaumudi. The commentator remarks that the first 
interpretation is not basically different from the second. It is remark- 
ed that although in reality the intellect is a knowable object, yet 
because of its association with the self, it appears to be the knower. 


596 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


IX. Tue THirTEENFOLD INSTRUMENT 


(23) As to how reflective discerning, which is a form of awareness, 
can be attributed to the nonintelligent intellect, it is replied that 
because the intellect is associated with the intelligent self, reflective 
discerning can be taken to be an attribute of the intellect. 

Nonattachment is not the absence of attachment but a positive 
entity, that is, an anti-attachment entity. Similarly ignorance is not 
the mere absence of knowledge, but its opposite, a positive entity. 

(26) The Vaisesika view that the four sense organs (the ear being 
excluded) are elemental has been discussed in detail, and it is shown 
that the arguments as adduced by the Vaiéesika teachers contain fall- 
acies of asddhdrana. It is further stated that because the four capaci- 
ties (excluding the auditory) are nonelemental, the remaining capa- 
city, ear, the auditory one, must also be nonelemental. 

Harirama has provided a few newarguments to prove that the capa- 
cities are nonelemental. Consequently they must be regarded as the 
transformations of egoity. 

(27) The reason for accepting construction-free awareness as found 
in Nyaya treatises is given here. It is said to be the cause of construc- 
tion-filled awareness. 

(29) The vital breath, which is of the nature of a capacity, can- 
not be the same as air, which is a substance. 

(3]) Harirama argues that, the embodied self cannot be regarded 
as the controller of the capacities because of its inability to perceive 
directly the supersenuous things like the intellect, etc., and since the 
existence of God is denied in Samkhya, the Samkhya teachers regard 
the goals of consciousness, experience, and liberation as the reason 
for capacities. 


XI. Susrite Bopy 


(40) Itis remarked that, because the subtle body is nothing but an 
aggregate of 18 entities, namely, intellect, etc., itis not regarded as 
a distinct entity different from the 25 principles. 


XIV. Stites FoR MATERIALITY 


(57) Harirama quotes Samkara’s commentary on Brahmasiitra 2.2.3 
criticizing the Samkhyan view of the activity ofa nonintelligent entity 
and also establishing the view that because it is inspired by an intelli- 
gent being, nonintelligent milk functions for the nourishment of the 
calf. (This suggests that materiality being incited by God is the cause 
of creation). It then establishes the view that, because there can be 
no invariable rule that nonintelligent entities act, being inspired by 


HARIRAMA SUKLA 597 


intelligent beings, Samkara’s criticism of the Samkhyan view is un- 
tenable. Statements ofthe system declaring that nonintelligent things 
act, being incited by intelligent beings, refer to the secondary creation. 
The primary creation (ddisarga) is not preceded by any thought (abud- 
dhipiroaka). 

(62) The word “frakrti’’ in this verse means the intellect, for it is 
the intellect (and not primordial materiality) that is directly connect- 
ed with worldly existence. Two authoritative passages are quoted to 
show that in reality bondage, liberation, and transmigration do not 
belong to consciousness. 

(69) It is remarked that Svetdfvatara Upanisad 5.2 “(rsim prasiitam 
kapilam)”’ refers to the sage Kapila. 


XVI. TRANSMISSION OF SAMKHYA TRADITIONS 
(72) While commenting on the verses of the Rdjavarttika, Harirama 


explains duration (fesavriti) twice and exemplifies it by the two verses 
(60 and 67) of the Samkhyakarika. 


SIVANARAYANA SASTRIN 


Pandit Sivanarayana Sastrin wrote this commentary on Vacaspati 
Miéra’s Tattvakaumudi in the early decades of the twentieth century. 
It was published in 1940 in Bombay at the Nirnaya Sagar Press by 
Pandurang Jawaji. ‘“‘E” refers to the edition. 


SARABODHINI 
(Summary by Anima Sen Gupta) 
I. Inrropuctory: ScopE AND Task oF SAMKHYA 


(1-3) (E8-11) Both experience in the world and liberation from it 
are goals of consciousness. Primordial materiality acts in order to 
achieve these two goals. Experience, being caused, cannot be final. 
Because this goal is not the final goal, no scriptural inquiry is to be 
undertaken to realize it. The scriptural instruction is necessary to 
bring about absolute cessation of frustration but had there not been 
an opposing force in the form of frustration in this world, people 
would not have been interested in the scriptural study, which shows 
the way of removing misery. Further, nobody is going to make a 
scriptural inquiry if he is convinced that frustration cannot be removed 
even though its removal is desirable. 

(E11-12) Further, even if it is possible to remove frustration by 
having recourse to suitable means, still in the absense of adequate 
scriptural knowledge regarding the means, the subject matter of the 
scripture will not be inquired into. Again, if easier means are 
available elsewhere, then also the scriptural inquiry will not be 
undertaken by anybody. 

(E17) Granted that there is a desire to remove frustration. 
According to the Samkhya school, which upholds the theory of pre- 
existent effect, the nonexistent cannot be produced and the existent 
cannot be destroyed. It can be stated here that, even though frust- 
ration cannot be absolutely uprooted, still it can be reduced to its 


600 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


calm and inactive form with the result that it becomes incapable of 
making its appearance again. 

(E83) Mere hearing (Sravana) about manifested objects will not 
enable a man to understand correctly their true character. Realiz- 
ation of truth regarding manifested objects needs constant meditation, 
which alone is the producer of true knowledge. 

(E90-94) Materiality is defined as that which can serve as the 
material cause of an effect of a different order. This definition of 
materiality enables the intellect, egoity, etc. (which are both causes 
and effects), to be called materiality. In fact, this is a definition 
that is neither too wide nor too narrow, and it permits the application 
of the word “materiality” to all the generated principles (from 
intellect down to the earth), The definition of materiality as the 
state of equilibrium of the three constituents is, however, applicable 
to the root cause only. It is not applicable either to the intellect, 
etc., or to the lump of clay and the like, which are mere material 
causes. 


II. INstRUMENTS OF KNOWLEDGE 


(4-5) (E95) The fundamental principles have been enumerated. 
These will be established by the instruments of knowledge. One 
instrument of knowledge cannot establish all the principles. So, there 
must be more than one instrument. 

Perception, inference, and verbal testimony are the three instru- 
ments that have to be admitted. Because the twenty-five principles 
are to be proved by these instruments, they are to be examined. 
Some principles are established by perception, some by inference and 
some by verbal testimony. All other instruments are included in 
these three. 

(E96-97) Knowledge is a mental operation that is different from 
doubtful cognition, erroneous cognition, vague cognition, and memory. 
Knowledge, in its primary form, refers to an apprehension by the 
experiencing subject of an object as a result of an operation of the 
awareness. Samkhyasiitra 1.43 has spoken of two forms of knowledge 
(1) the intellectual mode (through which consciousness is reflected) 
and (2) apprehension of the object by an experiencing agent. 

(E98) There are some things that are only instruments of knowl- 
edge and not themselves knowledge. The visual capacity is called an 
instrument of knowledge because it produces valid intellectual cog- 
nition in the form of ‘This is a jar.” There are other objects that 
can take the form of knowledge and are also instruments of knowl- 
edge. The operation of awareness is called knowledge when it is 
regarded as a product of the operation of sense capacities. Because 
this operation of awareness is the instrument that results in the 


SIVANARAYANA SASTRIN 601 


arousal of cognition in the cognizer, it is also called an instrument 
of knowledge. Apprehension by the experiencing agent is mere 
knowledge as it never serves as an instrument for any other cognition, 
Further, there is an object in the form of consciousness that is reflec- 
ted in the intellect; it is only the experiencer. There is also an 
object that is only the witness. It is pure consciousness that falls in 
the snare of the intellect through reflection. 

(E99) If apprehension by the experiencing agent implies that the 
consciousness is the substratum of awareness of contents, then such 
an attribution does not seem to be suitable for it; because conscious- 
ness, being the possessor of characteristics like knowerness, etc., will 
then become mutable in nature. There is, however, no ground for 
such apprehension. The awareness of contents is really of the nature 
of an intellectual operation and so it is not an attribute of conscious- 
ness. It is because the intellect and consciousness are not differenti- 
ated that awareness of content is falsely attributed to consciousness. 
Consciousness is not the substratum of such awareness. 

(E103-105) Three instruments of knowledge have been mentioned 
because objects of the world become known to ordinary persons (who 
are not Yogins) through these three instruments. The things that 
can be known by Yogins cannot be known by ordinary persons. 
Although the supernormal cognition of Yogins is admitted, still this 
has not been mentioned here as such supernormal cognition is not 
used in practical life. Moreover, this supernormal cognition is a form 
of perceptual cognition produced by yogic power; so it is included 
in perception. 

(E108) Here the word ‘“‘drsta” (which is synonymous with percep- 
tion) means that which is defined, and the remaining portion of the 
definition differentiates perception from the instruments of knowledge 
of the same class as well as from doubt, error, memory, etc. (which 
are different from the instruments of valid knowledge) . The definition 
must be free from the defects of being too wide or too narrow. 

(E111) Objects like jars, etc., color awareness with their own 
forms through sense contact. The word “‘object”’ should be taken to 
mean not only the gross objects but also the subtle objects like the 
subtle elements, etc., which are perceptible by Yogins alone. 

The definition of perception indicates that the sense capacities 
must come in contact with the object; butit does not mean that 
the sense capacities should leave their own places to meet the 
objects. Had this been the case, there would have been blindness, 
etc. (because of the absence of the sense organs in their respective 
places in the body). The word “operation” (vrtti) means contact. 
Tt does not mean that a sense capacity goes to the object leaving its 
own place. 

(£114) Although reflective discerning has been declared to be 


602 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


dependent on the sense capacities, still it is not a disposition of an 
external sense capacity. It subsists in the intellect, depending on the 
sense capacities. It is called an intellectual operation. The external 
sense Capacities, no doubt, assume the forms of the objects to which 
they become related but reflective discerning stands for the excess 
flow of the thought constituent, or sattvaguna, that results from the 
suppression of the covering of the intellect formed of tamas. The 
word “operation” really refers to the arousal of the (excess) flow of 
the sattva as a result of the overpowering of tamas. Therefore, the 
word “operation” is not to be understood to refer to sense contact, 
etc., even though such things cause arousal of the operation by 
stopping the operation of the sativa constituent. Hence the word 
“operation” is easily applicable to cases of inference and verbal 
testimony as well, and the definition of operation does not suffer 
from the defects of under and overextension. An operation becomes 
the revealer of an object of knowledge because of the subdued con- 
dition of tamas, The intellect, no doubt, is capable of revealing all 
objects but because it is obstructed by the activity of tamas it cannot, 
by itself, manifest objects. In the case of perception, the tamas is over- 
powered by sense contact and the intellect, therefore, reaches the 
object through the operation of the sense capacities and assumes the 
form of the object. Perception is, thus, the definite cognition of the 
object through the contact of the sense organs. It is groundless to 
urge that awareness, being partless, should be regarded as immut- 
able like consciousness. This is because (according to Samkhya) 
partlessness does not imply immutability. Had this been so, 
the primary cause, being partless, would have been treated as 
immutable. 

(E120) Knowledge, which is the outcome of the operation of the 
instruments of knowledge, arises in the intellect and not in the self. 
The self, being absolutely nonattached, cannot be the substratum 
of knowledge. 

(E125) Perception cannot give us knowledge of all objects. More- 
over, ignorance, etc., of another person cannot be known through 
perception. So, inference has to be admitted even by a materialist. 

Inference is to be ascertained after perception because inference 
depends on repeated observations. 

(E136) Inferential knowledge is not possible merely on the basis 
of the universal relation between pervaded (hetu) and the pervader 
(sddhya). The knowledge of the existence of the hetuin the paksa is 
also required for arriving at inferential cognition. These two (taken 
together) lead to the arousal of the inferential operation in the form 
of the inferred object. The operation of the intellect in the form of 
the inferred object is known as its functioning (gydpdra), and the 
knowledge in the form of inferential cognition arises as a result of 


SIVANARAYANA SASTRIN 603 


this functioning. That functioning operation therefore is the instru- 
ment of inferential knowledge. 

Inference is divided into two forms : positive and exclusionary. The 
positive form of inference is again of two kinds : pirvavat and sdman- 
yatodrsta. Exclusionary inference is called Sesavat and it is of one form 
only. 

(E 152-153) Verbal testimony as an instrument of knowledge is to 
be considered after inference, because the inexperienced person under- 
stands the relation between the word and its meaning by means of in- 
ference. Valid assertion (dptavacana) refers to cognition of the meaning 
of a sentence (vdkyarthajiidna) , and right revelation (dpiafruti) stands 
for correct knowledge of a sentence that is produced by the sentence. 

(E 155) Knowledge that is produced by a sentence may be intrinsi- 
cally valid or its validity may be externally caused. When the mean- 
ing of a sentence can be cognized correctly without the help of any 
other instrument of knowledge, that verbal cognition is valid intrinsi- 
cally (as, for example, knowledge derived from the Vedas). If the 
help of other instruments isnecessary tounderstand the correct mean- 
ing of some sentences, then the knowledge derived from these senten- 
ces is not self-sufficient in authority (as for example, sentences of the 
traditional texts, which depend on the Vedas for authority). 

(E 159) Here the scriptures have been enumerated and defined. 
“Smyti,”” for instance, stands for that scripture which is a recollection 
of the Vedas, Itihdsa records past happenings, whereas the Puranas 
deal with creation, dissolution, ‘manvantara,’ dynasty, and character 
of the hereditary rulers. Veddngas are six in number and updigas 
include Puranas, Nyaya, Mimamsa, and dharmaSastra. 


TIT. PREEXISTENT EFFECT 


(9) (E218-223) Buddhists hold that an entity can arise from a 
nonentity. Curd is produced from the destruction of milk. All posi- 
tive effects are caused by nonentities. 

Others hold that Brahman is the only Reality without a second; 
but it appears in the form of a multicolored universe due to igno- 
rance which is a limiting adjunct of Brahman. The visible object is 
not metaphysically real : Brahman, which is devoid of worldly dis- 
play (frapafica) displays itself as the phenomenal world because of 
superimposition and refutation of a wrong imputation (apavdda). 
Superimposition (adhydropa) stands for laying of a nonreal object on a 
real object. Refutation of awrong imputation means retaining the 
real after negating the unreal. 

(According to Kanada and Aksapada) the previously nonexistent 
things, such as dyads, arise from the atoms, etc. The effect is nonexis- 
tent in the cause prior toits production. Owing to the operation of 


604 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the causal factors, it comes into being. The effect is metaphysically 
real. 

(The Kapila view) : It is the cause that is changed into the form 
of the effect. So there is nondifference between the cause and the 
effect and both of them are real. 

Of these four views, the first three are incapable of establishing 
that type of the primary cause, the knowledge of which can be deriv- 
ed from the knowledge of its effect. The knowable effect (in which 
satisfaction, frustration, etc., are inherent) can establish only that 
type of cause which possesses satisfaction, frustration, etc., as its 
inherent ingredients. The first three views cannot prove the existence 
of such a cause. 

(E225) That which is the cause of satisfaction, etc., must be cap- 
able of producing satisfaction, etc., because the demand of the causal 
rule is that there must be identity between the cause and the effect 
from the point of view of the material stuff. The nonexistent cause 
is not capable of serving this purpose and no identity is possible bet- 
ween an entity and a nonentity. 

(E230-232) The world appearance is not false because it is per- 
ceived. In the case of silver in the conch shell there is the sublating 
knowledge (this is conch shell and not silver) but there is no such 
sublating knowledge so far as the perception of the world (in the 
empirical life) is concerned. So, how can the world be regarded as 
false ? The world is real because it is not produced by any defective 
cause, and because there is no empirical knowledge to negate it. The 
scriptural passage ‘‘odcdrambhana’’ (Chandogya Upanisad VI. 1.4) also 
proves that the effect is of the same nature as the cause. It does not 
prove its nonreality. Again, nobody resolves to produce an illusory 
object. The world has been brought into being through divine re- 
solution. Hence, the world is not illusory. If the whole world, except 
Brahman, is regarded as false, then the Vedas, too, being of this 
world, should be treated as false. Had the Vedas been false, Brahman, 
that has been spoken of in the Vedas, would have been equally false. 
If this be so, then the Ved4ntins, too, will be regarded as the up- 
holders of voidness (Sanyavdda). Hence the scriptural texts that seem 
to speak of the falsity (mithydtva) of the world, really speak of the 
noneternal nature of the phenomenal world. 

(E237) Although prior to production, the effect exists in its causal 
form; still, in its effect form, it is nonexistent. This view does not 
favor the view of the nonexistence of the effect. Causal operation, too, 
becomes necessary. It does not, however, produce anything that is 
entirely new, because it does not possess this ability. 

(E256) Because the theory of preexistence is free from all defects, 
it is valid and superior to all other views. 

IV-VI. (11-16) (E262) Here, ifthe word “guna” is to be under- 


SIVANARAYANA SASTRIN 605 


stood to refer to the three constituents (sativa, rajas, and tamas) , then 
we are to hold that these three constituents form the substratum of 
the manifest and the unmanifest. The three constituents are, no 
doubt, the substratum of the manifest but these cannot be regarded 
as the substratum of primordial materiality, which is of the nature of 
these constituents. Samkhyasiitra V1.39 too has stated that materiality 
cannot be understood to form a characteristic of the three constitu- 
ents because these constituents themselves are of the nature of 
materiality. The word “‘guna” is to be interpreted here in the sense of 
satisfaction, frustration, and confusion. In this sense only, the word 
‘‘guna”’ can. be applied here to materiality as it is the substratum of 
satisfaction, frustration, etc., which are the effects of the constituents. 
As there is no difference between quality and the possessor of qua- 
lity, the word “guna” has been used here to mean satisfaction, etc., 
and not the intellect, etc. Egoity, which is endowed with satisfac- 
tions, etc., is the cause of the five subtle elements. Because the effect 
is of the same nature as the cause, the five subtle elements, too, 
possess satisfactions, etc. Like egoity and as such, they continue to 
be of the nature of the three constituents. 

(E263-264) The Nyaya view that qualities like desire, aversion, 
effort, satisfaction, frustration, and knowledge are the indicators of 
the substance self is not correct. In fact, satisfactions, etc., are the 
qualities of the manifest and the unmanifest, and are other than 
the self. Scripture, too, has described the self as nonattached, wit- 
ness, alone and qualityless. If the Nyaya view is accepted, and satis- 
factions, etc., are regarded as qualities of the self, then this will go 
against scripture. Phenomena like sound, touch, etc., are only aware- 
nesses according to Vijfianavadins, (In their opinion) consciousness 
alone is real. The external object as something other than conscious- 
ness cannot be admitted as real. We can refute this view by asserting 
that the knowable external object—because it is knowable—must be 
different from awareness of it. Nobody is capable of establishing the 
oneness of awareness and its objects. It is because the jar is accepted 
as the content of awareness and awareness as the entertaining of con- 
tent that these two are clearly perceived as different. The jar that is 
cognizable is one thing and quite different from it is the cognition 
that becomes its receiver. It is because the external object is different 
from cognition that it can become a common object of awareness. 
Because the knowable remains the same, although knowers are differ- 
ent, the knowable object is regarded as different from the knower. 
The Vijfianavadins cannot prove how a particular object can become 
the common object of cognition (of many persons). Just as the 
cognition of one person cannot be directly known by another person, 
in the same manner the object of knowledge of one person cannot be 
apprehended by another person. 


606 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(E276-277) The three constituents form a state of equilibrium that 
is called primordial materiality. Thismay be regarded as the first 
transformation of the three constituents. 

Now, if primordial materiality is regarded as the ‘homogeneous 
transformation” of the three constituents, then it becomes a caused 
principle (hetumat). This is not so. The homogeneous transformation 
does not make it a caused entity. Where an object of a different order 
originates from a particular entity, there the heterogeneous trans- 
formation of principles gives rise to the character of being caused. 
Primordial materiality is none other than the three constituents, and 
so there is no transformation from one order to a different order in 
the case of primordial materiality. 

Neither can we regard primordial materiality as noneternal on the 
ground that the state of equilibrium is destroyed at the time of crea- 
tion. At that time, primordial materiality is merged in the constitu- 
ents, and the disappearance of the equilibrium in the constituents 
does not mean the origination of a different entity. 

(E296) Primordial materiality possesses the tendency of acting in 
two different ways. One kind of activity results in creation and an- 
other in dissolution. At the time of creation, the three constituents 
act in unison (some becoming primary and some remaining in a 
subdued condition) . 

(E302) That which is active becomes a cause. An inactive prin- 
ciple like consciousness cannot serve as a cause. 

(17-19) (E312) Scripture has declared that consciousness is non- 
attached. That which is nonattached cannot become an enjoyer. 

Others, however, interpret the word “‘bhoktrbhdva” (the character- 
istic of being an enjoyer) in the sense of drastrbhdva (the characteristic 
of being a seer). The enjoyer is the seer, andthe seer is to be inferred 
from the object of sight. The intellect and the rest, being objects of 
sight, lead to the supposition of a seer. The nonattached conscious- 
ness, however, cannot bea seer in the true sense. Its visibility is to 
be understood only by admitting the intellect as its limiting adjunct. 
The characteristic of being a seer and an enjoyer is ascribable to 
consciousness only when it is conditioned by the intellect. 

(E314) According to Vedanta, the self is one, eternal, all-pervad- 
ing, immutable, and devoid of all defects. One reality appears as 
many due to the power of the principle of illusion (maya), and not 
by its own inherent nature. 

(E317-318) The adjustment of birth, etc., cannot be explained by 
attributing it to a single selfas differently conditioned by contact with 
different bodies, etc., because this will create another difficulty of 
admitting birth, etc., of the soul in connection with hands and other 
limbs as well. Further, akafa limited by a particular jar may become 
liberated if the jar is destroyed; but it can be associated with a 


SIVANARAYANA §SASTRIN 607 


different jar, thereby becoming conditioned again. Similarly, the single 
self, being dissociated from one limiting adjunct, may be conditioned 
by another. Because of this conditioning, embodiment and liberation 
cannot be properly explained. 

(20-23) (E326-336) It has already been established that conscious- 
ness and activity are differently located. So, the feeling that I am 
doing this as a consciousness principle is wrong. In other words, the 
feeling that consciousness and activity belong to one and the same 
locus is wrong. The seed of this illusory feeling is association. The 
apparent activity of the self is due to its being in (seeming) union 
with the intellect and the apparent conscious nature of the intellect 
is due to its being intelligized by the self through association. 

Why should the consciousness principle depend on primordial 
materiality? Without primordial materiality, discriminative discern- 
ment is not possible. It is the primary cause that changes into the 
form of the intelleet and the discriminative knowledge is produced by 
the intellect. Because the yogic discipline is practiced disinterestedly, 
it isnot to be reckoned as a form ofwhiteaction. Again being devoid 
of an external and (tobe achieved by external means )yogic discipline, 
aiming simply at a steady and waveless awareness, does not assume 
the form of black action, either. Hence this discipline and the excel- 
lences arising therefrom are neither black nor white. 


IX. THIRTEENFOLD INSTRUMENT 


(30-37) (E365-366) According to the thinkers of the Samkhya 
schoo], the functions of awareness are both simultaneous and gradual 
in the case of perception. Perception, however, is not possible unless 
there is the operation of an external sense capacity along with the 
three internal organs. 

According to Nyaya-Vaisesika, the mind is one and atomic and 
so it cannot supervise simultaneously the different sense capacities 
located in different places. Just as a piece of iron, if moved rapidly, 
does not produce an awareness of succession even though succession 
is present, in the same manner, because of the quick succession of 
different bits of knowledge, gradualness is not felt. Hence in the 
opinion of the Nyaya-Vaisesika, the feeling of simultaneity is illusory. 
This is not the view of the Samkhya school. According to this school, 
the mind, being middle-sized, can supervise the actions of many 
sense capacities simultaneously. In the case of indirect knowledge 
such as inference, etc., the external sense capacities do not operate. 

(E375) The statement that the internal organs act at all the three 
points of time should not be wrongly interpreted to mean that 
Samkhya admits time asa distinct principle in addition to twenty- 
five principles (already admitted by them). According to Vaisesika, 


608 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


time is one, indivisible and eternal. The expression “time that is yet 
to be” cannot be applied to one eternal time. Neither can the 
Vaisesikas hold that although time is one, divisions as past, present, 
and future can be attributed to the limiting adjuncts of time be- 
cause the Samkhyans believe that the limiting adjuncts themselves 
form the basis of the three divisions of time. The activities (like the 
solar activity, etc.) themselves are to be regarded as time. There is 
no need for imagining a separate principle in the form of time. 

(E 384) The various experiences of consciousness in the forms of 
sound and the rest are brought about by the intellect. The intellect 
also produces the apprehension of the subtle difference between 
materiality and consciousness. 


XI. SusriEe BopyY 


(40-42) (E393) The word “linga” here stands for the subtle body, 
In the very beginning of transformation, primordial materiality pro- 
duced one subtle body for each consciousness. The subtle body can- 
not be obstructed, and so it can enter even a solid piece of stone. It 
continues to exist until the time of the final dissolution. It is a collec- 
tion of eighteen principles. The subtle body is incapable of experien- 
cing objects without the help of the gross body. The comfortable, un- 
comfortable, and confusing nature of the sense capacities can be 
experienced even by ordinary persons, and so these are specific. 

(E395) The subtle body, being composed of capacities that are 
specific, should be regarded as specific. Again, the five subtle ele- 
ments are nonspecific and being composed of them, the subtle body 
should become nonspecific. The subtle body is, however, regarded as 
specific because the number of specific principles of which it is com- 
posed is larger than the number of its nonspecific ingredients. 

(E397) One may pose a question: Why should not the subtle 
body, like primordial materiality, continue to exist even after the 
final dissolution ? The subtle body, being a product, cannot be 
permanent (like primordial materiality), That which is caused is 
sure to be merged into its own cause. On the basis of this universal 
principle, all effects of primordial materiality should be supposed to 
lose their identity (either directly or indirectly) in that materiality. 
Hence, the subtle body too is lost in its cause in final dissolution, 

(£398-399) The word ‘‘liiga’”’ stands for the intellect and the rest 
because they are the instruments of knowing primordial materiality. 
During the period intervening between death and rebirth, the intel- 
lect and the rest must have a support until they are associated with 
a gross body. 

To prove the existence of the subtle body, we can refer to the 
scriptural text that speaks of a thumb-sized body that was extracted 


SIVANARAYANA SASTRIN 609 


from the body of Satyavat (by Yama). Consciousness is not limited 
by space and time and so it does not have any prior entrance into the 
body or any posterior extraction. Hence it is the subtle body that 
performs the activities of going up or going out. 

The subtle body transmigrates in order to serve the purposes of 
consciousness. It becomes connected with causes in the form of 
virtue, vice, etc, Being associated with the gross body, it again be- 
comes interested in meritorious and demeritorious actions. The 
transmigration of the subtle body does not stop because of nondis- 
crimination. The Purdnas and Itihdsas, however, speak of persons who 
have appeared in gross bodies even after attenuation of their actions 
by means of true knowledge because of divine will. 


XII. Basic PREDISPOSITIONS 


(43-52) (E410) The dispassion that is coupled with knowledge 
does not lead to mergence into materiality, but mere dispassion un- 
accompanied by a quest for the knowledge of consciousness becomes 
the cause of such mergence. The word “mdatra’” (‘‘mere’’) in “‘vaird- 
gyamatra”) (‘‘mere dispassion’’) excludes the quest for the knowledge 
of the consciousness, 

(E416-418) The Yoga philosophy speaks of five afflictions, which 
are ignorance, ego sense, attachment, hatred, and fear of death: 
these are the five limbs of misconception. 


XIV. Smives roR MATERIALITY 


(57-62) (E463) Those things that are insentient and that are not 
actively controlled by consciousness cannot act for the benefit of 
others. On the basis of this universal principle, primordial materia- 
lity should be regarded as being actively controlled by consciousness 
because it acts for the benefit of another. 

(E473) Purusa is mere consciousness : it is immutable and ever 
free. Enjoyment in the form of going through worldly satisfactions 
and frustrations belongs to the mutable intellect. Because the trans- 
formations of the intellect are reflected in consciousness, the latter 
seems to be one with the intellect and its enjoyment is nothing but 
apprehension of this nondiscrimination. Therefore, the characteristic 
of being the enjoyer is attributed to consciousness through nondis- 
crimination. Consciousness in its true nature is subject neither to 
embodiment nor to liberation. 


XV. LIBERATION 


(62-69) (E479) If the practice of knowledge is not done with medi- 


610 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tation, then even if it is carried on for a long period of time, it will 
not bear fruits. Further, if practice of knowledge is done for a short 
while only, then also it will not bear fruit. In the course of practice, 
knowledge of the distinction between the intellect and consciousness 
does not arise directly. It arises because of meditation in the form of 
constant thinking of the distinction between the intellect and con- 
sciousness as taught by the preceptor, and such uninterrupted and 
constant thinking produces adirect awareness of the distinction bet- 
ween the intellect and consciousness. 

(E480) According to another view, the term “absence of error” 
does not remove doubt and how can doubtful knowledge be pure? 
So it is said that steadiness is the sign of truth and that there is no 
scope for doubt in steadiness. Doubt arises whenever a steady object 
is apprehended in an indefinite and unsteady manner. That also is 
a form of erroneous knowledge in which an object isapprehended in 
a form that it does not possess. 

(pp. 484-486): “I am not” (ndsmi) denies any action on the part 
of consciousness. It is equivalent to “I am not active.” Because 
consciousness is not active, itis also devoid of the characteristics of 
being an agent. “Nothing is mine’? means that consciousness does 
not own anything. As it is not an agent, it is also not an owner. 
Awareness in the form of “it is mine”? causes embodiment, whereas 
awareness in the form of “‘it isnot mine” liberates. ‘‘Not I” shows 
that even such expressions as “I know” etc., are not to be used in 
relation to consciousness, 

When pure knowledge is directly apprehended, materiality ceases 
to be productive (in relation to the liberated consciousness) and turns 
back from the seven forms of transformation. 


NARAHARINATHA 


Naraharinatha’s Sdmkhyavasanta was published by the Yogapra- 
carini Sabha in 1950, and it was composed, according to the last verse 
in the text, in 1946. The author appears to be a follower of the 
Natha school of Yoga. He was a disciple of Ksipranatha (according 
to verse 74). The work is nothing but a version in the vasantatilaka 
meter of the Sdmkhyakarika, The text has six benedictory verses, and 
thereafter each verse of the Samkhyakdrika is restated ina separate 
verse. Interestingly, Naraharinatha includes in his rendering of the 
text the so-called missing karikd suggested by B. G. Tilak (reconstruc- 
ted from verse 61 of the Gaudapada Bhdsya [see above under 
Igvarakrsna] ). 


SITARAMA SASTRI 


The text called Abhinavarajalaksmi purports to be a commentary on 
the Samkhyakarika but is really an expanded paraphrase of Vacaspati 
Misra’s Tattvakaumudi. The work was first written by Guruprasada 
Sastri and then revised for publication by Sitarama Sastri. The text 
was published in Varanasi in 1953 along with a Hindi commentary 
called Bhdsafika. The work is only a paraphrase of Vacaspati. 


BRAHMAMUNI 


The text called Samkhyasitrabhasya, published by Brahmamunihim- 
self in 1955 from the Vedanusandhanasadhana, Haridvara, is little 
more than a restatement of the view of Aniruddha and Vijianabhiksu 
on the Samkhyasiitra. The author is evidently a follower of Swami 
Dayananda Sarasvati. 


KESAVA 
KRSNA MISRA 


o + @ 


SAMKHYAPARIBHASA 


These short independent works are included in the collection 
Samkhyasangraha, Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 
1969, on pages 90-95, 114-124, 125-144 respectively. Although the 
authors’ names are known for the first two, nothing more can be 
said about them. Nothing at all is known about the date or author- 
ship of the Samkhyaparibhasa. 


The Samkhyatattvapradipika of Keéava isa simple summary present- 
ation of the Samkhya system along the lines of Vijfianabhiksu. 

The Tattvamimamsaé of Krsna Misra provides a short resumé 
of the Samkhyakarikd. It stresses that everyone naturally searches for 
satisfaction, and in order to find satisfaction, one must remove the 
cause Of frustration, The text also suggests that prakrti is really the 
same as mdyd or avidya in other systems, the author thereby betraying 
his Vedanta bias. 

The Samkhyaparibhasé may not be a Samkhya work at all. The 
word “‘sdémkhya’’ in the title seems to be used in the general sense of 
knowledge and not in the sense of the Samkhya system. The editor of 
the text, V. P. Dvivedi, indicates that the work appears to be in- 
complete and full of mistakes. Generally speaking, the text is a 
collection of quotations from the Upanisads and the Gita and has a 
clear Advaitin bias. 


M. V. UPADHYAYA 


The Samkhyastddhantaparamarga is a booklet containing 253 verses in 
Arya meter with occasional notes by its author, M. V. Upadhyaya. 
Upadhyaya has also composed a commentary in verse on the 
Brahmasitra, arguing that Samkhya is in full harmony with the Vedas, 
The text was published in 1972 by the Superintendent, Avadhita- 
vidvanmandala, Baroda. 


SRIRAMA PANDEYA 


The author is currently professor of Sanskrit at Sampurnananda 
Sanskrit University, Varanasi. His text, Samkhyarahasya, was published 
in Varanasi in 1966. It contains 102 verses interspersed with an 
autocommentary (svopajfa) entitled “‘Prakdsa.’? The text follows the 
order of the Samkhyakarika and on all important points follows the 
interpretation of Vacaspati Misra’s Tativakaumudi. 


NOTES 


(References given with “B” followed by a number are to Volume I of the Encyclo- 
pedia, the Bibliography of Indian Philosophies \st. Ed. (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1970). 
References beginning “RB” are to the second revised edition of the Bibliography, 
(Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983). Complete citations are provided with the first 
reference to a publication. “B” and “RB” citations appear thereafter.) All notes not 
otherwise attributed are by G.J. Larson. 


Tue Hisrory AND LirERATURE OF SAMKHYA 


1. For a detailed discussion of, and bibliography for, early Samkhya references 
and for a full treatment of the history of the secondary literature on Samkhya, see 
Gerald J. Larson (RB1378), Classical Samkhya: An Interpretation of Its History and 
Meaning, 2nd ed. rev. (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979). 

2. “...samkhyam yogo lokayatam ca iti anviksiki....? Artha$astra 1.2., pp.\6ff. in 
N.S. Venkatanathacharya, ed., Kaufaliyarthasastra of Sri Visqugupta, Oriental Research 
Ins‘itute, Sanskrit Series 103 (Mysore: Oriental Research Institute, 1960). 

3. “... hetubhir anviksamana...,” ibid. Compare also the discussion by Paul 
Hacker (B8877; BR12428) “Anviksiki,” Wiener Zeitschrift fur die Kunde Siid- und Osta- 
siens 2 (1958): 54-83. 

4. Paul Hacker, B8877; RB12428, 54-83; and Erich Frauwallner (B6431A; 
RB9627), “Die Erkenntnislehre des Klassischen Samkhya-Systems,”’ Wiener Zeitschrift 
fiir die Kunde Stid- und Ostasiens 2 (1958): 84-139. 

5. For a recent discussion of tantrayuktis, see W.K. Lele, The Doctrine of the Tantra- 
yuktis (Varanasi: Ghaukhamba Surabharati Prakashan, 1981). 

6. Richard Garbe (B6227; RB9527), Die Samkhya Philosophie (Leipzig: H. Haessel 
1917), 5ff. 

7. Franklin Edgerton, “The Meaning of Samkhya and Yoga,” American Journal of 
Philology 45, 50, No. 177 (1924): 16. 

8. Ibid., 32. 

9. Mahabharata (Critical Edition) XT1.239, XT1I.267.28, 

10. Mahabharata X11.267.30. 

11. Mahabharata X11.306. 

12. Mahabharata X11.298. 

13. J.A.B. Van Buitenen (B6423; RB9620), “Studies in Samkhya (I1),” Journal 
of the American Oriental Society 77 (1957): 101-102. 

14, For a discussion of the fragments of Paficasikha, see Larson, RB1378, 139-140, 
and R. Garbe (B278; BR536), “‘Paficasikha Fragmente”’, Festgruss an Rudolph von 
Roth (edited by E.W.A. Kuhn, Stuttgart, 1893), 77-80. 

15. Richard Garbe, B6227; RB9527, 52-65; and Hermann Oldenberg (B6275; 
RB9540), “Zur Geschichte der Samkhya Philosophie,” Nachrichten von der kiniglichen 


624 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Géttingen, Philologische-historische Klasse aus dem 
Jahre 1917 (Berlin: Weidmannsche Buchhandlung, 1918), 218-253. 

16. Larson RB1378, 122-124. 

17. Edgerton, “The Meaning of Samkhya and Yoga,” 34. 

18. P. Chakravarti, ed. (B1046A; RB2207), Yuktidipika, Calcutta Sanskrit Series 
23, (Calcutta: Metropolitan Printing and Publishing House, 1938); R.C. Pandeya, 
ed, (RB1370), Yuktidipika (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1967); Albrecht Wezler 
(RB2213), “Some Observations on the Yuktidipika,” Deutscher Orientalistentag (Wies- 
baden), Supplement ILXVIII (1974), 434-455; P. Chakravarti (B6381; RBS596), 
Origin and Development of the Samkhya System of Thought (Calcutta: Metropolitan Printing 
and Publishing House, 1951). 

19, Erich Frauwallner, B6431A; RB9627, 84-139. 

20. Paul Hacker (B6456; RB9646), ‘““The Samkhyization of the Emanation Doc- 
trine shown in a Critical Analysis of Texts,” Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Sid- und 
Ostasiens 5 (1961): 75-112. 

21. According to Chakravarti, the correct name of the Samkhya teacher is “Varsa- 
ganya” (meaning a descendent of Vrsagana). Moreover, such a name formulation 
usually indicates a later descendent beginning with the grandson. According to 
Frauwallner the correct name of the Samkhya teacher is ‘““Vrsagana” and the name 
“Varsaganya”’ refers to the followers of Vrsagana. It would appear, however, that 
Chakravarti is correct, for in the Yuktidipika the “followers of Varsaganya’”’ are 
referred. to as “‘varsaganah.” In other words, the Samkhya teacher was known as “Var- 
saganya, the grandson or later descendent of Vrsagana”’ (who presumably was not 
a Samkhya teacher), and his followers (including probably Vindhyavasin, Iivara- 
krsna and others) were called “‘vaérsaganah.” 

22, Frauwallner B6431A; RB9627, 84-139. 

23. Hacker B6456; RB9646, 75-112. 

24, For a full discussion of the variant accounts of the debate see Larson RB1378, 
141ff. 

25. Masaaki Hattori, trans. (RB1791), Digndga, On Perception. Harvard Oriental 
Series 47 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1968). For a good discussion of the 
other references to Madhava see Esther A. Solomon (RB1387), The Commentaries of 
the Samkhya Karika (Ahmedabad: Gujarat University, 1974), 153-163. 

26. Erich Frauwallner (B8590; RB12160), Geschichte der indischen Philosophie, (Salz- 
burg: Otto Miiller Verlag, 1953), Vol. 1, 408ff, and Chakravarti B6381; B9596, 138ff. 

27. A never ending problem in Samkhya studies has to do with the content and 
authorship of the so-called sastitantra, “Sixty Topics.” In my book Classical Samkhya 
(RB1378), 135-138, I summarized the range of the debate and assumed a skeptical 
posture regarding both content and authorship. I now think, however, that more 
can be said. The evidence in the Samkhya philosophical literature proper is over- 
whelming in terms of the content of sasfitantra, namely, the ten miilikarthas (“principal 
topics’’) and fifty padarthas (‘‘categories” ). The enumeration of ten plus fifty is implied 
in the Karika itself and is explicitly spelled out in Paramartha, the Samkhyaoriti, Sam- 
Khyasaptatioriti, Fayamangala, Yuktidipika, Tattvakaumudi, and Matharavrtti. It appears, 
furthermore, in the Tativasamdsa and its commentaries, and in the Sdémkhyasiitra and 
its commentaries. There can be little doubt, therefore, of the content of sasfitantra in 
the extant Samkhya philosophical literature. There are some variant items in the 
various listings (as E.A. Solomon has helpfully summarized in RB1387, 182-185), 
but that the “‘sixty topics” are the ten miilikarthas and the fifty padarthas is firmly fixed 
in the tradition. F.O. Schrader’s variant listing of sasfitanira from the Paficaratra 
( Ahirbudhnyasamhita) can only be construed as an eccentric, non-Samkhya fluke, a 
classic example of an exception proving the rule ! 

Regarding authorship of the sasfitantra, three names appear repeatedly, Kapila, 
Paiicasikha, and Varsaganya. According to the Yuktidipika, Kapila revealed the 


NOTES 625 


sastitantra, Moreover, Bhaskara in his commentary on Brahmasitira 11.1.1 ascribes 
authorship to Kapila. But Kapila’s authorship can hardly be taken seriously except 
to say that there may have been a format for discussing old Samkhya ideas that cen- 
tered on “sixty topics,” and that this format may have been attribute to the founder 
of the system. There is some support for the authorship of Paficasikha, for both Para- 
martha and Jayamarigalé refer to him as author. There is also support for Varsaganya, 
with references by Vacaspati Misra seeming to imply that Varsaganya was the author 
of sastitanira, Chakravarti and Frauwallner solve the problem of multiple authorship 
by suggesting that there was an old sastitantra that underwent several revisions. For 
further discussion see Larson RB1378, 135-138, and Chakravarti B6381; RB9596, 
116-127. My own suspicion is that in the ancient period “‘sasfitantra”? may not have 
referred primarily to a literary work but may rather have been an old proper name 
for the Samkhya system itself, that is the tantra of “sixty” (sasfi) enumerations. If 
such were the case, then there could have developed various ways for arranging the 
enumerated contents. Moreover, a number of works could eventually have been 
composed having to do with sasfitantra or, in other words, the Samkhya Sastra (that of 
Paficagikha, Varsaganya, and so forth), one important summary of which has come 
down to us as ISvarakrsna’s Samkhyakarika. 

28, An issue that deserves some mention but has only been obliquely treated thus 
far is the relation between early Samkhya philosophy and Buddhist thought. Richard 
Garbe was the first to emphasize affinities between Samkhya and Buddhism (in 
B6227; RB9527, 3-5), and in his edition and translation of Samkhyasitraortti (B3574; 
RB5524) (Calcutta: J.W. Thomas, 1888), v-xiv. H. Oldenberg, (B6275; RB9540, 
240-245), disagreed with Garbe and argued, instead, that Samkhya arose directly out 
of the old Upanisads and is more dissimilar than similar to Buddhist thought. H. 
Jacobi compared the twelvefold chain of dependent origination with the Samkhya 
theory of gunas in his article (B5452; RB8317) “Uber das Verhaltnis der buddhisti- 
schen Philosophie zu Samkhya-Yoga und die Bedeutung der Nidanas,” Zeitschrift 
der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft 10.2 (Leipzig, 1898), 1-15; and Th. Stcher- 
batsky offered an interesting comparison between “The ‘dharmas’ of the Buddhists and 
the ‘gunas’ of the Samkhyas” (B5039; RB7950), Indian Historical Quarterly (Calcutta, 
1934): 737-760. More recently Alex Wayman has returned to these old debates in 
his (RB1218) ‘Buddhist dependent origination and the Samkhya gunas,”” Ethnos 1962, 
14-22. A useful discussion of other secondary literature on the issue may be found 
in M. Eliade (B6395; RB9805), Yoga, Immortality and Freedom (London, 1958), 377+ 
381. Erich Frauwallner follows Oldenberg’s approach to the problem both in his 
older essay (B6293; RB9549) “Untersuchungen zum Moksadharma, II: Das 
Verhaltnis zum Buddhismus”, Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde des Morgenlandes 33 
(1926): 57-68, and more recently in B8590; RB12160, Vol. I, 477. 

My own view is that the Oldenberg/Frauwallner readings of the ancient literature 
are undoubtedly correct, namely, that Simkhya and Buddhist thought have some 
general affinities insofar as they emerge from the common intellectual heritage of 
post-Upanisadic thought but that they are really much more dissimilar than similar 
on a deeper level. Regarding ontology, epistemology, psychology, theory of causation, 
and theory of consciousness, the two traditions are notably divergent. There are some 
similarities in the areas of theory of values and yogic praxis, but such similarities like- 
wise abound in almost all ancient Indian speculative traditions. The truly interesting 
point of contact between Samkhya and Buddhism is not regarding origins but relates, 
rather, to the polemical debates occurring between the two traditions in the early 
centuries of the Common Era, long after each had reached maturity and had nume- 
rous subvarieties. Moreover, what is remarkable are the striking differences between 
the two styles of philosophizing—-Samkhya with its bold, constructive and speculative 
system-building in contrast with the Buddhist fear of systematic thought and its 
predilection for critical, dialectical, and skeptical debunking. 


626 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


29. For a useful summary of the varying views regarding the date of Vacaspati 
Misra, see Karl H. Potter, ed. (RB9446), Nydya-Vaisesika uf to Gangesa: Encyclopedia 
of Indian Philosophies, Vol. 2 (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1977; Princeton University 
Press, 1978), 453-455, 

30. S.K. Belvalkar (B1285; RB2153A), “Matharavrtti and the date of Tévara- 
krsna,” Bhandarkar Commemorative Essays (Poona, 1917), 171-184. 

31. A.B. Keith (B1286; RB2153B), “The Matharavrtti,” Bulletin of the School of 
Oriental Studies 3.3 (1924): 551-554; S.S. Suryanarayana Sastri (B1289), ““Mathara 
and Paramartha,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1931, 623-639; Umesh Mishra 
(B1288; RB2153D), “Gaudapadabhasya and Matharavrtti”, Allahabad University 
Series 7 (1931): 371-386. 

32. E.A. Solomon, ed. (RB1585), Samkhyasaptativrtti (Ahmedabad: Gujarat Uni- 
versity, 1973); E.A. Solomon, ed. (RB1818), Samkhyavrtti (Ahmedabad: Gujarat 
University, 1973); and Solomon RB1387. 

33. Solomon RB1387. 

34. Chakravarti B6381; RB9596, 164-168, 

35. M.R. Kavi (B2541; RB3823), “Literary gleanings—Jayamangala,” Quarterly 
Journal of the Andhra Historical Research Society, 1927, 133-136, cited in Chakra- 
varti B6381; RB9596, 165. 

36. Trevor Leggett in the “Technical Introduction” to his useful translations of 
the first two parts of the Yogasitrabhasyavivarana, entitled Sankara on the Yogasiitras 
(vol. 1: Samadhi pada) (vol. 2: Sadhana-pida): The Vivarana Subcommentary to Vyiisa~ 
bhasya on the Yogasiitras of Patafjali (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1981 and 
1983), xviii-xix (vol. 1), cites P. Hacker, H. Nakamura, and S. Mayeda as generally 
supporting the view that the Vivaraya is a genuine work of Samkara. Leggett himself 
also subscribes to the text’s authenticity, although he admits that the matter is still 
open. The arguments for the text’s authenticity include (a) the use of technical 
terms (for example, adhydsa, adhydropa, parivijymbhita, and so forth), (b) overall sty- 
listic tendencies, and (c) ideological content. Regarding technical terminology a 
plausible case appears to ha : been made. The same cannot be said, however, 
regarding matters of style and ideology. On the face of it, the Sanskrit style of the 
Vivarana is dramatically different from the other so-called “authentic” works of Sam- 
kara. The matter of ideology is even murkier. Not only is Samkara’s own position 
in the so-called “authentic” works unclear, but more than that the tenets of Yoga 
Philosophy in these early centuries is far from adequately understood. At the present 
moment there is nothing in the evidence that would prevent one from arguing that 
the author of the Vivarana was one of Samkara’s later followers. In other words, the 
text may be much later than the time of Samkara. Gopinath Kaviraj has suggestively 
argued, for example, that the Vivarana is a fourteenth-century work by a certain San- 
kararya (in “Literary Gleanings, Jayamangala,” Quarterly Journal of the Andhra 
Historical Research Society (Oct. 1927): 133-136). It should be noted, finally, that 
Albrecht Wezler of Hamburg, Germany, is currently working on a critical edition of 
the text. When completed, there will be much additional information upon which to 
base a discussion of the text’s authenticity. 

Regarding the current discussion, in addition to Leggett’s discussion already men- 
tioned, see also Paul Hacker (RB3313), “Sankara der Yogin und Sankara der Advai- 
tin: Einige Beobachtungen,” Wiener Zeitschrift fir die Kunde Sud- und Ostasiens 12-13 
(1968-69): 120-148; Hajime Nakamura, three articles in Japanese in Indogaku Buk- 
kyogaku Kenkyu for 1972; and Sengaku Mayeda, “Samkara” in Encyclopedia Britannica, 
15th ed. vol. 16 (Macropaedia), pp. 222-223, 

37. For discussionsof the dating of the Yoga literature see the following: J. H. 
Woods, trans., (B340; RB1121), The Yoga-System of Paiatjali, Harvard Oriental 
Series 17 (Gambridge: Harvard University Press, 1914), xvii-xxili; Frauwallner 
B8590; RB12150, vol. 1 408ff. and 482ff.; and Eliade B6345; RB9805, 370-372. 


NOTES 627 


38. Vyasa in Yogasitrabhdsya 111.13 illustrates the three modalities in the following 
manner: a lump of clay is made into a water jar, thus undergoing a change in “external 
property” (dharma); while in its present condition as water jar, it is able to hold water 
(its laksana); finally, the jar gradually becomes “old,” thus undergoing “stages of 
development” (avastha). 

39. For discussions of early Vedanta up through Samkara see the following: S. L. 
Pandey, Pre-Samkara Advaita Philosophy (Allahabad: Darshan Peeth, 1974); E. Deutsch 
and J. A. B, Van Buitenen, A Source Book of Advaita Vedinta (Honolulu: The Univer- 
sity of Hawaii Press, 1971); and Karl H. Potter, ed., Advaita Vedanta up to Samkara 
and His Pupils: Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Vol. 3 Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass 
and (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981. 

40. For a detailed discussion of the difference between Samkara and Samkhya, 
see the new epilogue to the second edition of Larson RB1378, 209-235. It should be 
noted, moreover, that there is some evidence that Samkara himself may have origin- 
ally been a follower of Yoga philosophy. See the interesting discussion of Paul Hacker 
in RB3313, 120-148. For the relation of this issue to the matter of Samkara’s author- 
ship of the Vivarana see note 36 above. 

41. George Thibaut, trans. (B1610; RB243), The Vedanta Sitras of Badardyana with 
the Commentary by Samkara, Sacred Books of the East (New York: Dover, 1962), vol. 
34, 289. 

42, Even the expression “cryptic little text” is an exaggeration. The Tattvasamasa 
is not a philosophical text in any sense. It is only a “checklist” of Samkhya enumera- 
tions, 

43. F. Max Miller (B7675; RB1286), The Six Systems of Indian Philosophy (London: 
Longmans, Green, 1919); Frauwallner, B8590; RB12160, vol. 1 251. 

44, For useful treatments of Vijfianabhiksu’s views see the following: S. N. Das- 
gupta (B7653; RB11305), A History of Indian Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1922; Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1975), vol. 3, 445-495; and T. S. 
Rukmani, trans., Yogavarttika of Vijftanabhiksu, vol.1 (Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 
1981). 


Tse PoitosopHy or SAMKHYA 


1, K. C. Bhattacharya, Studies in Philosophy, edited by Gopinath Bhattacharya 
(Calcutta: Progressive Publishers, 1956), vol. 1, 127. 

2. Garbe B6227; RB9527, passim; Dasgupta B7653; RB11305, vol. 1, 208-273; 
Frauwalliner B8590;; RB12160, vol. 1, 275-450; and K. C, Bhattacharya, “Studies in 
Samkhya Philosophy” in Studies in Philosophy, vol. 1, 127-211. 

3. Garbe B6227; RB9527, iv. 

4, Dasgupta B7653; RB11305, vol. 1, 221 and 223. 

5. Frauwallner B8590; RB12160, vol. I, 298ff. Cf also Frauwallner B6431A; 
RB9627, 84-137 and especially 130-137. 

6. K. C. Bhattacharya, Studies in Philosophy, vol. 1, 127. 

7. For Wittgenstein’s own laconic discussion of a “complete system of human 
communication,” “form of life,” or “language game,” see L. Wittgenstein, The Blue 
and Brown Books (New York: Harper Colophon Books, 1965), 165 ff. For a useful 
interpretive expansion of Wittgenstein’s insights see Norman Malcolm, Thought and 
Knowledge (Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1977), 191-216. 

8. The ancient texts are unanimous in considering Kapila as the first teacher or 
“founder” of the Samkhya tradition, and Kapila is referred to variously as the “supreme 
seer” (faramarsi) (Yuktidipikd, mangala, vs. 2), the “great seer” (maharsi) (Mathara- 
urtti on SK 1), the “primal knower” (ddividvén) (Yogasitira (YS) 1.25), the “son of 
Brahma” (brahmasuta) (Gaudapadabhasya on SK 1) and an “incarnation of Visnu” 


628 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(visnor avataravisesah, Tattvavaisaradt on Y.S 1.25). In epic and Purdnic texts his name 
is directly linked with Agni, Stirya, Siva, Narayana, Sviyambhuva, and Hiranya- 
garbha. He is a “mind-born” (mdnasaputra) “son of Brahma,” who appears at the 
beginning of each cycle of creation perfectly equipped from the moment of birth with 
the fundamental predispositions of knowledge (jfdna), merit (dharma), nonattach- 
ment (vairdgya), and power (aifvarya), and capable of assuming an appropriate appa- 
ritional form (nirmdnacitta, YS 1.25) so that he can transmit his knowledge of Samkhya 
to Asuri and thereby initiate the guruparampara in each cycle of manifestation. Vacas- 
pati Misra in the Tattvavaisaradi goes so far as to call Kapila “God of all the descen- 
dents of Svayambhii” (svayambhuvinam... Ifvara iti bhavah, on YS 1.25). For an 
interesting (discussion of Kapila as the “God of Samkhya,” see Albrect Wezler’s intri- 
guing article (RB3984), “Der Gott des Samkhya: Zu Nydyakusumafijali 1.3”, Indo- 
Iranan Journal, 12 no. 4 (1970): 255-262. 

9. Throughout this section on “Samkhya as Enumeration,” the various Samkhya 
components are being set forth as quantifiable “sets” with little or no attention to the 
philosophical issues involved. Detailed discussions of the philosophical meaning of 
the “sets” are to be found in the sequel, namely, in the sections entitled ““Samkhya as 
Process Materialism,” “Samkhya as Contentless Consciousness,” and ‘““Samkhya as 
Rational Reflection.” 

10. See for example, K. C. Bhattacharya’s discussion of the tanmatras and. maha- 
bhitas in Studies in Philosophy. vol. 1, 176-177. Compare also Richard Robinson’s dis- 
cussion of “universals and particulars” (and the predilection of Indian philosophies not 
to be concerned about such matters) in his “Classical Indian Philosophy” in J. W. 
Elder, ed., Chapters in Indian Civilization, vol. 1 (Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall/Hunt, 1970), 
189-191, 

11, For a useful discussion of the Samkhya emanation scheme vis-a-vis the Upa- 
nisadic, early Buddhist, V aisesika, and later Sarvastivada Buddhist emanation schemes, 
see Richard Robinson, “Classical Indian Philosophy,” 161-177. Robinson provides a 
series of comparative charts that reveal at a glance how the various emanation 
schemes relate to one another. 

12. §. S. Suryanarayana Sastri, trans. (B742; RB1322) The Sankhyakdrika of Isvara 
Krsna (Madras: University of Madras, 1948), xxvi-xxviii, presents three comparative 
charts of Samkhya emanation schemes: (a) that of the Samkhyakdriké itself; (b) that of 
the Chinese commentary on the Karikd, translated by Paramartha; and (c) that of the 
Saiva Siddhanta. Robinson, “Classical Indian Philosophy,” p. 174, also provides a 
chart of the emanation scheme in the Chinese commentary of Paramartha. 

13. These East Asian (Chinese) variants may be found in Taisho 25, 546c 17-29 
(Ta-chih-tu-lun) and Taisho 30, 170c 13 (Pai-lun), both of which are charted and 
discussed in Robinson, “Classical Indian Philosophy,” 171-174. Robinson became 
aware of these variants from the following: Ryusho Hikata, Suvikrantavikramipariprechd 
Prajkaparamitasitva (Fukooka, Japan: published by the Committee of Commemora- 
tion Program for Dr. Hikata, 1958), Ixv. 

14. As the chart indicates, Samkhya philosophy appears to intend that the various 
pentadic sequences correlate, recapitulate, or are cognate with one another, so that, 
for example, hearing correlates with speaking, sound, and space, or again, touching 
correlates with grasping, touch, and wind, and so forth. A possible problem arises, 
however, regarding the last two components of the karmendriya series, namely, excreting 
and procreating. It is not immediately apparent how excreting correlates with tasting, 
taste, and water, and how procreating correlates with smelling, smell, and earth. One 
possible solution is to suggest that excreting is linked with taste and water in the sense 
that the motor capacity of excreting has to do with the digestion and assimilation of 
food, and that procreating is linked with smell and earth in the sense that the motor 
capacity of sexual functioning has to do with characteristic animal sexual odors that 
generate mutual attraction. Moreover, for complete reproduction it is perhaps reason- 


NOTES 629 


able to assume that the process would encompass all five mahabhitas, thereby necessitat- 
ing linkage of procreating with the earth element. Another, perhaps somewhat better 
solution, is to reverse the order of the last two karmendriyas, so that the sequence is speak- 
ing, grasping, walking, procreating, and excreting. The motorcapacity of sexual 
functioning then correlates with taste and water in the sense of the ejaculation of semen, 
menstrual periods, and soforth. The motor capacity of excretion then correlates with 
the expulsion of material waste from the body. This latter solution is preferable mainly 
because there is textual evidence for it. In Manusmrti 2.90, Ahirbudhnyasamhita 7, 
Matsyapurana 111.20, and Asvamedhaparvan 21,2 of the Mahabharata, such a reversal of 
the last two components of the series is specifically mentioned. The Matsyapurdna 
sequence, for example, is Glapa, ddana, gati, dnanda, and utsarga. In the epic passage the 
sequence is vakya, kriyd, gati, retas and utsarga. The only problem with this latter 
solution is that it violates the order of the indriyas as set forth in Karikdés 26 and 28. This 
is not a crucial problem, however, for the order set forth in the Karikds itself appears 
to reflect the dictates of the drya meter more than it does a specific philosophical mean- 
ing. The same is true for the sequence of the sense capacities in Kérikés 26 and 28, 
Gaudapada, for example, reads Kariké 26 as giving the sequence seeing, hearing 
smelling, tasting, and touching, as does Vacaspati Misra. The Matharavriti and Yukti- 
dipika, however, read Karika 26 with the correct philosophical sequence of hearing, 
touching, seeing, tasting, and smelling. Regarding Karika 28, the matter becomes even 
murkier. The Maftharavrtti and Yuktidipika, which had maintained the correct philo- 
sophical order of senses in Karika 26, proceed to read Karika 28 as beginning “‘ripa- 
disu....’ instead of “‘sabdadisu....’? which latter would have been the obvious read- 
ing given their reading of Karika 26. By the same token, Gaudapada and Vacaspati 
read Kavikd 28 as beginning “‘fabdadisu....” instead of “ripadisu....” which latter 
would have been the obvious reading given their reading of Kéarika 26. Herein, of 
course, is an interesting problem for a critical text editor. The relevant issue in this 
discussion, however, is that the order of the indriyas in the Karika itself cannot be consi- 
dered determinative in interpreting the philosophical meaning of the indriyas within 
the overall Simkhya system, 

15. This interpretation of dharana, dhdrana, and prakasakara follows that of the Yukti- 
dipika (RB1370, 113). It is to be noted, however, that other interpretations are also 
possible. The Yuktidipika itself (RB 1370, 113) refers to an alternate interpretation 
wherein dharana refers to the karmendriyas, dharana to manas and ahamkéra, and prakésa- 
kara to the buddhindriyas and buddhi. Vacaspati assigns dharana to the karmendriyas 
dharana to the antahkarana, and prakaga to the buddhindriyas. Matharaortti assigns aharana 
to all the indriyas, dharana to ahamkara, and prakdsakara to buddhi. Gaudapada assigns 
both dharana and dhdrana to the karmendriyas, and prakasakara to the buddhindriyas. There 
is also disagreement as to the term “tenfold” in Karikd 32, with some commentaries 
(for example, Vacaspati, the Candrika, the Yuktidipika) arguing that “tenfold” refers to 
objects apprehended either in terms of “human” (adivya) and “divine” (divya) or in 
terms of “specific” (visesa or gross) or “nonspecific” (avisesa or subtle), and with other 
commentaries (Gaudapada, the Majharavrtti, the Jayamangala) arguing that “tenfold” 
simply refers to the functions of the five sense capacities and the five action capacities 
in the aggregate. The variety of views seems to indicate clearly that such epistemo- 
logical issues were very much at issue within the Samkhya tradition itself. 

16. It might be noted here, however, that Vijfianabhiksu argues in his Sémkhyaprava- 
canabhasya on siira III.9 that the “subtle body” (litgasarira) is “seventeenfold” or a 
‘set of 17.” The sdtra itself reads as follows: saptadaSaikam lingam. According to Vijfia- 
nabhiksu, the sitra is to be construed to mean “the seventeen as one (makes up) the 
subtle body,” and the seventeen are the eleven capacities, the five subtle elements, 
and buddhi (with ahamkara to be included within the buddhi). Aniruddha in his Sam- 
khyasitravyiti construes the same séfra in a different manner, namely, “‘the seventeen 
plus one (make up) the subtle body,” indicating, in other words, that the subtle body 


630 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is eighteenfold, which, of course, is the standard view of Isvarakrsna and his commen- 
tators. Aniruddha’s interpretation is undoubtedly correct, but it must be admitted 
that Vijfidnabhiksu’s view may well preserve a pre-Karikd view of the matter. Refer- 
ence has already been made to pre-ISvarakrsna forms of Samkhya in which the make- 
up of the subtle body was at issue (see, for example, the discussion of the views of 
Paurika, Paficidhikarana, and Vindhyavasin in the preceding chapter). It should 
be remembered also that Patafijala-Samkhya reduces the threefold internal organ 
to the notion of citta and does away with the notion of subtle body by arguing that 
the citta is all pervasive, a view that appears to come close to Vindhyavasin’s position 
(and has led Frauwallner and Chakravarti to suggest that Patafijala-SSamkhya may 
represent an extension of the older Varsaganya-Vindhyavasin interpretation of the 
Samkhya system), We also know that Vindhyavasin argued that the standard Sam- 
khya “‘thirteenfold instrument” (namely, the ten capacities, manas, ahamkéra, and 
buddhi) should be reduced to an elevenfold instrument (namely, the ten capacities plus 
manas, with ahamkéra and buddhi functions being encompassed by the mancs). Traces 
of this view appear to be present in the Samkhyasatra, for in satras 1.71, 11.40 and VI.25 
the term manas is clearly used in the sense of buddhi or citta, It would appear, then, that 
there were a variety of views within Samkhya regarding the structure of internal cogni- 
tion and, corollary to that, the precise makeup of the subtle body. One view (on the 
evidence of Vijfianabhiksu’s interpretation of sitra III.9) evidently reduced ahamkara 
to a dimension of buddhi, Another view (on the evidence of references to Vindhya- 
vasin in the Yuktidipiké together with the use of the term manas at 1.71, 11.40 and VI.25 
of the Samkhyosiitra) evidently reduced both buddhi and ahamkara to manas. Yet another 
view (on the evidence of Patafijala-“Samkhya) introduced the notion of citta, which 
encompasses the functions of manas, ahamkara, and buddhi. Tévarakrsna’s own view, of 
course, is that buddhi, ahamkéra, and mcnas each perform distinct internal functions 
(SK 29) but together perform the common function of maintaining life (the circula- 
tion of prana, and so forth), either by themselves (if one follows the interpretation of 
Vacaspati and Vijfianabhiksu) or in concert with the other ten capacities (if one 
follows the interpretation of Gaudapada and Jayamangald). Regarding the corollary 
issue of the subtle body, if one follows the interpretation of Vijfianabhiksu in siitra 
III.9, the subtle body is seventeenfold. If one follows Iévarakrsna’s own view, the 
subtle body is eighteenfold (namely, the thirteenfold instrument together with the 
five subtle elements). If one follows the view of Vindhyavasin or Patafijala-Samkhya, 
there is no need for a subtle body for transmigration. For Vindhyavasin, manas is 
central and the sense capacities are all-pervasive; hence, a subtle body is unnecessary. 
For Patafijala-Samkhya, citia is all-pervasive; hence, a subtle body is unnecessary. 
There are yet other views concerning the problem—e.g., the so called prandsfaka or 
eightfold medium made up of the five breaths, manas, pur, and vdc, and the vaivarta- 
Sarira, presumably made up of the five subtle elements plus buddhi, ahamkdara, and manas 
—all of which are conveniently discussed by P. Chakravarti (B6381; RB9596, 269-270 
288-298). 

At the risk of complicating matters even further, attention might also be drawn to 
an early Vedantin reference, namely, the Mandikya Upanisad, verses 3 and 4, in which 
the “waking” and “dreaming” quarters of Om, Brahman, and dtman are described as 
having “seven limbs” and ‘‘nineteen mouths.” According to Samkara’s Bhdgya, the 
“seven limbs” refer to heaven (dyuloka), the sun, space, air, fire, water, and earth. 
The “nineteen mouths” are called by Samkara the “doors of perception” (upalabdhi- 
dvdrani) and are made up of the five sense capacities (buddhindriya), the five motor capa- 
cities (karmendriyas), the five breaths (vayu, prdna, and so forth), plus manas, buddhi, 
ahamkara, and citta, In this formulation, instead of reducing the internal cognitive 
functions to one another (with manas or buddhi or citta encompassing the others), all 
four internal functions stand as distinct components. 

17, See the preceding note. 


.NOTES 631 


18. For a fuller discussion of the karmayonis in prephilosophical and non-Samkhya 
texts, see P. Chakravarti, B6381; RB9596, 270-277. 

19. The correlation of the five viparyayas of Samkhya with the five AleSas of Patafi- 
jala-Yoga is specifically made by Vacaspati Miéra in his Tattvakaumudi on Karika 47. 
The correlation is also made by Vijfianabhiksu in his discussion of viparyaya in Yoga- 
varttika, under Yogasitra 1.8. For the full discussion of the Alefas in Yoga philosophy, 
see Yogasiitra 1.5, 1.8, and II.2-9 together with the comments of Vy4sa, the so-called 
Samkara (of the Vivarapa), Vacaspati Misra’s Tattvavaifaradi, and Vijfianabhikgu’s 
Yogavarttika. 

20. It must be admitted that the set of 50 padarthas represents one of the most 
obscure problems in Samkhya studies. The origin, role, and function of the set within 
the Samkhya system as a whole have puzzled not only modern scholars but the native 
commentarial tradition as well. Especially vexing are the peculiar technical names 
that have been given to the “‘contentments” (tusfi) and the authentic “spiritual attain- 
ments” (siddhi). The names of the five ‘‘misconceptions” (viparyaya), namely, tamas, 
moha, mahdmoha, témisra, and andhatamisra, though obviously difficult in terms of the 
words themselves, are nevertheless reasonably intelligible in terms of content because 
of the testimony of the Yoga tradition that they are archaic names for the well-known 
five klesas, namely, avidyd, asmitd, raga, dvesa, and abhinivesa. By the same token, the first 
eleven of the twenty-eight “dysfunctions” (afakti) are reasonably intelligible in terms 
of content, since they refer to the inadequate functioning of the eleven capacities, 
that is, the five sense capacities, the five motor capacities, and mind. The remaining 
seventeen “dysfunctions” are not as clear, however, since they are only characterized 
as being the opposities of the nine contentments and the eight spiritual attainments, 
According to the Karika (along with Tattvakaumudi and Yuktidipika), the manifest 
names of the tusfis are prakrti, upadana, kala, bhagya (internal) and arjana, raksana, ksava, 
bhoga, and himsd (external, according to Yuktidipika). The manifest names of the 
siddhis are itha, Sabda, adhyayana, duhkhavighdtas trayah (the “‘triad’? of ways for over- 
coming the threefold frustration), suhytprapti, and dana, All of the commentaries 
to the Samkhyakarika, however, then proceed to offer archaic technical names for these 
tustis and siddhis. Unfortunately, however, there are a number of variants, the more 
important of which are charted on p. 632. 

A century ago Richard Garbe (in the introduction to B3574; RB5524, xiv-xv) 
offered the following interesting observations regarding the problem: 

I have already .... pointed out the peculiar figurative way in which the different 
stages of acquiescence (tusfi) are named, viz., water, wave, flood, rain, excellent 
water, most excellent water, crossing, happy crossing, perfect crossing (para, supdra, 
pGrapéra). Add to this the synonymous denominations of the first three perfections 
(siddhi): tara, sutdra, tératéra, All Samkhya commentaries have preserved these 
strange denominations...., beginning with Gaudapada who has found them in 
“another compendium” (sastrantara). Wilson ....does not know what to do with 
these expressions which, in his opinion, have quite different meaning than they 
usually bear, in this connection; he regards them as “‘slang or mystical nomencla- 
ture” and ends his remarks on them with these words: “No explanation of the words 
is anywhere given, nor is any reason assigned for their adoption.”? Thus all commen- 
tators of the Karikas as well as of the Sitras find themselves here before a riddle 
which they do not even try to explain, while they believe they are able to expound 
everything else. This speaks in favour of the assumption that these obscure words 
represent a very old tradition which has become totally unintelligible. I have no 
doubt that these denominations are based on the same metaphor which is current 
in Buddhism, viz.,on that of passing over the ocean of mundane existence into the 
harbour of liberation. The “acquiescences” (éusti) of the Samkhya system are, as 
preliminary stages of liberation, compared with smooth waters which facilitate the 
passage of those who have reached them. 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


632 


opipniup.dopos 
vypdups 
Duppou 
oypnuosg 
ppownsg 

(é) zavspy 
papins 

bint 


SYQUID-DUIDJIN 
SDYQuiD-DULD}NUD 
(d) 
vavgns 
papins 
24sia 
pyso 
ops 
spyquip 


£ 


opipnuvsgopos 
pypiups 

(¢ vupwppow) vuvyou 
opipnuiog 

ppowpug 

DADIDLDY 

pipins 

viny 


byisnyquiv-puDyn 
poivuins 
vayouns 
papyns 
Dinh 
sla 
vyso 
Dypyos 
soyquip 


W 


pyipnuppos 
pyptups 
pupUDpouL 
vjipnu 
vpoupsg 
DLDIOADI 
papins 

Dlny 


soyquip-puDpyyn 
SDYQuiD-DUDynUuD 
vapgnivg 

pivgns 

ving 

sia 

(vysau) vyso 
pyyos 

spyquip 


ALS 


vppnunugypos 
pypduns 
pupuDpout 
pyypnusg 
ppownsg 
DyuviDosv} 
vapins 

DYDIDY 


vdDyqpuDyn 
vnsDUns 
paqauns 
vivgns 
vapins 

usla 

pyso 

ppipos 
soyquio 


di 


pyipnupsdypps 
vypduns 
vupumpounsg 
oyipnupsg 
ppounsg 
DiDIDILY 
bipyns 

vyy 


DylspYyquip-puDyynun 
oylpu 

pajauns 

ving 

spuojns 

24Sda 

byso 

ops 


soyquip 


qo 


bupp 
ugosgyiyns 
IIT vipyszavyyynp 
II vipysravyyynp 
I vypyszavyyynp 
vunivdypo 
opqns 
oyn 

siyppis 


psuitsy 
nsoyq 
ndosy 
vunsyps 
ouolio 
od svyq 
PY 
ouppogn 


1dyoig 


sijéng 


mA NO WOON od 


3 


2-8 Soni 


mN OH 1D 


NOTES 633 


A. B. Keith in (B6291; RB9548) The Samkhya System (Calcutta: YMCA Publishing 
House, 1949), 104-105, exercising his characteristic Anglo-Saxon common sense, 
dismisses the whole problem as “hopeless” and suggests that verses 46 to 51 of the 
Karika (or that portion of the text dealing with the 50 padérthas) are a later interpo- 
lation. Erich Frauwallner, B8590; RB12160, vol. 1 319ff., argues that the 50 padarthas 
were added to the Samkhya system by Varsaganya and his followers after the time of 
Pajicasikha, which latter figure first formulated, according to Frauwallner, the basic 
evolutionary theory of Samkhya (that is to say, the theory of prakrti, triguna, and sat- 
karya). Frauwallner argues further that the 50 padarthas represent an innovation regard- 
ing the psychology of the Samkhya system and have very little philosophical signi- 
ficance. Igvarakrsna’s own doctrine of eight bhdvas, according to Frauwallner, is a 
great improvement over the older formulation of 50 padarthas, but Isvarakrsna allowed 
the older set of 50 padarthas to remain in his summary, since it had become authorita- 
tive in the tradition and could not be deleted. Frauwalliner’s treatment (as he himself 
readily admits) is highly speculative. There is no clear evidence that Varsaganya and 
his followers were responsible for the set of 50 padarthas, and there is no evidence what- 
ever that Igvarakrsna’s doctrine of 8 bhdvas was meant in any sense as an improvement 
over the set of 50 padarthas. Quite the contrary, the Yuktidipikd clearly indicates 
that the 8 bhdvas refer to a realm (the pravrtti realm) that is clearly distinguished 
from the realm of the 50 padarthas (the phala realm). Frauwallner’s treatment, there- 
fore, cannot be taken seriously. Most recently, Gerhard Oberhammer in (RB9925) 
Strukturen yogischer Meditation: Untersuchungen zur Spiritualitat des Yoga (Vienna: Osterrei- 
chische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Nos. 13, 1977) has discussed the 50 padérthas 
in an intriguing chapter entitled “Die samkhyistische Struktur der Meditation” (pp. 
17-56), in which he argues, largely on the basis of references in the Yuktidipikd, that the 
scheme of 50 padarthas represents an archaic method of meditation that focused mainly 
on the first three siddhis (namely aha, fabda, and adhyayana), or, in other words, medi- 
tation as rational reflection, while relegating nonattachment (vairagya) to the lower 
status of “contentment” (tusti). Fortunately, Oberhammer refrains from speculating 
whether this ancient system of meditation was originally Samkhya or whether it can 
be attributed to Varsaganya, and so forth, and thereby avoids the implausible excesses 
of Frauwallner. Indeed, Oberhammer’s treatment tends to bring the discussion back 
to Garbe’s observations of almost a century earlier (as quoted above). 

My own view regarding the interpretation of the 50 padarthas comes through very 
clearly in my introductory essay in the main text on the Philosophy of Samkhya. Far 
from being an embarrassment, I tend to see the pratyayasarga as a fundamental struc- 
ture of the full Samkhya system. I would agree with Oberhammer that it does function 
as a system of meditation, but I would go much further as well. The pratyayasarga, in 
my view, represents the Samkhya interpretation of the phenomenal, empirical world of 
ordinary life that is clearly to be distinguished from the “noumenal” or “causal” realm 
of the tattvas. The pratyayasarga is, therefore, important for the epistemology as well as 
for the ethics of Samkhya, making Samkhya a critical realism instead of a naive realism 
or a confused idealism. Finally, regarding the peculiar technical names for the fusfis 
and siddhis, I am inclined to agree with Garbe and Wilson that there is a “slang or 
mystical nomenclature” operating here that uses a metaphor that is fundamental in 
early Buddhist literature. By the same token, however, comparable metaphors are 
common in the older Vedic literature. For example, V.S. Agrawala in his Sparks from 
the Vedic Fire: A New Approach to Vedic Symbolism (Varanasi: Chowkhamba, 1962) 
sets forth a symbolic network of terms relating to the notion of soma (including rta, 
Gpas, asura, ambhas, salila, samudra, tamas, rétri, and so forth, which he contrasts with 
another network relating to agni (Indra) (including sarya, manu, deva, jyotis, hiranya- 
garbha, ahar, and so forth). “Crossing” in such a symbolic environment may refer not 
only to crossing a body of water but also to the sun and moon crossing the heavens, 
the sequence of day and night, and the symbolic boundaries of life and death. It is my 


634 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


suspicion that if the ancient Samkhya terms can ever be deciphered, it will be in some 
such symbolic network of “crossing,”’. 

21. Somewhat analogous conceptions of creation or manifestation by progressive 
deteriorization may be found in Udayana’s Nvdyakusumafjali 11.3 andin Véyupurdna 
VIII. 72-88, both of which are mentioned briefly in Chakravarti B6381; RB9596, 
287-288. Similar notions are also present in Buddhist literature. See Alex Wayman’s 
chapter entitled ““Buddhist Genesis and the Tantric Tradition” in his The Buddhist 
Tantras: Light on Indo Tibetan Esotericism (New York: Samuel Weiser, 1973), 24-29, 
for a good general discussion of possible Buddhist parallels. Buddhist references, how- 
ever, appear to link deteriorization with the ingestion of progressively coarser food. The 
ancient Samkhya a sequence focusses, rather, on progressively different activities there- 
by linking the deteriorization with the unfolding of the karmendriyas. 

22. Tattvasamasasiitravriti (also called Kramadipiké) in V. P. Dvivedi, ed. (B3714; 
(RB1862), Samkhyasamgraha (Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, 1969), 81-82. 

23. The correlations here and following are only speculative suggestions. The 
linkage of Brahma, Prajapati, and Indra with such tattvas as prakrti, buddhi, ahamkéra, 
and manas is plausible enough in view of comparable linkages prevalent in the cosmo- 
logical portions of the Purdnas, and so forth. I am not as sure about the correlations of 
tanmatras and bhitas with pitrs, gandharvas, and so forth. 

24, Ibid. 

25. Ibid. 

26, But see above, note 16, in which the seventeenfold set is linked with the subtle 
body. 

27. I am using the terms “‘adhidaiva,” “adhydtma” and “adhibhita”’ in the Krama- 
dipiké sense and not in the Karika sense of the three kinds of dubkha, although I am 
inclined to think that the two senses are clearly cognate. 

28. The Sanskrit is as follows (Yuktidipikd, p. 21): tatra ripapravrttiphalalaksanam 
vyaktam. riipam punah mahin ahamkdrah paiica tanmatrani ekadasendriyan patica maha- 
bhitani. sdmanyatah pravsitir dvividha: hitakamaprayojand ca, ahitapratisedhaprayojana ca. 
visesatah patica karmayonayo orttyadyah prapadyas ca patica vayavah. phalam dvividham: drstam 
adrstam ca. tatra drstam siddhitust yasaktiviparyayalaksanam; adrstam brahmadau stambapar- 
yante samsare Sarirapratilambha ity etad vyaktam. 

29. The Sanskrit is as follows (Yuktidipika, p. 140): tattvakhyo mahadadir bhavakhyo 
dharmadir bhitakhyo vyomadih. 

30. Bhagavadgita 111.28. The Samkhya conceptualization of milaprakrti as triguna 
and gunaparindma obviates the need for separate treatments of such traditional philo- 
sophical notions as time, space, or God. Put another way, these latter categories have 
no place in the Samkhya philosophical analysis, since malaprakrti as triguna represents 
the functional equivalent. Space and time are derived correlates of a beginningless 
process of combination (samghdta) and change (paripdma). The measurable space and 
time of ordinary experience, therefore, are not tattvas, but only phenomenal appear- 
ances, presumably generated by the projections (pravriti) of the buddhi that bring about 
the “consequent” (phala) realm of the pratyayasarga and the bhautikasarga. Moreover, 
because both prakrti and purusa are beginningless and all pervasive, there could never 
be a “time,” therefore, when purusa is not in proximity to prakrti (in any given cycle 
of manifestation). It would appear to be the case, then, that the emergence of the 
causal taftvas is not a temporal process in the sense of measurable time. Putting the 
matter another way, the process of combination and change has neither a beginning 
nor an end. The notions of “beginning” and ‘‘end” are relative constructs within the 
combination and change of manifestation occasioned by aviveka or nondiscrimination. 
Regarding the problem of God, Samkhya argues that frakrti as triguna is both the mate- 
rial (upddéna) and efficient (nimitta) cause of the manifest world; hence, there is no 
rational need for a doctrine of God (isvara). To be sure, one might conceive of buddhi 
as Hiranyagarbha, Brahma, and so forth, or one might assign a crucial revelatory (or 


NOTES 635 


teaching) role to sages such as Kapila or Asuri, but all such formulations are deriva- 
tive of milaprakrti in its buddhisattva modality (or, in terms of Yoga philosophy, ifvara 
as purusavisesa). The older Samkhya literature does not directly mention space, time, 
or God. The notions are mentioned in the later Samkhyasitra, at I1.12, I.92-99 and 
V.1-12. See also the discussion of “Time, Space and Causality” in K. C. Bhattacharya, 
Studies in Philosophy, 165-172. 

31. By “reductive materialism” is meant a philosophical view that construes or 
“reduces” mind, thought, ideas, feelings, and so forth, in terms of some sort of material 
stuff or energy or force. The expression “reductive materialism” has been used in 
recent philosophical writing, especially in the area of philosophy of mind—for example, 
in the work of Kai Nielsen, J.J.C. Smart, and others. For an older but still useful 
collection of discussions, see V. CG. Chappell, ed., The Philosophy of Mind (Englewood 
Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1962). For a popular and entertaining approach to 
the issues in a recent collection, see D. R. Hofstadter and D. C. Dennett, eds., The 
Mind’s TI: Fantosies and Reflections on Self and Soul (New York: Bantam Books, 1982). 
See especially the useful bibliography in “Further Reading,” pp. 465-482. 

32, K.C, Bhattacharya, Studies in Philosophy, vol. 1, 158-164, 

33. It is generally the case in Indian philosophy that a sharp distinction is not 
drawn between analytic and synthetic statements or between a priori and a posteriori. 
The Samkhya treatment of triguna, therefore, is not at all anomalous in its context. 

34, K. C. Bhattacharya, Studies in Philosophy, vol. 1, 182. 

35. In the preface to The Phenomenology of Mind (in the J. B. Baillie translation, 
London, George Allen & Unwin, 193i, p. 80) Hegel comments, ‘In my view—a 
view which the developed exposition of the system itself can alone justify—everything 
depends on grasping and expressing the ultimate truth not as Substance but as 
Subject as well.” 

Or, again, near the end of The Phenomenology of Mind \p. 790), Hegel comments: 
“Consciousness ,,. must have taken up a relation to the object in all its aspects 
and phases, and have grasped its meaning from the point of view of each of them. 
This totality of its determinate characteristics makes the object fer se or inherently 
a spiritual reality; and it becomes so in truth for consciousness, when the latter appre- 
hends every individual one of them as self, i.e., when it takes up towards them the 
spiritual relationship ....” 

36. K.C. Bhattacharya, Studies in Pnilosophy, vol. 1, 162ff. and 187ff. 

37, ....calata, kriya; s& ca dividhi parinamalaksand praspandalaksapd ca. tatra 
parinamalaksanaya sahakdribhavantaranugrhitasya dharminah pirvadharmat pracyutih. praspanda- 
laksana pranddayah karmendriyavrttayas ca vacanddyéh. Pandeya, RB1370, 60. 

38. Again, it should be noted that I am using adhidaiva, adhydtma, and adhibhita 
in the Kramadipika sense. 

39, Cf. G. J. Larson RB1378, 115ff. and 167ff. 

40. Cf. Richard Robinson, “Classical Indian Philosophy,” 167-177. 

41. Cf. G. J. Larson RBI378, 167ff. 

42. By “ghost in the machine” I am, of course, referring to Gilbert Ryle’s famous 
essay, The Concept of Mind (New York: Barnes and Noble, 1949), in which he debunks 
the notion of a separate or distinct “self” or “soul.” 

43, E.S. Haldane and G.R.T. Ross, trans., The Philosophical Works of Descartes, 
vol, 1, 240, 

44. Ibid., 190. 

45. Kai Nielsen, Reason and Practice (New York: Harper and Row, 1971), 333. 

46. See above, note 31. 

47, As has been noted since the time of Deussen, there is a striking similarity bet- 
ween Karika 3 and the opening passage of Johannes Scottus Eriugena’s Periphyseon 
(De Divisione Naturae), which reads: “It is my opinion that the division of Nature by 
means of four differences results in four species, (being divided) first into that which 


636 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


creates and is not created, secondly into that which is created and also creates, thirdly 
into that which is created and does not create, while the fourth neither creates nor is 
created.” (critical ed.: I. P. Sheldon-Williams and L. Bieler, eds. and trans., Peri- 
physeon, De Divisione Naturae, Book I, opening passage; Dublin: Scriptores Latine 
Hiberniae, vii, 1968). 

48. Some of the commentaries on the Karika explain the terms in the sequence 
variously. For example, there is divergence of views regarding the interpretation of 
eka and aneka. Vacaspati passes over the problem (perhaps thereby suggesting that 
the terms can be taken to mean simply “simple”? and “‘complex’’), but Gaudapada, 
the Chinese commentary, the Jayamangalé, and the Matharavrtti take the terms as 
meaning “one” and “many.” If eka means “one” in this context, however, then it is 
not correct to apply the term to both prakyti and purusa. The commentaries handle 
the difficulty by arguing (somewhat lamely) that this one component in the sequence 
is not to be applied to both prakyti and purusa. 

49. Unfortunately, a portion of Kariké 10 and all of Karika 11 are missing from the 
extant manuscripts of the Yuktidipika. This is very much to be regretted, because it 
is the Yuktidipika that most often offers the most cogent interpretations of the kinds of 
technical terms that one finds in these verses. 

50. I should hasten to add that this is my own view of the matter, and there is no 
textual support for my view other than Vijfianabhiksu’s comments under Samkhya- 
sitra 1.154, which, alas, is not much supporting evidence. All of the commentaries 
on the Karika do imply that purusas are somehow countable entities. If such is the 
case, then it must be conceded that the ancient Samkhya dcdryas allowed themselves 
to fall into an insuperable difficulty, In my view, however, such elementary errors 
are not at all characteristic of the Samkhya system. In almost every instance of the 
so-called weaknesses of the Samkhya system, the weakness is traceable to later mis- 
understandings and distortions by subsequent interpreters (both in the commentarial 
tradition itself and in modern scholarship). This is why I agree so often with K. C. 
Bhattacharya who has argued that Samkhya is a bold speculative philosophy the origi- 
nal arguments for which have been largely lost and must, therefore, be reconstructed 
from what remains. From a methodological point of view, this means some thing like 
the following: when one finds a glaring discrepancy in any given presentation of 
Samkhya, one strong possibility is that the given issue has not been carefully thought 
through by the later transmitters of the system. Instead of pouncing on the discre- 
pancy as polemical ammunition for showing that Samkhya is a hopeless “bundle of 
contradictions” (per Samkara in the native tradition, or per A. B. Keith in modern 
scholarship), a better approach might be to ask if possibly the discrepancy represents 
a misunderstanding or distortion of what the ancient Samkhya thinkers intended. 
This approach presupposes that the ancient teachers were not stupid and were fully 
as capable of apprehending contradictions as their later opponents. It also presup- 
poses that an ancient system of thought may be as sophisticated within its contextual 
framework as other later systems are within theirs. In any case, returning to the 
issue at hand, my suspicion is that the “plurality of purusas” (purusabahutva) has not 
yet been properly understood by interpreters of Samkhya (in the extant native textual 
tradition and in modern scholarship). One possible way of thinking through the pro- 
blem is to approach the issue as having to do with the epistemology of the buddhi 
rather than the ontology of the purusas. 

51. See the preceding chapter for a fuller discussion of the differences between 
Vacaspati Misra and Vijfianabhiksu. 

52. It should be noted that the metaphors and similes in the Samkhya literature 
are by and large not technical inferential drsfaéntas. They are closer in intention to 
the sorts of figurative language one finds in Plato—for example, in the Timaeus. 
The old creation myths in the Yuktidipika are to be construed in a similar manner, in 
my view. 


NOTES 637 


53. Frauwallner puts the matter as follows: 


Das Samkhya hat also eine doppelte Bedeutung. Es wirkte bahnbrechend in 
der Entwicklung der klassichen Philosophie Indiens und hat wesentlich dazu 
beigetragen, diese Philosophie auf ihre Héhe zu fiihren. Ferner hat es durch seine 
enge Verbindung mit brahmanischen Kreisen das gesamte indische Geistes- 
leben ungew6hnlich weit durchdrungen und hat bis in die neueste Zeit sein Bild 
in wesentlichen Ziigen mitbestimmt. Wenn also seine rein philosophische Bedeut- 
ung auch geringer ist als die mancher anderer Systeme, so ist seine historische 
Bedeutung um so grésser. Und man kann mit Recht behaupten, dass ohne 
Kenntnis der Samkhya-Philosophie ein volles Verstandnis der indischen Geis- 
tesentwicklung nicht méglich ist. (B8590; RB12160, vol. 1, 450.) 


54. Chakravarti, for example, B6381; RB9596, 123, quotes xii.29 of the Ahir- 
budhnyasamhita as evidence that there were many versions or variants for the sasti- 
tantra, namely, “... .sastitantrany atha ekaikam esim nanavidham... 

55. See, for example, the following: E. Frauwallner B6431A; RB9627, 84-139; 
G. Oberhammer, “On the ‘sastra’ Quotations of the Yuktidipika,’? Adyar Library Bulletin 
25 (1961): 131-172; G. Oberhammer (B1046D; RB2210), “The Authorship of 
the Sasfitantra,’ Wiener Zeitschrift fiir des Kunde Siid- und Ostasiens 4 (1960): 71-91; 
N. Nakada (RB2212), “Word and Inference in the Yuktidipika’, pts. 1, 2, 3, in Indo- 
gaku Bukkyogaku Kerkyu, 18.2 (1970): 36, 41-45; 19.2 (1971): 38, 25-31; 21.1 (1972): 
41, 19-22; A. Wezler (RB2213), “Some Observations on the Yuktidipika,”” Deutscher 
Orientalistentag, suppl. 2 (Wiesbaden), 434-455. See also A. Wezler, “Studien zum 
Dvadagaranayacakra des Svetambara Mallavadin: I. Der sarvasarvitmakatu.véda,” 
in Studien zum Fainismus und Buddhismus: Gedenkschrift fiir Ludwig Alsdorf, edited 
by K. Bruhn and A. Wezler (Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner, n.d.). It should also be 
noted that Dr. E. Harzer, of the University of Washington, Seattle, has recently 
completed a dissertation having to do with the epistemology of Samkhya with special 
reference to the Yuktidipika. I might add, finally, that 1am indebted to Dr. Harzer 
for drawing my attention to the above-cited work of N. Nakada on Samkhya 
epistemology. 

56. Frauwallner B6431A; RB9627, 84-139. 

57, Ishould like to make clear that my comments through this section on “‘philo- 
sophical methodology” and “Samkhya numbers” are entirely my own and admittedly 
highly speculative. They represent a variety of intuitions that I have reached over 
many years of pondering what could possibly be a deeper rationality in the Samkhya 
predilection for enumerations. Since, to my knowledge, no one has ever attempted 
to explain the significance of Samkhya numbers, there has been no way to 
proceed other than by way of my own intuitions regarding the problem. I fully 
recognize that I may well be wrong and that the Samkhya numbers may not have 
any rational significance whatever. By the same token, however, I also recognize 
that I may well be right, but naively so. That is to say, my own lack of knowledge 
of the history of ancient mathematics, music, and astronomy may be preventing me 
from understanding a great many mathematical and astronomical allusions in the 
Samkhya literature. In any case, I invite those with greater expertise in such matters 
to respond to my groping intuitions. 

58. I first noticed the Samkhya predilection for prime numbers when working 
with the Tativasamdasasittra and its commentaries, and I published some of my preli- 
minary findings in an article entitled ‘““The format of technical philosophical writing 
in ancient India: inadequacies of conventional translations” (Philosophy East and West 
30, no. 3 (July 1980): 375-380). Then, in April of 1981 I attended a Conference on 
Samkhya-Yoga, sponsored by the Institute for Advanced Studies of World Religions 
in Stony Brook, New York. Ireada paper at the conference entitled “An Eccen- 
tric Ghost in the Machine: Formal and Quantitative Aspects of the Samkhya-Yoga 


” 


638 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Dualisim,” (published in Philosophy East and West 33, no. 3 (July 1983): 219-233 and 
available in typescript through the Proceedings of the Conference, prepared by 
the IASWR), and the respondent to the paper was Ernest McClain, Professor 
Emeritus of Music at Brooklyn College of the CUNY and author of The Myth 
of Invarionce (New York: Nicholas Hays, 1976), The Pythagorean Plato (New 
York: Nicholas Hays, 1978), and so forth. McClain suggested that my intuitions 
concerning Samkhya enumerations were probably more on target than I suspected, 
and he directed me to read R. S. Brumbaugh’s Plato’s Mathematical Imagination 
(New York: Kraus Reprint, 1954) and O. Neugebauer’s The Exact Sciences in Antiquity 
(New York: Dover, 1957/69). He suggested, furthermore, that I might well find 
that the first three prime numbers were especially important in Samkhya since these 
numbers are especially important in Pythagorean tuning theory. Moreover, it appea- 
red to him that the Samkhya numbers probably bear some relation with the sexagesi- 
mal system of counting (as opposed to the decimal system). My own subsequent work 
confirmed that, indeed, the numbers 2, 3 and 5 (the first three prime numbers) are 
especially prominent in the Simkhya system. I have also been struck by the possible 
parallel between the sexagesimal system of counting and the old Samkhya term, 
Sastitantra (“the system of 60°). In any case, for those interested in mathematical 
allegorizing among the Babylonians, Sumerians, Pythagoreans, Hindus, and so 
forth an issue of the Journal for Social and Biological Structures, 1982, no. 5 (London 
Academic Press) has been given over to publishing a symposium on the topic, the 
lead paper of which is Ernest G. McClain’s “Structure in the Ancient Wisdom Lite- 
rature: The Holy Mountain” (pp. 233-248). My own contribution to the 
symposium appeared in the next issue of the journal, entitled ‘‘McClain’s Mathe- 
matical Acoustics and Classical Samkhya Philosophy.” 

59. See the earlier exposition of the 50 padarthas in the present chapter, and see 
also note 20, supra. 

60. For useful and brief summaries of Indian views concerning astronomy and 
the calendar, see A. L. Basham, The Wonder That was India (New York: Ever- 
green 1959), 489-495. For more detailed treatments, see O. Neugebauer, The Exact 
Sciences in Antiquity; and A. Pannekoek, A History of Astronomy (New York: Interscience 
Publishers, Inc., 1961). 

61. The best discussion of the sexagesimal system is to be found in O. Neugebauer, 
The Exact Sciences in Aatiquity. 

62. Ernest McClain, The Myth of Invariance, 13. 

63. Ibid., 12-17. 

64. Ibid., 13. 

65. Ibid., 33-42. 

66. Ibid., 73-93. 

67. Cf. Gerald J. Larson, “A Possible Mystical Interpretation of Ahamkara and 
the Tanmiatras in the Samkhyas” in Sri Aurobindo: A Garland of Tributes, edited by 
Arabinda Basu (Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Research Academy, 1972), 79-87. 

68. Parallels between ancient Indian philosophy and ancient Greek philosophy 
have been noted and debated for well over a century, and A. B. Keith’s comments 
(in A History of Sanskrit literature, London: Oxford University Press, 1920, 500) are 
still very much to the point, namely: 


Parallels between Indian and Greek philosophy are well worth drawing, but 
it may be doubted whether it is wise thence to proceed to deduce borrowing 
on either side. The parallelism of Vedanta and the Eleatics and Plato is worth 
notice, but it is no more than that, and the claim that Pythagoras learned his 
philosophic ideas from India though widely accepted rests on extremely weak 
foundations. The attempt to prove a wide influence of the Samkhya on Greece 
depends in part in the belief in the very early date of the Samkhya, and if, as 


NOTES 639 


we have seen, this is dubious, it is impossible to assert that the possibility of in- 
fluence on Herakleitos, Empedokles, Anaxagoras, Demokritos, and Epikuros is 
undeniable. But what is certain is that there is no such convincing similarity 
in any detail as to raise these speculations beyond the region of mere guesswork. 
An influence of Indian thought on the Gnostics and Neoplatonists may be held 
to be more likely, and it would be unjust to rule it out of court. 


There is evidence, of course, for historical contacts between ancient Greeks and 
Indians, some of which were extensive and involved considerable detail, as Jean 
Filiozat has shown (in his La doctrine classique de la medicine indienne, Paris, 1949, and in 
other writings). Moreover, such contacts may well have occurred already in the fifth 
and fourth century B.C.E, in the Persian courts, and increasingly thereafter. Further- 
more, there is little doubt that there was some awareness among the Greeks and 
Indians concerning the philosophical and religious views of one another. In almost 
every instance, however, whether it be Pythagoras, Pyrrho, Plotinus, and so forth, 
on the Greek side, or the Buddhists, Samkhya, Vedanta, and so forth, on the Indian 
side, the views of a given thinker or system can be most satisfactorily dealt with in their 
own specific historical contexts. Regarding specifics, after the fifth century B.C.E. 
there is neither sufficient evidence nor, even more than that, a pressing need to posit 
any kind of external borrowing. If such is the case, then the question naturally arises: 
how are the parallels to be explained ? One avenue of approach would be to push 
the matter further back, to the research of Georges Dumézil and his followers and to 
look for a common proto-Indo-European ideology from which the later Greeks, Irani- 
ans, Indians, and so on derived many of the basic categories and notions concerning 
corporate life. This is still basically a historical approach but a much more sophisti- 
cated one (albeit fraught with the problem of even less evidence !). Another approach 
would be along the lines of what social scientists have called “independent inven- 
tion” (whether in terms of Jungian “archetypes” or one or another form of structu- 
ralism). Yet another approach, which interestingly combines both historical pers- 
pectives and “independent invention” perspectives, is that represented currently 
in the work of Ernest McClain who wishes to argue that certain principles of ratio 
theory, mathematical acoustics, astronomy, and music were widely known in the 
ancient Near East, the Mediterranean world, South Asia, and Central Asia (and 
extending even into China) and that these principles formed the basis of much ancient 
ritual and myth and remain. as latent residues in many later cultural productions 
(for example, Pythagorean speculations about numbers and things, number references 
in Plato, the numerical relations between the kalpas in Puranic texts, and so forth). 
McClain hypothesizes, in other words, that there was a sophisticated “structure of 
ancient wisdom”’ (related to mathematics, music, and astronomy), that, if cogently 
reconstructed, would go a long way toward explaining the striking “parallels” that 
one finds in ancient thought. 

Returning now to Samkhya philosophy, my own inclination is to argue along the 
latter lines (namely, the approaches of Dumézil, structuralism, or an archaic tradi- 
tion of mathematical allegorizing) by way of explaining parallels, rather than the 
former (namely, some kind of historical borrowing between India and Greece). 
Put another way, my own view is that the Samkhya in ancient India is an interesting 
and context-specific variant of the kind of thing one finds in Pythagoreanism as a con- 
text-specific variant in Greek thought. Both provide intriguing glimpses of the birth 
of philosophy in their respective contexts, and both proved to be profoundly influen- 
tial for the subsequent development of their respective intellectual traditions. 

69. Paul Hacker B8877; RB12428, 54-83; Frauwallner B6431A; RB9627, 84-37. 

70. Variant listings of the ten milikarthas are conveniently summarized by E. A. 
Solomon RB1387, 182-185. 


640 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


71, A useful and brief discussion of these attributions may be found in the Krama- 
dipikd, 86. 

72, Frauwallner B6431A; RB9627, 84-137. 

73, Ibid., 131. 

74, Tbid., 126-130. Here and following I am providing an English paraphrase 
of Frauwallner’s German translation of the reconstructed fragments. 

75. Tbid., 126-127. 

76. Ibid., 128-129. 

77. Yuktidipikd, pp. 40-41. 

78. The expression “‘purusdrtha” in the Samkhya literature always refers to ordi- 
nary “experience” (bhoga or upabhoga) and the extraordinary “experience of release” 
(apavarga). The usual translation “for the sake of the purusa” (purusartha), therefore, 
simply refers to the inherent teleology of prakrti. 

79, See especially Vacaspati’s treatment of Karika 23, 24, and 27. 

80. See above, note 35. 

81. For an interesting discussion of Samkhya as critical realism, see M. Hiriyanna 
(B6316; RB9566), ‘The Samkhya View of Error,” Philosophical Quarterly (Amalner, 
1929): 99-105. 

82, The comparisons and contrasts with Kant have been nicely formulated by 
S. K. Maitra (B6416; RB9617), “Samkhya Realism: A Comparative and Critical 
Study”, in Recent Indian Philosophy, edited by Kalidas Bhattacharya (Calcutta: Pro- 
gressive Publishers, 1963), 130-143. Some passages of Maitra’s analysis are worth 
quoting in this context: 


Samkhya realism stands on a different plane in this respect and must be distinguish- 
ed both from Prabhakara and Nyaya realism. Both the Naiyayika and the Prabha- 
kara appeal to introspective evidence, to the immediate deliverance of con- 
sciousness. Samkhya however arrives at realism on the way of transcendental analy- 
sis and criticism. The Samkhya method in this respect has a close family likeness 
to Kant’s transcendental method. Both start from experience, but both alike resolve 
experience into its noumenal antecedents, its transcendental presuppositions. But 
these noumenal antecedents, according to Samkhya, are themselves objects of a meta- 
psychological intuition, of transcendental Yogika vision. This is not admitted by 
Kant and here Samkhya Transcendentalism parts company with Kantian Pheno- 
menalism. We have no faculty of nonsensuous intuition, says Kant. Therefore we 
have no more than a negative knowledge of the noumenal principles, We are 
capable of a metaempirical nonrelational intuition in Yogika vision, says Sam- 
khya. We have thus a positive knowledge of the noumenal principles and no more 
negative consciousness of them as limiting principles. The metapsychology of Sam- 
khya is, therefore, to be distinguished alike from the psychological realism of Nyaya 
and Mimamsa and the critical Phenomenalism of Kant. (133-134) 


83. Ibid., 135-137. Again, Maitra’s commenis are worth quoting at some length, 
for they nicely “locate” the Samkhya epistemological position within the framework 
of cross-cultural philosophy: 


The conception of a realistic transcendental background that is not constituted but 
only manifested by consciousness is common both to the Kantian and the Samkhya 
theories of knowledge. Common to both also is the distinction between conscious- 
ness as the transcendental presupposition of experience and consciousness as a tem- 
poral mental event. But the analogy breaks down when we come to Kant’s dualism 
of phenomena and noumena. Kant will not allow an extension of the forms of 
experience beyond the domain of phenomena. The categories, according to Kant, 
cannot be employed except in relation to sense-intuited data. Hence the subject 
of our empirical judgments is not the noumenal reality but only the phenomenal 
world which is ontologically discontinuous with its generative antecedent. We have 


NOTES 641 


thus no more than a negative knowledge of the noumenal principles, a positive 
knowledge of them requiring a faculty of nonsensuous intuition which we lack. 
To none of these positions does Samkhya subscribe. The manifested Prakrti, accord- 
ing to Samkhya, is not ontologically discontinuous with its nonmanifest background. 
It is continuous with the latter or rather one with it. Hence the subject of our 
causal, spatial and temporal world is the manifested Prakrti as consubstantial with 
its nonmanifest background. The world evolves in Prakrti and is Prakrti itself. 
Phenomenalism either in the Kantian meaning of the term or the Vedantic sense 
of an unreal projection of consciousness is not admitted by the Samkhya realist. 
The world is a real determination of a realistic Prakrti, no “no man’s land”? which 
is neither a qualification of consciousness nor a determination of the things-in- 
themselves. Neither is it an unreal projection of consciousness, a self-alienation of 
the pure Intelligence as the Samkara-Vedantist contends. On the contrary it is 
one with its noumenal background and held within the bosom of the latter. Further 
the noumenal Prakrti is not an unknowable reality which we cannot know except 
only as a negative limit. We can realize it positively in nonrelational Yogic intuition 
though we may not know it in the relational consciousness of the empirical life. 

The Samkhya theory of experience thus answers more nearly to the Aristotelian 
theory of a monistic becoming of an original primal matter than to the Kantian 
dualism of appearance and unknowable things-in-themselves. The world is a trans- 
formation of Prakrti, a transition from potentiality to actuality of form. The transi- 
tion presupposes a materia prima, a formless primal matter, viz., Prakrti which comes 
to form in the process. But the temporal unfolding presupposes an unmoved mover, 
an unchanging Intelligence as its final cause. Purusa is this unmoved mover, the 
final cause that imparts meaning to the process. The parallelism here with the Aris- 
totelian metaphysics is too obvious to deserve special mention. But the Samkhya 
regards this temporal unfolding from the dual standpoint of epistemology and meta- 
physics. The successive stages of the unfolding are the stages not merely of a world 
coming into being but also of our experience of the world. The Samkhya theory 
here overreaches both Kant’s purely epistemological standpoint and that of Aristo- 
tle’s metaphysics and may be said to be a sort of synthesis of the two. 


One final comment. Although I have referred to Kant and Hegel in passing through- 
out my presentation of the Philosophy of Samkhya, I have done so only for heuristic 
reasons. That is to say, there appear to be what might be called “selective affinities” 
in the general history of philosophy, and there is some value in highlighting these when 
attempting to explain one or another aspect of a given Indian system. Overall, how- 
ever, J would not subscribe to the views of those (for example, T.R.V. Murti in his 
discussion of Kant and Hegel vis-a-vis Madhyamika Buddhist thought) who would claim 
that such affinities are symptomatic of an identity of purpose or fundamental content 
between a Western or Indian system of thought. Regarding the Kantian philosophy, 
for example, the matter has been well put by Edward Conze (in his article, “Spurious 
Parallels to Buddhist Philosophy” (RB9016), in Thirty Years of Buddhist Studies, London, 
Bruno Cassirer, 1967, 231-232) : 

.». we must first of all bear in mind that it is the whole purpose of Kant’s philo- 
sophy to show that morality and religion, as understood by the German Protestant- 
ism of East Prussia, can survive, even though Newtonian physics be true and Hume’s 
skepticism significant... . 

Kant’s great specific contribution to philosophy stems from his insight into 
the problems posed by the tension between traditional values and the implications 
of natural science, and in his having found a solution acceptable to many for a long 
time. This tension was quite unknown in India. Since he answers a question no 
pre-Macaulayan Indian could ever ask, his answer can have no real correspon- 
dences in Indian thought, which never underwent the onslaught of the ‘“‘mecha- 
nical” method. 


642 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


By the same token, however, the force of Conze’s remarks goes the other way as well, 
which Conze to some extent recognizes with his eulogizing of the “perennial philos- 
ophy.” By this I mean that there are certain issues in Indian philosophy that no 
“pre-Macaulayan”’ Westerner could ever have asked, one of the more interesting of 
which concerns the possibility of a nonrelational (nonintentional), metaempirical 
(or metapsychological) consciousness (purusa), the presence of which may be achieved 
in a nonsensuous intuition of intellect/will (suddhi). Samkhya philosophy argues 
that this is a possibility. Simkhya argues furthermore that this is a possibility from 
the perspective of a critical realism that fully affirms the presence of a natural, 
material world. If the purpose of the Kantian philosophy were the survival of the 
German Protestantism of East Prussia, then one might formulate the purpose of 
Samkhya-Yoga philosophy as the survival of a transcendent point of reference for 
freedom (kaivalya) within an elitist social and material reality (that was oppressively 
real) in which the sanctions and consolations of conventional ritual and mythology 
had become utterly meaningless. Although we may have grown beyond the proble- 
matic of Kantian philosophy, it is in my mind an open question whether we have yet 
faced up to the sort of problem that the ancient Samkhya teachers addressed. 


NOTES TO SUMMARIES 
1. Kapa 


1. Wezler RB3984, 255-262, and see note 8 above under Philosophy of Samkhya. 
3. PaNcasmKHa 


1, V. M. Bedekar, Introduction to The Santiparvan, vol. 16 of the Mahabharata 
(critical edition), pp. ccv-ccxlvii. 

2. Franklin Edgerton, The Beginnings of Indian Philosophy (Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1965), 256-334. 


3. Dasgupta B7653; RBI1305, vol. 1, 213-222. 

4, E. H. Johnston (B6346; RB9587), Early Samkhya (London, 1937). 

5. Aésvaghosa, Buddhacarita, translated by E.H. Johnston (Calcutta, 1936), 166-187, 
6. Frauwallner B6293; RB9549, 179-206. 


7. Van Buitenen B6423; RB9620, Pt. 1, 153-157. 

8. V. M. Bedekar (B285; RB543), “Paficasikha and Caraka,” Annals of the Bhan- 
darkar Oriental Research Institute 38 (1958): 140-147; V. M. Bedekar (B286; RB544), 
“The teachings of Paficasikha in the Mahabharata,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute 38 (1958): 233-234, 

9. Larson RB1378, 36-57. 

10. Bedekar, Introduction to The Santiparvan, ccxi and ccxxxvi. 

11. Woods B340; RB1121, passim. 

12, N. L. Simha (B281; RB539), The Samkhya Philosophy. Sacred Books of the 
Hindus 11 (1915), 415. 

13, Ibid., 571. 

14. Ibid, 184. 

15. Translation of Gaudapada’s Bhasya on Karika 1 by T. G. Mainkar (RBI363), 
The Samkhyakarika of Isvarakysna. Poona Oriental Series 9, (1964), 3. 

16. Bedekar, Introduction to The Sdantiparvan, ccxliii. 

i7. Chakravarti B6381; RB9596, 115-116. 

18. Frauwallner B6431A; RB9627, 84-139. 

19. Frauwallner B8590; RB12160, vol. 1, 408-411, 476-477. 


4. SaSTITANTRA 


1. In F, Otto Schrader (B280; RB538), “Das Sastitantra,” Zeitschrift der Deui- 


NOTES 643 


sche Morgenlandisch2 Gesellschaft 63 (1914): 101-110, and his Introdustion to the Paftca- 
ratra and the Ahirbudhnya Samhita (Madras: Adyar Library, 1916), 109-111. 


2. 
1949, 
3. 


* 


a 


1. 


A Berriedale Keith (B6291; RB9548), The Samkhya System (Calcutta, 1924), 
73-76, 

Dasgupta B7653; RB11305, 219-221. 

Frauwallner B6431A; RB9627, 84ff. 

Chakravarti B6381; RB9596, 126-127. 


8. VARSAGANYA 


M. J. Takakusu (B742; RB1322), “La Samkhyakarika étudiée 4 la lumiére 


de sa versione chinoise,” Bulletin de Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient 1 and 2 (1904), 


2, 40-41. 
2. Ibid., 2, 38. 
3. Tbid., 1, 1-65; 2, 978-1064. 
4, Frauwallner B6431A; RB9627, 84-137, 
5. Chakravarti L6381; RB9596, 115. 
6. Woods B340; RBI121, 291. 
7. Tbid., 317. 
8. Th. Stcherbatsky (B504; RB1400), The Central Conception of Buddhism (Calcutta, 
1956), 75. 
9. Cited in Chakravarti B6381; RB9596, 140. 
9, VinpHyavAsIN 
1, Cited in Chakravarti B6381; RB9596, 145, note 4. 
2. Cited in Chakravarti, ibid., 142-143, 
3. Ibid., 144. 
4, Ibid., 141. 
5. Ibid, 188. 
6. Ibid., 138 £&f. 
7. Frauwallner B8590; RB12160, vol. 1, 482, footnote 212, 
8. Chakravarti B6381; RB9596, 138ff. 
10. MAprava 
1, Frauwallner B8590; RB12160, vol. 1, 408. 
2. Hattori RB1791, 6. 
3. Translated and annotated in detail by Hattori, ibid., 52-62 and 148-160. 
4, Frauwallner B8590; RB12160, vol. 1, 408. 
5. Solomon RB1387, 153-169. 
6. Solomon RBI818. 
11, T&varaxrsya 
1, In Sanskrit Research 1, 107-117, cited in Chakravarti B6381; RB9596, 156-157. 
2, S. Suryanarayana Sastri B742; RB1322, 
3. Pandeya RB1370, 146-153. 
4, Solomon RB1387, 194-207. 
5. The term “vaikrta” is evidently an ancient technical term. There is insuffi- 


cient evidence from available sources to determine its precise significance. 


6. 


In both cases, however (that is to say, whether in knowing what is perceptible 


of what is beyond perception), intellect/will, egoity, and mind function only when 
preceded by perception of an external object. 


644 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


7. The term “‘dvarin’’ here signifies “principal’? whereas ‘‘dvdra”’ signifies “sub- 
ordinate.” 

8. That is to say, just as a dramatic actor is capable of assuming a variety of roles, 
so also prakrti by its inherent power is capable of producing any number of bodies. 

9. To “come upon frustration” (duhkham prapnoti) is, of course, meant here only 
figuratively. Indeed, consciousness (purusa) cannot do anything. It is completely 
inactive. 

10. This verse does not appear in the Chinese translation. 

11. Verses 72 and 73 are probably later interpolations. 

12. Verse 73 is read only by Matharavrtti and Samkhyasaptativriti. 


12. ParaNyaui 


1. Yoga entries will be treated in greater detail in the Yoga volume of the Encyclo- 
pedia (in preparation). 

2. Woods B340; RB1121, 13M 

3. Dasgupta B7653; RB11305, vol. 1, 230ff. 

4. J. W. Hauer (B6322A; RB9775), Der Yoga im Licht der Psychotherapie (Leipzig, 
1930), 239-258. 

5. Frauwallner B8590; RB12160, 287-288. 

6. Chakravarti B6381; RB9596, 138ff. 


7. Woods B340; RB1121, xx. 
13. SuvARNASAPTATI 
i, M. J. Takakusu B742; RB1322. 
2. Belvalkar B1285; RB2153A. 
3. A. B. Keith B1286; RB2153B. 
4, Suryanarayana Sastri B1289; RB2153E. 


ar 


S. S. Suryanarayana Sastri (B742; RB1322), The Samkhya Kariké Studied in the 
Light of Its Chinese Version (Madras, 1933). 

6. Umesh Mishra B1288; RB2153D. 

7. N. Aiyasvami Sastri, ed. (B775; RB1352), Suvarnasaptati Sastra. Sri Venkate- 
svara Oriental Series 7 (Tirupati 1944). 

8. Ibid., xxxvil. 

9. Solomon RB1585 and RBI818. 

10. Solomon RB1387. 

11. Frauwallner B8590; RB12160, vol. 1, 478. 

12. It is to be noted that here at karika 3 and again later in the commentary on 
karikas 8, 10, 26 and 56 the present commentator derives the sense capacities as well 
as the gross elements from the five subtle elements, even though this clearly contradicts 
the Samkhyakdarika itself (cf. verses 24, 25 and 38). Possibly the explanation of deri- 
vation here and again under kérika 26 reflects an older, pre-Isvarakysna account of 
the system. In any case it strongly suggests that the author of the Suvarpasaptati is not 
the same as the author of the Samkhyakdarikas. 

13. Suryanarayana Sastri thinks that the Chinese text may have read “‘yyapini” 
or “uyapti” instead of “khyéti,” which usually means “discrimination.” 

14. For purposes of symmetry, one would have expected form (ria) to give rise 
to the organ of seeing and to be related to the gross element fire, but the commentator 
instead relates form to all five gross objects. In N. A. Sastri’s Sanskrit reconstruction 
from the original Chinese, however, the text is reconstructed to relate rapa (form), 
caksus (eye), and tejas (fire or light). The reconstruction is undoubtedly correct. 

15. There is an obvious anomaly here. In kériké 25 the subtle elements are said 
to be endowed with tamas, but here they are said to be characterized by sativa, Possibly 


NOTES 645 


the commentator holds a view that includes two sets of subtle elements, one per- 
taining to a very subtle (and largely sattvic and divine) set of essences from which 
the sense capacities, action capacities, mind, and the gross elements are all derived, 
and another less subtle (and largely tamasic and human) set of essences from which 
the gross human world is derived. There is little evidence in other texts, however, for 
postulating two sets of subtle essences, although it must be admitted that the various 
commentaries appear to be confused regarding the interpretation of the notions visesa 
and avisesa in the Samkhyakarika, It could be the case, of course, that in classical times 
issues such as this had not been definitively settled one way or the other. 

16. It is to be noted that Param4rtha differs here from the other commentaries. 
According to Paramartha, the subtle body has seven components: intellect, ego, and 
the five subtle elements, According to Gaudapada, the subtle body has eight compo- 
nents: intellect, ego, mind, and the five subtle elements. According to most commen- 
tators (e.g., Vacaspati Misra) the subtle body is made up of intellect, ego, the five 
subtle elements, and the eleven capacities. 

17. It should be noted that the Suvarnasaptati reads mohanatara for the sixth siddhi, 
but this is probably an error in transmission. Mohana means “deluded” or “confused,” 
whereas this siddhi appears to describe a joyous state in which the three kinds of frus- 
tration have been overcome. It is perhaps justified then to read modana instead of 
mohana, or possibly to follow Gaudapada who reads pramodamana. 

18. Note that Gaudapada lists saumya (soma) instead of asura. Vacaspati Misra lists 
pitr instead of soma or asura. Yuktidipika lists naga instead of yaksa. 

19. Karika 63 does not appear in Paramfrtha’s Chinese version, suggesting per- 
haps that this verse is a later interpolation after the period of Paramartha (who dates 
from around the middle of the 6th century). 

20. In three Chinese editions the name “‘Vindhyavasin” appears, but in the Korean 
text Vindhyavasin is not mentioned. 

21. The same quotation appears with minor variations both in Majfharavrtti and 
in Jayamangala. 

22. According to Paramartha, this final verse is not original to the Samkhyakarika 
but is a later addition by an intelligent follower of the Samkhya school. 

23. It is to be noted that this listing of the ten important subjects is different 
from the list as set forth in the Tattvakaumudi and the Yuktidipikd. See the Introduction 
for a full discussion of the principal topics (mélikartha). 


14, SAMKHYAVRITI 


1. Sdamkhyavrtti, edited by E. A. Solomon, RB1585. 

. The commentary does not refer to the problem of plurality of purusas. 

3. An old verse enumerating the ten basic topics (miilikartha) is given here: 

astitvam ekatvam atha arthavattvam 
pararthyam anyatvam atha nivrttih; 
jogo viyogo bahavah pumamSah 
sthitih Sartrasya ca Sesavritih, 

evam ete milikartheh. 

See Introduction, p. 82, for translation. The Sdamkhyasaptativriti, Matharaortti, 
Javamangala and Tattvakaumudi cite this verse in their explanations of harika 72. 
The Yuktidipiké cites a variant of the verse in its introductory verses. Yet another 
variant is cited in Suvarnasaptati under karika 71. 

4, It should be noted that this commentary, like the Samkhyasaptativytti and Para- 
martha’s commentary, does not quote or follow the Yogasiira. 

5. The text of verse 27 here is the same as in the Yuktidipika: 

samkalpakam atra manah tac ca indriyam ubhayatha samakhyatam; 
antas trikélavisayam tasmad ubhayapracaram tat. 


646 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


6. The commentator says that “ete” in verse 36 should not be construed with 
“gunavisesh.” “Etdni” referring to the above-mentioned “‘indriydpi” would have 
been better. 

7. According to Paramartha, his family name was Kausika. 


15. SAMKHYASAPTATIVRITI 


1. Samkhyasaptativriti, edited by Esther A. Solomon RBI818. 

2. For a useful discussion of this problem, see E, A. Solomon RB1387, 153ff. 

3, The last part of the first harika has a different reading: “naikantatyantatobhavat.” 

4, The second line of this karikd as read here is different from the well-known 
one: it reads “‘prakytijito vikérajitah sarvair duhkhair vimucyate.”’ 

5. The first line of verse 56 is differently read here than in most of the versions. 
Here it is “Ity esa prakrtivikptah pravartate vaikrtah prajasargah.” 


16. GauDAPADA 


1, E. A, Solomon RB1387, passim. 

2. For a useful discussion of the Vedantin Gaudapada, his life, and works, see 
Karl H. Potter, ed., Advaita Vedanta up to Samkara and his Pupils, 103-105. For discussions 
pro and con about the identity of the two Gaudapadas, see the following: A. B. 
Keith B6291; RB9548, 85; Umesh Mishra B1288; RB2153D, 371-386; Amar 
Nath Ray (B1250; RB1917), “The Mandiikya Upanisad and the Ka@rikas of Gauda- 
pada,” Indian Historical Quarterly 14, (1938); 564-569; B. N. Krishnamurti Sarma 
(B1236; RB1901), “New light on the Gaudapadakarikas,” Review of Philosophy 
and Religion (Poona) 2, no. 1 (1931), 35-56; Vidhusekhara Bhattacharya (B1254; 
RB1922), The Agamasastra of Gaudapadda, Ixxxix ff.; R. D. Karmarkar (B1264; 
RB1933), trans., Gaudapadakarika (Poona 1953), v.ff; BE. A. Solomon RB1387, 171-175. 

3. See E. Sachau, trans., Alberuni’s India, 1 (London: Kegan Paul, 1910), 266-267. 

4, It should be noted that the nature of inference is not discussed at this point in 
the commentary. 

5. It should be noted that Jaimini and the Mimamsakas do not mention these 
six in any available text. The six that are usually mentioned by the Mimamsaka are 
pratyaksa, anumana, Sabda, upamdana, arthapatti, and abhava. 

6. Again, it should be noted that the Gaudapada Bhdsya appears to be confused 
concerning epistemological issues. Usually comparison, presumption, probability, 
etc., are discussed as varieties of inference, although sometimes comparison is also 
discussed as a variety verbal testimony. Negation (or nonapprehension) is discussed 
in terms of inference or perception, and only tradition is included within verbal testi- 
mony. In view of the inconsistencies throughout this section of the Bhasya, one is 
tempted to think that the present text of Gaudapada is corrupt. 


17, VyAsa 


1. Chakravarti B6381; RB9596, 138ff. 
Frauwallner B8590; RB12160, Vol. 1, 482. 


18. YuxtipiprA 


Chakravarti, ed., B1046A; RB2207. 
Pandeya, ed., RB1370. 

Albrecht Wezler RB2213, 434-455. 
Pandeya RBI1370, xiv. 

Wezler RB2213 

Frauwallner B8590; RB12160, Vol. 1, 287. 


Porrene 


NOTES 647 


7. Allen W. Thrasher, “The dates of Mandana Misra and Sankara,” Wiener 
Keuschrift far die Kunde Sudasiens 23 (1979): 117-139. 

8. Pandeya RB1370, xv. 

9. This is not always the case: verses 13, 15, 28, 33, 41-43, 46, 49, 51, 53, 56, 58, 
64, and 68 are not broken down into parts. 

10. The author designates the discussion thus far as the introduction (upodghdta) 
to the commentary. It might be noted that the mode of presentation in terms of the 
“basic characteristics of a tantra’ (tantraguna or tantrayukti) is reminiscent of that found 
in chapter 65 of the Uttara Tantra of the Susrutasamhitd, also entitled tantrayukti. Similar 
accounts of tantrayuktis may also be found in Carakasamhitd, siddhisthana, chapter 12; 
Astangasamgraha, uttara, 50; and Kautilya’s Arthasdstra 15, chapter 1. 

11. The compounding of the word “tad” with “‘apaghdtaka”, though not permis- 
sible (see Panini 2.2.15), is justified by such other usages as in Panini 1.4.55, Katya- 
yana 4.1.44, and Mahabhasya 5.1.59. 

12. Vakyapadiya 2.426-427. 

13. Compare Nydyabhasya 1.2.9 and Nydyavarttikatatparyatika 1.1.5. 

14. For example, Patafijali’s Mahabhdsya 5.1.119 and 1.1.57. 

15, Cf. Mahabhagya 2.1.1. 

16. Panini 3.1.87 and Mahdbhagya 111.2. 

17. In other words, having a locative tatpurusa compound between sarvapramdapa 
and siddhatva, by Panini 2.1.41. 

18. Cf. Nyayasitira 1.1.6. 

19, All of these varieties of perception are implied in the compound prativisaya 
by construing it as an ekasesadvandva. 

20. In Kariké 25 the sattva and tamas forms of buddhi were described, and it was 
said that both these forms derive from taijasa, which probably means rajas. Possibly, 
the theory of the five karmayonis fits into the Samkhya analysis as an explanation of 
the tajjasa or rajas form of buddhi. 

21. The basic meanings for the contentments and attainments may be found in 
Samkhyakarika 50-51, and see the commentaries of Gaudapada, Vacaspati Misra, and 
ParamArtha’s Chinese version for variant listings of the ancient names. A precise 
characterization of each of these ancient lists is no longer available. The interpreta- 
tions of the ancient terminology in each of the commentaries appear forced and 
fanciful. 


19. JAYAMANGALA 
(notes 5-45 by R. S. Bhattacharya) 


Chakravarti B6381; RB9596, 166. 
Ibid., 167. 
Calcutta Sanskrit Series 19 (1926), 1-9. 
- Quarterly Journal of the Andhra Historical Research Society (October 1927): 
-136. 
‘*Muni” in this verse may refer to the author of the text, i.e., ISvarakrsna. But 
since such an assertion does not appear to be supported by any authority it is quite 
reasonable to take “‘muni”’ as referring to the first teacher of Samkhya, i.e., Kapila, 
the first enlightened being (ddividvas). The term may, however, refer to Paficasikha, 
the well-known Samkhya teacher (mentioned in SK 70), as he is said to have trans- 
mitted lokottarajfidna to Janaka (Santiparvan 320.38). 

6. The definitions are derived from the commentary on SK 53. 

7. The printed reading appears to be corrupt. Because ‘“‘pradhana” and “‘prakyti” 
are synonymous, prakrii cannot be said to be a product of pradhana. 

8. YAska*s Nirukta 2.4, 

9. Jayamangala reads “‘ca’’ (showing emphasis) in the third foot instead of “tu.” 


La 


Os © 


13 


oi 


648 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


10. V4caspati in his commentary on Nydyavéritika 1.1.5 quotes a verse: 


“Matra nimitia samyogiviyogisahacdribhih 
Svasvdmivadhyaghatadyaih samkhyanam saptadhanuma.” 


It is attributed to the Sdamkhyavarttika by Vardhamana in his Prakasa (BI edition, 
p. 671). There is a slight difference of opinion between the Jayamangala and this verse. 

11. The Fayamangala appears to read prasiddhi in place of pratiti. 

12. This contention of the Fayamangald, that purusa must not be held as eka owing 
to its plurality, is wrong. The epithet “eka” must be applied to purusa as the afore- 
said statement demands. But we are to take “eka,” not in the sense of number, but 
in the sense of ekaripa, having one form or one aspect, i.e., immutable or isolated 

(kevala), unmixed, without having any subdivision (sodgatabhedaSinya). The same 
word “‘eka’’ will be applied to the unmanifested also in the sense of “‘one” and to purusa 
in the sense of kevala or ekariipa. 

13. The printed reading of the commentary on the fourth foot of this verse is 
slightly corrupt. 

14. The passage “‘tatra siddhe ... .vedantavadinah’’ is printed as a part of the com- 
mentary on SK 17, It is actually the patanika of SK 18. 

15. How the pratiniyama of birth, death, and organs prove the plurality of purusas 
is not clearly shown here. 

16. The expression “anyatra vicdritatuat granthagauravabhayat” clearly refers to an- 
other work by the commentator. The identity of the work is yet to be determined. 

17, The printed reading quoted for describing these seven forms is corrupt and not 
fully intelligible. 

18. The two illustrations seem to indicate that this connection has some cause 
and that it can be destroyed by proper means, 

19. The reason for the former name appears to be its imperceptible aspect, i.e., 
the avyakta or the gupasamya form. Ancient teachers used the term “‘tamas’’ for prakrtis; 
see Jayamangala on SK 70 and also Durga’s commentary on Nirukta 7.3. “Avydkrta” 
is used in Brhaddranyaka Upanisad 1.4.7. 

20. The printed reading “atifaya’”’ is wrong. 

21. Jayamangalé seems to read “tanmdtrapaftcakam.” According to us the original 
reading of the second half of this karikd is ““ekadasasca ganah tanmatrah paftcakaS caiva.” 
The sentence shows that there are two groups evolving from ahamkéra: one group 
(gana) consisting of eleven members (of the organs), the other consisting of five mem- 
bers of the nature of tanmdtras. ‘““Tanmatra” means “concerning or pertaining to the 
tanmatras.” 

22. The Jayamangala notes that the word “upastha”’ is masculine in gender and 
that it belongs to both sexes. The seat of vdc is in the throat. 

23. The passage ‘‘anena dvdrepa tu. . .ity uktam’’ is not quite intelligible. The prin- 
ted reading seems to be corrupt. 

24, Pakti: the printed reading “patti” is corrupt. 

25. It is possible that this verse does not deal with the subtle body but with the 
linga that is mentioned in verse 20. In verse 40, the word “‘litga’”’ is not an adjective 
meaning that which goes to destruction (layam gacchati) but a substantive. This liga, 
not being a product of the visesas, is quite distinct from the subtle body, which is posi- 
tively a product of the visesas. Had verse 40 treated of the subtle body mentioned in 
verse 39, one might have expected plural number and masculine gender, while using 
the adjectives of the s idksmasSarira, as are found in verse 39. The linga is of the nature of 
a whole of which the internal and external organs are the parts. The five tanmdtras, 
though not parts of the linga, are attached to it so long as creation exists. 

26. The printed reading of the explanation of the term “‘kdrya”’ is corrupt. 

27. The Jayamangala seems to read “gupavaisamyavimardena’” instead of ‘“‘guna- 
vaisamyavimardat.”” 


NOTES 649 


28. The second explanation, “dharmo vd pratyayah sargah,’” is not quite clear. 

29. The name for the third uparama is wanting in the commentary. The commen- 
tary on this seems to be lost. 

30. The reading “‘fakteh” should be corrected to “afakteh” in the passage“‘tesam 
Saktier antarbhavati....” 

31. It is remarked that siddhi is jfanajfanalaksana, which seems to be a corrupt 
reading. 

32. The printed reading of the alternative name of the third siddhi is corrupt. 

33. The printed reading of the passage containing the names of these asiddhis is 
corrupt. Properly speaking, aha, etc., are the cause of siddhi (cf. ihahetuka prathama 
siddhih). 

34, In this connection, the Jayamangalé has quoted a verse from a treatise named 
*“Samgraha’”’. “Samgrahakaéra,”’ however, may mean an author of a samgrahasloka, a 
verse in which a long discussion is summarized in the briefest words. 

35. It should be noted that the characteristic features of these species are not 
stated by the commentator. 

36. The Jayamangala remarks that the bhautikasarga is of two kinds. The reading 
‘‘dvividhah’’ appears to be wrong and should be corrected to “‘trividhah,” i.e., “‘of three 
kinds,” 

37. The argument is not quite clear. 

38. The printed reading of the explanatory passage on the expression “‘svartha 
iva” is corrupt. 

39. What these kinds of objects are is not mentioned. 

40. The sentence “‘vyaktdtmand....” is to be connected with the commentary 
on SK. 61. 

41. The verse “gundndm.... quoted here is also quoted in the Vyasabhdsya 4.13 
(with slight variation) with the remark that it is a SastranuSasana. According to Vacas- 
pati, this verse belongs to some work by Varsaganya, an exponent of yoga; see 
Bhamati 2.1.3. 

42. The printed reading of the explanatory sentence “linga bhautika....” is 
corrupt. 

43, The import of the word “bheda” is obscure. It may be “veda.” Thus, “dgrya’” 
would mean that this doctrine (i.e., the knowledge propounded in Samkhya) sur- 
passes the Vedas (i.e., the path of action, the karmakdpda). As the taitvas are realized 
through samédhi only, Samkhya rmoust have its basis in Yoga, which is regarded as higher 
than the path of action. Cf. Bhagavadgita 6.44. 

44, Astatement of pradhdna and purusa is quoted here that seems to be an aphoristic 
statement of some ancient Samkhya teacher. According to Durga, it is a pdaramarsa 
Sitra; see his commentary on Nirukta 7.3. 

45, This shows that the last two verses were composed by the author to glorify 
himself and his work. 


20. SAMKARA 


1. Gerald J. Larson RB1378, 209-235. 
2. Allen W. Thrasher, “The dates of Mandana Misra and §amkara,” 117-139. 


21. MATHARAVRITI 
(notes by Harsh Narain) 


1. The commentary under this kariké contains a number of quotations from the 
Brahmanas and Srauta-Sitra texts and also one quotation from the Bhagavata Puréna 
bearing upon the slaughter of animals in Vedic sacrifices. 


650 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


2. The commentary also makes a passing reference to the threefold classification 
of the operations of words (Sabdavriti): primary signification (abhidka), secondary 
signification (Jaksand), and suggestion (vyafjana). 

3. The expression “gunalcksanena’ in the text appears to bea misreading of “‘aguna- 
laksanena’’? which alone can restore sense to the passage. 

4. “DuyangulakaSayoh” in the text is meaningless. “Doyangulyoh”’ (between two 
fingers) would be a better reading. 

5. The sentence is not clear. Action capacities (karmendriya) cannot be said to 
know or sense anything. 

6. The commentator on SK.33 makes a reference to the incarnation of Visnu 
named Kalki, which detracts from the antiquity of the commentary. 

7. This is cited as a pro-Samkhya verse, but it fits the Carvaka materialism better. 

8. Karika 73 (see summary under Samknyakarikas above) is absent in other editions 
of the Sdamkhyakarikas. 


22, VAcaspatr Misra 


1. Karl H. Potter RB9446, 453-455. 

2. S. A, Srinivasin, ed. (RB3878), Vacaspatimifras Tattvakaumud?: Ein Beitrag zur 
Textkritik bei kontaminierter Oberlieferung (Hamburg: Cram, De Gruyter, 1967), 60-63. 

3. Umesha Mishra (RB12387), History of Indian Philosophy, vol. 2 (Allahabad, 
1966), 100. 

4. Richard Garbe, trans. (B732; RB1315), Der Mondschein der Samkhya Wahrheit 
(Munich, 1891). 

5. Srinivasan RB3878. 

6. (B737; RB13!7) The Tattvakaumudi: Vacaspati Misra’s Commentary on the Sam- 
khyakarikd, Poona Oriental Series No. 10. (Poona, Oriental Book Agency, 1963). 

7. With these poetic verses, Vacaspati Migra is making several significant allu- 
sions to the older intellectual tradition. On one level, he is paraphrasing an old verse 
from the Svetdsvatara Upanisad (IV.5). Vacaspati’s paraphrase indicates, however, 
an important shift in conceptualization, In Svetéfvatara Upanisad IV.5 reference is 
made to a feminine “unborn one” and to a masculine “unborn one.” Vacaspati 
tetains the feminine “unborn one” but changes the masculine “unborn one” to many 
“unborn ones,” thereby stressing the classical Samkhya notion of a plurality of purusas. 
On another level, Vacaspati is probably also alluding to the Vedanta tradition, and 
specifically to Brahmas utrabhdsya 1.4.8-10 in which Samkara discusses the meaning of 
Svetdsvatara Upanisad 1V.5 and in which Samkara argues, interestingly, that the old 
Upanisadic passage is not a reference to Samkhya notions. On yet another level, 
Vacaspati is possibly also alluding to Chindogya Upanisad VI in which Being (sat) is 
described as having three constituents, namely, fire, water, and food, which are 
referred to as being characterized by the colors red, white, and black respectively. 
Here again, however, the Vedanta tradition of Samkara denies that the old Chandogya 
passage refers to Samkhya notions. Finally, on still another level, Vacaspati is pro- 
bably alluding to Rg Veda 1.164.20 (the famous “two birds” passage) and X.129 (the 
hymn that refers to “that one,” or tad ckam), Both of these passages were claimed by 
the followers of Samkhya as references to the Vedic sources for Samkhya philosophy, 
but the followers of Vedanta (and especially Samkara) denied such claims. Vacas- 
pati, therefore, by making these obvious allusions and by then linking these with the 
tradition of Samkhya teachers is most likely engaging in an intellectual double entendre. 
The informed reader knows that this is an appropriate manner to begin a treatise 
on Samkhya philosophy, but the informed reader also knows that a Vedantin 
would not take these traditional allusions very seriously. One is tempted to think that 
Vacaspati wants to eat his cake and have it too. More likely, however, is that Vacas- 
pati is indicating at the outset that although he is composing a treatise on Samkhya 
philosophy, he is himself approaching the task from the perspective of Vedanta. 


NOTES 651 


8. Although Vacaspati does not appear to draw any ultimate conclusions with 
respect to this final set of arguments, the upshot would appear to be that both inter- 
pretations of the problem of cause and effect, namely, the Samkhya satkarya and the 
Nyaya-Vaisesika asatkdrya , appear to require some kind of regress. The Samkhya 
theory of the manifestation of an existent effect, however, is superior, because it at 
least allows one to maintain an intelligible relation between cause and effect and to 
interpret that relation in terms of causal operation, even though it also entails an end- 
less regress of continuous transformation. This problem of an endless regress of conti- 
nuous transformation is dealt with in Samkhya in terms of one of its two basic postu- 
lates, namely, frakrti and its transformations. 

9. It is to be noted that Vacaspati does not comment on the issue of purusa being 
“one” (eka) or “plural” (bahu) in his interpretation of these two verses. See, however, 
the Bhasva of Gaudapada, Jayamangala, Matharavrtti and the Chinese commentary 
for differing interpretations. 

10. This quotation from a so-called Rajavarttika is the same as verses 10-12 of the 
introductory verses to the Yuktidipika. 

11. B340; RB1t121. 


23, BuojarAja 


1. E. Frauwallner B8590; RB12160, vol. 1 288. 


24, TatrvasAMAsASUTRA 


Frauwallner B8590; RB12160, vol. 1, 475. 

As collected and discussed in Frauwallner B6431A; RB9G627, 123-137. 
And see S. N. Dasgupta B7653; RB11309, vol. 2, 171. 

Garbe B3574; RBo524, vii. 

Tbid., viii. 

Max Miller B7625; RB11286, 225-229. 

Chakravarti B6381; RB9596, 168-169, 


atone 


ao 


25. KRAMADIPIKA 
1. Ghakravarti, ibid, 168-170. 
26, SAMKHYASUTRA 
1. B3574; RB5524, vii-ix of the preface. 
27, ANIRUDDHA 


1. Garbe B3374; RB5524, viii-ix. 

2. Ibid., xxiv. 

3. That is to say, bondage is caused only on the basis of a fundamental nondis- 
crimination that takes place when consciousness and materiality come in contact or 
proximity (samyoga) with each other. Bondage, in other words, is not an ontological 
problem vis-a-vis such issues as essential nature (svabhdva), time (kala), place (desa), 
action (karman), etc., because ontologically, consciousness and materiality are com- 
pletely distinct. It is, rather, an epistemological problem of nondiscrimination when 
consciousness and materiality are in contact or proximity. 

4. In other words, the assertion to be proved is so broad as to include literally 
everything. Hence, nothing can be cited as an illustration or documentation that is 
not already included in the original assertion to be proved. Put into modern terms, 


652 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the statement “everything is momentary” has no nonvacuous contrast by means of 
which its truth can be judged one way or another. 

5. It should be noted that Vijfianabhiksu, Nagesa, and Mahadeva reverse the 
order of sitras 53 and 54. Presumably, this reversal is because of the particle “iti” 
that appears at the end of sitra 53. Vijiidnabhikgu argues that the use of iti indicates 
that the discourse on bondage in the sitras has now been completed. Because sitra 
54 also deals with bondage, evidently Vijfianabhiksu solves this discrepancy by simply 
reversing the order of the two sitras. Aniruddha, however, who is the oldest commen- 
tator, does not reverse the order, nor does he suggest that the discourse on bondage 
has been concluded at this point. 

6. Presumably, ‘internal organ’? here refers to the intellect. 

7. That is to say, the atomic theory and the theory of primordial materiality are 
alike in the sense that both are intellectual constructs for purposes of systematic, philo- 
sophical reflection and so are first principles functioning more or less as heuristic 
devices or limiting parameters in which that which is knowable can be talked about. 

8. It should be noted that this sitra appears to make manas equivalent to buddhi 
or mahat. If this is the case, however, then one cannot easily account for the reference 
in sitra 61 to the “aggregate” of twenty-five. It is probably the case, therefore, that 
manas in this context is not the same as the indriya referred to by that name in Sam- 
khyokarika 27. At least, Vijfianabhikgu argues in this way. Possibly, however, we 
have here an example of the conflation of traditions. That is to say, different schools 
of ancient Samkhya speculation may have interpreted manas differently and in the 
Karika as well as in the Sdmkhyasiitra traces remain here and there as in this instance 
of the attempt to resolve such divergencies. Compare, for example, the views of 
Vindhyavasin as set forth in the Yuktidipika. 

9. In other words, there is no convincing inference that the world does not exist, 
nor can it be argued that our perception of the world is mistaken, as it is when we 
perceive a mirage, etc. Indeed, the very possibility of a mistaken perception—as for 
example in hallucination or mirage—can be accounted for only on the basis of the 
experience of a nonmistaken perception that corrects the error. If the world were 
unreal, there could be no rational criterion for even identifying a ‘‘mistaken” per- 
ception. 

10. It should be noted that if one construes satras 92-99 as dealing with the issues 
of the existence and functioning of God, the Samkhya position appears to be the fol- 
lowing: not only is the existence of God logically untenable, but even more than that, 
all of the conventional beliefs about God are more adequately accounted for by other 
means. Thus, God’s agency, his controllership, his apparent Vedic attestation, and 
his discriminative capacity can all be accounted for in terms of the functioning of the 
antahkarana or internal organ vis-a-vis the proximity of passive consciousness (purusa). 
But compare Vijfianabhiksu for a varying interpretation of these sitras. Also, see 
Book V.112 for further comments on the problem of God. 

11. That is to say, a jar becomes manifest by the work of a potter, or it becomes 
destroyed by smashing it with a hammer, etc. In all cases, however, a jar, or clay, 
etc., are possibilities within a certain causal environment, and in that sense they are 
always existent effects. Hence, it is quite possible to hold to the theory of satkarya 
and at the same time make relevant distinctions regarding prior absence, posterior 
absence, etc., of particular manifestations. The latter are verbal characterizations 
within certain contextual environments and depend on a given manifestation. 

12. That is to say, the preceding objections in sitras 119-123 concerning respecti- 
vely the problems of sequence, of destruction, and of vicious regress likewise arise with 
respect to the theory of asatkarya. 

13. That is to say, presumably, space and time presuppose the quantitative mea- 
sure of distance and duration and, thus, can only be relevant notions when the gross 
world has been constituted. In other words, space and time in Samkhya are consi- 


NOTES 653 


dered to be phenomenal derivatives of the fundamental principles and are not in 
themselves real in the sense that the twenty-five fundamental principles are real. 

14, It should be noted that the term ‘‘vaikrta” is evidently an ancient technical 
term the precise significance of which is unclear. See Introduction. 

15. That is to say, in a given state the designations “primary” and “secondary” 
are always based on the various functions that have to be performed on various 
levels of government. Overall, however, it is the governor who retains an ultimate 
superiority. 

16. That is to say, although it is possible to discuss the sun as an intelligible entity 
in and of itself, any accurate characterization of its functioning must always take 
account of what is illumined and sustained by it (namely, the manifest world of 
nature illumined and supported by it). Moreover, because the subtle body is inextri- 
cably related to the gross body, therefore, the subtle body cannot be considered to be 
the Self or contentless consciousness, which by definition can have no such dependence 
or relation. 

17. The sitrakéra does not appear to object to the alternative explanations of the 
makeup of the gross body, and hence it can perhaps be assumed that these varying 
interpretations were legitimate positions within the network of Samkhya “schools.” 

18. That is to say, discrimination and nondiscrimination are the necessary and 
sufficient conditions for liberation and bondage respectively. 

19. Just as dream constructions are derived from our experience of waking objects 
and are judged to be dream constructions precisely because of that, so also the con- 
ceptual constructions of accomplished Yogins are to be interpreted. Put simply, the 
experience of waking awareness is the primary criterion for identifying and assessing 
other kinds of awareness. 

20. Although materiality is eternal and self-sufficient, it nevertheless serves the 
needs of consciousness in terms of experience and liberation. Materiality, therefore, is 
the locus for nondiscrimination. 

21, It should be noted that there is an interesting contrast between Samkhya and 
Yoga on the problem of God. Both systems deny the notion of God in a traditional 
theistic sense, but both accept “God-talk” as it were in a limited way. For Yoga, God 
is a particular purusa; for Samkhya, “God” is simply another term for duddhi in its 
apparent manifestation as omniscient and omnipotent. 

22. The expression “for the sake of” should be construed in the light of the clari- 
fication given by the sitrakéra in I1.1. 

23. The analogy holds only for the milk and not for the cow. See II.37 for the 
use of the analogy of the cow. 

24. That is to say, action need not be considered a primary cause either of bondage 
or liberation as it is according to the MimAmsa. 

25. For those of middle-level capability, even after discrimination, prdarabdha- 
karman or “action that is in the process of being worked through” continues to operate 
for a time and, hence, there is a kind of experience (upabhoga). 

26. There is one source of this ancient tale that would indicate that ‘‘Pisdcaka’’ 
is a proper name of a person rather than an imp. The source is Naiskarmyasiddhi 
2.3; see the commentary by Jfianottama. 

27. Suka is the narrator of the Srimad Bhagavatam. The story is in the Santiparvan 
of the Mahabharata. 

28. One attains the final goal (krtakrtyata) by means of the knowledge of the prin- 
ciples (tattvajfiana), which is brought about through devotion to an authoritative 
teacher (guriipasand), according to Aniruddha. 

29. That is to say, if God should have such personal need, then He could not 
be God, and if He had no such need He would not engage in action or work. 

30. The principles of purusa and prakrti, according to Samkhya, are established by 
means of inference, Purusa is inferred by means of samghatapararthatva, etc., as set forth 


654 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in 1.146. On the basis of these effects, which establish prakrti, and the resulting impli- 
cations, which establish purusa, however, a God cannot be inferred. All of the 
functions of God can be more adequately accounted for with respect to the notions of 
purusa and prakrti. At best, purusa or consciousness can be called ‘“‘God” when, under 
the influence of nondiscrimination, consciousness appears to be an agent, but such a 
God is nothing more than a convenient verbal characterization and is certainly not 
an independently existing entity. Thus, neither perceptual nor inferential grounds 
exist for establishing the existence of God. 

31. The sitrakara asserts that the existence of God cannot be established by either 
perception, inference, or reliable authority, and, according to Samkhya, there is no 
other means for reliable knowing. Hence, the existence of God cannot be established. 
Compare Vijfianabhiksu’s commentary wherein the bhdsyakara makes a valiant, albeit 
unconvincing, attempt to soften the Samkhya denial of God. See especially his com- 
mentary on V.12. Finally, it should be noted that, for a full account of the Samkhya 
denial of God, one should read and compare 1.92-99 with V.2-12. 

32. Both Aniruddha and Vijiianabhiksu construe “‘sukha’” in this sitra to mean 
satisfaction, and they then proceed to show how satisfaction is established on the 
basis of the fivefold inference. 

33. An inference may work both ways vis-a-vis that which is to be proved, or only 
one way. For example, in the inference “all transitory things are produced,”’ the 
inference works both ways, so that it is equally valid to assert that “all produced things 
are transitory.” In the inference ‘‘where there is smoke there is fire,” however, the 
inference only works one way, or on one side, for there are examples of fire without 
smoke, 

34. It should be noted that Vijiianabhiksu interprets this stra as applying only 
to the Veda or dptavacana. If construed in this way, then the sara should be taken 
with the preceding sitras in which the authority and authorship of the Veda have 
been discussed. 

35. The Prabhakara theory of error is usually called ‘‘akhyati” or ‘“‘vivekakhyati” 
and not “satkhyati”’ The latter designation is usually given to the Vijfianavida 
theory of error. The siira V.53 (na, sato badhadarSandt) could be taken as referring 
to Vijfianavada, and the argument against the theory would be that it entails the 
denial of the incontrovertible perceptions of an external world. All of the commen- 
taries, however, take the sijtra as referring to Prabhakara, and both Garbe and 
Nandalal Simha agree. 


28. VijNANABHIKSU 


In S. N. Dasgupta B7653; RBI1305, vol. 3, 445-495. 
Richard Garbe B6227; RB9527, 100-105. 

A. B. Keith B6291; RB9548, 112. 

M. Winternitz, Geschichte der indischen literatur vol. 3, 454-457. 
Udayavira Sastrin, Saémkhyadar§an ka itihas, 305-304. 
Chakravarti B5381; RB9596, 171. 

Vijfianabhiksu, Yogavéarttika, translated by R. T, Rukmani, 5-7. 

8. The author gives two meanings of siftra 152, but philosophicaily speaking both 
the meanings are identical. Here he cites a verse of the Buddhist Bhavaviveka and 
wrongly attributes it to the Visnu Purana. 

9. Itshould be noted that Aniruddha accepts the classical doctrine of the eighteen- 
fold subtle body, thus construing this séra to mean ‘‘seventeen plus one more make 
up the liga.’ Vijfianabhiksu says that the subtle body is seventeenfold, the reference 
to “one” in the siéra alluding to the uniform aggregate that appears at the beginning 
of creation. 


NOR wN = 


NOTES 655 


10. This is a unique view of Vijfianabhiksu’s that is not in keeping with classical 
Samkhya. 

11. That is to say, there is (a) a subtle body (linga), (b) a subtle form of the five 
gross elements that provides a cover or wrap for the litga in the process of trans- 
migration, and (c) a gross body born of father and mother. Such an interpretation 
appears forced and awkward. 


29. BHAvAcangsa Dixksrra 


1. No gloss by Paficasikha has been published as yet. As indicated earlier, the 
reference may be to the Kramadipika. 


30. ManApreva VEDANTIN 


1. Keith B6291; RB9548, 112. 
2. Mentioned by Garbe in B3574; RB5524, v. 
3. Ibid., 5. 


33. NAcoji, or NAcrséa BHATTA 


1. Keith B6291; RB9548, 112. 


2. Cf. Bibliography (B) pp. 327-328 (RB, p. 452), for citations of his works. 
3. Keith, 112. 


34. VamsipHaRaA MisRA 
(notes by R. S. Bhattacharya) 


1. See the Sanskrit Introduction to the edition by Ramagastrin. The surname 
mentioned in the introduction is Punatamkara, which seems to be a variation in spel- 
ling only. Gopinath Kaviraj places Mahadeva in the second half of the 17th century. 
See G. Kaviraj B6007; RB9253, 80. 

2. See the commentary on Sdamkhyakarika 55. 

3. Vamsidhara takes the word “‘sémkhya’’ as a word of the yogaridha class, ie., 
as a word in which both the etymological and customary meanings are partly retai- 
ned, and shows its two meanings clearly. 

4. For elucidation of this view see Vydsabhasya on Yogasiltra 3.14. 

5. As Vaméidhara does not criticize this view we may surmise that he was in favor 
of the Vedantic view. 

6. As shown in Yogasatra 3.13. 

7. As the Vedantic view has not been criticized by Vamsidhara, it appears that 
he did not consider the Samkhyan view valid. 

8. For the nature of bhoga and apavarga see Vydsabhasya on Yogasiitra 2.18. 

9. “Udbhid,” as a source of beings, does not in fact mean a seed or soil as is 
sometimes supposed. ‘‘Udbhid” means udbhedana, the act of breaking through or 
shooting out. Because trees, etc., appear as a result of breaking through the earth 
they are called “‘udbhijja.”” See Nilakantha’s commentary on the Bhismaparvan of the 
Mahabharata 4.14, and Laksminrsimha’s commentary on Sivagité 32-33. 


45. PraMATHANATHA TARKABHUSANA 


(notes by Kalidas Bhattacharya) 


1. Pramathanathatarkabhisana is unnecessarily worried about interpreting sitras 
10 and 11 as though they are in the context of bondage and liberation. May they not 


656 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


be understood plainly in the context of sitra 9, purporting to show that in the case 
of a white sheet of cloth changing into red, or a seed germinating, there is no destruc- 
tion of its nature (svabhava)? 

2. Under sitra 26, there is another reading for “‘aptavadat’’ in the passage Ani- 
tuddha quotes. It is “‘apravadat,” ‘‘apravada’’ meaning ‘‘statement without justifica- 
tion.” “‘Aptavdda’”’ means a statement for which justification is believed to have been 
given. 

3. One wonders why the meaning of a word should change so often and so soon. 

4, Here, “arthakriya” is taken by Pramathanathatarkabhisana to mean “‘cause.” 

After elaborating Aniruddha’s argument against the Buddhists, Parmathanatha- 
tarkabhisana refers to an alternative reading for ‘‘uttarayogat” in sitra 39. But he 
observes that in that case another word, viz., ‘“‘kdle’’ has to be added after “‘parva- 
paye,” meaning that, if only at the moment a cause is destroyed its effect arises, then 
that cause can never be a material cause, even through the postulation of anything 
intermediately extra (atifaya). 

For “‘hetukdle” in Aniruddha’s commentary on sitra 40 there is an alternative read- 
ing, viz., “‘hetuhetumatkale.’ According to Pramathanathatarkabhisana this reading 
is unacceptable. 

5. This, according to Pramathanathatarkabhiisana, is what Aniruddha means 
by “‘ubhayavyabhicarat.” 

6. Those to whom Aniruddha is referring by the name “‘visesavadin’’ are just the 
Samkhyists. The word “‘abhasa’”’ in “‘karyatvabhasa’” in Aniruddha’s commentary means 
a fallacy of the hetu. 

The expression ‘‘vidhivakyottambhanaya” in Aniruddha’s commentary on 1.95 is not 
found in all texts. 

7. But is such an interpretation at all necessary? ‘Yoga’? may well mean contact 
in both cases; and is not this contact the cause of srsti—manifest nature, nonattach- 
ment (viréga) being itself a part of that srsfi? 

8. But did Aniruddha really understand vikalpa to be doubt? He has simply said 
“It touches both.” One has only to note that immediately before that he spoke of 
praména (instrument of knowledge)and viparyaya (error or misconception). So, he 
may well have meant that vikalpa touches both correct knowledge and error. Is this 
vikalpa different substantially from Vy4sa’s and Vijfianabhiksu’s? 

9. Why Pramathanathatarkabhisana brings in the subtle body here is not clear, 
for it has no relevance for the next satra. For the word ‘“‘parisvakta’” in III.6 there 
is an alternative reading. It is ‘‘parimukta’”? meaning ‘‘in bondage”’ (the prefix ‘“‘pari” 
meaning “‘contrary to’’). 

10. As Aniruddha states III.21, it reads ‘‘prapaitcatvadyabhavas ca,” where by 
“brapaficatva’ he means death. But there are two other alternative readings. One 
that Vijfianabhiksu accepts is ‘‘prapaftcamaranadyabhavas ca” and the other is “‘prapait- 
casyabhdvah,”” 

Under satra 1V.21, for ‘‘tatsvariipopdsanat” in Aniruddha’s commentary there is an 
alternative reading, ‘‘tatsddrSopasanat.”’ Pramathanathatarkabhisana is definite that 
itis a wrong reading. 

11. Was this interpretation, with the same word taken to be used so differently 
in two successive sentences, at all necessary ? 

12. But, as so interpreted, whose view is it after all? It could be imputed to the 
Vijiianavadin or the Siinyavadin or the Advaita Vedantin. But, as the context suggests, 
it belongs to none of them. 

13. But was this necessary? From the context it appears that ‘“‘ubhayatra’” here 
means as much in the case of ‘‘white cloth” as in that of “‘this horse is running” or 
“this is a cow.” 

14. But this clarifies nothing. 


NOTES 657 
46. KrsNanATHA NyAyApaANcANANA 
(notes by Kalidas Bhattacharya) 


1, Evidently, all these are cases of passing from the knowledge of x to what is 
analytically involved in x. 

2. But even then things do not clear up. 

3. But are they? Are they immediately experienced at all? Earlier in their com- 
mentaries both Vacaspati Misra and Nyayapaficanana had said that they are not 
immediately experienced. 

4. In other words, right predispositions alone are either innate or acquired, 
acquisition being effected through other factors. Wrong predispositions are always 
acquired ones, 

5. Nyayapaficanana refers to another reading for “‘ddhydtmika.” It is “adhyat- 
mikya,” found, he says, in some manuscripts. But Nyayapancanana holds that this 
reading is unacceptable because it spoils the rhythm of the first line of the verse. Again, 
for “‘pafica ca’’ he refers to another reading, viz., “‘nifcakara,” and rejects it on similar 
grounds, 

He refers to another alternative reading for “‘hastacandardhacandrajam” in the gloka 
quoted by Vacaspati Misra. The other reading is ‘‘cafcaccandardhacandrajam.” “‘Cait- 
cat” here means “extended.” 


49. PaNcANANA TARKARATNA 
(notes by Kalidas Bhattacharya) 


{, There is an alternative reading for “‘ete namasyamah.” It is “‘etén namasyamah.” 

2. Vacaspati Misra has quoted a passage “‘Akke cenmadhu....” Paficnanatarka- 
ratna says there is an alternative reading, viz., ‘‘Arke cenmadhu....”, “arka” meaning 
a kind of plant. 

3. Vacaspati quoted a passage from Paficasikha, viz., ‘‘svalpasamkarah sapariharah, 
etc.” Paficananatarkaratna writes that in some quotations there are some additional 
explanatory words between “‘svalpasamkarah’ and “‘saparihérah.” They are ‘‘svalpena 
pasuhimsadijanmané anarthahetuna apiirvena * samkarah.” 

4, He does not specify which Samkhyan. 

5. This equation is valid for Paficananatarkaratna and many others, not neces- 
sarily for all Samkhyists, 

6, According to some, the Samkhya tattvas are twenty-five in number; according 
to others, twenty-four, purusa being no tattva—tativa”” meaning whatever is conducive 
to the interest of purusa. 

7. Perception being the starting point and the paradigm of knowledge. 

8. Paficananatarkaratna refers to two alternative readings of the first sentence in 
Vacaspati’s commentary, according as the word “‘samakhya” or “‘samakhyaya” is found 
after ‘“‘pramanam iti.”” ‘‘Samakhya’? means definition. ‘‘Samakhyaya” indicates that the 
definition is obtained indirectly (not literally). 

9, In many editions of the Tattvakaumudi, Vacaspati’s analysis of the term 
“prativisayam” reads as “visayam visayam prati vartate.” Paficananatarkaratna writes 
that the correct reading should be “‘visayam prati...,” the word “‘visayam” being 
stated only once, not twice. 

10. The first alternative obviously, is an attempt to accommodate the Nyaya 
theory of praménas. So far as the Samkhya theory of pramapas is concerned, all later 
Samkhya interpreters, from Vacaspati onward, have been heavily influenced by 
Ny4ya. 

11, When it is a question of objective certainty, rather than of subjective assu- 


658 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


rance, it would be of the form ‘“‘This is such and such.” As distinguished from both 
subjective assurance and objective certainty, an operation of a sense capacity (speci- 
fically, of mind [ manas ]) would be of the colorless form ‘“‘This is such and such”? with- 
out any emphasis on any part of the sentence. 

12. Evidently, samkalpa falls short of niScaya (adhyavasdya). But how exactly? 
Vacaspati has never shown that. Paficananatarkaratna has made an attempt. 

13. This is with regard to intellect (buddhi) as will in which Vacaspati somehow 
appears to be exclusively interested. Paficananatarkaratna, however, as will become 
evident later, admits a corresponding theoretical side in addition. 

14. Orthodox Hindus believe in such periodic dissolutions followed by new 
creations. 

15. ‘‘Gavaya” is the name of an animal that looks very much like a cow. 

16. The whole point is to convince the Naiyayika even though he holds that uni- 
versals are perceived. 

17, It is doubtful, however, if a Samkhyist will accept this theory. See above. 

18. Alternative to the reading “‘buddher adhyavasdyasya” there is (as Paficanana- 
tarkaratna notes) another reading—“buddher adhyavasayah sa.” According to Paii- 
cananatarkaratna, this reading is wrong. 

19. V4&caspati in the Tativakaumudi writes ‘“Natpayikanayair udbhavaniyam.” Paiica- 
nanatarkaratna points out that there is another alternative reading. It is ‘‘Naipayi- 
katanayai....” He rejects this alternative reading as childish and practically out of 
context. 

20. To present the case in this way in the English language is indeed grotesque. 
In English, objects are satisfying, frustrating, or confusing, rather than satisfaction, 
frustration, and confusion. But such usage is permitted in Sanskrit. 

21. All these points have been statedin Ramesacandra Tarkatirtha’s subcommen- 
tary Gunamayt on this karika. 

22. It is not known who this teacher is. 

23. These points have been made by RameSacandra Tarkatirtha in his Gupa- 
mayt. 

24. See the concept of ‘‘specious present.” 

25. Paficdnanatarkaratna refers to three alternative readings for Vacaspati’s 
Tattvakaumudi regarding three of the five kinds of contentment—ambhas, etc. They 
are (a) YG tu prakrtydpi....ya tustih sé upadanaknya, (b) YG tu pravrajyapi ... .ya tustih 
sa kélakhya, and (c) Ya tu na kalat ...ya tustih sa bhagyakhya. 

26. These have each been interpreted by Vacaspati in two alternative ways. 

27. But has Patafijali, or even Vyasa, said what is attributed to them here? 


51. KrsyAVALLABHACARYA 
(note by R. S. Bhattacharya) 


1. Strictly speaking, pravritinimitta is the limiter of the state of being the thing 
denoted by the denotative function of a word. It is also called “‘Sakpatavacchedaka,” 
See widdhintamuktavali 8. 


53. RAMESACANDRA ‘TARKATIRTHA 
(notes by Kalidas Bhattacharya) 
1. This distinguishes Samkhya from all forms of Vedanta and aligns it with Nyaya, 
Vaisesika, and Buddhism. 


2. These interpretations will be taken up later in relevant contexts. 
3. Vacaspati Misra begins his commentary on this verse saying “‘atra ca pramapam 


NOTES 659 


iti samadkhydya laksyaparam.” WRamesacandra adds that there is another reading of this 
sentence of Vacaspati Miéra, viz., ‘*.... samakhyalaksapadam,” and, whereas the 
former relates to ‘‘those that are meant” (laksya) the latter relates to their defin- 
ing characteristics (laksana). 

4. Tanmatras are avifesa. 

5. Like the contact of the axe with the tree when an axe (qua axe) is taken as 
the instrumental cause of the cutting of a tree (qua tree). 

6. What precisely is gained by this starting assumption is not clarified by Ramesa- 
candra. 

7. Obviously gross elements (séhilabhitta) do not have to be inferred. According 
to Vacaspati Miéra they are perceived as gross things like pots and linens. 


56. Harméma SuKLA 
(notes by R. S. Bhattacharya) 


1, Asddhdrana is a variety of savyabhicara. It occurs where the hetu is absent from 
every sapaksa and from every vipaksa, but is present only in the paksa. Svariipasiddhi 
occurs where the hetu is absent from the paksa. 

2, There must be a corrupt reading here. It appears that verse 60 is to be taken 
as the example of subservience (pararthya) and not of duration (sesavrtti). Since 
Harirama explains the verses of the Rajavarttika following its order of enumeration, 
verse 60 must be taken as an example of pararthya. 


abhava (absence, non-existence) 171-72, 
254, 256, 274, 293, 391, 513, 520, 527, 
534 

abhibuddhi (pertaining to the function of 
the buddhi; five in Samasa-Samkhya: 
reflective discerning, self-awareness, 
intention, sensing, acting; vyavasdya, 
abhimana, iccha, kartavyata, kriya) 34, 
319, 324, 415, 447, 465 

Abhidharmakosa (of Vasubandhu) 139 

abhimana (self-awareness) 24, 52, 70, 88, 
144, 157, 260, 262, 347, 589. See also 
ahamkara, antahkarana, trayodasakarana 

Abhinavarajalaksmi. (of Sitarama Sastri) 
17, 31, 613 

abhisyandika (potential knowledge) 266 

mt (continuing practice) 29, 81, 162, 


“accumulation theory” of derivation 
51, 137, 260, 559 
acetana (non-conscious) 
prakrti, miilaprakyti 

action (karman). See karman 

action capacity (karmendriva). See kar- 
mendriya 

adharma (demeritorious behaviour or vice, 
a fundamental predisposition or bhava, 
residing in buddhi). See bhava 

adhibhautika (external frustration). See 
duhkha 


adhibhitta (external) 60-61, 319 

adhidaiva or adhidaivata (celestial or cau- 
sed by fate) 60-61, 319 

Gdhidaivika (celestial or cosmic frustra- 
tion). See dubkha 

adhisthana (overseeing) 79, 156, 344 

ddividvas, adividvan (‘‘primal wise man,” 
Kapila) 108 

adhyatma (internal or personal) 60-61, 319 

adhyatmavidya (science of liberation) 29 

adhyatmika (internal or personal frustra- 
tion). See duhkha 

adhyavasaya (reflective discerning) 24, 
52, 69, 88, 144, 153, 157, 242, 260, 262, 
280, 303, 322, 347, 512, 540, 596, 601. 
See also antahkarana, buddhi, trayodasa- 

__ karana 

Aditya 61 

advaita (non-duality), Samkhya critique 
of 363, 484, 485 

Agni 61, 111, 112 

ahamkara (egoity or ego; threefold struc- 


100. See also 


INDEX 


ture: “modified,” “energetic,” ‘“pro- 
ducing the elements”; vaikrta, taijasa, 
bhitadi) 6, 12, 24, 38, 49-65, 65-73, 
76-77, 83, 87, 99, 100, 122, 130, 144, 
146, 152, 157, 158, 159, 170, 171, 181, 
187, 201, 202, 211, 218, 261, 279-81, 
295-97, 308-310, 322, 324, 338, 339, 
347, 348, 372, 387, 388, 395, 406, 422, 
453, 495-96, 503, 535, 573, 583, 584. 
See also abhimana, antahkarana, trayodasa- 
karana 

Gharana (seizing) 53, 158, 174, 188, 202, 
219, 263, 280, 296, 309, 454-55, 541, 
629n 

Ahirbudhnyasamhita 108, 118, 125, 126 

aisvarya (power, a fundamental predis- 
position or bhava, residing in buddhi). 
See bhava 

Aitareya Brahmana 109 

Ajivikas 113, 293 

ajftana (ignorance, a fundamental predis- 
position or bhdva, residing in buddhi). 
See bhava 

akartrbhava (non-agency, inactivity) 81, 
93, 156, 258. See also malikartha 

Gkasa (‘‘space,” ether), See mahabhiita 

aklista (unafflicted) 28, 348 

dlocanamdtra (mere sensing, i.e., awareness 
unaccompanied by intellectual elabo- 
ration) 24, 32, 52, 158, 187, 218, 262, 
280, 296, 454, 553 

Amala (of Pramathanatha Tarkabhisana) 
17, 35, 473-86 

anaisvarya (impotence, a fundamental 
predisposition or bhava, residing in 
buddhi). See bhava 

anatman (no-self) 74, 75 

andaja (egg-born) 53, 63 

Aniruddha 16, 35, 84, 317, 327, 333-373, 
474, 487, 545, 651-54n. See also Sam- 
khyasittravrtti 

anirvacaniya (Vedanta theory of error) 362 

antahkarana (internal organ; threefold: 
intellect, egoity, mind; buddhi, aham- 
kara, manas; with three separate func- 
tions: reflective discerning, self-aware- 
ness, purposive intellectual activity; 
adhyavasaya, abhiména, samkalpaka) 25, 
52, 62, 76, 77, 87, 100, 158, 188, 231, 
383, 506, 583, 589, 607 
See also buddhi, ahamkara, manas, adhya- 

vasaya, abhimana, samkalpaka 


662 


antahkaranavrtti (intellectual operations) 
28, 76, 77 

Anugita 116 

anugrahasarga. See pratyayasarga 

anumana (inference) 10, 24, 33, 73, 88, 94, 
96-103, 136, 137, 143, 152, 153, 173, 
181, 184, 196, 198-200, 212, 213, 215, 
230, 239-46, 253-59, 273, 274, 276-79, 
292-93, 294-95, 303-305, 308, 341, 343- 
45, 359, 400-401, 421, 436-37, 452, 453, 
469, 478-79, 490-93, 494-95, 531, 538- 
40, 552, 565-69, 570-72, 593, 595, 602, 
603. See also pramana, pirvavat, Sesavat, 
samanyatodrsta, vita, avita 

Anuyogadvarasittra 109, 168, 291 

anviksiki (systematic reflection, ratioci- 
nation, “‘philosophy’’) 4, 115 

a (Nyaya theory of error) 102, 

anyatva (differentiation, dualism) 93. See 
also milikartha 

Anyayogavyavacchedadvatrimsika (of Hema- 
candra) 315 

anyonyapratibimba (mutual reflection) 36, 
82, 390-91 


ap or ap (water). See mahabhita 

apana (disposing breath). See paftcavayu 

apavarga (release) 73, 158, 352 

aptavacana (reliable verbal testimony, 
scriptural authority) 24, 29, 73, 88, 
152, 182, 196, 212, 239-46, 273, 274, 
292-93, 303-305, 341, 469, 492, 532, 
560, 567, 603. See also pramadna, word 
and meaning, problem of 

Aristotle 29, 76, 641n 

Arjuna 8 

ArthaSastra (of Kautilya) 3, 4, 14, 115 

arthavativa (objectivity) 93. See also mili- 
kartha 

arvaksrotas (downward streams) 58, 267. 
See also padartha 

aSakti (dysfunction; twenty-eight in Sam- 
khya, namely, failure of the eleven 
capacities, including sense capacities, 
action capacities and mind, together 
with seventeen states that result from 
failure to achieve the nine contentments 
and the eight rational attainments). 
See padartha 

asamprajitata-samadhi (altered state of 
awareness not having content) 29 

dsana (posture). See yogdnga 

asatkhyati_ (‘“‘Buddhist’? theory of error) 
362, 522 

Asita Devala or Asita and Devala 7 

astau prakrtayah (“eight prakrtis’’) 33,318, 
322, 413 

astitva (existence) 93. See also millikartha 

Asuri 7, 15, 59, 107-112, 131, 163, 166, 
178, 179, 191, 192, 207, 269, 286, 302, 
413, 524, 564 

ASvaghosa. See Buddhacarita 

Atharva Veda 5, 109 

“atheistic” and 
groups 316 

ativahika (subtle body) 265 


“theistic” (Samkhya 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


dtman (Self) 6, 29, 74, 80, 119, 335 

atomism, Samkhya critique of 365 

attachment (raga or avairagya). See bhava 

attainment, rational (siddhi). See padartha 

Augustine 76 

Avaranavarini (of Krsnanatha Nyayapafi- 
canana) 17, 31, 487-500 

avastha (state of development) 27 

avidya (ignorance) 28, 77, 335, 358-59, 
522. See also ajfiana, aviveka, bhava 

avisesa (non-specific) 27, 50, 73, 86, 159, 
175, 188, 242, 263, 309, 349, 397, 481, 
496, 504, 588. See also tanmatra 

avita (exclusionary inference) 32, 96-103, 
230, 244, 304-305, 490-93. See also 
anumana, pramdana, piirvavat, Sesavat, sama- 
nyato drsta 

aviveka (non-discrimination) 56,77, 82, 
370, 387, 432, 504. See also avidya, 
ajitana, bhava 

avivekin (undifferentiated) 78, 100 

avividisa (desire not to know). See karma- 
yont 

avyakta (unmanifest, ice., prakyti in its 
‘‘unevolved”’ or non-emergent state) 24, 
25, 27, 66, 68, 69, 73, 78,79, 86, 88, 119, 
152, 172, 183, 196, 197, 213, 236, 250- 
51, 275-76, 292, 293, 303, 307, 343, 
391, 435, 452, 468, 470, 493, 514, 569, 
583. See also miilaprakrti, prakrti 

awareness, intentional awareness, in con- 
trast to non-intentional consciousness 
76, 77, 79. See also abhimana, adhya- 
vasaya, ahamkara, antahkarana, antah- 
karanavrtti, buddhi, citta, cittavrtti, samkal- 
paka, trayodaSakarana 

Ayurveda 193. See also Carakasamhita, 
SuSrutasamhita 


bahutva (plurality). See purusabahutva 

bahyakarana (external organ; _ tenfold, 
namely, the five sense capacities and 
the five action capacities; duddhin- 
driyas and karmendriyas) 52, 62, 87, 158. 
See also buddhindriva, karmendriya, trayo- 
dasakarana 

Balarama Udasina 17, 31, 509-520. See 
also Vidvattosini 

“basic principle” realm. See rapa-realm, 
tattva-realm 

Bhagavadgité 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 33, 35, 
111, 116, 121, 139, 166, 210, 321, 377 

Bhagavatapurana 21, 38, 292 

bhakti (devotional theism) 23, 35, 74, 316 

bhaktivyoga (discipline of devotion) 8 

Bharati Yati 17, 31, 467-71. See also Tatt- 
vakaumudivyakhya 

Bhartrhari 20, 23, 228 

Bhasarvajiia 147 

Bhasya of Gaudapada on Saémkhyakariké. 
See Samkhyakarikabhasya 

Bhattacharya, K. C. 44-47, 68, 71, 628n, 
635n 

bhautikasarga (empirical world of ordi- 
nary life) 26, 56-62, 63, 64, 73, 161, 
206, 319, 326, 351, 368, 372, 373, 415, 


INDEX 


440, 456, 499, 543. See also daiva, 
manusaka, tairyagyona 

bhava (fundamental predisposition; eight 
in Samkhya: meritorious behaviour, 
knowledge, nonattachment, power, 
demeritorious behaviour, ignorance, at- 
tachment, impotence; dharma, jfténa, 
vairag ya, aisvarya, adharma, ajftana, raga, 
anaisvarya) 5, 6, 24, 28, 29, 39, 53-54, 
56, 58, 63, 71-73, 86, 87, 160, 161, 162, 
175, 189-90, 203, 217, 220-21, 261, 266, 
282-84, 297-98, 310-11, 359, 428, 440, 
455, 497, 498, 540, 542, 574, 609. See 
also padartha 

Bhavaganesa or Ganeéa Diksita 16, 33, 
46, 118, 320, 321, 375, 413-16, 655n. 
See also Tattvayatharthyadipana 

bhava-realm or dimension 64-65, 65-72, 
73, 93, 94, 186, 268. See also bhitta- 
realm, phala-realm, ripa-realm, tativa- 
realm 

Bhavaviveka’s Tarkajvala 209 

bhedabheda (identity-and-difference) Ve- 
danta of Vijfianabhiksu 375 

bhoga, upabhoga (enjoyment, ordinary ex- 
perience) 71, 73, 82, 86, 158 

Bhojaraja 16, 145, 165, 313, 651n. See 
also Rajamartanda 

bhoktrbhava (enjoyership) 79, 156, 344 

bhita (gross element). See mahabhiita 

bhitadt (“producing the elements,” one 


part of the threefold structure of egoity ). 


See ahamkara 

bhita-realm or dimension 64-65, 65-72, 
73, 93, 94, 102, 186, 268. See also bhava- 
realm, phala-realm, ripa-realm, tattva- 
realm 

bhitatman (manifest self) 6, 74. See also 
jiva 

Bhrgu 7 

bondage (bandha, baddha) 334-38, 350, 
382-87, 475-77, 501-502, 546-47. See 
also nimitia-naimittika, samsdra 

Brahma (the creator) 39, 58, 59, 60, 61, 
296, 405 

Brahmamuni 17, 35, 615. See also Sam- 
khyasittrabhdasya 

brahman (the ultimate, the absolute) 6, 
29, 115, 335, 593, 603 

brahmanda (cosmic egg) 589-90 

Brahmasiitra 379, 596 

Brahmasittrabhasya (of Samkara) 289, 315, 
441 

breaths. See paficavayu 

Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 109, 110, 111, 115, 
302, 335, 377 

Buddhacarita (of ASvaghosa) 5, 6, 14, 111, 
113, 114, 116, 121, 136, 139 

Buddhamitra 11, 132, 133, 141 

buddhi (intellect/will or simply intellect; 
also called mahat or ‘‘great one’’) 6, 12, 
24, 28, 31, 36-37, 49-65, 65-73, 76-77, 
79, 80, 82, 83, 87, 100, 112, 118, 119, 
120, 137, 144, 146, 152, 153, 157, 158, 
159, 170, 171, 181, 187-88, 201, 202, 
211, 217, 238, 261, 264, 279-81, 295-97, 
298, 308-310, 322, 338, 339, 347, 348, 
387, 388, 390, 391, 395, 396, 403, 405, 


663 


406, 409, 414, 422, 437-38, 453, 480, 
495-96, 512, 528, 529, 530, 535, 540, 
555, 556, 573, 578, 579, 583. See also 
adhyavasaya, antahkarana, trayodasakarana 


buddhindriya (sense capacity; five in Sam- 
khya: hearing, touching, seeing, tast- 
ing, smelling; Srotra, tvac, caksus, rasana, 
ghrana) 6, 12, 24, 32, 38, 49-65, 65-73, 
88, 144, 146, 152, 157, 158, 159, 171, 
174, 181, 188, 201, 218, 239, 261, 263, 
279-81, 295-97, 309, 338, 365, 367, 395, 
426, 438, 503, 587. See also dlocana- 
matra, bahyakarana, nirvikalpa, savikalpa, 
trayodaSakarana 

Buddhism and early Samkhya, the rela- 
tion between 625n 

Buddhism, Buddhists 4, 6, 8, 10, 11, 20, 
99, 43, 44, 45, 47, 74, 75, 84, 88, 113, 
114, 115, 117, 122, 140, 142, 147-48, 
183, 230, 242, 244, 250, 293, 305, 315, 
336-37, 362, 364, 385, 487, 513, 535, 
593, 603. See also Dignaga, Madhya- 
mika, Nagarjuna, Vasubandhu, Vij- 
fianavada 

buddhivrtti (intellectual operations) 24, 
38. See also adhyavasaya, buddhi 


caitanya 120. See also 
purusa 

caksus (seeing). See buddhindriya 

Candra 60 

Candra Gupta 13 

Candragupta IT 11 

Candramati 86 

Candrika. See Samkhyacandrika 

capacity (indriya). See buddhindriya, kar- 
mendriya and manas 

Caraka. See Carakasamhita 

Carakasamhita 3, 5, 15, 111, 114, 116, 121 

Cartesian dualism 75-76 

Carvaka materialism 45, 74, 349, 359 

category, subsidiary category. See padartha 

causation, theory of (satkdryavdda). See 
satkaryavada 

cause (kGrana). See kérana, satkaryavada 

celestial frustration (ddhidaivika). See 
duhkha 

cetand-Sakti (power of consciousness) 231, 
242. See also purusa 

Chandog ya Upanisad 5, 6, 14, 111, 115, 235, 
237, 302, 377, 382, 593, 594, 604 

Chinese commentary (trans. by Para- 
martha). See Suvarnasaptati 

Christian theology 29, 40, 76 

citta (awareness) 27, 28, 100, 146, 338, 
582, 630n 

cittavriti (functional operations of aware 
ness; five in Yoga philosophy: know- 
ledge, misapprehension, verbalization, 
sleep, memory; pramdna, viparyaya, vi- 
kalpa, nidra, smrti) 28, 38, 39, 76, 77, 395 

cittavrttinirodha (cessation of the functional 
operations of awareness) 28 

combination (samghata). See samghata 

consciousness or “‘self” (purusa). See 
purusa 


(consciousness ) 


664 


“consequent” 
bhiita-realm 

constituent, constituent process (guna). 
See guna 

contact (sparsa). See tanmatra 

contentment (tusti). See padartha 

cosmology 10, 33-35, 37, 39 

critical realism 24, 25, 640n 

“crypto-Buddhist” (pracchanno bauddhah) 
375, 384 

cycle of rebirth (samsdra). See samséra 


realm. See phala-realm, 


daiva (eightfold divine or celestial realm) 
26, 59, 60-62, 72, 87, 161, 177, 206, 
223, 284 

DaSapadirthasastra (of Candramati) 315 

Dasgupta, Surendranath 46-48 


demeritorious behaviour or vice (adharma). 


See bhava 

Descartes 75-76 

Devatirtha Svamin or Kasthajihva Sva- 
min 17, 461. See also Simkhyataranga 

dharana (holding) 53, 158, 174, 188, 202, 
219, 263, 280, 296, 309, 454-55, 629n 

dharana (focussed concentration). See yo- 
ganga 

dharma (meritorious behaviour, a funda- 
mental predisposition or bhava, residing 
in buddhi). See bhava 

dharma (morality, law, custom) 8 

dharma (property) 27 

Dharmakirti 20, 228 

dhyti (perseverance). See karmayoni 

dhyana (meditation) 29, 350, 398. See 
also yogadnga 

Digha-nikaya 113 

Dignaga 9, 12, 15, 19, 45, 48, 86, 94, 129, 
140, 147, 148, 228, 315 

discrimination, See vijfidna, jftdna, viveka 

drastrtva (subjectivity) 81, 258 

dravya (substance) 37, 387 

drsta (perception in Samkhya) 24, 96-103, 
136, 137, 143, 152, 181, 188, 196, 212, 
219, 239-46, 273, 274, 292-93, 303-305, 
340-41, 365, 421, 452, 492, 529, 601. 
See also pratyaksa. 

dualism of Samkhya 74-83 

duhkha, duhkhatraya (frustration, triad of 
frustrations: internal, external, celes- 
tial or supernatural; ddhydtmika ddhi- 
bhautika, ddhidaivika) 26, 27, 32, 33, 
34, 59, 67, 73, 103, 152, 170, 179, 180, 
194-95, 211, 231-34, 272, 273, 286, 
292, 319, 320, 333-34, 369, 379-82, 
401, 421, 467, 475, 488, 501, 510, 524, 
555, 564, 592, 599, 605 

Dumeézil, Georges 639n 

Doédasiranayacakra (of Mallavadin) 315 

dyads in Samkhya 86-87, 88-89 

dysfunction (agakti). See padartha 


earth (prthivi). See mahabhiita 
Edgerton, F. 5, 9 

effect (karya). See satkaryavada 

ego or egoity (ahamkdara). See ahamkéra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


eight divisions of knowledge (in Suvarna- 
saptati) 176 

eightfold yoga. See yoganga 

“eight prakriis”. See astau prakrtayah 

eightfold divine or celestial realm (daiva) 
26, 59, 60-62, 72, 87, 161, 177, 206, 
223, 284 

ekatva (uniformity) 93. See also miili- 
kartha 


Epic. See Mahabharata 

epistemology of Samkhya 10, 24-25, 28, 
31-32, 34, 38-39, 80, 81, 83-86, 92-103, 
152-53. See also pramana, pratyaksa drsta, 
anumana, aptavacana 

Eriugena, Johannes Scottus 635-36n 

error. See theory of error 

essence of action (karmatman). See karmdt- 
man 

ethics of Samkhya 26-27, 28-29, 32, 34- 
35, 39-40 

excreting or elimination (pdyu). See kar- 
mendriya 

external frustration 


duhkha 


(adhibhautika). See 


Feigl, H. 76 

fire (tejas). See mahabhitta 

five action capacities. See karmendriya 

five gross elements. See mahabhiita 

five sense capacities. See buddhindriya 

five subtle elements. See tanmdatra 

five vital breaths. See paficavayu 

fivefold animal and plant realm (tairya- 
gyona) 26, 59 

‘followers of Varsaganya” (vdrsaganah). 
See varsaganah 

form (ripa). See tanmdtra 

Frauwallner, E. 9, 10, 11, 12, 19, 33, 46- 
47, 84, 85-86, 92, 94-96, 114, 116, 122, 
123, 127, 134, 143, 147 

functions of the buddhi. See abhibuddhi 


gandha (smell). See tanmatra 

Ganesa Diksita. See Bhavaganesa 

Garbe, R. 4, 46-48, 109, 114, 301, 317, 
327, 333, 376 

Gaudapada, author of Méanditkya-karika 
13, 20, 21, 209-210 

Gaudapada, author of Bhésya on Sdm- 
khyakarika 16, 20-21, 51, 59, 97, 118, 
121, 127, 150, 167-69, 209-224, 271, 
291, 487, 646n 


ghrana (smelling). See buddhindriya 

Gita. See Bhagavadgita 

God. See isvara 

“Gold-Seventy”’ (Suvarnasaptati or Kana- 
kasaptati) 132, 133, 142, 150, See also 
Suvarnasaptati 

Gotama the Buddha 6. See also Buddhism, 
Buddhists 

grasping, prehending (pani). See karmen~ 
driya 

Greek philosophy and Indian philosophy, 
the relation between 638-39n 

gross body. See sthila-Sarira 


INDEX 


gross elements (mahdbhiita). See maha- 
bhita 


guna (constituent process in Samkhya; 
often ¢riguna or traigunya as three consti- 
tuent processes or tripartite constituent 
process, namely, the  intelligibility- 
process or sattva, the activity-process or 
rajas, and the inertia-process or tamas) 
5, 6, 10, 12, 23, 25, 35, 37, 38, 43, 65- 
73, 73-75, 78-80, 81, 82, 83, 87, 88, 89, 
98, 100, 102, 103, 110, 118, 120, 121, 
137, 139, 147-48, 54, 171, 173, 175, 
183-84, 197-98, 213-14, 252-53, 276, 
294, 307, 318, 319, 324, 338, 343, 387, 
392, 404, 405, 414, 419-20, 424, 432, 
434, 435-36, 452-53, 470, 478, 502, 509, 
514, 515, 516, 523, 526, 536-37, 547, 
555-561, 570, 582, 594, 595, 604. Sze 
also parindma, sattva, rajas, tamas 


“guna,” the term 65-66 

Gunamati 11, 12, 147 

Gunamayt ( of Ramésacandra Tarka- 
tirtha) 17, 31, 563-575 

gunaparinama (transformation of the cons- 
tituent processes). See parindma 

gunapraspanda (continuing activity of the 
gunas) 71-73 

Gunaratna 145, 168, 291, 316, 327 

Gunatrayaviveka (of SvayamprakaAéayati) 
16, 419-20 

Gupta (dynasty) 13, 23, 143 

guruparampara (traditional sequence of 
teachers) 7 


Hacker, P. 9, 10, 92 

Haribhadrasiiri 118, 315, 316, 327. See 
also Saddarganasamuccaya 

Hariharananda Aranya 17, 581-90. See 

also Sémkhyatattvaloka 

Hariprasada 17, 35, 501,508. See also Vrtti 

Harirama Sukla 17, 31, 591-97, 659n. 
See also Susama 

hearing (Srotra). See buddhindriya 

Me Hegelian philosophy 71, 635n. 

In 


Heidegger, M. 44-45 

Hemacandra 315 

Hindu, Hinduism 8, 11 

Hiranyagarbha 39, 58, 59, 108, 111,112, 
119, 166, 438, 590 

holding (dhérana), See dhérana 

cares 11, 23, 132, 133, 134, 141, 
47 

human realm (mdnusaka). See manusaka 


idealism 77 

ignorance (ajfidna). See bhdva 

illuminating (prakdsa). See prakasa 

illustrative stories (Book IV of the Sam- 
Khyasiitra) 353-57 

impotence (anaisvarya). See bhava 

Indra 59, 61, 62 

indriya (capacities that enable sensing, 
motor functioning and thinking). See 
buddhindriya karmendriya, manas 

inference (anumdna), See anumdana 


665 


instrument of knowledge (pramdna). See 
pramana 

intellect, intellect/will (auddhi). See buddhi 

internal or personal frustration (ddhpat- 
mika). See dubkha 

isolation (kaivalya). See kaivalya 

isvara (God) 6, 27, 28, 29, 35, 37, 39, 
74, 108, 119, 151, 201, 254, 255, 341, 
352, 357, 358, 368, 377, 378, 400, 410, 
414, 433, 483, 486, 564, 577, 589, 

_ 634n, 652n 

Isvarakrsna 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,, 18 
19, 43, 48, 51, 61, 82, 85-86, 96, 107, 
110, 114, 117, 127, 129, 130, 133, 143, 
145, 149-62, 178, 179, 192, 230, 260, 
266, 269, 289, 302, 315, 316, 487, 
643n 

ifvarapranidhana (devotion to God) 28 


Jaigisavya 113, 131 

Jain, Jainism 4, 6, 8, 11, 43, 74, 76, 88, 
113, 115, 122, 140, 183, 315, 316, 337, 
364 

Janaka 7, 113 

jardyuja (womb-born) 53, 63 

Jayamangala (of Samkara or Samkararya) 
16, 19, 20-22, 51, 97, 107, 118, 121, 
125, 127, 149, 150, 193, 271-87, 289, 
647-49n 

Jayanta Bhatta 86 

Jjijfiasé (desire to know, philosophical 
inquiry) 26, 67, 89 

Jinendrabuddhi 9, 45, 86, 94, 140, 147, 
315 

jiva 6, 76, 373, 397, 544 

jivanmukia (liberated while living) 353, 
411-12, 482, 574 

jiia (knower) 78, 101, 152, 170, 236. See 
also ksetrajita, purusa 

jiana (knowledge, a fundamental pre- 
disposition or dhéva, residing in buddhi). 
See bhava. See also vidya, viieka 

Jung, Jungian 639n 


kaivalya (isolation, liberation) 3, 27, 73, 
81, 82, 137, 163, 177, 190-91, 207, 223, 
258, 269, 298-99, 311, 344, 399-400, 
428, 471, 500, 609. See also apavarga, 
moksa 

kala (time) 177, 254, 255, 309, 334, 347, 
364, 395, 480, 503, 589, 609, 634n 

Kalipada Tarkacarya 17, 577-79. See 
also Saraprabha 

“tkalpandpodham’’ (“knowledge devoid of 
constructions”) 242 

Kamalasila 86, 315 

Kamasitra 271 

Kanada 255 

Kant, Kantianism 76, 102-103, 640-42n 

Kapila 7, 11, 13, 15, 46, 48, 59, 85, 107- 
112, 119, 127, 131, 132, 133, 141, 166, 
169, 178, 179, 191, 192, 207, 210, 224, 
230, 266, 269, 286, 291, 302, 305, 317, 
322, 327, 377, 413, 524, 564, 627-28n 

Kapila-Paficasikha Tantra 4-8, 9 


666 


Kapila-Tantra 4-9, 13, 128 

Kapilavastu 109 

karana (material cause) 24, 68-72, 73, 
86, 88, 98, 102, 153, 172. See also sat- 
karyavada 

Karika-Kaumudi Samkhya 16, 17, 29-32, 
33, 36, 37, 40-41, 317 

karikas (verses) 13 

Karika-Samkhya 15, 18-22, 23,27, 28, 
31, 33, 36, 37, 39, 40, 289, 316, 318 

karmen (action) 12, 13, 58, 73, 120, 148, 
335, 340, 357, 386, 474, 557 

karmasaya (karmic residue) 28 

karmatman (essence of action; five in 
Samasa-Samkhya, pertaining to egoity: 
good or pure deeds, bad or impure 
deeds, deluded deeds, deeds related 
to inference, deeds unrelated to infer- 
ence; vatkdrike, taijasa, bhitadi, sdnu- 
mana, niranumana) 34, 319, 325 

karmayoga (discipline of action) 8 

karmayoni (source of action; five in Samasa- 
Samkhya: perseverance, faith, plea- 
sure, desire to know, desire not to know; 
dhrti, Sraddha, sukha, vividisa, avividisa) 
33, 34, 55-56, 63, 88, 262-63, 318, 
319, 325, 415, 443, 445, 447, 465 

karmendriya (action capacities; five in 
Samkhya: speaking, grasping, walking, 
excreting, procreating; vdc, pani, pada, 
payu, upastha) 6, 24, 49-65, 65-73, 88, 
152, 157, 159, 170, 171, 181, 201, 218, 
239, 261, 279, 281, 295, 296, 297, 309, 
338, 503, 587, 628-29n 

Karnagomin 147 

karya (effect) 5, 68-72, 73, 86, 155, 172. 
See also satkéryavada 

Kashmir Saivism 126, 316 

Katha Upanisad 5, 6, 11, 14, 110, 111, 114, 
115, 583 

Kautilya. See Arthasastra (of Kautilya) 

Kaviraja Yati 16, 31, 449. See also Sam- 
khyatattvapradipa 

Kegava 17, 617. See also Samkhyatattva- 

pradipika 

Kiranavalt (of Krsnavallabhacarya) 17, 
31, 551-557 

Klein bottle 68 

kleSa (affliction; five in Yoga philosophy: 
ignorance, egoity, passion, hatred, 
clinging to life; avidyd asmita, raga, 
dvesa, abhinivesa) 32, 56-59, 311, See also 
vibaryaya padartha 

klista (afflicted) 28, 348 

knowledge (jfana), See bhava 

Kramadipika 16, 33, 60, 61, 84, 318, 319, 
320, 321-26, 375, 444, 651n 

kriyayoga (discipline of spiritual perform- 
ances in Yoga philosophy: ascetic 
practice, recitation, devotion to God; 
tapas, svadhyaya, isvarapranidhana) 29 

Krsna Misra 18, 617. See also Tattva- 
mimamsa 

Krsnanatha Nyayapaficanana 17, 31, 487- 
500, See also Avaranavarint 

Krsnavallabhacarya 17, 31, 551-57, 658n, 
See also Kirandvali, Samkhyakarikabhasya 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Ksemendra. See Simananda 

ksetra (‘field’) 6, 119, 192. See also prakrti 

ksetrajia (“knower of the field”) 6, 74, 
119, 192, 323. See also jita, purusa 

Kuei-chi 11, 132, 133, 134, 141 

Kumarila 86, 147, 309, 441 

Kumirila’s Slokavdrttika 144, 145, 309, 
441 

Kufijavihari Tarkasiddhanta 17, 35, 545- 
49. See also Tativabodhini 


Laghusémkhyavrtti (of Nagoji Bhatta or 
Nagesa). See Samkhyasiitravrtti 

laksana (defining feature) 27 

liberation or release. See kaivalya, moksa 

linga (characteristic mark in inference) 
153, 182, 273 

linga (essential core of a living being, 
made up of intellect, egoity, mind, 
five sense capacities and five action 
capacities) 52, 53, 54, 62, 63, 73, 77, 
81, 86, 89, 138. See also trayodasakarana 

linga-realm or dimension 64-65, 65-72 

linga-Sarira, siiksma-Sarira (subtle body, 
made up of eighteen principles or 
tattvas: intellect, egoity, mind, five 
sense capacities, five action capacities 
and five subtle elements, transmigrating 
into successive gross bodies) 12, 25, 
53, 54, 62, 86, 144, 159, 160, 161, 175, 
189, 202, 220, 265-66, 282, 310, 348, 
366, 367, 397, 398, 406, 414, 440, 455, 
481, 497, 504, 519, 548, 553, 573-74, 
608, 629-30n 

logic and epistemology of Samkhya 83-86, 
92-103 


Madhava (of Sarvadarfanasamgraha) 32, 
316, 327 

Madhava (the Samkhya teacher, called 
“‘samkhya-nasaka”’ or “destroyer of Sam- 
khya”) 11, 12, 13, 15, 19, 109, 117, 
136, 147-48, 168, 291, 315, 316, 643n 

Madhyamika Buddhists, Simyavadins 84, 
210, 337, 362, 364, 386 

madhyasthya (indifference) 81, 102, 156, 258 

Mahabharata 4, 5, 7, 14, 33, 37, 110, 112, 
115, 116, 117, 382, 414, 551 

mahabhita (gross element; five in Sam- 
khya: “space” or ether, wind, fire, 
water, earth; dkdsa, vdyu, tejas, ap, 
prthivt) 6, 24, 49, 50-53, 61, 62, 70, 
71, 73, 88, 100, 152, 157, 170, 171, 
174, 181, 189, 202, 211, 219, 239, 264- 
65, 281-82, 297, 308, 310, 338, 426, 
440, 455, 496, 497, 519 

Mahadeva Vedantin 16, 35, 417, 474, 
655n. See also Vritisara 

mahat (“great one,” synonym for buddhi). 
See buddhi 

mahatmya-Sarira (body of greatness or great 
being) 58, 60, 99, 255, 267. See also 
pratyayasarga, anugrahasarga, bhautika 
sarga, Hiranyagarbha 

Maitri Upanisad 114 

Majjhima-nikdya 113 


INDEX 


Mallavadin 9, 45, 86, 94, 140, 315 

Mallisena 315 

manana (thinking) 32 

manas (mind) 6, 12, 24, 38, 49-65, 65-73, 
76-77, 83, 100, 118, 122, 144, 146, 152, 
157, 158, 159, 170, 187, 201, 202, 218, 
239, 262, 279-81, 295-97, 308-310, 347, 
348, 364, 389, 395, 396, 414, 426, 438, 
453, 495-96, 506, 573, 584 

manifest world. See vyakta 

Manoratha 11, 131 

manusaka (human realm) 26, 59, 72, 87, 
161, 177, 207, 223, 284 

Manusmrti, Manavadharmasastra 5, 14, 34, 
11 

Markandeyapurdna 382 

Mathara 16, 109, 148, 167-69, 291-99, 
649-50n. See also Matharavrtti 

“matharapranta”’ (Mathara school) 168, 
193, 291 

Matharaortti (of Mathara) 16, 20-22, 51, 
97, 107, 108, 118, 121, 125, 127, 148, 
150, 167-69, 193, 209, 291-99, 487, 
649-50n. See also Mathara 

maulikya-samkhya (original’” Samkhya) 
316 


Mauryan (dynasty) 3, 8, 13 

McClain, Ernest 91, 639n 

meritorious behaviour (dharma). See bhava 

Mimamsa (orthodox system of philo- 
sophy) 13, 23, 30, 35, 43, 84, 217, 242, 
316, 362, 363, 366, 375, 378, 469, 487, 
488, 568, 592 

mind (manas), See manas 

misconception (viparyaya). See padartha 

Mitra 61 

Mébius strip 68 

moksa (liberation, release) 3, 161, 350, 364, 
368, 399-400, 485. See also apavarga, 
kaivalya 

Moksadharma (portion of Mahabharata) 4, 
5, 7,9, 10, 11, 14, 33, 35, 111, 113, 114, 
115, 116, 117, 118, 121, 122, 123, 126, 
131, 166 

momentariness, Buddhist theory of 336, 
384, 385-86, 477 

Mudumba Narasimhasvamin 16, 451-58. 
See also Saémkhyataruvasanta 

mukhyasrotas (fundamental streams) 58, 
267. See also padartha 


mitlaprakyti (primordial materiality ) 23, 24, 
25, 27, 33, 49-65, 65-73, 78, 83, 86, 102, 
103, 138, 152, 171, 173, 183, 184,185- 
86, 196, 198-200, 213, 215, 216, 238, 
250, 251, 292, 293, 303, 307, 335, 339, 
351-52, 371, 388, 408, 423, 599, 606. 
See also avyakta, prakrti 

milikartha (principal topic; ten in Sam- 
khya: existence, uniformity, objectivity, 
teleology, differentiation, non-agency, 
apparent contact, separation, plurality, 
residual functioning; astitva, ekatva, 
arthavattva, pdrarthya, anyatva, akartr- 
bhava, yoga, viyoga, purusabahutva, Ssesa- 
ortti) 10, 34, 93, 125, 126, 178, 208, 230, 
311-312, 319, 325, 445, 466 

nutual reflection (anyonyapratibimba). See 


667 


anyonyapratibimba 
M. V. Upadhyaya 18, 619. See also Sam- 
khyasiddhantaparamarsa 


Nagarjuna 13. See 
Buddhists 

Nagesa. See Nagoji Bhatja 

Nagoji Bhatta or Nagefga 16, 35, 429, 655n. 
See also Samkhyasitravrtti 

Naraharinatha 17, 611. See also Samkhya- 
vasanta 

Narayana 377 

Na&rayanatirtha 16, 421-28. See also Sdm- 
Khyacandrika 

Narendranatha Tattvanidhi 17, 465-66. 
See also Tattvasamasabhasya 

narrative stories and illustrations (akhyd- 
pikadhydya) 329-330, 353-357 

Navya-nyaya (Neo-Nyaya or later Nyaya 
philosophy) 431, 473, 521, 526, 527, 
563 


also Madhyamika 


nididhyésana (meditating) 32 
nidra (sleep). See cittavytti 
Nielsen, Kai 75-76 


nimitta-naimittika (trajectories of rebirth 
resulting from the force of the bhavas, 
eight in Samkhya: upward movement, 
final release, merger in materiality, 
increasing control, downward move- 
ment, bondage, continuing rebirths, 
and loss of control) 54, 63, 64, 71, 72, 
73, 87, 160, 175, 190, 204, 237, 282-83, 
297-98. See also bhava 

nirmana-citta (‘“‘artificial” mind or aware- 
ness) 108, 119 

eeeniens (without ordinary experience) 


nirvikalpa (without intellectual elabora- 
tion) 32, 38, 309, 395 

niyama (internal restraint). See yogdnga 

nonattachment (vairagya). See bhava 

Nyaya (orthodox system of philosophy) 
10, 13, 21, 23, 30, 32, 35, 44, 45, 84, 
217, 240, 242, 262, 291, 305, 306, 315, 
316, 335, 344, 359, 362, 365, 367, 375, 
377, 378, 388, 400, 416, 421, 431, 432, 
486, 506, 513, 536, 568, 594, 607 


“objects” or contents of awareness (visaya). 
See visaya 

ontology of Samkhya 10, 12, 23-24, 27, 
31, 33-34, 36-38, 49-65, 65-73, 73-83. 
See also paftcavimSati-tativas,  prakrti, 
purusa, dualism of Samkhya 


pada (walking, motion). See karmendriya 
padartha (category, subsidiary category; 
fifty in Samkhya: five misconceptions, 
twenty-eight dysfunctions, nine con- 
tentments, eight rational attainments; 
viparyaya, asakti, tusti, siddhi; altogether 
making up the pratyayasarga or ‘‘intel- 
lectual creation”) 10, 26, 28, 34, 39, 
56-59, 63, 73, 93, 125, 126, 160, 161, 


668 


178, 190, 204-206, 221-22, 267-68, 
282-84, 297-98, 310-11, 319, 325, 351, 
398-99, 455, 497-98, 499, 542-43, 574, 
631-34n. See also pratyayasarga 

Padmapuréna 378 

Pali Ganon 113 

pafica abhibuddhayah (five functions pertain- 
ing to buddhi). See abhibuddhi 

Paficadhikarana 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 107, 
129-30, 142, 143, 260, 263, 265, 266, 
269 


patica karmatmanah (five essences of action) 
See karmatman 

paiica karmayonayah (five sources of action). 
See karmayoni 

Pafcanana Tarkaratna 17, 31, 521-44, 
657-58n. See also Pirnima 

paficaparva avidyé (fivefold ignorance or 
misconception). See viparyaya, padartha 

Paficaratra 125, 126 

Paficasikha 7, 11, 13, 15, 46, 48, 59, 84, 
85, 107, 108, 109, 111, 112, 113-123, 
127, 163, 166, 178, 192, 207, 238, 269, 
286, 302, 303, 360, 373, 413, 414, 488, 
512, 524, 564, 642n 


Pac iibe Jatedevs Janaka dialogue” 

118- 

pafica vayavah (five vital breaths). See 
paficavayu 

paficavayu (five vital breaths: respiration- 
breath, disposing-breath, speech-breath, 
digestive-breath, diffuse-breath; prana, 
apana, udaéna, samaéna, wyana) 25, 34, 
54-55, 63, 88, 118, 158, 188, 218, 262, 
309, 318, 319, 325, 348,415, 518, 587 

paftcavimsati-tattvdni (twenty-five _ basic 
principles of classical Samkhya) 49- 
53, 62, 74, 75, 152, 170, 181, 191, 211, 
217, 297, 299, 338-39, 387-88, 404, 414 

pani (grasping, prehending). See karmen- 
driya 

paramarsi (supreme sage, Kapila) 107, 
224. See also Kapila 

Paramartha (translator of Chinese com- 
mentary, Suvarnasaptati) 15, 19, 108, 
117, 131, 132, 133, 134, 141, 167-78, 
179, 193, 209, 271, 564, 644-45n. 
See also Suvarnasaptati 

Paramartha’s ‘‘Life of Vasubandhu” 11, 
131-33, 141 

Paramarthasaptati 132, 133, 141, 142, 143 

parapratipadandngabhiita (persuasive ex- 
position of an inference; five compo- 
nents: the assertion to be proved, the 
reason, the illustration, the application, 
and the final conclusion; pratijfia, hetu, 
drstanta, upasamhara, and nigamana) 97, 
244. See also vyakhyangabhitia 

bararthya (teleology). See miilikartha 

paravaikrta (knowledge cultivated by 
means of others) 266 

barimana (limitation) 100 

parindma, gunaparindma (transformation of 
the coffstituent processes) 10, 23, 25, 
65-73, 73-75, 102, 120, 173, 218, 252, 
474, 477, 584, 594, 595. See also guna, 
sativa, rajas, tamas 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Parivrajaka (wandering ascetic) 19 

Pasupata 126, 378 

Patanjala-Samkhya 12, 13, 15, 18-19, 22- 
23, 27-29, 31, 33, 37, 39, 146, 165-66, 
289, 316. See also Patafijali, Vyasa, 
Yogasiitra, Yogasiitrabhasva 

Patafijali (author of the Mahdbhasya) 22, 
165 

Patafijali (compiler of the Yogasitra) 12, 
13, 15, 18-19, 22-23, 27-29, 40, 48, 
146, 165-66, 225, 315, 316, 412, 487, 
644n 

Patafijali (the Samkhya teacher) 10, 11, 
13, 15, 129-30, 142, 143, 238, 260, 263, 
265 

Paurika 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 107, 129-30, 
142, 143, 268, 269, 316 

payu (excreting). See karmendriya 

pentads in Samkhya 88-89 

perception (drsta, pratyaksa). See drsta, 
pratyaksa. See also pramana 

phala-realm or dimension 64-65, 65-72, 
73, 90, 93, 94, 102, 236 


phenomenology in Samkhya 26, 28, 32, 
‘34, 39 


> 


philosophical methodology in Samkhya 
83-86, 87-92 

Plato, Platonism 29, 40, 51, 76, 83, 639n 

Plotinus 639n 

plurality of consciousnesses (purusaba- 
hutva). See purusabahutva 

power (aisvarya). See bhava 

Prabhakara 362, 366, 654n 

pracchannam bauddham (‘‘crypto-Buddhist”’ ) 
375, 384 

pradhana (principal, materiality, material 
nature, synonym for prakrti) 6, 29, 30, 
65, 348, 556. See also prakyti, mila- 
prakrti 

Prajapati 59, 61, 62, 589 

prajfa (spiritual insight) 411, 414 

prakasa (illuminating) 53, 158, 174, 188, 
202, 219, 263, 280, 296, 309, 454, 455, 
629n 

prakrta (natural) 60, 130, 144 

prakrta-mandala (principal network of 
notions) 125 

prakyti (materiality, material nature) 5, 
10, 11, 12, 24, 29, 35, 37, 43, 49-65, 
65-73, 86, 89, 138, 148, 153, 155-56, 
157, 161, 162, 163, 170, 171, 173, 174, 
177, 178, 183, 184, 185-86, 191, 196, 
197, 198-200, 201, 213, 215, 216, 223, 
236, 250-51, 253-59, 272-73, 274, 275- 
76, 277,79, 285, 292, 293, 294-95, 298, 
299, 307, 308, 311, 322, 335, 338, 339, 
341, 342, 343, 346, 351-52, 371, 387, 
388, 389, 390, 393-94, 399, 408, 413, 
428, 432, 435, 436,-37, 441, 452, 453, 
457, 479, 493, 494, 499, 502, 503,509, 
514, 519-20, 522, 538-40, 543, 552, 
553, 555, 556, 569, 570-72, 578, 582, 
589, 595, 597, 600, 609. See also guna, 
miilaprakrti, pradhana 

praména (instrument of knowledge; three 
such instruments in Samkhya: per-, 
ception, inference and reliable verbal 


INDEX 


testimony; drsta or pratyaksa, anumana, 
aptavacana) 9, 12, 24, 28, 33, 34, 86, 
88, 92-103, 152-53, 171-72, 181-82, 
195-96, 212-13, 239-46, 273-74, 292-93, 
303-305, 319, 340-42, 390-91, 434, 
452, 469, 478-79, 490-93, 511-13, 527, 
547, 551, 560, 564-69, 584-86, 593, 
600-603. See also anumdna, aptavacana, 
drsta, pratyaksa, epistemology of Sam, 
khya 

Pramanasamuccaya (of Dignaga) 130, 147, 
315 


Pramathanatha Tarkabhisana 17, 35, 
473-86, 655-57n. See also Amala 

pbrana (respiration-breath). See paficavdyu 

pranayama (restraint of breath). See yo- 
ganga 

prandstaka (subtle body) 262, 264, 266 

prasavadharmin (productive) 78, 100. 

praspanda (continuing activity of the con- 
stituent processes )71,73, 252, 594 

pratibimba (reflection) 31, 82, 303, 439, 
579 

pratisaficara (periodic dissolution ) 33, 318, 
319, 324 

pratityasamutpada (dependent origination) 
74 


pratyahara (withdrawal of sense capa- 
cities). See yogdnga 

pratyaksa (perception) 73, 88, 94, 96-103, 
136, 137, 143, 181, 188, 196, 212, 219, 
239,46, 274, 292-93, 340-41, 365, 421, 
452, 492, 529, 560, 565, 601. See also 
arsta 

pratyayasarga (intellectual creation) 26, 
34, 56-59, 64, 70, 93, 160,190,221, 236, 
267, 282-84, 293, 319, 415, 427, 446. 
See also padartha 

pravriti-realm or dimension 64-65, 65-72, 
73, 93, 94, 236 

preexistence of the effect, theory of (sat- 
karyavada). See satkéryavada 

Pre-Karika Samkhya 3, 9,14, 15, 18, 31, 
37, 40 

principal topic (malikartha). See milli- 
kartha 

process materialism, Samkhya as 65-73. 
See also reductive materialism 

procreating (upastha). See karmendriya 

“projective” realm. See pravrtti-realm, 
bhava-realm 

Proto-Samkhya 3, 4-9, 14-15, 18, 40, 128, 
166 

prthivi (earth). See mahabhiita 

psychology/physiology of Samkhya 25, 
28, 32, 34, 39 

Puranas 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 15, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 
39, 91, 111 116, 168, 193, 217, 291, 
375, 416, 441, 454, 487 

Pirnima (of Paficanana Tarkaratna) 17, 
31, 521-44 

purposive intellectual activity (samkai- 
paka, samkalpa). See samkalpaka 

purusa (consciousness, “‘self”?) 6, 10, 11, 
23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 35, 36, 37, 
43, 49, 52, 56, 62, 73-83, 86, 87, 88, 89, 
103, 112, 119, 120, 137, 138, 145, 152, 


669 


155-56, 161, 162, 163, 170, 171, 173, 
174, 177, 181, 184, 185, 186, 189, 191, 
198-200, 200-261, 213, 215, 216, 239, 
253-59, 273, 274, 276-79, 294-95, 298, 
99, 303, 308, 309, 319, 323, 341, 343- 
45, 369-71, 378,79, 387, 388, 393-94, 
398, 403, 407, 409, 410, 414, 424-25, 
432, 436, 437, 438, 453, 480, 495, 502, 
508, 538, 540, 552, 555, 556, 570-72, 
581, 589, 591, 595 

purusabahuiva (plurality of consciousnesses ) 
23, 36-37, 43, 80-81, 93, 156, 184, 258, 
323, 344-45, 372, 378-79, 392, 507, 
636n. See also mitlikartha 

purusartha (for the sake of consciousness, 
i.e., the inherent teleology of prakrti to 
function on behalf of purusa) 23,99, 
100, 103, 162, 263, 592, 640n 

pirvavat (inference relating to what pre, 
cedes) 32, 96-103, 171, 181, 212, 239- 
46, 273, 303-305, 512, 593. See also 
anumana 

Pyrrho 639n 

Pythagoras, Pythagoreanism 43, 90, 91, 
92, 638n, 639n 


raga, avairagya (non,attachment, a funda- 
mental predisposition or bhava, residing 
in buddhi). See bhava 
Raghunatha Tarkavagisa 17, 459. See 
also Samkhyatattvavilasa 
Hajar artes (of Bhojaraja) 16, 145, 313, 
5in 


rajas (activity-process or constituent) 23, 
26, 27, 65,73, 73,75, 87, 89, 99, 121, 
154, 161, 171, 175, 176, 183-84, 190, 
197,98, 213, 218, 252, 276, 294, 308, 
324, 338, 343, 351, 387, 392, 404, 405, 
419,20, 424, 432, 435-36, 452-53, 478, 
514, 515, 516, 523, 536,37, 540, 547, 
570, 578, 583, 588, 594. See also guna 

Rajasekhara 315, 316, 327 

Rajavaritika 227, 228, 311, 445, 447, 466, 
597 

rajayoga (classical Yoga philosophy) 411 

Rajesvara Sastri Dravida 17, 559-61. See 
also Tattvakaumuditika 

Ramanuja 45 

Rameécandra Tarkatirtha 17, 31, 563, 
75, 658-59n. See also Gunamayi, Viveka- 
pradipa 

rasa (taste). See tanmdatra 

rasana (tasting). See buddhindriya 

rebirth, cycle of (samsara). See samsara 

reductive materialism 25, 76-77, 635n. 
See also process materialism 

reflection (pratibimba). See pratibimba 

reflective discerning (adhyavasdya). See 
adhyavasiya 

relation (sambandha). See sambandha 

release, liberation (kaivalya, moksa). See 
kaivalya, moksa 

Reg Veda 5, 110, 180, 210 

Rudra 60, 112 

ripa (form). See tanmdtra 

ripa-realm or dimension 64-65, 65-72, 73, 
90, 93, 94, 236 


670 


$abda (sound). See tanmatra 

sadasatkhyati (Samkhya theory of error) 
102, 362 

Saddarsanasamuccaya (of Haribhadrasiri) 
112, 118, 291, 315, 316 

Saddarsanasamuccaya (of Rajasekhara) 315 

Saiva Siddhanta 126, 316 

Saivism 126 


saksitva (witness, contentless presence) 77, 
81, 101, 102, 258 

Sakti (inherent capacity) 100, 253, 274 

samadhi (altered state of awareness). See 
yoganga 

samaéna (digestive breath). See paiicavayu 

Samanvaya (homogeneous) 100 

samanya (general, characterizable, intel- 
ligible) 78,100, 365-66 

sdmanyatodrsta (inference based on gene- 
ral correlation) 24, 32, 96-103, 153, 
171, 182, 212, 239,46, 273, 303,305, 
341, 512, 593. See also anumana 

Samasa-Samkhya 16, 17, 32,35, 40,41, 
317 

sambandha (relation) 49, 73, 74, 75, 95, 
156, 182, 183, 236, 366, 373, 383, 384, 
425, 432, 485, 506, 539 

samghata (combination) 23, 25, 79, 102 

samkalpaka, samkalpa (purposive intellec, 
tual activity) 24, 38, 52, 70, 88, 144, 
158, 260, 262, 406, 584 

Samkara (the Advaita Vedantin) 16, 22, 
29-30, 32, 40, 45, 228, 271, 289, 315, 
335, 441, 627n, 649n 

Samkara and Samkhya, the relation bet- 
ween 627n 

Samkarabhagavat 16 

Samkararya 16, 22, 271, 289 

ae the term 3-14, 48, 86, 110, 115, 

79 

Samkhyacandrika (of Narayanatirtha) 16, 
421-28 

Samkhyakarika (of USvarakrsna) 4, 7, 9, 10, 
13, 14, 15, 18-22, 23-27, 30, 31, 33, 40, 
43, 46, 48, 51, 61, 85-86, 107, 109, 110, 
127, 133, 142, 143, 145, 148, 149,63, 
167-69, 302, 315, 316, 318, 327, 424, 
446, 459, 487, 521 

Samkhyakarikabhasya (of Gaudapada) 16, 
20-22, 51, 108, 118, 121, 167-69, 209, 
224, 271, 291, 646n 

Samkhvakarikabhasya (of Krsnavallabha- 
carya) 17, 554-57, 658n 

samkhya-nasaka or samkhya-vainasika (‘‘des- 
troyer of Samkhya”’). See Madhava 

Samkhya numbers, significance of 89-92, 
637-38n 

Samkhyaparibhasa 18, 617 

Samkhyapravacanabhasya (of Vijfianabhi- 
ksu) 16, 35, 46, 117, 118, 121, 327, 
375,412, 444, 474, 487, 654-55n 

Samkhyapravacanabhasya (of Vyasa). See 
Yogasiitrabhasya 

an eye (of Sri Rama Pandeya) 

8, 621 

Samkhyasaptativriti 15, 20,22, 125, 148, 
150, 167-69, 193,208, 209, 271, 291, 
646n 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Samkhyasara (of Vijfianabhiksu) 16, 401, 
412 


Samkhyasiddhantaparamarsa (of M. V. Upa- 
dhyaya) 18, 619 

Samkhyasatra 16, 31, 35-41, 48, 80, 81, 83, 
84, 118, 120, 121, 127, 149, 316, 317, 
318, 321, 327-331, 375, 379, 456, 651n. 
See also Aniruddha, Vijfianabhiksu, 
Nagoji Bhatta, Mahadeva Vedantin 

Samkhyasttrabhasya (of Brahmamuni) 17, 
35, 615 

Samkhyasitravivarana 16, 33, 447-48 

Samkhyasitravrtti (of Aniruddha) 16, 35, 
317, 327, 333,373, 375, 474, 545, 
651-54n 

Samkhyasitravrtti (of Nagoji Bhatta or 
Nagesa) 16, 35, 429 

Samkhyasitravrttistra (of Mahadeva Ve- 
dantin) 16, 35, 417 

Samkhyataranga (of Devatirtha Svamin) 
17, 461 

Samkhyataruvasanta (of Mudumba Nara- 
simhasvamin) 16, 451-458 

Samkhyatattvakaumudt (of Vacaspati Misra). 
See Tativakaumudi 

Samkhyatattvaloka (of Hariharananda 
Aranya) 17, 581-90 

Samkhyatattvapradipa (of Kaviraja Yati) 
16, 31, 449 

Samkhyatattvapradipika (of Kesava) 17, 617 

Samkhyatattvavibhakara (of Vamsidhara) 
16, 31, 431-42 

Samkhyataitvavilasa (of Raghunatha Tarka~ 
vagisa) 17, 33, 459 

Samkhyatattvavivecana (of Simananda 16, 
33, 443-44 

Samkhyavasanta (of Naraharinatha) 17, 
611 


Samkhyavrtti 15, 20-22, 125, 150, 167-69, 
179-92, 193, 209, 271, 291, 645-46n 

Samkhyavrttiprakasa. See Samkhyatattva- 
vilasa 

samprajhata-samadhi (altered state of awa- 
reness having content) 29 

samsdra (cycle of rebirth) 12, 13, 25, 
32, 53, 54, 60, 63, 64, 73, 74, 103, 230, 
275 ; 

samsiddhika (knowledge that can easily 
be aroused in a composite body) 60, 
266 

samskara (latent disposition) 28, 39, 163, 
251, 348 

samyavastha (homogeneous equilibrium 
of the gunas) 37, 387, 509, 526 

samyoga (association or proximity) 156, 
236, 543 

Sanaka 59 

Sanandana 59 

Sanatana 59 

Sanatkumara 7 

Sanatsujatiya 116 

saficara (periodic manifestation) 33, 318, 

_ 319, 324, 445 

Santaraksita 147, 315 

saptadha sambandha, saptasambandha (seven- 
fold inference) 22, 95-96, 98, 182, 273 

saptamaharsis (seven great seers) 59, 210 


INDEX 


Sérabodhini (of Sivanarayana Sastrin) 17, 
31, 599-610 

Saraprabha (of Kalipada Tarkacarya) 17, 
577-79 

Sarvadarsanasamgroha (of Madhava) 32, 
316, 327, 333 

Sarvopakarinitika 16, 33, 445-46, 447 

Sastitantra or Sasfitanira (system of sixty 
topics or possibly the name of a text) 
7, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 18, 19, 48, 85, 86, 
91, 92, 93, 94, 108, 117, 122, 125-28, 
140, 149, 151, 163, 173, 178, 192, 207, 
208, 272, 286, 299, 311, 624-25n, 642. 
43n. See also tantra, Kapila-Paiicasikha 

. Tantra, Kapila-Tantra 

Satapathabrahmana 110 


satkaryavada (Samkhya theory of causa- 
tion) 5, 10, 12, 25, 43, 68-72, 73, 88, 
98, 101, 102, 153, 172, 182, 196, 213, 
237, 246-49, 274-75, 293, 305-307, 339- 
40, 342-43, 391, 423, 434-35, 470, 476, 
479, 493, 502, 513, 535, 552, 555, 569, 
603, 604,. See also karana, karya 

satkhyati_ (Prabhakara theory of error) 
362, 654n 

satsiddhi (six ways of reproduction) 60, 
62, 265 

sativa (intelligibility-process or consti- 
tuent) 23, 26, 27, 28, 65-73, 73-75, 80, 
87, 89, 99, 101, 121, 154, 157,161, 17), 
175, 176, 183-84, 190, 197-98, 213, 218, 
252, 276, 294, 308, 324, 338, 343, 351, 
387, 392, 404, 405, 419-20, 424, 432, 
435-36, 452-53, 478, 514, 515, 516, 523, 
536-37, 540, 547, 570, 578, 583, 588, 
594. See also guna 

Savikalpa (with intellectual elaboration) 
32, 38, 309, 395 

seeing (caksus). See buddhindriya 

seizing (dharana). See aharana 

self. See dtman, purusa, jiva, antahkarana, 
buddhi, ahamkdra, manas, citta 

self-awareness (abhimana). See abhimana 

sense capacities (buddhindriya). See bud- 
dhindriya 

$esavat {inference relating to what re- 
mains) 32, 96-103, 171, 182, 212, 239- 
46, 273, 303-305, 512. See also anumana 

Sesavrtti (residual functioning after en- 
lightenment) 93. See also mitlikartha 

sevenfold inference (saptadhka sambandha). 
See saptadha sambandha 

Siddhasena Divakara’s sanmatitarka 143 

siddhi (rational attainment; eight in Sam- 
khya: rational reflection, instruction 
from a qualified teacher, study, asso- 
ciation with appropriate peers, an open 
and disciplined temperament, together 
with the progressive overcoming of the 
kinds of frustration) . See pada- 
rtha 

siddhi (supernatural attainment, relega- 
ted in Samkhya to the realm of mis- 
conception or viparpaya; eight in num, 
ber: becoming atomic in size, becom- 
ing large in size, becoming light, be- 
coming heavy, becoming all-pervasive, 


671 


attaining all desires, gaining lordship 
over elemental forces, and immediate 
gratification; animan, mahiman, laghiman, 
gariman, prapti, prakdmva, iSitva or vasi- 
tva, and yatrakémavasayitva) 56, 57, 187, 
368. See also viparyaya, padartha 

Simananda or Ksemendra 16, 443-44. 
See also Saémkhyatattvavivecana 

Simhasiri 9, 45, 86, 94, 140 

Sitarama Sastri 17, 31, 613. See also Abhi- 

_ navarijalaksmi 

Siva 111, 112, 378, 405 

Sivandrayana Sdstrin 17, 31, 599-610. 
See also Sdrabodhint 

six contemplations (in Suvarnasaptati) 176 

six ways of reproduction (satsiddhi). See 
satsiddhi 

“sixteen products” (sodasa vikdrah). See 
sodaSa vikarah 

“sixty topics” (sastitantra). See sastitantra 

Smart, J.J.C. 76 

smell (gandha). See tanmdatra 

smelling (ghrina). See buddhindriva 

smrti (memory). See cittavrtti 

sodaSa vikarah (‘‘sixteen products”) 318, 
319, 323 

sound (Sabda). See tanmatra 

source of action (karmayoni). See karma, 
yoni 

space or place (dif) 335, 347, 364, 395, 
480, 502, 609, 634n 

“‘space,”? ether (dkafa). See mahabhita 

sparga (contact). See tanmdtra 

speaking (vdc). See karmendriya 

Sphota (meaning) 39, 318, 362-63 

Sraddha (faith). See karmayoni 

Sramana (wandering ascetic) 4 

Sravana (hearing) 32 

Sri Rama Pandeya 18, 621. See also Sam- 
khyarahasya 

Srotra (hearing). See buddhindriya 

sthila-Sarira (gross body, made up of five 
gross elements) 25, 53, 54, 86, 349, 
366, 367, 397-98, 406, 504, 548 

subsidiary category, category (padartha). 
See padartha 

subtle body (litga-Sarira, siiksma-Sartra). 
See linga-Sarira 

subtle element (tanmdira). See tanmdira 

Suka 7 

sukha (pleasure). See karmayoni 

sukha-duhkha-moha (pleasure-pain-delu- 
sion or the pleasure-pain continuum) 
26, 27 

Simyavadins. See Madhyamika Buddh- 
ists 

“supreme sage’? or Kapila (paramarsi) 107 

Susama (of Harirama Sukla) 17, 31, 591- 
97 

Susruta. See Susriutasamhita 

SuSrutasamhita 3, 5, 15 

sitva (collections of aphorisms) 13, 33, 
34, 35, 37, 39, 84, 85, 317, 319 

Sitra-Samkhya 16, 17, 35-41, 317, 318 

Suvarnasaptati (Paramartha’s Chinese trans. 
of commentary on Samkhyakarika) 15, 
20-22, 51, 118, 125, 127, 132, 150, 
151, 167-78, 179, 271, 291, 644-45n 


672 


svabhava (own-being) 118, 177, 187, 190, 
254, 285, 296, 334, 352, 476 

svadhyaya (study and recitation) 28 

svatah pramanya (intrinsic validity of know- 
ledge) 39, 484, 532, 576. 

svavaikrta (knowledge cultivated by one- 
self) 266 

Svayamprakasayati 16, 419-20. See also 
Gunatrayaviveka 

svedaja (moisture born) 53, 63 

Suetasvatara Upanisad 5, 6, 14, 32, 109, 110, 
111, 114, 115, 237, 318, 321, 415, 431, 
523, 551, 591, 592 

Syaédvadamafijari (of Mallisena) 315 


tadatmya (identity) 307, 506, 513 

taijasa (egoity as energized by rajas). 
See ahamkara 

tairyagyona (fivefold animal and plant 
realm) 26, 59, 72, 87, 161, 177, 207, 
223, 284 

Taittiriya Upanisad 237 

Takakusu, M. J. 133-34, 141, 167-69 

tamas (inertia-process or constituent) 23, 
26, 27, 65-73, 75, 87, 89, 100, 121, 154, 
157, 161, 171, 175, 176, 183-84, 191, 
197-98, 213, 218, 252, 276, 294, 308, 
324, 338, 343, 351, 387, 392, 404, 405, 
409, 419-20, 424, 432, 435-36, 452-53, 
478, 514, 515, 516, 523, 536-37, 540, 
547, 570, 578, 583, 588, 594. See also 
guna 

tanmatra (subtle element; five in Samkhya: 
sound, contact, form, taste, smell; 
Sabda, sparsa, riipa, rasa, gandha) 10, 12, 
24, 32, 49, 50-53, 61, 62, 70, 71, 73, 87, 
88, 100, 144, 152, 157, 159, 170, 171, 
175, 181, 189, 202, 211, 219, 264-65, 
281-82, 297, 308, 310, 322, 323, 338, 
387, 397, 415, 422, 427, 440, 455, 496, 
497, 519, 588 


tantra (“‘scientific’ work, systematic col- 
lection) 4, 9,114, 92, 107, 108, 143, 163, 
230. See also Kapila-Pajicasikha-Tan, 
tra, Kapila-Tanira, sastitantra, tantra- 
pukti 

tantrayukti_ (methodological devices) 4, 92, 
229, 230-31 

tapas (ascetic practice) 6, 28 

Taranatha Tarkavacaspati 17, 463. See 
also Upodghata 

Tarkarahasyadipika (of Gunaratna) 316 

tasting (rasana). See buddhindriya 

tattva (principle, entity) 5, 37, 65-73, 
217. See also paftcavimsati-tattoani 

Tattvabodhini (of Kufijavihari Tarkasid- 
dhanta) 17, 35, 545-49 

Tattvakaumudit (of Vacaspati Misra) 16, 
18, 20,22, 29-32, 40-41, 51, 97, 125, 
136, 139, 150, 193, 271, 301-312, 316, 
317, 318, 431, 446, 487, 521, 554, 564, 
650-5In 

Tattvakaumuditika (of Rajesvara Sastri 
Dravida) 17, 559-61 

Tattvakaumudivyakhya (of Bharati Yatu) 
17, 31, 467-71 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Tativamimamsé (of Krsna Misra) 18, 617 

tattva-realm or dimension 64-65, 65,72, 
73, 93, 94, 186, 268 

tattvasamakéla (knowledge arising simul- 
taneously with a tattva) 266 

Tattvasamasabhasya (of Narendranatha 
Tattvanidhi) 17, 465-66 

Tattvasamasasittra 16, 32-35, 40-41, 48, 
55, 60, 84, 127, 136, 139, 149, 315-20, 
375, 379, 459, 651n 

Tativasamasasiitravrtti. See Kramadipika 

Tattvavaisaradi (of Vacaspati Misra) 16, 
18, 23, 108, 117, 119, 122, 127, 302, 
312, 317 

Tattvavibhakara. See Samkhyatattvavibhakara 

Tattvayatharthyadipana (of Bhavaganesa) 
16, 33, 46, 321, 413-16, 444 

tejas (fire). See mahabhita 

‘theistic’? and “‘atheistic’”’ 
groups 316 

theory of error 12, 39, 318, 361-62, 431, 
441, 484, 505 

thirteenfold instrument (travodasakarcna). 
See trayodasakarana 

three constituent processes (triguna, trai, 
gunya). See guna 

threefold bondage (érividho bandhah: natu- 
ral bondage, acquired bondage, perso- 
nal bondage; prakrti-bandha, vaikarika- 
bandha, daksinabandha) 34, 35, 88, 266, 
297, 319, 326, 415 

threefold liberation (érividho moksah: pre, 
dominance of knowledge, quieting the 
longings of the senses, destruction of all 
impulses towards ordinary life; jidno- 
dreka, indriyaragopasama, krtsnaksaya) 34, 
35, 88, 319, 326,1415, 444 

threefold structure of egoity (vaikrta, tai- 
jasa, bhittadi). See ahamkara 

time (kala) 177, 254, 309, 334, 347, 364, 
395,1480, 503, 589, 609, 634n 

tiryaksrotas (horizontal streams) 58, 267, 
See also padartha 

touching (tvac). See buddhindriya 

traigunya (tripartite constituent process). 
See guna 

transformation (parinéma). See parindma 

trayodasakarana (thirteenfold instrument, 
made up of intellect, egoity, mind, five 
sense capacities and five action capa- 
cities; also called Liga) 12, 32, 52, 158, 
174, 186, 188, 201, 217, 261-64, 266, 
278, 279-81, 295-97, 298, 308-10, 326, 
348, 396, 437-39, 453, 470-71, 495, 503, 
517, 540, 553, 573, 607. See also buddhi, 
ahamkara, manas, buddhindriya, karmen- 
driya, antahkarana, bahyakarana, linga 

triads in Samkhya 87-88, 88-89 

triguna (three constituent processes). See 
guna 

Tripitaka 9 

trividho bandhah (threefold bondage). See 
threefold bondage 

trividho moksah (threefold liberation). See 
threefold liberation 

tusti (contentment; nine in Samkhya: 
proper understanding of prakrti, con- 


Samkhya 


INDEX 


ventional mendicant life, acceptance 
of delayed gratification, ability to cope 
with life as it comes, together with not 
being attached to the fivefold structure 
of material existence in terms of acqui- 
sition, preservation, waste, enjoyment 
and injury). See padartha 

tvac (touching). See buddhindriya 

twenty-five principles (paficaviméati-tat- 
tani). See pattcavimsatitattoant 


udana (speech-breath). See paficavayu 

udasina (indifference) 102, 157 

udbhijja (‘‘breaking through,” seed born) 
53, 63 

Uddyotakara 518 

universals, problem of 365-66, 506 

unmanifest (avyakta). See avyakta 

upabhoga (enjoyment, ordinary experi- 
ence). See bhoga 

upadhi (limiting adjunct, epistemological 
surrogate) 36, 80, 304, 490, 512, 531, 
566 

Upadhyaya, M. V. See M. V. Upadhyaya 

Upanisads 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 14, 58, 74, 75, 
80, 109, 115, 237, 377, 409, 487 

upastha (procreating). See karmendriya 

Upodghata (of Taranatha Tarkavacaspati) 
17, 463 

iirdhvasrotas (upward moving streams) 
58, 267. See also padartha 

Uttaradhyayanasitra 109 


vac (speaking). See karmendriya 

Vacaspati Misra 11, 16, 30-32, 35, 36, 
39, 40, 82, 97, 108, 117, 118, 120, 122, 
127, 136, 139, 149, 227, 301-12, 316, 
317, 395, 431, 446, 469, 487, 521, 564, 
650-51n. See also Tattvakaumudi, Tattva- 
vaisaradi 

vaikrta (modified egoity). See ahamkéra 

vaikrta-mandala (derived network of no- 
tions) 125 

vairagya (nonattachment, a fundamental 
predisposition or bhava, residing in 
buddhi). See bhava 

Vaisesika 10, 11, 12, 13, 20, 30, 35, 43, 
47, 74, 84, 122, 142, 148, 183, 242, 255, 
274, 293, 305, 306, 309, 315, 335, 344, 
365, 375, 377, 378, 384, 387, 388, 400, 
421, 432, 433, 475, 506, 536, 569, 596, 
607 

Vaisnavism 125, 126, 316 

vaivarta (subtle body) 265 

Vamsidhara or Vamsidhara Misra 16, 
31, 431-42, 655n. See also Samkhyatat- 
tvavibhakara 

van Buitenen, J.A.B. 6, 114, 115, 116 

varnasramadharma (behavior appropriate 
to caste and stage of life) 8 

Varsagana. See Varsaganya 

varsaganah (“followers of Varsaganya) 
10, 11, 134, 136-38, 141, 142, 143, 145, 
149 

Varsaganya 7, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18-20, 33, 


673 


46, 48, 51, 84, 85-86, 107, 108, 117, 
122, 123, 127, 129, 130, 131-40, 143, 
144, 145, 146, 178, 242, 260, 263, 269, 
315, 564, 624n, 643n 

Varsaganya-Vindhyavasin line of Sam- 
khya 12, 13, 22-23, 122, 131-46, 165-66, 
630n. See also Yogasiitra, Yogasiitra- 
bhasya 

Varuna 61 

vasana (latent disposition) 28, 39 

Vasistha 7 

Vasubandhu 11, 131, 132, 133, 135, 139, 
143 

Vatsyayana’s Nydyasiitrabhasya 139 

vayu (wind). See mahabhita 

Vayu (wind-god) 61 

Veda, Vedic 9, 32, 80-81, 91, 115, 178, 
180, 190, 195, 211, 217, 234, 292, 296, 
302, 305, 334, 340, 381 401, 468, 524, 
525, 555, 591 

Vedanta {orthodox traditions of philo- 
sophy) 13, 23, 29, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 40, 
44, 47, 76, 84, 305, 316, 335, 358, 362, 
364, 377, 388, 421, 433, 487, 536, 
579, 604, 606 

Vedantasdra (of Sadananda) 376 

Vedantinization of Simkhya 35, 40 

verbal authority, verbal testimony (dpia- 
vacana). See aptavacana. See also pramana 

videha-mukia (liberation at death) 574 

Vidvattosint (of Balarama Udasina) 17, 
31, 509-520 

vidya (wisdom, knowledge) 4, 5. See 
also jitana, vijftana, viveka 

vijidna (discrimination) 152, 170, 210, 
236, 237, 272, 292, 303, 421. See also 
viveka 

Vijfianabhiksu 16, 31, 35-40, 46, 47, 48, 
80, 81, 82, 84, 117, 118, 120, 121, 317, 
321, 327, 333, 375-412, 441, 444, 451, 
487, 517, 518, 530, 654-55n. See also 
Samkhyapravacanabhasya, Yogavarttika, 
Samkhyasdra, Yogasérasamgraha 

Vijfianavada Buddhist notions 336-37, 
364, 384, 435, 477, 515, 555, 570 

vikalpa (verbal construction) 38, 77. 
See also cittavrtti 

vikara, vikrti (emergent principles or 
tativas that do not themselves generate 
further principles; there are sixteen 
such principles: mind, the five sense 
capacities, the five action capacities 
and the five gross elements) 24, 33, 
52, 86. See also sodasa vikérah 

Vikramaditya 132, 141 

Vindhyavasin 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 18-20, 
46, 48, 85-86, 117, 123, 129, 131, 132, 
133, 134, 135, 141-46, 149, 165, 166, 
178, 225, 265, 266, 315, 564 

viparyaya (misconception; five in Sam- 
khya: darkness, confusion, extreme 
confusion, gloom, utter darkness; tamas, 
moha, mahamoha, taémisra, andhatamisra; 
sixty-two subvarieties). See padartha 

visaya (“object” or content of awareness ) 
6, 51, 100, 153, 159 

visesa (specific) 27, 50, 73, 86, 99, 159, 


674 


175, 188, 242, 263, 309, 349, 397, 481, 
504, 588 

Visnu 61, 111, 119, 401, 405, 551 

Visnupurana 21, 377, 414 

vita (positive inference) 32, 96-103, 230, 
243, 304-305, 490-93. 


Vivarana. See Yogasiitrabhasyavivarana 
viveka (discrimination) 5, 81, 82, 101, 

338 352, 353, 369-71, 379, 402. See 
also adhyavasdya, buddhi, vijnana 


vivekakhyati (discriminative realization) 
28 


Vivekapradipa (of Rameégcandra Tarka- 
tirtha) 17, 575 

vividisa (desire to know). See karmayoni 

viyoga (differentiation, separation). See 
miilikartha 

Vodhu 59 

Vrsagana. See Varsaganya 

Vrsaganavira. See Varsaganya 

Vriti or Samkhyasitravrtti (of Haripra- 
sada) 17, 35, 501-508 

Vritisara (of Mahadeva Vedantin) 16, 
35, 417 

Vyadi 145 

wakhyangabhiita (preliminary exposition 
of an inference; five components: the 
desire to know, the occasion for doubt, 
the purpose of the undertaking, the 
likelihood of a solution, and the eli- 
mination of extraneous doubts; jijiasa, 
samSaya, prayojana, Sakyaprapti, and 
samsayavavyudasa) 97, 244. See also 
parapratipadandngabh ita 

vyakta (manifest, i.e., prakrti in its “evolv- 
ed’? or emergent states) 24, 25, 27, 
66, 68, 69, 73, 78, 79, 86, 119, 152, 
172, 183, 196, 197, 213, 236, 250-51, 
275-76, 292, 293, 303, 307, 324, 343, 
351, 372, 373, 391, 435, 452, 468, 470, 
493, 514, 469. See also prakrtt 

vydna (diffuse-breath). See paiicavayu 

vyapti (logical pervasion) 121 

Vyasa or Vedavyasa 7, 12, 13, 16, 118, 
119, 122, 127, 138, 139, 146, 225, 289, 
316, 412, 487, 512, 515, 517, 518, 646n 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


walking, motion (pada)./See karmendriya 

water (ap or ap). See mahabhita 

wind (vdyu). See mahabhiita 

Wittgenstein, L. 47, 627n 

word and meaning, problem of (Sabdartha) 
360-61, 362, 363, 366, 483, 505 


Yajhtavalkya 7 

yama (external restraint). See yoganga 

yati (wandering ascetic) 4 

yoga (apparent contact, one of the ten 
mitlikartha) 93. See also mitlikartha 

Yoga, as system of philosophy 9, 12, 
27-29, 43, 84, 92, 165-66, 363, 377 

“yoga,” the term 5, 6, 28, 115 

yoganga (components or “limbs” in the 
practice of Yoga; eight in number: 
external restraint, internal restraint, 
posture, restraint of breath, withdrawal 
of sense capacities, focussed concent- 
ration, meditation, altered states of 
awareness; yama, niyama, asana, pranay- 
ama, pratyahara, dharand, dhyana, samadhi) 
29, 540 

Yogasérasamgraha (of Vijfianabhiksu) 16, 
376, 412 

Yogasiitra (compiled by Patafijali) 11, 13, 
15, 18-19, 22-23, 27-29, 40, 48, 165-66, 
395, 412, 487, 517 

Yogasiitrabhasya (of Vyasa) 12, 13, 16, 
18, 22-23, 27-29, 40, 108, 117, 118, 
119, 122, 127, 138, 139, 146, 166, M25, 
289, 412, 487, 512, 515, 517, 518 

Yogasiitrabhasyavivarana (attributed to 
Samkara) 16, 18, 22, 271, 289, 626n 

Yogavarttika (of Vijfianabhiksu) 16, 376, 
412, 487 

yukti_ (methodological device). See tantra- 
pukti 

Yuktidipika 4, 9, 12, 15, 18-19, 20-22, 
33, 45, 46, 48, 51, 55, 57, 59, 60, 64, 
65, 71, 80, 85, 90, 92, 97, 98, 99, 107, 
108, 118, 122, 125, 127, 129, 130, 134, 
135, 136-38, 142, 143-44, 149, 150, 
193, 227-269, 271, 315, 316, 318, 321, 
322, 446, 487, 646,47n 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Samkhya : a dualist tradition in Indian philosophy. 


(Encyclopedia of Indian philosophies ; 4) 

Bibliography: p. 

Includes index. 

1. Sankhya. 2. Sankhya—Bibliography. I. Larson, Gerald James. 
II. Bhattacharya, Ram Shankar, 1926-_ . III. Series: Encyclopedia 
of Indian philosophies (Princeton, N.J.) ; vol. 4. 

Z7129.15E52 1983 vol. 4 818'.4'0321s — 87-16892 
[B 132.83] [181'.41'0321] 
ISBN 0-691-07301-5 (alk. paper) 


