ENCYCLOPEDIA OF 
INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The Philosophy 


of the Grammarians 


HAROLD G. COWARD 
and 
K. KUNJUNNI RAJA 


PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Princeton, New Jersey 


Copyright © 1990 by Princeton University Press 
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, 
Princeton, New Jersey 08540 
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, Oxford 


All Rights Reserved 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 


The Philosophy of the Grammarians / edited by Harold G. Coward 
and K. Kunjunni Raja. 
p. cm.—(Encyclopedia of Indian philosophies ; v. 5) 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-691-07331-7 (alk. paper) 
1, Bhartrhari. Vakyapadiya. 2. Panini. Astadhyayi. 
3. Patafijali. Mahabhasya. 4. Sanskrit language—Philasqnhv 
5. Sanskrit language—Grammar—History. 6. Indo-Aryan lan- 
guages—Grammar—History. 7. Sanskritists—India. 1. Coward, 
Harold G. 
Il. Kunjunni Raja, K. ILI. Series: Encyclopedia of Indian 
philosophies (Princeton, N.J.) ; vol. 5. 


PK475.P48 1990 181'.4—dc20 90-47434 CIP 


This book was composed in India by Jainendra Prakash Jain 
at Shri Jainendra Press, New Delhi 


Princeton University Press books are printed on acid-free paper, 
and meet the guidelines for permanence and durability of the 
Committee on Production Guidelines for Book Longevity of the 
Council on Library Resources 


Printed in the United States of America 
by Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey 


109 8 765 43 2 «21 


Contributors : 


Ashok Aklujkar, University of British Columbia 
John G. Arapura, McMaster University 

S. R. Bannerjee, 

8. D. Joshi, University of Poona 

Shoryu Katsura, Hiroshima University 

G. B. Palsule, University of Poona 

Karl H. Potter, University of Washington 

V. K.S. N. Raghavan, University of Madras 
K. A. Subramania Iyer, Lucknow University 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE 


PART ONE : 
INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF 
THE GRAMMARIANS 


(Harold G. Coward and K. Kunjunni Raja) 


1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 


Historical Résumé 
Metaphysics 
Epistemology 
Word Meaning 
Sentence Meaning 


PART TWO : 
SURVEY OF THE LITERATURE OF 
GRAMMARIAN PHILOSOPHY 


1. 


2. 


Qn 


Philosophical Elements in Vedic Literature 
(John G. Arapura and K. Kunjunni Raja) 
Philosophical Elements in Yaska’s Nirukta 
(K. Kunjunni Raja) 


. Philosophical Elements in Panini’s Astddhyayi 


(KR. Kunjunni Raja) 


. Philosophical Elements in Patafijali’s Mahdbhdésya 


(K. Kunjunni Raja) 


. Bhartrhari 


Trikandi or Vakyapadiya, with Vrtti on Books 1 and 2 
(Ashok Aklujkar) 
Tika on Patafijali’s Mahdbhasya (K. Kunjunni Raja) 


. Durvinita or Avinita 
. Dharmapala 
. Hari Vrsabha or Vrsabhadeva 


(Ashok Aklujkar) 


. Mandana Miéra 


Sphotasiddht (G. B. Palsule, Harold G. Coward, and 
Karl H. Potter) 


xi 


33 
51 
63 
83 


101 


107 


115 


121 


175 
177 
179 


181 


VL 


10. 


ll. 
12. 
13. 


14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 


38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42, 
43. 


GONTENTS 


Helaraja 
Commentary on Bhartrhari’s Trikdndi 
(&. Kunjunni Raja) 

Prameyasamgraha 

Punyaraja 

Kaiyata 
Pradipa on Patafijali’s Mahdbhasya (S. R. Bannerjee 
and K. Kunjunni Raja) 

Jyesthakalasa 

Maitreya Raksita 

Purusottamadeva 

Dhanegvara 

(Rsiputra) Paramegvara II 
Sphotasiddhigopalika (K.A. Subramania Iyer) 


. Sega Krsna 


Sphotatativaniriipana (G. B. Palsule) 


. Satyananda or Ramacandra Sarasvati 
. Sesa Cintamani 

. Sesa Viregvara or Ramegvara 

. Sesa Narayana Bhatta 

. Visnumitra 

. Igvarananda or [évaridatta Sarasvati 
. Bharata Misra 


Sphotasiddhi (G. B. Paisule) 


. Sphotasiddhinydyavicara (G. B. Palsule) 
. Annambhatta 

. Appayya Diksita I 

. Bhattoji Diksita 


Sabdakaustubha 


. Sesa Visnu 

. Sivaramendra Sarasvati 

. (Sesa) Cakrapani (Datta) 

. Mallaya Yajvan 

. Nilakantha Sukla 

. Narayana (Sastrin) 

. Konda (or Kaunda) Bhatta 


Vaiyakaranabhisana and Vaiyékaranabhisanasdra 
(S. DD, Foshi) 
Taraka Brahmananda Sarasvati 
Cokkanatha or Sokanatha Diksita 
Tirumala Yajvan 
(Rama) Narayana (Sarman) (Vandyopadhyaya) 
Sadafgiva 
Hari Diksita 


193 


199 
201 
203 


205 
207 
209 
211 
213 


215 


219 
221 
223 
225 
227 
229 
231 


235 
237 
239 
241 


243 
245 
247 
249 
251 
253 
255 


309 
311 
313 
315 
317 
319 


CONTENTS 


44. 


45. 


46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 


K 


51. 
52. 
53. 
54. 


Ramabhadra Diksita 
Saddarsinisiddhanta samgraha (Vyakarana Section) 
(K. Kunjunni Raja) 
Sabdabhedaniriipana (K. Kunjunni Raja) 

NageSa (or Nagoji) Bhatta 
Paramalaghumanjisa (K. Kunjunni Raja) 
Mahdabhasyapradipoddyota (V. K. S. N. Raghavan) 
Sphotavada (K. Kunjunni Raja) 

Jfianendra Sarasvati 

Gop4lakrsna Sastrin 

Dharanidhara 

Vaidyanatha Payagunda 

Satyapriya Tirtha Svamin 

Jayakrsna Maunin 

Harivallabha 

Vasudeva Diksita 

Srikrsna Bhatta Maunin 
Sphotacandrika (G. B. Palsule) 


. Umamahefvara or Abhinava Kalidasa 
. Nilakantha Diksita 

. Agadhara Bhatta 

. Ramasevaka 

. Indradatta Upadhyaya 

. Krsnamitracarya or Durbalacarya 

. Haribhatta 

. Dharanidhara (II) 

. Mannudeva or Manyudeva or Gopaladeva 
. Bhairava Misra 

. Kumara Tataya 

. Satara Raghavendracarya (Gajendragadkar ) 
. Gangadhara Kaviraja 

. Taranatha Tarkavacaspati 

. Khuddi Jha (Sarman) 

. NityAananda Panta Parvatiya 

. Dravyesa Jha 

. Siryanarayana Sukla 

. Gopala Sastri Nene 

. P.S. Anantandrayana Sastri 

. Brahmadeva 

. V. Krsnamacarya 

. Sadasiva Sastri (Sarman) 

. Bala Krsna Paficoli 

. Rama Prasada Tripathi 

. Rudradhara Jha Sarman 


ix 


321 


323 


351 
333 
355 
357 
359 
361 
363 
365 
367 


371 
373 
375 
377 
379 
381 
383 
385 
387 
389 
39] 
393 
395 
397 
399 
401 
403 
405 
407 
409 
411 
413 
415 
417 
419 
421 


81. 
82. 
83. 
84, 
85. 


Kalika Prasada Sukla 
Sabhapati Sarman Upadhyaya 
Raghunatha Sarman 
Satyakama Varma 

Ramajiia Pandeya 


BIBLIOGRAPHY ON GRAMMAR 
(Vyakarana) (Karl H. Potter) 


Part 1 : Authors Whose Dates Are (More or Less) 


Known 


Part 2 : Authors and Works Whose Dates Are 


Unknown 


Part 3 : Secondary Literature on Vydékarana 


NOTES 


CUMULATIVE INDEX 


CONTENTS 


423 
425 
427 
429 
431 


433 


439 


517 


549 
563 


PREFACE 


This volume, the fifth in the Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, is devoted 
to the philosophy of the Grammarians. The introductory essay is 
intended to set their schcol in its context and to summarize the main 
Grammarian teachings. The summaries of primary sources that follow 
the introduction aim at making available the substance of the main 
philosophical ideas contained in these works, so that philosophers 
who are unable to read the original Sanskrit and who find difficulty 
in understanding and finding their way about in the translations (where 
such exist) can get an idea of the positions taken and arguments offered. 
The summaries, then, are intended primarily for philosophers and only 
secondarily for indologists. Certain sections of the works have been 
omitted or treated sketchily because they are repetitions or deemed less 
interesting for philosophers, though they may be of great interest to 
Sanskritists. The summaries are not likely to make interesting consecu- 
tive reading: they are provided in the spirit of a reference work. The 
appendix, which contains a lengthy bibliography of original and 
secondary writings on the philosophy of Grammar, is also presented as 
an aid to research. 

References in the foetnotes such as ‘““G273” are to the bibliography 
presented in the appendix. References such as “RB10337” are to the 
first volume of this encyclopedia, 2nd edition (1984). Abbreviations 
used are listed at the beginning of the appendix. 

Preparation of this volume has been made possible by grants from the 
American Institute of Indian Studies and the University of Calgary. 
These grants made possible the obtaining of the summaries and funded 
the travel that the editorial work required. The editors wish to thank 
Pradip R. Mehendiratta for his good offices. A debt of gratitude is also 
owed. to the late Professor T. R. V. Murti, who gave generously of his 
time in working with Harold Coward in the volume’s planning stages. 
A research followship awarded to K. Kunjunni Raja by the Calgary 
Institute for the Humanities enabled the two editors to work together in 
completing the project. Special gratitude is due to Karl H. Potter, editor 
of the Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, for his many contributions, 
which have added greatly to the value of this volume. 


1987 HAROLD G. COWARD 
K. KUNJUNNI RAJA 


PART ONE 


INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY 
OF THE GRAMMARIANS 


HISTORICAL RESUME 


1. THe PLace or LANGUAGE IN INDIAN PHILOSOPHY 


Language has been one of the fundamental concerns of Indian 
philosophy and has attracted the serious attention of all thinkers from 
the outset. In India the study of language has never been the monopoly 
of the Grammarians or the Rhetoricians. All schools of thought began 
their philosophical discussions from the fundamental problem of 
communication. The poet-philosophers of the Rg Veda were greatly 
concerned with the powers and limitations of language as a means of 
communicating their mystic, personal experiences of an ecstatic nature 
to their fellows and they tried to stretch the power of language by 
various means. They praised language as a powerful and benign deity 
(vdc), ever ready to bestow favors on hér devotees. The entire creation 
of the world. was attributed by some sages to divine language, and it 
was generally recognized that the ordinary speech of mortals was only 
a fraction of that language. 

Among the six accessories to the study of the Vedas (Veddigas) two 
are directly concerned with language: grammar (oydkarapa), or 
linguistic analysis, and etymology (nirukta), or interpretation of the 
meanings of selected words in the Vedas through etymological methods. 
Another accessory, metrics (chandas), is concerned with prosody. 

Among the systems of Indian philosophy (darfana), Pirvamimamsa 
is called vakyasastra or the science of sentence interpretation, and the 
Nyaya system was also intrinsically language oriented. The Buddhist 
and Jain schools of thought have also devoted considerable attention to 
the working of language. Grammar and literary criticism (sdhitya) 
are directly interested in language problems, including semantic and 
philosophical issues, and Grammarians have claimed the status of an 
independent darfana for themselves. 

The Indian approach to the study of language and linguistic prob- 


4 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


lems has been characterized by both analysis and synthesis, On the 
one hand, a systematic attempt was made to analyze speech utterance 
in terms of sentences and words, stems and suffixes, morphemes and 
phonemes. The verbal root was considered as the core element to 
which preverbs, primary suffixes, and secondary suffixes, as well as 
nominal or verbal terminations, were added to evolve the word. On the 
other hand, rules of coalescence (samdhi) between these various elements 
and between words in a compound word or a sentence were studied and 
systematized. Rules of syntax were also studied carefully and attempts 
made to identify the cementing factors helping to form an integral unit. 

The analytical method was older and more popular. The Sanskrit 
term for grammar, vydkarana, means literally “linguistic analysis’’. 
Kumiarila Bhatta, in the beginning of the seventh century, said that 
“we cannot think of any point of tizne totally devoid of some work or 
other dealing with the grammatical rules treating of the different 
kinds of roots and suffixes.”! Sakalya’s Padapatha of the Rg Veda was 
one of the early attempts in the direction of analysis; he broke down 
the samhifd text of the Rg Veda into words, identifying even the 
separate elements of compound words. The Brhaddevata, attributed to 
Saunaka, says that a sentence is made up of words, and words are 
made up of phonemes (varna).2 Panini, who flourished about the 
fifth century B.C., brought the descriptive grammar of the Sanskrit 
language to its highest perfection in his Asftédhydyi, which has been 
praised by Leonard Bloomfield, the father of modern linguistics, as 
“the greatest monument of human intelligence.’? Panini’s primary 
concern was the building up of Sanskrit words, both Vedic and classical, 
from verbal roots, preverbs, primary and secondary suffixes, and 
nominal and verbal terminations; but he was also interested in 
syntactic problems involved in the formation of compound words 
and the relationship of the nouns in a sentence with the action 
indicated by the verb. Panini did not neglect meaning, but he was 
aware of the fact that meaning was likely to change over time and 
that the final authorities regarding meaning are the people who speak 
the language. 

It was the etymological school of Yaska, author of the WNirukta 
commentary on the Nighanju list of select words in Vedic literature, 
that undertook a semantic analysis of words with their components in 
order to explain their meanings in the contexts of their occurrence. 
This school generally subscribed to the view that nouns are derived 
from verbal roots. The Unddisiitras follow this view and attempt to 
find derivations for even apparently integral words. 

Mimamsa, called vdkyaSdstra, was mainly concerned with the me- 
thodology of textual interpretation in order to give a cogent explana- 
tion of prescriptive scriptural texts. It had to deal with apparent 


t é 
HISTORIGAL RESUME 5 


absurdities, inconsistencies, and contradictions, besides ambiguities, 
and evolved rules of interpretation that were accepted generally by all 
schools of thought and were used freely in legal practice and in 
commentaries. The Mimamsakas used both analysis and synthesis in 
their approach to textual problems. They gave a semantic definition 
of the sentence, evolving the concepts of mutual expectancy (dkdiks@), 
consistency (yogyat@), and contiguity (dsatti) as factors necessary for 
the existence of a sentence. It was the Mimamsa school that developed 
the theory of metaphor to explain the apparent absurdities and in- 
consistencies in Vedic texts. 

The Nyaya school, mainly interested in the theory of knowledge and 
the truth or falsity of judgments, had to be concerned with the theory 
of meaning, because understanding the proposition was a primary 
requirement for making any significant study about it. 

The literary critics who were concerned with the understanding and 
appreciation of literature were very much interested in the stylistic 
analysis of language and in finding out the deviance of literary language 
from ordinary language, in order to see how far poets have been able to 
communicate their vision of beauty and emotional experience through 
the medium of words. 

It is clear that for centuries the various schools of thought in India 
have carried out studies that have produced insights into the working of 
language. The Grammarians’ interest was not confined to the description 
and analysis of a particular language, but extended to the true nature 
and potentialities of language, including its role in effecting liberation. 


2. Tue Basic PROBLEMS OF PHILosopHy OF LANGUAGE 


A, Linguistic Elements 


One of the fundamental problems discussed is the relation between 
the linguistic elements (fabda) and their meanings (artha). The term 
fabda is normally used by the Grammarians to refer to a linguistic 
element, a meaningful unit of speech.‘ Patafijali’s definition is that 
fabda is that which, when articulated, is seen to convey the idea of the 
referent. Mandana Misra defines it in his Sphotasiddhi as the cause that 
produces the idea of its meaning. In any case, it is the meaning bearer. 
In ordinary parlance people may use the word fabda to mean sound, 
as pointed out by Patafijali himself, but for the Grammarian itis the 
meaning-bearing unit. 

Is it the articulated sound, or the phoneme (vara), or the word 
(pada), or the sentence (vdkya) that is referred to by the term fabda? 
According to the sphota theory of Bhartrhari it is the complete utterance 
of the sentence that is the unit, and it is called vakyasphofa; but ata 


6 ENCGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


lower analytical level the word can be considered as the unit, for which 
the term padasphota is used by the Grammarian. Those who know the 
language very well think and speak in units of sentences and also hear 
whole sentences. It is only those who do not know the language 
properly who hear words or phonemes or bits of sounds and have to 
struggle with them to get the connected sentence meaning. But in 
grammatical texts the words are taken as the unit for the sake of easy 
understanding. 

This view is not acceptable to the Mimamsakas, who consider the 
letter (permanent articulated sound-unit) or phoneme (varra) to be 
the fabda or unit of language and the meaning bearer. They assume 
phonemes to be permanent and each utterance to be their realization. 
To the Naiyayikas fabda means sound produced by the speaker and 
heard by the listener, and it is impermanent; pada means a mor- 
pheme (meaningful unit). 


B. Meaning (Artha) 


What is meant by aritha or meaning? Is it the universal that is 
intended, or the particular? According to Katyayana and Patafijali, 
two different positions were held by two ancient Grammarians, 
Vyadi and Vajapyayana, the former holding that words refer to dravya, 
“substance” or “individual”, and the latter holding that words 
(including proper names) refer to jati, “universal” or ‘“‘attribute’’. 
Panini seems to have left the question open, holding that words could 
refer to individuals or to the universals. The Mimamsakas held that 
the primary meaning of a word is the universal and the sense of the 
particular in a sentence is obtained either through secondary signifi- 
cative power (according to Bhatta Mimamsakas) or through both the 
universal and the particular being grasped by the same perceptive 
effort simultaneously (according to the Prabhakaras). The early 
Naiyayikas considered the meaning of words as comprising universal 
(jati), configuration (dkyti), and particular ;° later Naiyayikas held that 
the primary meaning of words is the individual as qualified by the 
universal (jativisistavyakti). The Buddhists of Dignaga’s school held that 
the meaning is vikalpa, a mental construct that has no direct correspon- 
dence with the real, its nature being to exclude other things (anyapoha). 
The function of a word or a name is the exclusion of other possibilities. 


CG. Significative Power (Sakti) 

The significative power of words (Sakti) is based on the relation 
that exists between a word and its meaning. The Grammarians 
hold that in the case of ordinary words in everyday speech it is 
permanent; but in the case of technical terms it is based on the conven- 
tion. The Mimamsakas consider the relation as “‘original’’ (autpattika), 


t ¢ 
HISTORIGAL RESUME 7 


that is, as permanent or eternal. The Grammarians explain this perma- 
nencein two ways: pravdhanityata and yogyatdnityata. We learn language 
from our elders; they in turn learned it from their forefathers; thus 
it could be traced back to any conceivable period of human society. 
This type of permanence is pravahanityaté. The other view is based on the 
innate capacity of words to express any meaning; this capacity (yogyatd) 
is restricted by convention. Patafijali made a distinction between 
absolute eternality (kifasthanityata), by which an item is not liable to 
any modification, and the perennial nature as used through generations 
of speakers (fravdhanityata). 


D. Polysemy 


It is generally believed that in an ideal language a word must have 
only one meaning, and a sense must have only one word to express it. 
This binary relationship between a word and its meaning is accepted 
in principle by all schools of thought. It is also believed that this 
relationship, which is the basis for the significative power of words, 
is stable and constant because linguistic communication would be 
impossible without it. If there is no general understanding of the 
meaning of words shared by the speaker and listener there will be 
chaos and mutual comprehension will be jeopardized. 

The existence of polysemy is recognized in actual practice, however. 
Two words may have the same form, and the same word may develop 
more than one meaning. The problem of homophones and homonyms 
has been discussed by scholars like Bhartrhari. Yaska’s discussion 
about the principle of word derivation in Sanskrit also sheds consider- 
able light on the problem of synonyms. Nouns are normally derived 
from verbal roots. If all nouns are so derived from verbal roots denoting 
action, every object will have as many names as the actions with which 
it is associated, and by the same token each noun could be applied to 
as many objects as are associated with that action indicated by that 
verbal root. Yaska’s answer to the problem is that there are no restric- 
tions. Language designates things in an incomplete manner; it can 
choose only one of the many activities associated with an object. Hence 
there is some sort of permanent relation between a word and its 
meaning. 

It is accepted that even the primary meaning of a word is not 
definitely circumscribed and that the boundaries of the meaning 
often change on the basis of contextual factors, not only in the case of 
ambiguous words but even in that of ordinary words: thus “man is 
mortal” does not mean “‘woman is immortal”; but in the phrase ““man 
and woman’’, ‘‘man” does not include “woman”. When there is 
conflict between the correct etymological meaning and the popular 
usage, the meaning current in popular usage among the educated 


8 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


elite is to be accepted. Grammatical analysis and etymological inter- 
pretations are only means of approach; the final authority is the 
popular usage of the cultured. 


E. Secondary Meaning (Laksané@) 


Even though it is accepted that every word has a primary stable 
meaning core, in actual practice shifts in meaning, metaphoric transfers, 
and secondary usages are quite common. If there is discrepancy in 
sense when the primary meaning is taken, the passage will have to be 
explained by resorting to the secondary meaning. There are three 
conditions considered necessary for resorting to secondary meaning. The 
first, is inconsistency or incongruity of the words taken in the literal 
sense. A sentence like “He is an ass” or “He is a firebrand” cannot 
be taken in the literal sense because the human being referred to 
cannot be an animal or an inanimate object. A sentence like “The 
house is in the river” does not make sense, because a house cannot 
exist in the river. In such cases the primary meaning of the word has 
to be given up and another meaning used. Thesecond condition is that 
the actual meaning and the primary meaning must be related in some 
way; it may be on the basis of similarity or common quality or it may 
be on the basis of some other relationship like proximity. The example 
‘He is an ass” can be explained if the term “‘ass” is interpreted as 
“a fool’? (as the donkey is notorious for its dullness). The example 
of the house on the river has to be explained by taking “‘river’? to mean 
the bank of the river on the basis of proximity. The third condition for 
resorting to secondary significance is either sanction by popular 
usage, as in the case of faded metaphors, or a special purpose for which 
it is resorted to, as in the case of intentional metaphors. The inconsistency 
of primary meaning can mean impossibility of syntactic connection 
from the point of view of meaning, or it can mean inconsistency in the 
context. Asan example, in “see that crows do not spoil the curd” 
“crows” implies ali beings, including a-dog, who might spoil it. 

Literary critics like Anandavardhana proposed the element of 
purpose in intentional metaphors and pointed out its importance in 
enriching literature’s content. 


F. Conditions for Syntactic Relation 

How can we get a connected meaning from a sentence if each word 
gives only its isolated sense, which is of a universal nature? This problem 
has been discussed in India since ancient times, and three main factors 
have been pointed out as unifying of sentence meaning: expectancy 
(akanks@), consistency (yogyata), and contiguity (dsatti). Words in a 
sentence must have mutual expectancy. Panini hinted as much when 
he stressed the need for sdmarthya or capacity among the meanings of 


¢ t 
HISTORIGAL RESUME 9 


words for mutual connection, mainly in compound words.® This 
sdmarthya has been interpreted as similar to dkdnks@ or mutual expec- 
tancy and unity of sense. Later the Mimamsakas developed this concept, 
and the logicians made further modifications. Mutual expectancy 
consists in a word being unable to convey a complete sense in the 
absence of another word. Literally it is the desire on the part of the 
listeners to know the other words in the sentence in order to complete 
the sense. A word is said to have expectancy for another if it cannot, 
without the latter, produce knowledge of its interconnection in an 
utterance. The Mimamsakas were more interested in psychological 
expectancy, while the logicians and the Grammarians stressed the 
need for syntactic expectancy. 

To this primary condition were added two more, yogyaté or consis- 
tency of sense and Gsatti or the contiguity of the words. Grammarians 
did not emphasize the importance of yogyaid for to them it is enough 
for a sentence to give a syntactically connected meaning. Its veracity 
is not a condition. From the Grammarian’s point of view laksand, 
secondary meaning, is also of little interest. ““He is a boy” and “He is 
an ass” are equally valid for them. Even empty phrases like “‘the child 
of a barren woman” are linguistically valid to them, for Grammarians 
are not concerned with the real existence of the thing meant by an 
expression. Yogyaté involves a judgment on the sense or nonsense of a 
sentence. There is difference of opinion about whether it should be 
taken as a positive condition. If the lack of yogyat@—inconsistency—is 
only apparent and can be explained away by resorting to the meta- 
phorical meaning of a word in the sentence, there is no difficulty in 
understanding the sehtence’s meaning. 

Asatti or contiguity is the uninterrupted utterance or the unbroken 
apprehension of the words in a sentence. In the case of elliptical 
sentences, one school believes that the syntactic relation is known by 
supplying the necessary meaning, while another school insists that the 
missing words have to be supplied and the meaning obtained. Some 
take tdiparya, the intention of the speaker known from contextual 
factors, as a fourth condition for understanding the meaning of a 
sentence. 


G. Sentence Meaning 


Regarding the comprehension of the sentence meaning there are 
two main theories, called anvitibhidhdna and abhihitanvaya. Speech is 
purposive in nature. People use words with the intention of conveying 
a connected, unified sense. Hence from the use of words in juxtaposition 
it is assumed that the speaker has uttered them with the intention 
of conveying a connected sense. Expectancy, consistency, and conti- 
guity help in this comprehension of a unified sentence meaning. The 


10 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sentence meaning is something more than the sum of the word mean- 
ings. Besides the word meanings, the syntactic connection of the word 
meanings has to be conveyed. The abhihitanvaya theory says that in a 
sentence each word gives out its individual isolated meaning (which is 
universal) and their significative power is exhausted with that. Then 
with the help of laksana (secondary significative power) the syntactic 
relationship is obtained, and thus the sentence meaning is understood. 
According to the anvitabhidhdna school, by contrast, each word in a 
sentence conveys not only its isolated meaning but also the syntactic 
element. The words convey the meaning of the universal and simultan- 
eously the meaning as referring to the particular. The words them- 
selves also give the syntactic relationship. Thus the entire sentence 
meaning is conveyed by the words themselves. The Naiyayikas, who 
believe that the words in a sentence denote primary meanings that are 
particulars as qualified by universal traits, contend that the sentence 
meaning is an association of the word meanings (samsargamaryada). 


H. Sphota Theory 


Even in ancient India there were some scholars who emphasized 
the unreal nature of words and advocated the need for taking the 
sentence as a whole. In the Nirukta Yaska refers to Audumbarayana’s 
theory that it is the statement as a whole that is regularly present in 
the perceptive faculty of the hearer.” The sphota theory, fully promulgat- 
ed by Bhartrhari in the fifth century of the Christian era, is one of the 
most important contributions of India to the problem of meaning. 
He insisted that the fundamental linguistic fact is the complete utterance 
or sentence. Just as a letter or a phoneme has no parts, so also 
the word and the sentence are to be taken as complete integral units, 
not as made up of smaller elements. Bhartrhari says that although 
linguistic analysis—splitting sentences into words and further into 
roots and suffixes and into phonemes—may be a useful means for 
studying language, it has no reality. In a speech situation, communica- 
tion is always through complete utterances. The speaker thinks and 
the listener understands the utterance as a single unit. It is only those 
who do not know the language thoroughly who analyze it into words, 
and further bits, in order to get a connected meaning. Those who know 
the language will conceive the idea and the expression as a single 
unit and express it; and the listener likewise comprehends it as a whole, 
the understanding is as an instantaneous flash of insight (pratibha). 
The fact that the expression has to be through the medium of phonemes, 
through a temporal or spatial series, does not warrant our considering 
it as made up of parts. When a painter conceives a picture in his 
mind and paints it on a canvas, he may use various colors, and make 
various strokes; that does not mean that the picture is not a unit. And 


é a 
HISTORIGAL RESUME 11 


we see the picture as a unit, not as different colors and strokes. Just as 
the meaning is unitary, integral, and indivisible, the symbol that 
signifies it must also be unitary and indivisible. This concept is called 
Sphota—the sentence taken as an integral symbol, in which its apparent 
parts are irrelevant to it as parts. It is not something hypothetically 
assumed. to explain language behavior; it is actually experienced and 
known through perception. On hearing a sentence those who know 
the language well hear the sentence, not the phonemes or sound bits 
or even words. Those who do not know the language may hear only 
the sound bits. The sphota theory says that hearing the whole sentence 
is the real experience, while the apparent experience of hearing the 
sound. bits is only for those who do not know the language. 


I. Componential Analysis of Word Meaning 


It may be noted that even the so-called unity of meaning is often 
an illusion, for it is the language that makes the unity. Yaska in the 
fifth century B.C. and, following him, Bhartrhari in the fifth century 
of the Christian era have pointed out that a verb conveys a series of 
operations or activities taking place in a particular temporal sequence. 
Thus the word ‘‘cooks” conveys the idea of a series of activities— 
preparing the fire, putting the vessel on it, pouring water in the vessel, 
washing the rice, putting it in the water, blowing the fire to make it 
burn properly, putting out the fire, removing the excess water, and 
so on. It is the word ‘‘cooks’’ that collects all of these activities into a 
unitary, integral action. Each of these activities can be further analyzed 
into a series of activities taking place in time. 

Later philosophers of language made further componential analysis 
of words from the semantic point of view and declared that every 
verbal root (dhdtu) involved two semantic factors, activity (vyapara) 
and goal or result (pkala). The verb “he cooks” means an activity 
directed toward the softening of the rice, and so forth. There is a 
difference of opinion about whether both are primary meanings of the 
verbal root or one can be taken as the main meaning and the other as 
subsidiary. The verb was divided into the root and the suffix, and 
separate meaning bits assigned to them. Mandana Misra said that 
the meaning of the root is the result, and it is the suffix that indicates 
the activity. With the addition of preverbs the meaning changes 
considerably in Sanskrit, and there have been discussions of whether 
all the meanings are present in a latent form in the root, to be revealed 
by the preverbs, or these preverbs can be assigned specific meanings. 


J. Suggestion (ayafijand) 
The theory of literal (primary) and metaphoric (secondary) mean- 
ing developed by the Nyaya and Mimamsa schools of sentence inter- 


12 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


pretation in ancient India was extended farther by Anandavardhana 
in the second half of the ninth century to include emotive and 
other associative meanings under linguistic meaning. He did not attack 
the usual division of speech into words, into stems and suffixes and the 
distinction between the primary and secondary meanings of words. He 
accepted all of these concepts, but in addition he postulated a third 
capability of language, which he called oyafijand or the capacity to 
suggest meaning other than its literal or metaphoric meaning. Ananda- 
vardhana pointed out that this suggestive function of language has a 
vital role to play in literature. 


K. Time 


The concept of time and its divisions were discussed by such Gram- 
marians as Patafijali and Bhartrhari. The division of time into past, 
present, and future has a place in grammar, but the rules of usage given 
are not strictly followed in actual practice. The present tense (laf) is 
used to indicate the entire stretch of time included from the beginning 
of the action till its completion. “He is cooking’? can mean he has 
started cooking and the operations are not yet completed. The present 
need not be momentary. Usages like “‘the mountains are standing” 
and “‘the rivers are flowing” mean that they continue to stand or flow. 

Bhartrhari considers time to be the most important power of Sabda 
Brahman, relatively more independent than other powers, and to be 
responsible for regulating them. The ancient authority Varsayani 
said that becoming (bhdva) has six stages from birth to decay.® 


L. Gender 


Grammatical gender has attracted much speculation because in 
Sanskrit the grammatical gender does not coincide with sex, and words 
referring to the same object may occur in different genders. 


3. Tue LITERATURE ON GRAMMAR 


Grammar (vydékarana) was recognized from the earliest times in 
India as a distinct science, a field of knowledge with its own parameters 
that distinguished it from other sciences such as astronomy (jyotisa), 
architecture (SilpaSdstra), agriculture (krsiféstra), and the like. The 
coverage in this encyclopedia thus presents a peculiar problem somewhat 
different from that faced in dealing with the literature of other philo- 
sophical systems. Whereas in the cases of those other systems the 
‘‘philosophical” literature is confined to that material which relates to 
the overall aim of liberation and those treatises which discuss theoretical 
issues pertinent to that aim in a polemical context, in the case of the 


© 


¢ 
HISTORICAL RESUME 13 


grammatical literature the coverage has been widened to include those 
works which deal with theory of meaning and the related issues discussed 
in the previous section. As a result, the literature that is summarized 
here in the subsequent pages represents a selection from the total corpus 
of vydkarana literature classified as such in India. For that reason it 
seems appropriate to attempt at this point to place the writers treated 
in the body of this volume within the total roster of authors whose 
works constitute the entire corpus of grammatical literature. 

To this end we have provided as an appendix a bibliography of 
vyakarana works and authors that covers what is currently known of the 
literature on grammar in general. Within the confines of this literature 
the present volume provides summaries of some works that are (1) in 
print and (2) especially relevant to the concerns touched on in the 
preceding section. Many of the works that are not summarized do, 
without doubt, bear on these topics. The distinction drawn must seem 
from the standpoint of Indian tradition rather artificial. We can only 
remind our readers that the entire project of this encyclopedia is 
directed toward a readership that comprises in the main those trained 
in philosophy as understood in the western world. The bibliography will 
suggest to such readers the extent of classical writings on grammar in 
general. From these writings we have selected the ones that seem most 
informative concerning matters of general philosophical interest, as 
“philosophy” has been understood for the purpose of this entire 
encyclopedic project. 

The origin of grammar in India, as with so much else, is unclear. 
What is clear is that it was recognized as a field of study from a very 
early time. Panini and Yaska, who must represent a stage of thought 
several centuries prior to the Christian era, both refer to a number of 
grammatical authorities and their views. In some cases the names cited 
by both writers are identical. According to a statement in the 
Brahmanas it was the god Indra who first analyzed a speech utterance 
in terms of its parts.2 Some scholars speak of an “Aindra” school of 
Grammarians in locating the origins of grammar. Patafijali refers to a 
tradition involving the futile attempt of Brhaspati to teach the language 
by enumerating its words and their meanings.!° The earliest historical 
figure who dealt with linguistic study seems to be Sakalya, author of 
the Padapdtha of the Rg Veda, who is mentioned by Panini. According 
to Bhartrhari, the sage Audumbarayana (also mentioned by YAaska), 
together with Varttaksa, seems to have held views similar to the 
sphofa theory. A late tradition makes Sphotayana, mentioned by 
Panini, the founder of the sphofa theory.12 Sakatayana held the view 
that all words must be derived from verbal roots; some people consider 
him to be the author of the Unddisitras. Gargya and others held the 
view that not all nouns can be traced to verbal roots. But no authenticat- 


14 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ed works of any of these pre-Paninian writers have come down to 
us, and it is difficult if not impossible to say which, if any, of Panini’s 
rules may have been taken from his predecessors. 

Yaska and Panini are the two great early writers on language. 
They belong to a period several centuries before Christ, possibly 
the fifth century. Yaska is generally considered to be earlier than Panini, 
but Paul Thieme holds that Yaska knew Panini.® George Cardona 
thinks it wise to leave the problem open." The two writers are classified 
into different genres of literature by the Indian tradition. Yaska’s 
Nirukia provides the name for a discipline of etymology counted as 
separate from grammar (vydékarana), the discipline for which Panini 
stands as the major seminal figure. (The bibliography appended to 
this volume confines itself to works classed in the latter discipline.) 


A. Panini’s Astddhyayi 

Panini’s basic work is merely titled “The Eight-Chaptered”’ 
(Astdédhyayt). But a very remarkable work it is, providing a model for 
recent and contemporary work in descriptive linguistics that can stand 
with the best efforts of modern analysts. The eight chapters constitute 
a complete descriptive analytical grammar of the Sanskrit language, 
comprising about four thousand rules called siiras preceded by a list of 
sounds divided into fourteen groups, which are called the fiva—, pratya- 
hara-, or maheSvara-sitras. In these rules the language is analyzed into 
verbal and nominal bases, so that the bases have come to be cataloged 
in two lists known as dhdtupatha—the exhaustive lists of primitive 
verbal roots—and ganapatha—the selective lists of nouns, verbs, and so 
on for application in his rules. It is not clear whether one person wrote 
all these different components of the fundamental Paninian corpus. A 
further feature of Panini’s method is a set of metarules of paribhdsas, 
which tell usin which order toapply the rules, where exceptions are to 
be made, and so forth. All of these components are, in any case, made 
the subject of a grand commentarial tradition extending to the present. 

Certain additional materials are ascribed to Panini by the tradition, 
though scholarship is less agreed on the authenticity of these ascriptions. 
Among them, one group of séiras, the Unddisiitras, provides rules for 
introducing affixes after verbal roots to derive nominal bases. The 
authorship of these Unddisitras is frequently attributed to Sakatayana 
instead of Panini; and some scholars have found them to date from a 
later period. It is likely that there is truth in all of these views, in other 
words, that the sitras represent a development of analysis over a long 
period. 

A second set of ancillary sétras are the Phitsitras, which provide 
principles of accentuation. A feature of these rules is that accents are 
presupposed for nominal bases, from which the rules derive revisions 


f 
HISTORIGAL RESUME 15 


of accentuation for the wholes of which those bases form a part. Because 
Panini’s rules contain none specifying accents for nominal bases, 
Cardona reports that “‘it is clear that the phifsiitras cannot be attributed 
to Panini.”’* In fact, they are traditionally ascribed to Santanava, a 
rather later writer. Still, there are scholars who believe the Phitsétras 
date from a pre-Paninian period. 

The Litgdnusasana rules concern gender ; they dictate how todetermine 
the gender of linguistic items based on their structure and meaning. 
Although some scholars believe that this set of rules antedates Panini 
and was known to him, Panini in fact had his own rules governing 
gender, which in some respects complement and in others contradict 
the rules in the LingdnuSdsana. 

There are also two texts dealing with phonetics called Pdapiniyastksa, 
one of which has regularly been attributed to Panini. It seems unlikely 
that either of them is by Panini himself.1¢ 

Panini’s system is remarkable in several respects. It purports to 
derive all the forms of the Sanskrit language that correspond to correct 
usage from operations on two kinds of primitives—affixes (pratyaya) 
and bases (prakrti). The bases are of two kinds themselves, verbal 
(dhdtu) and nominal (pratipadika). The rules indicate how affixes are 
to be introduced after bases to generate the correct inflected forms of 
the language. They also tell us what compounds can be formed, 
and how to derive, for example, active and passive sentences. Some 
rules tell us under what conditions one form can be substituted for 
another. 

These rules are ordered, though not in a recognizable, systematic 
fashion throughout. In some cases the actual order in which the rules 
are given dictates the order in which they are to be applied. In other 
cases one rule blocks application of another—for example, a particular 
rule governs its own domain and restricts the scope of a more general 
one. There are negative rules (nisedhasiitra), which preclude application, 
as well as definitions (samjfidsittra) and metarules (pfaribhdsa) which 
serve to interpret and fix the scope of the operational rules (vidhisitra). 
Still another type of rule is the extension rule (atidefasitra), which 
extends the scope of a rule beyond its normal bounds. 

The remarkably systematic nature of Panini’s grammar is further 
reflected in Panini’s use of abbreviated expressions—symbols—to 
indicate certain recurrent features, notably syntactic functions such as 
agent, action, and object (known generally as kdrakas). He also 
introduces ‘‘markers’’ (Cardona’s term for it) to provide placeholders 
for certain functions and to form abbreviations (such as a marker X 
followed by a marker M signifies X and all the items following in a 
list up to and including M).2” 


16 ENQGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


B. Varttikakdras 

Inevitably, in such a complex undertaking as P&anini’s system 
provides, there were attempts to criticize and improve on his rules and 
definitions. Within what comes to be known as the Paninian school of 
grammar, comprising those who accept a tradition going back to 
Panini and not to others to be discussed shortly, the first emendation of 
the Asfadhydyi of which we know appears to have come in the form of 
comments (vdrttika) attributed to Katyayana. 

Considerable time must have elapsed between Panini and Katyayana 
because there are sufficient differences in their language to account 
for some of the Varttikas. A similar gap of time has to be assumed 
between Katyayana and Patafijali, author of the Mahabhdsya, so 
Katyayana may be assigned to the third century B.C. Although he is 
nowadays counted as a Paninian, he may have belonged to a different 
school. 

Various other authors of comments on and criticisms of PAnini 
probably lived in this period, and some names are mentioned that 
likely include a number of them, such as Sakatayana, Sakalya, 
Vajapyayana, Vyadi, and Pauskarasadi. We know little about their 
ideas, though a few of Vyadi’s rules are held traditionally to have 
come down to us, and Sakatayana is believed to have been the author 
of the Unddisiitras accepted by Panini. 


C. Patafijali’s Mahabhdsya 

Katyayana’s Varitikas come to us as a part of the “‘great commentary’’ 
(mahabhdsya) on Panini ascribed to Patafijali (who may or may not 
be the same as the author of the Yogasitras). The Mahabhasya takes the 
form of dialogues between student and teachers, some of whose solutions 
to problems are unacceptable, while one provides the final true view 
(siddhanta). Not all of Panini’s rules are discussed, and it is not always 
easy to identify the final view or to differentiate Katyayana’s contri- 
butions from those of Patafijali, not to speak of the possibility of 
subsequent interpolations. Nevertheless, the Mahdbhdsya provides the 
classical interpretation of Panini’s system and is made the subject of 
subsequent commentaries through the centuries until the present time. 
Furthermore, in Patafijali’s work, especially in its introductory passages, 
important philosophical ideas are broached, so that the Mahdbhdsya 
is perhaps the earliest philosophical text of the Grammarians. 


D, Other Schools of Grammar 

For the period between the time of Patafijali (perhaps 150 B.C.) 
and that of Bhartrhari (perhaps fifth century after Christ), scholars 
trace the origins of a number of the other systems of Sanskrit Grammar, 


e t 
HISTORICAL RESUME 17 


including the Digambara school of Jainendra and the Buddhist Candra 
school, as well as the Katantra tradition. 

The Katantrasittras are traditionally ascribed. to Sarvavarman, who is 
dated by Shripad Krishna Belvalkar without much evidence as having 
flourished in the first century of the Christian era. The evidence, such 
as it is, is that Durgasimha, a commentator on these siitras who must 
have lived around or before A.D. 800, had a text of the sétras that had 
already undergone considerable transformation or had possibly been 
lost, as there is a quite distinct version of them current in Kashmir by 
approximately the same time. The origins of Katantra seem to have 
come out of a felt desire for a more popular and easier grammar than 
Panini’s formidable system provides. It has spawned a fairly consistent 
line of commentators lasting until the present time. 

In keeping with the motivations to brevity and simplicity, the 
Katantrasiitras return to the older method of ordering the syllables (as 
found in the Pratisakhyas), arrange discussions of things more naturally 
(similarly to the arrangement later adopted within the Paninian 
tradition by Bhattoji Diksita in his Siddhdntakaumudi), and omit many of 
the most difficult rules prescribed by Panini. The result is a work of 
about fourteen hundred sééras only, in contrast to Panini’s four thousand. 

As is well known, the Jains were divided froman early period into 
the Digambara and Svetambara traditions. Each developed its own 
literature, and not surprisingly each developed its peculiar grammatical 
tradition. 

The Digambara tradition goes back to the Fainendravyakarana, which 
the Jains attribute to Mahavira, the Jina (founder of Jainism), who 
answers questions put to him by Indra, but which is a work that 
appears to have been composed about A.D. 500 by Pijyapada or Deva- 
nandin, who is also known as the author of certain fundamental philos- 
ophical works (see the first volume of this encyclopedia [2d ed. p. 99] ). 

According to Belvalkar the Jainendra grammar is 2 condensation of 
Panini and the vérttizkas, a condensation accomplished by the use of 
short technical terms that make study of the work very complicated. 
This difficulty may account for the relative dearth of commentaries 
that have been composed on it, those of Abhayanandin (perhaps 
750) and of Somadeva (1250) seeming to be the only ones still 
extant. 

The Svetambara version of grammar stems from a later date. Its 
basic works are the Sabddnusdsana and Amoghavrtti of Abhinava 
Sakatayana, not to be confused with the ancient authority by that 
name. This SabddnuSasana draws on the work of all the authors discussed 
so far, as well as on Candragomin’s Buddhist tradition; indeed, the 
dependence on this last tradition is fairly widespread. This system was 
carried on through the usual commentarial works until it was supplant- 


18 ENQGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ed for the most part by that of Hemacandra’s SabddnuSasana, also address- 
ed to the Svetambaras. 

Buddhist Grammar dates at least from Candragomin, to whom 
the Cdandrasiitras are ascribed, and who appears to have lived about 
Bhartrhari’s time, in the fourth or fifth century. Once again it depends 
largely on Panini, Katyayana, and Patafijali, though it is somewhat 
briefer—3,100 sétras in all. There are also accessory lists: a Dhdtupatha, 
Lingdnusdsana, Ganapdtha, Upasargaortti, and Varnasitiras, and a comm- 
entary on this material written by Candragomin, fragments of which 
have come down to us. This grammar seems to have been popular, 
was translated into Tibetan and was circulated throughout Buddhist 
lands. It is still studied in Tibet, though not in Sri Lanka, where it was 
later superseded by KaSsyapa’s Béldvabodha (ca. 1200). 


E. Bhartrhari (perhaps fifth century ) 

It was Bhartrhari who led Grammar into philosophy proper, by 
making a case for vy@karana as a darfana, a view about ultimate things, 
eventually about liberation. He was also the major architect of the 
Sphofa theory, which is regularly identified as the unique contribution 
of Grammarians to the philosophical problem of meaning. The locus 
classicus for his thoughts on these matters is the work popularly called 
Vakyapadiya, but he also wrote a commentary on the Mahdbhdsya and 
possibly other works. We have made the commentarial tradition on 
Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya central to the concerns of this volume. The 
first such commentator was Bhartrhari himself, it would seem, for 
he now appears to have been the author of a commentary on at least 
the first two books of the three that constitute the Vakyapadiya or 
Trikandi. 


F. The Fifth Through Tenth Centuries 

Attacks were leveled against Bhartrhari’s sphota theory by Kumarila 
Bhatta, the famous Mimamsaka, and by the Buddhist Dharmakirti. 
Mandana Misra, the great Advaitin and Mimamsaka, wrote an 
independent work, Sphotasiddhi, defending sphofa against these attacks 
and vindicating Bhartrhari’s position. And just at the end of this period 
we date Helaraja, probably the most important commentator after 
Bhartrhari himself. 

This period also features the production of avery influential comm- 
entary, the oldest extant complete running commentary, on Panini’s 
grammar, the Kastkdvrtti. It was composed by two authors, Jayaditya 
and Vamana, around the middle of the 7th century. The Kasika@ was 
in turn commented upon by Jinendrabuddhi, a Buddhist known for 
philosophical works as well as for his grammatical erudition. 

To this period likewise belong Abhayanandin, the Jainendra 


e e 
HISTORICAL RESUME 19 


commentator, Abhinava Sakatayana, author of Sabddnusdsana, and 
Durgasimha, the Katantra commentator, all mentioned earlier. 


G. Eleventh Through Sixteenth Centuries 

We have now arrived at an era in which a number of grammatical 
traditions were in place. The next few centuries featured in the main 
commentators explaining and furthering these traditions, with one or 
two new additions to the field. 

Within the Paninian tradition itself the most important comm- 
entators early in this period included Ksirasvamin, author of a comm- 
entary on Panini’s Dhdiupatha; Haradatta, a commentator on the Kasika; 
Maitreya Raksita, a Bengali Grammarian who wrote on the theory 
of verbal bases; and most notably, Kaiyata, thé major commentator 
on Patafijali’s Mahabhasya. It is on Kaiyata’s Pradipa rather than on the 
Mahdabhdsya itself that the subsequent commentators mainly based 
their remarks. Kaiyata must have lived about the beginning of the 
eleventh century, Still other figures of importance are Purusottamadeva, 
author of commentaries on Panini and Patafijali (though the latter 
has been lost), and Ramacandra, author of Prakriyakaumudi, on 
Panini. 

The period is likewise marked by the composition of various materials 
stemming from the traditions of Katantia. In Jainism, as was pointed 
out before, the field was commandeered, at least within the Svetambara 
branch, by Hemacandra, a polymath writer who is probably the most 
important and influential Jain scholar the tradition has ever known. 
His SabddnuSdsana is even longer than Panini’s—some 4,500 satras— 
and draws on his predecessors, especially on Sakatayana’s work. At least 
a quarter of the work deals with the various prakrta (Prakrit) languages, 
the ancestors of the modern regional languages of northern India, which 
are today beginning to take on their developed form. Hemacandra 
also composed a commentary, the Brhadvriti, which quotes many 
writers either to support or to criticize them. 

Anew school of Grammar, known as the Jaumara school and influen- 
tial especially in West Bengal even today, takes its rise from a grammar 
called Samksiptaséra, composed by Kramadigvara about the middle 
of the eleventh century. This work again depends on Panini, with a 
few rules rejected and the sétras rearranged. He makes many innovations 
both in the method and in the organization. The text as known to 
Gopicandra, another influential writer of this system, contains a 
chapter on Prakrit. The school actually takes its name from Jumara- 
nandin, who revised the Samksiptasdra, probably in the fourteenth 
century. 

Two other new systems are those of the Sarasvata and the Mugdha- 
bodha. The Sarasvata school appears to have been popular in northern 


20 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


India from its inception in the thirteenth century down to the time of 
Bhattoji Diksita, when the revival of the Paninian tradition put most 
of the other schools of grammar into a decline. The basic work of the 
system is the Sdrasvatiprakriya, composed by Anubhiiti Svariipacarya 
about 1270. Anubhiti Svaripacarya also wrote works on Advaita 
Vedanta. About the same time Vopadeva (or Bopadeva), a native of 
the Maharashtra country, wrote a grammar known as Mugdhabodha, 
which once more renresents an attempt to simplify and abbreviate 
Panini’s system, this time with evidence of a religious purpose, 
Vopadeva’s arrangement, like that of the Katantra, promised to make 
his grammar more accessible, but as he also rearranged the order ofthe 
syllables and removed all the markers his system was not easily recogniz- 
able to Paninians. Nevertheless, the Mugdhabodha system was very 
popular up to the time of Bhattoji, who went out of his way to refute it. 
The picture, then, of Grammar during the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries is one in which a number of competing grammatical systems 
flourished with different degrees of popularity in different parts of the 
subcontinent, and the Paninian system itself was only one among them. 


H. The Modern Period: Bhattoji Diksita, 
Konda Bhatta, and Nageéa Bhatta 


The Paninian tradition suffered through the difficulty of its system 
so that, as we have seen, other traditions grew up over the centuries 
that rivaled or surpassed Panini’s school in popularity and influence. 
Although some attempts had been made by grammarians who 
remained within the Paninian tradition to simplify the system, notably 
Ramacandra’s Prakriyakaumudi, it was Bhattoji Diksita at the end of 
the sixteenth century who produced a version of the Paninian grammar 
that made it generally accessible and served to elevate that tradition 
to its present place of unrivaled eminence. Bhattoji’s work is called 
Stddhantakaumudi. Cardona, referring to a traditional explanation, 
notes that kaumudi means “moonlight,” and just as moonlight brightens 
and cools, the kaumudi works “dispel ignorance while not involving 
the great effort necessary to understand works like the Mahdbhdsya,” 
works that previously had to be mastered in order to grasp the sense of 
Panini’s rules. Bhattoji also wrote a commentary on the Siddhdntakau- 
mudi, the Praudhamanoramé. The modern commentarial literature 
concentrates on the Siddhintakaumudi version. of the system; the number 
of commentaries on it and on Praudhamanoramaé far outnumbers the 
number composed after Bhattoji on Panini and Patafijali themselves. 
These commentaries are not always in agreement with Bhattoji; in 
addition to abridgment, his approach involved new interpretations 
of some of the rules, which departed in several instances from the 
interpretations of the classical Paninians. 


e é 
HISTORICAL RESUME 21 


Bhattoji wrote, in addition to the Siddhdntakaumudi and its comm- 
entary, another work, the Sabdakaustubha, in which he collected the 
interpretations of earlier writers on Panini’s rules, especially those of 
Patafijali. This work is incomplete, dealing only with the first, second, 
fourth, and part of the third chapters of Panini’s eight. In addition, 
Bhattoji is responsible for seventy-four verses on grammar, sometimes 
referred to as the Vaiyakaranamatonmajjana, which form the text around 
which Konda Bhatta, the next great figure after Bhattoji, assembles 
his magnum opus, the Vatyaékaranabhitsana with its séra. 

Konda Bhatta provided in his work of 1630 refutations of rival 
theories of meaning proposed by other schools, principally the Nyaya 
and Mimamsa. The work thus stands as the most important treatise 
after Bhartrhari’s to stem from the Paninian school concerning 
philosophy as understood for the purpose of this volume. Konda 
Bhatta’s Vatyakaranabhisanasdra is an abridged version, presenting the 
arguments alone without the considerations of other views that accom- 
pany them in the Vaiyakaranabhisana itself. 

Similarly, Nagesa Bhatta in the early eighteenth century dealt with 
philosophical matters. Nagesa was the pupil of Hari Diksita, author 
of Sabdaratna (or perhaps two Sabdaratnas, a longer and a shorter), 
who in turn was Bhattoji’s grandson. His output was lavish, including 
commentaries on Bhattoji and Kaiyata as wellas anumber of original 
works. Of the latter, three versions of a Mafijasd developing from 
Bhattoji’s verses are particularly pertinent to questions of philosophy. 
The shortest of them, Paramalaghumatjiasé, is summarized below. 
Nageéa is the most acknowledged grammarian of modern times, though 
he also wrote treatises on several of the other philosophical systems— 
Samkhya, Yoga, and Nyaya. There is also a separate work on the sphoja 
theory, of great interest for purposes of this discussion. 

The foregoing summary mentions only a small number of writers 
on grammar who have graced the ages in India. The bibliography 
appended to this volume will suggest to the casual reader the extensive 
development of this topic and the attention given to it, and it may 
offer the less casual reader guidance in seeking more detailed in- 
formation. From among the welter of authors and works mentioned 
there, this volume concentrates on those who contributed most tellingly 
to the philosophical aspects of the subject—its theory of meaning and 
related matters. Although it is hard, and perhaps not really necessary, 
to distinguish the most philosophically relevant texts from the rest, 
Table 1.1 will help the reader pick out those authors whose writings 
promise the most rewards for the philosophically oriented. 


22 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


TABLE 1.1 


Vyakarana Philosophy: 
Checklist of Authors and Works 








This list is not exhaustive and emphasizes writers on philosophy— 
See appendix for details 


T=Edited and translated 
E=Edited, but not translated 


M=Not published, but manuscript (s) available 





Name Date Place Title 
1. Patafjali 150 North of Mahabhasya on Panini’s Asfadhyayt 
B.c.? Ayodhya? (T) 
2. Bhartrhari AD. Vakyapadiya or Trikandi (T) 
450? ? Mahabhasyadipika or Tripadt (E) 
3. Vrsabbadeva or 650? ? Paddhati on book 1 of Vakyapadiya 
Hari Vrsabha (E) 
4, Mandana Misra 690? ? Sphojasiddhi (T) 
5. Helaraja 980? Kashmir Prakéfa on book 3 of Viakyapadiya 
(E) 
6. Punyaraja 1000? ? ? Tika on book 2 of Vakyapadiya (E) 
7. Kaiyata 1150? Kashmir Mahabhasyapradipa (E) 
8. (Rsiputra) 1410 Kerala Sphotasiddhigopalika (E) 
Paramesgvara IT 
9. Satyananda or 1500 ? Mahabhasyapradipalaghuvivarana (E.) 
Ramacandra 
Sarasvati 
10. Sega Krsna 1540 =Varanasi Sphofatattvaniripana (E) 
11. Annambhatta 1540 Andhradesa  Mahabhaisyapradipoddyotana (E) 
12, (Sesa) Narayana 1546 Varanasi Mahabhasyasiktiratndkara (M) 
(Bhafta) 
13. Igvarananda or 1550 ? Mahabhésyapradipabrhadvivarana (E) 
Isvaridatta Sarasvati 
Sabdabodhatarangini (M) 
14. Bharata Miséra 1550 ? Sphotasiddhi (E) 
15. Author unknown 1550 ? Sphotasiddhinydyavicara (E) 
16. (Sesa) Cintamani 1557 Varanasi Mahabhisyapradipaprakéfa (M) 
17. Bhattoji Diksita 1590 Andhradesa § Vaiyakarapasiddhantakdrika (E) 
18. Sesa Visnu 1605 Varanasi? Mahabhasyaprakasika (M) 
19. Sivaramendra 1605 ? Mahabhagyaratnaprakasa (E) 
Sarasvati 
20. Narayana (Sastrin) 1640 > Mahabhéspapradipavyakhya (E) 
21. Konda Bhatta 1640 Varanasi Vaiydkaravabhitsana and Sara (E) 
22. Narayana Bhattatiri 1640 Melputtur Apaniniyapramapata (T) 
(Kerala) 
23. Cokkanatha Diksita 1650 South Mahabhasyaratnévali (M) 
24, Sadasiva 1667 ? Mahabhasyagildharthadipant (M) 
25. Hari Diksita 1670 Varanasi Sabdaratna (Brhat- and Laghu-) 


(E) 








é é 
HISTORICAL RESUME 23 
Name Date Place Title 
26. Jagannatha 1670 =Patna Prabodhacandrika (M) 
Pandita 
27. Ramabhadra 1700 Tanjore Saddarsinisiddhantasamgraha (E) 
Diksita Sabdabhedaniripapa (E) 
28. Nagesa Bhatta 1714. Maharashtra/ Brkatmafjiisa (M) 
Allahabad; Laghumafjiisa (E) 
Nagesa spent Paramalaghumafjisa (part T; E) 
his scholarly  Mahabhasyapradipoddyota (E) 
life in 
Varanasi 
29. Gopalakrsna 1720 = Pudukottah Mahabhasyasabdikacintamani (M) 
Sastrin 
30. Dharanidhara 1730 Tiksnajnatiya  Bodhapaddhati (M) 
31. Vaidyanatha 1740 Varanasi Mahabhasyapradipoddyotachaya (E) 
Patyagunde Laghumafjiisakala (EB) 
32. Kasigvara Sarman 1740 ? Fianampta (M) 
33. Satyapriya 1745 > Mahabhasyavivarana (M) 
Tirtha Svamin 
34, Jayakrsna Maunin 1745 > Sabdarthaséramafjart (M) 
Sabdarthatarkamrta (M) 
35, Harivallabha 1747 ~— Gives his Vaiyakaranabhisanasdradarpana (M) 
native place 
as Kirmagiri 
36, Srikrsna 1750 ? Sphofacandrika (E) 
Bhatta Maunin Tarkacandriké (M) 
Vritidipika (EB) 
37. Asadhara Bhatta 1770 = Traditionally Sabdatrivepika (E) 
considered to 
have come 
from Baroda 
38, Ramasevaka 1770 ? Mahabhasyapradipayakhya (M) 
39, Indradatta 1800 ? Sabdatattvaprakasa (M) 
Upadhyaya 
40. Krsnamitracarya or 1800 > Vaiyakaranalaghumaftjisakuftccka (E) 
Durbalacarya 
41. Manyudeva 1815 ? Vaiyakaranabhilsanasarakanti (M) 
42. Bhairava Miéra 1824 ? Sphojapariksa (E) and commenta- 
ries on the Tattvabedhini, Sabden- 
duSekhara, and Paribhdsendusekhara 
43. Kumara Tataya 1825 ? Mahabhispaparijatam natakam (M) 
44, Satara Raghaven- 1840 fa Mahabhagyatripathaga (M) 
dracarya 
Gajendragadkar 
45. Gangadhara 1850  Jessore Trikapdasabdasdsana (BE) 
Kaviraja 
Trisittravyakarana (E) 
46. Anantacarya 1906 Musarapakkam Sarapasabdérthavicéra (E) 
47. Khuddi Jha 1910 = Varanasi Vaiyakaranabhisanasaratinarthavéda- 
(Sarman) sdra (E) 


24 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Name Date Place Title 

48. Nityananda Panta 1925 ? Commentary on Paramalaghumat- 

Parvatiya jiusa (BE) 
49. Siryanarayana Sukla 1937 ? Vakyapadiyabhavapradipa (E) 
50. Gopala Sastri Nene 1940 ? Vaiyakaranabhisanasdrasarala (E) 
51. P.S. Anantanarayana 1940 Trichur Vakyatativa (E) 

Sastri 
52. Brahmadeva 1943 . Vaiyakaranasiddhantamatijasa (E) 
53. V. Krsnamacarya 1946 Madras Sphotavada Upodghata (E) 


54, Sadasiva Sastri Joshi 1946 


? 


Paramalaghumaipisarthadipika (E) 


55. Bala Krsna Paficoli 1947 from Gujarat; Vaiyakaranabhisanaséraprabha (E) 
taught in 
Varanasi 
56. Madhukanta Sarma 1950 ? Mahabhasyaprakasa (E) 
Jha 
57. Rama Prasada 1952 Varanasi Vaiyakarapabhisanasdrasubodhini (E) 
Tripathi 
58. Rudradhara Jha 1954 ? Mahéabhésyatativaloka (E) 
Sarman 
59. Kalika Prasada 1951 from Gujarat, Paramaleghumafijisdjyotsné (£) 
Sukla worked in 
Baroda and at 
Varanasi 
60. Sabhapati Sarman 1963 ? Paramalaghumafjiisaratnaprabha (E) 
Upadhyaya 
61, Raghunatha Sarman 1970 taught in Vakyapadiyambakarirt (E) 
Varanasi, but 
came from Vyakaranadarsanabindu (EB) 
Chhata in 
Ballia District, 
U.P. 
62. Satyakama Varma 1970 Delhi Commentary on Vakyapadiya (E) 
63. Ramajfia Pandeya 1979 Varanasi Vyakaranadarsanapratimad (E) 


(Because it is difficult to give an exhaustive list of modern scholars, main works are 
given in the appendix. Dates for modern scholars given above are publication dates 


for their major works. ) 


4, Prosiems oF LANGUAGE 
DiscussED BY OTHER SCHOOLS 


A. Mimamsa 


Mimamsa deals mainly with the interpretation of the Vedic passages 


that give rules about the various rituals and sacrifices. The Veda 
consists of metrical hymns (mantras) and prose passages (brdhmanas). 
The bradhmanas are classified into two sections: (1) prescriptions, 
including injunctions (vtdk?) and prohibitions (nisedka) ; and (2) supple- 
mentary descriptions (arthavddas), which are classified into three 


é é 
HISTORICAL RESUME 95 


groups: (a) gunavddas, statements that are contradicted by our experi- 
ences in the world and have to be explained figuratively to get a cogent 
meaning, such as “the mind is a thief” (stenam manah), (b) anuvddas, 
involving repetition of ideas already known, such as “‘fire is the antidote 
to snow” (agnir himasya bhesajam), and (c) bhiitdrthavddas, which deal 
with things that are unknown but may be taken to be true, for example, 
statements like “Indra killed Vrtra.” 

In the arthavada section of Jaimini’s Mimamsésiiras the question is 
raised whether the arthavdda passages in the Veda can be considered as 
authoritative. The aim of the Vedic texts is to bring about action, 
hence apparently only injunctions and prohibitions can be held to 
be authoritative; the arthavada passages, not directly related to any 
command or prohibition, seem to be unauthoritative. But the final 
view of the Mimamsakas is that the arthavddas are also valid instru- 
ments of knowledge (framdna), because they are supplementary texts 
to be read along with the injunctions or prohibitions as a unit. 

Regarding the interpretation of an injunction itself there is difference 
of opinion between the two schools of Mimamsa—the Bhatta, following 
Kumiarila Bhatta’s views, and the Prabhakara, following Prabhakara’s 
views. According to the Bhatta school the content of an injunction is 
the realization that the action enjoined will produce some beneficial 
result. For every Vedic injunction the three basic components that 
must be indicated are: sddhya (what is to be brought about), sddhana 
(the means or karana), and itikartavpata (in what way it is to be brought 
about). In the Bhatta system the sddhya of the sabdi bhdvand is the 
Grthi bhdvanaé and the itikariavyataé is the arihavdda associated with the 
injunctions. Kumarila says that not even a fool will act without a 
purpose. There is no need to say who should act, for anyone who is 
desirous of the fruit will come forward to do it. According to the 
Prabhakaras, however, the basic components that need to be indicated 
are: the visaya (the act enjoined), the ziyojya, (the person who is 
enjoined to do it), and the karana (the means of doing it). There is no 
need to indicate the fruit of action for, according to Prabhakara, the 
Vedic injunction is to be obeyed simply because it is a command. 
The law is to be obeyed because it is the law, not because of the 
expectation of any reward or the fear of punishment. 

The definition given by the Mimamsakas for a sentence is in 
Mimémsasittra 2.1.46. A group of words serving a single purpose (artha) 
forms a sentence, if on analysis the separate words are found to have 
mutual expectancy (éka@nks@). The principle of syntactic unity is that 
“So long as a single purpose is served by a number of words, which on 
being separated, are found to be wanting and incapable of effecting 
the said purpose, they form one syntactical unit—one complete 
Yajus-mantra.”** Here the sentence definition is based on psychological 


96 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


akanksd and not syntactic akanksd. Prabhakara says that in this definition 
the term artha stands for both meaning and purpose and that the two 
are interrelated. Kumérila Bhatta says that it is possible to take artha 
as meaning in order to allow a wider scope to the principle, but he 
does not accept that interpretation himself. Bhartrhari refers to this 
definition and says that it is not identical with the definition given 
by Katyayana, that a sentence is that (group of connected words) 
which contains a single finite verb (ekatin).1° 

It was the Mimamsakas who took a leading part in studying the 
working of laksané or the secondary significance of words. They had 
to recognize it in order to explain apparent inconsistencies when words 
are taken in their literal sense. The main condition of a metaphoric 
transfer is this inconsistency (mukhydrthabadha). The Prabhakaras 
held that the inconsistency is the impossibility of taking the word in 
the literal sense, while according to the Bhattas it is the unsuitability 
in the context. The role of contextual factors was also recognized by 
both schools. A sentence may have a secondary meaning according to 
both the schools, while the Nyaya school allows it only for the individual 
words. 


B. Nyaya 

The Nyaya school is greatly interested in problems of language. 
A considerable portion of Navya-Nyaya is concerned with logical 
grammar, analyzing and classifying the significant elements of sentences 
and discovering rules that determine the motion of a meaningful 
sentence. It is to the Nyaya school that the modern fabdabodha 
studies look for inspiration and help. Sabdabodha means “knowledge 
of the sentence meaning,” and it is studied from the listener’s point 
of view. 

The Naiyayikas use the term pada (word) for any meaningful unit, 
not necessarily a free unit; and they use the term vakya (sentence) for 
any syntactically connected ‘“‘words’. Thus for them an expression 
like ghafam can be taken to be a “‘sentence’’ because it is made up of 
two “words”, ghata and -am, and is logically complete. 

The Naiyayikas believe that the relation between words and their 
meanings is not natural, but conventional, being established by the will 
of God in the case of ordinary words and by the will of man in the case 
of technical terms. This conventional relation is called significative 
power (Sakti). Meaning (artha) includes the universal (jati), the 
configuration (dkyti), and the individual (uyakti), according to early 
Naiyayikas; but later they considered it to be the individual as qualified 
by the universal (jdtivisistavyakti) .?° 

There is significative power only for primary meaning; secondary 
meaning is accepted as being related to the primary meaning. The 


c . 


HISTORIGAL RESUME 97 


Naiyayikas accept secondary meaning only for an individual word in 
a sentence, not for the sentence as a whole, by contrast to the Mimam- 
sakas, who accept secondary meaning for a sentence. The early Naiyayi- 
kas considered the impossibility of connecting the word meanings in a 
sentence to be the incompatibility that prompts their having secondary 
meaning; but according to the Navya-Nyaya school it is the unsuit- 
ability of primary sense in view of the sense intended in the context. 
The three conditions of expectancy, consistency, and contiguity 
necessary to unify the sentence are accepted by the Naiyayikas; but to 
them the expectancy is syntactic, not psychological. Some of the 
Naiyayikas accept intention (idtparya) as another condition, but not 
all. Suggestion (zyafijand) is not acceptable to the logicians who include 
it under inference. 


C. Buddhist Logicians®4 

The Buddhist Logicians of Dignaga’s school have been very interested 
in the philosophy of language. How far can verbal communication be 
successful? Dignaga was greatly influenced by his elder contemporary 
Bhartrhari. According to the Buddhist idealists reality consists of 
unique particulars (svalaksana), which are momentary and in perpetual 
flux. Perception is the sensation of the unique particulars, but all 
cognitions are based on concepts that are conceptual constructions 
(vikalpa), which cannot directly grasp reality. Words produce con- 
ceptual constructions, and conceptual constructions produce words. 
The Buddhists do not accept the universal as a reality. The function of 
a word, that is, a name, is the exclusion or elimination of other pos- 
sibilities, Construction-free (nirvikalpaka) perception of the unique 
particular alone is real perception; verbal knowledge based on concepts 
is only inference, according to them, and has no direct correspondence 
with the real external things. 

Bhartrhari too seems to have held an idealistic view of reality. All 
verbal discourse is meaningful in terms of our conceptual images and 
the words that symbolize them. He seems to deny the possibility of a 
construction-free knowledge beyond the reach of words. All knowledge 
is interpenetrated with words, and it is impossible to have a cognition 
free from word association (see Vakyapadiya 1.123). 

Dignaga’s indebtedness to Bhartrhari can be discovered in his main 
work, Pramdnasamuccayaortti 5, on apohapariccheda.*® Looking for proto- 
type of the theory of anydpoha (exclusion of others), Masaaki Hattori 
successfully demonstrates that thereis a striking resemblance between 
Dignaga’s concept of apoha and Bhartrhari’s concept of the universal 
(jati) discussed in Vakyapadiya 3.1, jatisamuddeSa. 

Dignaga quotes three verses of Vakyapadiya in Prama@nasamuceayavrttt 5 
in order to support his arguments. To clarify the grammatical distinc- 


28 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tions between two words with different nominal endings and those 
with identical endings, he quotes Vakyapadiya 3.14.8.74 To support the 
argument that a universal word (jatifabda) may be applied directly to 
members of that universal, he quotes Vakyapadiya 2.158. To support the 
argument that a universal word may never be applied to members of 
that universal, he quotes Vakyapadiya 2.155.%5 

Finally, Dignaga declares in Pramanasamuccayavrtti that the meaning 
ofa sentence (vdkydrtha) is “intuition” (pratibha), apparently under the 
influence of Vakyapadiya 2.143ff.: “When abstracted from a sentence, 
the meaning of a word is discriminated. The meaning ofa sentence 
called pratibha is first produced by it [thatis, the meaning of a word] .’”* 


D. Literary Criticism 

Grammar provided the foundation from which the detailed discu- 
ssions of literary criticism arose. The importance of emotions with 
special reference to the theater were stressed in Bharata’s Ndtyasastra 
(third century of the Christian era), which gives detailed directions re- 
garding the communication of emotions by the actors. Anandavardhana 
accepted the importance of emotions in all literature and evolved 
his dhvani theory to explain the poet’s communication of aesthetic 
experience through the medium of language by using the method of 
suggestion. 

Anandavardhana, the author of the Dhvanydloka, flourished in 
Kashmir under the patronage of King Avantivarman in the later half 
of the ninth century. The theory of primary and secondary meaning, 
developed by the Mimamsakas and the Naiyayikas in ancient India, 
was further extended by him to include emotive and other associative 
meanings also under linguistic meaning. He postulated a third potency 
of language named vyafijand, which he called the capacity to suggest 
a meaning other than its literal and metaphorical (secondary ) meaning. 
Under the term ‘“‘meaning’’ is included not only the information 
conveyed but the sociocultural significance, the figures of speech, and 
also the emotion induced; and among the indicators of meaning, 
Anandavardhana did not confine himself to the words and sentences, 
but included all the contextual factors, the intonation and gestures, the 
sound effect produced, the rhythm and the meter, as well as the literal 
sense. Although suggestion (vyafijand) is a comprehensive linguistic 
phenomenon, Anandavardhana confined his attention to poetic 
language and studied the problem only from that standpoint. Strictly 
speaking, the dhvani theory of Anandavardhana is only an extension 
of the rasa theory of Bharata to the domain of literature, as has been 
pointed out by writers like Abhinavagupta. 

Anandavardhana’s basic postulate is that an emotion cannot be 
evoked in the reader by merely referring to its name or by its bare 


ft rc 
HISTORICAL RESUME 29 


description. It has to be suggested by describing the situation and 
contextual factors such as the reactions of the characters. Not only the 
literal meaning, but also the suggestive possibilities of the expression, 
such as the sound echoing the sense, rhythm, imagery and symbols, 
selective exaggeration of the prominent element, and the suppression 
of the irrelevant, and bringing out the etymological significance through 
subtle supplementation—all of these devices are to be used for helping 
to evoke the right response in the reader. Words and expressions are 
to be selected from those in common usage in such a way as to help 
evoke the emotional effect desired. 

The linguistic speculations of ancient Indians such as the grammar- 
ians and logicians generally took a word as the unit of speech and 
considered a sentence as a combination of words for the purpose of 
communicating meaning. How is syntactic unity effected from a series 
of isolated words uttered in a sequence? This question was discussed 
and various explanations given by different schools of thought. The 
literal and metaphorical meanings of words were also discussed and 
the conditions for resorting to a word’s metaphorical meaning in a 
sentence were evolved. But there were some scholars, like Bhartrhari, 
who exposed the unsatisfactory nature of a linguistic theory dependent 
entirely on individual words and their lexical meanings; Bhartrhari’s 
theory of sphota emphasized the importance of taking the whole 
utterance as a significant unitary linguistic symbol. Anandavardhana 
took his cue from Bharirhari in developing his theory of suggestion in 
poetry. 

Logicians, interested more in accuracy and precision in the use of 
words that they want to analyze objectively than in the fullness of 
expression and the possibilities of extending the range of meanings to 
the domain of the inexpressible, are satisfied with the normal sense; 
but poets and critics who deal with the totality of human experience 
cannot ignore vast areas of human behavior. The suggested meaning 
is too vague, fleeting, and subjective to have a place among logical 
meanings; the subtle and subjective suggestions implied in language 
(upafijand) do not lend themselves to logical discussion and analysis. 
The suggested meaning depends on contextual factors, and the same 
utterance may convey different suggestions to different people depend- 
ing on their mental makeup and expectations. There is no invariable 
connection between an expression and the suggestions conveyed. 
Anandavardhana included the emotions evoked in the listeners under 
the rubric of meaning, which naturally necessitates the assumption of 
a limitless suggestive power for language, for even logicians cannot 
argue that the emotions induced by language can be included under the 
literal meaning. Emotions can be evoked by music or dance where 
no expressed sense is involved; the emotive element in a language 


30 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cannot be explained in terms of the primary literal meaning or even 
the metaphorical sense of words. 

It is true that intentional metaphors can suggest further ideas; but 
these suggested meanings have to be assigned to the suggestive power 
of language. The break in the flow, due to the incompatibility of the 
expressed sense, in the case of a metaphor is a signal to the listener to 
stop and think about the possible interpretations and thereby lead him 
into the sphere of suggestions. Anandavardhana was concerned only 
with poetic language and confined his attention to the suggestion of 
meanings of aesthetic value. His theory of dhvani is vyafijand or suggestion 
as applied to poetry. 

It was Anandavardhana who for the first time enunciated the theory 
of angirasa according to which there should be one predominant 
sentiment or rasa ina literary work such as a drama, epic, or lyric to 
which all the other rasas introduced should be subordinate. Mutually 
conflicting or supportive emotions could be delineated appropriately 
in a work, provided there is one rasa predominant throughout, the 
others being kept in the background as subsidiary. Earlier writers like 
Bharata had not stressed this point but considered that a work such as 
a drama has to cater to the different tastes of various types of people 
and must therefore deal with various emotions and rasas. Bharata 
seems to have felt that each character in a play may have one dominant 
emotion, but he did not consider the need for a predominant rasa for 
the work as a whole. Structural unity in plot was, however, stressed 
by him. Anandavardhana perhaps felt that unity in theme implied a 
predominant rasa for the work as a whole and that great classical 
writers have always taken this idea for granted; so he boldly stated 
that even the construction of the plot must be made in such a way 
that there is scope for a predominant rasa; incidents and descriptions 
irrelevant to the development of the main rasa should be avoided, and 
even the introduction of figures of speech and selection of the work’s 
texture should be in keeping with the rasa delineated. In all such 
cases the propriety from the point of view of the rasa is the most import- 
ant factor to be considered. 

Another point stressed by Anandavardhana is that the imaginative 
sensibility requisite for proper literary appreciation can be acquired 
only by a close study of classical works and by the constant practice 
of response to works of art. Because the most important element in the 
meaning of a poem is the emotion suggested, it can be understood and 
appreciated only by sahrdayas or men of like sensibility, not by all 
scholars and logicians, who may only be able to get at the literal meaning 
through analytical study. The process is one of getting the reader’s 
heart and mind tuned to the same frequency as that of the transmitting 
artist. Poetry does not give out its full charm to all, only to a select few. 


tf t 
HISTORICAL RESUME 31 


As the Rg Vedic seer observed, the goddess of speech exposes her full 
charm and yields herself completely only to the deserving devotee, just 
as a loving wife does to her husband. Bharata, who had to deal with 
the problems of the theatrical performances, considered that a drama 
should please all types of people, not merely the specialists. Ananda- 
vardhana, by contrast, considers that literary taste has to be acquired 
through practice. Even among connoisseurs tastes differ; some themes 
such as love stories and adventures may have a wider attraction than 
stories dealing with the quiet life of a recluse. The ideal sahrdaya, 
however, is one who can raise himself above his petty prejudices and 
individual predilections and appreciate things from the poet’s point of 
view. 

Anandavardhana exalts the freedom of the creative writer, which 
transcends even the powers of nature. He says that in the boundless 
samsara of poetry the poet is the sole creator, the whole world transforms 
itself depending on his wishes. If the poet is pervaded with rasa, the 
whole world of his creation will be suffused with that rasa. A good poet 
makes even insentient objects act as sentient beings. As Abhinavagupta 
explains it, the poet’s intuitive power (pratibha) enables him to create 
a world according to his wish. This tendency of infusing life into 
insentient objects of nature is a special feature of Indian poetry, though 
it has been criticized by Ruskin as the “‘pathetic fallacy.”?? 

In India even poetics or literary criticism claims to be not only a 
science (alamkdragastra) but also a darfana or philosophy. The main 
aim of literature and dramaturgy is to give unalloyed pleasure to the 
readers or the audience by evoking rasa. This rasa realized and enjoyed 
has often been compared to the bliss experienced by the mystics 
on getting a glimpse of the ultimate Reality or Brahman; some have 
claimed that rasa-realization is identical with Brahman-realization; 
there has also been a claim that it is superior to the bliss the yogins get 
in their deep meditation, for less effort is involved in it. 

The Rg Veda can be considered not only as the earliest religious text, 
but also as the earliest literary work in India, if not in the world. The 
Vedic seers were mystic poets fully conscious of language’s importance 
and of the problems of faithfully communicating intimate personal 
experiences. Some of the concepts that are universally accepted by the 
critics and are clearly found in the Vedas include: 

(1) The need fora vision in the mind, which is integral and pleasur- 
able, as the source for all poetry and philosophy. The term pratibha 
was not found, but the root drf, “‘to see” or “‘to visualize’ is frequently 
used to convey the idea. 

(2) The importance given to craftsmanship in composing poetry. 
Words have to be selected (from those used in everyday life) and 
arranged properly, with due regard to the meter used. The words 


32 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


must be “‘as sharp as arrows” and the hymn is to be composed carefully, 
like an artisan constructing a chariot. 

{3) Poetry can be understood and appreciated only by the few 
who are of the same mental nature as the poet (“‘sakhdyah sakhyani 
janate” Rg Veda 10,71.2c). 

Bhattanayaka (late ninth and early tenth centuries) seems to have 
been the first to associate aesthetic experience with mystical experience. 
The subject is completely dissolved in the object contemplated and the 
entire surroundings disappear from his attention, because of the con- 
centration on the thing contemplated, in both aesthetic experience 
and mystical experience. Bhattanayaka stated that aesthetic experience 
is similar to the experience of the Absolute Brahman. Abhinavagupta 
also accepts Bhattanayaka’s opinion regarding the similarity between 
aesthetic experience and the mystic experience of the Absolute. 

Bhattanayaka seems to have gone one step further to claim the 
superiority of aesthetic experience to the yogins’ mystical vision. He 
says that rasa or aesthetic pleasure is poured forth spontaneously by 
speech like a cow giving forth its milk to its calf; therefore, it is different 
from (and superior to) that (mystical vision) milked (laboriously) by 
the yogins. 

Abhinavagupta recognizes the similarity between aesthetic experi- 
ence and the mystical experience, but points out the boundary line 
that separates the two. The mystical experience of the ultimate reality 
is total and complete, and the _yogin is far beyond any form of discursive 
thought. Aesthetic experience gives bliss only temporarily and cannot 
be considered supreme bliss, though it is superior to the worldly joys. 
Anandavardhana was an advocate of rasa, but realized its limitations, 
for in one of his verses quoted in the Dhvanydloka he says that after 
experimenting with the imaginative poetic vision capable of affording 
aesthetic experience and also with the intellectual powers for analyzing 
and understanding the truth about reality, he is exhausted and has 
realized that the bliss that the devotee gets by contemplation of God 
is far superior. 

Later Jagannatha Panditaraja, author of the Rasagangddhara, states 
that rasa is identical with consciousness (cit) or Brahman, and aesthetic 
experience, in its true sense, is the realization of that consciousness 
by the removal of the veils covering it. 

Rasa is unique and at the ultimate stage there is no plurality. The 
division of rasa into eight or nine is based on the different permanent 
moods (sthdyibhavas) that lead to the rasa. At a still lower level even 
the sthayibhavas are sometimes referred to as rasa, 


2 


METAPHYSICS 


1. Vydkarana as A PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEM 


The goal of the Indian Grammarians’ philosophy, which we here call 
vyakarana, is not mere intellectual knowledge, but direct experience of 
ultimate truth. Knowledge of grammar resulting in correct speech not 
only conveys meaning but also enables one to “see” reality. This is the 
philosophical meaning of the Indian term darfana, which literally 
means “‘sight’’. It is this feature that sets Indian philosophy apart from 
modern western perspectives on language. Vydkarana not only addresses 
itself to the analysis of grammatical rules (though that is certainly 
important) or to theorizing about the way speech conveys meaning 
(though that too is achieved), it also insists that one should not be 
satisfied with mere intellectual conviction but should transform that 
conviction into direct experience. 

From the early Vedas the Indian approach to language has never 
been narrow or restrictive. Language was examined in relation to 
consciousness— (the scope of the inquiry) not even limited to human 
consciousness. All aspects of the world and human experience were 
regarded as illuminated by language. Indian philosophy also postulated 
that language had both phenomenal and metaphysical dimensions. 
It is remarkable that in the ancient hymns of the Rg Veda a semitechnical 
vocabulary was already developed to deal with such linguistic matters 
as grammar, poetic creation, inspiration, illumination, and so on.? 
Although there was careful concern for the phenomenal or outer aspects 
of language, the Indians always paid equal attention to the inner or 
metaphysical aspects of language. Indian philosophers of language 
seem to have successfully avoided the two reductionist mistakes of much 
western modern language speculation. They did notreduce language to 
the condition of a merely human convention having only scientific or 
factual referents; neither did they fall into the error of metaphysical 


34 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


reductionism that so devalues the meanings of human words that 
language ends up as obscure mysticism.? Grammarians like Panini 
and Patafijali and etymologists like Yaska were clearly concerned with 
human speech in the everyday empirical world, but they also made 
room for metaphysical study. Similarly, the great Indian philosopher 
of language, Bhartrhari, begins his Vakyapadiya with a metaphysical 
inquiry into the nature and origin of language in relation to Brahman, 
but then goes on in the second and third chapters to explore technical 
grammatical points involved in the everyday use of language. In 
classical Indian thought on language, the study of a particular 
phenomenon and the contemplation of it as a metaphysical mystery are 
not mutually exclusive. They are both considered parts of a darfana or 
systematic view of truth. 

There is one more aspect of traditional Indian philosophy of langu- 
age that must be understood by the modern reader. Whereas the 
contemporary writer often thinks in terms of using language creatively, 
thatis, to create something “‘original”’ or “‘new’’, the vyakarana conception 
is quite different. The correct or insightful use of language is not seen 
as conveying new knowledge, but rather as uncovering ancient know- 
ledge that has been obscured due to the accrual of ignorance. The 
Vedic sage does not produce something new out of his own imagination, 
but rather relates ordinary things to their forgotten eternal truth. 
Thus, from the perspective of grammatical philosophy the philo- 
sophical study of language and correct grammatical usage are seen as 
“ignorance-clearing activities’, which together open the way to a 
direct perception of truth. 

As a systematic means to knowledge vydkarana suffers from certain 
special difficulties. Language is the object of study in vydkarana, yet 
all thinking about language must, by virtue of human limitations, be 
done in language itself. One cannot get outside of language so as to 
examine it objectively. Language must be used to study language 
from within. Vydkarana does not draw back from this difficulty but 
relishes its challenge; it recognizes that, as Hans-Georg Gadamer puts 
it, all knowledge of ourselves and all knowledge of the world comes to 
us through language.* Thus the correct knowledge of language is 
basic to all other approaches to reality—all other darfanas.® 


2. SasppaA BRAHMAN AND Irs MANIFESTATIONS 


It was Bhartrhari who in Vakyapadiya 1.1 first systematically equated 
Brahman (the Absolute) with language (sabda), going on to argue 
that everything else arises as a manifestation of this one Sabda Brah- 
man.* But equating Brahman with language is found much earlier 


METAPHYSICS 35 


in the Vedic literature. The Asyavamiya Hymn (Rg Veda 1.164) states 
that the ultimate abode of language (vdc) is Brahman.’ Language is 
described as being at the pinnacle of the universe. Three-quarters 
of language remain hidden in a cave, while the fourth part fashions 
creation (Rg Veda 1.164.10, 41, 45). In Rg Veda 10.71 it is made clear 
that the manifestations of Brahman in language are not equally 
perceived by all people. Those who have purified themselves, namely, 
the rsis or “‘seers”, experience the full manifestation of language. 
Others, whose ignorance obscures their minds and sense organs, hear 
little of the fullness of language. The Vedic seers are not considered to 
be composers of the hymns but rather the “seers’? of eternal truth. 
In Rg Veda 1.164.37 language is related to cosmic order (ria) and is 
understood as logos, which manifests itself as both the uttered word 
(for use in ritual chanting) and the inner word that reveals truth. 

The equation of Brahman with language is also found within the 
Upanisads. In the Brhadéranyaka Upanisad 4.1.2 Brahman is identified 
as the one reality, without a second, which is identical with language. 
The Mdandiikya Upanisad 3.3 links the unspeakable absolute with the 
speakable via the symbol of aum. Aum is described as traversing the 
phenomenal levels of waking, dreaming, and deep sleep and as 
reaching out to the absolute. Brahman is identical with language, the 
basic manifestation of which is aum. Bhartrhari echoes this assertion in 
Vakyapadiya 1.9 in describing aum as “‘the source of all scripture and 
the common factor of all original causes.’’® Vydkarana scholars have 
focused on those Vedas and Upanisads which equate language, 
Brahman, and absolute reality. Passages that state otherwise are 
ignored or passed over. This practice, of course, is usual within each 
of the Indian philosophical schools (darfanas)—at least in those which 
claim to be orthodox (dst#ka) or grounded on the Vedas. 

The Vedas occupy a primary place in the manifestation of Sabda 
Brahman, as well as being the means by which Sabda Brahman may 
be realized and release experienced. The Veda, though One, is divided 
into many and spreads out through its various recensions and mani- 
festing sounds (dhvani) to the diversity of people. Although the experi- 
ence of the Vedas may be many, the reality they reveal isthe one 
Sabda Brahman. Vedic language is at once the creator and sustainer 
of the world cycles and the revealer of the Divine. Language is taken 
as having Divine origin (daivi vék), as Spirit descending and embody- 
ing itself in phenomena, assuming various guises and disclosing its 
truth to the sensitive soul.® As Aurobindo describes it, 


The language of the Veda itself is Sruéi, a rhythm not compos- 
ed by the intellect but heard, a divine Word that came vibrating 
outof the Infinite to the inner audience of the man who had 


36 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


previously made himself fit for the impersonal knowledge. The words 
themselves, drsfi and. Sruti, sight and hearing, are Vedic expres- 
sions; these and cognate words signify, in the esoteric terminology 
of the hymns, revelatory knowledge and the contentsofinspiration.”” 


In contrast with western views of revelation, there is nothing miraculous 
in the manifestation of the Vedas to the 752. The rsi “sees”? the divine 
truth not because it is given to him in an act of grace, but because he 
has made himself fit, through heroic practices of self-purification, to 
“see” the truth directly. He then puts it into spoken words, the Vedic 
hymns, for the purpose of helping others who are still caught in 
ignorance to purify themselves until they too have the experience of 
directly ‘‘seeing’? Sabda Brahman. Vydkarana has the special task of 
keeping the Vedas uncorrupted so that the manifestation of Sabda 
Brahman remains available to allin pristine form.44 Should vydékarana 
fail to provide this service and allow the Vedas to become corrupted 
through sloppy usage and transmission, then the possibility of realizing 
truth could be lost for the generations yet to come in this cycle of 
creation. For this reason vydkarana is described by Bhartrhari as more 
important than other darfanas. As the other schools base themselves 
on the Vedas, the loss or corruption of the Vedas would render the 
fruits of their particular approaches useless and misleading. 

The fact that Indian philosophy is based on oral traditions!” is 
another reason why uydkarana takes its teaching to be of primary impor- 
tance. Because the authoritative manifestation of Sabda Brahman is 
found first in spoken form and only secondarily in written forms, the 
role of syékarana in providing the rules and teaching that keeps the 
oral forms of language pure is of fundamental importance to all other 
philosophic schools. For example, Panini’s Astddhydyi is a grammar 
founded upon oral usage rather than upon etymology or derivation. 
The same stress on language’s oral character is found in the discussions 
offered by Patafijali in his Mahadbhasya and Bhartrhari in the Vakyapadiya 
of the way uttered words convey meaning. It is perhaps worth noting 
in passing that for Indian philosophy, the normative form of language 
is not written but oral and that vydékarana plays the important role of 
keeping the oral form disciplined and pure in its presentation. Without 
this purity the truth-bearing capacity of language could be 
restricted and the manifestation of Sabda Brahman obscured. Know- 
ledge of the Vedas is not simply the ‘‘book-learning” of main ideas 
that characterizes modern western scholarship. In the Indian tradition, 
language is only fully alive when spoken. Thus knowledge of the Vedas 
includes and requires the ability to speak the words with correct accent 
and meter. And consistent with the oral emphasis, thinking is seen as 
internal speaking to which not enough prara or breath has been added 


METAPHYSICS 37 


to make it overt. Writing, the focus of attention for the modern West, 
is seen by gyadkarana as a coded recording of the oral, which can never 
perfectly represent all the nuances of the spoken word and is therefore 
always secondary. The wydkarana approach is opposite to that taken 
in modern western scholarship. In modern biblical studies, for example, 
the scholar’s aim is to get back to the earliest available written manus- 
cript and then to use it as a criterion against which to check the text 
that is in use today. The rationale is that errors that have crept in over 
the years would not be present in the earlier manuscript. In addition, 
the modern school of Form Criticism has argued that before many of 
the scriptures (such as the Gospels) were written down there was a 
period of oral transmission, during which time the text (for example, 
the original teachings of Jesus) was modified by the needs of the people 
and the particular conditions under which they lived. This period of 
oral transmission is judged to be unreliable due to its failure to carry 
forward the original sayings in a pure and unchanged form.14 

The aydkarana practice is the exact opposite. When India achieved 
independence in 1947, one of the first acts of the new government 
was to establish a commission of senior scholars to go from place to 
place and listen to the assembled Brahmins reciting the Vedas. They 
would listen for errors in meter, accent, and samdhi and for any loss or 
change in words. It was the rigorous practice of the Pratifakhyas that 
was being checked by the senior scholars. They had mastered the 
Pratifakhyas and pure presentation of the Vedas through many years 
of careful oral practice and checking with their teachers. And the 
teachers of the present senior scholars had acquired their expertise 
not from books hut from oral practice with the best teachers of the 
generation before them, who in turn had been taught by the best 
teachers before them, and so on in an unbroken oral tradition back to 
the Vedas. 

It is not the dead or entombed manuscript but the correct and clear 
enunciation of the word in the here and now that makes for a living 
language and scripture. Large numbers of copies of ““The Living Bible”’ 
stacked in bookstores or reverently placed on personal bookshelves 
are not true language or living scripture, according to vpydkarana. Only 
when a passage is so well learned that it is with one wherever one goes 
is the word really known. In such a state the words become part of 
or, even more exactly, are one’s consciousness in the act of speaking. 
Books and all written forms are not knowledge in this sense of the word; 
rather they represent a lower, inferior, second order of language 
suitable only for the dull or the uneducated. The wydkarana provides 
the training rules for the oral learning of language and for the presen- 
tation of the Vedic word in its pure form. 

For gpakarana, then, spoken language is the medium through which 


38 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Sabda Brahman is manifested, and the Vedas are the criterion expres- 
sion of that manifestation. 


3. THE FUNCTION OF TIME 


In Bhartrhari’s systematization of vyékarana philosophy time (kéla) 
is assigned the function of enabling the one Sabda Brahman to appear 
as the many. This position is consistent with that given time in the 
Atharva Veda and the Maitri Upanisad.® In Vakyapadiya 1.3 Bhartrhari 
describes the creation of the objects of the universe as occurring in the 
first instance through the creative power of Sabda Brahman’s kala 
or time power. Kala is not different from Sabda Brahman but is that 
aspect of Sabda Brahman which allows manifested sequence to come 
into being. When such time sequences appear as differentiated objects, 
then time as a power seems to be different from Sabda Brahman, 
but really it is not (Vakyapadiya 1.2). Vakyapadiya 1.3 states that all other 
powers within the created universe are in the first instance governed 
by the creative power of time. Through time things come to be and 
pass away. Time is the efficient cause by which Brahman controls the 
cycles of the universe. 

Two illustrations are offered by Bhartrhari to make clear his mean- 
ing. The power of time in the creative process is like that of the wire- 
puller in a puppet play (Vakyapadiya 3.9.4). Just as the wire-puller is 
in complete control of the puppet play so kdla has full control over the 
running of the world. Ordinary cause-and-effect processes cannot ope- 
rate unless kala or time power infuses them with life-force. This control 
of ordinary cause and effect by time is further illustrated in relation 
to the strings a hunter ties to the feet of small birds that he uses as bait 
for larger ones. The small birds can fly overa limited distance but they 
cannot go beyond the length of their strings. Like the strings controlling 
the movement of birds, so the objects of the created world are con- 
trolled by the “‘string of time” (Vakyapadiya 3.9.15). 

It is in Vakyapadiya 3.9 that Bhartrhari presents his detailed analysis 
of time. Just as number measures material objects, time measures 
activity (3.9.2). In answer to the question of how activities are mea- 
sured by time, Bhartrhari states in verse 3, ‘In the creation (arising), 
existence and destruction (of beings) which possess these (activities), 
time, remaining in a divided state, is said to be the (instrumental) 
cause.”"16 Helaraja, in his commentary, explains the meaning of the 
verse as follows. Time is the cause of the birth, existence, and decay 
of everything. Thus we say some things are born in the spring, others 
in the autumn. The same can be said about their existence and their 
death. Time, though one, differentiates or sequences things through 


METAPHYSICS 39 


states of birth, existence, and decay. Itis in this sense that time is called 
the ‘‘wire-puller” of the universe. Yet, these everyday changes of state 
or sequences of action are not the true nature of time but superimposi- 
tions. Time in its own nature, as one with Sabda Brahman, is transcen- 
dent of all change, yet also its cause. 

To one familiar with Advaita Vedanta, the preceding description 
of time sounds very similar to Samkara’s notion of maya in relation to 
Brahman. This view is certainly held by two eminent contemporary 
interpreters of the Vakyapadiya, Gaurinath Sastri1? and K. A. Subra- 
mania Iyer.18 As we examine Bhartrharis’ description of kdla in 
Vakyapadiya 3.9, we will test this contention. 

Verse 14 of Vakyapadiya 3.9 is worth careful attention in this regard. 
It reads, ““By means of activities similar to the turning of the water- 
wheel, the eternal and all-pervasive time turns out (kalayati) all the 
fragments (kalah — objects) and thus acquires the name of kéla 
(time).”’ Like the ever-renewed pushing or lifting up of water by the 
waterwheel, so the all-pervading and all-penetrating time drives or 
pushes (kalayati) beings or objects, releasing them from their material 
causes and making them move. That is why time is given the appro- 
priate name of kala, Helaraja goes on to observe that what Bhartrhari 
means to say is, 


The soul of the universe is but one, called ‘“‘para-Brahman” i.e., 
the real Being. This same one, due to its being the agent of 
manifold actions, is defined as possessing unlimited power. And 
thus, manifesting successive beings which revolve like the turnings 
of a wheel, it “drives” (kalayati) the beings. Therefore it is called 
time (kala). This all-pervading one is independent. For this very 
reason, it has been established as being an independent power 
in the Vakyapadiya.)® 


If Helaraja is right, then Bhartrhari views time as a power of Sabda 
Brahman, independent of all beings and objects yet also inherent in 
them, pushing them through the successive changes of life. Instead of 
the passive external superimposition of the successive changes upon 
Brahman (the Advaita model), the image here is more characteristic 
of urgent change through pregnant forces within Sabda Brahman. 
The distinction between Bhartrhari’s conception of time and the 
Advaita Vedanta view of mdyd is not that the locus of time or maya 
isin Brahman (for both schools seem to agree on this point), but rather 
a question of the ontological power ascribed to time or mdya. Bhartrhari’s 
time doctrine emphasizes the driving (kalayati) power inherent in 
Sabda Brahman, which is the first cause of the bursting forth of worldly 
phenomena. The Advaita conception of mdyd, though it does indeed 


40 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(in the Vivarana tradition, at least) locate mdyé in Brahman*® does not 
attribute to méyaé the same degree of ontological “pregnancy” or 
“driving force” as Bhartrhari ascribes to time. While it is acknowledged 
that maya has two aspects, obscuring (dvarana) and projective (viksepa), 
the stress in Advaita interpretation is on the former more than the 
latter. For the Advaitin, the focus is on méyda’s obscuring of Brahman; 
for Bhartrhari, it is the projective power or driving force of time 
that occupies center stage. While this difference may at first appear 
to be merely a question of emphasis, a substantive distinction appears 
when the ontological status of the phenomenal projection itself is 
analyzed. While for Advaita the projected world of maya is neither 
real nor unreal but inexplicable (anirvacaniya), the time-driven world 
of Bhartrhari, though increasingly impure as it becomes manifested 
as worldly phenomena, never loses its direct ontological identity 
with Brahman. The relation between the phenomenal world and 
Brahman for Bhartrhari is continuous and does not have the mysterious 
break of an “all or nothing” sort that Samkara’s mdyd doctrine and its 
rope-snake analogy requires. Whereas superimposition (adhydsa) is a 
fitting term for Samkara,*! it does not seem appropriate to Bhartrhari. 
The illustrations offered in the Vakyapadiya are more often associated 
with images of Sabda Brahman bursting forth in illumination (sphofa), 
of pregnancy (the peacock egg producing all the colors of creation), 
and of driving force like the pushing-up or lifting-up action of the 
waterwheel (kalayati). 

According to Bhartrhari, time is a creative power, while for Advaita 
(the Vivarana Advaitin, at least) the obscuring function of avidyd is 
equated with mdyd.*? Bhartrhari in his commentary on 1.1 describes 
avidyaé as the diversity of phenomena created by Sabda Brahman’s time 
power. It is probably open to question whether the term avidya meant 
the same for Bhartrhari as it came to be defined by Samkara some 
centuries later. Modern commentators sometimes incorrectly apply 
concepts they have learned from Advaita Vedanta when interpreting 
the Vakyapadiya. Notions such as “superimposition” (adhydsa), if seen 
through Advaita eyes, are probably misleading and unhelpful in under- 
standing Bhartrhari. We may make more progress by staying with the 
words of the versesand the clear illustrations offered in the commentary. 

Bhartrhari apparently never wrote a commentary for chapter 3. At 
present only Helaraja’s Tiké (ca. A.D. 1050-1100) is available.?? In 
Vakyapadiya 3.9.62, Bhartrhari discusses directly the ontological status 
of time, and Helaraja adds some helpful comments. Bhartrhari observes 
that there are different doctrines about time: some call it “power” 
(Sakti), some call it ‘‘soul’’ (d#man), and others, “deity’’ (devata). Time 
is the first (stage) of avidyd, and does not exist in knowledge.** Helaraja 
in his 7ika further describes time as an independent power of Brahman 


METAPHYSICS 41 


and discusses its ontological status in relation to avidyd: “‘According to 
Bhartrhari, time is the svdtantrya Sakti of Brahman.... Due to avidya, 
there is, first of all, appearance of diversity. Diversity is temporal and 
spatial. The former comes first. Consciousness, at the stage called 
pagyanti, is without any sequence. When it becomes associated with 
pranavytti, it appears to have sequence due to time.’’?> As this comment 
makes clear, there are three ontological levels in Bhartrhari’s thought: 
Brahman, his powers of time and space, and the diversity of the pheno- 
menal world. Once again he contrasts with Samkara’s Advaita, where 
there is only one ontological level—Brahman—with maya as an episte~ 
mological second level (which is neither real nor unreal but inexplica- 
ble). For Bhartrhari the highest ontological level is pure Brahman 
without sequence or diversity. It is the culmination of our experience 
of vac or language.** Although time is inherent in Sabda Brahman at 
this stage, no sequence has yet occurred—it is still pure potentiality. 
The next ontological level, in descending order, is madhyama. It is at this 
level that time begins to push or drive delimited portions of Sabda 
Brahman into sequence, which it accomplishes with the help of prana 
or breath. In our experience of language this stage corresponds to the 
separation of the unitary sphofa into the mental sequence of thoughts. 
The full-blown appearance of diversity appears when time has released 
all the secondary cause-effect relations that have been waiting as stored 
memory traces (sapskdra) 01 “seed states” in all the cycles of the 
universe. It is in this third or vatkhari level that the power of time as the 
sequence evidenced in ordinary cause-effect relations is fully experienc- 
ed. To return to Bhartrhari’s own analogy, at this stage we see the 
birds on time’s strings flying about to the full limit that their strings 
allow. Time is thus the governing power of all activity in the universe 
of manifested objects. It is time that drives or pushes objects into action 
to the point at which their own secondary cause-effect relations take 
hold. But it is also the behind-the-scenes activity of time that controls 
the extent of the secondary actions of objects, along with their moment 
of decay or withdrawal. 

The notion of time functioning by permitting and preventing worldly 
activity is stated in Vakpapadiya 3.9.4 and reappears frequently through- 
out section 9: “Time has been called the wire-puller of the world 
Machine. It regulates the universe through prevention and permis- 
sion.”’2? The Sanskrit terms involved are abhyanujfia (permission) and 
pratibandha (prevention). As the wire-puller of the universe, time allows 
some things to appear at a particular time and prevents others from 
appearing. This scheduling activity is most important, for without it 
everything would appear simultaneously and there would be mass 
confusion.”® The function of time called ‘‘permission” allows things to 
be born and to continue in existence.”® By its other function, prevention, 


42 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


time obstructs the inherent capacities of objects and “old age” is then 
experienced. It is in this way that the stages of life and the seasons are 
ordered. When time is functioning under its impulse of prevention, 
decay (jaraé) occurs. Decay and growth (krama) operate like pairs of 
opposites. When decay is active, growth is blocked, and vice versa.®° 
But the underlying substratum of all of this activity is the driving 
impulse of time.8! Time remains eternal even though the actions of 
growth and decay come and go. 

As a result of the activity of growth and decay, time, which is one, 
attains the states of past, present, and future. Thus when an action 
ceases, time, conditioned by that action, is called past. When something 
is about to happen, time, conditioned by that event, is called future. 
When action has been initiated but is not yet completed, time is then 
called present.32 In this way the one transcendent reality—time—is 
experienced, through the actions of the secondary causes it releases or 
restrains, to be sequenced into past, present, and future. Time, says 
Bhartrhari, is like the everflowing current of a river, which deposits 
some things on the river bank and at the same time takes away others.3 
So it is that the seasons change, as symbolized by the motions of the 
sun and stars. As Helaraja puts it, ““The seasons may be looked upon 
as the abode of time, because it appears as the seasons. The power 
called ‘Freedom’ of Brahman is really time and it appears diversified 
as the different seasons like Spring, etc.’’** Thus the appearance of the 
universe, which is really without sequence, as something with sequence, 
is the work of time.*® 

In another analogy, past, present, and future are said to be like three 
paths on which objects move without any confusion.*® Helaraja’s 
comment likens this view to the Samkhya-Yoga explanation of time 
found in Vyasa’s commentary on Yogasitva 2.13. Here the activity of 
time is equated with the ever-present movement of the gunas on the 
three paths-of being (adhvan). The notion that objects and mental 
states do not all occur simultaneously due to the prevention and 
permission activities of time is clearly stated. The psychological mecha- 
nism involved is that of inherent tendencies or memory traces 
(samskéra), which sprout like seeds when the conditions created by the 
ever-changing gunas are favorable.3’? The point of this parallel between 
Samkhya-Yoga and vupdkarana doctrine is to show how the three 
apparently conflicting qualities can coexist in harmony. As Helaraja 
puts it, 


Just as the three ingredients, having the characteristics of serenity 
(sattva), activity (rajas) and inertia (¢amas), though existing 
simultaneously due to their eternity, acquire the subordinate and 
principal relation and effect beings through their peculiar evo- 


METAPHYSICS 43 


lution, in a proper manner in the splendor of their own course 
of action, so also, these (three) time-divisions, by the magnificence 
of their own power (become) capable of effecting sequence in 
external aspects.3® 


The past and the future hide objects, so they are like tamas or darkness 
(says Bharirhari). The present enables us to see the objects, so it is like 
light or the sativa of the Samkhyas. Rajas stands for the activity of time 
itself.°® For both Samkhya-Yoga and the Grammarian the harmonious 
coexistence of objects on the three paths of time makes the ordered 
sequence of the world possible. Time, like an eternal road, is the sub- 
stratum on which the objects of the world come and go. The road, like 
time, always remains the same.4° 

The essence of Bhartrhari’s viewpoint is that time is an independent 
power (Sakti) of Sabda Brahman. Time is characterized by its two 
energies of prevention or decay and permission or growth. If we look 
for the precursors of this doctrine of time, we can find a continuity back 
through Patafijali’s Mahabhasya to the Vedas. Although Panini is silent 
on the philosophical aspects of time, Patafijali in his Mahdbhdasya dis- 
cusses time in two places. At 2.2.5, kdla is described in terms of the 
growth, or decay of bodies. Vakyapadiya 3.9.13 seems to be a direct 
reference to this passage of the Mahdbhdsya. Again, at 4.2.3 of the 
Mahabhasya, Patafijali defines time as eternal.*! But Patafijali does not 
say whether time is to be taken as a power of Brahman (Bhartrhari’s 
view) or as a substance (the Nyaya-Vaisesika view).*2 In Nyaya- 
Vaisesika theory time is viewed as an independent substance. Time is 
present everywhere as the eternal connecting relations between pairs of 
objects.4* Some later Nyaya-Vaisesika theories seem to have followed 
Bhartrhari’s lead and identified time and space with dkdéfa and with 
Brahman.** 

A direct precursor for Bhartrhari’s view in the Vakyapadiya is available 
in the Maitri Upanisad discussion of time. As mentioned earlier, in 
Maitri 6.15 time is described as the form of Brahman that has parts. 
These parts (namely, the year, andso on) growand decay. Time is said 
to cook all things in the Great Soul (mahdiman). 

Bhartrhari has on occasion been mistakenly called a Buddhist. The 
Buddhist (Madhyamika) view of time, however, is radically different 
from that of the Vaékyapadiya. For the Buddhist there is no present time 
(vartamanakaéla) apart from the past and future.*® But the Buddhist 
emphasis on the constant process of change—and thus the necessary 
reference to past and future—seems too one-sided when it leaves no 
room for the present. We do experience the present as an ongoing 
moment, and this concept Bharirhari accommodates successfully. 

Bhartrhari’s notion of the dynamic limiting function of time 


44 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(kdlafakti) lies behind the discussion of the levels of language in the 
Vakyapadiya, After setting forth the absolute nature of Brahman as being 
the one eternal essence of word and consciousness, Bhartrhari intro- 
duces the notion of time as the power or means by which this one 
unchanging absolute (Sabda Brahman) manifests itself as the dynamic 
diversity mankind experiences as creation. Time is the creative power of 
Sabda Brahman and is thus responsible for the birth, death, and 
continuity of everything in the cosmos. Time is one, but when broken 
or limited into sequences appears as moments or actions. These seg- 
ments of time are mentally categorized as seconds or minutes. Such 
limited segments of time are then mentally unified into day, week, 
month, and year. In the same fashion notions of past, present, and 
future are developed. When time is viewed as an action not yet com- 
pleted, the notion of the present is established. An action that has been 
completed is time as past, and an action yet to be completed is time as 
future. All of ordinary life is sequenced by these three powers of time. 
Yet all the while, declares Bhartrhari, there is really no sequence at all. 
From the ultimate viewpoint all three powers of time are constantly 
present. Time is one. Although the effects of the three powers of time 
(that is past, present, and future) are mutually contradictory, they 
function without causing any disorder in the cosmos. They are like 
three paths on which objects move about without any confusion. 

Bhartrhari enters into this deep discussion of time in relation to the 
absolute not as a fascinating metaphysical aside, but to explain how 
the unitary Sabda Brahman manifests itself in experience as the diver- 
sity of words called language. As a Grammarian, he is also providing a 
metaphysical basis for the experience of the tenses past, present, and 
future in language. And it is past and future that have the veiling 
function of keeping one apart from the absolute eternal present. In 
religious terms union with the eternal present is union with the divine, 
which, for Bhartrhari, is the inherent goal toward which all language, 
all grammar, is reaching. 


4, Vydékarana as A MEANS OF RELEASE 
(Sabdaparvayoga) 


For the Hindu the ultimate goal of philosophy is liberation (moksa). 
Before Bhartrhari, Patafijali in his Mahdbhdsya included in the aims of 
grammatical study (vyakarana) the attainment of heaven (svarga) 
through the correct use of words and liberation from bondage (moksa) .*® 
While it is clear that for Patafijali liberation is the divine Word, he does 
not specify how this divine Word is to be achieved. Satyakam Varma 
solves this problem by assuming that the Patafijali of the Mahdbhasya 


METAPHYSICS 45 


is the same as the Patafijali of the Yogasitras and that the description 
of how yoga of the Word is to take place is given in the latter work.*? 
While not all scholars agree that the same Patafijali authored both the 
Mahabhasya and the Yogasitras, Satyakam Varma’s suggestion of obtain- 
ing help from the Yogasiiras has independent merit in the attempt to 
understand the grammarian concept of fabdapirvayoga or the yoga of the 
Word (literally, yoga preceded by the Word). For present purposes, 
however, an attempt will be made to interpret fabdapirvayoga by using 
only the Vakyapadiya. 

Bhartrhari emphasizes the aim of grammar as leading both to heaven 
and to liberation not only in the Vakyapadiya but also in his commentary 
on Patafijali’s Maha&bhdsya.4® At the beginning of the Véakyapadiya 
Bhartrhari says that’ grammar is the door leading to liberation (1.14); 
it is the straight, royal road for those who desire salvation (1.16); and 
by means of it one attains the supreme Brahman (1.22). At the end of 
the first chapter Bhartrhari returns to the topic and states that ‘‘the 
purification of the word is the means to the attainment of the Supreme 
Self. One who knows the essence of its activity attains the immortal 
Brahman” (1.131). The yoga of the Word, then, has the power to take 
one from the ordinary experience of the word all the way to union with 
the Divine. 


A. The First Stage 

The first requisite step is the purging of corrupt forms from one’s 
everyday language. While Bhartrhari allows that corrupt forms of 
words can convey meaning, spiritual merit can be attained only by the 
knowledge and use of the correct forms of words, which is the spiritual 
role of grammar. As Bhartrhari puts it in the ortti on 1.131: when 
speech is purified by the adoption of the grammatically correct forms 
and all obstruction in the shape of incorrect forms is removed, there 
results a spiritual merit that brings the experience of well-being 
(abhyudaya). This abhyudaya is also translated into English as ‘“‘moral 
power”’ of the sort that begins to move us in the direction of identifying 
ourselves with the divine.*® This identification is the first step in the 
yoga of the Word—the repeated use of grammatically correct language 
that generates more and more abhyudaya until the way is prepared 
through the lower levels of language (vatkhari and madhyamd vék) for the 
dawning of the mystical vision (pafyanti). 

For the modern mind it is hard to imagine just how the grammatically 
correct use of words could be understood as generating moral power, 
spiritual well-being, and the dawning of the mystical vision. In order 
for us to empathize with this first step in the yoga of the Word, it will 
help to remind ourselves how Bhartrhari understands the function of 
time in relation to the correct use of words. The appearance of the 


46 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


unitary Sabda Brahman as having parts (words) and sequence (word 
order) is the work of time.®° The entire universe is like a puppet show 
with time as its wire-puller. Time regulates the universe through 
prevention or decay and permission.5! Time controls the birth, death, 
and sequence of all objects, including all words. Time allows some 
things to appear at a particular time and prevents others from appear- 
ing. As the sequencing activity of all experience, time translates into 
grammar as the rules by which the appearance and disappearance of 
words in correct linguistic sequence is to take place. Underlying all 
activity, including all linguistic activity, is the driving impulse of time.®? 
Time, as the first power of the divine Word, remains eternal, though 
the activity of language may come and go.*8 

Incorrect usage results from attempts by humans to change the 
sequencing of language to suit themselves, without regard for the divine 
Word. Such ego-centered word use leaves behind memory traces, which 
serve to conflict and obscure the proper sequencing of Sabda Brahman 
by its time power. Without the aid of grammar and its purifying rules, 
such a confused mental state is the usual result. The truth of the Vedic 
teaching and glimpses of Sabda Brahman are obscured within con- 
sciousness by the layers of traces laid down by incorrect word use. 
Strict adherence to grammar, and its teaching of correct word use, 
gradually results in removal of these obscuring traces from consciousness. 
As the proper, non-ego-centered sequencing of language is established, 
the truth of the Vedic teaching can be seen and responded to. Then 
increased moral power and the first glimpses of the divine Word are 
experienced. This achievement is the truly creative function of the 
Word—not the making of something new by human ego-centered 
activity (the modern western notion of creativity), but the revelation 
of the real nature of things through the reflective power of language.5¢ 
Only when the rules of grammar are followed is word use crystalline 
enough to let the divine show through. Repeated practice of proper 
word. use restores to language its mirrorlike quality, enabling a reflec- 
tion of the transcendent Word to take place. Such a polishing and 
purification of the mind and its constituent word structures is the goal 
of stage one in the yoga of the Word. 


B. The Second Stage 

Stage two occurs when one focuses on the purified reflective power of 
the word until union with Sabda Brahman is realized. Bhartrhari quotes 
some verses describing the process in the oytt: on Vakyapadiya 1.131: 


“After taking his stand on the word which lies beyond the activity of 
breath, after having taken rest in oneself by the union resulting in 
the suppression of sequence,” 


METAPHYSICS 47 


‘After having purified speech and after having rested it on the mind, 
after having broken its bonds and made it bond-free,”’ 

‘After having reached the inner light, he with his knots cut, becomes 
united with the Supreme Light.”55 


The middle passage should be taken first. Speech has been purified 
(stage one) until the mind is using only correct grammatical structures, 
which is what the phrase “resting it on the mind” implies. The 
purging of ego attachment is essential in such a purification and must be 
carried even farther in stage two. The “‘breaking of bonds” referred to 
are the memory traces and their tainted motivations left by egocentric 
activity—in either spoken words (vaikhari vak) or inner thoughts 
(madhyamad vak). These ego bonds are removed by meditating on the 
divine Word (Sabda Brahman) so that the purified forms of language 
are being clearly reflected. The amount of such meditation required 
will be equal to the strength needed to negate the egocentric traces 
stored up within the mind. 

The first passage emphasizes the need for “suppression of sequence.” 
The function of time in sequencing the divine Word into thoughts and 
uttered sounds must now be suppressed. While such sequencing of 
language is essential in ordinary day-to-day activities, as well as in the 
understanding of the Vedic teaching, there comes a time when all that 
must be left behind. Immersion in worldly life as a student or house- 
holder, while necessary and good in itself, is not the ultimate goal. 
Study of the Vedic texts, while necessary, is not to be clung to as if it 
were the final end. Attachment to language use in either of these areas 
is only indicative of a failure to go beyond ego. Especially damaging is 
ego attachment to the Vedic words themselves—a textual literalism or 
fundamentalism reminiscent of a line from T.S. Eliot’s play Murder in 
the Cathedral: ‘“To do the right deed for the wrong reason is the greatest 
sin.’?5¢ Spiritual pride is always tragic, and spiritual pride attached to 
the divine Word is especially so. The wyakdrana practice of fabdapiirvayoga 
guards against such a result by insisting that the sequenced word of 
scripture be allowed to carry one beyond itself to liberation. This 
obstacle will undoubtedly be the most difficult one for the grammarian 
yogi to overcome. After having honed his grammatical style and know- 
ledge of scripture to a fine edge, it will be difficult to let go of that 
laboriously won achievement. But that is exactly what Bhartrhari 
requires, otherwise the traces of ego attachment to the uttered word 
will block out the reflection of the divine in it. 

Giving up attachment to sequenced language, purified though it may 
be, implies moving from spoken words (vatkhari) and inner thoughts 
(madhyama) to the direct mystical vision (pasyanti, pratibha, or sphota). 
As the first passage indicates, the function of breath here is important. 


48 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


In vaikhari breath is very active in producing the sequence of uttered 
sounds, At the level of inner thought (madhyamd@) breath is stil] active, 
though in a more subtle way, in fashioning sequences of thought. 
Pafgyanti lies beyond the activity of breath and sequence.®? The mind is 
quiet and focused, allowing the pratibha or intuitive perception of Sabda 
Brahman. Thus, through fabdapiirvayoga, the yoga of the Word, we are 
to pass on from the gross sequence to the subtle sequence and finally 
to that stage in which sequence is entirely eliminated. Like a perfectly 
still pond, consciousness, when stilled from its sequencing activity, 
clearly reflects the reality before it. For Bhartrhari, it is Sabda Brahman, 
the essence of consciousness, that stands revealed at the center of the 
stilled mind. 

The third passage quoted by Bharirhari reflects just such an expe- 
rience: ‘‘After having reached the inner light, he, with his knots cut, 
becomes united with the Supreme Light.” Although the “cutting of 
the knots” is not defined by Bhartrhari, Vrsabha describes it as a 
cutting of the bonds and knots of “ego sense.’’ Going beyond the ego- 
sense of “I”? and “mine’’ is obviously a major challenge in the yoga of 
the Word. It is repeatedly mentioned by Bhartrhari. For example, in 
the atti on Vakyapadiya 1.130 he says that those who know the yoga of 
the Word break the knots of ego-sense and are merged with the divine 
Word. If ego attachment in any form remains, the pasyanti stage will not 
be fully realized. In the vrtti on 1.142, pafyanti seems to be endowed 
with a number of phases (of increasingly pure reflection). In the lowest 
it seems to be still echoing some of the faint sequencing activity of 
madhyamd. At a higher level it assumes a quality in which all word forms 
are submerged beyond recognition. At the highest level it completely 
transcends all associations with word forms. Hence pafyantt can reflect 
worldly word forms and can also totally transcend them. Even though 
it may come into contact with the sequenced and often egocentric word 
forms of vaikhari and madhyamd, it remains pure, untouched, and 
spiritual in nature. To those who are trapped in ego knots and impure 
word usage, pafyanti may appear to be mixed up and contaminated. 
But in reality it is not. As one adopts correct word forms through a 
rigorous and reverent study of grammar, one’s consciousness is purified 
and the true inner vision of pafyanti revealed. As Bhartrhari puts it, 
those whose inner vision is unobstructed (with ego knots) see, without 
error, the power of words and know the true nature of things.°* The 
word forms are seen for what they are, namely, partial manifestations of 
the one divine Word, which in pafyanti stands clearly revealed. The yoga 
of the Word is the meditational exercise in which the mind is concen- 
trated on the unity of the divine Word and turned away from the 
diverse thoughts and sounds that manifest it.69 The whole meditational 
process, with its culmination in the vision of the divine Word and final 


METAPHYSICS 49 


reunion with it, is poetically described in the Rg Veda stanza “Maho 
devo martyam Aviveda”’: 


The spiritual aspirant reaches the Essence of Speech—the pure lumi- 
nous Eternal Verbum, which lies beyond the vital plane (prdnaovrtiim 
atikrante) by withdrawing his mind from external nature (a&tmdnam 
samhytya) and fixing it up on his inner nature (dimani). This entails 
the dissolution of temporal sequence of thought activity (krama- 
samhara-yogena). The purification of the Verbum results from this and 
the aspirant enters into it having severed all his ties with the material 
objective plane. This leads him to the attainment of the internal light 
and he becomes identical with the undying and undecaying Spirit, 
the Word Absolute.® 


Bhartrhari claims that in the spirituality attained through the 
practice of the yoga of the Word a greater measure of divine light shines 
through: ‘‘Those persons in whom correct speech exists in a greater 
measure, in them also resides, in a greater measure, the holy form of 
the creator.’’®! And as long as a grammarian in the state of spirituality 
is alive, the divine light of the Word resides in him as in a covered vessel. 
When such a one dies this holy luster merges into Sabda Brahman, its 
source. ® 

The yoga of the Word demonstrates that the meaningfulness of words 
is not merely intellectual, it is meaningfulness that has spiritual power. 
With the proper yoga, words have the power to remove ignorance 
(avidya), reveal truth (dharma), and realize liberation (moksa). The 
orttt on Vakyapadiya 1.5 states it clearly: “Just like making gifts, perform- 
ing austerities and practicing continence are means of attaining 
heaven. It has been said: When, by practicing the Vedas, the vast dark- 
ness is removed, that supreme, bright, imperishable light comes into 
being in this very birth.’’® It is not only this lofty goal of final release 
that is claimed for the spiritual power of words, but also the very avail- 
ability of human reasoning. Without the fixed power of words to convey 
meaning, inference through words could not take place.® Because of 
the power inherent in mantras for both human inference and divine 
truth, great care must be given to the yoga of words. 

In word yoga, the repeated chanting of mantras is an instrument of 
power. The more traces there are to be overcome the more repetitions 
are needed. Vakyapadiya 1.14 Vriti suggests that repeated use of correct 
mantras removes all impurities, purifies all knowledge, and leads to 
liberation. The psychological mechanism is described by Bhartrhari as 
a holding of the sphota in place by continued chanting. Just as from a 
distance, or in semidarkness, it takes repeated cognition of an object 
before one sees it correctly, so also repeated chanting of the mantras 


50 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


results in the sphota being perceived in all its fullness.*° Mandana Misra 
describes it as a series of progressively clearer impressions until a clear 
and correct apprehension takes place in the end.®* To begin with, such 
mantra chanting will be mainly at the vatkhari or outer word level. But 
as spiritual improvement is made, the chant will be more and more 
internalized on the madhyamd or inner word level. Eventually all 
sequenced chanting activity will submerge into the still steady mantra 
samadhi of pafyanti, and the final goal of the yoga of the Word will have 
been realized. 

For the vyakarana our outer words and inner thoughts are but reflec- 
tions, more or less perfect, of the one divine Word. The great ysis or seers 
recognized this fact and made themselves empty channels through 
which the divine Word could reverberate with little distortion. The 
great Grammarian teachers, basing themselves on the ysis’ utterances, 
formulated this wisdom into a teaching informing all of life and even 
into a pathway to final Jiberation. 

While not all may agree with the spiritual vision of the Hindu 
Grammarians it must be conceded that we do find here a view of 
language that makes sense of poetry, revealed scripture, science, and 
the mystical chanting of mantras, and which in addition strongly reso- 
nates with our ordinary everyday experience of coffee-cup chat. It is a 
way of seeing language that effectively explains why it is that sometimes 
when we listen we do not hear. It also teaches how to remove the 
obstructions in one’s consciousness so that real hearing becomes possible 
and suggests in a different way the ultimate wisdom of the observation. 
“In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the 
Word was God” (John 1:1). 


3 


EPISTEMOLOGY 


Recent western thought has focused much attention on the relation 
between language and knowledge, but it has consistently taken a 
narrower perspective than vydkarana would accept. Within the contem- 
porary school of linguistic philosophy, language seems to be restricted 
to the printed word and then analyzed for a one-to-one correspondence 
with objective reality. While the computer-like functions of language 
must be highly respected, modern linguists and philosophers often seem 
to consign all other dimensions of the word to the unreality of a mystic’s 
silence.t Ernst Cassirer has taken a much broader perspective including 
the natural sciences, the humanities, and all human cultural activity of 
language.? Vyakarana would applaud Cassirer but expand the realm of 
language even further. According to Bhartrhari, ““There is no cognition 
without the operation of words; all cognition is shot through and 
through by the word. All knowledge is illumined through the word.”’8 
The fundamental epistemological presupposition from Bhartrhari’s 
perspective is that the problem of meaning is basic. It is through the 
meaning conveyed by words that all knowledge is experienced. In this 
sense, then, the philosophy of language is not just another school of 
philosophy but is the basic foundation for all philosophy. As T.R.V. 
Murti has so aptly put it, ““The problem of what we can know is closely 
bound up with the question of what we can say. It is only thought as 
expressed in words that can be understood, communicated and criticiz- 
ed. Language is not an accidental, dispensable garb which could be put 
on and put off. It grows with thought, or rather thought grows with it. 
In the ultimate analysis they may be identical.”4 Meaning and cogni- 
tion are understood to manifest themselves together as expressions of 
one deep spiritual impulse to know and to communicate. Consciousness 
(cattanya) is identical with speech (vac). 


52 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


1. Sabda as Praména IN RELATION 
TO OTHER Praménas 


Before a discussion of fabda or testimony as a means of knowledge 
(pramdna), it may be useful to sketch the scholastic Indian conception 
of knowledge (pramd). In Sanskrit the word jf#dna stands for all kinds of 
cognition, irrespective of the questions of truth or falsehood. Pramd, 
however, is used to designate only a true cognition (yathdrthajfiana) as 
distinct from a false one (mithydjfidna). A pramana is an active and 
unique cause of a prama or knowledge.® The Samkhya and Yoga schools 
of Indian philosophy accept three pramdnas: pratyaksa (perception), 
anumana (inference), and fabda (testimony).?7 The Mimamsa school 
defines six pramdnas: pratyaksa, anumdna, Sabda, upamédna (analogy), 
arthdpatti (presumption), and abhdva (nonapprehension ).° The same six 
pramanas are also stated by Vedanta.® Of course, there are many diffe- 
rences of definition regarding specific pramdnas among the schools. 

Within vydkarana, Bhartrhari in his Mahdbhdsyatika accepts three 
pramdnas: perception (pratyaksa), inference (anumdna), and scripture 
(gama or Sabda), Perception is judged as liable to be erroneous, and at 
times inference is seen as superior to perception. But dgama or fabda, 
which consists of the revealed (Sruti) and remembered (smrti) scriptures, 
is a strong pramana and is more dependable than inference. Several verses 
in the Vakyapadiya (1.27-43) examine the relations obtaining between 
the pramanas of reason and scripture. In Bhartrhari’s view it is not 
justifiable to replace scripture with inference in nonempirical matters 
or to hold that philosophical views (vdda) can be free from scripture. 
Inference alone, without the steadying influence of scripture, is an 
inadequate means of valid knowledge. As Vakyapadiya 1.34 puts it, 
‘‘Whatever is inferred with great effort by clever reasoners is explained 
otherwise by cleverer ones.’!° Thus dharma or right conduct cannot be 
determined by reasoning without the help of the scriptural tradition 
(verses 1.30-31). And any attempt to establish the nature of objects by 
inference will likely fail because their properties differ according to 
place and time (verse 1.32). Knowledge of this sort can only be derived 
from the scriptural tradition (fabda), and then only after long hours of 
practice (abhydsa; verse 1.35). The words of the rsis convey supersensory 
knowledge that cannot be set aside by inference, because with their 
consciousness purged of ignorance (avidyd) they have directly perceived 
divine truth (Sabda Brahman; verse 1.38). The role of vydkarana is to 
safeguard the transmission of this scriptural knowledge and to assist the 
hearer in realizing the truth of fabda. 

The early grammarians Panini and Pataiijali define Sabda primarily 
in terms of the spoken word. In the beginning of his Mahabhdsya, 
Patafijali defines the word as “‘That on the utterance of which there is 


EPISTEMOLOGY 53 


understanding regarding objects (sampratyaya).’’! This definition of 
sabda does not identify the word with the uttered sound only. The dis- 
tinction between word (fabda) and sound (dhvani) is basic to the under- 
standing of language in Indian philosophy.’ To take the physical sound 
as the word is to conflate entities of two different orders, like the con- 
fusion of the soul with the body. “The word, like the soul, has a physical 
embodiment in the sound and is made manifest through the latter, but 
the conveyance of meaning is the function of the word; the sound only 
invokes the word.”!® If the word (Sabda) is only invoked and not 
constituted by the uttered sounds (dhvanit), a question then arises about 
the nature of this Sabda that is manifested. The Carvaka, Buddhist, and 
Jain schools, along with many modern linguists, think all words to be 
the result of human convention. Where human convention is not allow- 
able, the divine convention of God may be invoked—as is done by the 
Nyaya, for example. Against this view, and in agreement with the 
Mimamsa, vydkarana maintains that the relation between words and 
meaning is eternal, underived, and impersonal. The relation between 
fabda and its meaning is not an arbitrary convention established by man 
or Godor both. Not only is there no record of any such convention, 
says the vydkarana, but the very idea of “‘convention” itself presup- 
poses language—the thing claimed to be derived from convention.14 
Therefore, language must be taken as having existed without 
beginning. 

Murti suggests that the attempt to discover a temporal beginning of 
language may arise from a confusion of sabda with dhvani.1® While 
speaking sounds and learning how to group sounds into syllables and 
the like may well be conventional, the fact of verbal communication 
necessitates the acceptance of fabda as a given that the learned sounds 
manifest but do not constitute. Otherwise, there would be as many 
different words ‘‘cow” as there are people speaking, for each person 
produces the complex of sounds involved slightly differently, namely, 
with different accent, speed, and so on. Each single utterance of the 
word would be unique. The fundamental point of the vydkarana posi- 
tion is that in spite of the individual differences in speaking it “cow”? is 
recognized as the same word, “‘cow’’. This aspect of vyaékarana doctrine 
provides an eastern parallel to the western notion of Platonic forms. 
The word “cow’’, like a Platonic form, is identical and immutable even 
though instances ofits utterance may vary. The nub of the argument, as 
in Plato, is that verbal communication necessitates the acceptance of 
some kind of eternal word forms. The Platonic problem of the relation 
of the Idea to the “copies” appears in vydkarana as the relation of the 
immutable word to the many verbal manifestations that evoke it. But 
wyakarana goes beyond just establishing the eternality of fabda. It identi- 
fies Sabda with Brahman, so that all words ultimately mean Brahman— 


54 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


thus the absolute as Sabda Brahman. As Madhava puts it in his 
SarvadarSanasamgraha, 


Brahman is the one object denoted by all words; and this one 
object has various differences imposed upon it according to each 
particular form; but the conventional variety of the differences 
produced by these illusory conditions is only the result of igno- 
rance. Non-duality is the true state; but through the power of 
“concealment” (exercised by illusion) at the time of the con- 
ventional use of words a manifold expansion takes place.16 


Thus, knowledge of the meaning of words not only removes ignorance 
but also leads to the final bliss of identity with Sabda Brahman. 


2. Treortzes oF ERROR 


In vyakarana as in most other Indian philosophies, error or ignorance 
{avidyé) is ascribed the important function of obstructing the real from 
view. Although some scholars suggest that Bhartrhari’s theory of error 
is analogous to Samkara’s analysis of the rope-snake illusion,!’ other 
interpretations, which would distinguish wydkarana from Advaita 
Vedanta, appear viable. Samkara describes error (avidyZ) as being over- 
come by a single negation. Bhartrhari, however, in his Vakyapadiya 
seems to hold that error is overcome positively by an increasingly clear 
cognition of the word form or sphota, which the succeeding perceptions 
reveal, Whereas the overcoming of error for Samkara takes a negative 
form, for Bhartrhari it is positive. 

The vrtti on Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya 1.89 and Mandana’s comment 
on sitra 19 of the Sphofasiddhi state that the final clear perception of the 
sphota is achieved through a series of errors. The analogy is offered of 
the way that, from a distance, one may (if one is in India) mistake a tree 
for an elephant. But if one keeps on looking at it, the tree is ultimately 
recognized in its true form. In this situation the truth has been arrived 
at through a series of errors. The sense organ (in this case the eye) has 
been in contact with the tree throughout. The errors of perception have 
had the tree as their object, but the cognitions produced by the eye have 
had an elephant as their form. When the final or true cognition takes 
place, however, it has the form of the tree itself and is one with its 
object; but this true cognition has been arrived at by going through the 
series of erroneous perceptions that preceded it. Now this change from 
error to true perception cannot be explained by factors such as change 
in distance, for simply standing in the same spot and gazing with intense 
concentration often produces the desired result. According to Mandana, 


EPISTEMOLOGY 55 


‘it is the previous cognitions (having tree as the object and the form of 
the elephant) leaving progressively clearer residual impressions, which 
become the cause of the clear perception of the tree.’!® There could 
have been no erroneous cognition of elephant had the tree not been 
there as an object for the sense organ to contact in the first place. The 
error, therefore, may be described as misapprehension or vague percep- 
tion. In Bhartrhari’s theory of language, the sphofa is similarly said to 
be the object of the cognitions of each of the letters, and yet it at first 
appears in the form of a letter. But through the additional cognitions of 
the subsequent letters, the sphota is seen with increasing clarity until, 
with the uttering of the final letter, the form of the letters has become 
identical with that ofthe sphota. Here theletters areseenin a position that 
at first glance seems parallel to the snake in the famous rope-snake 
illusion of the Advaita Vedantins. The perception of the rope as snake 
is error, but it is through negating the erroneous snake perception that 
the true rope perception is finally realized. And were it not for the prior 
existence of the rope, the erroneous perception would have lacked the 
necessary ground for its phenomenal existence. Similarly, in this case, 
the letters are seen as dependent on the sphofa for their phenomenal 
existence, but in that phenomenal existence as being the means by 
which the noumenal sphota may be perceived. This apparent parallel, 
however, does not hold up under closer analysis. Advaita theory pro- 
vides for only true or false cognitions and allows no progressive approxi- 
mation to the real,}® as is the case in a series of erroneous sphota percep- 
tions. Whereas the Advaitin describes his error as being transcended 
via a single negation (such as when it is realized that “‘it is not snake”’), 
the grammarian holds that his error (for example, the vagueness of the 
perception of the whole in the first letter) is positively overcome by the 
increasingly clear perception of the sphota revealed by thesucceeding 
letters. This analysis of the way error is overcome would seem to give 
further weight to Gaurinath Sastri’s suggestion that in some ways the 
doctrine of reflection (dbhasa) of the Kashmir Trika writers may provide 
the closest parallel to sphofa theory.2° In the Kashmir Trika view 
consciousness (cattanya) is the only reality, and all external manifestation 
is held to be a reflection on consciousness as on a mirror. Error, in this 
view, occurs not because the initial perception has no existence but 
because its reflection of the object captures or includes only a part of its 
totality and fills in the gaps with other material (traces) taken from the 
old stock of memory. This error is positively transcended as the form of 
the reflection is progressively purified of memory material until it 
perfectly reflects the object. This perfect reflection, which is true know- 
ledge, is further described as a union of the subjective and objective 
aspects of consciousness—a return to the oneness that is its essential 
nature.*4 From this brief glance at the Kashmir dbhdsa theory, it would 


56 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


seem to provide a helpful parallel supporting the wpakarana view of the 
way in which the mainfest letters erroneously but positively approxi- 
mate their true object, the sphota itself. 

To return to Mandana, his explanation of the paradox of the way the 
indivisible sphota appears as the letters, and the letters as the parts of the 
partless sphota, is as follows. He says it is the sounds that resemble one 
another that are the cause of both the error and the final correct cogni- 
tion of the sphota. If, for the manifestation of two different word-sphofas, 
one has to make similar movements of the vocal organs, the letters 
produced by these movements appear to be parts of both of the indivisi- 
ble words.?2 This error is fostered by the construction of such artificial 
devices as alphabet letters or word syllables, usually for teaching pur- 
poses. It is precisely because of this kind of confusion, says Mandana, 
that sentences, words and letters appear to have parts, while in reality 
they do not.?8 The obverse applies to the sphota. From the phenomenal 
viewpoint the sphota ‘“‘cow’’, for example, may appear to possess qualities 
such as accent, speed, loudness, time, place, and person in its utterance. 
That they are qualities of the phenomenal sounds and not the noumenal 
Sphoja is what makes possible the common recognition of the word 
“cow” in spite of its diversity of utterance. From the sphota viewpoint, 
it is this noumenal grounding or basis that makes possible such things 
as the translation of thought from one phenomenal language to another. 

Mandana offers the example of a picture. He points out that in our 
cognition of a picture, although we may be aware of the different parts 
and colors, the picture is perceived as a whole over and above its parts.”4 
Similarly, when we perceive a piece of cloth our cognition is ofthe cloth 
as a whole and is quite distinct from the particular threads and colors 
involved.*5 

In both of these examples there is a necessary perception of the parts 
prior to the perception of the whole. This aspect is brought out clearly 
by Bhartrhari, who describes the painter as going through three stages 
when he paints a picture: “When a painter wishes to paint a figure 
having parts like that of a man, he first sees it gradually in a sequence, 
then as the object of a single cognition and then paints it on cloth or on 
a wall in sequence.’’?6 So also the hearer of a word perceives the word 
in a sequence of letters, which manifest in him the whole word as the 
object of a single cognition, As a speaker, however, he utters the whole 
word in its differentiated appearance as a sequence of letters. It is in 
this context that the perception of the many letters, before the final 
perception of the unitary sphoja, is described as error, illusion, or 
appearance. But it is a unique kind of error in that it has a fixed 
sequence and form, ultimately leads to the perception of the truth, and 
is thus regarded as a universal error.?’ The chief cause of this universal 
error is described as avidyd, the limitation of the individual self-con- 


EPISTEMOLOGY 57 


sciousness. A characteristic of this avidyd is that it provides no means for 
cognizing the sphofa other than the letters. That is why all individual 
selves universally experience the same error with regard to speech; but 
it is an error that ultimately leads to cognition of truth. It is only 
through this error or appearance of differentiation that the individual 
Sphota comes within the range of worldly usage so that we ordinary 
mortals have a way of comprehending it. 

With the preceding understanding of Bhartrhari’s sphoja theory in 
mind, we are now able to observe its significant difference from 
Samkara’s view of error. Whereas the Advaitin usually describes his 
error as being transcended via negation (such as when it is said that “‘it 
isnot snake’), the Grammarian holds that his error (for example, the 
vagueness of the perception of the whole in the first letter) is positively 
overcome by the increasingly clear cognition of the sphofa revealed by 
the succeeding letters.2® And the final clear cognition is a case of perfect 
perception or pratibhd—a flash of intuition revealing the sphofta or whole 
word.®° At the more mundane level of psychological functioning, how- 
ever, the positive process of perfecting the perception is described by 
Subramania Iyer as follows: 


(The final) clear cognition is a case of perception. The previous 
cognitions also had the sphofa as their object, but the cognition of 
it was vague and that is why they had the form of the sounds. 
But when the final cognition reveals the sphoja in all its clarity 
and distinctness, it no longer has the form of sounds. The error has 
given place to truth. Such a cognition can only be perception. 
The object and forms of the cognition are now identical.*+ 


Bhartrhari characterizes the conformity between the object and the 
form of the cognition in the final intuition as a certain fitness (yogyata) 
between the sounds and the sphofa, which, results in the clear manifesta- 
tion of the word.®? The perfect perception in which there is identity 
between the object (namely, the sphofa) and the form of its cognition 
(namely, the letters of sounds) is a special kind of perception that—the 
modern reader must realize—is held to be a function of the mind®® 
rather than of the external sense. The designation of the final cognition 
of the sphota as a case of perception, not of inference, has important 
logical implications.*4 Mandana expresses the point clearly: “The 
revelation (of an object) clearly or vaguely is confined to direct percep~ 
tion. In the case of the other means of knowledge there is either 
apprehension (of the object) or not at all.’85 According to almost all 
schools of Indian philosophy, the valid means of knowledge (pramédna) 
other than perception either reveal the object completely or do not 
reveal it at all. There can be increasing clarity of revelation only in the 


58 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


case of perception. This point is most important for the sphota theory in 
its contention that the error due to the vagueness of perception of the 
initial letters may be gradually and positively overcome, as described 
above. It is also crucial for the sphota theory in its contention that the 
existence of the sphofa is not a postulation, as the Mimamsakas maintain, 
but is proved by direct perception. 

Samkara in his commentary on Brahmasiitra 1.3.28 argues against 
Bhartrhari’s notion that the sphota is directly perceived. According to 
Samkara, only the individual letters of a word are perceived, and they 
are combined through the inferential activity of the mind into a word. 
aggregate.3® Because the psychological process is one of inference instead 
of perception, there can be no question of degrees of cognition. The 
inference pramdna is an all-or-nothing process. The error, if it is to be 
overcome, must be completely replaced all at once by a new inferential 
construction of the mind or by a superconscious intuition of Brahman. 
Thus the position of Bhartrhari (that the overcoming of error is a 
perceptual process admitting of degrees of positive approximation) and. 
the position of Samkara (that the overcoming of error is a negative 
process of inference—admitting of no degrees) are not at all analogous. 


3. THEORIES OF PARADOXES 


The logical principle “everything is either P or not P” has its 
limitations, especially in Indian philosophical discussions. Indian 
Grammarians and Logicians have classified negation into two types: 
prasajyapratisedha, verbally bound negative, and paryuddsa, nominally 
bound negative. The nominally bound negative like a-brahmana (“‘non- 
brahmin,” generally referring toa ksatriya, or the like) has a positive 
significance, and the negation is mainly for excluding some from 
the scope of the term negated. The verbally bound negation is a 
form of total negation and precludes an activity. 

The Madhyamika Buddhist proposes the fourfold negation (catuskotz) 
to deny all alternatives to the absolute. The Advaitin’s ‘‘indescribable,”’ 
used to indicate the nature of mdyd, is also not within the “‘either yes or 
no” principle. The Madhyamika thesis ‘“The phenomenal world is 
indeterminate” means that no predicate is applicable to the world. 
Now the question is raised, ‘‘Is ‘indeterminate’ a predicate or not ?” If 
it is, then the world is not indeterminate, for at least one predicate is 
applicable to it. Ifit is not, then we cannot say that the world is indeter- 
minate. Such paradoxes are met with the reply that ‘“tindeterminate”’ 
itself is not a predicate. 

Bhartrhari discussed some paradoxes in his Vakyapadiya. One is the 
famous liar’s paradox. “I am not telling the truth”’; if this statement is 


EPISTEMOLOGY 59 


true, he is a liar and his statement cannot be true, in which case it is 
true. Bhartrhari says that a statement of this type does not refer to 
itself. Another interesting remark from Bhartrhari regards the term 
“indescribable” (avdcya) : ““What you consider as avdcya can at least be 
referred to by the term avdcya (indescribable), and then it becomes vdcya 
or describable.” 


4. LEvELs of LANGUAGE 


The idea that various levels of language and knowing exist is present 
in several schools of Indian philosophy, but it is an idea that modern 
scholars in their first encounters with eastern thought either miss or 
misunderstand. The notion of levels of language is a necessary develop- 
ment in view of Bhartrhari’s absolutism. A monistic hierarchy such as 
the following necessarily results: just as the phonemes are only unreal 
abstractions of the word, so also words are unreal abstractions of the 
sentence, and the sentences are unreal abstractions of the paragraph. 
Even the paragraph is not the ultimate unity, for it is only an artificial 
division of the chapter of the book. At the top of this language hierarchy 
there is only one indivisible reality within our literary self, which, due 
to our human ignorance or limitation (avidya), can only manifest itself 
in such unreal forms as the book, the chapter, the paragraph, the 
sentence, and the word. The underlying principle, maintains 
Bhartrhari, is that all difference presupposes a unity (abhedapirvako hi 
bhedah). Where there is difference or parts there must be an underlying 
identity, otherwise the one could not be related to the other and each 
would constitute a world by itself. This concept provides the grounding 
for Bhartrhari’s metaphysical speculation and for the notion of a 
hierarchy of levels of languages (Vakyapadiya 1.1). 

Language can be seen to operate on at least two levels. There is the 
idea that comes as an inner flash (the cartoon image of the light bulb 
going on), and there is the outer speaking of words and sentences that 
attempis to convey the idea to others. The words and sentences are 
called. by Bhartrhari vaikhari véc—the uttered sounds that combine to 
make up the sentence, book, or poem. The inner idea or sphofa is aptly 
designated as pasyanti vdc—the intuitive flash of understanding of the 
sentence, book, or poem as a whole.®’ Between these two levels there is a 
middle or madhyama véc—the level of thought. Here the unitary idea or 
sphota appears separated into its sequence of thoughts, words, and 
phrases, none of which has yet reached the level of uttered sound. 
According to Bhartrhari, ode or language passes through these three 
levels whenever one speaks. Sabda, which is at first quite internal, is 
gradually externalized for the purpose of speaking. Hearing, of course, 


60 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


operates in the reverse direction. Whether one is dealing with factual 
scientific language or a poem that can be understood on various levels, 
Bhartrhari’s sphota theory seems to provide an adequate explanation. 
The complete continuum of cognition is covered. All of these pointsare 
in complete accord with Bhartrhari’s basic premise already mentioned, 
namely, that there is no possible cognition in which language does not 
figure. Knowledge, consciousness, and the word are all inextricably 
intertwined.®® Once this supposition is accepted, the idea of levels of 
language seems quite logical. 

Thought at the buddhi or differentiated stage of word sequences is 
perhaps best understood as internal speaking. And pratibhd, intuition, 
may be seen as a kind of muted speaking. The point being emphasized 
is that for Bhartrhari speaking is the essence of consciousness and the 
means to all knowledge. And. it must also be clearly understood that by 
‘‘speaking,”’ “language,” or ‘‘thought”’ what is meant is the conveyance 
of meaning—“‘thinking”’ here does not primarily refer to concept for- 
mation, the drawing of inferences, and so on, all of which would exist at 
the two lowest levels (vatkhari and madhyama@) only. When “meaning” 
is identified as intertwined with consciousness (as Bhartrhari identifies 
it), it satisfies instances of pratzbha as wellasinstancesofmore common- 
place cognition and can therefore be held to be logically possible at all 
levels of vdc, including even the very highest (namely, the pramdna). 

Let us now examine each level in somewhat more detail.9° Vatkhari 
is the most external and differentiated level in which vac is commonly 
uttered by the speaker and heard by the hearer. It is préna (breath) that 
enables the organs of articulation and hearing to produce and perceive 
sounds in a temporal sequence. Prépa may therefore be taken as the 
instrumental cause of vatkhari vdc. The chief characteristic of vaikhari vac 
is that it has a fully developed temporal sequence. At this level a 
speaker’s individual peculiarities (such as accent) are present, along 
with the Jinguistically relevant parts of speech. Going further inward, as 
it were, madhyamdé vac is the next level, and its association is chiefly with 
the mind or intellect (duddhi). It is the idea or series of words as conceiv- 
ed by the mind after hearing or before speaking out. It may be regarded 
as inward speech. All the parts of speech that are linguistically relevant 
to the sentence are present here in a latent form. At this level a variety 
of manifestation is possible. The same sphota or meaning is capable of 
being revealed by a variety of forms of madhyamad, depending on the 
language adopted. Although there is not full temporal sequence of the 
kind experienced in spoken words, word and meaning are still distinct, 
and word order is present. So temporal sequence must also be present, 
along with its instrumental cause, prdpa. Traditional yoga is able to 
demonstrate a subtle but direct connection between breathing and 
cognition 4° 


EPISTEMOLOGY 61 


The next and innermost stage is pafyanti vac. Pagpanti is the direct 
experience of the vdkya-sphota—of meaning as a noumenal whole. At 
this level there is no distinction between the word and the meaning, and 
there is no temporal sequence. All such phenomenal differentiations 
drop away with the intuition of the pure meaning in itself. Yet there is 
present at this level a kind of “‘going-out’’ or desire for expression. 
This impulse is the pratibha ‘‘instinct,’”? which in one sense may be said 
to motivate the phenomenalization into sentences and words of the 
pasyanti vision, so that communication may occur. Thus the Vedic 
vision or dhi of the rs, which in itself is pafyanti, becomes phenomenaliz- 
ed so that by its uttered word men might rise above their ignorance 
and be grasped in their cognition by the revelation of ultimate reality. 
Therefore, there is a sense in which Veda and pratibha are identified as 
pasyanti véc. Because pasyanti is, by definition, beyond the level of diffe- 
rentiated cognition, it is impossible to define it in word sentences. It 
occurs at the level of direct intuition and therefore must finally be 
understood through experience. Nevertheless, there has been no dearth 
of speculation over the exact nature of pasyanti and the possibility of yet 
a higher level of language, namely pard vdc.™ 


4 


WORD MEANING 


1. SIGNIFICATIVE FUNCTION 


Significative power (Sakti) is defined as the relation that exists 
between a word (Sabda) and its meaning (artha). This relation is 
considered to be permanent and stable, so that linguistic discourse be 
possible. The Naiyayikas consider this significative power to be conven- 
tional, having been established by the will of God. The Grammarians 
consider the relation to be based on the superimposition of one on the 
other, creating a sort of identity, one evoking the other. The Buddhist 
Logicians also consider that there is a causal relation between a word 
and its meaning. This relation is primary denotative power and is called 
abhidha. 

The function of words for conveying meaning is not restricted to this 
primary significative power. The binary relationship—every meaning 
having only one word and every word having only one meaning—may 
be an ideal, for avoiding confusion and ambiguity. But in all natural 
languages there are several exceptions to this rule. Even the borders 
of the meaning are not always fixed and depend on contextual factors, 
both situational and syntactic. Moreover, unconscious shifts of meaning 
and figurative usages as well as conscious, intentional devices used by 
poets and mystics have made the problem of meaning more complex. 

Various other functions of language are accepted by different schools 
of thought to explain the diverse types of language behavior within their 
field of investigation. The number of functions also varies, depending on 
the areas meant by fabda and artha. Abhidhd, laksanad, gauni, tatparya, 
wyaftjand, bhdvakatoa, and bhojakatva are the main functions introduced to 
explain the various types of meaning conveyed by speech. Some are for 
words, others may be for sentences or for the complete utterance. 

Of these types laksand, secondary significative power, is the most 
important and popular. Three conditions for a laksand are generally 


64 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


accepted by all schools. The first is incompatibility or inconsistency of 
the primary meaning in the context, which produces a break in the 
flow of thought, forcing the listener to think in order to understand 
what the speaker has meant by the uncommon usage and why he has 
used the word in an irregular way. This inconsistency can be either 
the impossibility of associating the normal meaning with the other 
word meanings of the sentence or the normal meaning’s unsuitability 
in the context. The second condition is some kind of relation between 
the primary, normal meaning of the term and its actual meaning inten- 
ded in the context. This relation can be one of proximity with contra- 
riety or one of similarity or common quality. The latter type is called 
gauni laksané, which the Mimarsakas treat as an independent function 
called gauni; according to them, real /aksand is only of the first type, a 
relation of proximity with contrariety. The third condition is either 
acceptance by common usage or a special purpose intended for intro- 
ducing the laksand. All faded metaphors (niridhd laksand) fall into the 
former category, and metaphoric usages, especially by poets, fall into 
- the latter. 

It may be noted here that Panini did not accept deksand as a separate 
function in language, though later Grammarians such as Patafijali did 
so. It was the Mimarhsakas who developed it to enable them to explain 
Vedic passages properly. To them there can be daksané not only for 
words, but also for sentences as a whole.! The Buddhist who considered. 
that words deal only with mental constructs (vkalpa) that have no 
direct connection with reality considered secondary meanings (laksand) 
or metaphor (upacdra) as helping language to deal with reality. 
Dignaga, the promulgator of the afohatheory, accepted that words may 
not have any positive content, but the sentence conveys a meaning 
that is of the nature of pratibhd. 

Additionally, Jayanta Bhatta introduced a new function called 
tatparyavrttt to explain how individual word meanings in a sentence 
combined to form a unified sentence meaning. Although he accepted a 
kind of abhthitinvaya (verbal comprehension) theory, he could not 
resort to laksand like the Bhatta Mimarhsakas, because Naiyayikas 
accept laksand only for words. 

Anandavardhana, who advocated the gyafijand ortti, included the 
purpose of intentional metaphors under it and pointed out its impor- 
tance in enriching the contents of literature. To him sabda meant not 
only the words, but contextual factors also, and under artha he included 
not only ideas, but figures of speech and emotions. 

Bhattanayaka claimed that poetic language has a special function 
(wyapdra)}, which he called bhdvand or bhavakatva, that helped in the 
universalization of the emotions depicted and helped the readers to 
concentrate. He also claimed another function, bhojakatva, for literature; 


WORD MEANING 65 


bhojakatva is the power of making the listener share the poetic emotions. 
These functions are not accepted by other scholars. 

Panini did not accept laksand as a separate function in language. The 
so-called incompatibility, either impossibility or unsuitability to the 
context, on which laksand is based according to later writers on the 
various schools, including the Grammarians, he did not consider to be 
linguistically relevant. “He is an ass’ and “‘he is a boy’’ are equally 
correct from the grammatical point of view. His grammar accounts for 
some of the popular examples of laksand like “the village on the river” 
(gangayim ghosah) by considering proximity as one of the meanings of 
the locative case. Similarly, Panini does not mention or provide for 
the condition of yogyatd or consistency, given as one of the conditions 
for the unity of the sentence. Agnind sificati (“He sprinkles with fire’’) 
is grammatically correct, though from the semantic point of view it 
may not be proper, because sprinkling can be done only with a liquid 
and not with fire. 

These two cases are similar; in both there is an inconsistency or 
incompatibility either real or apparent. If it is real, there is lack of 
yogyata and the sentence becomes a nonsentence. If it can be explained 
by resorting to a transferred meaning for one of the terms, the sentence 
becomes acceptable as an instance of laksapd. Panini does not make 
provision for the semantic appropriateness of the utterances derived 
by his rules. Statements may be true or false intrinsically or extrinsically. 
The correctness of a statement like the following depends on external 
factors and hasto be checked before decision, for example: “There are 
fruits on the tree near the river.” But there are other statements the 
correctness of which can be self-evident if one examines the words and 
their meanings: ‘‘He is the son of a barren woman”; “This triangle 
has four sides”; ‘“The circular square” are all anomalous utterances. 
If one of the lexical items arrived at by componential analysis of a 
word in a sentence prevents its co-occurrence with another word in it, 
it is said to be anomalous. But sentences that have no such resistance are 
acceptable. ‘“‘A square has four sides’; “Linguistics is the science 
dealing with language”; such sentences are intrinsically true. As far 
as Panini is concerned all of these sentences are grammatically accept- 
able, and the Grammarian is not concerned with the correctness or 
compatibility of the meaning. 

A metaphoric sentence and a normal sentence cannot be distinguish- 
ed. by their syntactic form. All metaphoric sentences are semantically 
deviant but syntactically normal. In such cases there is a semantic 
obstruction based on the violence to the co-occurrence restrictions for 
one of the lexical items. In the sentence “He is an ass,” the word “‘ass,”” 
referring normally to the animal also called a donkey, is syntactically 
identified with the boy, who is known from the context to be a human 


66 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


being (componential analysis also shows that he is a human being). 
Semantically this identification is impossible. The apparent anomaly 
can be solved by interpreting the word properly in the context of 
utterance. Such intentional deviance is resorted to as a communication 
device by poets everywhere. If the anomaly cannot be solved the 
sentence becomes no sentence. But from PAnini’s point of view all 
such, sentences, metaphoric as well as anomalous ones, are grammati- 
cally acceptable. 


2. Sphota AND WorD MEANING 


In his Sarvadarfanasamgraha Madhava describes sphota in two ways: 
first, as that from which the meaning bursts or shines forth; and, 
second, as an entity that is manifested by the spoken letters or sounds. 
Sphota may thus be conceived as a two-sided coin. On one side it is 
manifested by the word sound; on the other side it simultaneously 
reveals word meaning. Inmore philosophic terminology sphota may be 
described as the transcendent ground in which the spoken syllables 
and conveyed meaning find themselves united as word or fabda. Nageéa 
Bhatta identifies this theory with a sage Sphotayana, mentioned by 
Panini in one of his rules. This tradition is unknown to Bhartrhari, 
who considers Audumbarayana (mentioned by Yaska) as having a 
view similar to subsequent sphofta theory. The original conception of 
Sphota seems to go back to the Vedic period, when v&c or speech was 
considered to be a manifestation of the all-pervading Brahman, and 
the franava (aum) was regarded as the primordial speech sound from 
which all forms of wdc were supposed to have evolved. Aum, the sacred. 
syllable, is said to have flashed forth into the heart of Brahman while 
he was absorbed in deep meditation and to have given birth to the 
three Vedas containing all knowledge. Perhaps this claim provided 
the model upon which the gydkarana philosophers based their concep- 
tion of sphota. Indeed, sphota is often identified with the pranava.? 


A. Patajijali’s Sphota 

The Grammarians developed sphota theory as they set out to analyze 
the way word knowledge is manifested and communicated in ordinary 
experience. Patafijali provides the point of departure for the develop- 
ment of sphota theory when, at the beginning of his Mahdbhasya, he 
asks, ‘‘What is the word ‘cow’?”’ and answers, “It is that which, when 
uttered, brings us knowledge of creatures with dewlap, tail, hump, 
hooves and horns.’ Thus Patafijali emphasizes the fact that knowledge 
is the key factor—a word is a word only when it has a meaning. Here 
he is arguing against the Mimamsa4 view that a group of letters when 


WORD MEANING 67 


spoken is a word, even when there is no meaning or when the meaning 
is not understood.’ After discussing the need for something to hold the 
letters together as they come in temporal sequence so as to provide a 
cognition of the whole,® Patafijali concludes that even though the 
letters cannot coexist at the time of utterance, they can do so in the 
mind of the speaker as well as in the minds of the listeners. He distin- 
guishes between sphofa and dhvani. Sphota is the permanent element in 
the word and may be considered the essential word. Dhvani—the 
uttered sounds—is the actualized and ephemeral element and an 
aspect of the sphofa.* For Patafijali the sphota may be a single letter or a 
fixed pattern of letters. It is the norm that remains unaffected by the 
peculiarities of the individual speakers. Thus the sphoja is permanent, 
unchanging, and is manifested by the changing sounds (dhvanis) 
uttered by the speaker and heard by the listener. 

On the basis of Patafijali’s thought sphofa, though one, may be 
classified as both internal and external. The internal form of sphota is 
its innate expressiveness of the word meaning. The external aspect of 
sphota is the uttered sound (or written word), which is perceived by 
our sense organs but serves merely to manifest the inner sphofa with its 
inherent word meaning.’ 


B. Bhartrhari’s Sphota Theory 

While Patafijali provided the initial framework, it is in Bhartrhari’s 
Vakyapadiya that sphota is given systematic philosophical analysis. 
Vakyapadiya \ 44 states, ‘“In the words which are expressive the Gramma- 
rians discern two aspects: the one (the sphofa) is the cause of the real 
word (while) the other (dhvant) is used to convey the meaning”’.® These 
two aspects, though they may appear to be essentially different, are 
really identical. The apparent difference is seen to result from the 
various external manifestations of the single internal sphota. The 
process is explained as follows. At first the word exists in the mind of 
the speaker as a unity or sphota. When he utters it, he produces a 
sequence of different sounds so that it appears to have differentiation, 
The listener, though first hearing a series of sounds, ultimately perceives 
the utterance as a unity—the same sphofa with which the speaker 
began—and then the meaning is conveyed.® 

In his discussion, Bhartrhari employs several technical terms: Sabda/ 
Sphota, dhvani, and nada. By Sabda and/or sphota, he refers to that inner 
unity which conveys the meaning. The dhvanis are described as all- 
pervasive and imperceptible particles, which, when amassed by the 
movement of the articulatory organs, become gross and perceptible 
sounds and are then called ndda. These nadas function to suggest the 
word, sphota, or Sabda. Because these néidas, which are gross and audible, 
have division and sequence, it is naturally assumed that the suggested 


68 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


word also has parts when in reality it is changeless and sequenceless.1° 
Bhartrhari offers the illustrative example of reflection in water. Just 
as an object reflected in water may seem to have movement because of 
the water’s movement, so the word or sphofa takes on the properties of 
uttered speech (sequence, loudness or softness, accent, and so on) 
in which it is manifested. 

The question may arise of why this changeless whole or sphota should 
ever come to be expressed in the phenomenal diversity called language. 
In Bhartrhari’s view, such phenomenalization occurs because the 
Sphota itself contains an inner energy (kraiu) that seeks to burst forth 
into expression. Thus the unitary sphota is seen to contain all the 
potentialities for diversity, like the seed and the sprout or the egg and 
the chicken. Bhartrhari, in his ortti on Vakyapadiya 1.51, explains it as 
follows: 


The external (audible) word employed in verbal usage is merged 
in the mind after suppressing all assumption of differentiation, 
without, however, abandoning the residual force of the differentia- 
tion, as in the case of the yolk in the egg of the pea-hen. Just as 
one single word can merge, so can passages consisting of as many as 
ten parts. The word, thus merged, with all differentiation suppressed, 
again assumes differentiation and sequence, when through the 
speaker’s desire to say something, the inner word is awakened and 
it becomes the sentence or the word, each with its divisions.?? 


Here Bhartrhari seems to be suggesting two ways in which the energy 
of speech (kratu) causes the phenomenalization of the sphota. On the 
one hand, there is the potentiality for bursting forth pent up in the 
Sphota itself, while on the other hand there is the desire of the speaker 
to communicate. This desire for communication, however, is described 
as existing solely for the purpose of revealing the sphofa that is within, 
Unlike thinkers who conceive of language in conventional or utilitarian 
terms, Bhartrhari finds language to contain and reveal its own telos. 


C. Mandana MiSsra’s Defense of Bhartrhari’s Sphota Theory 

In the Vdkyapadiya Bhartrhari masterfully supports his sphota theory 
with illustrations from ordinary life. While they may convince one that 
the sphota theory is not implausible, such examples can hardly be 
taken as proof of the theory. Mandana Miéra took up this challenge 
in his Sphotastddhi—to demonstrate the existence of the inner word as 
distinct from its sounds in terms of Jogical necessity and consistency. 
His opponent in this task was the skillful Mimamsa philosopher, 
Kumarila Bhatta. 

The debate begins with a restatement of Patafijali’s question, “What 


WORD MEANING 69 


is meant by ‘word’?” and his answer, fabda, or that which has a 
meaning.*# Kumarila objects that Patafijali’s definition fails by being 
both too wide and too narrow. The definition of “word’’ in terms of 
meaning alone is too wide. Smoke, for example, signifies the meaning 
fire but is not taken as a word for fire. The definition is too narrow in 
that it holds fabda to be that which is heard. But the ear hears only a 
group of phonemes or letter sounds, each one of which (according to 
Patafijali’s definition) should be regarded as a word even though it 
does not signify any external fact. This problem results in the difficulty 
that in the word “‘cow,”’ for example, the individual phonemes c, 0, and 
w may be heard by the ear of the young child and therefore qualify 
as fabda, even though the word ‘‘cow”’ as yet carries no meaning for him. 
This view conflicts with Patafijali’s contention that the fabda is that signi- 
ficant word-whole which conveys meaning. Consequently, the uttered 
word. “‘cow”’ would at the same time be Sabda and not-fabda. It would 
be fabda in the sense that it consists in a commonly understood spoken 
word. But it would not be fabda before its meaning was known— 
although it would become fabda after the meaning is known. For three 
reasons—first, that smoke should not be called fabda even though it 
causes the cognition fire; second, that phonemes, even though they are 
audible, should not be called Sabda; and third, that the same thing 
should not at one moment be afabda and the next moment sabda— 
Kumiarila maintains that Patafijali’s definition of Sabda as interpreted 
by the Grammarians is not correct.15 In Kumiérila’s view, it is the fact 
of being audible that is the criterion for fabda, and the phonemes alone 
meet this requirement, so it is the phonemes that are commonly accepted 
as fabda. Anything over and above the phonemes (such as sphoja) does 
not deserve to be called fabda, for there is no such common usage. 
Mandana rejects Kuméarila’s criticism as frivolous misinterpretation. 
Saying that the signifying power is the criterion for fabda does not 
mean that a word ceases to be a word when it fails to communicate a 
meaning to an unlearned child. According to the Grammarian, the 
key point is that the word is capable of conveying meaning—regardless 
of its being understood or not understood in specific instances. And 
because the phonemes or letters that constitute a word do not have this 
capacity individually, they cannot be called fabda, Having refuted 
Kumiarila in this summary fashion, Mandana goes on to elucidate the 
Grammarian interpretation of fabda in answer to Patafijali’s question: 
“In that complex cognition expressed by the word ‘cow’ and which 
consists of many aspects such as the universal, the particular, quality, 
action, phonemes, sphofa, etc., which aspect is it to which the name fabda 
refers?”’18 Sabda, maintains Mandana, cannot refer to the individual 
phonemes because in themselves they convey no meaning. In common 
experience the whole word is the unit of language that is taken to be 


70 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


meaning-bearing. The common man takes a noun or verb to be a unity 
signifying meaning—without reference to the plurality of letters and 
syllables, which are the products of speculative thought. Mandana 
further criticizes Kumarila’s objections and establishes the basis for the 
Ssphota position as follows: 


As for the definition that a word is what is cognized by the auditory 
sense-organ, it is vitiated by serious defects. The auditory organ also 
apprehends qualitative differences of pitch and modulation and 
such universals as wordhood and the like. These attributes though 
known through the organ of hearing are not words. Moreover, 
word is not known only by the auditory organ but also by the mind. 
So the definition proposed by Kumiéarila is misleading and apt 
to create confusion. The verdict of unsophisticated common sense 
that “‘cow” is a whole word which yields meaning, ought not 
to be brushed aside as an uncritical appraisal. The unity of the 
significant word is a felt fact and no amount of quibbling can 
conjure it away.?? 


Of the various aspects of the complex cognition “cow,’? Mandana 
makes clear that it is the sphofa or felt word-unity that is capable of 
conveying meaning and therefore is the essential characteristic—with- 
out which it would cease to be what it is. Other aspects of the complex 
cognition, such as the particular, the quality, the phonemes, and the 
like, are merely occasional aspects. 

The next step in the argument occurs when Kumiérila extends his 
definition of the phonemes as fabda to rest not only on their uttered 
quality but also now on the contention that it is they (and not a so- 
called sphofa) that cause the understanding of meaning. “‘Why not 
say that the phonemes themselves are the cause of the understanding 
of meaning and that, when grouped according to units of meaning 
which are understood, they are called words (pada)??"48 

In rebutting this new contention that it is the phonemes that convey 
meaning, Mandana reasons as follows. Phonemes cannot singly convey 
the meaning because, as Kumarila admits, a collection of them in 
the form of a word or pada is needed. Neither can the phonemes 
coexist as a pada, for they are uttered singly and perceived in a certain 
order. When they are spoken by different speakers or in a different 
order or at the same time, they do not convey a meaning. At no time 
can all the phonemes or letters of a word exist together and work 
together; their individual natures, being eternal and unchanging, 
are such that no joint simultaneity is possible. Phonemes are necessarily 
successive and therefore cannot work together to produce a pada that 
conveys a meaning. Therefore, the understanding of meaning, which 


WORD MEANING 71 


cannot be due to the phonemes, points to a cause that is something 
different from the phonemes.?® 

Kumiarila counters this rebuttal by giving further development to 
the Mimamsaka view as stated in the Sabara Bhasya on Mimdmsasitra 
1.1.5, Let it be admitted that the understanding of meaning does not 
take place from the phonemes in their individual condition. But if, 
when grouped as pada, they are seen to acquire some special efficacy 
that provides for the conveying of meaning, what then remains to block 
the acceptance of the collection of phonemes alone as pada? Nothing 
is required but the phonemes. Without them, however, there is no 
possibility of conveying meaning. In this regard, the case of the 
phoneme is very much like that of the common seed. The seed will 
not produce a new effect (a sprout) as long as it is isolated, but when 
it is helped by a group of other factors such as soil, moisture, and so on, 
the sprout appears. Now the sprout is commonly judged as being the 
effect of the seed when combined with a group of helping factors. 
Similarly, these phonemes, when combined with a group of helping 
factors (such as being uttered by the same person in a particular 
sequence), are commonly held to become the cause of the understan- 
ding of meaning. As a parting shot, Kumarila invokes a principle of 
economy: “‘As long as there is a visible cause and a visible mode of its 
being, there is no occasion for thinking of an invisible cause.”®° 

In reply, Mandana admits that a special efficacy may be shown 
to be the property of an otherwise ordinary cause but maintains that 
it is just that special efficacy which has not been demonstrated in the 
case of phonemes as potential conveyers of meaning. Mandana asks, 
What is the difference between 0 in the word go (cow) and an isolated 
o? The obvious difference is that in one instance the 0 is isolated, while 
in the word it is accompanied by another phoneme. But can it really 
be called accompaniment when, by the time of the speaking or hearing 
of the 0, the other phoneme is no longer being perceived at all? A 
previously uttered phoneme, which has ceased to exist leaving no 
trace, and an unborn phoneme (or one that is as yet unspoken) are on 
the same footing. If previously spoken phonemes can be said to give 
help to a successor, then it should also be admitted that unspoken 
phonemes could also be of help—clearly discrediting the argument. 
Thus, the previously uttered phoneme g cannot in any way help the o 
to produce a special functional effect because it is dead and gone.” 

Kumarila responds by putting forth yet another explanation. He 
offers the example of how the new-moon and full-moon sacrifices, 
along with other rites, have sequence and yet produce their effect 
together—as do the repeated saying of the Veda for its memorization. 
In such examples different acts occurring at different times are still 
found to produce qualitatively and numerically different effects. This 


72 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


same kind of process, he argues, should be accepted in the case of 
phonemes.” 

Mandana is quick to note, however, that although these examples 
may seem plausible they are not parallel to the case of the phonemes. 
In sequences such as the examples offered, where the resultant is 
unitary, thinkers agree that the new effect is due to a trace or lasting 
impression that each part in the series leaves behind and which helps 
toward the one result. As Mandana puts it, “In new and full moon 
sacrifices and the like, which have sequence, certain new elements 
(apiirva) which are produced by the acts and. which last and are looked 
upon as powers or functions actually help (in producing the single 
effect ).’’23 In the case of Vedic recitation, the final learning is achieved 
with the aid of the memory traces left by the preceding repetitions. 
In the case of both the sacrificial apirvas and the memory traces, there 
is a kind of continuing existence or simultaneity that allows for co- 
operation among the serial instances toward a unitary result. But, 
as Mandana points out, the same is clearly not possible in the case of 
the phonemes, which have already been described as leaving no trace. 

Kumarila counters by allowing that phonemes may indeed leave 
lasting traces or impressions (samskdras), and through the traces left by 
the perceptions of the earlier phonemes and the last phoneme, the 
unitary meaning of the word may be conveyed.** The last phoneme, 
when helped out by the traces of the previous phonemes, conveys the 
meaning. 

Mandana finds a fallacy in Kuméarila’s reasoning. He points out that 
traces that are generated by individual phonemes can only reinstate 
those same individual phonemes. The memory trace for each phoneme 
will be present but, just as in the case of the original utterance or hear- 
ing, only individually—when the o is uttered, or remembered, the trace 
for the g will have ceased to exist. There can only be the cognition of 
one phoneme at a time, and this principle applies equally to the traces 
and the original utterance or hearing of the phoneme. Thus, the possi- 
bility of the phonemes producing traces gets one no closer to accounting 
for the generation of a meaning whole.*® 

Kumiarila defends his position by once again introducing an argu- 
ment of economy (that position which resorts to the smallest number 
of postulated special powers or entities is best). Now it is agreed that 
each phoneme, whether in its original utterance or hearing or in its 
trace, cannot coexist with other phonemes so as to give the meaning 
of the word. Therefore, some cause for the occurrence of meaning must 
be postulated. The weakness of the sphofa theory is that it has too many 
postulations: first, it must postulate the existence of the sphofa as some 
kind of unseen entity, and, second, it must then impose upon this postulat- 
ed sphoja the capacity to convey meaning. For the sphofa theorist two 


WORD MEANING 73 


things have to be postulated. The upholder of the phoneme, by contrast, 
has to make only one additional postulation. As has already been made 
clear, the existence of the trace is accepted by both the disputants. The 
only point at issue is whether it can be the cause of the understanding 
of meaning. All that is needed, claims Kumiarila, is that a new function 
be postulated for the trace, which everyone agrees exists. It is the cogni- 
tion of the final phoneme, accompanied by the special function of the 
traces of the previous phonemes, that conveys the meaning. Thus only 
one additional postulation is required, the postulation of a new function 
for the traces. The sphofa theorist is in an inferior position because he 
has to postulate both a new substance (namely, the sphofa) and a new 
function (its ability to convey meaning ).?¢ 

To Mandana, Kumarila’s explanation seems to be an oversimplifica- 
tion. The memory impression or trace is not seen but is a capacity or 
function that is inferred from the existence of the original phoneme. 
The difficulty comes when Kumarila postulates yet another function as 
resulting from the trace, which is itself already an inferred function. 
Mandana maintains that the postulation of functions and the like is 
unacceptable because it results in an infinite regress. In addition to this 
problem of infinite regress, Mandana finds logical weaknesses in 
Kumirila’s view that it is the cognition of the final phoneme, accom- 
panied by the cognitions of the previous phonemes, that conveys the 
meaning. This view cannot hold, says Mandana, because the traces 
left by the letters are the same even when their order is reversed. How 
is it, then, that the meanings of the words ‘‘now” and. “won” are not 
identical? As the letters and traces involved in the two words are 
identical, their meanings should also be identical, which is clearly not 
the case. 

Letting go of this argument, Kumarila takes up his final and seem- 
ingly most potent line of attack. He returns to the proposition that the 
last phoneme, accompanied by the traces of the previous phonemes, 
expresses the meaning. To avoid the difficulties encountered earlier, he 
now defines samskdra not as a memory trace, but rather as ‘‘something 
else which is brought about by the cognition of the phonemes uttered. 
separately in a fixed order by a particular speaker and leading to the 
understanding of meaning and it is similar to the effect called aparva 
(residual force) brought about by the performance of the different rites 
like a sacrifice and leading to heaven.’’?? The distinguishing feature of 
the trace that causes remembrance is that it causes something similar to 
that which produced it, which is not, however, the case of apiirva in a 
sacrifice. In a sacrifice, the individual acts performed perish imme- 
diately, but the apiirva or aftereffect of the whole sacrifice inheres in 
the self of the sacrificer as a special kind of potency until it brings the 
reward of heaven. Its result is thus very different from its cause, and 


74 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


this unusual kind of causal relationship is necessitated by scripture’s 
declaration that the performance of a sacrifice produces such a result. 
In Kumirila’s view, the apirva or aftereffect kind of samskara, which is 
left by the different letters upon the subject, is analogous to such 
religious heaven. Just as in a sacrifice it is the determinate order of 
performance by a single agent that is responsible for the spiritual leaven, 
here also the determinate order of the phonemes uttered by a single 
person is responsible for the unusual result. Therefore, it is when the 
last phoneme is spoken or heard in the midst of the “‘leavening’’ effect 
of the samskaras of the previous phonemes that the meaning is conveyed. 
For Kumarila, fabda is the Jast phoneme being heard or spoken and 
conveying the meaning (when helped by the samskdras of the previous 
phonemes). 

The exact nature of this help is that the samskdéras of the previous 
phonemes become a kind of intermediate cause (vydpéra). They help the 
last phoneme in its task of conveying meaning. This help does not 
depreciate the causal value of the previous phonemes in any way, for 
it is in harmony with their purpose—the phonemes are not uttered just 
for the sake of pronouncing letters or leaving impressions, but also for 
the purpose of conveying a meaning. This importance of and necessity 
for the phonemes as causing the conveyance of meaning must also be 
admitted by the proponent of the sphofa, Kuméarila claims. The propo- 
nent of the sphofa or undivided word entity has to admit that it is 
manifested by the phonemes uttered or heard in a definite order. Asno 
single letter can be said to reveal the sphofa, it must then be revealed by 
all the phonemes combined with one another. Neither can it be that 
each phoneme in succession reveals only a part of the sphota, because 
the sphota, by definition, is held to be a simple indivisible whole. For 
the very reasons given by the sphofa theorist himself, the phonemes of 
a word existing in a fixed sequence have no way of pooling themselves 
or their traces so as to result in a unitary whole. Just as the Mimamsaka 
has been forced to do, so also the sphofa theorist is forced to postulate 
some special kind of leaven of a trace by means of which the phonemes 
reveal the whole meaning. Why then, asks Kumarila (revealing his 
economy principle once more), does he not attribute the conveying of 
meaning to a special trace function itself and leave out the extra step 
of postulating a special kind of trace and then postulating the sphofa? 
For these reasons, concludes Kumé§rila, “‘it is better to assume that the 
special trace which has to be postulated conveys the meaning (rather 
than that it reveals the word). 

Mandana answers the foregoing criticism by making clear that the 
sphoja theory does not postulate a new kind of apirva for the conveyance 
of meaning. Sphofa theory needs nothing more than the postulation of 
the ordinary memory trace. It is just the commonly accepted traces 


WORD MEANING 75 


(samskéra) or dispositions (vésand) that result in the revelation of the 
Sphota. The only new thing postulated by sphojfa theory is the sphota 
itself, and in fact even that need not be postulated because it is directly 
perceptible.2® Now, maintains Mandana, this position is far superior to 
Kumirila’s, in which the one new thing (namely, the apiirva-type trace) 
cannot be perceived and has to be postulated on the authority of 
scripture and on analogy to religious merit. Even this analogy is very 
weak, for although the postulation of apirva or religious merit is 
necessary to validate the moral law and religious rites, there is no such 
necessity in the apprehension of the word and its meaning. The cases 
are not parallel. Also ignored is the common man’s intuition, ‘I under- 
stand the meaning from the word,” and the teaching of tradition that 
“the word, the meaning, and their relation are eternal.’’ There is a 
natural connection between word and meaning that is inalienable. The 
conventions we learn as children serve only to bring that relation out 
and to make the meaning present to us. Mandana summarizes his 
rejection of Kumarila’s position as follows: ‘‘Because it has been said 
that the impressions, after all, do not constitute the word, the final 
phoneme is not expressive, (therefore) a collection of phonemes does 
not constitute the word and it does not convey any meaning.’’20 

In this debate Kumarila’s attempt to identify fabda with the uttered 
phoneme seems to be discredited by the reasoning of Mandana, who 
at the same time has vindicated the identification of fabda with sphota. 
Nevertheless, Mandana still has to show how Sabda as sphofa may be 
comprehended using only ordinary memory traces of the phonemes to 
reveal the sphota. He must also show the sphota to be not a mere postula- 
tion but a perceivable reality, otherwise much of his logical argument 
simply collapses. These tasks he undertakes in kdrikds 18 and 19 of the 
Sphotasiddhe. 

In his explanation Mandana depends on the basic concepts put 
forward by Bhartrhari in chapter | of his Vakyapadiya. The sphota is 
something over and above the phonemes. The phonemes are change- 
able (capable of variations such, as accent, speed, and the like) , and when 
uttered serve only to manifest the changeless sphoja, which exists within 
the speaker and is potentially present within every hearer. The 
phonemes do not convey the meaning, but the sphota, once manifested, 
does so. Between the sphofa and its word-meaning aspect the relation is 
that of expression and thing or meaning expressed. It is a natural 
relationship, and is indestructable and beginningless. Convention only 
serves to bring it out. Bhartrhari emphasizes that the sphoja is an entity 
that exists within each person. All of us have the capacity instinctively 
to feel its existence within, and ultimately to perceive it directly with 
the mind. The contention that the sphota may be directly perceived, 
and is not merely an inference, is one of the key points of sphoja theory. 


76 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Keeping these basic concepts in mind, let us now examine Mandana’s 
detailed description of the way the sphoja is both cognized and perceived 
without recourse to any new apirva-type postulations. 

Mandana explains the process by which the sphota is cognized in his 
commentary on kdrikaé 18 of the Sphotasiddhi: 


Each sound individually reveals the whole sphota. Nor do the other 
sounds thus become useless because there is a difference in the 
revelation. It is like this: All the previous sounds bring about in the 
listener whose mind is free from any particular residual impression 
(samskdra), cognitions in which the word figures vaguely and which 
sow seeds in the form of residual impressions capable of producing 
a later clear cognition of the word. The last sound produces a clear 
cognition in which figures, as it were, clearly the image of the sphota 
caused by all the seeds in the form of residual impressions left by the 
vague cognitions of the previous sounds.*! 


Mandana offers the analogy of a jeweller who assesses the genuineness 
of a precious stone. His continuous gaze is really a series of cognitions, 
each of which perceives the genuineness of the stone but with increasing 
clarity. Each cognition leaves its samskaéra or common memory trace. 
The last cognition, helped by the trace of the previous ones, fully 
perceives the genuineness of the stone; but for the traces of the interven- 
ing cognitions, there would be no difference between the last one and 
the first one. An important point is that the jeweller is described as 
“expert”’, meaning that before beginning the examination he already 
had the image of a precious stone ingrained in his subconscious, and it 
was this image (like the inherent sphofa) that was revealed to the 
jeweller’s mind by his series of partial perceptions. 

The sphoja is a unity that already exists in the mind of the speaker. 
He utters sounds in order to manifest it, and once manifested the 
Sphofa conveys the meaning. A reasonable explanation of this process by 
which the sphofa and its meaning are held to be revealed is offered by 
Sesa Krsna in his Sphofatattvaniriipana. As the phoneme ¢ is spoken by 
someone who intends to say “cow’’, the hearer grasps not only the 
phoneme ¢ but also the whole word rather vaguely, as it isnow known 
that the speaker is pronouncing a word beginning with c and not with 
any other sound. But there are a multitude of words beginning with c, 
and we do not know which one is going to be uttered; thus the vague- 
ness of our knowledge. But, when the speaker utters the next phoneme, 
o, the field of possible words is further narrowed. All words not having 
co at the beginning are now excluded, and the hearer’s knowledge of 
the whole is less vague. When the final phoneme, w, is uttered, all doubt 


WORD MEANING 77 


disappears as the w unites with the memory traces co to manifest the 
whole sphofa “‘cow’’, which immediately conveys its meaning.®? 

The preceding explanation makes clear the reason behind Mandana’s 
insistence that a speaker’s efforts to utter the phonemes will differ 
according to the sphofa that he wants to manifest. Even though the 
phoneme may be the same (for example, the w in “‘won”’ and “‘now’’), 
the physical effort involved in vocalizing it will vary according to the 
position it occupies in the word. Thus the overall physical effort in 
saying ‘‘won” will be markedly different from that involved in saying 
“now,’’ even though the same three phonemes are involved in each 
case. Consequently, the sphofa theorist has a basis for claiming that the 
Sphotas manifested by the two vocalizations would be different, as 
would the meanings revealed. 

This last point is important in relation to the Mimamsaka contention 
that, because the phonemes are changeless, no mere difference in order 
or effort of vocalization can be important to the production of different 
meanings. Therefore, according to the Mimamsaka, were it not for the 
postulation of the special “‘apdrva-like effect,” the same meaning should 
result from “now” and “‘won.”’ From the sphota viewpoint, however, it 
is the sphota that is changeless and not the phoneme, and the evident 
variations in the pronunciation and ordering of phonemes in speaking 
different words is seen to be consistent with both sphota theory and the 
evidence of experience. “‘Now’’ and “‘won”’ are composed of the same 
three phonemes but do require that the vocalization of those phonemes 
be given different orders and intentions or efforts for the appropriate 
sphota to be manifested and its meaning revealed. 

The strength of this sphoja explanation of the way the word meaning 
is revealed rests not only on its concurrence with experience but also on 
the fact that no new kind of trace is postulated. The trace employed is 
the usual trace providing for the remembrance of the phoneme that 
originally caused it. ‘“The weak point of the Mimamsaka explanation,” 
as Subramania Iyer puts it, “‘was that it either postulated a new power 
for the ordinary kind of residual trace, or postulated a new kind of 
residual trace in order to explain the fact that, though caused by the 
cognition of the sound, it does not stop at causing a remembrance of it 
but causes the understanding of the meaning also.”’®? In other words, 
the trace is supposed to have an object different from that of the cogni- 
tion that deposited it in the first place, which is, saysthe sphota theorist, 
a logical impossibility. In his case, the original sphofa (which lay behind 
the vocalization of the phonemes by the speaker) and the end sphota 
(which, is the object of both the uttered phonemes and their traces) 
are identical. Consequently, the object (that is, the sphota) of the 
phonemes and the traces is the same, and there is no logical difficulty 
of the kind that besets the Mimamsaka. 


78 ENGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Mandana’s explanation of the paradox of the way the indivisible 
sphoja appears as the phonemes, and the phonemes as the parts of the 
partless sphota, is as follows. He says it is the sounds that resemble one 
another which are the cause of both the error and the final correct 
cognition of the sphota. If, for the manifestation of two different word 
sphotas, one has to make similar movements of the vocal organs, the 
phonemes produced. by these movements appear to be parts of both of 
the indivisible words.*4 This error is fostered by the construction of such 
artificial devices as alphabet letters or word syllables, usually for teach- 
ing purposes. It is precisely because of this kind of confusion, says 
Mandana, that sentences, words, and phonemes appear to have parts 
where in reality they have none. The obverse applies to the sphofa. From 
the phenomenal viewpoint the sphota “‘cow’’, for example, may appear 
to possess qualities such as accent, speed, loudness, time, place, and 
person in its utterance. That these qualities belong to the phenomenal 
sounds and not to the noumenal sphofta is what makes possible the 
common recognition of the word “‘cow,” in spite ofits diversity of 
utterance. From the sphota viewpoint, it is this noumenal grounding or 
basis that makes possible such things as the translation of thought 
from one phenomenal language to another. 

A later scholar of considerable note, Vacaspati Misra, attempts to 
reject Mandana’s concept of the relation between the phonemes and 
the sphota.*® This criticism occurs in its fullest form in Vacaspati’s 
Tattvabindu. The argument is stated as follows: “The particular sounds 
which manifest sphofa, are they different from sphofa or non-different 
therefrom?’’8* If nondifferent, says Vacaspati, then each phoneme 
should manifest the sphofa, and the remaining phonemes would be 
futile. If different, then there is no ground for relating the phonemes 
to the manifestation of the sphofa. If the phonemes are treated as 
illusory, then their reality is discredited—yet in experience we un- 
doubtedly cognize individual letters. What is the justification for 
treating such cognitions as illusory? 

In supporting the sphota argument of Mandana, S.S. Suryanarayana 
Sastri effectively enswers these criticisms of Vacaspati. To the criticisms 
regarding difference and nondifference Sasiri replies, “Such a question 
has little application to Mandana’s doctrine. To him indeed sphota is 
non-different from the sounds, as a whole is from its parts; and yet itis 
different too, since the whole is neither each part nor a mere aggregate 
of parts. The existence of functioning of such wholes can only be 
denied by defective psychology.’’®? As regards the justification for 
treating cognitions of the phonemes as illusory, Sastri answers: 


The obvious reply is that not the existence of these cognitions but 
their significance is in question, just as in the case of the reflection. 


WORD MEANING 79 


The reflection exists without doubt, but it is not real. And sublation 
in this case consists not in that presentation ceasing to be or giving 
place to another presentation, but in that presentation as such failing 
to fulfil what is expected of it. Ifeach cognition as an independent 
partcould by combination with other such, parts explain the whole, 
then it would be unsublated; since, however, it fails ofits purpose, 
since it seems to fit in more naturally with a theory which treats it 
not as a producer but as manifester, it is inso far forthsublated. The 
reflection is sublated not as a reflection, but as the face; the letter- 
cognition is sublated not as letter-cognition but as an independent 
productive constituent of meaning. 


Sastri observes that Vacaspati adopts and attempts to develop 
Kumiérila’s viewpoint further by trying to show that meaning somehow 
results from the phonemes entering into a single memory. As Sastri 
points out, however, such an explanation is untenable in the light of 
experience. If ‘‘cowness’’ is associated with the remembered letters c, 
0, w, that meaning should not be recalled except when all three letters 
are present. How is it, then, that when there is a misprint such as ‘“‘coe” 
or a mispronunciation such. as ‘‘coo” we still correctly apprehend the 
meaning to be “‘cow’’? The same sort of thing is evident when a letter 
or sound is omitted in the course of writing or speaking. The explana- 
tion in all of these situations would seem to be that we do not pass 
from part to part but rather apprehend the whole, filling up gaps or 
correcting errors when they occur. 

With regard to memory and sequence, VaAcaspati, following 
Kumiarila, maintains that in the memory itself the phonemes have no 
sequence, being presented together, but that memory follows expe- 
rience, conforms to it, and the sequence in which the letters are 
experienced is repeated in memory. This contention, however, does 
not square with the view that letters, being eternal and pervasive, can 
have no sequence belonging to themselves. This difficulty is overcome 
in the sphota view, which holds that the sequence is determined by 
something other than the letters—by the sphota intended. It is not the 
case that the letters in sequence constitute the word; rather, it is the 
word or sphota that determines the sequence. The question may then be 
asked, Is the word existent or nonexistent prior to the phonemes being 
apprehended in sequence? In purely empirical terms, this question may 
be shelved by saying that, though not present in my mind before I learn 
the sequence, it is present in the mind ofanother who instructs me; and 
in this fashion the process may be pushed farther and farther back, 
there being no authority for postulating the origin of language at any 
particular time. But such empirical indefiniteness does not seem 
adequate in the face of the common ground that necessarily appears 


80 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to underlie all empirical! languages—requiring the sphota interpretation 
that the word both is and is not prior to the apprehension of sequence. 
This paradox is ridiculed by Vacaspati, who describes it as the sphofa 
claim that the unreal helps the real. Sastri, in answer, states the sphota 
argument, “It is real, otherwise it could not be manifested in sequence; 
it is not existent, otherwise there would be no need for manifestation.’’® 
This solution, Sastri observes, is in line with the solution to the problems 
of human knowledge and activity in general. “Knowledge is of the 
novel and yet not of the non-existent. Activity realizes a purpose which 
is real yet not actual.’ As both the Advaita Vedanta and the sphota 
theorists point out, the only solution to this paradox, which seems to 
be universally present in human experience, would seem to be to take 
the phenomenal as partial and therefore defective and ilusory appea- 
rances of the unitary real. It is from this viewpoint that sphofa theory 
claims that there is a whole (namely, sphofa)that is increasingly revealed 
by particular phonemes uttered in sequence. As Sastri concisely puts 
it, ‘‘The succeeding sounds make more clear what was less clearly 
expressed by the preceding sounds; the latter provides the substructure, 
former superstructure, while all of them together reveal the one 
design, which while prompting their utterance is certainly not produced 
by them.’4! 


3. UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 


In his Sphoftasiddhi Mandana Misra also analyzes the relation between 
the universal and the particular. When one perceives the universal of 
an object, the particular and its qualities are also perceived, yet the 
essential cognition is that of the universal. To put it another way, 
when. the cognition of the whole takes place we are also aware of the 
parts that make up the whole, but it is the cognition of the whole that 
is dominant.*2 Mandana offers the example of a picture. He points 
out that in our cognition of a picture, although we may be aware of 
the different parts and colors, the picture is perceived asa whole that 
is over and above its parts.43 Similarly, when we perceive a piece of 
cloth our cognition is of the cloth as a whole and is quite distinct from 
the particular threads and colors involved.*4 

To illustrate this point, both Bharirhari and Mandana refer to the 
Vaisesika conception that when two things are brought before us we 
first perceive each one separately, and only on the basis of these separate 
perceptions does the notion of two arise. This method of perception 
applies to all higher numbers—their cognition and production is 
possible only by way of previously cognized lower numbers. So also 


WORD MEANING 81 


it is by way of the lower differentiated forms of speech that the higher 
unities, the word sphofas, may be understood.*5 


4, ConTEXTUAL FAcToRS 


The need for taking into consideration the contextual factors in 
determining the exact meaning of an expression has been emphasized 
by various thinkers in India from very early times. The Brhaddevata 
says that the established rule regarding the meaning of a Vedic passage 
as well as of an ordinary sentence is that the purpose to be served 
{artha), the subject matter under discussion (prakarana), an indication 
from another place in the text (lizga), its suitability (aucitya), the place 
(defa)}, and the time (kdla) have to be taken into consideration for 
determining it. Of these terms, vdkya, prakarana, linga, and artha are 
also known to the Mimarhsa school of interpretation. According to 
them there are six means of proof to be taken into consideration: 
$rutt or direct statement, linga or implication from another word, 
vdkya or syntactic connection, prakarana or context of situation, sthdna 
ar position, and samadkhyd or the etymological meaning. Of these six, 
each one is stronger than the succeeding ones. In the Vakyapadiya 
Bharirhari gives two lists of contextual factors; the first is almost a 
paraphrase of the list given in the Brhaddevaté. The second is a bigger 
list and is given as contextual factors that determine the exact meaning 
of a word in the case of ambiguous and equivocal expressions. This 
second list is discussed in detail by later writers like Nagega, the 
Grammarian and Alamkarikas like Mammata and Jagannatha 
Panditaraja. The contextual factors taken into consideration in deter- 
mining the meanings of ambiguous expressions include the factors of 
situational context and the context within the sentence. 

Even to understand the purport of an essay or a text as a whole, the 
Mimarsakas have pointed out certain factors to be taken into account. 
The six factors for determining the purpose of a text are given thus: 
consistency in the meaning between the introduction and conclusion; 
repetition of the main topic; the novelty of the subject matter; the 
result intended; corroborative and eulogistic remarks, as distinguished 
from the main theme; and arguments in favor of the main topic. 
These six li#gas or indications for deciding the purport of a text are 
accepted by all schools of thought. 

Literary critics from the time of Anandavardhana lay great stress 
on the importance of contextual factors in conveying suggested mean- 
ing. The situational context--such as the speaker, the listener, the 
time and place, the tone, as well as the social and cultural background— 
has an important role in bringing out the suggestion. It was Bhartrhari 


82 ENGYCGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


who pointed out that in many cases of language behavior, the literal 
meaning conveyed by the expression is not the intended meaning and 
that contextual factors play a vital role in determining the intended 
sense of a passage. It is because of these contextual and grammatical 
factors determining the intended sense that homonyms do not introduce 
the slightest confusion in actual speech. 


5 


SENTENCE MEANING 


1. Facrors or Sentence Unity 


A. Akdnksa 

Those who believe that a sentence is made up of words, each with 
an independent meaning of its own, will have to explain how a connec- 
ted and cogent meaning is understood from the sentence. This problem 
has been discussed by all schools of thought in India, and various 
theories have evolved. Mimamsa, the vakyafdstra, takes a lead in this 
field. Bhartrhari too has discussed various aspects of the problem and 
made his observations, though his final view is that the partless sentence 
is the unit of utterance. 

Panini uses the term vdkya in the general sense of an utterance but 
does not define a sentence. It is Katyayana who defines it as that (group 
of words) containing a finite verb. Panini does not seem to have 
subscribed to such a view, for his rule tinatizak, referring to the appli- 
cation of the accent of “a finite verb when not followed by another 
finite verb’, shows that he had no difficulty in allowing more than 
one verb in the same sentence. Panini’s view of the sentence seems 
more akin to that of the Mimamsakas than to that of the Logicians. 
Even later Grammarians agreed that there can be simple sentences 
with more than one finite verb if other conditions are fulfilled, for 
example, pasya mrgo dhavati, ‘See the deer is running.”’! The NVydyasiitra 
does not refer to the sentence or the sentence meaning, though Nyaya 
is very much interested in the word meanings. Perhaps early Naiyayikas 
believed that a sentence is a collection of words and that the sentence 
meaning is a combination of the word meanings. A formal definition 
of the sentence is also found in the Brhaddevaté (2. 117). But it is in the 
Mimamsdsitra that we first come across this definition: “A group of 
words serving a single purpose forms a sentence, if on analysis the 
separate words are found to have dkanksd or mutual expectancy”’ 


84 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(Mimdamsdsiitra 2.1.46). This definition was mainly for the Yajurveda 
passages. Here for the first time the importance of dkdnksd in unifying 
the words in a sentence is brought out. In this definition two terms 
deserve special attention, arthaikatva (unity of purpose) and dakdnksa 
(mutual expectancy). The term arthaikatva can also be interpreted as 
unity of meaning; explained in this way it can have an extended 
application, even to ordinary sentences. The Mimamsa principle of 
syntactical unity (ekavdkyatd) states that if a group of words can be 
interpreted as a single sentence, it is not proper to split it and interpret 
it as two sentences. A sentence like pafya mrgo dhdvatt, “‘see the deer is 
running,” would be a single sentence according to this principle (not 
treating it as two: “‘the deer is running’ and “see him’’). 

This condition of mutual expectancy, first promulgated by the 
Mimamsakas and later accepted by other schools, stresses the necessity 
of interdependence of words to give a unified sense as in a compound 
word or a sentence. Panini seems to have accepted something of the sort 
while mentioning sdmarthya, “‘capacity”, as a condition for forming 
compound words (Astddhydyi 2.1.1); for sdmarthya refers to semantic 
connection by syntactic elements.? Two meanings are given by Katya- 
yana for the term sdmarthya: first, ekdrthibhdva, emergence of single 
integrated meaning, which is similar to arthatkatva in the Mimamsa 
definition of the sentence; and, second, vydpeksé, which is equivalent to 
akanksad in the Mimdmsdsittra. It is not clear whether Panini himself 
intended those meanings or Katyayana is reading them in the light of 
the Mimamsa definition. Strictly speaking, sdmarthya is the capacity of 
the words for mutual association, vydpeksé is their interdependence, 
and dkdnksd is the need one has for the other in order to complete 
the sense. Panini is referring to the compound formation while the 
Mimamsakas are dealing with the Vedic sentence, but the principle 
involved is the same. Patafijali explains the two views as mutually 
exclusive and accepts the ekarthibhdva point of view as the final one, 
for according to the Grammarians the elements of a compound give 
up their individual meanings and acquire a special signification. He 
thinks that according to the vpdpeksé view the individual members 
retain their own meanings but are mutually related. Kaiyata points 
out that the former is a condition for the compound word, and the 
latter for the sentence. According to Bhartrhari the sentence is the unit 
Sphofa, and unity of meaning is certainly necessary. We may say that in 
all cases there should be unity of meaning when viewed as an integral 
unit and interdependence when viewed from the point of view of the 
parts. 

Akanksa can be seen from two points of view, psychological and 
syntactic. The Mimamsakas are interested in the psychological expec- 
tancy, while the Naiyayikas take it as a syntactic expectancy. Bhartrhari 


SENTENCE MEANING 85 


actually criticizes the Mimamsa definition of the sentence on the ground 
that its akdnks@ would imply that a passage of several grammatical 
sentences would have to be considered as one sentence. The Mimamsakas 
have to solve the problem by referring to the basic psychological 
expectancy. 

Salikanatha, a follower of Prabhakara, says that dkanksd, being the 
curiosity on the part of the listeners, has been explained by some as 
invariable association.* This definition will lead to complications, as 
there is no limit to such mental association. He says that only those 
that are essential for the accomplishment of the intended purpose 
need be taken as requirements, not all the kdraka associations. “Bring 
the cow”’ is complete in itself, but if the phrase “‘with a stick” is added, 
that phrase is in need of a verb for completeness, and hence “Bring 
the cow with a stick” becomes a single sentence. If the phrase were not 
added, it would mean that the speaker was indifferent to the way the 
cow was brought. 

To the Prabhakara Mimamsakas the three basic requirements for 
the accomplishment of the intended purpose are: the person who is 
enjoined to do the act, what to do, and how to do it. If one of these 
essential requirements is not given in the sentence it has to be assuméd 
as in elliptical sentences. To the Bhatta Mimamsakas, by contrast, 
the essential psychological requirements in a sentence are: the act 
enjoined (itikartavyatd), the means (sddhana or karana), and the fruit of 
action (phala or prayojana). 

The Grammarians and the Logicians take dkdnksé as syntactic, as it 
is only the need for the syntactic completeness of the sentence. The 
later Naiyayikas define akadnksd as a kind of syntactic need that one 
word has for another in a sentence in order to convey the interrelation 
of words. It is the dkdntksé that leads to the knowledge of the syntactic 
relation in asentence. Akdnksa plays an important role in the teaching 
method of Sanskrit texts. In a sentence the finite verb is taken first 
and then questions asked to get the necessary words to fill the kéraka 
relations. 

Nageéga says that dkdksd is the desire on the part of the listeners, 
on hearing a word in a sentence, to know the idea that can be related in 
order to get a complete sense; it is only in a figurative sense that the 
expectancy is attributed to the word. 

In the Vedantaparibhdsa (4.4-7), Dharmarajadhvarindra says that 
there are two kinds of akdnksd, natural expectancy (utthitakanksd) and 
potential expectancy (uithdpyakanksd). Akanksé can also be mutual or 
one-sided. In “‘bring the cow with a stick,” the phrase ‘‘with a stick” 
has expectancy toward the verb “‘bring,’’ but ‘“‘bring the cow” has no 
direct expectancy toward the phrase. There is no end to potential 


86 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


expectancy, and the addition of the word to resolve it depends on the 
speaker’s intention. 


B. Yogyata 


To the primary condition of mutual expectancy were added two 
more by the Mimamsakas, yogyataé (consistency of sense) and dsatti or 
samnidhi, which stands for the contiguity of the words. These three 
conditions have been generally accepted by all schools of thought 
as essential for Sabdabodha. To them some have added a fourth, namely, 
the knowledge of idiparya, the intention of the speaker or the general 
purport of the sentence. 

Yogyaia is the logical compatibility of the words’ consistency in a 
sentence for mutual association. Really it involves a judgment on a 
sentence’s sense or nonsense. The meaning of a sentence should not be 
contradicted by experience. ‘“He wets it with water’’—here there is 
jyogyata, because wetting is generally done with a liquid; but in a 
sentence “He wets it with fire” there is no _yogyatad, because the idea of 
wetting is incongruous with that of fire. 

There is no unanimity of opinion regarding the exact role of yogyaté 
in the comprehension of meaning from a sentence. Some Naiyayikas 
hold that a decisive knowledge of yogyatd is a prerequisite for verbal 
cognition. Others say that what is required is only the absence of a 
knowledge of incompatibility. Kumarila Bhatta says that incompati- 
bility with the actual facts does not prevent verbal comprehension, 
but only the validity of the knowledge. Perhaps itis the inconceivability 
of the mutual association of the word meanings that renders the whole 
sentence nonsensical; itis not the lack of correlation with the actual 
facts but the impossibility of connecting the word meanings that stands 
in the way of verbal comprehension. 

Sometimes the lack of yogyaté is only apparent and can be explained 
away by resorting to the metaphorical meaning of a word in the 
sentence; iftheincompatibility can beremoved thus and yogyatd restored, 
there is no difficulty in comprehending the meaning of the sentence. 
The apparent incompatibility of the expressed sense is an essential 
condition for laksand (secondary meaning). 


C. Samnidhi or Asatti 

Samnidhi or dsatti is generally explained as the condition that the 
words in a sentence should be temporally contiguous. It is the 
uninterrupted utterance or the unbroken comprehension of words 
when they are in juxtaposition. Kumérila Bhatta says that it is the 
continuous moving about of the words in the listener’s mind (buddhau 
viparivytti). The Prabhakaras also explain it that way. Lack of samnidhi 
can occur in two ways—not being uttered together and not being 


SENTENGE MEANING 87 


signified by words. The Bhatta Mimamsakas hold that verbal cognition 
is possible only when the necessary words are together in the mind, 
The Prabhakaras consider that only the contiguity of cognition of the 
sense is necessary. Thus in the case of elliptical sentences, the Bhatta 
Mimamsakas want the missing words to be actually supplied. 

The Navya-Nyaya school defines dsatti as an immediate recollection 
of the meanings of words through their expressive power or secondary 
signification (laksand); even if the words are separated there is dsatti 
if the meanings of the words are recollected without any interruption. 
This recognition happens in the case of verses. Early Naiyayikas thought 
that the knowledge of dsatti is the cause of verbal comprehension. The 
Navya-Nyaya school considers that Gsatti itself is the cause (svariipe 
Sati S4bdabodhahetuh). 

In the case of elliptical sentences, in which the intended meaning 
is understood from the context even though some of the words necessary 
for syntactic completeness are lacking, the Bhatta Mimamsakas believe 
that it is necessary to supply the missing words in order to have verbal 
comprehension. of the sentence meaning. The Prabhakaras hold that 
it is easier to supply the meaning than to presume the missing words 
as implied. : 


2. THE ROLE oF Td@tparya or INTENTION 


The term ¢déiparya has been used by the different schools of thought 
in India with varying subtle nuances, depending on the basic stand- 
point taken by each; but the general idea is quite clear.5 The term 
refers to the meaning intended to be conveyed by an utterance, and it 
can be viewed as the meaning intended by the speaker or as the 
purport of the utterance. The role of contextual factors in deciding 
this ¢diparya is also generally accepted by all, along with the importance 
of tdtparya in deciding the meaning ofa sentence. There is, however, 
no unanimity of opinion regarding the exact role played by édtparya in 
verbal comprehension. 

The meaning of a sentence can be considered from two distinct 
standpoints, from the point of view of the speaker and from the point 
of view of the listener. The general western approach has been from the 
speaker’s point of view, while the Indian approach, especially the later 
Sabdabodha approach, has been mainly from the listener’s point of view. 

In a normal speech situation there can be five different aspects of 
the meaning of an utterance: what is in the mind of the speaker who 
makes the utterance, what the speaker wants the listener to understand, 
what the utterance actually conveys, what the listener understands 
as the meaning of the utterance, and what isin the mind of the listener 
on hearing the utterance. 


88 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


In a perfect linguistic communication all five of these meanings 
must coincide; but often due to various causes there are bound to be 
differences standing in the way of easy communication. In all cases 
of successful lying or misdirection, what is in the mind of the speaker 
at the time of utterance is different from what is intended to be conveyed. 
to the listener. And very often what the listener understands as the 
meaning of the utterance is different from what the speaker intends 
to convey; this problem can be caused by the lack of expressive power 
on the speaker’s part or the inability to understand on the listener’s 
part. What is in the speaker’s mind before he speaks or in the listener’s 
mind after hearing the utterance is rather intangible and does not 
easily yield to objective scientific analysis. It is the actual utterance 
that can be objectively analyzed into its components of words, 
morphemes, and phonemes, and studied; but that does not mean that 
the other aspects are less important. 

The Mimamsakas and the Naiyayikas, who take the sentence to 
be a concatenation of the individual words it contains, have necessarily 
to depend on the power of édtparya to explain how a connected meaning 
is comprehended from a sentence. Each word in a sentence gives its 
own isolated meaning; but a string of unconnected isolated senses 
cannot produce aunified meaning. People use words with the intention 
of conveying a connected sense; hence from the use of words in juxta- 
position (samabhivydhara) it is assumed that the speaker has uttered 
them with the intention of conveying a connected sense, for otherwise 
the simultaneous utterance would be of no avail, but for such an 
intention /dtparya works as a general motivating force to help in correla- 
ting the word meanings and forming the sentence meaning. 

Tatparya is the intention or the desire of the speakers, according to 
the Naiyayikas. According to the Mimamsakas, it is the purport of 
the sentence. This tatparya is all-comprehensive, but not all-powerful 
or absolute. Normally it cannot change the Sekii, the primary meaning 
of a word. According to the Mimamsakas, the Sakti or the relation 
between a word and its meaning is autpaitika, innate or permanent; 
according to the Naiyayikas, this fakti is conventional or sdmketika, 
but permanent, being based on the will or icchd of God in the case of 
ordinary words and of the authors in the case of technical terms and 
the like. 

According to the Naiydyika, the sabdabodha or understanding of 
the sentence’s meaning is possible only through the knowledge of the 
words’ meanings, which form the immediate cause (kédrana); the 
knowledge of the expressive power of fakt#i in the individual words 
obtained through recollection is the sahakdri kdrana. Before one considers 
the question of the speaker’s intention, understanding the individual 
meanings of words on the basis of their fakti is essential. It is only in 


SENTENCE MEANING 89 


the case of ambiguous words, in which more than one sense is possible, 
that the speaker’s intention or contextual factors are taken into account. 

In the case of metaphoric expression, such as “the village on the 
Ganges,” in which the literal meaning is unsuitable, the incompatibility 
has to be removed by taking one of the word meanings as having been 
used in a sense different from its normal sense, but somehow related to 
it. In a particular sentence in which there is contextual incompatibility, 
it is on the basis of the ¢dtparya that the listener decides which of the 
words is to be taken as metaphorical. Some farfetched relationship can 
always be assumed between the primary meaning and the intended 
meaning. 

Along with dkdnksa, yogyatd, and dsaiti, some Naiyayikas want to 
include éatparya or a general knowledge of the meaning intended by the 
speaker, which may be termed “prehension,” as an essential factor in 
all cases of verbal comprehension. Some others believe that the speaker’s 
intention need not be considered as a direct factor, as it could be 
included in dkdnksd itself. Tdtparya plays a part in deciding dsaitti also. 
Gangeéa and Visvanatha have included #étparya as a fourth requisite. 

Even though the Mimamsakas do not accept tdfparya as a separate 
factor, it is accepted asa general motivating force. According to the 
Prabhakaras, the tatparya enables primary meaning itself to give both 
its word meaning and the syntactic relation. These anvitdbhidhdnavddins 
think that the Sakti of words is understood with reference to a meaning 
that is related to some ‘drya. All sentences, especially in the Veda, 
have to be ultimately meaning injunctions or prohibitions. The later 
theory of Dhanika, who includes dhvani under tétparya, follows this 
anvitabhidhanavada. 

According to the Bhatta Mimamsakas, the individual words in a 
sentence give their isolated meanings, and the sentence meaning is 
located through laksand, based on tatparydnupapaitt. It is Jayanta Bhatta 
who in his Nyayamaiijari advocates tétparya as a separate factor to explain 
the emergence of the sentence meaning from the associationist point 
of view. He does not refer to laksand in this case, because sentence 
laksan@ is not acceptable to the Naiyayikas. Harisiddhantavagisa, in 
his commentary on Sahityadarpana, says that this tatparyasakii is the same 
as the samsargamaryada of later Naiyayikas. 

Among Alamkarikas, Anandavardhana accepts only three functions 
of words, abhidha, laksané, and tatparya. He mentions the padéarthavakyar- 
thanydya but does not refer co it as a function. Tatparyauriti was accepted. 
for the first tume by Abhinavagupta in his Locana. He followed Jayanta 
Bhatta in this respect. Later Alamkarikas took it as a general view 
accepted by Dhvanikara himself. Thus Ruyyaka says wrongly that 
Dhvanikara accepted vpafijand as the fourth vydpdra, distinct from 
abhidhé, laksand, and tdiparya. Later Alamkarikas took the tdtparyavrtti 


90 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


as the view of abhihiténvayavadins and confused it with the Bhatta view, 
though the Bhattas have definitely stated that they accept only leksand 
and not /dtparya to explain the emergence of the sentence meaning 
from the word. meanings. 


3. Anvitabhidhina AND Abhihiténvaya THEORIES 


We saw earlier that the two main theories about sentence meaning 
are the anvitébhidhana, advocated by the Prabhakara Mimamsakas, 
and the abhihitanvaya, held by the Bhatta Mimamsaka. 

Prabhakara and his followers denied that words convey a meaning 
except in the context of a sentence, even though they regarded words as 
real and actual constituents of language. Like the Bhattas, the Prabha- 
karas have to accept the reality of individual words and their individual 
meanings, and agree that the primary meaning expressed by the word 
is a universal (jati). All of these points are specifically stated in the 
Mimdmséstitras, and no Mimamsaka can doubt its validity. It is also 
clear that the purpose of words in a sentence is to give a cogent, 
connected meaning. The difference between the two schools involves 
the following questions: 

(1) Does the unitary sentence meaning arise directly from the 
words themselves or indirectly through the recollection of the word 
meanings? The anvitabhidhana theory takes the former view, while 
the abhihitanvaya theory takes the latter. 

(2) The meaning of a sentence is made up of the individual word 
meanings and their mutual relation. Can both of these elements be 
directly conveyed by the words? The Prabhakaras say that the in- 
tention or purport, known from contextual factors, will make the 
primary, denotative power of the words convey both. But Bhattas 
hold that the primary denotative power of words is exhausted by 
conveying their isolated, individual meanings and stop with that. 
The connected meaning is conveyed through the secondary power 
of the sentence (laksand). The individual meaniag is a universal; but 
in the sentence meaning has to apply to the individual. The latter is 
also achieved by the power of laksand. 

Some of the Naiyayikas also accept the abhihitdénvaya theory, but 
because according to them the primary meaning of a word is the parti- 
cular qualified by the universal (jativifistavyakti), they do not have to 
depend on laksané to get the sentence meaning. To get the syntactic 
relationship between the words, they cannot resort to laksand, because 
they accept it only for words, not for a sentence. One of the Naiyayikas, 
Jayanta Bhatta, proposed a new function of the sentence, édtparya, to 
account for the syntactically connected meaning. 

The Prabhakaras stress the natural process by which children learn 


SENTENGE MEANING 91 


their language. It is by watching language used and by witnessing the 
activity of elders in daily life that children come to know the significance 
of words. Through the substitution method they come to know the 
meaning of words; this process is natural and subconscious. Later the 
child comes to understand the meaning of even new sentences. But from 
the world he knows that words are never used in isolation but have 
meaning only in the context of a sentence. The constituent words in a 
sentence convey meaning only as they are related to the sentence 
meaning. Thus in the sentence “Bring the cow,” the word “cow” 
means not the isolated concept cowness, but cow as related to the action 
of bringing. So also the word “bring” means the action of bringing in 
relation to the cow. The words themselves give their own meanings and 
their syntactic relation, so the sentence meaning is directly conveyed by 
the sentence. 

This view is rejected by the Bhatta Mimamsaka because of the fallacies 
of interdependence and complexity. According to them we are able to 
understand the individual meanings of words, even though we might 
have learned them by hearing people uttering sentences and watching 
their reaction. Unlike the words, the sentence does not have an indivi- 
dual meaning of its own. When we hear a sentence, we have first an 
understanding of the separate meanings of the words one after another; 
then these word. meanings are related on the basis of expectancy and 
other factors, and we arrive at the unified meaning of the sentence as a 
whole. 

The association of the word meanings is brought about by laksand, 
according to Bhatta Mimamsa, but the Naiyayikas explain it by resort- 
ing to samsargamaryada, 


4. SENTENCE Sphota 


Bhartrhari identifies Brahman, the ultimate being, with the essence 
of the speech principle; it is without beginning or end and indestructi- 
ble. The entire world is an appearance (vivarta) of this speech principle. 
Symbol and meaning are only two aspects of this speech essence, It is 
the same speech essence that appears in the form of various ideas and. 
meanings on the one hand and their symbols—words and sentences-—on 
the other, and thus constitutes the phenomenal world. This speech 
essence is of the nature of consciousness: though unchanging and part- 
less, it appears to be evolutionary and pluralistic on the basis of its own 
powers like time, which, though really identical with it, seems to be 
different. The eternal, timeless speech principle appears to be changing 
because of the working of the time factor, Time is an inherent power of 
the absolute, but it is relatively independent and exerts its influence in 
bringing about the other powers of the speech essence. 


92 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The basic principle of Bhartrhari’s theory of language is that the 
complete utterance or the sentence is the unit of speech and should be 
considered as a single, unanalyzable entity. ‘The utterance alone is valid 
with respect to actual language. The meaning of the utterance or 
sentence is also integral and indivisible and is of the nature of pratibhd, an 
intuitive flash of insight. This partless expression in the sentence sphoja 
manifests in a flash the integral meaning. Sequence and time factor do 
not really belong to the sentence but are unavoidable as means for 
revealing the sentence. Sentence sphofa as the expression (fabda) and 
pratibhd as the meaning (artha) are the basic factors in linguistic 
behavior. 

In the speaker’s mind before he begins to speak and in the listener’s 
mind after hearing, this unity is clear. But because of ou: inability to 
communicate it in an instantaneous flash, the sentence has to be uttered 
as a sequence of words, each word in its turn being a definite sequence 
of phonemes or letters. If both the speaker and the listener are quite 
proficient in the language, as in the case of the mother tongue, they do 
not feel that they are uttering or hearing articulated sound-bits or 
words, The speaker utters the sentence and the listener hears it as a 
sentence. If the language proficiency is meagre, the listener may be 
hearing the words and _ trying to organize the meanings into a unit. If 
the hearer does not know the language, he will hear only a series of 
articulated sounds or mere sound bits, All analysis of the sentence into 
lesser meaningful elements such as the word, bases, and affixes may be 
a convenient fiction. It is true that Grammarians’ main work is to 
analyze the utterance into its component parts in order to help the 
students understand the meaning, but they are aware that this linguistic 
analysis has no real validity except as a help to the students. 

Even though the sphofa theory envisages different subdivisions of the 
sphoja, Bhartrhari accepts only the sentence sphofa as the real unit of 
speech. Letters and words have only a pragmatic value, as useful units 
that build up higher units of speech, the sentence. The meaning of this 
single, indivisible utterance is pratibhd, a flash of insight, the real nature 
of which is indefinable. Its existence is ratified only in the individual’s 
experience of it, and the experiencer himself cannot describe it 
adequately. 

In the discussion of the sphofa theory it has been pointed out that the 
actual sounds uttered by the speaker and heard by the listener are the 
vaikrta dhvani, containing many irrelevant, idiosyncratic, and non- 
linguistic elements. This vaikyta dhvani reveals the prakrta dhvani, which 
is the linguistically relevant phonematic pattern of the utterance, free 
from the variations in intonation, tempo, pitch, and so on, which do not 
affect the language. Of course in languages in which the tone or pitch 
or length is relevant, these factors will be part of the prakyta dhvani itself. 


SENTENCE MEANING 93 


In normal linguistic discourse both the speaker and the listener are 
conscious of the normal phonological or phonematic pattern only. All 
nonlinguistic matter is eliminated at this stage; but the time sequence 
is still present. It is this pra@krta dhvani that reveals gradually, phoneme 
by phoneme and word by word, the sentence sphofa, the integral linguis- 
tic symbol. The role of the phonemes (varga) is only to reveal th~ word 
sphota and the role of the words to reveal the sentence sphofa. The 
smalJer elements cannot, individually or collectively, reveal the integral 
unitary meaning directly because of their appearance in a temporal 
sequence, because of their not being associated with parts of the 
meaning; their role is to build up the higher unit until the sentence 
sphota is revealed. This sentence sphota gives forth instantaneously in a 
flash the meaning of the sentence. 

Bhartrhari has stated that the speech principle (Sabdatattva) has three 
stages in the course of its manifestation, namely pasyanti, madhyamd, and 
vaikhari. The vaikhari level corresponds to the vatkrtadhvani of the sphota 
theory and is the actualized and manifested speech, the sounds spoken 
by the speaker and heard by the listener. The madhyamda level seems to 
correspond to the prdakrta dhvani, because the linguistically relevant 
elements, including the sequence, are present in both. The next stage, 
pasyanti, has been identified with pratibha indicated by the vdkyasphota. 
When we speak of the vakyasphota as the meaning revealer and of 
pratibhé as the meaning, the two seem to be different; but actually they 
are only two aspects of the same entity. Whether Bhartrhari considered 
the Sabda Brahman as a level higher than the pafyanti is not certain, for 
scholars are not unanimous on this point. He says that grammar is the 
highest place for vac in its threefold aspect—pasyanti, madhyamd, and 
vaikhari. That claim does not preclude the possibility of a higher level 
about which one cannot say anything. According to some scholars the 
pasyanti level has two aspects, the higher being also called pard pasyanti, 
at which, all distinctions are obliterated. 

Even though Bhartrhari considered the sentence to be the only unit 
of expression in actual life, he was fully conscious of the importance of 
linguistic analysis into wcrds and other units as a useful means for 
understanding the languages. This awareness is apparent from the third 
book of the Vakyapadiya, where various problems are discussed on the 
basis of morphemes and phonemes that make up the sentence. 


5. Sabdabodha 


Indian thinkers on language belonging to the different schools of 
thought considered language behavior in a linguistic situation not only 
from the speaker’s point of view but also from the listener’s. The various 


94 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


theories of §a4bdabodha or judgment consider the process of cognition of 
the sentence meaning from the listener’s point of view. 

The modern technique of §bdabodha was developed and perfected by 
the school of Navya-Nyaya, founded by Gangega about A.D. 1320 using 
technical terms for specifying the meaning of a sentence precisely and 
accurately. Literally the term sabdabodha means “verbal comprehen- 
sion” or “verbal cognition”’; it is used to indicate the meaning of a 
sentence as understood by the listeners. In modern works the term is 
used to refer to the linguistic paraphrase of the sentence, in which the 
exact denotation of each element in the sentence is clearly and precisely 
indicated. The sdbdabodha approach of understanding a sentence mean- 
ing is intended to avoid syntactic ambiguity by specifying the exact 
relations among the various elements in a sentence. The vagaries of the 
sentence’s surface structure will be absent in the sdbdabodha paraphrase, 
and the linguistic analysis at the syntactic level will become precise. 

The §abdabodha approach of analyzing the meaning of a sentence is 
analogous to the deep-structure level in Noan Chomsky’s analysis of a 
sentence. He distinguishes between the surface level and the deep- 
structure level. The underlying relations between the elements of a 
sentence at the sSdbdabodha level need not always be the apparent rela- 
tions at the surface level. Thus ghatasya nirmitih, “‘making the pot,” and 
caitrasya nirmitih, “creation by Caitra,” though similar in Sanskrit at 
the surface level, have different sabdabodhas. The genitive case in the 
first phrase indicates the object of the verb, while in the second expres- 
sion the genitive case indicates the agent; the former is ghatakarmika 
nirmitih, creation that has the pot as its object, but the latter is 
caitrakarirkaé nirmitik, creation that has caitra as its agent. 

The technique of Sa@bdabodha was also adopted by later workzers in the 
various other schools of thought. But on the basis of the difference in 
their basic assumptions there is difference in the emphasis, and the same 
sentence or expression has different Sabdabodha paraphrasesin the diffe- 
rent schools, Nyaya, Mimamsa, and Grammarians. They differ particu- 
larly about which element in a sentenceshould be regarded as predomi- 
nant. The Logicians (the Naiyayikas) are mainly interested in analyzing 
propositional sentences from a static point of view, so they consider the 
substantive (in the nominative case) to be the most important element. 
The Grammarians, as well as the early etymological schools, consider 
the sentence from the dynamic point of view and take the finite verb to 
be the most important element. The followers of the Mimamsa school, 
mainly concerned with the interpretation of Vedic injunctions, try to 
analyze the implications of imperative sentences. The same Sanskrit 
sentence may be interpreted differently at the deep-structure level in 
the Sabdabodha by the different schools of thought, because they differ 
in their basic standpoints, 


SENTENCE MEANING 95 


The sentence caitrah ghatam karott, ““Caitra makes a pot,” will be inter- 
preted by the Grammarians as “ekatvavacchinnacaitrakartrkah 
ekatvavacchinnaghatakarmakah vartamanakalakah karanavyaparah, 
the operation or activity of making, in the present tense, which has 
Caitra in the singular number as its agent and pot in the singular num- 
ber as its object. To the Naiyayika or the logician the same sentence 
will mean “‘ghatakarmakakaranakrtiman caitrah,”? Caitra who has the 
activity of making which has pot as its object. These interpretations 
could be further elaborated by pointing out all the implications of the 
sentence. The passive sentence “‘caitrena ghatah kriyate’’ (a pot is 
being made by Caitra) could be analyzed in the same way, because 
from the §ébdabodha point of view there is little difference in meaning 
between the active sentence and its passive form, according to the 
Grammarians. The Naijyayikas, however, make a clear distinction 
between the two. 

Among ancient writers neither Panini nor Gautama was interested 
in discussing the sentence. Jayanta Bhatta says in his Nydpamaiijari that 
the absence of any reference to the sentence in the Nydyasiitras shows 
that the early Naiyayikas considered the sentence to be merely a 
combination of words. Among Indian Grammarians it was Katyayana 
who first defined a sentence as ekatin, that which has one finite verb. 
Panini seems to have held the view that a sentence may contain more 
than one finite verb, for his rule tiv atiiah ordains the acute accent to a 
verb when it follows a nonverb (in a sentence). Later Grammarians 
have also accepted such sentences. Strictly from the formal surface- 
level approach, as advocated by Katyayana, such a sentence may be 
considered a complex sentence made up of two sentences, but at the 
deep-structure level, from the semantic point of view, they constitute a 
single sentence. 

We have already seen that the Mimamsakas first promulgated and 
the other schools later accepted the theory that the writing of the 
sentence is based on the three factors of mutual expectancy or inter- 
dependence of the meanings of the words in it, compatibility or absence 
of incompatibility, and proximity. The Mimamsakas considered mutual 
expectancy to be psychological, while the Logicians and Grammarians 
took it to be syntactical. Between the two schools of Mimamsa, the 
Bhatta and the Prabhakara, there is difference in view about the factors 
involved in an injunctive sentence. According to Kumarila Bhatta, 
every command. to do something raises three questions: What should 
be done? How is it to be done? and Who is to do it? A command or 
law should be obeyed because it is a law, not because of any profit 
motive or fear of punishment. Kumirila’s view was that nobody would 
act without a purpose. According to the two schools of Mimamsa, every 
complete sentence must satisfy these basic psychological requirements. 


96 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The Mim4msa schools held that the finite verb is the central element 
in asentence. It consists of two elements: the verbal root (dhdtu) and 
the verbal suffix (pratyaya). Of these two, the Mimamsakas held that 
the verbal suffix is semantically more important than the root. The 
verbal suffix denotes d4dvand or the efficient force, which is defined as 
that activity which brings something into being, ““‘bhavitur bhavanuki- 
lah bhavakavyA4paravisesah,” the operation of the operator conducive 
to the production of the result. Bhdvand in turn is of two kinds: fabdi 
bhavand and adrthi bhdvand. The injunctive sentence induces the hearer 
to perform some action, which is denoted by the optative suffix ln; this 
type is the §abdi bhdvané. The drthi bhdvand is based on it and is the 
activity of the agent that leads to the result. In the Bhdvandviveka, 
Mandana Misra defines bhdvand as the absence of inactivity in general 
(audésinyavicchittisimanyariipa) . 

The Mimamsakas and the Naiyayikas accepted individual words 
and their independent meanings. The Bhatta schools accepted the 
abhihitinvaya theory of verbal comprehension, according to which the 
words in a sentence escape their isolated meanings and the syntactic 
connection among them is found through secondary meaning. The 
Prabhakara school held that the words themselves conveyed their 
individual meanings and the syntactic relation (the anvitdbhidhana 
theory). The Nyaya school espoused the association theory of verbal 
comprehension and held that the syntactic connection among word 
meanings is obtained through the samsargamaryadd, the power of mutual 
association. 

In nilo ghatah, “a black pot”, the syntactic relation between the two 
word meanings is identity; it is conveyed through the power of associa- 
tion, called samsargamaryada by the Logicians. It is not directly conveyed. 
by any element in the sentence. If the underlying syntactic relation 
between the elements in a sentence is conveyed through some morphe- 
mic element in the surface structure itself, it is called prakdra. Thus in 
the phrase dhdnyena dhanavan, “possessed. of wealth in the form of grains,” 
the relation of identity of dhénya and dhana is conveyed by the instru- 
mental ending ena (dhanyabhinnadhanavén). Thus a distinction is made 
between the two types, one in which the syntactic relation is inherent 
in the constituent elements and the other in which this relation is absent 
and has to be found through implication or suggestion. 

Every verbal root consists of two elements: phala, “‘the result,” and 
vpdpara, “‘an activity.” Thus the meaning of every root can be analyzed 
as a kind of activity producing some result. Thus pac, “‘to cook,’ means 
utklithyanukiila vyapara, an activity conducive to the softening. In a 
transitive sentence the activity pertains to the agent (Kartr) and the 
result of the operation accrues to the object. 

In this chapter and the preceding ones we have shown how the 


SENTENCE MEANING 97 


Grammarian philosophers developed a consistent system for handling 
technical grammatical issues as well as epistemology and metaphysics. 
True to the Indian tradition the philosophy of Grammar has shown 
itself to be both a means of theoretical knowledge and a spiritual 
discipline leading to moksa or release. ‘The Grammarians began simply 
with the investigations of words, of how to manipulate and acquire 
them. But this systematic study of overt speech led to an awareness of 
higher and higher levels of language until the Word Absolute, Sabda 
Brahman, was discovered. From this metaphysical perspective, Sabda 
Brahman is the underlying principle of unity that makes possible all 
diversity. 

For the philosophy of Grammar the division of speech into words 
and letters is a convenient fiction made for pedagogical purposes, to 
teach words with precision and economy of effort. The basic division 
of sentences into words and words into bases (nouns and verb roots) 
with their respective suffixes is seen to be phenomenal and not ulti- 
mately real. A clear analysis of a hierarchy of levels of language is 
offered from overt or vatkhari speech to internal or madhyamd speech, 
with all of these levels being preceded logically by a more unitary stage, 
paSsyanti, in which there is no sequence of words but just a glimpse of 
the separation of word and meaning—the intentionality of the primor- 
dial urge to express onself. All of these concepts presuppose a unitary 
ground out of which distinction is manifested. This ground is called 
Sabda Brahman because the approach to this Absolute (Brahman) and 
the manifestation of it is through words (Sabda). 

The philosophical analysis of language offered in the Grammarian 
literature that follows is not just a logical exercise to satisfy intellectual 
curiosity, but an earnest and sustained spiritual approach to identify 
onself with the ground of all speech phenomena, Sabda Brahman. 

The philosophy of Grammar sees itself finally as a straight pathway 
to ultimate freedom (moksamdnamdam ajthma rajapaddhatih). 


PART TWO 


SURVEY OF THE LITERATURE OF 
GRAMMARIAN PHILOSOPHY 


PHILOSOPHICAL ELEMENTS IN 
VEDIC LITERATURE 


John G. Arapura and K. Kunjunni Raja 


Rg Veda 


The earliest available literature, the Rg Veda, contains glowing tributes 
to the power of speech. To the Vedic seers, who were facing the problem 
of communicating their mystic experiences, language was naturally an 
object of wonder and reverence. Many of the later philosophical 
theories on language may be seen in a subtle form in the Vedic literature 
itself. There are three hymns that deal mainly with divine Speech 
(Vac): the Asyavamiya hymn (1.164), which is one of the most philo- 
sophical hymns of the Rg Veda, but full of difficult symbols; 10.71 on the 
origin of language, which has been subjected to a great deal of inter- 
pretation by later Grammarians; and 10.125, where the Goddess of 
Speech, Vagambhrni, herself describes her power and functions. 
(These follow paraphrases of these three hymns. ) 


Asyavamiya Hymn 

The seer Dirghatamas asks the question: “I ask thee about the 
ultimate abode of speech,”’ and answers “‘the ultimate abode of speech 
is this Brahman.”’ 

The place of Vac is at the peak of the universe. “On the top of 
yonder sky, they say, is Véc, who knows all, but does not enter all’ 
(verse 10). 

Vdc has been divided into four parts. Those Brahmins with insight 
know them. Three parts that are hidden in the cave, the mortals do 
not activate. They speak only the fourth part (verse 45).1 

The seer Dirghatamas tells us that Vac, like a bull, lowed and thus 
fashioned the tumultuous, chaotic floods (verse 41). But she had also 


102 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


produced the aksara, the permanent syllable with which the chaotic 
material was to be organized. She taught it to Agni. 

Vde possessed the aksara of the Rg (verses 39, 42), who possesses a 
thousand aksaras. 

The same Vac is described by the Brahmins by different names: Agni, 
Yama, and Matariévan (verse 46). 

Vae is also identified with the river Sarasvati. In the Brahmanas the 
two are equated: “Your inexhaustible breast, Sarasvati, a source of 
delight with which you cause all the choicest things to flourish, which 
grants treasure, bestows wealth, confers good food—present that here 
to be sucked” (verse 49). 


Rg Veda 10.71 


Brhaspati ! When they came forth to establish the first beginning of 
language, setting up names, what has been hidden in them as their 
best and purest good became manifest through love. (1) 

When the sages fashioned language with their thought, filtering it 
like parched grain through a sieve, friends recognized their friends. 
Their beauty is marked on their language. (2) 

They traced the course of language through ritual; they found it 
embodied in the seers. They gained access to it and distributed it widely; 
the seven chanters cheered them. (3) 

Many who look do not see language, many who listen do not hear 
her. She reveals herself like a loving and well-adorned wife to her 
husband, only to some. (4) 

Although all the friends have eyes and ears, their mental intuitions 
are uneven. Some are like shallow ponds, which reach up to the mouth 
or armpit; others are like ponds that are fit for bathing. (7) 

Here the contrast between the two types of people is clearly 
indicated—those who see Vac and understand her and those who sce 
the form but do not understand her. The Vedic seers were not claiming 
to be composers of the hymns, rather the seers of an eternal, impersonal 
truth, 


Rg Veda 10.125 

Here Vé is a personal deity. 

I travel with the Rudras and the Vasus, the Adityas and the 
Visvedevah. Both Varuna and Mitra do I support, Indra, Agni, and 
the Agvins. (1) 

I am the sustainer and nourisher of Soma, Tvastr, Pisan, and Bhaga. 
I bestow wealth on the zealous patron of the sacrifice who makes the 
oblation and presses the Soma. (2) 

I am the queen, the gatherer of treasures, the one with penetrating 
perception, the first of those who should be worshipped. The gods have 


VEDIC LITERATURE 103 


distributed me manifoldly and caused (the chants) to enter many 
places. (3) 

I am the one through whose mé&p& everyone sees, breathes, and 
hears. (4) 

I am the lone speaker of welcoming words for the feast to the gods 
and men. Whoever is my favorite, him I make powerful, a true knower 
of the mystic power, a 7s? and an intelligent man. (5) 

I stretch the bow for Rudra so that his arrow may reach the hater of 
religion and destroy him. I rouse the battle fury for the people. I have 
penetrated heaven and earth. (6) 

I breathe like the wind supporting all the worlds. Beyond the sky, 
beyond this earth so great have I become by my might. (8) 

The Vedic seers believed that metaphysical knowledge can be had 
through transcendental vision by the exercise of mental concentration. 
It is a sort of intuition. The source of all true knowledge is Véc, who 
may communicate it to whomsoever she favors. 

Rg Veda 1.164.37 deals with the question of man’s self-knowledge. 
“What This is I know not (what I am in reality I know not). Shackled 
in mind, I move about. As the first born of yta has approached me, 
then I got a portion of that Vac.”” This first born of rta is Agni; Agni 
possesses a part of Vac, has a function in the cosmos, and is immortal. 

Here Vac must be clearly understood as Logos, and its connection 
with self-knowledge is a seminal thought already exhibited by this 
text. Furthermore, its connection with ria is significant, because the 
latter stands for the regularity, invariability, and consistency of such 
paramount importance in the Logos insofar as it is the ratio that goes 
with it, The idea that the imperishable Vaéc (Word/Logos) is the first 
born of via shows up again in the Taittiriya Brahmana 2.8.8.5 (“Vag 
aksaram prathamaja rtasya”’). Now the question about Va and the 
question about the self are not associated with each other accidentally, 
for, on the contrary, that they are related at the greatest depth becomes 
evident in the Brahmanas and the Upanisads. 

Cows are often used as symbols for Vac. Ancient texts on etymology 
and interpretation inform us that “‘cow’’ stands for speech. The 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad (5.8.1) says that “one should meditate on 
speech as a milch-cow.” 

The deity Vac was identified with Sarasvati in the Atharva Veda 
(5.7.5) as Vée Sarasvati; also in the Brahmanas. In the Rg Veda, Sarasvati 
is an earthly river, 1.164; 49 foreshadows the later identification. 

One of the most remarkable characteristics of the Vedas is that the 
two aspects of Vdc, which may be distinguished as the revealing word 
and the word in invocation (or recitation), are at root the same. The 
integrity of these two is quite significant in the way the Logos functions 
in the Vedas. And it is because Vac as the Logos is the basis of the ratio 


104 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that ratiocination has the potential to act as the open door to truth 
(satya), though by itself it can never realize its own potentiality. But 
this frustrating incapacity of ratiocination teaches a positive lesson 
too, namely, that as thinking (manana) it is dependent on, and follows, 
the hearing (fravana) of the Vac and that it also leads the way to the 
deeper thinking called nididhyadsana. The primary complement to the 
mystery of self-revelation, indeed to the very concrete possibility of it, 
is the other mystery, namely, that of the release of truth the invoking 
word signifies. With both these, man’s power to know encounters its own 
transcendence. The unfolding of all these hidden dimensions takes place 
in the Upanisads. 


Atharva Veda 


Stanzas 1-47 of Rg Veda 1.164 are reproduced with some variations, 
omissions, and additions in Atharva Veda as hymns 9.9 (Rg Veda, 1-22) 
and. 9.10 (Rg Veda 23-47). Stanzas 48-52 of Rg Veda 1.164 are omitted. 
It may mean that Rg Veda 1.164 is a blend of two hymns originally 
separate. 


Upanisads 


Equating of Brahman with speech is also found in the Upanisadic 
literature. 

“Speech, truly, is Brahman” (‘‘Vag vai brahmeti”, Brhaddranyaka 
Upanisad, 4.1.2). Here Brahman is defined as one reality, without a 
second, which is identical with speech. 

The Mandiikya Upanisad (3.3) tries to link this absolute, which is 
unspeakable, with the speakable through speech itself “by creating the 
deeply meaningful symbol of aum which traversing the phenomenal 
levels of consciousness, waking, dreaming, and deep, sleep reaches 
out beyond to the transcendent where the sound itself comes to an end.”’ 
Brahman, identical with speech, is also identical with aum. Just as 
leaves are held together by a stalk, so is all speech held together by 
Aum (Chandogya Upanisad 2.23.3). 

The supersensuous vision of Vdc is the ultimate experience of the 
Real. For the Upanisadic seers this intuition of the self has an internal, 
rather than an external, focus in its symbolic expression. 

Uddalaka’s teaching in the Sadvidya passage of Chandogyopanisad 
refers to the role of Vac or language in the manifestation of the world 
(“Vacarambhanam vikaro namadheyam mritiketyeva satyam,”’ 6.1.3). 
In clay products clay alone is the real (satya), while the product such, 
as a pot or a bowl is the creation of Vac in its dual role of name and 
form (ndmariipa), the appearances. Vac represents Brahman as the 
powerful and creative word. 


VEDIG LITERATURE 105 


There are several ancient statements quoted in Bhartrhari’s vriti on 
his Vaékyapadiya proclaiming the greatness of the goddess of speech. 
Many of them have not been identified. It is Vac alone that created 
the entire universe; the immortal and mortal—all came from Vac. It 
is Vac that sees objects, that talks about them; Vdc alone brings objects 
together; it is through Vdc that the world becomes many, that one 
reality transforms itself into many. 

This attitude of high appreciation of language finds its echo in the 
words of Dandin in the Kavyddarfa (1.3): “The entire world would 
have been plunged, in darkness, if the light in the form of language 
had not been shining throughout.” 

It may, however, be noted that Upanisadic seers have at times 
spoken also about the absolute reality as being beyond the range of 
language and mind, to point out the inadequacy of language to reveal 
Reality fully and clearly; for example, “From which the words, as 
well as the mind, return unable to approach it.” 


Vedaéngas 

There are six Veddngas or auxiliary sciences in the study of the Vedas; 
Siks& (phonetics), wydékarana (grammar), chandas (meter), nirukta 
(etymology) , kalpa (rubrics about rites and rituals), and jyotisa (astro- 
nomy/astrology). The first four are linguistic disciplines and the other 
two are nonlinguistic. Phonetics, grammar, and meter are traditionally 
assigned the task of safeguarding the sound aspect of the words in the 
Vedas, keeping the oral tradition intact. Nirukia is concerned with 
the correct interpretation of the words of the Vedic text, and it goes 
hand in hand with vydkarana. Yaska says that a knowledge of grammar 
is a prerequisite to the study of nivukta. The validity of nirukia is based 
on the fact that it follows from a long tradition from the Brahmanas 
themselves, 

Like the siksds, the pratisakhyas were also devoted to the preservation 
of the correct pronunciation for the texts of the Vedic mantras and did 
their work with meticulous care, prescribing rules for prosody, phonetics, 
accentuation, and the rules of euphonic combination. The term 
indicates that it is a practical handbook for each school of the Vedas. 
There is a maxim that in case of conflict between the Stksé and the 
pratisékhya, the praiisakhya is to be followed. 

While vyakarana deals with linguistic analysis to determine the exact 
form of words, nirukta is concerned with, linguistic analysis of the words 
to get the proper meaning of the words in the context. Nirukta empha- 
sizes the derivation of difficult and apparently unanalyzable terms. 
The Unddisétras take an intermediate standpoint and try to analyze 
irregular terms, using to a great extent Panini’s technique. 


106 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The earliest attempts at the interpretation of Vedic mantras is found 
in the Brahmanas themselves, though not in a systematic manner. 
Explaining the ritualistic background and pointing out the esoteric 
significance underlying the rituals, they led the way for the ritualistic 
(adhiyajfia) and metaphysical (adhydtma) interpretations of the Vedas, 
though the emphasis is on the former. In his Nirukta Yaska refers to 
the ancient view that the mantras of the Rg Veda admit of a threefold 
interpretation—from the point of view of the performance of religious 
rites (adhiyajfia), with reference to the deities (adhidevaté), and with 
reference to the soul (adhyatman). There was also a fourth way of inter- 
preting the Vedas, the historical or aitihdsika, considering that the gods 
mentioned in the text are individuals figuring in legends and narratives. 
It is generally accepted that a text need not have an absolute single 
meaning. The Vedic poets like ellipses, double meanings, and 
obscurities. The Satapatha Bréhmana (6.1.1.2) says that the gods like 
subtle ways (‘‘paroksapriya hi devatah’’). 

The Brhaddevaté, another ancient tool of Vedic exegesis, ascribed to 
Saunaka, contains some discussions about language. At 11.117, it says 
that a sentence is a collection of words, a word is a collection of phon- 
emes. And at 11.118, it says that the meaning of Vedic passages has 
to be understood with the help of contextual factors: the purpose to be 
served (artha), the subject matter under discussion (prakarana), an 
indication from another place (linga), propriety, the place, and the 
time. This requirement applies even to ordinary sentences. 


2 


PHILOSOPHICAL ELEMENTS IN 
YASKA’S NIRUKTA 


K. Kunjunni Raja 


The Nirukta! by Yaska (fifth century B.c.) is a commentary on the 
Nighanfu or collection of Vedic words, discussing the etymology in 
context. WMirukta is one of the Vedangas or ancillaries to the study of the 
Vedas, Yaska is generally considered to be earlier than Panini; but Paul 
Thieme holds that Yaska knew Panini’s work.? Cardona thinks that it 
is better to leave open the question of priority of one over the other.® 

Yaska follows a long tradition in the Brahmanas of giving the 
etymological explanation of words. Critics who findsome of his etymo- 
logies fanciful forget this fact. He wanted etymology to work hand in 
hand with grammar. He stressed the importance of considering the 
context while explaining the meaning and etymology of words. The 
same word could be derived and explained in different ways to suit 
different contexts. 


Yaska’s Definitions of the Verb and the Noun 


““A verb is chiefly concerned with bhdva, whereas nouns have sativa 
as the chief element in their meaning.”4 The term bhava is derived 
from the root bhi, meaning “‘to become,” and the term sativa is derived. 
from the root as, meaning “‘to be.” These two roots, as and bhi, are 
almost synonymous and mean “‘to exist.” 

WNirukta 1.2 refers with approval to the view of Varsayani that there 
are six modes for this bhava or “becoming.” Varsayani says that there 
are six modes for bhdva: a thing comes into existence, exists, changes, 
grows, decays, and ceases to exist.5 One of these modes, “‘exists’”’ (asti) 
is derived from the same root as sativa, hence there is a possibility of 
confusion. 


108 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Bhartrhari explains that reality (sait@), when it appears in a temporal 
sequence in various particular things, is called Kriya or bhava and, when 
viewed without any such temporal sequence, is called sativa. Thus, 
sativa and bhava are two aspects of the same existence scen from the 
static and the dynamic points of view, respectively.¢ Yaska himself 
has suggested the same by saying, “The verb indicates the action, 
which takes place in a temporal sequence.’? And Patafijali says that 
even verbal nouns have the static element predominating their 
meaning.® 


Audumbarayana’s Theory 


“It is the statement as a whole that is regularly present in the 
perceptive faculty of the hearer.”® According to the interpretation of 
this passage, Audumbarayana and Varttaksa held the view that it is 
only the sentence that is really found in the minds of the speaker and 
the listener; therefore, the fourfold classification of words into nouns 
(néman), verbs (dkhydta), prepositions (upasarga), and particles (nipata) 
has no absolute validity. Audumbarayana’s theory is considered the 
forerunner of Bhartrhari’s sphofa theory.!° 


Derivation of Nouns from Verbal Roots 


The fundamental assumption of the etymologist was that nouns were 
derived from verbal roots. Yaska generally subscribed to this view, and. 
we find in his Nirukia the tendency, often mechanical, to derive words 
from imaginary roots, as in the case of pumdn from pums. Sakatayana, 
to whom one tradition ascribed the Unddisiitras and who is mentioned 
by both Panini and Yaska, seems to have been a staunch advocate of 
this theory. But Gargya and some of the Grammarians held a more 
sober view that it is not possible to trace all nouns to verbal roots.14 

Following Gargya, Yaska discussed the pros and cons of this problem. 
If all nouns are derived from verbal roots that denote action, on the 
one hand every object will have as many names as the actions with 
which it is associated, and on the other hand each noun can be applied 
to as many objects as are associated with an action indicated by that 
verbal root. Thus the term asva, “a horse,” derived from the root af, 
“to move,’ would have to be applied to a camel as well, and for a 
pillar that stands upright fixed to a hole and joins a beam, different 
names indicating these different aspects would have to be applied. 
Yaska’s explanation of this problem is that the words are used natural- 
ly (svabhdvatah). Language designates things in an incomplete 
manner; it can choose only one of the many activities associated. with 
an object. Incidentally, this discussion also indicates the explanation 
for the presence of synonyms and homonyms in language. 

Yaska accepts the general rules that all nominal forms are to be 


YASKA’S NIRUKTA 109 


derived from verbal roots and that in deriving words proper attention 
should be paid. to accent, grammatical formation, and meaning. The 
particular rules mentioned are the following: 

(1) A nominal form is to be derived from a verbal root that has the 
sense of that act which solely belongs to the thing denoted by the noun 
in such a way that its accent and formation are based on rules of 
grammar, for example, kéraka from kr. 

(2) When the current meaning of a word does not agree with the 
meaning of the root apparent in it and when its nominal form cannot 
be developed in the ordinary manner from the root by the rules of 
grammar, one should take one’s stand on the general meaning only 
and explain the word through its resemblance to the verbal or 
nominal form of a root with the related meaning. For example, hasta, 
*‘a hand,” should be derived not from has, “to laugh” apparent in it, 
but from han, “‘to strike’? because the hand is quick at striking. 

(3) When there is no resemblance between a word and any form 
of a root that has its meaning, the resemblance or community of even 
a single letter (vowel or consonant) should be the basis of etymology. 

(4) Even inflected case forms may be adjusted to the meaning. 

(5) Similarly, secondary (taddhita) derivatives (formed by adding 
suffixes to nouns) and compounds (whether of two or more members) 
should be broken down into their component elements and the com- 
ponent elements explained. One should never give up the attempt 
at derivation (‘‘na tveva na nirbriiyat’’). 


Secondary Meaning (Laksand) 

Yaska knew that in etymology the semantic aspect is as important 
as the phonetic aspect; a word may be applied to a thing through 
similarity of meaning as well, through metaphoric transfer. He was 
also aware of onomatopoeia (Sabddnukrti) as a factor in the naming 
of some birds, such as kaka; also dundubhi is derived similarly. But he 
does not mention secondary meaning (laksand) explicitly. 

Yaska’s aim was to explain Vedic words in the contexts of the Vedic 
passages themselves; hence to suit the contexts he gave different deri- 
vations for the same word. as it occurred in different contexts. Meaning 
was the principal element to which other elements were subordinated. 
Yaska was concerned. mainly with the primary sense of words and did 
not pay much, attention to the importance of metaphoric meaning. 
Thus the term asura referring to the gods and the same term referring 
to the demons are differently derived; he does not consider that the 
jatter sense is through pejorative tendency. It may be noted here that 
even Panini did not recognize metaphoric transfer as an extension of 
the primary sense, and he gave separate enumeration of the use of the 
container for the contained among the meanings of the nominative case, 


110 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Classification of Words 

Y4ska divided Sanskrit words into four parts of speech: noun, verb, 
preposition, and particle. A verb is concerned with dynamic activity 
involving the time factor, while nouns represent static things.!? Sarva- 
naéman (pronouns) are also recognized. Regarding prepositions, Yaska 
says that Sakatayana held the view that a preposition detached from 
the verb has no meaning, that it is only suggestive (dyotaka). Gargya 
held the opposite view, that prepositions do have a meaning. Yaska 
seems to have agreed with Gargya, for he enumerates twenty preposi- 
tions together with their meanings. 


3 


PHILOSOPHICAL ELEMENTS IN 
PANINI’S ASTADHYAYI 
K. Kunjunni Raja 


Panini’s Astadhydyt of the fifth century B.c.1 is a complete grammar 
of the Sanskrit language, including the Vedic language. In eight 
chapters, each subdivided into four fddas, it contains about four 
thousand rules in sitra style, preceded by abbreviation rules grouping 
the phonemes of Sanskrit. The sitras refer to groups of verbal roots 
(dhdtu) and of nominal bases (gana), hence the dhdtupétha and the 
ganapatha form adjuncts to the work. It is believed that meanings were 
attached to the roots later by Bhimasena and did not form part of the 
original, The Unddisitras as they survive today are not Panini’s. 

Panini refers to ten earlier authorities, most of them presumably 
grammarians. He also refers to differences in the usage of words 
by people in different parts of India (“‘northerners,”’ ‘“‘easterners,”’ 
and so on). Considerable thought had been devoted before Panini 
to phonological and grammatical statements. On the basis of all of 
these and his own observations of the language, Panini composed the 
Astadhydyi, which remains a monumental work, even now, as a model 
of descriptive grammar. 


Cultural Usage of Language 

Panini uses the term bhdsé (speech) for the Sanskrit spoken by the 
cultured and educated people (Sisfa). They are the final authority 
in the case of language, says Patafijali, who points out the importance 
of cultivated usage in many places.? 

Panini (or Katyayana) says that the authority of the popular usage 
of words (amjfid) must supersede the authority of the meaning depen- 
dent on derivation. The meanings of words (the relations between 


112 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


word (fabda) and meaning (artha)) are also established by popular 
usage.* 


Derivation of Nouns from Verbal Roots 


Panini generally accepts the view that verbal roots are the basic 
units to which affixes are added. But he does not accept Sakatayana’s 
view that all nouns are derivable from verbal roots. The Unddisiitras, 
explaining the derivation of irregular nouns from verbal roots, are not 
Panini’s, though Panini was aware of such attempts (3.3.1, 3.4.75). 
Patafijali refers to such irregular nouns as nonderivable nominal 
bases.5 Panini seems to accept Gargya’s view that it is not possible to 
derive all nouns from verbal roots.® 


Syntax 

Panini is mainly concerned with the formation of correct words. 
But syntax is not completely excluded. His system implies a sentence 
analysis, and his discussion of compound formations is based on syn- 
tactic considerations. 

Rule 2.1.1 is samarthah padavidhih, ‘“‘an operation involving two or 
more words (padas) applies only to such words as are syntactically and 
semantically related.” The term sdémarthya is explained by Patafijali 
and Katyayana as implying unity of semantic function (ekdrthibhava) 
and mutual syntactic connection (paraspara vyapeksé). 

Thus Panini’s concept of a sentence seems to be almost the same as 
that of Jaimini, whose Mimédmsdsiitra defines it thus: ‘‘A group of words 
serving a single purpose forms a sentence if on analysis the separate 
words are found to have mutual expectancy.”? 

Of the three conditions of syntactic unity for a sentence, namely, 
mutual expectancy (dkdnksd), phonetic contiguity (sannidhi), and 
semantic fitness (yogyata), the first two are tacitly accepted by Panini 
but not the third. Panini does not make any provision for an utterance 
derived by his rules to be semantically appropriate; even deviant 
and semantically unacceptable sentences can be grammatically correct. 

Panini does not define a sentence (vékya). Katyayana’s definition 
(ekatin vakyam), “‘a sentence is that collection of words having one 
finite verb,’ does not seem to reflect Panini’s view. Panini’s rule ‘‘an 
item terminating in a verbal ending (i) has no high pitched vowel, 
after an item that terminates in an ending other than averbal ending 
(tin atinah)”’ (8.1.28), shows that Panini accepted the possibility of a 
finite verb preceded by another finite verb in the same sentence.® 


Laksana or Secondary Meaning 
Panini sanctions the nominative case ending not only for the nominal 
stem notion (pratipadika) but also for indicating the additional notions 


PANINI’s ASTADHYAYI 113 


of gender, measure and number. The rule reads: “The nominative 
ending is to be added when there is nothing but the nominal stem 
notion, nothing but the gender, nothing but the measure, nothing but 
the number” (2.3.46). 

From the discussion of the term ‘‘measure” (parimdna) in this rule 
by later writers it is clear that Panini wanted to justify the nominative 
ending in transferred uses such as that of the container for the contained. 
Jinendrabuddhi explains that the term parimdna here is an indicator 
(upalaksana) of other transferred senses, as in “‘the boy is a lion” 
(stmho manavakah).® The term “measure” sanctions use of the nomina- 
tive in cases like ‘‘a measure of grain”’ (prastho vrihih), in which there 
is the additional notion of being measured by; hence even in cases like 
“the Brahmana is fire,” in which the additional notion of “similarity 
to the fire’? is to be indicated, the nominative ending is justified. 
From the preceding it is clear that Panini did not accept secondary 
meaning as a separate function of words, for otherwise there was no 
need to include measure in the sétra. 

Explaining the siiva 1.4.42, sddhakatamam karanam (“‘karana is that 
instrument which is the most immediate one in accomplishing action’), 
Patafijali says that the use of the superlative tama here is to indicate 
that the rules relating to the case endings (kdraka) may be applied even 
in extended cases, not only to those expressly stated but also to those 
implied thereby. Thus instances of implied usages of secondary meaning 
could also come under the scope of that sitra, For example, proximity 
can be one of the implied meanings of the locative case, and gargdyam 
gadvah, “cows on the Ganges,” can come under the purview of the 
rule governing the locative. 


Reference and Use 


The dual function of an expression to refer to both its own form and 
its meaning is noted by Panini. Rule 1.1.68 (“‘svam riipam Sabdasya- 
Sabdasamjfia”’) states that in his grammatical text an expression 
serves to denote itself unless it is a technical term. 

In ordinary language a word normally refers to its meaning unless 
it is a quotation; and usually to indicate that it is a quotation the word 
iti (thus) is added at the end of the word quoted. But in grammatical 
metalanguage, a word normally refers to its own form except when it 
is a technical term. The rule agner dhak (4.3.23) introduces dhak eva 
after the term egni; the suffix is applied to the form agni and obviously 
not to its meaning (or synonyms). When ié is added to an expression 
in a rule, the preceding refers to the meaning and not to the form; thus 
in na veti vibhasé the sanctioning option applies to the meaning “or not” 
and not to the form na ud.*° 


4 


PHILOSOPHICAL ELEMENTS IN 
PATANJALI’S MAHABHASYA 


K. Kunjunni Raja 


Patafijali’s Mahdbhdsya of the second century B.c. is an extensive 
discussion of select rules from Panini and Katyayana’s comments on 
them given in his vé@rtizkas. It is not a full commentary on P4nini’s 
Astadhydyi. It incorporates Katyayana’s varttikas; it also contains 
vdritika-like statements in verse (called Slokavdrttikas). It is an elaborate 
commentary that analyzes each rule into its components, adding 
items necessary to the understanding of the rule, giving examples and 
counterexamples illustrating how the rule operates and discussing the 
need for the vértttkas to bring out the full significance of Panini’s sitra 
or to account for usages apparently not covered by the rule or against 
the rule. Both Katyayana and Patafijali wanted to test the validity 
and consistency of the rules. Some scholars have suggested that histo- 
rical changes in Sanskrit are responsible for Katyayana’s comments 
that modify and correct Panini. Patafijali often presents arguments to 
support or reject several views, leaving it difficult to know his “finally 
accepted view’? (siddhdnta). 

As far as the philosophical ideas are concerned, Patafijali seems to 
have been influenced by Vyadi’s Samgraha, which is not extant; he 
quotes many ideas from the Samgraha with approval. Most of the philo- 
sophical ideas are found in the introductory section. 


Sabda and Artha 

Patafijali discusses whether the relation between a linguistic item 
(Sabda) and its meaning (artha) is permanent or the invention of 
someone. A linguistic item, according to the grammarian, is not merely 
the sound but that unit (or symbol) which, when articulated, brings 
about the notion of the thing meant,! 


116 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


““What is the word ‘cow’? It is that by means of which, when uttered, 
there arises the understanding of creatures with dewlap, tail, hump, 
hooves, and horns.’? The commentators have made it clear that the 
term “uttered” (uccarita) is used in the sense of “revealed” or brought 
to light (abhivyakta). Thus Patafijali lays special emphasis on the fact 
that a linguistic item is a word only when it has a meaning. ‘This concept 
contradicts the Mimamsa view that an aggregate of letters, when mani- 
fested, is a linguistic utterance, even when there is no meaning or when 
the meaning is not understood.® 

A linguistic item is considered eternal and not capable of being 
newly produced. Patafijali says that one goes to a potter requesting him 
to make a pot so that one may use it; but one does not go to a gramma- 
rian, with the request to make new words so that one may use them. A 
distinction is made between absolute eternality (kitastha nityat@) and 
the permanence of the items as used through generations by speakers 
(pravéhanityata). Bhartrhari distinguishes between normal permanent 
words in a language (danika) and modern technical terms coined by 
writers like Panini (ddhunika). 

Regarding the meaning of a word, the problem discussed is whether 
it is the universal (jaf?) or the individual (dravya). According to 
Patafijali, Panini accepted both as meanings, and in either case 
“meaning” refers to something permanent. 

The relation between linguistic item and meaning is established 
(stddha) and is known from the usage of educated people.® 


Are Letters Meaningful? 


On the one hand, letters may be said to be meaningful, because 
meaning can be understood from verbal roots, stems, suffixes, or 
particles that consist of a single letter, and also because the substitution 
of a different letter can produce a different meaning, while the absence 
of a letter may make it impossible to understand the meaning of a word. 
On the other hand, it may also be said that letters are meaningless in 
themselves, because a meaning is not understood by the hearer from 
each, letter separately.® Patafijali does not give any final answer to this 
question. Unlike Bhartrhari, Patafijali did not consider the word to be 
an indivisible and timeless symbol, apart from the letters that are 
revealed when the word is uttered. 


The Primary Meaning of a Word 


Patafijali discusses the problem of whether the primary meaning of a 
nominal word is the particular substantive or the universal essential 
attribute. Among grammarians Vyadi, author of the Samgraha, held 
that a word primarily denotes qa substance (dravya), while Vajapyayana 


PATANJALI’S MAHABHASYA 117 


held the Mimamsaka view that it is the universal (jdiz) that forms the 
primary meaning of a word.? 

Patafijali says that according to Panini the primary meaning of a 
word, is both the universal and the particular, for sitra 1.2.588 is based 
on the view that a word means the universal, while sitra 1.2.64° is based 
on the assumption that a word means a particular..© Helaraja says that 
according to the school of Panini a word means both the universal and 
the particular.+ 

Bhartrhari discusses elaborately the various problems involved in 
these two views and concludes that whether the meaning of a word is 
the universal or the substance it is something real and permanent. 
Patafijali has also defined an “individual” (dravya) as that which does 
not lose its essence when different qualities come to inhere in it,1* 


Perception of a Temporal Series 

Patafijali and Katyayana discuss the problem of how a word can be 
grasped as a whole, if the different sounds come one after another in 
the exact order in which they are uttered and there is not a single 
moment in which all of the sounds are perceived together.1% 

Taking the example of the word for cow, gauh, he says, ““When the 
speech, is in g, it cannot be in au and £; when it is in au, it cannot be 
in g and #, and when it is in #, it cannot be in g and au. ... Each letter 
requires a special effort to produce it, and it disappears as the effort is 
changed to produce the next letter.’14 

Patafijali solves the problem thus: even though the letters cannot 
coexist at the time of utterance, they can do so in the mind of the 
speaker as well as in that of the listeners; the sequence of the letters is 
also to be grasped in the mind on the basis of the meaning.” Patafijali 
does not discuss the problem in detail; but he says that the simultaneous 
grasping of the word as a whole is somehow effected in the mind, even 
though the letters that make it up are pronounced separately. 


Patafijali’s View of the Sphoja 

Patafijali distinguishes between sphoia and dhvani. The former is the 
permanent element in the word and may be considered the essential 
word, while the latter is the actualized and ephemeral element and an 
attribute of the former.!6 

The sphota as described by Patafijali may be a single letter or a fixed 
pattern of letters. It is the norm: it remains constant and is not affected 
by the peculiarities of the individual speakers. Even when pronounced 
by different speakers with different tempos its linguistic value is the 
same. The absolute vowel length and the individual peculiarities of the 
particular instances are the sounds (dhvani) and depend on the indi- 
viduality of the speaker and on the effort with which the words are 


118 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


uttered. The sphofa is permanent and unchanging and is manifested by 
the ephemeral sounds uttered by the speaker and heard by the listener, 
which are analogous to Bhartrhari’s prakrta sound and vaikrta sound. 

This distinction is supposed to have been made by Vyadi, author of 
the Samgraha. Vakyapadiya 1.77,17 defining the two types of sounds, is 
ascribed to Vyadi by commentators. According to this account, prakrta 
sound (=Patafijali’s sphofa) causes the perception of letters, and 
vaikyta sound (= Patafijali’s dhvani) causes the differences in speed of 
utterance. 

Katyayana on 1.1.70 says that the letters are fixed and that the styles 
of diction depend on the speech habits of the speaker.1® Explaining this 
concept, Patafijali illustrates it with the analogy of a drum beat: ‘‘When 
a drum is struck, one drum beat may travel twenty feet, another thirty, 
another forty; but the sphofa is precisely such and such a size, the 
increase in length is caused by the sound.’ Patafijali uses the term 
sphota even to designate a single letter (varna) :2° “In both cases (r and 
L) it is only the sphofa that is taught in the sitra.”’ 


Gender 

The Mahabhagya on sitira 4.1.3 takes up the question of grammatical 
gender and first attempts to correlate it with sex: ‘“‘A female is charac- 
terized by breasts and hair, a male by his body hair, and the others by 
neither.”! But this concept of gender (linga) does not apply to Sanskrit 
grammar. So Patafijali tries to explain grammatical gender in terms of 
the constituents (gunas). He states clearly that the grammarians cannot 
take the grammatical gender to be the same as the gender of normal 
worldly usage (referring to the sex).22 Every object is characterized by 
different states of constituent element (guna), and these states constitute 
the gender of the thing.?* Patafijali does not refer to the three Samkhya 
gunas of sativa, rajas, and tamas here; but later commentators consider 
that they are implied. 

Patafijali also proposed a formal definition of grammatical gender: 
that which is referred to by the pronoun ayam is masculine, that which 
is referred to by zyam is feminine, that which is referred to by idam is 
neuter. 


Purpose of Studying Grammar 

One who knows the correct formation of words (Sabdasamskdra) can 
discriminate correct words (sdédhu) from incorrect words. Although 
communication may be possible even by using incorrect words, it is 
only by the use of proper words that one achieves merit (dharma). 

While discussing the Vedic hymn beginning “catvari épigah...” 
Patafijali does not refer to the later theory of Bhartrhari according to 
which the symbolic meaning of the passage refers to the four stages in 


PATANJALI’S MAHABHAS$YA 119 


the evolution of speech from the highest speech principle—pard, pasyanti, 
madhyamd, and. vaikhari. The “four horns of the bull” are explained by 
Patafijali as the four classes of words, noun, verb, prefix, and particle 
(ndmakhydtopasarganipatah). 


5 


BHARTRHARI 


The central figure of the philosophical development of grammar is 
Bhartrhari, whose dates are still in dispute, though recent scholarship 
has come to general agreement about their likely confines. It has been 
shown that quotations from Bhartrhari’s works appear in the 
Pramdnasamuccaya of Dignaga, the great Buddhist logician, who must 
be dated in the fifth and sixth centuries. Furthermore, Simhasirigani, 
a sixth-century Jain writer, tells us that Bhartrhari studied under a 
Grammarian named Vasurata, whom he identifies as a brother-in-law 
of a pupil of another famous Buddhist, Vasubandhu. Erich Frauwallner 
suggests, on the basis of these considerations, that because Dignaga 
presumably flourished between A.D. 485 and 540, we may date 
Bhartrhari between 450 and 510 and Vasurata between 430 and 490.1 
These dates are accepted by most recent scholarship as the best we can 
currently do. 

As with many great figures of classical times in India, a large number 
of works have been attributed to Bhartrhari, and once again current 
scholarship has hardly settled all questions concerning the authenticity 
of some of these claims. By definition, the Bhartrhari we are speaking 
of is the author of the work that is regularly referred to as the 
Vakyapadiya, a seminal work on Grammar and grammatical philosophy 
the influence of which, though difficult to calculate precisely, is 
certainly considerable in subsequent philosophical developments, both 
within Grammar and outside it. This work has three chapters, and. it 
was more properly termed Trtkdndi on that account. Ashok Aklujkar 
bas argued that only the first two chapters constitute the Vakyapadiya. 
Tt seems likely that Bhartrhari also composed the commentary called 
vriti on at least the first two chapters of the Trikéndi.2 Beside this body 
of literature—verses and prose commentary—Bhartrhari apparently 
also wrote a commentary—or part of one—on Patafijali’s Mahdbhasya. 
Again, the proper title is a matter of discussion: Aklujkar points out 


122 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that the title Tripadi for it has extensive sanction among early commen- 
tators in the grammatical tradition, while the title under which it is 
frequently known nowadays, Mahabhdsyadipikad, has only one manu- 
script mention in its favor. No doubt the work is referred to regularly 
as a fikd on the Mahdbhdsya. It seems likely that it was a lengthy work, 
perhaps covering the entire scope of Patafijali’s masterpiece, though 
only a small portion is now available. 

There are occasional references to another work, called Sabdadhatu- 
samiksd, which is attributed to Bhartrhari by Somananda and 
Utpalacarya, two Kashmiri Saivas of the ninth and tenth centuries. 
Utpalacarya indicates that in this work Bhartrhari set forth the kind of 
awareness he calls pasyanti, which is also discussed in the Trikdndi. This 
work has unfortunately not been preserved, as far as we can tell. 

Indian tradition identifies Bhartrhari the Grammarian with the 
famous poet who wrote the Subhdsitatrifati, three sets of a hundred 
stanzas each bearing the titles of Niti-, Srngara-, and Vairdgya-Sataka. 
Actually, the number of stanzas is many hundreds more than three 
hundred, which complicates the arguments on identity of authorship 
perhaps beyond hope of any definitive solution. 


Brier ANALYSIS 
Ashok Aklujkar 


Language 


(1) Language (v@k) has four levels or phases: speech (vaikhari), men- 
tal/intellectual or potential speech (madhyama), latent totality of units 
(pafyanti), and pure, basic language principle (ard pasyanti-ripa). 

(2) Viewed as a specific totality or sign system, language consists of 
three classes of units: phoneme (varna), word (pada), and sentence 
(vakya). 

(3) If what is cognized is a meaning having no expectancy for an 
unused or absent word, then its signifier is a sentence. Such a signifier 
may consist of only one word. 

(4) Asingle phoneme signifying some fairly well-associated meaning 
is a word. 

(5) The sentence, word, and phoneme are unitary entities (sphoja). 
Only while being perceived (due to association with sound, which by 
nature has a sequence) and when conscious or subconscious gram- 
matical analysis is being carried out do they appear to be made up 
of parts. Even so, the parts, though accepted commonsensically and on 
the level of analysis, do not exhaust the wholes. 

(6) The linguistic units sentence, word, and phoneme can be re- 
garded cither as universals (Sabdakyti) or as particulars (Sabdavyakti)- 


BHARTRHARI 123 


(7) The linguistic units are permanent (niéya).? 

(8) The sentence is the primary linguistic unit. 

(9) Language is infinite. There is no numerical limit to the 
sentences possible in a language. 

(10) Sentence meaning is the direct or indirect basis of meaning at 
other linguistic levels. It is in the form of an action-oriented cognition or 
“intuition” (pratibhd). It comes into being through the instrumentality 
of word meanings but is not confined to them. As an event, it is a unitary 
entity. On the level of analysis, it can be conceived in various ways: as 
a coalescence (samsarga) of general word meanings; as a meaning that 
comes in addition (ddhikya) to the word meanings; as differentiation 
(bheda, apoha) from entities that are not intended; as establishment of a 
relation (sambandha); as relation that brings words, associated with 
general (sdémdnya) meanings, into association with specific or qualified 
(visista) meanings; and as action as cognized from the verb (not the 
physical action) and as qualified by the meanings of other sentence 
components (vifista kriya). 

(11) Word meanings are of the signified (vacya, denotatum ) or cosigni- 
fied (dyotya, fanctional/grammatical) variety. The former are meanings 
that are entirely unsignified prior to the use of words that signify them 
(consider the meanings of “bull,” “‘white,” and “‘moves’’). The latter 
are meanings that are possibly signified but are not definitely known 
before the use of appropriate signifiers (consider the meaning of ‘‘and”’ 
as revealed by the pair of phrases ““Devadatta Dittha” and ‘“‘Devadatta 
and Dittha’’). 

(12) Signified (vdcya) meanings have either a reified, accomplished 
(siddha) nature or a sequential, to-be-accomplished (sédhya) nature. If 
a pronoun can stand for what a word signifies, then that signified 
belongs to the former category. 

(13) Meanings of words, whether compound (vriti, samasta) or non- 
compound (asamasta), are unitary at the level of ordinary communica- 
tion; they come to be viewed as made of parts on the level of analysis. 

(14) Word meanings are primarily mental or intellectual entities 
(buddhyartha), only secondarily and not always physical entities 

(vastvartha). As mental entities, they are not just ‘“images’’. In fact, in 
the ultimate analysis, meaningshave no existence apart from the 
linguistic units, which are also mental, that signify them. 

(15) Word meanings, entertained as separate entities for the sake of 
analysis and in deference to the common way of thinking, can be regar- 
ded either as particulars or as universals. 

(16) The relation between a word and its meaning can be charac- 
terized in several ways: as the relation of capability (yogyatd), as a cause- 
and-effect relation (kdryakdranabhdva), and as one of identification or 
superimposition (abhedddhydropa or adhydsa). Under any of these charac- 


124 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


terizations, the relation is permanent (nitya), in different senses of the 
word ‘“‘permanent.”“ When a convention of the type “X means 
X,” is established, “X” is not newly made capable of signifying 
“*X,”; only its capacity is thereby restricted. 

(17) Language is innate and without a beginning. It has been in 
existence as long as living beings have been in existence. 


Epistemology 

(1) In the sphere of ordinary experience there is no cognition that 
is not oriented to some kind of object, nor is there a cognition that is 
purely of the thing or physical reality. Linguistic expressions and the 
conceptual scheme they embody invariably figure in cognitions. 

(2) No type of cognition (perceptual, inferential, testimonial) points 
to reality without ever failing. Validity is not a built-in feature of any 
type. It can be determined only by testing the content of the cognition 
under consideration against the totality of experience and the princi- 
ples the totality has developed. 

(3) All cognitions are infused with language in one way or another. 

(4) Extraordinary cognitions—in other words, cognitions that trans- 
cend the limitations of ordinary cognitions in terms of dependence on 
objects, reflection of preconceptions, validity, and presence of 
linguistic expressions—are possible in the case of those who have 
spiritually perfected themselves; but such cognitions are not the basis 
of worldly communication and. conceptualization. 

(5) Every cognition is unitary, that is, devoid of divison and 
sequence. It appears as having parts or distinct elements (mdédtrd) 
because the diversity of its objects is transferred. to it. 

(6) The similarity and hence the universal (sémdnya) of cognitions 
are derived from the similarity of objects reflected in them. 

(7) A cognition as an event, in its own consciousness form (samuida- 
kara), does not ever become an object of cognition; it is self-manifest. 

(8) All cognitions enjoy the same period of existence. 

(9) The distinctions drawn among sentience (citi), cognizer (buddhz) 
proceeding toward. cognizing, instrument of cognition, fact of cognition, 
and the reflected form of the object are only conceptual; the entities 
spoken of are not physically distinct. 

(10) The intellect can unify, juxtapose, differentiate, and identify 
entities irrespective of what obtains in the realm of perceptible reality. 
Furthermore, it has a capacity to view its own constituents as external 
to itself. 


Ontology 
(1) We can determine the existence or nonexistence of something 
only if it is reflected in cognition and hence in language. 


BHARTRHARI 125 


Ontic decisions differ with difference of perspective. A scaled or 
tiered ontology is therefore to be preferred. For the grammarian or 
linguist, who has to work with meanings, it suffices to accept the 
existence of everything that language reflects as existing. By contrast, 
one who is out to find out what really exists will realize that ultimately 
only the physical things and the language principle exist; the rest of the 
multiplicity of objects is simply a result of the interaction of these two 
existents. Qualities (guna/dharma), capacities (Sakit), relations (sam- 
bandha), universals (jati), numbers (samkhyd), phases (avastha), group- 
ing (sdhitya, simagri, samiha), and absence (abhdva) do not have any 
existence of their own apart from the physical objects. Time (kdla) 
and space (dif) are, however, capacities and creations of the language 
principle. To come to the third tier of ontology, the perspective is of 
someone who wishes to go beyond worldly experience and existence. 
For him only the language principle exists; the traces of physical things 
that exist in the intellect in the form of specific linguistic expressions are 
necessarily wiped out. 

(3) As a thing can be cognized and spoken of in a number of ways, 
it can be viewed as a collection of capacities. 

(4) Actions can first be grouped into six categories: “‘is born,” 
‘exists,’ “changes,” “increases,” ‘‘decreases,”’ and “‘is destroyed.”’ These 
categories can be further reduced to three: “‘is born,” ‘“‘exists,”’ and “‘is 
destroyed.’? Because birth (or production} and destruction can be 
proved to be only appearance and disappearance of the specific forms 
of the thing (the thing is never entirely destroyed to be born or produced 
again), only “exists” or existence (sattd@) ultimately remains. 


New Contributions to the System 

Bhartrhari’s work is chronologically the fourth surviving work in the 
Paninian grammatical tradition. Much earlier literature that shaped 
his thinking and much subsequent literature that could have indicated 
the extent of his original contribution has been lost to us. Consequently, 
one cannot determine with, ease or certainty the contribution he made 
to his system for the first time. Bhartrhari does not write in a way that 
would set apart his views from those of his predecessors or contempora: 
ries. Although one feels the assurance of an original, self-confident 
thinker in his style, and the tradition speaks of his having held distinct 
views,> Bhartrhari makes neither a general claim of distinction nor 
specific statements identifying his own views. The following observations 
are, therefore, to be read as stating what is probably a new contribution. 

(1) Grammar (vpékarana) becomes a full-scale darfana, a purposive 
view of reality, in Bhartrhari’s work. 

(2) Speculation on the nature and role of speech (vdc) going back 
to the earliest Vedic philosophers combines in Bhartrhari’s work with 


126 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


descriptive grammar, which arose out of concern with Vedic texts. 
Theories of grammar and. theories of language are treated together in 
a measure far surpassing that of earlier available works. 


Trikaéndi or Vakyapadiya, wira Vriti on Booxs | anp 2 
Ashok Aklujkar, with Karl H. Potter 


The summary that follows is the work of Ashok Aklujkar, with 
occasional adumbrations by Karl H. Potter. E& references are to the 
editions by K.A. Subramania Iyer for book 1 (Deccan College Mono- 
graph Series 32, Poona, 1966); by K. Raghavan Pillai for book 2 
(Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1971); and by K.V. Abhyankar and 
V.P. Limaye for book 3 (University of Poona Sanskrit and Prakrit Series 
2, Poona, 1965). T references are to the translation of K.A. Subramania 
Iyer for book 1 (Deccan College Building Centenary and Silver Jubilee 
Series 26, Poona, 1965), book 2 (Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1977), 
book 3, part | (Deccan College Building Centenary and Silver Jubilee 
Series 71, Poona, 1971), and book 3, part2 (Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 


BOOK 1 


1—4 (£1; T1). Brahman has neither beginning nor end, either 
temporarily or spatially. It is the language principle (fabdatattva), the 
permanent syllable (aksara). It turns into (vivartate) a temporarily real 
multiplicity through its capacities of time and space. 

Vritt (Z1-14; T1-3). Brahman is a principle beyond all conceptual 
constructions (vikalpa). It has all powers (fakti) that are neither 
identical with nor different from it. Its form is a disjunction of vidya 
and avidyd. Even though its manifestations appear as temporally and 
spatially ordered, Brahman remains unaffected; it is free from spatial 
or temporal limitations. All of its manifestations, though apparently 
different from one another, are to be understood as linguistic, because 
they share their generative source (prakrit). Because we grasp things 
through language they must be recognized as sharing in the language 
principle. 

Brahman. is said to be the permanent syllable because it is the 
condition (nimitta) of the permanent syllable. Its individual manifesta- 
tion (yyakti) takes place for the purpose of making known to others 
what is inside each person’s consciousness (caitanya). 

**It turns into a temporarily real multiplicity”—that is, manifestation 
(vivarta) is a single thing’s taking on unreal (asatya) distinctions as 
belonging to other.things and without losing its own unitary nature; it 
is like the appearances of contents in dream, 


BHARTRHARI 127 


(A number of verses follow that may or may not be quoted from else- 

where. These verses develop the idea of an inner controller 
[ontaryémin], Brahman, who while remaining unaffected creates the 
diversity of the world out of language.) 

2 (£14; T4). This (Brahman), which has been traditionally taught 
as single and appears to be many through its various powers, though 
not separate from its powers, appears to be so. 

Vrtti on 2 (£14-17; T4). “Through its various powers” the language 
principle, in which Brahman’s powers are collected, remains one, just 
as an awareness that comprehends many contents—earth, people, 
and so on—remains one. Thus the form (dkdra) of the awareness is 
not different from the form of the contents, for the unity of the one is 
not opposed to the diversity of the other. ‘““Though not separate from 
its powers,”’ in other words, it is not that some of Brahman’s powers 
differ from others as, say, particulars and universals differ from each 
other, but rather, just as in illumination the Wluminator appears 
different from what is illumined, though they are really identical 
(ta@ddtmya), so it is here. 

3 (£18; T5). The six modifications—birth and so on—are the 
source of the distinctions among states (bhdva), depending on the 
temporal power (kdlasakti) of that (Brahman). 

Vrtti on 3 (£18-20; 75). All (other) powers come to be in depen- 
dence on the independent (power of) time. The apparent temporal 
sequence of things is a function of the limitations of the powers things 
have to take many forms, limitations operating through obstruction 
and permission. Thus time is the auxiliary cause (sahkakdrik@rana) of all 
modifications, in virtue of its postponing or effecting their occurrence. 
Because it thus produces sequential appearances, sequence is attributed 
to it (time), as the lines of a scale that result from contact with the 
thing being weighed are attributed to the scale. In this way the six 
transformations (parinima) or modifications—birth and so on— 
become the source of the modifications in (types of) existence. 

4 (£21; T6). That single seed of all things thus comes to have a 
state of multiplicity as experiencer (bhoktr), experienced (bhokta), and 
experience (bhoga). 

5 (#22; 77). The Veda is both a means of attaining to and a 
reflection of That (Brahman). Though single, the Veda has been 
passed down by tradition in many different ways. 

Vrition 5 (£22-26; T7-8). Attainment of Brahman is merely getting 
beyond egoity. Others say it is the absorption of the modifications into 
prakyii, or stopping the organs (vaikaranya), or contentment not as a 
means (asédhana-pariirpti), or the Self, or desire for the Self, or not 
having any adventitious thing as one’s purpose, or possession of perfect- 
ed powers, or escape from functioning in time, or attainment of no-self. 


128 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


*‘A reflection” of Brahman means that the Vedas as language reflect 
Brahman as our dreams reflect or suggest waking things. 

6-10 (427-38; 79-15). Brief discussion of Vedic branches and of 
the Veda as a source of rites, smrti, philosophical schools, and tradi- 
tional lore. 

11 (£39; 716). Grammar is the first among the (six) auxiliary 
sciences, the one nearest to Brahman, the best austerity. 

Vrtti on 1] (440-41; 116-17). It is ‘‘first’? because most important 
in gaining the same results as knowledge of the Vedas. It is ‘‘nearest to 
Brahman” because it is that science through which all the others 
are understood. It is the ‘‘best austerity”? in contrast to other forms of 
austerity because it leads to the highest results. 

12 (£41; 717). Grammar is the shortest path to attainment of the 
highest essence (rasa) of speech (vdéc) that has become differentiated. 

13 (£44; T19). On language depend the principles governing 
practical purposive activities (arthapravrititativa), and the under- 
standing of the principles of language cannot occur except through 
grammar. 

Vritt on 13 (244-47; T19-20). The Sanskrit compound. arthapraort- 
titattva is analyzed in six alternative ways. What depends on language 
may be the expression of the speaker’s intended meaning, the possibi- 
lity of applying a word to a thing, the ability to combine words into 
sentences, the connecting of objects with actions, identification of a 
thing as to be accomplished, or the projection of the content of an aware- 
ness aS an external object. By ‘the principles of language” is meant 
the proper forms of language. 

14 (£47; T21). Grammar is the door to liberation, the remedy of 
blemishes of speech, the purifier of all branches of knowledge. 

Vrtti on 14 (£47-49; T21-22). One who knows the correct forms of 
language understands the nature of language; he then goes beyond 
temporal sequence and gains union (yoga). Through the merit he gets 
by his correct usage he attains union with the greatest language essence 
(mahantam sabditmanam) and is without organs. He thus reaches the 
stage of undifferentiated speech and appreciates the chief among its 
modes, namely, intuition (pratibhé). Through that intuition and the 
repetition of the union the highest prakrii, free from allmodes, is realized. 

15-22 (£49-51; 722-23). These stanzas dwell on the importance of 
grammar. 

23 (£51; 724). Words, meanings, and their relations are held to 
be permanent (nztya) in grammar. 

Vrtti on 23 (252-63; 724-28). The basis of the science (of grammar) 
is that linguistic sounds, meanings, and the relation between the two 
is permanent. Here by “‘linguistic sound” we intend the general feature 
(akrtt) of each word, not the differentiating genus of language as 


BHARTRHARI 129 


such. “‘Being a linguistic sound” is a property that inheres in a 
thing along with a set of features (ék7iz) that are mutually opposed to 
other such features and so cannot coinhere with them in the same thing. 
It is this specific generic feature—for example, the feature of the word 
“tree’”—that we call a “linguistic sound.” Just as the universals 
“substanceness,”’ “‘earthness,” and “potness” can all coinhere in a pot, 
so in “‘tree” the universals “‘being attributive’ (gunatva), ““being a 
linguistic sound’ (Sabdatua), and “being the word ‘tree’”’ (urksafabdatva) 
coinhere. 

Objection: The cases are not alike. The parts of a pot, which are not 
pots, combine to cause the manifestation of an instance of the universal 
potness. But the parts of a word do not combine to produce a linguistic 
sound, for they do not exist at the same time. The universal being 
a linguistic sound exists in each part of the word “‘tree,” but if the 
general] feature specific to the word ‘“‘tree’”’ exists in each part of the 
word. “tree” we should think of trees as soon as we hear the first letter 
of the word. 

Answer: No. The analogy intended is with specific actions such as 
lifting, turning, pouring, and the like, which arise successively and do 
not manifest a whole as product. And just as one does not recognize, 
say, lifting until it has gone on a bit, likewise one does not recognize 
that “tree” is being spoken until that action goes on a bit, so that 
several elements in the series manifesting that word can be grasped. 
The initial sounds in the series prepare the hearer’s mind so that when 
the last sound occurs he recognizes the word. Grammarians do not 
necessarily think of inherence as the medium by which a general feature 
or universal is suggested to the hearer. There are, indeed, various 
views among grammarians about the constitution of linguistic sounds 
and the manner in which such a sound. is made known. 

24-26 (#64; T30)}. Grammar deals directly or indirectly with eight 
topics: (1) meanings determined through analysis—abstracted mea- 
nings (apoddhdrapaddrtha); (2) given or stable meanings (sthitalaksana 
artha); (3) linguistic forms that are to be analyzed (anvakhyeya Sabda) ; 
(4) linguistic forms that figure in grammatical derivations (pratipddaka 
fabda); (5) the cause-and-effect relation (kdryakdranabhava sambandha) ; 
(6) the relation of capability (yogyatd sambandha); (7) the relation (s) 
that lead(s) to merit; and (8) the relation(s) that bring(s) about 
communication (pratyaydiga sambandha). This work takes up some of 
these topics for consideration. 

Vriti on 24-26 (£65-81; 731-37). (1) Abstracted meanings are a 
matter of theoretical preconceptions, choice and convenience for the 
purposes of the science of Grammar. (2) Given meanings are those 
conveyed by sentences, single despite being made known through 
awareness of the separated word meanings. (3) The linguistic forms 


130 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that are to be analyzed will differ depending on which of them, words 
or sentences, are taken to be the limit (avadhi) of analysis, and this 
factor also determines (4) the forms that will figure in grammatical 
derivations. (The rest are explained in turn.) 

Verbal complementation is necessary for sentencehood. Where no 
specific action is mentioned, an action as existing is understood. Such 
single words or phrases are in fact sentences. 

27-29 (81-84; 740-42). While both grammatical and ungramma- 
tical expressions are means of communication, only the grammatical 
ones are means of merit (dharma). Matters of merit are determined by 
reference to tradition (agama) as maintained by the spiritual elite 
(Sista). 

30-43 (£85-99; 742-51). Merit cannot be determined by tarka alone 
without the help of the tradition. Even the sages got their awareness 
of merit through the tradition. The traditions about merit cannot be 
sublated by tarka, because they are accepted by the world (lokasiddha). 
The natures of things are very difficult to establish by inference, because 
they have different properties in different circumstances, because there 
are obstructors to the normal powers of a thing, and because what is. 
inferred by a clever thinker can always be explained otherwise by one 
cleverer. Expertise in jewels or coins comes from practice (abhydsa), 
not from inference, and the fathers (pity), demons (raksas), and goblins 
have powers born of their karma that go beyond what perception or 
inference can explain, as well as the yogi’s power to see the past and the 
future. We must depend on the tradition, which hands down the direct 
awareness of people with such expertise and powers; one does not set 
it aside, any more than one sets one’s own perception aside, on the basis 
of mere reasoning. So the elite have explained language on the basis 
of impersonal scientific treatises (Sdstra) and tradition (smrii). 

Vyritt on 38 (E95-96; T48). Examples of things seen directly by those 
sages responsible for dgama include the inner controller (antarydmin), 
atoms, unmanifest language-Brahman (anabhivyakta fabdabrahman), the 
gods, the tendencies bred by action leading to one result rather than 
others, the subtle body. 

44-48 (£100-106; 752-55). Expressions that convey meaning, 
including their own form as meaning® (updddna Sabda), can be viewed 
in two ways: as mental (buddhistha, sphota), as cause of expressions that 
are heard; or as audible (Sruti, dhvani|ndda), as sequential sound that 
conveys meaning. Just as the fire in the sticks (that are rubbed) is the 
cause of the fire that springs up, likewise the language in the mind of 
the speaker is the cause of the audible language expressing it. 

Vritt on 47-48 (#105-107; 755 56). When the speaker seeks to 
superimpose linguistic form onto his intended meaning, the language 
appears to change its nature into something else (the meaning) and to 


BHARTRHARI 131 


project it as sounds from the vocal organ. Thus the unchanging (avivar- 
tamana) language principle appears to be changing: in other words, 
it manifests through the imperceptible pervasive dhvani-sounds those 
gross néda-sounds which are articulated by the vocal organs. These 
gross ndda-sounds, though temporarily ordered in asequence, illuminate 
the sphota or mental language by obstructing it and permitting it (to 
manifest in the temporal sequence). Thus the sphofa, though’ single, 
appears to have parts sequentially arranged. 

49-52 (E107-111; T56-58). Other similes illustrating the relation- 
ships in question are now offered. The reflection in the water seems to 
move because the water ripples, just as the sphofa appears to be protrac- 
ted or short, fast or slow through being “reflected in” the gross ndda- 
sounds. Or, just as awareness by nature grasps its own form as well as 
that of its object, likewise in language the forms of both the meaning 
and the language principle itself are illuminated. Again, a painter 
paints in stages a figure he sees as a single thing. 

53-54 (£113-114; 759-60). Just as the speaker first thinks of the 
linguistic forms one by one, so tke initial awareness (vyavasdya) of 
the hearer is produced from those (linguistic forms). But people, 
intent on understanding the meaning, do not attend to the linguistic 
forms per se. 

Vrition 53 (£113; T59 60). Because the hearer is concentrating on 
understanding the meaning (of the entire utterance), he does not 
identify a linguistic form as a separate item. So the linguistic forms are 
first experienced as primary in importance and then become secondary 
to the production of meaning. 

55-60 (£115-119; 761-64). Just as light has two powers, as grasper 
and as grasped, so all linguistic forms have those two powers. Linguistic 
forms by themselves do not convey any meaning; only when they 
themselves become contents of awareness do they do so. That is why 
when the nature of a linguistic form is not understood the speaker is 
asked “‘what did you say?” It is unlike the case of the sense organs, which 
are not grasped when they reveal their objects. The action subsequent 
to the perception of a linguistic form sometimes has the form and. some- 
times the meaning, depending onthe purpose ina particular context. 
For example, grammatical operations pertain to the forms of expressions 
covered by rules of grammar. 

61-64 (£120-122; T65-67). In any case, that which is uttered can 
itself never be the object of the subsequent action; that object must be 
what it conveys. 

65-57 (4124-127; T68-70). An expression may not convey meanings 
of other types, but it is never without its own form as meaning. 

68-69 (£127; T 70-71). Panini’s rule 1.1.68, “svam ripam Sabdasya- 
sabdasamjfia”’, has been interpreted variously, depending on whether the 


132 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


own form (svariipa) of an expression is viewed as an individual (uyakti) 
or a universal (jdii). 

Vriti on 68-69 (£127-132; T70-73). Some Grammarians hold that 
unalloyed perception of and reference to individuals do take place; 
others are of the view that expressions, having come into existence 
because of the perception of universals, can refer to individuals only as 
colored by the universals. 

70-74 (£133-139; T74-77). Some Grammarians say that (a linguis- 
tic form) is single, whether it be held to be a product orto be permanent; 
others say it is many whether it be produced or eternal. Some view 
realizations of an expression in different phonetic contexts as the pre- 
sence of the same permanent individual; others as presence of what is 
felt to be the same but has in fact perished with each occurrence; still 
others as occurrence of what must be assumed to be the same for the 
sake of communication. Furthermore, there are thinkers who view all 
such realizations as different either because one permanent expression 
cannot become part of another permanent expression (then the latter 
will have parts and be impermanent) or because expressions are not 
permanent and hence cannot last long enough to become part of some 
other expression. 

75-77 (£140~-143; 778-80). Sphota, though without temporal dis- 
tinctions, appears to have temporal divisions of two kinds: difference 
in the form of short vowel or long vowel, and so on;? and difference in 
the form of a quick (druid), medium (madhyama), or slow (vilambita) 
pace of utterance, due to division in the manifesting sound (dhvani). 
A part of the sound is the minimum needed for the manifestation of 
the linguistic units (frdkrta dhvani); the remainder, if any, simply keeps 
the manifestation in effect for a longer time (vatkrta dhvani). The former 
is related to the distinction conveyed by “‘short,”’ and so on, the latter 
to the distinction conveyed by “fast,” and so on. 

78-80 (£144~-146; 781-82). How exactly the sound manifests the 
sphota is variously understood. Some think that a dispositional tendency 
(samskdra) is produced in the auditory sense organ, others that it is 
produced in the linguistic form, and still others that it is produced in 
both. Only the organ is conditioned by applying ointment or by concen- 
tration (samddhdéna), say the first group. But those who believe that the 
visual organ goes out to reach its object hold that both the content and 
the organ are conditioned by light, and thus the analogous view about 
sounds. 

Vrtti on 78-80 (£145-146; 781-82). That is to say, some think that 
the sound, when it has arisen, conditions the auditory sense and that 
the auditory sense, thus conditioned, becomes the means of auditory 
awareness. The second view mentioned is that it is the linguistic form 
that, conditioned by relation to the sound, is the content of the auditory 


BHARTRHARI 133 


experience. The third view is that the sound conditions both the linguis- 
tic form and the auditory organ, which, along with other causal factors, 
produce awareness that has the linguistic form as content. This view 
is analogous to the view, mentioned in the text, about the way light 
conditions both sense organ and object in perception by those who 
think the organ goes out. 

81 (£147; 783). Some Grammarians say that the sound is cognized 
as being the same as the sphofa. Others say the sound is not cognized at 
all, Still others say that it is cognized as an independent thing. 

82-92 (#148-157; 784-90). There is no doubt, however, that the 
manifestation (of the linguistic form) is gradual. Each succeeding 
element of the sound continuum serves to make the nature of the inten- 
ded. sphoja clearer and clearer. There are sometimes interim cognitions 
of units other than the one intended—of units that could be regarded 
as parts of the intended unit. They are an unavoidable feature of the 
medium of manifestation and a consequence of the nature of the hearer’s 
cognitive mechanism. They are instrumental in producing the final 
cognition, but they are not parts of it. 

Vriti on 92 (£157-158; 790-91). The Bhedavadins (believers in the 
ultimacy of distinctions between phoneme meanings) think that the 
word “‘cow”’ is just the several phonemes ¢, 0, and w and that thereis no 
indivisible linguistic form that they express and that is cognized by 
the understanding hearer. But according to their view, because the 
parts are manifested in sequence no single nature (of the linguistic 
form) could be cognized, and the final cognition in the series would 
have no content. A second view would be that all the parts, being 
eternal, are manifested at once, but then there would be no difference 
between the nature of the sounds “‘vega”’ and “gave.” 

93-94 (H159-160; 791-92). The sphofa is held by some to be a 
universal that is manifested by the individuals, the sounds.® Others 
go beyond the level of specific units, where the distinction of universal 
versus particular is applicable, and think of one linguistic form (that is, 
one sphofa) being manifested in various forms. 

Vriti on 95 (£161; T92-93). Objection: The linguistic form is noneter- 
nal, because it is manifested, like a jar. 

95 (£161; T92). Answer: Manifestation does not only occur in that 
which is noneternal; it is also seen that eternal universals are manifested 
by their individual (instances). 

Vriti on 96 (#162; T93-94). Objection: Linguistic forms are not mani- 
fested, because the manifester and the manifested are in different 
places—the linguistic forms are in one place, the vocal organs elsewhere. 

96 (£162; 793). Answer: Only embodied things (kdyavat) can occupy 
places. Neither sounds nor linguistic forms are actually located any- 
where in space. 


134 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Vrtti on 97 (#163; T94). Objection: Linguistic forms are not mani- 
fested, because their so-called ‘‘manifesters” are regulated—-the sounds 
that cause the manifestation of a particular phoneme cannot manifest 
any other phoneme—while manifested things, properly speaking, can 
always be manifested by several alternative things; a jar can be mani- 
fested—in other words, made a content of awareness—by a jewel or 
a lamp or some other source of illumination. 

97 (£163; 194). Answer: Just as the fitness of a certain kind of sense 
quality to be the manifestation of a certain kind of sense organ is 
regular, so particular sounds are likewise fit to be manifested only by 
Sphota. 

Vriti on 99 (E164-165; 795-96) Objection : A linguistic form is 
not manifested, because we find that its manifesters undergo increase 
and decrease and difference in number depending on the way the 
vocal organ is used, and in proper cases of manifestation, such as 
illumination by a lamp, such changes in the manifesters never take 
place. 

99 (£164; T95). Answer: There are many kinds of manifestation; 
consider a mirror, which manifests everything reflected in it; these 
reflected things change in various ways, but the mirror remains one. 

Vritt on 99 (£165; 796). Objection: In the case of the mirror the 
prototype, for example, the moon, gets into the mirror. 

100 (£165; 797). Answer: Big objects like the moon or a mountain 
cannot get into small objects, like a mirror or a diamond ! 

101 (£166; 797). So, phonemes, words, and sentences, which are 
without temporal distinctions, are taken to have such because of the 
temporal differences of their manifesting sounds. 

102-107 (£167-173; 797-101). The terms sphofa, dhvani, and nada 
have been understood differently by those who do not advocate per- 
manency. The explanation of short vowels, long vowels, and the like 
given by these thinkers is also different. 

Vriti on 102-107 (£167-177; T9 8-101). They hold the sphota to be 
the first sound produced by the vocal organ. The dhvanis, according 
to them, are the resulting sounds, which spread out from that first 
sound and by hearing which awareness of the sphofa or first sound is 
made possible. Some say that the term néda refers to what is manifested 
by the dhvanis that result from the activity of the vocal organ. Still 
others think that the sphofa and the dhvani come into existence at the 
same time; the sphofa is the meaningful sound, the dhvani mere articula- 
ted sound. There is no consensus on this matter. 

108-119 of Vriti (£177~195; 7102-106). The process of speech 
production can be described variously. 

112-114 (of #183-188), 120-122 (of 7107-110). Knowers of the 
tradition say that the world is the transformation of language. All 


BHARTRHARI 135 


understanding of what is to be done (#kartavyaté) depends on lan- 
guage. Even the child understands, because he has dispositional tenden- 
cies arising from prior births. Without such dispositional tendencies 
the child would not attempt to produce linguistic sounds. 

Vrtti on the preceding. What exists is as good as nonexistent unless 
it is spoken of. And even completely nonexistent things such as a hare’s 
horn or the city of the Gandharvas can be involved in our activities 
like something real, provided they are brought to mind by hearing 
language. Because children have speech in them through the traces born 
of their use of language in previous births, they come to understand 
how to act purposively through awareness based vaguely on heard 
language. Children’s attempts to speak are not taught them by others 
but arise by intuition. 

115-117 (of £188-192), 123-125 (of 7110-112). Language infuses 
all cognition. Without this close relationship between awareness and 
language nothing would become known; it makes identification of 
things possible. Language is the basis of all branches of knowledge 
(vidya), or all crafts (Silpa) and arts (kald@). 

Vrtti on the preceding. When the linguistic bhdvand is restrained, no 
(practical) effect is produced from the nonconceptual (avikalpaka) 
awareness that arises with regard to objects. For example, when walk- 
ing quickly over earth and grass one is not aware of them and does 
nothing to or with them. But when the seed of the linguistic bhdvand 
is awakened and the powers of words to express meanings are manifes- 
ted, then the object becomes cognized as having a certain form; thus 
the object is clearly conceived and can be identified as having a certain 
form, and we are said to be aware of it. And when this language seed 
is awakened through certain other causal conditions it produces 
memory. Some teachers say that sleeping persons have awarenesses 
just like waking persons; the only difference is that the language- 
bhdvand-seeds operate subtly in dreams—that is why that state is 
called “‘darkness.”’ Finally, it is because of this close relation between 
language and cognition that we are able to understand the meaning 
of a sentence from hearing the words. 

118-119 (of #193-195), 126-127 (of 7113-114). The consciousness 
of all transmigrating beings does not go beyond language. The linguis- 
tic form that makes possible waking-state activities that are. effective 
also becomes the object of effective activities in dreams. 

120-123 (of #196-201), 128-131 (of 7115-118). Some take every- 
thing to be merely the self (svamdira); others claim that everything is 
merely the Highest (faramdtra) ; in any case, as things are presented by 
language so they are understood; the object is established by language. 
Even such a thing as the “‘circle of fire’? (aldtacakra), which is not an 
actual object, is brought clearly to mind by language describing it. 


136 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Because the Self is that with which one desires union and that Self is 
the language within us, one attains that highest Self (garamdiman) 
through purification (samskéra) of language, and one who is aware of 
the principles of language’s activity attains immortal Brahman. 

Viti on the preceding. The first view (svamétravada) itself has varie- 
ties. (a) There are those who think that all modifications are merely 
the self, existing inside each person but appearing to be external— 
“internal”? and “‘external’’ being the results merely of usage. But that 
is impossible, for that self is single and immaterial. (b) Other svamd- 
travddins say that all awareness and all differences are transformations 
(parindma) of a single principle of conscious activity (citkripdtattva). 
Likewise the second view (of paramdiravéda) has varieties: some say 
that consciousness (cattanya) is the source of beings that differentiate 
themselves from it as oil from sesame seed, while others hold that it is 
more like sparks from a fire, or trees from seeds. But actually it does 
not matter whether an object exists externally; in either case it is always 
connected with language as the thing expressed by a linguistic form. 

Language is of two kinds, eternal and produced. The produced sort 
is involved in usage and reflects the nature of language (or the self, 
which is language). The eternal sort of language is the source of all 
usage, unsequenced, within everyone, the seat of all modifications, the 
locus of all actions, the basis of satisfaction and frustration, capable of 
producing any effects anywhere but with its field of enjoyment re- 
strained like a lamp covered by a jar, the limitless generating cause of 
ali beings...the Lord of all (sarvefvava), omnipotent (sarvafaktir), the 
great bull of language (mahdn fabdavysabha). Those who know linguis- 
tic yoga (vdgyogavida) break the knot of egoity and are united with 
language without any distinction from it. 

Well-being (abhyudaya) regularly follows upon purification of the 
language principle of all incorrect forms. Then by practice, after union 
with the language principle, and after having understood the intuition 
of which the source is that language-principle, attainment of the 
summum bonum (ksema) must follow. 

124-133 (of £203-212), 132-141 (of 7119-124). The thesis that 
expressions sanctioned by the grammar of the elite can lead to merit 
can be supported in two ways. First of all, the thesis is a matter of 
tradition. One can always refuse to follow any tradition or to inter- 
pret the accepted tradition differently, but the only interpretation of 
the tradition that is proper is that which does justice to the capacities 
of words by taking into consideration their context, and so on. That 
grammatical expressions are meritorious is such an interpretation.® 
In the second place, once a tradition is accepted, it can be supported 
by appropriate inference. Because pronunciation of certain words (in 
mantras and hymns) produces perceptible results like the removal 


BHARTRHARI 137 


of poison and is said to produce imperceptible results of a specified 
sort, one can infer that it is possible that knowledge and use of gramma- 
tical expressions lead to merit. Grammar is a smrt? preserved or com- 
posed. by the spiritual elite. 

134 (of E213), 142 (of 7125). Grammar is the highest station of the 
threefold speech (vac) of vaikhari, madhyama, and pasyanti, and it appears 
in a different form in each of its loci. 

Vriti on the preceding. The “correct/incorrect” (sédhu/asddhu) 
distinction extends only to the first three levels of phases of speech. 
Vaikhari is so called because it is cognized by others, is a content of 
auditory awareness, and is regulated according to the nature of what is 
heard. It is produced from a drum or a flute, and its correctness or 
incorrectness is well established, being mixed up with or manifested in 
varnas, Madhyama, however, resides within and seems to have sequence. 
The intellect (duddhz) is its only substratum (upddéna). Some think 
that even though sequence in it is suppressed, still it is accompanied 
by subtle breath. Pafyanti is achieved when sequence is suppressed, 
but it has the power to produce sequence even though it is without 
distinctions. It is restless and concentrated, hidden and pure. It is 
without form (nirdkdra), or the forms of the objects of knowledge have 
been suppressed within it, but it may or may not appear to support 
distinctions of different sorts of objects. But the higher form of parapas- 
yanti is beyond ordinary usage and experience. It is not covered by 
grammar, which can at the most be an indirect instrument in reaching 
it. In the threefold speech there is innumerable variation. Not more 
than one-quarter of speech appears in human beings, and even ofthat 
one-quarter only a portion figures in communication. The rest remains 
unrealized potential. 

135-137 (of E221-225), 144-146 (of 7129-132). Grammatical 
treatises are composed from time to time by the spiritual elite in defe- 
rence to differing capacities of individuals and by taking into considera- 
tion the changed capacities of expressions as far as merit and demerit 
are concerned. It cleanses one’s language. 

Vriti on the preceding. Some hold that scripture is authoritative 
only about things that have invisible consequences (adrsfaphaia) and 
hold human opinion to be doubtful and untrustworthy. They say 
that both Sruti and smrti are the product of a continuous tradition; Sruti 
(scripture) is preserved in the same versions according to strict rules 
of expression, while smyti was composed by the elite at different times 
and places in prose, poetry, or other forms. 

Some teachers believe that no action has in itself a visible or an 
invisible consequence. Rather, by acting contrary to scripture one 
manifests demerit (fratyavdya), and by acting according to scripture 
one manifests merit (dharma). Scripture itself teaches that, for example, 


138 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


killing a brahmin is a sin in some contexts but a cause of exceeding 
well-being in others. Others think that scripture only makes known 
the particular power of each object known. Merit and demerit are 
the results of the natures of substances, not of scripture; scripture 
merely makes the natures of substances known. 

138-147 (of #228-234), 147-155 (of 7132-136). An apabhramfa or 
incorrect linguistic form (asdédhu fabda) is that expression which the 
speaker employs with the intention of expressing the meaning associated 
with a specific expression derived by grammar, but which turns out to 
be different from that specific expression. Apabhramsas are not to be 
determined, by taking only the form into consideration; with changein 
the intended meaning, an expression may cease to be apabhramSa.. For 
those accustomed to grammatical speech, the apabhramsas convey mean- 
ing through the corresponding grammatical expressions. A reverse 
phenomenon is noticed when those who habitually use apabhramsas 
encounter grammatical speech. 


BOOK 2 


1-2 (£36; 71). A sentence has been characterized by “‘logicians’’ 
(nydyavadins) in at least eight ways: (1) as verb (dkhydia), (2) as a 
collection of linguistic forms (Sabda samghdta), (3) as the proper univer- 
sal (jd) that occurs in the collection (samghdtavartini), (4) as a single 
partless linguistic form, (5) as a sequence (of words), (6) as what 
hangs together in the intellect (buddhyanusamhyti), (7) as the first word 
(pada ddya), and (8) as all the words severally possessing expectancy 
(for each other, prthaksarvapada sakamksa). 

3-6 (E36-37; T2-4). The definition of Katydyana, the author of the 
Varttika (namely, “a sentence verb along with the indeclinables, 
case words, and qualifiers’) does not agree with the Mimamsa defini- 
tion, “‘that in which the words have mutual expectancy and which 
does not require additional words, has action as its principal element, 
has other subordinate words, and is a single linguistic form.” Some 
objections to Katyayana’s definition are met. 

7-12 (E37-39; 74-5). Just as that single entity which is the aware- 
ness of all objects (sarvarthapratyaya) is differentiated according to the 
distinctions among what is perceived, so it is with the awareness of the 
meaning of the sentence. Just as one picture may be analyzed as having 
colored parts, so the one sentence, without expectancy, is said to con- 
tain linguistic forms that require each other. Just as a word can be 
analyzed as having stem, suffix, and so on (as parts), so the sentence 
can be analyzed as having words as parts. The parts of words are 
meaningless, but they come to be communicative through analysis 
by agreement and difference (anvayavyatireka). 


BHARTRHARI 139 


13-14 (#39; 76). A linguistic form has no disjunction, so its meaning 
has none either. Only the ignorant thinks it actually does have parts. 

Vriti on 13-14. The sentence sphofa is indivisible; its meaning—that 
is to say, intuition (pratibha)—is likewise indivisible. It would be very 
difficult to understand the meaning of a sentence without analyzing 
it; nonetheless, a good student understands that such analysis is only 
a means to an end and that the linguistic form and meaning are 
indivisible. 

15-16 (£39-40; 77-8). The general (noncontextual) meaning (of 
an earlier word in a sentence), having disappeared (after its utterance), 
cannot remain in the particular meaning (it has in the context of the 
other words in the sentence). By contrast, if the meaning of the sentence 
is not a matter of the linguistic forms that express it, the same should be 
held about the meaning of each word, so the relation between language 
and meaning would be destroyed. 

17-18 (£40; 78-9). Some?® hold that the words of a sentence are 
only apparently similar to words noticed in isolation or in other senten- 
ces. The words of each sentence are in fact expressive of the sentence’s 
particular meaning right from the start; the understanding of the 
sense becomes firmer as the sentence is gradually perceived. Thus, 
each word bears the meaning of the entire sentence in which it figures. 

19 (#40-41; 79). When sentence and sentence meaning are said 
to be unitary, the reference is not to language in the form of sound. In 
addition to its speech form, audible to individuals other than the 
speaker, language has upaémfu (‘‘audibility only to the speaker’’), 
paramopamsu (“appearance of an expression only in the intellect’’), and 
pratisamhrtakrama (“Jatent, unthought expression”’) forms. Beyond these 
four exists its undifferentiated form, bereft of sequence. 

20-21 (#41; 710). Just as a motion is not grasped as distinct even 
though it is a particular movement, but when it is repeated its universal 
property as, say, turning is manifested, so linguistic forms such as 
phonemes, sentences, and words, even though quite different from 
each other, appear to be the same. 

22-26 (£41-42; T11-13). How can an eternal thing really be earlier 
or later than something? It only appears to be so through the power of 
the one (the sentence sphofa). And just as, though awarenesses that 
something is ‘“‘fast’’ or “‘slow”’ are without temporal extent, they appear 
to be temporally characterized, so vowels appear to be long or short. 
Time, which is eternal, cannot be differentiated through mdirdés belong- 
ing to something else. But in the absence of distinct métrés, how can 
there be any sequence? The awareness produced by them (the mdtrds) 
is single and without parts; through its own power it seems to be 
differentiated and to have sequence. 

27 (#43; T13). This sequenceless (sentence) (seemingly) has the 


140 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


power of having sequence when analyzed. So its meaning, though not 
differentiated, is experienced as having distinctions. 

Vritt on 27. It is like space (dif), which has no division but which we 
speak of as if it had them when we speak of “‘east’’, ‘‘west’’, and so on. 

28-29 (#43; 114). If these words are in the sentence, and those 
phonemes are in the word, then in the phonemes there would be distinc- 
tions of parts, such as atoms. As these parts cannot combine there would 
be neither phoneme nor word—and then what could a word be? 

Vrtti on 28-29, If it is held (as in view [2] of kdrikds 1-2) that a sen- 
tence is a collection of linguistic forms, then words and phonemes also 
in turn should be analyzed into components, say, atoms. But these 
ultimate atoms—by analogy with the process of analysis in question— 
would not be simultaneous and could not contact each other, so no 
phoneme, word, or sentence could result, for nothing could express any 
meaning. 

30 (£43; T15). Others (who espouse view [6] of karikds 1-2) say that 
the single inner language principle is illuminated by the sounds (ndda) 
uttered, and that unity is in the sentence. 

Vrtti on 30. They think that language is an inner consciousness that 
becomes the sentence when manifested by the sounds considered 
(wrongly) to be its parts. It is like the written symbols that are mistaken 
for the word. 

31 (£44; 715). According to them the inner meaning is illuminated 
by its parts. Linguistic form and meaning are inseparable divisions of a 
single nature. 

Vrtti on 31. There are two versions of this opinion. On the assumption 
that external things are noneternal, the meanings reflected in the 
intellect are taken to be identical with the external objects. On the 
contrary assumption, that external object is eternal, it manifests itself 
according to the power of sequence in the intellect. So, both word and 
object meant are in the intellect. Another variation of this second 
assumption is that the object is reflected in the intellect, which inheres 
in the self that is pure consciousness but which assumes the form of the 
intellect, so that the power of being what is experienced and of being 
the experiencer, though actually belonging to different things, become 
indistinguishable in the intellect. In any case, on all such views the 
single intellect, in which the different powers of being meant and con- 
veying meaning are not separated, is the locus of language—that is, of 
the sentence. 

32 (£44; T17). The language principle (fabdatattva), the nature of 
which. is essentially internal (antarmdtrdtman), is cause and effect, ilumi- 
nator as well as illumined. 

Vrtti on 32. The linguistic principle, being identical with conscious- 
ness, is beyond the distinctions of presence and absence. 


BHARTRHARI 141 


33 (#44; 718). That linguistic principle has the powers of existing 
or not existing; without sequence, it appears to have sequence and thus 
provides the basis for communication (vyavahara). 

34-40 (244-46; 718-21). Several possible objections to the thesis of 
unitariness can be refuted. The thesis can also be supported with positive 
arguments. Any view that admits actual presence of words in a sentence 
at the time of sentence cognition can be shown to end up in an absurd 
conclusion. Compound words serve as an analogy in that they are also 
made up of words. In their case too logic demands that unitariness be 
accepted. 

4143 (£46; 722-23). Some think of sentence meaning as that 
additional element which comes about when words with their ordi- 
nary, lexical meanings are joined by a relation. The substratum of this 
additional meaning is given differently as each word constituting the 
sentence and as the string of words taken as a whole. 

44-46 (£4647; 123-24). Some think of sentencehood as consisting 
in the delimiting or qualification, through being related, of a generality. 
Capabilities of words are only circumscribed when they join to form a 
sentence. 

47-48 (£47; T24—25). Some think of words in a sentence as circum- 
scribed or qulified right from the start. The adjacent fellow words simply 
make the qualification manifest. 

49-53 (#48; T25-26). Some think of sequence as the crucial element 
of a sentence. It is sequence that reveals the unrevealed distinctions, 
already existent, of word meanings. 

54-55 (£49; T26-27). Restatement of the preceding views. 

56-57 (#49-50; 727). The sentence is the primary unit of language. 
Words and word meanings are derivative. 

58-59 (£50; 7727-28). Vedic statements and Patafijali’s Mahkabhasya 
are cited in favor of the view that the sentence is an indivisible unit 
(akhandapaksa). 

60 (£50; 729). Just as the meaning of the word is not understood 
from hearing any single phoneme, so the meaning of the sentence is not 
understood from hearing any single word. 

Vytti on 60. Awareness of sentence meaning is self-illuminating, as 
well as illuminating its content. Being self-illuminating, that awareness 
is its own authority. 

61-87 (E51-57; T2942). Objection (by a Padavédin, Mimamsaka, or 
upholder of the thesis that it is words that are the primary units of 
meaning): Just as sentence meaning is understood when the words are 
gathered together, so word meaning is understood when all of the 
phonemes are together. We only see a small object when it is together 
with others. So it is here. (1) If words did not have meaning, then it 
would be impossible to understand as we do (for example) “‘sacrifice 


142 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


with rice” as meaning “‘sacrifice with a substance—rice if possible, if 
not some other substance”’; for if “‘rice’”’ excluded all alternatives it 
would exclude the meaning of substance as well. (2) If words had no 
meanings of their own, then one could not inquire about the meaning 
of an unfamiliar word. (3) The method proposed by Jaimini, which 
requires distinguishing primary from secondary meanings, becomes 
hopeless to apply, for one cannot distinguish between what is directly 
meant by a word and what is secondarily meant. (4) A compound (or 
complex) sentence is one in which the component clauses, through their 
expectancy for one another, combine to convey the meaning of the 
whole, which cannot happen according to the indivisible meaning 
thesis. (5) Jaimini’s exegetical rules require the recognition of the 
meanings of iniividual words for their application. Because such mean- 
ings are denied the rules cannot be applied. 

88-94 (257-59; T4244). Answer: These arguments do not contradict 
our position, for we hold that a sentence, even though its meaning is 
indivisible, can be analyzed into smaller sentences (which can in turn 
be analyzed along the lines proposed in the objections). It is like the 
scent that appears different when found in distinct flowers, or like the 
‘“‘cowness”’ that is (erroneously) ascribed to a gayal because we have not 
previously seen a gayal; in the same way, when two sentences differ in 
only one word, they appear to be similar, even though the two sentences 
have entirely distinct unitary meanings. Just as light (prakéfa) and 
consciousness (cetas), though each without parts, seem to be similar 
to each other in one part and different in another, so the two sentence 
meanings appear to resemble each other in one part and to differ in 
another, though they are really without parts. 

95-111 (£59-63; 745-49). There are several instances in whicha 
meaning is cognized, but its usual signifier is either not explicitly present 
(because of extended meaning [tantra], or some other factor) or is 
present in an altered form (due to word-connection [samdhi] , a different 
pronunciation, or the like). One who thinks that a sentence is made up 
of distinct words even at the time it delivers its meaning will not be able 
to account for this phenomenon, 

112 (£63; T50). Answer to item (4) of the objections in 61-87 above: 
In the case of one-word sentences (padasariipa vakya) one can say that 
what is ordinarily a constituent of a sentence has acquired an indepen- 
dent meaning. Similarly, if a sentence embedded in a larger sentence 
appears in separation, it will have an independent meaning. 

113-115 (£63-64; 750-51). Those who maintain that a sentence has 
only purpose (fraygjana) as its meaning, who say that it does not have 
a lexical (abhidheya) meaning as words do, cannot account for the 
relations between (such) sentences. But if it is (qualified) word mean- 
ing that is held to be revealed (by each succeeding word), the process 


BHARTRHARI 143 


will be one of recurrence (dvrtti) or resiatement (anuvdda). The 
(sentence) meaning that is (said to be) complete with each (word, it 
should be noted), comes about when those (words) are together.” 

116-118 (#64-65; 751-52). Various views are held regarding mean- 

ing. Despite the sentence’s having a single meaning, different opinions 
(vikalpa) with respect to the topic are derived based on the (different) 
experiences (bhdvané) (of their proponents). Some say that every 
linguistic form causes an intuition (pratibhkd) through practice 
(abhydsa), as is seen in the understanding of meanings by children and 
animals. This practice is not a matter of tradition. Some say it is conven- 
tional. It is of the form “‘this is to be done after that.” 

119-124 (#65-66; 753-54). There are twelve views of meaning that 
take sentence meaning to be constituted from word meanings: (1) Each 
linguistic form marks a notion that the form has a meaning, so that a 
word. like “‘cow’s” meaning is like the meaning of words like apirva, 
devata, or svarga (in other words, each one means merely that something 
exists that corresponds to that form). The association of a linguistic item 
with a specific feature comes through usage, perception, and practice; 
it is not the content of the linguistic form, but is based ona distinct effort. 

(2) According to a second view, some distinctive features (bheda) are 
revealed by the linguistic units that designate them. Some things that 
are only subsequently (or incidentally) understood are then taken to 
be the meanings of linguistic forms as well. 

Critique of (2): But a linguistic form, when it evokes the notion of the 
generic property (jati), does not evoke the idea of the individual 
distinguishing features that are characterized by that generic property. 

125-142 (£66-70; 755-60). (3) Others say that the designation of a 
linguistic form is regular both as to usage (prayoga) (in other words, 
what is implied) and means (sédhana) (that is to say, instrumentality to 
a resulting action). 

(4) The designation is a collection (samudaya), but without choice or 
combination (avtkalpasamuccaya). 

(5) Meaning is a nonexistent (asatya) relation (between the word and 
the property designated). 

(6) Meaning is the relation with a linguistic form of something exis- 
tent as obstructed (or conditioned, upddhi) by what is nonexistent. 

(7) Linguistic form and its meaning are the same thing. In ordinary 
affairs the meaning is the more important aspect, but in grammar either 
may be relevant according to the speaker’s intention. 

(8) Linguistic forms are invented so as to present in a manner regu- 
lated by a single meaning a thing having in itself no power, (9) or all 
powers. 

(10) The meaning is an intellectual content (buddhivisaya) that is 
related to an external object (bdhyavastu) and is cognized as such. 


144 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(11) Some (meanings) are based on manifested memories that have 
distinct features. Others present themselves as bare awareness 
(samvinmdira). 

(12) Just as a sense organ indicates its content in various ways, so 
the meaning is conveyed through language in many ways. A linguistic 
form intended by the speaker to mean one thing is heard as having 
various meanings by different hearers. And even the same hearer, at 
different times or different places, may understand a particular linguis- 
tic form in different ways. Everyone but those who have seen the natures 
of things are subject to this unreliability of language, and their visions, 
though based on reality, cannot be made relevant to practical affairs 
because those visions are not related to language. Language is no more 
reliable than perception—both are subject to illusions. The wise man 
should examine through reasoning (yukti) even what has been directly 
presented by perception, and in speaking he should follow the conven- 
tions of ordinary usage concerning objects, for they are difficult to 
explain correctly. 

143-152 (£70-72; T60-63). Sentence meaning is produced by word 
meanings but is not constituted by them. Its form is that intuition, that 
innate “know-how” awareness (pratibhz) possessed by all beings. It is a 
cognitive state evident to the hearer. It is not describable or definable, 
but all practical activities depend on it directly or through recollection 
of it. It comes to a person through maturing, just as animals and birds 
know innately how to act. Intuition is said to have six varieties: (1) 
natural (svabhdva), (2) Vedic (carana), (3) through practice (abhydsa), 
(4) yogic (yoga), (5) through invisible factors (adrsta), and (6) 
through instruction or intervention (upapddita). 

Pritt on 143-152. Examples of (1), the tendency of prakrti to evolve 
into buddhi, and thelike, or our natural tendency to wake up after sleep- 
ing. Of (2), Vasistha’s knowledge. Of (3), water divination. Of (4), 
awareness of the contents of other people’s minds. Of (5), the power of 
Raksaokas to enter others’ bodies. Of (6), Safijaya’s knowledge of the 
progress of the Mahabharata wars through Krsnadvaipayana’s spe- 
cially qualified reports. 

153-163 (#72-74; T63-68) Just as the word “‘cow” designates things 
that are associated with certain substances but does not itself designate 
those substances, so the linguistic form used to designate cows associated 
with a certain shape, color, and parts does not designate those portions. 
But language fails to function in usage if it is separated from itsdesigna- 
tion, as opposed to separation from the associated features, which does 
not preclude the functioning of language. Thus even though “cow” can 
be used of something where hair, hoof, and so on, are missing, it cannot 
be used where cowness is missing. 

164-169 (£75-76; T68—71). There are different views regarding the 


BHARTRHARI 145 


way that number and other factors are conveyed by the combination 
of suffix and stem or root. Some see no difference between the mode of 
conveying meaning seen in the case of stems or roots and the mode of 
conveying meaning seen in the case of suffixes. Others characterize the 
former as “designating” (abhidhdyaka or vécaka) and the suffixes as 
“indicative” (dyotaka). Their criterion is that of positive and negative 
concomitance (anvayavyatireka). 

170-179 (£76-78; T70-76). Synchronic derivation of words 
(nirvacana, fabdavyutpatti) is an area in which there is considerable scope 
for difference of perception and choice of elements. In such a derivation, 
the precise meanings of elements are frequently ignored in favor of their 
general, approximate meanings. 

180-191 (#78-81 ; 776-82). Regarding the stage in which a prefix or 
preposition is joined to a root, there are two views. Some sce this stage 
as preceding the semantic connection of the root, through the action it 
denotes, with action bearers (sadhana) ; others see it as succeeding this 
semantic connection. The prefix can be said to be denotative (vdcaka), 
indicative (dyotaka), or jointly signifying (sahabhidhayin). 

191-196 (#81-82; 782-84; 781-82). The indeclinable particles 
(nipata) can be said to be either indicative or capable of conveying a 
meaning only in conjunction with other words (pada) that constitute 
the sentence. 

197-204 (£82-84; 784-89). A fifth category of linguistic forms (in 
addition to nouns, verbs, prepositions, and particles) is that of the post- 
positions (karmapravacaniya). Linguistic forms in this category serve to 
delimit in a unique way the action implicit in the relationship of the 
two words they connect. The other justification for their separate group- 
ing is formal. Once the postpositions are separated from the prepositions 
the phenomenon of change of su to su can be better described in a 
grammar. 

205-212 (H84-86 ; T90-93). Of words that have an identifiable desig- 
nation several types can be specified from the point of view of their 
constitution, In some words the constituents have no meaning of their 
own; only the collection is a meaning bearer. In others, the constituents 
too bear meanings. Among the latter, insome the constituents contribute 
their meanings to make the meaning of the collection, while in some 
there is no recognizable or definite relationship between the meanings 
of the constituents and the meaning of the collection. There are also 
words in which a part is a meaning bearer and the remainder is not. 
One can also divide words into phonemes that have no meanings of 
their own; unless one chooses to identify some single-phoneme words 
with similar phonemes constituting a word. Some constituents of words 

(such as a root) have only abstracted meaning, based on grammatical 
analysis, 


146 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


213-215 (£86; 793-94). Phonemes do not express any meaning by 
themselves. This fact is evident from the fact that word x, which is 
distorted due to loss, addition, or reversal of a phoneme, does not fail 
to convey its usual meaning by reminding the hearer of the undistorted, 
form, provided that the distortion is not such as to turn x into another 
word y. 

216-228 (£87-89; T95-100). A compound word conveys a specific 
undivided meaning. It should be viewed as made up of parts only in the 
context of analysis. 

229-234 (£90-91; 7101-102). The elements set up in grammar and 
the meanings associated with them are a matter of practicality. It is 
ignorance (avidyd) that is described in the science (Sdstra) of Grammar 
in different ways. Understanding (vidyd) arises spontaneously, free from 
the alternative opinions (conceptual constructions?) (vikalpa) conveyed 
through. tradition. Just as the result is not related on its occasion 
(nimitta) and is thus indescribable (nirupdkhya), so understanding, 
though inexpressible (andkhyeya), is regarded as having the science of 
Grammar as its means (updya). 

235-238 (£91; 7103). Understanding of linguistic meaning comes 
from repetition, which is beginningless and false and appears to be 
natural. For example, an uneducated person (apandiia) takes an atom 
to have parts, and takes a whole made of parts to be joined with the 
parts (of other things). Because of our experience of pots and other 
things (as spatially divided), we take the world to be so divided, and 
because objects have a beginning, even the eternal Brahman is thought 
to have a beginning. Means that are intended for students can be mis- 
leading for children. One understands the truth by remaining on the 
path of untruth. 

239-249 (£91-94; 7104-108). (So), incompatibility of various sorts 
is noticed between the final meaning of a sentence and the meaning 
constructed by putting together the meanings of its components. Even 
the explanation of a simple negative sentence is fraught with logical 
difficulties as long as the explanation proceeds on the assumption that 
each succeeding sentence constituent modifies the meaning of the 
preceding constituent—that sentence meaning is perceived in parts and 
pieces. This point goes to prove the validity of unitariness. 

250-257 (£94-96; 7108-112). In the case of homophonous concate- 
nations that figure as sentence constituents and are associated with more 
than one meaning (mutually related or unrelated), there are two views. 
Some theoreticians think of each such concatenation as one and the 
same word. Others prefer to look on such a concatenation as different 
words in reality. 

Vriti on 250-257. When identity of the word is presupposed, the 
process of its association with a meaning other than its regular meaning 


BHARTRHARI 147 


is explained in various ways: first, the word, potentially capable of 
expressing any meaning, is restricted to one meaning by context. 
Second, the word is directly associated with only its regular meaning, 
but that meaning is changed through superimposition of another 
meaning. Third, the word has its own form as its invariable, immediate, 
and unique meaning. That meaning, in the form of form, is super- 
imposed. on each contextual meaning as the case may be. 

258-262 (#96-97 ; 7113-115). Considerations analogous to the ones 
in the preceding paragraph are applied by some thinkers to sentence 
and to Vedic mantras. 

263-297 (#97-104; 7115-129). Those who think that one linguistic 
form has many meanings base the distinction between its primary and 
secondary meanings on its being well known or not well known. Others 
trace the distinction to context. Again, it is taken to be a matter of the 
relative fullness or deficiency of features. Others think the meaning 
conveyed is a universal property. Still others say that the meaning 
conveyed results from deviation or distortion (viparydsa) of some sort, 
as with the snake and the rope. Other such examples are cited. 

298-313 (£104-107; 7129-135). A word form conveys a cluster of 
(grammatical) meanings such as number, tense, and person. Not all of 
them are intended when the action expressed by the sentence is to be 
carried out. One must distinguish between possible and intended 
meaning, usual and contextually appropriate meaning, meaning ele- 
ment that prompts the use of a word (prayojaka artha) and meaning 
element that is unavoidable (ndntariyaka) because the word must appear 
with a certain suffix, or meaning that simply serves to indicate the 
participant in an action (upalaksana artha) and that means the partici- 
pant itself (gradhana artha). 

314-317 (#108-109; 7135-138). The factors that determine the 
meaning to be assigned to a linguistic form in a particular sentence are, 
among others:3 sentence (vékya), especially the action expressed in the 
sentence; context (grakarana), in terms of the general activity going on 
at the time of utterance; meaning (artha) of co-occurring words, or 
textual context; propriety or suitability (aucitya or auciti); spatial con- 
text (defa); temporal context (kala); relation (samsarga or samyoga), 
accompaniment by an entity that would serve to distinguish; absence 
ofan entity that would serve to distinguish (viprayoga or viyoga) ; mention 
of an entity that regularly accompanies (sdéhacarya); opposition 
(wirodha) ; indication (linga) available in a related sentence; presence of 
a specifying word (anyasabdasamnidhi or Sabdéntarasamnidhana) ; probabi- 
lity (sdmarthya); gender (vyakti); accent (svara). 

In the bhedapaksa or nandtvapaksa, which holds that a homophonous 
expression is in reality many words, these factors serve only to reveal 
the already existent distinction—to remove the obscuration caused by 


148 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the identity of form. According to the proponents of ekatvapaksa, they 
make known the then-operative capacities of the word—they delimit 
its potentiality. 

318-324 (£109-110; 7138-139). There are instances in which the 
meanings of the constituent words do not add up to the import or 
message of the sentence. 

325-327 (#110-111; 7140-141). Whether something is a wordora 
sentence does not depend on the number of constituents; the matter is 
to be decided on the basis of the meaning conveyed. Single words, 
whether noun or verb, that convey a self-sufficient meaning or one 
free of expectancy are sentences. 

328-345 (#111-116; 7141-148). Some hold that “deficient sen- 
tences” (elliptical sentences) or sentences in which one of the expected 
or ordinary constituents is missing convey their meaning by first remind~ 
ing the hearer of their full form. This view is unacceptable; the so-called 
full sentence and the deficient sentence are in fact different expressions 
that are viewed as related in analysis and because of their similar out- 
comes. Categorization of words as nouns and soon is a product of 
analysis and a matter of convenience. It should not be viewed as 
primary truth to be retained at any price. 

346-351 (#£116-117; 7148-151). In the case ofa science like Gram- 
mar, a sentence is to be interpreted by taking into consideration what 
the related sentences state. The meaning to be assigned to a linguistic 
form in a sentence is held to be qualified by exceptions, specifications, 
and the like, right from the outset. The talk of a sentence (an exception 
(apavdda) ), specification (visesavidhi), or prohibition (pratisedha) quali- 
fying, obstructing, or canceling sentence f (a statement of a general 
rule, utsargavakya, simanyavidht) is to be understood as an inference that 
pf does not reach the area of g and g does not reach the area of p 
(apraptyanumdna). The cases in which acceptance of such demarcated 
areas is not possible are cases of option. 

352-361 (EI17-119; 7152-155). There are instances in which an 
entity is referred to by an identifying expression (semjfd) and also by 
an.expression that could be considered to be a part of that identifying 
expression (for example, datia is a part of devadatta). Some thinkers 
postulate the process of understanding the meaning here to be as 
follows: perception of the part (datta), recollection of the (full) ex- 
pression (devadatta), cognition of the named, that is, the person 
Devadatta. It is better, however, to hold that the name and what seems 
to be a part of it are in fact two names associated with each other in 
genesis and analysis, but not in the act of signification. Grammar 
derives, through devices such as elision (/opa) and the like, parts that 
can designate, as not all parts are acceptable substitutes for the full 
name. 


BHARTRHARI 149 


362-370 (#120-122; 7156-159). Some forms are acceptable only as 
identifying expressions, others almost identical with them are only 
acceptable in a role other than that of identifying. A name can occa- 
sionally be employed with the intention of designating the conditioning 
factor (nimitia) that led to its coining; it can also apply appropriately 
(in keeping with its meaning in nonidentifying use) to an entity (for 
example, krsna, “‘black,”’ employed as name of a person of dark skin). 
When a word is said to be a designator of some entity, its capacity (to 
designate) is only restricted; a new capacity for designation is not creat- 
ed (for its designative capacity is natural to it). In science (principally 
Panini’s Grammar), a longer identifying expression (mahati samjfa) 
indicates that the conditioning factor is intended or that a special 
consideration (such as assumption of recurrence) is involved. It is also 
noticed that the technical sense and the ordinary sense of an identifying 
expression are acceptable simultaneously in some instances and exclu- 
sively in others. 

371-383 (#122-125; T160-164). How the action expressed in a 
sentence takes place with respect to the entities mentioned in it depends 
on the nature of the action and the intention in a particular context. An 
action like eating applies in its completeness to each of the individuals 
designated in the sentence. A fine imposed on a community, by contrast, 
applies collectively, unless it is specified that each member of the 
community must pay a specific amount. A dramatic performance is 
realized only when each individual involved contributes his expected 
share of subactions. Seeing, to illustrate another variety, can be brought 
about either way: collectively or with respect to each member of the 
collectivity. Similar variation is noticed when identifying expressions in 
Panini’s Grammar are applied to their nominate or when rules describ- 
ing changes, such as that from z to n, are interpreted. 

384-388 (£125-126; 7164-166). There are two views regarding 
the unity of an action involving many entities. Some think of it as be- 
coming different with each change in the factors (agent, object, and 
the like) that are involved. It is expressed as one because the entities 
concerned are regarded as forming a collectivity. Others think of it as 
essentially single, but expressed with an indication of differentiation 
(such as plural number) because the factors involved are many and 
different. 

389-393 (£126-127; 7166-168). Objection: Each constituent sentence 
(or clause) applies to each individual item to which the major sentence 
applies. These constituents are not what is meant by the major sentence, 
but when the major sentence is uttered the hearer understands the 
distinct meanings of the constituent sentences. 

Answer: If the whole meaning of a linguistic form is contained in the 
meanings of its constituents, then what is the need for the existence of 


150 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


separate word meanings? If the meaning of a linguistic form exists in 
each constituent, then either it contradicts that constituent’s own mean- 
ing, or it accords with it. And if the latter, then linguistic forms do not 
have eternal meanings (as the opponent believes). 

394-398 (#£127-128; T168-170). The single generic meaning is 
established with respect to each component expression as well as to the 
whole collection of constituents and to each segment of the sentence. 
Analogously, even though phonemes have meanings, the case ending is 
added to the stem and not to each phoneme. Just as everyone sees the 
same property by means of the same lamp, so grammatical number is 
understood from one case ending. Thus meaningfulness does not 
belong exclusively to word, phoneme, or sentence. Such a view, found 
in tradition, only appears to conflict (with ours). 

399-404 (4128-129; 7171-174). Alinguistic form does notilluminate 
its objective unless it is used (that is to say uttered). Just as the visual 
organ sees (an object) only when it has access to it, so language ex- 
presses its meaning (or objective) only when intentionally applied to it. 
Just as the relation between an instrument (karana) and its object 
(karman) is brought about through action (Kriya), so the relation bet- 
ween designating (abhidhdna) and its designatum (abhidheya) is brought 
about through designation (abhidhd). And when several (distinct) 
things might be designated by a certain designating expression, the 
linguistic form is established in a particular case through its intentional 
application (abhisamdhdna). So, some say that Vedic linguistic ele- 
ments are meaningless when they are repeated and that when taught to 
others they merely stand for their own forms, but that these same Vedic 
expressions, which each have a single meaning, when in use have diffe- 
rent meanings depending on the different intentions of their speakers. 

405-407 (£129-130; 7174-175). Others, however, take each diffe- 
rence in usage to signify complete difference (between the meanings of 
the linguistic forms used), saying that a word such as aksa (which can 
mean a fruit, or dice, or an axle) is indeed many linguistic forms being 
considered as having a single common property (in virtue of all the 
words having the same ordered set of phonemes). So each linguistic 
form has its own fixed meaning, and there is no speaker’s intention 
other than just using the expression, which must have its meaning. The 
fact that an expression means different things in different contexts just 
shows that it is not one expression but several. 

408-410 (#130; 7176). For the advocates of the unitary sentence 
meaning, the question broached (between the advocates of fixed mean- 
ing and speaker’s intention) is a pseudoquestion because it rests on the 
incorrect assumption that the speaker begins with unrelated words and 
goes on to relate them. 

411-418 (£131-132; T176-180). Among those who view the speaker 


BHUARTRHARI 151 


as proceeding forth with related words, there are two views. Some 
think of the action expressed in the sentence as related to its bearers only 
generally at the initial moment, while others think of the action as speci- 
fically related to its bearers right from the first moment. Others think 
that it is not language that establishes the meaning, but that language 
only produces a memory (smrt?), which is like the meaning in appear- 
ance. Thus, a burned man understands burning from his contact with 
fire; it is otherwise when one learns the meaning of burning from the 
word ‘“‘burning.”” 

419-430 (#132-134; 7180-185). Just as the sense organs—which 
differ by nature from one another and have each their specific sphere of 
operation—cannot function except through the body, so words—which 
are individually related to their meanings—do not have meaning dis- 
joined from a sentence. The relational form (ofthe sentence) is grasped 
when the actual objects that are meant are connected to it, but its essen- 
tial nature is not indicated thereby, as the meanings of the words are 
not seen. Awareness likewise remains in its true, formless state but 
appears to be colored by relations to actual things. Again, a meaning 
can only be designated as related to existence or nonoccurrence; so it 
is the sentence that is fit (to designate). The meaning of a word, 
whether existent or the opposite, is not understood in communication 
without some connection to an action. So it does not exist. Even the 
one-word sentence “‘ (it) exists’? cannot be thought without some rela- 
tion (assumed) with an action in the form “‘it was” or ‘it was not.” It 
is the action (part of the meaning of the sentence) that is first analyzed, 
because of its primacy. The other means is used to effect that action. Its 
result is its motivation. But it is just the speaker, the intender, who forms 
the conception of the thing to be effected, its means, and the relation 
between them. A meaning (in other words, an objective that can be 
meant), because it has all powers (to play any role needed), is estab- 
lished as assisting in whatever the speaker wants to say. 

431-440 (£135-136; 7185-189). (Through language) things far apart 
can be presented as together, or vice versa; and one may be presented 
as many, or vice versa. This fact can be explained through supposing 
either that an object’s nature is everything or that it has no nature at 
all. It is language that has extremely fixed power, that relates (the 
things meant). A linguistic form is only an indicator (upalaksana) of an 
actual object (vastu); it does not express the powers (if any) of an 
object. The meanings of words are established through marks (laksana), 
but not as they actually are (vastutas); such an object is understood in 
different manners through its uses. The relationship that is the nature 
of a sentence’s meaning does not reside in the individual word meanings 
or in their aggregate. In communication we speak of it that way, but 
that is a product of analysis, which is needed to explain and thus under- 


152 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


stand it. In such analysis parts are distinguished that require each other. 
So the unity of sentence meaning must be understood from small 
indications. 

441 (£137; 7189-190). The external meaning (or object), whether 
existent or not, is to be distinguished from that meaning which is 
notional (sampratyaya). That distinction consists in analyzing the powers 
(of the words to signify external objects). 

442-446 (£137-138; 7191-194). A sentence is considered to be one by 
some if it has one finite verb; others thinks of it as one even if it has more 
than one finite verb, provided the verbs are expectant of (s&kamksa) 
each other. Whether a sentence is complete should be determined by 
examining whether it is wanting in a word. Nonspecification of the way 
that the action expressed is carried out does not make a sentence 
incomplete. 

447-450 (£138-139; T194-195). Action, while physically the same, 
appears different if the point of emphasis in the sentence is changed. 
Conversely, individual actions may be physically different due to 
difference of agent, means, and the like and yet may be expressed with- 
out an expression of the difference. 

451-456 (#139-140; 7195-197). Action expressed generally for a 
group takes place recurrently with respect to each individual agent in 
the group. Some explain this fact by pointing out that there is no one- 
to-one correspondence between linguistic utterance (uccdrana) and 
comprehension (pratipaiti) in any case. Others theorize that the one 
initial sentence gives rise to many sentences, which then apply indivi- 
dually to the agents. The latter seek support for their view in Panini’s 
practice of employing general and specific sentences. 

457-458 (£140; 7197-198}. According to some thinkers the distinc- 
tion between universal and particular is inapplicable to action. Others 
view action as containing a particular element (wyaktibhaga) and a 
common or universal element (sdémdnyabhaiga). The latter, they say, 
explains expressions in which distinctions of time, agent, or object are 
not reflected. 

459-475 (#141-145; T198-203). Sentences in which a single word 
performs a role in more than one part of the sentence—for example, 
having a different sense in combination with each of several verbs in 
the sentence—are explained in a variety of ways, based on (a) assump- 
tion of difference between utterance and comprehension; (b) recogni- 
tion of sequence and simultaneity as possible processes in the employ- 
ment of expressions; (c) division of words as aggregates of phonemes 
into those in which the distinction of parts is manifest, those in which 
that distinction is not explicit, and those in which there are no parts to 
begin with; (d) postulation of the arising of individual-oriented 
sentences in the period between utterance and comprehension; (e) 


BHARTRHARI 153 


ascription of more than one capacity to an expression depending on the 
expectation (arthitua) of the hearer; and (f) acceptance of recurrence 
(duriti). 

476-485 (2145-146; 7203-205). These epilogue verses make a few 
remarks about the passing of the Paninian tradition, starting with the 
Samgraha (referred to also by Patafijali), proceeding through Patafijali 
himself, Candra, and Bhartrhari’s teacher, and having suffered at the 
hands of ‘‘dry logicians’ (fuskatarkdnusdra) such as Baiji, Saubhava, 
and Haryaksa. All the traditions discussed heretofore, and many more, 
were mastered by Bhartrhari’s teacher; a fuller discussion will be found 
in the third book, to follow. It is important to become familiar with 
other traditions than one’s own and to understand the older teachers, in 
order that one’s understanding be clear. 


BOOK 3 


1. On Universal Property (Fatisamuddefa) 

1-5 (£58; T1-9). Words abstracted from sentences have been regard- 
ed as falling into two (noun, verb), four (with the addition of 
prepositions and particles) or five (with the addition of postpositions) 
categories. In the analysis into word meanings there are said to be two 
eternal word meanings for all language (or linguistic forms), namely 
universal and particular. Sometimes the particular as characterized by 
the universal of its class is intended, and sometimes without such a 
characterization. 

6-13 (£E58-59; T10-—16). Every linguistic form first designates its 
own universal property, which, is then identified by conceptual construc- 
tion superimposed (adhydropakalpand) as having the form of the universal 
of a meaning (or thing meant, artha). This identification happens just as 
the principle in the quality “‘red color’ is attributed to lac and is then, 
because of the lac’s being in contact with a piece of clothing, say, 
apprehended as residing in that piece of clothing; likewise, the universal 
property residing in language, because of the relation between language 
and meanings, is imagined to do the job of the universal property when 
there is attribution of properties to things meant. The universal property 
common to all universal properties is the linguistic form ‘universal 
property’; it is arrived at by elimination; the universal property 
common to linguistic universals is also “linguistic universal.”? This 
linguistic universal is in linguistic forms but is different from linguistic 
forms; it inchades as well the universal property “being a linguistic 
universal” (Sabdajatitva). Even if universals can actually designate 
objects meant (and not only as an appearance, a superimposition), 
every linguistic form designates a universal, for the meanings of words 
are determined according to their (the words’) operations (vydpara). 


154 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


So, even according to the view (not accepted by the author) that 
words designate substances (that is, particulars) they do so by virtue 
of having the properties of substances; so it is the property that should 
be held to be the meaning (of linguistic forms). 

1424 (E59; T17-21). A universal property is that property common 
to all members of a class which distinguishes the particular members of 
that class from nonmembers. Or, some say, the “‘general feature” 
(akytt) is that which is spoken of as common, and it is again spoken of 
as “particular substance”’ (dravya) to indicate differentiation. But diffe- 
rence or identity requires limitation (upddhi) by something other (than 
the things differentiated or identified). Only if things are connected 
(somehow) can they be thought to be different from or the same as 
each other. In fact, it is the one Self that has all powers; to suppose 
that things differ in their natures is unnecessary. So substance and the 
like are distinctly marked powers in tandem that assist men in gaining 
their purposes, but not separately. This connection among them is not, 
however, something above and beyond the powers, any more than the 
causal collocation (sdémagri) of sense organs is something above and 
beyond those organs. 

25-40 (£60-61; 722-30). It is the universal that is the prompter 
(prayqjaka) of the coming to be of the particular, being present ante- 
cedently in its causal conditions. Just as a face reflected in water is 
called merely a ‘‘face,”’ so it is only the universal manifested by the 
individuals that is designated (by language). And just as the differences 
among the sense organs, even though they be not perceived, lead. us to 
postulate differences among the sense objects grasped by those organs, 
so in the same way the individuals, though not perceived, lead us to 
accept differences in our awareness of (their) universal properties. But 
it is the universal that is the existent (satya), the individual being non- 
existent (asatya). Indeed, it is existence (sattZ) alone that differentiated 
through its relata is said to be the “universal’’; and all language is 
based on that (“‘existence’’). This existence is the meaning of the stem 
and of the root; it is the great Self, and it is designated ‘“‘action” (Kriya) 
when there is sequence among individuals. This existence universal 
takes on six states (avastha) when there is modification of becoming 
(bhdvavikdra) in apparent sequence; that sequence is likewise the nature 
of that Self in which time is seen as ifit were dividedinto stages of before 
and after. The nonexistence of a thing is its being taken to be hidden 
(tirobhava) ; its origination (janma) occurs when. that existence universal 
has left a previous stage and has not yet arrived at the next one. The 
causes of our finding distinctions in this existence universal arise from 
its own powers. 

41-48 (£61; 730-35). A universal does not need to have any shape of 
its own in order to manifest itself as earth or something else, and it 


BHARTRHARI 155 


persists when its locus is destroyed. Some say that it is not the case that 
everything is simultaneously dissolved at the time of pralaya; others say 
that when the various objects are merged in prakrti their universals 
have a single locus, the dravyasattva (pure Substance?). Still another 
view is that each universal resides in every being, but only comes to be 
known in its particular manifestations. Yogis, however, are aware of 
universals through all their senses sharpened by practice. 

Some universals—for example, the one expressed by the phrase 
‘““man-lion” (in other words, a heroic person)—have no linguistic 
forms that designate them but are established through expressions 
designating their parts that appear similar (to other words, namely, 
“man,” “‘lion”’). 

49-91 (#61-65; 735-56). That words have endings expressing 
number—despite their designating a single universal property each— 
can be explained in various ways in different cases. Sometimes the 
number serves other purposes; sometimes it is not even significant. 
Cases are adduced of these sorts. 

In general, activity with respect toa particular thing (or substance) 
depends on our understanding its relevant qualities. Indeed, substance 
and quality are mutually dependent (sémarthya). A sentence that indi- 
cates the relations of both quality and substance to an action should 
not be viewed as a compound sentence; both are conveyed together. 
Because it is the universal, and not the substance or quality, that is 
designated by the words, and because it is therefore the universal that 
is most closely connected with the action rather than the substance or 
quality, we find that one can maintain the action meant while substitut- 
ing another quality for the one first indicated (for example, one can 
perform a sacrifice with a black goat if a white one is not available). 
And even though substance and quality are mutually dependent, the 
fact that one is allowed to find a substitute for a quality (in such a 
context as above) but not for the substance can be explained by noting 
that the universal property is closely associated with the kind of 
substance (goat) but not so closely with the quality (say, its color). 

92-102 (£65-66; 757-61). Synonyms for “‘universal” are “lack of 
difference in form among things (of the same class),”’ “‘similarity,” ‘“‘the 
powers involved in the very nature of things.’? But even though one 
may get the idea of a stick from being aware that someone desires a 
stick, one does not thereby get the idea that he is actually a stickholder. 
For that one requires something else (namely, the universal). Otherwise 
the natural powers of things would remain indeterminate (avyapadesya) 
and communication could not occur. But when, abandoning distinc- 
tions, the nature of individuals is apprehended as single, then a single 
awareness occurs. When unity is considered to be among many, the idea 
of a “collection”? (samiha) is born. And when the individual members 


156 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of the collection are considered first as different and then in terms of 
their unity, there arises the idea of their similarity. And just as an 
awareness, though different from the next one, is considered to be the 
same, so an object, though it has the nature of excluding others, is 
apprehended (as being the same in nature). 

We do not have language to express the differences among things 
that are similar to one another; neither is that difference cognized. 
Thus, because of the difficulty of establishing the different specific 
contents of our awarenesses and of the meanings of linguistic expres- 
sions, we come to see them as identical. Or, according to the view of 
those who believe in relations, just as there are universal characters of 
(in) our awarenesses, so there are universals of (in) all objects, and the 
awareness universals prove the object universals. 

103-106 (£66; 761-63). (Or, according to another view) the univer- 
sals in the objects of our awareness help distinguish the awarenesses as 
well. An awareness does not require another awareness to cognize it, 
any more than a lamp requires another lamp to illuminate it. The 
awareness “this is an awareness of jar” is different from the awareness 
“this is a jar’; the form of being an awareness is not cognized as a 
content; we do not grasp its nature as distinct from the nature of the 
object meant. 


2. On Substance (Dravyasamuddesa) 

1-6 (£66-67; 764-68). Synonyms of dravya (substance) are “self” 
(atman), “‘actual entity’? (vastu), “(thing having its) own nature” 
(svabhdva), “‘body’’ (Sarira), “‘thatness’’ (dativa).14 This eternal existent 
is made known to us through nonexistent forms (dkéra); likewise, it is 
this existent alone that is designated by linguistic forms that designate 
nonexistent limitations (upddhi). In the same way, though the word 
‘thouse”’ designates a bare house, Devadatta’s house is designated by 
the word. through temporary indications (nimitta) of it; or the word 
“gold’’ is used to refer to particular impermanent golden ornaments, 
even though really it refers to gold in its purity alone. And just as the 
power of the visual organ is limited when one looks through a tube, so 
the power of language to express all meanings is limited by the 
(particular) forms. But because those forms are essentially identical 
with the substance (whose forms they are supposed to be), language 
that designates them designates the eternal substance.1® 

7-18 (#67-68; T68—74). The tradition of old is that there is no 
distinction between substance (tativa) and what is not substance 
({atattva). Rather, substance when not properly understood (avicérita) 
is thought to be something other than substance. That (real substance), 
the form of which, is not subject to conceptual construction (avikalpita), 


BHARTRHARI 157 


appears as if subject to constructions. For example, though not subject 
to temporal distinctions it appears as if it is. Just as the properties of 
contents cannot characterize awarenesses, yet appear to be characteri- 
zing them, so forms of the modifications, which cannot characterize 
substance, appear to do just that. 

What is existent is that which remains at the end when forms dis- 
appear. It is eternal, expressed by language and not different from the 
language principle. It is neither existent nor nonexistent; neither single 
nor separate; neither connected nor disjoined; neither modified nor 
unmodified. This single (substance) is seen as language, meaning, and 
the relation between them. It is what is seen, seeing, the seer, and the 
result of seeing. 


3. On Relation (Sambandhapariks@) 

1-2 (£68; 176-77). From linguistic forms that are uttered three 
entities can be known: the speaker’s awareness (what he is thinking of), 
the external object, and the linguistic form’s own nature. A hearer may 
fail to cognize the first two, but not the third. 

3-28 (H68~-70; T79-92). The relation between word and meaning is 
indicated by the use of the genitive case (‘‘y is the meaning of x”). There 
is no expression that designates this relation as a relation, for expressions 
reify—turn dependent entities like relation into independent, appa- 
rently substantive entities. This problem can be seen in the case of 
contact (samyoga) and inherence (samavdya), though neither of those 
two relations is the relation that connects linguistic forms and their 
meanings. Some say that relation is not among things meant by words 
(padartha) ; others say that relations such as contact and inherence fall 
among the things meant. But they cannot comprehend the meaning 
relation in their system, for language can designate substances, qualities, 
and universals, and the relations between language and meaning differ 
in different cases. Anyway, there can be no word expressing inherence. 
Some words (such as dkdfa) designate their own substrata, or their own 
universal properties, to which they are related by inherence. Other 
words designate a quality that coinheres in the same substratum as 
they do. A word such as “jar’’ designates an item that is related to it by 
the relation of being in contact with what it (the word) inheres in (samaveta- 
samyoga). An expression such as ‘“‘the jar’s black color’ designates an 
item that is related to it by the relation of inhering in what ts in contact with 
ats {the word’s) inherence locus (svdfrayasamyuktasamavdya). An expression 
such as “‘colorness”’ designates an item that inheres in what inheres in what 
is in contact with its (the word’s) inherence locus. A word such as ‘‘time”’ 
designates an item that is related to it by the relation of being in contact 
with what is in contact with its (the word’s) locus. (So the items belonging 


158 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to the other five categories of the Vaisesika six are accounted for, but) 
no other relation is found to relate the word “‘inherence” to its alleged 
designatum. But that word, “‘inherence,” cannot be meaningless, nor 
can any word mean any old object. So the (Vaisesika) analysis of 
linguistic meaning in terms of contact and inherence will not work. 

Objection: You say that inherence is inexpressible; but because you 
have just expressed it, it has become expressible ! Or if you say even 
the word “‘inexpressible’’ does not express it, we could not understand 
what your claim means. 

Prima facie reply: What we mean is that inherence’s dependent nature 
cannot be expressed. 

Objector’s reply: Then inherence itself cannot be expressed, and your 
words do not convey anything. 

Siddhantin’s answer: A doubt cannot be itself doubted. Again, a belief 
cannot itself come to be the thing it itself believes. To take another 
case: in saying “‘all that I am saying is false” (sarvam mithya bravimi) one 
does not intend to include that very sentence in the scope of its meaning, 
for then, as what one is saying would be implicitly false, the intended 
meaning would not be conveyed. Generally, what is expressive cannot 
at the same time be what it expresses, and if something x is conveyed by 
y then » cannot itself be expressed by something other than y. Another 
example: “the thesis (pratijid) is not probative (sddhaka)” does not 
apply to itself. 

29-38 (£70-71; 792-97). The meaning relation’is just the beginning- 
less fitness (yogyaid@) between linguistic forms and their meanings, 
analogous to the fitness sense organs possess for their contents. It is the 
correct (sddhu) linguistic form that expresses the fit meaning; incorrect 
forms are expressive only by inference. The word “‘relation’’ designates 
relations, and “‘fitness” designates fitness, because they are fit to do so 
(so that the analogous difficulty to the one about “‘inherence”’ does not 
arise). Awareness of this capacity comes through convention. Langu- 
age is the cause of meaning, so from the meaning that is a content of 
(the speaker’s) awareness language (for it) is understood (by the 
hearer). There was never a time that this fitness between language and 
meaning did not exist (as a general phenomenon); neither does it 
cease to exist when the thing a word refers to ceases to exist, for the 
thing is permanent as designatable (abhidheyadimana). 

39-51 (#71-72; T98-104). What words convey orimply can be called 
existence of a secondary nature (upacdrasatta). This existence differs 
from actual existence in that it can be reconciled with any property— 
even with properties ordinarily thought to be contrary to existence.16 
Tt is in this way that negative particles are meaningful, that we can talk 
of things not yet in existence, and so on. 

52-60 (£72; T105-109). Coverage of only a part, grasping something 


BHARTRHARI 159 


as limited by something else (such as a universal), reversal (or error, 
viparyaya), and absence or negation are inherent in linguistic communi- 
cation. In this aspect it reflects features and limitations of cognition. 
There is, therefore, no ordinary way in which external things are 
cognized or expressed purely as they are. The child and the pandit, 
insofar as they are communicators, both express only partial views of 
things. Pure awareness (fuddhajfidna) (beyond the level of communica- 
tion) embraces all objects and is not based (on sensory perception). 
An even purer stage, some say, occurs in awareness without form 
(aripika). When awareness exhibits the forms of external objects it is, 
as it were, impure through getting mixed up with those forms. And a 
meaning becomes impure in the same way, falling away from its true 
nature through being limited. And because the meaning, the linguistic 
form, and the awareness are all thus in error, there is no essential 
difference in the manner in which positive things (bhava) and negative 
ones (abhdéva) appear in communication; both are mutually dependent 
in that respect. 

61-71 (£72-73; T109-113). Positive and negative being are two 
conceptual constructions and are not different from the one self. 
Theories that seek to derive an existent from a nonexistent, or one 
existent from another existent, or a nonexistent from (the destruction 
of) an existent are logically problematic. They lead their proponents to 
advocate either something existent or something nonexistent as the 
ultimate source, but the derivation of the opposites from such sources 
is logically questionable. One must, therefore, accept as ultimate source 
an entity (dtman, artha) that unites in itself both existence and non- 
existence—which is indifferent to the distinction, which can be thought 
of either way. Linguistic usage does not proceed with this transcending 
reality as its basis. Its basis is rather what is thought to exist, what is 
conceptually constructed. 

72-77 (#73-74; 1114-115). Those who know the Upanisads 
(trayyantavedinah) have declared. that what really exists is that on which 
is constructed seer, seen, and seeing. Language expresses the universal 
as well as the particular as differentiated. Therefore it operates with 
distinctions that do not really exist, and among such distinctions is that 
between positive being and negative being. 

78-88 (E74-75; T116-119). Furthermore, language is incapable of 
expressing the cause-and-effect relationship without problematic impli- 
cations. That an entity called effect comes into existence when another 
entaty called cause is present is a matter of experience; it cannot be 
denied, it is like a miracle (atyadbhuta) in that words fail to convey it 
with precision.1? The sequence (krama) presupposed in the transition 
of cause to effect is not something physically different from the existent 
that undergoes the change, just as simultaneity is not physically over 


160 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and above the entities involved. The philosophers who accept a perma- 
nent existent have, therefore, thought of sequence as a capacity of the 
(one) existent. An entity does not actually exist merely because an 
expression for it exists. In the science of Grammar, however, all entities 
presupposed by expressions are thought to exist, and meanings of 
expressions are analyzed irrespective of actual existence or nonexistence. 


4. More on Substance (Bhiyodravyasamuddesa) 

1-3 (#75; T121-123). The subject matter of the following chapters 
concerns certain word meanings (padértha) abstracted in traditional 
ways from their forms in coalescence (samsarga, that is, the sentence) 
and from awareness (samvid). The nature of these word meanings is 
inferred from the rules of grammar. They are a basis of grammaticality 
(sédhutoa). 

A substance (individual, particular, dravya) is any entity that can be 
referred to by a demonstrative pronoun and that is viewed in the 
utterance as capable of differentiation.1® 


5. On Quality (Gunasamuddesa) 

1-9 (£75-76; 7126-132). A quality (guna) is that entity which accom- 
panies the substance, which is active in the role of differentiating it, and 
which is viewed as dependent on the substance for its existence. A 
substance cannot be referred to purely in itself; it needs qualities in 
order to be expressed. It is the excellence (or superiority, prakarsa)?® of 
a quality, not of the substance, that is expressed in comparison and 
similar constructions. Because such expressions are particularistic (only 
relatively more specific, vifesafabda, than some other expression), they 
cannot exhaust all elements of a substance that can be used for differen- 
tiating it. Thus there is always the possibility of being able to specify in 
a finer way, of turning the dependent element or guna of an earlier stage 
into the principal element (pradhdna) or substance of the next stage. 
(Compare the sentences “‘x has a form,” ‘‘x has a white form,” “x has a 
whiter form,”’ “The whiteness of « has a shine to it,”” and so on. ) 


6. On Spatial Direction (Diksamuddefa) 

| (£76; T7133). Words refer to spatial direction (dik), action bearers 
(or means, sddhana),° action (kriya), and time (kdla) as if they were 
actual entities. That they are in reality powers (Saki) arising from 
things is obliterated in usage. 

2-5 (£76; 7133-135). Spatial direction is that power which is behind 
such cognitions and usages as “x is before y,” “this thing is straight 


BHARTRHARI 161 


(without bends),” and “this actionisone of going upward.” It is single, 
but is divided into many (for example, the ten directions) on account 
of adjuncts (upddhi, such as contact with the sun at a particular 
time). Direction differentiates material things (miirta) in terms of near- 
ness and remoteness, while time distinguishes them in terms of sequence 
of actions. Direction is the basis of the talk of contact and disjunction 
through the perception of occupied and unoccupied regions of the sky 
or akafa.™t 

6-11 (E76-77; T136-139). Thereis no fixed arrangement of spatial 
direction. The various compass directions, which seem to divide syste- 
matically, are mere names when they are divested of reference to the 
things (for example, the sun at a particular time) with which they are 
associated. Names of regions of space contain in some cases references 
to the directions used conventionally without regard to the actual 
position of the speaker or hearer. 

12-22 (£77-78; T139-144). Based on distinctions such as “‘this,”’ 
‘that,’ “‘eastern,’’ ‘“‘western,”” and the like, which are introduced by 
spatial direction, are the divisions seen in things from mountains to 
atoms. These divisions are characterized in terms of the accompanying 
entity (for example, presence or absence of light) or configuration, but 
the concept or capacity called “spatial direction” is their ultimate 
foundation. Things per se are beyond division, sequence, and fixation 
by region. Division with which the adjuncts invest them has no end and 
cannot be something inherent to them. Yet division cannot be avoided. 
Spatial direction is operational everywhere. Along with time, it is part 
of the very nature of living beings. There wouJd be confusion in com- 
munication and action if entities such as spatial direction were to be 
abandoned, if they could at all be abandoned. Sometimes they are 
explicitly present (with extent or limit mentioned ), sometimes implicitly. 

23~28 (£78; 7144-146). Itis also possible to view space as a property 
or power of consciousness (so far it has been viewed as a power of 
things). Under either alternative, there is no gain in trying to prove 
either that it is ultimately one or that it is ultimately many (in other 
words, that it is a set of several powers). Spatial direction is not an 
actual entity. Its existence rests on convention. Besides, singularity and 
plurality are mutually relative concepts; one presupposes the other. 
They cannot, therefore, be exclusively applied. If spatial direction is 
declared to be single, the sense of “‘single’’ cannot be the usual sense, 
which contains an implicit reference to plurality. 


7. On the Means to Action (Sdédhanasamuddesa) 
1-8 (#78-79; 7147-152). Means (sédhana) is the power to bring 
about the action (or actions) expressed in the sentence, This power is 


162 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


located in what are viewed. as the loci (agent, object) of the action as well 
as in other entities mentioned in the sentence that are notso viewed (such 
as the instrument, karana). It need not always be physically or really 
present in the entities in which it is supposed to reside. It is what the 
intellect assumes to be present there. Entities are bundles of powers. 
The intellect enjoys autonomy in investing them with powers and in 
activating only some powers at the time of sentence formation. Thus it 
is possible, for example, to say “the is making a sound.” Although the 
sound has evidently not become a physical reality at the time of uttering 
this sentence, it is viewed as an existent acting as the power of an object 
with respect to the action of making. 

9-13 (£79; T153-156). The “‘relationalists’’ (samsargavadinah, thatis, 
the Vaisesikas)?? view powers as ontically subsumed under the cate- 
gories that they admit. A means for them is what should be viewed in 
the context of their ontology as instrumental in bringing about the 
action expressed. Thus, in “he sees a pitcher” the qualities of the 
pitcher such as its medium dimension are the means, but in “the sees 
a form (or color)” the universal called “‘formness” (or “‘colorness’’) is 
the means. Such means are not specifically expressed in the words of 
the sentences concerned; they are implied by endings (vibhakti) and are 
logically reconstructed. 

14-17 (£79-80; T156-157). Things that have come to exist are taken 
as means when they, as it were, oblige the action by being instrumental 
in bringing the object about. The power of being instrumental has been 
claimed by some to be an entity identical with the thing, or over and 
beyond the thing, which is instrumental in this manner. It does not 
matter (to the Grammarian) which is the case. As long as it is seen to 
be different it can be held to be the means. In the same fashion an 
action can be a means with réspect to a succeeding action it might 
generate. 

18-27 (£80; 7158-166). These passages discuss the range of applica- 
tion of the terms karaka and hetu. 

28-31 (£80-81; 7167-168). Powers are latent in substances that will 
become means of actions. These powers are revealed at the time the 
action takes place. 

32-42 (£81-82; 7168-172). Some thinkers view means as existing 
prior to the action, some as simultaneous with the action, and some as 
subsequent to the action. There is also a difference of views concerning 
what it is that brings about the action and bestows the status of mearis 
on entities—some of the candidates include karmic force (apirva), time 
(kala), the power of time, and action itself. The division of means into 
six kérakas has also been viewed by some as natural, by others as deriva- 
tive. Some have defended the identity with, as well as the distinctness 
from, the entity involved of the power that is means to action. It is not 


BHARTRHARI 163 


realized that an assertion of identity has an implicit reference to differ- 
ence and vice versa, and that reality transcends both concepts. 

43-44 (£81; T173-174). By comparing and contrasting (anvayavyati- 
reka) pairs such as urksas/orksam, one is led to hold that case endings 
(vibhaktt) are themselves meaningful. The category to which their 
meaning belongs is called kdraka. It has seven varieties: karman, karana, 
kartr, sampraddna, apdddna, adhikarana, and esa. 

45-53 (#82-83; 7174-178). Karman, the object of action, which. is of 
the kind that is what the agent wishes most to reach with his action, has 
three varieties: (a) a kind of object that is to be brought into existence 
(nirvartya) and is not a transformation of its material cause; (b) a kind 
of object that is a modification (vikdrya) of its material cause; and (c) 
a kind of object that is to be reached or obtained (prapya), in which no 
change is seen to take place when the action succeeds. There are alter- 
native ways of explaining (a) and (b), (a) as that kind of object which 
did not exist before its production, and (b) as either the result of the 
destruction of material or the result of modification of substance. As for 
those objects of action which are other than the kind most desired to be 
obtained, they are of four kinds: (d) that regarding which the agent is 
indifferent (audasinya); (e) that which the agent (ordinarily) avoids 
(anipsita); (f) that which is not covered by the other designations of 
kinds of kérakas; and (g) that which, though logically another kind of 
kdraka, is to be viewed as object (karman) in the process of sentence 
derivation on the Grammarian’s instruction. 

54-58 (£83; T7179-181). The objects of types (a), (b), and (c) are 
involved as elements that bring about the action of which they are the 
objects. To that extent they are agents (kartr). But the logical, first-level 
agenthood is replaced by objecthood in linguistic expression once 
another entity appears on the scene as instigating or causing the 
action—an agent marked by presand, that is to say directing, commis- 
sioning, impelling, or setting in motion. 

59-66 (£83-84; 7183-187). These passages discuss Mahadbhasya on 
Panini 1.3.67 and 3.2.60, concerning certain complications about ex- 
pressions that indicate objecthood and agency. 

67-80 (£84-85; 7188-197). Discussion of other siéras relating to 
object. Time and the like are objects with a different status, having 
become a kind of substratum for the substance objects. They are 
secondary (apradhéna) or external (bahiranga) objects. By contrast, the 
principal (pradhana) object is the one that is the prompter (prayojaka) 
of the action. 

81-86 (£85; T198-200 These karikds discuss constructions in Which 
the object does not appear in the accusative case. 

87-89 (#85-86; 7200-203). An action does not appear in a sentence 
as akarmaka—not requiring an object—simply because the object it 


164 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


requires already exists or is supposed to exist before it is related to the 
object or because its relating to the object leaves no traces. It appears as 
ekarmaka either (a) because the root used to express it has a different 
meaning elsewhere, or (b) because it already includes as a concept that 
which would be object in a construction with similar meaning, or (c) 
because its object is too well known to be specified, or (d) because the 
intention is merely to state it without specifying the object. 

90-100 (#86; 7203-208). The second category of case ending, 
instrument (karana), is now discussed. The instrument is that entity after 
the activity or operation (vyépara) of which the action being expressed 
takes place in the speaker’s view at the time of sentence formation. 
Whether a specific instrument’s activity is actually or invariably neces- 
sary for the realization of the action concerned, or whether that activity 
in fact immediately precedes the realization of the action, or whether the 
instrument physically exists does not matter. Similarly, there need not 
be only one instrument for an action. All entities that are viewed as 
more instrumental in bringing about the action than the rest of the 
kdraka entities of the sentence can be instruments. Such an understand- 
ing of “‘instrument” does not conflict with the eminence enjoyed by 
the agent (kavir) with respect to the action on account of his freedom 
to initiate or not to initiate it. 

101-105 (£87; F209-211) The third category of case endings, the 
agent (karir), is next treated. An agent is defined as independent 
(suatantra) by Panini (1.4.54) in the sense that it takes precedence over 
other kdrakas in the speaker’s perspective and is viewed as bestowing 
particular roles on the other kdrakas. It need not necessarily be sentient 
and capable of willful action. Whatever the speaker chooses to present 
as independent becomes the agent. This dependence on the speaker’s 
intention (vivaksd) and the fact of kdrakas such as agent being primarily 
linguistic (as opposed to actual) are evident from the following: what 
is physically single can be assumed to be different even in the course 
of one sentence. Usages such as “the kills himself with his own hands” 
(hanty dtmanam atmané) are possible because the (physically) same “‘he”’ 
is cognized from the perspective of three possible capacities: the capa- 
city to be the agent, the capacity to be the object (dt¢manam), and the 
capacity to be the instrument (dtmanda). 

Realization of this phenomenon, namely, that different cognitive 
stances toward the same thing are reflected in linguistic usage, provides 
a key to the understanding, for example, of sentences speaking of the 
birth or creation of something. A sentence such as “‘a sprout comes into 
being” (ankuro jdyate) would have to be declared illogical, marred by 
internal contradiction, if the reference of ‘“‘sprout”’ in it is held to be 
primarily to a sprout actually existent or nonexistent at the time of 
utterance (if the sprout already exists, how can one assert that it 


BHARTRHARI 165 


[newly] comes into being? If the sprout does not exist at the time of 
utterance, how can one assert its coming into being?). But if the sen- 
tence is understood as implicitly containing two views of the sprout—as 
an entity in the mind of intellect and as a physical entity—then there 
is no incongruence. The natural understanding of the expression 
“sprout” is an existent sprout. As soon as the expression “‘comes into 
being’’ is connected with ‘‘sprout,” it is implied that the sprout cannot 
be an existent in the usual sense—that it must have an assumed exis- 
tence; then only can it be the agent of “‘comes into being.” 

106-113 (£87-88; 7211-215). Other possible ways of accounting 
for a usage like ‘‘a sprout comes into being” follow: 

(a) An effect is nothing but a specific form taken by the cause. The 
real meaning of a sentence such as “‘a sprout comes into being”’ is that 
the seed becomes a sprout. As the cause —the seed—becomes the effect, 
it is referred to by the word, “‘sprout,’? which denotes the effect. 
Actually, there is no creation of something that did not exist before.® 

(b) If the cause and the effect are not viewed as a continuum and 
the effect is thought to be something previously nonexistent that came 
into being, then also a usage such as “a sprout comes into being” can 
be understood in such a way as to be free from internal contradiction; 
it can be understood as meaning that the sprout, which existed as a 
universal, appeared in the form of an individual. As a universal it 
already exists and hence can become the agent of the action of coming 
into being.*4 At the same time, as an individual the sprout is an entity 
to be produced, hence its coming into being can be asserted. 

(c) In all linguistic indication whatever entity is perceived is per- 
ceived as a positive existent (bhdva). Even in sentences such as ““X does 
not exist,” the word X denotes X as existing, as having some form 
(@kéra) or individuality (although the precise manner of existence, 
whether actual or imagined, permanent or temporary, may be stated 
later). Thus the existents as well as the nonexistents of the physical 
world are on a par as far as language goes; language can proceed with- 
out knowing which entity truly exists and which does not. As it is thus 
indifferent to external reality, the kind of problem that is seen in the 
case of “‘a, sprout comes into being” is not a properly posed problem to 
begin with. The problem assumes that words of language are there to 
reflect external reality, when in fact the words are not intended to carry 
any such assurance.?5 

(d) The very concepts of “coming into being” and “going out of 
existence” are due to one’s thinking being misled by mere appearances. 
In reality there is only one undifferentiated, changeless entity. Hence, 
just as other usage in which existence or nonexistence is explicit or 
implicit is accepted as valid in ordinary life, “‘a sprout comes into 
being”’ should be accepted. 


166 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(e) The real meaning of “‘a sprout comes into being” is that the 
cause of the sprout (say, the seed) takes the form of the sprout. Here, 
although the cause is the real agent, it is referred to by “sprout”, the 
word standing for the effect, just as subactions that lead to the action 
of cooking are referred to by a word like ‘‘cooks,”’ as in “She cooks rice.’’2® 

114-121 (288; 7215-219). Sometimes, asin “‘the seed becomes the 
sprout’’ the cause (specifically, the material cause, prakrti) is presented, 
as the agent; sometimes, asin “‘a sprout comes into being,” the effect 
(the product, vkdra) is presented as agent.?? This twofold possibility of 
expression is due to the very nature of coming into being, namely, birth 
or creation. The entity that is coming into being straddles both the 
earlier (causal) phase and the phase to come. Consequently, it can be 
expressed through. either. 

122-128 (EH88-89; 7219-222). In causal constructions such as 
“Yajfiadatta makes Devadatta cook rice,” the agent of the (apparently) 
incorporated sentence ‘“Devadatta cooks rice”? does not lose his indepen- 
dence (svatantrya) with respect to the karakas of that sentence. It con- 
tinues as prompted agent, while Yajfiadatta becomes the causal or 
prompting agent. 

The instigation of action that is seen in a causal construction is 
different from the instigation seen in an imperative or optative mood 
construction. The former applies to agents that are presumed to be 
already engaged in action and is a property of the expressed content. 
By contrast, the instigation in an imperative or optative mood cons- 
truction belongs to one who expresses the content; in other words, in 
that instance instigation is a disposition and presupposes absence of 
engagement in action up to that point on the part of the one receiving 
the command or request (allusions to Panini 1.4.52-55 and 3.1.26, and 
Mahdébhésya thereon). 

129-135 (#89; 7223-226). The kdraka called sampraddéna (indicated 
by the dative) is now discussed. Sampraddna is that kdraka which prompts 
or -participates in the action of giving/parting with as recipient or 
destination of the object of the giving or parting. 

136-147 (#89-90; 7226-232). Next, the kéraka called apaddna (the 
ablative) is discussed. (That is apédina which is uninvolved [udésina] 
in the action of moving away. Whether it be itself actually in motion 
or not, it is considered, to be fixed [dkruva] with respect to that which is 
expressed as moving away from it. )#6 

Apdddna has three varieties: first, one in whose case the action of 
moving away is explicitly stated (nirdistavisaya), for example, “‘village’’ 
in “he comes from the village’; second, one in whose case the expli- 
citly stated action contains the element of moving away from, it 
(upditavisaya), for example, “‘cloud”’ in “‘the lightning shines from the 
cloud”’; and, third, one in whose case no action (implicitly or explicitly) 


BHARTRHARI 167 


containing movement is mentioned, but is nevertheless expected 
(apeksitakriyaé), for example, “residents of Pataliputra”’ in “‘the residents 
of Mathura are richer than the residents of Pataliputra.?° 

Which item is taken to be the fixed thing, the starting point, depends 
entirely on the context—in relation to the horse’s trotting, Devadatta is 
fixed, while in regard to Devadatta’s falling, the horse is fixed. If, as in 
the case of two rams separating, both are moving, there are two starting 
points, one for each act of separation. A speaker does not want to 
predicate simultaneously such contrary properties as difference and 
identity, or being the separating element and being the element sepa- 
rated from. A single item can be, for example, both an instrument 
(karana) and a starting point (apdddna) at the same time, but either 
there is a rule specifying which suffix takes priority, or else one assumes 
that the two capacities are in fact one. 

148-155 (£91; 7232-236). Next comes a discussion of the locative 
case relation (adhikarana). It indicates that which helps accomplish the 
action by holding (dhdrayan) the agent or the object. Such service may 
include nondestruction (of the cause, which will be the effect), inde- 
pendently supporting the weight of the agent or the object, or their 
connection with portions of space. Some say the locus of everything in 
contact with others is éké@Sa, which allows us to say “‘this thing is here.”’ 
Likewise, the locus of all processes is time. 

156-162 (#91-92; 7237-240). The remaining type of meaning of 
case endings (namely, of the genitive case ending) is called “‘the rest’’ 
(Sesa). It indicates secondary or subordinate relationships, not an added 
kind of accessory to the action. 

163-167 (#92; 7241-243). The nature of the vocative case 
(sambodhana) is to call the attention of the hearer to somebody already 
there. The vocative is not part of the sentence meaning. 

These meanings of the case endings are analyzed from the sentence 
meaning. 


8. On Action (Kripdsamuddesa) 

1-10 (492-93; T1-11). Whenever something, whether completed 
(siddha) or uncompleted (astddha), is designated as something to be 
completed (sddhya), it is to be designated as an action (kriyd), because it 
has the nature of sequence (krama) inherent in it. For example ‘“‘it 
sounds,” ‘it whites” indicate actions (namely, of sounding, of shining 
as white) in contrast with merely ‘‘sound”’ or “white.” An action is a 
collection (samiiha) of parts that originate in sequence and is conceived 
to be identical with those parts. Then each part comes to be called by 
the name of the action, so that differences between the parts in the 
process can be apprehended, along with different tenses indicating the 


168 ENGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


different times in the process. The whole action cannot be perceived, 
but is grasped from its perceptible parts, like the fire wheel (aldtacakra). 

11-19 (£93-94; T11-16). That action, which is expressed through 
verbs, has a form that, following temporal flow, is said to be existing 
(asti), until it has completely finished, when it is said to have become 
(bhdva). Each part of the action, which actually has no sequence, 
appears to have sequence because the powers of the subsequent parts 
are attributed to it. The primary meaning of “action”’ is that moment 
(in the sequence) immediately after which the result occurs. The other 
moments (prior to that one) are also called (parts of the) action 
because they have the same outcome as their purpose. As long as a thing 
exists in the form of a cause, before it is born, being something to be 
accomplished, it is indicated (by a verb). Once it is accomplished it 
does not require any more accessories, for its purpose is fulfilled. Thus, 
the verb is not used then. 

21-25 (of £94), 20-24 (of 716-18). Others say an actionis a universal 
that inheres in many particulars. It is not to be accomplished (being a 
universal and so eternal), but in its form as particular it is perceived asif 
it were something to be accomplished. Alternatively, it is that universal 
which inheres in the last (portion of the series of moments). Or, 
action is existence inhering in the agent and the object, or inhering in 
the specific operation. Still others say that action is something mental 
that is superimposed on objects. 

26-35 (of £94-95), 25-34 (of 719-23). Among (Y4ska’s) six 
modifications of becoming (bhdvavikdra), two, manifestation and being 
hidden—or birth and destruction—are postulated of action for the 
purposes of practical affairs. All six are ultimately not different from 
existence. Birth is the stage of existence just prior to its accomplishment, 
and its (the action’s) destruction is the stage following that—namely, 
the accomplishment itself. We use a verb to express the former, a noun 
for the latter. (Other versions of Yaska’s account are considered. ) 

37-39 (of #95-96), 36-40 (of 723-25). Others think that action. is 
activity (pravytti), not resident in anything particular, which together 
with, accessories produces the result. At first, itis general (sémdnya), then 
it becomes disjoined into parts. Still later, in the form of the operation 
(wyapdra) it is established in the thing to be accomplished. This activity 
is the material (prekrti) of all the accessories, the first among them. 
Others say that the operations are different from the activity. 

40-53 (of E95-97), 41-52 (of 725-30). Because the (other) acces- 
sories are all completed things, the verb primarily designates action. 

Question: What about a word like “cooking” (péka), which, having 
case endings, functions as a noun but designates an action ? How can 
the same word have two contrary attributes, of naming both an 
accomplished thing and something to be accomplished? 


BHARTRHARI 169 


Answer: Just as in grammar we artificially divide a verb into two parts 
(root and suffix}, one indicating the action, the other the accessories 
(such as number, tense, and so on), so the same analysis holds good for 
anoun (like péka): its root designates the action, its ending the accesso- 
ries. Thus the same word expresses both things, just as in a sentence such 
as “See ! The deer runs” the same word, “‘runs,”” expresses both the 
object of the seeing and the action of the deer. 

54-64 (of £97), 53-63 (of 730-35). Because the meaning of verbs is 
an uncompleted process, there can be no identification of two actions 
except through using the expression “as it were’? (iva), and no 
comparison or similarity (upamdna) between actions. Every action is 
completely present in its locus; so, because comparison (similarity, 
requires a standard having more or less of the relevant property, no 
comparison can obtain between actions of the same kind; and because 
actions of different kinds have no points of similarity at all, they cannot 
be compared either. 


9. On Time (KGlasamuddesa) 

1-12 (E98-99; T36-39). Some say that time is a substance, single, 
omnipresent, permanent, without operation, the measure or dimension 
of things possessing motion. They say it is the cause of the origin, 
maintenance, and destruction of objects. Time is said to be the thread 
holder (sitradhara) of the world yantra (puppet show? ), who by holding 
some back and allowing others to go on differentiates the universe. Time, 
though, single, has many forms because of its being the locus of differen- 
ces among the things residing in it. Nothing is one or many, white or 
nonwhite, in itself; a substance appears in one way or another due to 
its relations to other things. Because of the distinctions among those 
relata time is thought to be differentiated, so it provides the basis for 
the stages of processes. Again, actualization of a power is caused by 
time, so that the regulation of birth, maintenance, and destruction of a 
thing depends on time. Every stage of the world requires time, so time 
is the very self (diman) of everything; it is operation itself. 

13-26 (£99-100; 739-43). Tume is the creator of the cycles. It holds 
back the various functionings of everything and then releases them, so 
that the potentialities come to mature at the appropriate time as 
particular manifestations of eternal activity. Then that power called 
inherence sublates differences and gives rise toan identity, as it were, 
between effects and their causes. This identity is prompted by univer- 
sals, which come to be reflected in the particular effects. Then the 
qualities (guna), conditioned by their (own) causes, come to be perceived 
in those effects and in turn lead to the manifestation of their own uni- 
versals. Because the loci of the particulars are eternal they persist over 


170 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


periods of time, dependent on relevant causes of that maintenance, and 
continue to perform their functions with the help of other existing 
things. Eventually time, through its power called “old age’ (jaré), 
which is opposed to its other powers, prevents things from performing 
their functions by developing propensities that are contrary to those 
functions, which in turn results in the cooperating objects disappearing. 
So the thing perishes. 

27-45 (£100-101; 743-48). Time is that with reference to which 
processes can be distinguished as fast or slow. Itis the measure of the 
great ages differing in the moral qualities of the agents inhabiting them; 
it is the measure of the turning of the seasons. Though single, it comes 
to go by myriad names because of the divisions and distinctions among 
those things measured by it. When limited (upddhi) by motions it be- 
comes differentiated into eleven forms of past, present, and future, 
specifically, five kinds of past, two kinds of present, and four kinds of 
future. 

46-56 (£102; 749-52). It is time that makes the universe (visva), 
which actually has no sequence, appear as if it had sequence. Past, 
present, and future are three powers of time; past and future cover over 
things while present illuminates them. The power called “‘future”’ allows 
birth to take place; the power called “‘past’? suppresses birth. These 
three powers or “paths” (adhvan) have no sequence, but objects get 
sequence from them. Two of them are like darkness, and one is like 
light. An object is present while its causes are active and functioning; 
when. they have stopped functioning it is said to be “‘past.”’ 

Some say, however, that time has only two powers, one that brings 
about the appearance, the other the disappearance of things. 

57-58 (£102-103; 752-53). There are those who say that time is only 
a mental construction. But whether it be dependent on awareness or 
existent outside of awareness, it is not possible to speak except in a 
temporal context. 

59-62 (£103; 753-54). There are those who say that every object 
has three powers; through these powers every object either exists or does 
not. They say that sequence is just these powers. The same thing is seen 
or not seen depending on these powers; nothing is really destroyed. 

Whatever be the various views about time, whether it be a power, 
the self, or a god, itisin any case the first form of ignorance to arise, 
and it is not known in correct understanding. 

63-84 (£103-105 ; 755-62). Objection: Iftemporal differences are only 
apparent, how can one explain the fact that there is actually more 
water flowing out of the measuring instrument while pronouncing a 
long vowel than there is while pronouncing a short one? 

Answer: There actually are differences in the objects by reference to 
which temporal differences are measured. The flow of water through 


BHARTRHARI 17] 


the measuring tube is itself the result of time’s prevention or permission, 
though not solely; other factors enter in. For that matter, everything is 
differentiated only through other things. Temporal differences result 
from the dissimilarity between the parts of an action that are themselves 
constitutive actions. 

85~90 (£105; 763-64). Objection: An actual entity either exists or 
does not; there is no third way. Thus there is no further possibility (for 
an action) beyond being past or future. A single thing without distinc- 
tions cannot have sequence, and if an action could be single everything 
would be unified, consisting of partly existent and partly nonexistent 
elements. 

Answer: The present time of an action is when it is perceived in its 
own form, when it is reflected in a single act of awareness. 

91-114 (Z105-107; 765-73). Objection: The nonaccomplishment of 
an action is its complete nonarising; it can be neither past nor future. 

Answer: But the opposite action (namely, the one that happens 
because its opposite does not) has a limit either in the past or in the 
future, so the unaccomplished action is temporally located by reference 
to that. 

The remainder of this section takes up further points relating to tense. 


10. On Person (Purusasamudde§$a) 

1-3 (£107; 175-76). Certain suffixes indicate limitations (on the 
action) according to whether the action is by the speaker or by some- 
one else. Even when consciousness is not existent in these, it is under« 
stood through use of these personal suffixes. But the third-person suffix 
cannol express consciousness in the agent, even when the verb is such 
as budh, jfia, or ctt (which indicate mental acts); these verbs themselves 
indicate consciousness, not the suffixes. 

4-9 (#108; 177-78). Some say that wherever the second-person 
suffix is used the vocative meaning is to be understood as stemming 
from that suffix, not. from the rest of the sentence. 


11. On Number (Samkhyasamuddesa) 

1-14 (£108-109; 779-84). Any existent has number. It is on 
number that identity and difference are based in the world. Whether 
number is a property different from or the same as its locus, in any 
case it is that on which differentiation is based. It distinguishes that 
in which it inheres (namely, substance), though it is sometimes imagi- 
ned in other things (such as quality) and enables us to speak of their 
differences as well (as, for example, “twenty-four qualities”). Actually, 
the separation of quality from substance is a result of abstraction; 


172 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


language and thought cannot deal with things except in terms of their 
properties. Thus we can think of, and speak of, the universal resident 
in universals, the individuator of individuators, the number of numbers, 
or the gender of genders. The different categories of things, though 
distinguished in theory and each having its own function, actually are 
found mixed up together, and their identification with one another 
depends on the occasion. 

15-32 (£109-111; 784-92). Unity is the source of duality, and so 
on, for unity is prior to all other distinctions, which depend on a thing’s 
being single. Some think the two unities require a mediating enumera- 
tive cognition (apeksdbuddhi) to create duality; others do not think so. 
Still others say that duality and the like are a collection of two or more 
unities, and that the number of a collection is due to the differences 
among its constituents. 

The remainder of this section treats the grammar of expressions 
indicating number. 


12, On Aspect (Upagrahasamuddesa) 
1-27 (£111~-113; 793-104). Ways of indicating in the verb the 
different sorts of purposes with which an action is done are discussed. 


13, On Gender (Ltrigasamuddesa) 

1-31 (#113~-116; 7105-119). There are seven views about what 
gender is: it is the thing qualified by its relation to signs of gender such 
as breasts or hair; it is those signs themselves so related; it is the 
universal residing in those signs; it is (three) stages of the constituents 
(guna); it is the three constituents themselves in these stages; it is a 
meaning attributed to things by language; it is a property of language 
itself. The author appears to lean toward the latter two views. 


14, On Linguistic Formations (VyttisamuddeSa) 

1-627 (#116-135; 7121-411). Fivesorts of complex formations are 
treated in this section: primary derivatives (krdanta), secondary deriva- 
tives (taddhitanta), compounds (samdsa), reduction of two verbs to one 
(ekaSesa), and nominal verbs (nd@madhdtu). As the discussion concerns 
technical grammar it will not be summarized here. 


Tikaé on ParaNyaur’s Mahdbhasya 
KX. Kunjunnit Raja 


Bhartrhari’s philosophical ideas are found in their fully developed form 
in the Vakyapadiya, which is his magnum opus; but the germs of his 


BHARTRHARI 173 


theories may be found in his commentary on the Mahdbhasya, of which 
a fragmentary manuscript alone is now available. It has been establish- 
ed that this fragmentary manuscript forms a genuine part of Bhartr- 
hari’s Mahabhdsyatika. This work was mentioned by Itsing in the 
seventh century and by Kaiyata as a source book for his Pradipa com- 
mentary on the Mahdbhdsya. 

The 77ké is not a regular word-for-word commentary on the Mahd- 
bhadsya. It contains observations and comments on select words and 
points raised in them. Some of the ideas that were developed later into 
a cogent system are found scattered here and there in the commentary 
on the Mahabhdsya. In some cases Bhartrhari’s comments in the Tika 
help us to understand his basic standpoint in the Vakyapadiya. 


Survey of Philosophical Topics 


1. Sphota Theory 

The sphota theory of the Grammarians considers the expressive word 
or sentence to be an integral, indivisible unit. The word sphofa occurs 
in the Mahdbhdsya twice, without any reference to its meaning-bearing 
function but in the sense of a phoneme, shorn of all variations owing to 
the special circumstance. But Patafijali uses the term fabda in the sense 
of the meaning-bearing unit. Later commentators like Kaiyata explain 
that by Sabda Patafijali meant sphota. S. D. Joshi says that even in 
Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya there is no clear statement that sphojfa is a 
meaning-bearing unit of language.?° 

In the Bhasyatika Bhartrhari says that there are different views on 
the problem. The one he seems to prefer is that sphota is the permanent 
essence (‘‘etac carthasvariipam sphoto’ yam eva Sabdatma nityah’”’).™ 
And Kaiyata says in the Pradipa that this definition has been established 
by Bhartrhari in the Vakyapadiya. 

Patajijali says that fabda is of two kinds, the eternal one (niéya) and 
the transitory one (kérya). Bhartrhari’s commentary gives the following 
clarification. The eternal one could be understood as either the uni- 
versal or the sphofa and the transitory one as either the particular or 
the sound (dhvani).3* It is clear that Bhartrhari does identify fabda with 
sphota, the meaning-bearing unit. Kaiyata is only following him. 

Bhartrhari distinguishes prékrtadhvani and vaikrtadhvani in his Tika 
thus: “Among the sounds which manifest the eternal word, some are 
primary and some secondary. That sound which is produced by the 
contacts of the vocal organs and that which is produced by such a 
sound, these two are primary. Through these two, distinction in vowels 
can be perceived. That sound which comes from another sound is 
called secondary, because no distinction is perceived through it.’’88 


174 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


2, Meaning of the Term Nitya 

While explaining the term siddha as nitya, Patafijali discusses its 
implications. Here Bhartrhari explains two kinds of nityatva (eternality) ; 
kiitastha nityaté, absolute eternality, and pravahanityaté or continuity, 
which, is free from three kinds of antiyaté: samsarganityaté (disappearance 
due to contact, as in the case of the color of a crystal in the presence of 
a colored flower); viparindmdnityatd (disappearance through transfor- 
mation, as in the case of the color of a fruit changing when it becomes 
ripe); and vastuvindsanityata (disappearance due to destruction’5* 


3. Instruments of Knowledge (Pramdna) 

Bhartrhari accepts perception (fratyaksa), inference (anumdna), and 
scriptures (@gama) as means of valid cognition. Perception is liable to 
be erroneous, and sometimes inference may be superior to perception.*® 
Thus the perception of a circle of fire (alatacakra) is erroneous. Agama 
or fabda, which. consists of fruti and smrti, is a strong instrument of 
knowledge and is stronger than inference. 

Scriptures form the basis for dharma. Dharma is the course of know- 
ledge (jf#dna). All the scriptures have their source in the three Vedas 
{trayi). Grammar is a smrti revealed by sages who possess superhuman 
powers of vision. 


4, Contextual Meaning and Etymological Meaning 

The meaning of a word depends on the words with which it is collo- 
cated syntactically by association or contrast. In the phrase ““Rama and, 
Laksmana,”’ ‘‘Rama”’ means the son of DaSaratha; in ‘‘Rama and 
Kesava” “Rama” means Balarama; and in “Rama and Arjuna” 
Rama means Paragurama (Arjuna means Karttaviryarjuna). 

The derivation of a word also has to be made to suit the context. 
“Vasudeva” in the sense of ‘‘the son of Vasudeva”’ has to be derived 
according to the rule applicable to the ksatriyas. If it is in the sense of 
“God,” the term “Vasudeva” has to be derived as ‘“‘vasanty asmin 
devah.” (It is in this sense that the word is used in the sdatra “‘Vasu- 
devarjunabhyam vun.”’) 


5. Language and the External World 

Grammar is not directly concerned with the nature of the external 
world. For grammar meaning is what the words present. Just as the 
existence of words like “‘heaven” (svarga), apirva, and ‘“‘god”’ (devaitd) 
leads to the inference about the existence of things meant by them, 
the existence of words can also be inferred on the basis of the object 


available. 


6 


DURVINITA OR AVINITA 


This writer has been identified as a seventh-century king of the western 
Gangetic area. He was traditionally held to be a patron of Bharavi, 
author of the Kirdtdrjuniya, and of Damodara, ancestor of Dandin. The 
title of his lost work on grammar is Sabddvatara. 


7 


DHARMAPALA 


Dharmapala (530-561, or 625?), the YogacAra teacher, is held to 
have composed a urtti on the Prakirmna (third) book of Bhartrhari’s 
Trika@ngi, according to the Chinese tradition and I-tsing. The title of 


this commentary is given as Prakirnavrtti by Durveka Miégra in his 
Dharmottarapradipa. 


8 


HARI VRSABHA OR VRSABHADEVA 
Ashok Aklujkar 


An author whom scholars date about A.D. 650, the son of Devayasas 
and a protégé of King Visnugupta, this author provides the first extant 
commentary on the Vdakyapadiya or Trikéndi composed by someone 
other than Bhartrhari. The title of the work is Vakyapadiyapaddhat. 


9 


MANDANA MISRA 


For historical details on this author, see Advaita Vedanta up to Samkara 
and His Pupils, volume III of this encyclopedia, pp. 346-347. Originally 
a Pirvamimamsaka, he is said to have been converted to Advaita, and 
is in any case the author of an Advaita work, the Brahmasiddhi, as well 
as of several Bhatta Mimamsa works. The Sphofasiddhi is, as far as we 
know, his only work written from the Grammarian standpoint. 

Although Bhartrhari provided the basic insights into the sphoja 
theory, it remained for Mandana Misra to systematize Bhartrhari’s 
thinking for purposes of philosophic debate. This goal was brilliantly 
accomplished by Mandana in his Sphotastddht. The main opponents 
of Bhartrhari’s sphota theory were the Mimamsakas. Kumarila Bhatta, 
in his Slokavarttika, skillfully argues against Bhartrhari’s ideas. Mandana 
had this full debate before him as he wrote the Sphotasiddhi; his method 
is to summarize Kuméarila’s position and to attack effectively from the 
strong base of his logical reordering of Bhartrhari’s position. A good 
example of this method is found in kdnkds 2-15, where he debates 
the question of how language conveys meaning. Mandana paraphrases 
the main arguments of Kumarila with supporting quotations from the 
Slokavéritika and then rephrases Bhartrhari’s position in the form of a 
counterargument.+ 

Mandana made an important contribution in first stating that the 
Sphofa is an empirical entity that can be directly perceived by the sense 
organs. This claim at once raised the sphota from being merely a theo- 
retical postulate (as stated by Kumarila) to the status of a verifiable 
fact; though what exactly the contents of the final cognition are, if 
not phonemes themselves, still remains vague, because Mandana merely 
says that ultimately the cognitions of phonemes are sublated by that 
of the word. Mandana’s insistence that every letter sound or phoneme 
can manifest the whole of the sphofa, his graphic description of the 


182 ENQYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


process of perceiving the sphofa, and his polemical sharpness made him 
the greatest supporter of Bhartrhari’s sphota theory. 

Mandana also clarifies some aspects that were not very clear in 
Bhartrhari’s treatment and had tended to veil the theory in some sort 
of mysticism. Mandana made it crystal clear that the sphojfa is not any 
entity over and above the word and sentence, but is the word and 
sentence themselves, which gave the sphofa a much-needed earthly 
character. 


Sphofasiddhi 
G. B. Palsule, Harold G. Coward, 
and Karl H. Potter 


References labelled ET are to the edition and translation by K. A. 
Subramania Iyer (Poona: Deccan College, 1966). References are by 
karikas. 

3 (#T2-7). What is this “‘word”’ (whose doctrine is being defended 
here) ? It is the linguistic element (fabda). What is meant by “linguistic 
element’’? Not the phonemes. Rather, a linguistic element is that which 
is the occasion for the arising of awareness of a thing (arthdvasdyapras- 
vanimitta) . 

Objection: Ifthat wereso, smoke, which is the occasion for the arising 
of the awareness of fire, would be a linguistic element. Furthermore, 
an item of speech would not be a linguistic element before understan- 
ding of its meaning arises, and would be one after that—so that 
“cow,” for example, would be both a linguistic element and nota 
linguistic element. The definition offered aboveis not right. The correct 
definition is rather that a linguistic element is anything that can be 
heard. It is the phonemes that satisfy this definition, and this fact acc- 
ords with common usage, which also finds the phonemes to be linguistic 
elements. 

Answer: Our definition fits what the author of the Mahabhasya has 
said. In an experience involving the utterance of, say, “‘cow’’ many 
items figure, such as universal, substance, quality, phoneme, sphota. 
Among them, asks the author of the Mahabhasya, which is the linguistic 
element? Just so one might ask, which one among those in the hall is 
Devadatta? Now if one should answer the latter question by saying 
‘*(Devadatta is) the one wearing earrings,’’ we will not understand 
him to be speaking of someone outside the hall, nor will we require that 
Devadatta has to wear earrings all the time to continue to be Devadatta. 
Likewise, when we say that a linguistic element is the occasion for the 
arising of awareness of a thing, the context assures that we are speaking 
of heard sounds (and not of something like smoke), and furthermore, 


MANDANA MISRA 183 


a linguistic element continues to be one even during those times in 
which it is not occasioning the arising of awareness. Occasioning of the 
arising of awareness is an accidental indicator (upalaksana), and it is 
language qua meaningful expressions that is indicated as the subject 
maiter of Grammar at the beginning of the Mahdbhasya. 

Merely being audible cannot be the correct definition of a linguistic 
element, for all sorts of things are audible, including universals—tike 
existence, soundness, linguistic-elementness, phonemeness, all of which 
reside in sounds and are grasped by the auditory organ. 

Objection: We mean that a linguistic element is only graspable by 
audition (universals are graspable by other means). 

Answer: No, for phonemes (which are according to you the linguistic 
elements) can also be grasped by the internal organ. 

Objection: We do not admit the existence of universals such as exis- 
tence or phonemeness. 

Answer: Then you should not admit any universals, because the 
basis for cognizing these two is as good as for any others. The only 
reason for postulating universals is our experience of kinds. We cognize 
cowness upon seeing Bahuleya, having seen Sabaleya previously, and 
with no other information; likewise having heard ka, ca, ta, pa we 
cognize phonemeness. 

4 (ET9-13). Objection: The phonemes are the occasions for under- 
standing designation; when grouped they are called words. 

Answer: No, a phoneme cannot singly produce an awareness. Fur- 
thermore, because phonemes occur one after another, they cannot 
coexist and so cannot collectively occasion cognition, and when uttered 
by different speakers or in different order they do not occasion under- 
standing of a meaning. 

Objection: Even so, the phonemes should be viewed as occasioning 
awareness of objects when in certain kinds of conditions—such as 
having an appropriate sequence—even though they are not causative 
by themselves, just as the seed is taken to be the cause of the sprout 
when accompanied by soil, moisture, and so on, even though by itself 
in the granary it does not produce a sprout. 

Answer: But because each phoneme disappears immediately after 
it arises, at a certain moment the only thing present to occasion aware- 
ness is a single phoneme. 

5 (ET13-15). Mimdmsaka: Ritual actions—sacrifices and the like—do 
not occur simultaneously, and yet they produce their result together. 
Likewise repetition of the Vedas, or for that matter the various subordi- 
nate acts in the activity of moving, have a collective result provided 
they are performed in the appropriate order and by the same agent, 
and so on, It is the same with the phonemes producing awareness. 

Answer; The cases are not alike. In the case of the sacrifices the 


184 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


actions produce apirvas that Jast and eventually produce the final 
result; no result is produced from an act in isolation. As for the repeti- 
tion of Vedic passages, the result—learning the passages by heart—is 
actually produced through the dispositional tendencies left by each 
repetition aided by those produced by previous recitations. As for the 
case of movement through space, the intermediary is the reaching 
of a point of space; this reaching becomes the cause of reaching 
the next point, and so on. But no such intermediary operates for the 
phonemes. 

6 (£T16-17). Mimamsaka: Yes. In the case of the varnas, the earlier 
ones leave latent dispositions, which then cooperate in producing the 
result once the last one has been uttered. 

Answer: No. A latent disposition produces the awareness of the thing 
that occasioned it, and not anything else. Therefore it is still unexplained 
how a phoneme can occasion awareness of an object. 

7 (ET17-20). Objection: Because the result does not come from the 
phonemes individually and they cannot coexist, some other cause for 
occasioning awareness must be supposed. It cannot be sphofa, for that 
would involve unnecessary complexity of supposition. After all, every- 
one admits latent dispositions to be present, so it is simpler to postulate 
the ability of the latent dispositions to produce awareness of objects 
other than the objects that caused them. 

Answer: ‘That would be to ascribe to a power—latent disposition— 
another power, or disposition, namely, expressive power, which would 
lead to infinite regress. Anyway, if the latent dispositions are cognized. 
in a different order they too do not occasion awareness, so they cannot 
be the cause of the awareness in any case. 

8 (ET20-24). Objector: Our view is that, though the latent disposi- 
tions do not directly produce understanding of the meaning, because 
they continue and thus all come to exist simultaneously they then pro- 
duce a single awareness in which all the phonemes figure. So the sphkota 
doctrine is unnecessary. 

Objection to the objector: But the simultaneity is then a matter of memo- 
ry, not of perception. 

Objector: Fine. Construe the single awareness either as a memory pure 
and simple, or as a complex involving both perception and memory. 

Objection to the objector: Things perceived in a sequence cannot be 
remembered all at the same time. 

Objector: Surely they can. Everyone recognizes, for example, that 
having perceived twenty things one remembers that there were twenty. 

MMandana’s answer: The later phonemes reveal all the previous ones 
simultaneously, and the previous awarenesses of previous varnas, 
having ceased, do not affect this revelation. 

Objection: The simultaneity is of the awareness, not of the things 


MANDANA MISRA 185 


cognized, in it. The phonemes are sequential, but they are cognized 
in @ single memory. 

Answer: No, for the phonemes qua phonemes have no sequence, 
being eternal and alJ-pervasive. When we remember the entire word, 
we do not remember a sequence of phonemes. And furthermore, if the 
objector’s position were correct we should understand the meaning 
of the word from the phonemes perceived in any order as long as they 
now figured in the final cognition produced by them all together. But 
we do not. Therefore we should conclude that it is something else 
(the sphofa) that is responsible for production of understanding of the 
meaning. 

9 (ET25-29). It is generally said that we understand the meaning 
from the linguistic elements (expressing that meaning) (Sabdadartham 
prattpadyamahe). Here the linguistic elements in question cannot be the 
phonemes (as fer above). They cannot be the universals of those 
linguistic elements (Sabdajdizt), either, for linguistic elements gua 
universals cannot signify a collection (samudaya). Thus, for example, 
the words “‘cow” and. “‘horse,”? both being words, should indicate the 
same thing if all that counted were their wordness. A linguistic element 
indicates either the universal (for example, “cow” signifies cowness) 
or the individuals in which the universal inheres (the cows), but not a 
collection of individuals. 

Objection: An utterance such as “the mango trees are a forest” 
(sahakdva vanam) shows that the expression “mango tree,” which 
signifies a universal, also expresses a collection (the forest). 

Answer: Not really, Otherwise the expression for “‘mango trees’ 
{sahakérah) would not be in the plural. Here the apposition proceeds 
through ignoring the distinction between the collection and the things 
that belong to it. This kind of apposition is not pertinent in the present 
case—the word ‘‘cow” (gaui) is not plural and nota collective com- 
pound of varnas. So, the popular saying (that we understand the 
meaning from the linguistic elements) is inexplicable without postula- 
ting a linguistic essence (Sabddtmd, that is sphoja). 

Objection: So let it be inexplicable ! Popular sayings are sometimes 
intelligible, sometimes not. One cannot draw any conclusion from 
inability to construe one. 

Answer: But we understand the popular saying in question, so we 
must assume that it has an intelligible meaning. And in any case there 
is proof for a linguistic essence, because people do make this (popular) 
statement without doubting it or debating it. 

10 (ZT 29-33). Objection: Then let the earlier view, according to 
which the last phoneme accompanied by the latent dispositions laid 
down by the previous phonemes expresses the meaning, stand, but let 
us understand by “latent disposition” something that operates analogo- 


186 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


usly to the apirva that explains how ritual acts can have results much 
later than their occurrence. The phonemes must have been produced 
in a certain order and by the same person. This view does not violate 
the (Mimémsa) view about the eternality of the relation between word 
and meaning, nor does it imply that the previous phonemes are mea- 
ningless, for they assist the final phoneme in producing understanding. 
As such latent dispositions must in any case be admitted, the postulation 
of sphofa in addition is unnecessary and cumbrous. 

Answer: The believer in the phonemes as expressing meaning has to 
postulate something unseen (adrsta), namely apirva, while we, the 
believers in sphofa as expressing meaning, need only presume that kind 
of latent disposition (namely, vdsand) which is evidently the cause of 
memories. 

11 (ZT33). Indeed, the believer in phonemes as expressing meaning 
has to postulate much more on the basis of scripture—the restriction 
of the results of a linguistic (or ritual) act to the same agent, the 
proper sequence, and the like—-none of which we are required to 
postulate. 

12 (£T35-36). The phonemes could only produce an additional 
result (in other words, express a meaning) if they were peculiarly 
suited to do so by their own nature or if they did so through association 
with others. They are not suited to do so by their own nature (because 
by themselves they do not produce understanding of word meaning). 
And because they are not simultaneous they cannot produce meaning- 
fulness in association. 

13 (£737). Even the final phoneme is in itself without meaning. 

Objection: Does this objection not equally apply to sphota? 

Answer: No, for we shall show that (the sphofa) is cognizable by 
sensory awareness. 

Question: Why all this effort to produce inferential reasoning to 
support it? 

Answer: To convince someone who, perversely, does not trust even 
perception. 

15 (ZT3940). Is identity of the speaker of the phonemes constitu- 
ting a meaningful expression a constituent (aga) of understanding or 
not? Because we sometimes understand meaning when we do not know 
(or wrongly assume) whether one or more speakers has spoken (for 
example, in a crowd) it cannot be a causal constituent, but at best an 
indicator (jfidpaka). 

17 (HT41-42). Therefore, as singleness of speaker is not a causal 
condition, and as the latent dispositions produced by the phonemes are 
the same whether one or more speakers produced them, and yet we do 
not generally understand sounds randomly collected as significant of 
meaning, something else must be the cause of significance. 


MANDANA MISRA 187 


Objection: How does the postulation of sphota help avoid the difficulty? 

Answer: Because when there is more than one speaker the sphota is 
not perceived. 

18 (ET43-45). Our view is as follows. In the case of every significant 
utterance an effort, depending on specific desires of the utterer and 
perceptible in his mental activity, produces a distinction in the sound 
uttered. Each sound produced. with such an effort (but not sounds not 
so produced ) reveals the entire sphota. The earlier sounds figuring in the 
utterance of a word, when heard by a hearer without any particular 
dispositions already conditioning his understanding, sows the seed of 
the cognition of the meaning by producing a vague conception of the 
sphota, which lays down a disposition capable of helping produce a 
later clear understanding of the meaning. When the final sound 
involved in the word is heard, the clear understanding of the sphota 
ensues, caused by the dispositions left by the vague cognitions seeded 
by the previous sounds. 

19 (ET46-50). Objection: This theory, as much as that of the believer 
in phonemes as expressing meaning, has to maintain that one kind of 
thing, a phoneme, when heard produces something entirely different, 
a cognition of word meaning, qua sphota. But if one kind of thing can 
produce awareness of something else entirely, then any awareness 
might have anything whatever as its content. If latent dispositions 
are adduced to connect the hearing of the varnas with the resultant 
understanding of meaning, then the theory attributes to the disposi- 
tions an ability they do not have, namely, to produce cognition of 
something other than what produced them. The theory is that hearing 
the phonemes, through the latent dispositions produced, produces an 
erroneous awareness of those phonemes appearing as a significant 
word. But an erroneous awareness must have a cause—and the theory 
does not explain what that cause could be. The cause cannot be the 
phonemes or the latent dispositions, for they serve to produce correct 
apprehension (of the word itself). The theory also assumes that hearing 
the phonemes under appropriate circumstances will always and 
necessarily produce cognition of meaning, the erroneous awareness 
in question. But other errors are not so necessitated—for example, if 
one mistakenly cognizes a rope, one need not cognize it as a snake; one 
might see it as a stream, or something else. In any case, to call this 
awareness erroneous is to imply there is a later sublation—and there 
is not. 

Answer: We do find that a thing when first cognized vaguely some- 
times appears different from what it really is. It would be wrong to 
suppose that, for example, the vague perception of a rope cognized as a 
snake is not produced by the rope. Now contact of the senses with one 
thing cannot cause cognition of something else. So it must be the 


188 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


progressively clearer latent dispositions, which arise as our perceptions 
become clearer, that eventually are responsible for the clear awareness 
that, for example, it is a rope. Otherwise we would have had to have a 
clear cognition at the first glance. 

Objection: Surely it is because we got closer and inspected the rope 
more carefully? 

Answer: No, for it also arises for one who stays where he is and attends 
more carefully. And even those whose sense organs are quite normal 
sometimes misperceive at the outset and later get it right in this way. 
So the initial erroneous awareness is not due to a defect in the organs. 

Objection: What happens is that first the bare essence (svariipamdatra) 
is perceived but is interpreted through its similarity as remembered 
from. previous experiences. 

Answer: One could say the same thing about the linguistic case as 
well—the bare essence of the sphofa is first perceived but interpreted as 
constituted of phonemes and so on because of previous experience. 

20 (£T51-52). In any case it is the sounds, which resemble one 
another, that are the cause of the erroneous awareness, as well as what 
causes eventual clarification. But because sounds are produced by 
different intentions, efforts, articulations, which nevertheless resemble 
one another, one naturally mistakes one thing (the sphofa) for some- 
thing else (the phoneme), as well as eventually getting it right on 
farther consideration. 

21 (#T53-56). The misinterpretation of sphofa as phoneme is inevi- 
table, as it always occurs through the same procedure. It is analogous to 
the case of cognition of a new (large) number—the cognition of the 
previous (nonexistent) numbers is the cause of its cognition in a fixed 
series leading to it. Here cognition of (nonexistent) phonemes is the 
cause of cognition of word meaning. Likewise, when a word is taught by 
one person to another there is inevitable misinterpretation of the word 
as phonemes, for there is no other way of teaching it. It has been said 
that the great sages, who did not learn language from others, appre- 
hended the word essence without misconception and taught it directly 
as mantras; the rest of us, by learning the text of the Vedas and Vedangas 
as we were incapable of receiving the mantras, at least understand the 
means of arriving at correct understanding. 

22 (£T57-59). It has been remarked that to call something an 
erroneous awareness is to imply that there is a Jater sublation, which 
there is not in the case of the awareness of phonemes. But indeed there is 
a later sublation, that sublation being the clear realization of the Sphofa. 

Objection: There is no incompatibility between a word’s being a single 
sphota and its being composed of phonemes, for indeed we see that the 
idea of the word is cognized as mixed up with that of the phonemes. So 
the later realization is not a sublation of the earlier cognition. 


MANDANA MISRA 189 


Answer: Of course it is. Just as the face comes eventually to be known 
as single, though initially confusedly thought to be in the mirror, so the 
sphota is eventually known as single, though initially confusedly thought 
to be subject to distinctions of the phonemes. 

23 (BZT59-61}. Only the sense organs are capable of apprehending 
an object more or less clearly or confusedly. The other instruments of 
knowledge either apprehend the object or not at all. Now the sphofa is 
cognized through perception. We know that it is perceptually cognized 
because the clear cognition of the sphofa, which is different from that of 
the phonemes, must have some supporting object (dlambana). 

24 (ET61-64). Objection: There is such a clear cognition, but it does 
not have a different supporting object from the phonemes; they alone 
are the supporting object. In the final cognition they are cognized 
collectively, while in the preceding erroneous awarenesses they are 
cognized distributively. 

Answer: Even though a cognition concerns one thing it does not 
follow that it may not have something else as its supporting object. For 
example, the awareness of a universal property, though it is mixed up 
with the form of the individual, still has the universal, not the indivi- 
dual, as its supporting object; likewise, the idea of a picture, despite its 
connection with, the colors of its parts, is about the picture, not the parts. 

25 (ET65). Objection: The unity of the phonemes is caused by their 
being cognized in a single mental act or by their serving collectively a 
single purpose. 

Answer: Then there is no unity anywhere, for the same account can 
be invoked to question any case of supposed unity. 

26 (ET66-67). Unless the nature of a word is known, its meaning 
cannot be understood; if that in turn depends on its cognition (as the 
previous objection would imply), there will be mutual dependence. 

27 (ET68-77). That which appears to be different even though the 
phonemes are the same, and that which appears to be one even though 
the phonemes are different, is the word; it is that which is perceived 
(the sphofa). 

Objection (Kumiarila, Sphofa section, verse 131): ‘““Phonemes and 
sounds do not manifest the sphota in words or sentences because they are 
revealers, like lamplight.” 

Answer: Depending on precisely how this argument is interpreted, it 
either proves what is already established (because words and sentences 
are sphoja according to the believer in sphofa) or it commits fallacies of 
unknown qualificandness in its paksa and unestablished locus 
(dSraydsiddha) in its hetu, as well as suffering from other faults. 

Kumarila (Sphota section, verse 133): ‘“Phonemes and sounds do not 
manifest the sphota of words or sentences, because they are manifesters 
(directly), like the light of a lamp.” Or (according to a different 


190 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


reading), ‘““Phonemes and sounds belonging to words or sentences do 
not manifest sphota, because they are manifesters, like the light of a 
lamp.” 

Answer: According to the second reading, the argument commits the 
fault of proving what is already accepted, for words and sentences are 
themselves sphotas. The first formulation involves the fallacy of unestab- 
lished locus, for the auditory sense and the internal organ manifest 
sphojas but do not manifest meanings directly. 

Kumarila (Sphota section, verse 134): ‘“‘Phonemes and sounds do not 
manifest the sphota of words or sentences, because they exist, like the 
jar, and so on.” 

Answer: This hetu is inconclusive (anaikdnttka), for it has been shown 
that sphofas are directly perceptible by the auditory sense. Further, a 
word that consists of just one phoneme is admitted by even the 
Mimamsakas to be manifested by the sound that it consists of, so the 
thesis contradicts their own tenet. 

Kumarila (Sphota section, verse 135): ““The sphofa is not expressive of 
meaning, because it is other than the phoneme, like a jar, and so on.” 

Answer: Because the Mimamsaka does not accept sphota, his reason 
is unestablished (svato’siddha). (Other reasons are also given.) 

Kumérila (Sphoja section, verse 136) : “Whoever denies that phonemes 
are expressive of meaning denies what is perceived, just as one who 
denies that ‘moon’ denotes the thing having the hare on it.” 

Answer: What is perceived is that words are expressive of meaning, not 
the correct analysis of words. 

Kumdrila’ (Sphota section, verses 137-138): “Awareness of objects 
arises from phonemes, because it arises immediately following aware- 
ness of them, just as awareness of fire arises from awareness of smoke.” 

Answer: The Mimamsaka admits that the awareness of the word 
arises from the phonemes before the comprehension of meaning, so he 
cannot appeal to this argument. 

(ET 77-83). Buddhist objection: There is no sentence apart from the 
phonemes, for no such thing is perceived. 

Counterobjection: We can infer some such different thing, because 
understanding requires a cause. 

Buddhist: Just the phonemes are the cause. 

Counterobjector: The same meaning does not arise from hearing jaré 
as from hearing raja, so the meaning cannot come just from the 
phonemes. 

Buddhist: It has to be shown that the phonemes (in the two words) 
are not different. 

Counterobjector. That is shown through recognition. 

Buddhist: Recognition may be in error. Anyway, all objects are 
momentary and so different from one another. 


MANDANA MISRA 191 


Counterobjector: Because we know that the sentences (one with jara in 
it, the other with raja in it) are different we know that they mean 
different things. 

Buddhist: It is wrong to attribute the difference to an imporceptible 
difference (among sentences) when there is a perceptible difference 
among the phonemes. Furthermore, the notion of a single sentence is 
problematic: does it have parts or not? If it has parts, are those parts 
meaningful or not? If meaningless, how can they constitute a sentence? 
If meaningful, do they have parts? If so, they are sentences, and the 
argument repeats indefinitely. If a sentence has no parts, it would be 
impossible to explain why one does not grasp the meaning of a sentence 
until its utterance is completed. (Other arguments are offered as well.) 

28 (ET 84-85). Answer: Just because phonemes figure in awareness 
of meaning, it does not follow that nothing else does. 

29 (ET85). The believer in sphota holds that neither the sentence nor 
the word has parts. And we have already explained how grasping the 
meaning of a word or sentence is a gradual process. 

30 (£T86). Even if phonemes are different each time they are 
produced, itis by virtue of their generic features, not of their newborn 
individuality, that they figure in the expression of meaning. 

31 (ET87). What is “‘sequence” (krama, that is, the gradual under- 
standing of the meaning)? Not merely the causal relation between the 
experiences of sounds or phonemes, for then understanding should arise 
even when the speakers of the sounds are known to be different. 

32 (ET88-89). Indeed, the causal relation between the experiences 
of sounds cannot be what is called sequence; only when that causal 
relation is itself known can it produce understanding. 

33 (ET89). A word is a unit. Analogously, scholars admit that an 
action, like raising a hand, is a unit manifested by different moments 
of activity. 

34 (ET90-91). That the sphofa is eternal follows from its unity. 

35 (ET91-92). Objection: Because awareness of a word depends on 
something else (namely, the phonemes) it is a mere construction 
(kalpané). 

Answer: Awareness of a universal property depends on awareness of 
the individual instances of it. 

36-37 (ET92-93). Thus sphoia is established. 


10 


HELARAJA 


This important commentator on Bhartrhari tells us that he is the son 
of Bhiitiraja and a descendant of a minister named Laksana, or King 
Muktapida of Kashmir. Abhinavagupta, who flourished in 1014, 
appears to have studied with Bhitiraja as well as with a son of 
Bhiitiraja whom Abhinavagupta calls “Induraja.” It is clear that 
Abhinavagupta is referring to Helaraja in some passages, as he is credit- 
ed with having written a grammatical work called Prakirnakavivarana, 
which may have been a commentary on Helaraja’s Prakirnakaprakafa—at 
least the title strongly suggests Abhinavagupta’s awareness of Helaraja’s 
work. Thus we may place Helaraja’s date about A.D. 980. 

Regarding his commentary on Bhartrhari’s Trikdydi, it seems clear 
that such a work was written covering the entire three chapters. There 
is some doubt about which portions of the work are available to us 
now. The commentary on book 3 is available in print.? Aklujkar argues 
that its proper title is Prakirpakaprakdsa, and that Helaraja’s commen- 
tary on book 1 was called Sabdaprabhd, while that on book 2 was 
Vakyakandatika or Vakyapradipa.® Aklujkar further argues that the Tika 
on book 2, which is available in print and credited to Punyaraja, is in 
fact Helaraja’s work instead.4 

Helaraja tells us that he wrote at least three other works, none of 
which is now available. One was an explanation of Katyayana’s 
vdrttikas on Panini, titled Varitikonmesa. Another work, called Kriydviveka, 
is intended to establish that action (Ariyd) is the main idea expressed by 
a sentence. A third, named Advayasiddhi, seems to have been a work on 
Sabdadvaita or linguistic monism; Helaraja remarks that in it he “‘has 
shown that the ultimate manifests itself as the experiencer and the 
experienced and that all that is experienced rests in consciousness, ’5 


194 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


COMMENTARY ON BHARTRHARI’S Trikandi 
Survey of Philosophical Topics 


1. On Universal Property 

In the case of words abstracted from sentences Bhartrhari tries to 
reconcile the universalist view of Vajapyayana and the substantialist 
view of Vyadi. The meaning of a word is permanent, whether a univer- 
sal or a substance. All words—nouns, verbs, prefixes, and postpositions 
—can be reduced to the category of universals. Every word primarily 
refers to the universal of its form—the word universal—which is then 
identified with the meaning universal through superimposition. Accord- 
ing to Panini both the universal and the particular are primarily 
signified by words; and both are understood simultaneously, because 
they are so intrinsically interconnected that one cannot exist without 
the other. According to those who consider the primary meaning as the 
universal, its connection with action may be direct or indirect. In the 
sentence “one should not kill a Brahmana”’ the whole class is meant, 
but in “fetch a Brahmana”’ only the individual is meant. 

Although Vaisesikas do not accept a universal within a universal, 
the Grammarians accept a hierarchy of universals, like classes and sub- 
classes: for example, the animal universal entails the universals of 
cowness and horseness. 

All nominal stems signify Being, which is eternal. Just as treeness is 
contained in the fimSapd-ness, Being is found in everything. It is the all- 
comprehending universal. The status of the phenomenal universal 
depending on convention (samketa) is not affected by the great 
universal, mahdsamanya. Being itself becomes action when viewed as 
having a sequence of time. 

Helaraja favored the metaphorical model of language rather than 
the crystal model. According to his model an object in the external 
world is given a name when the universal located in the name is super- 
imposed upon a universal belonging to a particular bearer in the 
external world. The thing universals have an ontological separate 
existence. But language is independent of the world. 


2. On Substance 

Another view is that all words denote substance (dravya), the 
individual, the concrete, the particular. Substance is of two kinds, the 
real (pdramdarthika) and the expressional (samvyavahérika). It is the 
second kind of substance that is dealt with in the supplementary section 
and is declared to be the meaning of all words by Vyadi. Through all 
these things with different forms, it is the same Ultimate Reality 
Brabman that is cognized. Words express these forms directly, and 


HELARAJA 195 


through them the Ultimate Reality also. The many forms that we 
cognize as the meanings of words are unreal, but the real runs through 
them all. Although there are different gold ornaments, actually every- 
thing is gold. Looking at a Jandscape through a tube, we are able to 
perceive only a limited portion; similarly, every word expresses an 
aspect of Reality. 


3, On Relations 

A word expresses the speaker’s idea, the external object and the 
word form. The word form is understood by all even without under- 
standing the conventional meaning. The relation between a linguistic 
form and its meaning is neither conjunction (samyoga) nor inherence 
(samavaya). The meaning relation is the beginningless fitness (yogpatd), 
like the fitness of sense organs for their contents. A word expresses only 
its correct meaning; incorrect words convey meaning only by inference 
the correct form. 

What words convey can be called existence of a secondary nature 
(upacarasatta). External objects are conveyed only in parts by words. 


4, On Quality 
A substance requires qualities for being expressed. Qualities help to 
specify a substance in a finer way. 


5. On Direction 

Direction (dik) is a power of Brahman, inferred from its effects. 
Those who believe that the whole manifestation of the external world 
exists within the Supreme Consciousness hold that the manifestation is 
not external, though it seems to be so. Everything is an inner mani- 
festation of Brahman. Strictly there is no distinction between inner and 
outer; there is only one Reality. 


6. On the Means to Action (Sddhana) 

The powers to produce various kinds of effects constitute the essential 
nature of the objects in the world. A normal sentence expresses a 
complex meaning of which the central meaning is some action, to 
which the other elements contribute. The verb expresses the central 
element and the nouns express the other elements. Sadhana, means to 
action, is the name given to the concrete objects that help to accomplish 
the action. 

In the use of words the power of a thing is more important than the 
thing itself, and the speaker’s intention plays an important role in 
deciding what type of kdraka is to be taken. ‘‘He cooks in the pot,” “‘he 
cooks with the pot,” and “‘the pot cooks” are all correct. The sddhana 
can be purely mental, as when a storyteller narrates the story of Krsna 


196 ENQYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


killing Kamsa. The means depends on the intention. In “he sees a pot” 
it is the dimension of the pot that is seen, but in “the sees the form,” it is 
the color. The Grammarian is interested in what the expression says. 


7. On Action 

The root is defined as something that expresses action (Kriyd)—a 
particular behavior on the part of the accessories. Kriyd is different 
from the accessories that play a part, direct or indirect, in its accom- 
plishment. It is not pratyaksa (perceptible) but has to be inferred, and 
even in the case of “‘to exit’’ it is an action, the continued existence of 
saita in time. Helaraja makes it clear that what is being discussed in 
grammar is not what action really is, but what action as presented by 
words is. There were conflicting views among early writers—whether 
it is a definite of action or the nature of the meaning conveyed by the 
verbal roots, and so on, The idea that action is a process is found in 
Yaska. Helaraja says that a process is something that has parts arranged 
in a temporal sequence. How can the idea of a single action be convey- 
ed, if the series of actions constituting it be not simultaneous? Unity is 
ascribed to the series of actions on the basis of the ultimate result. The 
unity is mental. 


8. On Gender 

The grammatical gender does not always correspond to the sex. 
Several attempts have been made to explain this inconsistency. Does 
gender depend on the form’ of words or on the meaning? Helaraja 
merely elucidates the views of Bhatrhari and tries to correlate them 
with the views found in the Mahabhasya. 


9. On Time 

Helaraja summarizes Bhartrhari’s view of time as follows. Time is an 
independent power of Brahman. On the basis of this power, differentia~ 
tion as the six transformations (birth and so on elaborated by 
Varsyayani) take place. The apparent sequence in the appearances of 
being is based on this time factor. Time is a creative power, not an 
eternal substance as the Vaisesikas hold. It is the sudtantryaSakti (power 
of complete freedom) of Brahman. As the creative power time is 
responsible for the birth, continuity, and destruction of everything. 
The other special causes, such as the material cause, depend on time, 
which is the auxiliary cause. Time is compared to the stage manager 
(siitradhara) of a puppet show, who pulls the strings and makes the 
puppets move according to his wish. The appearance and the dis- 
appearance of things are based on the permissive power and the 
preventive power of time, respectively; the continuity of things is also 
based on the permissive power of time. 


HELARAJA 197 


Time is measured by action, and action is determined or measured 
by time. Statements about an action being “‘slow” or “‘quick”’ are 
based on time. Although time is really one, it appears to be differentiat- 
ed and in sequence. It is because of actions that distinctions such as 
past, present, and future are attributed to time. Action that is complete 
is given the name of past. The fact that things are remembered is a 
proof of the existence of time. All divisions of time into parts are artifi- 
cial and based on actions that are brought about by it. 

If external movements are not available for measuring time, one 
can use one’s own breathing movement for the purpose. The yogins 
actually use the movement of their breath to determine time. 

Helaraja says that Bhartrhari devoted a whole section on time not 
to discussing its philosophical aspects, but to explaining adequately the 
tenses in the language. 

Brahman is true knowledge without any sequence, but under the 
influence of time (which is a power of Brahman) it is presented in a 
temporal sequence. Nescience (avidyd) is the cause of the phenomenal 
world, consisting of differentiation both temporal and spatial. Of the 
two, temporal differentiation comes first. Consciousness in the form of 
pasyanti is without any sequence, but in association with the prana 
principle, it shines as though it had sequence. When true knowledge 
dawns, the division of sequence also disappears. The main function of 
time is to present phenomena in a temporal sequence. 


11 


PRAMEYASAMGRAHA 


The unknown author of a lost commentary on the Vakyapadiya called 
Prameyasamgraha must have flourished about A.D. 1000. 


12 


PUNYARAJA 


Two different commentaries on the Trikdndi have been credited to 
this author, but in both cases the authorship has been questioned. For 
a long while the fiké on Book 1, which had been published in the 
Benares Sanskrit Series in 1887, was credited to Punyaraja, though the 
colophon clearly mentions the author’s name as Hari Vrsabha. The 
mistake was pointed out by Haraprasad Shastri and again later by 
C. Kunhan Raja, as well as by K.A. Subramania Iyer. In addition, 
as mentioned previously, Ashok Aklujkar has offered reasons to doubt 
Punyaraja’s authorship of the commentary on Book 2. 


[3 


KAIYATA 


Kaiyata, author of the Pradipa (“‘light’?) commentary on Patajijali’s 
Mahdbhadsya, occupies a high position in the history of the Paninian 
school of Grammar, along with Bhartrhari and Nagesa Bhatta. He was 
the son of Jaiyata Upadhyaya and pupil of Mahegvara, and probably 
belonged to Kashmir. He generally followed the views of Bhartrhari, 
as stated in the beginning of the commentary, and was influenced by 
the Kasikd of Vamana and Jayaditya. He is assigned to the later 
half of the eleventh century. 

A verse from Kaiyata’s work (bhdspabdhih kvatigambhirah) is quoted in 
Ruyyaka’s Alamkdrasarvasva, composed between 1135 and 1150; another 
verse is quoted by Maheévarasiiri in the commentary on the Anekértha- 
samgraha of his teacher Hemacandra (1088-1172). Purusottamadeva 
refers directly to Kaiyata in his Bhésduriti (about 1150). Kaiyata’s 
work contains indirect references to Helaraja’s commentary on the 
Vakyapadiya The generally accepted posteriority of Haradatta to 
Kaiyata is rejected by Peri, because Haradatta is mentioned by name 
in Dharmakirti’s Ripdvakéra (before the tenth century). There is a 
tradition that Kaiyata was a younger brother of Mammata. 

The Pradipa is an elaborate and complete commentary on the 
Mahdabhasya, elucidating the meanings of words and expressions in that 
work and. discussing the different views held by scholars in the interpre- 
tation of particular passages. There is little scope for giving his own 
views about problems on the philosophy of Grammar; still, the impor- 
tance of the Pradipa in elucidating the views of Patafijali and Bhartrhari 
is considerable. 


Pradipa on ParaNjaLrs Mahdbhdsya 


S. R. Bannerjee and K. Kunjunni Raja 
(1) Sivasitras. About the arrangement of the alphabets of Sanskrit in 


204 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the Sivasittras, Kaiyata says that they are essential for pratydhdra or selec- 
ting groups of them as used by Panini, and the enunciation of the 
siitras is not for explaining the proper pronunciation of the alphabets 
(svaritpakathana). 

(2) Kaiyata enunciates the principle that among the three great 
authorities on Sanskrit grammar—Panini, Katyayana, and Patafijali— 
the later the sage, the greater the authoritativeness.? Elsewhere he 
states that the authority rests with the three sages.® 

(3) On Patafijali’s statement regarding scripture as a prayojana for 
the study of Grammar, Kaiyata says that the term prayojana should be 
taken in the sense of motivating force (pravartaka). ‘“A Brahman shall 
learn and understand the Veda with its six ancillaries without any 
motive of gain,’*4 


14 


JYESTHAKALASA 


Another Kashmiri author ef a commentary on the Mahdbhdsya, now 
lost, was Jyesthakalasa of Kausika gotra (lineage), son of Rajakalaéa, 
grandson of Muktikalasa, of the Konmukha village in Kashmir. One 
of his sons was Bilhana, author of a kduya work titled Vikramdnkadeva- 
carita. From Bilhana’s date Yudhisthira Mimamsaka has calculated 
that Jyesthakalasa must have lived between 1005 and 1082. 


15 


MAITREYA RAKSITA 


This Buddhist Grammarian in eastern India lived between 1092 and 
1122, according to Yudhisthira Mimamsaka, who thinks he may have 
been a Bengali. In addition to works on Buddhist Grammar, including 
Dhatupradipa, Durghatavrttt, and a Tantrapradipa on Jinendrabuddhi’s 
Kasikanydsa (a fragmentary manuscript, which is listed as residing at 
the Asiatic Society Library in Calcutta), he appears to have written 
a tikd on the Mahabhésya, which has been lost. 


16 


PURUSOTTAMADEVA 


During the later half of the twelfth century in Bengal, during the reign 
of Laksmanasena, a number of grammatical works were composed by 
this writer, who may have been a Buddhist. One of his works was a 
Préndpana or Laghuvrtti on the Mahabhdsya, of which a fragment is avai- 
lable. Other works are Bhésdortti, Paribhdsdvriti, Ganaoriti, Fidipakasamu- 
ccaya, and a commentary on the Unddisiiiras, as well as a number of 
lexicographical treatises. 


17 


DHANESVARA 


Yudhisthira Mimamsaka places this writer at the beginning of the 
thirteenth century. In addition to a Prakriydrainamant, preserved in a 
single manuscript at Adyar, he also wrote a Cintémani on the Mahabhdasya. 


He was apparently the teacher of Vopadeva, the famous Bengali 
Grammarian. 


18 


(RSIPUTRA) PARAMESVARA II 


This well-known Pirvamimamsa writer flourished about 1410. He was 
a member of the important Payyur family of Bhattas and composed a 
commentary on Mandana Misra’s Sphofasiddhi, called Gopdlzka. In 
K. A. Subramania Iyer’s translation of Sphotastddhi use has been made of 
the Gopaliké, and a number of readings and explanationsin his footnotes 
are based on Paramesvara’s commentary. A few of the most important 
are repeated in the following set of notes. References are by karikas. 


10. 


2l. 


Sphotasiddhigopalika 
K. A. Subramania Iyer 


. It is the Gopdlikéd that identifies the opponents in question as 


Kumirila. Specifically Slokavaritika, Sphota section 119, is cited. 


. Parameévara says that the first sentence of Mandana’s answer in 


this section summarizes an explanation of “dispositional tendency” 
provided by Kumiéarila in the Tantravdritika on Mimdmsésiitra 
2.1.5., where Kumiarila is specifically speaking about apiirva. 


. Although Mandana’s text, in explaining why the final varpa is 


without meaning, confines itself to showing how the latent dispo- 
sition laid down by the previous phonemes is beyond the range of 
perception and inference, Paramesvara goes farther and shows 
that it is beyond the range of comparison and presumption as well. 
The Gopaliké points out that all erroneous awarenesses are caused 
by things that are the causes of veridical awarenesses as well. 
Parameévara explains that the analogy of our cognition of a new 
large number is here predicated on the theory about number, that 
it is neither a separate category nor a quality (guna), a view diffe- 
rent from the more commonly held Vaisesika view that number 
is a quality. 


214 


22. 


23. 


27. 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The Gopéliké points out that sublation may be by either a positive 
or a negative cognition. For example, when one discovers that 
“this is not silver,” it is negative, but if the discovery is ‘‘this is 
shell,” it is positive. 

The sense organs referred to here include both external and in- 
ternal ones. 

Last sentence. The Gopdlika explains why one does not grasp the 
meaning ofa sentence until its utterance is completed. It is because 
the following stages take time: (1) understanding each phoneme; 
(2) recognition of each one as a stem or a suffix and thus the cons- 
truction of a word; (3) understanding each word’s meaning; 
(4) satisfying the requirements of mutual expectancy, fitness, and 
contiguity; (5) connecting the several word meanings; (6) under- 
standing the sentence. 


19 


SESA KRSNA 


The Sesa family of Banaras is celebrated, and frequent attempts have 
been made to reconstruct its genealogy. According to New Catalogus 
Catalogorum, volume 4, p. 365b, this author was the grandson of Sesa 
Ramacandra and the son of Sesa Nrsimha, who was the author of the 
work on dharma entitled Govinddrnava. This Krsna was also the elder 
brother of Sesa Cintamani, author of Rasamafijarivyakhya. His sons were 
Sesa Viresvara, who was the guru of Jagannatha Panditaraja, a very 
famous figure of those days, and (Sesa) Narayana (Bhatta), author of 
the Saktiratndkara (see below, author 23). The New Catalogus Catalo- 
gorum places Sesa Krsna in the latter half of the sixteenth century, but 
if the preceding set of relationships is to be worked out consistently with 
the secure facts that are known, it would seem this date should be 
pushed back a bit—we suggest 1510 as the time in which he must have 
flourished. 

He is said to have composed a work entitled Sabddharana or Sabdalan- 
kara, which is lost. The New Catalogus also ascribes to him a small work 
on sphofa theory, entitled Sphofatattvaniripana. A work with this title is 
available, though manuscripts do not identify its author. 


Sphotatattvaniriipana 
G. B. Paisule 


This work is small, consisting of nineteen stanzas with the author’s own 
commentary. The text has no pretensions to either original ideas or 
an exhaustive treatment of the topic, its am apparently being to present 
the doctrine and the accompanying arguments in succinctly worded 
stanzas. It is worth mentioning that, though one of the Jate works, it is 
content with presenting the doctrine in its classical form and is free from 
such innovations as we find in the Sphofacandrika. 


216 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Its Vedantic bias is discernible when it speaks of the sphofa (= Sabda- 
brahman) as a basis (adhisthdna), with the phoneme, word, and, sentence 
as its illusory manifestation (viwarta), which are wrongly imposed 
(adhyasta) on it. 

The work is edited by M. G. Bakre in Vadarthasamgraha (Bombay, 
1913), vol. I, pp. 1-15. Numbered references are to stanzas. 

1. The first stanza salutes the fabdabrahman, the basis (adhisthana) for 
the manifestations of phoneme, word, and sentence. 

2. Previous authorities are named. 

3. This stanza declares the inability of the phonemes in any way to 
convey meaning. Sphofa alone can do it. There are two kinds of sphota 
(word and sentence). According to the view that sphota is partless, 
sounds directly manifest sphofa. But if sphota is accepted as having parts, 
then the sounds manifest phonemes, which in turn manifest sphoja. The 
author refutes the view that sphota has parts. 

4. Recognition of identity does not necessarily guarantee eternality 
for phonemes. Cognitions like ‘‘g is produced’’ can show the opposite. 

5. Even if one accepts the eternality of phonemes, there cannot be a 
cognition of a simultaneous whole when they are screened by winds 
(that manifest them) or by sounds. 

6. There cannot be any conveying of meaning by the accumulated 
dispositions in company with the final phoneme, because meaning- 
conveying is against the nature (svabhdvasya viparpyayat) of the disposi- 
tions. Assumption of such an ad hoe power involves unnecessary 
assumption (gaurava). 

7. No actual sequence is possible in the case of eternal and all-perva- 
sive phonemes. Even in the final cognition sequence is impossible, 
because cognition is one. 

8. The phonemes in the final memory cannot retain the sequence of 
their cognitions because they (previous cognitions) are not a subject of 
the final memory. 

9. A single sphoja is clearly experienced in the cognitions “this is a 
word,” “this is a sentence,”’ “this is a phoneme.” So the sphofa is a fact 
of experience, it is not just a postulate, the commentary adds. The 
commentary also adds that because no change of meaning is there, even 
when the order of words in a sentence is changed, an indivisible sentence 
has to be accepted. 

10. Neither as perishable nor as imperishable can phonemes be the 
parts of the sentence (= sphota). They are only its illusory manifestations 
as the world of the Brahman. 

11. The variety of appearance of a single sphofa is due to different 
sounds, like the variety of reflections of a single face in different reflec- 
tions. This fact also explains the differences in meaning from utterance 
to utterance, the commentary adds. 


§ESA KRSNA 217 


12. Though different from the phonemes, the sphofa appears to be 
tinged by them, because of imposed identity. 

13, This stanza describes the gradual perception of the sphota, with 
the help of previous impressions, and provides the usual illustration of 
the inspection of a gem. 

14. The cognition of the superimposed entity (here phonemes) is the 
cognition of the substratum (here sphofa) itself. 

15. Erroneous cognitions can be a means of correct cognition. The 
usual illustration, a tree mistaken as an elephant, is offered. 

16. In section 19 of Mandana’s text the progressive clarity must be 
taken as referring to the perception of sphofa, not to the understanding 
of meaning (from phonemes), because this feature is peculiar to know- 
ledge by direct perception (and the understanding of meaning is not an 
act of direct perception, adds the commentary). 

17. In spite of the sameness of phonemes the sphoja differs in cases 
like nadi/dindg. So it must be different from the phonemes. 

18-19. The unity of a word cannot be explained away as a secondary 
one (for example, because it conveys a single meaning), because the 
boundaries of a word are to be first understood before any meaning 
can be known. Moreover, such reasoning will amount to banishing all 
unity (and also the diversity based on it) from the face of the Earth. 


20 


SATYANANDA OR 
RAMACANDRA SARASVATI 


Author of a Laghuvivarana on Kaiyata’s Mahdbhasyapradipa, this writer 
appears to have been the father of Iévarananda, who wrote a corres- 
ponding “Brhad” Vivarana on Kaiyata. As a manuscript of Igvarananda’s 
work dated 1603 (=1551?) is extant, we must date his father to the 
first half of the sixteenth century. 


21 


SESA CINTAMANI 


A brother of Sesa Krsna, so presumably contemporaneous (thus, early 
sixteenth century), he may have been the author of a commentary, 
PrakaSa, on Kaiyata’s Mahdbhdsyapradipa.t 


22 


SESA VIRESVARA 
OR RAMESVARA 


One of Sesa Krsna’s sons, he is mentioned in one or two grammatical 
works of later times and may be identical with a Vategvara also named. 
We know of no works authored by him. Annambhatta was a pupil 
of his. 


23 


SESA NARAYANA BHATTA 


Younger brother of Sesa Vireévara, this writer must have flourished 
about 1540 (though Yudhisthira Mimamsaka gives a date halfa century 
easlier). He is the author of a commentary on the Mahdbhdsya titled 
Siiktiratnakara, which appears to have been written at the instigation of 


a King Pirinda or Phirinda. A manuscript of this work exists in the India 
Office Library, London. 


24 


VISNUMITRA 


This writer’s Ksirodara on the Mahdbhasya appears to be lost. It is refer- 
red to by Sivaramendra Sarasvati and by Bhattoji Diksita. Because the 
latter’s date must be the late sixteenth century, Visnumitra must have 
lived at least a few decades earlier, say about the middle of the sixteenth 
century at the latest. 


25 


ISVARANANDA or 
ISVARIDATTA SARASVATI 


The son of Satyananda (Ramacandra Sarasvati, see above, author 
20) and datable to about the middle of the sixteenth century on the 
basis of evidence in a manuscript of his work, [svarananda wrote a 
Brhat (large) Vivarana on Kaiyata’s Mahabhasyapradipa. One manuscript 
list cites another work by him, Sabdabodhatarangini. 


26 


BHARATA MISRA 


(The date of this writer is unknown. His work presumably precedes 
the anonymous Sphotasiddhinyayavicéra [next entry], which depends 
on it.) 


SPHOTASIDDHI 
G. B. Palsule 


Whereas Bharata Misra makes a clear-cut statement (not found in 
Bhartrhari or Mandana) that it is the sounds (dhvani) and not the 
phonemes (varya) (though he does not say how he differentiates the 
two) that manifest the sphofa, his most original contributions are in 
reconciling the theories of sphofa as universal (jai) and of sphota as 
individual (vyakti), and of sphota as inner mental word (antahkfabda). 
The universal theory takes division to be real and belonging to the 
individuals, the individual theory regards it as superimposed, really 
belonging to the manifesters. According to Bharata Miégra the different 
views are meant for students at different levels. The whole idea seems 
to have been tacitly accepted by the later authors. 

Mandana’s influence on Bharata Misra is evident not only in the 
title of the work but also in many an argument. But Bharata Misra is 
by no means without originality. The progress in methodology can be 
seen in the three clear-cut sections that offer three independent proofs 
in support of the sphoja. While the idea is not wholly new, Bharata 
Misra seems to have been the first to have developed Vedic authority as 
a full-fledged argument in favor of the sphofa theory; the first section, 
however, carries forward Mandana’s concept that sphoja is auditorily 
perceptible. 

The salutation to Bharata Misra in the anonymous Sphojasiddhinyé- 
Javicdra and adoption there of many of Bharata Miéra’s arguments and 


232 ENQYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


methodological features (like the three sections) would indicate his 
position among the writers on sphofa. 

The work is divided into three sections: perception, pp. 1-16; mean- 
ing, pp. 16-27; and Vedic authority, pp. 27-42 in the edition by K. 
Sambasiva Sastri (Trivandrum Sanskrit Series 89, Trivandrum, 1927). 
It is a prose work, but when each argument is over, it is summarized in 
a stanza (there are ten in all). E references are to Sastri’s edition. The 
summary here is by G. B. Palsule. 


Survey of Philosophical Topics 


1. Perception 

(Z1-9). An expression like “cow” (gauh), when heard, is directly 
perceived to be a single word-entity (padatativa). But this cognition of 
unity is sought to be explained with four alternative possibilities 
(anyathasiddhi) by the opponents so as to do away with the concept of a 
single word-entity. These possibilities are that the feeling of unity is due 
(1) to the phonemes appearing in a single cognition, (2) to their 
conveying a single meaning, (3) to the quickness of pronunciation, or 
(4) to a single power of the phonemes. They are contradicted as follows. 
(1) There being no sequence in a single cognition, there will be nothing 
to distinguish between the meanings of pika “a cuckoo” and kapi “a 
monkey,” which contain the same phonemes but in different sequences. 
(2) No meaning can be conveyed before a word is first grasped, because 
the word is the cause and the meaning its result. (3) Even in the case of 
long words like ¢itau, there is a single perception. (4) Apart from other 
objections to this suggestion, the objection contained in (1) remains, 
that the phonemes cannot appear in a single cognition. 

(£9-11). Bharata Miéra confirms this unitary word-entity in the 
context of the sentence “‘gosabdad artham pratipadyamahe” (‘we 
understand the meaning from the word “‘cow’’). The opponent’s argu- 
ments, seeking to explain the unity of the word “‘cow”’ (go) on grounds 
other than the positing of sphoja, are refuted practically on the same 
lines as in Mandana’s Sphofasiddhi. 

Bharata Miéra further points out that the statement concerned is not 
just figurative, nor erroneous, and that by the word go the final sound 
alone is not meant. 

(£11-14). The perception of parts in a word is explained. According 
to the theory of sphofa as universal, the division into parts belongs to 
the individuals; according to the theory of sphofa as individual, the 
division into parts belongs to the manifesters (vyafijaka) that are super- 
imposed on the word. The universal theory takes the division into 


BHARATA MISRA 233 


phonemes to be real; the individual theory, by contrast, takes it to be 
erroneously imposed. 

A parallel given for the unitariness of a word (and a sentence) despite 
apparent differentiation is that of the special vowel ai, technically called 
vrddhatdlavya, believed to be unitary by the opponent (Mimdmsaka) 
himself (cf. Mimdmsdasitras 9.2.32-33). If he questions the unitariness 
of a word, he cannot logically hold the unitariness of this vowel. 


2. Meaning 

(£16-21). In this section, which is meant to support the proof of 
direct perception in favor of the sphofa by showing that otherwise the 
understanding of meaning cannot be accounted for (anyathdnupapattt), 
Bharata Misra makes the following points. 

(1) Phonemes in no way have the meaning-conveying capacity. 
(The arguments are much the same as in Mandana’s Sphotasiddhi.) 

(2) The case is similar for the dispositions. (Incidentally, Bharata 
Misra defines power [fakti, a disposition is a power] as “extrasensory 
form restricted to bringing about a specific effect of an object” 

[“karyavisayaniyatam antindriyam ripam”’]. 

(3) The first phoneme is without the benefit of a preceding dispo- 
sitional trace. So the progressive imparting of excellence to phoneme 
cognitions is impossible, and, consequently, the dispositional trace 
cannot have the ad hoc power of conveying meaning. 

(4) There is no compelling reason to assume a trace of the type of 
apiroa. 

(5) The singleness of the speaker cannot be a cause of conveying the 
meaning. 

(6) An important statement: according to the Grammarians it is the 
sounds, and not phonemes, that manifest the sphota. The sounds in the 
word orsa are different from the first four in the word vrsabha. 

(#22). The indistinctness (avyaktatad) of the sphota is not of the nature 
of cognition-cum-noncognition (upalabdhatdnupalabdhatatmikd) but of 
that of relative distinctness (¢dratamyena) . 

(£23). The initial cognitions of phonemes constitute an anyathdkhyati 
of the sphoja. (Mandana had used the word viparydsa.) (1) The sounds 
bringing about the error (of part perception) are different from, but 
similar to, the sounds that bring about the correct cognition of the 
word. (Mandana, karikd 2, simply says that the same sounds are res- 
ponsible for both of these results.) 

(£23-24). (2) Bharata Misra shows how the sounds cause the 
erroneous cognition of parts in a sentence. 

(£24-25). (3) The threefold uniformity of error is justified. (These 
three kinds of niyataté are already in Mandana.) 

(#25).(4) The rsis perceive the partless sphoja directly (cf. Mandana, 


234 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


p- 33). Only direct perception is capable of progressive clarity (see 
Mandana, section 23). 

(#25~-26). This section states an important point. There is no con- 
flict in the three theories about the sphofa, as universal (jéfi), as an 
individual (vyakti), and as inner mental word (Sabdatattva). They are 
meant for different levels of students. 


3. Vedic Authority 

(£27-36). This section purports to establish the sphofa (actually the 
words used, are varndtirtktam vakiattvam, “superphonemic speech-princi- 
ple’’) on the basis of scripture, by showing that this doctrine is tacitly 
admitted in certain Vedic texts. 

(1) The first line of the celebrated Vedic stanza “uta tvah pafgyan”’ 
(Rg Veda 10.71.4) is interpreted to mean that the common man, seeing 
with his eyes the physical world, does not recognize it as an effect 
(manifestation) of the language principle. Similarly, the second line is 
interpreted to mean that, being deluded by the physical speech sounds, 
he does not grasp the language principle that controls them. 

(2) Bharata Miéra also quotes some passages from the Brahmanas 
like “‘saitam mantram apasgyat”’ (Aitareya Brahmana 5.23) in which, he 
maintains, the clairvoyant perception of a mantra or other passage is 
possible only if a superphonemic word principle is accepted. 

(3) It is also claimed that in the celebrated Mrukia passage (1.20) 
beginning “‘saksatkrtadharmana...’”’ the direct perception of dharma is 
meant to indicate that direct perception of word has preceded the per- 
ception of phonemes. 

(436-40). The reality at the basis of the whole word is sphota, which 
can also be perceived directly. In a lengthy argument Bharata Miéra 
tries to show that the ultimate reality is existence, with its indescribable 
power and form, which descends to the level of the phenomenal world 
(“advitiya sattaivanirvacyasvasaktiripavargadvayavati vyavaharapa- 
tham avatarati’’). 

Two additional noteworthy points are made. First, like Mandana, 
Bharata Misra uses expressions such as “word above and beyond the 
phonemes” (varndtiriktam padam) or “speech principle” (vdk tattvam) or 
“Janguage principle’’ (Sabdatattvam) along with sphota. Second, Bharata 
Misra mentions (Zl) Audumbarayana as the advocate of the sphofa 
theory and Upavarsa as its opponent, but adds that there is no real 
difference of opinion between the two, because Uapavarsa’s purpose is 
only practical (#28). 


27 


SPHOTASIDDHINYAYAVICARA 
G. B. Palsule 


This anonymous work is a good epitome of the usual arguments for and 
against the sphota, but otherwise there is little originality in it. It is 
considerably influenced by the Sphofasiddhi of Bharata Miéra (to whom, 
along with others, an obeisance is made in the initial stanza) ; indeed, 
in a limited sense, the present work could be called a metrical recast of 
Bharata’s work. 

One may in passing note that the author practically identifies, 
without expressly saying so, the individual sphota (vyaktisphota) with the 
language principle (fabdatattva), Another interesting item is the scathing 
criticism of the notion of sequence (krama). 

The edition (Z) is by T. Ganapati Sastri (Trivandrum Sanskrit 
Series 54, Trivandrum, n.d.). References are by stanza. 

1 (£1). Apart from the three Munis and Hari, the author mentions 
Bharata (and, of course, Mandana) in the initial stanza. 

2 (£2). The object of the work is to establish the superphonemic 
language principle (varnebhyo uyatirekena Sabdatativam) on the strength of 
direct perception, presumption (arthdpatti, the difficulty of explaining 
otherwise how we understand meaning), and scripture (dgama). 

3 (#3-10). The distinct cognition of the word asa single entity apart 
from the phonemes is explained. 

4 (#11-16). (a) This section elaborates the usual difficulties in the 
way of attributing meaningfulness to phonemes. 

(£17-116). (b) Various suggestions are put forth by the opponent 
to show meaningfulness of phonemes and are refuted by the author: 
(1) excellence (vifesa) imparted by phonemes to one another (17-29); 
(2) assigning a special power of conveying meaning, in the form of 
dispositions, to phonemes (30-49); (3) direct perception of the final 
phoneme combined with the memory of the preceding phonemes 
(49-53); (4) a simultaneous whole of the phonemes reflected in 


236 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the final memory (53-116). The arguments for rejecting these 
suggestions are the same as those in the Sphofasiddhis of Mandana and 
Bharata. Stanzas 84-115 contain a long-drawn-out argument chal- 
lenging the concept of sequence and its usefulness in assigning meaning- 
fulness to the phonemes. So the author concludes that if sphota be not 
accepted, we cannot account for the difference of meaning in words 
like sarah and rasah. 

5 (£117-121). The popular saying ‘“‘We understand meaning from 
word” (sabdad artham vijanimah) is explicable only by the sphofa theory, 
not by the phoneme theory. 

6 (#121-131). Objections: There is no perception of any entity diffe- 
rent from phonemes (as that of the thumb from other fingers); also, 
if such an entity existed, what would be its relation to the phonemes? 

(#131~174). Answer: By the relationship of the manifester and the 
manifested, the sounds manifest either the words (as individuals mani- 
fest a universal)—sphofa as universal (136-144)—or a single word- 
principle, with illusion of parts (word, phoneme, sentence )—sphota as 
individual (vyaktisphota) (145-174). There are two kinds of sound, 
prakyta and vatkyta, and their functions are described (151-155). Sounds 
have a deceptive nature and hence produce an illusion (156-164). The 
final cognition of unity sublates the initial cognitions of plurality 
(165-174). 

7 (£175-202). Sphota manifests itself gradually. 

8 (£203-205 ). Indistinct cognition is possible only in sense percep- 
tion (which grasps sphofa), not in the understanding of meaning from 
word. 

9 (£206-209). The three theories about sphota (as universal, as indi- 
vidual, as inner mental word) are reconciled. 

10 (£210-242). Sphota is established as the authority of scripture (on 
the same lines as in Bharata’s Sphotasiddhi). 
11 (£243-245 ). Conclusion. 


28 


ANNAMBHATTA 


This author, who flourished about 1560, is well known to students of 
Nyaya as the author of the most commonly studied introduction to the 
Nyaya system, the Tarkasamgraha, as well as of a commentary, Dipika, 
thereon. A native of the Telugu-speaking country, he identifies his 
father as “Tirumala Acarya” of the family of Advaitavidyacarya 
Raghava Somayaji.! P.P.S. Sastri says the family of Raghava Somayaji 
resided in Garikapada, which was formerly in the possession of Nizam 
Ali.? 

In addition to the Tarkasamgraha and several Nyaya commentaries, 
Annambhatta wrote a Mitaksara on the Brahmasiitras, an Advaita com- 
mentary on Nrsimhagrama’s Tattoaviveka, and Pirvamimamsa com- 
mentaries on Kuméarila’s Tantravaérttika and Someévara Bhatta’s Nydva- 
sudhd, His works on grammar were a Mitdksara on Panini’s Astadhyayi, 
and an Uddyotana on Kaiyata’s Mahébhasyapradipa, which has been 
edited several] times 

Annambhatta studied grammar with Sesa Viresvara (see above, 
author 22), the son of Sesa Krsna, while in Kagi. In his Uddyotana 
commentary on Kaiyata’s Pradipa, Annambhatta says, ‘“There is no 
reason to believe that only Sanskrit was created by God at the time of 
creation. When the Yavanas, and so on, were created their language 
was also created. We do not have any evidence to show that the Yavanas 
also first used Sanskrit and only later shifted to their own language.” 


29 


APPAYYA DIKSITAI 


The first and most famous of a number of members of the Bharadvaja 
lineage that bear this name, this writer is responsible for a large number 
of treatises that range over topics in Vedanta, Mimamsa, Dharma, and 
Alamkara §stras, as well as a handful of grammatical works. He was the 
son of Rangarajadhvarindra, a southern Brahmin, a grandson of Acarya 
Diksita, and an elder brother of Accan Diksita, who in turn was the 
father of Nilakantha Diksita, a famous kaévya author of more than one 
hundred works. 

A good deal is known about Appayya’s life and times. Y. Mahalinga 
Sastri gives Appayya’s dates as 1520-1593. That he died in his seventy- 
second year is declared by Nilakantha Diksita. He is known to have had 
several royal patrons, of whom the first was Chinna Timma of the 
Vijayanagara empire, who ruled until around 1550, and whom Appayya 
himself credits with having commissioned Appayya’s commentary 
on Vedanta Desika’s Yadavabhyudaya. A second patron, Chinna Bomma, 
ruled at Vellore from 1549 to 1578, and Appayya mentions him more 
than once. Finally, Venkatapati of Pennugonda, whose rule began in 
1585, ismentioned in Appayya Diksita’s Vidhirasdyana and Kuvalayananda. 
There is an inscription at Adayapalam dated 1582 that refers to 
him as an author of a hundred works, as well as having been bathed in 
gold by Chinna Bomma. He is associated most closely with the town of 
Chidambara, where he is held to have passed away. 

Appayya Diksita engaged in controversies with other Vedantins, 
through whose relative chronology Appayya’s date can be further 
confirmed. Notable among them is Sri Tatacarya (1508-1583), author 
of Paficamatabhafijana, a critique of Appayya, who was influential at the 
Vijayanagara court in the middle of the sixteenth century between 
1545 and 1585, during which time Appayya had apparently nothing to 
do with the Vijayanagara court. Mahacarya, another famous Visista- 
dvaitin, wrote Chandamaruta in response to Appayya’s polemics. Another 


240 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


important personality of the same period was Vijayindra Bhiksu, the 
Dvaitin, who died in 1595 and is said to have written 104 works to rival 
the same number of Appayya’s. Still another Dvaitin who responded to 
Appayya’s arguments was Vadiraja, head of one of the Udipi maths 
(ashrams), who lived in this same period. 

One of Appayya Diksita’s important pupils was Bhattoji Diksita, the 
author of Siddhantakaumudi, who came from the north to study Vedanta 
and Mimamsa and wrote Sabdakaustubha as a commemoration of his 
discipleship under Appayya. A story is told that Bhattoji found 
Appayya living unostentatiously in a village, belying widespread fame 
and royal patronage. 

After Vacaspati Misra I in the tenth century, Appayya Diksita is the 
most outstanding instance of a writer who transcended the scholastic 
boundaries to write treatises that were and still are revered and read by 
followers of a variety of systems and indeed of a variety of Sastras. His 
works on Viésistadvaita and Dvaita, as well as, of course, on Advaita and 
Mimamsa, are studied by proponents of those systems. He is the author 
of poetry, learned treatises on Alamkérasasira, literary criticism, and 
word derivations, as well as popular works on prayer and didactic 
works counseling how to live a fruitful life. 

His works on Grammar are not in print. He wrote a commentary on 
Panini, a manuscript of which lies in the Adyar Library, according to 
the New Catalogus Catalogorum. Other grammatical treatises ascribed to 
him include the Tisiantasesasamgraha and Kaumudiprakdsa. 


30 


BHATTOJI DIKSITA 


This famous Grammarian flourished toward the end of the sixteenth 
century. He was a Brahmin of Maharashtra or Telugu country (un- 
certain), a member of an important family that comprises several other 
famous names among Grammar specialists. His father was Laksmi- 
dhara; his brother Rangoji Bhatta, author of several Advaita works, 
who was himself the father of Kaunda Bhatta (see below, author 
37). Bhattoji’s own sons were Bhanuji Diksita and Vireévara, the father 
of Hari Diksita (see below author 43). His teachers are also well 
known: they included the Mimamsaka Samkara Bhatta, the polymath 
Appayya Diksita (see above, author 29), and Sesa Krsna (see above, 
author 19}. Yudhisthira Mimamsaka dates him from 1513 to 1593. 
He is held to have made his home in Varanasi, where he founded a 
school of Grammarians. He was roundly attacked by Jagannatha 
Panditaraja, a controversial figure. 


Sabdakaustubha 


E references in the following summary refer to the edition published 
by the Asiatic Society of Bengal, no date given. 


(Z1-5). The correctness of a word depends on the meaning also; 
asva, instead of afva, in the sense of a horse, is incorrect, but the term is 
correct if the intended meaning is “poor.” 

(£6-7). Division into stem and suffix in the study of words is only 
a means, it has no reality. Alternative division is also possible. Although 
grammar gives Jat and the like as indicators of the tense, actually it is 
the form # and so on that are used (in, for example, pacatz) to convey 
the meaning, for meaning is known through the usage of elders, and 
they use only the full words, never artificial symbols such as laf, 


242 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Although grammar gives the meaning of the artificial suffixes such as lat 
and then prescribes the actual form, such as #, as substitutes for them, 
it is the substitutes that actually bear the meaning, for they are the 
forms used in the world. 

(£8-11). Strictly speaking, meaningfulness is based on sphota alone. 
There are several views: varnasphota; padasphota; vakyasphota; akhanda- 
padasphota; and akhandavakyasphota are individual sphofas; there are 
three sphota universals, varnasphota and vdékyasphota. (The arguments 
are the same as in the Sphotavdda of Nagesa.) Bhattoji says that all of 
the views have been suggested in Mahdbhdsya passages here and there; 
and also in Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya. The experience as one word or 
one sentence is the basis for assuming padasphota and vakyasphofa. The 
phonemes (varnas) suggest the sphota, which is the meaning bearer. 
Because the primary source for understanding the language is the elders’ 
statements, which are in the form of sentences, the sentence has to be 
taken as the primary unit of meaning, 

(#12), The question of whether indeclinables are denotative or 
suggestive of meaning is valid only at the analytical level. 


31 


SESA VISNU 


A great-grandson of Sesa Narayana, Sesa Visnu composed a 
Prakasikéd on Patafijali’s Mahabhdsya, a manuscript of which is held at 
a library in Bikaner. He must have flourished about 1605. 


32 


SIVARAMENDRA SARASVATI 


This author’s Mahabhdsyaratnaprakafa is published. Theodor Aufrecht 


cites him as having written a ftikd called Ratndkara on the Siddhanta- 
kaumudi. There is also a reference to a commentary on Panini.t 


33 


(SESA) CAKRAPANI (DATTA) 


Cakrapani was the grandson of Sesa Krsna, the younger son and 
pupil of VireSvara, and the younger brother of Sesa Purusottama, as 
well as the father of Sesa Gopinatha. This important scion of the great 
Sesa family of Varanasi wrote a critique of Bhattoji Diksita’s Praudha- 
manorama, aptly named Khandana. It is apparently the same work that 
is called Paramatakhandana, though Yudhisthira Mimamsaka believes 
then to be distinct works.! He is also credited with a Kdarakatativa or 
Karakavicara.? 


34 


MALLAYA YAJVAN 


The author of a Tippani on Kaiyata’s Mahébhdasyapradipa, Mallaya 
was the father of Tirumala Yajvan (see below, author 40), the 
author of Darsapaurnamasamanirabhaésya. Yudhisthira Mimamsaka specu- 
lates that Tirumala was the father of Annambhatta, which would, of 
course, place Mallaya in the fifteenth century. There is no evidence to 
support this view, however, and it seems more likely that this author 
belongs to the seventeenth century, say, about 1630. 


35 


NILAKANTHA SUKLA 


This Nilakantha flourished between 1610 and 1670. A pupil of 
Bhattoji Diksita, he wrote in 1637 a grammatical work titled Sabdasobha, 
as well as various works on rhetoric.! 


36 


NARAYANA (SASTRIN) 


In his Vyakhyé on Kajiyata’s Mahdbhasyapradipa, Narayana Sastrin 
pays his respect to his guru, the famous Dharmarajadhvarindra, author 
of Vedantaparibhasé and other works. He is the father of Ramakrsna 
Yavjan. His date must be about 1640. 


37 


KONDA (or KAUNDA) BHATTA 


The famous author of the Vaiyaékaranabhiisana was the son of Rangoji 
Bhatta, the author of several Advaita manuals! and the nephew of 
Bhattoji Diksita (see above, author 30). Thus he must have 
flourished about 1650. He was a resident of Varanasi. 


Vaiyakaranabhiisana AND Vaiyakaranabhisanasira 
S.D. Foshi 


The Vaiyakaranabhisana is a commentary on the verses of his uncle 
Bhattoji Diksita, which are known as Vaiydkaranamatonmajjana.? On this 
commentary, which defends Grammarian views and refutes the theories 
of meaning found in Nyaya and Mimamsa, Konda Bhatta also com- 
posed an abridgment known as Vatydkaranabhisanasdra. He is also credit- 
ed with a Vaiydkaran. siddhantadipika. In the New Catalogus Catalogorum, 
volume 5, p. 92, he is also cited as having written works in the Bhatta 
tradition (Bhadttamatapradipika), as well as in Nyaya (Padarthadipika, 
Tarkapradipa, Tarkaratna) 8 

The Vaiydkaranabhisana has been edited many times. Most of these 
editions also contain the text of the sdéra. B references to the Bhiisana 
edition are to the Bombay Sanskrit and Prakrit Series edition of 1915, 
while S references are to the edition of the -séra in the same volume. 
“Verse” indicates Bhattoji’s verses. 


Section 1 

(B2) verse 2. A verbal root denotes a result (phala) and an operation 
(wapara). The personal endings of finite verbs denote either the agent 
of activity or the object in which the result appears. That is to say, in 
the active the personal endings denote the agent (karir), and in the 
passive, the object (Karman). The operation is syntactically predomi- 


256 ENQYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nant with respect to the result. The meanings “agent”? and “object” 
are qualifiers of the operation and the result denoted by the verbal root, 
respectively. 

The relation between the operation and the result is that of an 
accomplisher and the accomplished, for the activity produces the result, 

(B3). The word “result” (hala) means a single effect of an action 
(kriya@), produced by various operations conveyed by the root. For 
example, the root pac denotes any of the operations that go to make 
up the action of cooking, such as setting fire under the pot, fanning the 
fire, putting rice in the pot, and so on. Here, we see that all activities 
result in a single effect. 

An action is a specific sort of activity, another name for which is 
productive operation (bhkdvand, ‘‘bringing into being’), which is also 
called sddhya, “‘to be effected.” 

(B34). It is by these terms—sddhya, “‘to be effected,” and siddha, 
‘‘effected,’—that verbs are distinguished from nouns. Pacati, “‘he 
cooks,” gives us the notion that the action of cooking is in progress, 
while paka refers to an effected, completed action. The distinction 
between pacati, “he cooks,” and pakah, “cooking,” is that the first 
expression is complete in itself while the second is in expectation of 
some other action. 

(B45). The root pac denotes in general any operation that leads to 
the result, namely, the softening of the food. In different instances the 
root pac refers to specific operations such as blowing, setting the fire 
under the pot, fanning it, putting the rice in the pot, and so on. These 
specific operations are limited by various properties such as “‘operation 
limited by blowing” (phithdratudvacchinna-yapara) and “operation 
limited by setting the fire below (the pot)” (samtépanatvavacchinna- 
vyapara). In one instance, the root pac means blowing on the fire, while 
in another instance, it denotes the activity of setting the fire, because 
that is what is intended in these particular instances by the speaker. 
The singleness of denotation is determined by the speaker’s intention. 

(S271). When one uses the pronoun tad, “‘it,”” one may be referring 
to anything in the world. But this fact does not mean that tad has an 
infinite number of denotations. It has only one denotation, which may 
be limited by the speaker’s intention. 

(B35). In a majority of the cases pacati refers to the action of the main 
agent. But in kastham pacati, “the sticks of the firewood cook,” pacati 
refers to the action of the firewood. In sthali pacati, ‘‘the pot cooks” 
(that is, contains a particular quantity), it refers to the action of 
containing or holding. In this way pacati may refer to the action of 
other kérakas also. 

The Mimamsakas propose that the personal endings denote only the 
productive operation. But because an operation is inconceivable with- 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 257 


out an operator, we may say that agent is implied. Finally, the 
Mimamsakas suggest that the notion of the agent can be furnished in 
the sentence not by the verb at all but by the word in the nominative 
case. 

(B6). To this objection the Grammarians reply as follows: Panini 
3-4-69 prescribes /-suffixes (finite verb endings) to denote the sense of 
object and agent. 

Mimamsaka’s objection: Panini’s rule 3.4.69 means that /-suffixes denote 
kartrtva (agentness, volition, or productive operation) and karmatva 
(objectness, result). The number denoted by the personal endings is to 
be construed with the implied notion of the agent and the object. 

Answer; The Mimamsakas maintain that the primary suffixes (kyt) 
such, as -dna, -at (the present and future participle endings), which are 
also substitutes of -/, denote the sense of agent, while the personal end- 
ings in pacati, pacatak, and so on which are also substitutes of -/, denote 
the sense of kartyiva (volition) and karmatva (result). This claim involves 
contradiction. The personal endings must denote the sense agent (or 
object) because we see syntactic agreement between the noun 
“Devadatta” and the verb “cooks” in devadatiah pacati. Unless the 
meaning ‘“‘agent’”? (or object) is denoted by the personal endings in 
verbs like pacati, no syntactic agreement (coreferentiality) would be 
possible between the nouns and verbs. 

(B6-7). Moreover, the meaning “number” denoted by the personal 
endings cannot be connected with the implied meanings “‘agent’’ or 
“object,”’ because the rule, according to the Mimamsakas, is that two 
meanings (“number” and “productive operation”) denoted by the 
same word unit must be connected with each other. But it would be 
wrong to connect “number” with “productive operation.” Therefore, 
we must admit that the meaning “number” denoted by a personal 
ending should be connected with ‘“‘agent” or “object”. Consequently, 
“agent”’ or “‘object’”? must also be the denoted meanings of the personal 
endings. 

(B21-22). The personal endings denote agent or (grammatical) 
object, number, and time. Of them the agent is the qualifier of the 
activity and the (grammatical) object is the qualifier of the result. 
Number is a qualifier of the agent if the personal endings of the active 
voice are used, and it is a qualifier of the (grammatical) object if the 
passive endings are used. Time is a qualifier of an operation (action). 
If a time is construed with the agent or object then the idea of past, 
present, and future will depend on the state of the agent or object. As 
long as the agent or object exists, the usage will be “the cooks” or “‘it 
has been cooked”? even if the action of cooking has ceased or not yet 
begun. 

The semantic analysis of “caitrah tandulam pacati” (‘“Caitra cooks 


258 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


rice”’) is as follows: an operation (action) of the present time, of which 
the agent is limited by singularity and is identical with (Caitra), which 
operation is favorable to (a result, namely) softening, residing in (an 
object) rice grains limited by singularity (generic singular). And the 
analysis of “tandulah pacyate caitrena” (“‘rice is cooked by Caitra”’) is 
essentially the same: an operation of the present time favorable to (a 
result, namely) softening residing in (an object) which is identical with 
rice grain limited by singularity (generic singular), of which (opera- 
tion) the agent is limited by singularity and is identical with Caitra. 

(B23). Although elsewhere it is accepted that of the meanings 
denoted by a base form and a suffix the meaning denoted by a suffix is 
syntactically predominant, it is accepted here that meanings denoted 
by a verbal base are syntactically predominant over the meanings 
“agent” and “object”? denoted by the personal endings. This claim is 
made on the authority of the Nirukia, which states that a root presents 
the meaning “‘substance’”’ as predominant. 

(B24) verse 9. The finite endings of the passive voice, the passive 
vikarana suffix ya and the like, reveal the sense of object, and the present 
stem formants reveal the sense of agent. 

(B25). In the case of the reflexive passive (karmakartari), “pacyate 
odanah svayam eve” (“the rice boils itself’), the personal endings 
designate an object as an agent. Therefore, the personal endings have 
an active sense in the reflexive passive. An operation (vydpdra) is a 
producing (bhdvand), which is the same as bringing into being 
(utpddana) and as an action (kriyé). Roots cannot denote action only, 
without any result, because in that case there would be no difference in 
denotation of the roots kr and yat. Both denote the action of exertion 
only. Consequently the root ky, like the root yat, would be intransitive. 

(824-27). Naiyayikas argue that effort (volition) is the denotation of 
personal endings on the basis of the fact that pacati, “‘cooks’’, is explained 
as pakam karoti, ““he makes a cooking”’; karoti, according to Nyaya, can 
be applied only to sentient agent. When the root krfi is used with refer- 
ence to a nonsentient thing, it is used metaphorically, for instance, 
ratho gacchati, “‘the chariot moves.” According to Nyaya, the agent is 
not sumply a substratum of activity, as the grammarians would have it. 
If we accept the Grammarians’ view then every kdraka can be an agent. 
Nyaya distinguishes (the sentient) agent from the other kdrakas by its 
independence. The Naiyayikas say that the meanings of the personal 
endings fall within the area of exertion (krtitva, a universal property). 

According to Grammarians the personal endings denote agent and 
object. The limiting property of these meanings will be kartrtva (agent- 
ness) and karmatva (objectness). The kartriva or karmatva are properties 
that are present in all agents and objects and present in no other entity. 
These properties are nothing more than the actions and results residing 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 259 


in agents and objects, respectively; and there will be many different 
actions and results, depending on differences in agents and objects. 
This situation involves complexity; but such complexity is no defect 
if it accords with the fact. 

(B28-29). The result should be included in the denotation of the 
root. [fit is not included in the root meaning, then the roots gam (to go) 
and fyaj (to leave) should be synonymous. The distinction between 
gam and tyaj lies only in their denoted result. Gam means an activity in 
the form of motion favorable to conjunction with a consequent point, 
while tyaj means an activity in the form of motion favorable to disjunc- 
tion from a preceding point. The denoted activity in the form of 
motion is the same in both instances. 

The ancient Naiyayikas, who denied to verbal roots the denotation 
of result, said that the general idea of result is indicated by the accus- 
ative case ending, which contains the meaning of the roots gam and tyaj. 
One can say that the meaning of gam, when it is juxtaposition with an 
accusative, implies a result different from the result implied by tyay, 
when it is connected with an accusative case ending. The Grammarians’ 
point is that without an accusative also, gacchatt and tyajati indicate 
difference in meaning, therefore result should be included in the 
denotation of root. 

(B31-32) verse 6. According to Grammarians, a root is transitive 
when the operation and result denoted by it have different loci. Thus, 
in pacati, “She cooks,” the operation resides in the cook, the result in 
rice, But such definitions are impossible unless the root denotes both 
operation and result. 

According to Naiyayikas, the result is not part of the denoted meaning 
of the root. But the general idea of result is denoted by the accusative 
case endings. Thus a verb is transitive when it denotes activity condi- 
tioned by result; the root’s denotation includes result in the broadest 
sense, In its specific form it is understood from an accusative. 

Therefore, the roots kri and the like denote effect (and so on) 
connected with a result in the form of coming into being, and not an 
operation or result alone. So the reflexive passive construction 
(karmavadbhava), as in “‘kriyate odanah svayam eva” (“the rice comes 
into being itself’’), is allowed. This construction is permitted only with 
roots of which the denoted results are visible in their objects. If we deny 
to the root krfi the denotation of result, it will be impossible to use it in 
such a reflexive construction. 

(B32-33) verse 7. The reflexive passive construction is permitted 
when the object is producible or modifiable by the action of agent but 
not when the object is simply attainable. 

The grammatical object is of three sorts: producible, modifiable, and 
attainable. An example of the first one is ghafam karoti, “he makes a 


260 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


jar’; of the second one, somam sunoti, “‘he extracts the soma juice’; of 
the third one, riipam pasyati, “he sees color.’ Attainability of an object 
means nonapprehensibility of a change brought about in the object by 
the action of the agent. By looking at an object (a village or pot) one 
cannot apprehend that this pot is cognized by someone or that this 
village has been visited by some. In the case of attainable objects the 
reflexive passive construction is not permitted. 

(B42) verse 8. Therefore, the root kr explains the sense of the root 
(for example, pac) and not of the personal endings. The phrase 
pakvavan, ‘the has cooked,” is explained as pakam krtavan, “he has done 
the cooking,” and the phrase kim krtam, “‘what has been done?” is 
answered by pakvam, “‘it has been cooked.” 

(B45). The Mimamsakas and the Grammarians agree that pacati 
may be explained as pakam karoti. The Mimamsakas claim, however, 
that the word pakam in the explanation denoting result explains the 
meaning of the root pac, while the word karoti, denoting activity, 
explains the meaning of the personal ending. The Grammarians oppose 
this claim by showing that the root kr is also used in explaining other 
forms that contain no personal endings. Pakvavdn is explained as pakam 
krtavan. The Grammarians’ assignment of meanings “result” and 
“activity’’ to a verbal root is based on the following analysis: 


FORMS MEANING 

(1) pacatai (pac-+-personal ending) result, activity, agent 
(2) pakvavan (pac--tavat) result, activity, agent 
(3) pakvam (pac-+-vam) result, activity, object 


One morpheme and two meanings are common in these examples. 
Here the root morpheme denotes two meanings, “result” and 
“activity.” 

($308). If the root denotes the result alone, then we should have the 
notion that the village is possessed of going (gramo gamanavan) because 
the village is the substratum of the result of conjunction (reaching). 
Likewise, when the result (namely), the softening of the rice, has not 
yet occurred even though the activity (favorable to softening) is in 
progress, we could not say pdko bhavati, ‘‘cooking comes into being.” 
When, by contrast, the operation (favorable to softening) has ceased 
and the result is present, we would say pdko vidyate, ‘‘the cooking 
continues.” 

(B45). The denotation of the agent by the primary endings is 
necessary in order to establish the connection of the agent with number. 
Furthermore, in words like pakvavan, the denotation of action is just 
necessary in order to establish the connection (of the action) with the 
notion of karaka. The meaning ‘“‘number”’ can be construed only with 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 261 


the meaning “agent.” The meaning “‘time’’ can be construed only with 
the meaning “operation.” 

If the Mimamsakas claim that the root ky explains the sense of action 
denoted by the personal endings because kim karoti, “what does he do?” 
is answered by pacati, “‘he cooks’’ (pakam karoti), then they will have to 
accept also that the root ky explains the sense of nouns derived from the 
primary (Ayt) suffix. For instance, kim kadryam, ‘‘what is to be done?” is 
answered by pakvavan, ‘‘cooking should be done.” But the Mimamsakas 
say that the root morpheme denotes the result, the personal ending 
denotes the productive operation, and the primary suffixes denote the 
agent and object and imply productive operation. Thus the 
Mimamsakas’ analysis violates the principle that the common meaning 
should correspond to the common element. 

(B45). verse 9. Furthermore, there can be no such thing as a root 
without denotation of activity. That verbal roots denote actions 
(kriya) has been accepted by Panini, Katyayana, and Patafijali. 

In the word kdéryam, the primary suffix is used in the sense of karman 
(in the passive sense). In jyotistomayaji, “who has sacrificed with 
jotistoma sacrifice,” the primary suffix in denotes the sense of agent. 
The meaning of these suffixes must be connected with action, which 
proves that the operation must be denoted by the root. It is impossible 
to call something a kéraka if it is not related to the notion of action. It 
is, accordingly, impossible to use a suffix denoting a kdraka in the 
absence of a connection with the notion of action. 

(B50-51). Objection: If verbal roots are supposed to denote action 
then the roots as (to be) and the like, which are not denotative of 
action, would not be termed roots, for when we say asti, ‘‘he is,’’ the 
meaning ‘‘action”’ is not cognized. 

Answer: Roots such as as also denote action. In the case of intransitive 
roots, because agent and object of action are the same, the action is not 
subservient to any other entity than the agent. Therefore, the distinc- 
tion between the actor and the one acted on is lost. Consequently, the 
notion of action in the case of as is not immediately apparent. Further, 
we do cognize an action favorable to the result ‘“‘existence’’ from as 
(to be) and similar roots. Suppose a man is on the verge of death and 
with reference to him someone asks “‘what is he doing?” the answer 
“he is,” in other words, “the exists” is approved as meaningful by 
everyone. Here the answer refers to a particular activity (existing with 
great effort) on the part of the agent. 

(850-51) verse 12. And further, if actions were not denoted by roots 
like as, actions would not be specified as past, present, and future, 
which, they are. 

(B56) verse 13. When the operation and the result reside in the same 


962 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


substratum a root is intransitive; and when they reside in different 
substrata the root is called transitive. 

(B57). In “atma atmanam janati’”’ (“‘the self knows the self”), the 
self limited by the adjunct body is the object, and it is the substratum 
of the result, knowledge, while the self limited by the adjunct mind is 
the agent, and it is the substratum of activity. Thus the activity and the 
result have different substrata. 

(B59) verse 14. In the verb the root morpheme denotes sddhya 
(action), namely, action in progress or durative, and the finite verb 
ending denotes the sédkana (operator), which is capable of bringing the 
action into being. In a word like pdka, which endsin the primary suffix 
ghafi(a), the root morpheme denotes action in the process and the pri- 
mary suffix denotes siddha (accomplished) action that has the charac- 
teristics of an operator (sddhana). An accomplished action behaves like 
a substance and is thus always capable of being used as an instrument 
of action in progress. Bhiésana explains this sense quite differently. 

(B60) verse 15. In a noun ending in a suffix such as ghafi(a), a root 
portion denotes action in progress, while its frozen (accomplished) 
aspect is associated with suffix ghafi(a). 

For this reason we have a distinction between the constructions 
stokah pakak, “a small amount of cooking’’, and stokam pakah, “cooking 
to a small extent.”’ In the first case stoka is syntactically connected with 
the primary suffix ghafi(a), which denotes activity frozen (substanti- 
vated), and in the second case stoka is syntactically connected with the 
root pac, which denotes the action in process. Durative activity is void 
of gender and number (asattvabhiiia). 

(B64-68) verses 16-17. A word ending in the vocative case suffixes 
having the sense of kyivas (counting of recurrences), the kdrakas (instru- 
mental in bringing about the action ), the first suffix vat (Panini 5.1.115: 
prescribed in the sense of what is similar is an activity), the suffixes, 
infinitives, and so on, prescribed under the governing section (Panini 
3.4.1), verbal particle of negation (that is, other than nominally bound 
negative), the locative absolute (Panini 2.3.37) form proper construc- 
tion only with durative action. 

(B69). In stokam pakah the ending am is a formal constructional 
appendage because a substantive cannot be used without a case ending. 
Substantivated activity does possess, however, number and gender. 
Therefore, when sioka is construed with the suffix ghafi it takes masculine 
gender and whatever number is appropriate. 

(B69) verse 19. Just as the inseparable action (denoted by the root 
gam) in the word gaia, “has gone,” is constructed with the object grdma 
in the phrase grémam gatah, so the activity (denoted by the root Ar) in 
the phrase kriapiirvi katam, “one who has made a mat before”’ is connec- 
ted with the object kafam. 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 263 


Even when the activity denoted by a root is subordinate to the agent 
or object denoted by a suffix, a sdraka denoted by a separate word with 
oblique case ending is still construed with the action and not with the 
denotatum of suffix. This fact holds true in cases like grdmam gaiah, “‘he 
has gone to the village,” where the kdraka, gr@mam is construed with gam 
rather than with. the suffix -ta. In kyiapirvi katam, ‘““hewhohas made amat 
before,”’ and bhuktapiirvi odanam, ‘‘he who has already eaten rice,” kata 
and odana are construed with kr and bhuj rather than with the suffix -in. 
In these cases, outside words grémam, katam, and odanam are indeed 
construed with the subordinate members gam, kr, and bhuj, respectively. 
Such constructions are allowable. 

(B70) verse 21. Correctness has no invariable connection with com- 
munication. Even in the absence of correct forms, verbal knowledge is 
not denied by the Grammarians. 

(870-71). The Naiyayikas and the Mimamsakas hold the view that 
whatever is denotative is correct. Corrupt words are not denotative, so 
they are incorrect. The corrupt words like gévi appear to be denotative 
of the meaning ‘‘cow’’ because they remind us of the correct words like 
go. The Grammarians refute this view. Ifthe corrupt words had no denot- 
ative function they would convey no meaning. It does not help us to 
say that the corrupt words remind us of correct words and through them 
they are denotative, because ignorant persons who do not know the 
correct words understand the meaning from incorrect ones. According 
to the Grammarians, the correct word go and the corrupt word gdavi 
are both denotative of the cow. The only difference is that the use of 
corrupt words leads to religious demerit, while the use of correct words 
leads to merit. 


Section 2: The Meanings of Tenses 

and Moods (Lakdrarthanirnaya) 

(B73) verse 22. Lat and so on (the phrase stands for ten markers daf, 
lit, and so on, which do not occur in actual utterances; they represent 
the personal endings, #, tas, and so on, that come in place of /- the 
common symbol for all the finite suffixes of tenses and moods) are to 
be understood in the following meanings: present, past not witnessed 
(by the speaker), what is going to happen tomorrow, future (simple), 
injunction, request, and so on. 

(873). Lat denotes the present. Presentness is defined as being (a 
time) that is characterized by an action that is begun but not ended or 
as the property of being a time other than the past or future. 

(B73-75). The question is raised whether “time” is the denoted 
(vdcya) or the cosignified (dyotya) meaning of I-suffixes (personal end- 
ings). According to the first view, time is the denoted meaning of the 
l-suffixes. A verbal root cannot denote all the specific aspects of action, 


964 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


including specific time. In that case the denotative area of verbal roots 
will be too wide. It is simpler to say that a root denotes operation and 
result, and /-suffixes (personal endings) denote specific aspects of 
action, including time. Moreover, Panini’s rules (Panini 3.2.123 and 
elsewhere) lay down that /-suffixes denote time and aspects (injunction 
and so on). 

According to the second view, the ésuffixes are time-indicative 
suffixes and not independently denotative of time. These J-suffixes only 
single out the particular meaning that is to be adopted in a particular 
context. The verbal root already denotes all aspects of action, including 
time in general. 

In this connection, the final view of the Bhisana is that time is consi- 
dered to be the measurer of an action. But in reality time is measured by 
action, for time cannot be divided without being associated with action. 
According to Grammarians, time and action are identical because time 
has no reference to anything outside the domain of an action, Thus the 
general notion of time is denoted by verbal roots, when it denotes action. 
But the specific aspect of time, such as presentness, is indicated by 
l- suffixes. Therefore, the second view appears to be correct. 

(875). Then a question is raised: how to account for the use of 
the present tense in such sentences as dimd asti, “‘the self exists,’ and 
parvatah santi, “the mountains stand,”’ because existence and standing 
go on continuously without stopping? Therefore, continuous actions 
“existing” and “‘standing’’ cannot be associated with the three divisions 
of time. 

The Bhisana, following the Mahabhasya, answers that the existence of 
the self and the standing of the mountains are also differentiated as 
present or past with the aid of the contemporary actions of the kings 
belonging to different periods of time. 

Lif (perfect tense) expresses past action that happened at a definite 
time in the past, not witnessed by the speaker. Paroksatva, imperceptibi- 
lity (being not witnessed by the speaker) means the property of not 
being the object of the knowledge that can be described as ‘I perceive,” 
which. resides in the speaker. Imperceptibility either means impercepti- 
bility of action or imperceptibility of kdrakas engaged in an action. 
Although the action as a whole is always imperceptible, yet its parts 
are clearly perceptible. Thus the perfect is not to be used when some 
parts of the action as a whole are perceived by the narrator. The perfect 
in the first person is allowed when even one’s activity is not perceived 
by oneself due to one’s being absorbed in something or for some other 
reason. 

(B76). Lut (periphrastic future) expresses only future action, exclu- 
sive of today, that is, action that is going to take place at a definite time 
to come. Lyj denotes any future action. 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 265 


Let (Vedic subjuntive) denotes permission, injunction, command 
(Panini 3.4.7), inquiry, and the like. 

Lot (imperative) denotes command, permission, and the like. There 
is no sharp line of distinction between the imperative (Lot), the subjunc- 
tive (Le), and the optative (Liz). 

Lan (imperfect) denotes a completed action that happened at a 
definite time in the past (anadyatane). 

Lin (optative) expresses vidhi, injunction (including command); 
nimantrana, summoning to do something; dmantrana, invitation; adhista, 
respectful request; samprafna, inquiry; and prarthand, request. The first 
four of these meanings can be reduced to one, namely, prompting or 
instigation (pravartand). Pravartané is defined as an activity on the part 
of the prompter that leads the prompted person to do something. The 
definition cannot be applicable to Vedic injunctions because the Vedas 
are not composed by any human being. Therefore, in connection with 
Vedic injunctions we assume that the optative forms in the Veda itself 
prompt someone to do the thing stated in the Veda. 

(B77-79). But what is the precise nature of pravartand? The Bhisana 
mentions several views on this subject, as put forward by the Naiyayikas, 
by the Prabhakara Mimamsakas, and by Konda Bhatta himself. 

According to the Naiyayikas, the person to be prompted does not 
become inclined to act unless he knows the following three factors of 
action: 

(1} Feasibility (krtisadhyatva) : the prompted person does not proceed 
to perform impossible tasks such as bringing down the peak of Mount 
Meru, bringing down the moon, and the like. Therefore, feasibility is 
the meaning of /in-suffixes. 

(2) Knowledge that this (act) leads to the desired result (istasddha- 
natdjfidna): a person does not act unless he ascertains that this (act) will 
achieve something he desires. The person desiring satisfaction of his 
thirst does not thrash the water because he knows that this action will 
not bring him the desired result. Therefore, istasddhanatva is the meaning 
of the é77i-suffixes. 

(3) The cognition of not entailing a greatly undesired result (balava- 
danistananubandhitva). No one eats a food mixed with honey and poison. 
There is no inclination toward the eating of such a food because it leads 
to a greatly undersired result, namely, death. 

Unless the person to be prompted knows these things beforehand he 
does not proceed to perform any act. 

(B79-82). According to the Prabhakaras, something new to be 
achieved (apérva) is the meaning of the injunctive sentence containing- 
lin (optative suffix). Apirva is the same as karya, the thing to be brought 
about by exertion (kyti) or that toward which the activity is directed 
(krtyuddesya). Apiirva has been called prompting (niyoga) because it acts 


266 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


as an incentive to the prompted person to perform the act prescribed. 
The sacrifice does not directly precede heaven. Because apiirva is the 
immediately preceding cause of heaven, it is cognized as the thing 
to be done (arya) and it is the meaning of -lin. 

The Prabhakaras deny the property of being the means to a 
desired result (isfasddhanatva) as the meaning of the li”-suffixes (opta- 
tive). The reason is that there are certain obligatory rites, the perfor- 
mance of which does not lead to any desired result. Thus in the obliga- 
tory rites the inclination to act is due to apirva. 

It is also not correct to say that a din-suffix denotes the state of being 
an indirect cause of the desired result, if no operation (vydpdara, that is, 
apitrva) be known. Therefore, it is better to suppose that apirva is the 
direct cause that immediately precedes the result, heaven. Therefore, 
apirva (thething to be done) is the meaning of -lin. It is also ourcommon 
experience that the knowledge “‘this act is to be done” acts as an 
instigator (prompter). 

(B82-96). According to Konda Bhatta, the Ji#-suffixes express 
istasddhanatva or hitasiédhanatva, the property of being the means to a 
desired result. Here Konda Bhatta follows the view of Mandana Misra, 
the author of the Vidhiviveka. The person to be prompted requires some 
incentive. There can be no inclination to activity unless one knows that 
it leads to a desired result. Thus it is a means to a desired result and the 
cause of the performance of the act in general. 

Konda Bhatta, following Madhva (1197-1273), rejects feasibility 
as the meaning of -lin. If we accept that feasibility leads to an action, 
there will be inclination for prohibited things such as killing a brahmin, 
because killing is feasible. Further, the general rule is that only that 
meaning which cannot be obtained by any other means is accepted as 
verbal knowledge. There will be no inclination to act when the action 
involved is not feasible. Our common experience shows that the efforts 
toward nonfeasible acts are wasted, as they produce nothing. Then 
aversion is created in the mind of a prompted person, and accordingly 
he does not proceed to perform nonfeasible acts. 

According to Konda Bhatta, the property of not entailing a greatly 
undesired result (balavadanistananubandhitva) is also not the meaning of 
lin-suffixes. Noninclination toward disastrous acts can be caused by 
aversion, which prevents the agent from undertaking any activity. 
Moreover, there is no way to determine how much frustration will be a 
deterrent factor in the case of different acts and in the case of different 
individuals. For some persons, even a little trouble will be enough to 
remove the inclination to act. Therefore, it is aversion that should be 
accepted as the deterrent. Once it is accepted, the separate factor, 
balavadanistananubandhitva, for inclination to act is not necessary. 

Konda Bhatta also rejects the view of the Prabhakara MimAmsakas 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 267 


According to him, there is no evidence for saying that the immediately 
preceding cause ofa result (namely, the apiirva accepted by the Prabha- 
karas) is a prompter or instigator. Moreover, what immediately pre- 
cedes may not be necessarily the main cause of theeffect. Further, apirva 
means something to be produced by effort (kdrya). This property of 
being something to be effected (kéryaté) in fact belongs to the action 
denoted by the verbal root. So what is to be produced is sacrificing 
(yéaga) and not apiirva, as accepted by the Prabhakaras. According to 
Prabhakaras, apiirva is considered to be the denoted meaning of -lin. 
But it is hard to grasp the relation of apiirva and -lin. Without first 
knowing apiirva independently, how can one grasp the significatory 
association of apiirva and -lin? Konda Bhatta states that apirva cannot be 
a goal at all. The object of desire alone can be the goal of action. There- 
fore, apirva can be an intermediate link (as in, sacrifice-apirva-heaven), 
and apirva cannot be the object of desire. 

Lun (aorist) denotes the past in general. 

Lrn (conditional) is used in the past or future value to indicate that 
something is going to happen without any effect.* 


Section 3: Meanings of the Case Endings 

( Subarthanirnaya ) 

(B99) verse 24. The substratum, the limit (of separation), the 
recipient, relation, or capacities (of these things) are considered to be 
the denotation of case endings on the authority of the Mahabhasya. 

The accusative, the instrumental, and the locative denote the mean- 
ing substratum. The accusative denotes the substratum of the result 
(phalaSraya). The instrumental denotes the substratum of the operation, 
and the locative denotes the substratum of either operation or result 
through the medium of agent or object. The ablative case denotes the 
sense of limit from which the separation is to be effected. The dative 
case denotes the sense of recipient of the fruit of action (uddesya). The 
genitive case denotes the relation Sesa between the meanings denoted by 
two nouns. 

(S367). The term karman is defined (Panini 1.4.49) as that which is 
the most desired to be obtained (by the agent). The word karman means 
the object that is the substratum of the result produced by the activity. 
It is only through the possession of the result produced by the activity 
that the object becomes the most desired to the agent. 

In the sentence odanam pacati, “che cooks the rice,”’ odana is the object, 
because it is the substratum of the result softening (of the rice grains). 
In the sentence ghajam karoti, “he makes a jar,” the jar is the substratum 
of the result production. In the sentence ghafam janati, “he knows a jar,”’ 
the jar is the object because it is the substratum of the result breaking 
ofthe veil (ofignorance) denoted by the root jfia. 


268 ENOYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(5369-370). Odjection: While going to a village, the usage “caitrah 
caitram gacchati” (“Caitra goes to Caitra”) would be correct, because 
Caitra is also the substratum of the result conjunction produced by the 
activity in the form of motion, like the object village, because conjunc- 
tion is a property that resides in two things. Here it resides in the 
object gréma as well as in the agent Caitra. Similarly, in the sentence 
“prayagat kasim gacchati” (“the goes to Kasi from Prayaga’’) the 
apadana-karaka, namely, praydga, would also be karman because it is the 
substratum of the result disjunction produced by the activity of motion. 
The action of motion produces invariably two results: conjunction and 
disjunction. 

($372). Answer: Although Caitra, like the village, is the substratum 
of the result, still the designation agent belonging to Caitra sets aside the 
designation object, following Panini 1.4.1. Therefore, the usage “caitrah 
caitram gacchati” is not allowed. The designation “‘object’’ to the word 
prayaga in the sentence “‘prayagat kasim gacchati” is ruled out because 
the word phala in phalafraya is qualified by the phrase dhétvartha. The 
phrase dhdtvartha debars the designation because the result disjunction is 
not denoted by the root gam. The root gam denotes the action of moving, 
producing invariably two results: conjunction with a consequent point 
and disjunction with a subsequent point. Out of these two results, the 
root gam denotes only the former one. 

(B102-105). The Naiyayikas claim, however, that the word friya in 
the definition “‘kriyajanyaphalasrayam karma” is qualified by the phrase 
parasamavetatva, which serves to distinguish the object from the agent. 
The definition ‘‘parasamavetakriyajanyaphalasrayam karma’ means 
that Xis the karmakdraka, if X is possessed of the result produced by the 
action that appears in anything other than X. If X¥ stands for Caitra in 
the definition “‘caitro gramam gacchati,” the definition of the karma- 
karaka does not apply to Caitra because theaction ofgoing does not 
inhere in anything other than X. If X stands for a village (grdéma) that 
is the substratum of the result conjunction, the definition applies to the 
village because the action of going inheres in Caitra, who is other than 
the village. 

Konda Bhatta does not agree with this definition given by the 
Naiyayikas. The meaning parasamaveta, inherent in the other, and so on, 
is not the denoted meaning of the accusative because this assumption 
involves complexity. Moreover, this definition does not exclude the 
prompter agent (prayojaka) and reflexive agent (karmakarty) from the 
province of the karmakdraka. Therefore, the simple answer to exclude the 
agent from the province of the karmakaraka is to assume that the designa- 
tion agent (karir) prevails over the designation karman. 

(B105--106). The karmakéraka is divided into seven categories. The 
ipsitatamakarman, the object most desired by the agent, is of three kinds: 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 269 


(1) WNirvartya, the object to be produced, for instance, ghatam karoti, 
‘he makes a jar.” 

(2) Vikarya, the object to be modified. One kind of utkdryakarman is 
that which arises on account of the destruction of the material, as ashes 
from the firewood: kdstham bhasma karoti, “he reduces firewood to 
ashes”; another kind is that which arises on account of the origination 
of new qualities, as a modification of gold: suvarpam kundalam kareti, 
“he fashions an earring out of gold.” 

(3) Prapya, attainable. Praépyakarman is that in which the effectuation 
of particular features due to action cannot beunderstood from perception 
of the object or from inference, for instance, ghatam pasyati, ‘““hesees ajar.” 

The object not positively desired to be reached by the agent (anipsita- 
karman) is categorized. into four types: 

(1) Udasina, indifferent, for instance, grass frnam in “‘gramam gacchan 
trnam spréati” (“‘while going to the village he happens to touch the 
grass’’. 

(2) Dvesya, odious, for instance, visam bhunkte, “he eats poison.”’ 

(3) Andkhydia, unexpressed object. That is an unexpressed object 
(akathita) which is not intended to be otherwise expressed as apdddana, 
adhikarana, and so on. In other words, that is a kadraka which can be 
expressed otherwise, but not expressed by way of any other kdraka 
relation. But if the speaker intends to express it as apddana, adhikarana, 
and so on, he is free to do so, for example, ‘gam payo dogdhi”’ or “‘goh 
payo dogdhi,” (“che milks the cow” or “he milks from the cow’’). 

(4) Anyapiirvaka, an object that has been declared to be the 
karmakaraka by the special rule in place of sampraddana, and the like, for 
example, “kriiram abhikrudhyati,” (“heis angry with a cruel person’). 

(B107-108). The third case representing agent denotes substratum. 
A kGéraka is invariably considered to be an agent provided that the action 
belonging to it be denoted by the verbal root. Inthe sentence “‘devadat- 
tah kasthaih sthalyam odanam pacati” (‘““Devadatta cooks the rice 
in a pot with the help of firewood”), Devadatta functions as the agent 
who independently initiates the action and sets the other fAéraka in 
motion. Normally, pacati refers to the action of the main agent; still, it 
may also refer to the activities of the other kdrakas. For instance, if the 
speaker wants to convey the idea that firewood considerably facilitates 
the action of cooking, he will say kdsthdni pacanti, ‘‘firewood cooks.” 
Here pacanti refers to the action of the firewood. In sthdli pacati, “‘the 
vessel cooks,”’ the verb pacati refers to the action of containing or holding. 

(B108). The kartr-kdraka is divided into three types: 

(1) Suddhakarta, simple agent, for instance devadattena in ‘“‘devadat- 
tena harih sevyate”’ (“Hari is worshiped by Devadatta’’). 

(2) Prayojakakarta, prompter or causal agent, for instance kdryate 
harind, “‘someone is made to do by Hari,” 


270 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(3) Reflexive agent: when the object is transferred to the states of 
the agent it is called reflexive agent. For instance, ‘‘odanah pacyate 
svayam eva,” “the rice cooks itself.”’ 

(B109). The instrumental case denotes the sense operation also. The 
most effective means of operation is called karana. The most effective 
means is nothing but possession of the most important operation that 
produces the (desired) result immediately. 

The feature of being the most effective means for the accomplishment 
of an action is not fixed with regard to any specific kdraka. Whether a 
particular karaka plays the role of karana is determined by the speaker’s 
intention. One can say sthalyam pacati, “he cooks in the vessel,”’ sthalya 
pacyate, ‘‘ (it) is cooked by means of the vessel,” kdsthath pacati, “‘he cooks 
by means of firewood,” “or kasthdani pacanii, “the firewood cooks.” 

The locative case also denotes the substratum of action through the 
medium of the agent or the object. The following are the varieties of the 
locative case: 

(1) Abhivyapaka, coextensive or location of pervasion. For instance, 
tilesu iailam, “oil in sesame seeds.” 

(2) Aupaslesika, location of contact. When the superstratum (ddheya) 
forms its connection with only a part of substratum, the adhikarana is 
called aupaslesika; for example, kate Gste, “he sits on the mat.” 

(3) Vaisayika, nonphysical location, as in mokse icchasti, “‘he desires 
liberation.” The ablative case denotes the sense limit or fixed point (in 
connection with separation), which is called apdéddana. 

(8110-112). Following Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya, Konda Bhatta 
gives three varieties of the apaddainakdraka: 

(1) WNirdistavisaya, in which apdya “separation” has been directly 
stated by the verbal base, for instance afvdt patati, “he falls down from 
the horse.” 

(2) Updttavisaya, in which the verbal base denotes its own meaning, 
which indirectly includes the notion ofseparation; for instance, baldhakad 

vidyotate, “‘ (it) is lightning from the cloud.” 

(3) Apeksitakriya, in which the word denoting the action of separa- 
tion is not stated at all, forinstance, pétaliputrat, “(I came) from Patali- 
putra.” 

Following Panini (1.4.32), Konda Bhatta says that the dative case 
denotes the sampradana karaka. It is defined as that which is aimed at by 
the agent through theinstrumentality of the object of action, forinstance, 
“‘vipraya gam dadati’’ (“the gives a cow to the brahmin’’). Here the 
brahmin is called sampradana because brahmin is connected with the 
action of giving through the direct object cow. 

According to Konda Bhatta, the dative denotes the sense uddefya, the 
object for which the action is intended. Here Konda Bhatta considers 
that the sampradana kdraka is positionally predominant (although a 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 271 


brahmin does not syntactically predominate over the cows that are 
given to him). Therefore, the sampradana is called by the MimAmsakas 
Sesin, positionally predominant, to which something is Sesa, subservient. 

Then Konda Bhatta makes two points: first, the designation sampra- 
dana is not restricted in connection with the verbs having the sense of 
giving. Further, the root dé does not imply transference of ownership. 
To prove this point he quotes usages from the Mahabhdsya: “na $idraya 
matim dadyat” (‘one should not impart instruction to a Sédra’’), 
“khandikopadhyayah tasmai capetam dadati” (“the khandika teacher 
gives him a slap’’). In these usages the dative is used in connection with 
the root da when there is no question of ownership. But, according to the 
Kasikavriti, the genitive is used when the thing is not denoted. For 
instance, “rajakasya vastram dadati” (‘“‘he gives his clothes to the 
washerman”’) is the correct usage, not “rajakaya vastram dadati.” 

Following the Vakyapadiya, Konda Bhatta divides sampradana into 
three types: 

(1) Sampradina by not denying the offer (anirakarty): “Stiryaya 
arghyam dadati” (“he offers the water to the Sun god’). 

(2) Sampradina by making a request (preraka): ‘““Vipraya gam 
dadati” (“che gives a cow to the brahman’’). Hence the receiver incites 
the giver to give something to him. 

(3) Sampradana by giving one’s consent (anumanir): “Upadhyayaya 
gam dadati” (‘the gives a cow to his teacher”). Here the teacher per- 
mits a donor to present a cow to him, though he does not request the 
donor to do so. 

(B113). The genitive case denotes a very general relationship. The 
relation denoted by the genitive (fesa) is not regarded as a kdraka. The 
kérakavibhaktis denote the relation between the noun and the verb, 
while fesa is the relation between two nouns. 

(8114; S393). Then Konda Bhaitta says that the relation between 
the stem meaning and the case meaning is one of syntactic identity 
The case endings stand for the possessors of properties (dhkarmin) rather 
than for properties alone (dharma). For instance, the word tandulam, 
ending in the accusative, denotes the sense tand@uldbhinnasrayaka, substra- 
tum (of the result, softening) not different from the (objects) rice 
grains. The primary (Art) and secondary (taddhita) endings also denote 
the sense dharmin instead of dharma, for instance, devadatiah pakta, ““Deva- 
datta a cook.” The syntactic agreement between Devadatta and a cook 
cannot be maintained unless it is assumed that the suffix stands for the 
concrete objects rather than for abstract properties. Therefore, the 
accusative and so on denote the locus (dfraya) rather than locusness 
(@Srayatva). 

Finally, Konda Bhatta maintains that the direct denotation of the 
case endings is dharma (in other words, the abstract property). Konda 


272 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Bhatta furnishes us with the support of the Mimamsakas’ akytyadhikarana: 
a word always denotes primarily the meaning attribute (that is, the 
qualifier or vifesana or property or generic notion), while the meaning 
qualificand (vifesya or vyakti or dharmin) is indicated by the secondary 
function of the words. Thus, the case terminations primarily denote the 
abstract property locusness (dfrayaiva), and the concrete idea of locus 
(Gfraya) can be obtained from nominal stems or it can be inferred from 
the fact that there is no dharma without dharmin. 

(B115-116). Following Patafijali, Konda Bhatta states two alterna- 
tive views with regard to the restriction of case endings and their 
meanings. These two views are restriction imposed on case endings 
(Sabdantyama or vibhaktiniyama) and restriction imposed on meanings 
conveyed by the case endings (arthaniyama). Panini 4.1.2 introduces the 
case endings without specifying the meanings to be conveyed by them. 
Thus the accusative prescribed by Panini 2.3.2 is available to convey 
karman and other syntactic meanings. Because the accusative is already 
available to convey the meaning karman from Panini 4.1.2, the rule 
karmani dvitiya (Panini 3.4.2) does not add anything new to our know- 
ledge. Therefore, it becomes restricted. The restriction can be imposed 
in two ways. The first is karmani eva dvitiyd (vibhaktiniyama or §abdani- 
jyama): the accusative case ending is used to convey the sense of karman 
only. From this restriction it does not follow that the sense of karman 
is not bound to any specific case ending. The second is karmani doztiya 
eva (arthantyama): to convey the sense of karman, the second (case 
ending) only is used. Here the sense of karman becomes bound to the 
accusative case ending only. But it does not follow that karman is the 
only sense conveyed by the accusative case ending. The accusative case 
ending may also convey the other syntactic meaning. Konda Bhatta 
does not show any preference for either of these alternatives; he 
simply says that both are useful. 

Finally Konda Bhatta says that according to the modern Naiyayikas 
the relation between the verbal activity and the kdrakas cannot be 
determined by the logical definition of the different kdrakas, but is 
decided according to the nature of verbal activity and the context. 
Therefore, in some cases the secondary function comes into play to 
convey the accurate sense of the case terminations when the general 
sense of the case termination is abstracted. By contrast, the Gramma- 
rians and the ancient Naiyadyikas think that the kdrakas are rational 
and syntactic categories, and they have somewhat precise and con- 
sistent meanings in the majority of the cases. 


Section 4: Nominal Meanings 
(Namarthanirnaya)® 
(B117) verse 25, First Konda Bhatta enumerates five different views 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 273 


concerning nominal meanings. Théy can refer to (1) a generic property 
(alone) or an individual alone; (2) a generic property and an indi- 
vidual; (3) a generic property, an individual, and gender; (4) a gene- 
ric property, an individual, gender, and number; or (5) a generic 
property, an individual, gender, number, and a kéraka. The following 
passages elaborate these views. 

(B117-120). The first view (jdtivdda) claims that a generic property 
alone is the primary meaning of nominal stems. This view was first 
propagated by the pre-Katyayana Grammarian Vajapyayana and was 
later upheld by the Bhatta Mimamsakas. 

According to the Bhatta Mimamsakas, a generic property is cognized 
first, before an individual is cognized. Therefore, in the jdtivdda the 
generic property alone is the primary meaning, and all the individuals 
possessing that generic property are regarded as secondary meanings. 
The individuals are infinite, and it would be practically impossible to 
grasp the relation of a word with each individual (dnantya). If a word 
denotes a specific individual (X) it would fail to convey many other 
individuals (other than X, that is, vyabhicdra). But in communica- 
tion the individual object implied by the generic property is construed 
with an action in sentences such as “bring a bull.” Thus the primary 
meaning of a word is only a generic property, and the individual object 
is conveyed by implication (dksepa), secondary function (daksané), 
inference (anumdna), or presumption (arthapatti). 

(B118-120). Next Konda Bhatta discusses the view that the primary 
meaning of a nominal stem is only an individual (vyaktivada). This view 
is first proposed by Vyadi, a pre-Katyayana Grammarian, and followed. 
later by some of the Navya-Nyaya school. According to this view, the 
specific individual is the primary meaning, and other individuals are 
indirect meanings through generic property. The undenoted generic 
property as an indicator (upalaksana) is accepted as the limiter of pri- 
mary meaning, which explains the cognition of all individuals. The 
generic properties do not belong to the denotative area, yet their 
ontological existence helps us in cognizing all individuals belonging to a 
class. Konda Bhatta (following GangeSa) criticizes the Prabhakara 
Mimamsakas’ view that the primary function conveys reference to the 
individual objects. His argument is that the simultaneous operation of 
both of the functions, namely, primary and secondary, to convey the 
sense of generic property and the individual is regarded as a fault. The 
argument of infinity (dnantya}) and deviation (vyabhicdra) launched 
against vyaktivdda can equally be launched against jditvada. The 
reason is that, according to jativdda, the individual is cognized 
through the secondary function of words, and consequently we are 
forced to accept an infinite number of secondary functions correspon- 
ding to the infinite number of individuals. Usage shows that the indi- 


274 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


vidual objects are primary denotations of words because actions 
are not seen to be related to generic properties. 

(B120-121). The second view is jdtivisistavyaktivdda. According to 
this view an individual qualified by the generic property is the meaning 
of a word, and both of these meanings figure in the meaning cognition. 
This view is presented in two versions. First, according to the Naiyayikas’ 
version, a cognition of a word’s primary function produces the cognition 
of an individual qualified by the generic property. Therefore, it is 
necessary that the primary function of a word be grasped with respect 
to an individual qualified by a generic property, not just with respect 
to a generic property alone. The primary function bound with respect 
to a generic property will never cause a cognition of an individual 
qualified by a generic property. 

Second, according to the Prabhakaras’ version, the primary function 
of a word is grasped with respect to a generic property alone. The 
cognition of the primary meaning with respect to the generic property 
produces the verbal cognition of an individual qualified by the generic 
property. According to this view, the generic property is cognized from 
a word at first, but it can in turn produce the verbal cognition of an 
individual qualified by a generic property. The Prabhakara Mimam- 
sakas do not accept that the denotative function of words causes the 
cognition in respect of the individual. The individual is cognized just 
by its inseparable existence (svariépasat). The denotative function is the 
direct cause of cognition of the universal. The individual is grasped 
by its inseparable relation with the generic property. 

(B121-122). The third view proposes that the primary meaning ofa 
nominal stem includes gender as well as a generic property and an 
individual. Konda Bhatta also offers a number of views on the nature 
of gender. 

(1) Arthadharma: the gender is a property of objects signified by 
words. According to this, the naturalist view, the linguistic gender is an 
expression of physical sex (lauktkalinga). One who has breasts and long 
hair is a woman. One who has hair on the body is a man. That which 
has neither is neuter. The primary function of words is grasped with 
respect to physical sex distinctions. The primary function of words like 
kumdra, “‘boy,”’, chdga “‘goat,”’ brahmana, “brahmin,’ is grasped with 
respect to the technical masculine gender qualified by the physical sex. 
Here the physical sex is also the primary meaning of words. While 
actually inanimate objects do not have any sex genders, this naturalist 
view assumes superimposition of physical sex on inanimate objects to 
explain gender distinctions in the words that stand for inanimate 
objects. The masculine gender of the word dérak, which signifies the 
female sex, is explained by superimposing the masculine nature on the 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 275 


object. This explanation, in reality, amounts to saying that words 
have no relation to physical sex. 

(B122-123). (2) Sabdadharma: this view maintains that the gender is 
a property of words and not of objects signified by word. This view can 
be further divided into two views: that gender as a property of 
words is of metaphysical nature; and that the gender of words is of 
purely formal linguistic nature. 

Konda Bhatta states Patafijali’s philosophical conception of gender. 
Objects are composed of three elements: saitoa, rajas, and tamas. The 
masculine object represents an increase of these elements, the feminine 
objects a decrease of these elements, the neuter gender merely represents 
the existence of these elements. But the proportion of these elements 
is constantly changing. Therefore, the objects of the world are never 
stable. The activities of increase and decrease of constituent elements 
are common to all objects, so the gender of the objects depends on the 
intention of the speaker. If the speaker intends to represent increase 
then he uses the word in masculine gender; decrease, in feminine 
gender; neither decrease nor increase, in neuter gender. The speaker 
decides the gender, and gender is considered to be located in words 
(Sabdadharma). 

Finally, Konda Bhatta says that there is nothing wrong in holding 
that the gender of words has no necessary connection with physical sex. 
Masculine and feminine words are used to signify members of the 
opposite sex or objects with no physical sex. For instance, the masculine 
gender signified by the word déraék does not necessarily imply the 
physical sex of the object. 

(B125). According to the fourth and fifth views, gender, number, 
and kdrakas are also signified by the case suffixes on the basis of agree- 
ment (anvaya) and difference (uyatireka). For instance, when the case 
suffix is dropped, the nominal stem itself signifies kdraka, gender, and 
number. In dadhi pasya, “look at the curds,” wherethe accusative singular 
suffix -am is deleted, the nominal stem dadhi itself denotes all of the 
nominal meanings, including the karma karaka. The neuter gender is 
also the meaning of the pratipadika because lexical (lingdnuSdsana) texts 
ascribe the meaning gender also to the nominal stem. 

(B125-128). In certain cases the nominal stem signifies the sixth 
element, namely, the phonetic form of the word (svariipa). The word 
iti in Sanskrit indicates that a word stands for its own form. Without 
the use of the word iti, sometimes words also stand for their own 
form. In normal usage, a word signifies its meaning as qualified by its 
own. word form, while normally in grammar a word signifies its own 
form as qualified by its meaning. In normal usage a word with iti 
signifies the word. form as qualified by its meaning, while in grammar 
a word with it signifies its meaning as qualified by its word form. 


276 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(8130-132). With regard to a word form signified, Sanskrit Gram- 
marians employ two terms: anukdrya, ‘‘imitated word,” and anukarana, 
“imitation word.” Again anukarana is of two types: it may be of 
inarticulate sounds (avyakta) or of articulate sound (vyakta). The imita- 
tion word patat is an onomatopoetic imitation of inarticulate physical 
sound. By contrast, in the sentence “‘gauh iti ayam aha’’ (“the said the 
word gauh”’), the expression gauh is imitation of the word gauh that 
occurs in such sentences as gauh tisthati, ‘‘a bull stands.”? The imitated 
word gauh signifies a bull, while the imitation word signifies a word 
form. 

Then Konda Bhatta discusses the question of identity and difference 
between the imitation word and the imitated word. He states that 
according to Grammarians the imitation word and the imitated word 
are identical because their phonetic shapes are not different. Difference 
in signification does not differentiate words. 

As a general rule, imitation words are not meaningful words, and 
they are not nominal stems (pratipadika). But Panini uses inflectional 
suffixes after meaningless imitation words for metalinguistic purposes. 
The phonetic form of a word may form part of verbal cognition, but it 
is not considered to be the meaning of a word. Thus a word signifies its 
phonetic form, and yet it is not regarded as a meaningful item. Accord- 
ing to the Grammarians the imitated word and the imitation words are 
identical as far as the phonetic forms are concerned. 


Section 5: The Meaning of Compounds (Samdsdrthanirnaya) 

(B134) verse 28. Konda Bhatta gives a sixfold classification of com- 
pounds on the basis of the morphological structure of constituents 
without involving the primary and subordinate status of their meanings: 

(1) Supdm supa, ‘‘combination of case-inflected words before entering 
into compounding,” for instance réjapurusa, “a king man,’’ which is 
derived from two case-inflected words, rajfiah purusah. 

(2) Supam tind, “combination of case-inflected words with a verb 
form,’ for instance, paryabhisat, “She attended to,” anuvyacalat, “the 
moved subsequently.” This combination consists of the preverb as the 
first member and the verb as the second member. These forms become 
single finished words by compounding. 

(3) Supam naémnd, ‘combination of case-inflected word with a nominal 
stem (krdanta),” for instance, kumbhakdra, ‘pot maker.” Here the case- 
inflected word kumbham is compounded with the krdanta noun kéra before 
the case ending has been added to it. This compound is called the 
upapadasamésa. 

(4) Supdin dhdtund, “combination of case-inflected word with a 
verbal base,” for instance, dyatastiih, “ta panegyrist.”” Here the case- 
inflected word dyatam is compounded with a verbal base stu. 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 277 


(5) Tindn tind, ‘a combination of two finite forms,” for instance, 
khidatamodata, “eat and rejoice” (continual eating and rejoicing). Here 
two finite verb forms khddata and, modata are compounded. 

(6) Tindm supa, ‘‘a combination of a finite verb form with a case- 
inflected word,’’ which consists of the verb as the first member and the 
case inflected word asthe second member, for instance, jahistambah, 
constantly striking against the post.” 

(B134-135) verses 29-30. According to Panini, four broad categories 
of compounds are avyayibhdva, tatpurusa (with subdivisions vibhaktitat- 
purusa, karmadhdraya, and dvigu), dvandva (with subdivisions saméhara- 
dvandva and itaretarayogadvandva), and bahuvrihi. This fourfold classifica- 
tion cannot cover all cases of compounds. For instance, bhitapiirva, tva- 
compounds, ayatasti, and more do not come under any one of these 
categories. 

Patafijali has defined these terms semantically. The avyayibhava is a 
compound in which the meaning of the first member is predominant. 
The tatpurusa is a compound in which the last member is predominant. 
The bahuvrihi is a compound in which the meaning of another word is 
predominant. Konda Bhatta says that these semantic definitions work 
in the majority of cases, but not everywhere. For instance, in an 
avyayibhdva compound such as siipaprait, ‘‘a small quantity of soup,”’ the 
meaning of the second member is predominant. In the avyayibhdva 
compound unmattagangam, “‘the country where the Ganges flows impe- 
tuously,” the additional meaning stands predominant. In the tatpurusa 
compound ardhapippali, “the half of a pepper,”’ the first member stands 
predominant. 

(B135-140). First Konda Bhatta states Patafijali’s views on com- 
pound formation. Katyayana and Patajijali maintain that compound 
forms denote a single (integrated ) meaning (ekarthibhava). That is to say, 
meanings of the compound’s constituents are not presented separately, 
but they present their meanings as inseparably fused together. 

Then Katyayana and Patafijali state another view, namely, paraspara- 
oyapeksd, routual dependency, according to which the constituents of 
compounds present their meaning separately. This view maintains that 
the constituents of a compound present their meaning the same way 
that the constituents of the uncompounded word group present their 
meaning. So rdjapurusah and rajiiah purusah are syntactically equivalents. 

(B140-142), Patafijali (under vdaritika 11 on Panini 2.1.1) mentions 
the nityapaksa view: there is no need to formulate grammatical rules to 
explain the meaning of compounds, for compounds are not generated 
by grammatical rules. In this view a compound is a single word standing 
for a single meaning (ekdrthibhava). There cannot be mutual depen- 
dency (vyapeksa) because the constituents of a compound do not present 
their meanings separately. 


278 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The kéryafabdavada differs from the nitpapaksavada in the explanation 
of the ekdrthibhdvapaksa view. According to this view the compounds 
and the corresponding word groups are derived according to the rules 
of grammar, and the underlying syntactic structures of a compound 
and the corresponding word group are identical. The unified sense of a 
compound is not intrinsic (svdbhavika), rather it is the result of applying 
grammatical rules. The kdryafabdavdda uses the term urtit, ‘““complex 
formation,” to explain how the compound is formed from the 
corresponding word group. Viti means integration, which gives rise 
to the additional meaning. 

(B135-142). But when the constituents are connected, what happens 
to the meaning of constituents? Patafijali mentions two theories: 
jahatsvariha vriti, integration with loss of meanings of constituents, and 
ajahatsvartha vriti, integration without abandoning the meaning of 
constituents. 

According to the first view the constituents of a compound give up 
their own meaning. A compound as a whole conveys an integrated 
meaning, and in conveying that meaning the constituents have no 
separate function from the whole. It does not mean that constituents 
lose their meaning completely. Still, in a compounding, the meanings 
of the constituents are either related to cach other (samsarga) or differen- 
tiated from each other (bheda) or both related and differentiated 
(ubhaya). For instance, in the compound rdjapurusa the meanings, king 
and servant, are related to each other (samsarga), excluding the servant, 
which is not related to a king (bheda). Bheda and samsarga, which are 
responsible for the syntax in the sentence, are also responsible for 
compounds. 

According to the second view the first constituent retains its meaning 
as a qualificant to the meaning of the main member but does not 
independently denote its meaning. 

These two views have a place in the nityapaksa and the karyapaksa too 
to explain the role of the constituent meaning in the meaning of a 
compound. Konda Bhatta refers to the several opinions stated in the 
Mahdabhasya and then makes his own comments on their outcomes. 

(2142-145). Konda Bhatta states first Kaiyata’s view. Kaiyata sum- 
marizes the whole discussion of the Mahdbhdsya into three different 
views. First, the compound as a whole denotes a single indivisible 
meaning. ‘The compound and the corresponding word group belong 
to two different domains. In the uncompounded word group, mean- 
ings are separately presented. This view of eckdrthibhdva has been 
propagated by the nttyapaksavadin, who says that we do not require the 
grammatical rules to explain the specialized compound meaning. A 
compound is not to be derived; it is a natural element of language. 

The second view says that a compound is derived from the corres- 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 279 


ponding uncompounded word group. For the formation of a compound, 
mutual dependence of the constituents is required. But the derived 
compound conveys a single integrated meaning. The generation of 
compounds from the uncompounded word group is the view propagated 
by the kdryaSabdavadin. In the karyapaksa there are two theories, namely, 
tahatsvdrtha and. ajahatsvartha, which decide the meaning of compounds. 
According to this second view the compound constituents give up their 
own meaning and assume one undivided meaning (jahatsvartha). 

The third view is that the compound and the corresponding uncom- 
pounded word group are syntactically and semantically equivalent. In 
both compound and uncompounded word group the constituents are 
mutually dependent. This view has been adopted by the kdryafabdavadin, 
and it adopts the ajahatsvarthapaksa. 

Next Konda Bhatta refers to Haradatta’s theory. According to him 
ekarthibhdva implies that the principal member denotes its meaning as 
qualified by the meaning of the subordinate member, and the subordi- 
nate member denotes its meaning in a qualifying function, not as an 
independently signifying something. If the constituents of the compound 
are independently denotative of their meaning, the subordinate member 
could form a connection with the word lying outside of the compound. 

Haradatta says that for compound formation mutual dependence is 
also equally necessary. Otherwise the compound could have been 
formed out of constituents semantically unrelated. He also makes the 
point that the jahatsvartha urtti has no place in compound formation, 
because the constituents are related to each other without abandoning 
their meaning. If we assume that the constituents lose their meaning 
completely we will have to assign a special denotative function to the 
compound as a whole, which becomes a separate lexical item. But the 
assumption of such a denotative function is unnecessary because the 
compound’s meaning can be derived from the constituent’s meaning 
itself. Thus, Konda Bhatta remarks, according to Haradatta ekarthi- 
bhava, wyapeksd, and ajahatsvartha vytti are all necessary conditions for 
forming a compound. 

Konda Bhatta disagrees with Kaiyata and Haradatta and maintains 
that the whole discussion of Patafijali can be reduced to two points, 
namely, jahatsvdrtha and ajahatsvdrtha, which correspond to ekdrthibhava 
and wyapeksdé, respectively. According to the jahatsvaértha view, when 
integration takes place the members of the compound do not express 
their meaning separately. Therefore, a compound as a whole denotes 
its meaning; for the denotation of single integrated meaning we have 
to assign an aggregate denotative function (samudayasakti) to the com- 
pound form as a whole. According to the wyapeksd view the meaning of 
the constituents are presented separately, and syntactic connection 
between them is denoted by the morphemic elements. So the wyapeksd 


280 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


view is reduced to the ajahatsvadrtha view, according to which constituents 
retain their meaning. 

Konda Bhatta criticizes Kaiyata’s claim that according to Kaiyata, 
in the nityapaksa view ekarthibhava amounts to indivisibility of the mean- 
ing of compound. But to Konda Bhatta this goes against the logical 
interpretation of the Bhdsya. According to Patafijali, samartha means 
emergence of a single integrated meaning of constituents that ‘present 
their meaning separately in the uncompounded word group. Kaiyata’s 
interpretation of the nityasabdavada, which totally denies the relation 
between the constituent meanings and the compound as a whole, is not 
correct. If the ekarthibhava claims that the compound is indivisible and 
the constituents in a compound do not have any meaning at all, then 
one could also extend this theory to the sentence and deny meaning to 
the constituents of the sentence, which would mean that the undivided 
sentence conveys undivided meaning. But this extended theory goes 
against the intention of Patafijali, who maintains the mutual depen- 
dence (vyapeksa) of the constituents in a sentence. 

(B145-156). Similarly, Haradatta’s statement is also subject to criti- 
cism. Haradatta says that both wyapeksa and ekdrthibhdva are the 
necessary conditions for the formation of compounds. But this claim 
also goes against the intention of Patafijali, who, according to Kaiyata, 
maintains that single integrated meaning (ekarthibhdva) exists in a 
compound and that mutual dependence (vyapeksa) exists in a sentence. 
It is also incorrect to consider that the jahatsvartha view has no place in 
a compound formation. Patafijali himse]f shows at length that in the 
jahatsvartha view the subordinate member of the compound does not 
lose its meaning completely. The jakatsuvdriha view is also necessary to 
explain the relation between the constituent meanings and the meaning 
of the compound as a whole. 

Of these two views, ekdrthibhadva and ayapeksé, the firstone implies 
according to Konda Bhatta that a compound, as a whole, denotes one 
single meaning and has a separate denotative function (samudayaSakti) 
through which it gives rise to the single meaning. The second view, 
however, states that each word in a compound has a separate denotative 
function, and a compound as a whole has no separate denotative 
function. Of these two views Bhattoji, the author of the verse text, and 
Konda Bhatta maintain that the ekdrthibhdva is the only correct view. 
Just as in the case of the word pankaja its etymological meaning (grow- 
ing in the mud) cannot explain the conventional meaning /otus, so it is 
assumed that a word asawhole denotes the conventional meaning. 
Similarly, the compound as a whole has the separate denotative 
function. 

(B153). Moreover, the ekarthibhdva view has been adopted because 
the other view involves complexities (gaurava). It is necessary to formu- 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 281 


late rules to account for the following special features of a compound: 
absence of inflectional suffixes after the constituent members of a 
compound; inseparability of the members of a compound by other 
words; the fixed order of the constituents; possession of a single accent; 
ambiguity as regards the number of the subordinate member; ambi- 
guity as regards the syntactic relation between the compound members; 
inability to construe the subordinate word with a word outside the 
compound; absence of words such as ca, “‘and,” to indicate conjunction 
and other connections; the statement of option between compound and 
uncompounded word group. 

(B153-157). In the following compounds—aniskausaimbih, “departed 
from Kausambi (departed from),” gorathah,’’ a chariot to which oxen 
have been yoked (to which have been yoked),” ghrtaghatah,” a pot 
filled with ghee (pirna, ‘filled with’ ),” gudadhanéh, ‘‘crisps made of barley 
mixed with brown sugar (mixed with),” suvarndlamkdrak, “‘gold pro- 
duced ornament (produced),” dvidafa ‘‘two times ten (times),” and 
saptaparnah, “‘a tree having clusters of seven leaves’”— (at each point), 
we understand the additional meanings not conveyed by constituents, 
namely, krdénta (departed from), yukta (yoked), parna (filled), mifra 
(mixed), vikéra (product), samkhya (counting), vipsé (distribution). In 
the vyapeksé view every meaning element should occur in the analytical 
paraphrase. Therefore, the lexical items such as kranta, piirna, and so on, 
should be supplied in the constituent analysis, which are subsequently 
to be deleted. For the deletion of these elements we will have to phrase 
new rules. But according to the ekdrthibhava view as explained by Konda 
Bhatta there is no question of deriving compounds from the uncom- 
pounded word groups to account for these meanings, for the compounds 
and the corresponding uncompounded word groups may differ a great 
deal as far as meaning is concerned. The compound as a whole conveys 
the specialized meaning, and we do not require special rules. Thus 
there is an advantage in adopting the ekdrthibhava view. 

In other words, Konda Bhatta recognizes a separate denotative 
function for the compounds that is called samudayasakti, aggregate 
denotative function, apart from that of constituents. He argues that the 
compound should be assigned a distinct function because it conveys a 
meaning that supersedes the meaning denoted by constituents. For 
instance, the bahuvrihi compound citragu does not mean a brindle cow, 
which is the meaning of the constituents, but refers to a person who 
owns brindied cows. Similarly the compound. pdnipddam does not mean 
“hands, feet’? but rather an aggregation of hands and feet. Many 
meanings like kranta (departed from), pirna (filled with), and others 
are denoted by the compound as a whole but not by its constituents. 
Further, in the case of unanalyzed compounds (nityasamasa) a formally 
corresponding compounded word group is lacking. In such cases 


282 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the meaning of a compound is determined by the compound form as a 
whole and not by the constituents themselves. 

(8157, 168-170). The Naiyayikas and the Mimamsakas hold that a 
compound is formed of its constituents, and the meanings of the consti- 
tuents give rise to the qualified meaning denoted by the compound, 
They do not accept that there is a necessity to assign a separate denota- 
tive function (samudayasakti) to a compound as a whole. Both the Naiya- 
yikas and the Mimamsakas accept only mutual dependence (ovapeksé), 
not any urtti or ekdrthibhdva, in a compound. Both the Naiyayikas 
and the Mimamsakas resort to secondary meaning (laksan@) to explain 
any additional meaning that is denoted by the compound over and 
above the constituent meanings. For instance, in rdjapurusah the consti- 
tuent rdjan signifies the sense of relation by the secondary function along 
with its lexical meaning. In the case of karmadhdraya, laksané need not 
be resorted to; rather, the constituents themselves can convey qualified 
sense. In the case of bahuvrihi, the Naiyayikas adopt the padalaksana 
while the Mimamsakas adopt the vakyalaksand. So all these differences 
between a compound and corresponding uncompounded word groups, 
which are due to ekdrihibkdva according to the Grammarians, are 
explained as caused by the niridha laksand or ‘“‘conventional function.” 

(8182-183). Kumarila observes that denotative function assigned to 
the bahuvrihit as a whole conveys anyapaddariha, denotation of the meaning 
of another word. In a bahuvrihi the constituents express their own mean- 
ing but not anyapadartha. The sense anyapadartha cannot be brought out 
by the primary or secondary function of words because the primary 
meanings of the constituents are not given up at all. The reason is that 
the reference to a meaning other than what is denoted by the com- 
pound’s constituents is understood only when the outside word is used. 
along with the bahuvriht compound. Therefore, the anyapadé@rtha is the 
denoted meaning of a compound. The Mimamsakas observe that the 
anyapadartha is conveyed by the niridha laksandé through the primary 
meanings of the compound’s constituents. In b:huvrihi the Mimamsakas 
postulate the vakyalaksand, where the vékya means a phrase as a whole. 
The semantic connection exists between citraguk (and) devadattah, 
**brindled cow (owner) Devadatta.” The question is how this meaning 
“owner” is arrived at; the answer, according to the later Mimamsakas, 
is that this meaning “owner” is conveyed by the secondary function 
belonging to a sentence. 

{B8176-177). But, according to the Naiyayikas, either the word citra 
or the word go conveys the additional meaning, in other words, reference 
to the anyapadartha. But this view is untenable because the first member, 
citra, cannot be indicative of the meaning ‘“‘the owner of the brindled 
cows.”’ Consequently, go cannot be connected with citra. The reason is 
that citra does not refer to the meaning “‘brindled”’ any longer. Simi- 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 983 


larly, it is wrong to say that the word go indicates the sense of gosvdmin, 
owner of the cows, because in that case citra no longer forms connection 
with go. We cannot say either that both of the padas together convey 
the sense “‘owner of the brindled cows,” for even then it will be impos- 
sible to bring out the proper sense of the bahuvrihis like praptodako 
gramah, ‘‘water-reached village.” In the analysis “praptam udakam 
yam,” udaka, “‘water’’ is the agent and the village is the object of the 
action of reaching. In prapta the suffix kta has been added in the sense 
of agent. The sentence denotes primarily the agent of the action of 
reaching, while the compound denotes primarily the object of the 
action of reaching. Here reference to the object (the village) by a 
compound form cannot be explained by the secondary function 
(laksand@) because the constituents in the sentence stand in the syntactic 
agreement water, the agent of the action of reaching. If the secondary 
function indicates the sense of object (village), then the compound 
would mean the water, identical with the object of reaching. But this 
meaning is not the one intended by the compound. The other word, 
udaka, also cannot imply the sense of karman because the compound’s 
meaning cannot be judged without the proper understanding of the 
first member. To avoid all of these difficulties, Konda Bhatta advocates 
the aggregate denotative function on the basis of practical experience 
that a compound is one word. He puts forth the view that the compound 
meaning is understood even by children without knowing the gram- 
matical or constitutional analysis of compounds. 

(B157-158). The Naiyayikas also advocate that the indeclinables in 
compounds are secondarily indicative (laksana@) of the sense of proximity 
and so on, as in upakumbham, ‘‘in the vicinity ofa jar.” The sense of 
nearness is not included in the meaning of the second member of the 
compound. Therefore, it is held to be implied by the second member. 
Konda Bhatta argues that the indeclinables are suggestive (dyotaka) of 
the sense “nearness,”’ or whatever, but the sense of the compound as a 
whole, namely, “near a jar,” is denoted by the aggregate power of the 
compound, 

(B137, 151). Katyayana proposes the view yugapadadhikaranavacanata 
for the formation of dvandva compounds. According to this view, each 
item in a dvandva compound, just as in the case of ekafesa, represents the 
meaning of the other item simultaneously. The ekasesa and dvandva items 
are not singly represented but always together with another item or 
other items. In the case of dvandva and ekasesa, we find joint representa- 
tion of items. 

But Patafijali rejects the view of joint representation and states that 
in a dvandva the items are separately presented and that meaning of 
conjunction comes from integration only. The joint representation of 
items in a dvandva or ekasesa is a result of ekdrthibhdva (integration) only. 


284 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Konda Bhatta remarks that this view of simultaneous representation 
is formulated by the syapeksdvadins, who maintain that constituent 
meanings are separately represented. This view (yugapadadhikaranavaca- 
naté) is especially necessary to maintain the joint representation of the 
two items in the constituent analysis. But this simultaneous representa- 
tion, according to Konda Bhatta, cannot exist in the constituent ana- 
lysis, because dual or plural is not added to each constituent in the 
analytical paraphrase. We have instances like dydvdprihivi in which 
items are separately represented in the dual. But these instances are 
Vedic usages, which are exceptions to the general rules. According to 
the theory of samudayasakti or ekdrihibhdva, a dvandva compound is a 
single word denoting an aggregate of several individuals. 

(B158). In the case of dvandva the Naiyayikas accept yugapadadhika- 
ranavacanaia in a different sense. They argue that there is a syntactic 
relation between the primary sense of the constituents and the dual 
number added to a compound. If each constituent is related to a dual, 
then the compound dhavakhadirau would mean two dhavas and two 
khadiras. Therefore, to justify the dual number we must assume that 
the first constituent denotes association (sahitya). Because this sense of 
association is not conveyed by the primary function of the constituents, 
the Naiyayikas resort to secondary meaning to convey séhitya, which 
indicates the joint representation of two objects, while number, dual or 
plural, represents the objects that have been associated. The sense 
association indicated by the first member in compounds like dhavakhadi- 
rau does not mean two dhavas. It (dkava) does not mean dkava and 
khadira either, because dhava cannot mean khadira. The sense association 
or simultaneous representation is only through secondary meaning. 

According to Konda Bhatta, the aggregate denotative function ex- 
presses tlie meaning of dvandva as in the case of other compounds. In the 
ttaretarayoga, the aggregate denotative function expresses the items 
that are grouped together, which justifies reference to two or more 
items. In the case of samdhdra (group ofitems), the samudayasakti (aggre- 
gate denotative function) denotes the aggregation or group, which 
justifies the singular number. 

(B161 ). The Naiyayikas and the Mimamsakas do not accept a separate 
denotative function with regard to a compound as a whole. The Gram- 
marians argue that ifan aggregate denotative function is not assigned 
to a compound as a whole, the compound form cannot be called a 
nominal stem (pratipadika) by Panini 1.2.45, because the basic condition 
for the designation pratipadika is meaningfulness. We cannot apply the 
designation pratipadika by the next rule, Panini 1.2.46, because the word 
samasa in that rule is restrictive. The s#ra means that if the designation 
pratipadika is to be applied to a collection of words having a sense it 
must be restricted to a compound. It is not to be applied to a sentence. 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 285 


Moreover, if the compound as a whole has no denotative function it 
cannot have a secondary meaning, which is based on the denotative 
function (abhidha or Sakti) of words. 

(B174-175, 177). The Mimamsakas hold that a genitive compound 
like rajapurusa must be analyzed as “‘raja cdsau purusa§ ca” and not as 
“yajfiah purusah.” The first analysis indicates that the relation of 
qualified and qualifier is dependent on the mutual expectancy of consti- 
tuents and not on the case endings added to them. In the case of the 
genitive tafpurusa compounds, the sense of relation, namely, “‘servant 
and master,’’ is to be conveyed by the genitive suffix. But the compound 
vajapurusah does not refer to the relation between the two related; 
rather, rdjan in réjapurusah denotes the meaning of purusa in the sense 
that rajan becomes a qualifier to purusa. The constituent analysis must 
convey the meaning of the compound. The constituent analysis “raja 
cAsau purusag ca” can convey the qualifier and qualified relation 
(abheda), but the analysis “rajfiah purusah” fails to point it out. There- 
fore, “raja casau purusas ca” is a proper analysis. Similarly, the 
bahuvriht compound citraguk must be analyzed as ‘“‘citranam gavam 
ayam’”’ (“‘he, the owner of the brindled cows’’) and not as “‘citra gavo 
yasya’”’ (“‘possessed. of brindled cows’’). In the case of bahuvrihi com- 
pounds, the constituent analysis must be such as can convey reference 
to the anyapadartha. If we assume the analysis “citranam gavam ayam,” 
it can point out reference to the anyapadartha. But the constituent analy- 
sis “‘citra gavo yasya”’ primarily refers to the svapadartha ‘“‘constituents’ 
own meaning.” 

(B180-181, 186). Later Mimamsakas do not accept the aggregate 
denotative function of the whole compound or secondary meaning in 
the case of a karmadharaya compound. In nilaghata, “‘a blue jar,” the 
words nila and “‘ghata’”’ are in apposition, and their coreferentiality is 
brought out by merely joining the stems nila and ghata. But in a tatpurusa 
compound like rdjapurusah, ‘‘king’s man,” the servant-master relation- 
ship cannot be brought about by mere constituents. The syntactic 
relationship is dependent on the case ending: in the compound the case 
ending is not there. Therefore, this relationship is indicated by the 
secondary function. So in case of doubts, the karmadharaya compound, 
which does not involve the secondary function, is preferred to the 
sasthitatpurusa, which does. Consequently, the word nisddasthapati is taken 
to mean nisddah sthapatih, a chief who himself is a nisdda, rather than 
nisidindm sthapatih, a chief of the Nisada tribe. But Konda Bhatta’s 
standpoint is that the aggregate denotative function belongs to all 
compounds, and there would be no difference between a fatpurusa and 
a karmadhéraya compound. Then it would go against the Mimamsa 
doctrine, which proves that nisddasthapatih must be taken as a karmadha- 
vaya compound, and not as sasthitatpurusa for the sake of economy. To 


286 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


avoid this difficulty, Konda Bhatta answers that when a compound 
word denotes various meanings, the speaker’s intention (édiparya) must 
be taken to decide the sense of the compound. If we took the compound 
nisddasthapati in the context of ritual as a genitive tatpurusa compound, it 
would go against the interest of the author’s statement. Moreover, 
the true meaning of the compound is determined by its accent. 

(B183-186). Konda Bhatta replies that the constituent analysis and 
the compound need not be semantically and syntactically equivalents, 
Therefore, we may find the reversion of the principal and subordinate 
relation in the meaning indicated by the constituent analysis and 
compound. Therefore, the analysis ‘‘citra gavo yasya’” for the 
compound citraguh and “rajfiah purusah”’ for the compound rdjapurusah 
may not be objectionable. 

Even the Mimamsakas assume that productive operation (bhdvand) 
stands as predominant with respect to the kdrakas in the case of verbal 
forms, while in the case of krdania words the kérakas stand predominant 
with respect to bhdvand. Therefore, the constituent analysis may not be 
exactly equivalent to the compound meaning. 


Section 6: The Relation Between 
a Word and Its Meaning (Saktinirnaya) 


(B188). The relation of a word with its meaning, according to Konda 
Bhatta, is power (Sakti) or intrinsic fitness (yogyaté@). Following Bhartr- 
hari, Konda Bhatta states that semantic fitness (yogyatd) is the relation 
between a word and its meaning. The natural or intrinsic capacity of 
words to convey any meaning is called yogyatd. Just as the organs of 
perception (indriya) have a natural power to perceive objects, so words 
also have an innate capacity for conveying any meaning. The Gramma- 
rians and the Mimamsakas consider this power to be a separate cate- 
gory, while the Naiyayikas assume that it is based on convention. 

(5496-497). According to the Naiyayikas the connection between 
the words and their meanings is not natural but rather based on con- 
vention (samketa), which is established by God’s desire. According to 
this view language iscreated by God. The words are capableof conveying 
a sense because God has so desired. In the case of proper names like 
Devadatta, however, the desire is that of Devadatta’s father. The later 
Naiyayikas, however, maintain that this relation need not always be 
established by the will of God. 

(B189-190). According to the Mimamsakas the relation between 
words and their meanings is natural and eternal], not something brought 
about by convention of human beings. This relation between words and 
their meanings is without beginning. The Mimamsakas and the Gram- 
marians agree that the natural relationship is understood from the 
use of the elderly persons. This relation between the words and their 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 287 


meanings cannot be the desire of God because the Mimamsakas and 
the Buddhists, who do not believe in the existence of God, also under- 
stand the meanings of words. 

(B191 ). Konda Bhatta concludes that the nature of the power (Sakti) of 
words is to convey meaning, the signifierness (bodhakaiva) of the words. 
The primary function of the word ghafa (“‘pot’’) is its power or capacity 
to cause a cognition. This power of words is comparable to the power of 
the organs of sense to cause the cognition of objects. Konda Bhatta 
presents the view of the Paficapddtkdvivarana (an Advaita Vedanta text) 
to support his position. 

In addition to power, the Mimamsakas and the Naiyayikas assume a 
secondary function of words to convey their extended meaning. Konda 
Bhatta refuses to accept the secondary meaning even though he accepts 
suggestion (wyafijand) as a separate function to convey emotional over- 
tones attached to words in literary writings. The argument for not acce- 
pting secondary meaning is that the power that is bodhakatva, the capa- 
city of words to cause cognition of meaning is also the same in the case 
of extended meanings. 

(B195-198). The Naiyadyikas maintain that the corrupt forms of 
words that are current express their meaning indirectly by recalling 
the correct forms. Kuméarila, the Mimamsaka, states that the corrupt 
words (mlecchafabda) equally convey meaning. But the corrupt forms 
convey their meaning only through the original correct words, having 
brought them to our mind, whenever corresponding correct usage is 
available. The corrupt words that may convey their meaning indirectly 
cannot be regarded as synonyms for the original correct words. Thus, 
for instance, when the corrupt word gdvi is pronounced, it brings to 
our mind the correct Sanskrit word gauk. 

The Grammarians do not accept the view of the Naiyayikas and the 
Mimamsakas that corrupt words have no denotative power. If 
corrupt words have no denotative power, they can convey no meaning. 
It will not be correct to say that incorrect words remind us of correct 
words and we therefore know the meanings from the incorrect 
words, because ignorant persons who do not know correct words know 
the meaning from corrupt words. As far as conveying of meaning is 
concerned, there is no difference between the correct and corrupt forms. 
But the main difference is that the use of correct forms leads to 
spiritual merit, while the use of incorrect forms leads to spiritual demerit. 
And grammar teaches us the correct forms of words. The words that are 
derived according to grammatical rules are considered to be correct. 

(B197). The Grammarians insist that the corrupt forms derived from 
Sanskrit equally convey meaning. Thus in the case of languages like 
Marathi derived from Sanskrit, the meaning of words is understood not 
indirectly through the correct Sanskrit forms. 


288 ENCGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Following Bhartrhari, Konda Bhatta says that semantic fitness is 
understood from the usage of elderly persons (vrddhavyavahara). The 
denotative potency of words to convey any meaning is intrinsic and 
beginningless, but the use of elderly persons makes us acquainted with 
the natural capacity. 


Section 7: The Meaning of 

the Negative Particle Nafi (Nafiarthanirnaya) 

(B201). According to the first view proposed by Konda Bhatta (in 
connection with the negative fatpurusa compound), the reference of the 
compound is determined by the second member. The negative particle 
nafi (na or a or an) suggests the sense of superimposition (dropitaiva). 
The function of nafi in abr&éhmana is to convey the secondary sense that 
the word abrahmana is used with reference to a ksatriya. One superimposes 
brahminhood on a ksatriya, on account of the fact that the kyatriya 
shares a number of characteristics with a brahmin. To convey that the 
word braéhmana is used in the sense of ksatriya, the speaker uses nafi along 
with the word brdhmana. 

If the negative particle stands for absence (abhdéva), then abrahmana 
would mean a person not existing as a brahmin, according to which 
the first member would represent the main meaning. But this view is not 
correct because it involves various difficulties. In the negative taipurusa 
compound asak, “other than he,” the second member, sah (tat), will 
be subordinate. Therefore, it will not be called sarvanéman. So we cannot 
apply the operations prescribed for pronominal] stems. The result is that 
the compound form will be atad instead of asah. Therefore, this view 
should be discarded. 

(S515). There are six meanings in which. the negative particle nafi (na 
or a) is used in compounds: similarity (sddrfya), as in abraéhmanah, “like 
a brahmin’’; absence (abhdva), as in apdpam, “‘absence of sin”; being 
other than something (tadanyatvam, mutual] absence), as in anasvah, 
“other than a horse’; smallness of something (tadalpatd), as in anudaré 
kanya, “a girl with a thin belly’’; impropriety or unfitness (aprdfasiya), 
as in apagavah, “‘unfit animals (for sacrifice)”; and contrariety (v77ro- 
dha), asin adharma, “contrary to dharma.’ Of these six meanings only 
one is primarily denoted by nafi, namely, absence. The rest are secon- 
dary to this primary meaning. 

(B201-202). According to the Naiyayikas there are two primary 
meanings of nafi, namely, absence, as in apdpam, “‘absence of sin,” and 
mutual absence (anyonyébhdva), as in asah, “‘other than he.” But accor- 
ding to Konda Bhatta the basic meaning of naf is only absence. 

(8203-204). Patafijali explains that the function of nafi is to convey 
the sense nivrttapadarthaka, namely, bringing the absence of something 
to our notice. In other words, the function of nafi is to convey the absence 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 289 


of something in physical reality. Kaiyata interprets this Bhésya to mean 
that a word like brahmana in abrahmana is used in a secondary sense, 
namely, that of ksatriya, upon whom brahminhood has been superim- 

osed, The function of nafi in abrahmana is only to bring to our notice 
that braéhmana is used in the secondary sense. 

Konda Bhatta criticizes Kaiyata’s view. In instances like ghato ndsti, 
“there is no jar,” and abraéhmana, “‘(he is) not a brahmin,” the particle 
(nafi) does not have two different meanings of absence and superimpo- 
sition (dropitatva). Rather, in both of these cases nafi denotes the sense 
nivrttapadarthaka, which, implies that nafi brings to our notice the fact 
that something is absent. In other words, according.to Patafijali naw 
denotes absence. He further argues that if superimposition were the 
meaning of nafi, as Kaiyata thinks, then nafi would also denote the sense 
of similarity (sddrfya). In that case there would be six different denota- 
tions, as stated earlier. This position involves complexity. 

The negative particle nafi expressing absence may be sometimes 
subject or qualificand (vifesya) and sometimes adjunct or qualifier 
(vifesana). In the forms asah, “other than he,” atvam bhavasi, “‘ (some- 
body) other than you become,” or anekam, ‘‘more than one,” the 
second member is principal. That explains the pronominal operations, 
the number, and the person, which are determined by the predomi- 
nance of the second member. Thus the view of the meaning predomi- 
nance of the second member (uttarapaddrthapradhdnya) explains these 
examples. But according to the other view, the particle na# denotes 
“absence,”? which stands as a qualificand, so the meaning of nafi is the 
main meaning. In the aforementioned special cases the predominance 
of the second member is retained by resorting to secondary meaning, 
which conveys the sense of difference or mutual absence. In such cases 
the negative particle denies the relation of identity in the form of 
denying reference to the meaning of the second member. 


Section 8: The Meanings of Preverbs and 

Particles (Nipdtdrthanirnaya) 

(B205). Grammarians and Naiyayikas do not agree with each other 
about the nature of particles (nipdata). According to the Naiyayikas the 
particles are directly denotative (vdcaka). Particles belong to the cate- 
gory of independently significant words, but preverbs (upasarga) do 
not. The Grammarians disagree with this view. 

(B205) verse 41. Konda Bhatta following Patafijali and Bhartrhari, 
maintains that both preverbs and particles are suggestive (dyotaka) and 
not independently denotative (vdcaka). Preverbs and particles acquire 
meaning only in combination with other words. We find contrast in the 
meaning denoted by 4ste, “‘he sits,” and updste, ‘““he worships,’ which 
does not spring from the meaning inherent in the preverb, The presence 


290 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and absence of upa signal this contrast, which is actually inherent in the 
root meaning. The root as- does not convey by itself the transitive 
Meaning “‘to worship.”? The passive endings are added only to the 
transitive roots. Therefore, to explain the passive construction updsyete 
hariharau, ‘““Hiari and Hara are worshiped,”’ we have to assume thai the 
root as- stands for the meaning “‘to worship.” 

(B205--206). In some cases the preverbs only enlarge the meaning of 
roots. For instance, when we say prajayati, ‘“‘he wins well,” the meaning of 
the preverb does not alter the meaning of the root jz. Sometimes pre- 
verbs determine the specific meaning of the following root. For instance, 
the root sthd denotes the sense to stop the movement. But when it is 
joined with the preverb pra it denotes altogether a different meaning, 
“to move forward.”’ 

For the proper application of a grammatical operation such as 
augmentation, it is necessary to separate a verbal root from a preverb. 
For instance, the augment aé (that is, a in forms like anvabhavat) is inser- 
ted between a verbal root.and a preverb. The finite verb form (abhavat) 
is formed first. Subsequently, the preverb is united with the verb to 
reveal its meaning. In such cases the preverbs are suggestive rather than 
denotative. 

(B206) verse 42. Particles (cédi), like preverbs (prdédi), are also 
suggestive of the meanings of forms to which they are attached. Unless 
we assume the suggestiveness of particles we cannot explain the passive 
voice sdksatkriyate, “it is perceived,’ alamkriyate, “it is adorned,” or 
namaskriyate, “‘he is saluted.”’ ‘These passive voices could be explained 
if we assume that the root kr- denotes the sense of perceiving, adorning, 
and saluting that make the root kr- transitive. 

(8207). The Naiyayikas make a specific distinction between particles 
and preverbs. According to them, the particles are directly denotative, 
but the preverbs are suggestive. Preverbs such as pra have independently 
distinctive meanings of their own when they are disjoined from verbs. 
The preverbs suggest different meanings in connection with different 
verbs. Preverbs only disclose one of the several meanings of the verbal 
root that is to be adopted in a particular case. But particles like sak dt, 
“directly,” and namas, “‘salutation,’’ denote fixed meaning, 

(B215) verse 46. The Naiyayikas maintain that the meaningfulness 
of particles is established on the basis of agreement (anvaya) and diffe- 
rence (uyatireka). If we examine the pair orksah ca, “also tree,” and 
orksah, “‘tree,’’ we find that the particle ca reveals the contrast in mea- 
ning and expression. When we say orksah, “‘tree,”? we do not understand 
the sense of conjunction (namely, also). Therefore, by the process of 
agreement and difference it is clear that the particles are denotative. 

The Grammarians criticize the view of the Naiyayikas. According to 
the Grammarians neither preverbs nor particles are capable of being 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 291 


used independently of other words. For instance, we do not use the 
phrase bhiydn pra, “‘greater excellence,” the way we use the phrase 
bhiiydn prakarsah, “greater excellence.” Similarly, we do not use the 
phrase fobhanaé ca, ‘‘beautiful collection,” the way we use the phrase 
Sobhanah samuccayah, ‘“beautiful collection.” 

(B08-209) verse 43. Konda Bhatta further points out that the 
meaning of particles never stands in appositional relation with another 
nominal stem meaning. Take the instance ghafaf ca, “‘and jar.” The 
meaning conjunction (namely, and) does not stand in appositional 
relation with the meaning “‘jar.’? But the semantic rule is that two 
nominal stem meanings are related to each other appositionally. No 
one understands, however, that the meaning ‘‘conjunction” stands in 
appositional relation with the meaning “‘jar.”’? To remove this difficulty 
the Naiyayikas have to make a special provision that the aforementioned 
semantic rule does not apply to the particles. The Grammarians do not 
have this difficulty. The particle ca, according tothe Grammarians, 
does not convey the sense of conjunction independently. It only functions 
as the suggester of meaning. Therefore, “conjunction” is not regarded 
as nominal-stem-meaning (ndmdartha). 

(B209-210) verse 44. In addition, Konda Bhatta points out that if 
the particles are directly denotative of meaning we will have to assume 
the discontinuousness of meaningful elements. To illustrate this point 
he presents the phrase “‘usraih iva Saraih,” (“by rays, similar, by 
arrows’). The phrase actually means: by rays (that are) like arrows. 
The phrase consists of the following meaningful elements: usra (ray), 
~ais (by), iva (similar), fara (arrows), -ais (by). The instrumental en- 
ding ais added to the word usra does not convey the instrumentality of 
usra alone, rather that of usra+iva (by rays like). This sense is, however, 
not allowed by the grammatical theory, which insists that the case 
termination ais must be construed with the stem usra. One should not 
disturb the inseparable relation that exists between the stem and the 
suffix. Therefore, the analysis usra+-iva-+-bhis (rays like by) goes against 
the principle of word formation. To avoid this difficulty, the Gramma- 
rians maintain that the base usra denotes the sense usrasadrfa (rays like). 
The following particle iva does not denote independently the meaning 
“similar,”’ it only discloses the meaning of usra, “‘rays like,’’ which is to 
be adopted in this particular context. Because in the phrase usraih iva, 
the stem usra denotes the sense usrasadrfa, “rays like,” the meaning of 
the instrumental case ending “‘by”’ can be easily connected with it. 

But according to the Naiydyikas, the particle iva denotes the sense 
“similar.” Therefore, to maintain the meaningful relation between the 
constituents of the phrase usvaih iva the Naiyayikas will have to assume the 
construction usra (rays), wa (similar), ais (by). This construction violates 
the principle that the case endings must be construed with the stems, 


292 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(B210-211) verse 45. An objection is-raised by the Naiyayikas. If 
particles are not independently denotative of meaning, then in the 
tathurusa compound formed with the negative particle naf, the first 
member, nafi (that is, ain the compounds like abréhfmana, ‘other thana 
brahmin’’), will be meaningless. Ifthe first member is meaningless, the 
question of the second member’s predominance does not arise at all. 
Consequently, the definition of the fafpurusa compound (tatpurusa is a 
compound in which the meaning of the second member is predominant) 
will not be applicable. Similarly, particles and preverbs that are not 
independently meaningful will not be called nominal stems (pratipadi- 
kas) because the basic condition for the designation pratipadika (Panini 
1.2.45) is meaningfulness. 

The Grammarians answer that particles and preverbs are suggestive 
of meaning, so they are not totally meaningless. If one takes into 
account the suggestive nature of particles and preverbs, the designations 
tathurusa and pratipadika are applied. 

(B215-216). Finally, Konda Bhatta points out that one should not 
insist on any one of the two alternatives, suggestiveness or denotative- 
ness. Some preverbs and particles are suggestive and some are 
denotative. Nonetheless, he disagrees with the Naiyayikas and the 
Mimamsakas, who insist that particles are directly expressive, while 
preverbs are always suggestive of meaning. 


Section 9: The Meaning of Suffixes Forming Abstract 

Nouns (Bhdvapratyayarthanirnaya) 

(B217). In the case of a compound, a primary derivative (krt), or a 
secondary derivative (taddhta), the suffixes prescribed in the sense of 
bhava, or abstract notion, convey a relation excluding the words that 
have a conventional sense (ridhi), adjectives (abhinnariipa), and words 
expressing a relation that is inseparable. (The source of this statement 
quoted by Konda Bhatta is not known. Helaraja also quotes it in his 
commentary on the Vakyapadiya, kinda 3, chapter 5, verse 1.) 

(B217-218). The addition of abstract suffixes to such compounds as 
ra@japurusa, “king’s servant,’ denotes the sense of king’s relation to a 
servant, and the expression aupagavaiva, ‘“‘cowherd-sonness,”? expresses 
the son’s relation to the father cowherd. The abstract noun pdcakatva, 
*‘cookness,’’ stands for the actor—action relation. 

This rule has three exceptions. The riidha word. krsnasarpa conventio- 
nally refers to a poisonous snake. The word. Sukla, when it is adjectivally 
used, refers to a white thing, a substance. When we formulate the ex- 
pression fuklatva, “‘white-thingness,’’ it means the quality “white 
color.” Sattd is an instance of the third type, inseparable relation. The 
word saé refers to an existing thing, and satfdé denotes invariable relation 
to an existing thing. In other words, sai#@ cannot be separated from 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 293 


sat. As opposed to this claim, the Mimamsakas maintain that in words 
like dandi, ‘‘a person carrying a stick,” the passive suffix -in denotes only 
a substance and not a relation of owner—owned. The idea of the relation 
between danda (a stick) and -in (that is, a person referred to by the 
possessive suffix) arises after the relation of qualifier (danda) and the 
qualified (in other words, a person qualified by darda) is comprehended. 
Therefore, dandi does not denote a relation between danda (stick) and 
the person referred to by the taddhita suffix -in. Similarly, pacaka does 
not denote a relation between the stem meaning (action) and the 
suffix meaning (agent). The relation between péka, the action of 
cooking, and kartr, agent (the meaning of the suffix) is neither the sense 
of the root nor that of the suffix. Thus the primary (Art) and the secon- 
dary (taddhita) derivatives do not denote any relation. But the abstract- 
noun-forming suffixes tva and ial in pacakatvua and danditva denote the 
sense of relation. Konda Bhatta criticizes this Mimamsaka view by 
pointing out that if the relation is not expressed by the words dandin and 
pacaka, it will not be expressed by the words danditva and pacakatva. The 
Mimamsakas accept the principle halfway but not in its entirety. 

(B219). Konda Bhatta refers to Katyayana’s vdrttika 5 on Panini 
5.1.119. Katyayana says that the suffixes iva and tal denote the quality 
due to the presence of which a word is applied to an object. The quality 
denoted by an abstract suffix is any characteristic that is dependent on 
the thing meant as its substratum. This characteristic (prakdra) or 
quality, which determines the meaning expressed by the stem, is deno- 
ted by the suffixes tva and tal. For instance, when the word Sukla denotes 
a substance (white thing), the expression fuklatva denotes a white 
quality. But when the word sukla denotes white color, then the expres- 
sion fuklaiva stands for the universal common to white colors. Words 
like anu, “‘atomic,”’ mahat, “big,” or dirgha, “long,” always stand for the 
objects that have these qualities. The expressions anutva, mahativa, or 
dirghatva stand for the qualities (such as size or length) that distinguish 
these objects from others. The expression pacakatva stands for the relation 
between the agent and the action (cooking). The expression ghafatva 
stands for the notion of a universal jar. Konda Bhatta, following Bhartr- 
hari, states that from the point of ultimate reality the different univer- 
sals like ghajaiva are nothing more than the mahdsatid, the highest uni- 
versal, All words express the mahdsattd as it exists in all different things. 

(8220-221). Konda Bhatta quotes another véritika on Panini5.1.119. 
Each word is employed to express a thing (artha) on some ground 
(pravpitinimitia)}, and it is this ground that is expressed by-the addition 
of the abstract suffixes tva and tal. 

Kaiyata explains this view as follows. The expressions gotva, pacakatva, 
Suklatva, and the like point to the thing (that is, the referent) through 
some property known as its ground for application (praorttinimitia). In 


294 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF {NDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the case of the word go the expressed sense is a substance, while the 
ground for the term’s application is gotva, the universal feature. In the 
case of the word pdcaka, the expressed sense is the agent of the action of 
cooking, and the ground for the term’s application is the action of 
cooking. In the compounds rdjapurusah, “‘king’s servant,’’ and so on, the 
referent is the king’s servant and the ground for the term’s application 
is the relation between a king and a servant. “‘Dittha”’ refers to a person, 
ditthatva refers to the ground for application, in other words, the name 
that identifies the person called Dittha. Thus, according to Kaiyata, 
the meaning of the suffix tva is pravrttinimitta, the ground for the appli- 
cation of the term, which may be either a universal or action or relation 
or name. 

Konda Bhatta explains the real implication of the vdrttika as follows: 
all words express their meaning on account of their ground for the 
term’s application (pravrttinimitia). This praorttinimitia in the case of 
proper nouns is nothing but the word form. When we first learn to use 
proper nouns like ‘Hari,’ “Hara,” or “‘Nala” we know that someone 
is expressed by these words. Here we do not have any property that 
can be considered as ground for application of the term. The same 
thing is true in case of medicinal herbs growing in a forest, which do not 
convey any specific sense to persons living in cities. These names of 
medicinal herbs refer to a substance, and the ground for application of 
these terms is the name (word form) of these herbs. Then the abstract 
expression like Aaratva refers to the word form or to the name. 


Section 10: The Meaning of Suffixes Added to the Names 

of Deities (Devataipratyayarthanirnaya) 

(B224). In aindram havih, “an oblation presented to the god Indra,” 
the taddhita suffix -an is added to the stem indra- in the sense of sé; for 
example, sya devatd (Panini 4.2.24): ‘‘this is its deity.” Therefore the 
sense of the taddhita suffix -ap and others like it is an oblation presented 
to a particular deity. The meaning of the stem is construed with the 
meaning “‘deity in relation of apposition (abhedasambandha),”’ which is 
a part of the suffix’s meaning. The meaning devaid stands syntactically 
subordinate (that is, as the qualifier) with respect to the meaning deya, 
an oblation. The meaning deya stands syntactically predominant 
(that is, qualified) with respect to the meaning devatd. Thus the meaning 
of the suffix is devatoddesyakam deyam, an oblation to be presented that 
is subservient to a deity. 

Konda Bhatta mentions the second view that the meaning devatd, 
deity (of the rites), and deya, an oblation to be presented, are two 
separate denctations of the faddhita suffix. According to the first view, 
however, these meanings are always presented together and not the 
one separately without the other. 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 295 


(B225). The third view stated by Konda Bhatta is that the sense 
“deity” comes from the stem itself. The word indra, in the context of 
the sacrificial rite, stands for the deity Indra, and it is an accepted 
popular usage (niriidha laksana). Because the sense “deity’’ is already 
expressed by the stem it need not be expressed again by the taddhita 
suffix. 


Section 11: The Nondenotation of Number (by the Subordinate 
Constituent of Vyiti or Complex Formation) (Abhedaikatvasamkhya- 
nirnaya) 

(B226) verse 54. In the case of a complex formation the question is 
whether the subordinate member of the formation conveys the idea of 
a particular number or of no number at all. In compounds like rdjapuru- 
sah, “‘king servant,’’ we do not know whether the man belongs to one 
king, two kings, or more than two kings. Following Bhartrhari, Konda 
Bhatta answers that we apprehend, abhedatkatvasamkhyd, singular number 
without differentiation, from the subordinate member of the complex 
formation. 

The term abhedaikatvasamkhya is interpreted in two ways. According 
to the first interpretation, from a subordinate member of a complex 
formation we apprehend singular number, which includes other num- 
bers too. The notion of other numbers co-exists in the singular. From 
the singular one can understand any required number according to 
the fact of communication. In this view, the subordinate member expre- 
sses singular number, which is noncommittal and may represent any 
number. Just as the honey elixir represents an undifferentiated com- 
bination of the flavors of many medical herbs, so all three numbers 
have merged in the singular and become one. 

The second interpretation is that abhedaikatvasamkhyad means the 
notion of numbers in general, without specification being made. In the 
same way, from a distance a person who cannot see the exact color of 
a thing tells us that it has some indistinct color without knowing any 
specific color, like white. The same is true of number conveyed by the 
subordinate member of the complex formation: it conveys some number 
without committing any specific one. 

In some cases of compounds a particular number is clearly indicated, 
for instance, dviputrah, “having two sons,” triputrah, “having three sons,” 
and so on, where the meaning of the nominal item itself is a particular 
number. In the word formation tdvakinah, “belonging to you,” mdma- 
kinah, “belonging to me,” the substitutes tdvaka and mdmaka indicate 
singular number (Panini 4.3.3). 

(B227) verse 54. Konda Bhatta refers to the example hapiftjalan 
dlabheta, “‘one should kill (three partridges by immolating)”’ from the 
Pirvamimémsd. Here from the plural kapifijalan only three partridges 


296 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


are understood because the idea of three comes first. The idea of four 
and more includes the idea of three, but the idea of three can exclude 
the idea of four or more. There is no reason to abandon the idea of 
three. Therefore, the Mimamsakas conclude that the scripture pres- 
cribes killing of three partridges only and not of more than three. 
Similarly, in complex formation, when there is nothing that gives us 
an idea of a particular number we understand the idea of singularity, 
which comes first (verse 54, Bhiisana, p. 227). 


Section 12: Intended and Unintended Denotation of Number 

(Samkhypavivaksarthanirnayah) 

(8229). Konda Bhatta refers to the Mimamsa principle grahatkatva, 
singularity of cups (unintended). In the sentence graham sammarsti, “‘he 
cleans a cup” the singular number of the cup is not intended. By this 
sentence, cleaning with reference to a cup is prescribed. Here “cup” 
functions as the subject (uddesya, in other words, that with reference 
to which something is prescribed) and “cleaning” functions as the 
predicate (vidheya, in other words, that which is prescribed with refe- 
rence to something). The subject is guna, subsidiary, with regard to the 
predicate, and the predicate is pradhdna, principal, with regard to the 
subject. A subject phrase that figures as qualifier to a subject is avivaksita 
(not intentionally used.). Therefore the number of the subject is not 
intentionally used, that is to say, no special significance is attached to 
it. So “cup” stands for any cup and not for one particular cup. 

Again, the Mimamsakas hold that whatever figures as a qualifier 
in the predicate phrase is vivaksita, intentionally used, for instance, 
pasund yajeta, “one should bring about a sacrifice by means of an 
animal.” The sentence is interpreted to mean “‘yagam uddisya pasgur 
vidhiyate” (‘‘with reference to a sacrifice an animal is enjoined”). In 
the predicate the qualifying number is intentionally used. Therefore, in 
pasund, singular number is intentionally used. Accordingly, the sacrifice 
should be performed with one animal. 

The Grammarians do not accept this view. Whether number is in- 
tentionally used or not intentionally used in subject and predicate 
words depends on particular instances. We cannot make it a rule just 
because the Mimamsakas have done it. The Grammarians do not 
accept the view that a word that figures as the qualifier in the subject 
phrase is not significant or intentionally used. For instance, valddi, begin- 
ning with a consonant other than_y, which figures as a qualifying condi- 
tion with reference to the qualified drdhadhdtukasya in the subject phrase 
“valadeh Ardhadhatukasya” (Panini 7.2.35), is significant and inten- 
tionally used. 

(B229-230). Similarly, the view of the Mimamsakas that a work that 
figures as the qualifier in the predicate phrase is significant and inten- 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 997 


tionally used is also not acceptable to the Grammarians. For instance, 
the singular number conveyed by the phrase nah (replaced by the 
phoneme n), which figures as the qualifier in the predicate phrase 
(Panini 8.4.1), is not significant. That is why nz has been substituted 
in bhinna for d and ¢ in bhid+-ta. Finally, Konda Bhatta accepts that 
whatever figures as a qualifier in the predicate phrase should be taken 
to be intentionally used. 


Section 13: The Meaning of the Primary Suffixes Such as 

Kiva (Ktvapratyayadiném arthanirnayak) 

(B232). According to the Varitikakaéra (varitika 3 on Panini 3.4.26), 
the suffixes kivé (that is, iva) and tumun (that is, tum) have the same 
meaning (namely, agent/object) as the finite verb. But according to 
Patafijali, tva or tum (gerunds or continuatives) denote only bhava 
(action). 

Appayya Diksita in his Parimala maintains the view that in “paktva 
odano bhujyate devadattena” (“‘the rice is eaten by Devadatta after 
having cooked it’’), the verb bhujyate along with the suffix tvd expresses 
the sense Karman. Similarly, therefore, Panini 2.3.1 stops it from adding 
the accusative -am to the word odana by Panini 2.3.2. In “‘paktva oda- 
nam bhunkte devadattah” (“Devadatta eats rice after having cooked 
it”), the fact that Devadatta functions as the agent is abhihita, already 
expressed, by the verb ending ~ti as well as by suffix -ivd. As the sense 
“agent” is abhihita we are not allowed to add the instrumental ending 
after the stem Devadatta, according to Panini 2.3.18, 

(B232-235). Konda Bhatta disagrees with this view. According to 
him the suffix -tv@ does not express the sense “‘agent.”? Panini’s rule 
3.4.21 means: (the suffix -tvd is added to a verbal root, which expresses) 
the prior action of two (verbal actions) that have the same agent. The 
rule only says that both actions have the same agent; it does not say 
that the suffixes -tvd and -tum- denote the sense “‘agent.” Following 
Patafijali, Konda Bhatta maintains that the suffixes -tvd and -tum denote 
only bhdva, action. But this view does not mean that the object/agent 
of the action expressed by -tvd/-tum will be used in the accusative/instru- 
mental. Following Bhartrhari, he maintains that in the examples 
“paktva odano bhujyate” and “paktva odanam bhunkte devadattah,” 
odana is the object of both actions (the action of eating, which is the 
principal one, and the action of cooking, which is the subordinate one), 
and Devadatta is the agent of both actions. In the first example the 
sense “‘object’? (Karman) is expressed by the finite verb but not by the 
suffix vd. Similarly, in the second example the sense “agent” (karér) is 
expressed by the finite verb but not by the gerund-forming suffix -~tvd. 
When the sense “‘agent/object”’ is expressed by the main verb, the agent/ 
object word is used in the nominative. The object/agent of the subordi- 


298 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nate action is always in consonance with those of the principal action. 
The fact is that the abhihital/anabhihita by the main verb determines 
which case endings are to be added to a nominal stem. 

The expression bhuktvd vrajati, “che goes away after eating,” is regar- 
ded as one single sentence. Bhukivé and. vrajati are not to be read in 
isolation but as connected with each other by the qualifier—qualified 
relation. The action denoted by the finite verb is the qualified one, and 
the action denoted by the gerund is the qualifier one. 

This qualifier qualified relation may be of four types: janyajanakabha- 
va, the producer—produced relation, as in, for instance, bhoktum pacati, 
“the cooks for eating,” because eating cannot be undertaken without 
cooking ; pirvotiarabhdva, the relation of preceding and succeeding, as 
in, for instance, bhuktvd vrajati, “che goes after eating,’’ where we find 
that the action of going follows the action of eating; sémdnddhikaranya, 
coreferentiality, as in, for instance, bhuktvd vrajati, where both of the 
actions have the same agent, because we understand that the eater and 
the goer are the same person; and vydpyatva, the relation of pervasion, 
as in, for instance, adhitya tisthati, ‘‘while studying he stands,” “or 
mukham vyddaya svapiti, “while keeping his mouth open he sleeps.’ Here 
the action of studying is coextensive with the action of standing, and 
the action of keeping the mouth open is coextensive with the action of 
sleeping. The main actions, studying and sleeping, are regarded as 
coinciding with the actions of standing and keeping the mouth open. 


Section 14: The Doctrine of Sphota (Sphotanirnaya) 

(B236-239). Konda Bhatta classifies the sphofa into eight different 
varieties: varnavyaktisphota, the phoneme event is the conveyer of 
meaning; padavyaktisphota, the word event is the conveyer of meaning; 
vakyavyaktisphota, the sentence event is the conveyer of meaning; 
akhandapadasphofa, the finished word as an undivided linguistic unit is 
the conveyer of the meaning; akhandavikyasphota, the sentence as an 
undivided linguistic unit is the conveyer of meaning ; varnajatisphota, the 
phoneme type is the conveyer of meaning; padajdtisphota, the word type 
is the conveyer of meaning; and vékyajatisphota, the sentence type is the 
conveyer of meaning. The term varnasphota does not mean that each 
single phoneme is regarded as sphota, but the phoneme or phonemes 
constituting either a stem or a suffix are regarded as such. 

(B257) verses 60-69. Although the eight varieties of sphota are accep- 
ted by the Grammarians, it is the sentence sphofa alone that represents 
the essential nature of the sphofa doctrine. 

(B236-237) verse 59. According to the Naiyayikas fictional 
constituents, namely, sthdnin, prototype, like the symbol -l “‘el’’ and the 
like, are the conveyers of meaning. In opposition, the Grammarians 
maintain that the constituents that belong to the usable form of the 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 299 


language, like -tz (in bhavatz) or h (in rémah) are conveyers of meaning, 
not the fictional units such as -1 “‘el’’ or -su. 

The Naiyayikas argue that it is more reasonable to maintain that the 
prototypes are denotative of meaning than to assign the denotative 
function to the suffixes that are actually used. The reason is that compa- 
red to the prototype “el’’ -1, which stands for all verb endings, the 
substitutes -¢i, -tas, -anti, and so on are numerous. If the denotative 
functions were assigned to the substitutes it would lead to assumptions 
of endless denotative functions. 

As an answer to the objection raised by the Naiyayikas, Konda 
Bhatta argues that if the prototypes were denotative of meaning there 
would, be some ambiguity, because different grammatical schools have 
chosen different prototypes. We find that the prototypes are variable, 
while the substitutes are of fixed character. Further, the Grammarians 
maintain that the substitutes that are actually heard by listeners are 
meaning-bearing units but that the prototypes, which are not actually 
used in the language, are not. 

(S579). Some exponents of the phoneme sphoja theory formulate a 
different point of view. According to them, the meaning is conveyed 
by the last phoneme only, and the impressions of the individual phone- 
mes constituting a word are helpful to produce only the simultaneous 
recollection of the phonemes heard. The last sound, helped by impre- 
ssions left behind by the previous perceptions of sounds, reveals the 
meaning, 

Konda Bhatta criticizes this claim on the ground that it becomes 
dificult to answer why the meaning is not understood, even if the 
phonemes are uttered in different periods of time. 


Padasphota 

(8239) verse 63. In such forms as ghajena, “‘by a jar,” it is very 
difficult to determine precisely which part of the word represents the 
stem and which, the suffix. There is no fixed criterion that would enable 
us to determine that ghaja is the base and na is the suffix or that ghaf is 
the base and, ena is the suffix. Similarly, it is very difficult to point out 
the division between the stem portion and the suffix in the accusative 
optional plural vak, nak of the personal pronouns yusmad and asmad. 
Therefore, the padasphota (word sphoja) maintains that the finished 
word as a unique entity conveys the meaning. 


Vakyasphota 

(B240-241 ) verse 64. The padasphota theory also presents a difficulty 
in analyzing a sentence such as hare’va, ‘Hari protect me,”’ because 
the listener grasps the meaning even if he fails to récognize exactly 
the isolated constituents hare and ava, due to ignorance of the laws 


300 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of euphonic combination. Because the listener grasps the meaning 
without understanding the division of the sentence, the Grammarians 
contend that the sentence should be considered as a single unit for the 
purpose of communication. 

The Grammarians’ vdkyafakti theory assumes that the entire sentence 
is endowed with denotative function, and the sentence as a whole 
conveys one single meaning. 

The Naiyayikas claim that the meaning of a word is first remembered, 
and the relational meaning is cognized at the time of verbal knowledge. 
Thus according to the Naiyayikas the sentence conveys some new 
meaning (apirva). This additional meaning, over and above the word 
meaning, is the distinctive feature of the sentence meaning (vékypdrtha), 
and it is conveyed by factors like syntactic expectancy (dkdénksd), or 
relational seam, or the particular juxtaposition of words (samsarga- 
marydda), or speaker’s intention (tdtparya). The Naiyayikas raise the 
objection to the vékyasakti that according to the Grammarians the dis- 
tinction between the meaning cognized through the denotative function 
and the meaning cognized through the verbal cognition (sabdabodha) 
can no longer remain because, according to the vdkyafakti theory, the 
entire meaning of a sentence is known before the verbal cognition has 
taken place in the mind. 

The Grammarians answer that the objection can be raised against 
the theory of denotation of meaning as related to the meanings of other 
words (anvitabhidhanavida) maintained by the Prabhakara school of 
Mimamsa. The Prabhakaras contend that the relational meaning is also 
the denoted meaning of a word. According to this school, the relational 
meaning of words is also known in a general way, and the definite 
relationship between the meanings of words in their precise form is 
clearly brought out at the time of verbal knowledge. The Grammarians, 
arguing on the same lines maintain that the denotative function of a 
sentence denotes the meaning of the individual words distinctly and 
their relation along with the other word meanings in a general way. 
That is to say, the precise relation among the various word meanings is 
cognized at the time of verbal knowledge alone. 

To prove that the sentence meaning is known through the sentence 
function, Konda Bhatta cites the example “haridrayam nadyam 
ghosah”’ (“‘a hamlet [is situated] on [the bank of] the river Haridra’’.) 
When a person who has not heard the name of Haridra previously hears 
this sentence, he understands the meaning of the word haridrd. He can 
guess the meaning of the word haridra because he understands the 
meaning of the rest of the sentence, and then he is able to identify the 
meaning of the isolated words. The Prabhakaras claim that meaning 
exists in words that are fragments of a sentence. The procedure for 
understanding the meaning is to set side by side the sentences in which 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 301 


only one word is different. The child understands the meaning of words 
by the method of dvdpodvdpa, agreement and contrast. According to the 
Prabhakaras, words first convey the meaning related to one another, 
and later on we comprehend the meaning from isolated words. This 
analytical approach claims that an individual word is endowed with 
meaning, not the sentence as a whole. 

The Grammarians who are exponents of the vdkyasaktivdda maintain 
that although a child in a later stage identifies and isolates the word in a 
sentence, still it understands first the meaning from a sentence. The 
division of a sentence into words is an analytical method. When one 
hears a sentence it is not taken into account in terms of a series of 
meaningful units but as a whole. 

(B240-241 ) verse 65. Konda Bhatta points out that the Grammarians 
agree partially with the Bhatta school, for they maintain that a unified 
sentence meaning is verbal. According to the Bhatta school, the cogni- 
tion of unified meaning becomes verbal (Sabda) as it is conveyed by 
secondary meaning. According to the Grammarians, primary designa- 
tion or denotative function (abhidh@) assigned to a sentence conveys a 
unified sentence meaning. But according to the Bhattas, the secondary 
function conveys syntactically unified meaning. 

(B54-62). Konda Bhatta states that just as we comprehend the 
meaning of words from the words, so also do we comprehend the mea- 
ning of a sentence from the sentence. Consequently, just as the denota- 
tive function conveying the sense of words is assigned to the words, so 
the denotative function conveying the sense of a sentence should be 
assigned to the sentence. Thus the word sphofa and the sentence sphofa 
are established. 

(B241-244). The Naiyayikas hold that words primarily denote 
isolated meanings and the relational or syntactic meaning is communi- 
cated by the speaker’s intention or specific juxtaposition of the words. 
Thus, according to the Naiyayikas, the denotative function resides in 
isolated words. Now the Grammarians argue that if the denotative 
function resides in isolated words and not in the sentence, the layman 
might understand the meaning from the unconnected words: ghatfa, 
“jar,” karmatva, “objecthood,” dnayanam, “bringing,” and krtih, “effort,” 
as he understands the meaning from the sentence ghatam dnaya, “bring 
a jar,” because the amount of information furnished by the unconnec- 
ted words is practically the same as that furnished by the parts of the 
sentence ghafa+-am, d-+-nay-a. But it is experienced that a layman 
cannot grasp the meaning from unconnected words that do not form 
an organized sentence. Yet if it is held that the sentence as a whole is 
denotative of meaning, the difficulty does not arise, for the unconnected 
words mentioned above do not form an organized sentence. If the 
Naiyayikas assume that the words convey the meaning only when they 


302 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


are organized in a sentence form such as ghatam dnaya, then nothing 
but the theory of the vdkyasphota is established. 

(B249) verse 66, taken from Vakyapadiya. There are no phonemes in 
the words, and (there are} no parts in the phonemes. There is no 
absolute and clear-cut separation of words from sentence. Konda 
Bhatta, on the basis of this statement, lays emphasis on the indivisible 
nature of the sphota. The verse implies that the word is without any 
sequence of phonemes and that the sentence is bereft of the sequence 
of words, even if they are cognized as having the sequence of phonemes 
and words. Konda Bhatta argues that, as in the phonemes ¢, a, I, r, 
though the parts a, 7, l, r are separately cognized, they are not regarded 
as separate parts of the phonemes, so in the same manner a word should 
not be considered to be divisible into stems and suffixes. 

The diversity in knowledge such as “‘thisisthe phoneme k,”’ ‘‘this 
is the phoneme j,”’ can be justified simply by assuming a diversity in the 
delimiting property of production (utpatii) or revelation (abhivyakti) of 
various phonemes, residing in the conjunction of the wind (generally), 
accepted as giving rise to the various sounds. It is clearly stated in the 
section dealing with the deities (devatd) in the Bhamati (Vacaspati 
Miégra’s commentary on the Samkarabhdsya) that the shrillness (and 
other qualities) residing in the wind are superimposed upon the 
phonemes. Konda Bhatta points out that breath wind comes into 
contact with the different vocal organs, and it assumes the form of 
different phonemes. The diversity belonging to the airwaves (vdyusam- 
yoga) that come into contact with the different articulatory points is 
superimposed upon sounds that are modifications of airy substances. 

Thus the pirvapaksin raises the following objection: instead of assum- 
ing that the phonemes are denotative, why do we not consider the 
sound-producing movements themselves to be denotative? Konda 
Bhatta answers by reasoning that the auditory perception of phonemes 
experienced by people cannot be ascribed to the sound-producing 
movements, which are beyond the sense organs. The speaker makes 
the sound-producing movements, and from them, the listener perceives 
the phonemes. The listener identifies the outer phonemes and not the 
inner sound-producing movements, which are beyond the reach of 
sense organs. 

(B249-250). Konda Bhatta furnishes instances of recognition: it is 
the same phoneme g, it is the same word, it is the same sentence. The 
first instance points out that the phoneme sfhofa remains the same, 
though it is distinctively revealed by the peculiarities of the individual 
speakers. The experience shows that the phonemic g is a single entity 
and gives a unitary character to the phoneme g. Similarly the experien- 
ces of one word and of one sentence cannot be attributed to the 
phonemes, or stems or suffixes or words, because the notion of unitari- 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 303 


ness cannot present different objects as its contents. Konda Bhatta 
suggests that we cannot attribute this unitary perception to the collec- 
tive notions of the phonemes in a single memory. The perceptive 
experience shows that the word gauh is a single entity, and it corresponds 
to the unity of meaning. It is not possible to argue that this unitary 
experience is based on the single memory of all phonemes combined 
together, because meaningless phonemes cannot give rise to a meaning 
even when they are put together in a single memory. 

(B250-251). Konda Bhatta maintains the view that sounds perceived 
by the listeners are not different from the sphota. The sphota is cognized 
in the form of the distinctive sounds g-h-a-j-a. Konda Bhatta holds the 
view that the object of cognition is the indivisible word-~sphofa, but its 
form is nothing else than the phonemes auditorily perceived. The 
phoneme g manifested by sound is identified with the phoneme g, which 
appears to be the part of indivisible sphofa word. Owing to this con~ 
fusion, the sphofa, which is partless, appears to have parts. In reality, 
the individual phonemes are not conceived to be different from the 
partless sphota progressively revealed by sounds. 

(B252). The parvapaksin raises the question. Do the sound-producing 
airwaves reveal sphofa individually or collectively? It cannot be held 
that the sound-producing airwaves reveal sphofa individually, because 
ifit were so, any particular sound-producing airwave would be enough 
to reveal sphota, and the remaining airwaves would be redundant. It 
cannot be argued that the sound-producing airwaves reveal the sphoja 
collectively, because they are momentary, and each airwave perishes 
as soon as the succeeding one comes into existence. 

Konda Bhatta meets this argument by saying that the sound-produc- 
ing movements reveal sphota individually. A single airwave, for instance, 
in the word gauh reveals sphofa through the medium of the sound g, 
another reveals sphota through the medium of the sound au; and the 
third one reveals sphota through the medium of visarga (h). ‘Thus the 
Sphofa is more and more clearly revealed with each succeeding airwave. 
In this manner, Konda Bhatta says, the sphofa word. gauh is revealed by 
each individual wave through the medium of the order of sounds, g, 
au, h. The different sounds are considered to be nondifferent from the 
sphota word gauh. 

(B262). The Naiyayikas object that the relation of immediate 
sequence cannot be maintained between the two sounds, because the 
first has died out by the time the second has come into existence. The 
relation of priority and posteriority arises only when two things exist 
simultaneously. There cannot be any combination of what is non- 
existent with what exists. 

Konda Bhatta answers this objection by assuming that the combina- 
tion of nonexisting things is possible in cognition. The combination 


304 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


can be maintained between two sounds, because at the time of the 
knowledge of the uipatti (production), the knowledge of sthiti (duration) 
of the first sound, has not died out. 

(B248, 252). Kaiyata contends that the unity of word or sentence 
cannot be attributed to phonemes because one cannot account for the 
simultaneity of phonemes. The combination of phonemes itself is 
impossible, because each phoneme perishes as soon as it is uttered. 
There cannot be a combination of what exists with what has ceased to 
exist. Neither can the unity of the word be explained with reference to 
the collective recollection of the phonemes. In the collective recollection 
also, the phonemes do not figure in any sequence because the sequence 
of phonemes is an impossible task. Further, it would lead to the cogni- 
tion of the same meaning from words that contain the same phonemes 
in a different order. The difference between the words nadi and dina and 
their meanings (“river’ and “‘poor’’) would be unaccountable by the 
collective recollection of phonemes that constitute the words nadi 
(river) and dina (poor), because the constituent phonemes of the said 
words are the same. The impressions left by the phonemes will be the 
same even when the order is reversed. There is no sequence in the 
recollection because we cannot remember the objects in the same order 
as we have perceived them. Because the unitary experience “‘this is one 
word” cannot be explained with reference to the series of phonemes, and 
because the difference between the words nadi and dina and the like is 
otherwise unaccountable, the grammarians establish the existence of 
the sphota as an indivisible meaning-bearing unit. 

Konda Bhatta disagrees with the Grammarians’ view that the main 
justification of the sphofa entity stems from the fact that the combination 
of the sequence of phonemes that constitute the word cannot be explain- 
ed. Following the theory of association, he maintains that each succeed- 
ing phoneme progressively reveals the substructure of a word in the 
form of a certain sequence, and all of these substructures directly or 
indirectly reveal the word, which is an aggregate of phonemes f, a, f, a. 
Now at the time of perceiving the second phoneme, not only is the 
phoneme a cognized, but the substructure pa is also cognized through 
the impression of phonemes that is left on the mind of listener. In this 
manner, the whole structure pata is cognized at the time of perceiving 
the last phoneme a. Each subsequent sound reveals the substructure of 
the preceding and the succeeding scunds, and thus we can establish the 
coexistence of phonemes. Therefore, Konda Bhatta argues, the main 
reason for accepting the sphofa theory is not unaccountability of the 
idea of sequence, but the experience that the word is single and unitary. 

(B251). (The question is raised in the Parimala commentary whether 
the sphoja revealed by synonyms ghata and kalafa [both mean ‘“‘pot’’] 
are identical or different.) According to the Grammarian the sphofa 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 305 


word is indivisible, and it is something over and above the phonemes. 
Accordingly, the sphofa words cannot be said to have phonetic shapes. 
Thus the sphofa character of the word cannot be rendered different 
through the differences in the phonetic shape of words. The sphoja 
character of synonyms like ghafa and kalafa cannot be distinguished 
semantically either, because the meaning conveyed by these words is 
identical. If the sphota character of the synonyms ghafa and kalafa is 
assumed, to be identical, a man who is aware of the convention of the 
word ghafa but is ignorant of the convention of the word kalaga will 
understand the meaning from the sphota word kalaéa, which is identical 
with the sphofa word ghata. 

To get rid of this difficulty, the Grammarians maintain that the 
difference in the phonetic shape (in other words in the revealing sound 
of the sphofa) causes the difference in the revealed sphota. The know- 
ledge of the convention must be separately grasped in the case of the 
different sphota, though they may convey the same meaning. When this 
separation is maintained, the sphota word revealed by the phonetic 
shape gh-a-f-a becomes different from the sphota word revealed by the 
phonetic shape k-a-l-a-S-a. There remains no possibility of verbal cogni- 
tion from the sphofa-word kalafa when one knows the convention of 
the word ghata alone, because the two words are different. 

Sphota words are different, and the knowledge of the denotative 
function must be grasped separately, with reference to each sphota word. 
The Grammarians do not maintain a difference between two things: 
the difference in the sphofa word and the difference in the phonetic 
shape. 

(B253-254) verse 67. It is argued by the pirvapaksin that if the 
Grammarians maintain that the vdkyasphofa alone is real, how can they 
be justified in analyzing the sentence into different words, and words 
into stems and suffixes? The Grammarians answer that acceptance of 
the padasphofa and the varnasphoja is undoubtedly a fiction, inasmuch as 
there is no separate existence of words apart from the sentence of which 
they are parts. This device, though unreal, is stil] helpful from the point 
of unreal reality to describe our mind. The study of the grammatical 
science enables us to realize the ultimate reality through the unreal or 
illusory analysis of words. Just as the knowledge of the five sheaths 
(paficakosa) in the Vedanta is a means to attaining the knowledge of the 
ultimate reality, Brahman, so also the teaching of eight divisions of 
sphota is a practical device for comprehending the ultimate knowledge 
of the real, partless sentence-sphofa (akhanda-vikya-sphota). 

(B257) verse 69. The Mimamsakas maintain that the different 
attributes (upadki) such as shortness (hrasvatva), longness (dirghatva), 
lowness (anudditatva), and the like, belong in reality to the sound- 
producing airwaves, though they are superimposed on the phonemes. 


306 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


These superimposed qualities serve to distinguish one phoneme from 
the others. Arguing on the same lines, the Grammarians maintain that 
the k-ness (kafva) and so on, which belong to the airwaves, appear to be 
superimposed on the phonemes revealed by the airwaves. Similarly, 
the production and destruction are properties of airwaves, but they 
are felt to be associated with the phonemes. In this manner the cognition 
“the phoneme k is produced” is justified. 

(B255). The Grammarians maintain that the phoneme g in gana and 
gait is the same and permanent, because we have the recognition se’yam 
gakarah, “this is the same phoneme g.” The recognition referring to the 
sameness of individual phoneme g forces one to accept the permanency 
of phonemes. The Naiyayikas disagree with the Grammarians, however, 
and maintain that the cognition so’yam gakdrah, “‘this is the same 
phoneme g,” does not follow from the identity of the individuals but 
from the sameness of the individuals’ universal character. The two 
phonemes g, and g, are different from each other, still they are consider- 
ed to be the same and can be grouped under the universal character 
ce g-ness.”’ 

The Grammarians say that the recognition “this is the same phoneme 
g’ does not follow from the knowledge of the two individuals as related 
to the same class, but it refers to the sameness of the individual phoneme 
g pronounced at different times and by different individuals. The 
Naiydyikas controvert the Grammarians’ theory by pointing out the 
fact that, if the phonemes are permanent, it cannot be justified to make 
a statement like gakdra utpannah because the phonemes are not subjected 
to the origination. The Grammarians respond that the cognition 
gakdéra uipannah, “‘g is produced,” refers to internal air issued forth from 
speaker’s mouth. This internal air, which appears and vanishes, is 
identified with the auditory image of the phoneme g. 

By contrast, the Naiydyikas maintain that the cognition so?yam 
gakdrah, which points out the sameness of the phonemes g, and gz is, 
considered erroneous as far as it refers to the sameness of individuals. 
According to the Naiyadyikas the cognition of appearance and dis- 
appearance is valid, while the cognition of identity between the two 
individuals is invalid or erroneous. Thus the controversial point between 
the Grammarians and the Naiyayikas is whether the vocal organs 
produce a sound or make it manifest. 


Jatisphota and Vyaktisphota 

(B255) verse 69. The word gauh is a class that comprises varied 
utterances by different individuals. If the individual utterance gauh is 
regarded as denotative of meaning it would lead to the assumption of 
multiplicity of the denotative functions corresponding to the differences 
in the utterance of words. Therefore, it is assumed that the universal 


KONDA OR KAUNDA BHATTA 307 


word (jatisphofa), into which all the different spoken words with varied 
accents and tones are assembled, is denotative of meaning. This concept 
is called the class-character of the sphota word. 

The vyaktisphota view maintains that there are no different individual 
words that might be grouped into a single class. The vyaktisphota denies 
the plurality of individual words. The loudness, length, lowness, and 
so on are the properties of the articulate sound but not of the sphota 
word. It is the articulate sound that usually appears to be long or short, 
but the sphota word or manifested sound remains entirely unchanged. 
The varnavyakti or padavyaktz is one, but it appears divergent due to the 
variation in the articulated sound of different individuals. 


The Phonemes and Sphofta 


(B256-257). The phonemes and sphoja are intimately related to each 
other. In the cognition of the sphofa the phonemes are not irrelevant 
because they are not different from the sphofa. One cannot remain 
indifferent to the differences of phonemes when we think of the cogni- 
tion of the word. We undoubtedly cognize the individual phonemes 
when we perceive or cognize the indivisible single sphofta. The phonemic 
entity (varzavyakii) isolated from the other members of the class is 
distinct from the sphota. The perception gatvavdn sphota, “‘the sphota 
word contains the phoneme g,”’ is an illusory perception because the 
Sphofa word as a whole is indivisible. When the indivisible word is 
manifested by the sounds, the phonemes appear to be cognized as a 
part of the word owing to the hearer’s incapacity to perceive the word 
without perceiving the sequence of phonemes. We undoubtedly cognize 
the individual phonemes, but they are not identical with sphofa word. 
The sphofa word is unitary, and it is taken as a single and indivisible 
meaning-bearing unit of the language. While phonemes are many they 
are not considered to be the meaning-bearing units. They only prog- 
ressively reveal the sphota word. 

Revelation of the sphofa by the same phonemes but in a different 
order does not convey the same meaning. For instance, the words sarah 
and rasak, which contain the same phonemes, do not convey the same 
idea. The sequence of phonemes, which is the character of articulate 
sound, is left to be associated with the revealed sphofa. The difference 
in the sphoja words sarah and rasah, which have the same constituent 
sound units, is justified because the cognition of the sequence of 
phonemes appears in the sphofa word as its associative feature. 

(B258-260) verse 70, taken from Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya 1.93. 'This 
verse supports the class sphofa (jatisphofa) theory. Konda Bhatta inter- 
prets it to mean that phonetic entities such as p, a, ¢, a reveal the sphota 
word paja. The word fafa represents a class that comprises varied 
utterances made by different people. The universal sphofa is the con- 


308 ENGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


veyer of meaning because an expression uttered by different people 
does not convey different meaning to the listeners. There is only one 
class of all the particular events of the spoken word ghaf{a. 

The idea of the varpasphofa is not concerned with the meaning. The 
varnajatisphota means that the phoneme p represents a class sound that 
comprises varied utterances made by different people. 

The second half of the verse 70, according to Konda Bhatta, denies 
the distinction between varnavyakti and dhvani as pointed out by other 
Grammarians who maintain that the term varnavyakti stands for the 
individual auditory perception of the articulated sound, while the term 
dhvani stands for the varied individual articulated sounds. 

(B258-260) verse 71. There are two elements, real and unreal, in 
every object. The unreal elements are regarded as particulars (vyakti). 
The real element is known as the universal. The term jaz ultimately 
refers to Brahman which essentially underlies all objects (verse 71). 
ati, which is the essence of things, is equated with mahdsattéd, the highest 
universal. 

(B258-260) verse 72. The Grammarians equate the term fabda with 
the sphota, which is again identical with Brahman. It is also called 
the Sabdatativa by the Grammarians. The word sphofa etymologically 
means “from which meaning bursts forth” or “that which is revealed by 
sounds.” 


38 


TARAKA BRAHMANANDA SARASVATI 


A disciple of Gopalananda Yati, and thus p,esumed to have flourished 


about 1650, this writer composed some notes on Grammar called 
Vyakaranakrodapattra. 


39 


_ COKKANATHA OR 
SOKANATHA DIKSITA 


The New Catalogus Catalogorum dates this writer to the middle of the 
seventeenth century and indentifies him as the “son of Narayana, alias 
Dvadasahayajin of Kaugikagotra and preceptor and father-in-law of 
Ramabhadra Diksita (author of Jdnakiparinayandtaka); preceptor of 
Sadagiva Diksita (a. of Gitdsundara) and father of Nalla Perumal Diksita 
(a. of C. on Sabdakaumudi”’ (vol. 7, p. 85a). He is held to have composed 
at least two works, the Sabdakaumudi and a Mahabhasyaratnavali. At the 
foregoing location in the New Catalogus, Cokkanatha is also said to have 
written a commentary on Sabdakaumudi entitled Sabdikaraksd, but at 
vol. 10, p. 62b, the Sébdikaraksd isascribed to (Balapatafijali) Dvadasa- 
hayajin, grandson of Narayana. 


40 


TIRUMALA YAJVAN 


The son of Venkatega and grandson of Sarasvati Makhin of the Saddar- 
Sana family, this writer composed a Sumanorama on the Siddhantakaumudi 
(Adyar D, vol. 6, no. 355). He may also have been responsible for a 
commentary on the Mahdabhdsya titled Anupaja. He appears to have 
lived around 1660. Yudhisthira Mimamsaka! thinks he is the father 
of Annambhatta, but he would seem to have been a different Tirumala. 


41 


(RAMA) NARAYANA (SARMAN) 
(VANDYOPADHYAYA) 


The New Catalogus Catalogorum (vol. 10, p. 85a) lists this writer, “of the 
Vandyaghatiya family” and flourishing in 1664, as author of Suddhi 
(tattva) karikd, Sdrdvali (and ortti in seven pddas), and possibly a 
Dhaturatnakara, 


42 


SADASIVA 


This Sadasiva, the author of a commentary, Gidhérthadipani, on the 
Mahdbhasya, was a son of Nilakantha Diksita and a pupil of Kamalakara 
Diksita, who was in turn a pupil of Dattatreya.? 


43 


HARI DIKSITA 


Hari Diksita was the grandson of Bhattoji Diksita and the son of 
Viresvara, alias Bhanuji, also called Ramaérama. He taught Nageéa 
Bhatta. He is considered to have written two commentaries on Bhattoji’s 
Praudhamanorama called Sabdaratna, a larger (Brhat) and a shorter 
(Laghu) one. Some scholars hold the opinion that Nagesa actually 
wrote the BrhatSabdaratna and ascribed it to his teacher Hari. 

Students of Grammar regularly study the Laghusabdaratna up to the 
end of the kdraka chapter along with the Praudhamanoramé after they 
have mastered the Siddhantakaumudi. 


44 


RAMABHADRA DIKSITA 


Ramabhadra Diksita was the son of Yajfiarama Diksita, student and 
son-in-law of Cokkanatha Diksita (author of the Sabdakaumudi on 
Sanskrit grammar, protégé of King Sahaji of Tanjore who ruled from 
1684 to 1712 and belonged to Kandaramanikkam in Tamil Nadu. He 
was also a student and protégé of the great poet Nilakantha Diksita. 
Among his works are the Fdnakiparinaya Nétaka; several stotras on Rama, 
Patafijalicarita, which is a Mahdkdoya on the life of Patafijali; and the 
following technical works: Unddimanidipikd an elaborate commentary 
on the Paficapadi version of the Unddisittras; SaddarSinisiddhantasam~ 
graha; with a section on Grammar; and Sabdabhedaniritpana. 


SaddarSinisiddhantasamgraha (Vyakarana Section) 
X. Kunjunni Raja 


Sanskrit words may be classified into Vedic and classical (laukika). 
The former class consists of those occurring in the four Vedas, while the 
latter comprises words found: in Sanskrit literature from the Vedangas 
and Smrtis to contemporary works. 

Rejecting the view that correct or incorrect usage makes little differ- 
ence as long as the intended meaning is understood by the listeners, 
because the purpose of language is communication, Ramabhadra 
points out that one has to be choosy and use only what is correct. The 
analogies of selecting proper food and of taking an eligible woman as 
wife are also mentioned. 

Laukika or common words are classified into four: jati, guna, kriya, 
and samjfid. 

Regarding wrong usages (apafabda), Ramabhadra points out that 
the term applies not only to words but also to sentences and expressions, 


322 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Not using the proper kdrakas and case endings and not observing the 
rules of concordance between adjective and the noun qualified are also 
instances of apafabda; for example, “‘bhavan gam Anaya” is wrong 
because the term bhavdn requires the third person singular dnatyatu, 
The correctness also depends on the intention or the context. Afoam 
dnaya, “‘bring the poor man,”’ may be correct in itself, but is an apasabda 
when the context requires afvam Gnaya, “bring a horse.” 

Ramabhadra Diksita accepts the view that among the three great 
sages, Panini, Katyayana, and Patafijali, each preceding author is 
more authoritative than the next. 

A brief analysis of the contents of the Astddhyayi is also given in the 
text. 


Sabdabhedaniriipana 
K. Kunjunni Raja 


Use of words in literature is divided into primary, secondary, and 
suggestive. Abhidhd is the primary meaning. Laksand, secondary mean- 
ing, is resorted to when it is impossible to take the literal sense in the 
context (anvayanupapatti), but there is no incongruity with the speaker’s 
intention (tdiparydnupapatti). Secondary meaning may be based on 
different relations between the primary and the actual referents. One 
is dharyadhdrakabhdva, relation of the possessor and the possessed, for 
example, “‘the paficajanya was heard.”’ Here pdficajanya, a conch, is used 
for the sound produced by it (hearing the bell for hearing the sound of 
the bell), The second relation is ddhdradheyabhdva, the locus for what is 
on it, for example, Lankdtanka, “‘anxiety of Lanka.” Here “Lanka” 
stands for the people of Lanka, for anxiety is for the people. The third 
is sddréya, similarity, as in nagotsanga, ‘‘the lap of the mountain.”’ Here 
“lap” is used for the slope, through similarity. This third variety is also 
called gauni. 


45 


_ NAGESA 
(OR NAGOJI) BHATTA 


Of all the great Grammarians of the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries— 
indeed, of all those after Bhartrhari himself—perhaps none is more 
important for philosophical contributions than Nagesa Bhatta. He 
came from the family of Bhattoji Diksita, who was his great-grand- 
father. NageSa’s father was named Siva Bhatta; his mother was Sati, 
of the Kale family of Maharashtra Brahmins. He was patronized. by 
Ramavarman of Srigaverapura near Allahabad. He taught such illus- 
trious followers as Gangarama, Vaidyanatha Payagunda, and his own 
son, Balasarman. His literary activity extended between 1670 and 1750.4 

Nageéga’s output was extensive and ranged widely. He wrote Padartha- 
dipika and. Tarkabhdsdtyuktimuktdvali on Nyaya, a commentary (Laghu- 
oriti) on the Samkhyasiitras, another vrtti on the Yogasiitras, and a work 
on Vedanta titled Veddntabhdsyapradipoddyota. In Sanskrit grammar he 
is accepted as the final authority. Some fourteen works on Grammar 
are known to exist by his hand, and others are mentioned in the litera- 
ture. In addition to the works that focus on philosophical grammatical 
theories, summarized below, Nagesa wrote a commentary, Sabdendu- 
Sekhara, as well as a briefer version of the same (LaghuSabdenduSekhara) 
on the Siddhdntakaumudi, and a number of independent treatises on 
various aspects of Grammar. The latter include the ParibhdsenduSekhara, 
the definitive treatise on that subject, works on particular grammatical 
forms (Sabddnantasdgarasamuccaya, Suptinantasdgarasamuccaya, Sankdsama- 
dhéna), and commentaries on other grammatical works (Visampadi 
on Sabdakaustubha, Prabhikaracandra on Tattvadipikad, and perhaps a 
Laghusabdaratna based on his teacher Hari Diksita’s larger Sabdaraina, 
though this ascription is controversial. 

Nageéa wrote three works on the philosophy of Grammar titled 
Mafijiisd, Laghusiddhantamafijisa, and Paramalaghumafijisa. Vhe last is an 


324 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


abridgment of the second, which is in turn an abridgment of the first. 
Like Konda Bhatta’s Vaiyaékaranabhiisana and -sdra, these works are 
comprehensive, establishing the view of the Grammarians after discuss- 
ing and refuting the views of other schools, mainly the Nyaya and 
Mimamsa. Nagega has been influenced by Konda Bhatta, but in many 
cases he takes independent positions. As far as the sphofa theory is 
concerned, he differs from Bhartrhari, though he does not say so, and 
he was influenced by Kashmir Saivism and by Tantric works. 


Paramalaghumafijiisa 
K. Kunjunni Raja 


E references are to the edition by Kalika Prasad Sukla (with the 
editor’s Fyotsna commentary), published at Baroda in 1961. 


Significative Power (Sakti) 

(£1-13). Sphofa can be classified into eight varieties: varnasphota, 
padasphota, vakyasphota (each divided into the universal or the parti- 
cular), akhanda padasphoja, and akhanda vakyasphota. Of these types the 
vakyasphota is the most important, for the sentence is the unit of speech 
in worldly usage. The division of the sentence into words, and further 
into the stems and suffixes, is only a grammatical] device for analysis 
and has no reality. 

(#15-32). Verbal testimony is accepted as a means of valid cognition; 
but it is defined as the statement of a reliable person. For understanding 
the statement a knowledge of the meanings of the words spoken is 
essential. One who does not know the meaning of a word in the utter- 
ance, or who has forgotten it, cannot understand the statement. 

(£37). Meaning (vriiz) is of three kinds, primary significative power 
(Sakti), secondary meaning (laksand), and suggestion (vyaftjand). The 
Naiyayikas consider the significative power to be conventional, having 
been established by the will of God; but according to the Grammarians 
it is a relation between a word and its meaning, the signifier-signified 
relationship. On the basis of the superimposition of one over the other, 
there is a sort of identity and one evokes the other. 

(£40). This relationship exists both in words and in sentences. It is 
known through recollection (smyti). Even though the relationship is 
there permanently, it becomes effective only when it is known. 

(£41). The Naiyayika view that the significative power is based on 
the convention set by the will of God is not acceptable. Meaning is 
known from words directly, without the intervention of God’s will. 

(#43). The identity and the superimposition of word and meaning 
are in the mind. Strictly speaking, the existence of the meaning, as well 


NAGESA OR NAGOJt BHATTA 325 


as that of the word, is only in the mind. The word is the integral sphoja. 
The meaning is a uikalpa, a mental construct that comes along with 
the knowledge of the word and has nothing to do with the actual 
existence. Empty words like “the son of a barren woman” (vandhydsuta) 
are meaningful, though there may not be any corresponding external 
object. But for meaningfulness, the nominal suffixes ordained for 
meaningful stems (rétipadika) cannot be applied to such empty words. 

(#44). The Naiyayika’s view that in “the hare’s horn” (SaSafriga 
there is only error in the horn’s belonging to the hare is not acceptable; 
for in the sentence “‘there is no hare’s horn,” there isno need to see such 
an animal, and the suffixes are possible if the stem is meaningful. 

On the basis of the identity of a word and its meaning, it is accepted 
that when the meaning changes, the word also changes (in the case of 
homophones) ; the usage “the word has many meanings” is in the sense 
that the words are similar. 

(Z46-48). This significative power exists in correct words and 
corrupt words equally, for usage by the people, which is the best means 
of learning the meaning of words, works in the same way in both. On 
observing the behavior of elderly people, one may remember the 
meaning known in one’s previous birth. That is how children and 
animals understand the connected sense (of utterances). 

Objection: The Naiyayikas say that the meaning of corrupt words 
is known by recollecting the correct words. 

Answer: This claim is false, for meaning is known (from corrupt 
words) even without recollecting the corresponding correct words. 
Otherwise one who does not know the corresponding correct word will 
not be able to understand the meaning. 

One cannot say that meaning is got from corrupt words through an 
erroneous notion of the meaningfulness. Meaning is known without 
any doubt (from corrupt words), hence no confusion is to be assumed. 
That is why women, uneducated, people, and children have to be told 
the corrupt words, when they have doubts on hearing the correct 
words. The Mahdbhdsya passage, ‘“‘although meaning is known from 
correct as well as corrupt words, grammar gives the rules about merito- 
rious usage,”’ and Bhartrhari’s line, “‘Although there is no difference 
in meaningfulness, the grammatical rules are for metrit and demerit in 
usage,” are in favor of this view. The discussion regarding the Aryan 
and Mleccha usages in Mimamsa also shows this view. This discussion 
itself shows that both the Aryan and the Mleccha usages are valid; the 
Aryan usage is preferred as far as the Vedic terms are concerned. 

{Z£49-50). This significative power is of three kinds: conventional 
(ridhi), derivative (yoga), and conventional derivative (yogaridhi). 
When the whole word gives the meaning, which cannot be analyzed 
into its components through grammatical rules, it is conventional, as 


326 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in the case of words like mani and niipura. If the meaning is analyzable 
into its components according to the rules of grammar, it is derivative, 
as in the case of words like pacaka, “‘cook” (from pac, “‘to cook,” and 
agent suffix aka). Conventional derivation is that significative power 
in which, along with the meaning determined through grammatical 
analysis, some special restriction is also present, as in pakaja (literally 
“‘mud-born,” but restricted to the lotus). Sometimes on the basis of 
the intention (éétpbarya), the word can be used in the pure (yoga) deri- 
vational sense also, a usage called _yaugikariidha (derivative-cum-conven- 
tional). Examples are afvagandhaé (“a kind of herb” and “having the 
smell of horses’’). 

(£51-53). In case of ambiguous expressions, the meaning is restricted 
by contextual factors. They are given by Bhartrhari (Vakyapadiya 
2.315-17): samyoga, mention of the accompaniment of an entity; 
viprayoga, mention of the absence of it; séhacarya, mention of something 
that usually goes with it; virodhita, mention of its well-known adversary ; 
artha, the purpose served; prakarana, the situational context; liviga, indi- 
cation available (in a related sentence); anyasSabdasannidhi, the presen~ 
ce of another word in collocation; sdmarthya, “‘probability’”’; aucitya, 
propriety, the time, the place, the gender, and accent. 


Secondary Meaning (Laksanaé) 

(£54-57). According to the Naiyayikas, secondary meaning is a 
relation to the primary meaning. It is of two types: gauni, based on 
common quality, and fuddhd@ or pure, in which the relation is something 
other than similarity. It can be divided into two classes in another way: 
ajahatsvartha, in which the primary meaning is not abandoned, and 
jahatsvarthd, in which the primary meaning is abandoned. The former 
takes some additional meaning along with its own; for instance, 
chatrino yanti, “people with umbrellas are going”’ (used for some people 
with umbrellas and some without), kakebhyo dadhi raksyatém, “‘protect 
the curd from crows” (used for protecting from crows and also non- 
crows, such, as dogs). The latter abandons its primary meaning. ‘“Teach 
the Bahika bull’; here the bull cannot be taught, so the term gives up 
its meaning and is applied to the man who is dull (like the bull). The 
relation between the primary meaning and the actual meaning is 
given as the substratum, common quality, proximity, association, and 
purpose (for example, “the cats are crying,’ “he is a lion,” “the 
village is on the Ganges,” “‘bring the sticks’’ [for stick bearers], and 
“Indra” [used for the pole intended for Indra] . 

The actual basis of secondary meaning is the incompatibility of the 
primary meaning with the meaning intended in the context; the in- 
compatibility could be removed in different ways by assuming secon- 
dary meanings for different words. 


NAGESA OR NAGOJI BHATTA 327 


(£59). According to early authorities, there is also a variety of 
laksand called jahadajahallaksana, in which, part of the primary meaning 
of a term is abandoned and part retained, as in pafo dagdhahk, “the cloth 
is burned” (when only part is burned). In éattvam asi, “That thou art,” 
both tat and tvam have to give up some of their primary sense to permit 
identification. 

(E60). Some say that secondary meaning is the relation to what is 
conveyed by the expression, for instance, “the village is on the deep 
river.”” Here the term “deep” cannot refer to the bank of the river; 
hence the connected meaning ‘‘deep river’ is to be understood first and 
then the sense of bank is determined through secondary meaning. In 
dvirepha (“two 7s”), referring first to the word bhramara and then to a 
bee, the term laksitalaksand is used by some. 

(£63). Again, secondary meaning can be of two types, intentiona]— 
used with a purpose in view— (prayojanavati) and conventional (ri#dha). 
In “the village is on the Ganges,” the purpose is to indicate the sanctity 
and coolness of the place. 

The Grammarians reject secondary meaning per se. The Mahdbhdsya 
says that “every word has the capacity to express any meaning if there 
is the intention.” The significative power is of two kinds, well known and. 
less known. The first is called primary and the second secondary. The 
tdiparya (intention ) can be that of God or the tradition of elders. 


Suggestion (Vyafjand) 

(£63). Suggestion is a kind of impression in the mind produced by a 
flash of insight (pratibhd) or similar event, on the basis of the contextual 
factors, which is independent of any incompatibility to the literal 
meaning and which may or may not be associated with the literal 
meaning. 

(£64). Suggestion is acceptable to the Grammarians, for they consi- 
der nipdtas as suggestors (dyotakas) ; the nipdtas suggest the power existing 
in the words that are uttered along with them. The sphoja is also accep- 
ted as suggested by the phonemes. This suggestive power is experienced 
in the phoneme, the literal meaning, the word, part of a word, the 
texture of the expression, and so on. Contextual factors are only helpful 
in revealing the suggestive power. 

(£65). The Naiyayikas reject suggestion, saying that it can be inclu- 
ded in secondary meaning. This view is not acceptable, for secondary 
meaning requires incompatibility of the primary meaning and leads to a 
meaning somehow connected to it. Suggestion does not meet these 
criteria and cannot be included in secondary meaning. 


Sphota 
(E66). Now, what is the meaning-bearing element in an expression? 


398 ENGYGLOPEDIA OF iNDIAN PHILOSOPHizR$ 


The Mimamsaka view that it is the individual phonemes is not correct, 
for then the utterance of later phonemes (other than the first) will be 
superfluous and unnecessary. It cannot be the collection of phonemes, 
for simultaneity of the phonemes is impossible, as each phoneme disap- 
pears as soon asitis uttered. Revelation or production is an instantaneous 
one, and there is no time available for the phonemes or their group to 
be perceptible. 

(£67). The Naiyadyikas say that even though the phonemes are 
impermanent, the word can be perceived on the basis of the last 
phoneme, together with the impressions of the experience of the previous 
phonemes in their specific order. Or it can be assumed that each earlier 
phoneme produces its own subtle echo, extending till the last phoneme 
is revealed, and hence the word can be considered perceptible. Or the 
meaning is understood from the last phoneme together with the impre- 
ssions of the earlier phonemes. 

None of these explanations is possible. In the first view sequence can- 
not be perceived, because one phoneme is lost and the next alone 
remains. In the second, meaning cannot be assigned to the word, 
because the word does not exist. In the third, the order of sequence 
cannot be retained, because in recollection of impressions there is no 
need for such sequence. 

Then what is the meaningful element? It is sphota. 

(Z68-69). There are four levels of speech (vac): pard, pagyanti, 
madhyamd, and vaikhari. Of the, para vdc is fabdabrahman without any 
activity (spanda) of the form of bindu, originating (from Kundalini) in 
the milddhdracakra, the spot inside the body between the anus and the 
sex organ. When it is raised by the internal air to the ndbhicakra (or 
svadhisthdnacakra in the navel region) and becomes perceptible to the 
raind, it is called pafyanti. These two are said to be realized by yogins 
in their nirvikalpaka and savikalpaka types of samadhi. Raised farther up 
by the same air to the andhatacakra in the region of the heart, it is called 
madhyamd, still too subtle to be comprehended by the sense organs, but 
in the form of sphofa, bearing the meaning, and comprehensible by the 
mind at the time of japa (concentrated, silent utterance). Then, coming 
to the vocal organs in the mouth and articulated, it becomes the vaikhari 
and is capable of being heard by others also. 

(#71-72). For madhyamd and. vaikhari the sound is produced. simulta- 
neously; the former reveals the sphota, the meaning bearer; the latter is 
just meaningless sound. The madhyamé is subtle, can be realized inter- 
nally at the time of japa, and so on. It reveals the permanent Sabda 
Sphoja identical with Brahman, the speech principle according to Bhartr- 
hari. Though integral and indivisible, the padasphota or vakyasphoja 
appears as phonemes and the like on the basis of the adjuncts through 
which, it is revealed. Strictly speaking, it has no parts. 


NAGESA OR NAGOJI BHATTA 329 


(£72). The phonemes, which are factors of the sound (dhvani) that 
reveal the sphofa, seem to be part of the sphoja. The apparent multipli- 
city in the sphofa is due to that of the dhvani that reveals it. According 
to the view that sphoja can be analyzed, it is revealed by the last 
phoneme, the previous phonemes being helpful to indicate the intention. 

(£73-75). Dhvani is of two kinds, prakrta and vaikrta. The former is 
the revealer of the sphoja, the latter is produced from the former and 
keeps it (to be heard by the listener), and is responsible for such 
modifications of the sound as the speed of utterance (vsti). 

(E76-77). When a man utters a sentence like “bring the pot’, the 
speech at the vatkhari-level is heard by the listener, reaches his mind 
through the sense organ, and reveals the meaning. The term sphofa can 
be derived as that from which the meaning bursts forth. As far as the 
speaker is concerned, the sound is produced simultaneously by the 
madhyama and. the vaikhari. To the listener, the vaikhari helps in reveal- 
ing the madhyamd that gives the sphofa, the meaning bearer. 

All eight varieties of sphofa are based on their meaningfulness. 
Strictly, only the vaékyasphofa is meaningful, for in the word it is the 
complete utterance that reveals the meaning. 


Accessory Conditions for Understanding 

Sentence Meaning 

(Z77-80). Expectancy (dkdnksd), consistency (yogyat@), contiguity 
(dsatti), and intention (tdtparya) are the accessory conditions for under- 
standing the sentence’s meaning. Expectancy is responsible for giving 
the unity of the sentence. It is the desire on the part of the listener on 
hearing a word in a sentence to know the idea that can be related to its 
meaning, in order to get a complete sense; though expectancy is on the 
listener’s part, it is figuratively attributed to the words and their 
meanings. It can be called incompleteness of the expression. Patafijali 
says (in 2.1.1) that sémarthya is vyapeksé, or interdependence, which is 
not between words but between their meanings. Ina sentence such as 
“See, the deer is running,” the word “‘see”’ requires an object, and hence 
the whole utterance becomes a complete sentence; in ‘‘Devadatta 
cooks rice,”’ the verb “‘cooks”’ requires the agent and object for comple- 
tion of meaning, and thus there is unity of sentence. “The pot is the 
object, bringing is the action” is not a single sentence like “bring the 
pot,” for expectancy requires the relevant kdrakas in the proper case 
endings. 

(Z81-82). Semantic fitness (yogyatd) is the competence for mutual 
connection. “He wets it with water’ has fitness, because wetting 
requires a liquid and water is a liquid; but “‘he wets it with fire” has no 
fitness, because fire is not a liquid and has no competence for wetting, 
which can be done only with a liquid. The Naiyayikas say that in such 


330 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cases (of incongruity) the words give their individual meanings, but 
there is no knowledge of the syntactic connection; this claim is wrong. 
The meaning being mental, there is no obstruction for a connected idea. 
Hence empty words like “the son of a barren woman” are meaningful. 
Bhartrhari has said that worlds convey meanings, even if they are 
nonexistent in the world. The knowledge of incongruity itself is based 
on the knowledge of the sentence meaning. 

(#82-83). Contiguity (dsaitz) is the absence of words unconducive to 
understanding the syntactical connection. It exists to help dull people 
to get the sentence meaning; intelligent persons can easily get it with 
the help of expectancy, even if there is no contiguity. Intervention of 
irrelevant words may stand in the way of understanding the meaning. 

(£84-85). Intention (édiparya) is God’s desire that a word or a 
sentence must be uttered to indicate its particular meaning. Although 
the Grammarians accept that any word can be capable of conveying a 
meaning, it only does so when there is ‘diparya; the word “‘pot’’ does 
not convey the meaning of a cloth, because there is no intention. In the 
case of ambiguous expressions the disambiguating intention is that of 
the speaker, and the intention is to be ascertained on the basis of contex- 
tual factors. In the case of Vedic sentences, God’s intention is to be 
assumed. 

If the significative power (Sakti) can be regulated through contextual 
factors, what is the need for assuming intention? Our experience is that 
in ambiguous expressions we get both meanings through the power of 
the expressions themselves, and we feel uncertain regarding the inten- 
tion. 


Meaning of Verbal Roots (Dhétvartha) 


(£85-87). The meaning of the verbal root is an operation (updpdra) 
conducive to the production of a result (phala) and accompanied by a 
volition or effort (yaina). The term “result”? means the effect of the 
action indicated by the verbal root. And “‘operation”? means the opera- 
tion indicated by the root for producing the result. “‘Conducive” 
(anukiila) means the association (samsarga) of the action and the result. 

(£88). The Nirukta statement ‘The verb has an operation as its 
predominant element, and the nouns have existence (sativa) as their 
predominant element” shows that the operation is the most important 
element in a verb. The verbal] suffix indicates the number and the 
kdraka relationship ; the time (tense) qualifies the activity. 

(£89-90). Others say that a verbal root denotes both the result and 
the operation, and that the relation between the two is one of the accom- 
plisher (uddefya) and the accomplished (vidheya). The two meanings 
arise separately and are connected with difficulty. And it is cumbersome 
to assume two separate explanations for the same word. So they say 


NAGESA OR NAGOJI BHATTA 331 


that the significative power of the verbal root is the operation delimited 
by the effect or the effect delimited by the operation. 

(£92). The Mimamsakas (Mandana Misra) say that the meaning of 
the verbal root is the effect, and the meaning of the personal suffix is 
the operation. This view is against sucha rule as Panini’s “La is added 
in the sense of karman” and so on (3.4.69), where the personal suffix is 
not assigned the meaning of operation. Moreover, for words in different 
tenses—pacatz, “‘cooks,” paksyati, ‘‘will cook,”” and so on-—the meaning 
of the operations of blowing the fire and the rest will have to be assigned 
to different suffixes, which is more cumbersome than assigning it to 
the single verbal root. 

Again, if the suffix indicates the operations of blowing and so on, 
even in words like gacchatt, “‘he goes,” the same operation will be meant, 
and to avoid that problem one will have to say that the suffix indicates 
the operations of blowing and so on, when used along with the root pac. 

(£94). Moreover, the distinction between transitive and intransitive 
verbs will be affected, if such a view is taken. 

(£95~96). Bhartrhari has stated that what is accomplished (siddha) 
or what is not accomplished (asiddha) is described as a durative process 
of bringing into being (sddhya). It is called a verb (kriyd). The various 
minor operations, subordinate to the main operation, taking place in 
an order of sequence, considered in the mind as integral are called a 
verb (Kriya). The various operations that form parts of the overall 
operation take place in a sequence, but together, considered as a single 
operation, they form the verb (kriyZ). The unity of the various opera- 
tions is only in the mind. Thus the term facati, “he cooks,” can be 
applied for any one of the various operations involved in cooking. 

(£98). Objection: In ghatam karoti, ‘che makes a pot,” the noun ghata, 
pot,” seems to be sdédhya or “‘to be accomplished”’, hence seems to 
come under the classification of verb. 

Answer: From the word ghata it is the accomplished pot that is under- 
stood, along with the word karoti, “che makes.” The word may convey 
the idea that the pot is yet to be made. 

Existence (sattd) is the meaning of the roots as, bhi, vt, and vid. They 
come under kriyd or activity because existence continues to operate in 
time, as a durative activity. ‘Existence’ here means continuously 
having its own nature. 

(#99). When the operation and the effect take place in different 
substrata, the verb is called transitive; and when the operation and the 
effect take place in the same substratum, the verb is called intransitive. 
It is intransitive when there is no question of effect, as in the case of the 
root as, “‘to be,” for which the meaning is only existence, and no 
effect is discernible. The JVirukta explains it while interpreting the term 
ast in the six bhava vtkdras. 


332 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(£100). Strictly speaking, transitiveness is to be taken as the possibi- 
lity of association with the meaning of what is karman (object) according 
to the rules of grammar. In the case of adhydsité bhiimayah, “the grounds 
have been occupied,” adhyds is transitive, for bhimi, “ground,” though 
semantically a substratum (adhikarana), is karman according to a special 
rule of Panini, adhifinsthdsim karma, In the verb jivati, ‘‘lives,” the idea 
of bearing life may be implied, still grammatically it is intransitive. In 
the verb jandti, “che knows,” knowledge is the effect, and the operation 
is the contact of the aman and the mind; hence usages like mano jandti, 
“the mind knows,” amd a&tmanam janati, ““one knows oneself,” and the 
like are acceptable, for the operation and the effect have different 
substrata, one self limited by the body and the other self limited by 
mind. 

(#103). Naiyayikas say that the effect and the operation form the 
meaning of the verbal root, and the personal endings indicate the effort 
or volition (krt?). The meaning of the verbal root is subordinate to the 
meaning of the suffix, which is predominant, and the meaning of the 
personal endings is subordinate to that of the noun in the nominative 
case. 

(£104). Naiyayikas distinguish sentient agent from insentient beings; 
effort (yatna) can be applied only to a sentient agent. Caitrah pacati, 
‘‘Caitra cooks,’’ means Caitra whose effort is conducive to the operation 
favorable to the softening of food. In ratho gacchati, “‘the chariot goes,” 
because the chariot is insentient and cannot have a volition, the usage 
is explained as secondary. 

(2104-105). This view is not acceptable to the Grammarian; 
Panini’s rule “‘yusmady upapade samandadhikarane...says that the 
second-person suffix in the present tense is to be used when the kéraka 
indicated by the suffix and the second person (you) have the same 
substratum. This rule is not possible according to the Naiyayika view. 
Even in the case of present participles, which are also substitutes of Ja 
just like the personal endings, only the meaning of volition will be 
obtained. You cannot say that the participles have significative power 
toward the agent, for according to the Nyaya view the prototype /a has 
expressive power, not its many substitutes such as the participles and 
personal endings. 

(4107). Assumption of secondary meaning for explaining usages like 
“the chariot moves” is cumbersome. 

Panini’s rule kartrkaranayostrtiya (2.3.12) comes under the general rule 
anabhilite (2.3.1); if the personal endings express only the volition 
(krtt), as the Naiyayika believes, the agent and the object (Karman) 
being unexpressed, a sentence like Cattrah pacati, ‘‘Caitra cooks” will be 
impossible, because the word for the agent, Caitra, will have to be in 
the instrumental case. 


NAGESA OR NAGOJI BHATTA 333 


(£#108-109). The view that the meaning of the verbal root qualifies the 
meaning of the personal endings is also not correct. The general rule is 
that in a word the meaning of the stem and the meaning of the suffix go 
together to give the full meaning, and that the suffix meaning is predo- 
minant. Thus in fdcaka, “‘cook”’, the meaning “‘agent”’ is predominant. 
Yaska’s statement that the dkhydta (verbal ending) has activity as the 
predominant meaning is an exception to that rule. Here bhévapradhinam 
has to be taken as a bahuvriht compound. 

(Z110-111). The Naiyadyikas believe that in a sentence the principal 
qualificand is what is denoted by a nominative form. According to this 
view, a sentence like “‘pagya mrgo dhavati’’ (‘‘see the deer is running”’) 
could be ‘‘pasya mrgam dhavati” (which is wrong). But according to 
the Grammarians the activity of seeing (indicated by pasya) is the pre- 
dominant sense. The running of the deer would be its object. Through 
mutual association (samsarga), the idea of karman is achieved. Even a 
verb can qualify another verb, the main verb. 


Meaning of Particles (Nipdta) 

(Z£113-114). In an expression like sukham anubhiyate, “happiness is 
being experienced,” happiness being the object of experience, the verb 
is transitive. But that meaning of experiencing cannot be in the root, for 
without the preverb it is not known; and it cannot be in the preverb, 
because the meaning of personal ending associates only with the mea- 
ning of the verbal root. Hence suggestive power has to be assigned to 
the preverb. 

This suggestiveness (dyotakatva) is the capacity to reveal the meaning 
potentially present in the word along with which it is used. Sometimes 
the suggestiveness may modify the action; sometimes it may indicate a 
relationship, as in the case of karmapravacaniya. 

(£115). Naiyayikas consider preverbs to be suggestive and the other 
indeclinables to be expressive, because lexicons give the meaning of 
indeclinables such as s@ksat and namah. This view is improper because 
in both cases the understanding of the meaning is similar. 

(4118-120). Even the meaningfulness of particles is based on their 
suggestive power. Verbal roots have several meanings; in pratisthate 
the less-known sense (“to move”) of the root sthd, “to stand,” is made 
clear by the preverb pra. The accepted position is that the root is first 
associated with its kdrakas and then only with the preverb. 

In candra iva mukham, ‘“‘moonlike face,” the word candra, “moon,” 
gets the meaning “something like the moon” figuratively, and the word 
iva, “‘like’’, acts only to suggest that intended meaning. 

(#122-128). Some say that the word iva has the meaning of simila- 
rity, so there is no need for secondary meaning here. This notion is not 
correct, for according to this view the words candra and mukha cannot 


334 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


have the same substratum (and the genitive case ending may come for 
the word candra). 

Some others consider the word iva to be suggesting the standard of 
comparison, indicating that both have the same qualities. 

Negation is of two types, paryudasa and prasajyapratisedha (the former 
is nominally bound and the latter is verbally bound). The negation in 
paryudadsa suggests some positive entity, for instance, abraékmana (non- 
Brahmin) indicates a ksatriya. The compound is éatpurusa, which 
normally requires predominance for the meaning of the second member. 
The suggestive nature of the negation is quite in keeping with it. 
Normally this paryuddsa negation applies to someone similar to the one 
negated. Bhartrhari says that the negative particle naf% indicates five 
meanings: similarity (‘“‘nonhorse,” referring to a donkey), absence 
(“bring a nonhuman being’’), littleness (‘‘a girl without waistline,” 
anudaraé kanya), pejoration (‘“‘non-Brahmin” applied to a Brahmin), 
and opposition (adharma, ‘‘demerit’’). Cases of mutual exclusion (as in 
‘the pot is not a piece of cloth’’) also come under this type; but nor- 
mally examples of paryuddsa are compound. words (of nafi-tatpurusa type). 
Prasajyapratisedha (verbally bound negative) can be either in a com- 
pound or in an uncompounded expression: “There is no pot in the house”; 
astiryampasya rdjadaérah, “the king’s wives do not see the sun.’”? Examples 
like “no doubt” (na sandehah) come under this heading. Prdagabhéva 
(prior absence) and pradhvamsabhdva (posterior absence or destruction) 
are not suggested by the negative particle. Atyantabhdva (nonexistence) 
is syntactically connected with the verb, for instance, ‘“There is no pot”. 

{(#130-131). Objection: Anything that exists cannot be negated; 
negation does not apply to a nonexistent thing; thus negation becomes 
meaningless. 

Answer: Both the expression and the meaning exist in the mind; what 
exists in the mind can be negated outside in real life. The word ‘‘pot” 
gives the idea of the existence of the pot, while the negation is to remove 
it—this view of the Naiyayikas (who do not consider the meaning of 
words to be purely mental) has no stand, for existence or negation can- 
not apply to the mind. According to the Mahabhasya, secondary meaning 
is not accepted, and particles are not considered to be meaningful. 

(#132-138). The word eva, “‘only,” suggests the meanings of restric- 
tion and negation. Even without the use of the word, the meaning may 
be obtained. So they say that every word in a sentence has a restrictive 
sense. The restriction is of three kinds: when applied to a qualificand, 
it negates it in other places (for example, “Arjuna alone is a bowman”’); 
when applied to an adjective, it emphasizes it (‘‘the conch is white 
alone’) ; and when applied to a verb, it indicates absence of nonassocia- 
tion nilam sarojam bhavaty eva, “the blue lotus does exist’’). 

Sometimes eva is understood. What Mimamsakas call parisamkhyé 


NAGESA OR NAGOJI BHATTA 335 


(for instance, paiica paficanakhé bhaksydh, ‘“‘among five-nailed animals, 
five may be eaten’’) is included by the Mahdbhdsya as niyama or restri- 
ction. 


Meaning of Verbal Endings (Tenses and Moods) 

(Z138-140). Although the Naiyayikas discuss the meaning of the 
ten L-signs, the Grammarians accept meaningfulness only for what is 
actually spoken and therefore discuss the meaning of the substitutes, 
the actual verbal suffixes used in the world. Panini gives meaning to 
lat and so on as a simpler means for description. 

The meanings of the L-substitutes are number, time (present, past, 
and future tenses), karakas, and the action noun (bhava). Thus la}- 
substitutes express the present tense; along with class suffixes such as 
fap, the agent; and along with the suffixes yak and cin, the action and the 
object. 

Bhattoji Diksita says that the verbal root denotes both the result and 
the activity and that the verbal] suffixes denote the substratum (dfraya). 
In the active voice the activity is more important, and in the passive 
voice the result is more important. Together with the verbal suffixes, 
the verbal roots also indicate the number and the kdraka rejationship. 

(#141-143). The present tense is indicated by an activity that is 
started but not completed. Lit indicates the past tense earlier than today 
and also indirect information (in other words, information not directly 
perceived). In the case of auxiliary verbs ky, as, and bhd used along with 
other roots and the affix -dm, they indicate only action in general (as in 
edhdm cakre). 

(2143-145). Lut indicates future, other than today, in addition. Lrt 
is used in simple future. Lef is used only in Vedic language and has the 
same sense as liz (injunction and so on). Lof has the same sense of 
injunction and so on. Laz indicates the past tense, other than today. 
Lin has various meanings: injunction (vidhi), a summoning to do some- 
thing (nimantrana), an invitation to do something (dmantrana), respect- 
ful command (adhista), permission (samprasna), and request (prarthand). 
The first four meanings are different shades of prompting (pravartana) 
to action; this prompting is through the knowledge that the action will 
lead to a desired object, that the action is capable of performances, and 
that it is not associated with a strong undesirable result. 

Lun indicates past tense in general, with past meaning prior to the 
present. Lr% indicates the conditional sense, suggesting that the action 
is over, that if something had happened (which did not happen) 
another action (which also did not take place) would have taken place, 
for instance, “‘if fuel had been available, food would have been cooked.” 

(Z146-149). The Naiyayika view is that there are ten L-suffixes. 
L-suffixes indicate the agent, time (tense and mood), and the number, 


336 ENQYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The Grammarians think that agent is inferred from the term ca, “and” 
in P&nini’s rule lah karmani ca-. Bhatta Mimamsakas consider that 
operation (vpapdra) is meant instead. The Naiyayikas take volition or 
effort to be the meaning, as it is simpler; they consider that L-suffixes 
indicate the meaning, not L-substitutes, which are many. In the passive 
sentence “maitrena gamyate gramah”’ (“the village is reached by 
Maitra”), the L-suffixes indicate volition (given in the instrumental 
case) and the dtmanepada indicates the result (the village). The main 
idea in the comprehension of the sentence meaning is the noun in the 
nominative case. 

(#149-151). Lat indicates the present tense; lan, lun, and lif indi- 
cate the past tense; and luf and /rt indicate the future. Lin, lot, and let 
indicate injunction. The number is also indicated by the suffixes. Let 
is used only in the Veda. The tenses, such as the present, are for the 
activity. Laf directly expresses the present tense and through secondary 
meaning indicates the substratum (dfraya). Time (past or future) that 
is very near the present may also be indicated by Jaf. 

(#152-154). According to the Grammarians and the Bhatta Mima- 
msakas the meaning obtained from the verbal suffixes has an operation 
as its main factor; according to the former an operation is the meaning 
of the verbal root, and according to the latter it is the mental activity 
(bhdvand) and. is conveyed by the verbal suffixes. “Caitrah tandulam 
pacati” (“‘Caitra cooks rice’’) means to the Grammarians “the activity 
of cooking that has Caitra as the agent and rice as the object.”-To the 
Mimamsakas it means “the mental activity toward the action of cook- 
ing that has Caitra as its agent and rice as its object.” The Naiyayika 
insists that the meaning of the sentence has the noun in the nominative 
case as the main element, “Caitra who hasa volition conducive to the 
action of cooking that has rice as the object.” 

(#157-158). Liz has the meanings injunction and benediction. Lo} 
can mean injunction or permission. The Bhatta Mimamsakas explain 
vidhi (injunction) as pravartana or prompting. On hearing a lin from 
the teacher the student has the knowledge that the teacher wants him 
to do something; this view is not correct. There is no authority to corisi- 
der such knowledge as the cause for action on the student’s part. It is 
the knowledge that the action will lead to some desired’ result that 
prompts action. 

(£159-164). The Prabhakara Mimamsakas say that the injunction 
means something should be done. Svargakdmo yajeta, ‘‘one desirous of 
heaven should perform the sacrifice’? means (1) something should be 
done regarding sacrifice by heaven seeker; (2) something should be 
done, which is the means for heaven, and which is about sacrifice by one 
who is qualified; (3) sacrifice should be performed by heaven seeker, 
who is the person qualified to do it; (4) the performer of sacrifice is the 


NAGESA OR NAGOJI BHATTA 337 


heaven seeker; (5) I am a heaven seeker, therefore the sacrifice can be 
performed by my effort. 

Naiyayikas consider three powers for liz, meaning the knowledge of 
prompting. First, it is capable of being performed by effort; second, 
it will lead to a desirable result; and third, it will not be associated with 
avery bad effect. The power is not in all three together, but separately. 

In the case of /yn there is an argument based on the influence involved, 
asin “if there had been no fire, there would have been no smoke.” 


Karakas 

(#164-168). The six kdrakas are kartr, agent; karma, object; karana, 
instrument; sampraddna, recipient; apdddna, the fixed point from which 
splitting takes place; and adhikarana, substratum. Ké@rakas such as the 
agent bring about the action. Kariy, agent, is the substratum of the 
operation indicated by the verbal root in the context. Thus in the 
example “he cooks with fire,” burning may be an operation of fire but 
not of the contextual action, cooking, so fire is not the agent. When this 
operation is expressed by the verbal root, the agent will be in the 
nominative case; according to Panini’s view the nominative case indi- 
cates the pratipadika stem, and the kdrakas are expressed by specific 
suffixes. In Caitro bhavati, “‘Caitra exists,” Caitra is the agent (kartr); 
although that kdraka (kartr) is already expressed by the verbal suffix, the 
nominative case also indicates the same. In “Caitrena gramam gamya- 
te” (“the village is reached by Caitra’’), the meaning understood is 
“the contact with the village is a result of the action whose agent 
is Caitra.”’ , 

The vocative (sambodhana) is also a kdraka because it is syntactically 
connected with “‘you” (understood from the context) and thereby 
with the action to be performed. 

(£169-170). The definition of kdraka as the cause of action (kriydni- 
mittam) is not correct, for it will apply even to the genitive case in 
“Caitrasya tandulam pacati” (“he cooks Caitra’s food’’), because 
Caitra is indirectly responsible for the cooking. The definition ‘those 
bringing about the action” is better; direct connection with the opera- 
tion indicated by the verb is necessary. That is why the meaning of the 
genitive case, as well as of the nouns directly connected with other 
words (upapada), is not considered by the Grammarians to be kéraka. 
If the expectancy is not resolved, necessary words have to be taken as 
understood to explain the elliptical sentence. 

(E169-170). The Naiyayika view that the agent (kartr) is the karaka 
that prompts all the other kérakas (to bring about the action) is not 
correct, for in cases like sthali pacati, ‘‘the vessel cooks,” and asth chinatti, 
“the sword cuts,”’ there is no prompting on the part of the vessel] or the 
sword, , 


338 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(E171-178). Karma, object, is that (k@raka) which is intended to have 
the same substratum as the effect of the action meant by the relevant 
verbal root and prompted by its main activity. It is the meaning of 
ipsitatama, “intended most” in Panini’s rule on karma. In “kasim 
gacchan pathi mrtah”’ (“‘going to Kagi, he died on the way’), though 
he does not reach Kasi, the intention was there, hence KAsi is karma 
karaka. 

(£178-179). Karana, instrument, is that kdraka the activity of which 
immediately brings about the action (meant by the verb). In ““Ramena 
banena hato bali’? (“Bali was killed by Rama with an arrow”), the 
activity of the arrow is the immediate cause for the death, though 
Rama’s activity may have begun earlier. Hence béna is the instrument 
and Rama the agent (kartr). 

(£180-183). Sampradéna, recipient, is that karaka for whom the 
operation meant by the verb is taking place. In “brahmanaya gam 
dadati’” (“the gives the Brahmin a cow’’), the Brahmin is the recipient. 
The view that the gift meant is not to be returned is not valid. For 
giving clothes to the laundry man sampradana is also possible: “‘rajakaya 
vastram dadati” and “rajakasya vastram dadati” are both correct. 
Patafijali gives the example “the teacher gave the student a thrashing.” 
Sampraddna, used in the dative case, means the person to whom the 
action is intended. ‘‘Maitraya varttam kathayati” (“he tells the news 
to Maitra’”’?) means the operation of telling that has the news as object 
and Maitra as the person for whom the operation is intended. In an 
intransitive verb also, as in patye fete, ‘she lies down for her husband,” 
it is similar, it means she is lying down for the sake of her husband. 

(£183-187). Apdddna is the substratum of the point of departure 
indicated by the contextual verb, and it is the same as the limit. The 
departure can be real or mentally conceived. In ‘“‘vrksam tyajati 
khagah” (“‘the bird abandons the tree’’), separation is not the meaning 
of the root tyaj, hence urksa does not become apdddna. By limit is meant 
only the relatively fixed point as far as the relevant action is concerned. 
Hence we get “‘dhavatah asvat patati’’ (‘‘falls from the running horse’), 
for as far as falling is concerned, the horse is the fixed point, though it is 
also running. The meaning of the ablative case is the limit. ““Vrksat 
parnam patati”’ (“the leaf falls from the tree’’)} means the falling that 
has the leafas the agent and the limit (or the fixed point from which the 
separation takes place) as the tree. 

(£187-189). Adhikarana, substratum, is where the activity takes 
place, either through the agent or through the object. In “sthalyam 
odanam grhe pacati’” (“che cooks food in a vessel in the house’’), the 
vessel is the place in which the object is affected by the action, and the 
house is the place of the agent’s activity. 

This adhikarana is of three types. The first is abhivyadpaka, all-compre- 


NAGESA OR NAGOJI BHATTA 339 


hensive, as in “‘tilesu tailam asti’’ (“‘there is oil inthe sesame’). The 
second is aupaslesika, proximity, asin Panini’s sitra “iko yan aci” (“‘i, 
u, r, / change to y, v, r, and /, respectively in the proximity of [when 
followed by] a vowel’). Kaiyata’s example kate dste, “‘he sits on the 
mat,” is not happy. (It means he sits on a part of the mat.) The third 
type is “‘vaisayika kate Aste.” 

(#190). Relations, like that of master and servant, which are different 
from the kéraka relations are indicated by the genitive case, as in rajfiah 
purusah, “the king’s servant.” 


Meaning of Nouns 


(£192-196). The Mimamsakas say that words denote the universal; 
the particulars are innumerable and it is cumbersome to assign the 
meaning to the particulars. Even though the word directly means the 
universal, the particulars are known through secondary meaning. If 
one particular is given as the meaning of a word (like ‘“‘cow’’), it will 
not be possible to associate the word with another particular. 

Answer: Although particulars are innumerable, a particular can be an 
indication (upalaksana) of the universal, and there is no need to assume 
innumerable powers to refer to the individuals. Among the means of 
understanding the meaning of words, the most important—namely, 
the usage of elders—will give the meaning as applied to the particular. 
As Patafijali has said, even to one who takes the universal to be the 
meaning of a word, the particular does not cease to be the meaning. 

(£197). The gender is also the meaning of a noun; the suffixes only 
suggest. The gender of many Sanskrit words, such as khajoé, “‘a cot” 
(feminine), has nothing to do with sex. One formal way of distinguishing 
the genders is the following: whatever can be put in apposition with 
“the” is masculine, with ‘‘she’’ is feminine, and with “‘it”’ is neuter. 

(£198-203 ). The number is also the meaning ofa noun. The nominal 
suffixes only suggest number; it is the stem that actually expresses it. 
The kdraka is also the meaning of nominal stem. Thus the nominal stem 
indicates five things—the universal, the particular, gender, number, 
and kérakas. Sometimes the expression itself can be the meaning of the 
word, as in referring to a name, in imitating sounds, and similar 
instances. 


Meaning of Compound Words 

(#203~204). The meaning of compounds is of two kinds: jahkatsudrtha, 
giving up their own meaning, and ajahatsvdértha, without giving up their 
original meaning. The word Susrisd, “serving,” has given up the deriva- 
tive meaning, “desire to hear”. In rdjapurusa, ‘“‘the king’s servant,” the 
parts do not give up their meaning completely. In all five uytizs accepted 
by the Grammarians—tsyt, taddhita, samédsa, ekaSesa, and sdkya—the 


340 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


meaningfulness is in the whole, not in parts, because something more 
than the sum of the meanings of the parts is conveyed by them. 

(2211-212). Naiyayikas and Mimamsakas, who accept wyapeksa 
(mutual expectancy or association) in compound words and the like, 
say that there is no special power for the compound word. In a com- 
pound like rdjapurusa, ‘‘the king’s servant,’ the word rdja can mean 
related to rdjan through secondary meaning. In an example like 
ghanasydma, ‘“‘cloud-black,”’ the meaning of similarity (black like the 
cloud) can be obtained through secondary meaning. Understanding the 
meaning of the components is essential] for determining the meaning 
of the compound. 

Answer: If a special meaning is not accepted for the compound word 
as a whole, the stem will not be a pratipadtka, so nominal suffixes cannot 
be applied. The rule krttaddhitasamdsasca is not to make the compound a 
pratipadika, but to restrict the term pratipadika to compounds alone (and 
not to a sentence). 

Objection: If unity of meaning (ekdrthibhdva) is accepted for com- 
pounds, the components will be meaningless, and syntactic connection 
will be difficult. 

Answer: The special meaning comes only after the componential 
meanings have been understood and connected. 

(£213-2 16). When the componential meaning is against the accepted 
popular usage, the individual meanings are rejected, and the compo- 
nent will be jahatsvartha. 


MAHABHASYAPRADIPODDYOTA 
VE. S. N. Raghavan 


This work is a commentary by Nagega Bhatta on Kaiyata’s Pradipa. 
In it Nagega explains the views of Patafijali following Kaiyata for the 
most part though sometimes he differs from him. & references are to 
the edition of the work in five volumes by Vedavrata, published by the 
Haryana Sahitya Samsthana, Gurukula Jhajjhar, Rohtak, 1969. A 
small section (2.1.2—-2.1.49) has been translated by Shivaram Dattatrey 
Joshi (Centre for Advanced Study in Sanskrit, University of Poona, 
Poona, 1969: G627), and references labeled ZT are to this publication. 
The numbers refer to philosophical points made in the text. 


Summary of Philosophical Topics 

1 (4716-17). Explaining the Mahdbhaésya passage “‘catvari padaja- 
tani, namakhydatopasarganipatasca”’ (“there are four types of words, 
noun, verb, preverb, and indeclinables also”), Nageéa says that the 


NAGESA OR NAGOJI BHATTA 341 


word ca, “also”, suggests the fourfold classification of speech (adc): 
pard, pasyanti, madhyamd, and vaikhari. 

2 Referring to the two heads of the bull (of od¢) mentioned in the 
Vedic stanza, Patafijali’s explanation that they were the permanent 
(nitya) and the produced (kdrya) was interpreted by Kaiyata to mean 
the suggested (vyargya) and the suggestor (waftjaka). Nagega elucidates 
this interpretation by saying that the suggested is the madhyamd type and 
the suggestor the vaikhari type of speech. 

3 (ET18). Rg Veda 1.164.45, quoted by Patafijali, says: Vac has been 
divided into four levels, which the learned Brahmins know; the first 
three are kept (hidden) in the cave; people speak only the fourth. 
Nagega gives two explanations: first, each of the four parts of speech— 
noun, verb, preverb, and indeclinable—has only one-fourth in the 
speech of common people; and, second, the first three parts of speech 
(namely, pard, pasyanti, and madhyamé) are hidden. 

4 He quotes Vakyapadiya 1.143 “(Vaikhary4 madhyamayaéca... 
tryayya vacah param padam) and explains: vaikhari is the audible 
speech; madhyamd is the speech in the mind of the speaker, and cannot 
be perceived (by the listener), but is the cause of the speech utterance. 
Pafyanti is beyond the scope of worldly parlance (being undifferentia- 
ted), but the yogins are able to visualize it and even analyze it. At the 
paré stage, speech is beyond the reach even of yogic perception. 

Nageéga gives another quotation in support of his view. ‘‘Svariipajyotir 
evantah para vag anapayini tasyam drstasvaripayam adhikaro niva- 
tate’ (““The supreme speech [ard vdk ] is imperishable and is of intrin- 
sic brilliance; if one realizes the exact nature of the eternal resplendent 
luster, the (karmic) bondage or avidyd-karman retracts from one”’). 

Just as Vedantins hold the supreme being to be Absolute, Nagefa 
considers the supreme speech (pard vék) to be Absolute, the realization 
of which leads one to release from karmic bonds. 

5 (£19). While commenting on the Rg Vedic stanza “‘saktum iva” 
(10.71.2), quoted in the Mahabhasya, Nageéa identifies vac with Supreme 
Brahman. Those persons who have an adequate knowledge and capa- 
city to think deeply with regard to Vedic grammar achieve union 
(sdyujya) with Sabda Brahman. First they acquire deep knowledge by 
correctly understanding the unique import of words. 

In the case of word conveying the meaning of Brahman, there is the 
knowledge of the identity between the word and its meaning. Persons 
of extraordinary wisdom achieve sdyujya or identity with the Supreme 
Speech because the blessed goddess Laksmi, with self-brilliance and 
Brahman’s form, resides in every articulated speech of those well-versed 
Grammarians. 

6 (£8). Explaining Patafijali’s explanation of fabda (word) as “the 
sound that conventionally conveys a particular sense,” Nagega says: 


342 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


“The term pratitapadarthaka refers to a word that is well known among the 
people as capable of indicating precisely a certain object.”’ It is the word 
that is made up of sounds (in the form of articulated sound syllables) 
that are audible to the sense of hearing. It is also necessary that a word 
must have a precise meaning well known in the world. The grammatical 
text analyzes such words into their components and explains them. 

7 Explaining the terms dhvani and sphota used in the Afahabhasya, 
Nagefa says that sphota refers to the madhyamda type of vak, while dhvani 
refers to the vatkhari type. 

8 Among the uses of Grammar, Patafijali gives the first place to the 
pretection of the Vedas; Kaiyata explains it as gaining the purusarthas. 
Elaborating this notion, Nageéa says that purusdrtha means dharma and 
moksa here. Grammar is useful for obtaining a correct understanding 
of the forms and meanings of Vedic texts, so it forms part of the means 
for the achievement of dharma and moksa. The study of Grammar results 
in understanding the correct sense of Vedic passages, enabling one 
thereby to perform the ordained rituals, hence causing the enjoyment 
of heavenly bliss (svarga). Grammar is also useful for correctly under- 
standing the meaning of Upanisadic passages, thereby causing the 
attainment of supreme bliss (moksa). A study of Grammar is essential 
for understanding the Vedic and Upanisadic texts correctly, enabling 
one to perform one’s duties properly and to have a correct knowledge of 
reality. 


SPHOTAVADA 
K. Kunjunni Raja 


Sphofavada is an independent work by Nagesa Bhatta on the sphofa 
theory. According to Nagega, the founder of the theory was the sage 
Sphotayana, mentioned by Panini in formulating one of his rules. This 
tradition is unknown to Bhartrhari, who considers Audumbarayana 
(mentioned by Yaska) as having held a view similar to the sphota 
theory. Nagesa differs considerably from Bhartrhari and shows the 
influence of Kashmir Saivism and the Tantric tradition. Minor differen- 
ces can be seen between the views given in this work and those offered 
in the sphota section of the Paramalaghumafijiisd (see above). 

The edition (£) referred to is that by V. Krishnamacharya (Adyar 
Library and Research Centre, Madras, 1946). Numbers refer to philo- 
sophical points made in the text. 


Summary 


(£1). According to the Grammarians there are eight kinds of 
Sphota: phoneme (varna) sphoja (particular and universal forms), indi- 


NAGESA OR NAGOJI BHATTA 343 


visible-word (akhandapada) sphota, word (pada) sphofa (particular and 
universal forms), indivisible-sentence (akhandavadkya) sphota, and sen- 
tence (vakya) sphota (particular and universal forms). 

(E5-6). The term sphota means that from which the meaning 
bursts out, that is, the signifier. The cight types of sphofa are all desig- 
nating (vdcaka) linguistic signs. The letters actually heard, along with 
the order of sequence, bear the meaning, not the prototype (sthdnin), 
the grammatica] technical term (like /a in bhavait). It may seem simpler 
to assume that the meaning-bearing capacity belongs to the single 
technical term Ja, instead of to its substitutes like #; but the common 
man (who is not a Grammarian ) will not understand the meaning from 
ia and the like. Even though Panini’s Grammar may be an accessory to 
the Vedas (Veddniga), terms like da (for verbal endings) have no mean- 
ing bearing power. Even secondary meaning cannot apply to them. 

Objection: One who has learned the various substitutes for different 
technical terms may get confused and have difficulty understanding the 
meaning. 

Answer: As in the case of the scripts reminding the phonemes, here 
also it is possible. All of the items are needed to help the recollection. 

(E7). Moreover, worldly usage, the most important among the 
means of understanding the meaning of words, applies only to the 
words used, not to the artificial technical term, such as 1-suffixes. 

(£9). It may be noted that the meaning-bearing capacity is only 
for the phonemes when they are together (in a particular sequence), not 
for them individually. Otherwise, each phoneme will be a nominal 
(pratipadika) stem and get nominal suffixes. 

(£10). Thus meaningfulness is only for the actual expressions used 
in language, not for the artificially assumed prototype. The word 
ghatena has ghaja as the stem and.~ena as the instrumental singular suffix; 
only the grammarian knows it, not the ordinary man who uses the 
language, to whom the splitting is artificial. Hence the whole word 
ghatena must be assumed. to convey the full meaning. 

Similarly in the sentences hare’va, ‘Oh Hari! protect (us)” and 
visno’va, ““O Visnu! protect (us), the same argument shows that the 
whole sentence has to be taken as the meaning-bearing unit. Thus word 
Sphoja and sentence sphoja have to be accepted. 

(Z11). The sentence meaning, which is of the form of the associa- 
tion (of word meanings), is something new, and therefore here the 
significative power is the rejationship. 

Objection: The primary meaning of words is understood from the 
behavior of elderly people. Still, after the individual meanings of words 
have been understood from the words, the mind with the knowledge of 
their mutual expectancy understands the sentence meaning; there is no 
need for a special power. 


344 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer: The understanding of the word meanings from the words is 
impossible if the words are not understood clearly; mutual expectancy 
(akanksa) is the same as the sentence power (vdkyafakti). 

Objection by a Mimamsaka: The mutual association of the word 
meanings is known as the object of intention (fétparya). Intention is 
desire to convey the particular meanings; in the absence of such an 
intention or in the presence of another intention, the proper meaning 
will not be understood. Instead of taking these last two cases as obstruc- 
tions to the knowledge of the sentence meaning, it is simpler to take 
the knowledge of intention as one of the positive conditions for under- 
standing the sentence meaning. 

(£12-13). Answer: The novelty (apirvatva) of the sentence meaning 
cannot be the object of intention, and even from the primary meanings 
of the words the sentence meaning can be obtained (without the help 
of intention). In the case of words uttered by a parrot, the meaning 
of the utterance is understood, even though, it is certain thai there is no 
intention on the part of the parrot. Hence intention is not essential for 
understanding the sentence meaning. God’s intention also cannot be 
assumed, for it can be known only through the effect. Mimamsakas who 
do not accept the existence of God understand the meaning (without 
the help of intention); and Vedic sentences will be meaningless if 
intention is necessary (for there is no intention of the speaker or God 
there). Even the intention of the teacher cannot be assumed for the 
Veda, for the teacher may be a fool or a wise man. “Two meanings 
appear from the sentence, we do not know which one will suit the 
context—such general experience is also against assuming intention as 
a cause for the understanding of the sentence’s meaning. 

(£15-17). In ambiguous cases it is the context that helps in deciding 
the meaning, not the intention. Thus in a sentence like “‘bring the pot” 
the sentence meaning, which is of the nature of the mutual association 
of the word meanings, is determined from the sentence itself. From 
worldly experience it is known that the sentence gives the connected. 
sentence meaning; but through the method of substitution the words 
are also assumed, to have their individual meanings. Hence the sentence 
meaning can be considered to be mutual association (samsarga) of 
word meanings, which is obtained from the sentence as a whole 

(vékyasakit). 

(#17-18). Naipdvika objection: What is the need for assuming a signi- 
ficative power for the sentence, if the mutual association (samsarga} can 
be obtained from the word meanings themselves with the help of mutual 
expectancy and so on? Mutual expectancy (dkd#ksd@) is the desire to 
understand the word syntactically related to the other words in the 
sentence in order to bring out the intended connected meaning. The 
sentence “bring the pot’’ will be understood by the ordinary man, but 


NAGESA OR NAGOJI BHATTA 345 


not the statement “bringing is the activity and the pot is the object’’; 
the latter may be understood by the Nyaya scholar, to whom the 
morphemes ghafa (pot), -am (the accusative singular suffix indicative 
of the object), and so on are separate words (pada). 

(E18-21). Answer: You cannot say that because the intention of God 
is fixed (this word must give this particular meaning), a special new 
sense in the sentence meaning cannot be obtained, for I can accept 
God’s intention for the sentence meaning as well (Let this sentence 
give this particular meaning). You cannot say that a special power 
should be assumed to convey the special added meaning in the sentence, 
for assumption of a special power involves complexity. The view that a 
pada is a meaningful item is not affected, for it is not the pada but its 
knowledge that leads to thesentencemeaning. Thus what the Gramma- 
rians call the significative power of the sentence (vékyafakti) is the same 
as what the Naiydyikas call mutual expectancy (dkdntksé). Hence it is 
said that the sentence meaning is the mutual association of the word 
meanings (samsargo vakyarthah). And thatiswhy the Mahabhdsya says that 
Panini’s rule krttaddhitasamdsasca uses the term samdsa to exclude the 
sentence. 

(£24-27). Some others say that meaningfulness is located only in 
the sentence and not in its parts, the words. People understand the 
meaning only from the behavior of elders, and that is with reference 
to sentences. The meaning of words is understood separately through 
the substitution method; but that does not make the sentence meaning 
unreal. And in cases like hare’va, ““O Hari! protect,” it is necessary to 
take the sentence as a whole. With the help of the knowledge of word 
meanings one can get the sentence meaning; but then without the help 
of word meanings also the sentence meaning can be understood directly 
(through observing the behavior of elders). 

{£28-29). This view is not accepted by some others. The word 
ghafam indicates the meaning of the pot and its being the object; 
hence there is no need to accept a collective power for the sentence. 
Knowledge of meaning is based on the way it is learned. 

(#29-30). Even among those who accept significative power for the 
sentence, some may get the knowledge of sentence meaning directly, 
others after understanding the kdrakas, and some by other means. But 
the sentence meaning is based on the mutual association of the indivi- 
dual word meanings. 

(430-31). Objection: Knowledge of word meaning is the cause for 
the knowledge of the connected sentence meaning, for on hearing a new 
sentence one who knows the word meanings does have the knowledge 
of the sentence’s meaning. 

Answer: Without knowing the significative power of the sentence, 
one does not know the sentence’s meaning. People who are able to 


346 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


understand the meaning from a sentence sometimes find it difficult to 
identify the words and other parts, if they have no grammatical know- 
ledge. And acceptance of significative power for words does not involve 
complexity, because it is valid in worldly usage. 

(£31-53). Question: Just as words convey word meanings, why should 
the sentence not also convey the sentence meaning? And just as the 
word meanings are remembered, why should the sentence meaning not 
also be remembered? The sentence meaning itself is the fabdabodha, the 
meaning arrived at for the sentence. 

Answer: The sentence meaning is not directly experienced. The 
words produce their individual meanings through recollection, but the 
sentence does not. The words convey their meaning to the listener 
through recollection; then with the help of the sentence’s significative 
power, the knowledge of the sentence meaning is determined, consist- 
ing of the word meanings and their mutual association. 

(£54-55). The Mimamsakas say that it is not proper to assume a 
special power for the sentence, because secondary meaning is sufficient. 
The sentence meaning is not something new. On hearing the sentence 
“the village is on the river Haridra,” even a person who does not 
know such a river will know that it is the name of a river because of the 
use of the word “river”? accompanying it in the sentence; similarly, 
when the words have conveyed their individual meanings, it is possible 
to understand the sentence meaning with the help of the knowledge of 
mutual expectancy. To make it a verbal knowledge, secondary meaning 
is assumed. The secondary meaning gives the meaning related to what 
is conveyed by the primary meaning. It does not affect the authorita- 
tiveness of the Vedas, even though the sentence meaning is conveyed, 
not directly, but by secondary meaning from the word meanings on the 
basis of expectancy and so on. 

Answer: This view is not acceptable. Secondary meaning operates 
when there is some incompatibility with the literal sense. We cannot say 
that the condition for secondary meaning is the incompatibility with the 
speaker’s intention, for that does not work everywhere; and we have to 
assume an intention. It is simpler to assume a power to the sentence 
than to assume an intention. 

In fact, secondary meaning is the relation to the literal meaning, not 
the relation to what is understood; according to the Vedas itis not 
possible to assume secondary meaning here. 

(456-58). Objection: by Prabhakara Mimamsakas: The sentence has 
no special power to convey the sentence meaning. By contrast, the words 
have the power to convey the connected meaning. When it can be 
explained by the significative power of words, there is no valid reason 
for assuming a power to the sentence. The understanding of the sentence 
meaning is not possible unless it becomes the object of the significative 


NAGESA OR NAGOJL BHATTA 347 


power. It is simpler to assume it for the words instead of assuming a 
separate power (to the sentence). So each word gives the syntactic 
connection also (along with its own meaning) on the basis of mutual 
expectancy and so on and the fact that the words have been uttered 
together (as one group). Moreover, on hearing a word there is always 
a desire to know its syntactic position, and that desire can be satisfied 
only from words. It is not something new, for the syntactic relation of 
each word is known in a general way. The view that the power of a 
word is to give its meaning as syntactically connected with that of 
other words is not correct. The meaning of the other words can be 
obtained only from those words. The impression that a word like ghata, 
“a pot,” gives only its isolated meaning is erroneous. 

(£59). Answer: This view is not acceptable, for even though you 
assume that the words have a power to indicate the syntactic relation~- 
ship, its exact nature is known only by the other words uttered, and 
the utterance together (samabhivyahara) of the words has to be assumed 
as a cause for knowing it, which is more complex. 

(Z60-61). You have to assume that the words give the syntactic 
relation in a general way and that the specific relation is understood 
through inference. Then that inference itself can give the syntactic 
relation (sampsarga). The experience is that the sentence’s meaning is 
determined from the sentence itself, not that it is determined from 
inference or perception. 

(E66-68). Objection: The cause of understanding the sentence mean- 
ing is the word meanings or their recollection, not the knowledge of 
words. On seeing a vague white form and hearing the sound of hooves 
and neighing, one gets the idea that a white horse is running. Here 
there is no syntactic relation between the seeing of the white form and 
the hearing of the neighing. 

Answer: Such a knowledge can be obtained even from inference. If 
the knowledge is to be verbal, it must be from words. 

(Z68-69). Objection: Knowledge of a word or a sentence is impossible, 
because sequence is part of the utterance, and the phonemes are never 
together. 

Answer: Each phoneme is received as associated with the previous 
ones; that is why there is difference between sara and rasa, where the 
same phonemes appear in different sequence. The view that the word is 
grasped through the perception of the last phoneme and the recollection 
of the earlier phonemes is not acceptable, because there is no rule 
regarding the sequence between what is heard and what is recollected. 
There is no rule that recollection of past experience is always in the 
same order. 

(£69-70 ). The three types of sphofa discussed (phoneme, word, and 
sentence) are differentiated on the basis of the listener. Some understand 


348 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the distinct meanings of the stem and the suffix, some get the meaning 
from the words, and some others from the sentence as a whole. The 
meaning is understood from the whole. 


Akhandasphota 

(£71-74). On the basis of the experience “‘it is a single word” and 
“it is a single sentence,” it is necessary to assume an indivisible word 
(sbhofa) and an indivisible sentence (sphofa) free from the distinctions 
of phonemes, stems, and suffixes. It is not like the idea of “forest” for a 
collection of trees. Otherwise even a phoneme could be divided like r, 
split into r and vowel bits. 

(£74-75). Objection: There is no evidence for the existence of the 
phonemes. It is the articulated sounds that are heard, and the sphofa can 
directly be suggested by these sounds, even without the assumption ofa 
phoneme between them. 

Answer: Let the articulated sounds be identical with the phonemes. 
But mere sounds may not be able to reveal the sphota. The phonemes are 
the revealers of sphota. 

This sphofa is the designator (vacaka), because we have the experience 
“This meaning is obtained from this word or sentence.” According to 
some, the sphofas are innumerable (each word or sentence having a 
separate sphota). Others say that it is simpler to assume that there is 
only one sphofa and that it appears to be many on the basis of the differ- 
ences in the phonemes that suggest it. 

(£76). It is to be noted that the meaning is understood from the 
sphoja revealed by the phonemes in a specific sequential order. In the 
case of synonyms, the sphotas are to be taken as different (the synonyms 
ghaja and kalaSa, both meaning a pot, are different sphofas). 

(#80-83). Others say that there is only one phoneme. It appears to 
be many on the basis of the differences in the place of articulation, in the 
effort taken, and so on. Recognition of the same phoneme or word is 
on the basis of the differences in the revealing medium. This view is 
not acceptable. 

(£92-94). The sphoja theory that claims the word or the sentence as 
indivisible does not take away the validity of the science of Grammar, 
which is concerned with the linguistic analysis of words into stem and 
suffixes. Just as the discussion of the five sheaths (paficakofa) in the 
Upanisads is to lead the seeker after truth step by step to the knowledge 
of Brahman, so linguistic analysis of words is a step in the right direction. 
Even if the division into stem and suffixes may be artificial, it is useful 
as a means for arriving at the ultimate truth. 

(£9596). Some say that “phoneme sphoja’? means those monophone- 
mic words found in lexicons: “‘sakhanda word sphoja’”® means that a word 
indicates its meaning when its derivation is also known; so also the 


NAGESA OR NAGOJI BHATTA 349 


sentence sphofa is the sentence understood along with its further analysis. 
The indivisible word and the indivisible sentence are not understood in 
a way that involves knowledge of their derivations. 


Sphoja-Universal (Fatisphota) 

(£Z96-101). Some say it is reasonable to assume meaningfulness of 
the universal word or sentence rather than of the individuals. This 
universal is revealed by the phonemes in the specific order of sequence. 
Although sphofa, being a universal, is eternal, the meaning is understood 
only when it is known. The universal is identical with existence (satia), 
identical with Brahman. Thus both the signifier sphofa and the signi- 
fied meaning (sattd existence) are identical with Brahman. 

(#102). The Grammarian Nagesa has revised and explained the 
sphota theory of the ancient seer Sphotayana. 


46 


JNANENDRA SARASVATI 


This writer appears to have flourished about 1730. He was the teacher 
of Nilakantha Diksita and himself a pupil of Vamanendrasvamin. He 
composed a Tattvabodhini on the Siddhantakaumudi, which he was appa- 
rently unable to complete; it was completed by Jayakrsna Maunin as 
Subodhini (see below, summary 51). 


47 


GOPALAKRSNA SASTRIN 


Gopalakrsna is the author of Sabdikacintémani, on the Mahabhasya. His 
father’s name was Vaidyanatha, and he identifies his guru as Rama- 
bhadra Adhvarin. The New Catalogus Catalogorum tells us that Gopala- 
krsna was a classmate of Sadasivendra Brahmendra (who flourished 
about 1720) and the spiritual teacher of King Vijaya Raghunatha 
Tondaiian I of Pudukottah (1730-1769), as well as the teacher of the 
Appayya Diksita who composed Péniniyasitiraprakafa. Yudhisthira 
Mimamsaka infers from all this information that his dates fall between 
1597 and 1647,! but he is probably about a century early, and a date 
approximating 1725 would be preferable. Gopalakrsna also composed a 
commentary on the Unpddisitras. 


48 


DHARANIDHARA 


The New Catalogus Catalogorum, vol. 9, p. 237b, cites a work on Grammar 
called Bodhapaddhatt, composed in 1730 by Dharanidhara, son of 
Jvalananda of Tiksnajfiatiya. 


49 


VAIDYANATHA PAYAGUNDA 


Vaidyanatha, the son of Veni and Mahadeva, was a direct disciple of 
Nageéa Bhatta, so he should have flourished about 1735. He hailed 
from Kasi, that is, Varanasi, where he prepared a line of pupils. The 
name Balambhatta is given as the author of some of his works, such as 
the Kald on Nagesa’s Laghumafijiisd, but his son, who wrote a Mitdksara- 
ortii, was known as Balambhatta. 

Vaidyanatha wrote a number of commentaries, including Prabhké on 
Bhattoji’s Sabdakaustubha, Bhavaprakasika on Hari Diksita’s Sabdaratna, 
a Chayé on Nagesa’s Pradipoddyota, Kala on Nagesa’s Laghumafijiisa, 
and Bhavaprakafa on Bhattoji’s Praudhamanorama. The last two works 
have been edited. He also wrote a Bhavaprakasiké on the Brhatfabdendu-~ 
Sekhara, a Cidasthimala on the LaghusabdenduSekhara (which has been 
edited), and a Kaska or Gada on Paribhdsendusekhara, in addition to a 
short independent treatise called Rapratyahdrakhandana. He seems to 
have been the most important of Nagega’s commentators, and probably 
the premier Grammarian after Nageéa. 


50 


SATYAPRIYA TIRTHA SVAMIN 


This writer composed a Vivarana on Patafijali’s Mahabhasya. Yudhisthira 
Mimamsaka gives samvat 1764-1801 (1711-1748) as his dates. 


51 


JAYAKRSNA MAUNIN 


Jayakrsna was the elder brother of Sri Krsna Maunin, the son of 
Raghunatha Bhatta and Janaki, and grandson of Govardhana Bhatta. 
He wrote a number of independent works in the grammatical tradition, 
including (Sabdartha) Séramafijari, Sabdarthatarkémrta, Suddhicandrikd, 
Vibhakiyarthanirnaya, Vritidipikdé, and an Arthanirnaya on Raghunatha 
Siromani’s Akhydtavdda. He also completed Jfianendra Sarasvati’s 
Tattvabodhini on Bhattoji’s Siddhdntakaumudi (see above, number 46). 
He is sometimes credited with authorship of the Sphofacandrika (see 
introduction to the section on Srikrsna Maunin, below, number 54). 


52 


HARIVALLABHA 


According to V. Krsnamacarya, this writer was the son of Vallabha 
Utprabatiya, author of a Vedanta work called Vinodamafijari (cf. 
volume ] of this encyclopedia [2d ed. ], p. 585). Harivallabha flourished 
in 1747. He is the author of a Darpana on Konda Bhatta’s Vaipdkara- 
nabhiisanasara (Adyar D, vol. 6, no. 574), which has been edited. 


53 


VASUDEVA DIKSITA 


Vasudeva is known to Mimamsakas as the author of the Kutihalaortti 
on Jaimini’s Mimdmsdsiitras, edited several times (cf. volume 1 of this 
encyclopedia [2d ed. ], p. 466). He was the son of Annapirnamba and 
Mahadeva Diksita and the younger brother of Vigveévara Diksita. He 
seems to have lived about the middle of the eighteenth century. His 
Bélamanorama on Siddhantakaumudi has been published. 


54 


SRIKRSNA BHATTA MAUNIN 


Srikrsna was apparently Jayakrsna’s younger brother, though there is 
a suspicion that the two may be the same person. He wrote a series of 
works on grammatical topics, the most important of which is perhaps 
the Sphotacandriké, summarized below. In addition, he produced the 
Tarkacandriké, ‘‘a set of Krodapatras on grammatical works of recent 
times” (Adyar D, vol. 6, no. 457), such as Kaiyata’s Pradipa, the 
Siddhantakaumudi, Praudhamanorama, LaghuSabdaratna, and Laghusabden- 
duSekhara. His Vritidipiké has been twice published; it deals with the 
powers of words. In addition, he is credited in the New Catalogus 
Catalogorum with a commentary on Raghunatha’s Akhydta called 
Arthacandrikd (nirnaya), and a Lakdrarthanirnaya. 


SPHOTACANDRIKA 
G.B. Palsule 


The Sphotacandrikd is one of those late works on sphofa doctrine which 
gives it something of a final form and which betrays considerable influ- 
ence of standard texts such as the Vazpdkaranabhitsana. While on the one 
hand this text shows a certain staunchness and a penchant for hair- 
splitting polemics, on the other hand it also shows a spirit of accommo- 
dation and realism. The form of the sphota doctrine here is considerably 
different from its classical form—indeed, there is a revolutionary change 
in some respects. The transitoriness of the phonemes or their incapacity 
to form a simultaneous whole is no longer the reason for accepting the 
sphota theory: phonemes can be permanent, or, alternatively, even 
transient phonemes can form a simultaneous whole in memory. The 
reason is only tactical: it achieves simplicity of procedure (ldéghava). 
Similarly, sphofa need not now be necessarily over and above the 


368 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


phonemes; it can consist of the phonemes themselves. Altogether, one 
is not quite sure that, while successful in preserving the name sphota 
in their grim fight against the Naiyayikas, these texts have not lost some 
of the old soul of sphofa. But at the same time, in optionally equating an 
indivisible (akhanda) word sphota with an unanalyzable (ritdka) word, 
or a divisible (sakhanda) word sphota with a partly (yogardédha) or wholly 
analyzable (yaugika) word, the author displays a robust realism that 
serves to bring down the sphofa theory from its mystic heights to a solid 
earthly footing. 

& references are to the edition by M. G. Bakre in Vadarthasamgraha 
(Bombay, 1913), vol. 1, pp. 1-16. The references are to philosophical 
points made in the text. 


Summary 

1 (£1). Sphota is a yogariidha {conveying a partly etymological and 
partly conventional meaning) word, so called because the meaning 
bursts out (sphufati) from it. The name sphofa attaches either to the 
individual words or to the universals inhering in them. 

2 In all, eight kinds of sphota are recognized: the five individual 
(uyakia) sphofas, namely, phoneme (varpa), word (pada), sentence 
(vakya), indivisible word (akhandapada), and indivisible sentence 
(akhandavakya) sphojas; and the three universal (jdti) sphotas, namely, 
phoneme, word, and sentence sphofas, all three of which, by the very 
nature of the universal, are indivisible (akhanda). By implication, 
padasphofa and. vakyasphota are divisible (sakhanda). 

3 Only the indivisible sentence is the real sphofa. The designation 
sphota for the others (phonemes, and the like ) is a fiction resorted to as 
a convenient means of analysis. It is like the designation ‘““Brahman” 
given to sheaths like the annamaya (1.13-19). 


Phoneme Sphoja 


4 (£1-6). This term refers to single phonemes or phoneme complexes 
that form grammatically significant elements, such as stems and suffixes 
(like pac-, ti(P), and the like). It is clear that in the cases of suffixes the 
term applies to those actually used, and not to their prototypes (like-!), 
which appear only in the system. 

Srikrsna refutes the Naiyayikas’ definition of a word, Saktam padam, 
and of the four varieties of words, conventional (ré¢ka), derivative (or 
etymological, yaugika), derivative and conventional (yogaridha), and 
derivative or conventional (yaugikariidha). 

Another view of phoneme spiofa is that it consists of all single letters 
to which meaning has been assigned by the lexicons of words consisting 
of single letters (ek@ksarakosa). 


érRIKRSNA BHATTA MAUNIN 369 


Srikrsna criticizes Konda Bhatta’s Bhisana, which regards the word 
sphota as purely etymological (kevala yaugika). 

There follows a lengthy discussion of what constitutes denotative 
power (faktt), whether it be one or many, whether it resides in incorrect 
words also, and so on. The author’s view is that despite their meaning- 
fulness, incorrect words do not get the designation sphofa because such 
words are not accepted by Grammar, 


Word. Sphota 

5 (E£6-9). More internal (antaranga) to the sentence because it 
directly forms a constituent of the sentence in the word sphota. A 
phoneme is only an indirect constituent in that it builds the direct 
constituents of the sentence, namely, the words (pada). 

What is called a divisible word sphofta (sakhandapadasphoja) by the 
Grammarians (pac -++- ati; rémah) is the vakyasphota of the Naiyayikas. 

The indivisible word sphota (akhandapadasphsta) is the one in which the 
whole word is manifested by all the phonemes. 

Srikrsna refutes the objections against sphota by the Naiydyikas and 
Vedantins, taking a remarkable position (partly following the Bhisana), 
in contrast to the classical sphofa doctrine, that phonemes are not 
transitory and that even if they were they could form a whole in 
memory. 

Still the sphota (as an entity over and above phonemes) is accepted 
for the sake of economy of process, in that here the physical speech 
sounds (dhvani) are regarded as directly revealing the sphofa (thus doing 
away with the phonemes). This sphofa isidentified with the fabdabrahman. 

Next he presents a variation of the indivisible word sphofa. Here the 
Sphoja is not regarded as over and above the phonemes. The idea is 
that what the Naiyayikas call derivative (yaugika) and derivative- 
conventional (yogariidha, wholly or partly analyzable) words are regard- 
ed here as divisible word sphotas, while conventional (ridha) words 
are regarded here as indivisible word sphotas. (A grammatically ignorant 
person accepts the individual word sphoja even in the case of derivative 
words, ) 

According to this view of the indivisible and divisible word sphofas, 
the difference between the Grammarians and the Naiyayikas boils 
down to a quarrel over the name, as the author remarks. 

He closes this part with an incidental refutation of some doctrines of 
the Tarkikas (which have nothing to do with linguistic theory). 


Sentence Sphoja 

6 (£9-11). The basis of the sentence sphota is the actua] communi- 
cation, which consists of sentences and from which later one learns a 
language. 


370 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Sentence sphofas are of two kinds: divisible and indivisible. The latter 
is revealed by the indivisible words and is distinct from them. It alone 
is meaningful. It is accepted for the purpose of economy of process. 

The indivisible sentence sphofa, further, is of two kinds, either over 
and, above the phonemes, or not (where the physical speech sounds 
directly reveal the sentence). 

A variation of the indivisible sentence sphofa is accepted only in cases 
like Hare’va, “Save me, O Hari,’”? where word boundaries cannot be 
distinguished. In those cases in which word boundaries are clear (such 
as ghatam dnaya, ‘‘bring a jar’’), one accepts the divisible word sphoja. 

7 (£11-12). This section discusses whether the import of a sentence 
is predominantly nominal (rathamdntavisesyakah §abdabodhah) and 
similar topics (such as whether the sentence meaning is the grammatical 
object in such sentences as “‘pagya, mrgo dhavati’ [‘‘See, a deer is 
running’. Srikrsna also refutes the Vyutpattivdda. 

8 (£12-13). This section treats the application of divisibility and 
indivisibility in certain other types of sentences. A proposal is considered 
for a secondary sentence sphofa in the case of the statement “tat tvam 
asi” (“that thou art’). Ultimately it is rejected, and the designative 
sentence sphota (vdcakavikyasphofa) is accepted. The type of secondary 
meaning posited by Advaitins, jahadajahallaksana, is refuted. 

9 (£13-14). So far the discussion has concerned a sentence that is not 
poetic (kduydimaka). Now the poetic sentence is considered. Mammata’s 
definition is justified against the attacks of Jagannatha. 

10 (#14-15). Srikrsna discusses some figurative sentences (such as 
vahnina sificati, “sprinkles with fire’’?) and establishes sentence sphofa in 
such, cases. 

11 (415-16). What is the indivisible sentence sphofa? It is a single 
phoneme (eko varnak), auditorially perceived (fravana). It is like the 
citra riipa of the Nyaya or the composite vowels accepted by Gramma- 
rians. It is this indivisible sentence sphota, consisting of a single phoneme, 
that is designative (vdcaka). It is identical with fabdabrahman. 


55 


UMAMAHESVARA or 
ABHINAVA KALIDASA 


This author was responsible for several Advaita works (cf. volume 1 
of this encyclopedia [ 2d ed.] , p. 465) as well as a work on Grammar, 
Pininiyavddanaksatramala. Of a Vellala family, he was the son of Venka- 
tarya of the Moksagunda family; a pupil of Aksayasiiri; and himself the 
guru of Kavikufijara, author of Sabharafjanasataka. He flourished about 
1750, 


56 


NILAKANTHA DIKSITA 


The grandson of Ramabhadra Diksita and a pupil of Jfanendra 
Sarasvati, Nilakantha was patronized by Puratam Tirumal Devanara- 
yana of Ambalappuzha. His father was Varadesvara Diksita, who 
studied with the son of some Appayya Diksita and died at Varanasi 
as ah ascetic. He had an elder brother called Sundarefvara Yajvan, 
who composed a work titled Pdapinipradipa. Although Yudhisthira 
Mimamsaka attributes his works to Nilakantha Vajapeyin of the 
sixteenth century, it seems more likely this author flourished about the 
middle of the eighteenth century. 

This Nilakantha’s works include a Paribhasavrtti, a Tattvaviveka on the 
Mahabhasya, Gidharthadipika on his teacher Jiianendra’s Tativabodhini, 
and a LaghuSabdakaustubha. 


57 


ASADHARA BHATTA 


Agadhara was a pupil of Dharanidhara and should be dated to about 
1770. U. P. Shah has published a note on his life and works.1 His ( Sabda) 
Trivenikd, a short treatise on the three powers of a word, has been edited 
twice. In addition, he wrote a Padasamjfiavicaéra, as well as work known 
under various titles, such as Piéroapaksaprasnottari or mafijisad or mafijart. 
He also seems to have composed an Advaita work, Adoaitaviveka (cf. 
volume 1 of this encyclopedia [2d ed.], p. 471). 


58 


RAMASEVAKA 


This writer is the author of a Vydkhyé on Kaiyata’s Mahabhdasyapradipa. 
He was the father of Krsnamitracarya (or Durbalacarya), a prolific 
grammatical writer of various commentaries (cf. below, number 60). 


59 


INDRADATTA UPADHYAYA 


The New Catalogus Catalogorum tells us that Indradatta of the Garga 
gotra (lineage) was the son of Lalamani Upadhyaya and Ksemavati 
Devi, the grandson of Mohana Lala, and the great-grandson of Murali- 
dhara. A manuscript of Indradatta’s Sabdatattvaprakdsa exists that was 
copied in 1820. The work is based on Nageéa. 


60 


KRSNAMITRACARYA or 
DURBALACARYA 


One of the most prolific writers on Indian philosophy that ever lived, 
Krsnamitracarya contributed extensively to the literature on Nyaya, 
Samkhya, and Grammar. His father was Ramasevaka of Laksmapura 
(see above, number 58), his grandfather Devidatta. Only two of his 
works to my knowledge have been published so far, the Tattvamimamsd, 
a Samkhya treatise, and a Kuficikaé on NageSa Bhatta’s Vatyakaranalaghu- 
mafijisd. In Grammar he also wrote a commentary on the Paribhdsendu- 
sekhara, Bhavapradipa on Bhattoji’s Sabdakaustubha, Kalpalata on the 
Praudhamanorama, Raindrnava on Siddhéntakaumudi, and a commentary 
on the Vatydkaranabhisana. He must have flourished at the beginning of 
the nineteenth century. 


61 


HARIBHATTA 


Haribhatta flourished in 1801, and was the author of Darbana on the 
Vaiyatkaranabhisanasara. 


62 


DHARANIDHARA (II) 


This Dharanidhara was patronized by Thomas Henry of Calcutta, 
and he wrote his Vaiyakaranasarvasva in 1809, 


63 


MANNUDEVA or MANYUDEVA 
or GOPALADEVA 


Mannudeva was the son of Durga and Sambhu, the younger brother of 
Krsnadeva, and a pupil of Payagunda Balakrsna, who was in turn the 
son of Vaidyanatha Payagunda (see above, summary 49), a direct 
disciple of Nageéa Bhatta. He wrote Laghubhitsanasdrakanti on the 
Vaiyakaranabhisanasdra, Dosoddhara on the LaghuSabdendusekhara. The 
New Catalogus Catalogorum also attributes to him an Arthavatsitravada. 


64 


BHAIRAVA MISRA 


Bhairava was the son of Bhavadeva Misra of the Agastya family, who 
wrote a commentary on Hari Diksita’s Sabdaratna. M.S. Bhat dates 
Bhairava “‘circa 1780—-1840.’! He wrote the following works, all of 
which are in print: Sphotapariksé, Vaiyakaranabhisanasara-Pariksa, 
Candrakalaé on the LaghuSabdenduSekhara, a commentary on ParibhaSendu-~ 
Sekhara, and a commentary on the Sabdaratna (which appears not to be 
the same as his father’s) . 


65 


KUMARA TATAYA 


This writer composed a Parijdtam Natakam on the Mahdabhdsya. He 
appears to have lived in the early nineteenth century, about 1825. 


66 


SATARA RAGHAVENDRACARYA 
(GAJENDRAGADKAR) 


Author of several grammatical works, this Maharashtrian was the 
pupil of Nilakantha Vyasa, who died in 1853, according to B.N.K. 
Sharma, following Theodor Aufrecht.1 His works are Candriké on 
Nagesa’s LaghuSabdendusckhara, Tripathagi on Nagega’s Paribhdsendu- 
Sekhara, Prabha on Bhattoji’s Sabdakaustubha, Sabdaratnaprabhd, and 
Tipathaga on Patajfijali’s Mahabhdgya (uncertain attribution). 


67 


GANGADHARA KAVIRAJA 


Gangadhara was a Vaidya of Bengal, born at Jessore. His life covered 
the period from 1798 to 1885. Some of his works are partly published 
in Gatgddharamanisé (Calcutta, 1911). Two works are on Grammar: 
TrikandaSabdaSasana and Trisiitravyakarana, both in verse. 


68 


TARANATHA TARKAVACASPATI 


A well-known master pandit, whose expertise led him to contribute 
works in Nyaya, Samkhya, and Advaita as well as in grammar (listed in 
volume 1 of this encyclopedia, 2d ed.). He lived from about 1840 to 
1900. His works on Grammar included Tarkaratnamdla and a Saralad on 
the Siddhantakaumudi. 


69 


KHUDDI JHA (SARMAN) 


A widely celebrated pandit who flourished at the beginning of the 
twentieth century. He was a Maithila of Varanasi. His notes on the 
Laghusabdendusekhara, titled NdageSoktiprakasa, were published at Varanasi 
in 1899. He also wrote a Tinarthavadasdra on the Vaiyakaranabhisanasara. 


70 


NITYANANDA PANTA PARVATIYA 


Nityananda flourished about 1925. Two works of his are published, a 
commentary on the Paramalaghumaiijisa, and Dipika on LaghuSabden- 
dusekhara. 


71 


DRAVYESA JHA 


This writer’s Pratyekdrthaprakadsikd on the first book of Bhartrhari’s 
Vikyapadiya or Trikandi was published at Vrindavan in 1926. 


72 


SURYANARAYANA SUKLA 


Another commentary on book | of the Vakyapadiya, entitled Bhavapradipa, 
was composed by this author and published initially in 1937. He also 
wrote on other systems. 


73 


GOPALA SASTRI NENE 


This scholar was active during the first half of the twentieth century. 
He has written a Saralé on the Vaiydkaranabhiisanasdara. 


74 


P.S. ANANTANARAYANA SASTRI 


A recognized scholar who wrote a work on Grammar titled Vakyatattva. 
His dates are 1885-1947, 


75 


BRAHMADEVA 


Brahmadeva wrote his Vaiyékaranasiddhantamafijisa in 1943 


76 


V. KRSNAMACARYA 


Master savant, leader in many scholarly activities in and around 
Madras, Krsnamacarya composed a Sphoftavdda-Upodghita, which was 
published as Adyar Library Series 55 in 1946, 


77 


SADASIVA SASTRI (SARMAN) 


Ay Pan oe 


Sadasiva Sastri wrote an Arthadipiké on the Paramalaghumafjisa, publi- 
shed in 1946. 


78 
BALA KRSNA PANCOLI 


His Prabha on Vatydkaranabhisanasadra was printed in 1947, 


719 


RAMA PRASADA TRIPATHI 


A Subodhint on the Vaiydkaranabhisanasdra was published in 1952. 


80 


RUDRADHARA JHA SARMAN 


Rudradhara Jha Sarman published a Tattvdloka on Patafijali’s Mahdbha- 
sya in 1954, 


8 1 


KALIKA PRASADA SUKLA 


He published a Fyotsnd on the Paralaghumafyjisa (1961). 


82 


SABHAPATI SARMAN UPADHYAYA 


Sabhapati Sarman Upadhyaya wrote a Ratnaprabha on Paramalaghumait- 
jasd, published in 1963. 


83 


RAGHUNATHA SARMAN 


His extensive commentary, Ambakariri, on the Vakyapadiya, was published 
at Varanasi between 1963 and 1974. He also published Vydkaranadar- 
Sanabindu, Varanasi, 1971. 


84 


SATYAKAMA VARMA 


He published a commentary on the first book of the Vakyapadiya in 1970. 


85 


RAMAJNA PANDEYA 


His Vydkaranadarsanapratimé was published at Varanasi in 1979. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY ON GRAMMAR 
(VYAKARANA) 


No bibliography is entirely exhaustive. In the present case it is important to understand 
what the list is intended to cover and what it is not. Nyaya, Mimamsa, Vedanta and 
the writings of other darsanas on grammatical philosophy are listed in volume 1 of this 
encyclopedia, Bibliography of Indian Philosophies, and are not to be found here. The 
present bibliography is an effort to list publications that deal with the Indian science of 
wakarena, but not in all languages. While the primary sources, Sanskrit texts, are 
covered, secondary materials in Indian languages, including Sanskrit, are not. Secon- 
dary materials in European languages that pertain to zyékarana should be listed here, 
but closely related sciences, such as nirukta, are not covered. Furthermore, papers and 
monographs on Indian linguistics that concentrate on specific words or syllables have 
not been listed here. The primary literature in Sanskrit is exclusively dealt with; Pali 
writers are omitted. 

The general plan followed resembles that utilized in volume 1 of the encyclopedia. 
Part 1 deals in chronological order with the Sanskrit authors whose dates are roughly 
known. Part 2 lists classical writers on yyékarana (grammar) and others whose dates 
are not known, Part 3 lists secondary materials that are not specifically related to a 
particular work or author. This bibliography was prepared by the general editor of 
the encyclopedia, Karl H. Potter, 


ABBREVIATIONS FOR GRAMMAR BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ABorI—Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (Poona) 

ACIL—see PICL 

Acta Asiatica—Acta Asiatica (Tokyo) 

ActOD—A¢cta Orientalia (Copenhagen) 

ActOP—Acta Orientalia (Bucharest) 

acuT——Acta et Communicationes Universitatis Taruensis (Finland ) 

Adyar D—A Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Adyar Library, compiled 
by V. Krishnamacharya, Adyar, Madras 

AG—Acyuta Granthamala (Varanasi) 

AK—Aus Indiens Kultur : Festschrift Richard von Garbe, Erlangen, 1927 

AlonsL—Annali, Istituto Orieniale dt Napoli, sezione linguistica 

AIPHOS—-Annuaire de I’ Institut de Philologie et d° Histoire Orientales et Slaves (Brussels) 

AjP—American Journal of Philology (Baltimore) 

AxM—A bhandlungen fiir die Kunde des Morgenlandes 

ALB — Adyar Library Bulletin (— Brahmavidya) 

Ats — Adyar Library Series 

amec — Abhandlungen der Marburger Gelehrten Gesellschaft 


434 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Anviksa — Anviksa: Research Journal af the Department af Sanskrit, Jadavpur University 

Ao —— Archiv Orientalni (Prague) 

AOR — Annals of Oriental Research (Madras) 

AOSE — American Oriental Series Essay 

Ap — Aryan Path (Bombay) 

AsP — Asian Profile (Hong Kong) 

ass ~~ Anandasrama Sanskrit Series (Poona) 

asvo1 — Annals of the Sri Venkateswara Oriental Institute (Tirupati) 

AU} — Annamalai University Journal (Annamalainagar ) 

auss — Allahabad University Sanskrit Series 

AUSt — Allahabad University Studies 

Bp — (Bezzenbergers) Beitrage zur Kunde der indogermanischen Sprachen (Géttingen) 

soitv — D. R. Bhandarkar et al., eds., B. C. Law Volume, 2 volumes, Calcutta, 1945 

BpcRI — Bulletin of the Deccan College Research Institute (Poona) 

BEFEO — Bulletin de ? Ecole Frangaise d’Exiréme-Orient (Paris) 

Belvalkar — Shripad Krishna Belvalkar, An Account of the Different Existing Systems of 
Sanskrit Grammar, being the Vishwanath Narayan Mandlik Gold Medal Prize Essay for 
1909, (Poona, 1915) 

BEPHE — Bulletin de ? Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes (Paris) 

BenSS — Benares Sanskrit Series 

BGWL — Berichte iiber die Verhandlungen der kéniglichen sachsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaf- 
ten zu Leipzig 

Bh — Bharati : Bulletin of the College of Indology, Banaras Hindu University 

BhaKau — Bharata-Kaumudi: Studies in Indology in Honor of Dr. Radhakamal Mookerji, 
Allahabad, 1945 

sBuuss — Benares Hindu University Sanskrit Series 

BhV — Bhératiya Vidya (Bombay) 

Br — Bibliotheca Indica (Calcutta) 

BNKSarma — B, N. Krishnamurti Sharma, A History of the Dvaita School of Vedanta and 
Its Literatutre, revised edition, Delhi, 1981 

BonnOS — Bonner Orientalischen Studien 

BoRIs — Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute Post-graduate and Research Series 

sBpso — Bulletin of the Philological Society of Calcutta 

Bsoas — Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London 

Bsps — Bombay Sanskrit and Prakrit Series 

Budruss — Georg Budruss, ed., Paul Thieme; Kleine Schriften, 2 volumes, Wiesbaden, 1971 

Cardona — George Cardona, Pépini: A Survey of Research, Delhi, 1976 

aass-St — Center of Advanced Study in Sanskrit (Poona), Studies 

apsev — Charudeva Shastri Felicitation Volume, volume I, Delhi, 1974 

cu — The Cultural Heritage of India, 4 volumes, Calcutta, 1937; revised edition 1952- 
1953; second edition 1958 

ChSS — CGhowkhamba Sanskrit Series 

ChSSt —- Ghowkhamba Sanskrit Series Studies 

cipo — Proceedings of the International Congress of Orientalists 

oLTa — Cahiers de linguistique théorique et appliquée (Bucharest) 

coy —- Calcutta Oriental Fournal 

cr — Calcutta Review 

csors — Calcutta Sanskrit Gollege Research Series 

cwreos — Collected Works of Sri R. G. Bhandarkar, 4 volumes, GOSBORI, Class B, 1-4, 
Poona, 1933 

DAWIO — Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Institut fiir Orient forschung 

pesosys — Deccan College Building Gentenary and Silver Jubilee Series 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 435 


pass — Deccan College Building Centenary Series 

paps — Deccan College Dissertation Series 

poms — Deccan College Monograph Series 

pxrpv — D.C. Kunhan Raja Presentation Volume, Madras, 1946 

pnsFv — Dr. D. N. Shastri Felicitation Volume, Keshav Ram Pal, ed., Ghaziabad, 1982 

pracv — D. R. Bhandarkar Volume, ed. B. CG. Law, Calcutta, 1940 

zor — Satya Vrat Sastri, Essays on Indology, Delhi, 1963 

ere — Hastings, Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics 

zw — East and West (Rome) 

Festschrift Aditya Natha fha — Samskrti : daktar Aditya Natha Zhai abhinandana-grantha, 
Gopinath Kaviraj, ed., 3 volumes, Delhi, 1969 

Festschrift Bochenski — Contributions to Logic and Methodology in Honor of 3. M. Bochenski, 
Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka, ed., with Charles Parsons, Amsterdam, 1965 

Festschrift Bohtlingk — Festgriiss an Otto von Béhtlingk zum Doktor-Fubilaum 3 Februar 1888 
von seinen Freunden, Stuttgart, 1888 

Festschrift Charudeva Shastri — Charudeva Shastri. Felicitation Volume: Presented to Prof. 
Charudeva Shastri on the Occasion of His Seventy-fifth Anniversary by his Friends and 
Admirers, S. K. Chatterji et al., eds., Delhi, 1974 

Festschrift Emeneau —- Studies in Indian Linguistics (Professor M. B. Emeneau Sastiparti 
Volume, B. Krishnamurti, ed., Poona, Annamalainagar, 1968 

Festschrift F.B.F. Kuiper — Pratidinam: Indian, Iranian and Indo-European Studies Presented 
to Franciscus Bernardus Jacobus Kuiper on His Sixtieth Birthday, J. C. Heesterman et al., 
eds., The Hague, 1968 

Festschrift Kahane — Issues in Linguistics : Papers in Honor of Henry and Renee Kahane, B.B. 
Kachru et al., eds., Urbana, 1973 

Festschrift Morgenstierne — Indo-tranica; mélanges presentés a Georg Morgenstierne 4 l’occasion 
de son soixante-dixiéme anniversaire, G. Redard, ed., Wiesbaden, 1964 

Festschrift Rajeswar Sastri Dravid — Rsikalpanyésah, Devadatta Sastri, ed., Allahabad, 
1971 

Festschrift Roth — Festgriiss an Rudolf von Roth zum Doktor-Fubilaum, Stuttgart, 1893 

Festschrift Siddeshwar Varma — Siddha-bhérati, 2 volumes, Hoshiarpur, 1950 

Festschrift Turner — Sir R. L. Turner Jubilee Volume Presented on the Occasion of His Seventieth 
Birthday (5th October, 1958), Sukumar Sen, ed., 1958-1959 

Festschrift Weber — Gurupitjakaumudi; Festgabe zum finfzigjahrigen Doctor-Fubilaum Albrecht 
Weber von seinen Freunden und Schiilern dargebracht, Leipzig, 1896 

Festschrift Whatmough — Studies Presented to Foshua Whatmough on His Sixtieth Birthday, E. 
Pulgram, ed., The Hague, 1957 

Festschrift Ernst Windisch — Festschrift fiir Ernst Windisch zum siebzigsten Geburtstag am 4. 
September 1914 dargebracht von Freunden und Schiilern, Leipzig, 1914 

FL — Foundations of Language 

Fiss — Foundations of Language, supplementary series 

FRsD — see Festschrift Rajeswar Sastri Dravid 

FVSKB — Felicitation Volume Presented to Professor Sribad Krishna Belvalkar, Varanasi, 1957 

Gaurinath Sastri Festschrift A Corpus of Indian Studies: Essays in Honor of Professor Gaurinath 
Sastri, G. M. Bhattacharya et al., eds., Calcutta, 1980 

eps — Govind Book Series 

Gos — Gaekwad’s Oriental Series 

Gospor1 — Government Oriental Series, Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 
classes A to G 

Gsair — Giornale della Societa Asiatica Italiana (Florence) 

cspm — Grantha -saméodhana-prakasana-mandala 

@ss — Gurukula Sanskrit Series 


436 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIg 


upvoav — H. D. Velankar Commemoration Volume, S. N. Gajendragadkar and S, A, 
Upadhyaya, eds., Bombay, 1965 

HKNMM — Hari-krsna-nibandha-mani-mala 

Hockett — Charles Francis Hockett, ed., A Leonard Bloomfield Anthology, Bloomington, 
1970 

uss — Haridas Sanskrit Series (Varanasi) 

HTCMR — Edward Byles Cowell, ed., Miscellaneous Essays of H. T. Colebrooke, 2 volumes, 
London, 1873 

HTR — Jose Pereira, ed., Hindu Theology: A Reader, New York, 1976 

uvnress — Hindi-Visvavidyalayiya-Nepalarajya-Samskrita-Granthalayah Kusumar 

1A — Indian Antiquary 

10 — Indian Culture 

i — Indogermanische Forschungen (Berlin) 

1HQ — Indian Historical Quarterly 

ny — Indo-Iranian Fournal 

you — International Journal of Dravidian Linguistics (Trivandrum) 

1. — Indian Linguistics: Journal of the Linguistics Society of India 

IndF — Indische Forschungen (Breslau) 

IndPQ — Indian Philosophical Quarterly 

1PR — Indian Philosophical Review (Bombay) 

18 — Indische Studien (Berlin) 

ITaur — Indologica Taurinensia (Torino) 

1zA8 — International Zeitschrift fiir aligemeine Sprachwissenschaft (Heilbronn ) 

JA — Journal Asiatique 

jaurs — Journal of the Andhra Historical Research Society (Hyderabad) 

JainJ — Fain Fournal 

jJAos — Journal of the American Oriental Society 

JASBe — Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal (Calcutta) 

JASL — Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal (Calcutta), Letters 

JASP — Journal of the Asiatic Society of Pakistan 

jAU — Journal of the Annamalai University (Annamalainagar ) 

JBBRAS — Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 

jars — Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society (Patna) 

jJoL — Journal of the Department of Letters, University of Calcutta 

jJosup — Journal of the Depriment of Sanskrit, University of Dethi 

jajKsv — Journal of the Gangandtha Tha Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapith (Allahabad) 

jJoyni — Fournal of the Ganganatha Fhé Research Institute (Allahabad) 

JIBSt — Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies (— Indobukkyogakyu Kenkyu) (Tokyo) 

jr — Journal of Indian History 

jie — Journal of Indian Philosophy (Dordrecht) 

jJxu — Journal of the Karnatak University 

jusp — Fanua Linguarum, series practica 

jMu — Journal of the Madras University 

JMysoreU — The Half-Yearly Fournal of the Mysore University 

jot — Journal of the Oriental Institute (Baroda) 

JOR — Journal of Oriental Research (Madras) 

jJemMjo — Jfianapitha Mirtidevi Jaina Grantha-mala 

jras — Journal of the Royal Asiatic Soctety (London) 

jsvor — Journal of the Sri Venkatesvara Oriental Institute 

JSML — Journal of the Tanjore Sarasvati Mahal Library 

jus — Journal of the University of Baroda 

yur — Journal of the University of Poona (Humanities) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 437 


xaG — Kaviraja-abhinandana-grantha (Lucknow) 

xss — Kashi Sanskrit Series (Varanasi) 

xsvs — Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha Series (Allahabad) 

xupsp — Kerala University Department of Sanskrit Publications (Trivandrum) 

Ku — Kurukshetra University Fournal (Arts and Humanities) 

xvracv — Prof. K. V. Rangaswami Aiyangar Commemoration Volume, Madras, 1940 

xz — (Kuhns) Zeitschrift far vergleichende Sprachforschung auf dem Gebiete der indogermanischen 
Sprachen (Gottingen) ‘ ‘ 

ips — Lalbhai Dalpatbhai Series (Ahmedabad ) 

Lg — Language (Baltimore) 

ur — Harold G. Coward, ed., Language in Indian Philosophy and Religion, Calgary, 1978 

rm — Le Muséon (Paris) 

mars — Memoirs of the American Philosophical Society 

MGOML — Madras Government Oriental Manuscripts Library 

uooms — Madras Government Oriental Manuscripts Series 

mix — Miscellanea Indologica Kiotensia (Kyoto) 

mo — The Mysore Orienialist 

mst. — Memoires de la Société Linguistique de Paris 

uss —— Miinchener Studien zur Sprachwissenschaft (Munich) 

msuos — Maharaja Sayajirao University Oriental Series 

msurs —- M.S. University of Baroda Research Series 

ut — A Triennial Catalogue of Manuscripts Collected for the Government Oriental Manuscripts 
Library, Madras, M. Rangacarya, S. Kuppuswami Sastri, and Z. A. Sankaran, 
eds., 9 volumes, Madras, 1913-1943 

muss — Madras University Sanskrit Series 

NCat — New Catalogus Catalogorum, V. Raghaven, K. Kunjunni Raja, et al., eds., 
Madras, 1949 to present. 

noaw — Nachrichten von der kéniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Géttingen 

niA — New Indian Antiguary (Bombay) 

nts — Norsk Tidsskrift for Sprogvidenskap (Oslo) 

nuj — Nagpur University Journal 

ow — Our Heritage (Calcutta) 

oLz — Orientalistische Literaturzeitung (Leipzig) 

Oriens — Oriens; Journal of the International Society for Oriental Research (Leiden) 

0s — Orientalia Suecara (Uppsala) 

or — Oriental Thought (Nasik) 

ou — Occident und Orient (Gottingen) 

Palct, — Proceedings of the All-India Conference of Linguists 

paloc — Proceedings and Transactions of the. . All-India Oriental Conference 

Pan — The Pandit (Varanasi) 

Paribhasdsamgraha — Kashinath Vasudev Abhyankar, ed., Paribhdsdésamgraha, Bors 7, 
Poona, 1967 

PB — Prabuddha Bharata (Calcutta) 

pas — Prachya Bharati Series 

poass — Publications of the Centre of Advanced Study in Sanskrit, University of Poona 

PEFEO — Publications de l’ Ecole Francaise d’ Extréme-Orient (Hanoi, Paris) 

PEW — Philosophy East and West (Honolulu) 

Pict — Publications de I’ Institut de Civilisation Indienne, (Paris) 

PICL — Proceedings of the... International Congress of Linguists 

PIcp — Proceedings of the International Congress of Philosophy 

Piri — Publications de ? Institut francais d’Indologie (Pondicherry) 

Pisa — Proceedings of the...International Sanskrit Conference 


438 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Po — Poona Orientalist 

PowsssT —- Princess of Wales Saraswati Bhavana Studies (Varanasi) 

Powssr — Princess of Wales Saraswati Bhavana Texts (Varanasi) 

PQ — Philosophical Quarterly (amalner ) 

pvkr — A Volume of Studies in Indology Presented to P. V. Kane, Poona, 1941 

Qys — Quarterly Fournal of the Mythic Society (Bangalore) 

Rau ~—— Wilhelm Rau; ed., Franz Kielhorn: Kleine Schriften, mit einer Asswahl der epigra- 
phischen Aufsétze, 2 volumes, Wiesbaden, 1969 

Roso — Rivista degli studi orientali (Rome) 

Renou and Filliozat — Louis Renou and Jean Filliozat, L’Inde classique; manuel des 
études indiennes, volume 2, with Paul Demiéville, Olivier Lacombe, and Peirre 
Meile, Paris, 1953 

neG — Rajasthan Puratan Granthamala (Jodhpur) 

rsca — Shri Rajasthan Sanskrit College Granthamala 

Rtam — Riam; Akhila Bharatiya Sanskrit Parishad (Lucknow) 

RUB —— Revue de I’ Universite de Bruxelles 

Sambodhi — Sambodhi (Ahmedabad ) 

saMv —~ Sir Asuiosh Memorial Volume, Patna, 1926 

sas —~ Sanskrit Academy Series 

sp — Siddha Bharati, Hoshiarpur, 1950 

SBAW — Sitzungsberichte der Berliner Akademie der Wissenschaften 

spom ~—— Sarasvati Bhavana Granthamala 

sHAW — Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften 

stAL — Sources of Indo-Aryan Lexicography 

sissy — Studies in Indology and Buddhology Presented in Honour of Susumu Yamaguchi, Kyoto, 
1955 

sn — Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik (Germany) 

siL — Studies in Linguistics : 

siLH —— P. K. Gode, Studies in Indian Literary History, volume 1, sys 37, Bombay 1953 

Silverstein —- Michael Silverstein, ed., Whitney on Language: Selected Writings of William 
Dwight Whitney, Gambridge, Mass., 1971 

gjs —~ Singhi Jain Series 

skacv — Dr. S. Krishnaswami Aipangar Commemoration Volume, Madras, 1936 

spaioc — Summaries of Papers of the...the All-India Oriental Conference 

spisc —— Summaries of Papers of the...International Sanskrit Conference 

spp — Sdradd Pitha Pradipa (Dwarka) 

ssGM —~ Savitaraya-smrti-raksana-grantha-mala 

ssps ~~ Sanskrit Sahitya Parishad Series (Calcutta) 

Staal — A Reader on the Sanskrit Grammarians, J. F. Staal, ed., Studies in Linguistics |, 
Cambridge, Mass., 1972 

svos -— Sri Venkatesvara Oriental Series (Tirupati) 

svst —- Satyakam Varma, Studies in Indology, New Delhi, 1976 

svuo] — Sri Venkatesvara University Oriental Journal (Tirupati) 

SWAW — Sitzungsberichte der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Wien 

swse — World Sanskrit Conference; Summaries of Papers 

Tapa — Transactions of the American Philological Association (Hartford/Cleveland) 

tp — P.P.S. Sastri, Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Sarasvati Mahal 
Library, Tanjore, Srirangam, 1943 

TPs —— Transactions of the Philological Society (London) 

tss —~ Trivandrum Sanskrit Series 

vcr —~— University of Ceylon Review 

ULBTFPL — Université Libtre de Bruxelles, Travaux de la faculté de philosophie et letires 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 439 


ums — Usha Memorial Series 

upusy — Uttar Pradesh Historical Society Fournal 

upsps — University of Poona Sanskrit and Prakrit Series 

Vak —- Vak (Poona) 

yvBasM — Vidyabhavana Sanskrit Granthamala 

vorav — V. G. Paranjpe Commemoration Volume: Some Aspects of Indo-Iranian Cultural 
Traditions, Delhi, 1977 

yiok — Verhandlungen de...international en Dialektologenkongresses 

vit — Vishveshvarananda Indological Journal (Hoshiarpur) 

vypsa — V. S. Joshi, Papers on Sanskrit Grammar. 1980 

vKAawa — Verhandelingen der koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen ie Amsterdam, Nieuwe 
Reeks 

verv — Sanskrit and Indological Studies: Dr. V. Raghavan Felicitation Volume, R.N. Dande- 
kar, ed., Delhi 1975 

vsmv — Vidarbha SamSodhana Mandala Varsika (Nagpur) 

Wackernagel — J. Wackernagel, Kleine Schriften, 2 volumes, Géttingen, 1953 

WoolCV — Woolner Commemoration Volume, Lahore, 1940 

wzKM — Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde des Morgenlandes (Bombay/Vienna) 

w2MLUH — Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Martin-Luther-Universitat (Halle/ Wittenberg ) 

wzKsoa — Wiener Zeitschrift frir die Kunde Stid-und Ostasiens 

yjo — YAsovijaya Jaina Granthamala (Bombay) 

yM — Yudhisthira Mimamsaka, Samskrta Vyakaranasastra ka ltikasa, 3 volumes, Ajmer, 
1950-1966 

ZDMG — Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenlandischen Gesellschaft (Wiesbaden) 

zu —xeitschrift far Indologie und Iranistik 


In cross — references ; 


a — article 

b — book 

d — dissertation 
e— edition 


t— translation 


Part 1: AuTHors WHose Dates ARE 
(More or Less) KNOwn 


INDRA (GOMIN) ‘(fre-Pégini? ) 
(Cardona, p. 150; Belvalkar, p. 9; 
NCat 3.90) 
?Indravyakarana 

Gl : A. G. Burnell, On the Aindra School of Sanskrit Grammarians, Their Place in 
the Sanskrit and Subordinate Literatures. Bangalore, 1875; reprinted Varanasi, 
1976. 

G2 : Franz Kielhorn, “Indragomin and Other Grammarians,” 1a 15, 1886, 
181-183. Reprinted in Rau, pp. 244—246. 

G3 : Edited by E. Sieg. ssaw 1907-1908. 

G4 : B.N. Krishnamurti Sharma, “Indra and Panini,” IHQ 8, 1932, 380. 

G5 : Varadaraja Umarji, ‘‘The Aindra School of Sanskrit Grammar,” Po 19, 
1954, 47-54. 


440 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 





G6 $ » “The Aindra School of Sanskrit Grammar (Part — Two),” 
Po 20, 1955, 31-40. 
G7 7 , *Aindra School of Sanskrit Grammar (Its History and Geographic 





Extent),” svuoy 1, 1958, 5-11. 
SAKALYA (pre-Panini) 
AUDUMBARAYANA (pre-Panini? ) 
G8 : John Brough, ‘‘Audumbarayana’s Theory of Language,” tps 1952, 73-77, 
G9 : Nils Simonsson, “Audumbarayana’s Theory of Sound,” os 10, 1961, 22-30, 
APISALI (pre-Panini? ) 
? Apisalisiksa 
G10: Raghu Vira, ‘‘ApiSalisiksa,” Fournal of Vedic Studies 1, 1934, 225-248. 
G11 _—; Vittore Pisani, ““A Note on Apisali,” Jor 5, 1956, 272. 
G12; Edited and translated in B. A. Van Nooten, “‘The Structure of a Sanskrit 
Phonetic Treatise,” acur (1973), 408-436. 
G13: George Cardona, «‘On Apisalasiksé,’? Gaurinath Sastri Festschrift, pp. 245-256. 
KASYAPA (pre-Panini? ) 
(NCat 4. 144; G1624, p. 84) 
PDhatuvstti 
(NCat 4. 144) 
GARGYA (pre-Panini?) 
(NCat 6. 17; G1624, p. 80) 
GALAVA (pre-Panini? ) 
(NCat 6. 19; G1624, P. 67; ym 1. 150) 
CAKRAVARMAN (pre-Panini?) 
(G1624, p. 99) 
BHARADVAJA (pre-P4nini? ) 
(G1624, p. 95) 
SAKATAYANA (pre-Panini?) 
(the traditional author of the Upddisitras; Cardona, p. 149; Belvaikar, P. 21; 
G1624, pp. 69. 254) 
G14 __: F. Kielhorn, “On the Grammar of Sakatayana,” 14 16, 1888, 24ff. 
G15: Satyakam Varma, ‘Contribution of Sakatayana to Sanskrit Grammar,” 
SPaioc 27, 1974, 229-230. 
G16: Mrityunjay Acharya, “The Unddisitras and Sakatayana,” spasroc 27, 
1974, 226-227. 
G17 :Satyakam Varma, ‘Sakatayana: The Great Gaammarian,” svst 
pp. 133-143. 
SENAKA (pre-Pafiini?) (GI624, p. 101) 
SPHOTAYANA (pre-Panini?) (G1624, p. 100) 
PAUSKARASADI (pre-Panini?) (Belvalkar, p. 26; G1624, p. 135) 
G18 :M.S. Bhat, ‘“‘Acarya Pauskarasadi and the Date of Panini,” Jor 8 1959, 
385-388. 
AUDAVRAJLI (pre-Panini? ) 
(NCat 3. 98) 
KASAKRTSNA (pre-Panini? ) 
(Belvalkar, p. 8; Cardona, p. 151; G1624, p. 135; ym 1.106, 504, NCat 4.115) 
?K dsakrisnasabdakalapadadhatupafha 
G19 __ : Kshitish Chandra Chatterji, ‘“Kasakrtsna,” nig 8, 1932, 224-227. 
G20: Edited in Kannada script, with Cannavirakavi’s Kannada commentary. 
Sources of Indo-Aryan Lexicography 5. Poona, 1952. Roman translitera- 
tion in Bpari 19, 1958-1959, 154-235, 330-414. Sanskrit translation by 
Yudhisthira Mimamsaka. Ajmer, 1965. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 44] 


G21 : Gajanan Balakrishna Palsule, A Concordance of Sanskrit Dhatupajthas. pens 14. 
Poona, 1955. 

G22 :G. B. Palsule, ««A Glimpse into the KaSakrtsna School of Sanskrit Gram- 
mar,”’ PAIoc 17, 1953, 349-355. 

G23 =: Edited, with editor’s commentary, by Yudhisthira Mimamsaka. Ajmer, 
1965. 

KAUTSA (pre-Panini? ) 

(Nat 5.106) 

G24 :Sadashiv Lakshmidhar Katre, ““Kautsavyakarana: A Detailed Notice,” 
nia 1, 1938, 383-396. 

G25: Madhav Deshpande, *‘New Material on the Kautsa-Vyakarana,” jot 26, 
1976-1977, 131-144. 

PANINI (350 3.c.?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 10; Cardona, p. 260; G1624, p. 104) 
Astadhpayi 

(NCat 1.468) (includes Dhatupatha, Ganapatha) 

G26 :Edited, with Dharanidhara’s and Kasinatha’s commentaries. Calcutta, 
1809. 

G27: Editedin Otto Béhtlingk, Parini’s acht Bicher grammatischer Regeln. 2 volumes. 
Bonn, 1839~1840. 

G28 ~—: Edited Varanasi, 1852, 1869. 

G29  : Theodor Aufrecht, “Zwei Panini zugeteilte Strophen,’’ zpme 14, 1860, 
581-583. 

G30 =: Edited, with Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi, by 'Taranatha Tarkava- 
caspati. Calcutta, 1863-1864. Without Siddhdntakaumudi, Calcutta, 1871. 

G31 __ : Edited, with Jayaditya and Vamana’s Kasika, by Bala Sastri, Pan 8 (1873- 
1874)—n.s. 3 (1878-1879). Reprinted , 2 volumes, Varanasi, 1876-1878. 

G32. :R. G. Bhandarkar, “‘Dr. Goldstiicker’s Theory About Panini’s Technical 
Terms,” 1a 6, 1877, 107-113. Reprinted cwres 1.496-510. 

G33: Edited in Telugu script. Madras, 1881, 1894. 

G34 : Chapter 1. 1-5 edited and translated in W. Goonatilleke, Papini’s Hight 
Books of Grammatical Sitras. Bombay, 1882. 

G35: Dhatupatha edited, with Madhava’s Vrtti, by Damodara Sastri and Ganga- 
dhara Sastri. Pann.s. 4 (1882)—19 (1897). Reprinted Varanasi, 1897. 

G36: Edited Bombay, 1883, 1886, 1888. 

G37 =: Edited, with Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhdntakaumudi, and Hemacandra’s 
Litigdnusasana, by Sivarama Sarman. Bombay, 1887. 

G38 =: Edited and translated into German by Otto Béhtlingk. Leipzig, 1887. 
Reprinted Hildesheim, 1964. 

G39: F. Max Miiller, “On the dhatupatha,”’ 1zas, 3, 1887, 1-26. 

G40 : Edited, with Jayaditya’s and Vamana’s Kasika, by Bhagwatprasada 
Tripathi. 2 volumes. Varanasi, 1890. 

G41 ___: Edited and translated, with translation of Jayaditya and Vamana’s Kasika, 
by Srisa Chandra Vasu. 2 volumes. Allahabad, 1891. Reprinted Delhi, 
1962. 

G42: Otto Franke, ‘Pali mafffe (skr. manye, Panini I.4.106),” zpme 46, 1892, 
311-312. 

G43: Panini’s Grammatical Aphorisms Allahabad, 1892. 

G44: Georg Biihler, ““The Roots of the Dhdtupatha Not Found in Literature,” 
wzko 8, 1894: 17—42, 122-136. 

G45; Otto Franke, ‘“‘Miscellen; 1. a-pacasi, etc. 2. Pan. 6.3.57 (uda fiir udaka), 
3. paksa — rajakufijara, 4, iti — ‘etc.,’”’ zome 48, 1894, 84-88. 


G49 


G50 


G50A 


G51 
G52 
G53 
G54 


G55 
G56 


G57 
G58 
G59 
G60 
Gé6l 
G62 
G63 
G64 
G65 


G66 


G67 
G68 


G69 
G70 


G71 
G72 
G73 


G74 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


: F. Kielhorn “Panini i’ 3,11 svaritenadhikarah,” in Festschrift Weber, pp. 29~32 
Reprinted in Rau, pp. 290-293. 

: O. Béhtlingk, “Neue Miscellen: 4. Panini’s adhikara,” BGwi 1897, 46-48, 

: Sylvain Lévi, “Des Préverbes chez Panini (sitra I, 4, 80-82),” mst 14, 
1906-1908, 276-278. 

: Edited, with Jayaditya and Vamana’s Kasika, by Gangadhara Sastri. xss 
37. Varanasi, 1908. 

: George Abraham Grierson, ““VAsudeva of Panini IV, iii, 98,’ yras 1909, 
1-22. 

: Selections from Asfadhydyi and Kasika translated into German by Richard 
Garbe in O, Bohtlingk, ed., Sanskrit Chrestomathie, 3d part, Leipzig, 1909, 
251-278. 

: Edited in grantha script. Cidambaram, 1910. 

: B. GC. Mazumdar, ‘Vasudeva of Panini,” Jras 1910, 170-171. 

: R. G. Bhandarkar, ““Vasudeva of Panini IV. 3.98,” yras 1910, 168-170. 
Reprinted in cwrcB 1.214—216. 

: Edited, with Bhattoji Dikéita’s Siddhantakaumudi, Trichinopoly, 1911-1912. 
Published separately as Balamanorama Series 2, 1912. 

: Edited Arsagranthavali Series 8.6-7. Lahore, 1912. 

: Edited with Papiniyasiksa and Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddkdntakaumudi. Bombay, 
1913. 

: Bruno Liebich, Zur Einfithrung in die indische einheimische Sprachwissenschaft, 
volume 2, Historische Einfithrung und Dhatupatha. suaw 15. Heidelberg, 1919. 

: Dha@tupatha edited by Bruno Liebich, vol. 3 of G57. Heidelberg, 1920. 

: Bruno Liebich, Materialen zum Dhatupatha. SHAW 7. Heidelberg, 1921. 

: Umesh Chandra Bhattacharjee, ““The Evidence of Panini on Vasudeva- 
worship,” m7Q 1, 1925, 483—489; 2, 1926, 409-410, 865. 

: K. G. Subrahmanyam, “A Note on the Evidence of Paninian Vasudeva- 
worship,”’ n27Q 2, 1926, 86-188, 864-865. 

:R. M. Bhusari, ‘A Short Note on the Term bhakti in Panini’s Siitras,” 
ABORI 8, 1926—1927, 198-199. 

: Edited, with editor’s commentary, by Dayananda Sarasvati, 2 volumes. 
Ajmer, 1927~1961. 

: Leonard Bloomfield, ‘*On Some Rules of Panini,”’ yaos 47, 1927, 61-70. 
Reprinted in Hockett, pp. 157-165; Staal, pp. 266-272. 

: K. A. Subramania Iyer, ‘*On the Fourteen mahesvara sitiras,’’ patoc 4, 1927, 
133-143. 

: Barend Faddegon, ‘*The Mnemotechnics of Panini’s Grammar,” picr |, 
Leiden, 1928. Also ActOD 7, 1929, 48-65. Reprinted G1625, pp. 275-285. 

: Bruno Liebich, Konkordanz Pépini-Candra. IndF 6. Breslau, 1928. 

: Edited, with Paéniniyasiksa and Katyayana’s Varitikas, by S. Ghandrasekhara, 
Sastrigal. Madras, 1928. 

: W. Caland, “A Rhythmic Law in Language,” ActOD 9, 1931, 59-68. 

: Raghu Vira, ‘“‘Discovery of the Lost Phonetic Sutras of Panini,” ras 1931, 
653-670. 

: Vidhusekhar Bhattacharya, ‘‘Panini’s Grammar and the Influence of 
Prakrit on Sanskrit,’’ m 2, 1932, 439-441. 

: K. C. Chatterji, The anubandhas of Panini,”’ coy 1, 1933, 100-116. 

: Hermann Buiskool, Pirvatrasiddham: Analytisch onderzoek aangaande het sys- 
teem der Tripadi van Panini’s Astadhyayt. Amsterdam, Paris, 1934. Translated 
into English, Leiden, 1939. 

: K. C. Chatterji, ‘“The Siva siitras,”’ Jou 24, 1934, 1-10. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 443 


G75 ___: Vittore Pisani, “‘“Panini 1, 2, 23,” rpso 14, 1934, 84. 

G76: B. Breloer, ‘Die 14 pratyahara-siitras des Panini’, zr 10, 1935-1936, 133- 
191. 

G77: K. G. Chatterji, “A Rule of Panini,” coy 3, 1935, 17-28. 

G78 » The Astadhyayi and the Siddhantakaumudi,” coy 3, 1935, 1-2. 

G79 _ =:S. P. Chaturvedi, “Homogeneity of Letters in the Paninian System,” 
PAIOG 7, 1935, 165-174. 

G80: Saraswati Prasad Chaturvedi, ‘“‘“Need for Rewriting Panini’s Grammar,” 
nuy 1, 1935, 5-10. 

G81: Prabodh Chandra Lahiri, Concordance Papini-Patafjali (Mahabhasya). IndF 
10. Breslau, 1935. 

G82 ; Shridhar Shastri Pathak and Siddheshvar Shastri Chitrao, Word Index to 
Papini-siitrapa tha and PariSistas. Gosnort, Series C-2. Poona, 1935. 

G83: I. 8S. Pawte, The Structure of the Astadhyayt. Hubli, 1935. 

G84 =: Paul Thieme, “Bhdagya zu varttika 5 zu Panini 1.1.9 und seine einheimischen 
Erklarer ; cin Beitrag zur Geschichte und Wiirdigung der indischen gram- 
matischen Scholastik,’? neew 1935, 171-216. Reprinted Staal, 299-332. 

G85  : Barend Faddegon, Studies on Pagini’s Grammar. vVkKAWA 38.1, 1936. 

G86: Mangala Deva Shastri, Appendix III (A Comparison of the Rgvedaprati- 
Sakhya with the Paninian Grammar), pp. 329-344 of his edition and trans- 
lation of the Rgveda-pratifakhya with the commentary of Uvata. Lahore, 
1937. 

G87 _ : Krishnadeva Upadhyaya, “New Verses of Panini,” ng 13, 1937, 167-171. 

G88 =: Edited with Katyayana’s Varttikas and Pdapinivasiksé by Sankara Rama 
Sastri. Sri Balamanorama Series 2. Madras, 1937. 

G89: S. P. Chaturvedi, “On the Original Text of the Asfadhpayi,”’ nia 1, 1938, 
562-569. 

G90: Pierre Boudon, ‘Une Application du raisonnement per 1’absurde dans 
1’interpretation de Panini (les jfapakasiddhaparibhaésa),” JA 230, 1938, 65-121 
Reprinted G1625, pp. 358-391. 

G91 _—_: Edited by Harisankara Pandeya. Paina, 1938. 

G92: P.E. Pavolini, “‘La Grammatica di Panini,” Asiatica (Rome) 3.1, 1938, 1-9, 

G93: Jakob Wackernagel, ‘‘Eine Wortstellungsregel des Panini and Winkers 
Aleph-Beth-Regel,”? w 56, 1938, 161-170. Reprinted Wackernagel, pp. 
434-443, 

G94 :V.N. Gokhale, “Studies in Panini,” po 4, 1939, 97-120; 5, 1940, 109-122. 

G95: V.S. Agrawala, ‘‘Piirvacarya samjfias for lakéras,”’ n1a 3, 1940-1941, 39-40, 

G96: S. P. Chaturvedi, “Technical Terms of the Asjadhydyt,”” patoc 9, 1940, 











1191-1208. 

G97: , “Scholastic Disquisitions in the Paninian System of Grammar,” 
BhV 2, 1940, 59-63. 

G98: , “Panini’s Vocabulary—Its Bearing on His Date,” WoolCV, pp. 
46-50. 


G99: K. Madhava Krishna Sharma, “‘Technical Terms in the Asfadhydyi,” Jor 
14, 1940, 259-267. Reprinted in G485, pp. 15-23. 

G100 » “The Text of the Asjadhydyi,”’ upHsy 13, 1940. 

G101 : » “Some Problems in Panini,” yuu 13, 1941, 203-225. 

G102 :B.K. Ghosh, “‘Parvdedryas in Panini,” DReev.pp. 

G103 : S. P. Chaturvedi, ““On References to Earlier Grammarians in the Asfadhyayi 
and the Forms Sanctioned by Them,” nuy7, 1941, 46-53. 

G104 : » “On Panini’s s#ira VI.1.90—Wrong Wording or Corrupt Rea- 
ding?” aBori 23, 1942, 77-79. 











Gi05 
G106 


Gi07 
G108 


G109 


G110 
Gill 


G112 
G113 
G114 


Gi15 
G116 


G117 
Gils 
G119 
G120 
G12) 
G122 
G123 
G124 
Gi25 
G126 
G127 
G128 
Gi29 


G130 


G131 : 


G132 
G133 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 

é > “Significance of Panini’s stra VI.1.92,”” nuy 9, 1943, 68-69. 

: Sten Konow, “The Authorship of the Sivasitras,” ActOD 19, 1943, 
291-328. 

: K. M. Shembavnekar, “‘Safghas in Panini,”’ aporr 25, 1944, 137-140. 

:S. P. Chaturvedi, “‘On the Arrangement of the taddhita siitras in the Asta. 
dhyayi,”” BharKau 1945, 209-214. 

: B. K. Ghosh, ‘Aspect of pre-Paninian Sanskrit Grammar,” BcLv 1, 334- 
345. 

: A.B. Keith, ““Panini’s Vocabulary,” BharKau 1945, 343~345. 

: K. GC. Chatterji, “Technical Terms of Sanskrit Grammar,” nia 8, 1946, 
51-53. 

: Vasudev Sharan Agrawala, ‘‘Current Proper Names (manuspandma) in 
Panini,’? BharKau 1947, 1049-1063. 

: Translated into French by Louis Renou, La Grammaire de Panini. 2 volumes 
Paris, 1948-1954. Revised edition, including Sanskrit text, Paris, 1966. 

: S. P. Chaturvedi, ‘*On the Technique of Anticipation in the Application of 
the Paninian Sutras,” sparoc 15, 1949, 189. 

: P. C. Divanji, “Bhagavadgita and Astadhpayi,’’ anorr 30, 1949, 263-276. 

: Gajanan Balakrishna Palsule, ‘‘An Interpolated Passage in the Asfadhpayi,” 
asort 30, 1949, 135-144. 

; Siddhesvar Varma, ‘‘The Vedic Accent and the Interpretations of Panini,” 
sparoc 15, 1949, 17. 

: Ram Shankar Bhattacharya, “Paninian Principles of Determining the 
Desired Import of Words,” sanrs 21, 1950-52, 133-141. 

: Edited, with editor’s Tattvaprakasika, by Gangadatta Sastri, 2 volumes. oss 
8. Hardwar, 1950-1962. 

: S. P. Chaturvedi, “Some Aspects of the Technique of the anuvrtti Procedure 
in the Asfddhyay?,”” PAroc 13.2, 1951, 109-112. 

: Suddhir Kumar Gupta, “Authorship of the Phonetic siitras edited by Daya- 
nanda,”’ sparoc 16, 1951, 174-176 (summary); Po 16, 1952, 66-69. 

: Ram Shankar Bhattacharya, ‘‘Kinds of Agents (karté) as depicted by 
Panini,” Vak 3, 1953, 129~133. 

: Shrisrshna Sakharam Bhawe, “‘Panini’s Rules and Vedic Interpretation,” 
PAIoc 17, 1953, 231-240. Also m 16, 1955, 237-249. 

: S. P. Chaturvedi, ‘‘A Study into the Principles of Preference in the Appli- 
cation of Paninian sitras and Their Working,” spatoa 17, 1953, 91-92. 

:S. K. Gupta, “Nature and Authorship of the Grammatical Works Attribu- 
ted to Maharsi Dayananda Sarasvati,” spaioc 17, 1953, 93-94. 

: G. B. Palsule, ‘A Concordance of the Sanskrit didtupajhas,”? sport 15.1~2, 
1953, 1-203. Reprinted as pans 14, Poona, 1955. 

: Louis Renou, ‘Etudes paninéennes, I : Les Transitions dans la grammaire 
de Panim,” ya 241, 1953, 412-427, 

: Subhadra Jha, ““Unjustifiability of the Principle of jfiafana on the Basis 
of the Asfadhydyi of Panini,” paroc 17, 1953, 240. 

: Ram Shankar Bhattacharya, “Importance of the First Words of the gana- 
pafha-s,” BhV 15, 1954, 29-34. 

7 » “Some Unknown Senses of the Plural Number as Shown by 
Panini,” JuB 23.2, 1954, 45-48. 

» On the Original Reading of a Paninian sitra,” Jor 4, 1954~1955, 

268-269. 

: William Sidney Allen, “Zero and Panini,” m 16, 1955, 106-113. 

: Priyatosh Banerji, “Some Observations on the Interpretation of the Panini 











BIBLIOGRAPHY 445 


G134 
G135 
G136 
G137 
G138 
G139 
G140 
G141 
G142 
G143 
G144 
G145 


G146 
G147 


G148 


G149 


G150 
G151 
G152 


G153 


G154 


G155 


G156 
G157 


G158 


siitra Vasudevdrjunadbhyam vun and the antiquity of the Bhagavatas,” years 40.1, 
1955, 74-79. 

: Ram Shankar Bhattacharya, “Some Characteristics of the Ancient vrttis on 
the Astddhpdyi,”’ nag 31, 1955, 168-174. 

: Robert Birwé, “Interpolations in Panini’s Asfadhyayt,”’ BonnOS 3, 1955, 
27-52. 

:S. K. Chatterji, “On the Interpretation of a Rule of Panini,” m 16, 1955, 
194-195. 

: Edited with editor’s Malayalam commentary by I. C. Chacko. Ernakulam, 
1955. 

: Louis Renou, “Les nifdtana-sitra de Panini et questions diverses,’’ Picr 1, 
1955, 103-130. 

: Ram Shankar Bhattacharya, “Some Objections on the Textual Order of 
the Astadhyayi and Their Refutation,” yojrr 13, 1956, 119-129. 

: » Some Anomalies in the As/adhydyi and Their Justifications,” BhV 
15, 1956, 140-119. 

: Rajendra Chandra Hazra, ‘‘Some Observations on the Repetition (anu- 
vrtti) of Sega’ from Panini’s Rules sasthi Sese,” ast. 22, 1956, 99-131. 

: Sergiu Al-George, “*Le Sujet grammatical chez Panini,” ActOP 1, 1957, 
39-47. 

: G. B. Palsule, ““The Sanskrit Dhdétupdthas: A Critical Study.” Ph.D. diss., 
Poona University, 1957. Published Poona, 1961. 

: Vinayak W. Paranjpe, “Analysis of Case Suffixes with Special Reference to 
Panini’s Grammar,” crpo 24, 1957, 574-577. 

; G. Kunhan Raja, “The Siva siitras of Panini (an Analysis),”’ aor 13, 1957, 
65-81. 

: Th. Simenscly, Grammatica lui Panini. Bucharest, 1957. 

: Robert Birwe, ‘“Variae Lectiones in Adhyaya IV and V der Astadhyayi,” 
zpMG 108, 1958, 133-154. 

; Yutaka Ojihara, ‘‘Causeries vyakaranique (I): 1.1.62 vis-a-vis de 1.1.56,” 
JIBSt 6, 1958, 302-305; 8, 1960, 369-370. 

: G. B. Palsule, ‘Groupings, anubandhas and Other Technical Devices Used 
in the dhdtupaéthas,”’ part 19.1-2, 1958, 1-30. Reprinted in Gi43, pp. 59- 
88. 








: , “A Brief Account of the Different dhatupajhas,” Festschrift Turner, 
pp. 103-133. Reprinted in G143, pp. 27-56. 

:S. M. Ayachit, “‘Garapatha—A Critical Study.” Ph.D. diss., Poona Uni- 
versity, 1959. 

: Kapil Deo, *‘A Critical Edition of Gapapatha of Panini.” Ph.D. diss., Banaras 
Hindu University, 1959. 

: G. T. Deshpande, ‘“‘Extended Application of Some Panini-sitras,”” sparoa 
21, 1959, 144. Full paper in one of the annual numbers of the Vidarbha 
Samsodham Mandal, Nagpur. 

: Yutaka Ojihara, ‘‘Causeries vyakaranique (IJ): Anteriorité du ganapatha 
par rapport au sitrapatha”, jmsst 7, 1959, 785-797. 

:G. M. Patil, “The viserga-sandhi in Panini’s Grammar,” spatoc 21, 1959, 
143. 

:S.M. Ayachit, “Gapapatha: A Critical Study,” 1b 22, 1961, 1-63. 

: Robert Birwé, Der Gapapadtha zu den Adhpaya IV und V der Grammatik 
Panini : Versuch einer Rekonstruktion. Wiesbaden, 1961. 

: Yutaka Ojihara, “Causeries vyakaranique (II): Addenda et corrigenda: 
La Necessité ultime de su. 1.1,34-36,” JIBSt 9, 1961-62, 749-753. 


446 


G159 


G160 


G161 
G162 
G163 
G164 
G165 
G166 
G167 
G168 
G169 
G170 
Gli 
G172 


G173 
G174 


G175 


G178 


G179 
G180 


G181 
G182 


G183 
G184 


ENCGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


: Karaka section edited, with related section of Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhanta. 
kaumudi, by Umesh Chandra Pandeya. Vidyabhavana Samskrta Grantha- 
mala 60. Varanasi, 1961. 

: Ludo Rocher, “Geschiedenis en achtergrond van de Panini-interpretatie,” 
in Handelingen can het xxive Vlaams Filologen-congres (Leuven, 6~8 April 1961), 
pp. 112-119. 

: S. Sengupta, “Contribution Towards a Critical Edition of the Ganapdtha,” 
JASBe 3,.3—4, 1961, 89-186. 

: Betty Shefts, Grammatical Method in Panini: His Treatment of Sanskrit Present 
Stems. AOSE 1. New Haven, 1961. 

: M. D. Balasubrahmanyam, “The Accentuation of arya- in Panini and in 
the Veda,” spori 23, 1962-1963, 94-100. Reprinted in G1596. 

: Vaidikaprakriya section edited, with related section of Bhattoji Diksita’s 
Siddhdntakaumudi, by Uma Shankara Sharma. Vidyabhavana Samskrta 
Granthamala 80. Varanasi, 1962. : 

3; M. D. Pandit, ‘*Zero in Panini,” Jor 11.1, 1962, 53-66. 

: Sukumar Sen, ‘“The Names of the samdsas in Panini’s Grammar,’’ BPSC 3, 
1962, 90-92. 

: Johan Frederick Staal, ‘“‘A Method of Linguistic Description: The Order 
of Consonants According to Panini,’® Lg 38, 1962, 1-10. 

: Edited, with Papiniyasiksa, Santanava’s (?) Phitsitras, Bhattoji Diksita’s 
Siddhaniakaumudi and editor’s Sugandha, by Acyutananda Sastri, Kasi, 1963. 

:E. A. Grantovskij, ‘‘Plemennoe ob edinenie par$u-par$ava u Panini,” in 
W. Ruben et al., eds., Istorija i kultura drevnej Indii (k xxvi Mazdunarodnomu 
kongressu vostokovedov ). Moscow, 1963, pp. 68-100. 

: ALN. Jani, ‘“An Emendation ofa satra of Panini,” yor 12, 1963, 71-73. 

: Kapil Deva, “Significance of the Word frakdra in the siitras of the Asjadh- 
payi,” vi¥ 1, 1963, 239-246. 

: S. D. Joshi, ‘“The Two Methods of Panini’s Interpretations,’”? summarized 
in sparoc 22, 1963, 40~41. pcass-a 5, 1965 (yur 23), 53-61. 

: Chandra Kant Pandey, Panini and His Astadhyayi. Patna, 1963. 

: M. D. Pandit, “Some Linguistic Principles in Panini’s Grammar,” 1m 24, 
1963, 50-69. 

: » *Panini—A Study in Noncompounded Word Structures,” vy 1, 
1963, 224-238. 

: Bommakanti Ramalinga Sastri, ‘‘Panini’s Method of Morphemic Analy- 
sis,”’ sPAIOc 22, 1963, 128. 

: Edited with analysis and translated into Hind: by Brahmadatta Jijnasu 
(vols. 1-2) and Prajna Devi (vol. 3) as Astddhyayibhasyaprathamaortti. Ram 
Lal Kapur Trust Series 32, 1964-1968. 

: George Cardona, “On Translating and Formalizing Paninian Rules,” Jor 
14, 1964-1965, 306~314. 

: » The Formulation of Panini 7.3.73,” Jor 14, 1964, 38-41. 

: Sureshachandra Dhyaneshwar Laddu, ‘‘Panini and the ‘akalakam vyaka- 
ranam,””’ 11 25, 1964, 187~199. Reprinted amo 26.3, 1969, 99-104. 

: Vidya Niwas Misra, -‘Panini’s Grammar as a Mathematical Model,” m™ 
25, 1964, 157-178. Reprinted in G206. 

,» “The Structural Framework of Panini’s Linguistic Analysis of 
Sanskrit,” pro 9 (Janua Linguarum, series main 12), 1964, 743-747. 

: Rosane Rocher, ‘* ‘Agent’ et ‘objet’? chez Panini,”’ aos 84, 1964, 44—54. 

» “The Technical Term hetu in Panini’s Asiadhpayi, vij 2, 1964, 














31-40, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 447 


Gi85 :™M. D. Balasubrahmanyam, ‘“‘An Accentual Note on vikafa-in Panini and 
the Veda’’, 1. 26, 1965, 18-26. 

G186 : Saroja Sadashiv Chitari, “Panini and the Paniniyas on the Concept of 
guna,” PAIOG 22.2, 1965, 88-92. 

Gi87 :G.T. Deshpande, ‘“‘Paninian Concept of pada,” nuj 16.1, 1965, 62-69. 

G188 :; George Cardona, ‘‘On Panini’s Morphophonemic Principles,” Lg 41, 1965, 
225-238. 

G189 :do, “On Translating and Formalizing Paninian Rules,” jor 14, 1965, 
305-314. 

G190 : Murray Fowler, “How Ordered are Panini’s Rules?” Jaos 85, 1965, 44-47. 

G191 :K. Kunjunni Raja, “PAnini’s Attitude Towards leksapd,” ALB 29, 1965, 
177-187. Summarized in spAtoc 22, 1963, 247. 

Gi92 :Y.Ojihara, “A la Recherche de la motivation ultérieure du Panini- 
siitra 1.1.62,” mmx 6-7, 1967, 69-85. 

G193 : Edited by D. P.S, Patanjalas Astadhyayiprakésika. New Delhi, 1965. 

G194 :Rosane Rocher, “La Formation due futur périphrastique sanskrit selon 
Panini: Un Example de déscription lingwistique,”’ Alonst 6, 1965, 15-22. 

G195 :J. Frits Staal, “‘Context-sensitive Rules in Panini,” re 1, 1965, 63-72. 
Reprinted in Festschrift Emeneau, pp. 332-339. 

G196 : , Euclid and Panini,” pew 15, 1965, 99-116. 

G197 :Bhagiratha Prasada Tripathi, Pdpiniyadhdtupathasamiksd. Powsssr 14. 
Varanasi, 1965. 

G198 : M.D. Balasubrahmanyam, “The Three Paninian Suffixes Nac, inUV, and 

Kiri,” pcass-A 6, 1966. Also sup 23, 1966, 133-138. 

: » “An Accentual Problem in Panini and the Veda a Propos of the 
Word hayana-,” sport 25, 1966, 43-58. Also Vedasamiksé (Proceedings of the 
Vedic Seminar). Tirupati, 1967. 

G200 : M.S. Bhat, “‘The Vedic Stem rdfri- and Panini,” syapras 41~42, 1966-1967, 
8-11. 

G201_ : Robert Birwé, Studien zu Adhyaya III der As tadhyayi Paninis. Wiesbaden, 1966. 

G202 :G. T. Deshpande, ‘“‘Paninian Treatment of krama-samadhi,” spatoc 23.1, 
1966, 136. 

G203  : A.N. Jani, ‘The fivasiitras and Music,” yor 15, 1966, 400-402. 

G204 : Bimal Krishna Matilal, “‘Indian Theorist on the Nature of the Sentence,” 
FL 2, 1966, 377~393. 

G205 :V. P. Limaye, ‘“Necessity for New vdrttikas to Panini 1.1.27 and 5.2.39,” 
viyj 4, 1966, 228-229. 

G206 : Vidya Niwas Mishra, The Descriptive Technique of Pénini: An Introduction. 
jusp 18. The Hague, 1966. 

G207 : G.B. Palsule, ** ‘Samjiapyam’ in Panini,” paass-a 10, 1966. Also jup 25, 1967, 
31-75. 

G208 :M. D. Pandit, ‘‘Mathematical Representation of Some Paninian siiras,”’ 
poass-A 7, 1966. Also yur 23, 1966, 139-152. 

G209 » “Paninian IT-samjfid—a Symbolic Zero,” pporr 25, 1966, 77-94. 

G210 : Sailendranath Sengupta, ‘‘Contribution Towards a Critical Edition of the 
dhatupatha,’? JASBe 8, 1966, 191-217. 

G211 :J. Frits Staal, “Panini Tested by Fowler’s Automaton,” jaos 86, 1966, 
206-209. 

G212 : Sergiu Al-George, ‘“The Semiosis of Zero According to Panini,” zw 17, 
1967, 115-124. 

G213 :M. D. Balasubrahmanyam, “The System of Krf-Accentuation in Panini 
and Veda.” Ph.D. diss., Poona University, 1967. 





G199 








448 
G214 
G215 
G216 
G217 
G218 
G219 
G220 
G221 
G222 
G223 
G224 
G225 


G226 


G227 


G228 
G229 


G230 
G231 


G232 
G233 
G234 
G235 


G236 
G237 


G238 
G239 
G240 
G241 


G242 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


: George Cardona, “Negations in Paninian Rules,” Lg 43, 1967, 34-56. 

; > **Panini’s Syntactic Categories,” yor 16, 1967, 201-215. 

: G. T. Deshpande, “‘Panini : sétras VII.1.9 and 10,” nuj 18, 1967, 192-200, 

? G. V. Devasthali, Anubandhas of Panini. pcass-B 2. Poona, 1967. 

: Kapil Deva, The Ganapatha Ascribed to Panini. Kurukshetra, 1967. 

: S. M. Katre, Pdpinian Studies I. pcsesys 52. Poona, 1967. 

: S. D. Laddu, Evolution of the Sanskrit Language from P&nini to Patanjali 
with Reference to the Primary Formations. Ph.D. diss., Poona University, 
1967. 

: V. P. Limaye, “Panini 6.1.121: avapathdsi ca or apavathasi ca?”’ viy 5, 1967, 
193-195. 

; » The Basis of Panini (8.1.59 and 65) in Rgveda,” Kao 1967, 
282-288. 

:B. A. Van Nooten, “Panini’s Replacement Technique and the Active 
Finite Verb,” Lg 43, 1967, 883-902. 

: Buddha Prakash, “On Panini’s sitralV. 3.98, vasudevarjunabhyam vun,” 
xuy 1, 1967, 1-19. 

: M.S. Narayana Murti, “Ekasamjidadhikara in the Astadhyayi,” svuoy 10, 
1967, 11-22. 

: Y. Ojihara, ‘‘Causeries vyakaranique (IV): jati ‘genus’ et deu definitions 
pré-patafijaliennes,’? JIBSt 16, 1967, 451-459. Reprinted G1625, pp. 
425 -431. 

» “Sur l’Enoncé paniniéen astrivisaya (IV.1.63): Deux Interpréta- 

tions et leur rapport avec le ganapatha,” avs 31-32 (Festschrift V. Raghavan) 











. 
: 


- 1967-1968, 125-143. 


:Sergiu Al-George, “The Extra-linguistic Origin of Panini’s Syntactic 
Categories and Their Linguistic Accuracy,” jor 18, 1968, 1-7. 

: George Cardona, ‘‘Panini’s Definition, Description and Uses of svarita,” 
Festschrift F.B.F. Kuiper, pp. 448-461. 

: Amrit Madhav Ghatge, “‘Panini 1.4.32,” 1. 29,9, 1968, 150-154. 

:5.M. Katre, Pdnpinian Studies IJ-IV: Dictionary of Pagini. 3 volumes. 
pescsys 53, 62, 63. Poona, 1968-1969. 

: G.B. Palsule, ““Some Primary Nominal Formations Missing in Panini,” 
paass-4 18, Poona, 1968. Also yur 27, 1968, 145-151. 

¢ » “The Role of ky in the Sanskrit Grammatical Terms,” Pcass-A 24, 
Poona, 1968. Also yup 29, 1969, 11-29. 

: GQ. Ramachari, ‘“Taksan and Similar Artisans in the Astadhyayi,” Mo 1, 
1968, 105-114. 

: Rosane Rocher, La Théorie des voix du verbe dans I école Paninéenne (le l4e 
Ghnikad). ULBTFPL 35. Brussels, 1968. 

: » “Dhatupatha et dialectologie indienne,”’ vinx 2.II, 1968, 699-707. 

: Kapil Muni Tiwari, ‘“Panini’s Description of Nominal Compounds.” 
Ph.D. diss., University of Pennsylvania, 1968. 

3: HS. Ananthanarayana, ‘“The Feminine Formation in Panini’s Grammar,” 
um 30.2, 1969, 1-12. 

: Dhatupdtha edited by Kanakalala Sarma. uss 281. Varanasi, 1969. 

: Dhdiupdtha edited Amritsar, 1969. 

: Part 2, including Litgdnusdsana, edited by Dayananda Sarasvati with 
editor’s commentary. Ajmer, 1969-1970. 

:K. V. Abhyankar, «A Brief Note on the Chronological Order of the Phit- 
stitras, the Unadisittras and the Astadhy4ayi,”’ Jor 19, 1969-1970, 331-332, 








BIBLIOGRAPHY 449 


G243 


G244 


G245 


G246 


G247 


G248 


G249 


G230 


G251 


G252 


G253 


G254 


G255 


G257 


G258 


G259 


G260 
G261 


G262 


G263 


G264 


G265 


G266 


G267 
G268 


212. 
: Sadashiv Ambadas Dange, “Some Peculiarities of the Eastern Dialect 


: Sergiu Al-George, «Sign (laksag@) and Propositional Logic in Panini,” zw 


19, 1969, 176-193. 


: George Cardona, Studies in Indian Grammarians, volume 1, The Method of 


Description Reflected in the Sivasitras. Transactions of the American Philologi- 
cal Society 59.1. Philadelphia, 1969. 


: Dayashankar Madhusudan Joshi, Panini’s Taddhita Affixation Rules. 


Ph.D. diss., University of Pennsylvania, 1969. 


: S. D. Joshi, ‘Sentence Structure According to Panini,” 14 3d series 3, 1969, 


14-26. 


: Paul Kiparsky and J. Frits Staal, “Syntactic and Semantic Relations in 


Panini,” ru 5, 1969, 83-117. 


: B.A. Van Nooten, “Panini’s Theory of Verbal Meaning,” ri 5, 1969, 


242-255. 


: M.S. Narayana Murti, “Two Versions of the ekasamjfiddhikdra,”’ svuoy 12, 


1969, 75-84. 


: Edited, with Jayaditya’s and Vamana’s Kasika, by Sri Narayana Misra. 


2 volumes. xss 37. Varanasi, 1969-1972. 


: Narendra Chandra Nath, Péninian Interpretation of the Sanskrit Language. 


BHuss 2. Varanasi, 1969. 


:M. D. Pandit, ‘Panini: A Statistical Picture of Sanskrit Sounds,” 1a 3d 


series 3, 1969, 128-138. 


: Buddha Prakash, ‘On Panini’s sitra V.3.99,” Festschrift Aditya Natha ha 


3, 394-404. 


: Rosane Rocher, ‘“The Concept of Verbal Root in Indian Grammar (A 


Propos of Panini 1.3.1),”? ri 5, 1969, 73-82. 


: David Ellis Rogers, “A Study on the Context of Panini’s Karakas,” Ph.D. 


diss., University of Michigan, 1969. 


: Albercht Wezler, Paribhasa IV, V and SV; Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der 


einheimischen indischen grammatischen Scholastik. Berlin, Zurich, 1969. 


: Laidslav Zgusta, “Panini—Descriptivist or Transformationalist?” ao 37, 


1969, 404-415. 


: Saroja V. Bhate, ‘Pre-Paninian Grammatical Elements in Panini’s 


Asfadhyayi. Ph.D. diss., University of Poona, 1970. 


: George Cardona, “The Paninian View Regarding Agency and Animation,” 


Rtam 2-6, 1970-1975, 135-146. 
» ‘Some Principles of Panini’s Grammar,” jrr 1, 1970, 40-74. 
» “A Note on Panini’s Technical Vocabulary,’”’ Jor 19, 1970, 195~- 








According to Panini,” vsmv 1970, 173-198. 


: Madhav Deshpande, “Panini and Paniniyas on Dialectical Variation in 


Sanskrit,” Jor 40-41, 1970-1972, 49-74. 


;S. D. Laddu, “A Linguistic Phenomenon from the Mahabharata,” Riam 


2-6, 1970-1975, 69-72. 


: Narendra Chandra Nath, ‘Are Feminine Bases pratipadikds According to 


Panini?” viy 8, 1970, 82-85. 


:G. B. Palsuie, “Some Views of Panini and His Followers on Object-lan- 


guage and Metalanguage,” Pcass-a 36. Poona, 197U. Also yur 33, 1971, 
1-7. Reprinted in acur 2.2, 1973, 310-320. 


: Sukumar Sen, P@ninica, cscrs 74. Calcutta, 1970. 
:B. A. Van Nooten, ‘‘The Vocalic Declensions in Panini’s Grammar,” Lg 


46, 1970, 13-32. 


450 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


G269_: Edited, with Purusottamadeva’s BhésGortti. pps 9. Varanasi, 1971. 

G270 :M. D. Balasubrahmanyam, ‘Vedic starya- and Panini 3.1.123,” jJayxsy 
27~28, 1971-1972, 21-28. 

G27\ :G.T. Deshpande, “Import of the Term deva-vani” in his Indological Papers I, 
Nagpur 1971, pp. 29-48. 

, ‘Paninian Concept of fada’’ in his Indological Papers I. Nagpur, 
1971, pp. 49-57. 

G273 ; » “Paninian Concept of pragrhya” in his Indological Papers I, Nagpur, 

1971, pp. 58-65. 





G272 











G274 .“Paninian Treatment of krama-sandhi’’ in his Indological Papers I. 
Nagpur, 1971, pp. 66-77. 
G275 , “Arsa prayogas and Paninian Rules” in his Indological Papers I. 


Nagpur, 1971, pp. 78-89. 

G276 :A.N. Jani, ‘Fresh Light on Panini's sitra ‘tasyadita udattam ardhahras- 
vam’ (I.2.32),” Jeyxsv 27-28, 1971-1972, 261-264. Also paroc 24, 1972, 
257-259, 

G277_ : D.M. Joshi, “On Expressing kdrakas, & Propos of Panini 2.3.1,” 1.32, 1971, 
107-112. 

G278 :S, M. Katre, Pdpinian Studies V-VII: Dictionary of Panini: Ganapatha. 
poscsys 72-74, Poona, 1971. 

G279 :S. CG. Laddu, “Vedic Forms and Panini—a Glance,” Festschrift Rajeshwar 
Shastri Dravid, English section, pp. 54-68. 

G280_ : George Cardona, “Cause and Causal Agent: The Paninian View,” jor 21, 
1971, 22-40. Reprinted in acur 2.2, 1973, 354-381. 

G281 : Y. Ojihara, “Un Chapitre de la Saddaniti compare aux données panince- 
nnes,” JA 259, 1971, 83-97. 

G282 :Rama Nath Sharma, “Padavidhi in Panini.’? Ph.D. diss., University of 
Rochester, 1971. 

G283 :M.D. Pandit, “Panini : Statistical Study of Sanskrit Formations,” ABoRI 
52, 1971, 175-209. 

G284 :G.M. Patil “Paninian Formation of Sanskrit and English Sandhis” (abs- 
tract), PAtcL 1, 1971, 212. 

G285 : Yudhisthira Mimamsaka, Samskrtadhétukosa. Delhi, 1971. 

G286 : Hartmut Scharfe, Papini’s Metalanguage. MAPS 89. Philadelphia, 1971. 

G287_ : Jag Dev Singh, “Panini’s Theory of Language,” Kuy 5, 1971, 73-86. Also 
parton 1, 1971, 257-270. Also sypu 1, 1972, 80-96. 

G288 : K.M. Tiwari, “Asiddham bahirangam antarange: A Metarule of Ruleordering 
in Panini,” m. 32, 1971, 241-257. 

G289 :M. D. Balasubrahmanyam, “Panini 5,2.28-29,” Jeyxsv 28.3-4, 1972, 79- 
100. 

G290 :H. 5S. Ananthanarayana, “A Syntactic Classification of Verbs in Panini’s 
Grammar,” arat 3, 1972, 30. 

G291 :M. D. Balasubrahmanyam, ‘Vedic sriyase and Panini 3.4.9,” viy 10, 1972, 
7-10. 





G292 , *Paninian System of kré-suffixation and Accentuation,” in Panini 
Seminar. Kurukshetra, 1972, 10 pp. 

G293 :Saudamini Bahulikar, ‘Some Criteria for Determining the Insertions in 
the Asfddhyayi.’ Ph.D. diss., Harvard University, 1972. 

G294 :S. L. Athalekar, “Panini’s Way of Mentioning Roots,” in Pagini Seminar, 
Kurukshetra, 1972, 6 pp. 

G295 : George Gardona, ‘‘Panini’s Use of the Term upadega and the ekdnta and 


anekdnta Views Regarding anubandhas,” sprsc 4, 1972, 23-25, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 45] 


G296 : Karunasindhu Das, ‘On Indicatory Letters and Symbols (enubandhas) in 
Paninian Pronouncements (upadefas),” spAioc 26, 1972, 101-102. 

G297 : Madhav Murlidhar Deshpande, “‘Paninian Procedure of taparakarana: A 
Historical Investigation,” xz 86, 1972, 207-254. 

G298 : Sukheswar Jha, ‘A Study of the Paninian System of Accent.” Ph.D. diss., 
Darbhanga University, 1972. 

G299 :S.D. Laddu, ‘“‘The Device of Contiguity as a Key to Interpreting Panini’s 
Rules,” cass-St 1, 1972, 157-171. 

G300 :P. D. Nawathe, “Ritualistic Prolation and Its Treatment in Panini’s 
Grammar,” cass-St 1, 1972, 55-64. 

G301 :G. B. Palsule, “Panini 3.4.87-88 vis-a-vis Vedic Imperatives in -si,” 

JoyKsv 27-28, 1971-1972, 443-453. 

: » “Panini’s Treatment of Tense and Mood Formations,” aass-St 1, 
1972, 173-183. 

G303 :M. D. Pandit, “Panini—a Study in Abbreviations,” Vimarsa (Delhi) 1 
(English section), 1972, 21-30. 

G304 :J. D. Singh, “Panini’s Technique of Description,” Kuy 6, 1972, 137-150. 
Also Festschrift Charudeva Shastri, pp 279-293. 

and K. Doraswamy, “The Case: Tolkappiyam and Panini, a 
Comparative Study,” xuj 4, 1972, 119-129. 

G306 :P.S. Subrahmanyam, “Deep Structure and Surface Structure in Panini,” 
(abstract), arcu 3, 1972, 20-21. Full paper m 36, 1975, 346-366. 

G307 : Ram Nath Sharma, ‘‘Referential Indices in Panini,” are1 3, 1972, 19-20. 

G308 : Vishva Bandhu, New Varitikas to Papini’s Grammar. Hoshiarpur, 1972. 

G309_ : Albrecht Wezler, ‘“Marginalien zu Panini’s Astddhyayi. I: sthanin,” xz 86, 
1972, 7-20. 

G310 :Saudamini Bahulikar, “Concerning the Structure of Panini’s Asjadhyayi,”’ 
mL 34, 1973, 75-99. 

G311_ : George Cardona, “On the Interpretation of Panini 1.4.105+8,” ans 37, 
1973, 1-47. 

G312 : Murray Fowler, ‘“‘Panini’s Primary Accent-rules,” acut 2.2, 1973, 322-335. 

G313 :B. S. Godse, “Concept of vipratisedha in Paninian Grammar,” azpori 54, 
1973, 250-256. 

G314 :Jan Gonda, ‘‘Panini and Modern Linguistics,” acur 2.2, 1973, 335-352. 

G315 : Edited by Yudhisthira Mimamsaka. Bahalgarh, Haryana, 1973. 

G316 : T. S. Paik, ‘““Panini’s Treatment of the Augment? in Sanskrit.” Ph. D. diss., 
University of California, 1973. 

G317_ :M. D. Pandit, “Formal and Non-formal in Panini,” asorr 54, 1973, 
179-192. 

G318 : Anil CG. Sinha, ‘“‘Generative Semantics and Panini’s Adrakas,” yor 23, 1973, 
27-39. 

G319 :S. Bahulikar, ‘‘Use of the Particle ca in the Asfadkpdyi,” cass-St 2, 1974, 
67-82. 

G320 :M.D. Balasubrahmanyam, “Panini 6.1 209-210,” cpsrv 1974, 189-193. 

G321 : Karaka section edited, with related section of Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhanta- 
kaumudi and English explanation, by Bishnupada Bhattacharya, Calcutta, 
1974. 

G322 :K.V. Abhyankar, ‘“‘Upalekhasitram,” asori 54, 1974, 45-76. 

G323_ : George Cardona, “On Panini’s Metalinguistic Use of Cases,” in Festschrift 
Charudeva Sastri, 305-326. 

G324 : , “Panini’s Karakas: Agency, Animation and Identity,” je 2, 1974, 
231-306, 


G302 





G305 








452 
G325 
G326 
G327 
G328 
G329 
G330 
G331 
G332 


G333 
G334 


G335 


G336 
G337 
G338 
G339 
G340 
G341 
G342 
G343 
G344 


G345 
G346 


G347 


G348 
G349 


G350 
G35! 
G352 
G353 
G354 


G355 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


:K. C. Chattopadhyaya, “Did Panini Envisage ‘A’ as a Close (samorta) 
Vowel?” in Festschrift Charudeva Sastri, pp. 194-205. 

: G. V. Devasthali, “A propos ardhamdtralaghava paribhasd,” viy 12, 1974, 
96-102. 

: » “Vakya According to the munitraya of Sanskrit Grammar,” in 
Festschrift Charudeva Shastri, pp. 206-215. 

: Karl Hoffman, “Panini V11.2.69 sanim sasanivamsam,” Mss 32, 1974, 73-80. 

: , “Panini V.4, 61 ativyathane,” mss 33, 1975, 45-50. 

:S.D. Joshi, *Panini’s Rules 1.4.49-51,” sparoc 27, 1974, 442-443. 

: » *Panini’s Treatment of kdraka-relations,” in Festschrift Charudeva 
Sastri, pas 258-270. 

: Sudesh Kumari, ‘“‘A Study of Anubandhas in Paninian Grammar,’’ Ph. D. 
diss., University of Delhi, 1974. 

: Mahavir, ‘‘Some Anomalies Regarding Asfadhyayi,”’ sparoc 27, 1974, 392, 
: N. V. Rajagopalan, “Karaka in Paninian Grammar” (abstract). parc. 2, 
1974, 173. 

: Aleka Chandra Sarangi, “An Enquiry into PAnini’s Placement of the 
tacchilika Suffixes Within the Present Suffixes Section,” spatoc 27, 1974, 239. 
Full paper in poass-g 4 (cass-St 3), 1976, 121-129. 

: Krishna Kumar Sharma, “Paninian Concepts of Morphophonemics,” 
spaioc 27, 1974, 392. 

: J. D. Singh, ““Phonologic Component in Panini,” pata. 2, 1974, 7-46. 

: , “Panini’s Theory of kérakas,” rypu 3, 1974 287-320. 

: Kailas Pati Tripathi, ‘‘Presupposition of Panini,” sparoc 27, 1974, 232-233. 

: Satyakam Varma, ‘Technical Terms of Panini,” spatoc 27, 1974, 230. 

» “Importance of Mahésvara-siitras,” spAIoc 27, 1974, 229. 

George Cardona, ‘‘On Rules of Panini’s Grammar Said to Expatiate on 

Other Rules,” yor 25, 1975-76, 241-251. 

: George Cardona, ‘“‘A Note on the Formulation of Panini 6-1-67,” Aor 
Silver Jubilee Volume, 1975, 11-20. 

: Madhav Deshpande, “‘The Scope of Homogeneous Representation in 
Panini,” aor Silver Jubilee Volume, 1975, 271-291. 

. **Phonetics of Vin Panini,” anor 56, 1975, 45-65. 

: Venkatesha Shastri Joshi, ““The Significance of the Word ‘Bhasa’ in the 
Astadhydyi,”’ asori 56, 1975, 212-218. 

: H. P. Dvivedi, “The suarthika Secondary Affixes in Sanskrit According to 
Panini,” m 36, 1975, 152-156. 

: Ram Nath Sharma, “Referential Indicesin Panini,” ny 17.1-2, 1975, 31-39, 

: Albrecht Wezler, Bestimmung und Angabe der Funktion von Sekundar-Suffixen 
durch Papini, Wiesbaden, 1975. 

: H.S. Ananthanarayana, Four Lectures of Panini’s As tadhyayt. Annamalainagar, 
1976. 

:M. D. Balasubrahmanyam, ‘Panini III.iv.10 and the Vedic Facts,” 
svuo] 19, 1976, 5-10. 

: Pratibha P. Gokhale, ‘A Note on the paribhasa ‘stipa sapanubandhana,” 
Paioc 27, 1976, 377-378. 

: , Various Ways of Naming a Verbal Root in the Asfadhpayi,” 
poass-E 4 (cass-St 3), 1976, 101-111. 

: 8S. D. Joshi, *“‘Panini’s Rules: 1.4.49, 1.4.50 and 1.4.51,” pcass-z 4 (cass-St 
3), 1976, 59-71. 

:K. Kunjunni Raja, “Panini’s Concept of a Sentence,” ats 40, 1976, 


165-171, 























BIBLIOGRAPHY 453 


G356 : J. L. Shaw, “Subject and Predicate,” pir 4, 1976, 155-180. 

G357_ : K. A. Sivaramakrishna Sastri, “Some Anomalous Siitras in the As/adhyayi,”’ 
ppcrr 35.3-4, 1976, 132-136. 

G358 : Satyakam Varma, “Technical Terms of Panini,” svsr 1976, 8-102. 

G359 , “Phonetic Arrangement of Panini,” svsr 1976, 62-79. 

G360 : Indu Bala, “A Study of Phonetic Theories in the Light of Ancient Indian 
Grammarians (with special reference to Panini).’”” Ph.D. diss., Kurukshe- 
tra University, 1977. 

G361 :G. V. Devasthali, ““Vedic Hiatus Nasalization and Panini,” verav 1977, 
38-46. 

G362 :R.B. Diksitulu, «A Study of Pratyayas in Panini’s Astadhyay” Ph.D. diss., 

_ Andhra University, 1977. 

G363 :H.P. Dvivedi, Studies in Panini: Technical Terms of the Astadhyayt. Delhi, 1977. 

G364 :P.B.Junnankar, An Introduction to Panini. Baroda, 1977. 

G365 : Edited, with Litganusasana and Santanava’s (?) Phijsitras, by Virajananda 
Daivakarana. Haryana Sahitya Samsthan, 1977. 

G366 :K.C. Acharya, ‘‘The Etymology of Ravana 4 Propos Panini IV.1.112” 
(abstract), parcy 4, 1978, 299. 

G367_ : Sergiu Al-George, “Are Panini’s sivas Descriptive or Prescriptive Senten- 
ces?”’ ABorI 58-59, 1978, 27-36. 

G368_ : Biswanath Bhattacharya, “A Proposed Emendation on the Tibetan Trans- 
lation of Panini’s Astadhydyi 1/1/7,’? aport 58-59, 1978, 511-512. 

G369 :R. S. Bhattacharya, “Import of the Word ‘sigukrandaya’ in Asfadhyayt 
IV.3.88,”? Rtam 10, 1978-79, 21-22. 

G370 :8S. D. Joshi, «The Ordering of the Rules in Panini’s Grammar,”’ ABorI 
58-59, 1978, 667-674. 

G371 : V.K. Kshirsagar, “Panini Explained and Defended.” Ph.D. diss., Univer- 
sity of Bombay, 1978. 

G372 :V.P. Limaye, “Akumdram yasah Panineh Corrupt for akumari yasah Papineh??’ 
Abort 58-59, 1978, 727-732. 

G373 : Mahavir, Panini as a Grammarian (with Special Reference te Compound Forma- 
tions). Delhi, 1978. 

G374 :Siddhesvara Varma, Pdpini and Elision. Panjab University Indological 
Series 12. Hoshiarpur, 1978. 

G375 : M.D. Balasubrahmanyam, *‘Ase-words in Panini and the Veda,” ITaur 7, 
1979, 65-74. 

G376 : J. Bronkhorst, <“The Role of Meanings in Panini’s Grammar,” m 40, 1979, 
146-157. 

G377_ ; Paul Kiparsky, Pdagini as a Variationist. pcass-B 6. Poona, Cambridge, Mass, 
London, 1979. 

G378 :Uma Q. Vaidya, “Aphorisms Indicative of Option in the As{adhydyi.” 
Ph. D. diss., University of Bombay, 1979. 

G379 :M. D. Balasubrahmanyam, “Accent Jt-s in the kyt Suffixes,” ats 44-45, 
1980-1981, 543-555. 

G380 : George Cardona, ‘On the Domain of Panini’s Metarule 1.3.10: yathasam- 
khyam anudesah samanam,” ALB 44-45, 1980-1981, 394-409. 

G381 :jJohannes Bronkhorst, “Asiddha in the Asfadhy&i: A Misunderstanding 
Among the Traditional Commentators?” jie 8, 1980, 69-86. 

G382_ : Alaka Hejib and Aravind Sharma, ‘tA Note on Panini 6.1.87,” ars 44-45, 
1980-1981, 635-638. 

G383 : V.S. Joshi, “Panini and the Paniniyas on Samhita,”’ vysec 1980, 20~26. 

G384 , ‘Panini and the Paniniyas on parasavarga,” vyjspa 1980, 27-28. 








454 


ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 























G385_ : , “Some Historical Observations in the Descriptive Grammar of 
Panini,” vjsec 1980, 49-59. 

G386 » The Ten Predecessors Mentioned in the Asfadhyayi,” vJsrc 1980, 
60-65. 

G387 : . “Reduplicated Forms Treated as Basic Roots (dhdtu) in the 
As{ddhyayi,” vyspc 1980, 66-69. 

G388 : , “ ‘Even Homer Nods’: The Fault of ‘anyonyasraya’ in the Asfadh- 
yayi and a New Suggestion to Avoid It,” vyjspc 1980, 70-78. 

G389 » The Word sarghatitha and Panini,” vyjspc 1980, 102-106. 

G390 : Vir Bhadra Misra, ‘“‘Meaning of ipsita in Panini’s kérakas,”’ patoc 29, 1980, 
422-423, 

G391_ : Hartmut Scharfe, ‘“‘Overinterpretation Versus Redundancy,” ALB 44-45, 
1980-1981, 352-357. 

G392 : Johannes Bronkhorst, ‘‘Meaning Entries in Panini’s Dhdiupatha,” jr 9, 
1981, 335-358. 

G393 : . “Nirukta and Asfdédhydyi: Their Shared Presuppositions,” uy 23, 
1981, 1-14. 

G394 : George Cardona, ‘On the paribhdasé anirdistarthah pratyayah svérthe” (Sum- 
mary ). swsc 5. Delhi, 1981, pp. 14-15. 

G395_ : Karuna Sindhu Das, “On Concept of Loss as a Grammatical Phenomenon 
in Panini” (summary).swsc5, Delhi, 1981, p. 21. 

G396 :H. P. Dvivedi, “A Rethinking into the Meaning-charactér of Some of the 
Secondary Affixes of the Astadhyayt” (summary ). swsc 5. Delhi, 1981, p. 29. 

G397_ .S. Venkatasubramania Iyer, ‘Variants in Panini-suiras Affecting accent” 
(summary). swsa 5, Delhi, 1981, p. 115. 

G398 :S. D. Joshi, «‘The siddha Theory and Its Implications in Interpreting the 
Astadhyayt (summary ). swsa 5, Delhi, 1981, p. 42. 

G399 : Avanindra Kumar (Satya Vrat Shastri?), Archaic Words in Paini’s Asta- 
dhyayi. Delhi, 1981. 

G400 : Mahavir, “Definition of apasargas in Panmi,” Pisc 4, 1981, 45-48. 

G401 : , “Concept of ‘Sabda’ in Panini” (summary). swsc, 5, Delhi, 1981, 
pp. 48-49. 

G402 : Hari Mohan Mishra, ‘“Non-Aryan Words in the Astddhydyi”” (summary), 
swsc 5. Delhi, 1981, p. 54. 

G403  : Dipti Sharma, ‘“‘Panini’s Grammar and Contemporary Language,” Pisc 4, 
1981, 35-42. 

G404 : Mahesh Dutt Sharma, “Simhdvalokitanyaya in Explaining Panini’? (sum- 
mary). swsc 5, Delhi, 1981, pp. 92-93. 

G405 : Yajan Veer, «A Tale of 3 Terms (ud, vibhdsa, and anyatarasyam)” (summary). 
swsc 5, Delhi, 1981, pp. 116-118. 

G406_ : Mahavir, ‘‘Concept of fabda in Panini,” viy 20, 1982, 58-62. 

G407_ : Saroja Bhate, “The Place of P. 1.2.22 and P. 7.2.51 in the Asfadhyayi”, 
ABORI 63, 1983, 227-232. 

G408 :M.A. Mehendale, “On Panini 1.3.41,” asori 63, 1983, 225-226. 

G409 : Paul Thieme, “Missverstandenen Panini,” zpme Supplement 5, 1983, 
280-289. 

Unddisitras 

G410_: Edited by Otto Béhtlingk. St. Petersburg, 1844. 

G411 :K. B. Pathak, “Panini and the Authorship of the Unadisiiras,” asori 4, 
1922-1923, 111-136. 

G412 : K. G. Subrahmanyam, “The Authorship of the Unddisiitras,” Jor 1, 1927, 


53-66. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 455 


G413 :T. R. Chintamani, “A Note on the Authorship of the Unddisitras,” Jor 
1, 1927, 181-183. 

G414 :K.B. Pathak, “Further Remarks on the Unadi Sitras of Panini,” anort 11, 
1930, 90-93. 


See b 82. 

G415 :K. Madhava Krishna Sarma, “Authorship of the Unrddisitras,” pvxr, pp. 
395-404. 

G416 : Edited with editor’s commentary by Dayananda Sarasvati. Ajmer, 1949- 
1950. 

G417 : Louis Renou, “Etudes paninéennes, THiI: Les Unadisitra,” ja 244, 1956, 
155-165. 


G418 : Ram Awadh Pandey, “‘A Comparative Study of Unddisitras.”” Ph.D. diss., 
Banaras Hindu University, 1963. 

G419 : Kanshi Ram, “A Study of Sanskrit Upddisitras.” Ph.D. diss., University of 
Delhi, 1971. 

See a242. 

G420 : Edited, with Dayananda Sarasvati’s Vaidikalaukikakosa as Unadikosa, by 
Yudhisthira Mimamsaka. Bahalgarh, Haryana, 1974. 

G42! :S. Venkitasubromania Iyer, ‘“‘On the Unddisitra ‘mithune manih,’ ” svuoy 
18, 1975, 45-50. 

G422 :Nomita Dutt, ‘“Yaska’s Nirukta and Unpadisiitras,”? svuoy 19, 1976, 1-4. 

Lingadnusdsana 

See b82. 

G423 : D.G. Koparkar, “The Paniniya-linganusasana: Its Date and Authorship,” 
spatoc 15, 1949, 49-50. 

See 241; e365. 

?Paninivasiksa 

G424 : Edited and translated into German. 1s 4, 1858, 345-371. 

G425 :F. Kielhorn, “Remarks on the Stkshas,” ta 5, 1867, 141-144. Reprinted 
Rau, pp. 158-169. 

See e56; e68, 

G426 : Edited and translated by Raghu Vira. yras 1931, 653-670. 

See b82. 

G427 : Edited and translated, with edition and translation of Candragomin’s 
varpasiitras, editions of the (anonymous) Vedargasiksapaijiké and a Siksa- 
prakasa, by Manomohan Ghosh. Calcutta, 1938. 

G428 ; Edited with editor’s Pradipa, by Rudra Prasada Sarma. uss 59, Varanasi, 
1947-1948. 

G429_ ; Edited with editor’s commentary by Dayananda Sarasvati. Ajmer, 1950- 
1951. 

See e168. 

General 

G430  : Theodor Goldstiicker, Pagini. London, 1861; Allahabad, 1914; Osnabriick, 
1966. Abridged version ChSSt 48, 1965. 

G431 : Albrecht Weber, ‘‘Zur Frage tiber das Zeitalter PAaninis, mit specieller 

“ Beziehung auf Th. Goldstiickers ‘preface?’ zum ‘M&navakalpasiitra’”’, 
is 5, 1862, 1-176. 

G432 :T. Aufrecht, “Panini,” 14 4, 1875, 281. 

G433  : Leopold von Schroeder, “Ueber die Maitrayani Samhita,” zpme 33, 1879, 
177-207. 

G434 :T. Aufrecht, ‘Beitrage zur Kenntnis indischer Dichter,” zpme 36, 1882, 
361-383. 


456 ENCQYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


G435 ; F. Kielhorn, “Der Grammatiker Panini,” negw 1885,185-199. Reprinted 
in Rau, pp. 188-202. Partially reprinted in Staal, pp. 103-105. 

G436 : Otto Béhtlingk, ‘Versuch, cine jungst angefochtene Lehre PAnini’s in 
Schutz zu nehmen,”’ sewu 42, 1890, 79-82. 

G437 : Otto Franke, “Die Kasuslehre des Panini vergleichen mit dem Gebrauch 
der Kasus im Pali und in den Agoka-inschriften,” sp 16, 1890, 64-120. 

G438 : Bruno Liebich, Papini: Ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Indischen Literature und 
Grammatik. Leipzig, 1891. Chapter 5 reprinted in G1625, pp. 159-165. 

G439 :P. Peterson, ‘Panini, Poet and Grammarian,” sras 1891, 311-335. 

G440 : William Dwight Whitney, “The Veda in Panini,” csar 7, 1893, 243-254, 

G441 : Otto Béhtlingk, ‘“Neue Miscellen : 4. Panini’s adhikdra,”’ saw. 1897, 
46-48. 

G442_ : A. Foucher, “Panini,” La Grande Encyclopedic. Paris, 1900, pp. 945-946. 

G443 ; Johannes Hertel “Von Panini zu Phaedrus ** zpmo 62, 1908, 113-118. 

G444 :Kashi Prasad Jayaswal, ‘Dates of Panini and Katydyana,” 14 47, 1918, 
138. 

G445 :K.V. Lakshmana Rao, “Did Panini Know Buddhist Nuns?” 1a 50, 1921, 
82-84. 

G446 :Radhakumud Mookerji, “Ancient Hindu Education as Revealed in the 
Works of Panini, Katyayanaand Patajijali,” Qyws 12, 1921-1922, 156-170. 

, History of Sanskrit Literature from the Works of Panini, Katya- 
yana aud Patafijali,’”? 1a 52, 1923, 21-24. 

G448  : Hannes Skéld, Pagers on Panini and Indian Grammar in General. Lund, 1926. 

G449 » “The Relative Chronology of Panini and the Pratigakhyas,” 1 
"55, 1926, 181-185. 

G450 :K. G. Subrahmanyam, “Panini and Yaska—a Rejoinder,’’ jor 1, 1927, 
380-384. 

G451 :K. B. Pathak, “The Age of Panini and Sanskrit as a Spoken Language,” 
aport 11, 1930, 59-83. 

G452 : , “Were the Vajasaneyi Samhita and Satapatha Brahmana Un- 
known to Panini?” asror 11, 1930, 84-89. 

G453 : Raghu Vira, “The Author of the Siva-sitras,” jras 1930, 400-402. 

See a4. 

G454 :K. C. Chatterji, ‘‘Panini as a Poet,” coy 1, 1933, 1-24, 135. 

G455 :Bata Krishna Ghosh, ‘Panini and the Rkpratigakhya,” mig 10, 1934, 
665-670. 

G456 : Nali Nath Das Gupta, ‘‘Panini and the Yavanas,” 1c 2, 1935, 356-358. 

G457 : Paul Thieme, Pdpini and the Veda. Allahabad, 1935. 

G458 3: , “Zur Datierung des Panini,” zpme 89, 1935, 21-24. Reprinted 
Budruss, pp. 528-531. 

G459_ :A. Berriedale Keith, ‘Panini and the Veda,” 1c 2, 1936, 735-748. 

G460 :S. P. Ghaturvedi, “History of an Important Historical Word in the 
P&ninian School of Grammar,” patoc 8, 1937, 739-744. 

G461 : Kshetresh Chandra Chattopadhyaya, ‘Panini and the Rkpratigakhya II,” 
ig 13, 1937, 343-349. 

G462_ : Paul Thieme, ‘‘Panini and the Rkpratisakhya, I,’ naQ 13, 1937, 329-343. 
Reprinted Budruss, pp. 537-571. 

G463 :S.P. Chaturvedi, “Panini and the Rkpratigakhya,” nia 1, 1938, 450-459; 
2, 1940-1942, 723-726. 

G464 : Mangal Deva Shastri, ‘A Comparison of the Revedapratigakhya with the 
Paninian Grammar,” PowssSt 10, 1938, 143-161. 

G465 : K. C. Chattopadhyaya, ‘““Thieme and Panini,” 1c 5, 1938, 95-98. 


G447 : 














BIBLIOGRAPHY 457 


G466 : Bata Krishna Ghosh, ‘“‘Mr. Chaturvedi on Panini and the Rkpratisakhya,” 
nra 2, 1939, 59-61. 

G467 :K. Madhava Krishna Sharma, “The Paninian School and the Pratiéa- 
khyas: Post-Paninian Reciprocity of Influence,” BhV 2, 1941, 230-238; 4, 





1942, 46-53. 
G468 :V.S. Agrawala, “Panini, His Life and Works,” joyri 2, 1945, 81-144. 
G469 : » “Panini,” Jor 19, 1949, 124-134. 


G470 :Ram Shankar Bhattacharya, “Some Principles of Tracing pre-Paninian 
Portions in Paninian Works,” joyri 8, 1951, 407-418. 

G471 :S. P. Chaturvedi, ‘“Panini’s Vocabulary and His Date,” in Festschrift 
Siddheshwar Varma 2. 144-147. 

G472 :V. S. Agrawala, “Some Chronological Considerations About Panini’s 
Date,” n1Q 27, 1951, 269-286. 

G473 :R. S. Bhattacharya, “Panini’s Notion of the Authoritativeness of the 
Views of his Predecessors,” Jajri 9, 1952, 163-182. 

G474 ;: » “Some Chief Characteristics of Panini in Comparison to His 
Predecessors,” Jor 2, 1952, 165-173; 5, 1955, 10-18. 

G475_ : Carlo Della Casa, ““Uddhya e bhidya in Panini e Kalidasa,” rpso 26, 1952, 
67-70. 

G476 : Vasudeva Sharana Agrawala, India as Known to Panini. Lucknow, 1953; 2d 
edition, Varanasi, 1963. 

G477__: K. C. Chatterji, “Panini and Whitney,” cr 125, 1952, 55~58; 126, 1953, 
49-52. 

G478 :Siddheshwar Varma, “A Plan for the Evaluation of Panini on the Vedic 
Languages,” spaioc 17, 1953, 104-105. 

G479_ ; Paul Thieme, ‘‘Panini and the Paniniyas,” jaos 76, 1956, 1-23. Reprinted 
Budruss, pp. 573-595 

G480 : » “Panini and the Pronunciation of Sanskrit,” in Festschrift What- 
mough, 1957, pp. 263-270. Reprinted Budruss, pp. 612-618. 

G481_ ;: Parasaram Gopalakrishna Murty, ‘‘Panini and the Earlier Grammarians,” 
sparoc 20, 1957, 71. 

G482_ :S. K. Ramachandra Rao, “Specimens of Panini’s Poetry,”’ gyms 50, 1959, 
115-127. 

See al7. 

G483 : Hartmut Scharfe, ‘“‘Panini’s Kunstsprache’”’ (summary), wzmMiuH 10.6, 
1961, 1396. 

G484 +:S. Bhattacharya, ‘‘A Note on Panini,” Bh 6.2, 1962-1963, 76-80. 

G485 :V.S. Agrawala, Gotras in Papini. Varanasi, 1963. 

G486 :Deo Prakas Shastri Patanjal, A Critical Study of Rgveda (1. 137-163), 
Particularly from the Point of View of Papinian Grammar. New Delhi, 1963. 

G487 :G. V. Devasthali, ‘“Sayana Utilising Panini in His Rg-Veda-Bhasya,” 
JBBRAS 38, 1963, 165-173. 

G488 : , “Panini as an Aid to Rgvedic Interpretation,” Hpvov, pp. 20-26. 

G489 +: Venkatesh Laxman Joshi, ‘Panini and the Paniniyas on samhita,” m. 26, 
1965, 66-71. 

G490 : Paul Thieme, ‘“‘Die Kobra bei Panini,” xz 79, 1965, 55-68. Reprinted 
Budruss, pp. 239-246. 

G48la : G. V. Devasthali, “Panini and Rgvedic exegesis,” 14 3d series 2.3, 1967, 
1-8. Also aBori 48-49, 1968, 75-81. Also pcass-A 22, 1968, 1-8. Also 
jor 40-41, 1970-1972, 41-48. Also vrrv, pp. 97-104. 

G482a :S. D. Laddu, “Panini and the Veda.” Ph.D. diss., University of Poona, 
1967. 











458 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


G483a : Sumitra Mangesh Katre, Paninian Studies. Poona, 1967. 
G484a : D. N. Shastri, ‘A Reappraisal of Panini,” xac 1967, 296-301. 
G485a :K, Madhava Krishna Sarma, Panint, Kaiyayana and Patafjali. Delhi, 1968, 
G486a : Louis Renou, ‘“‘Panini,” Current Trends in Linguistics, volume 5, Linguistics 
in South Asia, ed. T. A. Sebeok, The Hague, 1969, pp. 481-498. 
G487a:S. D. Laddu, “The laukika, vaidika and yajitka Accentuation with the 
munitraya of Sanskrit Grammar,’’ ta 3d series 3, 1969, 93-111. 
G488a :M. D. Pandit, “Panini and the Vedic Interpretation,” in Festschrift 
Rajeshwar Shastri Dravid, English section, pp. 49-53. 
G489a : Peter H. Salus, Pauini to Postal: A Bibliography in the History of Linguistics. 
Edmonton, 1971. 
G490 : Hari Mohan Mishra, “A Reappraisal of Panini,’? ITaur 3-4, 1975-1976, 
317-320. 
G491 :Sergiu Al-George, “Panini and Modern Thought,” pisc 2.2, 1976, 82. 
G492 :S.D. Laddu, Evolution of the Sanskrit Language from Panini to Pataftjali. Poona, 
1974. 
G493 : Mavelikara Achyathan, Educational Practices in Manu, Panini and Kautilya. 
Trivandrum, 1974-1975. 
G494 : Bishnupada Bhattacharya, ‘“‘The Impress of Paninian Grammar on Sans- 
krit Poetics,’? on 27.2, 1979, 35-50. 
G495 : Johannes Bronkhorst, “The Orthoepic Diaskeuasis of the Rgveda and the 
Date of Panini,’ ny 23, 1981, 83-95. 
G496 :K.C. Varma, “Date of Panini,” vry 20, 1982, 29-57. 
VADAVA (pre-Pataiijali) 
KUNI (pre-Patafijali) NCat 4. 176) 
KUNARABADAVA (pre-Patafijali) 
GONIKAPUTRA (pre-Patafijali) 
G497  : Rajendralal Mitra, “On Gonikaputra and Gonardiya as Names of Patafi- 
jali,” JASBe 52, 1883, 261-269. 
GONARDIYA (pre-Pataiijali) 
See 497. 
G498 :Sylvain Lévi, “Gonarda, le berceau du Gonardiya,” samv 3.2, 1925, 
197-205. 
VYADI (pre-Katyayana) 
(G1624, pp. 130, 216; Belvalkar, p. 9) 
Samgraha 
G499 : Ram Shankar Bhattacharya, “A New Verse of the Samgraha (by Vyadi),” 
Po 19, 1954, 4-5. 
Paribhasa 
G500__ : Edited in Paribhadsdsamgraha, 31-43. 
General 
G501_ : Mysore Hiriyanna, ‘““Vyadi and Vajapyayana,” mig 14, 1938, 261-266. 
VAJAPYAYANA (pre-Katyayana) 
(G1624, pp. 134-135) 
See a501. 
KATYA or BHAVAN (pre-Katyayana) 
Mahavaritika (lost) 
KATYAYANA or VARARUCI (250 zB.c.) 
(Cardona, pp. 247, 250, 267; Belvalkar, pp. 9, 23; G1624, p. 136) 
Varttika(s) on Panini’s Astadhyayt 
G502 : Otto Bohtlingk, <‘Katyayana oder Patafijali im Mahabhasya,’’ zpmco 29, 
1875, 183-190. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 459 


G503 :F. Kielhorn, Katydyana and Pataftjali: Their Relation to Each Other and to 
Panini. Bombay, 1876. Reprinted Varanasi, 1963; Osnabruck, 1965, Rau, 
pp. 1-64. 

See ¢871. 

G504 :Sylvain Lévi, ‘Notes de chronologie indienne: devandmpriya, Aéoka et 
Katyayana,” ya 1891, 549-553. 

G505 : Edited (?) with Narayana’s Dipaprabha by T. Ganapati Sastri. rss 33. 
Trivandrum, 1913. 

G506 : Kashi Prasad Jayaswal, ‘“‘Katyayana and Parthiva,” 14 48, 1919, 12. 

See a444; a446 

G507 : Vasudeva Gopala Paranjpe, Le vartika de Katydyana: Une étude du style, du 
vocabularie et des postulats philosophiques. Heidelberg, 1922. 

See a447; e68. 

G508 :K.G. Subrahmanyam, “The Varttikas,” Jor 2, 1928, 25-33. 

See a84. 

G509 :V.R. Ramachandra Dikshitar, “Katyayana—the grammarian,” mig 11, 
1935, 316-320. 

G510 : Vasudeva S. Agrawala, “Pirvacarya samjfids for lakaras,” nia 3, 1940, 
39-40. 

G511 :K. Madhava Krishna Sarma, “Katyayana,” po 5.2-3, 1941, 126-132; 
6.1~2, 1942, 74-92. 

G512_ : G. V. Devasthali, “The Aim of the Vartika of Katyayana,” BhV 20-21, 
1960-1961, 52-63. 

G513 :S.D.Laddu, ‘The Sphere of Reference of the Technical Term Trjadi 
according to Katyayana and Patajijali,” pcass-a 23, 1968 (— yup 29), 
1-10. 

See b485. 

G514 :B.A. Van Nooten, “The Grammarian Katyayana and the White Yajur- 
veda School,” ri 29.1, 1968, 43-46. 

G515 :S. D. Laddu, «Authorship of a Varttika from the Mahabhasya,” Pcass-A 
38, 1970 (- Jur 33), 13-22. 

G516 :A. M. Ghatage, “Katyayana and the Transformational Approach,” PaAICL 
1, 1971, 31-35. 

G517_ : G. V. Devasthali, ‘““Katyayana’s Use of yogavibhdga,” Bpcri 35, 1975, 42-48. 

G518 :Y. Ojihara, ‘‘Qu’on ne confonde pas un varttika avec un sitra!” ITaur 
7, 1979, 333-338. 

AUTHOR UNKNOWN (100 8.c.) 
Eaghubhdsya on Panini’s Asfadhyayi 
G519_ ;K.V. Abhyankar, ‘‘LaghuLhasya and Its Author,’ sparoc 14.1, 1948, 23. 
PATANJALI (150 8.c.) 
(Cardona, pp. 243, 256; Belvalkar, p. 26) 
Mahadbhasya on Panini’s Astadhadyt 

(Cardona, p. 256; NCat 11.89) 

G520_ : Friedrich Max Miiller, ““Das Mahabhasya,” zpMe 7, 1853, 162-171. 

G521 : Volume 1 edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa and Nagesa’s Uddyota, by J. R. 
Ballantyne and the pandits of the Benares college. Mirzapore, 1855; with 
translation of text, 1856. 

G522. . Edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa, Nagesa Bhatta’s Uddyota, and editor's 
Tippani, by Bala Sastrin. Varanasi, 1870, 1886, 1906. 

G523_ :R. G. Bhandarkar, “On the Date of Patajijali and the King in Whose 
Reign He Lived,” 14 1, 1872, 299-302; 2, 1873, 59-61. Reprinted cwroB 
2. 108-114; G1625, pp. 78-81. 


460 


G524 » *On the Interpretation of Patafijali,”’ 14 2, 1873, 94-96. 

G525 . *Pataiijali’s Mahabhasya,” 1a 2, 1873, 69-71. Reprinted awres 1, 
121-124, 

G526_ : Albrecht Weber, “On the Date of Patafijali” (trans. D. C. Boyd), 1 2, 
1873, 61-64. 

G527 » “On Patafijali, etc.,” 16 2, 1873, 206-221. 

G528 , “Das Mahdbhagya des Patafijali, Benares 1872,’’ 1s 13, 1873, 293~ 
496. Portion translated in 1a 6, 1877, 301-307. 

G529_ : Photolithographed, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa and Nagega Bhatta’s Uddyota, 
by T. Goldsticker. 6 volumes. London, 1874. 

G530_ : Edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradifa, by T. Goldstiicker. London, 1874. 

G531 : Kashinath Trimbak Telang, ‘““‘The Ramayana Older than Patafijali,” 1 
3, 1874, 124. 

G532 :R. G. Bhandarkar, ‘Allusions to Krsna in Patajfijali’s Mahabhagya,”’ 1a 3, 
1874, 14-16. Reprinted cwres 1.209-213. 

See a502. 

G533_ : Albrecht Weber, “On the Yavanas, Mahabhasya, Ramayana, and Krish- 
najanméstami,’’ 1a 4, 1875, 244-251. 

See b503. 

G534 :F. Kielhorn, “On the Mahabhasya,” 14 5, 1876, 241-251. Reprinted in Rau, 
pp. 169-179. 

G535 : J. G. Buhler, “Mss. of the Mahdbhagya from Kashmir,” 14 7, 1878, 54f. 

G536 : Edited by F, Kielhorn. 3 volumes. ssrs 18-22, 28-30. Bombay, 1878-1885, 
1892, 1906, 1909, 3d revised edition by K. V. Abhyankar, Poona, 1962- 
1972. 

G537 : Partly edited, with editor’s Maniratnaprabha, by Viprarajendra, 1880. 

G538 : Peter Peterson, ‘“‘Note on the Date of Patafijali,” jepras 16, 1883-1885, 
181-189. Reprinted in his The Auchityalamkara of Kshemendra. Bombay, 1885. 

G539 :R. G. Bhandarkar, “The Date of Patafijali: A Reply to Professor 
Peterson,” JaBRAS 16, 1883~1885, 199-222. Reprinted in cwrBos 1.157-185. 

G540 :P. A. Danielsson, “Die Einleitung des Mahdbhasya, tbersetzt,” zpme 37, 
1883, 20-53. 

G541 :R. G. Bhandarkar, “‘Date of Patafijali, no. 2: Being a Second Reply to 
Professor Peterson,’? cwRaB 1.186—207. 

G542 ;F. Kielhorn, “Quotations in the Mahabhasya and the Kaftkdvyiti,” 1a 14, 
1885, 326-327. 

G543 . *Prakrtworte im Mahabhagya,” zpmc 39, 1885, 327. 

G544 : Edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa, Nagesga’a Uddyota, and Guruwara Bala 
Sastri’s Tippani, by Damodara Sastri Bharadvaja, Gangadhara Sastri 
Manavalli and Tatya Sastri Pattavardhana. 3 volumes. Varanasi, 1886. 

G545 : F. Kielhorn, ‘Notes on the Mahabhagya,’”’ 1a 15, 1886, 80-81, 203-211; 16, 
1887, 101-106, 178-184, 228-233. 244-252, Reprinted Rau, pp. 202-206, 
220-241. Partially reprinted in Staal, pp. 150-151, 107-114, 115-123. 

G546 :R.G.Bhandarkar, “The Maurya-passage in the Mahabhdgya,”’ 1a 16, 1887, 
156-158, 172-173. Reprinted cwres 1.148-156. 

G547_: Edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa and Bala Sastrin’s Tippant. Poona, 1887. 

G548 +:Otto Béhtlingk, “Noch ein Wort zur Maurya-Frage im Mahabhasya,” 
zpMe 41, 1887, 175-178. 

G549 : Govinda Das, ‘Prof. Kielhorn’s edition of the Mahabhdgya,”’ 1a 18, 1889, 
128. 

G550_ : Edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa and Nagega Bhatta’s Uddyota, by Bahuvalla- 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF [INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 

















bha Sastri. pr 142. Calcutta, 18998. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 461 


G551 : Bernhard Geiger, ““Mahdabhagya zu P. V1.4.22 und 132 nebst Kaiyafa’s 
Kommentar, ubersetzt, erlautert und mit einem Anhang,” swaw 160.8. 
Vienna, 1908, pp. 1-76. Reprinted Staal, pp. 209-259. 

G552 ;Adhyayas 1.2 through 2 edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa and Nagegas 
Uddyota, by S. D. Kudala. Bombay, 1908, 1912. 

G553 :K. B. Pathak, “The Divine Vasudeva Different from the kshatriya 
Vasudeva in Patafijali’s Opinion,” yaBras 23, 1909-1914, 96-103. 

G554 :Chandradhar Guleri, “On ‘Siva-bhagavata’ in Patafijali’s Mahadbhasya,” 
1A 41, 1912, 272. 

G555 : Edited, with Bhattoji Diksita’s Sitravytti, by Syamacarana Kaviratna. 
Calcutta, 1914. 

G556_: Edited Bombay, 1917. 

See a446; a447. 

G557_ :K. G. Subrahmanyam, ‘‘Patafijali and kavya Literature Presumed by 
Him,” patoc 3, 1924, 96-99. 

G558 :1.1.1 translated by Prabhat Chandra Chakravarti. nig 1, 1925, 703-739. 

G559 :K. G. Subrahmanyam, “Some Notes on Mr. Keith’s Interpretation of a 

Mahabhasya Passage,” yras 1925, 502-505. 

: . “A Short Note on Mr, Jayaswal’s Interpretation of a Mahabhasya 
Passage in His ‘Hindu Polity’ (p. 122),” mig 2, 1926, 416-418. 

G561_ : Prabhat Chandra Chakravarti, “Patafijali as He Reveals Himself in the 
Mahdbhasya,”’ 14Q 2, 1926, 67 -76, 262-289, 464-494, 738-760. 

G562_ : Kshetresh Chandra Chattopadhyaya, ‘‘Patafijali and His Knowledge of 
Science,” m1Q 3, 1927, 181-182. 

G563 : Otto Strauss, “AMahabhdsya ad Panini 4.1.3 und seine Bedeutung fiir die 
Geschichte der indischen Logik,” am 1927, 84-94. 

G564 :Shridhar Shastri Pathak and Siddheshvar Sastri Chitrao, Word Index to 
Patafijali’s Vyakarana-mahabhasya (Mahabhdsya-sSabdakosah). Gosport! series C. 
Poona, 1927. 

G565_ : Ahnikas 1-2 edited by Madhava Sastri Bhandari. Lahore, 1929. 

G566_ ; Edited with editor’s Kuficika, by Harisamkara Jha. Bareilly, 1929. 

G567 : Edited Calcutta, 1930. 

G568 :K. B. Pathak, “On the Text and Interpretation of Some Passages in the 
Mahabhasya of Pataiijali,” anorr 13, 1932, 17-24. 

G569 : Ahnikas 1-5 translated into German by Valentin Trapp. Leipzig, 1933, 
352-380. 

See a84; b81. 

G570 :Amalananda Ghosh, “A Study of the smrti Passagesin the Mahabhdsya,” 
mg 11, 1935, 70-90. 

G571 :K. C. Chatterji, “Some Technical Terms of Sanskrit Grammar,” coy 3, 
1936, 105~132. 

G572_ :V.S. Agrawala, “‘Patafijali on the ksudraka-malavas,” po 1.4, 1937, 1-7. 

G573_ : Edited with Marathi translation by V. S. Abhyankar and K. V. Abhyankar. 
7 volumes. Poona, 1938~1954. 

G574 ; Edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa and Nagefa’s Uddyota, by Samkara Sastri 
Marulkar. 2 volumes. ass 108. Poona, 1938. 

G575 : Edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa and Nagega’s Uddyota, by Guruprasada 
Sastri. 9 volumes. rscc. Varanasi, 1938. 

G576 : Dinesh Chandra Sircar, ‘“‘Date of Patafijali’s Mahabhdsya,” nag 15, 1939, 
633-638. 

G577_ ; V.S. Agrawala, “Pataiijali and the vahika-gramas,” 1c 6, 1939, 129-136, 





G560 


462 
G578 
G579 
G580 
G581 
G582 
G583 
G584 
G585 


G586 


G587 


G588 
G589 


G590 
G591 
G592 
G593 
G594 
G595 


G596 
G597 


G598 
G599 
G600 
G601 
G602 
G603 


G604 


ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


: Louis Renou, “On the Identity of the Two Patajfijalis,” mig 16, 1940, 
586-591. 

:D. G. Bhave, “A Note on the ‘Abhiras’ in Patajijali,” spcrr 2, 1940, 
137-138. 

:K. Madhava Krishna Sarma, “Patafijali, a laksyatkacaksus: His Lofty 
Realism,” Jor 14, 1940, 204—209. 

:S. P. Chaturvedi, “Notes on a vartika (?) and Its Misplaced Occurrence in 
the Mahabhésya,” pvxr 1941, 82-83. 

21.1, 4.4-5, and 5.6 edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa and Nagega’s Uddyota, 
by Bhargavasastri Bhikaji Josi. Bombay, 1942, 1945, 1951. 

:K. Madhava Kirshna Sarma, “Patafijali and His Relations to Some 
Authors and Works,” 1c 11.2, 1944. 

:P. V. Kane, “The Mahkabhasya and the Bhaésya of Sabara,’”’ BhV 6, 1945, 
43-45. 

:S. Vaiyapuri Pillai, «“Tolkappiyar and Patafijali,”? in C. K. Raja Commemo- 
ration Volume. Madras, 1946, pp. 134-138. 

: Mangal Deva Sharma, ‘“‘The Traditional Basis of the udaharanas in the 
Kagska and the Mahabhasya and the Mutual Relation of the Two Works 
Regarding the Same,” paroc 12, 1947, 333-339. 

: 1.1.4 edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa and Annambhatta’s Uddyotana thereon, 
by P-P.S. Sastri and A. Sankaran. mcoms 7, 1948. 

: G. V. Devasthali, “‘Sabara and Patajijali,” yous 20.2, 1951, 101-106. 

: P. S. Subrahmanya Sastri, Lectures on the Mahabhagya. 6 volumes. auss 11. 
Annamalainagar, 1951-1962. 

: 2.5-9 edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa and Annambhatta’s Uddyotana there- 
on, by T. Chandrasekharan. mcoms 13, 1952. 

:R. S. Bhattacharya, ‘‘Significance of the Examples in the Mahabhasya,” 
joyrt 10, 1952~1953, 39-48. 

: Sukumar Sen, “The Story of Devadatta in the Mahdbhasya,”’ uw. 12, 1952 
1953, 189-196. Also paroc 16, 1953, 268-275. 

: M. G. Gaidhani, “The Attitude of Patafiijali Towards Katyayana,” Paroc 
16.2, 1953, 95-104. 

: Louis Renou, “Etudes paninéennes, II; Le Veda chez Patafijali,” ja 241, 
1953, 427-464. 

:R. S. Bhattacharya, “‘One Corrupt Reading of the Mahabhdsya, po 19, 
1954, 2-3. 

, The Mahabhasya vs. the Kagika,” jsvor 15, 1954, 61-70. 

» “Some Characteristic Expressions of Patafijali,” jsvar 15, 1954, 
139-146. 

: 1.1 edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa, Nagesa’s Uddyota and editor’s Tattvaloka, 
by Rudradatta Jha Sarman. «ss 153. Varanasi, 1954. 

: Bishnupada Bhattacarya, ‘“‘Philosophical! Data in Patatijali’s Mahabhasya,” 
on 4, 1956, 51-65. 

: K. C. Chatterji, “How Patafijali Has Been Misunderstood,”’ m 17, 1956, 
100-102. 

: Introductory chapter edited and translated by K. C. Chatterji. ums 7, 
1957. 

: E. R. Sreekrishna Sarma, “‘The Words akrti and jati in the Mahabhasya,” 
ALB 21, 1957, 54—65. 

: Adoft Janacek, “‘Two Texts of Patafijali and Statistical Gomparison of 
Their Vocabularies,” ao 26, 1958, 88-100. 

; G. K, Pandey, ‘‘Patafijali,” Jars 44.3-4, 1959, 220ff, 








BIBLIOGRAPHY 463 


G605 :V. Swaminathan, “Patafjali and the Nirukta” (summary), sparoc 21, 
1959, 143. Full paper paioc 21, 1966, 185-209. 

G606 : Ram Suresh Tripathi, ‘Conception of jati in the Mahabhasya of Patanjali,” 
spaioc 21, 1959, 196. 

G607 : Erich Frauwallner, ‘‘Sprachtheorie und Philosophie im Mahabhagya des 
Patafijali,’? wzxsoa 4, 1960, 92-118. 

G608 : Hari Deo Mishra, ‘‘A Critical Study of Some Aspects of Sanskrit Grammar 
with special reference to the Mahabhasya of Patafijali,” Ph.D. diss., 
University of Poona, 1961. 

G609 : ¥. Ojihara, “Le Mahabhasya, adhyaya I, ahnika 8: Un Essai de Traduction,” 
MiK 2, 1961, 9-22. 

G610 : Hartmut Scharfe, Die Logik im Mahabhasya. pawio 50. Berlin, 1961. 

G611_ : Partially edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa and Nagega Bhatta’s Uddyota, by 
Vedavrata. 4 volumes. Rohtak, 1961-1963. 

G612 : First adhyaya edited, with editor’s Hindi commentary, by Charudeva 
Sastri. Varanasi, 1962. 

G613 :Stanley Insler, ‘“Verbal Paradigms in Patafijali: 250 Roots and Their 
Paradigmatic Derivations as Used and Discussed by Pataiijali in the 
Mahabhasya.” Ph. D, diss., Yale University, 1963. 

G614 :S. D. Joshi, “Patafijali on Two Methods of Interpreting the Asfadhydyi,” 
spaioc 22, 1963, 120. 

G615 : Y. Ojihara, ‘“‘Mahabhasya ad Panini 1.1.56: Un Essai de traduction,” Acta 
Asiatica 4, 1963, 43-69. 

G616 :Siddheshwar Varma, “Scientific and Technical Presentation of Patafijali 
as Reflected in the Mahdbhasya,”’ vij 1, 1963, 1-36. 

G617_ : Paul Thieme, “Patafijalitiber Varuna und die sieben Stréme,”’ in Festschrift 
Morgenstierne pp. 168-173. Reprinted Budruss, pp. 620-625. 

G618_ : Sudarshan Arora, ‘‘Patajfijali’s Criticism of Katyayana,” sparoc 23.1, 1966, 
151. 

G619 :M. D. Balasubrahmanyam, “Patafijali and the pre-Paninian anubandhas nt 
and c,” pcass-a 11. Poona, 1966. Also yup 25, 1967, 77-82. 

G620 :S. D. Joshi, “Patafijali’s Definition of a Word—a Reinterpretation,” 
Bpcrt 25, 1966, 65-70. Reprinted emo 27.3., 94-95. 

G621 :S, D. Laddu, A Possible Light on the Relative Age of Yaska and Pataii- 
jali,” spatoc 23.1, 1966, 156. 

G622_ : Adhyayas 1-3 edited, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa, Nagesa’s Uddyota and Vaidya- 
natha’s Chaya. 3 volumes. Delhi, 1967. 

See d220. 

G623 : E. de Guzman Orara, “An Account of Ancient Grammatical Studies down 
to Patafijali’s Mahabhasya: Two Traditions,” Asian Studies (Quezon City, 
Philippines) 5, 1967, 369-376. 

G624 :Satya Vrat, ‘Conception of Time in the Mahabhasya,” mo 1, 1967-1968, 
19-21, 88-91. 

See b485; 2513. 

G625 :2.1.1 edited and translated by S. D. Joshi. pcass-c 3. Poona, 1968. 

G626 :Baij Nath Puri, India in the Time of Patafijalt. Bombay, 1968. 

See a487. 

G627 :2.1.2-49 edited and translated, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa and Nageéa’s 
Uddyoia, by S. D. Joshi and J. A. F. Roodbergen. paass-c 5. Poona, 1969. 

G628 :G. B. Palsule, “Patafijali’s Interpretation of RV 10.71.2,” 14 3d series 3, 
1969, 27-29, 


464 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


G629 :Sudarshan Kumari Arora, “Patafijali as a Critic of K&tyayana and 
Panini.” Ph. D. diss., Delhi University, 1969. 

G630 :Y. Ojihara, “Les Discussions patafijaliennes afferntes au remaniement du 
Ganapatha,” ny 12, 1969~1970. 81-115. 

See 2515. 

G631 :jJ. A. F. Roodbergen, ‘Patajijali’s Vyakarana~-Mahabhasya-Bahuvrihi- 
dvandvahnika.’ Ph. D. diss., University of Poona, 1971. 

G632 : 2.1.51-72 edited and translated, with Kaiyata’s Pradipa, by 8. D. Joshi and 
Jj. A. F. Roodbergen. pcass-c 6. Poona, 1971. 

G633 : 2.2.2-23 edited, with Kaiyaja’s Pradipa, by S. D. Joshi and J.A.F. Rood- 
bergen. paass-c 7. Poona, 1973. 

See a327; b492. 

G634 :2,2.23-38 edited and translated by J.A.F. Roodbergen and S. D. Joshi. 
paass-c 9. Poona, 1974. 

G635 : V.P. Limaye, Critical Studies on the Mahabhadsya. Hoshiarpur, 1974, 

G636_ : Alekhacandra Sarangi, ‘Authorship of a Line from the Mahabhagya,”” BhV 
35, 1975, 13-17. 

G637 +: George Cardona, “Still Again on the History of the Mahabhasya,” anor 
58-59, 1977-1978, 79-99. 

G638 :Y. Ojihara, “Sur une Formule patanjalienne: na ceddnim dcdryah sitrani 
krtva nivartayanti,’? ITaur 6, 1978, 219-234. 

G639 :1.2 edited, with Madhava Sastri Bhandari’s Sphofavimarsini, by Veda 
Prakasa Vidyavacaspati. New Delhi, £979. 

G640 :S. D. Laddu, “A Reconsideration of the History of the Mahabhasya” 
(summary), swsc 5. Delhi, 1981, pp. 46-47. 

SARVAVARMAN (ist century a.p.) 
(NCat 3. 306; Belvalkar, p. 69) 
Katantrasitras 

(Nat 3. 307, 9. 288) 

G641_: Edited, with Durgdsimha’s Vyiti, by Mavatdiiata Tarkapancanana. Cal- 
cutta, 1870. 

G642 :Edited, with Durgasimha’s Vriti, by Julius Eggeling. pr 81. Calcutta, 
1874-1878. 

G643 ; Edited, with Trilocanadiasa’s Vrttipafijika, by Madhavacandra Tarkacuda- 
mani Bhattacarya. Calcutta, 1878. 

G644_ : Edited, with editor’s Pafjikajika, by Candrakanta Tarkalamkara. Barasol, 
1880. 

G645 :Edited, with Durgasimha’s Vriti, by Jivananda Vidyasagara. Calcutta, 
1884. 

G646_ ; Edited Calcutta, 1885. 

G647_ : Edited, with Sivarama Sarman’s Krimafijari, by Gandrakanta Nyayalam- 
kara. Dacca, 1886. 

G648 : Otto Bohtlingk, “Ober die Grammatik Katantra,” zpme 41, 1886, 657~ 
666. 

G649_ : Edited with Sripatidatta’s Parisista. Dacca, 1886; Calcutta, 1910. 

G650 : Edited, with Bhavasena Traividyadeva’s Rifamala, by Lallurama Jiva- 
rama Sastrin. Bombay, 1895. 

G651_: Edited, with Candrakanta Tarkalamkara’s Chandahprakriya, by Gurunatha 
Vidyanidhi Bhattacarya. Calcutta, 1896. 

G652_ : Edited, with editor’s Tika, by Mahendranatha Bhattacarya. Dacca, 1900. 

G653 : Edited, with Durgasimha’s Vitti, Sripatidatta’s Parisista, Vidy4sagara’s 
Akhyatatika, Trilocanadasa’s Pafjika, Ramakisora Sarman’s Asfamangala, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 465 


Bilvegvara’s Kalapacandra, Raghunandana Acarya’s Tativamava, and Hari- 
rama Bhattacarya’s Séra, by Gurunatha Vidyanidhi Bhattacarya. Cal- 
cutta, 1905. 
G654 : Dhdtupatha edited with Raman&tha’s Manorama. Calcutta, 1905. 
G655_ : Dhdtupatha edited with Srinatha Siromani’s Manordma. Calcutta, 1905. 
G656 : Edited, with Durgasimha’s Vriti, Trilocanadasa’s Pafjikd, Pitambara 
Vidyabhisana’s Dhdtusiitriya, Susena Kaviraja Mifra’s Kalapacandra, 
Pundarika Vidyasagara’s Pradipa, and Kulacandra’s Durgavakyaprabodha, 
by Gurunatha Vidyanidhi Bhattacarya. Calcutta, 1908, 1910. 
G657_: Edited, with Durgasimha’s Vrtti, Trilocanadasa’s Pafijikd, Bilvegvara’s Tika, 
and Kulacandra’s Prabodha, by Prasannakumara Bhattacarya. Calcutta, 
1910. 
G658__: Akhyata section edited, with Durgasimha’s Vriti, Trilocanadasa’s Paftjike, 
Bilvegvara’s Tika, and Sitanatha Sastrin’s Samjivani, by Sitanatha Siddhan- 
tavagisa Bhattacarya. Calcutta, 1910, 1912. 
G659___: Edited in L. Finot, ‘‘Fragmente du Katantra, provenant de Koutche.” 
tm 1911. 
G660_ : Edited and translated into German in Bruno Liebich, Zur Einfihrung in die 
indische einheimische Sprachwissenschaft: Das Katantra. sHAw 10. Heidelberg, 
1919. 
G661__: Edited by Narada Bhiksu. Calcutta, 1927. 
G662 :A. Venkatasubbiah, ‘‘On the Grammatical Work Si-T’An-Chang,” jor 
10, 1936, 11-26. 
G663_; Edited, with Samgramasimha’s Bélagiksa, by Maniraja Jinavijaya. RPG 3. 
Jodhpur, 1968. 
KUMARALABDHA or KUMARALATA (2d-3d century?) 
Commentary on the Kashmiri recension of the Katantra. 
G664__: Fragments edited in H. Liiders, Katentra und Kaumaralata, ssaw 25. Berlin 
1930, pp. 483-538. 
SANTANAVA ACARYA (350?) 
(Cardona, p. 22; Belvalkar, p. 22) 
PPhifstitras 
G665__: Edited and translated into German by F. Kielhorn. axm 4.2. Leipzig, 
1866. Reprinted 1966. 
G666 :A.N. Choudhari, ‘Notes on the Phitsiittra Santanava,” paroc 11. Hydera- 
bad, 1941. 
See e168. 
G667__: Edited and translated by Govind Vinayak Devasthali. pcass-c 1. Poona, 
1967. 
See a242. 
G668__: Edited, with Sudarganadeva’s Pradipa, by Vedananda Vedavagisa. Jhajjar, 
Haryana, 1969. 
See e365. 
SAUBHAVA (350?) 
(G1624, p. 165) 
HARYAKSA (350?) 
(G1624, p. 165) 
DHYANAKARA (pre-Bhartrhari) 
G669 :V.P. Limaye, ‘““Dhyanagraha-Kara or Dhyana-kara: A pre-Bhartrhari 
Grammarian,” vij 4, 1966, 228-229. 
G670 :K.A.Subramania Iyer, ‘Some Lost Works on Vydkarapa,” vrerv 1975, 
137-144, 


466 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


PUJYAPADA or DEVANANDIN (500?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 53) 
JFainendrayyakarana (there are two versions) 
G671 :F. Kielhorn, “On the Jainendra-Vyakarana,” 14 10, 1882, 75£f. 
G672 :K.B. Pathak, “Pijyapada and the Authorship of the Jainendra-Vyakarana,” 
1A 12, 1884, 19ff. 
G673 : Edited, with Abhayanandin’s Mahkdéoriti, by V. P. Dvivedin. Pan n.s. 31ff., 
1909-1922. 
G674_: Edited, with Gunanandin’s commentary. sys 5, 1914. 
G675 :K. B. Pathak, “The Text of the Jainendra-Vyakarana and the Priority of 
Candra to Pajyapada,” aporr 13, 1931-1932, 25-36. 
G676_ : Edited, with Abhayanandin’s Mahdortti. yemyo 17, 1956. 
BHARTRHARI (450? 530?) 
(G1624, p. 167) 
Vakpapadiya or Trikdndi, and Vytti thereon 
G677 :F. Kielhorn, “The Concluding Verses of the Second or Vakyakanda of 
Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya,”’ 14 3, 1874, 285-287. Reprinted in Rau, pp. 
156-157. 
G678 :G. Buhler, “Ober die Erlklarung des Woértes dgama in Vakyapadiya I1I.6,” 
zpMG 36, 1882, 653-654. 
G679 :F. Kielhorn, ‘‘On the Grammarian Bhartrhari,” 14 12, 1883, 226-227. Re- 
printed in Rau, pp. 185-186. 
G680_: Edited, with Helaraja’s Prakiruaprakasa on book 3 and Punyaraja’s Prakasa 
on books 1 and 2, by Ramakrishna Sastri Patavardhana, Gangadhara 
Sastri Manavalli, Ramachandra Sastri Kotbhaskara and Gosavami 
Damodara Sastri. BenSS 5, 6, 11, 19, 24, 95, 102, 103, 160, 161, 162, 163, 
164. Varanasi, 1884—1937. 
G681 : Ermenegildo La Tersa, “Su Bhartrhari,” cro 12. Rome, 1899. Volume 1, 
Section Inde et Iran, pp. 201~206. 
G682 :K.B. Pathak, “Bhartrhari and Kumiarila,” yasras 18, 1890-1894, 213-238. 
G683_ : Edited, with Dravyega Jha Sarma’s Pratyekarthaprakasika, by Sitaramacari 
Sastri. Vrndavana 1926-1927. 
G684 :K. G. Subrahmanyam, “A Note on the Vakyapadiya Tika,” yor 1, 1927, 
185-187. 
G685_ : Charudeva Shastri, ‘“Bhartrhari: A Critical Study with Special Reference 
to the Vakyapadiya and Its Commentaries,”’ patoc 5, 1930, 630-655. 
G686 :M. Ramakrishna Kavi, “The Discovery of the Author’s Vyt#i on the Vakya- 
padiya,” yarms 4, 1930, 235-241. 
G687_ : Brahmakanda edited, with the Vrtti and Vrsabhadeva’s commentary thereon, 
by Charudeva Sastri. Lahore, 1934. 
G688 : Third kaénda edited, with Helaraja’s Prakirpakaprakasa, by K. Sambasiva 
Sastri and L. A. Ravi Varma. tss 116, 148. Trivandrum, 1935, 1942. 
G689 :C. Kunhan Raja, “I-tsing and Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya,” skacv 1936, 
282-298. 
G690 :Brakmakanda edited, with Narain Datta Tripathi’s Prakasa, by Avadh 
Bihari Mishra. ops 1. Varanasi, 1937. 
G69! : Brakmakégda edited by S. Suryanarayana with editor’s commentary. Kss 
124, Varanasi, 1937, 1961. 
G692 : Book 2, part 2, section 1 edited, with the Vriti and Punyaraja’s Jika, by 
Charudeva Sastri. Lahore, 1939~1940. 
G693_ : K. A. Subramania Iyer, “Pratibha as the Meaning of a Sentence,” patoc 10, 
1941, 326-332, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 467 


G694 :N. Gopala Pillai, “The Conception of Time According to Bhartrhari,” Sri 
Citra (The Sanskrit College Magazine: Trivandrum) 2.2, 1942, 1-6. 

G695 :K. Madhava Krishna Sarma, “Gleanings from the Commentaries on the 
Vakyapadiya,” ABort 23, 1942, 405-412. 

G696 :K. Kunjunni Raja, “Yaska’s Definition of the Verb and the Noun in the 
Light of Bhartrhari’s Explanations’? (summary), spatoc 18, 1953, 97. Full 
article at aor 13, 1957, 86-88. 

G697 : Hajime Nakamura, ‘Tibetan Citations of Bhartrhari’s Verses and the 
Problem of His Date,” sissy, pp. 122-136. 

G698 :V. A. Ramaswami Sastri, ‘“Bhartrhari’s Interpretation of ‘graham 
sammiéarsti’ and ‘paguna yajeta,’”’ Jor 25, 1955-1956, 74-78. Also paroc 18, 
1958, 185-188. 

G699_ : Gaurinath Sastri “Absolute Consciousness as Bhartrhari Views It,” sparoc 
19, 1955, 144-145. 

G700 :C. T. Kenghe “Bhartrhari’s Commentary on the Vakyapadiyakarikas: Its 
Nature and Extent,” sparoc 19, 1955, 47-48. 

G701  : Gaurinath Sastri, ‘““Philosophy of Bhartrhari,’? JASBe 22, 1956, 71-74. 

G702 :Sadhu Ram, “Authorship of Some sdrikas and Fragments Ascribed to 
Bhartrhari,” soyr1 13, 1956, 51-80. 

G703 :Satya Vrat, “Conception of Space (dik) in the Vakyapadiya,” JASBe 23, 
1957, 21-26. Revised version in Eor pp. 205-215. 

» “The Conception of Time According to Bhartrhari,” asorr 39, 
1958, 68-78. Revised zo1, pp. 165-190. 

G705 :C. Ramachari, “Renunciation, the Final Import of the Satakatraya of 
Bhartrhari,” JMysoreU 18, 1958-1959, 13-20. 

G706_ : Gaurinath Sastri, The Philosophy of Word and Meaning. Calcutta, 1959. 

G707 : Wilhelm Rau, “(ber sechs Handschriften des Vakyapadiya,” Oriens 15, 
1962, 374-398. 

G708 :E. R. Sreekrishna Sarma, “Some Aspects of Bhartrhari’s Philosophy,” 
svuoj 5, 1962, 37~42. 

G709_ : Book 3, part 1 edited, with Helaraja’s commentary, by K. A. Subramania 
Iyer. poms 21. Poona, 1963. 

G710 : Brahmakanda edited, with Vriti and editor’s commentary, by K. A. Subra- 
mania Iyer. Varanasi, 1963. 

G711_ : Edited, with editor’s Ambakartri, by Raghunatha Sarma. 3 volumes. sBGM 
91. Varanasi, 1963, 1968, 1974. 

G712 :E. R. Sreekrishna Sarma, “The Philosophy of Sanskrit Gender,” spatoc 
22, 1963, 127. 

G713  : Hemanta Kumar Ganguli, Philosophy of Logical Construction. Calcutta, 1963. 

G714_ ; Santi Bhiksu Sastri, “Agamasamuccaya Alias Vakyapadiya-brahmakanda 
of Bhartrhari, translated and annotated,” wzxm 12.1, 1963, 191-228. 

G715 :K. Kunjunni Raja, “Bhartrhari’s List of Sentence-definitions,” ats 28, 
1964, 206-210. Summarized in sparoc 21, 1959, 197-198. 

G716 : Wilhelm Rau, ‘‘Handschriften des Vakyapadiya. Zweiter Teil,” Oriens 17, 
1964, 182-198. 

G717_ : Kapil Deva Shastri, “‘Bhartrhari’s Discussion on séménddhikaranya,”’ ALB 28, 
1964, 41-54. 

» “Bhartrhari’s Discussion on the Relation Between the upamdna and 
the upameyain His Vakyapadiya.”’ 11.25, 1964, 229-233. Also vij 2, 1964,87~-92. 

G719 :K. A. Subramania Iyer, “Bhartrhari on uyékarana as a Means of Attaining 
moksa,” As 28, 1964, 112-131. Summary in qripg 26, summaries 1964, 
129, 


G704 





G718 





468 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 





G720 : Madeleine Biardeau, Théorie de la conaissance et philosophie de la parole dans le 
brahmanisme classique. Paris, La Haye, 1964. 

G721  : Brahmakagda translated, with the Vytti, by K. A, Subramania Iyer. pascsys 
26. Poona, 1965. ‘ 

G722_ : Brahmakanda edited and translated into French, with the Viti, by Madeleine 
Biardeau. Paris, 1965. 

G723 : Kapil Deva, “Upamana, upameya and sdmdnyavacana According to the 
Vakyapadiya of Bhartrhari,” viy 3, 1965, 19-28. 

G724 :V. Anjaneya Sarman, “The sabdabrahman and the prasthanatrayt,” svuoy 8, 
1965, 31-36. 

G725 ; Edited and translated into Marathi by Vamana Balakrishna Bhagavat. 
aspm. Poona, 1965. 

G726 : Edited by K. V. Abhyankar and V. P. Limaye. upsps 2. Poona, 1965, 

G727 : Edited, with V7tti and Vrsabhadeva’s Paddkati, by K. A. Subramania Iyer. 
poms 32. Poona, 1966. 

G728 :K. A. Subramania Iyer, ‘“Bhartrhar:1 on dhvani,” aBorr 46, 1966, 49-65. 

G729 :Hemanta Kumar Ganguly, ‘‘Metaphysics of Meaning,” Anviksa 2.1, 1967, 
38-48; 2.2., 1967, 13-24; 3.1, 1968, 61-72; 3.2, 1969, 71-84. 

G730 : Gaurinath Sastri, ‘‘“Monism of Bhartrhari,” wzxsoa 12-13, 1968-1969, 
319-323. 

G731 :Ashok Aklujkar, “Two Textual Studies of Bhartrhari,” saos 89, 1969, 
547-562. 

See 2487 

G732 :K. A. Subramania Iyer, “Bhartrhari on the Primary and Secondary 
Meanings of Words,” 11 29.1, 1968, 97-112. 

See a487. 

G733 : Ashok Aklujkar, ‘Two Textual Studies of Bhartrhari,” yaos 89, 1969, 
547-562. 

G734 :K. A. Subramania Iyer, Bhartrhari: A Study of the Vakyapadiya. pcsosys 68. 
Poona, 1969. 

G735 : Ashok Aklujkar, ‘““The Philosophy of Bhartrhari’s Trikandi.”” Ph. D. diss., 
Harvard University, 1970. 

G736 : » “Ancient Indian Semantics,” apors 51, 1970, 11-29. 

G737 : Brakmakanda edited by Satyakama Varma. New Delhi, 1970. 

G738 : Kalasamuddesa section of book 3, translated, with Helaraja’s commentary, 
by Peri Sarveswara Sharma. Delhi, 1970. 

G739 : Books! and 2 edited and translated by K. Raghavan Pillai. Delhi, 1971. 

G740 : Wilhelm Rau, Die handschriftliche Oberlieferung des Vakyapadiya und seiner 
Kommeniare. aMGG 1971. 1. Munich, 1971. 

G741_ : Ashok Aklujkar, ‘“The Number of kdrikas in Trikandi, Bk. I,” yaos 9, 1971, 
510-513. 

G742 : Book 3, part 1 translated by K. A. Subramania Iyer. pcsasjs 71. Poona, 
1971. 

G743 : Ashok Aklujkar, “‘The Authorship of the Vakyapadiya-Vrtti,” wzxsoa 16, 
1972, 181-198. 

G744_:M.S. Bhat, “Two Passages from the Vakyapadiya,’’ JuB 42, 1973, 45-58. 

G745 : Hajime Nakamura, “Buddhist Influence upon the Vakyapadiya,” Joyr1 29, 
1973, 367-388. 

G746_ : Mithilesh Chaturvedi, ““Notes on a £arika Ascribed to Bhartrhari,” Joyr1 29, 
1973, 203-210. : 

G747 : Book 3, part 2 edited, with Helaraja’s Prakirnaprakasa, by K. A. Subramania 


Tyer. Poona, 1973, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 469 


See 327. 

G748 : Peri Sarveswar Sharma, ‘‘What Is the atyadbhuiavrtti (Miraculous Course 
of Action) in the Vakyapadiya?’’ v1y 12, 1974, 351-360. 

G748A; Book 3, part 2 translated, with Helaraja’s Prakirgaprakasa, by K. A. Subra- 
mania Iyer. Delhi, 1974. 

G749 : Albrecht Wezler, “Ein bisher missverstandener Vers in der Vakyapadiyavyt- 
ti,”? Mss 32, 1974, 159-164. 

G750_ : Ashok Aklujkar, “The Authorship of the Vakya-kanda-tika,” cpsrv 165-188. 

G751 :K. A. Subramania Iyer, “Bhartrhari on taddhita Formations Involving 
Comparison,” cpsrv, 241-257. 

G752_ : Virendra Shastri, “Critical Study of Sambandha Samuddesa of Vakyapadiya 
in the Light of Helaraja’s Commentary.” Ph. D. diss., Kurukshetra Uni- 
versity, 1975. 

G753 : Virendra Sharma, “Is the Eternal Verbum of Bhartrhari a Dynamic 
Principle?” vj 13, 1975, 337-350. 

G754 :; Selections translated in urr, pp. 224-237. 

G755 : Satyakam Varma, “Sabdapirva yoga,” svst 1976, 238-247. 

G756 : » “Linguistic Contents in Vakyapadiya,” svst 1976, 224-237, 

G757_ : Harold G. Coward, ‘“Language as Revelation,”’ IndPQ 3, 1976, 447-472. 

G758 : Book 2 translated by K. A. Subramania Iyer. Delhi, 1977. 

G759_; Edited, with word index, by Wilhelm Rau. ax 42.4, 1977. 

G760 : Wilhelm Rau, “Zwei neue Vakyapadiya-Handschriften,” su 3, 1977, 114- 
123. 

G761 : , “Metrical Peculiarities in Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya,”’ aBori 58-59, 
1977-1978, 263-269. 

G762_ : Ashok Aklujkar, ‘‘The Concluding Verses of Bhartrhari’s Vakya-Kagda,” 
ABORI 58-59, 1977-1978, 9-26. 

G763 :S. D. Joshi, ‘“Bhartrhari’s Concept of pratibha: A Theory on the Nature of 
Language Acquisition,” vercv 1977, 71-76. 

G764_ : Ashok Aklujkar, ““The Number of Verses in Trikdudi, Bk. TI,’ ars 42, 1978, 
142~167. 

G765 : , *Emendation of Some Verses in Bhartrhari’s Trikdgdi”, wzKsoa 
23, 1979, 63-74. 

G766 : Mithilesh Chaturvedi, “Upamdsamuddesa—a Part of Vrttisamuddesa of 
Vakyapadiya,” yor 31, 1980-1981, 195-197. 

G767_ :K. A. Subramania Iyer, “Bhartrhari on Grammatical Analysis (apod- 
dhara),”’ v1j 18, 1980, 69-79. 

G768 ;K. A. Subramania Iyer, “Bhartrhari on the Sentence,” ats 44-45, 1980- 
1981, 15-49. 

G769 : Ashok Aklujkar, “Interpreting Vakyapadiya 2.486 Historically (Part I),” 
ALB 44—45, 1980-1981, 581-601. 

G770_ :; M. Srimannarayana Murty, “Bhartrhari on svam ripam sabdasyasabdasam- 
jita,” ALB 44-45, 1980-1981, 602-613. 

G771 :P. Sriramamurti, “Grammarians and Literary Critics on pratibha in 
Sanskrit,’’ paroc 29, 1980, 301-305. 

G772 : M. Srimannarayana Murti, ‘Time According to Puartrhari,” vy 19, 1981, 
140-146. 

G775 :Hans G. Herzberger and Radhika Herzberger, “Bhartrhari’s Paradox,” 
Jw 9, 1981, 1-18. 

G774 : Ashok Aklujkar, “Interpreting Vékyapadiya 2.486 Historically (Part 2),” 
in Indological and Buddhist Studies: Festschrift F. W. de Fong. Canberra, 1982, 
pp. 1-10. 











470 


ENGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


G775 : Alex Wayman, “The Citations of Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiyain the Tattvasam- 


G776 


G777 


graha of Santaraksita and Kamalagila” (summary), swsa 5. Delhi, 1981, 
185-186. 

: Giovanni Bandini, ‘Die Erérterung der Person. Bhartrhari’s Purusasamu. 
ddefa und Helarajas Prakasa zum ersten Male tibersetzt mit einem Kommen- 
tar versehen”’ zpme 132, 1982, 150-173. 

: Harold Coward, ‘“‘Time (Kala) in Bhartrhari’s Vakpapadiya,” yre 10, 
1982, 277-288. 


Dipika on Patafijali’s Mahabhagya 


G778 
G779 
G780 
G781 


G782 
G783 


: Mysore Hiriyanna, ‘The First Commentary on the Mahdbhagya,” wag 2, 
1926, 415-416, 

: V. Swaminathan, “Bhartrhari’s Authorship of the Commentary on the 
Mahabhésya,” ALB 27, 1963, 59-70. 

: Ahnikas 1-4 edited by V. Swaminathan. rvnrss 11. Varanasi, 1965. 

: Ahnikas 1-7 edited by K. V. Abhyankar and V. P. Limaye. 2 volumes, 
Supplements to asori 43-47, 50. Boris 8. Poona, 1967, 1969. Reprinted 
Poona, 1970. 

: Ashok Aklujkar, “ Mahabhésya-Dipika or Tripadi,” ate 35, 1971, 159-171. 

2M. S. Narayanamurti, “Bhartrhari on ‘visesandndmcajateh’ of Panini,” 
svuoj 15, 1972, 49-62. 


Sabdadhdtusamiksa 


G784 
General 
G785 
G786 
G787 
G788 
G789 
G790 


G791 
G792 


G793 
G794 
G795 


G796 
G797 


G798 
G799 


G800 


:K. Madhava Sarma, ‘‘Sabdadhdtusamiksé: A Lost Work of Bhartrhari,” 
asvor 1.3, 1940, 65-70. 


: F. Kielhorn, “Oa the Grammarian Bhartrhari,” 14 12, 1884, 2264. 

: K.B. Pathak, “‘Bhartrhari and Kumarila,” jspras 18, 1890-1894, 213-238, 

: , ‘*Was Bhartrhari a Buddhist?”’ Japras 18, 1890-1894, 341-349. 

: Ermenegildo La Terza, ‘“‘Su Bhartrhari,’’ cmo 12. Rome, 1899. Volume 1, 
Section Inde at Iran, pp. 201-206. 

:V. A. Ramaswami Sastri, “Bhartrhari a Bauddha?” jau 6, 1936-1937, 
65-69. Also Patoc 7, 1937, 254-257. 

: , “Bhartphari, a pre-Samkara Advaitin,” sau 8, 1938, 42—53. Also 
paroc 9, 1937, 548-562. 

: O. P. Rangaswami, “Bhartrhari and Bhagavrtti,” yor 11, 1937, 45-50. 

: K. Madhava Krishna Sharma, “Bhartrhari: A Great post-Upanishadic 
Intuitionist,” ap 11, 1940, 538-539. 

5 “Bhartrhari Not a Buddhist: Evidence from Nearer Home,” Po 5, 
1940, 1-5. 

: Jambuvijaya Muni, “On the Date of Bhartrhari, the Author of the 
Vakyapadiya,” spaioc 14, 1948, 50-51. 

: H. R. Rangaswami Iyengar, “‘Bhartrhari and Dinnaga,” jppras 26, 1951, 
147-149, 

: Sadhu Ram, “Bhartrhari’s Date,” jayri 9, 1952, 135-152. 

: V. A, Ramaswami Sastri, ‘““Bhartrhari as a Mimamsaka,” ppcri 14, 1952, 
1-16. 

3 J. M. Shukla, “The Concept of Time According to Bhartrhari,” sparoa 17, 
1953, 379-384. 

: Satya Vrat Shastri, “‘Bhartrhari’s Conception of Time,” spaioc 17, 1953, 
244. aBorti 39, 1958, 68-78. Revised version in Zot, pp. 165-190. 

: Jean Filliozat, “A Propos de la Religion der Bhartrhari,” in Silver Jubilee 
Volume of the Zinbun-Kagaku-Kenkyusyo, Kyoto University. Kyoto, 1954, pp. 
116-120. 











BIBLIOGRAPHY 471 


G801 
G802 
G803 
G804 
G805 
G806 
G807 
G808 
G809 
G810 
Geil 
G812 


G813 
G814 


G815 
G816 
G817 
G818 


G8i9 


: P. S. Rao, “Bhartrhari,” ps 62, 1957, 347-352. 

: V. Swaminathan, “Bhartrhari and Mim4ms4,” Paroc 20, 1961, 309-317. 

: Hajime Nakamura, “‘Bhartrhari the Scholar,” ny 4, 1960, 282-305. 

: K. A. Subramania Iyer, ‘“‘Bhartrhari on apabhram$a,’’ wzKM 2, 1964, 242- 
246. 

: Kapil Dev, “Bhartrhari on samanddhikarana taddhitavytti,” spatoc 23.1, 1966, 
62-65. 

: Ashok Aklujkar, “(Nakamura on Bhartrhari,” uy 13, 1971, 161-175. 

: Hajime Nakamura, “Bhartrhari and Buddhism,” joyr1 22, 1972, 395-406. 

: John Brough, “I-Ching on the Sanskrit Grammarians,” Bsoas 36, 1973, 
248-260. 

: Karunesha Shukla, ‘‘Bhartrhari and Advaitism,” spatoc 27, 1974, 319. 

: Mithilesh Chaturvedi, ‘“‘Bhartrhari on the Number of Words to be com- 
pounded Simultaneously,” josup 3, 1974, 31-38. Also yayr1 35.1-2, 1979, 
115-130. 

7 . “Kakaialiya—a Grammatical Analysis by Bhartrhari,’”’ svuoy 17, 
1974, 93-100. 

: » “On Some Formations Involving /uk-elision,” viy 13, 1975, 42-49. 
Also joyri 33.4, 1977, 19-30. 

: Harold G. Coward, Bhartrhari. Boston, 1976. 

: Mithilesh Chaturvedi, ‘‘Yugepadadhikarapavacana in dvandva—a Critical 
Appraisal,” viy 14, 1976, 82-92. 

: » “The Negative Compound in Sanskrit—a Semantic Analysis by 
Bhartrhari,” ats 40, 1976, 1-40. 

: Satyakam Varma, ‘“‘Tradition and Bhartrhari,” svsr 1976, 185-200. 

: , “Bhartrhari: Works and Achievements,” svst 1976, 201-223. 

: Johannes Bronkhorst, “On Some Vedic Quotations in Bhartrhari’s Works,” 
sm 7, 1981, 173-175. 

: Whilhelm Rau, “‘Bhartrhari und der Veda,” su 7, 1981, 167-180. 














DURVINITA or AVINITA (Western Ganga king of 6th century) 
(NCat 1.427) 
Sabdavatara (lost) 
(cf. yRAS 1883, 298; 1911, 187; 1913, 389) 
CANDRA (GOMIN) (470) 
(Belvatkar, pp. 29, 48; G1624, p. 165; NCat 6.349) 
Candravyakarana or Candrasitrapi and Vrtti (incl. Upadi and LinganuSasana) 


G820 
G821 


G822 
G823 
G824 
G825 
G826 


G827 
G828 


: Sutras edited, with Kasyapa’s Balavabodhana, by William Goonetilleke, The 
Orientalist 1 (1884) 2 (1885). Incomplete. 

: F. Kielhorn, “The Chandra-uyaékarana and the K4asika-vziti,” 1a 15, 1886, 
183-185. Reprinted in Rau, pp. 244-246. 

: Bruno Liebich, Das Candravyékarana. Gottingen, 1895. 

: » Lhe Chandra-Vydkarana,”’ ta 25, 1896, 103£f. 

: » “Das Datum des Candragomin,” wzkm 13, 1899, 308-315. 

: Edited by Bruno Liebich. axm 11.4. Leipzig, 1902. 

: Sylvain Lévi, ‘Notes chinoises sur I’Inde: III. La Date de Candragomin,” 
BEFEO 3, 1903, 38-53. 

: Edited with Vrtti by Bruno Liebich. axm 14, Leipzig, 1918. 

: Bruno Liebich, Zur Einfiihrung in die indische einheimische Sprachwissenschaft, 
volume 4. Analyse der Candra-Vrtti. saaw 13. Heidelberg, 1920. 








See b67. 


G829 
G830 


:S. K. De, “Candragomin,” mig 14, 1938, 256-260. 
: Edited by K. C. Chatterji. 2 volumes. sist 13. Poona, 1953-1961. 


472 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


G831_ : Louis Renou, “Remarkable Words in the Candra-Vyakarana,” Vak 3, 1953, 
84-101. 
G832_ : Edited by Bechardas Joshi. ree 39. Jodhpur, 1967. 
G833_ : Robert Birwe, ‘‘Ist Candragomin der Verfasser der Gandra-Vrtti?”’ Pict 28, 
1968, 127-142. 
G834 :M. Hahn, “Der Autor Candragomin und sein Werk,” zpmc Supplement 2, 
1974, 331-355. 
G835_: » ‘Strophen des Candragomin in der indischen Sprachliteratur,” 
uy 19, 1977, 21-30. 
G836 :Madhav Deshpande, “‘Candragomin’s Syntactic Rules,” m 40, 1979, 
133-145. 
G837_ : Anna Radicchi, “On Candravyakarana’’ (summary). swse 5. Delhi, 1981, 
pp. 72-73. 
G838 : Prafulla Chandra Dash, “Chandra and the ‘asamjfiakam vwyakarana,’” 
pnsrv, Ghaziabad 1982, pp. 43-52. 
BHIMASENA (550) 
G839 :P. K. Gode, “Date of the Grammarian Bhimasena—Before A. D. 600” 
nia 2, 1939, 108-110. 
DHARMAPALA (625) 
Viti on book 3 of Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya (lost) 
HARSAVARDHANA (630?) 
(Belvalkar, pp. 44; vm 2.263) 
Commentary on Panini’s (?) Lingdnusasana 
G840 :Edited, with Sabarasvamin’s commentary and the Lirigdnusdsanas of 
Sakatayana and Vararuci and Yaksavarman’s commentary on Sakatayana, 
by R. Otto Franke. Kiel, 1890. 
G841 :Edited, with Prthivigvara’s Sarvalaksaza, by V. Venkatarama Sharma 
Vidyabbusana. muss 4, Madras, 1931. 
VIMALAMATI (648) 
(Gardona, p. 284) 
Bhagavztti on Patadijali’s Mahabhagya (lost) 
G842 :Kshitish Chandra Chatterji, “The Bhagavrtti,” nig 7, 1931, 413-418. 
See a791. 
G848 :S. P, Bhattacharya, “The Bhagavrtti and Its Author,” patoc 12, 1947, 
273-287. 
G844 : Citations collected by Yudhisthira Mimamsaka. 3 parts. The first appeared 
in the Panjab University Oriental Magazine. Part 2, in ss 8.1, 1953-1954, 
1~16; 8.2, 1953-1954, 83-106. Part 3, in Ajmer, 1964-1965. 
(HARI) VRSABHADEVA (650) 
Paddhati on Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya 
See e683; e727. 
KSAPANAKA of Kashmir (7th century?) 
(NCat 5.146) 
Commentary on Upédisitras (lost?) 
(NCat 2.295) 
JAYADITYA and VAMANA (ACARYA) (650?) 
(NCat 4.116; Cardona, p. 278; G1624, p. 172; Belvalkar, p. 29; vm 1.423, 462) 
Kastka (ortti) on Panini’s Astadhyayt 
See e31. 
G845 : F. Max Muller, “The Xaska,” 14 9, 1880, 305-308. 
See 2542; a821; ¢40; et41. 
G846_: Edited, with editor’s Tippagi, by Bhagavatprasada Sarman. Varanasi, 1890. 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 473 


G847 : 2.1~2 translated into German by Bruno Liebich. Breslau, 1892. 
G848 :F. Kielhorn, “‘Pauska Samvatsara in the Kasiké Vrtti on P. 4.2.21,” 1a 22, 
1893, 83ff. 
G849 : Edited, with Haradatta’s Padamafjari, by Bharadvaja Damodara Sastri. 
Varanasi, 1895. 
See e49; 150A. 
G850_ : Surendra Nath Mazumdar, “A Note on Kasha,” yaspe 8, 1912, 57. 
G81: Edited, with Jinendrabuddhi’s Nyasa, by 8. C. Chakravarti in Gaudagran- 
thamala. 3 volumes. Rajshahi, 1913, 1919-1924, 1925. 
G852 :Malati Sen, ‘‘The Kasikd and the Kéavydlapkarasatravrtti,” coy 1, 1934, 
229-240. 
See a586. 
G853_ : Edited by Sobhita Misra. 2 parts. xss 37, Varanasi, 1952. 
See a596. 
G854 :1.1 translated into French by Y. Ojihara and L. Renou. 3 volumes. PEFo 
48. Paris, 1960-1967. 
G855 : Yutaka Ojihara, «‘Causerie vyakaranique (III): Incoherence interne chez 
la Kasikd,” JIBSt 9, 1961, 749-753; 10, 1962, 766-776; 12, 1964, 847-855. 
G856 : Vinayak Wasudeo Paranjpe, “‘A discrepancy in Kasiké,” spatoc 22, 1963, 55. 
G857_ : Edited, with Jinendrabuddhi’s Nydsa and Haradatta’s Padamafijari, by 
Dwarikadas Shastri and Kalika Prasad Shukla. 4 volumes. Prachya Bharati 
Series 2. Varanasi, 1965. 
G858 :K.V. Abhyankar, ‘A Dissertation on a Doubtful Passage in the Kasikavrtti 
on P.1.1.4 and Two Passages in the Tatttiriya Aranyaka prapathaka 4,” ABORI 
47, 1967, 101-103. 
G859 : Y. Ojihara, “Read ‘parnam na veh’ : Kasika ad. P. 1.1.4: A Notice,” ABort 
48-49, 1968, 403-409. 
G860 :Ram Gopal, “Vedic Quotations in the Kasika and Siddhantakaumudi,” 
ABorRI 48-49, 1968, 227-230. 
G861_ : Edited by Aryendra Sharma, Handerao Deshpande, and D. G. Padhye. 2 
volumes. sas 17, 20. Hyderabad, 1969-1970. 
G862 : Edited with editor’s Hindi commentary by Narayana Misra. 2 volumes. 
kss 37. Varanasi, 1969-1972. 
G863 :M. D. Sharma, “The Késikdvrtti and Vaiyakarana Siddhantakaumudi: A 
Comparative Study.” Ph.D. diss., University of Poona. 1971. 
G864 : Mahesadatta Sharma, A Comparative Study of Kasikd Vrtti and Siddhania- 
kaumudt. Poona, 1974, 
G865_: Krishna Deo Jha, “A Critical Analysis of the Examples Used in the Kastka.”” 
Ph.D. diss., University of Bihar, 1976. 
G866 : Govinda Jha, ‘A Comparative Study of the Xasika and Siddhanta Kaumudi.” 
Ph.D. diss., University of Bihar, 1976. 
G867 :P. Visalakshy, ‘“‘The Influence of Candra and Katantra Grammars on 
Kasikdvrtti,” viy 19, 1981, 45-49. 
PLingdnusasana and commentary thereon (attributed to VAMANA) 
G868_ ; Edited by Chimanlal D. Dalal. aos 6. Baroda, 1918. 
G869_ : Edited by Vyakaranopadhyaya Vedavati. Ajmer, 1964-1965. 
MANDANA MISRA (690) 
Sphojasiddhi 
G870 :Edited, with Rsiputra Paramegvata’s Gopalika, by S. K. Ramanatha 
Sastri. muss 6. Madras, 1931. 
G871 : Edited and translated into French by Madeleine Biardeau. pri 13. 
Pondicherry, 1958. 


474 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


G872  : Edited and translated by K. A. Subramania Iyer. pcss 25, Poona, 1966. 
JEINENDRABUDDHI (725?) 
(Cardona, p. 281; G1624, p. 181; Belvalkar, p. 32) 
Nyasa or Pafijika or Vrtti on Jayaditya and Vamana’s Kasika 
(NCat 4.118) 
G873 : Pandurang Vaman Kane, ‘‘Bhamaha, the Nyasa and Magha,” jpBras 23, 
1909-1914, 91-95. 
G874 :K. B. Pathak, ““Bhamaha’s Attack on the Buddhist Grammarian Jinen- 
drabuddhi,” jasras 23, 1909-1914, 18-31. 
, “Dandin, Nydsakara and Bhamaha,” 14 41, 1912, 232~236. 





G875 
See e851. 
G876 :XK. B. Pathak, “‘The Nydsakara and the Jaina Sakatayana,” 1 43, 1914, 
205; 15, 1915, 275-279. 
G877 : , “Jinendrabuddhi, Kaiyata and Haradatta,” apori 12, 1931, 
246-251. 
See e831. 
G878  : Bhim Sen Shastri, A Study of Nyasa. Delhi, 1979. 
ABHAYANANDIN (750?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 55; NCat 1.278) 
Mahdavriti on Pijyapada’s JFainendravyakarapa 
(NCat 7.307) 
See e673; e676. 
(ABHINAVA) SAKATAYANA (850?) 
(Cardona, p. 149; Belvalkar, p. 57; NCat 1.307) 
Sabdanusasana and Amoghavrtti thereon 
G879_ : Georg Biihler, “‘Notiz tiber die Grammatik des Sakatayana,” ou 2, 1864, 
691-706. 
G880 :F. Kielhorn, “On the Grammar of Sakatayana,” 1a 16, 1887, 24~28. 
Reprinted in Rau, pp. 246-250. 
See e840. 
G881 : Edited, with Abhayacandra Siri’s Prakriyasamgraha, by Gustav Oppert. 
Madras, 1893. 
G882_ : F. Kielhorn, “Die Sakatayana-Grammatik,” necw 1894, 1-14. 
See a876. 
G883 :K. B. Pathak, ‘Jain Sakatayana Contemporary with Amoghavarsha I,” 
1A 43, 1914, 205ff. 
G884 : , “Sakatayana and the Authorship of the Amoghavrtti,” azorr 1, 
1918-1919, 7-12. 
G885_: Edited, with Yaksavarman’s commentary, by Ramasakala Mishra. Pan 34, 
1912-1942, 1920. 
G886 : Edited, with Yaksavarman’s Cintamagi, and translated by Vishnu S. 
Sukhthankar. Leipzig, 1921. 











See e882. 

G887 :K. B. Pathak, “On the Date of Sakatayana Cintamani,” yjepras n.s. 6, 
1930, 239-240. 

G888 , *On the Unadi Sutras of Jain Sakatayana,” asori 13, 1931-1932, 
154-156. 


G889_ : Sailendranath Sengupta, «‘Unadi Suffixes and Words Derived with Such 
Suffixes (a Concordance Based on the Works of Sakatayana, Bhoja and 
Hemacandra),” yasp 6, 1964, 123-206. 

G890_ : Edited with Amoghavrtti by Shambhu Nath Tripathi. ypmyo 39. Delhi, 1971. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 475 


G891 : J. M. Shukla, “Grammatical paribhdsa of the Jaina Grammarians,” jor 24, 
1974-1975, 128-138. 
JAYANTA BHATTA (870?) 
Vrtti on Panini’s Astadhyayi (lost) 
(NCat 7.180) 
GUNANANDIN (890) 
(ym 1.588) 
Commentary on Pijyapada’s Fainendravyakarana 
(NCat 7.307) 
See e650, e674. 
PORNAGANDRA (950) 
(NCat 9.290) 
Paftjiké on Candragomin’s Candravyakaraga 
(cf. Jars 22.1, 1936, 43) 
RABHASANANDIN or VALLABHACARYA (950?) 
(Sat) Karaka (vdda) or Karakasambandhoddyota 
(NCat 3.377) 
G892_ : Edited by H. P. Shastri. rec 6. Jodhpur. 
DURGA (SIMHA) or DURGADASA (950?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 73) 
Vytti on (Sarvavarman’s? ) Katantra 
(NCat 2.295; 3.224, 309; 9.76) 
See e641 ; e642; e645. 
G893 : Unddipatha edited Dacca, 1886. 
See e653; e656; 6657; e658. 
G894 : Upadipatha edited muss 7.6, 2. Madras, 1934. 
G895_: Litigadnusdsana edited by D. G. Koparkar. sta 10. Poona, 1952. 
G896_: Paribhasa section edited in Paribhasdsamgraha, pp. 49-66. 
HELARAJA (980?) 
Prakirgaprakdsa on book 3 of Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya 
See e679; e688; €709; t738; e747; t748A; d752. 
Sabdaprabha on book 1 of Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya (lost) 
(Adyar D, vol. 6, p. 208) 
See a670. 
Varttikonmesa on Katyayana’s Asfadhyayi-Varttikas (lost) 
(xm 1.328) 
See a670. 
Advayasiddhi (lost) 
See 2670. 
Kriyaviveka (lost) 
See a670. 
General 
G897 : K. Madhava Krishna Sarma, ‘Helaraja, Not a Disciple of Bhartrhari,” 
THQ 19, 1943, 79-82. 
G898_ : V. Swaminathan, ‘On the Date of Helaraja,” svuoy 10, 1967, 23-36. 
G899 :V. Raghavan, ‘‘The Dates of Helaraja and Kaiyata,” Riam 2-6, 1970~ 
1975, 105-110. 
AUTHOR UNKNOWN (1006?) 
Prameyasamgraha on book 2 of Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya 
G900  : Edited by Wilhelm Rau. Munich, 1981. 
TRILOCANADASA (1000?) 
Patjika on Durga’s Katantravztti 


476 ENCYGLOPEDIiA OF tNDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


See e643; e653; e656; e657; e658. 
UGRABHUTI (1000) 
(NCat 3.317) 
Sigyahitanyasa in five hundred verses in Arya metre; known in Tibet 
PUNYARAJA (1000?) 
Tika on book 2 of Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya 
See e679; e692; a750. 
DHARMAKIRTI (1000?) 
(Cardona, p. 285; G1624, pp. 186, 262; NCat 9.241) 
Ripdvatara on Panini’s Asfadhyayi 
(NCat 3.374) 
G901 : Edited by M. Rangacharya and M. B. Varadarajiengar. 2 volumes. 
Bangalore, 1916-1917, 1927. 
G902 :K. A. Nilakantha Sastri, “A Note on the Ripdvatara,’”’ Jor 8, 1934, 277~ 
280. 
Commentary on Vararuci’s Kérakacakra or Prayogamukha 
G903 : Edited by M. Rangacarya. Madras, 1927. 
ABHINAVAGUPTA (1014) 
Prakirgakavivarana on Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya (lost) 
BUDDHISAGARA SURI (1024) 
Paficagranthi or Sabdalaksana 
(NCat 11.12) 
G904 :N. M. Kansara, ‘The Linganusasana of Buddhisagarasiri,” joyri 35. 1-2, 
1979, 97-100. 
DAYAPALA (MUNI) (1025) 
Ripasiddhi (an abridgment of Sakatayana’s SabdanuSasana) 
(Belvalkar, p. 60; cos 134, 1961, 196; xm 1.603) 
KAIYATA (1030) 
(Belvalkar, p. 34; G1624, p. 181) 
Pradipa on Patafijali’s Mahkabhagya 
See e521; e522; e529; e530; 5443547; e550; et551; e552; a877; e575; e582; e587. 
G905 : V. Raghavan, ‘Chronological Notes: Kaiyata and Dhanaiijaya,” jor 19, 
1949, 223-224, 
See e590; e598; e611; e622. 
G906_ : Edited by M. P. Misra. Varanasi, 1967. 
See a899; e632. 
G907_ : Peri Sarveswara Sharma, “Kaiyata and His Works,” BhV 39, 1979, 5-13. 
PRABHACANDRA (ACARYA) (1040) 
(Belvalkar, p. 60; cos 134, 1961, 269) 
Nyasa on Sakatayana’s Amoghaustti 
YAKSAVARMAN (1050?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 60; xm 1.603) 
Cintamani on Sakatayana’s SabdanuSdsana 
See e840; e885; e886; ¢887, 
KSIRASVAMIN (1050?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 43; Gardona, p. 288; NCat 5.152) 
Ksirataratigigi on Panini’s Asfadhyayi-Dhatupatha . 
G908 : Edited, with Sarvavarman’s and Sakatayana’s Dhdtupathas, by Bruno 
Liebich. IndF 8/9. Breslau, 1930. 
G909_ : Edited by Yudhisthira Mimamsaka, BLKTs 25. Amritsar, 1957~1958. 
(Karmayoga) Amriatarangigi (lost) 
(NCat 1.347; 3.205) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 477 


Nipdtdoyayopasargavrtti 
G910_ : Edited svos 28. Tirupati, 1951. 
DURGASIMHA (1050?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 75; ym 1.564) 
Tika on Durga’. Katantrauytti 
(NCat 3.310) 
G9I11 : Edited Bhowanipore, 1881. 
KRAMADISVARA (1050?) 
Samksiptasara (revised by Jumaranandin) 
G912 : Edited with Rasavati and Goyicandra’s and Jumaranandin’s commentary. 
Calcutta, 1886, 1888, 1901, 1904, 1911. 
G913 : Edited with Nyayapaficanana’s Dipika. Calcutta, 1920. 
G914_ : Prakrta chapter edited by Satya Ranjan Benaraji. Ahmedabad, 1980. 
Unadiparifista 
(NCat 2.296) 
BHOJA (DEVA) or BHOJARAJA (1055) 
(G1624, p. 187) 


Sarasvatikanthabharana 
G915 :Edited by Anandaram Barua. Calcutta, London, 1883, 1884; Gauhati, 
1969. 


G916_ : Partly edited, Varanasi, 1888. 

G917  : Edited, with Ratnefvara’s commentary and editor’s commentary, by 
Jivananda Vidyasagara. Calcutta, 1894. 

G918 ; Edited, with Ramasimha’s commentary on chapters 1-3, Jagaddhara’s 
commentary on chapter 4, and Ratnesvara’s commentary on chapter 5, 
by Kedarnath Durgaprasad and V. L. S. Pansikar. in Kavyamala 94. 
Bombay, 1925. 

G919_ : Unadisitras edited muss 7.6, 1. Madras, 1934. 

See a889. 

G920  : Paribhasas edited in Paribhdsdsamgraha, pp. 105-107. 

G921_ : Edited, with Jagaddhara’s Tika, by Visvanatha Bhattacarya. Kasi, 1979. 

HARADATTA (1059) 
(Belvalkar, p. 32; Cardona, p. 281; G1624, p. 196; NCat 4.119) 
Padamafjari on Jayaditya/ Vamana’s Kasika 

G922 : Edited by Damodara Sastriin Pan 10 (1888)-21 (1899). 

G923 : Book 2, chapters 1-2 translated into German by Bruno Liebich. Breslau, 
1892. 

See 849. 

G924 :S.S. Suryanarayana Sastri, ““Haradatta Migra and Haradatta Sivacarya,” 
paroc 6, 1930, 607-612. 

See a877 ; €857. 

G925 :D.K. Kharwandikar, “Haradatta: A Critical Study.” Ph.D. diss., Uni- 
versity of Poona, 1973. 








G926 : , Mnemonic Verses in the Padamajijari of Haradattamiéra,” 
joyri 29, 1973, 285-294. 
G927 : , ‘Date of Haradatta: the Author of the Padamaiijari,” sparoc 27, 


1974, 234-235. 
JYESTHAKALASA (1060?) 
(xm 1.367) 
Tiké on Patafijali’s Mahabhasya (lost) 
INDU (MITRA) (1070?) 
(ym 1.479; NCat 1.203, 2.248) 


478 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Anunyésa on Jinendrabuddhi’s Paftjika 
G928 :Kshitish Chandra Chatterji, “The Authorship of the Anujydsa,” nag 7, 
1931, 418-419. 
G929 :K. Madhava Krishna Sarma, “Author of the Anunydsa,” Jor 15, 1941, 
25-27. 
G930 : V. Raghavan, “Indu, the author of the Anunydsa,” Jor 15, 194], 78. 
VARDHAMANA (1088) 
(Belvalkar, p. 74) 
Katantravistara 
(NCat 3.313) 
GOVARDHANA (1100?) 
(ym 2.204) 
Commentary on Panini’s Astadhyayt 
(NCat 6.182) 
DHANAPALA (1100?) 
G931 :Neelanjana S. Shah, ‘‘About a Forgotten Grammarian Dhanapala,” 
Sambodhi 4.3-4, 1975-1976, 63~78. 
NARAYANA DANDANATHA (1100) 
Aydayaharigi on Bhoja’s Sarasvatikanthabharana 
G932 :Robert Birwe, “Narayana Dandanatha’s Commentary on Rules III.2. 
106-121 of Bhoja’s Sarasvatikanthabharana,” jaos 84, 1964, 150-162. 
MAITREYA RAKSITA (1109) 
(G1624, pp. 206, 221; YM 1.398) 
Tika on Patajfijali’s Mahabhasya (lost) 
Tantrapradipa on Jinendrabuddhi’s Nyasa 
(NCat 9.291) 
Dhatupradipa 
G933 : Edited by Madhavacandra Tarkacudamani. Dacca, 1886. 
G934 : Edited by Srish Chandra Chakravarti. ssem 2. Rajshahi, 1919. 
Durghatavrttt 
General 
G935 : Kali Charan Shastri, ‘“Maitreya-raksita (a Bengali Grammarian of the 
Paninian System)”, BharKau 1947, 887-903. 
G936 , ‘‘Maitreyaraksita,”’ on 4, 1956, 89-98. 
TRIVIKRAMA (1118) 
Uddyota on. Trilocanadasa’s Katantravrttipanyjika 
(NCat 3.311) 
VIJAYANANDA or VIDYANANDA (1140) 
Katantrottara (siddhananda) 
(NCat 3.313, 5.130) 
G937_ : Edited in Rupamala 3. Bombay, 1871. 
VARDHAMANA (1140) 
(Cardona, p. 361; G1624, pp. 80, 191) 
Ganaratnamahodadhi and Vrtii thereon 
(NCat 5.257) 
G938 : Edited by Julius Eggeling. London, 1879-1881. Reprinted Delhi, 1963. 
G939_ : Edited Allahabad, 1894. 
HARIYOGIN SAILAVAGARYA, alias PROLANACARYA (1150?) 
~ (xm 2.98; NCat 9.291) 
Sabdikabharana or Dhatupratyayapafjika on Panini’s Astadhyayi-Dhatupatha 
(NCat 9.291) 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 479 


HEMACANDRA (1150) 

(Belvalkar, p. 60) 

Sabdanusasana and Brhadortti thereon, with (abridgment) Laghuurtti 

(NCat 9.289) 

G940_ : Lingdnusasana and Vyiti edited and translated by R. Otto Franke. Géttingen, 
1886. 

See e37. 

G941 :F. Kielhorn, ‘A Brief Account of Hemachandra’s Sanskrit Grammar,” 
WwzkM 2, 1888, 18-24. 

G942 : Unéddisiitras and Vrtti edited in J. Kirste, Sources of Sanskrit Lexicography. 
Vienna, Bombay, 1895, volume 2. 

G943_: LitgdnuSasana edited by Sivadatta and K. P. Parab. Bombay, 1896. 

G944 : Dhatupatha and Vytti edited by J. Kirste, Sources of Sanskrit Lexicography. 
Vienna, Bombay, 1901, volume 4. 

G945_ : LingdnuSdsana edited vya 2. Varanasi, 1905. 

G946_: Edited, with Laghuortti yyc 3. Varanasi, 1905. 

G947_ : Sutras only edited vjc 6. Varanasi, 1906. 

G948_: Satras only editedin alphabetical order. yjc 11. Varanasi, 1909. 

G949_ : Edited Varanasi, 1910. Index Varanasi, 1909. 

G950_ : Vinaya Vijaya Gani, Haimalaghuprakriya. Bombay, 1918, 1949. 

G951_: Edited with Brhadvrtti. First pada only. Ahmedabad, 1921. 

G952 : Edited with Meghavijaya Gani’s Candraprabha. Bombay, 1928. 

G953 : Edited by Chandra Sagara Suri. Ujjain, 1950. 

G954 : Krtpratyaya section edited by Vijayalvanyasuri. Botad, Saurashtra, 1963. 

G955__: Edited by Ratnalal Sanghvi. 2 volumes. Vyavar, Rajasthan, 1963. 

G956_ : Paribhasas edited in Paribhasasamgraha pp. 108-111. 

G957_ : Unadi and Gana sitras edited by Manohara Vijaya. Botad, Saurashtra, 1967, 

G958 :S. Sengupta, ‘“Hemacandra and Siddha Hema-Sabdanuéasana,” JainJ 2, 
1968, 200-206. 

G959 : Dhkdtupardyana edited by Muni Yasovijaya and Municandravijaya. Ahme- 
dabad, 1973. 

G960 :J. M. Shukla, ‘“‘Dhdtuparayanam—a Review Note,” Sambodhi 4.3~4, 1975~ 
1976, 40-43. 

General 

G961 : Hermann Jacobi,““Hemachandra,” ERE 6.684-686. 

G962__:G. Bthler,“‘Wber das Leben des Jaina Ménches Hemachandra, as Schiilers 
des Devachandra aus der Vajragakha,” Denkschriften der phil.-hist. Klasse 
der Kaiserliche Akademie der Wissenschaften, Vienna 37, 1889, 171-258. Transla- 
ted into English by Manilal Patel as The Life of Hemachandra. s3s 11. Bombay, 
1936. 

G963_ : Jagdish P. Sharma, “Hemacandra: The Life and Scholarship of a Jaina 
Monk,” AsP 3, 1975, 195-216. 

G964 :C.N. Basavaraju, “Hemcandra,” mo 11, 1978, 60-64. 

SARIPUTTA or SAGARAMATI of Polonnaruva (12th century) 
Commentary on Ratnamati’s 7iké on Candragomin’s Sitras 
(NCat 7.19) 
UTPALA (1170?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 64; cos 134, 1961, 80; NCat 2.316) 
?Linganusdsanavrtti 
(NCat 2.316) 
(MUNI) PRADYUMNA SURI (1170?) 


480 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Daurgasimhakatantravzttitika 
(NCat 9.76) 
SARANADEVA (1172) 
(Cardona, p. 282; G1624, p. 209) 
Durghatavrtti on Panini’s Asfadhydyt (revised by Sarvaraksita) 
G965_ : Edited by T. Ganapati Sastri. tss 6. Trivandrum, 1909. 
G966_: Edited and translated into French by Louis Renou. 3 volumes. Paris, 1940, 
1941, 1956. 
G967 : suis Renou, ‘Index of Remarkable Words and Forms in the Durghaja- 
ortti of Saranadeva,” Vak 1, 1951, 19-37. 
PURUSOTTAMADEVA (1175) 
(Cardona, p. 282; G1624, p. 209) 
Pranapana or Laghuvriti on Pataiijali’s Mahabhagya 
G968 : Dinesh Chandra Bhattacharya, ‘“‘Purusottamadeva’s Commentary on the 
Mahabhésya,” wig 19, 1943, 201-213. 
Bhasavrtti on Panini’s Astadhyayt 
G969 : Edited, with Srstidhardcarya’s Commentary, by Girisacandra Vedanta- 
tirtha. Br 209. Calcutta, 1912. 
G970_ : Edited by Srish Chandra Chakravarti. ssem 1. Rajshahi, 1918. 
G971_ : Paribhaésa@ section edited by D. C. Bhattacharya. Rajshahi, 1946. 
G972 : Louis Renou, “List of Remarkable Words (or Meanings) from Paribha- 
sendugekhara, Paribhasavrtti of Purusottamadeva, and Paribhasavriti of 
Siradeva,” Vak 2, 1952, 117-129. 


G973 : , “Words from the Bhdsdvrtti of Purusottamadeva,” Vak 3, 1953, 





1-36. 
G974_ : Paribhésa section edited in Paribhasdsamgraha, pp. 112-160. 
See e269. 
G975 :V.S. Joshi, “Some Words from the Bhésdortti of Purusottama Deva trans- 
lated by Prof. L. Renou,” vysec 1980, 91-94. 
FRapakasamuccayabhasya 
(NCat 7.350) 
UDAYACANDRA (1180) 
(Belvalkar, p. 66) 
Nyasa on Hemacandra’s Brhadortti 
(NCat 2.326) 
KUSALA (1200?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 74) 
Pradipa on Trilocanadasa’s Pafijika 
(NCat 3.311, 4.256) 
KASYAPA (1200) 
(a Candra writer) 
Balavabodha 
DEVA (1200?) 
(NCat 9.100, 169) 
Daiva (on Sanskrit roots) 
G976_ : Edited with Krsnalilagsukamuni’s Purusakdra, by T. Ganapati Sastri. rss 1. 
Trivandrum, 1905. 
G977 :Edited, with Krsnalilasuka’s Purusakdéra, by Yudhisthira Mimamsaka. 
Ajmer, 1962-1963. 
G978_: Satya Pal Narang, “A Critique of the Grammatical Work Daiva by Deva,” 
sPatoc 27, 1974, 228-229, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 481 


DEVENDRASORI (1210) 
(Belvalkar, p. 66) 
Laghunyasa on Hemacandra’s SabdanuSasana 
(NCat 9.160) 
GUNACANDRA (1210) 
(NCat 3.318) 
Tattvaprakasika on the Katantravibhrama (siltras) 
G979_ : Edited by Shravak Pandit Hargovinddas and Shravak Pandit Bechardas. 
yjo 34. Varanasi, 1913. 
KANAKAPRABHA (1240) 
Npdsasara on Hemacandra’s Sabdanusasana 
(NCat 3.142) 
AMARAGANDRA (1250) 
(Belvalkar, p. 67) 
Syadisamuccaya 
G980_: Edited, Varanasi, 1915. 
?Satkarakalaksana or Karakaniriipana 
(NCat 1.332, 3.375) 
BHAVASENA TRAIVIDYESA (1250) 
Katantraripamala 
See €650. 
Laghuvrtti on Katantrasitras 
(NCat 3.313-314) 
DHANESVARA (1250) 
Cintamani on Patafijali’s Mahabhasya 
Prakriyaratnamani 
(MS at Adyar) 
SIRADEVA (1250) 
(G1624, p. 226; NCat 11.223) 
Paribhasaortti 
G981 : Edited by Harinatha Dube. BenSS 8. Varanasi, 1885-1887. 
See a972, 
G982_ : Louis Renou, “Etudes paninéennes: La Liste des paribhasd chez Siradeva,” 
Pic 2, 1956, 132-136. 
G983 : Kali Charan Shastri, ‘‘Siradeva,” ou 5, 1957, 103-117. 
G984_ : Edited in Paribhasasamgraha, pp. 161-272. 
SOMADEVA (1250) 
(Belvalkar, p. 55; NCat 8.307) 
Sabdarnavacandrika on Pijyapada’s Jainendrayyékarana 
G985_ : Edited Pan n.s. 31-34, 1908-1911. 
VANGASENA (1250) 
(NGat 2.10) 
Akhyatanyakarana or Dhaturapa 
ANUBHUTI SVARUPACARYA (1270) 
(Belvalkar, p. 80; NGat 1.208) 
Sarasvataprakriya 
G986_: Edited Varanasi, 1852. 
G987 : Edited in MS form by Bapu Hara Set Devalekara. Bombay, 1861. 
G988 : Edited, with R&amacandragrama’s Siddhantacandrikad and Sadananda’s 
Subodhint. Varanasi, 1864, 1885; Lahore, 1869; Bombay, 1881, 1885, 1888. 
G989 : Edited, with Vasudeva Bhatta’s Sérasvatapraséda. Meerut, 1867, 1874, 
1876; Calcutta, 1882. 


482 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


G990_ _: Edited Amritsar, 1867. 

G991_ : Edited with Vasudeva Bhatta’s Sérasvataprasada by Jivananda Vidyasagara. 
Calcutta, 1874. 

G992 :Edited with Ramacandrasrama’s Siddhantacandrikaé. Lucknow, 1875; 
Bombay, 1884, 1888, 1914. 

G993_ : Edited Calcutta, 1882. 

G994 : Edited Patna, 1882. 

G995 : Edited Bombay, 1883, 1885, 1886, 1887, 1888, 1889, 1890, 1891, 1898. 

G996 : Edited with Madhava Bhatta’s Siddhdntaratndvali and editor’s Madhavi, by 
Madhava. Varanasi, 1887, 1911. 

G997 : Edited with editor’s Tippani by Govinda Parasurama Bhatta. Bombay, 
1888. 

G998 : Edited with Lokegvara Sarman Sukla’s Siddhantaratndvalt. Lucknow, 1890, 
1894. 

G999_: Edited with Candrakirti’s Subodhika. Bombay, 1890. 

G1000 : Edited by Sagaracandra Kaviratna. Calcutta, 1905-1915. 

G1001 : Edited, with Candrakirti’s Subodhiké, by Vasudev Laxman Shastri Pansikar. 
Bombay, 1907. 

G1002 : Partly edited, with editor’s Tippart, by Visnuprasada Sarman. Varanasi, 
1910, 1920. 

G1003 : Edited by Sulavatanka Kalyana Sunvambasamkara Sastri. Bombay, 1914. 

G1004 : Edited, with Ramanarayana Sarman’s Bhdsya, by Vipinacandra Vidya- 
nidhi. Calcutta, 1915. 

G1005 : Edited Varanasi, 1925, 1928. 

G1006 : Edited by Narahari Shastri Pendse. uss 4. Varanasi, 1927. 

G1007 :R. O. Meisezahl, “Uber jfim in der Tibetischen Version der Regel m 
chandasi der Sarasvata- Grammatik,” ny 9, 1965, 139-146. 

MAHADEVA. (1270) 
(Belvalkar, p. 74) (a Katantra author) 
Sabdasiddhi 
(NCat 3.312) 
VOPADEVA GOSV AMIN (1275) 
(Belvalkar, p. 87) 
Mugdhabodha (of which the Dhétupatha is called Kavikalpadruma) 

G1008 : Edited Shrirampore, 1807. 

G1009 : Edited Calcutta, 1826, 1845, 1866, 1868, 1876, 1884. 

G1010 : Xavikalpadruma edited in Bengali characters, with Durgadasa’s Dhatudipika. 
Calcutta, 1831, 1904. 

G1011 : Edited Kashipur, 1841, 1853. 

G1012 : Edited with Nandakigora’s Parisisfa and Gangadhara’s Setusamgraha. 
Calcutta, 1843. 

G1013 : Edited by Otto Béhtlingk. St. Petersburg, 1847. 

G1014 : Kavikalpadruma edited, with Durgadasa’s Paribhasajika, by Madana Mohana 
Tarkalamkara. Calcutta, 1848. 

G1015 : Edited with Durgadasa Vidyavagisa Bhattacarya’s Subodha. Shrirampore, 
1857. 

G1016 : Edited by Govindacandra Vidyaratna. Calcutta, 1861-1862, 1880. 

G1017 : Edited with Durgadasa’s Subodhé and Rama Tarkavagisa’s Karaka, Samésa, 
and Taddhita sections of his Pramodajanani. Calcutta, 1861. 

G1018 : Selections edited by Loharam Shiroratna. Calcutta, 1868. 

G1019 ; Edited with Girigacandra Vidyaratna’s Tippani. Calcutta, 1871, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 483 


G1020 : Kavikalpadruma edited, with Durgadasa’s Paribhasatika, by Jaranatha 
Tarkavacaspati. Calcutta, 1872. 

G1021 : Xavikalpadruma edited, with Durgadasa’s Paribhasajika, by Baradaprasada 
Majumdra. Calcutta, 1876, 1879. 

G1022 : Edited, with Durgadasa’s Subodha and Rama Tarkavagiéa’s Pramodajanani, 
by Rajanikanta Gupta. Calcutta, 1888. 

G1023 : Kavikalpadruma edited, with Durgadasa’s Paribhasafiké, by Jivananda 
Vidyasagara. Calcutta, 1888. 

G1024 : Edited, with Durgadasa’s Subodha, Nandakigora Bhattacarya Cakravartin’s 
Parisista, and editor’s Tikd, by Durgadasa Vidyavagisa Srirama Tarkava- 
gisa. Calcutta, 1908. 

G1025 : Edited, with editor’s Tippani, by Syamacarana Kaviratna. Calcutta, 1910. 

G1026 : Edited, with Rama Tarkavagisa’s Pramodajanani, by Siva Narayana 
Siromani. pr 201. Calcutta, 1911-1913. 

G1027 : Kavikalpadruma edited, with Durgidisa’s Dhdtudipika, by Gurunatha 
Vidyanidhi Bhattacarya. Calcutta, 1912. 

G1028 : Edited, with Rama Tarkavagisa’s Pramodajanani and editor’s Parimala, by 
Harendranarayana Devasarman. Berhampur, 1912. 

G1029 : Krdanta section edited with Rama Tarkavagiga’s Pramodajanani thereon. 
Varanasi, 1914. 

G1030 : Edited with Durgadasa’s Subodha and Rama Tarkavagiéa’s Pramodajanani. 
Calcutta, 1914. 

G1031 : Edited, with Durgadasa’s Subodhd, Rama Tarkavagisa’s Pramodajanani, and 
Sivanarayana Siromani’s Tippani, by Devendranatha Sengupta and 
Upendranatha Sengupta. Calcutta, 1916. 

G1032 : Edited by Syamacarana Kaviratna Vidyavaridhi. Calcutta, 1927. 

G1033 : Kavikalpadruma edited by G. B. Palsule. stau 15. Poona, 1954. 

SAMGRAMASIMHA (1279) 
Balasiksé on Sarvavarman’s Katantrasittras 

See e663. 

JINAPRABHA (SURI) or LESAPRABODHA (1280) 

(NCat 7.259) 

Durga( pada) prabodha on Trilocana’s Katantravritipanjika 

(NGat 3.311, 7.259) 

KRSNALILASUKA (1280) 
(NCat 9.100, 169) 
Purusakéra on Deva’s Daiva 
See e976; e977. 
MALAYAGIRI (1280) 
(Belvalkar, p. 67) 
Vrtti on Hemacandra’s Sabdanusasana 

(NCat 9.290 ) 

G1034 : Edited with autocommentary by Bechardas Jivaraj Doshi. Lps 13. Ahmeda- 
bad, 1967. 

VIMALA SARASVATI (1300) 

(Belvalkar, pp. 22, 36; G1624, p. 267) 

Ripamala 

G1035 : Edited with Hindi paraphrase by Kesava Deva Pandeya. 4 volumes, 
Delhi, 1973. 

NARENDRAPURI or PRAJNANASVARUPA (1300) 
Dhéiupaftha, a Sarasvata work 
(NCat 9.370) 


484 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ABHAYACANDRA (ACARYA) (1329) 
(Belvalkar, p. 60; NGat 1.273) (a Sakatayana author) 
Prakriydsamgraha 
See e881. 
MANDANA, pupil of Narendrapuri (1330) 
(Belvalkar, p. 82) 
Samdhiprakarana on Anubhiti’s Sdrasvataprakripa 
(NCat 2.374) 
ANANDAPURNA VIDYASAGARA (1350) 
(NCGat 3.118) 
Prakriyamafijari on Vamana/Jayaditya’s Kasika 
(NCat 2.108, 3.118) 
BHIMASENA (ACARYA) (14th century) 
(G1624, p. 255) 
Commentary on a Dhatupatha 
(NCat 9.288) 
JAGADDHARA of Kashmir (last half of 14th century) 
(NCat 7.317) 
Balabodhinit on the Kashmiri recension of the Kdtantrasittras 
(NCat 3.317) 
Apasabdanirakarana 
(NCat 7.131) 
Tika on Bhojadeva’s Sarasvatikanthabharana 
See e918; e921. 
SAYANA or MADHAVA (?) (14th century) 
(Cardona, p. 288; Belvalkar, p. 43; Gi624; pp. 240, 255) 
Madhaviyadhdatuvriti on Panini’s Astadhyayi-Dhatupatha 
See e35. 
G1036 : Edited by A. Mahadeva Sastri and K. Rangacaryal. 2 volumes. Govern- 
ment Oriental Series, Bibliotheca Sanskritica. Mysore, 1894-1903. 
G1037 : Naémadhdtuvyiti (an appendix) edited by Damodara Sastri. Pan n. s. 19, 
1897. 
G1038 : Edited by Ananta Sastri Phadke and Sadasiva Sarma Sastri Joshi. xss 103. 
Varanasi, 1934. 
G1039 : Edited by Dwarikadas Shastri. pss 1. Varanasi, 1964. 
MOKSESVARA (1350?) 
Commentary on Durgasimha’s Katantraurtti 
(NCat 3.313, 4.281 ) 
JUMARANANDIN (1350?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 91; cos 134, 1961, 162; vm 1.625) 
(Revision of Kramadigvara’s) Samksiptasdra and Rasdvati thereon 
See e912. 
UJJVALADATTA, alias JAJALI (14th century? but NCat 2.257 says 1250) 
(G1624, p. 233) 
Updadisitravytti 
(NCat 2.294) 
G1040 : Edited by T. Aufrecht. Bonn, London, 1859. 
G1041 : Edited by Jivananda Vidyasagara. Calcutta, 18. 
PADMANABHADATTA (1375) 
(Belvalkar, p. 93; NCat 11.128) 
Supadma 
G1042 : Upddi section published in Vidyedaya (Calcutta) 26-27 (1874, etc.), 


BIBLIOG 
G1043 : 
G1044 : 


G1045 : 
G1046 ; 


RAPHY 485 


Edited, with Visnumiégra’s Makaranda, by Trailokyanatha Bhattacarya. 
Calcutta, 1887. 

Edited, with Visnumiéra’s Makaranda, by Upendranatha Bhattacarya. 
Calcutta, 1900. 

Edited with a Vivaranapaficika. Calcutta, 1903. 

Edited with editor’s Tippant by Trailokyanatha Bhattacarya. Calcutta, 
1910. 


KAVIDARPANA RAGHAVA (1375?) 
Papiniyamatadarpana 


G1047 : 


V. Swaminathan, “Paniniyamatadarpana—a Forgotten Work on Gra- 
mmar,”’ svuoy 14, 1971, 61-76. 


MERUTUNGA (1388) 
Balavabodha on Durgasimha’s Katantravrtti 


(NCat 3 


31) 


KULAMANDANA SURI (1394) 
(NCat 4.238) 


Auktika or 


Mugdhabalavabodha 


(NCat 3.97, 4.238) 
DHARANIDHARA (1397) 
(NCat 9.237) 


Paftjika on 
G1048 : 


Panini’s (?) Paniniyasiksa 
Edited by Gopala Sastri Nene and Sudama Sarman Misra. uss 10. 
Varanasi, 1929. 


NANDAKISORA SARMAN BHATTACARYA CAKRAVARTIN (1398) 
(Belvalkar, p. 90; NCat 9.326) 
Parifista to Vopadeva’s Mugdhabodha 


See e101 


2; e1024. 


MANDANA KAVI (1400?) 
Kavikalpadrumaskandha Upasargamandana 


(NCat'2 


374, 3.270) 


MEGHARATNA (1400?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 83) 
Sdrasvata-Vyakaranadhundhika or Dipika 
GOYICANDRA or GOPICANDA (1400?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 92; Gos 134, 1961, 145) 
Vivarana on Kramadisvara’s Samksiptasara 


(NCat 6 
G1049 : 


-158, 159) 
Edited in two parts. Calcutta, 1888. 


Commentary on Jumaranandin’s Taddhitaparisisfa 
(NCat 6.158) 
RAMACANDRA (1400) 
(Cardona, p. 286; Belvalkar, p. 37; G1624, p. 268) 
Prakriyakaumudi on Panini’s Astadhyayt 


G1050 : 
G1051 : 


G1052 : 
G1053 : 


Edited, with Vitthala’s Praséda, by Kamalasankara Pranasankara Trivedi. 
ssps 78, 82. Poona, 1925-1931. 

Surjit Kumar Mukhopadhyaya, ‘‘Tibetan Translations of Prakriyakaumudi 
and the mention of Siddhanta-kaumudi Therein,” mig 20, 1944, 63-69. 

Adya Prasada Misra, Prakriyakaumudivimarsah. sB3 15. Varanasi, 1966. 
Edited, with Srikrsna’s Prakasa and editor’s Rasmi, by Muralidhara Misra. 
spem 111-112. 1977-1980. 


(RSIPUTRA) PARAMESVARA II (1410) 


(NCat 1 


1.191) 


486 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Gopalika on Mandana Miéra’s Sphotasiddhi 
See e870. 
GUNARATNA SORI (1411) 
(Belvalkar, p. 67; NCat 6.51} (Hemacandra writer) 
Kriydrainasamuccaya 
G1054 : Edited yye 10. Varanasi, 1908. 
NARAPATI MAHAMISRA (1425) 
(ym 1.510) 
(Vyakarapa) Prakéfa on Jinendrabuddhi’s Nydsa 
(NCat 4.119) 
SUBHASILA GANI (1425) 
Unadinimamdla 
(NCat 2.293) 
KRSNACARYA IT (1430) 
Upasargarthasamgraha and autocommentary 
(NCat 2.376) 
(ARRA or ERRA) MADHAVA BHATTA (1450) 
Tripadoddyotini 
(NCat 1.393, 8.235) 
SRIPATIDATTA (1450?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 75; Abhyankar, p. 396) 
Parisista to the Katantrasiitras 
See e649; e653. 
JONARAJA or JOGARAJA (1450) 
Padaprakaranasamgati, topical analysis of the Katantrasiitras 
G1055 ; Edited in Belvalkar, pp. 99-101. 
SITIKANTHA (15th century) 
Nydsa on Jagaddhara’s Katantrabalabodhini 
(NCat 3.317) 
UDAYADHARMA or DHARMASORI (1451) 
(NCat 3.97) 
Auktika or Vakyaprakasa 
(NCat 2.326, 3.97, 9.274) 
HEMAHAMSAVIJAYAGANI (1457) 
(Belvalkar, p, 67) 
Nydyasamgraha with Nydyarthamafjasa thereon (Hemacandra work) 
G1056 : Edited Varanasi, 1911. 
JINASAGARA (1460?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 65) 
Dipiké (or Dhupdhika? ) on Hemacandra’s SabdénuSasana 
(NCat 7.272) 
VITTHALA (1460) 
(Cardona, p. 285; Belvalkar, p. 37; G1624, p. 270) 
Prakriyaprasdda on Ramacandra’s Prakriyakaumud? 
See 1050. 
KUMARAPALA (1461) 
Ganadarpaga 
(cf. ym 2.404) 
PUNJARAJA (1485) 
(Belvalkar, p. 81) 
Commentary on Anubhiti’s Sérasvataprakriya 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 487 


G1057 : P. K. Gode, ‘*Oldest Dated ms, of Puiijaraja’s Commentary on the 
Sdrasvataprakriya,”’ ALB 5, 1941, 120-124. 
RAMAKANTA or RAMACANDRA or KAVICANDRA (1489) 
Dhatusadhana 
(NCat 9.295) 
AMRTABHARATI (1490) 
(Beivalkar, p. 81; NCat 1.350) 
Subodhika on Anubhiti’s Sdrasvataprakriya 
(NCat 1.350) 
ABHIRAMA VIDYALAMKARA (1500?) 
(cos 134, 1961, 37) 
Kaumudi on Goyicandra’s Sampk siptasdratika-Karakapada 
(NCat 1.310, 5.110) 
AUTHOR UNKNOWN (1500) 
Mukhabhisana 
G1058 : Edited by K. Kunjunni Raja. as 37, 1973, 89-172. 
KASINATHA BHATTA (1500?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 83; ym 1.633) 
Bhasya on Anubhiti’s Sarasvataprakriya 
(NCat 4.127) 
SATYANANDA or RAMACANDRA SARASVATI (1500) 
(ym 1.420) 
Laghuvivarana on Kaiyata’s Mahabhasgyapradipa 
G1059 : 1.1.8-1.2 edited, with Isvarananda’s Brhadvivarana, Sivaramendra Saras- 
vati Yogindra’s Ratnaprakasa, Narayana Sastri’s Ndrayaniva,; and Annam- 
bhatta’s Uddyotana, by M. S. Narasimhacarya. pir 51-55. Pondicherry 
1973-1980. 
DHANESVARA BHATTA (1510) 
(Belvalkar, p. 83) 
Pradipa on Anubhiti’s Sdrasvataprakriya 
(NCat 9.226) 
G1060 : P. K. Gode, “Date of Sarasvataprakriya of Bhatta DhaneSvara,” Po 1.4, 1936, 
30-33. 
APPAN NAINARYA (1510) 
(ym 1.485) 
Prakripadipika 
(Nat 1.258) 
KARMADHARA (1510) 
Prakasa on Durgasimha’s Katantravztti 
(NCat 3.310) 
MADHAVA BHATTA (1520?} 
(Belvalkar, p. 82) 
Siddhantaratnavalt on Anubhiti’s Sdrasvataprakripa 
See e996. 
PUNDARIKAKSA VIDYASAGARA BHATTACARYA (1520) 
Pradipa on Durgasimha’s XGtantravrtti 
See e656. 
Vaktavyaviveka on a Katantraparisista 
(NCat 3.316) 
Tiké on Jayaditya/Vamana’s Kasika (lost) 
KSEMENDRA (1525) 


488 ENQYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(Belvalkar, p. 81; NCat 5.169) 
Commentary on Ramacandra’s Sérasvataprakriya 
Commentary on Narendrapuri’s (Sarasvata) Dhdtupdtha 
(NCat 5.169, 9.289) 
DHANACANDRA or JINASAGARA or NANDASUNDARA and UDAYA- 
SAUBHAGYA (1533) 
(Belvalkar, p. 65) 
Dhundhikd on Hemacandra’s Brhadorztti 
Avacirika on Hemacandra’s Laghuortti 
(NCat 9.216) 
SESA KRSNA (1540) 
(NCat 4.365) 
Sphofatattvantripana 
G1061 : Edited in Mahadeva Sarma Gangadhara, ed., Vadarthasamgraha. Bombay, 
1913-1914. 
Sabdaharapa or Sabdalankara (lost) 
Padacandriké with Krsrakautihula thereon 
(NCat 4.365) 
Gidhabhdvavivrti or Prakasa on Ramacandra’s Prakriyakaumudi 
(NCat 4.365) 
(SESA) NARAYANA (BHATTA) (1546) 
(vm 1.405) 
Saktiratnakara on Patafijali’s Mahabhasya 
(NCat 10.89) 
RAMANATHA SARMAN (RAYI) (1546) 
(NCat 3.315) 
Manorama on Katantra-Dhdtupatha 
See e654. 
VISNUMITRA (1547) 
(ym 1.410) 
Ksirodara on Patanijali’s Mahabhagya (lost) 
BHARATA MISRA (16th century) 
Sphofasiddhi 
G1062 : Edited by K. Sambasiva Sastri. rss 89. Trivandrum, 1927. 
VIMALAKIRTI (1550?) 
(Gos 134, 1961, 359) 
Padavyavastha( stitra )karika 
(NCat 11.162) 
GOPINATHA TARKACARYA (1550) 
(Belvalkar, p. 75; NCat 3.316) 
Prabodha on a Katantraparisista 
G1063 : Edited Calcutta, 1890. 
Paribhasaortti 
(NCat 6.163) 
ISVARANANDA or ISVARIDATTA (1550) 
(NCat 2.280) 
Vivarana on. Kaiyata’s Mahabhasyapradipa 
See €1059. 
Sabdabodhatarangini 
(NCat 2.280) 
NARAYANA NYAYAPANCANANA (1550) 
(NCat 10.74) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 489 


Commentary on Xrdanta section of Goyicandra’s commentary on Samksiptasara 
(NCat 4.281, 10.74) 
Ganaprakafa on Samksiptaséra-Ganapaétha 
(NCat 5.256, 10.74) 
See e913, 
RAMA TARKAVAGISA (1550?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 90; cos 134, 1961, 324) 
Pramodajanani on Vopadeva’s Mugdhabodha 
(NCat 2.203) 
See e1017; €1022; €1026; e1028; €1029; 1030; e1031. 
Commentary on the Kdtantrasittras 
(NCat 3.314) 
KULACANDRA (1550?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 75) 
Durgavakyaprabodha on Durgasimha’s Kaiantravrtti 
See e656; e657. 
KASISVARA BHATTACARYA (1550?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 90; ym 1.637—638 ) 
Commentary on Vopadeva’s Mugdhabodha 
(NCat 4.141) 
Mugdhabodhaparisista 
(NCat 4.141) 
Sabdaratnakara 
(NCat 4.141) 
MADHAVA SARASVATI (1550?) 
Prakriydsudha on Ramacandra’s Prakriyadkaumudi 
G1064 : M.S. Bhat, “An Incomplete Manuscript of Madhavasarasvati’s Prakriya- 
sudhd, a Commentary on Prakriyakaumudt,” sua 37, 1959, 153-155. 
AUTHOR UNKNOWN (16th century?) 
Sphofasiddhinyayavicdra 
G1065 : Edited by T. Ganapati Sastri. rss 54. Trivandrum, 1917. 
SARVESVARA or SOMAYAJIN DIKSITA (1555) 
(ym 2.416) 
Sphirji on Kaiyata’s Mahabhasyapradipa 
(MS listed in Adyar D, vol. 6, nos. 107-109) 
CINTAMANI (1557) 
(NCat 7.58; ym 2.418) 
PrakaSa on Kaiyata’s Mahabhasyapradipa 
(NCat 7.58) 
HARSAKULAGANI (1557) 
(NCat 3.97) 
Commentary on Udayadharma’s Auktika 
(NGat 3.97) 
Versification of Hemacandra’s Kavikalpadruma-Dhatupajha 
G1066 : Edited yjc 12. Bombay, 1909. 
ANNAMBHATTA (1540? 1560?) 
(NCat 1.237) 
Uddyotana on Kaiyata’s Mahabhasyapradipa 
See €587 ; e590; €1059. 
Mitaksara on Panini’s Astadhyayi 
G1067 : Edited by S. P. S. Jagannathaswamy Aryavaraguru and Acharya Bhatta- 
nathaswamy. BenSS 20. Varanasi, 1903-1906. 


490 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


VASUDEVA BHATTA (1567) 
(Belvalkar, p. 82) 
Sdrasvataprasdda on Anubhiti’s Sérasvataprakriya 
See e989; e991. 
PURUSOTTAMA VIDYAVAGISA BHATTACARYA or NARA NARAYANA (1568) 
Prayoga(uttama)ratnamala 
(NCat 6.94) 
G1068 : Edited Kuch Bihar, 1890-1903. 
G1069 : Padamafijari section edited by Taranatha Gosvami Smrtiratna. Calcutta, 
1907. 
G1070 : Biswanarayana Shastri, ‘“The Kamariipa School of Sanskrit Grammar,” 
in Gaurinath Shastri Festschrift, pp. 236-244. 
CARITRASIMHA (GANT) (1569) 
Avaciiri on Katantra (vibhrama) siitras 
(NGat 3.318; 7.23) 
APPAYYA DIKSITA I (1580) 
Vadanaksatramdla on Panini’s Asfadhyayit 
(Nat 1.265) 
G1071 : Edited by V. Krishnamachariar. Kumbhakonam, 1910. 
GUNARATNA (1585) 
Commentary on Narendrapuri’s Sarasvataprakriyd-Dhaiupé tha 
HARSAKIRTI (1586) 
(Belvalkar, pp. 82, 86; NCat 1.197) 
Dhatupatha and Taratigini thereon 
(NCat 9.289) 
CIDRUPASRAMA or CIDRUPASRAMIN (1587) 
Vydkaranadipa or Dipavydkarana 
(NCat 7.55, 9.66) 
PVisami on a ParibhdsenduSekhara 
(NCat 7.55, 11.226) 
GOPALA BHATTA (1590) 
(aos 134, 1961) 
Visamapadarthadipikd or Gopdlabhat{i on Anubhiti’s Sarasvataprakripa 
(NCat 6.146) 
BHATTOJI DIKSITA (1590) 
(G1624, p. 273; Gardona, p. 283) 
Siddhantakaumudi on Panini’s Astadhydyi 
G1072 : Edited by Babu Rama in MS form. Kidderpur, 1811. 
G1073 : Edited Madras, 1858, 1866, 1882, 1886, 1887. 
G1074 : Edited with Jiianendra Sarasvati’s Tattvabodhini. Varanasi, 1862, 1885, 
1887, 1888. 
G1075 : Edited with editor’s Saralé by Taranatha Tarkavacaspati. 2 volumes. 
Calcutta, 1863-—1864. 
See e30. 
G1076 : Litganusasana section edited Calcutta; 1868. 
G1077 : Edited with editor’s commentary by Taranatha Tarkavacaspati. Calcutta, 
1870-1871. 
G1078 : Edited Varanasi, 1873, 1880. 
G1079 : First stabaka edited by Ramacandra Sarman Gufijikara. Bombay, 1880. 
G1080 : Edited with Vasudeva Diksita’s Bélamanoramd. Tiruvadi, 1885; Nandu- 
kaveri, 1901. 
See €37, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 491 


G1081 : Edited with Nageéa Bhatta’s LaghuSabdendusekhara. Varanasi, 1888. 

G1082 : Edited, with Jianendra Sarasvati’s Tattvabodhini, by Patavardhana 
Narayana Sastri. Varanasi, 1897. 

G1083 : Edited, with Jianendra Sarasvati’s Tativabodhini and Jayakrsna’s Subodhini, 
by Dinkar Keshava Shastri Gadgil and Vasudev Lakshmana Shastri 
Pansikar. Bombay, 1899, 1915. 

G1084 : Edited, with Nagesa Bhatta’s LaghusabdenduSekhara, by Karnataka Krsna 
Sastri. Varanasi, 1903. 

G1085: Edited and translated by Srisa Chandra Vasu and Vaman Das Vasu. 3 
volumes. Allahabad, 1905-1907. Reprinted Delhi, 1962. 

G1086 : Edited with editor’s Balacandri, by Balacandra Sastri. Meerut, 1908. 

G1087 : Edited, with Vasudeva Diksita’s Balamanorama, by S. Chandrasekhara 
Sastrigal. Trichinopoly, 1910-1911; Madras, 1927. 

G1088 : Edited with Bhairava Misra’s Ratnaprakasiké. Varanasi, 1910. 

See e543 e56. 

G1089 : Partly edited, with editor’s Pankticandrika, by Gangaprasada Sastrin. 
Brndaban, 1914; Bharatpur, 1931. 

G1090 : Edited with editor’s SdradarSini, by Sivadatta. Bombay, 1914. 

G1091 : 1.1 edited, with editor’s Mitabhdasini, and translated by Saradaranjan Ray 
Vidyavinod. Calcutta, 1920. 

G1092 : Edited, with editor’s Panktipradipa, by Nanakarama Sastri. Varanasi, 
1924-1925. 

G1093 : Edited, with editor’s Bhavabodhini, by Karaputugala Dharma Sri. Part 1. 
Varanasi, 1925. 

G1094 : Edited by Gopal Sastri Nene. uss 11. Varanasi, 1929. 

G1095 : Edited, with Vasudeva Diksita’s Bélamanoramaé, by C. Sankara Rama 
Sastrin and R. V. Krishnamachariar. 2d edition. Madras, 1929. 


See a78. 

G1096 : Edited, with editor’s Visesavivrti, by Somanatha Sarman. Varanasi, 1952. 

G1097 : Bhadanta Shanti Bhikshu, ‘“‘An Incorrect Reading Existing from a Long 
Time in Siddhdéntakaumudi,” sparoc 17, 1953, 100-101. Full paper in 14, 
1954, 553-556. 

G1098 : Siddheshwar Varma, ‘“The Vedic Limitations of the Siddhantakaumudi,” 
spaioc 17, 1953, 105-106. 

G1099 : G. B. Palsule, ‘“Discussion of a Reading in the Siddhdéntakaumudi,” spatoc 20, 
1957, 72. 

G1100 : Edited, with Vasudeva Diksita’s Baélamanoramaé and Jiianendra Sarasvati’s 
Tattvabodhini, by Giridhara Sarma Caturveda and Paramesvarananda 
Sarma Bhaskara. 4 volumes. Varanasi, 1958-1961. 

G1101 : Edited, with Vasudeva Diksita’s Balamanoramd, by Gopala Shastri Nene. 
2 parts. Kss 136, Varanasi, 1958-1961. 

G1102 : Edited by Somanatha Sarma. Kasthamandapa, Nepal, 1959. 

See e159; e168. 

G1103 : Vibhektyarthea (Karaka) section edited, with editor’s commentary, by 
Sridharananda Sharma Ghildiyal. Delhi, 1962. 

G1104 : Partially edited, with Sabhapati Sarma Upadhyadya’s Laksmi, by Bala 
Krishna Pancholi. 2 volumes. Delhi, 1966. 

See a860 (1968). 

G1105 : Edited with Hindi commentary by Bala Krishna Pancholi. 3 volumes. xss 
191. Varanasi, 1969-1971. 

G1106 : Xareka section edited by Dinesh Chandra Guha. Varanasi, 1970. 

G1107 : 8. Venkitasubramonia Iyer, ‘‘The Difference Between Bhafttoji Diksita and 


492 ENCYQLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Narayana Bhatta with Regard to Certain Phonetic Observations,” viy 8, 
1970, 86-102. 
See d863 (1971). 
G1108 : Mahesh Dutt Sharma, “‘A Note on the Siddhantakaumudi 2882 and 2940,” 
mo 4, 1971, 35-37. Also paroc 25, 1972, 317-319. 
G1109 : M.S. Narayana Murti, “‘Bhattoji Diksita and Kondubhatta on the Primary 
Denotation,” svuoy 15, 1972, 87-98. 
See e321; b864. 
G1110 : P. CG. Naganatha Sastry, Sri Bhattoji Dikshita’s Vaiyakaranpa Siddhantakaumudi. 
The Standard Sanskrit Grammar. An Analysis in English. 2 volumes. Delhi, 1974, 
1983. 

Gil11 : Pratibha P. Gokhale, “A Note on the paribhasa ‘stipa sapanubandhana,” 
spAroc 27, 1974, 246-247, 

See d866 

G1i12 : K. Kunjunni Raja, ‘‘A So-called Varttika: maturmatiac putrérthamarhate,” 
paioa 27, 1976, 383-384. 

Praudhamanoramé on his own Siddhantakaumudt 

G1113 ; Edited Varanasi, 1868, 1886, 1888. 

G1114 ; Edited with Hari Diksita’s (?) LaghuSabdaratna, by Rama Sastri Manavalli 
and Gangadhara Sastri. Varanasi, 1874-1888. 

G1115 : Edited, with Hari Diksita’s (?) Laghusabdaraina, by Ratnagopala Bhatta. 
Varanasi, 1906-1910. 

G1116 : Edited, with Hari Diksita’s (?) Laghusabdaratna, by Balakrsna Sastri. 
Varanasi, 1910. 

G1117 : Edited, with Hari Diksita’s (?) Laghusabdaratna and editor’s Prabhé, by 
Madhava Sastri Bhandarin. Varanasi, 1920. 

G1118 : Partially edited, with Hari Diksita’s LaghuSabdaraina and Bhairava Miégra’s 
Sabdaratna Bhairavi, by Sadasiva Sarma Sastri. kss 58. Varanasi, 1928. 

G1119 : Partially edited, with Hari Diksita’s Laghusabdaratna, by Sadasiva Sastri 
Joshi. uss 23, Varanasi, 1933. 

G1120 : Edited, with Hari Diksita’s Leghusabdaratna, Bhairava Misra’s Bhairavi, 
Vaidyanatha Payagunde’s Bhavaprakasa, and editor’s Saralaé, by Gopala 
Sastri Nene. kss 125, Varanasi, 1939. 

G1121 : Edited, with Hari Diksita’s Sabdaratna, by Narayana Dadaji Wadegaong- 
kar. 7 volumes. Nagpur, 1945-1964. 

G1122 : Edited, with Hari Diksita’s Sabdaraina, by Venkatesh Laxman Joshi. 
Volume 1: poms 31, Poona, 1966. Appendixes published as poms 31A, 
Poona, 1964, 

G1123 ;: Edited, with Hari Diksita’s Brhatsabdaraina and Nageéa Bhatta’s LaghuSabda- 
raina, by Sitaram Sastri. Volume 1. Hvnrss 8. Varansi, 1964. 

Sabdakaustubha 

G1124 : Edited Varanasi, 1876. 

G1125 : Edited, with Jayakrsna’s Sphotacandrika, by Vindhyesvari Prasada Dvivedin 
and Ganapati Sastri Mokate. ChSS 2. Varanasi, 1898-1917. 2.5-10 
reprinted with Sphotacandrikdé, Varanasi, 1929. 1.1 reprinted Varanasi, 
1933. 

PKriyanighan{u 

G1126 : Edited in Telugu script. Mysore, 1905. 

Vaiyakaranamatonmajjana or Vaiyakarapasiddhantakdrikas Printed in many editions of 

Kondabhatta’s Vatydékarapabhitsana and sara. 

See e555. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 493 


General 
G1127 : K. C. Chatterji, “‘Jagannatha and Bhattoji,”’ coy 3, 1935, 41-51. 
G1128 : P. K. Gode, ““A New Approach to the Date of Bhattoji Dikshita,” asvor 
1.2, 1940, 117-127. 
G1129 : Surya Kant Bali, ‘Contribution of Bhattoji Diksita to Sanskrit Grammar’”’. 
Ph.D. diss., University of Delhi, 1971. 
G1130: , Bhatijoji Diksita: His Contribution to Sanskrit Grammar, Delhi, 1976. 
(SESA) CAKRAPANI (1595)- 
(NCat 6.255) 
(Paramaia) Khandana on Bhattoji’s Praudhamanoramaé 
G1131 : Edited by V. P. Dvivedin. Pan 32, 1910; 2, 1-60; 33, 1911, 61-76; 34, 1912, 
77-120; 35, 1913, 121-134; 36, 1914, title page. 
Karakatattva or Kérakavicéra 
(NCat 3.375) 
Prakriyaépradipa (lost) 
TRILOCANA (1600?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 75) 
Uttaraparisista on Katantrasittras 
(NCat 3.316, 8.262) 
BHARATA MALLIKA (1600?) 
Ekavarnarthasamgraha 
G1132 : Edited by Suresh Chandra Banerji, ng 36, 1960, 29-34. 
SIVARAMA CAKRAVARTIN (1600?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 75) 
Siddhantaratnakara on Katantraparisista 
(NCat 3.316) 
RAMADASA CAKRAVARTIN (1600?) 
Vyakhpadsara or Candrika on Katantra 
(NCat 3.314) 
Candriké on a Katantraparisista 
(NCat 3.316) (see e632 for extracts) 
RAMACANDRASRAMA (1600?) 
(Belvalkar, p. 85; ym 2.249) 
(Vaiyakarana) Siddhantacandriké on Sdrasvatasitras 
(NCat 6.379) 
See e988; e992. 
G1133 : Edited, with editor’s commentary, by Sadasiva Sastri Joshi. uss 17. 
Varanasi, 1931. 
G1134 : Edited, with Sadananda’s Subodhini, LokeSakara’s Tattvadipikad, and editor’s 
Avyayarthamala, by Navkishore Jha. 2 volumes. xss91. Varanasi, 1931-1933. 
KAVICANDRA (DATTA) (1600) 
(NCat 3.274) 
Dhatucandrika 
Dhitusddhana 
(NCat 3.274) 
Saralakart (of Samksiptasara school) 
(NCat 3.274) 
NILAKANTHA VAJAPEYIN (1605) 
(wm 2.411~412) 
Piginipadipika 
Sukhabodhini on Bhattoji’s Siddhdnftakaumudi 





494 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


SESA VISNU (1605) 
ProkéSika on Patatijali’s Mahkabhasya 
Dhdturatnaprakasa or -mafijari 
(NCat 9.292) 
CANDRAKIRTI (1607) 
(Belvalkar, p. 82) 
Subodhika or Dipiké on Anubhiti’s Saérasvataprakriya 
See e960; e999; 1001. 
G1135 : Edited xss, 2 volumes. Varanasi, 1935-1936. 
SRIVALLABHAVACANA ACARYA (1607) 
(Belvalkar, p. 67) 
Durgapadaprabodha on Hemacandra’s LingdnusSdsana 
AGYUTA PISAROTI (1610) 
Pravesaka 
G1136 : Edited in Cochin Sanskrit Series 2. Cochin. 
TARKATILAKA BHATTACARYA (1614) 
(Belvalkar p. 85) 
Vrtti on Sarasvatasittras 
(NCat 8.114) 
Sabdabhaskara 
(NCat 8.114) 
GANGADHARA DIKSITA (1617) 
Prabha on Cidripagrama’s Vydkaranadipa 
(NCat 5.203, 9.66) 
VARADARAJA (1620) 
(Belvalkar, p. 42; Cardona, p. 287) 
Sdrasiddhantakaumudi 


G1137 : Edited and translated by Govind Vinayak Devasthali. pcass-c 4. Poona, 


1968. 
Madhyasiddhantakaumudi 


G1138 ; Liigdénusasana section edited by Visvanatha Sarman. Varanasi, 1884. 

G1139 ; Edited with editor’s commentary by Balakrsna Sarma Yogi with Jivarama 
Sastri Raikva. Bombay, 1895. 

G1140 : Edited by Ganesha Datta Sastri. Lahore, 1899. 

G1141 : Edited with editor’s Visemasthalatippana by Govindasimha. Bombay, 1900. 

G1142 : Edited by Narayana Ram Acarya. Bombay, 1950. 

G1143 ; Edited by Sadasiva Sastri Joshi and Rama Candra Jha, with the former’s 
Sudha. Hss 213, Varanasi, 1960. 

G1144 : Edited, with Viévanatha Sastri’s Prabhakara, by Nigamananda Sastri. 
Delhi, 1964. 


Laghusiddhantakaumudt 


G1145 : Edited Calcutta, 1827, 1874, 1877, 1883. 

G1146 : Edited Agra, 1848. 

G1147 : Edited Delhi, 1849, 1869. 

G1148 : Edited and translated by James R. Ballantyne. Mirzapore, 1849; Varanasi, 
1867, 1881. Reprinted Delhi, 1961. Edition and Hindi translation published 
Varanasi, 1856. 

G1149 : Edited with editor’s Tikd by Rupacandra. Lahore, 1853. 

G11560 : Edited Allahabad, 1873. 

G1151 : Edited Varanasi, 1879, 1889, 1890. 

G1152 : Edited Madras, 1880. 

G1153 : Edited Bombay, 1881, 1890. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 495 


G1154 : Edited Lucknow, 1882. 
G1155: Edited by Vitthala Narayana Sarma Gore and Ramacandra Sarma 
Gunjikara. Bombay, 1885. 
G1156 : Edited by Jivarama Sastri and Sitarama Sastri. Bombay, 1903. 
G1157 ; Edited, with editor’s Sérabodhini, by Shastri Rancchodji Odhavji. Bombay, 
1905. 
G1158 : Edited with editor’s Tinantapradipika by Kalavati Devi. Lucknow, 1909. 
G1159 : Edited with editor’s Sarala by Jivarama Sarman. Moradabad, 19113 
Vrindavan, 1918~1919. 
G1160 : Edited with editor’s Tippanit by Sivadatta Sarman. Bombay, 1915. 
G1161 : Edited with editor’s Tika by U. K. Venkatanarasimha Acarya. Madras, 
1916. 
G1162 : Edited by Kanakalal Thakur. uss 2. Varanasi, 1924. 
G1163 : Edited with editor’s Tippant by Jivanatha Raya. Moradabad, Varanasi, 
1925. 
G1164 : Edited Darbhanga, 1925. 
G1165 : Part 1 edited and translated, with editor’s Balabodhini, by Vasudev Visnu 
Mirashi. 1928. Reprinted Delhi, 1967. 
G1166 : Edited, with Kanakalala Sarman’s Samksiptabalabodhini, by Sadasiva Sarma 
Joshi. Varanasi, 1930. 
G1167 : Edited by Narayana Ram Acharya. Bombay, 1948. 
G1168 : Edited, with editor’s Bhaimi, by Bhimasena Sastri. 3 volumes. Delhi, 1950- 
1980. 
G1169 : Edited and translated by Kumudranjan Roy. Calcutta, 1957. 
G1170 : Edited with Hindi commentary by Shridharananda Sarma Ghildiyal. 
Delhi, 1961. 
Gi171 : Edited with Hindi commentary by Taranisa Jha. 3 volumes. Allahabad, 
1962~1965. 
G1172 : Edited with Hindi commentary by Mahesh Singh Kushwaha. 2 volumes. 
Vidyabhavan Sanskrit Granthamala 131. Varanasi, 1965-1977. 
G1173 : Edited, with Girija’s Ttka and editor’s Hindi commentary, by Rajendra 
Chaudhuri. Allahabad, 1969. 
Gi174 : Edited with Hindi commentary by Sadasiva Sastri. uss 119. Varanasi, 1977. 
Ghirvarnapadamafyari 
G1175 : Edited by Umakant Premanand Shah. Supplement to jor 7.4, 1958, 1-18. 
Reprinted as msuos 4. Baroda, 1960. 
Dhatukdérikavali 
G1176 : Edited in Grantharatnamala 3. Bombay, 1889. 
General 
G1177 : P. K. Gode, ‘‘Varadaraja, a Pupil of Bhattoji Diksita, and His Works— 
Between 1600 and 1650,” pvxr, pp. 188-199. 
RAGHUNATHA (1620) 
(Belvalkar, p. 86) 
Laghubhasya on the Sdrasvatasiitras 
SAHAJAKIRTI (1623) 
Sarasvataprakripavaritika 
SADHUSUNDARA GANI (1624) 
Dhaturatndkara 
(NGat, 9.293) 
KONDA or KAUNDA BHATTA (1630) 
(NCat 5.92; G1624, p. 285) 
Vaiyakarapabhisana on Bhattoji Diksita’s Vaiyékarapamatonmajjana, and -sdra thereon 


496 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


G1178 : Edited by Taranatha Tarkavacaspati and Madana Mohana Tarkalam- 
kara. Calcutta, 1849, 1872. 

G1179 : Edited with Harivallabha’s Darpana. Varanasi, 1866. 

G1180 : Edited Varanasi, 1890. 

Gi181 : Text only edited, with Konda Bhatta’s Padarthadipika, by Ramakrsna 
Sastri Patavardhana. BenSS 15. Varanasi, 1899-1900. 

G1182 : Edited, with Srikrsna’s Sphofacandriké and Bhairava Miésra’s Sphotapariksa 
by the Anandasrama pandits. ass 43, Poona, 1901. 

G1183 : Edited with editor’s Visamasthalafippart by Ramakrsna Sarma Tripathi. 
Varanasi, 1907. 

G1184 : Edited, with Harivallabha’s Darpara, by Ratnagopala Bhatta. Varanasi, 
1908. 

G1185 : Text only edited, with Harirama’s Kasika by K.P. Trivedi. ssps 70, 
Bombay, 1915. 

G1186 :; Edited with editor’s Sarala by Gopala Sastri Nene. Varanasi, 1919. 

G1187 : Edited, with Harivallabha’s Darpana, by Ananta Sastri Phadke. xss 23, 
Varanasi, 1924. 

G1188 : Edited, with Harivallabha’s Darpana, Bhairava Misra’s Pariksa and Krsna 
Mitra’s commentary, with Khuddi Jha Sarma’s Tisarthavadasdra, by 
Sadasiva Sastri Joshi. kss 133. Varanasi, 1939. 

G1189 : Edited, with Bala Krsna Pajicoli’s Prabha and Harivallabha’s Darpaua, 
by Tarakesvara Sastri, Caturvedi. ac 2. Varanasi, 1947. 

G1190 : Edited, with Gop4la Sastri Nene’s Saralé and editor’s Subodhini, by Rama 
Prasada Tripathi axnmM 7. Varanasi, 1952. 

G1191 : P.K. Gode, ‘“‘The Chronology of the Works of Kondabhatta (a Nephew 
of Bhattoji Diksita), Between a.p. 1610 and 1660,” aus 18, 1954, 62-67. 
Reprinted in sium 6.2, 237-241. 

G1192 : Edited, with editor’s Samkari, by Samkara Sastri Marulkara. ass 135. 
Poona, 1957. 

G1193 : Shivaram Dattatray Joshi, ‘“Kondabhatta on the Meaning of Sanskrit 
Verbs.”’ Ph.D. diss., Harvard University, 1960. 

G1194 : Sphofanirnaya (chapter 14) edited and translated by S.D. Joshi. pcass-c 2. 
Poona, 1967. 

G1195 : Partially edited, with editor’s Bhaimi, by Bhimasena Sastri. Delhi, 1969. 

See a1109. 

G1196 : Namérthanirgaya edited and translated in Madhav Murlidhar Deshpande, 
“Kaundabhatta on the Philosophy of Nominal Meanings.” Ph.D. diss., 
University of Pennsylvania, 1972. 

G1197 : Lakdararthaniraaya edited and translated in Jayashri Achyut Gune, Kaunda- 
bhatta on the Meaning of Verbal Endings. Poona, 1978. 

G1198 :S.D. Joshi, ““Kaunda Bhatta on the Meaning of Case-endings,” viy 18, 








1980, 88-95. 
G1199 : , ‘Kaundabhatta on sphofa,”’ in Gaurinath Sastri Festschrift, pp. 221-23, 
G1200: , ‘“Kaunda Bhatta on the Meaning of Gompounds,” aus 44—45, 


1980-1981, 369-389. 
ABHINAVA NRSIMHASRAMA, pupil of Ramacandraégrama (1630?) 
(NGat 1.304) 
NémakarthaprakéSasamgraha, a Sarasvata work 
(NCat 1.304) 
MALLAYA YAJVAN, father of Tirumala Yajvan (1630) 
(vm 2.419-~420) 
Tippani on Kaiyata’s Mahabhasyapradipa 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 497 


JINAVIJAYA, pupil of Kirtivijaya (1637) 
Vakyaprakasavarta on Udayadharma’s Auktika 
(NCat 3.97) 
NILAKANTHA SUKLA (1637) (pupil of Bhattoji Diksita) 
Sabdasobha 
(NCat 7.152; 10.173, 177) 
RAMAKRSNA DIKSITA, son of Govardhana Diksita (1638) 
Ganapé tha 
(NCat 5.255) 
CANDRASEKHARA (1638?) 
Commentary on Purusottama’s Prayogaratnamala 
(NCat 6.368) 
DURGADASA VIDYAVAGISA or VACASPATI (1639) 
Dhatudipika or Paribhaésatiké on Vopadeva’s Kavikalpadruma 
See €1010; €1014; €1020; e1021; €1023; e1027. 
Subodhd on Vopadeva’s Mugdhabodha 
(NCat 9.78) 
See €1015; e1017; e1022; €1024; €1030; €1031. 
NARAYANA BHATTATIRI or VAINATEYA of Kerala (1640) 
(NCat 10.72) 
ApaniniyapramaGpataé or Parapaksakhandana 
G1201 : Edited by E.V. Raman Namputri. Trivandrum, 1942. 
G1202 : Edited and translated by E.R. Sreekrishna Sharma. svuoy 8, Supplement 
1965. 
Prakriyadsarvasva 
G1203 : Edited by K. Sambasiva Sastri. rss 106. Trivandrum, 1931. 
G1204 : Unddisiitras published muss 7.2. Madras, 1933. 
G1205 : Part 3 edited by V.A. Ramaswami with an English introduction by 
S. Venkitasubramonia Iyer. Tss 152. Trivandrum, 1947. 
G1266 :S. Venkitasubramonia Iyer, Nérdyapabhatta’s Prakriydsarvasoa: A Critical 
Study. kupsp 7. Trivandrum, 1972. 
G1207 : K.V. Sarma, “‘A Vindication of non-Paninian Systems of Sanskrit Gram- 
mar,”’ viz, 13, 1975, 275-283. 
Dhitukdoya 
G1208 : Edited with the KAyspdrpana and Ramapanivada’s Vivarana. Kupse 6. 
Trivandrum, 1970. 
General 
G1209 : K. Kunjunni Raja, “‘Students of Melputtur Narayana Bhatta,” sparoa 15, 
1949, 61-62. 
G1210: . “The Date of Narayana Bhatta,” paioc 13, 1951, 183-186. 
See a1107. 
AUTHOR UNKNOWN (1640) 
Bhoja Vyakarana 
G1211 : P.K. Gode, “Chronology of Dharmapradipa and Bhoja Vyékarana, Composed. 
Under the Patronage of Rao Bhojaraja of Kaccha (a.p. 1631 to 1645),” 
Po 16, 1952, 40-47. 
KAMALAKARA BHATTA (1640?) 
(NCat 3.165) 
?Commentary on Ramacandra’s Prakriyakaumudt 
(NCat 3.160) 
Vibhaktyarthaprakdsa 
(Nat 3.165) 





498 ENGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Vyakhyddarsa on Patafijali’s Mahabhasye 
(NCat 3.165) 
NARAYANA (SASTRIN) (1640) (disciple of Dharmarajadhvarin, father of Rama- 
krsna Yajvan 
(NCat 10.87) 
Vydkhya or Kathinaprakésika on Kaiyata’s Mahabhasyapradipa 
See e1059. 
Commentary on Haradatta’s Padamaitjaré 
Dipaprabha on Praisa 
(NCat 10.87) 
Dipaprabha on Katyayana’s Varttikas or Vararucasamgraha’ 
See e505. 
KRSNA (1645) 
Laghubodha, an elementary grammar 
(NCat 4.294) 
JNANATILAKA (1646) 
(Belvalkar, p. 86) 
Siddhantacandrika on the Sérasvatasiltras 
BHAVADEVA (1649) 
Taddhitakosa 
(NCat 8.85) 
TARAKA BRAHMANANDA SARASVATI (1650) 
Vyakaranakrodapatira 
(NQat 8.151) 
?Citprabha on a Paribhasendusekhara 
(NCat 8.151) 
RANGANATHA DIKSITA (1650) 
(NCat 4.120) 
Maekaranda or Parimala on Haradatta’s Padamafijari 
(NCat 4.120) 
RAMABHATTA (1650) 
(Belvalkar, p. 84) 
Vidvatprabodhinit or Ramabhatji 
NRSIMHA (1650) 
Prakriyakalpavallart on Dharmakirti’s Rapdvatara 
(NCat 10.190) 
KESAVA (1650) 
(Nat 5.60) 
Manoramakhagdana (vs. Bhattoji Diksita) 
(NCat 5.60) 
RAMANATHA VIDYAVACASPATI (1650?) 
(cos 134, 1961, 324) 
Rahasya or Tiké on Katantra 
(NCat 3.314, 318) 
JAYANTA (1650) 
(Belvalkar, p. 51) 
Tativacandra on Ramacandra’s Prakriyakaumudi 
(NCat 7.180) 
COKKANATHA DIKSITA (1650) 
(NCat 7.85) 
Sabdakaumudi 
(NCat 7.85) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 499 


Ratndvalit on Patafijali’s Mahabhdsya 
(NCat 7.85, 9.293) 
G1212 : Dhdtu section edited jsmui 27, 1975, 1-16. 
APADEVA (1650) 
Sphofaniripana 
(NCat 2.125) 
HAMSAVIJAYAGANT (1650) 
(Belvalkar, p. 84) 
Sabdarthacandriké on Anubhiti’s Sarasvataprakriya 
JAGANNATHA PANDITARAJA TAILINGA (1650) 
(NCat 7.137; G1624, p. 280) 
Praudhamanoramakucamardana (vs. Bhattoji Diksita) 
(NCat 7.138) 
Sabdakaustubhakhandana (vs. Bhattoji; lost?) 
General 
See a1127 
VINAYAVIJAYAGANI (1652) 
(Belvalkar, p. 66) 
Haimalaghuprakriva 
KSEMANKARA (1653) 
(Belvalkar, p. 85) 
Pratyayodbhedapaddhati 
(NCat 5.162) 
UDAYAKIRTI, pupil of Sadhusundara (1654) 
Vivrtt on Vimalakirti’s Padavyavasthakarika 
(NGat 11.102) 
LAKSMINRSIMHA (1660) 
Vilésa on Bhattoji’s Siddhantakaumudi 
(MS listed in Adyar D, vol. 6, no. 353) 
TIRUMALA YAJVAN or DVADASAHADHVARIN (1660) 
(NCat 8.182; ym 2.413) 
Sumanoramaé on Bhattoji’s Siddhaéntakaumudt 
(MS listed in Adyar D, vol. 6, no. 355) 
?Anupdata on Patafijali’s Mahabhasya (cf. aus 3.1, 1939, 28) 
SIVARAMENDRA SARASVATI (1660) 
Siddhantaratnaprakdsa on Patafijali’s Mahabhasya 
See e1059. 
G1213 : Pierre Filliozat, “‘Sivaramendra Sarasvati’s Interpretation of ‘sthanivad 
adegah,’ Panini I.1.56,”’ aporr 58-59, 1978, 619-626. 
Ratnakarajika on Bhattoji’s Siddhantakaumudt 
(RAMA) NARAYANA (SARMAN) (VANDYOPADHYAYA) (1664) 
(NCat 10.85) 
Suddhi (tattua)karika 
(NCat 10.85) 
Séraévali and Vytti thereon 
(NCat 10.94) 
Dhéturatnakara 
(NCat 10.85) 
Karikavali 
(NCat 3.384) 
VIDYAVAGISA BHATTACARYA (1665) 


500 ENGYQLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Vierti on Vararuci’s (= Katyayana’s?) Kydakhydtaortti 
(NCat 4.281) 
NARAYANA (SADHU) of Didvana in Marwar (1667) 
Nirnaya or Anuurttyavabodhake on the Sdrasvatasiitras 
(NCat 10.94) 
G1214 : K.M.K. Sarma, “‘Sérasvatasitranirnaya of Narayana Sadhu,” mig 23, 1947, 
334-335. 
APPAYYA DIKSITA III or CINNA APPAYYA (1670) 
Prasiddhasabdasamskara 
(NQCat 1.267) 
HARI DIKSITA, grandson of Bhattoji, teacher of Nagega (1670) 
(G1624, p. 284; Cardona, p. 287) 
Brhat Sabdaratna on Bhattoji Diksita’s Praudhamanorama 
See e1118; e1129. 
G1215 : Kashinath Vasudev Abhyankar, “Date and Authorship of the Sabdaratna 
and the ByhatSabdaraina,’’ ABor1 32, 1951, 258-262. 
See e1122; €1123. 
(?) Laghu Sabdaratna on Bhattoji Diksita’s Praughamanorama (authorship disputed; may 
be by Nageéa Bhatta) 
See e1 114; e1115; e1116; 11173 e1118. 
Gi216 : Edited, with Bhagavata Hari Sastri’s Citraprabha, by Tata Subbaraya 
Sastri. Andh University Series 6. Waltair, 1932. 


See e1119; e1120. 
G1217 :K. V. Abhyankar, ‘‘Authorship of the LaghuSabdaratna,” asorr 45, 1964, 
152-158. 


G1218 : M.S. Bhat, “Authorship of the LaghuSabdaraina,’’ ppvev 1965, 203-206. 
G1219 : V.S. Joshi, ‘‘Authorship of the LaghuSabdaraina,” vysrc, pp. 107-161. 
General 
G1220 : G. H. Khare, “Hari Diksita and His Works,’’ Po 9.1—2, 1944, 62-67. 
JAGAN MOHANA PANDITA (1670?) : 
(NCat 7.144; jars 4, 1918, 144.) 
Prabodhacandriké 
(NCat 7.144) 
SADASIVA (1670?) 
(wat 2.416) 
Gadharthadipant on Patatijali’s Mahabhaésya 
(NCat 6.96) 
SUDHANANDASDURISISYA (1671) 
Jalpamafyari 
(NCat 7.206) 
GOPALA CAKRAVARTIN (BANARJI) (1672) 
Arthadipikd on Kramadigvara’s Samksiptasara 
(NCat 6.137) 
Vasudhatukarika 
(NCat 6.137) 
NILAKANTHA DIKSITA [cf. N. Ramesan, Sri Appayya Diksita (Hyderabad, 1972), 
pp. 137-139] (1675) 
Prakd§a on Kaiyata’s Mahabhasyapradipa 
(NCat 10.172) 
HARI BHASKARA AGNIHOTRA (1677) 
(ym 2.295) (NCat 11.221) 
Paribhdsabhaskara 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 501 


G1221 : Edited in Paribhdsdsamgraha, pp. 317-324. 
DVADASAHAYAJIN BALAPATANJALI (1680) 
Sabdikaraksa on Cokkanatha’s Sabdakaumudi 
(NCat 9.20) 
LOKESAKARA (1683) 
(Belvalkar, p. 86) 
Tativadipika on Ramasrama’s Siddhdntacandrika 
See e1133. 
RAMACANDRA VIDYABHOUSANA (1688) 
(Belvalkar, p. 90) 
Paribhésdvriti, a Mugdhabodha work 
(NCat 2.294) 
RAMACANDRA PANDITA (1690) 
Svaraprakriyé and autocommentary 
G1222 : Edited by K. V. Abhyankar. ass 138. Poona, 1974. 
RAMAKRSNA BHATTA (1690) 
Siddhantaratnakara on Bhattoji’s Siddhéntakaumudit 
(NCat 1.430) 
RAMABHADRA DIKSITA (1692) 
Unddimanidipika 
G1223 : Edited by K. Kunjunni Raja. aor 2i-23, 1966-1971. Reprinted Madras, 
1972. 
SaddarSinisiddhantasamgraha (grammar section ) 
(MS listed in TD no. 7631) 
G1224 : Edited by A. Thiruvengadathan as part of his doctoral dissertation. 
Sabdabhedanirilpapa 
(MS listed in TD no. 5301) 
See €1224. 
Vyakhya on Siradeva’s Paribhasdvziti 
(NCat 11.224) 
Prabhdvali 
Gi225 :K. Kunjunni Raja, “‘Prabhavalit, a Rare Work Dealing with Sanskrit 
Roots,” yor 19, 1949, 289-290. 
“Tarapatamapau gha’’ sittravicdra 
(NCat 8.110) 
MAHADEVA VEDANTIN (1694) 
(NCat 2.292) 
Upadikosa 
G1226 : Edited by K. Kunjunni Raja. muss 21. Madras, 1956. 
RAMAPRASADA (1694) 
Tika on Raman4rayana’s Karikdvalt 
DHUNDIRAJA (1700) 
Girvdpapadamafijart 
G1227 : Edited, with Dhundiraja’s Girvépavanmaftjari, by Umakant Premanand 
Shah. jor Supplement to volumes, 7—9. Reprinted msuos 4. Baroda, 1960. 
Girvanavanmatijart 
See e1227. 
DHARMASORI (1700) 
(ym 2.311; NCat 2.387) 
Paribhasarthaprakasiké 
(NCat 9.221, 274) 
RAMACANDRA (1700?) 


502 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIRS 


(NCat 3. 312; Belvalkar, pp. 74, 75) 
Kalaépatativabodhini on Trilocana’s Katantravarttikapaftjika 
(NCat 3.312, 316) 
MEGHAVIJAYA (1700) 
(NCat 6.362) (Belvalkar, p. 66) 
Haimokaumudi or Candraprabhavyakarana 


See ¢921. 
Sabdacandrika on Hemacandra’s SabdanuSsdsana 
(NCat 4.283) 


VAIDYANATHA DIKSITA or SASTRIN (1705) 
Vyakhya on Cokkanatha’s Sabdakaumudi (us 
listed in Adyar D, vol. 6, no. 177) 
Paribhésdrthasamgraha or Paribhastoritivyakhya 
(NCat 11.222) 
Paribhasopanyasa (lost) 
NAGESA or NAGOJI BHATTA (1714) 
(Cardona, p. 287; G1624, p. 290) 
(Brhat) Sabdendusekhara on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi 
G1228 : Edited by Sitaram Shastri. 3 volumes. sscm 87. Varanasi, 1960. 
Laghu Sabdendusekhara on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi 
G1229 : Edited, with Bhairava Miésra’s Candrakala, by Ganesadatta Sarma Miéra. 
Varanasi, 18€6. : 
G1230 : Edited by Ramasastri Manavalli and Narayana Sasiri Bharadvaja. 
Varanasi, 1887. 
G1231 : Edited, with Bhairava Miéra’s Candrakala, by Sita Rama Sastri Sendiy. 
Varanasi, 1911. 
G1232 : Edited with editor’s Dipaka by Nityananda Panta Parvatiya. Varanasi, 
1918, 
G1233 : Edited, with Bhairava Misra’s Candrakala, by Narahari Sastri Pendse. 
2 volumes. kss 5. Varanasi, 1922, 1927. 
G1234 : Edited up to Avyayi section, with Nityananda Panta Parvatiya’s Dipaka, 
by Gopal Shastri Nene. xss 27, Varanasi, 1925. 
G1235 : Edited with editor’s Guruprasdda by Tata Subrahmanya Sastrin. Madras, 
1926. 
G1236 : Edited, with an Abhinavacandrika, Vaidyanatha Paiyagunda’s Cidasthimald, 
Sadasiva Bhatta’s Sadésivabhatti, a Visamapadavivsti, Udayankar Nanapa- 
thaka’s Jyotsna, a Vijaya and a Vargint, by Guru Prasad Shastri. rsco 14. 
Varanasi, 1936. 
G1237 : Edited, with Khuddi Jha Sarma’s Néagesoktiprakdsa, by Sudama Miéra 
Sastri and Sadasiva Sastri Joshi. xss 128. Varanasi, 1938. 
Vaiyakarapa (laghu) siddhantama fj isa 
G1238 : Edited, with Durbala’s Kufijika and Balambhatta’s Kala, by Madhava 
Sastri Bhandari, Madan Mohan Pathak and Nityananda Panta Parvatiya. 
cuss 44, Varanasi, 1913-1926, 
G1239 : Edited up to the end of the Tatparyaniriipana section, with editor’s Raina- 
prabha, by Sabhapati Sarma Upadhyaya. xss 163. Varanasi, 1963. 
G1240 : Edited by Kalika Prasada Shukla. Varanasi, 1977. 
Paramalaghumaijiisa 
G1241 : Edited Varanasi, 1887. 
G1242 : Edited by Nityananda Panta Parvatiya. Varanasi, 1913. 
G1243 : Edited, with Sivinanda Pandeya’s Rainadipika. Varanasi, 1933. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 503 


G1244 : Edited, with editor’s Arthadipika and notes by Nityananda Pant Parvatiya, 
by Sadasiva Sarma Sastri (Joshi). uss 43. Varanasi, 1946, 1974. 
G1245 : Edited, with editor’s Jyotsné, by Kalika Prasad Shukla. msurs 7. Baroda, 
1961. 
G1246 : Kapil Deva Shastri, ‘‘On the Authenticity of Parama-laghu-maitjjiisd,” cpsrv 
1974, 299-304. 
G1247 : Edited in Kapil Deva Shastri, A Critical Study of the Paramalaghumafijitsa. 
Kuruksetra, 1975. 
Uddyota on Kaiyata’s Mahabhasyapradipa 
See e521. 
See €524; 6529; 550. 
G1248 : Edited by Bahuvallabha Sastri. 4 volumes. Br 142. Calcutta, 1901~1910. 
See e552; ¢574; €575; e582; e598; e611; e622. 
Paribhasendusekhara 
G1249 : Edited Varanasi, 1854. 
G1250 : Edited by F. Kielhorn. ssps 2, 7, 9, 12. Bombay, 1868, 1874, Revised 
edition by K.V. Abhyankar, with V.S. Abhyankar’s Tattvadarsa. Poona, 
1962. 
G1251 : Edited by Taranatha Tarkavacaspati. Calcutta, 1872. 
G1252 : Edited, with editor’s Tippanisdrdsdraviveka, by TBalasastrin Ranade. 
Varanasi, 1885, 
G1252A : Edited, with editor’s Ambakariri, by Govinda Bharadvaja Sastri. Poona, 
1885. 
G1253 ; Edited, with Bhairava Miséra’s Vivyti. Varanasi, 1886. 
G1254 : Edited with editor’s Bhiti by Ramakrsna (Tatyasastri). Varanasi, 1897, 
1912, 1926. 
G1255 : Edited with Visvanatha Bhajta’s commentary. Tanjore, 1910-1915. 
G1256 : Partly edited by Balakrsna Sastri. Varanasi, 1912. 
G1257 : Edited, with Vaidyanatha Payagunde’s Gada, by Ganesa Sastri Gokhale. 
ass 72, Poona, 1913. 
G1258 : Edited, with Bhairava Misra’s Bhairavi and editor’s Tattvaprakasika, by 
Lakshmana Tripathi. xss 31. Varanasi, 1915, 1931. 
G1259 : Edited, with Jayadeva Misra’s Vijaya, by Madhusudana Sarma Misra. 
Varanasi, 1915. 
G1260 : Edited, with Raghunatha Sastri Vyakaranacarya’s Laghujika, by Ananta 
Sastri Phadke. xss 19. Varanasi, 1924, 
G1261 : Edited, with Venimadhava’s BrhadaSastrarthakala, by Rajanarayana Sastri. 
«ss 137, Varanasi, 1943. 
See a972, 
G1262 : Hartmut Scharfe, ‘Kleine Nachlese zu Kielhorns Uhersetzung von 
Nagojibhatta’s ParibhasenduSekhara,’” Asiatica 1954, 570-574. 
G1263 : Louis Renou, “Htudes paninéennes : Le Paribhasendusekhara.,. L’arrange- 
ment des paribhésa chez Nagojibhatta,” piar 2. Paris, 1956, pp. 132-149. 
G1264 : Edited, with Jayadeva Sarma Misra’s Yaya, by Umesa Misra Sarma. 
Allahabad, 1968. 
Visamapadi on Bhattoji Diksita’s Sabdakaustubha 
(NCat 10.21) 
Vaiyakaranakarika 
(NCat 10.22) 
Sabdanantasdgarasamuccaya 
(NCat 10.22) 


504 ENOYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Suptinantasdégarasamuccaya 
(NCat 10.22) 
Prabhakaracandra on a Tattoadipika 
(NCat 8.48) 
Sphofavada 
G1265 : Edited, with editor’s Subodhini, by V. Krsnamacarya.aus55. Madras, 1946, 
FRapakasamgraha 
G1266 : Edited, with editor’s Vivziiz, by N.S. Ramanuja Tatacarya. xsvs 18, 
Tirupati, 1972. 
General 
G1267 : M.V. Mahashabde, ““The Penetrating Style of Nagoji Bhatta,” sparoa 15, 
1949, 53-54. 
G1268 : P.K. Gode, ‘‘The Relative Chronology of Some Works of Nagojibhatta 
Between c. A.D. 1670 and 1750,” or 1.2, 1955, 45-52. Reprinted in sys 38, 
1956, 212-219. 
G1269 : Paul Thieme, ‘The Interpretation of the Learned,” rvsKB pp. 47-62. 
Reprinted in Budruss, pp. 596-611. 
G1270 : S.D. Joshi, “‘Nagega on the Guiding Principles of Constructional Mean- 
ing,” sparoc 21, 1959, 198-199. 
G1271 : Ludo Rocher and Rosane Debels, ‘‘La Valeur des termes et formules 
techniques dans la grammaire indienne, d’aprés NageSabhatta,”’ arpHos 
15, 1960, 129-151, 
G1272 : Uma Sankar Sarman, “‘Nagega’s treatment of laksanavytti,” sparoc 23.1, 
1966, 57. 
Gi273 : Vidyadhar Dharmadhikar, “‘Nagefa: His Life and Works and Contribu- 
tion to Sanskrit Grammar.’ Ph.D. diss., Allahabad University, 1966. 
SRIVALLABHAVAGAKA or SRIVALLABHAVACARYA (1718) 
(aos 134, 1961, 198; NCat 9.75; Belvalkar, p. 66) 
Durgaprabodha on Hemacandra’s Lingdnusdsana 
(NCat 9.75) 
(MAHABHASYA) GOPALA KRSNA SASTRIN (1720) 
(NCat 6.136, 1.259) 
Sabdikacintamani on Patafijali’s Mahabhasya (mss available) 
Commentary on Unddisiitras 
Lalita on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi, completed by his son Anantanarayana 
(NCat 6.136) 
TIRUMALA BUKKAPATTANAM SRINIVASACGARYA (1720) 
Gajasitravdda 
(NCat 5.231) 
VENKATESVARA (1722) 
Unadighanfu 
(NCat 2.293) 
KASINATHA (1725) 
Dhdtumafijart 
G1274 : Edited by Charles Wilkins. 1815. 
APPA SURI or SUDHI (1730) 
(NGat 1.270) 
Sabdaratnavali 
Vyakhya on Vaidyanatha Sastrin’s Paribhasdrthasamgraha. 
(NGat 11.222) 
Paribhasdraina 
(Adyar D, vol. 6, no. 480) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 505 


JNANENDRA SARASVATI (1730?) 
(Gardona, p. 286; G1624, p. 278) 
Tattvabodhini on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi, completed by Jayakrsna Maunin 
as Subodhini 
See e1074; 1082; 1083; e1100. 
DHARANIDHARA (1730) 
(NCat 9.237) 
Bodhapaddhati mss (available) 
KASISVARA SARMAN (1739) 
Ffianamria 
(NCat 4.142) 
SVAYAMPRAKASANANDA (1740) 
Candriké on Vaidyanatha Sastrin’s Paribhasarthasamgraha 
(NCat 6.378, 11.222) 
VAIDYANATHA PAIYAGUNDA or BALAMBHATTA (1740) 
(NCat 1.389) 
Arthasamgraha 
(NCat 1.389) 
Prabha on Bhattoji Diksita’s Sabdakaustubha 
BhaévaprakaSiké on Nagega Bhatta’s BrhacchabdenduSekhara 
Cidasthimala on Nagesa Bhatta’s LaghuSabdendusekhara 
See 1236. 
Kasiké or Gada on Nagesga Bhatta’s Paribhasendusekhara 
See e1257. 
Bhdvaprakasika on Hari Diksita’s Sabdaratna 
Chaya on Nagesa’s Mahdbhagyapradipoddyota 
See e622. 
Kal@ on Nagesga Bhatta’s Vatyakaranzasiddhantamafijiisa 
See e1238. 
Bhavaprakaga on Bhattoji Diksita’s Praudhamanorama 
See e1120. 
RAMACANDRA (1744) 
(cos 134, 1961, 323) 
Vyitisamgraha on Panini’s Asfadhyayt 
(NCat 1.472) 
SATYAPRIYA TIRTHA SVAMIN (1745) 
Vivarana on Patafijali’s Mahdbhdsya (mss available) 
JAYAKRSNA MAUNIN (1745) 
Saramaitjari or Sabdabodhaprakasa 
(NCat 7.169) 
Sabdarthatarkamrta 
(NCat 7.160) 
Subodhkint, completion of Jfianendra Sarasvati’s Tattvabodhint on Bhattoji Diksita’s 
Siddhantakaumudi 
See 1074; e1082; e1083. 
Tika on Varadaraja’s Madhyasiddhantakaumudit 
(NCat 7.169) 
Tikaé on Varadaraja’s Laghusiddhantakaumudt 
(NCat 7.169) 
(Sphotacandriké: this work actually by Jayakrsna’s brother Srikrsna. See below.) 
HARI VALLABHA (1747) 
Darpana on Konda Bhatta’s Vaiyakaranabhilsagasara 


506 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


See e1179; e1187; 1188; e1189. 
SIVARAMA TRIPATHIN (1750) 
Vidyavilésa on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhdntakaumudi 
G1275 : P.K. Gode, ‘‘Vidpdvilasa, a Commentary on the Siddhanta-kaumudt by 
Sivarama Tripathin (Between a.p. 1700 and 1775),” aus 15, 1951, 62-67, 
Reprinted in sys 37, 1953, 237-241. 
Unddikofa or Laksminivdsabhidhana 
G1276 : Edited Varanasi, 1873. 
SRIKRSNA (BHATTA) (MAUNIN) (1750) 
Sphoftacandrika 
See e1125; e1 182. 
Tarkacandrika 
(NCat 8.112) 
Vyttidipika 
G1277 : Edited by Gangadhara Sastri Bharadvaja. powspr 29. Varanasi, 1930. 
G1278 : Edited rpc 7. Jodhpur, 1956. 
Akhydtérthacandrikd (nirgaya) 
(NCat 2.11) 
Kérakavéda or Vibhaktyarthanirnaya 
G1279 : Edited Bombay. 
Lakérdrthanirnaya 
(NCat 4.292) 
Prakdfa on Ramacandra’s Prakriyakaumudi 
See e1053. 
(VARKHEDI) TIMMANACARYA (1750) 
Pratyahdarasiltravicdra 
(NCat 8.180) 
VASUDEVA DIKSITA (1750) 
(Cardona, p. 286; G1624, p. 279) 
Balamanoramé on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi 
See e1080; e1087; 1095; G1100; GI101. 
(RAJA SR1) VENIMADHAVA (SOKLA) (1750) 
Kaumudikalpalatika 
G1280 : Edited by Sri Rajanarayana Sukla. uss 28. Varanasi, 1934. 
BrhadaSastrarthakalé on Nagesa Bhatta’s Paribhdsendusekhara 
See ei 261. 
NILAKANTHA DIKSITA (1750?) 
(NCat 10.173) 
Paribhdsaortti 
G1281 : Edited by T. Ganapati Sastri. Tss 46. Trivandrum, 1915. 
G1282 : Edited in Paribhasésamgraha, pp. 293-316. 
Tattvaviveka on Pataiijali’s Mahabhasya 
(NGat 10.173) 
Gidharthadipika on Jiianendra’s Tattvabodhint 
(Adyar D, vol. 6, p. 117) 
LaghuSabdakaustubha 
(Adyar D, vol. 6, p. 117) 
Kytprakasa 
(NCat 4.273) 
Vyakhya on Ramacandra’s Prokriydsaroasva 
(NCat 10.373) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 507 


ABHINAVA KALIDASA or UMAMAHESVARA (1750) 
Paniniyavédanaksatramala 
(NCat 1.298, 9.317) 
SESADRISUDHI (1750) 
(cos 134, 1961, 394; NCat 11.22) 
Paribhasabhaskara 
G1283 : Edited in Paribhdsdsamgraha, pp. 378-465. 
KUPPU SASTRIN (1750) 
(aos 134, 1961, 126) 
Critique of a Paribhdsabhiskara 
(NCat 4.197) 
ANANTANARAYANA SASTRIN (1750) 
Continuation of Gopalakrsna Sastrin’s Mahabhasya-Sabdikacintamant 
(NCat 6.136) 
Continuation of Gopalakrsna Sastrin’s Siddhantakaumudi-Lalita 
(NCat 6.136) 
LAKSMINRSIMHA (1750) 
Trisikha on Nagesga Bhatta’s Paribhasendusekhara 
(NCat 11.227) 
NARAYANA (SUDHI) (1750) 
Pradipa or Sdbdabhisana on Panini’s Astadhpayi 
(NCat 10.75) 
Sabdabhedaniriipana 
(NCat 10.75) 
Sabdamafijart 
(NCat 10.75) 
PERUSDRI (1755) 
(NCat 3.98) 
Aunadikapadarpava on Unédisittras 
G1284 : Edited by T.R. Chintamani. muss 7.4. Madras, 1939. 
APPAYYA DIKSITA, pupil of Gopalakrsna Sastrin (1760) 
(NGat 1.259, 269) 
Paniniyasitraprakasa 
(NCat 1.471) 
RADHAKRSNA SARMAN (1764) (probably of the Jumara school) 
(NGat 9.293) 
Dhituratndvali 
(NCat 9.293) 
ASADHARA BHATTA (1770?) 
(NCat 2.19; 8.268) 
Pirvapaksaprasnoitari or -mafijari 
(NCat 2.19; 8.268) 
Padasamjfiavicara 
Sabdatrivenika 
G1285 : Edited by Batuka Natha Sarma. powssr 14. Varanasi, 1925. 
G1286 : Edited by Kaliprasad Sukla. Varanasi, 1957. 
General 
G1287 : Umakant P. Shah, “‘A Note on Agadhara Bhatta and His Works,” vrrv 
1975, 351-359. 
RAMASEVAKA (1770) 
(wm 2.423) 
Vyakhya on Kaiyata’s Mahabhasyapradipa (mss. available) 


508 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


SAMKARA BHATTA (1770) 
Tika on Nagesa Bhatta’s LaghusabdenduSekhara 
(Adyar D, vol. 6, no. 347) 
Vyakhya or Samkari on Nageéa Bhatta’s ParibhdsenduSekhara 
(NCat 11.228) 
NAGOBA PANDITA (1775) 
Sadbhasasubantarapadarsa 
(NCat 10.23) 
SADASIVA BHATTA (1780) 
(Gos 134, 1961, 412) 
Commentary on Nagega Bhatta’s Paribhdsendusekhara 
(NCat 11.228) 
Sadasivabhat{i on. Nagega Bhatta’s LaghuSabdenduSsekhara 
See €1236. 
KRSNA MISRA (1780) 
(NCat 4.344) 
Krsnamisraprakriva 
(NCat 4.344) 
SIVARAMENDRA YATI (1780) 
Commentary on Panini’s Astadhydyi 1.3.67 (== Gajasitra) 
(NCat 5.231) 
VENKATADASA or VENKATACARYA III (1780) 
Gajasitravéda or Nerandvatisitiravyakhyd 
G1288 : Edited by R.V. Krishnamachariar. 1909. 
KALYANA SARASVATI (1790) 
(Belvalkar, p. 86) 
Laghusdrasvata 
(NCat 3.259) 
BHIMACARYA GALAGALT (1796) 
Arthamaftjarit on Nageséa Bhatta’s ParibhasenduSekhara 
(NGat 110.222, 227) 
HARIRAMA KALA (1797) 
(NCat 4.116) 
Kasika on Konda Bhatta’s Vaiyakaranabhisanasdra 
See e1185. 
BHAVADEVA MISRA (1799) 
Commentary on Hari Diksita’s Sabdaratna (lost?) 
KULAMUNI (1800) 
Samésaraava 
(NCat 4.239) 
INDRADATTA UPADHYAYA (1800) 
(NCat 2.251-252) 
Sabdatattvaprakasa (Mss available) 
Sabdakaustubhaguna (lost) 
Gidhaphakkikaprakasa on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi 
G1289 : Edited by Indra Dutt Sharma. xss 47. Varanasi, 1906. 
GOPALAGARYA or SRTRAMACARYA or GOPALADEVA VIDYAVAGISA (1800) 
Kéntimalé on Purusottama Vidyavagisa’s Prayogaratnamala 
(NCat 6.155) 
DURBALACARYA or KRSNA MITRA (ACARYA) (1800) 
Kuficika on Nagega Bhatta’s Vaiyakaranasiddhantamafijasa 
See e1 238, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 509 


Tiké on Konda Bhatta’s Vaipakaranabhitsana 
See 1188. 
Commentary on Nagesa Bhatta’s ParibhdsenduSekhara (Mss available) 
Bhavapradipa on Bhattoji Diksita’s Sabdakausiubha 
(Adyar D, vol. 6, nos. 133-136) 
Kalpalaté on Bhattoji Diksita’s Praughamanorama 
G1290 ;: Edited in Vyakaranagrantharatnavali 7-12, Tanjore, 1910-1915. 
Ratnérnava on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi 
(NCat 4.344) 
Yuktiratnékara 
(NCat 4.343) 
Vadacitdamani 
(NCat 4.344) 
KARTTIKEYA SIDDHANTA BHATTACARYA (1800?) 
Subodha on the Mugdhabodha 
(NCat 4.7) 
GANGADHARA (1800?) 
(NCat 5.198) 
InduprakasSa on Nagega Bhatta’s LaghuSabdendusekhara 
(NCat 5.198) 
Induprakafa on Nagesa Bhatta’s Paribhdsendusekhara 
(NCat 5.198) 
DHARANIDHARA (1809) 
QNGat 1.472, 9.237) 
Vaiyakaranasarvasva on Panini’s Asfadhydyi, completed by Kaginatha 
See e26. 
SIVABHATTA (1810) 
(aos 134, 1961, 391) 
Kusumavikésa on Haradatta’s Padamafijari 
(NCat 4.120) 
MANNU or MANYU or GOPALA DEVA (1815) 
(NCat 6.142) 
Laghubhisagasarakanti on Konda Bhatta’s Vaiyékaranabhitsanasdra 
(NCat 6.142) 
Dosoddhara on Nagega Bhatta’s LaghuSabdenduSsekhara 
(NCat 6.142) 
Arthavatsitravada 
(NCat 1.386) 
Gajasitravédartha or -vicdra 
(NCat 5.231) 
Kanjakoddhdra or Dosoddhara on Nagega Bhatta’s ParibhasenduSekhara 
(NCat 5.231, 6.142, 11.227) 
UDAYANKARA NANAPATHAKA (1800) 
(NCat 8.377) 
Jyotsna on Nagega Bhatta’s Sabdendusekhara 
See 1236. 
Anekamanyapadarthasitravicdra 
(NCat 2.326) 
Mitéorttyarthasamgraha on Panini’s Asfadhyayi 
(NCat 2.326) 
Paribhasapradiparcis 
(NCat 2.326; 11.220) 


510 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIE 


Bahuorihyarthavicdra 
(NCat 2.326) 
KASINATHA (1820?) 
Completion of Dharanidhara’s Vaiyakaranasarvasoa 
See e26. 
BHAIRAVA MISRA (1824) 
Sphofapariksa on Konda Bhatta’s Vaiyadkaranabhisanasara 
See €1182; ¢1188. 
Candrakala on NageSa Bhatta’s Laghusabdendusekhara 
See ¢1229; €1231; ¢1233. 
Gada on Nagega Bhatta’s ParibhasenduSsekhara 
See ¢1253; e1258. 
Bhairavi on Hari Diksita’s Sabdaraina 
See e1118; e1120. 
General 
G1291 : M.S. Bhat, “‘Bhairava Misra Circa 1780-1840 A.D.,” nag 35, 1959, 76-78 
DHARANANDA (1825) 
Phakkikadarpaua 
(NCat 9.239) 
KOCCA SANKARAN SUSAD (1825) 
Dhétupathakarika 
ArthaprakaSikaé on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhdntakaumudi 
KUMARA TATAYA (1825) 
(ym 2.415) 
Parijatam Nafakam on Patafijali’s Mahabhasya (mss available) 
GOVINDA BHARADVAJA SASTRIN (1835) 
Ambakartri on Nagesga Bhatta’s ParibhdasenduSsekhara 
See e1252A. 
BHARATA MALLIKA or BHARATASENA MALLISENA (1836? But NCat 3.379 
says 1750) 
Upasargaortti 
(NGat 2.375) 
KaGrakollasa 
G1292 : Edited by Janakinatha Sahityasastri. ssps 8, Calcutta, 1924. 
Ekavargarthasamgraha 
G1293 : Edited by Suresh Chandra Banerji. iH 36, 1960, 29, 34. 
Gayapdtha (according to Mugdhabodha principles) 
(NCat 5.256) 
Drutabodha and Drutabodhini thereon 
(NCat 9.187) 
GOKULACANDRA (1839) 
(yam 1.496) 
Vrtit on Panini’s Asfadhyayi 
(NCat 1.472, 6.110) 
SATARA RAGHAVENDRACARYA (GAJENDRAGADKAR) (1840) 
(ym 2.417; BNK Sarma 2.358; NCat 3.379, 10.166) 
Candrika on NageSa Bhatta’s LaghusabdenduSekhara 
(ms at 594) 
Tripathagd on Nagega Bhatta’s, ParibhasenduSekhara 
(NCat 11.227) 
Prabha on Bhattoji Diksita’s Sabdakaustubha 
Tripathaga on Pataiijali’s Mahdbhasya (mss_available) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 511 


Prabha on the Karaka section of Hari Diksita’s Sabdaratna 
G1294 : Edited by R.V. Krishnamachariar in Vyakaranagrantharatnavali 19-21. 
Tanjore, 1912. 
VIPRARAJENDRA (1845) 
Maniratnaprabha on Pataiijali’s Mahabhasya 
See e537. 
VISVANATHA DANDIBHATTA (1850?) 
(aos 134, 1961, 363) 
Candrika on NageSa Bhatta’s ParibhésenduSsekhara 
(NCat 6.178, 11.228) 
LALA VIHARIN (1850) 
(Abhyankar, p. 332) 
Commentary on Nagesa Bhatta’s Paribhdsendusekhara 
(NCat 11.227) 
HARIRAMA (1850?) 
Candrika or Vyakhyasara 
G1295 : Edited Calcutta, 1905. 
Taddhitacandrika 
(NCat 13.85) 
Commentary on Haribhaskara’s Paribhasabhdskara 
(NCat 11.221) 
HARINATHA DVIVEDIN (1850) 
(Abhyankar, p. 444) 
Akdedatandava on Nagesa Bhatta’s Paribhasendusekhara 
DAYANANDA (SVAMIN) SARASVATI (1850) 
(Gos 134, 1961, 196) 
Bhasya on Panini’s Astadhyayi 
See ¢63. 
G1296 : Edited by Raghuvira Jijnasu and Brahmadatta Jijnasu. 2 volumes. Ajmer, 
1940-1962. 
See al21, a125, e241. 
Bhasya on Panini’s Unadisiitras 
See e416, e420. 
Commentary on Panini’s (?) Panintyasiksa 
See e429. 
Avyayartha 
G1297 : Edited Ajmer, 1919, 
Karakiya 
G1298 : Published in Vedangaprakasa 6. Allahabad, 1891. 
General 
G1299 :S.K. Gupta, “A Study of Dayananda,” Po 13.1-2, 1948, 30~33; 13.3-4, 
1948, 3-9. 
, “Nature and Authorship of the Grammatical Work Attributed to 
Maharsi Dayananda Sarasvati,” patoa!7, 1953, 93-94. 
Tippari on Pataiijali’s Mahabhasya 
See e522; e547. 
BALA SASTRIN RANADE (1850) 
(Abhyankar, p. 427) 
Sardsdraviveka on Nage’a Bhatta’s Paribhdsendusekhara 
See e1885 1252, 
GANGADHARA KAVIRAJA (VAIDYA) (1850) 
(NCat 5.202-203) 


G1300 : 





512 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


TrikdndaSabdaSasana 
G1301 : Published. 
Trisitravyakarana 
G1302 : Published. 
Setusamgraha on the Mugdhabodha 
See e1012. 
Commentary on Katyayana’s Varttika 
Chandaprakéga on Panini’s Asfadhyayt 
(NCat 5.206) 

ROPAGANDRA (1853) 

Tika on Varadaraja’s Laghusiddhantakaumudt 
See e1149. 

SUBRAHMANYAM NAMBUTTIRIPAD (1860) 
Prasdda on Nagesa Bhafta’s LaghusabdenduSekhata 
Dhétusamgraha 

(NCat 7.92) 
TARANATHA TARKAVACASPATI (1867) 
Asubodhavyakarana 
G1303 : Published Calcutta, 1867, 1873. 
(Tarka) Ratnamala 
(NCat 8.123) 
Saralé on Bhattoji.Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi 
See €1075. 
Dhaturipadarsa 
G1304 : Published Calcutta, 1869. 
JARANATHA TARKAVAGASPATI (1870) 
Gommentary on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudt 
See e1077. 
RAGHURAMA 1871 
(NGat 3.62) 
Ekadasakarika 
G1305 : Published Bombay, 1871. 
YAJNESVARA BHATTA (1874) 
(xm 2.139) 
Gararainévalt 
G1306 : Published Baroda, 1874. 

DEVIDIN (1875) 

Commentary on Panini’s Asfadhpayt 
(NCat 1.472) 

CANDRAKANTA TARKALAMKARA (1880) 

Tika on Trilocanadasa’s Katantrapatjika 
See e644. 

Chandahprakriya on Sarvavarman’s Katantrasatras 
See e651. 

?Kaumudisudhakara 
G1307 : Published Calcutta, 1888. 

RAMATARANA SIROMANI (1883) 
Karacakra 

G1308 : Published 1883-1886, 1888. 

KALICARANA VIDYOPADHYAYA (1887) 

Papiniyatattoadarpana (with Sirya Prasida Miéra) 
G1309 : Published Varanasi, 1887, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 513 


MADHAVA (1887) 
Madhavi on Anubhiti’s Sarasvataprakriya 
See 6996. 
GOVINDA PARASURAMA BHATTA (1888) 
Tippant on Anubhiti’s Sarasvataprakripa 
See e997. 
SRIDHARA SARMAN (1889) 
Vyakhya on Nagesa Bhatta’s Laghusabdendusekhara 
G1310 : Published Varanasi, 1889. 
BHAGAVAT PRASADA SARMAN (1890) 
Tippafia on Jayaditya/Vamana’s Kasika 
See e846. 
BALAKRSNA SARMAN YOGI (1895) 
Commentary on Varadaraja’s Madhyasiddhantakaumudi 
See €1139. 
SETUMADHAVACARYA NADITIRAM (1895) 
Bhavabodhini on Nageéa Bhatta’s LaghusSabdendusekhara 
(Adyar D, vol. 6, p. 107) 
RAMAKRSNA (TATYASASTRIN) (1897) 
Bhiti on Nagesa Bhatta’s Paribhasendusekhara 
See e1254. 
DVARAKANATHA NYAYABHUSANA (1899) 
Auypayakosa 
G1311 : Published Calcutta, 1899. 
RAMA PANDITAVARA (SAHIBHA) (1900?) 
Commentary on Kashmiri recension of Katantra 
(NCat 3.317) 
YAGESVARA (1900) 
Haimavati on Nagesa Bhatta’s ParibhasenduSekhara 
MAHENDRANATHA BHATTAGARYA (1900) 
Tika on Sarvavarman’s Katantrasiitras 
See e652. 
HARI SARMAN (1900) 
(NCat 2.98) 
Vakyarthacandrika on Nagesa Bhatta’s Paribhasendusekhara 
(NCat 4.128, 11.228) 
Citraprabha on Hari Diksita’s Sabdaratna 
G1312 : Edited by Tata Subbaraya Sastri. Andhra University Series 6. Waltair, 1932. 
GANAPATI SASTRI (1900) 
(NCat 5.248) 
‘Gajasiitravadartha 
(NCat 5.231) 
ANANTACARYA (1900) 
(NCat 1.186) 
Commentary on the Tiranta portion of Nagesa Bhatta’s Sabdendusekhara 
(NCat 1.286) 
GOVINDASIMHBHA (1900) 
Visamasthalatippana on Varadaraja’s Madhyasiddhantakaumudi 
See e1141. 
RAMAKISORA SARMAN (1905) 
Asfamangala on Sarvavarman’s Katantrasitras 
See e653. 


514 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


NAVACANDRA-NYAYARATNA (1905) 
Paninisdra 
G1313 : Published Dacca, 1910, 1925; Calcutta, 1915, 1918. 
RANCCHODJI ODHAVJI (1905) 
Sarabodhini on Varadaraja’s Laghusiddhantakaumudt 
See e1157. 
ANANTAGARYA of Musarapakkam (1906?) 
SaranaSabdarthavicara 
G1314 : Published in Srivaisnava Grantha Mudrapaka Sabda Series. Madras, 
1906. 
RAMAKRSNA SARMA TRIPATHI (1907) 
Visamasthalatippani on Konda Bhatta’s Vaiyakaranabhitsanasara 
See ¢1183. 
DURGADASA VIDYAVAGISA SRIRAMA TARKAVAGISA (1908) 
Tiké on Vopadevwa’s Mugdhabodha 
See e1024. 
BALAGANDRA SASTRIN (1908) 
Balacandri on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi 
See €1086. 
KALAVATI DEVI (1909) 
Tinantapradipikd on Varadaraja’s Laghusiddhantakaumudt 
See 1159. 
VISNUPRASADA SARMAN (1910) 
Tippanit on Anubhitti’s Sarasvataprakriya 
See €1002. 
SYAMAGARANA KAVIRATNA (1910) 
Tippani on Vopadeva’s Mugdkabodka 
See €1025. 
KHUDDI JHA (SARMAN) (1910) 
Nagesoktiprakésa on Nagegéa Bhatta’s Laghusabdendusekhara 
G1315 : Published Varanasi, 1899. 
See e1237. 
Tinarthavédasadra on Konda Bhatta’s Vaiyakaranabhiisanasdra 
See 1188. 
KALURAMA SASTRIN (1910) 
Aayayarthamimamsa 
G1316 : Published Allahabad, 1910. 
HARENDRANARAYANA DEVASARMAN (1912) 
Parimala on Vopadeva’s Mugdhabodha 
See ¢1028. 
BRAHMADATTA (1914) 
Auyayanrtti 
G1317 : Published Lahore, 1914. 
SIVADATTA SARMAN (1914) 
Sdradarfint on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi 
See e1090. 
Tippani on Varadaraja’s Laghusiddhantakaumudi 
See e1160. 
GANGAPRASADA SASTRIN (1914) 
Pankticandriké on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi 
See €1089. 
BRAHMANANDA SARASVATI (1915?) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 515 


Citprabha on Nagesa Bhatta’s Paribhdsendusekhara 
(NGat 11.226) 
DEVENDRAKUMARA VIDYARATNA (1915) 
Paniniparisistavyakarana 
G1318 : Dacca, 1915; Calcutta, 1916. 
LAKSMANA TRIPATHIN (1915) 
Tattvaprakasika on Nagega Bhatta’s ParibhdsenduSekhara 
See e1258. 
U.K. VENKATANARASIMHA (1916) 
Tiké on Varadaraja’s Laghusiddhantakaumudt 
See €1916. 
NITYANANDA PANTA PARVATIYA (1918) 
Dipika on Nagesa Bhatta’s LaghusabdenduSekhara 
See 1232; e1234. 
Commentary on Nagesa Bhatta’s Paramalaghumattjisa 
See €1242; e1244. 
GOPALA SASTRI NENE (1919) 
Sarala on Konda Bhatta’s Vaiyakaranabhilsanaséra 
See e1186; e1190. 
Vyakaranapirvapaksavali 
G1319 : Edited in uss 5. Varanasi, 1927. 
Vyakarana Uttarapaksavalt 
G1320 : Edited by Brahmashankar Misra. uss 16. Varanasi, 1931. 
SARADARANJAN RAY VIDYAVINODA (1920) 
Mitabhasint on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhéntakaumudt 
See ¢1091. 
MADHAVA SASTRIN BHANDARI (1920) 
Prabha on Bhattoji Diksita’s Praudhamanorama 
See e1117. 
SphotavimarSini 
See e639. 
NANAKARAMA SASTRIN (1924) 
Panktipradipa on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi 
See e1092. 
JIVANATHA RAYA (1925) 
Tippani on Varadaraja’s Laghusiddhantakaumudi 
See e1163. 
KARAPUTUGALA DHARMA SRI (1925) 
Bhavabodhini on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi 
See e1093. 
TATA SUBRAHMANYA SASTRIN (1926) 
Guruprasada on NageSa Bhatta’s LaghusabdenduSekhara 


See €1235. 
VASUDEVA VISNU MIRASHI (1928) 


Balabodhint on Varadaraja’s Laghusiddhantakaumudt 
See e1165. 
JIVARAMA SARMAN (1928) 
Commentary on Panini’s As/adhydyi 
G1321 : Published Moradabad, 1928. 
HARI SAMKARA JHA (1929) 
Kuficikd on Patafijali’s Mahabhasya 
See e566. 


516 ENCYQLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


VASUDEVA SASTRI ABHYANKAR (1929) 
Tattvadarfa on Nagesa Bhatta’s ParibhasenduSekhara 
See e1250. 
Vriti on (JFainendra) Paribhasa, based on Abhayanandin’s commentary 
G1322 : Edited in Paribhasdsamgraha 
NAVKISHORE JHA (1931) 
Avyayarthamala on Ramacandrasrama’s Siddhantacandrika 
See e1133. 
RAMA SARANA SASTRI (1931!) 
Kaumudikathakallolini 
G1323 : Edited by Gayacarana Tripathi. vacsm 54. Varanasi, 1961. 
SORYANARAYANA SUKLA (1937) 
Bhavapradipa on book 1 of Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya 
See e648. 
Vadaratna 
G1324 : Edited by R.G. Sukla. 2 volumes, xss 80. Varanasi, 1932-1949, 
P.S. ANANTANARAYANA SASTRI (1940) 
Vakyatattva 
G1325 : Published Trichur, 1940. 
SADASIVA SASTRI (SARMAN) JOSHI (1946) 
Arthadipiké on Nagegéa Bhatta’s Paramalaghumafijitsa 
See e1244, 
Sudha on Varadaraja’s Madhyasiddhantakaumudi 
See e1143, 
Commentary on Ramacandraérama’s Siddhantacandrika 
See e1133. 
BRAHMADEVA (1943) 
Vaiyakaranasiddhantamahijasa 
V. KRSNAMACARYA (1944) 
Sphotavada Upodghata 
See e1265. 
BALA KRSNA PANCOLI (1947) 
Prabha on Konda Bhatta’s Vaipdkaranabhisanaséra 
See e1189, 
RUDRA PRASADA SARMA (1948) 
Pradipa on Panini’s (?) Paniniyasiksa 
See e428. 
GANGADATTA SASTRI (1950) 
Tattvaprakasika on Panini’s Astadhyayi 
See e119. 
MADHUKANTA SARMA JHA (1950) 
PrakéSa on Patafijali’s Mahabhasya 
G1326 : Published uss 199. Varanasi, 1950. 
SOMANATHA SARMAN (1952) 
Visesavivrti on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi 
See €1096. 
RAMA PRASADA TRIPATHIN (1952) 
Subodhint on Konda Bhatta’s Vatyakaranabhilsanasdra 
See e1190. 
RUDRADHARA JHA SARMAN (1954) 
Tativaloka on Pataiijali’s AMfahabhasya 
See ¢598. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 517 


SAMKARA SASTRIN MARULAKARA (1957) 
Samkari on Konda Bhatta’s Vaiyakaranabhitsanasara 
See e1 192. 
KALIKA PRASADA SUKLA (1961) 
Jvotsné on Nagésa Bhatta’s Paramalaghumatyiisa 
See e] 245. 
SRIDHARENDRA SHARMA GHILDAYAL (1962) 
Commentary on Vibhaktyartha section of Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi 
See e1103. 
K. A. SUBRAMANIA IYER (1963) 
Commentary on the Brahmakanda of Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya 
See e710. 
ACYUTANANDA SASTRIN (1963) 
Sugandha on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhdntakaumudi 
See e168. 
RAGHUNATHA SHARMA (1963) 
Ambakartri on Bhartrhari’s Vakpapadiya 
See e711. 
Vyakaranadarsanabindu 
G1327 : Published Varanasi, 1971. 
SABHAPATI SARMAN UPADHYAYA (1963) 
Rainaprabha on Nagesa Bhatta’s Paramalaghumaftjisa 
See e1 239. 
BRAHMADATTA JIJNASU (1964) 
Asfadhyaytbhasyaprathamaortti 
G1328 : Edited by Yudhisthira Mimamsaka. 3 volumes. Amritsar, 1964-1968. 
BHIMASENA SASTRI (1969) 
Bhaimi on Konda Bhatta’s Vaiyékaranabhasanasara 
See e1195. 
SATYAKAMA VARMA (1970) 
Commentary on Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya, book 1 
See e737. 
N.S. RAMANUJA TATACARYA (1972) 
Viuyti on Nagega Bhatta’s FAdpakasamgreha 
See 1266. 
MURALIDHARA MISRA (1977) 
Rafmi on Ramacandra’s Prakriyakaumudt 
See e1053. 


Part 2: AuTHORs AND Works WHOSE 
Dares ARE UNKNOWN 


ADENNA 
(vm 1.428) 
Sphirti on Kaiyata’s Mahabhasyapradipa 
(vm 1.428) 
AJITASENA ACARYA 
(Belvalkar, p. 60; ym 1.603; NCat 1.86) 


518 ENGYCGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(Mani) Prakasikd on Yaksavarman’s Cintamani 
(NCat 1.86) 
ANANDADATTA 
(Abhyankar, p. 60) 
Candravyakaranapaddhati 
(NCat 2.105; 7.18) 
ANANDA SIDDHANTAVAGISA 
Karakananda or Karakddyarthanirnaya 
(NCat 2.96; 3.378) 
ANANTA (perhaps more than one) 
Karakacakra 
(NCat 1.159) 
Vakpamaitjari 
(NGat 1.169} 7 
ANANTA BHATTA (perhaps more than one) 
Jatisaktivada 
(NCat 1.176) 
Sabdasudha 
ANANTASURI 
Prayogasiksa 
(NGat 1.184) 
Linganirnayacandrika 
(NCat 1.184) 
APPAYYA DIKSITA 
Vrétivarttika on the Vyaitjananirnaya of Nagega Bhatta’s Vaiyakaranasiddhantamafjiisa 
G1329 : Edited by Sivadatta and K. P. Parab. Kavyamala 38. Bombay, 1893. 
BALARAMA 
DhatuprakdSa (samgraha) and Tippani thereon 
(NCat 9.291) 
BETARAYA 
Dhdtumalika 
(NCat 9.292) 
BHAGAVATBHAKTA 
Bhasya on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudt : 
G1330 : (Mrs.) Saroj Gune, ‘‘Bhasha Siddhanta Kaumudi of Bhagavatbhakta,” 
sPAtoc 27, 1974, 248-249. . 
BHASKARA (perhaps more than one) 
Vildsa on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudit 
(NCat 5.111) 
Dhétupatha 
(NCat 9.288) 
BHATTA SIROMANI (or SIROMANI BHATTA or SIVANANDAYOGASVAMIN) 
Taddhitakosa 
(NCat 8.85) 
BHAVA MISRA or SARMAN 
Vriti on (Katantra) Paribhasa 
G1331 : Edited by K. V. Abhyankar in Paribhdsdsamgraha, pp. 67-75. 
BHAVANATHA 
Dhétupallava 
(NCat 9.286) 
BILVESVARA or VILVESVARA 
Kalapacandra on Sarvavarman’s Katantrasiitras 
See e653; e657; e658. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 519 


(PEDDINTI) BRAHMADEVA 
Vyakhya on Varadaraja’s Madhyasiddhantakaumudi (completed by his pupil Agnihotra) 
(NCat 1.45) 
CAKRIN 
(Abhyankar, p. 160) 
Jagrahitetivada (defending Madhava against Bhattoji Diksita) 
(NCat 6.290) 
CANDRADATTA JHA 
Paribhasémanimala 
(NCat 6.354) 
CANDRAKANTA VIDYALAMKARA of Gamerimuri 
Dhatumafijari 
(NCat 6.346; 9.292) 
CANDRASEKHARA 
ParibhésenduSekhara (or commentary on it? ) 
(NCat 6.368) 
CANDRASEKHARA VIDYALAMKARA 
(ym 1.626) 
Arthabodhini on Goyicandra’s Samksiptasaratika 
(NCat 6.370) 
CANGADASA or CAKADASA or GARCADASA 
(Gos 134, 1961, 151) 
SambandhoddesSa or Sambandhopadesa 
(NCat 7.1; 6.402) 
Vaiyakaranajivatu or Cangasiitra 
(NCat 7.2) 
CHICGHU or GHUGCHU or CHUCGHUKE BHATTA 
(Gos 134, 1961, 158) 
Laghuortti on Kashmiri recension of Katantra 
(NCat 3.317) 
CUDAMISRA 
Paninisitrasict or Asfadhydyisittrasict 
(NCat 7.70) 
DAMODARA 
Dhatuvriti on the Mugdhabodha 
(NCat 9.19) 
DAMODARA DEVASARMAN 
Commentary on Jumara’s Samksiptasara 
Nat 9.19) 
DAMODARA SARMAN 
Pratyayamauktikamdla 
(NCat 9.23) 
Balabodha or Balabodhiné 
(NGat 9.23) 
DANO(KACARYA) 
Dhatulakana or DaSadhatusédhana 
(NCat 8.320) 
DASABALA 
(Abhyankar, p. 197, NCat 8.346) 
Dasabélakarika (of Samksiptasara or Jaumara school) 
G1332 : Edited Katantraganmala, Calcutta, 1924, 


520 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


DATTA RAMA BHATTA 
Vriti on Panini’s Astadhyayt 
(NCat 1.472; 2.294) 
DAYASAMKARA 
Anubandhakhandanavada 
(NCat 8.324) 
DEVADATTA 
Katantravrtti 
(NCat 3.313; 9.107) 
DEVADATTA 
Anvayadipika (Jain work) 
(NCat 1.241) 
DEVAKINANDANA 
Avyayarthalahari 
(NCat 1.431) 
Karakadibodhint 
(NCat 3.378) 
DEVASAHAYA 
(vm 1.502) 
Laghu(urtti) viorti on Panini’s Astadhyayt 
(NCat 1.472) 
DEVASARMAN 
(aos 134, 1961, 200) 
Samanvayapradipasamketa, metrical recast of Kudaka’s work 
(NCat 4.176) 
DEVIDATTA SASTRIN 
Ekagotra sitraparémarsa 
(N@at 9.135) 
DEVIDASA 
Paninisiitrarthasamgraha 
(NQat 9.135) 
DEVIDASA CAKRAVARTIN 
(ym 1.637) 
Commentary on the Mugdhabodha 
(NGat 9.135) 
DHANAJIT 
(Abhyankar, p. 206) 
Dhétukalpatatiké 
(Nat 9.284) 
DHANANJAYA 
Kramakaumudi on a Sanskrit Dhatupétha 
(NCat 9.216) 
DHANANJAYA BHATTACARYA 
ParyéyaSabdaratina 
(NCat 9.218) 
DHANAPRABHA SORI, a Jain 
Dhundhiké on Durgasimha’s Kétantraurtti 
(NCat 3.312) 
Dhundhiké on Trilocanadasa’s Katantrapafijika 
(NGat 9.222) 
DHARMADASA 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 521 


Commentary on Candra’s Céndravyakarana 
(NGat 9.248) 
DHARMADEVA 
Pafjiké on Anubhitisvartipa’s Sdrasvataprakriya 
(NCat 9.248) 
(RAJAKUMARA) DHARMASASTRIN 
Laghuvyiti on Pajyapada’s Jainendravyakarana 
G1333 : Edited Varanasi, 1924. 
DIVYASIMHA MISRA 
Karikabhasya 
(NCat 9.51) 
DRAVYESA JHA 
PratyekdrthaprakaSiké on Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya 
See e656. 
ELESVARAGNIHOTRA 
Laksyamala 
(NCat 3.77-78) 
GADADHARA 
Tika on Nagesa Bhatta’s Paribhdsendusekhara 
(NCat 11.226) 
GANESA 
Vrtti on Nagesa Bhatta’s Paribhasendusekhara 
(NCat 5.267) 
GANGADASA (PANDITA) 
(ym 2,410) 
Vakyapadt 
(NCat 5.195) 
GANGADASACARYA 
Kétantra Vyakhyalekha 
(NCat 3.309) 
GANGADATTA 
Nyasasamgraha 
(NCat 5.194) 
GANGADATTA SASTRIN 
Commentary on Panini’s Asfédhyayi 
G1334 : Edited Jullundur, 1905, 1962. 
G1335 : Edited Hardwar, 1950. 
GANGADHARA (ym 2.181) 
Commentary on Vardhamina’s Ganaratnamahodadhi 
(NCat 5.200, 257) 
GANGADHARA NATHA 
Vagisamata 
(NCat 5.203) 
GANGADHARA SARMAN 
Vyakaranasamgraha (of the Vopadeva system) 
(NCat 5.206) 
GANGARAMITRA PATHIN (MALAVA) 
Sabdasudhanidhi 
(NCat 5.213) 
GANGESA MISRA UPADHYAYA 
Sumanorama 
(NCat 5.226) 


522 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


GANGESA SARMAN 
Katantrakaumudi 
(NCat 3.317) 
GAURAMOHANA BHATTA (VIDYARATNA) 
Ratnavalt (of Samksiptasara school) 
(NCat 6.234) 
GAUTAMA 
Katantradipika 
(NCat 3.309; 6.223) 
GEYADEVA 
(Pratipadika) Gapapathasamgraha 
(NCat 5.256) 
GHANASYAMA 
Varnaprakasa 
(NCat 6.275) 
Dhatukosa 
G1536 : Edited jrsmi 26.2-3, 1974. 
GIRIJA 
Tika on Varadaraja’s Laghusiddhaniakaumudi 
See e1062, G1173. 
GOLHANA 
Tippanika on Haimacatuskaortti 
(NCat 6.182) 
GOPALA 
Commentary on Nageéga Bhatta’s Sabdendusekhara 
(NCat 6.133) 
GOPALACGARYA 
Sthemadarpana 
(NCat 6.155) 
GOPINATHA 
Sabdaupyakhya 
(NCat 6.161) 
GOPINATHA BHATTA 
Karakavyuipattirahasya 
(NGat 3.378) 
GOSVAMI SRI SIVANANDABHATTA 
Padawyavasthakosa 
(NQat 11.102) 
GOVARDHANA BHATTA 
(Gos 134, 1961, 145) 
Kéatantrakaumudi 
(Nat 3.317) 
Commentary on Vardhamana’s Gayaratnamahodadhi 
(Nat 5.257) 
GOVINDA BHATTA 
Commentary on Katantra Dhatupatha 
(NGat 3.315; 6.190) 
Sispaprabodhika on Katantra 
(NCat 6.201) 
GOVINDA MISRA 
Commentary on Siradeva’s Paribhasdurtti 
(NGat 6.203) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 523 


GOVINDA PANDITA 
Katantraparisista 
(NCat 6.200) 
GOVINDARAMA VIDYASIROMANI 
Sabdadipika on Mugdhabodha 
(NCat 6.205) 
GOVINDA SENA 
Paribhasdpradipa 
G1337 : Edited (3d edition), Calcutta, 1906. 
(SIDDHA) GUNAKARA 
Vyékaranafika 
(NCat 6.58) 
GURUWARA BALA SASTRI 
Tippani on Patafijali’s Mahabhasya (?) 
See e542. 
HARAGOVINDA VIDYAVACASPATI 
Jhapakdvali (Samksipta work) 
(NCat 7.350) 
HARANATHA VIDYARATNA 
Dhatupradipa on Vopadeva’s Mugdhabodha 
G1338 : Edited by Madhavacandra Tarkacudamani. 
HARIDATTA (DAIVAJNA?) 
Unadisitira 
(NCat 2.294) 
Upasargarihadipika 
(NCat 2.376) 
HARIKRSNA 
Avyayartha 
(NGat 1.431) 
HARI PANDITA 
Commentary on Panini’s Asfadhyayit 
(NCat 1.472) 
HARIRAMA BHATTACARYA 
Séra on Sarvavarman’s Kdtantrasiltras 
See e663. 
(BHAGAVAT) HARI SASTRI 
Citraprabha on Hari Diksita’s? Laghusabdaratna 
See e1100. 
HARSAKIRTI SURI 
(ym 2.129) 
Vivarana on Hemacandra’s Sabdanusasana-Dhatuparayana 
(NCat 9.290) 
HAYAGRIVACARYA 
Candriké or Arthamafjari on Nagega Bhatta’s Sabdendusekhara 
(NCat 6.379, 11.222) 
Arthamaiijari on Nagesa Bhatta’s ParibhasenduSekhara 
(NCat 11.228) 
ISVARAKANTHA 
Dhatumala 
(NCat 2.273, 9.292) 
ISVARAMISRA 


524 ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Ripatarangint 
(NCat 2.277) 
ISVARIPRASADA 
Sabdakaustubha 
(NCat 2.280) 
JAGADDHARA 
Commentary on Haradatta’s Padamafijari 
See e918, 
JAGADISA 
Papiniyaséra 
(NCat 7.126) 
JAGANNATHA 
(Gos 134, 1961, 159; ym 1.633-634) 
Sdrapradipiké on Anubhiti Svaripacarya’s Sarasvatiprakriya 
(NCat 7.134) 
(MAHAMAHOPADHYAYA) JAGANNATHA 
Siddhantatattva 
(NCat 7.134) 
JANARDANA SARMAN 
Sabdaratna (of Katantra school) 
(NCat 7.153) 
JAYANTA BHATTA 
Vadighdtamudgara on Anubhiitisvariipacarya’s Sdrasvataprakriya 
(NCat 7.181) 
JINADEVASORI 
Kriyakalapa 
(NCat 5.130; 7.256) 
JNANESVARA 
Sabdabhasa 
(NCat 7.349) 
KALADHARA 
Saktisphuta 
(NCat 3.223) 
KALIDASA CAKRAVARTIN 
Dhatuprabodha 
(NCat 9.291) 
KALI KUMARA SARMAN 
Vydkaranddarsa 
G1339 : Published. 
KALYANAMALA 
(Gos 134, 1961, 113) 
Dipa on Hari Diksita’s Sabdaratna 
(NGat 3.256) 
KAMADEVA GHOSA 
Sabdaratndkara 
(NCat 3.349) 
KANAKALALA SARMAN 
Samksiptabalabedhint on Varadaraja’s Laghustddhantakaumudi 
See e1166. 
KANTA NATHA 
Sabdartharatnavalt 
(NGat 3.340) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


KASINATHA (perhaps several different) 
Kyduivarana 
(NCat 4.126) 
Dhatuprayogdvalt 
(NCat 4.127) 
Visesyavdda 
(NCat 4.127) 
Sifubodha 
(NCat 4.127) 
Prakriya@sdra on Ramacandra’s Prakriyakaumudt 
(NCat 4.527) 
KASINATHA DEVASARMAN 
Pradipa 
(NCat 4.133) 
KASINATHA MISRA 
Dhatusamgraha 
(NCat 4.133) 
KASIRAJA 
Commentary on Katantra 
(cf. ym 1.519) 
KASISVARA 
(Belvalkar, p. 94; ym 1.639) 
Dhdtupatha (of Saupadma school) 
(NCat 4.141) 
KASYAPA 
Bélavabodhana on Candravyakarana 
See e797. 
KAVI KANTHAHARA 
?(Kalapa) Carkaritarahasya 
G1340 : Edited Calcutta, 1905. 
KAVINDRANANDANA 
Vrtti on Kydvytit 
(NCat 4.281) 
KAVISARANGA 
Prayuktakhydtamafijart 
(NCat 3.287) 
KAVI VALLABHA 
Aparavisayapramapani 
(NCat 3.285) 
KEDARESVARA SARMAN 
Dhéatvavalé 
(NCat 9.296) 
KESARI MISRA 
Rapratythéramandana 
(NCat 5.75) 
KESAVA 
(yM 2.417) 
Sphotapratistha 
(NCat 5.61) 
KESAVADEVA TARKAPANCANANA BHATTACARYA 
(Belvalkar, p. 92) 


525 


526 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Vyakaranadurghajodghata on Goyicandra’s Samksiptasdravivarana 
(NCat 5.64) 
KHANA NRPATI 
Sabdaprakisa 
(NCGat 5.184) 
KODANDARAMA 
(Abhyankar, p. 129) 
Sabdasiddhantamafjart 
(NCat 5.93) 
KOLAHALA 
Paribhasdpradipa 
(NCat 5.95) 
KRPALA PANDITA 
Katantrakaumudi 
(NCat 9.317; 4.283) 
KRPARAMA 
Kéarakartha 
(NCat 4.282} 
Commentary on a Satpadt 
(NCat 4.282) 
KRSNA BHATTA 
Commentary on Nagesa Bhatta’s Paribhasendusekhara 
(NCat 4.335) 
KRSNA BHATTACARYA or SARMAN 
Prabhavati on the Sarasvata Vrttipatjika 
(NCat 4.340) 
KRSNACARYA (more than one?) 
Candrika 
(NCat 4.9) 
Yuktiratnékara 
(NCat 4.9) 
KRSNA DVIVEDIN 
Sphofatativa 
(NCat 4.324) 
KRSNA PANDITA 
Gadhabhavavivrti on Ramacandra’s Prakriyakaumudi 
(NCat 6.95) 
KRSNA SASTRIN 
(NCat 4.364) 
Sudhakara on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudi 
(NCat 4.364) 
Subantaprakasa 
(NCat 4.364) 
KRSNASUDHI or KRSNAMACARIAR 
Taéravali on Panini’s Astadhydyt 7.2.115 
(NGat 8.159) 
KRSNAVADHOTA 
Karakaniripana 
(NGat 3.375) 
KUDAKACARYA 
Samanvayapradipa 
(NCat 4.176) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 527 


KULLUKA BHATTA 
Ripaprakasa following Dhétupradipa 
(NCat 4.248) 
LAKSMANA DVIVEDIN 
Douikarmavada 
(NCat 9.205) 
LAKSMIDATTA, son of Krsnamitra 
Padarthadipika 
(NCat 11.108) 
LAKSMIDHARA, son of Nrsimhodgatr, lived in Puri 
Namanirmaladarpana 
(NCat 10.44) 
LAKSMIKARA or LAKSMISRI of Nepal 
(Candra) Tinanta 
(Cordier 3.460) 
LAKSMINARAYANA VYASA 
Astadhyayisittrakosa 
(NCat 1.471) 
LOKESVARA SARMAN SUKLA 
Siddhantaratnavali on Anubhiti’s Sarasvataprakriya 
See e998. 
MAHALINGA SASTRIN 
Unadiriipavalt 
(NCat 2.293) 
MAHESA JHA 
Dhatuparyayamanimala 
(NCat 9.286) 
MANALUR VIRARAGHAVACARYA 
Commentary on Panini’s Asfadhyayi 
Gi341 : Edited mcomL 33 (1954), 47 (1955) 
(SRI) MANASARMAN of Campahatti, son of Laksmipati 
Vijaya on Siradeva’s Paribhasaoriti 
G1342 : Edited in Paribhasdsamgraha, pp. 273-292. 
MANGARASA 
(Belvalkar, p. 60) 
Pratipada on Yaksavarman’s Cintamani 
MANIKYADEVA 
(Belvalkar, p. 45; cos 134, 1961, 306) 
Vriti or Dasapadi on (Jain) Upddisitras 
(NCat 8.345) 
MAUNISEKHARA, pupil of Rajasekhara 
Commentary on Kétantra 
(NCat 3.224) 
NANDAKIRTI 
Tyadyantasya prakriyapaddrohana 
(NCat 8.227) 
NANDANA MISRA or NYAYAVAGISA, son of Banegvara Miégra 
Tantrapradipoddipana on Jinendrabuddhi’s Nyasa 
(NCat 4.119, 9.327) 
NARAHARI 
Prabodha on Trilocana’s Katantravrttipatijika 
(NCat 3.311, 9.367) 


528 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


NARAHARI, disciple of Narayana Tirtha 
(Belvalkar, p. 97; ym 1.639) 
Bala (ka) bodha 
(NCat 9.368) 
NARAIN DATTA TRIPATHIN 
Prakéga on Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya, Book 1 
See e662. 
NARASIMHA SURI, son of Rudracarya of Kaundinya gotra 
Saptasvarasindhu or Svaramatjari 
(NCat 9.364) 
NARAYANA BHARATI 
(Belvalkar, p. 85) 
Sarasvatasdrasamgraha 
(NCat 10.94) 
NARAYANA 
(NCat 3.374) 
Karakacakra-Dipaprabha 
G1343 : Edited rss 33, 1913. 
NARAYANA of Kerala 
Prakriyasdéra 
(NCat 10.86) 
NARAYANA of Govindapura 
Pradipa or Sabdabhitsapa on Panini’s A stadhyayi 
(NCat 1.472) 
NAROTTAMA VIDYALAMKARA BHATTACARYA 
Samksiptasdrakarika 
(NCat 9.372) 
NAYASUNDARA, pupil of Dhanaratna 
Rilparatnamdla or Sdrasvatavyakarana 
(NCat 9.350) 
NILAMBARA MISRA 
Manoramiacandrika 
(NCat 10.184) 
NRSIMHA (more than one? ) 
Siktiratnakara on Patanjali’s Mahabhasya 
(NCat 10.190) 
Ripamala 
(NCat 10.190) 
NRSIMHA TARKAPANCANANA 
Ganamartanda on Samksiptaséra-Dhatupé tha 
(NCat 9.290, 10.195) 
ORAM BHATTA 
Vydkaranadipika on Panini’s Asfadhydyi 
G1344 : Edited by Ganapati Sastri Mokate, Pan n. s. 29 (1907)-37(1915). Re- 
printed Varanasi, 1916. 
PADMADHARA 
Indira 
(NCat 11.153) 
(RAJA) PADMANARAYANA 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 529 


Sifubodha 
(NGat 11.131) 
PADMASUNDARA 
Unddisadhana or Sundaraprakafasabdaérnava 
(NCat 2.293) 
PANCANANA KANDALI 
Chandraka Bhaésya on Ratnamala 
(NCat 11.72) 
?Varnaviveka 
(NCat 11.72) 
PASUPATI of Radha 
Karakapariksa 
(NCat 3.375) 
PITAMBARA VIDYABHUSANA 
Katantra-Dhatusitrapatrika or Kavirajapatrika 
See e656. 
PRAVARTAKOPADHYAYA 
(Abhyankar, p. 271; ym 1.428) 
Prakéfa or PrakaSika on Kaiyata’s Mahabhasyapradipa 
(NCat 5.76) 
PRAYOGAVENKATADRI 
(ym 1.415) 
Vidvanmukhabhisana or -Mandana on Patafijali’s Mahabhasya (MS at Adyar Library) 
PRTHVICANDRA or PRTHVIDHARA 
Daurgasimhavziti on Durgasimha’s Katantravrtti 
(NCat 3.313) 
PRTHVISVARA 
Sarvalaksana on Harsavardhana’s Litganusasana 
See e818. 
PUNYASUNDARAGANI 
(Belvalkar, p. 66) 
Dhatupatha (Hemacandra school) 
(NGat 9.290 ) 
PURNAGANDRA 
Dhatupatha 
G1345 : Biswanath Bhattacharya, ‘‘On the Sanskrit Restoration of Pairnacandra’s 
Dhdtu-Pétha from Tibetan Base,”’ JaBRas 52-53, 1977-1978, 88-91. 
RADHAKRSNA GOSVAMIN 
Aoyayartha 
(NCat 1.431) 
RAGHAVA JHA 
Karakarthavicara 
(NGat 3.379) 
Dvuandvatkasesavdda 
(NCat 9.189) 
RAGHAVA SURI (ym 2.329) 
Arthaprakasiké on Katyayana’s Varttika (MS in Madras) 
RAGHAVENDRACARYA 
Candrika on Nagega Bhatta’s Laghusabdendusekhara 
(NCat 6.379) 
RAGHUNANDA SIROMANI 


530 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(Belvalkar, p. 71) 
Katantratativaérnava or Kalapatattodraava 
See e653. 
RAGHUNATHA SASTRI VAIYAKARANA 
Laghutika on Nageséa Bhatta’s ParibhdsenduSekhara 
See el 134. 
RAJARAMA DIKSITA 
Commentary on Hari Bhaskara’s Paribhasdbhaskara 
(NCat 11.22) 
RAJIVA SARMAN or VISVANATHA CAKRAVARTIN or RAMADEVA 
SARMAN 
?Acaksanaviveka 
(NCat 2.21) 
RAMACANDRA, son of Visvanatha and disciple of Krsna Pandita 
Kriydkosa, abridgment of Bhattamalla’s Akhydtacandrika 
G1346 : Edited Varanasi, 1876. 
RAMACANDRA 
Karakacandrika 
(NCat 3.374) 
RAMACARANA 
Kartysiddhantamafijart 
(NCat 3.187) 
RAMACARITRA TRIPATHIN 
Phakkika Saralartha 
G1347 : Edited by Sadasiva Sastri Joshi. uss 21. Varanasi, 1932. 
Paftcasamasiya 
(NCat 11.60) 
RAMAJNA PANDEYA 
Vyakaranadarfanapratima 
G1348 : Edited by Ramagovind Sukla. powssst. Varanasi, 1979. 
RAMA KINKARA SARASVATI 
(Gos 134, 1961, 323; YM 1.639) 
Asubodha 
(NCat 2.198) 
RAMAKUMARA NYAYABHODSANA, son of Ramagati Vacaspati 
(NCat 3.225) 
Kalépasdra (based on Mugdabodha, Sarasvata, and KAtantra systems) 
(NGat 3.225) 
RAMADEVA MISRA 
Vrttipradipa on Jayaditya/Vamana’s Kasika 
(NCat 4.119) 
RAMANANDA TIRTHA 
Kalépasamgraha, a brief exposition of Katantra 
(NCat 3.225) 
RAMANARAYANA SARMAN 
Bhasya on Anubhiiti’s Sérasvataprakriya 
See €1004. 
RAMANATHA CAKRAVARTIN 
Sabdaratnavali or Katantravritiprabodha or Sabdasadhyaprabodhini 
(NCat 3.314) 
RAMAPANIVADA 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 531 


Vivarana on Narayana Bhattari’s Dhatukauya 
See €1002. 
RAMARSI 
Auyaparthamafjari on an Avpayarthakos§a 
(NCat 1.431) 
RAMASIMHA (more than one?) 
Commentary on Haradatta’s Padamafjari 
See e918. 
Dhéaturatnamanjari 
(NCat 9.292) 
RAMESVARA TARKAVACASPATI BHATTACARYA 
Kérakamalétikd on a Rain wala 
(NCat 3.376) 
RATIDEVA SIDDHANTAVAGISA, son of Gangadharacarya of the Catta family of 
Bengal 
Kriparisista 
(NCat 4.273) 
RATNAMATI 
Tiké on Gandragomin’s siléras 
(NCat 7.19) 
RATNAPANI 
(Sat)Karakavivarapa 
(NCat 3.377) 
G1349 ; Edited by H.V. Nagaraja Rao. mo 9, 1976, 49-62. 
RATNESVARA 
Commentary on Haradatta’s Padamaitjari 
See e917; e918. 
RUPARAMA NYAYAPANCANANA 
Kérakarahasya, a Saupadma work 
(NCat 3.376) 
SABARASVAMIN 
(Belvalkar, p. 44; cos 134, 1961, 383; ym 2.264) 
Sarvarthalaksana on Harsavardhana’s commentary on Hemacandra’s Linigdnufasana 
See e817. 
SABHAPATI SARMA UPADHYAYA 
Laksmi on Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudt 
See €1017; G1104. 
SACCIDANANDA 
Taddhitagupadipika 
(NCat 8.85) 
SADANANDA 
Subodhini on Anubhiti’s Sarasvatiprakriya 
See e988; e1134. 
Subodhini on Ramacandrasrama’s Siddhdntacandrika 
See €1041. 
SAMANTABHADRA 
(Belvalkar, p. 60) 
Tippani on Yaksavarman’s Cintamani 
SAMKARA 
Tiké on Purusottamadeva’s Mahabhasyalaghuvriti 
(x 2.403) 
SAMKARA SARMAN 


532 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Katantraparisistaprabodhaprakasika 
(NCat 3.316) 
SANATANA TARKACARYA 
(ym 1.509) 
Tippani on Panini’s Astadhyayit 
(NCat 1.472) 
Prabha on ?Jinendrabuddhi’s Nyasa (or ?Maitreyaraksita’s Tantrapradipa) 
(NCat 4.119, 8.90) 
SARVADHARA UPADHYAYA 
Commentary on (Katantra) Upadisiliras 
(NCat 2.295) 
Vanmayapradipa on Durgasimha’s Katantravrtti 
(NCat 3.313) 
Tyadayantasyaprakriya or Kalapatyadivy ttt 
(NCat 8.227) 
SASTHIDASA, son of Jayakrsna Tarkavagisa 
Dhatumala 
(NCat 9.292) 
SATYAVARYARYA 
Commentary on some Upddisaitras 
(NCat 2.295) 
(KASI) SESA SARMAN, patronized by King Krsnaraja III of Mysore 
(Belvalkar, p. 45; ym 2.299) 
Sarvamangala on Nagesa Bhatta’s ParibhasenduSekhara 
(NCat 4.141, 11.228) 
SIDDHANATHA VIDYAVAGISA 
Commentary on Purusottamadeva’s Prayogaratnamala 
Gi350 : Edited. Kuch Bihar, 1890-1903. 
SITANATHA SASTRIN 
Samjivani on Akhydta section of Sarvavarman’s Kéatantrasiitras 
See e658. 
SIVADASA or SIVARAMA SARMAN (VACASPATI) 
Kyrnmafijari with autocommentary 
Gi351 : Edited Dacca, 1886. 
G1352 : Edited Calcutta, 1905-1906. 
See e647 
SIVADASA CAKRAVARTIN 
Commentary on Samksiptasara Unadisiltras 
(NCat 2.296) 
SIVANANDA GOSVAMIN or SIROMANI BHATTA, a southerner who visit~.' 
Bikaner during the reign of Anupsingh 
Karakakosa or Vibhaktyarthavivarapa 
(NCat 3.372) (See DKRPV, p. 363.) 
SIVANANDA PANDEYA 
Rainadipika on Nageséa Bhatta’s Paramalaghumafijisa 
See el 122. 
SIVANARAYANA SIROMANI 
Tippanit on Vopadeva’s Mugdhabodha 
See e1916. 
SIVA PANDITA 
Kusumavikasa on Haradatta’s Padamaftjari 
(NCat 4.120) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 533 


SOMANATHA 
Brhatt Candrika 
(NCat 6.380) 
SOMAPRABHA, a Jain 
Auktika 
(NCat 3.97) 
SRIDEVA PANDITA 
Arthasamgraha 
(NCat 1.389) 
SRIKANTA MISRA 
Candrika 
(NCat 6.380 ) 
SRIKRSNA SARMAN 
Tinam Saktih or Tinivicara? 
(NCat 8.166) 
SRINATHA SIROMANI 
Manorama on Sarvavarman’s Katantrasiliras 
See e655. 
SRINIVASA 
Commentary on Haribhaskara’s Paribhasabhaskara 
(NCat 11.22) 
SRIPRABHA SURI 
Karakoktisamuccaya 
(NCat 3.379) 
SRSTIDHARACARYA 
Commentary on Purusottamadeva’s Bhdsdoriti 
See e938. 
SRUTASAGARA, pupil of Vidyananda 
Dhatuparayana 
(NCat 9.290) 
SUDARSANACARYA 
Karakarthapradipika 
(NCat 3.379) 
SUDARSANA DEVA 
Pradipa on Santanava’s Phitsiiiras 
See e644. 
SUSENA KAVIRAJA MISRA, son of Misra Mahidhara 
Candra or Vydkhyasara on Trilocana’s Katantraurttipatyika 
G1353 : “‘Akhyataviraja’” portion edited Dacca, 1890. 
See e656. 
SVETAVANAVASIN, son of Aryabhatta of Gargya gotra 
(NCat 2.172, 294-295) 
Vrtti on Updadisittras 
G1354 : Edited by T.R. Chintamani, muss 7.1, 1933. 
TALADEVASUDHI 
Dhatupratyayapaficika 
(NCat 9.291) 
TARANATHA, son of Kalidasa of Vatsa family 
Sabdartharatna 
G1355 : Edited Calcutta, 1951. 
TARAPADA NYAYARATNA 


534 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Kérakacandrika 
G1356 : Edited Calcutta, 1902. 
TARKALAMKARA BHATTACARYA 
Dhdtucandrikd 
(NCat 8.135) 
TEKNATHA (?) 
Paribhdsarthadipika 
(NCat 8.3) 
THAKKURADASA NYAYAPANCANANA, son of Mrtyufijaya Sarasvati 
Dhdatucandrikd 
(NGat 8.5) 
TILAKA 
Tika on Ksirasvamin’s Nipatduyayopasargavrtti 
G1357 ; Edited svos 28, 1951. 
TRILOGANA (more than one?) 
Avyayasabdavstti 
(NCat 8.261) 
Dhatupérayana 
(NCat 8.261) 
Vaiyakaranakotipattra 
(NCat 8.262) 
TRILOKANATHA, son of Vaidyanatha 
KarakGrthanirnaya or Satkarakaniritpana 
(NCat 3. 378, 8.259) 
UTSAVAKIRTI, SARANGA UPADHYAYA 
Padasiryaprakriya (Katantra work) 
(NCat 2.322, 3.309, 11.103) 
VAIJALADEVA 
Prabodhacandrika 
G1358 : G.V. Tagare, ‘‘Vaijadeva’s Prabedhacandrika,”’ spaioc 19, 1956, 36-37. 
VALABHIDATTA 
Commentary on Nagega Bhatta’s ParibhasenduSsekhara 
(NCat 11.227) 
VANGADASA 
Taddhitopadesa 
(NCat 8.86) 
VARENDRA GCAMPAHATTIYA MANASARMAN, son of Laksmipati 
Commentary on Siradeva’s Paribhaséurtti 
(NCat 1.203) 
Anuhyasaséra? 
(NCat 1.203) 
VASUDEVA 
Kaskévsitiséra 
(NCat 4.120) 
VEDANTACARYA 
Kaumudisérasamgraha, suramary of Bhattoji Diksita’s Siddhantakaumudt 
(NCat 5.111) 
VIDYACAKRAVARTIN 
Commentary on Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya (lost) 
VIJAYAVIMALA 
Avaciri on Harsakulagani’s Kavikalpadruma 
(NCat 3.270) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 535 


VINASVARANANDIN 
Karakasambandhoddyota 
(NCat 3.378) 
(King) VIRAPANDYA 
Tinantaparyayasamgraha (?) 
(NCat 8.166) 
VIRARAGHAVACARYA 
(Cardona, p. 36) 
Paninisiitraypakhya 
G1359 : Edited by T. Chandrasekharan. 2 volumes. mcoms 33 (1954), 47 (1955). 
VISVANATHA NYAYALAMKARA 
Dhatucintaémanit (Paniniya work) 
(NCat 9.285) 
VISVANATHA SASTRI 
Prabhakari on Varadaraja’s Madhyasiddhantakaumudi 
See €1048. 
VISVESVARA SURI 
(Vyakarana) Siddhantasudhanidhi 
G1360 : Edited by Dadhi Ram Sarma, Sita Rama Sastri Shende, and Madhava 
Sastri Bhandare. ChSS 45. Varanasi, 1924. 
VISVESVARA TARKACARYA, a Katantra writer 
(Nat 2.10) 
Akhydtavyakhyana or -bodha (MSS available) 
Commentary on Trilocana’s Katantravrttipanjika 
(NCat 3.312) 
VRAJARAJA 
Undadisitra 
(NGat 2.294) 
VURAMISRA, son of Harighala 
Dhétudarpaga, composed in the city of Amritsar 
(NCat 9.285) 
YASOBHOTI 
Laghuortti or Sisyahita on Kashmiri recension of Katantra (Tibetan translation exists 
in Tanjur; see yasp 1907, 125.) 
YATISA 
Avyayarthapradipika 
(NQCat 1.431) 
AUTHOR UNKNOWN 
Sadhutvadinirvacana (MS notice in Adyar D, vol. 6, p. 245) 
AUTHOR UNKNOWN 
Sphofasiddhi (MS notice in Adyar D, vol. 6. no. 655) 
AUTHOR UNKNOWN 
Varavarnini on Nagesa Bhatta’s Laghusabdendusekhara 
See el 116. 
AUTHOR UNKNOWN 
Vijaya on Nagesa Bhatta’s Laghusabdendusekhara 
See e1116. 
AUTHOR UNKNOWN 
Visamapadavivrti on Nagesa Bhatta’s Laghusabdendusekhara 
See e1116. 
AUTHOR UNKNOWN 


536 


ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Abhinavacandriké on Nagesa Bhatta’s LaghusabdenduSekhara 
See e1116. 
AUTHOR UNKNOWN 
Sabdarilpavalit 


G1361 


: Edited by Kanaka La] Sharma. uss 3. Varanasi, 1925. 


AUTHOR UNKNOWN 
Samasasamkha 


G1362 


G1363 


G1364 : 


G1365 


G1366 


G1367 


G1368 


G1369 


G1370 


G1371 


G1372 ; 


G1373 


G1374 : 


G1375 


G1376 
G1377 
G1378 


G1379 
G1380 
G1381 


G1382 


: Edited by H.V. Nagaraja Rao. mo 12, 1979, 45-46. 


Part 3: SECONDARY LITERATURE ON Vydkarana 


: Henry T. Golebrooke, ‘‘On the Sanskrit and Prakrit Languages,” Asiatic 


Researches 7, 1803, 199-231. Reprinted HTOMR 2.1—32; Staal, pp. 33-45. 
Theodor Aufrecht, De Accenitu Compositorum Sanskritorum. Bonn, 1847. 


:N.L. Westergaard, Radices linguae sanscritae ad decreta grammaticorum definivit 


atque copia exemplorum exquisitorum illustravit. Bonn, 1841. 


: Theodor Benfey, Vollstandige Grammatik der Sanskritsprache zum Gebrauch fir 


Vorlesungen und zum Selbststudium. Leipzig, 1852. 


: William Dwight Whitney, ‘‘On the Nature and Designation of the Accent 


in Sanskrit,” TAPA 1869-1870, 20-~45. 


: Otto Bohtlingk, ‘““Das Verhalten der drei kanonischen Grammatiker in 


Indian zu den im Wirzelverzeichniss mit s und 2 anlautenden Wirzeln,” 
zpMcG 29, 1875, 483-490. 


: Franz Kielhorn, Grammatik der Sanskrit-Sprache. Ist edition 1870, translated 


1881. Wiesbaden, 1965. 


:R.G, Bhandarkar, ‘““Wilson Lectureship: Development of Language and 


of Sanskrit,” saBRAS 16, 1883-1885, 245-274. 


: Hjalmar Edgren, ‘‘On the Verbal Roots of the Sanskrit Language and of 


the Sanskrit Grammarians,”’ saos 11, 1885, 1-55. 

William Dwight Whitney, “‘The Study of Hindu Grammar and the Study 
of Sanskrit,”? ajp 5, 1884; 14 14, 1885, 33ff.; Silverstein, pp. 287-305; Staal, 
pp. 142-154. 


: O. Béhtlingk, ‘“Haben iti und ca bisweilen die Bedeutung von addi?” zpma 


41, 1887, 516-520. 
Georg Biihler, ‘‘A Disputed Meaning of the Particles i#i and ca,”” wzkm 1, 
1887, 13-20. 


: Bruno Liebich, “Die Kasuslehre der indischen Grammatiker verglichen 


mit dem Gebrauch der Kasus im Aitareya-Brahmana (ein Beitrag zur 
Syntax der Sanskrit-Sprache),’’ BB 10, 1886, 205-234; 11, 1887, 274-315, 


:J.S. Peijer, Sanskrit Syntax. Leiden, 1886; reprinted Kyoto, 1968. 
: Friedrich Knauer, “‘Zu iti und ca,” Festchrift Bohtlingk, pp. 62-67. 
: F. Kielhorn, ‘‘Scheinbare Citate von Autoritaten in grammatischen 


Werken,” Festschrift Bohtlingk, pp. 52-53; reprinted Rau, pp. 256-257. 


: William Dwight Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar. Cambridge, Mass., 1889. 
; R. Otto Franke, ‘‘Was ist Sanskrit?” pp 17, 1891, 54-96. 
: Ferdinand Kittel, ““Dravidische Elements in den Sanskrit-Dhdiupajhas,” 


Festschrift Roth, William Dwight pp. 21-24. 


: William Dwight Whitney, ‘‘On Recent Studies in Hindu Grammar,” 


aye 14, 1893, 171-197. 


BIBLLOGRAPHY 537 


G1383 : G. Buhler, “The Roots of the dhdtupaiha not Found in Literature,” wzkm 8, 
1894, 122-136. Reprinted 14 23, 1894, 141-154, 250-255; G1625, pp. 
194-204. 

G1384 : F. Kittel, “On Some Sanskrit Verbs,” 1a 24, 1895, 81-82. 

G1385 : Jakob Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, Volume 1, Lautlehre. Gottingen, 
1896. Reprinted Wackernagel. 

G1386 : F. Kielhorn, ‘‘The Jatakas and Sanskrit Grammarians,”’ yras 1898, 17-21. 
Reprinted Rau, pp. 294-298. 

G1387 : Otto Wecker, “Der Gebrauch der Kasus in der alteren Upanisad-literature 
Vergleichen mit der Kasuslehre der indischen Grammatiker,” BB 30, 1906, 
1-61, 177-207. 

G1388 : Satischandra Vidyabhusana, ‘‘Sanskrit Works on Literature, Grammar, 
Rhetoric and Lexicography as Preserved in Tibet,’ JASBe 3, 1907, 
121-132; 4, 1908, 593ff. 

G1389 : Hermann Jacobi, ‘‘Was ist Sanskrit?’ Scientia 14, 1911, 251-274. 

G1390 : V.I. Kalyanov, ‘‘Classification of the Compound Words in Sanskrit” 
(in Russian), Izvestiya of Academia of Sciences, USSR 6.1, 1912, 77-84. 

G1391 : Emil Abegg, ““Die Lehre vom sphofa im Sarvadarsanasamgraha,”’ 
Festschrift Ernst Wondisck, pp. 188-195. 

G1392 : Jakob Wackernagel, ‘‘Indo-Iranica 15. Zur Bildung des 7. Aorists im 
Altindischen”’, kz 46, 1914, 273-275. Reprinted in Wackernagel. 

G1393 : V.S. Sowani, ‘“‘The History and Significance of upamé,”’ aBori 1, 1918~1920 
87-98. 

G1394 : Gopinath Kaviraj, “‘The Doctrine of pratibhad in Indian Philosophy,” 
ABORI 5, 1923-1924, 1-18, 113-132. . 

G1395 : Bruno Liebich, ‘Uber den sphofa (ein Kapitel uber die Sprachphilosophie 
der Inder),’? zDMG 77, 1923, 208-219. 

G1396 : Siddhesvar Varma, “‘Analysis of Meaning in Indian Semantics,” jou 13, 
1926, 1-38. 

G1397 : Umesh Mishra, “‘Physical Theory of Sound and Its Origin in Indian 
Thought,” AUSt 2, 1926, 239-290. 

G1398 : Otto Strauss, ‘“‘Altindische Spekulationen tiber die Sprache und ihrer 
Probleme,’’ zpMG 81, 1927, 99-151. 

G1399 : Vittore Pisani, Grammatica dell’ antico indiano. 3 parts. Rome, 1929-1933. 

G1400 :N.H. Purandhare, ‘‘A Few Thoughts on Semantics,” asorir 10, 1929, 
127-146. 

G1401 : Siddheshwar Varma, Critical Studies in the Phonetic Observations of Indian 
Grammarians. London, 1929, Reprinted New Delhi, 1961. 

G1402 : Prabhat Chandra Chakravarti, The Philosophy of Sanskrit Grammar. Calcutta, 
1930. 

G1403 : Louis Renou, Grammaire Sanscrite. Paris, 1930. 

G1404 : Albert Thumb, Handbuch der Sanskrit. 2d edition. Heidelberg, 1930. 

G1405 : Jakob Wackernagel und Albert Debrunner, Altindische Grammatik, volume 
3, Nominalflexion-Zahlwort Pronomen. Gottingen, 1930. 

G1406 : Willem Caland, ‘“‘A Rhythmic Law in Language,” ao 9, 1931, 59-68. 

G1407 : J. Mansion, Esquzsse d’une histoire de la language sanscrite. Paris, 1931. 

G1408 : A.M. Ipzzagalli, Elementi di grammatica sanscrita. Milan, 1931. 

G1409 : P.S. Subrahmanya Sastri, ‘“History of Grammatical Theories in Tamil and 
Their Relations to the Grammatical Literature in Sanskrit,” jor 5, 1931, 
183, 271; 6, 1932, 30, 130, 236, 371; 7, 1933, 113, 255, 376. Reprinted 
Madras, 1934. 


538 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


G1410 : Paul Thieme, ‘‘Grammatik und Sprache, ein Problem der altindischen 
Sprachwissenschaft,” zm 8, 1931, 23-32. Reprinted Budruss, pp. 514-523, 

G1411 : A. Gawronski, Podrecznik Sanskrytu. Krakow, 1932. 

G1412 : V.A. Ramaswami Sastri, ‘“The Doctrine of sphofta”’, avy 1, 1932, 231-240; 
2, 1933, 109-120. 

G1413 : Paul Thieme, “‘Zur Geschichte der einheimischen indischen Grammatik,” 
ouz 35, 1932, 236-242. Reprinted Budruss, pp. 524~527. 

Gi414 :S.S. Suryanarayana Sastri, ‘“Vacaspati’s Criticism of the sphofa Theory,” 
jor 6, 1932, 311-321. 

G1415 : P.C. Chakravarti, The Linguistic Speculations of the Hindus, Calcutta, 1933. 

G1416 : K.C. Chatterji, “‘Some Technical Terms of Sanskrit Grammar,” mg 9, 
1933, 279-281; coy 3, 1936, 105-132. 





G1417 : » ““The Critics of Sanskrit Grammar,” jou 24, 1934, 1-21. 

G1418 : P.c. Chakravarti, ‘Spiritual Outlook of Sanskrit Grammar,” jou 25.1, 
1934, 1-11. 

G1419 : Kurt F. Leidecker, Sanskrit: Essentials of Grammar and Language. New York, 
1934. 


G1420:C.R. Sankaran, ‘‘Five Stages of pre-Vedic Determinative-compound- 
accentuation as Surmised by the Historical Survivals of Their Represen- 
tatives in Sanskrit,’”’ Jor 8, 1934, 335-351; 9, 1935, 119-133. 

G1i421 :K.C. Chatterji, “Some Rules of sandhi,’’ coy 2, 1935, 261-268; 3, 1935, 
9-16. 

G1422: 





, Phonetics in the Study of Classical and Sacred Languages in the East. 
Calcutta, 1935. 

G1423 : Thomas Burrow, ‘‘Indian Theories on the Nature of Meaning” (summary), 
TPs 1936, 92-93. 

G1424 : S.K. Chatterji, “A History of Aryan Speech in India,” er 60, 1936. 

G1425 : Barend Faddegon, Grammar of the Indeclinables. Amsterdam, 1936. 

G1426 : B.K. Ghosh, ‘Sanskrit Noun Inflexion,”’ nq 12, 1936, 53-66. 

G1427 :S.M. Katre, ‘‘New Lines of Investigation in Indian Linguistics,” ABort 
20, 1936. 

G1428 : Gaurinath Sastri Bhattacharya, ‘“‘A Study in the Dialectics of sphota,” jou 
29.4, 1937, 1-115. Reprinted Delhi, 1980. 

G1429 : A. Carnoy, Grammaire elementaire de la langue sanscrite comparée avec celle des 

langues indo-européennes. 2d edition. Paris, 1937. 

G1430 : B.K. Ghosh, Linguistic Introduction ta Sanskrit. Calcutta, 1937. 

G1431 : Sten Konow, ‘‘Future Forms Denoting Past Time in Sanskrit and Prakrit,” 
nts 9, 1937-1938, 231-239. 

G1432 : Louis Renou, Monographie sanskrites: I: La Decadence et la disparition du 
subjonctif. Paris, 1937. 

Gi433 : Johann Schropfer, ‘‘Ein Werk iiber die Philosophie der Sanskrit-Gramma- 
tik’, ao 9, 1937, 417-429. 

G1434 : K.A. Subramania Iyer, ‘“Who Are the anityasphotavédinah?”’ paioc 8, 1937, 
258-263. : 

G1435 : Isidore Dyen, The Sanskrit Indeclinables of the Hindu Grammarians and Lexico- 
graphers. Baltimore, 1939. 

G1436 :S.P. Chaturvedi, ‘Scholastic Disquisition in the Paninian System of 
Grammar,” Bhv 2.1, 1940, 59-63. 

G1437 : K.M.K. Sharma, “‘The Doctrine of the sphofa,’’ kvracv, pp. 509-516. 

G1438 : Betty Heimann, “Spheta and artha,’’ pvKr, pp. 221-227. 

G1439 : Louis Renou, ‘Les Connexions entre le rituel et la grammaire en Sans- 
krit”, Ja 233, 1941-1942, 105-165. Reprinted G1625, pp. 435-469. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 539 


G1440 


G1441 


G1442 


G1443 


G1444 


G1445 


G1446: 


G1447 
G1448 


G1449 
G1450 
G1451 
G1452 
G1453 
G1454 


G1455 


G1456 
G1457 


G1458 


G1459 


G1469 
G1461 


G1462 
G1463 
G1464 
G1465 
G1466 
G1467 


G1468 


:K.M.K. Sarma, ‘“‘The Paninian School and the Pratigakhyas: Post- 
PAaninian Reciprocity of Influence,” Bhv 2.2, 1941, 230-238. 

: K. A. Subramania Iyer, ‘‘Pratibhé as the Meaning of a Sentence,” paroc 10, 
1941, 326-332. 

:J. R. Ballantyne, First Lessons in Sanskrit Grammar. Point Loma, Calif., 
1942; San Francisco, 1951. 

: Louis Renou, TYerminologie grammaticale du sanskrit. 3 volumes. BEPHE 280— 
282, Paris, 1942. Reprinted in 1 yolume, Paris, 1957. 

: J. P. Vogel, ‘“De eerste ‘grammatica’ van het Hindoestansch,’”’ Mededelin- 
gen der Koniklijke nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen (Amsterdam) 4(15), 
1942. 

: K. A. Subramania Iyer, ‘“‘The Conception of guna among the vaiyakaranas,” 

nia 5, 1942, 121~130. 

5. Suryanarayana Sastri, ‘“Word and Sense,”’ aBori 23, 1942, 424-430. 

: Jan Gonda, Kurze Elementargrammatik der Sanskritsprache. Leiden, 1943. 

:S. M. Katre, Some Problems of Historical Linguistics in Indo-Aryan. Bombay, 
1943. 

: Vittore Pisani, Grammatica Sanscrita. Milan, 1943-1944. 

: K.M.K. Sarma, ‘“‘Vak Before Bhartrhari,” po 8.1—-2, 1943, 21-36. 

: Jan Gonda, ‘“‘Quelques Observations sur l‘emploi du verbe simple’ au 
licu d’un compose’, etc. dans la langue sanscrite,”? ActOD 20, 1944, 
167-205. 

: Alain Daniélou, ‘“L’Alphabet Sanskrit et la langue universelle,” France- 
Orient 5 (48), 1945; Lotus bleu 61.2, 51-68. 

: Batakrishna Ghosh, ‘‘Aspects of pre-Paninean Sanskrit Grammar”, BcLV 
1.344—345. 

: T. V. Kapali Sastry, “‘Spkofa and the Spoken Word,” Sri Aurobindo Mandir 
Annual 4, 1945. 

: Gopinath Kaviraj, ‘‘Ndda, bindu and kala,” jayri 3, 1945-1946, 47-62. 
Also Festschrift Rajeswar Sastri Dravid, pp. 174-182. 

: Adrian Scharpe, Précis de grammaire du sanscrit classique I. Louvain, 1945. 

:K. A. Subramania Iyer, ““The vaiyaékaraza Conception of ‘Gender,’ ”’ 
BharKau 1945, 291-307. 

: William Dwight Whitney, Roots, Verb-Forms, and Primary Derivatives of the 
Sanskrit Language. New Haven, 1945. 

: Franklin Edgerton, Sanskrit Historical Phonology. aos Offprint Series 19, 
1946, 31. 

: Louis Renou, Grammaire sanscrite élémentaire. Paris, 1946. 

: M. Scheller, “Ein weiterer Beleg fiir Accusitavus com Infinitive in Sans- 
krit?” ao 18, 1946, 248-250. 

: I.J.S. Faraporewala, “Some Considerations of Sanskrit Syntax,” nra 9, 
1946, 2-63. 

: Betty Heimann, ‘‘Form Not ‘Apart’ but ‘a Part’ of Meaning as Exemplified 
in Sanskrit Literature,” ucr 6, 1947, 23-28. 

:K. A. Subramania Iyer, ‘“The Doctrine of sphofa,” Jajrr 5, 1947, 121-147. 

: R. B. Athavale, “‘Sabdabodha—a Study,” spatoc 14.1, 1948, 111-113. 

:K. GC. Chatterji, Technical Terms and Techniques of Sanskrit Grammar. Usha 
Memorial Series 1, Calcutta, 1948, 1964. 

: Barend Faddegon, ‘‘The Semitic and Sanskrit Alphabets,” Orientalia 
Nederlandica 1948, 261-272. 

: O. Nazzari, Elementi de Grammatica Sanscrita. Torino, 1948. 


540 
G1469 


G1470 
G1471 


G1472 


G1473 
G1474 


G1475 


G1476 
G1477 


G1478 
G1479 


G1480 
G1481 


G1482 : 


G1483 : 


G1484 


G1485 
G1486 
G1487 
G1488 
G1489 


G1490 


G1491 
G1492 


G1493 : 


G1494 : 


G1495 


G1496 : 


G1497 


G1498 : 


G1499 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


: K. A, Subramania Iyer, “The Point of View of the vaiydkaranas,”’ Jor 18, 
1948, 84-96. Reprinted in G1625, pp. 393-400. 

: Jan Gonda, “‘Dissimilation de mots entiers,”’ ao 21, 1949, 267-279. 

: Calvin Kephart, Sanskrit, Its Origin, Composition, and Diffusion. Strasburg, 
Va., 1949. 

: Siddhesvar Varma, ‘‘Sanskrit as a Medium of Conveying the Concept of 
Abstraction,” m 11, 1949-1950, 138-141. 

: V.S. Agrawala, “‘Pre-Paninian Technical Terms,” sB 2, 1950, 135-137. 

: Vidhusekhara Bhattacharya, ‘‘Some Composite Roots in Sanskrit,” sp 1, 
1950, 21-22. 

:K. C. Chatterji, “On the Cases Governed by Some Sanskrit Particles,” 
sB 1, 1950, 23-30. 

: Jan Gonda, “‘Ca,”’ Lingua 4, 1950, 1ff. 

: K. A. Subramania Iyer, ‘““The Conception of Action Among the vaiydkara- 
nas,” joyrr 8, 1950-1951, 165-188. 

: John Brough, ‘“Theories of General Linguistics in the Sanskrit Gramma- 
rians,” rps 1951, 27-46. Reprinted G1625, pp. 402-414. 

:J. Lehman, ‘‘Randbemerkungen zu den grammatischen ‘kategorien,’” 
w61, 1951, 17-28. 

: Murray B. Emeneau, Sanskrit Sandhi and Exercises. Berkeley, 1952. 

: Jan Gonda, “‘Professor Burrow and the Pre-history of Sanskrit,” Lingua 6, 
1952, 297-300. 

, “A Critical Survey of the Publications on the Periphrastic Future 

in Sanskrit,” Lingua 6, 1952, 158-179. 

, ‘On Nominative Joining or Replacing’ Vocatives,” Lingua 6, 
1952, 89~104. 

: V. A. Ramaswami Sastri, “‘Mukhya and gauna Words in Language,”’ BDCRI 
14, 1952, 1-15. 

: A. F. Stenzler, Elementarbuch der Sanskrit-Sprache. Berlin, 1952. 

: F. R. Adredos, Vedico y sanscrito classico. Madrid, 1963. 

: William Sidney Allen, Phonetics in Ancient India. London, 1953, 1963. 

: Ram Shankar Bhattacharya, ‘‘Senses of ca,” Po 18, 1953, 1-18. 

: John Brough, ‘‘Some Indian Theories of Meaning,” rps 1953, 161-176. 
Reprinted Staal, pp. 414-423. 

: Thomas Burrow, “‘Some Remarks on the Formation of Nouns in Sanskrit,” 








ABortI 32, 1953, 19-33. 


: M. Mayrhofer, Sanskrit-Grammatik. Berlin, 1953. 
: Louis Renou, ‘‘Les Grammariens sanskrits,’’ in Renou and Filliozat, pp. 
86~94. 





, “Les Speculations sur le language,” in Renou and Filliozat, pp. 

79-84. 

K. A. Subramania Iyer, ‘“‘On the Concept of upagraha Among the vaiya- 

karanas,” Jor 23, 1953-1954, 79-88. 

: Rulon Wells, “Secondary Derivation from Sanskrit i-Stems,’’ Lg 29, 1953, 

237-241. 

R. S. Bhattacharya, ‘‘Importance of the First Words of the ganapafhas,” 

BhV 15, 1954, 29-34. 

: Thomas Burrow, ‘“The Sanskrit Precative,”’ Asiatica 1954, 35-42. 

A. Debrunner, Altindische Grammatik, volume 2, Die Nominatsuffixe. Gottin- 

gen, 1954. 

: Reingold F. G. Muller, “Ober ein Neutrum im Sanskrit,”’ Die Sprache 6.1, 
1954, 39-45. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 541 


G1500 : A. Schropfer, Geistiger Wortsatz des Indischen und seine Geschichte. Heidelberg, 
1954. 

GI501 : E. R. Sreekrishna Sharma, ‘“‘The Theories of the Ancient Indian Philoso- 
phers about Word, Meaning, Their Mutual Relationships and Syntactical 
Connection,” Ph. D. diss., Philipps-Universitat Marburg, 1954. 

G1502 : K. V. Abhyankar, “A Short Note on Paribhasé Works in Sanskrit Gra- 
mmaar,’’ aBort 36, 1955, 157-162. 

G1503 : Franklin Edgerton, ‘‘An Often Neglected Aspect of Word Composition in 
Sanskrit and Indo-European,”’ aos 75, 1955, 279. 

G1504 : M. B. Emeneau, ‘“‘India and Linguistics,” Jaos 75, 1955, 145-153. 

G1505 : Jan Gonda, “Use of the Particle ‘ca,’” Vak 5, 1955, 1-73. 

G1506:P. Hartmann, WNominale Ausdrucksformen im wissenschaftlichen Sanskrit. 
Heidelberg, 1955. 

G1507 : K. Kunjunni Raja, ‘‘Indian Theories on Homophones and Homonyms,”’ 
ALB 19, 1955, 193-222. 

G1508 : , ‘The Theory of Suggestion in Indian Semantics,” aus 19, 1955, 
20-26. 

G1509 : K. A. Subramania Iyer, ‘“The Concept of dravya among the vaiyakaranas,” 
sparoc 18, 1955, 54-56. 

G1510 : Bishnupada Bhattacharya, ‘“‘Contribution of Words: sphofa Theory and 
Its Opponents”, ou 4, 1956, 217-226. 

G1511 : Betty Heimann, ‘‘Why Study Sanskrit?”’ aBori 28, 1956, 294-300. 

G1512 :K. Kunjunni Raja, “‘Sphota: The Theory of Lingusitic Symbols,” ats 20, 
1956, 84-116. 

G1513:M. Mayrhofer, ‘‘Altindische Nominalbildung: Zum neuen Band der 
‘Altindischen Grammatik,’’ otz 1956, 5-15. 

G1514 : Louis Renou, “Sur P Evolution des composés nominaux en Sanskrit,” 
Bulletin de la Societe de Linguistique de Paris 52.1, 1956, 96-116. 

GI515 , Histoire de la langue sanskrite. Paris, 1956. 

G1516 : P. S. Sastri, “Meaning and the Word,” or 2.1, 1956, 99-130. 

G1517 :K. V. Abhyankar, “Short e (ardha ekéra) and Short o (ardha okara) in 
Sanskrit,” aporr 36, 1957, 154-157. 

G1518:R. S. Bhattacharya, ‘‘Some Broad Aspects on Indian Grammar and the 
Theory of sphofa,”’ Jayr1 15, 1957-1958, 83-92. 

G1519 : Jan Gonda, “‘A Note on the Functions of the Accusative as Described in 
the Handbooks,” in rvsKB, pp. 72-80. 

G1520 : — . ‘The Character of the Sanskrit Accusative,” in Martinet Comme- 
moration Volume. Tenerife, 1957. 

G1521 : Ghandra Bhan Gupta, ““Vyaitjand as Suggestive Power,” Patoc 19.2, 1957, 
59-62. 

G1522 : Betty Heimann, Terminology: Significance of Prefixes. London, 1957. 

G1523 : K: Kunjunni Raja, ‘‘Diachronic Linguistics in Ancient India,’”’ juu 29, 
1957, 127-130. 

, ‘‘Akanksa: The Main Basis of Syntactic Unity,” ap 21, 1957, 
282-295. 

G1525 : Louis Renou, ‘*Grammaire et Vedanta,” Ja 245, 1957, 121-132. 

G1526 : Bishnupada Bhattacharya, ‘‘Connotation of Words (a Comparative 
Study of the Viewpoints of Grammarians, Mimamsakas and Naiyayikas),” 
on 5, 1958, 147-167. 

G1527 : Trilokanath Jha, ‘“‘The Concept of the Fivefold Sabdanaucitya in Earlier 
Grammarians,’”’ jars 44.3—4, 1958, 164-168. 

G1528 :V. I. Kalyanov, ‘“The Means of Expression of the Past Tense in Epic 














G1524 : 


542 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Sanskrit, According to the Materials of the Mahabharata” (in Russian), 
Scientific Paper no. 13 of the Oriental Institute of the Academy of Sciences, USSR, 
1958. 

G1529 : K. Kunjunni Raja, ‘““The Indian Influence on Linguistics,” Jmu 30, 1958, 
93-111. 

G1530 : , ‘The Elliptic Sentence—Indian Theories,” ALB 22, 1958, 25-31. 

G1531 : David Seyfort Ruegg, ‘““On the Term buddhiviparinama and the Problem of 
Illusory Change,” ny 2, 1958, 271-283. 

G1532 : Gaurinath Sastri, ‘‘Nature of Absolute in the Philosophy of Grammar,” 
po 31, 1958, 217-218. 

G1533 : Sukumar Sen, Histrory and Prehistory of Sanskrit. Mysore, 1958. 

G1534 : Satya Vrat, “‘Studies in Sanskrit Semantics,”’ po 23.3-4, 1958, 1-14. 

Gi535 : Thomas Burrow, The Sanskrit Language. London, 1959. 

G1536 : Erich Frauwallner, ‘‘Das Eindringen der Sprachtheorie in die indischen 
philosophischen Systeme,” Indologung-Tagen, 1959, 239-243. 

G1537 : Gajanan Moreshwar Patil, ‘“‘Gase-Morphemes in Sanskrit Nominal 
Declension,” spaioc 20, 1959, 120. 

G1538 : D. S. Ruegg, Contributions & Vhistoire de la philosophie linguistique indienne. 
Pict 7, Paris, 1959. 

G1539 : E. R. Sreekrishna Sarma, ‘‘Syntactic Meaning—Two Theories,” auB 23, 





1959, 41-61. 

G1540 :K. Kunjunni Raja, ‘“‘Tatparya as a Separate ovrtti,” patoc 20.2, 1959, 
319-332. 

G1541 : Richard V. de Smet, ‘“‘Language and Philosophy in India,” prep 12.10, 
1960, 47—54. 


G1542 : Bimal Krishna Matilal, ““The Doctrine of karana in Grammar and Logic,” 
joyri 17, 1960, 63-69. Also Paroc 20, 1961, 303-308. 

G1543 : Kalika Charan Pandeya, ‘‘The Theory of Sabdabrahman and sphota,”’ 
jeyrt 17, 1960-1961, 235-255. Also see Bh 6.2, 1962-1963, 102-104. 

G1544 : Louis Renou, ‘‘La Theorie des temps du verbe d’apres grammariens 
sanskrits,” Ja 248, 1960, 305-337. Reprinted G1625, pp. 478-499. 

G1545:J. Frits Staal, ‘‘Correlations Between Language and Logic in Indian 
Thought,”’ psoas 23, 1960, 109-122. 

G1546 : K. V. Abhyankar, A Dictionary of Sanskrit Grammar. cos 134, Baroda, 1961. 

G1547 :W. S. Allen, Sandhi, the Theoretical, Phonetic, and Historical Bases of 
Word-jJunction in Sanskrit. Janua Linguarum, series minor 17. The Hague, 
1962. 

G1548 : Bishnupada Bhattacharya, A Study in Language and Meaning. Calcutta, 
1962. 

G1549 : Arthur L. Herman, “‘Sphota,’’ Jayri 19, 1962—1963, 1-21. 

G1550 : S. D. Joshi, ““Werbs and Nouns in Sanskrit,” m 23, 1962, 60-63. 

G1551 : K. Kunjunni Raja, ‘‘Prarthayanti—a Ghost Word Discussed by the Gra- 
mmarians,” ALB 26, 1962, 26-28. 

G1552 : Ram Adhar Pathak, ‘‘Origin and Development of Sanskrit Grammar.” 
Ph.D. diss., Banaras Hindu University, 1962. 

G1553 : Rosane Rocher, ‘*The Hindu Grammarians and Linguistic Change,” Jor 
11, 1962, 260-268. 

G1554 : J. Frits Staal, ‘“Negation and the Law of Contradiction in Indian Thought: 
A Comparative Study,” Bsoas 25, 1962, 52-71. 

G1555 : Ram Chandra Pandeya, The Problem of Meaning in Indian Philosophy. Delhi, 
1963. 

G1556 ;: K. Kunjunni Raja, Indian Theories of Meaning. ats 91, Madras, 1963, 1969. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 543 


G1557 : E.R. Sreekrishna Sharma, ‘‘Gontroversies over fabda,”’ Janamuktavali 1963, 
182-193. 


G1558 : Madeleine Biardeau, Théorie de la connaissance et philosophie de la parole dans 
la brahmanisme classique. Paris, The Hague, 1964. 

G1559 :S.S. Barlingay, “Theories of Language in Indian Logic,” International 
Philosophical Quarterly 4, 1964, 94-109. 

G1560 : T.N. Dave, “‘Upakrama-upasamhara—as a Criterion for Textual Interpreta- 
tion,” spp 4.1, 1964 4-17. 

G1561 : Richard Hauschild Register zur Altindischen Grammatik von. 7 Wackernagel 
und A. Debrunner (Bd. I-III). Gdttingen, 1964. 

G1562 : Mukund Madhava Sharma, ‘‘Some Observations on the sphofta Theory,’ 
cipo 26, summaries 1964, 228-229. 

G1563 : K.V. Abhyankar, ‘‘Euphonic Combinations of 7 and / with 7 and J,” 1 26, 
1965, 1-7. 

G1564 : Rosane Rocher, ‘‘Les Grammariens indiens, leurs buts et leurs methodes,”” 
RuB 18, 1965-1966, 77-78. 

G1565 : V. Anjaneya Sharma, ‘‘The fabda-brahman and the prasthanatraya,” svuoj 8, 
1965, 31-35. 

G1566 : J. Frits Staal, ‘‘Reification, Quotation and Nominalization”, in Festschrift 
Bochenski, pp. 151-187. 

G1567 : Sergiu Al-George, ‘“‘La Fonction révélatrice des consonnes chez les phone- 
ticiens de I’Inde antique,” crra 3, 1966, 11-15. 

G1568 : Saudamini Bahulikar, ‘““The Construcions stotah pakah and stokam pakah,” 
PAIOG 22, 1966, 93-98. 

G1569 : T.N. Dave, “Sri Sankaracarya and sphota,” spp 6.1, 1966, 19-27. 

G1570 : C.G. Hartman, Emphasizing and Connecting Particles in the Thirteen Principal 
Upanisads. Annales Scientiarum Fennicare, series B, no. 143.2. Helsinki, 
1966. 

G1571 :S.D. Joshi, ‘‘Adjectives and Substantives as a Singie Class in the ‘Parts of 
Speech,’ ”’ pcass-a 9, 1966. Also yup 25, 1967, 19-30. 

G1572 ; — , “Word-integrity and Syntactic Analysis,” sparoc 23.1, 1966, 143. 
poass-a 20, 1968 (=jup 27, 1968), 165-173. 

G1573 : G. Marulasiddaiah, Sabdaurttis, Power of Words. Mysore, 1966. 

G1574 : B.L. Matilal, ‘Indian Theorists on the Nature of the Sentence (vdkya),”’ 
FE 2, 1966, 377-393. 

G1575 : Bommakanti Srinivasacaryulu, ‘““Language Spoken and Written,” sparoc 
23.1, 1966, 170. 

G1576 : J. Frits Staal, ‘Indian Semantics, I,” yaos 86, 1966, 304-310. 

G1577 : » ‘Room at the Top in Sanskrit: Ancient and Modern Descriptions 
of Nominal Composition,” “‘ny 9, 1966, 165-198. 

G1578 : R.N. Vele, ‘A Law About Nominal Suffixes Beginning with a- in Sans- 
krit,’”’ sparoc 23.1, 1966, 169. 

G1579 : George Cardona, ‘‘Anvaya and oyatireka in Indian Grammar,” ALB 31-32, 
1967-1968, 313-352. Summarized in cmo 27, 313-314. 

G1580 : G.T. Deshpande, ‘‘On the Accent of the Vocative (amantita),’’ Nuy 18, 
1967 113-120. 

G1581 : Suresachandra Dyaneshwar Laddu “A pre-Patafijalian Grammatical 
Observation,” 14 3d series 2.4, 1967, 40-41. 

G1582 : Y. Ojihara, ‘‘Causerie vyakaranique (IV): jaté ‘genus’ et deux definitions 
pre-patafijaliennes,” JIBSt 16, 1967, 451-459. Reprinted G1625, pp. 
425~431. 








544 
G1583 
G1584 


G1585 


G1586 : 


G1587 


G1588 : 


G1589 


G1590 : 


G1591 
G1592 
G1593 


G1594 
GI1595 


G1596 : 


G1597 
G1598 


G1599 
G1600 
G1601 
G1602 
G1603 
G1604 


G1605 


GI1606 : 


G1607 
G1608 


G1609 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


:J. Frits Staal Word Order in Sanskrit and Universal Grammar. Fuss 5, 
Dordrecht, 1967. 

: M.D. Balasubrahmanyam, “‘Amavadsya: An Accentual Study” jup 27, 
1968, 1-25. 

: M.B. Emeneau, “Sanskrit Syntactic Particles—kila, khalu, niinam,”’ ny 11, 
1968-1969, 241-268. 

Jan Gonda, “Abbreviated and Inverted Nominal Compounds in Sans- 

krit,””? Fanua Linguarum Series 34, 1968, 221~246. 

: Siegfried Lienhard, “‘Einige Bemerkungen iiber Sabdabrahman and Vivarta 

bei Bhavabhiti,” wzxsoa 12-13, 1968-1969, 215-220. 

T.S. Nandi, ‘‘The Problem of Sabdasaktimdladhvani or Suggestion Based 

on the Power of the Word,” jor 18, 1968-1969, 101-125. 

: G.B. Palsule, ‘“The Role of ky in the Sanskrit Grammatical terms,”’ PCASS-A 
24, 1968 (=yup 29, 1969, 11-29). 

» “Some Primary Nominal Formations Missing in Panini,’’ PGAss-A 
18, 1968 (=jup 27, 1967, 145-151). 

: J.D. Singh, The Bases of Sanskrit Phonology,’ Kur 2, 1968, 107-118. Also 
act 10.4, 1970, 145-153. 

: Paul Thieme, ‘“‘Adefa,” prox 28, 1968, 715-723. Reprinted Budruss, pp. 
259-267. 

: Siddheshwar Varma, ‘‘Plurality—Philosophical and Grammatical—in 
Sanskrit Tradition,” svuoy 11, 1968, 1-4. 

: K.V. Abhyankar, “‘Accent in Sanskrit,” aBor1 50, 1969, 41-55. 

: M.D. Balasubrahmanyam, ‘“‘Arya-: An Accentual Study,” 14 3d series 3, 
1969, 112-127. 

» “The Accent of K7t Formations.” Ph.D. diss., University of Poona, 








1969. 

: Thomas Burrow, ‘‘Sanskrit,”’? Current Trends in Linguistics 5, 1969, 3-35. 

: Govind Vinayak Devasthali, ‘“‘Paribhaésa (Introduction and General Sur- 
vey ),”’ 14 3d series 3, 1969 1-13. 

:K. Doraswamy ‘‘Phonological Studies in Ancient India and Greece,” 
kuy 3, 1969, 394-397. 

: F, Lambert, ““Who Wrote the First Sanskrit Grammar?”’ BhV 29, 1969, 1~9, 
: Harald Millonig, ‘Stumme Laute: Untersiichung einer Beschreibungs- 
technik altindischer Linguistik.” Ph.D. diss., University of Wiirzburg, 
1969. 
M.S. Narayana Murti, ““T'wo Versions of the ekasamjfiadhikara,”’ svuoy 12, 
1969, 75-83. 

: B.P. Rajapurohit, ‘Some Parallels Between Indian and Western Seman- 
tics,” Jku 13, 1969, 72-81. 

: J. Frits Staal, ‘Sanskrit Philosophy of Language,’’ Current Trends in Linguis- 
tics 5, 1969, 449-531. 

: Veluri Subba Rao, The Philosophy of a Sentence and Its Parts. New Delhi, 

1969. 

Siddheshwar Varma, ‘‘Object—Philosophical and Grammatical—in 

Sanskrit,” svuyo 12, 1969, 39-44 

: Ashok Aklujkar, ‘‘Ancient Indian Semantics,” aBor1 51, 1970, 11-29. 

: Sergiu Al-George, ““L "Inde antique et les origines du structuralisme,” 
Aart 10.2, 1970, 235-240. 

: HLS. Ananthanarayana, ‘The kdraka Theory and Case Grammar,” m 31, 
1970, 14-27. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 545 


G1610 


G1611 


G1612 


G1613 


Gi6l4: 


GI1615 


GI616: 


Gi617 
G1618 


G1619 


: Vidya Niwas Misra, ‘‘Structural Meaning: An Indian Standpoint,”’ acri 
10.2, 1970, 555-559. 

: Ramananda Acharya, ‘‘A Peep into the concepts of Cause and Instru- 
ment,” Anviksé 5.2, 1971, 88-92. 

: Sergiu Al-George, ‘‘Laksand, ‘Grammatical Role**’ joyrr 27.3-4, 1971, 
213-221. 

: Venkatesh Laxman Joshi, ‘“Treatment of Loanwords in Sankrit Grammar,” 

iz 32, 1971, 113-122. 

S.D. Laddu, ‘‘Ancient Sanskrit Grammarians and the Literary Records,” 

vij 9, 1971, 315~322. 

: B.K. Matilal, Epistemology, Logic and Grammar in Indian Philosophical Analysis. 

The Hague, Paris, 1971. 

S.G. Moghe, “‘Paribhasas of vyakarana and the Mimamsa Rules of Inter- 

pretation,” Festschrift Rajeswar Sastri Dravid, English section, pp. 90-100. 

: M.S. Narayana Murti, ‘‘Sanskrit Gompounds, a Philosophical Study.” 
Ph.D. diss., Tirupati, 1971. 

: Michael Silverstein, ed., Whitney on Language: Selected- Writings of William 
Dwight Whitney. Gambridge, Mass., 1971. 

: P. Thirujnanasambandham, ‘‘Problems of Meaning,” in Dr. V. Raghavan 
Shashtyabdapurti Felicitation Volume, Madras, 1971, pp. 183-187. 





G1620 : Franz Bopp, ‘‘Vergleichende Zergliderung des Sanskrits und der mit ihm 
Verwendten Sprachen. Erste Abhandlung von der Wiirzeln und Pronomi- 
nem erster und zweiter Person,” Abhandlungender Koniglichen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften zu Berlin, ph. -hist. K], 1972, 117-148. Reprinted in Kleine 
Schriften zur vergleichenden Sprachwissenschaft, Leipzig, 1972, pp. 1-32. 

Gi621 : Pradip Kumar Mazumdar, “‘A Philosophical Approach to the Meaning 
of Particles,’ patoc 26, 1972, 256-258. 

G1622 : Vidhata Mishra, A Critical Study of Sanskrit Phonetics. QhSSt 83. Varanasi, 
1972. 

G1623 : M.D. Pandit, “‘A Comparative Study of All Sanskrit Grammars, with 
special Reference to Past Passive Participle Formations.”? Ph.D. diss., 
University of Poona, 1972. 

G1624 : Kali Charan Sastri, Bengal’s Contribution to Sanskrit Grammar in the Paninian 
and Candra Systems, part one, General Introduction. csars 53. Calcutta, 1972. 

G1625 : J. Frits Staal, ed., A Reader on the Sanskrit Grammarians. su. 1. Gambridge, 
Mass., 1972. 

G1626 : Paul Thieme, ‘“The Sanskrit Language,” Jars 58, 1972, 197-223. 

G1627 : Siddheshwar Varma, “The Concept of ‘Agent’—Philosophical and 
Grammatical—in Sanskrit,” Jeyrr 28.1-2, 1972, 713-721. 

G1628 : » ‘*Purpose—Philosophical and Grammatical—in Indian Tradi- 
tion,” svuoy 15, 1972, 11-16. 

G1629 : J.G. Arapura, ‘‘Some Perspectives on Indian Philosophy of Language,” 
University of Rajasthan Studies in Sanskrit and Hindi 6, 1973-1974, 1-32. 

Gi630 : Veena Bhatnagar, “Un-Paninian Sandhi and Syntax in Epic Sanskrit.” 


G1631 


G1632 


G1633 


G1634 


Ph.D. diss., University of Delhi, 1973. 

: John Brough, ‘I-Ching on the Sanskrit Grammarians,” ssoas 36, 1973, 
248-260. 

: George Cardona, ‘Indian Grammarians on Adverbs,” Festschrift Kahane, 
pp. 85-98. 

: B.K. Matilal, ‘“The Notion of Substance and Quality in Ancient Indian 
Grammar,” in acur 2, 1973, 384-405. 

; M.S. Narayana Murti, ‘Philosophy of Grammar,” svuo] 16, 1973, 37-54, 


546 
G1635 


G1636 
G1637 


G1638 
G1639 


G1640 
G1641 


G1643 
G1644 
G1645 
G1646 
G1647 
G1648 
G1649 
G1650 
GI1651 


G1652 


G1653 : 


G1654 


G1655 
G1656 


G1657 
G1658 
G1659 
G1660 


G1661 
G1662 


G1663 
G1664 


G1665 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


: K.S. Ramamurti, ‘‘Andhra’s Contribution to Indian Culture: wyaékarana,”” 
svuoj 16, 1973, 25-36. 

: Jag Deva Singh, ‘‘Study of Language,” xuy 7, 1973, 199-203. 

: Pratap Bandyopadhyay, ‘‘Sanskrit Indeclinables (upasargas and nipdtas) 
and Their Meaning,” spatoc 27, 1974, 231-232. 

:S. Datta Kharbas and Rama Nath Sharma, Sanskrit Grammar: A Biblio- 
graphy of Selected Western Language Materials. Rochester, 1974. 

: G.V. Devasthali, ‘‘Vakya According to the Munitraya of Sanskrit Gram- 
mar,’’ cosev 1974, 206~215. 

: Jan Gonda, “‘Nimitta,” cpsrv 1974, 233-240. 

: T.S. Gourypathy Sastry, ‘“Quotative Nominals in Sanskrit,” 1 35, 1974, 
1-13. 

: T.R.V. Murti, “Some Comments on the Philosophy of Language in the 
Indian Context,” pre 2, 1974, 321-331. 

: G.B. Palsule, ‘‘Some Further Examples of the Occasional Sanskrit sanadahi 
u-v >> v,”? viy 12, 1974, 235-240. 

: V. Raghavan, ‘How Many Grammars?” cpsrv 1974, 271-278. 

: H.G. Ranade, ‘‘Parts of Speech in Sanskrit,” 11. 35, 1974, 129-138. 

:J.M. Shukla, ‘‘Grammatical paribhasas of the Jaina Grammarians,”’ jo1 24, 

1974~-1975, 128-138. 

: P. Sriramamurti, “Some Secondary Rootsin Sanskrit,” sparoc 27, 1974, 235. 

: J. Frits Staal, ‘‘The Origin and Development of Linguistics in India,” 
in D. Hymes, ed., Studies in the History of Linguistics, Bloomington, 1974, 
pp. 63-74. 

: Siddheswar Varma, ‘‘Separation, Philosophical and Grammatical, in 
Indian Tradition,” viy 12, 1974, 468-471. 

: George Cardona, ‘“‘Paraphrase and Sentence Analysis: Some Indian 
Views,” pip 3, 1975, 259-282. 

: Madhva Deshpande, ‘‘Phonetics of Short a in Sanskrit,’ ny 17, 1975, 
195~209. 

» Critical Studies in Indian Grammarians I: The Theory of Homogeneity 
(Savarnya). Ann Arbor, 1975. 

: Pierre-Sylvain Filliozat, ‘On the Analysis of Sanskrit Compounds,” in 
AoR Silver Jubilee Volume, 1975, pp. 81-95. 

: Manjulika Guha, “‘Sphota Theory,’’ JASBe 17, 1975. 

:§$.D. Joshi, ‘*Sabdabodha and Theories of Verbal Denotation,”’ svuoy 18, 
1975, 21-32. 

: K. Krishnamoorthy, ‘‘Tatparya and dhvani,” in aor Silver Jubilee Volume 
1975, pp. 21-33. 

: K. Kunjunni Raja, ‘‘Vyafjand: Suggestive Function of Language,” in AOR 
Silver Jubilee Volume 1975, pp. 602-607. 

: Angelo Morretta, ‘Sanskrit and the Sacred Language,” [Taur 3-4, 
1975-1976, 339-352. 

: Kenneth H. Post, ‘‘Samkara’s Objection to the sphofavada,” ABort 56, 1975, 
67-76. 

: Satya Vrat Sastri, “‘Sanskrit Usage,”? ITaur 3-4, 1975-1976, 449-454. 

: J. Frits Staal, ““The concept of Metalanguage and Its Indian Background,” 
JIP 3, 1975, 315-354. 

: J.-M. Shukla, “Particle in Sanskrit,” jor 25, 1975-1976, 252-259, 

:S. Venkitasubramonia Iyer, ‘‘The Concept and Scope of adhtkarana in 
Sanskrit Grammar,”’ vrrv 1975, 145-162. 

; Ashok Aklujkar, “Sanskrit and the Linguistic Science,” pisc 1.2.2, 1976, 85. 





BIBLIOG 


G1666 : 


G1667 : 


G1668 : 


G1669 
G1670: 


G1671: 
G1672 
G1673 : 
G1674 
G1675: 
G1676 : 


G1677 : 


G1678 


G1679 : 


G1680 
G1681 
G1682 : 
G1683 : 
G1684 : 
G1685 : 


G1686 : 


G1687 : 


G1688 : 


Gi689 : 
G1690 


G1691 
G1692 


RAPHY 547 


Michael Coulson, Sanskrit: An Introduction to the Classical Language. London, 
1976. 

S.D. Joshi, ‘‘Sanskrit Grammar,” in R.N. Dandekar, ed., Ramakrishna 
Gopal Bhandarkar as an Indologist: A Symposium, Poona, 1976, pp. 113-142. 
S.G, Kantawala, ‘‘Some Remarks on the Teaching of the Sanskrit Gram- 
mar,’’ jor 26, 1976-1977, 164-169. 


: Hari Mohan Mishra, ‘‘Sanskrit and Semantics,” Pisc 1.2.2, 1976, 86~90. 


Satya Swarup Mishra, ‘‘Contribution of Sanskrit to the Study of Linguis- 
tics,” pisc 1.2.2, 1976, 98-101. 

K. Raghavan Pillai, ‘‘Sanskrit Linguistics in the Context of General 
Linguistics,’’ psc 1.2.2, 1976, 83-84. 


: Hartmut Scharfe, ‘‘A Second ‘Index fossil’ of Sanskrit Grammarians,” 


jaos 96, 1976, 274-280. 
K.A, Subramania Iyer, ‘“‘Sanskrit and the Philosophy of Language,” PIsc 
1.2.2, 1966, 70-81. 


: Satyakam Varma, ‘“‘The Philosophy of Universal Grammar,” svsi, pp. 


160-184. 

» ‘Brief Survey of Sanskrit Grammar,” svst, pp. 103-132. 

» “Divisibility of Phoneme,”’ svsr, pp. 144-159. 

Siddhesvara Varma, ‘‘Relationship—Philosophical and Grammatical—in 
Indian Tradition,” vij 14, 1976, 1-4. 








: George Cardona, ‘‘A Note on Morphophonemic and Phonetic Rules in 


Sanskrit,’’ Mo 10, 1977, 1-6. 
§.D. Joshi and J.A.F. Roodbergen, ‘‘Vaékyasamskara and padasamskéara,”’ 
JBBRAS 52-53, 1977-1978, 142-148. 


: Pradipa Kumar Mazumdar, The Philosophy of Language in the Light of 


Paninian and the Mimamsaka Schools of Indian Philosophy. Calcutta, 1977. 


: Hartmut Scharfe, A History of Indian Literature: Grammatical Literature. 


Wiesbaden, 1977. 

A. Seshakumar, ““The Paribhdsds in Sanskrit Grammar: A Study.” Ph.D. 
diss., Andhra University, 1977. 

J.-M. Shukla, ‘“‘Bhdva and abhéva According to the Grammarians,”’ JBBRAS 
52-53, 1977-1978, 260-267. 

Madhva Deshpande, ‘‘Paninian Grammarians on Dialectical Variation,” 
ALB 40, 1978, 61-114. 

Pierre Filliozat, ‘““L’école moderne des Vaiyakarana du Maharashtra,” 
ITaur 6, 1978, 143-150. 

G. Gren. Ecklund, A Study of Nominal Sentences in the Oldest Upanishads. Act. 
Universitatis Upsaliensus. Studia Indoeuropeae Upsaliensis 3. Uppsala, 
Stockholm, 1978. 

H.V. Nagaraja Rao, “The Scope and Necessity of argadhikara,” jie 6, 
1978, 145-176. 

Mario Piantelli, ““Samkara’s Treatment of Sabdaprabhavatva in BSBh 1.3.28 
and the Problem of a Nexus Between the So-called fabdabrahman and 
sphota: Some Considerations,” ITaur 6, 1978, 241~250. 

D.S. Ruegg, ‘‘Mathematical and Linguistic Models in Indian Thought 
the Case of Sanyatd,”” WzKsoa 22, 1978, 171-182. 


: Krishna Sivaraman, ‘‘The Saiva and the Grammarian Perspectives of 


Language,” 1pr 19-32. 


: Satya Vrat, “Sanskrit grammar,” in cur 5, 1978, 312-320. 
: Sh. Bira and O. Sukhbeatar, “On the Tibetan and Mongolian Transla- 


tions of Sanskrit Grammatical Works,” ITaur 7, 1979 127-138, 


548 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


G1693 : Johannes Bronkhorst “‘Yaska’s Classification of nipdtas*? ABorr 60, 1979 
137-149. 

G1694 : Richard Gombrich ‘‘He Cooks Softly: Adverbs in Sanskrit Grammar ” 
BSOAS 42, 1979, 244-256. 

G1695 : Wilhelm Rau ‘‘Grammatik ’’ in H. Bechert and G. von Simonson eds. 
Einfiihrung in die Indologie. Dharmstadt 1979 pp. 159-161. 118ff. 

G1696 : J. Frits Staal “Oriental Ideas on the Origin of Language ”’ Jaos 99, 1979 
1-14, 

G1697 : M.M. Deshpande Evolution of Syntactic Theory in Sanskrit Grammar: Syntax 
of the Sanskrit Infinitive -tum UN. Linguistica Extrema Studia 10. Ann 
Arbor, 1980. 

G1698 : V.S. Joshi, “ ‘Pard odk’ and Sanskrit Grammarians”’ vjpsc 1980, 34-35. 

G1699 : *‘An Introduction to the Last Age in Panini’s School, vypsc 1980, 





79-90. 





G1700 : “Treatment of Loan Words in Sanskrit Grammar ”’ vjpsc 1980 
1-19, 

G1700A : Harold Coward, The Sphota Theory of Language. Delhi, 1980. 

G1701 : Bernfried Schlerath, Sanskrit Vocabulary. Leiden, 1980. 

G1702 : E.R. Sreekrishna Sarma, ‘‘Spkota and Samkara,” ais 44-45, 1980-1981, 
223-228. 

G1703 : T. Venkatacharya. ‘‘Significance of the Dictum ‘yata evakaras tato nyatra 
niyamah,’ ” viy 18, 1980, 80-87. 

G1704 : Alex Wayman, ‘‘Notes on Metaphoric Transfer,” ats 44—45, 1980-1981, 
272-285. 

G1705 : M.M. Deshpande, ‘‘Sanskrit Gerund Constructions: Syntactic Disputa- 
tions,” my 23, 1981, 167-185. 

G1706 : K. Meenakshi, ‘‘Sanskrit Grammar as Model for Writing Tamil Gram- 
mar” (summary). swsc 5, Delhi, 1981, pp. 49-50. 

G1707 : J. Ouseparampil, “‘The Problem of Gender in Sanskrit and Indo-European 
Language” (summary). swsc 5, Delhi, 1981, pp. 59-60. 

G1708 : A.C. Sarangi, ‘‘Ancient Grammarians and Their ‘Correct’ Interpreta- 
tions,’”’ BhV 40.4, 1981, 26-31. 

G1709 : M.S. Narayana Murti, “‘Causality in Sanskrit Grammar’ (summary). 
swsc 5, Delhi, 1981, p. 58. 

G1710 : J. Bronkhorst, ‘‘On the History of Paninian Grammar in the Early Cen- 
turies Following Pataiijali,” jw 11, 1983, 357-412. 

G1711:S.D. Laddu, “On the Earliest Handbooks on Derivation (prakriy@) in 
Sanskrit Grammar,” pnsFv 1982, 83-90. 

G1712 : V.N. Jha, ‘“The Structure of a Sdbdabodha,” pnsrv 1982, 77-82. 

G1713 : M.S. Narayana Murti, “Divisions of Time According to Indian Gram- 
marians,” ALB 46, 1982, 12-24. 

G1714 : J. Frits Staal, ‘Ritual, Grammar, and the Origins of Science in India,” 
yip 10, 1982, 3=36. 


NOTES 


«G”’ references are to the Bibliography in this Volume, “RB’’ refers to Volume I: 


Bibliography (Revised Edition) of the Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Other abbre- 
viations are identified in the Bibliography. 


1: HisroricAL RESUME 


1. Kumiarila, Tantravarttika, translated by Ganganatha Jha (RB155), p. 306. 

2. Brhaddevata, ed. A.A. Macdonnell, Harvard Oriental Series 5 (Cambridge, 
Mass., 1904), 2.117. 

3. Leonard Bloomfield, Language (New York, 1933), p. 5. 

4. See, part two, summary 4. 

5. Gautama, Nydyasitra 2.2.65. 

6. Panini, Asfadhyayt 2.1.1: “‘sammarthah padavidhih.”’ See Kunjunni Raja 
(G1556), pp. 154-156. 

7. Yaska, Nirukta 1.1: “‘indriyanityam vacanam audumbarayanah.” $ee also 
Brough (G8). 

8. Yaska, Nirukta 1.2. The six stages are ‘‘a thing comes into existence, exists, 
changes, grows, decays, and ceases to exist.” 

9. Krsea Yajurveda 6.4.7. 

10. Patafijali, Mahkdbhasya 1.1.1. 

11. Bhartrhari, Vekyapadiya 2.347. 

12. Nagesa Bhatta, Sphofavdda, concluding verse. See part two, summary, 45 on 
Sphotavada. 

13. Thieme (G458), pp. 23-24. 

14. Cardona, p. 273 (cf. abbreviation list in the bibliography). 

15. See part two, summary 13. 

16. See Gode (G1128). 

17. Also called Vaiyékaranamatonmajjini. It is quoted under that title in Nageéa 
Bhatta’s Sphofavdda. 

18. Ganganatha Jha (RB9473), p. 189. 

19. Bhartrhari, Vakyapadiya 2.3. See also Kunjunni Raja (G355), pp. 165-170. 

20. See Jagadiga’s Sabdasaktiprakasika. 

21. This subsection was written by Shoryu Katsura. 

22. For Dignaga’s theory of anydfoha and references to previous studies of the sub- 
ject, see S. Katsura, ““The Apoha Theory of Dignaga,” Journal of Indian and Buddhist 
Studies. 28.1 (1979): 16-20. 

23. Masaaki Hattori, ‘“The Sautrantika Background of the Apoha Theory,” in 
Buddhist Thought and Civilization: Essays in Honor of Herbert V. Guenther on His Sixtieth 
Birthday (Emeryville, Galif., 1977), pp. 50-52. 

24. Dignaga, Pramépasamuccayavytti (Vasudharaksita’s version) 70b8; M. Hattori, 
“A Study of the Chapter on Apoha of the Mimamsaslokavarttika (I1)” (in Japanese), 
Memoirs of the Faculty of Letters, Kyoto University 15, 1975: 25, n. 20. 

25. Pramdpasamuccayavziti 169a2—4—= 83a6-8 ; See also Iyengar (G795), pp. 147-149. 


550 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


26. Apoddhare padasyayam vakyad artho vivecitah / Vakyarthah pratibhakyo 
yam tenadav upajanyate.” 
27. John Ruskin, Sesame and Lilies unto This Last (London, 1952). 


2: MerrapHysics 


1. Hiriyanna (RB11464), pp. 182-183. 

2. Staal (G1662), p. 319. 

3. See, for example, the critique of modern language theories by Kiaus Kloster- 
miaier in ‘“‘Man Carries the Power of All Things in His Mouth,” in Revelation in Indian 
Thought, ed. H. Coward and K., Sivaraman (Emeryville, Galif., 1977), p. 8. 

4. Hans-Georg Gadamer, ‘‘“Man and Language,” in Philosophical Hermeneutics, 
trans. D.E. Linge (Berkeley, 1976), pp. 59-68. 

Vak } (1958): 10-14. 

Tbid., pp. 1-2. 

Reg Veda 1.164.35 “‘brahmayam vacah paramam vyomah.” 
As translated by K.A. Subramania Iyer (G721), p. 14. 
See Murti (G1643), pp. 321-331. 

10. Sri Aurobindo, The Secret of the Veda (Pondicherry, 1971), p. 8. 

11. Bhartrhari, Vaékyapadiya 1.11. 

12. See Frauwallner (RB12160). 

13. See part two, summary 3, of Panini’s Astddhpdyt, sittras 1.1.21, 1.1.65. 

14. See, for example, the fine critical survey of modern biblical scholarship present- 
ed by Harvey McArthur in his introduction to In Search of the Historical Fesus (New 
York, 1969). The survey of form criticism is found on pp. 6-7. Although this analysis 
focuses on biblical studies, the same points would generally apply to all modern 
western. literary criticism. 

15. The Vedas also offer their own speculations regarding time. Time is described 
in one hymn as the first god, existing in many forms. Time generates the sky and the 
earth and sets in motion the past, the present, and the future. Time is the lord of all 
and the father of Prajapati. The universe is set in motion and sustained by time. Indeed, 
in the Atharva Veda 19:53 and 54, time (kala) is celebrated as the primordial power 
and unifying principle of the universe. In kala lie the worlds and the sun. By kala was 
the universe urged forth. Kala is Brahman. ‘““Time contains and conquers all, and still 
continues onward’? (W. Norman Brown, ‘‘Veda and Religion,” in India and Indology, 
ed. R. Rocher [Delhi, 1978], p. 45). But the high place accorded kdla in the Atharva 
Veda is seldom repeated in the Upanisads, and in the Svetasvatara the view that every- 
thing came out of time is regarded as a heretical doctrine (S.N. Dasgupta [RB11488, ] 
66). In the Maitri Upanisad, though, time is given the same high status as in the Atharva 
Veda. In Maiirt 6 : 15 we read: 


$0) ED 


There are, assuredly, two forms of Brahma: Time and the Timeless. That which 
is prior to the sun is the Timeless (akdla), without parts (akdla). But that which 
begins with the sun is Time, which has parts. Verily, the form of that which 
has parts is the year. From the year, in truth, are these creatures produced. 

Through the year, verily, after having been produced, do they grow. In the 
year they disappear. Therefore the year, verily, is Prajapati, is Time, ts food, 

is the Brahma-abode, and is Atman. For thus has it been said : 


Tis Time that cooks created things, 

Ali things, indeed, in the Great Soul (mahdtman) 
In what, however, Time is cooked— 

Who knows that, he the Veda knows. 


NOTES 551 


(Translation by R.E. Hume, The Thirteen Principal Upanisads [Oxford, 1968], p. 434.) 
As in the Atharva Veda, time is here given the highest status of being identified with 
Prajapati, but now also with Brahman and Atman. Verse sixteen goes on to describe 
embodied Time as the great ocean of creatures, planets, and ail things. 


16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
3ff. 
22. 
23. 


As translated by Peri Sarveswara Sharma (G738), p. 42. 

Sastri (G706). 

Subramania [yer (G734)}. 

G738, p. 50. 

See Mahadevan (RB5466), pp. 236-251. 

See Samkara, introduction to Brakmasitrabhdsya, trans. G. Thibaut (RB243), 


RB5466, p. 229. 
An English translation of Helaraja’s Tika has been included by Peri Sarvesvara 


Sharma in G738. The date indicated is the one proposed by Sharma, p. 12. 


24, 
25. 
3.9.62. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29, 
30. 


Bhartrhari, Vakyapadiya 3.9.62. See the translations in G738 and G748A. 
K.A. Subramania Iyer’s paraphrase of Helaraja’s commentary on Vakyapadiya 
See G748A, p. 54. 

Vakyapadiya 1.142. 

Ibid. 3.9.4. Translated by Subramania Iyer (G748A). 

Ibid. 3.9.5. 

Ibid. 3.9.23. 

Ibid. 3.9.24. This balance, says Helaraja in his comment on 3.26, is Bhartrhari’s 


meaning of the term vivarta, which appears in Vakyapadiya 1.1 and 3.3.81. 


31. 
32. 
33. 
34, 
35. 
36. 
37. 
1908, 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41, 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
Sl. 
52. 
53. 
54, 
55. 
56. 
57. 
58. 


Ibid. 3.9.74. 

Ibid. 3.9.37. 

Ibid. 3.9.41. 

Ibid. 3.9.45, and Tika thereon. 

Ibid. 3.9.46. 

Ibid. 3.9.52. 

Patafijali, Yogasétra 3.13, translated by Ratna Prasada (New Delhi, 1978), pp. 


Vakpapadiya 3.9.52. 

Ibid. 3.9.53. 

Ibid. 3.9.74. 

Pataiijali, Mahabhasya 4.2.3. 

See introduction to G738, p. 37. 

Potter (RB9446), pp. 91-93. 

Ibid. 

See introduction to G738, p. 19. 

See Subramania Iyer (G719), pp. 112-113. 
svst, p. 242. 

Subramania Iyer, (G734), p. 58. 

Sastri (G1428), 1980 ed., p. 82. 
Vakpapadiya 3.9.46. 

Tbid. 3.9.4. 

Ibid. 3.9.74. 

For a full analysis of the function of time see Coward (G777). 
Cf. Klaus Klostermaier, cited in n. 3 above. 
Subramania Iyer (G721), p. 119. 

T.S. Eliot, Murder in the Cathedral (London, 1955), p. 44. 
Vakyapadiya 1.142 with ortté. 

Ibid. 1.143, urttz. See also ibid. 1.14. 


552 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


59. Ibid. 1.14. 

60. Sastri (G1428), 1980 ed., p. 85. 

61. Vakyapadiya 1.120 and vriii. 

62. Ibid. 1.120 and ofiéi. 

63. Ibid. 1.5 and 1.14. 

64. Ibid. 1.137. 

65. Ibid. 1.89. 

66. Subramania Iyer (G872), kérikds 19-20, 


3. EpisTEMOLOGY 


1. See, for example, Russell Fraser, The Language of Adam (New York, 1977), 
especially chapt. 4, ‘‘Mysticism and the Scientific Doom.” 
2. Ernst Cassirer, Language and Myth, trans. S.K. Langer (New York, 1953), pp. 
8-9. 
3. Vakyapadiya 1.123 as translated by T.R.V. Murti in his foreword to Coward 
(G1700A), p. vii. 
4. Murti, (G1643), p. 321. 
5. Ibid., p. 322. 
6. Datta (RBi0134), pp. 27-28. 
7. See Samkhyakarika 4, Samkhyasitras 1.88, and Yogasittras 1.7. 
8. See Ganganatha Jha (RB9473), p. 80. Prabhakara accepts only five pramdnas. 
9. See Dharmarajadhvarindra, Vedantaparibhasd, trans. S. Suryanarayana Sastri 
(RB6306), chaps. 1-6. 
10. In Subramania Iyer (G721), p. 45. 
li. Translation in Murti (G1643), p. 325. 


12. Tbid. 
13. Ibid., p. 326. 
14. Ibid. 


15. The following discussion regarding the Platonic parallel with vyadkarana is based 
on Murti (G1643), p. 327. 

16. Sarvadarsanasamgraha of Madhava trans. E.B. Cowell and A.E. Gough, (London, 
1892-1894), p. 219. 

17. Subramania Iyer (G734), p. 163. 

18. Subramania Iyer (G872), karika 19. Similar arguments are offered to show 
how the progressively clearer perception cannot be attributed to defects of the senses 
or memory through resemblance, p. 49. 

19. Mahadevan (RB5466), p. 62. 

20. Sastri (G706), p. 50. 

21. Pandy (RB4131), pp. 400-427. 

22. G872, sittra 20, pp. 51-52; and Vakyapadiya 1.88 and nytti. 

23. Ibid. 

24. G872, sitra 24, p. 64. See also Subramania Iyer (G1445), in which he makes 
clear that from the sphofa viewpoint whatever distinction of degree or part is made in 
an object must be done through a guna (quality or particular). For the grammarians 
it is the guza and never the universal that serves to express degrees in objects. It should 
also be noted that of the many possible ways of interpreting the universal, Bhartrhari 
prefers the following. A movement like lifting the hand consists of a series of move- 
ments. As these movements are transitory they cannot coexist and form a whole of 
which they would be the parts and in which the universal of the movement of lifting 
the hand would inhere. Now such a universal is more specific than the wider universal 


NOTES 553 


of movement in general. Although it inheres in each moment of movement, it is not 
cognizable in them alone due to too much similarity between moments of lifting and 
those of the moments of each movement, such as turning the hand. The moments of 
each movement are the result of a special effort to make that movement, and they 
are the substrata of the universal of that movement. But that universal cannot be 
cognized until a series of moments has been cognized. One or two moments of move- 
ment are not enough, but after a series of moments is cognized the cognition of the 
universal inherent in each movement becomes clear. Lifting, for example, may be 
identified, and other movements such as turning excluded. The process is similar in 
the manifestation of sphotas. Each is manifested by a series of special efforts to utter 
letters. One or two utterances of the series are not enough to eliminate other words 
with similar sounds. But as the complete series of letters is cognized, the cognition of 
the sphofa or universal of the particular word is clearly perceived, and meaningful 
usage of it in speech becomes possible. (Vakyapadiya 2.20-21 as interpreted by 
Subramania lyer [ G734] , pp. 168-169.) 

25. Ibid. 

26. Vakyapadiya, 1.52. 

27. Moving beyond Sanskrit itself and into the world of languages, I would take 
the universal error as referring to the necessity of going from the differentiated letters 
(the error) to the whole spkofa (meaning or ultimate reality). The fixed sequence 
and form of differentiation for a particular word-sphota would only be a constant error 
within cach language (such as Sanskrit). 

28. Vakyapadiya 1.85. 

29. Sphotasiddhi, sittra 22. 

30. Kaviraj (G1394), pp. 1-18 and 113-132. 

31. K.A. Subramania Iyer’s introduction to G872, p. 26. 

32. Vadkyapadiya 1.78-84. Among the analogies offered to explain the process, 
Bhartrhari’s favorite seems to be that the sounds leave impression seeds (samskéra, 
bhavand, or bija), which, as they mature in the mind, are conducive to an increasingly 
clear perception of the sphofa—to which they finally offer a perfect ‘‘fitness”’ or identity. 
A literal rendering of yogyata could be ‘‘to fit in a frame”’—the “‘fit” of the ‘“‘matured’ 
series of letters into the “‘frame’”’ of the sphofa. See also the oriti on Vakyapadiya 3.1.8. 

33. The phrase “function of the mind”’ here is intended to indicate that pratibha 
is not a function of the ordinary senses of the buddhi stage of consciousness, but is 
characteristic of the pre-buddhi or Sabdatattva stage. 

34. It should be clearly understood here that perfect perception of pratibha, how- 
ever valid in itself, remains outside the realm of pramaéna (which is characterized by 
sensory perception and discursive cognition). With regard to language, therefore, it is 
sphota when manifested as speech that is pramdpa (and not sphofa at the unified level 
of pratibha). The point made above, however, still stands. The cognition of sphofa at 
the level of either fabda pramapa or pratibha is via direct perception, not via inference. 

35. Sphotasiddhi, siitra 23, as translated by Subramania Iyer (G872), p. 60. 

36. Samkara, Brahmasittrabhdsya, as translated in Thibaut (RB243), vol. 1, p. 210. 

37. Vakpapadiya 1,142. 

38. I[bid., 1.123. 

39. The following summary depends mainly on Subramania Iyer’s presentation 
of Bhartrhari’s position in G734, pp. 144-146. 

40. Patarijali, Yogasitra 2.53. 

41. There is considerable debate in current scholarship over whether there should 
or should not be a fourth level of language, gard vak. Bhartrhari himself seems to leave 
open that possibility. The otti on Vakyapadiva 1.142 does quote among numerous other 
passages Rg Veda 1.164.45, which refers to four levels of vac. Cardona, p. 302, seems to 


554 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


contradict himself, suggesting four levels in the main text—pafyanti being divided into 
two aspects—but in the footnote observing “that Bhartrhri did not recognize an 
absolute fourth level called para vdc. ‘supreme speech,’ which was recognized by later 
thinkers, especially in the Kashmir Saiva school of thought” (p. 369). 


4: Worp MEANING 


1. See K. Kunjunni Raja, “‘Panini’s Attitude Towards Laksana,”’ Adpar Library 
Bulletin (1965) : 177-187. 

2. Sarvadarsanasamgraha of Madhava, trans. E.B. Cowell and A.E. Gough (London 
1892-1894, pp. 210ff. : 

3. See Chakravarti (G1402). 

4, Patafijali, Mahabhdsya 1.1. 

5. Kumirila, Slokavarttika, sphotavada section, verse 5. 

6. Patafijali, Mahabhdsya 1.4.109. 

7. Ibid. 
8. See Chakravarti (G1402), p. 100. 
9. Vakyapadiya 1.44. 

10. Ibid. 1.45—-46. 

11. Ibid. 1.47. 

12. Ibid. 1.49. 

13. Subramania Iyer (G721), p. 58. 

14. Véakyapadtya 1.1 and ofti. 

15. Subramania Iyer (G872), p. 2. 

16. Ibid., p. 3. 

17. Subramania Iyer (G1464), p. 124. 

18. A summary of part of Mandana’s answer to Kumarila in Mandana’s Sphota- 
siddhi, kariké 3, as presented by Gaurinath Sastri in G706, p. 105. 

19. Sphofasiddhi, karika 4. 

20. Ibid. 

21. Ibid. 

22. Unlike the subsequent discussion, the preceding debate assumes no invisible 
trace or samska@ra. Kumarila holds that the last phoneme, helped by the more visible 
going before of the other phonemes in the word, causes the understanding of meaning. 

23. Subramania Iyer (G872), p. 14. 

24. Sphotasiddhi, karika 5, G872, p. 16. 

25. Ibid. 

26. Ibid., kdrika 6, G872, p. 16. 

27. Ybid., G872, pp. 17-18. 

28. Ibid., kdrikd 10, G872, p. 30. 

29. Ibid., G872, p. 31. 

30. Ibid., karika 11, G872, p. 34. 

31. Ibid. 

32. Ibid., karikd 18, G872, p. 44. 

33. Subramania Iyer (G1464), p. 136. 

34. Subramania Iyer’s introduction to G872, p. 13. 

35. Ibid., kérikdé 20, and Vakyapadiya 1.88 with vriti. 

86. Itshould be noted that no less a person than Samkara argued against the sphota 
theory (in Brahmasitrabhaésya 1.3.28). See also the recent analysis of Samkara’s objection 
sphota in Herman (G1549). Samkara and Kumiarila both base their criticism on 
acarya Upavarsa, and their objections are somewhat different from the debate between 
Vacaspati and Mandana. 


NOTES 555 


37. This passage and the following ones are taken from the translation by S.S. 
Suryanarayana Sastri in G1414, reprinted in Collected Papers of S.S Suryanarayana Sastri 
(Madras, 1961), p. 296. 


38. Ibid. 
39. Ibid. 

40. Ibid., p. 301. 
41. Ibid. 


42. Ibid., p. 293. 

43. See Subramania Iyer’s introduction to G872, p. 17. 

44. Sphotasiddhi, kdrika 24, G872, p. 64. See also Subramania Tyer (G1445), in 
which he makes clear that from the sphofa viewpoint whatever distinction of degree 
or part is made in an object must be done through a guna (quality of particular). 

45. Vakyapadiya 1.85. For more on this topic see chapter 3 part 2 of this introduction. 


5, SENTENCE MEANING 


1. See Sphotasiddhi, karika 23. 

2. For detailed discussion see Kunjunni Raja (G355). 

3. See Kunjunni Raja (G1556), pp. 154-156. 

4. Kumiarila, Slokavaritika. 

5. See K. Kunjunni Raja, ‘“The Role of Tatparya in Understanding the Sentence,” 
in Ancient Indian Theories on Sentence Meaning (Poona, 1980). 

6. Noan Chomsky, Language and Mind (New York, 1968), chap. 3. 


NOTES TO SURVEY 


1. PumosopHica, Exements in Vepic LireraTuRe 


1. N&gesa Bhatta has interpreted this verse as referring to the fourfold mani- 
festation of vdc into para, pasyanti, madhyama, and vaikhari. 


2. PHiiosopHican ELeMEenT IN YAsKa’s JVirukta 


1. See B. Bhattacharya, Yaska’s Nirukta and the Science of Etymology (Calcutta, 
1952); Siddheswar Varma, The Etymology of Yaska (Hoshiarpur, 1953); Kunjunni Raja 
(G696). 

2. Thieme (G458), pp. 23-24. 

3. Cardona, pp. 270-273. 

4. ‘Bhavapradhanam akhyatam, sattvapradhanani namani.” 

5. “Sad bhavavikara, bhavantiti varsayanir jayate ’sti viparinamate vardhate 
paksiyate vinasyatiti.” 

6. ‘‘Praptakrama visesesu kriya saivabhidhiyate kramariipasya sambhare tat 
sattvam iti kathyate,” Vakyapadiya 3.1.35. 

7. ‘“Purvaparibhitam bhavam akhyatenacaste.” 

8. ‘‘Krdabhihito bhava dravyavad bhavati.”” 

9. ‘Indriyanityam vacanam audumbarayanah,” Vakyapadiya 2.347. 

10. Cf. Brough (G8). 

11. “Namanyakhyatajaniti sakatayano nairuktasamayasca; na sarvAniti gargyo 
vaiyakarananam caike,”’ Nirukia 1.12. 

12. “‘Bhavapradhanam akhydtam, sattvapradhanani namani.” 


556 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
3. PeniosopHicaL EveMents ww PAnunt’s Asfadhyayi 


1. Generally taken to be later than Yaska; but Thieme takes him to be earlier. 
See the extended discussion summarized in Cardona. 

2. ‘Sistah gabdesu pramanam.” 

3. ‘‘Lokavijnanat siddham,”’ see sitras 1.1.21, 1.1.65. 

4, “Tad aSisyam samjiapram4natvat,” sitra 1.2.53. ‘“Siddhe Sabdarthasam- 
bandhe lokatah,”’ Varttika. 

5. ‘‘Avyutpanna pratipadika.”’ See also the discussion in YAaska’s Nirukia. 

6. ‘Pratipadikavijfianacca Panineh siddham / Unadayo vyutpannani prati- 
padikani.” 

7. ‘“‘Arthaikatvad ekam vakyam sakanksam ced vibhage syAd,’’ Patafijali, 
Mahabhasya 3.2.41. 

8. See Kunjunni Raja (G355); also Devasthali (G327), pp. 206-215. 

9. Nydsa on Kasika, edited by S.C. Chakravarti in G851, p. 423. See Brough 
(G1478), pp. 28-29; also Staal (G1566), pp. 164-167. Narayana Bhattatiri elucidates 
this point in his Prakriydsarvasva. 

10. Nagega Bhatta discusses laksapd at length in his Mafijisa and says in the Parama- 
laghumafjiisé that according to the grammarians there is no necessity to accept laksand 
as a separate function of words. 


4. PriLosopHicaL ELEMENTs IN PaTANJALI’s Mahabhasya 


1. The Mimamsakas take Sabda to be the sound only, while to the grammarians 
meaningfulness is an essential feature of a linguistic sign. See Mandana Misra’s 
Sphotasiddhi, verse 3: ‘‘a fabda is the cause for creating the understanding of the 
meaning” (‘‘arthavasayaprasavanimittam sabda isyate’’). 

2. Mahabhasya 1.1. 

3. Kumirila, Slokavarttika, sphotavéda section, verse 5. 

4. See the discussion in chapter 5 of Bhartrhari. Among the followers of Panini, 
Vajapyayana considered the meaning to be @krti or jati, while Vyadi took it to be the 
individual or drayya. Among other scholars of philosophy, the Mimamsakas took dkrti 
to be synonymous with jati, while the Nyaya school took it to be the structural form, 
as distinct from the universal. Cf. Gautama, WNydyasiira, “‘Jatyakrtivyaktaas tu 
padarthah,.” 

5. Varttika 1: “‘siddhe Sabdarthasambandhe lokatah. .. .” 

6. Mahdabhasya 1: ‘‘arthavanto varnah....” 

7. WKatyayana’s vdrittka on 1.2.64: ‘‘dravyabhidhanam vyadih” and ‘‘akrtya- 
bhidhanad vaikam vibhaktau Vajapyayanah.” 

8. ‘Jatyakhyayam akasmin bahuvacanam anyatarasyam.” 

9. ‘Sariipdndm ekagesa ekavibhaktau.” 

10. Mahdabhasya 1. 

11. ‘*Paninidargane jatidravyau sabdendbhidhiyete.” 

12, “‘Yasya gunantaresvapi pradurbhavatsu tattvam na vihanyate tad dravyam” 
(on 5.1.119). 

13. On Panini’s sutra 1.4.109. 

14. Mahabhasya 1.35.5. 

15. Buddhau krtva sarvas cesfah karta dhiras tanvannitih. Sabdenarthanvacyan 
drstva buddhau kuryat paurvaparyam.”’ 

16. “Dhvanih sphotas ca sabdanam dhvanis tu khalu laksyate Alpo mahamé ca 
kesamcid ubhayam tat svabhavatah.” Also: “‘sphotah gabdah dhvanih égabdagunah.” 


NOTES 557 


17. ‘‘Varnasya grahane hetuh prakrto dhvanir isyate. Vrttibhede nimittatvam 
vaikrtah samapadyate.” 

18. ‘“‘Avasthita varna vaktus ciraciravacad vrttayo visisyante.” 

19. Mahabhasya 1.181. 

20. “‘Krpo ro lah,” Panini’s sitra 8.2.18. 

21. “StanakeSavati stri syal lomasah purusah smrtah, Ubhayor antaram yacca 
tadabhave napumsakam.”’ 

22. ‘“‘Na vaiyakaranais gakyam laukikam lingam Asthatum.” 

23. “‘Samstyanavivaksayam stri, prasavavivaksayam puman ubhayavivaksayam 
napumsakam.” 


5. BHARTRHARI 


1. Cf. Frauwallner (RB12599), pp. 134-135. 

2. The title Vakyapadiya could have referred originally to the second of the three 
kandas (chapters or books) that make up the work. It is definite that about a.p. 1000 
Vakyapadiya was generally regarded as applying only to the first two books; Trikdndi 
was the term that included all three books. The use of the title Vakyapadiya to speak 
of even the third book, the Padakanda or the Prakirnaka (Miscellany) seems to be no 
older than the sixteenth century (cf. Aklujkar [ G733], pp. 547-555). It is this use 
that is most common at present. The first two books, according to one manuscript 
tradition, consist of verses (karikés) as well as a prose commentary (vrtii). The other 
manuscript traditions have only the kdrikas, or karikas accompanied by a prose commen- 
tary (fika) evidently authored by someone other than the kérika author. A long line 
of writers in the Sanskrit tradition has consistently held that the Vriti too is Bhartrhari’s 
work and is an integral part of the Vakyapadiya (cf. Aklujkar [ G743] . In their under- 
standing the reference of the title Vakyapadiya is not confined to the kérikas. For many 
modern students of Bhartrhari’s works, however, that title stands for the kdrikds, 
primarily as well as exclusively. The Vriti is not generally viewed as included when 
references such as ‘‘Vakyapadiya 1.5” are made. 

3. The word nitya is not intended here in the sense ‘‘eternal’ (as in ‘“‘God is 
eternal”). Even as signifying “permanent” it has two or three shades of meaning, 
depending on the theoretical context. See Aklujkar (G735), p. 82. 

4. See the preceding note. 

5. Gf. Aklujkar (G762), p. 12, n. 12. 

6. When an expression is mentioned, as distinct from when it is used, it is thought 
to convey its own form as meaning. A theoretical distinction is made between an 
expression and its own form in cases of mention, and the former is said to be the 
signifier and the latter the signified; that is, when self-referring or quoted expressions 
are compared with the expressions having an external reference, the distinction is not 
seen in the mode of employment (“use-mention”) of the two, but in what they 
convey—what the outcome is. 

7. The concept varnasphota, as understood by the Paniniyas, differs from “‘pho- 
neme” as generally understood by linguists in one important respect. A, a, and a-——that 
is, short (hrasva), long (dirgha), and prolonged (pluta) a—are regarded as different 
realizations of varnasphota a; in other words, the varnasphofa here is an abstracted or 
generalized common factor form. 

8. The implication is that linguistic units are assumed to be individuals or parti- 
culars in the discussion summarized in the preceding paragraph. One of Bhartrhari’s 
commentators (Punyaraja/Helaraja, at 2.1-2, 19, 39-40) systematizes the sphofa view 
of linguistic expressions as follows: (a) bdhya sphota: individuals (zyakti) and universal 


558. ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(jatt); (b) abhyantara sphota: Sabdataiiva. This systematization is confirmed by the 
sequence of statements in 1.84—97. 

9. The foregoing interpretation of 1.148-154 is conjectural, for the passages 
do not contain an explicit statement to this effect: “‘The following/preceding is the 
justification of the claim that knowledge or Sastra-based use of grammatical expressions 
can lead to merit.’? I have assumed that such a statement was intended by Bhartrhari, 
because the context (1.144-147 and 1.158-174) is one of pointing out the importance 
of grammar and because the immediately following verses (1.155-157) are concerned 
with the relation between sadhu Sabda and dharma. It is, however, possible that 1.148-157 
are not at their original place in the Brahmakanda. 

10. Anvitabhidhana-vadins of the later works. 

11. The last three correspond, respectively, to madhyamd, pasyanti, and pardpasyantt- 
ripa. Speech (vaikhari) is marked by an observable presence of breath and sequence 
in both its upamsu and non-upamsu varieties. 

12. As will be apparent from this summary, the link among verses 112-115 is not 
clear. 

13. There is some overlap in the list that follows by the very nature of the matter 
involved and because the list evolved through the efforts of generations of thinkers. 
For the latter reason, there is also an element of variation in the understanding or 
definition of terms involved. For example, prakarana and sdmarthya obviously had wider 
meanings in addition to their specific meanings determined on the basis of other factors 
included in the list(s). 

14. The Vaiyakaranas understand dravya in two senses: first, the everlasting sub- 
stance that underlies all transient physical shapes; and, second, what a demonstrative 
pronoun (equivalent to “‘variable” of modern logic) can refer to. The second chapter, 
a summary of which begins at this point, expands on the first sense. The second sense 
is given in chapter 4. 

15. In the first chapter of the third book, all expressions are said to refer, in the 
final analysis, to Existence. This Existence is then viewed as a universal pervading 
everything. Here in the second chapter a similar conclusion is reached, but the Exis- 
tence is said to be a particular. Thus, there are two currents of thought, roughly 
corresponding to ontological reduction (a) to classes or (b) to individuals in recent 
western philosophy. 

16. Most, if not all, common sentences would be logically problematic (internally 
inconsistent) if the words in them were viewed as referring to actually existing entities 
(for example, in the case of “‘sprout is born,’’ one could ask: How is the sprout said 
to be born when it existed?). Explanations of how these sentences are possible vary. 
One involves distinction between reference and sense (or meaning). Another advocates 
acceptance of another kind of (verbal or linguistic) existence. The third rests on the 
observation that words cannot refer to entities in their entirety—in all of their aspects— 
or purely in themselves. The following summary alludes to this variety of explanations. 

17. The intention behind calling the arising of an effect a miracle could be of two 
sorts: either the becoming of the effect cannot be expressed without giving rise to 
unintended implications—without realizing the inadequacy of language, as in the 
description of a miracle—or we cannot determine the point of transition—the exact 
moment or phase in which the cause ceases to exist and the effect comes into being. 
The transition seems to take place in a flash like a miracle. Helaraja (3.3.81) is aware 
of both interpretations, and there is contextual support for both. Verses 3.3.78-80 and 
82-86 suggest that Bhartrhari located the logical problems of cause-and-effect relation- 
ship in the expression of that relationship and in being not aware of general truths 
about language’s relation to reality in understanding that expression. In other words, 
he seems to have dissolved the problems rather than solved them, Thus, the first 


NOTES 559 


interpretation is contextually justified. Support for the second interpretation can be 
seen in the adjectives abhégam, “‘partless,” and akramam ‘‘sequenceless,”? which are 
used in 3.3.81. 

18. The entity need not be explicity qualified. Ail that is necessary is a presupposi- 
tion that x can be qualified if necessary (bhedyatvena vivaksita). Second, qualification 
is to be understood as including predication, even of the simple type such as “‘x is/ 
exists.”’ The present definition allows us to view universals and the like as particulars 
and permits characterization of all word meanings as particulars or individuals. Thus, 
all words are said to refer to dravya in two ways: the one stated in chapter 3.2 (see the 
preceding note) and the one stated here in chapter 3.4. 

19. This excelling can also be in such negative respects as being disliked, being 
despised, and so on (for example, kutsitatara, ‘‘more censured of the two’’). 

20. The intended characterization of sadhana or karaka should be clear from the 
summary of the following chapter. The important points to remember are, first, that 
they are‘viewed as supports of the action as expressed in the sentence; second, that their 
actual relation to the action as seen in the physical world does not matter—what 
matters is the capacities in which the speaker places them—and, third, that the action 
mentioned in this context is not necessarily physical, observable action characterized 
by a serics of moments; even the meaning of “‘is’”’ or “exists” is action. 

21. As Helaraja (p. 209.12-13) observes here, while the definitions of sadhana, 
kriyé, and so on, like those of the preceding dravya and guna, are established by studying 
Paninian rules, the characterization of space, time, and so on is a result of a direct 
attempt to understand their nature; the rules do not provide clues as in the other 
cases. For Bhartrhari, akafa does not seem to be any positive, physical entity. It is 
nowhere distinguished from dis in his writings. He seems to have used the word con- 
ventionally in the sense ‘visible, perceptible space,”’ which, in view of his final rejection 
of space as an actually existent entity, ultimately comes to mean “space that is generally 
thought to be perceptible.”’ 

22. Vaisesikas, according to Helaraja, pp. 239.3-4, 243.9. 

23. (a) Helaraja (p. 315.18) labels this view in verse 107 as svasiddhanta, 
*“Bhartrhari’s own thesis,’? according to the available editions. But the view in verse 
109 is also svasiddhénta, according to Helaraja (p. 316.12). (b) There are no words 
such as atha vd, kesamcit, or anyesam, indicating paksdntara, in verses 108 and 109. That 
these verses express views different from the one contained in 106-107 is something 
one has to accept on the authority of Helaraja, who, in turn, seems to have (rightly ) 
noticed that the wording of 108-109 indicates different philosophical assumptions. 

24. The assumption here is that an agent must really exist to appear as an agent 
in a sentence. In the view expressed in verse 105, real existence is not held to be neces- 
sary; a tentative, imagined existence is held to be sufficient. Among the thinkers 
advocating necessity of “‘real existence’’ there are two groups: one (probably Samkhya) 
locates such real existence in the cause, maintaining that cause and effect are essen- 
tially identical; the second explains real existence as existence as a universal, clearly 
implying that the universals are real (as in the Nyaya view) and beyond question 
(which, of course, is not the case, as the questions of Buddhist logicians show). Although 
Bhartrhari can accommodate these views (three in all: buddhyavasthanibandhana or 
vivaksanibandhana, existence; satkarya; and jativyakti) as well as the upacarasatta (secon- 
dary, derivative existence) view expressed in 3.3.45, his first preference is the fabdartho 
"rtha view, expressed in 3.7.109 110. Meaning (Sabdartha) and reference (vastvartha or 
bahyartha) are to be distinguished. In understanding usage, attention to what is reflected 
in language is sufficient. Whether the entity spoken of actually exists (a worthwhile 
concern if the purpose of inquiry is something else) need not be considered to account 
for usage, such as ‘‘As sprout Comes into being.” For words carrying out denotation in 


560 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sentences like this, all existent entities are no different from nonexistent entities. To 
put the point differently, it is improper to see contradictions in a sentence by asking 
questions like: “Did the sprout exist before coming into being? If it did, how can it 
newly come into being? If it did not, how can it perform the action of coming into 
being?”’ The use of the word ‘‘sprout’”’ is in no way predicated on there being an actual 
sprout or a referent. The sentence with “‘sprout’’ as the subject can proceed as long as 
there is meaning or sense (Sabdartha) for ‘‘sprout.” 

25. In the original, verses 109-110, the observation about language (specifically, 
denotation) is said to hold good also in the case of prajfia or buddhi, “‘intellect’’ (speci- 
fically, a cognition reflecting an entity). Just as denotation implies acceptance of (some 
kind of) existence, cognition implies conceding (some kind of) existence. I have left 
out this mention of intellect and cognition here in order not to obscure the present 
discussion and also because language and intellect turn out to be ultimately identical 
in Bhartrhari’s philosophy. 

26. (a) Actions such as putting the pot on the stove, pouring water into the pot, 
adding rice to the water, lighting the stove, and more, are subsumed under the one 
action denoted by ‘‘cooks.”? See summary of the eighth chapter (Kriyasamuddesa). (b) 
Helaraja points out that this way of accounting for “‘A sprout comes into being”’ differs 
from the first way (a), in that here the identity of cause and effect is based on a feature 
of usage called upacdra (“‘extended application” of a verbal root like “‘cook”’ to cover 
subsidiary actions leading to cooking), while in (a) the identity of cause and effect 
is held to be factual (vdstava). 

27. The examples indicated by Bhartrhari are: “‘yavagi mitraya sampadyate,” 
“suvarnapindah kundale bhavatah,” “brahmanah samgho bhavati,” ‘‘brahmanah 
samghibhavanti,” ‘‘tvad-bhavasi,” and “‘rajan araja sampadyase/bhavasi.”” To them 
Helaraja adds: ‘‘ksiram dadhi sampadyate,” ‘‘bijad ankuro jayate,” “yavagva mitram 
jayate,” ‘“‘mahadbhiitas candramah,” and “‘mahadbhita brahmani.” The discussion 
of these examples is determined to some extent by the peculiarities of the Sanskrit 
language. For this reason, as well as to indicate the relationship of the point here with 
the preceding, I have preferred simpler examples. 

28. At the beginning of this section, a verse giving the definition of apddana is 
expected, as in the case of sections on other kdrakas in this SamuddeSa. But the first 
statement we see at present in it deals with the varieties of abadana. It seems, therefore, 
that at least one verse has been lost in the known manuscripts. The form of the lost 
verse is likely to have been ‘‘apaye yad udasinam calam va yadi vacalam / dhruvam 
evatadavesat tad apadanam ucyate,” that is, essentially the same as the verse quoted 
by Bhoja (Syigdraprakasa, chapter 4), Haradatta (Padamafijari 1.4.24), Bhattoji Diksita 
(Sabdakaustubha 1.4.24), and others. 

29. As the last example indicates, the action of moving away associated with the 
concept of apdédana is not necessarily the actual or physical action of moving away. In 
conformity with the Vaiyakaranas sébda (conceptual or semantic, as distinct from 
artha, actual, physical) concept of action (see summary of the Xriydsamuddefa, book 3, 
section 8 instances in which the movement is only imagined or intellectually entertained 
are also relevant here. 

30. Cf. Joshi (G1194) pp. 29, 39-40, etc, 

31. Swaminathan (G780), pp. 3-4. 

32. ‘“Dvau sabdatmanau nityah karyas ceti kaiscid nitya iti drstah kaiscid anitya 
iti. Athava jatir vyaktig ceti athava sphoto dhvanié ca,” ibid. p. 13. 

33. Subramania Iyer (G734), p. 171. 

34. Swaminathan (G780), p. 28; also Subramania Iyer (G734), p. 74, 

35. “Saksat pratipatter anum4napratipattir gariyasi.” 


NOTES 561 
9. Manpana Misra 


1. In this logical argument, it seems clear that Kumiarila’s attempt to identify 
sabda with the uttered phonemes is effectively discredited by the reasoning of Mandana, 
who at the same time has vindicated the identification of fabda with sphota. Although 
the logical groundwork has largely been completed, Mandana still has to describe in 
detail exactly how fabda as sphota may be comprehended using only ordinary memory 
traces of the phonemes to reveal the sphofa. He must also show the sphofa to be not a 
mere postulation but a perceivable reality, otherwise much of his logical argument 
simply collapses. These tasks he undertakes in karikds 18-19 of the Sphotasiddhi. 


10. He .ArAja 


See Subramania Iyer (G734), pp. 39-40. 
Cf. G709, G747. 

Aklujkar (G750), pp. 165-188. 

Ibid, 

Subramania Iyer (G734), p. 38. 


GP eye 


12. Punyvaraja 


1. Subramania Iyer (G734), p. 41. 


13. KaryvatTa 


1. Cf. Sarma (G907). 

2. ‘Yathottaram muniniam pramanyam” siltra 1.1.29. 

3. ‘‘Munitraya matenadyatva sadhvasadhu pravibhagah,” sdiva 5.1.21. 

4. Kaiyata’s views on different problems connected with language are found 
scattered in different parts of the commentary. Many of them have been noted and 
discussed in Konda Bhatta’s Bhiisaza( sara). 


21. Sesa CovrAmanr 


1. Qf. Yudhisthira Mimamsaka, Samskrta vydkarana-sistra kd itikdésa (Sonipat, 
1973), vol. 1, pp. 418-419. 


28, ANNAMBHATTA 
1. Yudhisthira Mimamsaka, Sapskyta vydkarana-Sastra ka ttihasa (Sonipat, 1973), 


vol. 1, p. 422, 
2. P.P.S. Sastri’s introduction to G587. 


32. SrvarAmenpra Sarasvati 


1. Theodor Aufrecht, Catalogus Catalogorum: An Alphabetical Register of Sanskrit 
Works and Authors, 3 pts. (Wiesbaden, 1962), pt. 1, pp. 718, 440, 


562 ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


33. (Szsa) CGaxrapAmi (Darra) 


1. Yudhisthira Mimamsaka, Sapskrta uyakarana-Sastra ka itihésa (Sonipat, 1973), 
vol. 1, pp. 540-541. 

2. Cf. New Catalogus Catalogorum, vol. 3, p. 275a, and Mimamsaka, Sanskrta 
vyakarana-Sastra, pp. 487-495. 


35. Ninaxanrua SuKLA 


1. See New Indian Antiquary 5 (1942): 177-183; also Journal of the Tanjore Sarasvati 
Mahal Library (1955 1956). 


37. Konpa (orn Kaunpa) Buarra 


1. See volume 1 of this encyclopedia, Bibliography of Indian Philosophies, 2d ed., 
p. 387. 

2. Descriptive Catalogue of the Manuscripts of the Adyar Library, vol. 9, no. 575. 

3. Volume | of this encyclopedia, Bibliography of Indian Philosophies, 2d ed., p. 422. 

4. The summary of this section was prepared through consultation of the disserta- 
tion of Gune (G1197). 

5. The summary of this section is based on the unpublished dissertation of 
Deshpande (G1196). 


40. TrruMALA YAJVAN 
1. See Yudhisthira Mimamsaka, Sanskyta wyakarana-Sastra kd itihdsa (Sonipat, 
1973), vol. 1, pp. 413ff. 
42, SapAsiva 
1. See Yudhisthira Mimamsaka, Sanskrta uyakarana-Sdstra ka itikdsa (Sonipat, 
1973), vol. 1, pp. 416-417. 
45. NAcrSa (or NAcop Buarra) 
1. For a relative chronology of his works see Gode, (RB6813); also P.V. Kane, 
History of Dharmasdasitra Volume One (Poona 1930), 453-456. 
57. ASApHARA BHATTA 


1. Shah, RB4735. 


66. SarArRA RAGHAVENDRACARYA GAJENDRAGADAKAR 


1. B.N.K. Sharma, A History of the Duaita School of Vedanta and Its Literature (Bombay, 
1961), vol. 2, p. 358; Theodor Aufrecht, Catalogus Catalogorum: An Alphabetical Register 
of Sanskrit Works and Authors, 3 pts. (Wiesbaden, 1962), pt. 1, p. 500. 


CUMULATIVE INDEX 


References are to pages unless preceded by “‘G’’, in which case the reference is to 
numerical entries in the Bibliography. This cumulative index combines indices 
of names, titles, and topics into one alphabetized guide. Abbreviations used are the 


following: 


a= article 
b= book 


d = dissertation 


e= edition 


t = translation 


Abegg, Ernst a: G1391 

abhdsa. See reflection 

abhava, See absence 

ABHAYACANDRA (ACARYA) (1329) 
484 

ABHAYANANDIN (750) 17-18, 474 

abhidha. See primary meaning 

abhihitanvaya (verbal comprehensive theo- 
ry) 9-10, 66, 92, 98 

ABHINAVAGUPTA (1014) 28, 91, 193, 
476 

ABHINAVA KALIDASA (1750) 371, 
507 

ABHINAVA NRSIMHASRAMA (1630) 
496 

abhinnariipa. See adjective 

ABHIRAMA VIDYALAMKARA (1500) 
487 

abhivyakti. See revelation 

Abhyankar, Kashinath Vasudev 128. 
a: G242, G322, G519, G573, G726, 
G1215, G1217, G1502, G1517, G1563, 
G1594, e: G536, G781, Gass, G1331, 
b: G1546 

abhyanujfid. See permission 

abhydsa. See practice 

ablative (apadéna) 168, 270, 337, 338, 560 

absence (abhdva) 54, 127, 149, 288, 334, 
G1683 

absolute G1532. See also Brahman 


—consciousness. See consciousness 
—eternality. See eternal, absolute 

Acaksanaviveka (of Rajiva Sarman) 530 

ACARYA DIKSITA 239 

ACCAN DIKSITA 239 

accent (svara) 15, 149, G185, GI199, 
G298, G324, G397, G457A, GI1367, 
G1580, G1584, G1594 
Vedic G117, G1420 

accomplisher (uddesya) 330 

accusative case 259, 272, G1461, G1519, 
G1520 

Acharya, K. C. a: G366 

Acharya, Mrityunjay a: G16 

Acharya, Narayana Ram e: G1167 

Acharya, Ramananda a: G1611 

Achyatan, Mavelikara b: G493 

action (kriyd) 168-70, 196-97, 256-58, 
261-62, 264, 268, 337, 559, G1477 
means to (sédhana) 25, 163-68, 262 
miraculous course of (atadbhiitavrtti) 

161, G748 

activity (pravrtti) 169 

activity (rajas) 44-45, 120, 275 

activity (sfanda) 328 

ACYUTANANDA SASTRI (1963) 517, 
e: G168 

AGYUTA PISHAROTI (1610) 494 

ADENNA 517 

adhikarana. See locative 


564 


adhisthina. See basis 
adhiyajfia. See ritualistic interpretation of 
the Veda 
adhunika. See technical term 
adhyasa. See superimposition 
adhvan, See path of being 
Adityas 104 
adjective (abhinnariipa) 292, G1571 
Adredos, F. R. b: G1486 
adrsta 146, 186 
Advaita Vedanta 20, 41-43, 54, 56-57, 59- 
60, 82, 216, 239-40, 255, 287, 305, 341, 
369-71, 375, 397, G790, G809 
Advaitaviveka (of Asadhara Bhatta) 375 
Advayasiddhi (of Helaraja) 193, 475 
adverb G1632 
Adyar Library 211, 240 
aesthetic experience 32-33 
agama. See scripture, tradition 
agent (kdraka) 269-70, 336-37 
(karir) 98, 16-167, 255-60, 268, 559, 
G259, G324, G1627 
prompting agent, see prompter 
reflexive agent 268 
Agni 104-5 
Agrawala, Vasudev Sharan a: G95, G112, 
G468, G469, G472, G572, G577, G1473, 
b: G476, G485 
agreement (anvaya) G1579 
and difference (anvayavyatireka) 146, 
275, 290 
agriculture 12 
Aindra school 13, G1, G5, G6, G7 
Aitareya Brahmapa 234, G1375 
ajahatsvartha 279-80 
Gjanika. See permanence of word 
AJITASENA ACARYA 518 
akanksa. See expectancy 
dkéra, See form 
akaé$a 162, 168 
akhandapada, See sphota 
akhandavikya. See sphoja 
akhyata. See verb 
Akhydtacandrika (of Bhattamalla) 530 
—Kriyakofa (of Ramacandra) 530 
Akhydtarthacandrikénimaya (of Srikrsna Bha- 
tta Maunin) 506 
Akhyétavada (of Raghunatha Siromani) 
—Arthanimaya (of Jayakrsna Maunin) 
361, 367 
Akhyétavyékarana (of Vahgasena) 481 
Akhyatauyakkyana (of Visvegvara Tarka- 
carya) 534 


ENCYQLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Aklujkar, Ashok 123-73, 179, 193, 201, 
559, 563, a: G731, G733, G736, G741, 
G743, G750, G762, G764, G765, G769, 
G774, G782, G806, G1607, G1665, 
d: G735 

akrti. See configuration 

aksara. See syllable 

AKSAYASORI 371 

alambana. See supporting object 

Alamkara literature 239 

Alamkdrasarvasva (of Ruyyaka) 203 

alamkarasastra, Alamkarikas 31, 83, 91-2, 
240 

alatacakra. See fire-wheel 

Al-George, Sergiu a: G142, G212, G228, 
G243, G367, G491, Gi567, G1608, 
G161i2 

Allen, William Sidney a: G132, b: G1478, 
G1547 

alphabet G1467 

AMARACANDRA (1250) 481 

Amoghavarsa I G883 
(Sabdénusasana) Amoghavriti (by Sakat- 

ayana) 17, 474, G884, G890, 476 
—wNpasa (of Prabhacandra) 476 

Amrtatarangini (of Ksivrasvamin) 476 

analogy. See comparison 

ANANDADATTA 518 

ANANDAPGORNA 
(1350) 484 

ANANDA SIDDHANTAVAGISA 518 

ANANDAVARDHANA 8, 12, 28-32, 66, 


VIDYASAGARA 


83, 91 
ANANTA 518 
ANANTA BHATTA 518 
ANANTACARYA (1900) 23, 518 
ANANTACARYA of Musarapakkam 
(1906) 514 
ANANTANARAYANA SASTRIN 
(1750) 507 


ANANTANARAYANA SASTRI, P. S., 
See P. S. ANANTANARAYANA SAS- 
TRI 

ANANTA SURI 518 

Ananthanarayana, H. S, a: G238, G1609, 
b: G350 

dnantya. See infinity 

Andhra G1635 

Anekamanyapadarthasitravicaéra (of Udayah- 
kara Nanapathaka) 509 

Anekarthasamgraha (of Hemacandra) 203 

atgadhikara G1687 


angirasa 30 


INDEX 


anipsitakarman 269 

aniroacaniya, See indescribable 

anitpasphotavada G1434 

ANNAMBHATTA (1540) 22, 223, 237, 
249, 313, 489, 561 

antaryémin, See inner controller 

anubandha G149, G417, G296, G619 

Anubandhakhandanavéda (of Dayagamkara) 
520 

ANUBHOTI SVARUPACARYA (1270) 
20, 481-82 

Anuhpesdra (of Varendra Campahattiya 
Managarman) 534 

anumana. See inference 

anuvada 25 

gnuotti G120 

Anvayadipika (of Devadatta) 520 

anvayaupatireka. See agreement and diffe- 
rence 

anvitabhidhana (vada) 9-10, 91-2, 98, 558 

aorist G1392 

apabhramsa G804 

apadana. See ablative 

APADEVA (1650) 499 

Apininiyapramapata (of Narayana Bhatta- 
tiri) 22, 497 

Aparavisayapramapani (of Kavi Vallabha)525 

apasabda 321-22 

Apasabdanirakarana (of Jagaddhara) 484 

apavada. See exception 

apeksabuddhi. See enumerative cognition 

APISALI 440 

Apisalisiksa (of Apisalz) 440 

apoddhara. See meaning, abstracted 

apoha (exclusion of others) 6, 27, 66, 125, 
549 
—pariccheda 28 

APPAN NAINARYA (1510) 487 

APPA SURI (1730) 504 

APPAYYA DIKSITA 518 

Appayya Diksita, grandfather of Nilakan- 
tha Diksita 373 

Appayya Diksita, author of Pdpinisitra- 
prakasa 353, 507 

APPAYYA DIKSITA I (1585) 239-40, 
397 

APPAYYA DIKSITA IIE (1670) 500 

appearance (vivaria). See manifestation 

application (praurttinimitta) 294 

apposition 185 

aprasastya. See inrapropriety 

apiroa 74-9, 164, 184, 213, 265-67, 300, 
344 


565 


Arapura, John G. 103, a: Gi629 
architecture 12 
Arora, Sudarshan Kumari a: 
d: G629 
artha. See meaning; See also purpose 
arthaikaiva. See unity of purpose 
arthapaiti. See presumption 
Arthasamgraha (of Srideva Pandita) 533 
Arthasamgraha (of Vaidyanatha Paiya- 
gunda) 505 
arthavada. See supplementary description 
Arthavatsitravada (of Manyudeva) 387, 
509 
artisans G234 
Aryavaraguru, S.P.S, Jagannathaswamy 
e: G1067 
ASADHARA BHATTA (1770) 23, 375, 
507, 562 
Gsatti, See continuity 
asatya. See unreal 
Asiatic Society Library of Calcutta 207 
Asoka G504 
aspect (upagraka) 173, G1494 
aSrayasiddhi. See fallacy of unestablished 
locus 
association of word meanings (samsarga- 
maryada) 10, 98, 125, 161, 284, 304, 330, 
333, 340, 344 
Asjadhyayi (of Panini) 4, 14, 16, 38, 86, 
113-17, 257, 322, 441-54, 550, 556 
—Mitaksara (of Annambhatta) 237, 489 
—Prakasa (of Appayya Diksita) 240, 
507 
Commentary (of Sivaramendra Saras- 
vati) 245, 508 
—Varttikas (of Katyayana). See Varttikas 
—Laghubhisya (author unknown) 459 
—Mahibhésya (of Patafijali). See Mahé- 
bhdsya 
—Vriti G542 
—Kasiké (of Jayaditya and Vamana). 
See Kastka 
Commentary (of Dharanidhara) 509 
Commentary (of Kasinatha) G26 
—Vriti (of Madhava) G35 
—Tattvaprakasika (of Gangadatta Sas- 
tri) 516, 521 
—Vrtti (of Jayanta Bhajta) 475 
—Prakirgaprakasa (of Helaraja) 475, 551 
—Ripavatara (of Dharmakirti). See Ripa-~ 
vatara 
Gommentary (of Govardhana) 478 
—Durghatdvytti (of Saranadeva) 480 


G6i8, 


566 


—Bhasavriti 480 
Commentary (of Srstidharacarya) 
G969 
—Prakriyakaumudi (of Ramacandra). 
See Prakriyakaumudi 
—Siddhéntakaumudt (of Bhattoji Dik- 
sita). See Siddhdntakaumudt 
—Vyitisamgraha (of Ramacandra) 505 
—Pradipa or Sabdabhisana (of Narayana 
Sudhi) 507 
—Mitéurttyarthasamgraha (of Udayan- 
kara Nanapathaka) 509 
—Vytti (of Gokulacandra) 510 
—Bhasya (of Dayananda Sarasvati) 511 
—Chandaprakésa (of Gangadhara Kavi- 
raja) 512 
Commentary (of Devidin) 512 
Commentary (of Jivarama Sarman) 
512 
—Bhésyaprathamavytti (of Brahmadatta 
Jijfiasu) 517 
—Sici (of Cudamisra) 519 
—Vyiti (of Datta Rama Bhatta) 520 
—Laghu (vytti)vivrti (of Devasahaya) 
520 
Commentary (of Hari Pandita) 523 
Commentary (of Manalur Viraragha- 
vacarya) 527 
—Pradipa or Sabdabhisana (of Nara- 
yana) 528 
~—Vydkaranadipika (of Oram Bhatta) 528 
—Tippani (of Sandatana Tarkacarya) 
532 
—Paninisitraoyakhyé (of Viraraghava- 
carya) 535 
Asjddhydyi-Dhatupatha (of Panini) 14, 19, 
113, G58, G59, G210, G236, G239, 
G240, G392 
—Ksiratarangini (of Ksirasvimin) 476 
—Sabdikébharana (of Hariyogin Saila- 
vacarya) 478 
—Madhaviyadhatuortti (of Sayana) 484 
—Tardvali (of Krsnasudhi) 526 
Astadhyayisitrakofa (of Laksmanarayana 
Vyasa) 527 
astika. See orthodox 
astronomy (jyotisa) 12, 107 
Afubodha (of Rama Kinkara Sarasvati) 
530 
Agubodhavyakarana (of Taranatha Tarkava- 
caspati) 512 
Asvins 104 
Asyavamiya hymn 37, 103-4 


ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Athalekar, S. L. a: G294 

Atharva Veda 40, 105-6, 550 

Athavale, R.B. a: G1465 

atideSasiitra. See extension rule 

Gtman. See self 

atom 148 

aucitya. See suitability 

AUDAMBARAYANA 10, 13, 68, 110, 
123, 342, 440 

AUDAVRAJI 440 

Aufrecht, Theodor 393, 561. a:G29, G432, 
G434, G1040, b:G364 

Auktika (of Kulamandana Siri) 485 

Auktika (of Somaprabha) 533 

Auktika (of Udayadharma or Dharma- 
sari) 486 
—Commentary 

489 

—Vakyaprakafavarta 497 

aum 37, 68, 106 

(Sri) Aurobindo (Ghose) 37-8, 550 

autpaitika. See original relation of word to 
meaning 

avadhi. See limit 

(King) Avantivarman 28 

dvarana. See mayé, obscuring 

avastha. See phase 

avidya. See ignorance 

Avinita. See Durvinita 

AyyayakoSa (of Dvarakanatha Nyayabht- 
sana) 513 

Avyayértha (of Dayananda Sarasvati) 511 

Avyayartha (of Harikrsna) 523 

Avyayariha (of Radhakrsna Gosvamin ) 529 

Avyayarthakosa 
—Mafijari (of Ramarsi) 531 

Avyayarthalahari (of Devakinandana) 520 

Auyayarthanimaya (of Kalurama Sastrin) 
514 

Avyayarthapradipika (of Yatisa) 535 

Avyayasabdavrtti (of Trilocana) 534 

Avpayaurtti (of Brahmadatta) 514 

Ayachit, S. M. a:G151, G156 


(of Harsakiilagani) 


Bahulikar, Saudamin a:G310, G319, 
G1568, d:G293 

Bahuvrihyarthavicéra (of Udayankara Nana- 
pathaka) 510 

bahyartha. See reference 

Bakre, M. Gangadhara 216, 268 

Bala, Indu d:G360 

Béla (ka) bodha (of Narahari) 528 

BALACANDRA SASTRI 514, e:Gi086 


INDEX 


BALA KRSNA PANCOLI 24, 417, 516 

BALAKRSNA SARMA YOGI 513 

BALAMBHATTA. See VAIDYANATHA 
PAIYAGUNDA 

BALARAMA 518 

Balasarman, son of Nagesa Bhatta 323 

BALASASTRIN RANADE 511 

Balasubrahmanyam, M. D. a:G163, 
G185, G198, G199, G270, G291, G292, 
G320, G351, G375, G379, G619, 
G1584, G1595, G1596, d:G213 

Balavabodha (of Damodara Sarman) 519 

Balavabodha (of Kasyapa) 18, 480 

Bali, Surya Kant b:G1130, d:G1129 

Ballantyne, James R. b:G1442, e:G521, 
et:G1148 

Banaras 215, 237, 241, 247, 255, 357, 399 

Bandbu, Visva b:G308 

Bandini, Giovanni a:G776 

Bandyopadhyay, Pratap a:G1637 

Banerji, Priyatosh a:G133 

Banerji, Suresh Chandra e:G1132, G1293 

Bannerji, S. R. 203-4 

Barlingay, S. S. a:G1559 

Barua, Anandaram e:G915 

Basavaraju, C. N. a:G964 

basis (prakrti, gana) 15, 113 
(adhisthana) 216 
nominal (prdatipadika). See nominal stem 
verbal. See roots 

Bechardas, Shravak Pandit e:G979 

becoming (Shava) 12, 109-10, 169 
modification of (vikdra) 169 

Belvalkar, Shripad Krishna 17 

Benaraji, Satya Ranjan e:G914 

Benfey, Theodor b:G1366 

Bengal 19, 207 209, 211 

BETARAYA 518 

Bhaga 105 

Bhagavadgita G115 

Bhagavat, Vamana Balakrishna e:G725 

BHAGAVATBHAKTA 518 

BHAGAVATPRASADA 
(1890) 513, e:G846 

BHAIRAVA MISRA (1824) 12, 389, 
510 G1088 

bhakii G62 

BHAMAHA G873, G874, G875 

Bhdmati (of Vacaspati Miégra I) 302 

Bhandare, Madhava Sastri e:G1360 

Bhandarkar, R. G. a:G32, G53, G523, 
G524, G525, G532, G539, G541, G546, 
G1370 


SARMAN 


567 


Bhanuji Diksita 241, 319 

BHARADVAJA 440 

Bharadvaja, Damodara Sastri 
G849 

Bharadvaja, Gangadhara Sastri e:G1277 

Bharadvaja lineage 239 

Bharata 28, 30-31 

BHARATA MALLIKA (1836) 493, 510 

BHARATA MISRA (1550) 22, 231-35, 
488 

BHARTRHARI (530) 6-7, 10-13, 17-18, 
22, 26-29, 36, 38, 40-62, 68-70, 77, 82- 
87, 93-95, 107, 110, 118-76, 181-82, 
193-97, 203, 231, 242, 270, 286-89, 293, 
295, 297, 307, 323-31, 334, 342, 476-81, 
557-60 

(Asfadhyéyt) Bhasdoriti (of Purusottama- 
deva) 203-9, 480 
—Commentary (of Srstidharacarya) 

533 

BHASKARA 518 

Bhaskara, Paramesvarananda 
e:G1100 

Bhat, M. S. 389, a:G18, G200, G744, 
G1064, G1218, G1291 

Bhate, Saroja V. a:G407, d:G258 

Bhatnagar, Veena d:G1630 

Bhatta, Govinda Parasurama e:G997 

Bhatta Mimamsa 6, 25-26, 66, 89-93, 
97-98, 181, 213, 255, 273, 301, 336 

Bhatta, Ratnagopala e:G1115, G1184 

Bhattacharjee, Umesha Chandra e:G60 

Bhattacharya, Bishnupada 557; a:G1510, 
G1526. b:G1548 

Bhattacharya, Biswanath a:G1345 

Bhattacharya, Dinesh Chandra a:G968, 
e:G971 

Bhattacharya, Gaurinath Sastri 551-52, 
a:G1428 

Bhattacharya, Gurunatha Vidyanidhi 
e:G651, G653, G656, G1027 

Bhattacharya, Madhavacandra Tarkacu- 
damani e:G643 

Bhattacharya, Prasanna Kumara e:G657 

Bhattacharya, Ram Shankar a:G118, 
G122, G129, G130-31, G134, G139-40, 
G369, G470, G473-74, G499, G591, 
G595-96, G1488, G1496, G1518 

Bhattacharya, Siddheswar a:G484 

Bhattacharya, Sitanatha Siddhantavagisa 
e:G658 

Bhattacharya, Siva Prasad a:G843 

Bhattacharya, Trilokyanatha G1046 


e:G433, 


Sarma 


568 


Bhattacharya, Vidhusekhara 
G1474 

Bhattacharya, Visvanatha e:G921 

BHATTAMALLA 530 

Bhattanathaswamy, Acharya e:G1067 

Bhattanayaka 32, 66-67 

BHATTA SIROMANI 518 

BHATTOJI DIKSITA (1590) 17, 20-22, 
227, 240-42, 247, 251, 280, 319, 323, 
335, 490-93, 560, G555 

bhava. See becoming 

BHAVADEVA (1649) 498 

Bhavadeva Misra 389 

BHAVADEVA MISRA (1799) 508 

bhavakatva 65, 67 

BHAVA MISRA (or SARMAN) 518 

BHAVAN 458 

bhavana 67, 98, 336, 553 
arthi- and sabdi- 25, 98 

BHAVANATHA 518 

Bhavanaviveka (of Mandana Misra) 98 

BHAVASENA TRAIVIDYESA (1250) 
481 

Bhave, D. G. a:G579 

Bhawe, Shrikrshna a:G123 

bheda. See difference 

Bhikshu, Bhadanta Shanti a:G1097 

Bhikshu, Narada e:G661 

BHIMACARYA GALAGALI (1796) 508 

BHIMASENA (550) 113, 472 

BHIMASENA (ACARYA) (1350) 484 

BHIMASENA SASTRI 517, G1168, 
e:G1195 

bhoga. See experience 

Bhoja 560, G889 

BHOJADEVA or BHOJARAJA (1055) 
477 

bhojakatva 65, 67 

(Rao) Bhojaraja G1211 

Bhoja Vyakarapa 497 

Bhusari, R. M. a:G62 

bhitarthavada 25 

Bhitiraja 193 

Biardeau, Madeleine b:G720, et:G722, 
G871, G1558 

Bible 39 

bija. See seed 

Bikaner 243 

Bilhana 205 

BILVESVARA 519 

bindu 328, G1455 

Bira, Sh. a:G1692 

birth 46, 127, 129, 169, 196 


a:G7}, 


ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Birwe, Robert a:G135, G147, G157, G201, 
G833, G932 

bliss 32 

Bloomfield, Leonard 4, 549. a:G64 

Bodhapaddhati (of Dharanidhara) 23, 355, 
505 

Bohtlingk, Otto a:G47, G436, G44, 
G502, G548, G648, G1368, G1373, 
e:G50A, G410, G1013, eb:G27, et:G38 

BOPADEVA. See VOPADEVA 

Bopp, Franz a:G1620 

Boudon, Pierre a:G90 

BRAHMADATTA (1914) 514 

BRAHMADATTA JIJNASU 
e:G51t 

BRAHMADEVA (1943) 24, 411, 516 

(PEDDINTI) BRAHMADEVA 519 

Brahman (Absolute) 31-33, 36-37, 41-43, 
45, 47, 56, 60, 68, 93, 99, 106-7, 128-30, 
148, 194-97, 216, 308, 328, 341, 348-49, 
551 

BRAHMANANDA SARASVATI (1915) 
514-15 

Braéhmanas 13, 24, 104-5, 107-9, 234 

Brahmasiddhi (of Mandana Misra) 181 

Brahmasitrabhasya (of Samkara) 60, 551, 
553 

Brahmasitramitéksara (of Annambhatta) 
237 

Brahmins 39 

breath (prana) 39, 43, 49-50, 62, 197, 558 

Breloer, B. a:G76 

Brhadéranyaka Upanisad 37, 105-6 

Brhaddevataé (of Saunaka) 4, 82-83, 86, 108, 
549 

Brhaspati 13, 104 

Brhaticandrika (of Somanatha) 533 

Brhatmafijusé (of Nagesa Bhatta) 23 

Bronkhorst, Johannes a:G376, G381, 
G392-93, G495, G818, G1693, G1710 

Brough, John 557-58, a:G8, G809, G1478, 
G1489, G1631 

Brown, W. Norman 550 

buddhi. See intellect 

BUDDHISAGARA SURI 476 

Buddhism 3, 6, 45, 55, 66, 190-91, 209, 
G445, G787, G789, G793, G807 

Buddhist Logic 27-28, 65, 559 

Buhler, J. George a:G44, G535, G678, 
G879, G962, G1374, G1383, b:G962 

Buiskool, Hermann b:G73 

Burnell, A. CG. b:Gi 


(1964) 


INDEX 


Burrow, Thomas a:G1423, G1481, G1490, 
G1497, Gi535, G1597 


caitanya. See consciousness 

CAKADASA. See CANGADASA 

(SESA) GAKRAPANI (DATTA) (1595) 
247, 493, 562 

CAKRAVARMAN 440 

CAKRIN 519 

Caland, Willem a:G69, G1406 

Candra (school) 17, G1624 

CGANDRA (GOMIN) (470) 17, 471-72 

CANDRADATTA JHA 519 

CANDRAKANTA TARKALAMKARA 
(1880) 512 

CANDRAKANTA VIDYALAMKARA 
519 

CANDRAKIRTI (1607) 494 

Candraprabhavyakarapa (of Meghavijaya) 
502 

CANDRASEKHARA (1638) 497 

CANDRASEKHARA 519 

CANDRASEKHARA 
KARA 519 

Candrasatras or -uydkarana (of Gandrago- 
min) 18, 471-72 
—Paijiké (of Pirnacandra) 475 
—Tikaé (of Ratnamati) 

—Commentary (of Sariputta) 479 

—Paddhati (of Anandadatta) 518 
Commentary (of Dharmadasa) 520 
—Baélavabodhana (of Kasyapa) 525 

CANDRIKA (of Harirama) 511 

Candrikd (of Krsnacarya) 526 

Candrika (of Srikanta Misra) 533 

CANGADASA 519 

Cangasitra. See Vaiyakaranajivatu 

CANNAVIRAKAVI 440 

capacity (sdmarthya) of words 8-9, 86, 149, 
329 
= Sakti 127 

CARCADASA. See CANGADASA 

Cardona, George 14-16, 20, 109, 549, 553- 
55, a:Gi3, G259-61, G280, G3il, 
G323-24, G342-43, G380, G394, G637, 
G1579, G1632, G1651, G1678 

GARITRASIMHA (GANT) (1569) 490 

(Kalapa) Carkaritarahasya (of Kavi Kan- 
thahara) 525 

Cernoy, A. b:G1429 

Carvaka 55 

case-ending (kdraka) 115, 267-72, 559, 
G277, G318, G323-24, G331, G334, 


VIDYALAM- 


569 


G338, G1375, G1387, G1609 
accusative case. See accusative case 
dative case 270 
genitive case. See genitive case 
case-inflected words 276-77 

CGassirer, Ernst 53, 552 

category (padartha) 213 

Caturveda, Giridhara Sarma e:G1100 

catuskofi. See negation, fourfold 

cause (hetu) 164-67, GI611 
(kdrana) 65, 90, 125, 131, 161, 559, 
G260, G1709 
auxiliary (sahakdrikdrana) 129 
material (prakrti) 167, 170, 196 

Chacko, I. CG. e:G137 

Chakravarti, Prabhat Candra 
a:G561, G1418, »b:G1402, 
t:G558 

Chakravarti, Srish Chandra 556, e:G85I, 
G934, G970 

Chandamaruta 239 

chandas. See metrics 

Chandogya Upanisad 106 

Chandrasekhara, S. e:668 

Chandrasekharan, T. e:G590, G1359 

change, illusory G1531 

Chatterji, Kshitish Chandra a:G19, G72, 
G74, G77-78, G111, G454, G477, G571, 
G600, G842, G928, Gi127, G1416, 
b:G1466, e:G830, et:G601 

Chatterji, S. K. a:G136, Gl424 

Ghattopadhyaya, Kshetresh Chandra 
a:G325, G461, G465, G562 

Chaturvedi, Mithilesh a:G746, G766, 
G810-12, G814 

Chaturvedi, Saraswati Prasad G466, 
a:G79-80, G89, G96-98, G103-5, G108, 
G114, G120, Gi24, G460, G463, G471, 
G581, G1436 

Chaudhuri, Rajendra e:G1173 

CHICCHU BHATTA 519 

Chidambara 239 

Chinna Bomma 239 

Chinna Timma 239 

Chintamani, T. R. a:G413, e:G1354 

Chitari, Saroja Sadashiv a:G186 

Chitrao, Siddhesvar Shastri 
G564 

Chomsky, Noan 96, 555 

Choudhari, A. N. a:G666 

CHUCCHU BHATTA. See CHICCHU 
BHATTA 

CIDRUPASRAMA 494 


554, 
G1415, 


b:G82, 


570 


CINNA APPAYYA. See 
DIKSITA IIT 
cit. See consciousness 
coalescence, rules of (samdhi) 4, 39, G1421, 
G1480, G1547, G1630 
=samsarga. See association of word 
meanings 
cognition (jidna) 54 
extraordinary 126 
final 216 
COKKANATHA DIKSITA (1650) 22, 
311, 321, 498-99 
Golebrooke, Henry T. a:G1363 
collection (samudaya) of words 145, 185 
(samitha) of parts 169 
communication 263 
comparison (upamana) 54, 170, 213, G178, 
G723, G751 
complexity. See fallacy of complexity 
composition, nominal. See nominal com- 
position 
compound (samdsa) word 4, 125, 173, 
276-86, 292, 334, 339-40, G166, G810, 
G1390, G1503, G1617, G1654 
(dvandva) 283, G814 
genitive. See genitive case, compound 
conceptual construction (vikalpa) 6, 27, 
66, 128, 147, 325 
concomitance (anvaypavyatireka). See agree- 
ment and difference 
condition (nimitia) 128. See also upadhi 
configuration (akrt?) 6, 26, 131, 553 
conjunction or contact (samyoga) 195 
connection (sdmarihya). See capacity 
syntactic. See syntactic connection 
connotation G1526 
consciousness (cit, caitanya, samvid) 33, 35, 
43, 57, 93, 126, 128, 163 
consistency (yogyatd) 5, 7-9, 14, 27, 59, 67, 
83, 88, 125, 131, 195, 286-88, 329, 553 
capacity restricted by convention (yog- 
pataénityata) 7 
consonants, order of G167 
construction, mental 171 
construction-free (nirvikalpaka) perception 
27-8 
context (prakarana) 149, 175, 268, 322 
contextual factors 7, 26, 30, 82-3, 
326-27 
sensitive features, rules G195 
contiguity (dsatti, samnidhi) 5, 8-9, 27, 88- 
89, 114, 329-30 
continuity 46, 196 


APPAYYA 


ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


contradiction (viroedha) 149, 288, G1544 

convention, conventional (samketa, samke- 
tika) 7, 26, 55-56, 65, 77, 90, 163, 194, 
286, 292 
conventional (ridhki) power of words 
325, 368-69 
conventional-derivative 

power 325-26, 368-69 

corrupt word (melcchasabda) 263, 287, 325 

cosignified (dyotya) 125 

cosmic order (rta) 37, 105 

Coulson, Michael b:G1666 

Coward, Harold G. 182-91, 
a:G757, G777, b:G813, GI1700A 

Cowell, E. B. 552, 554 

creation of the world 3, 40 

creativity 48 

CUDAMISRA 519 


(yogaridhi) 


550, 


Daiva (of Deva) 480 
~—Purusakéra (of Krsnalilasukamuni) 
483 
Daivakarana, Virajananda e:G365 
daivi vak. See language 
Dalal, Chimanlal D. e:G368 
DAMODARA 519 
DAMODARA DEVASARMAN 519 
DAMODARA SARMAN 519 
Dandin 107, 177, G875 
Dange, Sadashiv Ambadas a:G262 
Danielou, Alain a:G1452 
Danielson, P.A. a:540 
DANO (KACARYA) 519 
darkness. See inertia (¢amas) 
dargana. See (Indian) philosophy 
Darsapitraamasamantrabhisya (of Mallaya 
Yajvan) 249 
Das, Govinda a:G549 
Das, Karuna Sindhu a:G296, G395 
DASABALA 520 
Dasabdlakérika (of DaSabala) 520 
Dasadhatusadhana [of Dano (kacarya)] 520 
Dasgupta, Surendra Nath 550 
Dash, Prafulla Chandra a:G838 
Datta, Dhirendra Mohan 552 
DATTA RAMA BHATTA 520 


Dattatreya 317 
Dave, T. N. a:G1560, G1569 
DAYANANDA SARASVATI 511, 


e:G63, G241, G416, G429 
DAYAPALA (MUNI) (1025) 476 
DAYASAMKARA 520 
De, Sushil Kumar a:G829 


INDEX 


death 45, 127 

Debels, Rosane a:G1271 

Debrunner, Albert b:G1405, G1498 

decay (jar@) 43-44, 47,171 

definition (samjidsitra) 15 

deity (devatd) 42, 294-95, 302 

Della Casa, Carlo a:G745 

demon (raksasa) 132, 146 

denotation (fakti) 263, 274, 285, 287-88 
direct 271-72 
(udcya) 125, 147 

denotative (vdcaka) 146, 289, 301, 343 

Deo, Kapil d:G152 

dependence, mutual (updpeksa) 
329 

derivation (ayutpatti) 
of words 7, 146 
derivative power of words (yogayaugika) 

325-26, 368-69 

(prakriya) G1711 

defa. See place 

Deshpande, Gangesh Tryambak a:G153, 
G187, G202, G216, G271-75, G1580 

Deshpande, Handerao ¢:G861 

Deshpande, Madhav Muralidhar 562, 
a:G25, G263, G297, G344-45, G836, 
G1652-53, G1684, G1705, b:G1697, 
etd:G1196 

designative. See denotative 

De Smet, Richard V. a:G1541 

destruction 169, 196 
of the world 40 

deva, See god (s) 

DEVA. (1200) 480 

Deva, Kapil a:G171, G805, b:G218 

DEVADATTA 520 

DEVAKINANDANA 520 

Devalekara, Bapu Hara Set a:G987 

DEVANANDIN. See PUJYAPADA 

DEVASAHAYA 520 

DEVASARMAN 520 

Devasthali, Govind Vinayak 556, a:G326- 
27, G361, G481A, G487-88, G512, 
G517, G588, Gi598, G1639, b:G217, 
et:G667, G1137 

devata. See deity 

Devayasas, father of Vrsabhadeva 179 

DEVENDRAKUMARA  VIDYARA- 
TNA (1915) 515 

DEVENDRASOURI (1210) 481 

Devi, Prajna e:G177 

deviation. See false, deviation 

DEVIDASA 520 


277-84, 


571 


DEVIDASA CAKRAVARTIN 520 

Devidatta, grandfather of Krsnamitraca- 
rya 381 

DEVIDATTA SASTRIN 520 

DEVIDIN (1875) 512 

DHANACANDRA (1533) 488 

DHANAJIT 520 

DHANANJAYA 520 

DHANANJAYA BHATTAGARYA 520 

DHANAPALA (1100) 478 

DHANAPRABHA SURI 520 

DHANESVARA (1250) 211, 481 

Dhanika 91 

DHARANANDA (1825) 510 

DHARANIDHARA (1397) 485 

DHARANIDHARA (1730) 505 

DHARANIDHARA (1809) 23, 355, 375, 
385, 485, 505, 509 

dharma 54, 175, 234, 342. See also merit 
literature 239 
=truth. See truth 

DHARMADASA 520 

DHARMADEVA 521 

Dharmadhikar, Vidyadhar d:G1273 

DHARMAKIRTI (640) 18, 203, 476 

DHARMAPALA (625) 177, 472 

Dharmapradipa G1211 

DHARMARAJADHVARINDRA (1615) 
87, 253, 552 

(RAJAKUMARA) 
RIN 521 

DHARMASDRI (1700) 501 

DHARMASURI. See UDAYADHA- 
RMA 

Dharmoitarapradipa (of Durveka Misra) 
177 

dhatu, See (verbal) root 

Dhatucandriké (of Kavicandra Datta) 493 

Dhatucandriké (of Tarkalamkara Bhatta- 
carya) 534 

Dhatucandrika (of Thakkuradasa Nyaya- 
paficanana) 534 

Dhatucintamani (of Vigsvanatha Nyayélam- 
kara) 535 

Dhétudarpana (of Vuramisra) 535 

Dhatukalpalajika (of Dhanajit) 520 

Dhdatukaérikavalt (of Varadaraja) 495 

Dhdatukaya (of Narayana Bhattatiri) 497 
—Krsnarpana 497 
—Vivarana (of Ramapanivada) 530 

Dhatukofa (of Ghanasyama) 522 

Dhatulaksona (of Dano (kacarya)) 519 


DHARMASAST- 


572 


Dhdtumala (of Igvarakantha) 523 

Dhaétumala (of Sasthidasa) 532 

Dhatumalka (of Betaraya) 518 

Dhatumaftjart (of Candrakanta Vidydlam- 
kara) 519 

Dhatumafijari (of Kasinatha) 504 

Dhdtupallava (of Bhavanatha) 518 

Dhatupardyana (of Srutasagara) 533 

Dhatupardyana (of Trilocana) 534 

Dhatuparyayamanimala (of MaheSa Jha) 527 

dhatupatha G126, G143, G149, G150, 
G1383 

Dhdtupadtha (of Bhaskara) 518 

Dhdtupatha (of Gandra school) 18 

Dhdtupdtha (of Kasigvara) 525 

Dhdtupatha (of Narendrapiri) 483 
Commentary (by Ksemendra) 488 

Dhdtupétha (of Panini). See Astadhyayi- 
Dhatupatha 

Dhatupajha (of Punyasundaragani) 529 

Dhatupatha (of Pirnacandra) 529 

Dhatupathakérika (of Kocca Sankaran 
Susad) 510 

Dhatupdthakramakaumudi (of Dhanajfijaya) 
520 

Dhatuprabodha (of Kalidasa Cakravartin ) 
524 

Dhatupradipa (of Maitreya Raksita) 207, 
478 

Dhatuprakasa (samgraha) and Tippani (of 
Balarama) 518 

Dhatupratyayapattcika (of Taladevasudhi) 
533 

Dhatupratyayapaijiké (of Hariyogin Saila- 
vacarya). See Astadhydyi-Dhatu-Sabdi- 
kabharana 

Dhédtuprayogdévali (of Kasinatha) 525 

Dhaturatnakara (of Narayana) 315, 499 

Dhdaturatnakara (of Sadhusundara Gani) 
495 

Dhdturatnamafjart (of Ramasimha) 531 

Dhéaturatnaprakésa (of Sesa Visnu) 494 

Dhdturatnivali (of Radhakrsna Sarman) 
507 

Dhaturiipa (of Vangasena). See Akhydatav- 
jpakarana 

Dhaturipadarsa (of Taranatha Tarkava- 
caspati) 512 

Dhdtusddhana (of Kavicandra [Datta ]) 493 

Dhétusddhané (of Ramakanta) 487 

Dhétusamgraha (of Kasinatha Misra) 525 

Dhétusamgraha (of Subrahmanyam Nam- 
buttiripad) 512 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Dhatuvrtti (of Kasyapa) 440 

Dhatvavalt (of Kedaregvara Sarman) 525 

DHUNDIRAJA (1700) 501 

dhvani. See sound 

Dhvanikara 92 

Dhvanydloka (of Anandavardhana) 28, 32 

DHYANAKARA 465 

difference (bheda) 6, 125, 145, 149, 197, 
278 

DIGNAGA (480) 6, 27-28, 66, 123, G794, 
549 

dik. See space 

Dikshitar, V. R. Ramachandra a:G509 

Dikshitulu, R. B. d:G362 

Dirghatamas 103-4 

disjunction (vibhaga) 268 

dispositional tendency (samskdra, vdsand), 
or latent disposition. See trace 

distortion. See false: deviation (viparydsa) 

Divanji, Prahlad C. a:G115 

diversity 42-43 

DIVYASIMHA MISRA 521 

Doraswamy, K. a:G305, G1599 

Doshi, Bechardas Jivaraj ¢:G1034 

Dravidian G1381 

dravya, See substance 

DRAVYESA JHA 403, 521 

Drutabodha with Drutabodhini thereon (of 
Bharata Mallika) 510 

Dube, Harinatha e:G981 

duration (sthiti) 304 

DURBALACARYA. See 
TRACARYA 

DURGA(SIMHA) or DURGADASA 
(950-1050) 17, 19, 475, 477, G641-42, 
G645, G656-58 

DURGADASA VIDYAVAGISA (1639) 
497 

DURGADASA VIDYAVAGISA SRI- 
RAMA TARKAVAGISA (1908) 514 

Durgaprasad, Kedarnath e:G918 

Durghatavriti (of Maitreya Raksita) 207, 
478 

DURVEKA MISRA (1020) 177 

DURVINITA (550) 177, 471 

Dutt, Nomita a:G422 

DVADASAHADHVARIN. See TIRU- 
MAL YAJVAN 

(BALAPATANJALI) DVADASAHA- 
YAJIN (1680) 311, 501 

Dvaita Vedanta 240 

dvandva, See compound, dvandva 

Doandvaikasesavida (of Raghava Jha) 529 


KRSNAMI- 


INDEX 


DVARAKANATHA NYAYABHUSANA 
(1899) 513 

Doikarmavada (of Laksmana Dvivedin) 
527 

Dvivedi, H. P. a:G347, G396, b:G363 

Dvivedin, Vindhyesvari Prasada e:G673, 
G1125, G1131 

Dyen, Isidore b:G1435 

dyotaka. See suggestive meaning 

dyotya 125 


Ecklund, G. Green b:G1686 
economy, principle of 76 
Edgerton, Franklin a:G1503, b:G1459 
Edgren, Hjalmar a:G1371 
effort, speaker’s (yaina) 187, 258, 330, 332 
Eggeling, Julius e:G642, G938 
Ekadasakarika (of Raghurama) 512 
Ekagotrasitrapardmarsa (of Devidatta Sas- 
trin) 520 
ekarthibhava. See meaning, single 
ekaSesa. See reduction of two verbs to one 
ekavakyata. See syntactic analysis 
Ekavararthasamgraha (of Bharata Mallika) 
493, 510 
ELESVARAGNIHOTRA 521 
Eliot, T. S. 49, 551 
elite, spiritual (ssa) 132 
elliptical sentence 149, G530 
Emeneau, Murray B. a:G1504, G1585, 
b:G1480 
emotion, emotive meaning 12, 28-30, 67 
(case-) ending (vibhakti) 163-64 
personal 257-58, 263.64 
primary 260 
verbal 255, 262 
energy, inner (kratu) 70 
enumerative cognition (dpeksabuddhi) 173 
epic Sanskrit G1630 
epistemology. See knowledge, theory of 
error. See false 
essence (rasa) 28-33, 130 
(svariipa) 188 
eternal (nitya) 169, 175, 216 
absolute (kufastha) 7, 118 
as preserved by speakers (pravdhanityaté) 
7, 118, 130-31 
etymology (nirukia) 3, 8, 14, 38, 107-9, 
411, 555 
etymological meaning (samakhya) 83, 
175 
etymological words (yaugika) 368-69 
Euclid G196 


573 


eulogy 83 

excellence imparted by phonemes 235 

exception (afaudda) 150 

exclusion. See apoha 

existence (sattd) 127, 169, 183, 234, 330- 
31, 558 

(mutual) expectancy (akamksd) 5, 8-9, 27, 
85-88, 114, 124, 149, 300, 329, 343-44, 
G1524 

experience (bhoga) 129 

expressional (samvyavaharika) 194 

extension rule (atidesastitra) 15 


Faddegon, Barend a:G66, G1467, b:G85, 
G1425 
fallacy, of complexity 93 
of interdependence 93 
of unestablished locus 
189-90 
of unknown qualificandness 189 
“pathetic” 31 
false, falsity, error 5, 54, 59, 187-89, 213, 
217, 233, 236, 553 
theory of error 56-60 
—~deviation (viparydsa, wyabhicara) 149, 
273 


(afraydsiddha ) 


feasibility (krtisadhyatua) 265-66 


feature. See configuration (dkzti) 

feminine bases G265 
function G238 

figurative meaning. See meaning, figura- 
tive 

Filliozat, Jean a:G800 

Filliozat, Pierre-Sylvain a:Gi213, G1654, 
G1685 

Finot, L. ae:G659 

fire-wheel (dlatacakra) 169 

fitness. See consistency 

form (akéra) 129 

(linguistic) (complex) formation (orté) 
173, 295-96, 329 

Form Criticism 39 

Foucher, A. a:G442 

Fowler, Murray a:G190, G312 

Franke, R. Otto a:G42, G45, G437, 
G1380, e:G840, et:G940 

Fraser, Russell 552 

Frauwallner, Erich 123, 550, 559, a:G607, 
G1536 

function, operation (uydpara) 11, 67, 75- 
76, 98, 165, 169, 255-56, 258-61, 266, 
330-31, 336 


574 


Gadadhara (1660) 521 

Gadamer, Hans-Georg 36, 550 

Gadgil, Dinkar Keshava Shastri e:G1083 

Gaidani, M. G. a:G593 

Gajasitiravada (of Tirumala Bukkapatta- 
nam Srinivasacarya) 504 

Gajasitravada (of Venkatadasa) 508 

Gajasitravadartha (of Ganapati Sastri) 513 

Gajasitravadartha (of Mannu Deva) 509 

GALAVA 440 

Ganadarpana (of Kumarapala) 486 

ganapatha 14, G1496 

Ganapatha (of Bharata Mallika) 510 

Ganapatha (of Candra school) 18 

Ganapatha (of Panini) 113, G129, G151-52, 
G156-57, G161, G227, G278, G630 

Ganapatha (of Ramakrsna Diksita) 497 

Ganapathasamgraha (of Geyadeva) 522 

GANAPATI SASTRI (1900) 513 

Ganaratnamahodadhi and Vyiti (Vardha- 
mana) 478 
Commentary (of Gangadhara) 521 
Commentary (of Govardhana Bhatta) 
522 

Ganarainavali (of Yajiiesvara Bhatta) 512 

Ganavrtti (of Purusottamadeva) 209 

GANESA 521 

GANGADASA (PANDITA) 521 

GANGADASACARYA 521 

CANGADATTA 521 

GANGADATTA SASTRI 521, e:G119 

GANGADHARA (1800) 509 

GANGADHARA 521 

GANGADHARA DIKSITA (1617) 494 

GANGADHARA KAVIRAJA (1850) 
23, 395, 511-12 

Gangadhara, Mahadeva Sarma e:G1061 

GANGADHARA NATHA 521 

GANGADHARA SARMAN 521 

GANGAPRASADA SASTRIN 
e:G1089 

GANGARAMITRA PATHIN (MALA- 
VA) 521 

GANGESA (1350) 91, 96, 273 

GANGESA MISRA UPADHYAYA 
521 

GANGESA SARMAN 521 

Ganguli, Hemanta Kumar 
b:G713 

Gani, Vinaya Vijaya b:G950 

Garbe, Richard t:G50A 

GARGYA 13, 110, 112, 114, 140 

gaura, gauni words 65-66, 326, G1484 


514, 


a:G729, 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


GAURAMOHANA BHATTA (VIDYA- 
RATNA) 522 

GAUTAMA (150) 97, 522, 549, 556 

Gawronski, A. b:G1411 

Geiger, Bernhard a:G551 

gender (ditga) 12, 15, 83, 115, 120, 149, 
173, 196, 262, 273-75, 339, G712, 
G1457, G1707. See also person 

genitive case 271, 339 
compound 285 

gerund G1705 

GEYADEVA 522 

GHANASYAMA 522 

Ghat(a)ge, Amrit 
G516 

Ghosh, Amalananda a:G570 

Ghosh, Batakrishna a:G102, G109, G455, 
G466, G1426, G1453; b:G1430 

Ghosh, Manumohan et:G427 

GIRIJA 522 

GIRISACANDRA 
G1019 

Girvarnapadamaftjari: (of Dundhiraja) 501 

Girvarnapadamafijart (of Varadaraja) 495 

Gitdsundara (of SadaSiva Diksita) 311 

God (ivara) 26, 32, 52, 55, 65, 90, 237, 
286-87, 324, 330, 334-45, 557 

god(s) (deva) 108, 132 

Gode, P. K. a:G839, G1057, G1060, 
G1128, G1177, G1191, G1211, G1268, 
G1275 

Godes, B. 8. a:G313 

Gokhale, Pratibha P. a:G352-53, GI111 

Gokhale, V. N. a:G94 

GOKULAGANDRA (1839) 516 

Goldstucker, Theodor a:G32, G430-31, 
e:G529-30 

GOLHANA 522 

Gombrich, Richard a:G1694 

GONARDIYA 458 

Gonda, Jan a:G3l4, G1451, G1470, 
G1476, G1481-83, G1505, G1519-20, 
G1686, G1640, b:G1447 

GONIKAPUTRA 458 

Goonatilleke, William e:G820, etb:G34 

Gopal, Ram a:G860 

GOPALA 522 

GOPALA BHATTA (1590) 490 

GOPALA CAKRAVARTIN (BANER- 
JI) (1672) 500 

GOPALACARYA 522. See also GOPA- 
LADEVA VIDYAVAGISA 

GOPALADEVA. See MANYUDEVA 


Madhav a:G230, 


VIDYARATNA 


INDEX 


GOPALADEVA VIDYAVAGISA (1800) 
508 

GOPALAKRSNA SASTRIN (1720) 23, 
353, 504 

GOPALANANDA YATI 309 

GOPALA SASTRI NENE (1919) 24, 
407, 515, e:G1048, G1094, GIt0l, 
G1120, G1186 

GOPICANDA. See GOYICANDRA 

GOPINATHA 522 

GOPINATHA BHATTA 522 

GOPINATHA TARKACARYA (1550) 
488 

Gore, Vitthala Narayana Sarma e:G1155 

(Christian) gospels 39 

GOSVAMI SRI SIVANANDABHATTA 
522 

Gough, A.E. 552, 554 

GOVARDHANA (1100) 478 

GOVARDHANA BHATTA 522 

Govardhana Bhatta, grandfather of Jaya- 
krsna Maunin 361 

GOVINDA BHARADVAJA SASTRI 
(1835) 510 

GOVINDA BHATTA 522 

GOVINDA MISRA 522 

GOVINDA PANDITA 523 

GOVINDA PARASURAMA BHATTA 
(1888) 513 

GOVINDARAMA VIDYASIROMANI 
523 

Govindarnava (of Sesa Nrsimha) 215 

GOVINDA SENA 523 

GOVINDASIMHA (1900) 513 

GOYIGANDRA (1400) 19, G912, 485 

grammar (vydkarana) 3-4, 6-7, 12-14, 35, 
128, 161, 163, 170, 196, 233, 323 

grammatical analysis G767 

grammatical derivation (pratipddaka). See 
nominal stem 

grammaticality (sddhutva) 161 

Grantovskij, E. A. a:G169 

Greece G1599 

Grierson, George a:G50 

grouping (sdhitya, sémagri, samiiha) 127 

growth (krama) 43-44 

Guha, Dinesh Chandra e:G1106 

Guha, Manjulika a:G1655 

Guleri, Chandradhar a:G554 

guna G1445, 120 
in Panini G186 
in Samkhya 44, 120, 173 
quality (in Vaisesika, etc.). See quality 


575 


GUNACGANDRA (1210) 481 

(SIDDHA) GUNAKARA 523 

GUNANANDIN (890) 475 

GUNARATNA SURI (1411) 486 

Gune, Jayashri Achyut 564, etb:G1197 

Gune, Saroj a:G1330 

Gunjikara, Ramacandra Sarman G1079, 
e:G1155 

Gupta, Chandra Bhan a:G1521 

Gupta, Rajanikanta e:G1022 

Gupta, Suddhir Kumar a:G121, G125, 
G1299, G1300 

GURUWARA BALA SASTRI 523 


Hahn, Michael a:G834-35 

Haimacatuskavrttitippanika (of Golhana) 522 

Haimalaghuprakriya (of Vinayavijayagani) 
499 

HAMSAVIJAYAGANI (1650) 499 

HARADATTA (1059) 19, 203, 279-80, 
477, 560, G849, G857, G877 

HARAGOVINDA VIDYAVACASPATI 
523 

HARANATHA VIDYARATNA 523 

HARENDRANARAYANA DEVASA- 
RMAN (1912) 514, e:G1028 

hare’s horn 325 

Hargovindass, Shravak Pandit e:G979 

HARI BHASKARA AGNIHOTRA 
(1677) 500-01 

HARIBHATTA (1801) 383 

HARIDATTA (DAIVAJNA) 523 

HARI DIKSITA (1270) 21-22, 241, 319, 
500 

HARIKRSNA 523 

HARINATHA DVIVEDIN (1850) 511 

HARI PANDITA 523 

HARIRAMA (1850) 511 

HARIRAMA BHATTACARYA 523 

HARIRAMA KALA (1797) 508 

HARI SAMKARA JHA (1929) 515, 
e:G566 

HARI SARMAN or SASTRI (1900) 513, 
523 

HARISIDDHANTAVAGISA 91 

HARIVALLABHA (1747) 4, 23, 363, 
505-6, G118 

HARI VRSABHA. See VRSABHADEVA 

HARIYOGIN SAILAVACARYA 
(1150) 478 

HARSAKIRTI SURI 523 

HARSAKULAGANTI (1557) 489 

HARSAVARDHANA (630) 472 


576 


Hartman, C.G. b:G1570 

Hartmann, P. b:G1506 

HARYAKSA (350) 465 

Hattori, Masaaki 27, 549 

Hauschild, Richard b:G1561 

HAYAGRIVACARYA 523 

Hazra, Rajendra Chandra a:G141 

hearing (Sravana) 106 

heaven (svarga) 46-47, 342 

Heimann, Betty a:G1438, G1463, G1511, 
b:G1522 

Hejib, Alaka a:G382 

HELARAJA (980) 11, 40-44, 193-97, 
203, 292, 475, 551, 557-61, G776 

HEMACANDRA (1150) 203, 479, G889 

HEMAHAMSAVIJAYAGANI = (1457) 
486 

Henry, Thomas 385 

Herman, Arthur L. 554, a:G1549 

Hertel, Johannes a:G443 

Herzberger, Hans G. a:G773 

Herzberger, Radhika a:G773 

hetu. See cause 
in grammar G184 

Hiriyanna, Mysore 550, a:G501, G778 

Hoffman, Karl a:G328-29 

homogeneity G1653 

Hume, R. E, t:551 


icchd. See will 

I-ching. See I-tsing 

identity (iadadimya) 129, G324 
syntactic identity 271 

ignorance (avidya) 42, 51, 54, 58, 61, 128, 
147, 197. See also falsity 

imitation word 276 

imperative, Vedic G301 

imperceptibility (paroksatva) 264 

implication 273 

impropriety (aprasastyz) 288 

incompatibility or inconsistency of mea- 
ning 66-67, 148, 346 

indeclinable particle. See particle 

independence (sodtantrya) 167 

indescribable, inexpressible (anirvacaniya) 
42, 60, 147-48 

India, nation of 39 

indication (linga) 149 

indicator (upalaksapa) 115, 183, 186, 273, 
339 
dyotaka. See suggestive meaning 
jiapaka 186 

indices, referential G307, G348 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Indira (of Padmadhara) 528 

indirect object (of dative) (sampradana) 
167, 270-71, 337-38 

individual. See particular 

Indra 13, 17, 104, 295 

INDRA (GOMIN) 439-40 

INDRADATTA UPADHYAYA (1800) 
23, 379, 508 

Indravyikarana (of Indra) 439-40 

indriya. See sense-organ 

INDU (MITRA) (1070) 477-78 

Induraja 193 

inertia (tamas) 44-45, 120, 275 

inference (anumdna) 27, 51, 54, 59-60, 126, 
132, 175, 213, 273 

infinitive 262 

infinity (dnaniya) 273 

inflection G1426 

inherence (samavdya) 195, 268 

injunction. See prescription 

inner controller (antaryamin) 129, 132 

inseparable existence (svariipasat) 274 

insight. See intuition 

Tnsler, Stanley a:G613 

instigation (pravartand) 265, 336-37 

instrument of knowledge (pramdna) 25, 
54-56, 59-60, 175, 553 

instrumental case-ending. See means 

integration (vrtti) 278-79 

intellect (prajfid, buddhi) 62, 146, 551, 560 

intention of the speaker (iatparya) 9, 27, 
65-66, 89-93, 145, 165, 300, 322, 327, 
329-30, 344-46, 557, G1540, GI1657 

interdependence. See fallacy of interde- 
pendence 

intuition (pratibha) 10, 28, 31-32, 49-50, 
59, 62-66, 94-95, 125, 130, 146, 327, 
553, G763, G771, G1394, Gi441 

ipsitakarman 268-69 

Ipzzagalli, A. M. b:G1408 

istasddhanaiva, See means to a desired result 

ifvara. See God 

ISVARAKANTHA 523 

ISVARAMISRA 523 

ISVARANANDA or ISVARIDATTA 
SARASVATI (1550) 22, 219, 229, 488 

ISVARIPRASADA 524 

itihdsa 108 

itikartavyata 25, 87 

J-tsing 177, G689, G803, G1631 

Iyengar, H. R. Rangaswami a:G795 

Tyer, K. A. Subramania 41, 59, 79, 128, 
182, 201, 213-14, 517, 550-55, 561, 


INDEX 


a:G65, G670, G693, G728, G732, 
G751, G767-68, G804, Gi434, G1441, 
G1445, G1457, G1464, G1469, G1477, 
Gi494, G1509, G1673, b:G734, 
¢:G709-10, G721, G727, G747, et:G 
872, t:G742, G748A, G758 

Iyer, S. Venkatasubramania a:G397, 
G421, G1107, G1205, G1664, b:G1205 


Jacobi, Hermann a:G961, G1389 
JAGADDHARA (1325) 484 
JAGADDHARA 524 
JAGADISA 524, 549 
JAGAN MOHANA PANDITA (1670) 
500 
JAGANNATHA 524 
(MAHAMAHOPADHYAYA) JAGAN- 
NATHA 524 
JAGANNATHA PANDITARAJA TAI- 
LANGA (1650) 23, 32, 83, 215, 241, 
370, 499 
Jagrahitetivada (of Cakrin) 519 
jahatsvartha 279 
JAIMINI (25 A.D.?) 25, 114 
Jain, Jainism—3, 17-19, 54, 123, G1647 
Jainendravyakarapa 17, 466 
—Mahdoriti (of Abhayanandin) G673, 
G676 
—Sabdarnavacandrika 
G985 
—Vriti (of Vasudeva Sastri Abhyankar) 
516 
—Laghuurtti (of Dharmasastrin) 521 
Commentary (of Gunanandin) G674 
Jaiyata Upadhyaya 203 
JAJALI. See UJJVALADATTA 
Jalpamaijart (of Sudhanandasirisisya) 
500 
Janacek, Adolf 2:G603 
Ganakiparinayananataka (of Ramabhadra 
Diksita) 311, 321 
JANARDANA SARMAN 524 
Jani, A. N. a:G170, G203, G276 
jara. See decay 
JARANATHA  TARKAVACASPATI 
(1870) 512, G1020 
Fatakas G1386 
jati. See universal 
Jatisaktivada (of Ananta Bhatta) 518 
jatisphota. See sphota, jati 
jativisistavyakti, see particular qualified by 
a universal 
Jaumara school 19 


(of Somadeva) 


577 


JAYADEVA MISRA G1259, G1264 

JINADEVASORI 524 

JAYADITYA (650) 18, 203, 472-73 

JAYAKRSNA MAUNIN (1745) 23, 
351, 361, 367, 505 

JAYANTA (1650) 498 

JAYANTA BHATTA (870) 66, 91, 93- 
94, 97, 475 

JAYANTA BHATTA 524 

Jayaswal, Kashi Prasad a:G444, G506, 
G560 

Jesus 39, 550 

Jha, Ganganatha 549, 552 

Jha, Govinda d:G866 

Jha, Krishna Deo d:864 

Jha, Subhadra a:G128 

Jha, Sukheswar a:G298 

Jha, Taranisa e:G1171 

Jha, Triloknath a:G1527 

Jha, V. N. a:G1712 

Jhajjar, Vedananda Vedavagisa e:G668 

Jijnasu, Brahmadatta e:G177 

Jijnasu, Raghuvira e:G1296 

JINAPRABHA SURI (1280) 483 

JINASAGARA. See DHANACANDRA 

JINAVIJAYA (1637) 497 

Jinavijaya, Muniraja e:G663 

JINENDRABUDDHI (725) 18, 115, 474 

JIVANANDA VIDYASAGARA (1894) 
G917, e:G645, G991, G1023, G1041 

JIVANATHA RAYA (1925) 515 

JIVARAMAN SARMAN (1928) 515 

jflana, See cognition 

Fiaéndmrta (of Kasigvara Sarman) 23, 505 

JNANATILAKA (1646) 498 

JNANENDRA SARASVATI (1730) 351, 
373, G1100, 505 

JNANESVARA 524 

jiapaka. See indicator 

Fiapakasamgraha (of Nagesa Bhatta) 504 
—Vivrti (of N.S. Ramanuja Tatacarya) 

517 

Fiapakasamuccaya (bhasya) (of Purusotta- 
madeva) 209, 480 

Jiapakévalt (of Haragovinda Vidyavacas- 
pati) 523 

jftapana G128 

JONARAJA or JOGARAJA (1450) 486 

Joshi, Bechardas e:G832 

Joshi, Bhargavasastri Bhikaji e:G582 

Joshi, Dayashankar Madhusudan a:G277, 
d:G245 

Joshi, Shivarama Dattatreya 174 255- 


578 


308 340, 560, a:G172, G246, G330-31, 
G354, G370, G398, G614, G620, G763, 
G1198, G1200, G1270, G1550, G1571- 
72, G1656, G1667, G1679. d:G1193, 
et:G625, G627, G632-34, G1192 

Joshi, Venkatesha Laxman G1122 

Joshi, Venkatesha Shastri a:G346, G383- 
89, G975, G1219, G1699-1700 

JUMARANANDIN (1350) 19, 488, 484, 
G912 

Junankar, P. B. b:G364 

Jvalananda of Tiksnajnatiya 355 

JYESTHAKALASA (1060) 205, 477 

jootisa. See astronomy 


KAIYATA (1030) 19, 21-22, 86, 174, 
203-4, 278-80, 289, 293-94, 304,339-42, 
476, 561, G551, G877 

kala. See time 

KALADHARA 524 

Kalapasamgraha (of Ramananda Tirtha) 
530 

Kalapasara (of Ramakumara Nyayabhisa- 
na) 530 

Kalapatyddivrtti (of Sarvadhara Upadhya- 
ya) 532 

KALAVATI DEVI (1909) 514 

KALIGARANA VIDYOPADHYAYA 
(1887) 512 

Kalidasa G475 

KALIDASA GAKRAVARTIN 524 

KALIKA PRASADA SUKLA (1961) 
24, 324, 423, 517, e:G857, G1245, 
G1286 

KALI KUMARA SARMAN 524 

Kalpa (a Vedanga) 107 

KALURAMA SASTRIN (1910) 514 

KALYANAMALA SARMAN 524 

KALYANA SARASVATI (1790) 508 

Kalyanov, V. I. a:G1390, G1528 

KAMADEVA GHOSA 524 

KAMALAKARA BHATTA (1640) 497- 
98 

Kamalakara Diksita 317 

KAMALASILA (770) G775 

Kamaripa school G1070 

Kamsa 196 

KANAKALALA SARMAN 524 

KANAKAPRABHA (1240) 481 

Kane, Pandurang Varman a:G584, G873 

Kansara, N. M. a:G904 

KANTA NATHA 524 

Kantawala, 8S. G. a:G1668 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


karaka. See agent; case-ending; syntactic 
function 

Karakacakra 528 
—Dipaprabhaé (of Narayana) 528 

Karakacakra (of Ananta) 518 

Karakacakra (of Dharmakirti) 476 

Kirakacakra (of Ramatarana Siromani) 
512 

Kaérakacandrika (of Ramacandra) 530 

Karakacandrika (of Tarapada Nyayaratna) 
533-34 

Karakadibodhint (of Devakinandana) 520 

Karakakosa (of Sivananda Gosvamin) 532 

Karakénanda (of Ananda Siddhantavagiia ) 
518 

Karakaniripana (of Amaracandra). 
Satkarakalaksana 

Karakaniriipana (of Krsnavadhuta) 526 

Karakapariksa (of Pagupati) 529 

Karakarahasya (of Riparama Nyayapai- 
canana) 531 

Karakartha (of Krparama) 526 

(Sat) Karakarthanimaya (of Trilokanatha) 
534 

Karakarthapradipika (of Sudar§anacarya) 
533 

Karakérthavicara (of Raghava Jha) 529 

Karakasambandhoddyota (of Rabhasanan- 
din) 475 

Kaérakasambandhkoddyota (of Vinasvaranan- 
din) 535 

Karakatattva or Kéarakavicira (of [Sesa] 
Cakrapani) 247, 493 

Kérakavada (of Srikrsna Bhatta Maunin) 
506 

(Sat) Karakavivarana (of Ratnapani) 531 

Karakavyutpattirahasya (of Gopinatha Bha- 
tta) 522 

Kérakiya (of Dayananda Sarasvati) 511 

Karakoktisamuccaya (of Sriprabha Siri) 533 

Karakoll@sa (of Bharata Mallika) 510 

karana. See means 

karana. See cause 

KARAPUTUGALA DHARMA SRI 
(1925) 515, e:G1093 

Karikabhasya (of Divyasimha Misra) 521 

Karikavali (of Narayana) 499 
—Tiké (of Ramaprasida) 501 

KARMADHARA (1501) 487 

karman. See object (of action) 

karmapravacaniya. See postposition 

Karty, See agent 

kartrsiddhantamafjart (of Ramacarana) 530 


See 


INDEX 


KARTTIKEYA SIDDHANTA BHAT- 
TACARYA (1800) 509 
KASAKRTSNA 440-41 
Kashmir, 28, 203, 205, G535 
Kashmir Saivism 57, 124, 324, 342, 554 
Kasi. See Banaras 
(Asladhyayi) Kasikaé (vriti) (of Jayaditya 
and Vamana) 18, 271, 472-73, G586, 
G596, G821, G863 
—Tippant (of Bhagavatprasada Sar- 
man) 513 
—Padamaftjart (of Haradatta) 477, 560 
—Kusumavikasa (of Siva Pandita) 551 
—WNydsa (of Jinendrabuddhi). See Kasi- 
kanyasa 
—Prakriyamafjari (of 
Vidyasagara) 484 
—Tiké (of Pundarikaksa Vidydsagara 
Bhaftacarya) 487 
—Vrttipradipa (of Ramadeva Misra) 
531 
—Sdara (of Vasudeva) 534 
Kasikanydsa (of Jinendrabuddhi) £74 
—Anunydsa (of Indu) 478 
—Tantradipa (of Maitreya Raksita) 
207, 478 
—(Vydkarana) Prakasa 
Mahamisra) 486 
—Prabha (of Sanatana Tarkacarya) 532 
KASINATHA (1725) 504 
KASINATHA (1810) 510 
KASINATHA 525 
KASINATHA BHATTA (1500) 487 
KASINATHA DEVASARMAN 525 
KASINATHA MISRA 525 
KASIRAJA 525 
KASISVARA 525 
KASISVARA BHATTACARYA (1550) 
489 
KASISVARA SARMAN (1739) 23, 505 
KASYAPA 18, 440 
KASYAPA (1200) 480 
KASYAPA 525 
Katantra commentary (of Kumaralabdha) 
465 
Commentary (of Rama Panditavara) 
513 
Katantra system 17, 19-20, G664 
Katantrakaumudi (of Gangeéa Sarman) 522 
Katanitrakaumudit (of Govardhana Bhatta) 
522 
Katantrakaumudi (of Krpala Pandita) 526 
Katantraparifista (of Govinda Pandita) 523 


Anandapirna 


(of Narapati 


579 


Katantraparisista (of Sripatidatta) 486 
—Vaktavyaviveka (of Pundarikaksa Vid- 
yasagara Bhattacarya) 487 
—Prabodha (of Gopinatha TarkAcarya) 
488 
—Prakasika (of Samkara Sarman) 
532 
—Siddhantaratnakara (of Sivarama Ca- 
kravartin) 493 
—Candriké (of Ramadasa Cakravartin) 
493 
Katantrasitras (of Sarvavarman) 17, 464- 
65 
—Vytti (of Durghasimha). See Katantra- 
uriti 
—Kynmaijari (of Sivarama Sarman) 
G647 
—FParisista (of Sripattidatta). See Katan- 
traparisista 
—Tika (of Mahendranatha Bhattacar- 
ya) 513 
—Astamangala (of Ramakigora Sarman) 
513 
-——Kaldpacandra (of Bilveévara) 518 
—Séra (of Harirama Bhattacarya) 523 
Katantravrtti (of Durghasimha) 475, 477, 
G641, G642, G645, G653 
—Pafjika (of Trilocanadasa). 
TRILOCANADASA 
—Titka (of Durghasimha) 477 
—Vistara (of Vardhamana) 478 
—Tika (of Pradyumna Siri) 480 
—Tativaprakasika (of Gunacandra) 481 
—Ripamala (of Bhavasena Traividyesa) 
481 
—Balasiksa (of Samgramasimha) 483 
Commentary (of Moksegvara) 484 
-—Bala (va) bodhint (of Jagaddhara) 484 
—wNyasa (of Sitikantha) 486 
—Biélévabodha (of Merutunga) 485 
—Parisista (of Sripattidatta). See SRI- 
PATTIDATTA 
—Padaprakaranasamgati 
486 
—Prakésa (of Karmadhara) 487 
—Pradipa (of Pundarikaksa Vidyasaga- 
ra Bhattacarya) 487 
—Manorama (of Ramanatha Sarman) 
488 
Commentary (of Rama Tarkavagisa) 
489 
—Durgévakyaprabodha (of Kulacandra) 
489 


See 


(of Jonaraja) 


580 


—Avaciri (of Caritrasimha) 490 

—Uttaraparisista (of Trilocana) 493 

—Vyakhyasdra (of Ramadasa Cakravar- 
tin) 493 

—Rahasyya or Tika (of Ramanatha 
Vidyavacaspati) 498 

—Chandahprakriya (of Candrakanta Tar- 
kalamkara) 512 

—Paribhdsavytti (of Bhava Misra) 518 

—Laghuvrtti (of Ghicchu Bhatta) 519 

—Vriti (of Devadatta) 520 

—Dhundika (of Durgasimha) 520 

—Vyakhyalekha (of Gangadasacarya) 521 

—Dipika (of Gautama) 522 

—Dhdtupitha (of Govinda Bhatta) 522 

—Sisyaprabodhika (of Govinda Bhatta) 
522 

—Séra (of Harirama Bhattacarya) 523 

Commentary (of Kasiraja) 525 

Commentary (of Maunigekhara) 527 

~—Dhatusiitriya (of Pitambara Vidy4a- 
bhisana) G656 

—Daurgasimhaoytti 
529 

—Tattvarpava (of Raghunanda Acarya) 
529 

—Prabodha (of Ramanatha Cakravar- 
tin) 530 : 

—Vanmayapradipa (of Sarvadhara Upa- 
dhyaya) 532 

—Samjivani (of Sitanatha Sastrin) 532 

—Manorama (of Srinatha Siromani) 533 

—Kalapacandra (of Susena Kaviraja 
Misra) G656 

—Akhypatatika (of Vidyasagara) G653 

—Laghuvstti or Sisyahita (of Yasobhiti) 
5335 

Katantra (sutra )urtti-Patyika (of Trilocana 

dasa) G643, G656-58, 475-76 

—Uddyota (of Trivikrama) 478 

—Pradipa (of Kugala) 480 

— Durga (pada) prabodha (of Jinaprabha) 
483 

—Kalépatativabodhint (of Ramacandra) 
502 

—Tika (of Candrakanta Tarkalam- 
kara) 512 

—Dhundiké (of Dhanaprabha Siri) 520 

—Prabodha (of Narahari) 528 

—Candra or Vydkhyasara (of Susena 
Kaviraja Misra) 533 

Commentary (of Viévegvara Tarkaca- 
rya) 535 


(of Prthvicandra) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Katantrottara (of Vijayananda) 478 

Katre, Sadashiv Lakshmidhar a:G24 

Katre, Sumitra Mangesh a:G1427, 
b:G219, G231, G278, G483A, Gi448 

Katsura, Shoryu 549 

KATYA 458 

KATYAYANA (250 B.C.) 6, 16, 18, 26, 
85-86, 97, 114, 117, 119-20, 193, 204, 
261, 277, 283, 293, 322, 558, G444, 
G446-47, 458-59, G593, G618 

Kaumudisudhakara (of Gandrakanta Tarka- 
lamkara) 512 

KAUNDA BHATTA. See 
BHATTA 

KAUTILYA G1493 

KAUTSA 441 

Kavi, M. Ramakrishna a:G686 

KAVIGANDRA (DATTA) (1600) 493 

KAVIDARPANA RAGHAVA (1375) 
485 

Kavikalpadruma (of Hemacandra) 
versification (of Harsakulagani) 489 

—Avacirit (of Vijayamala) 534 
Kavikalpadrumaskandha Upasargamandana (of 
Mandana Kavi) 485 

KAVI KANTHAHARA 525 

KAVI KUNJARA 371 

KAVINDRANANDANA 525 

Kaviraj, Gopinatha 553, a:G1394, G1455 

Kavirajapatrika (of Pitambara Vidyabhi- 
sana) 529 

Kaviratna, Syamacarana G1025, e:G555 

KAVISARANGA 525 

KAVI VALLABHA 525 

Kawyadarga (of Dandin) 107 

Kavyalamkérasiitravztti G852 

Kavya literature G557 

KEDARESVARA SARMAN 525 

Keith, Arthur Berriedale G559, a:G110, 
G459 

Kenghe, G.T. a:G700 

Kephart, Calvin b:G1471 

KESARI MISRA 525 

KESAVA (1650) 498 

KESAVA 525 

KESAVADEVA TARKAPANCANANA 
BHATTACARYA 525 

KHANA NRPATI 526 

Kharbas, S. Datta b:G1638 

Khare, G. H. a:Gi220 

Kharwandikar, D. K. a:G926-27, d:G925 

KHUDDI JHA (SARMAN) (1910) 23- 
24, 399, 514 


KONDA 


INDEX 


Kielhorn, Franz G549, a:G14, G46, G425, 
G434, G535, G542-43, G545, G67], 
G677, G679, G785, G821, G848, G880, 
G882, G941, G1378, G1386, b:G2, 
G503, G1369, 6:G536, et:G665 

Kiparsky, Paul a:G247, G377 

Kiratarjuniya (of Bharavi) 175 

Kiurste, J. e:G942, G944 

Kiuttel, F, 2:G1381, G1384 

Klostermaier, Klaus 550-51 

Knauer, Friedrich a:G1377 

knowledge, theory of 5, 43, 53-63, 68-69, 
126, G720, G1558, G1615. See also 
cognition 
= prama 54 
= vidya 128, 147 

KOCCA SANKARAN SUSUD (1825) 
510 

KOLAHALA 526 

KODANDARAMA 526 

KONDA BHATTA (1630) 21-22, 241, 
255-308, 324, 369, 495-96, 562 

Konow, Sten a:G106, G1431 

Koparkar, D. G. a:G423, G895 

Kotbhaskara, Ramachandra 
e:G680 

krama. See growth; sequence 

KRAMADISVARA (1050) 19, 477 

kratu. See energy, inner 

krdanta. See primary derivative 

Kydvivarana (of Kasinatha) 525 

Kydoriti (of Kavindranandana) 525 

Krishnamachariar, R.V. e:G1095, G1294 

Krishnamacharya, V. 342, 363 

Krishnamoorthy, K. a:G1657 

kriyd. See action; verb 

Kriyékalapa (of Jinadevastri) 524 

Kriyénighanju (of Bhattoji Diksita) 492 

Kripdrainasamuccaya (of Gunaratna Siri) 
486 

Kripyaviveka (of Helaraja) 193, 475 

Kynmafjari (of Sivadasa) 532 

KRPALA PANDITA 526 

KRPARAMA, 526 

(God) Krsna 195, G532 

KRSNA (1645) 498 

KRSNA BHATTA 526 

KRSNA BHATTACARYA 526 

KRSNACARYA 526 

KRSNACARYA II (1430) 486 

KRSNADVAIPAYANA 146 

KRSNA DVIVEDIN 526 

EKRSNALILASUKA (1280) 483 


Sastri 


581 


KRSNAMACHARIAR. See 
SUDHI 

KRSNA MISRA (1780) 508 

Krsnamisraprakriya (of Krsna Misra) 508 

KRSNAMITRAGCARYA or DURBA- 
LACARYA (1800) 23, 377, 381, 508-9 

KRSNA PANDITA 526 

KRSNA SASTRIN 526 

KRSNASUDHI 525 

KRSNAVADHOTA 526 

Krsna Yajurveda 549 

krtti. See volition 

kytisddhyaiva, See feasibility 

Kyiparisista (of Ratideva Siddhanta Vagi- 
ga) 531 

Krtprakaga (of Nilakantha Diksita) 506 

KSAPANAKA (1650) 472 

KSEMANKARA (1653) 499 

KSEMENDRA (1525) 487-88 

Kshirsagar, V. K. a:G370 

KSIRASVAMIN (1050) 19, 476 

Kudala, 8.D. e:G552 

KULACANDRA (1550) 489 

KULAKACARYA 526 

KULAMANDANA SURI (1394) 485 

KULAMUNI (1800) 508 

KULLUKA BHATTA 527 

Kumar, Avanindra b:G399 

KUMARALABDHA or KUMARALA- 
TA (200) 465 

KUMARAPALA (1461) 486 

KUMARA TATAYA (1825) 23, 391, 510 

Kumari, Sudesh d:G332 

KUMARILA BHATTA (660) 4, 18, 25- 
26, 71-77, 81, 88-89, 97, 181, 189-190, 
213, 237, 282, 549, 554-56, 561, G682, 
G786 

KUNARABADAVA 458 

kundalini 328 

KUNI 458 

KUPPU SASTRIN (1750) 507 

KUSALA (1200) 480 

Kushwaha, Mahesh Singh e:G1172 

kutasthanityata. See eternal 


KRSNA- 


Laddu, Sueshacandra Dhyaneshwar 
a:G180, G220, G264, G279, G299, 
G482A, G487A, G492, G513, G5i5, 
G621, G640, G1581, G1614, G1711 

Laghubodha (of Krsna) 498 

Laghumaitjusa (of Nagesa Bhatta) 23 
—<Kalé (of Vaidyanatha Paiyagunda) 

23, 357 


582 


Laghusabdakaustubha (of Nilakantha Dik- 
sita) 373, 506 
Laghusabdaraina (of Nagega Bhatta)323, 
367 
Laghusarasvata (of Kalyana Sarasvati) 508 
Laghusiddhantakaumudi (of Varadaraja) 
494-95 
—Tikd (of Jayakrsna Maunin) 505 
—Tika (of Ripacandra) 512 
—Sérabodhini (of Rancchodji Odhavji) 
514 
—Tinantapradipika (of Kalavati Devi) 
514 
—Tippagi (of Sivadatta Sarman) 514 
—Tiké (of U. K. Venkatanarasimha) 
515 
—Tippani (of Jivanatha Raya) 515 
—Balabodhini (of Vasudev Visnu Mira- 
shi) 515 
—Tika (of Girija) 522 
—Samksiptabalabodhini 
Sarman) 524 
—Sérala (of Jivarama Sarman) G1159 
—Bhaimi (of Bhimasena Sastri) G1168 
Laghusiddhantamafijusa (of NageSa Bhatta) 
323 
—Kuficika (of Krsnamitracarya) 381 
Lahiri, Prabodh Chandra b:G81 
Lakararthanimaya (of Srikrsna Bhatta 
Maunin) 367, 506 
Laksana (= King Muktapida of Kashmir) 
193 
Laksaad. See secondary meaning 
Laksmana, 12th cent. ruler in Bengal 209 
LAKSMANA DVIVEDIN 527 
LAKSMANA TRIPATHI (1915) 515 
Laksmi 341 
LAKSMIDATTA 527 
Laksmidhara 241 
LAKSMIKARA 527 
LAKSMINARAYANA VYASA 527 
Laksminivasébhidha (of Sivarama Tripa- 
thin). See Unadikosa 
LAKSMINRSIMHA (1660) 499 
Laksyamala (of Elegvaragnihotra) 521 
Lalamani Upadhyaya 379 
Lambert, F. a:G1600 
Langer, Susan K. 554 
(spoken) language (Sabda) (vdc) 3-4, 37, 
94, 103-7, 114, 118, 124-25 
—acquisition G763 
as means of release (Sabdapiirvayoga) 
46-47, 49-50, G755 


(of Kanakalala 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


daivi vak 37 
—learning 93 
levels of 61-63 
paraé vak 63 
philosophy of 27, 36, G720 
—principle (fabdatattva) 95, 128, 553 
Lanka 322 
LATA VIHARIN (1850) 511 
La Terza, Ermanagilda a:G681, G788 
Lehman, J. a:G1479 
Leidecker, Kurt F. b:G1419 
LESAPRABODBA. See JINAPRABHA 
(SORT) 
letter. See phoneme 
Levi, Sylvain a:G48, G498, G504, G826 
lexicography G1388 
liar’s paradox. See paradox 
liberation (moksa) 18, 46-47, 49, 51, 99, 
130, 342, G719 
Liebich, Bruno a:G823-24, G1375, G1395, 
b:G57, G59, G67, G438, G822, G828, 
e:G58, G825, G827, et:G660, t:G847, 
G923 
Lienhard, Siegfried 2:G1587 
Limaye, V. P. 128, a:G205, G221-22, 
G372, G669, b:G635, e:G726, G781 
limit (avadhi) 132 
linga. See gender; indication 
Linganiraayacandrika (of Anantasiiri) 518 
LinganuSdsana 
of Candra school 18 
Commentary (by Harsavardhana) 
472 
—Sarvalaksana (of Prthivigvara) 529 
of Vamana 473 
rules 15 
Linganusésana (of Hemacandra) 504 
~—Durgdprabodha (of Srivallabhavacarya) 
504 
—Sarvarthalaksana (of Sabarasvimin) 
531 
LinganuSsasanavyiti (of Utpala) 479 
Linge, D. E. 550 
linguistic element (Sabda) 5-6, 182-85 
linguistic monism (Sabdadvatia) 193 
linguistics, diachronic G1523 
linguistics, modern G314 
literary criticism (sahitya) 3-5, 28-33, 67. 
See also alamkdraSasira 
loan words G1613 
Locana (of Abhinavagupta) 91 
locative (case-ending) (adhikeraya) 168, 
270, Gi664, 337-39 


INDEX 


absolute 262 
logic G563, G1545, Gi559 
propositional G243 
logos 37, 105-6 
LOKESAKARA (1683) 501 
LOKESVARA SARMAN SUKLA 527 
Liders, H. ¢:G664 


Macdonnell, A, A. 549 
MADHAVA or SAYANA (1350) 56, 68, 
484, 554, 556 
MADHAVA (1887) 513 
(ARRA or ERRA) MADHAVA BHA- 
TTA (1450) 486 
MADHAVA BHATTA (1520) 487 
MADHAVA SARASVATI (1550) 489 
MADHAVA SASTRI BHANDARI 
(1920) 515, e:G565, G1117 
MADHUKANTA SARMA JHA (1950) 
24, 516 
MADHVA (1280) 266 
Madhyamaka Buddhism 45, 60 
madhyama vic 43, 47, 49-50, 52, 61-62, 95, 
99, 121, 124, 328-29, 342, 555, 558 
Madhyasiddhantakaumudt (of Varadaraja) 
494 
—Tika (of Jayakrsna Maunin) 505 
Commentary (of Balakrsna Sarma 
Yogi) 513 
—Visamasthalatippani (of Govindasimha ) 
513 
—Sudha (of Sadasiva Sastri Joshi) 516 
—Vyakhyd (of Brahmadeva) 519 
—Prabhakara (of Vigvanatha Sastri) 535 
Magha G873 
Mahabhérata 146, G264, G1568 
Mahabhégya (of Patafijali) 16-17, 19-22, 
38, 45-47, 55, 68, 117-21, 124, 165, 167, 
182-83, 196, 242, 264, 267, 271, 278, 
325, 327, 334-35, 340-42, 345, 459-64, 
549, 553, 551, 556-57, G81, G502, 
G515, G586 
—Dipika or —Tripadi or Tikd (of 
Bhartrhari) 18, 22, 54, 124, 174-76, 
470 
—Bhdgaurtti (of Vimalamati) 472, G791 
—Pradipa (of Kaiyata). See Mahkabha;s- 
japradipa 
Gommentary (of Jyesthakalasa) 205, 
477 
—Tika (of Maitreya Raksita) 207, 478 
—Prapdpana or —Laghuvztti (of Puruso- 
ttamadeva) 209, 480 


583 


—Tikd (of Samkara) 531 
—Cintémapi (of Dhanegvara) 211, 481 
—Ratnaprokasa (of Sivaramendra Saras- 

vati) 22, 245, 487 
—Siktiratnakara (of [Sega] Narayana 

Bhatta) 22, 225, 488 
—Sphirti (of Sarvesvara) 489 
—Prakasika (of Sesa Visnu) 22, 243, 

494 
—Vyakhyadarsa (of Kamalakara Bhatta) 

498 
—-Siddhantarainaprakasa (of Sivaramen- 

dra Sarasvati) 499 
—Ratndvali (of Cokkanatha Diksita) 

22, 311, 499 
—Anipdta (of Tirumala Yajvan) 277, 

499 
—Gidhérthadipani (of Sadasiva) 22, 317, 

500 
—PrakaSa (of Nilakantha Diksita) 500 
—Sabdikacintamani (of Gopala Krsna 

Sastrin) 23, 353, 504 
—Vivarana (of Satyapriya Tirtha Sva- 

min) 23, 359, 505 
—Tattvaviveka (of Nilakantha Dikgita) 

373, 506 
—Parijatam Natakam (of Kumara Tata- 

ya) 23, 391, 510 
—Tripathaga (of Satara RAghavendra- 

carya) 23, 393, 516 
—Maniratnaprabha (of Viprarajendra) 

511, G37 
—Tippant (of Dayananda Sarasvati) 

5il 
—Prakésa (of Madbukanta Sarma Jha) 

214, 516 
—Kutuika (of Hari Samkara Jha) 515, 

G566 
—Tattvaloka (of Rudhradhara Jha 

Sarman) 24, 421, 516 
—Tippanit (of Guruwara Bala Sastri) 

523 
—Suktirainakara (of Nrsimha) 528 
—Vidvanmukhabhisaga (of Prayogaven-~ 

katadri) 529 


Mahabhésyapradipa (of Kaiyata) 19, 22, 


174, 203-4, 476 

—Laghuvivarana (of Satyénanda or 
Ramacandra Sarasvati) 219, 487 

—(Brhad)Viverana (of Isvarananda) 
22, 219, 229, 488 

—Uddyotana (of Annambhatfa) 22, 237, 
489 


584 


—Sphirtt (of Sarvesvara) 489 
—Tippant (of Mallaya Yajvan) 249, 
496 
—Vyakhya (of Narayana [Sastrin] 22, 
353, 498 
—Prakasa (of Nilakantha Diksita) 500 
—Uddyota (of Nagesga Bhatta) 23, 340- 
42, 503 
—Chaya (of Vaidyanatha Paiyagu- 
nda) 23, 357, 505 
—Tippanit (of Bala Sastrin) G522, 
G547 
—Vyakhyi (of Ramasevaka) 23, 377, 
507 
—Sphirti (of Adenna) 517 
—Prakdsa (of Pravartakopadhyaya ) 529 
—Prakdsa (of Sega Cintamani) 22, 221 
Mahacarya 239 
MAHADEVA (1270) 482 
Mahadeva, father of Vaidyanatha Paiya- 
gunda 357 
Mahadeva Diksita, father of Vasudeva 
Diksita 365 
Mahadevan, T. M. P. 551-52 
MAHADEVA VEDANTIN (1694) 501 
MAHALINGA SASTRIN 527 
Maharashtra 20, 241, 323, G1685 
Mahashabda, M. V. a:G1267 
Mahavaritika (of Katya or Bhavan) 458 
Mahavir a:G333, G400-01, G406, 
b:G373 
Mahavira 17 
MAHENDRANATHA BHATTAGAR- 
YA (1900) 513, e:G652 
MAHESA JHA 527 
Maheévara, teacher of Kaiyata 203 
MaheSgvara Suri 203 
Mahesvarasiitras of Panini’s Astadhyayi 14, 
G65, G341. See also Astadhyayt 
Maitrayani Samhita a:G433 
MAITREYA RAKSITA (1109) 19, 207, 
478 
Maitri Upanisad 40, 45, 550 
Majumdar, Baradaprasada e:G1021 
MALAYAGIRI (1280) 483 
MALLAYA YAJVAN (1630) 34, 496 
Mammata 83, 203, 370 
MANALUR VIRARAGHAVACARYA 
527 
manana. See thinking 
(SRI) MANASARMAN 527 
Manavalli, Gangadhara Sastri e:G680 
Manayalli, Rama Sastri e:G1114 


ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


MANDANA (1330) 484 
MANDANA KAVI (1400) 485 
MANDANA MISRA (690) 5, 11, 18, 22, 
51, 56-59, 70-80, 82, 98, 181-91, 231 
233-35, 266, 331, 473-74, 554, 556, 561 
Mandikya Upanisad 37, 106 
MANGARASA 527 
manifestation (vivarta, wyafijaka) 93, 129, 
216, 236, G1587 
MANIKYADEVA 527 
Mafijusé (of Nagesa Bhatta) 323 
Manoramaécandrika (of Nilambara Misra) 
528 
Manoramakhandana (of Kegava) 498 
Mansion, J. b:G1407 
mantra 24, 51-52, 107-8, 148, 188, 234 
—samadhi 52 
Manu G493 
MANYUDEVA or MANADEVA (1815) 
23, 387, 509 
Marathi 287 
marker (it) 16 
Marulasiddaiah, G. b:G1573 
Matarisvara 104 
mathematics G208, G1689 
Matilal, Bimal Krishna a:G204, G1542, 
G1574, G1633, b:GI615 
matter, material thing (mdrti) 162 
MUNISEKHARA 527 
Maurya G548 
maya 41-43, 60, 105 
obscuring (dvarapa) 42 
projective (viksepa) 42 
Mayrhofer, M. a:G1513, g:G1491 
Mazumdar, B. CG, a:G52 
Mazumdar, Pradip Kumar a:G1621, 
b:G1680 
Mazumdar, Surendra Nath a:G850 
McArthur, Harvey 550 
meaning, theory of 5, 8-10, 18, 27-30, 90, 
145, 186, 232-34, 324, G1396, G1555- 
56. See also connotation, sbhota 
abstracted (apoddhara) 13 
=artha 5-6, 26, 94, 114, 118-19, 149, 
559 
figurative G5, 370 
nominal. See nominal meaning 
relation of word to 7-8 
secondary. See secondary meaning 
sentence. See sentence meaning 
single (charthibhava) 277-84, 340 
stable 131 
verbal. See verbal meaning 


INDEX 


word-meaning. See word 
means or instrument (karapa) 25, 87, 163, 
165, 168, 270, 337-38, G1542 
=sédhana 145, 162-68, 195-96 
=updya 148 
to a desired result (isfasddhanatva) 265- 
66 
measure (parimdna) 115 
Meenakshi, K. a:G1706 
MEGHARATNA (1400) 485 
MEGHAVIJAYA (1700) G952, 502 
Mehendale, M. A. a:G408 
Meisezahl, R. O. a:Gi007 
memory, recollection (smrti) 30, 184, 216, 
235, 303, 321, 324 
—traces (samskara) 43-44, 48, 74-78, 
81. See also dispositional tendency 
(inner) mental word 231, 234 
merit (dharma) 121, 132 
MERUTUNGA (1388) 485 
metalanguage G266, G286, G323, G1662 
metaphor (upacdra) 5, 8, 11, 29-30, 67-68, 
91, 194, 258 
faded 66 
metaphoric transfer 26, G1704 
metaphysics 35-52 
metarule (paribhasé) 14-15, G326, G352, 
G1502, Gi598, G1616, G1647, G1682 
metrics (chandas) 3, 39, 107 
Millonig, Harald a:G1601 
(Parva) Mimamsa 3-6, 9, 12, 21, 25-28, 
54-55, 60, 66, 69, 71, 73, 76, 79, 83, 85- 
91, 95-98, 118-19, 181, 184, 186, 190, 
213, 233, 237, 240-41, 255-57, 260-63, 
271-72, 282, 284-87, 292-93, 295-96, 
324, 328, 331, 334, 339-40, 344, 346, 
556, G797, G802, G1526, GI1616, 
G1680. See also Bhatta; Prabhakara 
Mimamsaka, Yudhisthira 205, 207, 241, 
225, 241, 247, 249, 313, 359, 373, 561- 
62, a:G844, b:G285, ce:G23, e:G3i5, 
G420, G909, G977, G1328, t:G20 
Mimamsasiitras (of Jaimini) 25, 86, 92, 114, 
213, 230 233 
—Slokavaritika (of Kumarila). See Slok- 
avarttika 
—Tantravarttika (of Kumarila). See 
Tantravarttika 
—Kutihalavrtti (of Vasudeva Diksita) 
365 
miracle (atadbhiita). See action, miraculous 
course of 
Misra, Adya Prasada G1052 


585 


Mishra, Avadh Bihari e:G690 
Misra, Brahmashankara e:G1320 
Mishra, Hari Deo a:G608 
Mishra, Hari Mohan a:G402, G490A, 
G1669 
Misra, M. P. e:G906 
Misra, Narayana e:G862 
Mishra, Ramasakala e:G885 
Mishra, Satya Svarup a:G1670 
Misra, Sobita e:G853 
Misra, Sri Narayana a:G250 
Misra, Sudama Sarman e:G1048 
Mishra, Umesh a:G1397 
Mishra, Vidhata b:G1622 
Misra, Vidya Niwas 2:G181-82, G1610, 
b:G206 
Misra, Vir Bhadra a:G390 
Mitédksaravyiti (of Balambhatta) 357 
Mitra 104 
Mitra, Rajendralal a:G497 
mlecchaSabda. See corrupt word 
Moghe, R. G. a:G1616 
Mohana Lala, grandfather of Indradatta 
Upadhyaya 379 
Mokate, Ganapati Sastri e:G1125, G1344 
moksa. See liberation 
MOKSESVARA (1350) 484 
Mongolian G1692 
monism 61, G730 
mood 263-67, 335-37 
different permanent moods (sthayibhava) 
33 
Mookerji, Radhakumud a:G446-47 
moral power 47-48 
morpheme 4, 6, G1537 
analysis G176 
morphophonemics G336, G1678 
Morretta, Angelo a:G1659 
motion, movement 552-53 
motivating force (prayajana) 204 
Mugdhabalavabodha (of Kulamandana 
Siri). See Auktika 
Mugdhabodha (of Vopadeva) 20, 482-83 
—Parifista (of Nandakisora Bhattacarya 
CGakravartin) 485 
—Pramodajanant or —Karaka (of Rama 
Tarkavagiga) 489 
Commentary (of Kagigvara) 489 
—Subodha (of Durgadasa Vidyavaisa) 
497 
— (Kavikaipadruma) Dhatudipika or —Pa- 
ribhasatikaé (of Durgadasa Vidyava- 
giga) 497 


586 


—Subodha (of Karttikeya Siddhanta 
Bhattacarya) 509 
—Setusamgraha (of Gangadhara) 512 
—Tippani (of Syamacarana Kaviratna) 
514 
—Parimala (of Harendranarayana 
Devagarman) 514 
—Dhdtuvstti (of Damodara) 519 
Commentary (of Devidisa Cakravar- 
tin) 520 
—Tippant (of Girigacandra Vidyara- 
tna} G1019 
—Sabdadipika (of Govindarama Vidya- 
giromani) 523 
—Dhdtupradipa (of Haranatha Vidyara- 
tna) 523 
—Tippani (of Sivanarayana Siromani) 
532 
Mugdhabodha school 19 
Mugdhaparisista (of Kasigvara Bhattacar- 
ya) 489 
Mukhabhisagpa 487 
Mukhopadhyaya, Sunjit Kumar a:G1051 
mukhya words G1484 
Muktikalaga, grandfather of Jyesthaka- 
laga 205 
(King) Muktipada of Kashmir. 
Laksana 
Miller, F. Max a:G39, G520, G845 
Miiller, Reingold F. G. a:G1499 
Muni, Jambuvijaya a:G794 
Municandravijaya e:G959 
Muralidhara, greatgrandfather of Indra- 
datta Upadhyaya 379 
MURLIDHARA MISRA (1977) 517, 
e:G1053 
Murder in the Cathedral (of T. S. Eliot) 49 
miirta, See matter 
Murti, M. S. Narayana a:G225, G249, 
G770, G772, G783, G1L09, G1602, 
G1634, G1709, G1713, d:G1617 
Murty, Parasuram Gopala Krishna 
a:G481 
Murti, T.R.V. 53, 55, 550, 552, a:G1643 
music G203 
mystical experience 32, 47 
mysticism 65 


See 


nada 69-70, G1455 

NAGESA BHATTA (1714) 21, 23, 68, 
83, 87, 203, 319, 323-49, 357, 379, 387, 
G1081, G1084, 502-4, 549, 555-56, 562 

NAGOBA PANDITA (1775) 508 


ENGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Nakamura, Hajime a:G697, G745, G803, 
G807 

Nalla Perumal Diksita 311 

namadhatu, See verb, nominal 

Némakarthaprakasasamgraha (of Abhinava 
Nrsimhasrama) 496 

ndman. See noun 

Namanirmaladarpana 
527 

name and form (ndmariipa) 107 

Namputiri, E. V. Raman e:G1201 

nat. See negation, negative particle 

NANAKARAMA SASTRIN (1924) 515, 
e:G1092 

NANDAKIRTI 527 

NANDAKISORA SARMAN BHATTA- 
CARYA CAKRAVARTIN (1398) 485 

NANDASUNDARA. See DHANACAN- 
DRA 

NANDASUNDARA GANT 528 

Nandi, T. S. a:G1588 

NARAHARI 528 

NARAIN DATTA TRIPATHIN 528 

NARANARAYANA. See PURUSOTTA- 
MA VIDYAVAGISA BHATTACAR- 
YA 

Narang, Satya Pal a:G978 

NARAPATI MAHAMISRA (1425) 486 

Narasimhacarya, M. S. e:G1059 

NARASIMHA SURE 528 


(of Laksmidhara) 


NARAYANA 528 
NARAYANA BHARATI 528 
(SESA) NARAYANA  (BHATTA) 


(1546) 22, 215, 225, 243, 488, G1107 

NARAYANA BHATTATIRI (1640) 22, 
497 

NARAYANA DANDANATHA (1100) 
478 

NARAYANA NYAYAPANCANANA 
(1550) 488-89 

NARAYANA (SADHU) (1667) 500 

(RAMA) NARAYANA (SARMAN) 
(VANDYOPADHYAYA) (1664) 315, 
499 

NARAYANA (SASTRIN) (1640) 498 

NARAYANA (SASTRIN) 22, 253, 
G1059 

NARAYANA SUDHI (1750) 507 

NARENDRAPURI (1300) 483 

NAROTTAMA VIDYALAMKARA 
BHATTACARYA 528 

Nath, Narendra Candra a:G265, b:G251 

natural (svabhdva) intuition 146 


INDEX 


Natyasastra (of Bharata) 28 
NAVACANDRA NYAYARATNA 
(1905) 514 
NAVKISHORE JHA (1931) 516 
Nawathe, P. D. a:G300 
NAYASUNDARA 528 
Nazzeri, O. b:G1468 
negation 262, 288-89, 291-92, 334, G124, 
G1554 
fourfold (catusko{i) 60 
negative compound G815 
negative particle G815 
paryudisa 334 
prasajyapratisedha 60, 334 
Nerandvatisitravyakhya. See 
(of Venkatadasa) 
neuter G1499 
New Catalogus Catalogorum 215 
nididhydsana 106 
Nighanju (list of words) 4, 109 
NILAKANTHA DIKSITA (1675) 500 
NILAKANTHA DIKSITA (1750) 239, 
317, 321, 351, 373, 506 
NILAKANTHA SUKLA (1637) 251, 
497, 562 
NILAKANTHA VAJAPEYIN (1605) 
373, 493 
NILAKANTHA VYASA 393 
NILAMBARA MISRA 528 
nimitta, See condition; occasion. 
nipata. See particle 
Nipatavyayopasargavr iti 
477 
—Tika (of Tilaka) 534 
nirukta, See etymology 
Nirukta (of Yaska) 4, 10, 14, 108-12, 234, 
258, 330-31, 549, 556, G393, G422, 
G605 
nirvikalpaka (pratyaksa) 27-28 
nisedha, See probibition 
Niétifaiaka section of Subhdsitatrisati 124 
nitya. See eternal 
NITYANANDA PANTA PARVATIYA 
(1918) 24, 401, 515 
nipojya (person enjoined to act) 25 
nominal 
composition G1577, G1586 
formations G232, Gi590 
meaning (améartha) 272-76 
stem or suffix (pratipadika) 15, 115, 131, 
258, 275-76, 284, 291, 325, 339, 343, 
G1513-14, G1578 
quotative G1641 


Gajasiitravada 


(of Ksirasvamin) 


587 


sentence. See sentence, nominal 
verb (ndmadhdtu). See verb, nominal 
nominalization G1566 
nominative case 257, G1483 
nonapprehension. See absence 
noun (ndman) 110, 112, 114, 121, 149-50, 
256-57, 339, G696, G1550 
abstract 292 
formation of G1490 
novelty 83. See also apiirva 
NRSIMHA (1650) 498 
NRSIMBA 528 
NRSIMHASRAMA (1559) 237 
NRSIMHA TARKAPANCANANA 528 
number (samkhyd) 115, 127, 149, 172-73, 
188, 213, 273, 275, 284, 335, G130 
singular/plural 163, 257, 261-62, 295-97, 
G1593 
nuns G445 
Nyaya 3, 5-6, 9-11, 21, 26-29, 45, 55, 60, 
65-66, 85, 87-88, 90-93, 96-98, 237, 
255, 258-59, 263, 265, 268, 272, 274, 
282-92, 298-301, 303, 306, 324-40, 344- 
45, 368-69, 381, 397, 556, G1526 
Nyayabhiisana (of Bhasarvajfia) 262, 264- 
65, 296, 369 
Nyéyamaf§ari (of Jayanta Bhatta) 91, 97 
Nydyasamgraha (of Gangadatta) 521 
Nydyasamgraha (of Wemahamsavijayagani ) 
486 
—WNyayarthamafijusé (autocommentary) 
486 
Nydyasudhé (of Somesvara Bhatta) 
Commentary (of Annambhatta) 237 
Nyayasitras (of Gautama) 85, 97, 549, 556 
(grammatical) object (ofaction) (Karman) 
164-65, 255, 257-62, 267, G1606 
—kéraka 337-38 


occasion (nimitia) 147 

Ojihara, Yutaka a:G148, Gi54, G158, 
G192, G226-27, G281, G518, G609, 
G615, G630, G638, G855, G859, 
G1582, t:G854 

old age (jara). See decay 

onomatapoeia (Sabdanukrti) 111 

ontology 127 

operation. See function (wapdra) 

operational rule (vidhisitra) 15 

Oppert, Gustav e:G881 

opposition. See contradiction 

option G378 

ORAM BHATTA 528 


588 


Orara, E. de Guzman a:G623 

original relation of word to meaning 
(autpattika) 7, 90 

orthodox (astika) 37 

Ousaparampil, J. a:G1707 


pada. See word 

Padacandrika (of Sesa Krsna) 488 
—Krsnakautihula (autocommentary) 

488 

Padamafijari (of Haradatta) 
Commentary (of Narayana) 498 
~—~Makaranda or —Parimala (of Ranga- 

natha Diksita) 498 

—Kusumavikésa (of Sivabhatta) 509 
Commentary (of Jagaddhara) 524 
Commentary (of Ramasimha) 531 
Commentary (of Ratnegvara) 531 

Padapatha (of Sakalya) 4, 13 

padartha, See category 

Padéarthadipikad (of Konda Bhatja) 255, 
G1181 

Padarthadipika (of Nagesa Bhatta) 323 

Padasamjitavicara (of Asadhara Bhatta) 
375, 507 

padasphota, See sphota: pada 

Padasiiryapvakriyad (of Utsavakirti) 534 

Padavyavasthé (sitra) karika (of Vimalakirti) 
488 
—Vivsti (of Udayakirti) 499 

Padavyavasthakofa (of Gosvami Sri Siva- 
nandabhatta) 522 

Padhye, D. G. e:G861 

PADMADHARA 528 

PADMANABHADATTA (1375 ) 484-85 

(RAJA) PADMANARAYANA 528 

PADMASUNDARA 529 

Paik, T. S. d:G316 

painting 58 

Palsule, Gajanan Balkrishna 182-91, 215- 
17, 231-36, 367-70, a:G21-22, G116, 
G149-50, G207, G232-33, G266, G301- 
02, G1589, G1590, G1099, G1644, 
d:G143, e:G1033 

Paftcagrantht (of Buddhisagara Siri) 476 

Paftcamatabhatijana (of Sri Tatacarya) 239 

PANCANANA KANDALT 529 

Paftapadikavivarana (of Prakagatman) 287 

Paitcasamasiya (of Ramacaritra Tripathin ) 
530 

Pancholi, Bala Krishna 417, G1189, 
e:G1104-5 

Pandey, Chandra Kant a:G604, b:G173 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Pandeya, Harisankara e:G91 
Pandeya, Kalika Charan a:G1543 
Pandeya, Kesava Deva a:G1035 
Pandeya, Kshitish Chandra 552 
Pandeya, Ram Chandra b:G1555 
Pandeya, Umesh Chandra e:G159 
Pandit, M. D. a:G165, G174-5, G208-9, 
G252, G283, G303, G317, G488A, 
d:Gi623 
Pandye, Ram Awadh d:G418 
PANINI (350 B. €.?) 4, 6, 9, 13-21, 36, 
38, 45, 55, 66-68, 85-86, 97, 108-19, 165, 
167, 194, 204, 261-64, 267-72, 276-77, 
284, 293-97, 322, 331-45, 441-58, 549- 
50, 554, 556-57, G4, G503 
Paniniparisistavyakarana (of Devendraku- 
mara Vidyaratna) 515 
Paéninipradipa (of Sundaregvara Yajvan) 
373 
Pdpinisara (of Navacandra Nyayaratna) 
514 
Paniniyadipika (of Nilakantha Vajapeyin) 
493 
Péninipradipa (of Sundaregvara Yajvan) 
373 
Paniniyamatadarpana 
Raghava) 485 
Panintyaséra (of Jagadiga) 524 
Paniniyasikga 15, 455 
—FPaitjikd (of Dharanidhara) 485 
Commentary (of Dayananda Saras- 
vati) 511 
—Pradipa (of Rudra Prasida Sarma) 
516 
Péniniyatattvadarpana (of Kalicarana Vid~- 
yopadhyaya and Siirya Prasada Misra) 
512 
Paginiyavadanaksatramala (of Umamahes- 
vara) 371, 507 
Pansikar, Vasudev Laxman Shastri 
e:G918, G1001, G1083 
Parab, Kashinath Pandurang e:G943 
paradox 60-61, G773 
paragraph 61 
Paramelaghumafijusa (of Nagega Bhatta) 
21, 23, 323-40, 342, 502-3, 556 
—Arthadipika (of Sadasiva Sastri Joshi) 
24, 415, 503 
Commentary (of Nityananda Panta 
Parvatiya) 24, 401, 515 
—Jrotsna (of Kalika Prasida Sukla) 24, 
324, 423, 517 


(of Kavidarpana 


INDEX 


—Ratnaprabha (of Sabhapati Sarman 
Upadhyaya) 24, 425, 517 
—Ratnadipika (of Sivananda Pandeya) 
503, 532 
paramérihika. See real 
Paramatakhandana (of Cakrapani) 247 
(RSIPUTRA) PARAMESVARA II 
(1410) 22, 213-14, 485-86 
Paranjpe, Vasudeva Gopala b:G507 
Paranjpe, Vinayak Wasudeo a:G144, 
G856 
Parapaksakhandana (of Narayana Bhatta- 
tirl). See Apa&niniyapramanata 
paraphrase G1651 
para vak. See language 
paribhasad. See metarule 
Paribhasa (of Vyadi) 458 
Paribhdsaébhaskara (of Hari Bhaskara Agni- 
hotra) 500-01 
Commentary (of Srinivasa) 533 
Paribhasabhaskara (of Sesadrisudhi) 507 
—Paribhasabhaskara (of Kuppu Sastrin ) 
507 
Commentary (of Harirama) 511 
Commentary (of Rajarama Diksita) 
530 
Paribhasimanimalé (of CGandradatta Jha) 
519 
Paribhasapradipa (of Govinda Sena) 523 
Paribhasapradipa (of Kolahala) 526 
Paribhasépradiparcis (of Udayankara Nana- 
pathaka) 509 
Paribhasaratna (of Appa Siri) 504 
Paribhasarthadipika (of Teknatha) 534 
Paribhasarthaprakasika (of Dharmasiiri) 
501 
Paribhisarthasamgraha 
Diksita) 502 
—Vyakhya (of Appa Siri) 504 
—Candrika (of Svayampraka4sananda) 
505 
Paribhasavrtti (of Gopinatha Tarkacarya) 
488 
Paribhadsavriti (of Purusottamadeva) 209, 
480 
Paribhasavriti (of Nilakantha Diksita) 373, 
506 
Paribhasavriti (of Ramacandra 
bhusana) 501 
Paribhasavrtti (of Siradeva) 480-81 
—Vyakhyé (of Ramacandra Diksita) 
501 
Gommentary (of Govinda Misra) 522 


(of Vaidyanatha 


Vidya- 


589 


—Vijaya (of Managarman ) 527, 535 
Paribhasendusekhava (author unknown) 503, 
519 
Visami (of Cidriipasrama) 490 
Citprabha (of Taraka Brahmananda 
Sarasvati) 498 
ParibhasenduSekhara (of Nagega Bhatta) 
323, 503, G972 
—Kiasikaé or —Gada (of Vaidyanatha 
Paiyagunda) 357, 505 
—Brhadasastrarthakala (of Venimadha- 


va) 506 

—Trisikha (of Laksminrsimha) 507 

—Vyakhya or —Samkari (of Samkara 
Bhatia) 508 

—Arthamaijart (of Bhimacarya Gala- 
gali) 508 

Commentary (of Krsnamitracarya) 


381, 509 
—ZInduprakégfa (of Gangadhara) 509 
—Bhairavit or —Vivrti (of Bhairava 

Misra) 510 
—Tippantsdrasdraviveka (of Balagastrin 

Ranade) 511 
—CGandriké (of Visvanatha Dondi- 

bhatta) 511 
Commentary (of Lala Vidarin) 511 
—~Akhandatandava (of Harinatha Dvive- 

din) 511 
—Bhati (of Ramakrsna Tatyaéastrin) 

513 
—Haimavati (of Yagesvara) 513 
—Vakyarthacandrika (of Hari Sarman) 


513 
—Citprabha (of Brahmananda Saras- 
vati) 514-15 


—Tattvaprakasiké (of Laksmana Tri- 
pathi) 515 

—Tika (of Gadadhara) 521 

—Vriti (of Ganesa) 521 

—Arthamaijari (of Wayagrivacarya) 
522 

Commentary (of Krsna Bhatta) 526 

—Laghutika (of Raghunatha Sastri 
Vaiyakarana) 536 

—Sarvamangala (of Sesa Sarman) 532 

Commentary (of Valabhidatta) 534 

Commentary (of Visvanatha Bhatta) 
G1255 

—Vijaya (of Jayadeva Misra) G1259, 
G1264 

—Tattvadarsa (of Vasudeva Sastri Abh- 
yankar) 516 


590 


Paribhdsopanyadsa (of Vaidyanatha Diksita) 
502 

(Vedantakalpataru) Parimala (of Appayya 
Diksita I) 297, 304 

pariména. See measure 

paripdma. See transformation 

paroksatva. See iraperceptibility 

PARTHIVA G506 

particle (nipa@ta) 110, 112, 118, 121, 147, 
289-92, 337, 333-35, G319, G1425, 
G1435, G1570 G1585, G1621, G1637 
G1663 

particular or individual (vyakii) 6, 10, 26, 
82, 118-19, 145, 161, 185, 194, 231-36, 
273, 334, 556 
qualified by a universal (jativisistavya- 

kti) 6, 27, 92 

Sabda-yyakti 126 
unique (svalaksana) 27 

parts and wholes 131, 215, 235, 552 
parts of a sentence 191 

Paryayasabdaraina (of Dhanafijaya Bhatta- 
carya) 520 

paryudasa, See negation 

PASUPATI 529 

paSyanti vac 43, 47, 49-52, 61-63, 95, 99, 
121, 124, 197, 328, 554-55, 558 
para vac 5, 121, 124, 558 

Patanjal, Deo Prakas Shastri b:G486, 
e:G193 

PATANJALI (150 B.C.) 5-6, 12-13, 16- 
22, 36, 38, 45-47, 55, 66, 69, 71, 110, 
114-21, 124, 174-75, 182, 204, 261, 272, 
275, 277-80, 283, 289, 297, 321-22, 329, 
338-42, 459-64, 549, 551, 554, 556, G81, 
G220, G446-47, G502-3, G513 

PATANJALI (author of Yogasitras) 551, 
553 

Patafjalicarita (of Ramabhadra Diksita) 
321 

Patavardhan, 
e:G680, G1181 

path of being (adhvan) 44, 171 

Pathak, K. B. a:G4ll, G414, G451-52, 
G553, G568, G672, G675, G682, G786- 
87, G874-77, G883-84, G887-88 

Pathak, Ram Adhar d:G1532 

Pathak, Shridhar Shastri b:G82, G564 

“pathetic” fallacy. See fallacy, “pathetic” 

Patil, Gajanan Moreshwar a:G155, G284, 
G1537 

PAUSKARASADI 16, 440 

Pavolini, P. E, a:G692 


Ramakrishna Shastri 


ENCYOLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Pawte, I. S. b:G83 

Payagunde Balakrsna 387 

Payyur family 213 

PEDDINTI BRAHMADEVA. See BRA- 
HMADEVA 

Peijer, J. S. b:G1376 

Pendse, Narahari Shastri e:G1006 

perception (fratyaksa) 59, 126, 175, 188, 
196, 213, 232-33, 236 
erroneous 56-57 
valid 54 

Peri, N. 203 

periphrastic future G1482 

permanence of linguistic units 125-26 

permanence of word (jdnika) 118 

permanence of word-meaning relation 
(pravahanityata). See eternal, as preser- 
ved by speakers 

persmission (abhyanujita) 43, 47 

person (pfurusa) 172 

personal ending. See ending, personal 

PERUSORI (1755) 507 

Peterson, Peter G532, G539, a:G439, 
G538 

Phadke, Ananta Sastri e:G1038, G1187 

Phakkikadarpana (of Dharananda) 510 

Phakkika Saralartha (of Ramacaritra Tri- 
pathin) 530 

phala. See result 
phalagraya, See Substratum of the result 

phase (avasth@) 127 

(Indian) philosophy (darfana) 3-4, 18, 31, 
35-37 

Phirinda, King. See Pirinda 

Phitsitras (of Santanava Acarya) 14, 465, 
G242 
—Pradipa (of Sudarganadeva) 533 

phoneme or letter (vara) 4-5, 10-11, 57- 
61, 69-81, 94-95, 99, 108, 118-19, 124- 
25, 147, 182-91, 213-14, 216-17, 232-36, 
242, 302, 304-8, 329, 347-48, 367-68, 
561, G1676 

phonetics (fiks@) 107, 275, G337, G345, 
G359, G1401, G1422, G1487, G1591, 
G1599, G1622, G1652, G1678 

Pillai, K. Raghavan 128, a:G1671, et: 
G739 

Pillai, N. Gopala a:G694 

Pillai, S. Vaiyapuri a:G585 

Pinatelli, Mario a:G1688 

Pirinda, King 225 

Pisani, Vittore a:Gll, G75, b:G1399, 
G1449 


INDEX 


PITAMBARA VIDYABHUSANA 529 
piace (desfa) 83 
Plato, Platonic 55 
poetry 30-32, 35, 65-67 
polysemy 7-8 
position (sthéna), a means of proof 83 
Post, Kenneth H. 2:G1660 
Postal G489A 
postposition (karmapravacaniya) 147 
Potter, Karl H. 128-73, 182-91, 551 
power (Sakti) 128, 162-64, 195, 233, 286- 
88, 324-26, 369 
of complete freedom (svdtantryasakti) 
42, 196 
sentence-power (vakyaSakti) 344 
PRABHACANDRA (ACARYA) (1040) 
476 
PRABHAKARA (700) 25-26, 87, 92, 554 
Prabhakara Mimamsa 6, 25-26, 87-93, 
97-98, 265-67, 273-74, 300-01, 336, 346 
Prabhavalt (of Ramabhadra Diksita) 501 
Prabodhacandrika (of Jagannatha Panpita) 
23, 500 
Prabodhacandrika (of Vaijaladeva) 534 
practice (abhyaésa) 54, 132, 146 
pradhana. See principal element 
Pradipa (of Kaginatha Devasarman) 525 
PRADYUMNA SORI (1170) 479-80 
Praisadipaprabha (of Narayana) 498 
Prajapati 551-52 
prajta. See intellect 
PRAJNANASVAROPA. See NAREN- 
DRAPURI 
prakéra 98 
prakarana. See context; subject-matter 
Prakash, Buddha a:G224, G253 
Prakrit language 19-20, G71, G543, G1431 
prakriya, See derivation 
Prakriyadipika (of Appan Nainarya) 487 
(Astadhyaéyit) Prakriyakaumudt (of Rama- 
candra) 19-20, 485 
—Prasada (of Vitthala) 486 
—Gidhabhdvaviopti or = Prakasa 
Sesa Krsna) 448 
—Sudha (of Madhava Sarasvati) 489 
Gommentary (of Kamalakara Bhatta) 
497 
—Tattvacandra (of Jayanta)} 498 
—Prakdsa (of Srikrsna Bhatta Maunin) 
506 
—Vyakhyé (of Nilakantha Diksita) 506 
—Rasmi (of Muralidhara Misra) 517 
~—Prakriyasdva (of Kaginatha) 525 


(of 


591 


—VimarSa (of Adya Prasida Miséra) 
G1052 
—Siddhantakaumudit G1051 
Prakriyapradipa (of Cakrapani) 493 
Prakriyaratnamapi (of Dhanegvara) 211, 
481 
Prakriyasamgraha (of Abhayacandra) 484 
Prakriyasara (of Narayana) 528 
Prakriyasarvasva (of Narayana Bhattatiri) 
497, 556 
prakrti. 128-30, 146 See also basis; cause, 
material 
pramé. See knowledge 
pramaéna. See instrument of knowledge 
Praménasamuccaya and =Vytti (of Digna- 
ga) 27, 123, 549 
préna. See breath 
Prasada, Rama t:G553 
prasajyapratisedha. See negation 
Prasiddhasabdasapskara (of Appayya Dik- 
sita III) 500 
prasthanatrayt G724, G1565 
pratibandha. See prevention 
pratibhaé. See intuition 
pratipadika, See nominal stem 
Pratisékhyas 17, 39, 107, 
G461-64 
pratisedha. See prohibition 
pratyahara sittras of Astadhyayt 14, 204 
Pratyaharasiitravicara (of Timmandacarya) 
506 
pratyaksa. See perception 
pratyaya. See suffix 
Pratyayamaukikamala (of Damodara Sar- 
man) 519 
Pratyayodbhedapaddhatt {of Ksemankara) 
499 
(Siddhantakaumudi) Praudhamanordma 
Bhattoji Diksita) 20, 247, 367, 492 
—(Paramata) Khandana (of Gakrapani) 
247, 493 
—Kucamardana (of Jagannatha Pandita- 
raja Tailanga) 499 
—(Brhat)Sabdaraina (of Hari Diksita) 
21, 23, 323, 500 
—Bhavaprakasika (of Vaidyanatha 
Paiyagunda) 357, 505 
Commentary (of Bhavadeva Misra) 
389, 508 
—Bhairavi (of Bhairava Miégra) 389, 
510 
—Dipa (of Kalyanamala) 524 


G86, G449, 


(of 


592 


—(Laghu) Sabdaratna (of Hari Diksita) 
319, 500 
—Prabha (of Satara Raghavendra- 
carya) 511 
—Citraprabha (of Hari Sarman) 513, 
523 
—Bhivaprakafa (of Vaidyanatha Paiya- 
gunda) 357, 505 
—Kalpalataé (of Krsnamitracarya) 381, 


509 

—(Sabdaratna)Bhairavt (of Bhairava 
Misra) 510 

—Prabha (of Madhava Sastrin Bhandari) 
515 


—Sarala (of Gopala Sastri Nene) 515 
pbravahanityata. See eternal, as preserved by 
speakers 
PRAVARTAKOPADHYAYA 529 
pravartana. See instigation 
Pravegaka (of Acyuta Pisharoti) 494 
bravriti. See activity 
pravrttinimitta. See application 
pbrayoga. See use 
Prayogamukha (of Dharmakirti). See Kara- 
kacakra 
Prayoga (uttama) ratnamala (of Purusot- 
tama Vidyavagisa Bhattacarya) 490 
Commentary (by Candrasekhara) 497 
—Kantimala (of Gopaladeva Vidyava- 
gisa) 508 
Commentary (of Siddhanatha Vidyava- 
gisa) 532 
Prayogasiksé (of Anantasiiri) 518 
PRAYOGAVENKATADRI 529 
prayojaka, See prompter 
brayojana. See motivating force 
Prayuktakhpyatamafijart (of Kavisaranga) 
525 
ptecative G1497 
predicate G356 
prefix or preposition (upasarga) 110, 112, 
121, 146, G400, G1522, G1637 
prescription or injunction (vidhi) 24, 26, 
265, 336 
Vedic 96 
present time 45, 336 
presumption (arthapatti) 54, 213, 235, 273 
prevention (pratibandha) 43, 47 
preverb 4, 11, 289-90, 333 
primary derivative (kydanta) 173, 292 
primary meaning or denotative power 
(abhidha) 27, 65, 91-92, 273-74, 301, 
322, G732 


ENQYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


principal element (fradhdna) 162 

probability (samarthya). See capacity 

product (vtkdra) 167 

production (uépatti) 302, 304 

prohibition (nisedha, pratisedha) 15, 24, 150 

PROLANACARYA. See HARIYOGIN 
SAILAVACARYA 

prolation, ritualistic G300 

prompter (prayojaka) 268-69 

prompting (pravartana). See instigation 

pronoun (sarvandman) 112 

prose passages of the Vedas. See Brahmanas 

PRTHVICANDRA 529 

PRTHVISVARA 529 

P. S. ANANTANARAYANA SASTRI 
(1940) 24, 409, 516 

PUJYAPADA or DEVANANDIN (500) 
17, 466 

PUNDARIKA VIDYASAGARA BHA- 
TTACARYA (1520) 487 

PUNJARAJA (485) 486-87 

PUNYARAJA (1000) 22, 193, 201, 476, 
557, 561 

PUNYASUNDARAGANTI 529 

Purandhara, N. H. a:G1400 

Puratam Tirumal Devanarayana of Am- 
balappuzha 373 

PURNACANDRA (950) 475 

PURNACANDRA 529-30 

purpose (artha) 26, 82, 108, G1628 

Purusa. See person 

PURUSOTTAMADEVA 
203, 209, 480 

PURUSOTTAMA VIDYAVAGISA 
BHATTACARYA (1560) 490 

Pirvapaksaprasnottart or =maitjusé or 
=mafijart (of Asadhara Bhatta) 375, 
507 

Pisan 105 


(1175) 19, 


qualificandness, fallacy of unknown. See 
fallacy of unknown qualificandness 

quality (guna) 127, 161-62, 171, 195, 213, 
552 555, G1633 

quotation G1566 


RABHASANANDIN (950) 475 

RADHAKRSNA GOSVAMIN 529 

RADHAKRSNA SARMAN (1764) 507 

Radicchi, Anna a:G837 

RAGHAVA JHA 529 

Raghavan, V. a:G899, G905, G930, 
G1645 


INDEX 


Raghavan, V. K. S. N. 340-42 

RAGHAVANANDA AGARYA 529 

Raghava Somayaji 237 

RAGHAVA SURI 529 

RAGHAVENDRACARYA 530 

RAGHUNANDA SIROMANI 529-30 

RAGHUNATHA (1620) 495 

Raghunatha Bhatta 361 

RAGHUNATHA SARMA (1963) 24, 
427, 517, e:G711 

RAGHUNATHA SASTRI VYAKARA- 
NACARYA 530, G1260 

RAGHURAMA (1871) 512 

Raja, C. Kunhan 201, G145, a:G689 

Raja, K. Kunjunni 103, 109, 203-4, 321- 
22, 324-40, 342-49, 549, 554-56 G19l, 
G355, a:G696, G715, G1058, G1209-10, 
Gi225, G1530, G1540, G1551, G1658, 
b:G1556, e:G1223, G1226 

Rajagopalan, N. V. a:G334 

Rajakalasa, father of Jyesthakalasa 205 

RAJA KUMARA DHARMASASTR- 
IN. See (RAJAKUMARA) DHARMA- 
SASTRIN 

Rajapurohit, B. P. a:G1603 

RAJARAMA DIKSITA 530 

rajas. See activity 

RAJIVA SARMAN 530 

raksasa. See demon 

Ram, Kanshi d:G419 

Ram, Sadhu a:G702, G796 

RAMABHADRA DIKSITA (1692) 23, 
311, 321-22, 373, 501 

RAMABHATTA (1650) 498 

RAMACANDRA (1400) 19-20, 485 

RAMACANDRA (1700) 501-2 

RAMACANDRA (1744) 505 

RAMACANDRA 530 

RAMACANDRA PANDITA (1690) 501 

RAMACANDRA SARASVATI. See SA- 
TYANANDA 

RAMACANDRASRAMA (1600) 493 

RAMACANDRA VIDYABHUSANA 
(1688) 501 

RAMACARANA 530 

RAMACARITRA TRIPATHIN 530 

Ramachari, C. a:G234, G705 

RAMADASA CAKRAVARTIN (1600) 
493 

RAMADEVA MISRA 530 

RAMADEVA SARMAN 530 

RAMAJN A PANDEYA 24, 431, 530 

RAMAKANTA (1489) 487 


593 


RAMA KINKARA SARASVATI 530 

RAMAKISORA SARMAN (1905) 513 

RAMAKRSNA ADHVARIN (1650) 351 

RAMAKRSNA BHATTA (1690) 501 

RAMAKRSNA DIKSITA (1638) 497 

RAMAKRSNA SARMA TRIPATHI 
(1907) 514 

RAMAKRSNA TATYASASTRIN (1897) 
513 

Ramakrsna Yajvan 253 

RAMAKUMARA NYAYABHUSANA 
530 

Ramamurti, K. S. a:G1635 

RAMANANDA TIRTHA 530 

RAMANARAYANA SARMAN 530 

RAMANATHA CAKRAVARTIN 530 

RAMANATHA SARMAN RAYI (1546) 
488 

RAMANATHA VIDYAVACASPATI 
(1650) 498 

RAMA PANDITAVARA (SAHIBHA) 
(1900) 513 

RAMAPANIVADA 530 

RAMAPRASADA (1694) 501 

RAMA PRASADA TRIPATHI (1952) 
24, 419, 516, e:G1190 

RAMARSI 531 

RAMA SARANA SASTRI (1931) 516 

RAMASEVAKA (1770) 23, 377, 381, 
507 

RAMASIMHA 531 

RAMASRAMA. See BHANUJI DIK- 
SITA 

RAMATARANA SIROMANI (1883) 
512 

RAMA TARKAVAGISA (1550) 489 

Ramavarman of Srigaverapura 323 

Réméyana G533 

RAMESVARA. See SESA VIRESVARA 

RAMESVARA TARKAVACASPATI 
BHATTAGARYA 531 

Ranade, H. G. a:G1646 

RANCCHODJI ODHAVJI (1905) 514 

Rangacharya, Kandur e:G1036 

Rangacharya, M. e:GS01, G903 

RANGANATHA DIKSITA (1650) 498 

Rangarajadhvarindra 239 

Rangaswami, O. P. a:G791 

Rangoji Bhatta 241, 255 

Rao, H. V. Nagaraja a:G1687, e:G1349 

Rao, K. V. Lakshmana a:G445 

Rao, P. S. a:G801 

Rao, S. K. Ramachandra a:G482 


594 


Rao, Veluri Subba b:G1605 

Rapratyéhdrakhandana (of Vaidyanatha 
Payagunda) 357 

Rapratyahéramandana (of Keéari Miégra) 
525 

rasa. See essence 

Rasagangadhara (of Jagannatha Pandita- 
raja) 32 

Rasamaijarivyakhya (of Sesa Cintamani) 
215 

RATIDEVA SIDDHANTAVAGISA 
531 

(Tarka) Rainamala (of Taranatha Tarka- 
vacaspati) 512 

Rainamala 
—Chandraka Bhasya 

Kandali) 529 
~—Kérakamalatika (of Ramegvara Tarka- 
vacaspati Bhattacarya) 531 

RATNAMATI 479 

RATNAPANI 531 

Ratnavalé (of Gauramohana Bhatta) 522 

RATNESVARA 531 

Rau, Wilhelm a:G707, G716, G760-61, 
G819, G1695, b:G740, e:G759, G900 

Ravana G366 

real (paramarthika) 194-95 

reality (satta@) 110, 195 

recognition (pratyabhijfia) 302, 306 

reduction of two verbs to one (ekasesa) 173 

reference (vastvartha, bahyartha) 115-16, 
559-60 

reflection (abhasa) 57 

reflexive passive 259 

reification G1566 

relation (sambandha, samsarga) 125, 127, 
149, 195, 278, 328 
syntactic, See syntactic relation 

relational seam (samsargamaryada) 300 

relationship G1677 

remembered scripture (smpfi) 54, 132 

Renou, Louis G975, a:G127, G138, G417, 
G486A, G578, G594, G831, G967, 
G972-73, G982,. G1439, G1492-93, 
GIi514-16, G1525, Gi544, b:G1403, 
G1432, G1443, G1460, et:G966, t:G113, 
G854 

renunciation G705 

replacement technique in Panini G223 

representation, simultaneous 283-84 

result (pkala) 11, 83 

revealed scripture (sruti) 54, 87, 98, 255- 
59, 262, 330 


(of Paficanana 


ENGYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


revelation (abhioyakti) 302 

Rg Veda 3-4, 14, 31-32, 35, 37, 50, 103-6, 
108, 234, 341, 550, 553, G222, G486, 
G481A 

rhetoric, rhetoricians 3, G1388 

rhythm G1406 

ritualistic interpretation of Vedas (adhiya- 
jila) 108, G1439, G1714 

Rocher, Ludo a:G160, G1271 

Rocher, Rosane a:G:183-84, G236, G254, 
G1553, G1564, b:G235 

Rogers, David Ellis d:G255 

Roodbergen, J. A. F. a:Gi679, d:G631, 
et:G627, G632-34 

(verbal) root (dhatu) 4, 7, 10-15, 19, 98, 
113-14, 118, 146, 255-64, 268, 330-33, 
335, 337, G254, G294, G353, G387, 
G1458 

Roy, Kumudranjan et:G1167 

rsi. See sage 

RSIPUTRA PARAMESVARA II. See 
(RSIPUTRA) PARAMESVARA II 

rta. See cosmic order 

rudhi. See conventional powers of words 

Rudra 105 

RUDRADHARA JHA SARMAN (1954) 
24, 421, 516 ; 

RUDRA PRASADA SARMA (1948) 516, 
e:G428 

Rudras 104 

Ruegg, David Seyfort a:G1531, G1689, 
b:G1537 

rule 
negative (nisedha). See prohibition 
Paninian 559 

RUPACANDRA (1853) 512 

Riapamalé (of Nrsimha) 528 

Ripomala (of Vimala Sarasvati) 483 

Ripaprakésa (of Kulluka Bhatta) 527 

RUPARAMA NYAYAPANCANANA 
531 

Riparatnaméla (of Nayasundara) 528 

Ripatarangini (of ISvaramifra) 523-24 

Ripavatéra (of Dharmakirti) 203, 476 
—Prakriyakalpavallarit (of Nrsimha) 498 

Ruskin John 31, 550 

Ruyyaka 92, 203 


Sabarabhasya 
G584, G588 

SABARASVAMIN 531 

Sabda. See language; linguistic element; 
sound; (verbal) testimony 


(on Mimdmsasiitras) 73, 


INDEX 


Sabdabhaskara (of Tarkatilaka Bhattacar- 
ya) 494 
Sabdabhedaniripana (of Narayana Sudhi) 
507 
Sabdabhedanirupana (of Ramabhadra Dik- 
sita) 321-22, 501 
§abdabodha. See verbal cognition 
Sabdabodha (of Jiianesvara) 524 
Sabdabodhaprakdsa (of Jayakrsna Maunin). 
See Sdramaftjari 
Sabdabodhatarangint (of Igvarananda) 23, 
299, 488 
Sabdabrahman 12, 36-43, 45-50, 54, 56, 95, 
99, 132, 216, 341, 369-70, G724, G1543, 
G1565, G1587, G1688 
Sabdadhatusamiksa (of Bhartrhari) 124, 470 
Sabdadvaita, See linguistic monism 
Sabdaharana (of Sesa Krsna) 215, 488 
Sabdajitana. See verbal knowledge 
Sabdakaumudi 
Commentary (of Nalla Perumal Dik- 
sita) 311 
Sabdakaumudt (of Cokkanatha Diksita) 
311, 321, 498 
—Sabdikaraksa 
311, 501 
—Vyikhya (of Vaidyanatha Diksita) 
502 
Sabdakaustubha (of Bhattoji Diksita) 21, 
240-42, 492, 560 
—Visampadi (of Nagesa Bhatta) 323, 
503 
—Prabha (of Vaidyanatha Paiyagunda) 
357, 505 
—Bhavapradipa (of Krsnamitracarya) 
381, 509 
—Prabhé (of Satara Raghavendracar- 
ya) 393, 510 
Sabdakaustubha (of Iévariprasida) 524 
Sabdakaustubhaguna (of Indradatta Upa- 
dhyaya) 508 
Sabdakaustubhamandana (of Jagannatha 
Panditaraja Tailanga ) 499 
Sabdalaksana (of Buddhisagara Suri). See 
Paftcagranthit 
Sabdalamkara (of Sesa Krsna) 215, 488 
Sabdamaiijari (of Narayana Sudhi) 507 
Sabdanantasdgarasamuccaya (of Nageéa Bha- 
tta) 503 
Sabdanaucitya G1527 
Sabdaniripana (of Ramabhadra Diksita) 
23 
Sabdanukyti. See onomatapocia 


(of Dvadagahayajin) 


595 


SabdinuSasana (of Sakatayana) 17, 19, 
474-75, G908 
—Amoghanrtti 

Amoghaortti 
—Cintdmani (of Yaksavarman) 476 
—Prakésika (of Ajitasena Acfrya) 
517-18 
—Pratipadi (of Mangarasa) 527 
—Tippanit (of Samantabhadra) 531 
—Ripasiddhi (of Dayapala) 476 

Sabdanusasanabphadvriti (of Hemacandra) 
19, 479 
—Laghuvriti 

G946 
—Avacirikéd (of Dhanacandra) 488 
—WNydsa (of Udayacandra) 480 
—Laghuvyakhyd (of Devendrasiri) 481 
—Nydsaséra (of Kanakaprabha) 481 
—Vriti (of Malayagiri) 483 
—Dundghika (of Dhanacandra) 488 
—Durgaprabodha (of Srivallabhavacana 

Acarya) 494 
—Haimakaumudi or  Candraprabhioyé- 

karana (of Meghavijaya Gani) 502, 

G952 
—Vivarana (of Harsakirti Stiri) 523 

Sabdaprabha (Chapter one of Helaraja’s 
commentary on Trikandt) 193 

Sabdaprakasa (of Khana Nrpati) 526 

Sabdapiirvayoga. See language as means of 
release 

Sabdaratna (of Janardana Sarman) 524 

Sabdaratndkara (of Kasigvara Bhattacarya ) 
489 

Sabdaratnakara (of Kamadeva Ghosa) 524 

Sabdaratnaprabhad (of Satara Raghavendra- 
carya) 393 

Sabdaratndvali (of Appa Stiri) 504 

Sabdaratndvali (of Kanta Natha) 524 

Sabdaratndvali (of Ramanatha Cakravar- 
tin) 530 

Sabdartharatna (of Taranatha) 533 

Sabdarthasaramafijart (of Jayakrsna Mau- 
nin) 23, 361, 505 

Sabdarthatarkamgta (of Jayakrsna Maunin ) 
23, 361, 505 

Sabdaripavalt 536 

Sabdasddhyaprabodhini (of Ramanatha Cak- 
ravartin) 530 

Sabdasaktiprakasika (of Jagadisa) 549 

Sabdasiddhantamafijari (of Kodandarama) 
526 

Sabdasiddhi (of Mahadeva) 482 


(of Sakatayana), See 


(of Hemacandra) 479, 


596 


Sabdasobha (of Nilakantha Sukla) 251, 497 
Sabdasudha (of Ananta Bhatta) 518 
Sabdasudhanidhi (of Gahgaramitra Pathin) 
521 
Sabdatatia. See \anguage-principle 
Sabdatattuaprakaga (of Indradatta Upa- 
dhyaya) 23, 379, 508 
Sabdatrivenika (of Asadhara Bhatta) 23, 
375, 507 
Sabdavatara (of Durvinita) 177, 471 
Sabdavrtti G1573 
Sabdavyakhya (of Gopinatha) 550 
(Brhat) Sabdendusekhara (of Bhattoji Dik- 
sita) 343, 502 
—Bhévaprakasika (of Vaidyanatha Pai- 
yagunda) 505 
(Laghu) Sabdendusekhara (of Nagega Bha- 
tta) 323, 367, 502,G1081 
—Cidasthimala (of Vaidyanatha Paiya- 
gunda) 505 
—Sadasivabhatti (of Sadasiva Bhatta) 
508 
—Tika (of Samkara Bhatta) 508 
—Fyotsna (of Udayankar Nanapathaka) 
509 
—JInduprakésa (of Gangadhara) 509 
—Dosoddhara (of Mannu Deva) 509 
—Candrakalé (of Bhairava Misra) 510 
—Candriké (of Satara Raghavendracar- 
ya) 510 
—Prasada (of Subrahmanyam Nambu- 
ttiripad) 512 
—Vyakhya (of Sridhara Sarman) 513 
—Bhavabodhint (of Setumadhavacarya 
Nadatiram) 513 
Commentary (of Anantacarya) 513 
—WNageSoktiprakasa (of Khuddi Jha 
Sarman) 514 
—Guruprasida (of Tata Subrahmanya 
Sastrin) 515 
Commentary (of Gopala) 522 
—Candrika (of Raghavendracarya) 529 
—Varavarnini 535 
—Vijaya 535 
—Visamapadavivrti 535 
—Abhinavacandrika 536 
SABHAPATI SARMAN UPADHYAYA 
(1963) 24, 425, 517, 531 
SabharattjanaSataka (of Kavikufijana) 371 
SACCIDANANDA 532 
sacrifice 183, 267, 336-37 
SADANANDA 531 
SADASIVA, (1670) 22-23, 317, 500, 562 


ENGYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


SADASIVA BHATTA (1780) 508 

Sadasiva Diksita 311 

SADASIVA SASTRI JOSHI or SARMA 
(1946) 24, 415, 516, e:G1038, G1119, 
Gi166, G1188, G1347 

Sadagivendra Brahmendra 351 

Sadbhasasubantarapadarfa (of Nagoba Pan- 
dita) 508 

SaddarSinisiddhantasamgraha (of Ramabha- 
dra Diksita) 23, 321-22, 501 

sadhana. See means 

SADHUSUNDARA GANI (1624) 495 

sadhuiva. See grammaticality; nominal 
stem 

Sadhutvddinirvacana 535 

sadhya 25 

sddrsya, See similarity; simultaneity 

SAGARAMATTI. See SARIPUTTA 

sage (rst) 36, 38, 52, 54, 63, 103 

SAHAJAKIRTI (1623) 495 

Sah4ji, King of Tanjore 321 

sahakérikarana. See cause, auxiliary 

sahitya, See grouping; literacy criticism 

Sahityadarpana (of Harisiddhantavagisa ) 
91 

Sahityasastri, Janakinatha e:G1292 

sahydaya 31 

Saiva G1690 
Kashmir Saivism. See Kashmir Saivism; 

Trika 

SAKALYA 4, 440 

SAKATAYANA (850) 14-16, 19, 110, 
112, 114, 440, G876, 474-75 

Sakti. See denotation; power; significative 
power 

Saktisphuta (of Kaladhara) 524 

SALIKANATHA MISRA (925) 87 

Salus, Peter H. b:G489A 

samadhi 328 

sdmagri. See grouping 

samakhya. See etymology, etymological 
meaning 

samanadhikaranya G717 

SAMANTABHADRA (650) 531 

Samanvayapradipa (of Kudakacarya) 526 

samanya, See universal 

sdmarthya. See capacity 

samasa, See compound 

Samésaémava (of Kulamuni) 508 

Samdsasamkha 536 

samavaya. See inherence 

Samavayapradipasamketa (of Devagarman) 
520 


INDEX 


sambandha. See relation 
Sambandhoddesa (of Gangadasa) 519 
Sambasiva Sastir, K. 232 
sambodhana. See vocative 
Samgraha (of Vyadi) 117, 119-20, 458 
SAMGRAMASIMHA (1279) 483 
samjnd. See use 
samphdsiitra 15 
SAMKARA(ACARYA) (710) 41-43, 
56, 59-60, 531, 551, 553-54, G1569, 
G1660, G1688, G1702 
SAMKARA BHATTA (1770) 241, 508 
SAMKARA SARMAN 531 
SAMKARA SASTRI MARULKAR 
(1957), 517, e:G574, G1192 
samketa. See convention 
Samkhya 21, 44-45, 54, 381, 397, 559 
samkhya. See number 
Samkhyadsitra (of Kapila) 552 
—Laghuvriti (of Nagega Bhatta) 323 
Samksipiasdra (of Kramadisvara) 19, 477 
Commentary (of Jumaranandin) 484, 
G912 
Commentary (of Damodara Deva- 
sarman) 519 
—Vivarana (of Goyicandra) 485 
—Kaumudi (of Abhirama ‘Vidyalam- 
kara) 487 
Commentary (of Narayana Nydaya- 
pajicanana) 489 
—Arthabodhint (of Candrasekhara 
Vidydlamkara) 519 
—Vydkaranadurghatodghata (of Kesava- 
deva Tarkapaficanana Bhatta- 
carya) 525 
—Dipika or —Prakdfa (of Narayana 
Nydyapaficanana) 489, 502 
—Arthadipika (of Gopala Cakravartin) 
500 
-—Dhétupatha-Séra (of Nrsimha Tarka- 
paficanana) 528 
—Unpédisiitra—commentary (of Sivadasa 
Cakravartin) 532 
—Rasavati G912 
Samksiptasdrakarika (of Narottama Vidya- 
lamkara Bhattacarya) 528 
samnidhi. See contiguity 
sampradénakdraka. See indirect object (of 
dative) 
samsargamaryada. See association of word 
meanings 
samskara. See trace 
samudaya. See collection of words 


597 


samitha. See collection of parts; grouping 
samvid, See consciousness 
samnyavahirika. See expressional 
samyoga. See conjunction 
SANATANA TARKACARYA 532 
sandhi. See coalescence, rules of 
Sanghvi, Ratnalal ¢:G955 
Safijaya 146 
Sankaran, A. e:G587 
Sankaran, C. R. 2:G1420 
Sanskrit 237, 287, 321 
SANTANAVA AGARYA (350) 15, 465 
SANTARAKSITA (750) G775 
Saptasvarasindhu (of Narasimha Siri) 528 
SARADARANJAN RAY VIDYAVI- 
NODA (1920) 515, et:G1091 
Saralahart (of Kavicandra) 493 
Sdramaf§art (of Jayakrsna Maunin) 505 
SARANADEVA (1172) 480 
Saranasabdarthavicara (of Anantacarya) 
514 
Sarangi, Ancka Chandra a:G335, G636, 
G1708 
Sarasiddhantakaumudi (of Varadaraja) 494 
Sarasvataprakriyéd (of Anubhiti Svarupaca- 
rya) 20, 481-82 
-——Samdhiprakarana {of Mandana) 484 
Commentary (of Pufijaraja) 486-87 
—Subodhika (of Amrtabhava) 487 
—Bhasya (of Kasinatha Bhatta) 487 
—Pradipa (of Dhanegvara Bhatta) 487 
—Sdrasvataprasdda (of Vasudeva Bhatta) 
490 
—Visamapadarthadipika or 
(of Gop4la Bhatta) 490 
—(Vaiyakarana) Siddhantacandrikad (of 
Ramacandrasrama) 493 
Commentary (by Ksemendra) 488 
—Tattvadipika (of Lokegakara) 501 
Commentary (of Sadasiva Sastri 
Jogi) 516 
—Auyayarthamala (of Navkishore Jha ) 
516 
—Subodhint (of Sadananda) 531 
—Vryiti (of Tarkatilaka Bhattacarya) 494 
—Subodhika (of Gandrakirti) 494 
—Laghubhasya (of Raghunatha) 495 
—Varttika (of Sahajakirti) 495 
—Siddhantacandrikad (of Jhanatilaka) 498 
—Sabdarthacandrika (of Hamsavijaya- 
gani) 499 
—WNirmaya or —Anuvrttpavabodhaka (of 
Narayana Sudha) 500 


Gopalabhat ji 


598 


—Méadhavi (of Madhava) 513 
~——Siddhantaratndvali (of Madhava Bha- 
tta) 513 
—Tippant (of Govinda Parasgurama 
Bhatta) 513 
—Tippani (of Visnuprasada Sarman) 
514 
—Paftjika (of Dharmadeva) 521 
—Sdrapradipika (of Jagannatha) 524 
—Véadighatamudgara (of Jayanta Bhatta) 
524 
—Bhasya (of Ramanarayana Sarman) 
530 
—Subodhint (of Sadananda) 531 
Sérasvatasdrasamgraha (of Narayana Bhara- 
ti) 528 
Sarasvata school 19 
Sdrasvatanyékaraga (of Nayasundara) 528 
Sarasvatayydkaranadhundhika or —Dipika 
(of Megharatna) 485 
Sarasvati 105 
Sarasvatikanthabharapa (of Bhoja) 477 
—Hrdayaharini (of Narayana Danda- 
natha) 478 
—Tika (of Jagaddhara) 484 
Commentary (of Jivananda Vidyasa- 
gara) G917 
Commentary (of Ramasimha) G918 
Commentary (of Ratnesvara) G917, 
G918 
Sarasvati Makhin 313 
Sarasvati river 104 
Saravali (of Narayana) 315, 499 
—Vytti 315, 499 
SARIPUTTA (1159) 479 
Sarma, see Sharma 
Sarvadarsanasamgraha (of Madhava) 56, 
68, 552, 554, Gi391 
SARVADHARA UPADHYAYA 532 
sarvandma, See pronoun 


SARVANANDA PANDEYA G1243. 
e:G1243 
SARVARAKSITA 480 


SARVAVARMAN (50) 17, 464-65 

SARVESVARA (1555) 489 

SASTHIDASA 532 

Sastra. See scientific treatise 

Sastri. See Shastri 

Satapatha Brahmana 108, G452 

SATARA RAGHAVENDRACARYA 
GAJENDRAGADKAR (1840) 23, 
393, 510-11, 562 

Satkarakalaksana (of Amaracandra) 481 


ENQYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Satkdrakavdda (of Rabhasanandin) 475 

Satpadi 
Commentary (of Krparama) 526 

satta. See existence; reality 

sativa 120, 275 (See also serenity ) 

satya. See truth 

SATYAKAMA VARMA (1970) 24, 429, 
517 

SATYANANDA or RAMACANDRA 
SARASVATI (1500) 22, 219, 229, 487 

SATYAPRIYA TIRTHA SVAMIN 
(1745) 23, 359, 505 

SATYAVARYARYA 532 

SAUBHAVA (350) 465 

SAUNAKA 4, 108 

Sautrantika 549 

SAYANA. See MADHAVA 

Scharfe, Hartmut a:G391, G483, G1672, 
b:G286, G610, G1681 

Scharpe, Adrian b:G1456 

Scheller, M. a:G1461 

Schlerath, Bernfried b:G1701 

Schroeder, Leopold Von a:G433 

Schropfer, A. b:G1500 

Schropfer, Johann a:G1433 

science G616 

scientific treatise (Sastra) 132 

scripture (agama) 235 

secondary derivative (taddhita) 111, 173, 
292, G1495 

secondary meaning (laksana) 6, 8-12, 26-28, 
65-67, 89-92, 111-12, 115, 217, 272-73, 
282-86, 322, 324, 326-27, 334, 343, 346, 
554, 556, G191, G243, G732, G1612 
based on common quality (gaunz). See 

gaugi 

pure 326 

secondary nature 195 

secondary roots G1648 

seed (6ija) 555 

self, soul (@tman) 42, 130, 550 
Great Self (mahatmé) 46-47 

semantics 5, G1669 
generative G318 
semantic relations G247 

Sen, Malati a:G852 

Sen, Sukumar a:G166, G592. b:G267, 
G1533 

SENAKA 440 

Sengupta, Devendranatha e:G1031 

Sengupta, Sailendranath a:G171, G210, 
G889, G958 

Sengupta, Upendranatha e:G1031 


INDEX 


sense-organ (indriya) 56, 189, 214, 286 

sentence (vakya) 4, 10, 26-29, 61, 65, 83, 
85-99, 108, 114, 124-25, 149-50, 216, 
233, 304, 348, G204, G246, G355, G768, 
G1574 
definition of G715 
—formation 163 
~-meaning (vdkyartha) 9-10, 28, 146, 

148, 191, 343, 346-47 

nominal G1686 
parts of 233 
—sphota 62, 95, See also sphota 

separation G1650 

sequence (krama) 50, 94, 161, 169, 171, 
184-86, 191, 196-97, 216, 232, 235-36, 
303, 558 
suppression of 49, 81 

serenity (sativa) 44-45 

SESA CINTAMANI 22, 215, 221 

SESADRISUDHI (1750) 507 

SESA GOPINATHA 247 

SESA KRSNA (1540) 22, 78, 215-17, 
221, 223, 237, 241, 247, 488 

SESA NARAYANA. See (SESA) NARA- 
YANA (BHATTA) 

Sesa Nrsimha 215 

Sesa Purusottama 247 

Sesa Ramacandra 215 

(KASI) SESA SARMAN 532 

Sega Viregvara 215, 223, 225, 237 

SESA VISNU (1605) 22, 243, 494 

Seshakumar, A. d:G1682 

SETUMADHAVACARYA NADITI- 
RAM (1895) 513 

Shah, Neelanjana 8. a:G931 

Shah, Umakant Premananda 
a:G1287, e:G1175, G1227 

Sarma, Arvind a:G382 

Sharma, Aryendra e:G861 

Sarma, Batuka Natha e:G1285 

Sharma, B. N. Krishnamurti 393, 562, 
a:G4 

Sarma, Dadhi Ram e:G1360 

Sharma, Dipti a:G403 

Sarma, E, R. Sreekrishna a:G602, G708, 
G712, G1539, G1557, G1702, et:G1202, 
t:G1501 

Sharma, Indra Datta e:G1289 

Sharma, Jagdish P. a:G963 

Sharma, Krishna Kumar a:G336 

Sarma, Kanakalala e:G239 

Sharma, K. Madhava Krishna a:G99- 
101, G415, G467, G485A, G511, G580, 


375, 


599 


G583, G695, G783, G792-93, G897, 
G929, G1214, G1437, G1440, G1450 

Sarma, K. V. a:G1207 

Sharma, Mukund Madhava a:G1562 

Sharma, Mahesh Dutt a:G404, G863, 
G1108 

Sharma, Mangal Deva a:G586 

Sharma, Peri Sarvesvara 561, a:G748, 
G907, t:G738, 551 

Sarma, Ram Nath a:G307, 
b:G1638, d:G282 

Sarman, Rudradatta Jha e:G598 

Sharma, Uma Shankara a:G1272, e:G164 

Sarman, V. Anjaneya a:G724, G1565 

Sarma, Virendra d:G752 

Sharma, V. Venkatarama e:G841 

Sastri, A. Mahadeva e:G1036 

Sastri, Bahuvallabha e:G550, G1248 

Sastri, Bala e:G31, G522 

Sastri, Bala Krishna e:G1116 

Shastri, Bhim Sen b:G878 

Shastri, Biswanarayana a:G1070 

Sastri, Bommakanti Ramalinga a:G176 

Shastri, Charudeva a:G685, e:G611, 
G687, G692 

Sastrin, C, Samkara Rama e:G1095 

Sastri, Damodara e:G35, G922, G1037 

Shastri, Dharmendra Nath a:G484A 

Shastri, Dwarikadas e:G1039 

Sastri, Gangadhara e:G35, G49, G1114 

Sastri, Gaurinath 41, 57, 542, 552, 554, 
a:G699, G701, G730, G1532, b:G706 

Sastri, Gosvami Damodara e:G680 

Sastri, Guru Prasada e:G575 

Shastri, Haraprasad 201, G892 

Sastri, Jivarama e:G1156 

Sastri, K. A. Nilakantha a:G902 

Sastri, K. A. Sivaramakrishna a:G357 

Shastri, Kali Charan a:G935-36, G983, 
b:G1624 

Shastri, Kapil Deva a:G717-18, G1246, 
eb:G1247 

Sastri, Karnataka Krsna e:Gi084 

Sastri, K. Sambasiva e:G488, G497, 
G688 

Shastri, Lallurama Jivarama e:G650 

Shastri, Mangala Deva a:G464, et:G86 

Sastri, Patavardhana Narayana e:G1082 

Sastry, P. GC. Naganatha b:G1110 

Sastri, P. P. Subrahmanya 237, 561, 
a:G1409, b:G589, e:G587 

Sastri, P. S, a:G1516 


G348, 


600 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Sastri, Sada Siva Sarma (Joshi) e:G1118, 
G1174, Gi244 
Sastri, Samkara Rama e:G88 
Sastri, Santi Bhiksu ta:G714 
Shastri, Satya Vrat a:G799, GIi661, 
b:G399 
Sastri, Sitarama e:G1123, G1156, G1228 
Shastri, Sitaramacari e:G683 
Sastri, 5. K. Ramanatha e:G870 
Sastri, S. S. Suryanarayana 80-82, 552, 
555, a:G924, G1414, G1446 
Sastri, Sulavatanka Kalyana Sunvamba- 
samkara e:G1003 
Sastri, Tarakesvara e:G1189 
Sastri, T. Ganapati 235, e:G505, G965, 
G976, G1065, G1281 
Sastri, Tata Subbaraya e:G1216 
Sastry, T. S. Gourypathy a:G1641 
Sastry, T. V. Kapali a:G1454 
Sastrio, V. A. Ramaswami a:G698, G789- 
90, G1412, e:G1205 
Sastrigal, S. Chandrasekhara e:G1087 
Shaw, J. L. a:G356 
Shefts, Betty b:G162 
Shembavnakar, K. M. a:G107 
Shende, Sita Rama Sastri e:G1360 
Shukla. See Sukla 
SIDDHANATHA VIDYAVAGISA 532 
siddhanta. See view 
Siddhantakaumudt (of Bhattoji Diksita) 17, 
20, 240, 319, 367, 490-92 
—Praudhamanoréma (autocommentary ) 
See (Siddhantakaumudt)-Praudhamano- 
rama 
—Sukhabodhinit (of Nilakantha Vajape- 
yin) 493 
—Vilésa (of Laksminrsimha) 499 
—Ratnakarajika (of Sivaramendra Sara- 
svati) 499 
—Sunamanoramaé (of Tirumala Yajvan) 
499 


-—Siddhantaratnakara (of Ramakrsna 
Bhatta) 501 
—(Brhat)Sabdendusekhara (of Nageéga 


Bhatta) 323, 502 

—Bhavaprakasiké (of Vaidyanatha Pai- 
yagunda) 357 

—Cidasthimala (of Vaidyanatha Pai- 
yagunda) 357, 505 

—Disagoddhara (of Manyudeva) 387, 
509 

—Candrakalé (of Bhawrava Misra) 
387, 509 


—Candrika (of Satara Raghavaven- 
dracarya) 393, 510 
Notes (of Khuddi Jha) 399, 514 
—Dipiké (of Nityananda Panta 
Parvatiya) 401, 515 
— (Laghu)Sabdendusekhara (of Nagega 
Bhatta). See (Laghu)Sabdendusekhara 
—tLalita (of Gopalakrsna Sastrin) 
504, 507 
—Tattvabodhint (of Jianendra Saras- 
vati) 351, 505 
Subodhini (of Jayakrsna Maunin) 351 
361, 505 
—Vidydvilasa (of Sivarama Tripathin) 
506 
—Kalpalajika (of Venimadhava) 506 
—Balamanorama (of Vasudeva Diksita) 
365, 506 
—Gidhaphakkikaprakaga (of Indradatta 
Upadhyaya) 508 
—Ratnaérgava (of Krsnamitracarya ) 381, 
509 
—Arthaprakasika (of Kocca Sankaran 
Susad) 510 
—Ratnaprakasiké (of Bhairava Misra) 
G1088 
—Sarala (of Taranatha Tarkavacas- 
pati) 397, 512 
—Bilacandri (of Balacandra Sastri) 514 
—Parkticandrika (of Gangaprasada Sas- 
trin) 514 
—Saradarfani (of Sivadatta Sarman) 
514 
—Mitabhaésini (of Saradarafijan Ray 
Vidyavinod) 515 
—Pathtipradipa (of Nanakarama Sastri) 
515 
—Bhavabodhini (of Karaputugala Dhar- 
ma Sri) 515 
—Kathakollolint (of Rama Sarana Sastri) 
516 
—Visesaviorti (of Somanatha Sarman) 
516 
—Sugandha (of Acyutananda Sastrin) 
517 
Commentary (of Shridharenda Sharma 
Ghildiyal) 517 
—Bhasya (of Bhagavatbhakta) 518 
—Vilésa (of Bhaskara) 518 
—Sudhakara (of Krsna Sastrin) 526 
—Laksmi (of Sabhapati Sarma Upadh- 
yaya) 531 
—Sarasamgraha (of Vedantacarya) 534 


INDEX 


(Vydkarana) Siddhantasudhanidhi 
vesvara Siri) 535 

Siddhantatativa (of Jagannatha) 524 

Sieg, E. ¢: significative power (Sakti) 6-7, 
26, 42, 45, 65-68, 90-91, 330-31, 346 
svatantryasakti. See power of complete 

freedom 

Siksd. See phonetics 

Siksaprakasa G427 

Silpasastra. See architecture 

Silverstein, Michael e:G1618 

Simenscly, Th. b:G146 

Simhasuragani 123 

similarity (sa@drfya) 288. See also analogy; 
comparison; simultaneity 

Simhasirigani 123 

Simonsson, Nils a:G9 

simultaneity (sddrfya) 184-85, 289 

Singh, Jag Deva a:G287, G304-5, G337- 
38, G1591, G1636 

Sinha, Anil C. a:G318 

SIRADEVA (1250) 481 

Sircar, Dinesh Chandra a:G576 

SIROMANI BHATTA. See BHATTA 
SIROMANI 

SIROMANI BHATTA 532 

Sista. See elite 

Sisubodha (of Kaginatha) 525 

Sifubodha (of Padmanarayana) 528-29 

Sigyahitanpyasa (of Ugrabhiiti) 476 

SITIKANTHA (1450) 486 

SITANATHA SASTRIN 532 

Siva G554 

Siva Bhatta, father of Nagesa 323 

SIVABHATTA (1810) 509 

SIVADASA 532 

SIVADASA CAKRAVARTIN 532 

SIVADATTA PANDEYA 533 

SIVADATTA SARMAN (1914) 514, 
e:G943 

SIVANANDAYOGASVAMIN. 
BHATTA SIROMANI 

SIVA NARAYANA SIROMANT 532 

SIVA PANDITA 532 

SIVARAMA CAKRAVARTIN (1600) 
493 

Sivaraman, Krishna 550, a:G1690 

SIVARAMA SARMAN (VACASPATI) 
532 

SIVARAMA TRIPATHIN (1750) 506 

SIVARAMENDRA SARASVATI 
(1660) 22, 227, 245, 499, 561 

SIVARAMENDRA YATI (1780) 508 


(of Vis- 


See 


601 


Sivasittras (of the Astadhydyt) 14, 203-4, 
G74, G145, G203, G244, G453 

Skold, Hannes a:G449, b:G448 

sleep, deep 37, 106 

(Mimamsa)Slokavaritika (of Kumarila 
Bhatta) 181, 189-90, 213, 549, 554-56 

smaliness (tadalpat@) 288 

smpli. See memory; remembered scripture 

Smrtiratna, Taranatha Gosvami e:G1069 

SOKANATHA DIKSITA. See GCOKKA- 
NATHA DIKSITA 

soma 105 

SOMADEVA (1250) 17, 481 

Somananda 124 

SOMANATHA 533 

SOMANATHA SARMAN (1952) 516, 
e:G1096, G1102 

SOMAPRABHA 533 

SOMAYAJIN DIKSITA. See SARVES- 
VARA 

Someévara Bhatta 237 

sound (dhvani) 28, 30, 37, 55, 69, 91, 
119-20, 132, 153, 187-88, 231, 303, 308, 
329, 342, G728, G1637 
physical theory of G1397 
pbrakyta 94-95, 120, 174-75, 236, 329, 

Gi588 

vaikrta 94-95, 120, 174-75, 236, 329 

sound (fabda) 183, 308, 558 

Sowani, V. S. a:G1393 

space, spatial direction (dik or dis) 43, 45, 
127, 149, 162-63, 184, 195, 559 a:G703 

spanda, See activity 

specification (visesavidhi) 150 

speech (vac or vak) 49, 93-94, 103, 341, 555 
== bhasé 113 
daivi 37 
madhyama. See madhyama vak 
para 63, 121, 328, 553-55 
—principle (Sabdatativa). See language 

principle 

—wvaikhari, See vaikhari vak 

sphota, theory of 5, 10-11, 14, 18-21, 29, 
42-43, 49, 51, 56-62, 68-82, 110, 232-36, 
242, 298-99, 303-08, 324-29, 342-43, 
347, 367-70, 552-55, G1391, G1394, 
G1412, G1428, G1454, G1464, G1510, 
G1512, G1518, G1543, G1549, G1562, 
G1569, G1655, G1688, G1700A, G1702, 
552-55 
akhandasphoja 242, 298, 305, 348-49 
jatisphoja 306-8 
padasphofa 6, 242, 298-99, 303, 305, 328 


602 


vakyasphota 6, 93-95, 242, 298-300, 305, 
328, 369-70 
varnasphoja 242, 298, 308, 557 
wyaktisphota 306-7 
Sphofacandrika (of Srikrsna Bhatta) Mau- 
nin) 23, 36, 215, 367-70, 506 
Sphotaniriipapa (of Apadeva) 499 
Sphotaniripana (of Sega Krsna) 22, 78, 215- 
17, 488 
Sphotapariksé (of Bhairava Misra) 23, 389, 
G1i82 
Sphotapratistha (of Kesava) 526 : 
Sphojasiddhi (of Bharata Miésra ) 22, 231-36, 
489 
Sphofasiddhi (of Mandana Miéra) 5, 18, 22, 
56, 70-80, 82, 181-91, 213, 232-36, 473- 
74, 553-56, 561 
—Gopéalika (of [Rsiputra ] Paramesvara 
II) 22, 213-14, 486 
Sphojasiddhi (author unknown) 535 
Sphofasiddhinyadyavicara 22, 231, 235-36, 
489 
Sphotatattva (of Krsna Dvivedin) 526 
Sphotatattvanirtipaga (of Sesa Krsna) 22, 
78, 215-17, 488 
Sphojavada (of Nageéa Bhatta) 242, 342- 
49, 504, 549 
—Subodhini or —Upodghata (of V. Krs- 
namacarya) 24, 413, 516 
Sphotavimarsini (of Madhava Sastrin Bhan- 
dari) 515 
SPHOTAYANA 13, 68, 349, 440 
Sravana. See hearing 
SRIDEVA PANDITA 533 
SRIDHARANANDA SARMA GHIL- 
DIYAL (1962) 517, e:G1103 
SRIDHARA SARMAN (1889) 513 
SRIKANTA MISRA 533 
SRIKRSNA BHATTA MAUNIN (1750) 
23, 361, 367-70, 506 
SRIKRSNA SARMAN 533 
Sri Lanka 18 
SRINATHA SIROMANI 533 
SRINIVASA 533 
Srinivasacaryulu, Bommakanti a:G1575 
SRIPATIDATTA (1450) 486 
SRIPRABHA SURI 533 
SRIRAMACARYA. See GOPALADEVA 
VIDYAVAGISA 
Sriramamurti, P. a:G771, G1648 
SRI TATACARYA (1580) 239 
SRIVALLABHAVACAKA or =ACAR- 
YA (1718) 504 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


SRIVALLABHAVACANA AGARYA 
(1607) 494 

Srngaraprakasa (of Bhoja) 560 

SrngaroSataka section of Subhdsitatrigatt 124 

SRSTIDHARACARYA 533 

SRUTASAGARA 533 

Sruti. See revealed scripture 

Staal, J. Frederick (Frits) 550, 556, 
a:G167, G195-96, G211, G247, G1545, 
G1554, G1566, G1576-77, Gi604, 
G1649, Gi662, Gi696, Gi714, 
b:G1583, G1625 

state (bhava) 129 

statement, direct (fruti), a means of proof 
83 

stem 4, 118, 146, 348. See also nominal stem 

Stenzler, A. F. b:G1485 

sthana. See position, a means of proof 

sthayibhdva. See mood 

Sthemadarpana (of Gopalacarya) 522 

Sthiroratna, Loharam G1018 

sthiti. See duration 

Strauss, Otto a:G563, G1398 

structure, deep/surface G306 

Subantaprakasa (of Krsna Sastrin) 526 

SUBHASILA GANI (1425) 486 

Subhdsitatrigati (of Bhartrhari) 124 

subject-matter (frakarana) 82-83, 108 

subjunctive G1432 

sublation (badha) 188, 214 

Subrahmanyam, K. G. a:G6l1, G412, 
G450, G508, G557, G559-560, G684 

Subrahmanyam, P. S. a:G306 

SUBRAHMANYAM NAMBUTTIRI- 
PAD (1860) 512 

substance (dravya) 6, 119, 161, 164, 170, 
194-95, G1509, 558-59, G1633 

substantive G1571 

substratum of the result (phalasraya) 267 
of agency 269 

subtle body (saksmaSarira) 132 

SUDARSANACARYA 533 

SUDARSANADEVA 533 

Suddhicandrika (of Jayakrsna Maunin) 361 

Suddhi(tattva)karika (of Narayana) 315, 
499 

SUDHANANDASORISISYA 
500 

suffix (pratyaya) 4, 10, 12, 15, 98, 118, 
146, 257-58, 262, 266, 292-95, 335, 343, 
348, G198, G292, G335 
inflectional 276 
nominal. See nominal stem 


(1671) 


INDEX 


personal 331 
primary 4, 261, 297-98 
secondary 4, G347, G349, G396 
suggestion (uyafijand) 11, 27-30, 65, 92, 
287, 324, 327, 341, G1508, G1521, 
G1658 
suggestive meaning (dyotaka) 112, 146-47, 
289, 322, 333 
suitability (aucitya) 83, 149 
Sukhbeatar, O, a:G1692 
Sukhthankar, Vishnu S. e:G486 
Shukla, J. M. a:G798, G891, G960, 
G1647, G1663, G1683 
Shukla, Karunesha a:G809 
Sukla, Rama Govind e:G324, G1348 
Sukla, Sri Rajanarayana e:G1280 
siiksmasarira. See subtle body 
Saktiratnakara (of [Sesa] 
[Bhatta ]) 215 
Sumanorama (of Gangesa Misra Upadhya- 
ya) 521 
Sundaraprakdsasabdamava. See Unddisddhana 
SUNDARESVARA YAJVAN 373 
Sinyaté G1689 
Supadma (of Padmanabhadatta) 484-85 
—Makaranda (of Visnumisra) G1043, 
G1044 
—Vivaranapatcika G1045 
—Tippani (of Trilokyanatha Bhatfacar- 
ya) G1046 
superimposition (adhydsa) 42, 65, 126, 
216-17, 306, 324 
supplementary description, (arthavdda) 24 
supporting object (dlambana) 189 
Suptinantasdgarasamuccaya (of Nagesa Bha- 
tta) 504 
Suri, Chandra Sagara e:G953 
Suri, Vijayalvani e:G954 
Suryanarayana, S. e:G691 
SURYANARAYANA SUKLA (1937) 
24, 405, 516 
SURYA PRASADA MISRA (1887) 512 
SUSENA KAVIRAJA MISRA 533 
svabhava. See natural 
svara, See accent 


Narayana 


Suaramaftjari. See Sapiasvarasindhu (of 
Narasimha Siri) 
Svaraprakriya and autocommentary (of 


Ramacandra Pandita) 501 
svarga. See heaven 
svariipa. See essence 
svariipasat, See inseparable existence 
svdtantrya, See independence 


603 


svdtantryasfakti. See power of complete 
freedom 
SVAYAMPRAKASANANDA 
505 
SVETANIVASIN 533 
Svetésvatara Upanisad 550 
Swaminathan, V. 560, a:G605, G779, 
G802, G1047, e:G780, G898 
Syadisamuccaya (of Amaracandra) 481 
SYAMACARANA KAVIRATNA 
(1910) 514 
syllable (aksara) 104, 128 
syntactic analysis. See syntactic unity 
syntactic connection (pfaraspara vyapeksa) 
114, 330 
a means of proof (vakya) 83 
syntactic function (kéraka) 16, 87, 164, 
195, G215 
syntactic identity. See identity 
syntactic relation 8-9, G247, G257 
syntactic unity (ekavakyata) 26, 29, &6, 
G1572 
syntax 4, 114-15, G1539 


(1740) 


tadatmya. See identity 

taddhita. See secondary meaning, derivative 

Taddhitacandrika (of Harirama) 511 

Taddhitakosa (of Bhatta Siromani) 518 

Taddhitakosa (of Bhavadeva) 498 

Taddhitakosa (of Bhatta Siromani) 518 

Taddhitaungadipika (of Saccidananda) 531 

Taddhitopadesa (of Vangadasa) 534 

Tagare, G. V. a:G1358 

Taittiriya Aranyaka G858 

Taittiriya Brakmana 105 

Taksan G234 

TALADEVASUDHI 533 

tamas. See inertia 

Tamil (Nadu) 321, G1409, G1706 

Tantravaritika (of Kumiarila) 213, 549 
Commentary (of Annambhatta) 237 

Tantric works 324 

Tantrism 342 

TARAKA BRAHMANANDA SARAS- 
VATI (1650) 309, 498 

TARANATHA 533 

TARANATHA TARKAVACASPATI 
(1867) 397, 512, e:G30, G1178 

TARAPADA NYAYARATWINA 533-34 

Taraporewala, I. J. 8. a:G1462 

tarka 132 

Tarkabhasayuktimuktavali (of Nages’a Bha- 
tta) 323 


604 


Tarkacandrika (of Srikrsna Bhatja Mau- 
nin) 23, 367, 506 

Tarkacudamani, Madhavacandra e:G933 

TARKALAMKARA BHATTACARYA 
534 

Tarkalamkara, Madana Mohana e:G1178 
G1014 

Tarkapancanana, Navakumara e:G641 

Tarkapradipa (of Konda Bhatta) 255 

Tarkaratna (of Konda Bhatta) 255 

Tarkaratnamala (of Tarandtha Tarkava- 
caspati) 397 

Tarkasamgraha and —Dipiké (of Annam- 
bhatta) 237 

TARKATILAKA 
(1614) 494 

Tarkavagisa, Durgadasa Vidyavagisa Sri- 
rama e:G1024 

Tarkikas 369 

Tarpatam apau gha siitracvicéra (of Rama- 
bhadra Diksita) 501 

TATACARYA, N. S. RAMANUJA 
(1972) 517, e:G1266 

TATA SUBRAHMANYA SASTRIN 
(1926) 515 

tatparya. See intention of the speaker 

Tattvabindu (of Vacaspati Misra) 80 

Tativabindu (of Jianendra) 
—Gidharthadipika (of Nilakantha Dik- 

sita) 373, 506 

Tativadipikdprabhakaracandra 
Bhatta) 323, 504 

Tattvamimaémsa (of Krsnamitracarya) 381 

Tativasamgraha (of Santaraksita) G775 

Tattvaviveka (of Nrsimhasrama) 
Commentary (of Annambhatta) 237 

technical terms (a@dhunika) 118 

TEKNATHA 534 

Telang, Kashinath Trimbak a:G531 

Telugu 237, 241 

tense 149, 263-64, 331, 336, G302, G1528 

termination 4 

(verbal) testimony (Sabda) 54-56, 126, 
175, 324 

THAKKURADASA NYAYAPANCA- 
NANA 534 

Thakur, Kanakalal e:G1162 

Thibaut, Georg 553 

Thieme, Paul 14, 109, 549, 555-56, a:G84, 
G409, G458, G462, G465, G479-80, 
G490, G617, G1269, G1410, G1413, 
G1592, G1626, b:G457 

thinking (manana) 106 


BHATTACARYA 


(of Nagesa 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Thirujnanasambandham, P. a:G1619 

Thumb, Aibert b:G1404 

Tibet 18 

Tibetan G368, G397, G1007, G1051, 
G1692 

TILAKA 534 

time (kala) 12, 40-49, 83, 93-94, 119, 127, 
129, 149, 162, 164-65, 170-72, 196-97, 
257-58, 261, 263-64, 335, 550, G624, 
G694, G704, G772, G777, G798-99, 
G1455, G1544, G1713 
limiting function of time (kélasakii) 45, 

129, 164 

(VARKHEDI) 
(1750) 506 

Tinam Saktik (of Srikrsna Sarman) 533 

(Candra)Tinanta (of Laksmikara) 527 

Tinantaparyayasamgraha (of Virapandya) 
535 

Tinantasesasamgraha 240 

Tinivicdra (of Srikrsna Sarman) 533 

Tirumala Acarya 237 

TIRUMALA BUKKAPATTUNAM 
SRINIVASAGARYA (1720) 504 

TIRUMALA YAJVAN (1660) 313, 499, 
562 

Tiwari, Kapil Muni a:G288, d:G237 

Tolkappiyam G305, G585 

trace (samskéra) 184, 186-88, 213, 216, 
233, 235, G1679, 553-54 

tradition (agama) 132 

Traividyadeva, Bhavasena G650 

transformation (parindma) 129 

transitive 259 

Trapp, Valentin t:G569 

TrikandaSabasisana (of Gangadhara Kavi- 
raja) 23, 395, 512 

Trikandt (of Bhartrhari). See Vakyapadiya 

Trika system. See Kashmir Saivism 

TRILOGANA (1600) 493 

TRILOGANA 534 

TRILOGANADASA (1000) 475-76 

TRILOKANATHA 534 

Tripadoddyotint (of Madhava Bhatta) 486 

Tripathi, Bhaviratprasada b:G197, e:G40 

Tripathi, Gayacarana e:G1323 

Tripathi, Kailas Patil a:G337 

Tripathi, Ram Suresh a:G606 

Tripathi, Shambhu Nath e:G890 

Trisiitravyakarana (of Gangadhara Kavi- 
raja) 23, 395, 512 

Trivedi, Kamalasankara Pranasankara 
e:G1050, G1185 


TIMMANACARYA 


INDEX 


TRIVIKRAMA (1118) 478 

truth (satya) 5, 54, 106 
=dharma 51 

Tvastr 105 

Tyadyantasyaprakriya (of Sarvadhara Upa- 
dhyaya) 532 

Tyadyantasyaprakriydpadérohana (of Nanda- 
kirti) 527 


U.K, VENKATANARASIMHA (1916) 
515 
UDAYACANDRA (1180) 480 
UDAYADHARMA (1451) 486 
UDAYAKIRTI (1654) 499 
UDAYANKARA NANAPATHAKA 
(1800) 509-10 
UDAYASAUBHAGYA. See 
CANDRA 
Uddalaka 106-7 
udde§ya. See accomplisher 
Udipi 240 
UGRABHOTI (1000) 476 
UJJVALADATTA (1350) 484 
UMAMAHESVARA (1750) 371, 507 
Umarji, Varadaraja a:G5-7 
Unadiganiu (of Venkategvara) 504 
Unadikosa (of Mahadeva Vedantin) 501 
Unadikosa (of Sivarama Tripathin) 506 
Unadimamamala (of Subhasila Gani) 486 
Unadimanidipika (of Ramabhadra Diksita) 
501 
Undadiparisista (of Kramadigvara) 477 
Unadiripavalt (of Mahalinga Sastrin) 527 
Unadisddhana (of Padmasundara) 529 
Unddisitras 4, 13-14, 16, 108, 110, 113-14, 
434-35, G242 
Commentary (of Purusottamadeva) 209 
—Upadimanidipika (of Ramabhadra Dik- 
sita) 321 
Commentary (of Gopalakrsna Sastrin ) 
353, 504 
Gommentary (of Ksapanaka) 472 
—Vriti (of Ujjvaladatta) 484 
—Unpadikapadargava (of Perustiri) 507 
—Bhasya (of Dayananda Sarasvati) 511 
Gommentary (of Sarvadhara Upadhya- 
ya) 532 
Commentary (of Satyavaryarya) 532 
—Vriti (of Svetanivasin) 533 
Unddisiitras (of Haridatta) 523 
Unadisiitras (of Vrajaraja) 535 
Unddisiitras (Jain) 
—Vrtti or DaSapadi (of Manikyadeva) 527 


DHANA- 


605 


understanding. See knowledge 

unestablished locus. See fallacy of unesta- 
blished locus 

union (yoga) 138 

unity of purpose (artkaikaiva) 86 

unity, syntactic. See syntactic unity 

universal (jdti, samanya) 6, 10, 26, 28, 82, 
92, 118-19, 125-27, 131, 145, 148, 161, 
169, 183, 185, 191, 194, 231-32, 234, 
236, 273-74, 339, 552-53, 556, 558, 
G226, G602, G606, G723, G1582 
great universal (mahdsamanya) 194 
= Sabdakyti 125 
sphota-universal ( jatisphota) 349 
universal word (jatifabda). See word, 

universal 

unnecessary assumption 216, 280 

unreal (asatya) 129 

upacara. See metaphor 

upadhi 145, 162, 171, 305 

Upadhyaya, Krishnadeva a:G87 

upagraha. See aspect 

upakrama-upasamhara G1560 

upalaksana. See indicator 

upama. G1393 

upamdna, See comparison 

Upanisads 105-6, 161, 342, 348, G1387, 550 

upasarga. See prefix 

Upasargarthadipika (of Haridatta) 523 

Upasargarthasamgraha (of Kyrsnacarya II) 
486 

Upasargavriti (of Bharata Mallika) 510 

Upasargavriti (of Candra school) 18 

UPAVARSA 234, 554 

upaya. See means 

use, usage (prayoga) 145 
(in) correct 47-48 
=samjita 114-15 

UTPALA (1170) 479 

UTPALACARYA (930) 24 

utpatti. See production 

UTSAVAKIRTI SARANGA UPADH- 
YAYA 534 

uithita. See expectancy: natural 

UVATA G86 


vac. See speech 
pasyanti. See pasyanti vac 

vacaka. See denotative 

VACASPATI MISRA I (960) 80-81, 240, 
G1414, 554 

vacya. See denotation 

Vadacudimani (of Krsnamitracarya) 509 


606 


Vadaratna (of Saryanarayana Sukla) 516 
Vadarthasamgraha (of M. G. Bakre) 216 
VADAVA 458 
VADIRAJA (1571) 240 
VAGAMBHRNI 103 
Vagisamata (of Gangadhara Natha) 521 
Vaidya, Uma C, d:G378 
Vaidyanatha, father of Gopdalakrsna 
Sastrin 353 
VAIDYANATHA DIKSITA (1705) 502 
VAIDYANATHA PAIYAGUNDA, 
(1740) 23, 323, 327, 387, 505 
VAIJALADEVA 534 
vaikhari vak 43, 47, 49-51, 61-62, 95, 99, 
121, 124, 328-29, 342, 555, 558 
VAINATEYA. See NARAYANA BHA- 
TTATIRI 
Vairag yasataka section of Subhdsitatrifati 124 
Vaisesika 82, 163, 194, 196, 213, 559. See 
also Nyaya 
Vaiyakaranabhitsana and —Sara (of Konda 
Bhatta) 21-22, 255-308, 324, 367,495-96 
—Darpana (of Hari Vallabha) 23, 363, 
383, 505-06 
—Kasika (of Harirama Kala) 508 
—Tika (of Krsnamitracarya) 23, 381, 
509 
—Kanti (of Manyudeva) 23, 387, 509 
—Sphotapariksé (of Bhairava Misra) 
389, 510 
—Tinarthavddasara (of Khuddi Jha) 23, 
399, 514 
—Visamasthalatippani (of Ramakrsna 
Sarma Tripathi) 514 
—Sdarala (of Gopala Sastri Nene) 24, 
407, 515 
—Prabha (of Bala Krsna Pajicoli) 417, 
516 
—Subodhini (of Rama Prasada Tripa- 
thi) 419, 516 
—Samkari (of Samkara Sastrin Marula- 
cakara) 517 
Vaipakaranadarsa (of Kali Kumara Sar- 
man) 524 
Vaiyakarapadarsanabindu (of Raghunatha 
Sarma) 24, 517 
Vaiyakarapadarsanapratima 
Pandeya) 24, 530 
Vaiyakaranajivatu (of Cangadasa) 519 
Vaiyakaranakarikad (of Nagega Bhatta) 503 
Vaiyakarapakotipatira (of Trilocana) 534 
Vaiyakaranamatonmajjana (of Bhattoji Dik- 
sita) 21, 255, 492 


(of Ramajfia 


ENCYGLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


-—Vaipakaranabhisana (of Konda Bhatta). 
See Vaiyakaranabhisana 
Vaiyakaranapirvapaksavali (of Gopala Sastri 
Nene) 515 


Vaiyakaranasamgraha (of Gangadhara 
Sarman) 521 
Vaipyakaranasarvasava’ (of Dharanidhara) 
385, 509 


Vaiyakaranasiddhantadipika or —karika (of 
Bhattoji Diksita). See Vaiyakarapamaton- 
majjana 
Vaipakaranasiddhantamafijusa (of Brahma- 
deva) 24, 411, 516 
Vaiyakarana (laghu) siddhantamafijusa (of Na- 
geséa Bhatta) 502 
—Kala (of Balambhatta) 505 
—Kuryjika (of Durbala) 508 
—Vritivaritika (of Appayya Diksita) 518 
Vaiyakarana Ulttarapaksavali (of Gopala 
Sastri Nene) 515 
VAJAPYAYANA 6, 16, 119, 194, 273, 
458, 556 
Vajasaneyt Samhita G452 
vakya. See sentence; syntactic connection 
vakyartha, See sentence meaning 
vakyasakti 345. See also power 
vakyasphota. See sphota 
Vakyakantajiké (of Helaraja) 193 
Vakyamafijari (of Ananta) 518 
Vakyapadi (of Gangadasa) 521 
Vakyapadiya and —Vyiti (of Bhartrhari) 18, 
22, 27, 36, 38, 40-51, 54, 56, 60-61, 
69-70, 77, 83, 95, 107, 120, 123-74, 242, 
270-271, 302, 307, 326, 341, 466-70, 
549, 551-55, 557-60 
—Prakirnavriti (of Dharmapala) 177, 
472 

—Paddhatt (of Vrsabhadeva) 22, 178, 
472 

—Sabdaprabha (of Helaraja) 475 

— (Prakirna) Prakasa (of Helaraja) 22, 
193-97, 203, 292, 475, G776 

—Prameyasamgraha 199, 475 

~—Prakirnavivarana (of Abhinavagupta) 
476 

—Prakésa or —Tikaé (of Punyaraja) 22, 
201, 476 

—Bhavapradipa (of Siryanarayana Suk- 
la) 24, 405, 516 

Commentary (of Satyakama Varma) 
517 

Commentary (of K. A. Subramania 
Iyer) 517 


INDEX 


—Pratyekdrthaprakasika 
Jha) 403, 521 
—Prakdga (of Narain Datta Tripathin) 
528 
Commentary (of Vidyacakravartin ) 534 
Vakyapradipa (of Helaraja) 193 
Vakyaprakéfa (of Udayadharma) 486 
Vakyatattva (of P. S. Anantanarayana 
Sastri) 24, 409, 516 
VALABHIDATTA 534 
VALLABHACARYA, See RABHASA- 
NANDIN 
Vallabha Utprabatiya 363 
VAMANA (650) 19, 203, 472-73 
Vamendrasvamin 351 
VANGADASA 534 
VANGASENA (1250) 481 
Van Nooten, Barend A. a:G223, G248, 
G268, G514. et:G12 
VARADARAJA (1620) 494-95 
Varadarajiengar, M. B. e:G901 
Varadegvara Diksita 373 
Varanasi. See Banaras 
VARARUCI. See KATYAYANA 
VARDHAMANA (1088) 478 
VARDHAMANA (1140) 478 
VARENDRA CAMPAHATTIYA MAN- 
ASARMAN 534 
VARKHEDI TIMMANACARYA. See 
TIMMANACARYA 
Varma, K. C. a:G496 
Varma, L, A. Ravi ¢:G688 
Varma, Satyakarma 46, a:G15, GI7, 
G340-41, G358-59, G755-56, G816-17, 
G1674-76, e:G737 
Varma, Siddheswar 555, a:G117, G478, 
G616, G1098, G1472, G1593, G1606, 
G1627-28, Gi650, G1677, b:G374, 
G1401 
varna. See phoneme 
vargasphota. See sphota, varna 
Vamaprakafa (of Ghanasyama) 522 
Varnasitras of Gandra school 18 
Vamnaviveka (of Paficdnana Kandali) 529 
VARSAYANI 12, 110, 196 
Varttaksa 110 
(Astadhpayt) Varttikas (of Katyayana) 16- 
17, 117, 297, 458-59, 556 
—Vritikonmesa (of Heldraja)} 193, 475 
—Dipaprabha (of Narayana) 498 
—Viorii (of Vidyavagisa Bhattacarya) 
500 
—Arthaprakasiké (of Raghava Suri) 529 


(of Dravyesa 


607 


Varuna 104 

vdsand, See dispositional 

Vasistha 146 

vastvartha. See reference 

Vasu, Srisa Chandra et:G41, G1085 

Vasu, Vaman Das et:G1085 

VASUBANDHU (360) 123 

Vasudeva G60, G553 

VASUDEVA 534 

VASUDEVA BHATTA (1567) 490 

VASUDEVA DIKSITA (1750) 365, 506 

VASUDEVA SASTRY ABHYANKAR 
(1929) 516, e:G573 

VASUDEVA VISNU MIRASHI (1928) 
515 

Vasudhatukarika (of Goapala Cakravartin) 
500 

Vasurata 123 

Vasus 104-8 

Vatesvara 223 

Veda, Vedic texts 5, 24, 26, 32, 35, 37-39, 
45, 48-51, 66, 68, 73, 82, 91,111, 113, 
121, 128-30, 146, 148, 175, 183-84, 188, 
204, 231-32, 234, 265, 284, 321, 330, 
336, 341-43, 346, 550, 555, G199, G213, 
G351, G361, G489A, G594, G817-18, 
G860, G1098, G1486 
Vedic accent. See accent 
Vedic language 321, G270, G279, G291 
Vedic prescription. See prescription 
Vedic sages. See sage 

Vedanga 3, 107-9, 188, 321, 343 

Vedangasiksapatjika G427 

Vedantabhasyapradipoddyota (of Nagega Bha- 
tta) 323 

VEDANTACARYA 534 

VEDANTA DESIKA (1330) 239 

Vedantaparibhasa (of Dharmarajadhvarin- 
dra) 87, 552 

Vedantatirtha, Girisacandra e:G969 

Vedavati, Vyakaranopadhyaya e:G869 

Vedavrata 340, e:G611 

Veer, Yajan a:G405 

Vele, R. N. a:G1578 

VENIMADHAVA (1750) 506 

Venkatacharya, T. a:G1703 

VENKATADASA (1780) 508 

Venkatarya, father of Umamahe§vara 371 

Venkatasubbiah, A. a:G662 

Venkateéa, father of Tirumala Yajvan 313 

VENKATESVARA (1722) 504 

verb (akhydta) 110, 112, 121, 149, 256-57, 
333, G223, G1384 


608 


verb (Kriya) 321, G696, G1549 
nominal verb (naémadhatu) 173 

verbal cognition (sabdabodha) 26, 89-90, 
95-99, 300, 346, G1465, G1656, G1712 

verbal comprehension. See abhihitanvaya 

verbal ending. See (case)-ending 

verbal knowledge (Sabdajitina) 27 

verbal meaning G248 

verbal testimony (Sabda, dgama). See testi- 
mony 

vibhaga. See disjunction 

vibhakti. See (case) -ending 

Vibhaktyarthanimaya (of Srikrsna Bhatta 
Maunin) 361, 506 

Vibhaktyarthaprakafa (of Kamalakara Bha- 
tta) 497 

Vibhaktyarthavivarana (of Sivananda Gos- 
vamin) 532 

vidhi. See prescription 

vidhisiitra. See operational rule 

Vidhiviveka (of Mandana Misra) 266 

Vidvatprabodhini (of Ramabhatta) 498 

vidya. See knowledge 

Vidyabhusana, Satischandra a:G1388 

VIDYACAKRAVARTIN 534 

VIDYANANDA. See VIJAYANANDA 

Vidyanidhi, Vipinacandra e:G1004 

Vidyaratna, Govindacandra e:G1016 

Vidyavacaspati, Veda Prakasa e:G639 

VIDYAVAGISA BHATTACARYA 
(1665) 499-500 

Vidyavaridhi, Syamacarana Kaviratna 
e:G1032 

view, final true (siddkanta) 16 

Vijaya, Manohara e:G957 

VIJAYAMALA 534 

Vijayanagara empire 238 

VIJAYANANDA (1140) 478 

Vijaya Raghunatha Tondaiian I, King of 
Pudukottah 353 

VIJAYINDRA BHIKSU (165) 240 

vikalpa, See conceptual construction 

vikdra. See becoming; product 

Vikarmankadevacarita (of Bilhana) 205 

viksepa. See maya 

VIMALAKIRTI (1550) 488 

VIMALAMATI (648) 472 

VIMALA SARASVATI (1300) 483 

VINASVARANANDIN 535 

VINAYAVIJAYAGANT (1652) 499 

Vinodamaftjari (of Vallabha Utprabatiya) 
363 

viparyasa. See false 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


VIPRAJENDRA (1845) 511, e:G537 

Vira, Raghu a:G10, G70, G426, G453 

VIRAPANDYA 535 

VIRARAGHAVACARYA 535 

VIRESVARA 241, 247, 319 

virodha. See contradiction 

Visalakshy, P. a:G867 

Visesyavada (of Kasinatha) 525 

visesavidki. See specification 

ViSistadvaita 240 

(King) Visnugupta 179 

VISNUMISRA G1043-44 

VISNUMITRA (1547) 227, 488 

VISNUPRASADA SARMAN 514, e:G 
1002 

VISVANATHA BHATTA G1255 

VISVANATHA GAKRAVARTIN 530 

VISVANATHA DANDIBHATTA (1850) 
511 

VISVANATHA 
535 

VISVANATHA NYAYASIDDHANTA 
PANCANANA (1640) 91 

VISVANATHA SASTRI 535 

Vigvedevas 104 

Visvesvara Diksita 365 

VISVESVARA SURI 535 

VISVESVARA TARKACARYA 535 

VITTHALA (1460) 486, G1050 

Vivarana school of Advaita 41-42 

vivarta. See manifestation 

V. KRSNAMACARYA (1944) 24, 413, 
516, e:G1265 

vocative (case) (sambadhana) 168, 262, 
337, G1483 

Vogel, J. P. a:G1444 

voice (active/passive) 258, G235 

volition (krti) 257-58, 332 

VOPADEVA (1275) 20, 211, 482-83 

VRAJARAJA 534 

Vart, Satya a:G624, G703-4, G1534, 
Gi691 

(HARI) VRSABHADEVA (1650) 22, 
50, 179, 201, 472 

Vrtaksa 13 

vriti. See formation; integration 

Vritidipiké (of Jayakrsna Maunin) 361, 
367 

Vritidipika (of Srikrsna Bhatta Maunin) 
23, 506 

Vritipatijika 
—Prabhavati (of Krsna Bhattacarya) 
526 


NYAYALAMKARA 


INDEX 


VURAMISRA 535 

vyabhicara. See false, deviation 

VYADI 6, 16, 117, 119-20, 194, 273, 458, 
556 

oyakarana. See grammar 

Vyakaranadarsanapratima (of Ramajfia Pan- 
deya) 431 

Vydkaranadipa (of Cidraipasrama) 
—Prabhé (of Gangadhara Diksita) 494 

Vydkaranakrodapattra (of Taraka Brahma- 
nanda Sarasvati) 309, 498 

Vydkaranafika (of Gunakara) 523 

Vyakhyasara (of Harirama). See Candriké 

upakti. See particular 

uyaktisphota. See sphota 

uyafjand. See suggestion 

oyapara. See function 

vydpeksa. See dependence 
parasparavyapeksa. See syntactic connec- 

tion 

VYASA 44 

wyatireka G1579 

wutpatti. See derivation 

Vyutpattivéda (of Gadadhara) 370 


Wackernagel, Joseph a:G93, 
b:G1385, G1405 

Wadegaonkar, Narayana Dadaji e:G1121 

Wayman, Alex a:G775, G1704 

Weber, Albrecht a:G431, G526-28, G533 

Wecker, Otto a:G1387 

Wells, Rulon a:G1495 

Westergaard, N. L. b:G1365 

Wezler, Albrecht a:G309, G749, b:G256, 
G749 

Whitney, William Dwight a:G440, G1367, 
G1372, G1382, b:G379, G1458 

whole. See part and whole 

Wilkins, Charles e:G1274 

will (icché) 90 

word (pada) 5-6, 10, 26-27, 47, 55, 58, 61, 
71-73, 94, 99, 108, 119, 124-25, 147, 
149, 183, 187, 189-90, 216, 232-34, 276, 


G1392, 


609 


303, 345-46, 348, 369, G187, G272 

compound word, See compound 

word derivation. See derivation 

divine word 46 

noncompound word 125 

word-meaning (padartha) 11-12, 65-83, 
146, 161, 194, 343, G732 

(inner) mental word. See mental 

word-order 47, G1583 

universal word (jatifabda) 28 


Ydavibhyudaya (of Vedanta Desgika) 239 

YAGESVARA (1900) 513 

Yajfiarama Diksita 321 

YAJNESVARA BHATTA (1874) 512 

Yajurveda 86, G514 

Yajusmantra 26 

YAKSAVARMAN (1050) 476, G840, 
G885-86 

Yama 104 

YASKA 4, 7, 10-11, 13-14, 36, 68, 107-12, 
169, 196, 333, 342, 549, 555-56, G422, 
G450, G621, G696, G1693 

YASOBHUTI 535 

Yasovijaya, Muni e:G959 

YATISA 535 

patna. See effort 

paugika. See derivation; see also etymology 

Yavanas 237, G533 

yoga. See derivation; see also union 

yoga of the word (sabdayoga) 47, 50-52 

Yoga 21, 44-45, 54 

Yogacara 177 

yogaridhi. See convention 

Yogasitras (of Pataiijali) 16, 44, 46, 551-53 
—V7rtti (of Nagesa Bhatta) 323 

yogic intuition 146 

yogin 31-32 

pogyata. See consistency 

Yuktiratnakara (of Krsnacarya) 526 

Yuktiratnakara (of Krsnamitracarya) 509 


zero G143, G165, G209, G212 
Zgusta, Ladislav a:G257 


