ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
General Editor: Karl H. Potter 


The following volumes are published: 
Bibliography, Sections I and II, 3rd ed. (1995) 


Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology: The Tradition of 
Nyaya-Vaisesika up to Gangesa (1977) 


Advaita Vedanta up to Samkara and His Pupils (1981) 
Samkhya: A Dualist Tradition in Indian Philosophy (1987) 
The Philosophy of the Grammarians (1990) 


Indian Philosophical Analysis Nyaya-Vaisesika from 
Gangesa to Raghunatha Siromani (1993) 


Flo 


S<28 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF 
INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


VOLUME VII 


Abhidharma Buddhism 
to 150 A.D. 


EDITED BY 
KARL H. POTTER 

witH ROBERT E. BUSWELL, sr 
PADMANABH S. JAINI 

AND NOBLE ROSS REAT 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED @ DELHI 


First Edition: Delhi, 1996 


© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED 
All Rights Reserved 


ISBN: 81-208-0895-9 (Vol. VII) 
ISBN: 81-208-0307-8 (Set) 


Also avatlable at: 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

41 U.A., Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Madras 600 004 
16 St. Mark’s Road, Bangalore 560 001 

8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017 

Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 

Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


PRINTED IN INDIA 


BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, 
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110 028 

AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED, 
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007 


Contributors: 


George D. Bond 
Georage G. Burford 
Robert E. Buswell, Jr. 
Collett Cox 

Edwin Gerow 

Fred Greiner 

Shohei Ichimura 
Padmanabh S. Jaini 
Kosho Kawamura 
Robert Kritzer 
KarenC.Lang 
Christian Lindtner 
James P. McDermott 
Karl H. Potter 

Noble Ross Reat 
Charles Willemen 
Shingo Yoshimoto 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE 


PART ONE: 
INTRODUCTION 


1. 


The Historical Buddha and His Teachings (Noble 
Ross Reat) 

The Buddhist Way to Liberation (Karl H. Potter) 
The Development of Abhidharma Philosophy 
(Ropbert E. Buswell, Jr. and Padmanabh S. Jaini) 
A Few Early Abhidharma Categories 

(Karl H. Potter) 


PART TWO: 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 


Oman KDUNRWHY 


ee ey 
“YAM P WN HY CO 


. Dhammasangani (K. H. Potter) 

. Vibhanga (K.H. Potter) 

. Dharmaskandha (Fred Greiner) 

. Puggalapafifiati (K. H. Potter) 

. Sangitiparyaya (Christian Lindtner) 

. Prajfiaptibhasya 

. Patisambhidamagga (James P. McDermott) 
. Kathavatthu (James P. McDermott) 

. Mahaniddesa (Grace G. Burford) 

. Calaniddesa (Grace G. Burford) 

. Sariputrabhidharmasastra (Shinyo Yoshimoto) 
. Yamaka (Karen C. Lang) 

. Patthana (K. H. Potter) 

. Dhatukadya (Robert E. Buswell, Jr.) 

. Dhatukatha (K. H. Potter) 

. Vijfianakaya 

. Prakaranapada (Christian L Lindtner) 


59 
73 


121 


137 
165 
179 
189 
203 
217 
219 
265 
305 
313 
317 
327 
337 
345 
359 
367 
375 


Viil 

18. Petakopadesa (George D. Bond) 

19. Nettippakarana (George D. Bond) 

20. Jianaprasthana (Edwin Gerow and Karl H. Potter) 

21. (Bhadnta) Dharmasri, Abhidharmahrdaya or 
Abhidharmsara (Charles Willemen) 

22. Milindapafiho (K.H. Potter) 

23. Ghoska, Abhidharmamrta (Robert Kritzer) 

24. Mahavibhasa (Shohei Ichimura with Kosho 
Kawamura, Robert E. Buswell, Jr. and 
Collett Cox) , 


NOTES 
GLOSSARY -INDEX 


CONTENTS 


381 
403 
417 


451 
471 
489 


SII 


569 
595 


PREFACE 


With the present volume of the Encyclopedia we begin taking up 
the philosophy of Buddhism in South Asia. When this project was 
first planned, many years ago now, it was thought that Buddhist 
philosophy would be handled expeditiously in one volume on Abhi- 
dharma Buddhism and three more on Mahayana. After further 
reflection, however, it became apparent that though this division may 
represent what Buddhism has come to be seen as in modern times, 
it may well impose latter-day distinctions on a tradition which has 
a lot more in common throughout than such a division would well 
represent. As a result it has been decided to treat Buddhist philosophy 
all together chronologically, beginning with the Buddha and ending 
when Buddhist thought leaves India around the 14th century A.D. 
Thus Abhidharma and Mahayana writers will be treated side by side, 
and some may find distinctions among schools of Buddhism dealt 
with insufficiently for their liking. We can only say that it seems wisest 
not to impose more divisions into Buddhism than are historically 
apparent, and that although future scholarship may clarify the lines 
of distrinction among Buddhist schools and sect that is still a subject 
on which opinions differ, often heatedly. 

Let me remind our readers that the scope of these volumes is 
limited to summaries of text that are of philosophical interest 
throughout, theoretical rather than practical in their intended 
function, and polemical or at least expository in a context where 
defence of one.view among alternatives is appropriate. In the present 
volume these criteria have been interpreted broadly and loosely. 
Nevertheless, as in the volumes dealing with Vedanta, for example, 
where we summarize commentaries on the Upanisads but not those 
Upanisads themselves, in the present volume and the subsequent 
ones to appear dealing with Buddhism the original sétras, the earliest 
literature regularly ascribed to the Buddha or his immediate disciples, 
is not summarized, following the same lines of distinction. 

The present volume confines itself to Abhidharma philosophical 
texts. It may well be that certain of the Prajfaparamita sitras had 
their origin at a time within the period covered here. However, since 
dating is quite unclear in such cases we have decided to take up 
those sdtras in the next volume on Buddhism, where we shall discuss 
in greater detail the question of the dates and affiliation of the earliest 
Mahayana Buddhist materials. 

The preparation of this volume was made possible in part by a 
grant from the Division of Research Programs of the National 
Endowment for the Humanities, an independent Federal agency. We 
acknowledge with gratitude the generous support of the Endowment 


x PREFACE 


for this and subsequent volumes dealing with Buddhism, as well as 
for making possible acquisition of some of the summaries appearing 
in other volumes of our Encyclopedia. Thanks are also due to 
Smithsonian Institution for assistance relating to travel and mainte- 
nance for the General Editor while collecting some of the materials 
included herein, and to the American Institute for Indian Studies for 
their assistance in like ways. Finally, the editorial team would like 
to express particular thanks to Collett Cox, who read the finished 
manuscript and made helpful suggestions, and to Laura Townsend, 
our faithful typist. 


June 1989 KARL H. POTTER 


PART ONE 


INTRODUCTION 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA 
AND HIS TEACHINGS 


Noble Ross Reat 


I. THE LIFE AND TIMES OF THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA 


Itis generally accepted among scholars, with some reservations, that 
the historical Buddha was born in 563 B.C. and that he died in 483 
B.C. This was a remarkable period in the history of India and the 
world as a whole. It is fascinating to ponder the fact that, give or 
take a few decades, it would have been possible during this period 
to assemble in one room the majority of the dozen or so most 
influential thinkers the world has ever seen. Confucius and Lao-tzu 
in China were formulating systems of thought that would guide one 
quarter of the world’s population into the present century. In Persia 
and in Greece, Zoroaster and Socrates were formulating the ideologi- 
cal bases of the three great empires that dominated the classical 
history of the Western world, the Persian, the Greek and the Roman. 
In Israel, Jeremiah and Deutero Isaiah were formulating the principles 
of universal monotheism, which would later attain vast influence as 
a result of propagation by the followers of Christ and Muhammad. 
Yet no place on earth at this time was so intellectually and religiously 
stimulating as northern India, where the Buddha lived and taught. 
To gain some comprehension of the dynamism of this period in the 
history of India, it is necessary to look back into the mists of 
proto-history, where we know less of the events of entire millennia 
than we know of any single day in this century. 


ANCIENT Inbia: THE BACKGROUND OF BupDHISM 


Two thousand years before the Buddha’s time, in approximately 
2500 B.C., a highly advanced civilization flourished along the valley 
of the Indus River in what is present-day Pakistan. The two major 
cities of this civilization are now known by the modern names of 


4 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the archeological sites at Harappa and Mohenjo Daro. They rivalled 
any cities known to humankind at that time and for millennia 
afterward. Harappa and Mohenjo Daro do not appear to have been 
rivals, but rather cooperative centers of a unified civilization covering 
roughly the area of present-day Pakistan. This we suspect because 
the size of bricks for building and weights for use in beam balances 
are uniform throughout the Indus Valley archeological sites. A 
standard system of weights and measures throughout such a large 
area Suggests a strong central government, or at least two cooperating 
centers of power at Harappa and Mohenjo Daro. 

Both of these great cities were designed around an orderly grid 
of streets and avenues lined with one and two storey brick townhouses 
whose connected outer walls formed a barrier to the noise and dust 
from the street. Narrow alleyways through this outer wall led to the 
common courtyard of a dozen or so private dwellings in each city 
block, which thus formed a sort of neighborhood compound. Under 
the streets ran an extensive network of sewers, so that these great 
cities were probably more hygienic than most European cities were 
before the turn of the twentieth century. Some of the houses were 
equipped with flushing toilets and rooms for bathing which drained 
into these sewers. In addition to such pleasant domestic quarters, 
each city had an ample granary where emergency food supplies were 
stored, and numerous large municipal buildings and complexes which 
appear to have been palaces, assembly halls, government houses, 
and even perhaps schools and universities. 

Our knowledge of such things today, at least for the time being, 

‘is necessarily vague and tentative, for the Indus Valley civilization 
had vanished entirely from human memory until its two major cities 
were unearthed by archeologists early in this century. As a result 
of this four thousand year gap, the Indus Valley writing system is 
a puzzle that has yet to be deciphered, nor is it likely to be deciphered 
unless the equivalent of a Rosetta Stone is unearthed from an Indus 
Valley site. Without being able toread Indus Valley writing, the nature 
of religious belief and practice in this ancient culture is largely amatter 
of speculation. Nonetheless, a few conclusions about the religion 
of this great civilization are now, widely if not universally, accepted 
among historians of India. These conclusions are based not so much 
upon the positive evidence of archeological relics from the Indus 
Valley as they are upon the absence of appropriate evidence in 
another source of knowledge about the religion of ancient India, the 
Reg Veda. 

Until the rediscovery of the long forgotten Indus Valley civilization, 
the Rg Veda was our only source of knowledge about the religions 
of India before approximately 1000 B.C. The bulk of the Rg Veda 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 5 


was not, however, composed in India. It was the sacred scripture 
of an invading nomadic horde related racially and linguistically to 
modern-day Europeans. Nonetheless, according to the Hindu 
religious tradition this ancient scripture, gradually compiled 
between 2000 and 1000 B.C., is the sole fountainhead of all the 
sacred knowledge of India, which is regarded as an elaboration of 
the eternal truths enshrined in the obscure hymns of the Rg Veda. 
Acceptance of the overriding authority of the Rg Veda is in fact one 
of the major criteria of Hindu orthodoxy. Nonetheless, when one 
examines these hymns critically, one finds very little if any evidence 
. of many of the prominent characteristics of Hinduism or of Indian 
religion in general. Few of the major deities of classical Hinduism 
. have convincing counterparts in the Rg Veda, nor is there any real 
foreshadowing of the almost universal Indian beliefs in an immortal 
soul, a tiresome round of rebirths determined by one’s karma (moral 
action), and liberation therefrom. Instead, the Rg Veda offers praises 
to a pantheon of archaic deities scarcely recognizable in classical 
Hinduism. 

These hymns of praise are intended to elicit from the deities 
immediate material benefits and finally a blessed afterlife in heaven, 
characterized as the blissful abode of the ancestors. Alternatively 
there is a hell of “‘blind darkness.’’ In either case, the Rg Veda 
envisions only one earthly life, its aftermath determined primarily 
on the basis of whether or not one had been scrupulous in performing 
the proper rituals. Rituals relating to the afterlife were thought to 
create in heaven a subtle body (fanu) which one would join after 
death. This subtle body, it was thought, had to be maintained by 
continuing rituals performed on one’s behalf by one’s descendants. 
Otherwise one would fall into ‘‘blind darkness’’, which appears to 
be a metaphor for utter and final death. The Rg Veda does not appear 
to contain the concepts of an immortal soul, of rebirth, or of spiritual 
release therefrom. 

Before the discovery of the Indus Valley civilization, it was difficult 
to imagine how the integrated complex of beliefs in a soul, rebirth 
and spiritual release from rebirth could have gained such prominence 
in Indian religion without having a basis in the Rg Veda. It was similarly 
difficult to imagine how the classical Hindu pantheon had developed 
from Vedic antecedents. After the discovery of the Indus Valley 
civilization, it seemed only natural to suppose that classical Indian 
civilization and religion had its origins in the common historical 
phenomenon of the conqueror being conquered intellectually by the 
conquered race, in this case the Indus Valley civilization. The 
prominence of female deities in the Indus Valley, in contrast to the 
male dominated pantheon of the Rg Veda, may account for the many 


6 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


goddesses of Hinduism. The popular Hindu deity Krsna, meaning 
literally ‘‘the dark one,’’ might have found his way into the Hindu 
pantheon as a representative of the dark skinned indigenous inhabi- 
tants of India. There is evidence too of an Indus Valley deity 
associated with asceticism and wild animals, possibly a prototype 
of the Siva of classical Hinduism. : 

This last possibility is particularly intriguing, in that Siva is the 
favored deity of yogic practitioners. Essentially yoga is a system of 
meditative practice designed to re/ease the sou/ from rebirth, rebirth 
being regarded as a tedious and pointiess repetition of suffering, 
illness, old age and death. It seems possible, then, that the yogic 
triad of souls, rebirth and release derives from indigenous Indian 
religion rather than Vedic sources. History records two apparently 
indigenous religious traditions in India which claim to predate and 
to be independent of the Rg Veda, namely the Jainas and the Ajivakas. 
Both systems are purely yogic in that they are solely concerned with 
release of the soul from rebirth. Given the absence of such doctrines 
in the Rg Veda, it appears that the claims of these traditions to 
independence and great antiquity may well be valid. If so, most of 
the characteristics of classical Hinduism can be explained by postulat- 
ing a synthesis of Vedic and yogic religion which occurred in the 
first millennium B.C. 

Such a synthesis appears to inspire much of the material in the 
principal Upanisads, composed between 800 and 300'B.C. These 
texts contain the first clear expressions of the fundamental doctrines 
of classical Hinduism, often set forth in terms which coordinate Vedic 
theistic concerns with yogic concerns regarding release of the soul 
from rebirth. The Upanisads accomplish this synthesis by high- 
lighting a relatively minor Vedic theme which appears in only a 
few of the latest hymns of the Rg Veda—the question of the ultimate 
origin of the universe. They answer this question with reference to 
the yogic triad of souls, rebirth and release. 

In its enthusiasm for heaping lavish praises upon its many deities, 
the bulk of the Rg Veda without apparent hesitation credits several 
deities with having created the universe singlehandedly. Some of the 
latest contributors to the Rg Veda, however, betray a conviction that 

‘the multiple gods themselves must have been the result of a single 
creative act by a more essential, unitary divine principle. The nature 
of this universal principle, according to the Vedic sages, is the 
greatest of all mysteries. The authors of the Upanisads seize upon 
the Vedic theme of the origin of the universe and elaborate it with 
reference to the yogic triad of souls, rebirth and release. They urge 
that the mystery of the origin of the universe is to be resolved by 
yogic introspection. They hold that such introspection will reveal 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 7 


that the creative principle of the universe is in fact one’s innermost 
self, which is identical to the universal self, in which all things and 
all beings are one. The manifold universe is an illusion, a dream, 
as are the apparently individual souls which perceive, experience 
and act, are reborn according to their karmic merit, and finally attain 
release. Release, according to many Upanisadic passages, is an 
awakening from this illusory dream. Actually, one only appears to 
suffer repetitive life, sickness, old age and death as an individual. 
Ignorance is regarded as the primary barrier to release from this 
illusory process, ignorance of the true origin and nature of the self 
or soul and of the true origin and nature of the universe. _ 

By contrast, the purely yogic systems of the Jainas and Ajivakas 

-postulate the release of simple, individual souls within the context 
of an independently existing, objective universe. In these purely yogic 
systems there is no speculation regarding the origin of the universe. 
It is simply a given. It has always been here, and it will always be 
here. Yogic practices of austerity and introspection merely serve to 
purify the soul of the practitioner. When this purification is accompli- 
shed, the Jainas held that the soul would rise to the pinnacle of the 
universe and live: there forever in bliss. The Ajivakas held that the 
soul would simply cease to exist, and be released thereby from its 
countless sufferings through eons of rebirth. In either case, the 
impurity of the soul, rather than ignorance of the true nature of the 
soul and the universe, was regarded as the primary barrier to release 
from rebirth. 

Both these doctrines bear some resemblance to Buddhism, which 
is uninterested in speculations regarding the origin of the universe, 
and which regards release from rebirth as a cessation of mundane 
existence. Buddhism thus belongs primarily to the yogic tradition 
of Indian religion. Buddhism originated, however, at 4 time when 
the religious and intellectual traditions of two great civilizations were 
in the midst of vigorous interchange and ferment, as is evident in 
the speculations of the Upanisads. There is no indication that the 
Buddha was specifically acquainted with any of the Upanisads which 
have come down to us, but there is ample indication that he was 
familiar with such speculations.’ 

Early Buddhism is not, then, merely a variation upon the yogic 
theme of release of the soul from rebirth. This much is clear in the 
Buddhist denial of the soul. Instead, the Buddha participated in a 
critical and creative movement to synthesize ancient, traditional 
worldviews which vied for the collective heart of India in his time. 
By the time of the Buddha, this synthetic movement ‘had become 
widespread and urgent. One must try to imagine the cultural impact 
of conquering or being conquered by an alien race, and then slowly 


8 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


intermarrying over the centuries to form a unitary new race and 
culture. In the age of the Buddha, several remarkable thinkers began 
to attempt also to create a coherent unity from the religious and 
intellectual heritages of two great peoples in the process of becoming 
one, 

Aside from the Buddha, other participants in this movement 
included the Upanisadic sages fomenting revolution within the ranks 
of Vedic orthodoxy, heterodox rag-draped or naked bands of wan- 
dering ascetics seeking or claiming to have found ultimate truth, 
and the more established orders like the Jainas and Ajivakas. The 
movement included priests, princes, merchants, workers and out- 
castes, often indistinguishable as they pursued the search for ultimate 
truth within one group or another. The literature of ancient India 
abounds with such figures. Arjuna himself, the greatest mortal 
hero of Indian mythology, ponders in the Bhagavadgita the alter- 
native of quitting the battlefield for the serene life of a homeless 
holy man. Like the mythical hero Arjuna, many men, and fewer 
women, felt the lure of the simple life of the homeless ascetic and 
the single-minded search for truth. So many followed their urges 
that these wandering mendicants, who would have seemed a bizarre 
mob to modern Westeners, were a highly respected, even revered 
element of society. 


EARLY LIFE OF THE BUDDHA: 
BrTH TO THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


The most influential individual to emerge from this period of 
transition in ancient India was the Buddha, without a doubt the 
greatest historical figure of India. In the millennium following the 
life of the Buddha, the spread of Buddhism throughout East and 
Southeast Asia makes him arguably the most influential historical 
figure of the entire Eastern world. As the founder of a great religious 
tradition, the Buddha bears obvious similarities to Christ. It must 
be emphasized at the outset, however, that an inquiry into the 
historical Buddha is not analogous to the quest for the historical Jesus. 
Buddhism as a religious teaching claims to be valid independently 
of any special status of its founder. Even if it were to be discovered 
that the historical Buddha never existed, Buddhism as a system of 
thought and a spiritual path would nonetheless remain theoretically 
valid. As the Buddhist scriptures themselves state: 


Whether or not Buddhas arise, constant is the status of truth, 
the law of truth, the relationship of cause and effect.’ 


é 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 9 


The Buddha is again comparable to Christ in that very little 
reliable information concerning his early life is available. A royal 
inscription dating to within three hundred years of the event confirms 
that the Buddha was born in what is today southern Nepal and was 
a member of the aristocratic Sakya clan.* He was born into a royal 
family with the surname Gotama (sometimes spelled Gautama), and 
his given name is said to have been Siddhartha (Pali Siddhattha), 
which means ‘‘goal-accomplished.’’ The word ‘‘Buddha,”’ meaning 
‘the awakened one,’’ is atitle, and it is technically improper to apply 
it to Prince Siddhartha Gotama before the event of his enlightenment 
at the age of thirty-five. Instead; he should be referred to with his 
given name or as “‘the Bodhisatta’’ (Skt. Bodhisattva), which means 
‘“Buddha to be.”’ 

The voluminous scriptures which purport to contain the teachings 
of the Buddha provide little credible information regarding his early 
life. A few passages preserved in the Pali language by the. Theravada 
Buddhist tradition of Sri Lanka have at least the appearance of 
historical fact. One such passage indicates that Siddhartha’s parents 
were at least minor royalty, and that the young prince lived in luxury 
in three different palaces, one for each of three Indian seasons.‘ This 
same passage, corroborated by another,° also records the Buddha 
as recalling that he was inspired to abandon this privileged life 
for the austere life of a wandering seeker of truth because of 
existential angst regarding the universal affliction of human life 
by old age, sickness and death. Several passages indicate that 
Siddhartha’s parents opposed his decision to become a wandering 
holy man and resisted it with tears and pleadings.° 

There is little or no reason to doubt this basic scenario of the 
Buddha’s early life: that he was a gifted, intelligent and privileged 
young man who, like many in his day, rejected the comforts of the 
household life in favor of the freedom of the mendicant seeker of 
truth. Legends of the Buddha’s life recorded in the Pali canon and 
elsewhere amplify extravagantly upon this credible historical scena- 
rio. These legends add little to our historical knowledge of the 
Buddha’s life, but they are revealing of the ethos of the time and 
of the way Buddhists regard the founder of their religion. The 
following legendary account of the early life of the Buddha draws 
upon several sources—the Mahavastu, the Lalitavistara, and Asva- 
ghosa’s Buddhacarita—but is based primarily upon the Nidanakatha 
of the Pali canon, probably the earliest extant legendary account of 
the life of the Buddha. All of these treatments, in turn, appear to 
derive from two sutras or discourses on the Pali canon. Both of these 
sutras—the Acchariyabbhutadhamma Sutta of the Majjhima Nikaya 
and the Mahadpadana Sutta of the Digha Nikaya—reveal how early 


10 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and how widespread was the tendency to mythologize the life of 
the Buddha. : 

Buddhist legends portray the Buddha’s father Suddhodana as 
a mighty ruler of unimaginable wealth. His mother, the beautiful 
Queen May, is said to have received numerous auspicious omens 
heralding the exalted status of the child she bore, most notably, a 
dream of a white elephant entering her abdomen when the prince 
was conceived. The birth is said to have occurred not in the royal 
palace at Kapilavastu, but in a nearby park at Lumbini, while Queen 
Maya was on a pleasure outing. This detail may well be historical 
fact, but accounts of the birth itself can scarcely be accepted as such. 
The infant prince is said to have issued miraculously from his 
mother’s side, immediately able to walk and speak eloquently, and 
to have proclaimed then and there his supremacy in all. the world 
and his destiny to enlightenment. This miraculous infant, it is said, 
was endowed with the thirty-two major and eighty minor marks of 
the superman. These vary in different accounts, but usually include 
wheel symbols on the soles and palms, perfect proportions of body 
and face, radiant, golden hued complexion, a protuberance on the 
crown of the head (usnisa), and a circle of hair between the eyebrows 
(urna), as commonly seen on Buddha images. 

On the basis of these marks, King Suddhodana’s ministers pre- 
dicted that the child was destined to supreme greatness, either as 
a universal monarch—a cakravartin or “‘wheel turner’ of the mythi- 
cal wheel of universal dominion—or as a spiritual savior of human- 
kind. The ministers warned that if the sensitive young man ever 
came in contact with human suffering, he would be so overcome 
with compassion that he would abandon the princely life and embark 
singlemindedly on a quest for spiritual release from the sorrows 
of worldly life, thereby becoming the spiritual savior of the world 
rather than its political ruler. The king naturally preferred that his 
son follow in his own royal footsteps and rule the world as its righteous 
_ monarch, and so, as advised by his ministers, he is said to have 
constructed three magnificent palaces within which to isolate the 
young prince from any contact with the sorrow and suffering of the 
outside world. : 

And, so the legend goes, Prince Siddhartha lived out his youth 
within the walls of these pleasure palaces. He was often the focus 
of miraculous events and quickly attained superhuman proficiency 
in all of the respected arts of the day, intellectual, military and 
amorous. He enjoyed a large company of the most desirable and 
adoring concubines imaginable, and at the age of sixteen wed in 
addition the most beautiful woman in the land, Princess Yasodhara. 
Never was he allowed to experience or even witness strife, disease, 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 11 


old age, death, or indeed any form of suffering whatsoever. Despite 
these extraordinary protective measures, Buddhist legend asserts 
that in his twenty-ninth year the gods themselves conspired to bring 
the Bodhisattva in contact with four great visions which inspired him 
to embark on the quest for enlightenment. Most accounts say that 
Prince Siddhartha was ona pleasure outing, driven by his faithful 
charioteer Channa, when he encountered for the first time in his life 
the sight of an old man, a diseased man, a corpse, and finally a 
radiantly serene mendicant holy man. 

- The first three visions, according to legend, had the effect upon 
the prince predicted by the king’s ministers. He became preoccupied 
with the unavoidable sufferings of mundane life. The fourth vision 
. inspired in him the resolution to renounce material well-being and 
enter the austere path of spiritual enlightenment. Because of his 
innate spirituality, he had realized spontaneously on the basis of these 
four experiences alone that even such extravagant worldly pleasures 
as he had enjoyed were doomed to pass away due to the ravages 
of old age, disease and death, and that in all the world only the simple 
contemplative life of the mendicant seeker of truth held the key to 
release from the ravages of these sufferings. As noted above, the 
Pali sitras record the Buddha himself as indicating that contempla- 
tion of the universal misery of old age, disease and death inspired 
his search for truth. 

As a result of these ‘‘four visions’ Buddhist legend says that 
. Siddhartha summoned his charioteer Channa in secret and ordered 
him to saddle his horse Kanthaka so that he might flee from the palace. 
Despite the king’s extensive measures to secure the palace, the three 
escaped and traveled to the bank of a river where Siddhartha cut 
off his hair and changed his jewel-encrusted garments for rags from 
a rubbish heap. He then bid farewell to his beloved friends Channa 
and Kanthaka, and set forth on the path of seeker of truth. His 
charioteer returned alone to Kapilavastu with the sad news of 
Siddhartha’s departure, for the prince’s faithful horse died then 
and there on the river bank, of a broken heart. 

It is at this point in the life story of Siddhartha Gotama that 
the protagonist emerges from the fanciful fabrications of legend 
onto the stage of history. From this point only can we begin to speak 
of the Buddha as a real historical personage. Nonetheless, the 
legendary material recounting the early life of the historical Buddha 
is important in the story of Buddhism for more than its imaginative 
charm. In the first place, when the hyperbole and miraculous 
elements are stripped away, the story is a credible account of the 
broad outlines of the early life of a precocious and privileged young 
man of Siddhartha’s time. It is unlikely that the infant bore the major 


12 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and minor marks of the superman, that his parents’ protectiveness 
was so extreme, or that their financial means were so extensive, but 
it is not at all unlikely that the historical Buddha was the cherished 
child of a wealthy chieftain who lavished parental attention and high 
expectations upon his son. It is not unlikely either that a young 
man of such great intelligence and sensitivity as to become one 
of the acknowledged saviors of humankind would have begun to 
question—in the face of the sufferings of others—the pursuit of power 
and luxury urged upon him by doting parents and admiring peers. 

It is telling of the society of that day that the parents’ primary 
anxiety, as recorded in the legends of the Buddha’s early life, 
is that their son would opt out of society and follow the path 
of a mendicant seeker of truth. Many parents of their day must 
have had similar worries, as do ambitious parents of the present day. 
Siddhartha’s decision to follow the mendicant’s path was a rejection 
of conventional society in favor of a controversial lifestyle, but a 
lifestyle nonetheless admired in his day as attracting the most 
intelligent and creative people and producing the noblest expressions 
of the values and aspirations of the society in which he lived. 

Legends of the early life of the historical Buddha also reveal 
tellingly the religious beliefs and values of an important segment 
of Indian society in his'day. Saviors were expected. They might 
be born to mortals. They were thought to perform miracles and 
consort with deities almost as a matter of course. Their task was 
to discover and teach the path that leads beyond the relentless 
suffering of this and future lives. In this exalted search, the gods 
themselves, while not denied, were thought to be merely assistants 
and well-wishers. The final salvation of humankind would be realized 
not through divine intervention, but through truth, discovered and 
taught by extraordinary human beings. These saviors would emerge 
from the ranks of the homeless, mendicant ascetics who walked the 
land in humble attire seeking only enough food, clothing and shelter _ . 
to sustain their strenuous meditative and ascetic practices. 

Such spiritual séntiments may not have been universal in the 
India of the Buddha’s time, but they were certainly widespread. 
When the Bodhisattva Siddhartha set out on the open road, after 
the ‘‘Great Renunciation’’ of home and family, he entered a richly 
varied and stimulating subculture, which is described with surpris- 
ingly vivid detail in the Sutta Pitaka of the Pali canon, the earliest 
record of the teachings he himself was eventually to give. The 
question of the historical accuracy of this record is discussed at length 
below. These sutras,’ or discourses, do not specifically seek to give 
aconnected account of the enlightenment and ministry of the Buddha, 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 13 


and they doubtless contain much elaboration and hyberbole. None- 
theless, they include a surprising amount of material which appears 
to capture actual historical events and peer in remarkable detail 
for literature of that age. 


THe SEARCH For TRUTH 


In the course of giving his religious discourses, after he had realized 
enlightenment, the Buddha is recorded in the Sutta Pitaka as making 
occasional reference to his own search for truth. The following 
account is reconstructed from those scattered references, primarily 
the Ariyapariyesana and Mahdsaccaka sitras of the Majjhima 
Nikaya.* While this account cannot be historically verified, there 
is little reason to doubt its basic truthfulness. 

Soon after Siddhartha left his home, he studied meditative tech- 
niques under two acknowledged masters, Alara Kalama and Uddaka 
Ramaputta. Under their instruction he quickly mastered the upper- 
most levels of meditative trance, experiences of the “‘sphere of 
nothingness”’ and the ‘‘sphere of neither perception nor nonpercep- 
tion’. In all, eight of these advanced levels of concentration are 
retained as important spiritual exercises in the teachings of the 
Buddha, but Siddhartha did not accept the meditative attainments 
of either of his teachers as final enlightenment and release from the 
suffering of human existence.” 

After studying with these two teachers, dissatisfied, Siddhartha 
set out to seek enlightenment on his own. He soon attracted a band 
of five followers, and with them performed severe ascetic practices 
involving self-mortification and starvation. Such practices were 
common among seekers of the truth in his day, and were intended 
to liberate the immortal soul within from the mortal body it inhabited. 
The following purports to be the Buddha’s own description of the 
rigors of the ascetic discipline he imposed upon himself. 


I was unclothed, indecent, licking my hands. .. I took food only 
once a day, or once in two or seven days. I lived under the 
discipline of eating rice only at fortnightly intervals. . .I subsisted 
on the roots-and fruits of the forest, eating only those which 
fell (of their own accord). I wore coarse hempen cloth... rags 
from a rubbish heap. .. clothes of grass and of bark. .. | became 
one who stands (always) refusing to sit... I made my bed on 
thorns. The dust and dirt of years accumulated on my body... 
I subsisted on the dung of suckling calves... So long as my own 
dung and urine held out, I subsisted on that... Because I ate 
so little, my limbs became like the knotted joints of withered 
creepers, my buttocks like a bullock’s hoof, my protruding 


14 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


backbone like a string of beads, my gaunt ribs like the crazy 
rafters of a tumble-down shed. My eyes were sunken deep in 
their sockets... My scalp was shriveled... The hair, rotted at 
the roots, fell out if I stroked my limbs with my hand.'° 


After some six years of such rigorous ascetic discipline, the Pali 
sutras record the Buddha as saying that he realized that self-mortifi- 
cation would not lead him to the ultimate goal of enlightenment and 
spiritual liberation. He is said to have recalled that while his father 
was ploughing, as a child he had entered spontaneously into a tranquil 
condition later known as the first meditative trance (dhyana, P. 
jhana). He resolved at this point to pursue this more natural and 
wholesome means of spiritual development and to practice a modera- 
te, middle path between self-indulgence and self-mortification, Later 
the term ‘Middle Path’ would name and epitomize the entire edifice 
of Buddhist doctrine and practice. As a result of this realization, the 
Bodhisattva Siddhartha resolved to begin taking food in moderate 
but adequate amounts. He had known the extremes of sensual 
indulgence and mortification. He now rejected both as inhibiting 

‘spiritual progress, and developed the moderate daily routine that 
governs the lives of Buddhist monks to the present day. His five 
companions regarded this change as backsliding, and abandoned him 
in disgust.'! 

Siddhartha then carried on alone, going on an alms round in the 
morning, eating one moderate meal a day before noon, and spending 
the afternoon and evening in meditation, often late into the night. 
His progress was swift, and before long he sat before the fabled Bodhi 
tree (tree of enlightenment), a descendant of which still stands at 
Bodh Gaya, near Patna in modern Bihar. As he sat cross-legged 
beneath this tree on the night of the Great Enlightenment, it is said 
that he resolved not to stand until he had attained final spiritual 
enlightenment and release. In the morning, he stood, having realized 
at the age of thirtyfive the ultimate attainment of men and gods: 
Buddhahood. From this point, it-is proper to speak of him as the 
Buddha, ‘the awakened one’. 

Buddhist doctrine emphasizes that the specific content of the 
Buddha’s experiences on the night of enlightenment can never be 
conveyed by mere words. Sdtra accounts say that the Buddha 
expeyienced the ‘three knowledges’: remembrance of his past re- 
births in detail, knowledge of the past and future rebirths of other 
beings, and knowledge that he himself was free of all faults and 
illusions and would therefore never be reborn again. !? This latter 
‘knowledge’ is synonymous with the realization of liberation (nir- 
vana, Pali nibbdna). Buddhist legends recount the events of that 
night as a struggle between the Buddha’s resolve and the temptations 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 15 


and onslaughts of Mara, the Buddhist equivalent of Satan. In these 
accounts, Mara’s terrifying armies and seductive daughters re- 
present mythologically the terrors and temptations of mundane 
existence as well as the arduousness of meditational discipline. Such 
doctrines and mythological formulations, however, only serve to 
convey a slight hint of the content of the experience of enlightenment. 
' Because of the inexpressibility of enlightenment and liberation, 
and the difficulty of the path thereto, the Buddha is said at first to 
have despaired of ever being able to convey his discovery to others. 
Various deities are said to have intervened and encouraged him to 
teach the dharma (truth) and ‘to open the door of deathlessness’ 
to gods and men. The gods themselves informed him that the most 
‘capable recipients of his new teaching, his previous teachers Alara 
Kalama and Uddaka Ramaputta, had died. The Buddha then con- 
cluded that the people best qualified to understand his profound 
and subtle discovery were the five ascetics with whom he had 
undergone austerities. He is said to have been able to perceive with 
his miraculous,“‘divine eye’’ that they were then staying at Sarnath, 
near Varanasi (Benares) in modern day Uttar Pradesh. Having 
journeyed to Sarnath, the Buddha was able to overcome the initial 
resistance of the five ascetics who had rejected him for abandoning 
the ascetic path, and thus gained his first followers.'° 
Divine intervention and clairvoyance aside, it would have been 
~ natural in the Buddha’s time for a spiritual teacher with anew doctrine 
to propound to head for Varanasi, then as now the most sacred city 
of India. There is then little cause to doubt the sdtras in this detail. 
The Sutta Pitaka also preserves what purports to be the first sermon 
of the Buddha after his enlightenment, the ‘“Turning of the Wheel 
of Truth’’.'* As one might expect, this sutra propounds the Four 
Noble Truths, an outline of the fundamental doctrines of Buddhism. 
For the next fortyfive years, until his death, the Buddha attracted 
to himself an ever growing band of followers. Ironically, Prince 
Siddhartha had become, as his father had desired, a cakravartin, a 
‘Wheel Turning Monarch’, but the wheel he had set in motion with 
this first discourse was the death-conquering wheel of truth rather 
than the mythical world-conquering wheel of universal monarchy. 


Tue BuDDHA AND HIS FOLLOWERS 


In the course of attempting to record the sermons of the Buddha, 
the Sutta Pitaka also records incidentally a good deal of information 
regarding the personality, daily life and habits of the Buddha and 
some of his more prominent followers. Essentially, the Buddha taught 
a lifestyle and spiritual discipline whereby others could follow in 


16 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


his footsteps and realize for themselves the enlightenment and 
liberation he had gained under the Bodhi tree. The fundamental 
principle of this lifestyle and discipline was following a ‘‘middle 
path”’ between self-indulgence and self-mortification, as the Buddha 
himself had done. Whether traveling singly or in groups, the followers 
of the Buddha observed the same daily routine as the Buddha. All 
were’ expected to abstain from sex, intoxicants, and all harmful or 
abrasive conduct. In addition the Buddha and his followers eschewed 
all luxuries of attire, accommodation and diet. Like their teacher, 
they possessed only their robes and begging bowls, and moved 
constantly from place to place lest they become attached even 
to such rudimentary shelter as a certain tree or cave. 

Singly or in groups, they rose early in the morning, sometimes 
sitting in meditation before going on their daily alms rounds in a 
nearby village. They ate only one meal a day, before noon. In the 
afternoon they would listen to sermons by the Buddha or his foremost 
disciples, and then put the teachings into practice by meditating, often 
long into the night. These afternoon and evening sermons were often 
attended by lay followers of the Buddha, interested and sometimes 
hostile followers of other religious persuasions, and the merely 
curious. It was primarily through these sermons by the Buddha and 
his chief disciples that Buddhism grew steadily in numbers. 

Increasingly, the Buddha attracted to himself wealthy patrons who 
made lavish arrangements to host sermons by him. Such patronage 
no doubt further increased his following. The Pali satras probably 
exaggerate when they claim that up to 2500 people attended some 
sermons, but it is not unlikely that several hundred may have gathered 
-on some occasions to hear the teachings of the man who was very 
likely the best known religious teacher in India at the time. In spite 
of this fame, the Buddha and his followers remained faithful to the 
simple life of wandering about the countryside with a minimum of 
possessions and accepting only minimal hospitality—in the form of 
almsfood, robes and medicines—from their followers.'* 

An exception to this wandering lifestyle came during the monsoon 
season, when Buddhist monks were allowed to take permanent 
shelter for a period of about two months. As more followers of the 
Buddha joined the Sangha—the order of Buddhist monks and later 
of nuns as well—centers for assembling during the rains came to 
be recognized. At first these were caves and groves of trees, but 
as the lay following of the Buddha increased in numbers and wealth, 
permanent shelters sprang up across the countryside. These were 
the beginnings of the first monasteries, in which it is now customary 
for Buddhist monks to dwell permanently. During the Buddha’s life 
and for several generations afterward, however, the Buddhist monk’s 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 17 


routine was to wander the countryside alone or in small groups for 

most of the year. During the rainy season, the communal retreats 

provided a no doubt welcome variation on this solitary lifestyle. In 

these periods of residence, novice monks had an opportunity to gain 

instruction in the teachings of the Buddha from their more experien- 
ced brothers, and during these retreats a recognized canon of 

teachings attributed to the Buddha and his foremost disciples began 

to form. 

These recognized teachings were recorded in the Suttaand Vinaya 
Pitakas or ‘‘collections’’ comprising respectively the sermons of the 
Buddha and his foremost disciples and the rules governing the Sangha 
or order of Buddhist monks. After a time, the Sangha developed the 

_practice of gathering fortnightly to confess lapses against the Vinaya 
rules and prescribe punishments for such lapses. These gatherings 
culminated in a communal recital of the cardinal rules of monastic 
conduct. Though no mention of recitals of sdtras is mentioned in 
the early texts themselves, it s¢ems likely that the corpus of sdtra 
literature began to develop during these fortnightly gatherings as well 
as during the monsoon retreats. Certainly the form in which the sutras _ 
survive suggests this conclusion. 

Writing was virtually unknown in India during the time of the 
Buddha, so that his sermons could be preserved only through 
memorization by his followers until they were written down in the 
Pali language at about the time of Christ. The literary form of the 
Pali sdtras suggests that they are indeed a record of just such an 
oral tradition. There is a great deal of repetition from one sdtra to 
another, not only in terms of the doctrines expressed, but also in 
terms of extensive verbatim repetition of much material. This 
suggests that the Sutta Pitaka is a sincere attempt to record memori- 

_zed versions of individual sermons rather than an edited compilation 
of doctrine. Individual sdtras usually identify the location at which 
the sitra was preached. They always identify the speaker of the 
sermon—who is sometimes not the Buddha but one of his chief 
disciples—and they often provide details about the audience and the 
circumstances surrounding the discourse. The sutras which survive 
from this earliest period of Buddhism come down to us in a highly 
formulaic and repetitive mnemonic form which is something of a 
strain on our modern literary sensibilities. They are nonetheless 
effective in preserving a body of teachings by means of memoriza- 
tion. Though the Pali sdtras obviously exaggerate and mythologize 
the qualities and deeds of the Buddha, with regard to his teachings 
they have every appearance of constituting for the most part a faithful 
and reasonably accurate record. 

Despite this immediate appearance of reliability, doubts regarding 


18 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the historical accuracy of the teachings preserved in the Pali sitras 
have been raised by modern Western scholars of Buddhism, most 
notably Edward Conze.'° These scholars point out quite accurately 
that in addition to the Pali satras of Theravada Buddhism, other quite 
different accounts of teachings ascribed to the Buddha survive and 
form the basis of Mahayana Buddhism. They point out too that none 
of the literature purporting to contain the authentic teachings of the 
Buddha was actually written down before the time of Christ, approxi- 
mately 500 years after the death of the Buddha. Because of such 
considerations, it will probably remain forever impossible to deter- 
mine with historical certainty the precise nature of the original 
teachings of the Buddha. The following section, however, considers 
the schism of Buddhism into the Theravada and Mahayana branches 
and the available evidence bearing upon their respective claims to 
preserve accurately the teachings of the historical Buddha. On the 
basis of this historical evidence, it is possible to provide a reasonably 
confident account of at least the broad outlines of the original 
teachings of the historical Buddha. 


II. THE DEATH OF THE BUDDHA AND SCHISM IN THE SANGHA 


From the night of his enlightenment under the Bodhi tree until 
his death at the age of eighty, the Buddha and the Sangha of monks 
over whom he presided wandered northern India following a routine 
of collecting alms, meditating, mastering the teachings of the Buddha 
and spreading these teachings through sermons and by example. So 
long as the Buddha lived, his supreme authority within the Sangha 
prevented any serious doctrinal disagreements from erupting among 
his followers. The best available account of the death of the Buddha 
indicates that such disputes within the Sangha began to develop. 
almost immediately after the Buddha died. 

This account, the Mahdaparinibbana Sutta or ‘Sitra of the Great 
Decease’,'’ cannot be regarded as a rigorously accurate historical 
document. Nonetheless, the story it tells merits brief recounting here 
for the elements of historical truth which it probably does contain 
as well as for the insights it provides into the attitudes of early 
Buddhists toward the founder of their religion. Most notable among 
these attitudes is a tendency to idealize and in fact divinize the 
Buddha. This tendency eventually developed into full-fledged devo- 
tionalism in Mahayana Buddhism, though it is unlikely that such 
doctrines played a part in the original teachings of the historical 
Buddha. 

The Mahdparinibbana Sutta opens with a lengthy account of the 
Buddha’s movements and sermons immediately prior to the great 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 19 


decease. Most of these sermons have to do with living together in 
peace and harmony, as if the Buddha were attempting to prepare 
his followers for the time when he would no longer be among them 
to settle disputes. During the last rainy season of his life, the Buddha 
is said to have taken up residence at Beluva, a small village near 
the city of Vaisali, in the modern state of Bihar. There he became 
gravely ill and, it is said, at eighty years of age warded off death 
only by a great effort and firm resolve to take leave of the Sangha 
and give them his last instructions before dying his final death. Shortly 
after coming out of the rainy season retreat, however, the Buddha 
is believed to have contracted food poisoning and died in a grove 
of trees near a small village called Kusinara, without having had an 
opportunity to address many members of the Sangha. Instead, 
Ananda, the Buddha’s faithful attendant for most of the fortyfive 
years of his ministry, received most of the final teachings of the 
Buddha. These final teachings as recorded in the Mahdparinibbana 
Sutta do not differ in any significant way from the overall doctrine 
taught in the Pali sdtras as a whole. 

As gleaned from the Mahdparinibbana Sutta, the actual historical 
events surrounding the death of the Buddha are remarkable only by 
virtue of their insignificance. This historical skeleton, however, is 
fleshed out and clothed extravagantly with numerous supernatural 
events. Trees burst spontaneously into flower out of season and 
shower the dying Buddha with blossoms. Muddy water becomes clear 
for him to drink. Deities in their thousands assemble to witness the 
passing away of the Buddha, who announces that if he had so desired 
he could have chosen to live on until the end of the eon. The Buddha 
gives elaborate instructions concerning how his body is to be cre- 

‘mated in a manner befitting a king of kings. From out of nowhere 
500 monks appear in order to hear the last words of the Buddha: 
All component things are impermanent. Work out your own 
salvation with diligence. !® 
At the point of the Buddha’s death the earth quakes violently and 
thunder rends the sky. The great kings of the gods vie with one another 
in uttering hymns of praise to the Exalted One. The satra concludes 
with an account of an eleborate funeral and the distribution of the 
bones and ashes of the Buddha to nine influential clans andindividuals 
who vow to erect monuments over the remains. 

In the commingling of fact and fantasy in the Mahaparinibbana 
Sutta, two points are particularly interesting from the point of view 
of the development of schisms in the Sangha and subsequent dis- 
agreements concerning the original teachings of the Buddha. In his 
final address, the Buddha is recorded as saying that after his death 
the Sangha could abolish minor rules of monastic discipline if they 


20 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


so desired. At least one monk, Subhadra, is recorded as wanting 
to do this and more. According to the Mahaparinibbana Sutta he 
wanted to abolish all of the rules that the monks found inconvenient, 
whether major or minor. Since no major or minor rules of monastic 
discipline were ever abolished by Sangha, the sutra record of 
discussion of the issue has the ring of truth. At any rate, such 
considerations are likely to have motivated disciples of the Buddha 
to assemble soon after his death in order to formulate a strategy 
for coping with the dramatically new situation occasioned by the 
death of their founder. 


Tue First BuppHIST COUNCIL 


Traditionally, a gathering of 500 enlightened followers of the 
Buddha was convened shortly after the Buddha’s death by the senior 
monk Maha Kasyapa at Rajagrha, a village in the modern day state 
of Bihar. This gathering is known as the First Council. The historicity 
of the First Council is debated by modern scholars,!? and will 
probably remain in doubt forever. In the course of such debate, 
however, it must be remembered that the followers of the Buddha 
were accustomed to gathering on a fortnightly and yearly schedule, 
and that the death of the Buddha would have provided a natural 
impetus for a special: convocation. Whether there was any such single 
convocation as large or as representative and authoritative as it is 
traditionally supposed to have been is not as important historically 
as the point that soon after the death of Buddha, if not already within 
his lifetime, a corpus of his teachings regarded as authentic began 
to take shape. The Pali sdtras record the Buddha himself as referring 
to named collections of teachings, one of which appears to corres- 
pond to the eventual contents of the Pali canon.*’ This probably 
indicates on the one hand that the passage in question is relatively 
late, but on the other hand that the practice of compiling doctrine 
began relatively early on. 

Regardless of the historicity of the First Council, it remains 
customary among scholars of Buddhism to refer to three primary 
councils of monks—the first of which occurred soon after the death 
of the Buddha—even when denying that one or another of these 
_ councils actually transpired. The locus classicus of this convention 
is the Pali Vinaya Pitaka, that section of scripture which deals with 
monastic rules of discipline. The section of the Vinaya Pitakaknown 
as the Cul/lavagga contains in chapters 11 and 12 what purports to 
be a historical account of a First Council and a Second Council which 
occurred a hundred years later. The Third Council is recorded only 
in later works, the Mahavamsa and the Dipavamsa, which deal with 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 21 
the early history of Buddhism in India and Sri Lanka. These books, 
composed in Sri Lanka, depend upon the Cullavagga for their 
accounts of the first two councils. 

The Cullavagga account of the First Council asserts that at this 

Meeting the entire Vinaya Pitaka was recited from memory by the 
monk Upali, and the entire Sutta Pitaka by Ananda, the faithful 
attendant of the Buddha. This is rather difficult to believe, but is 
nonetheless possible. At the time, writing was virtually unknown in 
India, and all knowledge had to be passed on orally from one 
generation to the next and retained in human memory. This situation 
necessitated prodigious feats of memorization which we in the 
modern West can scarcely imagine. Because of the sanctity of oral 

transmission of scripture in India, even in the present day one 

_ encounters many people in India who can recite several entire 
volumes of scripture from memory, even though these are now 
readily accessible in written form. Still, the Suttaand Vinaya Pitakas 
are very large, comprising together almost thirty good-sized volumes. 
Of course, they may have been much smaller at the time of the First 
Council. All things considered, it is perhaps most likely that Ananda 
and Upili, and perhaps other senior monks, presided overa recitation 
of the Suttaand Vinaya Pitakas by several monks. Such a cooperative 
recitation from memory would be possible even today in Sri Lanka, 
Thailand or Burma, given a dozen or so learned monks. 

More important historically is the fact that the third section of the 
Buddhist canon, the AbAidhamma Pitaka, is not mentioned at all in 
the Cullavagga account of the First Council. This implies two things: 
(1) the lateness of the Abhidhamma and (2) the authenticity of the 
Cullavagga narrative. Traditionally, the AbAidhamma is supposed 
to be the word of the historical Buddha. This belief was firmly in 
place long before any of the Buddhist scriptures were written down, 
at approximately the time of Christ. The fact that the Cullavagga 
does not mention the AbAidhammain its account of the First Council 
is persuasive indication that the book as we have it today was not 
revised significantly when it was first committed to writing or 
thereafter. If the Cullavagga had been revised at any time with a 

_ view-to validating Buddhist doctrine historically, an obvious. change 
to make would have been to insert a reference to the Abhidhamma 
in its account of the First Council. A mere sentence would have 
sufficed. The fact that the oral transmitters and the literary compilers 
of the Cullavagga did not insert such a sentence indicates that they 
were remarkably reliable historians for such an ancient age. 


18 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the historical accuracy of the teachings preserved in the Pali satras 
have been raised by modern Western scholars of Buddhism, most 
notably Edward Conze.'° These scholars point out quite accurately 
that in addition to the Pali satras of Theravada Buddhism, other quite 
different accounts of teachings ascribed to the Buddha survive and 
form the basis of Mahayana Buddhism. They point out too that none 
of the literature purporting to contain the authentic teachings of the 
Buddha was actually written down before the time of Christ, approxi- 
mately 500 years after the death of the Buddha. Because of such 
considerations, it will probably remain forever impossible to deter- 
mine with historical certainty the precise nature of the original 
teachings of the Buddha. The following section, however, considers 
the schism of Buddhism into the Theravada and Mahayana branches 
and the available evidence bearing upon their respective claims to 
preserve accurately the teachings of the historical Buddha. On the 
basis of this historical evidence, it is possible to provide a reasonably 
confident account of at least the broad outlines of the original 
teachings of the historical Buddha. 


II. THE DEATH OF THE BUDDHA AND SCHISMIN THE SANGHA 


From the night of his enlightenment under the Bodhi tree until 
his death at the age of eighty, the Buddha and the Sangha of monks 
over whom he presided wandered northern India following a routine 
of collecting alms, meditating, mastering the teachings of the Buddha 
and spreading these teachings through sermons and by example. So 
long as the Buddha lived, his supreme authority within the Sangha 
prevented any serious doctrinal disagreements from erupting among 
his followers. The best available account of the death of the Buddha 
indicates that such disputes within the Sangha began to develop | 
almost immediately after the Buddha died. 

This account, the Mahdparinibbdna Sutta or ‘Sitra of the Great 
Decease’,’ cannot be regarded as a rigorously accurate historical 
document. Nonetheless, the story it tells merits brief recounting here 
for the elements of historical truth which it probably does contain 
as well as for the insights it provides into the attitudes of early 
Buddhists toward the founder of their religion. Most notable among 
these attitudes is a tendency. to idealize and in fact divinize the 
Buddha. This tendency eventually developed into full-fledged devo- 
tionalism in Mahayana Buddhism, though it is unlikely that such 
doctrines played a part in the original teachings of the historical 
Buddha. 

The Mahdparinibbdna Sutta opens with a lengthy account of the 
Buddha’s movements and sermons immediately prior to the great 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 19 


decease. Most of these sermons have to do with living together in 
peace and harmony, as if the Buddha were attempting to prepare 
his followers for the time when he would no longer be among them 
to settle disputes. During the last rainy season of his life, the Buddha 
is said to have taken up residence at Beluva, a small village near 
the city of Vaisali, in the modern state of Bihar. There he became 
gravely ill and, it is said, at eighty years of age warded off death 
only by a great effort and firm resolve to take leave of the Sangha 
and give them his last instructions before dying his final death. Shortly 
after coming out of the rainy season retreat, however, the Buddha 
is believed to have contracted food poisoning and died in a grove 
of trees near a small village called Kusinara, without having had an 
opportunity to address many members of the Sangha. Instead, 
Ananda, the Buddha’s faithful attendant for most of the fortyfive 
years of his ministry, received most of the final teachings of the 
Buddha. These final teachings as recorded in the Mahaparinibbana 
Sutta do not differ in any significant way from the overall doctrine 
taught in the Pali satras as a whole. 

As gleaned from the Mahdparinibbdna Sutta, the actual historical 
events surrounding the death of the Buddha are remarkable only by 
virtue of their insignificance. This historical skeleton, however, is 
fleshed out and clothed extravagantly with numerous supernatural 
events. Trees burst spontaneously into flower out of season and 
shower the dying Buddha with blossoms. Muddy water becomes clear 
for him to drink. Deities in their thousands assemble to witness the 
passing away of the Buddha, who announces that if he had so desired 
he could have chosen to live on until the end of the eon. The Buddha 
gives elaborate instructions concerning how his body is to be cre- 
mated in a manner befitting a king of kings. From out of nowhere 
500 monks appear in order to hear the last words of the Buddha: 

All component things are impermanent. Work out your own 

salvation with diligence.'® 
At the point of the Buddha’s death the earth quakes violently and 
thunder rends the sky. The great kings of the gods vie with one another 
in uttering hymns of praise to the Exalted One. The sutra concludes 
with an account of an eleborate funeral and the distribution of the 
bones and ashes of the Buddha to nine influential clans and individuals 
who vow to erect monuments over the remains. 

In the commingling of fact and fantasy in the Mahdparinibbana 
Sutta, two points are particularly interesting from the point of view 
of the development of schisms in the Sangha and subsequent dis- 
agreements concerning the original teachings of the Buddha. In his 
final address, the Buddha is recorded as saying that after his death 
the Sangha could abolish minor rules of monastic discipline if they 


20 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


so desired. At least one monk, Subhadra, is recorded as wanting 
to do this and more. According to the Mahdparinibbdna Sutta he 
wanted to abolish all of the rules that the monks found inconvenient, 
whether major or minor. Since no major or minor rules of monastic 
discipline were ever abolished by Sangha, the sutra record of 
discussion of the issue has the ring of truth. At any rate, such 
considerations are likely to have motivated disciples of the Buddha 
to assemble soon after his death in order to formulate a strategy 
for coping with the dramatically new situation occasioned by the 
death of their founder. , 


THe First Buppuist Counc. 


Traditionally, a gathering of 500 enlightened followers of the 
Buddha was convened shortly after the Buddha’s death by the senior 
monk Maha KaSsyapa at Rajagrha, a village in the modern day state 
of Bihar. This gathering is known as the First Council. The historicity 
of the First Council is debated by modern scholars,’® and will 
probably remain in doubt forever. In the course of such debate, 
however, it must be remembered that the followers of the Buddha 
were accustomed to gathering on a fortnightly and yearly schedule, 
and that the death of the Buddha would have provided a natural 
impetus for a special convocation. Whether there was any such single 
convocation as large or as representative and authoritative as it is 
traditionally supposed to have been is not as important historically 
as the point that soon after the death of Buddha, if not already within 
his lifetime, a corpus of his teachings regarded as authentic began 
to take shape. The Pali sdtras record the Buddha himself as referring 
to named collections of teachings, one of which appears to corres- 
pond to the eventual contents of the Pali canon.** This probably 
indicates on the one hand that the passage in question is relatively 
late, but.on the other hand that the practice of compiling doctrine 
began relatively early on. 

Regardless. of the historicity of the First Council, it remains 
customary among scholars of Buddhism to refer to three primary 
councils of monks—the first of which occurred soon after the death 
of the Buddha—even when denying that one or another of these 
_ councils actually transpired. The locus classicus of this convention 
is the Pali Vinaya Pitaka, that section of scripture which deals with 
monastic rules of discipline. The section of the Vinaya Pitaka known 
as the Cullavagga contains in chapters 11 and 12 what purports to 
be a historical account of a First Council and a Second Council which 
occurred a hundred years later. The Third Council is recorded only 
in later works, the Mahavamsa and the Dipavamsa, which deal with 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 21 
the early history of Buddhism in India and Sri Lanka. These books, 
composed in Sri Lanka, depend upon the Cullavagga for their 
accounts of the first two councils. 

The Cullavagga account of the First Council asserts that at this 

_Meeting the entire Vinaya Pitaka was recited from memory by the 
monk Upali, and the entire Sutta Pitaka by Ananda, the faithful 
attendant of the Buddha. This is rather difficult to believe, but is 
nonetheless possible. At the time, writing was virtually unknown in 
India, and all knowledge had to be passed on orally from one 
generation to the next and retained in human memory. This situation 
necessitated prodigious feats of memorization which we in the 
modern West can scarcely imagine. Because of the sanctity of oral 
transmission of scripture in India, even in the present day one 
encounters many people in India who can recite several entire 
volumes of scripture from memory, even though these are now 
readily accessible in written form. Still, the Suttaand Vinaya Pitakas 
are very large, comprising together almost thirty good-sized volumes. 
Of course, they may have been much smaller at the time of the First 
Council. All things considered, it is perhaps most likely that Ananda 
and Upali, and perhaps other senior monks, presided over a recitation 
of the Suttaand Vinaya Pitakas by several monks. Such a cooperative 
recitation from memory would be possible even today in Sri Lanka, 
Thailand or Burma, given a dozen or so learned monks. 

More important historically is the fact that the third section of the 
Buddhist canon, the Abhidhamma Pitaka, is not mentioned at all in 
the Cullavagga account of the First Council. This implies two things: 
(1) the lateness of the Abhidhamma and (2) the authenticity of the 
Cullavagga narrative. Traditionally, the AbAidhamma is supposed 
to be the word of the historical Buddha. This belief was firmly in 
place long before any of the Buddhist scriptures were written down, 
at approximately the time of Christ. The fact that the Cullavagga 
does not mention the Abhidhammain its account of the First Council 
is persuasive indication that the book as we have it today was not 
revised significantly when it was first committed to writing or 
thereafter. If the Cullavagga had been revised at any time with a 

_view-to validating Buddhist doctrine historically, an obvious. change 
to make would have been to insert a reference to the Abhidhamma 
in its account of the First Council. A mere sentence would have 
sufficed. The fact that the oral transmitters and the literary compilers 
of the Cullavagga did not insert such a sentence indicates that they 
were remarkably reliable historians for such an ancient age. 


22 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
THE SECOND CoUNCIL AND THE MAHASANGHIKA SCHISM 


Because of the apparent restraint and reliability of its compilers, 
the Cullavagga is also probably the most reliable historical source 
concerning the Second Council. According to the Cullavagga, this 
council was held approximately a hundred years after the Buddha’s 
death (i.e. around 380 B.C.) at VaiSali, north of modern day Patna. 
The Cullavagga is not the only historical source for the Second 
Council, however, for the Second Council resulted in the great 
Buddhist schism between the Sthaviravada or ‘School of Elders’ and 
the Mahayana. The Cul/avagga, ostensibly a Sthaviravadin text, 
represents the Elders’ point of view. The Mahayana version of the 
Second Council occurs in the writings of Vasumitra”! (around 100 
A.D. ), and i in later, derivative accounts by Bhavaviveka.and Vinita- 
deva.”? The sixth century historian Paramartha also wrote of the 
Second Council on the basis of these and other sources.”* According 
to these Mahay4na texts, the Second Council was held in Patna itself, 
then known as Pataliputra. This and other considerations have led 
some historians to conclude that there were two separate ‘‘Second 
Councils”, one dominated by the School of Elders and the other 
dominated by a proto-Mahayanist faction.”* 

The disagreement between the Theravada and Mahayana accounts 
of the ‘‘Second Council”’ centers upon the circumstances which made 
the convening of a council necessary. According to the Theravada 
version, the venerable elders Yasa and Revata called for the assembly 
because many monks had become lax concerning ten points of 
discipline. The most important of the practices regarded as reprehen- 
sible were accepting money in lieu of almsfood, eating after noon, 
and following improper procedures at meetings. According to the 
Mahay4na version, the Second Council was initiated by five criticisms 
raised by the liberal monk Mahadeva against the conservative arhats 
who dominated the Buddhism of the time by virtue of their supposed 
enlightenment. According to Mahadeva, those who claimed to be 
arhats had not fully conquered passion because they still had wet 
dreams, were not omniscient because they often had to ask for 
directions, etc., were still subject to doubts, and had gained their 
knowledge through others rather than through their own experience. 
The fifth point is obscure, but seems to have to do with making verbal 
exclamations during meditation. The circumstances which occasion- 
ed the Second Council will probably remain forever doubtful, if 
indeed there was one rather than two Second Councils. At any rate, 
all accounts agree that a large group of monks—known as the 
Mahasanghikas or—‘‘majority group’’—refused to accept the autho- 
rity of the Council of Elders, and that as a result a major schism 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 23 


in Buddhism occurred at this time. 

These Mahasanghikas eventually became the Mahayana, The 
Elders—the Sthaviras or Theras—came to be called first the Sthavira- 
vada and then the Theravada. Though Sthaviravada and Theravada 
mean exactly the same thing, “Doctrine of the Elders’, the archaic 
Sthaviravada spawned several different schools—traditionally 
seventeen”°—before emerging finally as the Theravada, the sole 
surviving School of the Elders. Mahayanists typically refer to these 
seventeen schools collectively with the derogatory term ‘‘Hinayana’’, 
which means ‘“‘small, inferior vehicle’’ as opposed to Mahay4na, 
which means “‘great, glorious vehicle’’. As a collective term for 
non-Mahayana Buddhism the term Hinayana can be convenient, 
but it should never be used as a synonym for Theravada, a practice 
which is both offensive and inaccurate. 

The actual differences among the several Hinayana schools, though 

‘hotly debated at the time, appear minor in retrospect, and in most 
cases are hopelessly obscure.”° The minor differences among the 
descendants of the Sthaviras are certainly insignificant in comparison 
to the major rift in Buddhism occasioned by the Mahdasanghika 
schism. This initial rift widened into separate traditions of scripture 
and formulations of doctrine so widely divergent that the original 
teachings of the Buddha have become a matter of historical un- 
certainty. The most viable means of moving toward resolution of 
this uncertainty is comparison of the surviving scriptures of the 
various early schools of Buddhism. Unfortunately, aside from a few 
miscellaneous texts from other schools, relatively complete canons 
of only two early schools of Buddhism survive. 


COMPARISON OF THERAVADA AND 
SARVASTIVADA SCRIPTURES 


Aside from the canon of the Theravada, the only extensive litera- 
ture to survive from any of the Hinayana schools is the Sarvastivada 
canon, large sections of which are preserved in Chinese translations. 
The Vinaya of the Sarvastivada survives also in Tibetan translation. 
The Chinese translations of Sarvastivada scriptures are in reasonably 
good general agreement with their Theravada counterparts,”” which 
establishes a common tradition regarding the teachings of the Buddha 
going back to approximately 250 B.C. when the Sarvastivada split 
from the Sthaviravada.”® 

The Theravada scriptures are organized into three major collec- 
tions known as pitakas. These are the Vinaya, Sutta and Abhidha- 
mina Pitakas. Together they comprise the 7ipitaka or ‘“Three Colle- 
ctions’’. The Vinaya Pitaka, containing the rules of monastic discipli- 


24 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ne, is further subdivided into three sections. The first and most 
important is the Sutta Vibhariga, which contains the Pratimoksa 
Rules, the rules which govern the day-to-day life of the Buddhist 
monk. Each of these 227 rules is followed by a detailed commentary 
explaining the rule and a story which purports to describe the 
circumstance which originally made the rule necessary. These stories 
provide an interesting and entertaining insight into day-to-day life 
~ in ancient India. The second section of the Vinaya, the Khandhaka, 
contains primarily procedural rules for the conduct of the affairs of 
the Sangha as well as some miscellaneous rules of the individual 
discipline. The Khandhaka is divided into the Mahdvagga and the 
Cullavagga, the latter of which contains the accounts of the First 
and Second Councils discussed above. The third section of Vinaya, 
the Parivara, is a supplement to the other two sections. The Vinaya 
of the Sarvastivida—preserved in Chinese and Tibetan translations— 
is very similar to that of the Theravada, except that it contains a 
different supplement in place of the Parivara. 

From the standpoint of early Buddhist doctrine, by far the most 
important section of the 7ipitaka is the Sutta Pitaka, which contains 
the sermons of the Buddha and a few of his foremost disciples. In 
the Theravada canonical tradition, these discourses are divided into 
five groups known as nikayas. The Digha Nikaya or “‘Long Group”’ 
contains the longest sermons. The Majjhima Nikaya or ‘‘Middle- 


length Group’’ contains the shorter discourses. The Samyutta 


Nikaya or ‘Connected Group”’ contains short discourses grouped 
according to their subject, and the Aguttara Nikaya or ‘‘Numerical 
Group”’ contains material grouped according to the number of items 
discussed. Each of these Theravadin nikayas corresponds to similar 
groupings known as dgamas of the Sarvastivada canon. The actual 
content of Digha and Majjhima Nikayas agrees relatively well with 
that the corresponding 4gamas of the Sarvastivada canon. The Sam- 
yutta and Aiguttara Nikayas are less similar to their Sarvastivadin 
counterparts, as might be expected given that these mikayas or 
4gamas appear to be derivative from the ‘‘Long’’ and ‘‘Middie 
length’’ discourses. In addition to these four groups of discourses, 
the Theravada Sutta Pitaka also contains a Khuddaka Nikaya or 
‘“‘Minor Group”’, which is comprised of several miscellaneous 
works—some short, some long, some purporting to be the word 
of the Buddha, some composed by eminent disciples, some very 
early, and some relatively late. Though labeled ‘‘minor’’ this group 
of texts contains some of the most revered scriptures of Theravada 
Buddhism. The Sarvastivada canon also contains a miscellaneous 
section known as the Avadana, but the material therein does not 
correspond well to the Theravada Khuddaka Nikaya. 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 25 


The third section of Theravada canon, the AbAidhamma Pitaka, 
also has a Sarvastivadin counterpart, but aside from a general 
similarity of the ideas expressed, the actual content of the two 
corpuses is not similar at all. Both are comprised of seven books, 
but the Theravadins ascribe their composition to the Buddha himself, 
whereas the Sarvastivadins ascribe them to seven different disciples 
of the Buddha. In both cases it is clear that the Abhidharma represents 
a scholastic development within Buddhism quite some time after the 
death of the Buddha. It represents a technical, scholastic movement 
to systematize the numerous philosophical, psychological and moral 
concepts of early Buddhism. The nature and content of this third 
section of the canon is discussed at length further on in the present 
introductory material. 

Analysis of the Theravada and Sarvastivada material just outlined 
reveals distinct stages in the development of Buddhist scriptures. 
The Digha Nikdaya itself contains two sutras which foreshadow the 
mnemonic organizational structure of the Samyutta and Arnguttara 
Nikayas. The Sangiti Sutta records a communal recital of essential 
points of Buddhist doctrine organized in groups of from one to ten 
items, apparently for ease of memorization. The Dasuttara Sutta 
records a similar ten-sectioned summary of doctrine spoken by 
Sariputra. Both sutras prefigure the organization of the Anguttara 
Nikaya, which also organizes Buddhist doctrine in groups of from 
one to ten items with a short concluding section on elevenfold 
groupings. In a. similarly mnemonic vein, the Samyutta Nikaya 
organizes scriptural material according to the subject matter address- 
ed. Both of these Nikayas thus appear to be early attempts to 
organize doctrine in a systematic and easily remembered form. This 
may indicate that these Nikdyas are something of an innovation, albeit 
a very conservative innovation, involving rearrangement rather than 
alteration of the core teachings contained in the Dighaand Majjhima 
Nikayas. It is almost certain that parts of the Theravada Khuddaka 
Nikdaya, the Sarvastivadin Avadana and the Abhidhammaas a whole, 
represent doctrinal developments in Theravada and Sarvastivada 
Buddhism beyond what the historical Buddha taught. 

The next stage in this development is recorded only in the Thera- 
vada tradition in a large number of commentaries and sub-commen- 
taries on the texts of the Tipitaka. These were composed originally 
in the indigenous Sinhalese language of Sri Lanka, and translated 
into Pali by the great scholar Buddhaghosa in the fifth century A.D. 
These commentaries confine themselves to expounding the texts of 
the 7ipitaka, but in so doing they interpret, extrapolate, systematize 
and thereby modify the doctrines found in the Theravada sétras and 
abhidhamma. Buddhaghosa’s great manual, the Visuddhimagga, 


26 - ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


provides an admirable summary of the commentarial tradition in 
Theravada Buddhism and reveals a marked development beyond the 
ancient doctrines expressed in the Sutta Pitaka. 

The earliest doctrinal developments in Mahayana Buddhism, by 
contrast, appear in the sutras themselves. Parts of some Mahayana 
sutras appear to be very old, but these are augmented, mixed and 
mingled with material which appears to represent doctrinal deve- 
lopment and innovation. The conservative Theravadins appear to 
have been reasonably careful, though perhaps not absolutely scrupu- 
lous, in separating new or doubtful material from their most ancient 
texts. This isolation appears to have occurred first in the Khuddaka 
Nikéaya, then in the Abhidhamma Pitaka, and finally in the commenta- 
rial literature. The Sarvastivadins apparently did the same, though 
no commentarial literature survives from the school. The Maha- 
yanists, by contrast, appear to have been content to incorporate 
new ideas and interpretations into the scriptures themselves. 


THE QUESTION OF ORIGINAL BUDDHISM 


The evidence considered thus far suggests that the Suttaand Vinaya 
Pitakas of the Theravada, in particular the Majjhima and Digha . 
Nikdayas, probably contain the most reliable surviving record of the 
teachings of the historical Buddha. There is, however, precious little 
real evidence. No Buddhist scriptures of any sort were committed 
to writing before about the time of Christ, almost five hundred years 
after the death of the Buddha. By this time the Mahayana had begun 
to develop, and based its doctrines on a scriptural corpus entirely 
different from the Pali canon of the Theravada. Moreover, the earliest 
Mahaydna literature was written down in India at about the same 
time as the Pali canon was committed to writing in Sri Lanka, in 
the early years of the Christian calendar. 

On the surface, the form and content of Mahayana literature 
suggests that it is much later in origin than the Theravada scriptures. 
In form, the Pali sitras are formulaic and repetitive, like songs with 
choruses: relatively easy to memorize, pleasant to hear, but some- 
what tedious to read. They have every appearance of being the end 
product of a preliterate, oral tradition. In general, Mahayana scrip- 
tures are more literary in form. They appear to be the products - 
of a literate age in which works were composed and transmitted in 
writing. Many Mahayana sdtras contain complex narratives and 
elaborate descriptive passages which would be difficult if not im- 
possible to memorize in any great quantity. 

The content of Mahayana sdtras also suggests that they are later 
in origin than the Pali satras. On the one hand, they contain complex, 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 27 


sophisticated philosophy which appears to have developed out of 
incipient ideas expressed in the Pali sitras. On the other hand, 
Mahayana sdtras in general are characterized by highly fanciful 
mythological content. To be sure, the Pali satras also contain much 
myth and miracle, but the Mahayana sdtras are extravagant in this 
regard. The process of divinizing the Buddha, begun in the Pali satras, 
is dramatically advanced in the Mahayana sétras. Many of them 
purport to have been delivered by the Buddha under supernatural 
circumstances to the deities in various heavens, almost a tacit 
admission that they do not record historical events. 

- Nonetheless, Mahay4nists maintain that their sdtras do record 
accurately the teaching of the historical Buddha. Most Mahay4nists 
do not deny that the Theravada satras were also taught by the Buddha, 
but they assert that these were inferior teachings for those with 
inferior intelligence, the Mahayana teachings being reserved for the 
spiritual elite among the Buddha’s followers. Again, this does not 
seem likely. Circumstantial evidence all points toward a greater 
historical authenticity of the Pali satras. The evidence considered 
thus far, however, is all circumstantial. The hard fact is that we have 
no relevant records which were actually committed to writing much 
before the time of Christ. This fact has led some modern historians 
of Buddhism to conclude that one is not justified in assuming that 
Mahayana Buddhism is a development from an original Buddhism 
enshrined in the Pali satras. Instead, they argue that in the absence 
of evidence to the contrary we must surmise that both the Theravada 
and the Mahayana scriptures are divergent developments of an 
original, precanonical teaching which has been lost forever. Among 
these historians, Edward Conze is the most prominent.”° 

Conze argues that only Mahasanghika literature could conceivably 
resolve the problem of original Buddhism. Only if we could locate 
Mahasanghika material which agrees with material in the scriptures 
of their rivals the Theravada, he asserts, could we be reasonably 
certain that this material predates the Second Council.*° Unfortu- 
nately, the only known Mahasanghika works—the Mahavastu and 
possibly the Lalitavistara—are highly mythological accounts of the 
life and previous lives of the Buddha which provide no insight 
whatsoever into the original doctrines of Buddhism. 

Fortunately, there does exist at least one sutra which appears to 
satisfy Conze’s rigorous criterion. This sutra, the Salistamba or ‘Stalk 
of Rice’, is concerned with the doctrine of dependent origination 
(pratityasamutpada), an important Theravada and Sarvastivada 
' doctrine, but a doctrine of little importance in Mahayana Buddhism. 
The Salistamba Satra does not exist in the original Sanskrit, but it 
does exist in Tibetan and Chinese translations. It appears to have 


28 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


been a very important Mahayana sdfra in its day, for it is extensively 
quoted as being authoritative in several Mahayana commentarial texts 
which do survive in the original Sanskrit. By locating these quotations 
and matching them against the Tibetan and Chinese translations, one 
can reconstruct reliably approximately 90% of the original Sanskrit 
text of the sitra.*! 

_ As early as 1913 L. de la Vallée Poussin noted that although the 
Salistamba Sutra was regarded as an authoritative Mahayana text it 
bears much general similarity to Theravada sitras and contains 
numerous passages directly paralleled in the Pali texts. Without the 
benefit of Conze’s work, Poussin did not note at the time that this 
probably indicates that the Sa/istamba Sutra is either a Mahasanghika 
text or one of the earliest if not the earliest surviving example of 
Mahayana literature. Though the scope of the Salistamba Sdutra is 
limited, its general agreement with Theravada doctrine, enhanced 
by many directly parallel passages, suggests that early Mahayana 
doctrine and literature diverged gradually from an original source 
very similar to the Pali sutras. This evidence does not conclusively 
establish the historical accuracy of Pali satras as a whole, but it does 
satisfy Conze’s rigorous criterion with regard to several cardinal 
doctrines and a few notable formulaic passages. In doing so it sheds 
more light than any other available source upon the development 
of Buddhist doctrine and literature from the Mahasanghika schism 
to the reign of the emperor Asoka, i.e. from the mid-fourth to the 
mid-third centuries B.C. This evidence is considered in greater detail 
in the following section on ‘“The Teachings of the Historical Buddha’’. 


THE EMPEROR ASOKA AND THE ASCENDANCY OF THE 
MAHAYANA IN INDIA 


Starting with the reign of ASoka in approximately 250 B.C., the 
development of Buddhism becomes clearer. ASoka—often compared 
to the first Christian emperor, Constantine—was actually an even 
more important figure in the development and spread of Buddhism 
than Constantine was for Christianity. Only from the time of Asoka 
can one begin to speak of India as a political entity, for it is he who - 

. conquered and united for the first time roughly the landmass which 
constitutes current day India. Before Asoka the sub-continent was 
divided into numerous small kingdoms. Asoka waged a ruthless and 
bloody campaign to bring all of these kingdoms under his rule. Once 
he had become the undisputed emperor of all India, Asoka is 
remembered and revered as one of the most benevolent and pro-’ 
gressive monarchs of all time. Buddhists assert that this transforma- 
tion from ruthless warmonger to benign lover of peace was due to 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 29 


ASoka’s conversion to Buddhism. Be that as it may, it is clear that 
the emperor chose Buddhism as the religion with which to unify the 
vast variety of peoples over whom he ruled. It is also clear that he 
ruled wisely by promoting peace, harmony and justice in the name 
of Buddhism. 

Not only is Asoka responsible for the political unification of India 
under a benign and progressive regime, he also reintroduced the art 
of writing on a wide scale after some two millennia of illiteracy in 
India. He left a legacy of scores of high-minded edicts carved into 
rocks and on great granite pillars erected throughout his empire. 
These edicts are the first surviving examples of writing in India after 
the still undeciphered Indus Valley writings, which petered out 
around 1500 B.C. Asoka’s edicts are thus the earliest decipherable 
written source of Indian history. 

The Asokan edicts do not mention any specific sectarian divisions 
within Buddhism, though they do frequently encourage the unity of 
the Sangha and express concern over schism within the order.*? They 
mention a few Buddhist texts by name, but none of these can be 
indisputably identified with a specific school of Buddhism. Asoka 
mentions in one of his edicts “‘the Rahulavada, spoken by the Lord 
_ Buddha with reference to wrong speech.”’ It is likely that this sdtra 
can be associated if not identified with the Ambalatthika Rahulovada 
Sutta of the Theravadin Majjhima Nikaya, a dramatic condemnation 
of lying. It is possible too that ASoka’s Munigathd ( Verses of the 
Sages) refers to the Theragatha (Verses of the Elders) of the Pali 
canon.*? The edicts also mention Buddhist missions sent to lands 
beyond Asoka’s realm. It is clear that at least one of these, the mission 
to Sri Lanka, was Theravadin, for Sri Lanka continued to be the 
bastion of Theravada Buddhism long after the Mahayana had become 
dominant in India. 

A Third Buddhist Council, supposed to have been convened under 
the auspices of Asoka, is recorded in Theravada sources written in 
Sri Lanka after the time of Christ, i.e. the Mahavamsa and the 
Dipavamsa. Naturally, these sources regard the Third Council as 
validating once again the conservative teaching of the Elders. Maha- 
yana sources donot mentiona Third Council, nor does the Theravadin 
Cullavagga, further indication that the Cullavagga text was frozen 
before the time of Asoka and not subject to sectarian corruption 
thereafter. It is quite likely, however, that ASoka would have con- 
vened some such council in order to standardize the state religion 
of his empire. Though his edicts do not mention a council of monks 
under his auspices, they do specify that any who incite schism 
in the Sangha will be disrobed. The Sanci Edict in particular appears 
to indicate that some action to unify the Sangha took place in his 


30 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


reign. 


The Sangha of monks and nuns has been made united (to endure) 
through the generations as long as the sun and moon. That monk 
or nun who divides the Sangha shall be compelled to wear the 
white garments (of a layperson) and live in nonresidence.** 


Asoka may very well have encouraged, if not presided over, 
specific actions to unify the Sangha. At any rate, all indications are 
that he favoured the conservative ‘‘Hinaydna’’ over the more liberal 
and innovative Mahayana and that the Theravada was regarded as 
the most authentic form of Buddhism in his time. Nonetheless, — 
despite Asoka’s apparent Theravadin orientation, it was he who 
established the environment which would result in the ascendancy 
of Mahaydna Buddhism in India. Asoka transformed Buddhism 
overnight from one of the many non-Vedic sects in India into a mass 
religion, the state religion of one of the greatest empires on earth. 
In addition he inaugurated one of the greatest ages of religious 
freedom and free thinking that the world has ever seen. In this 
atmosphere, the more liberal and innovative Mahayana proved to 
be more viable than the conservative Theravada. The pressure for 
doctrinal development, innovation and popularization was much 
greater in the cosmopolitan intellectual ferment of post- ASokan India 
. than in the relative isolation in which Theravada Buddhism thrived 
on the island of Sri Lanka. As noted above, the Mahayanists tended 
to incorporate doctrinal developments into their sdtra literature. As 
aresult, the Mahayana sutras eventually came to contain an exposition 
of Buddhism which is scarcely recognizable from the Theravadin 
point of view. . 

In the light of the foregoing, the innovations of the Mahayana appear 
to fall into three major categories: (1) the introduction of new 
scriptures, most purporting to be the word of the Buddha, (2) the 
development of new and divergent doctrines on the basis of these 
scriptures, and (3) the introduction of supernatural savior figures 
into the originally self-reliant religion of the historical Buddha. 
Despite the confidence and vigor of these innovations, however, the 
Mahayana did not go so far as to deny that their ‘‘Hinayana’’ brethren . 
preserved an accurate recollection of the teachings of the historical 
Buddha. They maintained only that these teachings were deficient 
and had been superseded by the Mahayana teachings, which had 
been reserved by the Buddha for the spiritual elite. The following 
section indicates that it is more likely that the basic Mah4yana 
doctrines developed gradually out of the teachings of the Buddha 
as recorded most accurately in the Pali sdtras. 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 31 
I. THE TEACHINGS OF THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA 


As the foregoing material indicates, the content of the. historical 
Buddha’s teachings is a matter in dispute among both Buddhists and 
scholars of Buddhism. To summarize briefly, the salient elements 
of this dispute are as follows. There are two major, extant branches 
of Buddhism, the Theravada and the Mahayana, both of which claim 
to record accurately the teachings of the historical Buddha. Neither 
branch actually committed to writing any record of the Buddha’s 
teachings until approximately five hundred years after his death. 
From a historian’s point of view it is clear that the Mahayana version 
of these teachings is highly embellished, but this does not prove that 
the Theravada version does not also deviate from the original 
teachings. The Sarvastivada scriptures which survive in Chinese 
translation reveal only that in about 250 B.C. the Hinayanists agreed 
among themselves concerning most of the content of the ‘‘Long”’ 
and ‘‘Middle-length’’ discourses of the Buddha. Such considerations 
led Conze to formulate the principle that rigorous verification of 
_ teachings which may claim to have originated with the historical 

Buddha requires agreement between early Mahayana scriptures and 
those of the Hinayana. Otherwise, each of the major branches of 
Buddhism may lay equally valid claim to recording piecemeal a 
pre-canonical version of the historical Buddha’s teachings, and 
neither can be discredited with any historical certainty. 

As noted above, there is every immediate indication that the 
Mahayana scriptures are not an accurate historical record of the 
teachings of the historical Buddha. The large majority of the Mahd- 
yana Sutras are not even conceivably literal historical accounts for 
any but the least critical of readers. Nonetheless, their hyperbole 

. could represent embellishment upon aspects of original Buddhism 
methodically edited out of the Theravadin and Sarvastivadin scriptu- 
res. Conze and others claim to find evidence of such editing in 
passages in the Pali sutras which at face value appear to contradict 
Theravada doctrine and which have a Mahayana flavor about them. 
These passages, Conze argues, were regarded as being too sacred 
or too authentic to alter or expunge. At the same time, he holds that 
many other similar passages were removed without a trace or altered 
beyond recognition, in an attempt to bolster Theravada doctrine and 
to discredit the Mahayana scriptures. This corpus of expurgated 
material, he implies, characterized that aspect of precanonical 
Buddhism upon which the Mahay4na scriptures are based. Follow- 
ing several Polish scholars whom he regards as belonging to a 
“‘Franco-Belgian’’ school of Buddhology, Conze cites Pali passages 
such as the following as instances of surviving traces of Mahayana 


32 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


teachings in the Pali sitras.?° 

The mind (c/tta) is luminous. It is defiled by defilements from 
without and (may be) cleansed of these defilements.*® 
Consciousness ( vififiana), invisible, infinite and shining every- 
where: it is there that water, earth, air, fire and air do not 
penetrate, that long and short, subtle and gross, pure andimpure, 
name and form cease without a trace. With the cessation of 
consciousness, these all cease.*” 

It is noteworthy that Conze’s argument is the historiographic 
equivalent of the sectarian Mahayana position that the Hinay4anists 
follow a deficient form of the Buddha’s teachings. If anything, the 
actual historical significance of passages such as the foregoing is that 
the Pali satras do record elements later seized upon and developed 
in the Mahay4na, and that their compilers did not edit out such 
elements when a Mahay4na interpretation emerged. In their Thera-- 
vada contexts, these passages are perhaps odd, by virtue of being 
uncharacteristic, but they are quite comfortable, and do not require 
apologetic interpretation. Again it should be emphasized that the 
Mahayana has never claimed that the Hinayana scriptures are histori- 
cally inaccurate in what they do contain, but only that they are 
deficient in not recording teachings found in the Mahayana scriptures. 
Mahaydanists attribute these additional teachings to the historical 
Buddha. The historian must be inclined to conclude that the additional 
doctrines found in the Mahayana scriptures are more likely to be 
natural historical developments from antecedents in the Pali texts. 

It is at this point in the debate that a text like the Salistamba Sutra 
is invaluable in reaching a reasoned historical conclusion concerning 
the nature of original Buddhism. Its status as a Mahayana sdtra is 
amply attested by the fact that it is quoted extensively as an autorita- 
tive text on the doctrine of conditioned arising in Santideva’s Siksa- 
samuccaya and in several of the most important commentarial works 
of Mahayana Buddhism.*® On the other hand, its extensive parallel- 
ism with Pali texts—in terms of both the doctrines expressed and 
the phraseology employed—suggests strongly that the Salistamba 
Sutra represents a period in the development of Buddhist literature 
before the Mahayana and Hinayadna accounts of the historical 
Buddha’s thought had diverged significantly. 

That there was such a period in the development of Buddhism 
belies the Mahayana position, whether traditional or scholarly, 
asserting a radical disagreement from the beginning between the 
Mahayana and the Hinayana concerning the teachings of the historical 
Buddha. Instead, the Salistamba Satra appears to indicate that the 
rift between the two branches of Buddhism was minor in the begin- 
ning, at least from the standpoint of scripture and doctrine, and 


‘THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 33 


that it widened over time. The basic similarity and in some instances 
direct parallelism between the Salistamba Sutra and the Pali sitras, 
moreover, indicates that the widening of this rift was due mostly 
to innovations within the Mahayana. 

The only obviously Mahayana content of the Salistamba Sitra is 
that it is delivered by Maitreya, the mythological future Buddha, and 
that it encourages realization of Dharmakaya Buddha—the meta- 
physical ‘‘Truth-body”’ of the Buddha—as the ultimate spiritual goal. 
It should be noted, however, that the mythological figure Maitreya 
appears also in the Pali sutras,*° along with other clearly non-histori- 
cal characters like the previous Buddha Vipassi in the Mahapadana 
Sutta.” Also noteworthy is the fact that the Salistamba Satra, in its 
treatment of Dharmakaya Buddha, confines itself to conflating two 
well known passages from the Pali texts: ‘“Whoever sees conditioned 
arising sees the Dharma’’*! and ‘‘Whoever sees the Dharma sees 
the Buddha.’’4? In the Theravadin context, the latter statement clearly 
intends that one need not set eyes upon the person of the Buddha 
in order to gain the full benefit of his teachings. In the Silistamba 
Sutra, the conflated statement Clearly intends an abstract, divinized 
concept of the Buddha, as is typical of the Mahayana. 

_ Though the Salistamba Sutra does not specifically elaborate further — 
upon realization of Dharmakaya Buddha, it does incorporate an 
incipient form of a doctrine of illusion (maya) resorting to the simile 
of a reflection in a mirror, imagery which is again typical of later 
Mahayana literature.*? The “‘illusion’’ which the Salistamba illustra- 
tes with this simile, however, is the illusion of an entity which 
transmigrates in the course of rebirth, a use of the mirror simile which 
is actually more similar to imagery found in the Pali sdtras.“* The 
fact that the Mahayana content of the sdtra is so tentative and so 

\nearly Theravadin in expression indicates that initially there were 
only minor disagreements concerning the content of the historical 
Buddha’s teachings. 

The bulk of the Salistamba Satra is a straightforward account of 
the doctrine of conditioned arising which would be slightly surprising | 
to a Theravadin at a few points, but nowhere objectionable. Fortuna- 
tely, the doctrine of conditioned arising is so central in Hinayana 
Buddhism that in the course of its exposition the Salistamba Sutra 
touches upon virtually all points of basic Buddhist doctrine as 
recorded in the Theravada and Sarvastivada versions of the ‘“‘Long”’ 
and ‘‘Middle-length’’ discourses. On this basis, one may say with 
confidence that the essence of the historical Buddha’s teachings was 
the Four Noble Truths: (1) Mundane existence is fundamentally 
unsatisfactory (frustrating, conducive to suffering, duhkha, P. 
dukkha); (2) Desire is the cause of suffering; (3) Nirvana is the 


34 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cessation of suffering; and (4) Buddhism provides a means of realizing 
the cessation of suffering, i.e. the Noble Eightfold Path. All of 
Theravada and most of Mahayana Buddhism may be regarded as 
an elaboration upon these four fundamental doctrines. 

The Noble Eightfold Path includes as its first ‘‘limb’’ recognition 
of the Four Noble Truths wa “‘right view’’. Thus the Eightfold Path 
includes the Four Noble Truths and vice versa. The Eightfold Path 
is traditionally divided into philosophical, moral and~ meditative 
segments, a categorization of the Buddha’s teachings which finds 
almost universal assent within all forms of Buddhism. For this reason 
these three headings provide a convenient framework within which 
to consider the likely teachings of the historical Buddhas. The 
following discussion of the “‘likely teachings’’ of the historical 
Buddha takes Conze’s rigorous criterion, as addressed by the Sai- 
stamba Sutra, as a starting point. Given this initial orientation, this 
discussion also looks to evidence provided by the Upanisads, 
non-Buddhist texts roughly contemporary with the Buddha. Where 
Buddhist doctrines are similar to Upanisadic teachings there is 
additional reason to regard them as archaic. Moreover, again given 
rigorous historical criteria as a starting point, the fact that incipient 
doctrines in the Pali sétras provide a convincing basis for doctrinal 
developments i in the Mahayana may be regarded as further evidence 
bearing upon the question of the Buddha’s original teachings. The 
phrase “‘original teachings’, given the rigor of Conze’s criterion, 
must be taken broadly as indicating early Buddhist doctrines which 
developed within one hundred years of the death of the historical 
Buddha. 

A final criterion to be considered is the internal coherence of the 
early Buddhist doctrines identified on the basis of the foregoing 
historical criteria. One must assume that the historical Buddha’s 
teachings were coherent, if not perhaps rigidly systematic, when they 
were given. Therefore any reconstruction of these teachings should 
reveal a coherent framework of doctrine. The following treatment 
may well be deficient, in that some original teachings may be omitted 
for lack of specific evidence, but it attempts to present a coherent 
framework of doctrine, based on specific historical criteria, which 
convincingly prefigures the remarkable diversity of subsequent 
Buddhist thought. 


ANALYTICAL PHILOSOPHICAL TEACHINGS 
The first Noble Truth is often rendered in English as ‘‘suffering’’, 


a literal translation of the Pali dukkha or the Sanskrit dubkha.** 
“‘Unsatisfactoriness’’ or ‘‘frustration,’’ however, are more adequate 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS _ ~ 35 


renditions of the term in its Buddhist context. Buddhism recognizes 
readily that existence can sometimes seem pleasant. The apparent 
pleasantness of existence is in fact regarded as the chief disincentive 
to the pursuit of a spiritual life. The first Noble Truth of Buddhism 
asserts that all mundane things—from the most trivial to the most 
sublime—are impermanent (aaitya, P. anicca) and doomed to pass 
away in time. Atypically in the Indian context, according to Buddhism 
this impermanence applies to our selves as well, and consequently 
there is no self (atta, Skt. atman). All beings in the universe—from 
the most trivial to the most sublime—are also doomed to pass away 
utterly in time. The doctrines of impertianence and selflessness thus 
form the two complementary facets of the most fundamental of 
Buddhist doctrines, the doctrine of universal unsatisfactoriness. 
These three together—anitya, anatman and duhkha—constitute the 
“three marks’’ (triJaksana) of existence. Recognition of these three 
essential characteristics in all things is held to be tantamount to 
penetration of the true nature of reality. 

_ Most religious thinkers of any age or place would accept the 
Buddhist doctrine of impermanence enthusiastically and without 
reservation. The doctrine of ‘‘non-self’’ (anatta, Skt. anatman), 
however, set Buddhism apart from contemporary Indian religions 
in the age of the historical Buddha and continues to set Buddhism 
apart from and at odds with all other major religious faiths. In the 
first place, belief in rebirth and in the self as the vehicle of rebirth - 
had become practically axiomatic among Indian religions at the time 
of the Buddha. Denial of the self was tantamount to denial of an 
afterlife in the ancient Indian context, though as discussed below, 
the Buddha affirmed rebirth by means ofa novel dovetailing of causal 
theory and morality. In the second place, the Buddha’s denial of the 


- . self had the effect of relativizing any and all deities. Though the 


Buddha did not deny the existence of deities, they too, according ~ 
to the non-self doctrine, are doomed eventually to pass away. 

This latter assertion was less radical in the Indian context than 
it is in relation to Western theistic religions. Indians of the Buddha’s 
time had become accustomed to cyclical theories of cosmology, 
whereby the universe goes through enormously long periods of 
evolution and devolution, alternating between chaos and cosmos. 
Minor deities—and in some schools of thought all but the most 
sublime metaphysical principle of the universe—were believed to 
be caught up in this cyclical universal process, coming into existence 
and going out of existence along with the cosmos as a whole. The 
Pali sdtras make it clear, however, that no deity and no metaphysical 
principle is exempt from this cyclical evolution and devolution of 
the universe. According to early Buddhism, there is no creator or 


36 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ruler of the universe, and no unchanging metaphysical principle 
undergirding it. 

Later forms of Buddhism drifted away from the radical atheism 
of the Pali sdtras, but it is arguable that none of them drifted so far 
as to be accurately characterized as theistic, and that at most they 
can be termed ‘“‘absolutistic.”” Mahayana Buddhism typically identi- ' 
fied an abstract concept of the true Buddha—the dharmakaya or 
“‘Truth-body”’ of the Buddha—as opposed to the airmanakaya or 
‘manifest body’’ of the historical Buddha—with the metaphysical 
principle of the universe. Nonetheless Mahayana Buddhism does not 
go so far as to assert that this metaphysical dharmakaya Buddha 
created or governs the universe. Early Buddhism avoided any such 
metaphysical speculation. Instead, like their contemporaries, the 
Jainas and Ajivakas, early Buddhists accepted the universe as a 
given—it has always been here and always will be here. Early 
Buddhists also accepted the common Indian belief in a cyclical 
universe, though this was not by any means a central or even 
important doctrine of the religion. 

In the place of a supreme deity or metaphysical principle, early 
Buddhism’s ultimate referent and goal was nirvana, cessation of 
rebirth and thereby of suffering. Grammatically, the term airvana 
means ‘‘blown out’’. It was probably intended originally to connote 
extinction of the consuming flame of desire and ignorance which 
keeps one entangled in samisara, the mundane realm of rebirth. There 
is some indication too that the term may have referred to extinction 
of the ‘‘flame’’ of consciousness, which according to early Buddhism 
is the medium in which the process of rebirth takes place. As a passage 
already verified as authentic states: 


Consciousness (vififidna), invisible, infinite and shining 
everywhere: it is there that water, earth, air, fire and air do 
not penetrate, that long and short, subtle and gross, pure and 
impure, name and form (24ma-rdpa) cease without a trace. With 
the cessation of consciousness, these all cease.*® 


The spiritual ambition to bring an end to rebirth and thus to 
mundane consciousness as we know it was common in both orthodox 
and heterodox Indian religions of the Buddha’s time. Common too 
were the beliefs that achieving an end to rebirth entailed cessation 
of individual consciousness, that this in turn involved realization of 
and participation in the ultimate nature of reality, and that both the 
experience of spiritual release and the ultimate reality thus encounter- 
ed were utterly beyond the scope of words or thought.*’ The Buddha, 

_ however, was more explicit and systematic than any of his recorded 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS ; 37 


-contemporaries in denying that one could in any way express or 
conceive ofthe ultimately real. In the course of this denial, the Buddha 
resorted to the famed catuskofi—the ‘four-cornered negation’ or 
‘tetralemma’. The four-cornered negation is fundamental and ubiqui- 
tous in the Madhyamika philosophy of Mahayana Buddhism. 

According to the catuskoti there are four logical possibilities given 
any assertion: (1) it is, (2) it is not, (3) it both is and is not, and 
(4) it neither is nor is not, With regard to any positive assertion about 
nirvana the Buddha held that all of these possibilities were false. 
Specifically, he denied that after realizing final nirvana one exists, 
does not exist, both does and does not exist, or neither does nor 
does not exist.*® The Pali sdtras also record instances in which the 
Buddha maintained a ‘noble silence’’ in response to a similar line 
of questioning.*? Mahayana Buddhism elaborated extensively upon 
the theme of the silence of the Buddha inthe ccurse of its development 
of an abstract concept of dharmakaya Buddha and of the doctrine 
of illusoriness. The Lanikavatara Sitra, for example, proclaims that 
in reality the Buddha never uttered a single word, ‘‘for not speaking 
is the Buddha’s speaking.’’*° 

Reasoning based on the catuskoti underpins the philosophical 
characterization of Buddhism as the ‘‘Middle Path’’, a characteriza- 
_ tion universally accepted throughout Buddhism. In the first instance, 
the Middle Path characterized a spiritual discipline between the two 
extremes of self-indulgence and self-mortification. By the outset of 
his own solitary search for enlightenment, the historical Buddha, by 
all accounts, had experienced both these extremes to the full, first 
as a pampered prince and then as a rigorous ascetic. After the 
Buddha’s enlightenment, in the early stages of the formulation of 
his teaching, ‘“Middle Path’’ came to connote also a philosophical 
position between the two extremes of nihilism and speculative 
metaphysical absolutism, in Pali Buddhist terminology the meta- 
physical extremes of absolute discontinuity (ucchedavada) and eter- 
nalism ($asvatavada).*' In context, these two rejected extremes refer 
to nihilism on the one hand and naive belief in an everlasting soul 
or metaphysical principle on the other, precisely as the terms are 
used in the Salistamba Sitra, where it is said that the being who 
is reborn is not to be viewed as eternal (S4svata) and not to be viewed 
as ‘‘cut off’ (uccheda).>* 

Aside from the fact that reasoning based on the catuskowi is 
conspicuous throughout Indian thought, the Salistamba Satra overtly 
employs the tetralemma, thus satisfying Conze’s criterion for 
establishing the content of original Buddhism. Upanisadic texts 
roughly contemporary with the Buddha employ similar though less 
systematic denials in the course of elucidating their concepts of 


38 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ultimate reality,** and Jainism employs prominently amore elaborate 
version of such reasoning in its syadvada or ‘‘doctrine of possibili- 
ties.’’°> These latter two considerations may indicate that the catu- 
skofi was not an invention of the Buddha, but they enhance the case 
for including this important doctrine in an account of the teachings 
of the historical Buddha. It bears repeating, moreover, that the 
catuskowi and the doctrine of the ineffability of the ultimately real 
are an indispensable foundation for later developments in the 
Madhyamika dialectic of emptiness ($unyata). 

Reasoning derived logically from the catuskoftiand resorting direct- 
ly to the philosophical doctrine of the Middle Path is also integral 
to the Buddhist doctrine of rebirth without a soul. No aspect of 
Buddhjsm has been so poorly understood and so often misrepre- 
sented in the West, possibly because of failure to come to grips 
with the reasoning behind the multiple logical possibilities recognized 
in Buddhism from its inception. Some Westerners have even at- 
tempted to deny that the Buddha ever taught the doctrine of non- 
self,°° presumably because they felt that it is contradictory to 
Buddhism’s conspicuous and admirable moral philosophy. Be that 
as it may, the doctrine of non-self is so widely recognized, if not 
always emphasized, in the various extant forms of Buddhism and 
Buddhist literature that there can be no serious doubt that it formed _ 
an integral part of the original teachings of the Buddha. Nor can there 
be any doubt that in conjunction with this doctrine the Buddha taught 
that one is morally responsible and accountable for one’s actions 
(karma) through the mechanism of rebirth. 

The apparent contradiction in asserting rebirth while denying that 
there is any abiding personal identity, i.e. any self which can be 
reborn, is not a contradiction at all from the standpoint of catuskofti 
reasoning. Put simply, there both is and is not rebirth, and there 
neither is nor is not something which is reborn. The classical 
Theravadin statement on rebirth is that the being as which one is 
reborn is “‘not oneself and not another”’ (na ca so, na ca afifio). This . 
statement is not canonical, but encapsulates admirably the canonical 
position expressed in a passage’ where the Buddha, again resorting 
to the catuskoti, denies that one’s suffering is caused by oneself, 
by another, by both or ‘‘arisen by chance”’ (adhiccasamuppanna).”* 
The Salistamba Sitra employs a direct parallel to this Pali passage 
in the course of expounding both the growth of a sprout from a seed 
and the process of rebirth.*? The Pali passage concludes with the 
following statement, which is well verified in both terminology and 
concept as an encapsulation of the early Buddhist understanding of 
rebirth. 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS . 39 


“The person who acts experiences the results’: this, Kassapa, 
which you first called “‘suffering caused by another’’ amounts 
to the eternalist theory. “‘One acts and another experiences the 
results’’ occurs to the experiencer as “‘suffering caused by 
another’ and amounts to the annihilationist theory... Avoiding 
both extremes, the Tathagata (Buddha) teaches the truth 
(dharma) by amiddle (way): ignorance conditions mental forma- 
tions (etc., enumerating the formula of conditioned arising 
discussed below). 


Thus, in both the Theravada sdtras and the Salistamba Sutra the 
Buddhist doctrine of rebirth is held to be preeminently intelligible 
in the light of the Buddhist theory of causation as elucidated in the 
doctrine of dependent origination. 

According to the Buddhist theory of causation, the laws of cause 
and effect operate just as inexorably in the moral realm as they do 
in the physical world. Like the Salistamba Sutra, the Pali’ sutras 
employ the simile of a seed growing into a plant to illustrate this 
point.” If one plants a seed, and various conditions necessary for 
its growth are met, a plant will grow. The plant is not the seed, and 
yet it is not other than the seed. It is a result of the seed. Obviously, 
the type of seed sown determines the type of plant which will result. 

_ Similarly in the moral realm, if one performs an action (Karman), 
a result ( vipaka) similar in nature to the action performed will accrue 
to the one who performed the action. 

Just as in the physical realm a result may not be simultaneous with 
its cause; so in the moral realm there may be a delay in the 
actualization of the moral result of an action. During this delay, there 
may well have been a considerable change in the person who initially 
performed the action in question. He or she may well have aged 
several years. By this time, the being who suffers or enjoys the result 
of the previously performed action would be “‘not the same, and 
yet not another’’. Similarly in the physical realm, a drought at the 
time of planting a seed may result later in a stunted plant.. Both 
the plant and the person in question may suffer or profit from causes 
and conditions which themselves occurred and vanished long ago. 
In fact, according to Buddhist moral and causal theory, both the plant 
and the person as such are at any given time the sum total result 
of myriad causes and conditions which have occurred in the past. 
The constant operation of cause and effect brings about constant 
change in both sentient beings and inanimate objects. The effect of 
any given cause—whether immediate or delayed, and whether occur- 
ring in the physical or moral realm—often operates upon a thing 
or being which has changed in a minor or major way since the 


40 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


occurrence of the cause in question. Whether or'not the same thing 
or being ‘‘deserves’’ the result which accrues at the time is a moot 
point, for the laws of cause and effect are impersonal and inexorable, 
whether operating in the physical or the moral realm. 

In the physical realm, this constant changing of things is denoted 
by the term anityata, ““impermanence”’, while the constant change 
in sentient beings gives rise to the term andatman, “‘no self’’. Thus 
far, the Buddhist theory of karma and its results is empirical. It is 
a fact of life that one may suffer as an adult for actions performed 
as a teenager, and that the adult who suffers is not the teenager who 
performed the action. The Buddhist moral doctrine, of course, also 
includes the concept of rebirth, whereby one may suffer or prosper 
in a future lifetime as a result of actions performed in a past life 
which one does not remember at all. 

Some may not accept the doctrine of rebirth, but as noted above, 
rebirth was all but axiomatic in India at the time of the historical 
‘Buddha. It was one of those commonly held, antecedent beliefs upon 
which all great religions haye been built. In this area, the radical 
contribution of the historical Buddha to Indian moral philosophy was 
his insistence that the laws of moral cause and effect are similar to 
the physical laws of cause and effect, and that they operate between 
lifetimes just as they operate within a single lifetime. This is to say 
that moral effects invariably operate upon a being who has changed 
since the performance of the action in question, whether in this or 
a future lifetime. 

Thus, though the Buddha accepted the general theory of rebirth 
current in his day, this acceptance was by no means uncritical. The 
Buddha’s teaching of rebirth without a soul was actually an attempt 
to rationalize existing concepts of rebirth which were based on belief 
in the self or soul. Pre-Buddhist theories of rebirth regarded the soul 
as the innermost essence of one’s identity. As such, the soul was 
usually regarded as sublime and unchanging.® On the other hand, 
the soul was universally regarded as the agent ultimately responsible 
for evil as well as good actions. This contradiction in the existing 
theories of the soul and rebirth was not lost entirely upon the 
forebears of the Buddha. The Upanisadic sages, some of whom 
definitely predated the Buddha, conceived of the innermost self in 
various ways, but typically regarded it as the eternal, sublime, 
unchanging essence of one’s being. They recognized early on the 
contradiction in asserting that such an entity could meaningfully be 
said to suffer or benefit from actions occurring in the mundane world, 
or indeed that such an entity could conceivably be responsible for 
relatively “‘good’’ or ‘‘bad’’ actions. In order to overcome such 
problems, religious thinkers ‘predating the Buddha, some of them’ 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 41 


recorded in the Upanisads, had begun to devise various hierarchies 
of the faculties of the soul, and suggest that karma and rebirth affected 
only the lower, less essential aspects of the person which were 
somehow shed by the essential, eternal soul at the point of release.° 

While the immediate motivation behind such speculations was 
religious apologetic, the speculations themselves involved a re- 
markable degree of quasi-scientific psychological observation and 
deduction. The available textual evidence suggests that before the 
historical Buddha the Upanisadic sages had recognized the five 
empirical senses as conduits of information to the mind (manas), 
and postulated yet deeper levels of consciousness remarkably 
similar, though perhaps not identical, to modern psychological 
concepts such as ego (ahamkdara), consciousness { vijiana), and the 
superconscious (buddhi, prajiia). The best known of these layered 
theories of the self is probably the Taittiriya Upanisad’s doctrine 
of the five ‘‘sheaths’’ of the soul, the material ( anna), the vital (prana), 
the mental (manas), the conscious (vijfiana) and the blissful 
(ananda).% © 

There is every indication that the historical Buddha expanded upon 
this existing fund of psychological observation and speculation in 
order to formulate his own systematic analysis of the individual 
human being into the “‘five aggregates” (paficaskandha, Pali pafica 
khandha), again a doctrine conspicuously treated in the Salistamba 
Satra. According to this doctrine, that which we typically experience 
as the individual self is in fact divisible into at least five *‘aggregates’’. 
These are: (1) body or materiality (rapa), (2) feelings ( vedana), (3) 
conceptual identification (samjfa), (4) conditioning factors (sam- 
sk&ra, Pali sankhara) and (5) consciousness ( vijfidna). Together these 
form a constantly fluctuating conglomerate which only gives the 
appearance of abiding personal identity. Each aggregate, in turn, can 
be further analysed into constituent components. Body, like all 
material phenomena, is composed of the elements earth, air, fire 
and water. Akasa, a fifth element recognized in the Salistamba Sutra, 
and a common feature in Mahayana literature, is relatively scarce 
in the Pali sitras as one of the recognized elements. Feelings, 
conceptual identifications and consciousness all occur as results of 
the activity of the five senses and the mind (manas) as sensus 
_ communis. Thus there may be visual feeling, olfactory identification 
or tactile consciousness and so on up to eighteen types of feeling, 
identification and consciousness (i.e. 6 senses times 3 aggregates). 
As the following sections of this introductory material show, this 
rudimentary categorization of experience was eventually expanded 
dramatically in the Abhidharma literature in an attempt to analyze 


42 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


minutely and exhaustively the various possible moments of con- 
sciousness. 

In the Pali sutras themselves, each of the eighteen basic types of 
feeling, identification and consciousness may be yet further analyzed 
according to the nature of the aggregate in question. Feelings, the 
most primitive level of experience, occur in three categories: 
pleasant, unpleasant and neutral. Identifications represent the more 
refined experiences normally denoted with adjectives, such as red, 
round, smooth, fragrant, etc. At this point, a specific identification 
regarding the object in question may be formed at the level of the 
“‘conditioning factors’ aggregate. For example pleasant visual, tacti- 
cal and olfactory feelings, along with similar identifications of ‘‘red, 
round, smooth and fragrant’, may give rise to the concept ‘‘an 
apple’’. Upon further experience this concept may be revised to, 
for example, ‘‘a pomegranate’’. In addition to conceptualization, 
volition also occurs at the level of conditioning factors. In this context 
volition indicates karmic efficient reactions such as desire (e.g., for 
apples) or aversion (e.g., to pomegranates). Similar processes occur 
throughout one’s waking life, and presumably in sleep and dreams 
as well. Interestingly, however, there is little indication of an early 
Buddhist doctrine regarding sleep and dreaming, though such specu- 
lations were enthusiastically pursued among the Buddha’s Upanisa- 
dic contemporaries, most notably in the Mandikya Upanisad. 

Be that as it may, according to early Buddhism a constant barrage 
of experiences continually modifies the fifth aggregate, conscious- 
ness, which is typically represented metaphorically as a stream in 
the Pali sutras. In these sdtras the term ‘‘consciousness’’ most often 
appears to represent the sum total functioning of the other three 
nonmaterial aggregates. In some instances, however, it appears to 
denote a deeper, more essential level of being reminiscent of Upani- 
sadic treatments of the layered self. This lack of clarity may be 
intentional, or may have been regarded as unavoidable given the 
delicacy of propounding a doctrine of rebirth without a soul in a 
culture in which the two doctrines were so closely associated. 

At any rate, consciousness occupies a unique position in early 
Buddhist doctrine by virtue of its crucial role in the process of rebirth 
and release. On the one hand, the Pali. sdutras state explicitly and 
firmly that consciousness does not pass from one birth to another 
as an entity.°” On the other hand, some role for consciousness in 
the rebirth passage is implied in several passages which indicate that 
upon the realization of final liberation consciousness “‘ceases’’ or 
is not “‘reinstated’’, or that it ‘‘descends”’ at rebirth. Such phrases 
seem to indicate that the consciousness aggregate represents the 
medium through which rebirth occurs.® In any case, it is clear that 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 43 


consciousness characterized as a stream is not to be taken as an 
entity. A stream flows along, constantly changing, constantly modi- 
fied by rocks, debris, etc., and yet recognizable as the same stream. 
At some point it may plunge over a precipice, shatter into spray, 
and then reform at the bottom into another stream which is “‘neither 
the same stream nor a different stream’’. Similarly, early Buddhist 
doctrine appears to represent consciousness—whether as a separate 
aggregate or the sum total functioning of the other nonmaterial 
aggregates—as flowing along in a recognizably continuous though 
constantly changing pattern throughout one’s life, being radically 
interrupted at death, and then reforming in rebirth in such a way 
as to be ‘“‘not oneself, and yet not another’. 

Clearly, a systematic concept of cause and effect—governed by 
the four logical alternatives of the catuskofi—underpins all of the 
foregoing psychological and philosophical material. For example, 
one is not reborn, because no abiding entity survives death. On the 
other hand one isreborn in the sense-that one’s actions and experien- 
ces in this life will affect causally a consciousness reinstated in 
another life. Even in a single lifetime, in one sense an infant develops _ 
- into an adult through the mechanism of cause and effect operating 
-both mentally and physically, while in.another sense, the infant’s 
physical body, desires, motivations and intentions perish utterly 
through that same mechanism. The infant both does and does not 
survive infancy. 

Both of these processes of identity in difference—whether in one 
lifetime or across many lifetimes—are summarized in the Buddhist 
doctrines of dependent origination (pratityasamutpada). The Salis- 
tamba Siutra’s extensive treatment of the twelvefold formula of 
dependent origination leaves little doubt that the classical formula 
as frequently expounded in the Pali sutras goes back to within a. 
hundred years of the historical Buddha himself. It is notable; how- 
ever, that the Theravada Digha Nikayanowhere contains the comple- 
te, classical, twelvefold formula. Instead, it contains only truncated 
or variant formulas. This seems to verify the immediate impression 
that the classical Buddhist doctrine of dependent origination is in 
fact an amalgamation of the several separate formulas, and suggests 
that the classical formula may well not have been assembled until 
after the death of the historical Buddha. At the same time, such 
glaring omissions in the Digha Nikaya formulas again testify that the 
preservers and compilers of the Pali Nikayas were remarkably cons- 
cientious as historians and textualists. The temptation to complete 
deficient formulas of such central doctrinal concern must have been 
great indeed. 

The classical, twelvefold formula of dependent origination, which 


44 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


incorporates many of the terms and concepts already discussed, runs 
as follows: (1) ignorance conditions conditioning factors, (2) condi- 
tioning factors (in turn) condition consciousness, (3) consciousness 
conditions name-and-form, (4) name-and-form conditions the six 
senses (including mind), (5) the six senses condition sensual contact, 
(6) sensual contact conditions feeling, (7) feeling conditions craving, 
(8) craving conditions grasping, (9) grasping conditions existence, 
(10) existence conditions birth {i.e. rebirth), (11) birth conditions 
(12) aging and death. 

According to the classical Theravadin interpretation of the formula, 
it carries on in a cycle. If one dies in a state of ignorance, this will 
condition, i.e. influence, the final thoughts occurring in that life, 
which will in turn determine the initial state of consciousness in the 
next life. This initial state of consciousness conditions ‘‘name- 
and-form’’, which is taken to denote the conscious and corporeal 
aspects of the human being developing in the womb. This construal 
of the term ‘‘name-and-form’’, though supported in the Salistamba 
Sdtra, is dubious on lexicographical, historical and conceptual 
grounds, and the overall interpretation is awkward at several points. 
For example consciousness, a fundamental aspect or comprehensive 
designation of mind, occurs before ‘‘name-and-form’’, which is 
supposed to mean ‘‘mind and body’’. Birth occurs twice within the 
formula, and existence, which the entire formula is held to describe, 
only occurs near the end. . 

As a result of such difficulties, modern scholars have suggested 
that the classical twelvefold formula of conditioned arising is actually 
an artificial amalgamation of three originally separate, though possi- 
bly overlapping formulas.® In the above enumeration, items 1-3 
appear to refer to rebirth, assuming that “‘name-and-form”’ refers 
to “‘mind and body” as per the traditional interpretation. Items 3-9 
appear to refer to the psychology of desire independently of the 
doctrine of rebirth; and items 10-12 appear to be an expansion upon 
the first ‘noble truth’ of the inherent unsatisfactoriness of existence. 
Thus, on the one hand there is reason to suspect that the classical 
formula of dependent origination may be an amalgamation. On the 
other hand, there is equally good reason to believe that such amalga- 
mation reflects a deliberate systematization of very early Buddhist 
doctrine, an amalgamation which may have occurred even during 
the Buddha’s lifetime. The Salistamba Sitra’s extensive treatment 
of the twelvefold formula of conditioned arising alone confirms the 
antiquity of the classical formulation of the doctrine. 

In any case, the problem remains that there is little in the Pali 
sutras themselves to suggest that ‘‘name-and-form’”’ refers to the 
conscious and corporeal duality often supposed to constitute a 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 45 


human being. This situation suggests a third interpretation of depen- 
dent origination which renders the classical formula more coherent 
and emphasizes similarities between the overall standpoint of the 
Pali sutras and that of Mahayana Buddhism. This third interpretation 
centers on the term namardpa. 

Literally, nama means ‘‘name”’ and rdpa means “*form or appear- 
ance’’. There are several appropriate Sanskrit and Pali words for . 
‘“‘mind’’ or “‘consciousness’’, notably citta and vijfiana. Kaya or 
Sarira are immediately obvious terms for ‘“body’’. It is thus very 
doubtful that ndmarupa originally meant ‘‘mind and body.’’ In the 
‘Upanisads, which are roughly contemporary with the historical 
Buddha, the term ndmardpa is a general designation for any discrete 
phenomenon. According to Upanisadic reasoning, all phenomena are 
characterized by their names and forms. ‘‘Name”’ is more than a 
verbal designation. It implies a concept, existing in the mind of the 
perceiver, which is at least potentially nameable. ‘‘Form”’ does not 
necessarily imply substance, but rather appearance or perceptibility. 
According to Upanisadic reasoning, in order to exist in any meaningful 
sense of the term, a phenomenon must present a form perceivable 
by the senses, and must be greeted in consciousness with a concept 
corresponding to that form. In short, consciousness and the objects 
of consciousness are interdependent. It is most likely that the term 
namaripa in the Pali satras should be similarly.construed. 

The Pali sutras repeatedly affirm the interdependence of cons- 
ciousness and the objects of consciousness without asserting the 
priority of either.’”° The following passage is a notable example. On 
the one hand, form ‘‘comes to be’’ as a result of having been 
perceived. On the other hand, consciousness is said to arise on the 
basis of form. 


‘When, sir, the internal eye is intact, external forms come within 
its range and there is appropriate attention, then there is appear- 
ance of the appropriate type of consciousness. Whatever is 
the form (rapa) of what has thus come to be is called the grasping 
aggregate of form.’ 


In addition, a few Pali passages clearly intend an Upanisadic construal 
of the term ‘‘name-and-form’’.’? For example: 


There is just this body and external to it, name-and-form. This 
is a pair. Conditioned by this pair are (sensory) contact and the 
six (sense) spheres.”° 


Most occurrences of the term ndémardpa in the Pali sdtras are 


N 


46 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


readily amenable to interpretation as “‘concept-and-appearance’’, 
and only a very few, if any, actually appear to refer to ‘‘mind- 
and-body.’’”* 

Given the obvious similarity between the early Buddhist and 
Upanisadic usages of the term namardupa, it is also possible, in 
addition to the traditional and Western scholarly interpretations, to 
construe the classical formula of dependent origination as a quasi- 
immaterialist treatment of the repeated arising and passing away 
of phenomena existing in mutual interdependence with conscious- 
ness. According to this interpretation, each new phenomenon is 
greeted with ignorance, which gives rise to a conditioning factor, 
an idea, which in turn influences the state of consciousness of the 
perceiving subject. This state of consciousness influences the 
concept and appearance (name-and-form) of the object perceived. 
The predisposition entailed in the subjective “‘concept and appear- 
ance”’ of the phenomenon in question conditions the nature of 
sensual information transmitted, and so on until the decay and demise 
of that particular, impermanent phenomenon occurs. Similarly, the 
perceiving subject is constantly modified by the nature of the objects 
perceived and is also discontinuous and impermanent. Conscious- 
ness, like the phenomena to which it responds, arises and passes 
away repeatedly. 

The implication of the foregoing is that according to early Buddhist 
thought one never experiences ‘‘external”’ objects as such. One only 
experiences apparent objects with an admixture of subjective bias. 
On the other hand, one’s subjective consciousness is influenced by 
the objects with which it comes in contact. In other words, conscious- 
ness and the objects of consciousness are interdependent and mutual- 
ly determinative. As the Mahdpadana Sutta of the Digha Nikaya 
States: 


When there is consciousness, there is name-and-form. 
Consciousness is the condition of name-and-form. When there 
is name-and-form, there is consciousness. Name-and-form is 
the condition of consciousness. > - 


Though a full analysis is beyond the scope of the present intro- 
duction, it is obvious that such psychological theories provide a 
convincing prototype for both the Madhyamika dialectic and Vijfiana- 
vada metaphysics. The implication of the Pali sdtras as a whole, and 
arguably that of the formula of dependent origination, is that the 
mutual interdependence of consciousness and its objects precludes 
valid knowledge of any independent reality, whether objective or 
subjective. Similarly, in terms of the Madhyamika dialectic, there 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS , AT 


can be no self-existent knower, no self-existent thing known, and 
no self-existent act of knowing.”° In terms of Vijfianavada meta- 
physics as classically formulated by Dharmakirti, though there may 
well be objectively existing external objects, it is impossible to 
establish their existence, and it is possible to proceed with rigorous, 
formal logic without reference to any objectively existing reality. 
In highlighting the necessary subjective component in any experience 
‘of an object, the Pali sdtras pave the way for discarding the objective 
referent of consciousness altogether in Mahayana Buddhist philo- 
sophy. 


Morac Doctrines 


Fhe foregoing analytical philosophy and psychology, in addition 
to countering ignorance of the true nature of reality, is intended 
to counter desire as well. By virtue of its position as the second Noble 
Truth, the cause of all human suffering, desire may appear to be 
regarded in early Buddhism as a graver fault than ignorance. In fact, 
ignorance is regarded as the obverse of desire. The two are insepara- 
ble. According to early Buddhist doctrine, and much of later Buddhist 
doctrine as well, if one were truly to comprehend the impermanence 
of all phenomena, including oneself, one’s desire would automati- 
cally cease. Conversely, in the absence of desire that things be other 
than what they are, ignorance of how things actually are would 
automatically fade. 

In particular, mistaken belief in an abiding self or soul, and all 
of the desires that such belief spawns, are held to be responsible 
for all moral evil. 


I do not see any way, monks, to embrace belief in the soul so 
that grief, anguish, suffering, despair and lamentation would not 
arise.’ 


- The analytical content of the Buddha’s teaching is not, therefore, 
an end in itself. It is instead quite explicitly a means to the end of 
overcoming desire, and thereby bringing about an end to suffering. 
Analytical doctrine is not, however, a self-sufficient means to this 
end. Desire must be attacked not only at its source—ignorance of 
the first Noble Truth and all that it entails—but must also be attacked 
in its results, immoral behavior. 

In addition to ignorance and desire, the third grave fault, according 
to the Pali sutras, is hatred. Desire, hatred and ignorance when 
considered together are usually referred to in the Pali sutras as Jobha, 
dosa and moha, or in Sanskrit as raga, dvesa and moha, a triad which 


48 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


occurs in the Sdalistamba Satra,” and is well attested throughout 
Buddhism. These three are termed in Pali the ‘‘roots of unwhole- 
someness’’ (akusalamila), Their opposites are the roots of whole- 
someness ( kusa/améla). Buddhist morality in general, whether early 
or late, is based upon a distinction between the wholesome and the 
unwholesome rather than between good and evil. This terminology 
is important because Buddhism posits no God who might decree 
what is good and what is evil. Instead, within the realm of karma 
and rebirth, thoughts and actions truly conducive to the immediate 
as well as the ultimate relief of suffering, both one’s own and. that 
of others, are wholesome. Their opposites, of course, are unwhole- 
some. Buddhist morality is thus founded upon compassion towards 
one’s fellow beings rather than obedience to divine decree. The Sutta 
Nipata, a very ancient Buddhist text, summarizes admirably the 
essence of Buddhist morality: 


As I am, so are they. As they are, so am I. Comparing others 
with oneself, one should not harm or cause harm. ’? 


The compassionate attitude enjoined by Buddhist morality is held 
to be practically validated by the mechanism of karma and rebirth. 
The term “‘karma’’, whether in the Buddhist context or in other 
Eastern contexts, is often misunderstood in the West and therefore 
requires brief elucidation as the term occurs in Sanskrit. Literally, 
*‘karman’ means *‘‘action’’. In most Indian contexts, and particularly 
in the Buddhist context, karma implies ‘‘volitional action or 
thought’’. Emphatically, karma is not like some sort of blessing or 
curse hovering around one. One does not Aave good or bad karma, 
one performs good or bad karma. The result of a volitional action 
or thought is karmavipaka or Karmaphala, “‘the maturing or fruit of 
karma’’. If one stubs one’s toe, that is not bad karma, it is the result 
of bad karma. Karma is volitional action or thought itself, nothing 
more. Volition, moreover, is the essence of karma.®° Unintentional 
actions are not regarded as morally operative, even though they may 
cause great benefit or harm. Negligence, of course, is regarded as 
volitional, so that for example a drunk driver is karmically liable 
for negligence whether or not an accident results. 

With these fundamental concepts in mind, it becomes clear that 
the noble eightfold path, the fourth Noble Truth, deals primarily with 
Buddhist morality. There is little contention among Buddhists or 
scholars of Buddhism concerning the basic moral teachings of the 
historical Buddha. The eightfold path, moreover, is recognized as 
a teaching of the historical Buddha in virtually all schools of 
Buddhism, thus meeting. the historical criterion of consensus. It 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 49 


therefore serves admirably in the present context as a framework 
within which to exhibit the Buddha’s moral teachings. The eightfold 
path is traditionally divided into three categories known as ‘‘pillars’’ 
(skandha, Pali khanda): wisdom (prajfia, Pali pafifia), ethics (Sila) 
and meditation (samadhi). The Buddha himself, however, is not 
recorded in the Digha or Majjhima Nikayas as dividing the path in 
this way. In the Ma ijjhima Nikaya this threefold division of the path 
is attributed to the nun Dhammadinna,*! and in the Digha Nikaya 
Ananda is recorded as dividing a variant list of stages of spiritual 
progress in this way.®? In the Anguttara Nikaya, in the section on 
threes, the Buddha is recorded as referring to prajfid, Silaand samadhi 
as a triad, but not specifically in relation to the eightfold path.®? 

This situation emphasizes the fact that there is a considerable 
degree of arbitrariness in the traditional threefold categorization of 
the eight ‘‘limbs’’ of the path. For example, according to the tradi- 
tional order of enumeration of the limbs of the path, the twofold 
wisdom pillar comes first, its components being (1) right view and 
(2) right thought. Right view (samyagdrst/) is consistently equated 
in the Pali sdtras with acceptance of the four Noble Truths, and thus 
may be regarded as entailing understanding of and agreement with 
the analytical, doctrinal material considered in the previous section 
of this introduction. The second limb of the path, however, samyak- 
samkalpa, “‘right thought’’ or ‘‘right intention’’, relates more to 
morality than to analytical philosophy. Samyaksamkalpa is con- 
sistently said in the, Pali sdtras to involve three things, thoughts 
or intentions of renunciation, benevolence and nonviolence (azs- 
kama, avyapada, and avihimsa).** These three ‘‘right thoughts” 
constitute the volitional underpinnings of Buddhist morality rather 
than a philosophical position, as might be suggested by their inclu- 
sion in the ‘‘pillars”’ of wisdom. This point is fundamental to a 
sympathetic understanding of early Buddhist morality, which other- 
wise may appear to be merely a set of rules designed to insure 
one’s karmic welfare in this and future lives. 

If ethics as a code of behavior is to be distinguished from morality 
as the quality of the intentions behind one’s behavior, the second 
pillar of the eightfold path delineates Buddhist ethics. These three 
limbs of the path: (3) right speech, (4) right action and (5) right 
livelihood correspond roughly to the “‘five precepts” (paficasila 
traditionally enjoined upon the Theravada Buddhist layperson. 
Again, however, the traditional Theravada doctrine is not strictly 
borne out in the early texts, for only four of the traditional “‘five 
precepts’ are included in sdtra treatments of the eightfold path. 
Though it is clear that the Buddha did not approve of alcohol and 
drugs,®° abstinence from intoxicants is not included in elucidations 


50 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of right action in the Pali sdtras, and is thereby not nearly as prominent 
and ethical issue as it came to be in later Buddhism. The sdtras®° 
normally mention only abstinence from (1) violence toward living 
creatures (panatipata), (2) taking what is not given (adinnadana), and 
(3) sexual misconduct (kamesu micchacara), as constituting ‘‘right 
action.”” When- this list-is expanded upon®’ abstinence from intoxi- 
cants still finds no place, but rather abstinence from harming plants, 
exploiting animals, attending shows, using adornments and ostenta- 
tious seats and beds. 

With regard to ‘‘sexual misconduct,”’ as the term kamesu miccha- 
cara is usually understood, it should be noted that the term actually 
implies immoderate behavior motivated by sensual desire of any 
kind, e.g. desire for comfort or possessions.** This is an important 
consideration given that desire for sensual gratification is one of the 
three types of desire which constitute the second Noble Truth, desire 
as the cause of suffering. The threefold categorization of desire typical 
of the Pali satras is: (1) desire for sensual gratification (Kamatrsna), 
(2) desire for existence (bhavatrsna) and (3) desire for nonexistence 
( vibhavatrsna). This is to say that in addition to sensual gratification, 
one also desires that those things and beings one loves, usually 
including oneself, will continue to exist, and one desires that those 
things and beings which one despises, sometimes including oneself, 
will cease to exist. It should be noted, however, that the Salistamba 
Satra does not mention this threefold categorization of desire, even 
though there is ample occasion to do so. 

With regard to sexual misconduct as such, monks and nuns are 
forbidden any sort of sexual contact. On the other hand, the specific 
sexual prohibition for laypeople is remarkably liberal, though cast 
in terms which give women little explicit guidance. Men are consis- 
tently enjoined to refrain from having sex with women who are 
' “under the protection of’ (raksita), i.e. supported by, parents, 
relatives or a husband.*? Presumably, women too should have sexual 
dealings only with men who support themselves, assuming in either 
case, of course, that no violence or dishonesty is involved. 

Right speech is consistently defined as abstaining from falsehood, 
slander, verbal abuse and idle chatter.*° At this point, the question 
arises as to why right speech is given such prominence in the eightfold 
path rather than being considered as a subdivision of right action. 
The answer to this question probably lies in the pan-Indian notion 
that karma—volitional, morally effective actions—can be performed 
through mind, speech or body. The eightfold path reflects this notion 
in limbs (2) right thought, (3) right speech, and (4) right action. The 
fifth limb of the path, right livelihood, is elucidated with various lists 
of professions which would entail wrong thought, speech or action, 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 51 


or would encourage them in others.?! 

With the sixth limb of the Path, “‘right effort’’ (samyagvyayama), 
begins the section or ‘‘pillar’’ of the path normally regarded as 
pertaining to meditation. The standard definition of right effort, 
however, also pertains critically to morality as cultivation of the good 
(kuSafa) and rejection of the bad (akusala). Exerting right effort, one 
is enjoined to (1) expunge existing unwholesome states of mind, 
(2) insure that other unwholesome states of mind do not arise, (3) 
cultivate existing wholesome states of mind, and (4) encourage the 
arising of other wholesome states of mind.°? A discourse in the 
Majjhima Nikaya entitled ‘‘The Forms of Thought’’®? makes it clear 
on the one hand that this ‘‘right effort’’ is in part a contemplative 
exercise, but at the same time specifically enumerates the moral 
‘roots of wholesomeness and unwholesomeness’”’ (greed, hatred, 
delusion and their opposites) as the objects of the exercise. Thus. 
five limbs of the eightfold path, representing wisdom, ethical beha- 
vior and meditation, all bear directly upon Buddhist morality. The 
natural confluence of Buddhist morality and meditation is nowhere 
better illustrated than in the well known verse 183 of the Dhamma- 
pada,”* said to encapsulate the essence of the Buddha’s teaching: 


Avoidance of all evil (papa), 
Cultivation of the wholesome (Kuala), 
Purification of one’s mind: 

This is the teaching of the Buddhas. 


. This natural overlapping of morality and meditation within the 
eightfold path lends additional credence to the brahmavihara medita- 
tions as an original part of Buddhism. According to this contemplative 
practice, one is to cultivate and extend to all beings a mental attitude 
of benevolence (maitri), compassion (Karuna), sympathetic joy 
(mudita) and equanimity (upeksa).** In the same vein, the extremely 
popular Theravadin Metta Sutta and the Sutta Nipata (verse 148) 
enjoin: 


Just as a mother would protect her only child at the risk of her 
own life, even so one should cultivate a boundless heart toward 
all beings. 


This prominent attitude of compassion and benevolence in the Pali 
sutras is extended rather than altered by the bodhisattva ideal of 
Mahayana Buddhism, whereby all of one’s actions are to be motivated 
by a sincere desire to relieve all sentient beings of their sufferings. 

In concluding this section on the moral teachings of the historical 


§2 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Buddha, it is perhaps revealing to note that the Digha Nikaya contains 
in the Mahdpadana Suttaa lengthy discourse attributed to the Buddha 
himself recounting the altruistic deeds of the former Buddha 
Vipassi.°° The story told resembles the career of the historical 
Buddha as recounted in the Pali sétras, and may have been derived 
therefrom. On the other hand, purported incidents in the historical 
Buddha’s life may equally well have been derived from this legend. 
At any rate, there is no real reason to doubt that the historical Buddha 
occasionally told such stories, and every reason again to respect the 
compilers of the Pali sutras for not editing out material comforting 
to their rivals the Mahayana. It is easy to see that such mythological 
material, in conjunction with the altruistic moral teachings of the 
Pali sutras, serves as a sufficient basis for the development of the 
bodhisattva ideal in Mahayana Buddhism. 


MEDITATIVE TEACHINGS 


It is with regard to meditative teachings that the greatest doubt 
regarding the teachings of the historical Buddha exists. In the first 
place, given the prominence of meditative practice in the early 
Buddhist spiritual path, remarkably little space in the Sutta Pitaka 
is dedicated to elaboration upon these practices. Such elaboration 
_as exists is normally formulaic and sweeping in scope, treating the 
stages of a lifetime’s meditative practice in a paragraph or so. On 
the other hand, the Pali sdtras are far more informative regarding 
the actual practice of meditation than other contemporary texts, most 
notably the Upanisads. The general scarcity of precise information 
on meditative practices no doubt reflects the fact that the details 
of meditative practice are an individual affair to be worked out 
between teacher and pupil. 

The eightfold path, in addition to ‘‘right effort’’, contains two 
further items which relate specifically to meditation. These are right 
mindfulness and right concentration. Two sétras—the Satipatthana 
of the Majjhima Nikaya and the Mahdsatipatthadna of the Digha 
Nikaya—deal specifically with mindfuiness and define it precisely 
as continuous and systematic attention to the body, feelings, the © 
mind, and certain points of doctrine (dharma). The two sutras which 
concentrate upon mindfulness indicate clearly that like ‘‘right effort’, 
mindfulness is to be observed at all times, not only during formal 
meditative practice. What is required of the practitioner, moreover, 
is objective observation—not evaluation or conscious modification— 
of (1) the composition, postures and activities of the body, (2) the 
pleasant, unpleasant or neutral nature of the feelings, and (3) the 
emotional and moral quality of the mind. Even with regard to (4) 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA: AND HIS TEACHINGS 53 


aspects of doctrine, the meditator is enjoined merely to note the 
presence or absence of the five hindrances (pafica nivarana)*’ and 
the seven limbs of enlightenment (satta bojjhariga),”* and to analyze 
experience with reference to the five aggregates, the six senses 
{including mind) and their corresponding objects, and according to 
the four Noble Truths. 

Right concentration, which as the term implies involves the ability 
to attain ‘‘mental one-pointedness’’ is consistently defined as cultiva- 
tion of the first four meditative states.°? Four higher states, the 
‘formless’ {aripa) meditations are consistently enumerated as (1) 
the sphere of infinite space, (2) the sphere of infinite consciousness, 
(3) the sphere of nothingness, and (4) the sphere of neither-identifica- 
tion-nor-nonidentification. These are often appendéd to the first 
four states, apparently as desirable but optional meditative accom- 
plishments beyond what is regarded as minimally necessary for 
the realization of liberation. It will be remembered that the Buddha. 
is said to have learned the last two meditative states from his two 
teachers Alara Kalama and Uddaka Ramaputta, and to have rejected 
their attainment as being less than final enlightenment and re- 
lease.! A ninth state, however, the ‘‘cessation of perception and 
feeling’’ (safifiavedayitanirodha), also known as ‘‘the attainment 
of cessation’ (nirodhasamdapatti, appears to be regarded as 
an integral part of the realization of liberation.!°’ The following 
characterization of this meditational state indicates that it involves 
suspension of all mental activity. 


The monk who has attained sa/ifiavedayitanirodha, his bodily 
activities, verbal activities and mental activities have been 
stopped, have subsided, but his vitality is not destroyed, his 
(body) heat is not allayed, and his senses are purified. This, sir, 
is the difference between a dead thing, passed away, and that 
monk, !° 


This poses a problem with regard to the concept of nirvana in the 
Pali sdtras.!°? On the one hand spiritual release appears to be 
regarded as the result of intellectual comprehension of the true nature 
of reality and a consequent intuitive penetration of the reality of things 
as they are (yathabhita). On the other hand, the actual realization 
of nirvana appears to be regarded as involving simultaneously a 
meditative attainment entailing the cessation of even the most rudi- 
mentary mental activity. Part of this apparent confusion may be due 
to an attempt to reconcile a conflict in early Buddhist practice by 
integrating two apparently distinct meditative endeavors: on the one 
hand the cultivation of concentration and tranquility, and on the other 


54 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


hand the cultivation of intuitive wisdom ( vipasyanda, jfiana or prajfia). 

The traditional Theravada division of Buddhist practice into sama- 
tha (tranquility) and vipasyand (insight) is foreshadowed, if not 
specifically spelled out, in the Pali satras.'°* It is also fairly clear 
that the sutras, like the Theravada tradition, regard samatha, a general 
term for tranquility, as roughly equivalent to samadhr in the specific 
sense of cultivation of the meditative states. The sutras also equate 
vipasyanda and prajfia, particularly in the Pali phrase adhipafifiadham- 
mavipassana, ‘‘supreme-wisdom-truth-insight.””’°> Even more 
common in the sdtras than division of meditative practice into 
Samathaand vipasyana is the related distinction between ‘‘mind-libe- 
ration” (ceto-vimutt) and ‘‘wisdom liberation’’ (paffavimutt).!°° 
In most cases, the development of tranquility and insight, and the 
resulting mind-liberation and wisdom-liberation appear to be 
regarded as mutually supportive and equally essential. 

There are, however, some notable instances in which these two 
aspects of meditative practice are explicitly contrasted with one 
another. Most notably, one passage!” records traces of an outright 
and acrimonious dispute between two factions of monks: the jhayins, 
who cultivated meditation, and the dhammayogabhikkhus, who 
appear to have concentrated upon development of analytical insight. 

- The passage in question attempts to quell this dispute without 
deciding in favor of either side, but given the existence of such a 
dispute, several passages in the Pali sutras appear to weigh in on 
one side or the other. 

The Digha Nikaya asserts that even before the Buddha there were 
two types of recluse, the meditators and an inferior group incapable 
of the rigors of the meditative regimen.'®* In a notable passage! 
two monks are questioned with regard to their non-speculative, direct 
insight into the arising and cessation of frustration according to the 
formula of dependent origination. Both give the same positive 
answers to each question, but when asked if they are arahatss, one 
remains silent, implying the affirmative, while the other answers 


I have seen directly (yathabhata) through right wisdom (sam- 
mapafifia) that nirvana is the cessation of existence, but I am 
not an arahat, not one whose defilements (dsava) are destroyed. 


This passage, regardless of the actual intent of the first monk’s 
silence, indicates that even highly developed intuitive wisdom is not 
alone sufficient for release. At least one important passage in the 
Digha Nikaya suggests that development of the ninth meditational 
state may have been regarded in some circles as being itself tant- 
amount to the realization of nirvana. 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 55 


- Toone standing at the summit of consciousness (after realization. 
of the eight jhdnas) it may occur: ‘To think at all is inferior. 
It would be better not to think. . .” So he stops thinking or willing, 
and perception ceases... He touches cessation (nirodham 
Phussati). Thus, Potthapada, does the gradual and deliberate 
attainment (sam4patti) of cessation (nirodha) occur.'!° 


Yet another passage does not mention specifically the ninth medita- 
tion, nirodhasamapatti, but implies that destruction of the intoxicants 
(asava) and consequently nirvana are to be attained primarily through 
cultivation of samatha or tranquility meditation and development of 
the meditative states. !!! 

On the other hand, the general tenor of the Pali sutras is that if 
anything insight is more essential than tranquility. The Satipatthdna 
Sutta and the Mahasatipatthana Sutta, the sitras most explicitly 
dedicated to elucidating meditational practice, both suggest that 
enlightenment and release are possible without cultivation of the 
meditative states at all. In addition, it must be remembered that the 
Buddha is supposed to have rejected the cultivation of meditative 
states, which he practiced under his two teachers, as not leading 
to final release from suffering. To a considerable degree, this re- 
jection is the basis of the difference between Buddhism and other 
contemporary spiritual paths. 

Also weighing in on the side of insight as opposed to tranquility 
meditation is a frequently enumerated ‘‘tenfold path’’. This enumera- 
tion, which occurs over sixty times in the first four nikayas of the 
Sutta Pitaka, mostly in the Ajguttara Nikaya, adds to the standard 
eightfold path (9) ‘‘right insight’’ (samyag jfidna) and (10) right 
release (samyag vimukt). The eightfold path concludes with ‘right 
concentration,”’ i.e. cultivation of the meditative states via tranqui- 
lity, whereas this tenfold listing seems to suggest that insight is the 
ultimate spiritual cultivation. One passage states specifically that this 
tenfold path is the path of the arahat and is superior to the eightfold 
path, which is the path of the learner.'!? “‘Right insight’’ and the 
“three wisdoms’’ realized by the Buddha on the night of his enlighten- 
ment are both consistently listed in the Pali sdtras immediately after 
the attainment of the four meditative states. ‘‘Right insight’’ thus 
appears to be associated with (1) remembrance of one’s own past 
lives, (2} ability to discern the past and future lives of others, and 
(3) realization of the destruction of all intoxicants.'!> In general, it 
is destruction of the intoxicants of sensual desire, existence and 
ignorance which the sdtras regard as the essential factor in the 
realization of liberation. 


56 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


In this tenfold listing, ‘‘right liberation’ clearly indicates realization 
of nirvana. The majority of relevant passages indicate that right 
liberation is held to involve both mind liberation and wisdom-libera- 
tion, and thus cultivation of both tranquility and insight.!'!* This would 
seem to be a natural state of affairs, except that some passages 
specifically mention the ideal of “‘liberation in both ways’’ (Pali 
ubhato-bhaga-vimutt).1!° This rather artificial third category 
emphasizes rather than resolves the tension between the quietistic 
meditative practices and the intellectual content of the Buddhist path 
to enlightenment as depicted in the Pali sutras. 

Overall, then, the Pali satras are ambivalent with regard to the 
relative importance of the meditative practices of tranquility and 
insight. By contrast, the Theravada commentarial tradition is decisive 
in its emphasis upon insight. Again, the fact that the Pali sdtras record 
ambivalence where orthodox Theravada doctrine is unequivocal 
indicates that these sdtras themselves did not suffer excessive 
sectarian revision at the hands of their preservers and compilers. 
If they had been subject:to biased revision, a few words omitted 
here and a few added there would have expunged all traces of conflict 
among the meditative practitioners of early Buddhism. 

As itis, we may note that whereas the Theravada tradition empha- 
sized insightful penetration of the analytical teachings of Buddhism 
as the paramount object of meditation, the early Mahayana tended 
to emphasize the nonconceptual, concentrative side of meditation. 
Starting with the Prajfdparamita or “‘perfection of wisdom”’ litera- 
ture, as systematized in the. Madhyamika school of Nagarjuna, 
Mahayana Buddhism exhibited a conspicuous mistrust of doctrine, 
and tended to regard enlightenment as a purely intuitive, noncon- 
ceptual, meditative attainment. The jhayins or meditators of the 
Pali sdtras may be said to survive in the dhyana school of Mahayana 
Buddhism transmitted to China as Ch’an by Bodhidharma, and thence 
to Japan as Zen. Even the more doctrine-oriented Vijfianavada or 
*“‘Consciousness School’’ of the Mahayana tended to emphasize 
the equivalent of the Pali sutras’ ceto-vimutti in their conceptualiza- 
tion of enlightenment as a quietistic state of parinispannavijfana 
or ‘‘perfected consciousness.” 

By contrast; the Theravada and Sarvastivada traditions—as appar- 
ently most of the so-called Hinayana schools of Buddhism—tended 
to emphasize the analytical content of the historical Buddha’s 
teachings in their meditational as well as their intellectual endeavors. 
As the following sections of this introduction indicate, the Theravada 
and Sarvastivada developed in their respective Abhidharmas a rigo- 
rously systematic guide to the practice of meditation. Such systemati- 
zation did not, however, preclude the spontaneous and intuitive 


THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS $7 


element of Buddhism, as is amply demonstrated by the Theragatha 
and Therigathé, the inspirational ‘‘Songs of the Monks and Nuns’’ 
enshrined in the Pali canon. On the other hand, though the Mahayana 
tended to emphasize the intuitive element of Buddhist meditation 
as portrayed in the Pali canon, none would suggest that Mahayanists 
have lacked the proclivity or the talent for rigorous systematization. 
The diversity of sincere and legitimate interpretations and develop- 
ments which have arisen from the teachings of the historical Buddha 
are an abiding testimony to the genius of the founder of this great 
religion. All of the foregoing material regarding the historical Buddha, 
the affairs of his Sangha, and the probable nature of his original 
teachings, supports the conclusion that Buddhism began and remains 
a spiritual path in which the analytical intellect, morality and medita- 
tion play mutually supportive roles, and in which each is necessary 
and none alone sufficient for enlightenment and release from the 
suffering of the realm of karma and rebirth. The vast diversity of 
Buddhism appears to haye resulted primarily from emphasis upon 
one or another of these mutually supportive aspects of the original 
teaching of the historical Buddha. . 


Z 


THE BUDDHIST WAY TO LIBERATION 


Karl H. Potter 


A standard list of moral practices is the ‘‘five precepts’ (paficasila) 
involving abstinence from killing, from stealing, from sexual miscon- 
duct, from lying and from intoxicating drugs or drinks. These can 
be practiced by the Buddhist layperson during the ordinary time of 
life. Beyond this Buddhist ethics generally applies to the Buddhist 
monk, who has left his family and home and become a member of 
the order (sarigha), a monk (bhiksu, P. bhikkhu). Although those 
who donot choose or cannot follow the monastic precepts are allowed 
- the ability to proceed far along the path, their ability to do so is 
severely limited; the requirements of everyday life regularly interfere 
with the meditation, the peaceful contemplation which is central to 
the path to liberation. Thus moral philosophy in Buddhism tends 
to be addressed to one who is either a monk or one ready to become 
one. 

Having made the decision to become an adept or monk, one’s moral 
training becomes more intense. He should follow the precepts for 
monks set forth in the pratimoksa, a code of conduct and training 
which constitutes the heart of the Buddha’s advice to those preparing 
for liberation. Secondly, he should begin to practice control of his 
sense-faculties, trying to become less sensitive to the attractions of 
“‘signs’’ (mimitta). The term “‘sign’’ as used here cuts a wide swath: 
it has many meanings! ranging from deliberately intended meanings 
of words to delicate hints and suggestions—the general meaning 
incorporates any mdication of something else. One at this introduc- 
tory stage tries, through practicing ‘“‘mindfulness’’ (smyti), to ‘‘ward 
off the spontaneous impulses to cling to the pleasant and reject the 
unpleasant.’’* Thirdly, the monk should plan his vocation carefully, 
making sure it is consistent with the principles of his monastic life. 
He should not take up work which involves lying, scheming, concupi- 
scence and other undesirable attitudes. And finally, he should take 
a correct attitude toward the few things he has kept—his robe, dish, 


60 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


body, abode; he should be aware that they are not possessions but 
merely means to an end. These four purifications (catuhparisuddhi) 
were taught at the outset by the Buddha. 

Another decision characteristically made at this stage is to choose 
a mentor, a “‘good friend’”’ (kafyanamitra) who can help indicate the 
path. The Buddha himself, as reported in the Pali canon, spoke often 
of the benefits of having such a good friend who can indicate to the 
adept appropriate objects on which to meditate, and who is available 
for consultation and advice when needed. 

The fledgling monk also needs to choose a suitable place to live, 
one where he can practice meditation without distraction. The 
Buddha mentioned some features of appropriate dwelling places: 
not too far from or near toa village, quiet, protected from the weather, 
a place where the four purifications can be practiced and appropriate 
teachers are available. He even recommends types of such places: 
in a forest, on a mountain, in a cemetery, etc. 

It is at this point that the texts speak of commencing ‘‘meditation’”’ 
(dhyana, P. jhana). There are in Buddhism said to be four (though 
sometimes eight or nine) meditative states and each of them can 
be identified in two ways: in terms of what needs to be done to shed 
the relevant bonds that bind the aspirant at this point, and in terms 
of what needs to be done to attain what is required for entrance into 
the next meditation. The path of meditation begins here, with the 
shedding of ‘the five ‘‘hindrances’’ (nivarana), the attitudes and 
thoughts which distract one from meditative application. 

The abandoning of these five hindrances and the consequent 
attainment of the reverse qualities is critical. These are the things, 
and the only things according to the texts, that preclude entrance 
onto the meditative path. Thus to get rid of them is requisite for 
any practice designed to lead toward ultimate liberation. The termi- 
nology for this list is, as is regularly the case, open to alternatives: 
we offer here some frequently used terms for the five hindrances. 

First of the five is said to be sensual desire, desire for the objects 
of the senses and the consequent finding of such objects to be 
attractive and stimulating. Such attachment breeds greed and desire, 
which are the root causes of frustration. Second in the list is the 
opposite of desire, that is, aversion, the feeling of dislike and hatred 
toward disagreeable things. Third in the list is sloth and torpor, the 
opposite of the requisite mindfulness or alertness with which the 
aspirant protects his virtuous approaches to things. The fourth 
hindrance is said to be restlessness and worry, distracting responses 
to situations which preclude or severely limit one’s capacity to 
meditate. Finally, fifth, there is doubt, insufficient resolve or con- 
viction concerning the basic beliefs of Buddhism such as concern 


THE BUDDHIST WAY TO LIBERATION 61 


for the Buddha, the dharma, the order and the whole procedure of 
training, doubts which breed skepticism and undermine resolve. 

These five hindrances, then, are the first problem for the aspirant. 
The method for controlling and eventually eliminating them characte- 
rizes the first meditative stage, understanding of which requires first 
that one is clear as to what causes these hindrances to occur and 
perpetuate themselves. The Buddha at one point traces the source 
of the hindrances through ‘‘three types of misconduct (bodily, verbal 
and mental) ..., non—restraint of the sense faculties . . . lack of mind- 
fulness and discernment... unwise consideration. .. lack of faith. .. 
not listening to the true dharma... not associating with superior 
men.”’> Critical here is ‘unwise consideration’ (ayoniso manasi- 
kara), wrong thinking about things, which in another passage* the 
Buddha associates specifically with each of the five hindrances, 
identifying in each case the ‘‘nutriments’’ of those hindrances. It is 
these mistaken ideas and the attitudes and practices they germinate 
which have to be addressed. sees 

At this point we come to a parting of the ways between the path 
of insight and the path of meditation. 


Two different approaches are offered because of the differing 
mental dispositions of disciples. Disciples of a contemplative 
bent generally incline to first attain concentration by suppressing 
the hindrances through jhana and then move on the development 
of insight. These are called practitioners of the vehicle of serenity 
(samathayanika) who develop ‘insight preceded by serenity’. 
Other disciples, of an intellectual bent, are generally disposed 
to strive immediately for insight, leaving until later the task of 
deepening concentration. These are called practitioners of the 
vehicle of insight (vipassanayanika) who develop ‘serenity 
preceded by insight’. Both types must eventually cultivate insight 
by practising the foundations of mindfulness, since insight- 
wisdom is needed to reach the supramundane path. They differ, 
not with respect to the inclusion of insight, but in the sequence 
they follow to develop it. The practitioner of serenity attains 
Jjhana, then cultivates insight, and finally reaches the path. 
The practitioner of insight reaches the path directly by cultivating 
insight, without relying on a foundation of jhana.° 


‘ The foundations of mindfulness referred to here are the four central 
types of things for ordinary awareness: the body, feelings, states of 
awareness and the contents of the awarenesses, viewed as usual in 
this connection as factors. The seeker of insight reflects that all these, 
initially especially the contents of awareness, are shot.through with 


62 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the five hindrances. Contemplating each content and the hindrances 
that accompany them one learns the nature of each thing, realizes 
its momentariness, unsatisfactoriness and lack of substantiality. He 
does not seek the kind of concentration that the follower of medita- 
tion does, but because of the fixity of his mind he may attain a kind 
of momentary concentration, and the series of such concentration 
replaces the kinds of experiences that involved the hindrances. The 
hindrances are thus suppressed by habit, and the practitioner is ready 
to become a ‘‘stream-enterer’’. What does he do then? He takes 
up the meditative methods which his counterpart who has already 
adopted the path of meditation has achieved. Thus the two ways—of 
insight and meditation—end up at the same point, as was said, 
differing only in the order in which the two vehicles are taken up. 

What, then, is the method followed by the seeker who follows 
the path of meditation? He takes up the first meditative stage, but 
instead of concentrating on the characteristics of objects, he practi- 
ces the first of a series of meditations on material form. By meditating 
on certain things he empties his mind of certain kinds of factors which 
are part of the causal nexus leading to bondage to ordinary existence. 
Specifically, in the first meditative stage five crucial factors are 
mentioned: initial thought (vitarka), sustained thought ( vicara), joy 
(priti), satisfaction (sukha) and one—pointedness (ekagrata). 

The first factor, initial thought, appears to mean what we would 
call “‘attending to’ an object. It is the most basic aspect of thinking 
or awareness of objects. In itself initial thought is neither good nor 
bad; it is what it is accompanied by that makes the difference. 
Thoughts are bad when they are tainted by greed, hatred and delusion, 
good when they are associated with the opposites of those three basic 
“‘roots’’. The texts spell out what sorts of ideas constitute examples 
of each of these sets of three. Generally, bad thoughts are those which 
are aimed at gaining pleasures of the senses, at doing mischief or 
harming others, but there are many varieties of bad thoughts. Perhaps 
the best way to think of these bad thoughts here is to consider them 
as those thoughts that are associated with five hindrances. 

All bad thoughts cease by the time one masters the first meditative 
state. All thoughts after that accomplishment are good or, eventually, 
neither good nor bad. Meditation comes in as a way of practicing 
limiting one’s thoughts to good ones. One practices this by selecting 
something (called in Pali a kasina) to concentrate on. One selects 
something visible—a color or a colored thing, for example, or other 
ordinary objects with which we are all acquainted. 


He takes a preliminary object such as a colored or elemental 
kasina and concentrates on it until he is able to visualize it with 


THE BUDDHIST WAY TO LIBERATION 63 


* his eyes closed as clearly as when he looks at it with his eyes 
open... When the object comes into focus when he attends to 
it with eyes shut as clearly as it does when he looks at it with 
open eyes the learning sign (ugrahanimitta) is said to have arisen. 
At this point the yogin should leave off the physical object and 
focus solely on the learning sign, developing it by striking at 
it over and over with applied thought and sustained thought. 

As he practices thus the jhana factors grow in strength, each 
suppressing its respective hindrance.° 


Initial thought counters the hindrance of sloth and torpor; the practi- 
tioner needs constant alertness to maintain his concentration. 

Thus we reach the second factor, sustained thought. The mind 
must not only be fixed mentally in the way just described; that 
concentration needs to be maintained, not to be distracted by other 
thoughts or emotions, etc. So the first two factors operate together 
to bring about mental concentration. , 

Distraction is not only caused by the objective features of disparate - 
objects. It is also caused by our emotional responses to objects. Just 
asthe first two factors train our intellectual efforts on good features 
of things, so the second two factors of joy and satisfaction train our 
emotional attitudes toward things. And just as initial thought leads 
directly to sustained thought, so joy leads directly to satisfaction. 
Various grades of joy are distinguished in our text, ranging from 
initial pleasurable feeling to ‘‘pervading rapture’, implying that just 
as one seeks to extend initial to sustained thought, one seeks to extend 
passing pleasure to sustained bliss. And these states are in turn 
accompanied by a subsiding of attempts to resist, question and 
otherwise leave the meditational state. As these subside one ex- 
periences a greater and greater satisfaction or tranquility. This in 
turn eases the difficulties of concentration. 

The fifth factor, one—pointed concentration, arises naturally when 
the distractions born of thoughts and emotions dwindle. In its minimal 
form it is present in any awareness and feeling, but like the two 
preceding pairs of factors it is capable of more intensification, until 
at its most advanced form it consists in the concentration from which 
one need not retreat. This condition comés at a point beyond this 
first meditative state, however. 

So far the adept has learned how to meditate for periods of time 
during which he can concentrate attentively on an object in a 
nondistracted pleasurable state. He can do this for a period of time, 
but in due course his attention is lost and he finds himself once again 
subject to desires, dislikes and the other unwanted attitudes of mind. 
Thus he finds his mastery so far insufficient, and discovers upon 


64 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


consideration that not only is his meditative state not stable, it also 
deals with insufficiently satisfying objects. That is the problem— 
there are too many objects, too much objectivity; these things that 
come to him without his asking for them threaten him by occasioning 
the types of emotional responses he is trying to avoid. He seeks for 
an even purer meditative state, and so sets out toward the second 
meditative stage. 

Initial and sustained thoughts are necessary conditions for langu- 
age. One thing that advancement to the second stage implies is the 
abandonment of language, as well as of linguistic conceptualization 
and classification of factors in our environment. This presents an 
obvious problem for continued description of further progress, and 
the reader should be aware (and beware) of the problems that 
situation poses. The adept becomes silent. No longer distracted by 
objects or by the challenges of thinking or speaking about them, 
he can experience even more developed stages of the other three 
factors—joy, satisfaction and one-pointedness. We are told that the 
feeling with which these higher states come to him is tranquility.’ 
In the previous, first meditative state one was not fully confident, 
since he was aware, even when meditating, that his meditation was 
trained on a something of a this—rather—-than-that kind which he 
associated with other things and which in any case he could lose 
if he stopped thinking of it and thought of something else. There 
the concentration was imperfect since subject to these changes. 
Without conceptual ties to ideas of objects, that concentration 
becomes more confident, less subject to disturbance by causes out 
of one’s control. A comparably greater degree of concentration is 
achieved, greater in length, purity, satisfaction and bliss. 

Having achieved the second stage and meditated for ever longer 
periods, one still finds oneself issuing from it from time to time and 
reflecting on why one does so. The fact that one is still inclined to 
indulge in thoughts couched in language bothers him—though sup- 
posedly he has abandoned thought he still finds himself thinking when 
not in the meditative situation. He also realizes that his situation is . 
unsatisfactory for what is perhaps a different reason—he is enjoying 
the extended happiness he experiences during his meditations, and 
this contrasts noticeably with his experiences while he is out of the 
trance state. He realizes that joy is an excessive state, too attractive 
to be sustained without being bound to it in a way which carries 
with it disappointment when it leaves him. The problem is not that 
the experience of joy is unwanted, but that it is precisely its attractive- 
ness which implies its impermanence. So, he embarks toward a third 
meditative state, in which he will not be subject to these subtle forms 
of frustration. 


THE BUDDHIST WAY TO LIBERATION 65 


Instead of joy what he now seeks is equanimity. Instead of being 
pleased by X in a way one is not pleased by Y, one cultivates a clear, 
fair, unimpassioned attitude toward everything. One remains neutral 
toward all that his meditative attention—and his attention while out 
of the meditative state—ranges over. This equanimity is not to be 
confused with a kind of disinterested feeling, for disinterested feeling 
' is a kind of feeling, and what our seeker is striving here to achieve 
is a state free from feeling. The equanimity he seeks is complete 
neutrality. 

Being without feelings does not, however, imply unawareness. 
Quite the reverse. The aspirant for the third state is not seeking 
nonawareness—he is not suicidal, at least in the ordinary way, for 
he is endeavoring to achieve more and more extended experiences 
of satisfying meditative contemplation, an extended steady state of 
awareness. Two Sanskrit terms used to characterize the kind of 
cognitive state one aspires for at this stage of meditation are smrti 
and samprajfia. Smrti is usually translated as ‘‘memory’’, and that 
is suggestive, though we normally mean by ‘“‘memory”’ a type of 
awareness of objects, and we know that the third~stage meditator 
is no longer aware of objects in his trances. Better, then, to find 
a different expression for smrti here. It is usually rendered ‘‘mind- 
fulness’’, and constitutes the attentiveness to his meditation which, 
without being bound either by objects or passions, brings it about 
that the mind ‘‘does not wander away”’ (avi/apana). Sampra/jfid or 
discernment is the same thing as wisdom (prajfia); the wise, dis- 
ceming person inspects the world—whatever world is given him 
to inspect—in a nonfalsifying way, not misled by it, seeing it as it 
is. 

The one who achieves the third state of meditation, then, is one 
who examines his meditative object in a way which does not distort 
it, and continues to do so in a manner which is detached but by no 
means cool, for this comprehension carries for him great satisfaction. 
He now has, by comparison with his past states, superior ability to 
concentrate meditatively on an object. 

Thinking about his mastery of contemplation, however, during 
those periods when he is not in meditation, he finds himself still 
dissatisfied. Though he has turned his back on joy in favor of 
equanimity during his meditative practices, he finds that when out 
of the trance joy is still attractive; further, this very satisfactoriness 
which he experiences during his trances breeds suspicion—for isn’t 
it subject to disorder, to being lost or jarred by the trials of life? 
And won’t he feel utterly lost and unhappy that it is? He sees the 
fallaciousness of satisfaction itself, or more properly, he abandons 
feelings of both satisfaction and frustration, of both joy and grief, 


66 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and cultivates an approach to things which is constituted of mind- 
fulness, which is completely neutral, neither satisfying nor frus- 
trating, happy or sad. His meditations are lengthened to this end. 
His mindfulness is clarified by equanimity alone. 

‘Having emptied his mind of thoughts and feelings while in medita- 
tion, the seeker has mastered the path of meditation, has achieved 
serenity. Of course, he is able to do this by meditating on an object, 
a material object. He may find the very materiality of this object 
limiting. Despite the fact that the object of his meditation in the fourth 
state above is said to have become “‘subtle’’ rather than gross, he 
is dissatisfied because he is still bound to material form. If he feels 
this way he may choose to meditate further on a series of immaterial 
objects, thus developing even more subtle and peaceful types of 
comprehension. “ 

It is to be emphasized that he need not do this. These advanced 
states of meditation are optional, not required. What is strictly 
required by one seeking liberation who has reached the fourth 
meditative state is to combine his achievement of meditation with 
a parallel achievement of wisdom. However, if the meditator still 
feels limited by the materiality of the objects he uses as crutch for 
his meditation, he can further rarify the things on which he meditates. 
Instead of meditating on kasinas such as material things, colors and 
the like, he may direct his meditation to less limited things in order 
to free his meditations from the limits inherent in those things. 

What he does, if he is so inclined, is to begin by meditating, not 
on the kasina itself, but rather on the space it appears in. In this 
way he removes the kasina from his attention and gains a meditative 
state which is ‘“‘boundless’’ as space itself is. Remember that his 
approach to this boundless space is still through a combination of 
equanimity and emotional neutrality. It does not, therefore, involve 
any advancement in the kind of meditation practiced, only in the 
object of that meditation. 

Still, as before, the meditator may eventually find himself dissatis- 
fied with this first ‘‘immaterial’’ (aripya) meditation, since despite 
the impartite quality of unbounded space it still comes to the 
meditator as an object, a content of consciousness, thus implying 
a dualism of subject against object. He thus seeks out another object 
to meditate on which is subjective rather than objective, namely 
consciousness itself, referred to as ‘‘boundless’’ or ‘‘unending”’ 
(ananta) consciousness. He meditates, that is, on his awareness of 
boundless space. 

But again this is unsatisfactory, since this awareness of awareness 
is still being viewed as a thing contrasting, however abstractly, with 
other possible things. Thus the meditator is led to a third immaterial 


THE BUDDHIST WAY TO LIBERATION 67 


meditation on nothingness (akificana), conceived as the absence or 
emptiness (Sanyata) of anything. He meditates on this by repeating 
“‘neti netr’ (“not this, not that’’ or “‘void, void’’) (Sanya, Sdnya), 
and gradually becomes absorbed in a consciousness with no object 
at all. 

Finally, however, even the contemplation of nothingness is unsatis- 
factory, since it is definitively apophatic just as the preceding states 
had been definitively kataphatic. In fact, neither negative nor positive 
awareness of things fully satisfies, since they each suggest too 
strongly their opposites, by involving the conception of those opposit- 
es. So one meditates on something that is neither-identification-nor- 
nonidentification, thinking of the aggregates of feeling, identification, 
conditioning factors and consciousness merely as peaceful but 
neither existent nor nonexistent. So doing he arrives at the fourth 
immaterial meditative state, which is the most serene state of 
concentration envisaged in Abhidharma Buddhism. 

As we pointed out, these four immaterial meditations are not 
required of the seeker, and one can appreciate why. They do not 
advance the aspirant any nearer to his ultimate goal of enlightenment 
and nirvana. Though he has achieved the pinnacle of serene concen- 
tration he has not eliminated all his hindrances. What has he attained, 
then? The texts tell us that he has attained one or another of 
innumerable planes of existence, where he will be reborn until the 
merit earned by his attainments is exhausted. But eventually he will 
return and be faced with the same problem, the ultimate one of 
overcoming rebirth altogether. 

After practicing, if he wishes, the immaterial meditations, the 
aspirant who has mastered the fourth meditative state may develop 
certain further sorts of “‘higher faculties’ (abAijaa). These are 
. variously identified in the texts surveyed in the present study, 
sometimes numbering three, sometimes five, six or more. The lists 
sometimes include one item which seems not to fit with the others, 
namely, knowledge of the destruction of one’s intoxicants. Of course 
one can only know that destruction if it has actually occurred, so 
this higher faculty is in fact only available for the arhat, the perfected 
being who has in fact eliminated all his hindrances. Sometimes this 
higher faculty is distinguished from the other as ‘‘supramundane’’. 
We shall omit-it from consideration at this juncture, to return to 
it at its appropriate place below. 

The other higher faculties represent what are actually supernormal 
types of knowledge held to be attainable by special efforts beyond 
those needed to gain the eight meditative states so far described. 
These efforts involve a heightened practice of the meditative states, 
applying them to all kasinas one by one and in different orders. These 


68 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


special efforts bring one special kinds of knowledge, according to 
Buddhism, of the following sorts: 

1. Special powers (rddhi)—such as the ability to appear in many 
forms in many places and at many times; to make oneself appear 
or disappear; to pass through walls, mountains, etc.; to make the 
earth become water and vice versa; to walk on water; to fly; to touch 
the sun and moon; tc travel to the world of Brahma; 

2. The divine ear (divyasrotra)—the ability to hear far-off sounds 
or those extremely close inside one; 

3. Awareness of others’ minds (paracittavijfiana)—knowing the 
thoughts of other people; 

4. Remembrance of previous lives (parvanivasanusmyti); and | 

5. The divine eye (divyacaksus)—the ability to see beyond ordinary 
visual limits, particularly to see the future and to know what karmic 
outcomes will transpire. Some texts mention still different kinds of 
special knowledge, but for the most part they seem to be versions 
of the above five. 

Up to this point all the stages of meditation we have discussed 
have been available to ordinary people—the term used in the texts 
is ‘“‘worldly”’ (/okiya), mundane. By practicing meditation one can 
purify one’s awareness and achieve serenity, whether before or after 
the development of insight. But while these activities are indispensa- 
ble preparations they do not themselves eliminate all the hindrances. 
They decrease the number and force of these intoxicants, but they 
are still with the aspirant if only in latent form. The final part of 
the path to liberation in Abhidharma Buddhism, then, teaches how 
to get rid of all hindrances without exception. 

In the Patisambhidamagga we are taught that there are seven 
purifications. These are (1) purification of morality (Si/a), practised 
at the outset; (2) purification of awareness (citta), that is, practice 
- of the several meditative states, thereby suppressing the five hin- 
drances; (3) purification of view (drsa), meaning the elimination 
of the view of self; (4) purification by overcoming doubt (kanksavita- 
rana), consisting of the understanding of the dependent origination 
of mental as well as material things and the resultant conviction of 
the basic truths of Buddhism; (5) purification by knowledge and 
vision of the right and wrong paths ( margamarga jnanadargana), which 
involves classification of all dharmas as impermanent, frustrating 
and not self; (6) purification by knowledge and vision of the way 
(pratipadajndnadarsana), carried forward by attainment of a series 
of insights into the destructibility of ail things; and (7) purification 
by knowledge and vision (/fanadarsana), beginning with what is 
technically called ‘‘change of lineage knowledge’’ (gotrabhujnana) 


THE BUDDHIST WAY TO LIBERATION 69 


and continuing on through several intermediate states to that of 
perfected being (arhat). The first six of these stages collectively 
summarize the various steps of the two paths of insight and medita- 
tion. 

Change of lineage knowledge represents entry into the supra- 
mundane or higher-worldly path, and marks the beginning of aware- 
ness of liberation. One who has this knowledge is said to enter 
the stream, and is thus known as a ‘‘stream-enterer’’. What is 
different about the: aspirant now is that from here forward his 
knowledge and practice function to cut off the remaining intoxicants. 
Since he is now committed to understanding the four noble truths 
he is also termed a “‘noble one’’ (arya) who has entered the noble 
eightfold path. 

The stream-enterer’s efforts are directed specifically toward elimi- 
nating certain hindrances arising from the three. bad roots. Some of 
these are among the five hindrances which were the concern of the 
meditations of his preparatory states. However, those meditations, 
while enabling the meditator to avoid those states of mind in which 
the hindrances figure, did not actually eliminate the source of those 
states of mind but merely suppressed them during the periods of 
meditation. Whereas the suppression of hindrances in meditation 
is temporary, it is the complete eradication of them that is now aimed 
at. They are to be “‘cut off at the root’’ by the successive stages 
of higher-worldly meditative practice. . 

There are in all ten hindrances which have to be eliminated before 
one is termed a perfected being, destined to be liberated at the end 
of one’s lifetime. These ten are (1) wrong view about existence 
(satkayadrst), (2) doubt (vicikitsa), (3) clinging to rites and rituals 
( Silavrataparamarsa), (4) sensual desire (kamacchanda), (5) ill will 
(vydpada), (6) desire for material existence (ripardga), (7) desire 
for immaterial existence (aripardga), (8) conceit (mana), (9) rest- 
lessness (auddhatya), and (10) ignorance (avidya). The first five 
tie us to the round of ordinary existence, the last five pertain to the 
higher realms of meditation. They are all to be eliminated through 
meditation of a supramundane sort. 

The stream-enterer’s meditation on liberation is designed to 
destroy the first three hindrances in the above list. Although these 
have been better understood during previous meditations and 
insights, they were not permanently eliminated thereby. The stream- 
enterer’s meditation not only cuts off these three hindrances but also 
eliminates greed for sense pleasures as well as hatred toward unplea- 
sant things. Since itis standardly held to be these desires and aversions 
which dictate the most unfortunate kinds of rebirth one is subject 
to, and since the stream-enterer has eliminated them, it follows that 


70 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


he cannot be reborn in such a lower state—e.g., as an animal or 
insect. 

One who successfully follows the stream-enterer’s path achieves 
the result or “‘fruit’” or stream-entry, and enjoys more extended 
moments of blissfulness and peace. More importantly, he reflects 
on a new understanding of things called in the Dhammasangani the 
faculty which realizes that “‘I shall know the unknown”’ (andjfiata 
4jfiasyamiti). He also (again following the Dhammasarigani) acquires 
certain states called ‘factors of the path’’ (mdargdriga) and “‘factors 
of enlightenment’’ (bodhyariga). The former comprises those states 
which belong in the noble eightfold path. The latter are the seven 
states of mindfulness, inquisitiveness, energy, rapture, tranquility, 
concentration and equanimity. It shouid be appreciated that we have 
now arrived at a stage where both the paths of wisdom and insight 
have come together. The stream-enterer is also described as being 
destined to no more than seven more births as human or deity. 

One who has successfully accomplished the results of stream-entry 
may proceed to a second higher-worldly meditation, and become 
a ‘‘once-returner”’ (sakrdagamin). This meditation weakens the 
fourth and fifth items of the ten hindrances, viz., sensual desire and 
ill will, although it does not completely destroy them. 

The destruction of hindrances four and five comes at the next stage, 
of “‘nonreturner’’ (andgdmin). Again one enjoys the fruits of his 
attainment, reflects, and meditates further. He is now called a 
“‘nonreturner”’ since even if he goes no further in this life he will 
achieve perfection in the next one. He also begins to master what 
the Dhammasarigani calls ‘‘the factor of final knowledge’’ (ajiiind- 
riya), a mastery which increases as he progresses through the next 
stage and culminates in the realization in one’s state of perfection 
that one now knows completely. 

The final stage of meditation is that of perfected being. This is 
attained by meditating as before. Now, however, with the worldly 
hindrances destroyed, the meditator is ready to lose the final set 
of hindrances, the last five in the list given above. And when these 
are destroyed none are left, and the adept becomes a perfected being. 
He arrives.at the faculty of the completion of knowledge ( ajfatavind- 
riya). 

George Bond argues that 


the arahant concept seems to have developed from an ideal 
readily attainable in this life... into an ideal considered remote 
and impossible to achieve in one or even many lifetimes.® 


In some of the Pali canonical texts, he reminds us, we hear of various 


THE BUDDHIST WAY TO LIBERATION 71 


people attaining liberation and getting rid of their hindrances. The 
description we have rehearsed in the preceding pages suggests, 
however, a longer and more difftcult path which needs several 
lifetimes to perfect, besides facing severe difficulties in just getting 
on the path. Bond associates this with what he calls a ‘‘second phase”’ 
in the development of the arhat notion, and goes on to discuss a 
third phase, beyond the scope of the period covered in the present 
volume, in which the path came to be viewed as tremendously difficult 
to complete and arhat ship ‘‘a remote but controlling ideal’’. > Bond 
argues in the article quoted against I.B. Horner’s interpretation, '° 
which has the development run the opposite way, from greatly 
difficult toward easier attainment of nirvana. If heis right, the increase 
in difficulty of attaining arhat ship is a reflection of the greater control 
of the monastic community over the business of Buddhism, with an 
increasing emphasis on the message to ordinary Buddhists con- 
cerning everyday life. 

In any case, whether quickly or more slowly, the perfected being 
is one whose existence will come to an end, a flame blown out, when 
the present lifetime reaches its natural termination. During the 
remaining period of the arhaf’s existence he is able to enter into 
protracted meditative periods during which he experiences only the 
pure bliss of consciousness, ending when the arhat wills it to by 
prior determination before entering a trance. 

The perfected being, as was implied before, also attains the sixth 
higher faculty, knowledge of the destruction of one’s ownhindrances. 

Besides these there is a third attainment termed nirodhasamapatti, 
the attainment of cessation. This is the most advanced supernormal 
state, attainable only by nonreturners and perfected beings. 


To attain cessation requires full possession of the two powers 
of serenity and insight. .. It cannot be reached in the immaterial 

realms since it must be preceded b y the four immaterial jhanas, 
which are lacking in those realms. 


It involves a fifth higher faculty, beyond the other four, termed ‘‘the 
attainment of the cessation of identification and feeling’ (sam/jfidve- 
dayitanirodha). It appears to be a state devoid of bodily, mental or 
. verbal functions. The texts say that only two things remain in one 
who has entered this trance state: vitality and heat. 


. The closest analogy in Western psychological parlance to 
this condition would be some kind of profound cataleptic 
trance. ..even more radical...than are the dominant Western 
models for the understanding of catalepsy. :.not only... {is) 


72 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


there no reaction to stimuli and no initiation of action, but also... 
no internal mental life of any kind. It is, in brief, a condition 
in which no mental events of any kind occur, a condition 

. distinguishable from death only by a certain residual warmth 
and vitality in the unconscious practitioner’s body.'” 


In the end, however, there seems still to be difference between 
those perfected beings who are “‘liberated by wisdom” (prajfiavi- 
mukta) and those who are “‘liberated both ways’ (ubhato- 
bhagavimukta), that is, liberated by both wisdom and meditation. 
The difference is by no means a later one only; one finds these terms 
used in the nikayas over and over. The one whois liberated by wisdom 
alone, the ‘“‘pure insight practitioner’ (Suddhavipasyanaydnika), 
does not practice the various sorts of meditations we have been 
describing, although he must have attained right concentration, one 
of the eight path factors required for liberation. Although being 
liberated ‘‘both ways’’ may be viewed as admirable it is not normally 
suggested that being liberated that way is any more of a liberation 
than that of one liberated “‘by wisdom’’.'* 

The perfected being, then, is liberated; he has attained nirvana, 
and when he dies he will have attained parinirvana. 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF 
ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 


Robert E. Buswell, Jr.and Padmanabh S. Jaini 
I. THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN SUTRA AND ABHIDHARMA 


This dharma, won to by me, is deep, difficult to see, difficult 
to understand, peaceful, excellent, beyond dialectic, subtle, 
intelligible to the learned.’ 


The Buddhist religion is founded upon the complete and perfect 
enlightenment achieved by the Buddha through his awakening. As 
the Mahdvagga relates, after his moment of final realization the 
Buddha spent several more weeks in contemplation, experiencing 
the bliss of liberation. Following the final seven-day period, the 
Lord: finally reflected on the profundity of the dharma he had 
experienced with the words cited above. Brahma Sahampati ultimate- 
ly was able to prevail on the Lord to teach the dharma for the welfare 
and weal of the world, an endeavor in which he continued until his 
death some forty years later. Those teachings formed the core of 
what was eventually to become several distinct doctrinal systems 
within the Buddhist religion. Despite the differences that characteri- 
zed these various scholastic schools, however, all were devoted to 
one goal: the ascertainment of the definitive meaning of that dharma 
realized by the Lord through his enlightenment. 

The discourses delivered by the Buddha during his teaching career 
were collected by his followers as sutras, a term used by the tradition 
to refer to both the unique teachings of the Buddha on such matters 
as dependent origination or the four noble truths, as well as the 
collected preachings of the Buddha. The sdtras are accounts of 
particular teachings made by the Buddha, to unique audiences, and 
in specific circumstances. As such, the teachings given by the Buddha 
were adapted to the precise needs of the audience, and were 


74 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


presented in such a way that they would be readily accessible to 
their unique spiritual propensities. It is this tendency toward adapta- 
tion that makes the content of the sdtras intentional (4bhiprayika) 
or conventional (aupacarika), i.e. their meaning had to be drawn out 
in order to be understood correctly. Hence, different sitras could 
give divergent explanations on a variety of doctrinal questions. 
Because of the inherent circumscription of their scope and applica- 
tion, the sdtras were not an ideal vehicle for constructing an indefeasi- 
ble system of philosophy, such as would be required if Buddhism 
were to compete in the crowded sectarian scene that characterized 
Indian religious life. It was to construct such a definitive system that 
Abhidharma was born. 

Abhidharma is defined in Mahaydnasitralamkara xi.3 as ‘‘that by 
which the meaning of the sutra is best understood” (abhigamyate 
satrartha etenety abhidharmah). As the Pali Althasalini also 
remarks,” the Abhidharma surpasses the dharma presented in the 
sutras, because the various classifications of the elements of exist- 
ence are listed haphazardly in the sdtras, while the Abhidharma gives 
them in their definitive catechetic forms. Thus, the sitras are prea- 
ched from the standpoint of conventional truth according to specific 
worldly circumstances, but the Abhidharma deals with absolute 
truth, and is concerned with the analysis of mind and matter (nama- 
ripapariccheda). 

This same sense of ‘‘abhidharma’’ is also alluded to by Vasu- 
bandhu, who in the AbhidharmakoSabhasya (I.2ab) notes that Abhi- 
dharma means that unsullied wisdom (prajfia’ mala) which analyzes 
factors (dharmapravicaya).* Hence, while the sutras might use terms 
in their conventional meanings, the Abhidharma would always use 
them only in their definitive sense.* For example, the term ‘‘atita’”’ 
might be used to refer to the past in general (adhva), to a particular 
continuum (santad), to a general time-frame (samaya), or to a 
discrete moment (Xsana). Of these four meanings, the first three are 
correct only in a figurative sense, as might be found in the sdtras; 
only the last, however, would be used in Abhidharma, as it is the 
only one that is valid from an ultimate standpoint and qualifies as 
a non-figurative, literally definitive statement.° 

This notion of literalness suggests that the early Buddhists did 
accept that there were specific laws (dharmata) by which the factors 
of existence (dharma) were considered to function. These laws were 
invariably correct as a fact of nature, and did not need to be revealed 
by the Buddha: ‘Whether or not the Tathagatas arise (in the world), 
this law of the elements of existence remains fixed.’’’ Certain 
presuppositions are found in all sutras, whether addressed to monks 
or laypeople, which are not necessarily spelled out. Indeed, all Indian 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 75 


philosophical schools have similar presuppositions upon which their 
doctrinal edifices are constructed. The Jains, for example, take the 
multiplicity of aspects as the hallmark of their doctrine, and consider 
that all one~sided views were of merely relative validity. Similarly, 
in many doctrines originating in the Upanisads, the notions of the 
eternal, unchanging nature of universal Brahman or the individual 
self were ultimate teachings, and any contrary ideas were nondefini- 
tive. For Buddhists, the laws consisted principally of the cardinal 
doctrines of impermanence, frustration, and lack of an eternal self. 
These were supplemented by such pan-Indian ideas as the continuity 
of moral action and result, as well as by such uniquely Buddhist 
concepts as dependent origination. The varied nature of the speci- 
fic teachings found in the sdtras compelled the Buddhists to look 
for general standards by which those teachings could be evaluated. 
The most important of these standards was the four references 
to authority,® which were used to verify claims that a specific teaching 
was authentic: i.e. that it was learned from (1) the Buddha himself; 
(2) a sangha of elders; (3) groups of monks who were specialists 
_ inthe sdtras, the discipline, or the doctrinal lists of matrices (mdatrka); 
(4) individual monks who were such experts. The manner in which 
such claims were approved itself involves three separate criteria. 
The Sanskrit versions, for example, state that a doctrine that claimed 
to have been learned from the Buddha himself should not be praised 
or disparaged, but, having heard and understood its words and 
syllables, one should see if it comes down in the satras and compare 
it with the Vinaya. If it passes these tests and does not contradict 
the law, then let this be said: ‘Truly, Noble one, these dharmas have 
been spoken by the Lord. Noble One, these dharmas have been well 
understood by you. Put against the sutra and compared with the 
Vinaya, these dharmas come down in the sdtra and are reflected 
in the Vinaya and do not contradict the law.’’? The third of these 
three criteria is not found in the recensions of this exchange found 
in either the Digha or Anguttara Nikayas,'° but does appear in the 
later Nettippakarana, an extracanonical Pali work ascribed by tradi- 
tion to Mahakaccana, one of the Buddha’s immediate disciples. 
There, the author clarifies the Theravada interpretation of the mean- 
-ing of these three criteria: those words and syllables should be put 
beside the sdtras, compared with the Vinaya, and tested against 
the law. Which sutras are they to be put beside? The four noble 
_ truths. With which Vinaya are they to be compared? With the 
pacification of passion, ill will, and infatuation. With which law are 
they to be tested? With the doctrine of dependent origination.'! 
Because of the varied nature of the teachings found in the sitras, 
-the incipient Abhidharma schools sought to delineate these general 


76 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tules of interpretation, so as to outline a coherent, systematic 
approach to Buddhist doctrine. Hence, Abhidharma claimed to 
supersede the sutras by deriving its authority from its own adherence 
to the overriding standard of the law, thereby establishing itself as 
superior to the satras. In its attempts to establish definitive general 
rules, Abhidharma ultimately became both an explanation of the stra 
teachings as well as a distinct body of exegetical material in its own 
right. 

Such unanimity of opinion concerning the law was of considerable 
importance if the Buddhists were to avoid nascent disputes about 
the nature of nirvéna or the path, which could have had disastrous 
consequences for the successful dissemination of the religion. The 
Buddha himself had warned in the Samagamasutta of the dangers 
that would result if controversies about the fundamental principles 
of the teachings were to develop: “Of little concern, Ananda, are 
quarrels respecting the rigors of regimen or the code of discipline. 
It is possible quarrels in the Order about the Path or the course of 
training that really matter.’’!? Such controversies did eventually re- 
sult, due to the differences in the sutra-collections of the develop- 
ing early schools and their varied exegeses of their own distinctive 
laws. Indeed, such disputes were noted later by such Mahayana 
polemicists as Haribhadra, who says in his AbAisamayalamkardaloka: 
“‘There is no concordance between different versions of the Sdtra 
and Vinaya Pitakas. The dharmatda established in one school is not 
identical with that of the other schools. With eighteen different 
schools each having its own separate version of Tripitaka, it is 
improper to hold up the mahapadesas as a standard for judging 
the authenticity of the words of the Buddha.’’!? 

We find in Haribhadra’s passage a reference to the split of the 
early church into eighteen contending schools, which is considered 
to have taken place by the time of Asoka (ca. third century B.C.). 
We may now examine the process by which the different sectarian 
schools of Abhidharma are traditionally said to have developed. 
Considerable scholarly controversy has raged concerning the histori 
city of the various synods that are said to have been convened 
to deal with disputes within the order.'* Our concern here will not 
be with the adjudication of the respective merits of the scholarly 
opinions concerning these councils. Instead, our focus will be on 
outlining the traditional accounts of both the derivation of. the 
principal Abhidharma schools and the methods that they adopted 
to legitimize their treatises. These accounts. will reveal the major 
issues that seem to have led to the development of distinct Abhi- 
dharma traditions within Buddhism. 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 77 


As the Mahdaparinibbanasutta relates, soon after the Buddha’s 
parinirvana {ca. 486 B.C.}, controversies began to develop over 
points of discipline and doctrine, as is found in the comments of 
the elderly Subhadda, who after the Buddha’s death rejoiced: 
‘Enough, sirs! Weep not, neither lament! We are well rid of the 
great Samana. We used to be annoyed by being told “This beseems 
you, this beseems you not.’ But now we shall be able to do whatever 
we like; and what we do not like, that we shall not have to do!’’!> 
This.attempt to guard against dissension in the order by establishing 
a definitive collection of the discourses of the Buddha was the 
motivation behind the convocation of the first council, which took 
place in Rajagrha in the Rainy Season following the Buddha’ s death. 
Mahakasyapa, the Buddha’s senior disciple, convened the council, 
and Ananda and Upali recited the sutra and vinaya texts, respecti- 
vely. The historicity of this council has been challenged by virtually 
all modern scholars. Bareau has even suggested that the account of 
this first council was directly inspired by the history of the second, 
. in order to justify the authenticity of the canon that was compiled 

at that latter convocation.'’ According to the tradition, even after 
this synod, however, there was at least one renowned elder, Punna 
by name, who refused to be bound by the reading of the discourses 
and the rules of discipline agreed upon at the Council, preferring 
to remember the Buddha’s words as he himself had heard them." 

Such differences in the renditions of specific siitras would eventually 

lead to varying recensions of the scriptures, and ultimately to distinct 

canonical collections. 

Two discrepant accounts of the second council are preserved in 
Buddhist literature. According to the narrative included inthe Vinayas 
of various schools, the second council was held at Vaisali, some 
one hundred years after the Buddha’s parinirvana. It was prompted . 

“by ten lax practices of the Vajjiputtaka (Vrjiputraka) monks of 
VaiSali, such as storing salt ina horn, accepting gold and silver, etc.'® 
- Seven hundred elders convened to decide on the propriety of these 
practices, with Revata as president, and finally rejected them. Some 
scholars have concluded that the refusal of the Vaisali monks to 
accept this, judgement led to the first schism in the order, between 
the Sthaviras (the “‘Elders’’), who are alleged to have relied upon 
the stricter original Vinaya in rejecting these new practices, and the 
schismatic majority group, who labelled themselves the Mahas- 
amghikas (the ‘‘Great Assembly’’), who were more flexible in their 
interpretation of Vinaya.”° This theory was, however, debunked first 
by M. Hofinger, who concluded that the Council dispersed in con- 
cord.”! Following non-Vinaya sources, such as the Samaya- 
bhedoparacanacakra by the Sarvastivadin exegete Vasumitra, André 


78 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Bareau proposed a second theory concerning this second council: 
there was instead a separate synod held at Pataliputra in 349 B.C. 
(137 years after the Buddha’s parinirvana), which resulted in the 
first major schism. This council was said to have been conve- 
ned because of five points of dissension raised by Mahadeva, which 
challenged the very foundations of Buddhism by calling into question 
the utility of the systematic path of practice outlined by the Buddha, 
and the ultimacy of the enlightenment attained by perfected beings 
through following that path. According to Mahadeva, the perfected 
beings even after their enlightenment (1) remain subject to tempta- 
tion, (2) may have residual ignorance, (3) may continue to entertain 
doubts, (4) gain knowledge through others’ help, and (5) the path 
may be attained by an exclamation such as ‘‘Aho!’’? Bareau further 
proposes that after an unsuccessful attempt on the part of King 
_ Mahapadma to mediate the crisis, the Sthaviras and Mahasamghikas 
split into separate sarighas, and eventually compiled their own distinct 
canons. Both these theories have been challenged by. Nattier and 
Prebish. They have marshalled considerable evidence that seems 
to contravene any conclusion that the schism between the Sthaviras 
and Mahasamghikas was caused by either the disciplinary excesses 
of the Vajjiputtaka monks or the five propositions of Mah4deva. In 
their hypothesis, ‘‘the sole cause of the initial schism in Buddhist 
history pertained to matters of Vinaya, but rather than representing 
areaction of orthodox Buddhists to Mahasamghika laxity, as maintai- 
ned by both Bareau and Demiéville, it represents a reaction on 
the part of the future Mahasamghikas to unwarranted expansion of 
the root Vinaya text on the part of the future Sthaviras.’’” 

Pali sources alone mention a putative third council, whichis alleged 
to have taken place also at Pataliputra in 247 B.C. during the reign 
of King Asoka. This council was presided over by the Elder Tissa- 
Moggaliputta, who is said to have compiled the Kathavatthu in order 
to present the definitive Sthaviravada conclusions concerning the 
doctrinal debates that took place during the convocation.** Two 
schools were the primary targets of the Sthaviravadins in the Katha- 
vatthu. First was the Sammitiyas who, along with the Vajjiputtakas, 
were said to‘have advocated a view that was anathema to all other 
Buddhists: that there was persisting personal entity (pudgala, Pali 
puggala). No writings that can be definitively attributed to this sect 
are-extant, and what little we know about them comes from the 
admittedly biased accounts of their Buddhist rivals.2> The second 
group, which was the major challenger to the Sthaviravadins, was 
the Sabbatthivadins (Skt. Sarvastivadins), who were named for their 
unique doctrine that dharmas existed throughout the past, present, 
and future, From the Kathavatthu debates, which we will examine 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 79 


later, it would appear that the Sthaviravadins and Sarvastivadins 
shared a similar set of scriptures, but differed in their interpretation 
of those texts—i.e. their laws were distinct. Their differing interpre- 
tative positions eventually led to the bifurcation of the Abhidharma 
tradition into these two great schools. Bareau has concluded that 
it was at the time of this council that the final division of the 
_ Theravadins and Sarvastivadins took place.*° A complete Tripitaka 
of the Sthaviravadins was apparently compiled during this council 
and missionaries were sent out under Asoka’s direction to all parts 
of the known world.”’ It was at that time that Buddhism eve- 
ntually made its way to Sri Lanka,** which, after the demise of the 
Sthaviravadins on the mainland, eventually became the center of the 
school (where it was known as Theravada). It was principally the 
Sarvastivadins among the early Buddhist schools that survived on 
the sub-continent and continued to exert predominant influence over 
the subsequent development of Buddhist and Indian philosophy. 
Before the third century B.C., the term sarvastivada is not attested 
in the literature, and the canon of that school certainly postdates 
Asoka. The prominent place of that school in the Katha- 
vatthu, however, suggests that its influence was equal, if not superior, 
to that wielded at that time by the Sthaviravadins. Similar to the way 
in which the Theravadins in the Mahavamsa have claimed for 
themselves the patronage of ASoka,”° several avadanas dealing with 
Emperor Asoka and his successors found in the Mila-Sarvastivada 
collection, Divyavadana, claim that Asoka instead favored their 
’ school.*° Indeed the Theravadins and Sarvastivadins both claim 
that their most eminent representatives (Tissa-Moggalliputta and 
Upagupta, respectively) served as ASoka’s personal teacher.*! But 
first the Brahmanical advisors to ASoka (who allegedly imprisoned 
the emperor for his profligacy in donating the wealth of the kingdom 
to Buddhist religious groups), and followed later by the Sungas, who 
overthrew the Mauryan empire, worked to establish Brahmanical 
hegemony in Pataliputra, which had been the stronghold of the 
Sarvastivadins. This apparently prompted a mass migration of fol- 
lowers of that school first to Mathura in north-central India, and 
later to northwest India, from whence the school eventually spread 
throughout central and east Asia. It was in Kashmir, under the 
sponsorship of the KuSana (Scythian) king Kaniska, that a separate 
third council, that of the Sarvastivadins, was said to have been 
held, allegedly during the first century A.D. It was during this council 
that the Sarvastivadin canon was codified, and their massive exegesis 
of Abhidharma, the Mahavibhasa, written.? 
’ We may now turn to a consideration of the ways in which the two 
major schools of Abhidharma, the Theravada and Sarvastivada, 


80 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


attempted to prove that their treatises were the authentic words of 
the Buddha. The Abhidharma books were the first major extension 
of the scope of Buddhist literature to take place in India, and 
the approach to legitimation taken by the Abhidharmikas adumbrates 
that adopted later by the Mahayana school. Three major concerns 
were apparent in their attempts to establish the authenticity of their 
new books: first, to prove that the Buddha himself had personally 
taught the Abhidharma; second, that it had been formally trans- 
mitted to eminent disciples of the Buddha, by whom it was then 
collected; and third, that the Abhidharma works had in fact been 
recited and codified at the time of the putative first council. In this 
wise, the Theravadins and Sarvastivadins attempted to justify the 
inclusion of their Abhidharmas as part of the canon. 

According to the Theravada account in the Atthasalini,? 3 the 
Abhidharma was preached by Buddha first to his mother, Mahamaya, 
during a three-month sojourn in the Tavatimsa heaven. As the 
Divyavadana also relates,** the Buddha’s mother had died soon after 
giving birth to the Bodhisattva and had never received the benefit 
of his teaching. This filial legend was therefore a convenient foil for 
the Theravadins to use in accounting for the time and provenance 
of the preaching of their Abhidhamma. A novel explanation for the 
transmission of the Abhidhamma to the disciples is then given 
in the Afthasdalini. Leaving a phantom of himself (nimittabuddha) in 
heaven, the Buddha returned to Anotatta (Skt. Anavatapta) Lake, 
in the Himalayas near Kailasa, where he taught the Abhidhamma 
to Sariputta. Sariputta then determined the textual order of the 
Abhidhamma books, decided upon the numerical series in the 
Patthdna, and finally transmitted the teachings to five hundred of 
his own disciples.*> Despite this vital role played by Sariputta in the 
compilation of the Abhidhamma, however, the Theravadins conti- - 
nued to claim that it was the Buddha himself who had actually first 
understood the Abhidhamma, at the time of his final enlightenment. 
Sariputta’s role was merely to have ‘‘laid down the numerical series 
in order to make it easy to learn, remember, study and teach the 
Law.’’*6 Finally, Ananda rehearsed the Abhidhamma during the First 
Council, and the ancient Commentary (Afthakatha} thereon was 
recited by Mahakassapa, the head of the congregation.*’ 

In spite of this attempt on the part of the commentators to make 
the Buddha the sole author of the Abhidhammapitaka, the comme- 
ntators agree to a large extent that the individual Abhidhamma books 
were propounded by the Elders. The major challenge to this extension 
of the words of the Buddha to include the Abhidhamma focussed 
on the Kathavatthu, which even the commentators admitted was 
compiled at the third council by Tissa~-Moggaliputta, long after the 


‘THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 81 


Buddha’s passing. The authority of the matrices of the doctrine was 
central to justifying the inclusion of the Abhidhamma in the canon. 
As will be discussed in more detail below, the matrices constitute 
the superstructure around which the complete edifice of the Abhi- 
dhamma was constructed. The creation of these dharma-lists was 
considered to be the exclusive province of the Buddha himself, not 
of his disciples. Accordingly, although authorship of such Abhi- 
dhamma treatises as the Kathavatthu might be attributed to disciples 
like Tissa-Moggaliputta, since these works were built upon matrices 
propounded by the Lord they could still be considered the word of 
the Buddha. The Theravadins were aware that several of the scrip- 
tures included in their Suttapitaka as the Buddha’s words were 
actually preached by Ananda, Moggallana, Sariputta, and Maha- 
kaccayana. For example, Afthasdlini cites the Madhupindikasutta 
in the Majjhimanikaya as an example of such a scripture: although 
the scripture was preached by Mahakaccayana, it was spoken by 
him on the basis of a synopsis given first by the Buddha, and thus 
qualified as the Buddha’s work. 

A somewhat similar approach is used by the Sarvastivadins in 
attempting to establish the authenticity of their own seven Abhi- 
dharma books as a separate pitaka. For the Sarvastivadins, the 
Abhidharma consisted of a variety of teachings of the Buddha 
scattered throughout the canon, which were systematized by the 
elders to whom these treatises were attributed. As YaSomitra tells 
us, 


The Vaibhasikas: maintain that the Abhidharmapitaka, which 
deals with nature of the characteristics of elements and belongs 
to the Upadesa class, was preached by the Buddha to his 
disciples, and remains scattered here and there. Just as Dharma- 
trata compiled several udanas of the Master in the work Udana- 
vargiya, similarly, the Elders Katyayaniputra and others collec- 
ted the Abhidharma together in these sastras.°? 


The fortuitous sindilarity between the name of Katyayaniputra—the 
Elder mentioned in YaSomitra’s quote who was considered to be 
the author of their central: Abhidharma book, the Jiadnaprasthana 
—and that of the Buddha’s disciple, Mahakatyayana, who partici- 
pated in the Council at Rajagrha, allowed the Sarvastivadins to claim 
further that the Jaanaprasthana, compiled from various teachings of 
Buddha, was sanctioned as his own words by the Buddha himself 
during his own lifetime.” A similar approach was made to authentica- 
ting the six branch-treatises of the Sarvastivada Abhidharma. Like 


82 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the Theravacins, the Sarvastivadins also claimed finally that this 
Abhidharmapitaka was recited by Ananda during the first council.* 

The principal challenge to Sarvastivada attempts to claim that their 
Abhidharmapitaka was spoken by the Buddha came from the Sau- 
trantikas (lit. ‘those who follow the satras’’). Both Pali and Sanskrit 
sources consider this school to be the last of the traditional eighteen 
nikayas, branching off from the main body of the Sarvastivadaschool. 
One of the primary reasons that the Sautrantikas split from the 
Sarvastivadins was their rejection of the claim that the Abhidharma 
books were spoken by the Buddha himself. As the. Sautrantika 
advocate, Yasomitra, says, this view that the Abhidharmapitaka was 
preached by the Buddha, ‘‘is a view of the Abhidharmikas,’’ not 
of the Sautrantikas. Indeed, we are told that the Abhidharmasastras 
actually have individual authors.*? The Sautrantikas accepted the 
three—basket classification of canonical texts, but understood the 
Abhidharmapitaka to mean specific types of sdtras that were con- 
cerned with determining meanings and characteristics of dharmas; 
hence, the Abhidharmapitaka was a class of literature that was found 
scattered through the Sutrapitaka, and not a separate collection, as 
the Sarvastivadins and Theravadins had both Pali and Sanskrit sources 
in which the Abhidharma is grouped under a subsection of the sdatras, 
called variously vyakarana or upadesa. Various interpretationsof the 
term “‘abhidharma’’ further emphasize the relation of the Abhi- 
dharma to the sdtras. For example, as was noted above, abhidharma 
was defined in Mahayanasatralamkdraas that by which the meanings 
of the sitras are best understood. Hence, there is some precedent 
for the Sautrantika’s radical rejection of the classification of the 
Abhidharma as a separate section of the canon. Having mentioned 
this Sautrantika caveat that Abhidharma should be looked for in the 
satras, we May now turn to a survey of the course by which the 
Abhidharma developed as a separate class of literature in the major 
schools. 


Il. THE LITERATURE OF THE VARIOUS 
ABHIDHARMA SCHOOLS 


THE INCEPTION Or ABHIDHARMA 

The beginnings of Abhidharma are found in certain fundamental 
listings of dharmas made by the Buddha, which were considered 
to be definitive and indisputable. The most important of these early 
listings was that of the thirty-seven limbs of enlightenment (Pali - 
bodhipakhiya dhamma). These the Buddha raised to a status superior 
to other teachings in such texts as the Pasadikasuttanta, where he 
called them ‘‘the truths which when I had perceived, I made known 
to you, and which, when ye have come together and have associated 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 83 


yourselves, ye are to rehearse, all of you, and not quarrel over, 
comparing meaning with meaning and phrase with phrase.’’** Here, 
it is not a particular sutra that is said to be supreme; rather, it is 
the sum total of all the teachings, as systematized into such a 
classification as the seven limbs of enlightenment.“ This list is the 
focus of a large number of satras in the Dighaand Majjhima Nikayas, 
-and constitutes one of the final teachings given by the Buddha prior 
to his entrance into parinirvana. Such tabulations of seven categories 
of factors as a definitive listing of the path-related factors acceptable 
to all Buddhists is common to many sdfras in all five nikayas; it marks 
the first stage in the development of the Abhidharma. The next stage 
is found in a whole series of sutras classified as ‘‘ vibhariga’’,*> a 
term meaning distribution, division, or expansion, which eventually 
came to be used to designate a commentary of exegesis. The second 
book of the Pali Abhidhammapitaka, for example, is called Vibhaniga, 
and it serves as a virtual supplement to the listings of the elements 
of existence that appear in the preceding Dhammasarigani. These 
two functions of collection and expansion characterize the vibhanga- 
sutras, which constitute the second stage in the development of the. 
Abhidharma. Several other sdtras in the nikayas exhibit a similar 
tendency toward collection and classification of dharma lists, at times 
even elaborating on the advanced teachings of the Buddha. A number | 
of satras in the Samyuttanikaya, for example, give long discourses 
on the stereotyped formulae repeated ad infinitum throughout the 
nikayas.** The numerical order of the Arguttaranikaya is itself quite 
similar to the sequential lists found in many Abhidharma texts. A 
number of these sitras are not the direct words of the Buddha himself, 
but elaborations made by his main disciples, such as Saripuita or 
MahakaccAyana, to a bare outline of doctrine (uddesa) made by the 
Buddha.*’ The factors that are discussed in these various expositions 
can be classified under such ubiquitous technical terms as skandha, 
dhatu, ayatana, indriya, satya, pratityasamutpada, karma, klega, 
_ marga, the four and five dhydnas, the six abAijfias, the eight vimoksas, 
the thirty-seven bodhipaksikadharmas, et al. The collective name 
for all these dharmas is ‘‘abhidharma’’, in that it ‘‘exceeds and is 
distinguished from the Dhamma (the Suttas).’’*® The contents of all 
the principal works on Abhidharma do not, in essence, stray from 
these major topics. 

We may now turn to the Sazigiti and Dasuttara suttantas, scriptures 
propounded by the Buddha’s chief disciple, Sariputta, which mark 
the start of Abhidharma literature proper. The Sangitisuttanta opens 
with a brief historical introduction outlining the reason for the recital 
of the Doctrine. Sariputta notes that after the death of Nigantha 
Nataputta, the leader of the Jaina community ,*” discord over the 


84 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
true nature of his teachings divided his followers into several con- 
tending factions. In order to prevent such an occurrence after the 
passing of the Buddha, Sariputta hastened to draw up a voluminous 
outline of the doctrine, covering 903 individual factors in 227 classes, 
presented sequentially as ones, dyads, triads, etc., up to decads. 
The Dasuttarasutta follows a similar patiern, also presenting groups 
of from one to ten factors. The format of these two scriptures can 
be readily compared to the matrices of the Abhidhamma, which we 
will discuss next. The Abhidharmika character of these two sdatras 
was noted early on by T.W. Rhys Davids, ‘*All that we know is that 
each of them forms a sort of thematic index to the doctrines scattered 
through the Four Nikayas. . . Inthe two features they have incommon, 
of catechism as a monologue by the catechuman, and of the absence 
of narrative, this further interest attaches to these last suttantas, that 
they become practically Abhidhamma rather than Sutta Pitaka.’’>° 
This observation is further confirmed by the fact that a Sarigitiparyaya 
is included among the seven Abhidharma works.of the Sarvastivada 
school. As Junjiro Takakusu first demonstrated, the Chinese re- 
cension of this text is attributed to Sariputra, and contains the same 
historical introduction that opens the Sangitisuttanta.>' Hence, it was 
such summaries of the doctrine that eventually came to be called 
“‘abhidharma’’. 


THE MATRICES 


This penchant of the Buddha’s disciples to compile categorized 
lists of dharmas culminates in the tabulation of matrices which form 
the nucleus of the formal Abhidharma. Such listings were made (quite 
probably with the Buddha’s approval) by such eminent elders. as 
Sariputra, Maudgalyayana, and Mahakatyayana, who were all re- 
nowned for their skill in exposition, and seem to have been well 
known to the early Buddhists. For example, the Gulissanisutta of 
the Majjhimanikdya states that a monk living in the forest should 
apply himself to abhidhamma and abhivinaya.-* These two terms 
are glossed as follows in the Majshimanikaya-Atthakathda. 


He should apply himself to the study of the Abhidhammapitaka 
and the Vinayapitaka, together with the commentaries. As 
regards the Abhidhamma, he should at least know the Duka- 
and Tika- Matikas together with the ‘‘ Dhammahadaya-vi- 
bhanga’’ [the last chapter of the Vibhaga]. As regards the 
Vinayapitaka, he must at least learn the two Patimokkhas.>° 


Although the correlation of Abhidhamma in this passage with the 
Abhidhammapitaka is certainly a later commentarial extrapolation, 
‘the emphasis on knowing the matrices suggests the significance of 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 85 


these lists in the early church. Indeed, in early Pali canonical litera- 
ture, the term ‘‘matrix’’ (mdatika) may be taken as a virtual synonym 
of abhidhamma, and experts in those lists were called matikadhara, 
as was noted above in the discussion on the mahdpadesas. The term 
matikadhara always occurs in association with both dhammadhara 
(specialist in the siitras) and vinayadhara (specialist in the vinaya)**, 
‘suggesting the existence of matrices as a separate collection of the 
word of the Buddha. The term mdtikd is also known to the Mula—Sar- 
vastivada Vinaya and the Divyavadana, where it is also mentioned 
in tandem with sutra and vinaya dharmas.°° 

The matrices form the exegetical framework of the first book of 
the Pali Abhidhamma, the Dhammasangani. An elaborate list of 
twenty-two triads and one-hundred dyads appear at the beginnin 
of the text, supplemented by an additional list of forty-two suttanta 
dyads.*° The triad matrix begins with a triad of factors that are good, 
bad, and indeterminate. Their arrangement is made by grouping 
together factors in three mutually exclusive sets which, when com- 
bined, encompass all mental (mama) factors in some cases and both 
mental and material (mamardpa) factors in others. Six of these triads 
(nos. 2, 7, 13, 16, 19, 21) cover only mental factors, while the 
remaining sixteen include both mental and material. These latter thus 
cover the entire range of phenomena as well as the unconditioned 
realm of liberation, called the asamskrta dhatu, which is included 
among the nama factors.*’ The dyad matrix consists of one-hundred 
dyads in thirteen groups. Ten of these groups are called “‘clusters’’ 
(gocchaka), and deal with the ten types of corruptions (asava; 
samyojana, klega, etc.) and their related factors; these are found 
only in the Pali Abhidhamma. The remaining three groups, called 
cUlantaraduka (shorter intermediate set of seven dyads), mahantara- 
duka (longer intermediate set of fourteen dyads), and pitthiduka 
(supplementary set of eighteen dyads), treat various miscellaneous 
pairs of factors, such as Aetu, na-hetu, etc. Many of the dyads in 
the mahantaraduka deal with the mutual relation of awareness and 
mental states. These three groups seem to be older and, as will be 
~ seen below, contain several items common to the matrices of the 
Sarvastivadin Abhidharma. Finally, the suttanta matrix contains 
forty-two dyads of miscellaneous factors. Rather than dealing with © 
nama and rapa, as the Abhidhamma matrices do, the suttantika 
matrices are more soteriological in import and are principally con- 
cerned with factors related to moral precepts, concentration, and 
views. Thirty-two of its forty-two pairs are identical to the pairs 


of factors appearing in the Sarigitisuttanta of the Dighanikaya,”* - . 


probably accounting for the designation of this listing as the suttantika 
matrices. 


. 86 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


None of the formal matrices of the Sarvastivada and Yogacara 
schools are now extant, but such tabulations can be reconstructed 
on the basis of the items dealt with in their Abhidharma works. Both 
schools have lists of dyads and triads that are nearly identical to those 
found in the mature Theravada Abhidhamma. In the first and third 
chapters of the AbhidharmakoSabhasya the factors are listed as 
follows:°? 


Factors Corresponding Item in Pali 
1. (a) impure (sasrava) (b) pure (anasrava) 37 
2. (a) conditioned (samskrta) (b) unconditioned (asamskrta) 30 
3. (a) visible (sanidarsana) (b) invisible (anidarsana) 31 
4. (a) resisting (saprangha) (b) unresisting (apratigha) 32 
5. (a) good (kusala) (b) bad (akuSa/a) 
(c) neutral (avyakrta) 
6. (a) re sexual passion (b) rematter 
(kamadhdtupratisamyukta) (rdpapratisamyukta) 
(c) re the immaterial 
(aripyapratsamyukta) 115-7 
7. (a) initial thought (b) sustained thought 
(savitarkavicara) ( vicdramatra) 
(c) noninitial thought 
(avitarkavicara) 6 
8. (a) with supporting object (b) without supporting object 
(salambana) (analambana) 77 
9. (a) appropriated (updtta) (b} unappropriated (anupatta) 
10. (a) primary (bAdta) (b) derived ( bhautika) 
(c}) mediate (nobhaya) 
11. (a) accumulated (samecita) (b) unaccumulated (asamcita) 
12. (a) ‘‘cooked”’ ( vipakaja) (b) grown (aupacayika) 
13. (a) internal (adhydtman) (b) external (b&hya} 88 
14, (a) homogeneous (sabhdga) (b) heterogeneous (tatsabhaga) 
15. (a) destroyed by vision (b) destroyed by practice 8 
(darSanaheya) (bhavandheya) 
(c) not destroyed (aheya) 
16. (a) views (drsti) (b) without views (na drst) 
17. (a) burning (dahaka) (b) burned (dahya} 
18. (a) weight (culya) (b) weigher (tolayitr) 
19. (a) impure (sasrava) (b) pure (andsrava) 
(c) both (ubpaya) . 37 
: (a) “cooking” ( vipaka) {b) not ‘cooking’ (na-vipaka) 


(a) with “cooking”’ (savipaka) (b) without ‘‘cooking’”’ (avipaka) 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY _ 87 


Thus, of the six triads and fifteen dyads found in the AbhidharmakoSa, 
four triads and eight dyads have their parallels in the Pali matrices. 

The Abhidharmasamuccaya of Asanga gives the Yogacara matrix in 
its opening chapter, Tridharmapariccheda.© It opens with a list of 
sixteen dyads: 


Factors 


(c) 


Not to be destroyed 
(aprahatavya) 


Pali No. 
1. (a). actual (dravyamat) (b) nominal (prajfiaptimat) 
2. (a) conventional (samvrtisat) (b) real (paramarthasah 
3. (a) cognized (jfleya) (b) known ( vijfieya) 
4. (a) material (ripin) (b) immaterial (ardpin) 33 
5. (a) visible (sanidarsana) (b) invisible (anidarsana) 31 
6. (a) resisting (sapratigha) (b) unresisting (apratigha) 32 
7. (a) impure (sasrava) (b) pure (andsrava) 37 
8. (a) conflicting (sarana) (b) not conflicting ( arana) 122 
9. (a) fleshly (samisa) (b) not fleshly (niramisa) 
10.(a)’ based on grasping (b) based on renunciation 
(erdhasrita) (naiskramyasrita) 
11.(a) conditioned (sarmskrta) (b) unconditioned (asamskrta) - 30 
12.(a) worldly (/aukika) (b) higher-worldly (/okottara) 34 
13.(a) arisen (ufpanna) (b) not arisen (anutpanna) 17 
14.(a)  grasper (grahaka) (b) grasped (grahya) 77 
15.(a) external ( bahirmukha) (b) internal (antarmukha) 
16.(a) defiled (kdista) (b) undefiled (akdista) 99, 
Five triads follow: 
17.(a) past (adta) (b) future (andggata) 
(c) present (pratyutpanna) 18 
18.(a) good (kuSala) (b) bad (akusaia) 
(c) neutral (avydkyta) 1 
19,(a) resexual passion (b) re matter 
(ka&mapratisamyukta) (ripapratisamyukta) 
(c) reimmaterial 
(drdpyasamyukta) 115-7 
20.(a) seeker (Saiksa) (b) adept (asaiksa) 
{c) neither . 
(naivasaiksanasaiksa) 11 
21.(a) destroyed by vision (b) destroyed by meditation 
(dar$anaprahatavya) ( bhavandprahatavya) 


88 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The matrix finally concludes with three more dyads: 


22.(a) homogeneous (sabhaga)} (b} heterogeneous (tatsabhdga) 
23.{a) with cooking (savipaka) (b) without cooking (avipaka) 3 
24.(a) higher (anuttara) (b} lower (sottara) 121 


As can now be readily gleaned from these listings, both the Sarvasti- 
vada and Yogacara schools had matrices that closely paralleled those 
found in the Pali Abhidhamma. Another tack to take in attempting to 
ascertain the original form of the matikd lists would be to single out 
only those items which appear in the works of all three of these schools. 
As outlined above, the Theravada recognized 22 triads and 100 dyads 
(excluding the suttanta matrices), the Sarvastivada 6 triads and 15 
dyads, and the Yogacara 5 triads and 22 dyads. Considering the 
overlapping character of several of the listings of dyads and triads found 
in the Pali matrices, it would seem that the Sarvastivada listing is more 
primitive and has less accretions. The Yogicara listings are also much 
closer to the Sarvastivadins than the Theravadins. Hence, the Sarvasti- 
vada matrices would appear to have the best chance of being closer 
to the original matrices than would those of the other two schools. 

Another approach to ascertaining the original matrices has been taken 
by A.K. Warder. As Warder notes, while the prominent placement 
of the three formal Pali matrices at the start of the first book of its 
Abhidhammapitaka was obviously meant to indicate their funda- 
mental position in its doctrinal edifice, various other tabulations of 
phenomena are also found throughout the remainder of the Theravada 
Abhidhamma. Such variable groupings of lists like the five skandhas, 
twelve dyatanas, eighteen dhatus, etc., serve as the framework for other 
books of the Abhidhammapitaka, such as the Vibhanga, Dhatukatha, 
Puggalapafifiatti, and Yamaka. Indeed, Warder proposes that these 
relatively unsophisticated listings of factors may actually have been 
the original matrix, which was subsequently refined by the Thera- 
vadins into the much more elaborate dyads and triads of the Dhamma- 


sangal. 


We may thus suppose that the Abhidhamma Pali originated from 
the matika of the Vibhanga and the texts dependent on it {i.e. 
Dhatukatha, Puggalapafifiatti, and to a lesser extent Yamaka)... 
The Theravada school then worked up its new system of tikas 
and dukas into the Dhammasarigani, ... whichit placed at the head 
of the Abhidhamma Pitaka. The Kathavatthu had probably been 
added already, since it precedes the Yamaka. Finally the tika-duka 
analysis was worked up in a different way into the Patthdna, the 
great exposition of the theory of causation which was regarded 
as the crowning work of the whole Pitaka.*! 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 89 


By comparing the Pali matrices with their Sanskrit counterparts 
appearing in the Sarvastivada Abhidharma, the Asokavadana, and 
the Milasarvastivada Vinaya, Warder finally hypothesizes that the 
original matrix may have been in the form of the following twenty-two 


groups: 


Column | Column 2 Column 3 

4 applications of 5 (42) precepts 5 aggregates 
mindfulness (sikkhapada) (skandha) 
(satipatthana) 

4 right endeavors 4 right results 12 bases 
(sammappadhdana) (samaiifiaphala) (4yatana) 

4 supernatural 4 traditional 18 elements 
powers | practices of a monk ({dhatu) 
liddhipida) (ariyavamsa) 

5. faculties 4 discriminations 22 faculties . (?)° 

|, {indriya) (patisambhida) 

5 powers 4 meditations 
(dala) (jfiana) 

7 conditions of . 4 boundless states ? persons 
enlightenment (appamaiina) (puggala) 
(bojjhanga) 

8 stages on the 6 (4?)higher faculties 4 truths 
path (maggariga) (abhififia) (sacca) 

, 12 elements 
in dependent 
origination 


The first column is the list of bodhipakkhiya factors which, as was 
discussed supra, was probably the earliest formal tabulation of 
factors; it gives a systematic outline of Buddhist spiritual deve- 
lopment, and suggests the soteriological orientation of the nascent 
Abhidharma. The second column is a further elaboration of this 
group, with more focus on the gnoseological concerns of the early 
Buddhists. The third column is predominantly metaphysical in orien- 
tation, and outlines the Buddhist analysis of the world; it serves 
as the core for the later philosophical elaborations found especially 
in the Theravada and Sarvastivada school. 

By building upon these various matrices the different schools of 
Abhidharma constructed coherent, systematic exegeses of Buddhist 
doctrine. It is to the literature of the two major schools of Abhi- 
dharma, the Theravada and the Sarvastivada, that we may now 
turn. 


90 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Il. THE STHAVIRAVADA (THERAVADA) SCHOOL 


Three Stages in the Development of Theravada Abhidhamma 

As was mentioned above, the literature of the Sthaviravada (Thera- 
vada) school was transmitted to Sri Lanka from India at the time 
of the third sectarian council (ca. 3rd century B.C.), whence it was 
diffused throughout the countries of Southeast Asia. Virtually ali of 
these Theravada texts are preserved in the Pali language, which 
became the church language of southern Buddhism. From the discus- 
sion in the Kathavatthu, it seems apparent that most of the school’s 
Abhidhamma books had been codified in near-final form by that time, 
and they had already become the subjects of a burgeoning commer- 
cial literature. Soon after the school’s transmission to Sri Lanka, 
however, the importance of the Sthaviravadins on the sub- 
continent began to wane, and the Indian branch of the school 
eventually passed into obscurity. Hence, after the second century 
B.C., the Theravada Abhidhamma literature of Sri Lanka and 
South-East Asia developed in virtual isolation from the rest of Indian 
philosophical thought, and exerted little influence on the future 
course of Indian Abhidharma literature. 

Three principal stages in the development of Theravada Abhi- 
dhamma can be discerned: (1) the composition and codification 
of the seven canonical Abhidhamma books and other semi-canonical 
texts; (2) writing of commentaries, called atthakathas, to these books 
and general manuals of Abhidhamma doctrine; (3) the composition 
of an extensive subcommentarial literature, known as Malatikas and 
Anutikas.©° 


THe CANONICAL Books 


According to tradition, the seven books of the Pali Abhidhamma- 
pitaka are listed as follows: Dhammasangani, Vibhaiga, Dhadtukatha, 
Puggalapatifiatti, Kathavatthu, Yamaka and Patthana. While author- 
ship of these works is attributed to the Buddha himself, they probably 
could not have been compiled until some two or three hundred years 
after the Buddha’s parinirvana (ca. 4th/3rd century B.C.). Text-criti- 
cal analysis indicates that these books were composed in three stages. 
The earliest stage saw the compilation of the Puggalapaiiiatti and 
at least some sections of the Dhammasangani and Vibhariga. These 
three texts contain extensive quotations from the sutras and, while 
the method of analysis in the latter two texts is obviously of later 
origin, their principal concern is to explain points of controversy 
in the Nikayas. Hence, their overall approach is more. indicative of 
this primitive stage of development. The middle period saw the 
composition of the Dhatukatha and Kathavatthu. A dialectical 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 91 


approach is commonly followed in these two texts, in which the 
doctrine is taught through a complex series of questions and answers. 
The final period of development of the canonical books includes the 
uniquely Theravada texts, Yamaka and Patthana. Both employ an 
extremely advanced catechetical style that is all but incomprehensi- 
ble to non-Abhidhammikas, which may be considered the culmina- 

‘tion of the stylistic and doctrinal tendencies exhibited in the earlier 
Abhidhamma books. 

_ The doctrinal edifice of the Pali Abhidhamma rests upon the 
Dhammasangani, the first book of the Abhidhammapitaka. The 
Dhammasatigani presents a systematic analysis of all individual 
compounded elements of existence (samskrta factors) within three 
major categories: states of consciousness (citta), mental concomi- 
tants (cetasika), and material form/corporeality (répa). To this has 
also been added some discussion on the uncompounded element 
(asamskrta factor), nirvana. The three categories of compounded 
elements are treated from the standpoint of moral cause-and-effect 
as being either karmically good, bad, or neutral. Because of its 
primary stress on the analysis of mind and the mental concomitants, 
the approach of the Dhammasarigani may be considered psychologi- 
cal in orientation. 

The Vibhanga, the second book of the Pali Abhidhamma, is a series 
of eighteen independent treatises ( vibhariga) on important categories 
of Buddhist doctrine, such as the five aggregates, twelve senses, 
bases and objects, etc. Each exegesis is generally given in three parts: 
the explanation taken from the sdtra, the Abhidhamma expatiation, 
and a catechetical series of questions and answers to elaborate on 
specific issues. The Vibhariga is cited extensively in the Patisambhi- ° 
damagga of the Khuddakanikaya, and seems to have been the 
inspiration of that later text. 

The Dhatukathd consists of fourteen chapters in catechetic style 
describing the relationship pertaining between individual factors and 
the classifications of aggregates, elements and senses. This rela- 
tionship may be by way of fourteen categories, as to whether a 
factor is included or notincluded in any of these three groups, whether 
they-are both included and unincluded, both unincluded and included, 
both included and included, and both unincluded and unincluded, 
etc. Its rigorous analysis of the interrelationships pertaining between 
factors provides more precise definitions of commonly used Buddhist 
technical terms; just as importantly, however, it also augurs the 
subsequent development of a sophisticated logical form, called the 
catuskou, which is found in many later Buddhist texts. 

The Puggalapafifiatti is the shortest book of the Abhidhamma- 
pitaka, and is distinct from all of the other canonical works in 


92 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


discussing not an ultimate factor of existence, but a conventional 
concept (Pali pasifiatti; Skt. prajfapti), that of the individual person 
(Pali pugegala, Skt. pudgala). The language of the text also shares 
more affinities with the conventional discourse of the sutras than 
the definitive language of the Abhidhamma, and much of its contents 
may be traced to the Avsguttaranikaya and Sangitisuttanta of the 
Dighanikaya. It is because of these affinities that the Puggalapafifiatti 
is generally considered to belong to the earliest stratum of Pali 
Abhidhamma literature. The Theravada school recognizes six con- 
ventional concepts, as are given in the matrix that opens the Puggala- 
paiifiatti: aggregates, bases, elements, truths, faculties, and con- 
cepts of persons. Because the first five concepts are said to be 
discussed elsewhere in the Abhidhamma—particularly in the Vibha- 
figa, as the commentary to the text notes—they are not treated in 
this work. The Puggalapafifiatti instead discusses 386 specific types 
of persons, in 142 different groupings. The text is notable for its 
often extensive treatments of different types of liberated beings, 
including Buddhas, pratyekabuddhas, and perfected beings, to the 
extent that the term puggaia in its title is glossed as ar/yapuggala, 
or noble person. Because of this focus on noble persons the concerns 
of the Puggalapafifiatti are thus brought within the purview of 
Abhidhamma, allowing the book’s inclusion in the AbAidhamma- 
pitaka.°* Technical terms that figure in the discussion of human 
types are also explained in detail here, and include definitions and 
similes that are not to be found elsewhere in Pali exegetical literature. 
The Kathavatthu, the fifth baok of the Pali Abhidhamma, is the 
only work in that pitaka which is not explicitly ascribed to the Buddha 
himself, though as was noted above, its contents were said to have 
been anticipated by the Buddha. The book is traditionally assumed 
to have been compiled by Moggaliputta Tissa, the convener of the - 
Sthaviravada Third Council, which was convened at Pataliputra by 
King ASoka ca. 246 B.C. As Nyanatiloka notes, however, ‘“The whole 
seems rather to have grown gradually so that already for this reason 
one would hesitate to ascribe the entire work to one single author. 
But the fact that most of the heretical opinions are ascribed to schools, 
which have come to life several centuries later, I consider positive 
proof that Moggali-putta-tissa could not have been the only author 
of the work.’’©> The Kathavatthu, as supplemented by the clarifica- 
tions appearing in its commentary, the Kathavatthuppakarana-Attha- 
kathd, gives. one of the earliest accounts of the eighteen schismatic 
schools in which the early Buddhist order was considered to have 
divided. Because the rival views held by these various sects threaten- 
ed to undermine the authority of the Sthaviravadin elders, these~ 
views were examined in detail in the Kathavatthu, and the heterodox 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 93 


opinions of the schismatic schools were refuted. A total of 219 
different controversies are covered in 23 chapters, with little appa- 
rent order. The Kathavatthu itself supplies no references as to which 
schools the various views were ascribed; these are instead provided 
by its commentary. Schools whose heterodox views were recorded 
in the text include virtually all of the known sects of early Buddhism, 
though the Sammitiyas and Sarvastivadins are among the most 
prominent. Some of these sects may have been predecessors of later 
Mahayana schools, as is perhaps the case with the Vetulyakas, who 
are identified in the text as Mahasufifiatavadins (Madhyamakas?).© 

A number of important doctrinal controversies that will figure in 
our treatment of the development of Indian Abhidharma are covered 
in the Kathavatthu and deserve brief mention here. The text opens 
with what is perhaps the most compelling issue facing any Buddhist 
school: can a person (puggala, glossed as self [ atta]) be said to exist 
in any real sense? This view, ascribed by the commentary to the 
Vajjiputtakas and Sammitiyas, is also the subject of a detailed 
refutation in the Sarvastivadin Vijfianakdya, and later in Vasu- 
bandhu’s Appendix to his summary of the Sarvastivadin Abhi- 
dharma, the AbhidharmakoSabhasya. 

Several soteriological issues receive extensive treatment in 
Kathavatthu. Controversies concerning the enlightened status of 
the perfected being, for example, are especially rife. Controversy 
1.2, for example, concerns theories that a perfected being was subject 
to regression from his state of enlightenment, a view that is attributed 
to the Sammitiyas, Vajjiputtakas, Sabbatthivadins, and some Maha- 
samghikas. I].1 suggests that perfected beings were still subject 
to nocturnal emissions, and thus had not totally sundered the bond 
of sensuality. 01.2-I1.3 cover claims that the perfected being was still 
subject to ignorance and doubts about his achievement. The Utta- 
rapathakas held the heterodox view that a layman could become 
an arhat, but then continues to live the household life (controversy 
IV.1); this position was vehemently opposed by the Theravadins and 
a number of other Buddhist schools. Views such as these challenged 
the very underpinnings of Buddhist spiritual practice, and would 
ultimately contribute to the Mahayanist revision of the ideal toward 
which practice was directed, replacing the arhat with the Bodhisattva. 
‘Intimations that some ordinary men were destined never to attain 
enlightenment, such as are found in controversy XIX.7, adumbrate 
both the concern in the Sarvastivada school with those whose 
capacities for wholesome action have been lost and the later Maha- 
yana doctrine of the icchantikas, i.e. those who will never be able 
to attain Buddhahood. Controversy 1.4 involves the Andhaka, 
Sammitiya, Sabbatthivadins, and Bhadrayanika claim that the defile- 


94 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ments were abandoned gradually. The Theravadins reply citing 
Suttanipata V.231 et al. indicating that defilements are excised 
forever at the time of insight. A related issue is controversy 0.9, 
involving whether there could be the gradual realization of the four 
stages of sainthood. This controversy will recur frequently in 
Buddhist thought, and perhaps contributed to. the schism between 
the Sarvastivadins and Theravadins (ca. 237 B.C.), the former main- 
taining that insight was gradual, involving sixteen stages in the realiza- 
tion of the four noble truths, the latter, that it was immediate. This 
debate received perhaps its most noted coverage in the putative 
debate that took place at the ‘Council of Lhasa’’ between the Chinese 
“‘Sudden”’ teachings of the Ch’an master Mo-ho-yen and the Indian 
‘Gradual’ doctrine of Kamalasgila.°’ 

A number of issues of specific importance to the Sarvastivada 
school, the main rival of the Theravadins, are also treated in Katha- 
vatthu. Perhaps the most prominent is controversy 1.6, where the 
Sarvastivadin view that factors exist in all three times is taken up; 
the Theravadins refute this view, allowing only that factors exist in 
the present moment. As is to be expected, this dispute will receive 
considerable treatment not only in Sarvastivadin works, but also in ~ 
other Abhidharma texts such as the Satyasiddhisastra (alt. Tattva- 
siddi) by the Bahusruttya author, Harivarman, as well as in Vydsa’s 
celebrated commentary on the Yogasiutras. Several disputes that 
relate to the Sarvastivadin theory of dissociated factors (cittavipra- 
yuktasamskara) appear also in Kathavatthu. Controversy XIX.4 treats 
the Pubbaseliya view that acquisition (patt7; Skt. prapt) is an un- 
compounded (asaikhata) factor; rather than calling it uncom- 
pounded, the Sarvastivadins instead included acquisition in their 
list of dissociated factors (cittaviprayuktasamskara). Ill.11 discusses 
the Andhaka claim that the unconscious gods (asafifiasatta, Skt. 
asamjfusattva) are still able to perceive, since rebirth cannot take 
place without the presence of the mental faculties; the Sarvastivadins 
attempt to resolve this problem by positing a peculiar type of 
“‘unconscious absorption”’ (asamjiiisamapatti among their dissocia- 
ted forces. The issue of whether the cessation-trance is mundane 
or supramundane is taken up in XV.7-XV.8; both the Theravadins 
and Sarvastivadins will claim that it is neither, but the Sarvastivadins 
will attempt to resolve disputes over its peculiar nature by including 
this absorption among its list of dissociated factors. The Rajagirika 
and Siddhatthika rejection of the reality of mental states, treated 
in controversy VII.3, will also reappear in the views of the Darstantika 
Dharmatrata and the Sarvastivadin teacher Buddhadeva. Contro- 
versy VIH.8 discusses the issue of whether a subtle form of matter 
still exists in the immaterial realm; this may adumbrate the Sarvasti- 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 95 


vada theory of unmanifest matter (avijfaptirdpa). Finally, 1.11 
concerns the Mahisasaka, Andhaka, and Sarvastivada view that 
there are two types of nirvana, ‘‘cessation through reflection” 
(patisankhanirodha, Skt. pratisamkhyanirodha), and cessation 
without reflection (appatisankhanirodha, Skt. apratisamkhya- 
nirodha). ; 

A few issues that seem to adumbrate later concerns of the Yogacara 
school of Mahayana appear also in the Kathavatthu. The Andhaka 
view (IX.5) that the awareness achieved through insight could occur 
without a corresponding object augurs the later Yogacara theory of 
niralambanajfidna, in which consciousness is permitted to operate 
in isolation from external objects. Suchness (tathata), which appears 
in the Yogacara list of uncompounded factors, was held by the 
Uttarapathakas also to be uncompounded, as XIX.5 discusses. 

Controversies involving the processes governing the world are also 
frequently taken up in Kathavatthu. The role of the individual in — 
shaping the physical world are covered in such controversies as VII.7, 
in which the earth is considered to be a karmic maturation, opening 
up the debate on what exactly karma yields. Another vitally important 
issue here, covered in VII.2, is whether there was an intermediate 
state between rebirths, a view attributed to the Sammitiyas and 
Pubbaseliyas, and maintained also by the Sarvastivadins. Disputes 
over the nature of karma abound in the text, such as XV.11, in which 
the accumulation of karma was considered by the Sammitiyas and 
Andhakas to operate independently of mind and was karmically 
neutral. 

Finally, we may also note a number of controversies concerning 
the transcendent nature of the Buddha, which was a mainstay of 
Mahasanghika and later Mahayana belief. XVII.1-XVII.2, for 
example, discuss claims of the Vetulyakas (proto-Mahayanists?) 
that the Buddha sent a phantom of himself to earth to preach the 
doctrine while he remained in Tusita heaven. This may also be 
compared with the Andhaka view that the Buddha’s conventional 
speech was also supramundane (I.10). The Mahasanghika position 
that there were multiple Buddhas living in all four quarters of the 
universe is discussed in XXI.6, a view that is remarkably similar to 
that found in many Mahayana texts. 

The Kathavatthu is also notable for the logical approach adopted 
in the text: while that cannot be considered syllogistic, it is neverthe- 
less systematic. In Kathavatthu 1.1, for example, there is the applica- 
tion of a five-step logical method, which, after eight separate 
analyses, becomes a dialectical whole.®* The usage of a ten-member 
logical formula elsewhere in the Kathavatthu led later Indian logicians 
to require concrete examples in order to clarify the alleged relation- 


96 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ships pertaining between constituents in the formula. 

The sixth book of the Abhidhammapitaka is the Yamaka, a 
handbook of logical analysis, which examines a number of doctrinal 
concepts in terms of their related doctrinal classifications and range 
of application. Its title, Yamaka (The Pairs) derives from its paired 
grouping of a question and its converse. In this wise the text attempts 
to clarify whether a term may be applied to all members of the class 
it denotes, some of them, or none. For example, the opening 
discussion ( Yamaka, I.1) on good faculties concerns their relation- 
ship with good dharmas: i.e. whether good faculties encompass 
good factors, the converse, or neither. Various other related 
questions then follow, such as whether such related factors have the 
identical faculty, etc. The analytical style of the Yamaka is perhaps 
the most complex of the entire Abhidhammapitaka, and has kept 
the text from exerting much influence over the development of 
Theravada Abhidhamma. 

The final book of the Pali Abhidhamma, the Patthana, is bestknown 
for its elaboration of causation theory. It is considered to be pure 
Abhidhamma, because it does not include the suttanta matrix that 
appears in the Dhammasafganr, along with the Yamaka it is consi- 
dered one of the most recondite of all Abhidhamma texts. The 
Patthana is an exhaustive examination of one of the cornerstones 
of Buddhist doctrine: the conditioned nature of all compounded 
factors. The Introduction to the text provides a detailed list of 
twentyfour specific types of conditioned relationships (paccaya; Skt. 
pratyaya) that may pertain between different factors. These are: (1) 
root condition, (2) object-content, (3) dominant,-(4) proximity, (5) 
contiguity, (6) conascence, (7) mutuality, (8) dependence, (9) strong 
dependence/decisive support, (10) prenascence, (11) postnas-— 
cence, (12) repetition, (13) act, (14) maturation, (15) nutriment, 
(16) faculty, (17) meditation, (18) path, (19) association, (20) 
dissociation, (21) presence, (22) absence, (23) disappearance, (24) 
nondisappearance.® These twentyfour conditions are not intended 
to be mutually exclusive; indeed, the later Pali manual, AbAidhamma- 
tthasangaha, reduces them all to four—object, decisive support, act, 
and presence—a list that comes closer to the six causes and four 
conditions of the AbhidharmakoSabhasya. After this already lengthy 
Introduction follow four prolix chapters, each several hundred pages 
in length, in which all twentyfour conditions are systematically 
applied to each and every factor, following the standard matrices 
of the Dhammasangani, et al. For example, each member and every 
possible combination of the first triad of the Dhammasangani matrix 
—that of good, bad, and neutral factors—are treated in terms of all 
twentyfour conditions, giving a grand total of 1176 investi- 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 97 


gations that take place for just this one triad. As can thus be 
imagined, the scope of the book is virtually overwhelming, and few 
are those who have ever claimed to have mastered it. 
The Patthana”® also includes the earliest canonical reference to 
a term of prime importance in Theravada Abhidhamma: bhavanga, 
or life-continuum. Bhavaiiga, literally, “‘the limb on which existence 
_occurs’’ is that substratum which maintains the continuity of the 
individual throughout that life, a sense evocative of the Sarvastivadin 
technical term aikayasabhagata. The bhavanga plays a vital role in 
the sequence of sensory perception, as will be discussed below and, 
in a number of ways, serves many of the same purposes as the 
Yogicara doctrine of the storehouse consciousness (a/ayavijfiana).”! 
While the Pafthéna is revered as the quintessence of Pali Abhi- 
dhamma literature, much in the same way that the Prajfiaparamita 
materials are held in esteem by Mahayanists, its very prolixity has 
tended to limit the contribution it has been able to make to Abhi- 
dhamma philosophy. 


THe PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA AND THE 
SEMICANONICAL WoRKS 


We may now turn to other treatises in the Pali canon that have 
Abhidhamma affinities. Perhaps the oldest of these quasi-Abhi- 
dhamma texts is the Patisambhidamagga. This text, attributed with 
little proof by the tradition to the Buddha’s disciple, Sariputta, is 
considered canonical by all Theravadins, and is now included in 
the Khuddakanikaya. Its three major sections include thirty chapters 
of extensive discussion on major doctrinal issues in Theravada 
Buddhism, in the format of a matika followed by a detailed exegesis— 
the style of many Abhidhamma books. Buddhaghosa’s commentary 
to the Dighanikaya, the Sumangalavilasini, reports that the reciters 
of the Majjhimanikaya included the text in the Suttapitaka, but 
the Digha reciters instead entered it into the Abhidhammapitaka.” 
This evidence of the Abhidhamma affinities of the text is substantia- 
ted by the fact that four passages from the Patisambhidamagga are 
cited as being ‘‘inthe Abhidhamma’’ inthe later Vimuttimagga, which 
some scholars believe to have been a text of the Abhayagirivasa 
subsect of Theravada; hence, the intimations are strong that the 
Patisambhidamagga was originally an Abhidhamma text and 
suggests that the Abhayagirivasins after their schism in B.C. 38 
restored it to that position. ’* The nucleus of the Patisambhidamagga 
appears to be a hypothetical commentary to the Dasuttarasutta 
discussed earlier, which might have been entitled Dasuttarapari- 
yaya. Subsequent sections of the Patisambhidamagga presume 

knowledge of several chapters of the Vibhanga, and much of the 


98 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


text was probably composed during the same period as the Dhamuna- 
sangam (ca. 3rd century B.C., with the final product completed by 
the first century B.C.”4 

The term patisambhida (Skt. pratisamvid) refers to four specific 
types of analytical knowledge, or ‘discrimination’: meaning (aftha), 
elements of existence (dhamma), languages (nirutt), and perspicuity 
(patibhana). This classification is virtually unknown in the Pali satras 
and, apart from this text, it is mentioned in only a few later Theravada 
works, such as the Niddesa, Vibhanga and Kathavatthu. Similarly, 
the term patisambhida receives only nominal mention in such rival 
Abhidharma texts as the Sarvastivadin Prakaranapada and the Bahu- 
$rutiya Tattvasiddhisastra. The Patisambhidamagga itself does not 
define these types of understanding, and seems to presuppose the 
definitions found in the Vibhanga (chapter xv). Its purpose is to — 
illustrate in great detail the ways in which comprehension takes place 
as an adept progresses along the path: that is, what occurs as a person 
comes to understand the Buddha’s teachings. Thirty separate ‘‘trea- 
tises’’ on specific types of understanding are included in the book, 
such as the meaning of action, the enlightenment factors, insight, 
and liberation. Its outline of the types of ‘discrimination’ required 
for progress on the path will find its greatest elaborations later in _ 
the Visuddhimagga and Abhidhammavatara. 

- The Patisambhidamagga seems to anticipate a later Theravada 
description of factors according to their unique characteristics (Pali 
lakkhana, Skt. Jaksana), function (rasa), and essential natures 
(sabhava; Skt. svabhava). While the term sabhava appears in Pali 
in the semicanonical Petakopadesa, and the Dhammasarigani- Attha- 
katha (Afthasalini 39), as well as in such independent treatises as 
Visuddhimagga, it is only in the Patisambhidamagga that it is des- 
cribed as being ‘‘empty by essential nature’, a phrase that has 
been glossed by Mahanadma (ca. 6th century A.D.), the author of 
the commentary to the text, the Saddhammappakasini, as ‘‘having 
emptiness as its own nature’’. This term gained currency in the 
Sarvastivada school, where svabhava as the abiding nature of factors 
was contrasted with karitra, or the ephemeral functioning of those 
factors. This elaboration of a theory of the essential nature of factors 
(dharmasvabhava) eventually led to Nagarjuna’s dialectical critique 
of this position, and spawned the Madhyamaka school of Mahayana 
philosophy. The use of rasa for ‘‘function’’ is a late usage that is 
fully developed only in the Atthakathas; this text, however, seems 
to represent a transition point between the basic s#tra meaning of 
““taste’’ and the developed commentarial sense of the term. 

The Patisambhidamagga (Section I, chapters 5-11) also is ap- 
parently the source for the series of “‘insight knowledges’’ that 





THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 99 


constitute the way. to liberation in later Theravada treatises: (1) 
knowledge of comprehension; (2) contemplation of rise and fall; (3) 
insight which is understanding of the contemplation of dissolution; 
danger; equanimity about compounded things. This series was 
apparently adopted by the Afthakathas from the Pafisambhida- 
magga, outlined in Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga and Buddha- 
datta’s Abhidhammavatara, and eventually expanded to their final 
tenfold stage in later Abhidhamma manuals, such as Paramatthavini- 
cchaya, Abhidhammatthasatigaha, and Namardpapariccheda. One of 
the most extensive discussions of the problematic term gotrabha 
(‘‘change-of-lineage”’) as the final type of insight knowledge is found 
in this text also, where it is interpreted as the conquest of the lineage 
“of the worldling (puthujjanagotta) through the realization of the 
ariyagotta.’ 

Anumber of other Pali texts relevant to Abhidhamma are consider- 
ed to be canonical by the Theravadins of Burma (who include them 
in the Khuddakanikaya), but only semicanonical by the Singhalese 
and Thais. Two of these texts, the Nettippakarana and Petakopadesa, 
are both attributed to the Buddha’s eminent disciple, Mahakacca- 
yana, but most probably were written around the first century B.C., 
about one century after the codification of the seven official Abhi- 
dhamma books. These books are actually two different recensions 
of the same text, the Nettippakarana being somewhat improved and 
thus accepted as the definitive version by the Theravadins.’° Both 
of these texts, which may be treated in tandem, are hermeneutical 
manuals, guiding Theravadin commentators and preachers in correct 
scriptural interpretation. The sdtra-teachings of the Buddha, which 

‘were said to be of the one taste of liberation ( vimuttirasa),’’ actually 
varied considerably in their approach, and those who heard it differed 
also in their capacities for spiritual understanding. Hence, the internal 
consistency of the dharma—and, by extension, its utility as a 
teaching-tool—could only be conveyed by providing the exegete with 
hermeneutical principles through which the intent of the Buddha in 
preaching specific sdtras was ascertainable. These principles are 
broadly based on meaning (artha) and phrasing (vyajijana), two 
elements by which the satras were differentiated by the Buddha 
himself. In these two texts, artha refers to the soteriological aim that 
unifies all of the Buddha’s teachings: nirvana and the path of practice 
leading to that experience. Vya/ijana suggests the diverse ways in 

- which that artha has been framed in Buddhist texts. Through detailed 
analyses of these two elements via naya (five meaning guidelines 
that illustrate how the dharma is made to relate to different people) 
and Adra (sixteen phrasing categories that reveal the identity of 
meaning of variant expressions of dharma), the underlying unity of 


100 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the sitras may be restored. Different sutra typologies are provided 
in both the Nettippakarana and Petakopadesa.”* This is based upon 
a fourfold division, i.e. of satras dealing with defilement, moral life, 
penetration, and the adept. As will be readily apparent, there is an 
explicit progression in these types, from the stage of defilement to 
that of final liberation. This basic listing is expanded to eight in the 
Nettippakarana and sixteen in the Petakopadesa, the later text also 
gives two variant typologies of thirteen and twentyeight satra-types. 


IV. THE ABHIDHARMA LITERATURE OF THE SARVASTIVADA 
SCHOOL 


OUTLINE OF THE LITERATURE ~ 


Among the traditional eighteen schools of the early Buddhist 
tradition, it is the Sarvastivadins who exerted the most profound 
influence on the subsequent development of the religion. Based upon 
the eponymous teaching that factors exist in all three time-periods 
(sarvam (sarvada) asti), its ontology and soteriology inspired the 
developing Mahayana schools. ’° As one concrete doctrinal example, 
the recension of the Jf#anaprasthdna translated by Hsuan-tsang in- 
cludes a fortytwo membered matrix (7. 26.943b7-16), beginning 
with twentytwo faculties and ending with ninetyeight contaminants, 
which outlines the contents of the eight chapters of the treatise.*° 
Many of these same factor-listings will reappear in later Mahayana 
writings, such as the Mahdprajfaparamitopadesa. Sarvastivadin 
theories also served as the point of departure in the subsequent 
examinations of Buddhist tenets by the Madhyamaka school. 

The Sarvastivadins are considered to have separated from the main 
trunk of the Sthaviravada lineage sometime prior to the third sectarian 
council at Pataliputra, during King ASoka’s reign, as was discussed | 
above. Their teachings occupy a prominent place in the Theravadin 
Kathavatthu, where the Afthakathd refers to it as the sabbatthivada 
(the Pali equivalent of sarvastivada). 

The Sarvastivadin school had the widest geographical distribution 
on the Indian subcontinent of all the early schools. After migrating 
from Pataliputra in the second century B.C., they made their home 
in the Mathura region.*! The school soon spread to Kashmir in 
northwest India, which ultimately became the orthodox base of the 
school: unless otherwise stated, mostreferences to the Sarvastivadins 
in later: Buddhist literature refer to this Kashmir branch. A major 
subsect of the school, known as the bahirdesakas (or ‘‘foreign 
teachers’’),°? was prominent in Gandhara, in the extreme north of 
the Indian culture sphere, and Bactria. Because these masters of the 
Kashmir and Gandhara schools considered their teachings to be 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 101 


elaborations of the doctrines found in the Abhidharma Mahavibhdasd, 
amassive commentary-cum-compendium of Sarvastivadin doctrine, 
they commonly referred to themselves as Vaibhasikas (‘‘those who 
follow the Vibhasa’’). Many classical sources on the lineages of the 
early Buddhist schools also distinguish between the Sarvastivadins 
and the Milasarvastivadins, but the relationship between the two 
remains unclear. Both apparently accepted the same Abhidharma 
texts, but recognized minor variances in certain Avadana texts, and 
maintained different recensions of the Vinaya.** In addition to its 
widespread currency in India, however, the Sarvastivada was also 
the only of the early schools to achieve popularity throughout greater 
Asia as well. The Chinese pilgrim, I-ching (ca. A.D. 671-95), for 
example, reported finding the Sarvastivada school flourishing in 
several of the petty kingdoms of central Asia, in southeast Asia on 
the islands of Sumatra and Java (where also was found the Theravada 
school), and in the southern, western and eastern provinces of 
China,** from whence it spread to other regions of East Asia. 

The Sarvastivada was the only school besides the Theravada that 
was known to have had a complete Abhidharma canon, based upon 
a central text, the J#anaprasthana, and six subsidiary treatises, called 
the padasastras. A massive commentary to the Jfanaprasthdna, 
known as the Mahavibhasd4, remains our principal source of informa- 
tion on the intrasectarian controversies that apparently raged within 
the school. In addition to these canonical texts, there are also several 
handbooks of Sarvastivadin Abhidharma that are still extant; these 
find their closest Pali parallels in Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga or © 
Anuruddha’s Abhidhammatthasangaha. Of all this massive amount 

of material, only the AbhidharmakoSabhasya and fragments of the 
Abhidharmadipa are extant in Sanskrit; apart from portions of the 
Prajfiaptibhasya which survive in Tibetan, the remainder of the 
canonical literature is available only in Chinese translation. This 
dearth of materials in the original Sanskrit has long inhibited research 
in the canonical literature of the Sarvastivadins, and still today little 
has been written in Western languages about the individual texts of 
the school. For this reason, our discussion about Sarvastivadin 
literature and teachings will have to be regarded as somewhat more 
tentative than is the case with Pali materials. 

Unlike the texts of the Pali Abhidharma canon, the original outlines 
of which are all attributed to the Buddha himself, the Sarvastivada 
Abhidharma books are all ascribed to human authors, though the 
Sarvastivadins themselves considered these men to be mere com- 
pilers of the Buddha’s words (see discussion supra). The Jianapras- 
thana is commonly considered to be the body of the Sarvastivadin 
Abhidharmapitaka, and the six supplements its limbs -(lit. ‘feet’; 


102 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
pada).*> However, since the Jf#anaprasthana is considered to be the 
youngest of the canonical Abhidharma texts, this could not have been 
the original meaning of the term ‘‘foot’’. Ching-mai’s postface to 
Hsiian-tsang’s translation of the Dharmaskandha suggests a different 
sense: a text ‘‘was titled pada because itrelied on the Abhidharma.’’®° 
Hence, this interpretation that these texts were subsidiary to the 
Jiianaprasthana is probably a later development.®’ The Jianapras- 
thana, also known as the Astagrantha, or the ‘‘Eight-chapters’’, 
is attributed by all accounts to Katyayaniputra, a Sarvastivadin master 
who lived in the later years of the precommonera.** Itis now generally 
considered to be the youngest of all the canonical works of the 
Sarvastivadin Abhidharmapitaka.*° According to the Sanskrit tradi- 
tion, preserved in YaSomitra’s commentary to the AbhidharmakoSa- 
bhasya, the Sphutartha AbhidharmakoSsavyakhya,” its six supple- 
ments appeared in the following order (with their ascribed authors 
in parentheses) : (1) Prakaranapada (Ch., Skt., Tib. Vasumitra); (2) 
Vijfanakaya (Ch., Skt., Tib. DevaSarman); (3) Dharmaskandha (Ch. 
Maudgalyayana; Skt. and Tib. Sdriputra); (4) Prajfaptibhasya (ait. 
Prajfiaptisastra, Ch. Katyayana; Skt. and Tib. Maudgalyayana); (5) 
Dhatukaya (Ch. Vasumitra; Skt. and Tib. Parna); (6) Sarigitiparyaya 
(Ch. Sariputra; Skt. and Tib. Mahakausthila). Three separate Chinese 
recensions of a commentary to the Jfianaprasthana are still extant: 
Vibhasé (T1547), Abhidharmavibhasa (T 1546), and Abhidharma- 
mahdavibhasa (T 1545), which has the most extensive coverage of 
the three. Finally, systematizations of the canonical literature were 
composed by Sarvastivada exegetes, such as Ghosaka’s Abhi- 
dharmamrta. 

Considerable controversy reigns among modern scholars con- 
cerning the authorship and chronology of these various texts how- 
ever. Ryogon Fukuhara, the scholar who has made the most exhaus- 
tive study of the Sarvastivida Abhidharma canon, has given what 
is perhaps the most plausible ordering of the canonical texts: Sangiti- 
paryaya and Dharmaskandha in the “earliest group; Prajfapti- 
bhasya, Dhatukadya, and Vijfianakdya, and Prakaranapdda in the 
middle group; followed by the latest of the canonical works, the 
J#anaprasthana.?' Fukuhara’s listing will be followed in this brief 
survey of the principal contributions of these various texts. 


Tue CANONICAL TEXTS OF THE EARLY PERIOD 
Sangitiparyaya 


Based on its structure and content, it is clear that the Sarigitipar- 
yaya belongs to the earliest stratum of the Sarvastivada Abhidharma. 
The matrix that opens the book includes 122 separate classifications 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY : 103 


of a total of 205 factors, which are arranged in a sequential series 
of monads, dyads, triads, up to decads, in a way that is quite similar 
to the format of the Ekottaragama.?* Hence, in format its affinities 
are more with the various recensions of the Sangitisuttanta found 
in the Pali Nikayas and Chinese Agamas than with the Abhidharma 
texts of the later Sarvastivada school; perhaps its closest parallel 
among the Pali Abhidharma texts is the Dhammasangani. Inits theory 
of the seven types of noble persons, however, the Sarigitiparyaya 
is slightly more developed than the Dharmaskandha. While the 
Dharmaskandha’’ only refers to two types of noble persons—the 
faith-followers and the followers of dharma—the Sarigitiparyaya”* 
gives amore complete listing of seven noble persons: faith-followers, 
dharma-followers, resolved.in faith, view-attainers, bodily witness, 
liberated by wisdom, and liberated both ways®°—suggesting that 
these portions of the text postdate the Dharmaskandha. While this 
listing is more advanced than anything found in either the Agamas 
or the Dharmaskandha, it in no way represents any sort of revolu- 
tionary expansion of the scope of the Agama presentation of the 
path, such as will be found Jater in the Jadnaprasthana. 


Dharmaskandha 


The Dharmaskandha is the second of the two earliest books of 
the Sarvastivaida Abhidharma. While its coverage closely parallels 
that of the Pali Vibhariga and the first half of the Sanputrabhidharma- 
$astra, its style appears to be the most primitive of the three.”° 
Its antiquity is indicated by its treatment of major classifications of 
factors: while later Sarvastivada texts, for example, always list the 
aggregates, bases, and elements in that order (in agreement with the 
Theravada tradition), the Dharmaskandha instead gives them as 
bases, aggregates, and elements, without accounting for this discre- 
pancy.®’ The major portion of the text is taken up with coverage 
of the individual constituent-classes of the thirtyseven limbs of 
enlightenment. These chapters constitute one of the first attempts 
in the Sarvastivada Abhidharma to systematize the marga scheme. 
One of the major innovations of the Dharmaskandha is the distinction 
it draws between the path ofinsight and the path of practice, a division 
that would come to be of cardinal importance in the mature soteriolo- 
gical scheme of the Vaibhasikas, and would exert enormous influence 
on the outline of the Buddhist path found in many Mahayana texts. 
The latter half of the text treats various technical classifications, such 
as the bases and elements. These two major divisions are synthesized 
in the sixteenth chapter, which emphasizes in particular the defile- 
ments and their removal. 


, 


104 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Tue CaNonicaAL TEXTS OF THE MippLE PERIOD 
Prajfiaptibhasya 


The Prajfaptibhasya is the only one of the canonical Abhidharma 
texts of the Sarvastivadins that is not extant in its entirety in Chinese 
translation. It is in its Tibetan recension that all three sections of 
the text are to be found: Lokaprajfapti, Karanaprajfiapti, and Karma- 
prajfiapti. The first section is an extension of the cosmogonic specula- 
tions of the Agamas, such as are found in the Aggatifasutta.”* A 
similar orientation is found also in the Li-shih a-pi-t’an Jun,?° 
translated by Paramartha. The Chinese translation of the Prajfapt- - 
bhdsya, which was made ca. early 11th century during the Sung 
dynasty, several centuries after the translation of the other canonical 
texts, preserves only portions of the second section on causes. 
Coverage includes material on the causes leading to the various stages 
in a Bodhisattva’s career, from entering the womb to entering parmnir- 
vana, a topic that is conspicuously absent in the Theravada Abhi- 
dharma. Surprisingly, however, the Pra jfiaptibhasya is the text most 
quoted in the Mahavibhasa,'™ suggesting that despite the provisional 
nature of most of the topics it covered, its speculations were 
nevertheless of concern to the Vibhasasastrins. 


Dhatukaya. 


The Dhdatukaya, traditionally the fifth of the six padasastras, is 
representative of this middle stratum of Sarvastivadin Abhidharma 
texts. It is a preliminary attempt to systematize the burgeoning 
numbers of mental phenomena into a coherent matrix. Its unique 
listings of many of the more important of these concomitant mental 
factors were precursors of the standardized Abhidharmika lists found 
in the Prakaranapada and later Sarvastivadin manuals. The telling 
parallels between the Dhatukaya and the Prakaranapada, both of 
which are ascribed by the Chinese tradition to Vasumitra, have 
suggested to some scholars that the Prakaranapada is an expansion 
of the abbreviated coverage of factors found in the Dhatukaya.'°! 
The Dhatuk4aya is never cited in the Mahavibhasd, suggesting that 
it was of marginal concern to the Vaibhasikas, perhaps because so 
many of the issues it raised were more extensively treated in the 
Prakaranapada. 


Vijnanakaya 


The compilation of the Vijfanakaya is ascribed by tradition to 
Devasgarman,'” and is considered by modern scholars to have been 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 105 


composed in the later half of the first century A.D,!°? The book is 
divided into six sections, based on an analysis of the six types of 
sensory consciousnesses. The most notable contribution made by 
the Vijfianakaya to Abhidharma philosophy is its account of the 
Sarvastivada theory that factors exist in all three time-periods, which 
is the only such treatment found anywhere in the padaSastras or the 
Jfianaprasthana. This discussion occurs in Chapters One and Two! 
as a refutation of the rival view of a certain Maudgalya ayana that things 
exist only in the present, not in either past or future.'°> The reasons 
given by the Sarvastivadin school in support of their view that factors 
exist in all three time-periods have been summarized by Hsiian- 
tsang’s disciple, P’u-kuang (fl. 650-63), in his Chu-she lun chi 
[Notes on the AbhidharmakoSabhasya): ‘‘Because it was spoken by 
the Buddha; because of the contact of sense-base and sense-organ 
[leading to the production consciousness]; and because karman has 
a fruition.””!°° The Vijnanakaya provides extensive treatment of 
all of these reasons.'°’ The close consideration of the three times 
issue found.in the Vijfianakayastems atleast partially from the book’s 
need to prove that there was a distinct cause for the arising of 
consciousnesses that cognized past or future objects. If there were 
no such objects existing in reality, such cognition could not take place; 
since they do occur, however, past and future objects must also be 
real. The Vijfianakdaya is cited frequently in the Mahavibhasd as the 
source of the three times theory; thus the Vijfanakaya is the basis 
for the refinements of the school’s position that is found in later 
Vaibhasika materials. 

This discussion on the three times is followed in the second chapter 
with a treatment of the issue of whether a person (pudgala) exists—a 
heterodox view that some Buddhist schools, such as the Vatsiputriyas 
and Sammitiyas, had proposed. The Vijfanakaya approach to this 
question would have a profound effect on the later development of 
Sarvastivadin doctrine. Having proven to its satisfaction the reality 
of factors in all three times, the Vijfanakaya continues on! to show 
that factors have a unique essential nature (svabhava); this investiga- 
tion is then the foil against which the refutation of the reality of the 
person occurs. The Vijfanakdya gives the Pudgalavada definition of 
pudgala as that which performs action, receives pleasure and pain, 
etc., and cites four sitra passages used by the Pudgalavadins in 
support of their position. The Vijfanakaya then exposes the inherent 
contradictions between the pudgala and a variety of other basic 
Buddhist doctrines, and finally treats a number of ancillary issues, 
such as the question, found discussed later in the AbhidharmakoSa- 
bhasya,)® that if there is no self, then how is it possible that the 
conception of self arises? The Vijfanakaya gives the only treatment 


106 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of no-self theory found in the canonical literature of the Sarvastivadin 
Abhidharma; even the Mahavibhasa lacks a section devoted exclu- 
sively to the refutation of pudgalavada (though there are several 
treatments of no-self in the Vibhasa).''° The only treatment in 
Sarvastivadin literature that compares in extent and sophistication 
with that of the Vijfanakaya is the Appendix to Vasubandhu’s 
AbhidharmakoSabhasya. From the discussion that appears there, it 
is clear that Vasubandhu was thoroughly familiar with the Vijfana- 
kaya treatment of pudgalavada, and was strongly influenced by 
its content and approach. 

. The Vijfianakdya also illustrates the concern that AbdAidharma- 
Sastras of the middle period had with the theory of causation. The 
Vijfanakaya mentions!!! fourteen types of Aetu, and it includes a 
discussion on the arising of the sense-consciousnesses that focuses 
on the role of the four types of conditions in bringing about that 
origination. This section is important, because it represents the 
earliest attempt of the Sarvastivadins to determine the functioning 
(karitra) of the essential nature of a factor, a concept that will play 
a central role in the defence of the three times found later in 
Sanghabhadra’s Nydydnusdra.'!* In bringing causation theory to 
the forefront of Abhidharma concerns, the Vijfanakaya thus played 
an important role in the development of Sarvastivada Abhidharma, 
and was to exert a profound influence over the later Abhidharma 
manuals.'!? 


Prakaranapada 


The Prakaranapdda is considered by the tradition to be the last. 
of the six pédasastras of the Sarvastivadins. It is attributed to Vasu- 
mitra, the author of the Dagtukdya—an ascription that is probably 
authentic given the close parallels in coverage between the two works. 
In its contents and style, the Prakaranapdda appears to be the latest 
of the six padasdstras. Its one-hundred citations in the Mahavibhasa 
are second in number only to those of the Prajflaptibhasya. There 
are two separate translations of the work in Chinese;'!* in addition, 
two completely independent books, the Abhidharmaparicavastuka- 
sitra''> and Sarvastivadanikayapaftcavastukavibhasd' © appear to 
be early translations of the first chapter of the Prakaranapada. 
Fukuhara has proposed that the Paficavastukasitra, translated in the 
mid-second century by An Shih-kao (fl. 148-70 A.D.), represents 
the first stage in the development of text, which someone else, 
perhaps Vasumitra himself, then rewrote into the Paficavastukavi- 
. bhasd the scope of that version was then expanded into a major 
Abhidharma treatise, which is the Prakaranapadaas it has come down 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 107 


to us today.!!7 The Prakaranapada illustrates the mature synthesis 
of Sarvastivadin doctrine, which will receive its most complete 
outline in the subsequent Abhidharma manuals, and thus represents 
the transition point between the sastras of the middle period of 

Sarvastivada literature and the later commentarial materials. , 

The Prakaranapada is the work that established definitively the _ 
Sarvastivada school’s distinctive classifications of factors: materiality 
(rapa), mind (citta), mental concomitants (caitta), factors dissociated 
from mind (cittaviprayuktasamskara), and uncompounded elements 
(asamskrtadharma). This fivefold grouping is not found in the Thera- 
vada tradition and seems to have developed within the Sarvastivida 
school, from which it was then adopted by other Buddhist schools. 
The origin of this scheme appears to have been in the Dharma- 
skandha,''® which treats all factors in terms of four classes 
(skandha): (1) matter; (2) feelings: (3) identification and conscious- 
ness; and (4) conditioning factors (samskara), which included both 
associated (cittasamprayukta) and dissociated (cittaviprayukta) 
factors. This division of conditioning factors into two parts was 
a special characteristic of the Dharmaskandha’'s treatment of factors, 
and was an essential step in the development of the mature fivefold 
scheme. The formal division into five classes, however, also seems 
adumbrated in the Dharmaskandha: in its treatment of the good, 
bad, and neutral elements, the Dharmaskandha!'!® maintains that the 
latter type includes unmanifest matter (wu-chi se, avijfapti- 
répa), awareness, concomitant mental factors, dissociated mental 
factors, and various unconditioned factors, the precise division that 
would become standard in the Sarvastivada Abhidharma. The divi- 
sion of mental concomitants found in Dharmaskandha’*® is also 
followed by later texts, such as the Dhatukaya (see the matrix in 
the summary of that text) and thence the Prakaranapada. Hence, it 
is clear that the fundamental insight of the Prakaranapada was drawn 
directly from the Dharmaskandha (indeed, the Dharmaskandha is 
. even cited by name in the Prakaranapada,. showing its author’s 
familiarity with that earlier text).!21 The Prakaranapada was not 
however content to give merely a listing and definition of each 
individual factor within the five classes. Rather, the text expanded 
upon these five classes in a comprehensive fashion, treating each 
of them in terms of various general characteristics such as the eight 
types of knowledge,'”* no-self, the four noble truths, frustration, 
and so forth. !?? 

The influence exerted by the Prakaranapada’s classification 
scheme is illustrated by the prominent place of the paficavastukas 
in the Mahavibhasa. The Jianaprasthdna, the text that served as the 
basis of the Mahavibhasd, gives only a fourfold division of factors: 


108 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


awareness, mental concomitants, matter, and dissociated condi- 
tioning factors. The adoption of the Prakaranapdda’s classification 
scheme by the Vibhdsdsastrins assured that it would enter the 
mainstream of the Sarvastivada school, from whence it would be- 
come standard in all later Vaibhasika works. The AbAidharmda- 
vatara'** of *Skandhila follows the Vibhdasa treatment, as does the 
Abhidharmakosa’s organization of seventyfive dharmas: in five 
groupings. This listing then influenced the treatment of factors found 
in the Tattvasiddhi, as well as in works by authors.in the Sautrantika, 
Madhyamaka, and Yogacara schools. 


Tue Mature SARVASTIVADA: THE JNANAPRASTHANA 


All sources agree that the doctrinal edifice of the Sarvastivada 
school is built upon the J#anaprasthana. The compilation of this text 
is attributed to Katyayaniputra, who is now generally considered to 
have lived around the later part of the first century B.C. !2° The six 
padas4stras, with their variant approaches to Sarvastivadin doctrine, 
were apparently in near final from by Katyayaniputra’s time; hence, 
like Buddhaghosa in the Theravada school, Katya4yaniputra was less 
a philosophical innovator than a scholastic systematizer. While 
contributing little unique to Sarvastivada thought, he was nevertheless 
the man who conceptualized the grand scale of the scholastic Sarvasti- 
vada system, with special attention to its outline of spiritual practice. 

Two separate recensions of the Jaanaprasthana are now extant in 
Chinese translation: the Astagrantha,'*’ translated by Samghadeva 
and Chu Fo-nien in 383 A.D., and the J#anaprasthana'** translated 
by Hsiian-tsang between 657 and 660. While both are substantially 
the same text, there are slight differences in the structure of the 
argumentation and the characteristics of the teachings, which seem 
to indicate that they belong to separate scholarly lineages. Indeed, 
the transliterations included in the Astagrantha suggest that it may 
have been the Gandharan version of the text, while the J#anaprasthana 
represents the recension used by the Kaémira Vaibhdsikas. These 
are only hypotheses, however, and much philological work remains 
to be done before any definitive conclusions can be drawn. !? 

The fundamental outlook of the J#anaprasthdna was soteriological, 
and the entire book is an attempt to systematize the various stages 
of the path of spiritual cultivation based on the overriding organizing 
principle of the four noble truths. The first chapter on miscellaneous 
factors opens with a discussion of the higher-worldly factors, and 
is primarily concerned with the truth of path. Chapter Two on fetters 
treats the truth of origination, while Chapter Three on knowledge 
and Chapter Seven on concentration are concerned with the truth 
of cessation. Chapters Four through Six, on action, the four great 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 109 


elements, and the faculties are principally concerned with the truth 
of frustration. While these first seven chapters outlined the correct 
outlook on the four noble truths, the final chapter, on views, is 
devoted to rebutting the mistaken views of non-Buddhists. Hence, 
the main body of the text is concerned with presenting a systematic 
outline of the process of spiritual.development. Concentration, the 
motive force behind progress on the path, is placed in the penultimate 
chapter; the realities of the world and the reasons that practice needs 
to be undertaken are placed in the middle sections; and knowledge, 
the fundamental cause of liberation, appears at the beginning of the 
book. Hence, as.the structure of the book suggests, due to the cause 
of knowledge and the condition of concentration there is liberation 
from the fetters, entrance into the highest worldly factors, and 
realization of the various levels of sainthood. 

The notion of highest worldly factor (Jaukikagradharma), which 
opens the book, is perhaps the major conceptual innovation of the 
Jfianaprasthana. The earliest appearance of the term in Sarvastivadin 
literature is in the Sargitiparyaya,'*° but no explanation is given of 
the meaning of the term. The opening line of the J#dnaprasthana'>! 
provides the first definition of ‘‘highest worldly factor’’: ‘‘If citta 
and caitta dharmas become immediate [ 4nantariya; i.e. without any 
object interrupting their focus on the nirvana object] and [bring 
about] the entrance into the certainty of insight (samyaktvaniyama- 
vakranti), these are called highest worldly dharmas.’”’ Hence, a 
higher worldly factor is the transition point between the worldling 

(prthagjana) and the noble person (arya), and brings about the 
' entrance into the path of insight (darSanamarga). It is through this 
prominent focus on highest worldly factors that the J#anaprasthana 
is best able to integrate the major segments of the path: the mundane 
path of practice, the path of insight, the supramundane path of 
practice and finally the path of the realized adept. By opening his 
work with this stage of the path, Katyayaniputra is explaining that 
the transmutation of the worldling into a saint is the highest religious 
aspiration of the Sarvastivadin school. In this manner also, Katyaya- 
niputra is delineating the scope of the Abhidharma concern with 
soteriology: unlike the Theravadin Visuddhimagga, which gives 
considerable room to coverage of such preliminary undertakings as . 
common morality and choice of a meditation topic, the Sarvastivadin 
Jfianaprasthanais only concerned with the higher reaches of the path. 
Katyayaniputra’s initial attempt to fix the stages of the path will prove 
to be a major influence on later Sarvastivadin scholiasts, as well as 
on Yogacara and other Mahayana exegetes. Each of the principal 
Stages of these various paths broached in the Jfianaprasthana, for 
example, will receive full elaboration in the Mahavibhasa. And 


110 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Katyayaniputra’s scheme will receive one of its clearest outlines in 
the sixth chapter of the AbhidharmakoSsabhasya, the Margapudgala- 
nirdega.'*? 

Perhaps the second greatest contribution of the Jianaprasthana 
is its systematization of the scheme of six causes into what become 
one of the cardinal doctrines of the Sarvastivadins: efficient cause, 
simultaneous cause, connected cause, homogeneous cause, cause 
recurring in every instance, and retributory cause. These six causes 
are not found anywhere in the Agamas, and earlier Abhidharma texts, 
such as Vijfidnakaya, mention only four.!** This teaching seems to 
have been adopted by Katyayaniputra in order to account for the 
cause/ effect relationships that pertained between the various stages 
of the path, which were his major concern in the J#anaprasthana. 
From the account in the AbAidharmamahavibhasa,'** there seems 
to have been considerable controversy among the early Vaibhasikas 
about whether to accept these six causes as an authentic teaching 
of the Buddha. But it was Katyayaniputra who brought them to the 
forefront of Sarvastivadin etiological investigations. '?> 


Tue VaAIBHASIKAS: ABHIDHARMAMAHA VIBHASA 


The Mahavibhasa is a massive sourcebook of Sarvastivadin doc- 
trine, compiled according to tradition in the first half of the second 
century A.D. at the time of the third sectarian council convened in 
Kashmir under the sponsorship of King Kaniska. The Mahavibhasa 
is conceived as an exposition of the Jadnaprasthana, and follows the 
chapters and section divisions of that text. However, by no means 
is it simply a word-for-word commentary. The value of the Maha- 
vibhasa lies in its immense expansion of the coverage of doctrinal 
issues found in the J#anaprasthana and the earlier padasastras. 
Competing currents within the contemporary Sarvastivadin school 
are treated: not only are the theories of the ‘‘four Abhidharmikas”’ 
(Dharmatrata, Vasumitra, Ghosaka, and Buddhadeva) mentioned, 
but a number of other teachers now otherwise unknown, who 
apparently are all Sarvastivadins, are also cited, including Buddha- 
raksa, Ghosavarman, Vamalabdha, Jivala, Sanghavasu, Ksemadatta, 
Purnayasas, Vaspa, Dharadatta and Dharmanandin. The intrasecta- 
rian debates recorded in this text are of enormous value in recon- 
structing the development of Sarvastivada philosophy; in addition, 
the Mahavibhasd represents the pristine Vaibhasika viewpoint, free 
from the Sautrantika bias of the later AbAidharmakoéa, the principal 
text through which most Abhidharma scholars have investigated the 
Sarvastivada school. Rival schools of Buddhism also receive exten- 
sive coverage: among the more prominent are the Dharmaguptaka, 
MahiSasaka, Mahasanghika, Vatsiputriya, Kasyapiya, Sthaviravada, 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 111 


Vibhajyavada (either the Sthaviravada or a branch of the Mahasanghi- 
ka), Darstantika (the early Sautrantika), the Sautrantikas proper, 
and the Yogicara (probably referring only to “‘practitioners of 
Yoga’’, not the later Mahayana school of the same name). Of 
considerable importance, too, is the information on the proto- 
Mahayana movement found in the Mahavibhasd, which illustrates 
the accommodations reached between the Hinayana and early 
Mahayana schools, as well as the means by which the Hinayana 
would eventually evolve into the Mahayana. This information pro- 
vides much support for the thesis that it was Sarvastivadin ontology 
and soteriology, rather than the Mahasanghika bodhisattva doctrine 
as found in the Mahavastu, which served as the basis for the 
development of Mahayana. A variety of non-Buddhist schools are 
also treated, including the Nirgrantha (Jaina), Samkhya, Vaisesika, 
Lokayata (materialists), Sabdavada (philosophers of language), and 
Hetuvidya (logicians).!°° In addition, the text includes extensive 
information on other nonphilosophical aspects of Indian culture, 
includirig astrology, calendrics, and medicine, which would be of 
interest to social historians. Thus, the Mahavibhasa provides both 
a comprehensive record of Buddhist and pan-Indian philosophy in 
the early decades of the common era, as well as valuable information 
on Indian cultural life in general. 

There are anumber of variant traditions concerning the compilation 
and dating of the Mahavibhasa. The text itself opens with several 
different views concerning its authorships.}9’ The anonymous 
compilers of the text, known as the VibhasaSastrins, maintain that 
the text was in fact composed by the Buddha himself. Forced to 
explain the catechetical style of the text, the Vibhasasastrins reply 
that the Buddha responded to the questions of an interlocutor, who 
is identified variously as Sariputra, the five hundred perfected beings, 
the gods, or a phantom monk conjured up by the Buddha himself 
specifically for this task. Regardless of the circumstances in which 
the text was composed, however, its final compilation and trans- 
mission is attributed by the VibhasaSastrins to Katyayaniputra, the 
author of the Jfdnaprasthana, in keeping with the common Indian 
practice of an author writing autocommentaries to his own treatises 
(as is the case with Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmakosabhdasya). 

Hsiian-tsang’s lineage of Chinese Abhidharma scholars give a 
somewhat different account. According to them, the Kusana king 
Kaniska (r. ca. 144-178 A.D.) called a convocation of arhats with 
the elder monk, Parva, as its chief, which included the four great 
Abhidharmikas, Dharmatrata (I, a Darstaéntika; not the fourth- 
century author of the Samyuktabhidharmahrdayasastra). Ghosaka, 

Vasumitra (not the author of the Prakaranapada), and Buddhadeva; 


112 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


at this third sectarian council, the Mahavibhasa was compiled over 
a twelve-year period.!3* Paramartha’s Life of Vasubandhu says that 
Katyayaniputra himself was president of the convocation; the re- 
nowned Buddhist poet, ASvaghosat who had been converted to 
the Sarvastivada school by Parsva somewhat ealier, was said to have 
been the vice-president, and was in charge of polishing the literary 
style of the Mahavibhas4.'*° As is indicated in the opening discussion 
of the Mahavibhasa, the text in its present form represents the 
teachings of the Kashmiri branch of the Vaibhasika school, and 
focuses on the followers of Katydyaniputra, the compiler of the 
Jfianaprasthaéna. Taiken Kimura, however, first demonstrated that 
such references in the Mahdavibhasd as ‘‘In the past, at the time of 
Kaniska’’,'*° show that the text had to have been composed later 
than Kaniska’s time. He suggests that the text probably dates from 
sometime between the reign of Kaniska and the advent of Nagarjuna, 
or ca. 150 A.D.'4! The four Abhidharmikas who receive prominent 
place in the text could not possibly have all been in attendance, hailing 
as they did from different regions and periods. Instead, the compilers 
apparently examined their respective positions and then critiqued 
them, in order to establish definitive Sarvastivada positions on 
controversial doctrinal issues. 

The Mahavibhdsa is written in the catechetical style that is so 
ubiquitous in Abhidharma texts. After a statement introducing a 
matter of controversy, the Vibhas4Sastrins commonly begin with the 
statement that this view was held by the earlier Abhidharma scholars 
(Pirvacaryas), and generally continue with a variety of anonymous 
opinions. After these unattributed citations, the views of rival Abhi- 
dharmikas are given. Among these doctrinal specialists, those most 
commonly quoted are Parsva, Vasumitra, Ghosaka, Dharmatrata, 
Buddhadeva, and Katyayaniputra, who is referred to simply as the 
Bhadanta.!*? As was mentioned previously, the opinions of anumber 
of obscure Sarvastivadin figures who are all but unknown elsewhere 
in Vaibhasika literature are also mentioned. Often, these accounts 
appear to be verbatim citations from specific works by these acaryas; 
this is specially the case with the four great Abhidharmikas.'*? This 
may suggest that the compilation of the Mahavibhasa was carried 
out while consulting actual treatises by these teachers, either in 
written form, or as orally recited by adherents of those masters. This 
would also account for the fact that the same teachers are represented 
time and again throughout the Mahavibhasa, for they were the authors 
of treatises that had achieved some degree of currency among the 
Sarvastivadins of the era. Each issue commonly concludes with the 
“‘definitive critique’’ (p‘ing-ylieh, ‘‘our view’’) of the Vibhasa- 
sdstrins. This ‘‘critique’’ will sometimes appear after a series of 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 113 
anonymous opinions, !“* indicating that there may have been conside- 
rable divergence of opinion among the compilers themselves. By 
some process of evaluation—concerning which, unfortunately, no 
information is provided—the controversies were resolved and the 
definitive view recorded. At other times, however, this “‘critique’’ 
appears after a specific statement by one of the recognized teachers. 
This suggests that the compilers were attempting to define a coherent, 
orthodox position for the Vaibhasika school by assessing the views 
of rival teachers within the school. Of the four principal Abhi- 
dharmikas, it is Vasumitra’s views that are usually (though not 
invariably) accepted. 

Three different Vibhdsds are extant in Chinese translation. The 
definitive text is the two-hundred fascicle Abhidharmamahdavibhasa 
(T 1545), translated by Hsiian-tsang between 656-59. An earlier 
recension of this same work was translated by Buddhavarman in 437 
A.D. as the Abhidharmavibhdasa(T 1546); only sixty fascicles of what 
originally was probably a hundred-fascicle work are now extant, the 
end of its sixtieth fascicle corresponding to fascicle 101 of Hstian- 
tsang’s text. Because of the early date of Buddhavarman’s recen- 
sion of the text, it would seem reasonable to assume that it more 
closely represented the original form of the text, which by Hsiian- 
tsang’s time had undergone a considerable expansion in scope and 
death of coverage; more research is needed before the precise 
process of its textual development can be ascertained, however. 
There is finally a completely independent Vibhasa ( T 1547), transla- 
ted in 383 A.D., which is attributed to Sitapani.'* It is not a variant 
translation of the Mahavibhasa, but seems to have been an indepen- 
dent exposition of the J#anaprasthana.'* 

The primary concern of the VibhasaSastrins was to undertake an 
analysis of all known solutions to specific Abhidharma problems and 
arrive at a consensus view that would thenceforth represent the 
orthodox Vaibhdsika position. In one illuminating passage,'*’ the 
Vibhasasastrins compress all of Abhidharma into fourteen principal 
topics: the six causes, four conditions, summary (samgraha or 
anugraha, adhikara, etc.), connected (samprayukta), ordered 
(samanvagama), and unordered (asamanvagama). Alternatively, 
other masters summarize these instead as seven dyads: the skillful 
knowledge of causes, conditions, specific characteristrics, general 
characteristics, connection and disconnection, connected and dis- 
connected, and finally ordered and unordered. As will be seen, 
these topics are convenient rubrics for a number of the issues raised 
in the Mahavibhasa. While many of them have been discussed 
previously, especially in the Jfanaprasthdna, considerable 
expansion in the scope of coverage has taken place in the Maha- 


114 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


vibhasa, for rather than culling its information only from the Jfiana- 
prasthana, the Vibhasasastrins have incorporated elements drawn 
from both the six padasastras as well as the writings of a number 
of Abhidharma masters. 

One of the most important developments in the Mahdavibhdsd is 
its treatment of dependent origination. Four different types of depen- 
dent origination are outlined in the text: momentary (Ksanika) causa- 
tion, as when all twelve moments of the chain are realized in 
a single moment of action; serial (sambandhika) causation, in which 
dependent origination is viewed in reference to the relationship 
between cause and effect; static (avasthika) causation, in which 
dependent origination involves twelve distinct periods of the five 
aggregates; and prolonged (prakarsika) causation, in which that 
sequence of causation occurs over three lifetimes. The Vibhasa- 
$astrins accept only static dependent origination, as will be reitera- 
ted later in AbAidharmakoSa iii.25 and in the Abhidharmahrdaya.'*® 
This type of dependent origination is most involved in the interplay 
between karmic cause and retribution, '*° and points out the persis- 
tent soteriological import of the Sarvastivada doctrine of causation: 
through the present fruition moments of dependent origination 
(consciousness, name and form, six sense-bases, contact, and feel- 
ing), one can know the past causes (ignorance and conditioning 
factors) that led to that fruition; and through the present causes 
(desire, grasping, being and birth) one can know the future fruition 
(old age and death). Hence, the Vibhasasastrins explicitly interpreted 
dependent origination in terms of its role in bringing about liberation 
from the-round of birth and death, rather than as an ontological 
principle, as some Buddhist schools were wont to do. 

Cosmogony, and especially the role of the individual in that 
creation, are also examined in the Mahavibhasa.'°° The Vibhasas- 
astrins raise the premise that sentient beings bring about the diversity 
of the world and undertake a corollary discussion of the reasons why 
an individual’s final liberation and consequent disappearance from 
the world would not cause that diversity somehow to be diminished. 
There was some controversy over whether ‘“‘world”’ referred to the 
physical environment itself or the karmic state of the individual being 
in that world. In the Kathavatthu'*' the Theravadins include a 
vehement criticism of the Andhaka claim that the physical world 
was created by the karma of individual beings. In later discussions 
of this issue as it concerned the Sarvastivadin school, both Vasu- 
bandhu in the AbhidharmakoSa'** and Yasomitra in his corres- 
ponding commentary in the SphAutartha vacillate on which of the 
two kinds of world is meant. Elsewhere in the Vibhasa, however, 
it is clear that at least some faction of the Vaibhasikas regarded both 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 115 


types of worlds as being products of karma, for we find the explicit 
statement, ‘‘the predominant force of the karman (karmdadhipatya; 
ye tseng-shang I) of classes of sentient beings causes the formation 
of the world (ding shih-chieh ch’eng}.’’'*? This discussion will have 
implications for the later Mahayana- Yogacara teaching that the world 
is created by mind alone (Dasabhimika, PaficavimSat, etc.). 

The Mahavibhasa also includes the most extensive discussion on 
another characteristic teaching of the Sarvastivadin school: the inter- 
mediate state between existences. Some means of accounting for 
the transfer of karmic effects from one lifetime to the next was 
essential if the fundamental principle of karmic cause and effect was 
not to be controverted. This teaching would be a matter of considera- 
ble controversy between the Buddhist schools—the Pirvasaila, 
Sammitiya, Vatsiputriya, and later Mahisasaka agreeing with the 
Sarvastivadins in accepting it, and Theravada, Vibhajyavada, Maha- 
sanghika, Mahisasaka, and the Samputrabhidharmasastra of the Dha- 
rmaguptakas rejecting it. Vehement criticism of the inter- 
mediate state is found in the Theravadin Kathavatthu, along with 
an equally spirited debate in the Abhidharmakosa.'** The Vibhasa- 
Sastrins, for their own part, accept the fact of an intermediate 
state between death and rebirth in the next life. The occupant of 
that state is called a gandharva, a special type of subtle-form body 
that is produced by the same karman that produced the physical body 
and which feeds on scent. 

The categorization of associated mental factors is also explicitly 
subordinated to soteriological concerns pertaining to the path in the 
Mahavibhdsa, a tendency that persists from the Jadnaprasthana. 
Fiftyeight mental factors are listed in the Mahavibhasa'°° in seven 
major groups, a grouping parallel to that found in the Dhdtukaya 
and Prakaranapdda. In the Vibhdsé, however, the mental factors are 
categorized in such a way as to allow. a detached analysis of the 
processes by which defilements are overcome and liberation 
attained. !5° The soteriology of the Abhidharma commonly focuses 
on the thirtyseven factors of enlightenment, as has been seen already 
several times above. Seven factors which bear on liberation that are 
not, however, mentioned in that standard listing receive attention 
in the Mahavibhas2. pride (m4na, Chinese man), sleepiness (middha, 
Ch. sui-min), regret (Kaukrtya, Ch. o-tso), fear (bhaya or udvega; 
Ch. pu), perplexity (vicikitsa, Ch. 1), aversion (nirveda, Ch. yen), 
and delight (praharsa, Ch. Asin). While the latter two of these mental 
factors are solely good (kuSa/a) in content, several of the others are 
twofold—perplexity, for example, being both bad and neutral. In the 
Mahavibhasa outline of the processes leading to liberation, much 
will be made of the relationship between perplexity and fear:'*’ This 


116 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


_ process begins with doubt. Doubt in most Buddhist schools is 
generally considered to refer to skepticism concerning the three 
jewels of Buddhism, the efficacy of the teaching, and so forth—in 
other words, it is anegative force that leads to wrong views. However, 
the VibhasasAstrins accept also that there is a type of doubt—-some- 
thing akin to informed curiosity or the intellectual passion to 
know—that can lead to correct view.'>* Due to this sort of positive 
doubt about the value of one’s present lot, there arises apprehension 
about one’s state in life, which brings in turn a desire to leave behind 
the defilements (virati; Ch. yiian-i/) and finally results in complete 
disgust with the world (mirveda; Ch. yen), which leads ultimately 
to liberation. Much discussion will also ensue on the precise definition 
of the disgust, which in many ways is the essential mental factor 
in catalyzing the transition from ordinary person to saint.!*? 

In its treatment of another distinctively Sarvastivadin category, the 
forces dissociated from awareness (cittaviprayuktasamskéra), the 
Mahavibhasa makes singularly important contributions to Buddhist 
factor-theory. According to the Kathavatthu, forces dissociated from 
mind are known inanumber ofearly schools, including the Andhakas, 
Uttarapathakas, Mahasanghikas, Sammitiyas and Véatsiputriyas. 
However, it was the Vaibhasikas in particular who took the classifica- 
tion to heart and employed them to make detailed theoretical analyses 
of Abhidharma problems. Acquisition-force (prapti), for example, 
is demonstrated to be the principal agent in establishing the individual 
in either bondage (samyoga) or liberation ( visamyoga). This focus 
on dissociated factors in the description of soteriological events is 
a peculiar characteristic of the Sarvastivadin treatment of the cate- 
gory. In the later Vaibhasika manuals, such as the Abhidharmakosa 
and Abhidharmadipa, standard lists include only thirteen such 
factors. The flexibility in the Vaibhasika use of this type of factor 
in order to account for complex moral and mental processes can 
only be gleaned by an examination of their treatment in the Maha- 
vibhasa. There, it becomes clear that the Vaibhasikas resorted to 
this peculiar type of force on a scale heretofore unsuspected, in order 
to explain a variety of anomalous events, including samuc- 
chinnakuSalamula (“serving the good roots’), mdrdhapatita 
(“‘backsliding from the stage of ‘summit’’’), arhattvaparihdna 
(“‘regression from sainthood’’), and even sarghabheda (‘‘causing 
schism in the order’’). In such cases, descriptive difficulties inherent 
in accounting for the processes underlying such events made the 
dissociated factors classification a particularly attractive heuristic 
device for resolving such problems. 

The Mahavibhasd is a major source of material on early Mahayana 
developments. The term “‘three vehicles”’ (tr/yana)—the vehicle of 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 117 


the disciples (Sravakaydna), the vehicle of the solitary Buddhas 
(pratyekabuddhayana), and the. Bodhisattva vehicle—does not 
appear in any of the six padasastras, but these three are clearly 
delineated in the Mahavibhasa. Even adherents of these three 
vehicles are carefully distinguished from the Buddhas, however, 
because the Buddhas are enlightened first, and have all-encom- 
passing enlightenment.! The relationship between these dif- 
ferent soteriological ideals and the concept of spiritual lineage (gotra) 
also received extensive discussion in the Mahavibhasa, where six 
different lineages are outlined.'®! There, the notion of ‘‘evolution 
of the locus’’ (a4srayaparavrtt, Ch. chuan-ken) is also covered, in 
order to account for possible cases of a practitioner of a lower lineage 
evolving to the point of being able to assume a totally new lineage, 
such as the transformation of the sravakagotra into the pratyeka- 
buddhagotra. Some of the most extensive treatments of these diffe- 
rent lineage ideals are found in the works of rival schools, such 
as the Sariputradharmasastra,‘* which also includes an eightfold 
lineage scheme, and the Puggalapafifiatti, which discusses a fourfold 
lineage outline. 

Doctrinal elements that have apparent affinities with those that 
are now regarded as Mahayana abound in the Mahavibhasa. In 
particular, descriptions of the levels of the path found in various 
places in the Vibhdsa adumbrate subsequent Mahayana deve- 
lopments. Katyayaniputra, for example, has outlined a scheme of 
spiritual development in ten stages, explicitly called bhamss, in five 
major segments. The (Jaukika) bhavanabhumi is comprised of six 
levels of practice: restraint of the organs (indriyasamvara, ken Ii-i), 
care in precepts (Silasamvara, chieh li-1), nonregret (akaukrtya, 
wu-hui), joy (priti, huan-hsi), satisfaction (sukha; an-lo), concen- 
tration (samadhi or cittaikagrata, teng-chih). This is followed by 
darsanabhimi (chieh-t), which is defined as knowledge and vision 
according to reality (yathabhitajfianadarsana),; samatvabhimi 
(po-ti), defined as disgust (nirveda); kKamavitaragabhami (li-yu ti, 
defined as fading away ( virdga; Ch. li-jan); and agaiksabhimi, defined 
as liberation (vimoksa). Nirvana is defined as the fruit of all these 
bhimis.'°? This outline resonates with various rival ten- 
bhimi schemes, as found in the Mahavastu and the Dasabhimika- 
sutra. Elsewhere in the Vibhasa, Ghosaka also outlines a ten-stage 
schema of development: (1) analyzing the truth of suffering; (2) 
analyzing origination; (3) analyzing cessation, (4) analyzing the path; 
(5) the path of application (prayogamdarga, Ch. chia-hsing tao), in 
which virtues are amassed and the four aids to penetration cultivated 
in order to perfect the three precepts; (6) the noninterrupted path 
(anantaryamarga, Ch. wu-chien tao), in which right knowledge 


118 ; ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


appears and eradicates the defilements; (7) liberation ( vimokxsa, Ch. 
chieh-t’o tao), which is the one moment of right knowledge following 
the liberation path, which brings about the awakening to truth; (8) 
the advantageous path (visesamarga, Ch. sheng-chin tao}, which 
builds the efficacy of contemplation and wisdom; (9) pratipannaka- 
marga (Ch. Asiang-tao), which “‘tends towards’’ the state of ultimate 
fruition; and finally (10) the fruits of attainment (praptaphala, Ch. 
te-kuo), which is the state of ultimate fruition. Even the names 
and placement of the various stages of this schema seem to adumbrate 
the five-stage Yogac4ra outline of the path: sambharam4arga, prayo- 
gamarga, darsanamarga, bhavanamarga, and nisthamarga.'™* 

The analysis of materiality (ipa) in the Mahavibhasa is the most 
thorough such treatment found in any of the Vaibhasika treatises. 
In its system, there are basically three different classifications of 
rapa: (1) the four great elements, consisting of earth (solidity), water 
(cohesion or fluidity), fire (maturation), and wind (motion); (2) the 
derivative materiality, comprised of the five internal sense-bases 
and the five external sense-objects; and (3) a peculiar type of 
unmanifest materiality (avijfaptirapa), which provides for the conti- 
nued efficacy of all physical acts, whether bodily or vocal, which 
do not have an obvious, immediate result. This later type of matter 
was posited by the Vaibhasikas in order to account for the continuity 
of karmic cause and effect, and was a matter of considerable 
controversy between the Buddhist schools. 

Materiality is generally defined as that which has resistance; !®° 
this definition will, however, raise considerable problems for the 
Vaibhasikas. As the interlocutor in the Mahavibhasa asks, “‘If that 
which involves the characteristic of resistance (pratigha) is called 
the defining mark of matter, then past, future, subtle, and unmanifest 
[types of materiality] would be without resistance and thus would 
not involve the mark of matter. And were they not to involve the 
mark of matter, they would not be material.’’!° This premise is 
rejected by the Vibhasasastrins: ‘*‘Although past matter now has no 
resistance, it previously did have resistance. Although future matter 
now has no resistance, it will have resistance. Although each indivi- 
dual subtle [matter] does not have resistance, as a mass they do 
have resistance. Although the own-nature (svabhava) of unmanifest 
(matter) is free from resistance, its locus (asraya) has resistance; 
hence [unmanifest materiality] is also said to involve resistance. 
What is its basis? The four elements. Because that basis has resist- 
ance, the unmanifest [matter] can also be said to involve resistance, 
like the shadow that moves when the tree sways.’’!®” 

Matter and karman were closely related in the Mahavibhasa. The 
five sense-bases are said to be produced in direct association with 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 119 


karman,'® a notion that is also found in the Tattvasiddhi.'% For 
example, due to action that is done with seeing as cause, the 
eye-faculty is obtained as result; due to the action that is done with 
hearing as the cause, the ear-faculty is obtained as result, and so 
forth. This is one of a number of areas in which the Mahavibhasa 
seems to have exerted an important influence on Harivarman, the 
author of the Tattvasiddhi. Another is the twenty implications of the 
meaning of rdpa given by the Vibhasasastrins,'? which can be 
compared with five parallel implications found in the Tattvasiddhi.'”' 
Avijfiaptirdpa is a peculiar type of matter, which, being invisible and 
unmanifest, is included in the dharmdyatana along with feeling, 
identification, and conditioning factors, as well as with the uncondi- 
tioned factors.!”* While it was also accepted by the Mahasanghikas 
and Dharmaguptakas,!7? it is most commonly associated with the 
Vaibhasika school. The term received various designations in later 
strata of Vaibhasika materials. The Samyuktabhidharmahrdaya 
refers to it as akriya (Ch. wu-tso),'"* while the Nyayanusdara calls 
it virati (Ch. yian-i).'7> This .unmanifest matter is said to involve 
two varieties of loci: 4srayaparivrtti(Ch. chuan-1), whichis the power 
of transformation wrought by the four great elements of the present; 
and upédayaparivrtti (Ch. tsao-i).'"6 

These few selective topics will have to suffice to illustrate the rich 
and varied coverage of philosophical issues that appear in this 
treasure trove of Abhidharma material. Detailed treatment of the 
Mahavibhdas4 will be found in the summary of the text below. 


A FEW EARLY 
ABHIDHARMA CATEGORIES 


Karl H. Potter 


In Buddhism, where there are no persistent entities, one may well 
question whether the question ‘‘what (things) are there?’’ can or 
should even be allowed to be asked. Nevertheless, it is asked, even 
in the canon itself, and since it is difficult to ask it without a 
terminology to talk about “‘things’’ a basic term is found in use right 
from the start to speak of the (kinds of) things there are. That term 
is dharma. 

Itis virtually impossible to give an acceptable translation of dharma. 
We have rendered the term as ‘‘factor’’, with thanks to Collett Cox 
for the suggestion. Dharmas are obviously not “‘things’’ in the usual 
sense, since they do not persist. Whether they are independent of 
the mind is a vexing question about which we shall have more to 
say when we consider the differences among the several schools. 
Whether they are real or not is also unclear. Sanskrit has terminology 
which is used suggestively when an author wishes to affirm the 
existence of something—terms such as vastu or sat come to mind 
here. But when lists of factors are catalogued—and Abhidharma 
literature is largely comprised: of such lists—one can question 
whether a metaphysical analysis is being proposed. 

Johannes Bronkhorst has attempted to trace the origins of this 
terminological choice of dharmaas the word most closely functioning 
in Buddhism as our English “‘thing’’ does. 


The items listed in matrkas came to be known as dharma. .. The 
items enumerated in list I can all be described as ‘‘psychic 
characteristics’... We may conclude that in this earliest list, 
which stands at the beginning of all later Abhidharma, dharma 
has a meaning which is in no way peculiarly Buddhist. 

The fact that...later matrkas developed out of, or were 
inspired by, our “‘list I’’ would explain the fact that the items 


122 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


contained in these later matrkas came to be designated dharma 
as well. Another factor may also have supported this expansion 
of the meaning of dharma. We know that the teaching of the 
Buddha is frequently called dharma. This use of the term would 
be acceptable to Buddhists and non-Buddhists alike. The 
matrkas were intended to contain the teaching (dharma) of 
the Buddha in a nutshell. Moreover, they were extension of an 
original list of ‘‘psychic characteristics’’ (dharma). These two 
factors may jointly be responsible for the fact that all the items 
enumerated in mdtrkas, i.e. all the ‘‘elements of existence’, 
came to be designated dharma.' 


What is Bronkhorst’s “‘list I’’? It is the list of thirtyseven that ‘‘occurs 
in a number of Buddhist sdtras and vinaya texts’’* and consists of 
the following: 


4 applications of mindfulness (smrtyupasthana) 
4 right exertions (samyakpradhana) 

4 supernatural powers (rddhipada) 

5 faculties (indriya) 

5 powers (bala) 

7 limbs of enlightenment (bodhyariga) 

8 members of the noble eightfold path. 


Bronkhorst adds: 


It seems clear that this is an early, perhaps the earliest, list of 
the type that came to be called matrkal? matika and formed 
the basis for the later Abhidharma works.” 

An independent development of this matrkd was used in the 
original Abhidharma-Vibhanga, which may date from less than 
fifty years after the death of the Buddha. . 


Bronkhorst goes on in his article to trace the development of this 
mmdatrka, showing that it gradually incorporated groups of meditative 
states which swelled the number of dharmas to numbers of the sort 
we find in the texts summarized below. For example, the Vibhariga 
works with a list of dharmas numbering 44, noting (following 
Frauwallner) that it and the Dharmaskandha must have had a 
common source in a lost version dating to prior to 200 B.C., and 
perhaps ‘‘/ong before 200 B.C.’” 

Whatever the history of its origins in the period prior to the first 
Abhidharma texts, treatment of the Abhidharma literature here 
covered must center on these matrices. It is impossible here to try 
to lay out even in summary fashion the variety of ways our literature 
finds to organize factors. The most thorough study to date of the 


A FEW EARLY ABHIDHARMA CATEGORIES 123 


matrices, showing which groups are located in which texts and belong 
to which schools, is found in the Introduction to André Bareau’s 
LL.D. thesis at the University of Paris of 1950, which mainly contains 
a translation into French of the Dhammasangani. He rates the three 
oldest lists as those found in the Vimuktimargas4stra, the Vibhariga 
and the Dhammasangani, and identifies in addition different lists 
found in the SariputrabhidharmaSastra and in Sarvastivada texts. He 
proposes dates, however, which have not been found acceptable by - 
more recent scholarship. The other notable study of the topic of 
matrices is found in A.K. Warder’s Introduction to Nanamoli’s 
translation of the Patisambhidamagga.® We quote from this study: 


It appears that after the First Schism, with the Mahasamghikas 
(probably in B.C. 349...) the Theravada Schools had an Abhi- 
dhamma in 4 sections, namely (1) With Questions, (2) Without 
Questions, (3) Conjunction and Inclusion and (4) Basis (condi- 
tions, sources). The first two of these correspond in content to 
the extant Vibhaziga, the third to the DAatukathd, and the fourth 
to the Patthana, though no doubt with comparatively little of 
the elaboration we now find in all these texts. .. The distinction 
of with and without questions is purely formal. Thus the topics 
of the groups or aggregates, the sense-spheres, elements... and 
some others were elaborated in the form of questions and 
answers by applying to their dhammas some at least of the 
dyads. .. and triads... much as we still find done. .. On the other 
hand, the topics of the four bases of... mindfulness, the exer- 
tions, bases of power (iddhi), the way (path) and so on were 
expounded by quoting relevant passages from the suttas. .. 

Only three Abhidhammas of schools developed from this original 
Theravada seem now to be extant: the Pali of the Mahavihara- 
vasins or Theravada in the narrow sense of the school which 
retained the original name; the Sabbatthivadin (for) seven texts 
of which some fragments are available in Sanskrit and the whole 
in Chinese and Tibetan translations; and the Sariputrabhidhar- 
masastra in a Chinese translation... which is conjectured to © 
belong to the Dhammaguttaka school.’ 


In principle it should be possible to take a list of factors proposed 
in an Abhidharma text and to subdivide it into groups corresponding 
to those identified in our texts. To attempt this project leads quickly 
to considerable frustration. There does not seem to have been a basic 
set or even a canonical number of factors that are to be found in 
all the lists. Even to find a common core relating any two lists is 
difficult and probably impossible. Furthermore, it is extremely hard 


124 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to recapture what, if any, plan the creators of these lists had in mind. 

One English-writing scholar, Nyanaponika Thera, has indeed 
attempted the sort of thing called for. His list is the one proposed 
in the Dhammasangani and the authority for his classification arises 
from Buddhaghosa’s Afthasdlini (a text later than the period here 
summarized). Finding 56 kinds of good dharmas given in that text, 
he is able to identify classifications of them as follows:® 


1. Contact (sparsa) 

2. Feeling (vedana) Pentad of Sense 
-3. Identification (sam na} Impression 

4. Thinking (cetana) ~ (sparsapaticaka) 

5. Consciousness (citta) 

6. Initial Thought ( vitarka) 

7. Sustained Thought ( vicara) Factors of 
8. Joy (priti) Absorption 
9. Satisfaction (sukha) (dhydnanga) 


10. Mental One-pointedness (cittass’ekaggata) 

11. Faculty of Faith (sraddha) 

12. Faculty of Energy ( viryendriya) 

13. Faculty of Mindfulness (smrtindriya) 

14. Faculty of Concentration (samdadhindriya) 

15. Faculty of Wisdom (prajfendriya) Faculties 
16. Faculty of Mind (manas indriya) 

17. Faculty of Joy (saumanasyendriya) 

18. Faculty of Vitality ( jivitendriya) 

19. Right View (samyagdrsh)} 


20. Right Conceptualizing (samyaksankalpa) Path 
21. Right Effort (samyak vyayama) Factors 
22. Right Mindfulness (samyak smyti) ( marganga) 


23. Right Concentration (samyak samadhi) 

24. Power of Faith (sraddhabala) 

25. Power of Energy ( viryabala) 

26. Power of Mindfulness (smrtibala) Powers 
27. Power of Concentration (samadhibala) (bala) 
28. Power of Wisdom (prajfidbala) 

29. Power of Shame (Aribala) 

30. Power of Scruples (apatrapabala) 


31. Absence of Greed (a/obha) Good 

32. Absence of Hatred: (advesa) Roots 

33. Absence of Delusion (amoha) (kusalamila) 
34. Absence of Covetousness (anabhidhya) Good 

35. Absence of Malice (avydpada) Paths of Action 


36. Right View (samyagdrst) (kuSalakarmapatha) 


AFEW EARLY ABHIDHARMA CATEGORIES 125 


37. Shame (Ari) Guardians of the World 
38. Scruples (apatrapa) (Jokapala) 

39. Bodily Serenity (kayaprasada) 

40. Serenity of Awareness ( cittaprasada) 

41. Bodily Lightness (kayalaghuta) 


42. Lightness of Awareness (cittalaghuta) The 

43. Bodily Pliancy (kayamrduta) Six 

44. Pliancy of Awareness (cittamrduta) Pairs 

45. Bodily Adaptability (kayakarmanyatd) (yugalaka) 


46. Adaptability of Awareness (cittakarmanyata) 
47. Bodily Proficiency (kayapragunata) 

48. Proficiency of Awareness (cittapragunata) 

49. Bodily Straightforwardness (kayarjukata) 

50. Straightforwardness of Awareness (cittarjukata) 


51. Mindfulness (smyti) Helpers 

52. Comprehension (samprajanya) (upakaraka) 

53. Peace (Samatha) Pairwise Combination 
54. Insight ( vipagyana) (yuganaddha) 

55. Determination (pragraha) The Last Dyad 

56. Undistractedness (aviksepa) (Pali pitthi-duka) 


While this is instructive as a sample, we must immediately note 
that not only is this list zo¢ adopted in its entirety by any other text 
covered here, but even in the Dhammasangani itself one finds a 
slightly different alternative list. Furthermore, the terms provided 
by Nyanaponika as classification of various groups within this list 
are not necessarily used elsewhere to pick out just this number of 
factors or just these factors. Clearly the circumstances call for a 
commentarial tradition to pull together disparate lists, contrasting 
terminologies, and indeed such a commentarial tradition does deve- 
lop, but largely after the period here surveyed. 

Under these circumstances to try to streamline these lists of factors 
into a manageable common format will necessarily require writing 
a new commentary on the texts, something it is preciselynot our . 
intention to provide here. About all we can do at this juncture is 
to indicate some of the most recurrent classifications of dharmas 
found in the literature under surveillance in this volume. Even to 
do this will be no more than a wave of the hand toward the direction 
of a task that must be performed by proponents of the tradition, 
since only they can bring to the effort the necessary sympathetic 
understanding of Abhidharma required for the serious contribution 
such a task would represent. 

We shall confine our efforts here to an attempt to indicate a few 
of the many classifications of factors found in the summaries below. 


126 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Quite a number of such matrix-type lists have been treated already 
in this Introduction. For example, the four noble truths appear in 
most matrices in one fashion or another, as do the twelve members 
of the chain of dependent origination. The six higher faculties, the 
intoxicants, the components of the noble path—whether eightfold 
or otherwise, the elements on a path (e.g. practice, meditation, 
insight, wisdom), the five ‘‘precepts’’ or moral practices, the five 
hindrances and their abandonment, the four meditative trance states, 
the seven purifications, the four aspirants (stream-enterer, once- 
returner, nonreturner, perfected being), the ten hindrances, and 
the seven factors of enlightenment, all of which have already been 
referred to in these introductory essays, appear in many lists of 
factors, though under differing terminology, in different numbers in 
irregular amounts. Besides these there are a few more that appear 
regularly in the works reviewed. 

The Five Aggregates. A useful translation of skandha i is hard to 
find. The usual rendition is ‘‘aggregate’’, which we have adopted 
here. In later Abhidharma works there are regular efforts to match 
groups of factors to each of the five aggregates—an exercise which 
is of dubious help to us who are trying to understand the notions 
themselves. At least it is always the same five (types of) things which 
are listed as: the five aggregates. These are matter (rapa), feeling 
(vedana), identification (samjfa), conditions (samskara) and 
consciousness (vijfiana). 

1. Matter. Though we have adopted the standard translation of 
the term rdpaas ‘‘matter’’, itis quite clear that, as with many Buddhist 
terms, neither this translation nor any other easily found is adequate 
for the purpose. ‘‘Matter’’ for us means stuff, and there is no stuff 
in Buddhism, for nothing persists.° It is said to be of four basic 
sorts—earth, fire, air and water, and to include also those things 
grasping (upadana) them. Specifically so included are the parts of 
the body, including the sense organs, and the external material things 
grasped by those organs, which are not substances but rather fleeting 
sensations or “‘sense-data’’. 

The classification of four basic sorts of matter, termed mahabhata 
in Buddhism, ‘is much like that found in other early schools with 
the absence (for the most part) of akaga (found in all comparable 
list of other Indian systems except that of the Jains who, like the 
Buddhists, list the four of earth, air, fire and water alone). In earliest 
passages this aggregate seems not to have been subdivided further, 
though it certainly is later, e.g. into 27 varieties in the Dhamma- 
sarigani. However, Gethin points out, 


What is clear. . . is the extent to which the early Buddhist account 


A FEW EARLY ABHIDHARMA CATEGORIES 127 


of ripa focusses on the physical world as experienced by a 
sentient being—the terms of reference are decidedly body- 


endowed-with-consciousness (savififianaka kaya).'° 


Thus ‘‘matter’’, associated by Westerners with inert stuff inde- 
pendent of humans, is not at all acceptable as a translation of the 
word rapa, which in fact rather means ‘‘color’’ or “‘form’’ {i.e. 
shape). 

Though there are four basic sorts of rapa, we find in Abhidharma 
the important and peculiar notion that every “‘material’’ thing has 
aspects of all four elements in it. Thus the translations of the’ 
respective Sanskrit terms as ‘‘earth’’, “‘water’’, ‘‘air’” and ‘‘fire”’ 
only refer to the distinguishing aspects of certain factors, the peculiar 
ways in which each respective element behaves along with other 
ways. In the case of a factor of earth, therefore, it has certain features 
which it possesses in virtue of its being an earthy factor, but it does 
not occur independently (as other systems such as Vaisesika view 
an earth-atom as occurring independently of a water-atom); rather, 
it must occur in the company of the features of watery, airy and 
fiery factors. These aggregates, then, are not atomic entities, as in 
Vaisesika, but rather aspects of fleeing experiences, numbers of 
which flash at any moment of occurrence. And when we speak, e.g. 
of an “‘earth rdpa’’ we are only calling attention to the aspects of 
the experience whichis (or would be) occasioned by (or constituted?) 
by the flashings. Such flashings come in groups, not singly. 

The aspects peculiar to earth flashings are said in the nikayas to 
be hardness, rigidity, spreading out and occupying space. But these 
features do not occur independently. Rather, they represent the 
earthy aspects of any material experience, occurring with watery, 
airy and fiery aspects. Watery aspects are such as viscidity and. 
cohesion, flowing in streams. Fiery aspects are especially heat (with 
cold touch counting a lowgrade type of heat)!! which is connected 
with the ripening and maturing of things. And airy aspects include 
inflation, fluctuation, motion, lightness (i.e. airiness). 

These four aspects of matter always arise together and disappear 
together. One cannot exist without the other three. And they always 
occur together in equal portions; one of the four cannot ‘‘outweigh”’ 
the others. How is it, then, that we have qualitatively different 
experiences, in one of which the visual element is paramount, in 
another the tangible, and so on? The answer given is that one of 
the four can be more intense than some or all of the others. A solid 
thing has earth predominant in intensity, a fiery thing water, and 
so on. Later on in Buddhism other ideas will arise on this topic. 


128 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


2. Feeling (vedana). The classifications here are simply into 
satisfying (sukha), frustrating (duhkha) and neutral (avyakrta). 
Feelings are also divided into bodily and mental. There is little 
attempt during this period to classify feelings. 

3. (Conceptual) identification (samjfa). Still one more term that 
appears to defy happy translation by any single English term is 
samjfa, the third aggregate. La Vallée Poussin writes: 


Consciousness (vijfiana) knows blueness, but does not know 
that ‘this (object) is blue’’. It is perception (sam/jfia) which 
identifies the external object with the internal object.'* 


Karunadasa suggests “‘perception’’ as a translation of sam/rid, but 
the way speakers of English use ‘‘perception’’ confines it closely 
to sensory grasping, and it is not sensation that is uniquely important 
here: many of the factors making up these aggregates are mental, 
not physical or sensory. Gethin suggests that 


a safifia of, say, ‘“‘blue’’ then becomes, not so much a passive 
awareness of the visual sensation we subsequently agree to call 
“‘blue’’, but rather the active noting of that sensation, and the 
recognising of it as “‘blue’’—that is, more or less, the idea of 


‘‘blueness’’. 3 


The translation suggested here, ‘‘(conceptual) identification’’, is 
not a happy one for easy speech but seems to capture the notion 
intended as closely as any English term can. 

The term samjfa strongly suggests the presence of linguistic 
aspects. Paul Williams has explored the relationship between sam/jfia 
and naman, another term that is suggestive of language. His dis- 
cussion relates to a somewhat later period in Buddhism, but the 
discussion is pertinent to the earlier period as well. 


Samjfa... becomes the principal element in the creation of a 
single term for a multitude of changing factors, and thus by virtue 
of the requirement of asinglereferent, samjfd creates prajnapti- 
sat entities. ..'4 


Prajfiaptisat or samvrtisat entities are those which have no real 
essence. They are “‘secondary entities’’, 


.. elements which are common to a number of spatial and 
temporal points and therefore cannot be uniquely described, 
they involve universals which necessarily transcend spatio- 


A FEW EARLY ABHIDHARMA CATEGORIES 129 


temporal momentariness and therefore cannot themselves be 
ultimately real.!° 


4. Conditioning Factors (samskara). A large number of factors 
in our texts belong to the general class of samskaras. What do 
samskaras have in common that warrants their being so termed? 


The nikayas define samkhdaras primarily in terms of will or 
volition (cetana); they also describe them as putting together 
(abhisamkharanti) each of the khandhas in turn into something 
that is put-together (samkhata). In this way samkhdaras are 
presented as conditioning factors conceived of as active volition 
forces. Cetand is, of course, understood as kKamma onthe mental 
level, and in the early abhidhamma texts all those mental factors 
that are considered to be specifically skilful (kusa/a) or unskilful 
(akuSala) fall within the domain of samkhara-khandha.’® 
Thus these factors correspond to a number of items which condition 
our doings and thinkings; their involvement in the karmic condition- 
ing process is suggested by the term ‘‘conditioning factor’’. In the 
summaries following we also use the more manageable term ‘“‘condi- 
tion”’ to indicate this aggregate. 

5. Consciousness { vijfiana). A question may have occurred to the 
reader which threatens to reduce to obscurity the very context in 
which discussion of aggregates arises. That is this: if a person is an 
aggregate of aggregates, and these aggregates are themselves factors 
which are momentary, what happens when these streams of factors 
come to an end with the death of the individual person? Buddhists 
talk, as other Indians do, of karmaand rebirth, but how isthat possible 
given the overarching conception of the momentariness of all things? 
The analysis of the person into physical (ipa), emotional { vedana), 
conceptual (samjfia) and conditioning {samsk4ra) elements doesn’t 
help explain how a person can even seem to persist from death to 
rebirth, since the physical body withers and dies, the emotions cease ° 
at death, concepts and volitions also cease. Under the circumstances, 
what is the connection between Ms. or Mr. A, who dies at f, and 
Mr. or Ms. B, who is born at f + 2? Surely the identity of the individual 
person needs to be included among the factors into which that person 
is analysed. 

It is presumably the need for an answer to this question which 
leads to the fifth factor. This fifth skandha plays several roles. On 
the one hand, since it is clear that there is an important difference 
between the consciousness which arises when a sense-organ contacts 
an object and the mere sensing ofa datum or even the mereidentifying 


130 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of it as (e.g.) “‘blue’’, we find in the lists of factors sensory aware- 
nesses (caksurvijfiana, etc.) listed in addition to the sensings (caksus, 
etc.) and identifyings themselves. But, beyond this, con- 
sciousness is that type of factor the stream of which persists beyond 
bodily demise.’ It is evidently this stream that maintains individual 
identity through the intermediate state and on into the next life. 

The term vijfianais also used in still another connection, to explain 
what it is that is still there (as stream) in the higher meditative states 
that Buddhist meditation theory describes. Wijesekere pertinently 
points out that the descriptive terms for these higher meditative states 
regularly incorporate the presence of consciousness if nothing else 
into the descriptions of these states. !® 

A number of distinctions have been rather hurriedly proposed in 
the previous paragraphs, relating to distinctions which might be 
suspected to be introduced for expository ease rather than any 
concern to report Buddhist tenets accurately. So we should point 
out immediately that besides the five aggregates there are other 
classifications of factors, accepted from the outset in the Buddha’s 
own accounts, which are based on these distinctions. We have, 
besides the aggregates, three sets of classifications dealing with the 
ways in which factors are cognized. 

Faculties, Bases and Elements. These classifications take account 
of the ways in which factors are grasped. There are five external 
faculties (indriya): the visual, auditory, gustatory, olfactory and 
tactile faculties. These are not to be confused with the physical 
organs—eye, ear, nose, tongue and skin—which we ordinarily think 
to perform the functions these ‘‘faculties’’ name. Rather, the refe- 
rence is to momentary, possibly atomic-sized factors scattered 
over the ball of the eye and possessed of the faculty of vision, etc. 
Added to these is a sixth faculty, the internal faculty of ‘‘mind’’, 
which grasps factors that do not involve external sensory elements. 

Each of these six faculties has a type of factor it is capable of 
grasping. As we saw, these factors flash together with factors of the | 
other three material kinds. The flashing is constituted by graspings 
of the five sensory sorts. Corresponding to the sixth, internal faculty 
there is a mental kind of object grasped by it. 

The twelve types of factors making up the list of faculties together 
with the things grasped by them is called the list of bases (ayatana). 
Everything that is grasped is comprised of bases, including the 
faculties themselves. 

A third list presents eighteen elements (dAatu). These are the twelve 
bases plus six more factors, identified as the consciousness ( vi/fidna) 
of each of the five sensory kinds plus, again, asixth called the element 
of mental consciousness or (as we have translated it here) ‘‘represen- 


AFEW EARLY ABHIDHARMA CATEGORIES 131 


tative cognition’ (a translation felt to give a bit more of an idea 
what is being talked about). McGovern describes the function of 
representative cognition in this manner: 


... Each of six vijfignas has only a momentary existence. 
Nevertheless, there is karmic or causal affinity between the 
various groups of consciousness of one moment and the next. 
The group of this moment inherits the tendencies, etc., of the 
immediately preceding group, and as the chief function of 
Manovijfianas is memory and reason, both separately connected 
with the continuity of the mental process, it is said that the 
constantly dying away vijfdnas of the past moment constitutes 
the base or organ for the activity of the manovijfidna of the 
present moment. Just as the activity of the caksur or indriya 
brings about the arising of caksur- vijfanaor the visual conscious- 
ness, so does the transmitted energy of all the immediately 
preceding vijfanas bring about the arising of the manovijfianas.'° 


Time. Early Buddhist ideas about time have been mentioned 

already. Generally, Buddhism takes it as canonical that things are 
fleeting, lasting for only a moment. But how long is a ‘‘moment’’? 
And in particular, are there “‘things’’ which occupy moments—past, 
present and future—or is a dharma confined to the present only? 

The most natural interpretation of ‘‘momentary’’ would seem to 
favor the last mentioned view, that things exist for only a moment, 
that a thing has no “‘history’’. The only existents are now. Apparently 
this was indeed the view of early Abhidharmists of the Sthaviravada 
persuasion, who are sometimes termed vibhajyavadins, i.e. *‘dis- 
tinctionists’’, since they divide factors into two kinds, those which 
‘exist’? and those which do not. But it was not the only view held 
in early Buddhism. 

Most of the earlier stratum of Sarvdstivadin texts do not treat time 
distinctly. But the very name of the movement suggests that their 
view is different from that of the distinctionists. Given our tentative 
reconstruction of the development of Abhidharma thought, the first 
text we have that presents the Sarvastivada side of the picture is the 
Vijfianakaya, which criticizes Maudgalyayana’s view that the pre- 
sent, but not the past or future, exists. as incoherent, involving 
self-contradiction. Whether this was the view of the northern, 
Sarvastivada Buddhists from the beginning is not entirely clear, 
though the‘name ‘Sarvastivada’ itself suggests that it was and that 
this was indeed the main point of distinction of their position. In 
any case, the Vijfanakdya, while it criticizes distinctionism, does 
not choose to offer a positive account of time. Indeed, a well-deve- 


132 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


loped account of this theory seems only to occur after our time 
period. 

Nevertheless, itis probable that the general lines of the Sarvastivada 
account of time extend back into our period. Collett Cox has 
summarized the views of two traditions of the time, the traditions 
of the Sarvastivadins and a view which will grow in importance later, 
that of the Sautrantikas (or, as Cox terms them, the Darstantika- 
Sautrantikas).”° 


The Sarvastivadins argue that factors exist as real entities 
(dravya) in the three time periods of past, present and future. 
As such, they are defined as intrinsic nature (svabhava), chara- 
cterized by a particular inherent characteristic. (svalaksana). 
Given appropriate causes and conditions, there existent factors 
manifest a particular activity (karitra), which then defines them 
as present. However, since factors also exist as past or future 
they are capable of serving as conditions in those times as well. . . 
By contrast, the Darstantikas equate a factor’s existence with 
its present activity. One cannot meaningfully distinguish a 
factor’s intrinsic nature from its activity, and thereby speak 
of its existence in the past or future. Further, they argue, factors 
do not exist as isolated units of intrinsic nature that manifest 
a particular activity through the influence of other isolated 
conditions. For the Darstantikas, the process of causal interrela- 
tion is the only fact of experience; the fragmentation of this 
process into discrete factors possessed of individual existence 
and unique efficacy is only a mental fabrication.”’ 


Other Categories. Besides the many sets of factors that have 
now been discussed there are still more that deserve at least brief 
mention, in no particular order of importance. 

(a) Four Immaterial States (brahmavihdra). These are listed as 
friendship, compassion, sympathy and equanimity, and are 
alternately referred to on occasion as ‘boundless’ states of ‘unlimi- 
ted scope’. 

(6) Four Knots (grantha) or Floods (ogha) or Bonds (yoga). In 
Dhammasangani the same list is called by all three names, and 
includes (1) ignorance, (2) covetousness, (3) malice and (4) addiction 
to moral precepts and vows. However, in the Savigitiparydya a 
different list appears as the four ‘floods’—(1) sensual pleasure, (2) 
existence, (3) (wrong) views and (4) ignorance. 

(c) Four Discriminations (pratisamvid), P. patisambhida). In the 
Vibhanga these comprise discrimination (1) as to the results of one’s 
actions, (2) as to factors, (3) as to the appropriate choice of words, 


A FEW EARLY ABHIDHARMA CATEGORIES 133 


(4) as to one’s awareness of others. But in Sangitiparydya the four 
concern (1) factors, (2) consequence, (3) awareness of others and 
(4) convention. A still different four are found in the Patisambhida- 
magga: discrimination of (1) things (or meanings) (artha), (2) factors, 
(3) language (nirukti) and (4) perspicaciousness (prati- 
bhana). 

(d) Five or Six Hindrances (nivarana). The list of these given in 
Dharmasamgraha comprises six: (1) sexual interest, (2) malice, (3) 
stolidity and torpor, (4) distraction and worry, (5) perplexity and 
(6) ignorance. There are only five of these listed in Sangitiparyaya— 
ignorance is not-counted there as a hindrance. 

(e) Fetters (samyojana). Different texts list different numbers of 
these, and one finds different numbers listed under this rubric in 
different places in the same text. For example, at Dhammasangani 
IIJ.1.1(8) there are three fetters—(1) belief that the body is real, (2) 
perplexity about the master, the dharma, the order, and (3) addiction 
-to moral precepts and vows. But at Ill. 1.2.4 the fetters number ten, 
these three being joined by (4) passionate desire, (5) repulsiveness, 
(6) pride, (7) passion to be reborn, (8) envy, (9) meanness, and 
(10) ignorance. Subsequent lists in Vibhariga, Satigitiparyaya and 
elsewhere overlap these, not always numbering ten. 

We need not prolong this exercise. It is not intended as in any 
way definitive of anything, but merely suggests that, despite the 
apparent repetitiveness of these texts the actual content is different 
with each new author. We do not yet have a fixed, dogmatic account 
to contend with. 


PART TWO 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 
(Arranged chronologically) 


DHAMMASANGANI 


Summary by Karl H. Potter 


In the list of seven Abhidharma treatises accepted by Theravada 
tradition the Dhammasaigani stands at the head. Tradition tells us 
that the Dhammasaziigani was recited at the Second Council, held 
around 386 B.C. according to Warder.’ This agrees with the date 
assigned by Mrs. Rhys Davids in T and accepted by many other 
scholars, a date which would make the Dhammasayigani about the 
oldest of the Abhidharma texts of either the Theravada or Sarvasti- 
vada traditions. There are close connections between portions of 
this text and passages in the Vibhanga and Puggalapafifatti, which 
leads many scholars to assign all three texts to an early-period. 
André Bareau, however, points out that some passages of 
Dhammasaigani are found in the Prakaranapada and Sariputrabhi- 
dharmasastra and he dates all of these materials later, in the 2nd 
century B.C. Part of the discrepancy turns on whether we are speaking 
of the dating of the headings or of the rest of the work. Bareau states: 
“It is probable that the composition of Kathavatthu was started 
well before that of Dhammasangani (mdtikd excepted)... and that © 
the Dhammasangani was terminated after (the Kathavatthu) has been 
definitely fixed.”’? Thus we find general agreement that the 
matika—or perhaps more than one such—found in this work repre- 
sents an early stage of development of Abhidharma thought. Whether 
it was the ‘‘original’’ matikais questioned by Warder, who distingui- 
shes three ‘‘separate (Abhidharma) lists of topics, or matrices’’, of 
which the list of dharmas grouping them into aggre- 
gates, sense-organs and elements, etc. may have been the oldest 
list and the classification of dharmas into 22 triplets, 100 pairs and 
further subordinate groups represents a ‘refinement on the part of 
the Theravada school’’.? 
This work lists and classifies dharmas under 122 matrices. The 
first 22 matrices involve a tripartite division, the remaining 100 are 
divided into two aspects. The style of exposition is in question and 


138 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
answer form, the question invariably being ‘‘which are the ...?”’, 
in answer to which the item in question is identified under various 
rubrics. In the following summary, more an outline, this dialogue 
style is not followed in the interest of the clarity and economy one 
can derive from a tabular account is provided. 

“*E”’ references are to the edition by J. Kashyap in the Nalanda- 
Devanagari Pali Series, Nalanda 1960 (RB19). ‘T’ references are 
to Mrs. Carolyn A. F. Rhys Davids’ translation under the title A 
Buddhist Manual of Psychological Ethics (London 1900, 1923; New 
Delhi 1975) (RB15).* 


(E3-17; TCV—CXII]) The work begins with the bare listing of the 
headings explained in Book II] below. 


BOOK ONE: ON THE ARISING OF AWARENESS® 
Chapter One: Good Factors 
Section One: Relating to the Sensuous Universe 
First (Type of) Awareness 


(A) Analysis of Terms 
({.1.1.1A) (E18-27; T1-23)° Good awarenesses relating to the 
sensuous universe which are accompanied by contentedness, con- 
nected with knowledge, and have as their supporting object some- 
thing visual (i.e. material) or auditory or gustatory or olfactory or 
tactual or a dharma, are accompanied or followed by: 
1. Contact, the relating of the idea to the content, 
2. Feeling, the pleasant sensation which arises from that contact, 
3. Conceptual identification, the cognitive awareness of the 
contact, 
4. Thinking, purposefulness toward action, 
5. Consciousness, mental consideration of the content, 
6. Initial thought on the nature of the content, 
7, Sustained thought on that nature, 
8. Joy, a happy emotional response, 
9. Satisfaction in the achievement of positive thought, 
10. One—pointed awareness, meditative concentration on the co- 
ntent, 
11. The faculty of faith, confidence in what one is doing, 
12. The faculty of energy, sustained ardent effort, 
13. The faculty of right mindfulness, 
14. The faculty of concentration (explained in the same words as 
10 above), 
15. The faculty of wisdom, 
16. The faculty of mind (explained as 5 was), 


DHAMMASANGANI 139 


42. 
43. 


44. 
45. 


46. 
“24h, 
48. 
49. 


50. 
51. 


'. The faculty of contentedness (explained as 9 was), 

. The faculty of life, the preservation of the above faculties, 
. Right view (explained as 15 was), 

. Right conceptualizing (explained as 6 was), 

. Right effort (explained as 12 was), 

. Right mindfulness (explained as 13 was), 

. Right concentration (explained as 10 was), 

. The power of faith (explained as 11 was), 

. The power of energy (explained as 12 was), 

. The power of mindfulness (explained as 13 was), 

. The power of concentration (explained as 10 was),. 

. The power of wisdom (explained as 15 was), 

. The power of shame, feeling disgrace at bad states, 

. The power of modesty when bad states have occurred, 

. Absence of greed,, 

. Sympathy, the absence of hatred or malice, 

. Understanding, literally the absence of delusion (explained as 


15 was), 


. Noncovetousness (explained as 31 was), 

. Absence of malice (explained as 32 was), 

. Right views (explained as 15 was), 

. Shame (explained as 29 was), 

. Modesty (explained as 30 was), 

. Serenity of the group of factors, i.e. the tranquility of feeling, 


identification and conditioning, 


. Serenity of awareness, the tranquility of consciousness, 
. Lightness of the group of factors, alertness in feeling, identifi- 


cation and conditioning, 
Lightness of awareness, alertness of consciousness, | 
Pliancy of the group of factors, absence of rigidity in feeling, 
identification and conditioning, 
Openminded awareness, pliancy in consciousness, 
Adaptability of the group of factors, the serviceability for good 
actions of feelings, identification and conditioning, 
Adaptability of awareness, the serviceability of consciousness 
for good actions, 
Proficiency of the group of factors, efficiency of feelings, 
identification and conditioning to accomplish good, 
Proficiency of awareness, efficiency of consciousness to 
accomplish good, 
Fitness of the group of factors, absence of deceit in feelings, 
identification and conditioning, 
Fitness of awareness, absence of deceit in consciousness, 
Memory (explained as in 13), 


140 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


52. Comprehension (explained as in 15), 
53. Peace (explained as in 10), 

54. Insight (explained as in 15), 

55. Determination (explained as in 12), 
56. Undistractedness (explained as in 10). 


(B) Aspects under which the good dharmas can be viewed 

(1.1.1.2) (E27~37; T24-33) 1. Under the four aggregates, viz., 
feeling, identification, conditioning and consciousness. States 2, 3 
and 5 of the aggregates listed in Part One above correspond to feeling, 
identification and consciousness aggregates respectively; all the 
others correspond to conditioning. 

2. Under the two sense-bases, viz. the basis of awareness (ex- 
plained as in item 5 in the list in Part One above) and the basis 
of factors, explained as the aggregates of feeling, identification and 
consciousness aggregates respectively; all the others correspond 
to conditioning. 

3. Under the two digments: viz., the element of mental conscious- 
ness (explained as under item 5 in Part One) and the element of 
dharmas (corresponding to the aggregates of feeling, identification 
and conditioning). 

4. Under three nutriments, viz., as the nutriment of contact 
(explained under item | of Part One), as the nutriment of representati- 
ve cognition or purposefulness, as the nutriment of consciousness 
or awareness. 

5. Under eight faculties (cf. items 11-18 of Part One}. 

6. Under the five aspects of meditation (see items 6-10 in Part 
One}. 

7. Under the fivefold path (cf. items 19. 23 of Part One). 

8. Under seven powers (cf. items 24-30 of Part One). 

9. Under three causes of moral behavior, viz., items 31-33 of Part 
One. 

10. Or each as a single factor, whether one of the 56 dharmas 
listed in Part One, or one of the aggregates, or a sense-organ, etc. 


(C) Emptiness 

(I. 1.1.3) (E37-39; T30-32) All these things—factors, aggregates, 
organs, etc.—that have been discussed are no more than immaterial 
causally dependent factors. 

Thus the first type of good awareness. 


Second (Type of) Awareness 


(1.1.1.4) (E39; T32-33) The second type is described precisely 


DHAMMASANGANI ; 141 


as the first is, except that it is characterized as having arisen from 
instigation. 


Third (Type of) Awareness 
(1.1.1.5) (E39-41; T33-35) The third type differs from the first 
in that whereas they were connected with knowledge, this type is 
disconnected from knowledge, so that items 15, 19, 33, and 36 are 


missing from the list of factors given here, and there is reference 
to a fourfold rather than a fivefold path, since item 19 is missing. 


Fourth (Type of) Awareness 


(1.1.1.6) (E41; T35-36) This type is like the third type except 
that it arises from prompting like the second type. 


Fifth (Type of) Awareness 
(1.1.1.7) (E41-43; T36-38) Here the good awareness is connected 
with knowledge and accompanied by equanimity. Items 8 and 9 in 
Part One are replaced respectively by one new item, viz., equanimity, 
and item 17 is replaced by the faculty of equanimity. 
Sixth (Type of) Awareness 


(I.1.1.8) (E43; T38) Like type five with the addition of the presence 
of prompting. 


Seventh (Type of} Awareness 


(1.1.1.9) (E43-44, T38-39) Like type five, except that the chara- 
cteristic of being disconnected from knowledge replaces its opposite. 


Eighth (Type of) Awareness 


(I.1.1.10) (E44-45; T39) Like type six, except that it is discon- 
nected from knowledge. 


Section Two: Relating to the Material World 
Part One: Earth-gazing as Meditative Device 


{A) Fourfold and Fivefold Aspects of Meditation 
{1.1.2.1A) (E45-51; T40-48) One who, to attain the material 
world, taking leave of desires and bad thought, by earth-gazing gets 


142 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to and stays in the first meditative state, which is the one involving 
initial and sustained thought in solitude and is accompanied by joy 
and satisfaction, is visited by the 56 good factors (listed in I.1.1.1A). 

When he suppresses initial and sustained thought and enters the 
second meditative state through earth-gazing, then his mind, free 
from discursive thought, becomes tranquil and ‘‘dwells on high’’, 
then he is visited by the good factors of I.1.1.1A excepting items 
6, 7, 20. Likewise, the lists of aspects are revised so as to exclude 
items involving initial and sustained thought, so that there are only 
three aspects of meditation and a fourfold path. 

When he becomes indifferent through losing desire for joy, being 
self-aware, and by earth-gazing gets to and stays in the third medita- 
tive state, then he is visited by the good factors of I.1.1.1A excepting 
for items 6, 7, 8. Likewise, the lists of aspects are revised from the 
previous paragraph to exclude items relating to joy, so that there 
are only two aspects of meditation and fourfold path. 

When he takes leave of both satisfaction and frustration as well 
as of both a contented or depressed mind, and by earth—gazing gets 
to and stays in the fourth meditative state, involving pure memory 
arising from equanimity with no feelings of satisfaction or frustration, 
then he is visited by the good factors of J.1.1.5. Likewise the lists 
of aspects are revised as in the previous paragraph. 

The foregoing account is reviewed with five, rather than four, 
meditative states involved, but to the same effect. 


(B) The Four Modes of Progress 


(J.1.2.1B) (ES1-52; T49-S0) When the aspirant of the foregoing 
section A by earth-gazing gets to and stays in first meditative state, 
his progress filled with frustrations and his higher faculties slow, 
the 56 factors of I.1.1.1A are good. They are also so whether his 
progress is satisfying and his higher faculties quick, or his progress 
frustrating and his higher faculties quick, or his progress satisfying 
and his higher faculties slow. These four possibilities are rehearsed 
with respect to the second, third and fourth meditative states utilizing 
the appropriate lists of factors as indicated in ].1.2.1A. 


(C) The Four Supporting Objects of Awareness 


(I.1.2.1C) (E52; TSO-51) When the aspirant of I.1.2.1A by 
earth-gazing gets to and stays in the first meditative state, which 
state is limited in scope and has a supporting object that is limited, 
the 56 factors of I.1.1.1A are good. They are also so whether his 
state is boundless and the supporting object bounded, the state 
bounded and the supporting object boundless, or the state bounded 


DHAMMASANGANI 143 


and the supporting object bounded. These four possibilities are 
rehearsed with respect to the second, third and fourth meditative 
states utilizing the appropriate lists of factors as indicated in I.1.2.1A. 


(D) The Combination of Sixteen 


(f.1.2.1D) (E53-56; T51-52) The descriptions gotten by per- 
muting the possible combinations of [.1.2.1B and I.1.2.1C above 
constitute sixteen cases. 


Part Two (acc. to E); 1E (acc. to T): 
The Remaining Seven Devices 


(1.1.2.2) (E56; T52-53) A like sixteen cases can be derived 
following the pattern of 1.1.2.1 for seven more meditative devices, 
which are identified as (2) water, (3) fire, (4) air, (5) dark, (6) yellow, 
(7) red and (8) white. 


Part Three (of E; Two of T): 
The Bases of Mastery 


(A) Limited Forms 

(I.1.2.3A) (ES6-57; TS3-54) When the aspirant for the material 
world who, not identifying his body as his body but seeing external 
objects as limited gets mastery by thinking ‘I am aware of (it), I 
see (it)’ and who then gets to and stays in the first meditative state 
is visited by the good 56 factors of I.1.1.1A. This is then expanded 
to cover the four or five meditative states following the pattern of 
1.1.2.1A. 


(B) Four Modes of Progress 


(I.1.2.3B) (E57-58; T54) Follows I.1.2.1B with the substitution 
of the mastery-formula of I.1.2.3A for ‘‘earth-gazing’’, 


(C) Two Supporting Objects of Awareness 


(I. 1.2.3C) (E58-59; T54—-55) Follows I.1.2.1C with the substitu- 
tion of the mastery-formula for ‘‘earth-gazing’’, and reading “‘which 
~ state is unlimited but whose supporting object is limited’’, 

(D) The Combination of Eight 


(I.1.2.3D) (E59-61; T55) Like I.1.2.1D, except that since only 


144 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


one of the two possibilities of 1.1.2.LC are found in I.1.2.3C there 
are only half as many combinations, viz., eight. 


(E) Limited but Beautiful or Ugly Forms 


(I.1.2.3E) (E61; T55--56) The routine of I.1.2.3A—D is repeated, 
except that the aspirant sees the external objects as beautiful or ugly 
as well as limited. 


(F) Forms of Unlimited Scope 


(I.1.2.3F) (E61—66; T56) The routine of I.1.2.3A-D is repeated, 
except that the aspirant sees the external objects as unlimited in 
scope. 


(G) Unlimited but Beautiful or Ugly Forms 


(I.1.2.3G) (E66; T57) Routine of I.1.2.3E is repeated, except that 
the aspirant sees the external object as unlimited in scope. 


(H) Dark Form, Yellow Form, Red Form, White Form 


(1.1.2.3H) (E66-67; T57-58} Follows routine of 1.1.2.3A-D, 
except that the external objects are seen in turn as dark, yellow, 
red or white. Sixteen combinations result. 


Part Four (of E; Three of T): ° 
The Three Liberations 


(1.1.2.4) (E67; TS8—S9) This time the aspirant contemplates some 
part of his body and depending on whether he identifies it as a part 
of his body or not or finds it beautiful, in entering and remaining 
in the first meditative state produces the 56 factors of 1.1.1.1A. 


Part Five (of E; Four of T): 
The Four Sublime Meditative States 


(1.1.2.5) (E67-68; T59-63) The pattern as usual, except that his 
states are accompanied by friendship, compassion, sympathy or 
equanimity. 


Part Six (of E; Five of T): 
The Meditation on Foul Things 


(1.1.2.6) (E69; T63-64) Here only the first meditative state is 
involved, and the aspirant meditates on a corpse in various stages 
of decay. : 


DHAMMASANGANI ' 145 


Section Three: Relating to the Immaterial World 
Part One: The Sense of Endless Space 


_ (1.1.3.1) (E70; T65-67) When the aspirant, to attain the immaterial 
world, by losing all awareness of matter, by ceasing to have any 
- sensations, by identifying everything as a unity, gets to and stays 
in the fourth meditative state accompanied by awareness of the sense 
of endless space involving equanimity, the 56 factors resulting are 
good ones. 


Part Two: The Sense of Endless Consciousness 


(1.1.3.2) (E70; T67) When the aspirant, having passed through 
the sense of endless space, gets to and stays in the fourth meditative 
state which is accompanied by awareness of the sense of endless 
consciousness, then the 56 factors are good. 


Part Three: The Sense of Nothingness 


(I.1.3.3) When the aspirant passes through the sense of endless 
consciousness and gets to and stays in the fourth meditative state 
accompanied by the awareness of the sense of nothingness, then 
the 56 factors are good. 


Part Four: The Sense-basis of Neither 
Identification nor Nonidentification 


(I. 1.3.4) When the aspirant passes through the sense of nothingness 
and gets to and stays in the fourth meditative state accompanied by 
that awareness which neither identifies nor fails to identify (a 
content), then the 56 factors are good. 


Section Four: Stages of Good Awareness 
Part One: In the Sensuous Universe 


(1.1.4.1) (E70-71; T69-72) When a good awareness has arisen 
in respect to the sensuous universe, and it (a) involves satisfaction 
and (b) is connected with knowledge and has (cl) inferior or (c2) 
medium or (c3) superior efficacy or has as its dominant factor (d1) 
interest or (d2) energy or (d3) awareness or (d4) investigation, any 
of which may be of inferior, medium or superlative efficacy, then 
the 56 factors of I.1.1.1A are good. 

A second case is where such a good awareness involves satis- 
faction, is connected with knowledge, and is prompted. A third 


146 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


case involves satisfaction, is disconnected from knowledge, and a 
fourth case is likewise and is prompted. Four more cases are created 
by varying the three parameters of satisfaction-involvement, know- 
ledge-connectedness and the presence of prompting. 


Part Two: In the Material Universe 


(1.1.4.2) (E71-72; T72) When, to reach the material heaven, one 
without desires or bad thoughts by earth-gazing gets to and stays 
in the first trance which features one of the three degrees of (c) or 
(d) (of 1.1.4.1) above, then the 56 factors are good. The formula 
is then repeated so as to apply to the remaining three or four trances. 


Part Three: In the Immaterial Universe 


(1.1.4.3) (E72-73; T73) When theaspirant, to attain the immaterial 
heavens, losing all awareness of matter, ceasing to have any sensa- 
tions, by identifying everything as a unity, gets to the fourth trance 
accompanied by awareness of the sense of endless space involving 
indifference, and which has some degree of (c) or (d) of 1.1.4.1 above, 
then the 56 factors are good. 

The description of the states of I.1.3.2-4 are likewise described 
with the addition of the degree of (c) or (d) of 1.1.4.1. 


Section Five: Relating to the Supramundane 
Part One: The First Path: The 20 Great Aspects 


(1.1.5.1) (E74-90; T74-87) When the aspirant comes to the higher 
world trance through which he may go on to the termination of 
rebirths and aiming at the first stage, having abandoned views, gets 
to and remains in the first trance, then there are the following good 
factors (identified by their number in the list at J.1.1.1A): Items 
1-5 are as before. 

6. Initial thought now means a component of the eightfold path 
(viz., right conceptualizing). 

Item 7 is as before. 

8. Joy is said to be one of the (seven) limbs of calleblennicnt, 
i.e. a factor inthe awakening to liberation. 

Item 9 is as before. 

10. One-pointed mind is now another of the factors in awakening 
to liberation as well as an item in the (eightfold) path. 

11 is as before. 

12. Energy and 

13. Memory are factors of awakening and items in the path. 


DHAMMASANGANI 147 


14. Concentration is described as one-pointed mind was. 

15. Wisdom is a factor in awakening and an item in the path. 

16-18 are as before. 

A new 19 is described as the faculty of perfect knowledge, a kind 
of wisdom described under 15 above. 

20. Right view is described as 15 above is. 

21. Right conceptualizing is described as 6 above is. 

22. Right speech is the avoidance of the four errors of. speech, 
viz., slanderous, dishonest, rude or frivolous language; it is an item 
in the path. 

23. Right action is avoidance of the three errors of conduct 
(murder, theft and unchastity), and is an item in the path. 

24. Right living is abstention from wrong modes of living, and is 
an item in the path. 

25-27 correspond to 21-23 of the list in ].1.1.1A. 

28-32 are the powers of faith, energy, memory, concentration 
and wisdom, and are explained as are 11-15 of the present list above. 

33. The power of shame and 34, the power of modesty are 
explained as 29-30 of the list in I.1.1.1A are. Likewise 35. absence 
of greed and 36. sympathy, corresponding to 31 and 32 of the list 
in I.1.1.1A. 

37. Understanding is explained as 33 in this list is. 

38. Noncovetousness, 39. absence of malice correspond to 34 
and 35 respectively of 1.1.1.1A. 

40. Right view is explained as wisdom, 15 seven is. 

41. Shame and 42. modesty correspond to 37 and 38 respectively 
of 1.1.1.1A. 

43. Serenity of the group of factors, and 44. serenity of awareness, 
correspond to 39 and 40 of I.1.1.1A, and are identified as factors 
of awakening. 

45. Lightness of the group, 46. lightness of mind, 47. pliancy of 
the group, 48. pliancy of awareness, 49. adaptability of the group, 
50. adaptability of awareness, 51. proficiency of the group, 52. 
proficiency of awareness, 53. fitness of the group and 54. fitness 
_ of awareness correspond to 41-50 of 1:1.1.1A. 51. memory, 52. 
comprehension, 53. peace, 54. insight, 55. determination and 56. 
undistractedness are explained as under the explanations of memory, 
wisdom and energy in the present list. 

The review of aspects under which these factors can be viewed 
follows the pattern of I.1.1.1B with variations corresponding to the 
present list of 56 factors. The modes of progress are reviewed as 
under I.1.2.1B, and the pattern extended to cover the remaining 
stages of meditation as under!.1.2.1A. There is an emptiness section 
showing that each of the four meditative states as well as the mode 


148 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of progress to it is empty. An additional two sections. indicate that 
these states are aimless and not aimed at. 

The twenty great aspects are now listed; they all relate to the higher 
world: 


. The meditative state (of the higher world) 
. The path (of the higher world) 

. The advance in remembering (or mindfulness) 
. Right efforts 

. The supernatural powers 

. The faculty of the higher world 

. The power of the higher world 

. The awakening... 

. The truth... 

10. The peace... 

11. The doctrine (dharma)... 

12. The aggregate... 

13. The sense-organ... 

14. The element... 

15. The nutriment... 

16. Contact... 

17. Feeling... 

18. Identification... 

19. Volition... 

20. Awareness... 


OCOonrnnrnnh ON eH 


The dominant factors ((d1-4) of 1.1.4.1) are permuted through 
the meditative states and the 20 great aspects. 


Part Two: The Second Path 


(I.1.5.2) (E90-91; T87-99) The aspirant is described as before, 
only this time he is aiming at the second stage by diminishing the 
strength of desire and passion. 


Part Three: The Third Path 


(I.1.5.3) (E91; T88) Here he aims at the third stage by completely 
abandoning desires and passions. 


Part Four: The Fourth Path 


(1.1.5.4) (E91; T88-89) And here he aims at the fourth stage by 
abandoning passion for the immaterial as well as the material, and 
has lost his ignorance. 


DHAMMASANGANI : . 149 


Chapter Two: Bad Factors 
Section One: Twelve Types 
First Type of Awareness 


(1.2.1.1) (E92—97; T90-—95) Bad awareness accompanied by joy, 
connected with views about things, which have as their contents 
something visual or auditory or gustatory or olfactory or tactual or 
a factor, are accompanied or followed by: 

1-10. Contact, feeling, identification, volition, initial or sustained 
thought, joy, satisfaction, one-pointed awareness as in the list of 
factors under I.1.1.1A. 

11-15. The faculty of energy, the faculty of concentration, the 
faculty of awareness, the faculty of contentedness, the faculty of life 
corresponding to 12, 14, and 16-18 respectively of the list in 
L1.1.1A. 

16. Wrong views, described by a set of metaphors indicating the 
wrongness of the views. 

17-19. Wrong conceptualizing, wrong effort, wrong concentration 
which are described as are items 7, 11 and 10, respectively in the 
present list. 

20-21. The power of energy and the power of concentration, 
explained as items 18 and 19 in the present list. 

22. Lack of shame, not feeling modest at bad states. 

23. Not being ashamed when bad states have occurred. 

24. Greed, passion or covetousness. 

25. Delusion, lack of understanding, deriving from ignorance. 

26-32. Covetousness, wrong views, lack of shame, immodesty, 
serenity, determination, and steadiness, explained respectively as 
items 24, 16, 22, 23, 10, 11 and 12 are in the present list. (1.2.1.2) 
Aspects corresponding to I.1.1.2 are listed for the present set of 
factors, except that there are only five faculties, a fourfold path, four 
powers, and there are two causes (of immoral behavior). 


Second Type of Bad Awareness 


(1.2.1.3) (E97; T96-97) Involving instigation and views 
(cf. 1.1.1.4). 


Third (Type of) Bad Awareness 


(1.2.1.4) (E98; T97) Not connected with views. Items 16 and 27 
are omitted. 


Fourth (Type of) Bad Awareness 


(1.2.1.5) (E99; T97—98) Involving instigation but not involving 
views (cf. 1.1.1.6). 


150 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Fifth (Type of) Bad Awareness 


(1.2.1.6) (E99-110; T98-99) Accompanied by indifference, 
parallel to 1.1.1.7 above. 


Sixth (Type of) Bad Awareness 


(1.2.1.7) (E100; T99-110) Indifference plus instigation (cf. 
1.1.1.8). 


Seventh (Type of) Bad Awareness 
(1.2.1.8) (E100-101; T100) Parallel to 1.1.1.9 above. 


Eighth (Type of) Bad Awareness 


(1.2.1.9) (E101; T100) Like the seventh type in the present list, 
plus the presence of instigation. 


Ninth (Type of) Bad Awareness 


(1.2.1.10) (E102-103;, T101-103) This type involves unsettled 
mind and repugnance. The list of factors is somewhat modified, 
including frustration in place of joy and satisfaction, the faculty of 
discontent in place of the faculty of contentedness, hate for 
selfishness, malice for covetousness, and omitting the two mentions 
of wrong views. Under aspects the list is as before except that a 
threefold path is specified. 


Tenth (Type of) Bad Awareness 


(1.2.1.11) (E103; T104) Like the ninth type plus the presence of 
instigation. 


Eleventh (Type of) Bad Awareness 


(I.2.1.12) (E104—105; T104—109) This type is accompanied by 
indifference and perplexity. Perplexity is explained by a series of 
terms implying hesitation and uncertainty. In the sets of aspects here 
there is only one cause (of immoral behavior), four faculties and 
three powers. 


Twelfth (Type of) Bad Awareness 


(I.2.1.13) (E105—106; T109—113) This type involves indifference 


* DHAMMASANGANI 151 


and excitedness; this last appears instead of selfishness (of the list 
in I.2.1.1). 


Chapter Three: Neutral Factors 
Section One: Maturation 
Part One: Good Karmic Results 
(A) Sensation _ 


(I.3.1.1A) (E107-111; T114-119) Visual awarenesses arising 
from the maturation of good karma stored up in the sensuous universe 
and accompanied by equanimity are accompanied or followed by: 

1-5. Contact, feeling, identification, volition and awareness, the 
descriptions of which resemble those of I.1.1.1A except that 
accompanying sensations involve equanimity rather than satisfying. 

6. Equanimity 
7, One-pointedness of awareness 
8. The faculty of mind 
9. The faculty of equanimity 
10.The faculty of life. 
Aspects are specified as before. 

Corresponding treatment is then applied to the remaining four 
types of sense-awareness (auditory, olfactory, gustatory and 
tactual), except that satisfactoriness has replaced equanimity in 
the list of factors. 


(B) The Mental Element 


(1.3.1.1B) (E111-113; T119-122) Representative cognitions 
arising from the maturation of good karma stored up in the sensuous 
universe and accompanied by equanimity and pertaining to a visual, 
auditory, olfactory, gustatory or tangible content, are accompanied 
or followed by the 10 factors listed under I.3.1.1A in addition to 
initial and sustained thought, a total of 12. 


(C) The Element of Representative Cognition 


(1.3.1.1C) (E113-117; T122-125) Representative cognitions 
(e.g., memories, etc.) arising from the maturation of good karma 
stored up in the sensuous universe, etc. (as inthe previous paragraph), 
accompanied by contentedness, etc., are accompanied by 13 factors, 
’ viz., the 12 in the preceding section minus equanimity and the faculty 
of equanimity and plus joy, satisfaction and contentedness. 

Similarly, if the same situation is‘accompanied by equanimity 
rather than contentedness precisely the 12 factors of 1.3.1.1B result. 


152 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
(D) Eight Main Types of Maturation 


(I.3.1.1D) (E117-118; T125—126) This section classifies repre- 
sentative cognition according to whether it is, as a result of good 
karma, (1) accompanied by (a) contentedness and (b) knowledge; 
(2) (a), (b) and (c) instigation; (3) (a) and lack of (b); (4) (a), lack 
of (b) and (c); (5) (d) equanimity plus (b); (6) (d), (b) and (c); 
(7) (d) lack of (b); and (8) (d) lack of (b) and (c). 


(E) In the Material Realm 


(1.3.1.1E) (E118; T126-127) In contrast to the aspirant described 
at I.1.2.1A, whose factors are good, one who gets to and stays in 
each of the four trances as a result of good karma stored up in the 
material realm is visited by neutral factors. 


(F) In the Immaterial Realm 


(1.3.1. 1F) (E119-120; T127-128) This section relates to 1.1.3.1 
above as the previous section did to 1.1.2.1. ‘ 


(G) In the Higher Realms 


(I.3.1.1G) (E120-132; T128-140) When the aspirant of 1.1.5.1 
arrives at the first stage by the methods described there, he is visited . 
by the 56 neutral factors plus the faculty of perfect knowledge. These 
are then developed following the pattern of emptiness, modes of 
progress, etc., as inI.1.5.1. The twenty great aspects are described 
as before, and one dominant factor, viz. desire is permuted. 


Part Two: Bad Karmic Results 


(1.3.1.2) (E132-141; T141-144) This section follows 1.3.1 except 
that here we are dealing with the results of bad karma. 


Section Two: Inoperative Awarenesses 


(1.3.2) (E141-146; T145-152) Inoperative sensuous conceptions 
which are neither good nor bad nor the results of karma, and which 
are accompanied by equanimity, and have visual or auditory or 
olfactory or gustatory or tangible contents, are accompanied by or 
followed by the neutral 12 factors of 11.1.1B. 

This formula is repeated for representative cognitions following 
1.1.1C, but 15 neutral factors are the outcome: the 13 of 11.1.1C 
plus the faculties of energy and of contentedness. Again’ if equanimity 
rather than joy is present then there are 14 factors (the above-men- 
tioned 15 minus joy). 


DHAMMASANGANI 153 


The eight main types of maturation are reviewed accordingly (cf. 
1.3.1.1D), and the formula worked through for the material, im- 
material and higher realms. 


BOOK TWO: MATTER 
Chapter One: Introduction’ 


(11.1) (E147; T153-154) The neutral factors are good and bad, 
the maturations (of karma) occurring in the sensuous realm, the 
material realm, the immaterial realm, or in the unincluded realm 
beyond these in connection with the aggregates of feeling, identifica- 
tion, conditioning and consciousness; also those inoperative factors 
which are neither good nor bad nor the result of karma; also all matter, 
and also the unconditioned element. 

The present Book provides a classification under headings of 
matter. 


Chapter Two: Classification According to Single Concepts 


(1.2) (E147; T155-157) Matter is not morally causative or asso- 
ciated with a moral cause,. but causally related, conditioned; it is 
worldly, an intoxicant of bondage and defilements, perverse, favora- 
ble to grasping, neutral, without supporting object or mentality, 
amoral, without joy, satisfaction or equanimity, not the kind of thing 
that can be destroyed by insight or by discipline, not contributing 
to the karmic accumulations, belonging to the realm of sense but 
not to the material nor to the immaterial realm, nor to the unincluded 
realm, not involving regularity (of karmic results?), present (in time), 
the contents of the six types of awareness, noneternal. 


Chapter Three: Classification by Pairs (of Attributes) 


(0-3.1) (E160-176; T158-184) Derived vs. nonderived 
matter. Derived matter includes: 

(1) the visual sense, a sentient organ, invisible and responsive, 
by which one sees matter that is visible and responsive; it is derived 
from the four great elements and reacts to them; it is that on 
‘dependence on which feelings, identifications, volitions and visual 
consciousness arise. 

(2) the auditory sense... + 

(3) the olfactory sense... 

(4) the gustatory sense... 

(5) the bodily sense (i.e. touch)... 

(2) to (5) are treated in parallel fashion to (1) 

(6) the sense of material form, which comprehends colors and 
Shapes, is derived from the four great elements, reacts with them, 
and is that on dependence on which feelings, identifications, volitions 


154 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and visual consciousness arise. 

(7) the sense of sound... 

(8) the sense of smell... 

(9) the sense of taste... 

(7) to (9) are treated in parallel fashion to (6). 

(10) the female-faculty, the characteristics distinguishing the 
female, including appearance, occupation, deportment. 

(11) the male-faculty, the characteristics distinguishing the male, 
including appearance, occupation, deportment. 

(12) the life-faculty, the maintenance of life. 

(13) bodily manifestations, the way in which a. person moves in 
indicating his awareness, his intentions, etc. 

(14) linguistic manifestations, by which one likewise indicates his 
awareness, etc. 

(15) the element of space, whichis found in the sky andin avacuum, 
‘is not in contact with the four great elements. 

(16) lightness of material form, its capacity for changing easily. 

(17) pliancy of material form, its softness and smoothness. 

(18) the adaptability of material form, a thing’s capacity for being 
worked up. 

(19) the growth of material form, through accumulation. ° 

(20) the maintenance of growth of material form. 

(21) the decay of material form, as it (i.e. we) grow(s) old. 

(22) noneternality of material form, its destruction. 

(23) solid food, by which living beings are kept alive. 

Nonderived matter is classified.as (24) tangible sense-basis or 
(25) fluid element. 

(0.3.2) (E176-190; T185-201) Grasped at vs. not grasped at. 
(1)-(5), (10)-(1 2) or whatever form that results from karmic matura- 
tion of (6)-(9), (24), (15), (25), (19) and (23) are grasped at. Not 
grasped at are (7), (13)-(14), (16)-(18), (21)-(22), or whatever 
material form sort which does not result from karmic maturation 
in the areas of (1)-(3), (24), (15), (25), (19) and (23). 

(0.3.3) Both grasped at and favorable to grasping vs. not grasped 
at but favorable to grasping. Satisfying the first description are the 
group described as ‘grasped at’ under II.3.2. Satisfying the second 

_ description are the rest. 

(1.3.4) Visible (6) vs. invisible (all the rest). 

(II.3.5) Responsive (or reactive) ((1)—(9), (24)) vs. nonresponsive 
(the rest excluding (25)). 

(I.3.6) Faculties ((1)-(5), (10)-(12)) vs. what are not faculties 
(6)—(23). 

(1.3.7) Great elements include (24) and (25); all the rest are 
not. 


DHAMMASANGANI 155 


(II.3.8) Language includes (13) and (14); the rest are not. 

(11.3.9) Arising from awareness are (13)-(14) and whatever is 
caused to arise through mental activity in the areas of (6)—(9), (24), 
(15), (25), (16), (23). The rest are not. 

(1.3.10) Coming to be along with awareness includes the same 
set as under ‘arising from awareness’ in II.3.9; the rest do not come 
to be along with awareness. 

(1.3.11) Likewise with the material form which follows upon 


. awareness. 


(1.3.12) Confined to persons are (1)~ (5); the rest are found 
outside of persons. 

(1I.3.13) Gross includes (1)-(9) and (24), while subtle includes 
the rest exclusive of (25). 

(1.3.14) Hard (to be aware of) are all those other than (1)-(9) 
and (24), which are patent to awareness. 

(1.3.15) Matter which is the actual basis of visual contact is 
(1). The rest are not. 

(1.3.16) (1).is the actual basis of feeling, identification, volition 
and awareness born of visual contact. The rest are not. 

(1.3.17) Likewise (2) is the actual basis of auditory contact, 
and so forth for olfactory, gustatory and tangible contacts, with the 
contrast as before. 

(0.3.18) Similarly for feeling, etc., following II.3.16 in. the 
natural progression. 

(1.3.19) (6) is the content of visual awareness, and the rest 
aren’t. 

(1.3.20) Similarly for the other four aggregates, parallel to 
1.3.16. 

(1.3.21) Likewise (7) is the content of auanory awareness, 
etc., parallel to 1.3.17. 

(0. 3.22) Parallel to I1.3.18. 

(11.3.23-26) The senses (i.e. (1)—(9) and (24)) are contrasted 
with what are not senses. 

(11.3.27-30) The elements ((1)-(5)) are contrasted with 
what are not elements. 

(I.3.31-35) The faculties (1)-(5), (10)-(12) are con- 
trasted with what are not faculties. 

(11.3.36-37) The kinds of ‘language’ are contrasted with 
the rest. 

(1.3.38) Space is contrasted with the rest. 

(1.3.39) The fluid element is contrasted with the rest. 

(11.3.40-47) The remaining items viz., (16)—(23), are contrasted 
with the others. 


156 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Chapter Four: Classification by Triples 


(0.4) (E191-210; T202-213) The 47 pairs of Chapter 2 preceding 
are now grouped into triples. Since the material is the same we here 
give only the method of classification in illustration. The first triplet 
is three possible permutations of (12) confined to persons and (1) 
derived. Thus the triplet is (a) confined to persons and derived, (b) 
not confined to persons, (c) not confined to persons and not derived. 
The twenty-five forms of matter are classified into (a)-(c). The 
second triplet arises from the pair (12) confined to persons and (2) 
grasped at, generating three possibilities. The pattern is as follows: 
given the ordered pair x/y, generate three possibilities (a) x and y, 
(b) not x and y, (c) not x and not y. 


Chapter Five: Classification by Quadruples 


(0.5) (E211-224; T214-221) The pair is this time allowed to 
generate all four combinations: thus given x/y, one gets (a) x and 
y, (b) x and not y, (c) not x and y, (d) not x and not y. The substituents 
for x/y listed and permuted are: (1)/(2),(1)/(3), (1)/(5), (1)/(3), 
(1)/(14), (2)/(4), (2)/(5), (2)/(7), (2)/(13), (2)/(14), (3)/(4), 
(3)/(5), (3)/(7), (3)/3), (3)/(14), (5)/(6), (5)/(7), (6)/(13), 
(6)/(14), (7)/(13), (7)/(14). 


Chapter Six: Classification by Fives 


(11.6) (E224-225; T222-223) The earth element, water (i.e. the 
fluid element), the fire element, the air element, and the derived, 
i.e., all the rest of the 25 forms of matter, make up the fivefold 
classification. 


Chapter Seven: Classification into Six 


(0.7) (E225; T224) The six are (6), (7), (8), (9), (24), each 
cognizable by a sense-organ, and the rest, which are cognizable by 
the mind. 


Chapter Eight: Classification into Seven 


(1.8) (E225; T225) This comprises the sense of types (6)-(9) and 
(24), plus the representative conception of those five senses, plus 
the conception of all the rest of the material forms. 


Chapter Nine: Classification into Eight 
(11.9) (E226; T226) These are the senses of (6)—(9), two varieties 


DHAMMASANGANI 157 


of bodily contact—pleasant and unpleasant—plus conceptions of 
those, plus conceptions of all the rest. 


Chapter Ten: Classification into Nine 


(1.10) (E226; T227) These are (1)-(5), (10)-(12)—i.e. the 
faculties—plus everything else, which are not faculties. 


Chapter Eleven: Classification into Ten 


. (1.11) (E226-227; T228) The first eight of 1.10, plus what is 
not a faculty but responsive, viz.,.(6)—(9) and (24), plus what is not 
a faculty and not responsive, viz., all the rest. 


Chapter Twelve: Classification into Eleven 


(0.12) (E227-228; T229) (1)-(9), (24), and everything else, 
described as what are invisible, nonresponsive, and objects of 
conceptual awareness. 


BOOK THREE: SUMMARY (OF THE MATRICES)® 
Chapter One: Classifications 
- Section One: (The 22) Triplets 


(Il.1.1.1) (E229-239; T230-251) 1. The good factors are: the 
three roots of good karma—absence of greed, absence of hate, 
absence of delusion; the aggregates of feeling, identification, condi- 
tioning and consciousness when associated with these (roots); the 
actions, bodily, vocal or mental, arising from these (roots). The bad 
factors are: the three roots of bad karma—greed, hate and delusion; 
the defilements united with them; the four aggregates mentioned 
_ when associated with these (roots); and the actions associated with 
them. The neutral factors are: the maturations of good and bad factors 
in the sensuous, material and immaterial realms, or in the unincluded 
realm; the four aggregates exclusive of matter; inoperative factors 
that are not good or bad or the results of actions; all matter; and 
the unconditioned.. 

2. Divisions into factors that are associated witha satisfying feeling, 
with a frustrating feeling, with neither kind of feeling. ; 

3, Division into factors that are maturations, factors which have 
. results, and factors which are neither. 

4. Division into factors (a) that are grasped at and favorable to 
grasping, (b) that are not grasped at but favorable to grasping, and 
(c) that are neither grasped at nor favorable to grasping. 

5. Division into factors (a) that are defiled and defiling, (b) that 
are not defiled but defiling, (c) that are neither defiled nor defiling. 


158 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


6. Factors (a) that involve initial and sustained thought, (b) that 
involve sustained but not initial thought, (c) that involve neither. 

7. Factors (a) that are joyful, (b) that are satisfying, (c) that are 
equanimous. 

8. Division into (a) factors that are to be eliminated by vision, 
viz., the three fetters, which are the view that there is an individual 
or personal self; perplexity about the Buddha, the doctrine, the order, 
etc.; and attachment to precept and ritual, which is the theory, held 
by those outside (our doctrine), that purity is gotten by observing 
rules of moral conduct or by ritual (sacrifice), etc.; (b) factors that 
are to be eliminated by spiritual practice; and (c) factors that are 
to be eliminated by neither seeing nor practice. 

9. Division into factors whose causes are to be eliminated (a) by 
seeing, (b) by practice, or (c) by neither. 

10. Division into factors that (a) lead to accumulation (of rebirths), 
(b) that lead to the elimination of rebirths, (c) which do neither. 

11. Factors that relate to training—the four paths that are the 
unincluded, and the three lowest results of the recluse’s life; factors . 
that do not relate to training—the result which is being a perfected 
being; factors that neither relate nor do not relate to training— 
everything else. 

12..Factors (a) that are limited (in scope), (b) that are ‘‘going to 
greatness’’, (c) states that are unlimited (in scope). 

13. Factors whose contents are limited, whose contents are “‘gone 
to greatness’’, whose contents are unlimited. 

14. Factors that are low, middling, and superior. 

15. Division into (a) factors whose wrongness is regulated (as to 
their results)}—-viz., the five kinds of action which have immediate 
consequences, and those wrong views which are regulated as to their 
results; (b) factors whose rightness is regulated as to their 
consequences—the four paths that are the unincluded; and (c) factors 
which are neither—all the rest. 

16. Factors (a) which have the path as their content, (b) which 
have the path as their moral cause, (c) which are dominated by the 
path. 

17. Factors which have arisen, factors which have not arisen, 
factors which will arise. 

18. Past factors, future factors, present factors. 

19. Factors with past contents, with future contents, with present 
contents, 

20. Factors that are confined to persons, factors that are external 
to persons, factors that are both. 

21. Factors whose contents are confined to persons, which are 
outside persons, which are both. 


DHAMMASANGANI 159 


22. Factors that are both visible and responsive, that are invisible 
but responsive, that are invisible and nonresponsive. 


Section Two: (The 100) Pairs? 
Part One: Moral Causes 


_ (0.1.2.1) 1. There are three moral causes of good (karma)—lack 
of greed, sympathy, understanding; three of bad (karma)—greed, 
hate, delusion; and three moral-causes of what is neutral—absence 
of greed, hate and delusion which are maturations of good factors 
or of inoperative neutral factors. Greed, hate and delusion are fully 
explained using many synonyms. The moral causes of the third, 
neutral sort are also identified as operative in the sensuous, material 
and immaterial worlds and the unincluded one. 

' The factors that are not moral causes are all factors except the 
four aggregates, matter and the unconditioned. 

2. The factors that occur with moral causes are the four aggregates. 
The factors that do not occur with moral causes are matter and 
the unconditioned. 

3. The factors that are associated with moral causes are similarly 

contrasted with those that are not. 
_ 4. Factors that are both moral causes and occur with moral causes — 
(essentially, those listed as moral causes of bad karma under (1) 
of this section) are contrasted with factors which occur with moral 
causes but are not themselves moral causes (viz., the four aggregates 
when they occur with the three factors mentioned). 

5. Similarly for factors that are both moral causes and associated 
with moral causes vs. those that are associated but are not themselves 
such, ~ 

6. Factors which are not moral causes but are associated with them 
vs. those which are neither moral causes nor associated with them. 


Part Two: Short Intermediate Pairs 


(1:1.2.2) (E244-246; T265-267) 1. Factors that have causal 
conditions vs. those that don’t (viz., the unconditioned). 

2. Conditioned vs. unconditioned factors 

3. Visible vs. invisible factors 

4. Resisting vs. nonresisting factors 

5. Material vs. nonmaterial factors 

6. Worldly vs. other-worldly factors 

7. Factors that are cognizable in one way but not in another—e.g., 
what is visually cognizable is not auditorily so, etc. 


160 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Part Three: Intoxicants 


(U0.1.2.3) (E247-249; T268~273) The intoxicants are of four 
. kinds: (1) the intoxicant of desire, i.e. sensual passion; (2) the 
intoxicant of rebirth, i.e. the.thirst for life; (3) the intoxicant of views, 
i.e. theories such as that the world is eternal or that it is not, that 
the soul is different from the body or not, or that the Buddha exists 
or does not exist after death, etc.; (4) the intoxicant of ignorance, 
ie. delusion. 

Nonintoxicant states are listed, as well as those that have or are 
associated with intoxicants and the permutations of those possibili- 
ties, parallel in manner to M11.1.2.1. 


Part Four: Fetters 


(1.1.2.4) (E249-254; T274-280) There are. ten fetters: (1) 
passionate desire, (2) repulsiveness, (3) pride, (4) (wrong) views, 
(5) perplexity, (6) perversion as to rule and ritual, (7) passion for: 
rebirth, (8) envy, (9) meanness, and (10) ignorance. These are 
explained. 

The factors that are not fetters, as well as those that are not fettered, 
along with those that are favorable to or not favorable to the fetters, 
are listed and permuted as above. 


Part Five: Knots 
(1.1.2.5) (E254-257; T281-284) The four knots are (1) igno- 
rance, (2} covetousness, (3) malice, and (4) perversion as to rules 
and rituals, all of which operate through the body. Factors which 
are not knots, knotted or not, associated with knots or not, are . 
permuted as above. 
Part Six: Floods 
(11. 1.2.6) (E258; T285) These are the same as the knots. 
Part Seven: Bonds 
(Il. 1.2.7) (E258; T286) These are also the same as the knots. 
Part Eight: Hindrances 


(III.1.2.8) (E258-262; T287~292) There are six hindrances: (1) 
sensual interests, (2) malice, (3) stolidity and torpor, (4) distraction 


DHAMMASANGANI 161 


and worry, (5) perplexity, (6) ignorance. These are explained, as 
well as the factors which are not hindrances, those favorable to or 
associated with hindrances and their opposites and the permutations 
thereof. 


Part Nine: Perversion 


(0.1.2.9) (E262-264; T293-294) Perverse factors are those 
involving (wrong) views. 


Part Ten: Large Intermediate Pairs 


(1.1.2.10) (E264-267; T295-298) 1. Factors which have a 
“content vs. have no content. 

2. Factors that are awarenesses vs. those that are not. 

3. Factors which are properties of awarenesses vs. those that are 
not. 

4, Factors that are associated with awareness vs. those that are 
not, 

5. Factors that are conjoined with awareness vs. those that are 
disjoined. 

6. Factors that have arisen from awareness vs. those that have 
not. 

7. Factors that come into being with awareness vs. those that do 
not. 

8. Factors that follow on awareness vs. those that do not. 

9. Factors that are conjoined with and arisen from awareness vs. 
those that are not. 

10. Factors that are conjoined with, arisen from, and come into 
being with awareness vs. those that are not. 

11. Factors that are conjoined with, arisen from, and follow on 
’ awareness vs. those that don’t. 
12. Factors which belong to persons vs. those that don’t. 
13. Factors which are derived vs. those that aren’t. 
14. Factors that are grasped at vs. those that aren’t. 


Part Eleven: Grasping 


(11.1.2.11) (E267-270; T299-302) There are four kinds of 
grasping: (1) of desires, (2) of views, (3) of rule and ritual, and 
(4) of the theory ofa self. The factors that are not graspings, favorable 
and unfavorable to grasping, associated with or disconnected to and 
the permutations thereof are set forth as before. 


162 — ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Part Twelve: Afflictions 


(1.1.2.12) (E270-276; T303-306) Ten bases of affliction are 
listed: (1) selfishness, (2) hate, (3) stupidity, (4) pride, (5) (wrong) 
views, (6) perplexity, (7) stolidity, (8) distraction, (9) lack of shame, 
and (10) immodesty. Then those factors which are not afflictions 
are listed, along with those that are associated with affliction, that 
are not, etc. 


Part Thirteen: Supplementary Pairs 


(HI.1.2.13) (E276-283; T307-313) 1. Factors that are to be 
eliminated through seeing vs. those that are not. 

2. Those that are to be put away by spiritual practice vs. those 
that aren’t. 

3. Those whose causes are to be put away by seeing vs. those 
not. 

4. Those whose causes are to be put away by practice vs. those 
not. 

5. Those accompanied by initial thought vs. those not. 

6. Those accompanied by sustained thought vs. those not. 

7. Those which are joyful vs. those not. 

8. Those accompanied by joy vs. those not. 

9. Those accompanied by satisfaction vs. those not. 

10. Those accompanied by equanimity vs. those not. 

11. Those that relate to the-sensuous realm vs. those that don’t, 
that relate to the material realm vs. those that don’t, etc., through 
the other two realms. 

12. Factors which lead on (to liberation) vs. those that don’t. 

13. Those that have regulated results vs. those that don’t. 

14. Those that have something beyond (or higher) vs. those that 
don’t. 

15. Those that are harmful vs. those that aren’t. 


Chapter Two: Suttanta Pairs 


(M.2) (E283-294; T314-333) 1. Factors that partake of under- 
standing vs. those which partake of ignorance. 

2. Factors that are like lightning vs. those that are like a thunderbolt. 

3. Factors that are childish vs. those that are erudite. 

4. Factors that are dark vs. those that are bright. 

5. Factors that conduce to remorse vs. those that don’t. 

6. All factors are expressible, explainable, designatable. 
. 7. Factors that are name (viz., the four aggregates and the uncondi- 


DHAMMASANGANI 163 


tioned) vs. those that are matter (viz., the four great elements and 
the matter that is derived from them). 
8. Ignorance vs. desire for rebirth. 
9, Views about rebirth vs. views about lack of rebirth. 
10. The view of eternalism vs. the view of nihilism. 
11. The view that the world and the self have an end vs. the 
view that they are endless. 
12. The view that what has a beginning has an end vs. the view 
that they exist in the future. 
13. Lack of shame vs. immodesty. 
14. Sulkiness vs. friendship with bad (people). 
15. Suavity vs. friendship with good people. 
16. Skill in (identifying the) offences vs. skill in gaining release 
from the offences. 
17. Skillin (identifying the),meditative attainment vs. skill in gaining 
release from those stages to go on to higher ones. 
18. Skill in the (identification of) the elements vs: skill in attention, 
explained as involving insight, etc.) to them. 
19. Skill in the senses vs. skill in the chain of dependent origination. 
20. Skill in identifying the causes of things vs. skill in what are 
not the causes of things. 
21. Sharpness vs. mildness. 
22. Patience vs. restraint. 
23. Courteousness in speech vs. considerateness. 
24. Lack of vigilance in the use of one’s faculties vs. lack of vigilance 
in what one eats. 
25. Vigilance in the use of one’s faculties vs. vigilance in what 
one eats. 
26. Forgetfulness vs. lack of comprehension. 
.27, Memory vs. comprehension. 
28. The power of calculation vs. the power of spiritual practice. 
29, Peace vs. intuition. 
30. The occasions for peace vs. the occasions for grasp. 
31. Grasp vs. steadiness. 
32. Deviation from moral rule defined as excess in word and action 
or both vs. deviation in view. 
33, Accordance with right moral rules vs. accordance with right 
views. 
34. Purity in moral rule vs. purity in view. 
A few technical terms from the sdatras are explained in the conclu- 
sion of this work. 


164 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
BOOK FOUR: ELUCIDATION’°® 


(IV) (E294-332; T334-344) Some 230 questions and answers 
go over in briefer fashion the same material as dealt with in the 
previous three Books. Kashyap provides in E a key to relate the 
questions of Book Four with the corresponding questions in the 
previous three Books. Mrs. Rhys Davids (at T335-344) provides 
two appendices in which she discusses differences in diction between 
Book Four and the prior treatment. 


VIBHANGA 


Summary by Karl H. Potter 


A text of the Sthaviravada tradition complementary and contempora- 
neous to the Dhammasargani, the Vibhanga has been edited several 
times: by Carolyn Rhys Davids in the Pali Text Society Series 55, 
1904, and by D.S. Mahathera and V. Sarman in J. Kashyap’s series 
of editions of Pali materials from Nalanda in 1960. This last edition 
is designated ‘‘E’’ in the present summary. ‘‘T’’ references are to 
the translation by U Thittila in the Pali Text Series, London 1969. 
According to Hajime Nakamura there exists a Japanese translation 
by Mitsuyu Sato in Nanden Daizokyo in 65 volumes of 70 fascicules 
(Tokyo 1935-41). J. Kashyap gives a 39 page English summary 
in his Abhidharma Philosophy (Sarnath, 1943). 

The word “* Vibhariga’’ means an analysis, and this work provides 
extensive analyses of many of the basic notions of Abhidharma. The 
work is divided into 22 books, titled ‘‘Analyses’’. In several of these 
books there is a division into a section which analyzes following the 
method of the sdtras, and one which analyzes according to what is 
termed the ‘Abhidhamma-method’. In some cases these two 
sections are followed by a third called ‘‘Interrogation’’, which 
consists of classifications into triplets and couplets. The style is 
question and answer as in Dhammasarigani,; again we make no 
attempt to reproduce or characterize this style.’ 


- BOOK ONE: ANALYSIS OF THE AGGREGATES 
Section One: By the Method of the Sutras 


(1.1.1) (E3—5; Ti-3) 1. The material aggregate is analyzed into 
(a) past, (b) future, (c) present, (d) confined to persons, (e) outside 
of persons, (f) gross, (g) subtle, (h) inferior, (i) superior, (j) distant, 
and (k) patent to awareness. The explanations provide synonyms 
for the description, indicating nuances of meaning. 


166 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(I.1.2) (ES-8; T3-6) 2. The aggregate of feeling is analyzed into 
the same headings, as are: 

(I.1.3) (E8-11; T6—9) The aggregate of identification: 

(1.1.4) (E1 1-14; T9-13) The aggregate of conditioning. 

(1.1.5) (E14-17; T13-16) The aggregate of consciousness. 


Section Two: By Abhidharma Method 


(I.2.1) (E17-20; T16-20) The material aggregate is explained 
following the classifications of Dhammasangani: first all the relevant 
classifications are provided (e.g. not moral cause, not accompanied 
by. a moral cause, not associated with a moral cause, is caused, ... 
is worldly, is the content of the bondage-breeders, etc. ...), then 
they are paired, permuted into triplets, quadruples, etc., up to an 
elevenfold permutation. 

(I.2.2.) (E20-33; T20-33) An even more complex method is fol- 
lowed for the aggregate of feeling, a series of ten permutations 
being repeated with variations several times, followed by a lengthy 
section of pairs and triplets of classifications, and in conclusion some 
classifications involving up to 30 or more possibilities. 

(1.2.3) (E33-45; 134-47) Similarly, the complex method is 
applied to the aggregate of identification. 

(1.2.4) (E45-57; T47-62) And to the aggregate of conditioning. 

(1.2.5) (ES8-69; T62—75) And to the aggregate of consciousness. 


Section Three: Interrogation 


(1.3) (E70-82; T76-88) The same information is now expounded 
succinctly in terms of contrasts drawn up by triplets, and then in 
a longer section in contrasts drawn up by pairs. 


BOOK TWO: ANALYSIS OF THE SENSES 
Section One: By the Method of the Sdtras 


(1.1) (E83; T89) There are 12 senses: (1) the visual-organ sense, 
(2) the visible sense, (3) the auditory-organ sense, (4) the sound 
sense, (5) the olfactory-organ sense, (6) the smell sense, (7) the 
gustatory-organ sense, (8) the taste sense, (9) the tactual sense, (10) 
the tangible sense, (11) the mind sense, (12) the dharma sense. All 
12 are described as impermanent, frustrating, lacking in self and 
changeable. 


Section Two: By the Abhidharma Method 


(11.2) (E83-88; T89-94) The first five sense-organ bases are 
characterized as organs which are responsible for our having aware- 
ness of asensory nature. The mind sense receives amore complicated 


VIBHANGA 167 


analysis into many permutations found in I.2.2, etc., above. Then 
the five senses (visible, etc.) corresponding to the organs are analyzed 
and illustrated—lists of kinds of colors, sounds, smells, tastes and 

‘touches. The dharma sense-basis (12) is analyzed as including the 
three aggregates of feeling, identification and conditioning, the 
female and male faculties, and the unconditioned element. 


Section Three: Interrogation 


(01.3) (E88-101; T95-106) Again, the information about these 
12 senses is now marshalled under triplets of classification, and 
following that under pairs. 


BOOK THREE: ANALYSIS OF THE ELEMENTS 
Section One: By the Method of the Satras 


(1.1.1) (E102—106; T107-110) First set of six elements: (1) the 
_ earth element, (2) the water element, (3) the fire element, (4) the 
air element, (5) the space element, and (6) the consciousness 
element. Each of the first five is divided into the type confined to 
persons (i.e. the parts of the body made of the element) and the 
‘type external to persons—i.e. objects. The consciousness element 
is divided into six varieties corresponding to the five sense-organs 
plus the mind. 

(1.1.2) (E106-107; T110-111) Second set of six elements: (7) 
the satisfaction element, (8) the frustration element, (9) the element 
of contentedness, (10) the element of depression, (11) the equani- 
mity element, (12) the ignorance element. Each is elucidated through 
synonyms. ; 

(1.1.3) (E107-108; T111-—112) Third set of six elements: (13) 
the desire element, (14) the malice element, (15) the cruelty element, 
(16) the renunciation element, (17) the element of absence of malice, 
(18) the element of absence of'cruelty. Again these are explained 
by synonyms. 


Section Two: By Abhidharma Method 


(I.2) (E108-—112; T112-116) There are 18 elements: (1) the 
visual organ element, (2) the material form element, (3) the element 
of visual consciousness, (4) the auditory organ element, (5) the sound 
element, (6) the auditory consciousness element, (7) the olfactory 
organ element, (8) the smell element, (9} the olfactory consciousness 
element, (10) the gustatory organ element, (11) the taste element, 
(12) the gustatory consciousness element, (13) the tactual organ 


168 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


element, (14) the tangible element, (15) the tactual consciousness 
element, (16) the mental element, (17) the element of factors, (18) 
the mental consciousness element. Items (3), (6), (9), (12) and (15) 
comprehend types of consciousness which depend on the relevant 
organ in each case. (17) is explained as comprehending the three 
aggregates of feeling, identification, and conditioning, together with 
invisible nonresponsive matter and the unconditioned. (18) is an 
awareness which arises immediately after a type (16) element has 
ceased (which in turn has arisen immediately after one of the 
awarenesses associated with a sense-organ has ceased). 


Section Three: Interrogation 


(00.3) (E112-125; T116-129) As before, classifications by 
triplets and pairs. 


BOOK FOUR: ANALYSIS OF THE TRUTHS 
Section One: By the Method of the Sdtras 


(IV.1.1) (E126-129; T130-133) The first noble truth, of frustra- 
tion, is explained as involving birth, old age, death, sorrow, lamenta- 
tion, frustration, depression, irritation, frustration that is connected 
with what is disliked, frustration that is disconnected from what is” 
liked, not getting what one wishes, and in short the frustrations arising 
from the five aggregates as objects of attachment. 

(IV.1.2) (E129-139; T133-135) The second noble truth, of the 
cause of frustration, is explained as stemming from desire which 
arises from and settles on things which are lovely and pleasant 
(examples of such things are provided). 

(IV.1.3) (E131-133; T135-137) The third noble truth, of the 
cessation of frustration, is explained as concerning the abandonment 
of the desire for those same pleasant things, which are again 
reviewed. : 

(IV.1.4) (E133-135; T138-139) The fourth noble truth, of the: 
path, is reviewed: right views, right conceptualizing, right speech, 
right action, right living, right effort, right mindfulness (lit., right 
memory), right concentration. 


Section Two: By the Abhidharma Method 
(IV.2) (E135-143; T139-146) Each of the key terms in the 


foregoing are explained and associated with other technical terms 
of the system. The process is gone through several times, each time 


VIBHANGA 169 


developing a deeper analysis of the components, e.g., of the cause 
of frustration, the nature of frustration, etc. 


Section Three: Interrogation 


(IV.3) (E143-155; 7146-158) The noble truths and their elements 
are now treated in triplets and pairs as before. , 


BOOK FIVE: ANALYSIS OF FACULTIES 
Section One: According to Abhidharma 


(V.1) (E155-159; T159-163) Twenty-two faculties are identified 
and explained: (1) the visual faculty, (2) the auditory faculty, (3) 
the olfactory faculty, (4) the gustatory faculty, (5S) the tactual faculty, 
(6) the mental faculty, (7) the female faculty, (8) the male faculty, 
(9) the life faculty, (10) the (bodily) satisfaction faculty, (11) the 
(bodily) frustration faculty, (12) the faculty of contentedness, (13) 

. the faculty of depression, (14) the faculty of equanimity, (15) the 
faculty of faith, (16) the energy faculty, (17) the memory (or 
mindfulness) faculty, (18) the concentration faculty, (19) the insight 

- faculty, (20) the faculty of “‘I am knowing what was unknown’, (21) 
the faculty of knowledge being perfected, (22) the faculty of perfected 
knowledge. 


Section Two: Interrogation 


(V.2) (E160-172; T163-179) Classification of these faculties into 
triplets and pairs. 


BOOK SIX: ANALYSIS OF DEPENDENT ORIGINATION 
Section One: By the Method of the Sdtras 


(VI.1) E173-177; T180-184) The twelvefold chain of dependent 
origination is set forth in terms of the causal relation between each 
member of the chain and its successor. Ignorance, then, is the 

‘condition of conditioning, which is explained to be of six sorts: (a) 
those producing merit on the sensuous level, (b) those producing 
demerit on the sensuous level, (c) those producing unshakeable 
results on the material level, (d) bodily conditioning, (e) vocal 
conditioning, (f) mental conditioning. The last three are equated to 
bodily, vocal and mental volitions respectively. Conditionings are 
the conditions of the six sorts of consciousness (corresponding to 
the five sense—organs and the mind). Consciousness is the condition 
for “‘name and form’’, where ‘‘name’’ is explained as the three 


170 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


aggregates of feeling, identification and conditioning, and ‘‘form’’, 
i.e. matter is explained as the four great elements and the qualities 
derived from them. From “‘name and form’’ the six senses arise, 
and from them contact (of senses with objects) arises. From contact 
feelings of the six sorts arise, and from these feelings in turn thirst 
for the six kinds of objects. From thirst comes grasping—of desires, 
of wrong views, of rules and rituals, and of the theory of a self. And 
from grasping come states of existence (of two sorts—those resulting 
from actions producing good, bad or unshakeable results, and those 
not resulting from actions, which occur in the three levels of sensuous, 
material and immaterial realms, which may be perceptual or not, 
and which may involve one aggregate, or four or five aggregates. 
From these states of being come (re)birth, and from that comes old 
age, death, sorrow, lamentation, frustration, both bodily and mental, 
and despair. 


Section Two: By Abhidharma Method 


- (VI.2.1) (E177-181; T184-189) This analysis considers the rela- 
tionships among the twelve members in terms of: (1) which are 
causal conditions of which, (2) which are the roots of which, (3) 
which are associated with which, and (4) which are reciprocally 
related with which. In this first section the dependent origination 
formula is repeated to show these relationships, and once more 
summarized. 

Itis perhaps significant that in some formulae of the present section 
the fifth member in the chain is not ‘‘six sense-bases”’ (sadayatana), 
but ‘the sixth 4yatana’’ ( sasthayatana). Furthermore, insomerehear- 
sals of the 12. members this fifth one is omitted. 

(VI.2.2) (E181-187; T189-194) This section resembles VI.1 
closely, explaining the key terms for Oe members and their causal 
relationships. 

(VI.2.3) (E187-192; T194-200) The same explanations are 
repeated, replacing ‘‘causally conditioned by”’ with “‘morally caused 
by”’ in the relations between successive members. 

(VI.2.4) (E192-198; T200—206) This time the connecting phrase 
is “‘associated with’’. 

(VI.2.5} (E198-207; T206-215) Hete the twelvefold chain is 
complicated by indicating that each of the members up to grasping 
is both the condition of its successor and conditioned by it. 

(VI.2.6) (E207—212; T215-221) Here the cause of ignorance is 
. located in bad factors, which are identified, and there is some 
modification in the items in the chain, specifically, desire leads to 
craving which in turn leads to resolve, which then leads to states 


VIBHANGA 171 


of existence. In another version feeling causes doubt, which in turn 
causes states of existence, while in the last in this section feeling 
causes excitedness, which causes decision, which causes states of 
existence. 

(VI.2.7) (E212-218; T221-228) From good factors the following 
chain ensues: conditioning, consciousness, name (but not form), the 
sixth sense (viz., mental-consciousness), contact, feeling, serenity, 
decision, existence, birth, old age and death. This chain is conditioned 
by good roots—absence of greed, hate and delusion. 

(VI.2.8) (E218-226; T228-240) Factors which are neither good 
nor bad, being characterized by neutrality, lead to the following chain: 
activity, consciousness, name, the sixth sense, contact, feeling, 
existence, birth, old age and death. This chain is then revised 
successively to include faith and/or decision as links between feeling 

and existence. 
_  (VI.2.9) (E229-232; T240-244) In this section good factors 
together with ignorance lead to the chain with variations involving 
faith and decision as before. 

‘(VI.2.10) (E232-235; T244-247) Here the condition for activity 
is the maturation of good actions. 

(VI.2.11) (E235-237; T247-250) And here the condition for 
activity is the maturation of bad actions. 


BOOK SEVEN: ANALYSIS OF THE CONDITION(ING) OF 
MEMORY/MINDFULNESS 
Section One: By the Method of the Satras 


(VIL.1) (E238-249; T251-263) The four conditionings of 
memory/mindfulness are: (1) contemplating the body, (2) con- 
. templating feelings, (3) contemplating awarenesses, and (4) con- 
templating factors. Each of these can be done with respect to one’s 
_ body, etc., another’s body, etc., or both. Contemplation is explained 
as involving insight. These contemplations should be undertaken 
while maintaining an appropriate posture, etc., and should be accom- 
panied by ardour and comprehension, without covetousness and 

. with contentedness. In each case one catalogues to himself, e.g., 
the parts of the body, the affective quality of feelings, the concomi- 
tants of awareness, or the presence of various factors i in oneself or 
others. 


Section Two: By Abhidharma Method 


(VII.2) (E249-252; T263-267) The practices described here are 
described from the point of view of the aspirant—he is in the first 


172 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


trance state and developing an otherworldly state through practice 
and slow acquisition of understanding. 


Section Three: Interrogation 


(VIL.3) (E252-254; T267-270) Triplets followed by pairs showing 
the properties and relations of the conditionings of memory/mind- 
fulness. 


BOOK EIGHT: ANALYSIS OF RIGHT EXERTION 
Section One: By the Method of the Satras 


(VH.1) (E255~-258; T271-274) There are four right exertions: 
(1) when a monk strives for the nonarising of bad factors that have 
not yet arisen, (2) when he strives for the destruction of bad factors 
that have already arisen, (3) when he strives for the arising of good 
factors not yet arisen, (4) when he strives for the development and 
completion of good factors that have already arisen. Each of the 
key terms in this account are then explained. 


Section Two: By Abhidharma Method 


(VHI.2) (E258-262; T275-279) As the previous section, with 
somewhat more complex explanations. 


Section Three: Interrogation 


(VII.3) (E262-263; T279-281) Triplets and pairs as before. 


BOOK NINE: ANALYSIS OF BASES OF 
' SUPERNATURAL POWERS 
Section One: By the Method of the Satras 


(IX.1) (E264-268; T282-287) There are four bases of supernatu- 
ral power: (1) the monk by exertion of desire gains concentration, 
and thus striving and conditionings; (2) he gains concentration, and 
thus striving and conditionings, by exertion of energy; (3) he does 
so through awareness; (4) he does so tfrough investigation. 


Section Two: By Abhidharma Method 


(IX.2) (E268—273; T287-293) This section stands to the previous 
one as VII.2 does to VII.1, i.e. it develops the same four bases in 
the light of the view of the aspirant’s progress. 


VIBHANGA 173 
Section Three: Interrogation 
(IX.3) (E273-275; T293-~296) Triplets and pairs. 


BOOK TEN: ANALYSIS OF THE CONDITIONS OF 
ENLIGHTENMENT 


BOOK ELEVEN: ANALYSIS OF THE FACTORS OF THE PATH 
Section One: By the Method of the Sutras 


(XI. 1) (E285-287; T308-310) The eightfold path (cf. IV.1.4) is 
‘set forth. 


Section Two: By Abhidharma Method 


(XI.2) (E287-291;.T310-315) The same, in light of the aspirant’s 
' progress toward and achievement of the first meditative state. The 
five consisting of right view, right conceptualizing, right effort, right 
memory, and right concentration are called the ‘‘path with five 
factors’’. 


Section Three: Interrogation 
(XI.3) (E291-293; T315-318) Triplets and pairs. 


BOOK TWELVE: ANALYSIS OF MEDITATIVE STATES 
Section One: By the Method of the Sutras 


(XII. 1) (E294-316; T319-343) This section opens with a lengthy 
description of the kinds of practices a monk should undertake to 
attain each of the four meditative states. The description ranges over 
~ such matters as how he should behave, from whom he should beg, 
_ what he should allow himself to see, hear, etc., what food he should 

eat, and how much, how he should be vigilant, mindful (exercising 
his memory), and insightfully aware, where he should sleep and how, 
the virtues of comportment he should cultivate, the kinds of mental 
_ States he should cultivate, the factors he should cultivate and those 
he should avoid. Having achieved the first meditative state by these 
means, he should now proceed to reflect with a joy and satisfaction 
born of concentration on what he understands, such concentration 
leading to the second meditative state. After this, he should practice 
means of concentration which will calm agitation produced by joy 
and satisfaction, and will lead to equanimity without losing what he 
Temembers and knows, thus attaining the third meditative state. 
Finally, by abandoning both frustration and satisfaction, his memory 


174 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


becoming unobstructed through his equanimity, he arrives at the 
fourth meditative state and dwells there, and having passed beyond 
perceptions of material form, of sensory objects, he achieves the 
state of spatial infinity, leading to infinite consciousness, leading to 
nothingness and finally passes on to the state which is neither 
perceptual nor nonperceptual. 


Section Two: By the Abhidharma Method 


(XI.2) (E316-323; T344-352) The explanation here starts by 
defining each of the four meditative states according to the good 
factors associated with them in the material realm. This is followed 
by a parallel account according to the good factors of the immaterial, 
and then according to the good factors of the otherwordly realm. 
Next, an analysis is conducted of the maturations associated with 
the first and second states in the material realm, and with the fourth 
state in the immaterial realm. Then a section on otherwordly matura- 
tions in the first two states, followed by a review of inoperative states 
of both material and immaterial realms associated with the first two 
' meditative states. : 


Section Three: Interrogation 
(XI.3) (E323-326; T352-—356) Triplets and pairs. 


BOOK THIRTEEN: ANALYSIS OF THE BOUNDLESS 
Section One: By the Method of the Sutras 


(XH. 1) (E327-332; T357-363) A monk dwells suffusing all the 
four directions by his volitional awareness associated with each of 
four things of unlimited scope, viz., (1) friendship, (2) compassion, 
(3) sympathy, (4) equanimity. 


Section Two: By Abhidharma Method 
(XI1.2) (E332-338; T363-372) These four things of unlimited 
scope are now explained in the light of the aspirant’s progress in 
the material realm and through all four of the meditative states. 


Section Three: Interrogation 


(XIII.3) (E339-341; T372-375) Triplets and pairs. 


VIBHANGA 175 


BOOK FOURTEEN: ANALYSIS OF SPIRITUAL TRAINING 
Section One: By the Abhidharma Method 


(XIV.1) (E342-348; T376-384) There are five precepts, involving 
abstention from (1) killing, (2) stealing, (3) sexual misconduct, (4) 
dishonesty, and (5) drunkenness. These are explained in terms of 
their associated factors. 


Section Two: Interrogation 
(XIV.2) (E348-349; T384-386) Triplets and pairs. 


BOOK FIFTEEN: ANALYSIS OF DISCRIMINATION 
Section One: By the Method of the Sutras 


(XV.1) (E350-352; T387-389) There are four kinds of dis- 
crimination: (1) as to results, (2) as to factors, (3) as to etymology, 
(4) as to awareness. In the present section these are applied to several 
subject-matters and the results identified. So: applied to truth, 
awareness of frustration is a (1), awareness of the causes of frustra- 
tion is a (2), awareness of the cessation of frustration is a (1), 
awareness of the way leading to cessation of frustration is a (2), 
awareness of the philological derivation of these is a (3), awareness 
of these awarenesses is a (4). Applied to dependent origination 
awareness of old age and death is a (1), awareness of the causes 
of those is a (2), and so forth. A monk is said to have discrimination 
when he knows the sutras, the discourses in prose and verse, the 
Passages beginning ‘‘thus it was said’’, the birth stories, miracle-sto- 
ries, and miscellanies, and understands and can explain the meanings 
of these passages. 


Section Two: By Abhidharma Method 


(XV.2) (E352-362; T389-401) Here the four discriminations are 
applied to a different set of subject-matters. A first portion applies 
them to the good factors, a second to the bad factors, a third to those 
that are neither good nor bad, and a fourth to those that are inopera- 
tive. The explanation is, as usual, in terms of the aspirant’s progress 

. through the meditative stages. 


Section Three: Interrogation 


(XV.3) (E362-365; T402-406) Triplets and pairs. 


176 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


BOOK SIXTEEN: ANALYSIS OF KNOWLEDGE 
Section One: Headings 


(XVI.1) (E366-377; T407-416) This section classifies all the 
kinds of knowledge mentioned in the Abhidharma system. First there 
is a list of these items, then they are summarized in pairs, triplets 
and so on up to a tenfold division setting forth ten powers called 
the ‘*Tathagata-powers’’ which enables the Buddha to take the role 
of leadership, ‘‘to roar the lion’s roar in the assemblies, and to set 
the wheel of Brahma rolling’. The ten things the Buddha knows are 
(1) causes, (2) results, (3) what comes about from (1) and (2}, (4) 
factors, (S) the various determinations (or natures) of beings, (6) 
the tendencies of the faculties of beings to improve or fail, (7) 
meditation, (8) previous existences of beings, (9) the nature of death 
and rebirth, (10) the intoxicants which destroy the defilements. 


Section Two: Exposition 


(XVI.2) (E377-408; T417-45 1) Following the same ten divisions, 
this section proceeds to explain the terminology used in the summary. 
The tenth portion is especially interesting once again, providing 
examples of the Buddha’s understanding instead of the standard 
review in the light of the aspirant’s progress, which is utilized in 
some of the earlier portions. For example, illustrations of what the 
Buddha understands about causes includes that a person ofright views 
cannot do or believe things which go against the teaching, whereas 
an ordinary person may; that only one, but not two, Buddhas should 
arise at the same time in the same world; that a man may, but a 
woman may not, be an enlightened perfected being or a universal 
ruler; that only good, not bad, results will accrue from right actions, 
and vice versa. The explanations under-(2) results include a series 
of exceptions to the regularity of the working of the karmic law, 
so that we are told that the Buddha knows that some bad acts do 

‘not mature because prevented by a favorable birth or body or time 
or effort, whereas other.bad acts do mature because these kinds of 
circumstances are unfavorable. 

Under (6) the tendency of the faculties there is presented a list 
of seven latent dispositions: the tendencies toward sensual pleasures, 
toward being repelled, toward pride; toward wrong views, toward 
doubt, toward hanging on to life, and toward ignorance. 

Under (7) eight liberations are distinguished: (1} one possessing 
matter sees material qualities (color?); (2) one not identifying 
material qualities as his own sees external things; (3) one becomes 


VIBHANGA : 177 


intent on clean things (through meditation); (4) one who attains the 
infinity of space by going beyond perceptions; (5) one who attains 
the infinity of consciousness by passing beyond (4); (6) one who 
attains the state of nothingness by passing beyond (5); (7) one who 
achieves a state that is neither perception nor nonperception; (8) 
one who attains a state where there is no perception or feeling. 


BOOK SEVENTEEN: ANALYSIS OF SMALL ITEMS 
Section One: Headings 


(XVII.1) (E409-414; T452-455) A list of specific vices is given 
here—kinds of things one might be proud of, such items as “‘vanity”’, 
‘‘foppery’’, “‘drowsiness. after a meal’’, not knowing who one’s 
betters (or inferiors) are, being moved by sympathy, gain, fame, etc., 
some 73 items in all. This list is then followed by portions in which 
pairs, triplets, etc., up to tens of such items are classified. A 
concluding portion details 108 kinds of thirst. 


Section Two: Exposition 


(XVII.2) (E414-479; T455+513) Each of these items is now ex- 
plained. So, we have here brief explanations of the three roots, 
the four defilements, the five defilements, six roots of contention, 
the seven latent tendencies, eight bases of corruption, nine bases 
of vexation, ten fetters—these being only one example from each 
of the portions. 


BOOK EIGHTEEN: ANALYSIS OF THE 
HEART OF THE DHARMA 
Section One: All-Inclusive Headings . 


(XVIII. 1) (E480-482; T5 14-516) Here are listed the five aggre- 
gates, the 12 senses, the 18 elements, the 4 truths, the 22 faculties, 
the 9 roots, the 4 nutriments, 7 types of contact, 7 types of feeling, 
7 types of perception, 7 types of volition, 7 types of conscious- 
ness—in short, all the factors of the system.* 


Section Two: Where They Arise 


(XVII:2) (E482-488; T516-523) We are now told how many of 
each of the above listed kinds of things are found in the sensuous, 
material and immaterial realms as well as in the unincluded realm. 


Section Three: Where They are Included 
(XVHI.3) (E488-491; T523-527) On each of the four planes, 


178 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
which of the items under discussion are included in which. 


Section Four: When They Appear 


(XVII.4) (E492-502; T527-538) Which of these items are 
present at the moment of conception in each of the four realms. 


Section Five: The Stages 


“ 


(XVII.5) (ES502-503; T538-539) Which are, and which are not, 
characteristic of each of the four realms. 


Section Six: Types of Birth and the Limits of Age 

(XVII.6) (E503-509; T540-544) 1. Three kinds of divinities are 
identified: those who are termed ‘‘gods’’ by convention, i.e. royal 
persons; those who were born gods; and those who became gods 
by purification, i.e. perfected beings. All three kinds of gods got 
their birth as such in virtue of moral practices and right observances. 
A catalogue of types of divine birth is provided. 

2. Age limit. The length of life of human beings (100 cara): and — 
those of various types of deities, calculated in terms of very marge 
numbers of years and eons. 

Section Seven: Things to be Understood, etc. 


(XVII.7) (ES09-511; T544—546) Which factors are to be under- 
stood, which to be avoided, which to be developed. 


Section Eight: Dharmas With and Without Contents 
(XVI1.8) (ES11-512; T546-548) As the title suggests. 
Section Nine: Which Factors Seen, Which Heard, etc.? 
(XVII.9) (ES12-513; T548-549) As the title suggests. 
Section Ten: Triplets, etc. 


(XVI.10) (E513-521; T549-559) Triplets and pairs. 


DHARMASKANDHA 


Summary by Fred Greiner and 
Karl H. Potter 


This collection of sdtras appears to be the earliest of the seven 
canonical Abhidharma works of the Sarvastivadins. Like the others, 
it is preserved in Chinese translation, specifically in a translation 
by the pilgrim Hsiian-tsang that was completed in 659 A.D. Jikido 
Takasaki has noticed Sanskrit fragments in manuscripts at Ujjain 
coming originally from the Gilgit area.’ It is printed as T 1537 in 
the Chinese Tripitaka. The Chinese tradition attributes the work to 
(Maha) Maudgalyayana, whereas Yasomitra ascribes it to Sariputra. 

The original of the headings utilized in the Dharmaskandha is to 
be found in the Chachakkasutta (Majjhimanikaya TW, 280-287). 
Fumimaro Watanabe compares the headings of the Dharmaskandha 
with those of the Vibhariga and the first 21 headings of the Sari- 
putrabhidharmasastra, noting the considerable matching of the 
headings despite their being ordered entirely differently in each 
of the three texts.’ 

Warder states that this text is parallel to the Vibhanga of the 
Sthaviravadin tradition and was probably elaborated about the same 
time as the Vibhanga, i.e. in the first two centuries after the Buddha’s 
parinirvana.’ Hajime Nakamura reports differing opinions among 
Japanese scholars, citing B. Shiio as thinking the text was composed 
at least 400 years after the parinirvana and Baiyu Watanabe as having 
it after the Sangitiparyaya and prior to the other Sarvastivada Abhi- 
dharma texts.” However, since it is known that passages of the 
Dharmaskandha are cited at least 15 times in the Sangitiparydya, 
we assume here that it was written just prior to the Sarigitiparyaya, 
around 300 B.C. 

There exists a Japanese translation by Baiyu Watanabe.> Jikido 
Takakusu has summarized the work briefly.° No translation into 
Western languages is known. 


180 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


_ Erich Frauwallner discusses the work in his Abhidharma-Studien,’ 
emphasizing the close resemblance of the treatment of topics in this 
text to that in Pali V/bhariga. Frauwallner believes that these were 
two versions of the very same work. 
The following summary is partly based on the material in Watana- 
be, Takakusu and Frauwallner. The summary of Chapters 2-—4 is 
by Fred Greiner. 


CHAPTER J: FIVE PRECEPTS OF SPIRITUAL TRAINING 


(E453c6-458b21) (The first fifteen Chapters of the work present 
an extended matrix comprised of ideas bearing on liberation.” In this 
and the succeeding chapters we are provided with a sutra-like text 
(referred to as ‘“‘scripture’’ by Greiner, below), followed by an 
‘explanation of each term in the text.) 

The subject of the first chapter corresponds to Book Fourteen 
of the Vibhariga. The five precepts require the adept to avoid (1) 
killing, (2) stealing, (3) sexual misconduct, (4) dishonesty and (5) 
drunkenness. 


CHAPTER II: CONSTITUENTS OF STREAM-ENTRANCE 


(E458b22-460a16) Scripture: At one time the Lord. .. said: There 
are four factors which should be cultivated with correct effort, viz., 
serving a good person, hearing the good dharma, thorough attention 
and practice of dharma and anudharma.’ 

Explanation: (A1) ‘‘Good person’’ (satpurusa) means the Buddha, 
one of his disciples or a person who practices moral precepts, the 
good dharma, the 37 limbs of enlightenment, etc.; is separated from 
bad factors of attachment, hatred, delusion, etc.; and can teach 
sentient beings. 

(A2) “‘Serving a good person’’ means to respect, do homage to, 
etc. such a person. - 

(B) ‘Hearing the good dharma’ means that the above-mentioned 
good person, in order to enlighten others, correctly expounds the 
four noble truths of (a) frustration, (b) arising, (c) cessation and (d) 
path by means of countless modes of expression, i.e. that (1) birth, 
old age, sickness, death, association with what is frustrating, separa- 
tion from what is satisfying, not obtaining what is desired, in short, 
all the five grasping aggregates are frustrating; (2) desire for rebirth, 
desire associated with delight, etc., in the past, present and future 
is the cause, source, etc., which can produce frustration in the present 
life and in the future; (3) the above-mentioned desire, etc., is 
destroyed, abandoned, etc., without remainder and this destruction 


DHARMASKANDHA 181 


is called refuge, without frustration, tranquility, most excellent, 
liberation, etc.; (4) the path which can destroy, etc., the past, present 
and future mass of frustration is correct view, aspiration, speech, 
action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness and concentration; and one 
delights in listening to, reflecting on, etc., this is good dharma. 

(C) ‘Thorough attention’’ means taking up, correctly considering, 
etc., the profound meaning of the good dharma, after having heard 
it. 

(D) ‘Practice of dharma and anudharma’’ means after correctly 
considering the meaning of the good dharma, one produces the five 
good dharmas which arise from departure from the household life: 
faith, effort, mindfulness, concentration and wisdom, cultivates 
these continually and with effort, and then enters the fixing of 
rightness (samyaktvaniyama = darsanamarga = entering the stream). 


CHAPTER II: PERFECT SERENITY" 


(E460a17-464c15) Scripture: At onetime the Lord... said: There 
are four kinds of perfect serenity which should be undertaken, made 
firm, etc., i.e. sérenity in the Buddha, the Dharma, the Assembly, 
and the moral conduct which is cherished by the noble ones.!° 

Explanatior. (A) ‘‘Perfect serenity in the Buddha’’ means, as the 
Lord has said: Here the noble disciples by means of the following 
characteristics bear in mind the Buddha as Tathagata, perfected 
being, rightly enlightened one, accomplished in the three know- 
ledges, well-gone one, knower of the world, superior one, guide 
of persons to be trained, teacher of gods and men, enlightened one, 
and Lord." 

(Al) ‘‘Here’’ means this realm of sensual desire, this world or 
the Jambidvipa continent, or this body; etc. or in this place where 
the Buddha, his disciples, sages, etc. are born; or in regard to this 
dharma which is taught, etc. 

(A2) ‘‘Noble disciples’? means those who take refuge in the 
Buddha, Dharma and Assembly. 

(A3) ““By means of the following characteristics they bear in mind 
the Buddha”’ means by means of the following aspects, modes, etc. 
they produce mindfulness, nonforgetfulness, etc., of him. 

(A4) ‘“Tathagata’’ means that from the night of his realizing 
perfect, complete enlightenment up-to the night of his entering final 
liberation ail of his teaching was true, without perversion, etc., and 
that he has seen by means of wisdom which is “‘thus”’ and according 
to reality. 

(AS) A perfected being is of two types: 

(a) The conditioned perfected being has obtained his fruit, the 


182 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


acquisition of that acquistion-force (praptiprapti), the 
adept’s faculties, powers, moral conduct, good roots, and 
the ten adept factors [the eightfold path constituents plus 
correct liberation and correct knowledge, etc. 

(b) The unconditioned perfected being has destroyed all the 
afflictions of passion, etc., transcended all destinies, attained 
liberation, etc. The Buddha possesses all these attributes 
and so is worthy of receiving the best clothes, food, homage, 
etc. 

(A6) “Rightly enlightened one’’ means that the Buddha possesses 
omniscience, understanding, etc., of the true nature of all factors, 
and can realize the four truths, the four fruits of stream- enterer, 
etc., and the six higher faculties. 

(A7) ‘‘Accomplished in understanding and career’’ means that the 
Buddha possesses the three knowledges of an adept, viz., knowledge 
of past births, knowledge of births and deaths of other sentient beings 
and knowledge of the destruction of the evil influences and practices, 
the adept’s restraints of body and speech, pure eating habits, and 
strictly regulated deportment. 

(A8) ‘‘Well-gone one’’ means that the Buddha possesses the 
faultless good dharma which leads to liberation, has destroyed all 
the afflictions of the courses of rebirth and like the past Buddhas 
has travelled the true path and gone beyond the world. 

(A9) ‘‘Knower of the world’’ means that the Buddha knows, sees, 
understands, etc., the world, i.e. the five aggregates, the five courses, 
the six sense-bases, the various places in the three realms and from 
what causes they are produced, etc. 

(A10) ‘Superior one’ means that among all sentient beings, those 
with no feet, two feet, etc., the Budcha is the best, most honored, 
etc. 

(A11) ‘‘Guide of persons to be trained’’ means that the Buddha 
employs three ways of training sentient beings which cause them 
to destroy all their afflictions, etc.: (a) mild— explaining good bodily, 
vocal and menial actions, their retributions, the good destinies (birth 
as a god or a man) and liberation, etc.; (b) strong—explaining evil 
bodily, vocal and mental actions, their retributions, the evil destinies 
(birth as an animal, hungry ghost or hell being), etc.; (c) both (a) 
and (b). 

{A12) ‘‘Teacher of gods and men” means that the Buddha is the 
best teacher, guide, etc., for monks, nuns, etc., and Mara, Brahma, 
etc. 

(A13) ‘‘Enlightened one’’ means one who possesses, produces, 
etc., the adept knowing, seeing, wisdom, etc., of a tathagata. 

(A14) ‘‘Lord’’ means one who possesses the superior good factors, 


DHARMASKANDHA 183 


has cultivated them, has perfected bodily moral conduct and mental 
wisdom, possesses infinite Tapa limitless factors and great 
majesty. 

(B) ‘‘Perfect serenity in the dharma’’ means, as the Lord has said: 
The noble disciples bear in mind the good dharma which is well- 
explained, present, non-burning, timely, conducive, open to all, and 
to be known personally.!? 

(B1) ‘‘Well-explained’’ means that four truths taught by the Buddha 
are true and not otherwise. 

(B2) ‘‘Presented’’ means that when one cultivates correctly the 
path of direct realization of the four truths, one enters into the higher 
realization of them [= the path of vision in this present life, and the 
same for the path of practice. ] 

(B3) Non-burning means that the eightfold path is without afflic- 
tions. 

(B4) “‘Timely”’ means that the eightfold path is so because if one 

‘cultivates correctly the path of direct realization of the four truths, 
just at that time one will enter into the direct realization of them, 
and the same for the path of spiritual practice. 

(BS) ‘‘Conducive’’ means that the cultivation of the eightfold path 
can lead to the direct realization of the four truths. 

(B6) ‘‘Open to all’? means that by cultivating the eightfold path 
one can know and see the four truths as they are. 

(B7) ‘‘To be known personally’? means that the Buddha and his 
disciples know, see, etc., the four truths by themselves. 

(C) ‘Perfect faith in the assembly” means as the Buddha has said: 
The noble disciples bear in mind the assembly, i.e. the Buddha’s 
disciples possess good mode of progress, straightforward mode of 
progress, proper progress, progress in dharma and anudharma, 
appropriate progress, progress in anudharma; they, the stream- 
enterer candidate, the stream-enterer, the once—returner candidate, 
the once-returner, the non-returner candidate, the non-returner, 
the perfected being candidate and the perfected being (thus, the eight 
noble persons) possess moral conduct, concentration, wisdom, 
liberation, and knowing and seeing liberation; they are to be offered 
gifts, given hospitality, respectfully saluted; they are supreme, a field 
of merit, and worthy of the veneration of the world. 

(C1) “‘Good mode of progress’’ means (a) by difficult practice 
one attains higher faculties slowly, (b) by easy practice one attains 
higher faculties quickly, (c) by difficult practice one attains higher 
faculties quickly, and (d) by easy practice one attains higher faculties 
slowly. 

(C2) ‘‘Straightforward mode of progress’’ means that the eightfold 
path is not circuitous, not deviating, etc. 


184 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(C3) ‘‘Proper progress’’ means that the eightfold path is fit and 
includes the 37 aids to enlightenment. 

(C4) ‘Progress in dharma and anudharma’’ means the practice 
‘of liberation and the eightfold path, the code of discipline and the 
restraint of the code of discipline, the bodily and vocal restraints 
and pure eating habits and the undertaking of these, respectively. 

(CS) ‘‘Appropriate progress’ means that the assembly has one 
moral conduct, one teaching, etc., for all monks and that the monks 
mutually greet each other, do appropriate homage, etc. 

(C6) ‘‘Progress in anudharma’’ means the practice of the eightfold 
path. 

(C7) ‘‘Stream-enterer candidate’ means one who has obtained 
the noninterrupted path, i.e. is capable of immediately realizing 
stream entrance, but has not yet destroyed most of the passion and 
hatred of the sensual desire realm and is currently cultivating the 
direct realization of the four truths. 

(C8) ‘‘Stream-enterer’” means one who has destroyed and 
completely known the three fetters, the view of the individual as 
real, doubt and addiction to moral precepts and vows, but cannot 
yet seek to realize the once-returner fruit. ‘ 
. (C9) ‘‘Once-returner fruit candidate” means one who is capable 
of immediately realizing the once-returner fruit, has destroyed most 
of the attachment and hatred of the sensual desire realm and is 
currently cultivating the direct realization of the four truths. 

(C10) “‘Once-returner’’ means one who has destroyed the above- 
mentioned three fetters and most of the attachment and hatred of 
the sensual desire realm, but cannot yet seek to realize the non-re- 
turner fruit. 

(C11) “‘Non-returner fruit candidate’ means one who is capable 
of immediately realizing the non-returner fruit, has destroyed the 
attachment and hatred of the sensual desire realm, and is currently 
cultivating the direct realization of the four truths. 

(C12) ‘‘Non-returner’” means one who has destroyed the five 
lower fetters, i.e. the three above-mentioned and the attachment 
and hatred of the sensual desire realm but cannot yet seek to realize 
the worthy one fruit. 

(C13) “‘Perfected being fruit candidate’ means one who is capable 
of immediately realizing the fruit of being perfected. 

(C14) ‘‘Perfected being’’ means one who has destroyed all of the 
afflictions in this present life. 

(C15) ‘“‘Those who possess moral conduct, concentration, 
wisdom, liberation, and knowledge and vision of liberation’’ are 
the non-adepts and adepts. 


DHARMASKANDHA 185 


(C16) ‘‘To be offered gifts’? means worthy to receive offerings, 
homage, etc. 

(C17) ‘‘To be given hospitality’’ means worthy toreceive offerings, 
ctc., because for even a small good deed done (for the assembly), 
one obtains a great benefit. 

(C18) ‘‘To be respectfully saluted’’ means worthy to be welcomed, 
bowed to, etc., by everyone. 

(C19) ‘‘Superior’’ means that among all groups the assembly is 
the best, most honored, etc. : 

(C20) ‘‘Field of merit’’ means that even if a small gift is given, 
etc., to the assembly, one obtains a great beneficial result from that. 

(C21). ‘“Worthy of the veneration of the world’’ means that the 
noble disciples should be honored by the world because they have 
practiced the pure path and possess the three pure actions (of body, 
speech and mind) which are venerated. 

(D) ‘‘Moral conduct cherished by the noble ones’’ means the 
undefiled bodily and vocal restraints and the pure eating habits which 
are cherished, followed, etc. by them. 


CHAPTER IV: FRUITS OF MONKHOOD 


(E464c16-465a2) Scripture: At one time the Lord... said: There 
are four fruits of the monk: stream-entrance fruit, once-returner 
fruit, non-returner fruit, and perfected being fruit. : 

Explanation: (A) ‘‘Stream-entrance fruit’ is of two types: (1) 
Conditioned means the acquisition of that fruit, the acquisition 
of that acquisition, the non-adept faculties, powers, moral conduct, 
good roots, the eight non-adept factors (= the eight limbs of the path), 
etc, (2) Unconditioned means the destruction of the three fetters 
(view of the individual as real, etc.), etc., and 88 latencies, etc. 

(B) ‘‘Once-returner fruit’’ is of two types: (1) Conditioned means 
the same as for (A). (2) Unconditioned means the destruction of 
the greater part of attachment, hatred, delusion, etc. 

(C) ‘‘Non-returner fruit’’ is of two types: (1) Conditioned means 
the same as for A. (2).Unconditioned means the destruction of the 
five lower fetters, etc., and 92 latencies, etc. 

(D) ‘‘Perfected-being fruit’’: defined at Chapter II, A S. 


CHAPTER FIVE: FOUR MODES OF PROGRESS 


(E465a22-466b14) This Chapter ‘‘is devoted to the mental expe- 
rience of an adept, as he proceeds from lower to higher stages 
of spiritual progress. In short, he acquires six transcendent 


powers.’’'¢ 


186 . ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


CHAPTER SIX: FOUR TRADITIONAL 
PRACTICES OF MONKS 


(E466b15-467c22) 


CHAPTER SEVEN: FOUR RIGHT EXERTIONS 
(E467c23-467c11) This Chapter corresponds to Book Eight of 
the Vibhanga. 
CHAPTER EIGHT: FOUR SUPERNATURAL POWERS 


(E471c12~—475e23) These involve the gaining of concentration, 
striving and conditioning through (1) desire, (2) energy, (3) aware- 
ness, and (4) investigation. It corresponds to Book Nine of the 
Vibhanga. 


CHAPTER NINE: FOUR APPLICATIONS OF MINDFULNESS 


(E475e24-479b23) This Chapter corresponds to Book Seven of 
the Vibhariga. 


CHAPTER TEN: FOUR NOBLE TRUTHS 
(E479b24-482a25) Corresponds to Book Four of the Vibhariga. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN: FOUR TRANCES 
(E482a26-—485b17) Corresponds to Book Twelve of the Vibhariga. 


CHAPTER TWELVE: FOUR BOUNDLESS STATES 


(E485a26-488b17} Corresponds to Book Thirteen of the 
Vibhanga. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN: FOUR IMMATERIAL STATES 
_(E488b18-—489a28) Also treated in Book Twelve of the Vibhanga. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN: THREE SPIRITUAL PRACTICES 
- OF CONCENTRATION 


(E489a29-491b7) These are (1) worship, (2) reverence, and (3) 
offering. 


DHARMASKANDHA 187 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN: SEVEN CONDITIONS OF 
“ENLIGHTENMENT 


(E49 1b8-494b end) Corresponds to Book Ten of the Vibhaniga. 
CHAPTER SIXTEEN: MISCELLANEOUS 
‘(E494c1-49 867) A long list of factors is divided into defilements 
and afflictions, and explained. The list closely matches the list of 
small items in Book Seventeen of the Vibhanga. 
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN: TWENTYTWO FACULTIES 
(E498b12-499c24) Corresponds to Book Five of the Vibhanga. 
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN: TWELVE BASES, 
(E499c26-500c25) Corresponds to Book Two of the Vibhariga. 
CHAPTER NINETEEN: FIVE AGGREGATES 
(E500c26-501b23) Corresponds to Book One of the Vibhanga. 
CHAPTER TWENTY: SIXTYTWO ELEMENTS 
(E501b24-505a8) Corresponds to the Vibhanga Book Three. 


CHAPTER TWENTYONE: TWELVE-FOLD 
_ CHAIN OF DEPENDENT ORIGINATION 


(E501b25-505a9) Corresponds to Book Six of the Vibhanga. 


4 


PUGGALAPANNATTI 


Summary by Karl H. Potter 


Another work in the Theravada Abhidharma list, it is likely that the 
Puggalapaiifiatti belongs to the same time period as the others 
reviewed so far, perhaps a couple of decades later. 

This work was first edited by Richard Morris for the Pali Text 
Society, London in 1883, and again with an edition of Buddhaghosa’s 
commentary by Georg Landsberg and Carolyn Rhys Davids in the 
Journal of the Pali Text Society for 1913-14, pp. 170-254. Still 
another edition is by Mahesh Tiwari, in The Paficappakarana-Attha- 
katha (Patna 1968). However, in the ‘‘E’’ references to follow we 
refer to the edition by J. Kashyap from Nalanda, 1960. The work 
has been translated by Nyanatiloka into German as Das Buch der 
Charaktere (Breslau 1980) and by Bimala Churn Law into English 
as A Designation of Human Types (Pali Text Society Translation 
Series 12, London 1924). It is this latter translation that is indicated 
by ‘‘T’’ below. There is also a Japanese translation by Tomotsugu 
Hiramatsu in Nanden Daizokyo, volume 47. The work has been 
summarized by Kashyap and by Tiwari in their respective editions 
above. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


(E1-18; T1-16) There are six kinds of nominal designations 
(prajnapti): (1) nominal aggregates; (2) nominal sense-bases; (3) 
nominal elements; (4) nominal truths; (5) nominal faculties; and (6) 
nominal personalities. There are 5 aggregates, 12 senses, 18 
elements, 4 truths, 22 faculties, and these are listed. The present 
work deals with the types of personality. 

The chapters take up the topic, grouping personalities by ones, 
twos, threes, etc., up to ten. In this Table of Contents are 54 classed 
by ones, 26 by twos, 17 by threes, 29 by fours, 14 by fives, 1 by 


190 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sixes, 2 by sevens, and | each by eights, nines and tens. To save 
repetition we shall omit a separate listing of these here. 


CHAPTER ONE: BY ONES 


(E19-28; T17-27) (1) A person liberated at times is one who 
experiences the eight kinds of liberation from time to time, and for 
whom through such wisdom some of his intoxicants are completely 
destroyed. 

(2) A person not liberated at times is one who experiences the 
eight kinds of liberation all the time, and whose intoxicants are 
completely destroyed. He is a noble personality. 

(3) A person of perturbable nature is one who enters the trances 
of the material and immaterial worlds, but with difficulty, much 
effort, and only occasional success; being subject to laziness. 

(4) A person of imperturbable nature enters the trances of the 

material and immaterial worlds easily and with complete success, 
not being visited by laziness. He is a noble personality. 
_ (5) A person of fallible nature is one who doesn’t achieve the 
trances of the material and immaterial worlds, or doesn’t succeed 
as he desires or as long as he desires, or has great difficulty, because 
of his laziness. 

(6) A person of infallible nature is one who achieves the trances 
of the two worlds as he desires, without difficulty, and as long as 
he desires, and is not lazy. He is a noble person. 

(7) A person who is competent in thinking is one who achieves 
the trances as above, but only when he wills to and as along as he 
wills to; whenever he is not willing he falls away from them. 

(8) A person who is competent in watchfulness is one who achieves 
the trances as long as, but only as long as, he is watchful. 

(9) An ordinary person is one who is not putting the three fetters 
aside. , 

(10) A person born of the lineage is one who has those factors 
which immediately proceed from the having of the noble nature. 

(11) One restrained by fear is one of the seven kinds of learners 
as well as ordinary persons. 

(12) One not restrained by fear is a perfected being. 

(13) One who is incapable of progress is one who is covered by 
karma, defilements and maturations, whois without faith, insufficient 
in desire, stupid, incapable of following the path of good factors. 

(14) One who is capable of progress has the opposite features 
to the above. 

(15) Those with a fixed destiny include five types going to hell, - 
eight types of noble persons, and persons with false views. 


PUGGALAPANNATTI 191 


(16) Those without regulated destiny are the rest. 

(17) There are four kinds of path-walkers. 

(18) There are four kinds who are fixed in the fruits. 

(19) One who is equal-headed is one whose life ends as soon as 
his intoxicants are terminated. 

(20) One for whom an eon endures is one for whom an eon that 
is scheduled to end continues on until he achieves liberation. 

(21) There are eight kinds of noble persons. 

(22) The rest are not noble persons. 

(23) A learner is oné of four kinds who follow the path or three 
who have the result. 

(24) A nonlearner is a noble person. 

(25) The rest are neither learners nor nonlearners. 

(26) The one who has three understandings. 

(27) Possessors of six superknowledges. 

(28) A perfectly enlightened one understands all the truths re- 
garding all doctrines as yet unknown, and has the power of the 
results. 

(29) A person enlightened for himself is one who understands 
truths regarding doctrines as yet unknown, but not all of them, and 
doesn’t have the power of the results. 

(30) A person liberated in both ways is one who experiences the 
eight stages of liberation and all of whose intoxicants are destroyed 
by his wisdom. 

(31) One liberated through wisdom is one who has not experienced 
the eight kinds of liberation but knows them by wisdom and all of 
whose intoxicants are destroyed. 

(32) An eye-witness is one who has both experienced the eight 
stages of liberation and knows them by wisdom and has some of 
its intoxicants destroyed. 

(33) One who has won vision understands the four noble truths 
and the Buddha’s doctrines and practices them and has some of his 
intoxicants destroyed. 

(34) The person liberated by faith is like (33) but his intoxicants 

‘ are destroyed in a different way. 

(35) A dharma-follower is one whose faculty of wisdom is deve- 
loping as a stream-enterer, who cultivates the noble path with 
wisdom. The person who has completed the development of this 
sort is the one who has won vision (33). 

(36) A faith-follower is like (35) except that he cultivates the noble 
path with faith. The completion of this cultivation makes him a person 
liberated by faith (34). 

(37) One reborn not more than seven times is a stream-enterer 


192 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


who has completely destroyed the three fetters; he will transmigrate 
seven times among gods and men and then his frustrations will end. 

(38) One who transmigrates from family to family is a stream- 
enterer who has destroyed the three fetters, who will transmigrate 
through two or three good families until his frustrations end. 

(39) A single-seeded person is a stream -enterer who has destroyed 
the three fetters and who will be liberated in one lifetime. 

(40) A once-returner is one who will only return once to the world 
before his frustrations will cease. 

(41) A nonreturner is one who has completely destroyed the five 
fetters which cause rebirth in hell and who has been reborn (as a 
god) without parents; achieving liberation in this state he does not 
return again to this world. 

(42) One whose final liberation will occur before the next life is 
a nonreturner before reaching the middle of his appointed span of 
years in heaven. 

(43) A term-curtailing decedent is a nonreturner who is in the later 
half of his appointed span in heaven. 

(44) An automatically decedent person is a nonreturner who 
automatically achieves liberation. 

(45) One who is liberated through effort is a nonreturner who 
liberates himself through effort. 

(46) A person going upstream to Akanistha is a nonreturner who 
goes from heaven to heaven to achieve liberation. 

(47) A person trying to destroy the three fetters is a path-enterer. 

(48 in E; 47 (b) in T) A stream-enterer is one who has destroyed 
the three fetters. 

(49 in E; 48 (a) in T) A person trying to destroy his attachment 
to the senses and malice is one trying to become a once-returner. 

(SO in E; 48 (b) in T) A once-returner is one who has succeeded 
in destroying attachment to the senses and to malice. 

(51 in E; 49 (a) in T) A person trying to destroy attachment to 
senses and malice without residue is trying to become a nonreturner. 

(52 in E; 49 (b) in T) A person who has succeeded in destroying 
attachment to senses and malice without residue is a nonreturner. 

(53 in E; 50 (a) in T) One trying to destroy attachment to the 
material and immaterial worlds, to pride, excitedness and ignorance 
is one trying to be a noble person. 

(54 in E; 50 (b) in T) One who has succeeded in destroying 
attachment to material and immaterial things, to pride, excitedness 
and ignorance is a noble person. 


PUGGALAPANNATTI 193 
CHAPTER TWO 


(E28-43; T28-39) (1) Angry and vengeful. Synonyms are provided 
for the two terms, as with the others below. 

(2) Hypocrite and quarrelsome. 

(3) Envious and selfish. ' 

(4) Crafty and deceitful. 

(5) Shameless and immodest. 

(6) Sulky and a friend of evil people. 

(7) With unguarded faculties and with unwise eating habits. 

(8) Forgetful and uncomprehending. 

(9) Infringer of precepts and holder of (wrong) views. 

(10) One with internal fetters and one with external fetters. The 
former’s fetters tie him to lower realms, the latter’s to upper realms. 

(11) Nonangry and unvengeful. 

(12) Without hypocrisy and nonquarrelsome. 

(13) Unenvious and unselfish. 

(14) Noncrafty and undeceitful. 

(15) Conscientious and modest. 

(16) Obedient and a friend to good people. 

(17) With guarded senses and wise food habits. 

(18) Alert and comprehending. 

(19) Observer of law and upholder of right view. 

(20) Two kinds of persons hard to find in this world—one who 
does good first and one who recognizes it. 

(21) Two persons hard to satisfy: a miser and a profligate. 

(22) Two kinds of persons easily satisfied—one who is not a miser 
and one who is not a profligate. 

(23) Two kinds of persons whose intoxicants increase—one who 
doubts where he shouldn’t and one who is not suspicious where he 
should be. 

(24) Two kinds of persons whose intoxicants do not increase—one 
who does not doubt where he ought not to do so, and one who doubts 
where he ought to do so. 

(25) Persons with low inclinations and persons with superior 
inclinations. 

(26) The to-be-liberated—viz., the perfected beings and the one 
who is enlightened for himself—and the liberated—the Buddha. 


CHAPTER THREE 
(E44-58; T40-54) (1) (a) A person is without hope whois immoral, 


impure, and does not aspire for liberation even when he hears of 
those who have attained it. 


194 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(b) A person is hopeful who is moral and who, when he hears 
of those who have attained liberation, hopes he may attain it too. 

(c) A person who has lost hope is one who, though he has himself 
attained those liberations that are gained through insight and thought 
and is thus without evil tendencies, nevertheless has lost desire for 
(final) liberation. 

(2) Three kinds of persons who are as if sick: (a) One kind of 
sick person fails to recover regardless. of treatment; likewise, some 
people fail to practice good regardless of whether they hear the 
doctrine, see the Buddha or not. (b) A second kind of sick person 
recovers regardless of his treatment. Likewise, there are those who 
practice good regardless of the doctrines and disciplines they may 
or may not have been taught. (c) A third kind of sick person depends 
upon treatment to recover. Likewise, there are those who require 
doctrines and disciplines in order to practice good, and for them 
the Tathagata has provided his teachings which should be imparted 
to others of this third type. 

(3) This triad consists of the eye-witnesses (1.32 above), those 
who have won vision (1.33 above) and those liberated by faith (1.34 
above). 

(4) (a) Foul-mouthed are those who lie. (b) Flower-speakers are 
those who speak the truth. (c) Honey-tongued are those whose speech 
is felicitous and attractive. 

(5) (a) Cancer-minded persons are those who are always out of 
sorts, full of anger and suspicion. (b) Lightning-minded are those 
who understand truly the noble truths. (c) Diamond- or thunderbolt- 
minded are those who have achieved the liberations of thought and 
wisdom with their intoxicants destroyed. 

(6) (a) Blind persons are those who cannot see their way to worldly 
success and cannot tell good from bad. (b) One-eyed persons are 
those who can see their way to worldly success but cannot distinguish 
good from bad. (c) Two-eyed persons can see their way to worldly 
success and can also tell good from bad. 

(7) (a) A person of stooping wisdom is one who, though he hears 
beneficial advice and doctrine, pays no attention to it. (b) A person 
of unawakened wisdom hears beneficial advice and doctrine and pays 
attention to it as long as he is seated, but having gotten up and gone 
away forgets it and does not practice it. (c) A person of abundant 
wisdom hears beneficial advice and doctrine, pays attention both 
during the discussion and afterwards. 

(8) (a) Persons who are attached to sense-desires and births include 
stream-enterers as well as once-returners. (b) Those who are non- 
attached to sense-desires but not to rebirths are the nonreturners. - 


PUGGALAPANNATII 195 


(c) The person who is nonattached to both sense-desires and births 
is a perfected being. 

(9) (a) Those like a mark on stone are those whose anger endures 
for a long time, like a mark in stone which is not soon eroded by 
wind or water. (b) Those like a mark in the earth are those whose 
anger does not last long, like the easily-eroded scratch in dirt. (c) 
Those like a mark in the water are those who, even though they 
speak harshly, are immediately agreeable. 

(10) (a) One like new but rough hempen cloth is the young Buddhist 
monk who leads his pupils astray through his immorality and lack 
of grace. (b) A middle-aged monk who does so is like a cheap older 
piece of hempen cloth, since his advice likewise leads his followers 
astray through his immorality and lack of grace. (c) A third kind of . 
monk is like the old tattered cloth that is used to clean the pots 
and then thrown away; his words are rejected by other monks and 
he is ousted from the community. 

(11) There are three kinds of Banaras silk—one new, beautifully 
colored, smooth and valuable; a second not new, though not old, 
of fine color, smooth and valuable; a third old yet beautiful and 
pleasant to the touch, used for wrapping jewelry and thrown into 
the chest. Likewise there are three kinds of monks—(a) those who 
are young, virtuous, an advantage to learn from; (b) those who are 
middle-aged, virtuous, an advantage to learn from; (c) asenior monk, 
whose words will be taken to heart as the cloth is placed in the 
perfumed chest. 

(12) (a) Easily measured is one whose speech and mind are proud 
and confused. (b) Hard to be measured is one whose speech and 
mind are to the point and collected. (c) Immeasurable is one who 
is liberated. 

(13) (a) One who should not be served is one whose ‘morality, 
concentration and wisdom are inferior, and should not be waited 
on except from compassion. (b) One who should be served is one 
whose morality, concentration and wisdom are equal to one’s own, 
so that discussion between them will be beneficial. (c) One who 
should be honored and served is one whose virtue, concentration 
. and wisdom is superior to one’s own, so that one can learn from 

him. 

(14) (a) One who is to be avoided and not served is one who is 
immoral, corrupt, for association with him will give oneself bad 
repute. (b) One who should be treated with indifference and not 
served is one who is easily angered, for the same reason. (c) One 
who is to be served is one of virtue and good disposition, for, even 
though such a one may hold a wrong view, association with him will 
still bring one good fame. 


196 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(15) (a) One who observes morality but whose concentration and 
wisdom are incomplete is the stream-enterer or the once-returner. 
(b) The person whose morality and concentration are complete but 
not his wisdom is the nonreturner. (c) The person whose morality, 
concentration and wisdom are all compleie is the perfected being. 

(16) There are three teachers: (a) one who provides understanding 
of sense-desires but not of objects or feelings; he has attained the 
meditative state in the material world. (b} A second one provides 
understanding of desires and objects but not of feelings; he has 
attained the meditative state in the immaterial world. (c) A third 
teacher sets forth understanding of all three—desires, objects, feel- 
ings; he is perfectly enlightened. 

(17) Another set of three teachers: (a) one who preaches eternal- 
ism; (b) one who preaches destructionism; (c) one who does not 
teach any real or permanent entity in regard to the present or the 
future life—this last is perfectly enlightened. , 


CHAPTER FOUR 


(E60-94; T55-88) (1) (a) Nota good man; (b) an even worse man; 
(c) a good man; (d) an even better man. - 

(2) (a) Bad; (b) worse than that; (c) good; (d) better than that. 

(3) (a) One whose dharma is bad; (b) one whose dharma is worse 
than bad; (c) one whose dharma is good; (d) one whose dharma 
is better than good. 

(4) (a) One who is blameworthy in conduct, speech and thought; 
(b) one who is very blameworthy; (c) one who is only a little 
blameworthy; (d) one who is blameless. 

_ (5) (a) One who understands the doctrine upon hearing it; (b) one 
who understands it upon analysis; (c) one who requires discussion 
and service to understand it; (d) one who will not understand it in 
this life. — , 

(6) (a) One who answers correctly but not quickly; (b) one who 
answers quickly but not correctly; (c) one who answers both correctly 
and quickly; (d) one who answers neither correctly nor quickly. 

(7) (a) One who in teaching the dharma speaks little and only what 
is irrelevant, so that the audience may fail to understand; (b) one 
who in teaching the dharma speaks little but what he says is relevant, 
so that the audience is able to understand; (c) one who in teaching 
the dharma speaks much irrelevancy, so that the audience cannot 
tell what the doctrine is; and (d) one who in teaching the dharma 
speaks much and what is relevant, so that the audience can under: 
stand. 

(8) There are four kinds of clouds, and four kinds of persons 


PUGGALAPANNATTI 197 


comparable to them: (a) those who speak but do not act, who are 
like a cloud that thunders but does not rain; (b) those who act but 
do not speak, like a cloud that rains but doesn’t thunder; (c) those 
who both act and speak, like a cloud that rains and thunders; (d) 
those who neither act nor speak, like a cloud that neither thunders 
nor rains. 

(9) There are four kinds of mice, and four persons comparable: 
(a) Like a mouse that digs a hole but does not live in it, a person 
who masters the doctrine in the scriptures (9 names listed) but does 
not learn from them: (b) Like a mouse’that lives in a hole he did 
not dig, a person who understands the doctrine even though he has 
not mastered the doctrine from the scriptures. (c) Like a mouse that 
lives in the hole he dug, the person who learns the doctrine from 
the scripture and lives it. (d) Like a mouse that neither lives nor 
digs in holes, a person who neither learns the doctrine from scripture 
nor understands it. . 

(10) There are four kinds of mangoes, and four persons compar- 
able. (a) Like an unripe but ripe-looking mango, some persons who 
do not understand the four truths behave as if they do. (b) Like a 
ripe mango which does not yet look ripe, a person may not look 
as if he does but actually understands the noble truths. (c) Like an 
unripe mango which does not yet look ripe, one may neither under- 
stand the truths nor look as if one does. (d) Like a ripe mango 
that looks ripe, some persons who look as if they understand the 


- noble truths do indeed do so. 


(11) There are four kinds of persons who can be compared to 
a jar. (a) Like a jar that is empty but covered, some persons who 
do not ‘understand the four truths behave as if they do. (b) Like a 
full and uncovered jar, some persons may not look as if they 
understand the truths but actually do so. (c) Like an empty and 
uncovered jar, some persons neither understand nor look as if they 
understand the truths. (d) Like a full and covered jar some persons 
understand the truth and look as if they do so. 

(12) Four types of persons comparable to a pool of water are 
distinguished: they are the same four kinds and distinguished in (10) 
and (11), but (a) is likened to a jar that is shallow but appears deep, 
(b) to a jar that is deep but appears shallow, (c) to a jar thatis shallow 
and appears to be shallow, (d) to a jar that is deep and appears deep. 

(13) There are four kinds of oxen—those that are a pest to their 
own herd but not to another, those that are a pest to another herd 
but not to their own, those that are a pest to both their own and 
other herds, and those that are pests to neither their own nor other 
herds. Like the first kind of ox is the person who creates trouble 
to his own congregation but not to that of others. Like the second 


198 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is the person who creates trouble to others’ congregations but not 
his own. Etc. 

(14) Four kinds of persons are like snakes—(a) like .a quick but 
not very poisonous snake, is one of quickly-dying anger; (b) like 
a poisonous but not very quick snake, is one slow to anger but stays 
angry a long time; (c) like a quick poisonous snake, is one often 
angry and for a long time; (d) like a slow nonpoisonous snake, is 
one infrequently angry and his anger does not endure. 

(15) (a) Some persons praise those unworthy of praise without 
examining them. (b) Some condemn those worthy of praise without 
examining them. (c) Some take satisfaction in what is not satisfactory 
without examining it. (d) Some find dissatisfaction in what is satis- 
factory without examining it. 

(16) (a) Some, after examining them, rightly condemn those 
unworthy of praise. (b) Some, after examining them, rightly praise 
those worthy of praise. (c) Some, after examining it, find dissatis- 
faction in what is not satisfactory. (d) Some, after examining it, 
find satisfaction in what is satisfactory. 

(17) (a) Some condemn what is unworthy of praise in a person 
but fail to praise what is worthy of praise in him. (b) Some praise 
what is praiseworthy in a person but fail to condemn what is not 
worthy of praise in him. (c) Some praise what is praiseworthy and 
condemn what is not praiseworthy. (d) Some neither praise what 
is praiseworthy nor condemn what is not praiseworthy. 

(18) (a) Some live on their present efforts and not on their 
(previously earned) merit. (b) Others live on their (previously earned) 
merit and not on their present efforts (the gods inhabiting the five 
pleasurable worlds). (c) Still others live on both present efforts and 
(previous) merit. (d) And still others live on neither (viz., those in 
purgatory). 

(19) (a) Some, such as Candalas, basket-weavers, etc., who are 
poor, ugly, and blind, and who do evil things, are reborn into misery, 
doom and disaster. (b) Some others of the same sort but who do 
good deeds are reborn into a good destiny. (c) Others, who are born 
of noble family, rich, good-looking but do evil things are reborn to 
misery, doom and disaster. (d) And others of that sort (like (c)} but 
who do good deeds are born into good destinies. 

(20) The above four types are also respectively like a person who 
stoops down and does not progress, a person who stoops down but 
progresses, a person who prospers yet doesn’t progress, a person 
who prospers and progresses. 

(21) Like trees, (a) some persons are weak (immoral) but sur- 
rounded by the strong (moral), (b) others are strong (moral) sur- 
rounded by weak (immoral), (c) others are weak and surrounded 


PUGGALAPANNATTI 199 


by the weak, and (d) others are strong and surrounded by the strong. 

(22) (a) One kind of person is satisfied by externals, (b) another 
satisfied by the words of others, (c). another satisfied by mere 
performance of austerities, (d) but others are satisfied by morality, 
meditation or wisdom. 

(23) (a) Some strive after their own welfare but not that of others, 

(b) others seek others’ welfare but not their own, (c) others seek 
not after welfare at all, and (d) still others seek for both their own 
and others’ welfare. 
' (24) (a) One type of person is self-mortifying (a long description 
of behavior indicative of this), (b) another kind torments others, (c) 
a third is both self-mortifying and tormenter of others, and (d) others 
who have heard or seen the Buddha are neither self-mortifiers nor 
tormenters of others (long description of the way of life of a Buddhist 
monk here). 

(25) (a) Some have not abandoned passion, (b) others still have 
hatred, (c) still others have delusion, and (d) others are proud. 

(26) (a) Some attain internal peace of mind but not wisdom, (b) 
others attain wisdom but not peace of mind, (c) others attain both, 
and (d) others neither. 

(27) (a) Some go with the stream through enjoying sensual plea- 
sures and committing sinful deeds, (b) others go against the stream 
through doing neither, (c) others having destroyed the five fetters 
become gods and are liberated in heaven, (d) others who have 
destroyed their intoxicants and who have achieved realization in this 
life are brahmins who have crossed the stream and gone to the other 
shore and are established in results. 

(28) {a) One who knows little and does not act up to what little 
he knows, (b) one who knows little but acts up to it, (c) one who 
knows lots but does not act up to it, (d) one who knows lots and 
acts up to it. 

(29) (a) The stream-enterers, who have destroyed three fetters 
and are destined for enlightenment, are called recluses with firm 
footing; (b) the once-returners are called ‘‘red-lotus-like recluse’; 
(c) one who has become a god through destroying five fetters is called 
- a “‘white-lotus-like recluse’’; (d) one who has realized liberation 
in this life is a delicate recluse. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


(E94-103; T89-96) (1) (a) One man does wrong and becomes 
remorseful but does not experience. the liberation of mind and 
wisdom, (b) another does wrong and does not become remorseful, 
(c) another does not do wrong and is nevertheless remorseful, (d) 


200 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


another does not do wrong and does not become remorseful, (e) 
but a fifth man, the Buddha, instructs all of them how to get rid of 
their intoxicants. 

(2) (a) One despises him to whom he gives, (b) another despises 
him with whom he lives, (c) another becomes infatuated with him 
of whom he speaks, (d) another has little faith, love or contentment, 
(e) and a final one cannot tell good from bad and is stupid. 

(3) Five kinds of soldiers who are like five kinds of monks: (a) 
one who, seeing a cloud of dust (i.e. merely hearing of temptation), 
sinks down and refuses to fight; (b) one who endures the cloud of 
dust but seeing the top of the flag (i.e. seeing a beautiful woman) 
sinks down and refuses to fight; (c) one who endures the cloud of 
dust and the top of the flag but on hearing the war cries (i.e. being 
spoken to by the woman) sinks down and refuses to fight {i.e. gives 
up the monastic life and returns to a householder’s ways); (d) one 
who endures the cloud of dust, the top of the flag and the war cries 
but is killed in the melee (i.e. consorts with the woman); (e) one 
who endures the cloud of dust, top of the flag, war cries and even 
the melee, wins the battle (i.e. follows the Buddhist path to enlighten- 
ment). 

(4) Five who live on alms: (a) one because of delusion, (b) one 
because of sinful desires, (c) one because he is mad, (d) one because 
he reflects, and (e) one who does so because his sins are 
eradicated but his life is needed. 

(5) Five who refuse to accept food after the proper time (as in 

(4)). 

(6) Five who use one seat (as in (4)). 

(7) Five who wear rags collected from refuse heaps (as in (4)). 

(8) Five who wear three garments (as in (4)). 

(9) Five who dwell in the forest (as in (4)). 

(10) Five who live under a tree (as in (4)). 

(11) Five who live under the open sky (as.in (4)). 
(12) Five who rest seated (as in (4}). 

(13) Five who dwell in a cremation ground (as in (4)). 


CHAPTER SIX 


(E104-105; T97-98) (a) The perfectly enlightened one, who 
understands the truths by his own effort and has omniscience as 
well as mastery of results. (b) The enlightened for himself, who does 
not have omniscience and mastery though he understands the truths. 
(c) A Sariputta or Moggallana, who ends his frustration through 
understanding the truths and becomes a disciple. (d) Other perfected 


PUGGALAPANNATTI 201 


beings, who understand but do not become disciples. (e) The 
nonreturner, who understands also. (f) The stream-enterer and 
once-returner, who do also. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


(E106-108; T99-102) (1) (a) A person of immoral qualities, once 
drowned, remains so. (b) A person who has good qualities but, having 
emerged from the water, decreases in morality, is drowned. (c) A 
person whose good qualities neither increase nor decrease persists 
after emergence. (d) A person who emerges with good qualities and 
destroys the three fetters becomes a stream-enterer; he looks around 
after emergence. (e) A person who emerges and not only destroys 
the three fetters but also destroys passion, hatred and delusion 
becomes a once-returner; he swims on after emergence. (f) A person 
who destroys the five fetters completely becomes a god and a 
nonreturner; he reaches a firm footing after emergence. (g) A person 
. whose will and insight are liberated, whose intoxicants are destroyed, 
is a true brahmin who has crossed to the other shore. 

(2) (a) A person who has experienced the eight liberations and 
has insight into them, whose intoxicants are destroyed, is liberated 
in both ways. (b) One who has insight into the eight liberations but 
has not experienced them is liberated in wisdom. (c) A person who 
has experienced the eight liberations and had insight into them, and 
some of whose intoxicants are destroyed, is an eye-witness. (d) One 
who understands the noble truths and who practices them, and some 
of whose intoxicants are destroyed, is one who has won vision. (e) 
One whois like (d), but whose intoxicants are destroyed ina different 
way, is one liberated by faith. (f) One who is like (d) but who is 
striving after the results of being a stream-enterer is one who 
conforms to dharma. (g) One who is like (e) but is striving after the ~ 
results of a stream-enterer is one conforming to faith. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


(E109; T103) The stream-enterer, the once-returner, the non- 
returner, and the perfected being are four who are on the path; 
and those four who achieve the results of each are four who have 
the results. 


CHAPTER NINE 


(E110-111; T104-106) The nine types are: the perfectly enligh- 
tened, the one enlightened for himself, the one liberated in both 


202 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ways, the one liberated by wisdom, the eye-witness, the one who 
has won vision, the one liberated by faith, the one conforming to 
dharma, and the one conforming to faith. 


CHAPTER TEN 


(E112; T107) Five who reach liberation here are: (1.37) the 
stream-enterer who will only have seven rebirths, (1.38) the stream- 
enterer transmigrating through a few families, (1.39) the single- 
seeded stream-enterer, (1.40) the once-returner, and (1.54 in E) 
the perfected being. Five who reach liberation after leaving this world 
are: (1.42) one whose final liberation will occur after this life but 
before the next one, (1.43) a term-curtailing decedent, (1.44) an 
automatic decedent, (1.45) one liberated through effort, and (1.46) 
one who goes upstream to Akanistha. 


SANGITIPARYAYA 


Summary by Christian Lindtner 


The Sangitiparyaya(SGP) is acommentary, belonging to the Sarvasti- 
vada school, on the Saigitisitra (SS), a sutra which along with the 
Dasottarasitra marks the earliest phase of Abhidharma in India. 
The SS is also extant in a Theravada recension (Sarigitisuttanta = 
Dighanikaya xxxiii) and a Dharmaguptaka recension (only extant in 
Chinese). These three recensions differ in a number of details. 

Apart from a few Sanskrit fragments the SGP is only available in 
a Chinese version done by the famous Hsiian-tsang. According to 
Chinese tradition SGP is a work of Sariputra whereas YaSomitra and 
Bu-ston ascribe its authorship to Mahakausthila. Along with the 
Dharmaskandha (which it often quotes) and the Prajfiaptisastra 
(which is later than the SGP) it comprises the earliest stage of 

. Sarvastivada Abhidharma. 

The Chinese text is Taisho (=‘‘T’’) 1536. Both SS and SGP have 
been édited and translated into German by Valentine Stache-Rosen. 
References in the summary below to this work are indicated by *‘E’’. 
Brief summaries of the work exist by J. Takakusu and S.C. Banerjee. 

Since the SGP usually follows the SS very closely in its structure 
and contents—it consists of ten sections (mipata) dealing with 203 
sets of different dharmas—the best way to treat it will be to provide 
a synopsis of these chapters and categories with an abbreviated 
paraphrase of the philosophically interesting parts of the commen- 
tary. 

Like most other Abhidharma works the SGP has little to offer from 
a purely philosophical point of view. What it offers is a sort of 
“‘soteriological ontology’’, i.e. it deals with basic ethical and reli- 
gious values from a psychological point of view. If the factors of 
existence are not related to this concern they are of no interest to 
our authors. On the other hand SS (and SGP} is of considerable 
historical interest. Along with the Dasottarasdtra the SS, as said, is 
an attempt to summarize all the fundamental concepts of Buddhist 


204 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tradition. In retrospect its manner of arrangement appears archaic 
and superficial. It is mechanical without any deeper formative princi- 
ple. Nevertheless the abundance of materials collected here provided 
later attempts at systematization with an indispensable background 
and inventory. The SGP in particular is not only the most extensive 
commentary extant on the SS but a mine of information about early 
Sarvastivada exegesis. To compare it closely with the corresponding 
Theravada SS exegesis as found above all in Buddhaghosa’s 
Sumaigalavildsini would throw interesting light on the individual 
development of these two early Buddhist schools. 

When commenting upon the SS the SGP sometimes merely gives 
brief or stereotypical definitions, sometimes it refers to or quotes 
other sources (mainly the Dharmaskandha or old sitras) and some- 
times it gives very thorough treatments. 


I. Section of Ones 


(T367al -369b9; E45-49) 1. All living beings subsist on nutriment 
of which there are four kinds: (i) edible, gross and fine, (ii) contact, 
(iii) representative cognition, and (iv) consciousness, All four are 
conditioned, impermanent, perishable, subject to change, produced 
by causes, invisible, impure and neither imperfect nor perfect. The 
rest of this section involves a long discussion of various subdivisions 
and peculiarities in regard to these four kinds. 

2. All living beings subsist on conditionings. They are likewise 
conditioned, impermanent, etc. Moreover they are material, in- 
dependent of mind and neutral. Again various subdivisions, etc. 

3. Not being careless in regard to good factors. 


Il. Section of Twos 


(T369b10-376a28; E49-63) There are 27 sets of twos: 

1. Name (nama), or spirit, and form (rapa), or matter. The former 
comprises the four immaterial aggregates, space, calculated cessa- 
tion and uncalculated cessation; the latter comprises the four 
elements and material forms derived from them. 

2. Ignorance—see III.3—and desire for existence, i.e. longing, 
craving, etc., for the material and immaterial elements. , 

3. (Wrong) view about existence and about nonexistence. The 
former consists in believing the ego and the world to be permanent, 
the latter in believing in their annihilation. 

4. Shamelessness and disregard. 

§. Shame and consideration. 7 

6. Sulkiness and indulging in bad company. 


SANGITIPARYAYA 205 


7. Suavity and being in good company. 

8. Skill in (discerning the five) offences and skill in desisting from 
these offences. The five offences are named as (i) adultery, (ii) leaving 
the order, (iii) natural falling, (iv) falling and (v) wickedness. 

9. Skill in (discerning the eight kinds of) meditative attainment 
and skill in desisting from these attainments. 

10. Skill in (discerning thirteen different) elements and skill in 
reflecting upon them. A monk understands that there are eighteen 
elements, six elements, etc., and reflects upon their being imperma- 
nent, frustrating, empty and without self. 

11. Rightness and mildness. 

12. Patience and good disposition. 

13. Courtesy and munificence. 

14. Mindfulness and comprehension. 

15. The power of calculation and the power of spiritual practice. 

16. Unguardedness of one’s faculties and intemperance in diet. 

17. Guardedness of one’s senses and temperance in diet. 

18. Moral disaster and theoretical disaster. 

19. Failure in morality and failure in theory. 

20. Moral accomplishment and theoretical accomplishment. (The 
opposite of II, 18) 

21. Purity in morality and purity in theory. (See 19 and 20) 

22. Purity in theory and thorough exertion of one having such a 
theory. 

23. Agitation over (four) agitating circumstances and thorough 
exertion of one being thus agitated. 

24. Discontent toward good factors and perseverance in exertion. 

25. Peace and insight. These two are inseparable. 

26. Knowledge—see III. 50—and liberation. Each is of three kinds. 

27. Cognition of destruction and cognition of nonorigination. 


Ill. Section of Threes 


(T376a29-391b10; E63-93) There are fifty sets of threes: 

1, Roots of bad things, viz., {i) greed, (ii) hatred and (iii) delusion. 
‘“‘Delusion’”’ is ignorance, e.g., of the past, the future, of karma, of 
the three jewels, of the four truths, etc. 

2. Roots of good things, viz., (i) absence of greed, (ii) sympathy 
and (iii) understanding. 

3. Bad initial thought of (i) sensual pleasures, {ii) malice and (iii) 
violence. 

4. Good initial thought of (i) renunciation, (ii) absence of malice 
and (iii) nonviolence. 

§. Bad conduct of (i) body, (ii) word and (iii) mind. 


206 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


6. Good conduct of (i) body, (ii) word and (iii) mind. 

7. Elements.of (i) sensual pleasures, (ii) malice and (iii) violence. 

8. Elements of (i) renunciation, (ii) absence of malice and (iii) 
nonviolence. 

9. Elements of (i) sensual pleasures, (ii) material form and (iii) 
immateriality. 

10. Elements of (i) material form, (ii) immateriality and (iii) 
cessation. i 

11. Periods, viz., (i) the past, (ii) the future and (iii) the present. 

12. Subjects of debate belonging to (i) the past, (ii) the future or 
(iii) the present. 

13. Classification of matter as (i) visible and resisting, (ii) invisible 
and resisting, and (iii) invisible and unresisting. 

14. Conditionings taking form as (i) body, (ii) word and (iii) mind. 

15. Awarenesses like {i) an open sore, (ii) lightning and (iii) a 
diamond. 

16. Persons of (i) stooping wisdom, (ii) wisdom like a pouched 
garment or (iii) comprehensive wisdom. 

17. Senior by (i) birth or rank, {ii} common consent or convention 
and (iii) character {dharma). 

i8. Groups (i) determined as falsehood, (ii) determined as 
righteousness and (iii) undetermined. 

19. Grounds of reproof based on (i) something seen, (ii) something 
heard or on (iii) suspicion. 

20. A Tathagata does not have to conceal any impure conduct in 
(i) body, (ii) words or (iii) thought. 

21. Desire for (i) sensual pleasures, (ii) form or (iii) formlessness. 

22. Desire for (i) material form, (ii) immateriality or (iii) extinction. 

23. Intoxicants (lit. “‘outflows’’ (asrava) ) of (i) pleasures, (ii) 
existence and (iii) ignorance. 

24. Longing for (i) pleasures, (ii) existence and (iii) a religious 
life. 

25. Existence as (i) the existence of sensual pleasures, (ii) the 
existence of material form and (iii) immaterial existence. 
_ 26. Obfuscation (tamas) concerning (i) the past, (ii) the future and 
(iii) the present. 

27. Fear of (i) disease, (ii) old age and (iii) death. 

28. Feelings may be (i) satisfying, (ii) frustrating or (iii) neither 
satisfying nor frustrating. 

29. Frustrations (i) consisting in pain, (ii) due to the conditioning 
or (iii) due to change. 

30. Kinds of conceit: (i) *“‘I am better than...,’’ (ii) “‘I am equal 
to...’ and (iii) ‘‘I am inferior to...”’ ‘ 

31. The fire of (i) attachment, (ii) hatred and (iii) delusion. 


SANGITIPARYAYA 207 


32. The fire (i) of being worthy of offerings, (ii) of a householder 
and (iii) of a good receiver of gifts. 

33. Occasions for good action are provided by (i) giving, (ii) 
following moral precepts and (iii) spiritual practice. 

34. Three kinds of rebirth in pleasure. 

35. Three kinds of rebirth in satisfaction. 

36. Wisdom derived from (i) traditional learning, (ii) reasoning 
or (iii) personal realization. 

37. Wisdom of (i) a pupil, (ii) a perfected being or adept and (iii) 
one who is neither a pupil nor an adept. 

38. The faculty (i) of coming to know the unknown, (ii) of knowing 
and (iii) of having fully understood. __ 

39. The eye of (i) flesh, (ii) the divine eye and (iii) of wisdom. 

40. The weapon of (i) learning, (ii) seclusion and (iii) wisdom. 

41. Training as to (i) morality, (ii) awareness and (iii) wisdom. 

42. Practice of (i) morality, (ii) concentration and (iii) wisdom. 

43, States that are (i) divine, (ii) sublime (brahma) or (iii) noble 
(arya). They are (i) the four meditational states, (ii) the four boundless 

things, viz., love, compassion, sympathy and equanimity and (iii) 
the four applications of mindfulness (see IV.1), the four right exer- 
tions (see IV.2), the four bases of supernatural power (see IV.3), 
the five faculties (see V.20), the five powers (see V.22), the seven 
factors of enlightenment (see VII.1) and the noble eightfold path 
(see VIII.1). 

44. Concentration (i) with initial and sustained thought, (ii) without 
initial and only with sustained thought, and (iii) without initial or 
sustained thought. 

45. The wonder of (i) supernatural powers, (ii) mind-reading and 
(iii) teaching. , 

46. Purity of (i) body, (ii) word and (iii) mind. 

47. Sagacity in (i) body, (ii) word and (iii) mind. 

48. Supremacy of (i) the world, (ii) oneself and (iii) the doctrine 
(dharma). 

49. The superiority of one’s (i) course, (ii) knowledge and (iii) 
liberation. 

50. The nonlearners’ knowledge manifesting itself in cognition 
of (i) former lives, (ii) decease and rebirth and (iii) destruction of 
intoxicants. 


IV. Section of Fours 


(T391b11-411c12; E93-130) There are fifty groups each con- 
sisting of four items: 


208 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


1. Application of mindfulness as to (i) the body, (ii) feelings, (iii) 
thought and (iv) concepts. 

2. Right exertion to (i) get rid of evil things, (ii) prevent evil things, 
(iii) engender good things and (iv) maintain and enhance good things. 

3. The four bases of supernatural power are motivated by (i) 
interest, (ii) energy, (iii) awareness and (iv) deliberation. 

4. The four stages of meditation. In the first, where the monk is 
free from desire and unwholesome thoughts, he experiences a 
solitary delight accompanied by initial and sustained thought, etc. 
(The well-known canonical phrases are given.) 

5. The four noble truths, i.e. the truth of (i) frustration, (ii) its 
origin, (iii) its cessation and (iv) the way. to achieve its cessation. 

6. The identification of {i) small, (ii) big, (iii) the boundless and 
(iv) nothing. 

7. Four boundless states, viz., (i) love, (ii) compassion, (iii) 
sympathy and (iv) equanimity. 

8. Four immaterial states, viz., the sphere of (i) spatial infinitude, 
(ii) infinitude of consciousness, (iii) nothingness and {iv) neither 
identification nor no identification. 

9. The four-fold traditional practice of a monk means that he is 
satisfied with any (i) robes, (ii) alms, (iii) bed and seat that he may 
get, and thaf (iv) he applies himself to abandonment and spiritual 
. practice. 

10. The four fruits of monkhood consist in (i) entering upon the 
stream, (ii) returning only once, (iii) returning no more and (iv) finally 
becoming a perfected being. 

11. The four signs of entering upon the stream are (i).the company 
of good people, (ii) listening to the true dharma, (ili) proper attention 
and (iv) behavior in conformity to Buddhism. 

12. One who has entered upon the stream firmly believes in (i) 
the Buddha, (ii) the dharma and (iii) the order. Moreover, (iv) he 
lives a pure life. 

13. Understanding of (i) the dharma, (ii) consequences, (iii) the 
awarenesses of others and {iv) convention. 

14. Understanding of (i) frustration, (ii) its origin, (iii) its extinction 
and (iv) the way of this. 

15. The powers of (i) faith, (ii) energy, (iii) concentration and (iv) 
wisdom. 

16. The support of (i) wisdom, (ii) truth, (iii) renunciation and 
(iv) inner peace. 

17. The main portions of Buddhism (dharmaskandha) are (i) a 
moral precepts, (ii) concentration, (iii) wisdom and (iv) liberation. 

18. Four attitudes to things, viz., deliberately to (i) use, (ii) endure, 
(iii) avoid or (iv) get rid of them. 


SANGITIPARYAYA 209 


19. Four items of Buddhism, viz., (i) noncovetousness, (ii) absence 
of malice, (iii) right mindfulness and (iv) right concentration. 

20. Things to be realized by means of one’s (i) body, (ii) recol- 
lection, (iii) vision or {iv) wisdom. 

21. One’s course may be difficult and result in (i) knowledge slowly 
acquired or (ii) quickly acquired, or it may be easy and result in 
(iti) knowledge slowly acquired or (iv) quickly acquired. 

22. Otherwise one’s course may imply (i) want of endurance, (ii) 
self-control, (iii) endurance or (iv) equanimity. 

23. Careful development of concentration contributes to (i) a 
pleasant life here and now, (ii) intuition, (iii) analytical wisdom and 
(iv) extinction of intoxicants. 

24. Actions may be (i) bad, (ii) good, (iii) bad and good or {iv) 
neither bad nor good. 

25. An attitude to the dharma may be (i) satisfying now but 
frustrating later, (ii) frustrating now but satisfying later, (iii) frustra- 
ting now and frustrating later or (iv) satisfying now and satisfying 
later. 

26. Bondage in the form of (i) sensual pleasure, (ii) existence, 
(iii) (wrong) views or (iv) ignorance. 

27. Separation from the bondage of (i) sensual pleasure, (ii) exist- 
ence, (iii) (wrong) views or (iv) ignorance. 

28. Four floods, viz., that of (i) sensual pleasure, (ii) existence, 
(iii) (wrong) views and (iv) ignorance. 

29. Clinging to (i) sensual pleasure, (ii) (wrong) views, (iii) moral 
precepts and rituals and (iv) beliefs in a self. 

30. Four knots, viz., (i) desire, (ii) malice, (iii) clinging to precepts 
and rituals and (iv) confidence in and clinging to ‘‘the idea that 
something is true’’. 

31. Four elements, viz., (i) earth, (ii) water, (iii) fire and (iv) wind. 

32. Four kinds of nourishment. viz., (i) gross and fine food, (ii) 
touch, (iii) representative cognition and (iv) consciousness. 

33. Four stations of consciousness, viz., (i) matter, (ii) feelings, 
(iii) identifications and (iv) conditionings. 

34. Four sources of desire, viz., (i) robes, (ii) alms, (iii) lodging 
and (iv) existence and nonexistence. 

35. Four wrong courses conditioned by (i) excitement, (ii) hatred, 
(1ii} delusion or (iv) fear. 

36. A question may be answered either (i) directly, (ii) with 
qualifications, (iii) after further interrogation or (iv) it may be left 
open. 

37. A gift may be pure on the part of (i) the donator, not the receiver, 
{ii) the receiver, not the donator, {iii) neither the donator nor the 
receiver or {iv) the donator as well as the receiver. 


210 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


38. The four grounds of conciliation are {i) liberality, (ii) kindly 
speech, (iii) helpfulness and (iv) a feeling of common good. 

39. Four ways of birth, viz., (i) oviparous creation, (ii) viviparous, 
(iii) moisture-sprung and (iv) spontaneous. 

40. One may obtain a body that can be destroyed (i) by oneself, 
not by others, (ii) by others, not by oneself, (iii) by oneself and by 
others or (iv) neither by oneself nor by others. 

41. An individual person may (i) follow the stream, (ii) go against 
the stream, (iii) rest in himself or (iv) have gone to the further shore. 

42. An individual person may be.concerned with (i) his own good, 
not that of others, (ii) that of others, not his own, (iii) neither his 
own nor that of others or (iv) his own as well as that of others. 

43. An individual person may {i) live in the dark and end in the 
dark, (ii) live in the dark and end in light, (iii) live in light but end 
in the dark, or (iv) live in light and end in light. 

44. An individual person may torment (i) himself, (ii) others, (iii) 
neither himself nor others or (iv) himself as well as others. 

45. There are four kinds of bad verbal behavior, viz., (i) to tell 
a lie, (ii) slander, (iii) rudeness and (iv) silly talk. 

46. The four kinds of good verbal behavior consist in abstaining 
from (i) lies, (ii) slander, (iii) rudeness and (iv) nonsense. 

47. Four ignoble modes of speech, viz., claiming to have (i) seen 
what one has not seen, (ii) heard what one has not heard, (iii) 
considered what one has not considered and (iv) understood what 
one has not understood. 

48. Four decent modes of speech, viz., admitting not to have (i) 
seen what one has not seen, (ii) heard what one has not heard, (iii) 
considered what one has not considered and (iv) understood what 
one has not understood. 

49. Four ignoble modes of speech, viz., claiming not to have (i) 
seen what one has seen, (ii) heard what one has heard, (iii) considered 
what one has considered and (iv) understood what one has under- 
stood. 

50. Four other decent modes of speech, viz., admitting to have 
(i) seen what one has seen, (ii) heard what one has heard, (iii) 
considered what one has considered and (iv) understood what one 
has understood. 


V. Section of Fives 


(T411¢13-428c15; E130-159) There are i groups each 
of five items: 

1. Five aggregates, viz., (i) the body, (ii) eaitries! (iii) identifica- 
tions, (iv) conditionings and (v) consciousness. 


SANGITIPARYAYA 211 


2. Five groups of grasping: as above. 

3, Five sensous constituents, viz., those objects that may be 
discerned by means of (i) the eyes, (ii) the ears, (iii) the nose, (iv) 
the tongue or (v) the body. 

4. Selfishness in regard to one’s (i) lodging, (ii) supporting family, 
(iii) beauty, (iv) gain and (v) the dharma. 

5. Five kinds of rebirth, viz., (i) in hell, (ii) as an animal, (iii) as 
a hungry ghost, (iv) as a human being or (v) as a god. 

6. Five obstructions in the form of (i) longing for sensual pleasures, 
(ii)-ill-will, (iii) torpor, (iv) worry and (¥) wavering. 

7, Barrenness of mind consists in a monk’s lack of belief in (i) 
the Buddha, (ii) the teaching, (iii) the instruction, (iv) the obligations 
and (v) the authoritative masters. 

8. The five bondages of the mind are, briefly stated, a monk’s 
(i) passion for his own person, (ii) passion for pleasure, (iii) passion 
for company, (iv) lack of interest in listening to the dharma and (v) 
his being satisfied by having made a minor spiritual progress. 

9. Five fetters belonging to the lower world, viz., (i) longing for 
pleasure, (ii) malice, (iii) belief in one’s own ego, (iv) clinging to 
precepts and rituals and (v) wavering. 

10. Five fetters belonging to the upper world, viz., (i) attachment 
to matter (or form), (ii) attachment to immateriality (or form- 
lessness), (iii) excitedness, (iv) pride and (v) ignorance. 

11. Five disadvantages of being impatient, viz., one becomes (i) 
violent, (ii) unhappy and (iii) unpopular, and one gets a bad (iv) 
reputation and (v) rebirth. 

12. Five advantages of being patient: one is not (i) violent, (ii) 
unhappy or (iii) unpopular, but gets a good (iv) reputation and (v) 
rebirth. ; 

13. The loss of one’s (i) relatives, (ii) possessions, (iii) good health, 
(iv) good morals and of one’s (v) opinions. 

14. The blessing of having (i) relatives, etc., as above. 

15. An admonition may be (i) at the right or wrong time, (ii) true 
or false, (ii) useful or not useful, (iv) mild or rude or (v) compassionate 
or full of hate. 

16. It is an impossibility that a pious monk (i) kills, (ii) steals, 
(iii) has sexual intercourse, (iv) tells a lie or (v) enjoys what does 
not belong to him. 

17.:There are five virtues of a monk exerting himself, (i) faith, 
(ii) honesty, (iii) good health, (iv) manly vigor and (v) wisdom. 

18. Five identifications that lead to emancipation, viz., that of (i) 
impermanence, (ii) the impermanent being painful, (iii) there being 
no self, (iv) food being repugnant and that of (v) death. 

19. There are five bases of emancipation, (i) hearing the dharma 


212 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


taught by the teacher, (ii) reciting it, (iii) preaching it oneself, (iv) 
pondering over it or (v) understanding it. 

20. Five faculties, as IV. 15 (q.v.) adding mindfulness as the third. 

21. Five other faculties, viz., that of (i) satisfaction, (ii) frustration, 
(iii) joy, (iv) distress and (v) equanimity. 

22. Five powers, as in V. 20. 

23. The five kinds of nonreturners are those who pass into final 
extinction (i) in an intermediate state of existence, (ii) after having 
been reborn, (iii) with effort, (iv) without effort and (v) those who 
are going upwards to Akanistha in the stream. 

24. There are five kinds of gods having pure abodes, viz., (i) the 
Avrhas, (ii) the Atapas, (iii) the Sudrsas, (iv) the Sudarsanas and 
(v) the Akanisthas. 

25. There are five basic elements tending to deliverance, viz., to 
' put it briefly, giving up (i) sensual pleasures, (ii) malice and non- 
malice, (iii) violence.and nonviolence, (iv) form and formlessness 
and (v) individuality and extinction of individuality. 


VI. Section of Sixes 


(T428c16-435a3; E160-175) There are twentyfour groups each 
of six items: 

1. The internal sense-bases of contact, viz., (i) eyes, (ii) ears, (iii) 
nose, (iv) tongue, (v) body and (vi) mind. 

2. The external sense-bases of contact, viz., (i) visible matter, (ii) 
sounds, (iii) smell, (iv) taste, (v) the tangible and (vi) concepts. 

3. The six kinds of consciousness depend on (i) the eyes, (ii) the 
ears, (iii) the nose, (iv) the tongue, (v) the (skin of the) body and 
on (vi) the mind. 

4, The six kinds of contact depend on (i) the eyes, etc., as above. 

5. The six kinds of feeling arise from contact with (i) the eyes, 
etc., as above. 

6. The six kinds of identification arise from contact with (i) the 
eyes, etc., as above. 

7, The six kinds of volition arise from contact with (i) the eyes, 
etc., as above. 

8. The six kinds of desire arise from contact with (i) the eyes, 
etc., as above. 

9. It is disadvantageous to show disrespect to (i) the Buddha, (ii) 
the dharma, (iii) the order, (iv) the training precepts, and it is 
disadvantageous to be (v) sulky or (vi) have bad friends. 

10. It is advantageous to show respect to (i) the Buddha, (ii) the 
dharma, (iii) the order, and it is advantageous to be (v) affable ‘and 
(vi) have good friends. 


SANGITIPARYAYA 213 


11. The six ponderings involving contentedness are concerned with 
(i} visible forms, (ii) sounds, (iii) odors, (iv) tastes, (v) tangibles and 
(vi) concepts. 

12. The six ponderings involving depression are concerned with 
(i) visible forms, etc., as above. 

13. The six ponderings involving equanimity are concerned with 
(i) visible forms, etc., as above. 

14. The six attitudes of perseverance are expressed in a monk’s 
equanimity and mindfulness towards (i) visible forms, etc., as above. 

15. The six elements are (i) earth, (ii) water, (iii) fire, (iv) wind, 
(v) space and (vi) consciousness. 

16. The six factors leading to liberation are expressed in a monk’s 
getting rid of (i) malevolence, (ii) injury, (iii) disgust, (iv) longing 
for pleasure, (v) consciousness following outward signs, and (vi) 
belief in an ego. 

17. The six roots of contention are expressed i in-a monk’s being 
(i) angry and grudging, (ii) unfair and hypocritical, (iii) envious and 
mean, (iv) deceitful and crafty, (v) full of wrong and false views, 
and (vi) tenaciously attached to his own persuasions. 

18. The six principles of fraternal living consist ina monk’s showing 
kindness (i) in deeds, (ii) in speech, (iii) in thoughts and in (iv) sharing 
gifts that one has received, (v) practising good morals and (vi) living 
according to orthodox views. 

19. The six higher faculties consist in (i) supernatural power, {ii) 
divine audition, (iii) reading the thoughts of others, (iv) knowing one’s 
previous incarnations, (v) knowing decease and rebirth and (vi) 
knowing the destruction of evil influences. 

20. The six identifications contributing to knowledge refer to one’s 
understanding of (i) impermanence, (ii) impermanence as frustrating, 
(iii) lack of self as frustrating, (iv) food as disgusting, (v) the entire 
world as lacking delight, and (vi) death. 

21. The six things to be recollected are (i) the Buddha, {ii) the 
dharma, (iii) the order, (iv) the moral precepts, (v) renunciation and 
(vi) the gods. 

22. The six superiorities consist in (i) seeing, (ii) listening, (iii) 
gain, (iv) discipline, (v) serving and (vi) recollecting. 

23. There are six kinds of longing for (i) matter, (ii) sounds, (iii) 
smell, (iv) taste, (v) tangibles and (vi) concepts. 

24. There are six modes of heredity: (i) a person of bad descent 
doing bad things, (ii) a person of bad descent doing good things, 
(iii) a bad person creating extinction that is neither bad nor good, 
(iv) a good person creating bad things, (v) a good person creating 
good things, and (vi) a good person creating extinction that is neither 
bad nor good. 


214 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


VI. Sets of Sevens 


(T435a4-440c22; E175-187) There are thirteen groups each of 
seven items: 

1. The factors of enlightenment, viz., (i) mindfulness, (ii) analysis 
of the doctrine, (iii) energy, (iv) joy, (v) serenity, (vi) concentration 
and (vii) equanimity. 

2. There are seven kinds of persons, viz., (i) the follower of 
confidence, (ii) the follower of the dharma, (iti) the one freed by 
confidence, (iv) the one who has won the right view, (v) one who 
has bodily testimony, (vi) one freed by insight, and (vii) one freed 
in both ways. 

3. The seven requisites of concentration are: correct (i) view, (ii) 
resolve, (iii) speech, {iv) action, (v) way of life, (vi) effort and (vii) 
mindfulness. 

4. The seven treasures. are: (i) faith, (ii) good morals, (iii) bash- 
fulness, (iv) modesty, (v) learning, (vi) renunciation and (vii) wisdom. 

5. The seven powers are those of (i) faith, (ii) energy, (iii) 
bashfulness, (iv) modesty, (v) mindfulness, (vi) concentration and 
(vii) wisdom. 

6. There are seven bad qualities, viz. ., (i) want of faith, (ii) 
unconscientiousness, (iii) indiscretion, (iv) want of learning, (v) 
slackness, (vi) muddleheadedness and (vii) lack of wisdom. 

7. There are seven good qualities, viz., (i) faith, (ii) shame, (iii) 
modesty, (iv) energy, (v) mindfulness, (vi) concentration and (vii) 
wisdom. 

8. The seven bad qualities are: not to know (i) the dharma, (ii) 
the meaning of what is said, (iii) the right time, (iv) the right measure, 
(v) oneself, (vi) the audience, and not to know (vii) whether a person 
is eminent or mean. 

9. The seven good qualities are: to know (i) the dharma, etc., as 
above. 

10. There are seven states of consciousness, viz., physical beings 
(i) diverse in body and in identification, (ii) diverse in body but 
uniform in identification, (iii) uniform in body but diverse in identifi- 
cation, and (iv) uniform in body and uniform in identification. 
Moreover there are immaterial beings who dwell in the realm of (v) 
infinite space, (vi) infinite consciousness, or (vii) nothingness. 

11. The seven kinds of latent dispositions are (i) sensual passion, 
(ii) enmity, (iii) lust for rebirth, (iv) conceit, (v) ignorance, (vi) false 
opinion, and (vii) doubt. 

12. The seven faultless attitudes are, to put it briefly, to have (i) 
faith, (ii) good morals, (iii) good friends. Moreover, (iv) to enjoy 


SANGITIPARYAYA 215 


Solitude and to have (v) energy, (vi) mindfulness and (vii) wisdom. 

13. There are seven ways for the settlement of cases: (i) by 
confronting both parties, (ii) when the accused is a victim of amnesia, 
(iii) when the prosecuted has regained his sanity, (iv) by checking 
the character of the prosecuted, (v) on majority vote, (vi) confession 
of guilt, or (vii) by ‘‘covering with grass’, ie. by reaching a compro- 
mise. 


VII. Section of Eights 


(T440c23-445b14; E187-199) There are ten groups each of eight 
items: 

1. Eight factors of the noble way, viz., the correct (i) view, (ii) 
intention, (iii) speech, (iv) action, (v) livelihood, (vi) effort, (vii) 
mindfulness and (viii) concentration. 

2. The eight persons are those who have (i) entered the stream, 
(ii) work for the fruit of stream-entry, those who are (iii) once- 
returners, (iv) work for the fruit of a once-returner, those who are 
(v) never-returners, (vi) work for the fruit of a never-returner, and 
those who are (vii) perfected beings, and those who (viii) work for 
the fruit of a perfected being. 

3. There are eight ways of giving gifts: (i) disrespectfully, (ii) from 
fear, (iii) from gratitude, (iv) in the hope of getting something in 
return in the future, (v) to follow up the family tradition, (vi) for 
fame, (vii) to be reborn in heaven, or (viii) to adorn and prepare 
one’s mind for the highest good. 

4. The eight instances of sloth occur, to put it briefly, when amonk 
(i) has done a little but is too lazy to do more, {ii) has done something 
but is too lazy to do more, (iii) has done his work but is too tired 
to do more, (iv) is too lazy to work the next day, (v) is too tired 
to continue his journey the same day, (vi) is too tired to continue 
his journey the next day, (vii) is too ill to work hard, or (viii) has 
recovered from his illness but still is too lazy to do his work. 

5. The eight instances of hard work: the opposite of the above. 

6. Meritorious deeds result in good rebirth as (i) a wealthy person 
or as a god, be it a (ii) Mah@rajika, (iii) a Trayastrimsa, (iv) a Yama, 
(v) a Tusita, (vi) a Nirmanarati, (vii) a Paranirmitavasavarti, or (viii) 
a BrahmakAyika god. 

7. The eight assemblies consists of (i) nobles, (ii) brahmins, (iii) 
householders, (iv) ascetics, (v) Caturmaharajakaéyika gods, (vi) 
TrayastrimSa gods, (vii) Maras and (viii) Brahmas. 

8. There are eight guiding principles in society, viz., (i) gain, (ii) 
loss, (iii) blame, (iv) praise, (v) fame, (vi) disgrace, (vii) frustration 
and (viii) satisfaction. 


216 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


9. The eight liberations are described at length in the usual cliche, 
see e.g., Dighanikaya Ill, p. 261. 

10. The eight positions of mastery are also described at length 
in the standard cliche, see e.g., Dighanikaya Ill, p. 260. 


IX. Section of Nines 


(T445b15-447a1 7; E199-203) There are two groups each of nine 
items: 

1. The nine fetters, viz., (i) attraction, (ii) repugnance, (iii) seven 
kinds of conceit, (iv) ignorance, (v) dogmatism, (vi) clinging, (vii) 
wavering, (viii) envy and (ix) selfishness. 

2. Of the nine abodes of beings (i)-(iv) and (vi)-(viii) are the 
same as the seven stations of consciousness, see VII (x), above. But 
there are also (v) material beings without any perception, and 
(ix) immaterial beings who have reached the realm of neither-identi- 
fication-nor-nonidentification. 


X. Section of Tens 


(T447a18-453b19; E203-206) Finally there are two groups each 
of ten items: 

1. Ten foundations of meditational totalization, viz., (i) earth, (ii) 
water, (iii) fire, (iv) air, (v) blue, (vi) yellow, (vii) red, (viii) white, 
(ix) endless space, and (x) endless consciousness. 

2. Ten virtues in need of no further training, viz., a correct (i) 
view, (ii) intention, (iii) speech, (iv) action, (v) livelihood, (vi) effort, 
(vii) mindfulness, (viii) concentration, (ix) emancipation and (x) 
wisdom. 


-PRAJNAPTIBHASYA 


According to Chinese tradition this is the sixth of the six padas of 

the Sarvastivada school.! However, it is doubtful whether any of it 

remains in existence. There is a Tibetan version which comes to 

us in three parts. Louis de la Vallée Poussin has provided an ‘‘analysis 

- and fragments’, in French, of the first two section parts of this text,” 
and has summarized the third part.? 

The work is ascribed to Maudgalyayana by YaSomitra and Bu-ston. 
Takakusu’s description of the Tibetan text finds the Lokaprajfapti 

.in 7 chapters, the Karanaprajfapt in 7 chapters, and the Karmapra- 
jfiapti in 5 chapters.‘ Tradition ascribes the translation of all three 
parts of Prajiiasena. , 

The content of these works can hardly be considered to belong 
in the field of philosophy. The first part, Lokaprajfiapu, deals with 
cosmology of a highly mythical character. The second part Karana- 
prajfapt, deals with the previous lives of the Buddha, the Buddha’s 
mother, his previous existences, and such matters. The third part, 
Karmaprajfapti, deals with karma theory in a manner not requiring 

_special attention here. 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 


Summary by James P. McDermott 


The author of this text is unknown. A.K. Warder dates the earliest 
stages of the text to ca. 349 B.C. The body of the text was essentially 
completed by 200 B.C., with some additions possibly as late as 100 
B.C 


The work has been edited by Arnold C. Taylor for the Pali Text 
Society (2 volumes, London 1905-07, reprinted in one volume in 
1979), and by Bhikkhu J. Kashyap for the Nalanda Devanagari Pali 
Series (Bihar: Pali Publication Board, 1960). In addition, a version 
of the Pali text in Burmese characters was published as part of the 
Chattha-Sangayana edition of the Tripitaka in 1956, and a version 
in Thai characters by the Mahamukuta Rajavidyalaya in 1926. “‘E”’ 
references are to the Kashyap edition. 

The only English translation, here identified as “T’, is by Bhikkhu 
Nanamoli, The Path of Discrimination, edited by A. K. Warder, Pali 
Text Society Translation Series 43 (London, 1982). There exists 
a Japanese translation by S. Watanabe in Nanden Daizokyo 40-41 
(Tokyo, 1935-41). 

The analysis of Patisambhidamagga often seems to supplement 
that of the Vibhariga. The most significant contribution of the Pag- 
sambhidamagga is in its analysis of the four discriminations (Pat- 
sambhida) in 1.1.416-433 and I. VI, which does not always match 
that of the Vibhanga either in order or in interpretation. 

The description of the Buddha’s miracle of the double appearance 
in I.1.592-595 would seem to be the first such description in Pali 
literature.’ 


220 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
I. GREAT DIVISION 


(E3-6; T1-8) Treatise on Knowledge 
Begins with matrices describing 73 kinds of knowledge. 67 of these 
are shared by disciples, while 6 are not. 


Chapter I: Learning 


1 (E6-7; T8-9) Summary statement of 16 cases in which auditory 
application leads to knowledge of what is heard. 


Section I 


2-3 (E7-8; T9) Propositions concerning factors to be known 
directly, namely: that all beings are maintained by nutriment; the 
conditioned and the unconditioned; the material, the immaterial, and 
the realm of sense desires; the 4 noble truths; 5 bases for liberation; 
6 superior experiences; 7 virtuous qualities; 8 bases of mastery; 9 
successive states; 10 causes of decay. 

’ 4(E8; T9) Summary statement of all that is to be directly known, 
beginning with the eye, visible objects, eye consciousness, etc. This 
is elaborated on in 

5 (E8-12;T9-12) where 201 factors are listed individually, includ- 
ing; 5 aggregates; 6 sense faculties; 6 sense objects; 6 sense 
consciousnesses; 6 sense contacts; 6 forms of contact-derived 
feeling; forms of identification related to the 6 senses; forms of 
volition related to the 6 sense objects; cravings for the 6 sense 
objects; initial thoughts applied to the 6 sense objects, and thoughts 
sustained on them; the 6 elements (e.g., earth, water, etc., including 
consciousness); 10 symbolic meditative devices; 32 body parts/ 
products; 12 bases; 18 elements; 22 faculties; 3 realms; 9 forms 
of being; 4 meditative states, 4 liberations; 4 meditative attainments; 
12 links of dependent origination. [This fundamental list of 201 
factors reappears frequently throughout the Patisambhidamagga. | 

6-17 (E12-14; T12-14) This basic list of 201 factors is expanded 
according to 6 different patterns. 

18 (E14-15; T15-16) 15 aspects of existence are to be known 
directly, namely: arising, occurrence, sign, karmic accumulation, 
rebirth-linking, course (on rebirth), generation, rearising, birth, old 
age, disease, death, sorrow, lamentation, and despair. These are 
followed by their negations, namely nonarising, nonoccurrence, etc. 
These in turn are followed by one-to-one pairings of each aspect 
with its negation. 

19 (E15-16; T16) Each aspect (i.e. arising, etc.) is identified with 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 221 


frustration, their negations (i.e. nonarising, etc.) with liberation. 

20 (E16-17; T16) The 15 aspects (arising, 2tc.) are related to fear, 
their negations to safety. 

21 (E17-18; T16-17) The 15 aspects are material, their negations 
immaterial. 

22 (E18-19; T17} The 15 aspects are conditionings, their negations 
liberation. 

23 (E19; T17-18) A series of synonyms for embracing the noble 
path, e.g., perfection, unification, giving up, liberation, crossing 
over, seeing, etc. : 

24 (E19; T18) Synonyms for peace and insight. 

25 (E20; T18) Further synonyms connected with entry on, con- 
tinuance, and completion of noble path. 

26-27 (E20; T18-19) Synonyms for the 5 faculties, 5 powers, 
7 conditions of enlightenment, and eightfold path, both individually 
and collectively. In addition, meanings are given for applications of 
mindfulness, right endeavors, supernatural powers, truths, paths, 
and fruits. 

28 (E21; T19) Synonyms for the 5 meditative states. 

29 (E21; T19) A series of miscellaneous synonyms beginning 
with “higher faculty’’. 

30 (E21; T20) Synonyms connected with cognizance. 

31 (E21-22; T20) Synonyms connected with unity. 

32 (E22; T21) This paragraph is concerned with aspects of the 
path and behavior governed by them. In addition there is a series 
of synonyms for burning up defilements and being stainless. 

33 (E22-23; T21) Synonyms for the 4 roads to supernatural power, 
namely, concentration of (a) interest, (b) energy, (c) consciousness, 
and (d) deliberation. . 

34 (E23; T22) Synonyms for the 4 truths, namely, frustration, 
origin, cessation, and the path. 

35 (E23; T22) Meanings connected with suchness, no self, truth, 
penetration, and the like. 

36-40 (E24; T22) List the negations of the 7 hindrances, the 4 
meditative states, 4 meditative attainments, 18 principal insights, 
4 paths and their fruits all as to be directly known. 

41 (E24-25; T23) All the faculties, powers, etc., listed at no. 26 
are to be directly known through their meanings. 

42 (E25; T23-24) Peace and insight are to be known through their 
meanings listed at 1.24. 

43 (E25-26) Entry, continuance, and completion of the path are 
to be known through the meanings listed at 1.25. 

44 (E26; T24) The nature of knowledge and understanding as 
applied to what is directly known is explained. 


222 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Section H 


45-46 (E26; T24-25) 10 propositions concerning factors to be 
fully understood, namely, contact as producing clinging; psychical 
and physical things; 3 kinds of feeling; 4 kinds of nutriment; 5 
aggregates; 6 faculties of consciousness; 7 supports of conscious- 
ness; 8 worldly conditions; 9 abodes of being; 10 bases. 

47 (E26-27; T25) The summary statement (1.4) of all that is to 
be directly known is here listed as what is to be fully understood. 

48-86 (E27-29; T25-26} The 201 factors, etc., of 1.5-43 
are here listed as to be fully understood. 

87 (E29; T26) The nature of knowledge and understanding as 
applied to what is fully understood is explained. 


Secton I 


88-89 (E29-30; T26-27) 10 propositions concerning unprofitable 
states to be abandoned, namely, the conceit that ‘‘I am’’; ignorance 
and craving for existence; craving for sense desires, existence and 
nonexistence; 4 floods; 5 hindrances; 6 types of thirst; 7 latent 
dispositions; 8 elements of falseness; 9 ideas rooted in thirst; 10 
falsenesses. 

90 (E30; T27-28) Two kinds of abandoning: by cutting off and 
by tranquilization. Renunciation as escape from sense desire; im- 
materiality as escape from materiality; cessation as escape from 
dependent origination. Abandoning as penetration of the 4 truths. 
5 kinds of abandoning, namely, suppression, by negation, by des- 
truction, by tranquilization, by escape. 

91 (E31; T28) The summary statement of 1.4 of all that is to be 
directly known, is here listed as what is to be overcome. 

92-129 (E31; T28) The 201 factors of 1.5-43 are listed as to be 
overcome. 

130 (E31; T28) Knowledge and understanding as knowing what 
is to be overcome. 


Section IV | 


131-132 (E31-32; T28-29} 10 propositions concerning states to 
be practiced, namely, mindfulness of the body; peace and insight; 
3 kinds of concentration; 4 applications of mindfulness; 5 factors 
of perfect concentration; 6 matters for recollection; 7 enlightenment 
factors; the eightfold noble path; 9 factors in the struggle for purity; 
10 exercises with symbolic meditative devices. 

133 (E32; T29) Types of spiritual practice: worldly and of the 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 223 


higher world. Practice of profitable ideas concerning the material 
sphere, the immaterial sphere, and the unincluded. Practice as 
penetration of the 4 truths. 

134 (E33-35; T29-31) Spiritual practice as longing, acquisition, 
single taste, and cultivation. 

135 (E35-38; T31-34) Practice in the sense (a) that the states 
produced do not turn on one another, (b) of single taste of faculties, 
(c) that the proper energy is operative, (d) of repetition. 

136-173 (E38; T34) When each of the factors, etc. listed at 1.5-43 
are seen, one practices. 

174 (E38-39; T34-35) Spiritually practiced states have a single 
taste. 


Section V 


175-176 (E39; T35) 10 propositions concetning things to be 
realized, namely, steady liberation of awareness; understanding and 
emancipation; threefold understanding; 4 fruits of asceticism; 5 main 
portions of Buddhism; 6 higher faculties; 7 powers of the perfected 
being; 8 liberations; 9 successive cessations; 10 qualities of the adept. 

177 (E39; T35-36) The summary statement of 1.4 of all that is 
to be directly known is here listed as what is to be realized. 

178-215 (E40; T36) When each of the factors, etc. listed at 1.5-43 
is seen, one comes to realization. 

216 (E40; T36) States that are realized are attained. 


Sections VI-IX 


217-219 (E40-41; T36-38) The nature of knowledge of factors 
that partake of diminution, duration, advantageousness, and penetra- 
tion for one who has obtained each of the 4 meditative states and 
spheres of boundless space, boundless consciousness, and 
nothingness. 


Sections X-XIl 


220-222 (E41-42; T38) Knowledge of the 201 factors of 1.5 as 
impermanent, frustrating and not self. 


Sections XHI-XVI 
223 (E42; T38-39) The 4 noble truths. 


224-236 (E42-44; T39-40) Detailed analysis of the first truth of 
frustration following Majjhimanikaya I1.250. 


224 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


237-238 (E44-45; T40-41) Detailed analysis of the second truth 
of the origin of frustration. 

239-240 (E45; T41) Detailed analysis of the third truth of the 
end of frustration. 

241-249 (E45-46; T41-42) Detailed analysis of the elements of 
the eightfold path. 

250 (E46-47; T43) Knowledge of the 4 noble truths. 


Chapter II: Virtue 


251-257 (E47; T43) Analysis of virtue consisting in (a) limited, 
(b) unlimited, (c) perfected, (d) unmisapprehended, and (e) tranquili- 
zed purification. 

258-259 (E47-49; T43-45) Distinction between virtue that has 
a limit and virtue that has no limit. 

260-261 (E49; T45)} Virtue is defined as will, as a concomitant 
of consciousness, as restraint, and as nontransgression. 

262 (E49; T45) Habits may be good, bad or indeterminate. 

263 (E49; T45) These originate respectively from good, bad and 
indeterminate cognizance. 

. 264 (E49-51; T45-47) Virtue consists in restraint and non- 
transgression in the case of 10 types of bad behavior—killing, 
stealing, sexual misconduct, improper speech of various sorts, etc. 
Virtue as restraint and nontransgression through renunciation of the 
7 hindrances, through the 4 meditative states, attainment of the 4 
meditative attainments, contemplation of the 18 principal insights, 
and the 4 paths. 

265 (E51-53; T47-48) Virtue as abandoning, abstention, will, 
restraint, and nonexcess leads to tranquility, joy, development, 
perfection, cessation, enlightenment, liberation. One trains in the 
higher cognizance that leads to these virtues by knowing them, 
reviewing them, being mindful of them, understanding them, aban- 
doning what is to be abandoned, etc. This is repeated for each 
of the 10 types of bad behavior. Through renunciation of the 7 
hindrances, through the 4 meditative states, through the 4 meditative 
attainments, through the 18 principal insights and the 4 paths one 
trains in virtue. 

266 (E53; T48) Knowledge as understanding is restraint. 


Chapter III: Concentration 
267-268 (E53-54; T48) 55 kinds of concentration are grouped 


in groups of one kind, two kinds, three kinds, and so on up to 10 
kinds. 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 225 


269 (E55; T49-50) 25 meanings of concentration, beginning with 
embracing, equipment, fulfillment, unification, and so forth. 
270 (E55; TS0) Knowledge as understanding of concentration. 


Chapter IV: Dependent Origination 


271 (E55-56; T50-51) Notes causal relationship between igno- 
rance and the arising of karmic conditionings in 9 aspects with 
reference to past, present, and future, This analysis is repeated with 
respect to the causal relationship between each of the elements in 
the formula of dependent origination and its succeeding element, 
beginning with that between karmic conditionings and the arising 
of consciousness. 

272 (ES6-57; T51) Analysis of the formula of dependent origina- 
tion beginning ‘‘Ignorance is a cause, karmic conditionings causally 
arise’, and so on through the chain for past, présent, and futures 
as at 1.271. 

273 (E57; T51-52) Similarly with ‘Ignorance is dependent, 
karmic conditionings dependently arisen’, and so through the chain 
as at 1.271. 

274 (E57; T52) Analysis as at 1.271, but of the form “‘Ignorance 
is a condition, karmic conditionings conditionally arisen’’. 

275 (ES7-58; T52) Ignorance, conditioning factors, craving, 
grasping, and existence in the past are conditions for rebirth-linking 
in the present. Consciousness, psychophysical complex, the bases 
for contact, contact, and feelings in the present have their conditions 
in past karma. This analysis is repeated for present cause and future 
result. 

276 (E58; T53) Knowledge as the understanding of discerning 
conditions. 


Chapter V: Comprehension 


277-280 (E58-59; T53-54) 201 factors of 1.5, whether past, 
present, or future, whether internal or external, gross or subtle, 
inferior or superior, near or far are all impermanent, frustrating and 
not-self, 

281 (E59-60; T54) Analysis of formula of dependent origination 
in reverse order in the form ‘‘With birth as condition, there is 
old age and death; without birth as condition, there is no old age 
and death, and so forth through the chain. 

282 (E60; T54-55) Knowledge as understanding of past, present, 
and future factors. 


226 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Chapter VI: Rise and Fall 


283-284 (E60; T55) The generation of the 201 factors of 1.5 is 
their rise. Their change is their fall. 

285 (E60; T55) He who sees the rise of the 5 aggregates sees 
25 characteristics. He who sees their fall sees 25 characteristics. 

286 (E60; T55-56) He sees 5 characteristics each for the rise and 
’ for the fall of each of the aggregates individually. 

287 (E60-61; T56) With the arising of ignorance, craving, karma, 
nutrition, and generation, he sees the rise of materiality. With their 
cessation, he sees its fall. 

288-290 (E61 -62; T56-57) With the arising of ignorance, craving, 
karma, contact, and generation, he sees the rise of feeling, per- 
ception, and conditioning factors. With their cessation, he sees 
their fall. 

291 (E62-63; T57) With the arising of ignorance, craving, karma, 
the psychophysical complex, and generation, he sees the rise of 
consciousness. With their cessation he sees its fall. 

292 (E63; T57) Thus a total of 50 characteristics for the rise and 
fall of the 5 aggregates. 

293 (E63; T57-58) Understanding of change of factors as know- 
ledge of rise and fall. 

294 (E63; T58) Materiality has nutriment for its origin. Feeling, 
perception, and conditioning factors have contact for their origin; 
consciousness has the psychophysical complex for its origin. 


Chapter VII: Dissolution 


295-296 (E63; TS8) Awareness arises with each of the 201 factors 
listed at 1.201 as its objects and then dissolves. This rise and 
dissolution is contemplated. 

297 (E63-64; TS9) Verses defining insight following reflection, 
insight into the characteristic of loss, and the insight of higher 
understanding. © 

298 (E65; T59) Knowledge of insight as understanding of the 
contemplation of the dissolution of awareness. 


Chapter VII: Appearance as Fear 


299-305 (E65-67; T59-61) Understanding of appearance as fear 
is knowledge of danger. Knowledge of the way of peace is safety. 
Arising of the 15 essentials of being listed at 1.18 is dangerous. Their 
nonarising is bliss and peace. Knowledge and understanding involve 
realizing this. . 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 227 


Chapter IX: Equanimity Concerning Conditionings 


306-312 (E67-68; T61-62) Understanding of desire for liberation, 
of reflection, and of composure as knowledge of the kinds of 
equanimity concerning conditionings. 

313-317 (E68-69; T62-63) The guidance of awareness in equani- 
mity about conditionings has two aspects in the case of the average 
individual, three in the case of the initiate, and three in the case of 
one without greed. 

318 (E69; T63) For the average individual and the initiate delight 
in equanimity about conditionings is defiling. 

319 (E69; T63) The average individual, the initiate, and one 
without greed all see equanimity about conditionings with insight 
as impermanent, frustrating, and not-self. 

320 (E70; T63) Equanimity about conditionings is good for the 
average individual and the initiate, but inde tamale for one without 
greed. 

321 (E70; T63-64) It is always clearly base by one without 
greed, but only sometimes by the other two. 

322 (E70; T64) One without greed sees it with mature insight, 
the others with immature insight. 

323 (E70; T64) The average individual sees it to enter the stream, 
the initiate to attain a higher goal, anc one without greed to abide 
in bliss. 

324 (E71; T64-65) One’s response to peace about conditionings 
depends on the level of one’s spiritual attainment. 

325-328 (E71-72; T65-66) 8 kinds of peace about conditionings 
arises through insight, 10 kinds through insight: 15 of these are good; 
3 are indeterminate. 

329-330 (E73; T66-67) Verse and prose summary of the chapter. 


Chapter X: Insight of the Convert 


331-332 (E73-74; T67-68) Conversion involves overcoming what 
is to be overcome and turning away from it, and thus is spoken of 
as (literally) ‘change of lineage’’ (gotrabha). 

335-338 (E74-76; T68) 8 kinds of change of lineage arise through 
peace, 10 through insight, etc., as at 1.325-329. 

339-340 (E76; T68-69) Verse and prose summary of the chapter. 


Chapter XI: The Path 
341-342 (E76-77; T69-70) At the moment of stream entry the 


elements of the eightfold path emerge from error, from defilements, 
from consequent aggregates, and externally from all signs. 


228 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


343 (E77; T70) At the moment of entry on the path of once-re- 
turner they emerge from gross fetters, greed, defilements, con- 
sequent aggregates, and externally from all signs. 

344-345 (E77-78; T70) Emergence of elements of the eightfold 
path at the moment of entry on the path of nonreturner and the path 
of the perfected being. 

346-347 (E78; T70-71) Summary to the effect that one with 
insight is not shaken. 


Chapter XII: Fruition 


348-353 (E78-80; T71-72) Liberation as spelled out in 1.341-345 
is the fruition of the path. 

354-358 (E80-81; T72-74) Three latent dispositions and two 
afflictions are cut off by stream entry; two gross dispositions and 
two gross afflictions by the path of once-returner; two secondary 
dispositions and two secondary afflictions by the path of nonreturner; 
and five dispositions and three afflictions by the path of the perfected 
being. 


Chapter XIV: Reflection 


359-360 (E81-83; T74-75) Details the sense in which the 
elements of the eightfold path, enlightenment of factors, powers, 
faculties, etc., are arrived at at the moment of stream-entry. Having 
emerged, these are reflected on. 

361 (E83; T75S) Analysis similar to that at 1.360 with reference 
to the moment of fruition of stream entry. 

362-368 (E83-84; T75-76) The analysis of 1.360-361 is repeated 
with reference to the moments of entry on the paths of the once- 
returner, the nonreturner, and the perfected being, as well as the 
moments of their fruition. 


Chapter XV: Analysis of the Internal 


369-377 (E84-86; T76-77) Definition as internal of each of the 
six sense faculties according to how they are produced; as imperma- 
nent and dependently arisen, frustrating, and not self. Having defined 
them thus, one becomes dispassionate, gives up grasping, and 
abandons perception of permanence, satisfaction, and self. 


Chapter XVI: Analysis of the External 


378-386 (E86-88; T77) Objects of the six senses are defined as 
external according to the pattern of 1.369-377. 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 229 


Chapter XVI: Behavior 


387-388 (E88; T77-78) Behavior is either characterized by 
consciousness, ignorance, or insight. 

389-390 (E88-89; T78-79) Adverting in order to see, hear, etc.; 
consciousness of objects by each of the senses; directing the mind 
and the results of this in response to sense perceptions are behavior 
characterized by consciousness. Such behavior is without greed, 
hate, delusion, pride, wrong views, agitation, uncertainty, and under- 
lying tendencies. It is dissociated from karmically effective action. 

391 (E89-90; T79-80) The act of impulsion of greed, hate, 
delusion, etc., as at 1.390 is behavior characterized by unknowing. - 

392 (E90-92; T80) Behavior characterized by unknowing involves 
greed, hatred, etc. It is associated with negative actions, and dissocia- 
ted from positive actions. 

393 (E92; T80-81) Behavior characterized by insight is acting for 
the purpose of contemplating impermanence, pain, not-self, dis- 
passion... change... emptiness, etc. Entry on the 4 paths and their 
fruition are also behavior characterized by insight. 

394 (E92-93; T81) Behavior characterized by insight is without 
greed, hate, etc., as at 1.390. It is associated with positive actions 
and dissociated from negative actions. 

395 (E93; T81) Three types of behavior as at 1.387-388. 


Chapter XVIII: Stages 


396-397 (E93; T82) The stage of sense desires; the material, 
immaterial, and unincluded stages. 

398 (E93; T82) The stage of sense desires ranges from Avici hell 
to the deities with power over the productions of others. 

399 (E93-94; T82) The material plane ranges from the Brahma 
world to the highest deities. 

400 (E94; T82) The immaterial plane ranges from deities of the 
realm of boundless space to those of the realm of neither identification 
not nonidentification. 

401 (E94; T82) The unincluded plane consists of unincluded paths 
and their fruition; also the unformed principle. 

402-403 (E94; T82-83) Knowledge of other fourfold categories, 
including foundations of mindfulness, right endeavors, roads to 
powers, meditative states, etc. 


Chapter XIX: Diversity of Factors 


404-410 (E94-97; T83-85) Sense-desire stage factors, material 
Stage factors, immaterial factors, and unincluded factors are defined 


230 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


as good and neutral. Sense-desire stage factors may be bad as well. 
Factors are rooted in joy when given attention as impermanent, 
frustrating, not-self. So for the 201 factors listed in 1.5. This leads 
to liberation and cessation of frustration. 

411 (E97; T85S) Diversity of principle leads to diversity in contact, 
which in turn leads to diversity in feeling... identification... 
thinking... interest... anguish... search. .. gain. 

412 (E97-98; T85) Hence knowledge is understanding of diversity 
of factors. 


Chapters XX-XXIV: Direct Insight, Full Understanding, etc. 


413-415 (E97-98; T85-86) Directly known factors are known 
(Chapter XX). Fully understood factors are investigated (Chapter 
XXI). Abandoned factors are given up (Chapter XXII). Developed - 
factors have a single taste (Chapter XXII). Realized factors are 
attained (Chapter XXIV). 


Chapters XXV-XXVII: Four Discriminations 


416 (E98; T86) Discrimination is of four types: (a) understanding 
of difference in sense is discrimination of meaning (Chapter XXV). 
(b) understanding of difference of factors (Chapter XXVI), (c) 
language (Chapter XXVII), and (d) perspicuity (Chapter XXVIII) are 
knowledge of the other discriminations respectively. 

417 (E99; T86) 5 faculties are understood as separate factors. 
Understanding this distinction is knowledge of discrimination of 
factors. 

418 (E99; T86-87) Meaning as resolve, determination, establi- 
shing, nondistraction, and seeing are understood as separate 
meanings. Understanding this distinction is knowledge of discrimi- 
nation of meaning. 

419 (E99; T87) Knowledge of language concerning these 5 factors 
and their meaning is distinguished. Understanding this distinction 
is knowledge of discrimination of language. 

420 (E99; T87) Knowledge of these 5 factors, 5 meanings, and 
10 kinds of language are to be distinguished from one another. 
Understanding this is knowledge of discrimination of language. 

421 (E100; T87) Discrimination of factors with respect to 5 
powers. 

422 (E100; T87) Discrimination of meaning with respect to 5 types 
of unshakeability. 

423 (E100; T87) Discrimination of language with respect to the 
factors of 1.421 and meanings of 1.422. 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 231 


424 (E100-101; T87-88) Discrimination of perspicuity with 
respect to factors, meanings and language of 1.423. 

425 (E101; T88) Discrimination of factors with respect to enligh- 
tenment factors. 

426 (E101; T88) Discrimination of meaning as establishment, 
investigation, determination, intentness, peace, nondistraction, 
calculation. 

427 (E101; T88) Discrimination of language withrespect to factors 
and meanings of 1.425-426. 

428 (E102; T88) Discrimination e perspicuity with respect to 
topics of 1.427. 

429 (E102; T88) Discrimination of factors with respect to 
elements of the eightfold path. 

430 (E102;T88) Discrimination of meaning as seeing, directing 
onto, embracing, originating, cleansing, determining, establishment, 
and nondistraction. 

431 (E102-103; T88) Discrimination of language with respect to 
subjects of 1.429-430. 

432 (E103; T88-89) Discrimination of perspicuity with respect 
to subjects of 1.431. 

433 (E103; T89) Summary of discriminations. 


Chapters XXIX-XXXI: States and Meditative Attainments 


434 (E103; T89) The meaning of the states (Chapter XXIX), of 
attainments (Chapter XXX), and of states and attainments (Chapter 
XXXII). 

_ 435 (E103-104; T89) Definition of signless state, desireless state, 
and empty state. 

436 (E104; T89-90) Definition of signless attainment, desireless 
attainment, and empty attainment. 

437 (E104; T90) Definition of signless, desireless, and empty state 
and attainment. 

438 (E104-106; T90) Whereas 1.435-437 define these in cases 
where the sign of conditioning is clearly seen, 1.438 repeats the 
definitions in cases where each of the 201 factors of 1.5 are clearly 
seen. 

439-440 (E106; T90-91) 3 states, 3 attainments, 3 states and 
attainments. Knowledge as understanding this distinction. 


Chapter XXXII: Concentration with Immediate Result 


441-443 (E106-108;T91-93) Nondistraction is concentration. As 
a result of that concentration knowledge arises. As a result of this 


232 . ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


intoxicants are exhausted. Understanding this is knowledge of con- 
centration with immediate result. 


Chapter XXXII: States Without Conflict 


444-445 (E109; T93-94) Contemplation of impermanence of the 
201 factors of 1.5 is a predominance of seeing. 

446 (E109; T94) Peaceful states as empty, signless, and desireless. 

447 (E109; T94) Being intent on emptiness, the signless, and the 
desireless is excellent resolve. 

448-449 (E109-110; T94) The 4 meditative states and attainment 
of the 4 bases are states without conflict. 

450 (E110; T94-95) Knowledge of states without conflict. 


Chapter XXXIV: Attainment of Cessation - 


451-452 {E110; T95) Control due to (a) possession of 2 powers, 
(b) tranquilizing the 3 conditionings, {c) 16 kinds of behavior with 
respect to knowledge and 9 with respect to concentration is know- 

ledge of the attainment of cessation. 

453-455 (E110-111; T95-96) The 2 powers are: the power of 
_ peace and the power of insight. 

456 (E111-112; T96) The 3 conditionings tranquilized are: (a) 
verbal conditionings in the second meditative state, (b) bodily 
conditioning in the fourth meditative state, and (c) mental condi- 
tionings for one who has attained cessation of identification and 
feeling. 

457 (E112; T96-97) The 16 kinds of behavior with respect to 
knowledge include contemplation of: impermanence, frustration, 
not-self, dispassion, fading away, cessation, relinquishment, turning 
away, the 4 paths and their fruitions. 

458 (E112; T97) The 9 with respect to concentration are 4 
meditative states, attainment of each of the 4 bases, and applied 
thought with purpose of attaining these 8. 

459 (E112-113; T97-98) 5 kinds of mastery are defined, namely: 
mastery in adverting, in attaining, in steadfastness, in emerging, in 
_ reviewing. These are each related to each of the meditative states 
and attainment of each of the bases. 


Chapter XXXV: Final Liberation 


461-463 (E113-114; T98-99) Understanding of the end of that 
which goes on (i.e. the circle of existence = pravytti) in one who 
is fully aware is knowledge of final liberation. 


- 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 233 


Chapter XXXVI: Equivalent Headings 


464-471 (E114-115; T99-100) Commentary on the terms in the 
statement that understanding of the cutting off, cessation, and nonre- 
appearance of all factors is knowledge of the meaning of equivalent 
headings. 13 headings are enumerated with their equivalents. 


- Chapter XXXVI: The Higher Life 


472-477 (E115-116; T100- 101) Commentary on the terms in the 
statement that understanding separateness (i.e. that the defilements 
are all separate from liberation), difference and unity (i.e. that the 
hindrances are based on differences and the absorptive states and 
paths are based on unity), and the end of the 5 consuming fires is 
knowledge of the higher life. 


Chapter XXXVID: Application of Energy 


478-481 (E116-117; T102-103) Understanding of the meaning 
of exertion in the self-motivated is knowledge of the application of 
energy. This is explained with reference to the prevention of unpro- 
fitable factors, the 7 hindrances, defilements, and with reference 
to the arising of the meditative states of absorption and the paths. 


Chapter XXXIX: Demonstration of Meanings 


482-486 (E117-118; T103-104) Commentary on terms in the 
statement that understanding the explanation of different factors is 
knowledge of the demonstration of meanings. 


Chapter XL: Purity in Seeing 


487-493 (E118-119; T104-105) Commentary on terms in the 
statement that understanding of the penetration of the 12 ways in 
which all factors are includable as one, and of their difference and 
unity, is knowledge of purity in seeing. 


Chapter XLI: Patience 


494-496 (E119; T105) The fact of having experienced under- 
standing is knowledge of patience. 


’ Chapter XLII: Penetration 


497-499 (E119; T106) Understanding what one is affected by 
(namely 201 factors) is knowledge as penetration. 


234 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Chapter XLII: Limited States 


500-504 (E120; T106-107) Understanding the process of combi- 
nation is knowledge of limited states. Such is knowledge that there 
exists what is experienced as conditioned by the elements of the 
eightfold path, their opposites, and the quieting of these 16. Similarly 
with respect to deliverance, zeal, applied thought, perception, the 
vigor needed to become a perfected being, and their opposites and 
quieting. 


Chapters XLIV-XLIX: Six on the Standstill 
of the Cycle of Existence 


$05-507 (E120- 121; T107-108) (XLIV) Understanding renuncia- 
tion and the negations of the 7 hindrances being given predominance 
is knowledge of the standstill of the cycle of existence through 
perception. 

508-510 (E121; T108) (XLV) When understanding diversity in 
the case of the hindrances, defilements, etc., and unity in their 
renunciation, in the paths, etc., cognizance turns away from the | 
hindrances, etc., it is knowledge of the standstill of the cycle of 
existence through awareness. 

511-513 (E121-122; T109) (XLVI) Understanding of establishing 
is knowledge of the standstill through awareness. 

514-516 (E122; T109-110) (XLVI) Understanding emptiness is 
knowledge of the standstill through knowledge. 

$17-519 (E£122-123; T110-112) (XLVI) Understanding re- 
linquishment is knowledge of the standstill through liberation. 

$20-523 (E123-124; T110-112) (XLIX) Understanding the 
meaning of suchness is knowledge of standstill through the 4 truths. 


Chapter L: Supernormal Powers 
524-528 (E124-125; T112-113) A monk develops the bases for 
success and cognizance of them. He is permeated with perception 
and enjoys supernatural powers. Specific powers are dealt with in 
Chapter LI-LIV. 
Chapter LI: The Divine Ear 


529-533 (E125-126; T113-114) Understanding the diversity and 
unity of the characteristics of sound is knowledge of the divine ear. 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 235 


Chapter LII: Penetration of Minds 


534-538 (E126-127; T114-115) A monk develops the bases for 
success and awareness of them. He directs this toward penetration 
of minds. He understands the nature of diverse types of awareness 
as they are. Understanding this unity and diversity of penetration 
in the case of the 6 faculties in this way is knowledge of penetration 
of minds. 


Chapter LID: Recollection of Past Lives 


539-543 (E127-128; T115-116) Similar to 1.534-538 with re- 
collection of past lives substituted for penetration of minds. 


Chapter LIV: The Divine Eye 


544-549 (E128-129; T116-117) Similar to t.534-538 with the 
divine eye substituted for penetration of minds. 


Chapter LV: Exhaustion of Intoxicants 


550-563 (E129-131; 7117-120) Understanding as mastery of the 
three higherworldly faculties—i.e. the assurance that I shall know 
what I did not yet know; the faculty of perfect knowledge; and the 
faculty of the knower—in 64 aspects is knowledge of the exhaustion 
of intoxicants. 


Chapters LVI-LXII: The Four Truths 


564-566 (E132; T120) Synonyms for frustration, origin, cessa- 
tion, and the path. Understanding the meaning of complete under- 
standing, abandoning, realizing, and developing is respectively 
knowledge of frustration, origin, cessation, and the path. 

567-569 (E132-133; T121) The understanding of one who 
possesses the path is knowledge of the 4 truths. Synonyms for 
understanding are listed here. 


Chapters LXIV-LXVI: Pure Discrimination 


571-572 (E133-134; T121-122) Discrimination of meaning, 
factors, language, and perspicuity is knowledge of meanings, factors, 
language, and perspicuity. Understanding of differences, definitions, 
noting, noticing, categories, evocation, etc., of meanings, etc., is 
knowledge of discrimination of meanings, etc. 

[Chapter I-LXVII analyze the 63 kinds of knowledge shared with 
disciples, while Chapters LXVIII-LXXIII analyze those not so 
shared. ] : 


236 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Chapter LXVIII: Penetration of Faculties of Others 


§73-583 (E134-136; T123-124) A Buddha sees those with faith 
as having (a) little dust in their eyes, (b) keen faculties, (c) good 
parts; and as being easy to instruct, and as seeing fear in the world 
and what is censurable. He sees one without faith as the opposite. 
The term ‘‘world’’ here refers to the world of aggregates, of elements, 
bases, etc. Types of world are listed as 1 nutriment for all beings, 
2 parts of the psychophysical complex, 3 kinds of feeling, 4 kinds 
of nutriment, 5 aggregates, 6 internal bases, 7 stations of conscious- 
ness, 8 worldly factors, 9 abodes, 10 bases, 12 bases, and 18 
elements. The Buddha thus knows the 5 faculties of others in 50 
aspects, this is his knowledge of penetration of faculties of others. 


Chapter LXIX: Biases and Underlying Tendencies 


§84-591 (E136-138; T124-126) The Buddha knows the biases 
and underlying tendencies, behavior, resolutions, and capabilities 
of others. The terms “‘biases’’, ‘underlying tendencies’’, .. . “‘capa- 
bilities’ are explained. ; 


Chapter LXX: Miracle of the Double Wonders 


~ $92-595 (E138-140; T126-127) The Buddha’s miracle of the 
double wonders is not attainable by his disciples. In it a fire is 
produced from the various parts of his body, and a shower of water 
from the opposite parts. So too from each hair and pore. Amid 6 
colors the Buddha appears doing one thing, and his created image 
another. 


Chapter LXXI: The Great Compassion 


596-597 (E140-145; T127-131) Upon enlightened ones who see 
the nature of worldly life in all its unsatisfactory aspects—which 
are here detailed—there descends great compassion for beings. 


Chapters LXXII-LXXII: Omniscience and 
Unobstructed Knowledge 


598-606 (E145-147; T131-133) The Buddha’s knowledge is 
omniscient and unobstructed. A detailed listing of all 73 kinds of 
knowledge known by the Buddha in his omniscience is listed in 
Chapters I-LX XII. 

607-612 (E147-148; T133-134) Because of this knowledge, he 
is ‘‘allseeing’’ in the sense of possessing the 14 kinds of knowledge 
of an enlightened one; namely, knowledge of the 4 truths, 4 discrimi- 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 237 


nations, and the 6 kinds of knowledge unique to the Buddha as listed 
in Chapters LX VIM-LXXiIl. There is nothing concerning these topics 
that he does not know. 


Il. TREATISE ON FALSE VIEWS 


1 (E149; T140) Headings of the topics of the 6 main sections of 
the treatise. 


Section I: Definition of False Views 


2 (E149-153; T140) Misinterpretation, through misinterpreting 
the first 198 factors (i.e. excluding the higherworldly factors) listed 
in 1.5, is false view. 


Section II: The Bases for False Views 


3-4. (E153; T140-141). There are 8 kinds of base, cause, or 
condition which arouse false views, namely: the aggregates, igno- 
rance, contact, identification, initial thought, careless attention, 
an evil friend, indoctrination by another. 


Section II: Ways in Which One is Possessed 
(or Obsessed) by False Views 


5 (El 53-154; T141) One is possessed by false views in 18 ways. . 
E.g., by having recourse to them, being caught as in a thicket, by 
the clash of opinions, by being fettered or impeded by them, etc. 


Section IV: 16 Kinds of False Views 


6 (E154; T141-142) These are: hedonistic views; views about self; 
wrong view; views about individuality, and eternity and annihilation 
based on it; views which assume finitude/infinitude; views con- 
cerning the past or future; views that fetter; views involving the 
conceits ‘‘]’’ or “‘mine’’; theories of self and world; views of being 
and nonbeing. 


_ Section V: Ways in Which False Views Function 


7 (E154-155; 7142-143) Summary. 

8-47 (E155-159; T143-144) 35 aspects of misinterpretation 
through hedonistic view. Any misinterpretation of pleasure that arises 
’ dependent on the 5 aggregates, 6 internal bases, 6 external bases, 
6 kinds of consciousness, 6 kinds of contact, 6 kinds of feeling is 


236 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Chapter LXVII: Penetration of Faculties of Others 


573-583 (E134-136; T123-124) A Buddha sees those with faith 
as having (a) little dust in their eyes, (b) keen faculties, (c) good 
parts; and as being easy to instruct, and as seeing fear in the world 
and what is censurable. He sees one without faith as the opposite. 
Theterm ‘‘world’’ here refers to the world of aggregates, ofelements, 
bases, etc. Types of world are listed as 1 nutriment for all beings, 
2 parts of the psychophysical complex, 3 kinds of feeling, 4 kinds 
of nutriment, 5 aggregates, 6 internal bases, 7 stations of conscious- 
ness, 8 worldly factors, 9 abodes, 10 bases, 12 bases, and 18 
elements. The Buddha thus knows the 5 faculties of others in 50 
aspects, this is his knowledge of penetration of faculties of others. 


Chapter LXIX: Biases and Underlying Tendencies 


§84-591 (E136-138; T124-126) The Buddha knows the biases 
and underlying tendencies, behavior, resolutions, and capabilities 


of others. The terms “‘biases’’, “‘underlying tendencies’’, .. . “‘capa- 
bilities’ are explained. 


Chapter LXX: Miracle of the Double Wonders 


~ §92-595 (E138-140; T126-127) The Buddha’s miracle of the 
double wonders is not attainable by his disciples. In it a fire is 
produced from the various parts of his body, and a shower of water 
from the opposite parts. So too from each hair and pore. Amid 6 
colors the Buddha appears doing one thing, and his created image 
another. 


Chapter LXXI: The Great Compassion 


$96-597 (E140-145; T127-131) Upon enlightened ones who see 
the nature of worldly life in all its unsatisfactory aspects—which 
are here detailed—there descends great compassion for beings. 


Chapters LXXTI-LXXII: Omniscience and 
Unobstructed Knowledge 


598-606 (E145-147; T131-133) The Buddha’s knowledge is 
omniscient and unobstructed. A detailed listing of all 73 kinds of 
knowledge known by the Buddha in his omniscience is listed in 
Chapters J-LXXIiI. 

607-612 (E147-148; T133-134) Because of this knowledge, he 
is ‘‘allseeing’’ in the sense of possessing the 14 kinds of knowledge 
of an enlightened one; namely, knowledge of the 4 truths, 4 discrimi- 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 237 


nations, and the 6 kinds of knowledge unique to the Buddha as listed 
in Chapters LXVIN-LXXIII. There is nothing concerning these topics 
that he does not ERnOW: 


Il. TREATISE ON FALSE VIEWS 


1 (E149; T140) Headings of the topics of the 6 main sections of 
the treatise. 


Section I: Definition of False Views 


2 (E149-153; T140) Misinterpretation, through misinterpreting 
the first 198 factors (i.e. excluding the higherworldly factors) listed 
in 1.5, is false view. 


Section II: The Bases for False Views 


3-4 (E153; F140-141) There are 8 kinds of base, cause, or 
condition which arouse false views, namely: the aggregates, igno- 
rance, contact, identification, initial thought, careless euennon: 
an evil friend, indoctrination by another. 


Section mM: Ways in Which One is Possessed 
(or Obsessed) by False Views 


5 (E153-154; T141) One is possessed by false views in 18 ways. 
E.g., by having recourse to them, being caught as in a thicket, by 
the clash of opinions, by being fettered or impeded by them, etc.. 


Section IV: 16 Kinds of False Views 


6 (E154; T141-142) These are: hedonistic views; views about self; 
wrong view; views about individuality, and eternity and annihilation 
based on it; views which assume finitude/infinitude; views con- 
cerning the past or future; views that fetter; views involving the 
conceits “‘I’’ or ‘‘mine’’; theories of self and world; views of being 
and nonbeing. 


_ Section V: Ways in Which False Views Function 


7 (E154-155; T142-143) Summary. 

8-47 (E155-159; T143-144) 35 aspects of misinterpretation 
through hedonistic view. Any misinterpretation of pleasure that arises 
’ dependent on the 5 aggregates, 6 internal bases, 6 external bases, 
6 kinds of consciousness, 6 kinds of contact, 6 kinds of feeling is 


238 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


hedonistic view. These lead to rebirth in hell or as an animal. 

48 (E159; T144) Some fetters are false; some are not. 

49-130 (E159-170; T144-149) 20 aspects of misinterpretation 
through views about self. The ignorant and undisciplined see mate- 
riality as self, self as possessed of materiality, materiality in self, 
and self in materiality. Similarly for the other aggregates. Misinter- 
pretation grounded in false assertion of these views is false view 
about self. 

131-160 (E170-171; T149) 10 aspects of misinterpretation 
through wrong view. There are 10 grounds here, namely: nothing 
is given, offered, or sacrificed; there is no karmicresult, no this world, 
no other world, no father or mother, no apparitional beings, no 
virtuous self-realized ascetics. Misinterpretation grounded in false 
assertion of these grounds is wrong view. 

161-222 (E171; T149) 20 aspects of misinterpretation through 
views about individuality. Follows the pattern of 2.49-130. 

223-284 (E172; T160) 15 aspects of misinterpretation through 
views of eternity based on individuality. The ignorant and undisci- 
plined see self as possessed of materiality, materiality in self, self - 
in materiality. Similarly for the other aggregates. Misinterpretation 
grounded in false assertion of these views is false view of eternity 
based on individuality. 

285-321 (E172- 173; T150) S aspects of misinterpretation through 
views of annihilation based on individuality. Each of the 5 aggregates 
is seen as self. Misinterpretation based on false assertion of these 
views is false view of eternity based on individuality. 

322-462 (E173-179; T150-154) 50 aspects of misinterpretation 
through views which assume finitude/infinitude. Misinterpretation 
of finitude/infinitude in 10 instances of assuming: the world is 
eternal, not eternal, has an end, has no end, self and body are the 
same, self and body are separate; a Tathagata exists, does not exist, 
-both exists and does not exist, neither exists nor does not exist after 
death. There is misinterpretation through the view assuming finitude 
/infinitude in 5 aspects for each of these 10 instances. - 

463 (E179-180; T154) 18 aspects of misinterpretation through 
views about the past. These are 4 kinds of theory concerning eternity, 
4 concerning eternity in part, 4 concerning finitude/infinitude, 4 
indecisive, and 4 concerning spontaneous origination. 

464 (E180; T155) 44 aspects of misinterpretation through views 
about the future. These are 16 kinds of theory concerning identifica- 
tion, 8 concerning nonidentification, 8 concerning neither identifica- 
tion nor nonidentification, 7 concerning annihilation, and 5 regarding 
the experience of liberation here and now. ; 

465 (E180; T155) 18 aspects of misinterpretation through views 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA , 239 


that fetter—as in 2.5. — 

466-518 (E180; T155) 18 aspects of misinterpretation through 
the conceit that the 6 sense faculties, 6 objects of sense, 6 types 
of sense consciousness are “‘T’’. 

§19-572 (E180-181; T155) 18 aspects of misinterpretation 
~ through the conceit ‘‘mine’’—as at 2.466-518. 

573-654 (E181-182; T155-156) 20 aspects of misinterpretation 
through views associated with theories of self—as at 2.49-130. 
655-678 (E182-183;T156) 8 aspécts of misinterpretation through 
‘ views associated with theories of the world. Thatis, misinterpretation 
arising from the view that self and world are eternal, not eternal, 
both, neither. Similarly that they are finite, infinite, both, neither. 
679 (E183; T156) Misinterpretation due to clinging to being. 
680 (E183; T157) Misinterpretation due to overclinging to 
nonbeing. ‘ 
681-700 (E183-185; T157-159) Classifies all aspects of all views 
in 2.8-678 according to whether they can be cross-classified as views 
of being or views of nonbeing. 


Section VI: Abolishing the Ground of False Views 


701 (E185-186; T159) How gods and humans cling to being or 
to nonbeing. 

702-703 (E186; T159-160) Teachers of other schools, their 
disciples, and anyone else with false views are contrasted with 
Buddhas, their disciples, and others with right views. 

704 (E186; T160) Those who assert ‘This is I, mine, or my self’ 
have false views. Those who assert “‘This is not I, mine, or my self’ 
have right views. 

705 (E186-187; T160) Analysis of views listed in 1.704 as to 
number of kinds of each of these views and their connection with 
past and future. 

706 (E187-188; T160-161) Those who find their goal in the 
Buddha have right view. Of those with right view, 3 kinds of 
stream-enterer, the once-returner, and the perfected being find their 
goal in this life. 5 kinds of nonreturner find their goal in the pure 
abodes. 


Ill. TREATISE ON MEDITATION ON BREATHING 
1 (E189; T164) When one develops supreme concentration by 


mindfulness of breathing, 212 kinds of knowledge arise in him. 
Summary of these as analyzed in 10 Sections which follow. 


240 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Section I: 8 Obstacles and 8 Aids to Concentration 


2-3 (E189; T164-165) There are 8 obstacles to concentration: 
sensuous interest, malice, stolidity, excitedness, perplexity, igno- 
rance, discontent, and all bad factors. There are 8 aids to concentra- 
tion: renunciation, freedom from malice, perceptual identification, 
undistractedness, resolution, knowledge, delight, and all good 
factors. 

4-5 (E190-191;T164-165) When awareness is well-oriented with 
respect to these 16 aspects, it establishes. unity and is purified of 
hindrances. 


Section II: 18 Afflictions 


6-14 (E191-195; T165-168) In one purified of these hindrances 
who develops concentration by mindfulness of breathing, there are 
18 afflictions obstructing concentration related variously to stages 
of inhalation and exhalation. These disquiet, perturb, and excite. 


Section IJ: 13 Kinds of Cleansing 


15-18 (E195; T168-169) 13 kinds of cleansing help avoid these 
minor obstructions. Thus the mind is not distracted and attains unity. 

19-23 (E195-196; T169-171) Analysis of the beginning, middle, 
and end of the first meditative state. 

24-38 (E196-197; T171) As at 3.19-23 with respect to the 
second, third and fourth meditative states. 

39-168 (E197-198; T171) As at 3.19-23 with respect to the 4 
immaterial attainments, 18 principal insights, and the 4 paths. 

169-170 (E199-200; T171-172) Mental image, inhalation, and 
exhalation are not the object of a single awareness. One who knows 
these three performs spiritual practice and is not distracted. The 
simile of a man cutting wood with a saw is used _to illustrate this 
point. - 

171 (E200; T172) Verse to the effect that one whose mindfulness 
of breathing is perfected is like the light of full a moon in illuminating 
the world. 

172-182 (E200-203; T172-175) Commentary on terms in 3.171. 


Section IV: Knowledge of 32 Kinds of Mindfulness of Breathing 
183 (E200-204; T175-176} A monk seated in the lotus poate 


in the forest practices mindfulness of breathing in 32 ways. - 
184-193 (E204-205; T176-177} Commentary on terms in 3.183. 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 241 


194-195 (E205-206; T177-178) Analysis of the way in which 
mindfulness of a long inhalation/long exhalation is developed. 

196-198 (E206; T178) Equates this process with practice of 
contemplation of the body‘as the first foundation of mindfulness. 

199-202 (E206-208; T178-180) When the mind is unified and 
undistracted as a result of mindfulness of inhalation and exhalation, 
he is aware of his feelings, identifications, and initial thoughts as 
they arise, are established, and pass away. 

203-216 (E208-211; T180-182), When the mind is unified and 
undistracted as a result of mindfulness of inhalation and exhalation, 
he puts together the faculties, powers, etc., and understands their 
common significance. 

217-218 (E211; T182) Analysis of the way in which mindfulness 
of short inhalation/short exhalation is developed. 

219-238 (E211-212; T182-183) As at 3.196- -216, but with refe- 
rence to short breaths. 

239-264 (E212-214; T183-185) Though the details differ, the 
analysis follows the general pattern of 3.194-216, but with respect 
to mindfulness of the whole body. 

265-288 (E214-216; T185-187) Analysis of the way in which 
he trains himself tranquilizing the bodily conditionings while mind- 
fully inhaling and exhaling. The pattern is generally as at 194-216 
with some difference in detail. 

289 (E216; T187) 3.194-288 thus analyze 8 kinds of knowledge 
of contemplation and 8 kinds of attendance on mind- 
fulness. These constitute 4 subjects from the sutras on mindfulness 
of the body as body. 

290-315 (E216- 9 17;T187-188) Analysis of how he trains himself 
experiencing joy while mindfully inhaling and exhaling. Joy is ex- 
plained. The analysis generally follows the pattern of 3.194-216 with 
some difference in order, except that the contemplative process here 
is equated with contemplation of feeling as the second foundation 
of mindfulness. 

316-341 (E218; T189-190) As at 3.290-315 with satisfaction 
substituted for joy. 

342-367 (E218-219; T190-191) Analysis of how he trains himself 
experiencing mental conditioning while mindfully DEANE? The 
analysis follows the pattern of 3.290-315. 

368-391 (E219-220; T192-193) How he trains tranquilizing 
mental conditioning, etc., following the pattern of 3.290-315. 

392 (E220; T193) 3.290-391 thus analyze 8 kinds of knowledge 
of contemplation and 8 kinds of attention on mindfulness. These 
constitute 4 subjects from the satras on mindfulness of feelings as 
feelings. 


242 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


393-418 (E220-221; T193-194) How he trains experiencing 
states of awareness while mindfully breathing. The analysis is as at 
3.290-315, except that the contemplative process here is equated 
with contemplation of states of awareness as the third foundation 
of mindfulness. 

419-442 (E221-222; T194-195) How he trains rejoicing the mind 
while mindfully breathing. The analysis is as at 3.393-418. 

443-466 (E222-223; T195-196) How he trains concentrating the 
mind while mindfully breathing. As at 3.393-418. 

467-49 1 (E223-224; T196-197) How hetrains liberating the mind . 
while mindfully breathing. As at 3.393-418. 

492 (E224; T197) 3.393-491 thus analyze 8 kinds of knowledge 
of contemplation and 8 kinds of attention to mindfulness. These 
constitute 4 subjects on mindfulness of states of awareness as states 
of awareness. 

493-517 (E224-225; T197-198) He trains contemplating im- 
permanence while mindfully breathing. Explanation of imperma- 
nence. Then the pattern of 3.290-315 is followed, except that the 
contemplative process here is equated with contemplation of factors 
as the fourth foundation of mindfulness. 

518-596 (E225-227; T199-202) He trains contemplating non- 
attachment, cessation, and renunciation respectively while mind- 
fully breathing. For each the analysis is generally as at 3.495-517 
with some difference in detail. 

597 (E227; T202) 3.493-596 thus analyze 8 kinds of knowledge 
of contemplation and 8 kinds of attention to mindfulness. These 
constitute 4 subjects on mindfulness of factors as factors. 


Sections V-X: Kinds of Knowledge 


598-599 (E229-230; T202) 24 kinds of knowledge through 
concentration. 

600-601 (E230; T202-203) 72 kinds of knowledge through 
insight. 

602-603 (E230; T203) 8 kinds of knowledge of aversion. 

604-605 (E230-231; T203) 8 kinds of knowledge of what 
conforms with aversion. 

606-607 (E231; T204) 8 kinds of knowledge as calming aversions. 

608-612 (E231-232; T204-205) 21 kinds of knowledge of the 
satisfaction of liberation. 


IV. TREATISE ON THE FACULTIES 


1 (E233; T208) The Buddha addressed his monks to the effect 
that 
2 (E233; T208) there are 5 faculties: faith faculty, energy faculty, 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 243 


mindfulness faculty, concentration faculty, and understanding fa- 
culty. 

3-5 (E233-236; T208-209) These 5 faculties are purified in 15 
aspects, are being developed in 10 aspects, and have been fully 
developed in 10 aspects. 

6. (E236; T209) At the moment of entry on the 4 paths (i.e. path 
of once-returner, etc.) the 5 faculties are being developed. At the 
moment of fruition of the 4 paths they have been fully developed. 

7 (E237-238; T210) There is development of faculties in 7 kinds 
of initiate and in an average person who is virtuous. The faculties 
have been developed in a Buddhist disciple, a solitary self-enlighten- 
ed one, and in a Buddha. 

8 (E238; T210-211) Those who understand the 5 faculties, their 
rise and passing away, are true Brahmins and ascetics. Those who 
do not are not. 

9-16 (E238-247; T211-218) There are 40 aspects to the origin 
of the faculties, 40 aspects to their passing away, 25 aspects of 
attraction to the 5 faculties, 25 aspects to their danger, and 80 aspects 
of liberation from the 5 faculties. These are all delineated. 

17 (E248; T218) (a) Faith faculty is to be found among the 4 
characteristic qualities of a stream-enterer. (b) Energy faculty is to 
be found among the 4 right endeavors. (c) Mindfulness faculty among 
the 4 foundations of mindfulness. (d) Concentration faculty among 
the 4 meditative states. 

18 (E248; T218-219) 5 dasuities are found through faith faculty 
in 20 aspects among 4 characteristic qualities of a stream-enterer, 
and 5 through energy faculty in 20 aspects among 4 right endeavors. 
‘The pattern continues similarly modifying (c) and (d) of 4.17. 

19-23 (E248-250; T219-220) For each case in 4.18, the 20 
aspects are listed. 

24 (E250; T210-21 1) There are 20 aspects in which conduct with 
respect to 5 faculties is found through... etc., as in 4.18 for each 
case listed there. 

25-29 (E250-254; T221-222) List the 20 aspects in which each 
conduct with respect to faculties as in 4.24 is found. 

30-31 (E254-255; T223) 8 kinds of conduct are listed: adopting 
the 4 postures, conduct with respect to the internal and external 
bases, mindfulness of the 4 applications of mindfulness, concentra- 
tion of the 4 meditative states, knowing the 4 truths, following the 
4 paths, arriving at the fruits of asceticism, and for the enlightened, 
higher-worldly conduct. 

32 (E255; T224) 8 more kinds of conduct are listed, namely: acting 
with faith, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, concentration, under- 
standing, consciousness, and for one who has adopted the way, with 


244 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


distinction. 

33 (E255; T224) 8 more kinds of conduct, namely: those con- 
nected with the 8 elements of the eightfold path. 

34-46 (E255-256; T224-225) Commentary on terms in 4.30. 

47-103 (E256-263; T225-230) The 5 faculties are to be found 
in the sense of sovereignty, producing, original cleansing, being 
extraordinary, steadying, ending, basing upon. These are explained 
in detail. 

104-107 (E264; T230-231) When an average person develops 
supreme concentration, he becomes skillful in attendance in 7 ways, 
an initiate in 8 ways, and one who has overcome the cankers in 10 . 
ways. These are enumerated. 

108-111 (E264-266; T231-232) When an average person deve- 
lops insight, he becomes skillful in attendance in 9 ways and non- 
attendance in 9 ways; an initiate in 10 ways in attendance and 10 
in nonattendance; one who has overcome the cankers 12 ways in 
attendance and 12 in nonattendance. These are enumerated. 

112 (E266; T232-233) Through skillful attendance on various 
subjects he puts together the faculties. Cf. 3.203ff. 

— 113-114 (E267; T233) Understanding in the sense of mastery of 
3 faculties in 64 ways is knowledge of the destruction of the cankers. 

115-124 (E267-268; T233) Repeat 1.552-562. 

125 (E268; T233) Verse to the effect that the Buddha is called 
all-seeing because he has known and experienced all that is knowable. 

126 (E268; T233) ‘‘All-seer’’ is glossed as at 1.608. 

127-129 (E269; T233-234) The extent of this’: knowledge is 
explained.: 

130-131 (E269-270; T234-235) The relation between faith, 
exertion, concentration, and understanding. 

132-140 (E270-272; T235) The Buddha’s eye and knowledge are 
identified. 1.574-583 are then repeated. 


V. TREATISE ON LIBERATION 


1, 3-5 (E273-274; T236-237) There are 3 kinds of liberation: 
conditionless, desireless, and emptiness. 

2 (E273; T237) Lists 68 kinds of liberation. These are explained 
as follows: 

6-11 (E274-275; T237) 4 kinds of liberation as inward emer- 
gence, 4 kinds as external emergence, 4 kinds of emergence from 
both sides. 

12-14 (E275-276; T238-239) 4 kinds of liberation in conformity 
with inward emergence, 4 kinds in conformity with external emer- 
gence, and 4 with emergence from both sides. : 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 245 


15-17 (E276; T239) 4 kinds of liberation as calming inward 
emergence, 4 as calming external emergence, and 4 as calming 
emergence from both sides. 

18-24 (E276-280; T239-240) 7 kinds of liberation described in 
terms of perception of materiality, and resolution on liberation as 
the attainment of various bases and as the attainment of cessation 
of peception.. 

25-26 (E280; T241) Seasonable and unseasonable liberation. 

‘27-28 (E280; T242) Temporary and permanent liberation. 

29-30 (E280; T242) Unsteady and steady liberation. 

31-32 (E281; T242}) Mundane and supramundane liberation. 

33-34 (E281; T282) Liberation connected with the intoxicants 
and liberation free from them. 

35-37 (E281; T242) Fleshly liberation, nonfleshly liberation, and 
liberation more fleshly than nonfleshly. 

38-40 (E281-282; T242-243) Controlled liberation, liberation 
free from all longings, and tranquilized controlled liberation. 

41-42 (E282; T243} Harnessed and unharnessed liberation. 

43-44 (E282; T243) Liberation based on unity and liberation based 
on distinctions. 

45 (E282-283; T243-244) Liberation of perception. 

46 (E283-284; T244-245) Liberation of knowledge. 

47 (E284-286; T245-246) Liberation in the sense that “‘it can 
become cool’’. 

48 (E286; T246) Liberation reached through meditative states. 

49 (E286-287;, T246) Liberation of awareness through non- 
attachment. 

50-53 (E287-289; T246-249) Detailed enumeration of the variety 
of kinds of attachment from which knowledge of contemplation is 
liberated. 

54 (E290; T250) 3 entrances to liberation lead to departure from 
the world, 

55 (E290; T250) The appearance of the conditionings when given 
attention as impermanent, frustrating, and not-self. 

56 (E290-291; T250) In these instances, his state of awareness 
is respectively possessed of great Tesolution, great tranquility, and 
great wisdom. 

57 (E291; T250) In these cases one acquires respectively faith 
faculty, concentration faculty, and understanding faculty. 

§8-59 (E291-293; T250-252) For each of the cases in 5.57 is 
listed the dominant faculty operative, the number of consequent 
faculties, the variety of related conditions, the sense in which there 
is development, and by whom. 

60-61 (E294-295; T252-253) When he gives attention to the 


246° ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


faculties as (a) impermanent, the faith faculty is outstanding, (b) 
frustrating, the concentration faculty, (c) not-self, the understanding 
faculty. In these cases respectively he is liberated by faith, a body- 
witness, has attained liberation through vision. 

62 (E295; T253-254) One can be liberated by faith, a body- 
witness, attain liberation through vision according to object and 
function. 

63 (E296-297; T254-256) Consequent faculties, related condi- 
tions, path acquired, and spiritual attainment are listed for cases 
where attention is given to the faculties as impermanent, frustrating, 
and not-self respectively. 

64 (E297-299; T256-257) Those who have developed, are deve- 
loping, will develop—a series of synonyms for each of these follows— 
in negation of the 7 hindrances, in the 4 meditative states, 18 principal 
insights, 4 paths, 4 foundations of mindfulness, 4 right endeavors, 
4 bases for success, 5 faculties, S powers, 7 enlightenment factors, 
the eightfold path, 8 types of liberation, 4 discriminations, 3 kinds 
- of understanding, 3 trainings, and realize the 4 truths are liberated 
by faith, a body-witness, attain liberation through vision. 

65-66 (E299-300; T257-258) The truth of frustration is penetra- , 
ted with the penetration of full understanding, the truth of origin with 
penetration of abandoning, the truth of cessation with the penetration 
of realization, and the truth of the path with the penetration of 
development. All factors are penetrated by direct knowledge, forma- 
tions by full understanding, good states by abandoning, the 4 paths 
by development, and cessation by realization. ; 

67-68 (E301; T258) Repeat 5.55-56. 

69 (E301; T258-259) In the 3 cases of 5.56 one acquires respec- 
tively conditionless, desireless, and emptiness liberation. 

70-73 (E302-304; T259-261) As at 5.58-61, but substituting © 
liberation for faculty with corresponding changes in detail. 

74 (E305; T261) At the 4 moments of fruition of the 4 paths, 
he is liberated, etc., as at 5.62. 

75-77 (E305-306; T261-262) As at 5.64-66. 

78 (E306; T262) When he gives attention as impermanent, frustra- 
ting, and not-self, he rightly knows and sees the sign or mental image, 
occurrence, and both sign and occurrence respectively. By imperma- 
nence the formations are seen as impermanent, etc., and doubt is 
overcome. 

79 (E306; T262) Correct knowledge, right vision, and the 
conquest of doubt mean the same thing. 

80 (E306-307; T263) Mental image, occurrence, and both mental 
image and occurrence respectively appear as fear when attention 
is given to the formations as impermanent, etc. : 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 247 


81 (E307; T263) Understanding of appearance as fear, knowledge 
of danger, and dispassion mean the same thing. 

82 (E307; T263) Contemplation of not-self and of emptiness mean 
the same thing. 

83 (E307; T263) When he gives attention to the conditionings as 
impermanent, etc., there arises knowledge after reflecting on mental 
image, etc. , 

84 (E307-308; T263) Desire for liberation, contemplation on 
reflection, and equanimity regarding the conditionings mean the 
same thing. 

85 (E308; T263-264) Analysis of how states of awareness emerge 
and enter in when one gives attention to the conditionings as imper- 
manent etc. 

86 (E308; T264) Understanding of emergence and turning away 
from the external means the same as knowledge of change of lineage. 

87 (E308; T264) When he gives attention as impermanernt, etc., 
his liberation is respectively conditionless, desireless, and empti- 
ness. 

88 (E308-309; T264) Understanding of emergence and turning 
away from both sides means the same as knowledge of the path. 

89-91 (E309-311; T264-266) 3 kinds of liberation are in different 
moments in 4 ways, in one moment in 7 ways. 

92-103 (E311-315; T266-269) Commentary on the terms libera- 
tion; entrance to liberation; what conforms to liberation; turning 
away, development, and calming with respect to liberation. 


VI. TREATISE ON COURSE ON EXISTENCE 


1. (E316; T271) In the case of fortunate courses of existence 
rearising has its condition in 8 causes associated with knowledge. 
In the case of wealthy Ksatriyas, wealthy Brahmins, wealthy house- 
holders, and deities of the sphere of sense desires rebirth has its 
conditions in 8 such causes; in the case of deities of the material 
sphere in 8 such causes; and in 8 such causes in the case of deities 
of the immaterial sphere. 

2 (E316; T271-272) At the moment of impulsion of good action 
there are 3 good causes of the volition produced then. At the moment 
of attachment there are 2 bad causes of the volition produced then; 
at the moment of rebirth linking, 3 neutral causes. 

3-5 (E316-317; T272) At the moment of rebirth linking 28 factors 
are conditions by way of simultaneous arising, conditions by way 
of mutuality, dependence conditions, and dissociation conditions. 

6 (E317; T272) 6.2-6 relate to the 8 causes in the case ofa fortunate 
course of existence. 


248 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


7-11 (E317-318; T272-273) Repeat 6.2-6 but with reference to 
the case of wealthy Ksatriyas, Brahmins, householders, and deities 
of the sense desire sphere. 

12-16 (E318; T273) Repeat 6.2-6 with reference to the case of 
deities of the material stage. 

17-20 (E319; T273) Similarly deal with the case of deities of the 
immaterial stage. Here but 14 factors are conditions, since there are 
no material conditions. 

21 (E319-320; 7273) In the case of a fortunate course of existence 
rebirth has its conditions in 6 causes dissociated from knowledge. 
In the case of the wealthy, etc., in 6 causes dissociated from 
knowledge. 

22 (E320; T273-274) At the moment of impulsion of good action, 
there are 2 good causes of volition. At the moment of attachment, 
there are 2 bad causes; at the moment of rebirth linking, 2 neutral 
causes. 

23-25 (E320; T274) At the moment of rebirth linking, 26 factors 
are conditions as at 6.3-5. 

26-30 (E320; T274) In the case of a fortunate course of existence, . 
rebirth has its conditions in 6 causes. 

27-31 (E320-321; T274) Repeat as at 6.26-30 for the case of 
the wealthy, etc. 


Vil. TREATISE ON ACTION 


1 (E322; T276) In past, present, and future there are actions with 
maturation and actions without maturation. 

2 (E322-323; T276) As in 7.1 with reference to good actions and 
maturations. 

3 (E323; T276) As in 7.1 with reference to bad actions and 
maturations. 

4-11 (E323-324; T276) Similarly for blameworthy and blameless, 
dark and bright action; action which produces satisfaction and which 
produces frustration; action which results in satisfaction and that 
which results in frustration. 


VI. TREATISE ON PERVERSIONS 


1 (E325-326; T277-278) There are 4 perverted views of identifi- 
cation, of consciousness, of view; namely, to regard the impermanent 
as permanent, the frustrating as satisfying, what is without self as 
having a self, and seeing what is foul as clean. There are 4 corres- 
ponding nonperversions— e.g., seeing the impermanent as impefma- 
nent, etc. 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 249 


2 (E326; T278) Analysis of the perversions abandoned by one 
' possessed of right views; namely, all 3 perversions with reference 
to seeing the impermanent as permanent and not-self as self; and 
perversion of view with reference to seeing the frustrating as satis- 
fying and the ugly as beautiful. 


IX. TREATISE ON THE PATHS 


1 (E327-328; T279) The sense in. which each element of the 
eightfold path is the path at the moment of stream-entry. 

2-4 (E328-329; T279-280) As at 9.1, but at the moment of 
entering the path of once-returner, nonreturner, and perfected being 
respectively. 

5 (E330-331; T280-281) Synonyms for the 8 elements of the 
eightfold path. The path as factors of enlightenment, powers, 
faculties, negation of hindrances, etc. 


X. TREATISE ON THE FIRST CLASS DRINK 


1 (E332; T282) Quotes Samyutta 1.29. 

2 (E332; T282) When the Buddha is present, the teaching, the 
receptacles, and the good life constitute a first class drink to be drunk. 

3 (E332; T282) Explains the teaching as a first class drink in terms 
of synonyms for teaching, and a list of what is taught—namely 4 
truths, applications of mindfulness, etc. 

4 (E332; T282) It is monks, nuns, lay people, deities, humans, 
and other cognizant beings who are the receptacle. 

5 (E332; T282) The good life is the eightfold path. 

6-8 (E332-337; T282-285) Resolution, energy, establishment, 
nondistraction, seeing are a first class drink to be drunk. Lack of 
faith, sloth, negligence, agitation, ignorance are the dregs to be 
thrown out. 


Il. DIVISION ON CONGRUITY 


I, Treatise on Yoking Together/Congruity 

IL.1.1 (E338-339; T287) Quotes Anguttara II.156. 

11.1.2 (E340-341; T286-288) Commentary on unification of states 
of consciousness and nondistraction through renunciation. There are 
4 kinds of spiritual practice. Explanation of the production of the 
elements of the eightfold path and abandonment of the fetters and 
their intoxicants. 

11.1.3 (E342-343; T289) As in H.1.2 with reference to unification 
of freedom from malice, 


250 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


II.1.4-71 (E343; T389) As in IL.1.2 with reference to negations 
of the remaining hindrances, 4 meditative states, 4 meditative 
attainments, 10 symbolic.meditative devices, 10 recollections, 10 
kinds of impurity, 32 kinds of mindfulness of breathing. 

11.1.72-273 (E343-344; T289-290) Development of peace prece- 
ded by insight in the sense of contemplation of the 201 factors listed 
in [.1.5 as impermanent, frustrating, not-self. 

I.1.274 (E344; T290) Insight and peace are developed yoked 
together in congruity with one another in 16 ways; namely, in the 
sense of foundation, field, abandoning, renunciation, emerging, 
developing, peacefulness, sublimity, being liberated, being free of 
intoxicants, crossing over, being without signs, free of desire, empty, 
having a single taste, in the absence of excess. 

1.1.275-288 (E344-348; T290-293) Explain how practice in each 
of the first 14 cases in [.1.274 occurs. 

¥1.1.289-315 (E348-349; T294-295) How the mind is agitated, 
the path produced, fetters abandoned along with their tendencies 
while giving attention as impermanent, frustrating, and not-self; 
knowledge, happiness, tranquility, resolution, exertion, estab- 
lishment, and equanimity arise. 

I1.1.316-5742 (E349; T295) As at I1.1.289-315 while giving 
attention to each of the 201 factors of [.1.5 as impermanent, frustra- 
ting, and not-self. 

I.1.5743 (E349-350; T295) Summary verse. 


I. TREATISE ON THE TRUTHS 


I].2.1 (E351; T297) Cites 4 truths quoting Samyutta V.430. 

1.2.2 (E351; 7297) Frustration in the sense of oppression, of being 
compounded, of torment,.and of change. 

Il.2.3 (E351; T297) Origin in the sense of accumulation, source, 
bondage, and of impediment. 

11.2.4 (E351-352; T297) Cessation in the sense of escape, seclu- 
sion, being uncompounded, and of deathlessness. 

0.2.5 (E352; T297)} Path in the sense of outlet, cause, seeing, 
and of sovereignty. 

1.2.6-10(E352-353; 7297-298) The 4 truths have single penetra- 
tion in 4 ways; namely, in the sense of suchness, in the sense of 
not-self, truth, and penetration. 

11.2.11-16 (E353-355; T298-299) There is single penetration of 
the 4 truths in 9 ways; namely, in the 4 ways listed in II.2.6-10, 
in the sense of direct knowledge, full understanding, abandonment, 
development, and realization. These 9 ways are further applied to 
each of the 4 ways in I.2.6-10. 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 251 


1.2.17 (E355; T299) As at 01.2.11-16, but in 12 ways—in the 
sense of idea, principle, and being known are added. 

11.2.18-29 (E355-356; T299-300) For each of the 12 cases in 
1.2.17 there is single penetration of the 4 truths in 16 ways. 

1.2.30 (E356; T300) The truths have the characteristics of the 
compounded and the uncompounded. 

1.2.31 (E356; T300) The rise, fall, and change of the compounded 
is known, but not of the uncompounded. 

1.2.32 (E356; T300) As at If.2.31 for each of the 4 truths 
individually. : 

1f.2.33-34 (E356-357; T301) With respect to the 4 truths, origin 
is bad, the path is good, cessation is neutral, and frustration may 
be good, bad or neutral. 

1.2.35 (E357-358; T301-302) Quotes Samyutta III.26. 

1.2.36 (E358-359; T302) Penetration by abandoning, by full 
understanding, by realization, and by practice respectively is know- 
ledge respectively of the 4 truths. 

1.2.37 (E359; T302) Truth in the sense of search, embracing, 
and penetration. 

11.2.38-40 (E359-362; T302-304) Reverse analysis of the chain 
of dependent origination as explanation of the meaning of truth in 
the 3 aspects. listed in 1.2.37. 


Ii. TREATISE ON THE FACTORS OF ENLIGHTENMENT 


0.3.1 (E363; T306) Quoting Samyutta V.77 lists 7 factors of 
enlightenment, namely, the mindfulness, investigation of factors, 
energy, bliss, tranquility, concentration, and equanimity enlighten- 
ment factors. : 

II.3.2-13 (E363-366; T306-308) These are factors of enlighten- 
- ment in the sense that they enlighten; in the sense of roots, of cause, 
condition, purification, blamelessness, renunciation, deliverance; 
in the sense of being free of cankers; in the sense of seclusion, and 
renunciation. . 

1.3.14 (E366; T308-309) They are enlightened in the sense of 
conduct with respect to roots, causes, etc., as at 11.3.2-13. 

1.3.15-19 (E366; T309) They are enlightened in the sense of 
embracing, equipment, perfection, ripening, and discrimination of 
_ each of the subjects listed in If.3.2-13. 

1.3.20-22 (E366-367; T309-310) They are enlightened in the 
Sense of causing to reach, developing mastery in, and achieving 
- Mastery in discrimination of all of the subjects of II.3.2-13. 

‘1.3.23 (E367; T310) Thus they are factors of enlightenment. 
11.3.24-43 (E367-373; T311-313) Lists numerous other senses 


252 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in which the factors of enlightenment are ‘‘enlightened’’. Included 
are repetitions of the patterns of [.1.26, 28-33, 35-36, and 41-43. 

11:3.44 (E373-374; T313-314) Quotes Samyutta V.70. 

1.3.45 (E375; T314) There is a factor of enlightenment as long 
as cessation is established, just as there is light as long as a lamp 
is burning. 

1.3.46 (E375; T314) Defilements, etc., are limited; thus as long 
as there is cessation, there is a factor of enlightenment in the. 
realization that it is boundless. 

1.3.47 (E375; T314) Defilements are not the same. Cessation is 
a matter of sameness in the sense that it is at peace. As long as 
cessation is established, there is a factor of enlightenment in the 
realization that it is well-calmed. 

11.3.48-50 (E375-376; T314-315) The mindfulness factor of 
enlightenment remains and falls away in 8 ways. 

11.3.51-80 (E356-357; T315) Similarly for the other factors of 
enlightenment. 

11.3.81-86 (E377-378; T315-316) 8 aspects of the rising and 
falling away of a factor of enlightenment in the realization that there 
is an equanimity factor of enlightenment. 


IV. TREATISE ON LOVING KINDNESS 


1.4.1 (E379; T317) Quotes Anguttara V.342 concerning deliver- 
ance by loving kindness leading to 11 benefits. 

11.4.2 (E379; T317) There is deliverance by loving kindness with 
unlimited, limited, and directional pervasion. 

11.4.3 (E379; T317) There is deliverance with unlimited pervasion 
in 5 ways, with limited pervasion in 7 ways, with directional 
pervasion in 10 ways. 

11.4.4 (E380; T317-318) The S ways with unlimited pervasion are: 
(a) that all beings may be free from hatred and ill will, and live happily; 
(b) toward all who are so free and happy; (c) toward all breathing 
things; (d) toward all people; and (e) toward all their own personality. 

1.4.5 (E380; T318) The 7 ways with limited pervasion are directed 
toward all women, all men, all noble ones, all who are not noble, 
all deities, all humans, and all creatures in states of distraction. 

11.4.6 (E380-381; T318-319) The 10 ways with which directional 
pervasion are directed toward east, west, north, south, 4 intermediate 
directions, up and down. Each of the 5 cases in Hf.4.4 and 7 cases 
in 11.4.5 is related to each of the 10 directions in this paragraph. 

11.4.7 (E381; T319) Loving kindness treats kindly in 8 ways. 

11.4.8 (E381-382; T319-320) Deliverance by loving nindnes can 
be fortified by the 5 faculties. 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 253 


If.4.9-10 (E382; T320) It is cultivated by means of the 5 faculties. 

11.4.11 (E382-383; T320) When dizecting loving. kindness toward 
all beings, one is unshaken. 

11.4.12-13 (E383-384; T320) 5 powers are cultivation of deliver- 
ance by loving kindness. 

11.4.14-16 (E384-385;T320-321) Deliverance by loving kindness 
is fortified by the 7 factors of enlightenment. 

11.4.18-19 (E385; T321) 8 path factors are cultivation of deliver- 
ance by loving kindness. 

I1.4.20-1602 (E385-391; T321-322) Repeat the pattern of II.4.7- 
19 for each of the cases in I1.4.4-6. 


V. TREATIES ON NONATTACHMENT 


11.5.1 (E392; T324) Nonattachment is the path; deliverance its 
fruit. af 

I1.5.2-5 (E392-394; T324-325) There is nonattachmentas libera- 
tion and as a reference to all factors which arise with liberation as 
their supporting object. At the moment of entry on each the 4 paths 
(stream-entry, etc.), the elements of the eightfold path become 
detached or fade away from their opposites (i.e. wrong view, etc.). 
The 7 path factors which arise with the elements of the eightfold 
path become detached or fade away. 

11.5.6 (E394-395; T325-326) Outlines the sense in which non- 
attachment is identified with the elements of the eightfold path, 
the factors of enlightenment, the 5 powers, the faculties, the applica- 
tions of mindfulness. 

11.5.7-10 (E397; T326-328) There is deliverance as liberation and 
as a fruit in the sense that all factors which arise with liberation as 
their supporting object are delivered. At the moment of fruition of 
each of the 4 paths, the elements of the eightfold path are delivered 
from their opposites. 

1.5.11 (E307; T328) Outlines the sense in which deliverance is 
identified with the elements of the eightfold path, etc. (as in 1.5.6) 
as their fruit. 


VI. TREATISE ON DISCRIMINATIONS 


11.6.1 (E386-401; T329-331} Quotes Vinaya 1.9 = Samyutta 
’ V.420. The treatise as a whole is a commentary on this passage with 
the discriminations as its central focus. 

11.6.2 (E401; T331) The new (a) vision or insight, (b) knowledge, 
(c) understanding, (d) recognition, and (e) illumination that arose 
in the Buddha were recognition of the first truth of frustration. 


254 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


11.6.3-4 (E401-402: T331-332) These 5 are factors which are the 
object and field in the discrimination of factors. Hence knowledge 
of factors is discrimination of factors. Similarly the meaning of 
seeing, knowing, understanding, recognition, and illumination are 
analyzed as object and field in the discrimination of meaning. 
Speaking to indicate these 5 factors and 5 meanings is analyzed as 
language which is the object and field in the discrimination of 
language. Knowledge of 5 factors, S meanings, and 10 sorts of 
language is analyzed as object and field in the discrimination of 
perspicuity. 

1f.6.5-11 (E402-403; T332) Repeat 1.6.2-4 as what is to be fully 
understood and has been fully understood. 

11.6.12-42 (E403-405; T332-333) Repeat 11.6.2-11 for each of 
the remaining 3 truths and the 4 truths collectively. 

1.6.43 (E405; T333-334) The contemplation of the body, feelings, 
states of awareness is identified with the vision, knowledge, under- 
standing, recognition, and illumination that. exists, is to be deve- 
loped, and has been developed. 

11.6.44-53 (E405-406; T334) The vision, knowledge, etc., that 
arose are identified with contemplation of the body as body. The 
analysis continues as in II.6.3-4. This contemplation of body as body 
is to be practiced arid has been practiced. The analysis is as at 
11.6.5-11. 

11.6.54-83 (E405S-407; 1334-335} Repeat the pattern of 
I1.6.44-53 with respect to contemplation of feeling as feelings, states 
of awareness as states of awareness, and factors as factors. 

1.6.85 (E407; T336) Quotes Samyutta V.258. 

11.6.86-95 (E407; T335-336) Regarding the basis for the success 
endowed with both zeal for concentration and instigation. The pattern 
is as at 11.6.44-53, 

11.6.96-126 (E407-409; T336-337} Regarding the basis for 
success endowed with concentration due to energy, due to states 
of awareness, and due to investigation, etc., as at II.6.44-53. 

11.6.127-142 (E409-411; T337-338) Arising and cessation were 
the vision, knowledge, etc., that arose in the Bodhisattvas Vipassi, 
Sikhi, Vessabhu, Kakusandha, Konagamana, Kassapa and Gotama. 

11.6.143 (E411; T338) Insofar as the meaning of higher faculty 
as higher faculty is known, seen, recognized, realized, and touched 
by understanding and no meaning is untouched by understanding, 
just so far vision, knowledge, understanding, recognition, and illumi- 
nation arose. 

11.6.144-172 (E411-413; 1338-340) Similarly substituting 
complete understanding, abandoning, development, and realization 
for higher faculty. Similarly substituting aggregates, elements, 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 255 


senses, what is conditioned, the unconditioned, frustration, and the 
4 discriminations. Similarly substituting knowledge of penetration 
into the faculties of others, knowledge of their biases and contami- 
nants, the miracle of double appearance, great compassion, omni- 
science, and unobstructed knowledge. 


Vil. TREATISE ON THE WHEEL OF DHARMA 


11.7.1 (E414; T341) Quotes Samyutta V.420 as in II. V1.1. 
II.7.2-3 (E414; T341) Repeat II. VI.2-3. 
IL.7.4 (E414-415; T341-342) The 5 factors as at II. VI.4 and their 
’ meanings have frustration and truth as their ground, support, and 
field. Established in the dharma and establishing it in others, the 
Buddha sets rolling the wheel of the dharma. 

11.7.5 (E415-417; T342-343) The 5 faculties are factors which 
’ he sets rolling. So too are the 5 powers, 7 factors of enlightenment, 
elements of the eightfold path, the path, applications of mindfulness, 
right endeavors, bases for success, 4 truths, peace and insight, 
congruity, purification, liberation, knowledge, and zeal. 

II.7.6-13 (E417; T343) Repeat II.6.5-10. 

I1.7.14-16 (E417; T7343) Similar to 11.6.12-14. Complete by 
repeating the end of II. VII.4. 

1.7.17 (E417; T343) Repeats I1.7.5. 

II.7.18-25 (E417-418; T343-344) Repeat I1.7.15-17 with the 
addition that the truth of the origin of frustration is to be abandoned. 

II.7.26-37 (E418; T344) Repeat II.7.2-13 with respect to the truth 
of the cessation of frustration. 

II.7.38-49 (E418-419; T344-345) Repeat II.7.2-13 with respect 
to the truth of the way which leads to the end of frustration. 

1.7.50 (E419; T345) Quotes Samyutta V.178. 

II.7.51-62 (E419; T345) Generally repeats 11.6.44-S52 with the 
addition of II.7.4-5. 

11.7.63-90 (E419; T345) As at II.7.4 with the 5 factors having 
feelings, states of awareness, factors and application of mindfulness 
as their ground. 

1.7.91 (E419-420; T346) Quotes Samyutta V.258. 

II.7.92-103 (E420-421;T346) Repeat II.6.86-94 with the addition 
of 11.7.4-5. 

I1.7.104-139 (E421-422; T346) As at II.7.4 with energy, states 
of awareness, inquiry as their ground and basis for success as their 
ground. 


256 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
VI. TREATISE ON THE SUPRAMUNDANE 


11.8.1 (E423; T347) 4 applications of mindfulness, 4 right endea- 
vors, 4 bases for success, 5 faculties, 5 powers, 7 factors of 
enlightenment, eightfold path, 4 paths and their fruits, and liberation 
are supramundane. 

11.8.2 (E423-424; T347-348) Supramundane in the sense of 
crossing over, transcending, and escaping the world; not being 
smeared by the world; dissociated from it, purified of it. They are 
not attached to the world; they abandon it. 


IX. TREATISE ON THE POWERS 


11.9.1 (E425; T349) The 5 powers are the powers of faith, energy, 
mindfulness, concentration, and wisdom. 

11.9.2 (E425; T349) There are 68 powers, namely: the 5 powers 
listed in 11.9.1 plus conscience, shame, reflection, development, 
blamelessness, assistance, patience, nominal designation, notifica- 
tion, sovereignty, steadiness, peace and insight, 10 powers each of 
the initiate and the adept, 10 powers of one who has overcome the 
intoxicants, 10 supernatural powers, and the 10 powers of a Buddha. 

11.9.3-22 (E425-431; T349-352) Explain the first 18 of these 
kinds of power. 

1.9.23 (E431; T352) Training in the elements of the eightfold path, 
plus training in knowledge and deliverance are powers of the initiate. 
Being trained in these 10 are the powers of an adept. 

11.9,24-33 (E431-432; T352-353) The powers of one who has 
overcome the intoxicants are: (a) He correctly sees all formations 
as impermanent; (b) he sees sense desires as like a burning pit; (c) 
his states of awareness tend toward detachment; (d) he has developed 
the 4 applications of mindfulness, (e) the 4 right endeavors, (f) 4 
bases for success, (g) 5 faculties, (h) 5 powers, {i) 7 factors of 
enlightenment, and (j) the eightfold path. 

I1.9.34 (E432; T353) The 10 supernatural powers are: the power 
of determination, of transformation, the power of mental creation, 
of penetrating knowledge, of penetrating concentration, the power 
of a noble one, the power born of the result of action, the power 
of the meritorious, power through sciences, and power in the sense 
of succeeding in what is appropriate to the occasion. 

11.9.35-44 (E432-434; T353-354) The 10 powers of a Buddha 
are: (a) He knows the difference between the possible and the 
impossible; (b) he understands the result of past, present and future 
action; (c) he understands where all ways lead; (d) he understands 
the world, (e) the determination of beings, (f) the disposition of 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA __- 257 


faculties in others, (g) corruption, cleansing, meditative states, 
liberation, etc., (h) he remembers his past lives, (i) he sees beings 
passing from existence to existence in accordance with their karma; 
and (j) he abides in a state of liberation. 
1.9.45 (E434-435; T354-355) Summary of the meaning of the 
, 68 kinds of power. 


X. TREATISE ON EMPTINESS 


1.10.1 (E436; T356) Quotes Samyutta TV.54 on the nature of 
the world as empty. 

11.10.2-26 (E436-445; T356-361) There is emptiness as empti- 
ness, emptiness of conditionings, emptiness of change, supreme 
emptiness, emptiness of characteristics; emptiness through renun- 
ciation, by substitution of opposites, by cutting off, by tranquiliza- 
tion; internal and external emptiness, as well as emptiness in both 
ways; equivalent emptiness, dissimilar emptiness; emptiness in 
search, embracing, obtaining, penetration; emptiness in unity and 
difference, in choice, in steadiness, in fathoming. 

11.10.27 (E445; T361) The ultimate meaning of emptiness is the 
termination that occurs on attaining the state of a perfected being. 


Il. DIVISION ON WISDOM 
I. TREATISE ON GREAT WISDOM 


Ill:1.1 {E446-447; T363) When developed, contemplation of im- 
‘permanence perfects impulse-driven wisdom; contemplation of 
frustration perfects penetrative wisdom; contemplation of not-self 
perfects great wisdom; contemplation of equanimity perfects keen 
wisdom; contemplation of nonattachment perfects abundant 
wisdom; contemplation of cessation perfects profound wisdom, 
contemplation of renunciation perfects unequalled wisdom. These 
7 kinds of wisdom perfect erudition. These 8 kinds of wisdom perfect 
wide wisdom. These 9 kinds of wisdom perfect laughter wisdom 
which is the discrimination of perspicuity. With the definition of 
meaning, factors, language, and perspicuity, the 4 discriminations 
are realized. 

Ii. 1.2-3 (E447-450; T363-366) When developed, contemplation 
of the 9 subjects (in I.1.1) in materiality, impermanence, etc., 
through the 201 factors of I.1.5 similarly perfect a variety of forms 
of wisdom as listed in II. 1.1. Thus the 4 discriminations are realized 
as in Ii.1.1. 

1.1.4 (E450-451; T366) Quotes Samyutta V.410 to the effect 


258 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that waiting on good men, hearing the dharma, attention to it, and 
practice in accord with it lead to realization of the fruit of stream- 
entry. Similarly with respect to the realization of the fruits of the 
remaining 3 stages of the path. They lead to awakening of wisdom 
of various types as in IH.1.1. 

Ill.1.5 (E451; T366-367) Obtaining wisdom means realizing, etc., 
knowledge of the 4 paths and their fruition, knowledge of the 4 
discriminations, the 6 kinds of supernatural knowledge, the 73 kinds 
of knowledge listed in 1.1.1, and 77 kinds of knowledge listed at 
Samyuttanikaya 11.59. 

1.1.6-11 (E451-455; T367-368) Explanation of awakening of 
abundance of, great, wide, abundant, and profound wisdom. 

1.1.12 (E455-458; T368-371} Explanation of awakening of 
unequalled wisdom. Wisdom at each stage of the path exceeds that 
of previous stages. Compared to lower stages, a perfected being’s 
wisdom is unequalled. Compared to a perfected being, the wisdom 
of a solitary self-enlightened Buddha is unequalled. Compared with 
this, the wisdom ofa Buddhais unequalled. There is nothinga Buddha 
has not known and seen; nothing knowable he has not known and 
seen. His knowledge reaches all factors and all beings. [The approach 
of this paragraph is more discursive than much of the rest of the 
text. ] 

1.1.13 (E458; T371} The nature of extensive wisdom as over- 
coming negative qualities, defilements, misconduct, karmic condi- 
tioning and the like. 

Il.1.14 (E458-459; T371-372) The nature of abundant wisdom. 
Similes. . 

Ill.1.15 (E459-460; T372) The nature of quick wisdom as rapidly 
perfecting virtues, etc. 

I.1.16 (E460; T372) The nature of speedy wisdom as speedily 
perfecting virtues, etc. 

IIl.1.17 (E460-461; T372) Laughter wisdom is when one perfects 
the virtues, etc., joyfully, gladly, with much laughter. 

I.1.18 (E461-462; T372-373) Driven by impulsion to realize that 
the 201 factors of 1.1.5, whether past, present, or future, internal 
or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near are 
impermanent, one develops impulse-driven wisdom. Having made 
clear, etc., that each of these 201 factors is impermanent, etc., it 
gives impulse to the cessation of these 201 factors. 

IIl.1.19 (E462-463; T372-373) Keen wisdom severs defilement. 
It does not endure evil and bad attitudes, thought, or action. 

1.1.20 (E463; T374)} Penetrative wisdom reacts negatively 
toward conditionings, penetrates and explodes negative attitudes, 
thought, and action. 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 259 


1.1.21 (E463; T374) There are 10 kinds of wisdom. One who 
has these has reached the discriminations. 

Ifl.1.22 (E463-464; T374) Some who have reached the discrimi- 
nations have had practice in former lives; others have not. 

1.1.23 (E464; T374) Of the two groups in III.1.22, some are 
well-taught; others are not. 

1.1.24 (E464; T7374) Of those who are well-taught, some teach 
much; others do not. 

IH.1.25 (E464; T374) Of those who do much teaching, some are 
dependent on a teacher; others are not. 

I11.1.26 (E464; T374-375) Of those who are so dependent, some 
abide in insight and maturation; others do not. 

1.1.27 (E464; T375) Of those who so abide, some do much 
reflection; others do not. 

I. 1.28 (E464-465; T375) Of those who do much reflection, some 
have reached the discrimination of an adept; some the discrimination 
of an initiate. 

1.1.29 (E465; T375) Of those who have reached the discrimina- 
tion of an adept, some have reached the perfections of a disciple; 
others have not. 

Il.1.30 (E465; T375) Of those who have reached the discrimina- 
tion of an adept, some have become solitary self-enlightened 
Buddhas, others have reached the perfection of a disciple. In each 
of the pairs in III. 1.22-30, the wisdom of the self-enlightened Buddha 
is the highest in attainment of discrimination, etc., as in III.1.12. 


I. TREATISE ON SUPERNATURAL POWER 


1.2.1 (E467; T377) Matrices. 

I.2.2-3 (E467; T377) There are 10 kinds of siscraataial power. 
Supernatural power has 4 stages, 4 bases, 8 steps and 16 roots. 

Il.2.4 (E467; T377) The 10 supernatural powers are listed as at 
11.9.34. 

11.2.5 (E467; T377) The 4 stages are the 4 meditative states. 

1.2.6 (E468; T377) The 4 bases are: the basis that possesses 
(a) concentration due to zeal and volitional conditioning due to 
endeavor, (b) concentration due to energy and volitional condition- 
ing ..., (c) concentration due to states of awareness and volitional ..., 
and (d) concentration due to inquiry and volitional... 

1.2.7 (E468; T376-377) Obtaining concentration and unification 
of states of awareness supported by zeal, energy, awareness, and 
inquiry are the 8 steps. 

I.2.8 (E468-469; T378) The 16 roots are undejected, unrelated, 
unattracted, unrepelled, independent, untrammelled, liberated, 


260 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


unassociated, unified, and illuminated states of consciousness; 
awareness free from barriers, embraced by faith, by energy, by mind- 
fulness, by concentration, and by understanding. 

1.2.9 (E469; T378) The power of determination is defined in 
terms of a monk’s ability to multiply himself or to become one; to 
disappear; to pass through walls; mountains, and the like; to dive 
into the earth as if it were water; to walk on water as if it were dry 
land; to float through the air; to touch the sun and the moon; and 
to have mastery of the body even into the Brahma world. 

M.2.10-22 (E470-473; T379-381) Commentary on M1.2.9. 

Il.2.23 (E473; T381) One possessed of the power of transforma- 
tion preaches the dharma adopting a variety of physical appearances. 

Ifl.2.24 (E473; T381-382) One possessed of the power of mental 
creation mentally creates out of his own body another body. 

Ifl.2.25 (E474; T382) One possessed of the power of penetrating 
knowledge succeeds in abandoning false perception through proper 
concentration. 

1.2.26 (E474-475; T382-383) One possessed of the power of 
penetrating concentration succeeds through attaining the meditative 
states and other higher states of awareness. 

Il'2.27 (E475-476; T383-384) One possessed of the power of 
a noble. one abides perceiving the repulsive and unrepulsive in the 
repulsive or unrepulsive as he wills. 

Il.2.28 (E476; T384) The power born of the result of action is 
that in all deities, all birds, some humans, and some beings in states 
of deprivation. 

1.2.29 (E476; T384) The power of the meritorious is when the - 
Wheel Turning King (cakravartin) travels through the air with his 
army and retinue. 

1.2.30 (E476; T384) The power of the lower sciences consists 
of magic spells which make possible flight through the air and the 
creation of various illusory appearances. 

_ {0.2.31 (E477; T384) The power of succeeding in what is appro- 
priate to the occasion. 


Ill. TREATISE ON HIGHER REALIZATION 


11.3.1 (E478-479; T386-387) Higher realization is a result of 
awareness. One without knowledge does not produce realization of 
‘the truth. One without awareness does not realize the truth. If 
realization of the truth is produced by awareness and knowledge, 
it is not by means of knowledge and awareness in the sense desire 
sphere, the material sphere, the immaterial sphere, awareness that 
is heir to or possesses action, awareness in conformity with truth; 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 261 


past, present, or future mundane awareness. Rather, the higher 
realization is produced by means of present mundane awareness at 
the moment of entry on the supramundane path and by means of 
knowledge. 

1.3.2 (E479-480; T387-388) At the moment of entry on the 
supramundane path there is realization of the truth of seeing, 
directing onto, enhancing, originating, cleansing, exertion, estab- 
lishing, nondistraction. These are identified with the elements of 
the eightfold path repectively. There is realization of the truth 
identified with the 7 factors of enlightenment, the S powers, 5 
faculties. These are each explained. There is realization of the truth 
of the path, applications of mindfulness, right endeavors, bases for 
success, truths, peace and insight, etc. There is higher realization 
in the sense of liberation. 

U.3.3-10 (E480; T388-389) As at Ifl.3.2 with respect to the 
moments of stream entry, entry on the path of once-returner, entry 
on the path of nonreturner, and the path of the perfected being, as 
well as at the moment of fruitioh of each of these. 

MH.3.11 (E481-482; T389-390) When one abandons defilements, 
he does not abandon past defilements since these no longer exist. 
He does not abandon future defilements since these do not yet exist. 
He does not abandon present defilements, for that would mean that 
though fired by greed, he abandons greed, etc. It would mean that 
practice of the path has defilement. However, this does not imply 
there is no practice of the path or higher realization. 

MM1.3.12 (E482; T390) Simile of a tree with undeveloped fruit which 
is cut down. The fruit remains ungenerated. So with higher realiza- 
tion, the cause of the defilements is destroyed and defilements no 
longer generated. : 


IV. TREATISE ON DISCERNMENT 


11.4.1 (E483-484; T391) Quotes Samyutta V.45f to the effect 
that the eightfold path is developed by depending on virtue. 

IH.4.2 (E484; T391-392) In the case of each of the elements of 
the eightfold path there are 5 kinds of discernment, 5 kinds of 
nonattachment, 5 kinds of cessation, 5 kinds of relinquishing, and 
12 supports. 

11.4.3 (E484; T392) In the case of right view, the 5 kinds of 
discernment are discernment by suppression, by substitution of 
opposites, by cutting off, by tranquilizing, and discernmentas escape. 
Three supports here are that he (a) is filled with zeal, (b) has faithful 
resolve and (c) steady awareness. 

ll.4.4 (E484-485; T392) The 5 kinds of nonattachment are by 


262 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


suppression, etc., as at III.4.3. 

I1I.4.5-6 (E485; T392-393) The 5 kinds of cessation and relinqui- 
shing are by suppression, etc., as at I.4.3. 

111.4.7-34 (E485-487; T393) As at III.4.3-6 with reference to the 
cases of the remaining 7 elements of the eightfold path. 

f.4.35-100 (E487-488; T393) Repeat I.4.1-34 substituting 7 
enlightenment factors, 5 powers, and 5 faculties for the elements 
of the eightfold path. 


V. TREATISE ON CONDUCT 


Ill.5 (E489-490; T340) The treatise as a whole repeats I.4.31-33 
verbatim. 


VI. TREATISE ON MIRACLES 


11.6.1 (E490; T395-396) Quotes Aguttara 1.170 on 3 kinds of 
miracle, namely, supernatural power, the miracle of mind-reading, 
and the miracle of instruction. 

Il.6.2 (E490-492; T396) Renunciation has good results and is 
thus a supernatural power. It surprises and is thus a miracle. Those 
possessed of that renunciation have pure states of awareness and 
their thought is stilled. This is the miracle resulting from instruction. 
Such renunciation should be cultivated. Such renunciation is the 
miracle (resulting) from advice. Similarly beginning ‘‘the absence 
of ill will has good results, etc.’ with reference to the rest of the 
7 hindrances and their negations, 4 meditative states, 4 immaterial 
attainments, 18 principal insights, and 4 paths. The path of the 
perfected being destroys defilements and is thus a miracle. Those 
on this path have pure states of awareness and their thought is stilled. 
This is a miracle resulting from instruction, etc. 

Il.6.3 (E492-494; T396) The supernatural power and the miracle 
together constitute the miracle of supernatural power. 


Vil. TREATISE ON EQUIVALENT HEADINGS 


H.7 (E495-496; T397) The treatise as a whole repeats 
1.1.464-470. 


VII. TREATISE ON THE APPLICATION OF MINDFULNESS 
I.8.1 (E497; T398) Quotes Samyutta V.73 listing the 4 appli- 


cations of mindfulness. 
1.8.2-4 (E497; T398) He contemplates the body as body. The 


PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 263 


subject matter is like that at I.3.196-198. 

H.8.5-40 (E498; T398-399) One contemplates the water body, 
fire body, air body, head-hair body, body-hair body, outer-skin 
body, inner-skin body, flesh body, blood body, sinew body, bone 
body, marrow body, etc., as at I[J.8.2-4. 

11.8.41-49 (E498-499; T399) Similarly with respect to con- 
templation of feelings as feelings. Satisfying feelings, frustrating 
feelings, and feelings which are neither satisfying nor frustrating 
are considered. 

Ml,8.50-115 (E499-500; T399-400) Similarly with respect to 
contemplation of states of awareness as states of awareness. 22 states 
of awareness are considered. 

0.8.106-108 (E500; T400) Similarly with respect to contempla- 
tion of factors as factors. 


IX. TREATISE ON INSIGHTS 


11.9.1-5 (ES01-503; T401) Quotes Anguttara I1.441f regarding 
a monk realizing certainty regarding what is right and attaining the 
fruit of the paths when he sees conditionings as impermanent, 
frustrating, and not-self, and thus makes a choice in conformity with 
truth. 

Il.9.6 (E503; T401-402) He makes a choice in conformity with 
truth in 40 ways, and realizes certainty regarding what is right in © 
40 ways. 

0.9.7-8 (E503-506; T402-404) That is, he sees 5 aggregates as 
impermanent, as frustrating, as a disease, a boil, a dart, a calamity, 
an affliction, as alien, disintegrating, as a plague, a disaster, fear, 
menace, as fickle, perishable, nonlasting, as offering no protection, 
no shelter, no refuge, as vain, void, not-self, a danger, changeable, 
_ as without a core, as the root of calamity, as murderous, as about 
to be annihilated, as subject to intoxicants, as compounded, as 
Mara’s lure, as connected with birth, old age, illness, death, sorrow, 
lamentation, despair and defilement. For each of these negatives, 
he chooses the positive opposite. 

I.9.9-10 (ES06-507; T404) These 40 higher realizations are each 
analyzed according to whether they involve contemplation of im- 
permanence, frustration, or not-self. These*40 with reference to 
each of the 5 aggregates amount to a total of 25 contemplations of 
not-self, 50 of impermanence, and 125 of frustration. 


’ X. TREATISE ON MATRICES 


1.10.1 (ES508-511; T405) A list of terms: satisfied; it is liberated 


264 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and thus is liberation; higher virtue, higher states of consciousness, 
higher wisdom, tranquility, knowledge, seeing, purification, renun- 
ciation, escape, detachment, relinquishing, conduct, liberation 
through states of absorption, development, steadiness and life. 
IM.10.2-6 (E511; T405-408) A commentary on these terms. The 
text ends with a brief verse table of contents. 


KATHAVATTHU 


by James P. McDermott 


The Kathavatthu, or Points of Controversy, consists of a series of 
debates over controverted points of doctrine. The text itself does 
not identify the disputants. The text is written from the perspective 
of Theravada Buddhism. Where it seemed advisable as a matter of 
phrasing to identify the position of the text by name, I have adopted 
the convention of referring to it as Sakavadi, that is the author’s own 
position. 

In preparing the following summary, I have followed the edition 
by Bhikkhu J. Kashyap published by the Nalanda Devanagari Pali 
Series (Bihar: Pali Publication Board, Bihar Government, 1961), 

- which is here identified as ‘‘E’’. ‘‘T’’ references are to the translation 
by Shwe Zan Aung and Mrs. Carolyn Rhys Davids, Points of Contro- 
versy (Pali Text Society, London 1915, reprinted by Luzac in 1960). 
In numbering the sections of the text I have followed the numbering 
of the P.T.S. translation. The numbers for Books and Controversies 
follow exactly those of the other standard available edition, that by 
Arnold C. Taylor in Pali Text Series nos. 34 and 36 (London: H. 
Frowde, 1894-97), and with rare exception match those of the 
Nalanda edition. There are two other editions to be mentioned, one 
by Mahesh Tiwari with Buddhaghosa’s commentary from Patna in 
1971, the other by N.A. Jayawickrame, Pali Text Series 169, London 
1979, also with Buddhaghosa’s commentary.’ 

The workis regularly ascribed to Moggaliputta Tissa, and it appears 
to have been prepared around 240 B.C. during Asoka’s period of 
reign, although André Bareau’ dissents from this opinion. Bareau 
-thinks that some verses of the work or its prototype may have been 
read at Pataliputta during ASoka’s reign, and that Kathavatthu and 
Vijfidanakaya may stem from the same prototype. 

Following the pattern of the printed versions themselves, I have 
taken the liberty of providing a more detailed picture of the argument 
involved in the earlier controversies than in those that follow. 


266 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
BOOK I. 


I.1. Concerning the existence of a person (pudgaia). 

1.1.1. The eight refutations. 

(1-5) The opponent states that the person is known as a real and 
ultimate fact, but is unwilling to admit that it is known in the same 
way as a real and ultimate fact is known. This is refuted as inconsis- 
tent. ; 

(2-5) Using the same reasoning, the opponent argues that if this 
were true, it would also be inconsistent to maintain the person is 
not known as a real and ultimate fact while maintaining, as the 
Sakavadi would, that it is unknown in the same way as a real and 
ultimate fact is known. Since the Sakavadi does not admit this as 
inconsistent, the original refutation must be faulty. 

(6-10) The opposite position is then argued beginning with the 
Sakavadi’s assertion that the person is not known in the sense of . 
real and ultimate fact. By repeating both steps of the above argument, 
it is thus shown that the opponent’s rejoinder to the Sakavadi’s 
original refutation in I.1.1.2-5 must be faulty. 

(11-13) It is then shown that the person cannot be known in the 
sense of a real and ultimate fact, since the opponent is unwilling 
to admit that it (I.1.1.11) is known everywhere in that sense; 
(I.1.1.12) is always known in that sense; and (I.1.1.13) is known 
in everything in the sense of a real and ultimate fact. 

In each case the opponent attempts to demonstrate the refutation 
faulty, as in I.1.1.2-5. 

(14-16) The opponent’s rejoinder in I.1.1.11-13 is then rejected 
through the opposing argument, as at I.1.1.6-10. 

I.1.2, Comparison of the hypothetical person with other realities. 

(17) The opponent maintains that both the person and matter are 
known in the sense of a real and ultimate fact, yet that they are not 
distinct from one another. The Sakavadi rejects such an opinion as 
inconsistent. 

(18-21) The same argument is then repeated, substituting for 
matter the other aggregates, 

(22-23} the twelve sense-bases, 

(34-51) the eighteen elements, 

(52-73) and the twenty-two faculties. 

(74-129) The opponent’s rejoinder and the Sakavadi’s response 
repeat the pattern of argument from I.1.1. for each of the aggregates, | 
bases, elements and faculties in turn. 

(130-134) Since his opponent both maintains that each of the 
aggregates are known as real and ultimate facts and that they each 
are separate and distinct from one another, the Sakavadi argues by 


KATHAVATTHU 267 


analogy that to be consistent he must also maintain that the person 
is separate and distinct from the various aggregates, as he also 
considers it a real and ultimate fact. This the opponent does not do. 

(135) The argument by analogy is repeated for each of the bases, 
elements and faculties in a similar manner. 

(136) The rejoinder and response once again repeat the pattern 
of argument from J.1.1. 

(138) Since the opponent does not consider the person distinct 
from these, logically he should consider it identical with them. This 
he does not do. 

(139) The opponent is further shown to be illogical in that he is 
not willing to admit (a) a person as matter, (b) a person as apart 
from matter, or (c) matter as being in the person. 

(140-145) The argument is repeated as in 139 for the remaining 
aggregates, the bases, elements and faculties. Again the pattern of 
rejoinder and response echo those in 1.1.1. 

(146) The opponentis questioned whether he considers the person 
(a) relative or absolute, (b) conditioned or unconditioned, (c) eternal 
or temporal, (d) to have external features or not. When he denies 
that any of these options can be truly predicated about the person, 
the Sakavadi calls the logic of this into question. 

(148-152) The opponent clarifies his concept of the person by 
indicating that while it is known, and is a reality which exists, the 
converse is not true. Not all that is known, is real, or exists is the 
person. 

(154-155) The opponent defines a person as one who has material 
qualities in the sphere of matter, and no material qualities in the 
immaterial sphere. 

(156) He is refuted for admitting (a) the identity between physical 
frame and body, (b) the identity of person and self (yiva), and (c) 
the difference between the physical frame-and the person, while at 
the same time denying the difference between body and self. 

(158-170) The opponent maintains that the person passes from 
one world to another (i.e. transmigrates). However, he denies that 
the person who is reborn is (a) identical with, (b) different from, 
(c) both identical and different, (d) neither identical nor different 
from the being who passed on. This is refuted. The opponent is incon- 
sistent, as he had earlier claimed that it was, indeed, the identical 

- person which transmigrates from one course to another. The Sakavadi 
presses his point by getting his opponent to admit a god may be 
reborn as a human or a brahmin or as a noble. Further inconsistencies 
are noted to exist in his view of the relation between the transmigrating 
person and the five aggregates. 

1.1.3 (171-179) The concept of the person is said to derive from 


268 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


each of the aggregates in turn, yet not to have the characteristics 
of these aggregates. This is refuted as inconsistent. 

(181-182) It is affirmed that a person with wrong views is derived 
from wrong views, but denied that when wrong views cease the 
person derived from them also ceases to exist. This is rejected as 
inconsistent. Similar claims and rejoinders are made for the other 
elements of the eightfold path. 

(183-188) The opponent maintains the concept of a person may 
be derived from the aggregates, bases, elements and faculties in turn. 
However, this is rejected because of the absence of multiple persons 
corresponding to these sources in one individual’s life-continuum. 

(189-192) It is argued that the concept of the person is derived 
from material qualities just as a shadow is derived from a tree. The 
validity of this analogy is rejected since the shadow is impermanent 
like its source, whereas the same cannot be said about the person. 
Other analogies used to derive the concept of the person are rejected 
in the same way. 

1.1.4 (193) It is maintained that there is a notion of a person for 
each moment of consciousness, yet denied that the person changes, 
dies and is reborn with each such moment. This is rejected as 
inconsistent. 

1.1.5 (196-199) It is taken to indicate the reality of the person 
when the Buddha says he is able to see beings (here equated with 
person) being reborn according to their karma. The proponent of 
this view is caught in an inconsistency when he then refuses to admit 
that this implies that the person is a visible object cognizable by 
sight and possessing color. 

1.1.6 (200) The opponent asks whether both the person who does 
an action and the person who causes him to do it are known to exist. 
Since the question involves the person rather than merely the action 
and its cause, the Sakavadi denies this. The opponent disagrees. The 
Sakavadi argues that logically this should imply that he who makes 
the doer should also exist, which the opponent cannot admit'sinée 
it implies the existence of God. Thus he is caught in a contradiction. 

(201) If by acting a person produces or causes a person who 
experiences the results, as the opponent at first maintains, each 
person would inevitably produce a successor, thus negating the 
possibility of final liberation—something untenable. 

(202-203) Although the effects of good and bad karma are known 
to exist, this does not imply the existence of a person which experi- 
ences these effects. 

(204-211) The argument of 202-203 is repeated using celestial 
satisfaction, human satisfaction, the misery of the realms of suffering, 
and the agony of hell as examples of effects of karma. 


KATHAVATTHU 269 


(212) The Sakavadi asks his opponent in turn (a) whether he who 
does an act is the same as he who experiences its effect, (b) whether 
they are two different persons, (c) whether they are at once the same 
and different persons, (d) whether they are neither the same nor 
different persons. At first the opponent answers each negatively, 
but on questioning reverses his opinion to avoid contradicting the 
sutras. Then he is asked in succession whether (a) satisfaction and 
frustration are self-caused, (b) produced by another, (c) both 
self-caused and produced by another, (d) neither self-caused nor 
produced by another, but of spontaneous origin. Each of these 
possibilities he denies. 

(213-216) Unlike his opponent, the Sakavadi will admit karma 
and its effect, but not that there is a person who performs the act 
and experiences its fruit. 

1.1.7 (217-218) The opponent argues that the fact that there are 
those with supernatural powers demonstrates the existence of the 
’ person as a real and ultimate fact. : 

1.1.8 (219-220) The opponent argues that granting the reality of 
mothers, fathers, brothers, sisters, nobles, brahmins, gods, etc., 
implies the existence of the person as a real and ultimate fact. The 
Sakavadi denies this as someone who is not a mother or. the like 

can become one and vice versa, whereas the concept of the person 
implies permanence. 

(221-223) A similar argument is made with respect to those on 
the various stages of the path (e.g., stream-enterers, once-returners). 

(224) Since the stage of the path ends with the achievement of 
final liberation, the opponent’s argument should imply the person 
is annihilated with the achievement of final nirvana. This contradicts 
the sutras. ; ; 

(225) The controversy concerns what is implied when the oppo- 
nent claims the person is real and ultimate. He holds the person is 
neither conditioned nor unconditioned. Since this implies a third 

alternative, it contradicts the sitra where the Buddha lists the 
conditioned and the unconditioned as the only irreducible categories. 

(226) The opponent holds the person is neither conditioned nor’ 
unconditioned, yet that the conditioned, the unconditioned and the 
person are not three different things. The aggregates and liberation 
are used as examples of the conditioned and the unconditioned 

‘respectively. 

(227) The opponent admits the genesis, passing away and duration 
of the personal entity, but is caught in an untenable position since 
these are characteristics of the conditioned. On the other hand, he 
cannot admit these characteristics are not apparent in the person 
for, to be true to scripture, that would imply the person is uncondi- 


270 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tioned. 

(228) The opponent affirms the person who has attained nirvana 
exists therein. This wrongly implies eternality of the person. Yet one 
cannot say he does not exist therein for that implies annihilation. 
He similarly affirms the person depends on (coming into) existence. 
Since the state of coming into existence is impermanent, contrary 
to his intent this implies the person is impermanent and uncondi- 
tioned. 

(229-230) The opponent argues that the fact of self-awareness 
proves the existence of the person as real and ultimate fact. But if 
a person is known to be such because of such self-awareness, that 
must wrongly mean that the person who lacks such awareness does 
not exist: 

(231) The opponent argues that denying there is such a thing as 
a person with self-awareness implies there can be no one with 
self-awareness. This the Sakavadi denies, thus leading his opponent 
to the conclusion that the person exists. 

(232-233) The argument of 229-231 is repeated substituting one 
who carries out the applications of mindfulness. for one who is 
self-aware. 

(234) Suttanipata 1119, which rejects the ‘‘world’s opinion’’ as 
to self, is cited against belief in the person. 

(236-243) Both parties to the controversy cite further passages 
from the sdtras in defense of their views, the opponent’s citations 
using the term ‘‘person’’ in what the Sakavadi takes to be but a 
conventional sense, while the Sakavadi’s proof-texts deny such 
concepts as the self, being and the like. 

[.2. The debate in this section centers on whether a perfected being 
can fall away. 

(1-8) The opponent asserts a perfected being can fall away from 
perfection. This is taken to imply any perfected being can fall away 
anywhere, at any time, not only from perfection, but also from the 
stages of never-returner, once-returner and stream-enterer. If this 
is so, those on the lower stages must also be able to fall away. 

(9-13) This the opponent denies. 

(14-20) It is replied that you cannot consistently deny that a 
perfected being who excels all others.in cultivation of 37 matters 
pertaining to enlightenment (the eightfold path, applications of 
mindfulness, etc.) can fall away while at the same time denying that 
those who have cultivated these to a lesser degree can equally fall 
away. . 

(21-32) A similar argument is made substituting realization of the 
four noble truths for cultivation of matters pertaining to enlighten- 
ment. 


KATHAVATTHU 271 


(33-44) To be consistent it must either be maintained (a) that at 
whatever stage one is at, one must be capable of falling away or 
(b) that one cannot fall away regardless of one’s stage of development. 

(48) The opponent modifies his statement to maintain that only 
the perfected being who now and then reaches liberation can fall 
away, not the perfected being who has permanently achieved this 
state. 

(49-54) In rejoinder it is maintained that this qualification does 
not affect the argument. 

« (55) The opponent is asked for examples of perfected beings who 
have fallen away, but can give none. 

(56-59) Proof-texts are cited by both sides, A II.173 in support 
of the view that the perfected being can fall away; and Suttanipata 
714, Anguttara 11.378, etc., against. 

(60-61) It is claimed a perfected being is led to fall because of 
delight in business, talk, sleep and the like or because he is assailed 
by greed, hatred or delusion. But this would imply that he is bound 
by earthly desires or latent dispositions. However, since this in turn 
is denied, the original claim is seen to be refuted. 

I.3. The claim that there is no observance of the religious life 
(brahmacarya) among the gods is debated. 

(1-2) The opponent denies there is observance of the religious 
life among the gods, yet—inconsistently—also denies they are physi- 
cally, mentally or morally defective. 

(3) The Sakavadi maintains there is such observance, but denies 
that gods observe the monastic discipline and that Buddhas become 
. enlightened among them. How then, he is asked, can they be said 

to observe the religious life? 

(4-7) In rejoinder he notes that laymen do not follow the monastic 
discipline, yet may nonetheless lead a religious life. 

(8-10) He further notes that the religious life is led in cities and 
countries other than where the Buddha became enlightened. Thus 
the absence of enlightened ones in the world of the gods does not 
make the opponent’s case. 

(11-14) The Sakavadi claims the religious life is observed by some 
gods, but not by all. The opponent considers this inconsistent. 
However, it is pointed out that even among men only some observe 
the religious life. 

(15-18) Since the never-returner overcomes the upper five fetters 
and realizes final liberation in the pure heavenly abodes, observance 
of the religious life must be possible among the gods of those spheres. 

(19) To claim otherwise is as much as to hold that the perfected 
being is capable of rebirth. 

1.4. The controverted point concerns whether the defilements are 


272 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


given up piecemeal. 
~ (1-12) The opponent affirms that when those on the path attain. 
higher vision, the defilments are put away piecemeal. But if this is 

sO, it should be admitted that part of an individual can become a 
stream-enterer, or once-returner, etc., while the remainder still has 
not achieved such a stage. 

(13-16) That part can be perfected being, while the remainder 
is not. 

(17) The opponent cites Dhammapada 239 in his support. 

(18) In rejoinder Suttanipata 231 and Vinaya 1.97 = Samyutta 
IV.47, etc. are cited. 

I.5. The controversy concerns whether an ordinary person who 
achieves higher states renounces his desires while still a man of the 
world. 

(1-6) The opponent maintains that the ordinary person who 
achieves the higher stages of the path does renounce sensuous desires 
and attachment as an ordinary person. The Sakavadi maintains this 
is the same as saying these desires are thoroughly arrested. The 
opponent disagrees. 

(7-10) The opponent holds the ordinary person renounces these 
desires by means of a path belonging to the material realm. In 
rejoinder, it is noted that such a path does not lead to enlightenment 
and freedom from the fetters and intoxicants which lead to grasping 
and defilement; whereas the path leading to the stage of never- 
returner does lead to such results. 

» (11-13) The opponent says the ordinary person who has overcome 
his desires achieves the status of never-returner as soon as he has 
comprehended the truth. Why not say he becomes a perfected being? 
To say he achieves the status of non-returner must wrongly imply 
he achieves the lower stages beginning with that of stream-enterer 
at the same time. 

(14-15) In defense the opponent cites Anguttara 11.373, while 
Arnguttara IV.104ff. is quoted in rejoinder. 

1.6. The controverted point concerns whether everything exists. 

(1} The opponent maintains everything exists. But this would imply 
that the nonexistent exists. 

(2) It is argued that past, present and future exist. How can this 
be since the future has not yet happened and the past is something 
that has ceased? 

(3-4) The argument is made concerning the existence of past 
material qualities and future material qualities, then repeated for each 
of the other aggregates. - 

(5-6) On questioning the opponent admits the phrases “‘present 
material aggregate’ and ‘‘material present aggregate’ to be equiva- 


KATHAVATTHU 273 


lent. A rejoinder is presented based on consistent parallel use of 
the adjectives ‘‘present’’ and “‘material’’. If the aggregate gives up 
its status as present when it ceases, it must also give up its materiality. 
If it cannot give up its materiality, it cannot give up its presence. 

(7-8) If the material aggregate cannot lose its materiality, it must 
be permanent and not subject to change. But the opposite is true. 

(9-10) To say past, present and future all exist implies analogies 
between them that.are not valid. 

(11-12) Since it is admitted that liberation exists, to say past, 
present and future exists implies analogies between them and libera- 
tion that are not valid. 

(13-20) A similar argument is made concerning the existence of 
past, present and future aggregates. 

(21) An argument similar to that in 5-6 of I.1.6 is made using the 
phrases *‘non-past exists’’ and ‘‘past nonexists’’. 

(22) The opponent is caught in an inconsistency of logic in a 
rejoinder based on a word-play when he admits that the future 
becomes present, but what has not been (i.e. future) does not become 
present. A similar argument is made substituting present and past. 

(23-26) If the opponent affirms all conditions of an act of per- . 

ception exist when past, it also should be admitted that one perceives 
the past object with senses that are past. The same point is made 
concerning conditions of a future act of perception. 
. (27-28) If he denies one perceives past objects with past senses 
since they too exist, he must also deny one perceives present objects 
with present senses. Similarly with respect to future objects and acts 
of perception. 

(29-34) Rejoinder based on the question of whether past and future 
awarenesses exist. If so, their existence must be analogous to the 
existence of the present processes of awareness. 

(35) The opponent is asked whether the past defilements of a 
perfected being exist, and replies that they. do. Is then the perfected 
being still attached as a result of his past but still existent attachment? 
Logically it would seem so, butit cannotbe. The argumentis repeated 
for nine other past defilements. 

(36-38) The argument is again repeated with respect to the past 
fetters, defilements and desires of the non-returner, once-returner 
and stream-enterer. 

(39-42) Insofar as the past defilements or fetters exist, the average 
man must be said to be subject to them at present. This wrongly 
implies that the perfected being, never-returner, etc., should also 
be subject to his past but nonetheless existent fetters, etc. 

(43-46) If it is impossible for a perfected being, etc., to be subject 
to defilements that exist for him as past, this should imply the same 


274 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


for the ordinary person. 

(47-49) Do past bodies, their parts and elements exist? If so, they 
must still be capable of acting and being acted upon. 

(50-53) Do past, present and future aggregates exist? If so, there 
must be fifteen aggregates rather than the five listed by the Buddha. 
Similarly an excessive number of organs and objects of sense, 
elements and faculties are implied. 

(54) Similar logic implies three wheel-turning kings must exist 
simultaneously. This cannot be. The same holds for multiple Buddhas 
existing simultaneously. 

(55-58) Having affirmed the past exists, the opponent is asked 
whether the existent is then past. He responds it may be past and 
not past. But since the existent is past, substituting terms considered 
equivalent, this implies the past may be past and not past, a logical 
fallacy. Similar logic is used with respect to the existence of the future 
and of nirvana. 

(59) Majjhima I.16ff. = Samyutta I11.47 is quoted i in defense of 
the view that past and future exist. 

(60-62) Samyutta III.71 and IV.52 and Agguttara 1.197 are cited 
in opposition. 

(63) Samyutta JI.101 is then cited in support. 

(64) The immediately following passage is taken in opposition. 

1.7. Debate over whether one’s past consists of aggregates, bases, 
elements or all three. : 

(1-2) The opponent argues that to admit that one’s past and future 
consist of aggregates, bases or the like implies the past and future 
exist. The Sakavadi admits such is their character, but not that they 
exist. 

(3-4) The opponent argues that to admit the present exists and 
consists of aggregates, etc., implies that the past and future which 
are similarly constituted also exist. 

(5-6) Again if a past or future consisting of aggregates, etc., which 
does not exist is admitted, it must also be concluded that the present 
no longer exists. 

(7-18) The same argument is repeated substituting numerous 
specifics. 

(19-20) The Sakavadi cites Samyutta III.71, his opponent Sam- 
yutta Iil.47 in support of their respective views. 

1.8. Controversy over the claim that some of the past and future 
exists and some does not. 

(1-4) The opponent admits that past things, the effects of which 
have not yet matured, exist. If their effects have matured, past things 
do not exist. But since the opponent admits that even the former 
may have ceased, he is refuted as inconsistent. 


KATHAVATTHU 275 


(5) The opponent argues that since the immature effects of past 
things will mature, these things may be said to exist. This means 
that such past things may be said to be present. This logic could 
lead to the conclusion that present things that will perish are non- 
existent. 

(6-10) The argument is similar to that of 1-5, but is based on the 
claim that inevitably determined future things exist, while those not 
inevitably determined do not. 

1.9. Controversy over whether the factors are all applications of 
mindfulness. 

(1-9) The debate-arises from an ambiguity in the use of the term 
‘‘application of mindfulness’’ which can have both a subjective and 
objective sense. The opponent confuses the two senses of the term, 
and thus maintains that all factors are applications of mindfulness. 
In rejoinder it is shown that this confusion results in logical incon- 
sistency. 

1.10. The debated point is the claim that things exist one way and 
not another. 

(1-7) The opponent asserts that things exist sialuaively as past, 
present or future at one time. They thus exist one way and not the 
other. This implies that each of these temporal modes both exists 
and does not exist, which the opponent has already denied. 

(8-12) A similar line of reasoning is followed with respect to the 
existence of the aggregates. 


BOOK II 


II.1. A debate concerning seminal emission on the part of perfected 
beings. 

(1-2) The opponent maintains a perfected being can have impure 
seminal emissions, but denies there is any passion remaining in the 
perfected being. This is taken to negate the original proposition. 

(3) The opponent holds this impurity is imparted by the Mara-gods, 
yet admits they themselves have no such impurity. Lacking such 
themselves, how could they impart it to others? 

(4) Such impurity is not imparted from the bodies of these gods, 
from the perfected beings themselves, nor from others—the only 
possibilities. 

(5-6) It is not imparted through the pores of the body. The 
opponent holds it is imparted to the perfected being in order to cause 
doubt as to his achievement. If the perfected being is free from doubt, 
this argument fails. If not, he must be capable of doubt as to the 
principles of faith as well, which is absurd. 

(7-8). The impurity cannot be due to eating or drinking. 


276 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(9-13) The Sakavadi argues that if perfected being(s) were capable 
of impure seminal emissions, it would imply sexual interest and 
activity on their part. But this cannot be for, as the opponent admits, 
the perfected being has cut off all desires at their roots, cultivated 
the factors of enlightenment and realized the final goal. 

(14-20) The opponent now limits his claim that perfected beings 
can have impure seminal emissions. He now holds this is so only 
for perfected beings who are skillful in their dharma but not for those 
skillful in (an)other dharma{s). 

(21) The Sakavadi cites Vinaya 1.295 in rejoinder. 

(22) The opponent argues that since the requisites for monastic 
life (e.g., robes, alms) can be imparted to a perfected being, the 
same should also be true of the impurity of seminal emission. - 

(23) In response it is noted that the argument is flawed since not 
everything can be imparted to a perfected being. 

1.2. A controversy over the knowledge possessed by a perfected 
being. 

(1-4) The opponent holds a perfected being may be lacking in 
knowledge. The Sakavadi takes this as equivalent to a claim that a 
perfected being may be ignorant. This the opponent denies, although 
an ordinary man may be both lacking in knowledge and ignorant. 
The ignorance of an ordinary man may lead him to evil deeds, but 
the lack of knowledge on the part of a perfected being cannot do | 
the same, maintains the opponent. 

(5-10) The opponent holds that although the perfected being may 
lack knowledge, it is not knowledge of spiritual import (e.g., dharma, 
ethics, causes) that is lacking, although such knowledge may be 
lacking in the case of the ordinary individual. ~ 

(11-16) The opponent’s claim that a perfected being may be lacking 
is limited to the perfected being who is good in his own dharma, 
and does not apply to the perfected being good at (an)other 
dharma(s). 

(17-21) In opposition to the view that a perfected being may be 
lacking in knowledge, Samyutta 11.29, V.434 andIV.17, Suttanipata 
231, and Vinaya 1.97 = Samyutta IV.47, etc., are cited. 

(22) The opponent holds a perfected being can lack knowledge 
of ordinary things like names or directions. 

(23) But since it cannot be said he lacks knowledge of the path, 
the Sakavadi argues he cannot be said to lack knowledge. 

1.3. Controversy over whether a perfected being can have doubts. 

(1-19) Repeats the argument of II.2 substituting ‘‘doubt”’ for ‘“‘lack 
of knowledge’”’ and “‘perplexity’’ for “‘ignorance’’. 

(20) In rejecting the view that a perfected being can experience 
doubt, VinayaI.18, Udana7, and Dighanikaya 11.275 are quoted. 


KATHAVATTHU 277 


11.4. C&htroversy over whether a perfected being can be excelled 
by others 

(1-19} The argument is similar to that in II.2 and Il. 3, the opponent 
holding the affirmative. 

(20) In opposition Suttanipata 1064 is quoted. 

II.5. The controversy concerns whether a person: who is in the 
first 
meditational state utters the word ‘‘frustration’’ on attaining the stage 
of the stream-enterer. 

(1) The opponent affirms this. But since such an utterance is not 
universal in such cases, his view is rejected. 

(2-3) It is further argued that this position cannot be maintained 
as there is no corresponding bodily expression. 

(4-5) Since he says ‘‘frustration’’ having understood frustration, 
why should he not equally utter names of the other three noble truths 
which he has also come to understand? That he does so is denied 
by the opponent. 

(6-7) The opponent holds the object of one’s insight to be the 
truth of frustration, and the object of his hearing to be the sound 
“‘frustration’’. For this to be so and the sound articulate would imply 
a combination of two simultaneous perceptions or moments of 
awareness—an impossibility. 

(8-11) Although affirming the thesis, the opponent denies that one 
who has meditated on the devices or who practices meditation for 
mundane reasons can utter an articulate sound. The Sakavadi does 
not consider these claims reasonable. 

(12-13) It is unclear why the possibility is claimed only for one 
who has attained the first meditational state and not for those in higher 
meditational states. 

(14) The opponent cites the Buddha to the effect that sustained | 
mental application leads to speech. Such application is characteristic 
of the first meditational state. 

(15) This seems to contradict 8-11, as concentration on the devices 
involves sustained application of mind. 

(16) But speech is also caused by identification. But since identifi- 
cation is also present in the higher meditational states, this contradicts 
12-13. 

(17-19) Samyutta IV.217 is cited against the opponent’s proposi- 
tion. 

(20-22) The opponent cites Anguttara V.133 in his favor, but this 
is shown not to apply. He then cites Afguttara 1.227 and Samyutta 
1.157. 

1.6. Controversy over whether repeating ‘‘frustration’’ plays arole 
in inducing insight. The opponent claims it does, and thus is part 


= s 


278 . ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of the path. This is rejected on the grounds that it wrongly implies 
that anyone saying the word is following the path. 

1.7. Controversy concerning the duration of an awareness. 

(1) The opponent holds a single awareness can last a day or longer. 
This is rejected as implying its constituent moments of arising and 
cessation can each last half a day or longer. 

(2-3) Anguttara 1.10 and Samyutta II.95 are cited to suggest how 
quickly awarenesses arise and pass away. 

(4) Since the content of an awareness does not endure for a day, 
the state itself should not be said to do'so. 

(5) Since apprehension of sounds, smells, sights, etc., involves 
separate awarenesses, the opponent’s view is refuted. 

(6) Since movement leads to separate awarenesses, the contro- 
verted point is again refuted. 

(7-10) The opponent’s inconsistency in admitting a single aware- 
ness lasts the entire aeons-long lifetime of gods of the sphere of 
unbounded space, but does not last an entire lifetime for other beings 
is noted. ’ 

1.8. Controversy over whether all conditioned things are no more 
than an ash-heap. 

(1-2) Basing his claim on the Buddha’s fire sermon ( VinayaI.134) 
and the doctrine that all conditioned things involve frustration, the 
opponent holds that without exception they are no better than an 
ash-heap. In opposition various types of satisfaction are noted. 

(3-8) Samyutta I1V.126 and Anguttara 1.286 are cited in support 
of the affirmative, Majjhima 1.85 and 92, panyatta IV.126, and 
Udana Il.1 in opposition. 

.9. A debate over whether penetration of the path is made in 
ordered segments. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that penetration is achieved gradually, 
but not that the stages of stream-enterer, once-returner, etc., are 
each gradually developed. - 

(5-9) He holds the defilements are given up piecemeal, but not 
that one can become a partial stream-enterer, etc. The Sakavadi by 
contrast considers the views that the defilements can be given up 
piecemeal and that one can become a partial stream-enterer, etc., 
equivalent. 

(10-13) The opponent considers one who is coming to see a stage 
of the path as practicing it. When he has seen it, he is considered 
experienced in its fruit. While the opponent admits this of the stages 
of the path, he will not admit it of the realization of the four truths. 
The Sakavadi considers this inconsistent. . 

(14-15) The Sakavadi admits that once the first truth is realized, 


KATHAVATTHU 279 


the others are also realized. Nonetheless, he rejects the charge that 
this is equivalent to holding the first truth amounts to the four truths 
collectively. 

(16) He holds the opponent’s original proposition wrongly implies 
multiple fruits corresponding in number to the portions into which 
the process of spiritual advancement is divided. 

(17-18) The opponent supports his thesis by citing Vinaya III.303 
and Dhammapada 239. 

(19-20) Samyutta V.436, Suttanipata 231 and Vinaya 1.97 = 
Samyutta IV.47, etc., are quoted in rejoinder. 

1.10. Was the Buddha’s worldly speech supramundane? 

(1) The opponent holds the affirmative. The rejoinder denies the 
Buddha’s ordinary speech was supramundane on the grounds that 
it was heard by the mundane ears of ordinary people. 

(2) The opponent is asked whether the Buddha’s terminology was 
supramundane—the implication being that he used mundane termi- 
nology to speak of spiritual matters. : 

(3) Since the supramundane {is not apprehended by the physical 
senses, no one could have heard the Buddha’s everyday speech if 
the opponent’s thesis were true. 

(4-7) His listeners were affected by his everyday speech in ways 
incompatible with the supramundane nature claimed for it. 

(8) The Sakavadi holds that whether the Buddha spoke of worldly 
or Supramundane matters he used the same worldly speech. 

(9-11) The opponent now affirms the Buddha’s speech is mundane 
or supramundane depending on its content. 

11.11. (1-5) The opponent affirms two kinds .of liberation. The 
rejoinder is that this wrongly implies the duality of the four noble 
truths and that there are two different liberations. The.two kinds 
of cessation affirmed are the cessation of composite things upon and 
without calculation. The Sakavadi holds cessation to be one, not two, 


BOOK Ill 


I[I.1. Whether all the powers of the Buddha are also possessed 
by his leading disciples. 

(1-2) The opponent holds the powers of the Buddha are also 
possessed by his disciples. This should wrongly imply that they are 
all-knowing as he is. 

(3-11) The Sakavadi holds only some of the Buddha’s powers are 
held in common with his disciples. The knowledge of the Buddha 
concerning causal matters and the like is without limit, that of the 
disciples limited. 
~ (12-16) That all can share knowledge of the extinction of the 


280 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


intoxicants is taken to confirm the opponent’s proposition. But in 
rejoinder it is noted that not all share knowledge of the development 
of the faculties. 

1.2. That of the ten powers of knowledge, all are to be considered 
noble. 

(1) The opponent affirms the power to discern causes is noble. 

(2-3) This is rejected on the grounds that emptiness (i.e. the 
sufifiata of nibbana), the signless and what cannot be desired are 
not the object of this power. 

(4-7) Since the opponent denies that liberation, etc., are objects 
of the power of a Buddha, it is argued that that power cannot be 
noble. 

(8-12) Repeats the argument with regard to the Buddha’s power 
to see the death and rebirth of beings. 

(13) The Sakavadi admits as noble only the power of knowledge 
of the extinction of the intoxicants. 

(14-16) The point of 13 is expressed in negative terms and the 
‘argument of 13-14 repeated substituting ‘“knowledge of the three 
signs as object is noble’’. 

11.3: Concerning liberation. 

(1-3) The opponent affirms liberation occurs for mental states 
associated with attachment. In rejoinder this is taken to mean it 
is the attached awareness which is emancipated. The opponent’s 
point is, rather, that there is no need for emancipation in the case 
of the pure awareness. 

(4-10) The same point is repeated substituting “‘hatred’’ and 
“‘delusion’’ for “‘attachment’’. 

11.4. Of becoming liberated. 

(1-8) The opponent holds becoming liberated ¢ is a process. The 
rejoinder considers this tantamount to a claim that liberation occurs 
step by step. 

Iil.5. Of the person at the eighth or lowest stage of the path. 

(1) The opponent’s view is that doubt and wrong views are put 
behind by an individual on entering the eighth and lowest stage of 
the path. This is not a claim that from the moment he has entered 
this stage he is a stream-enterer. 

(2-6) The rejoinder holds the proposition implies such an indivi- 
dual has put away the latent bias of doubt and wrong views. This 
cannot be since such a person has yet to engage in the actual practice 
of the path he is entering. 

(7-11) Though denying the initial proposition, the Sakavadi holds 
the view that outbursts of doubt and wrong views will no longer occur 
for one who has entered the eighth stage of the path. The opponent 
holds the latter claim tantamount to the former. 


KATHAVATTHU 281 


11.6. Of the faculties of the individual at the eighth or lowest stage 
of the path. 

_ (1-13) The opponent holds the faculties to be absent in the 
individual as he enters the path. The rejoinder holds that this is to 
deny such an individual the faith necessary for him to have entered 
the path. Samyutta V.202 is further cited in opposition to the thesis. 
In contrast, the point of the opponent’s proposition is that these 
faculties are not yet fully developed as one first enters the path. 

I].7. Of the higher or divine vision. 

(1-4). The opponent holds that fleshly vision becomes the higher 
or divine vision when it is the medium of a spiritual idea. The 
rejoinder takes this as equating this fleshly with divine vision, and 
denying a third type of vision which the Sakavadi calls the vision 

- or eye of wisdom. The Sakavadi cites I.61. 

01.8. Of the higher or divine ear. 

(1-3) The argument corresponds to II.7. 

1.9. Concerning knowledge of destiny (as determined) by karma. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that divine vision amounts to knowledge 
of the passing of beings from one mode of existence to another in 
accordance with their karma. The point is that inherent in the vision 
of beings being reborn in accordance with their karma is the explana- 
tion of their destiny. In rejoinder this is taken either to imply that 
such vision involves judgment of such beings, or that what is in fact 
a single act of consciousness is sequential. 

I.10. Concerning moral restraint. 

(1-8) The opponent holds there is restraint among certain gods. 
in rejoinder this is taken to imply its absence among some gods, 
since for them to refrain from a vice implies they are otherwise 
capable of such a vice. The opponent responds that if they lack moral 
restraint, this must mean they are evildoers. 

I].11. Concerning (the sphere of) identification. 

(1-7) The opponent holds there is identification among beings in 
the sphere where there is no identification at precisely the moment 
of death from that sphere or rebirth into it. This is not a claim that 
such beings identify things during their life in this sphere as the 
rejoinder suggests, 

1.12. Concerning (the sphere of) neither identification nor its 
reverse. 

(1-12) The opponent holds it wrong to say there is identification 
among beings in the sphere of neither identification nor its reverse. 
In refutation it is argued that the opponent would not be willing to 
consider this realm to be comprised only of the material aggregate 
and to lack the four mental aggregates. In refutation it is further asked 


282 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


how it can be consistently maintained that there is identification in 
the realm where there is no identification but not in the realm where 
there is neither identification nor its opposite. 


BOOK IV 


IV.1. Concerning whether a layman can be a perfected being. 

(1-6) The opponent holds that a layman can become a perfected 
being. His point is that one living in secular circumstances can attain 
perfection. The rejoinder assumes that the term ‘‘layman”’ applies 
not just to the external circumstances of the lay life, but more 
especially to the fetters binding a layman. Surely one so bound cannot 
attain perfection. 

IV.2. Concerning whether one can become a perfected being at 
the moment of rebirth. 

(1-2) The opponent so affirms, but not that one can become a 
stream-enterer, once-returner or non-returner at that moment. 

(3-4) On questioning he is unable to provide examples. 

(5-6) The rejoinder holds that since rebirth occurs as a result of 
desire the proposition cannot be valid. 

IV.3. Concerning the absence of intoxicants (in the case of the 
perfected being). 

(1) The opponent holds that everything about the perfected being 
or belonging to him is free from the intoxicants. In rejoinder it is 
noted that only the paths, the fruits of liberation and the factors of 
enlightenment are free of intoxicants. 

(2-8) The perfected being’s body and possessions are not. 

(9) In response the opponent argues that since the perfected being 
is free from the intoxicants, so must be everything connected with 
him. 

V.4. Concerning endowment. 

(1-24) The opponent holds that past spiritual achievements are 
retained permanently, that is that they are carried on as one rises 
to higher spiritual states. The rejoinder is that they are transcended, 
as nothing is permanent. 

IV.5. Concerning endowment with equanimity. 

(1-4) The opponent holds the perfected being is endowed with 
sixfold equanimity. The rejoinder understands this to imply he 
experiences six states of equanimity simultaneously, which is not 
the opponent’s point. 

IV.6. That one becomes (the) Buddha through enlightenment. 

(1-10) The debate hinges on an ambiguity in Pali, the opponent 
taking the position that one becomes enlightened through enlighten- 
ment, the rejoinder assuming this to-be a claim that one becomes 


KATHAVATTHU 283 


the Buddha through enlightenment. 

IV.7. That one gifted with the characteristic marks is destined for 
enlightenment. 

(1-6) The opponent holds that one possessed of the 32 characte- 
ristic marks is a bodhisatta. This is based on an interpretation of 
Digha V.145 where it is stated that ‘‘two careers are open’’ to the 
individual thus endowed. The rejoinder points out that this interpre- 
tation wrongly identifies the universal king as a bodhisatta, and 
seems to imply that one possessed of some of the characteristic marks 
is a partial bodhisatta. 

TV.8. On entering fixedness on the path. 

(1-6) The opponent holds that the bodhisatta actually entered 
the path of fixedness (i.e. the path of the stream-winner, etc.) when 
the Buddha Kasyapa assured him of his future enlightenment. The 
rejoinder sees the Buddha Kasyapa’s fixedness merely as a prophecy 
concerning the future. 

(7-8) He cites Vinaya I.91 = MajjhimaJ.171 = Therigatha 129.15 
and Samyutta V.422 in the rejoinder. 

IV.9. Further debate on endowments. 

(1-24) The opponent holds that a person striving to. attain per- 
fection permanently holds the three fruitions as acquired qualities. 
The argument largely repeats that of IV.7. 

IV.10. That putting off all the fetters is tantamount to perfection. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that. perfection is the putting off of all 
fetters. His point is merely that all fetters have been put off by the 
perfected being. The rejoinder, however, takes him to mean that 
they are put off simultaneously with the achievement of perfection, 
which is to be denied. 


‘ BOOK V 


V.1. Concerning liberation. 

(1-4) The opponent holds knowledge of liberation to have the 
quality of liberation. The rejoinder considers this statement too 
general as only knowledge of deliverance as the fruit of tranquilization 
has this quality. 

V.2. Concerning the insight of the adept, i.e. one beyond learning. 

(1-4) The opponent holds a disciple (or learner) has knowledge 
of an adept. The point is that a disciple is supposed to recognize 
what makes one an adept. Therejoinder, however, takes the proposi- 
tion to imply the disciple has the same insight as the adept, which 
of course is to be denied. 

V.3. Concerning perverted awareness in meditation. 

(1-8) The opponent holds that awareness is perverted in the case 


284 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of one who has attained a meditative state through use of a symbolic 
device. His point is that he sees one thing (the actual device) and 
becomes conscious of another (an idea). The rejoinder holds this 
is not really a perversion of awareness. For there to be such would 
require that permanence be seen where there is none. 

V.4. Concerning fixedness. 

(1-7) The opponent holds that in one not yet possessed of fixedness 
on the path, there is knowledge requisite for going on to fixedness. 
The rejoinder takes this as a claim that only the ordinary individual 
not yet engaged on the path is capable of developing knowledge 
necessary to assure achievement of the goal. The point of the thesis, 
rather, is that even in one not yet fixed in his pursuit of the path 
the possibility of developing the knowledge necessary for success 
may nonetheless exist. 

V.5. Concerning discrimination. 

(1-3) The opponent asserts that in the case of the spiritual adept 
all knowledge is discrimination. The debate turns on an ambiguity 
of terminology. While the opponent intends the term fiana to mean 
“*(transcendental) knowledge”’, the rejoinder takes the thesis as a __ 
more general claim concerning all awareness. In this latter interpreta- 
tion the thesis would imply that even conventional knowledge is 
transcendental. 

V.6. Concerning conventional knowledge. 

(1-3) The opponent holds the object of conventional knowledge 
‘ to be truth. The rejoinder, wishing to distinguish between (conven- 
tional) truth and (ultimate) truth, rejects the thesis for failing to 
avoid the implication—which the opponent rejects—that the (ulti- 
mate) truth is the sole object of conventional knowledge. 

V.7. Concerning knowledge of the awareness of others. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that knowledge of the consciousness 
of another—one of the six higher powers—has no object beyond 
{that} awareness. His point is that the only object of such insight 
is the state of consciousness of the other, that is, what is in his mind. 
The thesis is rejected as a claim that what is known is the psychologi- 
cal complex we know as awareness. 

V.8. Concerning knowledge of the future. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that knowledge of the future is possible. 
This is a claim that certain future events can be seen, not as the 
rejoinder understands it, that every element in the chain of future 
events can be known. 

V.9, Concerning present knowledge. 

(1-2) The opponent holds possible knowledge of the present as 
a whole. The rejoinder considers this impossible for it would inyolve 
an endless regression in which present knowledge of the present 


KATHAVATTHU 285 


becomes the object of present knowledge in the present and so forth. 

V.10. Concerning knowledge of fruition. 

(1-5) The opponent holds a disciple can have knowledge of the 
attainment of spiritual fruition by another. The point is that he can 
teach that a particular person has attained such spiritual fruits. The 
rejoinder rejects the thesis as a claim the disciple actually under- 
stands that person’s knowledge. 


BOOK VI 

VI.1. Concerning whether fixedness is unconditioned. 

(1-6) The opponent holds fixedness on the path to be uncondi- 
tioned. The intent is to maintain that once one is fixed on the path 
so as to assure its fruition, the nature of this fixedness is such that 
it cannot cease. The objection is that to use the term “‘unconditioned’”’ 
to refer to fixedness in this way wrongly makes fixedness equivalent 
to liberation. 

VI.2. Concerning dependent origination. 

(1-7) The opponent holds the causal links in the chain of dependent 
origination to be unconditioned, citing S$ I.25 in his support. The 
rejoinder is as in VI.1. 

VI.3. Concerning the four noble truths. 

(1-6) The opponent, citing Samyutta V.430, holds the four noble 
truths to be unconditioned. The rejoinder is as in VI.1. 

VI.4. Concerning the immaterial. 

(1-4) Citing Anguttara 11.184, the opponent holds the sphere of 
infinite space to be unconditioned. The rejoinder is as in VI.1. 

VI.5. Concerning the attainment of cessation. 

(1-5) The opponent holds the attainment of cessation to be 
unconditioned. In part the rejoinder follows VI.1. The objection 
further holds the fact one can enter and emerge from the state of 
cessation precludes its being considered unconditioned. 

VI.6. Concerning space. 

(1-5) The opponent holds space to be unconditioned. The rejoi- 
nder begins as in VI.1. Evidence against the thesis includes the fact 
that one can make space where there has been none, that movement 
through space is possible, and that space can be enclosed. 

VI.7. Concerning whether space is visible. 

(1-3) The opponent holds space is visible, as the interval between 
two objects can be “‘seen’’. The rejoinder is based on the view that 
visibility implies an object which is visible. 

VI.8-10, Concerning the four elements, the five sense faculties, 
and bodily action. 

(1-9) The opponent holds each of these to be visible. The argument 


286 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


parallels that of VI.7. 
BOOK VII 


VII.1. Concerning the grouped. 

(1-8) The opponent holds that factors cannot be grouped together 
by means of ideas. The point is that the factors are brought together 
in the physical sense. In rejecting this thesis, the me jouer uses the 
terms ‘‘group’’ in the sense of ‘‘classify’’. 

VII.2. Concerning whether factors are connected with one another. 

(1-2) The opponent holds that factors are not connected with one 
another, by which he means that they do not literally pervade one 
another. The rejoinder holds they are connected with one another, 
by which he means that they can be associated with one another. 

VII.3. Concerning properties of awareness. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that properties of awareness do not exist 
as things. The position of the rejoinder is that the term cetasika 
refers to mental properties or states of mind, which may properly 
be said to exist. 

VII.4. Concerning giving of a gift. 

(1-7) The opponent holds that terms dana refers not to the material 
gift but to the will to surrender it. That is, he considers giving a mental 
state. In-contrast, the rejoinder recognizes the use of the term in 
both a mental and a material sense. 

VII.5. Concerning whether merit increases with enjoyment. 

(1-7) The opponent holds that merit increases with enjoyment, 
that is that the merit accruing from a gift increases with its use. The 
rejoinder rejects this view for it could imply that one continues to 
‘gain merit for an act of which one is no longer conscious, or for 
an act performed with unwholesome thoughts. In rejecting the thesis, 
Anguttara II.50 is cited, while Samyutta I.33 is quoted in its defense. 
. VII.6. Concerning what is given here. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that what is given here (i.e. in this life) 
sustains elsewhere (i.e. in the afterworld of the hungry ghosts). This 
is rejected as implying the actual gifts are enjoyed in the afterlife, 
or that what is experienced by one individual is caused by another. 
The opponent’s point is, rather, that when an individual does an act 
in one life, he may experience its fruits in a future rebirth. Khuddaka- 
patha 6 and Axguttara II.43 are cited in support of the thesis. 

VII.7. Concerning the earth and the maturation of karma. 

(1-7) The opponent holds that the earth is a result of action. The 
point is that some obtain dominion or ownership over land as a result 
of their action. In rejecting the thesis, the point of the rejoinder is 
to maintain the maturations of actions take the form of subjective 
experiences. Further, the earth is experienced in common with 


KATHAVATTHU 287 


others, while the same could not be said of the results of an 
individual’s karma. 

VII.8. Whether decay and death are the result of karma. 

(1-6) The opponent holds old age and death to be maturations 
of karma. The argument is largely as in VII.7, the point of the 
rejoinder again being that the term ‘‘maturation’’ refers only to the 
subjective experiences resulting from action. 

VIL.9. Concerning whether the factors of the noble or spiritual 
adept have maturations. 

(1-6) The opponent holds that the factors of the noble have no 
positive results, for they do not lead to further rebirth. The opposing 
view Stresses in rejoinder that the career of the noble person produces 
great rewards, namely the fruits of the path, as its maturation. 

VII.10. Whether a maturation is a factor resulting in factors. 

- (1-5) The opponent holds that a maturation is a factor resulting 
in further factors, that is that a maturation in turn is the cause of 
further maturation. The rejoinder considers this view to lead to an 
endless cycle of maturation entailing maturation which in turn would 
rule out the possibility of ending existence and attaining liberation. 


BOOK VII 


VIII. 1. Concerning courses of existence. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that there are six courses of existence 
or possible realms of rebirth, the sixth being birth in the realm of 
demons. The Sakavadi recognizes only five courses of existence: 
godly, human, animal, ghost and hellish. 

VIII.2. Whether there is an intermediate state of existence. 

(1-13) The opponent posits an intermediate state of existence 
during the interim between the death of an individual and his rebirth 
in the succeeding life. This is to allow for time for the requisite 
conditions for conception to arise. The rejoinder notes that the 
Buddha allowed for the existence of only three states of becom- 
ing—the realm of desire, the realm of matter, and the immaterial 
realm—thus excluding the possibility of an intermediate state. 
Moreover, the existence of cases of immediate retribution is taken 
as evidence against the intermediate state. 

VIII.3. Concerning the constituents of sensuality. 

(1-5) The opponent holds the term kaémadhatu (‘‘sensuous 
world’’) refers only to the five constituents of sensuality. The 
rejoinder notes that the sensuous world also involves mind and 
external organs of sense. Further the term refers to a realm of beings 
to which action leads. 

VIII.4. Concerning sense-desire. 


288 “ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(1-3) The opponent holds the term kama refers only to the five 
constituents of sensuality. The Sakavadi, to the contrary, holds these 
are not to be termed kama, but that the term kama refers rather to 
the subjective experience of desire. 

VIILS. Concerning the realm of matter. 

(1-2) The opponent holds the term rapadhdatu (realm of matter) 
to refer to material qualities only. He is criticized for limiting the 
meaning of the term too far, for the term should refer to every aspect 
of the material realm. 

VIH.6. Concerning the immaterial realm. 

(1-2) The opponent holds the term arupadhdatu (immaterial sphere) 
to refer to the immaterial sphere as a realm of existence only. The 
objection to this is that this overly limits the meaning so as not to 
include such mental aspects of this sphere as feeling. 

VIII.7. Concerning the sense bases in the material sphere. 

‘(1-14) The opponent asserts ‘that beings in the material sphere 
have all six senses. This is rejected as implying the existence of 
objects to stimulate these senses in this sphere. 

Vill.8. Concerning matter in the immaterial sphere. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that there is matter even in the immaterial 
sphere. Although the reference is to a subtle, refined matter, this 
is rejected as a logical contradiction. 

VIII.9. Concerning whether matter is action. 

(1-39) The opponent holds that matter is karma, that the matter 
involved in physical and vocal action is of ethical import. Two points 
are involved: (a) bodily and vocal action are material, and (b) matter 
may be said to be good or bad. The reioinder is to stress that karma 
is defined as will. The physical involvement of body and voice only 
follows upon the act of having willed. Anguttara 1.415, Anguttara 
I.157ff. = Samyutta 11.39ff., Majjhima 11.209, etc., are cited in 
support of the rejoinder. 

VIII.10. Concerning vitality. 

(1-11) The opponent holds that there is nothing material in vitality, 
that vitality is a wholly psychological phenomenon. The rejoinder 
holds that this implies the impossibility of life in organic phenomena, 
for these are material. 

VIiI.11. Concerning karma as cause. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that a perfected being can fall away from 
perfection as a result of karma, specifically as a result of making 
malicious accusations against a perfected being in a previous life. 
The orthodox position considers this idea absurd. 


BOOK Ix 
IX.1. On seeing what is commendable. 


KATHAVATTHU 289 


- (1-4) The opponent holds the fetters are put off only by one who 
discerns liberation as commendable. The rejoinder notes that the 
fetters are also put off by those who discern the unsatisfactoriness 
and impermanence of the conditioned world. ; 

IX.2. Concerning the deathless as a supporting object. 

(1-7) The opponent holds that the deathless state as an object 
of thought is a fetter, The objection is that the deathless state is in 
fact accompanied not by the fetters, but by their opposites. 

IX.3. Whether matter is considered a “‘co-supporting object’. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that matter should be considered a 
co-condition for the working of the mind. The objection holds this 
wrongly would imply that matter has mental features. 

IX.4. Whether intoxicants are without supporting objects. 

(1-10) The opponent maintains that intoxicants lack a corres- 
ponding mental object. For example, a latent bias to evil may exist 
even in one thinking moral thoughts. If this were so, it would mean 
that all manifestations of sensual desire would be without mental 
objects. Moreover, the relationship of the intoxicants to the mental 
aggregates further suggests the invalidity of the opponent’s thesis, 
for the mental aggregates are not without mental objects. 

IX.5. Whether knowledge is objectless. 

(1-5) The opponent maintains that the knowledge belonging to 
the perfected being may lack a mental object. When his senses are 
occupied with a visual object, for example, his knowledge is ob- 
jectless. The rejoinder largely follows that of [X.4. 

IX.6-7. Of past and future mental objects. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that awareness of past or future ideas 
lacks a mental object. The rejoinder finds this view self-contra- 
dictory. 

IX.8. On what is affected by initial thought. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that all awareness is affected by initial 
thought. The point is that any awareness can be an object of initial 
thought. In the rejoinder it is argued that some awarenesses arise 
independent of prior thought, and thus that the thesis is to be rejected. 

IX.9. Of sound as the diffusion of initial thought. 

(1-2) The opponent holds that sound is the diffusion of initial 
thought. His point is that thought produces speech. If sound were 
merely the diffusion of thought, argues the rejoinder, each mental 
process would produce its own characteristic sound. 

IX.10. That speech does not conform to awareness. 

(1-5) The opponent maintains that speech does not conform to 
awareness, that is that one can speak without thinking or talk about 
something other than is on one’s mind. This is rejected as wrongly 


290 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


implying there is no connection possible between speech and aware- 
ness. 

1X.11. That action does not conform to awareness. 

(1-5) The debate is as in IX.10. 

IX.12. Concerning past, future and present. 

(1-7) The opponent argues that past and future experiences can 
be possessed in the present by one who can induce the meditative 
states. This contradicts the orthodox understanding of the past as 
come to an end and the future as not yet come into being. 


BOOK X 


X.1. Concerning cessation. 

(1-4) The opponent maintains that before one congeries of five 
aggregates ceases, five karmically functional aggregates arise. This 
is rejected as implying the existence of ten aggregates simultaneously 
rather than the five posited by the Buddha. 

X.2. Whether the path is material. 

(1-8) The opponent holds that the (eight-)limbed path is a path 
with physical form, that is that right speech, right action and right 
livelihood are material and, hence, that the body of one practicing 
the path is included in the path. The rejoinder denies that the three 
aspects of the path mentioned are material, hence rejecting the thesis. 

X.3. Concerning the path and fivefold consciousness. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that one can be practicing the path while 
enjoying the five types of sense-consciousness. This cannot be, goes 
the rejoinder, because sense-consciousness is worldly. 

X.4. Whether the fivefold consciousness is good or bad. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that the five kinds of sense-conscious- 
ness are morally good or bad. The argument follows that of X.3. 

X.5. Concerning co-ideation. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that the fivefold sense-consciousness 
is co-ideational. The argument is as in X.3. 

X.6. Concerning double morality. 

(1-7) The opponent holds that an individual engaged in pursuit 
of the path is practicing at once a worldly and an other-worldly 
morality. The rejoinder is based on the understanding that this would 
wrongly imply the simultaneous existence of two sets of mental 
processes. 

X.7. Whether morality is not a property of awareness. 

(1-11) The opponent holds that morality is not a property of 
awareness. The point is to affirm that the virtue of an act continues 
to exist after it has passed from mind. The rejoinder argues that to 
hold this thesis wrongly implies morality is either material, liberation 


KATHAVATTHU 291 


asense organ, or a sense object. The argument parallels that of VII.4. 

X.8. That morality is not connected with awareness. 

(1-8) The argument is as in X.7. 

X.9, Concerning attitude as cause. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that virtuous attitude is the cause of 
virtue. The argument is as at VII.5. 

X.10 Whether what makes itself manifest is moral. 

(1-2) The opponent holds that acts of manifestation are moral, 
that is that they have a moral quality. The rejoinder argues that 
manifestation is physical and morality is not, thus contradicting the 
opponent’s thesis. 

X.11. Whether nonmanifestation is immoral. . 

(1-4) The opponent holds that acts which do not intimate a moral 
thought behind themselves are immoral. The rejoinder notes that 
immoral acts themselves are manifest. 


BOOK XI 


XI.1. Three points about intoxicants. ad 

(1-20) The opponent holds that intoxicants are morally neutral, 
without root conditions, and independent of awareness. The re- 
joinder notes that the intoxicants cannot be identified with any of 
the morally neutral ultimates. Further it cannot be shown that these 
intoxicants are different from the corresponding fetters which are 
immoral. The argument continues as in IX.4. 

XI.2. Of knowledge. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that an individual who has overcome 
spiritual ignorance cannot be said to have knowledge at the same 
time as he has mundane thoughts. The rejoinder is-based on the 
understanding that to overcome ignorance means to have knowledge. 

XI.3. Whether knowledge is conjoined with mundane conscious- 
ness. : 

(1-5) The opponent holds that knowledge is not conjoined with 
mundane consciousness. If this were true, goes the rejoinder, 
knowledge would be identifiable with liberation, matter, sense- 
organs, sense objects, or the like. 

XI.4. Of the utterance “This is frustrating’’. 

(1-7) The opponent holds that knowledge of the nature of frustra- 
tion arises at the same time in the individual who at the moment 
of entering the path utters the phrase: ‘‘This is frustrating.’’ He is 
. found inconsistent in not admitting the development of knowledge 
in one who utters the other truths under such circumstances. 

XI.5. Of the force of supernatural power. 

(1-7) The opponent holds that one possessed of supernatural 


292 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


power can live an entire ka/pa. The rejoinder argues that such power 
can only avert an untimely death, not prolong one’s life-span unna- 
turally. 

XI1.6. Concerning concentration. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that continuity in the flow of awareness 
constitutes concentration. The rejoinder considers concentration to 
be confined to a momentary unit of awareness. 

XI°7. Concerning the establishing of causes and effects. 

(1-2) The opponent holds that the establishment of causes and 
effects is predetermined. The objection is that this would result in 
an endless chain of causes rendering the attainment of liberation 
impossible. 

XI.8. Concerning impermanence. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that impermanence is predetermined. 
The objection is again that this would result in an endless regression. 


BOOK Xi 


XI.1. Whether restraint is karma (i.e. morally effective action). 

(1-3) The opponent holds that both mental self-restraint and the - 
lack thereof are karmically efficacious. The objection is that the 
opponent’s refusal to apply the thesis to the other senses is incon- 
sistent. The rejoinder stresses that karma is will. 

XII.2. Concerning action. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that all action has maturation. In support 
he cites Anguttara V.292ff. The objection is that the thesis is 
unqualified, implying that both inoperative and neutral volitions 
produce karmic effects. 

XII.3. Whether sound is a karmic maturation. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that sound is a result of karma. The 
thesis is based on scriptural passages indicating that the quality of 
a person’s voice is a karmic reward. The objection is that the term 
‘‘maturation’’ refers to psychological states only. 

XII.4, Concerning the sense-organs. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that the sense-organs are the result of 
karma. The argument is as at XII.3. 

XI.5. Concerning (rebirth) seven times at the most. 

(1-6) The opponent holds that an individual who is said to be liable 
to seven more rebirths at the most becomes subjectively assured 
of final liberation only at the culmination of the seven. The objection 
is that such a person may achieve the goal in less than the maximum. . 

XII.6. Of the individual passing from one noble family to another 
(from ‘‘clan-to-clan’’). 

(1) The previous argument is continued with reference to the 


KATHAVATTHU 293 


clan-to-clan individual that is one of the three kinds of stream- 
enterer. 

Of the single-seeder. 

(2) Further continuation as in XII.5. (The Nalanda edition numbers 
this separately as XII.7.) 

XII.7. Of deprivation of life. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that an individual possessed of accom- 
plishment in views can deprive a creature intentionally of life. The 
objection is that the thesis implies such an individual is capable of 
matricide, patricide, arhaticide, etc. 

* XII.8. Concerning woeful destiny. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that for an individual accomplished in 
views the possibility of woeful destiny is eliminated although he may 
experience desire for objects or creatures in such courses of exis- 
tence. The Sakavadi to the contrary holds that one at the stage of 
accomplishment in views is still subject to sense desires. of a sort 
which may lead to rebirth in a woeful course. 

XII.9. Concerning the individual who has reached the seventh 
rebirth. The argument is as at XII.8. 


BOOK XII 


XIil.1. Of staying there for an aeon (Ka/pa). 

(1-3) The opponent holds that an individual doomed to aeon-long 
retribution must endure it for an entire aceon. The Sakavadi holds 
such retribution to last only for the duration of the current aeon. 

XIII.2. Of the acquisition of goodness. . 

(1-2) The opponent holds that an individual doomed for an aeon 
cannot acquire good awareness. The rejoinder is based on the view 
that such an individual is capable of mundane goodness. 

XIII.3. Concerning what is immediately applied. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that an individual who has instigated 
a crime resulting in immediate retribution cannot enter the path to 
enlightenment. The Sakavadi, however, holds that if the instigator 

reforms before the commission of the act it may be possible for him 
to enter the true path. 

XIll.4. Concerning the way of assurance. 

(1-2) The opponent holds that he who is fixed enters the way of 
assurance. The objection is that one can be equally fixed in assurance 
of immediate retribution. - 

XUI.5. Concerning one who is hemmed in. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that only one who is hemmed in by an 
obstacle can overcome it. The objection is that the thesis implies 
the simultaueous presence and absence of defilements suchas hatred 


294 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and the like. 

XMI.6. Of one who is face to face. 

The opponent holds that a fetter is cast off by one who is face 
to face with it. The argument is as at XIII.5. 

XI.7. Whether having attained a meditative state one enjoys it. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that one who has attained a meditative 
state enjoys it. The objection is that this implies that the meditative 
state is an end in itself, rather than merely a means to the goal. 

XIII.8. Of attachment to the disagreeable. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that one can experience attachiment for 
what is disagreeable, basing this view on an interpretation of Majjhi- 
ma\.266. The objection finds the thesis self-contradictory. 

XII.9. That craving for factors is morally neutral. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that craving for objects of the mind is 
morally indeterminate. The objection is that there is no basis for 
distinguishing between this and other craving which is immoral. 

XI.10. That craving for dharmas is not a cause of frustration. 

(1-5) The argument is as at XIII.9. 


BOOK XIV 


XIV.1. Concerning the relinking of the good and bad. 

(1-7) The opponent holds that the root of good awareness can 
link directly to the root of bad awareness, and conversely. For 
example, good and bad thoughts can occur consecutively. The 
objection is that this implies good awareness can follow upon bad 
and conversely without an intervening change of mind. 

XIV.2. Of the origin of the sense-organs. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that the six sense-organs originate at 
the moment of conception. The Sakavadi maintains, to the contrary, 
that only the mind and the organ of touch originate at the moment 
of conception, the others developing over time. 

XIV.3. Concerning proximity condition. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that one sensation follows another in 
immediate proximity. The rejoinder is similar to XIV.1. 

XIV.4. Of noble matter. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that the noble forms of speech and action, 
as material qualities, are derived from the primary material elements. 
Objection is that such speech and action are moral, rather than 
amoral as are the primary material elements. 

XIV.5. Of contaminant as other. 

_ (1-8) The opponent holds that a being afflicted by a contaminant 
is different from actually being possessed by the contaminant; that 
is, that the bias is different from the actual manifestation. The 


KATHAVATTHU 295 


objection is that this wrongly implies that an actual but unmanifest 
contaminant is also different in kind from the open manifestation 
of that contaminant. 

XIV.6. Whether outbursts are unconscious. 

(1) The opponent holds that passionate outbursts are not associated 
with awareness. The objection holds that this wrongly classes them 
as nonmental. 

XIV.7. Concerning what is included. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that desires for the material and the 
immaterial realms crop up and are included in those realms. The 
argument is based on an analogy to the sensual realm. The Sakavadi, 
however, holds that such desires are limited to the sensual realm. 

XIV.8. Concerning what is neutral. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that speculation is neutral. By this he 
means that speculation concerning matters,upon which the Buddha 
did not pass judgment is morally neutral. The thesis is rejected as 
a claim that speculation is morally neutral. 

XIV.9. Concerning the unincluded. 

(1-2) The opponent holds that speculation is to be found in the 
unincluded. The objection is that the term ‘‘unincluded”’ is limited 
to the experiences appropriate to the path and to liberation. 


BOOK XV 


XV.1. Of causal conditionhood. 

(1-8) The opponent holds that only one kind of causal relation 
can exist between two phenomena. Thus, a phenomenon related to 
another as moral cause or as its object cannot be related to it through 
contiguity or immediate succession. The rejoinder gives counter- 
, examples of multiple relationships of other sorts. 

XV.2. Of reciprocal relation. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that a reciprocal causal relationship does 
not exist between ignorance and action. The objection is that since 
_ action and ignorance can coexist, the relationship between them is 
Teciprocal. 

XV.3. Concerning duration. 

(1-6) The opponent holds that duration is predetermined, which 
the Sakavadi denies. 

XV.4. Concerning moments, instants and seconds. 

The opponent holds that moments, instants and seconds are 
predetermined. The Sakavadi denies it. 

XV.S. Concerning the intoxicants. 

The opponent holds that four intoxicants are free from intoxicants. 
The objection is that the intoxicants per se are not included in the 


296 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


category of nonintoxicants. 

XV.6. Concerning decay and death. 

The opponent holds that the decay and death of higher- worldly 
factors is itself higher-worldly. The objection is that there are but 
nine higher- worldly factors (i.e. four paths, four fruits and liberation), 
and higher-worldly per se is not one of them. 

XV.7-8. Concerning the experience of identification. 

The opponent holds that to attain cessation of the experience of 
identification is higher-worldly. The reply is that it is mundane. The 
argument is as at XV.5 and 6. 

XV.9. A third argument concerning the experience of identifica- 
tion. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that having entered the state of the 
cessation of the experience of identification one may die. The 
objection is that the mental symptoms of death and its accompanying 
states are absent in such a state, and that the causes of violent death 
cannot affect the body of an individual therein. 

XV.10. Concerning attaining rebirth in the sphere of unconscious 
being. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that attainment of the cessation of the 
experience of identification leads to rebirth in the sphere of un- 
conscious being. The objection is that one can experience the 
cessation of identification without attaining the moral conditions 
necessary for rebirth in the sphere of unconscious being. 

XV.11. Of action and its accumulation. 

(1-6) The opponent holds that karma is one thing and its accumula- 
tion another. The objection is that karma and its accumulation are 
conjoined, as are feeling, identification, mindfulness, etc., and their 
‘respective accumulation. Where there is karma, its accumulation 
begins; where it stops, its accumulation ceases. 


BOOK XVI 


XVI.1. Concerning influencing awareness. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that one who has power and authority 
can influence the awareness of another. The objection is that this 
implies the possibility of external control of one’s attitudes, emo- 
tions, will or the like. The rejoinder cites Dhammapada 164. 

XVI.2. Concerning operating another’s awareness. 

The opponent holds that one can operate the mind of another. 
The argument is as at XVI.1. 

XVI.3. Concerning giving another satisfaction. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that an individual can give satisfaction 
to another. He cites Majjhima 1.447. The objection is that one 


KATHAVATTHU 297 


doesn’t give away happiness in the same sense as a gift is given. 

XVI.4. Concerning excelling attention. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that we can attend to all things at once. 
The reference is to such generalizations as: ‘‘All things are imperma- 
nent’’. The objection is that we attend to things in any given moment 
as exclusively past, present or future, and not all at once. Moreover, 
we aren’t attentive to the process of attention at the moment of that 
attention. ; 

XVI.5. Concerning matter as cause. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that material qualities can be causes, 
that is that the four primary material qualities condition secondary 
qualities. The objection takes the term “‘cause’’ (Aetu) in its special 
sense as areference to one of the causes of moral or immoral conduct. 

XVI.6. Concerning matter and concomitant cause. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that material qualities are accompanied 
by acause. The argument is as at XVIL.5. 

XVI.7. Concerning matter as good or bad. 

(1-7) The opponent holds that matter is morally good or bad. His 
point is that the physical motions involved in action are moral or 
immoral. The objection is that unlike the moral conditions, matter 
does not have a mental aspect. 

XVI1.8. Concerning matter as maturation. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that matter is a maturation of action. 
The rejoinder insists on maintaining the subjective or psychological 
nature of the results of action. 

XVL9. Concerning matter in the material and the immaterial 
realms. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that there is matter ofthe realm of matter 
and matter of the immaterial realm, that is matter which is due to 
actions done in these two spheres. The objection sees the thesis as 
* aclaim that there is matter in these two realms. 

XVI. 10. Concerning what is included in the material and immaterial 
elements. 

(1-7) The opponent holds that attachment to matter in the sensuous 
realm is included among the elements of this realm. The argument 
is similar to XVI.9. 


BOOK XVII 


XVII.1. Concerning a perfected being accumulating merit. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that a perfected being can accumulate 
merit, that is that he can perform merit accumulating acts. The 
objection is that this thesis wrongly implies a perfected being can 
build up further karma. 


298 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


XVII.2. Whether a perfected being can suffer an untimely death. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that since a perfected being must 
experience the results of all his past karma before death, he cannot 
die an untimely death. The rejoinder notes the possibility that a 
perfected being can be murdered, and considers that this would-be 
an untimely death. 

XVII.3. That all this is from karma. 

(1-4) On the basis of Suttanipata 654 the opponent holds that all 
this is due to karma. The objection is that this implies karma itself 
is a karmic result and hence that one can commit crimes as a result 
of previous karma. 

XVII.4. On being bound up with the faculties. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that frustration is bound up with the 
faculties. The objection is that this implies that only what is bound 
up with sentience is impermanent, and thus that some frustration 
is not bound up with the other faculties. 

XVII.5. On the omission of the noble path. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that with the exception of the noble path 
all remaining conditionings are frustrating. The noble pathis excepted 
as leading to the cessation of frustration. The objection is that the 
thesis leads to the conclusion that the origin of frustration {i.e., the 
second noble truth) is also frustration {i.e., the first noble truth), 
thus reducing the noble truths to three in number. 

XVII.6. That it ought not be said the monastic order accepts gifts. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that it ought not be said that the monastic 
order accepts gifts. The thesis is based on the assumption that the 
term sangha refers to the paths and their function. 

XVIL7. That it ought not be said the monastic order sanctifies gifts. 

(1-4) The argument is as at XVII.6. 

XVIL8. That it ought not be said that the monastic order enjoys 
(lit. ‘‘eats”, bhuffjati). 

(1-4) The argument is as at XVII.6. 

XVI.9. That it ought not be said that what is given to the monastic 
order has great fruit. 

(1-4) The argument is similar to XVII.6. 

XVIL10. That it ought not be aac that what is given to the Buddha 
has great fruit. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that what is given to the Buddha is not 
really helpful, as he is beyond earthly enjoyment. The objection is 
that since he is the supreme field of merit, gifts to the Buddha do 
bear great fruit. 

XVII.11. Concerning the sanctification of a gift. 

_ {1-4) The opponent holds a gift is sanctified by the donor but not 
by the recipient. The objection is that since there is greater merit 


KATHAVATTHU 299 


in giving a gift to a more worthy field of merit, the recipient must 
also be a factor in the sanctification of the gift. 


BOOK XVIII 


XVIII.1. Concerning the world of men. 

(1-4) The opponent holds it ought not be said that the Buddha 
lived in the world of men. The thesis is based on the sdtra that says 
the Buddha was not defiled by the world (Samyutta I. 140). 

XVII.2. Concerning exposition of the dharma. 

The opponent holds it ought not be said that the Buddha himself — 
taught the dharma, but that it was taught by his magical creation. 

XVIII.3. Concerning compassion. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that the Buddha felt no compassion, 
since he had conquered his attachment. The objection is that the 
thesis implies the Buddha was ruthless. 

XVIH.4. Concerning odors. 

(1-2) The opponent holds that the fragrance of even the Buddha’s 
excrement surpassed that of all other things. The rejoinder holds 
that had this been true, some would have used the Buddha’s excre- 
ment for perfume. 

XVII.5. Concerning the one path. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that the four fruits of the religious life 
are realized by pursuit of a single path. The objection considers the 
paths of stream-enterer, once-returner, non-returner and perfected 
being separate and distinct. 

XVIII.6. Concerning passing over from one state of meditation to 
another. : 

(1-8) The opponent holds that the passage from one state of 
meditation to another is immediate. The objection is that the thesis 
seems to deny that any additional mental process is necessary to 
lead to the second state of meditation from the first. 

XVIII.7. Concerning the interval between meditative states. 

(1-9) The opponent holds that concentration accompanied by 
sustained thought without initial thought constitutes an intermediate 
stage between the first and second meditative states. The objection 
considers it inconsistent to posit any intermediate state of awareness 
between only the first two states of absorption. Further, as but one 
of three types of concentration spoken of by the Buddha, concentra- 
tion accompanied by sustained thought without initial thought should 
not be singled out from the others as the thesis does. 

XVII.8. Concerning whether one hears sound. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that one who has attained meditation 
continues to hear sound, because the Buddha said that sound is a 


300 - ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


thorn for the first meditative state. The objection is that the opponent 
is inconsistent in not allowing the other senses to operate in the first 
meditative state, and in failing to deal analogously with the “‘thorns”’ 
of the other meditative states. 

XVII.9. Concerning whether one sees matter with the eye. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that one sees matter with the eye. The 
objection is that one sees with visual consciousness, rather than with. 
the material eye. 


BOOK XIX 


XIX.1. On leaving behind the defilements. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that one can leave behind past, present 
and future defilements. The objection is that the thesis implies that 
we can dismiss both what has already ceased and what has not yet 
come to be. 

XIX.2. Concerning voidness. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that voidness is included in the aggregate 
of conditionings. For the fourth aggregate to involve the void, goes 
the objection, would be to deny its impermanence. Moreover, it 
would lead to the inclusion of the voidness of the other aggregates 
under the fourth aggregate. 

XIX.3. Concerning the fruit of monkhood. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that the fruit of monkhood is uncondi- 
tioned. The argument is similar to VI.1. 

XIX.4, Concerning attainment. 

(1-7) The opponent holds that attainment is unconditioned. The 
argument is similar to VI.1. 

XIX.5. Concerning suchness. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that the suchness of all fins is 
unconditioned. The argument is similar to VI.1, XIX.6. 

XIX.6. Concerning the morally good. 

The opponent holds that the sphere or element of liberation is 
good {i.e. faultless). The objection is that unlike liberation morally 
good states have mental objects and produce karmic results. 

XIX.7. Concerning final fixedness. 

(1-8) The opponent holds that the ordinary person can possess 
final fixedness. The objection notes that an ordinary person can 
commit heinous crimes, harbor doubts or adopt annihilationist views, 
none of which is possible for one possessed of final fixedness. 

XIX.8. Concerning the faculties. 

(1-7) The opponent holds that the five spiritual faculties are not 
worldly. The objection is that there can be faith, energy, mindfulness, 
concentration and wisdom (i.e. the five spiritual faculties} with 


KATHAVATTHU 301 


reference to worldly matters. Further the thesis is inconsistent in 
not treating the sixth mental sense analogously. 


BOOK XX 


XX.1. Concerning what is unintentional. 

(1-9) The opponent holds that the five gravest transgressions 
(matricide, patricide, etc.) involve immediate retribution even when 
committed unintentionally. This thesis aims at stressing the serious- 
ness of such acts even if unintentional. The rejoinder notes the lack 
of scriptural warrant and the inconsistency in denying that uninten- 
tionality is a mitigating circumstance only in the case of these five 
offences. 

XX.2. Concerning knowledge. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that there can be no knowledge in the 
case of an ordinary person. The debate results from the opponent’s 
failure to distinguish between ‘‘knowledge’’ in the sense of ‘‘worldly 
knowledge”’ and in the sense of ‘“‘spiritual insight’. The thesis denies 
knowledge in the latter sense to the ordinary individual. The objection 
allows knowledge in the former sense to such a person. 

XX.3. Concerning guardians in hell. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that there are no guardians to inflict 
punishment in hell. The objection is that since there is punishment 
in hell, a class of punishers is necessary. 

XX.4. Concerning animals. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that beings can be born in the heavens 
as animals. The case of Eravana, the elephant, is cited as proof. The 
objection is that the thesis wrongly confuses the aaa and heavenly 
realms. 

XX.5. Concerning the path. 

(1-6) The opponent holds that the noble path is fivefold sii Right 
speech, action and livelihood are not counted as limbs of the path 
because they are not states of awareness, as are the other limbs, 
and on the basis of a proof- text which suggests that one whois already 
pure in action, speech and livelihood can go on to pursue the path. 
Objection is based on numerous scriptural references to the path 
as eightfold. 

XX.6. Concerning insight knowledge. 

_ (1-2) The opponent holds that higher-worldly knowledge has a 
twelvefold base. Vinaya 1.96ff. is cited as evidence. The objection 
is that this wrongly implies that each of the paths and fruits is also 
twelvefold. 


302 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
BOOK XXI 


XXI.1. Concerning the teaching. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that the teaching has been made new, 
that is, reformed. The objection is that this implies it was possible 
to improve upon the Buddha’s message. 

XXI.2. Concerning one who is not separated. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that an ordinary person is not separated 
from factors of the three worlds. The point is that since he cannot 
tell which world his actions will lead to, he cannot be held incapable 
of actions leading to any of the three worlds. The objection is that 
the thesis implies an ordinary person can experience factors in all 
three worlds simultaneously. 

XXI.3. Concerning fetters. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that there is attainment of perfected 
being without eliminating a certain fetter, namely ignorance. His 
point is that the perfected being lacks the complete knowledge of 
the Buddha. The objection is based on a different listing of fetters 
not including lack of total knowledge. 

XX1.4. Concerning supernatural power. 

(1-5) The opponent holds that either a Buddha or his disciple has 
the power to do what he wills. The case of Pilindavaccha is cited 
as evidence. The rejoinder points to numerous wishes which such 
powers could not fulfill, a wish for perpetual moonlight to give but 
one example. 

XXI.5. Concerning Buddha. 

The opponent holds that there are differences among Buddhas. 
The Sakavadi objects that in essential matters such as enlightenment 
there is no difference. The only differences are in such accidental 
characteristics as age and physical appearance. 

XXI_.6. Concerning all directions. 

(1-2) The opponent holds that the Buddhas abide in all directions. 
The objection is that Sakyamuni, the historical Buddha, does not 
persist in all directions, nor can a separate Buddha be identified for 
each direction. 

XXI_.7. Concerning factors. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that all dharmas are fixed in their 
fundamental nature. The rejoinder takes the thesis as a claim that 
all factors are to be classed among those things resulting in assured 
fixed retribution. 

XXI.8. Concerning karma. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that all karma is fixed, that is that one 
type of karma cannot be converted into another. The objection is 
as in XXI.7. 


KATHAVATTHU 303 


BOOK XXII 


XXII.1. Concerning final liberation. 

The opponent holds that final liberation can be obtained without 
eliminating a certain fetter. The dialogue is as at XVI.3. 

XXII.2. Concerning good awareness. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that there is good awareness in a 
perfected being when he attains final release. The objection is that 
good awareness inevitably involves karmic consequences. 

XXII.3. Concerning unchangeableness. 

(1-4) The opponent holds that a perfected being is in a state of 
unchangeableness when he attains final release. The objection is that 
the perfected being’s final awareness is an ordinary though karmi- 
cally inoperative consciousness. 

XXII.4. Concerning realization of the dharma. 

(1-3) The opponent holds that an embryo is capable of realizing 
the dharma. The objection is that a perfected being is incapable of 
hearing and paying attention to the doctrine. 

XXIL.5. Three similar arguments. (The Nalanda edition numbers 
these separately.) 

The argument of XXII.4 is repeated with reieitiicn to: (a) attain- 
ment of perfection by an embryo, (b) realization of the truth by 
a dreamer and (c) attainment of perfection by a dreamer. 

XXII.6. Concerning the karmically neutral. 

(1-2) The opponent holds that all states of dream-awareness are 
karmically neutral. The objection is that in his dreams an individual 
can commit serious offences. 

XXIL7. Concerning repetition as condition. 

The opponent holds there is no condition by way of repetition. 
The rejoinder cites AnguttaraIV.247 and Samyutta V.54. 

XXII.8. Concerning what is momentary. 

The opponent holds that all dharmas persist for but a single moment 
of awareness. The point is to stress their mutability and imperma- 
nence. The rejoinder notes the existence of such concrete things as 
mountains and trees ie persist for longer than a single unit of 
awareness. 


BOOK XXIII 


XXIII. 1. Concerning single intention. 

The opponent holds that sexual intercourse can be entered into 
with single intention. The objection is that the thesis does not 
discriminate between appropriate and inappropriate circumstances. 

XXIII.2. Concerning apparent perfected beings. 

The opponent holds that nonhuman beings with the appearance 


304 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of perfected beings may engage in sexual intercourse. The objection 
is that the thesis appears to limit their possible offences to this one 
from among many. 

XXIII.3. Concerning one who governs himself according to his own 
inclination. (The Nalanda edition numbers this as XXII.3-6.) 

‘The opponent holds that a bodhisattva of his own free will can 
(a) enter a hellish state, (b) enter a womb, (c) perform difficult tasks, 
(d) perform acts of penance. In each case the Sakavadi denies what 
the opponent says. 

XXIII.4. Concerning what is fitting. 

The opponent holds that there can be the appearance of attachment, 
hate, delusion or the defilements without these actually existing. The 
Sakavadi denies this. 

XXII.5 Concerning what is not predetermined. 

The opponent holds that the aggregates, elements, faculties—all 
save frustration—are not predetermined. The objection is that all 
these are impermanent and, as such, characterized by frustration. 


9 


MAHANIDDESA 


Summary by Grace G. Burford 


The Mahdaniddesa is an Abhidharma-style commentary on the Aftha- 
kavagga of the Suttanipdta. Its structure is determined by that of the 
Afthakavagga, which it follows closely by sutta and verse. (The 
Althakavagga consists of verses 766-975 of the Suttanipata and is 
divided into sixteen suftas.) Along with the Culaniddesa, which 
comments on portions of the Parayanavagga of the Suttanipdata, the 
Mahdaniddesa constitutes the eleventh text of the Pali canon’s 
Khuddakanikaya. The Niddesa is the only explicitly commentarial 
text included in the Palicanon. Reflecting this unusual status, although 
most of the canonical texts are regarded as the Buddha’s words 
(buddhavacana), the Niddesais attributed by the Theravada tradition 
to the Buddha’s leading disciple, Sariputta. As a commentary the 
Niddesa is quite old, while as a canonical text it is relatively late. 
Thus it provides a valuable glimpse into a crucial time within the 
historical development of Theravada Buddhist thought—a time when 
Abhidharma types of analysis were being developed and were taking 
hold within the Buddhist traditions. 

Scholars have paid very little attention to the Mahdniddesa itself. 
Buddhists and non-Buddhists alike have used it primarily as a 
reference work for interpreting the Aftthakavagga. Buddhaghosa 
utilized itin writing his Suttanipata commentary, the Paramattha joti- 
ka Il. Modern scholars tend to consult it on difficult Afthakavagga 
passages and point out its divergence from the original text’s intent 
on passages that are easier to interpret. The Mahaniddesa’s peculiar 
style encourages this rather piecemeal use; it is considerably more 
difficult to read on its own than other Theravada commentaries. The 
bulk of it is hardly prose at all, consisting as it does of lists of synonyms 
(glosses, Pali: niddesa, Sanskrit: nirdesa) for particular words in the 
Atthakavagga verses. Although its repetitious application of these 
strings of synonyms gives the impression that the Mahaniddesa offers 
a simplistic and rather tedious commentary on an exciting, beautifully 


306 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


poetic work, a closer examination reveals that this admittedly dry 
text achieves a wide range of creative complexity within its standard- 
ized glossing form. Due to its peculiar style and commentarial 
structure, I shall offer a general description of this voluminous text, 
rather than a summary that follows the order of the text itself. 

References throughout are to the Pali Text Society edition: Mahda- 
niddesa, edited by L. de la Vallee Poussin and E.J. Thomas, 2 parts 
(London: Humphrey Milford, Oxford University Press for the Pali 
Text Society, 1916-17; reprint edited in one volume, London: Pali 
Text Society, 1978). The text has not been translated. 

The Mahdaniddesa’s comments on the occurrences of the terms 
““suddhr’ (“‘purity’’) and “‘santr’ (‘‘peace’’) in the Afthakavagga 
exemplify the range of commentarial innovation exhibited by this 
text within the limits of the glossing format. At one exteme, the 
Mahaniddesahas subbi- for suddhi- at 910, which is a scribal rather 
than a doctrinal divergence. On the same level, by glossing the phrase 
“* passami suddham’’ (“‘Isee the purified’’) with: ‘‘ passami suddham, 
dakkhami suddham, olokemi suddham, nijjhayami suddham, upapa- 
rikkhami suddham’’ the gloss on 788 reveals nothing new about the 
term suddha. 

At the simplest level of actual commentary, the Mahdniddesa 
begins to supplement the Afthakavagga’s terms with vocabulary of 
its own by offering strings of synonyms that begin with a word from 
the Afthakavagga but often conclude with terms far removed from 
that original word. The Mahdniddesa usually has more than one of 
these stock definitions for any one term, and its application of one 
or the other in particular instances can further indicate its underlying 
interpretation of the passages in question. The Mahaniddesa employs 
two strings of synonyms for “‘suddhi’’: (1) ‘“‘suddhi, visuddhi, 
parisuddhi, vodata, pariyodata’’ and (2) “‘suddhi, visuddhi, pari- 
suddhi, mutti, vimutti, parimutt’’’. In seven instances the glosses 
of ‘‘suddhi”’ consist entirely of one or the other of these two formulas. 

At the next level of increasing commentarial innovation, many 
glosses utilize one of the stock synonym strings as the basis for a 
slightly more complex explanation. Often the text builds on the basic 
formula by compounding the synonyms. with other terms. For 
example, the gloss on 891 defines suddhi as: ‘‘suddhimagga, 
visuddhimagga, parisuddhimagga, vodatamagga, pariyodata- 
magga’’. In this way the text extends the connotation of ‘“‘purity”’ 
(suddhi) in this particular context to include the path to purity. 

At an even higher level of innovative complexity, the Mahaniddesa 
begins many glosses with a standard formula and then introduces 
an explanatory passage that, unlike the synonym strings, consists 
entirely of material external to the Afthakavagga, having no particular 


MAHANIDDESA 307 


term connecting it directly with that original text. Further, the 
Mahaniddesa utilizes these passages themselves as stock exposi- 
tions, to be plugged into explanations as they are needed. For 
example, the gloss on 824 begins by defining ‘‘suddhi’’ with the 
“‘suddhi... parimuttr’ list and then it explains the phrase “‘Idh’eva 
suddhiiti’’ (‘‘Just this is purity’’) with a passage that the Mahaniddesa 
will use repeatedly in other contexts. This passage enumerates ten 
statements that deluded persons proclaim as the only truth, including 
opinions concerning the nature of the world (as eternal, ephemeral, 
finite, infinite), of the soul/life-principle (as identical to the body 
or other than the body), and of the ultimate fate of the Buddha (after 
death the Buddha is, is not, both is and is not, neither is nor is not). 
These are, of course, the famous metaphysical issues. Other Pali 
texts depict the Buddha as refusing to explain. 

In another example of this relatively complex level of commentarial 
creativity, the comment on the second line of 824 develops the 
meaning of suddhi in a slightly different way. The line in question 
states that nonideal persons do not say visuddhris in other dharmas. 
The Mahaniddesa paraphrases it as follows: 


Having set aside [i.e. excepting] their own teacher, dharma- 
preaching, group, view, way, path, they disparage [etc.] all 
other dogmas (thus): ‘‘that teacher is not omniscient, dharma 
is not well-taught, group-is not well-practised, view is not good, 
way is not well-attained, path is not leading-out; there is neither 
suddhi nor visuddhi . . . nor parimutti) from (i.e. because of) 
that; low, inferior (etc.) (persons) are not purified (sujjhanti, 
... parimuccanti from that’’, thus they say, preach [etc. ]. 


This gloss includes the second stock definition of suddhi, but it also 
offers a more innovative illustration of the term in the ‘That teacher 
is not omniscient . . . path is not leading-out’ statement. Since this 
gloss utilizes more than a simple string of synonyms and since, in 
turn, the commentary applies this more creative passage repeatedly 
in a variety of settings, this comment provides another example of 
an innovative explanation used by the Mahaniddesa in a set manner. 

Another type of complex glossing explanation that incorporates 
a stereotypical string of synonyms is illustrated by the gloss of 
*‘santr’ (peace) compounded with ‘‘pada’’ in 915 as: 


Santi is, in one aspect, peace, the state of peace (santipada), 
that deathless nibbana which is quieting of all conditionings, 
eradication of all limitations (upadhi), destruction of thirst, 
dispassion, cessation, nibbana. 


308 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


As the phrase ‘‘in one aspect”’ implies, there is more to this definition. 
A quotation from another (Pali Buddhist) text follows. Here, and 
in all similar instances, the Mahdniddesa introduces the quotation 
with the phrase ““Thus it was spoken by the Bhagavant’’ (vuttam 
h’ etam bhagavata). (The editors of the Pali Text Society edition have 
located the sources of most of these passages and they provide 
cross-references in the notes.) The quotation concludes with a string 
of synonyms for ‘‘sant?’ which relates loosely to the ‘‘first aspect”’ 
of this gloss, namely ‘‘the state of (-pada) peace (santi-), shelter 
(tana-), protection (/ena-), refuge (sarana-), the fearless (abhaya-), 
the eternal (accuta-), the deathless (amata-), nibbana-’’. We find 
this string of synonyms in the Mahaniddessa’s gloss of ‘‘santr’ in 
845, as well. 

The gloss on 784, which verse contains the first instance of the 
term ‘‘santi”’ in the Atthakavagga, exemplifies the Mahdniddesa’s 
highest level of innovation. This line presents a challenge to the 
word-by-word commentator because while overall the Atthakavagga 
treats santi as an undeniably ideal condition, this line implies that 
in some cases it can be less than ideal: 


Of whom there are designed, defined, 

preferred, unclean dharmas, 

What good result he sees in himself, 

he is dependent on that santi-with-unsteady- basis. 


The Mahdniddesa reconciles this somewhat derogatory use of the 
term ‘‘santi”’ with Afthakavagga’s usual unmitigated praise for sant 
by delineating three samfttis: (1) *‘accantasanti, that deathless libera- 
tion which is the quietening of all conditionings, eradication of all 
limitations, destruction of thirst, nonattachment, cessation, nib- 
bana” (as in the ‘‘first aspect’’ of the verse 915 gloss of santi 
mentioned above); (2) tadarigasanti, the calming of a series of 
negative factors at the eight successive levels of concentration-medi- 
tative attainment; and (3) sammutisanti, the sixty-two false views 
(ditthigata)’’ (the text does not enumerate these). Here the Maha- 
niddesa, by attributing secondary and tertiary meaning to one word, 
explains the Afthakavagga verse on two levels. On the level of the 
individual term ‘“‘santr’, this gloss reflects a complexity inherent in 
the original text’s vocabulary. But it goes beyond the obvious implica- 
tion in this particular line that sometimes calm is not depend- 
able. In connecting the idea of an unsteady calm with elaborate 
descriptions of three types of calm (from the most to the least 
valuable), the commentary elucidates the meaning of the entire verse. - 


MAHANIDDESA 309 


It seems clear that the gist of the Mahaniddesa’s comment is that 
the dharmas referred to in the first two lines of this verse are the 
sixty-two false views and a calm based on self-perceived accom- 
plishment in these is a calm with unsteady basis. Thus in this instance 
the commentary introduces elaborate schemes that are foreign to 
the original text, but the interpretation seems closer to the original 
significance of the verse than a stereotypical string of synonyms for 
the isolated word ‘‘santi’’ would be. 

The Mahdaniddesa has various ways of applying and building on 
the basic formulas it uses. It will often apply one stereotypical string 
of synonyms and/or one stock passage in defining more than one 
. word. For instance, we find the “‘ tana, lena, sarana, accuta, amata, 
nibbana’’ formula that the Mahdniddesa used to explain “‘santi’’ in 
915 and 845 as the gloss of khema in 896. The gloss at 809 combines 
that formula with the ‘‘deathless nibbana, ... cessation, nibbana’’ 
passage to define Ahema, as well. 

In the case of some words, the Mahaniddesa reiterates a stock 
definition verbatim every time it explains the term. Yet such defini- 
tions can be quite complex. The Mahdniddesa treats the term 
‘*muni’’ this way. Since this stock gloss exemplifies the stylistic and 
doctrinal complexity of the Mahdniddesa’s commentarial analysis 
at its best, it will be useful to present a summary of it here. This 
exposition begins with a formulaic definition of sagacity (mona) as 
that awareness (ana) which is: 


wisdom, knowledge, investigation, investigation into dharma, 
discernment, discrimination, erudition, proficiency, skill, criti- 
cism, thought, examination, understanding, intelligence, leading 
to (insight), insight, comprehension, goad? (Pali patodo), wis- 
dom, wisdom-faculty, wisdom-power, art of wisdom, palace 
of wisdom, light of wisdom, splendor of wisdom, lustre of 
wisdom, jewel of wisdom, nondelusion, investigation into 
. dharma, right-view. 


The gloss explains that one endowed with this awareness, attained 
to silence, is a sage (muni). Next the commentary delineates aspects 
or types of sagacity (moneyya): of body, speech and mind. Bodily 
sagacity consists of: 


abandoning of both the three kinds of body misbehavior and 
the three kinds of body right-behavior; knowledge, compre- 
hension of body; the path having comprehension; abandoning 
of desire and passion for the body; cessation of body-condition- 
ings and attainment of the fourth concentration-meditative state 
(jhana). 


310 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Sagacity of speech is basically the same formula, substituting 
“‘speech”’ for “‘body”’ and second concentration-meditative state for 
the-fourth. The definition of mental sagacity follows the same pattern, 
using ‘‘mind”’ instead of ‘‘body”’ or “‘speech’’ with reference to the 
misbehavior and right-behavior, ‘‘thought’’ with the remaining phra- 
ses, and ending with ‘‘attainment of cessation of identification and 
feeling’. 

Next the gloss quotes /tivuttaka II], 1, VI and VII, which adds that 
the sage is without intoxicants and is called ‘‘one having abandoned 
all” and ‘‘one cleansed of evil’’. Reverting to its own material, the 
commentary lists and defines six types of sage, all of whom are 
endowed with these three factors of sageliness: 


householder sages (householders having visible signs of having 
known the teaching), non-householder sages (ones gone forth 
having visible signs of having known the teaching), trainee sages 
(the seven trainees), non-trainee sages (arahant), individual 
sages (paccekabuddhas), and sages’ sages (tathagatas, arahants, 
sammasambuddhas). 


Then the gloss cites, first, Dhammapada 268-69 to the effect 
that it is not silence (mona) that makes one a sage, but rather wise 
taking up of right ( varam) and avoiding of evils (papani) in the world, 
and second, Suttanipata 527 which attributes becoming a sage to 
knowledge of what is and is not, of what is inner and outer in the 
world, and to having passed beyond the snare of attachment. 

Thus this one stock definition, reiterated by the Mahaniddesa every 
time ‘‘muni’’ occurs in Atthakavagga, includes a string of synonyms 
for the sagacity a sage has attained; a description of three aspects 
of sagacity; three quotations from other Pali texts to illustrate the 
meaning of the term; and its own list of six types of sages. It draws 
on a plethora of terms and categories entirely foreign to the Afthaka- 
vagga: the faculties; powers; three kinds of right behavior (and three 
of wrong) specifically with reference to body, speech, and mind; 
the idea of path; conditionings; the four concentration-meditative 
states and the four higher concentration-meditative states; intoxi-_ 
cants; distinctions among householders and nonhouseholders and 
the seven trainees and perfected beings; those enlightened for them- 
selves (paccekabuddhas) and those: rightly enlightened (sammd- 
sambuddhas); perfected beings; and tathagatas. Finally, it couples 
alater Suttanipata description of knowledge that has a definite meta- 
physical ring to it (knowledge of what is and is not, is inner and 
outer in the world)—far beyond the scope of the Atthakavagga’s 


MAHANIDDESA 311 


epistemological vocabulary—with that original text’s typical, simple 
depiction of the ideal as having passed beyond attachment. 

In its explanations of the Afthakavagea’s words and phrases, the 
Mahdniddesa reveals the ways in which the Theravada tradition had 
developed between the time of the early texts and the time when 
the canon was nearing completion. In contrast with the Afthakavagga, 
the Mahaniddesa utilizes vocabulary with reference to the goal, ideal 
persons, and ethical prescriptions that appears to have been intro- 
duced, developed, and standardized in the period between the two 
texts, such as (deathless) liberation, cessation, nonattachment, . 
noble, stream-enterer . . . perfected being (the four paths and four 
fruits), dharma, those enlightened for themselves, enlightened disci- 
ples, those rightly enlightened, tathdgatas, ignorance, thirst, wrong 
views, moral precepts and vows, defilements, conditionings, limita- 
tions, and the five constituents of desire. In addition, the commentary 
reveals amuch more developed metaphysical-cosmological scheme, 
as it couches its interpretations in terms of birth, lineage, rebirth, 
birth, old age and death, self-nature, elements, faculties, and occa- 
sionally aggregates. As for the practice, the Atthakavagga’s relative- 
ly simple prescriptions to do good, avoid evil, and refrain from critici- 
zing and arguing with others, are fully elaborated by the Mahaniddesa. 
The commentary speaks of a clearly delineated path (patha, marga), 
from an impure, nonideal state (samsara) characterized by frustration 
and death, through various meditative states and accomplishments 
(the concentration- meditative states, cessation of identification and 
feeling, mindfulness, and insight), to that deathless liberation which 
is the quietening of all conditionings, eradication of all limitations, 
destruction of thirst, nonattachment, cessation, liberation, This latter 
formula epitomizes the doctrinal transformation of the Theravada 
during the canonical period, as we find no part of it in the Afthaka- 
vagga, and yet it is all standard Theravada doctrine, clearly well 
developed and familiar by the time of the writing of the Mahdniddesa. 

The Mahaniddesa offers a developed conceptual scheme that 
reflects the teachings of the Theravada Buddhism of its own time, 
rather than the teachings of the Afthakavagga itself. The explanations 
that purport to render a vague idea more accurate, or a loose 
description precise, tend to alter the original teaching somewhat. 
In some respects, the Mahaniddesa is quite consistent with the 
Atthakavagga—for example, it retains the treatment of the ideal goal 
as entirely anthropocentric. But in other cases disagreements either 
between the original text and the accepted developed teachings of 
the Mahaniddesa’s time or between particular verses in the Afthaka- 
vagga itself, force the commentary to alter the original teaching quite 
radically. 


x 


312 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Both of these types of modifications of the connotation of Aftthaka- 
vagga verses provide fascinating material to the historian of religion. 
By examining particular instances of this common commentarial 
phenomenon, one can trace the development of religious tradition. 
The Mahdniddesa reveals the doctrinal history of the Theravada as 
it expands earlier, simpler ideas into complex metaphysical hierar- 
chies of epistemology, ontology, and soteriology. It also must resolve 
certain ambiguities and outright conflicts in the original text, precisely 
because the Afthakavagga is identified as the very words of the 
Buddha. 
The glossing method of textual exposition ideally presents one 
consistent definition for each occurrence of a word or phrase in a 
text, regardless of the term’s various conceptual contexts within that 
text. At the same time, a gloss, no matter how stereotypical, remains 
a kind of commentary; it purports to explain a text and cannot do 
so accurately if it ignores shifts in the basic meaning of particular 
words or phrases. Thus the Mahaniddesa also introduces complex 
conceptual hierarchies as a means of resolving problematic differen- 
ces within the Afthakavagga itself. For instance, in its innovative 
definition of “‘santi”’ as three types of peace (see above re: santi 
at 784), the Mahaniddesa explains why the Afthakavagga sometimes 
regards santi as a positive trait or accomplishment and at other times 
it clearly denounces it. It gives similar treatment to instances within 
the Afthakavagga’s criticisms of selfishly defending one’s own 
opinion or view, wherein words for knowledge and teaching are 

used in an unusual derogatory sense. 
' The overall impact of the Mahaniddesa isto bring the Afthakavagga 
into line with late Canonical Theravada Buddhism. It interprets that 
early text ina manner consistent with the highly elaborate abhidharma 
categories and hierarchies of its own era. Remarkably, it does this 
within the confines ofa rather limited commentarial format: the gloss. 
While it is by no means the only example of early Theravada Buddhist 
abhidharma, its focus on one particular early Buddhist text renders 
it a valuable tool in tracing the doctrinal development of early 
Buddhism. This value is increased by the fact that—as a canonical 
text itself—there is a major post-canonical commentary on it, the 
Saddhammapajjotika. Combined with Buddhaghosa’s commentary 
on the Suttanipata, the Saddhammapajjotika provides a third valu- 
able layer of literary source mateial for tracing this doctrinal history. 


10 


CULANIDDESA 


Summary by Grace G. Burford 


The Culaniddesa is most easily characterized as the canonical 
commentary on the Pardyanavagga, the fifth vagga of the Suttani- 
pata. Yet the structure of the Calaniddesa is somewhat more complex 
than that ofits companion the Mahdaniddesa, reflecting more obvious- 
ly the composite nature of the Suttanipata. The core of the Paréyana- 
vagga consists of sixteen sets of questions posed by sixteen sages, 
and the Buddha’s replies to them. These.appear as suttas nos. 2-17 
in the text, with suttas no. 1 and no. 18 serving as an introduction 
and conclusion which provide a frame story for the questions and 
answers. The Cdu/aniddesa begins with the first sutta, but it simply 
reiterates these verses without comment. It then gives a full com- 
mentary on the remaining suttas, including the final one. But it 
doesn’t stop there. Rather, it concludes with a commentary on the 
third sutta of the first vagea of the Suttanipata, the traditionally 
admired Khaggavisdna (Rhinoceros-horn) sutta. 

The Cuilaniddesa, like the Mahaniddesa, consists of formulaic 
definitions and explanations (glosses, Pali: niddesa; Skt. nirdesa) of 
words and phrases in the original text. The version of the Cu/aniddesa 
that has been reasonably accessible to scholars in the West for some 
time directly reflects the rather piecemeal nature of this type of 
commentary. This Pali Text Society. edition (W. Stede, editor, 
London: Humphrey Milford, Oxford University Press, 1918) is not 
the usual straightforward edition based on manuscripts. Stede has 
modified the arrangement of the Cu/aniddesa, presenting its indivi- 
dual glosses in dictionary form. 

In doing so, Stede has provided the potential student of the 
Suttanipata and the Cilaniddesa with an edition that facilitates a 
terminological analysis of these texts. Yet certain aspects of his 
explanation for modifying the arrangement of this text tend to 
undermine our confidence that he has presented the text merely 
rearranged, and such confidence must be inviolable if we are to utilize 


314 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


his analysis and not be forced to repeat it ourselves from the 
manuscripts. 

His statements that throw this procedure into question are of two 
sorts. First, he justifies his reworking of the text by saying that: 


In reality the exposition is not an organic structure, but only 
an aggregate of disconnected pieces or atoms—each of them 
representing a stereotype phrase which serves for the word or 
words not only in this special setting, but in any setting. (p. ix) 


We have seen that this is not strictly true with reference to the 
Mahdaniddesa, as the variations among the glosses for individual terms 
reveal a great deal about the particular instances of them in situ. 
Although Stede’s arrangement of them does not necessarily preclude 
recognition of such variations in the Ca/aniddesa, it is certainly not 
legitimate to use this rearranged version of the Cilaniddesa—as Stede 
suggests—as ‘‘a sort of passage-index’’ to the Mahdniddesa. For if 
there is no variation among the Cd/aniddesa glosses, they cannot 
accurately reflect the Mahdniddesa glosses; and if there is such 
variation, knowledge of the specific locations of the terms being 
variously explained in either the Afthakavagga or the Parayanavagga 
would be crucial to interpreting them. 

Stede also makes the general observation that all commentarial 
explanations are stereotypical and, consequently, he aims 


to one day reduce the whole of our explanatory matter (and I 
daresay a good deal of our text-matter as well) to its simplest 
form, its nucleus, and trace it back to its common source, 
(p. x)’ : 


Putting his specific observation about the Ciilaniddesa together with 
this claim concerning the commentaries in general, Stede concludes 
that the Ca/anidessa fits nicely into his scheme for analyzing the Pali 
Buddhist literature, as the real value of its glosses 


lies by no means in their “‘speciality’’, i.e. being an explanation 
of the passage to which they are appended, but rather in their 
“‘generality’’, as being part of a greater commentary-whole, 
bricks in a larger building, to the reconstruction of which the 
new arrangement will help contribute. (p. x) 


The second sort of statement that could lead one to doubt the 
precise faithfulness of this edition to the original text is epitomized 
by Stede’s asseration: 


CULANIDDESA . 315 


Thus its setting into the modern form is, I believe, in no way 

an impairment of its character; it only exchanges its Eastern garb 

for a Western one, and gains in its value as analysis (‘‘exposi- 
_tion’’) by a further improvement of it. (p. x) 


Any serious textual scholar should beware of previous attempts, no 
matter how scholarly, to “‘improve’’ a text, especially when that 
improvement is presented as an analytical substitute for a basic 
edition of the text. 

If we can rely on Stede’s analysis—and there is no obvious reason - 
to suspectit, aside from the ideological comments in his methodologi- 
cal introduction—he has indeed done us a great service. As he claims, 
Stede’s rearrangement of the text facilitates the identification of the 
abbreviated “‘pe’’ passages so commonin Palitexts. In such passages, 
a long or complex formulaic explanation is referred to by the first 
word or phrase in it, followed by the “‘etc.’” device. Often the full 
version of the passage can only be found at far remove from the 
‘pe’ passage at hand. This rearrangement also aids the study of 
Buddhist philosophical terminology. This latter benefit is quite 
welcome, as this text represents an early stage in the development 
of Buddhist Abhidharma terminology. Still, it would be better if we 
had a true edition of the text for the sake of comparing particular 
passages. Without such an edition, some uncertainty must remain 
as to whether Stede has overlooked minor glossing variations in the 
hope of reconstructing his commentarial building with uniformly 
made bricks. Perhaps the Pali Text Society has not yet reprinted 
this edition, although it did reprint the Mahdniddesa edition in 1978, 
because it recognizes the need for an edition of this text in a more 
conventional format. 

Despite Stede’s efforts to improve on the Cij/aniddesa, it seems 
to have been largely ignored by scholars of Pali texts in general. This 
is reflected in (and no doubt abetted by) the fact that this edition 
- is fairly difficult to obtain, at least in the West. The Pali Text Society 
no longer sells it. In my experience, the only accessible copy in the 
U.S. is the rather decrepit one (thus not to be photocopied) held 

by the Library of Congress. 
’ Until a critical edition in a more traditional form is published, we 
must set aside our potential doubts about Stede’s reworking of the 
‘text and use it to consider the philosophical content of the Cdlanid- 
desa. Stede’s edition facilitates this process greatly, whether one 
wishes to examine the definitions of the terms in particular verses, 
or the collected explanations of specific terms. This is because he 
first presents the Cu/aniddesa in its original order, but without any 
of the actual glosses. For each verse he gives, rather, a list of the 


316 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


terms the Caj/aniddesa explains and a number referring the reader 
to the location of their explanations in the Explanatory Matter or 
“‘dictionary’’ that constitutes the second portion of the edition. 

The Calaniddesa, like the Mahaniddesa, uses a variety of explana- 
tory formulas in a variety of ways. On the basis of the somewhat 
piecemeal ‘reading’ of these formulas one can get from Stede’s 
edition, his observation that the philosophical content of the Cii/a- 
niddesa does not differ from that of the Mahdniddesa in any signifi- 
cant way seems justified. The Ca/aniddesa reveals the same kind 
of developed Theravada  soteriological, ontological, and 
epistemological conceptual schemes that the Mahdniddesa pre- 
sents. It, too, utilizes many of the terms and formulas of the later 
tradition in explicating the earlier text. 

A comparison of the relationship between these two Niddesas and 
the texts they comment upon does lead to an interesting conclusion, 
but not one concerning the commentaries themselves. It seems clear 
that, while there is no great divergence between the two Niddesas, 
the philosophical and doctrinal differences between the Cilaniddesa 
and the Pardyanavagga are not nearly as radical as those between’ 
the Mahaniddesa and the Atthakavagga. This indicates that the 
Parayanavagga is somewhat closer to the later tradition, especially 
in terms ofits soteriology and metaphysics, than is the Afthakavagga. 
Thus the Ca/aniddesa in some instances does not need to alter the 
original teaching a great deal in order to explain particular ideas or 
descriptions. 

The Parayanavagga is undoubtedly much closer to the point in the 
evolution of the tradition represented by the Afthakavagga than to 
the later, fully developed tradition of the Niddesas. It never uses 
the basic abhidharmic terms or classifications that are so standardi- 
zed by the time of the Niddesas: nobles, stream-enterer . .. perfected 
being, the three types of enlightened ones, wrong views, precepts 
‘and vows, defilements, conditionings, constituents of desire, rebirth, 
self-nature, elements, faculties, samsara. But its use of certain terms 
that the Niddesas and other later Theravada texts utilize frequently— 
such as “‘dharma’’, “‘enlightened one’’, “‘tathagata’’, ‘‘ignorance’’, 
“‘thirst’’, ‘‘upadhr’, “‘birth and old age’’, ‘‘path’’, and ‘‘frustra- 
tion’’—indicate that it is at least slightly closer to the later text’s 
Abhidharmic view of reality than is the Afthakavagga. 


11 


- SARIPUTRABHIDHARMASASTRA 


Summary by Shingyo Yoshimoto 


The extant text of this work is in Chinese translation: 
She-li-fu-a-p’i-t’an-Jun by Dharmayasas and Dharmagupta (Taisho 
No. 1584, vol. 28, pp. 525-719). A Japanese translation of the 
Chinese is available by Baiyu Watanabe, Kokuyaku-issai-kyo, Bido- 
nbu vol. 19 and 22 (Daizo-shuppan). 

This text is one of the oldest Abhidharma texts in India. It presents 
a complete outline of Abhidharma thought in the early period of 
Buddhism before it had split into several sects. Little is known of 
the history of the Abhidharma thought in this period. 

This text has some common contents and thought with Vibhariga 
and Prakaranapada. Perhaps the root of this text may be the text 
of the Vibhajyavadins before it split into Theravada, Kasyapiya, 
Mahisasaka, and so on. But the dominant view about the school of 
this extant text is that it may have belonged to the Dharmaguptaka. ' 
The Sdariputrabhidharmasastra is a work in four sections called 
Saprasnaka (with questions), Aprasnaka (without question); Sam- 
yuktasamgraha (conjoined and inclusion), and Niddna (source). © 


SECTION ONE: WITH QUESTIONS 
Chapter One: Senses 


I. Classification of Spheres and Definitions of Them (525c1-526c20} 
1. The inner six senses 

(a) The eye-senses 

The eye-organ, the eye component; various pure forms be- 
longing to the self, seeing the visible objects, coming of the light. 
The same rule correspondingly applies to the following: 

(b) The ear-senses 

(c) The nose-senses 

(d) The tongue-senses 


318 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(e) The body-senses 
‘(f) The mind-senses 
The mental faculty, the aggregate of consciousnesses, and various 
consciousnesses. 
(1) The definition of six groups of consciousness. 
(2) The definition of seven elements of consciousness. 
(3) The definition of other modes of consciousness (e.g., the 
consciousness, past, future, present, and so on) 
2. The outer six senses 

(a} The visible senses. 

The visible and reacting objects which are perceived by the 
eye-consciousness. The same rule correspondingly applies to the 
following: 

(b) The sound-senses 

(c} The odor-senses 

(d} The taste-senses 

(ec) The tangible senses 

(f} The factor senses. 

The factor senses: the aggregate of feeling, identification, and 
of conditioning factors, invisible objects, nonreacting objects, and 
nonconditioned factors. 


Il. Several Classifications of Twelve Senses in the Abhidharmic 
Manner (526c21-534b3) 

The senses as mentioned above are further classified into two 
types, three types and four types in the so-called Abhidharmic 
manner. 

-In this text, 36 kinds of senses are classified: the material or 
immaterial senses, visible or invisible, resisting or unresisting, noble 
or ignoble, pure or impure, and so on. Five kinds of senses in three 
types: good, bad, or neutral, etc. Two kinds of senses in four types: 
past, present, future, or atemporal. 

In these classifications, the first, among the 12 material and 
immaterial, is as follows: 

How many senses are material and how many are immaterial? 
Ten are material, one is immaterial, and one is both material and 
immaterial. Which are ten material senses? They are the eye-sense, 
ear-sense, nose-sense, tongue-sense, body-sense, matter, sound 
smell, taste and tangibles. 

Which one is immaterial? It is the mind-sense. Which one is both 
material and immaterial? It is the factor sense. Which is a material 
or immaterial sense?. .. 


SARIPUTRABHIDHARMASASTRA 319 
Chapter Two: Elements 


I. Classification of (Eighteen) Elements and Definitions of Them 
eae 535al18) 
1. The visual element 
2. The auditory element 
3. The olfactory element 
4. The gustatory element 
5. The body element 
6. The material element 
7. The sound element 
8. The smell element 
9. The taste element 
10. The tangible element 
11. The visual consciousness element 
12. The auditory consciousness element 
13. The olfactory consciousness element 
14. The gustatory consciousnéss element 
15. The bodily consciousness element 
16. The mental element 
The mind which arose, arises, will arise, and is uncertain to arise 
by knowing, thinking of, and remembering of the phenomena is 
explained. 
17. The mental consciousness element 
The consciousness similar to and closed to its objects, and the 
mind similar to other objects, arose, arises, will arise, andis uncertain 
to arise. 
18. The factor element 
The definition of it is the same with the factor sense. 


Il. Several Classifications of Eighteen Elements in the Abhidharmic 
Manner (535a19-542c28) 
The several concepts of elements as mentioned above are further 
classified in two types, three types and four types in the Abhidharmic 
manner. 


Chapter Three: Aggregates 


I. Classification of Aggregates and Definitions of Them 
(543a5-545c10) : 
1. The Material Aggregate 
(a) The form factors, ten spheres with materiality (the eye- 
spheres, ear, nose, tongue, body, visible, sound, odor, taste, tangi- 
ble) and the form included in the factor sense (karma, bodily and 


320 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


word, unmanifest without moral precepts, etc.). 

(b) The four great elements, e.g., earth, water, fire and air, 
and the derivative matter from the four great elements. The manner 
of the definition is the same as that of the material factors. 

(c) Three aspects of materiality 

(1) Visible and reacting objects 
(2} Invisible and reacting objects 
(3) Neither visible nor reacting objects 

(d) The variety of materiality: past, future, present, inner, outer, 
and etc. 

2. The Aggregate of Feelings 

This is grouped under several classifications as follows: 

(a) One kind of feeling: the feeling accompanying mental factors. 

(b) Two kinds of feeling: bodily and mental. 

(c) Three kinds of feeling: satisfying, frustrating and neither. 

(d) Four kinds of feeling: the feeling (1) belonging to the realm 
of desire, (2) belonging to the realm of form, and (3) belonging to 
both of them, (4) not belonging to both of them. 

(e) Five kinds of feeling: the feelings (1) with the faculty to feel , 
satisfaction, (2) with the faculty of frustration, (3) with the faculty 
of joy, (4) with the faculty of depression, and (5) with the faculty 
of equanimity. These are interpreted in detail. 

(f) Six kinds of feeling: the feelings (1) caused by mutual contact 
with eye, (2) ear ..., and (6) mind. 

(g) Seven kinds of feeling: the feelings connected with (1) the visible 
element, (2) the audible element, (3) the olfactory element ..., and 
(7) mental consciousness. 

(h) Eighteen*kinds of mental action and other feelings of mind: 
six mental actions to feel joy, six to feel grief, six to feel hedonic 
neutrality: and the feelings of mind except for those eighteen kinds 
of mental actions. 

(i) 36 holy words and other feelings of mind: six joys based on 
greed, six joys based on the departure from the world, six griefs 
based on greed, six griefs based on the departure from the world, 
six hedonic neutralities based on the departure from the world, and 
the sensations of mind except for the 36 holy words. 

(j) 108 kinds of feeling, and other feelings of mind: the 36 holy 
words, past, future and present, and the feeling of mind except for 
these, 

(k) The variety of feelings: feelings, past, future, present, inner, 
outer, etc. 

3. The Aggregate of (Conceptual) Identification 

This is also grouped under several classifications which correspond 
to the groupings of feelings. 


SARIPUTRABHIDHARMASASTRA 321 


4. The Aggregate of Conditions 
The factors except for feeling-aggregates, identification-aggrega- 
tes and consciousness-aggregates, e.g., thinking, touch, attention, 
initial thought, sustained thought, liberation, absence of greed, lack 
of hatred, understanding, etc. 
5. The Aggregate of Consciousness 
(a) The senses of mind, or the faculty of mind. 
(b) Awareness, mind, consciousness, six groups of conscious- 
nesses, seven elements of consciousness. 
(c) The variety of consciousness: past, future, present, etc. 


. Several Classifications of Five Aggregates in the Abhidharmic 
Manner (545c11-552c8) 
The several concepts of aggregates as mentioned above are further 
classified in two types, three types, and a quartet in the Abhidharmic 
manner. 


Chapter Four: The Four Noble Truths 


I. Classification of the Four Noble Truths and Definitions of Them 
(552c1-554c3) 
1. The Noble Truth of Frustration 
The frustration of birth, old age, dying, meeting with the hated, 
parting from the loved, failure in one’s aims and the frustrations 
caused by all the five aggregates except for the desire mentioned 
below. 
2. The Noble Truth of the Origin of Frustration 
This desire involves joy and sensual pleasure. It is divided into 
two kinds of desires, three, four, five, and six kinds of desires, and 
36 kinds of behaviors of desires. 
3. The Noble Truth of the Cessation of Frustration 
(a) This is the entire dispassionateness, cessation, abandoning, 
forsaking, liberation, without a refuge, leaving, unborn of satis- 
faction. 
(b) The calculated cessation 
(1) The cessation of a factor as awareness is exhausted. 
(2) The cessation of a factor as the practise of the path of 
noble truth. 
(3) Four fruits of monkhood: stream-entry, once-returning, 
nonreturning, perfected being. 
(4) The Noble Truth of the Way to the Cessation of Frustra- 
tion. Eight noble paths (1) right view, (2) right conceptuali- 
zing, (3) right speech, (4) right action, (5) right livelihood, 
(6) right exercise, (7) right mindfulness, and (8) right con- 
centration. 


322 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


These noble truths are the truth attained by noble ones and the 
doctrine showed by the Buddha. 


Il. Several Classifications of the Four Noble Truths in the Abhi- 
dharmic Manner (554c4-560a3) 
The several concepts of these noble truths as mentioned above 
are further classified in two types, three types, and four types in 
the Abhidharmic manner. 


Chapter Five: Faculties 


I. Classification of the Twenty-two Faculties and Definitions of 

Them (560a8-561a12) 

The 22 kinds of faculties in human beings are as follows: (1) 
sight-faculty, (2) auditory-faculty, (3) olfactory-faculty, (4) taste- 
faculty, (5) touch-faculty, (6) faculty of femininity, (7) faculty of 
masculinity, (8) faculty of life-force, (9) satisfaction-faculty, (10) 
frustration-faculty, (11) contentedness-faculty, (12) depression- 
faculty, (13) equanimity-facylty, (14) mental-faculty, (15) faith- 
faculty, (16) energy-faculty, (17) mindfulness-faculty, (18) 
concentration-faculty, (19) wisdom-faculty, (20) the faculty of re- 
solving to come to know something unknown (andjfidtam djfia- 
syamindriya), (21) the faculty attained by thorough knowledge 
(ajfiendriya), and (22) the faculty possessed of perfect knowledge 
(ajfatavindriya). 


Wi. Several Classifications of Twenty-two Faculties in the Abhi- 
dharmic Manner (561a9-568a20) 

The several concepts of faculties as mentioned above are further 
classifed into two types, three types, and four types in the 
so-called Abhidharmic manner. 

In these classifications, it is worthy of note that five bodily 
faculties (e.g., sight-faculty ... touch-faculty) are free from the 
intoxicants. This theory is the same as that of the Vibhajyavadins. 


Chapter Six: Seven Conditions of Enlightenment 


I. Classification of Enlightenment-conditions and Definitions of 
Them (568a21-c7) 
The seven kinds of enlightenment-conditions are as follows: (1) 
mindfulness, (2) investigation of dharma, (3) energy, (4) tranquility, 
(5) joy, (6) concentration and (7) equanimity. 


II. Several Classifications of Seven Enlightenment-factors in the 


SARIPUTRABHIDHARMASASTRA 323 


Abhidharmic Manner (568c8-569a28) 
The several concepts of enlightenment-factors as mentioned above 
are further classified in two types, three types, and four types in 
the Abhidharmic manner. 


Chapter Seven: Three Bad Roots 


I. Classification of the Bad Roots and Definition of Them 
(569a29-569b28) 
1. The bad root of greed: covetousness. 
2. The bad root of hatred: anger. 
3. The bad root of delusion: ignorance. 


fl. Several Classifications of Three Kinds of the Bad Roots in the 
Abhidharmic Manner (570629-571a14) 
The bad roots mentioned above are further classified into two 
types, three types, and four types in the so-called Abhidharmic 
manner. 


Chapter Eight: The Three Good-Roots 


I. Classification of the Good Roots and Definitions of Them (57 1al5- 

572¢15) 

1. The good root of absence of greed: noncovetousness, the 
adaptability of mind without desire. 

2. The good root of lack of hatred: nonwrath, the adaptability of 
mind without anger. 

3. The good root of understanding: freedom from i IEROFANCE; the 
adaptability of mind without stupidity. s 


iI. Several Classifications of Three Kinds of the Good Roots in the 
Abhidharmic Manner ($71b20-572c15) 
The good roots mentioned above are further classified into two 
types, three types, and four types in the so-called Abhidharmic 
manner. 


Chapter Nine: The Primary Elements 


I. Classification of the Primary Elements and Definitions of Them 
(572c16-573a18) 
The primary elements are classified into four kinds: 
1. Earth 
(a) The inner earth: the intenal organs and the solid matters in 
one’s body. ; 


324 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
(b) The outer earth: the solids out of one’s body. 
2. Water 
(a) The inner water: the liquid in one’s body. 
(b) The outer water: the liquid out of one’s body. 
3. Fire 
(a) The inner fire: the heat in one’s body. 
(b) The outer fire: the heat out of one’s body. 
4, Air 
(a) The inner air: the air or wind in one’s body. 
(b) The outer air: the air or wind out of one’s body. 


II. Several Classifications of Four Primary Elements in the Abhi- 
dharmic Manner (573a19-573c8) 
The several concepts of the primary elements as mentioned above 
are further classified into two types, three types, and four types in 
the Abhidharmic manner. 


Chapter Ten: Devout Layman 


The Definitions of the Devout Layman (573c9-574c24) 

1. The devout layman is Sakyamuni Buddha. 

2. The devout layman is perfumed by the factors of fading away, 
cessation, and liberation. 

3. The restriction of the devout Jayman. 

4. The devout layman has five virtues. They are as follows: 
(a) not to kill 
(b) not to steal 
(c) not to commit adultery 
(d) not to speak falsely 
(e) not to drink wine. 


Il. Several Classifications of the Five Virtues in the Abhidharmic 
Manner (574c25-575b2) 
All the virtues as mentioned above are classified in everyone type 
in several Abhidharmic classifications: e.g., the whole are with form, 
invisible, penetrable, nonexcellent, impure, and so on.” 


SECTION TWO: WITHOUT QUESTIONS? 


1. Elements (575b7-579b23) 

2. Karma (579b25-584c9) 

3. Person (584c15-589c2) 

4. Awareness (589c8-606a1 2) 

5. The chain of dependent origination (606a18-612b20) 


SARIPUTRABHIDHARMASASTRA 325 


6. The four applications of mindfulness (612b26-616c7) 
7. The four right abandonments (616c9-617a20) 
8. The four supernatural powers (617a22-619c18) 
9. The four trances (619¢24- 62424) 
_ 10. The path (625a5-646a1) 
11. Bad factors (646a7-661a9) 


SECTION THREE: CONJOINED AND INCLUDED 


A. Conjoined 

1. Explanation and clarification of which objects are included in 
which objects (661a15-666a5) 

2. To which aggregates, elements and faculties do each of these 
objects belong? (666a6-671b2) 
B. Included 

1. Explanation and clarification of which are the holy objects 
(671c5-673c21) 

2. In which categories do these objects belong? (674a5-679a1 8) 


SECTION FOUR: SOURCE 


1. The ten conditions (679b5-687b17) 

2. The causes (687b19-689a18) 

3. Name and form (689a20-690a29) 

4. Ten fetters (690b2-694b10) 

5. Bodily, vocal and mental conduct (694b12-694c11) 
6. Contact (694c13-697b16) 

7. Awareness (697b18-700a1 1) 

8. Ten bad paths of action (700a13-700c7) 

9. Ten good paths of action (700c9-701a29) 

10. Concentration (701b6-719a21) 


12 


YAMAKA 


Summary by Karen C. Lang | 


This work is called ‘The Pairs’ ( yamaka) because it contains paired © 
questions on the distribution of terms in a proposition. The second 
question of the pair is the converse of the first, reversing the order 
of the terms. Often a second pair of questions, adding the negative 
na to the terms, follows the first pair. The answers to these questions 
indicate whether the term covers all the members of the class it 
denotes, some of.them, or none. The work has ten chapters, each 
named after the topic under examination. 

The work was edited for the Pali Text Society by Mrs. Rhys Davids 
(Journal of the Pali Text Society, 1910-12, 51-107 2 volumes; 
Pali Text Society, London 1911-13). More recently there have 
been published editions by Jagdish Kasyap (Bihar, 1961) and by 
Mahesh Tiwari (Patna 1972), Parts 6-10 exist in Burmese characters 
edited by Hsaya Lingayama (Mandalay 1905). There is no translation 
into a Western language, though it has been translated into Japanese 
by Shoko Watanabe in Nanden, volumes 48-49. 

The following summary’s ‘E’ references are to the Kashyap 1961 
edition. 


Chapter One: Pairs on the Roots 
Section One: Distribution of Designations 


I.1 (E1-9) Questions on four types of factors—good, bad, neutral 
and verbal—and their respective roots and nine synonyms: cause, 
foundation, source, origination, nutriment, support, condition and 
origin. Three pairs of questions ask whether a specific type of factors 
‘have one and the same root and whether these factors that have one 
and the same root have one another as roots. The second question 
of each pair is the converse of the first and asks whether a specific 
type of root is identical with the same type of factor, etc. 

(E9-22) Answers, indicating the distribution of the terms, e.g., 


328 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


three factors (greed, hatred, delusion) are bad roots; all bad roots 
are bad factors. 


Chapter Two: Pairs on the Aggregates 
Section One: Distribution of Designations 


l.1 (E23-30) Questions on matter, sensation, identification, 
conditioning and consciousness. Eight pairs of questions ask about 
the relation between the terms ‘‘matter’’, etc. and ‘‘aggregate of 
matter’, etc., between the general term “‘aggregate’’ and the specific 
term ‘‘aggregate of sensation’’, etc., and between the terms “‘mat- 

_ter’’, etc. and “‘aggregate’’. The format used in this chapter reoccurs 
in subsequent chapters with the appropriate substitution of terms: 

1. a. Is all matter the matter-aggregate? 

b. Is the matter-aggregate matter? 
2. a. (= 1.a) 
b. Are all aggregates the sensation aggregates? 
3. a. Is matter an aggregate? 
b. Are all aggregates material? 
4. a. (= 3.a) 
b. (= 2.b) 
Each of these paired questions is followed by a parallel pair which 
negates the terms, e.g., Is all that is not matter not the matter-aggre- 
gate? 

(E30-48) Answers. To |.a. Expressions such as ‘‘pleasing matter’’ 
are covered by the term ‘‘form’’ but not by the term ‘‘form-aggre- 
gate’. To 1.b. The matter-aggregate is covered by both terms. To 
2.a. (= 1.a) To 2.b. The sensation-aggregate is covered by the terms 
‘‘ageregate’’ and ‘‘sensation-aggregate’’. The other aggregates are 
covered by the term ‘‘aggregate’’ but not by the term ‘‘sensation- 
aggregate’. To 3.a. Yes. To 3.b. The matter-aggregate is covered 
by the term ‘‘aggregate’’ and by the term ‘‘matter’’. The other . 
aggregates are covered by the term “‘aggregate’’ but not by the term 
‘‘form-aggregate’’. To 4.a. (= to 3.a) To 4.b. (= to 2.b) 


Section Two: Application 


II.2.1 (E48-67) Questions and answers on the arising of pairs of 
agegregates—form and sensation, sensation and identification—at the 
same time (present, past or future) or at different times (one arising 
in the present, the other in the past, one in the present and the other 
in the future, and one in the past and the other in the future). These 
questions are asked in regard to persons, places and both. This same 
format is used in subsequent chapters: 


rrr 329 


- 1.a. Does the sensation-aggregate arise for whom the material 
aggregate arises? The material aggregate arises for those born as 
nonidentifying beings but not the sensation-aggregate. 

1.b. Does the material aggregate arise for whom the sensation 
aggregates arises? The sensation aggregate arises for those born 
immaterial but not the material aggregate. 

2.a. Does the sensation aggregate arise where the material aggre- 
gate arises? 

2.b. Does the material aggregate arise where the sensation aggre- 
gate arises? 

3.a. Does the sensation aggregate arise for whom and where the 
material aggregate arises? 

3.b. Does the material aggregate arise for whom and where the 
sensation aggregate arises? 


(The answers to 2.a, b and 3.a, b are identical to 1.a, b) The same 
questions are then asked in the negative: 1.a. Does the sensation. 
aggregate not arise for whom the material aggregate does not arise? 
The material aggregate does not arise for those born in the immaterial 
realm but the sensation aggregate does arise. Neither aggregate arises 
for those who pass away from that realm. 1.b. Does the sensation 
aggregate not arise for whom the material aggregate does not arise? 
The sensation aggregate does not arise for those born as nonidenti- 
fying beings but the material aggregate does. Neither aggregate arises 
for those who pass away from that state. These same questions are 
then asked in the past tense, future tense and in the combinations 
of present-past, present-future and past-future. 

1.2.2 (E67-84) Questions and answers on the cessation of these 
pairs of aggregates, e.g., Has the sensation aggregate ceased for whom 
the material aggregate has ceased (and conversely)? Yes. 

II.2.3 (E85-100) Questions and answers on the arising of one 
aggregate and the cessation of the other, e.g., Will the sensation 
aggregate cease for whom the material aggregate has arisen? The 
Material aggregate has arisen for those who have attained final 
liberation and the sensation aggregate will no longer cease; for all 
. others the material aggregate has arisen and the sensation aggregate 
will cease. Has the material aggregate arisen for whom the sensation 
aggregate will cease? Yes. 


Section Three: Comprehension 


II.3 (E101-104) Questions and answers on the comprehension of 
the paired aggregates matter and sensation in the present, etc., e.g., 


330 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Does someone who fully understands the material aggregate fully 
understand the sensation aggregate (and conversely)? Yes. 


Chapter Three: Pairs on the Sense-bases 
Section One: Distribution of Designations 


Il.1 (E105-122) Questions and answers (E112-122) on the six 
sense-organs and objects—visual organ and visible matter, auditory 
organ and sound, the olfactory organ and smell, the gustatory organ 
and taste, the organ of touch and tangibles, the mental organ and 
factor—and the respective twelve bases. These questions and 
answers follow the same format as 1.1, e.g., Is visual organ the 
visual organ base? Expressions like ‘divine eye’’ are covered by 
the term ‘‘visual organ’’ but not by the term “‘visual organ base’’. 


Section Two: Application 


IMl.2.1 (E122-200) Questions and answers on the arising of paired 
bases, following the format of II.2.1, e.g., Does the visual organ base 
arise where the mental organ base arises? Yes. 

1.2.2 (E200-292) Questions and answers on the cessation of 
paired aggregates. 

IIl.2.3 (E258-292) Questions and answers on the arising of one 
base and the cessation of the other. 


Section Three: Comprehension 


1.3 (E292-295) Questions and answers on the comprehension 
of the visual organ base paired with the auditory organ base. 


Chapter Four: Pairs on the Elements 
Section One: Distribution of Designations 


IV.1 (E296-30@) Questions and answers (E300-308) on the rela- 
tion between the six sense-organs and the six sense consciousnesses 
with the respective six elements, e.g., Is the visual consciousness 
the visual consciousness element (and conversely)? Yes. 


Section Two: Application 


IV.2 (E308-310) Questions and answers on the arising of paired 
elements. Excepts for the substitution of the term ‘‘element’’ for 
“‘base’’, this section is identical to IIf.2.1. 


YAMAKA 331 


Chapter Five: Pairs on the Truths 
Section One: Distribution of Designation 


V.1 (E311-314) Questions on the relation between the terms 
““frustration’’, “‘origin’’, “‘cessation’’, and ‘‘path’’ and the respective 
terms for the four noble truths, between the general term ‘“‘truth’’ 
and the specific terms for the four noble truths, and between the 
terms ‘‘truth’’ and “‘frustration’’, etc. 

(E315-322) Answers. The term ‘‘frustration’’ refers to the truth 
of frustration but apart from references to physical and mental 
frustration the term ‘‘truth of frustration’ does not refer only to 
frustration (here defined as painful sensation). The terms “‘origin’’, 
“‘cessation”’ and ‘‘path’’ do not refer only to the truth of origin, the 
truth of cessation and the truth of the path but these three truths 
do refer only to craving’s origin, its cessation and the eightfold path. 
Specific truths, e.g., the truth of origin, are covered both by the terms 
“‘truth’’ and “‘truth of origin’”’. The terms ‘“‘frustration’’, etc., do refer 
to “‘truth’’. 


- Section Two: Application 


V.2.1 (E323-355) Questions and answers on the arising of the 
truths of frustration, origin and path (cessation = liberation) which 
neither arises nor ceases. The truth of frustration arises at the 
moment awareness unconnected with craving arises in those who 
undergo rebirth, but the truth of origin does not arise then. At the 
moment craving arises, both truths arise. Similarly, the truth of 
frustration, and not the truth of the path, arises ‘when awareness is 
not connected with the path; when awareness is so connected, both 
truths arise. In the immaterial realms only the truth of the path arises; 
. among the nonidentifying beings, only the truth of frustration; among | 
beings in the lower realms, only the truths of frustration and origin; 
but among beings with four or five aggregates all three truths arise. 

V.2.2 (E355-381) Questions and answers on the cessation of pairs 
of these three truths. 

V.2.3 (E382-397) Questions and answers on the arising of one 
of these three truths and the cessation of the other. 


Section Three: Comprehension 


V.3 (E397-400) Questions and answers on the full understanding 
of pairs of these three truths. 


332 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Chapter Six: Pairs on the Conditionings 
Section One: Distribution of Designations 


VI.1 (Vol. Il, E3-5) Questions on the relation between the terms 
“‘body’’, ‘‘speech’’, and ‘‘awareness’’ and the respective condition- 
ings, between the general term “‘conditioning’’ and these three 
specific conditionings, and between one specific conditioning and 
another. (E5-10) Answers. The terms “‘body’’, ‘“‘speech’’ and 
“‘awareness”’ do not refer to the respective conditionings, nor do 
the terms for these conditionings refer to body, speech or mind. 
Specific conditionings, ¢.g., speech conditioning, are covered both 
by the term ‘‘conditioning’’ and ‘‘speech conditioning’. No one 
specific conditioning refers to another. 


Section Two: Application 


VI.2.1 (E10-39) Questions and answers on the arising of the 
conditionings. Bodily conditionings arise when discursive thought 
( vitarka, vicdra) is absent, for those engaged in breathing in and out, ’ 
and speech conditionings do not; both arise for beings in the sensuous 
realm when discursive thought is present and for those in the first 
meditative trance. When discursive thought is present and breathing 
in and out is absent, then vocal and mental conditionings arise, but 
not bodily conditionings. No vocal conditionings arise without the 
presence of discursive thought, but mental conditionings arise. For 
beings in the sensuous realm all three conditionings arise in the first 
meditative trance, bodily and mental conditionings arise in the second 
and third trances, but only mental conditionings arise in the fourth 
meditative trance. For beings in the material and immaterial realms 
vocal and mental conditionings arise in the first meditative trance, 
and only mental conditionings arise in the second through fourth 
meditative trances. 

VI.2.2 {E39-64) Questions and answers on the cessation of these 
three conditionings. 

VI.2.3 (E64-79) Questions and answers on the arising of one of 
these three conditionings and the cessation of another. 


Section Three: Comprehension 


VI.3. (E79) Questions and answers on the comprehension of paired 
conditionings. 


YAMAKA 333 


Chapter Seven: Pairs on the Contaminants 
Section One: Place of Origin 


VII.1 (E81) Questions and answers on where the seven contami- 
nants, i.e. (1) sensual desire, (2) repugnance, (3) pride, (4) wrong 
view, (5) perplexity, (6) desire for existence and (7) ignorance, 
occur. The contaminant of sensual desire occurs in regard to satis- 

. fying and neutral sensations of the sensual world. The contaminant 
of repugnance occurs in regard to frustrating sensations of the 
sensuous world. The contaminant of pride occurs in regard to 
satisfying and neutral sensations in all three realms. The contaminant 
of desire for existence occurs in the material and immaterial realms. 
The contaminants of wrong views, perplexity and ignorance occur 
in regard to factors which possess individuality. 


Section Two: Major Section 


VII.2.1 (E82-144) Questions and answers on the occurrence of 
combinations of these seven contaminants in regard to the categories 
of person, place and both. All the contaminants occur in an ordinary 
person; all but wrong views and perplexity occur in the stream- 
enterer and the once-returner: pride, desire for existence, and 
ignorance occur for the nonreturner. 

VII.2.2 (E144-203) Questions and answers on the possession and 
nonpossession of these contaminants. 

VIl.2.3 (E203-260) Questions and answers on the abandonment 
of combinations of these contaminants. Answers on the abandonment 
of pride, perplexity, desire for existence, and ignorance, when paired 
with sensual desire or hatred, indicate that only the pride, etc., 
connected with the sensual realm is abandoned. 

VIl.2.4 (E260-320) Questions and answers on the comprehension 
of combinations of these contaminants. 

Vi.2.5 (E320-379) Questions and answers on the abandoned 
contaminants in various combinations. Only the perfected being has 
abandoned all seven contaminants. 

VII.2.6 (E379-380) Questions and answers on the arising of the 
paired contaminants: sensual desire, hatred and pride. 

VII.2.7 (E380-386). Questions and answers (E386-393) on the - 
number of contaminants that arise after someone has died and been 
reborn. The answers are the same regardless of which realm a person 
has passed away from and has been reborn into: the ordinary person 
has seven contaminants, the stream-enterer and the once-returner 
have five, and the nonreturner has three. 


334 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Chapter Eight: Pairs on Awareness 


This Chapter has a single section, with five subsections. 

VIII. 1 (E395-399) Questions on the arising and ceasing of aware- 
ness in regard to persons. The questions concern stages in the arising 
of awareness, i.e. awareness that is in the process of arising, is 
arising, has arisen, arose, or will arise, and pair one stage with another 
or with one of a similar series of stages in the cessation of awareness. 

VII.2 (E399-403) Questions on arising and ceasing of awareness 
in regard to dharma. 

VIII.3 (E403-408) Questions on the arising and ceasing of aware- 
ness in regard to both persons and dharma. 

VIII.4 (E408) Questions on the arising of awareness according to 
the categories of the (Satipatthdna) Suttanta, i.e. consciousness with 
and without greed, anger and delusion, collected and distracted, 
distinguished and undistinguished, inferior and superior, concen- 
trated and unconcentrated, released and unreleased. 

VIlI.5 (E409) Questions on the arising of awareness according to 
the categories of the Abhidhamma, i.e. awareness that is good, bad, | 
neutral, etc. 

(E409-419) Answers to the questions, e.g., Will awareness cease 
and not arise for whom awareness arises and does not cease (in the 
present moment)? Awareness will cease and not arise only for those 
persons in the moment of the last awareness (prior to attaining final 
liberation); for others awareness arises.and does not cease (in the 
present moment) and will arise and cease (in a later moment). 


Chapter Nine: Pairs on Factors 
Section One: Distribution of Designations 


IX.1 (Vol. I, E3-6) Questions and answers on the terms ‘‘good’’ 
““bad’’ and “‘neutral’’ and whether they refer to the respective classes 
of factors; whether the general term ‘“‘factor’’ refers to any specific 
type of factor and whether the terms ‘‘good”’, ‘‘bad”’ and “‘neutral’’ 
refer to factors. 

(E6- 13) Answers. The terms “‘good’’, etc., refer to the respective 
types of factors. Any specific type of factor is covered both by the 
general term ‘‘factor’’ and the term for its specific type. The terms 
‘“‘good’’, ‘‘bad’’, etc., do refer to factors. 


Section Two: Application 


1X.2.1 (E13-45) Questions and answers on the arising of pairs of 
factors, i.e. good and bad, good and neutral, and bad and neutral 
in regard to persons, places and both in the present, etc. Good and 


YAMAKA 335 


bad factors never arise together; among beings with five aggregates 
~ good or bad factors may arise together with neutral factors but in 

the immaterial realms neutral factors never arise together with good 

or bad factors. Among nonidentifying beings and those who have 

attained the cessation trance only neutral factors arise. 

IX.2.2 (E45-75) Questions and answers on the cessation of pairs 

of these factors. 

- IX.2.3 (E75-105) Questions and answers on the arising of one 
. type of factor and the cessation of another. 


Section Three: Spiritual Practice — 


IX.3 (E105-106) Questions and answers on the practice and 
abandonment of these factors. E.g., does not someone who practices 
good factors abandon bad factors? Yes. 


Chapter Ten: Pairs on the Faculties 
Section One: Distribution on Designations 


X.f (E107-129) Questions on the relations between the terms for 
the six sense-organs, the terms ‘female’, ‘male’, ‘life’, ‘satis- 
faction’, ‘frustration’, ‘contentedness’, ‘depression’, ‘equanimity’, 
‘faith’, ‘energy’, ‘mindfulness’, ‘concentration’, ‘insight’, ‘the 
thought: I will know the unknown’, ‘knowledge’, ‘perfected know- 
ledge’, and the twenty-two respective faculties, between the general 
term “‘faculty’’ and specific faculties, and between the terms “‘visual 
organ’’ etc. and ‘‘faculty’’. 

(E129-179) Answers. The answers on questions concerning the 
sense-organs are the same as IJJ.1, with the substitution of the 
“‘faculty”’ for ‘‘base’’. The terms ‘‘female’’, ‘“‘male’’ and ‘‘equani- 
mity”’ do not refer to the respective faculties (and conversely); the 
remaining terms are identical with the respective faculties. Any 
specific faculty, e.g., visual organ faculty, is covered both by me 
term ‘‘faculty’’ and the term “‘visual organ faculty”’ etc. 


Section Two: Application 


X.2 (E179-492) Questions and answers {for the sense faculties 
the same as I]I.2.1) on the arising of pairs of all faculties except the 
last three in the present, etc. The feminine and masculine faculties 
occur only in the sensuous realm. The equanimity faculty does not 
occur among nonidentifying beings. The faculties of faith, mind- 
fulness, energy and concentration arise in the awareness of those 
being reborn when connected with a good cause; the arising of the 
faculty of insight requires a connection with knowledge as well. 


336 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Section Three: Comprehension 


X.3 (E493-531) Questions and answers on the comprehension of 
the pairs’ visual and auditory organ faculties, the abandoning of the 
depression faculty, and the cultivation of the last three faculties. 


13 


PATTHANA 


Summary by K.H. Potter 


The vastness of this work is belied by the comparatively brief 
summary that follows. McGovern remarks: “‘Pali theories con- 
cerning cosmic dynamics are to be found in that vast literary jungle 
known as the Patthana.’’ Of unknown authorship, this work probably 
grew over the years but may be dated in its earliest form to about 
the same age as Yamaka. Cousins considers it ‘cannot be later than 
the second century B.C.’’, although Bareau dates it in the 1st century 
A.D. Yamada considers it “‘the last of the Pali Abhidharma texts’’. 

Editions of portions of the work began to appear as early as 1904, 
when the Paccayavibharigavara and KuSalatika sections appeared in 
Burmese characters (ed. by Hsaya Sudhamma, Mandalay 1904). Mrs. 
Rhys Davids edited the Duka section for the Pali Text Society in 
1906, andthe 7ikasectionin 1923 with Buddhaghosa’s commentary. 
Complete editions exist: one in Sinhalese characters by Nanavimala 
Thera, four volumes, Colombo 1954-55; Jagdish Kashyap from 

Nalanda in 1961, in six volumes. A translation of an initial portion 
was made by U Narada in London 1969 for the Pali Text Society 
under the title ‘Conditional Relations’. References in the following 
summary are to the Kashyap 1961 edition (‘‘E’’) and the Narada 
translation (““T’’). 

The Pafthana discusses in terms of conditions (pratyaya) the 
relations among the items identified in the Dhammasangani and the 
other six Theravada Abhidharma treatises. It is extremely long, and 
the summary here will be very laconic. See the tabular presentation 
by Narada in T for detailed explanation of the contents of this work. 


INTRODUCTION: ANALYSIS OF TRIPLETS 
ENUMERATION OF THE POSITIVE CONDITIONS 


(E1-11, T1-12) Twenty-four types of conditions are listed and 
explained. 


338 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


‘1. Moral or root condition is related to the dharmas associated 
with roots and matter produced thereby. 

2. Supporting object condition by which sense-bases are related 
to their corresponding elements and the dharmas associated with 
them. Any dharma may be the content of awareness. 

3. Dominant condition relating desire, energy, awareness and 
investigation to the dharmas associated with them and the matter 
produced thereby. 

4. Immediately precedent condition by which preceding dharmas 
are related to their immediately succeeding ones. 

5. Directly antecedent condition by which preceding dharmas are 
related to their immediate successors. The exposition of this and 
item 4 preceding it are precisely the same. 

6. Conascence condition relating those pairs of things which are 
born together. 

7. Mutuality condition between things which regularly go together. 

8. Dependence condition between things which depend on one 
another. 

9. Strong dependence condition between things which necessarily 
depend on one another. 

10. Prenascent condition relating each kind of sense-basis with 
the corresponding kinds of element and its associated dharmas. 

11. Postnascent condition relating postnascent awareness and 
concomitant (cittacaitasika) dharmas to the prenascent body. 

12. Repetition condition relating the moral quality (good, bad, 
neutral) of preceding dharmas to the same quality in succeeding 
dharmas. 

13. Act condition, relating good and bad karma to the matter 
constituting the matured aggregates, and relating will to the dharmas 
and associated matter produced thereby. 

14. Maturation condition relating the four nonmaterial matured 
aggregates to each other. 

15. Nutriment condition relating food to the body constituted by 
it, and relating the nonmaterial nutriments to their associated 
dharmas and matter. 

16. Faculty condition relating each sense basis to its corres- 
ponding element and associated dharmas. 

17. Meditation condition relating the factors of meditation to their 
associated dharmas and matter resulting. 

18. Path condition relating the factors of the path to their associated 
dharmas and resulting matter. 

19. Association condition relating the four nonmaterial aggregates 
to each other. 

20. Dissociation condition relating material dharmas to immaterial 


PATTHANA 339 


ones and vice versa. 

21. Presence condition relating dharmas with other dharmas which 
are present, i.e. in contact, with them when they arise. 

22. Absence condition, relating dharmas which have just parted 
from each other to each other. 

23. Disappearance condition relating dharmas which have com- 
pletely disappeared from relation with others to those others. 

24. Nondisappearance condition relating dharmas which have not 
completely disappeared from relation with others to those others. 


QUESTIONS 


(E11-119; T13-21) The first triplet of Dhammasangani concerns 
good, bad and neutral dharmas, For each of the three alone and for 
each possible combination (making seven possible ways of occur- 
rence) the question arises for each of the 24 conditions just listed, 
whether the dharmas in question are determined by or dependent 
on that kind of condition. A total of 49 X 24, or 1176 such questions 
are indicated. 


I. GOOD, ETC., TRIPLET 
A. DEPENDENCE SECTION 
1. Positive Method 
(a) Analysis ( vibhariga) 


(E120-129; T22-35) Answers to those of the foregoing questions 
which related to positive conditioning are provided, showing which 
dharmas depend on which of the 24 conditions. 


(I-A.1) Enumeration (samkhya) 


(E129-132; T35-38) The number of answers relating to the 
combinations and conditions of the several sorts is provided. E.g., 
there are nine answers concerning root conditions, three concerning 
supporting object conditions, etc., and there are three answers 
concerning root and object conditions together, nine concerning root 
and dominant conditions together, etc. Conditions are first discussed 
singly, then in pairs, then by threes, twelves and twenty-twos. 


(I-A.2) Negative Conditions 
Questions about Good, Bad or Neutral 


(E132-144; T38-54) Those dharmas which arise dependent on 
good, bad or neutral states though not being conditioned in each 
of the 24 ways are now answered, and the answers enumerated. 


340 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(I.A.3) Positive-Negative 


(E144-155; T54-64) Taking a positive condition (e.g., root) and 
a negative condition (e.g., not-object) the number of answers pro- 
vided is enumerated. The method is by twos (as above), by threes 
(e.g., root + object is positive, nondominant is negative), by fours 
(e.g., root, object and dominance are positive, nonprenascent is 
negative), by elevens, twelves and twenty-threes. 


(I-A.4) Negative-Positive 


(E155-163; T65-73) Taking a negative condition and a positive 
condition the number of answers is enumerated by twos, threes, 
sevens, tens, fourteens and twenty-ones. 


{-B. Conascence Section 
1. Positive Conditions 


(E164-165; T73-75) Answers to those of the questions (cf. 
Introduction) which relate to conascent conditioning are provided, 
showing which dharmas depend on which of the 24 conditions. Then . 
the number of answers relating to the combinations of 
conditions of the several sorts is provided, as before. 


2-4. Negative Conditions, Positive-Negative 
and Negative-Positive 


(E165-166; T75-76) As in I-A.2-4, except that now it ts the 
relations of conascence that are studied. 


I-C. Conditioned Section 
1-4. Positive, Negative, Positive-Negative 
and Negative-Positive Conditions 


(E167-1100,; T77-115) Answers.to those of the questions of 
Introduction which relate to which are the good, bad and neutral 
dharmas on which other good, bad and neutral dharmas depend. 
The organization of this section parallels the preceding sections I-A_ 
and J-B. 


1-D. Supported Section 
1-4. Positive, Negative, Positive-Negative 
and Negative-Positive 


(E1100-1104; T115-120) As the three preceding sections, except 
that the new attention is on those good, bad and neutral dharmas 


PATTHANA 341 
which are supported by good, bad and neutral dharmas. 
I-E. Conjoined Section 


(E1104-1120; T120-138) Discussion as in the preceding four 
sections and in same order. Discussion concerns which good, bad 
and neutral dharmas are conjoined with which other good, bad and 
neutral dharmas. 


L-F. Associated Section 


(E1121-1122; T138-141) As in the preceding five sections. Dis- 
cussion concerns which good, bad and neutral dharmas are asso- 
ciated with which other good, bad and neutral dharmas. 


I-G. Wisdom Section: 


(E1123-1270; T141-317) The order of subsections of this is the 
same as in the six preceding sections. The section answers the same 
set of questions as the preceding six do, but with the emphasis now 
on which states condition others rather than the ones that are 
conditioned. For example, in discussing what sorts of dharmas good 
dharmas condition, three relations are studied: (1) with other good 
dharmas, (2) with neutral dharmas; (3) with dharmas which are both 
good and neutral. On the other hand, in discussing what sorts of 
dharmas condition, since only neutral dharmas are conditioned by 
them, there is only one relation discussed. 


Il. FEELING TRIPLET 


(E1. 271-308; T318-361) Discussion now turns to the second 
triplet of the Dhammasazigaui. The order of seven sections, and the 
order of subsections, is preserved. The questions are as before (they 
are not repeated); the sections provide the answers as before. 


IM. MATURATION TRIPLET 
(E1. 308-360; T362-428) Discussion as before of third triplet. 


IV. GRASPED AT TRIPLET 
(E1. 361-414; T429-502) Discussion of fourth triplet. 


V. DEFILEMENT TRIPLET 
(El. 414-436; T502-526) Discussion of fifth triplet. 


342 


(E2. 


(E2. 


(E2. 


(E2. 


(E2. 


(E2. 


(E2. 


(E2. 


(E2. 


(E2. 


(E2. 


(E2. 


(E2. 


(E2. 


(E2. 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSC 


VI. INITIAL THOUGHT TRIPLET 


3-118) © 
VI. JOY TRIPLET 
119-146) 
VII. VISION TRIPLET 
147-190) 


IX. ELIMINATION BY SEEING TRIPLET 


191-251) 
X. ACCUMULATION TRIPLET 

252-287) 

XI. TRAINING TRIPLET 
288-316) 

XI. LIMITED TRIPLET 
317-357) 
XII. LIMITED OBJECT TRIPLET 

358-375) 

XIV, INFERIOR TRIPLET 
376) 

XV. REGULATED FALSITY TRIPLET 

377-401) 


XVI. PATH AS OBJECT TRIPLET 


402-422) 
XVII. ARISEN TRIPLET 
423-430) 
XVII. PAST TRIPLET 
431-437) 
XIX. PAST OBJECT TRIPLET 
438-453) 
XX. INTERNAL TRIPLET 
455-474) 


PATTHANA 343 


XXI. INTERNAL OBJECT TRIPLET 
(E2. 475-485) 


XXII. VISIBLE/RESPONSIVE TRIPLET 
(E2. 486-417) 


ANALYSIS OF PAIRS 
1. Positive Conditions 


(E3-4) Now each of the 100 pairs of Dhammasangani are examined 
in a similar fashion. 


ANALYSIS OF PAIRS/TRIPLETS 
1. Positive Conditions 


(E4) Now each of the 100 pairs is taken as reference with each 
of the 22 triplets as variants, e.g., the first section studies good-root 
dharmas, not-good-root dharmas and root-good-not-root-good 
dharmas. There are 100 such sections. 


ANALYSIS OF TRIPLET/PAIRS 
1. Positive Conditions 


(E4) Each of the 22 triplets is taken as reference with each of the 
‘100 pairs as variants. So, the first section deals with good-root 
dharmas, bad-root dharmas and neutral-root dharmas. There are 
22 such sections. . 


ANALYSIS OF TRIPLET/TRIPLETS 
1, Positive Conditions 


(ES) Now each triplet is varied with the rest of the triplets. — 


ANALYSIS OF PAIR/PAIRS 
1. Positive Conditions 


(ES) And each pair with the rest of the pairs. 
TRIPLET, PAIR, PAIR/TRIPLET, TRIPLET/TRIPLET, 
PAIR/PAIR 
2-4, Negative, Positive-Negative 


and Negative-Positive Conditions 


(E6 entire) And finally, each of the foregoing lists is taken in 


344 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


reference to negative conditioning (e.g., dharmas that are not 
good-root conditioning dharmas that are not good), positive-nega- 
tive conditioning (e.g., good dharmas that root condition dharmas 
that are not good) and negative-positive conditions (e.g., dharmas 
that are not good root conditioning good dharmas). 


14 


DHATUKAYA 


Summary by Robert E. Buswell, Jr. 


The Dhatukdya is traditionally placed as the fifth of the six padasastras 
of the Sarvastivada Abhidharma canon.’ Chinese sources ascribe 
authorship to Vasumitra, although which of the five Vasumitras 
known to the Chinese tradition this might have been is never clari- 
fied.” Sanskrit and Tibetan sources declare Pina to be the author.? 
Baiyu Watanabe, the Japanese scholar who has most carefully studied 
the text, has noted this discrepancy and finds the ascription to 
Vasumitra the more credible of the two. Nevertheless, he finally 
concludes that the text is most probably a composite product of a 
number of Abhidharmikas, which was then ascribed out of reverence 
to an earlier, well-known figure.* 

Considerable controversy reigns among modern scholars con- 
cerning the Dhatukaya’s chronological position among the Sarvasti- 
vada Abhidharma materials. Kogen Mizuno has divided the seven 
canonical texts into three groups, early, middle and late. He places 
in the first group the Sangitiparyaya, Dharmaskandha and Prajfapti- 
' SGstra; the Vijfdnakaya and Dhatukaya in the second; and the 
Prakaranapada and Jfanaprasthana in the last group.> Hajime Saku- 
rabe advocates instead two major divisions, with the second group 
divided into three subdivisions: first, the Sangitiparyaya and Dharma- 
skandha; and second, (a) the Vijnanakaya, Dhatukaya and Prajnapt; 
(b) Prakarana; (c) Ja@anaprasthana.° Ryogon Fukuhara, the scholar 
who has made the most exhaustive study of the Sarvastivada canoni- 
cal materials, finally returns to a three-fold division in his description 
of the appearance of the six padasastras: Sangitiparyayaand Dharma- 
skandha appear in his earliest group, Prajfapti and Vijfanakaya in 
his middle group, and Dhatukaya and Prakarana in his late group.’ 
Both in structurre and content, we would expect the text to appear 
in later strata of material than the obviously primitive Sangitiparyaya 
and Dharmaskandha, which are both reminiscent of the 4gamas in 


346 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


their approach, though a more precise determination will be virtually 
impossible to make. 

K’uei-chi’s postface to Hsiian-tsang’s Chinese translation® notes 
that the Dhatukdya was originally composed in 6,000 slokas, which 
was later abridged into two different versions of 900 and 500 S/okas. 
Hsiian-tsang’s text in 830 slokas apparently represented still another 
recension.” The extant recension is divided into two major sections. 
The opening * Malavastuvarga lists headings of 91 awareness and 
awareness-concomitant (cittacaitta) dharmas in 14 groups, followed 
by a standard Abhidharmika definition of each term; these provide 
the working matter for the detailed analyses that comprise the 
majority of the text. The subsequent * Vibhajyavarga is a longer 
analytical section divided into 16 subsections. The first three sub- 
sections detail the intricate interrelationships between three major 
groups of mental phenomena—(1) the 5 feeling-faculties, (2) 
consciousnesses and (3) shamelessness and disregard—and each 
individual awareness-concomitant listed in the headings. The con- 
cluding thirteen subsections give an abbreviated analysis of the 
interrelationships between each individual awareness-concomi- 
tant on the schedule. Dharmas are listed in dyads as associated with 
and dissociated from individual dharmas, the inclusion or noninclu- 
sion of which is then analyzed in light of the 18 elements, 12 
sense-bases and 5 aggregates. The concluding lines of the Chinese 
recension note that the full-length text was subdivided into 88 
sections, which would have allowed for a separate subdivision to 
cover each of the concomitants listed in the headings, except for 
the final set of cravings, which would already have been covered 
in full in the preceding analyses.!° 

The attempts of the Dhatukayato make some sense of the burgeon- 
ing lists of awarenesses, as well as the expository style adopted 
in this attempt, were to be of considerable importance in later 
Abhidharma treatises. While Dhdtukaya’s listings from the 5 defile- 
ments onward were known in earlier strata of Agama and Abhidharma 
literature, its novel groupings of the 10 dharmas that arise with every 
awareness, 10 dharmas that arise with every defilements, and 10 
dharmas that arise with every affliction were the forerunner of later 
standardized lists of awarenesses as found in the Prakarana and 
AbhidharmakosSa. This particular grouping of 91 awarenesses into 
14 categories is, however, unique to this text. The expository style 
of the Dhatukaya, in which opening headings with Abhidharmika 
definitions is followed by an analysis in contrasting pairs, also 
influenced the approach of the later Prakarana, a synthetic Abhi- 
dharma work that tried to draw together all the doctrines of the 
earlier canonical materials. This similarity in structure is the major 


DHATUKAYA ; 347 


piece of evidence supporting the traditional ascription of both these 
texts to Vasumitra’s authorship. Hstian-tsang’s 7a T’ang Hs!-yii chi 
records that Vasumitra was presumed to have written the Prakarana 
near Puskaravati in the Gandhara district, !! probably about 100 years 
after ASoka’s time. This notice would virtually guarantee that this 
text was written after the Sarvastivada school had already moved 
into its Northwest Indian headquarters. We would then have fairly 
firm grounds: for assuming that the Dhdtukaya was composed in 
similar circumstances.' 
_ The Dhatukaya is most reminiscent in style and approach to two 
Pali Abhidharma works: the Patthana and the Dhatukatha. Like the 
Dhatukaya, the Patthdna also opens with introductory headings on 
the 24 conditions with their definitions, which is followed by sections 
that explicate their interrelationships; a separate section is allotted 
for explication in contrasting pairs. The strongest resemblances both 
in title and general approach are, however, between the Pali DAatu- 
katha and the Dhatukaya, although the content of the two texts 
shows virtually no parallelism. The Dhatukathd also opens with 
headings and, like our text, analyzes dharmas in relation to the 
elements, sense-bases and aggregates, although the 14 approaches 
followed and the 125 dharmas included in the investigation are 
radically different. It would seem possible, however, that both texts 
have independently evolved from a more primitive form of analysis 
in which dharmas were treated in terms of the elements, bases and 
aggregates. If this is indeed the case, we have here the philosophically 
interesting instance of two entirely distinct and independently deve- 
loped approaches to a parallel descriptive problem. A comparative 
investigation could yield important information on the difference 
between Sarvastivada and Theravada analytical approaches." 
References are to page and column of the Chinese translation 
(Taisho 1540). The Chinese title of Hstian-tsang’s translation is 
(A-pi-ta-mo) Chieh-Shen Tsu-Lun. The date of the translation is 
identified as July 14, 663. 


SUMMARY 
PART ONE: HEADINGS (* MULAVASTUVARGA) 
(1.614b10-c10) 


_ 10 factors that arise with every awareness: 
1. feeling 
2. identification 
3. volition 
4. contact 
5. attention 


348 


6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILO; 


interest 
resolve 
mindfulness 
concentration 
intellection 


10 factors that arise with every defilement: 


WAAYAMHB WN 


. lack of confidence 

. Sloth 

. lack of mindfulness 

, distraction 

. ignorance 

. lack of comprehension 
. careless attention 

. false resolve 

. excitedness 

10. 


heedlessness 


10 factors that arise with every affliction: 


— 
SOSIANAWNS 


anger 


. vengefulness 
. hypocrisy 


spite 
envy 


. selfishness 


deceit 
guile 


. arrogance 
. cruelty 


5 defilements: 
1. sensual desires 
2. desire for material things 
3. desire for immaterial things 
4. repugnance (or hatred?) 
5. perplexity 
5 wrong views: 
1. belief in a self 
2. extreme views 
3, false views 
4. adherence to views 
5. adherence to moral precepts and vows 
5 contacts: 
1. contact arising from sensory impingement 
2. expressible contact , 
3. mental contact associated with understanding 
4. mental contact associated with ignorance 


DHATUKAYA 349 


5. mental contact associated neither with knowledge nor igno- 
rance 
5 faculties (properly, the 5 feeling-faculties): 
1. faculty of satisfaction 
2. faculty of frustration 
3. faculty of contentedness 
4. faculty of depression 
5. faculty of equanimity 
5 factors: 
1. initial thought 
2.. sustained thought 
3. consciousness 
4. shamelessness 
5. disregard 
6 consciousnesses: 
1. visual consciousness 
2. auditory consciousness 
3. olfactory consciousness 
4. gustatory consciousness 
~ §. tactile consciousness 
6. mental consciousness 
6 contacts: 
1. eye-contact 
2. €ar-contact 
3. nose-contact 
4. tongue-contact 
5. body -contact 
6. mind-contact 
6 feelings: 
1. feeling born of eye-contact 
2. feeling born of ear-contact 
3. feeling born of nose-contact 
4. feeling born of tongue-contact 
5. feeling born of body-contact 
6. feeling born of mind-contact 
6 identifyings: 
1, identifying born of eye-contact 
2. identifying born of ear-contact 
3. identifying born of nose-contact 
4, identifying born of tongue-contact 
5. identifying born of body-contact 
6. identifying born of mind-contact 
6 volitions: 
1. volition born of eye-contact 


350 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


. volition born of ear-contact 
. volition born of nose-contact 
. volition born of tongue-contact 
. volition born of body-contact 
. volition born of mind-contact 
ravings: 
. craving born of eye-contact 
. craving born of ear-contact 
. craving born of nose-contact 
. craving born of tongue-contact 
. craving born of body contact 
. craving born of mind-contact.!4 

The Dhatukaya continues with standard Abhidharmika definitions 
of each of the factors appearing in the headings: the factors arising 
with every awareness (614c 10-26), the factors that arise with every 
defilement (614c26-615a13), the factors that arise with every 
affliction (615a13-23), defilements (615a23-b2), wrong views 
(615b2-11), contacts (615b14), feeling faculties (615b14-22), 
factors (615b22-c4), consciousnesses (615c4-9), contacts 
(615c10-15), feelings (615c15-26), identifyings (615c26-616a.8), . 
volitions (616a8-20), and cravings (616a20-28). These definitions . 
are principally intended: (1) to clarify the efficiency of each factor 
in present, past and future; (2) to delineate the primary characteristic 
of each factor; (3) to outline the conditions which lead to the arising 
of an individual factor. As can be gleaned from the above outline, 
there is a total of three lists of ten factors, five lists of five factors, 
and six lists of six factors, for a total of ninety-one individual 
awarenesses and concomitants. Throughout the remainder of the 
text, the interactions between these individual factors will be ex- 
plored sequentially in considerable detail. Familiarity with the head- 
ings, consequently, is essential for untangling the complicated inter- 
relationships that will be explored in the following sixteen sections. 


QDAUARWN 


6 


RUAPWN 


PART TWO: DISTINCTIONS (*VIBHAJYAVARGA) 


The remainder of the Dhatukdya is concerned with detailing 
explicitly the interrelationships between the factors listed in the 
headings. There are sixteen separate sections in two major divisions. 
The first division is in three sections: section one treats the 5 feeling 
faculties, section two discusses the 6 consciousnesses, and section 
three analyzes the two factors of shamelessness and disregard. These 
sections treat groups of awarenesses in terms of their relationships 
with each individual member listed in the headings. The second 
division is in thirteen sections, which discuss each of the factors in 


DHATUKAYA 351 


the headings in terms of their relation to the eighteen elements, twelve 
sense-bases and five aggregates. The full-length recension of the 
Dhatukaya, no longer extant, divided this second division into 
eighty-five separate sections, which would have allowed for indivi- 
dual treatment of each factor in the headings excluding the six 
cravings. The latter six factors did not require their own section, 
as their association/dissociation in regards to the elements, senses 
and aggregates would already have been covered in the preceding 
sections. 

(Since the type of analysis undertaken in this text is so repetitive, 
I intend to give a periphrastic translation only of the first section 
in each of the two major divisions. This should suffice to characterize 
the primary approaches of the Dhatukaya.) 


Section One: The Five Feeling Faculties 
(First division, First section; 616b5-c6) 


The 5 feeling faculties are the faculties of satisfaction, frustration, 
contentedness, depression and equanimity. How. many of the factors 
arising with every awareness and the 5 feeling faculties are associated 
and how many are dissociated ?... How many of (the awareness- 
concomitants) up to and including craving born of mind-contact 
(the last of the cravings) and the 5 feeling faculties are associated 
and how many are dissociated? 

As far as the lack of association between the factors arising with 
every feeling and the 5S feeling faculties is concerned: all are disso- 
ciated. The factors arising with every identification and the 5 feeling 
faculties are all associated. As far as those (factors arising with every | 
awareness) which are not dissociated is concerned, in the same way 
that identifying (is associated), volition, contact, attention, interest, 
resolve, mindfulness, concentration and intellection are likewise (in 
association with all the 5 feeling faculties). 

The lack of confidence (factor arising with every defilement) and 
the 5 feeling faculties: the five faculties are both associated and 
dissociated. Just as for lack of confidence, the remaining factors 
arising with every defilement are also the same. 

(Of the factors arising with every affliction) anger, vengefulness, 
spite, envy and violence are associated with two faculties— 
depression and equanimity—and dissociated from five faculties. 
Hypocrisy, deceit and craftiness are associated with three faculties 
—excepting satisfaction and frustration—and are dissociated from 
five faculties. Arrogance is associated with four faculties—excepting 
frustration—and dissociated from five faculties. Selfishness is asso- 


352 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ciated with two faculties—contentedness and equanimity—and 
dissociated from five faculties. 

(Of the five defilements) sensuous desire and attachment to 
material things are associated with three faculties—excepting 
frustration and depression—and dissociated from five faculties. 
Desire for immaterial things is associated with one 
faculty—equanimity—and dissociated from five faculties. Repug- 
nance is associated with three faculties—excepting satisfaction and 
depression—and dissociated from five faculties. Perplexity is asso- 
ciated with four faculties—excepting frustration—and dissociated 
from five faculties. ; 

Among the 5 wrong views, false view is associated with four 
faculties—excepting frustration—and dissociated from five faculties. 
The remaining four wrong views are associated with three faculties— 
excepting frustration and depression—and dissociated from five 
faculties. 

(Among the 5 contacts) contact arising from sensory impingement 
is associated with three faculties—excepting contentedness and 
depression—and dissociated from four faculties—excepting frustra- 
tion. Expressible contact is associated with four faculties—excepting 
frustration—and dissociated from three faculties—excepting con- 
tentedness and depression. Mental contact associated with under- 
standing is associated with three faculties—excepting frustration - 
and depression—and dissociated from-five faculties. Mental contact 
associated with ignorance and mental contact associated neither with 
understanding nor ignorance are associated with five faculties and 
dissociated from five faculties. 

As far as the lack of association between the’ satisfaction faculty 
(and the 5 faculties of feeling) is concerned: all are dissociated. Just 
as for the satisfaction faculty, the frustration faculty, contentedness 
faculty, depression faculty and equanimity faculty are also the same. 

(Of the five factors) initial thought and sustained thought are 
associated with five faculties, and dissociated from three facul- 
ties—excepting frustration and depression. Consciousness is asso- 
ciated with five faculties; it is (awareness) from which no other 
(awareness-concomitants) are dissociated. Shamelessness and 
disregard are associated with five faculties and dissociated from 
five faculties. 

. {Of the 6 consciousnesses) visual consciousness is associated with 

three faculties—excepting contentedness and depression—and 
dissociated from five faculties. Just as for visual consciousness audi- 
tory, olfactory, gustatory and tactile consciousnesses are also the 
same. Mental consciousness is associated with four faculties—ex- 
cepting contentedness and depression. Just as for the 6 conscious- 


~ DHATUKAYA 353 


nesses, the 6 contacts, the 6 identifications and the 6 volitions are 
also the same. 

As far as the lack of association between the feeling born of 
eye-contact (the first of 6 feelings) and the 5 feeling faculties is 
concerned: they are all in dissociation. Just as for the feeling born 
of eye-contact, the remaining feelings are also the same. 

(Of the 6 cravings) the craving born of eye-contact is associated 
with two faculties—contentedness and equanimity—-and dissociated 
from five faculties. Just as for the craving born of eye-contact, the 
craving born of ear, nose, tongue and body contact is also the same. 
The craving born of mind-contact is associated with three facul- 
ties—excepting frustration and depression—and dissociated from 
five faculties. 

An. identical approach is followed in the concluding two sections 
of this first division: section two on the 6 consciousnesses 
(616c.8-617a.4) and section three on the two factors shamelessness 
and disregard (617a.5-b.7). 

In the second division, there are thirteen sections in which each 
factor is analyzed in dyads in terms of its association/dissociation 
with the elements, senses and aggregates. As with the previous 
division, I will outline in detail only the first of these sections. 


Section Four: The Factors Arising with Every Feeling 
(Second division, First section: 617b.12-619a.15): 79 dyads 
A. Factors Arising with Every Awareness (9 dyads) 


1. Association and Dissociation with Feelings and Identifyings 

How many of the eighteen elements, twelve senses and five 
aggregates are included in what is associated with feeling? Eight 
elements (six consciousness elements, the mental element and the 
factor element), two senses (the mental sense and factor sense), three 
aggregates (identification, conditioning, consciousness). What is 
remaining? Feeling itself, matter, unconditioned factors and condi- 
tionings dissociated from awareness associated with eleven elements 
(five physical senses, five physical objects and the factor element); 
eleven senses (idem.); and three aggregates [matter, feeling (since 
feeling itself was excluded) and conditioning (because the condi- 
tionings dissociated from awareness were excluded)]. How many 
of the eighteen elements, twelve senses and five aggregates are 
included in the dissociated identifications? Identification itself, 
matter, unconditioned factors and conditionings dissociated from 
awareness associated with elements (idem.}), eleven senses (idem.} 
and three aggregates (matter, identification and conditioning). 

The Dhatukaya then transposes this dyad to what is associated 


354 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


with identifying and/or dissociated from feeling, with the values for 
each similarly transposed. Associated with identifying are eight 
elements and two senses (idem. with what is associated with feeling 
above), and three aggregates (feeling, conditioning, consciousness). 
The remaining factors are identification itself, matter, unconditioned 
factors and conditionings dissociated from awareness associated with 
eleven elements and eleven senses (idem. with what is associated 
with feeling above), and three aggregates (matter, feeling and condi- 
tioning). Associated with what is dissociated from feeling are eleven 
elements and eleven senses (idem.), and three aggregates (matter, 
feeling, conditioning). 

Rather than giving a complete analysis for the nine remaining dyads. 
between feeling and the other factors arising with every awareness 
the author simply notes that the analysis should proceed in the same 
fashion for the other members of that category. 


B. Factors Arising with Every Defilement et al. (16 dyads) 


1. Associated with Feeling/Dissociated from Lack of Confidence 
and Associated with Lack of Confidence/Dissociated from 
Feeling 

The values for what is associated with feeling and what is dissocia- 

ted from feeling here, and in all the following dyads, will be identical 
with those given in the first dyad of the previous section. Associated 
with what is dissociated from lack of confidence are all eighteen 
elements, twelve senses and five aggregates; associated with what 
is associated with lack of confidence are eight elements and two 
senses (idem. with what is associated with feeling above), and four 
aggregates (feeling, identification, conditioning and consciousness), 
with all eighteen elements, twelve senses and five aggregates remain- 
ing. Once again, the author of the Dhatukaya simply notes that the 
same analysis is to be applied for the remaining dyads between factors 
arising with every feeling and the other factors arising with every 
defilement, with sensuous desire and repugnance (among the five 
defilements), mental contact associated with ignorance and mental 
contact associated neither with understanding nor ignorance (of the 
five contacts), and shamelessness and disregard (of the five factors), 
for a total of sixteen separate dyads investigated in this section. 


C. Factors Arising with Every Affliction et al. (24 dyads) 
1. Associated with Feeling/Dissociated from Anger and Associated 


with Anger/Dissociated from Feeling 
All of the values arrived at are identical with the analysis in the 


DHATUKAYA 355 


section on the factors arising with every defilement. The analysis 
follows in parallel manner for the nine remaining factors arising with 
every affliction attachment to immaterial things and perplexity 
(among the five defilements), the five wrong views, mental contact 
associated with understanding (among the five contacts), and the 
six cravings, for a total of twenty-four dyads in this section. | 


D. Sensuous Attachment (1 dyad) 


1. Associated with Feeling/Dissociated from Sensuous 
Attachment and Associated with Sensuous Attachment/ 
Dissociated from Feeling 

What is dissociated from sensuous attachment is associated with 

all eighteen elements, twelve senses and five aggregates; what is 
associated with sensuous attachment is associated with six elements 
(of visual, auditory, bodily, mental consciousness along with the 
mental element and the factor element), two bases (the mental and 
factor sense) and four aggregates (excluding matter). There is no 
comparable analysis for any other mental factor. 


E. Repugnance Contact (1 dyad) 


1. Associated with Feeling/Dissociated from Repugnance Contact 
and Associated with Repugnance-Contact/Dissociated from 
Feeling 

What is dissociated from repugnance-contact is associated with 

thirteen elements (six senses, six sense objects and the mental- 
consciousness element), twelve senses and five aggregates. What 
is associated with repugnance contact is associated: with seven 
elements (five nonmental sense consciousnesses, the mental 
element and the factor element), two bases (mind sense and factor 
sense) and four aggregates (excluding matter); remaining are thirteen 
elements, twelve bases and five aggregates as just listed. There 
is no comparable analysis for any other mental factor. - 


F. Expressible Contact (1 dyad) 


1. Associated with Feeling/Dissociated from Expressible Contact 
and Associated with Expressible Contact/Dissociated from 
Feeling 

What is dissociated from expressible contact includes seventeen 

elements (excluding the mental-consciousness element), twelve 
senses and five aggregates. What is associated with expressible 
contact includes three elements (mind element, factor element and 


356 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


mental-consciousness element), two senses (mental sense and factor 
sense) and four aggregates (excluding matter). There is no compara- 
ble analysis. 


G. Initial and Sustained Thought (2 dyads) 


1. Associated with Feeling/Dissociated from Initial Thought and 
Associated with Initial Thought/Dissociated from Feeling 

What is dissociated from initial thought includes thirteen elements 
(six senses, six sense objects and the mental consciousness element), 
twelve and five aggregates. Associated with initial thought includes 
eight elements (six consciousness elements, the mental element and 
the factor element), two senses and four aggregates (excluding 
matter). The analysis is identical for sustained thought. 


H. Consciousness (1 dyad) 


1. Associated with Feeling/Dissociated from Consciousness and 
Associated with Consciousness/Dissociated from Feeling. 
What is dissociated from consciousness includes eighteen 
elements, twelve senses and three aggregates (matter, conditioning 
and consciousness). What is associated with consciousness includes 
one element (factor element); one sense (factor sense) and three 
aggregates (feeling, identification and conditioning); remaining are 
eighteen elements, twelve senses and three aggregates (matter, 
conditioning and consciousness). There is no comparable analysis. 


I. 6 Consciousnesses (6 dyads) 


1. Associated with Feeling/Dissociated from Visual Conscious- 
ness and Associated with Visual Consciousness/Dissociated 
from Feeling 

What is dissociated from visual consciousness includes all eighteen 

elements, twelve senses and five aggregates. What is associated with 
visual consciousness includes one element (factor element), one 
sense (factor sense) and three aggregates (feeling, identification and 
conditioning). The same analysis applies for the other five conscious- 
nesses, for a total of six dyads. 


J. Six Contacts et al. (18 dyads) . 
1. Associated with Feeling/Dissociated from Eye Contact and 


Associated with Eye Contact/Dissociated from Feeling 
What is dissociated from eye contact includes seventeen elements 


DHATUKAYA 357 


(excluding the visual consciousness element), twelve senses and five 
ageregates. What is associated with eye contact includes three 
elements (visual consciousness element, mind-element and factor 
element), two senses (mind sense and factor sense) and four aggre- 
gates (excluding matter). This same analysis applies for the other 
five contacts, the six identifyings and the six volitions, for a total 
of eighteen dyads in this section. 

For the entire section, we find a total of seventy-nine dyads 
covered, abbreviated into ten different groups. It should be noted 
that, in the text itself, no indication is given as to which of the 
elements, senses and aggregates are implied; a correct understanding 
of the text would have required either a written commentary on the 
text or oral instruction from a teacher trained in the traditional 
interpretation to fill out the bare list of numbers. 

For the remaining sections of this second division, I will be content 
simply to note the awareness-concomitants covered in the section, 
along with the factors subsumed under that heading in this abbrevia- 
ted version of the full-length text. 


Section Five: Factors Arising with Every Identifying 
(619a17-620c20) 


Section Six: Factors Arising with Every Volition 
(620c21-621c17) 


Section Seven: Factors Arising with Every Contact 
(621¢23-622a19) 


Section Eight: Factors Arising with Every Attending 
(622a20-b18) 


Section Nine: Factors Arising with All Interest 
(622b19-cl7) 


Section Ten: Factors Arising with Every Resolve 
(622c18-623a16) 


Section Eleven: Factors Arising with All Mindfulness 
(623a17-b14) 


Section Twelve: Factors Arising with Every Concentration 
(623c15-cl4) 


358 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Section Thirteen: Factors Arising with Every Intellection 
(623c15-624a3) 


Section Fourteen: Factors Arising with All Lack of Confidence 
(624a4-29) 


Section Fifteen: (624b1-c25) 


It is in this section that we find our first major abridgement. The 
Dhatukdaya notes laconically that the factors arising with sloth, which 
logically would have been the subject of this section, is analyzed 
as in section fourteen and is deleted. Henceforth, the author will 
only analyze those factors which have some modicum of novelty. 
Consequently, we find the following sections from the full-length 
recension passed over: sections 15-23 on the factors arising with 
every defilement, sections 24-33 on the factors arising with every 
' affliction, sections 34-38 on the 5 defilements, sections 39-43 on 

the 5 wrong views, sections 44-48 on the 5 contacts, sections 49-53 
on the 5 faculties and sections 54-58 on the 5 factors. The author 
finally takes up in our section fifteen what was actually section 
_59 in the complete text, on visual consciousness. Concluding that 
analysis, he notes that the following mental factors are to be analyzed 
in a similar fashion, and deletes them: sections 60-64 on the remain- 
ing consciousnesses and sections 65-70 on the 6 contacts. 


Section Sixteen: (624¢c26-625c2) 


The author here takes up the first of the 6 feelings, the feeling. 
born of eye-contact, which would have been section 71 in the 
full-length text. Completing that analysis, he notes that the following 
awarenesses are to be analyzed in a similar fashion, and deletes them: 
sections 72-76 on the remaining feelings, sections 77-82 on the 6 
identifyings, sections 83-88 on the 6 volitions. Hence, as the author 
informs us in the opening verse of the Vibhajyavarga (616b.1-4)"°, 
the complete text of the Dhatukaya was in eighty-eight sections, 
which have sensibly been reduced in this recension to a mere sixteen. 


15 
DHATUKATHA 


Summary by Karl H. Potter 


As in the case of the other Abhidharma treatises of the Theravada 
tradition, scholarly opinions vary regarding the date of the DAdatu- 
katha. H. Saddhatissa’ thinks it was recited at the 3rd Council during 
Asoka’s reign. Hajime Nakamura’ finds it contemporaneous with 
Kathavatthu but coming after the Puggalapafifiatti, Dhammasangani 
and Vibhanga. André Bareau’ believes it must be in the 1st century 
B.C., contemporaneous with the third part of the Sariputrabhi- 
dharmasSastra and the corresponding section of the Prakaranapada. 
Its authorship is likewise unknown. 

The work has been edited a number of times: with Buddhaghosa’s 
commentary by Edmund Rowland Jayatileka Gunaratne for the Pali 
Text Society in London, 1892, this edition being our “‘E’’; with the 
Puggalapaniiatti by D.S. Mahathera and V. Sarman in 1960; by M. 
Tiwari in 1968. An English translation, our ‘‘T’’, was prepared by 
Narada and Thein Nyun under the title Discourse on Elements, 
Pali Text Society Translation Series 34, London 1962. There are — 
summaries in the Tiwari edition cited above, and by J. Kashyap 
« in the Introduction to the 1960 edition as well as in his Abhidhamma 
Philosophy. 

As with the other Theravada works, a list of headings is first 
provided, which proposes fourteen modes of analysis for some 105 
. topics, as well as an analysis of the common principles and character- 
istics of the modes proposed, and concludes with a recapitulation 
of the 122 triplets and pairs expounded in the Dhammasangauni. The 
chapters of the work then proceed in accordance with the organiza- 
tion into fourteen chapters. The 105 topics listed here are as follows: 
S aggregates, 12 senses, 18 elements, 4 truths, 22 faculties, 28 
aspects of the chain of dependent origination, 4 applications of 
mindfulness, 4 right efforts, 4 supernatural powers, 4 meditative 
stages, 4 things unlimited (in scope), 5 faculties, 5 powers, 7 factors 


360 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of enlightenment, the eightfold path, contact, feeling, identification, * 
volition, awareness, determination, attention. 

As Frauwallner points out,* Louis de la Vallée Poussin refers to 
the kinship between the Dhatukaya and the Dhatukathd. ‘Both works 
show the same construction. In both a mdatrka stands at the head, 
the topics of which are then discussed from the standpoints of 
connection and comprehension...” But there are also clear differ- 
ences. ““The mdatrka that forms the basis for the explanations is 
different in each text. At the discussion of “‘connection’’ the Dhatu- 
kaya asks about the dharmas of the matrka ‘‘With which other 
dharmas of the mdatrka are these connected?’’ The Dhatukatha 
asks only about the connections with the dhdatus, dyatanas and 
skandhas ... The more complicated questions of the DAatukatha 
are omitted (in the Dhatukdya)... Thus the determination of the 
connection between the two works is uncertain.” 

Frauwallner points out that Chapter Four of the Prakaranapada 
includes a portion of the Dhatukaya. He concludes, after some 
discussion of details, that the Prakarana version agrees with the 
Dhatukatha rather than the Dhatukaya, but thinks this does not 
mitigate against the general kinship of all three works. 

All of this relates mainly to the first sections of the two works. 
When we examine the second sections it is evident, Frauwallner 
thinks, that the Dhatukaya has been extensively reworked, while the 
Dhatukathi, it is probable, has remained essentially as it was origi- 
nally. 

Frauwallner concludes from his discussion that the two works from 
the Pali and Sarvastivadin literature go back to a common source: 
He rejects the idea that they are two versions of the same fext. The 
texts work with different matrices and show other important diver- 
gences. 


Chapter I: Inclusion and Exclusion 
Section One: Aggregates 


(E1-4; T1-3) Matter is included in a group with 1 aggregate (matter 
itself), 11 senses (of vision, audition, olfaction, gustation and touch, 
the 5 contents corresponding to those, and the factor sense), and 
11 elements (the same list). Feeling is included in a group with 1 
aggregate (feeling itself), 1 sense (the factor sense), and 1 element 
(the factor element). 

Identification is included in a group with 1 aggregate (itself), 1 
sense (the factor sense), and 1 element (the factor element). 

Conditioning is included in a group with 1 aggregate, 1 sense, 1 
element, as the two previous. 


DHATUKATHA 361 


Consciousness is included in a group with 1 aggregate (itself), 1 
sense (the mental sense), and 7 elements (those of visual, auditory, 
olfactory, gustatory and tactual consciousness, the mental element 
and the mind-consciousness element). - 

By elimination, the factors which each aggregate excludes are 
identified. 

Next, four pairs (matter plus each of the other aggregates) are 
studied in the same manner—so that the pair matter/feeling is 
included in 2 aggregates, 11 senses and 11 elements, etc. 

Then three triplets (matter, feeling, and each of the remaining three 
aggregates in combination with those two) are studied likewise. 

Then two sets of four (the first three aggregates plus each of the 
remaining two}. 

Then all five aggregates. 


Section Two: Senses 


(ES-6; T3-5) A similar study is made of each of the senses, taken 
singly, in pairs {visual combined with each of the other 11 bases), 
and by all 12. 


Section Three: Elements 


(E6-8; T5-6) And the elements are studied in the same manner, 
singly, in pairs (visual combined with each of the other 17 elements), 
and by all 18. 


Section Four: Truths 


(E8-10; T7-8) The truth of frustration is included in a group with 
5 aggregates, 12 senses, 18 elements. The truth of the origin of 
frustration is included in a group with | aggregate, 1 sense and 1 
element. So is the fourth truth, of the eightfold path. The third truth, 
of the cessation of frustration, is included in a group with no aggregate 
(since liberation falls within no aggregate), 1 sense and 1 element. 
The same information is conveyed by analysis into pairs, triplets 
and quadruples. . 


Section Five: Faculties 


(E10-13; T8-10) The same treatment is provided for the 22 
faculties. Each of them is included in a group with 1 aggregate, 1 
sense and | element, except for the life faculty, which is included 
ina group with 2 aggregates, and the mental faculty, whichis included 


362 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in a group with 7 elements. Again, analysis by pairs, triplets, etc., 
up to 22’s. 


Section Six: The Remaining Factors 


(E13-16; T10-12) The remaining factors in the list of headings 
are now studied in the same manner. The 28 aspects of dependent 
origination are generated by the 12 standard items beginning with 
ignorance and ending with old age and death, but increased by the 
distinctions among a number of types of states of being, viz., karmic 
states of being, rebirth states of being, sensuous states of being, 
material states of being, immaterial states of being, identifying states 
of being, nonidentifying states of being, states of being neither 
identifying nor nonidentifying; single-aggregate states of being, 
quadruple-aggregate states of being and quintuple-aggregate states 
of being, as well as several added items which accompany the last 
. three members of the chain, viz., sorrow, lamentation, frustration, 
depression and irritation. 

Then the remaining items in the 105 topics (see list of headings) 
are treated likewise. Tables and charts on pp. 26-35 of T indicate 
the numbers of aggregates, senses and elements included in each 
item; the text does not indicate which specific aggregates, senses 
and elements are encompassed by these numbers. 


Section Seven: Triples 


(E16-22; T12-16) Now the 22 triples of the Dhammasangani are 
studied in like manner, i.e. showing how many aggregates, senses 
and elements each triplet comprehends. 


Section Eight: Pairs 


(E22-33; T17- 26) And the 100 pairs of the Dhammasangani 
likewise. 


Chapter II: Included and Excluded 


(E34-35; T54-55) Here the 37 items that, with a comparison 
group, are included under the same aggregate but not under the same 
sense or element are identified. Also the 7 items which are included 
with a comparison group under the same aggregate and the same 
sense but not under the same element. The discussion proceeds by 
eight questions and answers, each of which concern those items for 
which the answers are the same. Thus, for example, the visual sense 
is included in a group with the remaining items which belong with 
the material aggregate, but those remaining factors are excluded from 


DHATUKATHA 363 


the other four aggregates, from the senses of vision and mind, and 
from the visual group of the elements plus the seven elements of 
consciousness. The same is true of 9 other senses and 10 elements. 
These items are the subject of the first question. The remaining 
questions concern (2) the group of the 7 elements of consciousness, 
(3) the group of the 7 faculties, (4) the group of 2 states of being, 
viz., nonidentifying states of being and single-aggregate states of 
being, (5) the group consisting of two items, viz., lamentation and 
the factors which are both visible and reactive, (6) the factors that 
are invisible and reactive, (7) the visible factors, and (8) the reactive 
factors, and the derived factors. 

A concluding list of all the items discussed in this chapter is 
appended. 


Chapter II: Excluded and Included 


(E36-38; T61-63) This chapter discusses some 90 items that are 
not in a group with a single aggregate but are included in a group 
with a single sense and a single element. These 90 items are those 
that do not involve matter or consciousness, since material factors 
fall under various senses and elements, while consciousness falls 
under various elements. The 90 items are: 3 aggregates (feeling, 
identification and conditioning), 3 noble truths (excluding the first), 
16 faculties (exclusive of those corresponding with the sense- 
organs), 14 out of the 28 items in the list of dependent origination, 
applications of mindfulness, right efforts, things unlimited, 5 
faculties, 5 powers, 7 factors of enlightenment, eightfold path, 
contact, feeling, identification, volition, determination, attention, 
and then a number of pairs. 


Chapter IV: Included.and Included 


(E39-40; T67-68) Here 69 items are discussed. Each of them is 
included in a group with the same aggregate, sense and element. 
The 69 items are: the second and fourth noble truths, 15 faculties, 
11 of the dependent origination items, applications of mindfulness, 
right efforts, unlimited things, 5 faculties, 5 powers, 7 factors of 
enlightenment, eightfold path, contact, volition, determination, 
attention, and 30 of the pairs. 


Chapter V: Excluded and Excluded 


(E41-50; T71-79) Here are discussed 257 items which cannot 
be included in a group with others having the same aggregate, the 
same basis and the same element. The 99 factors which can be treated 


364 “ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in this way are those which do not involve both the material and 
consciousness aggregates. The remaining 158 items which make up 
the 257 are pairs and triples. 


Chapter VI: Association and Dissociation 


(E51-62; T83-95) Now 250 items are studied in terms of how 
many aggregates, senses and elements each is associated with and 
dissociated from. (An item is said to be ‘‘associated’’ with another 
when the two arise and cease together, have the same content (if 
any) and the same basis. When the above is not the case they are 
‘*dissociated’’.) Matter is always dissociated from the four other 
aggregates, and liberation is always dissociated from these aggregates 
as well by virtue of the Buddha’s say-so. An aggregate excluding 
matter may be partially dissociated from the other three if they do 
not satisfy the conditions of association (above). Dissociation is of - 
four varieties: (a) dissociation through meditative state, (b) dissocia- 
tion through class (e.g., good vs. bad factors, etc.), (c) dissociation 
in time, and (d) dissociation through stream of consciousness (in. 
one’s own stream an item is dissociated from any item in another’s 
stream). This information is supplied in T. 

The method of exposition is by question and answer, and is divided 
into sections relating to (1) aggregates, (2) senses, (3) elements, (4) 
truths, etc., (5) triples, and (6) pairs. 


Chapter VII: Associated and Dissociated 


(E63-65; T10S-106) Thirty-seven items are considered here. For 
each, an associated group and a dissociated group of items are 
identified. The 37 items involve 24 factors and 13 triplets or pairs. 
The 24 factors in question are those which are either consciousness 
or mental, viz., the aggregates of feeling, identification, conditioning 
and consciousness; the mental sense; the consciousness element 
(having six kinds); the mental consciousness element; the mental 
faculty; the equanimity faculty; three parts of the dependent origina- 
tion formula, namely consciousness, contact and feeling; contact; 
feeling; identification; will; awareness; attention; determination. 


Chapter VIII: Dissociated and Associated 


(E66; T110) Items dissociated (in the four ways mentioned above) 
from 97 factors and 227 more triplets and pairs are studied. The 
question is, with how many aggregates, senses and elements are such 
dissociated items associated? The answer is, with none. Chapter XIV 
takes up the same group of items. 


DHATUKATHA 365 
Chapter IX: Associated and Associated 


(E67-72; T113-118) One hundred twenty items (56 factors, the 
rest triples and pairs), which are parts of the four aggregates other 
than matter, are considered here. The group of items that is 
associated with each item in turn is related to the number of 
aggregates, senses and elements associated with that group. 


Chapter X: Dissociated and Dissociated 
(E73-82; T119-127) The 250 items discussed in Chapter VI are 
the items discussed here too. A group of items dissociated from each 


is identified and the question then asked, which elements, senses 
and elements is this group dissociated from. 


Chapter XI: Associated and Dissociated from the Included 

(E83-85; T129-131) The groups identified under the same aggre- 
gate, sense and element in Chapter IV are now treated under 
association and dissociation as in Chapter VI. 

Chapter XII: Included and Excluded Relating to the Associated 

(E86-92; T133-137) The items identified as groups by the method 
of Chapter IX are studied as to whether they are included in or 
excluded from the aggregates, senses and elements. 


Chapter XIII: Associated and Dissociated Relating to the Excluded 


(E93-97; T139-142) The groups of items identified in Chapter 
V are now treated by the method of Chapter VI. 


Chapter XIV: Included and Excluded Relating to the Dissociated 
(E98-113; T144-155) The items identified by the method of 


Chapter VIII are now considered as to whether they are included 
in or excluded from the aggregates, senses and elements. 


16 


VIINANAKAYA 


The date of this Sarvastivada text has been variously estimated 
between 200 B.C. to 75 A.D. Several scholars find it closely related 
to the Jidnaprasthadna, and it would seem to be datable close to the 
time of that work, with which it shares some features. 

The work is only available in a translation made by Hstian-tsang 
in 649, according to tradition. Hsiian-tsang says that it was composed 
in Visoka near Sravasti. It is only partly translated. The first and 
second of its six chapters are available in French translation by Louis 
de la Vallée Poussin as “‘La Controverse du Temps et du Pudgala 
dans le Vijfianakaya’’, from Etudes asiatiques oubliées a l’occasion 
du 25e anniversaire de l’Ecole-francaise de 1l’Estreme Orient, 
Volume One (Paris 1925), pp. 343-76. This translation is referred 
to below as ‘‘TP’’. Fumimaro Watanabe provides as English render- 
ing of a portion of the second chapter in Philosophy and Its Deve- 
lopment in the Nikayas and Abhidhamma (Delhi 1983), signified 
here by ‘“TW”’ page references. In some cases Watanabe is quoted 
verbatim with technical terms made consistent with the present 
volume’s translations, in other cases translations provided by him 
are summarized by the editor (Potter). 


Chapter I: Maudgalyayana 


(TP346-348; TW175-176) The monk Maudgalyayana is repre- 
sented as asserting that the past and future do not exist, but that 
the present and unconditioned do exist. A series of criticisms of this 
are presented, each following much the same pattern. First, in most 
_ cases, the Buddha’s words are cited and Maudgalyayana is asked 
if he agrees. He says he does. Now, the argument continues, is the 
Buddha speaking of things past, present or future? If the answer is 
that he is speaking of past or future things, then to also hold, as 
Maudgalyadyana says he does, that the past or future do not exist 


368 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is self-contradictory. If he accepts past and future but denies present 
existence certain implications (differing case by case) are generated 
which are either inconsistent among themselves or contradict some- 
thing evidently true or clearly maintained by the Buddha. This pattern 
of reasoning is applied in a series of sections as follows. 


Section 1 


1. Attachment, the root of evil, is bad. But is this attachment past, 
present or future? It must be admitted that past and future attachment 
exist. If they are denied, attachment must be always present, never 
past or future. But then what is the temporal locus of that to which 
one becomes attached? Finally, suppose Maudgalyayana denies the 
existence of all three, past, present and future. This will undermine 
the very point of Buddhist teaching: there can be no bondage and 
no liberation. Similar argument can be addressed against the denial 
of hatred and delusion. 

2. Illustrations are provided of the distinction between elements 
taught by the Buddha to be good or bad respectively. 


. Section 2 


The general line of argument is adduced to show that the following 
topics of the Buddha’s teaching require admission of past and future: 
the four floods, yogas, grasping, the knots and obstructions. 


Section 3 


1. The Buddha talks of fetters having been gained or lost, born 
or destroyed. The general pattern of argument is applied to show 
that unless past, present and future exist the Buddha’s words must 
be rejected, and this is unacceptable. 

2. When one has gained the first obstruction, of interest in sensual 
pleasure, he realizes it. This implies temporal passage. Likewise for 
the other obstructions. 

3. Awakeners to liberation must come to exist, so they were past, 
are now present, and will be in future. 

4. Things desired must come not to be desired. This establishes 
the necessity of admitting temporal distinctions. 

5. Ifonly present and not past or future bodily and mental sensations 
exist, then one must feel at the same time both bodily and mental 
sensations, which is impossible. 

6. Again, unless temporal discriminations made sense mental 


VUNANAKAYA 369 


consciousness (i.e. awareness of an awareness) would be impossi- 
ble. But the Buddha accepted it. 

7. Counting and counted must be different, the latter preceding 
the former. 

9. The eighteen ponderings require temporal passage. 


Section 4 


_ 1. The Buddha speaks of the discernment of something discerned, 
of consciousness as distinct from its content. 

2. Speech requires a distinction between something about which 
we speak and the speaking of it. They cannot be simultaneous. 

3. The Buddha distinguishes different results for different levels 
of excellence of the senses. This would be inexplicable if all the 
senses operated together at one time. 

4. The waning of desire, required for meditative ascertainment, 
must occupy. a time after one has desired. Otherwise no cessation 
can occur. 

5. Unless shame is followed by respect meditative ascertainment 
is not possible, 

6. The distinctions of stages of perfected being require temporal 
passage. 

7. Do the nonidentifying gods eat food? If they do so at present, 
they are not nonidentifying. If not at all, the Buddha was wrong when 
he said that all beings require food. 

8. Cognition requires a thing’s existence before awareness of it. 
Otherwise no knowledge is possible, and liberation is unattainable. 

9. It takes time to abandon the impure influences. 


Chapter II: Person 
Section 1: Transmigration into Five Courses 


(TP358-361; TW177-180) The believer in persons (pudgala- 
vadin) believes that the person exists in the highest, ultimate sense. 
The believer in emptiness (i.e. the one who denies persons) (sdnya- 
tavadin) argues that if the Buddha was correct in teaching that there 
are five future courses—viz., purgatory, animal, the dead, gods and 
humans—and that they are different, then it cannot be the same 
person who dies in one and is reborn in another. So either the 
Pudgalavadin must deny this teaching of the Buddha or he must give 
up his thesis. 

Suppose the Pudgalavadin says the following: It is wrong to say 
that a person living and dying in purgatory is the same as a person 
reborn as an animal, but it is also wrong to say that these persons 


370 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES - 


are different. The Sunyatavadin answers that in that case the Pudgala- 
vadin should admit that it is impossible for him to assert either 
that the person persists or that (s)he doesn’t. 

The same argument is now reviewed with respect to the relation 
between an (alleged) person in purgatory and one in the human 
course. If the Pudgalavadin asserts that it is the same person who 
is reborn as a man, he should be willing to admit that purgatory is 
the same as the human course. But there are functions—the five 
faculties, five powers and seven conditions of enlightenment—which 
operate in humans and notin beings in purgatory, and so these courses 
must be different. So the Sinyatavadin concludes that the persons 
in these two courses must be different, contrary to the Pudgalavadin’s 
assertion. 

Now suppose the Pudgalavadin changes his assertion. He now 
asserts that the person in purgatory /s different from the one reborn 
as a human being. The Sinyatavadin points out that this too is 
unreasonable, since if the person is destroyed in purgatory, (s)he 
cannot be reborn as a human, nor can anyone be reborn as a human: 
rebirth requires persistence. 

These lines of argument are rehearsed as pertaining to the identity 
or difference of a person as between each of the five courses. 


Section 2: Eight Kinds of Person re Stages on the Path 


(TP361-363; FW184-187) Pudgalavadin: There i is a person in the 
MIBHES!, ultimate sense. 

Sinyatavadin: But the Buddha teaches that there are eight different 
kinds of persons, viz., one whois getting the result of stream-entering, 
another who has entered the stream, another who is becoming a 
once-returner, another who has become a once-returner, another - 
who is becoming a nonreturner, another who has become a non- 
returner, another who is becoming a perfected being and another 
who is a perfected being. Do you accept that these are different 
persons? 

‘ Pudgalavadin: Yes. 

Stnyatavadin: And does the first kind of person, the one becoming 
a stream-enterer, become a stream-enterer? 

Pudgalavadin: Yes. 

Sanyatavadin: Then you are involved in inconsistency, since you 
hold that the same ultimately real person is both the same as and 
different from himself. You cannot hold either that the person who 
is entering the stream and who has entered are the same, since then 
the one who is seeking the fruit will have already received it, and 
you cannot hold that the persons are different, since then the one 


VUNANAKAYA 371 


person will cease to exist when the other one comes into existence, 
which contradicts your original thesis that the person exists in the 
ultimate sense. 

Pudgalavadin: Then it must be that it is impossible to say that the 
person whois the one entering the stream and the one who has entered 
it are the same or that they are different. 

Sanyatavadin: Then you must admit that it is impossible’ to say 
that the ultimately real person is the same as himself. 

The last part follows the pattern of the previous part of Section 
2, except that now the question relates to the identity or difference 
between the one who is becoming a non- -returner and the one who 
has become a non-returner. 


Section 3: The Person in Three Groups 


(TP363-364; TW187) This ‘deals with the person in three groups, 
namely: (1) group of wrongness (mithyatvaniyatarasi), (2) group of 
rightness (samyaktvaniyatarasi) and (3) group of the undetermined 
(aniyatarasi). This section is explained in the same way as Sections 
land2.> 


Section 4: Three Types of Person re Training . 


(TP364; TW187-189) The Pudgalavadin asserts the reality of the 
person as before. 

Stnyatavadin: The Buddha teaches that there are three types of 
persons: (1) a seeker, (2) one who is not (is no longer) a seeker, 
(3) one whois neither a seeker nor no longer aseeker. Was he correct? 

Pudgalavadin: Yes. 

Sanyatavadin: And isn’t it the case that the seeker learns and so 
is no longer a seeker, but again becomes a seeker (at the next stage)? 

Pudgalavadin: Yes. 

Sinyatavadin: But does one who is neither-a seeker nor an achiever 
become one who is neither, or vice versa? 

Pudgalavadin: No. 

Stnyatavadin: Then what you say is inconsistent. If there is a real, 
ultimately existent person then either you should deny that the same 
person is first a seeker, then an achiever, etc., or you should admit 
that the one who is neither is the same as the one whois either achiever 
or seeker. 


Section 5: Persons and Karma 


(TP364-366; TW189-193) Pudgalavadin: There exists such a 


372 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


thing as a self, a being, a living being, a man, a person. This person 
performs actions which conduce either to satisfying, frustrating or 
neutral feelings depending on the feature of the acts. 

Sinyatavadin: Are satisfaction and frustration made by that person 
or by something else? If they are self-made, then your view contra- 
dicts the Buddha’s teaching to Timbaruka, to whom he denied that 
they were self-made. If they are made by another, this contradicts 
the other part of the Buddha’s teaching to Timbaruka when he denied 
they were made by another. 

Furthermore, is the person who performs actions the same as the 
one that experiences the satisfying, frustrating or neutral result? If 
so, then you are convicted of eternalism (Sasvatavada) by the 

-Buddha’s own teaching when he said ‘‘he who performs actions 
and feels their results falls into the extreme of eternalism’’. 


Section 6: Where Does the Person Exist? 


(TP366; TW193-194) Pudgalavadin: Because the person exists 
among the factors that are seen, heard, sensed and cognized, the 
mind inquires into what it can obtain and seek. 

Sinyatavadin: But the Buddha taught the monk Arittha: ““Whatever 
is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, obtained or sought and inquired 
into must be regarded as ‘not mine, not me, not my self’.’’ So what 
"you Say violates the Buddha’s teachings. 


Section 7: Loving Kindness 


(TP366-368; TW194-197) Sanyatavadin: There is no such thing 
as an existent, ultimately real person. 

Pudgalavadin: Then what supporting object is there that is sup- 
posed to display loving kindness? 

Sinyatavadin: Factors exist, and their nature is designated 
according to their identification. Thus, the aggregates are the basis 
of that which displays kindness. 

Pudgalavadin: But it is unreasonable to suppose that, if kindness 
is a function of the aggregates, the Buddha would have taught “‘in 
order to make beings happy as he entered into meditation charged 
with kindness’. 

Sinyatavadin: However, did not the Buddha teach that there are 
six kinds of consciousness, namely, visual, auditory, olfactory, 
gustatory, bodily and mental consciousness? 

Pudgalavadin: Yes. 

Sinyatavadin: With which one of these is kindness connected? 
If you say, e.g., the first, visual consciousness, then the appropriate 
supporting basis there is matter, or if it is the second, auditory 


VUNANAKAYA 373 


consciousness, then the appropriate basis is sound. And so on through 
the rest, each of which have their appropriate supporting bases none 
of which account for kindness. So there ought to be a seventh 
consciousness beyond the six, a consciousness whose basis accounts 
for kindness. But the Buddha did not recognize any such additional 
consciousness, and yet he himself exhibited kindness in teaching the 
wheel of dharma confidently in the assembly, having gained enligh- 
tenment. If he was enlightened and did not teach a seventh conscious- 
ness, should we conclude he was ignorant about it? 

Pudgalavadin: No, he must have known the truth. 

Sinyatavadin: Also, the Buddha told Ananda that he always 
explains the 37 headings (4 applications of mindfulness, 4 right 
exertions, 4 supernatural powers, 5 faculties, 5 powers, 7 awakeners 
to liberation, 8 parts of the noble path). Yet you say he didn’t explain 
this seventh consciousness. Do you blame him for not teaching 
completely what he knew? : 

Pudgalavadin: I do not blame him. Nevertheless, he did know of 
such a consciousness though he didn’t explain it. He himself said 
(in SimSapavanasatra) that he hasn’t taught everything he understood. 

Sinyatavadin: But he goes on in the same passage to remark that 
the things he does not teach are just those things not conducive to 
good, truth, the religious life or higher faculties, enlightenment or 
liberation. Therefore if a person existed and the Buddha did not teach 
about it, and he taught truly, it follows that the notion of person 
is not conducive to good, truth, the religious life, higher faculties, 
enlightenment or liberation, and should be rejected. So the person 
does not exist. 


Section 7: Loving Kindness Continued 


(TP369; TW197) In this section ‘‘the relation between the occur- 
rence of kindness in the four applications of mindfulness and the 
~ seven awakeners to liberation and the person is discussed in me same 
way as above’’.” 


Section 8: Is the Person Conditioned or Not Conditioned? 


(TP369; TW197) Sinyatavadin: If conditioned, then (s)he is 
subject to birth, impermanence, duration and change. If uncondi- 
tioned, (s)he is not born, not impermanent, not durable, not changing. 
You want to claim a third kind of thing, neither conditioned nor 
unconditioned, as your person. But the Buddha taught that there 
are only these two classes and no other. Therefore your view is wrong. 


374 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Section 9: The Six Consciousnesses and the Person 


(TP370-373; TW198-207) It is carefully shown that none of the 
six kinds of consciousness are the person, nor does the contact that 
gives rise to each of those kind require the postulation of a person. 
Likewise, feelings, identifications, and thinking do not require such 
a postulation. The visual organ, its objects, visual consciousness and 
visual contact are none of them the person, and it is easily seen how 
each of the five aggregates arises from these four and their parallels 
in the other five cognitive realms. Each of the six consciousnesses 
have their own respective kinds of objects (color and shape for vision, 
sound for audition, etc.) and cannot cognize each others’ objects, 
though they can identify their own kind of object. So there is no 
place nor need for a person. The person claimed by the Pudgalavadin 
does not have a nature such that it could function as any of the 
consciousnesses or any of the 12 senses for that matter. So, since 
we never are aware of such a person, it does not exist ultimately. 


Chapter III: Conditions as Cause 


This chapter ‘‘deals with the relations of many types of awareness 
which might be called mental (active) phenomena (as can be seen 
in the Dhammasangani in which 89 awarenesses are distinguished). 
Also this chapter treats of four kinds of condition, namely: (1) cause, 
(2) directly antecedent, (3) supporting object, and (4) dominant 
factor, whilst the Pafthana operates with 24 kinds of conditions and 
the Sariputrabhidharmasastra explains 33 cause including 10 condi- 
tions and the pervasive.’’? 


Chapter IV: Condition as Supporting object 


“This fourth chapter deals with the problem of cognition and 
explains the six kinds of consciousness which are in the past, present 
and future, and which are good, bad, and neither-good-nor-bad, the 
interrelation of them, etc.’’* 


Chapter V: Conjuncts 


“The fifth chapter is devoted to epistemological explanations of 
the 6 consciousnesses, 12 sense-bases, 18 elements, etc.’”> 


Chapter VI: Coming Together 


“‘The sixth chapter deals with the mental functions of a person 
under training and explains the mental phenomena of the perfected 
being.”’ 


17 


PRAKARANAPADA 


Summary by Christian Lindtner 
and 
Karl H. Potter 


Traditionally this work, one of the six padas of the Sarvastivada 
canon, was composed by Vasumitra in a stdpaat Puskaravati.' There 
are two Chinese translations. One was prepared by Hsiian-tsang and 
is preserved as T.1542, the other by Gunabhadra and Bodhiyasas 
as T.1541. Hajime Nakamura, citing Japanese authorities, believes 
it was the last of the Sarvastivada padasastras and that it was emended 
in about 160-320 A.D. after the compilation of the Mahavibhasa. 
He remarks that it represents a transition point between the treatises 
of the middle period of Sarvastivada literature and the later com- 
mentarial materials. 

The first chapter of this work is known as the Pajicavastuka. It 
has survived in Sanskrit fragments and in three ancient Chinese 
translations: (1) as the first chapter of the Prakarana (T. 1541 and 
T. 1542), and in independent versions by (2) Shih-kao (T. 1557) 

and (3) Fa-ch’eng (T. 1556). Moreover there is an incomplete 
' Chinese version of an Indian commentary Paficavastukavibhasa 
(T. 1555) ascribed to a certain Dharmatrata. A single Sanskrit 
fragment of this has survived. This commentary was probably 
composed later than the Mahavibhasa4 to which it shows affinity 
in several cases. 

When comparing the Paficavastuka—the original title of which may 
well, as it appears, have been Paficadharmaka—with other early 
affiliated Abhidharma works the following picture emerges: Its style 
instantly reminds one of texts such as Dasottarasutraand Sangitisatra, 
characterized as they are by simple enumerations and brief defini- 
tions of the dharmas of Buddhism. In its attempt to deal with all 
the dharmas in a systematic way under five basic principles the 
Paficavastuka is taking over a classification that has its origin in the 
Dharmaskandha, one of the earliest, if not the earliest of the seven 


376 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Abhidharma works of the Saravastivada school. The historical signifi- 
cance of the Paficavastuka, then, consists in the systematic and 
rational way in which Vasumitra presents all dharmas under five 
headings. This way of dealing with the basic Buddhist concepts in 
terms of five actual entities (vastu) rather than in terms of five 
aggregates was to have a great impact upon many later Abhidharma 
authors without, though, ever completely superseding the traditional 
canonical five-aggregate classification. 

References preceded by ‘S’ are to the Sanskrit restoration from 
Chinese by N. Aiyaswami Sastri, Visva-Bharati Annals 10 (Santi- 
niketan 1966). 


Chapter One: Pajficavastuka 
Summary by Christian Lindtner 


There are five kinds of factors: (i) matter, (ii) awareness, (iii) 
awareness-concomitants, (iv) conditionings dissociated from aware- 
ness and (v) the unconditioned. A complete preliminary enumeration 
of all these factors is given. 


I. Matter (S1-3) 


Matter comprises (i) the four greaf elements, i.e. earth (solid), 
water (fluid), fire (heat) and wind (movement), (ii) eleven material 
derivatives (upadayaripa), i.e. eye, ear, nose, tongue, body (all are 
subtle matter); visible matter (color and shape), sound, smell, taste 
and a part of the tangible derived matter (viz., softness, hardness, 
weight, lightness, coldness, hunger and thirst), and (iii) the unmani- 
fest (avijfapti. - 


Il. Awareness (S1-3) 


‘“‘Awareness”’ (citta) is a synonym for ‘“‘mind’’ (manas) and 
“‘consciousness’’ ( vi/fiana). It is awareness of an object (prativijfiap- 
ti) that occurs dependent on the six sense-faculties and their 
respective objects, i.e. visible matter, sound, etc. 


I. Awareness-Concomitants (S1-11) 


The awareness-concomitants are those factors that are associated 
with awareness. They are enumerated and briefly defined as follows: 

1. Feeling. They may be satisfying, frustrating or neither. 

2. Identification. May be small, big or immeasurable. 

3. Thinking. An activity created by awareness; may be good, bad 


PRAKARANAPADA 377 


or neutral. 
4. Contact. May be satisfying, frustrating or neutral. 

§. Attention. 

6. Interest. 

7. Resolve. 

8. Faith. 

9. Energy. 

10. Memory. 

11, Concentration. 

12. Wisdom. Determination of factors. 

13. Initial thought. : 

14. Sustained thought. 

15. Heedlessness. 

16. Heedfulness. 

17. Three good roots, viz., (i) nongreed, (ii) nonhatred and (iii) 
nondelusion. 

18. Four neutral roots, viz., (i) desire, (ii) views, (iii) sitide and 
(iv) ignorance. 

19. Nine fetters, viz., (i) affection, (ii) hostility, (iii) conceit, of 
which there are seven kinds, (iv) ignorance, (v) views, of which there 
are three kinds, (vi) overestimation, (vii) doubt, (viii) jealousy and 
(ix) stinginess. 

20. Three bondages, viz., (i) greed: (ii) hatred and (iii) delusion. 

21. Seven kinds of contaminants, viz., (i) sensual passion (com- 
prises 5 kinds), (ii) enmity (5 kinds), (iii) thirst for existence (10 
kinds), (iv) pride (15 kinds), (v) ignorance (15 kinds), (vi) wrong 
view (36 kinds) and (vii) doubt (12 kinds). 

22. Afflictions. Refers to the same as the contaminants. 

_ 23. Eight envelopers, viz., (i) langor, (ii) torpor, (iii) excitation, 
(iv) malice, (v) jealousy, (vi) stinginess, (vii) shamelessness and (viii) 
disregard. 

24. Ten awarenesses. 

25. Vision. Refers to the eight kinds of patience. 

26. Higher realization. A cognitive vision. 

The author concludes by saying that other similar phenomena can 
also be regarded as awareness-concomitants. 


IV. Conditionings Dissociated From Awareness (S2; 11-12) 


Moreover, some factors are dissociated from awareness: 
1. Acquisition-force 
2. Trance free from conceptual identification, 
3. The cessation trance 
4. Those not involving identification 


378 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


5. Life-force 

6. Homogeneity -force 

7, Obtainment of.a locus 

8. Obtainment of entities 

9. Obtainment of a sense-base 
10. Birth 

11. Aging 
12. Duration 
13. Noneternality 
14. Collection of words, and finally 
15. Collection of phrases. 


V. The Unconditioned (S2, 12) 


There are three unconditioned things, viz.: 
1. Space 

2. Uncalculated cessation and 

3. Calculated cessation. 


Chapter Two: Ten Kinds of Awareness” 


(T.1541, p. 628c28-631b23; T.1542, p. 694b3-696b13) These 
are the same ten that are discussed in Chapter 1, Section Two, and 
also in the seventh chapter of Vasubandhu’s AbhidharmakoSa. The 
discussion follows the style of the Vijfanakaya. It is asked which 
supporting object each awareness has and why it has that object; 
to what extent is each awareness contained in others and why this 
is the case; which awarenesses are impure and which pure, and which 
have pure or impure objects, and which are condiffoned, which 
unconditioned, and which have conditioned or unconditioned 
objects. 


Chapter Three: The Twelve Sense-Bases 


(T.5141, p. 631c5-634a9; T.1542, p.696b14-698b26) Again the 
discussion follows a property-matrix that exhibits far-reaching simi- 
larities with the matrix found in the various forms of the Parica- 
skandha. 


Chapter Four: Seven Categories 
(T.1541, p. 634a10-636c28; T.1542, p. 698b27-702a6) This 


section repeats the first part of the Dhdtukaya, enumerating groups 
of factors and explaining them in the same fashion. Indeed so close 


PRAKARANAPADA : 379 


is the resemblance that the differences are miniscule. The only 
difference is a list of. ten good generally permeating factors, viz., 
(1) faith, (2) energy, (3) shame, (4) scruple, (5) absence of greed, 
(6) lack of hatred, (7) tranquility, (8) equanimity, (9) heedfulness, 
and (10) kindness. This list is added to the list of 12 sense-bases, 
5 aggregates, 10 generally permeating factors, 10 defiling permeating 
_ factors, and 10 limited defiling permeating factors found in the 
Dhatukaya. 


Chapter Five: Ninety-Eight Contaminants 


(T.1541, p. 637a5-644a23; T.1542, p. 702a7-711b5) Thirty-six 
of these are confined to the realm of desire, 31 to the material realm, 
the remaining 31 to the immaterial realm. 


Chapter Six: What can be Known or Inferred 


(T.1541, p. 644b5-662c26; T.1542, p. 711b6-733a16) The 
treatment here resembles that found in the third and fourth chapter 
of the Dhammasangani, except that where the Dhammasargani 
contents itself with groups of pairs drawn from the Sangitisitra, this 
treatment begins from small groups of threes and develops in no 
particular oder into groups of larger number. Frauwallner notes that 
here and in the rollowing two chapters similarities can be found with 
the matrix in use in the Abhidharmasamuccaya. 


Chapter Seven: 1,000 Questions 


(T.1541, p. 663a5-688c10; T.1542, p. 733a17-765c25) Here it 
is the Dharmaskandha’s matrkd that is used as basis. There are a 
few slight changes for comparisons between the mdatrkas of the two 
texts. 


Chapter Eight: Resumé of the Work 
(T.1541, p. 688cl1-692a23; T.1542, p. 766a4-770a19) This 


chapter provides nothing new, merely summarizing what has gone 
before. : 


18 


PETAKOPADESA 


Summary by George D. Bond 


This work is closely related to the Nettippakarana, and both works 
appear to have been composed around 150B.C., although the dating 
is a matter of some debate. Several writers (Mrs. Rhys Davids, B.C. 
Law, Hajime Nakamura’) feel that the Nettippakarana precedes the 
Patthana. Mrs. Rhys Davids wrote a whole article (Journal of the 
Royal Asiatic Society 1925, 111-13), in which she argues that the 
author of the Netti didn’t know the Patthdna. However, this fact might 
alternatively be explained as Nakamura reports Kogen Mizuno to 
explain it: ‘“K. Midzuno (sic) conjectures that this work (the Netti) 
was originally not of Pali Buddhism, but that it was later adapted 
by it.’” We may hazard that the work was in existence in some form 
by the 2nd century B.C.—beyond that evidence is not available at 
this point. 

This text, as well as the Nettippakarana, is traditionally attributed 
to Mahakaccayana. It has been edited by Aravinda Basu in the Pali 
Text Society in 1948 (‘‘E’’ references below), and was translated 
as The Pitaka-Disclosures by Bhikkhu Nanamoli, also for the Pali 
Text Society, in 1964 (= ‘‘T’’). 


Chapter One 


(I) (E1-22; T1-26) Explanation of the Noble Truths 

There are two conditions for the arising of right view for a hearer: 
another’s utterance of truth in proper order, and one’s own reasoned 
attention. This connection between hearing the truth explained 
properly and experiencing the truth leads to the need for a method 
of interpreting passages. 

In order to explain the consecutive order or logic of the dharma, 
as seen in the passages; one must understand the following aspects: 

(I.1) Sixteen Categories 

Teaching 


382 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Investigation 

Logical Ground 

Footing 

Characteristic mark 

Fourfold Arrangement 

Conversion 

Analysis 

Turning Back 

Synonyms 

Mere Designations 

Descending 

Clearing Up 

Support 

Requisites 

Coordination. 
(I.2) Five Guidelines 

Conversion of Pleasure 

Trefoil 

Play of Lions 

Plotting of Directions 

The Hook. 
(I.3) Eighteen Root Terms 

Ignorance 

Desire 

Greed 

Hatred 

Delusion 

Identification of Cleanliness 

Identification of Satisfaction 

Identification of Eternality 

Identification of Self 

Peace 

Insight 

Nongreed 

Nonhate 

Nondelusion 

Identification of Foulness 

Identification of Frustrations 

Identification of Noneternality 

Identification of No-Self. 

These root terms can be correlated with the four truths. The first 

nine represent unprofitable root terms and are equivalent to the origin 
of frustration. The second nine are profitable and equivalent to the 
path. In order to understand the noble truths, one must coordinate 


PETAKOPADESA 383 


the meaning and phrasing terms in the passage. 

(1.4) (E5-6; T6-8) Characteristic Marks of the Truths 

Frustration is analyzed into fifteen subcategories: birth, aging, 
sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, frustration, grief, despair, 
association with the unpleasant, separation from the beloved, not 
attaining, the five aggregates, aging and death, and desease and 
reappearance. The other three truths are origin, cessation and the 

' path. (Short definitions are given for each of these aspects of the 

truths.) 

(I.5) (E6-22; T8-26) Passages Exemplifying These Truths 

(Here short passages are cited illustrating the kinds of teachings 
represented by all the truths listed above. These passages demon- 
strate how the logic of the dharma should be understood.) Wherever 
the truths are expressed, having identified them through their charac- 
teristic features (parallel ideas), one can use unbounded phrasing 
to express the true meaning of a teaching. (That is, when one 
reads/hears passages, one can interpret them properly by extrapola- 
ting from them to the four truths by means of characteristics and 
root terms.) 


Chapter Two 


(I) (E23-59; T26-76) Foundation of the Dispensation 
(This chapter comprises three subject classifications for passages. 

Those represent three alternative and overlapping classification 
systems to identify the meaning of the passages.) 

(1.1) (E23-43; T26-57) First Classification of Types of Passages 

The first classification divides passages into four main types with 
additional types given because of combinations of these four. There 
are passages , 

(1.1.1) dealing with defilement 

(1.1.2) dealing with living (in samsara) 

(II.1.3) dealing with penetration 

(11.1.4) dealing with adept 

(11.1.5) dealing with defilement and living 

(1.1.6) dealing with defilement and penetration 

(0.1.7) dealing with defilement, penetration and the adept 

(II.1.8) dealing with living and penetration. 

(A short passage exemplifying each of these types is given. 

‘ Following these examples, explanations of each type are given.) 

(1) Defilement is of three kinds: defilement by desire, defilement 
by view, defilement by wrong conduct. 

(2) Passages dealing with living (in samsdra) concern virtue and 
good conduct here and now and in future existence. 


384 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(3) Passages dealing with penetration explain that those who 
overcome the hindrances abandon embodiment-view and attain the 
goal. There are two types of persons who attain the noble dhamma: 
faith-followers and dharma-followers. These two types of persons 
give rise to other classifications of persons on the Path. The faith- 
follower is (A) guidable, and the dharma-follower is (B) one who 
learns from a condensed teaching. 

The one who learns from a condensed teaching (type B) takes two 
forms: (B1) with keen faculties, (B2} with dull faculties. 

Likewise the guidable type (A) takes two forms: (A1) with keen 
faculties and (A2) with dull faculties. 

Type B2 and A1 can also be grouped together to form a third major 
type, (C) the type of person that learns from what is expanded. Thus, 
there are three major types of persons, types A2, BI and C. 

These three types of persons when following of the path attain 
different levels of stream entry when reaching the plane of vision. 
The three types attain the following levels: 


Type B—who learns by condensed teaching—becomes a single- 

seeder, the first kind of stream enterer, 

Type C—who learns from an expanded teaching—becomes a 

clan to clan, the second kind of stream enterer, 

Type A—the guidable—becomes a seven times at most, the third 

kind of stream enterer. 

(4) Passages dealing with the adept concern the way of the noble 
persons. 

These three types of persons (A, B and C) on reaching the fruit 
of nonreturn attain various levels of non-returnerhood. _ 

Type Bi—who learns by a condensed teaching—becomes either 
(i) one who attains release early or (ii) one who attains-release after 
reducing the time of rebirths. 

Type C—who learns from what is expanded—becomes either (iii) 
one who attains release without conditioning factors or (iv) one who 
attains release with conditioning factors. 

Type A—who is guidable—becomes (v) one who goes up stream 
to the akanistha gods. 

Or alternatively these three types of persons can be equated with 
the five types of nonreturners as follows: 

Bi = (i) 

B2 = (ii) 

C1 = (iii) [N.B. The previous discussion did not actually divide 
those who learn from what is expanded into the two groups of 
keen-facultied and dull-facultied, but this distinction is used here. ] 

= (iv) 

A = {(v) 


PETAKOPADESA 385 


Thus there are nine kinds of learners: these five nonreturners, the 
once-returner and three stream enterers. There are also nine kinds 
of perfect beings. The three basic types of persons on attaining 
perfection become the following kinds of perfected beings: 

Bi—condensed with keen faculties—becomes two kinds 

(a) Both ways liberated 
(b) Liberated by wisdom 
B2—condensed with dull faculties—becomes two kinds 
(c) Waiting an aeon 
(d) Penetrator 
Ci—expanded with keen faculties—becomes two kinds 
(e) Able by choice 
(f) Able by guarding 
C2—expanded with dull faculties—becomes two kinds 
(g) No-liberation-attainer if he seeks it, liberation-attainer if he 
does not seek it 
(h) No-liberation-attainer if he guards it, liberation- attainer if 
he does not guard it 

A—the guidable—becomes either one liable to fall away or one 
certain in action or even-headed. 

(E32-39; T39-49) Ten Powers of a Buddha 

In perfected beings the ten fold power of a Buddha occurs. The 
ten-fold power is as follows: 

(1) Knowledge of the possible and the impossible 

(2) Knowledge of the path leading to the welfare of all 

(3) Knowledge of difference of belief 

(4) Knowledge of different elements 

-(5) Knowledge of ripening of action 

(6) Knowledge of defilement and cleansing in all the undertakings 
of action 

(7) Knowledge of variety in the faculties, powers and energies 
of other persons 

(8) Knowledge of his own previous lives 

(9) Divine eye 

(10) Knowledge of exhaustion of intoxicants. 

Established in these ten powers, the Buddha teaches with five kinds 
of teaching: corruption, living in samsdara, seeing, spiritual practice, 
and the adept. 

(Rather than continuing to explain the other possible combinations 
of these four (now five) passage themes, the author ends the exempli- 
fication here.) 

These passages are taught to or for three kinds of persons, the 
ordinary person, the learner and the adept. The five basic kinds of 
passages (given above) can be reduced to the four basic kinds. The 


386 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


four kinds fall into three kinds: relating to the ordinary person, the 
learner and the adept. When abbreviated, these come to two types 
of passages: that dealing with penetration and that dealing with former 
connection. 

(1.2) (E43-48; T57-63) Second Classification of Types of Pas- 
sages 

Passages can also be categorized according to these types: 

(01.2.1) Injunction 

(11.2.2) Fruition 

(1.2.3) Means 

(01.2.4) Injunction and fruition 

(If.2.5) Fruition and means 

(1.2.6) Injunction, fruition and means 

(1.2.7) Gratification 

(11.2.8) Disadvantage 

(11.2.9) Escape 

(1.2.10) Gratification and disadvantage 

(1.2.11) Gratification and escape 
_ (1.2.12) Disadvantage and escape - 

(1.2.13) Gratification, disadvantage and escape. 

(11.3) (E48-59; T63-76) Third Classification of Passages 

(Short passages given to illustrate the following types of passages. 
No analysis beyond the passages in given.) 

(11.3.1) Associated with the mundane plane 

(11.3.2) Associated with supramundane plane 

(0.3.3) Associated with mundane and supramundane 

(11.3.4) Passages on karma 

(01.3.5) Passages on ripening of karma 

(II.3.6) Passages on karma and ripening 

(11.3.7) Passages that are demonstrated 

(11.3.8) Passages that are undemonstrated 

(If.3.9) Passages demonstrated and undemonstrated 

(1.3.10) Passages on knowledge 

(1.3.11) Passages on the knowable 

(1.3.12) Passages on knowledge and the knowable 

(1.3.13) Passages on seeing 

(I.3.14) Passages on spiritual practice 

(1.3.15) Passages on seeing and spiritual practice 

(If.3.16) Passages on ideas inseparable from npening 

(1.3.17) Passages on ideas not inseparable from ripening 

(II.3.18) Passages on both of the preceding (16 and 17) 

(II.3.19) Passages on our own word 

(1.3.20) Passages on another’s word 

(1.3.21) Passages on both of the preceding (19 and 20) 


PETAKOPADESA 387 


(1.3.22) Passages on abodes of beings 

(1I.3.23) Passages expressing the dharma 

(1.3.24) Passages on both of the preceding (22 and 23) 
(1.3.25) Passages on eulogy 

(i.3.26) Passages on the permitted 

(II.3.27) Passages on the rejected 

(1.3.28) Passages on both of the preceding (26 and 27). 


Chapter Three 


(I) (E60-73; T77-94) Terms of Expression in Passages 

This chapter presents another scheme for classifying passages. 
Passages can be divided into three groups: (1) dealing with three 
profitable and three unprofitable roots, (2) dealing with MES kinds 
of action, (3) dealing with the five sense-faculties. 

(1.1) (E60-69; T77-89) The Six Roots 

Passages on delusion, anger, attachment, nongreed, nonanger and 
nondelusion. (For each of these types of passages, a short example 
is given.) 

Each of these kinds of passages should be analyzed for three 
elements essential to the Buddha’s teaching style: outcome, cause 
and fruition. (The chapter analyzed the passages’ illustrations ‘with 
these three ideas to show how they identify the meaning of a passage.) 

(II.2) (E69-70; T89-90) Three Kinds of Action 

Passages also fall into the following three types depending upon 
the action they demonstrate: passages on bodily action, sitras on 
speech action and on mental action. 

(HI.3) (E70-73; T90-94) Five Faculties 

Passages express the five faculties: faith, energy, mindfulness, 
concentration and wisdom. 


Chapter Four 


(IV) (E74-80; T95-104) Investigation of Passages 

Investigation and construing of passages involve these four kinds 
of activity: , 

(IV.1) Investigation and construing of passages as profitable and 
unprofitable. A passage must be scrutinized as to profitable ideas 
in proper order. Unprofitable ideas should be coordinated with 
profitable ideas that counteract them and bring them to abandonment. 
But note that not all profitable ideas counteract all unprofitable ideas. 
For example, friendship does not counteract lust. If a passage is not 
construable in accord with the known meaning of the passages, then 


388 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES | 


it cannot be accepted. This is what is prescribed in the four great 
authorities. 

(IV.2) Investigation and Construing.of Passages by Conditions 

The causes and conditions for ideas—profitable and unprofit- 
able—must also be investigated. Three kinds of conditions, slight, 
medium and extraordinary. In addition to the condition, the outcome 
of a passage must also be investigated. 

(IV.3) Investigation and Construing of Agreement to the Blessed 

One’s Word 

Passages not uttered by the Buddha and seen among the passages 
must be investigated. Does such a passage agree or disagree with 
the Buddha’s sayings? A passage that agrees can be accepted; one 
that disagrees cannot. 

(IV.4) Confusion of Passages 

There are five basic types of passages: namely those dealing with 
corruption, living in samsara, the plane of vision, the plane of 
developing and the adept. Confusion of the passages occurs whenever 
passages are classified under the wrong headings and whenever 
passages are applied to the wrong types of persons. Also when the 
meaning and phrasing are confused. 


Chapter Five « 


(V) (E81-111; T105-154) Classification of Categories 

(V.1) Teaching Category 

(This category seems to represent the same aspects of interpreta- 
tion that were mentioned in Chapter One.) 

What is taught? Profit or lack of profit? Truths or one part of truths? 
The interpreter should examine a passage to find explanations of 
the four truths separately or together as was mentioned inI.5 above. 
These truths occur in shared or unshared passages in the form of 
the eighteen terms mentioned above as characteristics (I.4). Frustra- 
tion can be taught in brief by seven terms: (1) association with what 
one hates, (2) dissociation from what one loves, (3) bodily frustra- 
tion, (4) mental frustration, (5) frustration itself, (6) frustration in 
determinations and (7) frustration in change. 

The truths are thus taught in various forms and must be recognized. 
They are taught in seven and ten terms, and in the fiftyfold foundation 
of the dispensation, in the eighteenfold terms of expression in sutras, 
in the tenfold testings of the passage, in the sixteenfold classification 
of categories and in the twenty-onefold investigation inquiry. 

(V.2) (E82-88; T107-116) Category of Investigation 

Passages should be investigated or analyzed in four ways: according 
to term questions, what is asked, what comes before and what after, 


PETAKOPADESA 389 


and a verse paraphrase. 

When investigating the terms one examines how many key terms 
are used in a passage. 

Investigating questions means how many questions the terms 
imply. Are the questions used of the kind (a) to be answered in one 
way, (b) to be answered after analysis, (c) to be answered by asking 
a further question, (d) to be left unanswered? 

Investigating what is asked in a passage means noting what the 
Buddha was asked and how he answered in order to see the logic 
of his dharma. 4 

Investigating what goes before and what after means analyzing the 
structure of a passage. Does the Buddha answer first what was asked 
first? What order are the terms in? Once the logical structure is seen, 
the root terms such as quiet and insight should be found implicit 
- in the passage. 

Investigating the paraphrasing verse means comparing the verse 
with the prose explanations. 

(V.3) (E88-89; T116-118) Category of Logical Ground — 

This category is partially demonstrated in the first two categories. 
The example given for this category indicates how to construe the 
passage ‘‘Beings are defiled by a cause by a condition... and purified 
by a cause and a condition.’’ Construing in this case involves 
identifying the causes and conditions for the three aspects of the 
path: virtue, concentration and understanding. (These causes and 
conditions are implicit at best in the passage. From the explanation 
it is not clear whether looking for causes and conditions is essential 
to this category, or whether—and this is more probable—the example 
shows how the interpreter uses the passage’s mention of causes and 
conditions as a way of construing the passage in terms of the central 
dharma concepts, virtue, concentration and wisdom.) 

_This category can also be seen in the four great authorities (above 
IV.1). 

(V.4) (E89-90; T118-120) Category of Footings 

Footings are the proximate causes for other ideas. This category 
explains how the logic of the dharmacan be used to construe passages 
in terms of the cardinal ideas. All the examples given here indicate 
the footings of cardinal unprofitable ideas, e.g., the five faculties 
are a footing for lust for form. Perception of ESAute is the footing 
for lust for sensual desires. 

(V.5) (E90-91; T120-121) Category of Ghaadenstie Marks 

When one idea is expressed, all ideas of like characteristic are 
therein expreseed. For example, when a passage speaks of mind- 
fulness of the body, it implicitly speaks of the other three foundations 


390 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of mindfulness because they share the same characteristic. This 
category provides another method for establishing word-connections 
that lead from a particular passage to the four truths and the meaning 
of the dharma. - 

(V.6) (E9 1-93; T121-125) Fourfold Arrangement Category 

Under this category the interpreter deals with (a) grammar, (b) 
intention, (c) the source of a teaching and (d) the consecutive- 
sequence or structure. 

Intention and structure or context represent the key ideas in this 
category. The interpreter must deal with these two aspects of a 
passage by means of the four headings given here. 

(V.7) (E93-95; T25-128) Conversion Category 

This category shows how ‘‘footings’’ and “‘characteristics’’ can 
be used first to identify unprofitable root terms or other basic ideas 
of defilement and then to convert the unprofitable root terms or other © 
basic ideas of defilement and then to convert the unprofitable roots 
to the profitable ones. The four foundations of mindfulness oppose 
the four perversions. 

The mention of heedlessness in a passage can be seen through 
footings to imply desire and views. These two concepts represent 
the four intoxicants. Having definite negative characteristics, these 
four intoxicants are equivalent to. the four graspings: grasping after 
sensual desire, being, views and self-theory. These equated qua- 
druple views are converted or counteracted by the four foundations 
of mindfulness which can be further equated with the four noble 
truths. 

This is how conversion should be used in interpretation. 

(V.8) (E95; T129) Analysis Category 

Whatever is ‘‘declarable after analysis’, that is the analysis cate- 
gory. The term used here was given above (V.2) as one of the four 
kinds of questions. 

The text gives a very cryptic definition of this category. 

(V.9) (E9S-96; T129) Turning Back Category 

Whereas the previous category was said to include any kind of 
analysis, this category is said to include any demonstration of 
opposites. Obviously this is a central idea in the method of interpreta- 
tion being presented in this text, but the explanation of this category 
does not clarify the method much further. 

(V.10) (E96; T129-130) Synonyms Category 

. To understand the passage one must see that a single idea can 
be expressed by many synonyms. For example, the Buddha praised 
Sariputra by saying he had great wisdom, joyous wisdom and 
impulsive wisdom. These are synonyms for wisdom. 

Since the Buddha teaches people in their own language—i.e. 


PETAKOPADESA 391 


according to their own abilities (?)—one must look for synonyms 
to translate or interpret the language he uses in a given teaching. 

(V.11) (E96-98; T130-132) Designations Category 

The Buddha teaches by means of various kinds of designation with 
the designation of the four truths being the basic kind. Other kinds 
are designation in terms of abandoning and in terms of rejection. 

_The category says that there are two important kinds of designation: 
in terms of dependence on another:and in terms of dependence on 
self. These two kinds of dependence are explained as having to do 
with the relations between ideas rather than the relations of persons. 
Thus in the case of the four truths, the four faculties are other- 
dependent on wisdom, but wisdom is self-dependent. Self-depen- 
dence represents the end of the chain of footing relations. 

(V.12) (E98-101; T132-137) Descending Category 

Passages can and must be understood by reading them in the light 
of (or placing them beside) six ideas: aggregates, elements, senses, 
faculties, truths and dependent origination. There is no passage of 
any kind that cannot be compared with, made to agree with one of 
these ideas. For the whole of the teaching concerns these ideas. (This 
is perhaps the clearest explanation of the method of interpretation 
set forth.by both the Petakopadesa and the Nettippakarana.) 

The example is cited of the aggregate of feeling. Feeling represents 
the footing for lust, hate and delusion. There are three kinds of feeling: 
satisfying, frustrating, neither satisfying nor frustrating. These forms . 
of feeling can be compared with and linked with the truth of frustra- 
tion. Thus one is able to see how a teaching exhibits the truths. 

As to elements. The eighteen élements of form constitute the 
material aggregate, and correlate with the truth of frustration. 

There are twelve senses, ten of which have form and also-correlate 
with matter and frustration. The mind sense represents the conscious- 
ness category and the factor sense represents the meeting of different 
factors. . 

‘Dependent origination can be seen in passages having three 
elements, having four elements and having two elements. It can 
be seen in passages that deal with cause, fruit and outcome. The 
factors of dependent origination can be divided into three groups 
to correlate with these three terms. Ignorance, conditionings, desire 
and grasping are represented by cause. Consciousness, name and 
form, the sixfold base, contact, feeling are represented by fruit, and 
being, birth, aging and death are the outcome. 

In passages having the four elements of cause, condition, ripening 
_ and outcome, the factors of dependent origination can be divided 

into four corollary groups. Likewise in passages having the two 
elements of frustration and origin. 


392 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(V.13) (E101-102; T138) Clearing-Up Category 

In a passage, several verses may express the spirit or ground of 
the teaching. Therefore one must understand the logic of the passage 
——the structure of it—to understand which verses must be taken 
together, 

(V.14) (E102-104; T139-142) Support Category 

Under this category, ideas are examined according to their unity 
and their diversity. Unity and diversity are also agent and function. 
Understanding a basic idea such as form is a unity, and understanding 
the various kinds of forms, such as the elements of earth, air, fire, 
water, are a diversity. Again, craving is a unity and craving for sensual 
desire, craving for being and craving for views are the diverse 
expressions of this idea. 

(V.15) (E104-110; T142-151) Requisites Category 

This category looks for the cause and condition of ideas. The cause | 
is the individual essence while the condition is the other essence. 
The cause is unshared; the condition is shared. 

Cause and condition are twofold: immediate and remote. For 
example, ignorance is the remote condition for name and form, while 
consciousness is the immediate condition. The linkage between such 
remote and immediate conditions is central to the logic and function- 
ing of the factor. 

Ignorance is a condition for the aggregates for four reasons (four 
further kinds of conditions): 

(a) conditionality because of being born at the same time, which 
applies when desiring aggregates arise along with ignorance and 
destroy wisdom; 

(b) conditionality because of direct antecedence, Which applies 
when ignorance arises immediately before a state of mind that lacks 
knowledge; 

(c) conditionality because of overflowing, which means that igno- 
rance floods the aggregates as water does a lotus; 

(d) conditionality because of being a support, said because the 
aggregates reach their growth based on ignorance. 

The cause of ignorance is prior ignorance and the condition of 
ignorance is unreasoned attention. The field of ignorance proceeds 
from these because of noninterruption, fruition, rebirth and renewal 
of being, noneradication obsession and nonpenetration. 

(V.16) (E109-111; T151-154) Coordination Category 

This brief category states that the interpreter must look for what 
has been condensed and for synonyms as well as for coordination. 
The examples focus on coordination, showing that the ideas in the 
type of passages dealing with defilement must be coordinated only 
with the type dealing with defilement. The same sense of coordinating 


PETAKOPADESA 393 


like ideas with like ideas also applies to passages on living in samsdara 
and on penetration. 
Chapter Six 


(VI) (E112-140; T154-209) Collection of the Meaning of the 
Passage 

This chapter represents a further attempt to clarify the context 
within which passages have meaning. It offers a tripartite division 
of the main teachings and the path. In other words, it analyzes the 
structure of the dharma. 

(VI.1) (E112-114; T155-156) Part One 

The dispensation of the Buddha has three headings: aggregates, 
elements and senses. 

(VI.1.1) (E112; T155) Five Aggregates 

The five aggregates in their various manifestations are all diagnosed 
as impermanent, void, frustrating and-without self. 

(VI.1.2) (E113; T155-156) Eighteen elements also have these four 
characteristics. 

(VI1.1.3) (E113-114; T156-157} Twelve bases also have these 
four. But these with regard to comprehension divide into two groups: 
comprehension as knowledge and comprehension as abandonment. 
Comprehension as knowledge means knowing according to the above 
four characteristics. But comprehension by abandoning means 
abandoning desire and craving. 

(VI.2) (E114-136; T157-183) Part Two 

The schedule for this part lists the contents as follows: truths, 
higher realization of the truths, determination of defilement, aban- 
doning, planes and fruits of the monk’s life, and the elements of 
liberation. 

Higher realization of truth is a heading for the thirtyseven allies 
of enlightenment: the four foundations of mindfulness down to the 
noble eightfold path. Also the seven limbs of enlightenment, mind- 
fulness down to equanimity. 

The eightfold path has three groupings, namely, virtue, concentra- 
tion and wisdom. A meditator established in virtue does not grasp 
unprofitable hate, he removes the underlying tendency to hate, he 
extracts the arrow of hate, he recognizes frustrating feeling and 
overcomes the element of sensual desire. One established in con- 
centration does not grasp unprofitable greed and knowing the satis- 
fying feelings overcomes the form element. And one established 
in wisdom does not grasp delusion and overcomes the immaterial 
element. 

Finally, higher realization of the truths requires a knowledge of 
dependent origination which is cited and explained. 


394 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Defilement can be seen in the nine bad root terms. Two root 
defilements: ignorance and desire for being. Three bad roots: greed, 
hate and delusion. Four perversions: perversion of identification, of 
awareness, of view, which equate with the four wrong identifica- 
tions. 

Abandoning comes about through the nine good root terms: quiet 
and insight, nongreed, nonhate, nondelusion, and the four right 
identifications. The five faculties are part of abandoning. The footing 
for faith is the four factors of stream entering. The footing for energy 
is the four sight endeavors. The footing for mindfulness is the four 
applications of mindfulness. The footing for concentration is the four 
meditative states. The footing for wisdom is the four truths. 

The four wheels for abandoning are: (1) living in befitting places, 
(2) waiting on noble ones, (3) right disposition in self guidance, (4) 
having formerly made merit. 

There are four noble planes and four fruits of the life of a monk. 
The plane of vision and the fruit of stream entry. The plane of 
attenuation and the fruit of once returning. The plane of freedom 
from attachment and the fruit of nonreturn. The plane of one who 
has done and the perfected being. ; 

(VI.3) (E136-153; T183-204) Part Three 

Part Three describes the nine consecutive meditative attainments: 
four meditative states, four immaterial attainments and the attain- 
ment of cessation. 

The first meditative state is dissociated from five factors and 
associated with five factors. It is dissociated from the five hindrances 
which *‘hinder’’ the development of good factors. Interest in sensual 
interests hinders one from seeing foulness. Il will histders one from 
developing friendliness. Stolidity hinders one from tranquility. 
Sleepiness hinders one from instigation of energy. Excitedness 
hinders one from calmness, regret hinders one from nonremorse, 
and perplexity hinders from wisdom. 

The first meditative state is associated with the five factors of initial 
thought, sustained thought, joy, satisfaction and one-pointedness of 
mind. The other meditative states are associated with some of the 
same factors and with some other more purified factors. 

Seven types of persons have the five hindrances to their entry into 
the meditative states. The persons are those of attached conduct, 
hating conduct, deluded contact, attached and hating conduct, 
attached and deluded, hating and deluded, and attachment, hate 
and delusion quieting conduct. 

After this (E141 ff.) the author analyzes the four meditative states 
via a word commentary. Explanations of the five factors associated 
with the meditative states are given. 


a 


PETAKOPADESA 395 


Analyzed in detail, the meditative states are described in the 
following ways: according to their factors; according to their plane 
—the plane of the first state is that of discernment, the plane of the 
second is that of satisfaction, the plane of the third is that which 
has abandoned satisfaction and excitement due to satisfaction, the 
plane of the fourth is unaccompanied by satisfaction or frustration 
and accompanied by endeavor. They are also described according 
to accumulations, according to their reasons for coming about, 
according to their cause, according to their spiritual practice, accor- 
ding to the reasons for falling away from them, and according 
to gratification, skill and power. 


Chapter Seven 


(VI) {E153-241; T210-327}) Combined Treatment of the Cate- 
gories 

Organizationally, this chapter applies the sixteen categories from 
Chapter Five to the eight types of sdtras given in Chapter Two, Part 
One. It does this by taking the eight pairs of sutra quotations cited 
in Chapter Two as illustrating the eight types of sutras and offers 
a demonstration exegesis of each one using the sixteen interpretive 

_ categories. Thus the chapter is divided according to the eight types 

of sutras: 

(1) on defilement 

(2) on living 

(3) on penetration 

(4) on the adept 

(5) on defilement and living 

(6) on defilement and penetration 

(7) on defilement, penetration and adept 

(8) on living and penetration. 
' Although, on the basis of this structure, the basic intent of this 
chapter would seem to be to explain further the sixteen categories, 
this intent actually seems to play only a secondary or formal role 
in the actual chapter. For each of the sdtra passages, the chapter 
‘runs through the sixteen categories showing how they apply to that 
passage. However, the bulk of the material in this lengthy chapter 
consists not of these demonstrations of the categories, which are 
cited quite briefly and perfunctorily, but rather consists of commen- 
taries on the meanings of these sutra passages. After citing a sdtra 
passage and before going through the sixteen categories, the author 
provides a (usually) lengthy sdtra gloss or meaning commentary. 
Because this concept of the gloss is not part of the sixteen categories, 
it represents something of an intrusion here, upsetting the structure 


396 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and intent of the chapter. The gloss becomes the major element and 
the chapter becomes essentially a commentary on the eight pairs 
of sutra passages from Chapter Two. 

The glosses are not totally different from the sixteen categories, 
however, for they also interpret the meaning by pointing out the 
connections between the passage and ideas in the dharmaas a whole. 
The glosses, however, seem more concerned to clarify the meaning 
and intent of the ideas in the satra passages, whereas the applications 
of the sixteen categories indicate more specifically the links between 
the sitra passages and the essential ideas of the dharma. 

Because this chapter is based on the eight types of sutras discussed 
in Chapter Two, and, by means of glosses and the categories, it 
interprets them in terms of the already explained central factor 
categories and concepts, most of the material in this chapter has 
been seen earlier in the work. Thus, rather than rehearsing all the | 
explanations of all the sdtra passages, we shall only mention here 
some of the most important new concepts introduced in these 
commentaries. , 

The categories are cited very briefly in most cases. For example, 

(E187; T254) On one sdatra the text asks ‘“What is the teaching 
_ category (in regard to this passage)?’’. And it answers, “‘In this sutra 
the four noble truths are taught”... 

(E170-172; T232-234) The commentarial gloss on the second 
sutra of the type dealing with living in samsara explains four concepts 
in the passage: faith, virtue, generosity and wisdom. Among several 
alternate explanations of faith it finds this analogy: faith is like aman 
who can see the water in the bottom of a well, but cannot reach 
it. This faith is mundane. 

(E177; T240) In commenting on the first sdtra passage of the type 
dealing with penetration, the author explains that the word ‘‘above”’ 
in the passage refers to the future and that the word ‘‘below’’ refers 
to the past. These two views represent the nihilist and the eternalist 
views respectively. The first fifteen of the terms of the embodi- 
ment-view belong to the eternalist view, and the other five terms 
of embodiment belong to nihilism. The commentary shows how these 
two types of persons arrive at penetration. 

(E179; T242) The explanations in this chapter consist almost 
entirely of distinctions, categories and analyses already made in the 
previous chapters. As in the explanation of the category of construing 
applied to the penetration type of sdtra the text explains again the 
types of persons discussed in Chapter Two (above II.1.3 and 4). 

(E182-183; T246-248) In the commentary on the second sdtra 
of the penetration type, the Petakopadesa says that the meaning is 
twofold: word meaning (vacandrtha) and person’s meaning (puru- 


PETAKOPADESA 397 


sartha), These two kinds of meaning are said to be present in all 
sitras in the case of each term. The word meaning or aim is the 
aim of the dharma, the person’s meaning is the aim he seeks to 
achieve. The person’s aim is the actual realizing of whatever aim 
the person wants; the word’s aim is the Buddha’s aim in teaching. 

(E190ff.; T258ff.) An example of the kind of commentary that 
these glosses contain is seen in the explanation of the sdtra on the 
adept. The sutra speaks of ‘‘one whose awareness is steady as a 
rock’. The gloss explains this simile by showing that one whose 
mind is free. from attachment and hate is steady. Then it goes on 
to show how the entire path is developed building upon this steadi- 
ness. 

(E218; T294) In commenting on the sdtra on defilement and 
penetration, the Pefakopadesa explores the three kinds of action: 
mental action, bodily action and vocal action. 

(E232; T321) In order to explain the sutra on living and penetra- 
tion, the author repeats the distinction between the. two basic kinds 
of persons seen in Chapter Two: the faith-follower and the dharma- 
follower. Although, here the faith-follower is divided into the two 
kinds, blunt and keen facultied, and the dharma-follower type is 
likewise subdivided. A fifth type of person mentioned here is the 
totally deluded person, who finds enlightenment suddenly. 


Chapter Eight 


(VIII) (E242-260, T328-349) Arising of the guidelines. _ 

This chapter explains the three meaning and the two phrasing 
guidelines. These guidelines analyze sfitras according to the root 
terms and show how sdtras thus analyzed apply to and guide specific 
types of persons. 

(VIII. 1) (E242-249; T328-336) Play of Lions Guideline 

(Vil. 1.1) Four Types of Persons 

All creatures can be divided into four types in the following 
way: First there are creatures of desire-conduct and of view-conduct. 
These two types are equivalent to the nihilist and eternalist (cf. Ch. 
‘Vil, p. 177). When view-conduct persons become followers of the 
Buddha, they become dharma-followers whereas desire-conduct 
persons become faith-followers (cf. II.1.3). 

Beings of view-conduct divide into two kinds, those with dull 
faculties and those with sharp faculties. Beings of desire-conduct 
also divide into these two. View-temperament beings with sharp 
faculties follow (1) the satisfying way with quick higher faculties. 
View-temperament beings with dull faculties follow (2) the satisfying 
way with sluggish higher faculti¢s. Desire-conduct.beings with sharp 


398 . ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


faculties follow (3) the frustrating way with quick higher faculties. 
Desire-conduct beings with dull faculties follow (4) the frustrating 
way with sluggish higher faculties. These are the four types of persons 
and the four paths. 

(VIII.1.2) (E244-249; T330-336) The Play of the Lions 

Corresponding to these four types and four ways the dharma can 
be classified under a fourfold scheme. 

On the bad side: 

(1) Four nutriments 

(2) Four perversions 

(3) Four graspings 

(4) Four bonds 

(5) Four knots 

(6) Four intoxicants 

(7) Four floods 

(8) Four darts 

(9) Four conditions of consciousness 

_ (10) Four evil practices. 

The first two of each of these tetrads can be abandoned by beings 
of desire-conduct; the second two of each tetrad by beings of 
view-conduct. 

All of these negative states can be interrelated. The first nutriment 
is equivalent to the first perversion, etc. 

The plotting of directions guideline correlates all the members of 
these tetrads. All of the first members constitute the first direction, 
all of the second members, the second direction, etc. This “‘plotting’”’ 
can be done because their meaning is one and only their phrasing 
is different. These tetrads are all corollaries to the four root terms, 
the four misperceptions or perversions. 

On the good side there is a parallel grouping of ideas: 

(1) Four modes of progress 
(2) Four meditative states = 
(3) Four foundations of mindfulness 
(4) Four abodes 
(5) Four right endeavors 
‘(6) Four strange and wonderful things 
(7) Four supports 
(8) Four developments of concentration 
(9) Four satisfying factors 
(10) Four measureless factors. 

These good tetrads also can be correlated with each other and 
grouped under the four directions. The play of the lions consists in 
the ability of enlightened ones to use the good tetrads to counteract 
the bad ones. 


PETAKOPADESA 399 


The four good directions lead respectively to the four noble 
persons. 

(VI.2) (E249-253; T326-341) Trefoil Guideline 

(Vi.2.1) (E249-250; T326-327) Three Types of Persons 

Those persons who find the way by (1) the satisfying path with 
quick higher faculties represent the type of person (A) who learns 
via a condensed teaching. Persons on (2) the satisfying way with 
sluggish higher faculties and (3) the frustrating way with quick higher 
~ faculties represent the type of person (B) who learns by teachings 
that are expanded. And persons on (4) the frustrating way with 
sluggish higher faculties represent the type of person (C) that is 
guidable (cf. 1.1.3, above). 

Type A pursues concentration, then insight, Type B pursues both 
together, and type C pursues insight before concentration. 

Type A is trained in higher wisdom, type B in higher virtue, and 
type C in higher concentration. , 

(VII.2.2) (E250-253; T327-341) Threefold Concepts and 

Directions 
The defilement or bad side: 
(1) Three bad roots 
(2) Three kinds of contact 
(3) Three feelings 
(4) Three ponderings 
(5) Three defilements 
(6) Three kinds of initial thought 
(7) Three fevers 
(8) Three characteristics of the conditioned 
(9) Three kinds of frustration. 

All the elements of these triads are linked in a causal fashion. The 
first bad root, greed, arises from the first kind of object (this entire 
category is missing in the enumeration but should be satisfying, 
frustrating and neutral objects) and upon the first kind of contact, 
causes the first kind of feeling (satisfying feeling), etc. The second 
bad root, hatred, arises from the second kind of object (bad), etc. 
The third bad root, delusion, arises from the third object (neutral), 
etc. 

The good side: 

(1) Three good roots 
. (2) Three wisdoms 
(3) Three concentrations 
(4) Three trainings 
(5) Three signs 
(6) Three kinds of initial thought 
(7) Three faculties 


400 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(8) Three ponderings 
(9) Three longings 

(10) Three categories. 

These factors also can all be linked causally beginning with the 
three good roots, nongreed, nonhate and nondelusion. 

These three good roots and their related concepts represent for 
the three types of persons the three gateways to liberation: that which’ 
cannot be desired, the void and the signless. 

(VII.3) (E253-255; T341-344) Conversion of Pleasure 

(VINI.3.1) (E253-254; T341-342) Two Types of Persons 

Two types of persons can be seen by equating types (1) and (2) 
(VII.1.1, above) with the view-conduct type, and types (3) and (4) 
with the desire-conduct type. 

(VII.3.2) (E254-255; T342-344) Twofold Factors and Directions 

The bad side is characterized by these pairs of factors 

(1) Ignorance and thirst 

(2) Shamelessness and disregard 

(3) Unmindfulness and noncomprehension 
(4) Obstructions and fetters 

(5) Cleaving and insistence 

(6) I-making and my-making 

(7) Lack of confidence and sulkiness 

(8) Sloth and careless attention 

(9) Perplexity and covetousness 

(10) Not hearing the dharma and nonattainment. 

All of these bad factors can be coordinated under the two - 
directions. In relation to the four noble truths, they correspond 
to the first two truths, frustration and origin. The good side: 

(1) Peace and insight 
_ (2) Understanding and good conduct 
(3) Mindfulness and comprehension 
(4) Shame and modesty 
(5) Abandoning I-making and my-making 
(6) Right effort and reasoned attention 
(7) Right mindfulness and right concentration 
(8) Wisdom and dispassion 
(9) Attainment and hearing the dharma. 

(10) Contentedness and practice in accord with the dharma 
These good ideas also can be plotted according to their directions. 
(VII.4) (E255-260; T344-349) Summary of the Guidelines 
The lions’ play guideline uses eight root-terms, four good, four 

bad. The trefoil guideline uses six root-terms. The conversion of 
pleasure uses four. All eighteen root-terms can be made to agree 
with the group of eight in lions’ play, or the group of six in trefoil, 


PETAKOPADESA 401 


or the group of four in conversion of pleasure. The coordination of 
these root-terms is done by the plotting of directions guideline in 
conjunction with the hook guideline which brings the good and bad 
together. 

The lions’ play guideline leads to the four noble truths. The trefoil 
leads to the three gateways to liberation, and the conversion of 
pleasure leads to the liberation of the mind by the fading of attachment 
and to the wisdom liberation by the fading of ignorance. 

The Petakopadesa of Mahakaccayana Thera, dweller in the Rose- 
Apple wood, is completed. 


19 


NETTIPPAKARANA 


Summary by George D. Bond 


This work is of the same genre as the Petakopadéesa. It is traditionally 
attributed to Mahakaccdyana, but appears to have been written 
around the Ist-2nd century B.C., possibly by someone else named 
Kaccayana. Mrs. Rhys Davids believed that the work precedes the 
Patthana, on the basis that it seems to be acquainted with Dhamma- 
sarigamand Vibhargabut not with Per 1Morerecentscholarship 
has preferred a later date.” 

The earliest edition, and the only one in South Asian characters, 
is by Edmund Hardy for the Pali Text Society (London 1902). 
Editions also exist in Sinhalese (Perera, Sri Lanka 1923) and in 
Burmese ‘characters (Rangoon 1909, 1917, 1956). The translation 
(‘T’) is by Bhikkhu Nanamoli as The Guide (Pali Text Translation 
Series: London 1962).? 

The Nettippakarana represents an early Theravada Buddhist 
hermeneutical or exegetical treatise. Regarded as quasi-canonical 
by some Theravadins and canonical by other Theravadins, especially 
in Burma, the Netti comes down to us as the tradition’s earliest 
, attempt to solve the problem of how to interpret and expound the 
dharma correctly. The text seems to have been written to provide 
commentators and expositors of the 7ripitaka with a distinctively 
Buddhist solution to a distinctively Buddhist hermeneutical problem. 
_ For the Netti, the hermeneutical problem arises because of two 

characteristics of the Buddha’s dharma. First, the Buddha under- 
stood and taught a dharma that was ‘‘unbounded”’ or ‘‘immeasura- 
ble” (aparimana) and, thus, beyond the wisdom of ordinary human 
beings. Second, the Buddha’s dharma was perfectly conceived and 
imparted to guide people, who differed in their intelligence and 
development, to wisdom and liberation. These two characteristics 
account for, on the one hand, the dharma’s profundity and inner 
consistency of meaning, and on the other hand, the outer variety 
and diversity of expression in the dharma teachings. 


404 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


In short, the necessity for correctly interpreting teachings that 
participate in the unique meaning and intention of the dharma 
constitutes the problem of interpretation of the Netti. The solution 
to this problem rests upon the understanding that all of the ‘‘immea- 
surable’’ teachings convey the central meaning of the dharma. Since 
the dharma was perfectly devised and set forth by the Buddha to 
guide all beings to the truth, an interpreter must be able to recognize 
its structure and intention in order to convey its truth. The Nett’s 
method of interpretation, based upon the inherent structure and 
intention of the dharma, is intended to present a mirror image of 
the dharma itself. That is, just as in his teachings the Buddha 
employed definite techniques and a consistent logic in order to adapt 
the dharma for various purposes and various kinds of people, so 
the Netti. presents techniques of interpretation presupposing this 
logic in order to examine the dharma-teachings to identify their 
essential meaning. This solution to the problem of interpretation 
presupposes that the only way to understand the unique dharma is 
to interpret it in terms of itself: in accord with its own logic in terms 
of its own fundamental ideas. In this way, the Buddha, in effect, 
becomes the interpreter of his own teachings. 

The elements of “‘meaning’’ (artha) and “‘phrasing”’ (vyafijana) 
in the dharma determine the structure of the Nett’s method with 
special categories employed to treat each element. The term 
‘‘artha’, usually translated as ‘‘meaning’’, seems to denote, in the 
context of the Netti’s method, the purpose or goal of the Buddha’s 
teaching, liberation or the path to liberation. With regard to the 
element of meaning, the method of interpretation brings out the 
underlying intention of all teachings to point to the goal of liberation 
and demonstrates the interrelationships among the various levels of 
teaching and the essence of the dharma. The interpretation of the 
phrasing element calls for ways of recognizing the unity of meaning 
behind the variety of phrasing. The two main categories employed 
in the method of interpretation to accomplish these tasks are the 
guideline (naya) and the category (Aara) (see [1.2 and 1.3 below). - 


PART ONE 


(I) (E1; T3-4) Comprehensive Section 

The text begins with five verses that summarize the Nett? s method 
of interpretation. We might take this section as a preface, except 
that the text develops by commenting on and building on what is 
set out here. Each of the succeeding sections has what we might 
call a commentarial relationship to the sections that precede it and 
especially to this initial section. This careful arrangement is typical 


NETTIPPAKARANA 405 


of the tight structure and order present throughout the Nett. 

This section says that wise men can know the master’s teachings 
characterized by phrasing terms and meaning terms. Mahakatyayana 
provided sixteen categories to examine the phrasing, three guidelines 
to examine the meaning (plus two additional guidelines that apply 
to phrasing), and eighteen root terms. 


PART TWO 


(M1) (E1-193; T5-249) Explanation of Details 

(The title of this section is a heading that comprises the next three 
subsections and their divisions.) 

(0.1) (E1-3; TS-7) Indication 

Whereas the first section simply mentioned the elements of the 
Nett?s exegetical method, this section lists them, specifically 
answering the questions of the first section: What are the cate- 
gories? What are the guidelines? What are the root terms? 

(I.1.1) The sixteen categories are not explained here, but are 
enumerated as teaching, investigation, construing, footing, distinc- 
tive characteristic, fourfold arrangement, conversion, analysis, 
turning back, synonyms, designations, descending, clearing-up, 
support, requisites and coordination. ; 

(II.1.2) The five guidelines are listed as conversion of pleasure, 
trefoil, lion’s play, plotting of directions and the hook. 

(11.1.3) The eighteen root terms are divided into two groups, the 
good and the bad. The bad root terms are thirst, ignorance, greed, 
anger, delusion, identification of what is clean, identification of what 
is satisfying, identification of what is eternal and identification of 
(things as having) self (as nature). 

The good root terms are peace, insight, nongreed, nonanger, 
nondelusion, identification of what is foul, identification of what is 
- frustrating, identification of what is noneternal, and identification 
of (things as) not (having) self (as nature). 

(Although the text has not yet explained how these elements are 
to be utilized, it becomes clear that the root terms represent an outline 
of the central ideas of the dharma in Theravada’s view.) 

(II.2) (E3-5; T8-12) Gloss 

This section comments on the elements listed in the Indication: 
Section (II.1). It offers short, verse descriptions of the categories, 
the guidelines and their workings. These descriptions are still quite 
cryptic but they build upon the previous section and establish the 
agenda for the following one. 

(11.3) (ES-193; T13-249) Further Description Section 

Following the three increasingly detailed verse outlines (Sections 


406 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


I, 11.1 and 11.2), the Netti returns again to these descriptions to begin 
the full explanation of its exegetical methods. The remaining four 
major divisions of the text represent subsections to this one. 

(11.3.1) (E5-85; T13-118) Analysis of the Categories (That Inter- 
pret the Phrasing) 

This section explains the categories and in each case begins by 
commenting on the gloss given in the prior section (1.2). 

(1.3.1.1) (E5-10; T13-20) Category of Teaching 

As the first of the Nett’s interpretive categories the Category of 
Teaching provides a general overview of the problem and method 
of interpretation. It begins with a quotation from the Buddha that 
it takes as a summary of the nature and purpose of the dharma. The 
quotation is: 


O Monks, I shall teach a dharma that is good in its beginning, 
good in the middle, and good in the end, with its own meaning 
and phrasing. I shall make known a religious life (brahmacarya) 
entirely perfect and pure.* 


The Netti adds to the start of this quotation six terms, relishing, 
disadvantage, escape, fruit, means and injunction. By commenting 
on this passage and these six terms, this category explains the 
structure of the dharma and the keys to understanding it properly. 

The six terms are shown to represent the various ways that the 
Buddha explained the human predicament and its. solution. Using 
these terms the Nett demonstrates the various kinds of the teachings 
found in the dharma, and shows that the variety of teachings can 
be categorized under these six heads. Further, the Netf7explains that 
the six categories of teachings have the purpose of adjusting the 
dharma to various types of individuals. The text classifies individuals 
by a set of three types and a set of four types. The three are those 
persons who learn by what is condensed, who learn by what is 
expanded, and who are merely guidable. The four types include 
persons of thirst-conduct and of view-conduct multiplied by dull and 
intelligent variations. For example, the Buddha is said to have taught 
only escape to persons who learn from what is condensed, to have 
taught both disadvantage and escape to persons who learn from what 
is expanded, but to have taught relishing, disadvantage and escape 
to the guidable. . 

Significantly, this category shows that these six kinds of teaching 
can be reduced to or equated with four noble truths. In this way 
the Netti begins to show how the interpreter must move from the 
diversity of the dharma teachings to the consistent meaning present 


NETTIPPAKARANA 407 


throughout the dharma. This technique is basic to the Nett?'s method 
of interpretation. 

Finally, this category also clarifies the notions of the meaning and 
phrasing of the dharma. It indicates six ways that the phrasing of 
a teaching can be expressed and six ways that the meaning can be 
expressed; then it correlates these phrasing and meaning terms. The 
phrasing and meaning terms are shown to structure the dharma into 
the threefold goodness mentioned in the initial passage. This three- 
fold goodness also corresponds to the three types of persons mention- 
ed above. — 

The point of this category is to indicate the intricacy of the dharma 
and to lay the foundation for the Nett?s method of interpretation 
that was designed to deal with the elements of the dharma outlined 
here. 

(0.3.1.2) (E10-21; T20-36) Category of Investigation. 

This category also represents an introduction to the method of 
interpretation proper. It outlines four kinds of investigations that the 
interpreter should make of any teaching. The four are: 

(a) Term, question, answer, consecutive sequence 

(b) Relishing, disadvantage, escape, fruit, means and injunction 

(the six terms from Category 1) 

(c) Any paraphrasing verses 

(d) All that is in the ninefold sdtra. 

As the inclusion of the terms under (b) above indicates, the kind 
of investigation envisaged here is more than merely an identification 
of the structure of the teaching. This category intends to teach the 
interpreter to examine a teaching to discern how its elements express 
the essence of the dharma and accomplish the dharma’ $ purpose 
of pointing the way to liberation. 

(0.3.1.3) (E21-27; T36-44) Category of Construing 

This category—like the first two, but unlike most of those that 
follow—is also comprehensive in that it describes the entire method 
of interpretation. Here the interpreter is taught the basic criteria for 
the correct interpretation and application of dharma teachings. The 
criteria for acceptable interpretation is taken from the Mahdpadesa- 
sutta of the Sutta Pitaka.° A correctly interpreted or construed 
passage must conform to the basic themes of the dharma; the thread 
(sdtra), the discipline (vinaya) and the essential nature (dharmata). 
The Netti equates *‘thread’’ with the four truths, ‘‘discipline’’ with 
the disciplining of attachment, anger and delusion, and ‘‘essential 
nature”’ with dependent origination. 

The point of this category is to explain further the Nett’s view 
of interpretation as a process of reducing any teaching to its ‘“‘prime 


408 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


factors’’ in the dharma. The Nettisets up an outline of these ‘‘prime 
factors’ that constitute the essence of the dharma. The doctrines 
named here as criteria for construing are central to that outline, as 
are the six terms from the first category, the eighteen root terms 
mentioned in Section 11.1.3, and other concepts mentioned or 
implied further on. Correct construing involves finding these factors 
implicit in any teaching under consideration. 

Another task outlined in this category concerns understanding how 
the Buddha applied various teachings to various kinds of persons. 
For example, the Netti says the Buddha taught foulness rather than 
friendliness to a person of attached conduct. His teachings always 
fit the person’s needs. The Netti seems to imply that the value of 
properly construing teachings such as this is that it enables the 
interpreter (1) to understand the teachings correctly and (2) to apply 

-the dharma teachings to the right kinds of people. 

(1.3.1.4) (E27-29; T45-50) Category of Footings 

This category, like the succeeding twelve categories, apecilices a. 
particular technique for carrying out the interpretive task delineated 
in the first three categories, namely the task of construing any teaching 
in terms of the essence of the dharma. The technique explained in 
this category represents a way of discerning word-connections 
between any teaching and the central concepts. Footings represent 
the proximate causes for other ideas or concepts. Thus, to find what 
concepts are implied in a particular teaching, the interpreter must 
determine what the footings of the. teaching are and for what other 
concepts this teaching is the footing. For example, the five strands 
of sensual desire are said to be the footing for attachment to sensual 
desire; the five material faculties are the footing for attachment to 
material things. By recognizing the relationships called ‘‘footings’’, 
the interpreter can establish the necessary connections bétween any 
passage and the essential ideas of the dharma. __ 

(1.3.1.5) (E30-32; TS0-54) Category of Characteristics 

Another exegetical technique for establishing word connections, 
this category is closely related to the previous one. Both techniques 
represent methods frequently used by the Pali commentaries. This 
category provides for correlating a single idea with all other ideas 
that share a common characteristic or classification. For example, 
if one faculty is mentioned, all other faculties can be inferred also. 
This kind of association is shown to be valid because of the inter- 
connections between the progressive stages of spiritual practice 
leading toward nirvana. 

(1.3.1.6) (E32-40; T55-64) Fourfold Arrangement Category 

The interpreter must explain four aspects of a teaching: the 
language, the intention, the foundation, and the consecutive se- 


‘NETTIPPAKARANA 409 


quence. Each of these four are here explained and exemplified. 

(1.3.1.7) (E40-48; T64-73) Conversion Category 

The exegetical technique of this category is basic to the Netti’s 
entire method. “‘Conversion’’ means identifying the root terms in 
a passage via footings and converting the bad ones to good ones. 
In the exemplification, we clearly see how the Netti’s method of 
interpretation works. Interpretation for the Netti is a process of 
reading between or behind the lines to find the basic dharma 
teachings. 

(1.3.1.8) (E48-51; T73-77) Analysis Category 

Teachings must be analyzed according to factors, footing, levels 
of individuals for whom intended or mentioned and characteristics 
shared in common by various individuals. Closely related to other 
categories, the task of this category is to indicate further ways of 
examining and explaining teachings. The exemplification of the 
category draws an interesting distinction between the path teachings 
for householders and those for persons who have gone forth. 

(0.3.1.9) (E51-52; T77-78) Turning Back Category 

This category warns the interpreter to be aware of the opposites 
of the terms in a teaching in order to understand what is implied. 

(11.3.1.10) (E53-56; T79-84) Synonyms Category 

A basic form of word-connections, synonyms are to be employed 
by this interpreter to elicit the essential factors in a passage.. The 
summary verse states, ‘‘He is a knower of siétras who knows how 
many synonyms there are for one idea in the sdutra.”’ 

(0.3.1.11) (E56-63; T84-92) Designations Category 

That various teachings make known or describe various aspects 
of the path but can all be seen as expressions of the four truths is 
the message of this category. 

(I1.3.1.12) (E63-70; T93- 100) Descending Category. 

Recalling the third category where a primary criterion for proper 
interpretation was said to be ‘‘descending into”’ or ‘‘placing beside”’ 

‘the sdtra, this category clarifies further how teachings should be 
correlated with and understood in terms of the key concepts of the 
dharma. Here five doctrines are specified as part of the Netts outline 
of the dharma: dependent Griginalion, faculties, aggregates, elements 

‘and senses. 

The Netti explains how the interpreter should establish connec- 
tions between the phrasing of a text and one of these five central 
factors. 

(1.3.1.13) (E70- 72; T100-103) Clearing-Up Category 

The ‘‘clearing-up’’ here refers to the spirit or ground of a teaching, 
especially in the form of a question. Under this category, interpreta- 

tion requires understanding the structure of a text in order to see 


410 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


why the Buddha gave a teaching or asked a question and how he 
cleared it up. 

(1.3.1.14) (E72-78; T103-109) Terms of Expression Category 

This category shows the interpreter how to analyze passages accor- 
ding to unity and diversity. Factors can be expressed by one basic 
term or by diverse forms of that factor, e.g., frustration or forms 
of frustration. In either case, the Netti shows, the meaning is the 
same. Again the Netti manifests its basic assumption that the 
essential unity of the factor can be found behind the diversity of the 
phrasing, 

(01.3.1.15) (E78-80; T109-114) Requisites Category 

A doctrinally based method for correlating teachings with essential 
factors, this category points to two kinds of relations between terms, 
_ cause and condition. These are two “‘requisites”’ for the interpreter 
to identify. 

(11.3.1.16) (E8 1-84; T114-118) Coordination Category 

With all the basic exegetical techniques explained, the Netti: 
concludes this section with a category that again demonstrates its 
general method of interpretation. Here the interpreter is shown how 
to coordinate four items: footings, synonyms, spiritual practice and 
abandoning..The explanation of this category provides good exam- 
ples of how the Netti intends for interpretation to proceed by 
correlating related ideas and eliciting the entire path from any 
passage. 

(1.3.2) (E85-109; T119-147) Sixteen Categories in Combined . 

Treatment . 

In this section, the Netti demonstrates how the exegetical method 
works by applying all sixteen categories to one passage-from Udana 
38. The demonstration, however, does not seem to work the way 
it was planned because the exegesis is completed under the first two 
categories with the remaining fourteen then simply being mentioned 
in brief. 

(1.3.2.1) (E85-86; T119-121) Teaching Category 

Here we see exactly what the Netti means by the proper interpreta- 
tion of a teaching. The exegesis first shows that the terms in the 
Ud4ana passage imply the category of the perversions. A discussion 
of these perversions leads to consideration of desire and ignorance. 
These concepts are then shown to imply the first two of the truths, 
frustration and origin, and the opposites of these are finally seen 
to be cessation and the path. Beginning with a single passage, the 
interpreter explains it by recounting the essential ideas of the dharma 
ending with the four truths. 

(1.3.2.2) (E87-103; T121-139) Investigation Category 

The demonstration exegesis continues here with an account of 


NETTIPPAKARANA 411 


factors involved in peace and insight, the noble path. The eight path 
factors, factors of concentration, and three gateways to liberation 
(concentration, wisdom, morality) are listed here. These are brought 
in as explications of the fourth noble truth, the path. 

Then, the Netti offers a detailed exposition of the ten powers of 
the Buddha. These stand as justification for the teachings and they 
support the.Nett’s understanding of the uniqueness of the dharma 
_and its being perfectly suited to beings. 

The ten powers of the Buddha are: 

(a) Knowledge of the possible and impossible 

(b) Knowledge of the path leading to the welfare of all 

(c) Knowledge of the many and different elements in the world 

(d) Knowledge of diversity of resolve of beings 

(e) Knowledge of differences in fruition of past, future and present 

actions in their causal occasion and in their conditions 

(f) Knowledge of the defilements, cleansing and arising of all the 

meditative states, liberations, concentrations and attainments 

(g) Knowledge of diversity in the states of faculties of other persons 

or other beings 

(h) Knowledge of previous lives 

(i) Divine eye 

(j) Knowledge of destruction of the intoxicants. 

(I.3.2.3-16) (E103-109; T139-197) The rest of this section 
applies the methods of the remaining categories to the same Udana 
passage. These are all done in very brief fashion—even crypti- 
cally—and do not add either to the sample exegesis or the explana- 

‘tion of these categories in the previous section. 
(1.3.3) (E109-127; T148-172) Arising of the Guidelines 
Since the previous two chapters have explained the categories for 
interpreting the phrasing, this chapter explains the methods for 
interpreting the meaning of a teaching. ‘‘Meaning”’ refers to the 
implications of a teaching for pointing to the goal of the tradition, — 
nirvana. Because the phrasing and meaning of teachings are necessa- 
rily interrelated, the previous chapters, it will be seen, have already 
dealt with meaning, especially in the exegetical demonstrations. The 
specific methods for dealing with meaning are the three guidelines 
explained here. These are seen to function in conjunction with two 
phrasing guidelines that recall and control the phrasing categories. 
The eighteen root terms mentioned in II.1 above represent the key 
interpretive elements for the meaning guidelines. Having established 
correlations between the phrasing of a passage and the root terms, 
the interpreter can then lead to the goal via further implications of 
the root terms. 
(1.3.3.1) (E109-113; T148-152) First Meaning Guideline: Con- 


412 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


version of Pleasure and First Phrasing Guideline: Plotting of 
Directions 

The pair of bad root terms, thirst and ignorance can be counter- 
acted or guided out by the pair of good root terms: calmness and 
insight. Two types of persons correspond to the two bad root terms, 
the person of desire-conduct and of view-conduct. With regard to 
these two types of persons, calmness and insight represent the 
counteracting teachings. The dynamics of these pairs of good and 
bad root terms are equivalent to the four truths. These two types 
of persons can be subdivided into four types on the basis of the ways 
that they attain liberation. The view-conduct type find liberation ‘‘on 
the satisfying way with sluggish or quick higher faculties’, and 
persons of desire-conduct divide into those who find liberation *‘on 
the frustrating way with either sluggish or quick intuition’’. This is 
the way that noble ones describe a fourfold path. 

The summary verse at the end of this section reminds that the 
Conversion of Pleasure guideline specifically has to do with the 
counterbalancing of the two pairs of root terms, while Plotting of 
Directions generally refers to ‘‘plotting out’’ good and bad factors. 
(So, in this explanation the two are combined.) 

(1.3.3.2) (E113-124,; T153-167) Second Meaning Guideline: 

Lion’s Play in Combination with Plotting of Directions 

The summary verse for the lion’s play guideline States that it 
counterbalances four bad root terms, the four perversions, with four 
good root terms, the faculties. All defilements are said to be demon- 
strable by means of the perversions and all true doctrines by way 
of the faculties. In combination with the plotting of directions 
guideline, this guideline accomplishes an elaborate cerrelating of 
fourfold doctrines. 

Ten grounds of defilement are given, with each ground comprising 
a set of four terms: four nutriments, four perversions, four graspings, 
four yokes, four knots, four intoxicants, four floods, four darts, four 
conditions of consciousness and four evil practices. These ten sets 
of four are shown to parallel each other and to lead into each other. 
The ten grounds constitute the defilement of the two types of persons, 
the one of desire-conduct and the one of view-conduct, with the 
first two of each set of four applying to the desire-conduct type and 
the last two applying to the view-conduct type. 

The sets of four can also be divided up and equated with the four 
directions, with all of the first items belonging to the first directions, 
etc. These four directions apply to four types of persons as their 
defilement: the person of attached conduct, the person of hating 
conduct, the person of dull view-conduct and the person of intelligent 
view-conduct. 


NETTIPPAKARANA 413 


The ten grounds of defilement are also divided according to which 
elements are comprehended through the three gateways to liberation: 
the gateway of what cannot be desired, the void gateway and the 
signless gateway. 

The good side is shown to parallel these aspects of the bad side. 
Ten profitable ways counteract the ten grounds of defilement. They 
are the four modes of progress, four advances of mindfulness, four 
meditations, four abodes, four right endeavors, four strange and 
wonderful things, four supports, four practices of concentration, four 
factors dealing with satisfaction and four measureless states, 

These ten sets of four can all be paralleled in the same way as 
the bad terms. They constitute the good directions and are applied 
to the four types of persons as their corrective. The factors of these 
ten are also equivalent to the three gateways in a positive sense. 

Finally, all the ten grounds of defilement are shown directly to 
be the opposites of the ten sets of good terms. The equating and 

counteracting of all these concepts are the play of the lions: the 
Buddhas, pratyekabuddhas and disciples. 
(1.3.3.3) (E124-127; 7167-172) Third Meaning Guideline: 
Trefoil and Second Phrasing Guideline: Hook 

The trefoil guideline equates and counterbalances triads of root 
terms. On the unprofitable side there are greed, hatred and delusion; 
and on the profitable side, their opposites. These triads apply to three 
types of persons: those who learn from what is condensed, those 
who learn from what is expanded and those who are guidable. 

The three bad root terms generate a list of twelve triads of bad 
factors that apply to these three types of persons. And the three good 
root terms generate twelve sets of threes that represent the cleansing 
of these persons. 

The hook guideline functions in conjunction with the plotting of 
directions guideline to parallel the good and bad terms. (It is said 
to be exemplified here, but it has no separate explanation.) 

(01.3.4) (E127-193; T173-249) Setting Out of Dispensation 

Whereas the previous sections set forth a method for construing 
all teachings in terms of the essence of the dharma, this chapter 
provides an outline of the main themes of the dharma. The two parts 
of this chapter offer two classifications of types of passages with 

examples of each type. This chapter concerns interpretation because 
it attempts to delineate the context within which all passages must 
be understood. It points to the overall meaning and intention of the 
dharma. 

The introduction to this chapter asks, ““Where are the eighteen 
root terms to be seen?’’ The answer is ‘‘In the setting out of the 
dispensation’’. But despite this mention of the root terms, which 


414 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


would seem to be consistent with the Nett7’s original plan, this chapter 
does not explicitly deal with the root terms. On the Netti’s view, 
however, they are surely here implicitly. 

(1.3.4.1) (E127-161; T173-213) First Classification of Types of 

Passages 
Sixteen types of passages express the dharma: 
1. Passages dealing with defilement 
2. Passages dealing with living (in samsara) 
3. Passages dealing with penetration 
4. Passages dealing with the adept 
5. Passages dealing with defilement and living 
6. Passages dealing with defilement and penetration 
7. Passages dealing with defilement and the adept 
8. Passages dealing with defilement, penetration and the adept . 
9. Passages dealing with defilement, living and penetration 

10. Passages dealing with living and penetration 

11. Passages dealing with defilement by desire 

12. Passages dealing with defilement by view 

13. Passages dealing with defilement by wrong conduct 

14. Passages dealing with cleansing from desire 

15. Passages dealing with cleansing from view 

16, Passages dealing with cleansing from wrong conduct. 

(Since these sixteen types of passages actually amount to combina- 
tions and variations of the first four types, this section devotes most 
ofits attention to providing examples of passages of these four types.) 

(1) What is the type of passage dealing with defilement? 

The passages given as examples of this type have as their subject 
the predicament of human existence. For example, Dkammapada 
verse one is cited here: “‘If someone speaks or acts with a defiled 
mind, then frustration follows him as the wheel follows the ox’s 
hoof.”” Other satra passages refer to the frustration in this life and 
in future lives brought about by wrong desires and actions. A typical 
passage says, ‘‘by greed he turns from the dharma, by greed he does 
not go to heaven’’. 

(2) What is the type of passage dealing with living in samsdara? 

These passages delineate the kind of life one should lead to begin 
to avoid the defilements described above. Nanamoli translated 
vasand as ‘‘motality’’ which is basically correct, but it is a particular 
kind of morality: the morality for those living in the world, primarily 
householders. 

This classification and the following one were mentioned under 
category eight (II.3.1.8) and represent the two basic aspects of the 
path. A passage dealing with proclivities concerns ‘‘giving, morality, 
heaven, merit, the disadvantage of sensual desire and the advantage 


NETTIPPAKARANA 415 


of renunciation’. Giving to the Buddhas and perfected beings is the 
most frequently discussed topic here. Numerous passages tell how 
successful people and perfected beings attained their position as a 
result of a simple act of giving in a previous life. 

Passages on living deal with the first of ‘‘two principal endeavors”’ 
(E159) mentioned by the Buddha: giving robes, alms, lodging and 
the requisite of medicine to those who have gone forth from home 
to homelessness. 

(3) What is the type of passage dealing with penetration? 

A passage on penetration is said to concern the four truths. This 
kind of passage has as its subject the second of the ‘‘two principal 
endeavors’’: going forth from home to homelessness and cutting off 
all desires and attachments. The passages here describe the advant- 
ages of practicing meditation, the negative states to be abandoned 
and the positive states to be developed. 

(4) What is the type of passage dealing with the adept? 

Passages dealing with the adept describe the perfection attained 
by perfected beings. 

(5-16) The remaining types of passages that represent combina- 
tions of the first four are illustrated briefly with a few examples. 
These examples serve to clarify the four basic themes. 

(1.3.4.2) (E161-193; T213-249) Second Classification of Sutra 

Types . 
The eighteen root terms also can be seen in the following ten 
threefold categories of passages: 
1. Worldly (passages), higher-worldly passages and both 
. (Passages) focused on beings, focused on factors and both 
. (Passages) on knowledge and knowable and both 
. (Passages) on vision, on spiritual practice and both 
. (Passages) on our own words, another’s words and both 
. (Passages) on the answerable, the unanswerable and both 
. (Passages) on action, maturation and both 
. (Passagés) on the good, the bad and both 
. (Passages) on the permitted, the rejected and both 

10. (Passages) on eulogy. 

The first category, worldly and higher-worldly, is the basic one 
in the classification. After giving a few verses illustrating each of 
these themes, the Netti summarizes both sections by showing how 
~ the two classifications of passages are interrelated. 

The type of worldly passage encompasses the types from the first 
section that deal with defilement and living in samsdra. The type 
of higher-worldly satra encompasses passages on penetration and 
the adept. These six comprehensive concepts express the meaning 
and intention of the dharma. The logic of the dharma can be 


OmMmANMNA WY 


416 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


understood further by observing that the passages on living in samsara 
are intended to counteract passages on defilement. This begins logic 
of the path wherein passages on seeing counteract passages on living, 
passages on practice are for renouncing vision, and passages on the 
adept are for renouncing practice. 

This section ends with lists of types of persons belonging to worlds 
(nineteen types) and types of adepts (nine types). Other correlations 
between the second set of types of passages are also made. 

The Netti ends by citing Mahakaccayana as the one who spoke 
this text at the first council. 


20 


JNANAPRASTHANA 


Summary by Edwin Gerow 
and 
Karl H. Potter 


This text is only available (except for fragments) in Chinese. It is 
available now in two Chinese translations. One (T. 1543), generally 
called the Astagrantha and attributed to Paramartha, was made in 
383 A.D. by Sanghadeva and someone else (a Chinese named Chu 
Fo-nien, Pali Dhammapiya, according to Takakusu).! The other 
(T.1544), generally called Jianaprasthana, was made by the famous 
Hsiian-tsang in 657-60 according to tradition. Hsiian-tsang seems 
to have used a Sanskrit text, perhaps in a Kashmiri dialect, while 
the one attributed to Paramartha appears to have been composed 
in a dialect ‘akin to Pali’.” 

The author of the work is identified by Hstian-tsang as Katyayani- 
putra, who composed it in the monastery of Tamasavana in Chinapati 
in North India where there were 300 Sarvastivada students.* Poussin 
dates this event in the 4th century A.N.? 

The work has been partly rendered into Sanskrit from Hstian- 
tsang’s version by Shanti Bhiksu Shastri in Visva-Bharati Annals 
1, 1955. A fragment is edited and translated into French by Paul 
Demiéville as ‘‘Un fragment Sanskrit de l’ Abhidharma des Sarvasti- 
vadin’’, Journal Asiatique 249, 1961, 461-76. There are transla- 
tions of sections of it by Louis de la Vallée Poussin in ‘Documents 
d’Abhidharma’’, Bulletin de 1’Ecole Francaise d’ Extreme-Orient 
(Paris) 1930 and Melanges Chinois et Boudhique 1, 1932. Besides 
the summary by Takakusu just referred to, other summaries are’ 
provided by S.C. Banerjee, Sarvastivada Literature, op. cit., 
pp. 54-59 and by Kogen Mizuno in Encyclopedia of Buddhism (ed. 
G.P. Malalasekera et.al.) 1.1, 1961, 64-80. Leon Hurvitz has studied 
portions of the text in ‘Path to salvation in the JA#anaprasthana’’, 
Studies in Indo-Asian Art and Culture 5, 1977, 77-102. 


418 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


This is the basic text of the Sarvastivada school, the movement 
in Abhidharma Buddhism that is set forth in its fullest in the Maha- 
vibhasa, summarized below, which is itself a commentary on the 
Jianaprasthana. 

““E”’ references are to the translation from Chinese to Sanskrit 
by Shanti Bhiksu Shastri of Santiniketan 1955. There is no transla- 
tion. , 


BOOK ONE: MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS 
Chapter One: Higher Worldly Factors® 
Part One: Higher Worldly Factors 


1,(E2) Higher factors are awarenesses and mental states that are 
directly antecedent conditions conducing to enlightenment. Others 
say they are the five faculties that are directly antecedent conditions 
to that destiny. 

2.(E2) They are called ‘*higher factors’? because they are the 
awarenesses and mental states that are preeminent among worldly 
factors. These awarenesses and mental states directly destroy the 
status of ordinary person, lead to nobleness, and destroy falsity, thus 
leading to enlightenment. 

3.(E3) The higher factors are associated with the material realm, 
not the sensual or immaterial realms. It is not possible thtough any 
path in the sensual realm to overcome the obstacles by destroying 
the obstructions; rather, the obstacles constitute that realm. But it 
is possible by a path in the material realm to overcome these 
obstacles. Thus the higher factors are not associated with the sensual 
realm. ke 

If the higher factors were associated with the immaterial realm, 
the first full understanding that conduces to the enlightenment would 
involve recognizing frustration as frustration in the immaterial realm; 
afterward would come the parallel recognitions in the sensual and 
material realms. Thus the first discrimination of the reality of the 
immaterial realm would come when the noble path had already 
arisen, and later on would come the discrimination of the reality 
of the sensual and material realms. But this is of course not the order 
in which these discriminations occur. So the higher factors are not 
associated with the immaterial realm. 

4.(E4) These higher factors may occur with both initial and 
sustained thought, without either, or with neither in their respectively 
appropriate meditative states. 

$.(E4) The higher worldly factors may occur associated with 
satisfaction in the third meditative state, with contentedness in the 
first or second meditative states, and with equanimity in the fourth 
meditative state. 


JNANAPRASTHANA . 419 


6.(E4-5) A higher worldly factor is a single awareness, not many 
awarenesses. When it arises there is no arising of another ordinary 
awareness. If there were, the higher factor would have been des- © 
troyed, would be equivalent to an ordinary one, or would be still 
to come. If it were destroyed one could not practice realization, since 
one cannot practice through a destroyed path, If it were equivalent 
the possibility would be the same. If it were still to come then the 
higher worldly factors could not have been practiced previously, 
since this would be such a factor. 


Part Two: Summit 


1.(E6) What is the summit of faith? It is the arising of faith which 
provides a small instrument of knowledge of the factors of enlighten- 
ment. 

2.(E6) Falling from the summit occurred when a man who had 
heard the correct dharma, has had faith in the Buddha and the factors 
of enlightenment, belonging to a well-placed order, and practicing 
good conduct, and so understanding the first two of the noble truths, 
at another time fails in these regards and his cessation is thus 
destroyed. 


Part Three: Heat 
1.(E7) Heat is the assumption of a little faith in training for correct 
dharma. 


Part Four: The (Incorrect) View that the Body is Real 


1.(E7) There are twenty such views. Of them, five are wrong views 
about the self, viz., taking the self as body, feeling; identification, 
_ conditioning and consciousness. The remaining fifteen views are 
views relating to there being a self. 


Part Five: What is Included in and Excluded from Wrong Views 


_ 1.(E7) The wrong view that what is noneternal is eternal is 
comprised within extreme views and eternalism; it is overcome by 
the vision of frustration. 

2.(E8) The wrong view that what is eternal is noneternal is 
comprised among false views, and is overcome by the vision of 
cessation, 

3.(E8) The wrong view that what is frustrating is satisfying is 
comprised within adherence to particular (wrong) views of a grasper 


420 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


practicing lower factors, and is overcome by the vision of frustration. 

4.(E8) The wrong view that what is satisfying is frustrating, which 
is included among false views, is destroyed by the vision of cessation. 

5.(E8) The wrong view that what is not pure is pure, fostered by 
adherence to lower factors, is destroyed by the vision of frustration. 

6.(E9) The wrong view that what is pure is impure is a false view 
and has two kinds. One is that cessation is impure and is destroyed 
by the vision of cessation. The other is that the path is impure and 
is destroyed by the vision of the path. 

7. (E9) The wrong view that what is not self is self is comprised 
within the belief that the body is real, and is destroyed by the vision 
of frustration. 

8.(E9) The wrong view that what is not a cause is a cause is 
comprised within adherence to moral precepts and vows, and is 
destroyed by the vision of frustration. 

9.(E9) The wrong view that what is a cause is not a cause, 
comprised among false views, is destroyed by the vision of cessation. 

10.(E9) The wrong view that what exists does not exist is comprised 
within false views and has four varieties: (1) that there is no frustra- 
tion; (2) that there is no origin of frustration; (3) that there is no 
cessation of frustration; (4) that there is no path. Each is overcome 
by the vision of what it denies. 

11.(E9) The view that what does not exist exists is actually not 
a wrong view but just a mistaken awareness. 


Chapter Two: Awareness 
Part One: Single Awareness 


(E10) Can one awareness cognize all factors at once? No. When 
one is aware that all factors are not self, one is not awart of this 
awareness’ nature, of what is associates with it and coordina- 
ted with it. 


Part Two: Consciousness is Single 
(E10) The same formula is repeated for consciousness. 
Part Three: The Supporting Object of Two (Mental) Awarenesses 
1.(E11) Two awarenesses cannot reciprocally cause each other, 
because in no person can two awarenesses arise at once. 
2.(E11) Two awarenesses can, however, have a mutual supporting 


object. Also, two awarenesses can be mutually cognizant of each 
other, so each has two supporting objects. 


-JNANAPRASTHANA , 421 


Why can’t two ‘awarenesses arise in the same person at once? 
Because there is no directly antecedent condition through which 
consecutive awarenesses of a being function in a series of aware- 
nesses, and so there is no person. 


Part Four: Memory 
(E11-12) Memory arises by force of the repetition of factors. 
Part Five: Faith 


(E12-13) In dependence on what can faith be based if there is 
no going to the (world of) the fathers, etc.? On the factors involved 
in the fathers” courses. 


Part Six: The Number of Sense Faculties 


(E13) Is color seen by one or by two visual organs? By two, because 
when one eye is closed a nonvivid consciousness arises, but when 
both eyes are open the consciousness is vivid. 

Objection: When one eye is closed consciousness still arises, just 
as at the time both eyes are open, so it cannot be said that seeing 
color arises from two visual organs. 

Answer: But the consciousness arising when one eye is open is 
not vivid, as also when an eye is averted, defective or destroyed. 
Likewise, the hearing of a sound is from two auditory OTERNS, a 
smelling from two olfactory organs, etc. 


Part Seven: The Past 


(E13-15) Is everything past no longer present? There are four 
alternatives: (1) Something past and not present, e.g., any living 
thing; (2) something not present which is not past—e.g., something 
by ahigher faculty or by a knowledge of mantras or by some medicine 
is covered over, hidden and thus not cognized; (3) something past 
which is also not present—all.conditionings arise, are born, return, 
are born again, and so become past, ceased; (4) something neither 
past nor non-present. The same alternatives are repeated. 

Again, with respect to the avoiding of the fetters the following 
alternatives exist: (1) there are past fetters that do not cease, (2) 
ceased fetters that are not past, (3) past fetters which have ceased, 
(4) there are no past fetters and none have ceased. 

Is everything past hidden? Again four altenatives: (1) nothing past 
is hidden; (2) what is hidden is not past; (3) what is past is also 


422 eNCVeRDeEDIN OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
hidden; (4) nothing is past and nothing hidden. 
Part Eight: Perplexity 


(E15) Ifperplexity arises concerning frustration one might say “this 
is frustrating but that is not frustrating’’. Is this one or more than 
one awareness? Answer: It is many awarenesses. The awareness 
“this is frustrating’ is one awareness, the awareness “‘this is not 
frustrating’ is a second awareness. Perplexity is born thus in the 
paths’ origin and cessation. 

Is there a single awareness involving both perplexity and non- 
perplexity? No. Why? With respect to the truth of frustration ‘‘this 
is frustrating’’ is an awareness involving perplexity. There is (another) 
awareness ‘“‘this is frustrating’’ not involving perplexity. Likewise 
there is one awareness ‘‘this is not frustrating’’ which is not per- 
plexing, and another which is perplexing. 


Part Nine: Of Names, Words and Phonemes . 


(E15) A collection of names consists of particular utterances, 

identifyings, things established for grasping. f 
(E16) A word is a single arrangement filling an unfulfilled purpose. 
(E16) A phoneme is an assemblage of syllables. 


Part Ten: The Fatigue of the Buddha ~ 


(E16-16) Once the Lord said: ‘Indeed, one who addresses pupils 
is a useless person’’. What was the point of that? Answer: He was 
tired. a7 


Part Eleven: Six (Moral) Causes 


1. Enumeration of Six Causes 

(E17) These six causes are those associated through the causal 
causes. 

2. Connected Cause 

(E17) Feeling is a connected cause of those factors that are 
connected with feeling, and vice versa. Likewise identification, 
contact, attentive interest, resolve, memory, concentration and 
intellection are connected causes of those factors that are connected 
with intellection. 

3. Simultaneous Cause 

(E17) Awareness is a simultaneous cause of awareness-concomi- 
tants and vice versa. Awareness is a simultaneous cause with the 


JNANAPRASTHANA 423 


dissociated factors that follow awareness and vice versa. 

4. Homogeneous Cause 

(E18) A good root from a previous birth is a homésenedus cause 
of a good root of its homogeneous element born afterwards and of 
the factors associated with that. 

5. Pervasive Cause 

(E18) Dispositional tendencies which are pervasive and to be 
abandoned by seeing frustrations born earlier are the pervasive 
causes of those dispositions produced later of the same kind of 
element. They are to be avoided by spiritual practice and seeing the 
path to cessation. 

6. Maturation Cause 

(E18) All awarenesses and their concomitant factors give rise to 
maturations and are thus conditionings dissociated from awareness. 
These—awareness and concomitant factors—are the maturation 
causes of these maturations. 

7. Efficient Cause 

(E19) The visual organ and matter cause visual consciousness. 
Those two are thus the efficient causes of visual consciousness, just 
as are the auditory organ and sound, the olfactory organ and smell, 
etc. 


Part Twelve: Being Dormantly Defiled in Relation - 
to Awareness and Its Destruction 


(E19-20) Every awareness which has a latent disposition is called 
*‘dormantly defiled’’. Does the trace adhere closely to awareness 
or not? Some traces do so, and they are not destroyed through 
association with that awareness; such an awareness is one with a 
supporting object. Some traces do not, and are destroyed through 
association with that awareness. 

. Objection: A trace adheres closely to awareness. This trace is 
dormantly defiled. 

Answer: There are two kinds of such awareness. One kind, defiled 
by one but not by another, is awareness that is not destroyed. The 
other, defiled by the one and the other, is an awareness, when 
knowledge of frustration has arisen but knowledge of its origin has 
not yet arisen, whose supporting object is the destruction of the 
visions of frustration and of origin. 

Every awareness accompanied by defilement i is called ‘dormantly 
defiled’. Either it is to be destroyed by awareness or it isn’t. The 
kind that is destroyed is the one whose supporting object is the 
defilement itself. The kind that is not destroyed is that associated 
with awareness of the defilement. 


424 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objection: If so, any trace whose supporting object is impure is 
destroyed by the vision of the cessation path, so that what was clung 
to is destroyed. So the destruction of the supporting object is the 
destruction of the trace. 

Answer: Not so. It is the trace whose supporting object is pure 
which is destroyed through the vision of the cessation path, so that 
what was clung to is destroyed. And from the destruction of the pure 
influences comes the destruction of the impure ones. 

Objection: A trace is destroyed when awareness occurs. An 
awareness is called dormantly defiled since it occurs with traces. 

Answer: The awareness is of two kinds. One kind is that not vitiated 
by attachment; it is destroyed by spiritual practice. The other is 
awareness vitiated by attachment. 


Part Thirteen: Consciousness Destroyed by the 
Instrumentality of its Objective Field 


(E20) This consciousness is that. awareness, when knowledge of 
the frustration-truth has arisen but knowledge of its origin has not, 
that is to be destroyed by vision of the origin, whose supporting object 
is destroyed by the vision of frustration. To this consciousness 21 
kinds of traces adhere. It is not a'single awareness. 


Chapter Three: Personality 
Part One: Dependent Origination 


(E21) The birth of a single person is conditioned by 12 factors 
past, future and simultaneous. Two are past: ignorance and condition- 
ing. Two are future: birth and old age/death. The rest are simulta- 
neous. 


Part Two: Conditions 


(E21-22) The Lord said: ‘‘Conditioning factors are conditioned 
by ignorance, and existence is conditioned by grasping.’’ By ‘‘condi- 
tioning factors are conditioned by ignorance’ is meant that when 
action has been done in another earlier birth there is maturation in 
existence and this maturation is in the form of experience. By 
“‘existence is conditioned by grasping’’ is meant that when actions 
are dependently originated with a birth there will be maturations in 
future existence. The difference between the two statements is that 
the former refers by ‘‘ignorance’’ to a single defilement, while the 
latter refers by ‘‘existence’’ to all defilements. 

Are there conditioning factors that dependently originate with 


JNANAPRASTHANA 425 


ignorance but not with knowledge? No. Are there factors that 
dependently originate with knowledge and not with ignorance? Yes. 
Are there factors that are dependently originated with neither? No. 
The reason is that there is no being who has not been either on a 
noble path or not on a path in the past. Having first taken up a path 
one subsequently performs actions and accumulates karma relating 
to earthly things, or as a prince or king, etc. In this way he gets by 
the noble path prosperity and wealth appropriate to an earthly being 
in a town or city, as a man or animal or otherwise. So there are 
four conditions of previous awareness. But thereis only one dominant 
factor of subsequent awareness. 

But indeed there are conditioning factors that are originated in 
dependence on ignorance and not on knowledge—namely, the matu- 
rations of ignorance and defiled things. There are factors that are 
originated in dependence on knowledge and not on ignorance, viz., 
other pure factors that occur at the first knowledge. There are no 
factors dependently originated by both knowledge and ignorance. 
But there are factors which are dependently originated by neither, 
viz., neutral factors, maturations of ignorance, which are the first 
knowledge, good, and pure factors. 


Part Three: The Locus of Breathing 


(E23) Breathing in and out are said to be actions having the body 
but not awareness as locus. But it should be said that breathing is 
. anaction of both. If it were only a bodily action then breathing should 

occur also in the states of trance free from conceptual identification 

and the cessation-trance. If it were only a mental action then those 

in the immaterial realm should also breathe. If it were only a bodily 

action then those born of eggs, sweat, etc. should also breathe. Since 
_ itis both kinds of act, beings in hell, etc., also breathe. 


Part Four: The Locus of Awareness . 


_ (E23) The activity of the stream of awareness of material beings 

is bodily. Likewise, immaterial beings must have their awarenesses 
in some locus? Which one? They are located in the life-faculty, the 
homogeneity force, and other motivating dispositions dissociated 
from awareness. 


Part Five: Attachment to Nonbecoming 
(E23-25) Attachment to nonbecoming is said to be destroyed by 


vision and by practice. But it should be said to be destroyed by 
practice. 


426 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Others say: Either it is destroyed by vision or by practice, depen- 
ding on whether the factors to be destroyed relate to vision or to 
practice. 

The correct view is that it is only destroyed by practice. 

Objection: Attachment is undestroyed for a stream-enterer. So 
if it were as you say a stream-enterer should think ‘‘when I die I 
shall be nonexistent; so what is the use of satisfaction?’’ But he 
doesn’t do so. So attachment is not destroyed for a stream-enterer. 
Furthermore, you say that the attachment of hell-beings, hungry 
ghosts and animals is destroyed by practice only. If you were correct 
the stream-enterer should think ‘‘I shall become the nagaraja Maiya- 
vana, or Yama, etc.’ But he doesn’t. So your view is incorrect. 

Moreover, you say that through a life established on defilements 
one is deprived of parents, but that this defilement is destroyed by 
practice. But defilements are not destroyed for a stream-enterer. If 
they were, a stream-enterer should be deprived of parents. But he 
is not, So you are wrong. 

So your thesis must be that attachment to nonbecoming i is one 
of the factors destroyed by practice. But the attachment of a stream- 
enterer is dependently originated by practice. If it were not so then 
it would be wrong to say that attachment to nonbecoming is destroyed 
by practice. But it is. Thus your thesis is entirely mistaken. 


Part Six: Awareness is Free from Attachment, Etc. 


(E25-26) The Lord said: ‘Awareness is free from attachment, 
hatred, and delusion.’ Now which kinds of awareness achieve 
liberation—awareness from attachment and hatred, or awareness 
. free from them? The correct answer is that it is the second, awareness 
free from them. 

Others say that awareness that attains liberation must be associated 
with attachment, hatred and delusion. But that is not right, because 
an awareness in which attachment, etc. is not destroyed is not 
liberating. By analogy the Lord said ‘‘O monks, know that the sun 
and moon, etc. do not shine when turned back by the five coverings.” 

Which awareness is liberated—past or future? At the time of the 
arising of the awareness of an adept there will be in the future 
liberation from all coverings. How? There will arise a destroying 
knowledge ofthe path to liberation when the diamond-like concentra- 
tion is about to cease. 

Though liberation belongs to the awareness free from attachment, 
it is wrong to say that liberation is liberated awareness, just as it 
is wrong to say that acquisition-force is attained, though there is 
acquistion-force on the part of one who has attained. 


JNANAPRASTHANA 427 
Part Seven: Locus 


(E27) The Buddha said: ‘‘Monks, know that the locus of penetra- 
tion is nonattachment, the locus of nonattachment, release, and the 
locus of release is liberation’’. 

What is penetration? It is the agitation of all the traces of an adept, 
the contradiction of distress by a wise man. What is this non- 
attachment that is its locus? It is the dispassion of one associated 
with penetration, nonhatred, deluded or undeluded, the good roots. 
What is the release that is the locus of nonattachment? Itis the resolve 
of awareness on the part of one associated with nonattachment. What 
is this liberation that is the locus of release? It is the final destruction 
of attachment, of delusion, of all the defilements. 


Part Eight: Elements 


(E27) The Buddha said: ‘“There are three elements of abandoning 
the world, of nonattachment of the world, of cessation of the world’’. 
Abandoning is cutting of the other fetters while establishing the fetters 
of attachment. Nonattachment is the cutting off of the fetters of 
attachment. The element of cessation is the cutting off all the 
elements involved with other fetters. 

Every element of abandoning is an element of nonattachment. 
Every element of nonattachment is an element of abandoning. Every 
element of cessation is an element of abandoning. Every element 
of nonattachment is an element of cessation. And every element of 
cessation is an element of nonattachment. 


Part Nine: Identification 


(E28) The Buddha said: ‘“‘There are three identifications, of 
abandoning, of nonattachment, and of cessation’’. These are the 
awarenesses of the three-elements of the preceding section. 


Chapter Four: Affection and Reverence 
Part One: Affection, Respect and Reverence 


(E29) Affection is joy, delight. Reverence is fear of lords such 
as teachers, wise men and brahmacanins. 

What is respect? There are two kinds. The first involves using 
pleasing things, e.g., offering alms. The second is respect through 
dharma. 


428 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Part Two: Power 


(E30) Bodily power and inferiority are defined. Power is known 
through touch and through bodily and mental consciousness. 


Part Three: Cessation 


(E30) Calculated cessation is any cessation free from fetters. 
Uncalculated cessation is any cessation not free from fetters. The 
noneternality cessation is the destruction, cutting off, dissolution of 
all conditionings. 

What is the difference between the uncalculated and noneternality 
cessations? The uncalculated cessation does not liberate through the 
force of any calculation, but through sickness, failure, grief, intoxi- 
cants, Mara or karma. It does not lead one from sensual desires nor 
does it cause one to be delivered. The noneternality cessation is the | 
destruction of all conditionings, all changes. 


Part Four: Liberation 


(E31-32) Liberation while living occurs for the perfected being 
when the elements have been banished and the great elements are 
cut off. But the series of awarenesses based on the five senses is 
still operative. And because there is still something remaining the 
experience of contact is recovered. The perfected being loses all 
retention at cessation of the liberation-after-death sort. But what is 
the nature of the series of awarenesses then? It is cut off completely. 

Some people say that there are three kinds of practitioners: (1) 
those called seekers who abide in the initial three states of sainthood 
while still requiring further practice in the spiritual path; (2) those 
called adepts who have reached the fourth and final state of sainthood, 
having no further steps to practice; and (3) those called neither seeker 
nor adept, who have reached neither of the states described in (1) 
and (2). 

Some think that there is liberation only for type (3). But there is 
liberation for all three. 

What is your opinion? Is it that first everyone gets rid of desire 
and attachment by the worldly path and so reaches neither of the 
' states described in (1) and (2)? It is these who are the seekers? Or 
perhaps you think that they are first neither seekers nor adepts, 
becoming seekers later when they gain nonreturnership. But if these 
are seekers they must have been seekers before because of eternally 
operating according to their nature. So it is not right that they can 
be a seeker without being a nonreturner. 


JNANAPRASTHANA 429 


Or is your opinion that the seeker when all fetters are destroyed 
directly obtains the fruits of perfected being? How could this be? 
Your notion of adept is unintelligible. For if they are now adept they 
must be so eternally be nature. Since perfection is a result and not 
eternal this cannot be right. 

Or is your opinion that a seeker first becomes perfect and then 
becomes adept subsequently? But if one who is already adept 
becomes adept he must be so forever. This is not right either. 

Or is your opinion that a perfected being who is an adept becomes 
a seeker when his fetters are destroyed? But if a seeker reenters 
rebirths he will be eternally a seeker, and so the perfected being 
will never get free. 

Liberation does not come either before or after becoming a seeker, 
since both before and after he is an adept. For one is first seeker 
and later adept, or vice versa. This is bewildering, and since no clarity 
is attainable, liberation would be unattainable. = 

Therefore, liberation is proyed to belong to neither the seeker nor 
the adept. All factors must be forever unmixed with liberation. One’s 
nature is never attained and never destroyed. Liberation is always 
present, never absent. Thus neither the seeker nor the adept can 
be liberated. 


Part Five: Aggregates 


(E33) In the sdtra five aggregates of adepts are indicated: the 
aggregates of (1) precepts, (2) concentration, (3) wisdom, (4) 
liberation and (5) appreciating the knowledge of liberation. 

Which are the adept’s aggregate of precepts? The adept is a pure 
person who has stopped his body and speech. Which are the adept’s 
aggregates of concentration? Emptiness, dispositionlessness and 

: Signlessness. Which are his concentrations of wisdom? Right aware- 
' ness. Which are his concentrations of liberation? Past, present and 
future awareness conjoined mentally with an adept’s attentions. 
Which his awareness of the knowledge of liberation? The cessation 
and nonarising of awareness. 


Part Six: Basis 


(E33-34) The Buddha sometimes speaks of bases meaning the 
path, and sometimes meaning cessation. Passages are quoted. 


Part Seven: Grasping Ascertainment 


(E34-36) When the Buddha speaks of ‘‘ascertainment’’ he is 


430 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


referring to the five obstructions. They are what sap the strength 
of ascertainment and postpone liberation. Awareness is halted by 
the four applications of mindfulness, and that is practiced over and 
over with the seven conditions of enlightenment. 

Why does only the heretic proclaim things defiled by the three 
defilements but not by the theory of self? Though they have a belief 
in the self as person, this belief does not become a theory. The heretic 
also proclaims the ascertainment of all the defilements. Thus they 
. repeat the right words without understanding them. 


Part Eight: The Three Treasures 


(E37) One who knows that the Buddha exists, knows his name 
and understands, his behavior is enlightened. Likewise one who 
knows the dharma knows its name and understands it, and the one 
who knows the order knows its proper name and understands it. 


Chapter Five: Shamelessness 
Part One: “‘Black/White”’ 


(E38) Shamelessness is absence of humility, and disregard is lack 
of any feeling of indignation. The difference is that one who is 
shameless has no fear of God, while one without indignation is 
unafraid of any kind of ignorance. 


Part Two: Two Faculties 


(E39) There are two bad faculties, one excessive, the other minor. 
They should be avoided. ~ 


Part Three: Awareness 


(E39-40) All past awareness is conditioned, but some conditioned 
_awareness is not past. Again, all attached awareness is conditioned, 
but some conditioned awareness is not attached. For example, past 
awareness is devoid of attachment, but present and future awareness 
are saddled with hatred. _ 


Part Four: Excitedness and Regret (E40) 
Part Five: Stolidity and Sleepiness (E40-41) 
Part Six: Dream 


(E41) Are dreams meritorious or not? Neither. Then what factor 
is designated by the term ‘dream’? Even at the time of deep sleep 


JNANAPRASTHANA 431 


objects of awarenesss and mental states are still active, which is 
why we remember dreams. Thus dreams are actual existents. 


Part Seven: Obstructions 


(E42) The sdtra says: ‘‘There are five obstructions’. Are all 
obstructions comprised within the five, or are the five obstructions 
comprised within the class of obstructions? The latter, since igno- 
rance is an obstruction. 

The five past and future obstructions are not obstructed. The five 
present obstructions are conditions of and conditioned by all the 
defilements and afflictions. What are other than the five obstructions 
are conditioned and gone. There is no obstruction that is uncondition- 
ed. 


Part Eight: Ignorance 


(E42-43) All latent dispositions of ignorance are bound to sensual 
pleasure. Among them which are the bad ones? All bad factors are 
dispositions of ignorance which are bound to sensual pleasure. An 
example is ignorance bound by the belief that the body is real. 

Everything bound to the material and immaterial realms is a latent 
disposition to ignorance. Among them which are the neutral ones? 
All of them. But there are dispositions to ignorance which are neutral 
and not bound to the material or immaterial realms. 

Everything that is a cause of seeing an assemblage of frustrations 
is a consequence of ignorance. Are they omnipresent? There are 
causes of seeing an assemblage of frustrations that are not consequ- 
ences of ignorance. 

Is every consequence of ignorance that is a cause of seeing the 
path of cessation nonomnipresent? Yes, but there are nonomnipre- 
sent consequences of ignorance that are not causes of seeing the 
path of cessation. E.g., ignorance can be conjoined with consequen- 
ces that are not omnipresent which are causes of seeing an assem- 
blage of frustrations. 


Part Nine: Unconnected Things 


(E43) All ignorances are the unconnected consequences of igno- 
trance. In frustration there is nonperception of the origination- and 
cessation-paths. There is no unconnected contradiction of arro- 
gance. 


Chapter Six: Characteristic Marks 
Part One: Two- and Three-fold Distinctions 


(E44-46) Are the impermanences of birth, life, and old age of 


432 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


’ material factors to be called material or immaterial? Immaterial. The 
impermanences of birth, life, and old age are also termed immaterial. 
Likewise visible, resisting, impure and conditioned factors. 

The impermanences of birth, life and old age of past, present and 
future factors are called past, present and future respectively. Like- 
wise the ages of good, bad and neutral factors, the sensual, material 
and immaterial realms, the seeker, adept and one who is neither 
seeker nor adept, and those factors which are to be removed by the 
visual and spiritual paths and those not to be so removed—all are 
known by the names provided. 


Part Two: Characteristic Marks 


(E46) The difference between death and impermanence is that - 
all death is impermanent, but there are impermanent things which 
do not die, e.g., stopping death by suppressing the other conditioning 
factors. : 


Part Three: Three Momentary Things 


(E46-47) The Buddha said there are three things that are defined 
as conditions of what is conditioned: what arises at a single moment, 
cessation, and what is otherwise than static. The first refers to birth, 
the second to noneternality, and the third to old age. 


Chapter Seven: Unprofitable Things 
Part One: Unprofitable Things 


(E48) Self-mortification, practiced by heretics, is unprofitable. 


Part Two: Mindfulness 
(E48) Discussion of yogic methods of developing mindfulness. 
| Part Three: Inauspicious Things 
(E49) There are six kinds of inauspicious things, divided into those 


which have to do with faith and those having to do with dharma. 


Part Four: Knowledge of the Wheel of Dharma (E49) 
Part Five: Those with Song Gone, and Self-Produced (E50) 
Part Six: Being Satisfied with Desires 


{ES1) The virtue of not being satisfied with having many desires 
is extolled. 


JNANAPRASTHANA 433 
Part Seven: Indulgence and Incontinence 


(ES 1-52) Indulgence is excessive eating and drinking. Incontinence 
is excessive taste for food and drink. Their opposites are moderation 
and restraint. 


Chapter Eight: Thinking 
Part One: Thinking, Initial Thought and Excitedness 


(E53-54) Thinking is any awareness. Conceptual construction is 
a determination or a measuring. What is the difference? Thinking 
is an act; construction is an intellectual opinion. 

Initial thought is inference, a sifting undertaken by all minds. 
Sustained thought is inquiry. What is the difference? Initial thought 
is gross; sustained thought is subtle. 

Excitedness is disturbance of the mind. Distraction is infirmity, 
disturbance. What is the difference? Excitedness is the absence of 
peace; distraction is the division of attention among many things. 


Part Two: Delusion and Wrong Awareness 


(E54-55) Ignorance pertains to the three worlds. Wrong awareness 
is an opinion not confirmed by logic. 

Objection: Even one who has correct knowledge may speak falsely 
and often does, for his memory is imperfect inasmuch as he also 
lacks correct knowledge. 

Answer: Not so. Only he who has wrong awareness speaks falsely. 
Otherwise it cannot be asserted that wrong awareness is an opinion 
not confirmed by logic. Wrong awareness arises from imperfect 
memory. 

_ Why is every ignorant act conjoined with wrong awareness? Since 

even he who has right awareness must speak falsely because his 
memory is conditioned by ignorance, it will be as well to say: he 
speaks falsely who has incorrect knowledge. So it is illogical to assert 
that he who has correct knowledge may speak falsely. 


Part Three: Arrogance and Pride 


(E55-57) Arrogance is infatuation, disturbance, a fixing of the 
mind, a grasping for the essence of awareness. Pride is also a grasping 
for the essence of awareness; it supports the arising of awareness, 
for it passes away and is not yet arisen. What is the difference? 
Arrogance is pursuit of fixity of mind without reference to other 
things; pride is pursuit of fixity of mind with reference to other things. 


x 


434 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


One who is filled with excessive pride says ‘‘I see frustration as 
frustration’’ or “‘] see birth as birth’’. What is the point? Someone 
listening to a competent teacher memorizes the entire dharma from 
the beginning. Basing himself on that, he reaches patience consistent 
with truth. He comes to complete understanding of frustration or 
of birth, and no false views or doubts arise, or if they do, he does 
not understand them. And so he sees himself as visited by frustration 
or by birth, and accordingly pride arises and this excessive pride 
becomes a support for frustration or rebirth. By the same line of 
reasoning, a proud man who says “‘I see cessation as cessation” 
or “‘I see the path as the path’’ develops the same excessive pride 
with the same results. Likewise, one who thinks ‘‘this is correct 
conduct; this is the path’’ becomes arrogant and rebirth is generated. 
The same result accrues for one visited by pride in celibacy, doing ~ 
one’s duty, asserting that this is one’s final life, and humility—if these 
are believed by one with excessive pride they lead to suffering and 

‘ rebirth. : : 


Part Four: Sickness 


(ES7-58) Desire, anger, violence lead to sickness of self, other 
or both. Some cause frustration in their mind and body, being 
possessed by passion. Concentrating on that, they experience for 
many long nights sickness, frustration and the various fruits’of the 
karmic cycle. Others lust after the wife of another, or abduct her, 
are followed and beaten by her husband, the result being sickness 
in all parties. 


Part Five: Excess 

(E58) Is knowledge in excess or is it the object of knowledge that 
is in excess? The object, not the knowledge, since knowledge is 
itself an object. 

Is knowledge in excess, or the consciousness of it? The conscious- 
ness is in excess, not the knowledge, since every knowledge is 
associated with consciousness, but not every consciousness is asso- 
ciated with knowledge. © 

Are impure or pure factors in excess? The impure are, because 
impure factors are partially comprehended in all twelve bases, but 
the pure are comprehended in only two. 


Part Six: Career and Faculty 


(E58) What is the bodhisattva’s career? He becomes a perfected 
being, restrains speech, remains pure. 


. 


JNANAPRASTHANA 435 
Part Seven: Ordinariness 


(E59-60) The ordinary person is described. Should he be spoken 
of as good, bad or neutral? Neutral. But why not good? Because 
one becomes good by applying oneself, but that is not the nature 
of ordinary folk. Rather, one whose nature is good, since his good 
qualities are also eliminated, must be considered extraordinary. Why 
not bad, then? Because when desire and passion are destroyed, and 
the quality of badness entirely departed, the attainment of bad 
qualities cannot lead to ordinariness. Such a one is extraordinary, 
‘not ordinary. 

Does ordinariness produce desires of the corporeal or incorporeal 
body? Answer: Either. 

Is ordinariness gotten rid of through vision or through spiritual 
practice?. Answer: The latter, since all the qualities that can be 
destroyed through vision are produced by attachment, but ordinari- 
ness is not produced by attachment. Furthermore, when oneis patient 
and has repressed mundane qualities, the ordinariness known in the 
three realms departs and is no longer produced. But the qualities 
to be gotten rid of through vision still persist at the time, and have 
not departed. 

What quality is ordinariness? Answer: All the conditions known 
in the three realms which are free of awareness and not produced 
by passion. 


Part Eight: Falsehood 


(E60-61) A tetralemma is developed. There are qualities accom- 
panied by (1) false vision and wrong practice, (2) wrong practice 
but not false vision, (3) false vision but not wrong practice, (4) neither 
false vision nor wrong practice. 

Likewise, there are four alternatives connecting the coexistence 
or absence of false memory and false concentration. 


BOOK TWO: BAD FACTORS 
Chapter One: Bad Factors 
Section One: Headings 


(E65-69) The triplets: three fetters—belief that the body is real, 
addiction to moral precepts and vows, doubt. Three bad roots— 
greed, hatred and delusion. Three impurities—desire, existence 
and ignorance. | 

The fours: four floods—desire, existence, false views, ignorance. 
Four bonds—desire, exisfence, false views, ignorance. Four 


436 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


graspings—desire, false views, attachment to false views and ob- 

servances, belief in a self. Four bodily knots—covetousness, malice, 

attachment to false vows and observances, persistence in asserting 
“this is real’’. 

The fives: Five obstructions—desire-and- interest, malice, soli- 
dity, attachment to vows and observances, excitedness-and-regret. 
Five fetters—passion, repugnance, pride, envy and selfishness. Five 
lower internal fetters—desire and passion, repugnance, belief that 
the body is real, attachment to false views and observances, doubt. 
Five higher external fetters—attachment to bodily form, attachment 
to formlessness, repugnance, excitedness and ignorance. Five false 
views—believing the effect to be real, extreme views, false views, 
adherence to views, and attachment to false views and observances. 

The sixes: Bodies of craving—born of eye, ear, nose, tongue, body © 
and mind contact. 

The seven latent dispositions—desire and attachment, repugnance, 
desire for existence, pride, ignorance, false views and doubt. 

The nine fetters: craving, repugnance, pride, ignorance, false 
views, adherence, doubt, envy and selfishness. 

The ninety- eight latent dispositions: thirty-six propensities accom- 
panied by desire, thirty-one propensities accompanied severally 
by bodily form and formlessness. (31 + 31 + 36 = 98). 


Section Two: Essential Nature of Three Fetters, Etc. 


(E69-73) Of the threes, which are bad and which neutral? Among 
the fetters, belief that the body is neutral, attachment to moral 
precepts and vows and doubt are either bad or neutral. The rest of 
the headings are analyzed in like manner. ~ 


Part Two: Maturation 


(E73) Of the above, which mature and which do not? Answer: 
All that are bad come to fruition; those that are neutral do not. 


Part Three: What is To Be Destroyed 


(E73-76) The headings are categorized as to which are to be 
destroyed by vision and which by spiritual practice. For example, 
of the fetters, the first, belief that the body is real, if it has been 
preceded by vision, is either to be destroyed by vision or both by 
vision and practice. But if it is to be destroyed by those who are 
receptive to the frustrations preceding final illumination, who follow 
the dharmaand are faithful, and is associated with neither conscious- 


JNANAPRASTHANA 437 


ness. nor unconsciousness, then it is to be destroyed by vision; but 
if it is to be destroyed by the common man, it is to be destroyed 
by wrong effort; if by the mendicant, then by vision... . (This sort 
of treatment is repeated for all the headings.) 

Of these headings, which are to be destroyed by a demonstration 
of the first noble truth, that existence is frustrating, and which by 
effort? Answer: Belief that the body is real is to be destroyed by 
a demonstration of frustration. (Similar considerations pertaining to 
all the headings follow.) 


Part Four: False Views 


(E76) Which of the headings are false views and which are not? 
Answer: Among the three fetters two are false views, one is not.... 
(The question is repeated for the remaining headings.) 


Part Five: Initial and Sustained Thought 


(E77) Those of the headings that are accompanied by both initial 
and sustained thought, that are accompanied by sustained but not 
by initial thought, that are accompanied by neither, are distinguished. 


Part Six: Connection with the Sense-Organs 


(E77-80) Those of the headings that are conjoined with the senses 
pleasantly, unpleasantly, with good intention, with bad intention, and 
with the senses disregarded, are distinguished. 


Part Seven: Connection with the Elements 


(E80-81) Those of the headings conjoined with the element of 
‘desire, with the element of matter, and with formlessness, are 
distinguished. 7. 


Part Eight: Bases 


(E81-84) Are all three fetters descended from desire, based on 
desire? Four alternatives must be distinguished. Some fetters are 
descended from desire but not based on desire. For example, he 
who, possessed by vice, falls from the element of matter and is reborn 
into intermediate existence based on desire. The evil Mara, formerly 
situated in Brahmaloka, was reborn in the retinue of the Buddha 
because he was possessed by depravity. 

Some fetters are based on desire but are not descended from desire. 


438 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


For instance, he who; possessed by depravity, falls from the element 
of desire and is reborn into an intermediate state of existence based 
on bodily form, situated now in desire, finds himself fettered from 
a former existence with the elements of matter and formlessness. 

Some fetters are descended from desire and based on desire. For 
instance, he who, possessed by depravity, falls from the element 
of desire and is reborn either into an intermediate state of existence 
or a new existence based on the element of desire, situated in desire 
finds himself fettered with the element of desire. 

Some fetters are neither descended from desire nor based on 
desire. For instance, those who, possessed by depravity, fall from 
the element of bodily form, are reborn either into an intermediate 
state or a new existence based on matter. Or they may fall from 
matter to be reborn in formlessness, or fall from formlessness and 
be reborn in material form, or fall from formlessness and be reborn. 
in formlessness. Situated in bodily form they find themselves fettered 
with the elements of bodily form. 


Part Nine: Provisions 


(E84) The Buddhist disciple is provided with a demonstration of 
frustration, its origin, etc. Is his entire form which is not used up 
still connected? Yes. Is his form which is connected not used up? 
Yes. Likewise his frustrations, knowledge, conditions etc. which are 
not used up, remain connected and vice versa. 


Part Ten: Fulfilment 

(E85-89) There are five kinds of people:.the faith followers, the 
followers of dharma, those resolved in faith, those seized by false 
views, and those attending the body. 

For each of these, how many of the fetters, etc. are fulfilled and 
how many unfulfilled? Answer: For the faithful, if the consciousness 
of frustration has not yet arisen, all are fulfilled; if it has arisen, two 
are fulfilled, one (doubt) not fulfilled. The same is true of the followers 
of dharma. For those resolved in faith, all the fetters are unfulfilled, 
and likewise for those seized by false views. For those attending 
the body all fetters and all roots of unrighteousness are unfulfilled. 


Part Eleven: Conditions 
(E89-92) How many causes does the. view that the body is real 


have vis-a-vis the view that the body is real, attachment to false vows 
and observances, etc? Answer: Either four, three, two‘or one cause, 


JNANAPRASTHANA 439 


depending on how many types of conditions are taken into account. 
The same formula is repeated for each category. 


Chapter Two: Association 
Part One: Association of the Fetters 


(E93-104) The nine fetters are listed. Is the fetter of craving 
accompanied by the fetter of selfishness? Not altogether. Where the 
qualities of materiality and immateriality are present, the fetter of 
craving is not used up. 

Similar questions are asked about the combinations of each of the 
nine fetters with each of the others, with various answers. 


Part Two: Six Enumerations 


(E105-108) A series of questions along these lines “‘If there is 
contact with a fetter of craving that is past, is there also contact with 
a future fetter of that sort’’? Answer: Yes. If there is contact with 
a fetter of craving that is future, is there also with that which is past? 
Answer: If what is past has been used up, yes; otherwise no. 

Similar questions are raised about the possible temporal combina- 
tions of craving, as well as similar questions for the other eight fetters. 


Part Three: Seven Great Honeys 


(E109-122) The seven honeys are (1) past-past, (2) past-future, 
(3) past-present, (4) past-past and present, (5) past-future and 
present, (6) past-past and future, and (7) past-past present and future. 
A series of pairs are examined as to whether if an occasion is 
accompanied by the fetter of past A, whether it is also accompanied 
by past B? For example, the first pair is craving and repugnance, 
the second is craving and envy, the third desire and selfishness, etc. 


Part Four: Comprehension 


(E122-125) Of all the qualities from the three fetters to the 98 
latent dispositions, which are comprehended within which? Each 
case has to be examined separately and this is done. 


Part Five: Existence 
(E125-126) Of all the qualities from the three fetters to the 98 


latent dispositions, which produce a series of desire? which a material 
series? which an immaterial series? Each must be examined separa- 


440 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tely. For example, all three fetters produce all three forms (desire, 
material and immaterial). But the three bad roots and the impure 
influence produce the series of material and immaterial forms. And 
so forth. 


Part Six: (Cessation by) Dependence on Meditative Attainments 


(E126-127) By taking refuge in which attainment is there cessation 
of the qualities from the three fetters to the 98 latent dispositions? 
Again, the cases are separated and discussed. 


Part Seven: Relation 


(E128-129) Are all past fetters related? Yes, but some related 
‘ fetters are not past. Are all future fetters going to be related? Some 
are and some aren’t. Are all fetters now present in relation? Yes. 


Part Eight: Path 


(E129) Will those who by this path have cut off the fetter whose 
root is desire again be visited by that fetter if they deviate from the 
path? Yes. Likewise for the fetters whose root is material and 
immaterial. 


Part Nine: Ascertainment 


(E129-131) There are nine ascertainments. By the first, the fetters 
whose element is desire and which may be destroyed by seeing the 
origin of frustration are abandoned. By the second, the fetters whose 
element is material or immaterial form and which may be d€stroyed 
by seeing the origin of frustration are abandoned. By the third, the 
_ fetters whose element is desire and which may be destroyed by seeing 
the cessation (of frustration) are abandoned. By the fourth, the fetters 
whose element is material or immaterial form and which may be 
destroyed by seeing the cessation of frustration are abandoned. By 
the fifth the fetters whose element is desire and which may be 
destroyed by seeing the path are abandoned. By the sixth, the fetters 
whose element is material or immaterial form and which may be 
destroyed by seeing the path are abandoned. By the seventh, the 
fetters of material form and attachment are abandoned. By the eighth, 
the fetters of material form and attachment are abandoned. And by 
the ninth all fetters are abandoned. 

Is there comprehension of all the ascertainments by the nine 
ascertainments or vice versa? Of all the nine by all, but not all by 


JNANAPRASTHANA 441 


the nine. Of which is there no comprehension? There is no compre- 
hension by the nine of the used-up portion of the worldly fetters, 
which are to be destroyed after seeing suffering but not yet having 
cognized its origin, etc. 

There are eight persons: (1) stream-enterers, (2) those who have 
gained the fruit of stream-entry, (3) once-returners, (4) those who 
have gained the fruit of once-returning,.(5) non-returners, (6) those 
who have gained the fruit of non-returning, (7) perfected beings, 
(8) those who have gotten the fruit of perfected being. Now which 
of the nine ascertainments do each of these eight persons attain? 
(1) attains none, or one or two or three or four or five, (2) achieves 
six, (3) is like (1), (4) is like (2), (5) achieves six, (6) achieves one 
(viz.; the using up of the five lower fetters), (7) also achieves one, 
or two (depending on whether the material element is used up or 
not), (8) uses up all the fetters. 


Chapter Three: Beings 
Part One: Sequential and Simultaneous Association and Dissociation 


(E132-133) For each of the three elements there are two types 
of fetters—those to be destroyed by vision and those to be destroyed 
by spiritual practice. Is it possible, with respect to the single element 
of desire, to have simultaneous association with both types of fetters? 
It is. For instance, when acommon man, who has used up his passion 
for desired things, turns away from dispassion for desire, or when 
he falls from the material and immaterial elements and is reborn 
in the element of desire. 

Is it possible to have simultaneous dissociation? Yes, for example 
when the common man experiences a dispassion toward desire. 

It is not possible to have sequential association, but it is possible 
to have sequential dissociation, e.g., when the mendicant, having 
used up those fetters to be destroyed by vision, later uses up those 
fetters to be destroyed by practice. 

- A parallel set of questions reJates to the material element. 

Can a single immaterial element have simultaneous association 
with both types of fetter? Simultaneous dissociation? No. Sequential 
association? No. Sequential dissociation? Yes, e.g., when the mendi- 
cant, having used up those fetters to be destroyed by vision, later 
uses up those fetters to be destroyed by practice. 


Part Two: The Seven Forms of Attraction to Results 
Section One: Destruction of the Twofold Fetters 


(E133-138) In which of the results is the destruction by vision 


442 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
of the fetter whose root is desire included? The results of the first 
four kinds of person (see above, 2.2.9). Or it is not included. 

In which of the results is the destruction by practice of the fetter 
whose root is desire included? The results of non-returning and of 
perfection, or it is not included. 


Section Two: Destruction of the Five fold Fetter 


The five fetters are those four which are destroyed by vision of 
the four noble truths, and a fifth which is destroyed by practice. 

Cessation of the first three sorts of fetter is included within the 
results of being one of the first four kinds of person, or else it is 
not included. Cessation of the fourth sort is definitely included in 
the results of being the first four kinds of person. Cessation of the 
fifth sort is included in the result of perfection. 


Section Three: Destruction of the Ninefold Fetter 


The nine fetters are those four which are destroyed by knowledge 
of frustration and dharma of each of the four noble truths, plus that 
suppressible by practice. 


Section Four: Destruction of the Fifteen-fold Fetter 


The foregoing five are each considered according to three ele- 
ments: of desire, material and immaterial elements. Then ‘ 

desires 1-4 are attracted toward the results of the first four kinds 

of person, or not 

desire 5 is attracted toward the non-returner, or not 

material elements 1-4 are like desires 1-4 = 

material element 5 is attracted toward the result of 

perfection, or not 

immaterial 1-3 are like desires and materials 1-4 

immaterial 4 is like desires and materials 1-4 

immaterial 5 is attracted toward perfection. 


Section Five: Three Fetters through Destruction of 98 Fetters 


The same question is asked for every factor in this list. Answers 
conform to those already given. 


Section Six: Engaging in the Path and Reaching the Result 


The destruction of all the fetters for one who enters the stream 
comprehends which results? None. 


JNANAPRASTHANA 443 


The destruction of all the fetters for one who has gotten the fruit 
of stream-entry comprehends which results? Stream-enterer, or 
none. 

The destruction of all the fetters for one who starts becoming 
once-returner comprehends which results? Stream-enterer. 

The destruction of all the fetters for one who has become a 
once-returner comprehends which results? Once-returner. 

The destruction of all the fetters for one who starts becoming a 
non-returner comprehends which results? Non-returner. 

The destruction of all the fetters for one who starts becoming a 
perfected being comprehends which results? Perfection, or none. 

The destruction of all the fetters for one who has become a 
perfected being comprehends which results? Perfection. 


Section Seven: False Views 


Toward which result is the mendicant with false views, whose 
passion for desire is not used up, attracted? Toward the once- 
returner, or not attracted. 

Toward which results is the person whose sensual desires are used 
up, but whose desire for material form is not, attracted? None. 

Toward which result is the person whose desire for material form 
is used up, but whose desire for immaterial form is not attracted? 
None. 


Chapter Four: Three Kinds of Fulfilment 
(E138-143) Section 1: The Qualities of the Trainee-and Adept 


The qualities of the trainee are attained by all stream-enterers. 
Are these qualities included in the result of stream-entering? Yes 
and no. The conditioned result of stream-entry, attained and not 
wasted, is included, while the conditioned qualities of evil, the senses, 
etc., are included in all stream-entry as a sign of excellence. 

The conditioned result of stream-entry pertains to the trainee, 
while the unconditioned result pertains to the adept. 

The same questions are raised about the once-returner, the non- 
returner and the perfected being. 


Section 2: Pure Qualities 


Pure qualities are attained by all stream-enterers. The argument 
parallels that just given. 


444 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
; Section 3: All Factors 


All factors are to be attained by stream-enterers. Are they all 
included in the results of stream-entry? Four uF possibilities have to 
be distinguished. 

Some factors attained by stream-enterers are not attracted to those 
who gain stream-entry. For example, the conditioned qualities 
concerning evil, the sense, etc., which are to be attained by every 
stream-enterer as a sign of excellence, destruction of all the fetters, 
cessation, worldly qualities. 

Some qualities attracted toward stream-entry are not attained by 
the stream-enterer: for example, the result of stream-entry attained 
and then wasted. 

Some qualities are attained but not attracted {same example). 

Some qualities are not attained and not attracted—those not 
previously noted. 

Thé same questions are considered in respect to the once-returner, 
the non-returner and the perfected being. 


Section 4: Six Kinds of Fall and Rebirth 
(E143-144) Part 1. Apprehension and Nonapprehension of Existence 
on the Part of One Fallen and Reborn in his Own Realm 


Does one fallen and reborn in the realm of desire apprehend his 
existence in desire? Four possibilities must be considered.” 

Some fallen and reborn in the realm of desire do not apprehend 
their existence in desire, e.g., someone in an intermediate state in 
the realm of matter. = 

Some, not fallen and reborn in the realm of desire, do apprehend 
their existence in desire, €.g., one in an intermediate existence in 
the realm of desire. 

Some fallen and reborn in the realm of desire do apprehend their 
existence in desire, e.g., one who has fallen from the realm of matter 
and is reborn into it or into the immaterial realm, or one who has 
fallen from the immaterial realm and is reborn in the material or. 
immaterial realm. 

Some, not fallen and reborn in the realm of desire, donot apprehend 
their existence in desire, e.g., one who has fallen from the material 
realm and is reborn there or in immaterial form, or one who has 
fallen from immaterial form and is reborn in either material or 
immaterial form. 

The same discussion, mutatis mutandis, for one who is fallen and 
reborn in the realm of matter. 

Does one fallen and reborn in the realm of- jmmaterial form 


JNANAPRASTHANA 445 


apprehend his existence there? Yes. Some apprehend their existence 
there who have not fallen from it, e.g., one who has fallen from the 
realm of desire and is reborn in the realm of formlessness. 

How many kinds are there who are fallen and reborn in the realm 
of desire? Four kinds: the perfected person and the common man, 
each of whom may have his realm in each. 

How many kinds are there who are fallen and reborn in the realm 
of matter? Three kinds: the common man whose realm is desire, 
the perfected being, or the common man, each being in the realm 
of matter. 

How many kinds are there who are fallen and reborn in the 
immaterial realm? Two, the perfected being and the common man. 

(E144- 146) Part 2: Apprehension and Nonapprehension of Exis- 

tence by One Fallen and Reborn i in a Realm Other 
than His Own 

Does one fallen and reborn in a realm other than desire fail to 
apprehend his existence in desire? There are four cases to consider. 

Some fallen and reborn elsewhere than in desire apprehend their 
existence in desire, e.g., one who has risen from the material realm 
to an intermediate existence in the material realm. 

Some not fallen and reborn elsewhere than in desire fail to 
apprehend their existence in desire, e.g., one in an intermediate 
existence in the material realm. 

Some fallen and reborn elsewhere than in desire fail to apprehend 
their existence in desire, e.g., one fallen from the material realm 
and reborn in the material or immaterial realms, or one fallen from 
the immaterial realm and reborn in the material or immaterial realms. 

Some not fallen and reborn elsewhere than in desire apprehend 
their existence in desire, e.g., one who has arisen from the realm 
of desire and gained an intermediate existence in the realm of desire, 
as well as he who has been reborn. 

‘The same discussion, mutatis mutandis, for one who is fallen and 
reborn in the realm of matter. 

Does one fallen and reborn in a realm other than immaterial fail 
to apprehend his (former) existence in the immaterial realm? Yes. 
Some fail to apprehend their (former) existence in the immaterial 
realm who have fallen from formlessness and been reborn in another 
realm. 

How many kinds are there who have either fallen or been reborn 
in a realm other than the realm of desire? Five kinds: the common 
man in the realm of desire, material or immaterial realms, and the 
perfected being in the material or immaterial realms. 

How many kinds have either fallen or been reborn in other than 
the material realm? Six—the common and perfected beings in any 


446 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of the three realms. 

How many kinds are there who have either fallen or been reborn 
in a realm other than the immaterial one? Four—the perfected being 
and common man, each of which is of the realm of desire or matter. 

(E146-147) Part 3. Nonrebirth of One Who has Fallen from 

Realms in That or Another Realm 

Is there one who, fallen from the realm of desire, is not reborn 
in the realm of desire? Yes, e.g., one who rises from an intermediate 
existence in desire to the immaterial realm, or one who has extingui- 
shed existence. 

_ Is there one who, fallen from the realm of desire, is not reborn 
in the realm of matter? Yes—same as previous paragraph. - 

And is there one who, fallen from the element of desire, is not 
reborn in the immaterial realm? Yes, same answer as in previous 
two paragraphs. : 

The possible rebirths are further permuted in like vein. 

(E148) Part 4. Nonrebirth in the Three Realms of One Who Has 

Fallen from His Own Realm 

One who has fallen from either of the three realms and is not reborn 
in one of the three is either somebody in an intermediate existence - 
in the realm of desire or a liberated one. 

The number and kinds of such are reviewed as before. 

(E148-149) Part 5. Nonrebirth of One Who Has not Used His 

Attachment : 

Is there one who, his passion for attachment not used up and his 
life at an end, is not reborn in one or another of the three realms? 
Yes—one in an intermediate existence whose realm is desire. 


Again the kinds are listed. ~ 
(E149) Part 6. The Connection of the Contaminants and Fetters 
with the Common Man and the Perfected Being . 


How many contaminants and how many fetters is the common 
man whose realm is desire subject to? 98 contaminants and 9 fetters. 
How many is the perfected being whose realm is desire subject to? 10 
contaminants and 6 fetters. 

How many dispositions and fetters is the common man whose 
realm is material subject to? 62 contaminants and 6 fetters. How 
many is the perfected being whose realm is matter subject to? 6 
contaminants and 3 fetters. 

How many contaminants and fetters is the common man whose 
realm is immaterial subject to? 31 contaminants and 6 fetters. How 
many is the perfected being whose realm is immaterial subject to? 
3 contaminants and 3 fetters. 


JNANAPRASTHANA 447 
Chapter Four: Ten Doors 


(E150-155) Part 1: 42 Topics of Contaminants 

Question: What are the 42 topics and what is the relation between 
them and the (98) contaminants? 

Answer: 1. 22 faculties; external senses related to all passion- 
rooted contaminants; faculty of femininity related to all desire-rooted 
contaminants, plus the contaminants to be destroyed by practice; 
faculty of life force, related to the contaminants of all three roots 
and to those to be destroyed by practice; the five faith-faculties; © 
the mind, related to all the contaminants; the faculty of satisfaction, 
related to all contaminants rooted in the realm of desire and matter 
and those to be destroyed by practice; the faculty of contentedness 
in all those in the realm of matter—with the exception of pure doubt 
and the ignorance related to it—and to all the other contaminants 
rooted in desire; depression of all those rooted in desire; the three 
pure senses are not related to any contaminant. ° 

2. 18 elements (5 external senses plus mind, their objects and 
their awarenesses). Most of these (except mind, etc.) related to all 
desire-rooted contaminants plus the contaminant to be destroyed 
by effort. Mind, etc. are related to all. 

3. 12 senses related to all the desire-rooted contaminants plus 
the contaminants to be destroyed by practice. 

. 5 aggregates. 
. 5 aggregates which still have grasping inherent in them. 
. 6 elements. 
. Material and immaterial factors. 
. Visible and invisible factors. 
. Resisting and unresisting factors. . 
10. Pure and impure factors. 
11. Conditioned and unconditioned factors. 
' 12, Past, present and future factors. 

13. Good, bad and neutral factors. 

14. Factors of the realm of desire, the material and the immaterial 
realms. 

15. Factors belonging to the seeker, the adept and neither. 

16. Factors to be destroyed by vision or by practice or not to be 
destroyed. 

17. 4 truths (frustration, its cause, cessation and the path). 

18. 4 meditations. 

19. 4 boundless things. 

20. 4 immaterial things. 

21. 8 liberations. 

22. 8 stages of mastery. 


OMm~ INAS 


448 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


23. 10 spheres of totality. 

24. 8 awarenesses. 

25. 3 concentrations. 

26. 3 kinds of concentration. 

27. 3 fetters. 

28. 3 bad roots. 

29. 3 pure influences. 

30. 4 floods. 

31. 4 bonds. 

32. 4 graspings. 

33. 4 bodily knots. 

34. 5 obstructions. 

35. 5 fetters. 

36. 5 obstructive fetters. 

37. 5 upper fetters. 

38. 5 false views. 

39. 5 desirous bodies. 

40. 7 contaminants. 

41. 9 fetters. 

42. 8 contaminants not included above. 

The relations between each of these 42 sets and their relative 
contaminants are explained. 


Parts 2-3: The Respective Bases ofthe _- 
Corresponding Contaminants 


(E156-162) Essentially the same lists of categories are taken first 
as ‘‘sense’’ and then as cognitions of that sense. Relations to the 
various dispositions conform grosso modo to the treatment of the 
preceding section. It is explained what awareness of a sense corres- _ 
ponds to each of the collections of contaminants. 


Part 4: Immediate Rebirth of Awareness 


(E162-164) How many minds, among the 15 -fold 3-rooted aware- 
nesses, are generated immediately by each one of these factors 
beginning with awareness? The same list of categories is presumed. 
Answer: The awareness-sense generates immediately 15 aware- 
nesses, the evenminded-sense and the five sense-organs beginning 
with faith. The numbers generated by the rest are reviewed. 


Part 5: Initial Thought 


(E164-165) Each of the contaminants, when compounded with 


JNANAPRASTHANA 449 


topics listed previously, is to be described as (a) accompanied by 
both initial and sustained thought or (b) by sustained thought but 
not initial thought or (c) neither. 


Part 6: Applications of the Sense-Organs 


(E166-168) Are each of the contaminants to be described as 
connected through the sense of satisfaction, through the sense of 
frustration, through the sense of joy, through the sense of contented- 
ness, through the sense of depression, or through the sense of 
evenmindedness? 

As answer it is explained how each of the 98 contaminants operate 
through sense-organs, etc. 


Part 7-8: Presence and Absence 


(E168-172) Which kind of person do each of the contaminants 
belong to, and from which are they lacking? Answers are given for 
each of the 42 topics. 


Part 9: Ascertainment 


(E173-177) Which of the 98 contaminants, when known, provide 
knowledge of which others? And which of the 9 fetters are gotten 
rid of when that knowledge is gained? Answer: At the time one gains 
knowledge of the visual sensual desire for matter is gotten rid of. 
Etc. 


Part 10: Evidence 


(E176-185) With respect to each of the 98 contaminants, when 

its cessation is made evident, of which of the others is there also 

‘evidence of cessation? And which of the 9 fetters are gotten rid of 
when its cessation is made evident? Answer along the same lines. 


21 


(BHADANTA) DHARMASRI, ABHIDHARMA- 
~ HRDAYA or ABHIDHARMASARA 


Summary by Charles Willemen 


This work, T.1550, is preserved only in Chinese, having been 
translated into that language by Samghadeva and Hui-yuan in 391 
A.D. The work has been translated by Charles Willemen’ into English 
(our ‘‘T’’) and by I. Armelin? into French. Leon Hurvitz studies the 
section on the abhisamayas,° and P. Pelliot the introduction.* There 
is a Japanese translation by Baiyu Watanabe, Kogen Midzuno and 
Shuten Watanabe in KIK. Bidonbu, vol. 21, according to Hajime 
Nakamura.° 

Willemen estimates that Dharmasri’s date must be prior to the 
time of the Mahavibhasd, since heis mentioned by Bhadanta Dharma- 
trata, one of the Mahavibhasd masters. How much before is unclear. 
Willemen thinks Dharmasri must date after 130 B.C., when the 
Yiieh-chih came to Bactria where Dharmasri lived. He also reports 
Chinese opinions placing Dharmasri before the time of the J#anapra- 
sthana, though the reasons given would seem only to suggest he is - 
at least prior to the time of the Mahavibhasa. Frauwallner® and 
Armelin also date Dharmasri prior to the Ja#anaprasthana. But Hajime 
Nakamura writes that “‘Dharmasri composed the Abhidharma- 
hrdaya-Sastra in about 200 A.D.””’ 

Frauwallner’s opinion of the contribution of this work is interesting. 
He calls it ‘‘the oldest dogmatic work of the Sarvastivada’’ ,” crediting 
its author with having made a notable, if ultimately unsuccessful, 
attempt to systematize Sarvastivada tradition. ‘“The various compo- 
nents out of which it is compiled do not support one another. E.g., 
the account of the dharmas in Chapter Two does not accord with 
that of the latent dispositions in Chapter Four, and the teaching 
concerning the six causes. The supplementary attempts to bring these 
teachings into harmony with one another are purely superficial and 
do not pertain to the core of the teachings. That means that Dharmasri 


452 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in his system often had to work with older, contradictory teachings 
which he hesitated to alter wilfully.’’® 


Chapter One: Elements 


1 (T1-2) Salutations are offered to the Buddha, the dharma and 
the order. The question is raised as to why the characteristic marks 
of factors need to be known. One answer is that only ascertained 
factors can be the contents of convincing awareness. But ordinary 
people also know the differentiating features, e.g., of the elements 
in terms of their empirical characteristics, viz., that earth is solid, 
water wet, fire hot, and so on. So they already know the differentiating 
features of things and do not need to be taught them all over again. 
So this answer cannot be the right one. 

In fact, ordinary people do not know the differentiating features 
of factors. If what they are aware of—the empirical characteristics 
mentioned above—were those features, then they should never be 
doubted, i.e. they should be certain, but they are not. Furthermore, 
earth, in addition to being solid, is also impermanent, frustrating, 
and without a self-nature. But ordinary people, though they are aware 
of the solidity of earth, are not aware of these other features. 

2-5(T2-4) The Buddha taught the actual differentiating features 
of factors. Ordinary people ascribe to impure conditioning factors 
features which only belong to things different from those impure 
factors—features of permanency, possession of a nature, satisfac- 
toriness and cleanliness. However, these impure factors are impure 
because they produce defilements such as perverse views about 
individuality, or latent dispositions. These impure factor$ are also 
known as defilements, aggregates of grasping, and strife, because 
they trouble beings, because they take hold of us, because they 
produce angry thoughts. 

6-9(T4-6) Aggregates comprise all the conditioned factors, both 
pure and involving grasping, i.e., impure. There are five of them: 
material form, feeling, identification, conditioning factors and 
consciousness. 

Material form has ten bases: the five organs and the five corres- 
ponding qualities. In addition, the unmanifest is explained to belong 
to material form in Chapter Three on Karma. 

Consciousness is the sense-organ mind. Seven of the elements 
pertain to it, viz., visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, tactile and 
mental consciousnesses and mind itself. 

The remainder includes the other three aggregates, the unmanifest, 
and the three unconditioned factors, viz., space, calculated cessation 

4 


(BHADANTA) DHARMASRI 453 


and uncalculated cessation. These six are collectively termed ‘‘fac- 
tor-sense”’ (dharmayatana) or ‘‘factor-element”’ (dharmadhatu). 

Aggregates are conditioned only. Senses and elements may be 
conditioned or unconditioned. 

10-13(T6- 10) Discussion of the elements. One element is visible: 
matter. Ten elements possess resistance, viz., the five sense-organs 
and their respective qualitative contents (color, sound, smell, etc.). 
Eight elements are said to be neutral: the five sense-organs and the 
qualities of smell, taste and touch. The rest (color, sound, mind, 
the factor-element and the six consciousnesses) are either good or 
bad. Specifically, good bodily movements involve good matter, bad 
bodily movements bad matter. The other matter is indeterminate. 
Likewise with sound and vocal movements. The seven elements of 
awareness—the six consciousnesses and mind—are good when pure, 
bad when associated with defilements, and otherwise neutral. As 
for the factor element, they say that when it is associated with thought 
it is explained as above; otherwise, it is explained as in the chapter 
titled ‘‘Miscellaneous’”’ (i.e., Chapter 9 below). 

Fifteen elements are impure: 5 internal elements, 5 external 
elements, and 5 consciousness-elements, The rest—mind, repre- 
sentative cognition and the factor-element—are either pure or impu- 
re. Three (mind, factor-element and representative cognition) are 
found in all the three realms. Four (smell, taste, gustatory and 
tactile consciousnesses) are found in the sensual realm alone, since 
those in the other two realms have no attachment to solid food, and 
all smells and tastes have the nature of solid food. Eleven (5 internal 
elements, color, sound, touch, and the awarenesses which take these 
last three as contents viz., visual, auditory and tactile conscious- 
nesses) are found in both the sensual and material realms, but not 
in the immaterial realm, since that is free from form. 

Five elements are accompanied by initial and sustained thought, 
viz., the five consciousness-elements, which are associated with 
grossness. Three elements—mind, the factor-element and repre- 
sentative cognition—are such that, in the first trance state and in 
the realm of desire they have initial and sustained thought, but in 
the intermediate meditative stage they only have sustained, not initial 
thought, and at higher stages they have neither. The elements other 
than these eight are accompanied by neither initial nor sustained 
thought, since they are not associated with thought. 

Seven elements have a supporting object: the six consciousnesses 
and a bit of the factor-element. The latter has the factor supporting 
object as its basis. Only the concomitant mental factors have suppor- 
ting objects. 

Nine elements are appropriated—sound, the seven awareness 


454 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
elements and the factor-element. The rest may or may not be 
appropriated. An elementis said to be ‘‘appropriated”’ when, integra- 
ted in the sensorial organism, an awareness or concomitant mental 
factor takes it and appropriates it as its support. 

The factor-element is-both conditioned and unconditioned. The 
part corresponding to the unconditioned factors is not, and the rest 
is. The other 17 are conditioned only. 

14 (T10-11) Everything is included within things of its own nature, 
and separated from things of a different nature. So, a visible thing 
is included within one element, one aggregate and one sense. This 
will be explained later. 


Chapter Two: Conditioning Factors 


15-19(T12-15) Question: Since everything is included only within 
something of its own nature, mustn’t they come into existence 
through their own power? 

Answer: Ultimately nothing can come into existence that way, since 
nothing has anything accompanying it (which could occasion its rise). 
A conditioning factor is weak and cannot arise by itself. But like 
a sick person who can get out of bed when assisted by others, a 
thing can come into existence when supported by other things. 

Awarenesses arise accompanied by concomitant mental factors 
and factors dissociated from awareness. “‘Awareness’’, ‘‘mind’’ and 

““consciousness’’ are synonyms. When a thought comes into exis- 
tence dependent on something, with a supporting object, and at 
a particular moment, its concomitants come into existence along with 
it. These concomitants include: identification, interest, contact, 
wisdom, mindfulness (memory), thinking, resolve, attention, con- 
centration and feeling. Identification occurs when something esta- 
blished is experienced according to its sign. Interest is the desire 
to experience while an object is being experienced. Contact occurs 
when thought, its sense and its supporting object are not separated 
from each other. Wisdom is certainty about an object. Memory is 
not being forgetful. Thinking is the framing of something meritorious 
or evil or neither in relation to thought. Resolve is the belief, when 
experiencing an idea in relation to an object, that that object is 
certainly the right one. Attention is being active in a resolute way 
toward an object. Concentration is experiencing an object when one’s 
thoughts are not scattered. Feeling is the experiencing of a pleasant 
or unpleasant object or one that is neither. All ten of these concomi- 
tants come into existence associated with each thought; thus they 
are called generally permeating. And they are permanent accompani- 
ments of each thought, and incapable of increase or decrease. 


(BHADANTA) DHARMASRI 455 


Initial thought is a series of coarse thoughts; sustained thought a 
series of subtle thoughts. Faith is sincerity and true purity. Tranquility 
is satisfaction with good thoughts. Heedfulness is application in doing 
good things. Energy is strenuousness. Equanimity is acting without 
acting, seeking without seeking, guarding oneself and thus not 
producing conditioning factors. Defilements are explained in the 
chapter on latent dispositions. These factors, together with the three 
good roots: absence of greed, lack of hatred and understanding, do 
not all accompany every thought; sometimes they accompany, and 
sometimes not. 

20-22(T15-18) The concomitants of bad thoughts in the realm 
of desire number 21: the 10 generally permeating factors, initial 
thought, sustained thought, 2 defilements, shamelessness, disregard, 
lethargy, excitedness, lack of confidence, heedlessness and sloth. 

By subtracting shamelessness and disregard from the above list 
one gets 19 concomitants of the thoughts of the defiled person in 
the realm of desire. Such persons are not bad, and those two factors 
that were subtracted are bad only. 

There are 20 factors that fall into the category of special factors. 
A “‘unique’’ factor is one that is produced only by ignorance. The 
20 factors of the present group are the same as those in the group 
of concomitants of bad thoughts minus one of the two defilements 
{viz., the one that is not itself ignorance). Concomitants of good 
thoughts are: the ten generally permeating factors, initial thought, 
sustained thought, faith, energy, tranquility, heedfulness, three good 
factors, equanimity, shame and modesty. 

There are 12 neutral factors, the concomitants of the undefiled 
thoughts. These are the 10 generally permeating factors, initial and 
sustained thought. Thus there are five classes of thoughts, viz., good, 
bad, defiled, unique and neutral, with concomitants as mentioned. 
Regret increases the list of good and bad factors by one, and 
sleepiness may increase all five classes by one. 

The above relates to the realm of desire. As for the material realm: 
the first trance excludes bad thoughts, but the rest are to be under- 
stood to include all the other four classes of thoughts and concomi- 
tants described above, except that shamelessness and disregard, 
concomitants of bad thoughts only, do not arise in the unique class. 
In the intermediate meditative states of the material and immaterial 
realms sustained thought also goes. 

23(T18-19) For each atom constitutive of a visual, auditory, 
gustatory or olfactory faculty there are 10 seeds, viz., earth, water, 
fire, air, color, smell, taste, touch, the visual faculty and the bodily 
faculty. For each atom in the bodily faculty there are nine seeds, 
viz., the above 10 minus the bodily faculty itself. In the atoms 


456 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
constituting the remaining faculties there are eight seeds (viz., the 
first eight listed above). In the material realm smell and taste are 
absent. 

24(T19-20) The contaminants dissociated from awareness of 
material factors are birth, duration, change and disappearance. And 
each of these in turn has its own secondary mark, viz., coming to 
be for birth, maintaining for duration, changing for change, dis- 
appearing for disappearance. No infinite regress occurs, for each 
of the secondary marks produces that which it marks and vice-versa. 

25-29(T20-24) Every cause is included among the six kinds of 
cause. These are: (1) efficient cause, e.g., the production of all sorts 
of earthy products from earth; (2) simultaneous cause, when things 
spring up together, as, e.g., the factors which are thought together 
with their concomitants and the dissociated dispositions appropriate 
to them; (3) homogeneous cause, where a kind of thing causes 
something of its own kind, e.g., when good activity produces gocd 
factors, etc.; (4) pervasive cause, e.g., the process by which the 
defilements are produced in a series by urges; (5) connected cause, 
the specific association between, e.g., a thought and its specific 
concomitant; and (6) maturation cause, when a disposition matures, 
e.g., when a good disposition ripens into a good outcome. 

Now it is shown that everything is a product of causes, indeed, 
practically everything of at least two and at most five of the above . 
types of causes. For example, thoughts arising from maturations, 
their concomitants and the defilements are produced by five causes; 
matter born of a retributory cause and dissociated from awareness, 
defiled matter dissociated from awareness and, associated factors 
excluding the initial pure ones are produced by four causes; the 
remaining dissociated factors—excluding the initial pure ones—as 
well as the initial pure associated factors have three causes; the initial 
pure dissociated factors are produced by two causes. 

30-32(T24-26) The conditions are now explained. They are four: 
(1) the directly antecedent condition, relating a factor to its prede- 
cessor in a series; (2) the consciousness-supporting condition, the 
conditioning of a thought and its concomitants by its object; (3) the 
dominant condition, which is the efficient cause; (4) the condition 
as cause, which includes the remaining five causes in the previous 
section. 

Thoughts and their concomitants are produced by all four condi- 
tions. Trance free from-conceptual identification and cessation- 
trance are produced by three conditions—the thought immediately 
producing the trance is the directly antecedent condition, the qualities 
conducing to the trance are the conditions as cause, and all the factors 
other than the trance itself are the dominant conditions. The remain- 


(BHADANTA) DHARMASRI 457 


ing factors—e.g., the dissociated ones other than trances—have two 
conditions, viz., the condition as cause and the dominant condition. 
Question: Why are these factors not associated with thought called 
““conditioning factors’’? 
Answer: Because many factors, each formed by many conditioning 
factors, conspire to produce a single factor. Thus they work together 
(samskn to produce. 


Chapter Three: Karma _ 


33-35(T27-28) When these factors, so produced, bear fruit, 
different kinds of birth result. The three worlds (past, present, future) 
with their bodies in five courses (viz., hell, ghostly, animal, human, 
heaven) result from karma. Actions are bodily, mental or vocal. 

Bodily karma can be either manifest or unmanifest. Likewise for 
verbal karma. Mental karma is only unmanifest. Karma is manifest 
inasmuch as it is good, bad or neutral depending on the thought which 
gives rise to it. Karma is unmanifest when it arises as a result of 
habit despite thought preceding it which are of a different sort than 
it, so that even one having bad or neutral thoughts may yet do a 
good act, and likewise a person with good habits does evil actions 
despite himself. Mental acts have only unmanifest karma because 
they are not evident, being a subtle series of thinkings. 

36-39(T28-31) Manifest and mental acts are of one among three 
kinds, viz., they are either good, bad or neutral. Bodily and vocal 
unmanifest acts are never neutral—they are either good or bad, ~ 
because a neutral thought is-too weak to produce an action forceful 
enough to produce a bodily or vocal action of its own kind. 

Neutral karma is either obstructed or nonobstructed. An obstructed 
act is one which is defiled; a.nonobstructed one is not defiled. 
Obstructed neutral karma only occurs in the material realm; this is 
because in the realm of desire only bad defilements occur and they 
cannot produce neutral karma. Nonobstructed karma, on the other 
hand, can occur in both the realm of desire and the material realm. 

Mental actions are just the 21 kinds of thought described above 
{in stanzas 20-22). Good nonmanifest bodily and vocal karma is 
marked by one of the three kinds of restraint: meditative, pure and 
- liberation-oriented. ‘‘Pure’’ here means the noble path, viz., right 
speech, right action, right living. ‘‘Liberation-oriented restraint’’ is 
the restraint of desires through the code of discipline. 

Unmanifest results of action in the realm of desire are not com- 
panions of awareness, since though thoughts of three kinds (good, 
bad and neutral) do occur after liberation-oriented restraint, they 
do not correspond to the kind of action undertaken there. Manifest 


458 : ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
results of action in both the realms of desire and matter are not 
companions of thought, since they involve the body. Meditative and 
pure unmanifest results of action, however, are companions of 
awareness, since they depend on thoughts of a corresponding nature. 
40-45(T31-34) Pure restraint arises from understanding the four 
noble truths. Meditative restraint involves entering a meditative state. 
Liberation-oriented restraint comes from being ordained. 

Unmanifest karma of liberation-oriented restraint is permanent. 
When such a person brings about manifest karma he brings about 
a ‘‘present’’, and when that karma ends but is not lost, it is “‘past’’. 

It is said that one who has unmanifest karma through meditation 
accomplishes what is past (as above) and what is future (since the 
meditative restraint is to come). A person in concentration accomp- 
lishes what is present, since his unmanifest karma is companion of 
his concentration. 

Pure meditative restraint is accomplished by all that have gotten 
on the path, and so its unmanifest karma is future; the ghosts of 
the path are present in it. 

One who is restrained may nevertheless do bad actions and reap . 
their fruit; as long as he is bound by fetters he produces both manifest 
and unmanifest karma as a result. But when his fetters are destroyed, 
both manifest and unmanifest karma end. 

46-48(T34-36) One not restrained produces present unmanifest . 
karma as a foul fruit. Likewise if he produces bad manifest karma. 
But when good it is the opposite. One who is nonrestrained is bad 
as long as good thoughts continue. 

One neither restrained nor nonrestrained may be either good or 
bad, and so have manifest or unmanifest karma. 

49(T36-37) Question: How does one obtain restraint in the 
material realm? 

Answer: Through good thoughts in the material realm meditative 
restraint of that realm results whether one has or has not renounced 
desires; for restraint is always a companion of good thoughts in the 
material realm. But when good thoughts of that sort are lost, this 
meditative restraint is lost too. 

Pure restraint in the material realm accompanies pure thoughts 
of six stages, viz., nonreturning, noninterrupted trance and the four 
fundamental trances. 

§0-51(T37-38) Question: What interrupts these three restraints? 

Answer: The Buddha has said that the liberation- oriented medita- 
tion can be interrupted in five ways—by abandoning the moral rules, 
by breaking precepts, by dying, by increasing wrong views, or when 
the law vanishes. Whereas meditative trance may be interrupted in 
two ways—by falling away and by being born into a higher stage, 


(BHADANTA) DHARMASRI 459 


puretrance may be interrupted either by falling away or by maturing 
a result. 

Question: And what interrupts bad restraint, good formless acts 
and defiled acts (in the realm of desire)? 

Answer: Bad restraint is interrupted either when one is not applied 
to it any more or by death. Good formless acts are interrupted when 
the good roots are cut and when one is born into a higher stage. 
As for defiled acts, they are interrupted when desire is renounced 
mentally. 

52-54(T38-40) Bad actions bring evil fruits; they are dominated 
by covetousness, malice and wrong views. The opposite is called 
good conduct by the Buddha, lacking these dominating attitudes. 

There are ten paths of bad conduct: (1) taking life premeditatedly 
and with full cognizance of who the victim is; (2) stealing, which 
is taking things which are not offered to one; (3) wrong conduct, 
having intercourse with another’s woman or abusing one’s own 
woman sexually; (4) lying, that is, intentionally uttering falsehoods; 
(5) slander, when one speaks ill of someone else out of hatred; (6) 
frivolous talk, senseless words uttered by one with unwholesome 
thoughts; (7) covetousness, which is desirousness; (8) malice; (9) 
hatred; (10) wrong views. 

It is thinking (or volition [ cetana]) which is the fundamental action. 

Actions of these sorts produce their results either in the-present 
or in some next life. Other actions are not fixed as to the times of . 
their maturation. 

55-58(T40-43) Question: What about the Buddha’s classification 
of actions into those that produce satisfaction or frustration or 
neither? 

Answer: Good acts in the realm of desire and good acts in the 
(first) three stages of the material realm involve satisfaction as a 
product, whether they are fixed or not fixed as to the time of their 
maturation. Good actions at higher stages produce neither satis- 
faction nor frustration. Bad actions produce frustration. 

Question: What about the Buddha’s classification of actions into 
(a) black with black results, (b) white with white results, (c) black 
and white with black and white results, (d) neither black nor white 
and without results? 

Answer: Good action in the material realm i is white and involves 
white results. Good actions in the realm of desire are black and white 
and have black and white results, involving mixed retributions. What 
is foul, i.e. the bad acts, are black and have black results. But when 
volitions in the course of the noninterrupted path oppose these three 
kinds of action, the action which results is of the fourth sort, i.e. 


460 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


neither black nor white and without results. (For the noninterrupted 
path and details, cf. below, 204 and following). 

59-60 (T43-44) The Buddha speaks of verbal and mental crooked- 
ness, defects and faults. Crookedness is produced by craftiness, 
defects by hatred, and faults by passion. 

The Buddha also speaks of three purifications, which are forms 
of good conduct. Sageliness consists of good verbal and corporal 
conduct, characteristic of the adept. It is also mental. 

61 (T44-45) Now we explain the results of actions. Normally 
actions, whether good or bad, have two kinds of results, their natural 
kind of outcome and their karmic maturation. Pure actions have a 
natural result and the resulting disjunction (of defilements). Good 
impure actions can have three kinds of results—natural, karmic 
maturation and disconnection (of defilements). All other acts have 
only one kind of result, the natural kind. 

62-63 (T45-47) Which of the great elements produce which 
actions? It depends on the stage which one is in. 


Actions leading directly to hell, defilements and bad results are - 


called ‘obstructions’; they preclude experiencing the factors of the 
noble ones. The worst among actions is that kind which ruins the 
order; one will dwell in the great avicr hell for a Kalpa for such an 
act. The best action is the volition in the sphere of neither-identifying- 
nor-nonidentifying. 


Chapter Four: Contaminants'° 


65-70(T48-49) There are 98 contaminants, which can be divided 
into two kinds: (a) those which are to be abandoned through vision 
of the truths, and (b) those to be abandoned through practice. Of 
type (a), (1) 28 disappear when one attains the vision of frustration, 
(2) 19 disappear on the vision of its origin, (3) 19 at the vision of 
cessation, (4) 22 through vision of the path. Of type (b), 10 disappear 
through practice. 

Thirty-six of these contaminants are to be found in the realm of 
desire—10 of those from (al), 7 from (a2), 7 from (a3), 8 from 
(a4), and 4 from (b). Of the remainder, 31 are in the material realm 
and 31 in the immaterial realm. i 

71-73 (T49-52) All the contaminants are now explained. There 
are five defilements of view: (1) extreme view, (2) false view, (3) 
view that there is a self, (4) adherence to views, and (5) overadher- 
ence to rules and vows. (1) involves the views of eternalism or 
annihilation; (2) involves the denial of the truth; (3) is the view that 
there is something with feelings and consciousness; it is also called 
the belief that the body is real; (4) is believing impure factors to 


~ 


(BHADANTA) DHARMASRI 461 


be best; (5) is taking what is not a cause as a cause. Since these 
five involve wisdom they are called ‘‘views’’. 

The following are not views: (6) attachment to satisfactions; (7) 
perplexity, when.one is uncertain about something already seen; (8) 
resistance, when one’s actions meet with opposition; (9) pride, which 
is self-elevation; and (10) delusion, i.e. ignorance. 

These ten are the defilements. They are differentiated by what 
they deal with. Some proceed within frustration, some within origina- 
tion, some within cessation, some with the path. Those which 
proceed within frustration are abandoned when there is the vision 
of frustration; those proceeding within origination when there is the 
vision of origination, etc., up to the path. The rest are abandoned 
through practice. All ten defilements proceed within frustration. The 
seven excluding (1), (3) and (5) proceed within origination and within 
cessation. The eight excluding (1) and (3) proceed within the path. 
(8) does not proceed in the two upper realms, but all the rest do 
proceed there. (1-5) and (7) are not to be abandoned through practice 
in the realm of desire, but the other four are; three (those four minus 
8) are to be abandoned through practice in the material realm, and 
the same in the immaterial realm. 

74-76(T52-53) Question: How are they differentiated by what 
they deal with? 

Answer: al-a5, and al0 of the kinds to be abandoned through 
the vision of frustration, and b2, b4, b7 and bi0 to be abandoned 
through the vision of origination, are said to be pervasive. There 
are 11 such kinds. The rest are not pervasive, being restricted to 
a particular object that they deal with. 

75-77(T53-54) The as (minus al and a3) and bs ay have their 
object in the material and immaterial realms. 

(2) and (7) proceeding within cessation and the path, along with 
the ignorance associated with them or not associated with them, deal 
with pure contents. These six in the three realms make a total of 
eighteen. 

77-79(TS4-55) A defilement may be developed by its object 
and/or by association. Its object may be (a) impure or (b) pure. In 
the case of (a) all universal contaminants deal with all five kinds 
of contents (viz., destruction of the vision of frustration, etc.) in their 
particular stages, and they are developed by them. All other contami- 
nants deal with and are developed by factors within their own kind, 
in their own realm. Both universal contaminants and the other kind 
are developed by association with contaminants of their own kind, 
in their own stage. In the case of (b) the object is in a higher stage. 
In that case the contaminant is developed by association with ele- 
ments of its own class or kind. 


‘ 


462 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 

80(T55-56) In the realm of desire (1), (3) and the ignorance 
associated with them are neutral, for if it were not so one doing a 
good deed could not gain merit, since he would do so with a wrong 
view (of self). Likewise, holding to permanence is not bad, for the 
same reason. And holding the view of annihilationism is not bad, 
since it involves disgust with birth and death. The rest of the defile- 
ments are bad. 

On the other hand, in the material and immaterial realms all the 
contaminants are neutral since they are destroyed by concentration 
rather than maturing into frustrating results. 

81-82 (T56-57) (6), (8) and (9) deal with a specific past content, 
‘but deal with all future impure factors. The remaining contaminants 
deal with all factors, past or future. 

The defilements grow gradually within the relevant realm, and 
those found in higher realms will be reproduced in the lower ones. 

83-86 (T57-59) The old list of seven contaminants is related to 
Dharmasri’s present series of ten. The seven are also called bonds, 
grasping, floods and evil influences. 

87-89 (T59-61} The relations between the contaminants and the 
faculties is explored. All 98 contaminants are associated with equani- 
mity in all their realms. In the material realm contaminants are 
associated with contentedness and satisfaction. In the realm of desire 
contaminants (2) and (10) provide both satisfaction and frustration. 
(7) and (8) provide only frustration. The rest provide only satis- 
faction. Those which are (b) abandoned through practice are associa- 
ted with bodily and mental feelings, both satisfactions and frustra- 
tions. 

90-92 (T61-63) The afflictions are now explained. These are the 
following eight: (1) shamelessness, (2) disregard, (3) lethargy, (4) 
regret, (5) selfishness, (6) envy, (7) excitedness and (8) torpor. (3), 
(7) and (8) accompany all the dispositions. (1) and (2) accompany 
the bad ones. (4) is to be abandoned through practice; it is only 
associated with frustration and depression. (8) is associated with all 
defilements of the realm of desire. The other two (viz., (5) and (6)) 
are not associated with the others. 

93(T63) Question: How many consciousnesses are the defile- 
ments associated with? 

Answer: Sensual desire, resistance and ignorance, to be abandoned 
through practice, are based on all six consciousnesses in the realm 
of desire. In the material realm desire and ignorance are associated 
with four consciousnesses in the brahmaloka, i.e. trance 1, and with 
representative cognition alone in the higher stages. The other defile- 
ments are related to representative cognition. 

94-95 (T63-65S) One abandons each defilementina single moment 


(BHADANTA) DHARMASRI 463 


by the noninterrupted path, and they do not have to be abandoned 
again. Disjunction from the defilements takes several mom- 
ents—e.g., the defilements in the realm of desire which are to be 
abandoned through vision take a moment to be destroyed, and 
a moment is taken for the destruction of each of the four results 
of monkhood. 

Complete destruction constitutes full overcoming of abandonment. 
One such comprehension occurs through the visions of frustration 
and origination, a second through the vision of cessation, a third 
through vision of the path, and a fourth through ab andonment through 
practice. 

96 (T65-66) Contaminants defile awareness and so are associated 
with awareness. They are obstructions, and opposed to that which 
is pure. 


Chapter Five: Nobility"! 


97-103 (T67-71) We now explain how noble persons eliminate 
the defilements. First one practices four applications of mindfulness; 
viz., concentration on the body, feelings, awareness and the factors, 
both awareness and concomitant mental factors, including those 
dissociated from awareness. One contemplates the factors in general, 
their common characteristics of impermanence, voidness, self- 
lessness and frustration. Then a factor called heat is produced in 
the mind, the fire of pure knowledge. This heat has sixteen forms 
and it ranges over the four noble truths. The four forms relating to 
the first noble truth are impermanence, frustration, voidness and 
selflessness; the four relating to the second truth are cause, origina- 
tion, source, condition; to the third truth are cessation, calm, excel- 
lence, relation to deliverance; the four relating to the fourth truth 
are the path, correctness (nydya), leading (pratipatti) and liberating 
(nairyanika). Doing this gives rise to the summit, which leads to 
patience. And this in turn leads to the higher worldly factors, which 
open the gate to liberation. 

These higher worldly factors proceed within the four forms of 
frustration, and are comprised within six stages. Their content is like 
that of the first pure awareness. So also is patience comprised within 
six stages. Summit and heat are comprised within seven stages, since 
in addition to the six trances the realm of desire must also be included. 
_ 104-112 (171-77) This is the noble path. From the higher worldly 
factors comes patient acceptance of frustration. This is the pure 
immediate path. From this comes knowledge of dharma in relation 
to frustration and deliverance from it. Both the acceptance and the 
knowledge have as their content the lower frustration (in the realm 


464 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of desire), but the same is true of the upper frustration {in the material 
and immaterial realms}. So there are four awarenesses: in the realm 
of desire: acceptance of the dharma (i.e. the truth) of frustration, 
knowledge of it; in the two higher realms: subsequent acceptance 
in relation with frustration, and subsequent knowledge in relation 
with frustration. Likewise, with respect to the other three truths (viz., 
origination, cessation and path) there are likewise four awarenesses, 
so a total of sixteen awarenesses constitute the path of vision. The 
characteristies of those who practice this path are delineated. Those 
with keen faculties follow the dharma. Those with weak faculties 
follow faith. Persons can be distinguished according to the number 
of strength of defilements they have abandoned. There are nine kinds 
of strength of each defilement (permute weak, medium and strong 
into weak-weak, weak-medium, etc.). Those who have not yet 
renounced desire through practice while in the realm of desire 
progress toward the result of being astream-enterer; those who have 
abandoned six of the nine strengths of defilements progress towards 
the result of being once-returners; when all nine are abandoned, they 
progress towards the results of being non-returners. The tenth 
moment of the path of vision, the dharma-follower is called ‘‘view- 
attainer’’, and the faith-follower is called ‘‘enlightenment-resol- 
ved’’. At that moment these persons are called stream-enterers, 
once-returners, or nonreturners. A stream-enterer who has not yet 
renounced a defilement through practice in the realm of desire is 
called “destined for seven births’’. One who has destroyed three 
kinds of defiletnents (viz., strong-weak, strong-medium and 
strong-strong) will be reborn in several families (Ku/amkula). A 
once-returner who has destroyed eight kinds of defilements will 
germinate one more time. 

The nine kinds of defilements are found in the realm of desire 
and in the upper realms, of which eight are identified. All defilements 
are eliminated through a twofold path: the noninterrupted path and 
the path of liberation. He who, in the last stage of the immaterial 
realm, has obtained cessation-trance, is called *“‘bodily witness’’. 

113-116 (T77-80) {Up to here the seeker’s path has been des- 
cribed. Now we turn to the adept’s path.) The culminating thought 
of the seeker’s path, when in the highest (eighth) stage listed above, 
destroys all defilements forever; it is the diamond-like concentration. 
This automatically triggers the knowledge of extinction, the first 
moment in the adept’s path. It destroys all impurities and destroys 
all subsequent births. Such a one is nonattached, a noble person. 
_ He is of six kinds: (1) one who falls away, whose knowledge and 
energy are weak; (2) one who wills (his own destruction), who 
because of weak knowledge and energy dislikes his body and wants 


(BHADANTA) DHARMASRI 465 


to destroy it; (3) one who guards, who has weak knowledge but 
vigorous energy and guards his thoughts carefully; (4) one who abides 
unshakable, with medium knowledge and medium energy; (5) one 
who will penetrate, who because of lack of sharpness yet much 
energy certainly attains immovability; and (6) immovable, whose 
knowledge is sharp and energy vigorous and is thus immovable. 
(1)-(5), who were faith-followers, obtain knuwledge of destruction 
and the view of those who have no more training to do. They are 
now Called “temporarily released’’, which is to say that they cannot 
always do good on every occasion, their liberation depends on an 
appropriate occasion. The immovable one (6) is fully liberated, he 
always does good on every occasion. He has knowledge of destruc- 
tion, knowledge of nonarising, and the view of those who have no 
more training to do. 

He who is “‘liberated through wisdom’’ has not attained cessation, 
though he be one of the above six kinds. But one who is liberated 
through both the power of wisdom and through the cessation-trance 
is called ‘‘twice-delivered’’ and is fully liberated. 

117-119 (T80-82) The factors of the nobles are now explained. 
They are called the path of vision and are common to faith-followers, 
dharma-followers and the noble path of vision of the noble truths. 
These factors comprise the faculty of being one who will come to 
understand what is not yet understood (andjfiatam 4jfidsyamindriya) 
in the path of vision. In the path of practice this faculty is called 
“faculty of understanding’ (ajfendriya). In the adept’s path this 
faculty is called perfect knowledge (ajfiatavindriya). 

- 120-122 (T82-83) The defilements are gradually destroyed by 
a double ninefold path. Then the result which is discerned is obtained. 
In the case of, e.g., good impure factors, this result is obtained directly 
by the ninth noninterrupted path. Not everyone who is nonattached 
obtains immovability, but only the one who will penetrate. 


Chapter Six: Knowledge!” 


123-129 (T84-88) The Buddha expounded three kinds of know- 
ledge: (1) knowledge of dharma, visible to the faculties, the content. 
of which is the four truths in the realm of desire; (2) connected 
knowledge, in which the concomitants of the truths that are invisible 
to the faculties in the material and immaterial realm are known; and 
(3) conventional knowledge, whichis impure cognition grasping what 
is only conventionally true in terms of conceptual distinctions such 

as male/female, long/short, etc. Sakyamuni speaks of four know- 
ledges, corresponding to knowledge of each of the four truths. E.g., 
dharma-knowledge and knowledge of connection of which the 


466 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


contertt is the truth of frustration is called ‘‘knowledge of frustra- 
tion’’. There is alsc knowledge of the thoughts of others (paracitta- 
jana). The others’ thoughts may be conventional or pure (dharma- 
and connection-knowledge). Finally, there are two adept’s know- 
ledges: the knowledge of destruction (‘‘that which should be done, 
is done’’), and the knowledge of nonarising (“‘one will not do it 
again’’). The former represents knowledge of dharma, and the latter 
subsequent knowledge. 

The sixteen aspects of their relation with the knowledges are 
explained. E.g., the two adepts’ knowledges have fourteen forms 
(excluding voidness and selflessness from the sixteen listed). 

130-138 (T88-95) Now it is explained how these kinds of know- 
ledge are acquired. The first pure awareness in the noble path (see 
sec. 104-112 above) or acceptance of frustration produces only 
conventional knowledge if desire has not been abandoned. If it has 
been abandoned, the resulting awareness is knowledge of the aware- 
ness of others. 

The second awareness, viz., knowledge of dharma in relation to 
frustration, produces knowledge of dharma, knowledge of frustra- 
tion, and conventional knowledge. The third (viz., acceptance of what 
is concomitant with frustration) produces the above three plus 
knowledge of connection. The same pattern is recapitulated in 
discussing the other three knowledges (of dharma) in relation to 
arising, cessation and the path respectively. Nine of the resulting 
knowledges are found in the upper stages, ten in the meditative trance 
states, and eight in the immaterial realm. 

There are two kinds of practice: practice which means obtainment 
of merit previously unobtained and practice which involves practise. 
The former involves acquiring new qualities, the later practising 
qualities already acquired. The number of acts of awareness involved 
in these developments are elaborately laid out. The entire section 
spells out the path to liberation in terms of acts of awareness. 

139-142 (T95-98) Question: Is there any difference between 
vision, knowledge and wisdom? 

Answer: Vision and knowledge are varieties of wisdom. Vision 
involves seeking. Knowledge is certain. E.g., patience is not know- 
ledge; rather, it is vision since it involves seeking. Likewise, know- 
ledge of destruction is not vision, since it does not form (samskp 
anything, it does not seek. 

The number of acts of awareness comprising the knowledge of 
dharma, subsequent knowledge, and other kinds. of knowledge are 
expounded. — 

143 (T98-99) Question: The Buddha has said that one obtains 

‘Nonattachment through subsequent knowledge involving aban- 


(BHADANTA) DHARMASRI 467 
donment of the highest stage (viz., of neither-identification-nor- 
nonidentification). Since subsequent knowledge is thus said to be 
the path, isn’t it the only path? 

Answer: There are also knowledges of dharma which constitute 
paths in the material and immaterial realms. Knowledges of dharma 
in relation to cessation and the path extinguish the three realms, but 
subsequent knowledge cannot extinguish desire, since it does not 
relate to it. 

144-147 (T99-104) Itis explained which knowledges are involved 
in the divine higher faculties, in application of mindfulness with 
respect to the body, in the Buddha’s knowledge, in the four confi- 
dences, in discrimination, and in the knowledge resulting from 
vows.’ 


Chapter Seven: Concentration 


148-161 (T10S-115) The Buddha says there are eight concentra- 
tions: four meditative trance states and four meditative attainments. 
All but the eighth trance state are threefold: associated with relishing, 
i.e. associated with the defilements; or associated with impurity, 
i.e. good and impure; or associated with purity, i.e. not defiled. 

The first trance state has five members: (1) initial thought, in- 
volving gross things; (2) sustained thought, involving subtle things; 
(3) joy; (4) satisfaction; and (S) one-pointed awareness. (1) and (2) 
occur only in good trance states. In the first trance there are: 3 
feeling-faculties (pleasure, contentedness, equanimity), 2 godly 
realms, 4 consciousnesses (eye, ear, body, mind-consciousness). 

The second trance state has four members: (1) serenity, (2) joy, 
(3) satisfaction, and (4) one-pointed awareness. It has two faculties 
(contentedness and equanimity) and three kinds of godly realms. 

The third trance state has five members: (1) satisfaction, (2) 
equanimity, (3) mindfulness, (4) comprehension, and (5) one- 
pointed awareness. It has two faculties (contentedness and equani- 
mity). 

The fourth trance state has four members: (1) neither satisfaction 
nor frustration, (2) indifference, (3) pure mindfulness, and (4) one- 
pointed awareness. It is free from breathing out and in. 

Other states are also explained. The nonreturning state involves 
initial and sustained thought. The intermediate trance is where sus- 
tained (but not initial) thought is present. 

The qualities of these trance states include three concentrations— 
of voidness, of aimlessness, of signlessness; six higher faculties, viz., 
knowledge of the base of supernatural power, knowledge of the divine 
ear, knowledge of the awarenesses of others, remembrance of 


468 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
former lives, knowledge of birth and death, and knowledge of the 
extinction of the evil influences; ten all-bases (Arftsndyafana), viz., 
earth, water, fire, wind, blue, yellow, red, white, ether and con- 
sciousness; eight spheres of mastery, viz., the ten knowledges of 
section 123-126; eight liberations, viz., reflection on impurity while 
still having the idea of form, reflection on impurity having removed 
the idea of form, clean practice, the four immaterial trances, and 
cessation trance (they are called “‘liberations’’ because one 
abandons their ranges and doesn’t acquire anything in so doing). 

The state in which each of these qualitative states are accomplished 
is now explained. Then it is shown which of the qualities are pure 
and which impure. 

126-173 (T115-124) Now the steps in accomplishing these trance 
states are set forth. While one still has desires one accomplishes 
what is associated with relishing. When one has renounced desire 
in the realm of desire but has not yet reached beyond the brahmaloka 
(the first meditative trance state) one accomplishes the pure first 
trance state with its impure qualities. And then, as one moves up 
to each subsequent trance state, one practises a pure meditation of 
the kinds below. Some qualities are produced through application, 
not through renouncing desires. The causes, conditions, antece- 
dents, and supporting objects of the trance states are explained. 

There are mixed trances, mixing the pure ones with the impure 
ones, but these only occur after one has gained the fourth trance 
state. 

174-175 (T124-125) The pure trance-states remove afflictions, 
and so do the adjacent concentrations, which are preparatory paths 
to the fundamental trance states. 

Eight kinds of magical creations are produced by the thoughts of 
one who has supernatural power, four in the realm of desire and 
four in the stage of the first trance. 


Chapter Eight: Sitra 


- 176-179 (T126-129) In the realm of desire there are 10 abodes: 
hell, animal birth, ghost, man, and six desiring gods, viz., the gods 
of the four kings, the 33 gods, the yama gods, the tusita gods, the 
gods who enjoy magical creations, and the gods controlling enjoy- 
ment of magical creations of others. In the material realm there 
are 17 abodes (classified by their belonging to one of the four trances 
each). In the immaterial realm there are 4 abodes: unlimited space, 
unlimited consciousness, nothingness and neither-identification- 
nor-nonidentification. 

The Buddha speaks of seven abodes of consciousness. These are 


(BHADANTA) DHARMASRI 469 


the first three stages of the material realm and the first three of the 
immaterial realm plus the realm of desire good abodes. The rest 
are not abodes of consciousness, either because they involve frustra- 
tion or because they are beyond consciousness altogether. 

180-181 (T129-130) The twelvefold path of dependent origina- 
tion is now explained. It gradually produces defilements, actions and 
entities. The defilements are ignorance, craving and grasping. Action 
includes conditioning factors and existence. The rest are entities. 

182-185 (T130-133) The four great elements are explained. 
When the Buddha speaks of six elements he has in mind the roots 
of birth and death, viz., earth, air, water and fire, space and con- 
sciousness. 

The four noble truths are reviewed. The four results of monkhood 
are said to have six elements, viz., the five pure aggregates plus 
calculated cessation. Of them, the stream-enterer and once-returner 
are comprised within the pre-trance state; the nonreturner result is 
comprised within the four trances, the pre-trance, and the inter- 
mediate trance; and the result of nobility is comprised within the 
four trances, the pre-trance, the intermediate trance, and three 
immaterial realms. 

186-192 (T133-138) Other classifications found in the sutras are 
explained. The qualities of the faith-follower and dharma-follower 
are distinguished. Four perfect faiths (avetyaprasdda) are expounded: 
faith in Buddha, dharma, the order and in noble virtue. 

Four ways of developing concentration are distinguished: (1) the 
developing of concentration in the visible world that brings satis- 


faction, (2) the developing of concentration that obtains knowledge. 


and vision, (3) the developing of concentration which distinguishes 
wisdom, and (4) the developing of concentration which destroys the 
impure influences. (1) is obtaining satisfactions through the first 
trance. One who knows birth and death is one who practises (2). 
The wisdom gained in (3) includes the restraint of the realm of desire, 
good factors of the material and immaterial realms, and all pure 
conditioning factors. (4) involves the four supernatural powers, the 
four right abandonments, and the four applications of mindfulness. 
The qualities involved are also called the four traditional practices 
of the noble person. 

193-196 (T139-141) Ten factors contribute to enlightenment: 
faith, energy, mindfulness, joy, wisdom, tranquility, equanimity, 
(right) conceptualizing, virtue and concentration. These are each 
explained. The Buddha generates 37 varieties by considering the 
degrees of intensity, exertion and so forth. And by considering which 
of them occur in which meditative stages one generates a much larger 
number. 


470 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


197-198 (T141-143) Four foods are distinguished: solid food, the 
food of contact, the food of representative cognition, and the food 
of consciousness. The latter three are called ‘‘foods’’ because, when 
impure, consciousness, volition and contact do not interrupt the cycle 
of rebirth. 

The three concentrations of emptiness, of aimlessness, and of 
signlessness are explained. Aimlessness has ten forms: noneternality, 
frustration, the four forms of the second noble truth, and four forms 
of the fourth noble truth. Emptiness has two forms, viz., emptiness 
and selflessness. Signless concentration has four forms, viz., the four 
forms of the third noble truth. 

199-209 (T143-151) The four perverted views are those of aware- 
ness, of identification, and of view with respect to (1) perma- 
nence, (2) satisfactoriness, (3) purity and (4) possession of self. 

The Buddha speaks of many views, e.g., of 62 views, etc. They 
can all be comprised within the five views of stanza 71. Likewise, 
the Buddha’s 22 faculties are equated with the canonical nine (eye, * 
ear, nose, tongue, mind, body, male, female, life), and it is shown 
which belong in which realm, and when they produce karmic retribu- 
tions. Some of them (e.g., body, life) come when one is born, the 
others are gradually acquired. It is also explained how they. are lost 
at death. Some are to be abandoned by development, others not. 

210-215 (T151-155) Itis explained which factors are the contents 
of consciousness, which of knowledge, and which dispositions are 
produced by which defilements. 


Chapter Nine: Remaining Topics 

216-240 (T156-174) Further classifications of the factors. The 
factors associated with awareness and dissociated from awareness 
are distinguished, and all factors are classified in terms of what they 
are associated with, what they are produced by, whether and when 
they are good or bad, what they produce. A number of questions 
are raised regarding some of the Buddha’s pronouncements about, 
e.g., the craving for existence and for nonexistence, the elements 
called abandonment, nonattachment and cessation, and other 
matters. 


Chapter Ten: Conclusion 


241-250 (T175S) A few puzzles are posed and answered. 


22 


MILINDAPANHA 


Summary by Kar! H. Potter 


The Questions of King Milinda is perhaps the most popular early 
Abhidharma treatise, and has been edited and translated many times. 
The work recounts a discussion between a Buddhist monk named 
Nagasena and ‘‘King Milinda’’, assumed by many to be Menandros 
or Menander, an Indo-Greek king who ruled somewhere around 
155-130 B.C. in Sagala or Siyadlkot in the area of the Punjab in 
northern India. The discussion is available in several versions 
belonging: to Sarvastivada, Theravada and other sects of early 
Buddhism. It is available in Chinese in several versions as well as 
in Pali, Sanskrit and Prakrit. One can presume that the text must 
have been composed near the time of Menander, perhaps within a 
century of his reign. 

Of the numerous editions the one that is cited as ‘‘E’’ is by V. 
Trenckner in the Pali Text Society in 1880 and reprinted in 1928. 
‘“‘T”’ references are to the translation by T.W. Rhys Davids in the 
Sacred Books of the East Series, Volumes 35 and 36, Oxford 1890 
and 1894, and reprinted in New York in 1963. Translations into 
English have also been published by Nyanatiloka in 1919, and Irene 
Blew Horner in 1963-64. The work has also been translated into 
German, French and Dutch among Western languages.’ 


Book One: The Narrative Setting” 


(E1-24; T1.1-39) After a description of the city of Sdgala where 
Nagasena and King Milinda met, this chapter recalls the karmic 
predecessors of the two, who were once brethren in the Buddha’s 
community. One of them, reborn as Milinda, King of Sagala, who 
knew various arts and sciences and was a formidable debater, one 
day went forth and asked for someone to discuss with. Being directed 
to them, he went in turn to Pirana Kassapa and Makkhali Gosdala, 
posing questions to each of them they could not answer. In the 


472 : ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Himalayas there lived at that time a company of perfected beings 
headed by Assagutta, who heard of Milinda’s questions and, seeking 
someone who could answer them, went to the gods and in particular 
to Mahasena, who predicted his own reincarnation as Nagasena, son 
of Sonuttara. Nagasena learned all there was tolearn from his Brahmin 
father, then retired to meditate, where he was found by Rohana, 
one of Assagutta’s perfected beings, who taught him: the Abhi- 
dharma—including the Dhammasangani, Vibhanga, Dhatukatha, 
Puggalapafifiatti, Kathavatthu, Yaimaka and Patthana (each briefly 
characterized). Having mastered the Abhidhammapitaka so well 
that he recited it completely within a new threefold division of its 
contents, he was sent through Assagutta to Pataliputra, where he 
learned the other two pitakas and himself became a perfected being. 
Eventually Milinda found Nagasena out and was able to recognize 
him without an introduction, and the discussion began. 


Book Two: Questions About Characteristic Marks 
Chapter One 


(E25-39; T1.40-62) 1. Milinda asks Nagasena his name, and 
Nagasena identifies himself, but adds that his name it a mere 
designation and that there is no personality indicated by it. After 
reviewing a number of possibilities concerning what Nagasena is, 
Milinda concludes he is nothing, which is absurd. Nagasena responds 
by analyzing a chariot in a similar fashion—the chariot is not the 
axle, not the wheels, not the spokes, etc., nor the sum of them, nor 
anything else—and concludes that there is no chariot either, which 
is likewise absurd. He solves the puzzle by pointing out that though 
the chariot is not any of those things, still it is in virtue of all the 
aspects mentioned that the thing is called a ‘‘chariot’’, and likewise 
it is because of the coexistence of the various elements Milinda had 
reviewed that he is called ‘‘Nagasena’’, a ‘‘being”’. 

2. Milinda: Is it you, Nagasena, who are seven (years older than 
1) or is it the number seven which is seven? 

Nagasena: Just as your shadow or your reflection in the water is 
not you, the King, but depends on you for its existence, so the number 
seven depends on him, Nagasena, for its existence. 

4. Nagesena shows Anantakaya (one of the King’s followers) that 
the self is not the vital breath, since a trumpeter’s breath does not 
return after he blows and still he does not die, 

6. Those with defilements are reborn, those without are not. 

7. Attention and insight are not the same, since animals have the 
former but not the latter. 

8. The monk by reasoning grasps his mind and by insight cuts off 


MILINDAPANHA ; 473 


his defilements, just as farmers grasp the barley with their left 
hand and cut it off with their right. 

9. An account of good conduct, involving five qualities (morality, 
faith, energy, mindfulness and concentration). Morality is distingui- 
shed by the marks of the faculty powers, the conditions of enlighten- 
ment, the path, mindfulness, right endeavor, supernatural powers, 
meditations, the eight liberations, the four kinds of concentration 
and the eight meditative attainments. Some similes to illustrate how 
one of good conduct will develop. . 

10. Faith is characterized by tranquilisation and aspiration. The 
former cuts the defilements, and the latter motivates the aspirant. 

11. The mark of energy, viz., perseverance, is discussed and 
illustrated. 

12. The marks of mindfulness are repetition and keeping up. 

13. The marks of concentration include all good qualities. 

14. The marks of insight are cutting off and enlightenment. 

15. All these five qualities work together in ending the defilements. 


Chapter Two 


(E40-50; T1.63-78) 1. The continuity of a person is likened to 
that of a flame, or of milk which turns into curds, butter, ghee. 

2. Aman who will not be reborn knows that fact, because he knows 
that the causal conditions for rebirth have ceased to operate for him, 
just as a farmer knows whether or not his granary is getting filled. 

3. Discussion of knowledge and wisdom: they are synonyms. Just 
as the villager puts out a fire in his house with five waterpots placed 
there for the purpose and the fire stays out without continued 
application of the water, so the disciplined man puts out the fire 
of the defilements with the five waterpots or faculties of faith, energy, 
mindfulness, concentration and insight, and the sinfulness does not 
return. 

4. Does the nonreturner have frustrating feelings? 

Nagasena answers: Bodily feelings yes, mental feelings no, since 
the conditions for the latter have ceased. 

Milinda: Then why doesn’t he die immediately? 

Nagasena: He waits for his proper time. 

5. Satisfying feelings can be good or bad or indifferent, since the 
nature of a feeling does not arise from its moral quality, any more 
than if a man holds a red-hot ball in one hand and ice in the other 
and feels pain in both hands, the pain can come from the quality 
of what is held. 

6. Milinda: What is reborn? 


474 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 

Nagasena: ‘Name and form’, i.e. the psychophysical complex, 
is reborn, and then another psychophysical complex produced from 
the actions of that one, etc.; still, since the second complex is 
produced from the actions of the former one the person is notreleased 
from sin every time he is reborn. 

8. In the expression “‘name and form’’, “‘form’’ refers to what 
is gross (the body) and ‘‘name’’ to what is subtle (psychical); they 
are dependent on each other. 

9. Milinda: What does ‘‘time’’ mean? Is there such a thing? 

Nagasena: There is time that exists, and time that does not. For 
the conditioning factors that have ceased or changed altogether, time 
doesn’t exist; but for the factors which are still producing or have 
the potential to do so, time exists. So there is time as long as there 
are beings who will be reborn; for those who have died and are not 
reborn, i.e. who have achieved final liberation, there is no time. 


Chapter Three 


(E50-63; T1.79-99) 1. Ignorance is the root of the notion of the 
beginning point of time, since the temporal series is infinite or’ 
circular. 

2. Examples of infinite series. (seed and sprout; chicken and egg), 
and of recursive series (portions of the twelvefold chain of dependent 
origination). : ‘ 

3. The beginning point of all becomings is unknown, but the 
beginning. of each becoming is known. 

Milinda: But if everything is destroyed as soon as it is born, nothing . 
comes into being. ~ 

Nagasena: Like the seed which becomes a tree, the aggregates | 
are seeds of life. 

4. Conditioning factors which are produced include sight, desire, 
grasping, becoming, birth, old age and death, frustration. ~ 

5. No conditioning factors come into being suddenly; they have 
a gradual becoming, depending on causal conditions. 

6. There is no soul (vedagu), i.e. no inner cognizer which can 
operate indiscriminately through any of the sense-doors, since 
experience shows that the eyes can only see, the ears only hear, 
etc. 

7. Representative cognition accompanies sight, follows upon it but 
is not influenced by it, just as the rainwater flows down the slope 
over and over without the earlier water influencing the later. 

8. Representative congnition is always accompanied by contact, 
feeling, identification, will, initial and sustained thought. 

9. Discussion of contact. 


MILINDAPANHA 475 


10. Explanation of feeling, explained as experiencing (anubhava). 

11. Explanation of identification as samjanana (recognition? clas- 
sification?), as, e.g., when the king’s treasurer cognizes the items 
in the king’s treasure according to their colors. 

Explanation of will, which involves being thought of and being 
prepared. The examples are of persons who perform intentional acts 
with deliberate forethought. 

12. Explanation of consciousness as awareness of objects pre- 
sented to the organs of sense and the mind. 

13. Explanation of initial thought. It is the faculty of effecting an 
aim, illustrated by the carpenter’s creation. 

14. Explanation of sustained thought as “‘threshing out again and 
again’’, illustrated by the sounds a copper vessel makes as it is beaten 
into shape. 

15. Milinda: Can these various factors (contact, etc., explained 
in the preceding sections) be clearly distinguished from each other? 

Nagasena: No, any more than the ingredients in a sauce can be 
picked out after the blending. 


Book Three: Removal of Difficulties 
Chapter Four 


(E65-70; T1.100-108) 1. The five senses are produced by many 
acts, not just one, since they arise from many distinct seeds. 

2. Differences among human beings arise from differences in 
karmic seeds. 

4. Just as bits of stone are digested in the stomach’s heat but an 
embryo, because of the force of karma, is not, so the fires of 
purgatory, though terribly hot, do not burn up those who reside there 
because of their karma until that karma is exhausted. 

6. Liberation is cessation. 

7, Not all men achieve liberation. A brief description of those who 
do. 


Chapter Five 


(E70-73; T1.109-114) 5. Analogies for rebirth without trans- 
migration——lighting a lamp from another lamp, recollecting a verse 
learned once but since forgotten. 

8. The deeds committed by a psychophysical complex follow it 
and never leave it, but they cannot be perceived, any more than one 
can perceive the fruit on a tree that has not yet produced it. 

-10. The Buddha exists despite his having passed away, he is 
locatable in his doctrine. 


476 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Chapter Six 


(E73-78; T1.115-121) 1. A monk’s care for his body is like a 
king’s care for his wound—he cares for it but does not love it. 

4. The Buddha was no more a follower of Brahma, even though 
a brahmacarin, than the state elephant is a follower of gulls, even 
though it emits trumpeting like a heron. Anyway, since Brahma has 
awareness ( buddhi) he must be a follower of the Buddha! 

7. A passionate man is overpowered by his cleaving where the 
nonattached man is not; the difference is like that between one who 
in eating enjoys both the taste of the food and the desires that arise 
from the taste, as opposed to the man who experiences only taste 
and not the desires. 

8. Insight exists, as the wind does, even though neitherareiocatable 
in any place. 

10. It is by memory, not be the mind, that we remember. 


Chapter Seven 


(E78-89; T1.122-136) 1. Memory arises in sixteen (seventeen?) 
ways—by personal experience, by outward aid, by the impression 
made by the greatness of some occasion, by the impression made 
by joy, by the impression made by sadness, from similarity of 
appearance, from difference of appearance, from someone’s speak-’ 
ing, from a sign, from an effort, by calculation, by arithmetic, by 
learning by heart, by meditation, by consulting a book, or by apledge, 
or by association. 

2. One good deed or thought can save a man, just as a hundred 
loads of rock, each bit of which would sink by itself, is supported 
by a boat. 

4-5. Transmigration from one world to another occurs almost 
instantaneously regardless of distance, just as one can think of each 
oftwo places in the same amount of time regardless of their respective 
distances from here. 

7. There is more merit than demerit, since demerit brings on- 
remorse and no increase, while merit brings on increasing happiness 
without remorse. 

8. One who sins inadvertently is worse than one who does so 
intentionally, just as the one who grasps a red hot piece of iron 
inadvertently will be more badly burned than one who grasps it 
intentionally. 

9. It is possible for a monk with supernatural power to take one’s 
body to the Brahma world by making one’s body light through 
mastering it by his mind. 


MILINDAPANHA 477 


13. The sea is completely saturated with salt because it has stood 
there so long. 

14. The subtlest thing, viz., chiara, can be divided—by insight. 
_ The King was pleased with Nagasena’s answers, gave him a 
valuable coat and ordered him provided with meals for 800 days 
and a choice of whatever he wanted from the palace. And both 
concluded that Nagasena had answered well. 


Book Four: The Solving of Dilemmas 
Chapter One 


(E90-142; T1.137-201) 1-3. Milinda resolved to get Nagasena 
to solve ‘a number of puzzles concerning Buddhist thought, and 
undertook the eightfold vow for seven days, after which he asked 
Nagasena to discuss with him privately in a secluded place suitable 
for a recluse. 

4-9. Having withdrawn, Milinda demonstrated his understanding 
by listing the eight kinds of places where discussion should not be 
carried on (because of distractions and difficulties), eight kinds of 
people who spoil a discussion (because of pride, anger, confusion 
and the like), nine kinds of people who cannot keep a secret, eight 
causes of the growth of insight, and twenty-five virtues of a teacher 
who teaches a pupil who is as Milinda is. Nagasena responded by 
listing ten good qualities of a lay disciple, and agreed to answer the 
King’s questions. 

10-18. Milinda: Here is a dilemma: If the Buddha accepts respect 
he cannot have achieved final liberation; but if he has achieved final 
liberation, he cannot receive respect. Now any worship paid to one 
who doesn’t receive it is vain. 

Nagasena: Neither before nor after his final liberation did the 
Buddha accept respect—he neither accepted it nor refused it. 

_ And it is not the case that respect paid to one who doesn’t receive 
it is vain, any more than it is the case that rekindling a fire that has 
gone out is vain, or that creating a breeze in the absence of the wind 
fails to cool. Furthermore, just as living things do not assent to the 
birth and reproduction of worms within them but they nevertheless 
arise there due to karma which has passed away, so by the power 
and wisdom of the Buddha which has passed away does an act of 
worship toward him have result. 

19-27, Milinda: Was the Buddha omniscient? 

‘Nagasena: Yes, but only when he was reflecting. 

Milinda: Then he was not omniscient. 

Nagasena: There are seven kinds of minds: (1) those whose 
awareness is slow and heavy because of the traces of wrong actions; 


478 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(2) those stream-enterers who, having attained to right views, are 
easily and accurately aware of things in the three lower stages but 
are unclear about things in the higher regions; (3) those once- 
returners who are clearly and easily aware of things in the five lower 
stages but are unclear about things in the higher stages; (4) the 
nonreturners who have gotten clear about the ten lower stages but 
are still unclear about the higher ones; (5) the perfected beings, who 
through their purity understand everything except what is understood 
by Buddhas alone; (6) the enlightened-for-themselves, who under- 
stand everything except what is understood by complete Buddhas; 
(7) the completely enlightened, who understand easily and accurately 
everything they think of. The enlightened ones’ understanding is far 
greater than the previous six stages. Nevertheless, it takes an act 
of attention on their part to become aware of something. 

Milinda: But reflection involves seeking (more anys which the 
enlightened one allegedly already has). 

Nagasena: A rich man is not poor merely becatise he happens to 
have no cooked food ready for a traveller arriving unexpectedly, nor 
is a tree called barren when its fruit has not yet fallen; just as the. 
riches, or the fruit, are the necessary conditions of the enjoyment ‘ 
of them, so reflection is a necessary condition of the Buddha’s 
awareness of whatever he wants to know. 

28-34. Milinda: If the Buddha was aware that admitting Devadatta 
to the monastic order would lead to evil results, he cannot have been: 
kind and compassionate. If he was not aware of that, he cannot have 
been omniscient. 

. Naégasena: The Buddha knew Devadatta’s evil karma, and knew 
that if he did not enter the order he would brew moresuch karma, 
so he mercifully admitted him. 

Milinda: Then the Buddha is inconsistent—first he wounds, then 
he binds; first he throws a man over a cliff and then tries to save 
him! 

Nagasena: The Buddha does wound people but for their good; he 
does throw them over, but to their profit. Just so do loving parents 
sometimes hurt their children for their own good. Or consider the » 
case. of a robber being hurried toward execution when an officer 
stops them and pleads on the robber’s behalf, asking that they only 
cut off a hand or a foot but spare his life—the officer’s action is 
meritorious despite the pain caused by the robber’s losing his hand 
or foot; just so, the Buddha’s action in saving Devadatta from greater 
frustration is meritorious, though it led to some frustration. Or, 
likewise, the doctor who causes pain in the course of curing is not 
acting inconsistently. 

35-41. Milinda: The Buddha said that there are precisely eight 


MILINDAPANHA , 479 


causes of earthquake, but there is another, viz., Vessantara’s giving 
a gift (in the Vessantara Jataka). So the Buddha’s statement is false. 

Nagasena: When one lists causes he lists types of events repeatedly 
followed by earthquakes, not isolated instances of earthquake. 
(Nagasena adds a lengthy panegyric on Vessantara’s act.) 

42-48. Milinda: King Sivi gave his eyes away and got new eyes 
from heaven, but the passage says that when there is no cause the 
divine eye cannot appear. So there is a dilemma. 

Nagasena: The new eyes were caused in this case by the power 
of truth, Various examples of how truth operates, including the story 
of the courtesan Bindumati who performed an act of truth and rolled 
back the Ganges. 

49-55. A dilemma about conception. _ 

55-61. The Buddha at one point said to Ananda that dharma would 
only remain in existence for 500 years, but at another point, just 
before he died, he told Subhadra that if the brethren live the perfect 
life the world would not be bereft of perfected beings. There is a’ 
dilemma here. 

Nagasena: The two statements are about different things; the first 
is about the limit of the duration of the doctrine, the other about 
the religious life. There are three aspects to the disappearance of 
dharma: when intellectual comprehension of it ends a man may still 
conduct himself according to it but won’t know he is doing so; when 
right conduct ceases only the outward form of dharma remains; and 
when even the outward form ends, the tradition is cut off. When 
the Buddha said dharma would only. remain 500 years he was not 
predicting the end of dharma but indicating how much temporal 
credit, so to speak, Buddhism has, just as a man whose income has 
diminished might say “‘I’ve lost half of my property., but half still 
remains’’. 

62-66. Milinda: The Buddha is said to have burnt off all demerit, 
and yet we hear that he suffered from various diseases and wounds. 
Since all pain comes from karma, how can this be? Here is a dilemma. 

Nagasena: Not all pain arises from karma: There are eight causes 
of pain: too much wind, too much bile, too much phlegm, a combina- 
tion of these humors, variation in temperature, avoiding of dissimi- 
larities(?), external agency and karma. 

Milinda: But the first seven are themselves produced from karma. 

Nagasena: It is not so; each one in turn has a variety of causes 
only one of which is karma. And the Buddha did suffer pain from 
pain brought on by six of the above causes (excluding karma and 
avoidance of dissimilarities). 

67-70. Milinda: Buddhism says that when the Buddha sat under 
the bodhi tree he had accomplished everything he had to do, yet 


480 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


italso says that after enlightenment he remained in ecstatic concentra- 
tion. But one who has accomplished all has no need for concentration. 
There is a dilemma here. 

Nagasena: There are many virtues to concentration (he lists 
twenty-eight of them) and several reasons why Buddhas meditate 
(four of these). A Buddha does not meditate because he has anything 
left to do or to add to what he has already done, but because 
the advantages he appreciates arise from meditation. 

71. A Buddha can stay alive for a kalpa, or the remainder of the 
kalpa in which he receives enlightenment, it is said; but it is also 
said at a certain point that the Buddha will die three months from 
now. There is a dilemma here. 

Nagasena: In this context ‘‘ka/pa’’ means the duration of a man’s 
life. In any case, when the Buddha said the first thing he was praising 
the powers of saintliness, not boasting about hisown powers. In point 
of fact the Buddha is free from desires of any sort about his future | 
life. 


Chapter Two 


(E142-161; T1.202-228) 4-5. Milinda: The Buddha should be a 
teacher that keeps nothing back, and yet he failed to reply to 
Malunkyaputra’s question (in the Majjhima Nikaya). There is a 
dilemma here. : 

Nagasena: There are four ways in which a problem may be 
explained. First, there are questions (such as “‘is material imperma- 
nent?’’) that require a definite yes or no answer. Second, there are 
questions (such as “‘how is material impermanent?’’) which require 
going into details. Third, there are questions (such as ‘‘can the eye 
perceive all things?’’) that require to be answered by asking another 
question. Fourth, there are questions (such as ‘‘is the universe 
eternal?’’) which should be put aside because there is no purpose 
in answering it. Malunkyaputra’s question was of the fourth sort, 
which is why the Buddha didn’t answer it. 

6-14. When the Buddha said ‘‘all men are afraid of death’’ he 
didn’t mean to include perfected beings, whose fear of death has 
disappeared. Examples of other statements where “‘all’’ doesn’t 
mean everyone without exception. As for others, everyone is afraid 
of death, even those suffering torments in purgatory who might be 
otherwise supposed to welcome it, just as a man whose boil is about 
to be lanced fears the lance despite its being the source of his cure. 

20-26. Milinda: How can the merit of a Buddha be obstructed by 
the evilness of Mara, as Nagasena says he was when he went to the 

_village called Paficasala and received no alms? 


MILINDAPANHA 481 


Nagasena: There are four kinds of obstacles: one against a gift 
not intended for anyone in particular, a second against a gift intended 
for someone in particular, a third against a gift got ready, and a fourth 
against the enjoyment of a gift. Mara’s obstacle was of the first sort, 
not against the Buddha alone. No one, even Mara, could obstruct 
gifts of the second, third and fourth sorts. There are four kinds of 
things connected with a Tathagata to which no one can do any harm: 
gifts gotten ready for and intended for him, to his halo, to his 
omniscience, and to his life. 

27-28. Milinda: The Buddha said that whoever kills a living being 
unknowingly earns serious demerit; he also said that no blame 
attaches to one who acts in ignorance. There is a dilemma here. 

Nagasena: When the Buddha said the second thing you quote, he 
had in mind actions which are free from identification, not actions 
in which identification is present. So the two statements are not 
opposed. 


é 


Chapter Three 


(E162-188; T1.229-260) 1-4. Milinda: If the dharma is the best 
in the world, as Buddhism claims, then there is a dilemma presented 
by the statement, also accepted by Buddhists, that a layman who 
has attained insight and who practices the dharma should pay 
reverence to any monk, though he be a novice and unconverted. 

Nagasena; There are twenty qualities and two outward marks of 
a monk. Now one who.has these marks is going forward toward 
perfection, and because the layman sees him in that company he 
reveres him. And furthermore, if a layman achieves perfection 
himself, either he immediately dies or else he becomes a monk 
himself, for membership in the order, which is the state of non- 
attachment, is immovable. 
~ 15-18. Milinda: The Buddha is perfect in the courtesy of speech, 
said Sariputta; yet when dealing with the offence of Sudififia Kalana- 
putra he reviled him, calling him a useless fellow. There is a dilemma 
here. 

Nagasena: Well, he was a useless fellow, and the Buddha only 
said what was true and did him no harm. 

19-20. Milinda: The Buddha said that trees are unconscious, and 
yet elsewhere he speaks of an aspen tree making reply to Bharadvaja. 
There is a dilemma here. 

Nagasena: He was referring to the dryad who lives in the aspen 
tree. 

21-23. Milinda: The Buddha died from Cunda’s food, and yet he 
referred to that food as even greater in result than that which produced 


482 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


his enlightenment. There is a dilemma here; how can the food be 
great if it produced disease and death? 

Nagasena: The disease was occasioned by the weakness of his 
body, and his death came about because he had lived through the 
period of life he was to live, so the food wasn’t responsible for those 
things. Yet it brought about the states leading to final liberation so 
is greater in result than any other food. 

24-26. The Buddha advised against relic-worship and also pres- 
cribed honoring them. Nagasena explains that the two directives 
were issued to different audiences—members of the Order are 
advised not to honor relics, for that is not their business, while it 
is the business of others, whether gods or men, to do reverence. 

35-37. Milinda: The Buddha said do no injury to anyone, but he 
also said to punish him who deserves punishment. Dilemma. 

Nagasena: You misunderstand the latter statement: what he meant 
was that one should subdue pride and cultivate modesty, subdue 
wrong views and cultivate right ones; thus the noble one is to be 
cultivated, the non-noble one subdued, the honest one cultivated 
and the robber subdued. 

Milinda: Yes, and how is the robber to be subdued? 

Nagasena: If he deserves rebuke he should be rebuked, if a fine 
he should be fined, if death he should be executed. 

Milinda: Is execution of robbers part of Buddhist doctrine? 

Nagasena: No, and the robber’s death is not due to Buddhist 
teaching, but to his own actions. 


Chapter Four 


(E188-210; T1.261-302) 1-3. Though Moggallana was identified 
by the Buddha as the one among his disciples with the greatest 
supernatural power, Moggallana was nevertheless clubbed to death, 
and this is consistent, since the power of karma is greater than that 
of supernatural power. 

11-12. Milinda: It is said by the Buddha that the parents of a 
Bodhisattva are determined from long ago. The Buddha also lists 
eight things a Bodhisattva investigates while in the Tusita heaven 
(before he is reborn), viz., the time of his rebirth, the continent of 
it, the country of it, the family into which he will be born, the father 
who will bear him, the time he will be in the womb, the month he 
will be born, and the time he will renounce. There is a dilemma 
here, for how can he investigate his future family if it is alread 
predestined? : 

Nagasena: What a Bodhisattva does is to consider what sort of 


MILINDAPANHA 483 


a family it should be—whether a family of noblemen or a Brahmin 
family. Indeed, there are eight matters one should investigate about 
the future: a merchant should investigate goods before he buys them, 
an elephant should try with its trunk a path not yet trod, a cartman 
should test a ford he hasn’t yet crossed, a pilot should test the shore 
he is about to land on, a doctor should determine the patient’s future 
before treating him, a traveller should test the bridge before crossing 
it, a monk should find out how long it is till sunset before beginning 
his meal, and a bodhisattva should investigate whether his future 
parents should be noblemen or Brahmins. 

13-15. Milinda: The Buddha taught both that a member of the 
order is not to commit suicide, and also that they should bring about 
the destruction of birth, old age, disease and death. These are 
inconsistent teachings. 

Nagasena: The Buddha counselled good men to preserve their life 
in order to maintain their good qualities for their own good and that 
of others. But he also counselled overcoming frustration completely 
without rebirth. (There is a long list of examples of frustration, many 
but not all of which are of extremely painful character.) 

16. Though the power of love wards off all evil intended toward 
one, still Prince Sama (in the Jatakas), a loving person, was shot 
by a poisoned arrow by Piliyakkha the King. This, Nagasena explains, 
was because at the particular moment he was shot he had upset a 
water-pot without love. Love and other virtues are not inherent in 
a person but must be practiced at every moment. 

17-41. Milinda: Good actions are supposed to lead to heaven, and 
bad ones to hell. Yet Devadatta, a very wicked person, was reborn 
over and over in positions in life equal to or superior to the Buddha 
in his previous lives (Milinda gives a long list of examples from the 
Jatakas). So there is a problem. Good and evil actions seem to have 
the same results. 

”“ Nagasena: No indeed. Devadatta’s hostility to the Buddha bore 
fruit in each birth, even though because of his good deeds as king, 
etc., he achieved prosperity. And in any case you are only selecting 
a few lives; you must remember that Devadatta spends countless 
ages in purgatory reaping the reward of his sins, while the Buddha 
lived countless ages in heaven as a god, and finally, of course, was 
liberated. 

46-47. The Buddha was gotten to change his mind by the Sakyas 
of Catuma and Brahma Sahampati, so how can he be supposed to 
be omniscient? But, says Nagasena, what they reminded him of were 
parables he had taught himself. 


484 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Chapter Five 


(E211-234; T2.1-42) 12-15. Milinda: The Buddha said he had 
discovered a way previously unknown, but elsewhere he speaks of 
the ancient path along which previous Buddhas walked. This is a 
dilemma. 

Nagasena: Though Buddhas of old walked that path, it had since 
been forgotten; now the Buddha rediscovered it. 

35-37. Why did the Buddha, having attained omniscience for the 
sake of saving the people, have a moment when he inclined not to 
proclaim the truth but to rest in peace? Not because he was afraid, 
nor because he was not in fact omniscient, but because he saw how 
abstruse the doctrine was and how firmly held opinions contrary 
to it were, and so perceiving the difficulty of teaching he wanted 
to take counsel with himself concerning whom he should teach and 
how he should go about it. 


Chapter Six 


(E235-262;T2.43-91) 1-3. Milinda: The Buddha says at one point 
he has no teacher, but at another that Alara Kalama was his teacher. 
How do you reconcile this? 

Nagasena: The Buddha had five teachers while he was a bodhi- 
sattva—the eight Brahmins who identified his future glory; Sabba- 
mitta of the land of Udicya whom Suddhodana the king, the future 
Buddha’s father, sent for; the god who raised the anxiety in the future 
Buddha’s heart which led to his going out from the world; Alara 
Kalama; and Uddaka the son of Rama. But they only taught him 
worldly wisdom. The Buddhist doctrine was taught him by no one. 

4-9. Why shouldn’t more than one Buddha be alive in this world 
at the same time? Nagasena gives several reasons: one, there would 
be too much goodness for the world to support; two, their followers 
would quarrel; three, scriptures which point to the speech of the 
one Buddha would be falsified; four, that wherever very powerful 
things arise, there is no room for a second which would mitigate 
their power. 

23-29. Backsliders do not sully the purity of Buddhism, since it 
is the backslider’s demerit, not Buddhism’s. 

40-44. Ordinary persons experience both bodily and mental 
frustrations, but perfected beings, because of their mental dis- 
cipline, experience only bodily but not mental frustrations. , 


MILINDAPANHA 485 


Chapter Seven 


(E262-274; T2.92-113) 1-6. Milinda: Why do the members of 
the order study texts, engage in reasoning, and. concern themselves 
with doing good deeds, if by getting on the path they will overcome 
all obstacles? 

Nagasena: A pure person can become a perfected being in a 
moment; but impure persons require these means to become per- 
fected beings. 

9-10. A perfected being, though he is neither careless nor 
thoughtless and cannot thus be guilty of breaches of the canons 
of conduct of ordinary persons, may be ignorant of the special rules 
of conduct for monks, since perfected beings are not omniscient. 

11-12. Three things which one cannot find in this world: something 
not subject to decay or death, any quality that is not impermanent, 
and any acquisition of being. 

13-17. Milinda: Are there any uncaused things? 

Nagasena: Two: space (4kasa) and liberation (#irvana). 

Milinda: Surely liberation must have a cause! 

Nagasena: The realization of liberation has a cause, but liberation 
itself does not, since liberation is uncompounded. 

Milinda: What is liberation? And how can we know it exists? 

Nagasena: It is perceptible to the mind of a noble person who has 
attained the path. And just as the wind is not visually perceptible 
and yet exists, so liberation is not perceptible by the external prea 
and yet it exists. 


Chapter Eight 


(E274-328; T2.114-205) 1-17. Milinda: When Vessantara gave 
his wife and children away to the ogre he did a hard, indeed an awful, 
thing. Should he not have rather given himself away than to bring 
such misery on others? 

Nagasena: If a man were to assist a paralytic virtuous monk or 
Brahmin by providing him a carriage and having him taken where 
he wants to go, he would accrue great merit, even though the action 
involved pain to the bullocks who have to drag the carriage. 

Milinda: But this giving of Vessantara’s was excessive, and exces- 
sive giving is held blameworthy in the world. 

Nagasena: Since there is nothing in this world which should be 
withheld and not given if it is one’s duty to give and one worthy 
of receiving is there, if Vessantara’s giving satisfied these two 
' conditions it was not excessive or blameworthy. 

Milinda: I oon t blame him for giving them, rather I asked why 


486 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


he didn’t rather give himself to the ogre? 

Nagasena: But he wasn’t asked for himself, he was asked for his 
wife and children, and he deemed it best to give what he was asked 
for. He was unhappy about doing so, and wept according to the story, 
but he knew that they would come back to him later on, and thus 
he deemed it proper for him not to interrupt his practice of giving 
in this instance. ‘ 

24-32. Despite appearances to the contrary, virtue is stronger than 
vice, because it lasts longer. 

33-38. A dream is a sign in the mind. There are six kinds of people 
who have dreams—those in whom wind dominates, or bile, or 
phlegm, one who dreams under a god’s influence, one who dreams 
influenced by himself, and one whose dreams are prophetic. Only 
the last kind of dream is true, the others false. In the prophetic dreams 
the sign appears in awareness as a reflection does in a mirror. Dreams 
require interpretation, their meaning may not be immediately appa-, - 
rent. Dreams do not occur in deep sleep because the awareness has 
retired to the life-continuum and thus being veiled by sleep does 
not act, though’ it persists, just as the sun’s rays, though they are 
there, do not penetrate a thick fog. There are three stages of sleep: 
the beginning, where one feels tired, the middle or ‘“‘monkey’s . 
sleep’, and the end, when the awareness enters the life-continuum. 
Dreams occur in the middle stage. 

39-50. Premature death can occur from seven kinds of causes: 
starvation, thirst, snakebite, poison untreated by medicine, being 
burnt to death, drowning, and from being wounded. Now of the eight 
causes of pain leading to human death (see above, IV.62-66), only 
the last, karma, always causes death at the appointed time; the rest 
cause premature death. On the other hand, there are certain deaths © 
arising from the seven causes just listed which are also the result 
of karma, as when a man who has starved others to death starves 
to death himself as retribution, etc. A number of analogies to show 
how external causes can cause premature curtailment of natural 
results. 

53-57. Not everyone who conducts himself correctly achieves 
insight. Nagasena lists sixteen reasons for insight not arising, ranging 
from the person being born as an animal or a hungry ghost to those 
who commit various sins. The last case is of a child under seven 
years of age. Milinda wonders why, if such a child is ready for 
arhatship, he doesn’t achieve insight? 

Nagasena: The child’s mind is too weak to gain insight. 

58-60. Milinda: Liberation cannot be free from frustration, since 
we see that those who seek liberation carry on life’s activities which 
breed frustration. 


sao ApANITA 487 


Nagasena: No, liberation is completely free from frustration; it 
is complete satisfaction. What you are referring to is the state of 
seeking liberation, not liberation itself, 

61-75. Analogies to show why liberation is inexplicable—just as 
one cannot tell the amount of water in the ocean or the number of 
beings dwelling in it, so likewise liberation is measureless, formless. 
On the other hand, certain qualities which can be understood in 
empirical instances can by analogy be appealed to in order to 
understand liberation—for example, just as a lotus is pure, untainted 
by water, so liberation is pure, untainted by defilements, or just as 
water is cool, so does liberation cool the fever arising from the 
defilements, etc. 

76-84. Milinda: Since Buddhists say that liberation is neither past, 
present nor future, neither produced nor not produced nor to be 
produced, does one who realizes liberation realize something already 
produced, or does he produce it first and then realize it? 

Nagasena: Neither, and yet liberation exists. It is that which one 
who conducts himself correctly and understands all the conditioning 
factors according to the correct teachings understands by his insight, 
and it is gained by freedom from fear, from confidence, satisfaction, 
purity. 

85-88. Milinda: If liberation is not located at any place, as you 
say, it must not exist. 

Nagasena: Fire doesn’t exist (i.e. isn’t stored up) at any specific 
place, and yet it exists and will appear if the proper materials are 
provided. . 

Milinda: All right, but is there a place where a man may realize 
liberation? 

Nagasena: Yes, and that is virtue. 


Book Five 


(E329-347; T2.206-243) 1-25. Milinda: What is the evidence that 
the Buddha existed? Nagasena replies by an analogy: just as one 
may know that a great king of the past existed by finding in a city 
the bazars that king built for the people, so one may know the Buddha 
existed by finding his “bazars’—his doctrines, the conduct he pres- 
cribed, the meditative stages one can achieve, the noble truths, 
etc. 


Book Six 


(E348-362; T2.244-274) 1-26. Milinda: Do laymen achieve libe- 
ration? 


488 . ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Nagasena: Countless numbers of them. 

Milinda: Then what is the point of taking vows? 

Nagasena: Merely taking vows produces 28 good qualities; 
carrying those vows out generates another 18 good qualities. Laymen 
who realize liberation in every case have taken vows in previous 
lives. A long review of the vows. 


Book Seven 


(E363-420; T2.275-375) The good qualities which a monk must 
‘ have in order to become a perfected being are listed in similes. So 
there is one quality ‘‘of the donkey,” that he does not remain lying 
down long; five qualities ‘‘of the cock,’’ who goes to bed early, gets 
up early, is strenuous in scratching the earth, is blind to distractions, 
and does not leave home even though buffeted about; etc. Some 
67 different similes are thus employed. " 
This concluded the questions posed by the king, who pronounced 
himself satisfied with Nagasena’s answers and a convert to the 
Buddhist faith. The king eventually handed over his kingdom to his 
son and became a perfected being. ; 


23 


‘GHOSAKA, ABHIDHARMAMRTA 


Summary by Robert Kritzer 


The author Ghosaka, we are told by Louis de la Vallée Poussin, was 
invited, after the death of King Kaniska, to Tokhara in the western 
part of Kashmir. He is cited in the Mahavibhasa, so his life can be 
dated close to that text’s era, say the first half of the second century 
A.D. The text was translated into Chinese in 220-265 A.D.' 

_ The work has been rendered into Sanskrit (our E) by Santi Bhiksu 
Sastri, Visvabharati Studies No. 17 (Santiniketan, 1953). In the 
Introduction to this work Sastri picks out the special views of Ghosaka 
and tells us his theory was known as Laksandnyathatvavada, ‘‘that 
the changes undergone by the object are inits character’’.* Ghosaka’s 
views are referred to regularly by Vasubandhu in the Abhidharma- 
kosa. 


Chapter One: Giving and Virtue 


(E27-32) 

1. Definition of giving. 

2. The good results of giving depend on the giver’s purity of mind, 
on the purity of the recipient, and on the purity of the gift. 

3. Definitions of faith, respect and analysis. 

4. Descriptions of the fruits obtained by giving to various reci- 
pients. 

5. List of six hindrances te giving. 

6. Definition of virtue. There are two types of behavior, good and 
bad. Bad. behavior consists of killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, 
slander, abusive language, lying, frivolous talk, covetousness, ill-will 
and false views. 

7. Definitions of the first three types of bad behavior, which consist 
of bad physical actions. 

8. Definitions of the next four types, which consist of bad vocal 
actions. 


490 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


9. Definitions of the last three types, which consist of bad mental 
actions. 

10. Good actions are the abstention from these bad actions. 

11. List of thirty fields of merit. 


Chapter Two: Worldly Matters 


(E32-39) 

1. Lists of three realms and five courses, as well as birth in the 
intermediate existence. 

2. Lists of the eight major and sixteen minor hells, of the seven 
animal births and the various ghostly births. The hells are the result 
of the worst actions, animal births are the result of middling-bad 
actions, while ghostly births are the result of less serious bad actions. 

3. Lists of the four types of human births and the six types of births - 
as gods of the realm of sensual pleasure, all of which are the result 
of good actions. 

4. List of the seventeen material heavens and discussion of the 
_ connection between practice of the four material meditations and . 
birth in these heavens. 

5. List of the four immaterial heavens and explanation of how they 
are attained. 

6. Explanation of the names of the three realms. 

7-16. Comparison of time scales among the various births (e.g., 
50 human years make up one day and night among the Caturmaha- 
rajika gods, while the life-span in living (samjrva) hell is 
1,620,000,000,000 human years). Se 


Chapter Three: Duration and Nourishment 


(E40-42) ~ 

1.There are four durations of consciousness: of material things, 
feelings, identification and conditioning. The duration of the 
consciousness of material feelings is prevalent in the sensuous and 
material realms, while the other three are prevalent in various 
immaterial heavens. 

2. List of four types of food: solid, tactual, of representative 
cognition, and consciousness. 

3. Explanation of why solid food consists of smell, taste and touch, 
but not of vision: mere perception of food by the eyes (and material 
food is only perceived by the visual organ) does not contribute to 
the growth of a being’s elements. 

4. There are two types of solid food: gross and subtle. 

5. Definition of tactual food. 


GHOSAKA, ABHIDHARMAMRTA ; 491 


6. Explanation of which types of food are prevalent in which births. 

7. Explanation of which types of food are prevalent in which 
realms. 

8. Solid is the grossest, tactual food is subtle, representative food 
is more subtle, and consciousness is the most subtle food. 

9. There are four types of beings: egg-born, womb-born, mois- 
ture-born and apparition-born. Discussion of which kinds of beings 
are apparition-born, etc. Apparition-born beings acquire the six 
sense-organs simultaneously, while the other types of beings acquire 
them gradually. 

“10. There are four types of existences: birth-existence, death- 
existence, root-existence and intermediate- existence. 

11. Definition of, intermediate existence and explanation of its 
relationship to birth-existence, 

12. Explanation of which beings obtain intermediate existence. 


Chapter Four: Karma 


(E43-51) 

1. Definition of defiled karma and maturation. Defiled karma 

includes physical, vocal and mental action; good, bad and neutral 
action; action performed by seekers, action performed by adepts, 
and action different from these two types, and action to be destroyed 
by vision of the truth, action to be destroyed by meditation, and 
action that is not be destroyed. 
. 2. Karmic maturation can be experienced in the same lifetime, 
in the next lifetime, or in subsequent lifetimes. It can be pleasant, 
unpleasant or neither. And it can be black (bad), white (good) or 
mixed. 

3. There are three types of karma: karma that is neither black nor 
white-and has no maturation, karma that has a definite maturation, 
and karma that has an indefinite maturation. 

4. Detailed definitions of the types of karma listed in Section One. 

5. Detailed definitions of the types of maturations listed in Section 
Two. 

6. Detailed definitions of the types of karma listed in Section Three. 

7. Physical and vocal karma can be of two types, manifest and 

_unmanifest;.mental karma can only be manifest. 

8. Definitions of manifest and unmanifest karma. 

9. There are two types of neutral factors: obscured and unobscured 
by defilements. 

10. List of obscured neutral factors. 

11. List of unobscured neutral factors. 

12. There are three types of unmanifest karma: karma of pure 


492 : ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


influence, which consists of right speech, right action, and right 
livelihood; karma conascent with concentration, which is the obtain- 
ment of trance and the abandonment of the bad factors of the sensory 
realm; and karma of virtuous behavior, which is the acquisition of 
good but impure physical and vocal karma at the time of obtaining 
virtue. 

13. At different stages one obtains past, present and future unmani- 
fest karma. 

14. Discussion of which kind of actions produce which kind of 
manifest and unmanifest karma. The principle seems to be that only 
strongly volitional actions produce unmanifest karma. 

15. Explanation of the conditions for obtaining meditative disci- 
pline. 

16. Explanation of the conditions for obtaining pure behavior. 

17. Discussion of the causes for falling away from pure behavior, 
meditative behavior and virtuous behavior respectively. Ghosaka 
mentions a controversy as to whether virtuous behavior is destroyed 
at the time of the destruction of factors and gives his reasons for 
believing that it is not. 

18. List and discussion of the five kinds of fruits of the destruction 
of defilements: karmic maturation, the results of one’slocus, ofone’s © 
dominating conditions, of one’s body and of liberation. 

19. Definitions of the above five fruits. 

20. List of the three roots. Good roots consist of absence of greed, 
lack of hatred. and understanding. Bad roots consist of greed, hatred 
and delusion. Neutral roots consist of neutral attachment, views, 
ignorance and pride.’ 

21. Discussion of good, bad and neutral factors. 

22. Explanation of the ten good and ten bad paths of action. 

23. Discussion of certain actions that are not considered paths. 

24. List of three types of deaths: destruction of life, but not of 
merit; destruction of merit, but not of life; and destruction of both. 


Chapter Five: Aggregates, Elements and Bases 


(E52-59) 

1. Discussion of impure factors and explanation of the terms 
“‘intoxicant”’ and “‘defilement’’. The 108 defilements consist of 98 
bonds and 10 fetters.* The five aggregates are of two types, pure 
and impure (or grasping). 

2. Explanation of the material aggregate and what it consists of. 
Matter can be visible or invisible, it can be resisting or unresisting. 

3. Explanation of the feeling aggregate. Lists of 2 to 108 different 
types of feelings. 


GHOSAKA, ABHIDHARMAMRTA 493 


4. Explanation of the identification aggregate. There are three types 
of conceptual identification, small, large and immeasurable. 

5. Explanation of the conditioning aggregate. There are two types 
of conditionings, those associated with awareness and those not. 

6. Explanation of the consciousness aggregate. List and explanation 
of the six types of consciousness: visual, auditory, olfactory, gusta- 
tory, tactile and mental. 

7. Lists of the twelve senses and eighteen elements. 

8. Explanation of why the five sense-organs are considered the 
causes of the first five types of consciousness. 

9. Discussion of the objects of the six types of consciousness. 

10. Only representative cognition, and none of the five ordinary 
sense-consciousnesses, can discriminate. The terms “‘awareness’’ 
(citta), ‘‘mind’’ (manas) and ‘‘consciousness”’ ( vijftana) are funda- 
mentally the same in meaning. 

11. Conduct is the interaction among sense-organs, object and 
consciousness; feelings and the other conditionings arise simulta- 
neously with contact. 

12. Of the eighteen elements eight are neutral, while ten can be 
good, bad or neutral. These ten are matter, sound, the seven 
consciousnesses (including representative.cognition), and the factor 
element. 

13. Definition of good, bad and neutral matter and sound. 

14. Definition of good, bad and neutral consciousness. 

15. Definition of good, bad and neutral factors. 

16-18. Fifteen of the eighteen elements are defiled. Three, mind, 
the factor-element and representative cognition, can be either defiled 
Or pure. 

19. Explanation of why certain elements are associated with certain 
realms. Four—smell, taste, olfactory and gustatory awareness—are 
exclusively associated with the sensual realm. All five sense-organs, 
as well as the remaining three sense objects, can be associated with 
the sensual realm. 

20. All five sense-organs, as well as color, sound and tangibility, 
can be associated with the sensual realm. 

21. Visual consciousness, auditory consciousness and bodily 
consciousness can be associated with either the sensual or matene) 
element. 

22. Mind can be associated with any of the three elements, or 
it can be unassociated if a state of pure consciousness prevails. The 
same is true of representative cognition. 

23. Factors likewise can be associated with any of the three realms 
or can be unassociated. 


494 . ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


24. Of the eighteen elements the six objects of consciousness are 
external, while the rest are internal. 

25. Ten elements, namely, the five senses and the five sense- 
objects, do not involve initial and applied thought. The five sense- 
consciousnesses do involve initial and applied thought. Mind can 
involve initial and applied thought (in the first trance), involve initial 
but not applied thought (in the middle trances), and not involve either 
initial or applied thought (in the last trance). The same is true of 
representative cognition. As for the factor-element, those factors that 
are not associated with physical or vocal actions and those that 
are unconditioned do not involve initial and applied thought. The 
remaining factors are like mind. 

26. Seven elements (the five sense-consciousnesses, mind and 
representative cognition) possess a supporting object. The five 
senses and the five sense-objects have no supporting objects. As 
for the factor-element, all factors possess supporting objects except | 
for physical and vocal actions, dissociated factors and unconditioned 
factors. : 

27. Explanation of which elements are appropriated and which | 
are not appropriated. 

28. Except for three factors within the factor-elements, namely, 
calculated cessation, uncalculated cessation and space, all of the 
eighteen elements are conditioned. 


Chapter Six: Conditions 


(E60-69) . a 

1. All conditioned factors have four marks: birth, duration, decay 
and impermanence. 

2. List and explanation of the secondary marks: arising of birth, 
duration of duration, decay of decay and impermanence ofimperma- . 
nence. 

3. List of contaminants associated with awareness. This list? 
includes feeling, identification, thinking, contact, attention, interest, 

Tesolve, faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration, intellection, 
initial thought, sustained thought, false conditioning, correct condi- 
tioning, good roots, bad roots, neutral roots, the fetters binding to 
all the afflictions and complete wisdom. 

4. List of contaminants dissociated from awareness. This list® 
includes acquisition-force, birth, duration, decay, impermanence, 
trance free from conceptual identification, cessation-trance, sense 
basis free from conceptual identification, acquisition of place, acqui- 
sition of things, acquisition of sense-bases, collection of words, 
collection of phrases, collection of syllables ard ordinariness.’ - 


GHOSAKA, ABHIDHARMAMRTA 495 

5. There are four conditions: condition as cause, directly-antece- 
dent condition, consciousness-supporting condition and predomi- 
nant condition. 

6. Explanations of the four conditions. 

7. List and explanations of six causes, namely, connected, simulta- 
neous, homogeneous, pervasive, retributory and efficient causes. 

8. Discussion of which kinds of factors are produced by which 
causes. , 

9. Similar discussion regarding conditions. Awareness and con- 
comitant mental factors are produced by all four conditions, the 
trance free from conceptual identification and the cessation trance 
by three, and the other dissociated conditions, as well as matter, 
by two. Of course no factor is produced by a single condition. 

10. Explanation of awareness. The first step is contact, which arises 
from the coming together of three factors (an object, a sense-organ 
and awareness). At the same time arise identification, thinking, 
attention, interest, resolve, faith, energy, mindfulness, concentra- 
tion, wisdom and equanimity. 

11. Explanation of each of the factors involved in awareness, 
beginning with contact. 

_ 12. List of ten factors present in every moment of awareness.® 

13. Definition of connection, the union among these factors in 
which the factors themselves remain unchanged. 

14. List of ten factors present in every defiled moment of con- 
sciousness, . 

15. Definitions of the factors present in every afflicted moment. 

16. List of bad factors of limited occurrence.’ 

17. Definitions of them. 

18. Explanation of which defilements are associated with which 
realms. 

19. List of the ten factors present in every good moment of 
awareness. !! 

20. Definitions of them. 

21. There are three groups of defilements. All those associated 
with attachment belong to the sense of attachment, those associated 
with hatred to the sense of detachment, and those associated with 
ignorance to both senses. 

22. All defilements are the products of the three bad roots, which 
are ‘‘poisons’’ that destroy the good roots. 


Chapter Seven: Dependent Origination 


(E70-73) 
1. List of the twelve links in the chain of dependent origination. 


496 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 

2. Of these twelve, taree (ignorance, craving and grasping) can 
be considered defiling, two (conditioning and existence) karma, and 
seven (consciousness, the psychophysical complex, the six sense- 
organs, contact, feeling, birth and old age/death) frustrating. More- 
over, two belong to the past, twoto the future, and eightto the present. 

3. Explanation of the causal relationships between defilements, 
karma and frustration. 

4. Explanation in detail of the relationship between each condition 
and the one that follows it. 

5. Definition of ignorance. 

6. Those afflicted by ignorance perform three types of action: good 
action, which yields good results; bad action, which yields bad 
results; and neutral action, which yields birth in the material or 
immaterial realms. 

7. Good action consists of giving, observing Precepts and iiditas 
tion. 

8. Bad action consists of the three roots of evil, the ten bad paths 
of action, and the various crimes. Neutral action consists of the 
meditational states from the first meditation to the basis of 
neither-identification-nor-nonidentification. 

9. Detailed definitions of consciousness, the psychophysical 
complex, the six sense bases and contact. 

10-11. Detailed definition of feeling. 

12-13. Detailed definitions of craving and grasping. 

14. Detailed definitions of existence, birth and old age and death. 

15. Definitions of the various forms of mental frustration ex- 
perienced in the conditioned world, namely, sorrow, lamentation, 
frustration, depression and irritation. 

16. The cause of this frustration is ignorance and the other members 
of the chain. Only when the links are eliminated and all karmic results 
are destroyed will the frustration cease. 

17. Description of the factors necessary for a human body. These 
include the four great elements, space and consciousness, all of which 
are explained in detail. 

18. Explanation of the functions of these six factors within the 
human body. 


Chapter Eight: Pure Senses 


{E74-76) 

1. There are three ways of eliminating defilements: restraint, which 
is the practice of moral precepts by one who has not yet obtained 
purely influenced awareness; abandonment, which is the giving up 
of sexual misconduct and bad factors by one who has achieved - 


GHOSAKA, ABHIDHARMAMRTA 497 


meditational states; and destruction by wisdom, whichis the destruc- 
tion of defilements through practice based on an understanding of 
frustration by one who is enlightened. Only the last really leads to 
a purified mind. 

2. List and explanation of the sixteen external faculties. 

3. Definition of the term ‘‘faculty’’. 

4. Explanation of which faculties are associated with which realms. 

5. Explanation of which faculties are appropriated and which are 
not. 

6. Explanation of which faculties can be good, which can be bad, 
and which can be neutral. 

7. Explanation of which faculties can be pure and which impure. 

8. Explanation of which faculties are obtained in which births and 
realms. 

9. Explanation of which faculties can be destroyed by the vision 
of the truth and which by meditative practice, and of which are not 
to be destroyed. 


Chapter Nine: Contaminants 


(E77-82) 

1. There are 98 contaminants that can be destroyed by two different 
means, the vision the truth and meditative practice. Twenty-eight 
can be destroyed by insight into the truth of frustration, 19 by insight 
into the truth of origin, 19 by insight into the truth of cessation, and 
22 by insight into the path. Ten can be destroyed by practice. 

2. Explanation of how many of the 36 contaminants in the realm 
of sexual passion can be destroyed by each of the various means. 

3. Both the material and immaterial realms have only 3.1 contami- 
nants; they both lack the five types of resistance. 

4. There are ten basic contaminants: belief that the body is ‘real, 
extreme view, false view, adherence to particular views, addiction 
to moral precepts and vows, perplexity, attachment, resistance, pride 
and ignorance. 

5-6. Definitions of each of the ten basic contaminants. 

7. In the realm of sexual passion all the fetters can be destroyed 
by insight into the truth. Explanation of how many fetters are 
destroyed by insight into each of the four truths. 

8. Explanation of how many fetters are destroyed by practice in 
the realm of sexual passion and how many in the material and 
immaterial realms. Explanation of which fetters are destroyed by 
which means in the material and immaterial realms. 

9. Explanation of which fetters in the realm of sexual passion are 


498 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


destroyed by insight into frustration and which by insight into its 
cause. 

10. Two types of ignorance are to be destroyed by insight into 
frustration.!* 

11. There are two types of ignorance, pervasive and nonpervasive. 
Explanation of when jgnernce is pervasive and when it is nonperva- 
sive. 

12. All other fetters, except for attachment, hatred and pride, are 
pervasive. Explanation of when contaminants are pervasive within 
their own realm alone and when they are pervasive in other realms 
as well. 

13. In each realm there are six contaminants that are pure in their 
sphere of action: wrong belief, perplexity and ignorance that are to 
be destroyed by insight into cessation, and the same three when they 
are to be destroyed by insight into the path. All the other contaminants 
are impure. 

14. Explanation of which contaminants are associated with which 
of the five organs of feeling in the various realms. 

15. In the realms of passion all the contaminants that are to be 
destroyed by practice, except for pride, are associated with all six 
consciousnesses. Pride, as well as those dispositions that are to be 
destroyed by insight into the truth, are only associated with repre- 
sentative cognition. 

16. List of ten envelopers.!* 

17. Definitions of the ten envelopers.: . 

18. List of three bonds (attachment, hatred and delusion). Explana- 
tion of which bonds are associated with which awarenegses in the 
sensory and material realms. 

19. The noninterrupted path results in a threefold comprehension 
that causes the destruction of the fetters of the sensory realm. 

20. Explanations of the nine ascertainments of abandonment. 

21. Explanation of why all fetters, when they are active, must be 
associated with awareness. 

22. Allfetters are to be destroyed by meditation and wisdom, and 
liberation is obtained by practicing the two together. 

23. When one’s mind is soft and pliant, one should practice energy. 
When it is in a state of equilibrium, one should practice meditation. 
But when it is neither pliant nor ina state of equilibrium, one should 
bring its activity to rest. 

24. Asimile explaining why one should sometimes practice energy, 
sometimes meditation, and sometimes equanimity. 


GHOSAKA, ABHIDHARMAMRTA 499 


Chapier Ten: the Person of Pure Influence 


(E83-88) 

1. Discussion of the first rule of meditation, that the mind must 
have only one object. 

2. One obtains the factor of heat by realizing that dispositions 
are really impermanent, frustrating, empty and nonself. At the same 
time faith in the purified good roots arises. 

3. Explanation of the sixteen aspects of the four truths. Seeing 
these aspects and at the same time maintaining energy constantly, 
- one achieves the factor of heat. 

4. Definition of the summit, the next stronger type of good root. 

5. Definition of patience, the next type of good root. 

6. Definition of higher worldly dharma, the highest form of good 
root. 

7. The higher worldly dharma is said to be capable of opening 
the doors of liberation and is dependent on an understanding of the 
truth of frustration. 

8. List of six stages of meditation: nonreturner, intermediate, the 
fourth material trance, patience, summit and heat. 

9. Explanation of the first two moments of insight into the truth. 
The first is patient forbearance of frustration and is the neninter- 
rupted path. The second, awareness of frustration, is the path to 
- liberation. They have as their objects the frustration of the sensual 
realm. 

10. The third moment, forbearance of connection, is likewise the 
noninterrupted path, while the fourth, awareness of connection, is 
a path to liberation. Their objects are the frustrations of the material 
and immaterial realms. Similarly, each of the remaining three truths 
requires four moments of insight. 

11. Explanations of the various noble persons, namely, conformers 
to dharma, conformers to faith, experiencers of the fruits and those 
abiding in the fruits. 

12. Definitions of the stream-enterer, once-returner and non- 
returner. 

13. Explanations of the various types of stream-enterers: view- 
attainers, resolved in faith, committed to seven returns and clan- 
to-clan. 

14, Explanation of the two types of one who has destroyed six 
types of fetters is simply called once-returner, while one who has 
destroyed eight types is called “‘single-seeker’’ (ekavicika). 

15. Explanation of the term ‘“‘nonreturner’’ and list of five types 
of nonreturners: intermediately liberated, repeatedly liberated, 
conditionally liberated, unconditionally liberated and ‘‘highest 


500 ; ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


stream’’. Furthermore, there are nonreturners who are headed for 
the Akanistha heaven and who are first for the material and immate- 
rial realms. 

16. The nine types of fetters in the sensual realm and nine each 
in material and immaterial realms are destroyed by the nonreturner’s 
path and the path of liberation. First the nonreturner’s path destroys 
them, then the path of liberation finishes the job. The simile given 
is of a person who first captures a poisonous snake and puts it in 
a bottle and then caps the bottle. 

17. The supramundane path destroys the defilements of all three 
realms, while the worldly path destroys only those of the higher 
realms. 

18. Description of the eye-witness nonreturner. 

19. Definition of lightning-minded concentration, which leads to 
awareness of destruction. 

20. Definition of the term ‘‘perfected being’’. 

21. List and definition of nine types of perfected being:'* one of 
fallible nature, of nonfallible nature, of a thoughtful nature, one who 
is competent in watchfulness, of a maintaining nature, of a prative- 
dhana nature, steady-natured, liberated in wisdom and completely 
liberated.'° 

22. Explanation of the distinction between faith-following and 
dharma-following perfected beings. 

23. Discussion of the nine faculties of the faith-following perfected” 
being. In the fifteenth moment of the path of vision they are called 
4jfiasyamindriya; in the sixteenth moment of the spiritual path they 
are called faculties of understanding; and when the perfected being 
is on the adept’s path, they are called faculties of a perfected being. 

24. Discussion of why there are two types of fruit, conditioned 
and unconditioned, and explanation of why insight! into the truth is 
gradual and not instantaneous. 


Chapter Eleven: Knowledge 


(E89-93) 

1. List of ten knowledges: of dharma, of connection, conventional, 
of familiar things, of frustration, of its origin, of cessation, of the 
path, of destruction (of bondage) and of nonorigination. 

2-11. Definitions of the ten knowledges. _ 

12. Enumeration of the aspects of the various knowledges. 

13. Enumeration of the knowledges to be found in the various 
trance statés and moments of pure influence. 

14. There are two types of spiritual practice, the first of which, 
of acquisition, is the obtainment of previously unobtained merit; the 


GHOSAKA, ABHIDHARMAMRTA 501 
second, of development, is the realization of previously obtained 
merit. 

15..Explanation of which knowledges are practiced in which of 
the path-moments. 

16. In the first adept moment one practices both pure and impure 
good roots. This moment is associated with Bhowledes connected 
with frustration. '° 

17. Explanation of the differences between vision and ubwiedss. 

‘and between insight and vision. 

18. Explanation of the supporting object of each of the knowledges 
except for knowledge of cessation. 

19. Knowledge of cessation and of the path are capable of destroy- 
ing the fetters of the three realms. 

20. List of six higher faculties,!’ namely, of destruction of bond- 
age, of hearing, of vision, of previous events, of others’ awarenesses 
and of the destruction of impurity, and explanation of their relation 
to the knowledges. 

21. Explanation of the relation between the four applications of 
mindfulness and the knowledges. 

22. Explanation of the relationship between the four discrimina- 
tions and the knowledges. 

23. Explanation of the relation between knowledge of vows and 
the knowledges. 

24. Explanation of the relation between the ten powers and the 
knowledges. 

25. Explanation of the relation between the four confidences and 
the knowledges. 


Chapter Twelve: Trance 


(E94-98) 

1. Comparison between the consciousness of one who has obtained 
attainment of trance and a lamp, sheltered from the wind, that is 
brilliant and pure. 

2. Enumeration of the eight trances (four material and four im- 
material). Discussion of the various trances in terms of whether 
or not they are flavorful, tranquil or pure. 

3. Detailed explanation of the first trance. The first trance has five 
limbs, namely, initial thought, sustained thought, joy, satisfaction 
and concentration. It is associated with three organs of feeling, 
namely, joy, satisfaction and equanimity. Itencompasses existences 
in which beings have both different thoughts and different bodies 
and those in which they have different bodies but the same thoughts. 


502 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The first trance contains four types of consciousness: eye, ear, body 
and mind consciousnesses. 

4. Detailed explanation of the second trance. The second trance 
has four limbs: internal tranquility, concentration, joy and satis- 
faction. It is associated with only two organs of feeling, joy and 
equanimity. 

5. Detailed explanation of the third trance. A pure person who 
has abandoned joy, who is characterized by equanimity, who is 
mindful, and who dwells in satisfaction is said to have entered the 
third trance. The third trance has five limbs: satisfaction, equanimity, 
mindfulness, comprehension and concentration. 

6. Detailed explanation of the fourth trance. After abandoning 
satisfaction as well as frustration, and having destroyed both con- 
tentedness and depression, one enters the fourth trance, which has 
four limbs: equanimity, mindfulness, comprehension and concentra- 
tion. 

7, Discussion of the nonreturner’s trance. 

8. Descriptions of the four immaterial trances: of endless space, - 
endless consciousness, of nothingness and neither-identification- | 
nor-nonidentification. 

9. The road to liberation is twofold, consisting of the realization 
_ of the impurity of the body and mindfulness of the breath. Explanation 
of mindfulness of the breath and its importance. 

10. The nonreturner, intermediate, the four material and the first 
three immaterial trances can be either pure or impure. The fourth 
immaterial trance can only be impure. 

11. List of ten identifications: as noneternal, frustrating, frustrating 
not-self, contemplation of nutrition, nonsatisfyingness in the whole 
world, of hell, of death, the nonattachment of abandonment and 
cessation. Explanation of what it means to practice each of these. 
By practicing them one can obtain cessation of frustration. 


Chapter Thirteen: Complete Concentration 


(E99-112) 

1. Topics discussed in this chapter include concentration, the 
boundless states, the higher faculties, etc. 

2. Definition of concentration. Explanation of three types: empti- 
ness, the dispositionless, and the signiess concentrations. Enumera- 
tion of the aspects of each of these three types. 

3. Detailed explanations of the four boundless states: loving 
kindness, compassion, sympathy and equanimity. 

4. Detailed explanations of the six higher faculties: supernatural 
footing, divine eye, divine ear, knowledge of previous lives, know- 


GHOSAKA, ABHIDHARMAMRTA $03 


ledge of others’ awarenesses and knowledge of the destruction 
of impure influences. 

5. Explanation of why three of the higher faculties, the second, 
fourth and sixth of the list just given, are designated as under- 
standings. 

6. Brief explanation of the ten spheres of totality. 

7. Brief explanation of the eight liberations. 

8. Explanation of the eight senses of mastery. 

9. Explanation of the eight boundless senses. 

10. Explanation of which meditational accomplishments (which 
of the boundless states, higher faculties, etc.) are to be experienced 
in which trance or stage. 

11. Explanation of which accomplishments are pure, impure and 
neutral in which trance or stage. 

12. Explanation of the gradual elimination of fetters and the 
consequent attainment of the trance states. 

13. Discussion of the trances with respect to time (present and 
future). 

14. Discussion of the four material trances and the first three 
immaterial trances with respect to the path (pure and impure). 

15. Discussion of the trances practiced in the life-continuum, the 
fourth immaterial trance. 

16-17. Discussion of the pure trances. 

18. Discussion of the flavorful trances. 

19. The four boundless states, the eight bases of mastery, the first 
three liberations, and the first eight spheres of totality are all based 
in the realm of desire. The first five higher faculties are based on 
both the realm of desire and the material realm. 

20. Discussion of the perfuming trances. 


21. Enumeration and discussion of the four diserminations=~ot : 


dharma, grammatical, perspicuous and of meaning—as well as 
nonconflict and awareness of vows. 

22. Discussion of the times at which the three types of trances, 
namely, impure, flavorful and of pure influence, are obtained. 

23. Discussion of the fourteen magical awarenesses and the realms 
in which they are found. 

24. Discussion of the difference between trance when it is fulfilled 
_ and when it is unfulfilled. 


Chapter Fourteen: Allies of Enlightenment 
(E113-117) 


1. There are seven groups of allies of enlightenment: the applica- 
_ tions of mindfulness, the right exertions, the supernatural footings, 


504 J ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the faculties, the powers, the conditions of enlightenment and the 
parts of the path. Of these the seven conditions of enlightenment 
are always pure, while the others can be either impure or pure. 
According to another opinion the eight parts of the path are also 
always pure. 

2. Explanation of the four applications of mindfulness and of why 

an application of mindfulness is a form of wisdom. 

3. Explanation of why there are exactly four applications of 

mindfulness: each destroys one of the four perverted views. 

4-7. Detailed definition of bodily feeling, awareness and dharma 

applications of mindfulness. 

8. Definition of the four right exertions. 

9. Definition of the four supernatural footings, namely, the con- 

centrations of interest, energy, awareness and deliberation. 

10. Definition of the five faculties, namely, faith, energy, memory, ° 

concentration and wisdom. 

11. Definition of the five powers; the five that are faculties when - 

they are limited are called powers when they are large. 

12. Definition of the seven conditions of enlightenment, namely, . 

memory, investigation of dharma, energy, joy, tranquility, con- 
centration and equanimity. 

13. Definition of the eight parts of the path, namely right view, 

right conceptualizing, right speech, right action, right livelihood, 
right effort, right mindfulness and right concentration. : 

14. Ten basic factors encompass the thirty-seven allies of enligh- 

tenment: 

(a) faith (a faculty and a power) ~ 

(b) energy (a faculty, a power, four right exertions, energy as — 

condition of enlightenment, and right effort) 

(c) memory (a faculty, a power, memory as condition of enlighten- 
ment, right mindfulness) : 

(d) joy (as condition of enlightenment) 

(e) wisdom (a faculty, a power, four applications of mindfulness, 
the condition of enlightenment called investigation of dharma, 
and right view) 

(f) tranquility (a condition of enlightenment) 

(g) concentration (a faculty, a power, four supernatural footings, 
concentration as condition of enlightenment, and right con- 
centration) 

(h) equanimity (a condition of enlightenment) 

(i) conceptualizing (right conceptualizing) 

(j) virtue (right speech, right action, right livelihood). 


GHOSAKA, ABHIDHARMAMRTA 505 


General discussion of each of the seven groups of allies of 
enlightenment. 

15. Enumeration of how many allies of enlightenment are to be 
found in each of the trances. 


Chapter Fifteen: Four Noble Truths 


(E118-125) 

1. Definitions of the four noble truths: frustration, its origin, 
cessation and the path. 

2. Explanation of the sequence of the four truths. Frustration is 
the first truth because it is the least subtle and the easiest to 
understand. 

3. The five grasping aggregates are considered frustration when 
they are result and both frustration and its origin when they are cause. 
This is compared to a man who is both a son and a father at the 
same time. 

4. The truth of the origin of frustration consists of nine fetters: 
attachment, resistance, pride, ignorance, (wrong) views, adherence 
(to views), doubt, selfishness and envy. 

5. The truth of cessation encompasses two types of cessation, 
impure (with residue) and pure (without residue). Both consist in 
the destruction of fetters. 

6. Discussion of the four discriminations (see 13. 21 above) as 
examples of pure factors. 

7. Explanation of the four indestructible faiths of the stream- 
enterer, faith in Buddha, dharma, order and precepts. 

8. There are four practices of concentration. The first is the 
attainment of satisfaction in the present life. The second is the 
attainment of intuition. The third is discrimination of wisdom. And 
the fourth is the destruction of impure influences in the fourth trance 
by means of lightning-minded concentration. 

9. Discussion of the four paths: modes of progress. The path of 
the dharma-follower {one whose faculties are strong) is unpleasant 
and leads to higher faculties. The path of the faith-follower (whose 
faculties are weak) is unpleasant and leads to a slow higher faculties. 
The path of one who is in the midst of practicing the basic trances 
and who has strong faculties is pleasant and leads quickly to higher 
faculties, while that of one who has weak faculties is pleasant and 
leads slowly to-higher faculties. In the basic trances peace and insight 
are balanced, while in the other stages one or the other predominates, 
causing the path to be unpleasant. 

10. Explanation of the seven durations of consciousness: exist- 
ences in which the bodies and thoughts of the beings dwelling therein 


506 . ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


differ; existences in which bodies are different while thoughts are 
the same; existences in which bodies are the same while thoughts 
are different; existences in which both bodies and thoughts are the 
same; and the first three immaterial states. These existences are 
called durations of consciousness because consciousness is not 
interrupted in them. 

11. The woeful courses are not considered durations of conscious- 
ness because the unpleasant sensations experienced in them inter- 
rupt consciousness. Nor are the fourth meditative state, the trance 
free from conceptual identification, the sense of neither- 
identification-nor-nonidentification and the cessation trance consi- 
dered durations of consciousness because in them, too, conscious- 
ness is interrupted. : 

12. The nine abodes of beings consist of the seven durations of 
consciousness as well as the nonidentifying beings and the - 
neither-identifying-nor-nonidentifying sense. 

13. There are four noble seeds: satisfaction with one’s clothing 
and blanket, with one’s food and drink, and with one’s bed, and 
happiness in renunciation. 

14. Explanation of the 108 different feelings that arise from contact 
between an object and the six organs. 

15. Explanation of how memory functions. 

16. Explanation of dreams. 

17. Definition of sammoha, a state of distraction or illusion that. 
arises from bodily illness or possession by demons, or is the result 
_of things one has done in previous births. 
18. Definition of three aggregates that refer to the.qualities of the 
perfected being: virtue, concentration and wisdom. 

19. Definitions of two types of restraint, virtuous restraint and 
restraint of the faculties. 

20. Definitions of three types of obstacles that prevent the obtain- 
ment of perfection: defilements, karma and its maturation. 

21. Discussion of three types of unwholesome initial and sustained 
thought: attachment, hatred and defilements (delusion). These can 
be seen as sicknesses which can be cured, respectively, by the . 
understanding that the body is impure, the practice of friendliness 
towards all beings, and the recognition of the twelvefold chain of 
causation. 

22. Definitions of four types of practice: bodily, moral, of aware- 
ness and of wisdom. 

23. Explanation of why good people sometimes obtain bad 
rebirths, while bad people sometimes obtain good ones. 


GHOSAKA, ABHIDHARMAMRTA 507 
Chapter Sixteen: A Mixed Bag 


(E126-134) 

1. The four fruits of the recluse consist of six factors: the 
aggregates and calculated cessation. 

2. Discussion of the four fruits and the stages within which they 
are contained. 

3. There are four perverted views: belief that the impermanent 
is permanent, that the unpleasant is pleasant, that the impure is pure, 
and that the selfless possesses a self. 

4. Explanation of why all perverted views are destroyed by insight 
into the truth of frustration. 

5. Definitions of the five false views. 

6. Explanation of how the five false views are destroyed by the 
various truths and by insight into these truths. 

7. Definitions of six kinds of spiritual practice: acquisition, condi- 
tioning, abandonment, riddance, discrimination and restraint. 

8. There are five faculties. The faculty of depression is destroyed 
in the first trance, that of frustration in the second trance, that of 
contentedness in the third trance, that of satisfaction in the fourth 
trance, and that of equanimity in the trance free from conceptual 

identification. : 

9. There are three all-encompassing realms. In abandonment all 
the defilements except for attachment are destroyed. In non- 
attachment attachment is destroyed. And in cessation all the other 
factors are destroyed. 

10. One obtains consciousness-liberation from the destruction of 
attachment, while one obtains wisdom-liberation from the destruc- 
tion of delusion. 

11. Explanation of the ability of attachment to link internal and 
external bases. 

12. List of ten factors: of desire, material, immaterial, pure, 
connected, separated, good, bad, neutral and unconditioned. 

13. Five types of factors are the basis of the awareness of dharma: 
factors, either connected or separated, that are connected with 
desire; factors, either connected or separated, that are pure; and 
good unconditioned factors. 

14. Seven types of factors are the basis of knowledge of con- 
nection: the five mentioned in Section 13 as well as connected 
and disconnected factors connected with immaterial realm. 

15. Three types of factors are the basis for knowledge of the 
awarenesses of others: connected factors that are connected with 
desire and matter and pure connected factors. 

16. Ten types of factors are the basis for conventional awareness: 


508 , ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


connected and disconnected factors connected with each of the three 
realms, connected and disconnected pure factors, and good and 
neutral unconditioned factors. 

17. Six types of factors are the basis for knowledge of frustration 
and of its cause: connected and disconnected factors of the three 
realms. Only one type of factor is the basis for knowledge of 
cessation, namely, good unconditioned factors. Two types are the 
basis of knowledge of the path: associated and dissociated pure 
factors. 

18. Nine types of factors are the basis for knowledge of destruction 
and of nonorigination: those that are the basis for conventional 
awareness, minus neutral unconditioned factors. 

19. Definitions of two types of defilements: specific, which are 
restricted to a single stage, and pervasive, which are universal. 

20. Explanations of the two types of factors, associated and 
dissociated. List and definitions of the seventeen dissociated condi- 
tions (see Chapter 6, Section 4). 

21. Discussion of which dissociated conditions are good, which 
bad and which neutral. 

22. Discussion of which dissociated conditions are associated with ‘ 
which realms. 

23. Discussion of which dissociated conditions are pure and which 
impure. All of them can be impure, while birth, old age and death, 
duration and noneternality can be either. 

24. Brief definitions of the three unconditioned factors. 

25. List of six causes: homogeneous, connected, simultaneous, 
efficient, pervasive and maturation causes. 

26. Explanation of why liberation is also a fruit of conditioned 
factor. 

27. Explanation of why conditioned factors are effective at a single 
time with respect to a single supporting object. 

28. Definitions of the terms ‘‘liberation path”’ and “‘liberation’’. 

29, There are three kinds of attachment. Sensual desire is the desire 
for things. Lust for being is stinginess with regard to what one 
possesses. And passion for destruction is the desire to destroy. 

30-31. Discussion of which allies of enlightenment can be con- 
sidered faculty factors. 

32. All factors are associated with another and are dissociated from 
self. 

33. Definition of aSesaprahana, the destruction, without remain- 
der, of defilements. 

34. Discussion of the different kinds of faith that are based on 
the various truths. 

35. All concomitant mental factors, as well as unmanifest virtue, 


GHOSAKA, ABHIDHARMAMRTA 509 


birth, duration and old age/ death, follow consciousness because they 
have a single supporting object. 

36. Allimpure factors are to be destroyed, because they are morally 
defiled. 

37. All pure and impure factors are to be understood because they 
all have wisdom as supporting object. Past and future factors are 
considered distant because of their lack of efficacy, while present 
factors are considered near because they can cause effects. 

38. Discussion of nineteen indestructible faculties. 

39, Definitions of five types of conjunction of sense-organ, sense- 
object and consciousness: resisting, full of conceptual construction, 
defiled ignorance, or pure influence (knowledge) and undefiled 
impure relation (neither knowledge nor lack of knowledge). 

40, One obtains fruits by means of two paths, the path of destroying 
fetters and the path of obtaining release. The matured awareness 
of the perfected being brings him to final liberation because he has 
abandoned all factors. 

41. Definitions of the four types of existence: birth, death, root 
and intermediate. 

42. Definitions of aversion and nonattachment. 

43. Definitions of three types of influences. The sensual influence 
consists of all the defilements of the sensual realm, except for 
ignorance. The influence of being consists of all the defilements of 
the material and immaterial realms, except for ignorance. The 
influence of ignorance is confusion associated with all three realms. 

44. At the time of cessation, when all influences have been 
destroyed, one obtains the destruction of all frustration and the 
ambrosia of total wisdom. 


24 


MAHAVIBHASA 


Summary by Shohei Ichimura with 
Kosho Kawamura, Robert E. Buswell, Jr. 
and Collett Cox 


This summary is based on the following materials: 

(1) Ryogen Fukuhara’s Japanese itemization ofthe subjects treated 
in the Abhidharmamahavibhdsasastra, selectively rendered by 
Shohei Ichimura into English; (2) translations of selected passages 
from Louis de la Vallée Poussin’s French, and by Robert Buswell 
and Collett Cox into English; (3) a partial summary of the opening 
portion by Kosho Kawamura. The work is available in Chinese 
translations, numbered as T.1545, T.1546 and T.1547. The present 
version is based on Taisho 1545. Some of the passages provided 
further treatment on the basis of the translations of Poussin, Buswell 
and Cox are culled from versions other than T. 1545. However, since 
the work is, in each of its versions, a commentary on the J#anapras- 
thdna, it is possible for us to follow the overall plan of that work 
in organizing this summary. Nonparenthetical numerical references 
connect the summary to the sections in the summary of the Jfanapra- . 
sthana. The numbers in parentheses refer first to the page and column 
in the Chinese text. 

T.1545 (Nanjio 1264) was composed shovly after Kaniska’s 
council, which according to Etienne Lamotte took place around 
128-151.! The Chinese translation by Hsiian-tsang, made in 659, 
numbers 200 volumes. Hajime Nakamura tells us that “‘it is likely 
that the fourth congress, in which it is said that this text was compiled, 
did not actually take place’’.” 

T.1546 (Nanjio 1263) was written by Buddhavarman i in 439,° 
60 volumes. It seems to be an earlier form of T.1545.* 

T.1547 (Nanjio 1299) is ‘‘attributed to Sangabhadra, and most 
probably revised by. Sanghadeva’’> in 383.° It seems to be an 
independent work.’ 


§12 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Louis de la Vallée Poussin provides French translations of sections 
of these texts in several of his articles: ‘‘The two nirvanadhatus 
according to the Vibhasa ”’, Indian Historical Quarterly 6, 1930, 
39-45 concerns the pratisamkhya- and aprati-samkhya-ntrodhas. 
Other passages are rendered in his Documents d ” Abhidharma, 
Bulletin de l’Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient 1930, 1-28, 
247-298, Mélanges Chinois et Bouddhique 1, 1932, 63-125, and 
5, 1936-37, 1-87. There are also some passages translated in various 
volumes of Poussin’s translation of Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmakosa, 
op. cit. 


BOOK ONE: MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS 
Chapter One: Higher Worldly Factors 


(1.1a-4c) Different opinions are recorded about what the Jianapra- 
sthana represents. One master believes that it constitutes the 
Buddha’s answers to questions addressed to him. Another believes 
it is a treatise composed by Katyayaniputra. 

There is a discussion of the meaning of ‘‘abhidharma’’. It is held 
to mean ‘‘extreme’’, i.e. higher dharma. The essential nature of 
abhidharma is said to be the pure faculty of wisdom. Various theories 
are also cited and identified as those of various masters, specifically 
the views of Vasumitra, Bhadanta Katyayaniputra, Ghosaka, 
Buddhagupta, Buddhadeva, and members of the Dharmaguptaka, 
Mahisasaka, D4rstantika and Sabdika sects are mentioned. 

In connection with the notion of intoxicant, it is remarked that 
the real intoxicants are greed, hatred and delusion, so that e.g. 
woman, though perhaps a cause of impurities blocking-the practice 
of spiritual training, is not an actual evil influence. The power of 
karma is illustrated: an alms-offering, even a single meal, can be 
a cause that matures into seven rebirths among men and gods. 

‘“Higher worldly factor’ is defined as that which leads to the 
certainty of liberation. 

(2.5c-9b) Various theories are cited as to why the Jndnaprasthana 
begins by presenting the higher worldly factors and not others. The 
“earlier Abhidharmists’’ say that the higher worldly factors are states 
into which one enters by making the five faculties (of faith, etc.) 
a directly antecedent condition of the realization of enlightenment. 

The Vibhajyavadins say that the five faculties are simply of the 
nature of nonattachment, and not the higher worldly factors. 

The Vatsiputriya school agrees for the most part, but adds that 
the higher worldly factors are still influenced evilly by a contaminant 
neither mental nor material, rather being of the category of dissocia- 
ted conditioning factor. They add peculiar views of the school, such 


MAHAVIBHASA 513 


as that there are three different types of seeker, that asuras belong 
to the sixth course rather than the third as usually supposed, and 
that personality actually exists. 

Dharmatrata: Awarenesses and mental factors are differentiated 
by will, and so the higher worldly factors have will as their essential 
nature. 

_ Buddhadeva: Since the essential nature of awareness and mental 
factors is awareness, that is also the essential nature of the higher 
worldly factors. 

Though patience in awareness of frustration occurs for one who 
abides in the higher worldly factors, since patience toward know- 
ledge of the factor of frustration has not yet been gained, such 
a one is not yet termed “‘noble”’ (arya). 

Different views are considered concerning how the factors im- 
mediately precede entry into the realization that one is destined 
for enlightenment. One position is held by those who distinguish will 
from awareness, another by those who believe they are homogeneous 
and continuous. 

1.1 (3.10c-15b) Question: Is acquisition-force one of the higher 
worldly factors? The approved answer given is no, that the four 
characteristics of conditioned factors (arising, maintenance, decay 
and dissolution) are marks of higher worldly factors, but not 
acquisition-force. 


Part One: The Higher Worldly Factors 


1.2. Now the passage in Jfidnaprasthana, which defines the higher 
worldly factors as those five faculties which immediately precede 
entry into the realization that one is destined for liberation, is 
examined. This realization occurs at the stage where the ordinary 
man leaves his worldly nature, and it is caused by his ordinariness, 
just as one mounts a horse in order to tame it. This ordinary nature 
is neutral with respect to defilement, though the defilements operate 
when that nature is present. 

Other theories are reviewed. Some ‘ ‘nonorthodox 1 masters’’ say 
that ordinary folk can be divided into three groups as (1} those whose 
nature makes them able to realize liberation, (2) those whose nature 
makes them unable to realize liberation, and (3) a neutral kind of 
nature. In contrast to this, the Darstantika and Sabdika thinkers say 
that the term “‘destined”’ (in the phrase ‘‘destined to realize libera- 
tion’’) means that liberation is guaranteed. 

1.3. The Mahasamghikas say that the higher worldly factors share 
their nature with factors clinging to the realms of desire and matter, 
while the Vatsiputriyas believe these natures belong to the material 


$14 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
and immaterial realms. The Mahisasakas say that they belong to all 
three. The Dharmaguptakas say they share their nature with factors 
belonging to the sensuous, material and immaterial realms as well 
as with factors that do not belong to any of those. But the correct 
view is that the higher worldly factors share their nature only with 
those factors belonging to the realm of matter. 

There are two ways to counteract defilements, one direct, the other 
indirect. Both exist at the stage of the nonreturner. At the stage of 
the five upper meditational states of the sensuous realm the direct 
way, annihilation of defilements, is absent, but the indirect way, 
which magnifies aversion against defilements, is present. So these 
are the higher worldly factors. Thus the higher worldly factors do 
not cut off the defilements, but the steadiness of knowledge about 
frustration does. 

(4.15c-19c) The higher worldly factors do not belong to the 
immaterial realm. After full understanding of the frustrations inherent 
in the realm of desire one proceeds to comprehend the frustrations 
inherent in the material and immaterial realms. 

There are two kinds of ways of presenting arguments, expedient 
and fundamental. And likewise there are two ways of carrying on 
an argument, through affirmation and negation. 

1.4. The higher worldly factors and the steadiness of knowledge 
about frustration both have the same subject-matter. The higher 
worldly factors are present at three levels of meditation: one associa- 
ted with initial and sustained thought, a second associated with 
sustained but without initial thought, and a third without either. 

When one enters into the path of vision from the sixth stage and 
so refines conventional knowledge concerning both worldly and 
otherworldly objects, he departs from the stage of the higher worldly 
factors. The awarenesses involved in those factors are confined to 
the realm of material form, while in the path of vision one becomes 
aware of other kinds of objects. , 

1.6 (5.20b-25a) A higher worldly factor lasts for only a single 
moment. 

Question: Are higher worldly factors subject to retrogression? 
Answer: No. Neither is the path of vision. That path is approached 
in two ways, by steadily facing it or by suddenly encountering it. 


Part Two: Summit 


An aid to penetration may be one of three kinds: (1) disadvanta- 
geous, (2) conducive to maintenance, (3) advantageous. These three 
kinds of penetration or applications of mindfulness are found respec- 
tively in the stages of being (1) near to the ‘‘heat”’ of insight, of being 


MAHA VIBHASA : . $15 


(2) at the summit of faith, and of being (3) at the stage of patience 
for the nonarising of factors. The fourth application of mindfulness 
is a higher worldly factor. These three kinds of aids to penetration 
must be distinguished from the four kinds of features discussed in 
the section on concentration. These three are (1) being near to the 
“‘heat’’ of insight (usmagata), (2) being at the summit of faith, and 
(3) being at the stage of steadiness in the nonarising of factors. 
Steadiness is the state of mind of one who is contemplative, involving 
only the material realm, and it comes to involve all four of the 
applications of mindfulness, at which point it becomes the path of 
vision. Indeed, the path of vision is itself a good roct, the good root 
of pure influence. 

(6.25c-30b) The summit involves a small amount of faith in the 
three jewels. It is called ‘summit’ since one cannot remain there 
long. After one achieves it, one either proceeds to stage (3) or 
retrogresses to stage (1). One cannot regress from stéadiness or from 
the higher worldly factors. The faith achieved at the summit is the 
least degree of faith. 

Faith has two aspects: faith and resolve. Both are required for the 
noble truths of cessation and path, while only the former is needed 
for the truth of frustration and origin. The faith-follower and the 
dharma-follower have faith in both these senses, while One who 
practices according to his own resolve and one who practices 
following wrong views have only faith as acceptance. Likewise, he 
who realizes liberation at no specific time, and the enlightened for 
oneself, have only faith as acceptance but not with active resolution, 
while the one who realizes liberation at an appointed time as well 
as the disciple have faith in both senses. 

The Buddha taught the virtue of faith as essential to the climax 
of penetration for the sake of those who are endowed with wisdom 
but Jack faith. 

Those who lack faith fall away from the summit. Objection: This 
failing away from the summit is merely nominal and has no real 
essence. Answer: No. Falling away from the summit is one of several 
dissociated factors, an unobstructed neutral factor. 

The Darstantikas are cited as not believing in retrogression from 
the summit of penetration. 

Why is the first aid to penetration called ‘‘heat’’? Because it burns 
all the fuel of the defilements. What does it involve? Being only the 
first, it involves only a little faith. Evil men lack any heat. 

The four good roots are (1-3) of the aid to penetration plus the 
higher worldly factors as a fourth. They all involve penetration into 
the five aggregates as their essence. 


516 7 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Ghosaka: The four good roots are possessed in the sensuous realm 
and in the material realm. 

Our view: The four good roots are only found in the realm of 
matter. 

Ghosaka, Buddhadeva and Vasumitra have different analyses of 
the qualities found in each of the four good roots, and indeed there 
are innumerable kinds of analyses. 

Why are the aids to penetration so called? Because they aid in 
penetration of the noble path leading to the path of insight. 

(7.30c-35c) The “‘venerable ones from the western region”’ (i.e., 
the Gandharans and Bactrians) are said to have analyzed the aids 
to penetration in terms of seventeen aspects. In the case of heat these 
are (1) heat’s purport—all the good roots previously accumulated, 
(2) itslocus in meditation, (3) its cause—good roots, (4) its supporting 
object, the four noble truths, (5) its result, immediate fruition, (6) 
its outcome, subsequent good roots, (7) its maturation in the five 
aggregates of the material realm, (8) its principal quality, to serve 
as the determinate cause of liberation, (9) its sixteen aspects, (10) 
its fruition as both name and purpose, (11) its being a product of 
spiritual practice alone, (12) its being associated with the material 
realm alone, (13) its being only present in meditative trance, (14) 
its involving either, neither or both of initial and sustained thought, 
(15) its being associated with the faculties of satisfaction, contented- 
ness and equanimity, (16) its continuing through several moments, 
(17) its being subject to retrogression. 

The four good roots in the cases of the bodhisattva, the solitary 
disciple and the disciple who practices with his colleagues are 
explained. 

Though there is no fixed order in which the aids to penetration 
are developed by the other two, the bodhisattva, having developed 
the aids to penetration in past lives, develops all the aids in his single 
last lifetime as he practices the fourth meditation. 

The four good roots can be developed by men and gods abiding 
in the realm of desire, except for those residing in the northern Kuru 
region. They can be achieved by one in a female body or that of 
a eunuch who has a male mentality. 


Part Three: Heat 


The first good root, being near the heat of wisdom, has as its 
characteristic features wisdom regarding what it heard, thought, and 
practiced. The differentiations (sva/aksana) and shared features 
(samdnyalaksana), as well as the content (visaya) of this stage are 
identified. 


MAHAVIBHASA ; 517 


Three groups of good practices are distinguished that lead toward 
liberation: these are mindfulness of the inner peace of the five kinds 
of awareness, the mindfulness of the distributive features of things, 
and the mindfulness of the collective features of things. It takes three 
lifetimes to realize liberation swiftly, but for the slower it may take 
a kalpa or a hundred kalpas. Even those who are able to realize these 
stages of penetration may fall into a thousand lifetimes. 


Part Four: Wrong Views 


(8.36a-40b) Beliefs that the body is real are explained in twenty 
verses, and are distinguished into five kinds of wrong views about 
self and fifteen wrong views related to self, but there may be counted 
as many as 936 kinds of wrong views about self. 


Part Five: What is Involved in and Excluded from Wrong Views 


Five kinds of wrong views must be totally annihilated in the path 
of vision. They are (1) views insisting on the existence of a self 
and things belonging to it (satkayadrsti), explained in twenty verses;® 
(2) views insisting on one or another of extreme theses (antagraha- 
drsti), explained in twenty verses; (3) wrong views (mithydadrsti) 
especially derived from rejecting moral and spiritual causation, 
explained in 80 verses; (4) views insisting on erroneous views as 
correct (drstiparamarsadrsti}, expounded in 80 verses; (5) views 
insisting on wrong rules and vows as leading to liberation (Silavrata- 
paramarsadrst), explained in 40 verses. 

Other topics are discussed here, such as the concept of essential 
nature (svabhava), whether self is material, whether anyone holds 
the view that a single atom has a self. But there is no self dissociated 
from the aggregates. The nature, antidote (pratipaksa) and originating 
(samutthdna) of these views are examined. Ordinary men do not 
examine these matters, and even some teachers fail to do so and 
die without annihilating the delusions involved. 

(9.40c-42c) There are two kinds of self: the self composed of 
factors, which exists, and the person (pudgalatman), which does not. 

Views of wrong rules and vows are of two sorts: (1) regarding 
what is not a cause as a true cause—e.g., a belief in creator God; 
(2) regarding what is not a path as a path. The first kind is the same 
as wrong views. 

There are five kinds of existence, beginning with real existence 
(dravyasat) and nominal existence (prajfaptisat). False awareness 
is of two kinds: afflicted (upak/ista) and unafflicted (anupakirsta). 
Afflicted awareness is so called from the higher standpoint (para- 


518 4 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


martha), while unafflicted awareness is so called from the con- 
ventional standpoint (samvrtti). 


Chapter Two: Awareness 
Part One: Single Awareness 


(42c-43c) Mahasanghika: Awareness and its associated factors 
cognize their essential natures by themselves; they have the faculty 
of awareness as their essential nature, just as a candle illumines itself 
as well as others. 

Dharmaguptaka: Awareness and associated factors cognize their 
connection. 

Mahisdsaka: Awareness and associated factors cognize their 
co-presence. The cognitive faculty of those factors which are correla- 
tive among themselves know those dissimilar that are not correlated 
with them. The cognitive faculty of the noncorrelative factors know 
those dissimilar factors which are mutually correlative. 

Vatsiputriya: The person has the faculty of awareness. 

Vatsiputriyas and others: Awareness and associated factors cannot 
cognize their essential nature, their association, or their co-presence. 
An awareness does not know any factor whatever, since it is other 
than those factors which are in possession of their essential nature, 
association and co-presence. An essential nature cannot know its 
essential nature. 

All four views are rejected (it is remarked that this also refutes 
the view of the master of the western region). 


Part Two: Single Consciousness 


(44b-45c) Awareness and consciousness are not different in their 
essential nature. Awareness only acts on its proper contents, viz. 
the twelve senses. It cognizes both general and specific features. 

Vatsiputriya: Awareness constitutes only a part of the path, and 
consciousness only a part of phenomenal existence. 

Darstaintika: Awareness and consciousness are not concomitant; 
one must precede the other. 

The difference between the pure and impure features of nonself, 
is discussed. 

(11.45c-50c) Discussion of the functional features of nonself (i.e. 
of a collection of factors). That feature is found in seven stages, (e.g., 
the sensuous realm, the stage of the nonreturner, the stage between 
the first and second meditation, and the four states of meditation- 
concentration. Though it is found in the immaterial realm it does 
not act upon all factors there. It is impure. A perfected being may 


MAHAVIBHASA i 519 


set the impure feature of the nonself into action on the basis of four 
conditions. 
Some say that causes and conditions have no essential nature. 


Part Three: The Supporting Object of Two Awarenesses 


Mahdasanghika: Two awarenesses may arise concomitantly within 
a person. Some even say that these awarenesses become the cause © 
of the person, but that is not the correct interpretation of the 
Mahasanghika view. 

In any case, the Mahasanghika theory is incorrect. The awareness 
of wrong views and the awareness of impurity mutually evolve in 
reciprocal interaction. One awareness in one series and another in 
the same series mutually evolve in reciprocal interaction. Likewise, 
there is reciprocal interaction among the mental states (classified 
into ten types) as well as among other mental and material factors 
classified into eighteen elements, ten good mental factors, etc. 

’ Some say: A directly antecedent condition is not really existent. 

The Mahasanghika theory is refuted. in detail. 

The orthodox say that the six groups of awareness do not arise 
concomitantly or simultaneously. 

A perfected being’s last awareness and mental states are not a 
directly antecedent condition (of anything). 

Vasumitra and others are surveyed on the properties on the directly 
antecedent condition. It is proposed that even if there is some 
difference between the preceding and succeeding moments ofa factor 
there is no error in naming them as directly antecedent conditions. 

(11.51a-S5b) There is no directly antecedent condition within a 
future life. 

Bhadanta Katyayaniputra: Material factors cannot be directly ante- 
cedent conditions. Conditions dissociated from awareness ate not 
directly antecedent conditions. 

The directly antecedent condition does not explain the production 
of the meditative states whose maturations are ¢ without conceptual 
identification. 

The two highest meditative states (of the basis of neither- 
identification-nor-nonidentification and the cessation trance) have 
no directly antecedent conditions in between for even one kalpa, 
and so are called “‘directly antecedent concentrations’’. 

Direct antecedence of awareness and awareness free from interval 
are differentiated through use of the catuskot, etc. 

The reciprocal arising of twelve awarcnesses is explained. 

Vatsiputriya: The person really exists. 

The following are heretical views: that. factors mutually withdraw 


$20 ' ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


from existence; that factors mutually change their nature; that factors 
mutually pass away; that an awareness abides for two moments; that 
the mind element is without change; that change takes place between 
one moment of the aggregates to another moment of the aggregates; 
that the preceding awareness passes information on to the sub- 
sequent awareness. 

(12.55a-57b) Even though there is no self, through the force of 
dispositions a homogeneous awareness arises in identifying the 
subsequent moment of experience in reference to it. 

Visual consciousness and factors associated with awareness are 
produced in response to some corresponding material aggregate. 
Mental consciousness and factors associated with awareness are 
produced in response to the totality of factors. 

Awarenesses and mental states are-produced in response to 
objective spheres according to their epistemic bases. They are also 
determined according to their epistemic base. 

Some say that since the moment of arising is still functionally in 
a future moment, awarenesses and mental states do not act upen 
objective spheres; whereas the moment of perishing is still function- 
ally at the moment they are acting upon objective spheres. 

The nature of the collection of awarenesses and mental states that 
belong to the preceding moment of the series can be explained in 
reference to volitional speech (manogabda), while the nature of the 
collection of awareness and mental states that belong to the sub- 
sequent moment of the series can be explained by reference to 
recollective speech (smrtisabda). 

There are two features of the mind: one receives the functional 
features of awarenesses and mental states acting on the objective 
spheres, while the other receives the form of and becomes the 
objective sphere. There are up to twelve kinds. 


Part Four: Memory 


(57b-58b) Vasumitra: Even though there is no self, a person can 
recollect what happened earlier through three assisting conditions: 
(1) that awareness and mental states take a homogeneous form from 
the preceding collection of awarenesses and mental states; (2) that 
a commonly shared portion continues to survive from the preceding 
to the subsequent moment as constituents of the collection; (3) 
because, of these two, there is no chance of losing the memory. 

The homogeneous portion has three functional features: 

(1) active process, (2) passive process (=objective sphere); and 
(3) conformity between the two. Because of these functional features 
recollection is possible. 


MAHAVIBHASA 521 
Part Five: Faith 


(58b-61b) Loss of memory is also traced to three features in the 
heterogeneous portion, Memory loss occurs to anyone who abides 
in the realm of desire, in the five stages of the cycle of rebirth, in 
the world of men; it also occurs to those saintly human beings who 
abide in the four states of sainthood, but not to the world-honored 
one (=the Buddha). 

Among those who once abided in hell, anyone can recollect his 
past experience and can thereby know the mind of others who belong 
to the same group as regards their past experiences. This occurs 
only at the very beginning moment of rebirth. 

Some kinds of animals can recollect past experiences. Ghosts can 
as well. 

The phenomena of weather such as clouds, rainfall, heat, cold, 
etc. are induced by the dragon’s active function but are at the same 
time concurrent effects of conditions in the vicinity. The water 
flowing out of the dragon’s palace, however, is not an induction from 
its active function but rather an effect created by the common karma 
of all living beings. 

Those born among heavenly beings can recollect past experiences. 
In the world of men none have the power of recollecting past lives 
normally given to them by birth. 

There is further discussion about the ghosts. 


Part Six: Number of Sense-Faculties 
f 

(13.61c-65b) Vasumitra: Visual awareness perceives its material 
object. 

Ghosaka: The wisdom correlative to visual awareness perceives 
the material object. 

Darstantika: The harmonious whole of these factors perceives the 
material object. 

Vatsiputriya: The visual faculty alone perceives the materiai object. 

All four theories are mistaken. The correct view is that one 
perceives a material object through the interaction between the visual 
faculty and a material object. There are functionally two kinds of 
visual organ, one which can connect itself with consciousness and 
thereby perceives its material object, and-the other which does not 
connect itself with consciousness and thereby does not see its object. 

Both eyes simultaneously perceive a material object, no matter 
how far apart they may be. The sense-organs of hearing and smelling 
are also twofold, though they function as one. 

A distinction is drawn between the visual organ acquired by karmic 


$22 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
maturation at birth and the organ that results from further accumula- 
tions. 

The visual organ is atomically constituted. It is capable of going 
out to its object. But none of the five kinds of consciousness—visual, 
etc.— have an atom as locus or content. 

The orthodox view (viz., of the Vibhasasastrins) is: There are 
twenty kinds of material sense bases. Some of us say there are 
twenty-one. An atom has various forms, e.g., rectangular; but it 
cannot be perceived. 

Vasumitra: Vision depends on the four kinds of conditions, so that 
even when an object is present it may not be visually cognized. 

Samkhya: Vision depends on eight kinds of conditions so that even 
when the object is present it may not be seen. 

The number of kinds of auditory sense bases are eight, of olfactory 
bases four, of gustatory bases six, and of tactual bases eleven. 

The specific characteristic of a thing is twofold: (1) as objective 
fact, (2) according to its epistemic base. Externally existing smell, 
taste, touch, etc. are respectively the direct cause for the inner. 
faculties of smelling, tasting, touching, etc. to produce their aware- 
nesses. 

A bodhisattva’s six faculties are so sharp that he could single ou 
a single candle when extinguished out of five hundred other candles. 


Part Seven: The Past 


(65b-66a) Some say: Whatever does not exist in the past or future 
but exists at present must be anunconditioned factor. Whatever exists 
in its coming to be and going away ‘is a conditioned factdr at present. 

There are two kinds of past: (1) the world that has passed away, 
and (2) the inner concentration that has passed away. There are two 
kinds of future existence, namely (1) the world that has not yet come 
into existence, and (2) the inner obstruction that does not bring itself 
into being. 

When Brahmaraja hid himself the Buddha knew his presence, but 
when the Buddha hid himself Brahmar4ja could not see his presence. 

The five sets of alternatives in the text are analyzed. 


Part Eight: Perplexity 


(66b-69b) Is there or is there nota real perplexity about frustration? 
There are sixteen moments from the state of steadiness of insight 
into the nature of factors as frustrating up to the insight into the noble 
truth of the path regarding the material and immaterial. 

Since some theorists hold that there are hundreds of thousands 
of lives and deaths that one has to pass through, in order to make 


MAHAVIBHASA . §23 


it easy to understand multiple moments are explained to make up 
a single awareness. 


Part Nine: Of Names, Words and Phonemes 


(69c-71c} Darstantika: A collection of names, of words or of 
phonemes is not a real entity. 

Sabdika: These collections have language ( Sabda) as their essence. 

The ‘‘orthodox”’ view: Collections of words, etc. are real entities 
and belong to the class of conditions, dissociated from awareness. 
Without investigating the nature of such collections some fall into 
the hell-world, etc. But one should not feel anger upon hearing 
abusive words, etc. 

The name is basic; it fills up any collections of words. The 
composition of sitras and verse sastras is analyzed. A Phoneme i is 
analyzed as an aksara. 

(15.71¢-77a) Do words follow linguistic functions ( vakyabhami) 
or the functions of persons (pudgalabhimi)? Words belong to human 
kind and are not confined to any particular individual. Words are 
neutral in nature. 

The Buddha is capable of responding to a moment of thought and 
of explaining a moment of speech by means of a single character, 
whereas disciples and those enlightened for themselves can do the 
former but not the latter. 

Meanings are different from words. People in the unmemorable 
past organized words and thoughts among themselves. 

Vasumitra: Speech leads to the rise of words, and words reveal 
meaning. 

The four aggregates other than matter are called ‘‘names’’ because 
they can be expressed by their names, while the material aggregate 
because of its grossness reveals itself. 

The number of kinds of names is variously said to be six, four 
and two. There are three kinds of word-referents—in the past, present 
and future. Their nature is explained. Vasumitra, Bhadanta Katyaya- 
niputra and Parsva are cited as giving different reasons why there 
is no reference by higher worldly factors. 

Four kinds of question and answer are distinguished: (1) categorical 
’ affirmation or rejection or negation; (2) analysis of the different 
meanings implied in a question; (3) answering by questioning the 
méanings implied in a question; (4) not answering at all when a 
question is not appropriate to answer. The last is illustrated by the 
story of the perfected being Vasula, who answered the heretic 
Candala by silence and thereby defeated him. 


$24 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Part Ten: The Fatigue of the Buddha 


(16.77a-78b) The Buddha totally annihilated all defilements 
without any conditionings remaining; the saintly disciples of the 
two vehicles also annihilate defilements, but do not completely 
overcome remaining conditionings. E.g., in Ananda and Sariputra 
one found such. When the Buddha reprimanded his disciples he was 
not teaching them. 


Part Eleven: Six (Moral) Causes 


1. Enumeration 

(79a-79b) The six causes are propounded in order to refute the 
idea that there is no causality, that causality is imbalanced (i.e. that 
God is cause), or the Darstantika theory that things do not really 
exist. 

Some theorists hold that the six kinds of cause involve six kinds 
of effect. Thus the associated and corresponding causes both produce 
fruits of human action, etc. 

The theory of four conditions is found in the sdtras, but not the 
theory of the six causes. That theory was taught in the Ekottara 
Agama, but the information is hidden among the passages of the text, 
according to some theorists. Some also say that there is no single 
sutra in which the six causes are propounded in proper order and 
contiguously, and yet they are treated in various sutras scattered here 
and there. 
2.The Connected Cause 

(79c-81b) Darstantika: Awarenesses and concomitant mental 
factors arise mutually alternating as preceding or succeeding moment 
but never arise simultaneously. 

Vaibhasika: They arise simultaneously as well. 

Some say: The essential nature of one group of factors and that 
of another cari occur as co-originating. Various interpretations of 
a ‘‘co-originating occurrence’’ are refuted. The logic of co-origina- 
ting occurrence is illustrated by the ten factors arising with every 
awareness. “‘Connected’’ (in the title of this section) means co-origi- 
nating occurrence, that is, that two groups of factors are identical 
in their essential nature. 

Dhumika or Kuha: The four aggregates occur co- originating, i.e. 
in association. 

Vaibhasika: All five aggregates occur in association. But although 
the four great elements are invariably concurrent, because they have 
ho epistemic basis they are not in correlated occurrence. 


MAHAVIBHASA ; $25 


Bhadanta Katyayaniputra: ‘‘Associated’’ means “‘identical compa- 
nion’’. 

Ghosaka: “‘Associated’’ means the identity as to the respective 
bases, contents, forms and goals between two groups of factors. 


3.The Simultaneous Cause 

(81b-82b) Awareness becomes simultaneous cause for those 
factors that are incurred by bodily and vocal acts evolving along with 
awareness. Explanation of the essential nature of *‘evolving along 
with”’ (anuvartin). , 

(17.82c-85b) What is it that evolves along with awareness in bodily 
and vocal acts? Not restraint in the immaterial realm. But the restraint 
that arises in pure concentration and in the concentration belonging 
to the material sphere both evolve along with awareness. This istested 
with a fourfold alternation. Also, that restraint that arises while the 
practitioner investigates the knowledge of the path as the last step 
before completing the practice of undefiled insight into the nature 
of factors is also regarded as evolving along with awareness. 

The different numbers of restraints of the disciples, the Buddha, 
etc., are distinguished. - 

At the moment when a person reaches the state of perfected being, 
how many stages are there in which he acquires perceptual restraint 
as evolving in his body along with his awareness? Answers provided 
by the masters of the Western regions and those of Kashmir are 
varied. 


4. Homogeneous Cause 
(85b) Various classifications of this reviewed. 


5. Pervasive Cause 

(18.90c-93b) Various classifications and conflicting theories are 
reviewed. 

Defilements in the sensual realm can act upon the material and 
immaterial realms. Among the eleven members of the pervasive 
contaminants, nine members act not only on their own domains but 
also others’ domains as well, while the other two members act only 
on their own. 

(19.93c-95a) False view can be eliminated through knowledge 
of the truth of frustration and of its cause in the sensual realm; they 
do not increase themselves in acting in the material and immaterial 
realms. 

Defiled factors to be eliminated by a perfected being’s repeated 
practice have origination by way of acting upon others or have no 
origination: a variety of views are classified. 


526 i ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


6. Maturation Cause 

(96a-99a) Darstantika: No maturation cause is found dissociated 
from awareness, nor is there any effectuation from the maturation 
cause without feeling. 

Mahasanghika: Only the awareness and awareness- -concomitants 
are capable of having maturation causes and effects from them. 

Kasyapiya: A maturation cause continues to function as long as 
its effect does not reach maturation, but is bound to decay when 
it has reached full maturation. 

Some heretics say: Good or bad that is done do not bear satisfaction 
or frustration as their respective maturations. 

Sarvastivadin: There are seven different factors in the category 
of cognizable manifest actions ( vijfaptikarman) each of which has 
a maturation effect. Each member comprises many atoms and each 
atom has three time dimensions, while each time dimension com- 
prises multiple moments, each moment being a maturation effect. 

Discussion of various theories about what kind of maturation cause 
produces the trance free from conceptual identification. 

Concerning the maturation of karma to be received within one 
and the same lifetime, the maturation of karma to be received in 
the immediately following life, the maturation of karma to be 
received in the third life and after. 

There are many theories about the meaning of the word ‘‘matura- 
tion’’. One difference is between maturation of homogeneous effects 
and of heterogeneous effects. 

There is no maturation noe unconditioned factors or neutral 
‘factors. 

(20.99a-103c) The action of one . moment invites common charac- 
teristics shared by living beings. One action determines an entire 
lifetime. Sometimes an action mixed with another induces some 
effect other than its own, while when operating independently it only 
produces its own effect. 

The karmic maturations of animals, ghosts, gods and bisexuals 
are discussed. Also the maturations of deeds in the three spheres 
(sensual, material and immaterial). 

The good factors in the initial stage of meditation have in common 
being the maturations of the same kind of cause. In the sensual realm 
the three roots opposing the three good roots are stronger. The 
strongest good karma influences one’s life for a duration of 80,000 
larger kalpas, while the strongest bad karma influences one’s life 
negatively for 20 median ka/pas. Bad acts in the sensual realm lead 
to the five different courses through their maturations, but good acts 
do not. 

Some Say that those who fell into evil courses because they killed 


MAHAVIBHASA $27 


living beings and who are later reborn as human will have shortér 
lives. 

Question: How can the good conduct of parents help their ten-year- 
old child live longer?” 

Four kinds of death—due to natural exhaustion of the natural life 
span, etc. A perfected being’s karma must all mature so that he will 
not be reborn. 


7. Efficient Cause 

(103c-109b) Heretics hold that when factors come into existence 
they arise without cause. Some say that only conditioned factors can 
become general existential causes. Still others say that efficient 
causes receive as well as produce effects. Again, there are those 
who deny that there are any efficient causes which arise after their 
effects. 

In response to all these the correct view is expounded. The essential 
nature of the efficient cause is identical with that of the dominant 
condition. Still there are varied opinions about this offered by 
Vasumitra, Buddhadeva, Bhadanta Katyadyayaniputra and others. 

Déarstantika: The origin of a factor requires causes and conditions, 
but the termination does not. If both the origin and termination of 
a factor are equally bound to wait for causes and conditions to work, 
why don’t they arise simultaneously when they terminate? Vasu- 
mitra, Bhadanta Katyaniputra? and Ghosaka are reviewed on this. 

The causal aspect of factors lies in their function. The essential 
nature of a factor is unchanged, and so cannot be a cause or effect. 

Question: Since Mt. Sumeru and all the continents, etc. are the 
product of the mutual karma of all beings, what will happen to, e.g., 
Mt. Sumeru when someone attains final liberation? Vasumitra: Since 
there is a limitless number of sentient beings alive, even if a large 
number of persons attain liberation the karma of the rest will maintain 
order. Buddhadeva: Besides, past as well as present karmais respon- 
sible for Mt. Sumeru; it will not be affected by a single person’s 
demise. 

The six types of causes mutually combine to make up many 
classifications of causes. The relationships among them are exami- 
ned. It is also discussed which of the six are defiled, which undefiled, 
which worldly, which higher worldly, etc. Then the six are permuted 
with the four kinds of conditions. Finally, a cause is distinguished 
from a condition. _ 


528 ' ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Part ‘Twelve: Contaminants in Relation to 
Awareness and its Destruction 


(22.110a-115a) Some who advocate the continuity of one and the 
same awareness say: There is no difference between an awareness 
affected by contaminants and another awareness unaffected by them 
insofar as the essential nature of the awareness in question is 
concerned. It is only when those contaminants are destroyed that 
the awareness is said to be absolutely free. 

Darstantika: It is only relating to the person that the notion of 
increase for a contaminant makes sense. 

There are five major groups of contaminants: (1) those causing 
delusion about the four noble truths, (2) those causing delusion, i.e. 
attachment, hatred and pride in the three realms; (3) generally 


permeating contaminants; (4) generally permeating bad forces, and . 


(5) limited permeating bad forces. They have a nature capable of 

increasing force within an awareness affected by similar contami- 

nants. 
Theories of Bhadanta Katyayaniputra, Ghosaka and Buddhadeva 


are reviewed relating to the state of being afflicted by contaminants 


respecting the supporting object. 

Contaminants grow in two ways: (1) with regard to their supporting 
object, (2) with regard to their connected factors. Even past and 
future contaminants grow, though only present ones exert activity. 

Srilata, a Sthavira or Darstantika: No. (1) If contaminants related 
to supporting objects, then pure factors couldbe objects of the growth 
of contaminants, and (2) if contaminants grow with regard to their 
connected factors, these factors will a/ways grow, since connected 
factors never become dissociated. 

Answer: No. (1) Only impure factors in the present can conduce 
to growth. And (2) even though the connected factors cannot be 
disconnected, they can be overpowered by contrary forces arising 
in the life-stream. 


Part Thirteen: Consciousness Destroyed 
by the Instrumentality of its Objective Field 


Consider the state in which one has acquired knowledge of the 
frustration-truth but not yet of the origin-truth. The destruction of 
those contaminants to be destroyed through the path of vision can 
be increased as to one particular group as well as to other groups 
as a whole. Likewise relating to the path of spiritual practice. 
Contaminants can increase their force in relation to those associated 
with it as well as of the supporting object. Such an increase is possible 


- 


MAHAVIBHASA < 529 


because of the four aggregates excluding matter. 

Ghosaka: Past as well as future contaminants can increase their 
influence. : 

Vasumitra: It is because of all five aggregates that the contaminants 
can be destroyed. 

Question: At which moment does wisdom no more see any 
objects? At the moment when contaminants are destroyed? Dis- 
cussion by fourfold argument. 


Chapter Three: Personality 
Part One: Dependent Origination 


(116c-117c) Some say: Although past and future factors have no 
essential nature, and only present ones do, factors are mnconditioned 
in nature. 

The Vibhajyavadin says that dependent sfignaion itself is un- 
conditioned. 

There are four kinds of conditions of dependent origination: (1) 
momentary, (2) related to successive moments, (3) related to a 
particular stage, (4) bound to remote continuity. 


Part Two: Conditions 


(118a-120b) Awarenesses and concomitant mental factors arise 
from the four kinds of conditions. Meditation that realizes cessation, 
etc., arises from three kinds of conditions. Material factors and 
factors dissociated from awareness arise from two a of condi- 
tions. 

Different masters are cited as having different theories about 
* dependent origination and the factors so conditioned, as e.g. how 
to allocate the twelve members over twelve stages. 

Sremadatta(?) (She-mo-ta-to in Chinese) holds that it is within 
the duration of a single moment that all twelve members occur. Some 
hold that each of the twelve has two kinds. 

The five stages beginning with conception are reviewed, as well 
as the six sense-bases. 

It is proper to term ignorance, etc. as conditions but not as causes. 

(24.120c-125c) All three kinds of feeling (satisfying, frustrating 
and neutral) are conditions of craving, which itself has five kinds. 

(25.126b-131b) All operative factors can be classified into eleven 
kinds, which in turn can be related distributively to the four condi- 
tions, six-causes and their absence. 

The quickest means to liberation takes three life-cycles. 

Ignorance and knowledge discussed, and classified as relating to 


$30 ' ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


aggregates, senses and elements. 

The path of vision can be achieved only by those physically residing 
in the nine regions—three of human habitation {excluding the 
northern region of Mt. Sumeru) and the six heavenly regions be- 
longing to the sensual realm. The path of spiritual practice can be 
achieved, however, by those who reside in the sensual, material 
or immaterial realms. Supreme, perfect enlightenment can be achiev- 
ed by those who have lived in the Jambudvipa region (south of Mt. 
Sumeru) for one hundred years. 


Part Three: The Locus of Breathing 


(26.132a-137a) Inhaling and exhaling depend on the four aggre- 
gates and as long as the four are present breathing occurs, not 
otherwise. E.g., the embryo at the second, third or fourth week after 
conception does not breathe. 

Vasumitra and Bhadanta Katyayaniputra say that breathing ceases 
at the state of the fourth meditation-stage. 

The essential nature of mindfulness of inhaling and exhaling is 
wisdom. The difference between mindfulness with breathing and the 
mindfulness with breathing of foul things is explained. The former 
has six causes. The Buddha spent two months a year with his disciples 
sitting in a circle practicing breathing. 

The noble state is described as: 37 allies of enlightenment; the 
divine state, which is the highest stage of meditation; the Brahma 
state, which is the fourfold practice of the four boundless states; 
the state of the Buddha; the seeker’s state leading to perfection; the 
adept’s state requiring no further perfection. 


Part Four: The Locus of Awareness 


(27.137a-138a) The homogeneous nature of all humans is ex- 
plained. 


Part Five: Attachment to Nonbecoming 


(138a-139a) There are three kinds of attachment: (1) to desires, 
(2) to becoming, (3) to nonbecoming. It is the Vibhajyavadin who 
holds that attachment to nenbecoming is destroyed by both the paths 
of vision and practice. 

The discussion in the text is classed here as discussion between 
a yuktivadin and a vibhajyavadin. There is discussion of some of 
the ways of defeating an opponent in debate. 


MAHAVIBHASA §31 
Part Six: Awareness is Free From Attachment, Etc. 


(140b-142a) Vibhajyavadin: The nature of awareness is absolutely 
pure. ; 

Darstantika: There are two divisions of time, past and future, and 
another division, already perished and not yet perished. Other than 
these two sets of two there is no other time for a factor to have just 
arisen or just perished, and so factors do not really exist in the past 
or future. 

(28.142b-146b) The methods of gaining diamond-like concentra- 
tion are described, and as mary as 164 different preparatory con- 
centrations are discriminated. 

Discussion of the awareness-concomitants ‘‘delight’’ and non- 
anxiety, nongreed and extreme greed, nonhatred and extreme hatred, 
nondelusion and extreme delusion. 


Part Seven: Locus 


(147a-147b) Release has resolve, one of the ten generally permeat- 
ing factors, as its essential nature. 

The liberation of awareness from defilement realized in due course 
of time, and that liberation that is realized without due course of 
time, i.e. by abruptly bypassing steps. 


Part Eight: Elements 


(147c-148a) The three elements reviewed. Concerning shared 
theses and unshared theses. 

Peace and insight are two within one and the same awareness, 
only differentiated because of their ways of application. 

To whatever the Buddha grants recognition, four groups of 
Buddhists follow faithfully. 


Chapter Four: Of Affection and Reverence’ 
Part One: Affection, Respect and Reverence,. 


(150c-152c) There ‘are two kinds of affection: (1) involving 
attachment, viz., greed, and (2) not involving attachment, viz., faith. 

Reverence has conscientiousness as its nature. 

The two ways of paying respect are discussed. The former, 
alms-offering, is not found in the material and immaterial realms, 
nor in hell. The second way, of offering dharma, is found in the 
sensual and material realms and in the five levels of the life cycle. 
Examples are cffered, and the kinds of beings who make these 


$32 __ ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
offerings and receive them are identified. 

(30.153a) Alms-offering and respect through dharma evolve to- 
gether in relation to one and the same object. 


Part Two: Power 


(154b-156b) The views of the Vibhajyavadins, Dharmaguptakas, 
Darstantikas, etc. concerning physical power and inferiority. They 
view power as an independent essence. The orthodox view is 
defended against this. 

Examples of power: comparing the strength of different kinds of 
elephants. The limitless power of a Bodhisattva is contrasted with 
the declining of the Buddha’s strength. 

On the ten powers, and the power of one enlightened for himself 
alone and in a group. 

(31.158a-160b) The four confidences (1) that I have correct 
awareness, (2) that I have my evil influences destroyed, (3) that I 
can name the factors that are obstacles to the disciple, (4) that I 
can name the path of liberation of a disciple. 

The ten powers and the four confidences are combined. 

The best disciple is bound to wait for a duration of 60 ka/pas and . 
the best endowed of those enlightened for themselves for a duration 
of 100 kalpas. 

On compassion. Great compassion (of the Buddha) has the fourth 
meditative stage as its locus and appears only in the body of a great 
man in the Jambudvipa region of the sensuous realm. There are eight 
kinds of difference between ordinary human compassion and the 
Buddha’s great compassion. ~ 

Three applications of mindfulness and the eighteen special qualities 
unique to the Buddha (viz., ten strengths, four confidences, three 
applications of mindfulness, and great compassion). 


Part Three: Cessation!° 


(161a-162c) Darstantika: The three kinds of cessation do not really 
exist. 

Vibhajyavadin: The three kinds are always. unconditioned factors. 

Calculated cessation is what has to be realized through separation 
from defilements. Uncalculated cessation is not thus realized, but 
rather preempts such separation, as well as bondage. The non- 
eternality-cessation is realized through natural dispersion, break- 
down and withdrawal from existence. 

Some say that the essential nature of calculated cessation is single 
or as many as 89. 


MAHAVIBHASA $33 


The view of the critic: Since conditioned factors possess their 
essential nature where they-arise, the calculated cessation also has 
‘its essential nature where separation takes place, since an event with 
which factors are connected has its essence where it occurs. 

Some say that when people realize the calculated cessation they 
undergo one and the same experience although their experiencing 
of it is independent of each other’s. 

(32.163a-166b) Calculated cessation is also called nirvana. It has 
no homogeneous cause and thus is known as “‘having RCISEGRCNGOUS 
nature’’ { visabhagatva). 

The critic: Uncalculated cessation is to be realized only in terms 
of the nonoccurrence of factors in the future. 

Which, calculated or uncalculated cessation, takes place more 
often? Critic: Calculated cessation occurs in proportion to the 
number of defiled factors, while uncalculated cessation occurs in 
proportion to the number of continued factors. 

How the uncalculated cessation is sometimes realized in the evil 
courses. Is the uncalculated cessation realized in an evil course a 
temporary acquisition or a special acquisition? When one has reached 
the state of steadiness of insight into the nature of the factors involved 
in the four noble truths (i.e. the path of vision), it is generally the 
case that he should realize (the state of cessation), but it is not 
determined whether he can reach it from any state lower than that. 


Part Four: Liberation 


(167b-169a) The world of liberation realized while one is living 
and the world of liberation after death both have their essential 
nature, and this nature is pure. Views to the contrary are considered 
and refuted. 

The theory attributed in the words ‘‘some say’’ is in fact that of 
the Vatsiputriyas. 

The text related a series of disputes between the Yuktivadins and 
Vibhajyavadins. There are two theories attributed to the Vibhajya- 
vadin: (1) that there is no predetermined order as to the referential 
entities of liberation, and (2) that liberation comprises three kinds. 
The latter is viewed as more correct. 


Part Five: Aggregates 


(171b-173c} As to the five aggregates, the Buddha is the highest 
in quality, the enlightened for oneself is medium in quality, and the 
disciple is lowest in quality; for one and the same series (of factors) 
there should be no sense of difference. 


534 . ’ ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Part Seven: Ascertainment 


(175a-176c) Ascertainment is of two kinds: the one accomplished 
ascertainment of knowledge, the other separation from defilements. 
A number of views about the nature of ascertainment are reviwed. 
The one who ascertains is the perfected being. 


Part Eight: The Three Treasures 


(176c-178c) Taking refuge in the Buddha, the dharma and the 
satigha is generously explained.'! 


Chapter Five: Shamelessness 
Part One: ‘‘Black-White”’ 


(178c-180a) The fourfold negation method is used to analyze each 
of the two topics of this chapter, shamelessness and disregard. Their’ 
functions and objective domains are treated in detail. 


Part Two: Two Faculties 


(180b- 198c) The eradication of the good root factors is examined 
in reference to the nine levels of saintly practice in the spiritual path. 

Some theorists are said to hold that the essential nature of eradica- 
ting the good root factors is lack of faith. A critic says that the essential 
nature of. the eradication of the good root factors is nonaccom- 
plishment. The act of eradicating the good roots happens. among 
men of the three regions of the world of desire. It can happen to 
those who are oriented toward views, not to those who are oriented 
toward craving; the former perform actions intensely, the latter not. 
Both men and women may abandon the good root factors, though 
Ghosavarman disagrees, holding that only men can backslide since 
their covetousness is greater. 

Various classifications are presented in answer to the question at 
which stage of saintly career one eradicates the good root factors. 
Wrong views about the truth of cessation and of pure objects can 
also lead to the eradication of the good root factors, as can a wrong 
view concerning unconditioned objects. 

_ Question: How can the good root factors be abandoned? Are both 

those naturally born with one and those earned by practice lost? 
Answer: Those earned by practice having been already overpowered 
by defilements, it is just when those naturally inborn are lost that 
one reverts. 

Two cases are distinguished: (1) one who maintains the norm of 


MAHAVIBHASA , $35 
the good root factors while having a doubting awareness, (2) one 
who maintains it while having correct view. The eradication of the 
good root factors eventually matures in the avicrhell. When can one 
who has abandoned his good roots regain them? Only in the next 
life or in hell. 

It is explained why the good roots subject is explained only in 
reference to the sensual realm, but not in reference to the material 
and immaterial realms. 

Between (1) the conventional awareness acquired in the last stage 
of the path of vision along with the highest supramundane knowledge 
of the four noble truths, and (2) the knowledge of destruction 
acquired in the spiritual path through the ninth and last trance (viz., 
the cessation trance), which one is superior and which inferior is 
explained. 

The final stage of direct knowledge of the noble truths is elucidated. 
When practice directed to the first three noble truths is finalized 
one is aware of completion, but not when one practices the fourth 
and final noble truth (when’' one is not aware at all). But when the 
practitioner abides in the final seven stages (the sensory realm, the 
nonreturner. stage, the intermediate concentration, and the four 
meditative concentrations) one becomes aware of completion. 

Nevertheless one is never aware of its having occurred, only that 
it will occur (before it has done so); thus in an absolute sense ‘it 
iS nonoccurrent. 

Those who are affected by the delusions that are eliminated by 
the paths of vision and practice will be reborn into the courses of 
life, but if he has no delusion about the four noble truths to be 
eliminated in the path of vision he will not be subject to rebirth. 

Question: When a perfected being acquires ultimate knowledge 
does he invariably practice the good factors in the nine stages spread 
through the three spheres of existence? Answer: This is undeter- 
mined. 

These good root factors are found in the classes of eleniente among 
the representative conditions. 

The six kinds of states to be maintained are explained in detail. 

When one acquires the knowledge of destruction he at once 
practices his good root factors which are to be effected in the future 
three spheres of existence, since liberation is fully at hand in this 
state. 


Part Three: Awareness 


(190a-191a) Various theories, both Buddhist and others, are 
reviewed concerning the real nature of things past and future. 


536 ‘ ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


There are generally two kinds of change-and-decay of factors: (1) 
conventional and (2) necessary. 


Part Five: Stolidity and Sleepiness 


(191c-193a) Sleepiness is commonly found in all three kinds of 
awareness—good, bad and indifferent. While it occurs accustomed 
action can occur, but any action that requires deliberation cannot, 
including penetration and achieving the state of a perfected being. 


Part Six: Dream 


(193b-194c) Darstantika: Dreams do not really exist. But the 
orthodox hold that there is textual evidence that they do. Dreams 
are to be found classified among the representative cognitions. 

Vasumitra is cited as holding that dreams are conditioned by five 
conditions. Ayurvedins are said to hold the number as seven. 


Part Seven: Obstructions 


The five obstructions, viz., attachment, repugnance, stolidity and 
sleepiness, excitedness and regret, and doubt are explained. 


Part Eight: Ignorance 


(194c-197b) Ignorance is the sixth obstructive obstacle. The 
Darstantikas hold that every contaminant is bad, but others say that 
while defilements in the sensual region are bad, those in the material 
and immaterial spheres are indeterminate. 

It is explained which cases involve ignorance and which do not, 
in which cases ignorance occurs simultaneously with other factors 
and in which it does not. Ignorance of appropriate sorts can be 
removed through both the path of vision and the spiritual path. 


Chapter Six: Characteristic Marks 
Part One: Two-fold and Three-fold Distinctions 

(198a-198c)} There are two kinds of factors, conditioned and 
unconditioned. The Darstantikas hold that various conditioned 
characteristics do not essentially exist. The Vibhajyavadins hold 
that the essential nature of those characteristics is unconditioned. 
The Dharmaguptakas hold that birth, maintenance and decay are 
conditioned but that cessation is unconditioned. Some monks say 
that what characterizes and what is characterized are homogeneous. 
The Sautrantikas say that all these factors are of single duration. The 


MAHAVIBHASA ; §37 


orthodox hold that each moment has the four characteristic marks 
of birth, maintenance, old age and noneternality. 

Acquisition-force and what is acquired are not the same, nor are 
they invariably co-existent, since they are not a simultaneous cause. 
They may belong to different dimensions. Nevertheless they are 
cofunctional, mutually coexistent causes, always occurring at the 
same moment. 


Part Two: Four Characteristic Marks 


(199b) The difference between death and noneternality is ex- 
plained. 


Part Three: Three Momentary Things 


(199c-203b) The phenomenal features of three conditioned 
factors are arising, cessation and being other than static. The Dars- 
tantikas hold that these three are not momentary, but it is argued 
here that they are. Though they are all occurrent at the same time, 
in their essences they functionally have a temporal order. 

Does the essential nature of conditioning factors change? There 
are two kinds of change, one in essential nature and one in function. 

Are the four characteristic marks (arising, subsistence, decay and 
destruction) special features of (some?) conditioned factors or uni- 
versal features of them all? Some say that there are two kinds of 
specific characteristics, viz., the essential form of self and the 
nonessential form of self, Others say that the four marks are universal 
features of everything. Still others deny both these theories. The 

orthodox view is that the four characteristic marks are universal and 

that there are two kinds of universal features: essential and com- 
_ pounded, and that the four marks compounded into one are found 
in all conditioned factors. 

There are three features, maintenance, old age and decay; they 
are mutual enemies. 

Question:!? Since maintenance is conditioned, how éan the sdtra 
be explained that states that the conditioning factors do not persist 
through time? 

Answer: The sutra means that they do not persist very long, but 
of course they realize the factors persist for a moment. 

Vasumitra: If conditioning factors did not persist at least amoment 
the Buddha would not have spoken of a period of time or of the 
thing called ‘‘a moment’’. But the topic is difficult—only a Buddha, 
not even a pratyekabuddha, knows the measure of a moment. 

We say: Since one cannot explain this text otherwise, it must be 


538 : ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


accepted that a thing persists as conditioned after having arisen, and 
that after that it terminates. Otherwise activity cannot be explained. 

Question: Is the feature of old age postulated to explain decay and 
cessation or to explain change and transformation? 

Question: Are the characteristic marks and things marked the same 
or different? 

The status of a corpse of a liberated person is discussed. 

There are 6,400,099,980 moments within the duration of one day 
and night. 

Question: When a conditioned factor arises does its essence arise 
because of the factor of arising or because it is united with the features 
of arising? Answer: It arises because of the factor of arising. 

It is irrelevant for the conditioned factors to be united with the 
phenomenal features of arising. There are no such features of the 
conditioned factors. Various theories of Vasumitra and others con- 
cerning these matters are reviewed. 


Chapter Seven: Unprofitable Things 


(203b-21 5b) Rather than self-mortification Buddhas practice the 
true path of purity according to virtue, concentration and wisdom. 
There is discussion of the‘lotus posture in meditation. 

Contemplation of foul things is mentioned under the ways of 
focusing mindfulness. A contrast is drawn between Aniruddha, who 
could not regard the heavenly nymphs as impure by focusing his 
mind on them, and the Buddha, pratyekabuddhas and disciples such 
as Sariputra, who could. A number of other comparisons and 
contrasts are drawn among well-known persons, including the Bud- 
dha, in illustration of their behavior in focusing mindfulness. , 


Chapter Eight: Thinking 
Part One: Thinking, Initial Thought and Excitedness 


(215b-221a) Darstantika: Thinking and meditating are merely 
differentiations of one and the same entity, awareness, not separate 
entities. But that is not right; awareness and meditation are different. 
The three wisdoms concerning listening, thinking and practicing are 
distinguished. The first two enhance the respective wisdom of the 
moment, but the insight acquired from meditation is capable of 
destroying defilements. 

The Darstantikas say that initial and sustained thought are both 
the same as awareness. Others say they are merely nominal truths. 
But initial and sustained thought are different, though they are not 
alternatives: there is no conflict between the factors of strength (the 


MAHAVIBHASA : 539 


nature of initial thought) and subtlety (the nature of sustained thought) 
within awareness. 

Awareness has three properties: its own nature, recollection and 
deliberation. : 


Part Three: Arrogance and Pride 


(223a-226a) While defilements are not yet annihilated, they do 
not become active under five conditions: (1) presence of peace, (2) 
of insight, (3) of good teachers and.friends, (4) of a suitable environ- 
ment, and (5) of an individual endowed by nature with a lesser 
amount of defilement. 

The nature of conceit is discussed. E.g., one may incorrectly 
imagine he has acquired a higher state while still in the path of vision, 
and may proudly imagine he has realized the highest goal while still 
engaged in spiritual practice, and so remain an adept. 

Ordinary persons fall into five kinds of false pride, or nine 
according to some. The next section reviews a list of seven kinds 
of pride found in the three realms, and explains how they can be 
destroyed through the paths of vision and practice. 


Part Four: Sickness 


(226b-227a) Even though a Bodhisattva be still afflicted by the 
three defilements, since he knows the evil nature of them, this 
awareness of his is called heedfulness. His heedfulness consists in 
overcoming the conditions giving rise to these defilements by dealing 
with their subjective cause. 


Part Six: Career and Faculty 


(227b-227c} A question is raised as to whether a Bodhisattva— 
particularly Siddhartha—allowed his mind to be affected by the 
three defilements. A case when he was hungry is cited, and various 
theories are discussed as to whether such desires harm the Bodhi- 
sattva’s purity. 

Is there awareness of nothing? The Darstantika says so, but we 
(Sarvastivadins) deny it. Awareness and consciousness are mutually 
correlated. y 

Is the living body of the Buddha defiled or not? The Mahasanghikas 
say no, but we say yes. 


540 , ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Chapter Seven: Ordinariness 


(221b-236a) The Vatsiputriyas say that the ten contaminants can 
be annihilated by insight into the frustrating nature of the realm of 
desire; they are the essential nature of the ordinary man. 

But we (Sarvastivadins) believe that the ordinary man’s nature 
belongs to the three realms and can be dealt with by spiritual practice. 
It is originally uncontaminated, and is to be classified among the 
forces dissociated from awareness. It is a real entity, a point denied 
by the Darstantikas, who think there is no reality as such for the 
ordinary man, 

Various theories are distinguished about the nature of the ordinary 
man, concerning the elements, senses and aggregates. The preferred 
account is that ordinariness consists in not yet realizing the dharma. 

x 
BOOK TWO 
Chapter One: Bad Things 
Part One: Headings 


(236b-260b) The five fetters and 98 contaminants are not found — 
in the Agamas. But what is discussed here is what is not found in 
non-Buddhist texts (such as the Ramayana) which contain many 
stanzas with little or no meaning. 3 

A stream-enterer is reborn seven times into heavenly and human 
worlds. Anyone who annihilates the three fetters (listed in the text) 
and 88 contaminants becomes a stream-enterer. When the text 
specifies seven rebirths this encompasses 14 existences in each of 
the main states and 28 in the intermediate states. 

The three bad roots have fifteen items as their essence (computed, 
by combining the three bad roots with each of the four noble truths 
plus the worldly things dealt with by the path of spiritual practice). 

- The three impurities have 108 things as their essential nature. 

The five obstructions include 30 items in the realm of desire. 

The five fetters include 37 items comprising 30 kinds of defile- 
ments of passion, 5 kinds of defilements of pride, being specifically 
the defilements of hatred in the realm of desire plus envy and 
selfishness. 

The five (false) views comprise some 36 items, viz., 6 as extreme 
views in three worlds, 24 false views and adherence to particular 
views in each of the four groups in all three realms, and six kinds 
of addiction to views. 

The Darstantikas say that every defilement is bad. But in fact only 
those in the realm of desire are invariably bad, but those in the upper 


RUE , 541 


two realms are invariably neutral, for tee is no karmic maturation 
in the upper two realms. 


Section 2: Essential Nature of Three Fetters, Etc. 


(263a-263b) The venerable Dhumika, as well as the Vibhajya- 
vadins, hold the view that good fetters can be classified into four 
kinds, due to their own nature, due to the correlation between 
awareness and concomitant mental factors, due to co-originating, 
and due to liberation. Likewise, bad fetters are due to their own 
nature, due to the correlation between bad awarenesses and con- 
comitant mental factors, due to co-originating, and due to the 
precariousness of life and death. 


Part Two: Maturation 


(263c-264b) Darstantika: There is no maturation cause without 
thinking, nor is there any maturation effect without feeling. 

Kasyapiya: The maturation cause still retains its existence before 
the full maturation of its effect, but as soon as its maturation takes 
place it no longer exists. 

Even as there is no pleasure at the time of its cause, there can 
be dissatisfaction due to the evil course of the life cycle when its 
full maturation takes place, just as a fool, after covering fire with 
ashes, steps on it and burns his feet. 


Part Three: What is To Be Destroyed 


(264b-268a) The three fetters must be terminated before be- 
coming a stream-enterer, and the 98 contaminants must bé termina- 
ted through the path of vision. 

Darstantika: An ordinary man cannot terminate contaminants. 

Bhadanta K4tyayaniputra: Though an ordinary man does not termi- 
nate contaminants, he can overcome the fetters. 

Sarvastivada: An ordinary man can terminate fetters through the 
worldly path. 

Some say that a saintly man does not terminate contaminants 
through the worldly path. Others say that all fetters should be 
terminated suddenly; they cannot be terminated gradually. 

The ordinary man and the saint both terminate the belief that the 
body is real, but with different degrees of efficiency: while the 
ordinary man must go through nine steps in applying pure knowledge 
over the five groups of defilements in each of the three realms, the 
saint does the same by one step in terminating the entire group of 
defilements. An ordinary man prior to entering the path of vision 


542 ‘ ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cannot differentiate the five classifications of defilements, but must 
do it step by step through repeated practice, while the path of vision 
can terminate the defilements at once. 


Part Five: Initial and Sustained Thought 


(269b-270a) Darstantika: Sustained thought is invariably found 
from the realm of desire up to the realm of being. 

Defilements relating to satisfaction and those relating to frustration 
are differentiated. Darstantika: When factors arise they come into 
existence gradually, not suddenly. Bhadanta: They come into exis- 
tence in temporal order and not simultaneously. The proper view 
on this point is explained. But indeed there are many theories. 


Part Six: Bases 


(271b-274c) Some say that even those in the Brahmaloka are not 
free from hypocrisy and fetters. 

The nine stages of defiled awareness and concomitant mental 
factors of the path of spiritual practice must be gradually terminated, ° 
but those of the path of vision which are material, defiled but good ° 
or undefiled but indeterminate must be terminated at once through 
the power of the ninth path (of the fifteen paths of immediacy). 

An insight arising in the sphere of desire may terminate ignorance 
in the highest stage of the immaterial realm, while an insight arisen 
in the highest sphere may teminate ignorance in the lowest sphere. 


-~ 


Part Ten: Fulfilment 


(274c-283a) A faith-follower or follower of dharma should not 
be called ‘‘one who is endowed with the path of vision’’. 

Whenever it is said that material factors are ‘‘abandoned”’ it is 
meant that involvement is terminated, and vice versa. Thus even 
when defiled factors of awareness and concomitant mental factors 
are terminated up to the eighth stage one may still be involved in 
the lowest realm. 

The specific fetters that are removed by each of the five kinds 
of people are displayed. 


Part Eleven: Conditions 


(283b-286b) The enlightenment of a Buddha, a pratyekabuddha 
and a disciple consists in their being able to introspect the ways 
factors arise through the four kinds of cause. 

Those causes where the four sets of conditions activate defilements 


MAHAVIBHASA ; 543 


other than the 33 pervasive ones are distinguished from those in which 
they activate those defilements. 


, Chapter Two: Association 


(E288a-306c) There are five kinds of facts: (1) things in them- 
selves; (2) objective things for cognitive faculties to act upon; (3) 
relations that connect one to another; (4) causal factors; (5) things 
in one’s possession. Another five kinds of facts are (1) element, (2) 
sense, (3) aggregate, (4) external world, (5) moment. 

The Abhidharma masters say that whatever is linked and whatever 
links it with something else are real, while every person (pudgala) 
is existent but unreal. 

The Vatsiputriyas say the recipients of connection, the agent of 
connecting, and any person are unreal. 

The Darstantikas say that active agents are real, while recipients 
of actions and persons are unreal. 

The combinations of the fetters are extensively discussed. Fetters 
are divided into two kinds: (1) those which cause an individual to 
be deluded about the relations of things to himself (craving, repug- 
nance, pride, envy and selfishness), and (2) those that cause an 
individual to be deluded about the relations of things to each other 

_(ignorance, wrong views, misinterpretation and doubt). 

The relations among the fetters are extensively reviewed. 

. Vibhajyavadins: Each latent contaminant accompanied other 
latent dispositions without including its own essence. 

Sarvastivadin: Every factor invariably comprises its own essence. 

Discussion of the four principles of accepting others. 

(306c-310c) Vibhajyavadin: The undefiled awareness can also 
cause the factors of phenomenal existence to continue. A bodhisattva 
may be reborn after the proper length of time. Ordinary humans are 
most of them of perverted identification, such that if male and 
entering the womb he hates his father and loves his mother, while 
if a woman she loves her father and hates her mother. 

Sarvastivadin: A bodhisattva, prior to his last lifetime, entering 
his mother’s womb without perverted identification, loves both 
mother and father. 

Darstantika: Only the defilements of craving and hatred cause the 
phenomenal existence to continue. 

‘Sarvastivadin: All defilements cause existence to continue. 

Some say that evil paths are caused to evolve through the influence 
of hatred, while favorable courses are brought about by influence 
of craving. 

Sarvastivadin: The sensual realm is caused to continue by each . 


544 ‘ ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of the 36 contaminants directly, while the material and immaterial 
realms are caused to continue by each of 31 contaminants. 

There are four kinds of existence: (1) existence from birth to death, 
(2) in the last moment prior to death, (3) intermediate existence and 
(4) the first moment of birth. 

There are five kinds of life- continuum: continuity (1) through 
intermediate existence, (2) through the moment of birth, (3) through 
ordinary time, (4) through the nature of factors, and (5) through 
successive moments of time. When an individual’s aggregates perish 
at death another set of aggregates arises through the intermediate 
existence. . 

(310c-312c) Vibhajyavadin: Some defilements can be terminated 
without trance, as well as for a saint in the neither-identification-nor- 
nonidentification state who also loses his defilements. 

Sarvastivadin: There is no defilement that can be terminated 
without trances; thus concentration in trance is the antidote to all 
defilements. 

Ghosavarman holds that the worldly path can terminate defile- 
ments altogether. Jivala denies this. 

The path of vision relies solely on the four meditative concentra- 
tions, the preparatory concentration- and the intermediate one 
between the first and second state of meditation—six states in all. 
The three bad roots and all. the defilements except ignorance can 
be terminated by the preparatory concentration. Ignorance in the 
realm of desire can be terminated altogether by the four meditative 
concentrations, as well as the lower three states of meditative 
concentration in the immaterial sphere by the seven states of medita- 
tive concentration. 

Some say that when all defilements are terminated there should 
be no retrogression. The Sarvastivadins hold there still can be 
retrogression. The Vibhajyavadins say there is no necessary regula- 
rity in this matter. 

Sarvastivadin: A perfected being who has attained liberation may 
backslide if he (1) does certain bad things, (2) enjoys fruitless 
disputes, (3) likes to reconcile people’s conflicts, (4) likes to explore 
on long journeys, or (S) has a physical illness all the time. 

The perfected being Got(r)ika regressed six times, and being afraid 
of it happening a seventh time he attained final liberation by commit- 
ting suicide. 

A perfected being, though he has cut off the defilements, has not 
destroyed them, and so they may reappear in his lifestream. Only 
when he has attained the disconnection of defilements can they be 
said to be abandoned. 

(312c-318c) Vibhajyavadin: Contaminants are the seeds of en- 


MAHAVIBHASA . 545 


velopers. These envelopers arise from contaminants, and if they 
become manifest, cause regression. Their essential nature is associa- 
ted with awareness, while the essential nature of contaminants is 
dissociated from awareness. Since perfected beings have already cut 
off the contaminants and so no envelopers can arise, no backsliding 
can occur. 

Darstantika: ““Regression’’ has no essential nature and is merely 
a conventional notion (prajfapti). 

Sarvastivadin: Regression merely means nonrealization and has 
nonacquisition as its essential nature. 

Because of three conditions awareness incurs latent contaminants. 
These three conditions are (1) force of cause—the defilements not 
being terminated, (2) force of external factors—the presence of 
desire, bondage, and (3) force of action, such as irrelevant or 
unreasonable willing. 

Regression occurs in representative cognition, not in the other five 
kinds of sense-consciousness. Some tales of those who backslid are 
told. 

There are three kinds of retrogression: (1) for disciples only, 
regression due to circumstance after having accomplished the goal, 
(2) when no realization has yet been accomplished in a given state 
of advancement, (3) which is, as it were, due to the fact that the 
realization of one’s achievement is not directly revealed at the 
moment. Which of these kinds occur for the Buddha, the enlightened- 
for-himself, the disciple? Type (3) occurs for all Buddhas. The 
stream-enterer cannot regress, butregression is possible for the other 
types in the human stages of the sensual realm. There is no regression 
for the divine stages in the sensual realm and those in the two upper 
realms. 


Part Nine: Ascertainment 


(320c-327a) Some say: There cannot be ascertainment for one 
who has abandoned fetters. Others say there is one kind of ascertain- 
ment. But what does ‘‘ascertainment’’ mean? It refers only to the 
ninth, the highest state or on the basis of four conditions (in the case 
of the path of vision) or of five conditions (in the case of the path 
of practice). Ascertainment is attributed to the nonreturner and the 
saint, but not to the stream-enterer and the once-returner. 

The question is now raised: Who can desire to relinquish which? 
A candidate who has abandoned the third and fourth defilements 
in the realm of desire and now enters the path of vision, realizing 
the first saintly stage, as he is reborn from human to heavenly and 
from heavenly to human existence must be one who is ‘‘headed 


546 , : ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


toward the state of once-returner’’. Likewise are explained the other 
intermediate states tending toward a higher stage. 

Ghosaka and others: The eight saintly types of persons are essenti- 
ally real, since an agent whois on his way toward, e.g., once-returner- 
ship is required to have given up the stage of streamentrant. 

The stream-enterer has accomplished up to the six ascertainment. 


Chapter Three: Beings 


(327b-329a) The fetters in each of the three (lower) realms (of 
desire, material and immaterial) must be terminated by the paths 
of vision and practice. These fetters cause living beings to suffer 
and to be reborn. 

The distinction between sudden and gradual termination and their 
association respectively with the two paths. 

(330a-332c) The three aspects of the uninterrupted path of rid- 
dance from fetters are wickedness, frustration and obstruction. The 
three aspects of the path to liberation are calmness, excellence and 
deliverance. There are nine kinds of the path of riddance and eight 
of the path to liberation. It is explained how many of them are 
experienced during the practice of the saint and of the ordinary man. 

At the non-returner stage of concentration approaching the initial 
meditation, a practitioner practices initial thought about both impure ~ 
and pure factors, while at the higher stages he is required to apply 
initial thought only to the higher features of those aspects. Precisely 
which kinds of initial thought are required is discussed. 


~ 


Part Three: Destruction of the Ninefold Fetters 


(333a-334a) Concerning terminations of fetters through the non- 
interrupted path and through the liberation path. 


Part Four: Destruction of the Ninefold Fetters 


(334a-344a) The destruction of the sixteen sets of fetters (corres- 
ponding to the eight noninterrupted paths and the eight liberation 
paths) as to their saintly states as effects. 

Vibhajyavadin: The four saintly states are solely of unconditioned 
nature. 

Sarvastivadin: They are of conditioned or of unconditioned nature. 

Why are there only four saintly states and not five? Two saintly 
states are specified in connection with liberation from the fetters 
of the realm of desire, while for the material and immaterial spheres 
only one saintly state, namely the perfected being, is set. 


_ MAHAVIBHASA , ; 547 


The first of the four saintly states (stream-enterer) applies to the 
path of vision, while the other three apply to the path of practice. 

How can the once-returner and non-returner states be called 
saintly? The orthodox say: Those states are called saintly states 
according to generalization. 

Question: Of the four saintly states how many of them are 
nominally so designated and how many of them are actually differen- 
tiated thus? 

There are four kinds of saints: (1) path- winners, (2) path-indica- 
tors, (3) path-subsistent life-makers, and (4) path-polluters. 

There are two kinds of Buddha-bodies: (1) living body and (2) 
dharma body. 

A man of renunciation, even falling into laxity toward his per- 
ceptual vow, is superior to a layman who upholds his precepts. 

(350c-352b) Some say: In order for a practitioner who is resolved 
in faith to become a candidate for attainment of right view he should 
undertake the application path, nine noninterrupted paths and nine 
liberation paths. The orthodox hold properly that in order to 
transform one’s faculty fit or for one vehicle to be fit for another 
a practitioner should take one application path, one noninterrupted 
path and one liberation path. But it is not implied that a practitioner 
whose faculty or merit is destined for the lineage of disciple or 
enlightened-for-oneself should transform his lineage to become fit 
for that of a Buddha, for even when one changes his vehicle he should 
be able.to realize its goal without waiting for a very long passage 
of time. 

(352b-360c) The subject of intermediate existence is taken up. 
Some say that no life and death in the three spheres of existence 
has invariably an intermediate existence. But others say that, since 
there is some material form in the immaterial realm, there should 
be some form of intermediate existence in the immaterial realm as 
well as in those of sensuous and material form. Still others say that 
there is no intermediate existence for those whose karma in the desire 
and material spheres are intense and sharp, but there is for those 
whose karma is weak and slow. 

Sarvastivadin: There is some intermediate existence for everyone 
in the realm of desire and the material realm. Wherever the aggre- 
gates of the last moment before death perish, the aggregates of 
an intermediate existence must arise at once, just as whenever a 
seed perishes a sprout arises. And whenever a practitioner dies 
leaving the immaterial realm and is destined to be reborn inthe realms 
of desire or matter, his intermediate existence should manifest itself 
in that realm into which he is destined to be born. 

Darstantika: Even by merely restraining the working of the fetters 


548 ‘ ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


one should be able to be born in some higher state of existence. 

Our school says: Unless one is freed from the fetters of the lower 
state (within the nine levels of the three spheres) he will not be able 
to be reborn in a higher state. 

The Vibhajyavadin and the Yuktivadin dispute as to whether there 
is or is not any intermediate existence. The correct view is that inter- 
mediate existence cannot be-included in the five life-cycle states. 

Some say: While those living beings abiding in hell as well as in 
heaven have intense and sharp karma and so have no intermediate 
form of existence, those living beings who abide in the remaining 
three courses of life and thus have an impermanent nature should 
have some form of intermediate existence: 

Others say: Phantom beings, having intense and sharp karma, have 
no intermediate form of existence, but those in the remaining three 
courses do (as before). 

Still others say: If a practitioner invites a course of life by way 
of karma with meditation, he will not have any intermediate exis- 
tence; but if he does without meditation he will. 

Sarvastivadin: There is no intermediate form of existence in the 
immaterial realm. 

Where within the body one’s consciousness is kept as he is about 
to be reborn on an evil course (in his feet), about to be reborn among 
men or gods (navel or head), when he is about to be liberated (in 
his heart), are explained. 

Can an intermediate form of existence be changed from one life 
cycle to that of another? The Darstantikas say yes, since even the 
worst karma, having committed one of the five deadly sins, can be 
changed. The Abhidharma masters say, however, that no intermedia- 
te form of existence can be changed from one life cycle to another. 
We (Sarvastivadins) say that during life change of intermediate form 
of existence is possible, but not during existence in such a form. 

(361c-365c) Sremadatta: The intermediate form of existence 
takes as many as 77 days. 

Vasumitra: At the most it takes seven days. But if parental union 
is not fulfilled the being will not be lost. 

Bhadanta Katyadyaniputra says there is no limit to the time that 
may be taken. 

The features of intermediate existence of a peson mirror his 
life—the features of a person destined for hell is as hellish as the 
hell where he is destined. 

A being in an intermediate state is so minute and subtle that nothing 
can burnit, etc. The clothing is of the beings in intermediate existence 
in the material, desire and bodhisattva stages are described. Beings” 
in intermediate existence consume scent. 


MAHAVIBHASA : $49 


There is an extended discussion (repeating what has preceded in 
several aspects) of the process by which what transmigrates gets 
into the mother’s womb, etc. A supernormal faculty can be trained 
So as to see such a being. 

The most wicked beings fall into the avici hell while living aid 
instantaneously receive an intermediate form of existence. The ways 
in which heavenly beings, Indra, etc. are reborn are detailed. Some 
say that all heavenly beings, when born, already have the form of 
the prime of their respective lives. 


Chapter Four: Ten Doors 
Part One: 42 Topics of Contaminants 


(366a-369b) The topics of five aggregates, twelve bases and 
eighteen elements are reviewed as to their names and essences. There 
are three categories of existence. The terms are examined in respect 
to their meaning, and the nominal designation and reality of what 
is referred to examined. It is explained that the three categories differ 
from each other as the agent who relies on, that on which he relies, 
and the content constitute three separate factors. 

The difference between a visual organ functioning and not func- 
tioning (because conditions for function are lacking). A similar dis- 
tinction can be drawn between a visible object and object visible 
but not at the moment seen. 

(369c-370c) Why aren’t the five kinds of consciousness (visual 
consciousness, etc.) called ‘‘mental consciousness’’, since they 
involve the functioning of mind? Answer: The visual organ grasps 
what is visible unmixed with the sensations appropriate for any other 
faculty; thus it is called ‘‘visual’’, not ‘‘mental’’ consciousness. 

Relating to factor-elements, there is no object available but not 
at the moment grasped. 

(371a-374b) The elements of representative cognition are all 
included in the category of mental elements. They function separately 
from the sense-organs and their objects. There is an extended 
discussion of the relations among the three corresponding members 
of these three groups (e.g., between visual organ,‘visual object, and 
visual representative cognition). For instance, are the eye, its object 
and visual consciousness correlated (i.e., all equally belonging to 
the realm of desire) or not? The answer seems to be yes for the 
relation between’body, nose, smell and the representative cognition 
of smell. For other such sets corresponding to other senses the answer 
is that there are two kinds of relation, correlated and uncorrelated. 
The difference is applied to explanations of what happens at death 
and birth to these sensory items. 


$50 : ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


What kinds of discriminate consciousness should an initial visual 
consciousness in the realm of desire cause to arise in reference to 
the same thing? E.g., a visual sensation in a person belonging to the 
realm of desire could subsequently cause a defiled consciousness 
in reference to an object of perception belonging to the realm of 
desire. 

(377a-377b) Darstantika: The second trance and those higher have 
their own states of awareness and do not rely on the visual, etc. 
states of the first trance. 

Sarvastivadin: Each kind of sense consciousness (visual, etc.) 
always arises in correlation with indeterminate mental stages such 
as initial thought and sustained thought, and thus are absent from 
the second trance and those higher, since in the latter states there 
is neither initial nor sustained thought. 

Various opinions are reviewed about whether when a visual- 
element belonging to a higher trance state is acquired, it entails that 
a material realm belonging to that higher state must be acquired. 

(378b-383a) On the senses. Vasumitra and Bhadanta Katya- 
yaniputra hold that atoms do not touch each other. 

There are six inner senses, a different six outer senses. The six 
tactual senses are different from the latter. 

The reason the Buddha refers to the four trance states as ‘‘sense’’ 
is in order to discredit the heretics’ false adherence to them as four 
kinds of liberation. 

The lifetime of one who does not conceptually identify (asam jitika- 
sattva, one of the eight heavens belonging to the fourth trance of 
the material realm) lasts for 500 great ka/pas. On the other hand, 
the lifetime of one in the fourth trance state of the neither-identifying- 
nor-nonidentifying basis is 80, longest among ordinary men. 

(383b-386a) Buddhadeva and others: There are no material ele- 
ments other than the four great elements. 

Both the Darstantikas and Dharmatrata reject the theory that 
unmanifest matter belongs to the category of factor-sense. 

(386b-389c)!3 Some say that the essential nature of fear is either - 
rooted in the identification of body with self or in thirst or in delusion 
(=ignorance). 

Fear is distinguished from aversion. It has five kinds. 

The expression “‘grasping aggregate’ is explained and distin- 
guished from other aggregates. 

The material elements relating to earth, to space. Two kinds of 
space are distinguished: akasa-space and empty space. The former 
exists. 

(389c-391b) On matter. Whatever has its own essence is called 
a physical element belonging to the material aggregate. Again, it is 


MAHAVIBHASA 551 
what changes and resists other elements by occupying space. 

Darstantikas: Reflected images (in water or a mirror) do not really 
exist. This view is rejected: they do exist. Likewise echoes, etc. exist. 

(391c-393a)'* Mahasanghikas: The Buddha’s body is free from 
defilements. 

Sarvastivadin: The Buddha’s living body is not free from defile- 
ments. 

(393a-396a) Darstantika: Passage of time and forces of condition- 
ing factors are different. Vibhajyavadin: Time is permanent but 
conditioning factors are impermanent. Sarvastivadin: There is no 
_ difference between the nature of passage of time and of conditioning 
factors. 

The theory that past and future do not really exist is refuted. We 
Sarvastivadins hold that all three times exist. 

The relation between function (Ariya) and essence (svatman) is 
discussed. 

(397a-399b) On the four noble truths. Sarvastivadin: The five 
aggregates arisen from grasping constitute the truth of frustration; 
that they have impure causes constitutes the truth of origin; calculated 
cessation constitutes the truth of cessation; and practice of the seeker 
and the adept constitutes the truth of the path. 

Darstantika: The four truths deal respectively with the psycho- 
physical complex, with action and defilement, with the extinction 
of both, and with the paths of peace and insight. 

Vibhajyavadin: The four truths deal respectively with the eight 
marks of frustration, the attachment of love that induces subsequent 
rebirth, the extinction of such cause, and the practice of the eightfold 
path. 

-Ghosaka’s theory is also detailed. 

What truth means and why the Buddha did not refer to space or 
. uncalculated cessation as “‘truths’’. 

Some heretics taught four kinds of liberation through multiple 
paths, but the Buddha taught a single path. 

(399c-411a)!> Concerning the distinction between conventional 
and highest truth, as viewed by various teachers. ‘ 

The four truths are discussed at some length. Some sixteen aspects 
of them are distinguished. 

(411b-418c) On the four trance states. The term dhyana does not 
apply to the four concentrations in the immaterial sphere. 

The four trance states are explained by reviewing various names 
given to them. 

In the third trance state one is released from any sense of joy, 
and in the fourth state one is released from all feeling of satisfaction. 
When one realizes the second trance state one is released from 


552 ‘ ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


attachment and has thus already terminated any sensing of frustra- 
tion. 

Physical disasters such as a holocaust, flood or hurricane, while 
_ they can affect those in the first three trance states, cannot affect 
one who has reached the fourth. 

(420b-430c) The four boundless states are discussed. These are 
loving kindness, compassion, sympathy and equanimity. These are 
also called “‘sublime states’’ (brahmavihdra). 

Darstantika: It is not building shrines, monasteries, etc. that pro- 
duce merit equivalent to that of Brahma, but rather it is practice 
of the four boundless states as promulgated by the Buddha that does - 
so. ; 

Vasumitra: If one erects st#pas commemorating the Buddha one. 
can gain merit of a degree similar to that of Brahma. 

Whoever concentrates with compassion cannot be injured, 
although the four boundless states cannot invariably terminate all 
defilements. Specific defilements that can be terminated by practice 
of each of the four boundless states are detailed and illustrated with 
examples from Buddhist tradition. 

(430c-434a) When one practices loving Kindness he should reach 
the state of complete purity of the third trance state. When one 
practices the boundless state of compassion he should reach the 
immaterial realm called the basis of infinite space. When one prac- . 
tices the boundless state of sympathy he should reach the second 
immaterial realm called the basis of infinite consciousness. When 
one practices equanimity he should reach the third immaterial realm 
called the basis of nothingness. These are detailed. ~ ~ 

Vibhajyavadin: Even in the immaterial realm there is some matter. 

Yuktivadin: Certainly not! ‘ 

(434b-442a) Concerning the eight liberations. They are accompa- 
nied by defilements for the lower four trance states, but for the higher 
four, immaterial trances they may or may not be affected by defile- 
ment. 

The eight ways of release achieved through the eight graded trance 
concentrations are compared to the method and process of training 
elephants. Events in the lives of Buddhist saints (Aniruddha, Sari- 
putra) are detailed. 

(442b-461b) With respect to dormant defilements such as igno- 
rance or delusion which are to-be terminated through the path of 
spiritual practice through the trances states up to the immaterial 
realm, which other defilements can increase their influence? 

Some say: The visual elements belonging to the body of a purified 
being or adept are by nature free from defilements (and so of pure 
influence). 


MAHAVIBHASA : 553 


Others say that since defilement is of the ‘‘upside-down nature’’ 
( viparitamadha) there is nothing to act on to cause its arising. 

There are 22 faculties; six sense-faculties; the five organs of feeling 

. (joy, frustration, satisfaction, sorrow, equanimity); 5 good faculties 
of faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration and wisdom; the mas- 
culine, feminine and life principles; 3 faculties of pure influence 
(nonawareness, awareness and cognizer). 

Still others say that it is meaningless to speak of connected bondage 
(samprayogabandhana) in connection with dormant defilements; 
rather the bondage is supporting (a/ambanabandhana). 

There is extended and detailed discussion of the dormant 
defilements—in what numbers do they increase under various condi- 
tions. 

Darstantika: The six sense-organs act on their respective external 
objects separately from each other, not on the internal sense faculties 
or On consciousness. 

Sarvastivadin: There are sixteen kinds of objectives for a practi- 
tioner (viz., 15 groups of defilements in the three realms of existence, 
and one group of purely-influencing supporting objects). Accord- 
ingly there are 16 kinds of subjective consciousness as well. These 
become 32 kinds of objectives since each can be connected or 
unconnected. ” 

Concerning the classification of numerical increases of dormant 
defilements embedded in each of the kinds of consciousness corres- 
ponding to each of the 22 faculties (listed above); also that embedded 
in the consciousness which acts upon each correlative consciousness 
arising from the five groups of defilements in the three realms. 

A-series of such classifications is reviewed. 

As to the 5 groups of defilements in each of the three realms, how 
many awarenesses arise relating to each directly-antecedent condi- 

.tion? The Darstantika says that an awareness becomes a directly- 
antecedent condition, but not for the concomitant mental factors 
or mental states. 

(462c-464c) Do dormant defilements of the visual faculty include 
such indeterminate mentalities as initial and sustained thought, etc.? 
The Darstantikas say they are included up to the third sphere. We 
say that the five kinds of receptive appraisal—satisfaction, frustra- 
tion, joy, sorrow and equanimity—are correlated with the divisions 
of the paths of vision and practice, as well as to the three spheres. 

Some say that the receptive appraisals of satisfaction and frustra- 
tion are invariably found in the realm of passion up to the material 
realm, while those of joy and sorrow are found there and higher 
in the fourth immaterial realm as well. 

There is no male/female faculty distinction in the material and 


554 : ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


immaterial realms, yet men are men there for all that. 

(46Sa-466b) Ascertainment is twofold, one as acquiring know- 
ledge, the other as the ascertainment of abandonment. 

Some say: The lightning-minded concentration swiftly terminates 
the defilements of the three realms. 

The masters of the western region: The noninterrupted path alone 
terminates the working of the dormant defilements, and the path 
of liberation alone provides experience of that termination. 

The structure of this Chapter (Four: Ten Doors) of the Jfdna- 
prasthdna is shown to involve three major categories and 42 topics. 

(471¢-478c) Very complicated questions are raised, such as this: 
As to the indriyalambanavijfiana and the indriyalambanalambana- 
vijfiana equally comprising the defilement of ignorance that must 
be terminated through the path of practice, as to the visual faculty, . 
etc. up to the immaterial realm, how many series of awarenesses 
should these two kinds of consciousness produce without an inter- 
ruption in each group of awareness arising in the three realms and 
five divisions of the path? The differences between the two kinds 
of consciousness mentioned is explored. Who is the agent that . 
realizes or does not realize the two kinds of consciousness? Each 
must be studied in relation to each of the 42 topics. 


BOOK THREE: AGGREGATE OF KNOWLEDGE 
Chapter One: Aspects of the Seeker Path 


(479a-487c) The sdtras contain a theory that a perfected being 
who has totally annihilated the defilements is endowed*with the ten 
qualifications of the adept. 

Some say that there is no essential nature in past or future, but 
there is in the present, and that it is unconditioned. 

Darstantikas: There is no essential nature of realization or of 
nonrealization. 

Sarvastivadin: The sdtras say, and we do as well, that the essential 
nature of realization really exists. 

Vibhajyavadin: The path is transcendent in nature. 

Of the four kinds of passage toward liberation—acquisition, non- 
acquisition, equanimity, nonequanimity—which should the per- 
fected being acquire, and which should he renounce? Similar 
questions are asked on behalf of the enlightened one (buddha), 
one enlightened for himself and the disciple, and the relationships 
of the four kinds of passage is explored for each. 

(489b-493b) Some say that all phenomenal conditioned factors 
are. of the nature of vision. 

Darstantika: That state of steadiness in which a perfected being 


MAHAVIBHASA : $55 


acknowledges his insight into the nature of factors prior to clear 
realization of that knowledge is also of the nature of transcendental 
knowledge. 

Other theorists say: That knowledge of destruction as well as the 
knowledge of nonorigination (of factors) are also of the nature of 
vision, Vision explored, contrasted with knowledge, wisdom, etc. 

(494c-503c) Some say: In each antecedent trance state there is 
joy but not moral precepts and vows. 

Others say: For each state higher than each antecedent trance state 
there is right conceptualizing of the respective stage of meditative 
concentration. 

Others: Those in immaterial trance states can also have moral 
precepts and vows. 

Sarvastivadin: There is no state of joy as one of the seven members 
of enlightenment. Nor is there right conceptualizing in the higher 
stages of meditation. Likewise, precepts and vows are apsent from 
the immaterial trance states. 

The seven members of enlightenment are clearly waentioned in 
the Agamas among the 37 limbs of enlightenment. Actually the 
essential members of the 37 number eleven or twelve. The 37 
members are classified and ordered into seven groups. 

A different version of the limbs of enlightenment is the 41 con- 
ditions of enlightenment of the Vibhajyavadins. 

Darstantika: Regardless of whether it is sensory or has to do with 
karma or at the time of death, etc., a faculty of good wisdom does 
not have the nature of perceiving since it can’t differentiate just about 
anything. 


Chapter Two: Five Kinds of Views 


(504a-510c) The five false views are listed. Whatever establishes 
a false view is invariably wrong awareness, but not every wrong 
awareness is a false view. 

Some say that the fetters are not necessarily binding. There is a 
discriminatory faculty that operates with defiled factars; it is called 
“left-sided wisdom’’. 

For seekers the faculties of vision and wisdom are co-extensive 
with their undefiled awareness, so that their introspective faculty 
is identical with their discriminatory faculty. 

Indra is cited as a being (a god) who makes false claims of 
omnipotence; this is classified as an example of adherence to (false) 
views. Again, Indra’s supposed ability to create illusory beings is 
an example of addiction to precepts and vows. On the other hand 
Brahmi is cited as a god who can create illusory beings, and there 


556 ; : ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is an interesting review of beliefs about Brahma’s functions and 
abilities. One feature of this account is that Brahma ends his life during 
an intermediate meditative trance and enters a new life. 

The historical context of Mahadeva’s five principles is recounted. 


Chapter Three: Knowledge of Others’ Minds 


(512b-525c) This section also discusses knowledge of previous 
lives, which is said to be a power of impure minds only, while 
knowledge of others’ minds can belong to either pure or impure 
minds. Specifically, those in the immaterial sphere have no such 
power to know others’ minds. 

The power of knowing others’ minds as it is (was) possessed by 
the Buddha and by those enlightened for themselves is outlined. 

Awareness of events in previous lives is likewise not found in the 
immaterial realm. Some heretics and some disciples, as well as 
Buddhas, are capable of awareness of previous lives. However, such 
awareness is confined only to events one has experienced oneself. 
Events that happened 20,000, 40,000 or even 120,000 kalpas ago 
can be recalled by those who believe that the world is eternal. 

Those who can know the minds of others may do it by listening 
to their words, by examining their features or divination; even those 
on their way to hell may have the ability of know others’ minds 
prior to their receiving hellish suffering. 

Even animals may know the minds of others. An example is given 
of a wolf and a woman who throughout five hundred life-cycles 
mutually injured their offspring. Ghosts too may have this capacity. 
Among men, no one knows others’ minds at birth, but those PEDOE 
in heavens may have it. 

The terms used to describe different kinds of liberation are 
reviewed; it is shown that some of them overlap each other in 
meaning. Being liberated at a time is explained and contrasted with 
being liberated at no particular time. The discussion proceeds toward — 
a characterization of the immense amount of time it takes to gain 
liberation on the part of the perfected being, the one enlightened 
for himself, for the Buddha. 

(526a-534c) The nature of knowledge of destruction is discussed. 
The supernatural powers of the perfected being are distinguished 
from those of the adepts and the seekers. 

Jain saints (nirgrantha sravaka) may be capable of seeing things 
at a distance through supernormal vision, but they can’t see things 
nearby. Some myths about special abilities are summarized. 

Vibhajyavadin: A bodhisattva at once realizes a clear and direct 
insight into the four noble truths. 


MAHAVIBHASA 557 

Sarvastivadin: No, he gradually realizes it. In what specific order 
is viewed somewhat differently by different masters. 

(536c-545a) The four perverted views are discussed. The Vibha- 
jyavadin posits twelve perverted views, of which eight are to be 
resolved through the path of vision and four through the path of 
practice. 

Question: If a stream-enterer or once-returner incurs attachment 
to objects of one of the five kinds of desire does he entertain thoughts 
of satisfaction and purity or of frustration and impurity? 

The stages of three kinds of concentration: on emptiness, on the 
signless, and on the dispositionless. Various sources and authorities 
are invoked on these. There is a discussion of the ten kinds of 
emptiness treated in the Pranepes Sastra. 


Chapter Four: Knowledge gained 
through Meditative Practice 


(546b-559b) Darstantika: Awareness that is knowledge is free 
from any ignorance whatsoever, but when the defilement of perplexi- 
_ ty is present along with awareness there is lack of certainty. 

Sarvastivadin: One and the same awareness may be pe know- 
ledge as well as ignorance. 7 

Some say that meditational practice deals with good, bad and 
neutral factors. But we (Sarvastivadins) say that only such practice 
which deals with good factors constitutes meditative practice. 

Concerning the application-path, the noninterrupted path and the 
liberation path upon which an ordinary man relies for realization 
of liberation from defilements. 

In the path of vision introspection should be applied only to objects 
which are related, while in the meditational path-one should consider 
heterogeneous matters. 

“‘Masters of foreign lands’’: The noninterrupted path terminates 
bondage through defilements, while the liberation-path experien- 
tially acknowledges the accomplishment of cessation. 

Sarvastivadin: The noninterrupted path does both jobs. 

Some say that there are no supporting objects, just as there are 
no objects of hallucinations. Others say that some kinds of awareness 
capable of knowing have no objects, and some knowable objects 
are not known. 

Discussion of the sevenfold observational consciousness and of 
the three kinds of introspection (into the general features, the 
distinctions, and the characteristic distinguishing marks of a thing). 


558 : ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Chapter Five: Seven Kinds of Noble Persons 


(562a-577c) Question: Of the practices of the faith-followers, etc. 
up to the liberation from defilements, how many of the eight kinds 
of knowledge (the noble eightfold path) should each of them gain 
and which not? 

Some say that each should arise individually but not together. We 
(Sarvastivadins) say that the knowledge arising from each of the four 
noble truths should arise separately. 

Still others say (wrongly) that when one meditates on the four truths 
he applies vision to all four truths simultaneously, so that knowledge 
of them arises at once. 

Some say that there can be various kinds of awareness at the same 
moment. We (Sarvastivadins) say that only a single awareness can 
arise at one moment. 

Some say that the three concentrations are one; it is divided into 
three for the sake of teaching. We (Sarvastivadins) say that the three 
concentrations have their respective essential natures. 

Some say that awarenesses and concomitant mental factors arise 
independently and there is no correlation. Others say that they arise 
in correlation by temporal relationships between precedent and 
subsequent occurrences. Still others say that correlation only occurs 


between the essential natures. We (Sarvastivadins) say that aware- | 


nesses and concomitant mental factors arise conditioned by three 
things (reciprocal interaction due to inclusion and exclusion). 

The forty-four kinds of knowledge are discussed. (These are 
derived by permuting four truths through eleven of the twelve 
members of the chain of dependent origination excluding ignorance.) 
By a different permutation 77 kinds are detailed, coming to a total 
. of 275 facts of knowing overall. Which of these are defiled and which 
undefiled is explained. 

This section concludes with a number of questions and answers 
pertaining to the eight kinds of knowledge. 


BOOK FOUR: KARMA 
Chapter One: Bad Conduct 


(E578a-595a) The kinds of good and bad conduct are reviewed, 
with related points such as manifest and unmanifest action, the ten 
courses of good karma. Various heretical theories of karma are 
discussed: five held by Vaisesika, nine by Samkhya, and twelve by 
others. 

Darstantikas say that verbal, bodily and mental acts are all just 
thinking. The Vibhajyavadins say that action has as its essential nature 


- 


MAHAVIBHASA «$59 


attachment, hatred and false view. 

The path of action is extensively reviewed. It is said that when 
the universe begins (at the outset of a Xa/pa) the life span of a human 
being is immeasurable, but by the end of it human life is reduced 
to no more than ten years. During this period there are four kinds 
of declines and four kinds of thriving (as to longevity, population, 
material means and moral quality). 

Examples of four kinds of karma (black-black, black-white, etc.) 
are provided. E.g., of black-black the example is provided of those 
who adhere to canine or bovine behavior and fall to hell as result. 

The time span for the maturing of karmic residues is discussed. 
Examples of karmic outcomes are offered, many of them involving 
the bad results of harming animals. 

The Darstantikas say that all karma can be transformed. 

There are two kinds of indeterminate karma: one is indeterminate 
as to the time when its effect is to be received, the other is indetermi- 
nate as to whether its effect occurs at all. 

A discussion of which of the kinds of karma indices its major 
effect and which induces its specific effect. 

Again, as to where the karmic maturation of the kind which is 
to be received in this lifetime occurs—in what sphere, what kind 
of meditative stage, which course of life. 

(E596a-604b) Three kinds of karmic retribution are frustration, 
satisfaction and neither. Five kinds are: feeling the specific appro- 
priate nature; feeling the exclusive presence of the retribution; 
feeling its supporting object; feeling what is connected with it; and 
feeling the maturation of the karma. 

‘Actions that produce neutral or pure karma do not lead to any 
maturation at all. Which actions are of which sort—e.g., joy is but 
sorrow is not—is reviewed. 

Two ways are distinguished of experiencing retribution: physical 
(i.e. through the five senses) and mental. 

The three obstructions are defilements, karma and karmic matura- 
tion (frustration). 

The five deadly sins (matricide, patricide, killing a perfected being, 
injuring the Buddha’s body, and creating schism in the order) are 
explained. Question: Which of these is the worst? Some say that 
mental action is the worst. 

The different hells are distinguished and discussed. Excepting the 
Avici hell, in the rest though there is no joy or satisfaction as to 
retribution, there is a kind of joy and satisfaction after having 
experienced retribution. 

Discussion of various topics relating to the order. 


560 ‘ ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Chapter Two: Bad Speech 


(604-608b) Darstantika: Besides words and deeds there is an 
essential nature of right livelihood as well as wrong livelihood. 

We (Sarvastivadins) say that both night and wrong livelihood 
essentially involve both speech and action. 

Discussion of killing, stealing, bad sexual behavior, lying, double 
talk, abuse, frivolity and wrong views. It is shown that they all arise 
from attachment, hatred and delusion. 

There are 12 types of livelihood that involve unrestrained activity. 
Goat-slaughter is an example. Three ways of countering such a 
life-style are discussed. Adoption of such a way of life is part of 
what is attained by receiving the preceptual vow or at ordination. 

(609a-615c) Craftiness (Sathya, also called vanka) gives rise to 
bodily, vocal and mental karma, but does not occur in the upper 
two spheres. It is contrasted with filthiness and faults, using the 
method of the catuskoui. 

Awareness as an active agent causes actions to take place, while 
awareness is immediately followed by actions at the subsequent 
moment. We say that the five kinds of sensory awareness function 
only in the latter way and not in the former. Those awarenesses which 
have to be terminated through the path of vision make for themselves 
an instantaneous mental follow-up and are incapable of activating - 
material and vocal actions. 

Vatsiputriyas and Vibhajyavadins consider vocal sounds to be 
karmic outcomes. Others say that sounds are a third item in a series 
begun by an action which induces various great elements to operate, 
in turn bringing sounds into being. Still others say that sounds are 
fifth in a series of operations of material principles of which the 
second are brought about by action, and thus that vocal sounds are 
not karmic outcomes. 

Some (heretics) say that the later portion of a thing can be a cause 
of the earlier portion, e.g., spring water pushing preceding water 
upwards. But we say that if karma is to be experienced in this life 
as a karmic outcome it must have been caused in the past and the 
effect must lie in the future. 

The kinds of karmic outcomes of the trance free from conceptual 
identification and of cessation-trance are explained. 


Chaper Three: Injuring Life 
(616c-624a) Homicide is analyzed. 


Six different theories on intermediate existence are reviewed. 
The five gravest sins, those that lead to hell, require premeditation 


MAHAVIBHASA S61 


as well as actual accomplishment of the deed. There are no such 
sins for ghosts or animals. 

If an embryo is transplanted from one womb to another, which 
is the mother of the child? and if (s)he kills one, by killing which 
is (s)he guilty of matricide? 

Those who abide in the uninterrupted hell will not perish at the 
end of the universe, but because of the power of their karma will 
be drawn to the hells of other universes to receive their retribution. 

Restraints are discussed. Some do and some do not undergo karmic 
reinforcement. One kind works toward liberation while two others, 
which do not, are acquired through trance and through purity. There 

- are one, two, or as many as 42 kinds of restraints. 

Though the restraints of past, present and future Buddhas are not 
identical, one can say that their restraints have an identical nature 
since they all undergo the same practice, have identical merit, and 
realize the same dharma. 

(625c-632b) An ordinary practitioner, if he reaches steady insight 
into factors and his life ends then, should not fall into any evil courses. 

Four kinds of birth (from the egg, the womb, from moisture and 
from transformativegeneration) are distinguished. All four take place 
in the realm of desire. In the material and immaterial realms there 
is only one kind of birth, the transformative generation one. 

A Saint is not born from egg or moisture. 

The most numerous kind of birth is the last, from transformative 
generation. 

Does any embodied person necessarily acquire verbal karma? 
Various answers reviewed. 

Vatsiputriya: The maturations of actions created from defilements 
classified into five categories (of the paths of vision and practice) 
should be classified into those same categories. 

Sarvastivadin: Though those actions are classified into the five 
categories, their maturations belong in a single category to be dealt 
with through the path of practice. 

The kinds of karmic results are reviewed in the standard manner 
involving five kinds (outcome, maturation, disjoined, mutually 
supportive and dominant). The masters of the westérn regions find 
nine kinds of karmic effects. 


Chapter Four: Manifest and Unmanifest Action 


(634b-648c) Darstantika: There is no essential nature of either 
manifest or unmanifest karma. 

Sarvastivada: Both manifest and unmanifest karma are really 
existent (i.e. have essential natures). 


562 , ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Is it the case that whenever unmanifest karma is produced manifest 
karma is also? 

There is in the realm of desire no manifest physical karma that 
is both obstructed and neutral. 

What counts as verbal karma? Do echoes, flute-sounds, 
bird-sounds count? How about magically-created speech? Can a 
magically created being without a body speak? 

If an action is impure is its result also impure? 

There are four ways of classifying restraints: (1) according to 
practices, (2) according to the restraining discipline, (3) according 
to the three realms, (4) according to human behavioral norms. 

There are seven kinds of followers of Buddhism, classified accor- 
ding to the code of discipline (rather than the kinds of trance). 
Some moral precepts applying to laymen are reviewed. 


- Chapter Five: One’s Own Karma 


(649a-661a) One is bound to receive the results of his own karma. 

A Single action can produce longevity of 80,000 ka/pas in those 
whose senses are free from conceptual identification. 

Backsliding is considered possible for ordinary people but not for 
stream-enterers. However, in some (special) cases even a perfected 


being may be imprisoned because of his past actions, and even a 


stream-enterer may scheme a homicide. 


A perfected being who is capable of prolonging his life should arise - 


from the highest trance and verbally express his intent. 
A karmic effect cannot be changed, but the power.of karma can. 


Suicide is discussed. Some say that Buddhas forsake one-third of 


their natural life span. Others say it is one-fifth. 

Some say that insanity is caused in four ways, or in five according 
to others. Perfected beings are subject to insanity like ordinary men, 
but the Buddha was not. 

A discussion about what is the central teaching of the Buddha. 
Some say that nomenclature is its essence. Traditionalists say that 
it consists of verbal actions. We say that the essential nature of the 
teaching has the characteristics of goodness and neutrality; he did 
not preach in order to convert. There is a discussion of the divisions 
of scripture and how to understand the teachings. 


BOOK FIVE: GREAT ELEMENTS 
Chapter 1: Great Elements and What is Made of Them 


(661c-679a) Sarvastivadin: There are two masters of our school, 
Buddhadeva and Dharmatrata. Buddhadeva holds that ‘material 


‘ 


MAHAVIBHASA : 563 
form’ means nothing but the great elements themselves; there are 
no accompanying mental factors, but only awareness itself. Dharma- 
trata holds that there is no touching the great elements or anything 
made of them, and no cognition of material form. 

Some (heretics) say that space is one of the five great elements. 
Others say that it is to reveal a meaning correlative to the characte- 
ristic of factors that matter is explained as composed of great 
elements. 

There are four kinds of great elements: that arising from matura- 
tion, that arising from growth, that arising as similar outcome, and 
that arising as a change. 

Great elements that belong to one kind are made up of atoms of 
that kind. But the great elements must be clearly distinguished from 
conditioned objects. Great elements are invisible, while some of the 
conditioned objects are visible. The visible, invisible, conditioned 
and unconditioned tangibles are classified. 

The spheres and terminations (through vision, Pras or both) 
of great elements are explained. 

The topic of ‘‘food’’ is reviewed in the standard manner. We are 
told that in hell regular food consists of swallowing heated iron balls. 
The kinds of food consumed by ghosts, animals and those in the 
higher realms is considered. 


Chapter Two: Conditions 


(680b-693b) How great elements are conditioned and function 
as conditions is explained. The relation of the great elements to the 
material forms, to awareness and concomitant mental factors is 
discussed. 

An explanation of substantial change from soft to hard and vice- 
versa is given. Hardness and non-hardness are enhanced or de- 
tracted from by the elements of each respectively being increased 
or disappearing. Hardness and softness are not essential features of 
things. 

Can atoms touch each other? Different theories are proposed. 

Some (other Buddhists) say that past elements do not exist, and 
that the elements of the present time are unconditioned. 

Great elements and ordinary substances are always simultaneous 
in past, present or future. 

‘There are two kinds of unmanifest karma that arise and perish 
along with the arising and perishing of an awareness of meditation 
or those of an undefiled awareness, and there are seven kinds of 
unmanifest karma under each of the two. There are three kinds of 
unmanifest karma that arise along with manifest karma, and seven 


564 ‘ ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


kinds which arise along with restraints as well as with nonrestraints. 

Speculations are considered about the possibility of the great 
elements in spheres of desire and matter influencing each other. Are 
they of the same sort? Is, e.g., the sphere of the element earth the 
same thing as the great element earth? Which one is a sense-basis, 
which an object of awareness? 

There is a discussion of the four stages of the universe, viz., the 
period of evolution, of maintenance, of decay and of emptiness. 
What happens to the relative population of living beings at these 
stages? The major kinds of disasters that occur during these stages, 
and where they will take place, is described. 


Chapter Three: Views and Insights 


(693b-700c) Vibhajyavadin: The stream-enterer and once- 
returner have acquired the proper meditative states of concentration 
of all eight stages. Sarvastivadin: Not so. 

What happens to the great elements between kalpas? Do they 
disappear during the interval or not? 

Darstantikas and Bhadanta Katyayaniputra: Magical beings do not 
really exist. Others say that there is some objective basis upon which 
the illusion is created. Still others say that there is no such basis. 
Mythical examples are offered. , 

Vibhajyavadin: There is no intermediary state between lives. It 
is discussed whether there are any great elements at that time. 

Darstantika and Vibhajyavadin: The essential nature of a temporal 
period and its passage are separate entities, the former being perma- 
nent, the latter transitory. ; 

The number of kalpas and their objects. There are twenty inter- 
mediary kalpas, of which the first is only to perish, and the last 
only increases, and the eighteen in between increase in one condition 
and decrease in another condition. The appearance of the Buddha 
takes place only during the Ka/pa that perishes, the appearance of - 
the universal ruler (cakravartin) only during the last Ka/pa that increa- 
ses, and the appearance of one enlightened for himself occurs 
during those Ka/pas that increase or decrease. 

(701b-728c) The duration of a moment.’® Day and night increase 
and decrease in duration. 

Seven atoms make up a particle. 

Some say that there are various kinds of feelings. Others hold that 
there is only frustrating feeling, not of satisfaction or neutral feeling. 

When one becomes a stream-entrant how many applications of 
mindfulness are to be practiced, and how many in future lives? Some 
say there is no practice in future lives. The Sarvastivadin holds that 


MAHAVIBHASA : 565 


the stream-entrant and once-returner do not acquire a trance for 
each state of the four meditations nor for the immaterial contempla- 
tions. 

Concerning the practice of the fifteen gates. 

(729a-742a) Discussion of VaiSesika and Samkhya theories about | 
the number of faculties. Some (heretics) say there are 120 faculties. 
Actually there are 17. Dharmatrata says there are 14 actual bases 
of these 22. Buddhadeva believes that the actual basis of all faculties 
is just the mental faculty. Some say that a human being is defiled 
when his mind is defiled. Lengthy discussion of the 22 faculties. 

Darstantika: There is no experience without thinking and there is 
none without sense reception. Kasyapiya: The cause continues to 
exist until the effect comes into existence, when it disappears. 

Darstantika: No ordinary man terminates the defilements in 
worldly life. Bhadanta Katyayaniputra: No ordinary man terminates 
the latent dispositions, but they are capable of overcoming 10 kinds 
of envelopers; still, there is no permanent termination of defilements 
in the ordinary world. Some say that although an ordinary man may 
terminate the way of the world he is still an ordinary man and not 
a saint; he ought to use the superior path. 

(743a-759a) Which defilements are destroyed by vision and which 
by practice explained. 

A discussion about which kinds of symbolic processes——gross or 
subtle—are to be used (Darstantika and Bhadanta Katyayaniputra 
agree). 

(760a-773a) Darstantika: Three epistemic factors combine to 
produce our experience of touch, but contact is not a real entity. 

Vision discussed. Some say that when the supernatural visual 
powers arise the regular visual faculty does not end its-function but 
remains as well. Some say that the supernormal vision can see 
intermediate existence. 

Question: Does supernormal vision grasp the ordinary kinds of 
color, etc.? The Samkhya opinion is reported to be that the super- 
natural visual faculty is just the human eye transformed by repeated 
practice. 

Question: Is the object of supernatural vision resistant? Could 
supernatural vision see things in the dark? 

The topic of aging is reviewed, with views of Vibhajyavada, Vasu- 
mitra and Darstantikas considered. 

Darstantikas and Vibhajyavadins believe that a minute mental 
function still remains in the trance free from conceptual identifica- 
tion. Others say that this state only arises for one who transcends 
all defilements. This trance only occurs for those in the fourth 
meditative stage. There is no return from this state, although Dars- 


566 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tantikas are quoted as opining that there is. This trance is the result 
of karma earned in a previous lifetime. 

(774a-783a) Darstantikas and Vibhajyavadins say that subtle 
mental function remains in the cessation-trance and that it is not 
terminated. Other views are reviewed, and the correct one formula- 
ted. There is no cessation-trance in the lower trance states. Cessa- 
tion-trance is sometimes termed “‘liberation’’. Its varieties are discu- 
ssed. Eleven kinds of people induce this trance in themselves, not 
only perfected beings but also some of those still in a state of 
bondage. There are many theories about this state. 

A mind that is in cessation-trance is impure, but may become pure 
when leaving it. The examples of Udayana and Sariputra are consi- 
dered. A cessation-trance is brief, at its longest not more than seven 
days and nights. But in the material realm it may last for more than . 
a kalpa. 

Various theories are offered as to why an ordinary man is unable 
to enter into cessation-trance. Question: Does a bodhisattva enter 
into it? Is one who enters it aware that he has entered it? It is said 
that fire cannot burn him, nor water drown him. 

One who attains the cessation-trance deserves alms and one who 
offers them to him will be amply rewarded, like those who give alms. 
for parents, sick, teachers and bodhisattvas. This trance breeds no 
further karma. : 

Does one who leaves the cessation-trance also leave the state of 
perfected being? The fourfold-negation method is applied to the 
question. 

(783b-796b) Various questions are raised concerning the trance 
free from conceptual identification.E.g., does one who falls away 
from it get reborn in the realm of desire? Is this state part of the 
third trance state? What thoughts are experienced there? ; 

When one dies in the realm of desire and is reborn there do his 
faculties perish? The connected psychophysical elements that arise 
with the mind abide during its existence and perish when it perishes; 
these are all the elements belonging to the class of concomitant mental 
factors. A monk is quoted who advocates the theory of three 
moments, that material factors abide for three moments, but con- 
comitant mental factors for only one. 

Those who hold that lives arise without any specific order are 
wrong; the order is caused. 

A variety of issues are reviewed pertaining to the twenty-two 
faculties, e.g., which are good, bad and neutral, or if there should 
be a different classification; what their causes and conditions are. 

(796b-812b) Review once more of whether things have an essen- 
tial nature and if so which ones do and what they are. The Sarvasti- 


MAHAVIBHASA ; 567 


vadin holds that even nonaccomplishment has its essential nature. 

Discussion of acquisition-force. It comes into being at the same 
time as any factor does, and belongs to the factor at each of the 
three periods of time (past, present, future). Space and the uncondi- 
tioned factors cannot be acquired, but even they accompany 
acquisition-force in past, present and future. The acquisition-force 
of the uncalculated cessation is an impure factor. 

Factors in past, present and future have their acquisition-force in 
the respective period of time, so that acquiring an occurrence at a 
time will gain the respective three periods of time as well as factors 
that transcend that time-period. Those factors that arise contiguously 
have acquisition-force for each other, and nonacquisition for the 
factors that don’t occur, while there is neither acquisition-nor- 
nonacquisition-force for factors different from either. This is spelled 
out in detail. 

(813c-859b) Vibhajyavadin: Only the first trance has five 
branches. 

What it’s like to enter into and exit from concentration, both in 
general and relating to specific stages. 

Why ‘don’t the four boundless states, or the sixteen kinds of 
contemplation of the four noble truths, terminate defilements 
completely? There are two kinds of concentration, maturation- 
concentration and meditation. The former is the upshot of the four 
boundless states. 

Some say that meditative attainment must be pure and undefiled, 
but that there is no relishing in meditation. Others say that even in 
the material realm there are undefiled states and the state of 
neither-identification-nor-nonidentification. The difference be- 
tween relishing and pure meditation is explained. 

A lengthy discussion ensues about concentration and meditation, 
matching the trance states with types of meditation and liberation. 

(860a-885c) Discussion of a variety of topics broadly relating to 
the five kinds of life cycle as animal, ghost, human etc. Should there | 
be a sixth life cycle of asuras? 

Further discussion of other groups of five—five objects of sense, 
five ways of entering liberation from the nonreturner stage. 

Vibhajyavadin and Mahasanghika: The Buddha’s living body was 
free from defilements and pure. Sarvastivadin: The Buddha’s body 
was impure and bound by defilements, since it could have caused. 
other’s bodies to increase their defilements; furthermore, he still 
had impurities from previous existences. 

There are four kinds of persons: (1) one who follows his desires, 
(2) one who strives against his desires, (3) one who abides in the 
material and immaterial concentrations and does not return to the 


568 ; ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ordinary world, and (4) one who is liberated. 

If one cultivates good faculties through practice oriented toward 
liberation, even if he falls into the Avic/ hell (cases cited), he should 
be able to escape it as Devadatta did. On the other hand, two are 
cited who reached the trance free from conceptual identification 
but nevertheless fell back into the Avicy hell. 

(886a-919b) To become a Bodhisattva takes difficult practice for 
three immeasurable Kalpas. The characteristics of the Bodhisattva 
are described. 

Sarvastivadin: A Bodhisattva is engaged in the practice of the four 
perfections for three ka/pas. The masters of foreign countries hold 
there are six perfections by adding patience and trance to the four. 
The masters of this country say, however, that these two are included 
in the four. 

Legends about past Bodhisattvas are cited. The pect powers 
of Bodhisattvas are described and extolled. 

(919b-931b) The three types of concentration—emptiness, sign- 
lessness and dispositionlessness—are described and compared. 

What should one become mindful of to complete the path of 
vision? The orthodox say that it is by contemplating the three kinds 
of frustration. The Darstantikas say that it is by contemplating the 
impermanent nature of life. 

Vibhajyavadin: One who enters the trance free from conceptual © 
identification will, when defilements end and all karma has been 
exhausted, attain the state of perfected being. 

Darstantika: The three spheres of existence and the nine states 
of concentration all include three types: those who will realize the 
goal in the future, those who aren’t to realize it because of evil karmd, 
and those whose future is indeterminate. 

Mahasanghika: The stream-enterer may still backslide. 

Darstantika: The factor of the trance free from conceptual identifi - 
cation should not be accepted. 

(932a-1003b) The work concludes with a wide array of subjects 
arranged in no discernible order. 


NOTES 


PART ONE 
1. INTRODUCTION 
THE HISTORICAL BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS 


1. See for example Digha 1: 186-187, where the Buddha rejects three 
of the Taittiriya Upanisad’s five levels of the soul, and Majjhima 1: 135- 136 
rejecting the universal atman. 

2. Samyutta 2: 25. A parallel to this phrase occurs also in the Salistamba 
Sutra, paragraph 9, the historical significance of which is discussed below. 

3. G. S. Murti and A.N.K. Aiyangar, Edicts of Asoka, Adyar Library, 
Madras, 1951, pp. 132-135. 

4, Anguttara 1: 145-146. 

5. Majjihima 1: 163. 

6, Majjhima 1: 163; 240; M2: 93; 212. 

7. We use the Sanskrit forms when words are used in the text; thus we 
provide sitra for Pali sutta. When passages are quoted, however, we use 
the form given in the passage quoted. 

8. Majjhima 1: 160-175 and 237-251. 

9. Majjhima 1: 163-166; 240. 

10. Majjhima 1: 77-80 (abridged). 
~ LL. Majjhima 1: 246-247. 

12. Majjhima 1: 248-249. 

13. Majjhima 1: 168-170. 

14. Samyutta S: 420-424. 

15. Digha 2: 95-98. 

16. E. Conze, Buddhist Thought in india, London, 1962, pp. 31-32; 
Thirty Years of Buddhist Studies, Oxford, 1967, pp. 1-13. 

17. Digha 2: 72-167. 

18, Digha 2: 156. 

19. See A. Bareau, Les premiers concils bouddhiques, Paris, 1955. 

20. Majjhima 1: 133. 

21. Samayabhedoparacanacakra, translated by A. Bareau, Journal Asia- 
tique, Paris 1954. 

22. Bhavaviveka, Nikayabhedavibhangavyakhyana, Vinitadeva, Nikaya- 
bhedoparsanasamgraha; both translated by A. Bareau, Journal Asiatique, 
Paris 1956. See A.K. Warder, Indian Buddhism, Delhi, 1980, pp. 214 and 
544; and E.J. Thomas, The History of Buddhist Thought, 2nd Ed., London, 
1951, pp. 33 and 288. 

23. See Paul Demiéville, ““L’origine des sectes bouddhiques d’aprés 
Paramartha’’, Mélanges chinois et bouddhiques, vol. 1, Louvain 1932. 

24, See A. Bareau, Les premiers concils bouddhiques op. cit. 

_ 25. Mahavamsa, ch. 5, vs. 1-10. 

26. See A. Bareau, Les sectes bouddhiques du petit véhicule, Paris, 

1955, for the classical study of these schools. See also A-K. Warder, Jadian 


570 ‘ ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Buddhism, 2nd edition, Delhi 1980, pp. 288-351, and E. Lamotte, Histoire 
du Bouddhisme Indien, Louvain 1958, pp. 571-606. 

27. See Anesaki, ‘‘Some problems of the textual history of the Buddhist 
scriptures’’ and ‘“The Four Buddhist Agamas in Chinese’’, Transactions of 
the Asiatic Society of Japan, vol. 35, nos. 2 and 3, 1908. See also Thich 
Minh Chau, The Chinese Madhyama Agama and the Pali Majjhima Nikaya, 
The Saigon Institute of Higher Buddhist Studies, n.d. but probably 1964. 

28. E. Conze, Buddhist Thought in India, op. cit., p. 31. 

29. See E. Conze, Thirty Years of Buddhist Studies, op. cit., pp. 1-13. 


30. E. Conze, Buddhist Thought in India, op. cit., p. 31. 

31. This exercise was first undertaken by Louis de la Vallée Poussin, 
Théorie des douze causes, London, 1913, and recently updated by N. 
Ross Reat, The Salistamba Sutra, Delhi, 1993. 

32. Minor Pillar Edicts of Sarnath, Kosami, and Sajfici. See G.S. Murti 
and A.K. Aiyangar, Edicts of Asoka, op. cit., pp. 127-131. 

33. Bhabra Edict. See Murti and Aiyanagar, Edicts of Asoka, op. cit., pp. 
83-85. 

34. See N.A. Jayawickrama, ‘A reference to the Third Council in ASoka’s 
edicts?’, University of Ceylon Review 17.3-4, 1959, pp. 61-72. 

35. E. Conze, “Recent progress in Buddhist Studies”, The Middle Way, 
vol. 34, 1959, 12. Reprinted in E. Conze, Thirty Years of Buddhist Studies, 
op. cit. See also Constantin Regamey, ‘‘Der Buddhismus Indiens”’ in Christus 
und die Religionen der Erde volume 3 (Vienna 1951), 231-317 (reprinted 
in Der Christ in der Welt, series 17, volume 6 (Zurich 1964), 1-103.) See 
also Regamey, “‘Le probléme du Bouddhisme primitif et les derniers travaux 
de Stanislaw Schayer’’, Rocznik Orientalistyczny vol. 21, 1957, 37-58. See 
S. Schayer, ‘‘Precanonical Buddhism’’, Archiv Orientalni vol. 7 fasc. 2, 
1935, 121-132, and “‘New contributions to the problem of pre-Hinayanistic 
Buddhism’’, Polski Biuletyn Orientalistyczny vol. 1, 1937, 8-17. Response 
to former by A.B. Keith, ‘‘Pre-canonical Buddhism”’, Indian Historical Quar- 
terly vol. 12, 1936, 1-20. See also M. Falk, Nama-rupa and Dharma-rapa 
(Calcutta 1943). Reluctantly no doubt, these scholars join C.A.F. Rhys- 
Davids in her quest for a pre-canonical Buddhism; see Sakya or Buddhist 
Origins (London 1931). 

36. Anguttara 1:10. 

37. Digha 1:223. 

38. YaSomitra, AbhidharmakoSasphutartha; Prajiiakaramati, Bodhi- 
caryavatarapaiijikd, Candrakirti, Madhyamakakarikaprasannapada. 

39, Digha 3:76. 

40. Digha 2:1-54. 

41. Majjhima 1:191. 

42. Samyutta 3:120. 

43. Lankavatdra Sutra, Suzuki trans., p. 278. Mahayanasamgraha, 
Lamotte trans., pp. 93-95. See Conze, Buddhist Thought in India, op. 
cit., p. 222; Buddhist Texts Through the Ages, p. 166. 

44. Samyutta 3:105. 

45. In these volumes of the Encyclopedia we regularly translate duhkha 


NOTES é Oe 571 
as ‘‘frustration’’. 

46. Digha 1:223. 

47. See, for example, Kena Upanisad 1.3.7; Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 
2.3.6; 4.4.1-25 and 4.5.13-15; Chdndogya Upanisad 2.41, 8.11 and 12; 
Taittiriya Upanisad 2.9. See note 54 below. 

48. Digha 1:188; Majjhima 1:426-432, 483-489; Samyutta 2:18-22, 
222 and 4:374-403 passim. 

49. Samyutta 4: 400-402. See Itivuttaka, verse 67. 

50. Lankavatara Sutra, ch. 61, Suzuki translation, pp. 123-124. See also 
Vimalakirti Sdtra, ch. 9, Thurman translation, p. 77; Luk translation p. 100; 
and E. Conze, The Large Sutra on Perfect Wisdom (Berkeley 1975), p. 
209. 

51. See Samyutta 2:15-20 and 4:400; Digha 1:13 and 34. 

52. N. Ross Reat, The Salistamba Sutra, Delhi, 1993, p. 75. 

53. N. Ross Reat, The Salistamba Sutra, op. cit., pp. 46; 68. 

54. In the following passages, all four of the catuskofi alternatives are 
addressed concerning the question of whether the innermost soul is 
conscious (caitanya) (MaitrT Upanisad 6. 10), not conscious (acitta) (Maitn7 
prajaa, naprajria) (Mandiakya Upanisad 7). 

55. See S. Dasgupta, A History of Indian Philosophy (Cambridge 1922), 
Vol. 1, pp. 179-181; and N. Smart, Doctrine and Argument in Indian 
Philosophy (London 1964), pp. 66-69. 

56. C.A.F. Rhys Davids, The Birth of Indian Psychology and its Deve- 
lopment in Buddhism (London 1936), ch. 11. 

57. Samyutta 2:19-20. 

58. Samyutta 2:19-20, 33, 38. See also Digha 1:200; D3:137; Udana, 
pp. 69-70; and Milindapatiha, Pali Text Society edition, pp. 46-48. 

59. N. Ross Reat, The Salistamba Sutra, op. cit., pp. 46-47; 68-69. 

60. Samyutta 2:20. 

61. Digha 2:354; Samyutta 1:227 and 3:54. 

62. The Ajivakas appear to have been something of an exception. 

63. E.g., Katha Upanisad 1.3 

64. Taittiriya Upanisad 2.2-5; 3.2-6. See Painigala Upanisad 2.7. 

65. See Majjhima 1:421-423. 

66. Digha 1:223, 2:63, 335, 338. Majjhima 1:296. Samyutta 1:122, 
3:124. 

67. Majjhima 1:258. 

68. Samyutta 1:122, 2:91 and 3:124; Digha 1:223 and 2:63, Suttanipata 
vs. 1037. 

69. Ninian Smart, Doctrine and Argument in Indian Philosophy (London 
1964) p. 46. 

70.E.g., Majjhima1:111; Digha1:222-223, 2:62.SeeN.R. Reat, “Some 
fundamental concepts of Buddhist psychology,”’ Journal of the International 
Association of Buddhist Studies vol.17, 1987, 15-28. 

71. Majjhima 1:190. 

72. See Suttanipata, verse 909: *‘A seeing man will see name-and-form’’. 
Having seen he will understand those things. Let him at pleasure look much 


$72 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


’ 


or little, for the skillful do not say that purity is (attained) by that’. See 
also Suttanipata, verses 1037 and 1073. 

73. Samyutta 2:24, 

74, Majjhima 1: 190: “A space enclosed by bones, sinews, flesh and 
skin is known as ripa’’, in the context of a discussion of ndmardpa, is in 
fact the only unambiguous instance I have located. 

75. Digha 2:32. 

76. Madhyamika Karika, section 3, vs. 1-9. 

77. Majjhima 1:137. 

78. N. Ross Reat, The Salistamba Sutra, op. cit. , pp. 57-60. Digha 3:214; 
Majjhima 1:147; 489. 

79. Sutta Nipata, verse 705.45. 

80. Anguttara 3:415. Cp. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad V1.4.5. 

81. Majjhima 1:301. 

82. Digha 1:206. 

83. Anguttara 1:125. Cp. Anguttara 1:230 ff. regarding Sila, citta and 
ptrajfia. 

84. Digha 2:312. 

85. Afguttara 1:261; Samyutta 2:167. 

86. As at Digha 2:312. 

87. As it is extensively at Digha 1: 4-8 and 63-69. 

88. As at Majjhima 1:85. 

89. Majjhima |: 286; Samyutta 5:264. 

90. Digha 2: 312; Anguttara 5:205. 

91. Digha 1:9-12; Majjhima 3:754; Anguttara 3:208, etc. 

92. Digha 2: 312. 

93. Majjhima 1:118-122. 

94. Also occurring at Digha 2:49. 

95. Digha 1:251; Majjhima 1:351. 

96. Digha 2:1-53. r = 

97. Majjhima 1: 60. (1) sensual desire (kamachanda), (2) hatred (vya- 
pada), (3) sloth and torpor (p. thinamidha), (4) flurry and worry (P. 
udhaccakukucca), (5) uncertainty (P. victkicchd). 

98. Majjhima 1: 61-62. (1) mindfulness (P. sat/, (2) investigation of 
dharma (P. dhammavicaya), (3) energy (P. viriya),-(4) joy (P. pit), (5) 
serenity (P. passaddhi), (6) concentration (samadhi), (7) equanimity (P. 
upekkha). 

99, Majjhima 3:71; Digha 2:313. 

100. Majjhima 1:163-166. . 

101. Digha 1:184; Ariguttara 4:451-454, and see Paul Griffiths, On Being 
Mindless: Buddhist Meditation and the Mind-Body Problem (La Salle, 
Illinois, 1986). 

102. Majjhima 1:296. 

103. Paul Griffiths, ‘“Concentration or insight: the problematic of Thera- 
‘vada Buddhist meditation-theory’’, Journal of the American Academy of 
Religion 49, 1981, 605-624. 

104. Digha 3:213; Majjhima 1:33, 494; Anguttara 5:99-100, 131, 
Samyutta 5:52. 


NOTES 573 


105. Anguttara 4:360 and 5:99-100, 131. 

106. Majjhima 1:71, 357; Anguttara 1:61, 3:417, 4:360; 31-32, 99-100, 
431. 

107. Anguttara 3:355. 

108. Digha 3: 93-94. 

109. At Samyutta 2:118. 

110. Digha 1:184. 

111. Majjhima 1:435-437. 

112. Majjhima 3:76. See Samyutta 5:20. 

113. Rod Bucknell, ““The Buddhist path to liberation: an analysis of the 
listing of stages’’, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies, 7.2, 1984, 10-11.See Majjhima 1:182-184, 347-348 and 2:38-39, 

114. Majjhima 1:33, 70-71, 356-358; Anguttara 1:61, 3:417, 4:360, 
451-454 and 5:32, 99-100; Samyutta 5:203. 

115. Digha 2:71; Majjhima 1:477; Anguttara 4:453; Samyutta 1:191; 
Ariguttara 1:73 and 4:10, 77. 


2. THE BUDDHIST WAY TO LIBERATION 


1. See the list of ten relevant meanings in Peter Harvey, ‘*‘Signless 
meditation’ in Pali Buddhism’’, Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 98.1, 
1986, 31-33. 

2. Henepola Gunaratna, The Path of Serenity and Insight (Delhi, 1985), 
p. 18. 

3. Anguttara Nikaya 5:113. 

4. Samyuttanikaya 5:64-65. 

5. Gunaratna, op. cit., pp. 38-39. 

6. Gunaratna, op. cit., pp. 55-56. 

7, Samprasadana, Gunaratne translates it as ““confidence’’. 

8. George D. Bond, ‘‘The development and elaboration of the arahant 
ideal in the Theravada Buddhist doctrine”’, Journal of the American Academy 
of Religion 52.2, 1984, p. 227. 

9. Ibid., p. 234. 

10. Irene B. Horner, The Early Buddhist Theory of Man Perfected. A 
Study of the Arahan (London 1936). 

11. Gunaratna, op. cit., p. 189 

12. Paul J. Griffiths, On Being Mindless. Buddhist Meditation and the 
Mind-Body Problem (La Salle, Minois, 1986), pp. 10-13. This book should 
be consulted for an extended investigation of the conception of this state 
in the various kinds and stages of Buddhism. Note also the discussion 
in the present volume by Noble Ross Reat, pp. 53-55 above. 

13. Gunaratna, op. cit., p. 205, suggests the superiority of the latter, but 
even he admits that ‘‘the pafifia-vimutta and ubhatobhagavimutta arahats 
are equal with respect to release from suffering’’. 


3. THE DEVELOPMENT OF ABHIDHARMA PHILOSOPHY 


1. T.W. Rhys Davids, trans., Book of Discipline, Mahavagga|\. p. 6. 
2. Atthasalini 1.2, 3. 
3. Vinaya-Althakatha, vol. 5, p. 990: “‘abdhidhamme’”’ ti nama-ripa-pari- 


574 . ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


cchede vinetum na patibalo hott. Cf. also Atthasdlini, 1.52. 

4. Pradhan, ed. Abhidharmakosabhasyam, p. 2. 

5. Cf. P. Pradhan, ed., ibid.: esa tavat pdramarthiko "bhidharmah. 

6. Vibhanga -Atthakatha, pp. 7-8: ettha ca khanadikathda va ‘‘nippariyaya””’. 
sesa “‘sappariyaya’’ tasu nippariyayakatha idha adhippeta. 

7. Utpadad va tathdgatanam anutpadad va tathagatanam sthitaivaisa 
dharmandm dharmatd, This is a.common refrain in a number of Buddhist 
texts; see the references in Ronald M. Davidson, ‘‘An introduction to the 
standards of scriptural authenticity in Indian Buddhism’, in Chinese Buddhist 
Apocrypha, ed. Robert E. Buswell, Jr., Honolulu: University of Hawaii, 
1990. 

8. The mahdpadeSas have been treated by Etienne Lamotte, ‘La critique 
d’authenticite dans le Bouddhisme’’, Jndia Antiqua [Vogel Festschrift] 
(Leyden: E.J. Brill, 1947), pp. 213-222. A recent survey article examining . 
the role of the mahapadesas in Buddhist standards of textual authenticity 
has been written by Ronald M. Davidson: see previous note. There were 
other standards of textual hermeneutics, as for example the catuhpratisarana 
(the four resorts): i.e. to take resort (1) in Dharma, not individuals; (2) 
in meaning, not the words; (3) in sdtras of definitive meaning [ niftartha}, 
not sutras of provisional meaning [neyartha]; (4) in knowledge, not con- 
sciousness; for these, see Etienne Lamotte, ‘‘La critique d’interpretation 
dans le bouddhisme’’, Annuaire de l'Institut de Philologie et d’Histoire 
Orientales et Slaves IX [Mélanges Henry Gregoire] (1949), pp. 341-361. 

9. Ernst Waldschmidt, ed., Das Mahaparinirvanasiitra, Abhandlungen der 
Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin (Berlin: Akademie der 
Wissenschafte, 1951), vol. 2, pp. 238-240; idem., Die Uberlieferung vom 
Lebensende des Buddha, Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften 
in Gottingen, Philologisch-Historische Klasse, Dritte Folge, Nr. 29 (Got- 
tingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1944), vol. 1, pp. 136-140. See also 
André Bareau, Recherches sur la Biographie du Buddha dans les Si utrapitaka 
et les Vinayapitaka anciens, Publications de I’ Ecole Francaise d’Extreme- 
Orient, vol. 77 (Paris, 1971), part I, pp. 222-239; translated in Davidson, 
“Standards of authenticity’, op. cit. 

10. See T.W. Rhys Davids and J.E. Carpenter, eds., Dighanikaya (London: 
Pali Text Society, 1890-1911), vol. 2, pp. 123-126; R. Morris, E. Hardy, 
M. Hunt, eds., Asguttaranikaya (London: Pali Text Society, 1885-1910), 
vol. 2, pp. 167-170. 

11. E. Hardy, ed., Nettipakarana (London: Pali Text Society, 1902), pp. 
21-22; Nanamoli, trans., The Guide, Pali Text Society Translations Series, 
no. 33 (London: Luzac, 1962), pp. 37-38. The Sarvastivadins have also 
interpreted dharmatd as pratityasamutpada: ‘‘{na ca sitram badhate] na ca 
sitrantaram virodhayati. [na dharmatam badhate] iti pratityasamutpada- 
dharmatam.”’ For dharmatd as indicating the ‘‘way of things’, see Walpola 
Rahula, ‘‘Wrong notions of dhammata {dharmata)’’, in Buddhist Studies in. 
Honour of IB. Horner, ed. L. Cousins, et al., pp. 181-191 (Dordrecht, 
Holland: D. Reidel, 1974). 7 

12. Majjhimanikaya ii.245: ‘‘appamattako so, Ananda, vivado yad idam— 
ajjhajive va adhipatimokkhe va. magge va hi Ananda, patipadaya va sanghe 


NOTES : 575 
vivado uppajjamano uppajjeyya; svaso vivado bahujanahitaya bahujanasu- 
khaya bahuno janassa anatthaya ahitaya dukkhaya devamanus- 
sanam.”’ 

13. Abhisamaydlankaraloka of Haribhadra, ed. G. Tucci, Gaekwad’s 
Oriental Series, vol. 62 (Baroda, 1932), pp. 260-261; see also Abhidharma- 
dipa, p. 197-8 n. 7. 

14. The major European research concerning the Buddhist Councils has 
been succinctly treated by Charles S. Prebish, “‘A review of scholarship 
on the Buddhist councils’, Journal of Asian Studies 33 (1974), pp. 239-254. 

15. Mahaparinibbana-sutta, Dighanikaya ii. 162; Rhys Davids, trans., 
Dialogues of the Buddha, vol. 2, p. 184. Also Cullavagga 11.1 (Vinaya-pita- 
kaiii.284): ‘‘tenakho panavuso, samayena Subhaddo nama vuddhapabbajito 

“tassam parisayam nisinno hoti. Atho kho, avuso, Subhaddo vuddhapabbajito 
te bhikkhi etad avoca: ’alam, dvuso, ma socittha; ma paridevittha. Sumutta 
mayam tena mahasamanena; upadduta ca mayam homa—idam vo kappati, 
yam no icchissama na tam karissama’ ti. handa mayam, avuso, dhammam 
ca vinayam ca sahgayama.’’ The interlocutor who makes this remark is 
identified variously in the literature of the different schools as either Sub- 
hadda (Theravada), Upananda (Mahisasaka, Dharmaguptaka, and Haima- 
vata schools), or anonymous (Sarvastivada, Mahasamghika); see discussion 

‘in Davidson, ‘‘Standards of authenticity’, op. cit. 

16. Scholarship on this council has been discussed by Prebish, ‘“A review 
of Buddhist councils’, op. cit., pp. 240-246. 

17. André Bareau, Les premiers conciles bouddhiques, op. cit., p. 28, 
noted in Prebish, ‘‘A review of Buddhist councils’, op. cit., p. 245. 

18 “‘Therehi, avuso Purana, dhammo ca vinaya ca sangito, upehi tam 
sangitim’ ti. ““Susangitavuso, therehi bhikkhihi dhammo ca vinayo ca. api 
ca yatheva maya bhagavato sammukha sutam, sammukha patiggahitam, 
tathevaham dharessami’ ti. Cullavagga 11.7; Vinaya-pitaka iii.290. 

19. For this list, see Nalinaksha Dutt, Buddhist Sects in India (Delhi: Motilal - 
Banarsidass, 1978), pp. 15-22; Prebish, ‘*A review of Buddhist councils”’, 
op. cit., pp. 246-247. 

20. See, for example, Wilhelm Geiger, trans., The Mahavamsa, or the 
-Great Chronicle of Ceylon (1912; reprint edition, London: Pali Text Society, 
1964), p. lix. . 

21.M. Hofinger’s study, Etude sur la concile de Vaisali (Louvain; Bureaux 
de Museon, 1946), was the first to attempt to debunk the theory that the 
first schism took place at the council of Vaisali. = 

22. Among the most exhaustive treatments of these five points is Janice 
J. Nattier and Charles S. Prebish, ‘‘Mahasamghika origins: the beginnings 
of Buddhist sectarianism’’, History of Religions 16 (1977), pp. 250-257. 
Mahadeva’s fifth point adumbrates the debate concerning sudden and 
gradual enlightenment that is of vital concern to several of the Asian traditions 
of Buddhism, and figured in the epic debate between the Indian gradualist 
and Chinese sudden enlightenment traditions that is supposed to have 
occurred at the ‘“‘Council of Lhasa’’. 

23. Nattier and Prebish, ‘‘Mahasamghika origins’, op. cit., pp. 238-239. 


576 ‘ -  BNCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Based on internal text-critical evidence noted by modern scholars of the 
Vinaya-pitaka, such as Bareau, Pachow, Hofinger, Frauwallner, and Roth, 
these scholars show that the Mahasamghika Vinaya was the most ancient 
and conservative of the Vinaya recensions, and the schism with the Sthavira- 
vadins seems to have been prompted by attempts of the Elders to expand 
the Saiksadharma sections of the Vinaya; see ibid., pp. 268-270. 

24, Mahavamsa v.278; Wilhelm Geiger, trans., The Mahavamsa or The 
Great Chronicle of Ceylon, op. cit., pp. 49-50. 

25. The attribution to this sect of the Sammitiyanikayasastra, which is 
available only in Chinese translation (71649), has been challenged by Thich 
Thien Chau, ‘‘The literature of pudgalavadins’’, Journal of the International 
Association of Buddhist Studies 7 (1984), p. 8. 

26. Bareau, Les premiers conciles bouddhiques, op. cit., pp. 115-118. 
See the outline of this council in Prebish, “Buddhist councils’, op. cit., 
pp. 253-254. 

_ 27. According to the Pali Mahavamsa (ca. 6th century) xii; Geiger, 

Mahavamsa, pp. 82-87. 

28. Mahavamsa xiii; Geiger, Mahavamsa, pp. 88-90. 

29. Cf. Geiger, Mahavamsa, pp. 39-50. 

30. P.L. Vaidya, ed., Divyavadana, Buddhist Sanskrit Texts Series, no. 
20 (Darbhanga: Mithila Institute, 1959), notably avadanas nos. 26-29. 

31. See Geiger, Mahavamsa, pp. 32-50 passim. 

32. For accounts of the Third Council of the Sarvastivadins see Bareau, 
Premiers conciles, op. cit., pp. 112[?]-133; for the compilation of the 
Mahavibhasa, see infra. 2 

33. Pe Maung Tin, trans., The Expositor (1920; reprint ed., London: Pali 
Text Society, 1976), pp. 18-21. 

34, Vaidya, ed., Divyavadana, p. 258. 

35. Pe Maung Tin, trans., The Expositor, pp. 20-21. a 

36. Pe Maung Tin, trans., The Expositor, p. 21. - 

37. Pe Maung Tin, trans., The Expositor, p. 2. 

38. Pe Maung Tin, trans., The Expositor, pp. 6-8. 

39. Sphutartha Vyakhya, p. 12. For sources on the Uddnavarga, by 
Dharmatrata (ca. 2nd cent. A.D.), see Maurice Winternitz, History of Indian 
Literature (Calcutta: University of Calcutta Press, 1933), vol. 2, p. 237; 
and for Dharmatrata, see the summary in Charles Willemen, trans., The 
Essence of Metaphysics, Publications de l'Institut Belge des hautes études 
bouddhiques, series études et textes, no. 4 (Bruxelles, 1975), pp. xiv-xv. 

40. Jean Przyluski, Le Council de Rajagrha, Buddhica, no. 2 (Paris: 
Librairie Orientaliste Paul Geuthner, 1926), pp. 201, 303. 

41, Przyluski, ibid., pp. 229-231. The approaches to legitimation adopted 
by the Theravadins and Sarvastivadins has received extensive treatment in 
Davidson, ‘‘Standards of authenticity’’, which may be consulted for further 
references. 

42. Sphutartha, p. 11. 

43. Dighanikaya iii.128; Rhys Davids, trans. Dialogues of the Buddha, 
Sacred Texts of the Buddhists vol. 2, p. 120. 

44. For a complete explanation of these thirty-seven items, see Rhys 


NOTES 577 
Davids, The Dialogues of the Buddha, ibid. pp. 128-130 n. 2. 

45. See, for example, the suttas included in Vibhangavagga of the Maj/jhr- 
manikaya. Cdlakamma-vibhatiga, Mahakamma-vibhanga, Saldyatana- 
vibhatiga, Uddesa-vibhatiga, Arana-vibhatiga, Dhatu-vibhanga, Sacca- 
vibhanga and Dakkhina-vibhanga. 

46. The Nidanasamyutta (ii.1-132) includes several sdtras dealing only 
with dependent origination. The Dhatusamyutta(Samyutta ii.140-177) deals 
with all kinds of elements and gives their traditional definitions. 
The Khandhasamyutta (Samyutta iii.1-180) discusses details relating to all 
the aggregates. The Sa/a4yatanasamyutta (Samyutta iv.1-172) deals with the 
way in which the three marks of existence apply to the sense-fields. The 
Sariputta (Samyutta iti.235-240) and Moggallana Samyuttas (Samyutta 
iv.262-280) are long discourses on the form and formless concentrations, 
The AsamkKhatasamyutta (Samyutta iv.359-373) deals with nirvana. The 
Mahavagga, the last book of the Samyuttanikaya, deals with the path. Finally, 
there are seven separate samyuttas dealing with the seven categories of 
dharmas included in the bodhipakkhiyadhammas. 

47. See, for example, the Saccavibhanga-sutta and Uddesavibhariga-sutta, 

48. Pe Maung Tin, trans., The Expositor, p. 3. _ 

49. A.L. Basham, History and Doctrines of the Ajivikas (London, 1951), 
p. 75 has suggested that this is instead a reference to the death of Makkhali 
Gosila. 

50. T.W. Rhys Davids, trans. Dialogues of the Buddha, Part Il, Sacred 
Books of the Buddhists, vol. 14 (1921; reprint ed., Pali Text Society, 1977), 
p. 199. 

51. Takakusu Junjiro, ‘‘On the Abhidharma Literature of the Sarvas- 
tivadins’’, Journal of the Pali Text Society 57 (1904/1905), pp. 99-101. 
As Takakusu notes, however, the contents of the dharma-lists included in 
the two texts are usually different. 

52. Majjhimai.472. 

53. Majjhima-Atthakatha iii.185. - 

54. Anguttarai.117. . 

55. See references cited in Edgerton, Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Dictionary, 
Volume 2: Dictionary (Delhi 1970), p. 428, s.v. “‘mdatrka’’; Divyavadana, 
p. 18. 

56. These mdtikas are listed in Nyanatiloka Mahathera, Guide through 
the Abhidhamma-Pitaka (1938; reprint ed., Kandy: Buddhist Publication 
Society, 1971), pp. 6-11; they have received extensive treatment in Nyana- 
ponika Thera, Abhidhamma Studies. Researches in Buddhist Psychology 
(1949; reprint ed., Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society, 1976), passim. 

57. Dhammasangani 1309. Edward Muller, ed., Dhammasarigani (1885; 
reprint ed., London: Pali Text Society, 1978), p. 226; Caroline Rhys Davids, 
trans., A Buddhist Manual of Psychological Ethics (London: Royal Asiatic 
Society, 1900), pp. 341-2. 

58. Digha iii.212-214; Rhys Davids, trans. Dialogues of the Buddha, op. 
cit., pp. 205-207. 

59. Nos. 1-18 of this chart appear in the first KoSasthina; nos. 19-21 
are taken from the third Kosasthana. 


578 : ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


60. Prahlad Pradhan, ed., Abhidharmasemuccaya, Visvabharati Studies 
12, 1950. 

61. A.K. Warder, ‘‘The Matika’’, in A.P. Buddhadatta and A.K. Warder, 
eds., Mohavicchedani: Abhidhammaméatikatthavannana (London: Pali Text 
Society, 1961), Introduction, p. xx. 

62. Warder, Mohavicchedani op. cit., Introduction, pp. xx-xxi, and see 
discussion pp. xxi-xxiii. 

63. A cogent summary of these three stages of development of Pali 
Abhidhamma literature may be found in Mizuno Kogen, ‘‘Abhidharma 
literature’, Encyclopedia of Buddhism, ed. G.P. Malalasekera (Ceylon: 
Government of Ceylon, 1961), fascicule A-Aca, p. 75-80. See also K.R. 
Norman, Pali Literature Wiesbaden 1983. 

64. It has also been suggested that the text came to be included in the 
Abhidhammapitaka because it served ‘‘to define the limits of philosophical 
discourse’’; see A.K. Warder, ‘“‘The concept of a concept’’, Journal of Indian 
Philosophy | (1971), p. 185. 

65. Nyanatiloka, Guide through the Abhidhamma-Pitaka (1938; rev. ed., 
Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society, 1971), p.61.  - 

66. Kathavatthu xvii.6; Shwe Zan Aung and C.A.F. Rhys Davids, trans., 
Points of Controversy (1915; reprint ed., London: Pali Text Society, 1979), 
p. 318. Nyanatiloka (Guide, op. cit., p. 81) suggests that Vetulyaka is 
corruption of Vaspulya, alluding to the Vaipulya-sitras of the Mahayanists. 

67. For an extensive bibliography on the “‘Council of Lhasa” and a. 
discussion of this issue of sudden and gradual enlightenment in Indian 
Buddhism, see Luis O. Gomez, ‘‘Indian materials on the doctrine of sudden 
enlightenment”’, in Early Ch’an in China and Tibet, ed. Whalen Lai and 
Lewis R. Lancaster, Berkeley Buddhist Studies Series, vol. 5, pp. 393-434 
(Berkeley, 1983). 

68. See discussion in H.N. Randle, indian Logic in the Early Schools 
(London, 1930), pp. 13-15. 

69. For a discussion of each of these twenty-four paccayas, see Nyanati- 
loka, Guide, op. cit., pp. 117-127. 

70. At 159, 160, 169, 324. 

71. The most extensive discussion on the term bhavariga appears in E.R. 
Sarathchandra, Buddhist. Psychology of Perception (Colombo: Ceylon 
University Press, 1958), pp. 75-96, who cites also the Milindapattha trea- 
tment of the term; see also O.H. de A. Wijesekera, ‘“Canonical references 
to bhavariga’’, Malalasekera Commemorative Volume (Colombo, 1976), 
pp. 348-352. 

72, Mizuno Kogen, “‘Abhidhamma literature” , Op. cit., p. 67. 

73. A.K. Warder, Introduction to Path of Discrimination, (Patisambhi- 
damagga), trans. Bhikkhu Nanamoli (London: Pali Text Society, 1982), p. 
x1. 

74. For an elaborate discussion of the chronology of the text’s evolution, 
see A.K. Warder, Introduction to The Path of Discrimination, ibid., pp. 
XXiX-XXXiX; its place in the Abhayagirivasin is discussed at p. xl. Much 
material on the philosophy of the Patisambhidamagga and its place in 
Abhidhamma philosophy may be found passim throughout his Introduction. 


NOTES . 579 

75. For references to the appearance of these ten knowledges in Pali 
materials, see Warder, Introduction to Path of Discrimination, ibid., p. xxi. 
For the term gotrabhi, see D. Seyfort Ruegg, “Pali gotta/gotra and the term 
Gotrabha in Pali and Buddhist Sanskrit’, in Buddhist Studies in Honour 
of LB. Horner, ed. L. Cousins, et al., pp. 119-210 (Dordrecht: D. Reidel 
Publishing Co., 1974); the Patisambhidamagga treatment of the term 
appears in Path of Discrimination, pp. 200-202. 

76. For the relationship between these two texts, see Nanamoli Thera, 
‘‘Translator’s Introduction’’, The Guide, op. cit. 

77. Aniguttara 1.36, iv.203. ; 

78. For detailed treatments of these two books, see George D. Bond, 
The Word of the Buddha: The Tipitaka and Its Interpretation in Theravada 
Buddhism (Colombo: M.D. Gunasena, 1982); and Bond’s “The gradual path 
as a hermeneutical approach to the dharma in the Netti Pakarana and 
Petakopadesa’’, in Buddhist Hermeneutics, ed. Donald Lopez (Honolulu: 
University: of Hawaii Press, forthcoming). 

79. For specifically Sarvastivada ideas that were adopted by the Maha- 
yanists, see Hirakawa Akira, “‘The rise of Mahayana Buddhism and its 
relationship to the worship of the stpas’’, Toyo Bunko 22, 1963, pp. 59-69 
(full article, pp. 57-106), translated Taitetsu Unno. 

80. These members are listed at Fukuhara, Abhidatsuma ronsho, pp. 
174-177, where also is clarified its distinction from the forty-member 
matrka included in the earlier translation of the J#anaprasthdna. 

81. For early Sarvastivada activities in Mathura, and especially the contri- 
bution of their patriarch, Upagupta, none of whose works survive, see 
Nalinaksha Dutt, Buddhist Sects in India, op. cit., pp. 126-128. For inscri- 
ptional evidence to the Sarvastivada vihdras in Mathura, see Klaus L. Janert, 
Heinrich Luders: Mathura Inscriptions (Gottingen: 1961). 

82. For the bahirdesakas, see Kimura Taiken, AbAidatsumaron no kenkyu, 
p. 213; Watanabe U., Ubu Abhidatsumaron no kenkyu p. 124; Charles 
Willemen, trans., The Essence of Metaphysics, p. xxii. 

83. Dutt, Buddhist Sects, op. cit., pp. 136-137. 

84. Junjiro Takakusu, /-tsing’s Record, pp. xxii-xxiv. Another Chinese 
pilgrim, Fa-hsien (travelled to India A.D. 399-414) refers to ‘‘followers of 
Hinayana’’ predominating in several of central Asia kingdoms; see James 
Legge, trans., A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms (1886; reprint ed., New 
York: Dover Publications, 1965), passim. While it is unclear to which specific 
school these followers belonged, certainly many would have been Vaibhasika 
adherents. 

85. Jianaprasthana, T 26.887a221-22; see discussion in Takakusu, 
“‘Abhidharma literature’, op. cit., p. 78. For extensive references to 
secondary materials on this division, see Willemen, Essence, op. cit., pp. 
191-192 n. 111. 

86. T 26.514a7. 

87, See discussion in Fukuhara, Ubu Abhidatsuma, p. 109. 

88. Watters, Yuan-chwang, vol. 1, p. 294. 

89. Etienne Lamotte, trans., Le traité de la grande vertu de sagesse 
(Mahdaprajfiaparamitopadesa), vol. 3 (Louvain, 1970), p. xx; Erich Frau- 


580 ; ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


wallner, ‘“Abhidharma-studien”’, Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Stida- 
siens 15 (1971), p. 71; see discussion in Willemen, Essence, op. cit., p. 


xix. 

90. Sphutartha Abhidharmakosavyakhyd ed. U. Ogihara (Tokyo, 1971), 
p.ll. 

91. Fukuhara Ryogen, Ubu Abhidatsuma ronshe no kenkyu (Kyoto, 
1965), pp. 102-219. 

Sakurabe Hajime has proposed three major stages in the development 
of the Sarvastivadin Abhidharma literature. First was the Saigitiparyaya and 
Dharmaskandha, the primitive style of which was evocative of the Agamas. 
This was followed by a fivefold second stage: (a) Vijidnakaya, Dhatukaya, 
and Prajfiaptibhasya, (b) Prakaranapada; (c) Jianaprasthana and Arya- 
Vasumitrabodhisattva-Sangitisastra; (d) the various Vibhasas, and (e) Abhi- 
dharmamrta of Ghosaka. This was followed by Abhidharmahrdaya of Dha- 
rmasti, Dharmatrata’s Samyuktabhidharmahrdaya, culminating in Vasuba- 
ndhu’s celebrated Abhidharmako§ga. See Sakurabe Hajime, Kusharon no 
Kenkyu p. 42 ff, 50 ff.; Sakurabe’s position has been summarized in 
Willemen, Essence, p. xxii. 

Mizuno Kogen (‘‘Abhidharma literature’, op. cit., p. 69) has also divided 
the several canonical texts into three similar groups. He places in his earliest 
group the Sangitiparyaya, Dharmaskandha, and Prajnaptibhasya, the 
Vijhanakaya and Dhatukaya in the middle; and Prakaranapada and diiana- 
prasthdna in the latest group. 

All of these various chronologies must be considered tentative, and 
information that may be gleaned from stylistic considerations or passages 
quoted from other works will have to be taken fully into account in order 
to make a more definitive determination. 

92. For a chart of the number of dharmas included in each chapter, see~ 
Fukuhara, Ubu Abidatsuma, p. 106. = 

93. T 26.463a 6-7. 

94. T 26.435b. 

95. See also the listing of these seven types in Pradhan, ed., Abhidharma- 
kosabhasya, p. 380. 

96. For a chart of the contents of the three texts, see Fukuhara, pp. 
110-112. 

97. See Abhidharmakosa, pp. 54 ff for discussion on the reasons for 
adopting the former order; and cf. Visuddhimagga. 

98. Digha 27, Hsia-yian ching, Dirghdgama, sitra no. 5. 

99. T 32.173-22S. 

100. Fukuhara, p. 124. 

101. For the scholarly debate on this point, see Fukuhara, Ubu Abidat- 
suma, p. 129. 

102. See Hsuan-tsang’s Hsi-yu chiS, T. 51.898c. 

103. This according to Fukuhara, pp. 130-131, citing Akanumi Chizen, 
p. 157b. 

104. T 26.5319 ff. 

105. This Maudgalyayana, the namesake of one of the chief disciples of 
the Buddha, is otherwise unknown. According to Fukuhara (p. 131), he was 


NOTES ‘ $81 


a follower of the Mahasamghika school, but Fukuhara provides no substantia- 
tion for his surmise. It may be recalled in this connection that Maudgalyaya- 
na’s name figures prominently in the AbhidharmakoSa in the debates conce- 
rning the reality of the three times. There, itis stated that certain parivrajakas, 
having _killed Maudgalyayana with cudgels, sub- 
sequently claimed that their actions would have no consequence in the future 
because they occurred in the past. In order to correct this false view regarding 
the potency of karman, the Buddha then is said to have declared, ‘‘Past 
karman does exist’’. These words thus served as the source for the debate 
between the Vaibhasikas and Sautrantikas concerning the reality of the three 
times. The relevance of the name Maudgalyadyana in connection with the 
claim in this passage of the Vijnanakaya that only the presentexists is perhaps 
to be traced to the ambiguities present in this tale. 

106. Chii-she lun chi20, T41.310a19-20. 

107. Its discussion is summarized at Fukuhara, pp. 133-134, citing 
Vijnanakaya, T. 26.353b. ff. 

108. T 26.537a ff. 

109. T 29.157a fff. 

110. As, for example, at T 27.41a. 

111. T 26.547b. 

112. Further clarification of the meaning of past and future is found in 
the Vasumitrasarigitisastra (T 28.795b), which excerpts the material by 
Vasumitra on threé times that appears in the Vibhasd, and clarifies that where 
there is the samanvagama (=prapt) of a dharma, that dharma exists, but 
where there is asamanvagama (=aprapti), it does not. Noted Fukuhara, pp. 
136-137. 

113, Fukuhara, p. 153. 

114. These two recensions are composed in Fukuhara, p. 154. 

115. T 28.98-100. 

116. 7 28.995-998. The texts have been reconstructed into Sanskrit first 
by N. Aiyaswami Sastri, ‘‘Paficavastuka Sastra and Vibhasa’’, VisvaBharati 
Annals 10 (1961), pp. 1-54; and later by I. Imanishi, ‘“‘Das Paficavastukam 
und die Paficavastukavibhasa@’ , Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenscha- 
ften in Gottingen, I Philologische-Historische Klasse (Jahrgang, 1969). 

117. Fukuhara, p. 156; Aiyaswami ( ‘‘Paficavastuka’’, p.in. 1) suggests 
that the Paficavastukavibhasa is adopted from the Prakaranapada, with only 
minor variations. 

118. T 26.501a-b 

119. T 26.804c 25-27. 

120. T 26.494c. 

121. For the development of Sarvastivadin dharma-classifications, see 
Fukuhara Ryogon, “‘Shoho bunrui no shiteki tenkai’’ [The historical deve- 
lopment of dharma-classifications], Ryukoku daigakyu ronshu 359 (1958). 

122. At Fukuhara, p. 155. 

123. Fukuhara, p. 158. — 

124. T 28.981c ff. 

125. See discussion in Fukuhara, ‘‘Shoho no bunrui’’, op. cit. 

126. Other traditions place him between one and five centuries after the 


582 ; ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Buddha’s parinirvana; see discussion in Fukuhara, op. cit., pp. 172-174. 

127. Pa chien-tu lun, T 1543. 

128. Fa-chih lun: T 1544. 

129. For discussion of the differences between these two Chinese re- 
censions, see Fukuhara, op. cit., pp. 218-219. 

130. Chi-i-man tsu-lun: T 26.383a 27-28. 

131. T 26.8-9. 

132. For extensive discussion on the soteriological orientation of the 
Jiianaprasthdna, see Fukuhara, op. cit., pp. 180-187. 

133. T 26.547b. 

134. T 27.79a ff. 

135. For discussion of these six Aefus and the role of the Jfdna- 
prasthana in their development, see Fukuhara, op. cit., pp. 196-217. 

136. For lists of these teachers and schools, see Mizuno, ‘‘Abhidharma 
literature’, op. cit., p. 72; Fukuhara, Ubu, pp. 223-227. It should be noted 
that the names of several of the early Sarvastivada teachers. mentioned are 
reconstructions of the Chinese transliterations, and must be considered as 
tentative. 

137. T 1545.27.1 a-b. 

138. For a summary of this account, see Fukuhara, Ubu, p. 222. 


139. Takakusu Junjiro, “‘The Life of Vasubandhu by Paramartha (A.D. , 


499-569)”, T’oung Pao S (1904), pp. 276-279. Asvaghosa’s sectarian 
affiliation is a matter of considerable controversy. E.H. Johnston (Buddha- 
carita Il, p. xiii) proposes that A$vaghosa belongs to the Bahusruttya subsect 
of the Mahasamghikas. B.C. Law (Asvaghosa [Calcutta, 1946], pp. 16-17) 
suggests that he was an adherent of the Dharmaguptaka school. Finally, de 
Jong (Indo Iranian Journal 20 [1978], pp. 125-126) hypothesizes that he 


was a follower of the Sautrantika school. See the summary of these views. 


in David Seyfort Ruegg, Madhyamaka Literature, p. 121 andn. 402. Itshould 
be noted that ASvaghosa’s connection with the authorship of th€ Mahavibhasa 
is mentioned only in Paramartha’s account. 

140, 7 1545.27. 

141. Kimura Taiken, Abhidharumaron no kenkyu, p. 248 ff. 


142, Yasomitra (Sphutarthd, op. cit., p. 58) refers to the debate over the | 


identification of a certain Bhadanta as being Dharmatrata, and suggests that 
“‘he is some other elder Sautrantika monk besides Venerable Dharmatrata’’. 
Dharmatrata I’s Samyuktabhidharmahrdayasastra (T. 28.946b15) notes 
that Dharmatrata I (a Darstantika, who was one of the four Abhidharmikas 
cited in the Mahdvibhdasa) is sometimes referred to as the Bhadanta; noted 
in Willemen, Essence of Metaphysies, op. cit., p. xv. These comments are 
probably not relevant to the identification of the Bhadanta inthe Mahavibhasa 
as Katyadyaniputra, who is the only plausible candidate in the context of a 
text that is, it must be remembered, fundamentally a commentary to the 
Jfanaprasthdna. 

143. For example, in one section of the Mahavibhasa (T 27.393a), which 
opens with the query, ‘‘What are the samskrtalaksanas?’’, the presentations 
of the views of most of the teachers begin with the stock phrase: ‘‘Ghosaka 
gives this explanation: If a dharma is....’’ For Vasumitra, how- 


NOTES Pa 4g 583 
ever, we instead find a citation that seems to be from a commentary by 
Vasumitra embedded in the text: ‘‘Vasumitra gives this explanation: ‘‘What 
are the samskrtalaksanas?. ...’’ This appears to be a quote directly from 
a text by Vasumitra himself. This is because if this were purely and 
extemporaneous oral presentation, there would have been no need to repeat 
verbatim the Vibhas4éastrin’s question that opened the discussion; indeed, 
such a requotation is not found in the citations of other teachers. 

144, Cf. T 10.46a26. 

145. Tao-an in his Preface to the Vibhasa (quoted in Ch’u-san-tsang 
chi-chi, T 55.73b-c) questions the authenticity of this attribution to Sitapani; 
see Fukuhara, Ubu, pp. 227-228. 

146. The contents of these three texts have been compared by Kawamura 
Kosho, Abidatsuma ronsho no shiryoteki kenkyu (Kyoto, 1974). 

147. T 27.116b16-24. 

148. 7 28.860c. 

149. T 27.809b. 

150. T 27.106c-107A. 

151. Kathavatthu 8.7, cf. Kathavatthu 17.3. 

152. Abhidharmakosa 4.1. 

153. T 27.690a 23-24. 

154. For an outline of the attitude toward the antarabhava held by the 
various Buddhist sects, see Alex Wayman, ‘“The intermediate state dispute 
~ in Buddhism’’, in Buddhist Studies in Honour of IB. Horner, L. Cousins 
et al., eds. (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1974), pp. 227-239. 

155. T 27.220a. 

156. See T 27.146c ff.; Fukuhara, pp. 252-253. 

157. For this relationship, see the extensive discussion in Fukuhara, pp. 
248-259. 

158. On the.two types of doubt, see T 27. 386b, Fukuhara, p. 248; for 
a different listing of four kinds of doubt, see 7 27.68c, Fukuhara, p. 249. 

159. Cf. T 27.146c. 

160. See Fukuhara, pp. 287 ff. 

161. T 28.33b4-21, where they are listed as {1} parihdnadharman 
(t’ui-f'a); (2) cetanadharman (ssu-fa); (3) anuraksanadharman (hu-fa), (4) 
_sthitikampya (ju-fa); (5) prativadhanadharman (t’ung-ta); (6) akopyadha- 
rman (pu-tung-fa). 

162. T 28.585a ff., quoted in Fukuhara, pp. 289-290. 

163. T 28.147b79-c4. 

164. For Fukuhara’s treatment of.Ghosaka’s scheme, from which the 
_ expository descriptions of the significance of each state included above has 
been drawn, and his discussion of the relation between this scheme and 
the Yogacara, see Fukuhara, pp. 278-280. 

165. T 28.389c25. 

166. T 28.389c 24-26. 

167. 728.389c28-390a5. The tree-shadow simile may also be found in 
the Abhidharmakosa 1, T 29.3a. 

168. See discussion in Fukuhara, pp. 317-8, who cites no reference hon 
the Vibhasa. 


584 ‘ ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


169. T 32.266a ff. 

170. T 28.389c. 

171. 7 32.266a. 

172. Abhidharmakosa1.15. 

173. See Samayabhedopacaracanacakra. 
174. T 28.888b. 

175. T 29.543c. 

176. T 28.688c-689a. 


4. AFEW EARLY ABHIDHARMA CATEGORIES 


1. Johannes Bronkhorst, ‘‘Dharma and Abhidharma’’, Bulletin of the 
School of Oriental and African Studies 48.2, 1985, p. 318. 

2. Bronkhorst, ibid., p. 30S. 

3. Ibid. 

4. Ibid., p. 318. 

5. Ibid., p. 309. 

6. The "Path of Discrimination. Pali Text Society Translation Series 43, 
London 1982. 

7. Warder, ibid., pp. xxx-xxxi. 

8. Based on Nyanaponika Thera, Abhidhamma Studies. Researches in ° 
Buddhist Psychology (Colombo 1949; Kandy 1965, 1976, 1985), pp. 
31-33. I have replaced Nyanaponika’s translations of Buddhist terms with 
those used in this Encyclopedia. 

9. R.M. Gethin, ‘‘The five khandhas: their treatment in the nikdyas and 

early Abhidhamma’’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 14, 1986, pp. 35-53. 
~ 10. Ibid., p. 36. 

11.Cf. Y. Karunadasa, “The Buddhist conception of mahabiites as primary © 
elements of matter’’, University of Ceylon Review 22, 1964, -pp. 28-47. 

12. As translated by Y. Karunadasa, ibid., P. 28. 

13. Gethin, op. cit., p. 36. 

14. Paul M. Williams, ‘Some aspects of Tangiege and construction in 
Madhyamaka’’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 8, 1980, pp. 16-17. 

15. Williams, ibid., p. 1. “ 

16. Gethin, op. cit., p. 37. 

17. O.H. de A. Wijesekere, “The concept of vififiana in Theravada 
Buddhism”’, Journal of the American Oriental Society 84, 1964, pp. 255 
ff. 

18. Wijesekere, ibid., p. 257. 

19. William Montgomery McGovern, A Manual of Buddhist Philosophy. 
Cosmology. London 1923; Lucknow 1976, pp. 101-102. 

20. “The history of the Darstantikas aftd Sautrantikas are closely inter- 
twined, with the Darstantikas as the probable precursors of the Sautranti- 
kas.” Soller Cox, *‘On the possibility of a nonexistent object of consciou- 
Association of Buddhist Studies'11. 1, 1988, p. 70. 

21. Cox, ibid., 32-33. 


NOTES . 585 


PART TWO 
"1. DHAMMASANGANI 


1. Warder, Indian Buddhism, op. cit., p. 208. 

2. Bareau in the Introduction to his French translation of Dhammasangani 
of 1951 (B19A; RB8). 

3. Warder, Introduction to his edition (with A.P. Buddhadatta) of Kassa- 
pa’s Mohavicchedani (Pali Text Translation Series, London 1961), pp. ix-xx. 

4. Other important materials pertaining to this text are as follows: 

_ Editions. by Edouard Muller, 1885 (B14; RB1); by P.V. Bapat and R.D. 
Vadekar, 1940 (RBS); by D.S. Mahathera and V. Sarman, 1960 (B19; RB9). 

Translation. into French by André Bareau, 1951 (B18A; RB8). 

Outlines or Summaries. by Nyanaponika Thera, 1949 (RB6); J. Kashyap 
gives a summary in his Abhidhamma Philosophy, Chapter It (B5072; 
RB7969) and in his Introduction to B19 = RB9. 

5. According to Frauwallner (Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Siidasiens 
15, 1971, 117-121—16, 1972, 95-117) this Cittakanda (Book One) is an 
“interpolated work’’. Frauwallner provides an extended discussion, in- 
volving comparisons with other works in our list, and a treatment of the 
meditation-path as viewed in this work. Summarizing this section, Frau- 
wallner reports that it consists of three parts: (1) an ancient psychology based 
on the distinction between good and bad psychic processes; (2) treatment 
of the neutral dharmas, a development of psychic processes and karma 
theory; and (3) an independent account of the path of meditation to liberation. 

6. For presentation of the first part of the list of dharmas in this section 
see above, pp. 124-125. 

7. Frauwallner (Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Siidasiens 16, 1972, 
118-120), considers this Book a second interpolation, and gives a short 
account. 

8. Cf. Frauwallner, ibid., pp. 121-124. 

9, Frauwallner (ibid. p. 121) suggests that this matikd and its commentary 
is an interpolation from a Pali work that corresponds to the Sangitiparyaya 
of the Sarvastivadins. 

10. K.R.Norman, Pali Literature (Wiesbaden, 1983), pp. 99-100 points 
out that Buddhaghosa considered this last section the work of Sariputta—or, 
alternatively, of the Buddha himself. The Dipavamsa says it is one of those 
texts rejected by the Mahasanghikas when they split from the Theravadins. 
Norman thinks it was included in the Dhammasangani by the time of the 
third council. 


2. VIBHANGA 


1. Erich Frauwaliner, Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Siidasiens 15, 
1971, 107 ff., provides an extended summary in German of this work. Here 
is a rough English translation of the first bit of his account: 

The Vibhanga is basically three matrices, bound together with two little 


586 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


texts, the Nanavibhanga and the Dhammahada iya-vibhango. 
The first matrix is this: 

1. 5 aggregates — 

2. 12 sense-bases 

3. (a) 6 elements (earth, etc.) 
(b) 6 elements (satisfaction, etc.) 
(c) 6 elements (realm of sexual passion, etc.) 
(d) 18 elements 

4. 4 noble truths 

5. 22 faculties 

6. dependent origination. 

-This matrix matches the third matrix of the Dharmaskandha (Chapters 
17-21),.except that the four truths are arranged differently. 

The second matrix is 
. 4 applications of mindfulness 
. 4 right endeavors 
. 4 supernatural powers 
. 7 conditions of enlightenment 
. eightfold path 
. 4 trances 
. 4 boundless states 
. 5 bases of spiritual training 
. 4 discriminations. 

This matches the first matrix of Dharmaskandha. A siinilae list—though 
not entirely the same—is found in Dhatukathd, and seems to descend from 
its earlier formulation in the Parinibbanasutta. 

The third matrix is based on the Ksudravastuka and corresponds to the © 
second matrix of the Dharmaskandha. 

2. Cf. Frauwallner, op. cit., pp. 111-112 for an analysis of this section. 


~O@MAIWAMAR WN 


3. DHARMASKANDHA 


1. Cf. (RB13) Jikido Takasaki, ‘Remarks on the Sanskrit fragments 
of the Abhidharmaskandhapdadasastra’, Journal of Indian and Buddhist 
Studies 13.1, 1965, 33-41. 

2. Fumimaro Watanabe (RB14), Philosophy and Its Development in the 
Nikayas and Abhidharma (Delhi 1983), pp. 54-55.2. 

3. Warder, Indian Buddhism, op. cit., pp. 221-222. 

4. Hajime Nakamura, Indian Buddhism, op. cit., p. 106. 

5. In KIK, Bidanbu, volume 3. 

6. J. Takakusu, op. cit., pp. 111-115. 

7. Wiener Zeitschrift fur die Kunde Siidasiens 8, 1964, pp. 73-80. 

8. The same list with a few discrepancies is found in the Prakarana-— 
pada (T. 1541, p. 663a5 ff; T. 1542, p. 733al7 ff.) 

9. Samyuktagama 30, T. 843; Samyutta 55.5 (V. 347 ff.) 


NOTES , 587 


10. Samyuktagama 30, T. 836, cf. Samyutta 55.17 (V. 365f.) 
11. Cf. Ariguttara 7.4 (IV.406) 

12. Cf. Anguttara ix.27.4 {IV.406). 

13. Samyuktégama 28, T. 796; Samyutta 45.35 (V, p. 25). 
14. S.C. Banerjee, Sarvastivada Literature, ibid., p. 66. 


6. PRAJNAPTIBHASYA 


1, J. Takakusu in Journal of the Pali Text Society 1904-05, p. 116. 
2. L. de la Vallee Poussin, ‘‘Cosmologie bouddhique’’, Etudes asiatiques 


' oubliées a l'occasion du 25e anniversaire de | 'Ecole-francaise de l’Estreme 


Orient, Volume One (Paris 1925), pp. 295-350. 

3. In Volume 6 of his translation of Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmakosa 
(revised by Etienne Lamotte), Mélanges chinois et bouddhiques 16, 1971, 
PP. XXXVii-XXXVili. 

4. Stcherbatsky, according to Takakusu, located these three chapters 
in the Tanjur Mdo, Ixii, 1-107; 107-191; 191-257. 


7. PATISAMBHIDAMAGGA 


1. Erich Frauwallner’s opinion (Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Siidasiens 
16, 1972, 124-127) is that this work is a loose series of sometimes longer, 
sometimes shorter texts dealing with various concepts. At the beginning of 
each section a key word or sutra is provided (not reflected in the summary 
here provided): the source of these in passages from the Pali canon and 
elsewhere can sometimes be traced. 


8. KATHAVATTHU 


1. There is a substantial body of critical literature available pertaining 
to the Kathavattu. : 

Discussions of the date of the KV: Dwijendra Lal Barua (B6; RB47); 
S.N. Dube (B11; RB54). 

Analyses: of the entire work by S.N. Dube, Cross Currents in Early 
Buddhism (Delhi 1980); of KV’s treatment of Mahasanghika tenets by 
Nalinaksa Dutt (B5012; RB7937, 7954); of KV’s treatment of Sarvastivada 
by Dutt (B5013; RB7861); of KV’s treatment of Sammitiya views on 
pudgala, by Dutt (B5059; RB7962); of the “‘five points of Mahadeva’ by 
Louis de la Vallée Poussin (B4; RB45); of its treatment of karma by James 
P. McDermott (B12; RB535); of the ‘‘Magadhisms’’ in the work, by K.R. 
Norman in A.K. Narain and L. Zwilling (eds.), Studies in Pali and Buddhism 
(Delhi 1979), pp. 279-287; of the section on the Pudgala by A.K. Warder 
(B10; RB52), paraphrased and sometimes expanded by Fumimaro Wata- 
nabe in Philosophy and Its Development in the Nikayas and Abhidhamma, 
ibid., pp. 156-174; on the relation of Madhyamika methods to the method 
of KV, by Shohei Ichimura (RB57); of B.C. Law’s translation of KV by C.A.F. 
Rhys Davids (B9; RBS1), and in various parts of other books and articles. 

’ Summaries: by J. Kashyap (B5072; RB7969); by Rahula Sankrtyayana 


S588 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(tr. M.L. Morin) in Journal Asiatique 1934, pp. 195-208. 
2. In his Introduction to his French translation of the Dhammasangani 
(typescript, Paris 1951). 


11. SARIPUTRABHIDHARMASASTRA 


1. Cf. Kogen Mizuno, ‘About the Sariputrabhidharmasastra’ (in Japanese), 
Kanakura-hakushi Koki-kinen Indogaku Buddyogaku Ronshu, Kyoto: 
Heirakuji-shoten, 1966, pp. 109-133. 

2. According to Erich Frauwallner (Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde 
Siidasiens 16, 1973, pp. 137 ff.) Chapters 5-10 comprise the remainder 
of the dharmas that make up the first matrix of the Vibhaiiga. Frauwallner — 
thinks parts 1-4 of this section, dealing with elements, karma, person and 
awareness, may be independent small works interpolated into our text. As 
for Sections Three and Four, on inclusions and relations among the dharmas, 
Frauwallner compares the changes wrought here on the Vibhanga with 
the comparable changes found in Dhatukaya., Section Five bears a parallel 
relation to the Pafthdna. 

3. Frauwallner, ibid., pp. 133-135, provides a summary of the contents 
of the Sériputrabhidharmasastra. We provide here an English translation of 
his account of the remainder of the work. 


14. DHATUKAYA 


1. YaSomitra, Sphutarthabhidharmakosavyakhya, commentary on karikad 
1.iii, Wogihara (ed.), (Tokyo, 1971), p. 11; Dwarikadas Sastri (ed.), 
(Varanasi, 1981), p. 25; noted Willemen, Essence of Metaphysics (Bru- 
xelles, 1975), p. XVIII; Mizuno Kogen, ‘Abhidharma Literature’, Encyclo- 
pedia of Buddhism 1 (Colombo, Sri Lanka, 1961), pp. 68-69; Takakusu 
Junjiro, ‘On the Abhidharma Literature of the Sarvastivadins’, Journal of 
the Pali Text Society 57 (1904-5), pp. 73-80. For the Chinese listing, see 
P’ukuang’s Chi-she Jun chi. 

2. K’uei-chi’s postface, p. 625c.20; Chi-she Jun chi 1, noted by Mizuno, 
‘Abhidharma’, p. 69. A list of the five Vasumitras can be found in Watanabe 
Baiyu, ‘‘Abidatsuma kaishin soluron’’, Kokuyaku issai kyé 107, Bidonbu. 
5 (Tokyo, 1932), pp. 5-6 n. 2; of these, the two most logical candidates 
would be the Vasumitra who flourished ca. 300 after nirvana (A.N.) and 
composed the Prakarana; and the Vasumitra who was one of the four major 
Vaibhasika exegetes who participated in the compilation of the Abhidharma- 
mahavibhasasastra, c. 400 A.N. 

3. Yasomitra, ibid.; and Bu-ston, Chos-hbyung, E. Obermiller (trans.), 
History of Buddhism by Bu-ston (Heidelberg, 1931), p. 49. 

4. Watanabe Baiyu, ‘Abidatsuma kaishin sokuron’, p. 1. 

S. Mizuno, ‘‘Abhidharma’’, p. 69. 

6. Sakurabe Hajime, Kusharon no kenkyu (Kyoto, 1969), pp. 42 ff. and 
50 ff.; noted Willemen, Essence, p. XXII. 

7. Fukuhara Ryogon, Ubu Abidatsuma ronsho no kenkya (Kyoto, 1965). 

8. T. 26.625c16. (Hereafter, this text will be cited by fascicle and page 


NOTES . $89 
number) 

9. K’uei-chi’s postface to T. 26.625c.18-20. 

10. Chieh-shen tsu-lun3, p. 625c1-2. 

11. Ta T’ang Hsi-yii chi 2, T 51. 881a13-16; Samuel Beal (icant ), 
Buddhist Records of the Western World! (London, 1911), p.109. 

12, Vasumitra’s authorship of both the Prakarana and Dhdatukaya is 
mentioned by P’u-kuang, Chii-she lun chi 1, ibid,; noted Mizuno, ‘‘Abhi- 
dharma”’, p. 69. 

13. Frauwallner, Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Siid und Ostasiens 8, 
1964, pp. 8-88, makes some provocative comments on this text. 

14. It will be noticed that these lists differ considerably from those given 
by Takakusu in his pioneering article, ‘Abhidharma Literature’, p. 110, 
the majority of his comments which follow about the substance and organiza- 
tion of this can now be safely discarded with the advance in our knowledge 
of this material over the past eighty years. 

15. In Takakusu’s synopsis of this second division (‘‘Abhidharma Litera- 
ture’’, p. 111), he has badly misread this verse to imply that there were 
‘*.,. 88 categories minutely discussed under 16 sections’: As we have seen 
from the above outline, this is decidedly not the case. Indeed, as the 
concluding line of the text tells us, ‘“Thus, the abbreviated exposition has 
sixteen séctions; if [these were] expounded upon in detail, there would be 
eighty-eight sections.’’ [Chieh-shen tsu-lun 3, p. 625c1-2] Takakusu’s 
confusion is probably due to the fact that Hsiian-tsang’s recension retained 
the opening verse to the Vibhajyavarga which appeared in the full-length 
recension but proceeded to abbreviate the repetitive material which appear- 
ed later. in the text. 


15. DHATUKATHA 


1. In his article in Studies in Indian Philosophy. A Memorial Volume in 
Honour of Pandit Sukhlalji Sanghvi (Latbhai Dalpatbhai Series 84; Ahmeda- 
bad 1981), p. 9. 

2. Indian Buddhism, op. cit., p. 105. 

3. Introduction to Bareau’s French translation of Dhammasarigani, op. 
_ cit., p. 27. 

4. E. Frauwallner, Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Stid- und Ostasiens 
8, 1964, p. 84. 


16. VINANAKAYA 


1. Watanabe, Philosophy and Its Development in the Niké, = and Abhi- 
dhamma (Delhi 1983), p. 187.. 

2. Watanabe, ibid., p. 197. 

3. Watanabe, ibid, p. 176. This section and the remaining three are briefly 
summarized by Frauwallner; Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Stid und 
Ostasiens 8, 1964, pp. 89-92. 

4. Watanabe, ibid., p. 176. 

5. Watanabe, ibid., p. 176. 


590 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


6. Watanabe, ibid., p. 176. 
17. PRAKARANAPADA 


1. Erich Frauwallner, Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Siid- und Ostasiens 
8, 1964, pp. 97-98, notes that Kumarajiva states in his Mahaprajnapdaramito- 
padeSa that only four chapters were Vasumitra’s work, the other four being 
written by ‘the Arhat’ from Kashmir. But which are which? Frauwallner 
thinks that it is Chapters 1-3 and 8 that are the authoritative parts, but admits 
his is only a guess. 

2. Cf. Frauwallner, ibid, p. 96. 


18. PETAKOPADESA 
1. Hajime Nakamura, Jndian Buddhism, op. cit., p. 114. 
19. NETTIPPAKARANA 


1. Carolyn A.F. Rhys Davids, ‘‘The Nettippakarana an earlier book than 
the Patthana (Maha-Pakarana)”’ ; Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 1926, 
pp. 111-113. 

2. Lance Cousins in the Journal of the Pali Text Society 1984, pp. 24-25; 
Hajime Nakamura in Indian Buddhism, op. cit., p. 114. 

3. Discussions of this text include: W. Piyananda Thera, “The Nettipaka- 
rana and the logic of interpretation’’, Mahabodhi 85, 1977, pp. 190-195; 
George D. Bond, ‘‘The nature and meaning of the Netti-pakarana’’ in A.K. 
Narain and Leonard Zwilling (eds.), Studies in Pali and Buddhism (J. Kashyap 
Memorial), 1979, pp. 29-39, and ‘‘The Netti-pakarana—a Theravada 
method of interpretation”’ in S. Balasoriya et al., eds., Buddhist Studies in 
Honour of Walpola Rahula (London 1980), pp. 16-28. % 

4. Majjhima 1.280 and elsewhere. 

5. Digha1l.123ff, cf. Anguttara I. 167ff. 


20. INANAPRASTHANA _ 


1. M. Takakusu, Journal of the Pali Text Society 1905, p. 84. 

2. Takakusu, ibid. Nakamura, Jndian Buddhism, op. cit., p. 105, tells us 
that T 1543 comprises 30 volumes of Chinese, and has been translated 
into Japanese by Giyu Nishio and Yakio Sakamoto in KIJK, Bidunbu, vols. 
17-18, while T 1544 comprises 20 volumes of Chinese translation. Taka- 
kusu, ibid., pp. 86-98, provides a lengthy summary of the two Chinese 
translations side by side to show they are essentially the same. 

3. This according to Takakusu, ibid. p. 8S. 

4. Louis de la Vallée Poussin in Volume 6 of his translation of Vasu- 
bandhu’s Abhidharmakosa, op. cit., pp. 

5. The Sanskrit translated by ‘highest worldly dharmas’ is regularly 
restored as Laukikagra. Takakusu and Banerjee, op. cit., have /okuttara-. 


NOTES : 591 


21. ABHIDHARMAHRDAYA 


1. Ch. Willemen, The Essence of Metaphysics. Abhidharmhrdaya. Bru- 
xelles 1975. 

2. Paris 1978. 

3. Leon Hurvitz, ‘‘Dharmasri on the sixteen degrees of comprehension’’, 
Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 2.2, 1979, 7-30. 

4. P. Pelliot, ‘‘Les stances d’introduction de |’Abidharmasastra de 
Dharmatrata’’, JA 217, 1930, 267-273. 

5. Hajime Nakamura, Jndian Buddhism, op. cit., p. 108. 

6. Erich Frauwallner, Wiener Zeitschrift fir die Kunde Siidasiens 15, 
1971, p. 72. 

7, Nakamura, ibid. 

8. Frauwallner, op. cit., p. 71. 

9. Frauwallner, ibid., pp. 72-73. 

10. Frauwallner in Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Siidasiens 15, 1971, 
73-102 provides an anlysis of this chapter that is a good deal longer than 
the text analyzed. Here is the gist of what he says. 

Man is afflicted by 10 contaminants in 98 varieties. The path to liberation 
consists of the display of the’ four noble truths constituting the path of 
awareness (darsanamarga) followed by a meditation of this, called the 
spiritual path (bhavandmarga, leading to the removal of these contaminants. 
When that removal is accomplished one attains the awareness of destruction 
(ksayajniana) and the awareness of nonarising (anutpadajriana), and libera- 
tion is achieved. 

Frauwallner finds this account a significant departure from the preceding 
literature. For one thing, he points out, it replaces the canonical ‘‘outflows”’ 
(asrava) with the notion of contaminants (anusaya). These latter, though not 
unknown in the older works, were usually numbered there as seven rather 
than the present 10. The change is brought about by eliminating the dis- 
tinction between sensual desire (kamaraga) and tust for being ( bhavardga) 
and replacing the single ‘‘views’’ (drst) by the 5 specific beliefs (1) that 
the body is real, (2) in extremes, (3) in false views, (4) adherence to particular 
theories, and (5) addiction to moral precepts and vows. 

In an extended theoretical reconstruction Frauwallner develops a wide- 
ranging account of what he calls “‘the new doctrine.’’ The ten contaminants 
are now classed under five headings. Four of these are the proper “‘vision’”’ 
or understanding of the four noble truths—frustration, its origin, its elimina- 
tion and the path thereto. This corresponds to what is termed the path of 
awareness. The fifth is the spiritual path. And the “‘new doctrine’’ involves 
a systematization of the myriad older categories of outflows into a set of 
contaminants. These contaminats are first identified by a vision of the four 
noble truths and then expunged by meditation on them. Frauwallner uses 
this model to approach the 98 contaminants in the three realms of sexual 
passion (kama), material (répya) and immaterial (ardpya). 

11. For an extensive analysis of the first part of this Chapter see Frau- 
wallner, ibid., pp. 82-85. 

12. Frauwaliner believes this Chapter represents a later and different 


592 ‘ ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


tradition from the previous two (ibid., p. 85). 
22, MILINDAPANHA: 


1. In addition we may note a few other discussions of this work: S.B. 
Dasgupta, ‘‘Nagasena’s popular exposition of Buddhist doctrines’’, Bulletin 
of the Ramakrishna Mission of Indian Culture 4, 1953, 188-192; Rabindra 
Nath Basu, “‘Anattavdda in the Milindapafiha’’ in H.C.Das et al., ed.s, 
Buddhism and Jainism (Bhubaneshwar 1976), pp. 178-180; James P. 
McDermott, ‘“‘MWibbana as a reward for kamma’’, Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 93, 1973, 344-347 and ‘‘Karma in the Milindapajiha’’, 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 97, 1977, 460-468; Arthur L. 
Herman, “Ethical theory in Thervada Buddhism’’, Journal of the Bihar and 
Orissa Research Society 47, 1961, 170-187. Concerning the Chinese 
translations of the work see Paul Demieéville, “‘Les versiones chinoises du 
Milindapafiha’’, Bulletin de !’Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient 24, 1924, 
pp. 1-258; J. Takakusu, ‘‘Chinese translations of the Milinda Pafiha’’, 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 1896, pp. 1-22; Edouard Specht, ‘“‘Deux 
traductions chinoises du Milindapafiho’’, Proceedings of the International 
Congress of Orientalists 9.1,'1892, 518-529. 

2. Cf. V. Trenckner, ‘‘Critical and Philological notes to the first Chapter 
(bahirakatha) of the Milinda-pafiha’’, Journal of the Pali Text See 1908, 
pp. 102-151. 


23. ABHIDHARMAMRTA 


1. Its Chinese title is A-p 7-t’an-Ju-wei-lun. Its Chinese version appears 
in Taisho 1553, its Tibetan version is Nanjio 1278. There is a Japanese 
translation by Kogen Mizuno in KIK, volume 2. 

2. E, p. 7. 

3. According to the Abhidharmakoga the Apparantakas hold this view; 
the Vaibhasikas say that only ¢rspa (i.e., raga), avidyd and prajfia can be 
considered avyakrtamilas. Cf. L. de la Vallée Pousin’s translation, op. cit., 
Chapter 5, pp. 42-43. 

4. These enumerations are not found in the Abhidharmakoéa. 

§. In a form not found in the AbhidharmakoSa 

6. Also in a form not found in the AbhidharmakosSa. 

7. Ghosaka differs from Vasubandhu in omitting apra4pt, sabhagatd and 
Jjivitendriya, whilt including prthagjanatva and deSa-, vastu- and ayatana- 
prati. 

8. The list is the same as Vasubandhu’s. 

9. This list differs from that of the AbhidharmakoSa in several respects. 
It omits pramdda andstyana, while it includes musitasmrtita, cittaviksepa, 
mithyamanaskara, mithyadhimukti, avidya(as a separate dharma, in addition 
to moha, in the sense of traidhatukajfiana), and mithyasamskara. Ghosaka’s 
list is similar to a list attributed to the ‘“Mula Abhidharma’’ by Vasubandhu. 
A discussion of the difference between the latter list and Vasubandhu’s can 
be found in the Kosa (Louis de la Vallée Poussin’s translation, op. cit., 


-~ 


NOTES : $93 
Chapter 2, pp. 161-164). . 

10. This list differs from Vasubandhu’s in that it includes mana and 
mahdmdna but omits vihimsé and mada. According to Ghosaka, these 
dharmas are of ‘‘limited’’ occurrence because they are only associated with 
manovijfdana and not with the other five (sense) consciousnesses. For the 
KoSa’s explanation of the term see Louis de la Vallée Poussin’s translation, 
op. cit., Chapter 2, pp. 164-165. 

11. These are the same in the Kosa, but they are presented in a different 
order, 

12. In a note the editor identifies these as aveniki and sadhdrana. 

13. This list corresponds to that of the AbhidharmakoSa. 

_ 14. This list is not identical to the list found in the Aarikas of the 
AbhidharmakoSa, but see de la Vallée Poussin’s translation, op. cit., Chapter 
Six, p. 261, note 4. 

15. The last two are conaidered varieties of akopyadharma in the Abhi- 
dharmakoSa, the latter being called ubhayatobhagavimukta. 

16. But others believe that it is associated with samudaydnvayajfiana. 

17. Different from that in the AbhidharmakoSa—de \a Vallée Poussin 
translation, op. cit., Chapter Seven, p. 98. 


24. MAHAVIBHASA 


1. Willemen, op. cit., Introduction. 

2. Nakamura, /ndian Buddhism, op. cit., p. 107. Takakusu, op. cit., p. 
‘119, writes ‘‘We may have to abandon the theory that the Vibhasas were 
compiled in the Buddhist council under King Kaniska. There may have 
existed several vibhasas before the compilation of the Mahavibhasa.”’ 
Takakusu provides an outline, op. cit., pp. 129-130. 

3. Willemen, op. cit., p. xix 

4. Takakusu’s outline of this appears op. cit. pp. 126-127. 

5. Ibid. 

6. According to Takakusu, op. cit. p. 124, 

7. See the outline of this by Takakusu, op. cit., p. 125. 

8. This section is translated into French by Johannes Rahder, ‘‘Le satkaya- 
drstid’ aprés Vibhasa, 8’ (B462; RB697), Mélangues Chinois et Bouddhique 
1, 1932, 227-239. 

9. The section on Bhadanta Katydyaniputra’s view is translated into French 
by Louis de la Vallée Poussin in Mélanges chinoise et bouddhique 5, 
1937-37, pp. 148-149. 

10. This Part is translated by Louis de la Vallée Poussin into French in 
Bulletin de I’Ecole Francaise d’Estreme Orient 1930, pp. 1-28. 

11. The first part of this section is translated into Freach by Poussin, 
Mélanges chinoise et bouddhique 1, 1932, pp. 74-85. 

12. This discussion of time is translated into French by Poussin, Mélanges 
chinois et bouddhique 5, 1936-37, pp. 155-157. 

13. This section is translated into French by Poussin, Bulletin d’ Ecole 
Francaise d’Extreme Orient 1930, pp. 247-250. 

14. This section is translated into French by Poussin in Mélanges chinois 


594 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


et bouddhique 5, 1936-37, pp. 8-25. 


15. This section is translated by Poussin, Mélanges chinois et bouddhique 
5, 1936-37, pp. 161-169. 


16. Poussin translated this short section into French at Mélanges chinois 
et bouddhique S, 1936-37, pp. 441-443. : 


abandoning, 224, 234, 250, 253, 254, 264, 
325, 384, 386, 393,406, 407,427, 496, 
554 

abhautika, see underived 

Abhayagirivasa sect, 97,578 

abhibhii, see mastery 

Abhidhamma, 21, 74, 82, 84, 85, 88 

Abhidhamma Pitaka, 21 ,23-26, 80-82, 84, 
88-97, 101, 472, 577, 578 

Abhidhammatthasangaha(Anuruddha), 96, 
99, 101 

Abhidhammavatara (Buddhadatta), 98,99 

abhidharma, the word, 512 

Abhidharmadipa (Vimalamitra), 101,116, 
575-577. 

Abhidharmahrdaya(Dharma&sn), 1 14,451- 
470, 580, 591-592 

Abhidharmako§a (Vasubandhu), 87, 108, 
110, 114-116, 346, 378, 489, 512, 580, 
581, 583, 584, 587, 590, 592 

Abhidharmakosabhasya (Vasubandhu), 
74, 86,93, 96, 101, 105, 106, 111,580 

Abhidharmamahavibhasa see Mahda- 
vibhasa 

Abhidharmamrta(Ghosaka), 102,489-509, 
580, 592-593 

Abhidharmapitaka (of Sarvastivadins), 102 

Abhidharmasamuccaya (Asahga), 87,379, 
578 

Abhidharmasara (Dharmasri), see 
Abhidharmahrdaya 

Abhidharmavatara(Skandhila), 108 

Abhidharmavibhasa, 102, 113 

abhidhyd, see covetousness 

abhijati, see heredity 

abhijna, see faculty, higher 

abhildsa, see covetousness 

abhimana, see pride 

abhinirhara, see endeavour 

abhinive§Sa, see insistence 

abhisamaya, see understanding, full 

Abhisamayalamkaraloka (Haribhadra) 76, 
574, 575 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


abhivinaya, 84 
abode, living place, 60, 234, 236,468,506 
absence condition, 96, 339 
absolutism, 36, 37 
absorption, 44, 233, 264 
, factors of, see meditation, factors of 
acaya, see accumulation 
Acchariyabhutadhamma Sutta,9’ 
accomplishment, 205. 
accumulated, 86 
matter, see matter, accumulated 
accumulation, 342 
of rebirths, s.v. 
acquisition-force, 94, 116, 182,377,426, 
494, 500, 513, 537, 554, 567, 581 
act-condition, 96, 338 
action (see also karma), 108, 157, 171, 185, 
209, 248, 268, 269, 285, 288, 290, 292, 
296, 387, 397,459, 460, 483, 491,496, 
551 
, bad, 171, 176, 325, 492 
, good, 207, 247, 459 
, Matter as, see matter as action 
, path of, 124, 125, 325, 492, 559 
, power born as the result of, 256, 260 
sight, 49, 50, 147, 168, 181,301,491 
activity, 232 : 
actual, 87, 132 
entity, 121, 132,376 
adaptability, 125, 139, 147, 154,323 
adbhiita, see miracle 
adept, 87, 100, 109, 182, 184, 185, 191, 
207, 223, 259, 283, 287, 383-386, 388, 
395, 414-416, 426-429, 443-447, 464- 
466, 491, 501,530, 539, 551,552, 554 
adhimukti, see resolve 
adhipati, see dominant 
adhipatya, see supremacy 
adhisthana, see (1) resolve, (2) support 
adhyatman, see internal 
adhipraya, see thought 
P. adinnadana, see stealing 
adinava, see disadvantage 


596 


admonition, 211 

adultery, 205 

advantageous path, 118 

adverting, 229, 232 

affection, 377,427, 531-534 

affliction, 182, 183, 187,228, 377,431,468 

agamas of Sarvastivadins, 24, 104, 110, 
346, 540, 555, 580 
, Chinese, 103 

age, 178 
, an, see eon 
, old, s.v. 

Aganinasutta, 104 

aggregate, 41, 42, 53, 83, 88, 89, 91, 92, 
103, 123, 126, 127, 129, 137, 140, 155, 
159, 162, 165, 166, 177, 180, 182, 187, 
220, 222, 227, 228, 236-238, 255, 263, 
266-274, 290, 304, 311, 319-321, 325, 
328-330, 338, 346, 351, 353-355, 359- 
365, 372, 374, 376, 379, 383, 391,393, 
429,447,452, 453, 469, 474, 492, 505- 
507, 515,517,523, 524, 529, 530, 533, 
540, 549, 551, 584, 586 

aging, see old age 

agitation, see excitedness 

ahamkara, see ego 

Ghara, see (1) food; (2) nutriment 

ahimsa, see nonviolence 

Ghrikya, see shamelessness 

aimlessness, 467,470 

air or wind, 41, 118, 126, 127, 143, 156, 
167, 324, 455, 456, 486 

Aiyangar, A.N.K., 569,570 

ajiva, see livelihood 

Ajivika, 6-8, 36, 571,577 

P. ajjhosana, see cleaving 

Gjniasyamindriya, see knowledge of whatis 
unknown. 

Gjnatavindriya, see knowledge, perfect 

Gjnindriya or djiiendriya, see knowledge 
that one knows 

Akanistha heaven, 192, 202, 212, 384, 
500 

Gkara, see aspect 

akasa, see space 

akaukrtya, see nonregret 

Gkimcanya, see nothingness 

aklista, see undefiled 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


akopyadharma, see factor, akopya 

akriya, see matter unmanifest 

aksara, 123 

aksobhya, see imperturbable 

akumpatva, see steadiness 

akuSala, see bad 

Glambana, see supporting object 

Alara Kalama, 13, 15, 53,484 

alcohol, 49 

alert, 193 

all-basis, see totality, element of 

rally of enlightenment, see enlightenment- 
factor 

alms, 22, 200, 531, 532 

alobha, see nongreed 

amatrajnata, see intemperance 

Ambalatthika Rahulavada Sutta,29 

amita, see measureless 

amna, see mango 

amoha, see understanding 

anabhidhya, see covetousness 

anabhisamskaravimukti, see liberation, 
conditionless 

anagamin, see nonreturner 

anagata, see future 

analysis, 74, 165,214, 339, 382, 390, 409, 
489 


Gnanda, see bliss 

Ananda, 19, 21, 49, 77, 80-82, 373, 479, 
524 ~ 

Anantakaya, 472 


Gnantarya, see noninterrupted 

anapatrapya, see disregard 

anasrava, see pure 

anatikrama, see nontransgression 

anatman, see no-self 

Gnatti, see injunction 

anavadya, see blameless 

anavastha, see regress, infinite 

Anavatapta, 80 

andha, see blind 

Andhaka, 93-95, 114, 116 

Anesaki, Masaharu, 569,570 

anger, 193, 195, 213, 323, 407 

Anguttara Nikaya, 24, 25, 55,75, 83, 92, 
249, 252, 262, 263, 271,272, 274, 277, 
278, 285, 286, 288, 292, 303, 570, 572- 
574, 577, 579, 586, 590 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 597 


anidarSana, see invisible apilapana, see repetition 
animal, 6, 426, 521, 556, 561, 563 Apparantaka, 592 
, rebirth as an, 238, 301, 369,490,526 application path, 117,547,557 

aniiijya, see unchangeableness appraisal, receptive, 553 
Aniruddha, 552 apramada, see heedfulness 
anitya, see noneternal apratigha, see nonresisting 
aniyata, see neutral aprapti, see nonacquisition 
ankuSa, see hook apratihanya, see nonreacting 
anna, see food aprativanita, see perseverance 
annihilationism, see nihilism apprehension, see doubt 
answers, 209 ; - appropriated 

anta, see end element, 453,454, 494 
antarabhava, see intermediate state factor, 86,497 

antaraya, see hindrance apramana, see boundless . 
antarmukha, see internal apranihita, see aimlessness 
antecedent condition, direct, 338,456,519,  apratigha, see unresisting 

553 araksya, see unguarded 

antidote, 517 arana, see nonconflicting 

anu, see atom arati, see discontent 
anubhava, see experiencing ardour, 171 

anudharma, 181, 183, 184 arhat, see perfected being 
anugraha, see summary candition arising, see birth 

anunaya, see attraction Arittha, 372 

anupasyana, see contemplation Ariyapariyesanasutra, 13 
anupatta, see unappropriated Grjava, see straightforwardness 
anupeksd, see nonequanimity Arjuna, 8 

anuraksana, see watchfulness Armelin,1.,451 

anurodha, see obedience ' arrangement, fourfold, 382, 390, 405,408, 
Anuruddha(1110), 101 409 

- anuSdsana, see teaching arrogance, 348, 357 
anuSaya,see(1)contaminant,(2)remorse artha, see meaning 

anutapa, see remorse P. arukupama, see cancer 
Anutika,90 ariupasamadhi, see concentration, formless 
anutkarsa, see nonexcess arupya, see immaterial 
anutpdda, see nonorigination Grya, see noble 

anuttarya, see superiority asaddharma, see bad 
anuvarta, see evolving asaiksa, see adept 

anvaya, see connection asamanvagama, seé unordered 
anxiety, see fear . asamcita, see unaccumulated 
anyonya, see reciprocal asamjna, see nonidentification 
apacaya, see elimination of rebirths asamjfitsamapatti, see absorption, 
aparimana, see immeasurable ; unconscious 
aparitta, see unlimited asamskrta, see unconditioned 
aparyaprajfia, see unincluded asamtusta, see discontent 
Gpas, see water asamvadin, see nonresponsive 
apatrapa, see modesty Asanga (350), 87 

" apatti, see offense asava, see intoxicant 


apaya, see hell Gsaya, see bias 


598 


ascertainment, 369, 429, 430, 440, 441, 
449, 498, 534, 545, 546, 554 
ascetic(ism), 6, 8, 13, 15,54, 199,223, 243, 
507 
Asia 
, Central, 101 
, East, see China; Japan 
, Southeast, s.v. 
asiddhi, see nonrealization 
Asoka (3dc. B.C.), 28-30, 76, 78, 79, 92, 
100, 265, 347, 359, 569, 570 
Asokavadana, 89 
aspects 
of existence, 220, 221 
, twenty great, 146-148, 151, 152 
aspirant, see seeker 
aspiration, see breathing 
asraddhya, see confidence, lack of 
Gsrava, see intoxicant 
GSraya, see locus 
-paravrtti, 117 
-parivrtti, 119 
Assagutta, 472 
assembly, see order 
assistance, 256 
associated (mental) factors, see awareness- 
concomitant 
association, 439-44 1,525, 543-545 
-condition, 96, 338 
assurance, way of, 293 
Astagrantha (see also Jidnaprasthana), 
108, 417 
astrology, 111 
a$ubha, see foul 
asura, 513, 567 
Gsvadana, see relishing 
' A$vaghosa, 9, 112, 582 
Atapa gods, 212 
atapin, see ardour 
atheism, 35-36 
atita, see pasttime 
atom, 127, 526, 550, 563, 564 
attachment, 180, 192, 206, 248, 273, 280, 
304, 352, 355, 368, 387, 401,407, 425- 
427,430, 446, 495, 498, 507, 528, 552, 
. 559 
___ , plane of freedom from, 394 
attainment, see trance 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


attention, 297, 321, 347, 351, 357, 360, 
363, 422, 454, 472, 494, 495 
, careless or unreasoned or false, 237, 

348, 400, 592 

attenuation, plane of, 394 

Atthakathd, 80,90, 98 

Atthakavagga, 305, 306, 308, 310, 311, 
312, 314, 316 

Atthasdalini (Buddhaghosa), 74, 80, 81,98, 
124, 573 : 

attitude, 208 

attraction, 216,441,442 

audarika, see gross 

audasinya, see indifference 

auddharya, see liberality 

auddhatya, see excitedness 

auditory 
consciousness element, 167,319 
faculty, seeear 
organ, see ear 
-organ element, 167,319 
-organ sense, 166, 318, 421, 522 

Aung, Shwe Zan, 265, 578 

ausadha, see medicine 

Avadana, 24, 25,79, 101 

Gvarana, see hindrance 

avarjana, see adverting 

avartaka, see recurring 

avasthd, see (1) finite; (2) state 

avasthana, see resolve = 

avasthika, see static 

avatarana, see descending 

avayama, see effort 

Gvenika, see unique 

aversion or hatred (see also malice), 42, 47- 
48,51, 60, 115, 117, 124, 139, 150, 157, 
159, 162, 180, 205, 206, 209, 213, 229, 
242,271,280, 294, 304, 322, 328, 377, 
382, 391,393,413, 426, 459, 495, 498, 
509, 512,514,528, 540, 543, 550, 559, 
572 
, absence of (see also sympathy), 157, 

159, 199, 321, 322, 379, 382, 531 

avetyaprasada, see faith, perfect 

Avici hell, 229, 460, 535, 549, 559, 568 

avidya, see ignorance 

avihimsd, see nonviolence 

avijnapti 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


-karman, see karma, unmanifest 
-rupa, see matter, unmanifest 
aviksepa, see undistracted 
_ Avrha gods, 212 
avrta, see convert, conversion 
avyakrta, see neutral 
avyapada, see benevolence 
awareness, 41,91, 107, 108, 124, 138-153, 
155, 171, 172, 175, 186, 206, 208, 221, 
226, 259, 263, 278, 286, 290, 296, 303, 
321,324, 325, 334, 338, 360, 364, 369, 
376-378, 420-424, 429, 430, 433,448, 
454,493, 495, 504, 513, 518-529, 531, 
535, 536, 539, 558, 560, 563 
, afflicted/unafflicted, 517,518 
-basis or locus, 140, 425, 530 
-concomitant, 91, 94, 107, 108, 115, 
116, 286, 338, 346, 376, 377, 418, 
454, 508, 509, 513, 518, 520, 524, 
526, 529, 531, 542, 558, 563, 566 
, defiled, see awareness, perverted 
-faculty, 149,518 
,higher-worldly, 148,418 
, inoperative, 152, 153 
, locus of, see awareness-basis 
, magical, 503 
, objectless, 95, 289 
, perverted, 283, 284, 542 
» Self, see self-awareness 
, sensory, see perception 
, unafflicted, see awareness, afflicted/ 
unafflicted 
dyatana, see (sense-)basis 
ayudha, see weapon 
Ayurveda, 536 


backsliding, 14, 93, 116, 117, 119, 190, 


205, 232, 271, 288, 382,390,405, 409 


419, 444-446, 484, 492, 514, 515, 534, 
544, 545, 562, 566, 568 
of aperfected being, see perfected being, 
falling away 

Bactria, 100, 451,516,525, 554 

bad (see also unpleasant), 40, 51,91, 115, 
196, 201, 214, 224, 244, 334, 540- 
543 
action, s.v. 
factors, 86, 87, 107, 149-151, 157, 172, 


599 


173,240, 325, 327, 339-341, 435-449, 
453, 497, 507 
badhidhd, see external 
BahirdeSaka sect, 100 
bahirmukha, see external 
BahusSrutiya, 94, 98, 582 
bahya, see external 
bala, see (1) power, (2) childish 
bandha, see (1) bond; (2) bondage 
Banerjee, S.C., 203, 417, 587,590 
Bapat, P.V., 585 
Bareau, André, 77-79, 123, 137, 265, 337, 
i 359, 569, 574-576, 585, 589 
Barua, Dwijendralal, 587 
basis 
all- ,s.v. 
for success, see success, basis for 
sense-, 83, 88, 89, 91, 92, 103, 105, 
114, 118, 130, 140, 170, 182, 187, 
189, 212, 220, 222, 232, 236, 237, 
243, 259, 266-268, 274, 286, 330, 
332, 346, 351, 355, 374, 378, 379, 
429, 437, 439, 494, 496, 529, 540, 
549, 596 
Basham, Arthur L., 577 
bashfulness, see shame 
Basu, Aravinda, 381 
Basu, Rabindra Nath, 592 
bauddha, see enlightened 
Beal, Samuel, 588, 589 
beautiful object as meditative device, 144 
becoming, 155,530 
behavior (see also restraint) 229, 310 
being, see existence 
forms or abodes of, 220, 222 
Beluva, 19 
Benares, see Varanasi 
benevolence (see also friendship), 49, 51, 
147, 167, 205, 206, 209, 240, 249 
Bhadanta, see Katyayaniputra 
Bhadrayanika, 93 
Bhagavadgita,8 
Bharadvaja, 481 
bhautika, see derived 
-ripa, see matter, derivative 
bhava, see existence 
bhava, see becoming 
bhavanga, see life-continuum 


600 


bhavani, see practice 
Bhavaviveka (550), 22, 569 
bhaya, see fear 
bhiksa, see alms 
bhiksu, see monk 
bhoga, see enjoyment 
bhumi, see stage 
bhita, see primary 
bias, 236, 255 
, latent, 289 
Bihar, 14, 19, 20 
bija, see seed 
bile, 486 
Bindumati, 479 
birth, 114, 168, 171, 220, 268, 311, 378, 
383, 424,431,456, 490, 494, 496, 509, 
$22, 523 
-s, knowledge of previous and future, 
14, 55, 176, 182, 190, 207, 217, 
225, 284, 383, 385, 411, 501, 522, 
529, 533, 535, 556, 563, 564 
-s, knowledge of others’, 182, 385 
, the term, 316 
, ways or type of, 210, 490, 491, 561 
bisexuals, 526 
blamelessness, 248, 251,256 
blameworthiness, 196,248 
blind person, 194 
bliss, 41, 64, 70, 226, 251 
Bodh Gaya, 14 
bodhi, see enlightenment 
tree, 14, 18,479 
Bodhidharma, 56 
Bodhicaryavatarapaiijika (Prajiiakaramati), 
570 . 
bodhisattva, 51, 52,93, 104, 117,283, 304, 
482, 516, 522, 532, 539, 543, 548, 
556, 566, 568 
The Buddha as, 11, 12 
, the word, 9 
Bodhiyaéas, 375 
body, 45, 52, 171, 206, 263, 267,274, 319, 
420, 448, 496 
» Parts of the, 126, 220 
, subtle, 5 
-witness, see witness, bodily or eye- 
bond (see also congruity), 132, 160, 398, 
412, 435, 448, 462, 492, 498 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Bond, George D., 70, 71, 381-416, 573, 
579, 590 
bondage, 116, 153, 209, 250, 377, 500, 
501, 553 
boundless sense, 503 
states, 89, 132, 142, 144, 174, 186,207, 
208, 413,447, 502, 530, 552, 567, 586 
Brahma gods, 215 
brahma, 182, 476, 552, 555, 556 
Sahampati, 73, 483 
, world of, 68, 229, 260 
brahmacarya, see religious life 
Brahmakayaka god, 215 
brahmaloka, 437, 462, 468, 542 
Brahman, 75 
brahmana, see Brahmin 
Brahmaraja, 522 
brahmavihara, see meditation, Brahma- 
vihara 
Brahmin, 199, 243, 247, 248, 269, 483 
breath, vital, 472 
breathing, 181, 332, 425, 467, 502, 530 
mindfulness of or meditation on, 239 - 
242, 250, 530 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, 570, 571 
bright color, see white 
Bronkhorst, Johannes, 121, 122,584 
Bucknell, Rod, 573 
buddha , 117,271,274, 302, 385,397,415, 
422, 531,532,537, 542,547,556, 561, 
562 = 
, body of a, 547, 551, 559, 567 
, the word, 9 
Buddha, Gautama, 3-57, 111, 181-183, 
200, 254, 271, 302, 307, 324, 367, 368, 
390, 404, 465,487,521, 530, 533, 534, 
539, 545, 569, 585 
*s powers, 279-280, 411 
-s words, 305 
Buddhacarita (ASvaghosa), 9, 582 
Buddhadatta(425),99 
Buddhadatta, A.P., 578, 585 
Buddhadeva (100 A.D.), 110-112, 512, 
$13,516,527, 528, 550, 562, 563, 565 
Buddhaghosa (425), 25, 97,99, 101, 108, 
124, 204, 265, 305, 312, 337 
Buddhagupta, 512 
Buddharaksa, 110 


GLOSSARY -INDEX 


Buddhavarman (437), 113,511 
buddhi, see awareness 
Burford, Grace G., 305, 316 


- Burma, Burmese, 21,99, 219, 403 


burning, burned, 86 

Bu-ston, 203, 217, 588 

Buswell, Robert E. Jr., 73-119, 345-358, 
511-568, 574 : 


Caitta, caittasika, see awareness-concomi- 
tant 
cakra, see wheel 
cakravartin, see wheel-turner 
caksus, see eye 
calculated cessation, see cessation, calculated 
calculation, 163,205,231 
calendrics, 111 
calmness, see tranquility 
cancer-minded, 194 
Candala, 198,523 
Candrakirti (640), 570 
canker, 251 
carana, see conduct 
career, 434, 539 
Carpenter, J.E.,574 
carya, see career 
catalepsy,71 
catechism, 84 
category, 99, 378, 379, 381, 388-393, 400, 
404-410 
Catuma, 483 
Caturmaharajakayika gods, 215,490 
catuskoti, see tetralemma 
cause, causation, 96, 104, 106, 153, 176, 
251, 295, 297, 325, 392, 420 
as condition, 334, 456, 457 
, directly antecedent, s.v. 
and effect, 8, 43, 91, 292, 565 
,8ix kinds of, 110, 113, 159,248, 422, 
423, 451, 456, 495, 508, 524-527, 
$29, 582 
, theory of, 39, 40, 88 
cessation, 117, 206, 223, 224, 232, 242, 
252, 261,262,290, 311,423,427, 428, 
475, 509, 529, 532, 533, 536 - 
-attainment or - trance, 53,55, 71,72, 
94, 232, 285, 377, 425, 465, 468, 
494, 495, 519, 535, 566 


601 


, calculated or through reflection, 95, 
204, 279, 378, 428, 452, 469, 494, 
507, 512, 532, 533, 551 
, knowledge of, 464, 500, 501, 508 
,noneternality, 428,532 
of the experience of identification, see 
identification, cessation of path (the 
third noble truth), 108, 221, 250, 
251,321,419, 420, 424, 431,551 
of perception and feeling, 53, 71,72 
-truth, see cessation path 
,uncalculated or without reflection, 95, 
204, 279, 378, 428, 453, 494, 512, 
532, 533, 551, 567 
cetahkhila, see mind, barenness of 
cetana, see (1) thinking, (2) volition, (3) will 
cetasika, see awareness, concomitant 
Ceyion, See Sri Lanka . 
chanda, see (1) desire, (2) interest, (3) will 
change, 250, 268, 456, 536, 537, 563 
of lineage, see lineage, change of 
Chachakasutta, 179 
Chandogya Upanisad, 571 
Channa, 11 
Ch’an Buddhism (see alsodhyana), 56,94, 
578 
characteristics, see marks, characteristic 
chariot, 472 
Chau, Thich Minh, 570, 576 
Chieh-shan tsu-lun, 589 
Chi-i-man tsu-lun, 582 
childish, 162 
China, 101,417 
Chinese Abhidharma scholars, lineageof, _ 
111 
translation, 23, 24, 27, 28, 31,84, 101, 
104, 106, 123, 179, 203, 345, 
417, 451, 471, 489, 511, 582 
Ching-mai, 102 
Chizen, Akanumi, 580 
Christ, Jesus, 3, 8,9 
Chu Fo-nien (383), 108, 417 
Ch’u-san-tsang chi-chi, 583 
Chu-she lun chi(P’ u-kuang), 105,581,588 
cintamayi, see reasoning 
citta, see (1) awareness, (2) mind 
» the word, 572 
clan-to-clan, 292, 293, 384, 464,499 


602 


cleanliness, 177,382,405 
cleansing, 240, 385 
clearing up, 382, 392, 405, 409, 410 
cleaving, 400 
clinging (see also grasping), 126, 176,209, 
216, 222, 239 
cloth, hempen, 195 
clouds, 196, 197 
cluster,.85 
cognition, representative, s.v. 
cohesion, 118, 127 
co-ideation, 290 
collection, group, 24 
color, 124, 153,421, 455, 456 
compassion, 10, 51, 132, 144, 174, 207, 
208, 236, 255, 299, 532, 552 
Competence, see proficiency 
composure, see equanimity 
compounded, 250, 251, 537 
comprehension, 99, 125, 140, 147, 163, 
171, 193,205, 225, 393, 400, 439, 467, 
502 
, lack of, 163, 349, 400 
conascence condition, 96, 338, 340 
conceit, see pride 
concentration (see also trance), 49, 51-57, 
60, 62, 63, 68, 69, 70, 72, 96, 108, 117, 
124, 139-141, 147, 149, 168, 172, 173, 
181, 183, 184, 186, 195,207, 209, 214, 
222,225, 231,232, 240,251,254, 259, 
277,292, 299, 322, 325, 338, 393, 394, 
399, 400, 411, 415,422, 429, 448, 458, 
467-470, 473, 480, 491,492, 496, 498, 
499, 501-503, 515,529, 544, 555,557, 
558, 564, 567, 568, 572 
arises with every awareness, 348, 351, 
357, 377, 454, 494, 495 
, Brahmavihara, 51,552 
, development of, 209, 398 
-faculty, 124, 138, 149, 169,243, 246, 
300, 322, 335, 387 
formless, 53,71 
, higher (-worldly), 148, 399 
, one-pointed, see one-pointed 
, path, of -61, 62, 557, 585 
,apower, 124, 139,147, 149, 208, 214, 
256, 268 
, practice of, 413, 469, 473, 565 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


, Signless, see signless meditation 
concept, 92, 189, 256, 549 
conception in the womb, 529, 530 
conceptualizing, see thought 
conciliation, 210 
concomitant awareness, see awareness- 
concomitant 
condition, 96, 113,222,251, 325, 327, 337- 
344,347, 392, 438, 439, 456, 494, 495, 
524, 527, 529, 530, 542, 543, 563, 564 
conditioned, 220, 255, 268, 269, 399, 500 
factor, 86, 87, 159, 508, 536 
relationship, see condition 
conditioning or compounded factors, 41, 
42,44, 46,91, 107, 114, 119, 129, 140, 
153, 157, 166, 168-172, 204, 206, 221, 
225, 226, 231,232, 247, 259, 300, 310, 
311, 316,318, 321, 328, 332, 353, 354, 
360, 363, 364,424, 425,447, 454-457, 
474, 490, 493, 494, 512,551 
conduct, 262, 264, 325, 493 
, g00d/bad, see ethics 
»higher-worldly, 243 
, moral, see ethics 
confidence 
-s, 467, 501, 532 
, lack of, 348, 351, 354, 358, 455 
conflicting, 87 
Confucius, 3 
congruity, 249,250,255 ~ 
conjunction, see contact 
connected 
cause, 110, 422, 456, 524, 525 
condition, 113 
factors, 286, 495, 507, 508 
knowledge, 465 
connection (see also association), 499, 500 
consciente (see also shame), 256 
conscientiousness, see shame 
consciousness, 32, 36, 41-46, 114, 126, 
128-131, 138, 140, 157, 171, 177,204, 
209, 214, 221,222, 224-226, 229, 230, 
268, 291,318, 346, 349, 350, 352, 353, 
356, 374, 376, 420, 424, 452-454, 467, 
468, 475, 490, 493, 496, 518,519, 528, 
529, 539, 549, 557, 584 
-aggregate, 153, 166, 318, 321, 328, 
354, 361, 364, 493 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


(citta), see awareness 

durations of, 505, 506 

, conditions of, 398, 412 

infinite or boundless or endless, sphere 
of, 53,66, 145, 174, 177, 208, 214, 
223, 468, 502, 552 

, mental, see representative cognition 

perfected, 56 

» perversion of, see perversion 

, States or stations of, 131, 209, 212, 


226, 237, 239, 264, 318, 321, 348, 


352, 353, 356, 372, 373 
, sense, see senses, five 
storehouse, s.v. 
, Visual, see vision 
considerateness, 163, 204 
consideration, unwise, 61 
Constantine, 28 
construction, conceptual, 433. 
construing, 405-407 
contact, 44, 114, 124, 138, 140, 148, 149, 
151, 157, 170, 171, 177,204, 212, 220, 
222,225, 230,237, 347-352, 353, 355- 
358, 360, 363, 364, 377, 399, 422, 428, 
454, 474, 494-496, 509 
contaminant, 100,255,294, 295, 333, 377, 
379, 448, 449, 456, 460-463, 494, 497, 
498, 525, 528, 540, 543, 545, 591 
contemplation, 241,247,567 
content, 516 
contentedness, 138, 142, 151, 152, 167, 
171, 200, 400, 418, 502 
-faculty, 139, 149, 152, 169, 322, 335, 
349, 351-353, 447 
contention, see spite 
continuum, time, 74 
Controversy, Points of, 265-309 
conventional, 518 
knowledge, s.v. 
(prajnaptisat), 545 
convert, conversion, 227, 382, 390, 405 
of pleasure, see pleasure, conversion of 
Conze, Edward, 18,27, 28, 31,32, 34, 37, 
569-571 
cooking, see maturation 
coordination, 382, 392, 393, 405, 410 
co-originating occurrence, 524 
correctness, 463 


603 


corruption, see wickedness 
cosmogony, 114 
cosmology, 35 
Council, Buddhist, 575,576 
, First, 20, 21, 24, 77, 80-82, 123 
, Second, 22-24, 27,77, 137 
, Third, 29, 78, 79, 90, 92, 359, 576 
course, 182, 209, 457, 490, 558 
-s of existence, see existence, courses of 
-s, woeful, 506, 526, 527, 533, 561 
courtesy, 163, 205 
Cpusins, Lance S., 337, 575, 583, 590 
covetousness, 124, 132, 149, 160, 171, 
172, 323, 400, 459, 489, 490, 534 
Cox, Collett, 121, 132, 511-568, 584 
craftiness, 193,213, 460 
craving, see desire 
criticism, 32 
crookedness, see dishonesty 
crossing over, 250 
cruelty (see also violence), 50, 167, 206 
, absence of, see nonviolence 
Cilaniddesa, 305, 313-316 
Cullavagga, 20-22, 24, 29,575 
Cunda’s food, 481, 482 


dahaka, see burning 

dahya, see burned 

dana, see gift, giving 

dark (color), 162 
as meditative device, 143, 144 

darkness, 206 

darSgana, see vision 

Darstantika school, 94, 111, 132,512,513, 
515,518, 521,523,524, 526-528, 531, 
532, 536, 537, 539-543, 545, 547, 548, 
550-555, 557-561, 564-566, 568, 582, 
584 

dart, 398, 412 

Das, H.C., 592 

DaSabhimikasitra, 115,117 

Dasgupta, S.B.,592 

Dasgupta, Surendra Nath, 571 

Dasuttara- or Dasottara-Sutta(nta), 25, 
83, 84, 97, 203, 375 

Dasuttarapariyaya, 97 

daurmanasya, see depression 

daurvacasya, see sulkiness 


604 


Davidson, Ronald M., 574-576 

death, 5-7, 11,44, 114, 168, 170, 171,175, 
176, 206, 220, 263, 268, 287, 296, 311, 
383,424, 432, 480, 482, 485, 492, 496, 
509, 522, 523, 527, 537, 555 
-less, 250, 289 
, untimely or premature, 298, 486 

debate, 206, 530 

decay, see old age 

decedent, term-curtailing, 192,202 

deceit, 193, 213, 348, 351 

defiled, 87, 423, 459, 527 

defilement (see also intoxicant), 32,54, 83, 
85,93, 94, 100, 103, 115, 116, 118, 153, 
157, 177, 187, 190, 221,227, 228, 233, 
252, 261-263, 272, 273, 278, 293, 300, 
304, 311,316, 341, 346, 348, 350, 352, 
358, 383, 390, 392-395, 397, 399, 412- 
414,415,426, 427, 430,431,452, 455, 
456, 460-462, 464, 465, 467, 469, 472, 
473,492,495, 495-497, 500, 508,514, 
515,524, 531,532, 534,536, 539, 540, 
544, 550-554, 559, 561, 565, 567, 568 

definition, see mark 

deity, see god 

de Jong, J.W., 582 

deliberation, 208, 221 

delight, 115,227, 240, 531 

deliverance, see escape 

delusion, 47, 48, 51, 124, 149, 157, 159, 
180, 199, 200, 205, 209, 229, 271,280, 
304, 391,393, 397, 407,413, 426, 427, 
433, 507, 512, 528, 531, 552 
, absence of, see understanding 

Demi€ville, Paul, 78,417,569, 592 

dependence condition, 96, 247, 338 

dependent origination, 27, 39, 43-46, 68, 
83, 89, 114, 126, 169-171, 175, 187, 
220, 225, 285, 324, 359, 362-364, 393, 
407, 424, 469, 495, 496, 529, 574, 586 

depression, 142, 167, 168, 320, 322, 335, 
349, 351, 353, 447, 496, 502 

derivative, 376 

derived, 86, 153, 156, 363 

deSana, see teaching 

descending, 382, 391, 405, 409 

designation, 162, 327, 328 
» Mere, 382, 391, 405, 409 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


»nominal, see concept 
desire, 33, 42, 44, 47, 50, 114, 141, 148, 
152, 160, 161, 168, 170, 173, 177, 180, 
186, 190, 200, 209, 212,213, 220, 222, 
225, 226, 250, 271, 273, 282, 311,338, 
350, 353, 369, 390-392, 400, 412, 414, 
432,433, 436, 439, 440-442, 467, 496, 
507, 529, 543, 592 
-conduct, 397, 398, 400, 406, 412 
for existence, 50, 204, 206, 222, 333, 
377, 591 
for immaterial existence, 69, 206, 348, 
352 
for material existence, 69,206, 348, 352 
for nonexistence, 50, 206 
(for) sensual (gratification), 50,55, 60, 
69 
, realm of sensory, 70, 130, 132, 133, 
153, 162, 170, 173, 176, 205, 206, 
211, 220, 247, 248, 260, 287, 288, 
332, 348, 352, 354, 355, 379, 408, 
414, 418, 431, 444-447, 455, 458, 
462, 490, 497, 498, 503, 508, 518, 
521, 534, 540, 550, 561, 562, 566, 
572, 591 : 
, the term, 316 
despair, see irritation 
destiny 
, knowledge of one’s, see bjrths, previous 
and future, knowledge of, 
, person of fixed or regulated, 190 
, woeful, 293 
detachment, 264, 495 
future, 87, 105, 118, 158, 165, 206, 225, 
238, 248, 256, 257, 261, 272-274, 284, 
289, 290, 318, 367, 368, 432, 439, 447, 
509 
births, see births, knowledge of one’s 
previous and future 
destruction, knowledge of, 205, 466, 500, 
508, 535, 555, 556, 591 
determination, 125, 140, 147, 149, 230, 
231, 360, 363, 364 
Deutero Isaiah, 3 
deva, see god 
Devadatta, 378, 483, 568 
Devasgarman, 102, 104 
development (see also practice, spiritual), 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


224, 230, 250, 254, 256, 264, 388, 501 
devi, see goddess 
deviation from moral rule, 163 
device, 62, 66 
, Meditative, 141-143, 216, 220, 222, 
250, 277, 283, 284 
Dhammadinna, 49 
Dhammapada, 51,272,279, 296, 310,414 
Dhammaptya, see Chu Fo:nien 
Dhammasangani, 70, 83, 85,88, 90, 91,96, 
98,103, 123-126, 132, 133, 137-166, 
337, 339, 341,359, 374, 379, 403, 472, 
577, 585 
Dhammasangani-Atthakatha, 98 
Dharadatta, 110 
dharma, 15,33, 52,53, 73,99, 177, 178, 
180, 181, 183, 184,276, 299, 303,311, 
334, 397, 400, 403-408, 413,415, 432, 
434, 464, 467,477,479, 481,504, 531, 
532, 534, 572, 574 
-ayatana, see factor-sense 
-dhatu, see factor-element 
-follower, 191,202,384, 397,438, 469, 
500, 515 
,higher-worldly, 148 
-indriya, 166, 167 
-kaya, 33, 36, 37 
-knowledge, 465, 466, 500 
-skandha, 208 
, wheel of the, 255, 373, 432 
Dharmagupta, 317 
Dharmaguptaka school, 110, 115, 119, 
123,203, 317,512,514,518, 532, 536, 
575, 582 
Dharmakirti (6400), 47 
Dharmanandin, 110 
Dharmaskandha (Maudgalyayana), 102, 
103, 107, 122, 179-187, 203, 204, 345, 
375, 580, 586, 587 
Dharmasri (Bhadanta), 45 1-470, 580 
dharmata, see essence, essential nature; see 
also law, dharmata 
the word-574 
Dharmatrata (Bhadanta) (100a.p.), 81,94, 
110-112,413,451, 550, 562, 563, 565, 
580, 582 
Dharmayasas, 317 
dhatu, see (1) element, (2) realm 


605 


Dhatukatha, 88,90,91, 123,347, 359-365, 
472, 586, 589 
Dhatukaya (Vasumitra or Pina), 102, 104, 
106, 107, 115, 345-358, 360, 378, 379, 
580, 588, 589 
Dhumika, 524, 541 
dhyana, see (1) meditation, (2) trance 
school (=Ch’ an), s.v. 
diamond-like concentration, 464,531 
diamond-minded, see thunderbolt-minded 
differentiation, 516,517 
difficulty,removalof,475 
‘Digha Nikaya, 10,24-26, 33,43, 46,49, 52, 
54, 75, 83, 92, 97, 203, 216, 276, 283, 
569, 571, 572-577, 580, 590 
dik, see direction 
Dipavamsa, 20, 29,585 
direction, 399, 412 
, plotting of, s.v. 
Dirghagama, 580 
di§, see direction 
-dlocana, see plotting of directions 
disadvantage, 386, 406, 407 
disagreeable, 294 ; 
disappearance, 260, 456 
condition, 96, 339 
disaster or loss, 205, 226, 564 
discernment, 65, 261, 262, 395 
disciple, 117,200, 259, 311,413,516, 533, 
545, 547 
-s, power of, 279, 280, 556 
discipline (see also (1) Pratimoksa; (2) 
restraint), 22, 153, 184, 407 
disconnected factor, 507, 508 
discontent, 150,205, 240 
discrimination, 89,98, 132, 133,175,219, 
230, 231, 235-237, 246, 253-255, 284, 
467, 501, 503, 505, 586 
disease, 11,206, 220, 482 
disgust, see aversion 
dishonesty, 147, 175, 180, 460 
dispassion, 232, 400 
dispensation, foundations of the, 383,413, 
414 
disposition, 205 
, latent, see trace 
-less, see aimless 
disregard, 149, 162, 163, 193, 204, 346, 


606 


349, 352-354, 400, 430, 455, 462, 534 

dissociated factor, 94, 107, 108, 116,353, 
354, 376-378, 423,454, 456, 457, 470, 
494, 519, 523, 526, 529, 540 

dissociation, 411 
condition, 96, 247, 338, 339 

dissolution, 226 

distant matter, 165 

distraction (see alsoexcitedness), 63, 133, 
592 

divine state, 207 

divya, see divine 

Divyavadana, 79, 80, 85,576,577 

doctrine, 83,405 

dogmatism, 216 

dominantcondition or factor, 96, 145, 148, 
338, 374, 415, 456, 457 

door, 447-449, 549-554 

dosa, see aversion 

double talk, 560 

doubt (see also perplexity), 22, 60, 69, 93, 
116, 171, 176, 193,214, 278, 280, 377, 
436, 447, 535, 536, 583 

dragon, 521 

dravatva, see fluidity 

dravyamat, see actual 

dream, 7, 22, 42, 303, 430, 431, 486, 506, 
536 : 

drink, 249, 433 

drsti, see view 

drugs, 49, 59 

drunkenness, 175, 180 

dubbanna, see ugly 

Dube, S.N., 587 

duhkha, see frustration 

duration, see life 
of consciousness, see consciousness, 

duration of 

durgati, see course, woeful 

duskrtya, see wickedness 

Dutt, Nailinaksha, 575,579, 587 

dvara, see door 

dveSa, see aversion 

dyad, 85 


ear, 169, 322 
, divine, 68, 234, 281 
earth, 32,41, 118, 126, 127,286, 455,456 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


-element, 156, 167, 323, 324 
-gazing, 141-143, 146 
-quake, 479 
eating (see alsoenjoyment), 22, 182, 184, 
185, 193, 433 
Edgerton, Franklin, 577 
edicts, ASokan, 29 
efficient cause, 110,423, 456, 527 
effort, 63 
shigher-worldly, 148 
, liberation through, 202 
right, 51,52, 124, 139, 168, 173, 181, 
354, 363, 400 
, wrong, 149 
ekabijin, see single-seeded 
ego (see also self), 41 
(1)-making, 400 
ekacaksusa, see one-eyed 
ekagrata, see one-pointedness 
ekatva, see unity 
ekavicika, see single-seeded 
Ekottaragama, 103,524 
Elders, School of, see Theravada 
element (see also factor), 41,92, 103, 148, 
187, 189, 205, 206, 213, 220, 255, 311, 
316,319, 324, 325, 374, 385, 391, 393, 
427,428, 437,441,447, 452-454, 493, 
494, 530, 531, 535, 549, 596 
factor, see factor-element 
, great, 109, 118, 126, 153, 163, 170, 
204, 209, 285, 297, 320, 323, 324, 
376, 392, 428, 460, 469, 525, 562- 
568 
, five, 155,212, 453 
, immaterial, s.v. 
Material, s.v. 
of consciousness, see consciousness, 
elementof 
of existence, see existence, elementof 
of totality, see totality, element of 
, sensory, see realm, sensory 
elephant, see Eravana 
elimination of rebirth, 342 
emancipation, see liberation 
embryo, 303, 530, 561 
emergence, emerging, 232,244, 245,250 
emission, nocturnal or seminal, 93, 275, 
276 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


emotionalattitude, 63. 
emptiness, 38,67, 140, 147, 152, 205,247, 
250, 257, 280, 369, 400, 429, 463, 467, 
470, 502, 564, 568 
endless, 163 
endeavor, 89,221,229, 243,246, 255, 256, 
261, 394, 398, 413, 415, 473, 586 
endowment, 282,283 
energy, 70, 124, 139, 145-147, 149, 172, 
186, 208, 214, 221,233, 249, 251,254, 
256, 259, 322, 338, 377, 379, 385, 394, 
455, 469, 473, 494, 495, 498, 499, 572 
-faculty, 124, 138, 149, 152, 169,242, 
243, 300, 322, 335, 387 
enjoyment, 286, 298 
enlightened being, 316, 478, 554 
the term “enlightened”, 316 
enlightenment (see also liberation), 199, 
224, 270, 271,272, 282, 283, 302, 374, 
464,512 
Buddha’s Great, 14 
for oneself, 92, 117,191,200, 259, 310, 
311, 413, 478, 515, 516, 533, 537, 
545, 547, 554, 556 
, seven limbs or conditions of, 53, 89, 
122, 126, 173, 187, 207, 214, 221, 
222, 246, 261, 262, 322, 323, 360, 
361, 363, 370, 373, 540, 503-505, 
555, 577, 586 
,37 limbs or factors or allies of, 70, 82, 
83,89, 103, 115, 146, 180,228, 231, 
249, 251-253, 255, 256, 270, 373, 
393, 419, 473, 505-506, 508, 530, 
555 
, perfect, 191,200, 530 
, sudden, 397, 575 
enmity, see vengefulness 
entity, actual, s.v. 
enumeration, 339, 439 
enveloper, 377, 498, 565 
envy, 133, 160, 193, 216, 348, 351,377, 
462,540 
eon, 460, 480, 517, 519, 526, 532, 550, 
556, 559, 562, 564, 566, 568 
, enduring, person for whom an eonis, 
191, 292, 293, 385 
-s, period between, 564 
equal-headed, 191 


607 


equanimity, 51,65, 70,99, 132, 141, 142, 
144, 151, 152, 158, 167, 173, 174, 207, 
208, 214, 227, 247, 250, 251, 282, 320, 
322,335, 349, 351-353, 364, 379, 418, 
455,462,467, 468, 495, 498, 501,502, 
552-554, 572 
-less, 153 

Eravana, 301 

error, 227 

erudition, 162 

esana, see desire 

gscape, see abandoning 

essence, essential nature, 76, 407, 551. 

establishing, establishment, 230,231,249, 
250 

eternalism, 37, 39, 163, 204, 372, 396, 397, 
419, 462 

eternal, eternity, 238, 382,405 

ethics (see also precepts; moral), 40,47-52, 
58, 59, 182-184, 203, 205, 206, 400, 
414, 459, 558-560, 577 

etymology, 175 

evil, 51, 289, 310, 368 

evolving, 525,564 

excitedness, 60, 69, 151, 171, 192, 205, 
209, 240, 249, 348, 377, 394, 430, 455, 
462, 536 

excrement, Buddha’s, 299 

exertion, 122, 123,250 
tight, 172, 186, 207, 208, 373, 503, 

504 

exhalation, see breathing 

excess, 163, 250, 434 

exclamation, 22 

existence, 33, 44,55, 114, 132, 170, 171, 
206, 209, 439, 440, 496, 509, 517,518, 
544, 568 
, courses of, 247, 248, 286 
, nominal, see nominal 
previous, see births; previous 
» Teal, s.v. 

experience (see also faculty, higher), 475 

explainableness, 162 

expressibleness, 162 

external factor, 86, 87 

extinction, see cessation 

eye, 45, 166, 207, 220, 421 
, divine, 68, 207, 235, 385, 411 


608 


-witness, 191, 194, 201, 202, 500 
Fa, ch’eng, 375 
Fa, chihlun, 582 
fact, 543 
factor, 74, 81,96, 98, 128, 133, 140, 148, 
171, 175, 176, 190, 203, 226, 230, 235, 
236, 263, 287, 302, 303, 308, 334, 335, 
349, 350, 352, 357, 358, 372, 375, 376, 
407, 408, 444, 542, 451, 518, 581 
, akopya, 593 
, associated, see awareness-concomitant 
-basis, 119, 140 
, conditioning, see condition or 
conditioning factor 
, dissociated, s.v. 
-element, 18, 83, 88, 123, 130, 131, 
137, 140, 167, 168, 177, 205, 220, 236, 
266-268, 274, 304, 330, 338, 346, 351, 
353-355, 359-365, 453,454,493, 494, 
549 ‘ 
enlightenment-seeenlightenment-factor 
, essential nature of, 98, 106 
-follower, 103, 397, 465, 542 
, lists of, 83-89, 107, 123-125 
, permeating, see permeating factor 
sense, 353, 355, 391, 453, 550 
, the term, 121, 122,316 
, unconditioned, see unconditioned 
Fa-hsien, 579 
faith, 124, 139, 147, 171, 181, 208, 214, 
236, 246, 256, 281,377, 379, 394, 396, 
419,421,432, 452, 469, 473, 489, 494, 
495, 499, 505, 508, 515 
-faculty, 124, 138, 169,242,243, 246, 
300, 322, 335, 387, 447 
-follower, 103, 191,202,384, 397,438, 
464, 465, 469, 500, 515, 542, 558 
-less, 189, 200, 249, 534 
, liberated by, 191, 194, 202 
, perfect, 469 
, resolved in, 103, 438, 499, 547 
, summit of, see sumit of faith 
Falk, Maryla, 570 
fallible nature, 190 
falling away, see backsliding 
falseness, -hood, falsity, 222, 342, 435 
fatigue of Buddha, 524 
fear, 115, 190, 206, 209, 221, 226, 247, 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


531,550 

feeling, 41,42, 44,52, 107, 114, 119, 124, 
126, 128, 138, 140, 148, 149, 151, 153, 
155, 157, 170, 171, 177, 206, 212, 220, 
222, 225, 226, 230, 236, 237, 241, 263, 
311,341, 349, 353-356, 358, 360, 363, 
374, 399, 422, 473,475, 490, 493, 496, 
501, 502, 504, 506-526, 529, 564 
-aggregate, 153, 166-168, 318, 320, 

321, 328, 329, 354, 360, 363, 364, 
391, 492 

-faculty, 346, 350-353, 467 

female, feminine, 8, 50,512,534 
-faculty, 154, 169, 322,335, 447,553 

fetter, 85, 108, 133, 158, 160, 177, 190, 
192, 193, 199, 211,216, 228, 238, 239, 
249, 250, 271, 272, 273, 282, 283, 289, 
294, 302, 303, 325, 368, 377, 400, 421, 
427-429, 435-437, 439-444, 456, 448- 
458,492,494, 497-501, 503, 505, 509, 
540-543, 545, 546-549, 555 . : 

fever, 399 

field, 250 

finitude, 238 

fire, 32,41, 118, 126, 127, 143, 156, 167, 
206, 207, 233, 278, 324, 455, 456 

fitness, see proficiency 

fixedness, final, 300 ; 
on the path, see path, fixedness on 

fleshly, 87 

flight, ability for, 260 

flood, 132, 160, 209, 222, 368, 398, 412, 
435, 448, 469, 552 

flower-speaker, 194 

fluidity, 118,155 

flurry, 572 

food (see‘also nutriment), 154, 173,97 
338, 369, 470, 490, 563 

footing, 382, 389-391, 394, 405,408, 40s, 
503, 504 

forgetfulness, 163, 193,592 

form, material, see matter 

formlessness, realm of, see unincluded 
realm 

foul or inauspicious things, 42, 144, 432, 
530 
-mouthed, 194 
-ness, 382, 394, 405, 408 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


foundation, 250, 327, 408 

Frauwallner, Erichh von, 122, 180, 360, 
379, 451, 575, 579, 585-591 

friend, bad, 237 
, good, 60, 193, 539 

friendship or living kindness, 132, 144, 
163, 394, 408 

frivolousness, 147,459, 489, 560 

fruit, see result 

frustration, 33-35, 62, 107, 128, 142, 150, 
157, 166-168, 170, 173, 175, 200, 205, 
206, 221,227, 230, 232, 248, 250, 255, 
269, 277, 278, 291, 298, 304, 311,316, 
320, 372, 382, 383, 388, 399, 405,410, 
422, 423,431,434, 438, 459, 463, 464, 
466, 479, 484, 487, 496, 499-502, 513, 
514, 522, 542, 553, 557, 564, 568,570 
-faculty, 169, 322, 335, 349, 351-353 
-truth (the first Noble Truth), 109,223, 
246, 250, 251, 254, 298, 321,391,419, 
420, 499, 528, 551 

Fukuhara, Ryogon, 102, 106, 345, 511, 
579-583, 588 

fulfilment, 438, 443,542 

function, 98, 106, 132,551 


gandha, see smell 

Gandhara, 100, 108, 347, 516, 525,554 

gandharva, 115 

Ganges, 479 

garbha, see embryo 

garment, like a pouched, see wisdom, 
unawakened 

gati, see course 

Gautama Buddha, see Budha 
, the word, 9 

Geiger, Wilhelm, 575, 576 

generation, 220, 226 
, transformative, 561 

generosity, see gifts, giving 

Gerow, Edwin, 417-449 

Gethin, R.M., 126-128, 584 

Ghosaka (125 a.v.), 102, 110-112, 117, 
489-509, 512,516, 521,525,527-529, 
546, 551, 582, 583, 592, 593 

Ghosavarman, 110,534, 544 

ghost, 286, 426, 490, 521, 526, 556, 561, 
563 


609 


ghrana, see olfactory 
gift, giving, 183, 185, 186,200, 207, 209, 
. 215, 286, 298, 299, 396, 414,415,489, 
496 
Gilgit, 179 
glana, see sick 
glani, see languor 
gloss, 305, 312, 313 
go, see OX 
goat-slaughter, 560 
gocchaka, see cluster 
God, 36, 268, 430, 517, 524. 
god, 5,6, 15,35, 178, 199, 212, 229, 239, 
247,248, 269, 271,278, 281, 468, 528 
,Tebirth as a, 192, 369, 526 
, unconscious or nonidentifying, 94, 
369 
goddess, 6 
Gomez, Luis O.,578 
good (see also pleasant), 40, 51,91, 115, 
180, 196, 201,214,220, 224, 293, 294, 
300, 334 
action, see action, good 
,common, 210 
company, 205 
factor, 86, 87, 107, 124, 172, 174, 175, 
230, 240, 327, 339-341, 447, 453, 
497, 507 
root, 116 
Got(r)ika, 544 
Gotama, see Buddha - 
gotra, see lineage 
-bhi, 579 
gradual realization, see termination, gradual/ 
sudden 
grahaka, see grasper 
grahana, see grasping 
grahin, see receiver 
grahya, see grasped 
grammar (see also etymology; language), 
98, 133, 230, 231, 235, 390 
grantha, see knot 
grasp, see understanding 
grasped, 87, 154, 157, 341 
grasper, 87 
grasping, 44, 87,114, 126, 130, 153, 154, 
157, 161, 170,211,225, 272, 368, 398, 
412, 436, 448, 452, 462, 496, 550 


610 


gratification, 386 

Greece, 3 

greed, 51,60, 124, 149, 157, 205,228, 229, 
261,271,323, 328, 377, 382, 393, 405, 
413, 512,531 

Greiner, Fred, 179-185 

grhastha, see householder 

grief, see sorrow 

Griffiths, Paul, 572 

gross, 66, 155, 165 

ground, logical, 382, 389 

group, 24, 82, 84, 286 

grown, see maturation 

grudgingness, see envy 

guardedness, 205 

guardian of the world, 125 

guidable, see faith-follower 

guidelines, 99, 382, 397-401, 404, 405, 
411-413 

guile, see craftiness 

Gulissanisutta, 84 

guna, see quality 

Gunabhadra, 375 

Gunaratna, Edmund Rowland Jayatileke, 
359 

Gunaratne, Henepola, 573 

guptadvarata, see vigilance 

gustatory (see also taste) 
-consciousness element, 167,319 
faculty, 169, 322 
-organelement, 167,319 
-organ sense, 166, 318, 522 


habit, 224 

Haimavata school, 575 
hallucination, 557 

hanabhagitya, see disadvantage 
hanya, see (1) killing, (2) murder 
happiness, see satisfaction 

hara, see category 

Harappa, 4 

hard(ness), 127, 155, 563 
Hardy, Edmund, 403,574 
Haribhadra (850), 76 
Harivarman (250), 94, 119 
Harvey, Peter, 573 

hate, hatred, see (1) aversion, (2) malice 
heading, see matrix 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


heat, 127, 419, 463, 499, 515-517 
, bodily, 71 
of insight, 515 
heaven, 5, 146, 414, 490, 549, 550, 556 
, Akanistha, s.v. 
-ly beings, 521 
hedonism, 237, 238 
heedfulness, 377, 379, 455, 539 
heedlessness, 249, 348, 377,390, 455,592 
hell, 5, 190, 193, 238, 268, 304, 426, 460, 
490, 521, 523, 531, 548 
-guardians, 301 
, living, 490 
, uninterrupted, 561 
helper, 125 
helpfulness, 210 
heredity, 213 
heretic, 526, 527, 551, 556, 560, 563 
Herman, Arthur L., 592 
hermeneutics, 99, 403 
heterogeneous factor, 86, 88 
nature, 533 
hetu, see cause 
-vidya, 111 
higher worldly, see supramundane 
highest worldly factor, 109, 590 
Himalaya, 80,472 
himsa, see injury 
hina, see inferior 
Hinayana, 30, 32 
, the word, 23 
hindrance or obstruction, 53,60-63,67-70, 
126, 133, 160,221,222, 224, 233, 234, 
246, 249, 250, 262, 368, 384, 394, 400, 
418, 430, 431,436, 448, 457, 460, 481, 
489, 506, 536, 540 
, knowledge of one’s own, see know- 
ledge of one’s hindrances 
to concentration, see concentration, 
hindrances to 
Hirakawa, Akira, 579 
Hiramatsu, Tomotsugu, 189 
Hofinger, M., 77,575 
holocaust, 552 
homicide, see murder 
homogeneity, homogeneous, 86, 88, 536 
cause, 110, 423, 456, 525, 533 
-force, 97,378 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


-ness, 592 

honey, great, 439 
-tongued, 194 

hook, the, 382, 401, 405, 413 

hope, one without, 193, 194 

hopeful, 194 

Horner, Irene Blew, 71,471,573, 574 

hostility, see vengefulness 

householder, 207, 247, 248, 310, 414 

hri, see shame 

Hsuan-tsang (600), 100, 102, 105, 108, 
111,113, 179, 203, 346, 347, 367,375, 
417, 511, 580 

Hui-yuan (391), 451 

Hunt, M., 574 

Hurvitz, Leon, 417, 451, 591 

hymn, Vedic, 5 

hypocrisy, 193, 213, 348, 351, 542 


icchantika, 93 

Ichimura, Shohei, 511-568, 587 

I-Ching (690), 101 

identification, conceptual, 41,42, 107,119, 
124, 126, 128, 129, 138, 140, 148, 149, 
151, 153, 155, 157, 211-213, 220, 230, 
237, 238, 241,248, 277, 281, 296, 311, 
328, 347, 349, 350, 352-354, 360,363, 
374,376, 422,454, 475, 481,490, 493, 
495, 502, 562 
-aggregate, 153, 166-168, 170, 318, 
320, 321, 360, 363, 364 

identity in difference, 43 

identity, personal, 41 

ignorance, 7, 44, 46, 47, 55, 69, 93, 114, 
132, 133, 160, 161, 163, 167, 169, 171, 
176, 192, 204, 209, 214, 216, 222, 225, 
226, 229, 237, 240, 249, 291,311,316, 
323, 333, 348, 377, 382, 392, 400, 401, 
405,412,424, 425, 431,433,447, 455, 
462,474, 496, 498, 529, 536, 552, 554, 
557, 592 
of a perfected being, 276, 302 

illness, see sickness 

illusion, 7,33 
illusory beings, 555 

ill will, see malice 

Imanishi, I., 581 

immaterial, 66, 86, 87, 148, 159, 204, 206, 


611 


214,216, 221,285, 318, 398, 413,432, 
439, 440, 447, 507 
attainments, 262, 394, 468 
element, 297, 441,442 
gods, 248 
meditations, see meditations, formless 
realmor world, 145, 146, 152, 153, 159, 
170, 173, 174, 190, 220, 223, 229, 
260, 267, 287, 288, 297, 328, 379, 
418, 425, 431, 444-447, 499, 500, 
$18, 525, 554 
states, 132, 186, 208 
imppeasurable, 195,403,404 . 
immediate, see noninterrupted 
immodesty, see disregard 
immoral, see bad 
impediment, 250 
impermanent, see momentariness 
imperturbable nature, 190 
impulsion, 247,248 
impure, 32, 87, 318, 435, 540, 557 
factor, 86,250,434, 437, 447,452,492, 
497, 509 
inauspicious, 432 
included, 295 
indeterminate, see neutral 
identification, see doctrine 
indifference, 150,467 
indigenous Indians, 6 
individual, individuality, 227,238 
indoctrination by another, 237 
Indra, 549, 555 
indriya, see (sense-) organ 
-dlambana, 554 
dharma-, see dharma-sense 
indulgence, sensual, 14, 433 
Indus river, 3 
Indus Valley, 4-6 . 
ineffable, 38 
infallible nature, 190 
inferior matter, 165 
infinite, 238 
regress, see regress, infinite 
series, 474 
, Spatial, see space, infinite 
inflation, 127 
influence, 448, 509 
inhalation, see breathing 


612 


initial thought, 62-64, 86, 124, 138, 142, 
146, 149, 158, 162, 205-207, 220, 237, 
241,289, 299, 321,332, 342, 349, 352, 
356, 377, 394, 399, 418, 433, 437, 448, 
449, 453,455, 467,475,494, 501,514, 
539, 542, 546, 550, 553 

initiate, see seeker 

injunction, 386, 406, 407 

injury, 213, 259 

inoperative factor, 175 

inquisitiveness, 70 

insanity, 562 

insight (see also wisdom), 54, 56, 68, 72, 
94, 125, 126, 147, 153, 163, 169, 171, 
173,201,205, 221,222, 224, 226, 227, 
229, 230, 232, 240, 242, 246, 250, 
253, 255, 256, 261-263, 278, 311,335, 
382, 398, 400, 405,411,412, 472, 476, 
477,486, 497, 498, 500, 501,507,514, 
522, 525,531,533, 539,540, 551,561, 
564-568 
-knowledge, 98, 99, 301 
, path of, 61, 70, 103, 109, 516 

insistence, 400 

instigation, 141, 145, 146, 150, 152, 254 

instruction, miracle of, 262 

intellection, 348,351,358, 422, 494 

intemperance, 205 

intention, see thought 

intentness, see one-pointedness 

interest, 145,208, 221,230, 348,351,357, 
377, 454, 494 
, sensuous, 160, 240, 276, 368, 394 

intermediate state, 95, 115,287,437, 444, 
446, 467, 469, 490, 491,499, 502, 540- 
549, 556, 560, 564, 583 

internal factor, 86; 87 

intoxicant (see also defilement), 55, 85, 
126, 153, 160, 190, 191, 193, 199-201, 
206, 232, 249, 256, 263, 272, 279, 280, 


282, 289, 291, 295, 296, 310, 390, 398, 


412, 428, 492, 512 
, knowledge of the destruction of the, 55, 
67, 176, 182, 207, 235, 385, 411 
introspection, 7,557 
intuition, 163 
investigation, see sustained thought 
irritation or despair, 168, 170, 220, 263, 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


383, 496 

invisible, 86, 157, 159,206, 318, 320, 363, 
447 

irsya, see envy 

Israel, 3 

t§vara, see God 

I-tsing, 579 

Itthivuttaka, 175,310,571 


Jain, Jainism, 6-8, 36, 38, 75, 126, 556 
Jaini, PadmanabhS., 73-119 
Jambudvipa, 181,530 
Janert, Klaus L., 579 

Japan, 56 

jar, 197 

jarda, see old age 

Jataka, 175, 483 

jati, see (1) birth, (2) rebirth 
Java, 101 

javana, see impulsion 
Jayawickrame, N.A., 265,570 


_ jealousy, seeenvy 


Jeremiah, 3 

jewel, 116,214, 430, 534 

Jiva, see (1) self, (2) animal 

Jivala, 110,544 , 

Jivita, see life 

jiiana, see (1) awareness, (2) knowledge 

Jnanaprasthana, 81, 100-103, 105, 107- 
110, 115,345, 367,417-4495451,511- 
513, 554, 579, 580, 582, 590 © 

Johnston, E.H., 582 ; 

joy, 51, 62-65, 117, 124, 138, 142, 146, 
149, 151, 158, 162, 173,214, 224, 230, 
241, 320,322, 342, 394, 427, 467, 469, 
501, 502, 551, 553, 555, 559, 572 
-less, 153 


Kailasa, 80 

kakusandha, 254 

kala, see time 

kalpa, see eon . 

kalpand, construction, conceptual 

kama, see desire 

kamadhatu, the word, 287 

Kamalasila (770), 94 

kamavitaragabhimi, see fading away, stage 
of 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


Kuniska(150a.p.), 110-112,489, 511,593 

kanksa, see doubt 

Kanthaka, 11 

Kapilavastu, 10, 11 

karana, see cause 

-hetu, see efficient cause 

karanaprajiiapti,217 

karitra, see function 

karma (see also action), 5,7, 38-41, 48, 50, 
75,83, 91,95, 105, 114, 115, 118,119, 
129, 151-153, 157, 159, 176, 190,217, 
226, 268, 269, 281, 288, 292, 296-298, 
302, 324, 338, 371, 372, 386, 424, 428, 


457-460, 475,479, 482,491,492, 496, | 


512, 527, 547, 548, 555-562, 568 
karmic result, see maturation 
, manifest, 457, 458, 491, 492, 526, 
558, 561, 562 
»neutral-527 
, unmanifest-457, 458, 491, 492, 558, 
561, 562, 563, 564 

karmanyata, see adaptability 

karmaprajnapti,217 — 

karpanya, see stinginess 

karuna, see compassion 

Karunadasa, Y., 128,584 

Kashmir, Kashmiri, 70, 100, 108, 1 10, 112, 
417, 525, 590 

Kashyap, J., 138, 164, 165, 189,219, 265, 
327, 337, 359, 585, 587 

P. kasina, see device, meditative 

Kasgyapa, 254, 283, 471 

Kasyapiya school, 110,317,526,541,565 

Kathavatthu, 78-81,88,90, 92-96, 98, 100, 
114-116, 137, 265-304, 359, 472, 578, 
583, 587 

Katthavatthuppakarana, Ajthakatha, 92 

Katha Upanisad, 571 

kathina, see (1) hard, (2) nonremorse 

kathinya, see solidity 

Katyayana, 102 

Katy4yaniputra (,Bhadanta) 81, 102, 108- 
112, 117,417,512, 519, 523, 525, 527, 
528, 530, 541, 542, 548, 550, 564, 565, 
582, 593 

kaukrtya, see regret 

kauSalya, see skill 

kausidya, see sloth 


613 


kautilya, see dishonesty 
Kawamura, Kosho, 511-568, 583 
kaya, see (1) body, (2) tactual 
-indirya, see tactual-organ element- 
saksin, seeeye-witness 
Keith, Archibald B.,570 
Kena Upanisad, 57C 
Khaggavisanasitra, 313 
P. khandha, see (1) aggregate, (2) pillar 
khandaka,24 
Khuddaka Nikaya, 24-26, 91, 97,99, 286, 
305 
Kimura, Taiken, 112,579, 582 
kindness (see also nonviolence), 379 
, loving, see friendship 
kleSa, see defilement 
klista, see defiled: 
knot, 302, 160, 209, 368, 412, 436, 448 
knowledge, 14, 68, 107, 108, 141, 145, 146, 
152, 176, 177, 181, 182, 205, 220-237, 
240, 242, 250, 253, 255, 256, 260, 261, 
264, 280, 284, 291, 301,411,434, 465- 
467, 473, 500, 501,535,555, 557,574 
, aggregate of 554-558 
,conventional, 284, 301,465,466, 500 
of another’s spiritual faculties, 285 
of destruction of intoxicants, see 
intoxicants, knowledge of 
of other’s thoughts or other minds, 68, 
207, 235, 262, 411, 466, 501, 521, 
556, 557 
of past and future rebirths, see births, 
knowledge of previous and future 
of what is unknown, 70, 169, 207, 235, 
322, 335, 465, 500 
of whatis possible and impossible, 256, 
260 
, perfect, 14, 70, 147, 152, 169, 207, 
235, 322, 335, 465, 501 
that one is free from faults, see 
knowledge, perfect 
that one knows, 70, 207, 235, 243, 322, 
335, 465 
through concentration, see concentra- 
tion, knowledge through 
P. kolanola, see clan-to-clan 
Konagamana, 254 
koSa, see sheath 


614 


Kritzer, Robert, 489-509 
kriyd, see action 
krodha, see (1) anger, (2) irritation 
killing (see also murder), 224, 459, 481, 
489, 527, 559 
, abstinence from-59, 175, 180 
Krsna,6 
ksana, see moment 
ksanikatva, see momentariness 
ksanti, see patience 
Ksatriya, 247,248 
ksaya, see destruction 
ksema, see safety 
Ksemadatta, 110 
ksetra, see field 
Ksudravastuka, 586 
K’uei-chi, 346, 588 
Kuha, 524 
P. kukucca, see (1) flurry, (2) worry 
kulankula, see clan-to-clan 
Kumiarajiva, 590 
kumpadharma, see perturbable nature 
kuSala, see good 
Kusana, 79, 111 
KuSinara, 19 


laghuta, see lightness 
Lai, Whalen, 578 
laksana, see mark 
Laksananyathatvavada, 489 
Lalitavistara, 9,27 
lamentation, 168, 170,220, 263, 363, 383, 
496 
Lamotte, Etienne, 511,569, 574, 579, 587 
Lancaster, Lewis, 578 
Landsberg, Georg, 189 
Lang, Karen C., 327-336 
language, 64, 155, 206, 408, 523, 584 
, abusive, 489 
(nirukti), see grammar 
languor, 377 
Lankavatara Sitra, 37, 570, 571 
Lao-tzu, 3 
laukika, see worldly 
laukikagradharma, see highest worldly 
factor 
law, 74, 193 
Law, Bimala Charan, 189, 381,582,587 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


lay people, 249, 282, 324, 481, 487, 488 
laziness, see sloth 
leading, 463 
learner, see seeker 
learning, 214 
, traditional, 207 
Legge, James, 579 
lethargy, see sleepiness 
Lhasa, Council of, 94, 575, 578 
liberality, 210 
liberating, 463 
liberation, 5,7, 14-16, 33, 36, 37, 41, 42, 
53,55, 56,69, 71,83, 91, 114-118, 144, 
158, 162, 176, 177, 180-184, 190-192, 
194, 201, 205, 207,21 1-213, 216, 220, 
221,223, 224, 227, 228, 230, 232, 238, 
242, 244-247, 250, 253, 255-257, 261, 
263, 268-270, 273, 279, 280, 282, 283, 
285, 289, 295, 300, 303, 311,321,393, 
403,413,427-429, 447, 465, 468, 475, 
477, 485-487, 499, 507, 508,513,517, _ 
527,529, 531,533, 544,551,552, 556, 
558, 565, 566, 568, 591 
at no specific times, 515,556 
at times, 190, 271,556 
, Buddha’s final, see parinirvana- 
, gateway to, 400, 401,411,413 
in both ways, 56, 72, 103, 191,201,385, 
573, 593 
mind, 54, 56, 103 = 
, path of or to, 500, 502, 554, 557, 591 
while living, 428, 533 
wisdom, 54, 56,72, 103,201,246, 507, 
573 
life (see also vitality), 71, 264, 288 
-continuum, 97, 268, 486, 503, 528, 
544, 578 
-cycle, 529, 531,548, 567 
, higher, 233 
(-force)-faculty, 124, 139, 149, 151, 
169, 322, 335, 378, 447, 592 
slength of, 295,378, 456, 490, 537, 559, 
564 
, maintenance of, 537, 564 
, Teligious, desire for, 206 
-sheath, 41 
lightness, 125, 127, 139, 147, 154 
lightning, 162, 206 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


-minded, 194, 500, 554 
limitation, 307,311 
limbs of enlightenment, see enlighten- 
ment-factors 
limited factor, 158,342 
Lindtner, Christian, 203-216, 375-379 
lineage, 99, 117, 190, 311 
, change of, 68, 99, 227, 247 
Lingayama, Hsaya, 328 
lion’s play, 382, 397-401, 405, 412, 413 
Li-shiha-pi-t’an lun, 104 
livelihood, living, 395 
, fraternal, 213 
stright, 49, 147, 168, 181, 183,301,491, 
560 
P. lobha, see greed; desire 
locus, 118, 378, 427 
logic, 47, 95, 96, 273 
lohita, seered 
loka, see world 
-pala, see guardian of the world 
Lokaprajnapti, 217 
Lokayata (see also Carvaka), 111 
lokiya, see worldly 
lokottara, see supramundane 
long, see size 
longing, see desire 
loss, see disaster 
Lopez, Donald, 579 
lotus posture, 240 
love, 207, 208, 483, 551 
«less, 200 
Luders, Heinrich, 579 
Luk, Charles, 571 
Lumbini, 10 
lust, see (1) desire, (2) greed, (3) passion 
lying, 59, 194, 210, 459, 489, 560 


mada, see (1) arrogance, (2) alcohol 

madhubani, see honey-tongued 

Madhupindakasutta, 81 

madhyama, see middle 

Mdhyama Agama, 570 

Madhyamaka, Madhyamika, 37, 46, 56,93, 
98, 100, 108, 584 

Madhyamakakarika (Nagarjuna), 572 

Madhyamakakarikaprasannapada (Can- 
drakirti), 570 


615 


magical beings, 299, 564 

mahabhimika, see permeating 

Mahadeva, 22, 78, 556, 575 

Mahakaccayana, see Mahakatyayana 

Mahiakassapa, 20, 77, 80 

Mahakatyayana, 75,81, 83,99, 381,401, 
403, 405, 416 

Mahakausthila, 102, 203 

Mahamaya, see Maya, Queen 

Mahamukuta Rajavidyalaya, 219 

Mahanama (6thcentury), 98 

Mahdniddesa, 305-312, 313-316 

Mahdpadana Sutta, 10, 46,52 

Yhahapadesa, 76, 85,574 

Mahapadesasutta, 407 

Mahapadma, (King), 78 

Mahaparinibbanasutta or Mahapari- 
nirvanasitra, 18-20, 77,574, 575 

Mahaprajnaparamitopadesa, 108,579,590 - 

Mahardjika gods, 215 

Mahasaccakasutra, 13 

Mahasanghika, 22, 23,27, 28, 77,93, 110, 
115, 116, 119, 123,513,518, 519,526, 
539, 551,567,568, 575, 580, 582,585, 
587 
, Vinaya of, 575, 576 

Mahasena, 472 

Mahasuiifiatavada, 93 

Mahasatipatthana Sutra, 52,55 

Mahathera, D.S., 165, 359, 585 

Mahavagga, 24, 73, 573, 577 

Mahavamsa, 20, 29, 79, 569, 575, 576 

Mahavastu, 9, 27, 117, 

(Abhidharma) Mahavibhasa, 79, 100, 101, 
104-107, 109-119, 375,418,451, 511- 
568, 582, 588, 593, 594 

Mahaviharavasins, 123 

Mahayana, 18, 22, 23, 26-34, 36, 37, 41,45, 
52, 56, 57, 80, 93, 97, 98, 100, 109, 111, 
117,579 ; 
-sutras, see sutras, Mahayana 

Mahayanasamgraha (Asanga?), 570 

Mahdyanasitralamkara (Asanga?) 74, 82 

Mahisasika school, 95, 110, 115,317,512, 
514, 515 

maintenance, see life, length of 

Maitreya (future Buddha), 33 

maitri, see (1) benevolence; (2) friendship 


616 


Maitri Upanisad, 57\ 

Maiyavana, 426 

Majjhima Nikaya, 9, 13, 24-26, 29, 33, 49, 
51, 52, 81, 83, 84, 97, 179, 223, 274, 
278, 283, 294, 296, 480, 569-574, 576, 
577, 590 
-Atthakatha, 84,577 

Makkhalli Gosala, 471,577 

mala, see impure 

Malalasekara, G.P., 417,578 

male faculty, 154, 169, 322, 335, 553 

malevolence, see malice 

malice or ill will, 9,69, 70, 124, 132; 133, 
139, 150, 160, 167, 192, 205, 206, 209, 
211, 213, 240, 377, 394, 489, 490 
absence of or freedom from, see 

benevolence 

Malunkyaputra, 480 

mana, see pride 

manahsamcetana, see representative 
cognition 

manas, see mind 

manas(1)ké ra, see attention 

Mandikya Upanisad, 42,571 

mango, 197 

manifest karma, see karma, manifest 

manifestation, 154,291 

mantra, 421 

Mara, 15, 182, 263, 428, 437, 480, 481 
gods, 215, 275 

marana, see death 

marga, see path 

mark, 35,494. 
characteristic, 98, 132, 225, 226, 283, 
382, 389, 390, 405, 408, 431,432, 452, 
472, 473, 536-538, 557 
, general, 516, 517 
, Secondary, 494 

masculine, -ity, see male 

mastery, 143, 144,216,220, 232,447, 468, 
503 

material, 86, 87, 119, 221, 447, 507, 519, 
527 
aggregate, see matter 
element, 167,297, 319, 441,442,450 
gods, 248 
-ity, see matter 
path, 290 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


quality, 176 

realm or world, relating to, 141, 144, 146, 
152, 153, 159, 162, 170, 220, 288, 297, 
379, 431, 444-447, 455, 458, 499, 500, 
503, 515,525, 567 
sense, 318 
sheath, 41 
trance, 501,503 

Mathura, 79, 100,579 

mati, see intellection 

matikadhara, 85 

matrix, 75, 81, 84-89, 97, 100, 121, 122, 
126, 137, 157-163, 180, 220, 259, 263, 
264, 360, 379, 577-579, 585, 586 
-ces 37, see enlightenment, 37 limbs of 

matrka, see matrix 

matsarya, see selfishness 

matter, 62,91, 107, 108, 126, 146, 153- 
157, 159, 163, 165, 166, 174, 206, 266, 
267, 281,288, 289, 294, 297, 300, 319, 
320, 328, 353, 354, 360, 376, 391,418, 
439, 440, 452, 490, 492, 493, 520, 550, 
551 

, derivative, 118 
, great elements of, see element, great 
, subtle form of, 94 
unmanifest, 95, 107, 118, 119, 376, 
452, 550 

maturation, karmic, 39,48, 86, 88,95, 114, 
151-153, 157, 171, 174,190, 247, 248, 
286, 287, 292, 297, 341,385, 432, 436, 
561 
cause, 110, 423, 456, 526, 527, 541 
condition, 96, 338 
, immediate, 287, 293, 301 
, time of, 559 

Maudgalyayana, 84, 102, 105, 179, 217, 
367-369, 580, 581 

mauna, see sagacity 

Maurya(n Empire), 79 

maya, see (1) illusion, (2) deceit 

Maya, Queen, 10, 80 

McDermott, James P., 219-304, 587,592 

McGovern, William Montgomery, 131, 
337, 584 

meaning, 98,99, 133,230, 231,233, 235, 
404,411 
definitive, 574 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


, provisional, 574 
, word, 396, 397 
meanness, see malice 
means, 386, 406, 407 
measured, easy/hard, 195 
measureless, 398 
mediate, 86 
medicine, 111,421 
meditation, see concentration 
memory (see also mindfulness), 131, 139, 
142, 146, 147, 151, 163, 171, 172,209, 
213,222, 250, 377,421,422, 454, 476% 
506, 520 
, loss of, 521 
of pastlives or rebirths, 14,55, 68,235, 
257, 521 
Menander, 471 
mental, see mind 
associate, see awareness-concomitant 
merit, 7,185, 198, 256, 260, 286, 297,476 
Metta Sutta, 51 
mice, 197 
middha, see sloth 
middle path or way, 14, 16, 37-39 
mildness, 163,205 
Milinda, King, see Menander 
Milindapafiha, 471-488, 571,592 
mimamsé, see deliberation 
mind, mental, 32,41, 44,45, 52, 107, 130, 
150, 153, 166, 206, 211,281,319, 321, 
376, 391,447,452, 454, 457,493,494, 
520, 549 
-and-material, see name and form 
mental creation, 256, 260 
mental faculty, 169,301,318, 322, 364, 
565 
mental element, 151, 168,319, 353 
concomitants, or associated mental 
factors, see concomitants, mental 
-consciousness element, 168, 171,319, 
320, 520, 549, 593 
mental factors, 85, 104, 320 
-faculty, 124, 138, 151,321 
sense, 353, 355, 364 
sheath, 41 
mindfulness, 59, 60, 65, 66, 70, 123, 125, 
148, 173, 181,205,214, 222, 251, 252, 
270, 311,322,348, 351,357,389, 390, 


617 


400, 432, 454, 467, 469, 473, 495, 502, 
517,572 
-faculty, 124, 138, 169,243, 300, 322, 
335,387 
, foundation or application of, 61, 89, 
122, 186, 207, 208, 221, 222, 229, 
243, 246, 253, 255, 256, 261-263, 
275, 325, 359, 363, 373, 390, 393, 
394, 398, 413, 430, 463, 467, 501, 
503, 504, 514, 515,532, 564, 586 
of breathing, see breathing, mindfulness 
of 
,apower, 124, 139, 147,214, 256 
sTight, 52, 124, 139, 168, 173, 181,209, 
400 ‘ 
miracle, 262 
of double appearance, 219, 236, 255 
-story, 175 : 
mirror, 33 
miser, 193 
mita, see measured 
mithyd, see (1) false, (2) wrong 
mitra, see friend 
Mizuno, Kogen, 345, 381,417,451, 578, 
580, 582, 588, 589, 592 
Mohavicchedani (Kassapa), 187,578,585 
modesty, 124, 139, 147, 193, 214, 400, 
455, 482 
Moggalana, 81,200, 482 
Moggaliputtatissa, 78, 79, 81,92, 265 
moha, see delusion 
Mohenjo Daro, 4 


-Mo-ho-yen, 94 


moment, 74, 295, 529, 537, 566 

momentariness, 35, 40, 62, 75, 129, 131, 
166, 205, 227, 230, 232, 242, 250, 270, 
292, 303, 304, 432, 463, 485, 494, 537, 
538 : 

momentary causation, 114 
condition, 529 

monastery, 16 

mona, see sagacity 

money, 22 

monks, monastic order (see alsoorder), 14, 
16, 18-20, 29, 30, 50, 59, 75, 172-175, 
184, 200, 205, 241,249, 276, 298, 393, 
472, 478, 481, 485, 488, 566 
monkhood, fruits of, 185, 208, 300, 


618 


321, 394, 469 
, practices of, 186, 394 
monotheism, 3 
moral (see also (1) virtue; (2) dharma, (3) 
ethics), 68, 100, 140, 195, 205, 290, 
291, 338, 411, 414, 473 
precepts, see precepts, moral 
Morin, M.L., 587 
Morris, Richard, 189, 574 
mortification, 14 
motion, 118, 127 
mraksa, see hypocrisy 
mrdava, see mildness 
mrduta, see pliancy 
midhita, see stolidity 
mudita, see (1), joy, (2) sympathy 
Muhammad, 3 
mila, see root 
Miulatika, 90 
Muller, Edward, 577, 585 
multiplication, ability for self, 260 
multiplicity of aspects in Jainism, 75 
munificence, 205 
Munigatha, 29 
murder (see also killing), 147, 293, 298, 
560-562 
miurdha, see summit 
mirdhapatta, see backsliding 
Murti, G.S., 569, 570 
musitasmrtitva, see forgetfulness 
mutuality condition, 96, 247, 338 
my-making, 400 


nagaraja, 426 

Nagarjuna, 56, 98, 112 

Nagasena, 471-488 

nairydnika, see liberating 
-vimukti, see liberation, factors leading 

to 

naiskramya, see renunciation 

naivasamjnasamjnayatana, see neither- 
identification-nor-nonidentification 

Nakamura, Hajime, 165, 179, 359, 375, 
381, 451, 511, 586, 590, 591, 593 

Nalanda, 138 

namaripa, see (1) psychophysical complex, 
(2)name-and-form 

Ndamarupapariccheda(Anuruddha), 99 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


name (see also word), 45, 162, 171, 422, 
523 
, the word, 128, 572 

name-and-form, 32, 36, 44-46, 74, 85, 114, 
169, 170, 204, 325, 474 

Nanamoli, Bhikkhu or Thera, 123, 219, 
381, 403, 414, 574, 579 

Nanavimala, 237 

Narada, U., 337, 359 

Narain, A.K., 587,590 

nastika, see (1) atheism, (2) heretic 

Nattier, Jan, 78,575 

nature, essential or intrinsic, 98, 105, 118, 
132, 517-519, 537, 554, 561, 566, 567 
, upside-down, 553 

naya, see (1) guideline, (2) aspect 

negation, four-cornered, see tetralemma 

negligence, see heedlessness 

neither-identification (perception)-nor- 
nonidentification (nonperception), 13, 
53, 67, 145, 174, 177, 208, 216, 229, 
238, 281, 282, 460, 467, 468, 496, 502, 
519, 544, 550, 567 

Nepal, 9 

Nettippakarana, 75,99, 100, 381, a0ks 
403-416, 574, 590 

neutral, 42, 86, 87,91, 95, 107, 115, 128, 
151-153, 157, 171, 175, 206, 224, 227, 
233, 247, 248, 291, 294, 295, 303, 327, 
334, 339-341, 371,372, 447,453, 457, 
462, 491, 497, 507, 541, 564 
-ity (see alsoequanimity), 65,66, 320 

never-returner, see nonreturner 

neyartha, see meaning, provisional 

nidana, see foundation 

Nidanakathd, 9 

Niddesa (see also Mahdaniddesa and 
Cilaniddesa), 98, 305 

nigama, see disappearance 

Nigantha Nataputta, 83 

nihilism, 37, 39, 163, 204, 396, 397, 462 

nihsarana, see abandoning 

nikaya, see group 
-s, Pali, 43, 103 
-sabhagata, see homogeneity-force 

Nikayabhedavibhangavyakhyana 
(Bhavya), 569 

Nikayabhedopadarsanasamgraha 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


(Vinitadeva), 569 
niksipati, see miser 
nila, see dark 
nimitta, see sign 
niramisa, see nonfleshly 
nirasa, see hope, one without 
niraya, see hell 
nirdeSa, see gloss 
Nirgrantha school, see Jain 
nirmala, see stainless 
nirmanakaya, 36 
Nirmanarati god, 215 
nirodha, see cessation 
nirukti, see grammar 
nirvana, see liberation 
nirveda, see (1) aversion, (2) penetration 
nirvida, see dispassion 
niryana, see abandoning 
nisevana, see development 
Nishio, Giyu, 590 
niskama, see renunciation 
nispatti, see fulfilment 
nispunya, see meritorious, power of the 
niSraya, see dependence 
nisyanda, see intoxicant 
nitartha, see meaning, definitive 
nitya, see eternal 
nivarana, see hindrance 
nivrtti, seecessation 
niyama, see determination 
niyata, see fixed 
nobhaya, see mediate 
noble, 207, 311,316, 318, 463-465, 469, 
482, 513, 530 
person, 69,92, 109, 183, 185, 190-192, 
256, 260, 287, 464, 465, 485, 499, 
558 
nominal, 87, 128, 129 
designation, see concept 
nonacquisition, 400, 554, 592 
force, 567, 581 
nonanger, 387, 405 
nonarising, see nonorigination 
nonattachment, 242, 253, 261, 262, 311, 
427, 481, 509, 512 ‘ 
nonattainment, see nonacquisition 
nonbecoming, attachment to, 530 
nonconflicting, 87 


619 


noncovetousness, 147, 209, 323 

nonderived matter, 154 

nondisappearance condition, 96, 339 

nondistraction, 125, 140, 170, 230, 231, 
240, 249 

nonequanimity, 554 

noneternal, noneternity, 153, 154, 378, 
382, 405, 537 

nonexcess, 224 

nonfleshly, 87 _ 

nongreed, 139, 147, 157, 159, 205, 321, 

© 323, 379, 387, 405, 531 

nonidentification, 238, 335, 363 

noninterrupted, 109 
condition, 96, 294 
path, 117, 463, 498, 499, 554, 557 

nonlearner, see adept 

nonmaterial, see immaterial 

nonorigination, 205, 466, 500, 508, 555, 
591 

nenorthodox master, 513 

nonreacting, 318 

nonrealization, 554 

nonrebirth, see nonreturner 

nonregret, 117 

nonremorse, 394 

nonresisting, 159 

nonresponsive, 159 

nonreturner, 70, 126, 183, 185, 192, 194, 
201,212,215, 225,249, 261, 270-273, 
282, 299, 370, 384, 394, 428, 441,444, 
446, 458, 464, 467, 469, 473, 478, 499, 
500, 502, 514, 518, 545, 546 
candidate, 184,215, 370, 441, 443 

nonsense, 210 

nonitransgression, 224 

nonviolence, 49, 167, 205, 206, 379 

Norman, K.R., 578,585, 587 

nose, see olfactory organ 


no(n)-self, 35, 38, 40, 62, 105, 107, 166, . 


205,221,227, 230, 232, 247, 250, 270, 
382, 405, 420, 520, 569, 592 
nothingness, 13, 53, 67, 145, 174, 177, 
208, 214, 223, 468, 502, 552 
notification, 256 
nourishment, see (1) food, (2) nutriment 
number, see enumeration 
nun, 16, 30, 50, 249 


620 


nutriment (see also food), 61, 140, 148, 
177,204, 209, 220, 222, 226, 236, 327, 
398, 412, 490, 491 
condition, 96, 338 

Nyanaponika (Thera), 124, 125,577,584, 
585 


Nyanatiloka (Mahathera), 92, 189, 471, 
577,578 

nyaya, see (1) correctness, (2) logic 

Nydydanusara (Sanghabhadra), 106, 119 

Nyun, Thin, 359 


obedience, 193 

Obermiller, E., 588 

obfuscation, see darkness 

object (see also(1) content, (2) artha), 46 
47 


-content condition, 96 
-less, see awareness, objectless 
sense-118, 130, 220, 228, 229, 549 
, Supporting, see supporting object 
obstacle, see hindrance 
obstruction, see(1) hindrance, (2) enveloper 
odata, see white 
offense, 295 
offering, see giving 
ogha, see flood 
old age, 6,7, 11,44, 114, 154, 168, 170, 
171, 175, 206, 220, 263, 287, 296, 311, 
378, 383,424, 431,484, 485, 494, 496, 
509, 564 
, the term, 316 
olfactory 
-consciousness element, 167,319 
faculty, 169, 322 
-organelement, 167,319 
-organ sense, 166, 318, 421, 522 
omnipotence, 555 
omniscience, 22, 200, 255, 485 
of the Buddha, 182,236, 237,477,478, 
483,484 
once-returner, 70, 126, 183, 185, 192, 194, 
201, 202, 215,228, 249, 261, 269, 270, 
272, 273, 278, 282, 299, 370, 394, 441, 
443,444, 464, 469, 478, 499, 545, 546, 
557, 564, 565. 
candidate, 184, 215,370, 441, 443 
one-eyed, 194 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


one-pointed, 53, 62-64, 124, 138, 146, 149, 
151, 231, 394, 467 

openmindedness, 139 

oppression, 250 : 

order, Buddhist, 16-20, 24, 29, 30,57, 75, 
116, 181, 183, 185,298, 373,419, 481, 
482, 485, 534, 559 
, leaving the, 205 

ordered condition, 113 

ordinariness, 109, 435, 494, 513 

organ, sense, see sense-organ and under 
eye, nose, etc. 

origin of frustration, 221, 224, 250, 251, 
298, 321, 500, 528, 551 

original Buddhism, 26-28, 37 

origination, 108, 117,327,517 

orthodoxy, Hindu, 4 

otherworldly, see supramundane 
realm, see unincluded realm 

outburst, passionate, 295 

outcome or outflow, see intoxicant 

overestimation, 377 

oxen, 197-198 


Pa chien-tu lun, 582 

Pachow, 575 

pada, see word 

padaSastra, 101, 102, 106, 108, 110, 114, 
117, 345, 375 

pain, see frustration 

Paingala Upanisad, 571 

pair, 125, 153-155, 159-163 
Pairs, The, see Yamaka 

paisunya, see slander 

Pakistan, 3,4 

Pali language, 9,282 

Paficadharmaka, see Paticavastuka 

Pajicasala, 480 

Pancavastuka, 107 : 

Pancavastuka chapter of Prakaranapdda, 
375, 378, 581 

Paricavastukasitra, 106 

Pajicavastukavibhasa (Dharmatrata), 375, 
581 

Paiicavimsati, 115 

pandita, see erudite 

pani, see drink 

pantheon, 5 


- 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


papa, see (1) evil, (2) sin 
paracittajnana, see knowledge of others’ 
thoughts 
parajika, see adultery 
paramartha (6th c.), 22, 104, 112, 417, 
569, 582 
Paramatthajotika(Buddhaghosa), 305,312 
Paramatthavinicchaya(Anuruddha), 99 
paramrsta, see perverse 
Paranirmitavasavarti gods, 215 
Parasparapratyaya, see mutuality 
condition 
Parayanavagga chapter of Suttanipata, 
305, 313, 316 
parent, 527 
paridagha, see fever 
parideva, see lamentation 
Parijna, see ascertainment 
parihana, see backsliding 
-dharma, see fallible nature 
parikalpa, see construction 
parikrama, see worship 
parinama, see (1)change, (2) transformation 
Parinibbanasutta, 586 
parinirvana, 72,77, 581 
Paris, University of, 123 
parisad, see order 
pariskara, see requisite 
pariguddhi, see (1) purification, (2) purity 
paritta, see limited 
Parivara, 24 
parivartana, see backsliding 
parivrajaka, 581 
parivrajaki, see nun 
parivrtti, see backsliding 
Par§va, 11, 112,523 
Paryavasthana, see enveloper 
Pasadikasuttanta, 82,83 
passage, 386-388, 393, 415,416,523, 569 
-s, Mahay4na, 26, 27, 30, 31 
-S, Pali, 26-28, 32-36, 41,42, 45,47, 50- 
52, 73-78, 554 
passion, 148, 149 
, abandonment of, 199 
, defilement of, 540 
, realm of, see desire, realm of 
, sensual, 160, 214, 377 
past, 74,87, 105, 118, 158, 165, 206, 225, 


621 


238, 248, 256, 257, 261, 272-274, 289, 
290, 318, 342, 367, 368, 421,422, 432, 
439, 447, 509, 522, 527, 529, 535, 563, 
580 
body, see body, past 
Pataliputra, 14,22,78, 79,92, 100,265,472 
patent (i.e., close to view), 165 
path, 103, 117, 123, 158, 191, 221, 226, 
228, 278, 282, 287, 290, 299, 310,311, 
316,325, 342,385, 440, 442, 500, 501, 
ie 504,509, 517, 541,554 
condition, 96, 338 
, four (stream-entry, etc., s.v. each), 
141, 221, 232, 240, 242, 243, 246, 
253, 256, 262, 311 
, fivefold, 140, 301 
, fixedness in a, 283-285 
, eightfold, 34, 48-52, 55,70, 122, 184, 
207, 215, 221, 222, 224, 228, 234, 
244, 246, 250, 255, 256, 261, 262, 
268, 290, 321, 360, 363, 373, 393, . 
411, 420, 473, 504, 551, 557, 586 
,higher-worldly, 148,565 
-indicator, 547 
snoble, 126, 298, 411, 425 
of action, see action, path of 
of application, see application 
-polluter, 547 
, pure, 185 
, synonyms for, 221 
, tenfold, 55 
, uninterrupted, 546, 547 
-walker, 191 
-winner, 547 
patience, 163, 205,211,233, 256, 377,434, 
463, 466, 499, 513, 515 
P. patisambhida, 98 
Patisambhidamagga, 68,91,97-99, 123, 
133, 219-264, 578, 579, 587 
Patna, see Pataliputra 
Patthana, 80,88, 90, 91,96, 97, 123,337- 
334, 347, 374, 381, 403, 472, 588 
-Atthakatha (Buddhaghosa), 537 
peace, see tranquility 
Pelliot, Paul, 451,591 
penetration, 100,221,233,236,246,255,383- 
385, 396, 397, 414, 415, 427, 515, 536 
, aids to, 117, 514-516 


622 


of the four truths, 222, 250, 251 
perception, sensory, 97, 151, 177, 226, 
234, 240, 273 
-less beings, 216 
=samjna, see identification, conceptual 
perfected being, 22,54, 55, 67, 70, 71,93, 
126, 158, 169, 178, 181-183, 185, 190, 
193, 195,201, 202, 207,215, 224,228, 
234, 249, 261, 262, 271-273, 275,277, 
282, 283, 288, 289, 297-299, 302, 303, 
310, 311,316, 369, 370,374, 394,415, 
428, 429, 434, 441-446, 478-480, 484, 
485, 500,518,519, 525,527, 534-536, 
544, 545, 554, 556, 562, 568, 573 
, apparent, 303, 304 
-candidate, 184, 215,370, 441, 443 
’s falling away, see backsliding 
, killing a, 559 
perfection, see purity 
permeating, 531 
afflicting factors, 346, 348, 350, 354, 
379, 495 
awareness factors, 346-348, 350, 351, 
353, 354, 379, 495 
defiling factors, 346, 348, 350, 351, 
354, 379, 495 
perplexity or uncertainty, 69, 115, 133, 
150, 158, 160, 161, 162, 229, 240, 276, 
333,348, 352, 355, 357, 394, 400, 422, 
461, 498, 522, 523, 572 
perseverance, 205,213 
Persia, 3 
person, 78, 89,92, 105, 106, 155, 156, 158, 
165,214,215, 266-275, 324, 369-374, 
397-399, 424-427, 441,442,517, 429- 
531, 543, 567, 568, 576, 587 
,ordinary, 190,272,276, 284, 300-302, 
385, 386, 484, 485, 517, 539-541, 
543, 557, 561, 562, 565, 566 
royal, 178 
*smeaning, see meaning, person’s 
personality, nominal, 189-202 
perspicuity or perspicaciousness, 98, 133, 
230, 231, 235 
perturbable nature, 190 
pervasion, 252 
pervasive cause, 423, 456, 525 
defilements, 461 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


perverse, perversion, 160, 161,248 
perverted view, see view, perverted 
Petakopadesa, 98-100, 381-401,403,590 

Dhala, see result 
phantom, 549 
of the Buddha, 95 
phlegm, 486 
phoneme, phrasing, syllable, 99, 378, 404, 
406, 411-413, 422, 494, 523 
phrases, phrasing, see phoneme 
Pilindavaccha, 302 
Piliyakkha, 483 
pillar, 49,51 
pita, see yellow 
pitta, see bile 
Piyananda (Thera), W., 590 
pleasant, pleasure (see also (1) good; (2) 
contentedness; (3) satisfaction), 42, 
206, 207, 209, 213 
, conversion of, 382, 400, 401, 405, 
409, 412 
, sensual, 132, 176, 205, 431 
pliancy, 125, 139, 147, 154 
plotting of directions, 382, 398,401 , 405, 
412 
pondering, 213, 269, 399, 400 
possible and impossible, a Buddha’s 
knowledge of, 385 
post-nascence condition, 96,338 
posture, 171,243 
Poussin, Louis dela Vallée, 28, 128, 217, 
306, 360, 367, 417,489, 511,512,570, 
587, 590, 592, 593 
power, 122, 182, 228, 229, 232, 241,249, 
259, 310, 428, 482, 532 
born as the result of action, see action, 
power born as the result of 
five, 89,207,212, 221,246, 253, 255- 
257, 261, 262, 359, 363, 370, 373, 
504 
of others, abuddha’s knowledge of the, 
385 
of the Buddha, see Budha’s powers 
, Supematural orspecial basesof, 68,89, 122, 
123, 148, 172, 173, 185, 186,207,221, 
234,262,269, 291,292, 302,325,359, 
373, 473, 476, 504, 586 
, seven, 124, 140, 214, 223 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


, ten, 501, 532 
practice, spiritual or meditative, 126, 163, 
186, 205, 207, 222, 223, 249, 385, 400, 
423, 466, 500, 501,506, 507, 534, 540 
, destroyed by, 86, 158, 162,425, 426, 
436, 437, 441, 447, 460, 491, 497, 
565 
, four evil practices, 398, 412, 435 
-s of a monk, 89, 208 
, path of, 103, 109, 528, 530, 534, 535, 
539, 542, 545, 546, 552-554,.§57, 
561,591 
practitioner, 428 
prada§a, see spite 
pradeSsavihara, see abode, limited 
Pradhan, Prahlad, 573,577,580 
pradhana, see (1) abandoning, (2) exertion, 
(3) destruction, (4) endeavour, (5) 
exertion 
pragaha, see determination 
pragunata, see proficiency 
praharsa, see delight 
praiseworthiness, 198 
prajna, see wisdom 
, the word, 572 
Prajfiakaramati (1075), 570 
Prajiiaparamita, 56,97 
prajnapti, seeconcept 
-mat or -sat, see nominal 
Parjnaptibhasya (Katyayana_ or 
Maudgalyayana), 101, 104, 106, 203, 
217, 345, 557, 580, 587 
Prajfiasena, 217 
Prakaranapadda (Vasumitra_ or 
DevaSarman), 98, 102, 104, 106-108, 
115, 137,317, 345-347, 359, 360, 375- 
379, 580, 581, 586, 588-590 
prakarsika, see prolonged 
pralapa, see frivolous 
pralaya, see eons, period between 
pramdda, see heedlessness 
pramoda, see delight 
prana, see (1) life, (2) sheath 
pranidhi, see vow 
pranita, see superior 
prapti, see acquisition-force 
pras&da, see tranquility 
Prasannapada, see Madhyamaka- 


623 


karikaprasannapada 

praSasya, see praise 

prasna, see problem 

prasrabdhi, see tranquility 

prasthana, sce application 

pratibhana, see perspicuity 

pratigha, see(1)repugnance, (2) resisting 

pratihanya, see reacting 

Pratimoksa, 23, 24,59 

pratinihsarga, see relinquishment 

pratipad, see (1) progress, (2) answer 

pratipaksa, see antidote 

pratipatti, see leading 

pratisamdhi, see(1)conceptioninthe womb, | 
(2) rebirth-linking 

pratisamkhyana, see calculation 

pratisamstara, see munificence 

pratisamvid, see discrimination 

pratityasamutpadda, see dependent 
origination 

pratiSarana, see resort 

prativedhana, 500 

pratyagjata, see post-nascence condition 

pratyaksa, see perception, sensory 

pratyaveksana, see reflection 

pratyaya, see condition 

pratyekabuddha, see Buddha, solitary 

pravicaya, see (1) analysis, (2) sustained 
thought 

praviveka, see seclusion 

pravrtti, see activity 

prayoga, see application 

Prebish, Charles S., 78, 575, 576 

precedent condition, immediately, 338 

precept, moral, 49, 50, 59, 89, 117, 126, 
175, 180, 193, 207, 311,346, 429, 496, 
555 

predetermination, predestination, 304 

prema, see love 

prenascence condition, 96, 338 

prerana, see instigation 

presence condition, 96, 339 

presenttime, 87, 105, 158, 167,206,225,247, 
256,257,261,272-274,284,290,3 18,367, 
368, 421, 432, 439, 447, 509, 563 

and vows, addiction to, 132, 158, 170,209, 
348, 420, 436, 517 

preta, see ghost 


624 


pride, 69, 115, 133, 162, 176, 192, 199, 
206, 214,216, 229, 333, 377, 433, 434, 
461, 482, 498, 528, 539, 540, 593 

primary factor, 86 

principles, guiding, 215 

priti, see joy 

priya, see pleasant 

problems, 480 

proclivity, see trace 

proficiency, 125, 139, 147, 190 

profligate, 193 

progress 142, 143, 152, 183-185, 190,398, 

413,505 

prolonged causation, 114 

prompting, see instigation 

propensity, see trace 

prophesy, prophetic, 486 

proximity, see noninterrupted 

prthagjanatva, see ordinariness 

prthivi, see earth 

Przyluski, Jean, 576 

psychology, 41,44 

psychophysical complex (see also name- 
and-form), 225, 226, 236, 284, 474, 
475, 496, 551, 566 

Pubbasaliya school, 94,95 

pudgala, see person 

Puggalapajifatti, 88, 90-92, 117, 137, 
189-202, 359, 472 

Puggalapaniatti-Atthakatha, 189 

puja, see respect 

P’u-kuang (650), 108, 518, 588, 589 

punishment, 482 

Punjab, 471 

Punna, see Piirna 

punya, see merit 

pupil, see seeker 

purgatory, 369, 370, 483 

pure, 86,87, 318,420,434, 443,447,497, 
507-509 
influence, see influence, pure 

purification, 60, 68, 126, 251, 255, 264, 
460 

purity, 32, 163, 205, 207, 222, 306, 307, 
552, 557, 568 

Purna, 77, 102, 345 

Purnayaéas, 110 

purusendriya, see male-faculty 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Purvaparasamdhi, 
consecutive 

PiirvaSaila school, 115 

Puskaravati, 347,375 ¢ 


see sequence, 


quality, material, 268, 297 
quarrelsome, 193 


raga, see (1) desire, (2) attachment, (3) 
passion, (4) love 

Rahder, Johannes, 593 

Rahula, Walpola, 574 

Rahulavada, 29 

Rajagirika school, 94 

Rajagrha, 20, 77,81 

raksitatva, see guardedness 

Ramayana, 540 

Randle, Henry N.,578 

rapture, 70 

rasa, see (1) function, (2) taste 

rasi, see group 

ratna, see jewel 

rddhi, see power 

reacting, reactive, 320, 363 

real, 87,517,518 
thing, see actual entity 

reality of things, 53 

realization, 207, 223, 230, 246, 250, 254- 
256, 261, 554 a 
higher, 260, 261, 263, 377 

realm (see also material, immaterial, 
sensory, unincluded), 157, 178, 182, 
220, 229, 295, 320, 382, 400, 405, 428, 
453, 461-465, 467, 469, 490, 497, 507, 
514,515,525, 530,535, 536,542, 544- 
547, 552, 553, 561, 564, 591 
, lower, see hell 

rearising, 220, 247 

reason, 131 

reasoning, 207 

Reat, Noble Ross, 3-57, 570-573 

rebirth (see alsocourse), 5-7, 33, 35, 38-44, 
48, 70, 94, 123, 158, 160, 163, 170, 176, 
182,207, 211,214,220, 247, 248, 267, 
268, 281,282, 296, 311,316, 369, 370, 
434, 444, 473, 521, 566 
from family to family, 192 
-linkage, 220, 225 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


, seven times at most, 191, 192, 202, 
292, 293, 384, 464, 499, 540 
, termination of, see liberation 
receiver, receiving of gifts, 207 
reciprocal relation, 295,519 
recluse, see ascetic 
recognition, 253,475 
recollection, see memory 
recurring cause, 110 
recursive series, 474 
red, 143, 144 
reflection, 226-228, 256, 551 
refuge, 181,534 
refutation, 266 
Regamey, Constantin, 570 
region, see world 
regress, infinite, 292, 456 
regression, see backsliding 
regret, 115, 394, 430, 455, 462, 536 
release, see liberation 
relic-worship, 482 
religious life, 271,406 
religious values, 203 
relinquishment, 232, 261,264 
relishing, 406, 407, 467, 468, 567 
remembrance, see memory 
remorse, 162, 199, 200 
renunciation, 49, 87, 106, 167, 208, 214, 
222, 224, 234, 240, 242, 249-251, 262, 
264, 415 
repetition-condition, 96, 303, 338 
representative cognition, 130, 131, 140, 


151,152, 204, 209, 364, 453,462,469, . 


474, 490, 493, 494, 536, 545, 549 

reproof, grounds for, 206 

repugnance, 150,216, 333, 348, 352, 354, 
356, 536 

repulsiveness, 133, 160, 176 

requisites, 382, 392, 405,410 

resistance, 86, 87, 118, 159,206, 447,453, 
461, 462, 497 

resolve, resolution, 230, 240, 249, 250, 
348, 351,357, 377,422,454, 494, 495, 
515,592 

resort, 574 

respect, 369, 427, 477, 489, 531, 532 

responsive, 154, 157, 159 

restlessness, see excitedness 


625 


restraint, 117, 163, 182, 184, 185,224, 281, 
292,433,458, 459, 496, 506, 525, 561, 
562 

result, 89, 175, 176, 191,221, 311, 386, 
406, 407, 492, 500, 507 

retribution, karmic, see maturation, karmic 

retrogression, see backsliding 
Revata, 22, 77 
reverence, 186,427, 531-534 
Rg Veda, 4-6. 
thinoceros-horn, 313 
Rhys Davids, Carolyn A.F., 137, 138, 164, 
165, 189,327, 381,403, 570, 571,577, 
578, 587, 590 
Rhys Davids, T.W., 89, 471, 573-577 
right, 181,205, 371 
action, see action, right 
rigidity, 127 
ritual, 5 
-s, clinging toor grasping, 69, 158, 161 
robber, 482 
Rohana, 472 
Roman, 3 
root, 177,251, 327, 394, 423 
-s, bad, 48, 62, 69, 177, 205, 323, 328, 
387, 390, 399, 435, 447, 448, 492, 
494, 495, 501, 512, 540 

condition, 96, 338, 339 

-s, good, 48, 62, 171, 177, 182, 205, 
323, 377, 387, 390, 399, 400, 412, 
427, 455, 492, 494, 499, 501,515, 
516, 534, 535 

-S, neutral, 377, 494, 592 

Rosetta Stone, 4 

Roth, Gustav, 575 

rudeness, 147,210 

Ruegg, David Seyfort, 579, 582 

rule 
, grasping of, 161 
and ritual, see precepts and vows 
-s of the Buddhist Order, 17 

rupa, see (1) matter, (2) color, (3) form 
» the word (dhatu), 288, 572 

rupin, see material 


Sabbanimitta, 484 
Sabda, see (1) language, (2) sound, (3) 
speech 


626 


-vada, 111 

Sabdika, 512,513, 523 

sabhaga, see homogeneous 

sabhoga, see co-ideation 

sacrifice, ritual, 158 

(Mahavibhasa)-Saddhammapajjotika, 312 

Saddhammapakasini (Mahanama), 98 

Saddhatissa, Hemavati, 359 

sadhana, see means 

safety, 221 

sagacity or sageliness, 64, 207, 309, 310, 
460 

Sagala, 471 

sahabhi, see simultaneous 

sahajata, see conascence 

Saiksa, see seeker 

saint, saintly (see also perfected being), 
521,541, 545-548, 561 

Sakamoto, Yakio, 590 

Sakavadin, 265-281, 287, 288, 293, 295, 
302, 304 

sakhilya, see courtesy 

sakrdagamin, see once-returner 

saksin, see witness 

Sakurabe, Hajime, 345, 580, 588 

Sakya, 483 

Sakyamuni, see Buddha, Gautama 

Salistamba Sittra, 27,28, 32-34, 37-39, 41, 
43, 44, 48, 50, 569, 570-572 

Salya, see dart 

salute, salutation, 185 

Sama, Prince, 483 

samadana, see attitude 

samadhi, see concentration 

Samagama Sitra, 76 

Samanantarapratyaya, see antecedent 

. + condition 

Samanvagama, see (1) prapti, (2) ordered 

samanya, see universal 

samapatti, see (1) absorption, (2) trance 

Samaropana, see coordination 

Samatha, see tranquility 

samaya, see time frame 
-vimukti, see liberation at times 

Samayabhedopacaranacakra, 77,569,584 

sambandhika, see serial 

sambhara, see accumulation 

sambhava, see source 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sampbodhi, see enlightenment 

samcita, see accumulated 

samgha, see order, Buddhist 

Samghadeva (383), 108,451 

samgraha, see (1) included, (2) summary 
condition 

samiksya, see considerateness 

samisa, see fleshly 

Samjanana, see recognition 

samjna, see identification, conceptual 
, the word, 128 

samkalpa, see thought 

samkhya, see enumeration 

Samkhya, 111,522, 558, 565 

sammoha, 506 

Sammitiya, 78, 93,95, 105, 115, 116 

SammitiyanikayaSastra, 576 

sammoha, see excitedness 

Sampatti, see accomplishment 

Samprajnia, see discernment 

samprasddana, see tranquility 

Samprayoga, see association 

samprayojana, see comprehension 

Samprayukta, see connected 

Samrafnijaniya living, see livelihood, 
fratemal — 

samsara, 36, 311,316,383, 385, 388, 393, 
414-416 
, living in, see proclivity 

samSaya, see doubt 

samskara, see conditioning factor 

samskrta, see conditioned 

samsparsa, see contact 

samtati, see life, length of 

samtirana, see deliberation 

Samudaya, see origin 

samutthana, see (1) origination, (2) co- 
originating 

samvara, see (1) behavior, (2) restraint 

Samvrti, see conventional 

samyaktva, seerightness 

samyoga, see (1) bondage, (2) conjunction, 
(3) cohesion , 

Samyojana, see fetter 

samyukta, see compounded 

Samyuktabhidharmahrdayasitra (Dhar- 
matrata), 111, 119,580,582 

Samyuktagama, 586 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


Samyutta Nikaya, 24, 25,83, 249-258, 261, 
274, 276-279, 281, 283, 285, 286, 288, 
299, 303, 569-573, 577, 586 

Sancti Edict, 29 

sangha, see order, Buddhist 

Sanghabhadra (380), 106,511 

Sanghadeva (383), 417,511 

Sanghavasu, 110 

Sangitiparyaya (Sariputra or Maha- 
kusthilya), 84, 102, 103, 109, 132, 133, 
179, 203-216, 345, 580, 585 

Sangiti Sutta(nta), 25,83-85,92, 103,203, 
204, 375, 379 

sanidarSana, see visible 

P. sankhdra, see factor, conditioning 

Sankrtyayana, Rahula, 587 

Santi, see peace 
, the term, 221, 382 

Santideva (740), 32 

santika, see patent 

Sapratigha, see resisting 

Sarana, see refuge 

Sarana, see conflicting 

Sarathchandra, E.R.,578 

Sariputra, 25, 80,81, 83, 84,97, 102, 111, 
179, 200, 203, 305, 390, 481,524, 552, 
566, 585 

Sariputrabhidharmasastra, 103,115,117, 
123, 137, 179, 317-325, 359, 374, 588 

Sarira, see body 

Sarman, V., 165, 359, 585 

Sarpa, see snake 

Sarvajfiatva, see omniscience 

Sarvastivada, 23-27, 31,33, 56, 77-89, 93- 
98, 100-119, 123, 131, 132, 137, 179, 
203-217, 345-358, 367-379, 417-449, 
451-471, 511-568, 575, 576 
Mila-, 79, 85, 101 

Sarvastivadanikayapaficavastukavihasa, 
106 

Sarvatraga, see pervasive 

sasrava, see impure 

Sastri, Dwarikadass, 588 

Sastri, N. Aiyaswami, 376, 581 

Sastri, Santi Bhiksu, 489 

saSvatavada, see eternalism 

Satan, 15 

Satata, see perseverance 


627 


Sathya, see craftiness 

Satipatthana Sutra, 52,55, 334 

satisfaction, 62-64, 117, 124, 128, 138, 
142, 145, 146, 149-151, 157, 158, 162, 
167, 169, 173, 206, 207, 241,248, 250, 
263, 268, 269, 296, 297, 320, 322, 335, 
349, 351,352, 382, 395,398, 405, 413, 
418, 420, 447, 459, 461, 467, 473, 501, 
502, 542, 551, 553, 557, 559, 564 

satkayadrsti, see self, theory of 

Sato, Mitsuyu, 165 

P. sattakkhettuparama, see rebirth, seven 
times at most 

satya, see truth 

Satyasiddhi(sastra) (Harivarman), 94,98, 
108, 119 

Sauci, see (1) purification, (2) purity - 

Saumanasya, see contentedness 

Saunika, see soldier 

sauratya, see disposition, good 

Sautrantika, 82, 108, 110, 111, 132, 536, 
582, 584 

Sauvacasya, see suavity 

savior, 30 

Schayer, Stanislaw, 570 

schisms orschools, Buddhist, 76,79, 100 
in the order, see order 

sciences, power through, 256, 260 

scruple, see modesty 

Scythian, see Kusana 

seclusion, 250, 251 

second, see moment 

seed, 455, 506 

seeing, see vision 

seeker or learner or disciple, 87, 171-176, 
190, 191,207, 227,371,385, 386, 428, 
429, 443, 447, 463, 464, 491,513,530, 
543, 551, 554, 555 

self, soul, 5-7, 35, 40-42, 47, 75, 93, 267, 
307, 382, 405, 420, 472, 517, 537 
-enlightened, see Buddha, solitary 
-indulgence, 16, 37 
-ishness, s.v. 
-lessness, see no-self 
-mortification, 13, 14, 16,37, 199,432 
-nature, 311,316,452 ; 
, Sheaths of, see sheath 
, theory. of, 158, 161, 170, 204, 209, 


628 


213, 238, 239, 348, 405, 419, 430, 
463, 517, 593 
(vedagu), 474 
selfishness, 151, 162, 193,211,216, 348, 
351, 352, 439, 462, 540 
sensation, see (1) feeling, (2) contact 
sense or faculty, 83,92, 96, 100, 105, 109, 
123, 126, 130, 137, 140, 149, 154, 155, 
157, 176, 182, 189, 193, 228, 241,249, 
253,255, 281,291, 292, 294, 298, 304, 
310, 311,316, 325, 338, 369, 391, 393, 
412,421, 423,437,447, 449, 455,473, 
496, 497, 504, 508, 530, 539, 565 
~awareness, see perception 
-basis, see basis, sense 
-consciousness, 106, 550 
-data, 126, 146, 151 
-impression, 124 
,»higher-worldly, 148 
,keen/dull, 384, 385, 397, 398 
-object, see object, sense- 
-s, two bad, 430 
-s, three, 399 
-s, four, 391 
-8, five, 89, 122, 130, 207, 211, 221, 
230, 242, 244, 246, 255, 256, 261, 
262, 285, 290, 349, 358, 359, 363, 
370, 373, 387, 394, 408, 418, 428, 
475, 493, 494, 498 
-8, Six, 44, 53, 126, 130, 166, 167, 170, 
182, 213, 220, 221, 223, 228, 229, 
239, 317, 318, 335, 412, 502, 521, 
522, 553 
-s, seven, 363 
-s, eight, 140, 155 
-s of others, knowledge of, 236, 385 
-S, twelve, 91,155, 166, 167, 177, 353- 
355, 359-365, 391, 447, 453, 493 
-S, sxteen external, 497 
-S, nineteen indestructible, 509 
-S, 22,89, 169, 177, 187,220, 266-268, 
322, 335, 336, 359, 361, 362, 447, 
470, 553, 566, 586 
sense-organ (see also sense), 105, 153, 
166, 292, 294, 437, 449, 521,522 
,higher- worldly, see awareness, higher- 
worldly 
sensory realm, see desire, realm of sensory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sensual, sensuous, sensory 
interest, see interest, sensory 
-ity, 287, 288 
passion, see passion, sensual 
realm, see realm, sensory 
separated, see disconnected 
separateness of defilements from liberation, 
233 
sequence, consecutive, 390, 408, 409 
serenity, see tranquility 
serial causation, 114 
sermon, the Buddha’s first, 15 
seventimes at most, see rebirth, seven times 
at most 
sexual 
interest, 133 : 
misconduct, 50, 59, 175, 180,224, 489, 
496, 560 ; 
passion factor, 86, 87 
relations, 50, 303, 304 : 
shame or bashfulness, 124, 125, 139, 147, 
193, 204, 214, 256, 369, 379, 400, 455, 
531 
shamelessness, 149, 162, 163, 193, 204, 
346, 349, 352-354, 377, 400, 430, 455 
shape, see form 
sharpness, 163 
shared features, see mark, general 
Shastri, Shanti Bhiksu, 417,418 
sheaths of the self, 41 
She-mo-ta-to, see Sremadatta 
Shih-kao, 375 
Shiio, B., 179 
short, see size, short 
sickness, 6,7,.194, 263,383,428, 434, 539 
Siddhartha, see Buddha 
, the word, 9 
Siddhatthika school, 94 
siddhi, see realization 
sign, 59, 220, 227, 228, 280, 399 
, learning, 63 
-lessness, 250, 280, 400, 429, 467, 470, 
502, 557, 568, 573 
Sikhi, 254 
Siksd, see training 
SiksGsamuccaya (Santideva), 32 
Stla, see (1) precept, moral, (2) moral 
, the word, 572 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


silence, see sagacity 

silk, Banaras, 195 

simha, see lion 

SimSapavanasiura, 373 

simultaneous cause, 110, 422, 423, 456, 
525,537 

sins, five deadly, 559-561 

Sin(g)halese, 99 
language, 25 

single-seeded or -seeker, 192, 293, 384, 
499 

Sitapani (383), 113,583 

iva, 6 

Sivi, King, 479 

Siyalkot, 471 

skandha, see (1) aggregate, (2) pillar 

Skandhila (500), 108 

skepticism, 116 

skill, 163, 166, 205 
-ful, see good 

slander, 147,210, 459, 489 

sleep, 42, 173, 486 

sleepiness, see sloth 

Slesman, see phlegm 

sloth, 60, 115, 133, 160, 190, 215, 249, 
348, 358, 377, 394, 400, 430, 455, 462, 
536, 572, 592 

Smart, Ninian, 571 . 

smell, 154, 167, 299, 319, 455, 456, 490 

smrti, see (1) memory, (2) mindfulness 
-upasthiti, see alert 

snake, 198 

sneha, see (1) affection, (2) viscidity 

Socrates, 3 

Sodhana, see clearing up 

Soka, see sorrow 

soldier, 200 

solidity, 118; 452 

solitude, 142 

Sonuttara, 472 

sore, 206 

sorrow or grief, 168, 170, 220, 263, 320, 
383, 496, 553 

soteriology, 93, 103, 108, 114-116, 203 

soul, see self 

sound, 154, 166, 167,289, 292, 299, 300, 
319, 560 

source, 327 


629 


Southeast Asia, 8, 90, 101 
sovereignty, 256 
space, 41, 126, 155, 204, 285, 378, 452, 
485, 494, 550, 551, 563 
-element, 154, 167 
, infinite or boundless orendless, sphere 
of, 53,60, 145, 146, 174, 177, 208, 
214, 223, 229, 278, 285, 468, 502, 
552 
sparsa, see (1) contact, (2) touch 
Specht, Edouard, 592 
speech, 277,289, 290, 332, 369, 520, 562 
, the Buddha’s, 279 
»tecollective, 520 
right, 49, 147, 168, 210, 301, 492 
, wrong, 147,210, 224, 560 
sphere, seeelement . 
Sphutartha AbhidharmakoSa Vyakhya 
(YaSomitra), 102, 114, 570, 576, 580, 
582, 588 
spite, 177, 213, 348, 351 
sprastavya, see tangible 
Sraddha, see faith 
$ramana, see monk 
Sramanya, see asceticism 
Sravaka, see disciple 
Sravasti, 367 
Sremadatta, 529,548 
SriLanka, 9,21, 25, 26,29, 30, 79, 90,575 
Srilata, 528 
P. srotas, see stream 
srotapanna, see stream-entry 
Srotra, see ear 
Sruta, see learning, traditional 
Stache-Rosen, Valentina, 203 
stage of vision, 117 
-s (see alsorealm), 117 
stainless, 221 
starvation, 13 
state, 207, 220, 231, 232 
, immaterial, see immaterial state 
, Meditative, see meditation 
static causation, 114 
Stcherbatsky, Th., 587 
steadiness, steadfastness, 149, 163, 180, 
232, 256, 264, 515, 522, 533, 554 
stealing, 50,59, 147, 175, 224, 459, 489, 
560 


630 — 


Stede, W., 313-316 
sthavira, see elder 
Sthaviravada (see also Theravada), 22, 23, 
77, 79, 110, 131 
sthiti, see life, length of 
stinginess, 377 
stolidity, 133, 160, 162,240, 394, 430, 536 
storehouse-consciousness, 97 
straight-forwardness, 125 
stream, 199 
-entry, 62,69, 70, 126, 180-185, 191, 
192, 194, 199, 201, 202, 208, 215, 
227, 228, 243, 249, 261, 269, 270, 
272, 273, 277, 278, 280-283, 292, 
293, 299, 311, 316, 371, 384, 394, 
426, 441-444, 464, 469, 478, 499, 
505, 540, 541, 545, 546, 557, 562, 
564, 565, 568 
-candidate, 183, 184, 215, 370, 371, 
441,443 
of consciousness, 43 
strength, see power 
Stri, see female 
stupa, 552 
styana, see sloth 
suavity, 163, 205 
Subha, see cleanliness 
Subhadra, 20, 77, 479, 575 
sublime, see boundless 
subtle 66, 118, 155, 165, 539 
body, s.v. 
success, see realization 
suchness, 95, 221, 250, 300 
SudarSana gods, 212 
sudden termination, see termination, 
gradual/sudden 
Suddhi, see purity 
Suddhodana, King, 10,484 
Sudhamma, Hsaya, 337 
Sudinna Kalanaputra, 481 
SudrSa gods, 212 
suffering (see also frustration), 6, 10, 11, 
39, 40, 48, 117, 268 
suicide, 483, 544, 562 
sukha, see satisfaction 
Sukla, see white 
sitksma, see subtle 
sulkiness, 163, 193, 204, 400 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Sumangalavilasint (Buddhaghosa), 97, 
204 

Sumatra, 101 

Sumeru, Mt., 527,530 

summary condition, 113 

summit, 419, 463, 499, 514-516 

Sung dynasty, 104 

Sunga, 79 

Sunyata, see emptiness 

Siinyatavadin, 370-373 

superconscious, see (1) buddhi, (2) wisdom 

superior, 165 
-ity, 207, 213 

superknowledge, see higher faculty : 

support, 261, 327, 382, 392, 398, 405, 413 
-s of consciousness, see consciousness 

supporting object, 86, 138, 142, 143, 153, 
289, 338, 339, 374, 420, 424, 453, 454, 
494, 501, 509, 519 

supramundane, 67, 87,94, 108, 146-148, 
159, 172,235, 243, 256, 296, 418-420, 
463, 499, 513-515, 523, 527 
awareness, see awareness, higher- 

worldly 
concentration, see concentration, higher- 
worldly Z 

conduct, see conduct, higher-worldly 
contact, s.v. 
knowledge, 535 
path, 69, 261, 500 
speech, 95, 279 

supremacy, 207 

suspicion, see doubt 

sustained thought, 62-64, 86, 124, 138, 
142, 145, 149, 158, 162, 172, 186, 207, 
220, 231,234,277, 299, 321, 332, 338, 
349, 352, 356, 382, 388, 389, 394, 406, 
407,410, 411,418,433, 437,453, 455, 
467,475,494, 501,506, 514,539, 542, 
550, 553 

susupti, see sleep, deep 

Sutra, see (1) passage, (2) thread 

Sutta Nipata, 48,51, 94, 270-272, 276, 
277,279, 298, 305, 310, 312,313,316, 
571,572 

Sutta Pitaka, 12, 13, 15,17,21,23, 24, 26, 
52,55, 76, 77, 81, 82, 84, 97, 407, 574 

Sutta Vibhanga, 23 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


suvarna, see beautiful object 

Suzuki, Daisetz, 571 

svabhava, see nature, essential 

svalaksana, see differentiation 

Svapna, see dream 

svarga, see heaven 

syaddvada, 38 

syllable, see phoneme 

symbolic process, 565 

sympathy, 132, 139, 144, 147, 159, 174, 
205, 207, 208, 552 

synonym, 306, 307, 382, 390-392, 405, 
409 


tactual 
-consciousness element, 168 
faculty, 169 
-organ element, 167, 168 
sense, 166, 522 
Taittirtya Upanisad, 41,569,571 
Takakusu, Junjiro, 84, 180, 203,217,417, 
577, 579, 582, 586-589, 592, 593 
Takakusu, M., 590 
Takasaki, Jikido, 179,586 
tamas, see darkness 
Tamasavana, 417 
tangible 
element, 168,319 
sense, 166 
tanu, see attenuation 
Tao-an, 583 
taste (see also gustatory), 154, 166, 167, 
250, 319, 455, 456, 490 
of liberation, 99 
Ta T'ang Hsi- yii, 588, 589 
tathagata, 176, 181, 182, 194, 206, 310, 
311,316, 481 
tathatd, see suchness 
tatsabhaga, see heterogeneous 
tattva, see principle 
TattvaSuddhi, see Satyasiddhi(sastra) 
Tavatimsa heaven, 80 
Taylor, Arnold C., 219, 265 
teaching, 207, 302, 381, 388, 390, 396, 
405-407, 410, 539 
tejas, see fire 
tendency (see disposition) 
, underlying, 229, 236 


631 


termination, gradual/sudden, 94,527,541, 
546 

term, see word 

tetralemma, 37,38, 43, 238, 269, 307,435, 
519, 534, 560, 566, 571 

Thai 99 

Thai language, 219 

Thailand, 21 

theft, see stealing 

Theragatha, 29,57 

Theravada, 9, 18,22-34, 38, 43,44, 51,54, 
56, 75, 79, 80, 82, 88-101, 107-109, 
114, 117, 123, 137, 203, 204, 265, 305- 
317 

Therigatha, 57,283 

thina, see sloth 

thinking, 124, 138, 230, 321, 374, 376, 
377, 433, 454, 459, 495, 558,565 ° 

thirst, see desire 

Thomas, Edward J., 306, 569 

thorn, 300 

thought, 302, 321, 390, 408 
, bad, 146, 149 
, initial, s.v. 
, tight, 49, 124, 139, 146, 147, 168, 173, 

469, 555 

, Sustained, s.v. 

thread, 407 

thunderbolt-minded, 194 

Thurman, Robert A.F., 571 

Tibetan translation, 23, 24, 27, 123,217 

tiksna, see sharp 

Timbaruka, 372 

time (see also past; present; future), 94, 105, 
131, 132, 153,474, 490, 503, 520, 526, 
531, 551, 554, 564, 567, 581 
-frame, 74 

Tin, Pe Maung, 576, 577 

P. Tipitaka, see Tripitaka 

Tissa-Moggaliputta, see Moggaliputtatissa 

Tiwari, Mahesh, 189, 265, 327, 359 

Tokhara, 489 

tolayitr, see weigher 

tongue, 166 

torment, 250 

torpor, see sloth 

totality, element of, 448, 465,503 

touch (see alsocontact), 209,455,456, 490 


632 


,cold, 127 
-faculty, 322 
trace or latent disposition, 156, 176, 177, 
214, 222,228, 271,414,423, 424, 427, 
431,436, 439, 440, 451,452, 456,499, 
520, 565 
-lessness, 429, 502, 557 
trainee, see seeker 
training, 158, 175,207,246, 342, 399, 586 
trance, meditative, 53, 55, 60-66, 89, 118, 
126, 142, 146, 147, 163, 173, 174, 186, 
‘205, 207, 208, 220, 221,224, 229, 231, 
232, 240, 243, 250, 259, 262, 290, 294, 
300, 310, 311,325, 359, 394, 400, 413, 
440, 447, 458, 467, 468, 473, 501,503, 
518, 550, 551, 562, 586 
cessation- , see cessation-attainment 
, first, 14, 146, 172, 455, 567 
, fourth, 145, 146, 499 
frre from conceptual identification, 377, 
456, 494, 495, 565, 566, 568 
,honinterrupted, 458, 535 
tranquility, 53-56, 61, 63, 64, 66, 68, 70, 
125, 139, 140, 142, 147, 149, 163, 171, 
181-185, 199, 205, 208, 214,221,222, 
224, 226, 227, 231,232, 250, 251,256, 
261,264, 306-308, 312, 322,379, 394, 
400, 405, 411,412,455, 467, 469, 502, 
531, 539, 551, 572 
transformation, 256, 260 
transmigration, see rebirth 
TrayastimSa gods, 215 
treasure, see jewel 
tree, 198, 199 
trefoil, 382, 399-401, 405, 413 
Trenckner, V.,592 
Tripitaka, 23-25, 79 
trsnda, see desire 
truth, 8, 13-15, 83, 92, 175, 208, 209, 255, 
284, 479, 551 
-s, fournoble, 15,33-35,44,47-50, 53, 
89, 107, 108, 126, 168, 169, 177, 
180, 182, 183, 186, 191, 200, 208, 
220, 221, 224, 235, 243, 250, 251, 
254, 255, 270, 278, 285, 321, 322, 
331, 359, 361, 363, 381, 383, 388, 
391, 394, 396, 400, 401, 407, 412, 
442, 447, 460, 461, 465, 469, 497, 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


499, 505, 506, 515, 528, 533, 535, 
540, 551, 556, 558, 586, 591 
- ,conventional, 74, 284, 551 
(=dharma), 39 
,higher-worldly, 148 
, nominal, 189 
tulya, see weight 
turning back, see backsliding 
Tusita god or heaven, 95, 215, 468, 482 
tyaga, see renunciation 


ubhatabhagavimutkti, see liberation in both. 
ways 

ucchedavada, see nihilism 

Udana(varga) (Dharmatrata), 81, 276, 
278, 410, 411, 571, 576 

Udayana, 566 

Uddaka Ramaputta, 13, 15,53, a 

udde§a, see doctrine 

uddhatya, see worry 

Uddicya, 484 

udvega, see fear 

ugly object as meditative device, 144 

Ujjain, 179 

unaccumulated factor, 86 

unappropriated factor, 86 

unbounded, see immeasurable 

uncertainty, see perplexity 

unchangeableness, 303. 

uncompounded, see unconditioned 

unconditioned, 85-87, 91,94,95, 107,119, 
157, 159, 162, 163, 167, 168, 220,250, 
251, 255, 269, 270, 285, 300, 318, 353, 
354, 367, 376, 378, 447, 494, 500, 507, 
508, 522, 532, 536-546, 554, 563 

undefiled, 87, 455, 527, 567 

underived matter, 153 

understanding (see also knowledge), 139- 
147, 157, 159, 162, 163, 182, 191,205, 
208, 246, 253, 254, 321,382,400, 405, 
531 
, complete or higher, 226, 254 
-fuculty, see knowledge that one knows 
, full, 230, 250, 451 
, lack of, see delusion 

undetermined, see neutral 

undistracted, see nondistraction 

unguarded, 205 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


unincluded realm, 153, 158, 159,223,229, 
295, 445 

unique, 593 

unity, 221,392 

universal feature, 537 

universe, 6,7, 138-141, 564 

unlimited, 158, 359, 363 

unmada, see insanity 

unmanifest 
karma, 457, 458, 491, 492, 563, 564 
matter, 95, 107, 118, 119,376,452, 550 

unnati, see inflation : 

Unno, Taitetsu, 579 

unordered, 113,581 

unpleasant, see foul 

unprofitable thing, 432-435 

unresisting, 87 
factor, 86,447 
matter, 206 

upacara, see reverence 

upddana, see clinging 

upadaya, see derivative, derived 

upadesa, 81, 82 

upadhi, see limitation 
, the term, 316 

Upagupta, 79,579 

P. upahaccaparinibbaya, see decedent, 
term-curtailing 

upakaraka, see helper 

upakleSa, see affliction 

Upali, 21,77 

upanaha, see vengefulness 

Upananda, 575 

Upanisad, 6-8, 34,37,40-42, 45,46, 52,75 

upapaduka, see magical being 

upapatti, see rearising 

upasaka, see lay people 

upasama, see peace, inner 

upasthana, see establishing 

upatta, see appropriated 

upavicara, see pondering 

upayogatva, see helpfulness 

upeksa, see equanimity 

urna, 10 

usma, see heat 

usnisa, 10 

UThittila, 165 

utkarsa, see excess 


633 


utpanna, see arisen 
utsaha, see zeal 
Uttarapathaka school, 93,95, 116 


vacana, see admonition 

Vadekar, R.D., 585 

vadya, see blameworthiness 

Vaibhasika, 81, 101, 103, 108, 110-119, 
579, 581, 592 

Vaidya, P.L.,576 

Vaipulyasitra, 578 

vairdgya, see nonattachment 


' Vaiéali, 19, 22, 77,575 


vaisaradhya, see confidence 

Vaisesika, 111, 127,558, 565 

P. Vajiputtaka, 77, 78,93 

vajra, see thunderbolt 

Vamalabdha, 110 

vanka, see craftiness 

Varanasi, 15 

vasana, see trace 
, the word, 414 

Vaspa, 110 

vastu, see actual entity 

Vasubandhu (360), 74,93, 106, 111,112, 
114,378,489, 512,580, 582,587,590, 
593 

Vasula, 523 

Vasumitra (more than one by this name), 
22, 77, 102, 104, 106, 110-113, 345- 
356, 375, 376, 512,516, 519-523, 527, 
529, 530,536,537, 548, 550, 552, 565, 
581-583, 588 

Vasumitra (bodhisattva)-Samgitisastra, 
580, 581 

Vatsiputriya school, 105, 110, 115, 116, 
512-514, 518,519, 521,533,543, 560, 
561 

vayu, see ait 

vedagu, see self (vedagu) 

vedana, see feeling 

Vedic orthodoxy, 8 

vehicle, 116, 117 

vengefulness or enmity or hostility, 193, 
214, 348, 351,377 

verbal factor, 327 

Vessabhia, 254 

Vessantara Jataka, 479, 485 


634 


Vetulyaka, 93,95, 578 
vevacana, see synonym 
vibhaga, see detachment 
Vibhajyavada school, 111, 115, 131,317, 
512, 529-533, 536,541, 543,544, 546, 
549, 551, 552, 554-558, 560, 564-568 
vibhakti, see analysis 
vibhanga, see (1) analysis, (2) dispensation 
Vibhanga, 83,88, 90-92, 97, 98, 103, 122, 
123. 132, 133, 137, 165-178, 179, 180, 
186, 187,219, 317, 359, 403, 472, 529, 
585, 586, 588 
-Atthakatha (Buddhaghosa ), 573,574 
Vibhanga sittra, 83, 122 
Vibhasa, 102, 106, 113-115, 117, 580, 
581, 583, 593 
Vibhasasastrin, 111-119 
vibhava, see nonbecoming 
vicara, see sustained thought 
vicikitsa, see perplexity 
vidyut, see lightning 
view, 68, 146, 160, 161,213, 377,390,414, 
460, 461, 564-568, 591 
, adherence to, 348, 534 
-attainer, 103,464, 499 
-conduct, 397, 398, 400, 406, 412 
,extreme, 348, 419, 517 
, perverted or heretical, 248, 249, 390, 
398, 412, 470, 504, 519, 520, 557 
tight, 34, 49, 124, 139, 147, 168, 181, 
193, 249, 261, 273, 478 
, wrong or false, 69, 132, 149, 150, 158, 
160, 162, 170, 176, 190, 193, 204, 
209, 213, 214, 229, 237-239, 268, 
280, 309, 311, 316, 333, 348, 350, 
352, 355, 358, 377, 419, 436-438, 
443, 448, 459, 482, 489, 490, 498, 
507, 517, 519, 525, 540, 555, 556, 
559, 560, 591 
vigama, see disappearance 
vigilance, 163, 173 
, lack of, 163 
vigraha, see dissociation 
vihara, see abode 
vihimsa, see cruelty 
vijnana, see (1) consciousness; (2) 
awareness 
sheath, 41 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Vijnanakaya (DavaSarman), 93, 102, 104- 
106, 110, 131, 165, 345, 367-374, 378, 
580, 581,589 

Vijiianavada, see Yogacara 

vijnapti, see (1) manifest, (2) notification 

vijneya, see known 

vikalpa, see construction, conceptual 

viksepa, see distraction 

Vimalakirtisiitra, 571 

vimati, see difficulty 

vimoksa, see liberation 

vimukti, see liberation 

vimuktimargaSastra, 123 

P. vimutticeto, see liberation, mind— 

Vimuttimagga, 97 

vinaya, see discipline 
of Milasarvastivada, 89, 101 
of Sarvastivada, 85, 101 

Vinayapitaka, 17,20, 21,23, 24,26, 76-78, 
84, 253, 272, 276, 278, 279, 283, 301, 
574, 575 
-Atthakatha, 573 

Vinitadeva (750), 22,569 

violence, see cruelty 

vipaka, see (karmic) maturation _ 

-ja, see factor produced by maturation 
viparinama, see change 

viparitamidha, see nature, upside-down 

viparyasa, see view, perverted 

viparyaya, see error a! 

Vipassi, 52, 254 

vipasyana, see insight 

vipatti, see deviation 

viprayukta, see dissociation, dissociated 

viraga, see backsliding 

virakti, see indifference 

virati, see matter, unmanifest 

virtue (see also(1) moral, (2) dharma), 224, 
264, 291, 383, 393, 396, 398, 469, 486, 
489, 508 

virya, see energy 

visabhagatva, see heterogeneous nature 

visamyoga, see separate 

visaya, see content 

viscidity, 127 

visesa, see advantageous 

visibie, 86, 87, 159, 206, 320, 363, 447 

visual, vision, 151, 154, 209, 220, 230, 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


232, 233, 253, 261, 264, 342, 355, 377, 

395, 466, 490, 501, 554, 555, 565 

consciousness, 167, 300, 319, 423, 
520, 550 

, destroyed by, 86, 158, 162,425, 426, 
435-437, 441, 447, 460, 491, 497, 
565 

faculty, 169, 322,455 

, one who has won, 191, 201, 202 

organ, see organ, visual 


»pathof, 181,464, 465,514,515, 528, - 


530, 533, 535, 539, 541, 542, 544- 
547, 553, 554, 560, 561, 591 
, plane of, 384, 388 
-organ element, 167,319 
-organ sense, 166, 318, 421, 549 
, higher or supernatural or divine, 281, 
501,565 
viskambhana, see restraint 
Visoka, 367 
Visuddhimagga (Buddhaghosa), 25, 98, 
99, 101, 109, 580 
vis vasa, see assurance 
vital, vitality, see life 
breath, see breath, vital 
vitaraga, see attachment, plane of freedom 
from 
vitarka, see initial thought 
P.vitikkama, see excess 
vivada, see debate 
viveka, see discernment 
P. vodana, see cleansing 
void, see empty 
volition (see also will), 42, 129, 149, 151, 
153, 155, 177,212, 220, 247, 248, 347, 
349, 350, 351, 353, 357, 360, 363, 459 
,higher-worldly, 148 
vow, 69, 311, 316, 467, 501, 517, 555 
vrata, see VOW 
vrksa, see tree 
vyadhi, see disease 
vyakarana, see grammar 
vyakhyana, see construing 
vyafijana, see (1) phrasing, (2) phoneme, 
(3)syllable 
vyapada, see malice 
vyapti, see pervasion 
Vyasa, 84 


635 


vyasana, see disaster 
vyavadana, see purification 
vyaya, see disappearance 
vyayama, see effort 

vyuha, see arrangement 


Waldschmidt, Ernst, 574 

Warder, A.K., 88,89, 123, 137, 179,219, 
569, 578, 584-587 

Watanabe, Baiyu, 179,317, 345,451,588 

Watanabe, Fumimaro, 179, 180, 367, 586, 
587, 589 


Watanabe, Shoko, 219,327 


Watanabe, Shutan, 451 

Watanabe, U.,579 

watchfulness, 190 _ 

water, 32,41, 118, 126, 127, 143, 156, 167, 
197, 260, 324, 455, 456 

Watters, 579 

Wayman, Alex, 583 

weapon, 207 

weigher, weight, 86 

Western region, see Gandhara, Bactria 

wheel, 10 
-turner, 10,15, 274, 564 

white, 143,144, 162 

wickedness, 177, 205, 385, 388 

Wijesekere, O.H. de A., 130, 578,584 

will (seealso volition), 129,224, 364,475, 
513 : 
, ill, see malice 

Willemen, Charles, 451-470, 580, 582, 
588, 591, 593 

Williams, Paul M., 128,584 

wind, see air 

Winternitz, Moriz, 576 

wisdom, 41,49, 51,54, 55,65, 70, 72, 74, 
124, 126, 139, 147, 181, 183, 184, 190, 
191, 195, 199, 201, 207-209, 214, 256, 
257-264, 341,377, 391,393, 394, 396, 
399, 400, 403, 429, 454, 466, 469, 473, 
494, 495,497, 509, 516,521,529, 555, 
592 
-faculty, 124, 138, 300, 322, 387,512, 

555 

higher, 264, 398 
, liberation by, 385, 411, 465 
-liberation, see liberation, wisdom- 


636 


, Stooping or unawakened, 194, 206 
witness, bodily, 103, 246 

,eye, see eye-witness 
Wogihara, Unrai, 588 
woman, see female 
word, 410, 422, 523 

» holy, 320 

-meaning, see meaning, word- 

-s, collection of, 378, 494 
world, 239, 307, 320, 530 
worldling, see ordinariness 
worldly, 68, 87, 159, 527 

, higher, see higher-worldly 
worry, 60, 133, 161,572 
worship, 186 
writing, 17,21, 29,31 
wrongness, 371 


yajna, see sacrifice 

Yama gods, 215, 426, 468 

Yamada, Isshi, 337 

Yamaka, 88,90, 91, 327-336, 337, 472 
yana, see vehicle 

Yasa, 22 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Yasodhara, 10 

YaSomitra (850), 81, 82, 102, 114, 179, 
203, 217, 570, 582, 588 

yathabita, see reality of things 

yellow, 143, 144 

yoga (see also (1) bond, (2) congruity), 6, 
7, 368, 432 

Yogacara, 46, 47, 56, 86-88, 95, 97, 108, 
109, 111, 118, 583 

Yogasiitras (Patafijali), 94 

yogyata, see proficiency 

yoke, see bond 

Yoshimoto, Shingyo, 317-325 

Yiieh-chi, 451 

yuga, see pair 

yuganaddhi, see congruity 

yukta, see (1) ground, logical, (2) 
proficiency 

Yuktivada, 530, 533, 548,552 


zeal, 234, 255,259 

Zen, 56 

Zoroaster, 3 

Zwilling, Leonard, 587,590 


